Advances, challenges and promises of carbon dots  - Inorganic Chemistry Frontiers (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7QI00614D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7QI00614D
(Review Article)
Inorg. Chem. Front., 2017, 4, 1963-1986Advances, challenges and promises of carbon dots

        
          
            Jin 
            Gao†
, 
      
        
          
            Mengmeng 
            Zhu†
, 
      
        
          
            Hui 
            Huang
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Yang 
            Liu
          
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Zhenhui 
            Kang
          
          
        
      *
      Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Carbon-based Functional Materials and Devices, Institute of Functional Nano and Soft Materials (FUNSOM), Soochow University, Suzhou, China. E-mail: zhkang@suda.edu.cn; yangl@suda.edu.cn; hhuang0618@suda.edu.cn
Received 
      5th October 2017
    , Accepted 6th November 2017First published on 10th November 2017AbstractIn recent years, carbon dots (C-dots) have become a rising star for a spectrum of environmental and energy applications, ranging from chemical catalysis, to photocatalysis, electrocatalysis and energy storage, such as batteries and capacitors, due to their unique physicochemical, optical and electrical properties. This review discusses the up-to-date progress on carbon dots, with an emphasis on their environmental and energy applications along with some discussion on the challenges and promises in this exciting and promising field.Jin GaoJin Gao is now pursuing her Master's degree under the supervision of Prof. Zhenhui Kang at the Institute of Functional Nano & Soft Materials (FUNSOM), Soochow University, P.R. China. Her main research interest is focused on the study of carbon dots and carbon-based materials applied in the field of the reduction of carbon dioxide.Mengmeng ZhuMengmeng Zhu is now pursuing her Master's degree under the supervision of Prof. Yang Liu at the Institute of Functional Nano & Soft Materials (FUNSOM), Soochow University, P.R. China. Her main research is focused on the study of the synthesis and catalytic applications of carbon dots, as well as the applications of carbon-based materials.Yang LiuYang Liu is currently an associate professor at the Institute of Functional Nano & Soft Materials and the Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Carbon-Based Functional Materials & Devices in Soochow University, P.R. China. Her main research field is dedicated to the synthesis and assembly of morphologically unique nanostructures and nanocomposites, and the applications in catalysis and energy conversion.Zhenhui KangZhenhui Kang is currently a professor at the Institute of Functional Nano & Soft Materials and the Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Carbon-Based Functional Materials & Devices in Soochow University, P.R. China. His main research interests are in the fields of the synthesis and surface chemistry of carbon dots, as well as exploring their applications in nanocatalysis, new energy and bioimaging.
1. Introduction
Carbon nanodots (C-dots) are a novel class of carbon nanomaterials that comprise discrete, quasispherical nanoparticles with sizes below 10 nm. They were first discovered during the purification of single-walled carbon nanotubes fabricated by arc discharge methods by Xu et al. in 2004.1 Since then, much attention has been paid to this emerging carbon nanomaterial. The family of C-dots encompasses several types of carbon-based fluorescent nanoparticles. The group defined as C-dots can be further divided into different subgroups, namely, very tiny sized carbon nanoparticles, graphene quantum dots, graphitic carbon quantum dots, amorphous carbon dots and polymer dots. In general, we can define C-dots as spherical-like carbon-based objects in shape (and/or graphite fragments) with dimensions lower than 10 nm. Compared to traditional semiconductor quantum dots and organic dyes, photoluminescent C-dots are superior in terms of their high (aqueous) solubility, robust chemical inertness, facile modification and high resistance to photobleaching. Their superior biological properties, such as low toxicity and good biocompatibility, render C-dots with potential applications in bioimaging, biosensing and biomolecule (drug) delivery. The outstanding electrochemical properties of C-dots as electron donors and acceptors, causing chemiluminescence and electrochemical luminescence, endow them with wide potential for applications in optronics, catalysis and sensors.2,3 The rich photoluminescence (PL) and photochemical properties of C-dots also make them efficient catalysts (such as photocatalysts for selective oxidation, light-driven acid-catalysis and hydrogen bond catalysis) and very active additives commonly used in energy devices (solar cells, photoelectronic water splitting cells, batteries and supercapacitors) for improving the performance of such devices. Another important property is the tailorable surface chemistry of C-dots, which facilitates their functionalization and integration with other functional materials. There are also some other metal-free materials, such as graphene, carbon nanotubes, g-C3N4, black phosphorus, that show similar properties. Compared with C-dots, however, these materials all have more or less problems; for instance, graphene contains less functional groups and defects, while carbon nanotubes are high cost, difficult to synthesize and their solubility is poor and g-C3N4 has poor electrical conductivity. Black phosphorus recently emerged as a new two-dimensional (2D) material with highly unique optical and electrical properties,4,5 but it is not stable and the literature studies on black phosphorus are not yet thorough enough and also, its biological compatibility is not good. Some recent reviews have covered the synthesis and properties of C-dots, together with a focus on their recent applications in biosensing, bioimaging, optoelectronic devices and sensors.6–8 Herein, we present an in-depth discussion to aid the understanding of the properties of C-dots and highlight the recent progress in their applications towards nanocatalysis, sensing, and in the environmental and new energy fields. We hope this review will provide some critical insights to inspire more exciting work on C-dots for environmental and new energy applications in the near future.
2. Synthesis, structure and properties
2.1 Synthesis of C-dots
The preparation methods for C-dots can be roughly classified into “top-down” and “bottom-up” approaches.9–13 Typically, the top-down methods include arc discharge, laser ablation, acidic exfoliation, electrochemical oxidation and microwave-assisted hydrothermal synthesis, where C-dots are formed or “broken off” from a larger carbon structure. The top-down routes for the preparation of C-dots have the advantages of abundant raw materials, large-scale production and simple operation. A facile electrochemical approach was recently reported by Kang's group for the large-scale synthesis of high-quality C-dots with high purity, using only pure water as an electrolyte without any other chemical additives (see Fig. 1).9b The obtained C-dots feature a highly crystalline nature and excellent aqueous dispersibility. C-Dots can also be prepared through bottom-up routes, including solution chemistry, the cyclodehydrogenation of polyphenylene precursors, the carbonization of some special organic precursors or by the fragmentation of suitable precursors, during which C-dots are formed from molecular precursors. The bottom-up methods offer the exciting opportunities to control C-dots towards obtaining C-dots with a well-defined molecular size and shape, and thus tuning their properties. For example, a hydrothermal method to synthesis a new kind of chiral C-dots was recently reported by Kang's group.13 However, these methods always involve complex synthetic procedures, and the special organic precursors may be difficult to obtain. In general, the preparation of C-dots currently faces have three notable issues: (i) carbonaceous aggregation during carbonization, which can be avoided by using electrochemical synthesis, confined pyrolysis or solution chemistry methods; (ii) achieving size control and uniformity, which is important for ensuring uniform properties and facilitating mechanistic studies, but this can be optimized via post-treatment, such as filtration, column chromatography, gel electrophoresis, centrifugation and dialysis; (iii) ensuring suitable surface properties, which are critical for solubility and selected applications, through tuning during their preparation or post-treatment. Surface modification is a powerful method to tune the surface properties of materials for selected applications. There are various approaches for functionalizing the surfaces of C-dots through surface chemistry or interactions, such as covalent bonding, coordination or p–p interactions.9–13 In addition, facile methods for the large-scale preparation of C-dots are highly desired for their wider practical application. Recently, the gram-scale synthesis of single-crystalline C-dots was demonstrated by a facile molecular fusion route under mild and green hydrothermal conditions. Alternatively, C-dots can be fabricated in the large scale from various types of coal based on a one-step wet-chemical route.14,15
 Fig. 1  (a) Reaction equipment for the preparation of C-dots; digital image of C-dots solution (b) before treatment, (c) after treatment; (d) DLS histogram of C-dots; (e) TEM, (f) HRTEM image of C-dots. (Reproduced from ref. 9b.) 
2.2 Structure and properties of C-dots

2.2.1 Composition and structure. 
The currently reported C-dots are all partially oxidized and therefore bear hydroxyl, epoxy/ether, carbonyl and carboxylic acid groups on their surfaces. Raman spectroscopy is a powerful and non-destructive tool for the characterization of C-dots. The G band in the Raman spectrum is assigned to the E2g vibrational modes of the aromatic domains, whereas the D band arises from the breathing modes of the graphitic domains. The intensity ratio (ID/IG) of the “disordered” D to crystalline G band is used to compare the structural order between crystalline and amorphous graphitic systems. The ID/IG values of C-dots vary significantly depending on the preparation methods. Also, the HRTEM images of C-dots feature two kinds of lattice fringes, namely, the (002) interlayer spacing (see Fig. 2) and the (110) in-plane lattice spacing. The interlayer spacing of C-dots depends strongly on their degree of oxidation because the anchored hydroxyl, epoxy/ether, carbonyl and carboxylic acid groups can increase the interlayer spacing. Similar to the XRD pattern, the former centred at 0.34 nm has been observed for C-dots prepared by acidic oxidation from carbon black and from the microwave-assisted method and electrochemical cutting method. An in-plane lattice spacing centred at 0.24 nm is observed for C-dots synthesized via the microwave-hydrothermal protocol, amino-hydrothermal method, K intercalation, acidic oxidation from carbon fibres and from the photo-Fenton reaction, while the 0.21 nm spacing is observed from C-dots prepared via a hydrothermal cutting strategy and glucose carbonization method. Moreover, C-dots are not always crystalline, and amorphous C-dots have also been prepared via the hydrothermal method and citric acid carbonization.9–13
 Fig. 2  (a) TEM image of C-dots with diameters under 4 nm; (b) fluorescent microscopy images of C-dots with an excitation wavelength of 360 nm (scale bar: 50 mm); (c–h) HRTEM images of typical C-dots with different diameters (scale bar: 2 nm). (Reproduced from ref. 13b.) 


2.2.2 Properties. 
2.2.2.1 Absorption. 
C-Dots typically show strong optical absorption in the UV region, with a tail extending out into the visible range. There may be some absorption shoulders attributed to the π–π* transition of the CC bonds, the n–π* transition of CO bonds and/or others. Moreover, C-dots prepared via different methods also show different absorption behaviours and absorption peak positions. Furthermore, the variation of oxygen content was reported to play an important role in deciding the absorption peak position of C-dots.9–13
2.2.2.2 Photoluminescence. 
C-Dots prepared via different approaches can emit PL with different colours, including UV, blue, green, yellow and red and in the near-infrared region. Typically, the luminescence mechanism may derive from intrinsic state emission and defect state emission. However, the exact mechanism of PL for C-dots remains unsettled. The luminescence has been tentatively suggested to arise from excitons of carbon, emissive traps, quantum confinement effect, aromatic structures, oxygen-containing groups, free zigzag sites and edge defects. The widely accepted mechanism for the luminescence emission from C-dots needs more systematic investigation. Anyway, the PL of C-dots should be attributed to either a combining effect or from competition between intrinsic state emission and defect state emission. C-Dots prepared via various methods probably exhibit distinct PL mechanisms, which leads to different dependences of their PL on the size, excitation wavelength, pH, solvent and concentration etc. The quantum yield (QY) of C-dots varies with the fabrication method and the surface chemistry involved. As for the unpassivated C-dots prepared via stepwise solution chemistry and microwave-assisted acidic oxidation, respectively, QYs between 2% and 30% have been observed. C-Dots commonly contain carboxylic and epoxide groups, which can act as non-radiative electron–hole recombination centres. Therefore, the removal of these oxygen-containing groups may improve the QY, either by reduction or surface passivation. Recently, a significantly enhanced QY of ∼72% was achieved, which is the highest value reported so far for C-dots (see Fig. 3) in solution.16
 Fig. 3  (a) UV–vis absorption, PL (λex = 400 nm) and PLE (λex = 500 nm) spectra of C-dots aqueous solution, (b) photographs of C-dots aqueous solution and RhB ethanol solution with the same mass concentration (10 μg mL−1) under visible light (left) and 365 nm UV light (right), (c) PL decay curves of C-dots measured at room temperature and excitations at 400 nm, (d) PL and PLE spectra of C-dots in the solid state, inset: photo of bamboo drawing with C-dots ink under visible light (left) and 365 nm UV light (right). In this figure, the N-GQDs are the C-dots. (Reproduced from ref. 16.) 
2.2.2.3 Photoinduced electron-transfer property. 
The PL emission from C-dots can be efficiently quenched in the presence of either an electron acceptor, such as 4-nitrotoluene or 2,4-dinitrotoluene, or an electron donor, such as N,N-diethylaniline, as the photoexcited C-dots are excellent as both electron donors and electron acceptors. The PL of C-dots can also be quenched efficiently by surface-doped metals through disrupting the excited-state redox processes. Significant PL quenching was also observed in the C-dots-GO system, which was attributed to ultrafast electron transfer from C-dots to GO. These photoinduced electron-transfer properties of C-dots as an electron donor/acceptor may offer new opportunities for light energy conversion, catalysis and related applications, as well as for mechanistic elucidation.2–6
2.2.2.4 Electrochemiluminescence. 
Chi et al. reported a simple and effective method for preparing water-soluble C-dots with electrochemiluminescence (ECL) activity by applying a scanning potential to graphite rods, and reported their observations of the ECL behaviour during and after the preparation of C-dots (see Fig. 4).17 ECL emission (maximum emission at 535 nm) from C-dots was observed when the potential was cycled between +1.8 and −1.5 V. The ECL mechanism of C-dots was suggested to involve the formation of excited-state C-dots (R*) via the electron-transfer (ET) annihilation of negatively charged (R·−) and positively charged (R·+) C-dots.18 Chi et al. also reported another ECL system consisting of C-dots and sulfite SO32−, in which SO32− as a new ECL coreactant significantly enhanced the cathodic ECL signal of the C-dots.17
 Fig. 4  Schematic illustration of the ECL and PL mechanisms in C-dots (in this figure, CNCs are the C-dots). R˙+, R˙−, and R* represent positively charged, negatively charged, and excited-state C-dots, respectively. (Reproduced from ref. 17.) 
2.2.2.5 Proton adsorption. 
The surface functional groups of C-dots, such as –OH, –COOH and –CO, contribute to drawing H+ closer to C-dots, which enhances the adsorption capacity. On account of the excellent water solubility of C-dots, the adsorption experiments were conducted via a dialysis method.19 The amount of adsorbed H+ (based on HCl) was about 10–24 mg g−1 for the C-dots. The equilibrium of sorption was further evaluated using two well-known models, namely the Langmuir and Freundlich isotherm models. The Langmuir isotherms for C-dots had higher correlation coefficients than that of the Freundlich isotherm model, which indicated that a monolayer adsorption of H+ takes place on the homogeneous surface of C-dots adsorbents. Moreover, the adsorption is favourable and rather irreversible. Since the calculated correlation coefficients were closer to unity for the pseudo-first-order kinetics model than the pseudo-second-order kinetic model, it indicated that the present sorption systems follow predominantly the first-order rate model.19–22
2.2.2.6 Toxicity. 
The toxicity of C-dots is a natural concern for potential bio-applications. C-Dots have been variously reported to have low toxicity.23a Kang and Liu et al. demonstrated that C-dots could serve as fluorescent probes for in vivo imaging in live mice by using a wide range of excitation wavelengths and displayed excellent signal-to-background separation under NIR excitation. They further studied the in vivo biodistribution of C-dots using a radiolabelling method. After intravenous injection, the C-dots exhibited high accumulation in the reticuloendothelial system as well as in the kidney, and they were gradually excreted via both renal and faecal pathways. Importantly, it was observed that C-dots at a dose of 20 mg kg−1 appeared to be safe to the treated animals over a period of 3 months, as evidenced by systematic time-course blood chemical analysis and complete blood panel and histological analyses (see Fig. 5).23a However, Markovic et al. demonstrated that the presence of defects and free radicals of C-dots could result in the generation of singlet oxygen. An in vitro photodynamic cytotoxicity study showed that photoexcited C-dots could cause programmed cell death via apoptosis and autophagy. Fortunately, this feature can be exploited in photodynamic therapy.23b,24 Wu et al. investigated the cytotoxicity of C-dots in detail, for C-dots prepared through the photo-Fenton reaction of GO.25 The cytotoxicity of the prepared C-dots was lower than that of the GO sheets, as proven by their effects on cell viability, internal cellular reactive oxygen species levels, damage to mitochondrial membrane potential and cell cycle. The toxicity of the C-dots did not significantly increase with increasing their concentration.
 Fig. 5  (A) Radiolabelling stability curve of C-dots in mouse plasma at 37 °C. (B) Blood circulation curve of C-dots. (C) Time-dependent biodistribution of C-dots in female Balb/c mice. (D) Distribution of C-dots in urine and in the faeces of Balb/c mice collected by metabolism cages. Error bars are based on standard deviations of four mice per group. (Reproduced from ref. 23a.) 

3. C-Dots-based functional nanocomposites
3.1 C-dots in mesoporous structures
Several examples of C-dots in mesoporous silica particles have been reported for bioimaging and drug delivery.26 Different strategies have also been developed for the fabrication of mesoporous silica particles with C-dots. Basically, two synthesis routes can be recognized, the first one is the so-called one-pot approach, which involves forming a mesoporous silica matrix and incorporating the C-dots in a single step, while the second route involves adding the C-dots to pre-fabricated silica mesoporous particles. There is also a wide choice of methods for adding the C-dots, such as by capping on the particle surface or embedding in the pores or even on the pore walls. The best strategy depends on the desired application; in theranostic applications, for instance, the mesoporous particles form an interactive platform with a multifunctional role, such as acting as an environment-sensitive gate.26 A quite original one-pot method to prepare mesoporous silica nanoparticles containing C-dots involved using rice husk as a precursor both for the silica and the C-dots.9,26 Rice husk is, in fact, rich in silica and carbon and when mixing the pyrolyzed powder with an ionic surfactant (cetyltrimethylammonium bromide, CTAB) gives a SiO2/C-dots nanodispersion in water with strong fluorescence.27 Similar systems for theranostic applications were obtained by different routes, such as forming the C-dots in the silica matrix via the use of suitable precursors. One example of such precursors is the use of carbohydrates, such as glycerol, glycol, glucose and sucrose, to produce emissive C-dots.28 A similar experiment was reported in another study where MCM-41 silica particles were loaded with C-dots and Doxorubicin; in this case, however, the C-dots played a more sophisticated role because they also served as caps to entrap the Doxorubicin molecules within the mesopores.29 The versatility of a mesoporous material as a functional platform can be fully exploited by increasing the number of active species in the matrix. Previous examples have shown that combining the C-dots fluorescence with mesoporous silica particles allows producing relatively simple and effective devices with combined properties, such as drug release and bioimaging. These properties can be even enhanced by taking advantage, as previously underlined, of the open porosity. A main issue here is increasing the fluorescence of C-dots–SiO2 particles. However, this can be achieved by using the metal-enhanced fluorescence effect. Silica mesoporous particles containing both Ag and C-dots within the pores were synthesised through a “one-pot” route, which produced a 3.4-fold enhancement in luminescence intensity.30 In the above examples, the C-dots were capped on silica mesoporous particles or embedded into the pores. Alternatively, they can be anchored on the mesopore walls. This material has been prepared by reacting methoxysilyl-modified carbon dots (Si–C-dots)31 with tetraethyl orthosilicate and organic template (CTAB).32 The mesopores have also been used as hosts for analyte-sensitive molecules, with the C-dots in the silica backbone acting as the reference species. This allows building up a pH ratiometric sensor. In fact, if the C-dots emission spectrum overlaps the excitation spectrum of the guest dye, fluorescent resonance energy transfer (FRET) occurs.33,34 A ratiometric sensor for the detection of Hg2+ ions have been realized using a Rhodamine 6G derivative as the Hg2+ sensitive dye.
Zinc oxide mesoporous films containing C-dots synthesized by a one-pot route using a fluorosurfactant as a templating agent.35 3D photoluminescence maps showed a complex trend, which was attributed to energy transfer involving dipole interactions and reabsorption between ZnO and C-dots and the formation of surface defects in the inorganic oxide structure.35
3.2 C-dots in polymers
Luk et al. reported a facile, low-cost chemical oxidation polymerization process for preparing a polyaniline (PANI)–C-dots composite.36 They also demonstrated the tuneable PL and hysteresis behaviours of C-dots embedded in the PANI matrix. The controllable electrical and optical properties in the composite films could be explained by the charge trapping sites located at the surface states induced by the functional groups. Mosconi et al. proposed some convenient routes to produce hybrid-polymers (including polyamide, polyureaurethane, polyester and polymethylmetacrylate) with covalently enclosed or confined N-doped C-dots (see Fig. 7).37 These hybrid materials can be easily prepared and processed to obtain macroscopic objects of different shapes, i.e. fibres, transparent sheets and bulky forms, where the characteristic luminescence properties of the native N-doped C-dots are preserved. They also explored the potential use of these hybrid composites to undergo photochemical reactions, such as the photoreduction of silver ions to silver nanoparticles (under UV-light), the selective photo-oxidation of benzyl alcohol to the benzaldehyde (under vis-light) and the photocatalytic generation of H2 (under UV-light). In this field, Xie et al. also reported organic–inorganic hybrid functional C-dots gel glasses, in which the QY of the C-dots increased sharply (QY over 80%).38
 Fig. 6  Schematic showing the CTAB-assisted synthesis of meso-SiO2 and attachment of C-dots to form a meso-SiO2/C-dots complex. (Reproduced from ref. 9.) 
 Fig. 7  Top: Two-phase synthesis of nylon-6,6/N-doped C-dots hybrids and the related, macroscopic, electrospun material. Bottom: (A) SEM image of electrospun fibres from pristine nylon. (B–D) SEM images of electrospun fibres from nylon/N-doped C-dots hybrids materials obtained by the use of increasing amounts of N-doped C-dots (5, 50 and 100 w/w%, respectively, referred to as 1,6-hexamethylene-diamine). (E) TEM image of 100 w/w% (referred to as 1,6-hexamethylene-diamine) nylon-6,6/N-doped C-dots electrospun fibres. In this figure, CQDs are the C-dots. (Reproduced from ref. 37.) 
3.3 C-dots as building blocks for mesoporous structures
As a result of their tiny size, highly crystalline nature (fragments of graphite) and functionalized surface, C-dots could be regarded as subunits for carbon materials, allowing the construction of mesoporous carbon without templates. Kang et al. reported a template-free method for preparing mesoporous carbons (MCs) with a high specific surface area (183.6 m2 g−1) and uniform pore size distribution (5 nm) from C-dots via a one-step calcination (see Fig. 8).39 In comparison with previous techniques, there are two advantages of the C-dots annealing approach: (1) the synthesis procedure is fairly simple, requiring neither pre-synthesis of the templates nor additional infiltration; (2) this approach is mild, cheap and capable of achieving the large-scale production of MCs. Kang et al. also developed a facile hydrolytic process for the preparation of C-dots/SiO2 nanocomposites with a pore size of about 5.8 nm.40 These C-dots/SiO2 porous nanocomposites showed high catalytic activity (31.73% conversion based on cis-cyclooctene and 89.13% selectivity for 2-hydroxycyclooctanone) for the selective oxidation of cis-cyclooctene under visible light irradiation, with TBHP as a radical initiator and oxygen (in air) as an oxidant at 80 °C. Yang et al. further reported the facile fabrication of porous Co/N/C by the pyrolysis of VB12 and C-dots.41 It was noted that the doping concentrations of Co and N could be finely tuned from 0% to 3.68% and 0% to 5.88%, respectively. In particular, Co/N/C containing 1.12% Co and 2.92% N prepared at 700 °C exhibited the best electrocatalytic activity and selectivity for the ORR in both alkaline and acid media.
 Fig. 8  Schematic representation of the preparation process for MCs from C-dots. In this figure, CQDs are the C-dots. (Reproduced from ref. 39.) 
4. Applications
Above all, based on C-dots’ unique physicochemical, optical and electrical properties as well as on the structure of various C-dots-based functional nanocomposites, they have been applied in several different fields, including catalysis, sensors, solar energy, supercapacitors, lithium-ion batteries and lubrication. Here, we introduce some specific applications as follows.
4. 1 Catalysis application

4.1.1 C-dots as photocatalysts. 
Kang et al. reported that C-dots (1–4 nm) were effective NIR light-driven photocatalysts, and could catalyse the efficient oxidation of benzyl alcohol to benzaldehyde with high conversion (92%) and selectivity (100%) in the presence of H2O2 as an oxidant (see Fig. 9).42 The catalytic activity of C-dots was dependent on the H2O2 decomposition rate and their NIR light-induced electron-transfer property. Under NIR light irradiation, the C-dots’ photoinduced electron-transfer ability (especially as strong electron donors) protected the first-step product (benzaldehyde) from over oxidation by the photoelectron reductive environment,43 thus facilitating achieving a high selectivity (100%) to benzaldehyde. The scope of reactivity of the aforementioned C-dots catalyst was further explored by Kang et al. using a variety of benzyl alcohol derivatives under the same conditions. These benzyl alcohol derivatives could also result in their oxidized aldehyde products in high conversion rates and high selectivities with H2O2 as the oxidant and NIR light irradiation.
 Fig. 9  Proposed mechanism for the highly selective oxidation of benzyl alcohol to benzaldehyde catalyzed by C-dots under NIR light irradiation. In this figure, CQDs are the C-dots. (Reproduced from ref. 42.) 
C-Dots (5–10 nm) were shown to have a strong photoinduced proton-generating capacity in solution under visible light irradiation (see Fig. 10).44 The catalytic activity of 5–10 nm C-dots was strongly dependent on the illumination intensity and reaction temperature. As light-driven acid-catalysts, C-dots can catalyze a series of organic reactions (esterification, Beckmann rearrangement and aldol condensation) with a high conversion efficiency in water solution under visible light irradiation. Here, 5–10 nm C-dots can be produced from a graphite rod by simple electrochemical method in pure water. The reversible temperature- and concentration-dependent photo-proton generating ability could be attributed to the light-induced structure interconversion of the functional groups on the surface of the C-dots. Also, the proton-generation mechanism of C-dots under visible light irradiation has been shown, whereby the hydroxyl group of C-dots dissolved in water release a free proton (or H3O+) under visible light irradiation. The intermediate then produces another proton (hydrolyzed to H3O+) from the reaction of the CO group with H3O+. After the O in CO links with HO– by supramolecular interaction, the intermediate with the epoxy group is obtained. A series of reactions (esterification, Beckmann rearrangement, aldol condensation) needing an acid as a catalyst was performed by Kang et al. to study the photoinduced proton-generating property of C-dots and reference samples (small-sized C-dots with 1–4 nm, graphite particles).13b The catalytic activities of C-dots in aqueous solution are attributed to the remarkable visible light-induced proton-generating capability associated with the oxygen-containing functional groups of C-dots.
 Fig. 10  (a) Probe approach curves of a glassy carbon electrode modified by C-dots with and without visible light irradiation. Inset shows the corresponding curves of the control sample (glass sheet). (b) Photocurrent responses of C-dots under visible light; inset shows the schematic of the photocurrent measurement of photoinduced proton generation of C-dots: photogenerated protons can enhance the current at the Pt probe tip. (c) pH value responses of the C-dots under visible light irradiation. (d and e) pH change versus illumination intensity and temperature for different C-dots concentrations (0.05, 0.1, 0.5, 1.0 mg mL−1). (f) Dissociation constant (Ka) of different C-dots concentrations under different conditions (in the dark, 90% light intensity and 90 °C). (g) FT-IR spectra of C-dots with and without visible light irradiation. In this figure, CQDs are the C-dots. (Reproduced from ref. 44.) 
C-dots are good H-bonding catalysts based on their rich photochemical properties as well as functional carboxylic and hydroxyl groups.45 As heterogeneous nanocatalysts for H-bond catalysis, C-dots have shown excellent photoenhanced catalytic abilities (89% yield when 4-cyanobenzaldehyde is used) in the aldol condensation. A series of catalytic experiments confirmed that the catalytic activity of C-dots can be effectively enhanced by visible light, which may be attributed to their photoinduced electron-accepting properties. The aldol condensation had a high yield of condensed product under C-dots as the catalyst. The most satisfying photocatalytic performance for this H-bond catalysis reaction was with the 5 nm C-dots, which should be attributed to their highest electron-accepting ability compared with other C-dots (with sizes >10 nm and <4 nm). Further, the control catalytic experiments confirmed that the efficient electron-accepting properties of C-dots strengthened the O–H bond and activated the CO bond of the 4-cyanobenzaldehyde, thus accelerating the aldol condensation.
Sun et al. reported that the functionalized C-dots with gold or platinum coating can be used as photocatalysts for the reduction of CO2 (see Fig. 11).46 The photoreduction of CO2 generally yields formic acid as a significant product. For the reduction to formic acid only, the estimated quantum yield was ∼0.3%, which was likely lower than the overall quantum yield for the CO2 conversion. For the platinum-coated photocatalysts in the CO2 conversion reaction under otherwise identical experimental conditions, the results were generally similar to those with the gold-coated ones described above, though more quantitative comparisons, including those for the effects of varying the amounts of metal coating, are still being pursued. The functionalized C-dots apparently served the function of harvesting visible photons to drive the photoreduction process, with the particle surface defects facilitating the charge separation by trapping the separated electrons and holes. In addition to the obviously important advantage of strong visible absorption, other distinctive features of the nanoscale carbon-based photocatalysts include their aqueous solubility for the photoconversion under homogeneous reaction conditions and the confinement of the photoinduced charge separation to the particle surface, thus facilitating more efficient electron harvesting by the coated gold or platinum as the cocatalyst in the CO2 conversion. Beyond CO2 photoreduction, the same functionalized C-dots with gold or platinum coating could be used as photocatalysts for H2 generation from water.47,48 Sun et al. also reported on C-dots by focusing on their syntheses, on their photoexcited state properties and redox processes and on their applications as photocatalysts in visible-light carbon dioxide reduction and in water splitting, as well as on their mechanistic similarities and differences.49
 Fig. 11  Illustrations of (upper) the high-pressure optical reactor. (Lower left) Photoreductive doping of the carbon dot with gold, completely quenching the dot-surface-based fluorescence (illustrated as the change in the dot surface from rainbow to grey) and (lower right) the gold-doped C-dots as a photocatalyst for CO2 conversion, where the doped gold (in yellow) was small in quantity, insufficient to form a shell, and likely random in terms of size and shape. The sacrificial electron donor was isopropanol added in some experiments or PEG1500N molecules on the surface of the carbon dots in the absence of isopropanol. (Reproduced from ref. 46b.) 
Teng et al. synthesized nitrogen-doped C-dots as the potocatalyst for overall water-splitting.50–52 The nitrogen-doped C-dots exhibited both p- and n-type conductivities. The diode configuration resulted in an internal Z-scheme charge transfer for effective reaction at the C-dots interface. Visible light (>420 nm) irradiation on the C-dots resulted in simultaneous H2 and O2 evolution from pure water at an H2:O2 molar ratio of 2:1. An energetic band bending was present at the interface between the semiconductor and solution, and a p–n type photochemical diode configuration, mimicking the biological photosynthesis system, providing a favourable situation to accomplish vectorial charge displacement for overall water-splitting. These developed N-doped C-dot photocatalysts consisted of nitrogen-doped graphene sheets stacked into crystals, with oxygen functional groups on the crystal surface. The band gap of the nitrogen-doped C-dots was approximately 2.2 eV, and meant the C-dots were capable of absorbing visible light to generate excitons. This nitrogen-doped C-dots construction resulted in the formation of p–n type photochemical diodes, in which the n-conductivity was caused by embedding nitrogen atoms in the graphene frame, and the p-conductivity by grafting oxygen functionalities on the graphene surface. Visible light illumination on nitrogen-doped C-dots suspended in pure water resulted in the evolution of H2 and O2 at a molar ratio of approximately 2:1, where the p- and n-domains were responsible for the production of H2 and O2 gases, respectively. Nitrogen-free C-dots with p-type conductivity catalyzed only H2 evolution under irradiation, proving that the band bending in the p-type domains was favourable for electron injection to produce H2. Likewise, NH3-treated nitrogen-doped C-dots showed n-type conductivity and catalyzed only O2 evolution (see Fig. 12). Yeh et al. also synthesized another kind of nitrogen-doped C-dots by thermally treating graphene oxide sheets in NH3 with a subsequent ultrasonic exfoliation. Nitrogen doping in C-dots synthesis repaired the vacancy-type defects of GO and introduced n-type conductivity to compensate for the unbalanced charges on the p-type GO, thereby suppressing leakage of the photogenerated charges.
 Fig. 12  The diode consists of the p- and n-type domains, connected through the sp2 clusters as an Ohmic contact. Illumination on the diode system results in recombination of the majority carriers at the sp2 clusters to produce useful electron–hole pairs at the semiconductor–water interfaces. The band bending of the p-type domains at the semiconductor–water interfaces is analogous to photosystem I for electron injection to produce H2. The band bending of the n-type domains at the semiconductor–water interfaces is analogous to photosystem II for hole injection to produce O2. This overall water-splitting reaction scheme for the graphene-based photocatalyst bears a remarkable similarity to biological photosynthesis. (Reproduced from ref. 52.) 
When deposited with Pt as the cocatalyst, this kind of nitrogen-doped C-dots exhibited high activity in H2 generation with an apparent quantum yield of 12.8% under monochromatic light (420 nm) irradiation. The high activity of the iNGO-QDs could be attributed to the synergistic effect of the oxygen and nitrogen functionalities in facilitating charge separation and transfer.51,52
Recent work about photocatalysts based on N-doped C-dots was reported by Zhang et al.53 They synthesized a number of nitrogen-doped CQDs (NCDs) with N/C atom ratios ranging from 0.14–0.30, which could optimize the performance of CQDs/semiconductor hybrid photocatalysts. N-Doped carbon quantum dots with TiO2 composites could afford an external QY of 66.8% at 360 nm, and contained outstanding electron-transfer properties and photosensitization efficiencies. NCDs can act as both photosensitizers and electron reservoirs in this composite system. Under stimulation with UV and visible light, NCDs with high N-doping levels could suppress non-radiative quenching to lead to a high PLQY. Conversely, under UV irradiation, charge separation in TiO2 leads to electron transfer to the adsorbed NCDs, which then serve as the active sites for H2 evolution (see Fig. 13). The photoexcitation of NCDs and interfacial charge-separation efficiency between NCDs and TiO2 can be enhanced by increasing the N-doping level in the NCDs, which leads to enhanced photocatalytic H2 evolution performance.
 Fig. 13  Schematic illustration of the electron-transfer mechanisms involved in photocatalytic H2 evolution over the NCDs/P25 composites under UV and visible light illumination. (Reproduced from ref. 53.) 


4.1.2 C-dots as electrocatalysts. 
Carbon dots often can be interesting contenders as electrocatalytic materials because of their high stability and good electrical conductivity.47 In addition, much attention has been paid to doped carbonaceous materials. Doped carbon dots have shown excellent performance in electrocatalysis reactions. N-Doping has been demonstrated to significantly affect the properties of C-dots, including the emergence of size-dependent electrocatalytic activity for the oxygen reduction reaction.9–13 Previous reports on graphene have indicated that doping nitrogen atoms in carbon materials, especially in the form of pyridinium moieties, plays a critical role in enhancing the electrocatalytic activities towards the ORR. One of the pioneering reports on the use of C-dots as electrocatalysts for the ORR was by Li and co-workers.62 They demonstrated that N–C-dots (N-doped C-dots) with oxygen-rich functional groups prepared via an electrochemical procedure were electrocatalytically active towards the electrochemical reduction of oxygen. The onset potential of ORR was found to be −0.16 V (vs. Ag/AgCl), which is close to that of commercial platinum-based electrocatalysts. Similar results were later obtained by Yan and co-workers and Liu et al. with N–C-dots synthesized by totally different procedures.54–64 A comparison between nitrogen-free C-dots and the N–C-dots suggested that the electrocatalytic activity of the N–C-dots was indeed closely associated with the N-doping effect. In addition, the N–C-dots exhibited excellent tolerance to a possible crossover effect from methanol. First-principles investigations of the N–C-dots suggested that pyridinic and graphitic nitrogen were responsible for the observed electrocatalytic activity.65a In another report, Zhu and co-workers investigated the electrocatalytic activity of C-dots prepared from natural biomass–soy milk.30 Similar to the N–C-dots, a much enhanced electrochemical reduction profile of oxygen was obtained. Likewise, the oxygen-evolution reaction (OER) also suffers from sluggish kinetics and a high overpotential is required in order to drive the OER at a reasonably high rate. Currently, the best electrocatalysts for the OER are ruthenium- and iridium-based materials. Again, the formidably high cost of these materials has urged researchers to search for alternative electrocatalysts that could offer high efficiency in the OER but at low cost. Unfortunately, reasonably a high electrocatalytic activity of C-dots towards the OER has yet to be reported.


4.1.3 Photocatalyst designs based on C-dots. 
4.1.3.1 Metal nanoparticle/C-dots complex photocatalysts. 
Kang et al. reported the design of a tuneable photocatalyst based on a composite of C-dots and metal nanoparticles for the selective oxidation of cyclohexane (see Fig. 14).66 Significantly, the Au nanoparticles/C-dots (Au/C-dots) composite catalyst achieved the oxidation of cyclohexane to cyclohexanone with a 63.8% efficiency and >99.9% selectivity in the presence of H2O2 under visible light at room temperature. In this process, the interaction between C-dots and Au NPs under visible light played a key role in the eventual high conversion and selectivity. The surface plasma resonance of Au NPs enhanced the light absorption of Au/C-dot composites. Under visible light, H2O2 was decomposed to hydroxyl radical (HO˙), which served as a strong oxidant for the conversion of cyclohexane to cyclohexanone. Further, Ag nanoparticles/C-dots (Ag/C-dots) and Cu nanoparticles/C-dots (Cu/C-dots) composite photocatalysts were synthesized, and used to catalyze cyclohexane oxidation under the same conditions as the Au/C-dots system. Like the Au/C-dots system, the Ag/C-dots and Cu/C-dots composites exhibited similarly good catalytic performance under purple light (conversion 54.0%, selectivity 84.1% for Ag) and red light (conversion 46.7%, selectivity 75.3% for Cu), which corresponded, respectively, to the surface plasma resonance of Ag and Cu nanoparticles. Given their diversity and versatility of structural and composition design, metal nanoparticles/C-dots composites may provide a powerful pathway for the development of high-performance catalysts.
 Fig. 14  Au/C-dots composites as a photocatalyst for the selective oxidation of cyclohexane in the presence of H2O2 under visible light. In this figure, CQDs are the C-dots. (Reproduced from ref. 66.) 
4.1.3.2 TiO2/C-dots photocatalysts. 
As one of the most popular photocatalysts, TiO2 has been used in the removal of organic pollutants and in the generation of H2 through water splitting. However, a major drawback in its photocatalytic efficiency resides in its ineffective utilization of visible light as the irradiation source. Because the bandgap of bulk TiO2 lies in the UV region (3.0–3.2 eV), less than 5% of sunlight is utilized by TiO2. Zhang et al. focused on the study of CD-based photocatalyst, and first reported67 that C-dots/P25(TiO2) exhibited improved photocatalytic H2 evolution under UV-Vis and visible light irradiation without the need to load any noble metal cocatalyst, compared to pure P25. Under UV-Vis light irradiation, C-dots acted as an electron reservoir to trap photoinduced electrons from the conduction band of P25, improving the efficient separation of the photoinduced electron–hole pairs of P25. However, under visible light irradiation, the C-dots acted as a photosensitizer to sensitize P25 into a visible light response “dyade” structure for H2 evolution (see Fig. 15).
 Fig. 15  Schematic illustration for the photocatalytic H2 production mechanism over the CQDs/P25 under UV-Vis and visible light (l > 450 nm) irradiation. (Reproduced from ref. 67.) 
In another work, TiO2–C-dots nanocomposites were reported to be able to completely degrade dye under visible light irradiation.13b Apart from harvesting visible light and converting it to shorter wavelength light through up-conversion, which in turn excited TiO2 to form electron–hole pairs, it was believed that the C-dots in the nanocomposites facilitated the transfer of electrons from TiO2 and that the electrons could be shuttled freely along the conducting paths of the C-dots, allowing charge separation and stabilization, hindering recombination, thereby generating long-lived holes on the TiO2 surface. The longer-lived holes then accounted for the much enhanced photocatalytic activity of the TiO2–C-dots nanocomposites. Nonetheless, more work is needed to improve the lifespan of the above-mentioned photocatalysts before they can be employed in practical scenarios. Tian et al.68 reported the UV–visible–NIR broad spectrum active photocatalytic property of C-dots/hydrogenated TiO2 (H-TiO2) nanobelt heterostructures. Their improved UV and visible photocatalytic property could be attributed to improved optical absorption, charge carrier trapping, and hindering of the photogenerated electron–hole recombination of oxygen vacancies and Ti3+ ions in TiO2 nanobelts created by the hydrogenation. The NIR photocatalytic activity was from photoinduced electron transfer, the electron reservoir and the up-converted PL properties of C-dots, which could absorb NIR light and convert into visible light and then transfer to visible photocatalytic active H-TiO2 nanobelts.
4.1.3.3 CdS/C-dots photocatalysts. 
Cadmium sulfide (CdS) is a promising inorganic photocatalyst for hydrogen production driven by visible light. However, the photocorrosion of CdS constrains its further development. Zhu et al. reported a carbon dots-cadmium sulfide (CdS–C-dots) nanocomposite, which showed significant photocatalytic water splitting properties with impressive stability without the requirement for any sacrificial agents or cocatalysts. When the concentration of C-dots in the sample was 0.03 gCDs gcatalyst−1, the highest hydrogen production rate was obtained for about 2.55 μ mol h−1, with an oxygen-evolution rate of about 0.52 μ mol h−1. The CdS–C-dots nanocomposite showed greater stability (8-times) than that of the CdS catalysts reported up to now (without sacrificial agents or cocatalysts), since the C-dots enhanced the absorption towards visible light and enabled a rapid separation of electron–hole pairs.69
4.1.3.4 C3N4/C-dots photocatalysts. 
The use of solar energy to produce molecular hydrogen and oxygen (H2 and O2) from overall water splitting is a promising means of achieving renewable energy storage. In the past 40 years, various inorganic and organic systems have been developed as photocatalysts for water splitting driven by visible light. These photocatalysts, however, still suffer from low quantum efficiency and/or poor stability. Liu et al.70 reported the design and fabrication of a metal-free carbon nanodot–carbon nitride (C3N4) nanocomposite and demonstrated its impressive performance for photocatalytic solar water splitting (see Fig. 16). They measured quantum efficiencies of 16% for wavelength λ = 420 nm, 6.29% for λ = 580 nm and 4.42% for λ = 600 nm, and determined an overall solar energy conversion efficiency of about 2.0%. The catalyst comprised low-cost, earth-abundant, environmentally friendly materials and showed excellent stability. Xia et al.71 also reported NIR-light-induced H2 evolution using a C-dots/C3N4 metal-free photocatalyst. The considerable H2 production at 808 nm and large promotion of the photocatalytic activity in both UV-vis and vis regions originated from the synergistic effect on the spectral and electronic coupling of C3N4 nanosheets and C-dots.
 Fig. 16  Proposed reaction mechanism for visible-light-driven water splitting by C-dots-C3N4. (Reproduced from ref. 70.) 
4.1.3.5 pCN(g-C3N4)/C-dots photocatalyst for CO2 reduction. 
Ong et al. successfully constructed a metal-free C-dots/pCN photocatalyst with C-dots uniformly distributed on the surface of pCN. The C-dots/pCN-3 sample with a C-dots content of 3 wt% showed the highest catalytic activity in the CO2 photoreduction process, which resulted in the evolution of CH4 and CO under visible and simulated solar light. Furthermore, the C-dots/pCN-3 sample demonstrated high stability and durability after four consecutive photoreaction cycles, with no significant decrease in the catalytic activity. The significant improvement in the photoactivity using C-dots/pCN-3 was attributed to the synergistic interaction between the pCN and C-dots. This synergy allowed the effective migration of photoexcited electrons from pCN to C-dots via well-contacted heterojunction interfaces, which retarded the charge recombination (see Fig. 17). Overall, the use of metal-free C-dots as effective cocatalysts provides a crucial foundation for the interface engineering of g-C3N4-based semiconductor photocatalysts for diverse applications.72
 Fig. 17  Charge transfer and separation in the enhanced photoreduction of CO2 to CO and CH4 using CDs/pCN samples under visible light or simulated solar irradiation. (Reproduced from ref. 72.) 
4.1.3.6 CoO/C-dots photocatalysts. 
Shi et al. constructed a composite material with C-dots decorated on the exposed highly reactive (111) facets octahedral CoO as an effective and stable photocatalyst for tetracycline degradation (Fig. 18). The optimized CoO/C-dots (5 wt% C-dots/CoO) composite showed a high photocatalytic activity for the degradation of tetracycline (87%, 60 min) and remarkable photostability after five successive cycles (5 h). This enhanced photocatalytic property could be ascribed to several merits of C-dots that not only improved the charge-separation efficiency and visible light absorption but also strengthened the interaction between C-dots and the highly reactive (111) facets of the CoO octahedrons.74
 Fig. 18  Schematic illustration of photocatalytic water splitting over the CoO/C-dots photocatalyst. (Reproduced from ref. 74.) 
4.1.3.7 Enzyme/C-dots photocatalysts. 
Li et al.73a demonstrated that an enzyme's catalytic activity could be modified by C-dots in the presence of visible light (see Fig. 6). They created porcine pancreatic lipase (PPL)/C-dots hybrids using a wet chemical method. When the PPL/C-dots were irradiated by visible light (PPL/C-dots-light), their activity was higher than that of free PPL (activity increased by ∼10%). When the light source was removed, the activity of the PPL/CDs was lower than that of free PPL (activity decreased by ∼30%). Using Michaelis–Menten kinetics, they also confirmed that the C-dots played the role of a non-competitive inhibitor. The addition of visible light irradiation initiated C-dots-mediated structural changes to the PPL in the PPL/C-dots hybrids, which improved the catalytic activity. The surfaces of the C-dots contained many functional groups, including amino groups, carboxyl groups and hydroxyl groups, which allowed for easy adsorption of the C-dots onto the surface of PPL to form PPL/C-dots hybrids. Li et al.73b further fabricated laccase/phosphate-modification carbon dots (P–C-dots) hybrids and investigated the effect that the P–C-dots and visible light had on the catalytic behaviour of laccase. The catalytic activity of the laccase/P–C-dots was higher than that of laccase (increased by about 47.7%). When the laccase/P–C-dots were irradiated by visible light (laccase/P–C-dots-light), their catalytic activity increased by about 92.1% vs. laccase/P–C-dots hybrids. The functional groups of C-dots also played an important role affecting the activity of laccase via the interaction between the phosphate group and T1 Cu in laccase.


4.1.4 Photoelectrochemical catalyst designs based on C-dots. 
TiO2 is regarded as one of the most popular photoanode materials for photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting devices owing to its high resistance to photocorrosion, physical and chemical stability, easy availability and low cost. While, for efficient hydrogen generation under visible light, a good sensitizer should meet several criteria described as follows.75 First, it must be able to enhance the absorption of the solar spectrum for the host materials. Second, it should have suitable energy levels so that the photoexcited electrons in the HOMO level or conduction band could be efficiently injected into the semiconductor acceptor's conduction band, and simultaneously the holes in the LUMO level or valence band could oxidize the reducing substances in the electrolytes. Third, it is favourable to contain some specific functional groups on their surfaces which could make them easy and stable to attach to the semiconductor acceptors’ surfaces. Fourth, it should be resistant to corrosion or degradation in the practical operation conditions of PEC cells for the long term. Zhang et al.75 reported that C-dots could be used as an alternative sensitizer for the PEC cells based on TiO2 nanotube arrays (TiO2 NTs) (see Fig. 19). Under simulated sunlight illumination (100 mW cm−2), the photocurrent density of the C-dots-sensitized PEC cell was four times larger than the unsensitized one at 0 V vs. Ag/AgCl. The corresponding hydrogen production rate was determined to be about 14.1 μmol h−1 for a C-dots-sensitized TiO2 NTs (C-dots/TiO2 NTs) photoanode with a Faradaic efficiency of nearly 100%. A sensibilization mechanism was proposed to illustrate the role of C-dots in the PEC cells. A photon with adequate energy could excite the electrons in the HOMO level to transfer to the LUMO level of the C-dots. Afterwards, the excited electrons in the LUMO level of the C-dots are transferred to the conduction band of the contacted TiO2 NTs and then transported to the counter electrode for the hydrogen evolution reaction along the TiO2 NTs axial direction; while the holes left in the HOMO level of the C-dots could oxidize the sacrificial reagent to complete a whole galvanic circle. Further studies also demonstrated that C-dots were effective sensitizers for the PEC photoelectrode based on various semiconductors, such as ZnO, CdSe, CdSe/TiO2 and np+-Si.76–79 Recently, Ye et al. reported a NiOOH/FeOOH/CQD/BiVO4 (NFCB) photoanode, which exhibited enhanced PEC activity for water splitting under visible light irradiation with a photocurrent density of 3.91 and 5.99 mA cm−2 at 0.6 V and 1.23 V vs. RHE under AM 1.5G in KH2PO4 aqueous solution without a hole scavenger (pH = 7), respectively. The CQDs in this system could not only broaden the light response range and increase the separation of electrons and holes, but could also maintain the hole-transfer ability from BiVO4 to the OEC layer.80 On the other hand, Reisner et al.81 reported that C-dots were established as excellent photosensitizers in combination with a molecular catalyst for solar-light-driven hydrogen production in aqueous solution (see Fig. 20). The C-dots displayed activity in the visible region beyond λ > 455 nm and maintained their full photocatalytic activity for at least 1 day under full solar spectrum irradiation. A high quantum efficiency of 1.4% was recorded for noble- and toxic-metal-free photocatalytic systems. Moreover, a follow-up work into a carbon dots/molecular catalyst photosystem was reported by Martindale et al.82 They used a TCEP/NaAsc donor system to prevent rapid radical decomposition of the catalyst, and they synthesized a CQD-NiP photocatalyst system with enhanced H2 evolution activity and improved photocatalytic stability (achieving a benchmark lifetime of more than five days and a record turnover number (TON) of 1094 ± 61 molH2 (molNi)−1 for a defined synthetic molecular Ni catalyst in purely aqueous solution under AM 1.5G solar irradiation and 825 ± 183 under visible-only light).
 Fig. 19  (a) The chopped-light current density versus time (J–t) curves of the TiO2 NTs and C-dots/TiO2 NT photoanodes at 0 V vs. Ag/AgCl. (b) Linear sweep voltammetric (J–V) curves of the two kinds of photoanodes under dark and simulated light illumination. (c) The diffused reflectance UV-VIS spectra of the two types of TiO2 NTs. (d) Comparison of the IPCE spectra of the two photoanodes measured at 0 V vs. Ag/AgCl. In this figure, CQDs are the C-dots. (Reproduced from ref. 75.) 
 Fig. 20  Representation of solar H2 production using the hybrid C-dots–NiP system described in this work. The irradiation of photoluminescent C-dots results in the direct transfer of photoexcited electrons to the catalyst NiP, with a subsequent reduction of aqueous protons. The electron donor EDTA carries out quenching of the photoinduced holes in the C-dots. In this figure, CQDs are the C-dots. (Reproduced from ref. 81.) 


4.1.5 Electrocatalyst designs based on C-dots. 
A C-dots/NiFe-layered double hydroxides (LDH) complex was developed and exhibited high OER electrocatalytic activity (with an overpotential of ∼235 mV in 1 M KOH at a current density of 10 mA cm−2) and stability for oxygen evolution, which almost exceeded those of any previous Ni–Fe compounds and were even comparable with that of the lowest overpotential reported in Ni–Fe catalysts of ∼230 mV at 10 mA cm−2 for electrodeposited Ni–Fe films.83,84 The high electrocatalytic property was primarily attributed to the NiFe-LDH phase, and further enhanced by strongly associating the LDH with C-dots, which possessed a small size, excellent conductivity, rapid electron transfer and electron-reservoir properties. Specifically, the small size of C-dots provide a large specific surface area for more convenient electrococatalytic reactions. Also, the rapid electron-transfer from C-dots to NiFe-LDH on the surface could further improve the electrocatalytic activities. The surface functional groups on C-dots (such as carboxy CO) made it easier for the formation of C-dots/NiFe-LDH composites solidly due to the strong electrostatic interactions (or by generating new covalent bond (like C–O–Ni or C–O–Fe)). Zhao et al.85 also demonstrated that a carbon nanodots (phosphate-functionalized carbon nanodots, P–C-dots)-modified cobalt phosphate (CoPi) composite (CoPi/P–C-dots) could serve as a high-efficiency oxygen-evolution reaction (OER) catalyst in both neutral and alkaline conditions with a low onset potential and high current density. Sun et al.86a designed a Pt–Co3O4–C-dots electrocatalyst with enhanced electrocatalytic performance and resistance to CO poisoning for direct methanol fuel cells. Guo et al.86b synthesized Cu–C-dots nanocorals as an electrocatalyst for efficient CO2 reduction, where the C-dots could enhance the adsorption of CO2 and H+, which are significant for CO2 reduction. Samantara et al.87 prepared a hybrid material composed of sandwiched reduced graphene oxide (rGO) and N,S co-doped carbon dots (N,S–C-dots). This composite exhibited dual performance as an electrode material for supercapacitors and fuel cell catalysts. Xu et al.88 reported C3N4@C-dots nanohybrids by a one-step hydrothermal treatment and then further demonstrated their potential towards energy conversion applications. N,S-doped RGO/C-dots hybrids as a kind of metal-free electrocatalyst were demonstrated by Luo et al.89 to have good catalytic properties with long-term operational stability and tolerance to the crossover effects of methanol for oxygen reduction via a four-electron pathway in alkaline solution. There were also many reports on an electrocatalyst design based on C-dots and metal-free semiconductors (GO, C3N4, microporous carbon nanospheres, graphene nanoribbons, etc.). On the other hand, Favaro et al.90 reported the synthesis of singly and multiply doped graphene oxide quantum dots via a simple electrochemical method with water as a solvent. The chemical and structural properties of the obtained materials were investigated by photoemission spectroscopy and scanning tunnelling microscopy analyses. The electrochemical activity towards the ORR of the doped graphene oxide quantum dots was studied by cyclic voltammetry and rotating disc electrode measurements (see Fig. 21), and showed a clear decrease in the overpotential as a function of the dopant according to the sequence: N ∼ B > B, N. Moreover, assisted by density functional calculations of the Gibbs free energy associated with every electron transfer, they demonstrated that the selectivity of the reaction was controlled by the oxidation states of the dopants; whereby as-prepared graphene oxide quantum dots followed a two-electron reduction path that leads to the formation of hydrogen peroxide, whereas after the reduction with NaBH4, the same materials favoured a four-electron reduction of oxygen to water.
 Fig. 21  CVs of pure C-dots (a) and B– (c), N– (e), and B, N–C-dots (g) in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution, at different potential scan rates (10 (red curve), 20, 50 and 100 mV s−1) and the corresponding CVs (b, d, f, h; scan rate 50 mV s−1) acquired in Ar-saturated (thick curves) and O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solutions. In this figure, GOQDs are the C-dots. (Reproduced from ref. 90.) 
It should be noted that nitrogen (N)-doped carbon materials exhibit high electrocatalytic activity for the ORR, which is essential for several renewable energy systems. However, the ORR-active site (or sites) is unclear, which retards the further developments of high-performance catalysts. Very recently, Guo et al.91 characterized the ORR-active site by using newly designed graphite (highly oriented pyrolitic graphite) model catalysts with well-defined p conjugation and the well-controlled doping of N species. The ORR-active site is created by pyridinic N. Carbon dioxide adsorption experiments indicated that pyridinic N also creates Lewis basic sites. The specific activities per pyridinic N in the HOPG model catalysts were comparable with those of N-doped graphene powder catalysts. Thus, the ORR-active sites in N-doped carbon materials were carbon atoms with Lewis basicity next to pyridinic N (see Fig. 22).
 Fig. 22  Structural and elemental characterization of four types of N-HOPG model catalysts and their ORR performance. (A) Optical image of patterned edge-N+-HOPG. (B) AFM image obtained for the region indicated by the yellow rectangle in (A). (C) Three-dimensional representation of (B). (D) Line profile of the AFM image obtained along the blue line in (B). (E) N 1s XPS spectra of model catalysts. (F) ORR results for the model catalysts corresponding to (E). Nitrogen contents of the model catalysts are shown as the inset in (F). (Reproduced from ref. 91.) 


4.1.6 Surface modifications towards catalyst design. 
Efficient electrocatalysts for the OER and ORR are essential components of renewable energy technologies, from fuel cells to metal–air batteries.92–95 Much progress has been achieved in the development of platinum-based electrocatalysts for ORR and iridium (or Ru)-based electrocatalysts for OER, so that they are now regarded as the most effective catalysts for ORR and OER, respectively.96–100 However, these electrocatalysts still do not yet meet the demands for large-scale commercialization because of their sluggish electron-transfer kinetics,101 poor durability102 and high cost. Carbon nanostructures have a number of notable merits, including low cost, wide abundance, large surface areas, high electrical conductivity and good stability.103–106 Consequently, catalysts based on carbon nanostructures (doped with nitrogen, boron, phosphorus, iodine, fluorine, etc.) have attracted much attention in the past decade,107–111 particularly in improving their ORR and OER activity relative to that of commercial Pt/C and IrO2/C.112–115 Among efforts in carbon nanostructures for ORR and OER catalysts,116–119 a recent exciting development showed that a polymer co-doped with P and N (coined as N–P co-doped mesoporous nanocarbon (NPMC) foam) could serve as an efficient bifunctional electrocatalyst for both ORR and OER.120 Kang et al. reported that carbon nanodots, via surface modification, could independently become either an ORR or OER electrocatalyst with unprecedented performance better than all previous catalysts, including NPMC.121,122,126 C-dots have exhibited unique photoinduced electron transfer, photoluminescence (PL), and electron-reservoir properties.9b,10,13b,123,124 They possess high catalytic activity for various reactions and can also serve as functional units for photocatalyst and electrocatalyst design.43,70,80,125 Kang et al. demonstrated that C-dots after surface modification with amidogen and phosphorus species (NH2-C-dots and PO4-C-dots), respectively, possessed outstanding OER and ORR electrocatalytic properties (e.g. activity), which were similar to or even better than iridium-based and platinum-based electrocatalysts (see Fig. 23). Furthermore, superior electrocatalytic activity and stability were achieved by attaching Au nanoparticles (NPs) to NH2-C-dots and PO4-C-dots, exceeding those of commercial catalysts (IrO2/C and Pt/C) under visible light.126
 Fig. 23  Electrocatalytic activities of NH2-C-dots and PO4-C-dots. (a) LSV curves of C-dots, NH2-C-dots-3, and IrO2/C (20 wt% IrO2 loading) in an N2-saturated 0.1 m KOH aqueous solution. (b) Steady-state voltammograms for the OER in N2-saturated 0.1 m KOH at the Pt disc-Pt ring electrodes, applying a rotation rate of 1600 rpm. The Pt ring was biased at 1.51 V versus RHE. (c) LSV curves of CDs, PO4-C-dots-6, and Pt/C in an O2-saturated 0.1 m KOH aqueous solution. (d) LSV curves of PO4-C-dots-6 in an O2-saturated 0.1 m KOH aqueous solution. (e) Relationship between the amidogen contents and OER activities of the NH2-C-dots electrocatalyst (black line: the potentials required to achieve 0.15 mA cm−2; red line: the current density at 1.60 V). (f) The relationship between the phosphorus contents of PO4-C-dots and the onset potentials (black line) and current densities (red line) normalized to commercial Pt/C. In this figure, CDs are the C-dots. (Reproduced from ref. 126.) 

4.2 C-dots for sensing and detection

4.2.1 PL sensors. 
For sensing applications, various C-dots-based PL sensors have been fabricated with either a signal-off or signal-on process. Recently, Fan et al.127 reported that doping C-dots with S atom (S–C-dots) could promote the coordination interaction between Fe3+ and phenolic hydroxyl groups of S–C-dots, leading to significant PL quenching. Taking advantage of the PL quenching of C-dots, a turn-off sensor for Ag+ and biothiol detection was developed by Ran et al.119,128 He et al. reported a glucose biosensor via the PL quenching of hemin-functionalized C-dots.129 According to the surface quenching states induced mechanism, 3-aminobenzeneboronic acid-functionalized C-dots were also used for glucose detection by Qu et al.130 In addition, Wang et al. developed a simple PL-off assay for the activity of protein kinase CK2 based on the selective aggregation of phosphorylated peptide-C-dots conjugates triggered by Zr4+ coordination.131 Apart from the signal-off PL sensors described above, signal-on PL sensors have been designed as well.132–135 An aggregation-induced PL sensor for the label-free detection of glucose was proposed by Zhang et al.133 In another study, Li et al. designed a glucose sensing system using anionic C-dots and a cationic boronic acid substituted bipyridinium salt.134 Li et al. also demonstrated a label-free PL signal-on assay for the detection of trypsin based on cytochrome c (Cyt c)-induced self-assembled C-dots.135 Liu et al. proposed a PL “off-to-on” mechanism of glutathione-functionalized C-dots for the assay of adenosine triphosphate (ATP). Wu et al. designed a PL turn-on sensor for sensitive biothiols and Hg2+ detection. Fan et al. demonstrated the use of B-CDs as a PL turn-on sensor for detecting Al3+.132 Zhang et al. reported C-dots as a fluorescent sensing platform for the highly sensitive and selective detection of Fe3+ ions.136 Wu et al. designed a carbon nanodots-based fluorescent turn-on sensor array for biothiols detection and differentiation.146 Li et al. demonstrated that C-dots/tyrosinase (TYR) hybrids, as a fluorescent probe, were efficient, fast, stable and sensitive for the detection of levodopa (L-DOPA). It is worth mentioning that TYR did not require modification and immobilization, and the test results could be read as soon as the probe–sample incubation was completed. Moreover, the test results were comparable to those of the present clinical fluorescence and high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) methods.19 Similarly, Li et al. also reported C-dots–laccase hybrids, which were sensitive, stable and of low cost for the precise detection of catechol and catechol derivatives.137 Yang et al. established a fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) system for the determination of Zn(II) based on C-dots.138
Notably, C-dots synthesized through refluxing glucose could serve as efficient fluorescent probes for the convenient and sensitive detection of Norfloxacin (NOR) with a wide concentration range (see Fig. 24).139 For C-dots, the fluorescence intensity was enhanced gradually as the NOR concentration was increased. Under the optimized conditions, the detection of NOR could be performed in the liquid phase and on a solid substrate. This method was used to detect NOR in real samples. A series of experiments suggested that the enhanced fluorescence should be attributed to the strong hydrogen bond interaction between the C-dots and NOR. Compared with high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), this method was a faster, simpler, lower-cost and higher sensitivity method for the determination of NOR.
 Fig. 24  (a) Fluorescence spectra of C-dots with enhanced fluorescence using a series of NOR concentrations in PBS. CNOR (0.01 μM) = (A) 2000; (B) 1000; (C) 500; (D) 200; (E) 100; (F) 50; (G) 20; (H) 10; (I) 5; (J) 3; (K) 2; (L) 1.33 and (M) 0; (b) the relationship between I/I0 and NOR concentration. (c) Fluorescence spectra of the C-dots enhanced fluorescence using a series of NOR concentrations in PBS. CNOR (0.01 μM) = (a) 10000; (b) 5000; (c) 2000; (d) 1000; (e) 500; (f) 200; (g) 100; (h) 50; (i) 5; (j) 3.8 and (k) 0. (d) The relationship between I/I0 and NOR concentration. (e) Images of the C-dots and their responses to NOR solution with concentrations of 8.4 × 10−4, 4.2 × 10−4, 8 × 10−5, 2 × 10−5, 8 × 10−6, 2 × 10−6, 8 × 10−7, 2 × 10−7, 8 × 10−8, and 0 mol L−1 (spots A–J, respectively) under visible and UV (at 365 nm excitation) light. In this figure, CDs are the C-dots. (Reproduced from ref. 139.) 


4.2.2 Electronic, electrochemiluminescence and electrochemical sensors. 
Unlike the extensive applications of graphene in field-effect transistors, C-dots are mainly used in single electron transistor (SET)-based charge sensors.140–144 As the bias voltage between the source and drain is increased, an electron can pass through the island, such that current then flows, and charge detection is realized.141–144 In addition to detecting charge in SETs, C-dots have also been applied to build electronic sensors for the detection of humidity and pressure.145 ECL emission was also observed from C-dots.147–150 Yang et al. designed a sandwich-type ECL immunosensor by using gold–silver nanocomposite-functionalized graphene (GN-Ag–Au) as the sensor platform and C-dots functionalized porous Pt/Pd nanochains (pPtPd) as the signal amplifier for the detection of a tumour marker (see Fig. 25).148 Lu et al. constructed an ECL sensor via an electrochemiluminescence resonance energy transfer (ERET) between C-dots and gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) for DNA damage detection.149 By combining the intense ECL of C-dots and the aptamer technique, Lu et al. proposed a novel ECL aptamer sensor for measuring ATP.150 In addition, Dong et al. presented an ECL sensor for the detection of H2O2 using hydrazide-modified C-dots.151 On the other hand, the electrocatalytic performances of C-dots have been gradually recognized, allowing the use of C-dots as nanoprobes for electrochemical biosensors.152–155 Due to their biocompatibility, large surface-to-volume ratio and ease of modification, C-dots can be employed in electrochemical biosensors as nanocarriers.156–164
 Fig. 25  ECL of the immunosensor at various concentrations of CA199 (U mL−1): (a): 0.002, (b): 0.01, (c): 0.05, (d): 0.5, (e): 5, (f): 50 (A). Relationship between ECL and the CA199 concentration, where each point is the average of ten measurements (B). Selectivity of the ECL immunosensor (C). ECL-potential curves of (a) pure C-dots, (b) pPtPd@ C-dots and cyclic voltammogram (inset) of pPtPd@ C-dots on the electrode in pH 7.4 PBS containing TPA. (Reproduced from ref. 148.) 


4.2.3 C-dots for humidity and temperature sensing. 
Zhang and Kang et al. reported the fabrication of a humidity sensing device based on a C-dots film (see Fig. 26).165 The conductivity of the C-dots film had a linear and rapid response to relative humidity. The sensing mechanism was proposed to be the formation of hydrogen bonds between the carbon quantum dots and water molecules in the humidity environment, which significantly promoted electron migration. In a control experiment, this hypothesis was confirmed by comparing the humidity sensitivity of candle soot (i.e. carbon nanoparticles) with and without oxygen-containing groups on the surfaces. As reported by Liu et al., N-doped C-dots, obtained from C3N4 and ethanediamine, emitted bright-blue fluorescence under UV light.166 They were also demonstrated to have good water-dispersibility and excellent fluorescence properties, which were independent of ionic strength, pH and time. Besides, temperature-dependent fluorescence was also measured from 20 °C to 80 °C. The fluorescence intensity decreased with the temperature increasing. Significantly, this process was reversible and the fluorescence could recover to the initial intensity with the temperature decreasing. For the present system, the thermal sensitivity of the N-doped C-dots’ PL intensity was determined to be about 0.85% °C−1. The origin of this temperature-dependent PL sensing may be attributed to the synergistic effect of abundant oxygen-containing functional groups and hydrogen bonds (see Fig. 27). Further, these N-doped C-dots were also demonstrated to have low cytotoxicity, and could be regarded as an effective in vitro and in vivo nanothermometer in a biosystem.166 Wang et al. also reported this application of CDs. They synthesized CDs through the hydrothermal treatment of glucose (glc) in the presence of glutathione (GSH) and reported that these CDs may be useful as pH sensors or as versatile nanothermometry devices based on the pronounced temperature dependence of their steady-state fluorescence emission spectra, which changes over the physiological temperature range (15–60 °C) (see Fig. 28 and 29).167
 Fig. 26  (a) Conductivity of the C-dots film as a function of the ambient relative humidity. (b) The response and recovery curve of the C-dots-based humidity sensing device. The curves were measured between 7% and 43% RH at room temperature. In this figure, CQDs are C-dots. (Reproduced from ref. 165.) 
 Fig. 27  Schematic mechanism for the temperature-dependent fluorescence intensity of N–C-dots. (Reproduced from ref. 166.) 
 Fig. 28  (a) PL intensity of CDs at various pH values; (b) PL intensity upon the cyclic switching of CDs under alternating conditions of pH = 3 and pH = 9. (Reproduced from ref. 167.) 
 Fig. 29  (a) Fluorescence emission spectra (excitation 400 nm) for various temperatures in the range 15–90 °C (top to bottom); (b) the intensity at 500 nm is plotted versus temperature. (Reproduced from ref 167.) 

4.3 C-dots for solar energy
In addition to being used as photocatalysts, C-dots have been capturing the attention of researchers as potential photosensitizers in solar cells.13b For example, a C-dots–RhB–TiO2 system showed that the C-dots could effectively bridge the RhB molecules to the TiO2 substrate by acting as a one-way electron-transfer intermediary (see Fig. 30).124 Compared to the RhB–TiO2 system, the presence of C-dots significantly enhanced the photoelectric conversion efficiency by a factor as much as seven times. In another report, a C-dots/TiO2 electrode was employed in a solar cell.124 The photocurrent density was 2.7 times larger than that of a pristine TiO2 electrode under visible light illumination. Enhanced performance of a solar cell was also obtained when N–C-dots were used as photosensitizers. Although the photo-to-electricity conversion efficiency of the above-mentioned solar cells is far from satisfactory, these findings definitely encourage more research in the application of C-dots in photovoltaic devices and photocatalyst design.
 Fig. 30  (a) Photoluminescence quenching of RhB and the RhB/C-dots complex measured by a time-correlated single photon counting (TCSPC) technique. (b) Ground-state bleaching recovery of RhB molecules in RhB/TiO2 and the RhB/C-dots/TiO2 complex systems extracted from femtosecond transient absorption (TA) spectroscopy. (c) Scheme of electron transfer from RhB to C-dots. (d) The C-dots serve as an electron-transfer intermediary for bridging the photogenerated electrons and suppressing their recombination. In this figure, CQDs are the C-dots. (Reproduced from ref. 124.) 
C-dots have played different roles as photoabsorption agents, sensitizers and transporting layers, where and the efficiency varied from 0.1% to 9%. For example, C-dots/silicon nanowire array core–shell devices have shown a conversion efficiency of 9.1%, which is comparable to that of Si-based hybrid solar cells (SCs).168 A similar structure was also employed by Gao et al., who obtained a conversion efficiency of 6.63%. Such an improved performance compared to bare Si or graphene oxide hybrids could be explained by the special energy band structure of the C-dots, which behaved as an electron-blocking layer.169 The size of the C-dots plays an important role in device performances as shown by the open circuit voltage (VOC) of the device increasing while the short-circuit current (JSC) deceases with the decrease in size. The quantum size effect accounts for this phenomenon, where the heterojunction barrier increases with the decrease in size, while the barrier for hole transportation increases, resulting in an increase in VOC and decrease in JSC, respectively. In fact, to make the best of the photogenerated carriers, many approaches have been applied to facilitate the separation and to suppress the recombination of carriers. The interfaces between materials, layers and different units are very important for the enhancement of SCs. For example, ZnO nanorod arrays decorated with C-dots have been prepared.170,171 Besides this, other kinds of solid-state solar cells have also been fabricated, combining inorganic quantum dots and C-dots.172,173 It turns out that facilitation of the charge propagation from the C-dots and Förster resonance energy transfer improves the device performance greatly. All the solution-processed organic and dye-sensitized SCs can also benefit from the broad absorption, special band structure and electron transportation ability of C-dots. Li and co-workers fabricated a bulk-heterojunction organic solar cell based on a composite layer of poly (3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) and C-dots.174 The C-dots improved the charge transport through the active layer, and then, a photoconversion efficiency of 1.28% was obtained, and such a structure without C60 was also accepted by other groups to fabricate organic solar cells.175,176 A high VOC (1.6 V) and conversion efficiency of about 1% can be obtained. Though the efficiency of these devices is still low compared to conventional organic solar cells, it is expected that C-dots can be promising alternatives to the expensive C60 as electron acceptors.
C-dots were first applied in DSSCs by Yan and co-workers.177 However, limited efficiency was obtained, with a rather low short current density of 200 μA cm−2, because of the weak affinity between GQDs and the TiO2 surface. Such physical adsorption is detrimental to the charge injection such that functionalization for covalent attaching and adjusting the band energy structure are highly sought. A device with the same configuration was fabricated by employing nitrogen-doped C-dots (N–C-dots).178 The in situ hybridization of TiO2 with C-dots and lowered work function induced by nitrogen doping contributed to the improvement of device performance. A VOC of 0.46 V and JSC of 0.69 mA cm−2 were obtained, with a conversion efficiency of 0.13%. Recently, DSSCs combined with dyes and C-dots (co-sensitizers) were fabricated and a high conversion efficiency was achieved.179,180 A type II alignment for a TiO2/C-dots/dye configuration was realized by tuning the electronic levels of C-dots and such a cascaded alignment of energy levels was found to enhance the charge separation and collection. Additionally, energy transfer from the C-dots to dyes occurs because of the overlap between the PL of the C-dots and absorption of the dye to promote applications in solar energy. Last but not the least, electron recombination to the redox couple is reduced because of the inhibition of the back electron transfer to the electrolyte by the C-dots. Therefore, the DSSCs exhibited an efficiency of 6.1%, higher than that of device without C-dots by 19.6%. Organic/inorganic hybrid solar cells combined with metal oxides and organic semiconductors have also attracted researchers’ attention, though it remains a challenge to match the energy levels of the donor–acceptor system. Qin et al. demonstrated the insertion of C-dots in organic/inorganic layers or in combination with organic semiconductors, which led to an enhancement of the power conversion efficiency (see Fig. 31).181,182
 Fig. 31  SEM images of TiO2 (a) and TiO2/C-dots (b). (c) Cross-sectional SEM image of TiO2/C-dots blend film. (d) On–off switches by illuminating (100 mW cm−2) and darkening (0 mW cm−2). (e) J–V curves of the HSCs with and without C-dots. In this figure, GQDs are the C-dots. (Reproduced from ref. 182.) 
Huang et al. developed a conceptual device by employing poly-(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT)/C-dots as electron donors/acceptors.183 Wang et al. demonstrated that, in solution-processed small-molecule bulk-heterojunction solar cells, the C-dots improved light absorption and effective charge conduction, and this led to high-efficiency solution-processed small-molecule solar cells.184 Zhu et al. reported a power conversion efficiency improvement of perovskite solar cells from 8.81% to 10.15% due to insertion of a C-dots layer between the perovskite and TiO2.185 Pan et al. prepared C-dots/p-type CuAlO2/n-type ZnO photoelectric bilayer film composites. The enhancement of the photoconductivity was mainly attributed to C-dots with a unique up-converted photoluminescence behaviour. In addition, the p–n junction structure and C-dots with the ability to accept electrons could help to separate the photogenerated electron–hole pairs to increase the carrier concentration further.186 When C-dots were also introduced into the active layer of polymer solar cells, the performance of doped devices obtained by Liu et al. was apparently improved, and a highest power conversion efficiency of 7.05% was obtained, corresponding to a 28.2% enhancement compared with that of the control device.187 C-dots were demonstrated by Li et al. to be excellent hole-transport layers in both polymer solar cells and small-molecule solar cells.188
Recently, Li et al. designed a carbon quantum dots/TiO2 composite as an electron-transport layer (ETL) in conjunction in the perovskite solar cell and obtained an unprecedented efficiency of 19% under standard illumination test conditions. They also found that the open circuit voltage and short-circuit current density were both increased compared with using TiO2 alone (see Fig. 32). They attributed this improvement to the enhanced electronic coupling between the CH3NH3PbI3−xClx and TiO2 ETL interface as well as the energy levels, which contributed to electron extraction caused by the C-dots.189
 Fig. 32  
J–U curves of the perovskite solar cells based on ITO/C10/T and the control device based on the ITO/TiO2 substrate. (Reproduced from ref. 189.) 
4.4 Applications in supercapacitors and lithium-ion batteries
For the application of C-dots in supercapacitors, Hu et al. deposited C-dots onto aligned carbon nanotubes by an electrical method.190 A capacitance of 44 mF cm−2 was obtained, exhibiting a more than 200% improvement over that of bare CNT electrodes. Considering the formation of micropores between the C-dots and CNT scaffolds and the neighbouring C-dots, here, the authors referenced the electric double-cylinder capacitor model.191 Such a structure facilitated the amount and transportation of ions, resulting in a high capacitance and stability. Similarly, C-dots and other carbon porous structures, such as graphene192 and 3D aerogel,193 were applied. At least a 100% improvement was obtained in these works thanks to the high specific surface area and easy access and diffusion of ions. Despite there being capacitors used in the workplace with higher energy, micro-supercapacitors applied in portable electronics are studied here. A C-dots-based symmetric micro-supercapacitor was first prepared by Liu et al., using a simple electro-deposition method on interdigital gold electrodes.194 The devices exhibited a superior rate capability (1000 V s−1) and excellent power response with a very short relaxation time constant in both aqueous and ion liquid electrolytes. A retention of 97.8% of its initial specific capacitance after 5000 cycles was obtained. Then, an asymmetric device employing a conductive polymer, polyaniline (PANI), was prepared using a similar method.195 First of all, PANI nanofibres were prepared through an electrochemical method and then, C-dots were electrodeposited on the aligned PANI fibres. Such devices employing PANI and C-dots as the positive and negative active materials also showed a high rate capability and short relaxation time constant of 115.9 ms. Compared to double layer capacitors, pseudocapacitors associated with redox reactions usually exhibit a higher energy density. Obviously, a higher specific surface area and more atoms participating in the redox reactions will result in a higher specific capacitance. Zhu et al. reported that a C-dots-decorated RuO2 network exhibited a specific capacitance of 460 F g−1 and excellent rate capability.196 Hassan et al. developed a simple and effective strategy using ultrasonication and chemical activation to generate activated C-dots with enriched edges, which showed photoluminescence similar in origin to their non-activated counterparts but distinctive in their higher intensity.197
On the other hand, for C-dots’ application in the field of lithium-ion batteries (LIBs), Zhu et al. synthesized CuO/Cu/C-dots tri-axial nanowire arrays. This was the first report about the application of C-dots in LIBs. Such a soft protection of C-dots showed a greatly increased surface conductivity and stability of the nanowire array structure. Compared to the CuO/Cu composite structure, the tri-axial nanowire electrodes achieved a high initial Coulombic efficiency (87%) and superior capability retention (high retention after 1000 cycles). The current collector, i.e. copper foam, also provided good conductivity for electrons because no binder was used. This method is also suitable for the improvement of performance in other less-stable materials, such as VO2. C-Dots-coated VO2 arrays were fabricated via a similar method by the same research group.198 The effect of C-dots was similar with that with supercapacitors, namely separating VO2 nanobelts from each other and avoiding the agglomeration as well as minimizing the dissolution of active materials. LIBs based on the above electrodes exhibited about 99% initial Coulombic efficiency and 100% during the following cycles and a 36% capacity retention when the current density was increased from 1/3 C to 120 C. Incredibly, such a structure delivered a retention of 94% of the original capacity after 1500 cycles at 60 C (see Fig. 33). Jing et al. also demonstrated the fabrication of a C-dots-coated Mn3O4 composite by a green alternating voltage electrochemical approach. The as-produced Mn3O4/C-dots composite utilized as an anode material for LIBs demonstrated excellent electrochemical performances, showing an enhanced reversible discharge capacity of 934 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles at a current density of 100 mA g−1, which was almost five times as much as that of pure Mn3O4.199
 Fig. 33  (a) Charge–discharge curves at different C rates (1 C = 300 mA g−1). (b) CV curves at a scan rate of 0.3 mV s−1. (c) Rate tolerance performance of the GVG electrode. (d) Cycling performance of three different GVG electrodes at 5 C for 500 cycles. The Rct as a function of cycle number is also shown. (e) AC impedance plots at full-charged state after different cycles. The resistance is simulated using the same equivalent circuit RS(Q(RctZW)) (inset in panel e) as used in LIBs. (f) Cycling performance of three different electrodes at 60 C for 1500 cycles (1/3 C at the first five cycles for activation). (g) Ragone plot based on the total mass of the whole electrode, the sloping lines indicate the relative time to get the charge in or out of the electrodes. (Reproduced from ref. 198.) 
4.5 C-dots nanocomposites for efficient lubrication
Mechanical wear accounts for one-third of the present global energy consumption. Yet it still lacks an efficient lubricant to achieve simultaneously highly efficient lubrication and metal wear repair.200–203 Kang et al. reported that C-dots/CuSx nanocomposites show enhanced lubrication and metal-worn-surface-repair abilities when used as additives. They reported a simple method to obtain the C-dots/CuSx nanocomposites in the large scale (about 250 g h−1). The obtained C-dots/CuSx nanocomposites were uniform and monodispersed with diameters of approximately 20 nm. C-Dots possess a graphite-like multi-layer structure, which can improve the lubrication performance; while the CuSx with a noninteger ratio exhibited a high chemical activity (e.g. easy-to-form CuFeySx–y alloy with Fe) in oil. The antiwear properties of C-dots/CuSx nanocomposites in liquid paraffin (as additive) were evaluated with a four-ball machine at ambient conditions. The wear scar volume significantly decreased as the C-dots/CuSx nanocomposites increased. This indicates that C-dots/CuSx nanocomposites have a significant antiwear effect as a lubrication additive, which may be closely related to their small size, low melting point and high reactivity.204 The high oil solubility and stability of C-dots/CuSx nanocomposites in liquid paraffin can be readily transferred onto the contact zone of rubbing steel surfaces and deposited there to form a surface protective and lubricious layer, resulting in a reduced friction coefficient (see Fig. 34). Further experiments were carried out, where the C-dots/CuSx nanocomposites were loaded on the surface of metal plates, and then these two metal plates underwent a high speed relative rotation. After that, the worn surfaces analysis suggested that the Cu and S elements could uniformly append on the surface of the frictional couple of the carbon steel, which confirmed that the C-dots/CuSx nanocomposites could efficiently achieve the repair of a worn surface. Also, the C-dots/CuSx nanocomposites could efficiently combine with the substrate to form bonding and alloys, which was key to enhancing the lubrication of damaged mechanical aspects and restoration of the strength in damaged areas. As said by the authors, the CuSx with a noninteger ratio exhibited high chemical activity, therefore forming a CuFeySx–y alloy with Fe in oil more easily. More tests indicated that the C-dots/CuSx nanocomposites not only enhanced the precision of machine tools, but also could repair the machine tools, which could prolong the service life and reduce their cost. In the engine repair test, the C-dots/CuSx nanocomposites showed distinct improvement in repairing the engine.
 Fig. 34  Variation of the wear scar volume (a) and friction coefficient (b) with different contents of C-dots/CuSx nanocomposites in liquid paraffin (four-ball, 100 N, 1450 rpm and 15 min). (c) Relationship between the friction coefficient and friction time (920 s) using C-dots/CuSx nanocomposites with different contents (1, 2, 5 and 10 wt%) and liquid paraffin as additives (four-ball, 100 N, 1450 rpm and 15 min). (d) Relationship between the friction coefficient versus friction time (1850 s) with 5 wt% C-dots/CuSx nanocomposites and liquid paraffin as additives (four-ball, 100 N, 1450 rpm). In this figure, CQDs are the C-dots. (Reproduced from ref. 204.) 
5. Outlook
In this review, we described recent advances in the research on C-dots, focusing on their synthesis, properties, nanocomposites and applications in catalysis, environmental and new energy. A variety of synthesis techniques already exist for producing C-dots with different characteristics. In the future, we expect the advent of more facile and robust synthetic routes and creative applications to better realize the potential of the increasingly important C-dots materials. New properties and how to tune these properties, such as fresh phosphorescence and debatable up-converted PL, are also challenging due to its unclear luminescent mechanism. The amorphous to nearly crystalline internal structure, nonquantitative surface structure and virtual size polydispersion may block clarification of the luminescence mechanism. This problem will be solved through their accurate synthesis, careful analysis and intelligent consideration. C-Dots as photocatalysts in synthetic chemistry represent an attractive approach in the development of green chemistry, which may eventually lessen the burden of energy consumption, product clean-up and waste disposal. The immediate goal in this emerging area should be geared towards the discovery of photochemical solutions for increasingly ambitious synthetic goals. The long-term goals should be to improve the efficiency and synthetic utility and to eventually perform chemical syntheses under sunlight. Compared to other applications of C-dots, there have been fewer studies on the usability of C-dots as electrocatalysts for ORR and OER. In-depth theoretical and experimental studies are needed to delicately design C-dots-based electrocatalysts with desirable electrocatalytic activity and long-term operation stability. The combination of C-dots doping and C-dots-based nanocomposites with other nanomaterials may open up new avenues to systematically study the effect of structural parameters and chemical compositions on the catalytic performance of the electrocatalysts, thus leading to fundamental insights and practical applications. The potential of C-dots in the storage and transport of electrons impacted by light has yet to be exploited fully. C-Dots also stand to have a huge impact in biosensing, environmental and energy applications. Their optical properties, such as tuning their emission colours, high quantum yield and lack of blinking, enable them to be used in the development of nanosensors with high sensitivity. Engineering the surface chemistry, properties and functionalization of C-dots also provides a lot of scope for them to be incorporated in imaging and sensing. Research into the detection of toxic elements present in the environment by C-dots is also underway, and relies on their energy-transfer capability. Their biocompatible nature allows them to be used in the analysis of biological samples and also in wastewater treatment, which contains toxic chemicals. By surface and band gap modification of the C-dots via functionalization, we can expect to design novel functional systems from C-dots for green chemistry and energy issues. Carefully designed C-dots composites have the potential to expand the capabilities of next-generation energy-storage and photovoltaic devices, and sensors. The unique photoinduced electron-transfer ability, as well as excellent light harvesting capability, makes C-dots an exceptional candidate for photovoltaic applications. The use of C-dots in optoelectronics is also of primary interest as production will be high and also cost effective. Electronic devices, like light-emitting diodes, can be produced with improved brightness. Light energy conversion is also possible with C-dot solutions, which makes them a promising candidate for use in photovoltaic systems.
In the future, carbon dots will definitely brighten the lives of humans by paving the way to simplified bioimaging techniques, drug delivery systems, efficient optoelectronics, photovoltaic systems, optical sensors and detectors. As this is a very new field, there is a lot of space for new discoveries and a lot of exploration is still needed. We believe that new physical and chemical properties will be found and new applications and devices will be invented. As time progresses, many challenges might be faced and at the same time may lead to many more advantages that will help achieve a better future.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by the Collaborative Innovation Center of Suzhou Nano Science and Technology, the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21771132, 51422207, 51572179, 21471106, 21501126), the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province (BK20161216) and a project funded by the Priority Academic Program Development of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions (PAPD).
Notes and references
X. Y. Xu, R. Ray and Y. L. Gu, 
            et al.
          , J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 12736 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Yu, R. Shi, Y. F. Zhao and T. R. Zhang, 
            et al.
          , Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9454–9477 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. A. M. Hutton, B. C. M. Martindale and E. Reisner, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 6111–6123 RSC .
S. X. Huang and X. Lin, Small, 2017, 13, 1700823 CrossRef PubMed .
G. W. Zhang, S. Y. Huang and H. G. Yan, 
            et al.
          , Nat. Commun., 2017, 14071 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Wang and J. J. Qiu, J. Mater. Sci., 2016, 51, 4728 CrossRef CAS .
T. Mhetaer, Y. Xu and X. B. Yin, Chin. J. Anal. Chem., 2017, 45(1), 139–150 CAS .
L. M. Shen and J. Liu, Talanta, 2016, 156–157, 245–256 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) S. N. Baker and G. A. Baker, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 6726 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) H. Ming, Z. Ma, Y. Liu, K. M. Pan, H. Yu, F. Wang and Z. H. Kang, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 9526 RSC .
H. Li, Z. H. Kang, Y. Liu and S. T. Lee, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 24230 RSC .
L. L. Li, G. H. Wu, G. H. Yang, J. Peng, J. W. Zhao and J. J. Zhu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 4015 RSC .
L. L. Hu, Y. Sun, Y. J. Zhou, H. Huang, Y. Liu and Z. H. Kang, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2017, 4, 946–953 RSC .

  (a) S. Y. Lim, W. Shen and Z. Q. Gao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 362 RSC ; 
  (b) H. T. Li, X. D. He, Z. H. Kang, H. Huang, Y. Liu, J. L. Liu, S. Y. Lian, C. C. A. Tsang, X. B. Yang and S. T. Lee, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 4430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, Y. L. Wang, T. Xu, H. B. Liao, C. J. Yao, Y. Liu, Z. Li, Z. W. Chen, D. Y. Pan, L. T. Sun and M. H. Wu, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5457 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Q. Ye, C. S. Xiang and J. Lin, 
            et al.
          , Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2943 Search PubMed .
J. Sun, S. W. Yang and Z. W. Wang, 
            et al.
          , Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2015, 32, 434 CrossRef CAS .
L. Y. Zheng, Y. W. Chi, Y. Q. Dong, J. P. Lin and B. B. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 4564 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Bae, N. Myung and A. J. Bard, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1153 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, J. Liu, S. J. Guo, Y. L. Zhang, H. Huang, Y. Liu and Z. H. Kang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2015, 3, 2378 RSC .
S. M. Henrichs and S. F. Sugai, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 1993, 57, 823 CrossRef CAS .
E. C. Cho, L. Au, Q. Zhang and Y. N. Xia, Small, 2010, 6, 517 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. H. Liu, J. Liu, W. Q. Kong, H. Huang, X. Han, X. Zhang, Y. Liu and Z. H. Kang, Dalton Trans., 2014, 43, 10920 RSC .

  (a) H. Q. Tao, K. Yang, Z. Ma, J. M. Wan, Y. J. Zhang, Z. H. Kang and Z. Liu, Small, 2012, 8, 281 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) Y. B. Song, S. J. Zhu and B. Yang, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 27184 RSC .
Z. M. Markovic, B. Z. Ristic and K. M. Arsikin, 
            et al.
          , Biomaterials, 2012, 33, 7084 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wu, C. Wang, T. Han, X. Zhou, S. Guo and J. Zhang, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2013, 2, 1613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Innocenzi, L. Malfatti and D. Carboni, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 12759 RSC .
S. Pandey, A. Mewada, M. Thakur, S. Pillai, R. Dharmatti, C. Phadke and M. Sharon, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 1174 RSC .
X. Wang, K. Qu, B. Xu, J. Rena and X. Qu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 2445 RSC .
L. Zhou, Z. Li, Z. Liu, J. Ren and X. Qu, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 6396 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, C. Y. Liu, Z. Y. Zhang, W.-D. Yang and S. D. Nie, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 2881 RSC .
F. Wang, Z. Xie, H. Zhang, C. Y. Liu and Y. G. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 1027 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lei, L. Yang, D. Lu, X. Yan, C. Cheng, Y. Liu, L. Wang and J. Zhang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2015, 3, 57 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tang, B. Kong, H. Wu, M. Xu, Y. C. Wang, Y. L. Wang, D. Y. Zhao and G. Zheng, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Nie, M. J. Li, Q. S. Li, S. J. Liang, Y. Y. Tan, L. Sheng, W. Shi and S. X.-A. Zhang, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 3104 CrossRef CAS .
K. Suzuki, L. Malfatti, D. Carboni, D. Loche, M. F. Casula, A. Moretto, M. Maggini, M. Takahashi and P. Innocenzi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 2837 CAS .
C. M. Luk, B. L. Chen, K. S. Teng, L. B. Tang and S. P. Lau, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 4526 RSC .
D. Mosconi, D. Mazzier, S. Silvestrini, A. Privitera, C. Marega, L. Franco and A. Moretto, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 4156 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xie, F. Wang and C. Y. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1716 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhou, J. Liu, X. Zhang, R. H. Liu, H. Huang, Y. Liu and Z. H. Kang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 5831 RSC .
X. Han, Y. Z. Han, H. Huang, H. C. Zhang, X. Zhang, R. H. Liu, Y. Liu and Z. H. Kang, Dalton Trans., 2013, 42, 10380 RSC .
Y. M. Yang, J. Liu, Y. Z. Han, H. Huang, N. Y. Liu, Y. Liu and Z. H. Kang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 25350 RSC .
H. T. Li, R. H. Liu, S. Y. Lian, Y. Liu, H. Huang and Z. H. Kang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 3289 RSC .
Z. H. Kang, C. H. A. Tsang, N.-B. Wong, Z. D. Zhang and S.-T. Lee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 12090 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. T. Li, R. H. Liu, W. Q. Kong, J. Liu, Y. Liu, L. Zhou, X. Zhang, S. T. Lee and Z. H. Kang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 867 RSC .
Y. Z. Han, H. Huang, H. C. Zhang, Y. Liu, X. Han, R. H. Liu, H. T. Li and Z. H. Kang, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 781 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) L. Cao, S. Sahu, P. Anilkumar, C. E. Bunker, J. Xu, K. A. S. Fernando, P. Wang, E. A. Guliants, K. N. Tackett and Y. P. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 4754 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) S. Sahu, Y. M. Liu, P. Wang, C. E. Bunker, K. A. S. Fernando, W. K. Lewis, E. A. Guliants, F. Yang, J. P. Wang and Y. P. Sun, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 8631 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yan, J. Yang, G. Ma, G. Wu, X. Zong, Z. Lei, J. Shi and C. Li, J. Catal., 2008, 254, 198 CrossRef .
K. Maeda, K. Teramura and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2655 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. S. Fernando, S. Sahu, Y. M. Liu, W. K. Lewis, E. A. Guliants, A. Jafariyan, P. Wang, C. E. Bunker and Y. P. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 8363 CAS .
S. C. Roy, O. K. Varghese, M. Paulose and C. A. Grimes, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1259 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. F. Yeh, S. J. Chen and H. Teng, Nano Energy, 2015, 12, 476 CrossRef CAS .
T. F. Yeh, C. Y. Teng, S. J. Chen and H. Teng, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Shi, Zi Li, H. Yu, Lu Shang and T. Zhang, ChemSusChem, 2017 DOI:10.1002/cssc.201700943 .
T. F. Yeh, S. J. Chen, C. S. Yeh and H. Teng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 6516 CAS .
G. Eda, Y. Y. Lin, C. Mattevi, H. Yamaguchi, H. A. Chen, I. S. Chen, C. W. Chen and M. Chhowalla, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tetsuka, R. Asahi, A. Nagoya, K. Okamoto, I. Tajima, R. Ohta and A. Okamoto, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5333 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Jin, D. H. Kim, G. H. Jun, S. H. Hong and S. Jeon, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 1239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. A. Ponomarenko, F. Schedin, M. I. Katsnelson, R. Yang, E. W. Hill and K. S. Novoselov, Science, 2008, 320, 356 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. W. Son, M. L. Cohen and S. G. Louie, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 97, 216803 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Li, X. Wang, L. Zhang, S. Lee and H. Dai, Science, 2008, 319, 1229 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. B. Yang, X. L. Feng, X. C. Wang and K. Müllen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 5339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, Y. Zhao, H. H. Cheng, Y. Hu, G. Q. Shi, L. M. Dai and L. T. Qu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Yan, H. Wu, Q. Zheng, J. Y. Wang, J. L. Huang, K. J. Ding, Q. G. Guo and J. Z. Wang, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 23097 RSC .
Y. Liu and P. Y. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 3362 CAS .

  (a) W. A. Saidi, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 4160 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) C. Zhu, J. Zhai and S. Dong, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 9367–9369 RSC .
R. H. Liu, H. Huang, H. T. Li, Y. Liu, J. Zhong, Y. Y. Li, S. Zhang and Z. H. Kang, ACS Catal., 2014, 1, 328 CrossRef .
H. J. Yu, Y. F. Zhao, C. Zhou, L. Shang, Y. Peng, Y. H. Cao, L. Z. Wu, C. H. Tunga and T. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 3344 CAS .
J. Tian, Y. H. Leng, Z. H. Zhao, Y. Xia, Y. H. Sang, P. Hao, J. Zhan, M. C. Li and H. Liu, Nano Energy, 2015, 11, 419 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhu, C. A. Liu and Z. H. Kang, 
            et al.
          , Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 114–121 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, Y. Liu, N. Y. Liu, Y. Z. Han, X. Zhang, H. Huang, Y. Lifshitz, S. T. Lee, J. Zhong and Z. H. Kang, Science, 2015, 347, 970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Y. Xia, N. Deng, G. W. Cui, J. F. Xie, X. F. Shi, Y. Q. Zhao, Q. Wang, W. Wang and B. Tang, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 10899 RSC .
W. J. Ong, L. K. Putri and Y. C. Tan, 
            et al.
          , Nano Res., 2017, 10(5), 1673–1696 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) H. Li, W. Q. Kong, J. Liu, M. M. Yang, H. Huang, Y. Liu and Z. H. Kang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2014, 2, 5652 RSC ; 
  (b) H. Li, S. J. Guo, C. X. Li, H. Huang, Y. Liu and Z. H. Kang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 10004 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. L. Shi, F. Guo, H. B. Wang, H. Huang, Y. Liu and Z. H. Kang, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 219, 36–44 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, F. Wang, H. Huang, H. T. Li, X. Han, Y. Liu and Z. H. Kang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 2274 RSC .
N. M. Vuong, J. L. Reynolds, E. Conte and Y. I. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 24323 CAS .
K. A. Tsai and Y. J. Hsu, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 164, 271 CrossRef CAS .
K. Y. Yoon, H. J. Ahn, M. J. Kwak, P. Thiyagarajan and J. H. Jang, Opt. Mater., 2015, 3, 907 CrossRef CAS .
D. L. Chen, S. Dai, X. D. Su, Y. Xin, S. Zou, X. S. Wang, Z. H. Kang and M. R. Shen, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 15340 RSC .
K. H. Ye, Z. L. Wang, J. W. Gu and S. Xiao, 
            et al.
          , Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 772–779 CAS .
B. C. M. Martindale, G. A. M. Hutton, C. A. Caputo and E. Reisner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 6018 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. C. M. Martindale, E. Joliat, C. Bachmann, R. Alberto and E. Reisner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 9402–9406 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Tang, J. Liu, X. Y. Wu, R. H. Liu, X. Han, Y. Z. Han, H. Huang, Y. Liu and Z. H. Kang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 7918 CAS .
L. Trotochaud, J. K. Ranney, K. N. Williams and S. W. Boettcher, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 17253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Zhao, C. X. Li, H. Huang, Y. Liu and Z. H. Kang, J. Materiomics, 2015, 1, 236 CrossRef .

  (a) Y. Sun, Y. J. Zhou, C. Zhu, L. L. Hu, M. M. Han, A. Q. Wang, H. Huang, Y. Liu and Z. H. Kang, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 5467–5474 RSC ; 
  (b) S. J. Guo, S. Q. Zhao, J. Gao and C. Zhu, 
              et al.
            , Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 298–304 RSC .
A. K. Samantara, S. C. Sahu, A. Ghoshc and B. K. Jena, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 16961 CAS .
C. Y. Xu, Q. Han, Y. Zhao, L. X. Wang, Y. Li and L. T. Qu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 1841 CAS .
Z. M. Luo, D. L. Yang, G. Q. Qi, J. Z. Shang, H. P. Yang, Y. L. Wang, L. H. Yuwen, T. Yu, W. Huang and L. H. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 20605 CAS .
M. Favaro, L. Ferrighi, G. Fazio, L. Colazzo, C. Di Valentin, C. Durante, F. Sedona, A. Gennaro, S. Agnoli and G. Granozzi, ACS Catal., 2014, 5, 129 CrossRef .
D. H. Guo, R. Shibuya, C. Akiba, S. Saji, T. Kondo and J. Nakamura1, Science, 2016, 351, 361 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. H. Zhang, J. Liu, J. J. Gu, L. Su and L. F. Cheng, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2535 CAS .
Y. Y. Liang, Y. G. Li, H. L. Wang and H. J. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 2013 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Paraknowitsch and A. Thomas, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2839 CAS .
D. W. Wang and D. S. Su, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 576 CAS .
L. Zhang, L. Y. Wang, C. M. B. Holt, B. Zahiri, Z. Li, K. Malek, T. Navessin, M. H. Eikerling and D. Mitlin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6156 CAS .
C. Wang, N. M. Markovic and V. R. Stamenkovic, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 891 CrossRef CAS .
T. Reier, M. Oezaslan and P. Strasser, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 1765 CrossRef CAS .
Y. M. Lee, J. Suntivich, K. J. May, E. E. Perry and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. E. L. Stephens, A. S. Bondarenko, U. Grønbjerg, J. Rossmeislc and I. Chorkendorff, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6744 CAS .
W. Chen, J. Kim, S. H. Sun and S. W. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 3891 CAS .
Y. Y. Liang, Y. G. Li, H. L. Wang, J. G. Zhou, J. Wang, T. Regier and H. J. Dai, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 780 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Musameh, N. S. Lawrence and J. Wang, Electrochem. Commun., 2005, 7, 14 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xiao, D. H. Mei, X. L. Li, W. Xu, D. Y. Wang, G. L. Graff, W. D. Bennett, Z. M. Nie, L. V. Saraf, I. A. Aksay, J. Liu and J. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5071 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) R. Liu, D. Wu, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Angew. Chem., 2010, 122, 2619 CrossRef ; 
  (b) R. Liu, D. Wu, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 2565 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Wang, L. P. Zhang, X. H. Xia, A. Roy, D. W. Chang, J. Baek and L. M. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 4209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Gong, F. Du, Z. Xia, M. Durstock and L. Dai, Science, 2009, 323, 760 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. F. Lai, J. R. Potts, D. Zhan, L. Wang, C. K. Poh, C. Tang, H. Gong, Z. Shen, J. Lin and R. S. Ruoff, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7936 CAS .
R. Silva, D. Voiry, M. Chhowalla and T. Asefa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 7823 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yang, Z. Yao, G. Li, G. Fang, H. Nie, Z. Liu, X. Zhou, X. Chen and S. Huang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yang, S. Jiang, Y. Zhan, L. Zhu, S. Chen, X. Wang, Q. Wu, J. Ma, Y. Ma and Z. Hu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 7132 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, R. Nakamura, K. Kamiya, S. Nakanishi, K. Hashimoto, Y. Zhao, R. Nakamura, K. Kamiya, S. Nakanishi and K. Hashimoto, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2390 Search PubMed .
W. Yang, T. P. Fellinger and M. Antonietti, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 133, 206 CrossRef PubMed .
C. V. Rao, C. R. Cabrera and Y. Ishikawa, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2622 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Y. Shao, D. W. Matson, J. Li and Y. Lin, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1790 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mao, Z. Wen, T. Huang, Y. Hou and J. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 609 CAS .
Z. Wang, S. Xiao, Z. Zhu, X. Long, X. Zheng, X. Lu and S. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 4048 CAS .
G. Tian, M. Zhao, D. Yu, X. Kong, J. Huang, Q. Zhang and F. Wei, Small, 2014, 10, 2251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lin, G. H. Waller, Y. Liu, M. Liu and C. Wong, Carbon, 2013, 53, 130 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Zhang, Z. H. Zhao, Z. H. Xia and L. M. Dai, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Zhao, C. X. Li, H. Huang, Y. Liu and Z. H. Kang, New J. Chem., 2015, 39, 8881–8886 RSC .
S. Y. Zhao, J. Liu, C. X. Li, W. B. Ji, Y. M. Yang, H. Huang, Y. Liu and Z. H. Kang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6(24), 22297–22304 CAS .
Y. P. Sun, B. Zhou, Y. Lin, W. Wang, K. A. S. Fernando, P. Pathak, M. J. Meziani, B. A. Harruff, X. Wang, H. Wang, P. G. Luo, H. Yang, M. E. Kose, B. Chen, L. M. Veca and S. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 7756 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ma, Y. L. Zhang, L. Wang, H. Ming, H. Li, X. Zhang, F. Wang, Y. Liu, Z. Kang and S. T. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 5080 CAS .
S. Zhao, C. Li, J. Liu, N. Liu, S. Qiao, Y. Han, H. Huang, Y. Liu and Z. Kang, Carbon, 2015, 92, 64 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, S. Y. Zhao, C. X. Li, M. M. Yang, Y. M. Yang, Y. Liu, Y. Lifshitz, S. T. Lee and Z. H. Kang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 1502039 CrossRef .
Z. T. Fan, S. H. Li, F. L. Yuan and L. Z. Fan, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 19773 RSC .
X. Ran, H. J. Sun, F. Pu, J. S. Ren and X. G. Qu, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 1079 RSC .
Y. Z. He, X. X. Wang, J. Sun, S. F. Jiao, H. Q. Chen, F. Gao and L. Wang, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2014, 810, 71 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. B. Qu, X. G. Zhou, L. Gu, R. M. Lan, D. D. Sun, D. J. Yu and G. Y. Shi, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 9830 RSC .
Y. Wang, L. Zhang, R. P. Liang, J. M. Bai and J. D. Qiu, Anal. Chem., 2013, 85, 9148 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. T. Fan, Y. C. Li, X. H. Li, L. Z. Fan, S. X. Zhou, D. C. Fang and S. H. Yang, Carbon, 2014, 70, 149 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, Z. Y. Zhang, R. P. Liang, Y. H. Li and J. D. Qiu, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 4423 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Li, L. Zhang, J. Huang, R. P. Liang and J. D. Qiu, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 5180 RSC .
X. Li, S. J. Zhu, B. Xu, K. Ma, J. H. Zhang, B. Yang and W. J. Tian, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 7776 RSC .
Y. L. Zhang, L. Wang and H. C. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 3733 RSC .
H. Li, W. Q. Kong, J. Liu, N. Y. Liu, H. Huang, Y. Liu and Z. H. Kang, Carbon, 2015, 91, 66 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Yang, W. Q. Kong, H. Li, J. Liu, H. Huang, Y. Liu and Z. H. Kang, Microchim. Acta, 2015, 182, 2443 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Yang, H. Li, J. Liu, W. Q. Kong, S. Y. Zhao, C. X. Li, H. Huang, Y. Liu and Z. H. Kang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2014, 2, 7964 RSC .
H. J. Sun, L. Wu, W. L. Wei and X. G. Qu, Mater. Today, 2013, 16, 433 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. Wang, G. Cao, T. Tu, H. O. Li, C. Zhou, X. J. Hao, Z. Su, G. C. Guo, H. W. Jiang and G. P. Guo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 262113 CrossRef .
S. Fringes, C. Volk, C. Norda, B. Terrés, J. Dauber, S. Engels, S. Trellenkamp and C. Stampfer, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2011, 248, 2684 CrossRef CAS .
J. Güttinger, J. Seif, C. Stampfer, A. Capelli, K. Ensslin and T. Ihn, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 83, 165445 CrossRef .
T. Mueller, J. Güttinger, D. Bischoff, S. Hellmüller, K. Ensslin and T. Ihn, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 12104 CrossRef .
T. S. Sreeprasad, A. A. Rodriguez, J. Colston, A. Graham, E. Shishkin, V. Pallem and V. Berry, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wu, X. Liu and Q. Wu, 
            et al.
          , Anal. Chem., 2017, 89, 7084–7089 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. L. Li, J. Ji, R. Fei, C. Z. Wang, Q. Lu, J. R. Zhang, L. P. Jiang and J. J. Zhu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 2971 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Yang, W. Y. Liu, C. Ma, Y. Zhang, X. Wang, J. H. Yua and X. R. Song, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 123, 470 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Lu, W. Wei, Z. X. Zhou, Z. X. Zhou, Y. J. Zhang and S. Q. Liu, Analyst, 2014, 139, 2404 RSC .
J. J. Lu, M. Yan, L. Ge, S. G. Ge, S. W. Wang, J. X. Yan and J. H. Yu, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2013, 47, 271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Q. Dong, R. P. Dai, T. Q. Dong, Y. W. Chi and G. N. Chen, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 11240 RSC .
Z. Y. Wang and Z. H. Dai, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 6420 RSC .
Y. J. Song, K. G. Qu, C. Zhao, J. S. Ren and X. G. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, C. Y. Wu, X. J. Zhou, X. C. Wu, Y. Q. Yang, H. X. Wu, S. W. Guo and J. Y. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 1816 RSC .
H. Q. Zhang, P. W. Dai, L. Z. Huang, Y. H. Huang, Q. T. Huang, W. X. Zhang, C. Wei and S. R. Hu, Anal. Methods, 2014, 6, 2687 RSC .
J. Zhao, G. F. Chen, L. Zhu and G. X. Li, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13, 31 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Shao, H. Gu, Z. Wang, X. L. Chai, Y. Tian and G. Y. Shi, Anal. Chem., 2013, 85, 418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Razmi and R. Mohammad-Rezaei, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2013, 41, 498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. L. Wang, Z. C. Wang, Y. P. Rui and M. G. Li, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2015, 64, 57 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Muthurasu and V. Ganesh, Appl. Biochem. Biotechnol., 2014, 174, 945 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. Li, Y. M. Zhong, Y. Y. Zhang, W. Weng and S. X. Li, Sens. Actuators, B, 2015, 206, 735 CrossRef CAS .
Q. T. Huang, S. R. Hu, H. Q. Zhang, J. H. Chen, Y. S. He, F. M. Li, W. Weng, J. C. Ni, X. X. Bao and Y. Lin, Analyst, 2013, 138, 5417 RSC .
Q. T. Huang, H. Q. Zhang, S. R. Hu, F. M. Li, W. Weng, J. H. Chen, Q. X. Wang, Y. S. He, W. X. Zhang and X. X. Bao, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2014, 52, 277 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. Hu, Q. T. Huang, Y. Lin, C. Wei, H. Q. Zhang, W. X. Zhang, Z. B. Guo, X. X. Bao, J. G. Shi and A. Y. Hao, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 130, 805 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, H. Ming, R. H. Liu, X. Han, Z. H. Kang, Y. Liu and Y. L. Zhang, Mater. Res. Bull., 2013, 48, 790 CrossRef CAS .
N. Y. Liu, J. Liu, W. Q. Kong, H. Li, H. Huang, Y. Liu and Z. H. Kang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2014, 2, 5768 RSC .
C. Wang, Z. Xu and H. Cheng, 
            et al.
          , Carbon, 2015, 87–95 CrossRef .
X. Shen, B. Sun, D. Liu and S. T. Lee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 19408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Gao, K. Ding, Y. Wang, K. Ruan, S. Diao, Q. Zhang, B. Sun and J. Jie, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 5164 CAS .
M. Dutta, S. Sarkar, T. Ghosh and D. Basak, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 20127 CAS .
J. Briscoe, A. Marinovic, M. Sevilla, S. Dunn and M. Titirici, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 4463 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Mirtchev, E. J. Henderson, N. Soheilnia, C. M. Yip and G. A. Ozin, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 1265 RSC .
R. Narayanan, M. Deepa and A. K. Srivastava, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 3907 CAS .
L. Bao, Z. L. Zhang, Z. Q. Tian, L. Zhang, C. Liu, Y. Lin, B. Qi and D. W. Pang, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Gupta, N. Chaudhary, R. Srivastava, G. D. Sharma, R. Bhardwaj and S. Chand, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 9960 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Kwon, G. Lee, S. Do, T. Joo and S. W. Rhee, Small, 2014, 10, 506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yan, X. Cui, B. Li and L. S. Li, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1869 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Q. Zhang, D. K. Ma, Y. G. Zhang, W. Chen and S. M. Huang, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 545 CrossRef CAS .
I. Mihalache, A. Radoi, M. Mihaila, C. Munteanu, A. Marin, M. Danila, M. Kusko and C. Kusko, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 153, 306 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fang, M. Li, K. Guo, J. Li, M. Pan, L. Bai, M. Luoshan and X. Zhao, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 137, 634 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, K. Chang, W. Guo, H. Li, L. Shen, W. Chen and D. Yan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 073306 CrossRef .
Y. Qin, Y. Cheng, L. Jiang, X. Jin, M. Li, X. Luo, G. Liao, T. Wei and Q. Li, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2015, 3, 637 CrossRef CAS .
Z. C. Huang, Y. T. Shen, Y. Li, W. J. Zheng, Y. J. Xue, C. Q. Qin, B. Zhang, J. X. Hao and W. Feng, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 13043 RSC .
D. H. Wang, J. K. Kim, S. J. Kim, B. H. Hongc and J. H. Park, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 15175 RSC .
Z. L. Zhu, J. Ma, Z. Wang, C. Mu, Z. Fan, L. Du, Y. Bai, L. Z. Fan, H. Yan, D. L. Phillips and S. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 3760 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Q. Pan, Y. Z. Sheng, J. X. Zhang, P. Huang, X. Zhang and B. Feng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 7878 CAS .
C. Y. Liu, K. W. Chang, W. B. Guo, H. Li, L. Shen, W. Y. Chen and D. W. Yan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 073306 CrossRef .
M. M. Li, W. Ni, B. Kan, X. J. Wan, L. Zhang, Q. Zhang, G. K. Long, Y. Zuo and Y. S. Chen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 18973 RSC .
H. Li, W. Shi and W. Huang, 
            et al.
          , Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 2328–2335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hu, Y. Zhao, G. Lu, N. Chen, Z. Zhang, H. Li, H. Shao and L. Qu, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 195401 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Huang, B. G. Sumpter and V. Meunier, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 520 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Chen, Y. Hu, C. Hu, H. Cheng, Z. Zhang, H. Shao and L. Qu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 19307 RSC .
L. Lv, Y. Fan, Q. Chen, Y. Zhao, Y. Hu, Z. Zhang, N. Chen and L. Qu, Nanotechnology, 2014, 25, 235401 CrossRef PubMed .
W. W. Liu, Y.-Q. Feng, X. B. Yan, J. T. Chen and Q. J. Xue, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 4111 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liu, X. Yan, J. Chen, Y. Feng and Q. Xue, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 6053 RSC .
Y. Zhu, X. Ji, C. Pan, Q. Sun, W. Song, L. Fang, Q. Chen and C. E. Banks, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3665 CAS .
M. Hassan, E. Haque, K. R. Reddy, A. I. Minett, J. Chenc and V. G. Gomes, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 11988 RSC .
D. Chao, C. Zhu, X. Xia, J. Liu, X. Zhang, J. Wang, P. Liang, J. Lin, H. Zhang, Z. X. Shen and H. J. Fan, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 565 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Jing, J. F. Wang, H. S. Hou, Y. C. Yang, Y. Zhang, C. C. Pan, J. Chen, Y. Zhua and X. B. Ji, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 16824 CAS .
Z. Zhang, J. Zhang and Q. Xue, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 98, 12973 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gao, G. Chen, Y. Oli, Z. Zhang and Q. Xue, Wear, 2002, 252, 454 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xue, W. Liu and Z. Zhang, Wear, 1997, 213, 29 CrossRef CAS .
J. Padgurskas, R. Rukuiza, I. Prosyčevas and R. Kreivaitis, Tribol. Int., 2013, 60, 224 CrossRef CAS .
H. Huang, H. L. Hu, S. Qiao, L. Bai, M. M. Han, Y. Liu and Z. H. Kang, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 11321 RSC .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this review.This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2017
Table Content:
Jin Gao	Jin Gao is now pursuing her Master's degree under the supervision of Prof. Zhenhui Kang at the Institute of Functional Nano & Soft Materials (FUNSOM), Soochow University, P.R. China. Her main research interest is focused on the study of carbon dots and carbon-based materials applied in the field of the reduction of carbon dioxide.
Mengmeng Zhu	Mengmeng Zhu is now pursuing her Master's degree under the supervision of Prof. Yang Liu at the Institute of Functional Nano & Soft Materials (FUNSOM), Soochow University, P.R. China. Her main research is focused on the study of the synthesis and catalytic applications of carbon dots, as well as the applications of carbon-based materials.
Yang Liu	Yang Liu is currently an associate professor at the Institute of Functional Nano & Soft Materials and the Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Carbon-Based Functional Materials & Devices in Soochow University, P.R. China. Her main research field is dedicated to the synthesis and assembly of morphologically unique nanostructures and nanocomposites, and the applications in catalysis and energy conversion.
Zhenhui Kang	Zhenhui Kang is currently a professor at the Institute of Functional Nano & Soft Materials and the Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Carbon-Based Functional Materials & Devices in Soochow University, P.R. China. His main research interests are in the fields of the synthesis and surface chemistry of carbon dots, as well as exploring their applications in nanocatalysis, new energy and bioimaging.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Reaction equipment for the preparation of C-dots; digital image of C-dots solution (b) before treatment, (c) after treatment; (d) DLS histogram of C-dots; (e) TEM, (f) HRTEM image of C-dots. (Reproduced from ref. 9b.)	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) TEM image of C-dots with diameters under 4 nm; (b) fluorescent microscopy images of C-dots with an excitation wavelength of 360 nm (scale bar: 50 mm); (c–h) HRTEM images of typical C-dots with different diameters (scale bar: 2 nm). (Reproduced from ref. 13b.)	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) UV–vis absorption, PL (λex = 400 nm) and PLE (λex = 500 nm) spectra of C-dots aqueous solution, (b) photographs of C-dots aqueous solution and RhB ethanol solution with the same mass concentration (10 μg mL−1) under visible light (left) and 365 nm UV light (right), (c) PL decay curves of C-dots measured at room temperature and excitations at 400 nm, (d) PL and PLE spectra of C-dots in the solid state, inset: photo of bamboo drawing with C-dots ink under visible light (left) and 365 nm UV light (right). In this figure, the N-GQDs are the C-dots. (Reproduced from ref. 16.)	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic illustration of the ECL and PL mechanisms in C-dots (in this figure, CNCs are the C-dots). R˙+, R˙−, and R* represent positively charged, negatively charged, and excited-state C-dots, respectively. (Reproduced from ref. 17.)	 

 	Fig. 5  (A) Radiolabelling stability curve of C-dots in mouse plasma at 37 °C. (B) Blood circulation curve of C-dots. (C) Time-dependent biodistribution of C-dots in female Balb/c mice. (D) Distribution of C-dots in urine and in the faeces of Balb/c mice collected by metabolism cages. Error bars are based on standard deviations of four mice per group. (Reproduced from ref. 23a.)	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic showing the CTAB-assisted synthesis of meso-SiO2 and attachment of C-dots to form a meso-SiO2/C-dots complex. (Reproduced from ref. 9.)	 

 	Fig. 7  Top: Two-phase synthesis of nylon-6,6/N-doped C-dots hybrids and the related, macroscopic, electrospun material. Bottom: (A) SEM image of electrospun fibres from pristine nylon. (B–D) SEM images of electrospun fibres from nylon/N-doped C-dots hybrids materials obtained by the use of increasing amounts of N-doped C-dots (5, 50 and 100 w/w%, respectively, referred to as 1,6-hexamethylene-diamine). (E) TEM image of 100 w/w% (referred to as 1,6-hexamethylene-diamine) nylon-6,6/N-doped C-dots electrospun fibres. In this figure, CQDs are the C-dots. (Reproduced from ref. 37.)	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic representation of the preparation process for MCs from C-dots. In this figure, CQDs are the C-dots. (Reproduced from ref. 39.)	 

 	Fig. 9  Proposed mechanism for the highly selective oxidation of benzyl alcohol to benzaldehyde catalyzed by C-dots under NIR light irradiation. In this figure, CQDs are the C-dots. (Reproduced from ref. 42.)	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Probe approach curves of a glassy carbon electrode modified by C-dots with and without visible light irradiation. Inset shows the corresponding curves of the control sample (glass sheet). (b) Photocurrent responses of C-dots under visible light; inset shows the schematic of the photocurrent measurement of photoinduced proton generation of C-dots: photogenerated protons can enhance the current at the Pt probe tip. (c) pH value responses of the C-dots under visible light irradiation. (d and e) pH change versus illumination intensity and temperature for different C-dots concentrations (0.05, 0.1, 0.5, 1.0 mg mL−1). (f) Dissociation constant (Ka) of different C-dots concentrations under different conditions (in the dark, 90% light intensity and 90 °C). (g) FT-IR spectra of C-dots with and without visible light irradiation. In this figure, CQDs are the C-dots. (Reproduced from ref. 44.)	 

 	Fig. 11  Illustrations of (upper) the high-pressure optical reactor. (Lower left) Photoreductive doping of the carbon dot with gold, completely quenching the dot-surface-based fluorescence (illustrated as the change in the dot surface from rainbow to grey) and (lower right) the gold-doped C-dots as a photocatalyst for CO2 conversion, where the doped gold (in yellow) was small in quantity, insufficient to form a shell, and likely random in terms of size and shape. The sacrificial electron donor was isopropanol added in some experiments or PEG1500N molecules on the surface of the carbon dots in the absence of isopropanol. (Reproduced from ref. 46b.)	 

 	Fig. 12  The diode consists of the p- and n-type domains, connected through the sp2 clusters as an Ohmic contact. Illumination on the diode system results in recombination of the majority carriers at the sp2 clusters to produce useful electron–hole pairs at the semiconductor–water interfaces. The band bending of the p-type domains at the semiconductor–water interfaces is analogous to photosystem I for electron injection to produce H2. The band bending of the n-type domains at the semiconductor–water interfaces is analogous to photosystem II for hole injection to produce O2. This overall water-splitting reaction scheme for the graphene-based photocatalyst bears a remarkable similarity to biological photosynthesis. (Reproduced from ref. 52.)	 

 	Fig. 13  Schematic illustration of the electron-transfer mechanisms involved in photocatalytic H2 evolution over the NCDs/P25 composites under UV and visible light illumination. (Reproduced from ref. 53.)	 

 	Fig. 14  Au/C-dots composites as a photocatalyst for the selective oxidation of cyclohexane in the presence of H2O2 under visible light. In this figure, CQDs are the C-dots. (Reproduced from ref. 66.)	 

 	Fig. 15  Schematic illustration for the photocatalytic H2 production mechanism over the CQDs/P25 under UV-Vis and visible light (l > 450 nm) irradiation. (Reproduced from ref. 67.)	 

 	Fig. 16  Proposed reaction mechanism for visible-light-driven water splitting by C-dots-C3N4. (Reproduced from ref. 70.)	 

 	Fig. 17  Charge transfer and separation in the enhanced photoreduction of CO2 to CO and CH4 using CDs/pCN samples under visible light or simulated solar irradiation. (Reproduced from ref. 72.)	 

 	Fig. 18  Schematic illustration of photocatalytic water splitting over the CoO/C-dots photocatalyst. (Reproduced from ref. 74.)	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) The chopped-light current density versus time (J–t) curves of the TiO2 NTs and C-dots/TiO2 NT photoanodes at 0 V vs. Ag/AgCl. (b) Linear sweep voltammetric (J–V) curves of the two kinds of photoanodes under dark and simulated light illumination. (c) The diffused reflectance UV-VIS spectra of the two types of TiO2 NTs. (d) Comparison of the IPCE spectra of the two photoanodes measured at 0 V vs. Ag/AgCl. In this figure, CQDs are the C-dots. (Reproduced from ref. 75.)	 

 	Fig. 20  Representation of solar H2 production using the hybrid C-dots–NiP system described in this work. The irradiation of photoluminescent C-dots results in the direct transfer of photoexcited electrons to the catalyst NiP, with a subsequent reduction of aqueous protons. The electron donor EDTA carries out quenching of the photoinduced holes in the C-dots. In this figure, CQDs are the C-dots. (Reproduced from ref. 81.)	 

 	Fig. 21  CVs of pure C-dots (a) and B– (c), N– (e), and B, N–C-dots (g) in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution, at different potential scan rates (10 (red curve), 20, 50 and 100 mV s−1) and the corresponding CVs (b, d, f, h; scan rate 50 mV s−1) acquired in Ar-saturated (thick curves) and O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solutions. In this figure, GOQDs are the C-dots. (Reproduced from ref. 90.)	 

 	Fig. 22  Structural and elemental characterization of four types of N-HOPG model catalysts and their ORR performance. (A) Optical image of patterned edge-N+-HOPG. (B) AFM image obtained for the region indicated by the yellow rectangle in (A). (C) Three-dimensional representation of (B). (D) Line profile of the AFM image obtained along the blue line in (B). (E) N 1s XPS spectra of model catalysts. (F) ORR results for the model catalysts corresponding to (E). Nitrogen contents of the model catalysts are shown as the inset in (F). (Reproduced from ref. 91.)	 

 	Fig. 23  Electrocatalytic activities of NH2-C-dots and PO4-C-dots. (a) LSV curves of C-dots, NH2-C-dots-3, and IrO2/C (20 wt% IrO2 loading) in an N2-saturated 0.1 m KOH aqueous solution. (b) Steady-state voltammograms for the OER in N2-saturated 0.1 m KOH at the Pt disc-Pt ring electrodes, applying a rotation rate of 1600 rpm. The Pt ring was biased at 1.51 V versus RHE. (c) LSV curves of CDs, PO4-C-dots-6, and Pt/C in an O2-saturated 0.1 m KOH aqueous solution. (d) LSV curves of PO4-C-dots-6 in an O2-saturated 0.1 m KOH aqueous solution. (e) Relationship between the amidogen contents and OER activities of the NH2-C-dots electrocatalyst (black line: the potentials required to achieve 0.15 mA cm−2; red line: the current density at 1.60 V). (f) The relationship between the phosphorus contents of PO4-C-dots and the onset potentials (black line) and current densities (red line) normalized to commercial Pt/C. In this figure, CDs are the C-dots. (Reproduced from ref. 126.)	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) Fluorescence spectra of C-dots with enhanced fluorescence using a series of NOR concentrations in PBS. CNOR (0.01 μM) = (A) 2000; (B) 1000; (C) 500; (D) 200; (E) 100; (F) 50; (G) 20; (H) 10; (I) 5; (J) 3; (K) 2; (L) 1.33 and (M) 0; (b) the relationship between I/I0 and NOR concentration. (c) Fluorescence spectra of the C-dots enhanced fluorescence using a series of NOR concentrations in PBS. CNOR (0.01 μM) = (a) 10000; (b) 5000; (c) 2000; (d) 1000; (e) 500; (f) 200; (g) 100; (h) 50; (i) 5; (j) 3.8 and (k) 0. (d) The relationship between I/I0 and NOR concentration. (e) Images of the C-dots and their responses to NOR solution with concentrations of 8.4 × 10−4, 4.2 × 10−4, 8 × 10−5, 2 × 10−5, 8 × 10−6, 2 × 10−6, 8 × 10−7, 2 × 10−7, 8 × 10−8, and 0 mol L−1 (spots A–J, respectively) under visible and UV (at 365 nm excitation) light. In this figure, CDs are the C-dots. (Reproduced from ref. 139.)	 

 	Fig. 25  ECL of the immunosensor at various concentrations of CA199 (U mL−1): (a): 0.002, (b): 0.01, (c): 0.05, (d): 0.5, (e): 5, (f): 50 (A). Relationship between ECL and the CA199 concentration, where each point is the average of ten measurements (B). Selectivity of the ECL immunosensor (C). ECL-potential curves of (a) pure C-dots, (b) pPtPd@ C-dots and cyclic voltammogram (inset) of pPtPd@ C-dots on the electrode in pH 7.4 PBS containing TPA. (Reproduced from ref. 148.)	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) Conductivity of the C-dots film as a function of the ambient relative humidity. (b) The response and recovery curve of the C-dots-based humidity sensing device. The curves were measured between 7% and 43% RH at room temperature. In this figure, CQDs are C-dots. (Reproduced from ref. 165.)	 

 	Fig. 27  Schematic mechanism for the temperature-dependent fluorescence intensity of N–C-dots. (Reproduced from ref. 166.)	 

 	Fig. 28  (a) PL intensity of CDs at various pH values; (b) PL intensity upon the cyclic switching of CDs under alternating conditions of pH = 3 and pH = 9. (Reproduced from ref. 167.)	 

 	Fig. 29  (a) Fluorescence emission spectra (excitation 400 nm) for various temperatures in the range 15–90 °C (top to bottom); (b) the intensity at 500 nm is plotted versus temperature. (Reproduced from ref 167.)	 

 	Fig. 30  (a) Photoluminescence quenching of RhB and the RhB/C-dots complex measured by a time-correlated single photon counting (TCSPC) technique. (b) Ground-state bleaching recovery of RhB molecules in RhB/TiO2 and the RhB/C-dots/TiO2 complex systems extracted from femtosecond transient absorption (TA) spectroscopy. (c) Scheme of electron transfer from RhB to C-dots. (d) The C-dots serve as an electron-transfer intermediary for bridging the photogenerated electrons and suppressing their recombination. In this figure, CQDs are the C-dots. (Reproduced from ref. 124.)	 

 	Fig. 31  SEM images of TiO2 (a) and TiO2/C-dots (b). (c) Cross-sectional SEM image of TiO2/C-dots blend film. (d) On–off switches by illuminating (100 mW cm−2) and darkening (0 mW cm−2). (e) J–V curves of the HSCs with and without C-dots. In this figure, GQDs are the C-dots. (Reproduced from ref. 182.)	 

 	Fig. 32  
J–U curves of the perovskite solar cells based on ITO/C10/T and the control device based on the ITO/TiO2 substrate. (Reproduced from ref. 189.)	 

 	Fig. 33  (a) Charge–discharge curves at different C rates (1 C = 300 mA g−1). (b) CV curves at a scan rate of 0.3 mV s−1. (c) Rate tolerance performance of the GVG electrode. (d) Cycling performance of three different GVG electrodes at 5 C for 500 cycles. The Rct as a function of cycle number is also shown. (e) AC impedance plots at full-charged state after different cycles. The resistance is simulated using the same equivalent circuit RS(Q(RctZW)) (inset in panel e) as used in LIBs. (f) Cycling performance of three different electrodes at 60 C for 1500 cycles (1/3 C at the first five cycles for activation). (g) Ragone plot based on the total mass of the whole electrode, the sloping lines indicate the relative time to get the charge in or out of the electrodes. (Reproduced from ref. 198.)	 

 	Fig. 34  Variation of the wear scar volume (a) and friction coefficient (b) with different contents of C-dots/CuSx nanocomposites in liquid paraffin (four-ball, 100 N, 1450 rpm and 15 min). (c) Relationship between the friction coefficient and friction time (920 s) using C-dots/CuSx nanocomposites with different contents (1, 2, 5 and 10 wt%) and liquid paraffin as additives (four-ball, 100 N, 1450 rpm and 15 min). (d) Relationship between the friction coefficient versus friction time (1850 s) with 5 wt% C-dots/CuSx nanocomposites and liquid paraffin as additives (four-ball, 100 N, 1450 rpm). In this figure, CQDs are the C-dots. (Reproduced from ref. 204.)	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this review.

This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2017
