Self-powered materials obtained by interfacing functional assemblies with energy harvesting films  - Materials Chemistry Frontiers (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0QM00759E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0QM00759E
(Review Article)
Mater. Chem. Front., 2021, 5, 2623-2648Self-powered materials obtained by interfacing functional assemblies with energy harvesting films

        
          
            Wangshu 
            Tong
          
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Zhihao 
            Wang
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Xuemei 
            Wang
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Xiao 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yihe 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Qi 
            An
          
          
        
      *
      Beijing Key Laboratory of Materials Utilization of Nonmetallic Minerals and Solid Wastes, National Laboratory of Mineral Materials, School of Materials Science and Technology, China University of Geosciences, Beijing, 100083, China. E-mail: tong@cugb.edu.cn; zyh@cugb.edu.cn; an@cugb.edu.cn
Received 
      29th September 2020
    , Accepted 19th January 2021First published on 21st January 2021AbstractSelf-powered materials prepared by combining functional assemblies with energy harvesting films have attracted increasing research attention recently and are applied in many fields, such as in drug delivery and therapeutic devices, tissue engineering materials, surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy substrates, hybridized photocatalysts, mechanoluminescent materials, and optoelectronic devices, amongst others. Compared with self-powered devices containing a management circuit, self-powered devices obtained by directly interfacing the energy generation unit and the electricity consumption unit have higher efficiencies and exhibit low power loss. More compact designs can also be developed, which results in devices with smaller volumes, further facilitating their usage. In this review, we document and discuss self-powered devices built by interfacing the electricity generation units and the electricity consumption units without being connected by an electric circuit. The electricity generating units and enhanced functionality as well as function promoting mechanisms are discussed. We expect that this review will help promote the development of integrated self-powered devices and lead to advanced systematic materials that better address current medical, environmental, and energy challenges.
Wangshu Tong
Dr Wangshu Tong is currently an Associate professor at the School of Materials Sciences and Technology in China University of Geosciences (Beijing). She received her PhD degree in 2016 from Materials Science and Technology, China University of Geosciences (Beijing). Her current research interests include flexible functional materials and self-powered materials.
Zhihao Wang
Zhihao Wang is currently a PhD candidate at the School of Materials Sciences and Technology in China University of Geosciences (Beijing). Her current research focuses on piezocatalysis and pyrocatalysis.
Xuemei Wang
Xuemei Wang is currently a master's student at the School of Materials Sciences and Technology in China University of Geosciences (Beijing). Her research focuses on mineral nanocomposites for triboelectric generators.
Xiao Zhang
Xiao Zhang is currently a master's student at the School of Materials Sciences and Technology in China University of Geosciences (Beijing). Her research interests focus on mineral composite materials.
Yihe Zhang
Yihe Zhang is a Professor at the School of Materials Sciences and Technology, China University of Geosciences (Beijing) and leads the Beijing Key Laboratory of Materials Utilization of Nonmetallic Minerals and Solid Wastes, School of Materials Science and Technology, China University of Geosciences (Beijing). Zhang received his PhD from the Technical Institute of Physics and Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2005, and he was previously a Visiting Scholar, a Postdoctoral Fellow and a Research Fellow in the City University of Hong Kong and The Hong Kong Polytechnic University from 2003 to 2009. His current research focuses on nanomaterials, composites and their applications for the environment and energy.
Qi An
Prof. Qi An is currently a professor at the School of Materials Sciences and Technology in China University of Geosciences (Beijing). She received her PhD degree from the Chemistry Department of Tsinghua University, China, in 2010 under the supervision of Prof. Dr Guangtao Li. After a two-year postdoctoral work under the joint supervision of Prof. Dr Jurriaan Huskens and Prof. Dr Pascal Jonkheijm at the MESA+ Institute for Nanotechnology, University of Twente, the Netherlands, she joined China University of Geosciences (Beijing) and later became a Professor in the year 2019. Her current research interests include chemistry, nanotechnology, and functional materials.
1. Introduction
Self-powered systems are prevalent in biological phenomena. For example, enzymes generate an electric field via alteration of conformation in their active center to speed up chemical reactions. Cell membranes produce an electrical field via deformation to regulate mass transport. Bones generate electrical stimuli in response to mechanical loads to enhance growth or regeneration. These self-powered systems are highly efficient and are constructed by combining electricity generation units with electricity consumption parts, without using circuits or energy management devices for connection. These biological phenomena suggest that self-powered systems prepared by interfacing the energy consumption unit with the energy generating part have the potential to be used as high performing biomimetic devices.
Self-powered devices should include two essential functionalities: the electricity generating unit and the electricity consumption unit. In designing the electricity generating unit, a wide range of energy sources in the environment can be utilized and converted into electricity. For example, wind, ocean waves, solar irradiation, geothermal heating or liquid evaporation can all be converted into electricity. In human activities, limb movements, periodic breathing, heart beating and body heat can all be used to produce electricity. Thus, employable energy sources for self-powered electricity generation are omnipresent. The energy consumption functionality can harness the electricity, which is usually alternating electricity with low (∼1 Hz) and random frequencies, via multiple mechanisms. For example, the electricity can induce polymer swelling or collapse to trigger drug release, enhance charge separation or alter the electronic band structure to boost catalytic reactions, or to activate cells and improve tissue healing or regeneration.
The development of self-powered devices began from the development of “self-powered” nanosensors. The nanosensors integrated components for an independent and self-sufficient operation with the nanogenerator being used as a power source.1 Usually the sensors operate by detecting the output electrical signals generated by external stimuli, such as mechanical or temperature changes. Subsequently, the generated electricity is collected and utilized to power other functionalities other than merely serving as sensors. In most cases, the electricity goes through a management circuit for regulation, storage, or even amplification in order to provide electricity to the electricity consumption functionality.2,3
Recently, an increasing number of self-powered devices have been developed by directly interfacing the energy generating unit and the electricity consumption unit. The potential merits of such systems include higher efficiencies by avoiding power loss through electrical circuits and more compact designs that result in smaller devices. In the future, when the mechanisms of self-powered devices are more clearly elucidated and understood, self-powered devices may advance into molecular devices that are comparable to biomimetic systems. A potential challenge for such systems is that the electricity generated is of relatively low intensity and low frequency compared with the electricity obtained from the power grid. Thus, a judicious design of the entire system by employing and even exploring novel integrating mechanisms is required for successful device preparation.
In this review, we document and discuss self-powered devices built by interfacing the electricity generation units and the electricity consumption units, which are not connected by an electric circuit. The electricity generation units and electricity consumption units are discussed separately. In the section concerning electricity generation devices, a wide range of energy converters are introduced and discussed, including piezoelectric generators, triboelectric generators, pyroelectric generators, magnetoelectric generators, piezo-dielectric generators, and energy generating units that integrate multiple energy sources. Subsequently, various functional systems obtained by compositing energy consumption units and electricity generators are explored. These systems include drug delivery or therapy devices, tissue engineering materials, surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy substrates, hybridized photocatalysts, mechanoluminescent materials, and optoelectronic devices. The electricity in the generator unit can serve the consumption unit in two manners: one way is to provide an electric field, and the other way is to provide charges. The electric field can alter the band gap of semiconductors, change molecular orientations, or drive the movement of charged species. The charges can vary the local electric potentials and inject into the receiving unit to adjust their charge density-relevant properties such as catalytic efficiency or plasmonic absorbance intensities. The two manners of electrical energy exchange can also simultaneously exist in many self-powered devices. Lastly, challenges and perspectives in the development of self-powered devices consisting of electricity consumption and generation units are discussed. Such integrated devices hold high promise but face obstacles with regard to meeting the needs of the medical, environmental, and energy challenges facing our society.
There are several closely related research topics that have been reviewed in recent literature. For readers interested in such topics, we suggest other relevant review papers that cover the topic of self-powered devices or nanogenerators,4–6 wearable electronics,7 or all-in-one self-powered flexible microsystems.8
2. Energy harvesting films with different energy sources
Conversion of energy from the environment into electrical energy has attracted significant attention not only for addressing the global energy crisis, but also for the development of various functional materials or systems.1 Energy in various forms can be converted into electricity via the use of energy-converting materials including piezoelectric, pyroelectric and photoelectric materials and triboelectric generators as shown in Fig. 1. In this section, energy harvesting films which utilize different energy sources are discussed, with a particular emphasis on the energy supply on the material surfaces. Piezoelectric, triboelectric, pyroelectric, magnetoelectric, piezoelectric–dielectric composite and electricity generating units that integrate multiple types of energy conversion sources are discussed below.
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of various self-powering strategies by harvesting various types of energy which may stem from polarization or charge separation. These electricity generation units may (a) include piezoelectric–dielectric materials,9 (b) be integrated in storage devices,10 or even (c) be achieved via simultaneous use of multiple types of electricity generators.11 
2.1 Piezoelectric units
When pressure is applied to a crystal without a symmetrical center, positive and negative ions in the crystal cell move, leading to relative displacement of the positive and negative charge centers. Such displacement results in net positive and negative charges appearing at each end of the crystal and consequently in macroscopic polarization. This phenomenon of generating electricity from material deformation is called the positive piezoelectric effect. For electricity generation by the positive piezoelectric effect, the figures of merit are open circuit voltage, short circuit current and the amount of the generated electrical energy. When holding the generated electric charges, piezoelectric generators can be viewed as capacitors. Thus, the open-circuit voltage, short-circuit current and the generated electrical energy can be evaluated using the following formulae:12 (1) (2)where Q is the charge, C is the capacity, h is the thickness, A is the surface area, ΔF is the force applied on the material, Δt is the applied time, ε0 is the permittivity of free space, εr is the relative dielectric constant of the piezoelectric material, and d33 is the piezoelectric charge coefficient given in pC N−1.
The generated electrical energy can be evaluated using the following formulae: (3)where V is the output voltage. Using eqn (2), the expression for the generated electrical energy in terms of the applied force can be written in the form of eqn (3).13 Based on eqn (1) and (2), it can be seen that the open-circuit voltage and short-circuit current are linearly dependent on the applied pressure and the piezoelectric charge coefficient (d33), and that the generated electrical energy is dependent on the square of both d33 and the applied force.
There are many types of piezoelectric materials, including piezoelectric ceramics, polymers and composites. Piezoelectric ceramics, such as barium titanate and zirconate titanate, possess high d33 values (of several hundred pC N−1); these materials have been applied in many sensing fields. Conversely, piezoelectric polymers like polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) and polylactic acid have relatively small d33 values compared with ceramic materials (10–30 pC N−1).14,15 However, due to their excellent mechanical flexibility, piezoelectric polymers can be used in a wide range of applications such as sensors, flexible generators, or electronic skins. Thus, performance optimization of the piezoelectric polymer has attracted a great deal of attention and become a prominent research topic in the field of piezoelectricity. Researchers have developed various strategies to boost the piezoelectric performance of polymer materials. One method is to integrate rigid piezoelectric ceramic particles into a flexible piezoelectric polymer matrix so as to realize both high piezoelectricity and flexibility. Another method involves the addition of nucleating agents during the formation of the piezoelectric polymer to enhance the effective piezoelectric phase. A wide variety of materials that exhibit strong interactions with the polymer matrix, such as carbon materials, clay particles and also polymers, can act as nucleation-inducing materials. Finally, the preparation technique, such as the application of a strong electrical field, stretching or stress, can also improve the piezoelectric phase generation. In addition, porous piezoelectric materials have attracted extensive interest due to their excellent piezoelectric performance. The high volume of air, which has a low εr value of 1, decreases the overall εr of the porous polymeric material; the preparation process of the porous structure usually enhances the β phase crystallization. Furthermore, pores are able to inhibit the movement of carriers and contribute to the low loss,16 decreasing the amount of energy dissipated during the energy conversion process. These factors combine to endow the porous film with good piezoelectric capabilities.17 In addition, porous PVDF, which has low mechanical quality factors (Qm), is more suitable for energy harvesting at lower frequencies and has potential applications for energy collection and conversion from humans and the natural environment.16
When the piezoelectric unit supplies energy to the functional unit integrated on their interfaces, the electric field intensity on the material surface should be considered. When calculating electrical fields outside the piezoelectric unit, the numerous microscopic polarizations in the polarized piezoelectric unit can be replaced by an equivalent volume charge density plus a surface charge density in order to simplify the calculation process. During uniform polarization (homogeneous material), there would be no bound volume charge density because the negative and positive charges cancel each other out, and only the surface charge densities need to be considered.18 Thus, for most piezoelectric films, the electricity generation capabilities can be evaluated by the surface charge densities and the thickness of the piezoelectric film. The thickness of the film matters because the opposite charges on the upper and lower surfaces partially cancel out each other's electric field and the residual electric field is the overall electric field intensity at the location of interest (near the surface of the piezoelectric film), as shown in Fig. 2(a). Therefore, the larger surface charges and thickness can provide more energy to the electricity consuming unit mounted on the surface of the piezoelectric films.
 Fig. 2  The electric field intensity at the location on the surface of (a) piezoelectric, pyroelectric or magnetoelectric units and (b) triboelectric units. 
2.2 Triboelectric units
The triboelectric effect is a type of contact-induced electrification, owing to which a material would become electrically charged after it comes into frictional contact with another dissimilar material.19 For the triboelectric effect between solid–solid pairs, the electron transfer mechanism was reported by Zhonglin Wang who believes that electron transfer occurs only when the interatomic distance between the two materials is in the region of repulsive forces.19 The contact/friction force assists in overcoming the interatomic potential barrier and induces a strong overlap between the electron clouds (or wave function in physics, bonding in chemistry) in the repulsive region, leading to electron transition between the atoms/molecules.19 When two charged objects have been relatively displaced, the induced charges emerge, leading to the displacement of the current in the external circuit.
Generally TENGs possess four basic working modes despite the wide range of electrode configurations.20 Utilizing polarization in the vertical direction is classed as the vertical contact-separation mode. Utilizing the polarization in the lateral direction due to the relative sliding between two contact surfaces is classified as the lateral sliding mode. Harvesting energy from a freely moving object without attaching a conduction line belongs to the single-electrode mode. Power generation by electrostatic induction between a pair of electrodes is the freestanding triboelectric-layer mode.
Since 2012, a novel technology of triboelectric nanogenerator (TENG) has been proposed for converting tiny mechanical energy into electricity.21 Various self-powered systems have been developed using TENG which can collect and convert energy from waves, wind and human motion. The areal output power density of TENG has reached 500 W m−2, and an instantaneous conversion efficiency of ∼70% has been demonstrated.22 The choice of material pairs is critical for the performance of TENGs. Thus, a triboelectric series has been qualitatively ranked according to their tendency to gain or lose electrons. A pair of materials with very different triboelectric polarization capabilities can be chosen as the friction partners to create static electricity in order to enhance the performance of TENGs.23
When mounting the energy consumer on the surface of the frictional electrode as shown in Fig. 2(b), the TENG can provide both charges and an electric field to the unit. Again, both the number of charges on the friction surfaces and the distance from the charges need to be considered when calculating the efficiency of electricity generation. When the electrodes present large amounts of transferred charges and have a small thickness, the small distance between the consumer and charges results in an effectively large electrical field.
2.3 Pyroelectric units
Pyroelectric phenomena stem from the fact that crystal structure parameters change with alterations in temperature. The premise of the pyroelectric effect is the inherent polarization in the crystal, which produces bound charges on the crystal surface. In a stable state, the material will automatically absorb the free charge in the surroundings to shield the bound charge on the surface, making the material neutral. Once the environmental temperature changes, lattice vibrations increase, leading to a relative displacement of positive and negative charge centers of the polarized crystal, and thus release the surface charges providing a pyroelectric effect. Therefore, under a temporal temperature gradient, pyroelectric materials exhibit a changeable spontaneous polarization, and as the temperature varies, the thermodynamic equilibrium can be broken and reestablished because of the change in the polarization states, as shown in Fig. 2(a). The current and energy generated by the pyroelectric effect can be expressed as follows.24
The pyroelectric current I can be determined using the following equation: I = pAdT/dt(4)where p, A and dT/dt are the pyroelectric coefficient, effective area of the device, and rate of change in temperature, respectively. Along the thickness of the PVDF film, the potential difference U between the top and bottom electrodes is given by U = Ed = Qd/(εrε0) = ΔTpd/(εrε0)(5)where E is the electric field intensity, d is the thickness of the PVDF film, Q is the change in surface-bound charge density, and εr and ε0 are the relative and vacuum dielectric constants, respectively.
Temperature change (dT/dt) is necessary for pyroelectric generation. A pyroelectric nanogenerator (PNG) driven by water vapor was designed, whereby a fast temperature oscillation up to 23 °C s−1 was achieved using automatic water condensation and evaporation on the surface of the PNG, as shown in Fig. 3(a). The PNG based on a commercial PVDF polymer is able to output an open-circuit voltage of 145 V and a short-circuit current of 0.12 μA cm−2.25 Hao Xue et al. fabricated a wearable PNG using a PVDF thin film integrated in an N95 respirator for energy collection from human respiration, as shown in Fig. 3(b). The PNG can generate an open-circuit voltage of 42 V and a short-circuit current of 2.5 μA with the temperature fluctuation induced by human breathing at an ambient temperature of 5 °C.26
 Fig. 3  Energy harvesting by pyroelectric units. Energy harvesting from (a) water vapor and air flow,25 (b) human breath,26 and (c and d) solar light and sporadic ambience.29,30 (e) The pyroelectric units used as pyrocatalytic devices.32 
In addition, a judicious design of a pyroelectric generator can effectively utilize the change in surface temperature of the device stemming from sporadic body part movements under constant light irradiation.27,28 Haitao Li et al. designed such a pyroelectric generator by combining enhanced solar harvesting materials and effective pyroelectric units, as shown in Fig. 3(c). The solar harvesting material is chemically-modified reduced graphene oxide by polyethyleneimine (PEI–rGO), and the pyroelectric layer is a highly polarized polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) film. During the process of arm movement while walking or jogging under sunlight irradiation, a highly efficient pyroelectric nanogenerator (S-PENG) with an unprecedented performance of 21.3 mW m−2 was developed. The S-PENG, designed as a bracelet, could charge a fitness tracker after only one hour of outdoor exposure.29 Modi Jiang et al. reported a PVDF-based solar-driven interfacial evaporation device with self-adaptive temperature oscillation that enables pyroelectricity generation. The automatic temperature oscillation is realized by the thermochromic effects of tungsten-doped vanadium dioxide nanoparticles, as shown in Fig. 3(d). Water evaporation was employed to control heat release and absorption. Under simulated solar illumination with a power density of 1.1 kW m−2, a self-adaptive temperature oscillation with a maximum temperature difference of ≈7 °C was developed with a maximum output electrical power density of 104 μW m−2.30
The output charges from the pyroelectric effects can participate in catalytic reactions. In addition, the changes in surface polarity during the pyrocatalytic effect could facilitate the adsorption or desorption of the chemical species from the surrounding electrolyte to enhance the catalytic performance.31 Many pyroelectrically active catalysts exhibited outstanding performance. However, studies on the pyrocatalysis mechanism are still lacking. This pyrocatalytic effect has attracted considerable attention in the last few years due to its potential application in environmental purification and even H2 generation.31 An improvement in the utilization of slight heat fluctuations is a key concern of pyrocatalysis. Mengdie Min et al. reported a porous pyroelectric membrane floating at the liquid/air interface that degraded waste dye under rapid temperature oscillation. The membrane consists of a carbon black film on the top layer as the photothermal converter, and a porous PVDF film embedded with pyroelectric BaTiO3 nanoparticles below the carbon black layer as the pyroelectric unit, as shown in Fig. 3e. The temperature variation stems from the quick temperature rising stage resulting from the low thermal conductivity of the porous PVDF polymer and rapidly decreasing temperature via interfacial evaporation through the porous membrane along with convective air cooling and radiative cooling. A degradation efficiency of 75% for RhB dye was obtained in 6 h.32
2.4 Magnetoelectric units
Magnetoelectric coupling arises as a combined effect of magnetostriction and piezoelectricity.33 When an external magnetic field is applied to the magnetoelectric material, the magnetic force works on the electron spin of atoms or ions. The coupling of magnetic force and elastic force of the material leads to deformation termed magnetostriction. This deformation causes a piezoelectric effect to produce a change in polarization, leading to the oppositely bound charges at both ends of the material, similar to piezoelectric materials. Therefore, the magnetoelectric (ME) effect results from the intrinsic interactions between lattice, charge, spin, and orbital degrees of freedom.34 ME materials supply energy to the functional unit on their surface in a manner similar to that of piezoelectric materials, as shown in Fig. 2(a). The electric field also originates from dipoles in the materials, which re-orientate with the externally applied magnetic field. The number of charges on the surfaces and the thickness of the magnetoelectric materials are important to consider for the ME energy providing materials.
The magnetoelectric unit can also be built by combining magnetic materials with a triboelectric nanogenerator, allowing electricity generation via the force–electricity conversion process. Magnetic particles like Fe3O435 and Fe–Co–Ni36 powders were introduced to the friction layer of the triboelectric nanogenerator to control the movement of the friction layer; the magnetic field is thus determined by the frictional behavior of the triboelectric nanogenerator (TENG), as shown in Fig. 4(a). For example, in the PDMS/Fe–Co–Ni composite TENG, the generated AC is converted into DC by an inverter, and the VOC can reach 150 V. Additionally, when using the TENG with a 10 mm gap to charge a 5 μF capacitor at a working condition of 10 Hz driven by a 5 kOe magnet, the voltage reaches 10 V in 2 s.
 Fig. 4  (a) Magnetoelectric unit built by combining magnetic materials with a triboelectric nanogenerator.36 (b) The magnetoelectric units used in magnetoelectric catalytic devices.37 
The free charges in/on the magnetoelectric unit can also be supplied to the functional unit mounted on the material surface. Fajer Mushtaq et al. demonstrated a localized trigger for catalytic reactions via the direct magnetoelectric (ME) effect on the surface of the multiferroic nanoparticles where surface charges can initiate redox reactions and form hydroxyl and superoxide radicals as shown in Fig. 4(b). The RhB pollutant is degraded with an efficiency of 97% within 50 min and ˙OH and ˙O2− radicals are the main reactive species in the magnetoelectrically induced catalytic degradation process.37
2.5 Piezoelectric–dielectric units
Piezoelectric–dielectric units possess the special advantage of generating enhanced electrical potential and extended energy preservation processes compared with pure piezoelectric units.9 Piezoelectric–dielectric coupling takes place in composite materials with the piezoelectric matrix and dielectric fillers, such as rGO/PVDF composites. Upon applying external force, a piezoelectric–dielectric coupling process takes place in three steps: (1) a piezoelectric field is generated within the material; (2) the dielectric fillers polarize under the piezoelectric field and (3) the piezoelectric field is diminished following withdrawal of the external force and the depolarization of the filler. As shown in the composite PVDF material in Fig. 5(a), the PVDF polymer serves as a piezoelectric unit to provide the piezoelectric field, and the dielectric fillers can be polarized in the piezoelectric field. When the force works on the piezoelectric–dielectric unit, the piezoelectric field is generated immediately; the fillers are then polarized which screen the piezoelectric field. When the force is removed, the piezoelectric field drops to zero immediately and the polarization of the fillers slowly decreases during a period ranging from seconds to minutes. With careful design of the material structure and filler component, the electrical energy in the piezoelectric–dielectric unit can be preserved for tens of seconds to minutes, facilitating the transfer of energy to adjacent functional units. In addition, during the deformation recovery process, the charges on the opposite surfaces of the materials are moved in opposite directions against their experienced electrical force. This process converts mechanical energy into electrical energy and enhances the electrical energy in the piezoelectric–dielectric composite. Due to the enhanced electrical energy and extended preservation, the piezoelectric–dielectric units are beneficial in building self-powered functional systems and have been applied in the areas of motion sensors and memory,38 piezophotocatalysis,39 surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS),40 and drug delivery,41,42 as shown in Fig. 5(b).
 Fig. 5  The piezoelectric–dielectric units:9 (a) schematic illustration of the electricity generation mechanism; (b) demonstration of their applications; and (c) a summary of the performance of the reported piezoelectric–dielectric materials. 
Experimentally, the piezoelectric–dielectric units can be achieved by compositing conductive fillers (graphene or carbon black) or ionically polarizable fillers with the piezoelectric matrix; the filler fractions are below the percolation threshold, as shown in Fig. 5(c). Surface modification of the conductive fillers to enable their interfacial compatibility and thus good dispersion in the piezoelectric polymer matrix is usually necessary. The maximum open circuit voltage (VOC) of smooth composite piezoelectric–dielectric films with graphene-type fillers is 1.5–4 V, and the electrical energy holding times are around 40 s. An increase in film thickness, porous structure, and adequate polarization are beneficial to a large trans-membrane voltage and a longer preservation period. The porous PVDF–HFP with conductive carbon black was prepared and presented a VOC as high as 20 V with a holding time of around 300 s.9 The ionic polarization of fillers is also effective in preparing the piezoelectric–dielectric coupling materials. For example, Li+ modified montmorillonite and halloysite were prepared and added to PVDF–HFP. Due to the slow movement of ions in the composite, the holding time reached 120 s and the maximum VOC was similar to that of the rGO/PVDF–HFP composite (1.5–6 V).
2.6 Energy harvesting units that integrate multiple energy sources or storage units
Environmental energy is present in multiple forms, such as mechanical, thermal and photo energies. Thus, materials that are able to convert multiple types of environmental energy into electricity are beneficial as highly-efficient energy conversion materials. Shuhua Wang et al. prepared a PVDF-based hybridized generator that converts mechanical and thermal energies into electricity via triboelectric–piezoelectric–pyroelectric effects, as shown in Fig. 6(a). When the hybridized generator is working with a loading resistance of 4 GOhm under stress and with a temperature change of about −11 °C, the output voltage is around 100 V; this can mostly contribute to the pyroelectric effects. The output current is approximately 15 μA and can be attributed to the triboelectric–piezoelectric effects.43 Tao Huang et al. developed “self-matched” tribo-piezoelectric nanogenerators which have a highly polarized PVDF membrane with a graphene dopant. A strong piezoelectric potential generated by the PVDF membrane modifies the surface potential of the PET layer to match the electron-transfer direction of the spider silk in the triboelectrification process, improving the triboelectric output, as shown in Fig. 6(b). The highest VOC and short-circuit current (ISC) generated are ≈300 V and ≈72 μA, respectively, with a maximum power density of 4016 mW m−2.11
 Fig. 6  (a) The piezo-tribo-pyroelectric generator43 and (b) piezo-triboelectric generator integrating multiple energy sources.11 (c) Piezoelectric unit integrated in a Li ion battery.10 (d) Piezoelectric unit integrated in a supercapacitor.50 
The flexible energy conversion films can also be combined with conventional energy generation units. For example, Wang's group firstly integrated piezoelectric PVDF with chemical energy conversion devices and prepared an enhanced lithium-ion battery.10 When the battery was subjected to external mechanical deformation, the piezoelectric potential promotes the migration of the lithium ions to the anode to participate in energy storage, as shown in Fig. 6(c). Under a compressive force at a frequency of 2.3 Hz, the voltage of the device increases from 327 to 395 mV in 240 s. Following the self-charging process, the device is discharged back to 327 mV with a discharge current of 1 μA, which lasts for about 130 s. The stored electric capacity of the power cell is approximately 0.036 μA h. There is no intermediate process in the storage phase which improves the charging efficiency. In later publications, graphene, graphite, carbon nanotubes, ZnO and CuO were used to improve the anode of the lithium battery, and the porous PVDF and PVDF composite film replaces the original pure PVDF film to further improve energy conversion and storage efficiency.44–48 In addition, piezoelectric PVDF combined with supercapacitors was also reported. As shown in Fig. 6(d), hydrogen ions and sulfuric or phosphoric acid are driven by the piezoelectric potential under stress and react with the electrode to store electrical energy.49,50 These works provide valuable inspiration to integrate novel types of energy harvesting units with conventional units for energy conversion device optimization.
Conventionally, the energy generation unit supplies energy to the consuming unit via circuit connections. In our daily life, commercial electricity consuming devices are all driven by plugging them into the power network at a specific output voltage and frequencies via electrical circuits. However, the emergence of the concept of self-powered devices provides a novel opportunity to connect the energy supplier and the energy consumers. The nanoscopic energy consumers can be directly mounted on the surface or integrated into the energy generation unit. The generated electricity can drive various functions by promoting the electrochemical processes in the functional consuming part or by triggering biological functions. This leads to a multitude of device design strategies which are to be discussed in the following section.
3. Self-powered assemblies developed by interfacing with functional units
Interfacing electricity generating materials with functional units is emerging as a promising strategy for the preparation of self-powered functional materials. In this section, various types of effective self-powered assemblies that present enhanced functionalities compared with their passive counterparts are introduced. They can function as drug delivery and therapy devices, tissue engineering materials, surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy substrates, hybridized photocatalysts, and self-powered mechanoluminescent devices, and can also exhibit optoelectronic capabilities (Fig. 7).
 Fig. 7  Schematic illustration of various applications of self-powered assemblies prepared by interfacing with functional units.39,42,51–54 
3.1 Drug delivery and therapy devices
There are significant challenges in the efficient delivery of therapeutics (drugs, proteins, genes, etc.) into targeted cells and tissues for both therapeutic and fundamental research purposes.55 A self-powered unit can be combined with the drug delivery unit either by directly mounting the delivery unit onto the self-powered unit or via electrical circuit connections. Self-powered drug delivery devices can effectively increase drug delivery efficiencies via multiple mechanisms. Firstly, the electric field in the self-powered unit promotes molecular movement in the matrix. Secondly, the electric field promotes the transdermal delivery of drug molecules due to electrophoretic effects. Thirdly, the electric field may electropolarize the cells and increase cell permeability towards the drug molecules. In addition to the enhanced delivery effects and increased clarity of these drug delivery mechanisms, recent studies have been directed toward accurate delivery using self-powered devices.
Firstly, the promotion of drug diffusion from the delivery matrix is discussed. The promoted molecular movement in the matrix can be realized via a number of mechanisms, including electrophoresis, electrical-field-induced matrix polymer swelling or collapsing, or electrochemically generated bubble propelling. Yi Zhang et al. reported a self-powered drug delivery device by assembly of a layer-by-layer matrix onto a piezoelectric–dielectric film,41,42 as shown in Fig. 8(a and b). The composite piezoelectric–dielectric film generates a trans-membrane electrical voltage that slowly disappears in response to an external mechanical disturbance. After 15 s, the voltage is still greater than 1.5 V following a one-time pressing of 5 N. Dendrimers are included in the layer-by-layer matrix to enhance drug loading. In response to finger pressing or simulated throat swallowing that are present in medical treatment situations, improved drug deliveries of up to 200% are realized. When mesoporous SiO2 microparticles are introduced as the drug loading units, proteins can be delivered with not only high efficiency in response to external stimuli but also high activity. The delivery boosting effects are applicable to positively charged, negatively charged, zwitterionic or polar molecules as well as peptides or proteins. The thickness of the drug delivery matrix affects the efficiency of the delivery, with the optimal matrix thickness being around several hundred nanometers. The enhanced delivery of the anti-vomiting drug from a gastric lavage tube or enzyme CAT from anti-oxidant soothing pads demonstrates the potential applications of self-powered delivery devices.
 Fig. 8  The electric field (EF) provided by the energy harvesting film (a and b) boosting drug diffusion,41,42 (c and d) inducing transdermal iontophoresis56,57 and (e and f) boosting trans-cell membrane electroporation.58,59 
In addition to boosting molecular diffusion, the electric field in the self-powered unit can also induce iontophoresis for effective transdermal delivery. Iontophoresis has proven to be an effective physical permeation enhancing approach to the delivery of hydrophilic and/or charged molecules across the skin. In such processes, an electric current (typically <0.5 mA cm−2) is applied to the skin to drive the flow of charged molecules, while the resulting electroosmotic flow of biofluids transports neutral or weakly charged molecules. In a recent study, a TENG was connected via electric circuits to a porous polypyrrole matrix that served as the drug reservoir for on-demand transdermal drug delivery, as shown in Fig. 8(c). With the assistance of a power management circuit, a voltage between 0.8 and 1.1 V is maintained for approximately 20 min after a quick charging process with the TENG. The cumulative drug release over 60 min was 35 μg cm−2.56 In another study, a noninvasive transdermal drug delivery system consisting of a wearable TENG and an iontophoretic patch was developed. A maximum pulsed DC current of 12 μA was delivered to the drug patch at a maximum voltage of 4 V. The depth of diffusion of rhodamine 6G in the skin is 50 μm under the drug delivery patch following continuous operation for 6 h. Both bright-field and fluorescence images on the skin tissues demonstrate the TENG driving force for the iontophoretic transport of dyes into the skin (Fig. 8(d)).57
The third mechanism, electroporation, is best utilized when combined with the micro-needle technique. In electroporation, the electric field plays a dual role of creating pores in cell membranes and providing a local driving force for molecular transportation. Chaochao Zhao et al. reported that doxorubicin, an anti-tumor drug, could be delivered to red blood cells using the electroporation technique, as shown in Fig. 8(e). The red blood cells directly contact the interdigital electrodes, which are powered by triboelectric nanogenerators, with output electric potentials up to 70 V and a current of 0.55 μA. After electric field treatment, the red blood cells shrank and pores on the membrane could be observed. The amount of released drug is three times that observed in the reference experiments with no assistance from the electroporation.58 Occasionally, the electroporation voltage is as high as 1000 V; this can often cause the generation of irreparable pores in cell membranes that cause cell damage.55 The nanoneedle array can enhance the localized electric field at the electrode–cell interface and decrease cell damage. Delivery nanoneedle-array electrodes, which provide several pointed tips, possess high delivery efficiencies of up to 90% and a simultaneous high cell viability of over 94%. Transdermal biomolecule delivery with an over threefold depth enhancement in mice was realized using this drug delivery system under finger friction or hand slapping of the wearable triboelectric nanogenerator (TENG), giving a 20 V output voltage.55
Circuits and electrodes were employed in the aforementioned needle-based drug delivery devices, but electrode-less and circuit-free delivery systems can also be fabricated. Moonjeong Bok et al. combined a TENG with microneedles directly for drug delivery. The triboelectricity generated by salmon deoxyribonucleic acid-based microneedles and chargeable polymers (polyimide and Teflon) provides an electrical potential field to promote drug delivery through the skin, as shown in Fig. 8(f). The drug delivery rate in pig cadaver skin is increased by the TENG devices with an electrical output voltage of ∼95 V. Approximately 220 ng of the drug is released with triboelectrification; in contrast, only 50 ng of the drug is released in the absence of an electrical field. The transient electric field generated by the triboelectricity generator is transferred to the interior part of the skin via microneedles.59
Recently, research into self-powered drug delivery devices has placed increasing emphasis on the accurate control of drug release. At a bias-voltage of 1 V by a TENG, the wettability of poly(3-hexylthiophene) switches from hydrophobic to hydrophilic; in the hydrophilic state, the small molecules and ions can penetrate through the poly(3-hexylthiophene) film. Methylene blue, fluorescein sodium, and rhodamine 6G can be controllably released from this flexible drug release device with wettability switching.60 Peiyi Song et al. proposed a TENG-based implantable drug-delivery system using an electrochemical microfluidic pump and demonstrated its functionality for ocular drug delivery. Gases were generated on the electrodes powered by the TENG to pressurize the drug reservoir and drugs were pumped out through a microtube. Pumping flow rates from 5.3 to 40 μL min−1 with rotating TENG speeds of 300 to 600 rpm were realized.61 In addition, Hao Wang et al. reported a self-powered flexible skin patch for transdermal insulin delivery using a liquid volume sensor to monitor the delivered drug volume. The drug volume measurement was realized by establishing the relationship between the frictional contact area and pump-chamber deformation. When the TENG spacing was 1000 μm, output voltages of 1 to 6.5 V were obtained with delivery volumes ranging from 0.01 to 0.1 mL.62
3.2 Tissue repair
Electrical stimulation in the functionality of living tissues has been widely studied and exhibited potential for use in tissue engineering and bone regeneration. Piezoelectric and ferroelectric materials are promising candidates for application to injured tissues due to their ability to deliver an electrical stimulus in the absence of an external electrochemical power source or circuit. Recently, studies have demonstrated that P(VDF–TrFE), PVDF, ZnO and BaTiO3 can be used to produce ample surface charge to stimulate the proliferation or differentiation of a variety of cells, such as bone cells, nerve cells and fibroblast cells. Moreover, the use of a piezoelectric material and a triboelectric nanogenerator (TENG) as an energy source can provide an electric field (EF) to adjacent functional materials, promoting tissue restoration, for example, by powering photocatalysts and electrode materials to help in wound healing and hair regeneration.
The piezoelectricity generated by bone, which can be attributed to the crystalline micelles of collagen molecules, is essential for the development of fully functional bone; it has been demonstrated to promote bone growth and remodeling.63 Thus, the development of scaffolds possessing piezoelectric properties that mimic the electrical signal stemming from collagen assemblies is highly desirable for bone regeneration.64 The generation of an electric field on the piezoelectric scaffolds in vivo is a key issue to solve. There are three methods for the realization of electric field generation for bone cells. Firstly, the mechanical force from the extracellular environment, such as acoustic vibration and body movement, can be employed to stimulate piezoelectric effects. Secondly, the self-adhesion of cells can generate a piezoelectric field in situ. Thirdly, the original surface potential of the ferroelectric composite can also provide a continuous electric field for bone growth.
Acoustic vibration is a commonly employed strategy for contactless mechanical energy input. Aochen Wang prepared a well-aligned and polarized P(VDF–TrFE) piezoelectric nanofiber membrane, both as a nanogenerator and as a scaffold, to assist the proliferation of preosteoblasts. The maximum voltage and current output of the membrane reached −1.7 V and 41.5 nA, respectively, under the dynamic piezoelectric stimulus generated by custom-made speakers. Under uniform mechanical vibration, cell proliferation on the polarized P(VDF–TrFE) was 1.27–1.13-fold that of the materials without the poling process. This verifies the significant enhancement of preosteoblast proliferation by the electrical stimulation of P(VDF–TrFE).65 Differing from devices that employ acoustic vibration that consumes extra energy, self-powered tissue engineering materials that employ body movements as the stimuli for osteogenesis have also been developed. C. Ribeiro et al. proved that piezoelectric poly(vinylidene fluoride) (PVDF) was able to provide an electrical stimulus upon mechanical solicitation related to walking and enhanced bone regeneration in vivo. Poled PVDF films implanted at defects lead to enhanced defect closure and bone remodeling.66
In addition to external stimuli or body movements, a piezoelectric force can also be generated naturally through the adhesion of cells in the absence of an external power source or human movement. Cell adhesions can generate enough voltage to trigger the opening of ion channels and improve cell activity. Gonzalo Murillo et al. reported cell culture substrates prepared from 2D ZnO nanosheets that possess an effective piezoelectric coefficient of 4–6 pm V−1 and could generate a piezoelectric potential in the range of 0.5–50 mV. Cell adhesion forces were able to bend the nanosheets to induce a local electric field to stimulate the motility of macrophages and trigger the opening of ion channels in the plasma membrane of osteoblast-like cells and induced intracellular calcium transitions, as shown in Fig. 9(a). They believe that this in situ cell-scale electrical stimulation of osteoblast-like cells can be extrapolated to other excitable cells, such as neurons or muscle cells, for future bioelectronic medicines based on cell-targeted electrical impulses.54
 Fig. 9  The electric field provided by (a) piezoelectric ZnO54 and (b) ferroelectric materials stimulating bone cells to enhance bone regeneration.67 (c) The electric field provided by PVDF/PCL stimulating nerve cells for nerve generation.68 (d) The electric field provided by piezoelectric BTO enhancing bacterial killing in wound healing.70 (e) TENG providing electrical stimulation for effective hair regeneration.71 
Maria Kitsara developed PVDF nanofibrous scaffolds via electrospinning to achieve high piezoelectricity and used oxygen plasma treatment to prepare a hydrophilic surface. Osteoblast cells exhibit high cell activation on the piezoelectric electrospun nanofibrous scaffolds due to the electrical stimulation originating from the bending of the fibrous scaffold resulting from the cell forces applied upon attachment. A maximum piezopotential of 30 mV can be obtained using a single PVDF nanofiber when strained by a cell (0.1–10 nN). The piezopotential causes the opening of plasma membrane channels which lead to an increase in the number of calcium ions in the cytoplasm.64
In designing piezoelectric materials that provide an electric field to cells, a number of properties need to be properly adjusted for optimal performance. These properties include the sensitivity of the piezoelectric materials, use of an appropriate type and frequency of stimulating force, and particular voltage values. In contrast to the numerous factors that influence regular piezoelectric properties, ferroelectric materials can maintain a polarized state and provide a continued electric field that facilitates the growth of bone cells. Xuehui Zhang et al. fabricated polarized composite membranes with a homogeneous distribution of BaTiO3 (5 vol%) coated with polydopamine in a poly(vinylidene fluoride-trifluoroethylene) (P(VDF–TrFE)) matrix. The surface potential of the nanocomposite membranes was tuned to −76.8 mV. The substrate enhanced bone marrow mesenchymal stem cell activity and osteogenic differentiation in vitro and gave rise to rapid bone regeneration and complete mature bone-structure formation in vivo. The newly formed medullary cavity could be observed at the 4th week, and complete healing with flat and consecutive bone-structure formation showing full bone maturity was realized 12 weeks after implantation, as shown in Fig. 9(b).67
In addition to bone regeneration, enhanced nerve restoration and wound healing facilitated by piezoelectric materials has also been the subject of intensive research. Yuan Cheng prepared a 3D structured porous polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF)/polycaprolactone (PCL) composite nerve tissue engineering scaffold with improved mechanical properties, biocompatibility, and biodegradation. PVDF/PCL contributed to nerve regeneration and attenuate muscle denervation even 4 months after implantation in the damaged sciatic nerve rat model (Fig. 9(c)). Meanwhile, PVDF in PC not only increases cell viability, but also improves the biodegradation of scaffolds via a piezoelectric field.68 Aochen Wang optimized electrospinning conditions for preparing P(VDF–TrFE) nanofibers to develop an enhanced energy harvester in SD rats, benefiting cell proliferation and cell alignment. The electrospun PVDF–TrFE nanofibers with a remnant polarization (Pr) and d31 of ∼42.5 mC m−2 and 16.17 pC N−1, respectively, could generate an electrical output of 0.75 V and 22.5 nA under mechanical vibration. After being implanted under the skin of the rat's leg, the peak output voltage and output current of the P(VDF–TrFE) nanofiber reached ∼6 mV and around ∼6 nA, respectively. With greater cytocompatibility and larger piezoelectric effects, fibroblast cells grew along the nanofiber direction and the cell proliferation rate was enhanced 1.6-fold.69
Piezoelectric materials as energy sources can also power photocatalysts in order to realize antibacterial effects via the piezophototronic effect, which can also help in wound healing. Xin Yu et al. inserted a ferroelectric semiconductor barium titanate (BaTiO3) nanolayer between a TiO2 nanorod and gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) to fabricate a TiO2/BTO/Au multilayered coaxial heterostructured nanorod array. The TiO2/BTO/Au, used as an antibacterial coating, had an antibacterial efficiency of up to 99.9% under simulated sunlight. Furthermore, the antibacterial coating efficiently promoted infected wound regeneration in mice with S. aureus infected dermal wounds, as shown in Fig. 9(d). On the 9th day, wound closure reached over 85% with the piezoelectric antibacterial treatment, while the closure rate in the control group was less than 70%.70 TENG as an energy source providing EF also enhanced hair regeneration. Guang Yao et al. designed a universal motion-activated and wearable electrical stimulation device (m-ESD) which can effectively promote hair regeneration stimulated by random body motions, as shown in Fig. 9(e). The m-ESD driven by irregular head motions generated consistent AC voltage pulses up to ∼0.1 V via triboelectric generation. After three weeks of treatment, the hair growth rate in the m-ESD region was 0.73 mm per day. The final hair shaft length under m-ESD was 1.8 and 2.2 times longer than that under treatment using traditional medicines. Additionally, the hair follicle density from m-ESD stimulation was 141% of the regions subjected to traditional treatments. The device works by improving the secretion of vascular endothelial growth factor and keratinocyte growth factor to promote hair regeneration in genetically defective nude mice by alleviating hair keratin disorder and increasing hair follicle numbers.71
3.3 Surface-enhanced Raman spectra
Electrically boosted surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (E-SERS) can be achieved by interfacing conventional SERS substrates with power conversion materials. Haitao Li et al. achieved electrically enhanced SERS with piezoelectric–dielectric and triboelectric–dielectric substrates as the power providers, as shown in Fig. 10. The energy conversion unit converts a finger press or friction into stored electrical energy which induces electron injection from the rGO-based substrates into the SERS-active layer. The electron-rich noble metal nanoclusters present an enhanced electromagnetic field under laser irradiation to enhance SERS intensities. Specifically, an electric potential of 2.6 V was generated by pressing with a finger on the modified graphene/PVDF–HFP composite film (self-powered substrate) and the electrical film potential was still over 1.9 V after 40 s. Rh6G, 4-mercaptopyridine (4-MP) and thiram detection of the self-powered substrate were increased 3–10 times compared with the control group without the self-powered units. In addition, pesticide residues on the surfaces of apples, cucumbers or protein residues on cell phones can be detected without sample pretreatment. These results demonstrate that the self-energizing SERS substrate has potential for use in detecting pesticide residues or detergent residues in everyday life.40,53
 Fig. 10  (a) The E-SERS substrates achieved by including a piezoelectric–dielectric unit40 or (b) a triboelectric–dielectric unit.53 
3.4 Hybridized photocatalysts
In photocatalysis, the recombination of photogenerated electrons and holes is an important cause of low photocatalytic activity. Many methods have been developed to enhance charge separation, such as the use of ion doping to create electron traps, addition of conductive fillers to increase electron transfer, and compositing with other materials to form heterojunctions. In recent years, electric fields generated by piezoelectricity or pyroelectricity have attracted much attention as a facile method to boost the separation of photogenerated charges. These enhanced photocatalytic systems are usually prepared by combining the photocatalyst with energy conversion materials. Many piezoelectric materials such as BaTiO3, ZnO, MoS2, and PVDF and its copolymers have found applications therein.
The stimulation of the self-powered photocatalytic process is usually achieved by ultrasonication or mechanical vibration using a vortex mixer. They provide relatively intense energy to activate the piezoelectric material for obtaining alternating electric fields. Deyi Hong et al. reported piezo-photocatalytic CuS/ZnO nanowires that rapidly degraded methylene blue (MB) under both solar and ultrasonic irradiation, as shown in Fig. 11(a). The MB in aqueous solution could be degraded with efficiencies approaching 100% within 20 min. In comparison, the rate of degradation was 60% under only solar irradiation, demonstrating that the piezoelectric field effectively boosts the catalytic capacity of the catalysts.72 Interestingly, MoS2 has both photocatalytic and piezoelectric properties, so the photocatalytic activity of MoS2 can be improved by its own piezoelectric field. Ting-Mao Chou et al. reported that nanocatalysts based on molybdenum disulfide (MoS2) nanosheets with deposited Au nanoparticles catalyzed the generation of reactive oxygen species to inactivate bacteria. This is achieved via a piezoelectrically enhanced photocatalytic effect, as shown in Fig. 11(b). AuNPs on the surface of MoS2 form Schottky junctions which further enhance the electron–hole separation. A 99.999% reduction in E. coli can be attained by mechanical vibration on a vortex mixer or under visible-light irradiation for 45 min. When mechanical vibrations and near-infrared-light irradiation are simultaneously applied, equal antibacterial effects can be achieved within 15 min.73
 Fig. 11  The piezo-photocatalyst of (a) CuS–ZnO72 driven by ultrasonication and (b) MoS2 driven by vibrations.73 Polymer-based piezo-photocatalyst of (c) TiO2/BiOI/CdS on porous rGO/PVDF–HFP,39 (d) g-C3N4 on helical PVDF74 and (e) Sn3O4 nanostructures on PVDF75 driven by flowing water. (f) Piezo-photocatalyst of BiVO4 quantum dots on a ZnO nanorod driven by airflow.77 (g) Pyro-photocatalyst of CdS on CNT/PVDF–HFP driven by infrared light.78 
The ultrasonic irradiation and vortex mixer mentioned above consume large amounts of extra electrical energy. Thus, many studies aimed at harvesting the energy from the ambient environment have been conducted, such as collecting mechanical energy from water flow or airflow, and harvesting thermal energy following a change in ambient temperature. The challenge here is that the energy in the ambient environment is usually dispersed and irregular and thus these devices require conversion materials with high performance.
Flexible piezoelectric polymer films were explored to harvest the energy from flowing water in order to boost the photocatalytic activity. Wangshu Tong et al. proposed a piezophotocatalysis by combining a photocatalyst with a self-powered piezoelectric–dielectric cushion driven by gentle disturbances from flowing water, as shown in Fig. 11(c). A porous composite graphene/PVDF–HFP polymeric film used as an energy cushion provided large and prolonged electric fields in response to gentle mechanical disturbances. The electricity generated by the porous rGO-F/PVDF–HFP remained above ∼800 mV throughout the stirring processes. The slowly diminishing electric fields benefit applications which involve low frequency deformation scenarios where the deformation of the substrate is induced by flowing water. Photocatalysts were coated on the surface of the energy cushion and the electric field enhanced the photocatalytic performance of TiO2, BiOI, and CdS by 300%, 21%, and 400%, respectively. This design concept for flexible self-powered cushion/photocatalyst composite catalytic systems allows material optimizations in the catalytically relevant fields of environmental remediation and clean energy production via gentle mechanical disturbances.39 Baoying Dai et al. prepared a helical g-C3N4/PVDF composite microfiber which can be stimulated by disturbances from flowing water, as shown in Fig. 11(d). The photocatalytic degradation efficiencies of rhodamine B after 75 min treatment were 73.4–96.8%, and the photodegradation efficiency of methyl orange after 5 h was 60–75.9%. The stronger harmonic vibration caused by higher flow rates induces a more obvious deformation over the piezoelectric helical microfibers and is thus responsible for the greater enhancement in the photocatalytic performance of the PVDF/g-C3N4 helical microfibers.74 Shuwei Han et al. assembled Sn3O4 nanostructures on a PVDF surface via the coordination effect between the metal ion and the fluorine atom on the surface of PVDF. When the hybrid nanostructured photocatalyst is subjected to flowing water, as shown in Fig. 11(e), a built-in electric field enhances the photocatalytic properties of the Sn3O4 photocatalyst. The degradation rate of Rh B reaches 62.6% after 225 min and that in the control group in the absence of the piezoelectric field is only 50.2%.75 Baoying Dai reported that a flexible composite film of PVDF–Na0.5Bi0.5TiO3–BiOCl0.5Br0.5 containing BiOCl0.5Br0.5 as the photocatalyst and PVDF–Na0.5Bi0.5TiO3 as the piezoelectric substrate could generate a piezoelectric potential ranging from −1.8 V to +1.8 V. Under magnetic stirring, the electric field provided by the PVDF–Na0.5Bi0.5TiO3 substrate boosts the photocatalytic activity of BiOCl0.5Br0.5 2.33 times for the degradation of tetracycline. The tetracycline was finally degraded into small molecules through the loss of functional group(s) and ring-opening reactions.76
Besides water treatment, piezoelectric materials can also be stimulated by airflow to promote photocatalysis in air purification. Qiujin Shi et al. used the piezoelectric potential generated in a ZnO nanorod to promote the photocatalytic performance of BiVO4 quantum dots, as shown in Fig. 11(f). The BiVO4 quantum dots were loaded on the ZnO nanorod through successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction processes. Wind with a speed of 2.3 m s−1 caused the sample to vibrate in a periodic manner which can generate a piezoelectric potential of around −1.4 V. The visible photodegradation rate improved formaldehyde degradation up to 2.5 times compared with catalysts without a ZnO nanorod. It is believed that the generated piezoelectric potential elevates the conduction band of the BiVO4 quantum dots; this, in addition to the enhanced charge separation, is also the reason for their enhanced photocatalytic activity.77
A pyroelectric field can also be employed to improve photocatalytic performance. Baoying Dai constructed infrared-light-responsive photoinduced carriers for enhanced photocatalytic hydrogen evolution, as shown in Fig. 11(g). The system consists of a pyroelectric substrate PVDF–HFP, a photothermal material carbon nanotube (CNT), and a photocatalyst CdS. Under light irradiation, CNT absorbs infrared light and is heated first. The heat is conducted to the PVDF–HFP microfibers which lead to the generation of a pyroelectric potential. The potential output of the PVDF–HFP/CNT/CdS is ∼4.8 V under light irradiation. The optimized PVDF–HFP/CNT/CdS–Pt samples provide a high photocatalytic hydrogen generation activity and the average apparent quantum yield is 16.9%.78
3.5 Self-powered luminescent film
Luminescence, as a type of cold body radiation, can be stimulated by mechanical stress, photoabsorption, electric fields, and chemical reactions. Their applications cover a wide spectrum of areas including lighting, displays, electronic skins, information encryption, disinfection and medical imaging.79 At present, luminescence stimulated by self-powered systems has been achieved by mechanoluminescence, electroluminescence, or the use of both. In the preparation of these self-powered luminescent devices, luminescent materials are usually mixed or closely interfaced with the power providing units.
Mechanoluminescence can be induced by the mechanical stress applied to solids such as doped ZnS and their mechanoluminescence can be enhanced by an electric field provided by a self-powered system. Fulei Wang et al. designed a ZnS:Cu,Mn/PVDF multilayer sandwich structure as a mechanoluminescent device to realize an enhanced mechanoluminescent response using the piezoelectric field of PVDF, as shown in Fig. 12(a). The piezoelectric potential of PVDF at a pressure of 15 N reaches a maximum of ±40 mV at the center of the applied pressure. Under pressure, trapped charges of ZnS are released by the in situ generated internal piezoelectric field of PVDF, achieving an ∼85% improvement compared with the individual ZnS:Cu,Mn layer.80
 Fig. 12  (a) Mechanoluminescence enhanced by a piezoelectric field.80 Electroluminescence driven by (b) piezoelectric field52 and (c and d) triboelectric field.79,81 (e) Coupled effect of electroluminescence and mechanoluminescence.82 
Haitao Li et al. developed a self-powered electroluminescent composite material via mixing of piezoelectric PVDF–HFP and electroluminescent ZnS fluorescent powder as shown in Fig. 12(b). Interfacial interactions between ZnS and PVDF–HFP induce a high fraction of piezoelectric β-phase (83.41%) in the porous PVDF–HFP matrix. The generated illuminating patterns are visible to the naked eye and the luminescence intensity increases nearly linearly with the magnitude of pressing force.52
Xiao Yan Wei prepared a triboelectrification-induced electroluminescence (TIEL) that consists of a poly(methyl methacrylate) matrix and ZnS:Cu phosphor particles, and an electrification layer prepared from fluorinated ethylene propylene, as shown in Fig. 12(c). The ZnS:Cu phosphor in the composite film can be excited by extremely weak mechanical interactions. Even a low stress (10 kPa) was sufficient to induce substantial luminescence without an external power source. The large voltage of 700 V was obtained at the sliding interface, which excites the electroluminescence of the underlying phosphor. The effects of the thickness of the electrification layer, sliding velocity, and diameter of the sliding object on the luminescence intensity were studied.79 In their later studies, in order to promote the luminescence intensity further, they developed microsized contacts to promote the rate of change of the electric field, which significantly elevates the luminescence intensity twofold compared with the cases without the microsized contacts, as shown in Fig. 12(d). The luminescent composite is composed of polyvinyl chloride (PVC) as the matrix and ZnS:Cu phosphor particles as fillers. Upon applying the microsized stamp, the luminescent film experiences a transient surge in the electric potential of over ∼2.4 kV within the contact area. All of the microsized contacts can simultaneously glow at a threshold pressure of 4 kPa and a threshold velocity of 0.5 cm s−1, thus forming uniform planar luminescence.81
In addition, the triboelectrification-induced electroluminescence (TIEL) and the mechanoluminescence (ML) can take place simultaneously to induce synergistic effects. Yanghui Chen et al. reported a stretchable bilayered luminescent composite that can be excited either by externally applied mechanical strain or by moving an object that slides against the composite. ZnS/Cu phosphor as a filler was added to the bilayered PDMS. Addition of the PTFE nanoparticles in one layer promoted the triboelectrification between the two contacting surfaces. When TIEL and ML are simultaneously activated, a significant luminescence intensity is observed, as shown in Fig. 12(e). The overall luminescence intensity is enhanced by over 72% compared to that obtained solely from the ML.82
3.6 Performance enhancement of optoelectronic devices
Piezo- and pyrophototronic effects can be used to modulate the behavior of photoexcited carriers and promote the performance of optoelectronic devices.83 In solar cells, the band structure and thus carrier generation, separation, and transport can be modulated by the piezo- or pyropotential to improve conversion efficiency.84 Silicon-based Cu(In,Ga)Se2 and poly(3-hexylthiophene) solar cells enhanced by ZnO via a piezo- or pyrophototronic effect are described below. The enhancement of UV photodetectors by pyrophototronic effects is also discussed.
ZnO is the most widely used piezoelectric material in these devices. Laipan Zhu et al. developed piezoelectrically enhanced silicon-based heterostructured (p+-Si/p-Si/n+-Si (and n-Si)/n-ZnO NW array) photovoltaic devices (Fig. 13(a)). By applying a 800 kPa static compressive pressure, the efficiency of the p+-Si/p-Si/n+-Si/n-ZnO NW array solar cells was increased from 8.97% to 9.51%.51 In addition, Shuang Qiao et al. introduced ZnO nanowires into Cu(In,Ga)Se2(CIGS)-based solar cells to increase device performance via piezo-phototronic effects (Fig. 13(b)). With vertical pressure on the device increasing from 0 to 2 MPa, the power conversion efficiency of the rigid CIGS solar cell increased from 9.83% to 11.40%. In addition, with a change in strain from a 0.74% tensile strain to a −0.74% compressive strain, the power conversion efficiency of the flexible CIGS solar cell increases from 4.82% to 5.96%.85 In addition to introducing additional piezoelectric units such as ZnO, some non-central symmetrical crystals in regular solar cells can produce a piezopotential by themselves to generate a piezo-phototronic effect. Chunyan Jiang et al. improved the conversion efficiency of InGaN/GaN multiple quantum well solar cells by using the piezo-phototronic effect (Fig. 13(c)). The lattice mismatch induces piezoelectric polarization charges at the InGaN/GaN interface. When InGaNa is subjected to an external applied strain, under 0.134% applied strain, the maximum conversion efficiency of the InGaN/GaN multiple quantum well solar cell increases by 11%, and the short-circuit current increases from 1.05 mA cm−2 to 1.17 mA cm−2.84
 Fig. 13  Enhancement of solar cell efficiencies by (a–c) the piezo-phototronic effect51,84,85 or (d) the pyro-phototronic effect.83 (e) Enhancement of ultraviolet sensing by the pyro-phototronic effect.87 
Pyro-phototronic effects can also promote solar cell performance. ZnO is also the most widely used material to be introduced into solar cells to provide a pyropotential. Kewei Zhang fabricated a poly(3-hexylthiophene)/ZnO nanowire array heterojunction solar cell and the output performance was enhanced by harnessing a temperature-variation-induced pyro-phototronic effect resulting from the presence of ZnO under weak light illumination. The output current and voltage can be increased by 18% and 152%, respectively, by applying an external cooling temperature variation. The inner pyroelectric nanogenerator and the pyroelectric nanogenerator-induced band bending of the heterojunction are believed to be the two main reasons for the enhanced performance.86 Laipan Zhu et al. fabricated a flexible Cu(In, Ga)Se2 solar cell based on a ZnO thin film on a mica substrate and the efficiency was enhanced via both piezo- and pyro-phototronic effects, as shown in Fig. 13(d). The performance is increased from 13.48% to 14.23% by the pyro-phototronic effect, with the temperature decreasing from 31 to 2 °C. The performance can be further enhanced from 14.23% to 14.37% via the piezo-phototronic effect by further applying a static compressive strain.83
The performance of UV photodetectors can also be enhanced by the pyrophototronic effect. Ultrafast and energy-efficient ultraviolet sensing was realized by a light-self-induced pyroelectric effect in ZnO as shown in Fig. 13(e). Upon ultraviolet illumination, the pyroelectric effect of wurtzite ZnO nanowires was utilized as an effective approach for high-performance photon sensing. The response time decreased from 5.4 s to 53 ms with an increase in temperature, and from 8.9 s to 63 ms in the decreasing stage by five orders of magnitude. The specific detection sensitivity and the signal intensity were both enhanced by 322%. At the same time, the response time was improved with an enhancement of five orders of magnitude.87 Moreover, the temperature dependence of the pyro-phototronically-enhanced performance of the ZnO/perovskite heterostructured photodetector was investigated. At low temperatures, the enhancement effect was more significant.88
The aforementioned various functional devices can in principle be built using more than one type of electricity generating unit. The choice of the generating unit is made based on the consideration of both the generating performance and application environments. Triboelectric generators can usually generate high electric potentials over 20 V which can sometimes reach hundreds of volts, but the electric currents are usually as low as 10 nA. Triboelectric generators require two parts that can move relative to each other, while, in comparison, piezoelectric generators usually generate voltages of several volts, lower than that generated by a triboelectric generator. The current generated herein is also as low as several tens of nanoamperes, but can be promoted via filler compositing. The building component of a piezoelectric generator can be as simple as a polymeric film and thus can be facilely applied in various scenarios. These two types of generators are triggered by mechanical stimuli that should be omnipresent in the environment. Pyroelectric and magnetoelectric generators are highly dependent on special types of environmental stimuli. Temperature fluctuations are required to motivate pyroelectric generators. Magnetic fields are needed to drive magnetoelectric devices. These types of generator are only used when the environmental conditions are satisfied.
4. Challenges and perspectives
The preparation of self-powered devices built by directly interfacing electricity generating and consumption functionalities has seen significant progress. However, compared with biological self-powered systems, the performance of artificial systems still has significant room for optimization. In addition, the medical, environmental, and energy crises faced by our society all require functional materials with higher efficiencies. Thus, improving the performance of these self-powered devices is urgently desired. The challenges faced by current self-powered devices may include the following issues, and addressing any of them should benefit further development of these self-powered functional systems.
(1) The electric field provided by the electricity generating unit and the field distribution should be determined with higher accuracy, assisted by simulation tools. The field intensities depend not only on the distance from the charged interfaces but also on the dielectric constants of the materials. These factors should be taken into consideration when choosing the functional electricity consumption units.
(2) The second issue also concerns the accurate determination of the electric field. The electricity generating unit usually provides both electric fields and charges to the consumption unit. However, when charges are consumed, the electric field that originates from the charges simultaneously decreases. Thus, the profiles of the electric field provided by the generator should be carefully determined taking the consumption rate of the charges into consideration.
(3) The interface between the electricity generation and consumption units is definitely the main factor in building high-performance devices. There have been various reported strategies to engineer the interfaces of electricity nanogenerators, such as improving the surface roughness, coating functional groups on the surface, injecting charges (electret), and preparing composite materials to improve the dielectric constant. Material structural engineering strategies to prepare porous structures can also enhance the interfacial area effectively. These strategies should also be applied to integrated self-powered devices for enhanced performance.
(4) Novel power management strategies should be explored in these compact self-powered devices. The power management for most electricity nanogenerators are electronic devices found in a circuit. For self-powered assemblies built via the in situ consumption mode, the power management device might be replaced by interfacial materials, such as p-type and n-type semiconductors or heterojunctions to adjust the interfacial power connections.
(5) The electricity obtained from triboelectric or piezoelectric nanogenerators is of low and random frequencies (∼1 Hz) and low intensities compared with the regular electrical energy obtained from the power grid. In addition, the generated voltage is high but the current is usually low. Therefore new consumers with new energy consumption patterns should be explored by delving into the physical or chemical functioning mechanisms of nanomaterials so that such types of energy can be adequately utilized. Detailed overall device design should also be highlighted.
(6) Last but not least, large-scale or industry-friendly production strategies of integrated self-powered devices should be explored in an efficient and economic manner to facilitate real-time application of these devices. The self-powered devices have shown high potential as medical healing-promoting functional tapes, wearable sensors, and catalysts. Effective strategies to produce the devices, guarantee their reliable performance, and lower their production cost should facilitate their real-time application.
5. Conclusion
In this review, the development of self-powered devices built by directly interfacing the power consumption units with electricity generating functionalities is summarized systematically. The concept of these integrated self-powered devices, which do not possess external-circuit connections, is inspired by highly efficient biological systems. The electricity generating and consumption functionalities are the two essential fragments of the integrated self-powered devices. Various electricity producing mechanisms, including piezoelectric, triboelectric, pyroelectric, and magnetoelectric phenomena, and their coupling methods with multiple sources, are introduced. Subsequently, device functionalities and performance improvement mechanisms are discussed. For example, electricity can induce polymer swelling or collapse to trigger drug release, enhance charge separation or alter the electronic band structure to boost catalytic reactions, and activate cells to promote tissue healing or regeneration. Lastly, the challenges and opportunities faced by the integrated devices are put forward with the expectation that this review should incite discussion and inspire the development of integrated self-powered devices. It is hoped that using electricity to power conventional functional systems will lead to the development of high-performance devices that benefit the society.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51803193, 21922203, 51772279), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (QZ05201908, 2652019029), and the Open Project of State Key Laboratory for Supramolecular Structure and Materials (SKLSSM 201617).
Notes and references
S. Xu, Y. Qin, C. Xu, Y. G. Wei, R. S. Yang and Z. L. Wang, Self-powered nanowire devices, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 366–373 CrossRef CAS .
W. L. Liu, Z. Wang, G. Wang, G. L. Liu, J. Chen, X. J. Pu, Y. Xi, X. Wang, H. Y. Guo, C. G. Hu and Z. L. Wang, Integrated charge excitation triboelectric nanogenerator, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1426 CrossRef .
Y. K. Liu, W. L. Liu, Z. Wang, W. C. He, Q. Tang, Y. Xi, X. Wang, H. Y. Guo and C. G. Hu, Quantifying contact status and the air-breakdown model of charge-excitation triboelectric nanogenerators to maximize charge density, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1599 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Nie, X. Y. Chen and Z. L. Wang, Electrically responsive materials and devices directly driven by the high voltage of triboelectric nanogenerators, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29(41), 1806351 CrossRef CAS .
Q. J. Sun, W. Seung, B. J. Kim, S. Seo and S.-W. Kim, and Jeong Ho Cho, Active matrix electronic skin strain sensor based on piezopotential-powered graphene transistors, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3411 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, Z. Wei, Q. Zhang, H. Yu, S. P. Wang, X. X. Yang, G. Y. Gao, S. S. Qin, G. Y. Zhang, Q. J. Sun and Z. L. Wang, Static and dynamic piezopotential modulation in piezo-electret gated MoS2 field-effect transistor, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 582–590 CrossRef CAS .
K. Dong, X. Peng and Z. L. Wang, Fiber/fabric-based piezoelectric and triboelectric nanogenerators for flexible/stretchable and wearable electronics and artificial intelligence, Adv. Mater., 2019, 32, 1902549 CrossRef .
X. S. Zhang, M. D. Han, B. Kim, J. F. Bao, J. Brugger and H. X. Zhang, All-in-one self-powered flexible microsystems based on triboelectric nanogenerators, Nano Energy, 2018, 47, 410–426 CrossRef CAS .
W. S. Tong, Q. An, Z. H. Wang, Y. N. Li, Q. W. Tong, H. T. Li, Y. Zhang and Y. H. Zhang, Enhanced electricity generation and tunable preservation in porous polymeric materials via coupled piezoelectric and dielectric processes, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2003087 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Xue, S. H. Wang, W. X. Guo, Y. Zhang and Z. L. Wang, Hybridizing energy conversion and storage in a mechanical-to-electrochemical process for self-charging power cell, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 5048–5054 CrossRef CAS .
T. Huang, Y. J. Zhang, P. He, G. Wang, X. X. Xia, G. Q. Ding and T. H. Tao, “Self-matched” tribo/piezoelectric nanogenerators using vapor-induced phase-separated poly(vinylidene fluoride) and recombinant spider silk, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1907336 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Surmenev, T. Orlova, R. V. Chernozem, A. A. Ivanova, A. Bartasyte, S. Mathur and M. A. Surmeneva, Hybrid lead-free polymer-based nanocomposites with improved piezoelectric response for biomedical energy-harvesting applications: A review, Nano Energy, 2019, 62, 475–506 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Surmenev, T. Orlovaa, R. V. Chernozem, A. A. Ivanova, A. Bartasyte, S. Mathur and M. A. Surmeneva, Hybrid lead-free polymer-based nanocomposites with improved piezoelectric response for biomedical energy-harvesting applications: a review, Nano Energy, 2019, 62, 475–506 CrossRef CAS .
E. Fukada, Recent developments of polar piezoelectric polymers, IEEE Trans. Dielectr. Electr. Insul., 2006, 13, 1110–1119 CAS .
S. Cha, S. M. Kim, H. Kim, J. Ku, J. I. Sohn, Y. J. Park, B. G. Song, M. H. Jung, E. K. Lee and B. L. Choi, Porous PVDF as effective sonic wave driven nanogenerators, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5142–5147 CrossRef CAS .
J. Roscow, Y. Zhang, J. Taylor and C. R. Bowen, Porous ferroelectrics for energy harvesting applications, Eur. Phys. J.-Spec. Top., 2015, 224, 2949–2966 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhang, C. R. Bowen, S. K. Ghosh, D. Mandal, H. Khanbareh, M. Arafa and C. Wan, Ferroelectret materials and devices for energy harvesting applications, Nano Energy, 2019, 57, 118–140 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Chakravorti, Electric Field Analysis, Taylor & Francis Group, Boca Raton, FL,  2015, pp. 121–123 Search PubMed .
H. Y. Zou, Y. Zhang, L. T. Guo, P. H. Wang, X. He, G. Z. Dai, H. W. Zheng, C. Y. Chen, A. C. Wang, C. Xu and Z. L. Wang, Quantifying the triboelectric series, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1427 CrossRef .
Z. L. Wang, Triboelectric nanogenerators as new energy technology and self-powered sensors-principles, problems and perspectives, Faraday Discuss., 2014, 176, 447–458 RSC .
F. R. Fan, Z. Q. Tian and Z. L. Wang, Flexible triboelectric generator, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 328–334 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Luo and Z. L. Wang, Recent advances in triboelectric nanogenerator based self-charging power systems, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 23, 617–628 CrossRef .
Z. L. Wang and A. C. Wang, On the origin of contact-electrification, Mater. Today, 2019, 30, 34–51 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Leng, L. Chen, H. Y. Guo, J. L. Liu, G. L. Liu, C. G. Hu and Y. Xi, Harvesting heat energy from hot/cold water with a pyroelectric generator, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 11940–11947 RSC .
F. X. Gao, W. W. Li, X. Q. Wang, X. D. Fang and M. M. Ma, A self-sustaining pyroelectric nanogenerator driven by water vapor, Nano Energy, 2016, 22, 19–26 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xue, Q. Yang, D. Y. Wang, W. J. Luo, W. Q. Wang, M. S. Lin, D. L. Liang and Q. M. Luo, A wearable pyroelectric nanogenerator and self-powered breathing sensor, Nano Energy, 2017, 38, 147–154 CrossRef CAS .
T. P. Ding, L. L. Zhu, X. Q. Wang, K. H. Chan, X. Lu, Y. Cheng and G. W. Ho, Hybrid photothermal pyroelectric and thermogalvanic generator for multisituation low grade heat harvesting, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1802397 CrossRef .
C. M. Wu, M. H. Chou, T. F. Chala, Y. Shimamura and R. Murakami, Infrared-driven poly(vinylidene difluoride)/tungsten oxide pyroelectric generator for non-contact energy harvesting, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2019, 178, 26–32 CrossRef CAS .
H. T. Li, C. S. L. Koh, Y. H. Lee, Y. H. Zhang, G. C. Phan-Quang, C. Zhu, Z. Liu, Z. S. Chen, H. Y. F. Sim, C. L. Lay, Q. An and X. Y. Ling, A wearable solar-thermal-pyroelectric harvester: Achieving high power output using modified rGO-PEI and polarized PVDF, Nano Energy, 2020, 73, 104723 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Jiang, Q. C. Shen, J. Y. Zhang, S. An, S. Ma, P. Tao, C. Y. Song, B. W. Fu, J. Wang, T. Deng and W. Shang, Bioinspired temperature regulation in interfacial evaporation, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1910481 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, Z. C. Zhao, J. Z. Zhao, Z. T. Zhang, X. Li and J. M. Zhang, Recent advances of ferro-, piezo-, and pyroelectric nanomaterials for catalytic applications, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2020, 3, 1063–1079 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Min, Y. M. Liu, C. Y. Song, D. W. Zhao, X. Y. Wang, Y. M. Qiao, R. Feng, W. Hao, P. Tao, W. Shang, J. B. Wu and T. Deng, Photothermally enabled pyro-catalysis of a BaTiO3 nanoparticle composite membrane at the liquid/air interface, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 21246–21253 CrossRef CAS .
M. Balinskiy, A. C. Chavez, A. Barra, H. Chiang, G. P. Carman and A. Khitun, Magnetoelectric spin wave modulator based on synthetic multiferroic structure, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 10867 CrossRef .
H. G. Gao, Z. X. Yue, Y. D. Liu, J. Hu and X. Li, A first-principles study on the multiferroic property of two-dimensional BaTiO3 (001) ultrathin film with surface Ba vacancy, Nanomaterials, 2019, 9, 269 CrossRef CAS .
J. Q. Zhao, H. Guo, Y. K. Pang, F. B. Xi, Z. W. Yang, G. X. Liu, T. Guo, G. F. Dong, C. Zhang and Z. L. Wang, Flexible organic tribotronic transistor for pressure and magnetic sensing, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 11566–11573 CrossRef CAS .
L. B. Huang, G. Bai, M. C. Wong, Z. Yang, W. Xu and J. Hao, Magnetic-assisted noncontact triboelectric nanogenerator converting mechanical energy into electricity and light emissions, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2744–2751 Search PubMed .
F. Mushtaq, X. Z. Chen, H. Torlakcik, C. Steuer, M. Hoop, E. C. Siringil, X. Marti, G. Limburg, P. Stipp, B. J. Nelson and S. Pané, Magnetoelectrically driven catalytic degradation of organics, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1901378 CrossRef .
W. S. Tong, Y. H. Zhang, Q. Zhang, X. L. Luan, F. Z. Lv, L. P. Liu and Q. An, An all-solid-state flexible piezoelectric high-k film functioning as both a generator and in situ storage unit, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 7029 CrossRef CAS .
W. S. Tong, Y. H. Zhang, H. W. Huang, K. Xiao, S. X. Yu, Y. Zhou, L. P. Liu, H. T. Li, L. Liu, T. Huang, M. Li, Q. Zhang, R. F. Du and Q. An, A highly sensitive hybridized soft piezophotocatalyst driven by gentle mechanical disturbances in water, Nano Energy, 2018, 53, 513–523 CrossRef CAS .
H. T. Li, H. Dai, Y. H. Zhang, W. S. Tong, H. Gao and Q. An, Surface-enhanced Raman spectra promoted by a finger press in an all-solid-state flexible energy conversion and storage film, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 2649–2654 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, Q. An, W. S. Tong, H. T. Li, Z. Q. Ma, Y. Zhou, T. Huang and Y. H. Zhang, Small, 2018, 14, 1802136 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, C. Y. Tong, Z. Q. Ma, L. M. Lu, H. Fu, S. F. Pan, W. S. Tong, X. M. Li, Y. H. Zhang and Q. An, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 14372 RSC .
S. H. Wang, Z. L. Wang and Y. Yang, A one-structure-based hybridized nanogenerator for scavenging mechanical and thermal energies by triboelectric-piezoelectric-pyroelectric effects, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2881–2887 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xing, Y. X. Nie, X. Y. Xue and Y. Zhang, PVDF mesoporous nanostructures
as the piezo-separator for a self-charging power cell, Nano Energy, 2014, 10, 44–52 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Xue, P. Deng, B. He, Y. X. Nie, L. L. Xing, Y. Zhang and Z. L. Wang, Flexible self-charging power cell for one-step energy conversion and storage, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301329 CrossRef .
Y. S. Kim, Y. N. Xie, X. N. Wen, S. H. Wang, S. J. Kim, H.-K. Song and Z. L. Wang, Highly porous piezoelectric PVDF membrane as effective lithium ion transfer channels for enhanced self-charging power cell, Nano Energy, 2015, 14, 77–86 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, Y. J. Zhang, X. Y. Xue, C. X. Cui, B. He, Y. X. Nie, P. Deng and Z. L. Wang, PVDF-PZT nanocomposite film based self-charging power cell, Nanotechnology, 2014, 25, 105401 CrossRef .
X. Y. Xue, P. Deng, S. Yuan, Y. X. Nie, B. He, L. L. Xing and Y. Zhang, CuO/PVDF nanocomposite anode for a piezo-driven self-charging lithium battery, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2615–2620 RSC .
R. B. Song, H. Y. Jin, X. Li, L. F. Fei, Y. D. Zhao, H. T. Huang, H. L. Lai, W. Chan, Y. Wang and Y. Chai, A rectification-free piezo-supercapacitor with a polyvinylidene fluoride separator and functionalized carbon cloth electrodes, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 14963–14970 RSC .
A. Ramadoss, B. Saravanakumar, S. W. Lee, Y. S. Kim, S. J. Kim and Z. L. Wang, Piezoelectric-driven self-charging supercapacitor power cell, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 4337–4345 CrossRef CAS .
L. P. Zhu, L. F. Wang, C. F. Pan, L. B. Chen, F. Xue, B. D. Chen, L. J. Yang, L. Su and Z. L. Wang, Enhancing the efficiency of silicon-based solar cells by the piezo-phototronic effect, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 1894–1900 CrossRef CAS .
H. T. Li, Y. H. Zhang, H. Dai, W. S. Tong, Y. Zhou, J. F. Zhao and Q. An, A self-powered porous ZnS/PVDF-HFP mechanoluminescent composite film that converts human movement into eye-readable light, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 5489–5495 RSC .
H. T. Li, H. Dai, Y. H. Zhang, Y. H. Lee, C. S. L. Koh, G. C. Phan-Quang, W. S. Tong, Y. H. Zhang, H. Gao, X. Y. Ling and Q. An, Triboelectrically boosted SERS on sea-urchin-like gold clusters facilitated by a high dielectric substrate, Nano Energy, 2019, 64, 103959 CrossRef CAS .
G. Murillo, A. Blanquer, C. Vargas-Estevez, L. Barrios, E. Ibáñez, C. Nogués and J. Esteve, Electromechanical nanogenerator-cell interaction modulates cell activity, Adv. Mater., 2017, 24, 1605048 CrossRef .
Z. R. Liu, J. H. Nie, B. Miao, J. D. Li, Y. B. Cui, S. Wang, X. D. Zhang, G. R. Zhao, Y. B. Deng, Y. H. Wu, Z. Li, L. L. Li and Z. L. Wang, Self-powered intracellular drug delivery by a biomechanical energy-driven triboelectric nanogenerator, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1807795 CrossRef .
Q. L. Ouyang, X. L. Feng, S. Y. Kuang, N. Panwar, P. Y. Song, C. B. Yang, G. Yang, X. Y. Hemui, G. Zhang, H. S. Yoon, J. P. Tam, B. Liedberg, G. Zhud, K. T. Yong and Z. L. Wang, Self-powered, on-demand transdermal drug delivery system driven by triboelectric nanogenerator, Nano Energy, 2019, 62, 610–619 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Wu, P. Jiang, W. Li, H. Y. Guo, J. Wang, J. Chen, M. R. Prausnitz and Z. L. Wang, Self-powered iontophoretic transdermal drug delivery system driven and regulated by biomechanical motions, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 30, 1907378 CrossRef .
C. C. Zhao, H. Q. Feng, L. J. Zhang, Z. Li, Y. Zou, P. C. Tan, H. Ouyang, D. J. Jiang, M. Yu, C. Wang, H. Li, L. L. Xu, W. Wei and Z. Li, Highly efficient in vivo cancer therapy by an implantable magnet triboelectric nanogenerator, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1808640 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bok, Y. Lee, D. Park, S. Shin, Z.-J. Zhao, B. Hwang, S. H. Hwang, S. H. Jeon, J.-Y. Jung, S. H. Park, J. Nah, E. Lim and J.-H. Jeong, Microneedles integrated with a triboelectric nanogenerator: an electrically active drug delivery system, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 13502–13510 RSC .
G. X. Liu, S. H. Xu, Y. Liu, Y. Y. Gao, T. Tong, Y. C. Qi and C. Zhang, Flexible drug release device powered by triboelectric nanogenerator, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 12, 1909886 CrossRef .
P. Y. Song, S. Y. Kuang, N. Panwar, G. Yang, D. J. H. Tng, S. C. Tjin, W. J. Ng, M. B. A. Majid, G. Zhu, K.-T. Yong and Z. L. Wang, A self-powered implantable drug-delivery system using biokinetic energy, Adv. Mater., 2017, 11, 1605668 CrossRef .
H. Wang, Z. L. Xiang, P. Giorgia, X. J. Mu, Y. Yang, Z. L. Wang and C. K. Lee, Triboelectric liquid volume sensor for self-powered lab-on-chip applications, Nano Energy, 2016, 23, 80–88 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ribeiro, V. Sencadas, D. M. Correia and S. Lanceros-Méndez, Piezoelectric polymers as biomaterials for tissue engineering applications, Colloids Surf., B, 2015, 136, 46–55 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kitsara, A. Blanquer, G. Murillo, V. Humblot, S. D. B. Vieira, C. Nogués, E. Ibáñez, J. Esteve and L. Barrios, and P. Hydrophilic, Piezoelectric PVDF nanofibrous scaffolds promoting unaided electromechanical stimulation on osteoblasts, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 8906–8917 RSC .
A. Wang, M. Hu, L. W. Zhou and X. Y. Qiang, Self-poweredwell-aligned P(VDF-TrFE) piezoelectric nanofiber nanogenerator for modulating an exact electrical stimulation and enhancing the proliferation of preosteoblasts, Nanomaterials, 2019, 9, 349 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ribeiro, D. M. Correia, I. Rodrigues, L. Guardão, S. Guimarães, R. Soares and S. Lanceros-Méndez, In vivo demonstration of the suitability of piezoelectric stimuli for bone reparation, Mater. Lett., 2017, 209, 118–121 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Zhang, C. G. Zhang, Y. H. Lin, P. H. Hu, Y. Shen, K. Wang, S. Meng, Y. Chai, X. H. Dai, X. Liu, Y. Liu, X. J. Mo, C. Cao, S. Li, X. L. Deng and L. L. Chen, Nanocomposite membranes enhance bone regeneration through restoring physiological electric microenvironment, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 7279–7286 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cheng, Y. Xu, Y. Qian, X. Chen, Y. Ouyang and W.-E. Yuan, 3D structured self-powered PVDF/PCL scaffolds for peripheral nerve regeneration, Nano Energy, 2020, 69, 104411 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Wang, Z. Liu, M. Hu, C. C. Wang, X. D. Zhang, B. J. Shi, Y. B. Fan, Y. G. Cui, Z. Li and K. L. Ren, Piezoelectric nanofibrous scaffolds as in vivo energy harvesters for modifying fibroblast alignment and proliferation in wound healing, Nano Energy, 2018, 43, 63–71 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yu, S. Wang, X. D. Zhang, A. H. Qi, X. R. Qiao, Z. R. Liu, M. Q. Wu, L. L. Li and Z. L. Wang, Heterostructured nanorod array with piezophototronic and plasmonic effect for photodynamic bacteria killing and wound healing, Nano Energy, 2018, 46, 29–38 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yao, D. W. Jiang, J. Li, L. Kang, S. H. Chen, Y. Long, Y. Z. Wang, P. Huang, Y. Lin, W. B. Cai and X. D. Wang, Self-activated electrical stimulation for effective hair regeneration via a wearable omnidirectional pulse generator, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 12345–12356 CrossRef CAS .
D. Y. Hong, W. L. Zang, X. Guo, Y. M. Fu, H. X. He, J. Sun, L. L. Xing, B. D. Liu and X. Y. Xue, High piezo-photocatalytic efficiency of CuS/ZnO nanowires using both solar and mechanical energy for degrading organic dye, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 21302–21314 CrossRef CAS .
T. M. Chou, S. W. Chan, Y. J. Lin, P. K. Yang, C. C. Liu, Y. J. Lin, J. M. Wu, J. T. Lee and Z. H. Lin, A highly efficient Au-MoS2 nanocatalyst for tunable piezocatalytic and photocatalytic water disinfection, Nano Energy, 2019, 57, 14–21 CrossRef CAS .
B. Y. Dai, Y. R. Yu, Y. K. Chen, H. M. Huang, C. H. Lu, J. H. Kou, Y. J. Zhao and Z. Z. Xu, Construction of self-healing internal electric field for sustainably enhanced photocatalysis, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 16, 1807934 CrossRef .
S. W. Han, D. Chen, J. Wang, Z. Liu, F. Liu, Y. K. Chen, Y. C. Ji, J. B. Pang, H. Liu and J. G. Wang, Assembling Sn3O4 nanostructures on a hydrophobic PVDF film through metal-f coordination to construct a piezotronic effect-enhanced Sn3O4/PVDF hybrid photocatalyst, Nano Energy, 2020, 72, 104688 CrossRef CAS .
B. Y. Dai, H. M. Huang, F. L. Wang, C. H. Lu, J. H. Kou, L. Z. Wang and Z. Z. Xu, Flowing water enabled piezoelectric potential of flexible composite film for enhanced photocatalytic performance, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 347, 263–272 CrossRef CAS .
Q. J. Shi, M. Zhang, Z. M. Zhang, Y. X. Li, Y. Qu, Z. Q. Liu, J. L. Yang, M. Z. Xie and W. H. Han, Energy and separation optimization of photogenerated charge in BiVO4 quantum dots by piezo-potential for efficient gaseous pollutant degradation, Nano Energy, 2020, 69, 104448 CrossRef CAS .
B. Y. Dai, J. J. Fang, Y. R. Yu, M. L. Sun, H. M. Huang, C. H. Lu, J. H. Kou, Y. J. Zhao and Z. Z. Xu, Construction of infrared-light-responsive photoinduced carriers driver for enhanced photocatalytic hydrogen evolution, Adv. Mater., 2020, 12, 1906361 CrossRef .
X. Y. Wei, X. Wang, S. Y. Kuang, L. Su, H. Y. Li, Y. Wang, C. Pan, Z. L. Wang and G. Zhu, Dynamic triboelectrification-induced electroluminescence and its use in visualized sensing, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6656–6664 CrossRef CAS .
F. L. Wang, F. L. Wang, X. D. Wang, S. C. Wang, J. F. Jiang, Q. L. Liu, X. T. Hao, L. Han, J. J. Wang, C. F. Pan, H. Liu and Y. H. Sang, Mechanoluminescence enhancement of ZnS: Cu, Mn with piezotronic effect induced trap-depth reduction originated from PVDF ferroelectric film, Nano Energy, 2019, 63, 103861 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Wei, L. P. Liu, H. L. Wang, S. Y. Kuang, X. X. Zhu, Z. L. Wang, Y. H. Zhang and G. Zhu, High-intensity triboelectrification-induced electroluminescence by microsized contacts for self-powered display and illumination, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1701063 CrossRef .
Y. H. Chen, X. Y. Wei, H. Y. Li, Y. J. Fan, W. G. Hu and G. Zhu, Combination of strain-induced and triboelectrification-induced electroluminescence, ACS Omega, 2019, 4, 20470–20475 CrossRef CAS .
L. P. Zhu, P. Lin, B. D. Chen, L. F. Wang, L. B. Chen, D. Li and Z. L. Wang, Piezo-phototronic and pyro-phototronic effects to enhance Cu(In, Ga)Se2 thin film solar cells, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 3877–3885 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Jiang, L. Jing, X. Huang, M. M. Liu, C. H. Du, T. Liu, X. Pu, W. G. Hu and Z. L. Wang, Enhanced solar cell conversion efficiency of InGaN/GaN multiple quantum wells by piezo-phototronic effect, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 9405–9412 CrossRef CAS .
S. Qiao, J. H. Liu, G. S. Fu, K. L. Ren, Z. Q. Li, S. F. Wang and C. F. Pan, ZnO nanowire based gigs solar cell and its efficiency enhancement by the piezo-phototronic effect, Nano Energy, 2018, 49, 508–514 CrossRef CAS .
K. W. Zhang, Z. L. Wang and Y. Yang, Enhanced P3HT/ZnO nanowire array solar cells by pyro-phototronic effect, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 10331–10338 CrossRef CAS .
Z. N. Wang, R. M. Yu, C. F. Pan, Z. L. Li, J. Yang, F. Yi and Z. L. Wang, Light-induced pyroelectric effect as an effective approach for ultrafast ultraviolet nanosensing, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8401 CrossRef CAS .
W. B. Peng, R. M. Yu, X. F. Wang, Z. N. Wang, H. Y. Zou, Y. N. He and Z. L. Wang, Temperature dependence of pyro-phototronic effect on self-powered ZnO/perovskite heterostructured photodetectors, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 3695–3704 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2021
Table Content:

Wangshu Tong
	Dr Wangshu Tong is currently an Associate professor at the School of Materials Sciences and Technology in China University of Geosciences (Beijing). She received her PhD degree in 2016 from Materials Science and Technology, China University of Geosciences (Beijing). Her current research interests include flexible functional materials and self-powered materials.

Zhihao Wang
	Zhihao Wang is currently a PhD candidate at the School of Materials Sciences and Technology in China University of Geosciences (Beijing). Her current research focuses on piezocatalysis and pyrocatalysis.

Xuemei Wang
	Xuemei Wang is currently a master's student at the School of Materials Sciences and Technology in China University of Geosciences (Beijing). Her research focuses on mineral nanocomposites for triboelectric generators.

Xiao Zhang
	Xiao Zhang is currently a master's student at the School of Materials Sciences and Technology in China University of Geosciences (Beijing). Her research interests focus on mineral composite materials.

Yihe Zhang
	Yihe Zhang is a Professor at the School of Materials Sciences and Technology, China University of Geosciences (Beijing) and leads the Beijing Key Laboratory of Materials Utilization of Nonmetallic Minerals and Solid Wastes, School of Materials Science and Technology, China University of Geosciences (Beijing). Zhang received his PhD from the Technical Institute of Physics and Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2005, and he was previously a Visiting Scholar, a Postdoctoral Fellow and a Research Fellow in the City University of Hong Kong and The Hong Kong Polytechnic University from 2003 to 2009. His current research focuses on nanomaterials, composites and their applications for the environment and energy.

Qi An
	Prof. Qi An is currently a professor at the School of Materials Sciences and Technology in China University of Geosciences (Beijing). She received her PhD degree from the Chemistry Department of Tsinghua University, China, in 2010 under the supervision of Prof. Dr Guangtao Li. After a two-year postdoctoral work under the joint supervision of Prof. Dr Jurriaan Huskens and Prof. Dr Pascal Jonkheijm at the MESA+ Institute for Nanotechnology, University of Twente, the Netherlands, she joined China University of Geosciences (Beijing) and later became a Professor in the year 2019. Her current research interests include chemistry, nanotechnology, and functional materials.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of various self-powering strategies by harvesting various types of energy which may stem from polarization or charge separation. These electricity generation units may (a) include piezoelectric–dielectric materials,9 (b) be integrated in storage devices,10 or even (c) be achieved via simultaneous use of multiple types of electricity generators.11	 
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)

 	Fig. 2  The electric field intensity at the location on the surface of (a) piezoelectric, pyroelectric or magnetoelectric units and (b) triboelectric units.	 
I = pAdT/dt	(4)
U = Ed = Qd/(εrε0) = ΔTpd/(εrε0)	(5)

 	Fig. 3  Energy harvesting by pyroelectric units. Energy harvesting from (a) water vapor and air flow,25 (b) human breath,26 and (c and d) solar light and sporadic ambience.29,30 (e) The pyroelectric units used as pyrocatalytic devices.32	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Magnetoelectric unit built by combining magnetic materials with a triboelectric nanogenerator.36 (b) The magnetoelectric units used in magnetoelectric catalytic devices.37	 

 	Fig. 5  The piezoelectric–dielectric units:9 (a) schematic illustration of the electricity generation mechanism; (b) demonstration of their applications; and (c) a summary of the performance of the reported piezoelectric–dielectric materials.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) The piezo-tribo-pyroelectric generator43 and (b) piezo-triboelectric generator integrating multiple energy sources.11 (c) Piezoelectric unit integrated in a Li ion battery.10 (d) Piezoelectric unit integrated in a supercapacitor.50	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic illustration of various applications of self-powered assemblies prepared by interfacing with functional units.39,42,51–54	 

 	Fig. 8  The electric field (EF) provided by the energy harvesting film (a and b) boosting drug diffusion,41,42 (c and d) inducing transdermal iontophoresis56,57 and (e and f) boosting trans-cell membrane electroporation.58,59	 

 	Fig. 9  The electric field provided by (a) piezoelectric ZnO54 and (b) ferroelectric materials stimulating bone cells to enhance bone regeneration.67 (c) The electric field provided by PVDF/PCL stimulating nerve cells for nerve generation.68 (d) The electric field provided by piezoelectric BTO enhancing bacterial killing in wound healing.70 (e) TENG providing electrical stimulation for effective hair regeneration.71	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) The E-SERS substrates achieved by including a piezoelectric–dielectric unit40 or (b) a triboelectric–dielectric unit.53	 

 	Fig. 11  The piezo-photocatalyst of (a) CuS–ZnO72 driven by ultrasonication and (b) MoS2 driven by vibrations.73 Polymer-based piezo-photocatalyst of (c) TiO2/BiOI/CdS on porous rGO/PVDF–HFP,39 (d) g-C3N4 on helical PVDF74 and (e) Sn3O4 nanostructures on PVDF75 driven by flowing water. (f) Piezo-photocatalyst of BiVO4 quantum dots on a ZnO nanorod driven by airflow.77 (g) Pyro-photocatalyst of CdS on CNT/PVDF–HFP driven by infrared light.78	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Mechanoluminescence enhanced by a piezoelectric field.80 Electroluminescence driven by (b) piezoelectric field52 and (c and d) triboelectric field.79,81 (e) Coupled effect of electroluminescence and mechanoluminescence.82	 

 	Fig. 13  Enhancement of solar cell efficiencies by (a–c) the piezo-phototronic effect51,84,85 or (d) the pyro-phototronic effect.83 (e) Enhancement of ultraviolet sensing by the pyro-phototronic effect.87	 

This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2021
