Surface structure-dependent photocatalytic O 2 activation for pollutant removal with bismuth oxyhalides  - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0CC05449F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0CC05449F
(Feature Article)
Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 15282-15296Surface structure-dependent photocatalytic O2 activation for pollutant removal with bismuth oxyhalides

        
          
            Hao 
            Li
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Zhihui 
            Ai
          
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Lizhi 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      *
      Key Laboratory of Pesticide & Chemical Biology of Ministry of Education, Institute of Environmental & Applied Chemistry, College of Chemistry, Central China Normal University, Wuhan 430079, China. E-mail: zhanglz@mail.ccnu.edu.cn; jennifer.ai@mail.ccnu.edu.cn
Received 
      10th August 2020
    , Accepted 21st October 2020First published on 22nd October 2020AbstractThe purification of water and air by semiconductor photocatalysis is a rapidly growing area for academic research and industrial innovation, featured with ambient removal of organic or inorganic pollutants by using solar light as the energy source and atmospheric O2 as the green oxidant. Both charge transfer and energy transfer from excited photocatalysts can overcome the spin-forbidden nature of O2. Layered bismuth oxyhalides are a new group of two-dimensional photocatalysts with an appealing geometric and surface structure that allows the dynamic and selective tuning of O2 activation at the surface molecular level. In this Feature Article, we specifically summarize our recent progress in selective O2 activation by engineering surface structures of bismuth oxyhalides. Then, we demonstrate selective photocatalytic O2 activation of bismuth oxyhalides for environmental control, including water decontamination, volatile organic compound oxidation and nitrogen oxide removal, as well as selective catalytic oxidations. Challenges and opportunities regarding the design of photocatalysts with satisfactory performance for potential environmental control applications are also presented.
Hao Li
Hao Li obtained his PhD degree in physical chemistry from Central China Normal University (CCNU) under the supervision of Professor Lizhi Zhang in 2017. His research interests focus on photocatalytic nitrogen fixation, organic transformations and pollutant control. Currently, he is a postdoctoral researcher in Swiss Federal Laboratories for Materials Science and Technology (Empa) and ETH Zürich.
Zhihui Ai
Zhihui Ai received her PhD degree in environmental engineering from the Huazhong University of Science & Technology, China, in 2004. Then she joined the College of Chemistry, CCNU, located at Wuhan and became a full professor of chemistry in 2012. During 2008–2010, she worked at The Hong Kong Polytechnic University as a postdoctoral research fellow. Her current research mainly focuses on environmental catalysis using nanomaterials, advanced oxidation technology, and air pollution control technology.
Lizhi Zhang
Lizhi Zhang received his PhD degree in environmental science from the Chinese University of Hong Kong, China, in 2003. After his postdoctoral research in the Department of Chemistry, Chinese University of Hong Kong, he joined the College of Chemistry, CCNU, as a full professor of chemistry in 2005. He worked at the Max-Planck Institute of Colloid and Interface as an Alexander von Humboldt Scholar from 2006 to 2007. His research interests include developing layered bismuth oxyhalides for solar water splitting and nitrogen fixation and utilizing the iron cycle for pollution control and environmental remediation. He won the National Natural Science Funds for Distinguished Young Scholars of China in 2014, and was appointed as the Changjiang Scholar Distinguished Professor of the Ministry of Education of China in 2015.
Introduction
In the context of industrialization and population growth, environmental contamination is becoming an emergency problem that requires immediate and accurate treatment. The past few decades have witnessed extensive efforts in developing physical, physicochemical, and biological techniques to solve these environmental problems, including incineration, coagulation, air-stripping, chlorination, anaerobic digestion, and filtration.1–5 Despite being efficient, many of these conventional techniques suffer from undesirable secondary pollution. For instance, physical adsorption of atmospheric pollutants usually produces risky solid waste, which must be disposed of through post-treatment.6 Air-stripping to remove dissolved volatile compounds will shift the water contamination problem into an air pollution one.7 Some destructive technologies (chlorination and ozonation) for water decontamination use hazardous chemical reagents as the strong oxidant. Worse still, incomplete pollutant removal is usually accompanied by more toxic intermediates’ emission.
Environmental pollution removal should be energy efficient and free of secondary contamination. Take the oxidation of organic pollutants as an example. Thermodynamically, organic pollutants can be completely mineralized by using molecular oxygen (O2) as the oxidant. O2, which constitutes about 21% of air, is the greenest and low-cost oxidant on earth. The only reaction products are non-toxic H2O, CO2, and inorganic species. However, due to the spin forbidden reaction, O2 in the ground (triplet) state cannot directly oxidize most pollutants, especially those anthropogenic ones with high toxicity at low concentration.8,9 Thus, O2 must be effectively activated by catalysts with external energy input for organic pollutant removal. Solar energy is a clean and renewable energy source that will meet future social development.10,11 Semiconductors can effectively harvest solar light; semiconductor photocatalysis thus represents an excellent candidate for efficient O2 activation.
Photocatalytic O2 activation involves three fundamental pre-steps, i.e., photocatalyst excitation, charge carrier generation, and separation.6,7,12 Briefly speaking, adsorption of a photon of ultra-bandgap energy will excite the photocatalyst and enable the production of electron/hole (e−/h+) pairs (Fig. 1). Electrons are then excited from the valence band (VB) to the conduction band (CB), and holes are left in the VB. For electrons in the excited state, they can activate and convert surface O2 into three dominant reactive oxygen species (ROSs), including superoxide radicals (˙O2−), peroxide anions (O22−), and hydroxyl radicals (˙OH). Besides, singlet oxygen (1O2) can also be produced during photocatalysis through energy transfer, necessitating the spin-triplet excitons to overcome the spin–flip restrictions (Fig. 1).13–15 All these ROSs actively participate in pollutant control, including water decontamination (organic pollutant degradation), air purification (volatile organic compound and NO removal), and also selective catalytic oxidations.7,16,17
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of photocatalytic O2 activation. 
It is widely accepted that different ROSs show various redox properties with pollutant substrates. Thus, activated O2 in different chemical states will influence the thermodynamics and kinetics of pollutant removal as well as the removal pathways. Through different removal pathways, various intermediates, either toxic or non-toxic, may be generated. In this regard, understanding the actual chemical reactivity of different ROSs is of considerable significance, while the absolute prerequisite is to achieve selective photocatalytic O2 activation.
The traditional viewpoint on selective photocatalytic O2 activation predominantly focuses on tuning the electronic band structure of photocatalysts.18,19 By modifying the CB structure of TiO2 through Cu, Au, or Fe doping, reduction potentials of photoelectrons can be adjusted between selective one-electron O2 activation (O2 + e− → ˙O2−, −0.13 V vs. NHE) and two-electron O2 activation (O2 + 2e− + 2H+ → H2O2, +0.68 V vs. NHE).20–23 Besides the band structure, synergistic development of material characterization methods and density functional theory has recently highlighted that the distinct surface structure of photocatalysts plays a more pivotal role in determining the manner of O2 activation. For instance, Zhao's group discovered that the structural difference between anatase TiO2(001) and (101) surfaces dramatically affected the O2 activation pathways for photocatalytic alcohol oxidation.24 Moreover, defects on the surface of photocatalysts in tiny amounts are demonstrated to influence O2 activation, typifying the “less is more” philosophy. Among the abundant defects identified so far, the anionic oxygen vacancy (OV) is the most common one due to its low formation energy; thus, it has been widely studied for decades. The formation of OVs is usually accompanied by enrichment of localized electrons and the construction of surface dangling bonds. These features make OVs immensely reactive for the binding and activation of O2.25–27
Meanwhile, the activation states of O2 on OVs are sensitive to the native surface structures. For example, O2 can be activated into ˙O2− or O22− on the OVs of rutile (110) or anatase (101) surface.28,29 Although enormous work has been devoted to clarifying the influence of surface structure on photocatalytic O2 activation behavior, research in this field is still in its early stage, leaving massive space for further investigation. Therefore, based on our recent study, this Feature Article endeavors to present our critical thinking over layered bismuth oxyhalides, aiming at clarifying the surface structure-dependent photocatalytic O2 activation for pollutant removal.
In the following sections, we will first discuss why bismuth oxyhalides (BiOX, X = Cl, Br, I) are selected as the model catalyst for investigating photocatalytic O2 activation. Subsequently, the regulation approaches to tune photocatalytic O2 activation based on surface structure engineering are thoroughly discussed based on theoretical and experimental results. Then, we demonstrate selective photocatalytic O2 activation of bismuth oxyhalides for environmental control, including water decontamination, NO removal, volatile organic compound oxidation, and selective catalytic oxidations. Finally, we highlight the challenges and possibilities regarding the design of novel photocatalysts for potential environmental control applications.
Bismuth oxyhalides: structure, property, and reactivity
Recently, two-dimensional (2D) layered materials with an adjustable bandgap, a large surface area, and copious reactive sites are promising photocatalysts to solve potential energy and environmental problems.30–33 Among the abundant 2D materials, bismuth oxyhalides, a part of the V–VI–VII compounds with the general formula of BiOX (X = Cl, Br, I), have attracted considerable attention.25,34–39 BiOX quickly crystallizes into the tetragonal matlockite (PbFCl-type) structure with a layered configuration. The layered configuration is characterized by the periodic stacking of [X–Bi–O–Bi–X] slices through the van der Waals interaction, enabling the polarization of interior atoms and orbitals to form an internal electric field (Fig. 2a). The separation and transfer of photoexcited e−/h+ pairs from the bulk to the surface can be boosted by the internal electric field along the crystal orientation. The bandgaps of BiOCl, BiOCl, and BiOI are indirect and share similar electronic band structures. According to the densities of states of BiOX, the VB maximum is mainly composed of O 2p and X np states, while the CB minimum is dominated by Bi 6p states (Fig. 2b).40,41 Meanwhile, X np states' density peak in the valence band shifts toward the valence band maximum with increasing X atomic number. Moreover, an increase in X number will gradually decrease the indirect bandgap, accompanied by reduced band edges (Fig. 2b). This is consistent with the experimental observation of the extended photo-adsorption range from UV light (BiOCl) to shallow-yellow-light (BiOBr) and red-light (BiOI) regions.35 BiOCl and BiOBr possess suitable energy band positions that straddle O2 reduction and water oxidation's redox potential (Fig. 2b). In comparison with BiOCl and BiOBr, BiOI has the smallest bandgap, while it affords only two-electron O2 activation.
 Fig. 2  (a) Primitive cell, internal electric field, and layered structure of BiOX. (b) Bandgaps, band edges of BiOX, and redox potentials for the formation of ROSs. (c) Schematic illustration of 2D BiOCl with different crystal orientations and exposed facets. (d) Schematic illustration of the formation of OVs on BiOX. 
Our group first investigated the photoreactivity of BiOCl, BiOBr, and BiOI towards methyl orange removal under visible light, and it was found that all displayed better photoreactivity than P25 and C-doped TiO2.42 Unfortunately, it is still challenging to define the “real” photoreactivity of BiOX for pollutant removal, because the intrinsic photoreactivity of BiOX depends on both its band structure and the type of pollutant. For instance, for dye removal, both direct photoexcitation and indirect dye self-photosensitization would co-exist: BiOI displayed the best photoreactivity towards methyl orange removal,42 but BiOCl achieved the highest photocatalytic rhodamine B and methylene blue removal efficiencies.43 For colorless phenol and 4-chlorophenol removal, BiOI exhibited higher removal efficiency than BiOBr,44,45 while BiOBr showed much better photoreactivity for tetracycline hydrochloride removal than BiOI.46 Overall, besides the photocatalyst's electronic structure, the nature of pollutants (including optical properties, electrostatic potential, and redox potentials) will also contribute to the intrinsic photoreactivity of BiOX.
In comparison with commercial P25 TiO2, BiOX displayed much higher photoreactivity for the removal of other dyes (rhodamine B, acid orange II, methylene blue),47–49 colorless water pollutants (bisphenol-A, salicylic acid, agent ciprofloxacin, p-nitrophenol, resorcinol, benzotriazole, caffeic acid),50–56 and also for NO oxidation,57,58 as well as Cr(VI) reduction.59,60 Therefore, BiOX is a good choice for practical application in pollutant removal.
Owing to their 2D layered structure, the crystal facets of BiOX can be easily tailored. For BiOCl, BiOBr, and BiOI with the same exposed surface, they share similar surface states due to their similar electronic band structures. However, for BiOX with different exposed surfaces, distinct surface states are expected. BiOX usually exposes three prototypical facets during the natural growth process, the {001}, {110}, and {010} facets, which display different surface geometric structures and electronic states (Fig. 2c). For 2D BiOCl nanosheets grown under acidic conditions, the top and bottom surfaces are identified as the {001} facet, while the {110} facet constitutes the four lateral surfaces.42 The {001} facet of BiOCl has a close-packed structure with exposure of O atoms of high-density (Fig. 2c). Usually, adsorption of protons onto the O atoms will enrich the BiOCl surface with hydroxyl groups.61 The {110} facet of BiOCl possesses an open channel structure with O, Cl, and coordinative unsaturated Bi atoms exposed. Xiong's group calculated the partial projected density of states of these two facets through DFT and pointed out that the valence band edge of the {110} facet was 0.36 eV higher than that of the {001} facet.62 This electronic structure difference led to the spatial migration of electrons and holes to the {001} and {110} facet, respectively, which contributed to the rapid separation of charge carriers for efficient pollutant removal.62,63 For 2D BiOCl nanosheets grown under near-neutral conditions, the {010} facet became the dominant exposed surface. Like the {110} facet of BiOCl, the {010} facet has an open channel structure but is flatter, which favors substrate adsorption and indirect dye self-photosensitization degradation.42 In contrast, the {001} facet of BiOCl favored direct photoexcitation pollutant degradation through the inherent internal electric field. Other researchers also revealed similar photoreactivity differences among different facets of BiOBr and BiOI.64,65
Besides the layered structure and the tunable exposed crystal surface, another prominent feature of BiOX is the facile formation of OVs. Different from conventional photocatalysts such as TiO2, ZnO, CuO and Fe2O3, whose OVs are usually introduced under severe conditions, BiOX easily incorporates surface OVs during synthesis, or through solar light irradiation, and low-temperature thermal treatment (Fig. 2d).25,66,67 This is attributed to the rapid separation of e−/h+ pairs and the low dissociation energy of surface Bi–O bonds.68,69 All these unique characteristics make BiOX an excellent platform to investigate the sensitivity of surface structures on photocatalytic O2 activation. In the next section, we will discuss different regulatory approaches to tune photocatalytic O2 activation based on surface structure engineering.
Selective photocatalytic O2 activation on bismuth oxyhalides
Selective ˙O2− or O22− generation by regulating the crystal surface and OVs
As mentioned above, one-electron O2 activation (O2 + e− → ˙O2−, −0.13 V vs. NHE) and two-electron O2 activation (O2 + 2e− + 2H+ → H2O2, +0.68 V vs. NHE) were highly dependent on the reduction potential of electrons in the CB. However, our theoretical calculations pointed out that the crystal surface and native OVs also played important roles in determining the O2 activation pathway. For BiOCl with the (001) surface exposed (BOC-001), once OVs were introduced onto such a surface, a typical four-line spectrum (1:1:1:1) corresponding to ˙O2− was quickly detected according to electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectra (Fig. 3a).25,68 This signal confirmed that OVs on BOC-001 (BOC-001-OV) promoted O2 activation. Moreover, another four-line spectrum with relative intensities of 1:2:2:1 due to the presence of ˙OH was detected (Fig. 3a). The formation of ˙OH was associated with H2O2 decomposition via H2O2 + e− → ˙OH + OH−. H2O2 was produced by an additional one-electron reduction via ˙O2− + e− + 2H+ → H2O2. As the generation rate of H2O2 or ˙OH of BOC-001-OV was much lower than that of ˙O2−, OVs of the BiOCl(001) surface then selectively activated O2 to ˙O2− through a one-electron transfer pathway (Fig. 3b). Theoretical calculations further confirmed this point of view.61 The (001) surface of BiOCl has a close-packed structure, and the outermost layer is covered with –OH groups. Chemical interaction between clean BOC-001 and O2 was excluded. However, native OVs on such a surface were capable of binding O2, either in a terminal end-on or a side-on bridging mode.61 According to the magnetic moment (0.81 μB) and O–O bond length (1.26 Å) of O2 on BOC-001-OV, the adsorbed O2 was demonstrated to be ˙O2− of low-spin π*3, consistent with the experimental result (Fig. 3c). Charge density difference showed that the driving force for O2 activation was the instinct back donation of localized electrons from the OV to O2. Interestingly, for the OV on the (010) surface of BiOCl (BOC-010), it preferred to activate O2 into O22− through a two-electron reduction according to the electronic configuration (π*4) and O–O bond length (1.46 Å) (Fig. 3d). Thus, OVs of BiOCl highly favored O2 activation. And regulation of the crystal surface of BiOCl, which would confine OVs in different geometric structures, enabled the selective one-electron or two-electron activation.
 Fig. 3  (a) Spin-reactive ˙O2− and ˙OH on BiOCl as detected by EPR. (b) ROSs’ concentration change as a function of time on BOC-001-OV. The charge density difference of (c) ˙O2−-adsorbed BOC-001-OV and (d) O22−-adsorbed BOC-010-OV. Activated O2 is shown in black. Charge accumulation and depletion in the space are respectively reflected by the yellow and blue isosurfaces. Reprinted with permission from ref. 25 (Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH), ref. 68 (Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry), and ref. 61 (Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society). 
Besides the OV structures, the concentration of OVs was shown to influence the selectivity of O2 activation by modifying the electronic structure of BiOCl.70 This approach is feasible, as the change of concentration of OVs can modify the distortion degree of the neighboring atoms, and thus modulate the electronic structure of host materials (Fig. 4a). The theoretical calculations revealed that BOC-001 with a low concentration of OVs activated O2 into ˙O2−, while a high concentration of OVs kinetically favored the activation of O2 to O22− (Fig. 4b). Diffuse reflectance Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy further identified these two different activated O2 species on BOC-001-OV with varying concentrations of OVs. After introducing 16O2 into the FTIR cell, two absorption bands at 1120 and 885 cm−1 were in situ detected and assigned to ˙O2− or O22−, respectively (Fig. 4c).71 To confirm these two pronounced FTIR bands, 18O2 was used instead, which gave two relevant bands at 1066 and 840 cm−1 for BOC-001-OV with a high concentration of OVs. Since the calculated isotopic ratio of ν16O2/ν18O2 (1.05; 1120 cm−1/1066 cm−1) was almost the same as the theoretical one ((O18/O16)1/2, 1.06), these two bands at 1120 and 885 cm−1 were further confirmed as adsorbed ˙O2− and O22− species, respectively. Because BOC-001-OV with a high concentration of OVs had a much higher ratio of O22−/˙O2− than that of BOC-001-OV with a low concentration of OVs, it was therefore concluded that a high concentration of OVs indeed preferred to activate O2 into O22−.
 Fig. 4  (a) Theoretically modelled BiOCl surface with low (4 × 4 model) and high (2 × 2 model) concentration of OVs. (b) Theoretical modeling of the end-on O2− on BiOCl with low OV concentration and side-on O22− on BiOCl with high OV concentration. (c) Change of O2− FTIR of BiOCl with different concentrations of OVs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 70 (Copyright 2018 Elsevier). 
A similar strategy to achieve selective ˙O2− generation was reported by Gao's group. BiOI nanosheets with (001) or (110) surface were synthesized via the conventional solvothermal way. Theoretical calculations indicated that O2 adsorption on the (110) surface was more thermodynamically favorable than that on the (001) surface, thus allowing the production of more ˙O2− on the (110) surface.65 It is to be noted that BiOI cannot afford one-electron O2 activation according to its band structure (Fig. 2b). It is thus believed that surface OVs of BiOI might also contribute to the photocatalytic O2 activation.
Selective ˙OH generation by regulating the crystal surface and OVs
˙OH is not a straightforward O2 activation product but is indirectly generated through H2O2 decomposition. Since the oxidation power of H2O2 is much weaker than that of ˙OH, H2O2 usually acts as the reservoir of ˙OH during photocatalysis. ˙OH is generally believed to be a non-selective ROS, in terms of its chemical state or reactivity. However, we reported a distinct case study recently.72 Theoretical calculations first revealed that H2O2 interacted with the defect-free BiOCl surface through weak hydrogen bonds or moderate chemical bonds. However, once OVs were introduced, spontaneous dissociation of H2O2 occurred, generating a ˙OH and one –OH group (H2O2 + OV → ˙OH + –OH). Charge density difference indicated that H2O2 dissociation was initiated by the localized electron donation from OVs to H2O2 and was promoted by the consequent lengthening of the O–O bond toward heterolytic breaking (Fig. 5a and b).
 Fig. 5  Adsorption and dissociation of H2O2 on (a) BOC-001-OV and (b) BOC-010-OV. Charge accumulation and depletion in the space are respectively reflected by the yellow and blue isosurfaces. (c) Spin-reactive ˙OH radicals as detected by EPR, which were generated after H2O2 dissociation on OVs of the as-prepared BiOCl photocatalysts. (d) Linear generation and exponential decaying of ˙OH on different BiOCl surfaces. Reprinted with permission from ref. 72 (Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society). 
It is interesting to note that ˙OH displayed different chemical states on OVs of different BiOCl surfaces. In our case, dissociated ˙OH was in the free state on BOC-001, while it chose to bind to the surface of BOC-010 (Fig. 5a and b). The ˙OH radical could be stabilized by the coordinating unsaturated Bi atom (Lewis acid site) on BOC-010-OV, while a considerable hindrance of the hydroxyl-rich BOC-001-OV impeded ˙OH from adsorption. The chemical states of ˙OH were then checked by monitoring the lifetime of ˙OH through EPR. After H2O2 dissociation on OVs of BiOCl, strong four-line EPR spectra with the relative intensities of 1:2:2:1 appeared and corresponded to ˙OH, whose intensity linearly increased along with the increase in reaction time (Fig. 5c). After residual H2O2 was quenched by the addition of catalase (2H2O2 → 2H2O + O2), the concentration of ˙OH exponentially decreased (Fig. 5d). However, ˙OH generated by BOC-010-OV displayed a visible slower decay rate than that produced by BOC-001-OV, which can be explained by the longer lifetime of surface-adsorbed ˙OH. After the replacement of surface ˙OH on BOC-010-OV by F−, free ˙OH drastically increased, indicating that most of the generated ˙OH was located on the surface of BOC-010-OV. Therefore, OVs on BiOCl enabled thermodynamic H2O2 activation, and through regulating the OVs on different crystal surfaces, free or surface ˙OH could be selectively generated.
Selective 1O2 generation by regulating the crystal surface
Unlike the ROSs we have discussed above, 1O2 is a non-carrier-based ROS with broad applications in catalysis and photodynamic therapy.73,741O2 is usually generated through energy transfer from a photosensitizer to the ground state of O2, changing the electronic configuration of O2 from 3Σ−g to 1Δg (Fig. 6a).15,75 Selective generation of 1O2 over inorganic photocatalysts, which usually have a small binding energy (Eb), is proved difficult. For the first time, Xie's group demonstrated that giant excitonic effects were expected in confined layered BiOX that benefited exciton-involved energy transfer for 1O2 generation.76 Theoretical simulations revealed that CB and VB states were both localized on Bi atoms of the confined [Bi2O2] slabs, thus inducing great e−–h+ interactions (Fig. 6b and c). Meanwhile, a reduced electronic screen was also observed due to the valence electrons that were strongly localized on the halogen slabs. According to the number of localized valence states (Nv) and conduction states (Nc) near band edges within the cutoff energy, Eb values could be calculated through a numerical linear fitting of Eb ∝ (NcNv)1/2.77 According to the numerical fitting, the Eb value of BiOCl, BiOBr, and BiOI was respectively estimated to be ∼169, ∼280 and ∼121 meV, much larger than those of typical semiconductors, including AlN, ZnO, InN, GaN, and GaAs (Fig. 6d). Particularly for the confined slabs of BiOBr with [001] orientation, electrons and holes would actively interact with each other through Coulomb force in confined [Bi2O2] slabs, which demonstrated giant excitonic effects.
 Fig. 6  (a) Generation of ROSs associated with the excitation and relaxation of confined layered BiOX. System isosurfaces of (b) conduction charge density and (c) valence charge density near band edges. (d) Numerical fitting of Eb ∝ (NcNv)1/2 for the estimation of Eb for BiOX. Reprinted with permission from ref. 76 (Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society). 
To verify this theoretical prediction, BiOBr nanosheets with (001) surface exposed (BiOBr-001) were first prepared, whose confined structure should enable the giant excitonic effect. BiOBr nanosheets with (010) surface exposed (BiOBr-010), whose [010] crystal orientation was perpendicular to the [Bi2O2] slabs, were prepared for comparison. According to steady-state phosphorescence spectra as induced by the radiative decay from spin-forbidden excitonic states, BiOBr-001 displayed a prominent sharper phosphorescence peak at 500 nm than that of BiOBr-010. The difference in phosphorescence suggested that the [001] crystal orientation apparently favored the formation of excitons due to structure confinement (Fig. 7a). Time-resolved phosphorescence shows the non-exponent decaying behavior for BiOBr-001 and BiOBr-010 (Fig. 7b). The initial stage was arisen from the exciton–exciton annihilation process due to high exciton concentration.78 Along with the depopulation of excitons, the decaying of phosphorescence became a monoexponential one. The lifetimes were respectively calculated as 123.9 ms and 82.1 ms for BiOBr-010 and BiOBr-001 (Fig. 7b). These results confirmed that crystal surface regulation was crucial to tune the excitonic effect through modulating the structural confinement of layered BiOBr.
 Fig. 7  (a) Steady-state and (b) time-resolved phosphorescence spectra of BiOBr. The decay curve was collected at the corresponding emission peaks in Fig. 7a at 8 K. (c) Influence of different scavengers on photocatalytic TMB oxidation by BiOBr-001. (d) EPR spectra of BiOBr-001 and BiOBr-010 with TEMP as the probe molecule. Reprinted with permission from ref. 76 (Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society). 
To evaluate photocatalytic ROS generation by BiOBr, 3,3′,5,5′-tetramethylbenzidine (TMB) was used as the probe molecule. Only after the addition of carotene, which acted as the scavenger for 1O2, would the oxidation of TMB by BiOBr-001 be largely suppressed (Fig. 7c). As for BiOBr-010, the addition of catalase, which was used as the H2O2 scavenger, inhibited the TMB oxidation. By using 2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine (TEMP) as the probe molecule, EPR measurements further demonstrated that the 1:1:1 triplet 1O2 signal with a g-value of 2.0056 on BiOBr-001 was much stronger than that on BiOBr-010 (Fig. 7d). Hence, the dominant ROS generated by BiOBr-001 was 1O2, while the two-electron O2 activation product H2O2 was the major ROS on BiOBr-010. From the mechanical point of view, the high 1O2 generation by BiOBr-001 arose from the giant excitonic effect that promoted energy transfer. In contrast, exciton dissociation for the production of charge carriers favored electron-mediated O2 activation on BiOBr-010, which could be regulated by the crystal surface.
Bismuth oxyhalides for pollutant control
Water decontamination
Sodium pentachlorophenate is a typical colorless and organochlorine pesticide with acute toxicity to humans, whose biodegradation in water is shown to be slow and incomplete. Interestingly, the selective generation of ˙O2− by OVs of BiOCl(001) surface was shown to accelerate the kinetic steps of reductive dechlorination (Fig. 8a).25,68 Generation of 2,3,5,6-tetrachloro-phenol, 2,3,4,5-tetrachloro-phenol, and 2,3,4,6-tetrachloro-phenol was associated with the reductive dechlorination processes promoted by ˙O2− (Fig. 8a). These intermediates with eliminated Cl (electron-withdrawing group) increased the electron cloud density around the O atoms on the benzene ring, favoring the oxidative destruction of the conjugated π system by ˙OH. Thus, quinone species were readily formed, which were easier to be opened than benzene rings.79 This reductive pathway mediated by superoxide radical explained why ring-cleaved species (tetrachlorobenzene-1,4-diol), five-membered ring products could be smoothly formed. Small acids (succinic acid, 2-hydroxypropanoic acid, oxalic acid, but-2-enedioic acid) were finally produced, suggesting deep oxidation and mineralization of sodium pentachlorophenate.
 Fig. 8  (a) ˙O2−-Mediated sodium pentachlorophenate removal. Proposed photocatalytic degradation pathways of bisphenol A by (b) BiOI(001) and (c) BiOI(110). Reprinted with permission from ref. 25 (Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH) and ref. 65 (Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society). 
Bisphenol A [2,2-bis(4-hydroxyphenyl)propane] is one of the endocrine disruptors with estrogenic activity and acute toxicity to aquatic organisms. The work done by Gao's group demonstrated that photocatalytic bisphenol A degradation pathways by BiOI with (001) surface and (110) surface were markedly different.65 When bisphenol A was degraded on the BiOI(001) surface, the concentration of the hydroxylated product of bisphenol A (m/z 243) remained relatively stable after reaching the maximum, and the degradation of the above-mentioned cleaved intermediate (m/z 133) was sluggish (Fig. 8b). This result suggested that bisphenol A could not be entirely mineralized into CO2 and H2O on the BiOI(001) surface. As compared to the BiOI(001) surface, the BiOI(110) surface selectively generated more reactive oxygen species, including ˙O2− and ˙OH. Consistently, for the degradation of bisphenol A on the BiOI(110) surface, higher concentrations of intermediates (hydroxylated products of bisphenol A (m/z 243, 259), cleaved species of the above intermediates (m/z 133, 163), and aromatic ring-opening products (m/z 143)) could be rapidly formed and then quickly decreased with higher level of mineralization (Fig. 8c). The massive difference between BiOI(001) and BiOI(110) surfaces in generating reactive oxygen species is responsible for forming different intermediates during bisphenol A degradation. Photoreactivity of the BiOI(001) surface for bisphenol A degradation was restricted by the slow ring-opening process, while the BiOI(110) surface could achieve deep oxidation of bisphenol A into small organic acids, CO2 and H2O.
As we mentioned above, regulating the OVs on different crystal surfaces of BiOCl enabled the selective generation of free or surface ˙OH. It is generally conceived that free ˙OH exhibits superior reactivity in solution but is less stable, while surface ˙OH is more stable with a longer lifetime. Hence, the inherent reactivity of free and surface ˙OH could be explored by selective ˙OH generation.72 To this end, two groups of organic water pollutants were selected as the targets. The first group (group I) of pollutants included benzoic acid, benzene, and phenol, all of which showed weak affinity to BOC-001-OV and BOC-010-OV. Another group of pollutants (group II) were formic acid, rhodamine B, and methyl orange, which could be readily adsorbed on BOC-010-OV through the abundant Lewis acid/base sites.
Interestingly, free ˙OH generated by BOC-001-OV showed much higher reactivity than surface ˙OH generated by BOC-010-OV for group I pollutants’ removal (Fig. 9a). This trend was in agreement with the fact that free ˙OH was extremely active in oxidizing dissolved organic species. Interestingly, for group II pollutants’ removal, a considerably higher reactivity was observed by surface ˙OH on BOC-010-OV, indicating that surface ˙OH selectively reacted with co-adsorbed pollutants (Fig. 9a). This hypothesis was confirmed by pentachlorophenol (PCP) removal. Similar to formic acid, PCP could be readily adsorbed on the BOC-010-OV surface. As expected, BOC-010-OV showed a much faster PCP degradation than BOC-001-OV. The primary intermediates were tetrachlorohydroquinone (TCHQ), tetrachlorobenzoquinone (TCBQ), and dichloromaleic acid (DCMA). TCHQ was formed by oxidative dechlorination of pentachlorophenol by ˙OH, and TCBQ was formed by further oxidation of TCHQ. TCBQ was easier to be cleaved than the benzene ring in pentachlorophenol, generating DCMA as the intermediate. According to these intermediates, chlorine atoms in PCP molecules were first substituted by ˙OH to form benzoquinone, and the benzene ring was finally cleaved (Fig. 9b). Besides the four intermediates, tetrachlorocatechol (TCCC) emerged as a new intermediate on BOC-010-OV, indicating that the oxidative dechlorination by surface ˙OH was more efficient, which was confirmed by the rapid generation of Cl− ions by BOC-010-OV (Fig. 9c). Hence, surface ˙OH was more efficient for the oxidative dechlorination of surface-adsorbed PCP than free ˙OH.
 Fig. 9  (a) Kinetic constants for group I and group II pollutants’ removal by the as-prepared oxygen-deficient BiOCl photocatalysts. (b) The proposed PCP degradation pathways by different ˙OH. (c) Chloride ion generation along with PCP degradation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 72 (Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society). 
Volatile organic compound (VOC) removal
Air pollution is a critical environmental problem both now and in the coming decades. Indoor volatile organic compounds (VOCs) represent a group of organic compounds, posing adverse effects on human health.80,81 Removal of indoor VOCs is usually through adsorption by a functional filter containing zeolite or activated carbon, which suffers from risky VOC desorption and poor regeneration capability. Photocatalysis has therefore attracted considerable attention to remove indoor VOCs through ROSs. Even though many papers have been published on this topic, most of them focused on reactivity rather than reaction pathways. Take toluene oxidation as an example. Ideally, toluene can be mineralized into CO2 and H2O through photocatalysis. However, toxic intermediates (aromatic oxides, epoxides, peroxides, and hydroxylated compounds) may be generated in real photocatalytic systems owing to sluggish aromatic ring-opening processes.
To promote aromatic ring-opening and suppress toxic intermediates, Dong's group introduced OVs on the BiOCl(001) surface (BOC),82 and found that BiOCl with OVs (OVBOC) enabled the production of more ROSs (˙O2− and ˙OH). Meanwhile, OVs also lowered the energy barriers for potential ring-opening processes by activating toluene and primary intermediates. The oxidative ring-opening of toluene, benzyl alcohol, benzaldehyde, and benzoic acid was more thermodynamically favorable on OVBOC than on BOC, thus suppressing the accumulation of aromatic oxides or polyhydroxylated compounds (Fig. 10). Meanwhile, in situ FTIR results revealed that the benzene ring of toluene was opened via the intermediate of benzoic acid on BOC, while on OVBOC, the ring-opening was initiated via the intermediate of benzyl alcohol. The generation of more ROSs by OVs also speeded up chain scission of the ring-opening intermediates towards deep oxidation. Recently, Dong's group proposed that by regulating the crystal surface of BiOCl, both electronic states of adsorbed toluene and ROS can be tailored to adjust aromatic ring-opening processes.83 According to their results, the alternative charge arrangement on the BiOCl(010) surface facilitated the benzyl oxidation to benzoic acid for ring-opening reaction, whose efficiency was much higher than that of the BiOCl(001) surface which opened the aromatic ring of toluene from benzaldehyde at a high energy cost.
 Fig. 10  The calculated pathways for oxidative ring-opening of (a) toluene, (b) benzyl alcohol, (c) benzaldehyde, and (d) benzoic acid over BOC and OVBOC. Reprinted with permission from ref. 82 (Copyright 2019 Elsevier). 
Nitric oxide (NO) removal
Nitric oxide (NO) is a critical pollutant from automobile exhaust and fossil fuel combustion. Even dilute NO (sub-ppm or ppb levels) contributes largely to acid rain, photochemical smog, and ozone depletion in the atmosphere.84 Meanwhile, in highly polluted areas, NO is a potential risk to people with respiratory or cardiopulmonary diseases. For NO removal from industrial sources of high concentration (above 200 ppm level), conventional techniques, including adsorption, and selective and non-selective catalytic reduction, are efficient enough. Unfortunately, these techniques cannot deal with dilute NO in an indoor environment without preconcentration. By virtue of the ROSs, photocatalysis has attracted considerable attention to remove indoor NO efficiently.85,86 Using oxygen-deficient BiOCl as the model catalyst, our recent work first differentiated the oxygen species associated with NO oxidation in two standard catalytic systems, i.e., thermocatalysis and photocatalysis.87 OVs, either in bulk or on the surface, were selectively introduced onto BiOCl by implementing a surface hydrogen bond network. According to positron annihilation spectra (PAS), both BiOCl with bulk OVs (BiOCl-VOB) and surface OVs (BiOCl-VOS) yielded four lifetime components (τ1, τ2, τ3, and τ4), in which the two longer components (τ3 and τ4) were due to interfaces or large defect clusters (Fig. 11a and Table 1).88τ1 with a lifetime of 187 ps was the dominant lifetime component in BiOCl-VOS due to single-point  in bulk. In comparison, BiOCl-VOS mainly contained a more extended lifetime component of τ2 (320 ps) that corresponded to larger-sized surface OV associates , which could be directly visualized through high-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM). The surface structure remained almost undisturbed for BiOCl with dominant bulk OVs (Fig. 11b and c). However, for BiOCl with abundant surface OVs, severe distortion of the surface structure was observed due to large  vacancy associates (Fig. 11d). According to the line profiles of the HAADF-STEM micrograph along the [110] axis, the deeper valleys with low contrast-intensity were clearly recognized as surface VO along with periodic Bi/O distribution (Fig. 11d).
 Fig. 11  (a) PAS of BiOCl with bulk and surface OVs. (b) Atomic-resolution HAADF-STEM image of BiOCl-VOB and (c) the corresponding rainbow-colored scale image. (d) Atomic-resolution HAADF-STEM image of BiOCl-VOS. The corresponding intensity line profile extracted from the black line along the [110] axis from the enlarged image is shown on the right. (e) Thermocatalytic NO oxidation by BiOCl-VOB and BiOCl-VOS. The dashed line shows the equilibrium line. (f) Room-temperature photocatalytic NO oxidation under visible light by BiOCl-VOB and BiOCl-VOS. Reprinted with permission from ref. 87 (Copyright 2020 Elsevier). 
Table 1 Positron lifetime parameters of BiOCl-VOB and BiOCl-VOS. Reprinted with permission from ref. 87 (Copyright 2020 Elsevier)




Sample

τ
1 (ps)/I1

τ
2 (ps)/I2

τ
3 (ps)/I3 (defect cluster)

τ
4 (ns)/I4 (interface)




BiOCl-VOB
186.4/70.3%
321.1/17.1%
573.3/9.1%
2.34/3.5%


BiOCl-VOS
188.5/22.9%
319.9/62.8%
597.3/9.7%
2.27/4.6%




For thermocatalytic NO oxidation, BiOCl-VOS slightly increased the reactivity of BiOCl to 31%, while BiOCl-VOB achieved a much higher NO conversion efficiency of 56% (Fig. 11e). It is widely accepted that an increase in temperature will activate intrafacial lattice O atoms in the bulk, while bulk OVs promote diffusion of interior O atoms to the surface, thus favoring thermocatalytic NO oxidation.89,90 As for photocatalytic NO oxidation, 60% of NO was quickly removed by BiOCl-VOS in 10 min, while BiOCl-VOB exhibited very poor reactivity. The first-order rate constant for photocatalytic NO oxidation by BiOCl-VOS was over two times higher than that of BiOCl-VOB (Fig. 11f). During photocatalysis, NO is mainly oxidized through a suprafacial mechanism, through which surface OVs activated O2 into ˙O2− for rapid photocatalytic NO oxidation. In theory, NO can be either partially oxidized to NO2 or completely oxidized to nitrate. In our case, ˙O2− completely oxidized NO into nitrate with over 90% selectivity. Given that NO2 is an extremely undesirable intermediate or product with high toxicity in the open photocatalytic system, complete NO oxidation to nitrate should be more desirable as it not only avoids NO2 emission but also concentrates metabolic nitrogen species.
To understand why ˙O2− on OVs of the BiOCl(001) surface selectively oxidized NO into nitrate, a broader theoretical calculation was carried out.91 Activated O2 in the form of ˙O2− on the OV of the BiOCl(001) surface showed two diverse structures, i.e., terminal end-on and side-on bridging structure (Fig. 12). Through a classical Eley–Rideal mechanism, NO would attack the OV-adsorbed ˙O2−. Specifically, terminal end-on ˙O2− oxidized NO into peroxynitrite (OONO−), releasing 1.32 eV energy (pathway I). Unstable peroxynitrite, which is the structural isomer of nitrate, was decomposed on the OV to generate NO2 as the product with a small energy barrier. Interestingly, side-on bridging ˙O2− directly oxidized NO into nitrate with more energy release (pathway II: NO(g) + ˙O2− → NO3−, ΔE = −3.10 eV). Moreover, the structural transformation from peroxynitrite to nitrate was faced with a great energy barrier of 1.03 eV; thus NO oxidation via pathway I was more thermodynamically favorable, which theoretically explained why ˙O2− selectively oxidized NO into nitrate.
 Fig. 12  ˙O2−-Mediated NO oxidation on the OV of the BiOCl(001) surface. Reprinted with permission from ref. 91 (Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society). 
After investigating the catalytic role of ˙O2−, it is natural to expect the intrinsic activity of O22− for photocatalytic NO oxidation. To this end, using the BiOCl(010) surface with OVs as the model surface, the reaction pathway of O22−-mediated NO oxidation was simulated.92 Similar to ˙O2−-mediated NO oxidation on the BiOCl(001) surface, O22− directly oxidized NO into bidentate nitrate in the same exothermic process (Fig. 13a). After stoichiometric NO oxidation by ˙O2−, the single-electron-trapped OV  on the BiOCl(001) surface was completely quenched . However, as for O22− on the two-electron-trapped OV  of the BiOCl(010) surface, it would donate one of its electrons back to the OV of the BiOCl(010) surface after oxidizing NO  (Fig. 13a). After nitrate desorption, the OV on the BiOCl(010) surface could activate another O2 and trigger another round of NO oxidation  (Fig. 13b). Thus, contrary to ˙O2− that oxidized NO through a stoichiometric one-electron transfer process (˙O2− + NO → NO3−), O22− could oxidize two molecules of NO (O22− + O2 + 2NO → 2NO3−).
 Fig. 13  (a) Difference between ˙O2− and O22−-mediated NO oxidation on the OV of different BiOCl surfaces and the corresponding energy changes. TS depicts the transition state associated with NO oxidation. (b) Proposed NO oxidation pathways by O22− on the OV of BiOCl(010). (c) Solar-light stimulated NO oxidation and (d) the corresponding NO2 generation by BiOCl that generated different ROSs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 92 (Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society). 
In principle, O22− on the BiOCl(010) surface should be more reactive than ˙O2− on the BiOCl(001) surface, as confirmed by simulated photocatalytic NO oxidation under visible light. For air-saturated NO (500 ppb) removal, the highest NO oxidation rate over BOC-010-OV was 1.8 times that of BOC-001-OV (Fig. 13c). The corresponding turnover frequency was calculated to be 0.036 s−1 for BOC-010-OV, over two times that of BOC-001-OV (0.017 s−1), indicating that O22− was more reactive for NO oxidation than ˙O2−. Moreover, vaporized H2O2 partially oxidized NO into NO2 with 95% selectivity. However, in situ generated NO2 by BOC-010-OV was less than 80 ppb. This result suggested that surface O22− altered the selectivity of NO oxidation from NO2 to nitrate, agreeing well with the theoretical calculation (Fig. 13d).
Photocatalytic NO decomposition (NO + hν → N2 + O2) is also an appealing de-NOx process. Since both N2 and O2 are clean gases, which may readily desorb from the catalyst's surface, photocatalytic NO decomposition can avoid secondary pollution and prevent catalyst deactivation. However, photocatalytic NO decomposition suffers from a high N–O bond dissociation energy (152.8 kcal mol−1), accounting for non-direct decomposition of NO on conventional photocatalysts. Wu et al. developed a new oxygen-deficient TiO2 photocatalyst with Fe doping (Fe/TiO2−x) and achieved ambient NO decomposition.93 OVs of TiO2 were responsible for NO activation and reduction, while Fe3+ stabilized the OVs from deactivation. Since the NO conversion efficiency over Fe/TiO2−x was only 3% under UV light, exploring novel photocatalysts that decompose NO at a higher efficiency remains highly challenging.
Selective catalytic oxidations
Selective catalytic oxidations are fundamental organic transformations to synthesize aldehydes, ketones, acids, imines, and sulfoxides, all of which are essential building blocks to manufacture pharmaceuticals and fine chemicals.17 Unfortunately, traditional selective oxidations use transition-metal complexes as the catalysts and toxic reagents as the oxidant.94,95 Besides the environmental application for pollutants removal, the use of environmentally benign semiconductor photocatalysts and O2 opens a new vista to tackle potential environmental problems related to selective oxidations. Similar to organic water pollutants’ removal, selective oxidation is also highly dependent on ROSs generated through photocatalytic O2. To promote OV-mediated O2 activation, plasmonic Au nanoparticles were deposited onto oxygen-deficient BiOCl(001) (Au-BiOCl-OV).96
Under visible light irradiation, OVs offered an efficient channel to trap plasmonic electrons of Au with the assistance of an intensified electric field at the interface (Fig. 14a and b). So, more ˙O2− was generated through this plasmonic effect (Fig. 14c). For selective benzyl alcohol oxidation to benzaldehyde (eqn (1)), a defect-free BiOCl(001) surface with Au nanoparticles could only oxidize 7.3% of benzyl alcohol. In comparison, Au-BiOCl-OV showed a remarkable 75.6% conversion efficiency for selective benzyl alcohol oxidation with 99% selectivity. (1)
 Fig. 14  (a) Hot electron trapping and transfer processes at the Au and oxygen-deficient BiOCl interface. (b) Electric field intensity enhancement contours of the Au/BiOCl hybrid system under the out-of-plane (left) and in-plane (right) polarized excitation. (c) In situ generation ˙O2− over as-prepared photocatalysts as detected by EPR. (d) Reaction pathways for selective benzyl alcohol oxidation by Au-BiOCl-OV. Reprinted with permission from ref. 96 (Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society). 
The mechanistic study revealed that the first step of benzyl alcohol oxidation is the co-adsorption of benzyl alcohol and O2 (Fig. 14d). Benzyl alcohol adsorption was proceeded through a deprotonation process with surface hydroxyl groups of BiOCl, while O2 was readily adsorbed on the OVs of BiOCl. Under visible light, OVs played a vital role in trapping plasmonic electrons from Au nanoparticles and activated adsorbed O2 into ˙O2−. The plasmonic holes on Au nanoparticles mildly oxidized benzyl alcohol into the corresponding carbon-centered radical. Recombination of ˙O2− and the carbon-centered radical generated a surface oxygen-bridged intermediate, whose concerted bond cleavage significantly enhanced the selective formation of benzaldehyde and a peroxide-bridged intermediate. The peroxide-bridge could be further protonated to H2O2 so that the surface structure of Au-BiOCl-OV could be refreshed. Besides benzyl alcohol, a wide range of other aromatic alcohols could be selectively oxidized into the corresponding aldehydes by Au-BiOCl-OV.
It is worth noting that ˙O2− is not a selective ROS for the oxidation of amines to imines (eqn (2)). Take the oxidation of a secondary amine N-tert-butylbenzylamine (BA) to N-tert-butylbenzylimine (BI) as an example. ˙O2− inevitably overoxidized BA into benzaldehyde or N-(tert-butyl)benzamide (eqn (3) and (4)).97,98 As a result, the selectivity of BA oxidation by BOC-001-OV was only 72%. (2) (3) (4)
Intriguingly, when BOC-010-OV was used as the photocatalyst, selectivity was increased to 92%, indicating that O22− was more beneficial for the selectivity of BA oxidation. This hypothesis was validated by the preparation of BOC-001-OV with a higher concentration of OVs to promote O22− generation.70 We have presented this theoretical scenario above. As expected, along with the increase of OVs and the accumulation of more O22− on the BOC-001-OV surface, selectivity for BA oxidation was increased from 72% to 87% (Fig. 15a). The mechanistic study revealed that oxidation of BA by h+ to generate the corresponding aminium cation radical was the first kinetic step of BA oxidation. To verify the carbocationic intermediates, oxidation of para-substituted BA (MeO, Me, H, Cl, and CF3 groups) was evaluated to obtain the Hammett plot. Good linearity (ρ = −0.15, R2 = 0.95) was acquired according to the log(kX/kH) values and the σ+ constants, indicating the generation of carbocationic intermediates (Fig. 15b). Different from ˙O2−, O22− could selectively oxidize the intermediate of the aminium cation radical to BI without any overoxidation (Fig. 15c). (5)
 Fig. 15  (a) The influence of OVs’ concentration on the selectivity of photocatalytic BA oxidation. (b) Hammett plots for the oxidation of para-substituted BA. (c) Mechanism of selective BA oxidation on the BiOCl surface containing a high concentration of OVs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 70 (Copyright 2018 Elsevier). 
In light of the high selectivity for 1O2 generation, Xie's group applied the BiOBr(001) surface for selective photocatalytic oxidation of sulfide (eqn (5)).76 Different from carrier-based ROSs like ˙O2−, O22−, and ˙OH that often cause overoxidation of sulfide to sulphones, 1O2 is selective enough to oxidize sulfide into sulfoxide.99 As expected, BiOBr-001 selectively oxidized thioanisole into methyl phenyl sulfoxide with high efficiency (99%), while BiOBr-010 showed much lower selectivity (20%), generating sulphone as the major byproduct. The addition of NaN3 as the 1O2 scavenger remarkably inhibited sulfoxide generation by BiOBr-001, validating the essential function of 1O2 towards selective sulfide oxidation. Meanwhile, BiOBr-001 showed general high reactivity and selectivity for the oxidation of thioanisole derivatives, including those with electron-withdraw substituent groups (para-ClPh and para-BrPh) and electron-donating substituent groups (para-MeOPh and para-MePh).
Outlook and perspectives
Semiconductor photocatalysis is a perfect alternative for environmental control by using atmospheric O2 as the green oxidant. By overcoming the spin forbidden reactions of triplet O2, photocatalysis activates O2 into various ROSs, including ˙O2−, ˙O22−, OH, and 1O2. Since different ROSs show various redox properties with pollutant substrates, they can remove pollutants through different pathways with toxic or non-toxic intermediates. Therefore, understating the intrinsic reactivity of certain ROSs is of great importance, which necessitates the selective O2 activation to generate desirable ROSs. Beyond the electronic structure, the surface structure of photocatalysts is recently demonstrated to play a more important role in influencing the manner of O2 activation. With this background, we present in this Feature Article the efforts to selectively tune ROSs using BiOX. First, BiOX is specifically selected as the model photocatalyst because of its unique layered structure, tunable crystal surface, and facile OV formation. All these features enable us to control photocatalytic O2 activation at the surface molecular level. Specifically, we revealed that OVs of BiOCl kinetically promoted O2 activation by localized electrons. Regulation of the crystal surface of BiOCl, which would confine OVs in different geometric structures, allowed the selective generation of ˙O2− or O22−. Moreover, increasing OVs' concentration on the BiOCl(001) surface modulated the surface atomic and electronic structures and further altered the O2 activation pathway to generate O22−via a two-electron transfer pathway selectively. ˙OH is usually the product from H2O2 dissociation, whose chemical states could be selectively governed by adjusting the structure of OVs. Spontaneous dissociation of H2O2 occurred on native OVs of BiOCl without any energy barrier. At the same time, the BiOCl(001) surface generated free ˙OH as the main product, while the (010) surface preferred to generate more surface ˙OH. By taking the excitonic effect into consideration, regulation of the crystal surface of BiOBr allowed the selective generation of 1O2 through an energy transfer process. For environmental application, selective photocatalytic O2 activation will help us gain mechanistic insight into the delicate molecular processes of conventional pollutants’ removal. For example, selective generation of ˙O2− accelerated the dechlorination of sodium pentachlorophenate, and ring-opening of bisphenol A towards deep oxidation. ˙OH would desorb from the BiOCl(001) surface and selectively oxidize dissolved pollutants in solution. However, surface ˙OH on the BiOCl(010) surface chose to oxidize strongly adsorbed pollutants with high priority. Through regulating OVs and the crystal surface structure of BiOCl, both O2 and VOC substrates could be activated, so that kinetic steps associated with aromatic ring-opening were facilitated for deep oxidation. In this regard, toxic intermediates were suppressed. As for NO oxidation, ˙O2− completely oxidized NO into nitrate (˙O2− + NO → NO3−) without risky NO2 emission. Meanwhile, for each O22−, it was able to oxidize two molecules of NO (O22− + O2 + 2NO → 2NO3−), displaying greater reactivity than ˙O2−. Photocatalytic O2 activation can also tackle potential environmental problems related to traditional selective oxidations, through which environmentally unfriendly catalysts and oxidants can be avoided. ˙O2− and O22− were respectively the ROS for selective alcohol and amine oxidation, while 1O2 was more suitable for selective sulfide oxidation.
The structure–performance relationship highlighted in this Feature Article can be extended to other photocatalyst systems with different compositions and architectural characteristics. Our recent studies revealed that the introduction of OVs onto P25 nanoparticles and CeO2 nanorods facilitated the O2 activation through single-electron pathways to generate ˙O2− that selectively oxidized NO to nitrate without toxic NO2 emission.100,101 Another prominent extension of the structure–performance relationship of BiOX is the photocatalytic N2 fixation. OVs can activate the stubborn N–N triple bond N2 through localized electrons, and thus decrease the energy barriers of either photocatalytic or photothermal N2 fixation over zero-dimensional BiO quantum dots,3 one-dimensional nanotubes (Bi5O7Br,102 W18O49103), two-dimensional nanosheets (layered-double-hydroxide,104 Bi2MoO6105 and TiO2106) and three-dimensional composite materials (Ru/TiO2,107 Fe/TiO2108).
Although considerable efforts have been devoted to this fascinating field, future research is still faced with plenty of challenges and opportunities. The first challenge is the secondary pollution from the emission of intermediates, whose toxicity can be much higher than that of the parent pollutants. For organic water pollutants’ or VOCs’ removal, deep oxidation towards mineralization is preferred. For photocatalytic NOx removal, NO2 should be possibly avoided that necessitates deep oxidation of NO to nitrate or direct NO composition to N2. Moreover, the secondary pollution caused by photocatalysts’ decomposition, especially those photocatalysts or cocatalysts containing heavy metals (CdS, CdSe, Cu2O, NiO, PbO2), should be well controlled for environmental applications. The second challenge is the need for a better comprehension of the intrinsic geometric and electronic structure of OVs and crystal surfaces of as-studied photocatalysts. Some advanced characterization methods, such as extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS), scanning tunneling microscopy, scanning transmission electron microscopy, and positron annihilation, may offer us a possibility to achieve this goal. Third, pollutant removal pathways with sophisticated molecular steps on different BiOX with distinct crystal surfaces should be further probed. Researchers usually deduce the surface reaction pathway based on the interaction between reactive oxygen species and pollutants. Some in situ techniques, including in situ FTIR, Raman spectroscopy, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, EXAFS, and transmission electron microscopy, will be beneficial for a deeper understanding. Fourth, other defects, including halogen vacancies, metal vacancies, dual vacancies, and vacancy clusters, will also influence the geometric structure and electronic states of photocatalysts like OVs do. Hence, gaining deep insight into the influence of defect type on O2 activation is essential for the logical design of novel photocatalysts with good catalytic performance for pollutant control. Fifth, because multiple factors are involved in the photocatalytic reactions, including temperature, humidity, reactor geometry, light intensity, substrate concentration, and photocatalyst concentration, the absence of standardization in reporting the photoreactivity for pollutant removal is adverse to the quantitative comparisons of photoreactivity among different photocatalysts, hindering our deep understanding of photocatalytic reactions. Some standardized protocols for photocatalysis have been recently proposed and highlighted, but only limited to simple photocatalytic systems like water splitting and organic synthesis.109–111 As for environmental applications, particularly for organic pollutant removal, unifying parameters associated with photocatalytic reactions is not enough because many toxic intermediates might be generated during the photocatalytic reaction. Therefore, a comprehensive assessment of the intrinsic photoreactivity and intermediates is highly required for standardization of the photocatalytic system for pollutant removal and safe environmental control. We believe only after these goals are fully met will selective photocatalytic O2 oxidation become an emerging technique for environmental remediation and pollutant control.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by The National Key Research and Development Program of China (2016YFA0203000), National Natural Science Foundation of China (21936003), and 111 Project (B17019).
Notes and references

          P. Weaver, L. Jansen, G. van Grootveld, E. van Spiegel and P. Vergragt, Sustainable Technology Development, Routledge,  2017 Search PubMed .
C. Chen, W. Ma and J. Zhao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 4206 RSC .
H. M. Freeman, Waste Manage. Res., 1989, 7, 295 Search PubMed .
R. Rife, T. W. Thomas, D. W. Norberg, R. L. Fournier, F. G. Rinker and M. S. Bonomo, Environ. Prog., 1989, 8, 167–175 CrossRef CAS .
J.-G. Kim, A. E. Yousef and S. Dave, J. Food Prot., 1999, 62, 1071–1087 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Hoffmann, S. T. Martin, W. Choi and D. W. Bahnemann, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 69–96 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mills, R. H. Davies and D. Worsley, Chem. Soc. Rev., 1993, 22, 417 RSC .
M. Metz and E. I. Solomon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 4938–4950 CrossRef CAS .
B. F. Minaev, Int. J. Quantum Chem., 1980, 17, 367–374 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pacesila, S. G. Burcea and S. E. Colesca, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 56, 156–170 CrossRef .
J. Luo, S. Zhang, M. Sun, L. Yang, S. Luo and J. C. Crittenden, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 9811–9840 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Nosaka and A. Y. Nosaka, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 11302–11336 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kovalev and M. Fujii, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2531–2544 CrossRef CAS .
C. Schweitzer and R. Schmidt, Chem. Rev., 2003, 103, 1685–1758 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, X. Yang, W. Shao, S. Chen, J. Xie, X. Zhang, J. Wang and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 11376–11382 CrossRef CAS .
C. George, M. Ammann, B. D’Anna, D. J. Donaldson and S. A. Nizkorodov, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 4218–4258 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lang, W. Ma, C. Chen, H. Ji and J. Zhao, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 355–363 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zheng, L. Lin, B. Wang and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 12868–12884 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bai, J. Jiang, Q. Zhang and Y. Xiong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2893–2939 RSC .
Y. Nosaka, S. Takahashi, H. Sakamoto and A. Y. Nosaka, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 21283–21290 CrossRef CAS .
M. Teranishi, S. Naya and H. Tada, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 7850–7851 CrossRef CAS .
D. Tsukamoto, Y. Shiraishi and T. Hirai, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2013, 3, 2270 RSC .
H. Zhang, L.-H. Guo, L. Zhao, B. Wan and Y. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 958–963 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, W. Ma, Y. Li, H. Ji, C. Chen, H. Zhu and J. Zhao, Angew. Chem., 2012, 124, 3242–3246 CrossRef .
H. Li, J. Li, Z. Ai, F. Jia and L. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 122–138 CrossRef CAS .
M. Setvín, U. Aschauer, P. Scheiber, Y.-F. Li, W. Hou, M. Schmid, A. Selloni and U. Diebold, Science, 2013, 341, 988–991 CrossRef .
A. Tilocca and A. Selloni, ChemPhysChem, 2005, 6, 1911–1916 CrossRef CAS .
U. Aschauer, J. Chen and A. Selloni, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 12956 RSC .
Y.-F. Li, U. Aschauer, J. Chen and A. Selloni, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 3361–3368 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, C. Xiao, Z. Li and Y. Xie, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 1600436 CrossRef .
Y. Sun, S. Gao, F. Lei, C. Xiao and Y. Xie, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 3–12 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, S. Gao, F. Lei and Y. Xie, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 623–636 RSC .
H. Li, C. Mao, H. Shang, Z. Yang, Z. Ai and L. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 15429–15435 RSC .
J. Di, J. Xia, H. Li, S. Guo and S. Dai, Nano Energy, 2017, 41, 172–192 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, H. Li, G. Zhan and L. Zhang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 112–121 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li and L. Zhang, Curr. Opin. Green Sustainable Chem., 2017, 6, 48–56 CrossRef .
H. Li, J. Shang, H. Zhu, Z. Yang, Z. Ai and L. Zhang, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 8276–8285 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, J. Shang, Z. Ai and L. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 6393–6399 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, J. Shang, J. Shi, K. Zhao and L. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 1986–1993 RSC .
L. Zhao, X. Zhang, C. Fan, Z. Liang and P. Han, Phys. B, 2012, 407, 3364–3370 CrossRef CAS .
W. L. Huang, J. Comput. Chem., 2009, 30, 1882–1891 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jiang, K. Zhao, X. Xiao and L. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 4473–4476 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Long, Q. Han, Z. Yang, Y. Ai, S. Sun, Y. Wang, Q. Liang and M. Ding, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 13005–13011 RSC .
X. Jia, J. Cao, H. Lin, Y. Chen, W. Fu and S. Chen, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2015, 409, 94–101 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, Z. Liu, D. Liu, G. Liu, M. Yang, F. Cui and W. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 236, 222–232 CrossRef CAS .
M. Du, Y. Du, Y. Feng, Z. Li, J. Wang, N. Jiang and Y. Liu, Cellulose, 2019, 26, 5543–5557 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, X. Liu, G. Liu, C. Zhang, G. Liu, S. Xu, P. Cui and D. Li, Catal. Commun., 2019, 130, 105769 CrossRef CAS .
F. Tian, Y. Zhang, G. Li, Y. Liu and R. Chen, New J. Chem., 2015, 39, 1274–1280 RSC .
K. Dai, D. Li, J. Lv, L. Lu, C. Liang and G. Zhu, Mater. Lett., 2014, 136, 438–440 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xiao, R. Hao, M. Liang, X. Zuo, J. Nan, L. Li and W. Zhang, J. Hazard. Mater., 2012, 233–234, 122–130 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cao, Z. Lu, L. Zhu, L. Yang, L. Gu, L. Cai and J. Chen, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 1434–1444 RSC .
Z. Liang, J. Yang, C. Zhou, Q. Mo and Y. Zhang, Inorg. Chem. Commun., 2018, 90, 97–100 CrossRef CAS .
W. Guo, Q. Qin, L. Geng, D. Wang, Y. Guo and Y. Yang, J. Hazard. Mater., 2016, 308, 374–385 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, L. Li, C. Guo, Y. Zhang and S. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2013, 221, 230–237 CrossRef CAS .
R. Li, F. Xie, J. Liu, Y. Wang, Y. Wang, X. Zhang and C. Fan, Dalton Trans., 2016, 45, 9182–9186 RSC .
H. Lan, G. Zhang, H. Zhang, H. Liu, R. Liu and J. Qu, Catal. Commun., 2017, 98, 9–12 CrossRef CAS .
F. Dong, Y. Sun, M. Fu, Z. Wu and S. C. Lee, J. Hazard. Mater., 2012, 219–220, 26–34 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ai, W. Ho, S. Lee and L. Zhang, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2009, 43, 4143–4150 CrossRef CAS .
M. Qamar and Z. H. Yamani, Appl. Catal., A, 2012, 439–440, 187–191 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Mera, Y. Moreno, J.-Y. Pivan, O. Peña and H. D. Mansilla, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2014, 289, 7–13 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhao, L. Zhang, J. Wang, Q. Li, W. He and J. J. Yin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 15750–15753 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bai, X. Li, Q. Kong, R. Long, C. Wang, J. Jiang and Y. Xiong, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3444–3452 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhao, X. Liu, Y. Dong, Y. Xia, H. Wang and X. Zhu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 31532–31541 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, Y. Yang, Z. Zhou, Y. Zhao and L. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 14662–14669 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pan, H. Zhang, G. Gao, L. Liu and W. Chen, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2015, 49, 6240–6248 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ye, K. Deng, F. Xu, L. Tian, T. Peng and L. Zan, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 82–85 RSC .
L. Ye, L. Zan, L. Tian, T. Peng and J. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 6951 RSC .
H. Li, J. Shi, K. Zhao and L. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 14168–14173 RSC .
H. Li and L. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 7805–7810 RSC .
C. Mao, H. Cheng, H. Tian, H. Li, W.-J. Xiao, H. Xu, J. Zhao and L. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 228, 87–96 CrossRef CAS .
L. Vaska, Acc. Chem. Res., 1976, 9, 175–183 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, J. Shang, Z. Yang, W. Shen, Z. Ai and L. Zhang, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2017, 51, 5685–5694 CrossRef CAS .
N. M. Idris, M. K. Gnanasammandhan, J. Zhang, P. C. Ho, R. Mahendran and Y. Zhang, Nat. Med., 2012, 18, 1580–1585 CrossRef CAS .
T. Montagnon, M. Tofi and G. Vassilikogiannakis, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1001–1011 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, S. Jiang, W. Shao, X. Zhang, S. Chen, X. Sun, Q. Zhang, Y. Luo and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 3474–3480 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, S. Chen, D. Yong, X. Zhang, S. Li, W. Shao, X. Sun, B. Pan and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 4737–4742 CrossRef CAS .
M. Dvorak, S.-H. Wei and Z. Wu, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2013, 110, 016402 CrossRef .
Y. V. Romanovskii, A. Gerhard, B. Schweitzer, U. Scherf, R. I. Personov and H. Bässler, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2000, 84, 1027–1030 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ding, K. Zhao and L. Zhang, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2014, 48, 5823–5831 CrossRef CAS .
Y. M. Kim, S. Harrad and R. M. Harrison, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2001, 35, 997–1004 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Shin and W. K. Jo, Chemosphere, 2012, 89, 569–578 CrossRef CAS .
X. Dong, W. Cui, H. Wang, J. Li, Y. Sun, H. Wang, Y. Zhang, H. Huang and F. Dong, Sci. Bull., 2019, 64, 669–678 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, X. Dong, G. Zhang, W. Cui, W. Cen, Z. Wu, S. C. Lee and F. Dong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 3366–3374 RSC .
K. C. Taylor, Catal. Rev., 1993, 35, 457–481 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lasek, Y.-H. Yu and J. C. S. Wu, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2013, 14, 29–52 CrossRef CAS .
W. Cui, J. Li, F. Dong, Y. Sun, G. Jiang, W. Cen, S. C. Lee and Z. Wu, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2017, 51, 10682–10690 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, S. Chen, H. Shang, X. Wang, Z. Yang, Z. Ai and L. Zhang, Sci. Bull., 2020, 65, 1916–1923 CrossRef .
M. Guan, C. Xiao, J. Zhang, S. Fan, R. An, Q. Cheng, J. Xie, M. Zhou, B. Ye and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 10411–10417 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, K. Zhou, L. Wang, B. Wang and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 3140–3141 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gao, A. Duan, S. Liu, X. Wu, W. Liu, M. Li, S. Chen, X. Wang and D. Weng, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 203, 116–126 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, H. Shang, X. Cao, Z. Yang, Z. Ai and L. Zhang, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2018, 52, 8659–8665 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, H. Shang, Y. Li, X. Cao, Z. Yang, Z. Ai and L. Zhang, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2019, 53, 6964–6971 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wu and R. van de Krol, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 9369–9375 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, M. Zhang, C. Chen, W. Ma and J. Zhao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 7976–7979 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, Q. Wang, C. Chen, L. Zang, W. Ma and J. Zhao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 6081–6084 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, F. Qin, Z. Yang, X. Cui, J. Wang and L. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 3513–3521 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zhang, X. Li, H. Ye, S. Chen, H. Ju, D. Liu, Y. Lin, W. Ye, C. Wang, Q. Xu, J. Zhu, L. Song, J. Jiang and Y. Xiong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 8928–8935 CrossRef CAS .
X.-J. Yang, B. Chen, X.-B. Li, L.-Q. Zheng, L.-Z. Wu and C.-H. Tung, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 6664 RSC .
E. L. Clennan, Acc. Chem. Res., 2001, 34, 875–884 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shang, M. Li, H. Li, S. Huang, C. Mao, Z. Ai and L. Zhang, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2019, 53, 6444–6453 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shang, S. Huang, H. Li, M. Li, S. Zhao, J. Wang, Z. Ai and L. Zhang, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 386, 124047 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, X. Hai, X. Ding, K. Chang, Y. Xiang, X. Meng, Z. Yang, H. Chen and J. Ye, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701774 CrossRef .
N. Zhang, A. Jalil, D. Wu, S. Chen, Y. Liu, C. Gao, W. Ye, Z. Qi, H. Ju, C. Wang, X. Wu, L. Song, J. Zhu and Y. Xiong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 9434–9443 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, Y. Zhao, G. I. N. Waterhouse, L. Zheng, X. Cao, F. Teng, L.-Z. Wu, C.-H. Tung, D. O’Hare and T. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703828 CrossRef .
Y. Hao, X. Dong, S. Zhai, H. Ma, X. Wang and X. Zhang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 18722–18728 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, Y. Guo, R. Jiang, F. Qin, H. Zhang, W. Lu, J. Wang and J. C. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 8497–8508 CrossRef CAS .
C. Mao, L. Yu, J. Li, J. Zhao and L. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 224, 612–620 CrossRef CAS .
C. Mao, H. Li, H. Gu, J. Wang, Y. Zou, G. Qi, J. Xu, F. Deng, W. Shen, J. Li, S. Liu, J. Zhao and L. Zhang, Chem, 2019, 5, 2702–2717 CAS .
I. E. Wachs, S. P. Phivilay and C. A. Roberts, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 2606–2611 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chip Le, M. K. Wismer, Z.-C. Shi, R. Zhang, D. V. Conway, G. Li, P. Vachal, I. W. Davies and D. W. C. MacMillan, ACS Cent. Sci., 2017, 3, 647–653 CrossRef .
C. Minero, A. Bedini and M. Minella, Int. J. Chem. React. Eng., 2013, 11, 717–732 Search PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

Hao Li
	Hao Li obtained his PhD degree in physical chemistry from Central China Normal University (CCNU) under the supervision of Professor Lizhi Zhang in 2017. His research interests focus on photocatalytic nitrogen fixation, organic transformations and pollutant control. Currently, he is a postdoctoral researcher in Swiss Federal Laboratories for Materials Science and Technology (Empa) and ETH Zürich.

Zhihui Ai
	Zhihui Ai received her PhD degree in environmental engineering from the Huazhong University of Science & Technology, China, in 2004. Then she joined the College of Chemistry, CCNU, located at Wuhan and became a full professor of chemistry in 2012. During 2008–2010, she worked at The Hong Kong Polytechnic University as a postdoctoral research fellow. Her current research mainly focuses on environmental catalysis using nanomaterials, advanced oxidation technology, and air pollution control technology.

Lizhi Zhang
	Lizhi Zhang received his PhD degree in environmental science from the Chinese University of Hong Kong, China, in 2003. After his postdoctoral research in the Department of Chemistry, Chinese University of Hong Kong, he joined the College of Chemistry, CCNU, as a full professor of chemistry in 2005. He worked at the Max-Planck Institute of Colloid and Interface as an Alexander von Humboldt Scholar from 2006 to 2007. His research interests include developing layered bismuth oxyhalides for solar water splitting and nitrogen fixation and utilizing the iron cycle for pollution control and environmental remediation. He won the National Natural Science Funds for Distinguished Young Scholars of China in 2014, and was appointed as the Changjiang Scholar Distinguished Professor of the Ministry of Education of China in 2015.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of photocatalytic O2 activation.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Primitive cell, internal electric field, and layered structure of BiOX. (b) Bandgaps, band edges of BiOX, and redox potentials for the formation of ROSs. (c) Schematic illustration of 2D BiOCl with different crystal orientations and exposed facets. (d) Schematic illustration of the formation of OVs on BiOX.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Spin-reactive ˙O2− and ˙OH on BiOCl as detected by EPR. (b) ROSs’ concentration change as a function of time on BOC-001-OV. The charge density difference of (c) ˙O2−-adsorbed BOC-001-OV and (d) O22−-adsorbed BOC-010-OV. Activated O2 is shown in black. Charge accumulation and depletion in the space are respectively reflected by the yellow and blue isosurfaces. Reprinted with permission from ref. 25 (Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH), ref. 68 (Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry), and ref. 61 (Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Theoretically modelled BiOCl surface with low (4 × 4 model) and high (2 × 2 model) concentration of OVs. (b) Theoretical modeling of the end-on O2− on BiOCl with low OV concentration and side-on O22− on BiOCl with high OV concentration. (c) Change of O2− FTIR of BiOCl with different concentrations of OVs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 70 (Copyright 2018 Elsevier).	 

 	Fig. 5  Adsorption and dissociation of H2O2 on (a) BOC-001-OV and (b) BOC-010-OV. Charge accumulation and depletion in the space are respectively reflected by the yellow and blue isosurfaces. (c) Spin-reactive ˙OH radicals as detected by EPR, which were generated after H2O2 dissociation on OVs of the as-prepared BiOCl photocatalysts. (d) Linear generation and exponential decaying of ˙OH on different BiOCl surfaces. Reprinted with permission from ref. 72 (Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Generation of ROSs associated with the excitation and relaxation of confined layered BiOX. System isosurfaces of (b) conduction charge density and (c) valence charge density near band edges. (d) Numerical fitting of Eb ∝ (NcNv)1/2 for the estimation of Eb for BiOX. Reprinted with permission from ref. 76 (Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Steady-state and (b) time-resolved phosphorescence spectra of BiOBr. The decay curve was collected at the corresponding emission peaks in Fig. 7a at 8 K. (c) Influence of different scavengers on photocatalytic TMB oxidation by BiOBr-001. (d) EPR spectra of BiOBr-001 and BiOBr-010 with TEMP as the probe molecule. Reprinted with permission from ref. 76 (Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) ˙O2−-Mediated sodium pentachlorophenate removal. Proposed photocatalytic degradation pathways of bisphenol A by (b) BiOI(001) and (c) BiOI(110). Reprinted with permission from ref. 25 (Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH) and ref. 65 (Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Kinetic constants for group I and group II pollutants’ removal by the as-prepared oxygen-deficient BiOCl photocatalysts. (b) The proposed PCP degradation pathways by different ˙OH. (c) Chloride ion generation along with PCP degradation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 72 (Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 10  The calculated pathways for oxidative ring-opening of (a) toluene, (b) benzyl alcohol, (c) benzaldehyde, and (d) benzoic acid over BOC and OVBOC. Reprinted with permission from ref. 82 (Copyright 2019 Elsevier).	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) PAS of BiOCl with bulk and surface OVs. (b) Atomic-resolution HAADF-STEM image of BiOCl-VOB and (c) the corresponding rainbow-colored scale image. (d) Atomic-resolution HAADF-STEM image of BiOCl-VOS. The corresponding intensity line profile extracted from the black line along the [110] axis from the enlarged image is shown on the right. (e) Thermocatalytic NO oxidation by BiOCl-VOB and BiOCl-VOS. The dashed line shows the equilibrium line. (f) Room-temperature photocatalytic NO oxidation under visible light by BiOCl-VOB and BiOCl-VOS. Reprinted with permission from ref. 87 (Copyright 2020 Elsevier).	 

BiOCl-VOB	186.4/70.3%	321.1/17.1%	573.3/9.1%	2.34/3.5%
BiOCl-VOS	188.5/22.9%	319.9/62.8%	597.3/9.7%	2.27/4.6%

 	Fig. 12  ˙O2−-Mediated NO oxidation on the OV of the BiOCl(001) surface. Reprinted with permission from ref. 91 (Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Difference between ˙O2− and O22−-mediated NO oxidation on the OV of different BiOCl surfaces and the corresponding energy changes. TS depicts the transition state associated with NO oxidation. (b) Proposed NO oxidation pathways by O22− on the OV of BiOCl(010). (c) Solar-light stimulated NO oxidation and (d) the corresponding NO2 generation by BiOCl that generated different ROSs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 92 (Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society).	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 14  (a) Hot electron trapping and transfer processes at the Au and oxygen-deficient BiOCl interface. (b) Electric field intensity enhancement contours of the Au/BiOCl hybrid system under the out-of-plane (left) and in-plane (right) polarized excitation. (c) In situ generation ˙O2− over as-prepared photocatalysts as detected by EPR. (d) Reaction pathways for selective benzyl alcohol oxidation by Au-BiOCl-OV. Reprinted with permission from ref. 96 (Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society).	 
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)

 	Fig. 15  (a) The influence of OVs’ concentration on the selectivity of photocatalytic BA oxidation. (b) Hammett plots for the oxidation of para-substituted BA. (c) Mechanism of selective BA oxidation on the BiOCl surface containing a high concentration of OVs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 70 (Copyright 2018 Elsevier).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
