Stabilized hydroxide-mediated nickel-based electrocatalysts for high-current-density hydrogen evolution in alkaline media   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1EE01487K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1EE01487K
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 4610-4619Stabilized hydroxide-mediated nickel-based electrocatalysts for high-current-density hydrogen evolution in alkaline media†

        
          
            Yuting 
            Luo‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Zhiyuan 
            Zhang‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Fengning 
            Yang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jiong 
            Li
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Zhibo 
            Liu
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Wencai 
            Ren
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Shuo 
            Zhang
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Bilu 
            Liu
          
        
      *a
aShenzhen Geim Graphene Center, Tsinghua-Berkeley Shenzhen Institute & Institute of Materials Research, Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen 518055, P. R. China. E-mail: bilu.liu@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn
bShanghai Synchrotron Radiation Facility, Shanghai Advanced Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 201210, China. E-mail: zhangshuo@sinap.ac.cn
cShenyang National Laboratory for Materials Sciences, Institute of Metal Research, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenyang, Liaoning 110016, P. R. China
Received 
      19th August 2020
    , Accepted 5th July 2021First published on 6th July 2021AbstractLarge-scale production of green hydrogen by electrochemical water splitting is considered as a promising technology to address critical energy challenges caused by the extensive use of fossil fuels. Although nonprecious nickel-based catalysts work well at low current densities, they need large overpotentials at high current densities, which hinders their wide applications in practical industry. Here we report a hydroxide-mediated nickel-based electrocatalyst for high-current-density hydrogen evolution, which delivers a current density of 1000 mA cm−2 at an ultralow overpotential of 97 mV. Combined X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) results show charge redistribution of Ni sites caused by Mo and surface Fe, which can stabilize the surface nickel hydroxide at high current densities for promoting the water dissociation step. Combined in situ XAS, quasi in situ XPS, and density functional theory calculations indicate that Fe plays an important role in the improved catalytic activity. Such a catalyst is synthesized at the metre-size scale and delivers a current density of 500 mA cm−2 at 1.56 V in overall water splitting, demonstrating its potential for practical use. This work highlights a charge engineering strategy to design efficient catalysts for high current density electrochemical applications.

Broader context
Carbon neutrality by 2050 has become the world's most urgent mission. Developing cheap, efficient, and durable electrocatalysts that work well at industrially-relevant high current densities is key to large-scale implementation of electrolysis technology to produce green hydrogen, a clean energy carrier towards global carbon neutrality. Pt and RANEY® nickel are the electrocatalysts currently used in industry for hydrogen production, but they have problems such as high cost and scarcity (for Pt), or low performance and poor stability in alkaline media (for RANEY® nickel). Recently, researchers have shown that surface nickel hydroxide facilitates water dissociation in alkaline hydrogen production and is promising to solve the above limitations. However, the performance of nickel hydroxide at high current density is still poor, preventing its potential applications. Herein, we report a charge-engineering strategy and prepare a hydroxide-mediated nickel-based catalyst with stabilized surface nickel hydroxide through charge redistribution at industrially-relevant large current density. In situ characterization and theoretical calculations show that the Ni–O–Fe motif plays a vital role in the exceptional activity of the catalyst, requiring a record low overpotential of 97 mV to reach 1000 mA cm−2.

Introduction
Hydrogen (H2) is of great importance in key industrial processes, such as oil refining and production of ammonia.1 It is clean and energy-dense, so that it can help in tackling critical energy challenges caused by the extensive use of fossil fuels.2 Electrochemical water splitting that converts water into hydrogen and oxygen is a promising way for sustainable production of hydrogen, especially when it is driven by electricity generated by sunlight, wind, and other renewable energy sources.3 It can be performed in either acidic or alkaline media. Alkaline water splitting is used in industrial plants because it is cost-effective, has a long lifetime, and is less corrosive to electrolyzer construction.4,5 Contrary to acidic water splitting, transition metals, such as nickel (Ni), cobalt (Co), and iron (Fe), are stable in alkaline media. The prices of these metals are about five orders of magnitude lower than that of platinum (Pt),6 which stir the passions of researchers to find transition metal-based electrocatalysts for alkaline water splitting. Nevertheless, the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) in alkaline media is challenging because its kinetics is slowed by an additional water dissociation step.7 The reaction rate on Pt, the best HER electrocatalyst, is usually 2–3 orders lower in an alkali than that in an acid.8
Transition metal-based electrocatalysts with high activity for the alkaline HER have been explored over the past decade, including metal oxides,9–11 metal alloys,12–15 traditional metal phosphides,16–20 carbides,21,22 and sulfides.23–25 Among them, Ni-based catalysts are promising for the alkaline HER because of their high catalytic activity, high electrical conductivity, and low price. For example, Gong et al. reported that NiO/Ni nanoparticles anchored onto the sidewalls of carbon nanotubes showed good HER performance and achieved ∼20 mA cm−2 at a cathode overpotential of ∼40 mV, which only needed a cell voltage of 1.5 V to deliver 20 mA cm−2 for water splitting when using NiFe layered double hydroxide as the anode catalyst.26 Nickel hydroxide on the catalyst surface could facilitate the water dissociation step and provide protons for the subsequent generation of H2, rendering high activity of metal catalysts for the alkaline HER.23,26 Alloying Ni with another metal (Ni–M, M = Zn, Al, Mo, Cr or Fe) could also improve its HER activity.27,28 Although these nickel-based catalysts operate well at low current densities, their performance at high current densities needs to be improved in terms of low overpotentials and excellent stabilities. The required current densities are from 200 to 500 mA cm−2 at potentials of 1.8 to 2.5 V in commercial alkaline electrolyzers.4,29 RANEY® Ni is the currently-used HER catalyst in alkaline water splitting that has advantages of low cost, large surface area, and decent stability; it, however, delivers a current density of 500 mA cm−2 at fairly large overpotentials of 300–500 mV.30 The increased current density is desired but restricted by the large overpotentials.31 It is still challenging for Ni-based catalysts to have good HER performance at high current densities.
Here, we report a Ni-based catalyst that is composed of hydroxide-mediated Ni4Mo nanoparticles decorated with FeOx and anchored onto MoO2 nanosheets (h-NiMoFe), which shows superior performance for the alkaline HER at high current density. Combined X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) results reveal that the charge redistribution of nickel sites is caused by both Mo and surface Fe, which stabilize the surface nickel hydroxide at high current densities and benefit the water dissociation step. The important role of iron in the HER activity was explored by in situ XAS, quasi in situ XPS, and DFT calculations. As a result, the h-NiMoFe catalyst shows good performance for the high-current-density HER with a Tafel slope of 30.7 mV dec−1 and an overpotential of 74 mV at 500 mA cm−2, especially a high current density of 1000 mA cm−2 at 97 mV. Such a catalyst is synthesized at the metre scale with a price in the range of 75–292 US$ m−2. It is then used for the overall water splitting, which delivers 500 mA cm−2 at 1.56 V, which remains stable for over 40 h. Our results show the potential of the h-NiMoFe catalyst for practical use. This work may guide the rational design of electrocatalysts that work well at high current densities by a charge engineering strategy.
Results and discussion
h-NiMoFe was prepared by a two-step method. Microspheres composed of radially aligned iron-doped nickel molybdate nanosheets (Fe-NiMoO4) were first grown on Ni foams by the hydrothermal method, followed by reduction at 500 °C in Ar/H2 mixture flow (Fig. 1a–c, see details in the “Methods” section). Under a scanning electron microscope (SEM), the Fe-NiMoO4 microspheres show a three-dimensional rugged feature, which endows the sample a strong capillary force to promote the pumping of electrolytes onto the sample surface32 and increase its affinity to electrolytes (Fig. 1e), in contrast to the Ni foam (Fig. 1d). Such microsphere structures are maintained during the H2 reduction process and nanopores are formed on the basal planes of the nanosheets due to the partial removal of O atoms during reduction (Fig. 1e). h-NiMoFe shows an enhanced affinity to alkaline electrolytes and its mass transferability surpasses that of Fe-NiMoO4 (Fig. 1f), which may be caused by the presence of nanopores. These results show that h-NiMoFe with a rugged morphology is obtained by a two-step approach, guaranteeing the accessibility of the catalyst to alkaline electrolytes.
 Fig. 1  Synthesis and characterization of the h-NiMoFe catalyst. Synthesis of the catalyst by a two-step process: from (a) bare Ni foams via (b) oxide precursors to (c) h-NiMoFe. (d–f) Captured photos showing the dynamic wettability on different samples. The droplets are 1.0 M KOH with an identical volume of 4 μL. (g and h) HRTEM images of the catalyst, where small nanoparticles are anchored onto porous nanosheets. (i) EDS mappings of the catalyst showing that Mo and O elements are uniformly distributed, while Ni and Fe elements mainly exist on the nanoparticles. HRTEM images of h-NiMoFe, showing (j) an enlarged view of h-NiMoFe, lattice fringes of a MoO2 nanosheet (blue box) and Ni4Mo nanoparticles (red box), as well as (k) a side view of the MoO2 nanosheet. Scale bars in the insets of (j) are 5 1/nm. 
To shed light on the microscopic structure of the h-NiMoFe catalyst, spectroscopic characterization was carried out. High-resolution transmission electron microscope (HRTEM) images (Fig. 1g) show that the catalyst is composed of ultrathin nanosheets with nanoparticles anchoring onto them (Fig. 1h). There are a large number of nanopores on the nanosheets, showing a narrow diameter distribution of 3.1 ± 1.2 nm. Profiles of the nanoparticles are distinct under high-angle annular dark-field scanning TEM (HAADF-STEM), showing an average diameter of 18.0 ± 5.7 nm (Fig. 1i). Whereas Mo and O elements are distributed uniformly in the nanosheets in energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) elemental maps, Ni and Fe elements mainly exist in the nanoparticles (Fig. 1i and Fig. S1, ESI†), revealing different chemical compositions of the nanosheets and the nanoparticles. The HRTEM images (Fig. 1j) show typical lattice spacings of 0.24 nm and 0.20 nm, corresponding to the (020) plane of MoO2 and the (220) plane of Ni4Mo, respectively. These, in combination with the EDS results, show that nanoparticles are made up of Ni4Mo and nanosheets are made up of MoO2. The Ni4Mo nanoparticles are anchored onto the MoO2 nanosheets (Fig. 1k). The compositions of Ni4Mo and MoO2 in the h-NiMoFe catalyst are further confirmed by the X-ray diffraction (XRD) (Fig. S2, ESI†) and Raman spectrum (Fig. S3, ESI†). MoO2 nanosheets are frameworks of the microspheres and work as high-surface-area and electroconductive supports.33,34 Although the Fe element is observed under EDS, no Fe-based compounds are detected by HRTEM, XRD, and Raman spectroscopy, indicating the lack of long-range crystal structures. These results show that h-NiMoFe is composed of Fe-decorated Ni4Mo nanoparticles that are anchored onto MoO2 supports.
More insights into the local electronic structure and local geometric structure of Fe and Mo in the h-NiMoFe catalyst are obtained by X-ray absorption fine structure (XAFS) spectroscopy at the Fe K-edge and Mo K-edge. Fig. 2a displays the Fe K-edge X-ray absorption near-edge structure (XANES) for the h-NiMoFe and reference samples. The position of the adsorption edge indicates that the oxidation state of Fe in h-NiMoFe is in between +2.5 and +3, suggesting that Fe species are not incorporated into the Ni4Mo lattice. Consistent results are seen in the Fourier transforms of the extended X-ray absorption fine structure (FT-EXAFS) at the Fe K-edge (Fig. 2b, Fig. S4 and Table S1, ESI†). The FT-EXAFS spectrum of h-NiMoFe shows a scattering peak at ∼1.5 Å, corresponding to the Fe–O distance. Nevertheless, the absence of the Fe-metal scattering peak shows that Fe species lack a long-range crystal structure, agreeing well with the XRD result. The further fitting results unravel a four-fold coordination environment with an Fe–O bond length of 1.92 Å. These data suggest that irons are on the Ni4Mo surface in oxidation, which are possibly in the form of mononuclear FeOx clusters. With respect to molybdenum, a mixture of Mo oxide and alloy in h-NiMoFe is shown in the Mo K-edge FT-EXAFS spectrum, as evidenced by the two peaks at ∼1.7Å and ∼2.6 Å (Fig. S5, ESI†), attributable to Mo–O and Mo–M (M = Ni or Mo) bonds in MoO2 and Ni4Mo, respectively. The above results confirm that iron shows the oxidative nature and molybdenum shows the alloy nature in Ni4Mo nanoparticles in the designed catalyst.
 Fig. 2  X-ray absorption spectroscopies. (a and c) XANES and (b and d) FT-EXAFS of the h-NiMoFe catalyst and control samples at Fe and Ni K-edges, showing the effects of Mo and Fe on the electronic structure and local environment of Ni. 
The effects of the presence of Mo/Fe on the local electronic structure of Ni were further investigated by Ni K-edge XAS (Fig. 2c and d). The FT-EXAFS spectra of h-NiMoFe, NiMo, and Ni foil show that nickel is in a metallic state among the three samples, as evidenced by a scatter peak at ∼2.2 Å that is attributable to the Ni–M (M = Ni or Mo) bond (Fig. 2d, Fig. S6 and Table S2, ESI†). The introduction of Mo/Fe remarkably changes the charge distribution of nickel sites, as revealed by the Ni K-edge XANES spectra in Fig. 2c. Compared to Ni foil, the absorption edge in the NiMo sample moves to higher energy and the white-line intensity increases (Fig. 2c), showing that nickel in the NiMo sample has more unoccupied states than that in Ni foil due to the presence of Mo. This effect is further enhanced in the presence of Fe. These results indicate a charge transfer from Ni to Mo/Fe in h-NiMoFe. The XPS characterization also unraveled that the peak of Ni0 shifts to higher binding energy when Mo/Fe exists, and meanwhile, the peak of Mo0 in NiMo shifts to lower binding energy compared to that of Mo foil (Fig. S7, ESI†), consistent with the XAS results. These comprehensive characterization studies demonstrate a strong interaction between Ni and Mo/Fe in the h-NiMoFe catalyst and modulate the charge distribution of nickel sites.
To understand the impacts of the presence of Mo/Fe in h-NiMoFe on its surface nickel species, we used high-resolution XPS characterization. It reveals that nickel exists as Ni(OH)2, NiO, and metallic Ni in the curve-fitting of the Ni 3s XPS spectra for the h-NiMoFe, NiMo, and Ni samples (Fig. 3a and Fig. S8, ESI†). We observed a higher content of surface hydroxide on h-NiMoFe than those on the control NiMo and Ni samples (Fig. 3b). Specifically, more than 60% of the nickel is in the form of Ni(OH)2 on the h-NiMoFe surface, higher than the contents of surface metallic Ni and NiO. This trend is distinct from that shown by the control Ni sample, where metallic Ni is dominant on the surface. It is also different from that of the NiMo sample, where the metallic Ni is prone to convert to surface NiO rather than Ni(OH)2. These results indicate that the presence of Mo/Fe may induce the conversion of the Ni surface to Ni(OH)2 because nickel in h-NiMoFe has more unoccupied states than those in the control NiMo and Ni samples. The h-NiMoFe catalyst has a hydroxide-mediated surface. We then compared the Ni 3s XPS spectra of the h-NiMoFe, NiMo, and Ni samples before and after HER cycling in potential windows corresponding to their current densities from 0 to 1000 mA cm−2. All samples were carefully treated to ensure that they were exposed to the ambient environment for less than 1 min (see details in the “Methods” section). We observed that the metallic Ni still dominates on the Ni sample after the HER (Fig. 3b and Fig. S9, ESI†). This phenomenon is distinct from that exhibited by the NiMo sample, where most of the surface metallic Ni species are converted to Ni(OH)2 (Fig. 3b and Fig. S9, ESI†). With respect to the h-NiMoFe sample, the conversion from surface metallic Ni to Ni(OH)2 is similar and the content of Ni(OH)2 is even higher, in this way enhancing the water dissociation of the Ni surface.35 As a result, the h-NiMoFe catalyst shows better HER activity than the Ni and NiMo catalysts (Figs. S10 and S11, ESI†). These data show that h-NiMoFe has the ability to stabilize the surface hydroxide during the HER process at high current densities.
 Fig. 3  Surface chemistry characterization before and after the HER. (a) An XPS Ni 3s spectrum of h-NiMoFe showing its surface compositions. (b) Relative percentages of surface Ni species on the Ni, NiMo, and h-NiMoFe samples before and after experiencing HER cycles from 0 to 1000 mA cm−2. These results are obtained from their XPS Ni 3s spectra. 
To understand the local electronic structure and local geometric structure of the h-NiMoFe catalyst under HER conditions, we performed in situ XAS characterization. Fig. 4a displays the Ni K-edge XANES spectra for h-NiMoFe and reference Ni foil. The position of the absorption edge shows that the Ni remains in the metallic state under the HER conditions (Fig. 4a and Fig. S12, ESI†). Consistent results are seen in the FT-EXAFS at the Ni K-edge (Fig. 4b and Fig. S12, ESI†). Combined in situ XAS and quasi-in situ XPS characterization results indicate that nickel exists in the metallic state in this bulk, while its surface is decorated by hydroxide groups under the HER conditions. With respect to Fe K-edge XANES, the oxidation state of Fe is still in between +2.5 and +3 and increases a little under the HER conditions (Fig. 4c and Fig. S13, ESI†). However, the shape of the Fe K-edge XANES spectrum differs from those of Fe2O3, Fe3O4, and Ni3Fe LDH references, indicating that Fe exists as a different type of surface species. As for Fe K-edge FT-EXAFS, a new scattering peak at ∼3.0 Å appears as soon as a reductive potential is applied to the h-NiMoFe catalyst. This result shows that a new chemical species containing the Fe–O(H)–Ni motif forms (Fig. 4d and Table S2, ESI†). Then, FT-EXAFS fitting results show that an iron site is coordinated by four O atoms (or OH groups) and four Ni atoms (Fig. S14 and Table S2, ESI†). The configuration of such a surface Fe species on Ni4Mo is further confirmed by the density functional theory (DFT) calculations (Fig. 4d and Fig. 5a). The iron site under the HER conditions has a local structure of one Fe connecting to four hydroxylated Ni sites on the Ni4Mo surface (the motif is denoted as Fe–(OH)4–Ni4). These results show that the Fe–(OH)4–Ni4 surface motif is formed under the HER conditions.
 Fig. 4  
In situ X-ray absorption spectroscopies of h-NiMoFe. (a and c) XANES and (b and d) FT-EXAFS of the h-NiMoFe catalyst and control samples at Ni and Fe K-edges. For the HER conditions, a reductive potential of −0.28 V (vs. RHE) was applied to the h-NiMoFe catalyst in a homemade three-electrode electrochemical cell. 
 Fig. 5  DFT calculations. (a) Calculated relaxed configuration of an Fe–(OH)4–Ni4 motif on a Ni4Mo (002) slab and (b) the corresponding charge density difference in this configuration. The yellow and cyan regions indicate electron accumulation and depletion, respectively. (c) Calculated partial densities of states (PDOS) of Ni in the NiMo (i.e., Ni4Mo(002)) slab (top) and the h-NiMoFe slab (bottom). The positions of the Ni d-band centers (εd) are highlighted using dashed lines. Adsorption energies for (d) H on h-NiMoFe and control samples and (e) dissociated H2O on h-NiMoFe and Pt (111). 
To explain the role of iron of h-NiMoFe in HER performance, we performed DFT calculations. First, the charge density difference calculations (Fig. 5b) show that the formation of Fe–(OH)4–Ni4 motifs on the Ni4Mo surface through Fe–OH–Ni bonds can extract electrons from Ni atoms, leading to more unoccupied states of Ni sites. This result is consistent with the XAS data, indicating that adding iron in h-NiMoFe remarkably changes the charge distribution of nickel sites. Then, we compared the partial densities of states (PDOS) and positions of the d-band centers (εd) of Ni in h-NiMoFe and NiMo (Fig. 5c). The h-NiMoFe catalyst shows a more negative energy of the Ni d-band center than the NiMo catalyst without adding iron. As a result, the h-NiMoFe catalyst shows a stronger H bonding behavior than NiMo (Fig. 5d), which leads to a close to 0 eV adsorption free energy of H (ΔGH). Considering that water dissociation is usually sluggish on catalysts such as Pt(111), we also calculated the adsorption energies for dissociated H2O on h-NiMoFe (Fig. 5e and Fig. S15, ESI†). Compared to Pt(111), h-NiMoFe shows a much lower energy barrier and fast kinetics for water dissociation. These results show that the addition of iron in h-NiMoFe can benefit not only the hydrogen adsorption/desorption step but also the water dissociation step, and thus make h-NiMoFe exhibit good HER activity in alkaline media.
The HER performance of h-NiMoFe at high current densities was characterized using a three-electrode electrochemical cell in a 1.0 M KOH solution. Standard electrochemical tests were carried out (Fig. S16, ESI†) following standard processes in a previous study.36Fig. 6a shows the polarization curves of h-NiMoFe, Ni foam, and Pt catalysts. The activity of h-NiMoFe at low current density is comparable to that of Pt catalyst and much better than that of Ni foam, indicating high HER activity of h-NiMoFe. The consistent results are shown by their Tafel curves, where h-NiMoFe has a Tafel slope of 32.7 mV dec−1 that is also close to Pt (Fig. 6b). Moreover, both the specific activity of h-NiMoFe (normalized by its electrochemical surface area) and the turnover frequency (TOF) are comparable to those of Pt catalyst (Fig. S17, ESI†). The h-NiMoFe catalyst shows the smallest charge transfer resistance among these samples (Fig. S18, ESI†). In the case of low current densities, h-NiMoFe is similar to Pt and surpasses Ni foam. For example, the overpotentials of h-NiMoFe, Pt and Ni foam at 10 mA cm−2 are 14 mV, 59 mV, and 309 mV, respectively (Fig. 6a). The HER performance of h-NiMoFe at 10 mA cm−2 is compared to those of state-of-the-art catalysts reported previously (Table S3, ESI†). In the case of high current densities, h-NiMoFe needs smaller overpotentials to deliver the same current densities compared to Pt and Ni foam. For instance, the overpotential is 75 mV at 500 mA cm−2 for h-NiMoFe, while Pt needs 402 mV to deliver the same current density (Fig. 6a). Moreover, h-NiMoFe shows an increased current density of 1000 mA cm−2 at an overpotential of 98 mV. These results show that the h-NiMoFe catalyst has superior performance for the high-current-density HER.
 Fig. 6  HER performance at high current densities. (a) Polarization curves and (b) Tafel plots of the h-NiMoFe catalyst and its control samples. (c) Ratio of Δη/Δlog|j| of the catalysts at different current densities. (d) A comparison of current densities at an overpotential of 100 mV, which are achieved on the different electrocatalysts including the h-NiMoFe catalyst and other catalysts reported in the literature. 
To further evaluate the high-current-density HER performance of the h-NiMoFe catalyst, we analyzed the relationships between current densities and Δη/Δlog|j| (Fig. 6c). Specifically, the Δη/Δlog|j| ratio shows how much overpotential (η) is needed when the current density (j) increases, which is maintained small on good catalysts. The ratio for h-NiMoFe remains small (∼23 mV dec−1), but that for Pt increases to more than 40 mV dec−1 when the current density increases to 50 mA cm−2. As the current density is even larger (e.g., 500 mA cm−2), the ratio for h-NiMoFe is still much smaller than ∼284 mV dec−1 of Pt catalyst. Moreover, it is smaller than 120 mV dec−1 for h-NiMoFe even when the current density is high up to 1000 mA cm−2. These results further confirm that the h-NiMoFe catalyst works well for the high-current-density HER. The advantage of h-NiMoFe in terms of delivering high current densities at small overpotentials is seen by comparison with the previously reported data (Fig. 6d and Table S4, ESI†). The h-NiMoFe catalyst shows a current density of 1041 mA cm−2 at 100 mV. By comparing the HER performance of h-NiMoFe with those of the control NiMo and Ni catalysts, it is suggested that alloying of Ni4Mo and addition of Fe play vital roles in the good performance of the h-NiMoFe catalyst (Figs. S10 and S11, ESI†). Note that the good performance at high current density is attributed to the combined effect of high intrinsic activity, fast mass transferability, a large number of active sites, and a good conducting network. Taken together, the designed catalyst shows high current densities at small overpotentials, further confirming its good performance for the HER.
To realize the large-scale use of electrolyzers, it is important to reduce the cost of device components. Scaling-up the synthesis of catalysts from low-cost precursors can pave the way for this goal. To show the feasibility of the scaling-up synthesis of the h-NiMoFe catalyst, we used a roll of Ni foam with dimensions of 1.5 meters × 0.1 meter as the substrate and then grew h-NiMoFe on it by the same synthesis method (Fig. 7a, see details in the “Methods” section). The uniformity of the catalyst is shown by SEM, XRD, and EDS characterization (Fig. S19, ESI†). The price of this catalyst is ∼82 US$ m−2 (and the catalyst price is in the range of 75–292 US$ m−2 if one chooses different suppliers and includes the labor cost, see Table S5 and Note S1 (ESI†) for details). Such a catalyst price is of the same order of magnitude as that of commercial RANEY® Ni (∼60 US$ m−2) and two orders of magnitude lower than that of commercial Pt/C catalyst on carbon paper (Table S6, ESI†). Such a low price is attributed to cheap precursors with transition metal elements (Ni, Fe, and Mo) having higher global availability than Pt.37 Moreover, high reserves of these metals on Earth promise the potential of mass production of the h-NiMoFe catalyst. Taken together, the h-NiMoFe catalyst shows not only high performance but also low price.
 Fig. 7  Scaling-up synthesis of the h-NiMoFe catalyst and the overall water splitting. (a) Scaling-up the synthesis of h-NiMoFe with dimensions of 0.1 meter × 1.5 meters. (b) A scheme showing the overall water splitting by the h-NiMoFe catalyst. (c) A demo showing the overall water splitting driven using a commercial photovoltaic cell. (d) Polarization curve, (e) faradaic efficiency for hydrogen evolution, and (f) time–current curve showing the catalytic performance of h-NiMoFe for the overall water splitting. (g) A comparison of the overall water splitting performance of the h-NiMoFe catalyst with previously reported data. 
For practical applications, RANEY® nickel catalysts require to be operated for overall water splitting in the same alkaline electrolyte and deliver high current densities. We characterize the electrochemical performance of the h-NiMoFe catalyst in overall water splitting systems, where the h-NiMoFe catalyst is used as both HER and OER catalysts (Fig. 7b and c). This catalyst shows high performance and achieves a current density of 500 mA cm−2 at a record-low cell potential of 1.56 V (Fig. 7d). It outperforms the RANEY® nickel catalyst under these conditions or even favorable conditions, which requires cell potentials of 1.8 to 2.5 V to achieve 200 to 500 mA cm−2.29 Owing to such good performance, the overall water splitting system using h-NiMoFe catalysts can be powered using a mini solar photovoltaic cell whose output voltage is smaller than 2 V (Fig. 7d). Furthermore, the faradaic efficiency (FE) is found to be close to 100% by measuring the volumes of hydrogen generation (Fig. 7e and Fig. S20, ESI†). Stability is another parameter of catalysts, especially at current densities relevant to industry. The h-NiMoFe catalyst shows no obvious degradation of performance at various current densities over a period of 40 h continuous operation (Fig. 7f and Figs. S21–S23, ESI†), showing its good stability. The in situ XAS data also confirmed that Ni maintains its metallic state after the HER. The advantage of this catalyst in terms of delivering high current densities for water splitting is seen by comparing it with previously reported catalysts (Fig. 7g and Table S7, ESI†). These results confirm the strong potential of the h-NiMoFe catalyst for practical use.
Conclusions
We developed a brand-new h-NiMoFe electrocatalyst that is highly active and stable, performing especially well at high current densities up to 1000 mA cm−2 towards the HER. Detailed microstructure characterization shows that strong interactions between Ni and Mo/Fe modulate the local electronic structure of Ni with more hydroxide on the surface than control samples. As a result, the h-NiMoFe catalyst could stabilize the surface hydroxide on it even at high current densities. The role of Fe for h-NiMoFe in HER activity was studied by quasi in situ XAS, in situ XPS, and DFT calculations. Such a catalyst could be synthesized at a meter-size level and be used for overall water splitting, delivering a current density of 500 mA cm−2 at 1.56 V, which is stable for over 40 h. These findings shed light on charge engineering as an effective strategy to design electrocatalysts towards high current density electrochemical reactions and applications.
Author contributions
Y. L. and B. L. conceived the idea. B. L. and S. Z. supervised the project and directed the research. Y. L. and F. Y. prepared the materials. Y. L. performed the XRD, SEM, Raman spectroscopy, and XPS characterization and electrochemical experiments. Z. L. and W. R. performed the TEM characterization. F. Y. took part in the electrochemical measurements and discussion. S. Z., Z. Z, J. L., and Y. L. performed the XAS and analyzed the XAS results. S. Z. and Z. Z. carried out the in situ XAS experiments. J. L. performed the DFT calculations. Y. L., S. Z. and B. L. interpreted the results. Y. L., Z. Z., S. Z. and B. L. wrote the manuscript with feedback from the other authors.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing interests.
Acknowledgements
We sincerely thank Prof. Hui-Ming Cheng for fruitful discussions and inputs on/to this work. We acknowledge support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51722206 and 51920105002), the Youth 1000-Talent Program of China, Guangdong Innovative and Entrepreneurial Research Team Program (No. 2017ZT07C341), the Bureau of Industry and Information Technology of Shenzhen for the “2017 Graphene Manufacturing Innovation Center Project” (No. 201901171523), and the Shenzhen Basic Research Project (No. JCYJ20200109144620815). We also thank staff in the BL11B beamline in Shanghai Synchrotron Radiation Facility (SSRF) for their technical assistance.
References
IEA, Global demand for pure hydrogen, 1975-2018, IEA, Paris https://www.iea.org/data-and-statistics/charts/global-demand-for-pure-hydrogen-1975-2018, 2019.
IEA (2019), Tracking energy integration 2019, IEA, Paris https://www.iea.org/reports/tracking-energy-integration-2019, 2019.
IEA (2019), The future of hydrogen, IEA, Paris https://www.iea.org/reports/the-future-of-hydrogen, 2019.
M. Carmo, D. L. Fritz, J. Mergel and D. Stolten, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 4901–4934 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhang, J. Liu, J. Wang, Y. Ruan, X. Ji, K. Xu, C. Chen, H. Wan, L. Miao and J. Jiang, Nano Energy, 2017, 37, 74–80 CrossRef CAS .
National Minerals Information Center, https://www.usgs.gov/centers/nmic/commodity-statistics-and-information, 2020.
R. Subbaraman, D. Tripkovic, K. C. Chang, D. Strmcnik, A. P. Paulikas, P. Hirunsit, M. Chan, J. Greeley, V. Stamenkovic and N. M. Markovic, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 550–557 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Durst, A. Siebel, C. Simon, F. Hasché, J. Herranz and H. A. Gasteiger, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2255–2260 RSC .
M. Gong, W. Zhou, M. J. Kenney, R. Kapusta, S. Cowley, Y. Wu, B. Lu, M. C. Lin, D. Y. Wang, J. Yang, B. J. Hwang and H. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 11989–11993 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ling, T. Zhang, B. Ge, L. Han, L. Zheng, F. Lin, Z. Xu, W.-B. Hu, X.-W. Du, K. Davey and S.-Z. Qiao, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1807771 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Zhou, F. Yu, Q. Zhu, J. Sun, F. Qin, L. Yu, J. Bao, Y. Yu, S. Chen and Z. Ren, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2858–2864 RSC .
Y.-Y. Chen, Y. Zhang, X. Zhang, T. Tang, H. Luo, S. Niu, Z.-H. Dai, L.-J. Wan and J.-S. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703311 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhang, T. Wang, P. Liu, Z. Liao, S. Liu, X. Zhuang, M. Chen, E. Zschech and X. Feng, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15437 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Cao, Q. Chen, J. Zhang, H. Li, Y. Jiang, S. Shen, G. Fu, B.-a. Lu, Z. Xie and L. Zheng, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15131 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Wei, Y. Sun, G. G. Scherer, A. C. Fisher, M. Sherburne, J. W. Ager and Z. J. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 7765–7775 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. You, Y. Zhang, Y. Jiao, K. Davey and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 11796–11800 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, L. Zhang, X. Li, C. Li, R. Zhang, Y. Zhang and H. Zhu, Nano Res., 2016, 10, 415–425 CrossRef .
I. K. Mishra, H. Zhou, J. Sun, F. Qin, K. Dahal, J. Bao, S. Chen and Z. Ren, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2246–2252 RSC .
A. B. Laursen, K. R. Patraju, M. J. Whitaker, M. Retuerto, T. Sarkar, N. Yao, K. V. Ramanujachary, M. Greenblatt and G. C. Dismukes, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1027–1034 RSC .
A. Han, H. Zhang, R. Yuan, H. Ji and P. Du, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 2240–2248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lu, D. Tranca, J. Zhang, F. R. Hernandez, Y. Su, X. Zhuang, F. Zhang, G. Seifert and X. Feng, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 3933–3942 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Vrubel and X. Hu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 12703–12706 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Luo, X. Li, X. Cai, X. Zou, F. Kang, H. M. Cheng and B. Liu, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 4565–4573 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zang, S. Niu, Y. Wu, X. Zheng, J. Cai, J. Ye, Y. Xie, Y. Liu, J. Zhou, J. Zhu, X. Liu, G. Wang and Y. Qian, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1217 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Wang, Z. L. Zhao, S. Dong, D. He, M. J. Lawrence, S. Han, C. Cai, S. Xiang, P. Rodriguez, B. Xiang, Z. Wang, Y. Liang and M. Gu, Nano Energy, 2018, 53, 458–467 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gong, W. Zhou, M. C. Tsai, J. Zhou, M. Guan, M. C. Lin, B. Zhang, Y. Hu, D. Y. Wang, J. Yang, S. J. Pennycook, B. J. Hwang and H. Dai, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4695 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Herraiz-Cardona, C. González-Buch, C. Valero-Vidal, E. Ortega and V. Pérez-Herranz, J. Power Sources, 2013, 240, 698–704 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wang, M. Wang, H. Yang, M. Xu, C. Zuo, K. Feng, M. Xie, J. Deng, J. Zhong, W. Zhou, T. Cheng and Y. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 3522–3529 RSC .

          T. Smolinka, E. T. Ojong and J. Garche, Hydrogen production from renewable energies—electrolyzer technologies,  2015 Search PubMed .
Y. Luo, L. Tang, U. Khan, Q. Yu, H.-M. Cheng, X. Zou and B. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 269 CrossRef PubMed .
O. Schmidt, A. Gambhir, I. Staffell, A. Hawkes, J. Nelson and S. Few, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 30470–30492 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhu, Y. Luo, J. Tian, J. Li and X. Gao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 10660–10665 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Xie, X. Zheng, D. Wu, X. Chen, J. Shi, X. Han, X. Zhang, G. Peng, Y. Gao and H. Huang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2017, 111, 093505 CrossRef .
D. O. Scanlon, G. W. Watson, D. J. Payne, G. R. Atkinson, R. G. Egdell and D. S. L. Law, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 4636–4645 CrossRef CAS .
C.-T. Dinh, A. Jain, F. P. G. de Arquer, P. De Luna, J. Li, N. Wang, X. Zheng, J. Cai, B. Z. Gregory, O. Voznyy, B. Zhang, M. Liu, D. Sinton, E. J. Crumlin and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Energy, 2018, 4, 107–114 CrossRef .
C. Wei, R. R. Rao, J. Peng, B. Huang, I. E. L. Stephens, M. Risch, Z. J. Xu and Y. Shao-Horn, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1806296 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Zhang, Y. Luo, J. Tan, Q. Yu, F. Yang, Z. Zhang, L. Yang, H.-M. Cheng and B. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 3724 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ee01487k‡ These two authors contributed equally.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Broader context
Carbon neutrality by 2050 has become the world's most urgent mission. Developing cheap, efficient, and durable electrocatalysts that work well at industrially-relevant high current densities is key to large-scale implementation of electrolysis technology to produce green hydrogen, a clean energy carrier towards global carbon neutrality. Pt and RANEY® nickel are the electrocatalysts currently used in industry for hydrogen production, but they have problems such as high cost and scarcity (for Pt), or low performance and poor stability in alkaline media (for RANEY® nickel). Recently, researchers have shown that surface nickel hydroxide facilitates water dissociation in alkaline hydrogen production and is promising to solve the above limitations. However, the performance of nickel hydroxide at high current density is still poor, preventing its potential applications. Herein, we report a charge-engineering strategy and prepare a hydroxide-mediated nickel-based catalyst with stabilized surface nickel hydroxide through charge redistribution at industrially-relevant large current density. In situ characterization and theoretical calculations show that the Ni–O–Fe motif plays a vital role in the exceptional activity of the catalyst, requiring a record low overpotential of 97 mV to reach 1000 mA cm−2.


 	Fig. 1  Synthesis and characterization of the h-NiMoFe catalyst. Synthesis of the catalyst by a two-step process: from (a) bare Ni foams via (b) oxide precursors to (c) h-NiMoFe. (d–f) Captured photos showing the dynamic wettability on different samples. The droplets are 1.0 M KOH with an identical volume of 4 μL. (g and h) HRTEM images of the catalyst, where small nanoparticles are anchored onto porous nanosheets. (i) EDS mappings of the catalyst showing that Mo and O elements are uniformly distributed, while Ni and Fe elements mainly exist on the nanoparticles. HRTEM images of h-NiMoFe, showing (j) an enlarged view of h-NiMoFe, lattice fringes of a MoO2 nanosheet (blue box) and Ni4Mo nanoparticles (red box), as well as (k) a side view of the MoO2 nanosheet. Scale bars in the insets of (j) are 5 1/nm.	 

 	Fig. 2  X-ray absorption spectroscopies. (a and c) XANES and (b and d) FT-EXAFS of the h-NiMoFe catalyst and control samples at Fe and Ni K-edges, showing the effects of Mo and Fe on the electronic structure and local environment of Ni.	 

 	Fig. 3  Surface chemistry characterization before and after the HER. (a) An XPS Ni 3s spectrum of h-NiMoFe showing its surface compositions. (b) Relative percentages of surface Ni species on the Ni, NiMo, and h-NiMoFe samples before and after experiencing HER cycles from 0 to 1000 mA cm−2. These results are obtained from their XPS Ni 3s spectra.	 

 	Fig. 4  
In situ X-ray absorption spectroscopies of h-NiMoFe. (a and c) XANES and (b and d) FT-EXAFS of the h-NiMoFe catalyst and control samples at Ni and Fe K-edges. For the HER conditions, a reductive potential of −0.28 V (vs. RHE) was applied to the h-NiMoFe catalyst in a homemade three-electrode electrochemical cell.	 

 	Fig. 5  DFT calculations. (a) Calculated relaxed configuration of an Fe–(OH)4–Ni4 motif on a Ni4Mo (002) slab and (b) the corresponding charge density difference in this configuration. The yellow and cyan regions indicate electron accumulation and depletion, respectively. (c) Calculated partial densities of states (PDOS) of Ni in the NiMo (i.e., Ni4Mo(002)) slab (top) and the h-NiMoFe slab (bottom). The positions of the Ni d-band centers (εd) are highlighted using dashed lines. Adsorption energies for (d) H on h-NiMoFe and control samples and (e) dissociated H2O on h-NiMoFe and Pt (111).	 

 	Fig. 6  HER performance at high current densities. (a) Polarization curves and (b) Tafel plots of the h-NiMoFe catalyst and its control samples. (c) Ratio of Δη/Δlog|j| of the catalysts at different current densities. (d) A comparison of current densities at an overpotential of 100 mV, which are achieved on the different electrocatalysts including the h-NiMoFe catalyst and other catalysts reported in the literature.	 

 	Fig. 7  Scaling-up synthesis of the h-NiMoFe catalyst and the overall water splitting. (a) Scaling-up the synthesis of h-NiMoFe with dimensions of 0.1 meter × 1.5 meters. (b) A scheme showing the overall water splitting by the h-NiMoFe catalyst. (c) A demo showing the overall water splitting driven using a commercial photovoltaic cell. (d) Polarization curve, (e) faradaic efficiency for hydrogen evolution, and (f) time–current curve showing the catalytic performance of h-NiMoFe for the overall water splitting. (g) A comparison of the overall water splitting performance of the h-NiMoFe catalyst with previously reported data.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ee01487k
‡ These two authors contributed equally.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
