Significant enhancement of optical absorption through nano-structuring of copper based oxide semiconductors: possible future materials for solar energ ...  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4CP00827H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4CP00827H
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 11054-11066Significant enhancement of optical absorption through nano-structuring of copper based oxide semiconductors: possible future materials for solar energy applications†

        
          
            Anagh 
            Bhaumik
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Austin M. 
            Shearin
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Rishi 
            Patel
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Kartik 
            Ghosh
          
        
      *
      Department of Physics, Astronomy and Materials Science and Center for Applied Science and Engineering, Missouri State University, Springfield, MO 65897, USA. E-mail: KartikGhosh@MissouriState.edu
Received 
      25th February 2014
    , Accepted 14th April 2014First published on 14th April 2014AbstractThe optical absorption coefficient is a crucial parameter in determining solar cell efficiency under operational conditions. It is well known that inorganic nanocrystals are a benchmark model for solar cell nanotechnology, given that the tunability of optical properties and stabilization of specific phases are uniquely possible at the nanoscale. A hydrothermal method was employed to fabricate nanostructured copper oxides where the shape, size and phase were tailored by altering the growth parameters, namely the base media used, the reaction temperature, and the reaction time. The nano crystalline structures, phases, morphology, molecular vibrational modes, and optical properties were investigated using X-ray diffraction (XRD), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), Raman spectroscopy, photoluminescence (PL), and UV-vis spectroscopy. A significantly large optical absorption coefficient, of the order of twice that of Si in the visible range, was observed in a particular phase mixture of nanostructured copper oxides. An optical absorption coefficient of 7.05 10+5 cm−1 at 525 nm was observed in a particular nanostructured phase mixture of copper oxides which is appreciably larger than commercially pure CuO (1.19 10+5 cm−1) and Si (1.72 10+5 cm−1). A possible mechanism of formation of phase mixtures and morphology of copper oxides has also been discussed, which opens up a roadmap in synthesis of similar morphology nanostructures for efficient solar cells.
Introduction
The numerous detrimental aspects of fossil-fuel energy sources evolve a greater need to explore alternative sources of energy. Solar cell technology, which is state-of-the-art technology, is an excellent source of renewable energy. The physics of semiconductor materials used in solar cell technology is predominantly governed by their energy band gap and optical properties. When sunlight strikes the surface of a PV cell, its absorption depends on the absorption coefficient and the energy band gap of the semiconductor materials used in the solar cell.1,2 The absorption factor of a PV cell is defined as the fraction of incident solar irradiance that is absorbed by the cell. An increase in the solar absorption coefficient increases the electron–hole pair generation rate, which forms the backbone for a more efficient solar cell. Considerable efforts have been made to develop novel materials that absorb better at long wavelengths, so far with little success.3,4 One such option to improve the absorption of red and near infrared light is by increasing the nanoparticle film thickness to improve the optical density; however this leads to exceeding the electron diffusion length through the nanoparticle network.5 Therefore unique materials with a large optical absorption coefficient must be developed to overcome these issues.
The use of nanostructured materials represents a general approach to reduce both cost and size and to improve efficiency in photovoltaic cells.6,7 The physical mechanism underlying high external quantum efficiencies for photoluminescence in low dimensional materials is mainly that of the quantum confinement of excitons in a nanometer-scale crystalline structure.8,9 As photons are absorbed by the material and charge carriers are produced, the average diffusion time (τ) from the bulk of the material to the surface has been shown to follow eqn (1): (1)where r is the grain radius and D is the diffusion coefficient of the material.1 With a decrease of grain radius, the diffusion time for these charge carriers is reduced and thus there is less of a chance for recombination thereby increasing the efficiency of the solar cell.
Stringent control over the morphology of the nanomaterial itself has been shown to change the optical properties of a material.10 For example, bulk copper oxide has a band gap of 2.17 eV, whereas nanocrystalline thin film and nanowires of copper oxide have band gaps of 2.06 eV and 2.69 eV, respectively.1 Superior optical activity of metal oxide nano flowers has also been reported.11 The morphology associated with both the particle network and the inter particle contact area also dictates solar activities.12,13 Band gap engineering for better optical properties is being widely used for metal oxides by the process of doping,14 and mixed oxide synthesis.15 The thrust to synthesize nanostructures with well-defined geometrical shapes and organize them as 2- and 3-dimensional assemblies have further expanded the possibility of developing new strategies for light energy conversion.16,17
The dominance of Si solar cells is now being challenged by new generations of photovoltaic cells.18 Copper oxide was one of the earliest materials studied for solar cell applications due to its semiconductor properties,19 but other materials such as silicon and germanium were further developed since they more closely approached the Shockley–Quisser limit.1 Copper oxide compounds provide a unique possibility to tune the optical and electronic properties from insulating to metallic conduction, from band gap energies of 2.1 eV to the infrared at 1.4 eV, i.e. right into the middle of the maximum efficiency for solar-cell applications. Cupric oxide (CuO) and cuprous oxide (Cu2O) are being widely used as p-type semiconductors for designing solar cells.20,21 Thus, there will be a considerable change in the optical properties with the change in phase percentage, morphology and size of room temperature stable copper oxides. We report excellent optical solar absorption characteristics (two times that of Si in the visible range) in a particular phase percentage of a hydrothermally prepared nanostructured mixture of CuO and Cu2O.
Results and discussion
Synthesis of copper oxide composite nanostructures
Phase mixtures of copper oxide nanostructures were synthesized by a hydrothermal process for 15 hours at different reaction temperatures. Different bases (KOH, NH4OH, and NaOH) were reacted with copper sulphate pentahydrate (CuSO4·5H2O) to form nanostructures of copper oxides. In order to investigate the growth mechanism and the action of ethylene glycol (EG), the experiments were carried out with the addition of 10 ml EG. The obtained samples were characterized using X-ray powder diffraction (Bruker, D8 Discover) θ–2θ scan with CuKα (λ = 1.5405 Å); Rietveld analysis was done using Diffracplus Topas software. The morphology of as-prepared samples was characterized by Scanning electron microscopy (FEI Quanta 200S). The vibrational phonon modes of the resulting copper oxides were determined by Raman spectroscopy using a 532 nm green laser (Horiba Labram Raman-PL). Photoluminescence measurements were carried out employing a 325 nm UV laser using the above-mentioned instruments. Absorption spectra were measured using an Ocean Optics HR 4000 spectrometer in conjunction with Ocean Optics Spectra suite software. Details of the synthesis and characterization procedures have been provided in the Experimental section.
Structural and physical properties
X-ray diffraction (XRD)
Powder XRD was carried out on all the copper oxide powder samples synthesized by a hydrothermal process. The Rietveld analysis of XRD data for four selected copper oxide powder samples is shown in Fig. 1. Samples A, B, C, and D represent copper oxides formed under varied reaction parameters and possess different optical absorption characteristics. The observed XRD pattern (black line) along with that of calculated (red line) using Rietveld analysis and the difference (blue line) profile of the powder sample are shown in Fig. 1. XRD data indicate that a mixture of copper oxides is formed which crystallizes in space group symmetry of C12/c1 (monoclinic) and Pnm Z (cubic) for CuO and Cu2O, respectively.
 Fig. 1  Rietveld fitted XRD pattern of (a) sample A, (b) sample B, (c) sample C, and (d) sample D having different optical absorption properties. The observed XRD pattern (black line) along with that of calculated (red line) using Rietveld analysis and the difference (blue line) profile of the powder sample are shown in the figure. XRD data indicate that a mixture of copper oxides is formed which crystallizes in space group symmetry of C12/c1 (monoclinic) and Pnm Z (cubic) for CuO and Cu2O. 
The crystal structure was extracted by Rietveld analysis and is represented in Fig. 2. The calculated bond angles (a and b) along with the bond lengths (c) are tabulated in Table 1. The disappearance of higher angle XRD peaks in sample D can be accounted for a higher degree of preferentially oriented planes of CuO. The calculated phase percentages of CuO and Cu2O, size, strain, Cu–O–Cu, O–Cu–O bond angles, Cu–O bond lengths, and goodness of fit (GOF) are shown in Table 1 for samples prepared with different reaction parameters, according to a decrease in solar absorption characteristics. Sample A shows the least deviation in bond angles and bond lengths from pure CuO.
 Fig. 2  Crystal structure of monoclinic CuO showing the measured bond angles and bond length, extracted from the crystallographic information file (cif) by Rietveld analysis. The red balls represent Cu2+ and the green ones O2−. 
Table 1 The phase percentages, size, strain, bond angles, bond lengths, goodness of fit, and optical absorption (%) at 525 nm of hydrothermally synthesized copper oxide samples according to the decrease in solar absorption properties. The standard values of O–Cu–O/Cu–O–Cu angles are 95.72° and 78.96°, and bond length (Cu–O) is 1.961 Å for pure CuO25




Reagent used
Reaction parameter
CuO/Cu2O (%)
Sizea (nm)
Straina
Bond angle O–Cu–O(a)/Cu–O–Cu(b)a
Bond length Cu–O(c)a (Å)
Goodness of fit (gof)
Absorption at 525 nm (%)





a The values were calculated for CuO only.






KOH + EG(A)


80 °C/15 h


97.7/2.3


45


0.63


95.74/78.93


1.961


1.07


92.5



KOH
80 °C/15 h
98.4/1.6
1024
0.76
95.54/79.09
1.955
1.13
90.2


NaOH
120 °C/15 h
98.8/1.2
1210
0.70
95.59/79.05
1.962
1.16
76.9



NaOH(B)


80 °C/15 h


99.7/0.3


42


0.48


95.67/78.99


1.960


1.14


74.7



KOH
120 °C/15 h
100/0
1125
0.36
95.71/78.96
1.961
1.11
71.9


KOH + EG
120 °C/15 h
42.5/57.5
52
0.01
95.74/78.92
1.961
1.15
68.2


NaOH + EG
120 °C/15 h
56.9/43.1
38
0.57
95.74/78.92
1.962
1.14
54.2



NH4OH + EG(C)


120 °C/15 h


99.3/0.7


19


0.10


95.42/79.17


1.952


1.05


47.4



NaOH + EG
80 °C/15 h
95.9/4.1
31
0.04
95.40/80.03
1.938
1.12
41.0



NH4OH(D)


120 °C/15 h


99.9/0.1


1548


0.13


95.63/79.03


1.961


1.11


14.0





A larger deviation in bond angles and bond lengths from the pure CuO results in weak or strained bonds. The energy of the weak bonds is higher and these bonds can easily break to form defects in the atomic network. Band tail states represent the energy states of electrons that form the strained bonds in the crystal network.22 An increase in disorder and strained bonds increases the width of the tail states. The wave functions of the tail and defect states are localized within the structure and therefore these states are also referred to as localized states. The mobility of the charge carriers is least in these localized states.23,24 The size, strain, bond angles, and bond length were calculated for CuO. The standard values of O–Cu–O/Cu–O–Cu angles are 95.72° and 78.96°, and bond length (Cu–O) is 1.961 Å for pure CuO.25
The tail states act as trapping centres26 and build up a space charge in a potential device, which act as very effective recombination centres and affect in particular the lifetime of the charge carriers, which is detrimental for a solar cell. Incorporation of sample A having least deviation in the cell parameters from the standard crystal structure can considerably increase the efficiency of solar cells. An interesting interdependence of bond angles with solar absorption characteristics can be found from bond angle calculations. Increased solar absorption activities can be related to an increase in the O–Cu–O bond angle and a decrease in the Cu–O–Cu bond angle, where the bond length seems to play a lesser role in the absorption properties. The change in bond angles is not too predominant when EG is being used as a modifier and a reducer in the hydrothermal process, thus, introduction of EG is crucial for better solar absorption properties. However, it should be noted that increased solar absorption should not only be accounted for minimal changes in the bond angle.
It can be concluded from Rietveld analysis that nanostructured copper oxide composites having a phase percentage of 97.7:2.3 (CuO:Cu2O) and possessing a minimal perturbation of the bond angle from the standard crystal structure exhibit excellent solar absorption properties, which can be utilized in fabricating solar cells.
Raman spectroscopy
The Raman spectra of the four selective hydrothermally synthesized copper oxide powder samples (A, B, C, and D) are shown in Fig. 3. The Raman data were analyzed using Voigt peak fittings in Labspec 5 software. CuO belongs to the C62h space group with two molecules per primitive cell.7 There are nine zone-center optical phonon modes with symmetries 4Au + 5Bu + Ag + 2Bg; only three modes (1Ag + 2Bg) are Raman active.27,28 The optical vibrational Raman active modes present in pure CuO are at 290 cm−1 (Ag), 340 cm−1 (B1g), and 620 cm−1 (B2g).29,30 A likely reason for the weakness of the latter signal (B2g) is the strong polarization dependence of this particular mode.31
 Fig. 3  Raman spectra of samples (a) A, (b) B, (c) C, and (d) D with the Voigt peak fitted curves. The Raman active vibrational modes are also shown. The green solid spheres represent O2− and the blue ones Cu2+. 
Cu2O crystallizes in a cubic structure of space group O4h (Pn3m).32,33 Its primitive cell contains two Cu2O units, i.e., six atoms, yielding 15 optical phonon modes in addition to the three acoustic phonon modes.34,35 Vibrations belonging to the threefold degenerate T2g symmetry are the only Raman active modes in this material. The A2u and Eu modes are silent modes.36 It is worth noting that the reported Raman spectra may vary significantly in the mode intensities and the number of observed modes. The reason for this is the instability of Cu2O that leads to a variety of intrinsic defects and a tendency towards nonstoichiometry.37 Additional effects due to different excitation conditions i.e., in resonance and off resonance with the excitonic transitions of Cu2O, due to a dependence on the scattering geometry and polarization conditions, and due to the surface treatment of the samples also play a role, but are less significant.38–40 Nonstoichiometry due to the formation of point defects such as vacancies, interstitials, or antisite defects has two major effects. On the one hand, the translational symmetry is broken and the corresponding selection rules no longer strictly hold, e.g., the point defects reduce the local symmetry such that the distinction between Raman-allowed and Raman-forbidden lattice vibrations diminishes.
On the other hand, depending on the specific point defect and its compatibility with the lattice, local vibrational modes may be introduced, which may also be Raman active.36 The Raman spectra of sample A shows three optical vibrational modes of CuO (279.0 cm−1, 322.4 cm−1, and 611.0 cm−1), namely Ag, B1g, and B2g. The shift of these peaks towards lesser wavenumbers (red shift) and an increased value of FWHM ascertain the nanostructured CuO. In addition to CuO peaks, a Cu2O peak was also seen in sample A at 485.2 cm−1 which corresponds to 2Eu and is assigned to multi phonon scattering, which involves vibrations of both Cu and O atoms.36
When the grain size increases, Raman peaks become stronger and sharper, and shift slightly to a higher wavenumber (blue shift) as is seen in the case of sample B. The frequency dependent Raman peak intensity I(ω), which is a superposition of weighted Lorentzian contributions over the whole Brillouin zone, is given by eqn (2):39 (2)where, ω(k) is the phonon dispersion curve, Γo is the natural full line width and C(0,k) is the Fourier coefficient of the phonon confinement function, which is often represented as eqn (3): (3)where d is the average size of the nanocrystals.41 The broadening and the red shift of a Raman peak are a result of this integration in the above mentioned equation when the grain size decreases. It should be noted that crystal defects can also result in a red shift and broadening of the Raman peak. As is well known, nanometer-sized materials usually have many structural defects, such as oxygen vacancies in oxides, and these defects may sometimes affect the optical characteristics. The three Raman peaks in CuO arise from vibrations of the oxygen atoms only.42 The vibrations of the oxygen ions (green) are also represented as inset figures along with the Raman spectra.39 Studies have suggested that the changes in the spectra are mainly due to size effects and not related to oxygen deficiency.21
The prominent B2g mode in all the samples suggests a non-polarizable nature. The giant red shift of B1g to 313.7 cm−1 indicates nanostructured morphology of sample C. In particular, this mode (B1g) seems to have been affected appreciably by morphological changes in copper oxide samples. The Raman peaks of CuO shifts towards a lower wavenumber in sample D suggesting nanostructures and hence more defects in the resulting phase mixture. The increased values of FWHM and the red shift of the Raman peaks in sample A suggest a nanostructured phase mixture. When Cu2O is placed in contact with a metal to form a Schottky barrier, most metals reduce Cu2O to form a copper rich region at the interface, which dictates the barrier-height magnitude. This reduction phenomenon, coupled with inter diffusion of copper results in low efficiencies, necessitating a heterojunction design, which increases the complexity of the solar cell device. Sample A shows a much more stable structure, as the Raman peaks shift towards lower wavenumbers and thus can be an excellent material for solar cell applications.
Raman spectra are normally determined by the crystal structure of the sample and the relative orientation between its crystal axes and the polarization direction of the incident laser. However, for nano materials when the size of the sample is smaller than the focus spot size of the laser, the shape of the sample also becomes a contributing factor to the Raman spectra because the effective electric field inside the sample can be different along different directions due to polarization. Raman spectroscopy has played a unique and significant role in the study of nanostructures.43–45 The angle θ between the long axis of the copper oxide nanostructures and the polarization direction of the incident laser is adjusted between 0 degrees and 180 degrees in steps of 45 degrees using an analyzer and a polarizer. All the Raman active modes are stronger when the polarization direction of the incident laser is parallel to the long axis of the nanostructures (θ = 0 or θ = 180) and weakest in perpendicular geometry (θ = 90). Interestingly it may be noted that the strongest Raman signals are achieved at 45 degrees and 135 degrees. This may be related to the shape and size of the copper oxide nanostructures, and will be a major part of our research work in near future. The signal strength of all the Raman active modes especially B2g increases at 45 degrees and drops down at 90 degrees, and increases thereafter at 135 degrees when it is the highest and thereby returns to its initial state at 180 degrees. As observed by Chen et al.46 from Raman tensors, the Ag and two Bg modes of bulk single crystal CuO have different polarization dependence.
The polarization dependence of copper oxide nanostructures can be explained using the classical electromagnetic theory. The electric field inside a one dimensional nanostructure at the wavelength of the laser beam could be dramatically attenuated when the incident laser is polarized perpendicular to the long axis of the nanostructures, and is represented by eqn (4): (4) where Ei is the electric field inside the nanorods, Ee the excitation field, and ε(ε0) is the dielectric constant of the nanostructure (vacuum).47 The polarization dependence of Raman modes in free-standing copper oxide nanostructures is dominated by the adjustment of the electric field inside nanorods and big dielectric contrast between these nanorods and their surroundings. The Raman polarization measurements are given in the ESI.†
Scanning electron microscopy (SEM)
SEM images of the four selective hydrothermally synthesized copper oxide samples (A, B, C, and D) are shown in Fig. 4. Sample A shows a unique one dimensional lassie nanostructure measuring less than 50 nm. SEM imaging of sample B shows 1D rod like nanostructured copper oxide which is considerably larger in size than the lassie nanostructure present in sample A, which is likely due to the lower pH of the base used. An increased reaction temperature facilitates conglomeration of the rods into flower shaped nanostructures. Sample C shows nano fibril structure of copper oxides measuring less than 30 nm. In sample D, stacked copper oxide rods can be seen, which attain the morphology of a flower. The pH of the base used is considerably lower, which can be the reason for a lesser number of XRD peaks for copper oxide in the sample. Uniqueness of the nanostructured morphology can play a crucial role in optical absorption properties. In particular, the entanglement of the 1D nano-lassie structure in sample A can increase the solar absorption properties by trapping light. The enhanced solar absorption is likely due to the unique 1D nanostructure, as well as to the phase percentages of the copper oxide formed. Introduction of EG serves the purpose of reduction above certain temperatures, where unique morphologies of copper oxides are formed.
 Fig. 4  SEM images of samples (a) A, (b) B, (c) C, and (d) D. The solar absorption characteristics are also dependent on the morphology of the copper oxides synthesized. 
So, it can be seen that varied morphology of copper oxide can be synthesized by a hydrothermal process, which opens up the road map for engineering improved forms of copper oxides for various optoelectronic devices.
Optical absorption
The optical absorption of an electromagnetic wave by a quantum system is responsible for decay of intensity of the wave with an absorption coefficient (∝) of the material, and is represented in eqn (5): I(x) = Ioe(−∝x)(5)
The energy loss by the wave per unit volume is given by eqn (6): (P/v) = I(6)
This energy loss favors electronic transitions which form the basis of solar cells. So, an increase in the absorption coefficient is highly desirable for better efficiency of a solar cell. The stacked solar transmitted intensity of all hydrothermally synthesized samples is shown in Fig. 5.
 Fig. 5  Variation of solar transmitted intensity of hydrothermally synthesized copper oxide samples with wavelength of the solar lamp used. The stacked plots indicate that samples have varied optical band gaps, and thus possess different optical absorption characteristics. The red underlined sample (A) has the highest optical absorption coefficient. 
This is a direct consequence of the change in the absorption coefficient which is due to change in the energy band gap, and unique morphology of the samples. It is quite obvious from the above plots that sample A exhibits the largest optical absorption properties in the visible solar spectrum.
To further understand this unusual behavior extensive analysis of the optical data has been carried out. The band gap of sample A was calculated using Tauc's formula and is shown in Fig. 6. The optical direct and indirect band gaps of CuO nanoparticles were extracted according to the following eqn (7):48,49 (7)where hv is the incident photon energy, ∝ is the absorption coefficient, B is a material dependent constant and Eg is the optical band gap.
 Fig. 6  Tauc plot for calculating (a) direct and (b) indirect band gaps of sample A. The sample A has a direct band gap of 1.60 eV and an indirect band gap of 1.10 eV. The higher degree of linearity in the direct band gap calculations predicts the predominance of the direct band gap in sample A. 
The value of n depends on the nature of transition. To calculate the indirect band gap transition (∝hν)0.5 is plotted against photon energy (hν). The intercept of the straight line on the hν axis corresponds to the optical band gap (Eg). The calculated direct and indirect band gaps for sample A using Tauc's plot are 1.60 eV and 1.10 eV respectively. The resulting direct band gap approaches the Shockley–Queisser limit for maximum solar cell efficiency (1.34 eV).50 Studies have shown that incorporation of intermediate band gap energies can actually increase solar cell efficiencies.51 The shift in the direct band edges as seen in the present case is due to the quantum confinement effect,52,53 which is evident from the energy band calculations of sample D. The calculated energy gap in sample D (1.1 eV) may be due to absorption involving defect states.
The reported value of the direct energy band gap for pure CuO is 1.2 eV,54 which is the same as that calculated in sample D. The absorption coefficient is calculated by the following eqn (8): (8)where, t is the thickness and T is the transmittance. We calculated the value of ∝1t and ∝2t for samples A and D, where ∝1 and ∝2 are the absorption coefficients of samples A and D. Sample D corresponds to pure CuO as determined by the phase percentage calculated by Rietveld analysis, and the direct energy band gap calculations.
To better understand the excellent optical absorption properties of sample A, we also investigated the optical properties of physical mixtures prepared from commercially available micro particles of CuO (Alfa Aesar – 99.7% metal basis) and Cu2O (Alfa Aesar – 99.9% metal basis) in the same phase percentages as sample A. The solar transmitted intensity plot shown in Fig. 7 shows that sample A absorbs a higher amount of solar light than the physical mixture. It should also be noted from Fig. 7 that the absorption coefficient of sample D is about the same as that of commercially available pure CuO (Alfa Aesar – 99.7% metal basis). It is important to compare the optical absorption properties of sample A with currently utilized solar cell materials. The variation of absorption coefficient ∝ of sample A along with pure CuO and widely used solar cell material Si as a function of wavelength is shown in Fig. 8. It can be clearly seen from Fig. 8 that ∝ tends to decrease exponentially as the wavelength increases. This behavior is typical for many semiconductors and can occur due to internal electric fields within the crystal, deformation of lattices due to strain caused by imperfection, and inelastic scattering of charge carriers by phonons.55
 Fig. 7  Demonstration of superior solar transmitted intensity of sample A. The sample absorbs more light than commercially available pure CuO, a physical mixture of copper oxides and sample D. 
 Fig. 8  Variation of the optical absorption coefficient with wavelength of sample A compared to commercial pure CuO and Si. The sample A possesses a significantly large optical absorption coefficient in the visible range as compared to Si and commercial pure CuO. 
The most interesting result is that the optical absorption coefficient of sample A is significantly larger as compared to pure CuO and is nearly double when compared with a conventionally used solar material, Si. This increase in ∝ of sample A is attributed to the nano particulate size, direct band gap, phase percentage, and lassie morphology of the copper oxide. An increased value of α will decrease the thickness of the copper oxide solar cell thereby decreasing the material usage in the fabrication process. Studies have confirmed that the optical absorption spectra and polarization properties in an extensive series of quasi-two dimensional copper oxides, including the simplest oxide CuO, show that the fundamental absorption band at 1.0–1.5 eV (in different oxides) is associated with an allowed blg−eu transition (eu, is the hybrid eu(π)–eu(σ) state).56

Fig. 8 represents variation of the optical absorption coefficient with wavelength of sample A compared to commercial pure CuO57 and Si.58 The sample A possesses a significantly large optical absorption coefficient in the visible range as compared to Si and commercial pure CuO.
The increase in the absorption coefficient also increases the extinction coefficient (k), which is defined as the imaginary part of the complex refractive index and represented in eqn (9): (9)
Increased values of extinction coefficients are favored for designing anti-reflective coatings on solar cells. Thus, it can be proved that hydrothermal synthesis can be employed to synthesize varied energy band gap copper oxide nanoparticles. By introducing a buffer layer of varying energy gaps in between copper oxide solar cells, fewer recombination sites should be available for the excited carriers. With these methods for improving efficiencies, copper oxide is a potentially attractive material for photovoltaic cells. In a general case, the carrier generation as a proportion of incoming photons of a given energy can be written as eqn (10):59–61 (10)where b(E) is the incident photon flux and R(E) is the reflectivity to normally incident light of energy E. In order to obtain the total rate of generation of charge carriers (G(x)) it is necessary to integrate over the range of photon energies that could result in a charge carrier being generated as represented in eqn (11):54–56 (11)When the incoming energy of a photon is greater than the band gap charge carriers with an increased amount of kinetic energy are created, however this energy is soon lost due to collisions in the crystal lattice until the energy is reduced to Eg; this process is known as thermalization. An increase in the range of photons absorbed by the synthesized copper oxide nanoparticles can help for better fabrication of solar cell devices. The photo current density (J) produced in an external circuit can be formulated as shown in eqn (12):52–54 (12)where b(E) is the incident spectral photon flux density i.e. the number of photons in the range E to (E + dE) that falls upon the unit area of the photovoltaic surface per unit time. Quantum efficiency (QE) and hence the current density are dependent upon the absorption coefficient of the solar cell material. Deviations in the reported values may arise due to different models that have been used to extract the optical properties from measured quantities. This not only affects the value of the band gap but also affects the interpretation of the nature of the gap (i.e. direct or indirect).
Photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy
The room temperature PL spectra using the laser excitation source of 325 nm of sample A along with the peak fitted Gaussian and Lorentzian curve using Labspec software are shown in Fig. 9. Emission peaks are observed at 2.9 eV (427 nm – violet), 2.3 eV (540 nm – green), 2.1 eV (590 nm – yellow), 1.8 eV (690 nm – red), 1.6 eV (775 nm – near IR), 1.5 eV (827 nm – near IR), 1.3 eV (954 nm – near IR), and 1.2 eV (1033 nm – near IR). The emission at 427 nm corresponds to band-edge emission.62 The second one at 2.3 eV arises from the singly ionized oxygen vacancy resulting in green emission of CuO materials because of recombination of a photo generated hole with a singly ionized electron in the valence band.63 The fluorescence at all other points arises due to band to band transition of copper-oxide and other defects arising in the nanostructured mixture. The luminescence peak corresponding to 2.3 eV is also due to band to band transition of CuO. A transition from the conduction band to the acceptor level (above the valence band) takes place and corresponds to an emission at 2.1 eV, while another transition from the donor level (below the conduction band) to the valence band and the acceptor level corresponds to fluorescence emission at 2.1 eV. Out of these transitions, a transition from the electron trapping level (below the conduction band) to the valence band takes place with a fluorescence of energy 2.1 eV through a non-radiative transition from the conduction band to the electron trap level. Balamurugan et al.64 have reported that the defect level is due to copper ion vacancies in copper oxide. Jung et al.65 had also reported the PL spectrum at ∼2.3 eV from Cu2O NPs embedded in a polyimide layer, due to inter band transitions from the ground electronic sublevel to the ground heavy-hole sublevel of the Cu2O NPs.
 Fig. 9  Photoluminescence spectra of sample A. The electronic transitions are observed in the visible to near IR region, which proves that the mixture can absorb a wide range of solar energy. This proves that the hydrothermally prepared nano mixture can be used as an excellent material for solar cell applications. 
The lack of luminescence data for copper oxide can be due to its low emission efficiency. The copper oxide band gap, and in general its optical properties, have been studied by optical absorption with a dispersion of results as the reported values of 1.85 eV in thin films,66 2.03 eV67 and 1.2 eV68 in nanowires, or 2.43 eV in nanoparticles.69 Lin et al.70 estimated from photoluminescence measurements a band gap of 1.67 eV in nanofibers. We predict that the 1.3 eV band, whose energy is close to the band gap value reported in several absorption measurements, corresponds to near band edge transitions of CuO. The bands peaked at lower energies may correspond to defect levels. Previous spectrally resolved photocurrent measurements71 actually revealed the existence of recombination centers lying 1.2 eV below the conduction band edge in CuO samples with a band gap of 1.3 eV. Furthermore, recent theoretical calculations indicate that although Cu vacancies are the most stable defects in CuO, they do not introduce new states within the band gap.72 Hence, Cu vacancies might not be involved in the mentioned emissions. In contrast, calculations reveal that such states can be introduced by oxygen vacancies and antisite defects.73 The formation energy of OCu antisite defects of acceptor nature is actually only slightly higher than the formation energy of Cu vacancies.12 In any case, it is currently recognized74 that a systematic study of the stoichiometry and defect structure of CuO, particularly in samples grown under a wide range of well-defined equilibrium conditions, is still necessary.
The photoluminescence spectrum of nanoparticles shows a broad luminescence in the visible region which indicates that these nanoparticles can be applicable for fabrication of photonic devices. The electronic transitions as seen from the PL spectra, at 590 nm and 690 nm, are the greatest, which correspond to the peak of the solar absorption spectra. Some electronic transitions are also observed in the near IR region, which proves that the mixture can absorb a wide range of solar energy. The PL spectra prove that the hydrothermally prepared mixture can be used as an excellent material for solar cell applications.
Mechanism of formation
Studies from the previous researchers revealed that, under supercritical conditions, the following three-step mechanism is involved in the formation of oxide nanoparticles from the metal salts:75
(1) The ion product of water (Kw) considerably increases, giving rise to higher concentrations of OH− ions and more rapid hydrolysis of the metal cations (reactions (13) and 14).
(2) The dielectric constant of water declines and, accordingly, its solvent power for dissolving ionic materials also reduces. Reducing the solvent power of water elevates the tendency of the hydroxide molecules (reaction (15)) for immediate precipitation, which, in turn, leads to the creation of a larger number of the precipitate nuclei and, thus, the formation of the nanosized particles.
(3) Because of the high-temperature conditions, unstable transition-metal hydroxides are converted to their corresponding oxides (reaction (15)). Water dissociation: H2O → H+ + OH−(13) Hydrolysis: Cu2+ + 2OH− → Cu(OH)2(14) Dehydration: Cu(OH)2 → CuO + H2O(15)
The morphology of CuO nanostructures without introduction of EG into the hydrothermal process is determined by the crystallographic structure of the Cu(OH)2 precursor.76 At room temperature, orthorhombic Cu(OH)2 first precipitates in the solution. The (010) plane in orthorhombic Cu(OH)2 structure is a corrugated sheet structure. By the phenomenon of edge sharing, a sheet of distorted Cu(OH)6 octahedral is formed. The 2D layers of these sheets parallel to the (010) plane are connected through H-bonds. When the reaction temperature and time increase to a certain extent, due to the action of the excess OH−, the orthorhombic Cu(OH)2 transforms into monoclinic CuO nanostructure by a dehydration reaction breaking the interplanar H-bonds.77 It is also known that the crystal growth habit is not only determined by internal structure but is also affected by external conditions. When a certain quantity of EG is introduced into the hydrothermal process, it is believed that under a certain range of alkaline conditions the hydrogen bonds of EG can attack the OH-bonds protruding out of the edge of orthorhombic Cu(OH)2. Consequently, the orthorhombic Cu(OH)2 was activated and the dehydrated reaction took place more easily at the positions attacked by EG. In this way and with the lapse of time at higher reaction temperatures, the nuclei of monoclinic CuO are formed by the dehydration of the orthorhombic Cu(OH)2.40Fig. 10 represents a schematic of the nanostructured copper oxides formed by the action of the base and EG. The connecting hydrogen bonds between (010) crystallographic planes of Cu(OH)2 are being acted upon by the OH− of the base. The OH bonds in Cu(OH)2 are being activated by H atom in EG. Dehydration reaction results in the flower like morphology of copper oxides. The green atoms represent O, red ones Cu atoms and yellow ones are H atoms. The formation of lassie nanomorphology depends on the reaction parameters, base and EG used during hydrothermal synthesis. Therefore, EG plays a critical role in the formation of monoclinic nanostructured copper oxides. However, EG also acts as a reducing agent above certain reaction temperatures. As a result, a small quantity of cubic Cu2O with the flower-like morphology coexists with CuO nanostructures. Because of the internal symmetry crystallographic structure of cubic Cu2O, it can grow along the 3D directions around it. Therefore, at the positions modified by EG, the nuclei of Cu2O grow bigger and longer along the radial directions.78 Higher pH of the base used in hydrothermal synthesis and reaction temperatures and time favor formation of CuO, which has distinctly different solar absorption properties. Introduction of EG in the system reduces some CuO to Cu2O, which also alters the morphology, size and optical absorption characteristics which is schematically shown in Fig. 10. The uniqueness of this study deals with the correlation of the significantly large optical absorption coefficient of nanostructured copper oxides with the structural conformity, optical-phonon vibrational modes, morphology, optical band gap calculations, and photoluminescence spectra. Sample A was observed to have the largest optical absorption characteristics, which was significantly more than commercially available CuO and nearly twice that of Si, and was a particular phase mixture of copper oxides. The Rietveld analysis confirmed the phase mixture to be 97.7:2.3 (CuO:Cu2O). The sample has a minimal perturbation of the bond angles and bond lengths, as calculated by Rietveld analysis. This can reduce the localized tail states, which act as effective recombination sites. The mobility of the charge carriers is the least in these states, and reduction of these states can therefore enhance solar cell efficiency. Stable inorganic oxide nanostructures are highly desirable for better working heterojunction solar cell devices.
 Fig. 10  Schematic representing the mechanism of formation of 1D nanostructured copper oxides. Nanostructured copper oxides of varied morphology are formed by changing the base media and introduction of EG during the hydrothermal growth. 
Studies have also shown that incorporation of the intermediate band gap energies can actually increase solar cell efficiencies. The electronic transitions as seen from the PL spectra, at 590 nm and 690 nm, are the greatest, which correspond to the peak of the solar absorption spectra. Some electronic transitions are also observed in the near IR region, which proves that the mixture can absorb a wide range of solar spectrum.
Experimental
Synthesis of copper oxide composite nanoparticles
All the chemicals were analytic grade reagents and used without further purification. The experimental details were as follows: (0.15 M) CuSO4·5H2O (GFS Chemicals – assay 98.0–102.0%) was dissolved in (20 ml) deionized HPLC water (GFS Chemicals – resistivity at 25 °C is 18.0 Mohm-cm) under stirring. (45% (W/W)) of KOH (GFS Chemicals – assay 45%) was added to the resulting aqueous solution till the pH of the solution was 13. Then, the solution was transferred into Teflon lined stainless steel autoclaves, sealed and maintained at different reaction temperatures (80 °C and 120 °C) for 15 hours. In order to investigate the growth mechanism and the action of Ethylene glycol (EG), the experiments were carried out with the addition of (10 ml) EG (GFS Chemicals – 99% pure) to the aqueous solution at the same reaction parameters mentioned above. After the completion of the hydrothermal process, the solid products were centrifuged (LW Scientific centrifuge-Model E8) at a rotation speed of 30 revolutions s−1 for 30 min, washed three times with distilled water and ethyl alcohol (Fisher Scientific, anhydrous and denatured), respectively, to remove the ions possibly remaining in the final product, and finally dried at 100 °C in air. Powder samples were also prepared using (50% (V/V)) NaOH (GFS chemicals – assay 48–52%), and (10% (V/V)) NH4OH (GFS Chemicals – concentration 10.0 +/− 0.5%), which possess different basicity as compared to KOH.
Powder X-ray diffraction studies and Rietveld analysis
The obtained samples were characterized using X-ray powder diffraction (Bruker, D8 Discover) θ–2θ scan with CuKα (λ = 1.5405 Å). Rietveld analysis was done using Diffracplus Topas software. Special care was taken for a quality data collection, background contribution, peak-shape function, refinement of the profile parameters as well as the structure parameters and interpretation of the agreement indices (R values), in the due course of the XRD analysis. The Bragg Brentano reflection geometry was employed for collection of the crystallographic pattern. Factors that were considered prior to the collection of the XRD data were the geometry of the X ray diffractometer, alignment, proper calibrations, thickness of the sample, slit sizes, and adequate counting time. For Bragg Brentano geometries, it is important that the incident beam be kept on the sample at all angles to ensure a constant volume condition. Quite often, the divergence slits used are too wide and the beam hits the sample holder at low angles, so the intensities measured at these angles are too low.79 Henceforth, we used 0.6 mm for both primary and secondary divergence slits. To ensure good counting statistics throughout an X ray powder diffraction pattern, more time should be spent on data collection at high angles where the intensities are lower. We employed counting time of 6 seconds for a good quality XRD pattern. The assumption for refection geometry is that the sample is infinitely thick and thus a considerable time was spent on proper sample preparations. Preferential orientations were calculated with the help of March Dollase function. The goodness of fit (GOF) appreciably approached 1 with the incorporation of sophisticated corrections using spherical harmonics. Any temptation to smooth the diffraction data before doing a Rietveld refinement was resisted. Smoothing introduces point-to-point correlations (off diagonal weight matrix elements) which results in aberrant refinement values. The emission profile was considered for all the values of Cu K alpha radiations. Chebychev background correction was done of the order of 5. The Goniometer primary and secondary radii were carefully incorporated in the program with the consideration of the primary and the secondary soller slits used. The zero error and the absorption were refined in the process for better results. The Lorentz Polarization factor was fixed throughout the analysis. The peak profile function used for the refinement is the Fundamental parameter (FP). These numerical convolutions have a high degree of accuracy as they comprise analytical Lorentzian and Gaussian functions convoluted with straight line segments. The fundamental parameter approach (FPA) provides a complete description of the geometric instrument response. All parameters in FPA models are physically based, with parameters that map directly onto the geometry of the diffractometer. This facilitates the interpretation and evaluation of the line profile model fit.80 The Debye Waller temperature factor was fixed throughout the refinement process. The refinement was carried out carefully to minimize the errors due to an increase in the number of variable parameters. The lattice parameter was calculated from the Pawley fitting (unrestrained fitting of parameters), which was fixed in the preceding Rietveld refinements. The space coordinates, and the temperature factors for the ions were not refined in the Rietveld analysis.
Raman micro-scattering spectroscopic analysis and photoluminescence measurements
The vibrational phonon modes were determined by Raman spectroscopy using 532 nm green laser (Horiba Labram Raman-PL). Photoluminescence measurements were carried out employing 325 nm UV laser using the above-mentioned instrument. The Raman spectra and PL spectra were analyzed using Gaussian and Lorentzian peak fittings in NSG Lab spec software.
Optical absorption measurements
0.4 mg of the hydrothermally synthesized powder was dissolved in 3 ml double deionized water and the resulting solution was transferred to cuvettes for further optical characterization. Absorption spectra were measured using an Ocean Optics HR 4000 spectrometer in conjunction with Ocean Optics Spectra suite software. The solar light (Newport 69907 light source) was used for solar cell simulation. We were extremely cautious during the absorption measurements. Many transmission spectra were taken repeatedly in small intervals to make sure that there were no errors during the measurement. Collection of the absorption spectra takes less than 5 seconds as we used the Ocean Optics software which takes spectral readings on the instantaneous basis. We have taken several measurements to assure the integrity of the presented data. We have also seen that the powder remains in the solution for a considerable period of time before it settles down.
For calculating “t” we have employed a trivial but unique method. First, we collected the transmission spectra for commercially pure copper oxide (with a known optical absorption coefficient). It must be noted that the same amount of powders was mixed with the same volume of DI water for making the solutions which were being used for optical absorption calculations. We used eqn (8) for calculating (αCuO*t) from the transmittance spectra. It should be noted that since transmittance varies with the wavelength of source light, so the value of (αCuO*t) will also vary with the wavelength of source light. Then, we collected the transmittance spectra of synthesized nanostructured copper oxide samples. This gives us the value of (αsampleA*t). Then we take the ratio of these two values i.e. (αCuO*t): (αsampleA*t). αCuO is known from standard calculations, and thus we can find out αsampleA. Again, αsampleA is a function of wavelength of light, and we took the value at the peak of the visible solar spectrum (i.e. at 525 nm) and compared the same with that of standard Si at that point. To prove the correctness of the procedure used we synthesized nanopowder copper oxide with the same band gap as that of commercially available CuO. We measured transmittance spectra of the synthesized powder and it is in accordance with that of commercially available CuO.
Scanning electron microscopy
The morphology of as-prepared samples was characterized by scanning electron microscopy (FEI Quanta 200S). Carbon adhesive tapes were being employed during EDX measurements.
Conclusions
Nanostructures of copper oxides with a high optical absorption coefficient have been synthesized by an energy efficient hydrothermal process. The solar absorption coefficient of the hydrothermally prepared nanostructured phase mixture of copper oxides is significantly large as compared to commercially available pure CuO and is nearly double when compared with Si. This significant increase in solar optical absorption can be attributed to the lassie nanostructure, change in the energy band gap and a particular phase mixture of copper oxides. Investigation of the growth mechanism indicates that EG plays a critical role in the formation of a mixture of copper oxides, and modifies the morphology of the nanostructures. The ability to engineer a nanostructured phase mixture of copper oxides with a large optical absorption coefficient can lead to resurgence of CuO based solar cells. The formation mechanism discussed in this paper opens up a new approach in synthesis of similar morphological nanostructures for highly efficient solar cell applications.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to acknowledge Kushol Das for preparing some composite copper oxide nanostructured samples. This research was funded by National Science Foundation, Grant Numbers: DMR-1126375, and DMR-0907037, Missouri State University, and CASE exploratory research funding. The authors would like to acknowledge A. Haque, M. N. Taufique, R. Rahaman and P. Karnati for proof reading this research article.
References
Y. Abdu and A. Musa, BAJOPAS, 2009, 2, 8 Search PubMed .
S. Agarkar, V. Dhas, S. Muduli and S. Ogale, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 11645 RSC .
A. Frank, N. Kopidakis and J. van de Lagemaat, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2004, 248, 1165 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Law, L. Greene, J. Johnson, R. Saykally and Y. Peidong, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 455 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Oekermann, D. Zhang, T. Yoshida and H. Minoura, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 2227 CrossRef CAS .
N. Lewis, Science, 2007, 315, 798 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Huynh, J. Dittmer and A. Alivisatos, Science, 2002, 295, 2425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Bisi, S. Ossicini and L. Pavesi, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2000, 38, 1 CrossRef CAS .
L. Pavesi, L. Dal Negro, C. Mazzoleni, G. Franzo and F. Priolo, Nature, 2000, 408, 440 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, H. Liu, Z. Wang, N. Ming, Z. Li and A. Biris, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 3897 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yuxin, L. Xinyong, W. Ning, Q. Xie and C. Yongying, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2008, 62, 727 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Kopidakis, K. Benkstein, J. van de Lagemaat, A. Frank, Q. Yuan and E. Schiff, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2006, 73, 7 CrossRef .
K. Zhu, N. Neale, A. Miedaner and A. Frank, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 69 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Asahi, T. Morikawa, T. Ohwaki, K. Aoki and Y. Taga, Science, 2001, 293, 269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Faughnan and R. Crandall, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1977, 31, 834 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Jin, Y. Cao, E. Hao, G. Metraux, G. Schatz and C. Mirkin, Nature, 2003, 425, 487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xia, P. Yang, Y. Sun, Y. Wu, B. Mayers, B. Gates, Y. Yin, F. Kim and H. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 353 CrossRef CAS .
M. Grätzel, Nature, 2003, 421, 586 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Wu and W. Zhang, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2006, 73, 235206 CrossRef .
A. Mittiga, E. Salza, F. Sarta, M. Tucci and R. Vasanthi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 163502 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Kidowaki, T. Oku, T. Akiyama, A. Suzuki, B. Jeyadevan and J. Cuya, J. Mater. Sci. Res., 2012, 1, 138 CAS .
M. Zeman and J. Krc, Mater. Res. Soc. Symp. Proc., 2007, 989, A03-01 CrossRef .
S. Kugler, J. Phys.: Conf. Ser., 2010, 253, 1 CrossRef .
K. Nomura, H. Ohta, A. Takagi, T. Kamiya, M. Hirano and H. Hosono, Nature, 2004, 432, 488 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Asbrink and L. Norrby, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B: Struct. Crystallogr. Cryst. Chem., 1970, 26, 8 CrossRef CAS .
R. Street, Philos. Mag. B, 1984, 49, L-15 CAS .
J. Chrzanowski and J. Irwin, Solid State Commun., 2009, 70, 11 CrossRef .
H. Goldstein, D. Kim, P. Yu, L. Bourne, J. Chaminade and L. Nganga, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 41, 7192 CrossRef .

          J. Nye, Physical Properties of Crystals: Their Representation by Tensors and Matrices, Oxford University Press, London,  1957 Search PubMed .
R. Loudon, Adv. Phys., 1964, 13, 423 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hagemann, H. Bill, W. Sadowski, E. Walker and M. Francois, Solid State Commun., 1990, 73, 447 CrossRef CAS .
M. Balkanski, M. Nusimovici and J. Reydellet, Solid State Commun., 1969, 7, 81 CrossRef .
C. Carabatos and B. Prevot, Phys. Status Solidi B, 1971, 44, 701 CrossRef CAS .
K. Huang, Z. Phys., 1963, 171, 213 CrossRef CAS .
E. Kroumova, M. Aroyo, J. Perez-Mato, A. Kirov, C. Capillas, S. Ivantchev and H. Wondratschek, Phase Transitions, 2003, 76, 155 CrossRef CAS .
B. K. Meyer, A. Polity, D. Reppin, M. Becker, P. Hering, P. Klar, T. Sander, C. Reindl, J. Benz, M. Eickhoff, C. Heiliger, M. Heinemann, J. Blasing, A. Krost, S. Shokovets, C. Muller and C. Ronning, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2012, 249, 1487 CrossRef CAS .
J. Reydellet, M. Balkanski and D. Trivich, Phys. Status Solidi B, 1972, 52, 175 CrossRef CAS .
A. Compaan and H. Cummins, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1972, 6, 4753 CrossRef CAS .
P. Williams and S. Porto, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1973, 8, 1782 CrossRef CAS .
A. Compaan, Solid State Commun., 1975, 16, 293 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, W. Ji, Z. Shen, W. Li, S. Tang, X. Ye, D. Jia and X. Xin, J. Raman Spectrosc., 1999, 30, 413 CrossRef CAS .
J. Irwin and T. Wei, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 1991, 3, 299 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Rao, P. C. Eklund, S. Bandow, A. Thess and R. E. Smalley, Nature, 1997, 388, 257 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, M. A. Hamon, H. Hu, Y. S. Chen, A. M. Rao, P. C. Eklund and R. C. Haddon, Science, 1998, 282, 95 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Rao, E. Richter, S. Bandow, B. Chase, P. C. Eklund, K. A. Williams, S. Fang, K. R. Subbaswamy, M. Menon, A. Thess, R. E. Smalley, G. Dresselhaus and M. S. Dresselhaus, Science, 1997, 275, 187 CrossRef CAS .
X. K. Chen, J. C. Irwin and J. P. Franck, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1995, 52, R13130 CrossRef .

          L. D. Landu, E. M. Lifshitz and L. P. Pitaevskii, Electrodynamics of Continuous Media, Pergamon, Oxford,  1984 Search PubMed .

          N. Mott and E. Davis, Electronic Processes in Non-Crystalline Materials, Oxford University Press, New York,  1971 Search PubMed .
G. Yue, D. Peng, P. Yan, L. Wang, W. Wang and X. Luo, J. Alloys Compd., 2009, 468, 254 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Shockley and H. Queisser, J. Appl. Phys., 1961, 32, 510 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Luque and A. Marti, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1997, 78, 514 CrossRef .
S. Neeleshwar, C. Chen, C. Tsai, Y. Chen, C. Chen, S. Shyu and M. Seehra, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 71, 201307 CrossRef .
P. Mallick and S. Sahu, Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2012, 2, 71 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Balamurugan and B. Mehta, Thin Solid Films, 2001, 396, 90 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sawaby, M. Selim, S. Marzouk, M. Mostafa and A. Hosny, Phys. B, 2010, 405, 3412 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kelly, P. Barboux, J. Tarascon and D. Aspnes, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1989, 40, 6797 CrossRef CAS .
T. Maruyama, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1998, 56, 85 CrossRef CAS .
M. Green, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 1305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          P. Würfel, Physics of Solar Cells: From Principles to New Concepts, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, Germany,  2005 Search PubMed .

          D. Neaman, Semiconductor Physics and devices: Basic Principles, McGraw-Hill, Boston,  2003 Search PubMed .

          M. Green, Solar Cells; Operating Principles, Technology and System Applications, Prentice-Hall,  1982 Search PubMed .
R. Ningthoujam, N. Gajbhiye, A. Ahmed, S. Umre and S. Sharma, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2008, 8, 3059 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Vanheusden, W. Warren, C. Seager, D. Tallant, J. Voigt and B. Gnade, J. Appl. Phys., 1996, 79, 7983 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Balamurugan, B. Mehta, D. Avasthi, F. Singh, A. Arora, M. Rajalakshmi, G. Raghavan, A. Tyagi and S. Shivaprasad, J. Appl. Phys., 2002, 92, 3304 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jung, T. Kim, M. Song, Y. Kim and K. Yoo, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 101, 093708 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Santra, C. K. Sarkar, M. K. Mukherjee and B. Gosh, Thin Solid Films, 1992, 213, 226 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kaur, K. P. Muthe, S. K. Despande, S. Choudhury, J. B. Singh, N. Verma, S. K. Gupta and J. V. Yakhmi, J. Cryst. Growth, 2006, 289, 670 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. J. Hansen, G. Lu and J. Chen, J. Nanomater., 2008, 830474 Search PubMed .
H. Wang, J. Z. Xu, J. J. Zhu and H. Y. Chen, J. Cryst. Growth, 2002, 244, 88 CrossRef CAS .
H. H. Lin, C. Y. Wang, H. C. Shih, J. M. Chen and C. T. Hsieh, J. Appl. Phys., 2004, 95, 5889 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. P. Koffyberg and F. A. Benko, J. Appl. Phys., 1982, 53, 1173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. U. Dangxin, Z. Qiming and T. Meng, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2006, 73, 235206 CrossRef .
M. A. M. Jaskari, Modell. Simul. Mater. Sci. Eng., 2006, 14, 207 CrossRef .
C. Carel, M. M. Bahout and J. Gaudé, Solid State Ionics, 1999, 117, 47 CrossRef CAS .
M. Outokesh, M. Hosseinpour, S. Ahmadi, T. Mousavand, S. Sadjadi and W. Soltanian, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2011, 50, 3540 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, X. Wen and S. Yang, Inorg. Chem., 2003, 42, 5005 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Li, H. Zhang, Y. Ji and D. Yang, Nanotechnology, 2004, 15, 1428 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, E. Shi, Y. Zheng, W. Li, B. Xiao and J. Zhuang, J. Cryst. Growth, 2003, 249, 294 CrossRef CAS .
L. McCusker, R. Von Dreele, D. Cox, D. Louer and P. Scardie, J. Appl. Crystallogr., 1999, 32, 36 CrossRef CAS .
R. Cheary and A. Coelho, J. Appl. Crystallogr., 1992, 25, 109 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c4cp00827hThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2014
Table Content:
	(1)

 	Fig. 1  Rietveld fitted XRD pattern of (a) sample A, (b) sample B, (c) sample C, and (d) sample D having different optical absorption properties. The observed XRD pattern (black line) along with that of calculated (red line) using Rietveld analysis and the difference (blue line) profile of the powder sample are shown in the figure. XRD data indicate that a mixture of copper oxides is formed which crystallizes in space group symmetry of C12/c1 (monoclinic) and Pnm Z (cubic) for CuO and Cu2O.	 

 	Fig. 2  Crystal structure of monoclinic CuO showing the measured bond angles and bond length, extracted from the crystallographic information file (cif) by Rietveld analysis. The red balls represent Cu2+ and the green ones O2−.	 



KOH + EG(A)
	
80 °C/15 h
	
97.7/2.3
	
45
	
0.63
	
95.74/78.93
	
1.961
	
1.07
	
92.5

KOH	80 °C/15 h	98.4/1.6	1024	0.76	95.54/79.09	1.955	1.13	90.2
NaOH	120 °C/15 h	98.8/1.2	1210	0.70	95.59/79.05	1.962	1.16	76.9

NaOH(B)
	
80 °C/15 h
	
99.7/0.3
	
42
	
0.48
	
95.67/78.99
	
1.960
	
1.14
	
74.7

KOH	120 °C/15 h	100/0	1125	0.36	95.71/78.96	1.961	1.11	71.9
KOH + EG	120 °C/15 h	42.5/57.5	52	0.01	95.74/78.92	1.961	1.15	68.2
NaOH + EG	120 °C/15 h	56.9/43.1	38	0.57	95.74/78.92	1.962	1.14	54.2

NH4OH + EG(C)
	
120 °C/15 h
	
99.3/0.7
	
19
	
0.10
	
95.42/79.17
	
1.952
	
1.05
	
47.4

NaOH + EG	80 °C/15 h	95.9/4.1	31	0.04	95.40/80.03	1.938	1.12	41.0

NH4OH(D)
	
120 °C/15 h
	
99.9/0.1
	
1548
	
0.13
	
95.63/79.03
	
1.961
	
1.11
	
14.0


 	Fig. 3  Raman spectra of samples (a) A, (b) B, (c) C, and (d) D with the Voigt peak fitted curves. The Raman active vibrational modes are also shown. The green solid spheres represent O2− and the blue ones Cu2+.	 
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)

 	Fig. 4  SEM images of samples (a) A, (b) B, (c) C, and (d) D. The solar absorption characteristics are also dependent on the morphology of the copper oxides synthesized.	 
I(x) = Ioe(−∝x)	(5)
(P/v) = I	(6)

 	Fig. 5  Variation of solar transmitted intensity of hydrothermally synthesized copper oxide samples with wavelength of the solar lamp used. The stacked plots indicate that samples have varied optical band gaps, and thus possess different optical absorption characteristics. The red underlined sample (A) has the highest optical absorption coefficient.	 
	(7)

 	Fig. 6  Tauc plot for calculating (a) direct and (b) indirect band gaps of sample A. The sample A has a direct band gap of 1.60 eV and an indirect band gap of 1.10 eV. The higher degree of linearity in the direct band gap calculations predicts the predominance of the direct band gap in sample A.	 
	(8)

 	Fig. 7  Demonstration of superior solar transmitted intensity of sample A. The sample absorbs more light than commercially available pure CuO, a physical mixture of copper oxides and sample D.	 

 	Fig. 8  Variation of the optical absorption coefficient with wavelength of sample A compared to commercial pure CuO and Si. The sample A possesses a significantly large optical absorption coefficient in the visible range as compared to Si and commercial pure CuO.	 
	(9)
	(10)
	(11)
	(12)

 	Fig. 9  Photoluminescence spectra of sample A. The electronic transitions are observed in the visible to near IR region, which proves that the mixture can absorb a wide range of solar energy. This proves that the hydrothermally prepared nano mixture can be used as an excellent material for solar cell applications.	 
Water dissociation: H2O → H+ + OH−	(13)
Hydrolysis: Cu2+ + 2OH− → Cu(OH)2	(14)
Dehydration: Cu(OH)2 → CuO + H2O	(15)

 	Fig. 10  Schematic representing the mechanism of formation of 1D nanostructured copper oxides. Nanostructured copper oxides of varied morphology are formed by changing the base media and introduction of EG during the hydrothermal growth.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c4cp00827h

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2014
