Effective modulation of the exotic properties of two-dimensional multifunctional TM 2 @g-C 4 N 3 monolayers via transition metal permutation and biaxi ...  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D3NR00984J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D3NR00984J
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2023, 15, 9843-9863Effective modulation of the exotic properties of two-dimensional multifunctional TM2@g-C4N3 monolayers via transition metal permutation and biaxial strain†

        
          
            De-Bing 
            Long
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yulin 
            Feng
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Guoying 
            Gao
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Li-Ming 
            Yang
          
        
      *a
aKey Laboratory of Material Chemistry for Energy Conversion and Storage, Ministry of Education, Hubei Key Laboratory of Bioinorganic Chemistry and Materia Medica, Hubei Key Laboratory of Materials Chemistry and Service Failure, Hubei Engineering Research Center for Biomaterials and Medical Protective Materials, School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China. E-mail: Lmyang@hust.edu.cn
bCollege of Physics and Electronic Science, Hubei Normal University, Huangshi 435002, China
cSchool of Physics and Wuhan National High Magnetic Field Center, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China
Received 
      2nd March 2023
    , Accepted 30th April 2023First published on 1st May 2023AbstractThe exotic physicochemical properties of TM atom (3d, 4d, and 5d) embedded g-C4N3 as a novel class of 2D monolayers were systematically investigated through hierarchical high-throughput screening combined with spin-polarized first-principles calculations. After several rounds of efficient screening, 18 types of TM2@g-C4N3 monolayers with a TM atom embedded g-C4N3 substrate in large cavities on both sides in asymmetrical mode have been obtained. The effects of transition metal permutation and biaxial strain on the magnetic, electronic, and optical properties of TM2@g-C4N3 monolayers were comprehensively and deeply analyzed. By anchoring different TM atoms, various magnetic states including ferromagnetism (FM), antiferromagnetism (AFM), and nonmagnetism (NM) can be obtained. The Curie temperatures of Co2@ and Zr2@g-C4N3 are substantially improved up to 305 K and 245 K by applying −8% and −12% compression strains, respectively. This makes them promising candidates for low-dimensional spintronic device applications at or close to room temperature. Additionally, rich electronic states (metal, semiconductor, and half-metal) can be realized through biaxial strains or diverse metal permutations. Interestingly, the Zr2@g-C4N3 monolayer undergoes a transition of FM semiconductor → FM half-metal → AFM metal under biaxial strains from −12% to 10%. Notably, the embedding of TM atoms dramatically enhances visible light absorption compared to bare g-C4N3. Excitingly, the power conversion efficiency of the Pt2@g-C4N3/BN heterojunction can be as high as 20.20%, which has great potential in solar cell applications. This large class of 2D multifunctional materials provides a candidate platform to develop promising applications under different circumstances and is expected to be prepared in the future.
1. Introduction
Inspired by the exotic properties of graphene, increasing attention has been paid to graphitic CxNy monolayers in recent years. The experimentally synthesized 2D graphitic CxNy monolayers, such as C3N4,1 CN,2 C2N,3 and C3N,4,5 with inherently regular and uniformly distributed nanopores and tunable bandgaps, are considered to have a variety of potential applications in gas separation,6 fuel cell,7 photocatalysis,1 electrocatalysis,8 lithium–sulfur (Li–S) batteries,9 energy storage,10 and nanoelectronics.5 As a derivative of 2D materials, CxNy-based heterostructures are combined by van der Waals forces between the CxNy layer and other 2D layers. Based on the double-layer structure characteristics of this interlayer-coupled van der Waals heterostructure, it can effectively separate positive and negative charges and hinder the recombination of charges, thereby enhancing the catalytic performance of water splitting11,12 and expanding its application in optoelectronic devices such as light-emitting diodes (LEDs), photodetectors, light sensors, light transistors, and solar cells.13–15 Among these diverse nitrogen carbide monolayers, because of its great visible light response and excellent thermal and chemical stability, g-C3N4 has been extensively applied in photocatalytic water splitting, reduction of CO2 and NOx, and organic pollutant degradation.16–19 However, the lack of intrinsic spin polarization limits its further usage as a suitable spintronic material. Currently, introducing efficient spin polarization into nonmagnetic 2D materials can be achieved by diverse strategies such as introducing vacancy defects,20 applying electric fields/strain,21 adsorption,22 chemical functionalization,23 and so on. Among these, the adsorption of transition metal atoms is considered as a traditional and straightforward approach to modulate the electronic and magnetic properties of nonmagnetic 2D materials. The presence of uniformly distributed vacancies on g-C3N4 monolayers makes them suitable for trapping TM atoms because the potential barrier of vacancy sites prevents them from approaching each other or migrating. Recent theoretical investigation shows that bare g-C3N4, which is a wide bandgap (∼2.7 eV) semiconductor, becomes metallic and possesses prominent absorption in the visible light energy region upon 3d TM (TM = V–Zn) atom inclusion.24 In addition, V, Cr, and Fe embedded g-C3N4 monolayers tend to show ferromagnetic ordering, with a TC of 205, 170.5, and 115 K, respectively. The experimentally synthesized Fe@g-C3N425 and Ni@g-C3N426 exhibit magnetism and significant visible light absorption, which renders them potential spintronic and optoelectronic applications. Both theoretical and experimental results have well confirmed the feasibility and effectiveness of tuning the magnetic, electronic, and optical properties of g-C3N4 monolayers by introducing transition metals.
Recently, one intriguing functional carbon material with an extended framework, namely g-C4N3, has been experimentally synthesized by trimerization of a nitrile-containing anion.27 Such a new type of graphitic carbon nitride material, which can be regarded as C-doped g-C3N4, possesses intrinsic ferromagnetic half-metallicity.28 The substitution of the N atom with a C atom in nonmagnetic g-C3N4 will inject a hole into the system, which breaks the pair electrons occupying a C–N bonding orbital and finally results in the appearance of magnetic half-metallicity. Under optical excitation, the photogenerated carriers occupying different spin states can transform each other, and the g-C4N3 surface is fully filled with metallic spin-down states, which is more advantageous to carrier transfer, and thus it can be used as a potential photocatalyst for hydrogen evolution.29 Compared with the freestanding g-C4N3 monolayer, the formation of the heterostructure of g-C4N3/graphene shows an absorption edge red shift and a greatly enhanced visible light response, which is more promising for photoelectrochemical uses.30
Like the widely explored g-C3N4 monolayer, single layer g-C4N3 contains electron-rich pyridine-like nitrogen coordinated cavities, which are potential ideal sites to firmly anchor transition metal atoms for the modification of electronic structures and thus regulate its original properties. In the present study, by means of systematic DFT calculations, we studied the influence of transition metal permutation and biaxial strain on the magnetic, electronic, and optical properties of TM2@g-C4N3 monolayers. Our study shows that the TM2@g-C4N3 monolayer can be a metal, semiconductor, or half-metal, and the magnetic, electronic and optical properties can be tuned by embedding diverse TM atoms and applying a series of biaxial strains. It demonstrates that strain engineering can be used as an effective approach to improving the magnetic transition temperature, especially for ferromagnetic Co2@ and Zr2@g-C4N3 systems. With the embedding of TM atoms, the optical absorption spectra exhibit an obvious absorption edge red shift and considerable enhancement in visible light response. Additionally, Pt@g-C4N3 can be used as a donor material to form a heterojunction with BN, and its power conversion efficiency can be as high as 20.20%, which has great potential in solar cell applications. This class of materials with fascinating properties and functionalities provides a promising platform for the design of new 2D materials and van der Waals heterostructures to develop diverse applications in nanoelectronics, spintronics, optoelectronics, and photovoltaic devices.
2. Computational methodologies
All first-principles calculations were carried out within the spin-polarized DFT framework using the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP)31 employing projector-augmented wave (PAW) pseudopotentials.32 The generalized gradient approximation (GGA) of Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof (PBE)33 was adopted as the exchange–correlation functional to treat the electron–ion interactions. The PBE+U method34 was used to describe the strong-correlated d electrons of TM atoms. The on-site Coulomb interaction parameter (U) and the exchange interaction parameter (J) are set to be 4.0 and 1.0 eV (i.e., the effective Hubbard Coulomb parameter Ueff = U − J = 3 eV) for d electrons, which has been used in similar TM–N coordinated metal–organic monolayer systems and is reliable to determine the magnetic ground states and local magnetic moments of TM atoms.35–38 Other different Ueff values (Ueff = 2, 2.5, 3.5, 4 eV) were also tested, which don't change the magnetic ground states and obviously affect the local magnetic moments of the TM atoms (as shown in Table S1†). Thus, the magnetic properties of this work were performed based on the PBE+U (Ueff = U − J = 3 eV) level. The plane-wave energy cutoff was set to 500 eV. All the structures were relaxed without any symmetry constraints until the convergence criteria of energy and force were less than 10−6 eV and 0.01 eV Å−1, respectively. The periodic boundary conditions with a vacuum space of more than 15 Å along the z direction were introduced to avoid interactions between adjacent layers. The first Brillouin zone was sampled by the Monkhorst–Pack method.39 Since the size of supercells in configuration screening and magnetic ground state calculations are different, various k-spaces were used. 5 × 9 × 1 and 5 × 5 × 1 k-grids were used for calculating 2 × 1 × 1 and 2 × 2 × 1 supercells, respectively. The effects of van der Waals (vdW) interactions were considered through the DFT-D340 dispersion correction method.
The cohesive energy (Ec) of TM atoms was calculated according to the formula Ec = (nETM(single) − ETM(bulk))/n, where ETM(single) and ETM(bulk) represent the energy of a single TM atom in a vacuum and the energy of bulk metal, respectively, and n is the number of transition metal in its bulk phase. The binding energy (Eb) of each TM atom embedded in the g-C4N3 monolayer was obtained using the equation Eb = ETM2@g-C4N3 − 2ETM − Eg-C4N3, where ETM2@g-C4N3 and Eg-C4N3, refer to the total energies of the TM2@g-C4N3 complex and pristine g-C4N3 monolayer, respectively. Ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) simulations were performed using a 4 × 4 × 1 supercell to assess the thermal stabilities of TM2@g-C4N3 monolayers with the constant number, volume, temperature (NVT) ensemble at 300 or 600 K. The total simulation lasted 10 ps with a time step of 2 fs, and the temperature was controlled by the Nosé–Hoover thermostat method.41
The electronic properties were calculated at the PBE+U level, and although Hubbard U was added to moderate the strong coulombic interactions, it cannot fully compensate for the underestimation of band gaps caused by the intrinsic PBE errors in the approximation of single-particle eigenvalues and the lack of derivative discontinuity.42 The higher-level HSE06 functional43 containing the exact exchange energy was employed to obtain more accurate electronic structures. In the HSE06 functional, the full PBE correlation energy was added, and 1/4 of the PBE exchange was replaced by the Hartree–Fock (HF) exact exchange.
For magnetic calculations, three different configurations of magnetic states including one ferromagnetic (FM) and two antiferromagnetic (AFM) states in a 2 × 2 × 1 supercell were constructed to study magnetic coupling in TM2@g-C4N3 monolayers. The magnetic ground state was determined by comparing the energy between the different magnetic states. The magnetic exchange energy (Eex = EAFM − EFM) was obtained by calculating the energy difference between FM and AFM states. The nearest and next-nearest exchange interactions were considered to compute the magnetic coupling parameters. Monte Carlo (MC) simulations, based on the 2D Ising model, were used to evaluate the Curie/Néel temperature (TC/TN) of single-layer TM2@g-C4N3 ferromagnets/antiferromagnets. A 40 × 40 × 1 supercell was adopted in the MC simulations with 105 equilibration steps for each temperature. Providing the exact solution to the spin Hamiltonians, TC (or TN) can be estimated by locating the peak position of specific heat capacity. To have a better understanding of the origin of the magnetism, the plot of spin-polarized charge density (Δρ = ρ↑ − ρ↓) was also calculated, plotted and analyzed systematically. The magnetic anisotropic energy (MAE) calculations were performed using the non-collinear magnetic approach with the spin–orbit coupling at the PBE+U level and the magnetization axis aligned along the different in-plane [100], [010] and [110] directions, and out-of-plane [001] and [111] directions.
The frequency dependent real and imaginary parts of the dielectric function were calculated and then deduced light absorption coefficients to evaluate the optical responses of pure and TM adsorbed g-C4N3 monolayers. The complex shift η in Kramers–Kronig transformation44 was set to be 0.1 for the conversion between the real and imaginary parts. To obtain a reasonable absorption coefficient, the number of energy bands was increased to 500 to guarantee enough empty conduction bands for electronic excitation.
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Configuration design of TM atom adsorption on the g-C4N3 monolayer
The pristine g-C4N3 monolayer consists of s-triazine units (ring of C3N3) and exhibits uniformly distributed cavities coordinated by three N atoms, as shown in Fig. 1b. These large cavities are highly electron-rich (surrounded by three lone pair electrons) and thus ideal centers for the fixation of TM atoms. In addition, the small hollow site in C–N rings, surrounded by three N atoms with lone electron pairs, may also be an adsorption site for TM atoms. To obtain the energetically favorable adsorption configurations, we considered various adsorption modes of TM atoms on the center of the large cavity (H site) and the small hollow site (h site) of the C–N ring. Fig. 1 shows the process of configuration design, with a 2 × 1 × 1 g-C4N3 supercell containing two H sites and two h sites adopted as the substrate to adsorb transition metal atoms (including 3d, 4d, and 5d series). Taking three adsorption cases (adsorption on one side of the g-C4N3 monolayer, and symmetrical and asymmetrical adsorption on both sides of the g-C4N3 monolayer) and two adsorption sites (H and h sites) into account together, there are seven possible configurations (Fig. 1c–e). That is, TM atoms are (1) adsorbed at two H sites on one side, (2) anchored to two h sites on the same side, (3) symmetrically adsorbed at two H sites on both sides, (4) symmetrically distributed at two h sites on both sides, (5) asymmetrically distributed at the H sites on both sides, (6) embedded in the h sites on both sides in an asymmetric way, and (7) asymmetrically anchored to the H site on one side and the h site on the other, respectively. This yields a total of 210 candidate materials which will be used for subsequent high-throughput screening.
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the configuration design of TM2@g-C4N3 monolayers including seven possible adsorption modes and 30 TM atoms. (a) 3d, 4d, and 5d TM atoms, (b) 2 × 1 × 1 g-C4N3 supercell containing two big cavities (H site, red circle) and small hollow sites (h site, light blue circle), (c) adsorption on one side, (d) symmetrical adsorption on both sides, and (e) asymmetrical adsorption on both sides. 
3.2. Stepwise high-throughput screening together with viability analysis and stability evaluation for 210 candidates
Hierarchical high-throughput screening (HHTS) is argued with viability analysis and stability evaluation as indexes for selecting optimal TM2@g-C4N3 monolayers. Theses indexes for screening are (1) structural relaxation and energy comparison of different adsorption configurations. (2) The absolute value of binding energy (|Eb|) of TM atom-embedded g-C4N3 should be larger than the cohesive energy of transition metals, i.e., Eb + Ec < 0. (3) Thermal stability evaluation using AIMD simulations. Fig. 2 shows our entire HHTS workflow for energetically favorable and stable TM2@g-C4N3 monolayers. After three-step HHTS, 18 optimal TM2@g-C4N3 monolayers are obtained and can be used for further magnetic, electronic, and optical property studies.
 Fig. 2  Schematic diagram of the high-throughput screening workflow for the energetically favorable adsorption configuration and stable TM adsorption species. 

3.2.1. Structural relaxation and energy comparison of different adsorption configurations. 
The geometric structures of the seven adsorption modes before and after optimization using DFT calculations are shown in Fig. S1.† As can be seen from Fig. S1,† TM atoms can be stably embedded in two H sites on the same side, and the g-C4N3 monolayer still maintains a planar structure of configuration-1 after structural relaxation. In configuration-2 mode, TM2@g-C4N3 can preserve a flat g-C4N3 skeleton with TM atoms anchored to two h sites on one side, but the longer TM–N bonds give it higher energy compared to configuration-1. When the TM atoms are symmetrically adsorbed at two H sites or h sites on both sides (configuration-3 or -4), the g-C4N3 monolayer still maintains a flat structure after structural relaxation, while the obviously elongated TM–N bonds at h sites of configuration-4 weaken the bond strength between TM atoms and the g-C4N3 substrate, resulting in lower stability than that of configuration-3. For the case of TM atoms asymmetrically adsorbed at two H sites (configuration-5), the planar g-C4N3 monolayer relaxes into a considerably buckled structure with lower energy than configuration-1. As for configuration-6 (asymmetrical adsorption at two h sites), the two TM atoms initially placed at the h sites have relaxed to the adjacent H sites, eventually leading to a structural transformation to configuration-5. In configuration-7, two TM atoms are initially placed at an H site on one side of g-C4N3 and an h site on the other, but the TM atom at the h site migrated to another H site after structural relaxation, resulting in a transformation to configuration-5. These results indicate that regardless of the adsorption modes, TM atoms prefer to stay at the large cavities of g-C4N3 rather than at the small hollow sites. After geometric structure optimization and energy comparison, two energetically favorable adsorption modes, configuration-3 and configuration-5 (symmetrical and asymmetrical adsorption at two H sites, a total of 60 materials) were preliminarily screened.


3.2.2. Thermodynamic stability. 
The stability of TM2@g-C4N3 monolayers is essential for practical applications such as optoelectronic devices and catalysts. To maintain the stability of the configuration, TM atoms should be firmly bound to the g-C4N3 monolayer rather than easily forming clusters. Clustering generally is not favorable if the absolute value of binding energy (|Eb|) of TM atoms anchored on the g-C4N3 monolayer is larger than the cohesive energy of transition metals (i.e., Eb + Ec < 0). The more negative Eb + Ec means the stronger fixation of TM atoms by the g-C4N3 monolayer. Our calculated cohesive energies of the 3d, 4d and 5d transition metals are consistent with the experimental values, as shown in Table S2.† For the case of TM atoms adsorbed in an asymmetrical way (configuration-5), the values of Eb + Ec for 18 transition metal atoms (namely, Sc, V, Mn, Co, Ni, Zn, Y, Zr, Ru, Rh, Pd, Cd, Lu, Hf, Re, Os, Ir, and Pt) are negative, indicating that these TM atoms can be uniformly distributed and stably anchored on the g-C4N3 monolayer in the form of asymmetrical adsorption (configuration-5). In the case where TM atoms are symmetrically adsorbed at H sites on both sides, only Y satisfies the criterion of Eb + Ec < 0.


3.2.3. Thermal stability. 
To further evaluate the thermal stability of the 18 TM2@g-C4N3 monolayers, we performed ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) simulations at 300 or 600 K for 10 ps. The AIMD snapshots before and after 10 ps of simulated annealing and the temperature and total energy versus simulation time are displayed in Fig. S2–S7.† During simulated annealing, no obvious structural deformation is observed, and all atoms in the cell vibrate near their equilibrium positions. The TM atoms are firmly anchored on the g-C4N3 substrate without migration and agglomeration, and the C–N skeleton and structural integrity are well-maintained. The time-dependent evolution of temperatures and total energies exhibits very small fluctuations. All these indicate that the 18 selected TM2@g-C4N3 monolayers are thermally stable and can be used at room temperature. Among the 18 TM2@g-C4N3 monolayers, eight TM2@g-C4N3 (TM = V, Mn, Co, Ni, Zr, Ru, Re, and Pt) can even survive 10 ps annealing up to 600 K, and thus they have the potential to work above room temperature. In the case of TM atoms symmetrically adsorbed on the g-C4N3 (configuration-3) substrate, the Eb + Ec values of almost all TM atoms (except for Y) are positive, which means that the adsorption mode of configuration-3 is unstable and the TM atoms are easy to agglomerate. In addition, the AIMD simulations of the symmetrical adsorbed TM2@g-C4N3 monolayers at 300 K (Fig. S8–S10†) show significant structural destruction and TM atomic agglomeration, which further proves that the configuration of symmetrical adsorption at H sites on both sides is extremely unstable at room temperature. Thus, all symmetrical adsorption configurations with different TM species are ruled out, and 18 asymmetrical adsorbed TM2@g-C4N3 monolayers meeting the stability criteria are finally screened out for further investigation.


3.2.3. Lattice dynamic stability. 
The effect of strain on the stability of Co2@ and Zr2@g-C4N3 monolayers have been evaluated by calculating the phonon dispersion spectra under −14% to 12% strains and the results are shown in Fig. S11 and S12,† respectively. We find that Co2@ and Zr2@g-C4N3 are stable under strains from −12% to 11%. Either compressive strains exceeding −12% or tensile strains beyond 11% will lead to structural instability. From Fig. S11 and S12,† we can see that they display negative frequencies at −14%, −13% and 12%. Between −12% and 11%, all positive frequencies were observed (there is no imaginary frequency in the phonon dispersion spectra of these monolayers in the entire Brillouin zone). This shows that they can maintain good structural stability in a large strain range, and thus their intrinsic properties can be effectively regulated by a strain engineering strategy.

3.3. Crystal structure information of 18 stable TM2@g-C4N3 monolayers
The optimized crystal structure information for the selected 18 stable TM2@g-C4N3 monolayers is summarized in Table S3.† It can be observed that all TM2@g-C4N3 monolayers exhibit a unique buckled honeycomb structure, with TM atoms protruding in opposite directions on both sides. Due to the small cavity size, no TM atoms can incorporate into the central cavity of g-C4N3 to form a planar configuration. All TM adatoms disturb the lattice configuration of g-C4N3 to some extent. The lattice constant of pristine g-C4N3 is a = b = 9.68 Å, and different buckling amplitudes and TM atomic radii make the lattice constants of the TM2@g-C4N3 monolayers range from the minimum 9.05 Å (Zr2@g-C4N3) to the maximum 9.73 Å (Co2@g-C4N3). The three N atoms coordinated with each TM atom have the same TM–N bond length, and they are in the range of 1.83–2.12 Å for different TM species. Due to the buckled structure, the C–N bonds (in the range of 1.33–1.40 Å) in TM2@g-C4N3 monolayers are slightly compressed or elongated compared to the C–N bonds (1.35 Å) in pure g-C4N3.
3.4. Magnetic properties

3.4.1. Intrinsic magnetic properties without strain regulation. 
After the three-criterion screening, 18 energetically favorable and stable TM2@g-C4N3 monolayers were finally picked out for further magnetic, electronic, and optical property studies. To explore the magnetic coupling of these TM2@g-C4N3 monolayers, a 2 × 2 × 1 supercell containing four TM atoms was constructed and used for magnetic ground state calculations. Three linearly independent spin configurations (one FM and two AFM states) were constructed to determine the preferred spin ordering in the lattices and are displayed in Fig. 3. The relative energies of the three coupling states are compared through collinear magnetic calculations. The calculated magnetic states and magnetic moments, as well as the energy differences of different AFM configurations relative to the FM state, are summarized in Tables S3 and S4.† Among these 18 TM2@g-C4N3 monolayers, 2 structures are ferromagnetic, and 11 systems prefer antiferromagnetic ground states, whereas the remaining 5 TM2@g-C4N3 monolayers are nonmagnetic, as listed in Table S3.† For the convenience of discussion and analysis, according to the magnitude of magnetic moments accumulated on each metal atom, the 13 magnetic systems can be roughly divided into three categories: 5 weakly magnetic (0.26–0.92μB), 5 moderately magnetic (1.38–2.96μB), and 3 strongly magnetic (3.62–5.04μB). The Sc, Ni, Zr, Pd, and Pt systems with small magnetic moments of 0.26μB (Sc), 0.92μB (Ni), 0.43μB (Zr), 0.71μB (Pd), and 0.70μB (Pt) exhibit weak magnetism. V (2.96μB), Co (1.82μB), Ru (2.54μB), Rh (1.52μB), and Ir (1.38μB) systems are moderately magnetic. While the strong magnetic systems Mn2@, Re2@, and Os2@g-C4N3 have high magnetic moments of 4.68, 5.04, and 3.62μB, respectively.
 Fig. 3  Schematic diagrams for different magnetic ordering configurations in 2D TM2@g-C4N3 monolayers. (a) ferromagnetic (FM), (b) antiferromagnetic-1 (AFM1), and (c) antiferromagnetic-2 (AFM2). Orange balls are TM atoms, and the arrows indicate the spin directions of the TM atoms. The nearest (J1) and second-nearest (J2) exchange interactions are indicated by magenta and green dotted lines, respectively. 
To understand the origin of magnetism, we plotted the spatial distribution of spin densities (Δρ = ρ↑ − ρ↓) for pristine g-C4N3 and TM2@g-C4N3 monolayers in Fig. 4 and Fig. S13.† One can see that most of the electron density is distributed symmetrically on the N atoms in a dumbbell shape, and slightly reside on the neighboring C atoms, indicating that the intrinsic ferromagnetism of g-C4N3 is mainly attributed to the p orbitals of three N atoms. After adsorbing the TM atoms, it can be observed that almost all the spin-polarized electrons in the magnetic TM2@g-C4N3 monolayers are localized around the TM atoms, while the spin polarization on the N atoms is negligible, which is consistent with the large magnetic moment located on the TM atoms in Table S3.† The above results indicate that different magnetic states (NM, FM, and AFM) can be realized by introducing diverse metal species, proving the feasibility of magnetic regulation for the TM2@g-C4N3 monolayers.
 Fig. 4  Top and side views of the spin densities (Δρ = ρ↑ − ρ↓) for 2D periodic (a) g-C4N3, (b) Mn2@, (c) Co2@, and (d) Zr2@g-C4N3 monolayers in 2 × 2 × 1 supercells at an isosurface value of 0.03 e Å−3. 
Why do these 13 magnetic systems exhibit FM or AFM ground states? What is the underlying mechanism? To fundamentally understand the intrinsic magnetic coupling interactions from the atomic level, we perform in-depth analyses of electronic/magnetic structures and the chemical environment of two representative materials (ferromagnetic Co2@g-C4N3 and antiferromagnetic Mn2@g-C4N3) from local coordination environment (LCE), projected density of states (PDOS), crystal/exchange field splitting (CFS/EFS), d orbital filling (DOF) and their exchange coupling interactions. Let us first discuss the ferromagnetic Co2@g-C4N3 monolayer. The magnetism of FM Co2@g-C4N3 is dominantly contributed by the Co atoms which are in a distorted trigonal pyramidal coordinated crystal field environment (Fig. 5a). The calculated PDOS are shown in Fig. 5b and it can be used as acute fingerprints to precisely determine the degeneracy and energy order of d orbitals that cannot be accurately determined by the local chemical environment of Co atoms. From Fig. 5b, we can see that the d orbitals are split into five singly degenerate orbitals. Among the five orbitals, dz2, dx2−y2, dxy, and dxz are four low-lying orbitals close in energy, and dyz is the high-lying orbital. Thus, the d electrons of Co3+ will preferentially fill the four low-lying orbitals, and thus the electron configuration is (dz2)2(dx2−y2)2(dxy)1(dxz)1(dyz)0, as shown in Fig. 5c. Such electron occupation gives rise to a local magnetic moment of 2μB, in good agreement with the result of the first-principles calculations (1.84μB). The nearest and next-nearest neighbor Co–Co distances are 4.93 and 5.71 Å, which are too far to be coupled directly. Hence, due to this long distance, direct metal–metal magnetic coupling interactions between the Co atoms are negligibly small. The FM ground state in Co2@g-C4N3 can be understood by the superexchange coupling interaction between the transition metals through the g-C4N3 ligand (Fig. 5d and e). One half filled p orbital of the ligand (p1) played the role of medium for the superexchange interaction (Fig. 5f and g). Such d–p–d superexchange interaction finally results in long-range FM coupling between transition metals in the Co2@g-C4N3 monolayer. Now, let us move to analyze the situation of the antiferromagnetic Mn2@g-C4N3 monolayer. The local chemical environment of magnetic Mn atoms (Fig. 5h) and d orbital splitting (Fig. 5i) are similar to the situation of Co atoms in the ferromagnetic Co2@g-C4N3 monolayer, but the energy order of the d orbitals is different (Fig. 5j). In AFM Mn2@g-C4N3, dxy, dyz, dz2, and dxz are the four low-lying orbitals close in energy, and the high-lying orbital is dx2−y2. The electronic configuration of Mn3+ being (dxy)1(dyz)1(dz2)1(dxz)1(dx2−y2)0 produces a local magnetic moment of 4μB, which is consistent with the DFT calculated results (4.69μB). The mechanism of AFM coupling in Mn2@g-C4N3 is somewhat complicated. This can be elucidated with the aid of spin-frustrated magnetism,45,46 which induces the spin-liquid state formation and is commonly found in magnetic materials with a corner-shared triangular lattice or kagome lattice.47–49 Mn2@g-C4N3 consists of triangular units (Fig. 5m) containing three transition metals at three corners. Two adjacent transition metals were coupled antiferromagnetically (Fig. 5l) on this triangle via a superexchange interaction through one fully occupied p orbital of the bridging ligand (p2) as the intermediate (Fig. 5o). The two metals are designed as an AFM pair and the third metal on this triangle is a frustrated state because it cannot simultaneously satisfy the AFM coupling with others (i.e, AFM pair). It shows AFM (FM) coupling with one (the other) of the AFM pair. The FM coupling (Fig. 5k) that has higher energy leads to a spin-frustrated state. In this way, all the local magnetic moments keep changing their orientations, resulting in a spin liquid state with a high degree of degeneracy.50 They all cancel out their magnetic moments, and thus the total magnetic moment is zero. Thus, the Mn2@g-C4N3 monolayer exhibits the AFM ground state.
 Fig. 5  The underlying mechanism of magnetic coupling in two representative materials Co2@ and Mn2@g-C4N3 monolayers. (a)/(h) are the local coordination environment of magnetic atoms, (b)/(i) are the PDOS of the electronic fingerprint used to distinguish the degeneracy of the five d orbitals of magnetic atoms, (c)/(j) are the splitting of five d orbitals of magnetic atoms in both crystal and exchange fields, (d)–(e)/(k)–(m) are the schematic diagrams of magnetic coupling and its relevant atoms, (f)–(g)/(n)–(o) are the distribution of d electrons in different d orbitals and the exchange coupling among the electrons located in different orbitals. The yellow region in the crystal structure indicates the g-C4N3 moiety. 
To explore the stability of magnetic ordering at elevated temperatures, we calculated the exchange interaction parameters Ji by comparing the energies of different AFM configurations with reference to the FM state and using these exchange parameters to predict the magnetic transition temperatures, i.e., Curie or Néel temperature. The classical spin Hamiltonian is adopted to fit the energies of different magnetic configurations. Counting in the next-nearest magnetic exchange interaction, the Hamiltonian can be expressed as , where Mi/Mj/Mk/Ml is the magnetic moment at site i/j/k/l, J1 and J2 denote the exchange coupling parameters of the nearest and second-nearest site pairs. Based on this Hamiltonian model, the total energies of different magnetic orderings are given as eqn (1)–(3). Then with the exchange energies Eex, which is defined as Eex = E(AFM) − E(FM), the exchange coupling parameters J1 and J2 can be obtained using eqn (4) and (5). Here E0 is the reference energy without magnetic order. The calculated exchange energies and parameters are summarized in Table S4.† E(FM) = E0 − 4J1M2 − 8J2M2(1) E(AFM1) = E0 + 4J1M2(2) E(AFM2) = E0 − 4J1M2 + 8J2M2(3) (4) (5)
For the pristine g-C4N3 monolayer, a 2 × 2 × 1 supercell (black diamond in Fig. S14†) which contains 12 N atoms is used for studying the magnetic coupling between the N atoms. Apart from FM ordering, two AFM orderings are also constructed for obtaining the magnetic interaction, as shown in Fig. S14.† The geometries of FM, AFM1, and AFM2 are first optimized by collinear spin-polarized calculations, but we find that the AFM configurations cannot be described correctly under collinear calculations due to several N atoms that have undergone magnetic reversal and magnetic moment annihilation. Thus, the constrained local moment approach of non-collinear spin-polarized calculations is applied to obtain the correct AFM configurations of the g-C4N3 monolayer. This method can solve the problems of magnetic reversal and magnetic moment annihilation by constraining the size and direction of the magnetic moments. We artificially set the direction of the magnetic moments in non-collinear calculations to be consistent with that of collinear calculations, that is, along the x direction, and the magnetic moment components in the y and z directions are set to zero. As addressed in Table S5,† we can see that the magnetic moment and energy of the FM configuration given by the non-collinear calculation are almost the same as the results of the collinear calculation, and the required AFM configurations are also obtained. Clearly, the FM ordering is the most favorable magnetic configuration, with energies 0.742 and 0.771 eV lower than those of AFM1 and AFM2 configurations. The corresponding magnetic moment in a 2 × 2 × 1 supercell was calculated to be ∼4μB, which is in good agreement with the previous report.28 To verify the reliability of this method, non-collinear calculations are used to optimize the FM and AFM configurations of the Re2@g-C4N3 monolayer. As shown in Table S6,† the same results as collinear calculations are obtained, demonstrating the reliability of this method. Thus, we apply the results of noncollinear calculations to calculate the magnetic interactions of the g-C4N3 monolayer, and the obtained exchange energies and parameters are listed in Table S5.†
To develop practical spintronic devices based on TM2@g-C4N3 monolayers, their magnetic transition temperature should be comparable to or above room temperature. After obtaining the magnetic exchange-interaction parameters Ji, the Curie temperature (TC) of the FM state or Néel temperatures (TN) of the AFM state can be estimated using the Monte Carlo (MC) simulations with the Wolff algorithm.51 In the MC simulations, a 40 × 40 × 1 supercell with 105 MC steps for each temperature was employed and spins on all magnetic sites flip randomly. Providing the exact solution to spin Hamiltonians, TC (TN) can be estimated by locating the critical point of the magnetic moment or the peak position of thermodynamic specific heat with respect to temperature. As shown in Fig. 6a, the TC value of the pristine g-C4N3 monolayer estimated using MC simulation is 295 K, very close to room temperature. After the adsorption of TM atoms, the transition temperature is quite low, far below room temperature, as listed in Table S4.†
 Fig. 6  The evolution of magnetic moment (red) and specific heat Cv (blue) versus temperature from classic Ising MC simulation for (a) pristine g-C4N3, (b) Co2@g-C4N3 at −8% compression strain, and (c) Zr2@g-C4N3 at −12% compression strain. The magnetic transition temperature TC is denoted by dotted lines perpendicular to the temperature axis. (d) is the evolution of transition temperatures versus biaxial strains from −10% (−14%) to 10% for Co2@ and Zr2@g-C4N3 monolayers. The inset in (d) is a comparison of the critical temperatures of Co2@g-C4N3 and Zr2@g-C4N3 at equilibrium state and compressive strain (−8% for Co2@g-C4N3 and −12% for Zr2@g-C4N3). 
MAE is an important parameter to evaluate the stability and utilization of the long-rang magnetic order in 2D magnets. MAE calculations were performed using the non-collinear magnetic approach with spin–orbit coupling at the PBE+U level and the magnetization axis aligned along the different in-plane [100], [010] and [110] directions, and out-of-plane [001] and [111] directions. The calculated energy per transition metal atom along different magnetization orientations relative to the total energy with the magnetization orientation parallel to the easy axis and MAE are summarized in Table S7.† It can be seen that the easy axis of Sc2@, V2@, Mn2@, Co2@, Ni2@, Zr2@, Ru2@, Rh2@, and Pt2@g-C4N3 monolayers is parallel to the z-direction with out-of-plane MAE ranging from 20 to 1135 μeV per TM, while Pd2@, Re2@, Os2@, and Ir2@g-C4N3 monolayers show an in-plane magnetic anisotropy with MAE varying from 168 to 333 μeV per TM. Among these monolayers, Pt2@g-C4N3 has the largest MAE due to the strongest spin–orbit coupling effect in the heavy element Pt. These MAE values are about one to three orders of magnitude larger than those of bulk Fe (1.4 μeV per atom),52 Co (65 μeV per atom),52 Ni (2.7 μeV per atom),52 and 2D MnPS3 (9 μeV per TM).53,54 The sizable MAE of the TM2@g-C4N3 monolayers will benefit the stabilization of the long-range magnetic order of the FM/AFM state against the spin fluctuation induced by heat. In addition, the MAE of Zr2@ (788 μeV per TM), Ru2@ (623 μeV per TM), Rh2@ (820 μeV per TM), and Pt2@g-C4N3 (1135 μeV per TM) are comparable or even higher than that of typical 2D intrinsic magnets, such as CrI3 (804 μeV per TM),55 Cr2Ge2Te6 (220 μeV per TM),56 and Fe3GeTe2 (920 μeV per TM),57 as well as FeCo alloys (∼700–800 μeV per atom) which are predicted to be promising magnetic recording media.58 Such giant MAE values suggest that these TM2@g-C4N3 (TM = Zr, Ru, Rh and Pt) monolayers have potential applications in magnetic data storage devices.


3.4.2. Modulation of magnetism by elastic strain engineering. 
The above discussion and analysis focus on intrinsic magnetism at equilibrium structure without external stimuli. In this part, we will explore the modulation of magnetism (with possible magnetic phase transition and substantial improvement of the critical temperature) through elastic strain engineering as it is one of the most effective approaches to tune the magnetism and critical temperature of 2D materials, which has been confirmed in many reports in the literature.59–62 Thus, we have confidence that elastic strain engineering can bring unexpected surprises for the TM2@g-C4N3 monolayers. In this study, in-plane biaxial strains from −10% (−14%) to 10% were applied to four representative examples (Co2@, Zr2@, V2@, and Mn2@g-C4N3) to explore the regulation effects on magnetic coupling and critical temperature. We can observe that the magnetic moments of all systems increase monotonically from −10% (−14%) to 10% strains in Table S8† and Fig. 10. This phenomenon can be perfectly explained by the spin density plots at different strains in Fig. 7. Three materials (except Mn2@g-C4N3) undergo a magnetic phase transition at different thresholds (6% for Co2@g-C4N3, 10% for Zr2@g-C4N3, −8% for V2@g-C4N3) within the strain range of −10% (−14%) to 10%. Specifically, Co2@g-C4N3 can maintain the original FM state at −10%–4% biaxial strains, while FM → AFM phase transition occurs at 6%–10% tensile strains. The magnetic moment varies in the range of 1.79–1.95μB. Zr2@g-C4N3 is in the FM state at −14% to 8% biaxial strains, and when the 10% tensile strain is applied, it will transform from the FM to the AFM state. The magnetic moment varies from 0.34 to 0.45μB. V2@g-C4N3 preserves the AFM state in the strain range of −8% to 10%, while the phase transition of AFM → FM occurs at −10% compression strain. The magnetic moment ranges from 2.72 to 2.99μB. The AFM state of Mn2@g-C4N3 does not change under −10% to 10% biaxial strains, and the magnetic moment increases monotonously within 4.60–4.77μB. By applying biaxial strains, we can see that the Co2@ and Zr2@g-C4N3 monolayers are quite sensitive to in-plane biaxial strain. As depicted in Fig. 6b and c, the TC for Co2@ and Zr2@g-C4N3 can reach 305 K and 245 K at −8% and −12% compressive strains, respectively. From Fig. 6d, one can see that the TC value of the Co2@g-C4N3 monolayer shows a significantly monotonous increment under 0 to −8% compressive strains and can substantially be enhanced from 8.5 K to 305 K at −8% strain. For the Zr2@g-C4N3 monolayer, a similar evolution trend is also observed. The TC value dramatically improved from 41.5 K to 245 K at −12% compressive strain.
 Fig. 7  The plots of spin density (around the large purple arrow) of four representative materials at different strains from −10% to 10% with an interval of 2%. (a) Co2@, (b) Zr2@, (c) V2@, and (d) Mn2@g-C4N3. The red arrows indicate the magnetic phase transition. 
The above discussion and analysis demonstrate that elastic strain engineering is a very powerful method to substantially modulate the magnetism of TM2@g-C4N3 monolayers. This lays the foundation towards diverse applications (e.g., spin filters, spin field effect transistors, magnetic tunnel junctions, magnetic memory resistors, magnetic storage, magnetic field sensors, magnetic random-access memory, etc.) of these magnetic materials in various fields.63–66


3.4.3. The origin of regulation of magnetism via biaxial strain. 
The above exciting results demonstrate that elastic strain engineering is a very powerful routine towards playing around with the magnetism of TM2@g-C4N3 monolayers with desirable magnetic properties and functionalities in (potential) diverse applications. It is quite crucial to unveil the origin from the atomic level, which will provide a fundamental understanding of the microscopic mechanism of magnetism and shed guiding insights into the practical applications of TM2@g-C4N3 monolayers implemented in spintronic devices under different conditions. Here, we propose two simple and effective descriptors to unveil the origin of modulation of magnetism.
After many efforts and attempts of trial and error, we unexpectedly uncover that the plots of spin density (Fig. 7) can be very clearly used to distinguish the different magnetic states and the magnitude of magnetic moments, and effectively elucidate the evolution of the rich magnetic phenomena caused by elastic strain engineering. From Fig. 7, one can clearly see the magnetic phase transition at specific strain and the vivid evolution of spin density (magnetic moment). These plots can quite well explain the fact that the magnetic moments (Fig. 10) increase monotonically from −10% to 10% strains. This can be explained phenomenologically through the hypothesis that the compressive strain will lead to a decrease in the distances between adjacent atoms, which results in an increase of the overlap between atomic orbitals. The increase of the atomic orbital overlap benefits the electron pairing, which will lead to the increase of the number of paired electrons, and thus, the number of single electrons decreases, i.e., the decrease of the magnetic moment. The process of gradually enlarged red and blue bubbles in each panel in Fig. 7 indicates the evolution trend of spin density (magnetic moment) from small to large, and vice versa. In short, the spin density plot can be used as a novel, simple, effective and unified “graph descriptor” to intuitionistically reflect the origin of regulation of magnetism and magnetic phase transition at the atomic level. This will greatly facilitate the study of magnetism, such as quickly identifying the magnetic ground state and magnetic phase transition, intuitively explaining the evolution of magnetic moment under strain, and fundamentally deepening the understanding of the nature of magnetic exchange interactions under strain.
From charge distribution analysis, the Bader charges (Fig. S15†) located on the TM atom feature a monotonic increase from −10% (−14%) to 10% strain, whereas the Bader charges on the g-C4N3 substrate show a monotonic decrease from −10% to 10% strain. This indicates that the electrons flow from the TM atom to the g-C4N3 substrate under a series of strains. The larger the strain, the more electrons lose. The electron flow among different atoms demonstrates the change of electron filling in different orbitals, which further indicates the evolution of the electron occupation number (EON) in different orbitals. In TM2@g-C4N3 monolayers, C and N are the main group elements, and the magnetism of TM2@g-C4N3 monolayers is mainly contributed by the d orbitals of TM atoms with a negligible contribution from C and N atoms. So, we focus on exploring the evolution of the EON of five d orbitals of TM atoms. The calculated results of the EON of d orbitals at different critical strains are collected in Fig. 8. From there one can clearly see the evolution of the EON of spin up and down channels of five d orbitals. Interestingly, the EON of one spin channel increases, the other spin channel decreases for the same d orbital, and vice versa. The larger the difference of the EON between two spin channels, the larger the magnetic moment. The crosspoint of two spin channels reflects the possible magnetic phase transition, and the number of crosspoints (Fig. 8) implies the number of magnetic phase transitions, which further indicates the number of different magnetic states. Let us take Mn2@g-C4N3 as an example for discussion. The spin plots (Fig. 7d) indicate two magnetic phase transitions associated with three magnetic states. Surprisingly, this is consistent well with the EON plot in Fig. 8d. From Fig. 8d, one can clearly see the strain intervals where magnetic phase transition occurs, they are 〈−4%, −2%〉 and 〈8%, 10%〉. A similar situation can be seen for other TM2@g-C4N3 monolayers, indicating the general applicability. Thus, the EON can be regarded as a new, simple, and effective “data descriptor”, which will be very convenient to reveal the electron filling in d orbitals, the magnetic exchange mechanism, spin polarizability, and the mutual evolution of charge and spin, and effectively correlate the two degrees of freedom (i.e., spin and charge).
 Fig. 8  The evolution of the electron occupation number (EON) on different d orbitals of TM atoms in four representative TM2@g-C4N3 monolayers. (a) Co2@, (b) Zr2@, (c) V2@, and (d) Mn2@g-C4N3. 

3.5. Electronic properties

3.5.1. Intrinsic electronic properties without strain regulation. 
The spin-polarized band structures of pristine and transition metals adsorbed g-C4N3 monolayers are present in Fig. 9 and S14–S15.† For the pristine g-C4N3 monolayer, there is a large direct band gap (2.208 eV) in the spin-up channel (red), while a metallic behavior is observed in the spin-down channel (blue), as illustrated in Fig. 9a. It means that the pristine g-C4N3 monolayer is a ferromagnetic half-metal in which charge transport is dominated by spin-down electrons, and the current flow in such a system should be fully spin-polarized. The spin-resolved projected density of states (PDOS) of g-C4N3 shows that the half-metallicity and magnetic moment are mainly attributed to the 2p states of three N atoms at the triazine ring. To verify the reliability of the PBE+U results, the HSE06 functional was carried out for more accurate band structure calculations. The calculated band structures are present in Fig. 9a′. Obviously, both functionals predict similar valence and conduction band dispersion curves, but the conduction band positions obtained using the HSE06 functional are significantly up-shifted, resulting in the band gap in the spin-up channel widening to 3.107 eV. This result is consistent with the previous report.28
 Fig. 9  The band structures and PDOS for (a) pristine g-C4N3, (b) Mn2@, (c) Co2@, and (d) Zr2@g-C4N3 monolayers calculated at the PBE+U level. (a′)–(d′) are the band structures calculated at the HSE06 level. Γ (0, 0, 0), M (0, 1/2, 0), and K (−1/3, 2/3, 0) are high symmetry points in the first Brillouin zone in reciprocal space. The PDOS of TM-s, TM-p, TM-d, C-s, C-p, N-s, and N-p, and the total density of states are plotted in light blue, orange, blue, red, green, violet, magenta, and black, respectively. The partial zoom-in of (a′) and (d′) are plotted to clearly display the band dispersion near the Fermi level. 
It is evident that the TM2@g-C4N3 monolayer shows a variety of electronic states with diverse choices of metal atoms. According to the band gap, these 18 TM2@g-C4N3 monolayers can be divided into three categories: 8 metals, 9 semiconductors, and 1 half-metal. Here, we take Mn, Co, and Zr members as the three typical cases (metal, semiconductor and half-metal) to systematically analyze the electronic structures, as plotted in Fig. 9b–d.
Metal. 
After Mn adsorption, the same metallic behavior can be found in the spin-up and spin-down channels (see Fig. 9b), which leads to an FM half-metal to AFM metal transition in the g-C4N3 monolayer. The PDOS analysis suggests that the C and N 2p states are responsible for metallicity. Similarly, the character of AFM metal is also observed in Sc2@ and V2@g-C4N3 monolayers, as shown in Fig. S16a and b.† When Zn is adsorbed, the band structure exhibits a non-spin polarized metallic feature (see Fig. S16c†). The PDOS analysis shows that the metallicity mainly originates from the Zn 4s and N 2p states, and there is an obvious orbital hybridization between them. The nonmagnetic metal feature can also be obtained by adsorbing Y, Cd, Lu, and Hf atoms (Fig. S16d–g†).
Semiconductor. 
As for Co adsorption, the band structure shows a spin-polarized direct band gap semiconductor feature, and the band gaps of spin-up and spin-down channels are 0.668 and 0.338 eV, respectively (see Fig. 9c). From the corresponding PDOS diagram, we can see that the 3d states of Co atoms are rather localized below the Fermi level, and the spin-down orbitals are almost occupied, while in the spin-up channel, the 3d states of Co and 2p states of three neighboring N atoms show obvious hybridization near the Fermi level, indicating the strong bonding interactions between them. At the HSE06 level, the band gaps in up and down spin channels further increase to 1.864 and 1.408 eV. For the adsorption of Ni, the system preserves the semiconducting character with the same indirect band gap of 0.670 eV in the spin-up and spin-down channels, as present in Fig. S17a.† The AFM indirect band gap semiconductor properties are also found in Ru, Rh, Pd, Re, Os, Ir, and Pt adsorbed g-C4N3 monolayers (see Fig. S17b–h†), and the band gaps are 0.909, 0.915, 1.304, 0.675, 0.538, 0.421, and 0.968 eV, respectively. Examining the PDOS revealed that the valence band maximum (VBM) is mainly contributed by the TM 3d (or 4s) and N 2p states, while the conduction band minimum (CBM) is occupied by the 2p states of N and C atoms. With corrected by the HSE06 functional, the band gaps for Ni, Ru, Rh, Pd, Re, Os, and Ir systems are 1.684 eV (Ni), 1.812 eV (Ru), 2.151 eV (Rh), 2.295 eV (Pd), 1.459 eV (Re), 1.288 eV (Os), 1.379 eV (Ir), and 1.971 eV (Pt), as shown in Table S9.†
Half-metal. 
In the case of Zr adsorption, although the band structure exhibits the same half-metallicity as a pristine g-C4N3 monolayer, it is noteworthy that the band gap (0.967 eV) appears in the spin-down channel, while the spin-up channel is metallic (as shown in Fig. 9d). This is exactly the opposite of the pristine g-C4N3 monolayer. Compared with the band gap in the spin-up channel of the pristine g-C4N3 monolayer, the band gap in the spin-down channel of the Zr2@g-C4N3 monolayer is indirect and narrower. Different from the pristine g-C4N3, the bands near the Fermi level are dominated by the 3d states of Zr atoms, and the spin-up channel is almost occupied. Therefore, the magnetic moment arises from the spin-up occupied electrons. The half-metal behavior is also further substantiated by the HSE06 functional, and the band gap in the spin-down channel increases to 1.505 eV, as shown in Fig. 9d′. To develop practicable spintronic devices with half-metals, besides the fact that the Curie temperature should be comparable to or higher than room temperature, another essential issue is that the half-metallic energy gap should be wide enough (e.g., >1.0 eV) to efficiently prevent the spin–flip transition of carriers due to thermal excitation and preserve half-metallicity in the working temperature window.67 The half-metallic band gap is larger than those of some reported half-metals, such as Sr2FeMoO6 (∼0.8 eV),68 Mn2FeReO6 (∼1.0 eV),69 and LaCu3Fe4O12 (∼0.82 eV),70 and is comparable to that of NaCu3Fe2Os2O12 (∼1.6 eV).67 Therefore, the Zr2@g-C4N3 monolayer is expected to be a novel half-metal for spintronic applications.
If taking the electronic structure and magnetism into account together, the TM2@g-C4N3 monolayers can be further divided into five categories: antiferromagnetic metal (Sc2@, V2@, and Mn2@g-C4N3), nonmagnetic metal (Zn2@, Y2@, Cd2@, Lu2@ and Hf2@g-C4N3), ferromagnetic semiconductor (Co2@g-C4N3), antiferromagnetic semiconductor (Ni2@, Ru2@, Rh2@, Pd2@, Re2@, Os2@, Ir2@, and Pt2@g-C4N3), and ferromagnetic half-metal (Zr2@g-C4N3). All the above results indicate that transition metal permutation is an effective way to regulate the magnetic and electronic properties of TM2@g-C4N3 monolayers. Such regulation mainly arises from electron transfer including between TM atoms and the g-C4N3 substrate as well as between the TM intraatomic orbitals induced by the strong coupling between the TM and the g-C4N3 substrate. In the pristine g-C4N3 monolayer, the charge transfer takes place from the C to N atoms (see Fig. S18a†), while after the adsorption of TM atoms, charge transfer occurs between the TM adatoms and the g-C4N3 substrate, mainly between TM and N atoms, as shown in Fig. S18.† Such charge transfer will affect the pairing of electrons of TM atoms and further influence the electronic structure and magnetic properties of TM2@g-C4N3 monolayers.


3.5.2. Modulation of the electronic properties by elastic strain engineering. 
The electronic structure of TM2@g-C4N3 also changes significantly under biaxial strain. For example, in the process of applying −10% compressive strain to 4% tensile strain, the Co2@g-C4N3 monolayer is a semiconductor with a monotonically decreasing band gap, as shown in Fig. 10a. While in the range of 6%–10% tensile strains, the band gap presents a monotonically increasing trend as the tensile strain increases. The corresponding PDOS under different strains are plotted in Fig. S19† from −2 to 2 eV to highlight the regions responsible for the band gap changes. The p states of the C and N atoms and the d states of the Co atom below the Fermi level gradually shift to higher energy as the strain changes from −10% to 4%. Therefore, the band gap of the Co2@g-C4N3 monolayer monotonically decreases in the strain range of −10% to 4%. As the tensile strain increases from 6% to 10%, the peaks of the Co-d states and C- and N-p states near the Fermi level gradually shift away from the Fermi level, resulting in a wider band gap.
 Fig. 10  The evolution of band gaps (orange) and magnetic moments (cyan) versus biaxial strain from −10% (−14%) to 10%. (a) Co2@g-C4N3, (b) Zr2@g-C4N3, (c) V2@g-C4N3, and (d) Mn2@g-C4N3. “M”, “S”, and “HM” denote the metal, semiconductor, and half-metal, respectively. “up” and “dw” indicate spin up and spin down, and the values in the parentheses are spin-up and spin-down band gaps, respectively. 
In Fig. 10b, the electronic state of Zr2@g-C4N3 changes from S → HM → M under a biaxial strain of −12%–10%. It still maintains the characteristics of half-metal in the range of −6%–8%, but the bandgap of the spin down channel shows a monotonically increasing tendency. When the compressive strain exceeds −6%, Zr2@g-C4N3 transforms from a half-metal to a semiconductor. In the strain range of −8% to −12%, the spin-up band gap is gradually increased as the compressive strain increases, while the spin-down band gap shows the opposite trend. When the tensile strain is increased to 10%, it has transformed into a metal. From the results of PDOS analysis in Fig. S20,† one can see that there is significant hybridization between the d states of the Zr atom and the p states of C and N atoms and substantial overlaps within the region of −1–0 eV near the Fermi level. In the strain range of −6% to 8%, the strength and position of the hybridization peak in the spin-down channel are clearly weaker and closer to the Fermi level, resulting in a continuously narrowing spin-down band gap. When the tensile strain reaches 10%, the spin-down band gap disappears completely and both spin-up and spin-down orbitals are fully occupied, thus the electronic structure has transformed from a half-metal to a metal. When compressive strain exceeds −8%, the spin-up channel has a small band gap with a weak p–d hybridization peak appearing above the Fermi level. With a further increase of the compressive strain, the hybridization peaks near the Fermi level of the spin-up channel are gradually away from the Fermi level, while the hybridization peaks in the spin-down channel are the opposite, which causes a widened spin-up band gap and a narrowed spin-down band gap.
As depicted in Fig. 10c, the electronic structure of the V2@g-C4N3 monolayer maintains the characteristics of metal in the strain range of −8% to 10%, and the transition from M → S occurs when the compression strain reaches −10%. The strong hybridization between the d states of the V atom and p states of the C and N atoms crosses the Fermi level, which is responsible for the metallicity in the unstrained V2@g-C4N3 monolayer, as illustrated in Fig. S21.† During the process from 10% tensile strain to −8% compressive strain, the p–d hybridization near the Fermi level does not change significantly, and thus the electronic state still maintains the metallicity. When applying −10% compressive strain, the spin degeneracy is broken, and the p–d hybridized states of both spin channels are unoccupied at the Fermi level, resulting in the appearance of the semiconducting character.
For Mn2@g-C4N3, it is a metal when applying the biaxial strain from −2% to 10%. Once the compression strain exceeds −2%, it turns into a semiconductor, and the band gap is gradually enlarged with the compressive strain increases, as shown in Fig. 10d. From PDOS analysis (Fig. S22†) we can see that in the absence of external strain, the hybridization states between the Mn-s, d states and C-, N-p states near the Fermi level cross the Fermi level and exhibit good metallicity. As tensile strain increases, the overlaps between Mn-s, d and C- and N-p states are intensified, which will enhance the metallicity of Mn2@g-C4N3. When compressive strain is applied, we can observe that the hybridization peaks of s–p and p–d states gradually fall away from the Fermi level, and shift to lower and higher energy levels, respectively. Therefore, the band gap gradually expands as the degree of compressive strain increases. Rich electronic states can be obtained by applying biaxial strains, which indicates that strain can not only effectively modulate the magnetism, but also the electronic structure. The rapid variation of spin polarization and the electronic state in TM2@g-C4N3 monolayers under biaxial strain offers a new avenue for controllable and tunable spintronic devices.

3.6. Optical properties

3.6.1. Optical absorption coefficients. 
An effective photovoltaic material should adequately capture sunlight, especially infrared and visible light. Thus, we computed the optical absorbance α(ω) (including xx and yy components) of TM2@g-C4N3 (TM = Co, Ni, Zr, Ru, Rh, Pd, Re, Os, Ir, and Pt, at least one spin channel has a band gap) monolayers based on the imaginary part ε2(ω) of the frequency dependent complex dielectric function ε(ω) = ε1(ω) + iε2(ω) to quantitatively understand their light-harvesting ability. The imaginary part ε2(ω) is first calculated according to the following formula:71 (6)where |Mc,v(k)|2 denotes the momentum matrix element, and c and v are the conduction and valence band states, respectively. Then the real part ε1(ω) is derived from the imaginary part according to the Kramers–Kronig transformation.44 Finally, we can obtain the optical absorption coefficients α(ω) via the following expression:72 (7)
As depicted in Fig. 11a–k, the pristine g-C4N3 monolayer exhibits isotropic absorption coefficients (xx = yy), with a small intensity in the visible light region (below 0.5 × 105 cm−1, close to the ultraviolet light region), and responds almost exclusively to ultraviolet light, which is consistent with the previous report.30 Remarkably, the optical absorption of g-C4N3 shows an obvious red shift (toward the long-wavelength direction) after the adsorption of TM atoms, and the absorption intensity in the visible light region is significantly enhanced, most of them exceeding 3 × 105 cm−1. Compared with the pristine g-C4N3, the optical absorption of TM2@g-C4N3 exhibits obvious anisotropy. In particular, for Ru, Pd, and Pt systems, there are considerable differences between the optical absorbance of xx and yy components. The optical absorbance of Zr (1.505 eV), Re (1.459 eV), Os (1.288 eV), and Ir (1.379 eV) systems starts in the infrared region, while for Co (1.864 eV), Ni (1.684 eV), Ru (1.812 eV), Rh (2.151 eV), Pd (2.295 eV), and Pt (1.971 eV) systems, the absorption edge is lying in the visible light region. In the infrared region, Zr2@, Re2@, Os2@ and Ir2@g-C4N3 monolayers have a weak absorption intensity below 0.5 × 105 cm−1. In the visible light region, the main absorption peaks for Co2@, Ni2@, Ru2@, Rh2@, Pd2@, Re2@, Os2@, Ir2@, and Pt2@g-C4N3 monolayers are located at (xx, yy) = (2.23, 2.78), (3.07, 3.15), (3.10, 2.45), (2.93, 2.70), (2.93, 3.03), (2.47, 2.59), (2.50, 2.66), (3.09, 3.04), and (3.09 eV, 3.26 eV), respectively. After the introduction of TM atoms, the absorption intensity of TM2@g-C4N3 in the ultraviolet region is greatly enhanced compared to that of the g-C4N3 monolayer, ranging from 4.90 × 105 to 9.70 × 105 cm−1, showing extraordinary sunlight-harvesting ability. Therefore, the adsorption of TM atoms on g-C4N3 does play a positive role in the modulation of optical properties, that is, achieving the enhancement of the visible light response and improvement of solar energy harvesting ability, which makes them potential solar-absorbing materials for solar cells.
 Fig. 11  Optical absorption coefficients of (a) 2D g-C4N3, (b) Co2@, (c) Ni2@, (d) Zr2@, (e) Ru2@, (f) Rh2@, (g) Pd2@, (h) Re2@, (i) Os2@, (j) Ir2@, and (k) Pt2@g-C4N3 monolayers calculated at the PBE+U level with HSE06 corrected band gaps. The infrared, visible and ultraviolet regions are marked by red and purple dashed lines. 
Significant changes in the band gap under strain will inevitably affect the optical properties of the material. Here, we take Co2@ and Zr2@g-C4N3 monolayers as examples to discuss the effect of strain on optical absorption. The evolution of the optical absorption coefficient versus biaxial strains for Co2@ and Zr2@g-C4N3 monolayers is displayed in Fig. S23 and S24.† The band gap of Co2@g-C4N3 is gradually increased under compressive strain, thus resulting in a gradual blue shift of the absorption edge. It is noteworthy that the absorption intensity of visible light dramatically increases from 4.90 × 105 to 8.77 × 105 cm−1 at −10% strain. Under tensile strain, the band gap first decreases and then increases, which leads to the red shift and then the blue shift of the absorption edge. The absorption intensity of visible light gradually increases and reaches up to 7.43 × 105 cm−1 at 10% strain. By applying biaxial strain, in addition to the absorption intensity of visible light, the ultraviolet light absorption is also enhanced, and the absorption intensity of ultraviolet light increases from 4.85 × 105 to 6.17 × 105 and 5.86 × 105 cm−1 at −10% and 10% strains, respectively. Zr2@g-C4N3 is a half-metal under −6% to 8% strains, and the band gap of the spin-down channel decreases monotonically, thus leading to a continuous red shift of the absorption edge. The absorption intensity of infrared light dramatically enhances from 0.44 × 105 to 5.31 × 105 cm−1 at 10% strain. Under −12% to −8% strains, Zr2@g-C4N3 transforms from a half-metal to a semiconductor, and with an increase of the compressive strain, the spin-down band gap shows a trend of first increase and then decrease, which causes the blue shift and then the red shift of the absorption edge. The visible light absorption can be significantly improved by applying compressive strain, and the absorption intensity of visible light substantially increased from 3.13 × 105 to 6.52 × 105 cm−1 at −12% strain. Additionally, the ultraviolet light absorption has also been somewhat enhanced under compressive strain, and improved from 6.67 × 105 to 7.62 × 105 cm−1 at −10% strain. The above results show that elastic strain engineering is an effective means to regulate the optical properties of materials. By applying biaxial strain, the absorption edge of the TM2@g-C4N3 monolayers can be adjusted, and their optical absorption intensity can be significantly enhanced, especially the response of visible light, which can greatly expand the applications in optoelectronic and photovoltaic devices.


3.6.2. Power conversion efficiency (PCE). 
The most important parameter that characterizes the performance of a solar cell device is PCE, which measures the portion of solar energy that a solar cell can be converted into electricity. Since the nine TM2@g-C4N3 (TM = Co, Ni, Ru, Rh, Pd, Re, Os, Ir, and Pt) semiconductors have suitable band gaps (1.288–2.295 eV) as well as desirable optical properties, they should be expected that the 2D solar cells based on the nine TM2@g-C4N3 monolayers would have a rather high PCE. After systematic screening (type-II band alignment, suitable conduction band offset and energy gap) from 100 2D semiconductors and insulators (from ref. 73 and 74), BN and GaP were chosen as suitable acceptor materials to construct heterojunctions with the nine TM2@g-C4N3 monolayers. The band alignment of the donor and acceptor materials obtained at the HSE06 level is shown in Fig. 12a. In the limit of 100% external quantum efficiency (EQE), the upper limit to the PCE (η) in such a type-II heterojunction device can be estimated by75,76 (8)where βFF = 0.65 is the fill factor (FF), Jsc is the short circuit current, and Psolar represents the incident solar power per unit area. Voc = Edg − ΔEc − 0.3 is the open-circuit voltage, where Edg is the band gap of the donor material, and ΔEc is the conduction band offset, which has been estimated at the HSE06 level. The 0.3 eV value is an empirical parameter accounting for energy losses due to the involved kinetics in energy conversion. P(ħω) is the AM1.5 solar energy flux at the photon energy (ħω). As shown in Fig. 12b, among the proposed nine heterojunctions, four of them (Co2@g-C4N3/BN, Ni2@g-C4N3/BN, Os2@g-C4N3/GaP, Ir2@g-C4N3/BN, and Pt2@g-C4N3/BN) have a PCE higher than 15%. In particular, the PCE of the Pt2@g-C4N3/BN heterostructure is as high as 20.20%, which is higher than those of the reported ones, such as MoS2/InSe (15.2%),74 germanane/phosphorene (15.32%),74 BP/InSe (18.89%),74 MoTe2/MoSe2 (19.32%),74 monolayer MoS2/bilayer phosphorene (18%),77 and GeSe/SnS (∼18%)78 heterostructures. This indicates that the Pt2@g-C4N3/BN heterojunction is a promising candidate in optoelectronic devices and nanoscale solar energy conversion applications.
 Fig. 12  (a) Band alignment of the donor and acceptor materials obtained at the HSE06 level. The values of the VBM and CBM are set with respect to the absolute vacuum level. (b) Calculated PCE of nine newly designed 2D type-II heterostructures based on TM2@g-C4N3 monolayers. The background with different color regions refers to different efficiencies. 

4. Conclusions
The effects of transition metal permutation and biaxial strain engineering on the modulation of the magnetic, electronic, and optical properties of TM2@g-C4N3 monolayers are fundamentally unveiled by high-throughput screening combined with first-principles calculations. Among this material family with 210 candidates, 18 TM2@g-C4N3 monolayers with a TM atom embedded g-C4N3 substrate in large cavities on both sides in asymmetrical mode stood out after stepwise screening. With the permutation of TM atoms, different magnetic states (FM, AFM, and NM) can be obtained. Excitingly, the TC of Co2@ and Zr2@g-C4N3 monolayers can be improved up to 305 K and 245 K by applying −8% and −12% compression strains, respectively. Moreover, rich electronic states (metal, semiconductor, and half-metal) can be achieved under a series of biaxial strains or the permutation of diverse TM atoms. The Zr2@g-C4N3 monolayer can realize the transition of FM semiconductor → FM half-metal → AFM metal under biaxial strains from −14% to 10%. Remarkably, the embedding of TM atoms greatly enhances ultraviolet light absorption and visible light response compared to bare g-C4N3. Unexpectedly, Pt@g-C4N3 can be used as a donor material to form a heterojunction with BN, and its power conversion efficiency can be as high as 20.20%, and it is expected to be used in photovoltaic devices. Our work suggests a practical route to achieve the effective modulation of the magnetic, electronic, and optical properties of 2D multifunctional materials via transition metal permutation and biaxial strain engineering, which can greatly enrich their application in nanoelectronics, spintronics, optoelectronics, and photovoltaic devices. We hope that the present study will stimulate further experimental efforts in this field.
Author contributions
L.-M. Y. conceived the study, designed the research, analyzed the data, revised the draft, and finalized the paper. D.-B. L. performed the calculations, collected and analyzed the data, wrote the draft, and finalized the paper. Both of them contributed substantially to the analysis of data, the extraction of the rules, discussion, and finalization of the paper. Yulin Feng and Guoying Gao provided assistance on computing the magnetic transition temperatures (TC/TN).
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
D.-B. L. and L.-M. Y. gratefully acknowledge the support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21873032, 22073033, 21673087, 21903032), the startup fund (2006013118 and 3004013105) from the Huazhong University of Science and Technology, the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (2019kfyRCPY116, 2021yjsCXCY054), and the Innovation and Talent Recruitment Base of New Energy Chemistry and Device (B21003). The work was carried out at the LvLiang Cloud Computing Center of China, and the calculations were performed on TianHe-2. The computing work in this paper is supported by the Public Service Platform of High Performance Computing by the Network and Computing Center of HUST. Dedicated to Prof. Guosheng Shao on the occasion of his 65th birthday.
References
W.-J. Ong, L.-L. Tan, Y. H. Ng, S.-T. Yong and S.-P. Chai, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 7159–7329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. F. Gao, T. Wen, J. Y. Xu, X. P. Zhai, M. Zhao, G. W. Hu, P. Chen, Q. Wang and H. L. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 617–624 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Mahmood, E. K. Lee, M. Jung, D. Shin, I. Y. Jeon, S. M. Jung, H. J. Choi, J. M. Seo, S. Y. Bae, S. D. Sohn, N. Park, J. H. Oh, H. J. Shin and J. B. Baek, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6486 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Mahmood, E. K. Lee, M. Jung, D. Shin, H.-J. Choi, J.-M. Seo, S.-M. Jung, D. Kim, F. Li, M. S. Lah, N. Park, H.-J. Shin, J. H. Oh and J.-B. Baek, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, 7414 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yang, W. Li, C. Ye, G. Wang, H. Tian, C. Zhu, P. He, G. Ding, X. Xie, Y. Liu, Y. Lifshitz, S. T. Lee, Z. Kang and M. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605625 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Li, Y. Qu and M. Zhao, Carbon, 2015, 95, 51–57 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liu and J. Zhang, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 3821–3828 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wu, C. He and W. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2022, 144, 9344–9353 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. He, Y. Liang and W. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 29120–29130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wu, Q. Wang, Q. Sun and P. Jena, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 6055–6059 CrossRef CAS .
W. X. Zhang, S. Xi, Y. Liang and C. He, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2023, 608, 155106 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, H. Qiao, Z.-H. Yan, L. Duan, L. Ni and J.-B. Fan, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2023, 48, 14659–14669 CrossRef CAS .
P. Lin, N. Xu, X. Tan, X. Yang, R. Xiong, C. Wen, B. Wu, Q. Lin and B. Sa, RSC Adv., 2022, 12, 998–1004 RSC .
H. Chai, W. Chen, Y. Li, M. Zhao, J. Shi, Y. Tang and X. Dai, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2023, 25, 4081–4092 RSC .

          N. K. Murugasenapathi and P. Tamilarasan, Nanoscale graphitic carbon nitride: Chapter 16-graphitic carbon nitride based optoelectronic devices, Elsevier, Amsterdam,  2022, pp. 2515–2544 Search PubMed .
X. Wang, K. Maeda, A. Thomas, K. Takanabe, G. Xin, J. M. Carlsson, K. Domen and M. Antonietti, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 76–80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Cao and J. Yu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2101–2107 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, G. Zeng, D. Huang, C. Zhang, D. He, C. Zhou, W. Wang, W. Xiong, X. Li, B. Li, W. Dong and Y. Zhou, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 272, 118970 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, C. Xiong, S. Jiang, X. Wu and S. Song, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 249, 282–291 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tong, Y. Guo, K. Mu, H. Shan, J. Dai, Y. Liu, Z. Sun, A. Zhao, X. C. Zeng, C. Wu and Y. Xie, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703123 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Ren, F. Cheng, X. Zhou, K. Chang and G. Zhou, Carbon, 2019, 143, 14–20 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Krasheninnikov, P. O. Lehtinen, A. S. Foster, P. Pyykkö and R. M. Nieminen, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 102, 126807 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Radhakrishnan, D. Das, A. Samanta, A. de los Reyes Carlos, L. Deng, B. Alemany Lawrence, K. Weldeghiorghis Thomas, N. Khabashesku Valery, V. Kochat, Z. Jin, M. Sudeep Parambath, A. Martí Angel, C.-W. Chu, A. Roy, S. Tiwary Chandra, K. Singh Abhishek and M. Ajayan Pulickel, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1700842 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Ghosh, G. Periyasamy, B. Pandey and S. K. Pati, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 7943–7951 RSC .
R. B. N. Baig, S. Verma, R. S. Varma and M. N. Nadagouda, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2016, 4, 1661–1664 CrossRef CAS .
L. Kong, Y. Dong, P. Jiang, G. Wang, H. Zhang and N. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 9998–10007 RSC .
J. S. Lee, X. Wang, H. Luo and S. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1004–1007 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Du, S. Sanvito and S. C. Smith, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 108, 197207 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Zhou, Y. Shan, Y. Hu, X. Xu, L. Long, J. Zhang, J. Dai, J. Guo, J. Shen, S. Li, L. Liu and X. Wu, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3366 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Cui, S. Liang and J. Zhang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 25388–25393 RSC .
G. Kresse and J. Furthmüller, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1996, 54, 11169–11186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. E. Blöchl, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1994, 50, 17953–17979 CrossRef PubMed .
J. P. Perdew, K. Burke and M. Ernzerhof, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1996, 77, 3865–3868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. L. Dudarev, G. A. Botton, S. Y. Savrasov, C. J. Humphreys and A. P. Sutton, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1998, 57, 1505–1509 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhou and Q. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 15113–15119 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Niu, X. Wang, C. Shao, Y. Liu, Z. Zhang and Y. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 6555–6563 RSC .
X. Xin, C. Guo, R. Pang, X. Shi and Y. Zhao, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 570, 151126 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ma, Y. Dai, W. Wei, L. Yu and B. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2013, 117, 5171–5177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Monkhorst and J. D. Pack, Phys. Rev. B: Solid State, 1976, 13, 5188–5192 CrossRef .
S. Grimme, J. Antony, S. Ehrlich and H. Krieg, J. Chem. Phys., 2010, 132, 154104 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Nosé, J. Chem. Phys., 1984, 81, 511–519 CrossRef .
A. Seidl, A. Görling, P. Vogl, J. A. Majewski and M. Levy, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1996, 53, 3764–3774 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Heyd, G. E. Scuseria and M. Ernzerhof, J. Chem. Phys., 2003, 118, 8207–8215 CrossRef CAS .

          P. Y. Yu and M. Cardona, Fundamentals of semiconductors, Springer, Berlin,  1996, pp. 1991–1639 Search PubMed .
S. K. Pati and C. N. R. Rao, Chem. Commun., 2008, 4683–4693 RSC .
L. Balents, Nature, 2010, 464, 199–208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T.-H. Han, J. S. Helton, S. Chu, D. G. Nocera, J. A. Rodriguez-Rivera, C. Broholm and Y. S. Lee, Nature, 2012, 492, 406–410 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Depenbrock, I. P. McCulloch and U. Schollwöck, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 109, 067201 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Punk, D. Chowdhury and S. Sachdev, Nat. Phys., 2014, 10, 289–293 Search PubMed .
G. H. Wannier, Phys. Rev., 1950, 79, 357–364 CrossRef .
U. Wolff, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1989, 62, 361–364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. H. O. Daalderop, P. J. Kelly and M. F. H. Schuurmans, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1990, 41, 11919–11937 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Lançon, R. A. Ewings, T. Guidi, F. Formisano and A. R. Wildes, Phys. Rev. B, 2018, 98, 134414 CrossRef .
T. Olsen, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2021, 54, 314001 CrossRef CAS .
L. Webster and J.-A. Yan, Phys. Rev. B, 2018, 98, 144411 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Zhuang, Y. Xie, P. R. C. Kent and P. Ganesh, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 92, 035407 CrossRef .
H. L. Zhuang, P. R. C. Kent and R. G. Hennig, Phys. Rev. B, 2016, 93, 134407 CrossRef .
T. Burkert, L. Nordström, O. Eriksson and O. Heinonen, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 93, 027203 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Ma, Y. Dai, M. Guo, C. Niu, Y. Zhu and B. Huang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1695–1701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhou, Z. Wang, P. Yang, X. Zu, L. Yang, X. Sun and F. Gao, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 9727–9736 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-Q. Xie, Z.-W. Lu, C.-C. He, X.-B. Yang and Y.-J. Zhao, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2021, 33, 215803 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ren and G. Xiang, Nanomaterials, 2022, 12, 1929 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. H. MacDonald and M. Tsoi, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A, 2011, 369, 3098–3114 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Marti, I. Fina, C. Frontera, J. Liu, P. Wadley, Q. He, R. J. Paull, J. D. Clarkson, J. Kudrnovský, I. Turek, J. Kuneš, D. Yi, J. H. Chu, C. T. Nelson, L. You, E. Arenholz, S. Salahuddin, J. Fontcuberta, T. Jungwirth and R. Ramesh, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 367–374 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Jungwirth, X. Marti, P. Wadley and J. Wunderlich, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 231–241 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-J. Gong, C. Gong, Y.-Y. Sun, W.-Y. Tong, C.-G. Duan, J.-H. Chu and X. Zhang, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2018, 115, 8511–8516 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, M. Liu, X. Shen, Z. Liu, Z. Hu, K. Chen, P. Ohresser, L. Nataf, F. Baudelet, H.-J. Lin, C.-T. Chen, Y.-L. Soo, Y.-f. Yang, C. Jin and Y. Long, Inorg. Chem., 2019, 58, 320–326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. D. Sarma, P. Mahadevan, T. Saha-Dasgupta, S. Ray and A. Kumar, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2000, 85, 2549–2552 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-R. Li, M. Retuerto, Z. Deng, P. W. Stephens, M. Croft, Q. Huang, H. Wu, X. Deng, G. Kotliar, J. Sánchez-Benítez, J. Hadermann, D. Walker and M. Greenblatt, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 12069–12073 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Meng, L. Zhang, F. Yao, X. Zhang, W. Zhang, X. Liu, J. Meng and H. Zhang, Inorg. Chem., 2017, 56, 6371–6379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Li, C.-w. Zhang, J. Lian, M.-j. Ren, P.-j. Wang, X.-h. Yu and S. Gao, Opt. Commun., 2013, 295, 45–52 CrossRef CAS .
S. Saha, T. P. Sinha and A. Mookerjee, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2000, 62, 8828–8834 CrossRef CAS .
V. O. Özçelik, J. G. Azadani, C. Yang, S. J. Koester and T. Low, Phys. Rev. B, 2016, 94, 035125 CrossRef .
J. Linghu, T. Yang, Y. Luo, M. Yang, J. Zhou, L. Shen and Y. P. Feng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 32142–32150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Bernardi, M. Palummo and J. C. Grossman, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 10082–10089 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. C. Scharber, D. Mühlbacher, M. Koppe, P. Denk, C. Waldauf, A. J. Heeger and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 789–794 CrossRef CAS .
J. Dai and X. C. Zeng, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1289–1293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lv, W. Wei, C. Mu, B. Huang and Y. Dai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 5032–5039 RSC .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Initial and final geometric structures before and after full structural relaxation of the seven adsorption configurations. Cohesive energies of 3d, 4d, 5d bulk transition metals; binding energies of TM2@g-C4N3 monolayers in symmetrical and asymmetrical adsorption modes. AIMD simulation results for TM2@g-C4N3 monolayers in two adsorption modes. The crystal structures, space groups, lattice parameters, and magnetic moments of 18 optimized TM2@g-C4N3 monolayers. Spin densities of the remaining 10 magnetic TM2@g-C4N3 monolayers. Schematic diagrams of three different magnetic ordering configurations in the g-C4N3 monolayer. Exchange energies and parameters per supercell, average magnetic moment per TM atom, and Curie/Néel temperatures under biaxial strains from −10% (−14%) to 10% for four representative TM2@g-C4N3 monolayers. Evolution of calculated Bader charges on TM atoms and the g-C4N3 moiety of four representative materials versus biaxial strains from −10% (−14%) to 10%. PBE+U and HSE06 band structures of the remaining 15 TM2@g-C4N3 monolayers. Charge density difference of the 18 systems. The evolution of the PDOS of different atoms near the Fermi level versus biaxial strain from −10% (−14%) to 10% for four representative materials. The evolution of the optical absorption coefficient versus biaxial strains for Co2@ and Zr2@g-C4N3 monolayers. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d3nr00984jThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the configuration design of TM2@g-C4N3 monolayers including seven possible adsorption modes and 30 TM atoms. (a) 3d, 4d, and 5d TM atoms, (b) 2 × 1 × 1 g-C4N3 supercell containing two big cavities (H site, red circle) and small hollow sites (h site, light blue circle), (c) adsorption on one side, (d) symmetrical adsorption on both sides, and (e) asymmetrical adsorption on both sides.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic diagram of the high-throughput screening workflow for the energetically favorable adsorption configuration and stable TM adsorption species.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic diagrams for different magnetic ordering configurations in 2D TM2@g-C4N3 monolayers. (a) ferromagnetic (FM), (b) antiferromagnetic-1 (AFM1), and (c) antiferromagnetic-2 (AFM2). Orange balls are TM atoms, and the arrows indicate the spin directions of the TM atoms. The nearest (J1) and second-nearest (J2) exchange interactions are indicated by magenta and green dotted lines, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 4  Top and side views of the spin densities (Δρ = ρ↑ − ρ↓) for 2D periodic (a) g-C4N3, (b) Mn2@, (c) Co2@, and (d) Zr2@g-C4N3 monolayers in 2 × 2 × 1 supercells at an isosurface value of 0.03 e Å−3.	 

 	Fig. 5  The underlying mechanism of magnetic coupling in two representative materials Co2@ and Mn2@g-C4N3 monolayers. (a)/(h) are the local coordination environment of magnetic atoms, (b)/(i) are the PDOS of the electronic fingerprint used to distinguish the degeneracy of the five d orbitals of magnetic atoms, (c)/(j) are the splitting of five d orbitals of magnetic atoms in both crystal and exchange fields, (d)–(e)/(k)–(m) are the schematic diagrams of magnetic coupling and its relevant atoms, (f)–(g)/(n)–(o) are the distribution of d electrons in different d orbitals and the exchange coupling among the electrons located in different orbitals. The yellow region in the crystal structure indicates the g-C4N3 moiety.	 
E(FM) = E0 − 4J1M2 − 8J2M2	(1)
E(AFM1) = E0 + 4J1M2	(2)
E(AFM2) = E0 − 4J1M2 + 8J2M2	(3)
	(4)
	(5)

 	Fig. 6  The evolution of magnetic moment (red) and specific heat Cv (blue) versus temperature from classic Ising MC simulation for (a) pristine g-C4N3, (b) Co2@g-C4N3 at −8% compression strain, and (c) Zr2@g-C4N3 at −12% compression strain. The magnetic transition temperature TC is denoted by dotted lines perpendicular to the temperature axis. (d) is the evolution of transition temperatures versus biaxial strains from −10% (−14%) to 10% for Co2@ and Zr2@g-C4N3 monolayers. The inset in (d) is a comparison of the critical temperatures of Co2@g-C4N3 and Zr2@g-C4N3 at equilibrium state and compressive strain (−8% for Co2@g-C4N3 and −12% for Zr2@g-C4N3).	 

 	Fig. 7  The plots of spin density (around the large purple arrow) of four representative materials at different strains from −10% to 10% with an interval of 2%. (a) Co2@, (b) Zr2@, (c) V2@, and (d) Mn2@g-C4N3. The red arrows indicate the magnetic phase transition.	 

 	Fig. 8  The evolution of the electron occupation number (EON) on different d orbitals of TM atoms in four representative TM2@g-C4N3 monolayers. (a) Co2@, (b) Zr2@, (c) V2@, and (d) Mn2@g-C4N3.	 

 	Fig. 9  The band structures and PDOS for (a) pristine g-C4N3, (b) Mn2@, (c) Co2@, and (d) Zr2@g-C4N3 monolayers calculated at the PBE+U level. (a′)–(d′) are the band structures calculated at the HSE06 level. Γ (0, 0, 0), M (0, 1/2, 0), and K (−1/3, 2/3, 0) are high symmetry points in the first Brillouin zone in reciprocal space. The PDOS of TM-s, TM-p, TM-d, C-s, C-p, N-s, and N-p, and the total density of states are plotted in light blue, orange, blue, red, green, violet, magenta, and black, respectively. The partial zoom-in of (a′) and (d′) are plotted to clearly display the band dispersion near the Fermi level.	 

 	Fig. 10  The evolution of band gaps (orange) and magnetic moments (cyan) versus biaxial strain from −10% (−14%) to 10%. (a) Co2@g-C4N3, (b) Zr2@g-C4N3, (c) V2@g-C4N3, and (d) Mn2@g-C4N3. “M”, “S”, and “HM” denote the metal, semiconductor, and half-metal, respectively. “up” and “dw” indicate spin up and spin down, and the values in the parentheses are spin-up and spin-down band gaps, respectively.	 
	(6)
	(7)

 	Fig. 11  Optical absorption coefficients of (a) 2D g-C4N3, (b) Co2@, (c) Ni2@, (d) Zr2@, (e) Ru2@, (f) Rh2@, (g) Pd2@, (h) Re2@, (i) Os2@, (j) Ir2@, and (k) Pt2@g-C4N3 monolayers calculated at the PBE+U level with HSE06 corrected band gaps. The infrared, visible and ultraviolet regions are marked by red and purple dashed lines.	 
	(8)

 	Fig. 12  (a) Band alignment of the donor and acceptor materials obtained at the HSE06 level. The values of the VBM and CBM are set with respect to the absolute vacuum level. (b) Calculated PCE of nine newly designed 2D type-II heterostructures based on TM2@g-C4N3 monolayers. The background with different color regions refers to different efficiencies.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Initial and final geometric structures before and after full structural relaxation of the seven adsorption configurations. Cohesive energies of 3d, 4d, 5d bulk transition metals; binding energies of TM2@g-C4N3 monolayers in symmetrical and asymmetrical adsorption modes. AIMD simulation results for TM2@g-C4N3 monolayers in two adsorption modes. The crystal structures, space groups, lattice parameters, and magnetic moments of 18 optimized TM2@g-C4N3 monolayers. Spin densities of the remaining 10 magnetic TM2@g-C4N3 monolayers. Schematic diagrams of three different magnetic ordering configurations in the g-C4N3 monolayer. Exchange energies and parameters per supercell, average magnetic moment per TM atom, and Curie/Néel temperatures under biaxial strains from −10% (−14%) to 10% for four representative TM2@g-C4N3 monolayers. Evolution of calculated Bader charges on TM atoms and the g-C4N3 moiety of four representative materials versus biaxial strains from −10% (−14%) to 10%. PBE+U and HSE06 band structures of the remaining 15 TM2@g-C4N3 monolayers. Charge density difference of the 18 systems. The evolution of the PDOS of different atoms near the Fermi level versus biaxial strain from −10% (−14%) to 10% for four representative materials. The evolution of the optical absorption coefficient versus biaxial strains for Co2@ and Zr2@g-C4N3 monolayers. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d3nr00984j

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
