Transition metal oxide and chalcogenide-based nanomaterials for antibacterial activities: an overview  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1NR00664A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1NR00664A
(Minireview)
Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 6373-6388Transition metal oxide and chalcogenide-based nanomaterials for antibacterial activities: an overview

        
          
            Yanan 
            Tang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zhen 
            Qin
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Shengyan 
            Yin
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Hang 
            Sun
          
          
        
      *a
aKey Laboratory of Bionic Engineering (Ministry of Education), College of Biological and Agricultural Engineering, Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin Province 130022, PR China. E-mail: sunhang@jlu.edu.cn
bState Key Laboratory of Integrated Optoelectronics, College of Electronic Science and Engineering, Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin Province 130012, PR China
Received 
      31st January 2021
    , Accepted 1st March 2021First published on 2nd March 2021AbstractA new battle line is drawn where antibiotic misuse and mismanagement have made treatment of bacterial infection a thorny issue. It is highly desirable to develop active antibacterial materials for bacterial control and destruction without drug resistance. A large amount of effort has been devoted to transition metal oxide and chalcogenide (TMO&C) nanomaterials as possible candidates owing to their unconventional physiochemical, electronic and optical properties and feasibility of functional architecture assembly. This review expounds multiple TMO&C-based strategies to combat pathogens, opening up new possibilities for the design of simple, yet highly effective systems that are crucial for antimicrobial treatment. A special emphasis is placed on the multiple mechanisms of these nanoagents, including mechanical rupture, photocatalytic/photothermal activity, Fenton-type reaction, nanozyme-assisted effect, released metal ions and the synergistic action of TMO&C in combination with other antibacterial agents. The applications of TMO&C nanomaterials mostly in air/water purification and wound healing along with their bactericidal activities and mechanisms are also described. Finally, the contemporary challenges and trends in the development of TMO&C-based antibacterial strategies are proposed.Yanan TangYanan Tang is currently a Ph.D. candidate at the Key Laboratory of Bionic Engineering (Ministry of Education), College of Biological and Agricultural Engineering of Jilin University. She obtained her M.S. degree in bionic science and engineering from Jilin University in 2019. Her research interests focus on semiconductor-based bio-inspired nanomaterials for antibacterial applications.Zhen QinZhen Qin is a postgraduate student at the Key Laboratory of Bionic Engineering (Ministry of Education), College of Biological and Agricultural Engineering at Jilin University since 2018. She received her B.S. degree in polymer material and engineering from Dalian Polytechnic University in 2018. Her current research focuses on inorganic semiconductor based biomimetic materials and their applications in photocatalysis, sterilization and solar thermal conversion.Shengyan YinShengyan Yin received his Ph.D. degree from the State Key Laboratory of Supramolecular Structure and Materials from Jilin University in 2009. During 2009–2013, he worked as a postdoctoral research fellow at Nanyang Technological University of Singapore. Afterward, Shengyan Yin joined Jilin University and now is a professor at College of Electronic Science and Engineering of Jilin University. His current research topics are graphene/semiconducting polymer dots for biomedicine applications and photocatalysis.Hang SunHang Sun is a professor at the Key Laboratory of Bionic Engineering (Ministry of Education), College of Biological and Agricultural Engineering of Jilin University. She received her Ph.D. degree in 2009 from the State Key Laboratory of Supramolecular Structure and Materials, Jilin University. During 2009–2012, she was a postdoctoral research fellow at Nanyang Technological University of Singapore. She joined Jilin University in 2013 as an Associate Professor and then was promoted to full Professor in 2017. Her research interests focus on bio-inspired energy materials and devices, bio-inspired antibacterial materials.
1. Introduction
Bacterial contamination is considered as a serious global issue which poses a major threat to public health. In clinics, the diseases induced by pathogens such as wound infections and catheter-associated urinary tract infections are the major drivers of morbidity and mortality and contribute to excessive healthcare costs.1,2 In daily life, air, water or other facilities can also be contaminated by even a relatively small amount of bacteria resulting from their strong adaptability and rapid propagation, causing serious problems.3 Traditional antibiotics or disinfectants were previously recognized as the most effective means of inactivating bacteria by interfering with the cell-wall construction or inhibiting certain metabolic aspects such as the synthesis of proteins, DNA and RNA.4,5 However, microorganisms have been constantly seeking to evolve via mutations and transfer of DNA to address the issues raised by antibacterial formulation.6–8 Notably, multiple antibiotic-resistance genes from different organisms can be acquired by one microbe, eventually contributing to the emergence of the most deadly “superbugs”.9 For example, a super-resistance gene (NDM-1) in the bacteria can induce enzymatic degradation of β-lactam antibiotics that makes it resistant to a broad range of powerful antibiotics.10,11 Therefore, a new antibacterial approach which is free from antibiotics is urgently needed.
Bacteria can be mainly divided into two categories as Gram-negative and Gram-positive, and the subtle differences lie in their structure of cell walls.5,12 Gram-positive bacteria are composed of a peptidoglycan layer, teichoic acids together with a cytoplasmic membrane underneath.13–15 In contrast, Gram-negative bacteria have a distinctive, hydrophobic lipid bilayer with lipopolysaccharides which provide further protection from environmental damage.16–18 The additional phosphates and carboxylate groups present in the lipopolysaccharides greatly contribute to the high negative potential of the cell envelope (Fig. 1).4 Bacterial membranes play important roles in many basic biological processes such as cell–cell interaction, signal transduction and material transport.19,20 Besides, cell components including organelles, proteins, and genetic materials (DNA and RNA) are also crucial for cellular homeostasis.21–23 This provides a train of thought that the destruction of these centers is the basic part for the development of antibacterial strategies.
 Fig. 1  Schematic diagram showing the cell wall structures of Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria. Reproduced with permission.4 Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
With continual advances in nanotechnology, the possibilities of nanomaterials as antimicrobial agents are set to increase.24–26 It has been reported that nanomaterials can break cell walls by direct contact and the leakage of cytoplasmic contents is peculiarly prone to occur.27–29 Then, intracellular components such as DNA, proteins and enzymes are vulnerable to attack followed by destabilization of cell membranes, which contributes significantly to cell survival, proliferation, differentiation and information transfer.16,30–32 Nanomaterials can also interfere with the normal function of bacterial cells in which oxidative damage, enzyme inhibition and electrolyte imbalance are involved, ultimately triggering cell injury or death.33,34 This comes to a new strategy by employing nanomaterials as antibacterial agents which are less likely than traditional antibiotics to develop resistance due to their unique physiochemical properties and multiple bactericidal pathways.
Many types of nanomaterials have been employed for fighting antibiotic resistance in relevant fields, mainly including noble metal nanomaterials, carbon-based nanomaterials, supramolecular nanomaterials, and transition metal oxides and chalcogenides (TMO&Cs). Noble metal materials have been extensively designed with potent activities against Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria, especially Ag nanoparticles (NPs), which cause damage to bacterial cells accomplished by the generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS), free radicals and the release of Ag ions.13,35 But it is important to note that the potential risk of toxicological events in humans and cost problems still limit their widespread use in antibacterial-based therapies.36–38 Supramolecular nanomaterials have emerged as a promising alternative to the established antibiotics due to the flexibility of their non-covalent interactions with biomolecules and the capability to incorporate bioactive components for practical antibacterial applications.8 Cationic organic compounds, including cationic polymers, antibacterial peptides, chitosan, surfactants, and others, have been used advantageously to construct supramolecular antibacterial materials through electrostatic interactions with anion molecules.39,40 The obstacle to the large-scale clinical application of supramolecular materials is constrained by some factors, such as low stability and old preclinical paradigms.41 Carbon-based nanoagents are in the early stages of achieving their potential for positive treatment outcomes.42–44 Remarkable bacteria-killing efficiencies of carbon-based nanomaterials have been confirmed through massive research work, however, the existing impurity and inhomogeneity problems have negative impacts on their antimicrobial performance.45 Furthermore, the level of potential harm to the host has not been fully assessed yet.46 In that case, the TMO&C-based antibacterial system has occupied an important position for combatting pathogenic bacteria in many applications, stemming from their unconventional structural features, versatile physiochemical properties, good biocompatibility and feasibility of functional architecture assembly.47–50
TMO&Cs are composed of transition metal elements and oxygen or sulfur elements, such as TiO2, ZnO, MoS2, Cu2O, etc.48,51–53 In recent years, TMO&Cs have been extensively explored due to their earth abundance, various valence states, electronic configurations and stable chemical properties.54–56 TMO&C-based antibacterial nanomaterials have certainly become the most attractive candidates in terms of their low cost, controllable structures, multiple preparing methods and environmental friendliness.57–59 The impressive bacteria-killing ability of TMO&Cs can be explained as follows. First, the structural characteristics can be well tailored under specific conditions which have an enormous impact on the antimicrobial pathway.60,61 Second, it has been well-documented that TMO&Cs engineered with specific physiochemical properties, involving optical, physical, and electrical features, can furnish promising strategies for the development of effective and safe antimicrobial agents. For instance, nonspontaneous reactions can be dominated by TMO&Cs, especially light-mediated actions, and are active for generating energetic carriers which play a role in the bacteria-killing process.62 Specifically, TMO&Cs with photodynamic properties enable direct conversion of captured light into ROS energy, which meets the green and sustainable requirements for antibiotic-free strategies.63,64 Similarly, some TMO&Cs can act as catalysts in Fenton or nanozyme-mediated reactions for ROS formation.65–67 Meanwhile, TMO&C-based photothermal treatments follow the principle that such light-absorbing nanoagents realize highly efficient light-to-heat conversion and induce local hyperthermia to denature proteins and disturb the metabolic activity of pathogenic bacteria.68,69 And the released noxious factors from TMO&Cs are also harmful for bacterial cells in the process of being used.53 Lastly, multiple bactericide modes can be executed by the combination of different mechanisms to achieve synergistic antibacterial effects and minimize the occurrence and impact of drug resistance.
In this review, we discuss the recent progress of TMO&Cs with a focus on their various antibacterial mechanisms and excellent bactericidal capability. The remarkable performances in practical antibacterial applications are also included. We hope that this introductory overview of the antibacterial strategies assisted by TMO&Cs can whet appetite for further exploration and provide inspiration to create new antimicrobial agents.
2. Antibacterial mechanisms of TMO&Cs
TMO&C-based antibacterial systems are employed to counteract the drug-resistant bacteria that perform multiple actions for combatting bacterial infection, potentially bringing an end to the scourge of the superbug. In this part, we put emphasis on the various types of antibacterial mechanisms which start from the unique physiochemical properties of TMO&C-based nanomaterials.
2.1 Mechanical rupture
The cell walls serve as the crucial components of pathogenic bacteria in various cellular life forms, possessing multiple functions required for maintaining cell structure integrity and full pathogenicity.70 This line of evidence indicates a role of the cell membrane as an important target for antimicrobial formulation. Previous studies suggested that naturally occurring nanopatterns on the surfaces of cicada and dragonfly wings could puncture the cell wall of invading bacterium and cause cytoplasm leakage, ultimately leading to cell death.71,72 The purely physical interaction between the cells and nanostructured surfaces is responsible for the killing behavior which is not affected by the chemical composition (Fig. 2a–d). Such bactericidal activity could be equally applied to synthetic analogues73,74 and typical natural/bioinspired bactericidal surfaces are shown in Table 1. A good strategy based on the cell-rupturing mechanism is adopted to ensure that the synthetic surface exhibits a broad range of biological activities against bacteria and fungi, and will not cause resistance issue.70,75 A hierarchically structured surface (a micro-scale cylinder patterned silicon wafer coated with ZnO nanoneedles) has been reported by Jiang and co-workers, which displays remarkable antimicrobial performance.76 Those tenacious bacteria adhered on the dual-scale structured surface are physically killed completely (Fig. 2g–j). However, the major downside for this type of surface structure is that only adhered bacteria can be impeded.77,78 Taking all these factors into account, the combination therapy of multiple mechanisms (physical damage and chemical destruction) is a wise choice for superior bactericidal ability. TMO&Cs are favored and become the focus in the research of antibacterial agents benefitting from their unique physicochemical properties. For example, ZnO nanopillars coated on zinc foil and galvanized steel surfaces have been proved to kill both adhered and non-adhered microbes (Fig. 2e–f).79 The excellent killing efficiency (100%, 3 h) depends on the high levels of superoxide (˙O2−) generated from the ZnO coating with electrons donated by Zn to ZnO (conduction band) via the interface effect. Therefore, the synergistic action combining the mechanical properties of the biomimetic nanostructure and highly toxic ˙O2− radicals can achieve an enhanced antibacterial activity.
 Fig. 2  Nanostructure induced mechanical bactericidal effect. (a) Photograph of cicada, Psaltoda claripennis. (b) Structural physiology of the forewing of Psaltoda claripennis. (c) SEM image of the upper surface of the forewing. (d) SEM image of a bacterial cell sinking between the nanopillars on the cicada wing surface. Reproduced with permission.72 Copyright 2012, Wiley. (e) SEM images of ZnO nanopillars on glass slides. (f) E. coli on ZnO nanopillars. Reproduced with permission.79 Copyright 2018, Wiley. (g) and (h) SEM images of the dual-scale structured surface. The corresponding bacterial coverage statistics of CLSM images after 3 h (i), and 24 h (j) incubation intervals. Reproduced with permission.76 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. 
Table 1 Inactivation of microorganisms through mechanical rupture




Natural/bioinspired bactericidal surfaces
SEM images
Antibacterial efficiency
Ref.




The images shown in Table 1 are reproduced with permission from ref. 70 copyright 2012, Nature; ref. 72 copyright 2012, Wiley; ref. 73 copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry; ref. 74 copyright 2020, Elsevier; ref. 76 copyright 2020, Elsevier; ref. 77 copyright 2020, Elsevier; ref. 79 copyright 2018, Wiley.




Dragonfly wing (D. bipunctata)




P. aeruginosa (>3 log reduction, 3 h)

70




S. aureus (>4.6 log reduction, 3 h)



B. subtilis (>1.4 log reduction, 3 h)


Cicada wing surfaces (P. claripennis)




P. aeruginosa (>5 log reduction, 3 h)

72



Gecko skin surface




S. mutans (88%, 7 days)

73




P. gingivalis (66%, 7 days)


ZnO nanorod arrays




E. coli (56.4%, 30 min)

74



ZnO nanoneedles




E. coli (>98%, 3 h)

76



ZnO/Au nanopillars on PDMS




E. coli (65.5%, 30 min)

77



ZnO nanopillars on glass.




E. coli (96%, 18 h);

79





2.2 Photocatalytic effect
The intrinsic bactericidal activity of TMO&Cs involves either physical damage or chemical disruption, in which the former is driven by a purely physical mechanism and not by a chemical process, and more details are discussed in section 2.1. And bacteria can also be inactivated by toxic chemicals such as ROS, which shows broad-spectrum antimicrobial activity.80–82 Due to the relatively strong oxidation ability and practicality, ROS-mediated performance is of high importance and exhibits great potential in antibacterial fields, departing from the existing conventional ways.13,83 High levels of ROS can attack bacteria and typically inactivate biomolecules such as lipids, proteins and nucleic acids, resulting in membrane destruction, protein denaturation, and interference with bacterial metabolic activity.84–86 Since the photocatalytic properties of TiO2 were proposed, tremendous efforts have been greatly devoted to ROS-mediated treatment, especially in air or water disinfection.87–89 Ultraviolet (UV) irradiation can also provide rapid, effective inactivation of microorganisms owing to its deleterious effects on cells, and even damage to the DNA.90 However, it has been suggested that the dead state of bacteria induced by UV treatment may be only a temporary condition,91 and the dead bacteria may be repaired and reactivated in a definite time.92 In contrast, the damage is irreversible for ROS-mediated antibacterial treatment and the dead microbes cannot be reactivated.93,94 Therefore, photocatalytic disinfection is preferable for bacteria-killing as compared to UV treatment. Correlatively, TMO&Cs have received increasing recognition because of their inherent photocatalytic properties, which give fresh impetus to antimicrobial agent design.3,95–97 When photons with sufficient energy strike the photocatalyst, pairs of electrons and holes can be induced. Subsequently, the excited electron leaps into the conduction band (CB) and leaves behind a hole in the valence band (VB). The oxygen molecules absorbed on the surface of photocatalyst interact with electrons to produce superoxide radicals (˙O2−). Simultaneously, the photogenerated holes react with H2O to yield hydroxyl radicals (˙OH), which can directly lead to the inactivation of microorganisms.98 Their photocatalytic properties can be easily tailored by size optimization, structure fabrication and surface modification. Recently, we designed spiky nanohybrids of TiO2/Au NPs for enhanced photocatalytic properties and rapid bacteria killing under visible light irradiation (Fig. 3). Spiky TiO2/Au is preferred for reducing the viable bacteria count by up to 99.8%, followed by commercial TiO2, with a killing efficiency of 45.6% in 30 min. The unique spiky structure could increase the optical path via multiple-step scattering and reflection, which greatly pushes the photocatalytic-rate up. Simultaneously, coupling TiO2 with AuNPs effectively promotes the minimization of electron–hole recombination and the generation of ROS, leading to a significantly higher bacterial inactivation efficiency.99 Such considerable modifications enable photocatalysts with the enhanced ability to remove bacterial contamination. Besides, the main approaches that involve deposition of noble metals,100,101 doping with ions,102,103 and construction of semiconductor heterostructures,104,105 as listed in Table 2, can result in an enhanced photocatalytic performance.
 Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of the reaction mechanism enabled by spiky TiO2/Au NPs for the photodegradation of organic contaminants and the inactivation of bacteria. Reproduced with permission.99 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. 
Table 2 Summarized results of a few photocatalytic antibacterial nanomaterials enabled by modified TMO&Cs




Photocatalysis
Approach
Dose
Light wavelength (λ)
Antibacterial efficiency
Ref.




TiO2
Commercial TiO2
0.1 mg mL−1
420 < λ < 780 nm

E. coli (45.6%, 30 min)

99



TiO2
Spiky TiO2
0.1 mg mL−1
420 < λ < 780 nm

E. coli (88.2%, 30 min)

99



ZnO/Au4%
Noble metal deposition
0.1 mg mL−1
Simulated sunlight

E. coli (>95%, 10 min)

100




S. aureus (>90%, 10 min)


Cu–MoS2
Noble metal deposition
1cm × 2cm × 40 nm
Visible light

E. coli (>99.999%, 20 min)

101



N-TiO2
Ion doping
25 μg mL−1
200 < λ < 800 nm

E. coli (>99%, 3 h)

102



MoS2@Cu2+
Ion doping
2 mg mL−1

λ = 660 nm

S. aureus (99.64%, 20 min)

103



ZnO/V2O5
Semiconductor coupling
1 mg mL−1
Simulated sunlight

E. coli (99.8%, 12 h)

104



TiO2/rGO/WO3
Semiconductor heterostructures
0.1 mg mL−1
Simulated sunlight

E. coli (97.3%, 80 min)

105





Generally, photocatalysts exert their bacteria-killing capability only under continuous illumination for the requirement to generate predominant radical species. Therefore, the potential of photoassisted catalytic reactions is often restricted when the light is “turned off”. Recently, it has been demonstrated that photocatalysts with the post-illumination “memory” effect can retain the catalytic performance even in the dark.106,107 In one example, Sun and co-workers have investigated the disinfection effect of a ZnO/V2O5 composite photocatalyst and a promising killing result has been achieved.104 Under light and dark conditions, the nanocomposite exhibits an antibacterial efficacy of 99.8% and 99.0% against S. aureus, respectively. This can be ascribed to the transfer of photogenerated electrons from V2O5 to ZnO, in which V2O5 is reduced to V4+ and stores electrons in V5+ under light illumination. Later, these trapped electrons can be released in the dark and react with O2 molecules to generate ˙O2− for the inactivation of bacteria (Fig. 4). What that means is that coupling the photocatalyst with a storage capacitor could circumvent the problem in photocatalytic reactions when the illumination is switched off. Studies about photocatalytic heterojunctions with the “memory” effect, including Cu2O/TiO2, TiO2/WO3, TiO2/SnO2, and Cu2O/SnO2, and their applications have gained quite a bit of attention.108,109
 Fig. 4  Possible antibacterial mechanism (a) in simulated light: ZnO/V2O5 photocatalyzes to produce ROS after absorbing light and inactivates bacteria by oxidative stress; (b) in the dark: V4+/V5+ redox pairs release electrons to continue the photo reaction to produce ROS and to inactivate bacteria by oxidative stress. Reproduced with permission.104 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. 
2.3 Fenton reaction-based effect
An ROS-based antibacterial strategy arises from the production of diverse ROS radicals (˙O2−, ˙OH, H2O2, 1O2, etc.), which is regarded as a good way for eradicating even the challenging pathogens. Among the ROS-based antibacterial treatments, the catalytic Fenton reaction has broad prospects and application orientation due to high chemical stability and low biodegradability.110 Generally, the bacteria-killing ability of the Fenton reaction is measured by the conversion of H2O2 into ˙OH and other highly oxidative species, which could increase cellular oxidative stress and promote the mutations in the DNA sequence.111,112 Much work has been done and Fe-based nanocatalysts are the most extensively studied for triggering the Fenton reaction. However, the Fe2+ regeneration of Fe3+ is an important limiting factor of the Fenton process as well as Fenton-mediated killing efficiency. To fix this, Thakur et al. demonstrated an Fe-TiO2 antibacterial composite that accomplishes 6.2 log reduction of E. coli under UV light for 90 min, which is attributed to the dual effect of photocatalysis (TiO2) and photo-Fenton reaction.113 It was indicated that the photo-Fenton system can convert an existing Fe3+ to an Fe2+ component via ligand-to-metal charge transfer, resulting in an additional pathway of ˙OH production. Liu et al. introduced MoS2 co-catalysts into the classic Fenton system which is highly efficient at decomposing H2O2 for the generation of ˙OH.114 The reduction of Fe3+ to Fe2+ results from the exposed Mo4+ species in MoS2 after the removal of unsaturated S atoms (Fig. 5a–c). A higher toxicity toward E. coli is achieved by the MoS2 co-catalytic Fenton system with a killing efficiency of 83.37% just in 1 min that provides the inspiration for the treatment of wastewater.
 Fig. 5  (a) The proposed bactericidal mechanism of the MoS2 co-catalytic Fenton reaction. (b and c) SEM images of E. coli before and after reaction for 1 min in the MoS2 co-catalytic Fe2+/H2O2 Fenton system. Reproduced with permission.114 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (d) Mechanism of the nanozyme-catalyzed antibacterial performance of CuO NRs. Reproduced with permission.115 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
2.4 Nanozyme-based effect
Nanozyme is a novel kind of nanomaterial that mimics the functions of natural enzymes (e.g. the oxidase- or peroxidase-like activity) and catalyzes biologically relevant reactions under physiological conditions.84,116 This is another interesting concept, and the action derives from the catalytic ability of nanozymes by decomposing hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) or O2 to generate ROS that then participate in the bacteria-killing process.117 TMO&C-based nanomaterials with enzyme-like activities were firstly considered and assessed for their potential in bacterial control, mainly involving Fe3O4, Fe2O3, MoS2, CuO, V2O5 and CeO2.118 It was reported that CuO NPs could catalyze the production of strong antibacterial ˙OH from H2O2, serving as a model for peroxidase mimics. For increased efficiency, Karim and co-workers employed visible light as a “trigger” for the regulation of nanozyme-assisted catalytic performance of CuO nanorods (Fig. 5d). When irradiated with light, an enhanced affinity of CuO NRs towards H2O2 was discovered. And more remarkably, CuO NRs could also be excited by visible light, and contribute to a nearly 20-fold increase of ROS production while achieving efficient bacteria-killing performance even at low levels of H2O2.115 Moreover, nanozymes could offer favorable biocompatibility and ambient stability, holding promising potential in biomedical applications. Sang et al. reported a multiporous MoS2-hydrogel and its enzyme-mimicking role by converting H2O2 into ˙OH was also demonstrated. The multifunctional nanozyme-hydrogel exhibited broad-spectrum bactericidal properties without any obvious cytotoxicity to tissue cells.119 These factors effectively promote wound healing by preventing bacterial infections.
2.5 Photothermal effect
Photothermal therapy (PTT) has also been regarded as an effective strategy to combat bacteria, especially for the treatment of local infections.120,121 PTT is a process that induces hyperthermia damage in cells by employing a light of appropriate wavelength and a light-absorbing agent.122,123 In a typical PTT process, the photothermal agent could absorb near-infrared (NIR) light and generate considerable amounts of heat which directly deactivates phospholipids, enzymes, proteins and results in irreparable cell damage or death.124–126 Transition-metal chalcogenides have been successfully explored for PTT-based antibacterial applications due to their advantages of effective photothermal conversion and good biocompatibility.127,128 Recently, Huang and co-workers developed biocompatible nanocomposites consisting of bovine serum albumin (BSA) as the template with uniform CuS nanoparticles (Fig. 6a) that show strong photothermal conversion efficiency (24.68%), and result in rapid bacterial killing capability with a killing rate of 99.8% against S.aureus for 10 min.129 Moreover, the photothermal effect of nanoagents can be used either on their own or in conjunction with other antibacterial strategies to enhance the elimination rate of bacteria. Yin et al. have fabricated polyethyleneglycol functionalized MoS2 nanoflowers (PEG-MoS2) with excellent photothermal properties which exhibit a disinfection efficacy of 97% and 100% for E. coli and B. subtilis cells, respectively, under irradiation with 808 nm light.130 The generated hyperthermia effect can enable glutathione oxidation to obstruct the action of bacterial cells and finally lead to cell death. Meanwhile, in the presence of H2O2, PEG-MoS2 can exhibit both peroxidase catalytic properties and PTT performance, also envisioned as a way to strengthen the bactericidal efficacy and promote wound healing (Fig. 6b and c).
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic diagram illustrating the fabrication and bactericidal process of BSA-CuS NPs as a kind of photothermal agent. Reproduced with permission.129 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic illustration of PEG-MoS2 as a combined system for peroxidase catalyst-photothermal synergistic elimination of bacteria: (I) PEG-MoS2 was captured by bacteria; (II) PEG-MoS2 catalyzes the decomposition of less concentrated H2O2 to generate ˙OH to damage the cell wall integrity; (III) 808 nm laser irradiation causes hyperthermia, which accelerates GSH oxidation. (c) Photographs of E. coli infected wound treated with PBS (control), H2O2; MoS2; MoS2 + NIR; MoS2 + H2O2 and MoS2 + H2O2 + NIR at the second, fifth day and their corresponding histologic analyses. Reproduced with permission.130 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
2.6 The released noxious ions
Copper or zinc-based bactericides prevent bacterial growth by the release of noxious factors to the surrounding environment, filled with a sufficient quantity of biocidal ions to maintain toxicity.60,131 The antibacterial agents consisting of zinc and copper ions that released from the zinc oxide and cuprous oxide nanoparticles respectively are two typical examples. Prior research indicated that biocidal ions could possess a broad range of biological activities against bacteria, virus and fungi.132 In this system, the origin of the antibacterial properties was associated with their greater affinity towards thiol-containing groups and oxygen sites which replaced the essential metals from native binding sites.131 Meanwhile, the conformation changes of nucleic acids, cell proteins and adverse reactions on osmotic balance and oxidative phosphorylation could also explain the toxicity toward microbes.133 However, there is a concern about the side effects of released ions due to their potential to affect non-target organisms in the long-term use process. This behavior assisted by the released noxious ions is generally not served individually, rather in combination with other antibacterial approaches. It was reported that a stimulus-responsive system composed of 3-(trimethoxysilyl)propyl methacrylate (MPS) and mesoporous silica (mSiO2) modified CuS NPs (CuS/mSiO2-MPS) can significantly enhance the antimicrobial efficiency over 99.8% after irradiation with a single 808 nm NIR for 10 min.134 As previously mentioned, CuS has been suggested as a photothermal agent and the local hyperthermia can directly weaken the bacterial activity. Meanwhile, slow release of copper ions contributes to long-time inhibition of pathogens, a desirable property that serves as a supplement to the prevention of pathogenic infections (Fig. 7).
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration of the bacteria killing processes with the CuS/mSiO2-MPS hydrogel. (b) In vitro antibacterial assay showing the spread plate results of S. aureus and E. coli. Histogram of the antibacterial ability of (c) S. aureus and (d) E. coli. Reproduced with permission.134 Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
2.7 Synergetic antibacterial strategies
The combination of two or more different bactericidal mechanisms in a new way is a promising strategy for TMO&Cs to achieve enhanced bacteria-killing performance. This line of research is appealing in which a range of fascinating studies have been conducted and potentially led to avenues for prevention and new approaches to treatment. The synergetic strategies will be introduced in this section, although a few examples have been discussed above.
Bacterial cell membranes tend to be highly negatively charged due to their lipid layers and peptidoglycan.135 Therefore, TMO&Cs endowed with positive charge could show stronger affinity to microbial cells and result in better killing efficiency than uncharged nanoagents. Huang and co-workers fabricated antibiotic-loaded nanoplatforms by combining quaternized chitosan (QCS) modified MoS2 with ofloxacin (OFLX) through electrostatic interaction and π–π stacking to combat bacteria and accelerate wound healing simultaneously when exposed to 808 nm light for just 5 min.136 The positively-charged MoS2 nanoflakes can initiate appropriate dispersion stability and realize effective bacterial adhesion. And the enhanced antibacterial efficacy triggered by the synergistic effect of PTT and antibiotic action can be achieved in a short time under NIR irradiation (Fig. 8a). Similarly, the functional composite compounded from the nanosized TiO2 NPs and chitosan yields a much higher bactericidal efficacy when compared with pure TiO2.137 This is due to the chitosan specified in a liner cationic polysaccharide that interacts with the negatively-charged lipids exposed on the cell membranes, causing cell damage or death.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation of QCS-MoS2-OFLX and antibiotic-photothermal synergistic therapy against MRSA bacteria. Reproduced with permission.136 Copyright 2020, Springer. (b) Schematic illustration for the bacteria inactivation mechanism of PDMS-ZnO/Au under visible light. Reproduced with permission.77 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. 
In a recent study, we found that a biomimetic ZnO/Au nanopillar array on the surface of PDMS exhibited a remarkable antibacterial activity either in the dark or under light exposure (Fig. 8b). The nanotopography of PDMS-ZnO nanopillar arrays resembling that of dragonfly wings demonstrates bacteria-killing performance through mechanical rupture, and results in a lethality rate of 65.5% in the dark. The incorporation of AuNPs can exhibit outstanding visible-light-driven photocatalytic activity and then the ROS generated from PDMS-ZnO/Au are much higher than those from PDMS-ZnO. Consequently, PDMS-ZnO/Au shows strong antibacterial capability owing to the synergy of mechanical and photocatalytic bactericidal actions upon the irradiation of visible light, and 99.8% of the bacteria adhered on the surface were decomposed.77 It is a general trend to develop a synergistic antibacterial strategy which combines multiple mechanisms to fight against the resistance. Overall, there are a variety of modes of synergistic action, mainly including photocatalytic + photothermal effect,96 physical-rupturing + photocatalytic effect,77 nanozyme-assisted + physical rupturing effect,138 nanozyme-assisted + photothermal effect130 and Fenton-assisted + photocatalytic effect,114 which could be considered as highly promising strategies for combatting bacterial infection.
3. Antibacterial applications enabled by TMO&Cs
TMO&C-based nanomaterials serve as highly efficient antimicrobial therapies which are heralded for their potential in practical applications.139,140 Recently, there has been a fair amount of reports about the superior performance of TMO&C-based nanoagents. Here, we provide a brief introduction about the practical applications of TMO&Cs with antibacterial capability in these three directly relevant fields: air purification, water purification and wound healing.
3.1 Air purification
With the development of industrialization, air pollution has become an increasingly serious concern and poses a tremendous threat to human health and the environment.141–143 Air pollutants are complex and mainly consist of particulate matter, toxic gases, and biological contaminants. Filtration has become an essential need for air purification.144 The common measures employed by the public mostly rely on mask filters for outdoor protection and air-filtering devices for indoor pollution. After long time usage, conventional filters tend to be a ground for breeding bacteria which is related to the organic contaminants accumulated on air filters. Additionally, the co-occurrence of microorganisms with other air pollutants under natural conditions becomes a challenging and complicated goal for eliminating biological pollution. This indicates an urgent demand for efficient filter materials capable of combatting bacteria. TMO&C-based nanomaterials like ZnO and TiO2 are potential photocatalysts with intrinsic antibacterial properties and have been employed for air disinfection.145,146 For example, Lv et al. have prepared a ZnO-loaded hybrid poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) and konjac glucomannan (KGM) electrospun nanofiber membrane which results in not only sufficiently high air-filtration efficiency but also excellent photocatalytic performance and bactericidal activity with the aid of ZnO NPs (Fig. 9a).147 The diameters of the inhibition zones observed in the experiment have shown that the highest killing efficiency against E. coli and Bacillus subtilis was found in 1.0 and 2.0 wt% ZnO@PVA/KGM, respectively. Significantly, nanomaterials have been exploited for air filtration and show strength due to their own controllable physiochemical properties.145 The expanded polytetrafluoroethylene (ePTFE) filters functionalized with ZnO nanorods (NRs) have been demonstrated with extremely potent air filtration efficiencies owing to the large surface area of ZnO NRs (Fig. 9b–e). These filters also exhibited a superior antibacterial activity against both Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria (>99.0% killing rate).148
 Fig. 9  (a) Multifunctional ZnO@PVA/KGM electrospun nanofiber membranes: (I) schematic presentation of the preparation of the membranes by electrospinning and (II) their application for air filtration. (III) Photocatalytic degradation. (IV) Antibacterial activity of the membranes. Reproduced with permission.147 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. SEM images and the corresponding schematic of the particle capture mechanism of the pristine ePTFE filter filtrating 0.3 μm particles (b), the functionalized ePTFE filter filtrating 0.3 μm particles (c), the pristine ePTFE filter filtrating 1.2 μm particles (d), and the functionalized ePTFE filter filtrating 1.2 μm particles (e) Particles with sizes of 0.3 and 1.2 μm represent the nanosized and microsized particles, respectively. Reproduced with permission.148 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (f) Schematic of the suggested photocatalytic mechanism of H-TiO2 photocatalysts under solar light irradiation. Removal of (g) reactive black 5, (h) rhodamine B, and (i) phenol by commercial TiO2 and H-TiO2 under solar light irradiation. Reproduced with permission.149 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. 
3.2 Water purification
Water pollution has become a global concern. The types of pollutants vary and microbial contaminant is one of the challenging problems which bring hazards to public health and the environment. Control measures are offered and ordinary disinfectants such as O3, Cl2 or ClO2 have potential carcinogenic risks due to their by-products.150 Nanotechnology has been a viable alternative for water purification and disinfection by providing a variety of sorbents and catalysts. Wang et al. focused on the removal of pathogenic bacteria via adsorption, and the prepared ZnO-coated zeolite (ZOCZ) demonstrated a high removal capacity for E. coli of 4.34 × 106 CFU g−1 within 120 min.151 It was indicated that ZOCZ with positive charge could show strong binding ability toward bacterial cells and facilitate the bacteria-killing process coordinated by the release of zinc ions. As an alternative, in situ generation of ROS is highly preferable for the destruction of organic pollutants and bacteria. For instance, An et al. designed nanoporous hydrogenated TiO2(H-TiO2) photocatalysts and the application values in the treatment of wastewater was evaluated under simulated solar irradiation (Fig. 9f–i). The resultant H-TiO2 exhibits almost complete photodegradation of three azo-dyes within 120 min. The reinforced antibacterial efficiency was also realized with a killing rate of over 82%, and commercial TiO2 can only inactivate 37% of E. coli under the same conditions.149
3.3 Wound healing
Skin is the body's largest organ that acts as the first barrier against infectious pathogens. Once that protection is lost, the damaged skin is more susceptible to bacterial strains, and may cause inflammatory response, purulent infections and delay the healing process.152,153 Antibiotics, as a common means of antibacterial treatment, have prompted the emergence of drug-resistant bacteria due to their misuse or abuse. This narrows the clinical option of common antibiotics and creates an urge to develop new alternative methods to combat bacterial infections. Specific attention is given to nanotechnology in which a wide variety of TMO&Cs hold great promise in eradicating pathogenic bacteria and simultaneously accelerating wound healing. For instance, highly efficient chitosan@MoS2 hybrid coating presents a superior capacity to kill bacteria due to the synergistic effects of both photodynamic and photothermal actions (Fig. 10). Under co-irradiation with 660 nm and 808 nm, the bacterial killing ratios are enhanced to 99.65% and 99.84% against S. aureus and E. coli, respectively. There is no obvious inflammatory response in which the 1O2 and hyperthermia triggered by CS@MoS2-Ti under dual lights are responsible for enhancing the repair process of soft tissue wound.96 TMO&C-based nanomaterials are being explored in infection treatment154 or as vectors for drug delivery,136 thus, the cytotoxicity of these chemically treated TMO&Cs should be assessed. In one example, Zhang and co-workers have prepared a multifunctional hydrogel embedded with CuS@MoS2 microspheres for wound dressing.155 The prepared hydrogel could exert formidable antibacterial activity, 99.3% of E. coli and 99.5% of S. aureus are killed under dual light illumination for just 15 min. Furthermore, the hydrogel dressings cannot induce obvious cytotoxicity to the endothelial cells, which can significantly expedite wound healing by triggering a surge of hypoxia inducible factor-1(HIF-1α) and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) at the wound sites. Similarly, ultrasmall copper sulfidenanodots (CuS NDs) were fabricated to cure multidrug-resistant bacteria-infected chronic nonhealing wound.156 A study on cell viability has found that HFF-1 and HUVECs (two human cell lines) are still viable even at slightly higher concentrations of nanoagents, indicating the less cytotoxic nature of CuS NDs.
 Fig. 10  (a) Disinfection schematic in vivo, disruptive behavior on the bacterial cell membrane, and inactivating bacteria through photodynamic and photothermal actions of CS@MoS2 hybrid coating on a Ti implant under dual lights (660 nm VL + 808 nm NIR). (b) Photographs of bacterial colonies formed by E. coli and S. aureus of pure Ti and CS@MoS2-Ti under dark conditions (light−) and after exposing to 660 nm VL; 808 nm NIR; dual lights (660 nm + 808 nm) for 10 min. (c) H&E staining images showing the tissue infection degree of samples. The samples were divided into five groups, pure Ti as the control and CS@MoS2-Ti under different irradiation treatments as the experimental group (scale bar: 50 μm). Reproduced with permission.96 Copyright 2018, Wiley. 
4. Conclusions
With the deepening of research, the remarkable performance of TMO&C-based antibacterial nanomaterials has been constantly elucidated. The antibacterial performance of TMO&C-based nanomaterials can be further optimized by means of structure design, function modification and the combination of multiple antibacterial mechanisms. It came to our attention that TMO&C nanomaterials could offer several advantages over traditional antibiotics such as high efficiency, less acquired resistance, broad-spectrum, durability, low toxicity while simultaneously being nonirritating to skin issues. TMO&C-based antibacterial systems have shown great potential for the treatment of bacterial infections that excel at eliminating bacterial pathogens and address the issue of resistance.
Here, we have summarized the recent development of TMO&C-based nanomaterials with antimicrobial performance. The various types of bactericidal mechanisms observed on TMO&Cs, mainly including mechanical rupture, photocatalytic/photothermal effect, catalytic bacterial-killing by Fenton reactions and nanozymes, released noxious ions and the synergetic action, have been discussed. Subsequently, we have focused on the practical application of TMO&Cs in the fields of air/water purification and wound healing. The antibacterial strategies enabled by TMO&Cs have undergone consistent improvement and show an impressive prospect which are closely related to their unique features and properties.
In view of further applications of TMO&C-based nanoagents, some suggestions are provided as follows:
1. The basis of mechano-responsive nanomaterials has been confirmed, which indicates that the surface with sharp nanofeatures can physically pierce and insert into bacterial membranes, and then lead to cell damage or death. This means that mechanical rupture arises from a purely physical interaction between the nanoarchitectures and microbial cells, independent of the chemical composition. There's a practical limit that only surface-adhered cells can be killed through the rupturing mechanism. It is therefore wise to coordinate with other bactericidal pathways for superior bactericidal performance.
2. Photocatalytic disinfection has been perceived as a promising candidate for resisting bacterial infection. Over the past few years, a great deal of research has been dedicated to improving the photocatalytic efficiency that is inextricably linked to ROS generation and bacterial inactivation. Of particular note is the photocatalysts with visible light response have great potential in the removal of multidrug-resistant bacteria. It might require a paradigm shift in the photocatalytic field towards developing novel photocatalysts to provide continuous solar-powered disinfection under both light and dark conditions. Recently, the “memory catalysis” effect has been proved to induce the disinfection effect of photocatalysts in the dark, which is adapted for more widespread applications, especially in the field of water treatment.
3. The Fenton reaction has been employed as a powerful and effective weapon for disinfection. The action principle is that the Fenton catalysts involved the activation of H2O2 to product ˙OH radicals which are highly toxic for pathogens. Fe-based nanomaterials are the most extensively studied catalysts for triggering the Fenton reaction, which greatly contribute to the inactivation of bacteria under acidic conditions. But the narrow pH operation range to avoid the ferric precipitate presents a significant obstacle to their further applications. The focus should be assigned to the modifications of the classical Fenton reaction in which the photo-Fenton reaction shows broad application potential for their antibacterial activities.
4. The bacterial-killing ability assisted by nanozymes has been explored as an effective strategy for infection control. Nanozymes with peroxidase- and oxidase-like activities can be utilized to catalyze the production of ROS which then participate in the bacterial-killing process. Nanozymes are gaining popularity as alternatives to natural enzymes in terms of low cost, facile preparation and stability; such features are favorable for antibacterial applications, especially in the field of wound disinfection. The catalytic ability is also affected and tuned by many factors, among which the pH and temperature cannot be ignored.
5. Photothermal treatment has shown great potential for combatting pathogenic bacteria, stemming from the ability of nanoagents to generate high amounts of heat when exposed to NIR-light irradiation. The induced hyperthermia potently damages bacterial cells and such light-mediated antibacterial approaches are suitable for biological applications which benefit from their controllability, biosafety and selectivity. The illumination time needs to be controlled accurately to avoid excessive damage to normal tissues.
6. The bacterial-killing strategy enabled by the released noxious ions, mainly including copper or zinc-based nanoagents which provide a broad range of biological activities against bacteria. The potential to affect non-target organisms is a limiting factor for their particle applications. The bactericidal action defined in this system is generally not served individually, rather in combination with other antibacterial approaches.
7. There are multiple pathways for TMO&C-based nanomaterials to obliterate pathogenic bacteria which play a vital role in countering antibiotic resistance. For example, MoS2 has been deemed as one of the effective options for antibacterial treatment due to its excellent photothermal conversion ability and photodynamic properties. Correlatively, the synergistic action of TMO&Cs combined with other antibacterial agents is expected to achieve an enhanced bacterial-killing efficiency.
8. TMO&C-based nanomaterials provide viable options to address thorny issues of antibiotic resistance due to their unconventional physicochemical properties, and have wide application foreground, especially in the fields of air purification, wastewater treatment and wound healing. Following the development of research, we believed that the TMO&C-based antimicrobial strategy provides a promising platform for combatting biological contamination, even expanding into the environment and biomedical fields which are closely linked to human health.
5. Prospects
Despite significant achievements made in the development of various TMO&C-based functional systems for bacteria inactivation, the practical application of TMO&C is still restricted by some obstacles (cost, security, efficiency, etc.)
1. For now, there is still a lack of research on the decomposition products of bacteria after killing, so it is urgent to clarify the intermediate products and investigate their biological toxicity. For biomedical field applications, it is necessary to evaluate the cytotoxicity and genotoxicity of TMO&Cs. And the current application is mostly limited to skin surface or in vitro test, and there is little research on their in vivo use. It is indispensable to evaluate the bactericidal efficiency and biological safety of TMO&Cs in vivo. Furthermore, extensive toxicological studies on TMO&Cs to avoid secondary pollution caused by nanoparticles themselves or metal dissolution are needed.
2. It is high time and necessary for TMO&C-based antibacterial systems to realize the aim of cost reduction and the demand for bactericidal properties. However, there is still much room for improving the efficiency of TMO&C-based nanoagents, which are embodied in different forms such as bactericidal rate, minimum inhibitory concentration and response time. We could integrate different technologies and products into a cohesive system that aims at a high-killing efficiency in the treatment of bacterial infection.
3. So far, the antibacterial effects of TMO&Cs are mainly evaluated on Escherichia coli, Staphylococcus aureus, etc., but the action modes are not clear for other bacteria. Whether TMO&Cs can kill other pathogenic microorganisms, such as viruses, mycoplasma, chlamydia, fungi and parasites should also be further explored.
4. A large number of TMO&Cs have shown broad prospects of development in their application, but there are still many controversies on their practical applications. In order to meet respective requirements of different fields, more research is needed to fully understand the role of subclinical traits in the process of sterilization, such as the chemical stability at different pH values or temperatures, the killing efficiency and selectivity under the coexistence of multiple bacteria, and the optimization and coordination of antimicrobial agents with multi-functional characteristics. Furthermore, the environmental risks of these nanoagents should be carefully assessed.
5. With regard to wastewater treatment, the reported antibacterial agent mainly exists in the form of solid powder, which is tough to recycle after disinfection. Thus, the coupling of TMO&Cs with recyclable magnetic materials is beneficial for reasonable reuse and does not cause secondary pollution. Using TMO&Cs to modify the filter screen to achieve sterilization of filtered water is also an alternative solution for treatment of wastewater. Furthermore, the “win-win” strategy for bacteria inactivation and pollutant degradation is also a development trend by employing TMO&C nanomaterials.
6. Bacterial adhesion and colonization on the medical devices is the prerequisite for infection-related diseases, therefore the TMO&C-based antibacterial strategy supplemented by controlling the initial adhesion of bacteria is highly effective for combatting such infections. In addition, for air and water disinfection systems, controllable capture, killing and removal of bacteria are the breakthroughs to improve the antibacterial ability of nanomaterials in the future.
With the in-depth research on antibiotic-free strategies, TMO&Cs with rapid and controllable bacteria-killing property have obvious advantages in air filtration, wastewater purification and medical implants. We hope that TMO&C-based antibacterial strategies can draw even more attention and be widely used in high-risk places for bacterial control and destruction.
Author contributions
Yanan Tang: conceptualization, formal analysis, writing – original draft. Zhen Qin: writing – review & editing. Shengyan Yin: writing – review & editing, funding acquisition. Hang Sun: supervision, writing – review & editing, funding acquisition.
Conflicts of interest
Authors declare no conflicts of interest for this work.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC, 51772121) and Jilin Provincial Science & Technology Department (20200401126GX).
References
K. Lim, R. R. Chua, H. Bow, P. A. Tambyah, K. Hadinoto and S. S. Leong, Acta Biomater., 2015, 15, 127–138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, X. Wu, C. He, J. Huang, S. Yin, M. Zhou, L. Ma, W. Zhao, L. Qiu, C. Cheng and C. Zhao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 13698–13708 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Feng, L. Liu, J. Zhang, H. Aslan and M. Dong, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 8631–8652 RSC .
A. Gupta, S. Mumtaz, C.-H. Li, I. Hussain and V. M. Rotello, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 415–427 RSC .
D. Ciumac, H. Gong, X. Hu and J. R. Lu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 537, 163–185 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. M. G. O'Connell, J. T. Hodgkinson, H. F. Sore, M. Welch, G. P. C. Salmond and D. R. Spring, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 10706–10733 CrossRef PubMed .
M. S. Ganewatta and C. Tang, Polymer, 2015, 63, A1–A29 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, H. Bai, Y. Yang, J. Yoon, S. Wang and X. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 1805092 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Lakhundi and K. Zhang, Clin. Microbiol. Rev., 2018, 31, 4 CrossRef PubMed .
P.-R. Hsueh, J. Formosan Med. Assoc., 2010, 109, 685–687 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, C. Hu and L. Shao, Int. J. Nanomed., 2017, 12, 1227–1249 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Pacios, L. Blasco, I. Bleriot, L. Fernandez-Garcia, M. G. Bardanca, A. Ambroa, M. López, G. Bou and M. Tomás, Antibiotics, 2020, 9, 65 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. T. Khan and A. Malik, J. Hazard. Mater., 2019, 363, 295–308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chouirfa, H. Bouloussa, V. Migonney and C. Falentin-Daudré, Acta Biomater., 2019, 83, 37–54 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Abee, Á. T. Kovács, O. P. Kuipers and S. van der Veen, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 2011, 22, 172–179 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. A. Hemeg, Int. J. Nanomed., 2017, 12, 8211–8225 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yuan, Y. Wei, Y. Zhang, L. Riaz, Q. Yang, Q. Wang and R. Wang, Sci. Total Environ., 2021, 761, 144303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-C. Jin, X.-J. Wu, J. Xu, B.-B. Wang, F.-L. Jiang and Y. Liu, Biomater. Sci., 2017, 5, 247–257 RSC .
A. Anand, B. Unnikrishnan, S.-C. Wei, C. P. Chou, L.-Z. Zhang and C.-C. Huang, Nanoscale Horiz., 2019, 4, 117–137 RSC .
R. Wu, X. Ou, R. Tian, J. Zhang, H. Jin, M. Dong, J. Li and L. Liu, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 20162–20170 RSC .
B.-M. Jun, S. Kim, J. Heo, C. M. Park, N. Her, M. Jang, Y. Huang, J. Han and Y. Yoon, Nano Res., 2019, 12, 471–487 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Mauter, I. Zucker, F. Perreault, J. R. Werber, J.-H. Kim and M. Elimelech, Nat. Sustain., 2018, 1, 166–175 CrossRef .
R. V. Kumaraswamy, S. Kumari, R. C. Choudhary, A. Pal, R. Raliya, P. Biswas and V. Saharan, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2018, 113, 494–506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, Y. Yang, Y. Shi, H. Song and C. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 1904106 Search PubMed .
Q. Xin, H. Shah, A. Nawaz, W. Xie, M. Z. Akram, A. Batool, L. Tian, S. U. Jan, R. Boddula, B. Guo, Q. Liu and J. R. Gong, Adv. Mater., 2018, e1804838 Search PubMed .
D. Li, B. Kumari, J. M. Makabenta, B. Tao, K. Qian, X. Mei and V. M. Rotello, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2020, 8, 9466–9480 RSC .
P. V. Baptista, M. P. McCusker, A. Carvalho, D. A. Ferreira, N. M. Mohan, M. Martins and A. R. Fernandes, Front. Microbiol., 2018, 9, 1441 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liu, L. Shi, L. Su, H. C. van der Mei, P. C. Jutte, Y. Ren and H. J. Busscher, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 428–446 RSC .
Y. Zhao, Y. Tian, Y. Cui, W. Liu, W. Ma and X. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 12349–12356 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Tan, J. Li, X. Liu, Z. Cui, X. Yang, K. W. K. Yeung, H. Pan, Y. Zheng, X. Wang and S. Wu, Small, 2018, 14, 1703197 CrossRef PubMed .
U. Kadiyala, E. S. Turali-Emre, J. H. Bahng, N. A. Kotov and J. S. VanEpps, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 4927–4939 RSC .
S. Liu, S. Cao, J. Guo, L. Luo, Y. Zhou, C. Lin, J. Shi, C. Fan, M. Lv and L. Wang, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 19603–19611 RSC .
P. Makvandi, C. Y. Wang, E. N. Zare, A. Borzacchiello, L. N. Niu and F. R. Tay, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1910021 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, L. Liu, L. Huang, W. Zhang, R. Wang, T. Yue, J. Sun, G. Li and J. Wang, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 9468–9477 RSC .
W. Zhang, B. Xiao and T. Fang, Chemosphere, 2018, 191, 324–334 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Zheng, M. I. Setyawati, D. T. Leong and J. Xie, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2018, 357, 1–17 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liao, Y. Li and S. C. Tjong, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2019, 20, 449 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Seitz, R. R. Rosenfeldt, K. Storm, G. Metreveli, G. E. Schaumann, R. Schulz and M. Bundschuh, Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf., 2015, 111, 263–270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bhattacharya and S. K. Samanta, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 11967–12028 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Schnaider, S. Brahmachari, N. W. Schmidt, B. Mensa, S. Shaham-Niv, D. Bychenko, L. Adler-Abramovich, L. J. W. Shimon, S. Kolusheva, W. F. DeGrado and E. Gazit, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1365 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Schnaider, S. Brahmachari, N. W. Schmidt, B. Mensa, S. Shaham-Niv, D. Bychenko, L. Adler-Abramovich, L. J. W. Shimon, S. Kolusheva, W. F. DeGrado and E. Gazit, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1365 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Ji, H. Sun and X. Qu, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2016, 105, 176–189 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sun and J. Li, Nano Today, 2018, 20, 121–137 CrossRef CAS .
K. He, Z. Zeng, A. Chen, G. Zeng, R. Xiao, P. Xu, Z. Huang, J. Shi, L. Hu and G. Chen, Small, 2018, 14, 1800871 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Mei, S. Zhu, W. Yin, C. Chen, G. Nie, Z. Gu and Y. Zhao, Theranostics, 2020, 10, 757–781 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Han, Z. Wu, Y. Li and Y. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 358, 1022–1037 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Djurišić, Y. H. Leung and A. M. C. Ng, Mater. Horiz., 2014, 1, 400 RSC .
K. Kasinathan, J. Kennedy, M. Elayaperumal, M. Henini and M. Malik, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 38064 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, W. Zhu, Y. Qiu, X. Yi, A. von dem Bussche, A. Kane, H. Gao, K. Koski and R. Hurt, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 1750–1780 RSC .
X. He, D.-P. Yang, X. Zhang, M. Liu, Z. Kang, C. Lin, N. Jia and R. Luque, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 369, 621–633 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, J. Li, T. Liang, C. Ma, Y. Zhang, H. Chen, N. Hanagata, H. Su and M. Xu, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 10126–10133 RSC .
P. Panchal, D. R. Paul, A. Sharma, P. Choudhary, P. Meena and S. P. Nehra, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 563, 370–380 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, W. Wang, L. Yue, S. Cui, H. Wang, C. Wang and S. Chen, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 382, 122855 CrossRef CAS .
F. Haque, T. Daeneke, K. Kalantar-Zadeh and J. Z. Ou, Nanomicro Lett., 2018, 10, 23 Search PubMed .
Z. Xu, J. Lu, X. Zheng, B. Chen, Y. Luo, M. N. Tahir, B. Huang, X. Xia and X. Pan, J. Hazard. Mater., 2020, 399, 123057 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Agarwal and K. Chatterjee, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 16365–16397 RSC .
A. M. Mostafa, E. A. Mwafy and M. S. Hasanin, Opt. Laser Technol., 2020, 121, 105824 CrossRef CAS .
J. Song, X. Wu, M. Zhang, C. Liu, J. Yu, G. Sun, Y. Si and B. Ding, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 379, 122269 CrossRef CAS .
R. Medhi, M. D. Marquez and T. R. Lee, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2020, 3, 6156–6185 CrossRef CAS .
K. Qi, B. Cheng, J. Yu and W. Ho, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 727, 792–820 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yuan and Y. Zhang, Nanomedicine, 2017, 13, 2199–2207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Jiang, Z. Xing, T. Zhao, Z. Yang, K. Wang, Z. Li, S. Yang, L. Xie and W. Zhou, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 274, 118947 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sułek, B. Pucelik, J. Kuncewicz, G. Dubin and J. M. Dąbrowski, Catal. Today, 2019, 335, 538–549 CrossRef .
N. Waiskopf, Y. Ben-Shahar and U. Banin, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706697 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Tian, M. Zhou, Y. Pan, X. Du and Q. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 403, 126361 CrossRef CAS .
M. Xu, Y. Hu, Y. Xiao, Y. Zhang, K. Sun, T. Wu, N. Lv, W. Wang, W. Ding, F. Li, B. Qiu and J. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 50260–50274 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, Y. Gao, R. Chandrawati and L. Hosta-Rigau, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 21046–21060 RSC .
Z. Zhou, B. Li, C. Shen, D. Wu, H. Fan, J. Zhao, H. Li, Z. Zeng, Z. Luo, L. Ma and C. Tan, Small, 2020, 16, 2004173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Xing, Y. Liu, Q. Zou and X. Yan, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 22182–22195 RSC .
E. P. Ivanova, J. Hasan, H. K. Webb, G. Gervinskas, S. Juodkazis, V. K. Truong, A. H. F. Wu, R. N. Lamb, V. A. Baulin, G. S. Watson, J. A. Watson, D. E. Mainwaring and R. J. Crawford, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2838 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Pogodin, J. Hasan, V. A. Baulin, H. K. Webb, V. K. Truong, T. H. P. Nguyen, V. Boshkovikj, C. J. Fluke, G. S. Watson, J. A. Watson, R. J. Crawford and E. P. Ivanova, Biophys. J., 2013, 104, 835–840 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. P. Ivanova, J. Hasan, H. K. Webb, V. K. Truong, G. S. Watson, J. A. Watson, V. A. Baulin, S. Pogodin, J. Y. Wang, M. J. Tobin, C. Löbbe and R. J. Crawford, Small, 2012, 8, 2489–2494 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, G. S. Cheung, G. S. Watson, J. A. Watson, S. Lin, L. Schwarzkopf and D. W. Green, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 18860–18869 RSC .
E. Jeong, C. U. Kim, J. Byun, J. Lee, H.-E. Kim, E.-J. Kim, K. J. Choi and S. W. Hong, Sci. Total Environ., 2020, 712, 136574 CrossRef CAS .
V. T. H. Pham, V. K. Truong, D. E. Mainwaring, Y. Guo, V. A. Baulin, M. Al Kobaisi, G. Gervinskas, S. Juodkazis, W. R. Zeng, P. P. Doran, R. J. Crawford and E. P. Ivanova, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2014, 2, 2819–2826 RSC .
R. Jiang, L. Hao, L. Song, L. Tian, Y. Fan, J. Zhao, C. Liu, W. Ming and L. Ren, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 398, 125609 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tang, H. Sun, Z. Qin, S. Yin, L. Tian and Z. Liu, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 398, 125575 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ge, C. Ren, Y. Ding, G. Chen, X. Lu, K. Wang, F. Ren, M. Yang, Z. Wang, J. Li, X. An, B. Qian and Y. Leng, Bioact. Mater., 2019, 4, 346–357 CrossRef .
G. Yi, Y. Yuan, X. Li and Y. Zhang, Small, 2018, 14, 1703159 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Xie, Y.-P. Peng, L. Yu, C. Xing, M. Qiu, J. Hu and H. Zhang, Sol. RRL, 2020, 4, 1900400 CrossRef .
R. Katal, S. Masudy-Panah, M. Tanhaei, M. H. D. A. Farahani and H. Jiangyong, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 384, 123384 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fan, S. Liu, Y. Yi, H. Rong and J. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 2005–2037 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, G. Li, D. Xia, T. An, H. Zhao and P. K. Wong, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2017, 4, 782–799 RSC .
X. Xiong, Y. Huang, C. Lin, X. Y. Liu and Y. Lin, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 22206–22215 RSC .
T. Shi, X. Hou, S. Guo, L. Zhang, C. Wei, T. Peng and X. Hu, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 493 CrossRef CAS .
K. Qi, X. Xing, A. Zada, M. Li, Q. Wang, S.-Y. Liu, H. Lin and G. Wang, Ceram. Int., 2020, 46, 1494–1502 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kalathil, M. M. Khan, A. N. Banerjee, J. Lee and M. H. Cho, J. Nanopart. Res., 2012, 14, 1051 CrossRef .
S. Mei, H. Wang, W. Wang, L. Tong, H. Pan, C. Ruan, Q. Ma, M. Liu, H. Yang, L. Zhang, Y. Cheng, Y. Zhang, L. Zhao and P. K. Chu, Biomaterials, 2014, 35, 4255–4265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. He, A. Kumar, M. Khan and I. M. C. Lo, Sci. Total Environ., 2021, 758, 143953 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. C. Eischeid, J. N. Meyer and K. G. Linden, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2009, 75, 23 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lu, G. Meng, C. Wang and H. Chen, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 404, 126526 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-T. Guo and C. Kong, Chemosphere, 2019, 224, 827–832 CrossRef CAS .
C. Pablos, J. Marugán, R. van Grieken and E. Serrano, Water Res., 2013, 47, 1237–1245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, Y. Jin, W. Chen, J. Wang, H. Chen, L. Sun, X. Li, J. Ji, Q. Yu, L. Shen and B. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 358, 74–90 CrossRef CAS .
C. Mutalik, D.-Y. Wang, D. I. Krisnawati, A. Jazidie, S. Yougbare and T.-R. Kuo, Nanomaterials, 2020, 10, 643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Feng, X. Liu, L. Tan, Z. Cui, X. Yang, Z. Li, Y. Zheng, K. W. K. Yeung and S. Wu, Small, 2018, 14, 1704347 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Fu and A. Mo, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2018, 13, 187 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Sathe, K. Laxman, M. T. Z. Myint, S. Dobretsov, J. Richter and J. Dutta, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 3624 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Tang, H. Sun, Y. Shang, S. Zeng, Z. Qin, S. Yin, J. Li, S. Liang, G. Lu and Z. Liu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 535, 516–523 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. He, H.-K. Kim, W. G. Wamer, D. Melka, J. H. Callahan and J.-J. Yin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 750–757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, D. Kong, P. C. Hsu, H. Yuan, H. W. Lee, Y. Liu, H. Wang, S. Wang, K. Yan, D. Lin, P. A. Maraccini, K. M. Parker, A. B. Boehm and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 1098–1104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. U. Lee, S. C. Lee, S. Choi, B. Son, S. M. Lee, H. J. Kim and J. Lee, Chem. Eng. J., 2013, 228, 756–764 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, J. Li, X. Liu, Z. Cui, D.-F. Chen, Z. Li, Y. Liang, S. Zhu and S. Wu, Biomater. Sci., 2020, 8, 4216–4224 RSC .
H. Sun, Z. Yang, Y. Pu, W. Dou, C. Wang, W. Wang, X. Hao, S. Chen, Q. Shao, M. Dong, S. Wu, T. Ding and Z. Guo, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 547, 40–49 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zeng, Z. Wang, G. Wang, T. R. Gengenbach, D. T. McCarthy, A. Deletic, J. Yu and X. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 218, 163–173 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, Y. W. Li, Z. Liu, R. Xie and J. K. Shang, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 1068–1072 RSC .
T. Cai, Y. Liu, L. Wang, S. Zhang, J. Ma, W. Dong, Y. Zeng, J. Yuan, C. Liu and S. Luo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 25350–25359 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sakar, C.-C. Nguyen, M.-H. Vu and T.-O. Do, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 809–820 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liu, W. Sun, W. Yang, Q. Li and J. K. Shang, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 20878 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. D. Bokare and W. Choi, J. Hazard. Mater., 2014, 275, 121–135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Chen, D. Yang, L. Yu, X. Jing and Y. Chen, Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7, 317–337 RSC .
C. Ruales-Lonfat, N. Benítez, A. Sienkiewicz and C. Pulgarín, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 160–161, 286–297 CrossRef CAS .
I. Thakur, B. Örmeci and A. Verma, J. Water Process Eng., 2020, 33, 101085 CrossRef .
J. Liu, C. Dong, Y. Deng, J. Ji, S. Bao, C. Chen, B. Shen, J. Zhang and M. Xing, Water Res., 2018, 145, 312–320 CrossRef CAS .
M. N. Karim, M. Singh, P. Weerathunge, P. Bian, R. Zheng, C. Dekiwadia, T. Ahmed, S. Walia, E. Della Gaspera, S. Singh, R. Ramanathan and V. Bansal, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2018, 1, 1694–1704 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ge, R. Wu, Y. Chong, G. Fang, X. Jiang, Y. Pan, C. Chen and J.-J. Yin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1801484 CrossRef .
H. Wei and E. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 6060 RSC .
J. Wu, X. Wang, Q. Wang, Z. Lou, S. Li, Y. Zhu, L. Qin and H. Wei, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 1004–1076 RSC .
Y. Sang, W. Li, H. Liu, L. Zhang, H. Wang, Z. Liu, J. Ren and X. Qu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1900518 CrossRef .
X. Zhao, Y. Liang, Y. Huang, J. He, Y. Han and B. Guo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1910748 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, L. Ma, C. Cheng, Y. Deng, J. Huang, X. Fan, C. Nie, W. Zhao and C. Zhao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1705708 CrossRef .
J. Zhao, S. Huang, P. Ravisankar and H. Zhu, ACS Appl. Bio Mater., 2020, 3, 8188–8210 CrossRef CAS .
J.-W. Xu, K. Yao and Z.-K. Xu, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 8680–8691 RSC .
Y. Zou, Y. Zhang, Q. Yu and H. Chen, Biomater. Sci., 2021, 9, 10–22 RSC .
M. Li, L. Li, K. Su, X. Liu, T. Zhang, Y. Liang, D. Jing, X. Yang, D. Zheng, Z. Cui, Z. Li, S. Zhu, K. W. K. Yeung, Y. Zheng, X. Wang and S. Wu, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1900599 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Zhu, X. Liu, L. Tan, Z. Cui, Y. Liang, Z. Li, K. Wai, K. Yeung and S. Wu, J. Hazard. Mater., 2020, 383, 121122 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhao, Q. Yang, W. Guo, H. Liu, T. Ma and F. Qu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 20820–20827 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Tian, X. Shi, L. Cheng, Y. Luo, Z. Dong, H. Gong, L. Xu, Z. Zhong, R. Peng and Z. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 8542–8548 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Huang, J. Zhou, J. Zhuang, H. Gao, D. Huang, L. Wang, W. Wu, Q. Li, D. P. Yang and M. Y. Han, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 36606–36614 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yin, J. Yu, F. Lv, L. Yan, L. R. Zheng, Z. Gu and Y. Zhao, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 11000–11011 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Sathe, K. Laxman, M. T. Z. Myint, S. Dobretsov, J. Richter and J. Dutta, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 3624 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Han, W. Qiu and W. Gao, J. Hazard. Mater., 2010, 178, 115–122 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Bora, P. Sathe, K. Laxman, S. Dobretsov and J. Dutta, Catal. Today, 2017, 284, 11–18 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, X. Liu, L. Tan, Z. Cui, X. Yang, Z. Li, Y. Zheng, K. W. K. Yeung, P. K. Chu and S. Wu, Biomater. Sci., 2018, 6, 2110–2121 RSC .
X. Zhang, G. Xiao, Y. Wang, Y. Zhao, H. Su and T. Tan, Carbohydr. Polym., 2017, 169, 101–107 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Huang, Q. Gao, X. Li, Y. Gao, H. Han, Q. Jin, K. Yao and J. Ji, Nano Res., 2020, 13, 2340–2350 CrossRef CAS .
U. Siripatrawan and P. Kaewklin, Food Hydrocolloids, 2018, 84, 125–134 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, F. Gao, A. Wang, X. Chen, H. Li, X. Zhang, H. Zheng, R. Ji, B. Li, X. Yu, J. Liu, Z. Gu, F. Chen and C. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2005423 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wang, X. Zhang, L. Mei, D. Ma, Y. Liao, Y. Zu, P. Xu, W. Yin and Z. Gu, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 8415–8424 RSC .
S. Begum, A. Pramanik, D. Davis, S. Patibandla, K. Gates, Y. Gao and P. C. Ray, ACS Omega, 2020, 5, 3116–3130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Fan, Y. Wang, W.-H. Zhong and S. Pan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 14266–14274 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yang, Z. Yu, C. Yu, H. Chen and F. Pan, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2019, 4, 1900101 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, Q. Wang, Y. Wang, J. Di, S. Miao and J. Yu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 43409–43415 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, J. Xu, D. Sun, T. Lin and F. Huang, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2020, 3, 1564–1570 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hu, Z. Zhong, F. Zhang, W. Xing, Z.-X. Low and Y. Fan, Ceram. Int., 2015, 41, 7080–7090 CrossRef CAS .
H. Souzandeh, B. Molki, M. Zheng, H. Beyenal, L. Scudiero, Y. Wang and W.-H. Zhong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 22846–22855 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Lv, R. Wang, G. Tang, Z. Mou, J. Lei, J. Han, S. De Smedt, R. Xiong and C. Huang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 12880–12889 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhong, Z. Xu, T. Sheng, J. Yao, W. Xing and Y. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 21538–21544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-R. An, S. Y. Park, J. Y. Huh, H. Kim, Y.-C. Lee, Y. B. Lee, Y. C. Hong and H. U. Lee, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 211, 126–136 CrossRef CAS .
C. Dong, J. Ji, B. Shen, M. Xing and J. Zhang, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2018, 52, 11297–11308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, W. Wu, X. Xie, H. Chen, J. Lin and D. D. Dionysiou, Water Res., 2018, 141, 145–151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhan, H. Xu, Y. Zhong, Q. Wu and Z. Liu, Mater. Des., 2020, 188, 108432 CrossRef CAS .
S. Homaeigohar and A. R. Boccaccini, Acta Biomater., 2020, 107, 25–49 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wei, Q. Yu and H. Chen, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2019, 8, e1801381 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhang, G. Zhang, H. Zhang, X. Liu, J. Shi, H. Shi, X. Yao, P. K. Chu and X. Zhang, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 382, 122849 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qiao, Y. Ping, H. Zhang, B. Zhou, F. Liu, Y. Yu, T. Xie, W. Li, D. Zhong, Y. Zhang, K. Yao, H. A. Santos and M. Zhou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 3809–3822 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:
Yanan Tang	Yanan Tang is currently a Ph.D. candidate at the Key Laboratory of Bionic Engineering (Ministry of Education), College of Biological and Agricultural Engineering of Jilin University. She obtained her M.S. degree in bionic science and engineering from Jilin University in 2019. Her research interests focus on semiconductor-based bio-inspired nanomaterials for antibacterial applications.
Zhen Qin	Zhen Qin is a postgraduate student at the Key Laboratory of Bionic Engineering (Ministry of Education), College of Biological and Agricultural Engineering at Jilin University since 2018. She received her B.S. degree in polymer material and engineering from Dalian Polytechnic University in 2018. Her current research focuses on inorganic semiconductor based biomimetic materials and their applications in photocatalysis, sterilization and solar thermal conversion.
Shengyan Yin	Shengyan Yin received his Ph.D. degree from the State Key Laboratory of Supramolecular Structure and Materials from Jilin University in 2009. During 2009–2013, he worked as a postdoctoral research fellow at Nanyang Technological University of Singapore. Afterward, Shengyan Yin joined Jilin University and now is a professor at College of Electronic Science and Engineering of Jilin University. His current research topics are graphene/semiconducting polymer dots for biomedicine applications and photocatalysis.
Hang Sun	Hang Sun is a professor at the Key Laboratory of Bionic Engineering (Ministry of Education), College of Biological and Agricultural Engineering of Jilin University. She received her Ph.D. degree in 2009 from the State Key Laboratory of Supramolecular Structure and Materials, Jilin University. During 2009–2012, she was a postdoctoral research fellow at Nanyang Technological University of Singapore. She joined Jilin University in 2013 as an Associate Professor and then was promoted to full Professor in 2017. Her research interests focus on bio-inspired energy materials and devices, bio-inspired antibacterial materials.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic diagram showing the cell wall structures of Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria. Reproduced with permission.4 Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 2  Nanostructure induced mechanical bactericidal effect. (a) Photograph of cicada, Psaltoda claripennis. (b) Structural physiology of the forewing of Psaltoda claripennis. (c) SEM image of the upper surface of the forewing. (d) SEM image of a bacterial cell sinking between the nanopillars on the cicada wing surface. Reproduced with permission.72 Copyright 2012, Wiley. (e) SEM images of ZnO nanopillars on glass slides. (f) E. coli on ZnO nanopillars. Reproduced with permission.79 Copyright 2018, Wiley. (g) and (h) SEM images of the dual-scale structured surface. The corresponding bacterial coverage statistics of CLSM images after 3 h (i), and 24 h (j) incubation intervals. Reproduced with permission.76 Copyright 2020, Elsevier.	 


Dragonfly wing (D. bipunctata)	

	
P. aeruginosa (>3 log reduction, 3 h)	
70


S. aureus (>4.6 log reduction, 3 h)

B. subtilis (>1.4 log reduction, 3 h)
Cicada wing surfaces (P. claripennis)	

	
P. aeruginosa (>5 log reduction, 3 h)	
72

Gecko skin surface	

	
S. mutans (88%, 7 days)	
73


P. gingivalis (66%, 7 days)
ZnO nanorod arrays	

	
E. coli (56.4%, 30 min)	
74

ZnO nanoneedles	

	
E. coli (>98%, 3 h)	
76

ZnO/Au nanopillars on PDMS	

	
E. coli (65.5%, 30 min)	
77

ZnO nanopillars on glass.	

	
E. coli (96%, 18 h);	
79


 	Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of the reaction mechanism enabled by spiky TiO2/Au NPs for the photodegradation of organic contaminants and the inactivation of bacteria. Reproduced with permission.99 Copyright 2019, Elsevier.	 

TiO2	Commercial TiO2	0.1 mg mL−1	420 < λ < 780 nm	
E. coli (45.6%, 30 min)	
99

TiO2	Spiky TiO2	0.1 mg mL−1	420 < λ < 780 nm	
E. coli (88.2%, 30 min)	
99

ZnO/Au4%	Noble metal deposition	0.1 mg mL−1	Simulated sunlight	
E. coli (>95%, 10 min)	
100


S. aureus (>90%, 10 min)
Cu–MoS2	Noble metal deposition	1cm × 2cm × 40 nm	Visible light	
E. coli (>99.999%, 20 min)	
101

N-TiO2	Ion doping	25 μg mL−1	200 < λ < 800 nm	
E. coli (>99%, 3 h)	
102

MoS2@Cu2+	Ion doping	2 mg mL−1	
λ = 660 nm	
S. aureus (99.64%, 20 min)	
103

ZnO/V2O5	Semiconductor coupling	1 mg mL−1	Simulated sunlight	
E. coli (99.8%, 12 h)	
104

TiO2/rGO/WO3	Semiconductor heterostructures	0.1 mg mL−1	Simulated sunlight	
E. coli (97.3%, 80 min)	
105


 	Fig. 4  Possible antibacterial mechanism (a) in simulated light: ZnO/V2O5 photocatalyzes to produce ROS after absorbing light and inactivates bacteria by oxidative stress; (b) in the dark: V4+/V5+ redox pairs release electrons to continue the photo reaction to produce ROS and to inactivate bacteria by oxidative stress. Reproduced with permission.104 Copyright 2019, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) The proposed bactericidal mechanism of the MoS2 co-catalytic Fenton reaction. (b and c) SEM images of E. coli before and after reaction for 1 min in the MoS2 co-catalytic Fe2+/H2O2 Fenton system. Reproduced with permission.114 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (d) Mechanism of the nanozyme-catalyzed antibacterial performance of CuO NRs. Reproduced with permission.115 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic diagram illustrating the fabrication and bactericidal process of BSA-CuS NPs as a kind of photothermal agent. Reproduced with permission.129 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic illustration of PEG-MoS2 as a combined system for peroxidase catalyst-photothermal synergistic elimination of bacteria: (I) PEG-MoS2 was captured by bacteria; (II) PEG-MoS2 catalyzes the decomposition of less concentrated H2O2 to generate ˙OH to damage the cell wall integrity; (III) 808 nm laser irradiation causes hyperthermia, which accelerates GSH oxidation. (c) Photographs of E. coli infected wound treated with PBS (control), H2O2; MoS2; MoS2 + NIR; MoS2 + H2O2 and MoS2 + H2O2 + NIR at the second, fifth day and their corresponding histologic analyses. Reproduced with permission.130 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration of the bacteria killing processes with the CuS/mSiO2-MPS hydrogel. (b) In vitro antibacterial assay showing the spread plate results of S. aureus and E. coli. Histogram of the antibacterial ability of (c) S. aureus and (d) E. coli. Reproduced with permission.134 Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation of QCS-MoS2-OFLX and antibiotic-photothermal synergistic therapy against MRSA bacteria. Reproduced with permission.136 Copyright 2020, Springer. (b) Schematic illustration for the bacteria inactivation mechanism of PDMS-ZnO/Au under visible light. Reproduced with permission.77 Copyright 2020, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Multifunctional ZnO@PVA/KGM electrospun nanofiber membranes: (I) schematic presentation of the preparation of the membranes by electrospinning and (II) their application for air filtration. (III) Photocatalytic degradation. (IV) Antibacterial activity of the membranes. Reproduced with permission.147 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. SEM images and the corresponding schematic of the particle capture mechanism of the pristine ePTFE filter filtrating 0.3 μm particles (b), the functionalized ePTFE filter filtrating 0.3 μm particles (c), the pristine ePTFE filter filtrating 1.2 μm particles (d), and the functionalized ePTFE filter filtrating 1.2 μm particles (e) Particles with sizes of 0.3 and 1.2 μm represent the nanosized and microsized particles, respectively. Reproduced with permission.148 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (f) Schematic of the suggested photocatalytic mechanism of H-TiO2 photocatalysts under solar light irradiation. Removal of (g) reactive black 5, (h) rhodamine B, and (i) phenol by commercial TiO2 and H-TiO2 under solar light irradiation. Reproduced with permission.149 Copyright 2017, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Disinfection schematic in vivo, disruptive behavior on the bacterial cell membrane, and inactivating bacteria through photodynamic and photothermal actions of CS@MoS2 hybrid coating on a Ti implant under dual lights (660 nm VL + 808 nm NIR). (b) Photographs of bacterial colonies formed by E. coli and S. aureus of pure Ti and CS@MoS2-Ti under dark conditions (light−) and after exposing to 660 nm VL; 808 nm NIR; dual lights (660 nm + 808 nm) for 10 min. (c) H&E staining images showing the tissue infection degree of samples. The samples were divided into five groups, pure Ti as the control and CS@MoS2-Ti under different irradiation treatments as the experimental group (scale bar: 50 μm). Reproduced with permission.96 Copyright 2018, Wiley.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
