Ultra-fast sintered TiO 2 films in dye -sensitized solar cells: phase variation, electron transport and recombination  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2TA01005D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2TA01005D
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 2225-2230Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsUltra-fast sintered TiO2 films in dye-sensitized solar cells: phase variation, electron transport and recombination

        
          
            Matthew J. 
            Carnie
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Cecile 
            Charbonneau
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Piers R. F. 
            Barnes
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Matthew L. 
            Davies
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Ian 
            Mabbett
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Trystan M. 
            Watson
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Brian C. 
            O'Regan
          
        
      d and 

        
          
            David A. 
            Worsley
          
        
      *a
aSPECIFIC, College of Engineering, Swansea University, Baglan Bay Innovation and Knowledge Centre, Central Avenue, Baglan, SA12 7AX, UK. E-mail: d.a.worsley@swansea.ac.uk
bDepartment of Physics, Imperial College London, UK
cSchool of Chemistry, Bangor University, Bangor, Gwynedd, UK
dDepartment of Chemistry, Imperial College London, UK
Received 
      6th November 2012
    , Accepted 14th December 2012First published on 17th December 2012AbstractWith the application of near-infrared radiation (NIR), TiO2 films for dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs) on metallic substrates can be sintered in just 12.5 seconds. The photovoltaic performance of devices made with NIR sintered films match those devices made with conventionally sintered films prepared by heating for 1800 seconds. Here we characterise the electron transport, electron lifetime and phase-morphological properties of ultrafast NIR sintered films, using impedance spectroscopy, transient photovoltage decay and X-ray diffraction measurements. An important factor in NIR processing of TiO2 films is the peak metal temperature (PMT) and we show that during the 12.5 second heat treatment, a PMT of around 635 °C gives near identical electron transport, electron lifetime and morphological properties, as well comparable photovoltaic performance to a conventionally sintered (500 °C, 30 min) film. We demonstrate that the rapid heating of the TiO2 (to temperatures of up to 785 °C) does not lead to a large scale rutile phase transition. As such photovoltaic performance of resultant DSC devices is maintained since the heating period is insufficient to induce a significant transition from anatase to rutile or morphology changes which result in a loss of photocurrent.
Introduction
With the development of Co(II/III) tris(bipyridyl) based electrolytes and D–π–A porphyrin dyes, laboratory manufactured dye-sensitized solar cell (DSC) device efficiencies are now in excess of 12%,1 and as such it is looking increasingly probable that DSCs will be able to compete against more established, inorganic photovoltaic technologies in the near future. In particular, DSC devices offer good low light and low incident light angle performance due to the combination of dye sensitisation and the mesoporous TiO2 scaffold onto which the dye molecules are adhered.
A number of the processing steps in making a DSC device take place in the timescale from minutes to hours and these process bottlenecks need to be addressed in order to scale up DSC manufacture. Firstly, binder removal from and sintering of the TiO2 paste precursor to form the working electrode, typically involves a heating step of around 30 min at between 450 °C and 500 °C.2,3 This is effectively tripled if TiCl4 treatment is included as this involves a 30 min immersion in TiCl4 solution followed by another 30 min thermal anneal.4 To put this in perspective, if the TiO2 film were to be applied to a metal substrate on a typical roll-to-roll coating process where line speeds of over 120 m min−1 are common, then an oven would be required in excess of 3.6 km in length for just one 30 minute process. A second process limitation is the 30 min heating of the counter electrode at 400 °C (ref. 5 and 6) to decompose H2PtCl6 and platinise the ITO or FTO surface and render the surface suitable as an electro-catalyst for tri-iodide reduction. The final lengthy process is the traditional dyeing method which involves immersing the prepared photoanodes in the dye solution for up to 24 hours.6 Faster dyeing has been achieved by Hinsch et al.7 and Sommeling et al.8 in which they achieved dyeing in 30–60 minutes and recent work has reduced the dyeing time to 5 minutes using a pumping procedure.9 This not only decreases dyeing time but also has the added benefit of appearing to increase the effectiveness of co-sensitization with resulting efficiencies greater than that of either dye individually.10
Several alternative methods have been proposed which can bring about the necessary processing of the TiO2 in times of under 5 min and these include compression,11 microwave12 and laser13 technologies. In 2011 we reported a novel near-infra-red (NIR) heat treatment that could achieve TiO2 sintering upon metal substrates in just 12.5 seconds.14 The application of NIR radiation has recently been demonstrated as a method for removing a number of other bottlenecks in the manufacture of DSCs.15 It has been shown that NIR can be used to significantly reduce the processing time for silver inks16 and platinisation of the counter electrode.17 Here, we build on the original TiO2 sintering work14 to reveal in greater detail the electron transport and lifetime characteristics of devices made with NIR sintered TiO2 electrodes and how these are related to the TiO2 phase-morphology of the film.
Experimental
Fast sintered TiO2 films were produced by tape casting TiO2 paste (DSL 18NRT, Dyesol) onto titanium metal substrates and subsequently irradiating with an AdPhos coil lab V2 NIR oven. The AdPhos lamps produce a very high energy density by applying an over voltage to a tungsten halogen source, producing filament temperatures as high as 3200 K and thus emitting strongly in the wavelength range 800–1200 nm, between the visible and mid-infrared regions. This energetic irradiance causes rapid heating of the substrate followed by short range conduction into the TiO2 paste leaving a sintered porous titania network with binder removed. The peak metal temperature (PMT) of NIR treated titanium substrate was measured by spot-welding a thermocouple to the underside of the titanium substrate and is defined as the maximum temperature recorded during the 12.5 s heating process.
The TiO2 films were sensitized overnight at Tamb by immersion in a 0.3 mM dye solution bath. The dye solution was prepared by dilution of cis-bis(isothiocyanato)bis(2,20-bipyridyl-4,40-dicarboxylato)-ruthenium(II) bis-tetrabutyl-ammonium (N719, Dyesol) in ethanol. The films were further rinsed with ethanol and dried in air.
Counter electrodes were prepared on pre-cut 1.5 × 2.5 cm2 pieces of TEC 15 (15 Ω cm−2 FTO coated glass from NSG). A hole was drilled in preparation for electrolyte insertion, using a 0.5 mm drill bit. A 5 mM solution of chloro-platinic acid (H2PtCl6, Sigma Aldrich) in isopropanol was spread on the conductive side of the glass substrates and held in a pre-heated oven at 385 °C for 30 min to platinise the FTO.
Laser cut 25 µm thick Surlyn gaskets (Solaronix) were cleaned with isopropanol and dried before application. Sealing of the working and counter electrodes was performed using a hot press at 120 °C for 1 min. A standard I−/I3− based electrolyte, 0.8 M 1-propyl-3 methylimidazolium iodide (PMII), 0.3 M benzimidazole, 0.1 M I2 and 0.05 M guanidinium thiocyanate dissolved in 3-methoxypropionitrile was vacuum filled through the pre-drilled hole. The hole was sealed by melting a small piece of Surlyn underneath a circular microscope coverslip. Silver conductive paint was applied along the edges of the electrodes for improved current collection.
The photovoltaic performance of assembled DSC devices was tested using an Oriel Sol 3A solar simulator (equipped with a xenon arc lamp), under normal illumination at 1 sun (1000 W m−2, AM 1.5). The lamp output was calibrated with a reference silicon solar cell, traceable to NREL.
Transient photovoltage decay measurements, as described in ref. 18, were made at open circuit. The bias light was provided by a custom made bank of 20 × 1 watt, white LEDs. A given steady state VOC value was obtained by altering the bias light intensity and upon reaching steady state, a pulse was provided by 1 × 1 watt, red LED. The resultant small increase in voltage and exponential decay back to the steady state gives the recombination lifetime, τ which is determined by fitting a single exponential function to the voltage decay data.
Impedance spectroscopy measurements were carried out on a Gamry Reference 600 potentiostat/galvanostat/ZRA. Devices were measured in a two electrode set-up and illuminated with a white LED at various intensities. The measuring bias potential was set equal to the VOC obtained at a given LED light intensity with the measurement taking place under illumination. AC amplitude was set at ±10 mV with a frequency range of 50 kHz to 0.1 Hz. Equivalent circuit modelling was achieved using a transmission line model19,20 to derive the electron transport resistance (Rt), recombination resistance (Rr) and chemical capacitance (Cµ) of the TiO2 photoelectrodes.
Results and discussion
The two most common crystalline forms of TiO2 are the anatase (101) form and the rutile (110) form. The crystal structure influences the photovoltaic properties of a DSC device and it has been shown that rutile based DSCs will have lower photocurrents than anatase based devices, due to less dye adsorption because of rutile's lower available surface area. In addition it was also shown that electron transport is slower through rutile crystals than it is through anatase.21 Since rutile has a lower surface area than anatase, it might also be expected that recombination would be slower due to there being less recombination sights. Anatase is thermodynamically unstable above 610 °C and the transformation to rutile is rapid above 730 °C22 and since the rapid NIR heat treatment might lead to processing temperatures above 610 °C, the crystal structure of rapidly sintered TiO2 films needs to be monitored. Example XRD spectra for the samples that have been heated conventionally for 30 minutes at either 500 °C or 800 °C are illustrated in Fig. 1 with spectra from NIR treated samples that have reached a variety of peak metal temperatures (PMTs) in the same temperature range. In each case the samples were heated on metal substrates identical to those used to make the DSC devices presented in this paper.
 Fig. 1  XRD data of NIR fast sintered TiO2 films compared to those sintered conventionally at 500 °C and 800 °C. It is evident that at a PMT of between 700 °C and 785 °C, an anatase-to-rutile phase transition occurs resulting in rutile peak (110). The anatase peak (101) also appears to narrow suggesting a growth in the size of the anatase crystals in these higher PMT samples, and in the conventional devices sintered at 800 °C for 30 min. 
The data illustrated in Fig. 1 show that heating the TiO2 layer at 800 °C for 30 minutes results in the anatase being largely converted to rutile. The interesting effect that is shown for the rapid NIR heated samples is that whilst at 785 °C ± 15 °C PMT there is a very small rutile peak, at temperatures below this there is no conversion even at measured temperatures of 700 °C where it would be expected that anatase–rutile phase transition would occur.22 Hence, although anatase is thermodynamically unstable at these temperatures it appears as though the TiO2 layer on the metal surface is kinetically stable in anatase form at these temperatures over the NIR exposure period (12.5 s). This is further evidenced by the micrographs shown in Fig. 2, where it can be seen that the TiO2 microstructures for the fast sintered films remain similar to that of the conventionally sintered (500 °C, 30 min) film, even when the NIR processing temperature reaches around 700 °C. When processing temperatures of around 785 °C are reached however, the microstructure shows some evidence of growth of the crystals by coalescence, a prelude to the anatase-to-rutile transition observed on the XRD patterns. The XRD and microstructural evidence present an intriguing observation since they suggest that the processing window (i.e. the breadth of temperatures that the TiO2 layer can reach during rapid heating) is much wider for fast sintered devices, which has implications not only in DSC devices but for processing of sintered films for photocatalysis. Furthermore we note that the films produced through the rapid heating method are identical in their adhesion and abrasion characteristics suggesting that the films are inherently similar in their physical properties. Table 1 shows the anatase crystal sizes estimated using the Scherrer equation, shown in eqn (1) below where σ is the mean crystal size in nm, K is the shape factor, λ is the X-ray wavelength in nm, β is the XRD peak width at half maximum height in radians and θ is the Bragg angle of the XRD peak in radians.23 (1)
 Fig. 2  Micrographs of some of the TiO2 films used to obtain the XRD spectra in Fig. 1. The top row shows micrographs of rapidly sintered TiO2 films with their PMTs indicated. The bottom row shows conventionally sintered devices with their processing conditions shown. It can be seen that even when reaching temperatures of around 700 °C there is no significant change to the microstructure. However, when temperatures of around 785 °C are reached, crystal growth and coalescence is observed indicating the onset of the anatase-to-rutile transition. Conventionally sintered films are shown for comparison and it can be seen that films heat treated at 800 °C for 30 min have largely been converted from anatase to rutile TiO2. All micrographs are shown at the same magnification. 
Table 1 Anatase and rutile crystal sizes calculated from XRD data using the Scherrer equation (shape factor = 0.9)




Device sinter conditions
Anatase (101) crystal size (nm)




500 °C, 30 min
22


800 °C, 30 min
73


PMT = 545 °C (±5 °C)
22


PMT = 635 °C (±5 °C)
21


PMT = 700 °C (±5 °C)
21


PMT = 785 °C (±15 °C)
46




Assuming shape factor = 0.9, it is clear that the anatase crystal sizes for the TiO2 film sintered at 500 °C are identical to the fast sintered films up to PMT = 785 °C (±15 °C) where anatase crystals experience a growth in addition to the phase transition to rutile. This effect is more prominent in the TiO2 film sintered at 800 °C for 30 min where, as well as the phase transition to rutile, anatase crystals experience large growth presumably due to the high holding temperature and relatively long heat treatment. Fig. 3 summarises the I–V characteristics of the devices made with both NIR sintered and conventionally sintered TiO2 photoanodes. A key point to note is that these are reverse illuminated cells on metals (i.e. light is incident on the electrolyte–electrode side) with no blocking layer and a single simple TiO2 active layer and no TiCl4 treatment. As such this gives rise to relatively low efficiencies. This route was chosen to minimise the number of variables within the experimental programme and provides a detailed focus on the effect of the heating method alone.
 Fig. 3  Summary of the mean I–V properties of devices with both NIR sintered and conventionally sintered TiO2 photoanodes: (a) power conversion efficiency (%η), (b) fill factor, (c) open circuit voltage (VOC) and (d) short circuit photocurrent density (JSC). Where visible, the error bars represent the range of values in a set of 3 devices. 
If simply looking in terms of device efficiency (η), it appears that there is a wide optimum process window where the PMT of NIR sintered devices reaches between 580 °C and 700 °C. TiO2 films sintered within this processing window result in devices with equivalent η to devices where the film is conventionally sintered. However, there appears to be a slight drop off in efficiency outside this processing window when the NIR PMT is either too low or too high. Fig. 4 shows typical device parameters measured using impedance spectroscopy. Fig. 4a shows the chemical capacitance (Cµ) of the TiO2 film vs. the open circuit voltage (VOC). The film capacitances seem to be very similar (except for the film sintered at 800 °C), which suggests the density of trap states is relatively similar. There does appear however, to be a slight trend in the NIR sintered cells suggesting that the density of traps for a given voltage appears to increase as the NIR sintering temperature increases. The reduced density of states in the conventionally sintered (800 °C, 30 min) film is probably due to larger, less defective crystals (Table 1.), and may also be linked to the formation of rutile. Fig. 4b and c show the electron recombination and electron transport resistances respectively. It can be seen in the NIR sintered devices that recombination resistance increases with increasing processing temperature and this is likely due to increasing effectiveness of TiO2 paste binder removal from the crystal surface. Electron transport resistance decreases with increasing NIR processing temperature which can be attributed to improved inter-particle contact. Films that were NIR sintered with a PMT lower than the processing window show increased electron transport resistance, Rt which can be attributed to poorer film sintering and could be the cause of lower photocurrents in these devices (Fig. 3). Films sintered at 800 °C for 30 minutes show a large increase in electron transport resistance which must be due to the presence of rutile-TiO2. Slower electron transport has been observed in pure rutile DSCs and previously reported with the increased transport resistance being attributed to decreased inter-particle connectivity arising from the inefficient particle packing density of non-spherical rutile particles.21Fig. 4d shows the electron diffusion lengths, LDvs. VOC of the sample devices. In this case the diffusion length was calculated using eqn (2) below where d is the TiO2 film thickness, τn is the electron recombination lifetime (RrCµ) and τt is the electron transport lifetime (RtCµ). (2)
 Fig. 4  Impedance spectroscopy data: (a) TiO2 chemical capacitance (Cµ), (b) TiO2–electrolyte recombination resistance (Rr), (c) electron transport resistance (Rt), and (d) electron diffusion length (LD), all vs. VOC. 
It can be seen that the diffusion length is greatest in the two highest temperature NIR sintered devices. Both the conventionally sintered devices have similar diffusion lengths implying that they might exhibit similar collection efficiencies, if it is assumed that LD at VOC is related to LD, at JSC then the reduced photocurrents seen in the 800 °C devices in Fig. 3 can be attributed to poorer dye loading on the TiO2 film linked to the formation of rutile crystal structures. The recombination lifetime is a measurement which is proportional to the average electron residence time in the TiO2 film at open circuit and is often obtained from impedance measurements and calculated as an RC time constant, equal to the product of the charge transfer resistance (Rr) across the TiO2–electrolyte interface and the chemical capacitance (Cµ) of the TiO2 film.19 Recombination lifetimes can also be measured directly using open circuit photovoltage transients, whereby a steady state VOC is perturbed by a flash from an LED to give a brief increase in photovoltage. The resultant decay back to the steady state is modelled with an exponential function with the time constant of the exponential decay, τn, being equal to the recombination lifetime, as also measured in the frequency domain with EIS (above).18Fig. 5 shows the recombination lifetimes obtained from photovoltage transients, as with the Rt values shown in Fig. 4, it appears that a PMT of around 635 °C is necessary to achieve equivalence with conventionally sintered devices. Similarly, devices sintered with a PMT of around 545 °C results in a decreased electron lifetime.
 Fig. 5  Electron lifetimes (tau) measured with transient photovoltage decay, of selected devices representing the median device in their set. It can be seen here, much like the Rt measurements that a PMT of around 630 °C is necessary to achieve an electron lifetime equivalent to that of a conventionally sintered device. 
The phase transition of the TiO2 film may be useful in explaining the electron lifetime and transport properties of the devices that reached a PMT of around 785 °C which show a lower transport resistance and longer electron lifetime than other devices with lower PMTs. Electron mobility has been shown to be higher in pure anatase crystals than in pure rutile crystals24 and pure rutile films in DSC devices show slower electron transport than pure anatase films.21 NIR sintered devices with PMTs of around 785 °C show evidence of rutile phase transition so might be expected to have higher transport resistances, however, we see reduced transport resistance compared to those devices sintered at around 700 °C which show no phase transition. The NIR sintered (785 °C) TiO2 films here are not pure rutile but are predominantly anatase with small amounts of rutile (Fig. 1). The lower transport resistance observed is likely due to improved particle interconnectivity due to the higher processing temperatures. This means that NIR sintering provides an interesting opportunity to enhance particle connectivity whilst not overly compromising the anatase phase even though the films are briefly held well above the anatase-to-rutile phase transition temperature.
Devices with electrodes that are NIR sintered above 700 °C show increased electron lifetime and lower transport resistance. Because of this, it might be expected that these cells would perform well. This is not the case however as devices NIR sintered above 700 °C show a drop off in η. In the case of these devices, the increased electron lifetime could be due to the fact that the rutile TiO2 has a lower capacity to adsorb species to its surface25,26 (perhaps related to larger crystal size) and so the decreased surface area available to I3− approaching the TiO2 surface results in lower recombination rates. The lower adsorbtivity of rutile is also evident during visual inspection of the dyed films in that they appear visibly lighter to the eye, suggesting lower dye uptake. This is also observed in devices that were conventionally sintered at 800 °C. These cells have the longest recombination lifetimes of all the devices tested and this combined with the large XRD rutile peak suggests that the phase transfer is responsible for the longer electron lifetimes and lack of dye uptake in NIR sintered cells where PMT reaches around 785 °C. The longer electron lifetimes in devices conventionally sintered at 800 °C may also be the reason why these devices show higher VOC due to a reduced rate of recombination.
In terms of electron transport resistance and recombination lifetime, to match conventionally sintered films, it appears that a PMT of ∼635 °C may be the ideal. When devices consisting of TiO2 films that reach a PMT of ∼around 635 °C are measured, they show similar electron transport and recombination properties and also in overall device power conversion efficiency.
Conclusions
The rapid heating of TiO2 films on metals to produce highly consistent and well adhered sintered layers is possible within seconds using near infrared heating. The NIR heats the metal very rapidly driving off the organic binder in the paste and sinters the titania particles. The heating technique is so rapid compared to a conventional oven treatment which takes ca. 30 minutes that even at temperatures of over 700 °C, where the anatase crystal form is thermodynamically unstable, the heating cycle is so fast that anatase remains kinetically stable. This results in high surface area, sintered anatase films which have very similar electron transport properties to conventional sintering which can be produced within rapid timeframe and at temperatures between 550 °C and 700 °C.
NIR has been proven to sinter metal based DSC TiO2 electrodes in just 12.5 s with equivalent performance to conventionally sintered electrodes. Furthermore, we have shown that, in terms of manufacturing processability, that there is a wide processing window where it is expected that there will be little variation in cell performance. Based on the data presented here it is recommended that a PMT of 640 °C to 700 °C is a good manufacturing target. This leaves a wide processing window of ±60 °C which could be optimised further during manufacturing line trials. In addition, the rapid heating technique also presents the possibility of rapidly processing other metal oxide films and work is currently being undertaken to investigate this.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank the EPSRC and TSB for supporting this work through the SPECIFIC Innovation and Knowledge Centre (GR/EP/I019278). We would also like to gratefully acknowledge the Welsh Government and ERDF Low Carbon Research Institute (LCRI) convergence funding through the Solar Photovoltaic Academic Research Consortium (SPARC-Cymru).
References
A. Yella, H.-W. Lee, H. N. Tsao, C. Yi, A. K. Chandiran, M. K. Nazeeruddin, E. W.-G. Diau, C.-Y. Yeh, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Science, 2011, 334, 6056 CrossRef .
S. Ito, N.-L. C. Ha, G. Rothenberger, P. Liska, P. Comte, S. M. Zakeeruddin, P. Péchy, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Chem. Commun., 2006, 4004 RSC .
B. C. O'Regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Sommeling, B. C. O'Regan, R. R. Haswell, H. J. P. Smit, N. J. Bakker, J. J. T. Smits, J. M. Kroon and J. A. M. van Roosmalen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 39 CrossRef .

          S. Ito, Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells, EPFL Press,  2010 Search PubMed .
S. Ito, T. N. Murakami, P. Comte, P. Liska, C. Grätzel, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Thin Solid Films, 2008, 516, 4613 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hinsch, J. M. Kroon, R. Kern, I. Uhlendorf, J. Holzbock, A. Meyer and J. Ferber, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2001, 9, 425 CAS .
P. M. Sommeling, M. Späth, H. J. P. Smit, N. J. Bakker and J. M. Kroon, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2004, 164, 137 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. Holliman, M. L. Davies, A. Connell, B. V. Velasco and T. M. Watson, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 7256 RSC .
P. J. Holliman, M. Mohsen, A. Connell, M. L. Davies, K. Al-Salihi, M. B. Pitak, G. J. Tizzard, S. J. Coles, R. W. Harrington, W. Clegg, C. Serpa, O. H. Fontes, C. Charbonneau and M. J. Carnie, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 13318 RSC .
H. Lindström, A. Holmberg, E. Magnusson, L. Malmqvist and A. Hagfeldt, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2001, 145, 107 CrossRef .
S. Uchida, M. Tomiha, N. Masaki, A. Miyazawa and H. Takizawa, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2004, 81, 135 CrossRef CAS .
G. Mincuzzi, L. Vesce, M. Liberatore, A. Reale, A. Di Carlo and T. M. Brown, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 2011, 58, 3179 CrossRef CAS .
T. Watson, I. Mabbett, H. Wang, L. Peter and D. Worsley, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2011, 19, 482 CAS .
T. Watson, C. Charbonneau, M. Carnie, I. Mabbett, M. Cherrington and D. Worsley, MRS Online Proc. Libr., 2012, 1447 DOI:10.1557/opl.2012.1169 .
M. Cherrington, T. C. Claypole, D. Deganello, I. Mabbett, T. Watson and D. Worsley, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 7562 RSC .
C. Charboneau, K. Hooper, M. Carnie, J. Searle, B. Philip, D. Wragg, T. Watson and D. Worsley, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2012 Search PubMed  , under review.
P. R. F. Barnes, K. Miettunen1, X. Li, A. Y. Anderson, T. Bessho, M. Gratzel and B. C. O'Regan, Adv. Mater., 2012 DOI:10.1002/adma.201201372 .
F. Fabregat-Santiago, J. Bisquert, G. Garcia-Belmonte, G. Boschloo and A. Hagfeldt, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2005, 87, 117 CrossRef CAS .
J. Halme, P. Vahermaa, K. Miettunen and P. Lund, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 35 CrossRef .
N. G. Park, J. van de Lagemaat and A. J. Frank, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 8989 CrossRef CAS .
A. W. Czanderna, C. N. R. Rao and J. M. Honig, Trans. Faraday Soc., 1958, 54, 1069–1073 RSC .
A. L. Patterson, Phys. Rev., 1939, 56, 978 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tang, K. Prasad, R. Sanjinès, P. E. Schmid and F. Lévy, J. Appl. Phys., 1994, 75, 2042 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Fox and M. T. Dulay, Chem. Rev., 1993, 93, 341 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mills, R. Davies and D. Worsley, Chem. Soc. Rev., 1993, 22, 417 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  XRD data of NIR fast sintered TiO2 films compared to those sintered conventionally at 500 °C and 800 °C. It is evident that at a PMT of between 700 °C and 785 °C, an anatase-to-rutile phase transition occurs resulting in rutile peak (110). The anatase peak (101) also appears to narrow suggesting a growth in the size of the anatase crystals in these higher PMT samples, and in the conventional devices sintered at 800 °C for 30 min.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 2  Micrographs of some of the TiO2 films used to obtain the XRD spectra in Fig. 1. The top row shows micrographs of rapidly sintered TiO2 films with their PMTs indicated. The bottom row shows conventionally sintered devices with their processing conditions shown. It can be seen that even when reaching temperatures of around 700 °C there is no significant change to the microstructure. However, when temperatures of around 785 °C are reached, crystal growth and coalescence is observed indicating the onset of the anatase-to-rutile transition. Conventionally sintered films are shown for comparison and it can be seen that films heat treated at 800 °C for 30 min have largely been converted from anatase to rutile TiO2. All micrographs are shown at the same magnification.	 

500 °C, 30 min	22
800 °C, 30 min	73
PMT = 545 °C (±5 °C)	22
PMT = 635 °C (±5 °C)	21
PMT = 700 °C (±5 °C)	21
PMT = 785 °C (±15 °C)	46

 	Fig. 3  Summary of the mean I–V properties of devices with both NIR sintered and conventionally sintered TiO2 photoanodes: (a) power conversion efficiency (%η), (b) fill factor, (c) open circuit voltage (VOC) and (d) short circuit photocurrent density (JSC). Where visible, the error bars represent the range of values in a set of 3 devices.	 
	(2)

 	Fig. 4  Impedance spectroscopy data: (a) TiO2 chemical capacitance (Cµ), (b) TiO2–electrolyte recombination resistance (Rr), (c) electron transport resistance (Rt), and (d) electron diffusion length (LD), all vs. VOC.	 

 	Fig. 5  Electron lifetimes (tau) measured with transient photovoltage decay, of selected devices representing the median device in their set. It can be seen here, much like the Rt measurements that a PMT of around 630 °C is necessary to achieve an electron lifetime equivalent to that of a conventionally sintered device.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
