Excitons and charges at organic semiconductor heterojunctions  - Faraday Discussions (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1FD00104C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1FD00104C
(Paper)
Faraday Discuss., 2012, 155, 339-348Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsExcitons and charges at organic semiconductor heterojunctions

        
          
            Richard H. 
            Friend
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Matthew 
            Phillips
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Akshay 
            Rao
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Mark W. B. 
            Wilson
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Zhe 
            Li
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Christopher R. 
            McNeill
          
        
      
Cavendish Laboratory, JJ Thomson Avenue, Cambridge, CB3 0HE. E-mail: rhf10@cam.ac.uk
Received 
      5th July 2011
    , Accepted 8th July 2011First published on 12th December 2011AbstractAll-organic heterojunction solar cells now provide very high quantum efficiencies for charge generation and rapidly-improving power conversion efficiencies. Charge generation and separation however, must overcome the strong Coulomb interactions between electrons and holes in these materials that is manifest also through the large exchange energies usually observed. We show for a polymer–polymer system with low charge generation efficiency that this arises through intersystem crossing from the photogenerated charge-transfer state to a lower lying triplet state, mediated by the proton hyperfine interaction, and that the activation barrier for full separation of electrons and holes is of the order of 250 meV. We observe, using transient optical spectroscopy, the processes of charge separation, recombination and sweep-out in efficient polymer-fullerene devices. We report also on the process of singlet exciton fission to form a pair of triplet excitons in pentacene that can later be dissociated against a heterojunction formed with C60.
1 Introduction
Current designs for organic photovoltaic diodes depend on the ionisation of photogenerated excitons at the heterointerface between electron-accepting and hole-accepting semiconductors. This was first demonstrated in 1986 by Tang1 using vacuum-sublimed layers of hole-accepting and electron-accepting molecular semiconductors. This structure requires that excitons photogenerated in the bulk of the donor or acceptor layers can diffuse to the heterojunction formed between the two molecular semiconductors where they can dissociate to form free charges. Since diffusion ranges for excitons in such materials are short (typically less than 10 nm), and considerably shorter than the thicknesses required for optical absorption (of order 100 nm), this architecture does not lead to a high quantum efficiency, typically no higher than 10%. The arrangement of energy levels for donor and acceptor are illustrated in Fig. 1.
 Fig. 1  Scheme for charge generation at a donor–acceptor heterojunction: (i) shows photon absorption that lifts an electron from the filled π states to the empty π* states to form an intramolecular photoexcition, exciton; (ii) shows its dissociation to leave the hole on the donor (to the left) and electron transferred to the acceptor (to the right). This may form a Coulombically-bound charge transfer exciton, or may dissociate to form free charges, as illustrated by process (iii). 
An important advance was the development in 1995 of the so-called ‘bulk heterojunction’ using partly de-mixed blends of organic polymeric semiconductors. This was demonstrated using polymer–polymer blends2 and using a polymer–fullerene system.3 These structures are formed by spin-coating a common solution of the two materials, which de-mix as the solvent evaporates to form the solid film. This is driven by the de-mixing generally expected between high molecular weight materials. Empirical optimisation of process conditions, such as the choice of solvent, can now give the correct nanoscale morphologies that are required to achieve efficient charge photogeneration following exciton photogeneration on either of the two components. It is generally found that fullerenes provide the most effective electron acceptors; these are chemically modified to control solubility and the first reported material,3 PCBM, see Fig. 2, is the most widely used, both with C60 and, to give improved optical absorption, C70.There has been very extensive work to develop the donor polymers to cover optical absorption across the solar spectrum; a selection of currently used materials is shown in Fig. 2.
 Fig. 2  Structures of a selection of conjugated polymers used in organic PV, together with the commonly-used electron-accepting C60 derivative, PCBM. 
The performance of these organic solar cells has advanced steadily over the past decade, with reliable reports of around 5% power conversion efficiency for the commonly-used poly(3-hexylthiophene)/PCBM system (that does not absorb beyond 650 nm), and a range of reports from a number of industrial laboratories using proprietary materials that now give efficiencies above 8%. Many of these operate with very high quantum efficiencies, very close to 100% for the example of PCDTBT/PCBM.4 The gap between high quantum efficiency and still modest power conversion efficiency is due to the relatively low open circuit voltages (0.6–0.8 V) and fill-factors. The factors that contribute to limit performance are of course a matter of great research interest, but have remained relatively complex to disentangle, with factors associated with imperfect bulk heterojunction morphologies, and as we discuss below, fundamental requirements to achieve the correct electronic energy structure.
The offsets of the π and π* band edge states as shown in Fig. 1 are required in order to separate the electrons and holes that are Coulombically bound in the intramolecular exciton. Excitons in molecular semiconductors generally show high Coulomb binding energies, of order 0.3 eV, because the dielectric screening is low. There is considerable evidence that photoinduced charge transfer occurs very rapidly in a wide range of donor–acceptor systems5,6 but the picture of what happens subsequently is rather less clear.
There are several systems, generally formed from polymer–polymer blends, where the charge-transfer state remains as a localised and bound charge-transfer exciton (CT), such as that formed between PFB (donor) and F8BT (acceptor).7 A bound CT exciton with electrons and holes immediately adjacent is reasonably expected to be Coulombically bound and localised.8 In contrast, free charge generation clearly proceeds with high efficiency at room temperature in many of the polymer/PCBM blends, though there is still evidence for the formation of a population of long-lived CT states in these systems.9
A consequence of the large exciton binding energy is that the singlet–triplet exchange energy is also large. This can present a challenge for the design of high open-circuit voltage PV diodes if the CT energy is higher than the energy of the lowest intramolecular triplet level, since intersystem crossing would then take the CT state to the triplet level. It has been established that indeed this does occur for the PFB-F8BT system.10
In this paper we present results on two aspects of this problem of charge separation following photoinduced electron transfer. In the first, we show that the process of intersystem crossing in PFB-F8BT proceeds through the hyperfine interaction of the protons attached to the π-conjugated carbons. The magnetic field dependence of this provides information that allows us to estimate the Coulomb binding energy that has to be overcome in order to separate electrons and holes from the CT state. In the second example, we track the processes of charge motion, recombination and sweep-out using transient optical absorption measurements obtained on working PV diodes under DC bias.
Large exchange energies allow scope for multiple exciton generation for materials for which the triplet exciton energy is less than one half of the singlet exciton energy, since this favours energetically the fission of a photogenerated singlet to a pair of triplet excitons. Evidence for ‘singlet fission’ was first reported in tetracene in 196911 and has recently received attention since this process is potentially capable of raising the efficiency of the single-junction solar cell above the Schocklwy–Quiesser limit12 We have shown that this process is effective in pentacene and that the resultant triplets can be ionised against a heterojunction formed with fullerene.13
2 Intersystem crossing and the binding energy of CT states
As mentioned in the Introduction, the heterojunction system formed from a blend of PFB and F8BT shows clear evidence for the formation of a photo-induced CT exciton. PFB shows a blue fluorescence (peak near 470 nm), F8BT yellow-green (peak near 530 nm), but the blends when formed with high interfacial area shows red emission (peak near 630 nm) which has a slow decay (40 ns typically) and that results from direct radiative recombination between donor and acceptor.8 This CT exciton is sufficiently long-lived that thermal excitation allows it to move away from the heterojunction into the bulk of the lower-gap material (here the F8BT) where it can decay radiatively. Measurement of this green emission as a function of temperature establishes the thermal barrier for excitation to the bulk to be around 250 meV, lower than the red-shift of the luminescence (350 meV).14 The lifetime of the 630 nm emission of around 40 ns has been shown to arise from the loss of the CT state through intersystem crossing to access the lower energy triplet exciton on the F8BT.10

        PV diodes made with this system show poor quantum efficiency, with typical values of external quantum efficiency (EQE) of 3% under short-circuit conditions. Under reverse bias, however, efficiencies can rise to high values, above 30%. Most of this photocurrent arises from early-time charge separation from the initially-generated ‘hot’ state as the bulk exciton reaches the heterojunction, with the applied field biassing the branching from formation of the bound CT (or exciplex) state towards full charge separation. The scheme for these competing processes is shown in Fig. 3.
 Fig. 3  Scheme showing bulk exciton forming an initially hot state at the heterojunction (geminate polaron pair), which can branch to form free charges under an applied DC field or form the CT exciton bound at the heterojunction. The CT exciton can ionise thermally, be thermally excited back to the bulk exciton, emit radiatively (not shown), or undergo intersystem crossing to a lower energy triplet exciton. 
We report here a detailed study of short-circuit photocurrent of PV diodes (made as previously reported15), luminescence and CW photoinduced absorption near 800 nm (at the energy of the allowed T1 to T* transition) under an applied magnetic field. Experiments were carried out at room temperature, with a field of up to 5T. The fractional changes due to the applied field are shown in Fig. 4 as a function of field. The applied magnetic field clearly increases the population of triplet excitons and decreases both photocurrent and luminescence. This can all be accounted for if the presence of the applied B field causes an increase in the intersystem crossing rate from the CT exciton to F8BT triplet (Fig. 3). We consider that the process that causes intersystem crossing at zero field is the hyperfine interaction between protons on the conjugated carbons on both donor and acceptor. The CT state is ionic, so that the electrons and holes sit on either side of the heterojunction and each experiences a different hyperfine field, so precess from singlet to triplet state, which is energetically degenerate with the singlet as a CT state, but seems to relax very promptly to the lower energy triplet state on the F8BT.
 Fig. 4  Magnetic field dependence of the photoinduced absorption near 780 nm, short-circuit photocurrent and photoluminescence measured near 730 nm for a blend of PFB and F8BT at room temperature. Excitation was provided by an argon ion laser at 488 nm. The value of Δg shown, 2.07 × 10 − 6, was used to obtain the solid-line fits using rates for other processes reported earlier.10 
The intersystem crossing rate of 40 ns is consistent then with hypefine linewidths of order a few gauss measured for radical anions or cations on conjugated polymers such as these.16 The effect of the applied B field is to provide an additional channel for intersystem crossing through the difference in g factor for the electron and hole. Within this simple model, the reduction in the lifetime of the CT state is linear in field. The effect of a linear decrease in the CT lifetime is to reduce the slow CT luminescence, as observed in Fig. 4, to increase the triplet population (though there are additional factors controlling triplet formation and decay associated with low B fields, discussed elsewhere16). The short-circuit photocurrent decays with field at exactly the same rate as observed for the luminescence. This shows that the short-circuit current arises from slow charge generation during the full lifetime of the CT state, in contrast to the early-time charge generation previously established under high bias voltages.10
Slow charge generation must result from thermal excitation of the CT exciton. We can make comparison with the similar thermal excitation of the CT state to re-form the bulk F8BT exciton, for which the activation energy is established to be around 250 meV.14 Both processes occur with efficiencies of a few % over the 40 ns lifetime of the CT state, and we conclude that the energy barrier to overcome the Coulomb interaction between electrons and holes in the CT exciton is comparable to the activation energy for the exciton regeneration, around 250 meV. This is a significant barrier for efficient charge generation, and indicates that electrons and holes reside on relatively localised polaron wavefunctions. A similar estimate for this Coulomb energy has been made from low temperature luminescence measurements.17
3 Optical measurement of charge evolution within organic PV diodes
In contrast to the relatively inefficient free charge generation in the polymer–polymer system described above, devices made with PCBM as the electron acceptor are generally much more efficient. This must indicate that the Coulomb interactions that dominate the PFB-F8BT system are much less significant. One feature of many of the polymer–fullerene systems is the very large offset of the π* Lowest Unoccupied Molecular Orbitals (LUMO) between polymer and fullerene. For P3HT-PCBM this is as large as 1 eV, accounting for the relatively low open circuit voltage. However, this offset must deliver a very hot excitation at the heterojunction and there is evidence that the size of this excess energy scales with the efficiency of the PV diode, suggesting that the excess energy allows electrons and holes to migrate apart during cooling a sufficient distance to allow full charge separation.18 The picture is more complicated because it seems that polymer donors with significant charge-transfer character (often introduced to red-shift the optical absorption), such as PCPDTBT and PCDTBT shown in Fig. 2 require less ‘excess energy’ that the much-studied polythiophenes.18 Furthermore, there is evidence that (weak) direct optical absorption to the charge transfer state is similarly efficient in the generation of separated charges.19
Electrical measurements of PV diodes do not provide particularly direct information about the different electronic processes that contribute to photocurrent and photovoltage and we have therefore set up measurements to follow the temporal evolution of charges (holes on the polymer chains) following optical excitation. Transient optical absorption measurements of conjugated polymers provide a powerful means for following the evolution from exciton to charged state (electron or hole polaron) since all electronic excitation in such materials cause large rearrangements in optical transitions, and both ground state bleaching and excited state absorptions are easily measured. However, excitation densities produced using typical Ti-sapphire laser systems are so high that PV diodes are taken well beyond their linear current–excitation intensity response. Within the Cambridge group we have previously reported results using excitation intensities of 12 μJ cm−2 for P3HT-PCBM diodes.20 At this intensity we did observe about a 50% reduction in EQE in comparison with CW excitation. However, this study did allow the time resolution of recombination and sweep-out to be measured. Recombination was found to be faster under open-circuit conditions (50% reduction in carriers at 100 ns) than with an applied bias (short circuit or reverse bias), indicating that at least some of the mechanisms for the recombination processes are attenuated in the presence of the DC field. One such mechanism is switch-off of geminate recombination of charges that do not separate adequately following photoexcitation.20
We have improved our experimental facility and are now able to carry out measurements under considerably lower excitation fluences, down to 3 μJ cm−2. We report here measurements on the system PCDTBT-PC70BM which is important because it gives the highest reported quantum efficiency for charge generation.4Fig. 5 shows typical transient optical absorption spectra for this system. The positive signal up to 675 nm is due to bleaching of the ground state absorption and the negative response that peaks near 900 nm is associated with optical transitions within the manifold of levels associated with the hole polarons present on the polymer chains. The fullerene response is relatively small and is not evident in these data. These optical responses can then be used to track the temporal evolution of the hole population in the device. Fig. 6 shows data at longer times, using an electronic delay between pump (0.6 ns doubled Q-switched Nd:YVO4 at 532 nm) and white light probe pulse derived from an amplified Ti-sapphire laser, similar to the system used previously.20
 Fig. 5  Spectrally-resolved transient optical absorption spectra, shown as fractional change in optical transmission, for a film of PCDTBT-PC70BM excited at 480 nm and probed with a white light continuum. 
 Fig. 6  Top four panels: Transient spectra fora PCDTBT-PC70BM device with an applied bias of 0 V, +0.3 V, −1 V and −2 V. The positive feature from 550 nm to 675 nm is assigned to the bleaching of the ground state absorption and the negative response at wavelengths greater than 675 nm corresponds to the absorption of polarons. Time slices are shown at 0–5 ns (black), 5–10 ns (red), 10–50 ns (blue), 50–250 ns (teal), 0.25–1 μs (pink), 1–10 μs (moss green), 10–100 μs (navy blue). Spectra are integrated over the time ranges indicated. The feature at 600 nm in the spectra measured at −2 V is caused by an artefact in the white light continuum. Bottom panel: Charge kinetics at various applied voltages. Kinetics were integrated over the spectral range 800–1000 nm, corresponding to the polaron absorption. The four plots show the time evolution at −2 V (red circles), −1 V (blue triangles), 0 V (black squares) and +0.3 V(teal triangles). All spectra and kinetics were measured following excitation at 532 nm at 3 μJ cm−2. 
These results show that both recombination (seen at 0.3 V, open circuit conditions) and sweep-out (the dominant decay mechanism at −2 V) are both relatively slow processes in comparison with P3HT devices, consistent with the lower carrier mobilities expected for this less-crystalline polymer. However, we see more clearly than for the case of P3HT20 that recombination is strongly dependent on bias voltage and is relatively prompt under open circuit conditions, setting in from 10 ns. This DC field dependence of recombination clearly makes a substantial contribution to the sub-optimal fill factor for the device. The Cambridge group have recently developed a new experiment, using an above-gap pump followed by an IR ‘push’ pulse that absorbs into the hole polaron absorption band. This ‘push’ pulse produces a very significant increase in charge generation from self-trapped CT states, and its time delay with respect to the above-gap excitation pulse allows measurement of the lifetime of the CT states that are excited in this way. This is typically in the range of a few 100 ps for polymer–fullerene systems.21
4 Exciton fission in pentacene and charge generation from triplet excitons
The large exchange energies found in the acenes makes possible the direct photogeneration of triplet excitons via fission of the singlet. Fission proceeds rapidly and without thermal activation if the lowest-lying triplet state (T1) has less than half of the energy of the lowest-lying singlet state (S1).22,23 As shown in Fig. 7, the energy of S1 in pentacene is 110 meV greater than twice the energy of T1. We note therefore that, regeneration of the singlet via triplet–triplet recombination is unlikely at room temperature.
 Fig. 7  Energy level scheme for pentacene singlet and triplet excitons. 
Following work by Kippelen et al. that showed that pentacene/C60 bilayer photovoltaic devices exhibit very high photon-to-electron conversion efficiencies,24,25 as well as a report from Baldo et al. of a pentacene/C60 photodiode with greater than 100% quantum efficiency under reverse bias,26 we demonstrated that charge generation in these polycrystalline devices is achieved via the long-range diffusion of long-lived triplet excitons that were created within the 200 fs time resolution of the measurement.13 We have recently (in collaboration with the group of G. Cerullo) extended the time resolution and find that the generation time for triplet excitons is around 80 fs.27 This timescale of triplet generation is too short to be explained by intersystem crossing, which suggests that the triplet population results from exciton fission.
The transient optical absorption spectrum of pentacene thin films, as shown in Fig. 8, is complex. The majority of the features can be readily assigned to ground state bleaching (580 nm, 680 nm) and to the appearance of broad absorption associated with triplet excitons peaking towards 900 nm. However, other features have proved more puzzling, such as the apparent absorption feature near 630 nm. This has been assigned in a number of ways, for example as arising from a charged polaron.28 We have recently shown that many of these features are due to heating of the sample by the laser pulse coupled with anomalous temperature dependence of the absorption (which becomes stronger at high temperature near 630 nm), and have concluded that all measured transient absorption features can be accounted for by a combination of thermal modulation and the photogeneration of a population of triplet excitons.29
 Fig. 8  Transient optical absorption (TA) spectra for a 150nm thick pentacene film deposited on a silica substrate. Data at early time (<2 ns) were obtained by exciting with a 90 fs, 490 nm pulse with an irradiance of 80 μJ cm−2. Data at long times (>2 ns) were obtained by excitation with 600 ps, 532 nm pulse with an irradiance of 120 μJ cm−2. Data from 550–780 nm and from 820–915 nm are derived from sequential experiments on the same sample under the same experimental conditions. Spectra are integrated over time ranges indicated. 
This provides a robust description of efficient triplet exciton generation in pentacene thin films. Charge generation against C60 is efficient even for a simple two-layer structure24,25 and we have previously shown that there is a comparatively slow time evolution of a charge-like signature, appearing as an electro-absorption feature30 of the ground state bleaching response after about 5 ns.13 We show in Fig. 9 new transient absorption measurements at a probe wavelength of 1650 nm where pentacene shows hole–polaron absorption31 which reveals the slow appearance of holes on the pentacene after a few ns, and very slow decay beyond 300 ns, considerably longer than the measured lifetimes of the photogenerated triplet excitons as shown in Fig. 8. These recent results provide a very robust description for the sequence of processes outlined in Fig. 7. The challenge now is to incorporate pentacene with its singlet fission into a PV diode than includes also an IR-absorbing semiconductor that can harvest longer wavelength photons, such as lead chalcogenide nanocrystals.
 Fig. 9  Time evolution of charge-like features in the transient absorption spectrum of pentacene/C60 bilayers. The electroabsorption feature that arise due to the transient appearance of an electric field shows an initial response at around 1 ns and decays beyond 30 ns; in contrast the pentacene hole absorption at 1650 nm is longer lived. 
5 Conclusion
The electronic processes that operate in organic heterojunction solar cells are analogous to those in photosynthesis but there are important differences. Implicit in the description of these devices is the selection of organic semiconductors for which there is little ‘concentration quenching’ or H-aggregate Davydov splitting of luminescent excited states, which are therefore able to transfer energy efficiently to charge-like states at the heterojunction. The need for elaborate structures used in photosynthetic systems for light harvesting and energy transfer is thus avoided. These devices present just a single heterojunction for charge generation, in contrast to the cascade of energy levels that is used in photosynthetic reaction centres to shuttle electrons and holes away from one another rapidly. That this simple structure can be engineered to avoid geminate trapping or recombination is a surprising and important development. An important role must be played by relatively delocalised or extended molecular orbitals that are accessed by the emerging electrons and holes.
References
C. W. Tang and S. A. van Slyke, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1987, 51, 913–915 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. M. Halls, C. A. Walsh, N. C. Greenham, E. A. Marseglia, R. H. Friend, S. C. Moratti and A. B. Holmes, Nature, 1995, 376, 498–500 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yu, J. Gao, J. C. Hummelen, F. Wudl and A. J. Heeger, Science, 1995, 270, 1789–1791 CAS .
S. H. Park, A. Roy, S. Beaupre, S. Cho, N. Coates, J. S. Moon, D. Moses, M. Leclerc, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 297–U295 CrossRef CAS .
P. B. Miranda, D. Moses and A. J. Heeger, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2004, 70, 085212 CrossRef .
T. M. Clarke and J. R. Durrant, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6736–6767 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Morteani, P. Sreearunothai, L. M. Herz, R. H. Friend and C. Silva, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 92, 247402 CrossRef .
Y. S. Huang, S. Westenhoff, I. Avilov, P. Sreearunothai, J. M. Hodgkiss, C. Deleener, R. H. Friend and D. Beljonne, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 483–489 CrossRef CAS .
K. Vandewal, K. Tvingstedt, A. Gadisa, O. Inganas and J. V. Manca, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 904–909 CrossRef CAS .
S. Westenhoff, I. A. Howard, J. M. Hodgkiss, K. R. Kirov, H. A. Bronstein, C. K. Williams, N. C. Greenham and R. H. Friend, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 13653–13658 CrossRef CAS .
N. Geacintov, M. Pope and F. Vogel, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1969, 22, 593 CrossRef CAS .
W. Shockley and H. J. Queisser, J. Appl. Phys., 1961, 32, 510–519 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rao, M. W. B. Wilson, J. M. Hodgkiss, S. Albert-Seifried, H. Bassler and R. H. Friend, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 12698–12703 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Morteani, A. S. Dhoot, J. S. Kim, C. Silva, N. C. Greenham, C. Murphy, E. Moons, S. Cina, J. H. Burroughes and R. H. Friend, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 1708 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gonzalez-Rabade, A. C. Morteani and R. H. Friend, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3924 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Phillips, PhD thesis, University of Cambridge,  2010 Search PubMed .
S. Gelinas, O. Pare-Labrosse, C. N. Brosseau, S. Albert-Seifried, C. R. McNeill, K. R. Kirov, I. A. Howard, R. Leonelli, R. H. Friend and C. Silva, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 7114–7119 CAS .
S. Shoaee, T. M. Clarke, C. Huang, S. Barlow, S. R. Marder, M. Heeney, I. McCulloch and J. R. Durrant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 12919–12926 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, K. Vandewal, S. R. Yost, M. E. Bahlke, L. Goris, M. A. Baldo, J. V. Manca and T. V. Voorhis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 11878–11880 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Marsh, J. M. Hodgkiss and R. H. Friend, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3672–3676 CrossRef CAS .

          A. A. Bakulin, A. Rao, V. G. Pavelyev, P. H. M. van Loosdrecht, M. S. Pshenichnikov and R. H. Friend, submitted.
C. Jundt, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1995, 241, 84–88 CrossRef CAS .
V. Thorsmølle, R. Averitt, J. Demsar, D. Smith, S. Tretiak, R. Martin, X. Chi, B. Crone, A. Ramirez and A. Taylor, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 102, 017401 CrossRef .
S. Yoo, W. J. Potscavage Jr, B. Domercq, S.-H. Han, T.-D. Li, S. C. Jones, R. Szoszkiewicz, D. Levi, E. Riedo, S. R. Marder and B. Kippelen, Solid-State Electron., 2007, 51, 1367–1375 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yoo, B. Domercq and B. Kippelen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 5427–5429 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, P. Jadhav and M. A. Baldo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 033301 CrossRef .
M. W. B. Wilson, A. Rao, J. Clark, R. S. S. Kumar, D. Brida, G. Cerullo and R. H. Friend, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011 Search PubMed  , in press.
H. Marciniak, M. Fiebig, M. Huth, S. Schiefer, B. Nickel, F. Selmaier and S. Lochbrunner, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 99, 176402 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Rao, M. W. B. Wilson, S. R. Albert-Seifried, R. Di Pietro and R. H. Friend, in press.
L. Sebastian, G. Weiser and H. Bässler, Chem. Phys., 1981, 61, 125–135 CrossRef CAS .
C. P. Jarrett, A. R. Brown, R. H. Friend, M. G. Harrison, D. M. de Leeuw, P. Herwig and K. Müllen, Synth. Met., 1997, 85, 1403–1404 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Scheme for charge generation at a donor–acceptor heterojunction: (i) shows photon absorption that lifts an electron from the filled π states to the empty π* states to form an intramolecular photoexcition, exciton; (ii) shows its dissociation to leave the hole on the donor (to the left) and electron transferred to the acceptor (to the right). This may form a Coulombically-bound charge transfer exciton, or may dissociate to form free charges, as illustrated by process (iii).	 

 	Fig. 2  Structures of a selection of conjugated polymers used in organic PV, together with the commonly-used electron-accepting C60 derivative, PCBM.	 

 	Fig. 3  Scheme showing bulk exciton forming an initially hot state at the heterojunction (geminate polaron pair), which can branch to form free charges under an applied DC field or form the CT exciton bound at the heterojunction. The CT exciton can ionise thermally, be thermally excited back to the bulk exciton, emit radiatively (not shown), or undergo intersystem crossing to a lower energy triplet exciton.	 

 	Fig. 4  Magnetic field dependence of the photoinduced absorption near 780 nm, short-circuit photocurrent and photoluminescence measured near 730 nm for a blend of PFB and F8BT at room temperature. Excitation was provided by an argon ion laser at 488 nm. The value of Δg shown, 2.07 × 10 − 6, was used to obtain the solid-line fits using rates for other processes reported earlier.10	 

 	Fig. 5  Spectrally-resolved transient optical absorption spectra, shown as fractional change in optical transmission, for a film of PCDTBT-PC70BM excited at 480 nm and probed with a white light continuum.	 

 	Fig. 6  Top four panels: Transient spectra fora PCDTBT-PC70BM device with an applied bias of 0 V, +0.3 V, −1 V and −2 V. The positive feature from 550 nm to 675 nm is assigned to the bleaching of the ground state absorption and the negative response at wavelengths greater than 675 nm corresponds to the absorption of polarons. Time slices are shown at 0–5 ns (black), 5–10 ns (red), 10–50 ns (blue), 50–250 ns (teal), 0.25–1 μs (pink), 1–10 μs (moss green), 10–100 μs (navy blue). Spectra are integrated over the time ranges indicated. The feature at 600 nm in the spectra measured at −2 V is caused by an artefact in the white light continuum. Bottom panel: Charge kinetics at various applied voltages. Kinetics were integrated over the spectral range 800–1000 nm, corresponding to the polaron absorption. The four plots show the time evolution at −2 V (red circles), −1 V (blue triangles), 0 V (black squares) and +0.3 V(teal triangles). All spectra and kinetics were measured following excitation at 532 nm at 3 μJ cm−2.	 

 	Fig. 7  Energy level scheme for pentacene singlet and triplet excitons.	 

 	Fig. 8  Transient optical absorption (TA) spectra for a 150nm thick pentacene film deposited on a silica substrate. Data at early time (<2 ns) were obtained by exciting with a 90 fs, 490 nm pulse with an irradiance of 80 μJ cm−2. Data at long times (>2 ns) were obtained by excitation with 600 ps, 532 nm pulse with an irradiance of 120 μJ cm−2. Data from 550–780 nm and from 820–915 nm are derived from sequential experiments on the same sample under the same experimental conditions. Spectra are integrated over time ranges indicated.	 

 	Fig. 9  Time evolution of charge-like features in the transient absorption spectrum of pentacene/C60 bilayers. The electroabsorption feature that arise due to the transient appearance of an electric field shows an initial response at around 1 ns and decays beyond 30 ns; in contrast the pentacene hole absorption at 1650 nm is longer lived.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
