Birnessite nanotubes for electrochemical supercapacitor electrodes  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1EE01394G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1EE01394G
(Communication)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2813-2817Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsBirnessite nanotubes for electrochemical supercapacitor electrodes

        
          
            Alexander J. 
            Roberts
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Robert C. T. 
            Slade
          
        
      
Chemical Sciences, University of Surrey, Guildford, Surrey GU2 7XH, U.K. E-mail: A.Roberts@Surrey.ac.uk;  Fax: +44 1483 686401;   Tel: +44 1483 686834
Received 
      1st April 2011
    , Accepted 6th May 2011First published on 26th May 2011AbstractBirnessite nanotubes have been made through a templated hydrothermal route. Variations in experimental conditions have resulted in differing morphologies of high specific surface area. After forming into electrodes in supercapacitor test cells, good cycleability was observed with specific capacitances approaching 350 F g−1 at low discharge current densities.

Broader context
The move from fossil fuels for energy generation and transport applications presents one of the most significant challenges for the scientific community of the early 21st century. Much attention is being directed towards the use of renewable technologies for grid and large scale power applications, with fuel cell and battery technologies at the forefront of the search for an alternative to the internal combustion engine. Central to each of these technologies is the need for effective and efficient energy storage. The application of supercapacitors, either on their own or in conjunction with fuel cells or batteries, offer promising opportunities by virtue of their high power densities. In the current work, phase pure birnessite nanotubes have been synthesised for the first time, without the presence of manganese oxyhydroxide. It is expected that birnessite nanotubes could offer significant improvements in current research as catalysts in Li batteries, oxygen reduction catalysts for chemical and microbial fuel cells and for peroxide scavenging in polymer membranes to help extend their low temperature working lifetimes. The materials produced have been tested in aqueous supercapacitor cells and the nanotubular morphology reported here has been shown to have a high specific capacitance (almost 350 F g−1) and power densities for a bulk birnessite material with good cycleability.

With the threat of global warming and concerns over environmental sustainability, a great deal of research is being targeted towards clean energy technologies for both high power applications and for an alternative to the internal combustion engine. Many of these energy sources (e.g. rural wind, solar and tidal) do not offer security of supply, whilst the fuel cell battery technologies, seen by most as the only viable alternatives to the internal combustion engine, do not currently exhibit the high power density required to be effective on their own. This illustrates the need for the development of more effective and efficient high power energy storage devices. One such device is the electrochemical supercapacitor which has gained much attention in recent years in a number of potential applications, including in electric vehicles. The supercapacitor can be used to enhance both performance and lifetime of energy storage systems when used in conjunction with batteries or fuel cells, by virtue of the high-power density and rapid charge - discharge characteristics.1–6 Commercially available supercapacitors typically consist of carbon or ruthenium(IV) oxide-based electrodes and an electrolyte: the most promising to date rely on amorphous RuO2- based systems, with high specific capacitances (>700 F g−1) and cycling ability being reported, but with inherent problems of high cost and toxicity. Of the metal oxides under investigation as potential alternatives, MnO2 is perhaps the most promising with in device capacitances over 450 F g−1 and a high natural abundance, low cost and low toxicity. MnO2 has the further advantage that a range of phases and morphologies are possible through the tailoring of synthetic routes and conditions,7–11 with attempts usually centred on maximising specific surface areas and pore volumes and tailoring pore size distributions in order to maximise specific capacitance. Some birnessite MnO2 materials, have, however shown high specific capacitances at a relatively low specific surface area.12 This is a result of the thinness of birnessite platelets allowing access to almost all of the bulk MnO2, effectively meaning that close to 100% is at the surface.
In the current work, a templated hydrothermal method has been used to synthesise birnessite nanotubes without the formation of other phases, thereby incorporating the enhanced specific capacitance of the birnessite phase discussed above with the potential increases in capacitance associated with nanotubes as observed in carbon systems.13
The synthesis employed followed a simple hydrothermal route whereby KMnO4 (15g, 0.0949 mol) was added to KOH(aq) (0.5988 mol, 180 cm3) and stirred for 15 min before the addition of 1 – hexadecylamine template (4.1048g, 0.0170 mol). The resultant slurry was transferred to a Hastelloy steel autoclave and heated to 150 °C under autogenous pressure for 1, 2 or 3 days with constant stirring before allowing the reaction to cool slowly to room temperature. The resultant materials were thoroughly washed with water until the washings had pH ≈ 7. The solids were then refluxed in ethanol saturated with NaCl, three times, to facilitate hexadecylamine template removal. CHN anaylsis was used to check for any remaining template, which would be subsequently removed with further refluxing. The materials so formed are referred to from herein as 1 day, 2 day and 3 day, corresponding to their reaction time.

Powder XRD profiles (Fig. 1) could be matched to that of K-birnessite (ICPDF No. 01-052-0556), with the degree of crystallinity and/or long range ordering increasing with reaction time as apparent in the increase in intensity of the 00l reflections. Little difference was observed between 1 day and 2 day, but additional peaks were observed in 3 day (annotated * in Fig. 1); additional peaks were attributed to the formation of the manganite phase, manganese(III) oxyhydroxide (ICPDF No. 01-074-1842) and were to be expected after 3 days reaction at 150 °C (over reaction). Previous reported attempts by others to synthesise birnessite nanotubes have resulted in the formation of purely manganese oxyhydroxide at reaction times necessary for the formation of the required morphology.
 Fig. 1  
Powder XRD profiles of 1 day, 2 day and 3 day showing major hkl indicies. Peaks corresponding to MnOOH are indicated by *. 

Nitrogen sorption at 77 K of the 3 materials (Fig. 2) showed isotherms that could be classified as a combination of types I and IV as classified by BDDT,14 with a rapid uptake of nitrogen at low pressures, with no plateau at high pressures, and with hysteresis observed upon desorption suggesting the presence of both micro and mesopores. The hysteresis loop observed in 2 day and 3 day was classified according to IUPAC definitions15 as H3 suggesting slit shaped pores, with that of 1 day being a combination of H2 and H3 suggesting a more complex pore structure of interconnected networks of varying size and shape, pointing towards a textural change between 1 day and 2 day. The specific surface areas were seen to decrease with increasing reaction time from 110 to 91 to 63 m2 g−1 with the specific pore volumes conversely increasing from 0.34 to 0.48 to 0.54 cm3 g−1 in 1 day, 2 day and 3 day material respectively. Pore size distributions calculated through application of the BJH model (Fig. 3) showed a marked effect of reaction time. A single broad unimodal distribution was observed in all cases, increasing in pore width from 12 nm (1 day) to 30 nm (2 day) to over 50 nm (3 day). These pore structures are believed to be a result of a combination of pores inside the nanotubes and/or “open flowers” (as seen in electron microscopy studies) and interparticle voids. One electrolyte is used in this study to assess specific capacitance of the materials, but these variations in pore size distribution may result in markedly differing behaviour when a variety of electrolytes are used with differing ion sizes/hydration spheres.
 Fig. 2  
Nitrogen sorption isotherms of 1 day (circle), 2 day (square) and 3 day (triangle). Closed and open symbols denote adsorption and desorption respectively. 
 Fig. 3  
          Pore size distributions of 1 day (circle), 2 day (square) and 3 day (triangle) as calculated by BJH method. 

Scanning Transmission Electron Microscopy (STEM) images of the materials are shown in Fig. 4. The SEM image of 1 day suggests the presence of large angular particles with some surface texture. These large particles are shown in the TEM image of the same area to be an agglomeration of what appear to be groups of needles emanating from a point. In the TEM image after further magnification, the needle like morphology is again observed, however the SEM image of the same area shows this not to be the case and in fact the particle is made up of “flower – like” nanoparticles. Both SEM and TEM of 2 day and 3 day show them to be of the same morphology. At lower magnification the SEM images are shown in both cases to be of a mixture of plates and rods or tubes. TEM images taken at the same magnification, however, showed the plates to actually be agglomerations of rods or tubes. At a higher magnification, TEM confirmed these were in fact tubes and not rods. No discernible differences were observed in 3 day that would suggest a differing morphology for the manganite oxyhydroxide phase relative to that of birnessite. The differing morphologies observed between 1 day and those of 2 day and 3 day explain the change in shape and classification of the hysteresis loop in nitrogen sorption studies discussed earlier. To the authors' knowledge, 2 day is the only reported example of a phase pure birnessite nanotube.
 Fig. 4  
          STEM studies. SEM images of (a) 1 day, (c) 2 day and (e) 3 day. TEM images of (b) 1 day, (d) 2 day and (f) 3 day. Higher magnification images are shown in insets with scale bar in (a) and (b) representing 100 nm and in (d) and (f) representing 20 nm. 
From consideration of the electron microscopy images, a simple mechanism can be proposed for the formation of birnessite nanotubes in this system; it is suggested that sheets of birnessite (its preferred morphology) begin to form at a point (probably as a result of the presence of the hexadecylamine template). These sheets begin to grow outwards from the point, increasing in both length and width. As they do so, they begin to curl upon themselves around the template (possibly helped by steric hindrances) and continue until they wrap around completely to form tubes. These tubes at some point in their growth break away from each other and continue to grow. The template is then removed as detailed in the experimental section to leave birnessite nanotubes. Further reaction (if time permits) then results in the conversion of MnO2 to MnOOH.
In order for the materials to be studied in potential supercapacitor devices, they were fabricated into electrodes. This was done by mixing the material with polyvinilydene fluoride (PVDF) and graphite in the ratio 85:5:10 in acetone, with stirring for several hours. After heating to 85 °C, the resultant ink was poured onto a glass sheet and spread using a micrometer blade on a Sheen Automatic Film Applicator 1133N with a traverse speed of 100 mm s−1. A carbon based counter electrode was also made in this way, replacing MnO2 with Darco G60 commercial carbon. Supercapacitor cells were assembled in a hybrid arrangement with one MnO2 and one carbon electrode and a glass fibre separator with (NH4)2SO4 (aq., 2 mol dm−3) electrolyte. The test cells were tightened to a constant torque of 2 N m−1.

Cyclic voltammetry (CV) experiments were carried out in a 3- electrode configuration with Ag/AgCl (sat. KCl(aq)) reference electrode. The CVs were all of the same form for all 3 materials, an example of which is given in Fig. 5. One peak was observed in each scan direction, most prominent at lower scan rates. These peaks could be attributed to the insertion and deinsertion of NH4+ into the birnessite structure with an accompanying redox reaction as Mn(IV) was converted to Mn(III) and vice versa, showing clear pseudocapacitive behaviour.
 Fig. 5  CV profiles of 2 day electrode at various scan rates. 
Deviation from the ideal rectangular shaped profile was observed in all cases, profiles becoming less ideal as the scan rate was increased and also deviating from the horizontal at higher scan rates. The explanation for this could be found in the fact that supercapacitive behaviour in birnessites is reliant upon the insertion/deinsertion of electrolyte into the electrode. This diffusion controlled process is able to proceed into almost all of the available pores at low scan rates, resulting in the more ideal “rectangular” response CV.2,16,17 At higher scan rates this interaction is decreased such that the electrolyte species merely approach the electrode surface with very little interaction resulting in a deviation from the ideal rectangular shape and also angling of the CV away from the horizontal.
Galvanostatic charge-discharge cycling over 1000 cycles between 0 and 1.35 V at discharge current densities between 0.1 and 100 A g−1 were performed on test cells as described above. The expected “sawtooth” profile was observed during cycling, as shown in Fig. 6, with a slight “i.r. drop” on the start of discharge.
 Fig. 6  “Sawtooth” charge-discharge profile as observed at a discharge current density of 2 A g−1. 
An initial drop in specific capacitance was observed over the first 50 cycles (this was observed in all test cells regardless of discharge current density), after which time excellent cyclability and coulombic efficiency (99–100%) were obtained up to 1000 cycles (Fig. 7). The initial drop in specific capacitance could be attributed to dissolution of Mn into the electrolyte solution as reported by others.18
 Fig. 7  Effect of galvanostatic cycling at a discharge current density of 1 A g−1on specific capacitance for 1 day (diamonds), 2 day (squares) and 3 day (triangles) devices. 
The effect of discharge current density on specific capacitance is shown in Fig. 8. A rapid drop in specific capacitance was observed as the current density was increased to 2 A g−1, becoming less significant at higher current densities. The higher charge-discharge rates observed at higher current densities result in the electrolyte ions not being able to access as much of the pore structure and simply approaching the outer surface, resulting in a smaller electrochemical surface and hence lowered specific capacity. A specific capacitance of almost 350 F g−1 was observed for the 2 day cell at low discharge current density. This value was particularly high for bulk (non thin-film) birnessite materials and points towards a promising supercapacitor electrode material. The highest specific capacitance was observed for the 2 day electrodes at low current densities (<1 A g−1) with the 3 day electrodes showing the lowest. At high current densities all 3 electrodes showed comparable specific capacitance with the 1 day electrode performing best at 1 and 2 A g−1 discharge current density.
 Fig. 8  Effect of discharge current density on specific capacitance for 1 day (diamonds), 2 day (squares) and 3 day (triangles) devices. 
In order to understand the trends in specific capacitance observed for the 1 day, 2 day and 3 day electrodes at low current densities in relation to their physiochemical properties, a number of factors must be considered.
The charge storage mechanism in supercapacitors is highly dependent upon the availability of an accessible surface, with most promising electrode materials having a high specific surface area (although this is not always the case3). In this study, the specific surface areas measured decrease with increasing synthesis/reaction time and do not explain why the specific capacitance of the 2 day cell is greater than that of the 1 day cell. Another important factor is the pore volume and pore structure of the electrodes; the 3 day material has a considerably higher pore volume than the 2 day material yet the 2 day cell exhibits a higher specific capacitance than the 3 day cell. The pore size distribution also plays an important role, if the pores are too small to allow hydrated ions to enter, large amounts of surface area becomes inaccessible to the electrolyte. Given that the modal pore size distribution of the 3 day material is highest, this alone cannot be used to explain the variations in specific capacitance observed. It has been shown by some authors14 that a nanotube morphology can have a large positive effect on specific capacitance. This would explain the larger specific capacitance of the 2 day cell over the 1 day cell and account for the increase despite a lower specific surface area. It would not explain the lower specific capacitance of the 3 day cell relative to the 1 day cell. The 3 day material was shown to contain the manganite phase as well as birnessite; this Mn(III) phase would be expected to have a considerably lower specific capacitance and its presence could explain the relatively poor specific capacitance of the 3 day cell.
It is clear, therefore, that the trends observed are a result of the complex interactions (both positive and negative) discussed above. As the current density is increased, the linked contributions of particle morphology, pore size distribution and pore volume are decreased as the higher charge discharge rates result in a lesser interaction between the pore structure and the electrolyte, meaning that much of the porosity is no longer accessible. This results in the specific surface area dictating, to an extent, the specific capacitance. The 1 day material exhibits the highest external surface (highest specific surface area and lowest pore volume) and accounts for the higher specific capacitance values observed in the 1 day cell. As the current density is increased further, a lower proportion of the electrode is accessed by the electrolyte.
The similar specific capacitances observed for all 3 cells suggest that the surface accessed is smaller than the specific surface area of the smallest area electrode material (3 day).
Energy densities were calculated from galvanostatic data, with values approaching 90 W h kg−1 at low current densities observed in the 2 day cell and with power densities over 75000 W kg−1 at 100 A g−1 current densities in all 3 cells. The high power densities observed are of the same order as with other birnessite systems, with the energy densities being higher than those previously reported for non-thin-film birnessite-based systems.
In conclusion, birnessite nanotubes have been made by a simple templated 2 day hydrothermal method. A shorter synthesis time resulted in the formation of birnessite nanoflowers, with the undesirable manganite phase being formed in part after 3 days. Specific surface areas of the materials were seen to decrease with longer synthesis time, a larger modal pore size distribution also following with a corresponding increase in pore volumes. Galvanostatic cycling of supercapacitor test cells using the materials showed a range of specific capacitance with high (350 F g−1) values being observed in the 2 day cell and good cyclability being observed with all three materials. Analysis of specific capacitance measured at a variety of discharge current densities showed no one material outperformed others under all conditions, emphasizing that there was a complex interaction of a number of positive and negative factors at work. Finally, energy densities as high as 90 W h kg−1 were observed at low discharge current densities. With power densities as high as 77000 W kg−1 observed at high discharge current densities. The results presented show the phase pure (XRD) birnessite in a nanotube morphology to be a potentially excellent candidate for supercapacitor applications.
Acknowledgements
This work was funded under the UK's EPSRC Supergen Energy Storage Consortium (Grant No. EP/H01956/1).
Notes and references

          B. E. Conway, Electrochemical Supercapacitors, Scientific Fundamental and Technological Applications, Kluwer Academic/Plenum, New York,  1999 Search PubMed .
Q. Wang, Z. Wen and J. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 2141–2146 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Cuentas-Gallegos, R. Maryinez-Rosales, M. N. Baibarac, P. Gomez-Romero and M. E. Rincon, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 2088–2092 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Cuentas-Gallegos, M. Lira-Cantu and P. Gomez-Romero, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1125–1133 CrossRef CAS .
G. Lota, K. Lota and E. Frackowiak, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 1828–1832 CrossRef CAS .
Q. L. Chen, K. H. Xue, W. Shen, F. F. Tao, S. Y. Yin and W. Xu, Electrochim. Acta, 2004, 49, 4157–4161 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Roberts and R. C. T. Slade, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 7460–7469 Search PubMed .
A. J. Roberts and R. C. T. Slade, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 3221–3226 RSC .
S. Komaba, N. Kumagai and S. Chiba, Electrochim. Acta, 2000, 46, 31–37 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, X. Wang, W. Huang, P. J. Sebastian and S. Gamboa, J. Power Sources, 2005, 140, 211–215 CrossRef CAS .
V. Subramanian, H. Zhu and J. Wei, J. Power Sources, 2006, 159, 361–364 CrossRef CAS .
T. Brousse, M. Toupin, R. Dugas, L. Athouel, O. Crosnier and D. J. Belanger, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, A2171–A2180 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chmiola, Y. Yushin, Y. Gogotsi, C. Portet, P. Simon and P. L. Taberna, Science, 2006, 313, 1760–1763 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. W. Sing, D. H. Everett, R. A. W. Haul, L. Moscou, R. A. Pierotti, J. Roquerol and T. Siemieniewska, Pure Appl. Chem., 1985, 57, 603–609 CrossRef CAS .
J. Rouquerol, D. Avnir, C. W. Fairbridge, D. H. Everett, J. H. Haynes, N. Pernicone, J. D. F. Ramsay, K. S. W. Sing and K. K. Unger, Pure Appl. Chem., 1994, 66, 1739–1758 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. Xu, L. B. Kong, W. J. Zhou and H. L. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 19141–19147 CrossRef CAS .
V. Subramanian, H. Zhu, R. Vajtai, P. M. Ajayan and B. Wei, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 20207–20214 CrossRef CAS .
S.-C. Pang, M. A. Anderson and T. W. Chapman, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147, 444–450 CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:

Broader context
The move from fossil fuels for energy generation and transport applications presents one of the most significant challenges for the scientific community of the early 21st century. Much attention is being directed towards the use of renewable technologies for grid and large scale power applications, with fuel cell and battery technologies at the forefront of the search for an alternative to the internal combustion engine. Central to each of these technologies is the need for effective and efficient energy storage. The application of supercapacitors, either on their own or in conjunction with fuel cells or batteries, offer promising opportunities by virtue of their high power densities. In the current work, phase pure birnessite nanotubes have been synthesised for the first time, without the presence of manganese oxyhydroxide. It is expected that birnessite nanotubes could offer significant improvements in current research as catalysts in Li batteries, oxygen reduction catalysts for chemical and microbial fuel cells and for peroxide scavenging in polymer membranes to help extend their low temperature working lifetimes. The materials produced have been tested in aqueous supercapacitor cells and the nanotubular morphology reported here has been shown to have a high specific capacitance (almost 350 F g−1) and power densities for a bulk birnessite material with good cycleability.


 	Fig. 1  
Powder XRD profiles of 1 day, 2 day and 3 day showing major hkl indicies. Peaks corresponding to MnOOH are indicated by *.	 

 	Fig. 2  
Nitrogen sorption isotherms of 1 day (circle), 2 day (square) and 3 day (triangle). Closed and open symbols denote adsorption and desorption respectively.	 

 	Fig. 3  
          Pore size distributions of 1 day (circle), 2 day (square) and 3 day (triangle) as calculated by BJH method.	 

 	Fig. 4  
          STEM studies. SEM images of (a) 1 day, (c) 2 day and (e) 3 day. TEM images of (b) 1 day, (d) 2 day and (f) 3 day. Higher magnification images are shown in insets with scale bar in (a) and (b) representing 100 nm and in (d) and (f) representing 20 nm.	 

 	Fig. 5  CV profiles of 2 day electrode at various scan rates.	 

 	Fig. 6  “Sawtooth” charge-discharge profile as observed at a discharge current density of 2 A g−1.	 

 	Fig. 7  Effect of galvanostatic cycling at a discharge current density of 1 A g−1on specific capacitance for 1 day (diamonds), 2 day (squares) and 3 day (triangles) devices.	 

 	Fig. 8  Effect of discharge current density on specific capacitance for 1 day (diamonds), 2 day (squares) and 3 day (triangles) devices.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
