Cu(In,Ga)Se 2 thin films without Ga segregation prepared by the single-step selenization of sputter deposited Cu-In-Ga-Se precursor layers  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2EE22804A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2EE22804A
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9914-9921Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsCu(In,Ga)Se2 thin films without Ga segregation prepared by the single-step selenization of sputter deposited Cu-In-Ga-Se precursor layers

        
          
            Dong Gwon 
            Moon
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jae Ho 
            Yun
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jihye 
            Gwak
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            SeungKyu 
            Ahn
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Ara 
            Cho
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Keeshik 
            Shin
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Kyunghoon 
            Yoon
          
        
       and 

        
          
            SeJin 
            Ahn
          
        
      *
      Solar Energy Department, Korea Institute of Energy Research, Republic of Korea. E-mail: swisstel@kier.re.kr;  Fax: +82 42 860 3739;   Tel: +82 42 860 3541
Received 
      11th May 2012
    , Accepted 2nd October 2012First published on 2nd October 2012AbstractWe report a new approach to fabricating Cu(In,Ga)Se2 (CIGSe) light absorbing layers for thin film solar cells without Ga segregation using a sputtering and single-step selenization process. To mitigate Ga segregation at the CIGSe/back-contact region, which has frequently been observed in the selenization of metal/alloy precursor layers, we used Se-containing precursor layers (Cu-In-Ga-Se) to capture Ga in covalently bonded structures and investigated the effects of Se content in the precursor layers on the properties of the selenized CIGSe films and the devices. As the Se content in the precursor layer increased, Ga segregation was significantly mitigated, resulting in a completely homogenized Ga distribution when the Se/metal ratio of the precursor films is over 0.8. Finally, a thin CIGSe film (∼670 nm) with a uniform Ga distribution was processed to fabricate a solar cell, and the device exhibited a conversion efficiency of 11.7% with an open circuit potential of 0.6 V. An increase of the CIGSe film thickness to 1.55 μm resulted in a device efficiency of up to 13.16%.

Broader context
A novel approach to fabricating Cu(In,Ga)Se2 (CIGSe) light absorbing layers for thin film solar cells without Ga segregation using a sputtering and single-step selenization process is demonstrated. To mitigate Ga segregation at the CIGSe/back-contact region, Se-containing precursor layers (Cu-In-Ga-Se) were used to capture Ga in covalently bonded structures. When the Se/metal ratio of the precursor films was over 0.8, a CIGSe film with a completely homogenized Ga distribution was obtained and the device showed an open circuit potential of 0.6 V.

Introduction
Chalcopyrite CuInSe2 is well-suited as an absorber material for use in thin-film solar cells because of its direct transition nature leading to a high light absorption coefficient over 105 cm−1 and its excellent resistance to high-energy radiation. In addition, the band gap of absorbing materials can be tunable from 1.04 eV (CuInSe2) to 1.72 eV (CuGaSe2) by adjusting the Ga-to-In atomic ratio. As previously reported, solar cells fabricated with CIGSe films with a band gap energy of 1.2 eV corresponding to a Ga/(In + Ga) ratio of approximately 0.3 exhibited a record efficiency of over 20%.1
However, this record efficiency has been achieved through a three-stage co-evaporation that requires complicated processing steps which may potentially increase the total production costs. In contrast, a two-step process consisting of the sputter deposition of metallic precursor layers with a subsequent selenization has attracted much attention as an alternative deposition process for absorber formation due to its potential for achieving high conversion efficiency with low cost and high productivity.2–5 Recently, an aperture area efficiency of 17.2% was demonstrated for a 30 × 30 cm2 Cu(In,Ga)(S,Se)2 (CIGSSe) sub-module fabricated using a sputtering method.6
One critical issue in the selenization of metallic precursors (Cu-In-Ga) is Ga segregation near the CIGSe–Mo back-contact interface.7 The driving force of the Ga movement during selenization has been considered to be the preferential reaction between In and Se.8 This undesired Ga distribution sometimes results in a phase separation into CuInSe2 (surface region) and CuGaSe2 (back-contact region),9 and inhibits the realization of the high open-circuit potential (VOC) that is expected according to the average Ga/(In + Ga) ratio, due to the lack of Ga in the absorbing layer near the CIGSe–CdS junction.8,9
Traditional solutions to this problem include modifications of the post heat-treatment steps. An additional reaction step for surface sulfurization of the pre-selenized CIGSe layers with H2S gas was proposed to increase the band gap of the absorber layer near the junction. This resulted in a graded band-gap Cu(In,Ga)Se2 absorber with a thin Cu(In,Ga)(S,Se)2 surface layer.10 Consecutive heat treatments of the metallic precursor in H2Se gas and in an Ar atmosphere had also beneficial effects on the Ga homogenization.9,11 However, despite the remarkable results obtained by these approaches, an increased number of heat treatment steps is not considered the best solution for the Ga distribution control because of the increased process time, complexity of the equipment and, thus, the final cost.
In this regard, we aimed to develop a new process by which CIGSe films without Ga segregation can be obtained through a single-step selenization with Se vapor. The basic scheme is altering the matrix through which Ga should move from pure metal/alloys (in which Ga can move relatively easily) to covalently bonded selenide phases (in which Ga is strongly bonded), as shown in Fig. 1. Fig. 1(a) and (b) show the estimated Ga movement during selenization in a Cu-In-Ga metallic matrix and a Cu-In-Ga-Se selenide matrix, respectively. Weakly bonded Ga can be easily pushed to the back-contact side by the preferential reaction between In and Se (Fig. 1(a)), however, covalently bonded Ga in the selenide matrix is expected to be immovable, eventually preventing Ga segregation (Fig. 1(b)).
 Fig. 1  Schematic of estimated Ga movement during selenization in (a) a Cu-In-Ga metallic matrix and (b) a Cu-In-Ga-Se selenide matrix.  represents Cu or In and  metal vacancy. 
To realize the situation illustrated in Fig. 1(b), we must incorporate Se into the precursor films prior to selenization. Selenization of Se-containing precursors was previously reported by Kamada12 and Dejene,13 but it was not a true sputter/selenization process because they utilized vacuum evaporation to deposit metal–selenide layers. Much effort has been made to fabricate CIGSe thin films using sputtering of a single Cu-In-Ga-Se target, which is conceptually close to the situation illustrated in Fig. 1(b), but these device efficiencies were low (<10%).14,15
An interesting approach to the preparation of CIGSe thin films via sputtering of Cu, In2Se3 and Ga2Se3 targets was reported by Romeo.16 The authors adopted two strategies for forming CIGSe films; in the first case, initially a CISe layer was formed by selenization of a stacked In2Se3/Cu layer sputter deposited at 400–450 °C. Additional Ga2Se3 and Cu layers were deposited onto that CISe layer, and the sample was selenized again to form CIGSe films. The second one was selenization of a stacked In2Se3/Ga2Se3/Cu layer sputter deposited at 350, 350 and 450 °C, respectively. Both the routes resulted in the CIGSe solar cells with efficiencies ranging from 12 to 14%. However, apart from the complexity of the processes, it is noteworthy that VOC values of their solar cells were relatively low, 0.520 to 0.580 mV, compared to those of typical high efficiency CIGSe solar cells (>0.6 V) with an optimized Ga/(In + Ga) ratio of 0.3. Even though the authors did not mention the Ga distribution in their CIGSe films, it is reasonable to consider that the films did not have a fully optimized Ga distribution.
In the authors' opinion, the inferior device performance demonstrated in the previous works (low efficiency14,15 and low VOC16) should be attributed to a lack of understanding of how addition of Se into the precursor affects the characteristics of the final absorber layers including the Ga distribution and the morphological/structural evolution during selenization.
Therefore, we report a systematic study on the effects of Se content in sputter-deposited precursor films on the mitigation of Ga segregation and the corresponding cell performance. We employed binary selenide targets (Cu–Se and In–Se) rather than a single quaternary target to add flexibility in controlling the Se content in the precursor films. As the Se content increased, Ga segregation was significantly mitigated, resulting in a completely homogenized Ga distribution at a Se/metal ratio of 0.8. Furthermore, the CIGSe films became flatter and denser with increasing Se content in the precursor films. Finally, a thin CIGSe film (∼670 nm) without Ga segregation was processed for the fabrication of a solar cell, and the device demonstrated a conversion efficiency of 11.7% with an open circuit potential of 0.6 V. In addition, an increase of the CIGSe film thickness to 1.55 μm resulted in a device efficiency of up to 13.1%.
We claim that by the sputter/selenization route suggested in this paper, one can get a firm way to completely eliminate the Ga segregation problem, and it can finally be applied to obtain CIGSe films with an intentionally controlled Ga distribution, i.e., a double graded Ga distribution, which has resulted in the highest conversion efficiency.17,18
Results and discussion
Three types of precursor films of different Se contents were prepared using a co-sputtering method, and were selenized with Se vapor. Fig. 2 presents a summary of these precursor films along with the sputtering targets used to form the films.
 Fig. 2  Three precursor films with different Se/metal ratios used in this study. Combinations of the targets used to prepare the films are also shown. 
As a reference, the first sample was prepared by co-sputtering Cu–Ga, Cu–In and Cu targets (pure metal/alloy film, Fig. 2(a)). The Se content in the precursor films was then gradually increased. Precursor films with low Se content (Se/metal ratio of 0.3, Fig. 2(b)) were prepared by co-sputtering Cu–Ga, Cu–In and Cu–Se targets. The Cu–Se target replaced the pure Cu target to supply Se into the precursor layer. Precursor films with high Se content (Se/metal ratio > 0.8, Fig. 2(c)) were prepared by co-sputtering Cu–Ga, In–Se and Cu–Se targets. The In–Se target was used instead of the Cu–In target to supply additional Se to the films.
Pure metal/alloy precursor films
The characteristics of a pure metal/alloy precursor film sputter deposited from Cu–Ga, Cu–In and Cu targets are shown in Fig. 3. Fig. 3(a) and (b) indicate that the precursor film, which is approximately 920 nm thick, has a non-uniform and rough morphology. As shown in the XRD pattern of the sample (Fig. 3(c)), the film is primarily composed of Cu9(In,Ga)4 and elemental In. Note that there is no elemental Cu peak in Fig. 3(c) although an elemental Cu target was used during the co-sputtering process. This means that a Cu-In-Ga compound can be easily formed at room temperature (or under the temperature induced by natural heating during the sputtering process) due to the fast proliferation between Cu, In and Ga as observed in the co-sputtering of CuIn and Cu.5 The depth profile of the precursor film (Fig. 3(d)) reveals that the inner portion of the film (near the Mo) is presumably Cu9(In,Ga)4, and the pure In exists at the surface region. This observation implies that Cu, In and Ga react to form Cux(In,Ga) and additional In, which is not involved in that reaction presumably due to the solubility limit of In in the Cu-rich matrix, exists in its elemental form at the surface. This surface In is thought to be responsible for the non-uniform morphology and the high roughness of the film.
 Fig. 3  (a) Planar and (b) cross-sectional SEM images, (c) XRD pattern and (d) AES depth profile of the pure metal/alloy precursor film. 

Fig. 4 presents the characteristics of the film obtained by the selenization of the precursor layer that is shown in Fig. 3 and the corresponding device performance. The selenization of the Cu-In-Ga layer induced a large volume expansion, as evidenced by the thickness of the selenized film (2.2 μm) presumably due to the incorporation of the relatively large Se atoms into the film. The voids found at the CIGSe–Mo interface, frequently observed in the selenization/sulfurization of metallic precursors,5,19–21 can be attributed to the significant structural change that occurs during selenization/sulfurization.
 Fig. 4  (a) Cross-sectional SEM image, (b) XRD pattern and (c) AES depth profile of the film obtained by the selenization of the pure metal/alloy precursor film shown in Fig. 3. A light illuminated I–V curve of the device fabricated using the film is presented in (d). 
The selenization of the metallic precursor layer resulted in a complete phase separation into CISe and CGSe (Fig. 4(b)), and the majority of Ga was segregated at the Mo back contact (Fig. 4(c)). This result is consistent with the grain size distribution of the film (Fig. 4(a)) in which the surface region has relatively large grains, while the inner portion has small ones. The grain size of CIGSe thin films is known to decrease with increasing Ga content.22 This Ga segregation near the Mo back contact has frequently been observed in the selenization of metallic precursors, and has been attributed to the difference in the reaction rates between the Cu-In-Se and Cu-Ga-Se phases.9 The CISe phase forms much easier and faster than the CGSe phase, which should result in the preferential formation of CISe at the surface. As a consequence, Ga may be driven back to the film–Mo interface.9 Furthermore, the deposition sequence of the elements in the precursor film (e.g., Cu/Ga/In and Cu/In/Ga) is not critical to the degree of Ga segregation,9 implying that the movement of Ga in the pure metal/alloy matrix is feasible regardless of the initial Ga position. Therefore, the matrix through which Ga should move must be changed to a more strongly bonded one, i.e., the selenide phase.
The device prepared from the pure metal precursor exhibited a rollover in the I–V curve yielding a low FF and thus a low efficiency of 2.28%. The origin of the rollover is unclear at this stage. It has frequently been interpreted as the presence of a back-contact reverse diode in CdTe solar cells.23 However, the back contact of the device should have a CGSe/(MoSe2)/Mo structure; thus, it is unlikely to form a reverse diode. The possibility that an electron flow barrier or a large number of interfacial defects formed at the abrupt CISe–CGSe interface could explain the rollover.
Precursor films with low Se contents
Precursor films with a Se/metal ratio of approximately 0.3 were prepared by co-sputtering Cu–Ga, Cu–In, and Cu–Se targets. By adding Se, the flatness of the precursor film is markedly improved as shown in Fig. 5(a) and (b). This improvement is thought to be related to the suppression of inter-diffusion between the metallic elements, as evidenced by the low intensities of the XRD peaks corresponding to the metal/alloy phases (Fig. 5(c)). Se may react with Cu-In-Ga to form amorphous Cu-In-Ga-Se while simultaneously mitigating proliferation between the metals. Because the total amount of Se in the precursor film is inadequate to cover all the metal atoms (Se/metal ∼0.3), Cu-In-Ga that does not participate in the reaction might be detected in the XRD pattern in the form of Cu2(In,Ga) and elemental In. The AES depth profile (Fig. 5(d)) also supports the mitigation of the formation of a Cu-In-Ga solid solution by Se incorporation in that there is no solubility-related elemental segregation compared with the obvious non-uniform elemental distribution in the depth profile of the pure metal/alloy precursor film (Fig. 3(d)).
 Fig. 5  (a) Planar and (b) cross-sectional SEM images, (c) XRD pattern and (d) AES depth profile of the precursor film with low Se content. 

Fig. 6 presents the characteristics of the film obtained by the selenization of the precursor layer shown in Fig. 5 with a Se/metal ratio of 0.3 and the corresponding device performance. The selenized layer has a thickness of approximately 1.4 μm (Fig. 6(a)), which indicates that the volume expansion of the film during selenization is reduced compared with that of the pure metal/alloy because approximately 30% of the total Se required to construct the CIGSe structure was presented in the starting materials. The smaller volume expansion also resulted in a complete removal of voids at the film–Mo interface. However, the selenized layer has a double-layer structure with an upper layer (900 nm thick) containing relatively large crystallites and a bottom layer (430 nm thick) composed of small grains. This double-layer formation will be addressed in detail later. The film is a single-phase chalcopyrite CIGSe without an apparent phase separation (Fig. 6(b)), but it still contains an undesirable Ga distribution (Fig. 6(c)). These results indicate that Se incorporation into the precursor layer is beneficial to mitigate Ga segregation, but the amount of Se corresponding to a Se/metal ratio of 0.3 is inadequate to completely inhibit the movement of Ga. This result can be understood by assuming that approximately only 30% of Ga is bonded to Se and the other 70% of Ga is in the same situation as the pure metal/alloy precursor. Therefore, partial mitigation of Ga segregation (single-phase formation) should occur, but a significant fraction of Ga is still driven back to the film/interface.
 Fig. 6  (a) Cross-sectional SEM images, (b) XRD pattern and (c) AES depth profile of the film obtained by the selenization of the precursor film with low Se content shown in Fig. 5. A light illuminated I–V curve of the device fabricated using the film is presented in (d). 
Apart from the Ga distribution, Fig. 6(a) illustrates that a distinct boundary exists between the two CIGSe layers as compared with the gradual change observed in the grain size of the film selenized from the pure metal/alloy precursor (Fig. 4(a)). This observation implies that Ga segregation may not be solely responsible for the double-layer formation because Ga segregation is more pronounced in the pure metal/alloy case. We attribute this layer separation to the difference in the Se overpressure applied to the precursor film during the initial selenization. The surface region and the inner portion of the precursor films should experience different Se overpressures because adequate Se vapor is supplied to the surface region from the effusion cell (Se source), while the inner precursor film should begin to be selenized with the small amount of Se inherent in the film itself. The effects of the amount of Se vapor on the CIGSe crystallite growth have been well demonstrated in the selenization of CIGSe nanoparticles.24,25 Increasing the amount of Se vapor supplied to the CIGSe nanoparticles during selenization resulted in larger CIGSe grains, while an insufficient Se supply resulted in no particle growth and, in some cases, the loss of In and Ga.24,25 Furthermore, the amount of Se may also affect the Cu–Se liquid flux formation behavior as reported in ref. 26, in which the amount of Se vapor played a critical role in the growth of the amorphous Cu-In-Se nanoparticles by determining the amount of the Cu–Se liquid phase.
The device prepared from the precursor film with low Se content, showed a normal I–V shape without an apparent rollover yielding an improved efficiency of 9.43%. This result indicates that the Ga distribution in this film (Fig. 6(c)) induced a smooth bandgap grading rather than an abrupt phase separation. The high JSC value of 37.37 mA cm−2 presumably resulted from an improved carrier collection induced by a bandgap gradient, i.e., an increased Ga content towards the back contact.18 However, VOC is still too low (0.413 V) compared with the averaged Ga/(In + Ga) ratio of the device (∼0.28), which can be attributed to the absence of Ga at the surface of the absorber film.
All of the above observations, including the still significant Ga segregation, the double-layer formation and the low VOC around 0.4 V, indicate that the amount of Se in the precursor layer is insufficient at this stage. Therefore, we add more Se into the precursor layer by introducing an In–Se target in place of the CuIn target in subsequent experiments.
Precursor films with high Se contents
By co-sputtering Cu–Ga, In–Se and Cu–Se targets (Fig. 2(c)), the fabrication of precursor films with a Se/metal ratio of approximately 0.8 was possible. Fig. 7(a)–(c) show that the precursor film is completely amorphous and has a flat surface compared with the pure metal film (Fig. 3(b)) and the film with a Se/metal ratio of 0.3 (Fig. 5(b)). The AES depth profile (Fig. 7(d)) demonstrated a uniform elemental distribution throughout the entire film confirming again that Se acted to mitigate the inter-diffusion of the metals. Consequently, the uniformity of the film was greatly improved in terms of the elemental distribution and morphology.
 Fig. 7  (a) Planar and (b) cross-sectional SEM images, (c) XRD pattern and (d) AES depth profile of the precursor film with high Se content. 
For the same sample, Raman analysis was performed to obtain further structural information. In Fig. 8, the intensity of the Raman scattering is low, indicating that the crystallinity of the film is poor, which is consistent with the XRD result (Fig. 7(c)). However, some traces of ordered vacancy compounds (OVC) and CIGSe phases are detected in the Raman spectra. Thus, Se inhibited the reactions between the metals while reacting with those metals to form chalcopyrite-like structures implying that the structure of this film is close to the schematic shown in Fig. 1(b) in which Ga is immobilized within the structure.
 Fig. 8  Raman spectrum of the precursor film with high Se content that is shown in Fig. 7. 
The characteristics of the film obtained by the selenization of the precursor layer with a Se/metal ratio of 0.8 are shown in Fig. 9. Interestingly, the thickness of the selenized film was reduced from that of the precursor film (933 nm, Fig. 7(b)) to 674 nm because there is no volume expansion reaction. The reduction in thickness can be attributed to the partial evaporation of Se (which originally existed in the precursor film) and/or to structural ordering to form a highly crystalline chalcopyrite phase.
 Fig. 9  (a) Cross-sectional SEM images, (b) XRD pattern and (c) AES depth profile of the film obtained by the selenization of the precursor film with high Se content that is shown in Fig. 7. A light illuminated I–V curve of the device fabricated using the film is presented in (d). 
The single-phase construction is well demonstrated in the XRD pattern (Fig. 9(b)). Additional diffraction peaks corresponding to the MoSe2 phase are detected. The AES data (Fig. 9(c)) clearly indicate that the film has a uniform elemental distribution, which strongly supports our postulation that Se incorporation into the sputtered precursor films prevents Ga segregation during selenization.
Apart from the above results, the film shown in Fig. 9(a) has a single-layer structure with large grains. Compared to the double-layer film with small grains shown in Fig. 6(a), this remarkable morphological improvement is driven by sufficient Se incorporation into the precursor. Furthermore, the formation of a MoSe2 phase should be noted because it is reportedly essential for forming a quasi-ohmic contact and for improving adhesion between the Mo back contact and the absorber layer.27,28
The device prepared from the precursor film with high Se content represents a high VOC value approaching 0.6 V resulting in a cell efficiency of 11.71%. The significant increase in VOC originates from the Ga/(In + Ga) ratio at the CIGSe–CdS junction reaching 0.28.
Given these beneficial effects in conjunction with the complete elimination of Ga segregation, we claim that Se incorporation into the precursor layer can be considered a breakthrough in sputtering/selenization processes.
Comparison of device characteristics
To investigate the effects of the Ga distribution in the absorber film on the more detailed device characteristics including the shunt conductance (G) and the series resistance (Rs), we compared the I–V characteristics of the above devices.
For a clear comparison, the Ga/(In + Ga) ratios of the absorber films were calculated for the AES depth profiles and are shown in Fig. 10. The device parameters are summarized again in Table 1.
 Fig. 10  Ga/(In + Ga) ratios of the absorber films prepared from the precursor film with different Se/metal ratios. 
Table 1 Summary of the device parameters




Se/metal ratio in the precursor
Absorber thickness (μm)

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
F.F.
Eff. (%)
Remark




0
2.2
0.391
32.64
0.18
2.28

Fig. 4



0.3
1.4
0.413
37.37
0.61
9.43

Fig. 6



0.8
0.67
0.600
27.48
0.71
11.71

Fig. 9



0.8
1.55
0.598
32.37
0.68
13.16

Fig. 11





However, it should be mentioned that the device parameters shown in Table 1 should not be directly compared because all the films had different thicknesses which should have also influenced the device efficiency. Ramanathan previously reported that CIGSe device performance degraded when the absorber thickness was reduced presumably because of insufficient light absorption and the increase in defect densities close to the junction interface and at the back-contact region.29 He further mentioned that there was a dramatic drop in efficiency when the absorber thickness was below 1 μm. It means that the device parameters of the solar cell fabricated with the 674 nm thick CIGSe film (Fig. 9(d)) may be significantly affected by the absorber thickness as well as the Ga distribution.
Therefore, to compensate the efficiency drop in the thin CIGSe device and to enable a meaningful comparison among the devices, we increased the thickness of the CIGSe film prepared from the precursor film with a Se/metal ratio of 0.8 to 1.55 μm by increasing the co-sputtering time. The EDS data revealed that the film had a Cu/(In + Ga) ratio of 0.8 and a Ga/(In + Ga) ratio of 0.25. The SEM images of the film are presented in Fig. 11(a) and (b), and the I–V and the EQE data of the device fabricated using the film are shown in Fig. 11(c) and (d), respectively. It is clear that the increase in the film thickness noticeably increases the device efficiency to 13.16%. This efficiency improvement is mainly due to the increase in the short circuit current which is originated from the improved light absorption. The bandgap of the CIGSe layer was determined from the [hν × ln(1 − EQE)]2 against hν relationship (inset in Fig. 11(d)), showing a value of 1.15 eV which is consistent with the previously reported bandgap of the CIGSe film with a Ga/(In + Ga) ratio of approximately 0.25.22
 Fig. 11  (a) Cross-sectional and (b) planar SEM images of the 1.55 μm thick CIGSe thin film obtained by the selenization of the precursor film with high Se content. (c) I–V curve and (d) EQE data of the device fabricated with the absorber layer. 
As a final step, we compared the device characteristics of the solar cells prepared with the absorber films with comparable thicknesses, mainly focusing on the effects of Ga distribution. For clarity, the 2.28% device prepared from the pure metallic precursor film was not included in the following comparison because the device is suffering from a complete phase separation and the device characteristics must be determined mostly by the phase separation rather than the Ga distribution. Consequently, characteristics of the 9.43% device (prepared with the precursor film with low Se content) and the 13.16% device (prepared with the precursor film with high Se content) were directly compared.
To extract G, Rs and A (a diode ideality factor) of the two devices, the light illuminated I–V curves (Fig. 6(d) and 11(c)) were converted to dJ/dV vs. V and R–J forms.
From the dJ/dV vs. V relationship (not shown here), G values were measured to be 1.14 mS cm−2 for the case of the low Se content and 1.25 mS cm−2 for the high Se content, respectively, where there is no noticeable difference between two values and they are similar to the typical G values of high efficiency (>16%) CIGSe solar cells (∼1 mS cm−2). The similarity of G values can be attributed to the fact that both the films have a similar Cu/(In + Ga) ratio and dense surface morphology as shown in the SEM images (Fig. 6(a) and 11(a)).

R–J curves drawn from the illuminated I–V curve are presented in Fig. 12, by which Rs and A were estimated. Fig. 12 demonstrates that the device prepared with the precursor film with low Se content suffers from higher Rs and A compared to that prepared with the precursor film with high Se content. The higher Rs value of the 9.43% device presumably resulted from the small grained bottom layer in the absorber film (Fig. 6(a)). This result indicates that even though the bandgap grading in this film formed by increased Ga content towards the back contact is thought to be beneficial in terms of an improved carrier collection, which is partly evidenced by the high JSC value of 37.37 mA cm−2, the inferior material properties of the high Ga containing film (the small grained bottom layer with the Ga/(In + Ga) ratio reaching 0.5) result in an overall lower device efficiency compared with the device with a homogenized Ga distribution.
 Fig. 12  
R–J curves of CIGSe solar cells prepared from the precursor film with low and high Se content, which are redrawn from the light illuminated I–V curves (Fig. 6(d) and 11(c)). 
For the case of the diode ideality factor, the higher A value of the 9.43% device than that of the 13.16% device reflects that the 9.43% device suffers from more significant recombination in the space charge region. It can be understood from the fact that the recombination probability will be reduced in the regions with the increased band gap since this probability is inversely proportional to the bandgap.18 The absence of Ga at the surface region in the absorber layer of the 9.43% device is thought to be related to the higher recombination at the junction region.
From the above experimental results, we demonstrated that Ga segregation, which is frequently reported in the selenization process of metal/alloy precursor films, can be completely eliminated by using Se containing Cu-In-Ga-Se precursors. Furthermore, this approach can be used to fabricate a CIGSe film with an intentional Ga grading simply by modifying the precursor sputtering step because the initial Ga position in the precursor film will be unchanged after the post-selenization process. A sequential sputtering of Ga- and In-containing targets or a gradual change of sputtering power of a Ga-containing target might realize the double graded Ga distribution, and these are under investigation.
Experimental
Formation of precursor films
To investigate the effects of Se content in the precursor films on the properties of the selenized layers, three different precursor films were deposited on 1 μm-thick Mo-coated soda-lime glass substrates as follows:
(i) Pure metal/alloy precursor films: Cu-In-Ga metal/alloy films were prepared by co-sputtering Cu52Ga48 (at.%), Cu38In62 (at.%), and pure Cu targets.
(ii) Precursor films with low Se content: Cu-In-Ga-Se films with a Se/metal ratio of ∼0.3 were prepared by co-sputtering Cu52Ga48 (at.%), Cu38In62 (at.%), and Cu50Se50 (at.%) targets. The Cu–Se target was used to replace the pure Cu target to supply Se into the precursor layer.
(iii) Precursor films with high Se content: Cu-In-Ga-Se films with a Se/metal ratio of 0.8 were prepared by co-sputtering Cu52Ga48 (at.%), In60Se40 (at.%), and Cu50Se50 (at.%). The In–Se target was used rather than the Cu–In target to further supply Se into the layers.
In the above deposition processes, the metal/alloy targets (Cu, Cu–In and Cu–Ga) were sputtered by DC magnetron sputtering, while binary selenide targets (Cu–Se and In–Se) were sputtered by RF magnetron sputtering. Prior to the precursor deposition, a base pressure of 1 × 10−6 Torr was achieved using a turbo-molecular pump. Then, Ar gas was injected into the chamber to set the working pressure at 3 × 10−3 Torr. The substrate, placed at 50 mm from the targets, was rotated at 15 rpm during the deposition at room temperature to improve the film uniformity. The composition of the precursor films was adjusted to have a Cu/(In + Ga) atomic ratio of approximately 0.8 and a Ga/(In + Ga) atomic ratio of approximately 0.25–0.28 by controlling the sputtering power of each target.
In addition, to investigate the volume expansion behavior during the selenization as a function of the Se content in the precursor layers, the thickness of the precursor films was controlled at approximately 900 nm in all the cases. This value is based on the authors' previous experiment in which the selenization of a 900 nm-thick Cu–In alloy precursor layer resulted in a 2 μm-thick CISe film.5
Selenization
H2Se gas, which is highly toxic to humans, has conventionally been used as a selenization medium.30,31 In this work, selenization was carried out using Se vapor supplied by a Knudsen-type effusion cell equipped in a vacuum chamber. Initially, the chamber was evacuated to a base pressure of 5 × 10−6 Torr with a turbo molecular pump, and the Se vapor was evaporated from the effusion cell. The typical substrate temperature and selenization time were 500 °C and 1 h, respectively. The flux of the Se vapor was regulated by the effusion cell temperature. To prevent indium loss during the temperature ramp-up stage, which has been reported to occur under Se-deficient conditions,24,32,33 the Se vapor was supplied to the precursor before the substrate temperature reached 500 °C. For the same reason, the Se supply was maintained until the substrate temperature reached 400 °C during the cooling-down stage.
Device fabrication
Solar cells were fabricated according to the conventional Mo/CIGSe/CdS/i-ZnO/n-ZnO/Al structure. A 60 nm-thick CdS buffer layer was deposited onto a CIGSe film by chemical bath deposition (CBD) and i-ZnO (50 nm)/Al-doped n-ZnO (500 nm) was deposited by radio-frequency (RF) magnetron sputtering onto the CdS layer. A 500 nm-thick Al grid was deposited as a current collector by thermal evaporation. The active area of the completed cell was 0.44 cm2. Anti-reflection coating was not used in this study.
Characterization
The morphology, composition and crystal structure of the precursor films and the selenized films were investigated using the high-resolution scanning electron microscopy (HRSEM, XL30 SFEG Philips Co., Holland) at 10 kV, energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS, EDAX Genesis Apex, acceleration voltage = 30 kV, collection time = 100 s using a standard-less method) and X-ray diffraction (XRD, Rigaku Japan, D/MAX-2500) using CuKα radiation. Raman spectra of some of the selenized films were taken in the quasi-backscattering geometry using the 514.5 nm line of an Ar-ion laser as the excitation source. The scattered light was filtered with a holographic edge filter, dispersed by a Spex 0.55-m spectrometer and detected with a liquid-nitrogen-cooled, back-illuminated charge-coupled-device (CCD) detector array. The depth compositional profile of the selenized film was obtained using Auger electron spectroscopy (AES, Perkin Elmer, SAM 4300). Device performances including the conversion efficiency and the EQE (External Quantum Efficiency) were characterized using a class AAA solar simulator (WXS-155S-L2, WACOM, Japan) and an IPCE (Incident Photon Conversion Efficiency) measurement unit (PV measurement, Inc., USA), respectively.
Conclusions
In summary, we describe a novel approach to fabricating Cu(In,Ga)Se2 (CIGSe) light absorbing layers for thin film solar cells without Ga segregation using a sputtering and single-step selenization process. To mitigate Ga segregation at the CIGSe/back-contact region, we used Se-containing precursor layers (Cu-In-Ga-Se) to capture Ga in covalently bonded structures. As the Se content in the precursor layer increased, Ga segregation was significantly mitigated, resulting in a completely homogenized Ga distribution when the Se/metal ratio of the precursor films is over 0.8. A thin CIGSe film (∼670 nm) without Ga segregation was processed to fabricate a solar cell, and the device exhibited a conversion efficiency of 11.7% with an open circuit potential of 0.6 V. An increase of the CIGSe film thickness to 1.55 μm resulted in a device efficiency of up to 13.16%.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by KRCF (Korea Research Council of Fundamental Science & Technology) and KIER (Korea Institute of Energy Research) for ‘NAP (National Agenda Project) program’. This work was also supported by the New & Renewable Energy Technology Development Program of the Korea Institute of Energy Technology Evaluation and Planning (KETEP) grant (2008NPV12P150000) funded by the Korea Government Ministry of Knowledge Economy. The authors thank Prof. H. Cheong and D. Nam at Sogang University for Raman analysis.
Notes and references
M. A. Green, K. Emery, Y. Hishikawa and W. Warta, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2011, 19, 84 CAS .
N. G. Dhere and K. W. Lynn, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1996, 41–42, 271 CrossRef .
W. Li, Y. Sun, W. Liu and L. Zhou, Sol. Energ., 2006, 80, 191 CrossRef CAS .
O. Volobujeva, M. Altosaar, J. Raudoja, E. Mellikov, M. Grossberg, L. Kaupmees and P. Barvinschi, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 11 CrossRef CAS .
D. G. Moon, S. J. Ahn, J. H. Yun, A. Cho, J. Gwak, S. K. Ahn, K. Shin, K. H. Yoon, H. D. Lee, H. Pak and S. Kwon, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 2786 CrossRef CAS .

          http://www.solar-frontier.com/news/109
        .
W. K. Kim, G. M. Hanket and W. N. Shafarman, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 235 CrossRef .
G. M. Hanket, W. N. Shafarman, B. E. McCandless and R. W. Birkmire, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 102, 074922 CrossRef .
M. Marudachalam, R. W. Birkmire, H. Hichri, J. M. Schultz, A. Swartzlander and M. M. Al-Jassim, J. Appl. Phys., 1997, 82, 2896 CrossRef CAS .
S. Niki, M. Contreras, I. Repins, M. Powalla, K. Kushiya, S. Ishizuka and K. Masubara, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2010, 18, 453 CAS .
M. Marudachalam, H. Hichri, R. Klenk, R. W. Birkmire, W. N. Shafarman and J. M. Schultz, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1995, 67, 3978 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kamada, W. N. Shafarman and R. W. Birkmire, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 451 CrossRef CAS .
F. D. Dejene and V. Alberts, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2003, 14, 89 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Shi, Z. Q. Li, D. W. Zhang, Q. Q. Liu, Z. Sun and S. M. Huang, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2011, 19, 160 CAS .
J. A. Franz, R. Y. Bekele, V. Q. Nguyen, J. S. Sanghera, A. Bruce, S. V. Frolov, M. Cyrus and I. D. Aggarwal, Thin Solid Films, 2011, 519, 7763 CrossRef .

          N. Romeo, A. Bosio, S. Mazzamuto, D. Menossi and A. Romeo, Proceedings of 35th IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists Conference, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA,  2010, p. 786 Search PubMed .
P. Jackson, D. Hariskos, E. Lotter, S. Paetel, R. Wuerz, R. Menner, W. Wischmann and M. Powalla, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2011, 19, 894 CAS .
O. Lundberg, M. Edoff and L. Stolt, Thin Solid Films, 2005, 480–481, 520 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gupta, S. Shirakata and S. Isomura, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1994, 32, 137 CrossRef CAS .
D. Dwyer, I. Repins, H. Efstathiadis and P. Haldar, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 598 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yoo and J. Kim, Thin Solid Films, 2010, 518, 6567 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jung, S. J. Ahn, J. H. Yun, J. Gwak, D. Kim and K. H. Yoon, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2010, 10, 990 CrossRef .
A. Niemegeers and M. Bugelman, J. Appl. Phys., 1997, 81, 2881 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Ahn, C. W. Kim, J. H. Yun, J. C. Lee and K. H. Yoon, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 1836 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Ahn, K. H. Kim, J. H. Yun and K. H. Yoon, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 105, 113533 CrossRef .
S. J. Ahn, K. H. Kim, A. Cho, J. Gwak, J. H. Yun, K. Shin, S. K. Ahn and K. H. Yoon, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 1530 CAS .
T. Wada, N. Kohara, S. Nishiwaki and T. Negami, Thin Solid Films, 2001, 387, 118 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bars, S. Nishiwaki, L. Weinhardt, S. Pookpanratana, W. N. Shafarman and C. Heske, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 042110 CrossRef .

          K. Ramanathan, R. Noufi, B. To, D. L. Young, R. Bhattacharya, M. A. Contreras, R. G. Dhere and G. Teeter, Proceedings of 4th World Conference on Photovoltaic Energy Conversion, Waikoloa, Hawaii, USA,  2006, p. 380 Search PubMed .
V. Alberts, J. H. Schon and E. Bucher, J. Mater. Sci., 1999, 10, 469 CAS .
S. Vermals, N. Orbey, R. W. Birkmire and T. W. F. Russell, Prog. Photovoltaics, 1996, 4, 341 Search PubMed .
A. Parretta, M. L. Addonizio, S. Loreti, L. Quercia and M. K. Jayaraj, J. Cryst. Growth, 1998, 183, 196 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Ahn, C. W. Kim, J. H. Yun, J. H. Gwak, S. H. Jeong, B. H. Ryu and K. H. Yoon, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 8108 CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

Broader context
A novel approach to fabricating Cu(In,Ga)Se2 (CIGSe) light absorbing layers for thin film solar cells without Ga segregation using a sputtering and single-step selenization process is demonstrated. To mitigate Ga segregation at the CIGSe/back-contact region, Se-containing precursor layers (Cu-In-Ga-Se) were used to capture Ga in covalently bonded structures. When the Se/metal ratio of the precursor films was over 0.8, a CIGSe film with a completely homogenized Ga distribution was obtained and the device showed an open circuit potential of 0.6 V.


 	Fig. 1  Schematic of estimated Ga movement during selenization in (a) a Cu-In-Ga metallic matrix and (b) a Cu-In-Ga-Se selenide matrix.  represents Cu or In and  metal vacancy.	 

 	Fig. 2  Three precursor films with different Se/metal ratios used in this study. Combinations of the targets used to prepare the films are also shown.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Planar and (b) cross-sectional SEM images, (c) XRD pattern and (d) AES depth profile of the pure metal/alloy precursor film.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Cross-sectional SEM image, (b) XRD pattern and (c) AES depth profile of the film obtained by the selenization of the pure metal/alloy precursor film shown in Fig. 3. A light illuminated I–V curve of the device fabricated using the film is presented in (d).	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Planar and (b) cross-sectional SEM images, (c) XRD pattern and (d) AES depth profile of the precursor film with low Se content.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Cross-sectional SEM images, (b) XRD pattern and (c) AES depth profile of the film obtained by the selenization of the precursor film with low Se content shown in Fig. 5. A light illuminated I–V curve of the device fabricated using the film is presented in (d).	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Planar and (b) cross-sectional SEM images, (c) XRD pattern and (d) AES depth profile of the precursor film with high Se content.	 

 	Fig. 8  Raman spectrum of the precursor film with high Se content that is shown in Fig. 7.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Cross-sectional SEM images, (b) XRD pattern and (c) AES depth profile of the film obtained by the selenization of the precursor film with high Se content that is shown in Fig. 7. A light illuminated I–V curve of the device fabricated using the film is presented in (d).	 

 	Fig. 10  Ga/(In + Ga) ratios of the absorber films prepared from the precursor film with different Se/metal ratios.	 

0	2.2	0.391	32.64	0.18	2.28	
Fig. 4

0.3	1.4	0.413	37.37	0.61	9.43	
Fig. 6

0.8	0.67	0.600	27.48	0.71	11.71	
Fig. 9

0.8	1.55	0.598	32.37	0.68	13.16	
Fig. 11


 	Fig. 11  (a) Cross-sectional and (b) planar SEM images of the 1.55 μm thick CIGSe thin film obtained by the selenization of the precursor film with high Se content. (c) I–V curve and (d) EQE data of the device fabricated with the absorber layer.	 

 	Fig. 12  
R–J curves of CIGSe solar cells prepared from the precursor film with low and high Se content, which are redrawn from the light illuminated I–V curves (Fig. 6(d) and 11(c)).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
