Monolayer-like hybrid halide perovskite films prepared by additive engineering without antisolvents for solar cells   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8TA04794D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8TA04794D
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 15386-15394Monolayer-like hybrid halide perovskite films prepared by additive engineering without antisolvents for solar cells†

        
          
            Mengru 
            Wang‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Bo 
            Li‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Peter 
            Siffalovic
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Lung-Chien 
            Chen
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Guozhong 
            Cao
          
        
      ad and 

        
          
            Jianjun 
            Tian
          
        
      *a
aInstitute of Advanced Materials and Technology, University of Science and Technology Beijing, 100083, Beijing, P. R. China. E-mail: tianjianjun@mater.ustb.edu.cn
bInstitute of Physics, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, 84511, Slovakia
cDepartment of Electro-optical Engineering, National Taipei University of Technology, 10608, Taiwan
dDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195-2120, USA
Received 
      23rd May 2018
    , Accepted 12th July 2018First published on 13th July 2018AbstractSearching for a simple method to replace the conventional antisolvent process with the objective of achieving a high-quality perovskite film is indispensable for the practical manufacture of solar cells. In this work, we explored antisolvent-free additive engineering to fabricate compact CH3NH3PbI3 (MAPbI3) perovskite films combining the coordination effect of methylammonium chloride (MACl) and methylammonium acetate (MAAc). The MACl coordination with organic and metal halides in the precursor solution resulted in the perovskite film having a large grain size and a single crystal-like cross-section profile (monolayer-like). The introduction of MAAc into the precursor solution reduced the perovskite film shrinkage after the film deposition, presumably due to an increased nucleation rate. Consequently, we succeeded in fabricating high-quality monolayer-like perovskite films with a micro-scale grain size (∼2 μm), a smooth surface and enhanced crystallinity. The time-resolved photoluminescence (PL) spectra and space-charge limited current (SCLC) measurements have confirmed that there was a significantly reduced density of trap states, which has an imminent impact on the perovskite film quality. As a result, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the perovskite solar cells (PSCs) using the mixed additive increases to 19.64%, which is much larger than those of devices using a single MACl additive (15.61%). Accordingly, this work provides a new one-step fabrication method of high-quality perovskite films for the coming generation of PSCs.
Introduction
Hybrid lead halide perovskites (e.g., CH3NH3PbX3, X = Cl, Br, and I) possess enormous application prospects due to their excellent solar performance and cost-effective solution fabrication process.1–3 Owing to their suitable bandgap,4,5 low exciton binding energy,6 long electron–hole diffusion length6,7 and outstanding photoluminescence properties,8 solar cells employing perovskites as an active layer have evolved and high power conversion efficiencies (PCE) starting from 3% to over 20% have been achieved in only one decade,9,10 which is comparable to the performance of crystalline silicon and thin film solar cells.11 Moreover, perovskite solar cells (PSCs) can be combined in tandem with other solar cells to achieve high PCEs over 25%.12
To accomplish high performance PSCs, high-quality perovskite films with a spatially homogeneous surface coverage, large micrometer-sized crystals with a suitable crystallographic texture, and a low defect density are regarded as imperative.13–16 The one-step spin-coating procedure is a common fabrication method of perovskite films, in which the precursor (a mixture of organic halide and metal halide) in a polar organic solvent (e.g. N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF)) is spin-coated on a substrate and transformed into perovskite crystalline films by means of annealing or vacuum extraction.17,18 However, the organic and metal halides have different solubility in the precursor solution, which could result in inhomogeneous crystallization (e.g. branch-like grains) during the solvent evaporation. The inhomogeneous surface morphology of branch-like perovskite films, exhibiting a high roughness and the presence of pinholes (voids in films), is reflected in a lowered performance of PSCs.19 To overcome this issue, the introduction of intermediate phases has been proposed by using additive engineering during the perovskite crystallization process. Either the additives contain a special functional group that coordinates with Pb2+ to form the intermediate phase, resulting in a decreased crystallization rate of PbI2 or they increase the number of homogeneous nucleation sites and hence improve the surface coverage of the perovskite film.14,20 For example, Park and co-workers20 proposed a Lewis adduct to modulate perovskite morphology by forming the coordination complex of MAI–PbI2–DMSO (DMSO: N,N-dimethyl sulfoxide) due to interactions between the Lewis base DMSO (S) and the Lewis acid PbI2 (Pb2+). On the other hand, the sole thermal annealing or vacuum processing cannot remove the additives completely, which limits the formation of a pure perovskite phase due to their strong coordination capacity. Consequently, the widely adopted antisolvent treatment of perovskite films is used to assist the removal of additives. In the course of antisolvent treatment, the upper part of the precursor solution is rapidly extracted and a dense perovskite film forms on the top, which prevents a deeper penetration of the antisolvent and leads to the formation of shrinkage at the bottom of the perovskite layer.21 Moreover, the antisolvent is usually dropped onto the center of the substrate, which leads to spatially inhomogeneous nucleation of large perovskite films. This is detrimental for large-area solar cell fabrication and device reproducibility. In addition, the antisolvent method has an obvious disadvantage as it generates volatile organic compounds, threatening the production environment. As a result, an alternative simple method, which would replace the conventional antisolvent treatment employed in the fabrication of high-quality perovskite films, is highly desired. The recently introduced rapid thermal annealing22,23 of perovskite films offers an antisolvent-free method suitable even for the large-scale manufacture of PSCs.
Our previous studies15,24,25 have already demonstrated that the MACl additive could retard the rate of crystallization to control the perovskite morphology and enhance the performance of PSCs; meanwhile it can be simply removed by annealing after a one-step spin coating. The MACl coordination with organic and metal halides in the precursor solution results in the nucleation of large size colloidal clusters that facilitate the growth of a perovskite film with an enhanced grain size.15,26 There are no boundaries along the cross profile of the perovskite film from the top to the bottom, thus forming a monolayer-like film. The monolayer-like perovskite films with large micrometer-sized grains possessed a lower density of defect traps and a higher charge mobility, comparable to the single crystal perovskite.25 However, in absence of any antisolvent method, a large number of pores and pinholes were observed in the monolayer-like films. It was likely attributed to the low crystallization velocity. Therefore, the antisolvent is usually adopted to boost the crystallization velocity.15,24 According to the discussion above, however, the antisolvent treatment is not an ideal fabrication method for a large-scale production.25,27 We have identified that the MAAc additive could accelerate the nucleation of MAPbI3 and thereafter support the formation of spatially uniform perovskite films because MAAc is unstable.28–30 However, the rapid formation of the perovskite intermediate phases between PbI2 and MAAc leads to a small size of the perovskite grains (∼200 nm) and limited crystallinity, which is not beneficial for the formation of monolayer-like perovskite films.
In this work, we have developed a novel additive engineering without antisolvent method to fabricate compact monolayer-like perovskite films. The addition of MACl to the precursor solution results in the nucleation of large size colloidal clusters, which are an essential prerequisite for the development of monolayer-like perovskite films. The MAAc additive has an effect, equivalent to the antisolvent process, which increases the crystallization velocity and eliminates the presence of pinholes and defects in the film. This facile solution-process based on this particular one-step antisolvent-free method does not only yield high-quality perovskite films, but also immensely improves the fabrication reproducibility. Finally, perovskite films with a micro-scale grain size, a smooth surface, enhanced crystallinity and a lower trap density were accomplished. Benefiting from the high quality of perovskite films, the photovoltaic devices exhibit an improved PCE of 19.64%, having the following structure: glass substrate/FTO/TiO2/MAPbI3/spiro-oMeTAD/Ag.
Experimental section
Materials synthesis and solution preparation
All chemicals were purchased, including CH3NH3I (MAI, 99.999%), PbI2 (99.999%), MACl (99.999%), and DMF (99.8%) from the Yingkou You Xuan Trade CO., LTD; and other chemicals were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. The compact TiO2 precursor solution was prepared by diluting titanium diisopropoxide bis(acetylacetonate) (75 wt% in isopropanol) in ethanol with a volume ratio of 1:25. Mesoporous TiO2 paste was prepared by diluting commercial TiO2 nanoparticle paste (Dyesol 36NRT, Dyesol) in ethanol with a weight ratio of 1:10. The as synthesized MAI (159 mg) and PbI2 (461 mg) were mixed in anhydrous N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) to produce the standard perovskite precursor solutions, and then 33.75 mg of MACl and different volume ratios of MAAc (in DMF) were added to the standard precursor solutions after filtering through a 0.44 μm pore PVDF syringe filter. The hole-transport layer precursor solution was a blend of 72.3 mg spiro-MeOTAD, 29 μL 4-terttert-butylpyridine and 17.5 μL Li-TFSI solution (520 mg Li-TFSI in 1 mL acetonitrile) in 1 mL chlorobenzene.
Device fabrication
The etched FTO glasses were cleaned in an ultrasonic bath using deionized water, acetone and ethanol for 15 min, respectively, and then subjected to UV ozone treatment for 15 min before spray pyrolysis deposition. A 30 nm compact TiO2 layer was coated by spray pyrolysis deposition at 450 °C, followed by annealing for 30 min. An ultrathin mesoporous TiO2 layer was deposited on the compact TiO2 by spin-coating at 5000 rpm for 30 s, and then annealed at 500 °C for 30 min. 40 μL perovskite precursor solution was spin-coated on the mesoporous TiO2 layer at 4000 rpm for 30 s. Then the wet film was annealed at 100 °C for 50 min on a hotplate. When the substrate was cooled down, 25 μL spiro-MeOTAD solution was spin-coated on the perovskite film at 4000 rpm for 30 s. After oxidation for 12 h in a desiccator, a 50 nm Ag electrode was deposited onto the substrate through a shadow mask by thermal evaporation with a base pressure of <5 × 10−5 Pa. The active area of the device is 0.1 cm2
Characterization
Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) was performed using a Bruker Vertex 80v spectrometer, and the concentration of perovskite precursors was 1 M. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) measurements were performed using a cold field emission scanning electron microscope (S4800, Hitachi). Atomic force microscopy (AFM) images were obtained using a MFP-3D Infinity AFM (Asylum Research, Oxford Instruments). The XRD patterns were measured on an X-ray diffractometer (PANalytical, Netherlands) with a monochromatic Cu Kα radiation source (λ = 1.54056 Å). The absorption spectra were recorded using an ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) spectrophotometer (UV-3600, Shimadzu). The photoluminescence (PL) spectra were measured using a steady state fluorescence spectrometer (FLS980, Edinburgh), and the excitation wavelength was 375 nm. The current–voltage characteristics were recorded using a digital source meter (2400, Keithley Instruments Inc.) under 3 A grade AM 1.5 G simulated sunlight (100 mW cm−2) (7-SS1503A, 7 Star Optical Instruments Co., Beijing, China). The incident light intensity was calibrated with an NREL-calibrated Si solar cell (Newport, Stratford Inc., 91150V). The external quantum efficiency (EQE) was measured in the direct current (DC) mode using a custom measurement system consisting of a 150 W xenon lamp (7ILX150A, 7 Star Optical Instruments Co., Beijing, China), a monochromator (7ISW30, 7 Star Optical Instruments Co., Beijing, China) and a digital source meter (2400, Kiteley Instruments Inc.).
Results and discussion

Fig. 1 shows top-view and cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM) micrographs of the perovskite films prepared by an antisolvent-free process employing a single additive of MACl (Fig. 1a) and a mixed additive of MACl and MAAc (Fig. 1b). The perovskite grains are up to over one micrometer in size, which is more than the thickness of the perovskite film. This is attributed to the effect of MACl in the precursor solution according to our previous studies.15,24,25 However, without the usage of MAAc, there is a large number of pores and pinholes in the film, which are detrimental for the performance of PSCs. Relying on the synergistic effect of MAAc, a continuous pinhole-free film with homogeneous perovskite grains was obtained as shown in Fig. 1b. The perovskite layers prepared by the addition of the MACl additive are free of multi-grain stacks in the cross-sectional plane as validated by the SEM images as shown in Fig. 1a3 and b3. In view of the transversal charge transport across the active layer, such a perovskite film can be considered as a monolithic MAPbI3 film. On the other hand, the large surface roughness of the perovskite layer fabricated using only the MACl additive (Fig. 1a3) promotes an increased leakage current in the final PSCs. In contrast, using the mixture of MAAc and MACl additives, the resulting perovskite film shows a uniform and smooth surface. There are no grain boundaries along the cross-section of the perovskite film (Fig. 1b3) from the top to the bottom. This suggests an enhanced, low-scattering, charge carrier transport towards the corresponding electron and hole transporting layers. The effect of the MAAc content (from 0 to 5%) on the perovskite film was also studied as shown in Fig. S1.† When the content of MAAc reaches 4%, a compact film forms, free of any pores and pinholes.
 Fig. 1  Top-view and cross-sectional SEM images of the perovskite films prepared by the antisolvent-free process using additives: (a) MACl exclusively and (b) the coordination effect of combined MACl and MAAc. 
Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) and X-ray diffraction (XRD) were carried out to reveal the formation of the perovskite films using different additives. The FTIR spectra shown in Fig. 2a confirm the coordination interaction of ions and molecules in the precursor solution. In the case of the standard perovskite precursor, the stretching vibration peak of the CO bond appears at 1653 cm−1. With the introduction of a single additive of MAAc, the vibration peak of the CO bond shifts from 1653 cm−1 to 1651 cm−1. The addition of the pure MACl additive shifts the vibration peak of the CO bond from 1653 cm−1 to 1648 cm−1. These results confirm that the affinity of MACl toward PbI2 is higher than that of MAAc. Our previous work15,25 demonstrated that MACl induced the formation of the complex PbI2·MACl·MAI·DMF, which is essential for the preparation of monolayer-like perovskite films with a large grain size as shown in Fig. S1a.† Nevertheless, the films prepared using a single MACl additive showed the presence of pores and pinholes. The coordination of MAAc is weaker than that of MACl (see Fig. 2a). The perovskite films prepared using exclusively the MAAc additive, exhibit a small grain size of not more than 200 nm as shown in Fig. S2.† When MAAc is added to the precursor solution containing MACl, the vibration peak of the CO bond does not shift (1648 cm−1). This indicates that the introduction of MAAc cannot break the coordination of MACl with PbI2. Hence, the use of MACl and MAAc additives facilitates the formation of monolayer-like perovskite films with a desired large grain size (∼1 μm). In addition, we noted that the vibration peak of the CO bond of DMF molecule shifts from 1653 cm−1 to 1651 cm−1 after the introduction of the MAAc additive in the standard precursor. This implies that the affinity of MAAc toward PbI2 is higher than those of DMF and MAI. So the coordination sites of PbI2 may be occupied by Ac− by partial replacement of the coordinated DMF and MAI molecules in MAI·PbI2·DMF coordination complexes. During the spin coating process, the fast evaporation of uncoordinated DMF and MAAc in the precursor solution facilitates the perovskite crystallization as well as the enhancement of the nucleation rate. This can be demonstrated by Fig. S3.† Fig. S3† shows the absorption spectra of the wet perovskite films prepared using the single additive of MACl and a mixture of MACl and MAAc additives. There is no obvious MAPbI3 absorption edge at the wavelength of 780 nm for the wet film prepared using the single additive of MACl, indicating that the intermediate phases cannot transfer to the MAPbI3 perovskite. In contrast, the film prepared using the mixture of additives shows the well-developed MAPbI3 absorption edge, which means that the intermediate phases have already transferred to the MAPbI3 phase during the spin coating process. This suggests that the MAAc additive accelerates the phase transition towards the MAPbI3 perovskite phase and eliminates the development of pores and pinholes in the film. To further reveal the effect of mixed additives in the film formation, the SEM images of the additive induced perovskite film for different annealing times are shown in Fig. S4.† We first compared the morphology of perovskite intermediate phase films with the additive of MACl and MACl + MAAc after spin coating. In the case of perovskite film with a single additive of MACl, we can clearly see that there are many voids in the perovskite intermediate phase films after drying at 60 °C for 1 min, as shown in Fig. S4a.† Under the combined effect of MACl and MAAc additives, the FTO substrate is completely covered by compact perovskite crystals. This implies that the formation of perovskite crystals is easily induced by MAAc in the MACl-based perovskite precursor. This suggests that MAAc will accelerate the nucleation of perovskite during the removal of the solvent, which is consistent with the UV-vis spectra in Fig. S3.† We also investigated the growth of perovskite crystals with the additive of MACl and MACl + MAAc. For the perovskite intermediate phase film prepared using the mixed additives shown in Fig. S4(e and f),† regular grain boundaries were formed and tended to grow up to a size of micro-scale after annealing for 5 min. However, slower growth kinetics was observed for the perovskite crystals prepared using the single MACl additive. The growth of the crystals showed the same trend with the sample prepared using the single MACl additive only when the annealing time was more than 10 min as shown in Fig. S4(b and c).† These results illustrate that MAAc accelerates the nucleation and growth of perovskite crystals. Therefore, our mixed additive strategy can release the coordinated solvent molecules from the formed coordination complexes in a standard perovskite precursor. Then the fast evaporation of the MAAc additive and solvent molecules in turn results in a favorable environment for the perovskite or intermediate phase crystallization, which avoids the formation of voids and shrinkage. And MACl facilitates the formation of a monolayer-like film during the annealing time.
 Fig. 2  (a) FTIR spectra of solutions with different additives. Standard perovskite precursor solution containing MAI and PbI2 dissolved in DMF solvent without any additives (black curve). The red, blue and magenta curves correspond to the MAAc, MACl and MACl + MAAc additives dissolved in the standard precursor solution, respectively. (b) XRD patterns of the perovskite films prepared using 0.5 M MACl with the successively increasing MAAc content ranging from 0 to 5%. 
We also investigated the effect of MAAc on the crystallinity of the perovskite by means of XRD. Fig. 2b shows the XRD patterns of the perovskite films prepared by employing the single additive of 0.5 M MACl and a mixture of additives with the gradually increasing content of MAAc (from 0 to 5%) without the antisolvent process. There are two main diffraction peaks located at 14.1° and 28.4°, corresponding to the reflections from the (110) and (220) lattice planes, respectively. This indicates a preferential crystallographic orientation of the perovskite crystal growth.31 In addition, with the increasing content of MAAc in the precursors, the intensity of the XRD peaks of the perovskite phase increases remarkably and reaches the maximum at the MAAc content of 4%. And the full widths at half maximum (FWHM) of the (110) and (220) planes of the perovskite films prepared by the antisolvent free process using additives of 0.5 M MACl and different contents of MAAc (from 0 to 5%) are shown in Fig. S5.† Comparing the FWHM comprehensively, 4% is the appropriate content of MAAc in the precursor containing MACl because both the FWHM of (110) and (220) planes of perovskite films are small. Fig. S6† shows the XRD patterns of the perovskite films prepared using MACl, MAAc and MACl + MAAc additives. The XRD integral intensity of the perovskite phase, represented by the major diffraction peaks 110 and 220, in the film prepared using a mixture of MACl and MAAc additives is considerably stronger than those of the films prepared using a single additive. These results illustrate the indispensable role of the MAAc in the crystallization of monolayer-like perovskite films under the synergistic effect of MACl.
According to our discussion above, we deduced the formation of the perovskite film using the mixed additive in Fig. 3. Fig. 3 shows the schematic illustration of the formation of the perovskite film using the single MACl additive and mixed additive of MACl and MAAc. For the perovskite precursor with the MACl additive, the affinity of MAAc toward PbI2 is higher than those of DMF and MAI (see Fig. 2a), and the coordination complex of PbI2·MACl·MAI·DMF was formed as shown in Fig. 3(a). However, the coordinated DMF molecules and MACl additive are difficult to release during the solidification process, which is unfavorable for the perovskite nucleation.13,15 For the combined effect of MACl and MAAc as shown in Fig. 3(b), the affinity of MAAc toward PbI2 is higher than those of DMF and MAI, but weaker than that of MACl. So the coordination sites of PbI2 may be occupied by Ac− by partial replacement of the coordinated DMF and MAI molecules in PbI2·MACl·MAI·DMF coordination complexes. As a result, during the spin coating process, the fast evaporation of MAAc in the precursor solution facilitates the perovskite crystallization as well as the enhancement of nucleation rate to obtain a compact monolayer-like perovskite film.
 Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of the formation of a perovskite film from precursors with the MACl additive and the mixed additive of MACl + MAAc. (a) MACl additive; (b) mixed additive of MACl and MAAc. 
We further carried out atomic force microscopy (AFM) to assess the surface roughness of the perovskite film. Fig. 4 shows the AFM images of the perovskite films on mesoporous TiO2 substrates. The film prepared using the single MACl additive has the RMS (root mean square) roughness of 77.8 nm, and it is much rougher than the film prepared using the mixture of additives (33 nm). The 3D perspective projections of the AFM images shown in Fig. 4c and d enable a better visualization of a smaller surface roughness of the perovskite film prepared using the mixture of additives. The perovskite films cast from the precursor solution based on the mixture of additives do not exhibit only a significantly lower roughness but are also free from pores and pinholes. Fig. S7† shows the photoabsorption spectra of MAPbI3 perovskite films prepared using the mixture of additives with constant and varying contents of MACl and MAAc, respectively. With the increase of the MAAc content, decreased light scattering in the long wavelength region (above 780 nm) is observed. It implies that the roughness of perovskite films decreases, which is consistent with the surface morphology measured by AFM.
 Fig. 4  The surface morphology of perovskite films prepared on the mesoporous TiO2 substrate. The AFM images of perovskite films cast from the precursors with the following additives: (a and c) MACl and (b and d) MACl–MAAc. 
In order to gain a further insight into the effect of mixture of additives on the quality of perovskite films, we characterized the optoelectronic behavior of the perovskite films by means of steady-state photoluminescence (PL) and the time-resolved PL (TRPL) as shown in Fig. 5a and b. It is obvious that both PL peak maxima of the samples prepared using the single MACl additive as well as using the mixture of MAAc and MACl are located at 766 nm, showing a small blue shift compared to that of the conventional MAPbI3 perovskite as shown in Fig. S8†, which is similar to previous reports.20,32,33 Furthermore, the PL intensity of the MACl-based perovskite film was more than doubled by the introduction of MAAc. These results exemplify that the perovskite films prepared using the mixture of additives have a fewer band-edge trap states, which is reflected in a spectral blue shift of the PL maximum and a higher PL intensity.34,35 The TRPL measurements shown in Fig. 5b were used to extract the photogenerated carrier lifetimes. Table S1† summarizes the fitting results using a double-exponential decay model with a fast decay lifetime τ1 and a slow decay lifetime τ2. Independent of the employed additives, all samples exhibit comparable carrier lifetimes, which means that the introduction of MAAc retains the long charge carrier lifetime of the MACl-based perovskite film. This is in agreement with the previous report.36 Surprisingly, the fast component of lifetime τ1 decreases by the addition of MAAc, which indicates a lower defect concentration and hence a lower number of recombination centers. Consequently, we can conclude that the herein studied antisolvent-free multiple additive method using MACl and MAAc delivers high quality perovskite films, suitable even for the large-scale manufacture of PSCs.
 Fig. 5  (a) Steady-state PL spectra and (b) time-resolved PL decays of MACl-based and MACl–MAAc-based films on Si substrates; current density–voltage characteristics of (c) MACl-based and (d) MACl–MAAc-based perovskite devices with an FTO/TiO2/perovskite/PCBM/Ag architecture (electron-only devices); (e) the ideality factor derived from the light-intensity dependent VOC of PSCs with MACl-based and MACl–MAAc-based perovskites. 
We assessed the trap density and charge-carrier mobility by using the space-charge limited current (SCLC) analysis. The current–voltage characteristics (I–V curves) of the single-carrier devices are given in Fig. 5c and d for perovskite films cast from the precursors using a single additive (MACl) and the mixture of additives (MACl + MAAc), respectively. The architecture of the electron-only single-carrier device is as follows: FTO/TiO2/MAPbI3/PCBM/Ag. The I–V curves display the three distinctive stages: Ohmic, trap-filled limited (TFL) and SCLC regime. At the low bias voltage, there is a linear relationship of I–V, indicating an ohmic contact. When the bias voltage increases, the injected carriers start to fill the traps and reach the TFL stage.25 The threshold voltage between the ohmic regime and the TFL regime is known as the trap-filled limit voltage VTFL, which is determined by the trap state density ntrap:37, where e is the elementary charge, and ε, ε0 and L are the relative dielectric constant, the vacuum permittivity and the thickness of the perovskite film, respectively. The VTFL values of MAPbI3 films prepared using the mixture of additives (MACl + MAAc) and the single additive (MACl) are 0.113 V and 0.451 V, respectively. The corresponding trap density values are 2.25 × 1015 cm−3 and 8.95 × 1015 cm−3, respectively. The defect density of the MAAc–MACl-based film is approximately fourfold lower than that of the MACl-based film. In the SCLC regime, the current shows a quadratic dependence on the voltage. At this stage, the charge carrier mobility can be calculated by the Mott–Gurney law:38, where μ and V are the mobility and bias voltage, respectively. The values of the electron mobility in the devices prepared using the mixed additive of MAAc–MACl and the single additive of MACl are 20.2 cm2 V−1 S−1 and 11.23 cm2 V−1 S−1, respectively. The MAAc–MACl based film displays a higher charge carrier mobility, approaching that of the MAPbI3 single crystal.37 The huge difference probably originates in the large number of pores and pinholes in the MACl-based perovskite film. The poor quality of the perovskite film leads to increased leakage currents and enhanced recombination of electrons and holes.
Furthermore, we compared the dependence of photovoltage on illumination intensity to probe the recombination process of free charge carriers in the PSC devices. Fig. 5e shows the open-circuit voltage Voc as a function of illumination intensity of the two samples. For the MACl-based solar cell, the Voc value drops rapidly with the illumination in the low intensity region (<0.1 sun), suggesting a predominant trap-assisted recombination process caused by deep-level trap states.39,40 In contrast, the MAAc–MACl-based solar cell exhibits a constant linear dependence of Vocvs. illumination intensity across all the tested ranges, indicating that the introduction of MAAc has effectively reduced trap-assisted recombination. According to the equation:41, the ideality factors (n) of the MAAc–MACl-based and the MACl-based devices are 1.28 and 1.58, respectively. This also demonstrates that the interfacial charge recombination in MAAc–MACl-based devices is less pronounced than that of the MACl-based one. This fact points again to the higher quality of the perovskite film prepared by using a synergistic effect of a combined action of MAAc and MACl additives.

Fig. 6 shows the (a) current density–voltage (J–V) curves, (b) external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra, (c) stabilized PCE, (d) statistics of PCE distribution and (e) light stability of PSCs. The performance of the devices has been measured under a 3A grade solar simulator.
 Fig. 6  (a) J–V curves of the best performing PSCs cast from the precursors containing solely MACl (black) and MACl–MAAc (red) additives; (b) the corresponding EQE spectra complemented with the integrated current density of the best PSCs; (c) stabilized current density and PCE of the best PSCs at a given constant bias related to the maximal power point; (d) the histogram of PCE, the data were collected from an ensemble of 30 PSCs; (e) light stability of PCE for unencapsulated devices tested for 120 minuters under AM 1.5 G 100 mW cm−2 in the ambient environment with a humidity of ∼15% at room temperature. 

Fig. 6a shows the J–V curves of the best MACl–MAAc and MACl-based devices. The highest PCE of 19.64% has been achieved by introducing the mixed additive (MAAc–MACl), with a Jsc of 23.50 mA cm−2, Voc of 1.06 V and high FF of 0.79. As a reference, the best solar cell assembled by using the MACl-based perovskite film shows a decreased PCE of 15.6%, with a Jsc of 20.58 mA cm−2, Voc of 1.01 V, and FF of 0.75. The EQE spectra in Fig. 6b demonstrate the higher quantum conversion efficiency for MAAc–MACl-based PSCs throughout the entire wavelength range. The improved PCE and EQE of the MACl–MAAc-based device may be related to the lower trap density and a reduced interface charge recombination primarily due to the high-quality monolayer-like film. The incomplete surface coverage of the solely MACl-based film results in a high interface charge recombination and an increased leakage current, which deteriorates the maximum reachable values of Jsc and Voc. The J–V curves in Fig. S9† show a minor hysteresis in reverse and forward scans for the MACl-MAAc-based cell modified with a PCBM layer, which validates that the hysteresis is not due to the perovskite material layer.25 For that reason, the presence of hysteresis may be associated with the TiO2 layer, which is a poorer electron conductor than PCBM and leads to an unbalanced electron and hole flux.42Fig. 6c shows the stabilized power output as a function of time under constant illumination. The MACl–MAAc-based device shows a higher stabilized PCE of 18.5%, with the corresponding Jsc = 21.4 mA cm−2. In contrast, the MACl-based device reached a PCE of only 14.9%. As a result, compared to the MACl-based device, the MAAc–MACl-based device shows a higher current density in response to the illumination. The improved charge collection efficiency can be seen in the compact and pinhole-free MAAc–MACl-based perovskite film. During the switching on of the illumination, the photogenerated carriers in the perovskite layer occupy exclusively the empty trap states. Only after the traps are filled, the current density reaches a stable value. Accordingly, the shorter the time to stabilize the photocurrent, the fewer defects are present in the device.43 The MACl–MAAc-based device reaches the stable current density value faster than the MACl-based device (Fig. 6c). Thus, the introduction of MAAc into the MACl-based additive reduces the density of defects in the film, which in turn decreases the recombination of charge carriers. We fabricated 30 PSCs in order to demonstrate the reproducibility without antisolvents. The statistical distribution of the measured PCE values is shown in Fig. 6d. The narrow PCE distribution, with the maximum of 19.64% and the average of 17.75%, for the MACl–MAAc-based PSCs points to an enhanced reproducibility of the herein studied antisolvent-free fabrication method. Our final study is related to the temporal light stability of the fabricated PSCs. The unencapsulated devices were continuously tested for 120 minutes under AM 1.5 G 100 mW cm−2 in the ambient environment with a humidity of ∼15% at room temperature, as shown in Fig. 6e. The MACl-based devices degraded faster, especially within the first 20 minutes, which may be attributed to the inferior quality of the perovskite layer, in terms already discussed above. As a comparison, the MACl–MAAc-based device retained more than 90% of the initial PCE after 120 minutes. It is conceivable that the late degradation of PCE is predominantly due to the interdiffusion of silver atoms into the perovskite layer, which is especially true for the MACl-based device that exhibits a large interface roughness, as shown in Fig. 1c. To explore the effect of the MAAc additive on PCE in the absence of MACl, we fabricated a PSC cast from a precursor, which contained exclusively the MAAc additive. Fig. S10† shows the J–V curve of the PSC prepared using a single MAAc additive. The PCE is merely 15.4%. This concludes that the PCE of the solar cell fabricated by using the mixture of additives is much higher than those of the devices produced by using a single additive of MACl or MAAc only. This further confirms that the combined effect of MACl–MAAc additives on the formation of high-performing perovskite layers constitutes the basis of an attractive antisolvent-free fabrication method.
Conclusions
We developed an additive engineering without antisolvent strategy to realize a facile and convenient fabrication method for obtaining high-quality perovskite films. By introducing MACl and MAAc into the pristine CH3NH3PbI3 precursor, monolayer-like and pinhole-free MAPbI3 films were obtained. The MAAc additive accelerates the nucleation and growth of perovskite crystals, which effectively eliminates the development of pores and pinholes. MACl plays a major role in the growth of perovskite crystals during the annealing process to promote the formation of a perovskite film with a large grain size and a single crystal-like cross-section profile. PSCs fabricated by this method exhibit a high charge carrier mobility, significantly decreased density of trap states and enhanced light stability. The test devices yielded an impressive average efficiency of 17.75% with the best efficiency of 19.64% under the standard one sun illumination. The synergistic effect of the combined action of two additives (MACl and MAAc) is the core of the novel antisolvent-free method, which is expected to open new possibilities of fabricating high performance PSCs. Moreover, the environmentally friendly footprint of the proposed antisolvent-free method eliminates the requirement for the use of volatile solvents, currently employed in standard antisolvent methods.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Science Foundation of China (51774034, 51772026 and 51611130063), Beijing Natural Science Foundation (2182039), Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (FRF-TP-17-030A1, FRF-TP-17-083A1, FRF-TP-17-082A1 and TW2018010), and Project funded by the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2017M620611, 2018M630068).
References
A. Polman, M. Knight, E. C. Garnett, B. Ehrler and W. C. Sinke, Science, 2016, 352, aad4424 CrossRef PubMed .
M. J. Carnie, C. Charbonneau, M. L. Davies, J. Troughton, T. M. Watson, K. Wojciechowski, H. Snaith and D. A. Worsley, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 7893–7895 RSC .
J. Burschka, N. Pellet, S. J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Gratzel, Nature, 2013, 499, 316–319 CrossRef PubMed .
J. H. Noh, S. H. Im, J. H. Heo, T. N. Mandal and S. I. Seok, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1764–1769 CrossRef PubMed .
S. A. Kulkarni, T. Baikie, P. P. Boix, N. Yantara, N. Mathews and S. Mhaisalkar, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 9221–9225 RSC .
C. Wehrenfennig, G. E. Eperon, M. B. Johnston, H. J. Snaith and L. M. Herz, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1584–1589 CrossRef PubMed .
S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini, C. Menelaou, M. J. P. Alcocer, T. Leijtens, L. M. Herz, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2013, 342, 341–344 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Wang, C. Bi, J. Yuan, L. Zhang and J. Tian, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 245–251 CrossRef .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef PubMed .
B.-W. Park, W. S. Yang, E. H. Jung, N. J. Jeon, D. U. Lee, Y. C. Kim, S. S. Shin, J. Seo, E. K. Kim, S. I. Seok and J. H. Noh, Science, 2017, 356, 1376–1379 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Matsui, H. Jia and M. Kondo, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2010, 18, 48–53 Search PubMed .
D. P. McMeekin, G. Sadoughi, W. Rehman, G. E. Eperon, M. Saliba, M. T. Horantner, A. Haghighirad, N. Sakai, L. Korte, B. Rech, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2016, 351, 151–155 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Li, J. Tian, L. Guo, C. Fei, T. Shen, X. Qu and G. Cao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 4684–4690 CrossRef PubMed .
C. B. Fei, B. Li, R. Zhang, H. Y. Fu, J. J. Tian and G. Z. Cao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602017 CrossRef .
B. Li, M. Li, C. Fei, G. Cao and J. Tian, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 24168–24177 RSC .
N. Giesbrecht, J. Schlipf, I. Grill, P. Rieder, V. Dyakonov, T. Bein, A. Hartschuh, P. Müller-Buschbaum and P. Docampo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 4822–4828 RSC .
Q. Chen, H. Zhou, Z. Hong, S. Luo, H. S. Duan, H. H. Wang, Y. Liu, G. Li and Y. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 622–625 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Li, Q. Guo, W. Qiao, Q. Chen, S. Ma, X. Pan, F. Wang, J. Yao, C. Zhang, M. Xiao, S. Dai and Z. a. Tan, Org. Electron., 2016, 33, 194–200 CrossRef .
S. Bae, S. J. Han, T. J. Shin and W. H. Jo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 23964–23972 RSC .
N. Ahn, D. Y. Son, I. H. Jang, S. M. Kang, M. Choi and N. G. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 8696–8699 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Xiao, F. Huang, W. Huang, Y. Dkhissi, Y. Zhu, J. Etheridge, A. Gray-Weale, U. Bach, Y. B. Cheng and L. Spiccia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 2014, 53, 9898–9903 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Kim, G.-H. Kim, K. S. Oh, Y. Jo, H. Yoon, K.-H. Kim, H. Lee, J. Y. Kim and D. S. Kim, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 6057–6064 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Sanchez, X. Hua, N. Phung, U. Steiner and A. Abate, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702915 CrossRef .
C. B. Fei, L. X. Guo, B. Li, R. Zhang, H. Y. Fu, J. J. Tian and G. Z. Cao, Nano Energy, 2016, 27, 17–26 CrossRef .
M. Li, B. Li, G. Cao and J. Tian, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 21313–21319 RSC .
K. Yan, M. Long, T. Zhang, Z. Wei, H. Chen, S. Yang and J. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 4460–4468 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Nie, H. Tsai, R. Asadpour, J. C. Blancon, A. J. Neukirch, G. Gupta, J. J. Crochet, M. Chhowalla, S. Tretiak, M. A. Alam, H. L. Wang and A. D. Mohite, Science, 2015, 347, 522–525 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Xia, C. Ran, Y. Chen, Q. Li, N. Jiang, C. Li, Y. Pan, T. Li, J. Wang and W. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 3193–3202 RSC .
Y. Wu, F. Xie, H. Chen, X. Yang, H. Su, M. Cai, Z. Zhou, T. Noda and L. Han, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701073 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Venkatesan, M. Hasan, J. Kim, N. R. Rady, S. Sohal, E. Neier, Y. Yao and A. Zakhidov, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 10114–10121 RSC .
P. W. Liang, C. Y. Liao, C. C. Chueh, F. Zuo, S. T. Williams, X. K. Xin, J. Lin and A. K. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3748–3754 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Shao, Z. Xiao, C. Bi, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5784 CrossRef PubMed .
D. D. Song, P. Cui, T. Y. Wang, D. Wei, M. C. Li, F. H. Cao, X. P. Yue, P. F. Fu, Y. Y. Li, Y. He, B. Jiang and M. Trevor, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 22812–22819 CrossRef .
C. Wang, D. Zhao, Y. Yu, N. Shrestha, C. R. Grice, W. Liao, A. J. Cimaroli, J. Chen, R. J. Ellingson, X. Zhao and Y. Yan, Nano Energy, 2017, 35, 223–232 CrossRef .
D. Bi, C. Yi, J. Luo, J.-D. Décoppet, F. Zhang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, X. Li, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16142 CrossRef .
P. Docampo, F. C. Hanusch, S. D. Stranks, M. Döblinger, J. M. Feckl, M. Ehrensperger, N. K. Minar, M. B. Johnston, H. J. Snaith and T. Bein, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1400355 CrossRef .
Z. Liu, J. Hu, H. Jiao, L. Li, G. Zheng, Y. Chen, Y. Huang, Q. Zhang, C. Shen, Q. Chen and H. Zhou, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606774 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Gao, K. Zeng, J. Guo, C. Ge, J. Du, Y. Zhao, C. Chen, H. Deng, Y. He, H. Song, G. Niu and J. Tang, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 7446–7454 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Tvingstedt, L. Gil-Escrig, C. Momblona, P. Rieder, D. Kiermasch, M. Sessolo, A. Baumann, H. J. Bolink and V. Dyakonov, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 424–430 CrossRef .
L.-W. Chong, H.-T. Chien and Y.-L. Lee, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 5109–5113 CrossRef .
H. Chen, W. Fu, C. Huang, Z. Zhang, S. Li, F. Ding, M. Shi, C.-Z. Li, A. K. Y. Jen and H. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700012 CrossRef .
Y. Yang, S. Feng, M. Li, F. Li, C. Zhang, Y. Han, L. Li, J. Yuan, L. Cao, Z. Wang, B. Sun and X. Gao, Nano Energy, 2018, 48, 10–19 CrossRef .
H. Bai, T. Shen and J. Tian, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 10543–10548 RSC .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta04794d‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Top-view and cross-sectional SEM images of the perovskite films prepared by the antisolvent-free process using additives: (a) MACl exclusively and (b) the coordination effect of combined MACl and MAAc.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) FTIR spectra of solutions with different additives. Standard perovskite precursor solution containing MAI and PbI2 dissolved in DMF solvent without any additives (black curve). The red, blue and magenta curves correspond to the MAAc, MACl and MACl + MAAc additives dissolved in the standard precursor solution, respectively. (b) XRD patterns of the perovskite films prepared using 0.5 M MACl with the successively increasing MAAc content ranging from 0 to 5%.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of the formation of a perovskite film from precursors with the MACl additive and the mixed additive of MACl + MAAc. (a) MACl additive; (b) mixed additive of MACl and MAAc.	 

 	Fig. 4  The surface morphology of perovskite films prepared on the mesoporous TiO2 substrate. The AFM images of perovskite films cast from the precursors with the following additives: (a and c) MACl and (b and d) MACl–MAAc.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Steady-state PL spectra and (b) time-resolved PL decays of MACl-based and MACl–MAAc-based films on Si substrates; current density–voltage characteristics of (c) MACl-based and (d) MACl–MAAc-based perovskite devices with an FTO/TiO2/perovskite/PCBM/Ag architecture (electron-only devices); (e) the ideality factor derived from the light-intensity dependent VOC of PSCs with MACl-based and MACl–MAAc-based perovskites.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) J–V curves of the best performing PSCs cast from the precursors containing solely MACl (black) and MACl–MAAc (red) additives; (b) the corresponding EQE spectra complemented with the integrated current density of the best PSCs; (c) stabilized current density and PCE of the best PSCs at a given constant bias related to the maximal power point; (d) the histogram of PCE, the data were collected from an ensemble of 30 PSCs; (e) light stability of PCE for unencapsulated devices tested for 120 minuters under AM 1.5 G 100 mW cm−2 in the ambient environment with a humidity of ∼15% at room temperature.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta04794d
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
