Metamaterial and nanomaterial electromagnetic wave absorbers: structures, properties and applications  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TC01990A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TC01990A
(Perspective)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 12768-12794Metamaterial and nanomaterial electromagnetic wave absorbers: structures, properties and applications

        
          
            Jin 
            Zhou
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zhengqi 
            Liu
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Xiaoshan 
            Liu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Guolan 
            Fu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Guiqiang 
            Liu
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Jing 
            Chen
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Cong 
            Wang
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Han 
            Zhang
          
        
      *c and 

        
          
            Minghui 
            Hong
          
        
      d
aJiangxi Key Laboratory of Nanomaterials and Sensors, Jiangxi Key Laboratory of Photoelectronics and Telecommunication, College of Physics and Communication Electronics, Jiangxi Normal University, Nanchang 330022, Jiangxi, People's Republic of China. E-mail: zliu@jxnu.edu.cn; lzhq86025@163.com; liugq@jxnu.edu.cn
bCollege of Electronic and Optical Engineering, Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Nanjing 210023, China. E-mail: jchen@njupt.edu.cn
cShenzhen Engineering Laboratory of Phosphorene and Optoelectronics, Collaborative Innovation Center for Optoelectronic Science and Technology and Key Laboratory of Optoelectronic Devices and Systems of Ministry of Education and Guangdong Province, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, 518060, China. E-mail: hzhang@szu.edu.cn
dDepartment of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National University of Singapore, 117576, Singapore
Received 
      23rd April 2020
    , Accepted 6th July 2020First published on 7th July 2020AbstractPerfect absorbers (PAs) are devices that can realize the annihilation of incident electromagnetic waves (EMWs) by eliminating reflection and transmission. Such engineered devices possess ample potential for practical applications and have attracted tremendous attention because of their superb capability of harvesting EMW energy. Since the first demonstration of metamaterial PAs in 2008, great efforts have been made to develop high-performance PAs utilizing metamaterials and nanomaterials. Thanks to advanced nanofabrication technologies, the research on metamaterial/nanomaterial based EMW absorbers has remarkably expanded over the past decade. In this review, we concentrate on state-of-the-art advances, systematically review the development progress of structures and materials, and explore some novel strategies to develop lithography-free absorbers which are promising for large-scale preparation. Following the aspects mentioned above, the emerging applications of PAs, such as solar energy conversion, photoelectric devices, high-precision sensing and high-resolution structural color pixels, have been reviewed. Finally, the present challenges for practical implementation are outlined and the future outlook is also discussed.
1. Introduction
Over the past decade, a great number of investigations have been devoted to the field of perfect EMW absorption; the ever-increasing quantity of PA-related publications is shown in Fig. 1a. With the support of developed nanofabrication techniques, researchers have theoretically designed and experimentally demonstrated PAs with various properties over a broad frequency range covering microwaves,1 infrared (IR),2,3 visible,4,5 and even ultraviolet (UV).6,7 Due to the diverse and valuable performances, perfect EMW absorbers have shown promising prospects in numerous fields: IR detection,8–10 photovoltaics,11–13 sensing,14–17 thermal imaging,18–20etc. In the following sections, the basic physical mechanism, the development of structures and materials, and the applications of PAs are presented in detail.
 Fig. 1  (a) The increasing amount of PA-related papers. (b) The annual citations (from 2008 to 2019) of the paper which reported a metamaterial PA for the first time. Source: Web of Science. (Data collected on March 24, 2020.) 
Metamaterials, artificially engineered materials the electromagnetic properties of which can be manipulated via changing the structural dimensions, have long been investigated. The first metamaterial PA was experimentally demonstrated by Landy et al. in 2008 and their work has gained increasing citations in recent years (Fig. 1b), indicating the expanding research in the field of perfect absorption. The first metamaterial PA is based on a metal–insulator–metal (MIM) configuration and the electromagnetic resonators are the dominant functional parts. Since then, the MIM stack has become a typical configuration to construct a PA. Afterward, on the basis of the MIM concept, a stack of alternating metallic and dielectric layers has also been studied.21,22 It has been proved that the MIM-type configuration works very well, but there are still some limitations. An inflexible SiO2 slab is widely used for the insulator and the bottom metallic layer of the MIM-type configuration is also inherently rigid, thus leading to a lack of mechanical flexibility and restricting applications on nonplanar structures such as human body sensing devices. To fulfil the demands for flexible nonplanar photonic and photoelectric systems, some novel flexible configurations have been experimentally demonstrated by utilizing a polymeric film as the substrate or the insulator. Such flexible PAs can be attached to curved surfaces as efficient solar energy harvesting devices and can even be attached to people's skin as biomedical sensors. Generally, to establish the MIM-type EMW absorbing systems, costly and complicated lithographic techniques are always required to obtain artificially engineered electromagnetic resonators. In consequence, the high cost and the low yield make it hard to achieve mass production even if these PAs can provide superior performance as photonic devices. To overcome this challenge, in recent years, extensive research has been conducted and multiple solutions relying on lithography-free fabrication techniques including the self-assembly method have been proposed. Diverse kinds of schemes that are able to provide a unique combination of relatively-simple fabrication processes and high performance have been carried out. These innovative schemes significantly paved the way for the large-scale application of perfect EMW absorption. To provide guidance on how to obtain a PA with superior performances and promising prospects of practical application, this review summarizes a collection of novel lithography-free schemes. Basically, there are two effective methods to obtain such a cost-effective and easy-to-fabricate PA: the plasmonic nanoparticle based configuration and multilayer planar structure. For instance, it is easy to induce strong localized surface plasmon resonance in the gaps among Au nanoparticles.23 The intense interaction between the metallic nanoparticles and incident wave can help to trap the electromagnetic energy inside a very narrow space, and hence the transmission and reflection can be depressed. Another lithography-free method is to construct a stack of planar films and take full advantage of interference effects. Fabry–Perot-type (FP-type) resonant cavities composed of planar high-loss metallic and low-loss dielectric layers can efficiently trap the incident wave and achieve perfect absorption.24 Besides, a graded refractive-index profile stack composed of several layers of films with proper refractive indexes can work as the anti-reflection component and efficiently inhibit reflection.25
The materials have also evolved in the field of perfect EMW absorbers. At the very beginning, coinage-metals (such as Au, Ag and Cu) were widely utilized to construct perfect light absorbers. These metals work very well in terms of absorption intensity, but it was relatively hard for them to create broadband absorption in MIM structures owing to their intrinsic properties.26 To achieve broadband EMW absorption, high-loss refractory metals (such as Ti, Cr, Ni and W) have been extensively studied in recent years.27 These metals can yield broadband EMW absorption and strong resistance to high temperature, and they are thus promising for photo-thermal applications. 2D materials, such as graphene, black phosphorus and transition metal dichalcogenides, have attracted considerable attention in the past few years due to their remarkable optical and electrical properties. In the field of optical PAs, 2D nanomaterials have also manifested their potential for efficient electromagnetic wave harvesting. Therefore, we elaborate the advanced light absorptive devices based on 2D materials. Moreover, some phase-change material based structures are also presented.
With the support of expanding research, advanced nanofabrication techniques, and self-assembly methods, relying on the various designed novel structures and selective materials, perfect EMW absorbers have exhibited considerable feasibility for multiple practical applications.
2. Physical mechanisms
As is known, propagating EMWs can be described with three vectors: the electric field E, the magnetic field H, and the propagating wave vector k, which indicates the direction of energy flow of the electromagnetic field. Generally, for a medium, the electromagnetic properties can be characterized by two parameters—permeability and permittivity. When EMWs are propagating in a natural medium of which the permeability and the permittivity are not simultaneously negative,28E × H lies along the direction of k and the three vectors jointly form a right-hand system according to the Maxwell curl equations. When it comes to metamaterials, the traditional simple permeability and permittivity cannot work well because metamaterials are always composed of more than one kind of material and are typically decorated with artificially engineered periodic subwavelength nanostructures. To describe the electromagnetic characteristics of metamaterials, people have come up with the effective permeability μ and the effective permittivity ε by considering metamaterials as effective homogeneous media. However, artificially designed metamaterials can exhibit negative permeability and permittivity simultaneously, which is an exotic phenomenon in comparison to natural materials. As mentioned above, metamaterials can be characterized by a complex effective permeability μ(ω) = μ1 + iμ2 and a complex effective permittivity ε(ω) = ε1 + iε2.29,30 By altering the morphology and the constituent materials of the metamaterial, the values of μ(ω) and ε(ω) can be manipulated so as to tailor the impedance  and then attain impedance matching between the absorptive structure and free space, that is, Z(ω) = Z0 (the impedance of free space), thereby eliminating reflection.29,31,32
The absorption of a metamaterial light absorber can be written as A = 1 − T − R, where R represents reflectivity and T indicates transmission.29,30 The transmission T can be neglected if the metamaterial is thick enough. Consequently, to maximize the absorption A, great attention has been focused on how to minimize the reflectance R via impedance matching between the medium and free space.29 On most occasions, perfect absorption of EMWs generated by metamaterials is ascribed to surface plasmon and strong electromagnetic resonances occurring in the designed structures.
To illustrate the mechanism of perfect absorption, various theories and analytical models, such as interference theory,33,34 the equivalent circuit model,35,36 and the aforementioned impedance matching,29,31 have been proposed. In general, the intense absorption of light can be attributed to strongly localized electromagnetic resonances and optical field trapping. In a metamaterial light absorber, the incident EMWs are always trapped, absorbed, and ultimately dissipated.32,37 The detailed absorption mechanisms may differ from each other as a consequence of the distinguishing configurations. In the following sections some absorption mechanisms which are closely related to the structural and material features are discussed separately. For instance, the mechanism for metal/insulator and opaque metal substrate related absorbers is mainly related to the strong plasmonic resonance of the metallic parts and the magnetic resonance of the two layers of the metallic structures intercalated by the insulator film.3–6 Plasmonic resonances of the metallic nanoparticles and plasmonic near-field coupling effects of adjacent ones are the physical mechanisms for all-metal based absorbers.37 Electromagnetic wave absorption by spatial interference and impedance matching due to the special geometry in other systems was also demonstrated.38
3. Structures
Since the demonstration of the first metamaterial PA, many kinds of micro/nanostructures have been designed, investigated and fabricated over the years. In this section, we provide a detailed review on PAs formed by tri-layer MIM stacks, all-metal configurations, and highly flexible structures.
3.1. Metal–insulator–metal structures
The most representative and widely-used structure for PAs is the tri-layer MIM stack composed of a top metallic layer decorated with nanostructures, a middle insulating spacer, and a bottom metallic slab.30,37 Au, Ag and some other coinage-metals are frequently utilized for the top and bottom metallic layers, while SiO2,35,39 MgF28,40 and some other analogous dielectrics are always used for the insulator.
In 2008, Landy et al. realized an absorption peak higher than 88% at 11.5 GHz utilizing a periodic component which is composed of a top electric ring resonator and a bottom cut wire.31 Electric resonant coupling can be obtained with the electric ring resonator and magnetic coupling can be induced by the combination of the electric ring resonator and the cut wire.31 Subsequently, based on a similar mechanism, Tao and co-workers experimentally prepared a terahertz PA with optical absorbance up to 97%.29 This design is highlighted by the usage of a highly flexible polyimide substrate, which can pave a path to nonplanar applications for the PA. Additionally, the bottom layer of this absorber is a continuous metal film but not the cut wire utilized in the previous work, and thus the fabrication process can be effectively simplified.
In recent years, advanced nanofabrication techniques have been introduced for EMW absorbers and therefore enabled the realization of elaborate nanostructures and periodic subwavelength electromagnetic resonant units with multiple geometrical contours such as disks,41–43 crosses,8,35 cubes,44,45 grooves,46 and triangular pillars.47 Generally, resonators with superior geometric symmetry can produce polarization-independent electromagnetic responses.6,48
Kang et al. demonstrated an ultra-narrowband PA with cross-shaped Au resonant units and obtained absorbance exceeding 99.7% at a wavelength of 5.83 μm.35 The absorption performance is independent of both the polarization state and incidence angle; this PA has great potential for high-resolution and miniaturized spectrometers. Nanocubes have also been widely researched in the MIM scheme. As illustrated in Fig. 2a, a Ag/Al2O3/Ag stack with top Ag cube-shaped resonators has been proposed for light absorption.49 The impinging EMW is trapped in very small regions and reflection is consequently depressed. Lei et al. theoretically designed a PA, employing an array of Ti–SiO2 cube-shaped resonators, and achieved an average absorbance of 97% over a broadband range from visible to near infrared (NIR).44 In this scheme, the pronounced absorption is attributed to surface plasmon resonance generated inside the MIM FP-cavity. The utilization of Ti rather than noble metals reduces the fabrication cost and this design has potential for solar energy harvesting and IR detection thanks to the broad spectrum. As for the MIM structures, strong plasmonic resonances of the metallic parts and the magnetic resonance in the two layers of metallic structures intercalated by the insulator film are the main contributions for the absorption.
 Fig. 2  (a) A 3D illustration of the MIM structure based plasmonic metamaterial absorber, and the magnetic and electric field profiles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 49 Copyright 2015, Optical Society of America. (b) The ultra-narrowband reflection generated in a MIM structure. Adapted with permission from ref. 51 Copyright 2019, Optical Society of America. (c) Simulated reflection spectrum (black dashed curve) using the whole perfect EMW absorptive structure and the calculated reflection spectrum (red solid line) viaeqn (1). The inset shows the configuration of the mushroom-shaped unit cell. (d) The amplitude of α (red line) and R12 (blue line). (e) The phase terms: θ = ϕ(R12) − ϕ(α) − 2β (blue), the phase ϕ(α) of α (green), the phase ϕ (R12) of R12 (red), and the propagation phase 2β (black). (c–e) Adapted with permission from ref. 52 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. 
Interestingly, a metasurface based on unordered metallic nanoparticles has also been proposed for perfect light absorption. On the basis of the MIM structure, we demonstrated a novel broadband EMW absorber with easy-to-prepare Au nanoparticles for the top metasurface, SiO2 for the dielectric spacer, and Au for the ground plane.50 This nanoparticle-based PA demonstrates absorbance up to 87% in a broad wavelength range of 370–880 nm and the lithography-free strategy opens a new pathway for high-efficiency and large-scale absorbers.
Narrowband perfect EMW absorption is a significant property in some certain applications, including sensing, detection, filters, and modulators. Recently, an ultra-narrowband absorption response has been numerically realized using the well-designed Au/Al2O3/Au structure (Fig. 2b).51 By adjusting the structural parameters of the Au gratings, the unwanted resonance mode was suppressed. Meanwhile, the desired mode remained intact. In addition, some interesting shapes have also been introduced to the unit cells and impressive absorption resonant properties have been obtained. For instance, a large-area plasmonic PA was experimentally fabricated and it exhibits notable potential for refractive index sensing.52 The dielectric layer was partially etched to construct a mushroom-shaped unit cell (see the inset of Fig. 2c).52 Based on the transfer matrix approach,52 the reflectivity can be given as (1)In the above equation, α = T12T21 − R12R21, where T12 is the transmission coefficient through the Au disc along the direction of air → Au → Al2O3, while T21 indicates the transmission coefficient through the Au disc along the reverse direction. R12 is the reflection coefficient of the top Au disc from air, R21 is the reflection coefficient of the Au disc from the spacer, R23 (≈−1) is the reflection coefficient of the bottom Au mirror, and β denotes the propagating phase term in the spacer. Fig. 2c shows the simulated reflectance and the reflectivity calculated viaeqn (1). The prerequisites for R decreasing to zero can be expressed as the following amplitude and phase equations |R12| = |α|(2) θ = ϕ(R12) − ϕ(α) − 2β = 2mπ, |m| = 0, 1, 2,…(3)As depicted in Fig. 2d and e, at the resonance wavelength, the amplitude of R12 equals the amplitude of α, and the phase term θ is zero at the phase condition of m = 0 (gray curve). In conclusion, R decreases to zero only when eqn (2) and eqn (3) are fulfilled simultaneously, as shown in Fig. 2c–e.
3.2. All-metal structures
The MIM structure has long been investigated as a promising candidate for light absorbers.37,53 Interestingly, it has been found that perfect absorption of EMWs can also be accomplished in all-metal structures. Typically, the absorbed light may generate a lot of heat due to the strong plasmon oscillations. Consequently, the local temperature may dramatically rise to an ultra-high level and then melt the structure if the heat cannot be dissipated opportunely.30,37,54,55 Conventional MIM structures are faced with the challenge of high temperature since the middle insulator layer hinders efficient thermal dissipation. This problem can be solved in all-metal structures as once the heat is generated it will be transmitted away and dissipated efficiently rather than being accumulated locally.30,37 As for the way in which perfect absorption is realized, the absorption mechanism of structures consisting solely of metals may be different from that of the MIM configuration. Due to the absence of a dielectric layer, for all-metal structures, a FP-cavity cannot be constructed and electromagnetic coupling between the separated metallic layers in MIM configurations cannot be induced. As a result, the intense absorption supported by all-metal absorbers is often based on surface lattice resonances, which are essentially the combination of the localized surface plasmon resonances and delocalized surface plasmon resonances of the metallic nanostructures.37
Utilizing an array of nanowires and nanorings placed on an opaque Au substrate, Li and co-workers experimentally fabricated an all-metal PA with ultra-narrowband absorption (Fig. 3a).37 The spectral bandwidth was merely 12 nm and the absorbance reached 90%. Au-film-coated structures can also function as excellent resonators. Xiong et al. designed a PA and experimentally realized a higher than 90% absorbance in the mid-infrared (MIR) region.30 The three-dimensional (3D) four-tined fish-spear-like structures and the substrate are both coated with a continuous 35 nm-thick Au film (see Fig. 3b). In this system, resonance, which leads to excellent absorption, occurs in the space between the tines of the resonator, unlike the electromagnetic resonance in the dielectric spacer of the MIM configuration. To demonstrate the significance of resonators, they calculated the reflection of a 35 nm thick flat Au film and higher than 99% reflection was obtained, suggesting that the flat Au film without the resonator was nearly a perfect reflector rather than a PA. Moreover, it has been verified that the materials of the substrate and the interior of the resonators have a weak influence on the absorption efficiency. Inspired by this study, a similar configuration has also been experimentally proposed and investigated in another study and high absorption performance was achieved (Fig. 3c and d).56 Thanks to the highly symmetric resonators, polarization-insensitivity was obtained in the two studies.
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic representation of an all-metal PA. Reproduced with permission from ref. 37 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (b) 3D sectional drawing of the four-tined fish-spear-like unit cell and the field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) image of the arrays. Adapted with permission from ref. 30 Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH. (c and d) The simulated spectrum and the scanning electron microscopy image of a unit cell composed of two orthogonally oriented stand-up split ring resonators. The scale bars are 10 μm and 40 μm, separately. Adapted with permission from ref. 56 Copyright 2017, the Authors. (e and f) The schematic of an all-metal PA and the spectra of reflection and absorption; the insets reveal the normalized intensity distributions of the electric fields at the absorption peaks and dip. Reproduced with permission from ref. 59 Copyright 2016, IOP Publishing Ltd. 
Metal gratings have also been investigated to construct perfect EMW absorbers. Utilizing Au-gratings, Li et al. proposed an ultra-narrowband metamaterial absorber operating in the IR range.57 According to simulations, this absorber is able to achieve high absorbance with a full-width at half-maximum (FWHM) close to 0.66 nm. In addition, a Ag film with binary gratings can also act as a EMW absorber and provide near-unity absorbance.58 Generally, the FP resonant cavity in the MIM structure plays a critical role in light absorption and is able to efficiently trap the incident wave. Thereby, it is relatively easy for MIM structures to achieve broadband light absorption compared with all-metal structures. Nonetheless, the narrowband absorption makes all-metal structures promising for sensing applications. Based on an all-metal metasurface, our previous work reported a scheme for sensing applications (Fig. 3e).59 The absorbance is up to 89% (Fig. 3f) owing to the surface lattice resonances supported by the resonators and their hybridization coupling with the particle plasmon resonances. Due to the ultra-narrowband perfect absorption in the spectrum, the slight shift in the wavelength range leads to a big change of the spectral intensity at the operation wavelength. This work introduces a feasible way to detect the ultra-low change of the concentration of ions or other biomaterials. The change of the spectral intensity can even produce a switching process for visual sensing between the “bright state” and the “dark state”, as shown in Fig. 3f.
3.3. Flexible structures
To date, most substrates of PAs are made of rigid materials, such as SiO2, Si, and metals, which lack structural flexibility and consequently hamper applications on non-planar surfaces. Such a problem can be tackled using flexible light absorptive structures, and consequently flexible PAs have attracted significant attention in recent years. Realization of plasmonic effects on stretchable and soft substrates opens a route for flexible electronics and biosensing.60 Within the past decade, remarkable progress has been made in the fabrication of flexible perfect EMW absorbers.61
To obtain such a PA, taking the MIM structure for example, a proposed straightforward method is utilizing a flexible material as the dielectric spacer and replacing the rigid back metallic layer with a metallic wire grid. Jang et al. experimentally prepared a transparent and flexible broadband microwave absorber.62 The structural flexibility originates from the polyethylene terephthalate film, the polydimethylsiloxane layers and the bottom Al wire grid. Numerous studies have been done to prepare metamaterials based on flexible polymers, such as polyethylene terephthalate,62 polyimide,63–65 and polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS).66,67 Another ultra-flexible system employing commercial Kapton film as the spacer has also exhibited intense absorbance in the THz region.68
In addition, an FR4 film can also act as the dielectric spacer in light absorptive devices in order to improve the structural flexibility.69 Flat substrates are mostly used in the reported PAs; moreover, substrates with lumpy surfaces have also been investigated. A broadband and flexible PA was experimentally proposed by Ji et al. and the structure was composed of a top layer of Ag nanoparticles and a bottom Ag layer on a PDMS substrate with its surface moth-eye shaped.70 For the purpose of near-ideal absorbance in the flexible structures and lower fabrication cost, a flexible PA was achieved by depositing a Ag–Sb2S3 nano-porous array on a polyimide film.71 This report introduced an inexpensive lithography-free method, making it possible for the structure to be fabricated on an industrial scale. Additionally, graphene composites have also been introduced in flexible structures.72,73 Recently, perfect absorbers for microwave technology have also been investigated due to the numerous applications. For instance, Lu et al. experimentally prepared a graphene-based flexible microwave absorber.72 They realized broadband absorption of microwaves utilizing a transparent and flexible structure composed of two patterned graphene layers and a thin metal–oxide–metal film. Additionally, an optically transparent radar-wave absorber with broadband microwave absorption was achieved via windmill-shaped elements in another work.73
Utilizing nanoparticles other than the continuous and rigid metallic metasurface is another effective approach to constructing high-performance flexible PAs. In a recent study, an innovative structure was experimentally fabricated to realize a flexible EMW absorber.74 Utilizing Au nanoparticles and aramid nanofibers, Zhang and co-workers realized an ultra-broadband, omnidirectional and near-unity absorber. The absorption spectrum is from 400 nm to 2000 nm and the average absorption efficiency exceeds 95%. The fabrication process (seen in Fig. 4a) is cost-effective and simple, thus making this scheme relatively easy to scale up. The mechanical property of this structure was characterized by measuring the Young modulus and tensile stress. After being bent and stretched hundreds of times, no distinct change was observed (Fig. 4b and c) according to the tests. Therefore, the designed plasmonic nanomaterial film possesses super flexibility and decent durability of mechanical strength. It is worth noting that the broadband and efficient absorption generated by this PA is mainly dependent on the non-resonant decay of the waves inside the nanocomposite and the localized surface plasmon resonances induced by the Au nanoparticles with different sizes, which is different from the conventional MIM configurations and all-metal structures. Recently, Wang and co-workers also reported an ultra-thin PA with near-ideal absorbance in the visible range of 400–750 nm.97 They launched further investigation on the applications in laser scanning confocal microscopy and found that the proposed PA can notably improve the contrast and clarity of imaging by enhancing the signal-to-noise ratio. This PA, with structural flexibility and high absorption performance, has great potential for large-scale applications, including solar energy harvesting and signal detection.
 Fig. 4  (a) The fabrication process of an electromagnetic wave absorber with excellent flexibility and absorption properties. (b and c) The measured tensile stresses and Young's modulus after a large number of stretching-bending cycles. The inset demonstrates a single stretching-bending cycle. Reproduced with permission from ref. 74 Copyright 2019, the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
4. Absorbers based on special materials
To date, multiple materials have been validated in EMW absorptive structures. First, the coinage-metals, which are inherently suitable for surface plasmon resonance and plasmonic crystals, are the most-widely investigated and most-often used in light absorptive systems. They have exhibited excellent performances, especially in nanoparticle-based EMW absorbers. Second, refractory materials, especially high-loss refractory metals, are exactly needed in broadband light absorption for solar energy harvesting devices and other applications with the need for high-temperature tolerance. These metals and their nitrides have been used in numerous schemes for broadband EMW absorbers. Third, some emerging materials, such as 2D materials and phase-change materials with prominent physical properties, have also been investigated and exploited in EWM absorption. Moreover, semi-conductors including Si have also been widely utilized in light absorptive structures to obtain some valuable photoelectric properties.75
Phase-change materials, such as VO2, Ge2Sb2Te5, and Ge2Sb2Te6, have the ability to transform rapidly and reversibly between two states with tremendously different properties and possess a unique combination of notable physical properties.76,77 Especially, Ge2Sb2Te5 has demonstrated a lot of valuable properties such as ultra-fast change of phase, strong robustness at room temperature, and a big difference in complex refractive index between the amorphous phase and the crystalline phase. These special materials have shown great potential for display devices, plasmonic memories, color pixels and some other integrated optics applications. PAs which can provide tunable absorption performances are often needed in some certain applications and many related designs have been proposed. However, the tenability of many absorbers is based on varying the structural parameters of the periodic resonators or the thickness of the dielectric layer via new fabrication processes, which may hamper practical application. Fortunately, phase-change materials provide a promising solution to this problem. For instance, phase-change materials can act as the manageable spacer in plasmonic crystals for EMW absorption. By altering the crystallization level of the phase-change material, a dramatic variation in the refractive index can be realized, and then the dielectric environment of the resonators can be changed and the resonance can be manipulated.77 In some schemes, phase-change materials have been successfully introduced into nanomaterial PAs and exhibited several valuable performances.78,79 It is worth noting that phase-change materials are particularly useful to achieve tunable EMW absorbers.20,80 For instance, a tunable PA, based on a Ge2Sb2Te5 (GST) layer and several metallic films and dielectric layers, was demonstrated recently.81 Without loss of generality, the high absorbance can also be attributed to the interference between the reflected light beams. By employing GST, a typical phase-change material, in a MIM configuration, Chen et al. designed a plasmonic absorber with wavelength-tunable absorption.82 Tian et al. proposed a novel scheme based on GST and realized polarization-independent absorbance over a broad wavelength range.78 Unlike most of the reported schemes, the resonators in this project are made of phase-change materials rather than metals. In the field of perfect light absorbers, a significant application of phase-change materials is to yield tunable absorption performances. However, to realize a PA whose absorption performances can be easily manipulated, the classic 2D carbon material graphene is also a promising alternative. Graphene has been integrated into tunable PAs and it has exhibited great potential for generating manageable absorption properties. Different from the way in which phase-change materials support tunable absorption, graphene can generate tunable absorption via its intrinsic adjustable electromagnetic property, which is closely related to the Fermi level.83–85 By altering the bias voltage, the Fermi level can be changed and then the optical response of graphene such as the absorption intensity and resonant wavelength can be manipulated.83,86 Since graphene has shown valuable light absorption properties and a lot of related schemes have been proposed, the PAs based on graphene are discussed in the following subsection.
In addition to all the aforementioned materials, a kind of emerging low-dimensional carbon material, carbon nanotubes, has also exhibited great potential for being integrated into perfect light absorbers.87–91 An array of vertically-aligned carbon nanotubes can exhibit a low refractive index which is near to that of air owing to its special morphology and the characteristic optical properties of carbon nanotubes. Consequently, vertically-aligned carbon nanotubes can be used to efficiently lower the reflection and then yield near-ideal absorption of EMWs, which provides a new means of constructing PAs. For example, in recent work, Jin et al. experimentally proposed a novel network consisting of highly-aligned carbon nanotubes.87 By utilizing carbon nanotubes, they realized a unique combination of superb absorption performances including super-high absorbance, omnidirectional response, polarization insensitivity, and ultra-broad bandwidth in the UV-visible-NIR wavelength range.87 Moreover, the fabrication process of carbon nanotubes is relatively simple and it enables high throughput, which is exactly needed in the mass production of efficient light harvesting devices.87,88
In the following subsections, PAs based on refractory materials and novel 2D materials are discussed.
4.1. Refractory materials
The first metamaterial PA was based on Cu structures.31 Afterward, Au and Ag have been successively introduced in optically absorptive systems. Nevertheless, the weak thermal stability restricts their applications in high-energy optoelectronic devices, solar energy harvesting, photodetection, and bolometry.
Refractory metals, such as Ti, V, Cr, W, and Ni, can be utilized to achieve high absorption efficiency over a broad wavelength range covering visible and NIR because of their inherent high losses. Besides, they have notable thermal stability. Chen and co-workers demonstrated that the intrinsic absorption properties of materials were of great significance for broadband absorbers.26 Metals with high-imaginary-part-permittivity, such as Ni, Ti, and W, can help to achieve broadband absorption even in the absence of enhanced magnetic resonance.26 Thus, these refractory metals can provide great assistance to broadband absorption and high-temperature resistance simultaneously.92 Another perfect light absorber based on stacked refractory nanodisks with decreasing radius was proposed by us (Fig. 5a); an ultra-broad bandwidth and remarkable absorption have also been achieved.21
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic of an ultra-broadband light absorber composed of alternating refractory metal disks and SiO2 disks. Adapted with permission from ref. 21 Copyright 2018, Elsevier B.V. (b) SEM image of the refractory material based metamaterial PA after annealing treatment at 1200 °C for 10 hours. The scale bar is 500 nm. (c) Absorptivity spectra before and after annealing. Inset: 3D schematic of the refractory metamaterial. (b and c) Adapted with permission from ref. 94 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (d) Simulated absorption spectra corresponding to diverse distributions of triangular meta-atoms. Adapted with permission from ref. 47 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
PAs based on high-temperature resistant compounds have also been studied. Huang et al. experimentally formed a broadband perfect EMW absorber composed of SiC, SiO2 and W cylinders and achieved high absorbance exceeding 95% over a spectral range of wavelength from 200 to 900 nm.93 This metamaterial is stable even at 800 °C and the absorbance remains high over a broad range of incident angle. Chang et al. realized broadband and near-unity absorption using the refractory MIM arrangement.94 In this scheme, W was utilized for both the top metasurface and the ground plane. To prevent the top surface from possible evaporation and oxidation and boost the thermal stability, a hafnium oxide (HfO2) protective layer was attached onto the W-based metasurface. The high-temperature resistance is so strong that the absorption spectra and structural integrity do not show any noticeable degradation after annealing at 1200 °C for 10 hours (Fig. 5b and c). The thermal stability and spectral selectivity made this PA a promising candidate for solar thermo-photovoltaic applications. Nanodisk resonators are often used to construct metasurfaces for ideal EMW absorption. However, triangular nanopillars can effectively boost the light absorption as well. Li and co-workers devised and experimentally constructed a broadband PA composed of triangular meta-atoms made of refractory materials.47 This PA produced full-spectrum sunlight absorption and meanwhile ultra-high efficiency of solar energy-thermal conversion even at a high temperature of 1000 K. As has been testified, the absorption performance was insensitive to the lateral periodicity or the orientations of meta-atoms (see Fig. 5d). Based on a W material, another study reported a wide-angle and polarization-independent absorber with absorbance over 95% in a broad wavelength range from UV to NIR and high-efficiency solar thermal energy conversion.95
Nitrides and oxides of these refractory metals can also contribute to near-ideal absorptivity. Chirumamilla et al. reported a wide-angle ultra-broadband absorber utilizing 3D TiN nanopillars.11 This PA, prepared via a lithography-free method, has been validated in terms of excellent thermal stability via an annealing process, suggesting that it is a good candidate for large-scale solar energy applications. Yan et al. prepared a PA relying on heavily self-doped TiO1.67 nanoparticles and achieved very high absorption (>90%) over a broad wavelength range (300–2000 nm) throughout almost the whole solar radiation spectrum.96
Wang et al. demonstrated a wide-angle PA by embedding TiN nanoparticles into an AlN layer and achieved ultra-high absorbance exceeding 99.6% in the visible regime (400–750 nm) and high absorbance (above 96%) in a broader wavelength range of 350–1000 nm.97 In this scheme, a topmost anti-reflection coating composed of TiO2 and SiO2 is utilized to reduce the reflection loss as the two layers can provide gradient refractive indexes and help to achieve superior impedance matching between this structure and free space. It is worth noting that TiN nanoparticles, randomly formed in the AlN dielectric, demonstrate prominent plasmonic properties which are almost equivalent to those of noble metals in the visible and NIR regions. The incident light is totally absorbed with the assistance of the anti-reflection coating and then trapped due to the surface plasmons generated by the TiN nanoparticles. In addition, there are some other valuable properties of this PA, such as corrosion resistance, chemical stability, and thermal stability. These superior performances make the structure promising for mass applications including solar energy harvesting and stray light elimination in signal detection.
In this subsection, perfect EMW absorbers based on refractory materials have been discussed. Owing to the intrinsic properties of these refractory metals (for example, W, Ti, Cr and Ni) and refractory metal based compounds (such as TiN and TiO2), a lot of refractory PAs have shown broadband absorption of EMWs. The intrinsic broadband absorption response of the material features and the strong plasmonic resonances of the metals make combined contributions for high absorption in a wide spectrum. In these schemes, disc-shaped and pillar-shaped resonators have been experimentally exploited and refractory composites have also been validated in terms of their superior performances. The thermo-stability and broadband high-efficiency absorptivity, together with some other noteworthy features, make this kind of PA a promising candidate for large-scale practical applications, including solar energy-harvesting and thermal emission.
4.2. 2D materials
When the sizes of materials (including graphite, black phosphorus and transition metal dichalcogenides) are reduced to a low-dimensional scale, especially the sub-nanometer scale, some novel properties which are distinct from those of bulk materials could be obtained and such materials composed of a few or even single layers of atoms are always called 2D materials. For example, bulk graphite may block the propagation of light, while the optical transparency can be dramatically improved in graphene and its light absorption properties can be switched and modulated electrically.98 Since the first demonstration in 2004, 2D graphene has sparked extensive research efforts in diverse fields.99–101 Moreover, many other 2D sub-nanometer materials such as monolayer molybdenum disulfide (MoS2) and monolayer black phosphorus have also attracted significant attention in recent years because of their extraordinary photonic and mechanical properties.102 Thanks to the expanding research efforts, these 2D materials have exhibited promising potential for ultrafast lasers,103–106 plasmonics,107–109 photodetection,110–112 photoluminescence,112–115 optical modulation,116–119 solar energy harvesting120–122 and even biomedicine.123 Although atomically thin, these novel 2D materials enable strong interaction with light and have shown the ability to promote the efficiency of light absorptive systems.124–126 For instance, monolayer MoS2 is merely 0.6 nm in thickness, but it can support an average single-pass absorptivity of approximately 10% in the visible region.127 Due to the superior optical response, some 2D materials have been exploited in photonic devices for perfect light absorption. Therefore, in this subsection, we introduce and discuss some schemes for EMW absorption devices based on 2D materials, especially graphene.
Graphene, a monolayer of carbon atoms in a honeycomb lattice, exhibits a lot of superior performances and is promising for various applications.128–132 Graphene is a material with linear energy dispersion and zero band gap, and it can provide some properties similar to those of metals.128 The conductivity of graphene is gate tunable because its charge carrier concentration is able to be manipulated by the additional electric field.128 Thanks to the fine structure constant, single layer graphene is almost transparent and exhibits intrinsic light absorption (∼2.3%) in the visible and IR regimes,133,134 but this absorbance cannot meet the demands of optoelectronic devices which require intense absorption of light. As mentioned above, graphene has its intrinsic advantage of manageable photoelectric properties. The optical response of graphene can be dramatically influenced by its Fermi level, which can be controlled via simply changing the bias voltage. Thanks to the superior photoelectric properties including the strong plasmon-like resonances, graphene has been the most widely used 2D material in the field of perfect light absorbers. Similar to conventional absorptive structures, the strategy for boosting the light absorption in graphene structures is also to cancel reflection via light–matter interactions and restrain transmission using opaque substrates. The absorption generated by single layer graphene is 2.3% but it has been found that the absorption efficiency increases linearly with the number of atom layers. Therefore, one straightforward way to realize higher absorbance of light is to employ more layers of graphene sheets. Additionally, some properly designed graphene-based photonic devices have also exhibited remarkable ability to absorb EMWs.83,135–137 Recently, several methods have been proposed to facilitate light absorption in graphene based optical systems, such as strain engineering,138 nanopatterning,136,139 plasmonic resonances,140–144etc.145–147
Generally, combining single layer graphene with a metastructure can effectively help to generate strong absorption.148,149 Here we summarize some often-used methods for enhancement of light absorption in 2D material based structures. First, researchers introduced a simple resonant back mirror to a monolayer graphene structure. The resonant interaction between monolayer graphene and the incident EMWs is not sufficient to achieve perfect absorption. However, the opaque back mirror can not only help to reduce transmission but also construct a resonant cavity and facilitate light–matter interactions. Zhu et al. experimentally proposed a photonic structure composed of coherent single-layer graphene, a dielectric spacer, and an opaque mirror.150 With the assistance of the bottom mirror, this structure exhibits angle-selective absorption of 77.6% in the MIR range. Moreover, in this scheme, the coherent surface does not need the utilization of costly nanopatterning techniques, thus reducing the fabrication expense and making this strategy suitable for practical manufacture. A similar resonant cavity can also be fabricated with graphene micro-ribbons. For instance, Alaee and co-workers demonstrated perfect absorption with FP cavities composed of graphene micro-ribbons, a dielectric spacer, and a metallic plate.151 Second, researchers added resonant cavities, for example plasmonic nanocavities, to graphene-based structures.144,152 Nanocavities in metamaterials can produce surface plasmons and by introducing surface plasmons to graphene sheets the absorption of EMWs can be dramatically boosted.147 Fan and co-workers theoretically and experimentally demonstrated perfect absorption with a photonic crystal which is based on plasmonic resonance cavities and graphene, as shown in Fig. 6a.147 This graphene-based structure exhibits peak absorbance exceeding 99% and the FWHM is merely 18 nm (Fig. 6b). Moreover, it has been found by Ferreira et al. that with the combination of graphene and FP resonant cavities, the absorbance can even be raised up to ∼100%.145 Third, researchers utilized patterned graphene rather than coherent graphene sheets. In our previous work, we proposed a PA based on split graphene resonators and obtained three sharp absorption peaks (Fig. 6c).83 The notable absorption efficiency in this work was ascribed to localized surface plasmons formed by the graphene nanodisks. It should be noted that the proposed graphene nanostructure can act as an electrical-adjusting multi-band plasmon switch with near-ideal modulation depth (∼100%). Moreover, an almost-linear relationship between the resonant wavelength and the Fermi level of graphene is achieved, suggesting that this system can act as a novel platform for plasmonic switching. Fourth, researchers created graphene-based waveguide structures. By vertically stacking graphene and a dielectric layer, remarkable enhancement of absorption can also be realized. Utilizing a 90 nm-thick graphene metamaterial, Lin et al. experimentally demonstrated an ultra-thin graphene metamaterial absorber with polarization-insensitive EMW absorption (∼85%) covering almost the full-spectrum of solar radiation (300–2500 nm).121 The gratings, composed of alternating dielectric and graphene layers, provide strong interaction with the incident wave and generate the broadband absorption. Moreover, low-cost approaches (laser writing and self-assembly methods) were introduced in the fabrication process. It should be noted that the experimentally prepared graphene absorber is efficiently superior to most of its peers because of its ultra-broadband and high absorption. All the advantages make this graphene absorber promising for wide applications such as optoelectronic devices and opto-thermal systems. Periodic gratings based on graphene and a semi-conductor can also generate notable light absorption. Zou et al. reported a polarization-insensitive graphene absorber and demonstrated absorbance higher than 90%.153 Based on periodic graphene gratings, the tunable THz absorber achieved a wide-incident-angle optical response. Fifth, researchers utilized vertically-aligned multi-layer graphene sheets. Zhang and co-workers experimentally fabricated a perfect EMW absorber based on vertically-aligned graphene sheets (Fig. 6d) and realized ultra-high absorbance over a very broad wavelength range from 250 to 2500 nm.154 Furthermore, they developed an innovative freezing method to achieve large-scale fabrication of vertically-aligned graphene sheets. This plan for a graphene-based absorber has the advantages of notable absorption performance, high efficiency of solar-thermal transformation and simplified fabrication, thereby holding promising prospects for practical solar-driven photo-thermal equipment.
 Fig. 6  (a) 3D schematic of the properly engineered graphene-based photonic crystal. (b) The ultra-narrowband absorption at a wavelength of 1526.5 nm. (a and b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 147 Copyright 2017, Optical Society of America. (c) The electrical-adjusting PA based on a nanopatterned graphene surface. Reproduced with permission from ref. 83 Copyright 2018, Elsevier Ltd. (d) Schematic of the perfect light absorber based on vertically-aligned graphene. Adapted with permission from ref. 154 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (e) The MoS2 photonic crystal for total absorption of EMWs. (f) The optical response, which is dependent on the radius of the nanocavities. (e and f) Adapted with permission from ref. 127 Copyright 2017, Optical Society of America. 
Besides the aforementioned structures, some other configurations with high performances have also been proposed recently. For instance, an electrically tunable broadband coherent EMW absorber was demonstrated and computationally investigated utilizing a graphene/electrolyte/graphene tri-layer sandwich structure.155 The relation between the Fermi level of graphene and the bias voltage has been calculated by the researchers and the absorbance can be dynamically tuned from 50% to 100% via changing the additional bias voltage. Additionally, Wang et al. experimentally prepared a microwave absorber which is based on an asymmetric FP cavity consisting of monolayer graphene, a fused SiO2 layer, and an ultrathin transparent silver layer.156 This microwave absorber features high transparency in the visible regime and can realize near-unity absorption at 13.75 GHz with an effective bandwidth of 3.6 GHz.156
In addition to graphene, black phosphorus and transition metal dichalcogenides have also been investigated to create intense light–matter interactions for perfect absorption of EMWs. In terms of physical properties, single-layer black phosphorus and transition metal dichalcogenide monolayers can serve as 2D semiconductors. When transition metal dichalcogenides are at the monolayer scale, they can exhibit a direct band gap in the range of 1.7–2.2 eV,157 and monolayer black phosphorus shows a direct band gap of 2 eV.158 Owing to excitonic coupling effects, the single-pass absorption capability of monolayer MoS2 in the visible region is superior to that of graphene, but the absorption still needs to be enhanced to meet the requirements of high-efficiency photonic devices. To achieve an enhancement of absorption, diverse metamaterial based schemes for 2D MoS2 absorptive structures have been proposed. The strategies for absorption enhancement in MoS2 optical systems are similar to those in graphene PAs. Resonant cavities also work well in structures based on monolayer MoS2. Li et al. proposed a photonic system consisting of monolayer MoS2, a hollow Si slab, and a thick Ag reflector (see Fig. 6e).127 With appropriate thickness and structurally optimized resonant nanocavities, the sandwiched Si photonic crystal slab can help to form critical coupling with guided resonance and generate remarkable absorption enhancement, and hence ultra-high light absorption can be obtained. The critical coupling is rigidly dependent on the radius of the resonant nanocavities and only when the radius is set to 60 nm does the critical coupling occur, otherwise the system would be in either the under coupled or over coupled state. As a result, the absorption performance may also be influenced by the radius of the nanocavities. Thanks to the novel method of light–matter interaction enhancement, this scheme is a promising platform for photo-detection and wavelength-selective photoluminescence. 2D black phosphorus, as an emerging direct band-gap material, can fill the gap between wide-bandgap transition metal dichalcogenides and graphene. A lot of study on 2D black phosphorus has proved its saturable optical absorption for ultra-fast laser photonics.159 Moreover, this kind of material can also be used to realize perfect light absorption in plasmonic metamaterials, though there are limited related studies. It has been found that the concept of critical coupling with guided resonances also works well in monolayer black phosphorus based metamaterials. For instance, utilizing the critical coupling method and a monolayer black phosphorus based metamaterial photonic crystal, Qing and co-workers designed a narrowband absorber which enables perfect absorption of THz waves.160 Besides 2D material PAs based on periodic nanostructures, some planar configurations have also been demonstrated in the past years. Liu et al. presented a simple method for absorption enhancement in 2D sub-nanometer films.161 They proposed a theoretical model by sandwiching a sub-nanometer film between a transparent layer and a metallic layer, and perfect absorption occurred.161 Further investigation revealed that when the sub-nanometer film was placed onto the transparent layer on a metallic plate, perfect absorption could still be maintained. This methodology can provide guidance on how to construct 2D material based planar absorbers suitable for large-scale applications. Single-kind 2D materials can be used to generate intense absorption; the combination of graphene and black phosphorus has also been validated in terms of its remarkable absorption performance.162,163 For instance, Cai et al. investigated a plasmonic PA utilizing graphene–black phosphorus multilayers and realized anisotropic absorption in the IR region.163
In this subsection, many high-performance 2D material based schemes have been presented and several strategies for enhancement of absorption have been discussed. Although the intrinsic absorption of EMWs supported by 2D materials is not sufficient for high-efficiency photonic devices, multiple electromagnetic resonances such as guided resonances and localized surface plasmon resonances formed by metastructures can remarkably facilitate the light–matter interaction so as to promote light absorption. 2D material based PAs possess some advantages over conventional PAs. For instance, a most impressive property of graphene based PAs is the manageable absorption performances such as the absorption intensity and resonant wavelength. The absorption performances can be manipulated by altering the Fermi levels of the graphene material via changing the additional bias voltage.84–86,164–168 In summary, many novel schemes have been proposed and various valuable performances have been obtained in the field of 2D material based PAs over the past few years. Nevertheless, the utilization of 2D materials in PAs is still in its early stages and more investigations need to be carried out. Moreover, unfortunately, limited experimental fabrication has been done mainly because advanced experimental facilities and sophisticated nanofabrication methods are always required to construct 2D material based nanostructures.169 How to take advantage of inexpensive and simplified methods to achieve perfect absorption in 2D material based nanostructures is a key point for development and practical application in the future.
5. Strategies for lithography-free structures
Advanced nanofabrication techniques allow intense light–matter interactions in artificial nanostructures and can notably improve the performances of PAs.110 Therefore, most of the reported EMW absorbers come with the requirement of lithographic techniques such as electron beam lithography (EBL) and focused ion beam (FIB) milling. On one hand, these lithographic methods enable the realization of complicated structures and have boosted the development of EMW absorbing structures. On the other hand, these sophisticated, time-consuming and costly manufacturing processes restrict the mass production and applications of PAs. To address these limitations, researchers have invested tremendous efforts in lithography-free PAs and have made remarkable progress. Compared with lithographic techniques, some low-cost methods such as sputtering,95,97,170 self-assembly processes,74,171 and e-beam evaporation25,172 have been introduced in the fabrication of PAs. Based on the reported schemes, we summarize two effective strategies for lithography-free perfect EMW absorbers – one is nanoparticle based configurations, and the other is planar multilayer structures. In this section, we discuss some representative schemes for lithography-free PAs and provide a detailed summary of lithography-free projects. To visualize state-of-the-art advances, selected lithography-free schemes are listed in Table 1. Herein, we present a discussion on some typical lithography-free schemes and their preparation processes. Nanoparticles, especially Au nanoparticles, possess superb plasmonic properties and they enable strong interactions with light, which is exactly needed in light trapping systems. Moreover, the manufacturing processes of nanoparticle-based PAs are relatively simple and have potential for being scaled up. Nanoparticle-based light harvesting structures are often prepared via self-assembly methods. In the fabrication of nanoparticles, the concentrations of solutions are of great significance and need to be controlled carefully.171 In addition, some other factors such as time and temperature also play important roles. Besides nanoparticle-based designs, another kind of lithography-free structure—compacted planar films—has also been proposed and experimentally demonstrated.24,173,174 Planar structures are mainly based on the deposition method and electron beam evaporation is usually exploited to obtain closely compacted thin films.24 In comparison with structures with periodic resonators, planar designs do not need the nanopatterning procedure, and hence the global preparation process can be simplified and the manufacturing cost can be lowered. In addition to nanoparticle-based structures and planar-film-based configurations, some other innovative designs have also been experimentally realized. For example, Li et al. fabricated periodic metallic nanostructures via a template stripping technique.175 The size and the geometrical parameters can be well controlled and the thickness of the metallic layer can be accurately manipulated via the electrochemical deposition step. Moreover, the Si wafer which serves as the template can be reused many times, which further makes this strategy suitable for large-scale implementation and application.175
Table 1 Some typical lithography-free schemes for PA fabrication




Structure
Total absorbance
Operating wavelength
Ref.
Year




Au–SiO2 nanocomposite
—
Visible

4

2011


TiN nanopillars
94%
300–2300 nm

11

2017


Cr/SiO2/Cr film stack
99.5%
400–800 nm

24

2015


MgF2/TiO2/Si/Ge/Cr/SiO2 film stack
≈98%
400–2000 nm

25

2016


Au metasurface/SiO2/Au substrate
83%
370–880 nm

50

2015


Ag–Sb2S3 nanoporous structure
—
300–2400 nm

71

2018


Au nanoparticles/aramid nanofibers
>95%
400–2000 nm

74

2019


Multi-film stack
—
Broadband

81

2017


Multi-film stack
>95%
Visible-NIR

95

2018


TiO1.67 nanoparticles
>90%
300–2000 nm

96

2016


Nanocomposite
>99.6%
400–750 nm

97

2019


Ag–SiO2 nanocomposite
≈100%
≈350–600 nm

170

2014


Sphere-shaped structure
>90%
3–6 μm

171

2019


Ag nanoparticle layers/SiO2 layers/Ag slab
96%
300–1100 nm

172

2015


Cr/Al2O3/Cr film stack
>90%
400–850 nm

173

2018


Ag/SiO2/Ag film stack
97%
≈17 nm

176

2015


Pt coated TiO2 nanowires
>97%
370–1100 nm

177

2017


Au nanoparticles/GST film
≈92%
400–1000 nm

178

2019


Nanocomposite
—
300–800 nm

179

2017


Nanoparticle-based nanocomposite
—
—

180

2019


Nanocomposite
—
300–2600 nm

181

2018


Si/AlCu alloy film
>99%
Multi-band

182

2018


Cu-Polytetrafluoroethylene nanocomposite
97%
400–750 nm

183

2012


Metal nanoparticles/wood
≈99%
200–2500 nm

184

2018


Au nanoparticles/nanoporous Al2O3 template
90%
Tunable bandwidth

185

2017


Au nanoparticles/nanoporous templates
≈99%
400 nm–10 μm

186

2016




5.1. Nanoparticle-based structures
Metallic nanoparticles have been widely used in surface plasmon-related applications, including Raman scattering detection187,188 and perfect EMW absorption,50,170 because of their unparalleled properties. In addition, metallic nanoparticles can also be used to suppress the reflection of light in photon harvesting systems.189 To devise nanomaterials for ideal EMW absorption and simultaneously avoid lithographic methods, plasmonic nanoparticles, such as metallic nanoparticles74,170,190 and core–shell nanoparticles,171 have been exploited in EMW absorbers.
There are several advantages with nanoparticle-based PAs. First, nanoparticles can be prepared via high-yield, simple, and cost-effective fabrication. Second, it is relatively easy to yield strongly localized surface plasmon resonance among the gaps of these nanoparticles, thus trapping the incident EMWs.23,74,191,192 The scheme proposed by Zhang et al. exactly presented a method to make the best of localized surface plasmon resonance generated among Au nanoparticles.74 Moreover, we have also experimentally demonstrated a novel broadband EMW absorber using randomly distributed Au nanoparticles with different sizes (Fig. 7a).50 In this scheme, a novel metasurface was automatically obtained during a simple metal film formation process. Randomly distributed Au nanoparticles replaced the accurately fabricated periodic unit cells with regular geometries in most conventional MIM structures. Therefore, the fabrication can be simplified and the cost can be notably lowered. In another lithography-free study, we experimentally demonstrated that metal–colloidal crystal composite micro-spheres can also be utilized to achieve perfect EMW absorption.193 The composite spheres provide a combination of plasmon resonances and photonic modes, thus exhibiting notable broadband absorption in the IR regime.
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic of the lithography-free Au nanoisland/SiO2/Au perfect metamaterial absorber (above) and the reflectivity/absorptivity spectra (below). Reproduced with permission from ref. 50 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic of the Au nanocube/TiO2/Au metamaterial absorber and profiles of the magnitude of the electric and magnetic fields. Reproduced with permission from ref. 194 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic and top view SEM image of the meta-polymeric spheres and the corresponding spectra. Adapted with permission from ref. 171 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. 
As shown in Fig. 7b, tightly packed and highly ordered Au nanocubes have been utilized to achieve perfect absorption.194 The nanocube arrays allow both gap and propagating plasmon modes; moreover, the plasmon resonance can be engineered by altering the geometry of the nanocubes. At the resonant wavelength, the absorbance is up to 98%. The Au nanocube arrays are formed via a two-step self-assembly process, which is simpler than most of the existing self-assembly methods.
Generally, MIM configurations are always composed of flat films. However, the MIM tri-layer stack can also be attached onto spheres to realize high absorbance of EMWs.171 Recently, Yu et al. proposed and experimentally fabricated a tunable large-area broadband plasmonic absorber with near-ideal absorptivity (>90%) in the MIR region.171 The proposed nanomaterial consists of tightly packed sub-micrometer-sized polystyrene spheres assembled on a metallic substrate (Fig. 7c). It should be noted that the polystyrene spheres are all covered with MIM films. In addition, simple and cost-effective self-assembly techniques are used in this work, suggesting an effectively reduced fabrication cost and the prospect of large-scale applications. Additionally, core–shell nanostructures based on carbon materials and metals can also provide efficient absorption in the microwave region.195,196 When carbon nanoparticles are coated with metallic shells, there will be an enhancement of interfacial polarization thanks to the substantial heterogeneous carbon–metal interfaces; moreover, an improvement in impedance matching can also be realized.196 Based on similar mechanisms, carbon-encapsulated metallic nanostructures have been validated in terms of their great potential for being utilized to fabricate microwave absorbers.197 Although engineered metasurfaces can act as high-efficiency microwave absorbers,197 nanoparticle-based systems should also be considered as significant candidates for microwave absorption.
5.2. Planar multilayer structures
Another strategy to obtain near-unity absorption is the planar film stack.25,80,95,173,176 Planar structures based on stacked films possess advantages over precisely patterned nanostructures. First, planar structures can notably simplify the fabrication process and lower the fabrication cost. Second, the absorption performance of patterned metasurface based absorbers heavily depends on the precise configurations and morphologies. Especially for narrowband PAs, the spectral response is highly sensitive to the precise morphologies of the metasurfaces and thus may be influenced by the fabrication error of structural parameters. In consequence, perfect EMW absorbers based on planar film stacks have attracted mass attention because of the simple fabrication process, low cost, and the potential for large-scale industrial applications. As for the absorption mechanism, planar structures are different from traditional metamaterial absorbers. Owing to the absence of periodic resonators, the perfect absorption in a planar design mainly relies on the interference effect when the light is propagating inside the structure and the intrinsic optical losses of the constituent materials.
Based on the optimized configuration and selective materials, MIM structures without patterned surfaces have been validated in terms of near-ideal absorption and some other excellent properties. Li et al. experimentally proposed a narrowband absorber using a planar Ag/SiO2/Ag architecture.176 Without patterned surfaces, there are still strong light–matter interactions in this structure and the absorbance is up to 97%. The bottom Ag layer functions as a highly reflective mirror and this MIM structure can be regarded as a FP-type resonant cavity. The absorption mechanism of this scheme, unlike those of MIM structures with periodic resonators, is related to interference rather than localized surface plasmon resonance. A similar resonant cavity was also used in other schemes.81,198 For instance, Zhao et al. proposed an ultra-narrowband PA based on a tri-layer Ag/Al2O3/Ag stack, as shown in Fig. 8a. The absorption can be tuned via changing the thickness of the sandwiched Al2O3 spacer.198
 Fig. 8  (a) The multilayer planar perfect light absorber and absorption, reflection, and transmission spectra. Reproduced with permission from ref. 198 Copyright 2014, AIP Publishing LLC. (b) 3D schematic of a multilayer planar broadband high-efficient light absorbing structure and the absorptivity spectra. Reproduced with permission from ref. 25 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
In addition, multilayer planar structures have also been employed in perfect EMW absorbers. Yang et al. experimentally realized omnidirectional absorption utilizing a multilayer film stack (Fig. 8b).25 The average absorbance is approximately 98% covering nearly the whole solar radiation spectrum range (400–2000 nm). Cr is selected as the metallic mirror because of its high extinction coefficient. It is worth noting that the TiO2 layer and MgF2 layer are lossless in the visible and NIR ranges and they cannot absorb the incident EMW; however, they help to constitute a graded index profile and function as anti-reflection coatings. The lower Si, Ge and Cr films work as absorptive layers and make indispensable contributions to the broadband absorption. As the wavelength varies from the visible to the NIR region, the extinction coefficients of these absorptive materials separately change and the alteration of the dominant absorptive layers can be concluded as: Ge/Si layers → Ge layer → Cr/Ge layers → Cr layer. Although the extinction coefficient of every material changes with the wavelength, the total extinction coefficient of the three absorptive materials remains high, thus generating high absorbance. The graded index profile (i.e., the compacted Ge/Si/TiO2/MgF2 layers) can efficiently reduce reflection over a broad wavelength range. A similar strategy is also used in another study.199 A PA comprised of six antireflective layers and a heavily-doped Si absorptive layer can provide high absorbance at a broad frequency range from 0.1 to 20 THz.
As far as we know, we have reviewed lithography-free perfect EMW absorbers for the first time. Tremendous progress has been made in the field of PAs and numerous schemes with superb properties have been implemented. But to make PAs more suitable for mass industrial applications, more projects based on simplified, cost-effective, and high-yield fabrication methods need to be experimentally demonstrated.
6. Applications
In the past decade, perfect EMW absorbers have demonstrated multiple valuable properties, such as ultra-high absorbance, ultra-broad/ultra-narrow bandwidth, tunable absorption, polarization-independence, insensitivity to the incident angle, and even high efficiency of solar-thermal conversion. Thanks to these superb properties, PAs can be applied in practical devices in various fields, for example, solar energy harvesting, photodetection, sensing, and structural color. In the following subsections, we will discuss some emerging applications of perfect EMW absorption.
6.1. Solar energy harvesting
Solar energy, a promising renewable energy source which can be freely obtained everywhere on the earth, is a prominent alternative solution to the latent energy crisis. In recent years, solar energy harvesting techniques have aroused tremendous research interest.200 To harvest solar energy, broadband and high-efficiency absorption are of great significance and a mass of PAs working in the solar radiation spectrum have been theoretically designed and experimentally investigated.
High-loss and refractory metals are good candidates for solar energy harvesting owing to their intrinsic broadband absorption and thermal stability.21,47 For example, Ti and W meta-atoms have been used to fabricate high-performance solar energy harvesting devices.21,41,47 Numerous investigations have been done, but there are still challenges that may hamper the large-scale applications of these PAs. For instance, the structures are predominantly fabricated through FIB, EBL or other top-down solutions,19,201–203 indicating inherent limitations of them in terms of the manufacture throughput, fabrication cost, and spatial resolution. Thus, to achieve widespread applications of PAs, a lot of studies have been done to fabricate perfect solar energy absorbers via lithography-free methods.186,204
Plenty of fresh water is needed in human daily life but the available fresh water resource is not so sufficient on the earth. Therefore, the fresh water resource crisis has been one of the most serious challenges for the sustainable development of humanity. Fortunately, seawater desalination provides a promising solution to this crisis. In the field of perfect EMW absorption, a tremendous amount of research has gone into solar-driven evaporation. To obtain a high-performance device for solar-driven evaporation and seawater desalination, in addition to the efficient harvesting of solar energy, high-efficiency thermal conversion of solar energy is also required. Based on the two properties, many innovative schemes have been experimentally proposed.
Copper sulfide (CuS), as a kind of plasmonic semiconductor, has been studied in solar-driven vapor generation.205 For instance, utilizing a simple one-pot hydrothermal technique, a solar energy absorber based on hierarchical CuS and a microporous poly membrane was prepared by Tao and co-workers.205 As depicted in Fig. 9a, the poly membrane (indicated by PVDFM) showed remarkable absorption of solar radiation but low evaporation efficiency; the CuS-based structures are able to raise the water evaporation efficiency to a much higher level.
 Fig. 9  (a) The water evaporation efficiencies of the CuS-based solar energy absorber. Adapted with permission from ref. 205 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (b) The photo-thermal evaporation based on plasmonic effects of nanoparticles. Adapted with permission from ref. 207 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (c and d) The schematic of a novel solar steam generating device based on a perfect plasmonic EMW absorber and the corresponding simulated temperature distribution with a maximum temperature up to 83 °C. Adapted with permission from ref. 208 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (e and f) The metallic-nanoparticle-decorated wood as a plasmonic solar energy harvesting device and its boosted light absorptivity curve. Adapted with permission from ref. 184 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. 
Plasmonic effects generated via nanoparticles can significantly boost the localized heating in light absorptive structures and provide great assistance for solar steam generation.206 The schematic of photo-thermal effects supported by Au nanoparticles can be seen in Fig. 9b.207 Liu et al. demonstrated a highly efficient solar thermal evaporation system using an assembled Au nanoparticle thin film and airlaid paper (Fig. 9c).208 In this scheme, they take full advantage of the localized surface plasmon resonance generated by the Au nanoparticles. The high evaporation efficiency has notable stability in that it can be maintained even when this system is recycled numerous times. The architecture of this device is simple, while the performance is pretty good. Moreover, the utilized self-assembly method can effectively create advantageous conditions for mass preparation. Superior to conventional evaporation methods, this device generates localized heat at the surface of the solution and the bulk liquid under the surface simultaneously remains at a low temperature during the evaporation process. As depicted in Fig. 9d, according to the simulations, the maximum temperature can be raised to 83 °C while the other parts of the solution are still cool after 15 min solar illumination.
Recently, Zhou et al. reported a significant advance in solar-driven steam generation based on solar energy harvesting.186 They experimentally prepared a solar absorber with high efficiency (∼99%) covering an ultra-broad wavelength range from 400 nm to 4 μm. This system is fabricated by placing Au nanoparticles onto a nanoporous Al2O3 template. With high absorption efficiency, this PA is found to be capable of collecting solar power, transforming solar radiation into heat, and generating solar steam with an efficiency exceeding 90%. Another scheme quickly followed in this kind of configuration. The researchers replaced the Au nanoparticles with Al nanoparticles, which were also closely packed in the nanoporous anodic Al2O3 membrane.204 The cost of fabrication was lowered while the high absorption efficiency and the broad solar spectrum absorption were still maintained. Based on this nanoparticle-based absorber, a device model for solar desalination has been experimentally demonstrated with solar steam efficiency up to 91% under 6 sun illumination.204 Interestingly, another group found that a natural mesoporous wood block can be substituted for the nanoporous Al2O3 template.184 As shown in Fig. 9e, they experimentally demonstrated an innovative perfect EMW absorber using metallic particle-decorated wood. By assembling the metallic nanoparticles into a wood block with elongated micro-channels, novel plasmonic wood with notably enhanced absorbance of light was prepared (Fig. 9f). This structure exhibited superb cycling stability and self-cleaning ability. In addition, the solar energy conversion efficiency is up to 85%, thereby making this plasmonic wood absorber an excellent candidate for large-scale solar-thermal applications. Additionally, carbon-based materials have also been utilized to fabricate efficient photothermal devices.209–211 Porous carbon materials can serve as efficient absorbers for solar energy harvesting and a lot of related work has been performed.212–215 Ito et al. designed a PA using porous graphene and achieved superior solar energy collection; moreover, they realized a very high energy conversion efficiency.212 Hu and co-workers proposed and experimentally demonstrated a high-efficiency solar absorber utilizing porous graphene oxide based aerogels.213 This proposed absorber can realize broadband absorption of solar radiation and it enables an ultra-high solar steam generation efficiency which is nearly 83% even under one-sun illumination. Because of the scalable fabrication process and materials, solar-thermal devices based on porous carbon materials have great potential for mass production and practical application. By exploiting carbon/metal hybrid materials, high-efficiency solar energy harvesting and photo-thermal conversion can also be achieved.216 Wang et al. experimentally proposed a novel composite nanofluid by combining Au nanoparticles and nitrogen-doped graphitic carbon together, and this nanofluid exhibited superb photo-thermal performance and capability of collecting solar energy.216
In summary, to obtain perfect EMW absorbers for solar energy harvesting, the following factors should be taken into consideration. First, efficient solar energy absorption and high energy transformation efficiency are of great significance. Without loss of generality, absorption with insensitivity to the incident angle and polarization state is helpful for high performance solar energy harvesting. Researchers have achieved omnidirectional broadband absorption to promote the absorption efficiency of PAs.175 Second, with the precondition of high efficiency, it is better to utilize inexpensive materials to lower the fabrication expense. It is worth noting that the structures of perfect EMW absorbers should have excellent thermal stability to avoid the structural damage caused by high temperature. Third, simplified and low-cost manufacturing processes can make PAs more suitable for widespread applications. Additionally, some other valuable properties, such as high structural flexibility and selective absorption, can doubtless pave a broader way to extensive applications for PAs.
6.2. Photoelectric devices and optical switches
The non-radiative decay of surface plasmons was once regarded as an adverse process that restricts the performance of plasmon-based devices. Nonetheless, a lot of studies found that the hot electrons generated via the non-radiative decay process can be used in multiple applications including photodetection,206,217 photo-catalysis,218,219 and even photovoltaics.220 Unfortunately, few hot electron generating devices with very high quantum efficiency have been demonstrated due to the limitations of poor electron injection and low optical absorption. Consequently, in the field of perfect EMW absorbers, intensive efforts have been devoted to hot electron generation based on plasmonic nanostructures.221–225
In recent years, hot-electron photodetectors have aroused a lot of interest as they are able to achieve below-bandgap photodetection with the absence of classic semiconductor junctions. Hot electrons based on non-radiative decay of surface plasmons in nanostructures have been validated in terms of their great potential for photodetection and photovoltaics, suggesting that metamaterial plasmonic absorbers can be used in photoelectric applications.226–228 Plasmonic nanostructures are able to harvest photons beyond the traditional band-to-band photovoltaic conversion of semiconductors and consequently have stimulated intensive research activities in plasmonic perfect EMW absorber based hot electron generation.229
For photodetectors, a Schottky barrier can be formed by realizing intimate contact between a metallic surface and a semiconductor layer.230 Based on a metamaterial perfect EMW absorber, a hot electron photodetector was investigated and experimentally demonstrated by Li and co-workers.220 In this scheme, ultrathin cube-shaped plasmonic nanostructures were used for high absorbance of EMWs (Fig. 10a), which strongly boosted the hot electron transfer and therefore produced excellent photoelectric responsivity. The photocurrent in this metamaterial photodetector can be interpreted by considering the hot electron transfer over the Schottky barrier and the process can be described with a three-step model, as shown in Fig. 10b. First, the plasmons decay into hot electrons in a non-radiative way; second, before thermalization, the hot electrons transfer to the metal–semiconductor interface; and third, the hot electrons are eventually injected into the conduction band of the n-type Si material via internal photoemission. Additionally, this proposed Si-based metamaterial detector is able to fulfil an omnidirectional and polarization-insensitive photoelectric response.
 Fig. 10  (a and b) Schematic diagram of a perfect EMW absorber based photodetector. (b) The transfer process of hot electrons over the Schottky barrier generated by the metal–semiconductor interface. (a and b) Adapted with permission from ref. 220 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (c) A plasmonic hot electron photodetector based on Au-coated disordered Si nanoholes. (d) Measured responsivities of the hot electron harvesting devices. (c and d) Adapted with permission from ref. 229 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic diagram of the broadband light absorber for high-efficiency hot electron harvesting. Adapted with permission from ref. 226 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
Wen et al. investigated and experimentally constructed a nanocomposite photoelectric device.229 This system, based on disordered Au-film coated Si nanoholes (Fig. 10c), can generate hot electrons efficiently. Spectral- and time-resolved investigations demonstrated that the proposed device had the ability to track fast-varying NIR signals through the hot electron emitting process with a photo-responsivity ranging from 1.5 to 13 mA W−1 (Fig. 10d). In addition, as shown in Fig. 10d, to optimize the architecture, the responsivities of the devices have also been measured and investigated via changing the thickness of the Au coating. This metasurface can effectively boost the EMW absorption through multiple-scattering and near-field localization. The near-unity light absorption over a broad wavelength range, the superior capability of photon-to-hot electron conversion, and the cost-effective but high-throughput fabrication provided a new way to NIR photodetectors and photo-catalysis. Apart from Si, TiO2 has also been used in plasmonic PA based hot electron generating devices. For instance, a TiO2-based broadband absorber, which can harvest hot electrons over the total visible range, was experimentally constructed, as shown in Fig. 10e.226
To simplify the production process and lower the cost, photodetectors based on planar film stacks or nanoparticles have been investigated and reported.231,232 Li and co-workers theoretically investigated and experimentally prepared a plasmonic absorber with enhanced hot electron generation and controllable transfer of hot electrons from a metal to a semiconductor.233 This device is based on Au@Cu2O core–shell nanoparticles with different shell thicknesses and the fabrication technologies are simple, suggesting an excellent platform for PA-based photodetection.
Optical switches have paved a new way for switching because of their ultra-fast photoelectric response. In recent years, many studies have demonstrated that PAs can also function as ultrafast optical switches.234 Perfectly absorptive nanostructures have exhibited promising potential for photoelectric switches. In previous work, we theoretically designed and investigated a graphene nanostructure with ultra-narrowband absorption, high modulation depth, and modulation intensity, and provided a meaningful strategy for the design of precise-adjusting switches.83 In addition, GST, as a standard phase-change material, has also been introduced in light absorptive structures and showed potential for applications such as switches and modulators.235 Polarized reflectivity paves another path to ultra-fast optical switching. Based on a tunable plasmonic EMW absorber, a polarization optical switch with ultra-high response speed can be obtained.234
6.3. Sensing
As is widely known, the leakage of flammable and explosive gas may lead to serious accidents, thereby making it of great significance to develop such gas sensors. For instance, hydrogen sensors are indispensable to some industries. Moreover, hydrogen sensing plays an important role in a lot of applications such as biochemistry, food safety, medicine, and environmental monitoring. The mechanical or optical properties of many materials may be changed upon hydrogen exposure and these materials can thus be used in sensing devices. Several metals, such as palladium (Pd), yttrium (Y), and magnesium (Mg), have been verified as good candidates for hydrogen sensors.45,236–238
Pd-Based PAs have been widely investigated in hydrogen sensing schemes. With the presence of hydrogen, Pd undergoes a phase transition from Pd to Pd hydride and its optical properties demonstrate notable modification, thus changing the spectral response.238 Bagheri and co-workers designed and fabricated a Pd resonator based perfect EMW absorber via a cost-effective laser interference lithography process, and demonstrated high sensitivity to hydrogen (Fig. 11a).45 Under exposure to hydrogen with a concentration of 5%, the reflection spectra exhibit a distinct increase of the reflection minimum, as demonstrated in Fig. 11b. A coherent Pd film based planar MIM architecture can be used in hydrogen sensing as well.239 The perfect EMW absorption is based on the intrinsic optical loss of Pd and destructive interference generated in the MIM FP-type cavity. The resonance is highly sensitive to the optical properties of the top Pd material, which exhibits significant changes when exposed to hydrogen. To enable the large-area production of this sensing device, lithography-free methods are utilized in the fabrication.
 Fig. 11  (a) The schematic of a sensor based on perfect light absorption. (b) The reflectivity of the device undergoes a significant increase when it is exposed to 5 vol% hydrogen (in nitrogen carrier gas). (a and b) Adapted with permission from ref. 45 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (c) Graphical demonstration of the absorption spectra in different surroundings. Reproduced with permission from ref. 35 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (d) Schematic of the refractive index sensing device based on a hybrid plasmonic-photonic PA. (e) The FOM* and S (sensitivity) of the proposed refractive index sensor. (d and e) Adapted with permission from ref. 246 Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) The FOM responses of the resonances for the structure with a film coated on the slit walls and at the top surface, separately. Adapted with permission from ref. 247 Copyright 2015, Elsevier B.V. 
High-resolution spectra can also be utilized to construct gas sensing devices. Kang et al. experimentally fabricated a PA which shows high-resolution spectra and possesses great potential for gas sensing applications. Discrepancies in the spectral response were observed under different gas detection (see Fig. 11c).35
Narrowband absorption of EMWs is usually desired in optical sensors since the spectral quality factor (Q-factor) is a crucial parameter for sensing devices.240 The Q-factor can be described as Q = λ/λFWHM, where λ is the resonance wavelength, and λFWHM is the spectral bandwidth of the full width at half-maximum.83 Besides, the quantitative sensitivity S and figure of merit (FOM) are also significant parameters for sensing devices.37,240–242S can be written as S = dλ/dn, and FOM can be given by FOM = S/λFWHM.37,240,241,243 In addition to hydrogen sensing, refractive index sensing has also been studied in the field of perfect EMW absorption.110,244 Hu and co-workers fabricated a PA-based THz sensor with high sensitivity to the surrounding refractive index; the calculated quantitative sensitivity S is up to 3.5 THz per refractive index unit (RIU).245 Based on a hybrid plasmonic-photonic absorptive structure, we experimentally designed a refractive index sensor in our previous work; the architecture is shown in Fig. 11d.246 The maximum figure of merit (FOM*) and S are both at very high levels (see Fig. 11e). It should be noted that the FOM* is given by FOM* = dI(λ)/dn(λ)/I(λ), where dI(λ) is the intensity variation caused by the change of refractive index dn, and I(λ) denotes the intensity in air. The FOM* is utilized to evaluate the spectral intensity change and the signal-to-noise ratio for matching to real requirements during optoelectronic measurements. In this scheme, cost-effective fabrication processes including simple deposition and some self-assembly methods were used. Besides, we have proposed a multispectral spatial sensing MIM structure with high sensitivity and FOM. When a biomolecular film with a thickness of 3 nm is attached to the top and the slit walls of the structure separately, the FOM exhibits remarkably different spectral responses (Fig. 11f).247 Moreover, this device also shows frequency-related sensing behaviors.247
In summary, PA-based sensing, as an emerging application, has been widely investigated. Many materials that allow interactions with hydrogen have been introduced in PA-based hydrogen sensing devices. Additionally, many narrowband perfect EMW absorbers with high quantitative sensitivity and Q-factor have shown notable properties in refractive index sensing. Nonetheless, more experimental investigations and fabrications are still needed in the area of PA-based sensing.
6.4. Structural colors
Colors play momentous roles in people's daily life, especially in terms of information transfer. There are several often-used conventional strategies to produce colors, such as emitting light at specific wavelengths and the utilization of dye pigments. Structural colors, a new type of color generating method, have been investigated in recent years.187 Such colors can be generated via interactions between light and artificially engineered structures such as diffraction,248–251 interference,33,252–254 and plasmonic effects.255–261 Compared to dyestuffs, structural color features notable durability and environment friendliness. Consequently, it has stimulated a mass of research interest and has exhibited big potentiality for applications in the fields of printing,33,262 display devices,176 and color filters.176 Herein, we introduce some novel designs for structural color generation based on perfect light absorption.
The fundamental concept of light absorption based structural color generation is to achieve the intense absorption of light at particular wavelengths. To obtain such structural colors, a widely used mechanism is optical coatings which generate a FP resonance. Generally, the FP-type resonance is based on destructive and constructive interference caused by the phase shifts generated when waves are propagating in the lossless dielectric layer of FP cavities. Relying on the FP resonance, some color filters have been experimentally fabricated and proposed. For instance, a visible-frequency color filter based on a planar MIM structure was experimentally prepared by Li et al. (Fig. 12a).176 By adjusting the thicknesses of the metallic film and the dielectric layer, the performances of this nanostructure such as the bandwidth, absorption, and transmission can be significantly manipulated. When the top Ag film thickness is set to be 30 nm and the bottom Ag layer thickness is set to be 100 nm, ultra-sharp absorption peaks can be obtained. Therefore, structural colors can be generated through the selective narrowband absorption and the corresponding anti-reflection. In this case, the nanostructure acts as a reflective color filter. Moreover, the resonant wavelength can be flexibly tuned by varying the dielectric thickness (Fig. 12b). Furthermore, Fig. 12c depicts the reflectance as a function of the dielectric thickness and wavelength. A leaking-mode cavity can be obtained when the top Ag layer thickness and the bottom Ag film thickness are both set to 30 nm. In this case, this nanostructure can act as a transmission-mode color filter with high efficiency and decent color purity (Fig. 12d).
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic of the color filter composed of planar films. (b) The simulated (solid curve) and measured (dotted line) absorption spectra. (c) Plot of reflectance as a function of wavelength and thickness of the dielectric layer. (d) The simulated (solid curve) and measured (dotted line) transmittance. (a–d) Adapted with permission from ref. 176 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (e) 3D schematic of the asymmetric FP resonant cavities with varying geometric parameters to achieve full-color printing. (f) The full palette covering a wide range of colors generated with the asymmetric FP resonators. Scale bar, 50 μm. (e and f) Adapted with permission from ref. 33 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. 
Similar resonant cavities have been widely utilized in PA-based devices to obtain high-quantity structural colors.33,262 For instance, full-color printing was achieved by Yang and co-workers via the interference in MIM-type asymmetric FP resonant cavities.33 In this scheme they designed and fabricated asymmetric FP cavities composed of a top ultra-thin Ni film, dielectric oxide spacer, and bottom Al reflector, as shown in Fig. 12e. These FP cavities enable high reflectivity of light at a specific wavelength and near-unity absorption of light at other wavelengths. By tuning the thicknesses and the filling density of the FP cavities, full colors with varying saturation and brightness can be generated (see Fig. 12f).33 Different from the above-mentioned FP cavities, a group designed a novel optical coating, utilizing a dielectric material with high loss in the visible region.252 In their work, a Au surface coated by a highly absorptive Ge thin film was exploited for structural coloring.
Extensive efforts have also been made to develop structural colors based on the surface plasmonic effect in nanostructures. Lee and co-workers experimentally prepared a structural color filter, which is based on the near-ideal plasmonic absorption occurring in the engineered nanostructure.34 This structure exhibits high absorbance of light at the resonant wavelength, thereby reflecting the light in the complementary spectrum. This structural color generating device has a strong tolerance of the incident angle, which brings it additional potential for practical applications. Besides the aforementioned strategies, PAs relying on some other materials and configurations such as porous photonic crystals,263 one-dimensional photonic crystals,264 and nanoparticles have also been validated in structural color generation.
From the perspective of production, the generation of structural colors requires more expensive and sophisticated production processes compared with the traditional dyeing strategies. However, perfect light absorber based structural colors are distinguished from conventional dyestuff-based colors by remarkable tunability, durability, and chemical resistance, thereby holding tremendous potential for applications such as high-resolution printing,265,266 display devices,34 color filters,176,258 and the decoration and anti-forgery labels of consumer products.257
7. Conclusions and future outlook
In the past decades, multiple kinds of metamaterial or nanomaterial based perfect EMW absorbers have been theoretically investigated and experimentally fabricated thanks to the expanding research and the rapid development of nanofabrication technologies. This review summarizes the developments of structures and materials in the field of perfect EMW absorption and reports the emerging applications, highlights some facile and innovative strategies and configurations, and provides guidance on how to meet the requirements of large-scale production and applications. To recapitulate, the research on perfect EMW absorbers has made remarkable progress in the recent decade. In the field of PA research, multiple kinds of new materials and novel configurations have been investigated and utilized. The efficiency of light absorption has risen to a very high level and diverse superb performances have also been achieved.
In terms of design, to obtain a perfect light absorber promising for mass production and practical application, several factors need to be taken into consideration. First, high performances, such as ultra-high EMW absorbance, high-efficiency hot electron generation, and efficient photo-thermal conversion, are of great significance for practical applications. In certain applications such as energy harvesting, ultra-broadband absorption, polarization-independence, and angle-insensitivity can notably boost the efficiency of devices. Second, simplified manufacturing processes are of great significance. Time-consuming and complicated fabrication methods may seriously hamper the high output of PAs and restrict the industrial application. Third, low-cost materials and cost-efficient fabrication methods, are, though not so easy to realize, exactly required in the practical implementation of PAs. Doubtlessly, Au and Ag have tremendous potential for achieving efficient light absorption, but the utilization of such expensive metals may lead to high manufacturing cost. Therefore, more research needs to be conducted to realize perfect absorption of light with inexpensive materials. Fourth, environmental-friendly materials and fabrication process are required. For instance, Cr materials provide notable performance in broadband light absorption, but as a heavy metal, it may harm the human body and the environment.
As for fabrication, there are some challenges which still remain to be tackled, such as time-consuming fabrication processes, low output, and high fabrication cost. Most fabrication processes of the reported PAs require accurate control of dimensions at the nanoscale. In consequence, multistep and high-cost lithographic methods such as FIB and EBL are frequently used. The FIB and EBL techniques have made great progress in recent years and these advanced lithographic methods significantly enable the fabrication of complicated structures with nanoscale dimensions. However, the intrinsic high cost and low output restrict large-scale production and application. Therefore, to address such a challenge, some novel structures based on lithography-free fabrication processes have been experimentally demonstrated. In general, there are two significant lithography-free strategies, one is constructing nanoparticle based structures and the other is exploiting compacted planar films. These two lithography-free strategies take full advantage of self-assembly methods and deposition methods, which can efficiently simplify the fabrication and decrease the cost. In addition, the low-cost template stripping method can also be used to construct metasurfaces and the geometry parameters of nanostructures can be well manipulated simultaneously. However, lithography-free methods have their drawbacks such as the relatively low accuracy and the fact that they can only enable the realization of nanostructures with simple shapes. Nonetheless, lithography-free strategies should be considered as a significant supplement to advanced lithographic approaches in the field of PAs. To summarize, more efforts are needed to develop configurations that can provide a combination of superior performances and high output.
For perfect light absorbers, there are several development directions. To date, numerous schemes for PA-based devices and applications have been investigated and reported. New energy resources including solar energy have attracted considerable attention over the years. Broadband PAs have exhibited great potential for solar energy harvesting. Moreover, the lack of fresh water resources is really an ever-increasing challenge for humans, while perfect EMW absorbers have been demonstrated as a feasible way to achieve seawater desalination via solar-driven evaporation. Therefore, solar-driven evaporation and seawater desalination may be one of the major development orientations of PAs. On the other hand, the non-radiative decay of surface plasmons can be used to construct high-performance photoelectric devices and paves the way to further applications of metamaterial PAs. PA-based photodetection and hot electron generation can produce ultra-high signal-to-noise ratio and notable efficiency of the photoelectric effects relying on the near-unity absorption of energy and the strongly-enhanced local field caused by the plasmonic resonances. Consequently, photoelectric devices based on metamaterial PAs have stimulated intensive research as an emerging field. In addition to solar energy harvesting and photoelectric devices, sensing and structural colors are also significant and promising development directions of PAs.
To summarize, in terms of fabrication techniques and performances, there are still some challenges for perfect EMW absorbers. Nevertheless, since tremendous progress has been made in this field and the research is still rapidly expanding, it is reasonable for us to believe that metamaterial and nanomaterial EMW PAs possess a promising future.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) (11804134, 11664015, 51761015, 11564017 and 11974188), and Natural Science Foundation of Jiangxi Province (2018ACB21005, 20182BCB22002, 20181BAB201015).
References
B. Wang, T. Koschny and C. M. Soukoulis, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 80, 33108 CrossRef .
Z. H. Jiang, S. Yun, F. Toor, D. H. Werner and T. S. Mayer, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4641–4647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cui, J. Xu, K. H. Fung, Y. Jin, A. Kumar, S. He and N. X. Fang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 253101 CrossRef .
M. K. Hedayati, M. Javaherirahim, B. Mozooni, R. Abdelaziz, A. Tavassolizadeh, V. S. K. Chakravadhanula, V. Zaporojtchenko, T. Strunkus, F. Faupel and M. Elbahri, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5410–5414 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Fang, Y.-R. Zhen, L. Fan, X. Zhu and P. Nordlander, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 85, 245401 CrossRef .
N. I. Landy, C. M. Bingham, T. Tyler, N. Jokerst, D. R. Smith and W. J. Padilla, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 79, 125104 CrossRef .
J. Zhu, S. Yan, N. Feng, L. Ye, J.-Y. Ou and Q. H. Liu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2018, 112, 153106 CrossRef .
K. Chen, R. Adato and H. Altug, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 7998–8006 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhao, H. Liu, Z. He and S. Dong, Opt. Express, 2018, 26, 12838–12851 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ishikawa and T. Tanaka, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 12570 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Chirumamilla, A. Chirumamilla, Y. Yang, A. S. Roberts, P. K. Kristensen, K. Chaudhuri, A. Boltasseva, D. S. Sutherland, S. I. Bozhevolnyi and K. Pedersen, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2017, 5, 1700552 CrossRef .
I. Kim, S. So, A. S. Rana, M. Q. Mehmood and J. Rho, Nanophotonics, 2018, 7, 1827–1833 CAS .
Z. Yong, S. Zhang, C. Gong and S. He, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 24063 CrossRef CAS .
A. E. Cetin, S. Korkmaz, H. Durmaz, E. Aslan, S. Kaya, R. Paiella and M. Turkmen, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2016, 4, 1274–1280 CrossRef CAS .
T. G. Mayerhöfer, R. Knipper, U. Hübner, D. Cialla-May, K. Weber, H.-G. Meyer and J. Popp, ACS Photonics, 2015, 2, 1567–1575 CrossRef .
S. Luo, J. Zhao, D. Zuo and X. Wang, Opt. Express, 2016, 24, 9288–9294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wu, R. Li, Y. Liu, Z. Yu, L. Yu, L. Chen, C. Liu, R. Ma and H. Ye, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2017, 12, 427 CrossRef .
J. Kim, K. Han and J. W. Hahn, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 6740 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Walter, A. Tittl, A. Berrier, F. Sterl, T. Weiss and H. Giessen, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2015, 3, 398–403 CrossRef CAS .
A. Tittl, A.-K. U. Michel, M. Schäferling, X. Yin, B. Gholipour, L. Cui, M. Wuttig, T. Taubner, F. Neubrech and H. Giessen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4597–4603 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Liu, X. Liu, J. Chen, Y. Li, L. Shi, G. Fu and Z. Liu, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2019, 190, 20–29 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cui, K. H. Fung, J. Xu, H. Ma, Y. Jin, S. He and N. X. Fang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1443–1447 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Haran and L. Chuntonov, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 5539–5580 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, E. Palacios, S. Butun, H. Kocer and K. Aydin, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 15137 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yang, C. Ji, W. Shen, K.-T. Lee, Y. Zhang, X. Liu and L. J. Guo, ACS Photonics, 2016, 3, 590–596 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chen and Y. He, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 188, 156–163 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, G. Liu, Z. Huang, X. Liu and G. Fu, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 179, 346–352 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Smith, W. J. Padilla, D. C. Vier, S. C. Nemat-Nasser and S. Schultz, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2000, 84, 4184–4187 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tao, N. I. Landy, C. M. Bingham, X. Zhang, R. D. Averitt and W. J. Padilla, Opt. Express, 2008, 16, 7181–7188 CrossRef .
X. Xiong, S.-C. Jiang, Y.-H. Hu, R.-W. Peng and M. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3994–4000 CrossRef CAS .
N. I. Landy, S. Sajuyigbe, J. J. Mock, D. R. Smith and W. J. Padilla, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 100, 207402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Duan, J. Schalch, X. Zhao, J. Zhang, R. D. Averitt and X. Zhang, Phys. Rev. B, 2018, 97, 035128 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, Y. Chen, Y. Zhou, Y. Wang, P. Dai, X. Zhu and H. Duan, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2017, 5, 1700029 CrossRef .
K. T. Lee, S. Seo and L. J. Guo, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2015, 3, 347–352 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kang, Z. Qian, V. Rajaram, S. D. Calisgan, A. Alù and M. Rinaldi, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7, 1801236 CrossRef .
A. Lochbaum, Y. Fedoryshyn, A. Dorodnyy, U. Koch, C. Hafner and J. Leuthold, ACS Photonics, 2017, 4, 1371–1380 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, S. Butun and K. Aydin, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 8242–8248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ng, L. Wesemann, E. Panchenko, J. Song, T. J. Davis, A. Roberts and D. E. Gómez, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7, 1801660 CrossRef .
K. Aydin, V. E. Ferry, R. M. Briggs and H. A. Atwater, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 517 CrossRef .
H. Wang, V. P. Sivan, A. Mitchell, G. Rosengarten, P. Phelan and L. Wang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2015, 137, 235–242 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ding, J. Dai, Y. Chen, J. Zhu, Y. Jin and S. I. Bozhevolnyi, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 39445 CrossRef CAS .
N. Liu, M. Mesch, T. Weiss, M. Hentschel and H. Giessen, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2342–2348 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ghobadi, H. Hajian, M. Gokbayrak, S. A. Dereshgi, A. Toprak, B. Butun and E. Ozbay, Opt. Express, 2017, 25, 27624–27634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Lei, S. Li, H. Huang, K. Tao and P. Xu, Opt. Express, 2018, 26, 5686–5693 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bagheri, N. Strohfeldt, F. Sterl, A. Berrier, A. Tittl and H. Giessen, ACS Sens., 2016, 1, 1148–1154 CrossRef CAS .
T. Søndergaard, S. M. Novikov, T. Holmgaard, R. L. Eriksen, J. Beermann, Z. Han, K. Pedersen and S. I. Bozhevolnyi, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 969 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Li, D. Li, D. Zhou, C. Chi, S. Yang and B. Huang, Sol. RRL, 2018, 2, 1800057 CrossRef .
W. J. Padilla, M. T. Aronsson, C. Highstrete, M. Lee, A. J. Taylor and R. D. Averitt, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 75, 041102 CrossRef .
S. Ayas, G. Bakan and A. Dana, Opt. Express, 2015, 23, 11763–11770 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, X. Liu, S. Huang, P. Pan, J. Chen, G. Liu and G. Gu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 4962–4968 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. He, J. Jie, J. Yang, Y. Chen, Y. Han and S. Zhang, Opt. Express, 2019, 27, 15298–15308 CrossRef CAS .
K. Bhattarai, Z. Ku, S. Silva, J. Jeon, J. O. Kim, S. J. Lee, A. Urbas and J. Zhou, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2015, 3, 1779–1786 CrossRef CAS .
L. Meng, D. Zhao, Z. Ruan, Q. Li, Y. Yang and M. Qiu, Opt. Lett., 2014, 39, 1137–1140 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, Y. T. Chen, X. Chen, J. M. Hao, M. Yan and M. Qiu, Opt. Express, 2011, 19, 14726–14734 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, Y. T. Chen, M. Yan and M. Qiu, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 2550–2557 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wu, X. Zhao, J. Zhang, J. Schalch, G. Duan, K. Cremin, R. D. Averitt and X. Zhang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2017, 111, 051101 CrossRef .
R. Li, D. Wu, Y. Liu, L. Yu, Z. Yu and H. Ye, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2017, 12, 1 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Perrakis, O. Tsilipakos, G. Kenanakis, M. Kafesaki, C. M. Soukoulis and E. N. Economou, Opt. Express, 2019, 27, 6842–6850 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, G. Liu, G. Fu, X. Liu, Z. Huang and G. Gu, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2016, 49, 445104 CrossRef .
S. Aksu, M. Huang, A. Artar, A. A. Yanik, S. Selvarasah, M. R. Dokmeci and H. Altug, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4422–4430 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ng, L. W. Yap, A. Roberts, W. Cheng and D. E. Gómez, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1604080 CrossRef .
T. Jang, H. Youn, Y. J. Shin and L. J. Guo, ACS Photonics, 2014, 1, 279–284 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shan, L. Chen, C. Shi, Z. Cheng, X. Zang, B. Xu and Y. Zhu, Opt. Commun., 2015, 350, 63–70 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Singh, K. A. Korolev, M. N. Afsar and S. Sonkusale, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 264101 CrossRef .
X. Chen and W. Fan, Appl. Opt., 2015, 54, 2376–2382 CrossRef .
K. Ling, K. Kim and S. Lim, Opt. Express, 2015, 23, 21375–21383 CrossRef CAS .
R. Xu, J. Luo, J. Sha, J. Zhong, Z. Xu, Y. Tong and Y.-S. Lin, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2018, 113, 101907 CrossRef .
W. Wang, K. Wang, Z. Yang and J. Liu, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2017, 50, 135108 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, J. Duan, B. Zhang and W. Zhang, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 705, 262–268 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ji, Y. Wang, Y. Cui, Y. Lin, Y. Hao and D. Li, Mater. Today Energy, 2017, 5, 181–186 CrossRef .
W. Dong, T. Cao, K. Liu and R. E. Simpson, Nano Energy, 2018, 54, 272–279 CrossRef CAS .
W. B. Lu, J. W. Wang, J. Zhang, Z. G. Liu, H. Chen, W. J. Song and Z. H. Jiang, Carbon, 2019, 152, 70–76 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, Q. Cheng, J. Yang, J. Zhao and T. J. Cui, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2017, 110, 143511 CrossRef .
H. Zhang, L. Feng, Y. Liang and T. Xu, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 437–443 RSC .
T. Yatsui, Opto-Electron. Adv., 2019, 2, 19002301 Search PubMed .
A. Nemati, Q. Wang, M. Hong and J. Teng, Opto-Electron. Adv., 2018, 1, 18000901 Search PubMed .
Y. G. Chen, T. S. Kao, B. Ng, X. Li, X. G. Luo, B. Luk’yanchuk, S. A. Maier and M. Hong, Opt. Express, 2013, 21, 13691–13698 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Tian and Z.-Y. Li, Photonics Res., 2016, 4, 146–152 CrossRef CAS .
N. Mou, X. Liu, T. Wei, H. Dong, Q. He, L. Zhou, Y. Zhang, L. Zhang and S. Sun, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 5374–5379 RSC .
K. V. Sreekanth, S. Han and R. Singh, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706696 CrossRef PubMed .
V. K. Mkhitaryan, D. S. Ghosh, M. Rudé, J. Canet-Ferrer, R. A. Maniyara, K. K. Gopalan and V. Pruneri, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2017, 5, 1600452 CrossRef .
Y. Chen, X. Li, X. Luo, S. A. Maier and M. Hong, Photonics Res., 2015, 3, 54–57 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, G. Liu, P. Tang, G. Fu, G. Du, Q. Chen and Z. Liu, Carbon, 2018, 140, 362–367 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kim, M. S. Jang, V. W. Brar, K. W. Mauser, L. Kim and H. A. Atwater, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 971–979 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, W. He, F. Yang, J. Ran, B. Gao and W. L. Zhang, Opt. Express, 2018, 26, 25558–25566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, R. Zhong, J. Huang, Y. Lv, C. Han and S. Liu, Opt. Express, 2019, 27, 7393–7404 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jin, T. Zhang, Z. Huang, J. Zhao, Y. Zhao, Z. Wang, L. Lai, J. Wang, K. Jiang, S. Fan and Q. Li, Carbon, 2020, 161, 510–516 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, W. Lu, J. Suhr, H. Chen, J. Q. Xiao and T. W. Chou, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 2349 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Mizuno, J. Ishii, H. Kishida, Y. Hayamizu, S. Yasuda, D. N. Futaba, M. Yumura and K. Hata, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106, 6044–6047 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. A. Tomlin, A. E. Curtin, M. White and J. H. Lehman, Carbon, 2014, 74, 329–332 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Kaul, J. B. Coles, M. Eastwood, R. O. Green and P. R. Bandaru, Small, 2013, 9, 1058–1065 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Ye, M. Chen and W. Cai, Sol. Energy, 2019, 184, 489–496 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huang, L. Liu, M. Pu, X. Li, X. Ma and X. Luo, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 8298–8303 RSC .
C.-C. Chang, W. J. M. Kort-Kamp, J. Nogan, T. S. Luk, A. K. Azad, A. J. Taylor, D. A. R. Dalvit, M. Sykora and H.-T. Chen, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 7665–7673 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, H. Alshehri, H. Su and L. Wang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 174, 445–452 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yan, P. Liu, C. Ma, Z. Lin and G. Yang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 8826–8838 RSC .
S. Wang, F. Chen, R. Ji, M. Hou, F. Yi, W. Zheng, T. Zhang and W. Lu, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7, 1801596 CrossRef .
J. Chen, S. Chen, P. Gu, Z. Yan, C. Tang, Z. Xu, B. Liu and Z. Liu, Carbon, 2020, 162, 187–194 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Jiang, K. Yin, C. Wang, J. You, H. Ouyang, R. Miao, C. Zhang, K. Wei, H. Li, H. Chen, R. Zhang, X. Zheng, Z. Xu, X. Cheng and H. Zhang, Photonics Res., 2020, 1, 78–90 CrossRef .
Z. Liu, H. Mu, S. Xiao, R. Wang, Z. Wang, W. Wang, Y. Wang, X. Zhu, K. Lu, H. Zhang, S.-T. Lee, Q. Bao and W. Ma, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3535–3542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, Z. Li, C. Chi, H. Shan, L. Zheng and Z. Fang, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1600430 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Du, M. Zhang, Z. Guo, J. Chen, X. Zhu, G. Hu, P. Peng, Z. Zheng and H. Zhang, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 42357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. T. Wang, Y. H. Xu, S. C. Dhanabalan, J. Sophia, C. J. Zhao, C. W. Xu, Y. J. Xiang, J. Q. Li and H. Zhang, IEEE Photonics J., 2016, 8, 1–10 Search PubMed .
J. Li, H. Luo, B. Zhai, R. Lu, Z. Guo, H. Zhang and Y. Liu, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 30361 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ge, Z. Zhu, Y. Xu, Y. Chen, S. Chen, Z. Liang, Y. Song, Y. Zou, H. Zeng, S. Xu, H. Zhang and D. Fan, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6, 1701166 CrossRef .
Z. Dai, X. Xiao, W. Wu, Y. Zhang, L. Liao, S. Guo, J. Ying, C. Shan, M. Sun and C. Jiang, Light: Sci. Appl., 2015, 4, e342 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, Q. Wu, F. Zhang, L. Chen, X. Jin, Y. Hu, Z. Zheng and H. Zhang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7, 1800224 CrossRef .
Y. Jiang, L. Miao, G. Jiang, Y. Chen, X. Qi, X. F. Jiang, H. Zhang and S. Wen, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 16372 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Q. Yang, M. Gao, M. Hong and G. W. Ho, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1802894 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Chen, L. Miao, X. Chen, Y. Chen, C. Zhao, S. Datta, Y. Li, Q. Bao, H. Zhang, Y. Liu, S. Wen and D. Fan, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2015, 3, 1769–1778 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fang, Y. Ge, C. Wang and H. Zhang, Laser Photonics Rev., 2020, 14, 1900098 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Jeong, U. J. Kim, H. Kim, G. H. Han, H. Lee, M. S. Kim, Y. Jin, T. H. Ly, S. Y. Lee, Y.-G. Roh, W.-J. Joo, S. W. Hwang, Y. Park and Y. H. Lee, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 8192–8198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, F. Zhang, X. Tang, X. Chen, Y. Chen, W. Huang, Z. Liang, L. Wu, Y. Ge, Y. Song, J. Liu, D. Zhang, J. Li and H. Zhang, Laser Photonics Rev., 2018, 12, 1800016 CrossRef .
J. Zheng, X. Tang, Z. Yang, Z. Liang, Y. Chen, K. Wang, Y. Song, Y. Zhang, J. Ji, Y. Liu, D. Fan and H. Zhang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2017, 5, 1700026 CrossRef .
S. Yu, X. Wu, Y. Wang, X. Guo and L. Tong, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606128 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Zhang, S. B. Lu, J. Zheng, J. Du, S. C. Wen, D. Y. Tang and K. P. Loh, Opt. Express, 2014, 22, 7249–7260 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wu, W. Huang, Y. Wang, J. Zhao, D. Ma, Y. Xiang, J. Li, J. S. Ponraj, S. C. Dhanabalan and H. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1806346 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, W. Huang, J. Zhao, H. Huang, C. Wang, F. Zhang, J. Liu, J. Li, M. Zhang and H. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 871–878 RSC .
T. Mahmoudi, Y. Wang and Y.-B. Hahn, Nano Energy, 2018, 47, 51–65 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lin, B. C. P. Sturmberg, K. T. Lin, Y. Yang, X. Zheng, T. K. Chong, C. M. de Sterke and B. Jia, Nat. Photonics, 2019, 13, 270–276 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xie, Y. Duo, Z. Lin, T. Fan, C. Xing, L. Yu, R. Wang, M. Qiu, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhao, X. Yan and H. Zhang, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1902236 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, H. L. Bao, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhang, X. Zheng, A. Yu, M. Hong and B. Jia, ACS Photonics, 2019, 6, 1033–1040 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Bahauddin, H. Robatjazi and I. Thomann, ACS Photonics, 2016, 3, 853–862 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, A. Klots, Y. Yang, W. Li, I. I. Kravchenko, D. P. Briggs, K. I. Bolotin and J. Valentine, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 181104 CrossRef .
J.-T. Liu, T.-B. Wang, X.-J. Li and N.-H. Liu, J. Appl. Phys., 2014, 115, 193511 CrossRef .
H. Li, M. Qin, L. Wang, X. Zhai, R. Ren and J. Hu, Opt. Express, 2017, 25, 31612–31621 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N.
O. Weiss, H. L. Zhou, L. Liao, Y. Liu, S. Jiang, Y. Huang and X. F. Duan, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5782–5825 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhan, J. Yan, L. Lai, Z. Ni, L. Liu and Z. Shen, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4055–4069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Fang, Y. Wang, Z. Liu, A. Schlather, P. M. Ajayan, F. H. L. Koppens, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 10222–10228 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Huang, J. Liu, H. Deng and S. Wu, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6, 1701378 CrossRef .
Z. Fang, Z. Liu, Y. Wang, P. M. Ajayan, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3808–3813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, R. Cheng, L. Liao, H. Zhou, J. Bai, G. Liu, L. Liu, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 579–585 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. L. Bao, H. Zhang, Y. Wang, Z. Ni, Y. Yan, Z. X. Shen, K. P. Loh and D. Y. Tang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 3077–3083 CrossRef CAS .
H. Huang, H. Xia, W. Xie, Z. Guo, H. Li and D. Xie, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 4183 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Thongrattanasiri, F. H. L. Koppens and F. J. García de Abajo, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 108, 047401 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Fang, Y. Wang, A. E. Schlather, Z. Liu, P. M. Ajayan, F. J. García de Abajo, P. Nordlander, X. Zhu and N. J. Halas, Nano Lett., 2013, 14, 299–304 CrossRef PubMed .
A. H. Castro Neto, F. Guinea, N. M. R. Peres, K. S. Novoselov and A. K. Geim, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2009, 81, 109–162 CrossRef CAS .
C. Cen, L. Liu, Y. Zhang, X. Chen, Z. Zhou, Z. Yi, X. Ye, Y. Tang, Y. Yi and S. Xiao, Opt. Mater. Express, 2019, 9, 706–716 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ferreira and N. M. R. Peres, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 86, 205401 CrossRef .
L. Ju, B. Geng, J. Horng, C. Girit, M. Martin, Z. Hao, H. A. Bechtel, X. Liang, A. Zettl, Y. R. Shen and F. Wang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 630–634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Ozbay, Science, 2006, 311, 189–193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Echtermeyer, L. Britnell, P. Jasnos, A. Lombardo, R. Gorbachev, A. Grigorenko, A. Geim, A. Ferrari and K. Novoselov, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 458 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhu, L. Shi, M. S. Schmidt, A. Boisen, O. Hansen, J. Zi, S. Xiao and N. A. Mortensen, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4690–4696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ferreira, N. M. R. Peres, R. M. Ribeiro and T. Stauber, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 85, 115438 CrossRef .
G. Pirruccio, L. M. Moreno, G. Lozano and J. G. Rivas, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 4810–4817 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. S. Fan, C. C. Guo, Z. H. Zhu, W. Xu, F. Wu, X. D. Yuan and S. Q. Qin, Opt. Express, 2017, 25, 13079–13086 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, A. Klots, Y. Yang, W. Li, I. I. Kravchenko, D. P. Briggs, K. I. Bolotin and J. Valentine, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 181104 CrossRef .
Z. Yan, Q. Zhu, M. Wan, X. Lu, X. Pu, C. Tang and L. Yu, Opt. Express, 2020, 28, 6095–6101 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Zhu, F. Liu, H. Lin, J. Hu, Z. Yu, X. Wang and S. Fan, Light: Sci. Appl., 2016, 5, e16052 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Alaee, M. Farhat, C. Rockstuhl and F. Lederer, Opt. Express, 2012, 20, 28017–28024 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, A. Chadha, D. Zhao, J. R. Piper, Y. Jia, Y. Shuai, L. Menon, H. Yang, Z. Ma, S. Fan, F. Xia and W. Zhou, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 181105 CrossRef .
X. Zou, G. Zheng, J. Cong, L. Xu, Y. Chen and M. Lai, Opt. Lett., 2018, 43, 46–49 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zhang, J. Li, L. Lv, Y. Zhao and L. Qu, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 5087–5093 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, X. Wei, M. Permaratne and W. Zhu, Photonics Res., 2019, 7, 868–874 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, Y. Zhang, C. Ji, C. Zhang, D. Liu, Z. Zhang, Z. Lu, J. Tan and L. J. Guo, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1901320 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ramasubramaniam, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 86, 115409 CrossRef .
V. Tran, R. Soklaski, Y. Liang and L. Yang, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 89, 235319 CrossRef .
Y. Chen, G. Jiang, S. Chen, Z. Guo, X. Yu, C. Zhao, H. Zhang, Q. Bao, S. Wen, D. Tang and D. Fan, Opt. Express, 2015, 23, 12823–12833 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. M. Qing, H. F. Ma and T. J. Cui, Opt. Express, 2018, 26, 32442–32450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Liu and Q. Li, Nano Energy, 2017, 34, 172–180 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Hong, F. Xiong, W. Xu, Z. Zhu, K. Liu, X. Yuan, J. Zhang and S. Qin, Opt. Express, 2018, 26, 22528–22535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cai, K.-D. Xu, N. Feng, R. Guo, H. Lin and J. Zhu, Opt. Express, 2019, 27, 3101–3112 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, L. Wang and X. Zhai, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 36651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Xing and S. Jian, Opt. Laser Technol., 2018, 100, 129–132 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, Q. Huang, H. Cai, X. Lin, H. He, T. Ma and Y. Lu, Opt. Express, 2019, 27, 5217–5229 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ye, Y. Chen, G. Cai, N. Liu, J. Zhu, Z. Song and Q. H. Liu, Opt. Express, 2017, 25, 11223–11232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Si, Z. Dong, X. Yu and X. Deng, Opt. Express, 2018, 26, 21768–21777 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Stauber, G. Gómez-Santos and F. Javier García de Abajo, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2014, 112, 077401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. K. Hedayati, A. U. Zillohu, T. Strunskus, F. Faupel and M. Elbahri, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 041103 CrossRef .
W. Yu, Y. Lu, X. Chen, H. Xu, J. Shao, X. Chen, Y. Sun, J. Hao and N. Dai, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7, 1900841 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ji, L. Peng, Y. Zhu, F. Yang, Y. Cui, X. Wu, L. Liu, S. He, F. Zhu and Y. Hao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 161107 CrossRef .
A. Ghobadi, H. Hajian, A. R. Rashed, B. Butun and E. Ozbay, Photonics Res., 2018, 6, 168–176 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Dereshgi, A. Ghobadi, H. Hajian and B. Butun, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 14872 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Li, B. Liu, Y. Ni, K. K. Liew, J. Sze, S. Chen and S. Shen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4585–4591 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, S. Butun and K. Aydin, ACS Photonics, 2015, 2, 183–188 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ghobadi, S. A. Dereshgi, H. Hajian, G. Birant, B. Butun, A. Bek and E. Ozbay, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 16652–16660 RSC .
T. Cao, K. Liu, L. Lu, H.-C. Chui and R. E. Simpson, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 5176–5182 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Lu, A. Raza, S. Noorulla, A. S. Alketbi, N. X. Fang, G. Chen and T. J. Zhang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2017, 5, 1700222 CrossRef .
T. Cao, K. Liu, L. Lu, H.-C. Chui and R. E. Simpson, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 20546–20553 RSC .
A. Lin, C.-C. Yang, P. Parashar, C.-Y. Lin, D. R. Jian, W.-M. Huang, Y.-W. Huang, S. M. Fu, Y. K. Zhong and T. Y. Tseng, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 3453–3461 RSC .
M. R. S. Dias, C. Gong, Z. A. Benson and M. S. Leite, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6, 1700830 CrossRef .
M. K. Hedayati, F. Faupel and M. Elbahri, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2012, 109, 769–773 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhu, Y. Li, F. Chen, X. Zhu, J. Dai, Y. Li, Z. Yang, X. Yan, J. Song, Y. Wang, E. Hitz, W. Luo, M. Lu, B. Yang and L. Hu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701028 CrossRef .
L. Zhou, S. Zhuang, C. He, Y. Tan, Z. Wang and J. Zhu, Nano Energy, 2017, 32, 195–200 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhou, Y. L. Tan, D. X. Ji, B. Zhu, P. Zhang, J. Xu, Q. Q. Gan, Z. F. Yu and J. Zhu, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1501227 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Liu, W. Lin and M. Hong, APL Photonics, 2019, 4, 051101 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, X. Zhang, C. Luo, Z. Liu, Y. Chen, S. Dong, C. Jiang, S. Yang, F. Wang and X. Xiao, Small, 2019, 15, 1805516 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Yang, F. Luo, T. Kao, X. Li, G. Ho, J. Teng, X. Luo and M. Hong, Light: Sci. Appl., 2014, 3, e185 CrossRef CAS .
T. Putnin, C. Lertvachirapaiboon, R. Ishikawa, K. Shinbo, K. Kato, S. Ekgasit, K. Ounnunkad and A. Baba, Opto-Electron. Adv., 2019, 2, 19001001 Search PubMed .
A. Aubry, D. Y. Lei, A. I. Fernandez-Dominguez, Y. Sonnefraud, S. A. Maier and J. Pendry, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2574–2579 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Y. Bao, S. Liu, Y. Hou, A. Shang, F. Yan, Y. Wu, D. Lei and J. Dai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 26797–26803 RSC .
G. Liu, Y. Liu, X. Liu, J. Chen, G. Fu and Z. Liu, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 186, 142–148 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Shi, T. U. Connell, Q. Xiao, A. S. R. Chesman, W. Cheng, A. Roberts, T. J. Davis and D. E. Gómez, ACS Photonics, 2019, 6, 314–321 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, X. Zhang, B. Quan, G. Ji, X. Liang, W. Liu and Y. Du, Nanotechnology, 2017, 28, 115704 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. H. Chen, Z. H. Huang, M. M. Lu, W. Q. Cao, J. Yuan, D. Q. Zhang and M. S. Cao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 12621–12625 RSC .
X. G. Liu, B. Li, D. Y. Geng, W. B. Cui, F. Yang, Z. G. Xie, D. J. Kang and Z. D. Zhang, Carbon, 2009, 47, 470–474 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhao, L. Meng, H. Gong, X. Chen, Y. Chen, M. Yan, Q. Li and M. Qiu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 221107 CrossRef .
G. Xu, J. Zhang, X. Zang, O. Sugihara, H. Zhao and B. Cai, Opt. Express, 2016, 24, 23177–23185 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Kannan and D. Vakeesan, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 62, 1092–1105 CrossRef .
I. E. Khodasevych, L. Wang, A. Mitchell and G. Rosengarten, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2015, 3, 852–881 CrossRef CAS .
A. Tittl, M. G. Harats, R. Walter, X. Yin, M. Schäferling, N. Liu, R. Rapaport and H. Giessen, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 10885–10892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Qu, Q. Li, H. Gong, K. Du, S. Bai, D. Zhao, H. Ye and M. Qiu, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2016, 4, 480–486 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhou, Y. Tan, J. Wang, W. Xu, Y. Yuan, W. Cai, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 393–398 CrossRef CAS .
F. Tao, Y. Zhang, K. Yin, S. Cao, X. Chang, Y. Lei, D. Wang, R. Fan, L. Dong, Y. Yin and X. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 35154–35163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Fang and X. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3840–3856 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Hogan, A. S. Urban, C. Ayala-Orozco, A. Pimpinelli, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4640–4645 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, S. Yu, R. Feng, A. Bernard, Y. Liu, Y. Zhang, H. Duan, W. Shang, P. Tao, C. Song and T. Deng, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2768–2774 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Liu, J. Xu and K. Wang, Nano Energy, 2017, 41, 269–284 CrossRef CAS .
H. Badenhorst, Sol. Energy, 2019, 192, 35–68 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Guldi and V. Sgobba, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 606–610 RSC .
Y. Ito, Y. Tanabe, J. Han, T. Fujita, K. Tanigaki and M. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4302–4307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Hu, W. Xu, L. Zhou, Y. Tan, Y. Wang, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 29, 1604031 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Li, W. Xu, M. Tang, L. Zhou, B. Zhu, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, 13953–13958 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ghasemi, G. Ni, A. M. Marconnet, J. Loomis, S. Yerci, N. Miljkovic and G. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, G. Zhu, W. Yu, J. Zeng, X. Yu, Q. Li and H. Xie, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 184, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang and N. A. Melosh, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5426–5430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, S. K. Cushing, P. Zheng, F. Meng, D. Chu and N. Wu, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2651–2658 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Mukherjee, F. Libisch, N. Large, O. Neumann, L. V. Brown, J. Cheng, J. B. Lassiter, E. A. Carter, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 240–247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li and J. Valentine, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3510–3514 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. H. W. Ho, A. Shang, F. Shi, T. W. Lo, P. H. Yeung, Y. S. Yu, X. Zhang, K. Wong and D. Y. Lei, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1800383 CrossRef .
H. Chalabi, D. Schoen and M. L. Brongersma, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1374–1380 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Shan, Y. Yu, X. Wang, Y. Luo, S. Zu, B. Du, T. Han, B. Li, Y. Li, J. Wu, F. Lin, K. Shi, B. K. Tay, Z. Liu, X. Zhu and Z. Fang, Light: Sci. Appl., 2019, 8, 9 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Qi, Y. Zhai, L. Wen, Q. Wang, Q. Chen, S. Iqbal, G. Chen, J. Xu and Y. Tu, Nanotechnology, 2017, 28, 275202 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Ng, J. J. Cadusch, S. Dligatch, A. Roberts, T. J. Davis, P. Mulvaney and D. E. Gómez, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 4704–4711 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, Q. Qian, L. Qin, X. Zhu, C. Wang and X. Li, ACS Photonics, 2018, 5, 5079–5085 CrossRef CAS .
S. Song, Q. Chen, L. Jin and F. Sun, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 9615–9619 RSC .
K.-T. Lin, H.-L. Chen, Y.-S. Lai and C.-C. Yu, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3288 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Wen, Y. Chen, L. Liang and Q. Chen, ACS Photonics, 2017, 5, 581–591 CrossRef .
A. Di Bartolomeo, Phys. Rep., 2016, 606, 1–58 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, K. Wu, Y. Zhan, V. Gianninic and X. Li, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 10323–10329 RSC .
Y. Zhan, K. Wu, C. Zhang, S. Wu and X. Li, Opt. Lett., 2015, 40, 4261–4264 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, W. Ali, Z. Wang, M. F. Mideksa, F. Wang, X. Wang, L. Wang and Z. Tang, Nano Energy, 2019, 63, 103873 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, K. Kelley, E. Sachet, S. Campione, T. S. Luk, J.-P. Maria, M. B. Sinclair and I. Brener, Nat. Photonics, 2017, 11, 390–395 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wen and Q. Xiong, Sci. China Mater., 2016, 59, 165–172 CrossRef CAS .
N. Strohfeldt, A. Tittl, M. Schäferling, F. Neubrech, U. Kreibig, R. Griessen and H. Giessen, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1140–1147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Sterl, N. Strohfeldt, R. Walter, R. Griessen, A. Tittl and H. Giessen, Nano
Lett., 2015, 15, 7949–7955 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Tittl, P. Mai, R. Taubert, D. Dregely, N. Liu and H. Giessen, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4366–4369 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. ElKabbash, K. V. Sreekanth, Y. Alapan, M. Kim, J. Cole, A. Fraiwan, T. Letsou, Y. Li, C. Guo, R. M. Sankaran, U. A. Gurkan, M. Hinczewski and G. Strangi, ACS Photonics, 2019, 6, 1889–1894 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ng, J. Wu, S. M. Hanham, A. I. Fernández-Domínguez, N. Klein, Y. F. Liew, M. B. Breese, M. Hong and S. A. Maier, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2013, 1, 543–548 CrossRef .
L. J. Sherry, S. H. Chang, G. C. Schatz, R. P. Van Duyne, B. J. Wiley and Y. N. Xia, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 2034–2038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, T. Li, B. Zeng, H. Zhang, H. Lv, X. Huang, W. Zhang and A. K. Azad, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 12682–12688 RSC .
B.-X. Wang, W.-Q. Huang and L.-L. Wang, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 42956–42963 RSC .
X. Wang, J. Zhu, X. Wen, X. Wu, Y. Wu, Y. Su, H. Tong, Y. Qi and H. Yang, Opt. Mater. Express, 2019, 9, 3079–3088 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hu, G. Xu, L. Wen, H. Wang, Y. Zhao, Y. Zhang, D. R. S. Cumming and Q. Chen, Laser Photonics Rev., 2016, 10, 962–969 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, M. Yu, S. Huang, X. Liu, Y. Wang, M. Liu, P. Pan and G. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 4222 RSC .
Z. Liu, G. Liu, S. Huang, X. Liu, P. Pan, Y. Wang and G. Gu, Sens. Actuators, B, 2015, 215, 480–488 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jiang, S. Alan, H. Shahbazbegian, J. N. Patel and B. Kaminska, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 10544–10554 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Alan, H. Jiang, H. Shahbazbegian, J. N. Patel and B. Kaminska, Nanotechnology, 2017, 28, 135302 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Jiang, M. Rezaei, M. Abdolahi and B. Kaminska, Nano Futures, 2017, 1, 025001 CrossRef .
H. Jiang and B. Kaminska, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 3112–3125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Kats, R. Blanchard, P. Genevet and F. Capasso, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 20–24 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Chung, S. Yu, C.-J. Heo, J. W. Shim, S.-M. Yang, M. G. Han, H.-S. Lee, Y. Jin, S. Y. Lee, N. Park and J. H. Shin, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2375–2379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. V. Yakovlev, V. A. Milichko, V. V. Vinogradov and A. V. Vinogradov, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 3078–3086 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. M. Goh, Y. Zheng, S. J. Tan, L. Zhang, K. Kumar, C.-W. Qiu and J. K. W. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5361 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, Q. Zhang, X. Ouyang, D. Y. Lei, A. P. Zhang and H.-Y. Tam, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 9913–9921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-M. Guay, A. Calà Lesina, G. Côté, M. Charron, D. Poitras, L. Ramunno, P. Berini and A. Weck, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 16095 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Roberts, A. Pors, O. Albrektsen and S. I. Bozhevolnyi, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 783–787 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Xu, Y.-K. Wu, X. Luo and L. J. Guo, Nat. Commun., 2010, 1, 59 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Kumar, H. Duan, R. S. Hegde, S. C. W. Koh, J. N. Wei and J. K. W. Yang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 557 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Tan, L. Zhang, D. Zhu, X. M. Goh, Y. M. Wang, K. Kumar, C.-W. Qiu and J. K. W. Yang, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4023–4029 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yang, Y. Zhou, Y. Chen, Y. Wang, P. Dai, Z. Zhang and H. Duan, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2016, 4, 1196–1202 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, M. Anaya, G. Lozano, M. E. Calvo, M. B. Johnston, H. Míguez and H. J. Snaith, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 1698–1702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-T. Lee, C. Ji, D. Banerjee and L. J. Guo, Laser Photonics Rev., 2015, 9, 354–362 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhu, C. Vannahme, E. Højlund-Nielsen, N. A. Mortensen and A. Kristensen, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 325–329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. D. James, P. Mulvaney and A. Roberts, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 3817–3823 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) The increasing amount of PA-related papers. (b) The annual citations (from 2008 to 2019) of the paper which reported a metamaterial PA for the first time. Source: Web of Science. (Data collected on March 24, 2020.)	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) A 3D illustration of the MIM structure based plasmonic metamaterial absorber, and the magnetic and electric field profiles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 49 Copyright 2015, Optical Society of America. (b) The ultra-narrowband reflection generated in a MIM structure. Adapted with permission from ref. 51 Copyright 2019, Optical Society of America. (c) Simulated reflection spectrum (black dashed curve) using the whole perfect EMW absorptive structure and the calculated reflection spectrum (red solid line) viaeqn (1). The inset shows the configuration of the mushroom-shaped unit cell. (d) The amplitude of α (red line) and R12 (blue line). (e) The phase terms: θ = ϕ(R12) − ϕ(α) − 2β (blue), the phase ϕ(α) of α (green), the phase ϕ (R12) of R12 (red), and the propagation phase 2β (black). (c–e) Adapted with permission from ref. 52 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH.	 
	(1)
|R12| = |α|	(2)
θ = ϕ(R12) − ϕ(α) − 2β = 2mπ, |m| = 0, 1, 2,…	(3)

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic representation of an all-metal PA. Reproduced with permission from ref. 37 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (b) 3D sectional drawing of the four-tined fish-spear-like unit cell and the field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) image of the arrays. Adapted with permission from ref. 30 Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH. (c and d) The simulated spectrum and the scanning electron microscopy image of a unit cell composed of two orthogonally oriented stand-up split ring resonators. The scale bars are 10 μm and 40 μm, separately. Adapted with permission from ref. 56 Copyright 2017, the Authors. (e and f) The schematic of an all-metal PA and the spectra of reflection and absorption; the insets reveal the normalized intensity distributions of the electric fields at the absorption peaks and dip. Reproduced with permission from ref. 59 Copyright 2016, IOP Publishing Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) The fabrication process of an electromagnetic wave absorber with excellent flexibility and absorption properties. (b and c) The measured tensile stresses and Young's modulus after a large number of stretching-bending cycles. The inset demonstrates a single stretching-bending cycle. Reproduced with permission from ref. 74 Copyright 2019, the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic of an ultra-broadband light absorber composed of alternating refractory metal disks and SiO2 disks. Adapted with permission from ref. 21 Copyright 2018, Elsevier B.V. (b) SEM image of the refractory material based metamaterial PA after annealing treatment at 1200 °C for 10 hours. The scale bar is 500 nm. (c) Absorptivity spectra before and after annealing. Inset: 3D schematic of the refractory metamaterial. (b and c) Adapted with permission from ref. 94 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (d) Simulated absorption spectra corresponding to diverse distributions of triangular meta-atoms. Adapted with permission from ref. 47 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) 3D schematic of the properly engineered graphene-based photonic crystal. (b) The ultra-narrowband absorption at a wavelength of 1526.5 nm. (a and b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 147 Copyright 2017, Optical Society of America. (c) The electrical-adjusting PA based on a nanopatterned graphene surface. Reproduced with permission from ref. 83 Copyright 2018, Elsevier Ltd. (d) Schematic of the perfect light absorber based on vertically-aligned graphene. Adapted with permission from ref. 154 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (e) The MoS2 photonic crystal for total absorption of EMWs. (f) The optical response, which is dependent on the radius of the nanocavities. (e and f) Adapted with permission from ref. 127 Copyright 2017, Optical Society of America.	 

Au–SiO2 nanocomposite	—	Visible	
4
	2011
TiN nanopillars	94%	300–2300 nm	
11
	2017
Cr/SiO2/Cr film stack	99.5%	400–800 nm	
24
	2015
MgF2/TiO2/Si/Ge/Cr/SiO2 film stack	≈98%	400–2000 nm	
25
	2016
Au metasurface/SiO2/Au substrate	83%	370–880 nm	
50
	2015
Ag–Sb2S3 nanoporous structure	—	300–2400 nm	
71
	2018
Au nanoparticles/aramid nanofibers	>95%	400–2000 nm	
74
	2019
Multi-film stack	—	Broadband	
81
	2017
Multi-film stack	>95%	Visible-NIR	
95
	2018
TiO1.67 nanoparticles	>90%	300–2000 nm	
96
	2016
Nanocomposite	>99.6%	400–750 nm	
97
	2019
Ag–SiO2 nanocomposite	≈100%	≈350–600 nm	
170
	2014
Sphere-shaped structure	>90%	3–6 μm	
171
	2019
Ag nanoparticle layers/SiO2 layers/Ag slab	96%	300–1100 nm	
172
	2015
Cr/Al2O3/Cr film stack	>90%	400–850 nm	
173
	2018
Ag/SiO2/Ag film stack	97%	≈17 nm	
176
	2015
Pt coated TiO2 nanowires	>97%	370–1100 nm	
177
	2017
Au nanoparticles/GST film	≈92%	400–1000 nm	
178
	2019
Nanocomposite	—	300–800 nm	
179
	2017
Nanoparticle-based nanocomposite	—	—	
180
	2019
Nanocomposite	—	300–2600 nm	
181
	2018
Si/AlCu alloy film	>99%	Multi-band	
182
	2018
Cu-Polytetrafluoroethylene nanocomposite	97%	400–750 nm	
183
	2012
Metal nanoparticles/wood	≈99%	200–2500 nm	
184
	2018
Au nanoparticles/nanoporous Al2O3 template	90%	Tunable bandwidth	
185
	2017
Au nanoparticles/nanoporous templates	≈99%	400 nm–10 μm	
186
	2016

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic of the lithography-free Au nanoisland/SiO2/Au perfect metamaterial absorber (above) and the reflectivity/absorptivity spectra (below). Reproduced with permission from ref. 50 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic of the Au nanocube/TiO2/Au metamaterial absorber and profiles of the magnitude of the electric and magnetic fields. Reproduced with permission from ref. 194 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic and top view SEM image of the meta-polymeric spheres and the corresponding spectra. Adapted with permission from ref. 171 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) The multilayer planar perfect light absorber and absorption, reflection, and transmission spectra. Reproduced with permission from ref. 198 Copyright 2014, AIP Publishing LLC. (b) 3D schematic of a multilayer planar broadband high-efficient light absorbing structure and the absorptivity spectra. Reproduced with permission from ref. 25 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) The water evaporation efficiencies of the CuS-based solar energy absorber. Adapted with permission from ref. 205 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (b) The photo-thermal evaporation based on plasmonic effects of nanoparticles. Adapted with permission from ref. 207 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (c and d) The schematic of a novel solar steam generating device based on a perfect plasmonic EMW absorber and the corresponding simulated temperature distribution with a maximum temperature up to 83 °C. Adapted with permission from ref. 208 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (e and f) The metallic-nanoparticle-decorated wood as a plasmonic solar energy harvesting device and its boosted light absorptivity curve. Adapted with permission from ref. 184 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a and b) Schematic diagram of a perfect EMW absorber based photodetector. (b) The transfer process of hot electrons over the Schottky barrier generated by the metal–semiconductor interface. (a and b) Adapted with permission from ref. 220 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (c) A plasmonic hot electron photodetector based on Au-coated disordered Si nanoholes. (d) Measured responsivities of the hot electron harvesting devices. (c and d) Adapted with permission from ref. 229 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic diagram of the broadband light absorber for high-efficiency hot electron harvesting. Adapted with permission from ref. 226 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) The schematic of a sensor based on perfect light absorption. (b) The reflectivity of the device undergoes a significant increase when it is exposed to 5 vol% hydrogen (in nitrogen carrier gas). (a and b) Adapted with permission from ref. 45 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (c) Graphical demonstration of the absorption spectra in different surroundings. Reproduced with permission from ref. 35 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (d) Schematic of the refractive index sensing device based on a hybrid plasmonic-photonic PA. (e) The FOM* and S (sensitivity) of the proposed refractive index sensor. (d and e) Adapted with permission from ref. 246 Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) The FOM responses of the resonances for the structure with a film coated on the slit walls and at the top surface, separately. Adapted with permission from ref. 247 Copyright 2015, Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic of the color filter composed of planar films. (b) The simulated (solid curve) and measured (dotted line) absorption spectra. (c) Plot of reflectance as a function of wavelength and thickness of the dielectric layer. (d) The simulated (solid curve) and measured (dotted line) transmittance. (a–d) Adapted with permission from ref. 176 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (e) 3D schematic of the asymmetric FP resonant cavities with varying geometric parameters to achieve full-color printing. (f) The full palette covering a wide range of colors generated with the asymmetric FP resonators. Scale bar, 50 μm. (e and f) Adapted with permission from ref. 33 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
