Organic luminogens bearing alkyl substituents: design flexibility, adjustable molecular packing, and optimized performance  - Materials Chemistry Frontiers (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0QM00851F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0QM00851F
(Review Article)
Mater. Chem. Front., 2021, 5, 1525-1540Organic luminogens bearing alkyl substituents: design flexibility, adjustable molecular packing, and optimized performance

        
          
            Yuanyuan 
            Fan
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Qianqian 
            Li
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Zhen 
            Li
          
          
        
      *ab
aSauvage Center for Molecular Sciences, Department of Chemistry, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China. E-mail: qianqian-alinda@163.com; lizhen@whu.edu.cn
bInstitute of Molecular Aggregation Science, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300072, China
Received 
      22nd October 2020
    , Accepted 23rd November 2020First published on 24th November 2020AbstractFor molecular engineering of organic luminogens, the utilization of different substituents is a common approach to tune their light emission properties. Unlike the well-recognized influence of aromatic substituents furnishing electron push–pull properties or steric hindrance on the luminescence properties, alkyl groups have attracted much less attention in most cases, regardless of their greater and greater importance to molecular packing appearing in recent years. In this review, we will give a summary of recent advances in organic luminogens modified with alkyl groups and their corresponding fluorescence, phosphorescence and/or mechano-responsive properties. Through systematical investigation of the relationship of the chemical structure–molecular packing–luminescence properties, some guidance is proposed for the rational molecular design of organic luminescent materials.
Yuanyuan Fan
Yuanyuan Fan received her Bachelor's degree (2019) from the College of Chemistry and Molecular Science at Wuhan University (China). She is currently a Master's graduate student in the group of Prof. Zhen Li. Her research focuses on the design and synthesis of organic room temperature phosphorescence materials, as well as the investigation of the structure–property relationship.
Qianqian Li
Qianqian Li received her BSc degree from Hubei University, China, in 2004, and then obtained her PhD degree under the supervision of Prof. Zhen Li at Wuhan University in 2009. She is now a full professor at Wuhan University, and her research interests are in the design and synthesis of new optoelectronic functional materials.
Zhen Li
Zhen Li received his BSc and PhD degrees from Wuhan University (WHU) in China in 1997 and 2002, respectively, under the supervision of Prof. Jingui Qin. He has been a full professor at WHU since 2006 and chair professor at Tianjin University from 2018. His research interests are in the development of organic molecules and polymers with new structures and new functions for organic electronics and photonics.
1. Introduction
In the past several decades, researchers have paid much attention to organic opto-electronic materials, owing to their wide-ranging applications in organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs),1–3 organic field-effect transistors (OFETs),4–8 organic photovoltaic cells (OPVs),9,10 sensors,11–13etc. When it comes to molecular engineering in different application fields, the main building blocks with conjugated structures and specific functions were firstly chosen, and then the opto-electronic performance of materials was finely optimized by the incorporation of substituent groups. In most cases, the central π-conjugated moieties are considered to have the main effect on the functions of materials, while the peripheral substituents play an assistant role. However, some recent work has shown that the opto-electronic properties of materials could be changed greatly through the introduction of substituent groups,14–24 meaning that modifying groups can also be the “leader” in some cases. It is mainly related to the powerful effect of substituents on the molecular packing in the aggregated state. Generally, substituents with different electron donating or withdrawing ability are usually selected to tune the electronic properties of organic luminescent materials, as well as the packing modes driven by electronic effects.15,16 Also, some bulky groups with steric hindrance effects and functional moieties are incorporated to tune the molecular packing by the adjustment of intermolecular interactions.14,17,25,26 Alkyl groups as the simplest substituents of conjugated systems, which are usually ignored in some cases, exhibited a great effect on their performance in many fields. For example, as a hot spot in biological research, methylation plays a vital role in the modification of proteins and nucleic acids, which can regulate or shut down gene expression, closely related to cell development, aging and generation of some diseases.27 There are also some cutting-edge studies reporting the effect of alkyl groups on the luminescence properties. A representative example is the odd–even effect observed in the room temperature phosphorescence (RTP) property of organic luminogens bearing different length alkyl chains.28 In this case, the alkyl groups play the dominant role in the molecular packing. Accordingly, we can use a metaphor that a π-conjugated chromophore is just like a person, and the alkyl group is a dog, as shown in Fig. 1. Mostly, the properties of materials are determined by the nature of the π-conjugated chromophore, while the alkyl group as a modifying group can also be powerful and be a dominant one in some cases.
 Fig. 1  The relationship between π-conjugated aromatic cores and alkyl substituents of organic luminogens, and the influence of alkyl substituents on different kinds of luminescence properties in the aggregated state. ML: mechanoluminescence. MC: mechanochromism. 
In this review, we would like to give a brief discussion about the influence of alkyl groups on the emissive properties of organic luminophores from their basic properties.
Firstly, alkyl groups have a negligible effect on the electronic properties of organic luminogens due to the extremely weak electron-donating capacity. Whereas, alkyl chains with bulk sizes can suppress the π–π interactions of conjugated cores due to the steric hindrance effect in most cases. Since π–π interactions are usually considered as a quenching factor of the fluorescence emission, they can be favorable to enhance the emission intensity and efficiency. However, sometimes, the much looser molecular packing due to the large steric effect of alkyl chains may be adverse to phosphorescence emission.
Secondly, alkyl structures with a multitude of C–H bonds exhibit high activity to form multiple C–H⋯π and C–H⋯X (X represents heteroatoms, such as N, O, and F) intermolecular interactions with surrounding aromatic rings or heteroatoms. These interactions can suppress the possible vibrations and rotations of organic molecules, thus reducing non-radiative transitions and contributing to radiative transitions as emission.
Thirdly, alkyl groups consist of abundant rotatable C–C single bonds, which exhibit high flexibility for frequent molecular rotations at room temperature. It is beneficial to the non-radiative transitions and negative to light emission.
Accordingly, the possible effect of alkyl substituents on the luminescence properties of organic molecules in the aggregated state will be analysed and discussed in terms of these three aspects (Fig. 2). Considering the different kinds of luminescent materials, the following discussions are mainly divided into three sections: the effect of alkyl substituents on the fluorescence and phosphorescence emission, and the mechano-responsive properties. Finally, through the systematic analysis of the structure–packing–performance relationship, a summary and outlook are presented at the end of the review.
 Fig. 2  The possible positive and negative effects of alkyl substituents on the luminescence properties of organic molecules in aggregated states. 
2. The effect of alkyl groups on fluorescence emission at aggregated states
From single molecules to molecular aggregates, the fluorescence emission usually exhibits obvious differences due to the effect of intermolecular interactions and molecular packing in the aggregated state. Among them, drastic effects are aggregation caused quenching (ACQ) and aggregation-induced emission (AIE) as opposite ones.29 Interestingly, they can be converted to each other by the incorporation of alkyl chains at different positions.30 As shown in Fig. 3, 2TT-mC6B with the alkyl chains located at the meta position displays a typical ACQ property, and exhibits strong emission in the second near-infrared window (NIR-II) (1064 nm) in solution but nearly no emission in the aggregated state. It is mainly related to the coplanar thiophene–BBTD–thiophene (TBT) core, resulting in strong π–π interactions. Once the substitution site of the hexyl group changed from the meta to the ortho position, the resultant 2TT-oC6B exhibits a distorted backbone due to the steric repulsion between the hexyl group and benzobisthiadiazole unit. It displays typical AIE character with a quantum yield of 11% at the aggregated state. In addition to the ACQ and AIE properties, there are still some examples filling the gap between ACQ and AIE, demonstrating dual bright state emission both in solution and the solid state.31–35 The transformation among these three kinds of effect also can be realized by the utilization of different alkyl groups as side chains or bridge moieties.34,36–38
 Fig. 3  (A) Chemical structures of 2TT-mC6B and 2TT-oC6B. (B) Optimized ground-state (S0) geometries of 2TT-mC6B and 2TT-oC6B from theoretical calculations. ACQ: aggregation caused quenching. AIE: aggregation-induced emission. Reproduced with permission.30 Copyright 2020, John Wiley and Sons. 
Through the introduction of alkyl chains with different lengths, some researchers have systematically studied the effect of alkyl groups on the fluorescence emission, including the luminescence colors and efficiencies. In 2018, a series of TPEPy-n (n = 1, 4, 7, 10) compounds (Fig. 4A) with alkyl chain engineering were reported, which exhibited a fluorescence emission maximum at 575 nm, 560 nm, 566 nm, and 531 nm, respectively.39 With the increased length of the alkyl chains, the emission wavelength in the solid state shows a hypochromatic shift, which is attributed to different molecular conformations and arrangements. In their single crystals, the molecular conformations of TPEPy-1 and TPEPy-4 were highly twisted as a result of the propeller-shaped tetraphenylethylene (TPE) unit, guarding against the formation of strong π–π stacking between molecules and making them glow brightly in the aggregated state. The origin of the emission color differentiation between TPEPy-1 and TPEPy-4 crystals is the distinct torsion angles between the bridging phenyl ring and vinyl core of the TPE unit. Owing to the existence of a vinyl linker between the TPE group and pyridinium moiety, two different configurations were found in crystals of TPEPy-1 and TPEPy-4. The torsion angles of the two different configurations in crystal TPEPy-1 (44.75° and 62.14°) are smaller than those in crystal TPEPy-4 (51.3° and 62.75°), and the better conjugation effect in TPEPy-1 resulted in bathochromic emission. Regrettably, the crystal data of TPEPy-7 and TPEPy-10 were not obtained.
 Fig. 4  The influence of alkyl groups on the fluorescence of materials. (A) Chemical structures and emission colors with maximum peaks of TPEPy-n (n = 1, 4, 7, 10). (B) Chemical structures of DBF-n (n = 1, 2, 4) and emission colors with maximum peaks of crystal DBF-1a, DBF-1b, DBF-2a, DBF-2b, and DBF-4. Reproduced with permission.39 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission.40 Copyright 2012, John Wiley and Sons. 
Similarly, seven di(p-methoxylphenyl)dibenzofulvene analogues of DBF-n (n = 1, 2, 4, 6, 8, 12, 16) were synthesized; however, only single crystals of DBF-1, DBF-2, and DBF-4 were cultivated successfully (Fig. 4B).40 Two kinds of crystals for DBF-1 and DBF-2 were obtained, while only one for DBF-4. Through careful analysis of the crystal data, it was found that there were no π–π interactions in all these crystals, and the different length alkyl chains influenced the planarity and conjugation degree of the central chromophores primarily, thus causing the difference in the emission colors of the crystals. The fluorene ring in crystal DBF-1b has better coplanarity with two torsion angles (labeled by the red arrows in Fig. 4B) of 65.43° and 44.83° compared to those of 74.4° and 57.95° in crystal DBF-1a, resulting in the red shift of the fluorescence emission of DBF-1b. This alteration trend can also be observed in crystals DBF-2a, DBF-2b and DBF-4 with torsion angles of 83.35°, 77.48° and 74.44°, respectively. The central chromophores with smaller torsion angles and more planar molecular conformations exhibited a red-shifted emission color. The emission wavelength of DBF-1 in the amorphous form has a red shift evidently compared to those of crystals DBF-1a and DBF-2a, possibly because the intermolecular interactions and steric hindrance between molecules in the amorphous form decreased greatly, thus influencing the molecular conformation and emission color.
In addition to the distortion of the central chromophore, the molecular packing is also a crucial factor affecting the emission colors of organic materials. The emission of green fluorescent protein (GFP) chromophore derivatives can also be tuned by alkyl chain engineering, as shown in Fig. 5.41–44 Compound GFP-0 (Fig. 5A) without an alkyl moiety is non-luminescent in the solid state, because of strong π–π interactions and proton transfer in the excited state derived from strong intermolecular hydrogen bonding.41 After the alkyl modification, the three compounds bearing –CH3, –C6H13 and –C12H25 groups exhibited bright emission in the aggregated state, which is mainly due to the restriction of π–π stacking and hydrogen bonding. However, their emission colors are quite different. GFP-1 exhibits dark-red fluorescence, whereas GFP-6 and GFP-12 emitted greenish-yellow and blue fluorescence, respectively. It is mainly related to the packing modes of aromatic rings. Alkyl groups with shorter length have little effect on the original packing modes of aromatics in the aggregated state; consequently, the crystal structure of GFP-1 is similar to that of GFP-0 with the herringbone arrangement. But alkyl groups with longer carbon chains can change their packing modes significantly. An antiparallel arrangement character is presented in the crystals of GFP-6 and GFP-12, and the emission color changed from greenish-yellow to blue due to the varied electron coupling of the π conjugation system, along with the different slip distances between adjacent molecules.
 Fig. 5  (A) Chemical structures and crystal photographs under UV light of GFP-n (n = 0, 1, 6, 12) (top), and crystal structures of GFP-1 and GFP-12 shown in a unit cell (bottom). (B) Chemical structures and emission efficiencies of oGFP-n (n = 1, 4, 5, 8, 12, 16) (top), and crystal structures of oGFP-1 and oGFP-12 (bottom). (C) Chemical structures and crystal photographs under UV light with emission efficiencies of mGFP-Cn (n = 1, 3, 5, 11) (top), and crystal structures of mGFP-C1 and mGFP-C11 shown in a unit cell (bottom). Reproduced with permission.41 Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission.42 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. Reproduced with permission.44 Copyright 2013, Springer Nature. 
Undoubtedly, besides the emission colors, the emission efficiencies can be influenced by the molecular packing. Fig. 5B and C demonstrate successive studies concerning GFP derivatives with alkyl modifications, and their quantum efficiencies increased gradually with the increasing length of the alkyl chains.42–44 Longer alkyl chains usually bring larger steric hindrance, triggering the change of the molecular packing with decreased π–π interactions. Thus, improved emission efficiencies can be achieved by relieving the quenching effect. This trend of increased emission efficiencies accompanying the increased length of alkyl chains can also be observed in other systems, such as some pyridinium-functionalized dibenzo[a,c]phenazine derivatives.45
3. The effect of alkyl groups on phosphorescence emission
According to the Jablonski diagram, the photoluminescence process is accompanied by a variation in molecular energy levels (Fig. 6). After absorbing photons with a wavelength in a certain range, molecules can transit from the ground state to excited ones. Generally, fluorescence can be generated by radiative transitions from the singlet excited state to the ground state, whilst phosphorescence occurs when molecules transit from the triplet state to the ground one, which is a spin-forbidden process for organic luminogens, from the aspect of transition selection rules in quantum mechanics.46 Therefore, with the aim to obtain organic phosphorescent materials with high quantum yield, as well as long lifetime, scientists have made a lot of efforts to boost and stabilize triplet excitons. Some strategies have proved to be effective, such as introducing halogen atoms47–49 or heteroatoms,50–53 enriching intermolecular interactions,54–56 constructing H-aggregation,57–60 establishing a rigid matrix61–67 and so on.
 Fig. 6  Jablonski diagram with fluorescence and phosphorescence processes. 
Certainly, alkyl groups are also splendid groups to regulate the molecular packing mode and optimize the luminescence performance. Generally, tighter molecular packing is advantageous to enhance intermolecular electron coupling, and impede the entry of external triplet exciton quenchers, such as water and oxygen, and stabilize triplet excitons.46,68–72 For example, Chi and Zhao et al. studied the phosphorescence performance of three compounds with different numbers of methyl groups (Fig. 7).73 Crystal 0 M without a methyl group possessed a moderate RTP lifetime of 0.36 s and a RTP efficiency of 1.50%. The phosphorescence lifetime and efficiency of crystal 1 M rose to 0.82 s and 2.64% with the incorporation of one methyl group. It is mainly due to the smaller free volume region (ffree) in the single crystal of 1 M with denser molecular packing. Once the number of methyl groups increased to three, the free volume region in the single crystal of 3 M became smaller, resulting in a longer lifetime of 0.83 s. Nevertheless, the incorporation of alkyl groups can also bring about larger energy splitting and lower phosphorescence efficiency in some cases. As shown in Fig. 8, the crystal of carbazole derivative CPM has a glorious RTP performance with a long lifetime of 748 ms and a quantum yield of 3.17%, as a result of the compact face to face packing mode.14 After introducing a methyl or methoxy group to yield compounds CMPM and CMOPM, the resultant molecular packing showed large differences in the overlap of carbazole moieties among adjacent molecules. From CPM to CMPM, and then to CMOPM, the overlap decreased with the weakened electron coupling, along with decreased RTP lifetimes (340 ms for CMPM, and 114 ms for CMOPM). Although methyl or methoxy groups may increase some additional intermolecular interactions, such as C–H⋯π and C–H⋯O interactions, they may be not enough to compensate for the weakened π–π interactions, and thus the phosphorescence performance still exhibited a downward trend.
 Fig. 7  (A) Chemical structures, phosphorescence lifetimes (τ) and quantum yield (ΦP) of 0 M, 1 M and 3 M. Free volume region (ffree) in the unit cells of crystal 0 M (B), 1 M (C) and 3 M (D). 
 Fig. 8  Chemical structures, phosphorescence lifetimes (τ), and photoluminescence efficiencies (ΦPL) of CPM, CMPM and CMOPM and their molecular packing in single crystals. Reproduced with permission.14 Copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons. 
Alternatively, there are also some systems in which the introduction of alkyl or alkoxy groups facilitates the compact packing of molecules and improves the RTP performance. As shown in Fig. 9, co-enhanced fluorescence and phosphorescence dual emission has been achieved successfully by decorating alkoxy substituents onto the thioxanthone (TX) moiety.26 Initially, H-aggregation was formed between TX molecules. After the incorporation of an isopropoxy group with large steric hindrance, J-aggregation can be formed between TX-OCH(CH3)2 molecules due to the large slip displacement along the short axis direction of the TX unit. Meanwhile, the multiple C–H⋯π interactions induced by the isopropoxy group are conducive to suppressing non-radiative transitions and improving the emission efficiency. As a whole, the additional intermolecular interactions from alkoxy substituents are sufficient to compensate for the energy destabilization, despite the fact that the large steric hindrance of the isopropoxy group has severely reduced the π–π overlap between TX planes in the TX-OCH(CH3)2 crystal. As a result, the PL efficiency is promoted from 1.5% of TX to 45.0% of TX-OCH(CH3)2.
 Fig. 9  Chemical structures, molecular packing in crystals and photoluminescence efficiencies of TX, TX-OCH3, TX-OC2H5, TX-OC3H9, and TX-OCH(CH3)2. Reproduced with permission.26 Copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons. 
In addition to the regulation of the interactions between aromatic rings, the steric hindrance of alkyl groups also has the function of stabilizing the conformers of phenothiazine derivatives with quasi-axial (ax) and quasi-equatorial (eq) ones.25,74,75 As shown in Fig. 10A, the ax phenothiazine conformer was found in OPM with a methyl substituted onto the phenothiazine unit, and the molecules have a character of planar intramolecular charge transfer (PICT), enabling the RTP property of the OPM crystal. When the methyl unit was located on the benzophenone moiety, the resultant OMP possessed the eq phenothiazine conformation, leading to twisted intramolecular charge transfer (TICT) character and the TADF property.75 The different intramolecular charge transfer effects of the varied conformations of the phenothiazine moiety act as a controlling switch between RTP and TADF. Also, the impact of the size of the alkyl groups on the phenothiazine conformer (Fig. 10B) demonstrates that the steric hindrance of alkyl groups is of benefit to stabilize the ax conformer, which usually exhibited the RTP property.25 Compared to the coexistence of the ax and eq conformers in DPTZ-DBT, the pure ax conformer is achieved in DPTZ-Me-DBT, DPTZ-iPr-DBT and DPTZ-tBu-DBT, which was mainly due to the large steric hindrance accompanying with the introduction of alkyl groups at the 1- and 9-positions of phenothiazine. It is conducive to restricting the rotation of the C–N bond and enlarging the energy barrier between the two conformers, which is beneficial to the RTP property of these three compounds DPTZ-Me-DBT, DPTZ-iPr-DBT and DPTZ-tBu-DBT with a lifetime of 31 ms, 37 ms, and 85 ms, respectively.
 Fig. 10  (A) Chemical structures of OPM and OMP and molecular conformations in crystals. (B) Chemical structures of DPTZ-Me-DBT, DPTZ-iPr-DBT and DPTZ-tBu-DBT. Reproduced with permission.75 Copyright 2018, John Wiley and Sons. 
For systematic research on the alkyl group effect on the phosphorescence performance of materials, the introduction of alkyl chains with different lengths at the N position of carbazole molecules was conducted to construct long-lived RTP molecules (Cn), as shown in Fig. 11A.76 The obtained compounds Cn (n = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5) have totally different phosphorescence lifetime and emission intensity. C1, C3 and C4 show relatively longer lifetime and higher RTP intensity, while the phosphorescence performance of C2 and C5 is relatively poorer. The strength of intermolecular interactions corresponded well to the lifetimes of four compounds (C1, C3, C4 and C5) from 810 ms (C3) to 12.4 ms (C5).
 Fig. 11  (A) Chemical structures of Cn (n = 1–5), and their phosphorescence lifetime and photographs as powders under different conditions. (B) Chemical structures of MCzT, ECzT, PCzT, BCzT and FCzT, and the photo activated RTP (room temperature phosphorescence) process. (C) Chemical structures, molecular arrangement and phosphorescence lifetimes of CS-CnH2n+1 (n = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6). Reproduced with permission.76 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. Reproduced with permission.77 Copyright 2018, John Wiley and Sons. Reproduced with permission.28 Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
With the introduction of different alkoxy chains into a triazine core modified with a carbazole unit (Fig. 11B), a significant effect on the π–π overlap between adjacent molecules has been realized by the increased length of alkoxy chains.77 In the initial state, MCzT and ECzT with methyl and ethyl substituents have ultralong lifetimes longer than 1 second, and the molecular packing exhibited larger π–π overlap, while the lifetimes of PCzT, BCzT and FCzT with longer alkyl chains are only about 1 millisecond due to the decreased π–π overlap. It is mainly related to the larger steric hindrance of n-propoxy, n-butoxy and n-pentoxy groups. Interestingly, the phosphorescence lifetime of BCzT increases sharply from 1.8 to 1330 ms after photoactivation for 10 min with a UV lamp under ambient conditions, similar to the first example of photo-induced RTP reported by Li et al.15 Recently, an odd–even effect of alkyl chains on the RTP lifetimes of organic luminogens was also reported by Li et al. (Fig. 11C).28 The six phenothiazine 5,5-dioxide derivatives CS-CnH2n+1 (n = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6) were designed through simply modifying alkyl chains with different lengths; among them, CS-CH3, CS-C3H7, and CS-C5H11 with odd numbers of alkyl chains exhibited longer phosphorescence lifetimes than those of CS-C2H5, CS-C4H9, and CS-C6H13 with even numbers of alkyl chains, respectively. The crystal data disclosed that CS-CH3, CS-C3H7, and CS-C5H11 exhibited larger π–π overlap and stronger π–π interactions, while the π–π interactions in CS-C2H5, CS-C4H9, and CS-C6H13 were weaker. The differences in π–π interactions contributed to variant RTP lifetimes with an odd–even effect.
When an alkyl chain with branched structure was substituted onto a bromonaphthalimide moiety, an organic RTP liquid could be obtained for BNA-2 (Fig. 12), and its RTP lifetime can achieve 5.7 ms, which is similar to that of the analogue BNA-1 (6.2 ms) with methyl modification.78 It is mainly related to the intermolecular Br–O interactions in BNA-2 liquid with large viscosity, favoring suppression of non-radiative transitions and stabilizing triplet excitons.
 Fig. 12  Chemical structures and phosphorescence lifetimes (τ) of BNA-1 (A) and BNA-2 (B), and their photographs as a powder or liquid under daylight. Reproduced with permission.78 Copyright 2019, John Wiley and Sons. 
Actually, alkyl groups are not limited to be regarded as the peripheral units; they can also be used as bridging groups.36,79 As shown in Fig. 13, by introducing alkyl groups as a flexible bridging group onto the carbazole (Cz) molecule, the distorted configuration of imidobenzyl (Id) was obtained, which demonstrated blue shifted phosphorescent emission (525 nm), compared to that of carbazole (555 nm).79 Accordingly, the RTP lifetime of Id (402 ms) was much shorter than that of carbazole (910 ms) due to the resultant looser molecular packing and slipped stacking mode. However, lately, it was reported by Liu et al. that the ultralong organic phosphorescene emission of carbazole and its derivatives was caused by isomers in many cases.80
 Fig. 13  Chemical structures, phosphorescence emission wavelength, and phosphorescence lifetimes (τ) of carbazole (Cz) and imidobenzyl (Id) and their packing modes in crystals. Reproduced with permission.79 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
For organic molecules with alkyl chains as side groups, the increased length resulted in bulk steric hindrance, which can suppress the π–π interactions in most cases. As for organic molecules with alkyl modification in the bridge,81–83 the increased length of alkyl chains can enlarge the distance of the conjugated systems at both ends, benefiting the compact packing of aromatics in some cases. As shown in Fig. 14A, once an alkoxy spacer was inserted between the carbazole and benzophenone group in molecule C–Br, the resultant C–C4–Br exhibited an improved RTP effect with the quantum yield increasing from 5% to 11%, since the inserted alkyl unit was favorable to reduce steric hindrance and facilitate intermolecular electron coupling.81 It can be proved by the decreased distance between the bromine atom and nearby carbazolyl group from 3.989 Å in C–Br to 3.429 Å in C–C4–Br. The separation of aromatics by alkyl chains can also result in the varied emission color of RTP, mainly due to the changeable molecular packing of conjugated systems. Also, the possible effect from carbazole isomers can not be ignored.75 In 2019, it was found that MCzT (Fig. 14B) without a flexible chain as the linkage exhibited only yellow phosphorescence emission at room temperature and 77 K, while MTOD modified with an alkoxy spacer could exhibit color-tunable phosphorescence emission from yellow to blue-green with the temperature changing from room temperature to 77 K.82 The dynamic emission controlled by the temperature indicated a double radiative transition process of phosphorescence; one is blue emission from a single molecule, and the other is yellow phosphorescence from molecular aggregates. Thus, the insertion of alkyl chains as a spacer can be an efficient method to break the conjugation effect between aromatics, favoring dynamic emission by the changeable molecular packing and intermolecular interactions in different conditions.
 Fig. 14  (A) Chemical structures, phosphorescence lifetimes (τ) and phosphorescence quantum yields (ΦP) of C–Br and C–C4–Br and the intermolecular electronic coupling in their crystals. (B) Chemical structures of MCzT and MTOD and phosphorescence photographs under room temperature or 77 K. Reproduced with permission.81 Copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons. 
In addition, through modification of alkyl groups with different lengths between aromatics, the phosphorescence emission can be adjusted from green to orange, along with lifetimes varying in the range of 222–762 ms (Fig. 15A).83 Meanwhile, these compounds exhibited multi-functional properties. The RTP emission of CzEL, CzPL, and CzBL can be excited by visible light, CzEL and CzBL possessed a mechanoluminescence (ML) effect, and all of them exhibited a mechanochromism (MC) property. There was a big difference in the molecular packing modes of these four compounds (Fig. 15B and C). For instance, CzEL with an ethyl linker presented a cross-type arrangement between the carbazole and phthalimide chromophores, while the steric hindrance can be decreased in CzFL with a longer flexible alkyl chain linker, so the carbazole and phthalimide chromophores can be well distributed. The different molecular packing modes caused the distinctive RTP emission wavelength of CzEL (501 nm) and CzFL (561 nm).
 Fig. 15  (A) Chemical structures, phosphorescence emission wavelength, phosphorescence lifetimes and colorful UOP properties of functionalized CzEL, CzPL, CzBL, and CzFL. Molecular arrangement of CzEL (B) and CzFL (C) in single crystals. Reproduced with permission.83 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
Last but not least, another unique feature of alkyl groups is that they can easily form chiral centers through different substituents. The chirality of organic molecules was beneficial to spiral molecular packing in the aggregated state, which was proved to be the preferred stacking mode for the RTP effect.84 A levorotatory compound of S-PCzT and its corresponding racemic compound PCzT were investigated (Fig. 16A).85 The S-PCzT crystal exhibited a longer phosphorescence lifetime (420 ms) and a higher quantum yield (0.58%) than those of PCzT (229 ms, 0.1%). It was found that S-PCzT with chirality could form spiral molecular packing, which enhanced the intermolecular interactions, and generated denser molecular packing, thus promoting the RTP effect. Once the chirality disappeared in the PCzT crystal, it exhibited an antiparallel molecular arrangement, and the intermolecular interactions in PCzT were mainly distributed in dimers constructed from molecules with the same chirality, but the interactions between enantiomer molecules were relatively weaker. As a whole, the intermolecular interactions in the PCzT crystal are weaker than those in the S-PCzT crystal, leading to poorer RTP performance.
 Fig. 16  (A) Chemical structures of R-PCzT and S-PCzT, and their phosphorescence lifetimes (τ), phosphorescence quantum yields (ΦP) and molecular packing modes in crystals. (B) Chemical structures of S-COOCz, R-COOCz and COOCz, and their RTP lifetimes. (C) Chemical structures of TPA-(R/S)-PEA and the RTP lifetimes. Reproduced with permission.85 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. Reproduced with permission.86 Copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons. 
With the aim to further simplify the fabrication process of organic RTP materials with chirality, a pair of RTP enantiomers was generated just by simply binding the chiral center of an ester chain into an achiral phosphor carbazole (Fig. 16B).86 The levorotatory compound S-COOCz, dextrogyrate compound R-COOCz and racemate compound COOCz exhibited a photo induced RTP effect, and the phosphorescence lifetimes can be improved from 80 ms to 600 ms approximately under irradiation with a hand-held UV lamp for several minutes. Duan et al. also cultivated two chiral ionic co-crystals TPA-(R/S)-PEA (Fig. 16C) composed of terephtalic acid (TPA) and chiral α-phenylethyamines (PEAs), and the phosphorescence lifetime can achieve up to 862 ms.87 However, it seems that the chirality of molecules does not have much effect on the molecular packing mode in the above two systems, because the phosphorescence properties of the enantiomers and racemate compounds did not exhibit much difference.
In this section, the effects of alkyl groups as side modifying groups, bridge spacer groups and chiral center units on the RTP property of the resultant organic luminogens were discussed. The molecular packing mode was confirmed as an important factor. Basically, tighter molecular packing modes, which were obtained by elaborate regulation of alkyl groups, facilitated phosphorescence emission.
4. The effect of alkyl substituents on the mechano-responsive properties
The fluorescence and phosphorescence emission of organic materials discussed above both belong to photoluminescence processes, which usually require light irradiation in a certain wavelength range to excite molecules in the ground state. Without the light source, some materials can still emit under a mechanical stimulus, defined as mechanoluminescence (ML).88–95 Also, the mechanical force can bring the color change of photoluminescence emission, named mechanochromism (MC).96–102
Compared to the photoluminescence or electroluminescence process, ML is a new way to utilize mechanical energy, such as friction, grinding or shaking (Fig. 17A). The process of ML is accompanied by the breakage of organic crystals, and the molecular packing has a direct impact on the ML activity, as proved by the totally opposite ML activity of some polymorphs.103–106 Returning to our topic, alkyl groups can also be applied to regulate the packing modes of ML molecules in the aggregated state, in which even simple alkyl groups can play the decisive role.
 Fig. 17  (A) The phenomenon and luminescence process of mechanoluminescence (ML). (B) The phenomenon of mechanochromism (MC). 
In 2017, the ML properties of diarylboryl-phenothiazine derivatives SNB-2Me and SNB-3Me with methyl modification in different quantities were reported (Fig. 18A).107 For the mechano-responsive properties of the two crystals, intriguing ML behavior of SNB-2Me could be observed under external force stimulation, and ML emission with a yellow color can be observed either in the dark or daylight. But another crystal SNB-3Me with one more methyl modification exhibited no ML activity. Further analysis of the crystal data disclosed that the molecules in SNB-2Me formed a 3D supramolecular structure, in which adjacent molecules crossed each other to form an interlocking packing mode. The crossed conformation makes the molecules closer to each other and facilitates stronger intermolecular interactions, contributing to ML emission, since denser molecular packing modes are helpful to reduce the slippage between molecular layers under external pressure, thus decreasing the energy dissipation as non-radiative transitions and improving the luminescence efficiency. For SNB-3Me without ML emission, the phenyl groups of adjacent molecules were relatively parallel accompanied by weaker intermolecular interactions. Likewise, as shown in Fig. 18B, the ML activity of mono-DMACDPS and Me-DMACDPS with similar structures is much different.108 The disappearance of the ML activity of compound Me-DMACDPS after methyl modification is ascribed to the relatively loose molecular packing.
 Fig. 18  (A) Chemical structures of SNB-2Me and SNB-3Me, and their molecular packing modes in single crystals and ML activity. (B) Chemical structures of mono-DMACDPS and Me-DMACDPS, and their molecular packing modes in single crystals. ML: mechanoluminescence. Reproduced with permission.107 Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. Reproduced with permission.108 Copyright 2019, John Wiley and Sons. 
Alternatively, the positive effect of alkyl groups on the ML activity can be realized in phenothiazine derivatives. CzS-CH3 and CzS-C2H5 with methyl and ethyl modification on the phenothiazine units displayed both mechanophosphorescence and RTP properties (Fig. 19A and B).109 Compared to CzS-CH3, CzS-C2H5 displayed a higher PL efficiency (8.1% for CzS-C2H5, and 3.0% for CH3), and the bright ML emission of CzS-C2H5 could be caught by the naked eye under daylight, while only in the dark for CzS-CH3. The phosphorescence can be excited by mechanical force and UV irradiation in these two compounds. It was mainly related to the multiple C–H⋯π interactions and strong intermolecular charge transfer in dimers, which was beneficial to the intersystem crossing process, facilitating the population of excited triplet states. Similarly, the ML properties of Cz-alkyl-6 and Cz-alkyl-7 with the modification of soft alkyl chains onto carbazole units were investigated, as shown in Fig. 19C and D.110 Crystals Cz-alkyl-6 and Cz-alkyl-7 exhibited conical funnel and spiral packing of carbazole moieties, respectively. The cross-arrangement between the molecules in the two crystals made it difficult for the crystals to slip after being stressed. Besides, the alkyl chains aggregated together to generate alkyl chain zones, which can be brittle locations under mechanical force due to the weaker interactions, and beneficial to the ML process. More importantly, according to the alkyl chain zones and relatively looser packing, Cz-alkyl-6 exhibited a low glass transition (−50.8 °C), crystallization (−16.5 °C) and melting point (68.8 °C). A repeated ML property can be easily realized by exposure to artificial sunlight under a solar simulator for 1 minute. With the modification of even longer alkyl chains, the melting point (35.9 °C) of Cz-alkyl-7 decreased significantly, resulting in a much shorter recycle time (10 s) for excellent solar renewable properties.
 Fig. 19  (A) Chemical structure of CzS-CH3, molecular packing mode (dimer) in a single crystal and the frontier orbital contributions of the CzS-CH3 dimer. (B) Chemical structure of CzS-C2H5, molecular packing mode (dimer) in a single crystal and the frontier orbital contributions of the CzS-C2H5 dimer. (C) and (D) Chemical structures of Cz-alkyl-6 and Cz-alkyl-7, and their molecular packing modes from different directions in single crystals. ML: mechanoluminescence. Reproduced with permission.109 Copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons. Reproduced with permission.110 Copyright 2018, John Wiley and Sons. 
For MC research, alkyl groups can not only regulate the molecular packing but also accelerate the self-recovery process, owing to the flexibility of alkyl chains. The influence of the alkyl length on the MC properties of 9,10-bis[(N-alkylphenothiazin-3-yl)vinyl]anthracene derivatives AnPhn (n = 3, 6, 12) (Fig. 20A) was examined.111 With the increased length of alkyl chains, the difference in emission wavelength increased from 33 to 78 nm by grinding and melting. A similar increasing trend could also be observed in other systems, such as phenothiazine derivatives PVBDAn (n = 2, 8, 12, 16) and CnPAHN (n = 2, 4, 8) (Fig. 20B and C).112,113 It is mainly related to the steric effect of alkyl chains, which can suppress the π–π stacking between aromatic rings, resulting in the blue-shifted emission of crystals in the initial state. The longer the length of the alkyl chains, the larger the steric hindrance effect. Nevertheless, the crystal lattice will be undermined after the crystals are subjected to mechanical force, so the steric hindrance of alkyl groups with different chains will be weakened greatly. They exhibited similar stacking modes and interactions, as well as emission wavelengths, in this case. Therefore, the alkyl groups with longer chains will fortify the degree of red shift in the MC process. With regard to the self-recovery process, rapid speed usually occurred in the molecules with longer alkyl chain modification, since the increased length of the alkyl chain in the PVBDAn and CnPAHN series can enhance the flexibility of the organic molecules, favoring molecular motions in the recovery process. However, there are still some other examples declaring that the influence of alkyl groups on the mechanochromism properties is irregular,114 demonstrating the complexity of the alkyl group effect.
 Fig. 20  (A) Chemical structures of AnPhn (n = 3, 6, 12) and the shift of the emission wavelength of the corresponding crystal under mechanical force (λ: maximum emission wavelength, Δλp–g = λground − λpristine, Δλp–m = λmelted − λpristine). (B) and (C) Chemical structures of PVBDAn (n = 2, 8, 12, 16) and CnPAHN (n = 2, 4, 8). 
5. Summary and outlook
In this review, some typical examples were selected to demonstrate the effect of alkyl groups on the luminescence properties of organic molecules in aggregated states, including the steric hindrance effect, the formation of intermolecular C–H⋯π and/or C–H⋯X (X is a heteroatom) interactions, and active molecular motions. The combined effect from these three aspects ultimately leads to the alteration of the luminescence properties by the introduction of alkyl moieties at different positions. In addition to the effect of alkyl groups on the fluorescence, phosphorescence and force-responsive properties, the utilization of alkyl groups is also an efficient method to adjust the performance of some opto-electronic devices, for instance, organic field-effect transistors (OFETs) and organic photovoltaic cells (OPVs). Some experimental data testify the potential of alkyl chain modification in improving the charge transport capability of OFETs115,116 and photoelectric conversion efficiency of OPVs.117
Compared with other substituents, modification with alkyl groups displays excellent design flexibility due to the easy attachment process and multiple reaction positions. Among them, two main linkage modes of alkyl groups to central chromophores are listed: (1) As side modifying groups: the length of the carbon chains, the number of carbon chains or the position of branches can be tuned flexibly, which can adjust the molecular packing effectively through the different steric effects and intermolecular interactions. (2) As bridge modifying groups: alkyl groups can be regarded as spacer units to break down the conjugation systems or reduce the steric effect between conjugated chromophores, in which the length of bridging carbon chains can be changed easily to finely tune the molecular packing. Especially, the substitution of different functional groups on the same carbon atom can be used to construct point chiral centers in the molecules, which is also a good choice to investigate the relationship between the molecular packing and luminescence properties.
The organic materials discussed in this review can be divided into light and mechanical stimulus responsive ones. There are some similarities in the function of alkyl chains in photoluminescence and mechanoluminescence, which is related to steric hindrance, intermolecular interactions and molecular motions induced by alkyl chains. Their difference mainly exists in the excitation process; for a mechanical stimulus as the excitation source, it is a dynamic process for a varied aggregated state (from a crystal to the amorphous state) under mechanical force, resulting in poor recyclability of mechanoluminescence, while photoluminescence is static emission in most cases.
Although we can’t come to an accurate conclusion to determine the effect of alkyl substituents on the luminescence properties of aggregated materials, it is absolute that the molecular packing is an important factor between the molecular structures and luminescence properties, which can be depicted by the concept of Molecular Uniting Set Identified Characteristic (MUSIC).11 Maybe alkyl groups are simple but they are non-negligible, so more attention should be paid to alkyl effects in the future. On the one hand, for molecular engineering of organic luminogens: (1) more central chromophores should be discovered, not just the star chromophores, such as carbazole and phenothiazine; (2) the number of alkyl substituents can’t be limited to one or two; and (3) alkyl groups can not only be used as substituents or modifying groups, but also be regarded as the main skeleton structure to yield some molecules with relatively high molecular weight, or even macromolecules. On the other hand, the effect of alkyl substituents should not be confined to the research field of organic luminogens. There are also some other unique properties, for example, hydrophobicity is an important property of alkyl substituents, which act as the main driving force in the formation of nanoparticles of organic molecules with different shapes in aqueous solution,118 resulting in various biology applications.119 Also, the hydrophobicity of alkyl substituents can be used to construct luminogens with amphipathy, the melting point of materials can also be adjusted by alkyl substituents to construct molecules with self-healing properties, etc. Based on the systematical investigation presented above, there will be more and more examples to certificate the power of the seemingly simple group.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to the National Natural Science Foundation of China (no. 51673151, 21734007 and 21875174), and Excellent Youth Foundation of Hubei Scientific Committee (2020CFA084), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (2042020kf0200) and Wuhan City (2019010701011412) for financial support.
Notes and references
Z. Yang, Z. Mao, Z. Xie, Y. Zhang, S. Liu, J. Zhao, J. Xu, Z. Chi and M. P. Aldred, Recent advances in organic thermally activated delayed fluorescence materials, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 915–1016 RSC .
X. Liang, Z. L. Tu and Y. X. Zheng, Thermally Activated Delayed Fluorescence Materials: Towards Realization of High Efficiency through Strategic Small Molecular Design, Chem. – Eur. J., 2019, 25, 5623–5642 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cai and S. Su, Marching Toward Highly Efficient, Pure-Blue, and Stable Thermally Activated Delayed Fluorescent Organic Light-Emitting Diodes, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1802558 CrossRef .
C. Zhang, P. Chen and W. Hu, Organic Light-Emitting Transistors: Materials, Device Configurations, and Operations, Small, 2016, 12, 1252–1294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. E. Quinn, J. Zhu, X. Li, J. Wang and Y. Li, Recent progress in the development of n-type organic semiconductors for organic field effect transistors, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 8654–8681 RSC .
Y. Huang, Z. Wang, Z. Chen and Q. Zhang, Organic Cocrystals: Beyond Electrical Conductivities and Field-Effect Transistors (FETs), Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 9696–9711 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, Shooting flexible electronics, Front. Phys., 2021, 16, 13602 CrossRef .
J. Zhang, J. Jin, H. Xu, Q. Zhang and W. Huang, Recent progress on organic donor–acceptor complexes as active elements in organic field-effect transistors, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 3485–3498 RSC .
H. Yao, L. Ye, H. Zhang, S. Li, S. Zhang and J. Hou, Molecular Design of Benzodithiophene-Based Organic Photovoltaic Materials, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 7397–7457 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. A. Mazzio and C. K. Luscombe, The future of organic photovoltaics, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 78–90 RSC .
P. Gao, W. Pan, N. Li and B. Tang, Fluorescent probes for organelle-targeted bioactive species imaging, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 6035–6071 RSC .
D. Zheng, Y. Yang and H. Zhu, Recent progress in the development of small-molecule fluorescent probes for the detection of hydrogen peroxide, TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem., 2019, 118, 625–651 CrossRef CAS .
P. Gu, Z. Wang and Q. Zhang, Azaacenes as active elements for sensing and bio applications, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2016, 4, 7060–7074 RSC .
Y. Xie, Y. Ge, Q. Peng, C. Li, Q. Li and Z. Li, How the Molecular Packing Affects the Room Temperature Phosphorescence in Pure Organic Compounds: Ingenious Molecular Design, Detailed Crystal Analysis, and Rational Theoretical Calculations, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606829 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Yang, X. Zhen, B. Wang, X. Gao, Z. Ren, J. Wang, Y. Xie, J. Li, Q. Peng, K. Pu and Z. Li, The influence of the molecular packing on the room temperature phosphorescence of purely organic luminogens, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 840 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Cai, H. Shi, J. Li, L. Gu, Y. Ni, Z. Cheng, S. Wang, W. Xiong, L. Li, Z. An and W. Huang, Visible-Light-Excited Ultralong Organic Phosphorescence by Manipulating Intermolecular Interactions, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701244 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Chen, T. Yu, E. Ubba, Z. Xie, Z. Yang, Y. Zhang, S. Liu, J. Xu, M. P. Aldred and Z. Chi, Achieving Dual-Emissive and Time-Dependent Evolutive Organic Afterglow by Bridging Molecules with Weak Intermolecular Hydrogen Bonding, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7, 1801593 CrossRef .
J. Wang, C. Wang, Y. Gong, Q. Liao, M. Han, T. Jiang, Q. Dang, Y. Li, Q. Li and Z. Li, Bromine-Substituted Fluorene: Molecular Structure, Br–Br Interactions, Room-Temperature Phosphorescence, and Tricolor Triboluminescence, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 16821–16826 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Li, J. Zhou, Z. Mao, Z. Xie, Z. Yang, B. Xu, C. Liu, X. Chen, D. Ren, H. Pan, G. Shi, Y. Zhang and Z. Chi, Transient and Persistent Room-Temperature Mechanoluminescence from a White-Light-Emitting AIEgen with Tricolor Emission Switching Triggered by Light, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 6449–6453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yu, C. Wang, Y. Wei, Y. Fan, J. Yang, J. Wang, M. Han, Q. Li and Z. Li, Halogen-Containing TPA-Based Luminogens: Different Molecular Packing and Different Mechanoluminescence, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7, 1900505 CrossRef .
Q. Liao, Q. Gao, J. Wang, Y. Gong, Q. Peng, Y. Tian, Y. Fan, H. Guo, D. Ding, Q. Li and Z. Li, 9,9-Dimethylxanthene Derivatives with Room-Temperature Phosphorescence: Substituent Effects and Emissive Properties, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 9946–9951 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, Z. Liu and W. J. Jin, The Effect of Electron Donation and Intermolecular Interactions on Ultralong Phosphorescence Lifetime of 4-Carnoyl Phenylboronic Acids, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2020, 124, 2746–2754 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gong, K. Chang, C. Chen, M. Han, X. Zhan, J. Min, X. Jiao, Q. Li and Z. Li, Pyrene-fused PDI based ternary solar cells: high power conversion efficiency over 10%, and improved device thermal stability, Mater. Chem. Front., 2019, 3, 93–102 RSC .
Y. Li, M. Han, W. Yang, J. Guo, K. Chang, J. Wang, J. Min, Q. Li and Z. Li, Perylene diimide-based cathode interfacial materials: adjustable molecular structures and conformation, optimized film morphology, and much improved performance of non-fullerene polymer solar cells, Mater. Chem. Front., 2019, 3, 1840–1848 RSC .
R. Huang, J. S. Ward, N. A. Kukhta, J. Avó, J. Gibson, T. Penfold, J. C. Lima, A. S. Batsanov, M. N. Berberan-Santos, M. R. Bryce and F. B. Dias, The influence of molecular conformation on the photophysics of organic room temperature phosphorescent luminophores, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 9238–9247 RSC .
Y. Wen, H. Liu, S. Zhang, J. Cao, J. De and B. Yang, Achieving Highly Efficient Pure Organic Single-Molecule White-Light Emitter: The Coenhanced Fluorescence and Phosphorescence Dual Emission by Tailoring Alkoxy Substituents, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2020, 8, 1901995 CrossRef CAS .
H. Qiu, A. Sarathy, K. Schulten and J. P. Leburton, Detection and Mapping of DNA Methylation with 2D Material Nanopores, npj 2D Mater. Appl., 2017, 1, 3 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Yang, H. Gao, Y. Wang, Y. Yu, Y. Gong, M. Fang, D. Ding, W. Hu, B. Z. Tang and Z. Li, The odd-even effect of alkyl chain in organic room temperature phosphorescence luminogens and the corresponding in vivo imaging, Mater. Chem. Front., 2019, 3, 1391–1397 RSC .
J. Luo, Z. Xie, J. W. Y. Lam, L. Cheng, B. Z. Tang, H. Chen, C. Qiu, H. S. Kwok, X. Zhan, Y. Liu and D. Zhu, Aggregation-induced emission of 1-methyl-1,2,3,4,5-pentaphenylsilole, Chem. Commun., 2001, 18, 1740–1741 RSC .
S. Liu, C. Chen, Y. Li, H. Zhang, J. Liu, R. Wang, S. T. H. Wong, J. W. Y. Lam, D. Ding and B. Z. Tang, Constitutional Isomerization Enables Bright NIR-II AIEgen for Brain-Inflammation Imaging, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1908125 CrossRef CAS .
G. Chen, W. Li, T. Zhou, Q. Peng, D. Zhai, H. Li, W. Z. Yuan, Y. Zhang and B. Z. Tang, Conjugation-Induced Rigidity in Twisting Molecules: Filling the Gap Between Aggregation-Caused Quenching and Aggregation-Induced Emission, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4496–4501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lei, W. Dai, Z. Liu, S. Guo, Z. Cai, J. Shi, X. Zheng, J. Zhi, B. Tong and Y. Dong, A novel strategy for realizing dual state fluorescence and low-temperature phosphorescence, Mater. Chem. Front., 2019, 3, 284–291 RSC .
W. Dai, P. Liu, S. Guo, Z. Liu, M. Wang, J. Shi, B. Tong, T. Liu, Z. Cai and Y. Dong, Triphenylquinoline (TPQ)-Based Dual-State Emissive Probe for Cell Imaging in Multicellular Tumor Spheroids, ACS Appl. Bio Mater., 2019, 2, 3686–3692 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wu, Z. Chen, W. Chi, A. K. Bindra, L. Gu, C. Qian, B. Wu, B. Yue, G. Liu, G. Yang, L. Zhu and Y. Zhao, Structural Engineering of Luminogens with High Emission Efficiency Both in Solution and in the Solid State, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 11419–11423 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, G. Baryshnikov, L. Ding, X. Bao, X. Li, J. Lu, M. Liu, S. Shen, M. Luo, M. Zhang, H. Ågren, X. Wang and L. Zhu, Dual-Phase Thermally Activated Delayed Fluorescence Luminogens: A Material for Time-Resolved Imaging Independent of Probe Pretreatment and Probe Concentration, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 7548–7554 CrossRef CAS .
R. Iwai, S. Suzuki, S. Sasaki, A. S. Sairi, K. Igawa, T. Suenobu, K. Morokuma and G. I. Konishi, Bridged Stilbenes: AIEgens Designed via a Simple Strategy to Control the Non-radiative Decay Pathway, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 10566–10573 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, F. Tao, Y. Cui and Z. Xu, The aggregation induced fluorescence effect enhanced by a reasonable length of carbon chain, J. Mol. Liq., 2020, 302, 112550 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Guo, C. Yan and W. H. Zhu, High-Performance Quinoline-Malononitrile Core as a Building Block for the Diversity-Oriented Synthesis of AIEgens, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 9812–9825 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Li, Y. Y. Liu, Y. Li, J. B. Zhuang, R. R. Cui, Q. Gong, N. Zhao and B. Z. Tang, Fine Tuning of Emission Behavior, Self-Assembly, Anion Sensing, and Mitochondria Targeting of Pyridinium-Functionalized Tetraphenylethene by Alkyl Chain Engineering, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 24249–24257 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Gu, J. Yao, G. Zhang, Y. Yan, C. Zhang, Q. Peng, Q. Liao, Y. Wu, Z. Xu, Y. Zhao, H. Fu and D. Zhang, Polymorphism-Dependent Emission for Di(p-methoxylphenyl)dibenzofulvene and Analogues: Optical Waveguide/Amplified Spontaneous Emission Behaviors, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 4862–4872 CrossRef CAS .
J. Dong, K. M. Solntsev and L. M. Tolbert, Activation and Tuning of Green Fluorescent Protein Chromophore Emission
by Alkyl Substituent-Mediated Crystal Packing, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 662–670 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ghodbane, W. Brett Fellows, J. R. Bright, D. Ghosh, N. Saffon, L. M. Tolbert, S. Fery-Forgues and K. M. Solntsev, Effects of the benzoxazole group on green fluorescent protein chromophore crystal structure and solid state photophysics, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 2793–2801 RSC .
C. Carayon, A. Ghodbane, L. Gibot, R. Dumur, J. Wang, N. Saffon, M. Rols, K. M. Solntsev and S. Fery-Forgues, Conjugates of Benzoxazole and GFP Chromophore with Aggregation-Induced Enhanced Emission: Influence of the Chain Length on the Formation of Particles and on the Dye Uptake by Living Cells, Small, 2016, 12, 6602–6612 CrossRef CAS .
X. Shen, G. Huang, K. Li, G. Zhang and D. Zhang, Tuning the solid-state emission of the analogous GFP chromophore by varying alkyl chains in the imidazolinone ring, Sci. China: Chem., 2013, 56, 1197–1203 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, Z. Yang, W. Xu, Y. Chu, J. Yang, Y. Yan, Y. Hu, Y. Wang and J. Hua, Fine tuning of pyridinium-functionalized dibenzo[ a, c]phenazine near-infrared AIE fluorescent biosensors for the detection of lipopolysaccharide, bacterial imaging and photodynamic antibacterial therapy, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 12509–12517 RSC .
Kenry, C. Chen and B. Liu, Enhancing the performance of pure organic room-temperature phosphorescent luminophores, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2111–2115 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Z. Yuan, X. Y. Shen, H. Zhao, J. W. Y. Lam, L. Tang, P. Lu, C. Wang, Y. Liu, Z. Wang, Q. Zheng, J. Z. Sun, Y. Ma and B. Z. Tang, Crystallization-Induced Phosphorescence of Pure Organic Luminogens at Room Temperature, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 6090–6099 CrossRef CAS .
O. Bolton, K. Lee, H. Kim, K. Y. Lin and J. Kim, Activating efficient phosphorescence from purely organic materials by crystal design, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 205–210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Cai, H. Shi, D. Tian, H. Ma, Z. Cheng, Q. Wu, M. Gu, L. Huang, Z. An, Q. Peng and W. Huang, Enhancing Ultralong Organic Phosphorescence by Effective π-Type Halogen Bonding, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1705045 CrossRef .
Z. He, H. Gao, S. Zhang, S. Zheng, Y. Wang, Z. Zhao, D. Ding, B. Yang, Y. Zhang and W. Z. Yuan, Achieving Persistent, Efficient, and Robust Room-Temperature Phosphorescence from Pure Organics for Versatile Applications, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1807222 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Zhao, Z. He, J. W. Y. Lam, Q. Peng, H. Ma, Z. Shuai, G. Bai, J. Hao and B. Z. Tang, Rational Molecular Design for Achieving Persistent and Efficient Pure Organic Room-Temperature Phosphorescence, Chem, 2016, 1, 592–602 CAS .
Z. He, W. Zhao, J. W. Y. Lam, Q. Peng, H. Ma, G. Liang, Z. Shuai and B. Z. Tang, White light emission from a single organic molecule with dual phosphorescence at room temperature, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 416–423 CrossRef .
Z. Chai, C. Wang, J. Wang, F. Liu, Y. Xie, Y. Zhang, J. Li, Q. Li and Z. Li, Abnormal room temperature phosphorescence of purely organic boron-containing compounds: the relationship between the emissive behaviorand the molecular packing, and the potential related applications, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 8336–8344 RSC .
Z. Yang, Z. Mao, X. Zhang, D. Ou, Y. Mu, Y. Zhang, C. Zhao, S. Liu, Z. Chi, J. Xu, Y. Wu, P. Lu, A. Lien and M. R. Bryce, Intermolecular Electronic Coupling of Organic Units for Efficient Persistent Room-Temperature Phosphorescence, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 2181–2185 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liang, Y. Shang, K. Liu, Z. Liu, W. Wu, Q. Liu, Q. Zhao, X. Wu, L. Dong and C. Shan, Water-induced ultralong room temperature phosphorescence by constructing hydrogen-bonded networks, Nano Res., 2020, 13, 875–881 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, S. Tang, Y. Wen, S. Zheng, B. Yang and W. Z. Yuan, Nonconventional luminophores with unprecedented efficiencies and color-tunable afterglows, Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7, 2105–2112 RSC .
Z. An, C. Zheng, Y. Tao, R. Chen, H. Shi, T. Chen, Z. Wang, H. Li, R. Deng, X. Liu and W. Huang, Stabilizing triplet excited states for ultralong organic phosphorescence, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 685–690 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Gu, H. Shi, L. Bian, M. Gu, K. Ling, X. Wang, H. Ma, S. Cai, W. Ning, L. Fu, H. Wang, S. Wang, Y. Gao, W. Yao, F. Huo, Y. Tao, Z. An, X. Liu and W. Huang, Colour-tunable ultra-long organic phosphorescence of a single-component molecular crystal, Nat. Photonics, 2019, 13, 406–411 CrossRef CAS .
E. Lucenti, A. Forni, C. Botta, L. Carlucci, C. Giannini, D. Marinotto, A. Pavanello, A. Previtali, S. Righetto and E. Cariati, Cyclic Triimidazole Derivatives: Intriguing Examples of Multiple Emissions and Ultralong Phosphorescence at Room Temperature, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 16302–16307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Lucenti, A. Forni, C. Botta, L. Carlucci, C. Giannini, D. Marinotto, A. Previtali, S. Righetto and E. Cariati, H-Aggregates Granting Crystallization-Induced Emissive Behavior and Ultralong Phosphorescence from a Pure Organic Molecule, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 1894–1898 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Lee, O. Bolton, B. C. Kim, J. H. Youk, S. Takayama and J. Kim, Room Temperature Phosphorescence of Metal-Free Organic Materials in Amorphous Polymer Matrices, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 6325–6329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Kwon, D. Lee, S. Seo, J. Jung and J. Kim, Tailoring Intermolecular Interactions for Efficient Room-Temperature Phosphorescence from Purely Organic Materials in Amorphous Polymer Matrices, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 11177–11181 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhou and D. Yan, Hydrogen-Bonded Two-Component Ionic Crystals Showing Enhanced Long-Lived Room-Temperature Phosphorescence via TADF-Assisted Förster Resonance Energy Transfer, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1807599 CrossRef .
J. J. Li, H. Y. Zhang, Y. Zhang, W. L. Zhou and Y. Liu, Room-Temperature Phosphorescence and Reversible White Light Switch Based on a Cyclodextrin Polypseudorotaxane Xerogel, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7, 1900589 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wu, W. Chi, Z. Chen, G. Liu, L. Gu, A. K. Bindra, G. Yang, X. Liu and Y. Zhao, Achieving Amorphous Ultralong Room Temperature Phosphorescence by Coassembling Planar Small Organic Molecules with Polyvinyl Alcohol, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1807243 CrossRef .
Z. Y. Zhang, Y. Chen and Y. Liu, Efficient Room-Temperature Phosphorescence of a Solid-State Supramolecule Enhanced by Cucurbit[6]uril, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 6028–6032 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, J. Yang, M. Fang, Y. Yu, B. Zou, L. Wang, Y. Tian, J. Cheng, B. Z. Tang and Z. Li, Förster Resonance Energy Transfer: An Efficient Way to Develop Stimulus-Responsive Room-Temperature Phosphorescence Materials and Their Applications, Matter, 2020, 3, 449–463 CrossRef .
Q. Li and Z. Li, Molecular Packing: Another Key Point for the Performance of Organic and Polymeric Optoelectronic Materials, Acc. Chem. Res., 2020, 53, 962–973 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, M. Fang and Z. Li, Stimulus-responsive room temperature phosphorescence in purely organic luminogens, InfoMat, 2020, 2, 791–806 CrossRef CAS .
M. Fang, J. Yang and Z. Li, Recent Advances in Purely Organic Room Temperature Phosphorescence Polymer, Chin. J. Polym. Sci., 2019, 37, 383–393 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ma, J. Wang and H. Tian, Assembling-Induced Emission: An Efficient Approach for Amorphous Metal-Free Organic Emitting Materials with Room-Temperature Phosphorescence, Acc. Chem. Res., 2019, 52, 738–748 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Li, Y. Tang, W. Hu and Z. Li, Fluorescence of Nonaromatic Organic Systems and Room Temperature Phosphorescence of Organic Luminogens: The Intrinsic Principle and Recent Progress, Small, 2018, 14, 1801560 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Mao, Z. Yang, Z. Fan, E. Ubba, W. Li, Y. Li, J. Zhao, Z. Yang, M. P. Aldred and Z. Chi, The methylation effect in prolonging the pure organic room temperature phosphorescence lifetime, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 179–184 RSC .
J. S. Ward, R. S. Nobuyasu, A. S. Batsanov, P. Data, A. P. Monkman, F. B. Dias and M. R. Bryce, The interplay of thermally activated delayed fluorescence (TADF) and room temperature organic phosphorescence in sterically-constrained donor–acceptor charge-transfer molecules, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 2612–2615 RSC .
C. Chen, R. Huang, A. S. Batsanov, P. Pander, Y. Hsu, Z. Chi, F. B. Dias and M. R. Bryce, Intramolecular Charge Transfer Controls Switching Between Room Temperature Phosphorescence and Thermally Activated Delayed Fluorescence, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 16407–16411 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, L. Tang, X. Fan, Y. Wang, K. Zhang, Q. Sun, H. Zhang, S. Xue and W. Yang, 
            N-Alkylcarbazoles: homolog manipulating long-lived room-temperature phosphorescence, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 8984–8989 RSC .
L. Gu, H. Shi, M. Gu, K. Ling, H. Ma, S. Cai, L. Song, C. Ma, H. Li, G. Xing, X. Hang, J. Li, Y. Gao, W. Yao, Z. Shuai, Z. An, X. Liu and W. Huang, Dynamic Ultralong Organic Phosphorescence by Photoactivation, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 8425–8431 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Goudappagouda, A. Manthanath, V. C. Wakchaure, K. C. Ranjeesh, T. Das, K. Vanka, T. Nakanishi and S. S. Babu, Paintable Room-Temperature Phosphorescent Liquid Formulations of Alkylated Bromonaphthalimide, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 2284–2288 CrossRef CAS .
C. Sun, X. Ran, X. Wang, Z. Cheng, Q. Wu, S. Cai, L. Gu, N. Gan, H. Shi, Z. An, H. Shi and W. Huang, Twisted
Molecular Structure on Tuning Ultralong Organic Phosphorescence, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 335–339 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, Z. Chi, K. C. Chong, A. S. Batsanov, Z. Yang, Z. Mao, Z. Yang and B. Liu, Carbazole isomers induce ultralong organic phosphorescence, Nat. Mater., 2020 DOI:10.1038/s41563-020-0797-2 .
S. M. A. Fateminia, Z. Mao, S. Xu, Z. Yang, Z. Chi and B. Liu, Organic Nanocrystals with Bright Red Persistent Room-Temperature Phosphorescence for Biological Applications, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 12160–12164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Niu, C. Ma, W. Ye, H. Wang, W. Jia, H. Shi, H. Shi, Z. An and W. Huang, Colour-tunable ultralong organic phosphorescence upon temperature stimulus, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 19075–19078 RSC .
X. Wang, H. Ma, M. Gu, C. Lin, N. Gan, Z. Xie, H. Wang, L. Bian, L. Fu, S. Cai, Z. Chi, W. Yao, Z. An, H. Shi and W. Huang, Multicolor Ultralong Organic Phosphorescence through Alkyl Engineering for 4D Coding Applications, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 5584–5591 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. Nidhankar, Goudappagouda, K. D. Mohana, S. K. Chaubey, R. Nayak, R. G. Gonnade, G. Kumar, R. Krishnan and S. S. Babu, Self-Assembled Helical Arrays for the Stabilization of the Triplet State, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 13079–13085 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ma, H. Ma, K. Ling, R. Zheng, M. Gu, L. Song, Z. An, H. Shi and W. Huang, Insight into chirality on molecular stacking for tunable ultralong organic phosphorescence, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 10179–10183 RSC .
H. Li, H. Li, W. Wang, Y. Tao, S. Wang, Q. Yang, Y. Jiang, C. Zheng, W. Huang and R. Chen, Stimuli-Responsive Circularly Polarized Organic Ultralong Room Temperature Phosphorescence, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 4756–4762 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chen, Z. Tian, Y. Li, Y. Jiang, M. Liu and P. Duan, Long-Persistent Circularly Polarized Phosphorescence from Chiral Organic Ionic Crystals, Chem. – Eur. J., 2018, 24, 17444–17448 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. I. Zink, Triboluminescence, Acc. Chem. Res., 1978, 11, 289–295 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xie and Z. Li, Triboluminescence: Recalling interest and new aspects, Chem, 2018, 4, 943–971 CAS .
S. Xu, T. Liu, Y. Mu, Y. Wang, Z. Chi, C. Lo, S. Liu, Y. Zhang, A. Lien and J. Xu, An Organic Molecule with Asymmetric Structure Exhibiting Aggregation-Induced Emission, Delayed Fluorescence, and Mechanoluminescence, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 874–878 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, Z. Ren, Z. Xie, Y. Liu, C. Wang, Y. Xie, Q. Peng, B. Xu, W. Tian, F. Zhang, Z. Chi, Q. Li and Z. Li, AIEgen with Fluorescence-Phosphorescence Dual Mechanoluminescence at Room Temperature, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 880–884 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, J. Qin, P. Geng, J. Wang, M. Fang and Z. Li, Molecular Conformation-Dependent Mechanoluminescence: Same Mechanical Stimulus but Different Emissive Color over Time, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 14174–14178 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, Y. Yu, Z. Chai, F. He, C. Wu, Y. Gong, M. Han, Q. Li and Z. Li, Recyclable mechanoluminescent luminogen: Different polymorphs, different Self-Assembly effect of thiophene moiety and recovered molecular packing via simple Thermal-Treatment, Mater. Chem. Front., 2019, 3, 32–38 RSC .
Y. Xie and Z. Li, The development of mechanoluminescence from organic compounds: breakthrough and deep insight, Mater. Chem. Front., 2020, 4, 317–331 RSC .
C. Wang, Y. Yu, Y. Yuan, C. Ren, Q. Liao, J. Wang, Z. Chai, Q. Li and Z. Li, Heartbeat-Sensing Mechanoluminescent Device Based on a Quantitative Relationship between Pressure and Emissive Intensity, Matter, 2020, 2, 181–193 CrossRef .
P. Chen, H. Zhang, L. Niu, Y. Zhang, Y. Chen, H. Fu and Q. Yang, A Solid-State Fluorescent Material Based on Carbazole-Containing Difluoroboron β-Diketonate: Multiple Chromisms, the Self-Assembly Behavior, and Optical Waveguides, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1700332 CrossRef .
Y. Gong, P. Zhang, Y. Gu, J. Wang, M. Han, C. Chen, X. Zhan, Z. Xie, B. Zou, Q. Peng, Z. Chi and Z. Li, The Influence of Molecular Packing on the Emissive Behavior of Pyrene Derivatives: Mechanoluminescence and Mechanochromism, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6, 1800198 CrossRef .
Y. Xie and Z. Li, Recent Advances in the Z/E Isomers of Tetraphenylethene Derivatives: Stereoselective Synthesis, AIE Mechanism, Photophysical Properties, and Application as Chemical Probes, Chem. – Asian J., 2019, 14, 2524–2541 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Man, Z. Lv, Z. Xu, Q. Liao, J. Liu, Y. Liu, L. Fu, M. Liu, S. Bai and H. Fu, Highly Sensitive and Easily Recoverable Excitonic Piezochromic Fluorescent Materials for Haptic Sensors and Anti-Counterfeiting Applications, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2000105 CrossRef CAS .
L. Huang, L. Liu, X. Li, H. Hu, M. Chen, Q. Yang, Z. Ma and X. Jia, Crystal-State Photochromism and Dual-Mode Mechanochromism of an Organic Molecule with Fluorescence, Room-Temperature Phosphorescence, and Delayed Fluorescence, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 16445–16450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Huang, Y. Jiang, S. Yang, B. S. Li and B. Z. Tang, Multistimuli Response and Polymorphism of a Novel Tetraphenylethylene Derivative, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1900516 CrossRef .
S. N. Lei, H. Xiao, Y. Zeng, C. H. Tung, L. Z. Wu and H. Cong, BowtieArene: A Dual Macrocycle Exhibiting Stimuli-Responsive Fluorescence, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 10059–10065 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, Z. Chai, J. Wang, C. Wang, M. Han, Q. Liao, A. Huang, P. Lin, C. Li, Q. Li and Z. Li, Mechanoluminescence or Room-Temperature Phosphorescence: Molecular Packing-Dependent Emission Response, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 17297–17302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, B. Xu, M. Li, Z. Chi, Y. Xie, Q. Li and Z. Li, A stable tetraphenylethene derivative: aggregation-induced emission, different crystalline polymorphs, and totally different mechanoluminescence properties, Mater. Horiz., 2016, 3, 220–225 RSC .
Y. Yu, Y. Fan, C. Wang, Y. Wei, Q. Liao, Q. Li and Z. Li, Phenanthroimidazole derivatives with minor structural differences: crystalline polymorphisms, different molecular packing, and totally different mechanoluminescence, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 13759–13763 RSC .
J. Yang, Z. Ren, B. Chen, M. Fang, Z. Zhao, B. Z. Tang, Q. Peng and Z. Li, Three polymorphs of one luminogen: how the molecular packing affects the RTP and AIE properties?, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 9242–9246 RSC .
K. K. Neena, P. Sudhakar, K. Dipak and P. Thilagar, Diarylboryl-phenothiazine based multifunctional molecular siblings, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 3641–3644 RSC .
L. Zhan, Z. Chen, S. Gong, Y. Xiang, F. Ni, X. Zeng, G. Xie and C. Yang, A Simple Organic Molecule Realizing Simultaneous TADF, RTP, AIE, and Mechanoluminescence: Understanding the Mechanism Behind the Multifunctional Emitter, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 17651–17655 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, X. Gao, Z. Xie, Y. Gong, M. Fang, Q. Peng, Z. Chi and Z. Li, Elucidating the Excited State of Mechanoluminescence in Organic Luminogens with Room-Temperature Phosphorescence, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 15299–15303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, Q. Huang, Z. Mao, Q. Li, L. Jiang, Z. Xie, R. Xu, Z. Yang, J. Zhao, T. Yu, Y. Zhang, M. P. Aldred and Z. Chi, Alkyl Chain Introduction: In Situ Solar-Renewable Colorful Organic Mechanoluminescence Materials, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 12727–12732 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, Z. Ma, Y. Yang, X. Zhang, Z. Chi, S. Liu, J. Xu, X. Jia and Y. Wei, Influence of alkyl length on properties of piezofluorochromic aggregation induced emission compounds derived from 9,10-bis[(N-alkylphenothiazin-3-yl)vinyl]anthracene, Tetrahedron, 2014, 70, 924–929 CrossRef CAS .
P. Xue, B. Yao, X. Liu, J. Sun, P. Gong, Z. Zhang, C. Qian, Y. Zhang and R. Lu, Reversible mechanochromic luminescence of phenothiazine-based 10,10′-bianthracene derivatives with different lengths of alkyl chains, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 1018–1025 RSC .
T. Zhang, Y. Han, K. Wang, M. Liang, W. Bian, Y. Zhang, X. Li, C. Zhang and P. Xue, Alkyl chain-dependent ESIPT luminescent switches of phenothazine derivatives in response to force, Dyes Pigm., 2020, 172, 107835 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ma, X. Zhang, L. Yang, Y. Li, H. Liu, Y. Yang, G. Xie, Y. Ou and Y. Wei, Alkyl length dependent mechanofluorochromism of AIE-based phenothiazinyl fluorophenyl acrylonitrile derivatives, Dyes Pigm., 2017, 136, 85–91 CrossRef CAS .
S. Inoue, H. Minemawari, J. Y. Tsutsumi, M. Chikamatsu, T. Yamada, S. Horiuchi, M. Tanaka, R. Kumai, M. Yoneya and T. Hasegawa, Effects of Substituted Alkyl Chain Length on Solution-Processable Layered Organic Semiconductor Crystals, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 3809–3812 CrossRef CAS .
H. Minemawari, M. Tanaka, S. Tsuzuki, S. Inoue, T. Yamada, R. Kumai, Y. Shimoi and T. Hasegawa, Enhanced Layered-Herringbone Packing due to Long Alkyl Chain Substitution in Solution-Processable Organic Semiconductors, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 1245–1254 CrossRef CAS .
D. Mo, H. Chen, J. Zhou, N. Tang, L. Han, Y. Zhu, P. Chao, H. Lai, Z. Xie and F. He, Alkyl chain engineering of chlorinated acceptors for elevated solar conversion, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 8903–8912 RSC .
M. Soni, S.
K. Das, P. K. Sahu, U. P. Kar, A. Rahaman and M. Sarkar, Synthesis, Photophysics, Live Cell Imaging, and Aggregation Behavior of Some Structurally Similar Alkyl Chain Containing Bromonaphthalimide Systems: Influence of Alkyl Chain Length on the Aggregation Behavior, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 14338–14347 CrossRef CAS .
A. Shao, Y. Xie, S. Zhu, Z. Guo, S. Zhu, J. Guo, P. Shi, T. D. James, H. Tian and W. Zhu, Far-Red and Near-IR AIE-Active Fluorescent Organic Nanoprobes with Enhanced Tumor-Targeting Efficacy: Shape-Specific Effects, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 7275–7280 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2021
Table Content:

Yuanyuan Fan
	Yuanyuan Fan received her Bachelor's degree (2019) from the College of Chemistry and Molecular Science at Wuhan University (China). She is currently a Master's graduate student in the group of Prof. Zhen Li. Her research focuses on the design and synthesis of organic room temperature phosphorescence materials, as well as the investigation of the structure–property relationship.

Qianqian Li
	Qianqian Li received her BSc degree from Hubei University, China, in 2004, and then obtained her PhD degree under the supervision of Prof. Zhen Li at Wuhan University in 2009. She is now a full professor at Wuhan University, and her research interests are in the design and synthesis of new optoelectronic functional materials.

Zhen Li
	Zhen Li received his BSc and PhD degrees from Wuhan University (WHU) in China in 1997 and 2002, respectively, under the supervision of Prof. Jingui Qin. He has been a full professor at WHU since 2006 and chair professor at Tianjin University from 2018. His research interests are in the development of organic molecules and polymers with new structures and new functions for organic electronics and photonics.

 	Fig. 1  The relationship between π-conjugated aromatic cores and alkyl substituents of organic luminogens, and the influence of alkyl substituents on different kinds of luminescence properties in the aggregated state. ML: mechanoluminescence. MC: mechanochromism.	 

 	Fig. 2  The possible positive and negative effects of alkyl substituents on the luminescence properties of organic molecules in aggregated states.	 

 	Fig. 3  (A) Chemical structures of 2TT-mC6B and 2TT-oC6B. (B) Optimized ground-state (S0) geometries of 2TT-mC6B and 2TT-oC6B from theoretical calculations. ACQ: aggregation caused quenching. AIE: aggregation-induced emission. Reproduced with permission.30 Copyright 2020, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 4  The influence of alkyl groups on the fluorescence of materials. (A) Chemical structures and emission colors with maximum peaks of TPEPy-n (n = 1, 4, 7, 10). (B) Chemical structures of DBF-n (n = 1, 2, 4) and emission colors with maximum peaks of crystal DBF-1a, DBF-1b, DBF-2a, DBF-2b, and DBF-4. Reproduced with permission.39 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission.40 Copyright 2012, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 5  (A) Chemical structures and crystal photographs under UV light of GFP-n (n = 0, 1, 6, 12) (top), and crystal structures of GFP-1 and GFP-12 shown in a unit cell (bottom). (B) Chemical structures and emission efficiencies of oGFP-n (n = 1, 4, 5, 8, 12, 16) (top), and crystal structures of oGFP-1 and oGFP-12 (bottom). (C) Chemical structures and crystal photographs under UV light with emission efficiencies of mGFP-Cn (n = 1, 3, 5, 11) (top), and crystal structures of mGFP-C1 and mGFP-C11 shown in a unit cell (bottom). Reproduced with permission.41 Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission.42 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. Reproduced with permission.44 Copyright 2013, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 6  Jablonski diagram with fluorescence and phosphorescence processes.	 

 	Fig. 7  (A) Chemical structures, phosphorescence lifetimes (τ) and quantum yield (ΦP) of 0 M, 1 M and 3 M. Free volume region (ffree) in the unit cells of crystal 0 M (B), 1 M (C) and 3 M (D).	 

 	Fig. 8  Chemical structures, phosphorescence lifetimes (τ), and photoluminescence efficiencies (ΦPL) of CPM, CMPM and CMOPM and their molecular packing in single crystals. Reproduced with permission.14 Copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 9  Chemical structures, molecular packing in crystals and photoluminescence efficiencies of TX, TX-OCH3, TX-OC2H5, TX-OC3H9, and TX-OCH(CH3)2. Reproduced with permission.26 Copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 10  (A) Chemical structures of OPM and OMP and molecular conformations in crystals. (B) Chemical structures of DPTZ-Me-DBT, DPTZ-iPr-DBT and DPTZ-tBu-DBT. Reproduced with permission.75 Copyright 2018, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 11  (A) Chemical structures of Cn (n = 1–5), and their phosphorescence lifetime and photographs as powders under different conditions. (B) Chemical structures of MCzT, ECzT, PCzT, BCzT and FCzT, and the photo activated RTP (room temperature phosphorescence) process. (C) Chemical structures, molecular arrangement and phosphorescence lifetimes of CS-CnH2n+1 (n = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6). Reproduced with permission.76 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. Reproduced with permission.77 Copyright 2018, John Wiley and Sons. Reproduced with permission.28 Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 12  Chemical structures and phosphorescence lifetimes (τ) of BNA-1 (A) and BNA-2 (B), and their photographs as a powder or liquid under daylight. Reproduced with permission.78 Copyright 2019, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 13  Chemical structures, phosphorescence emission wavelength, and phosphorescence lifetimes (τ) of carbazole (Cz) and imidobenzyl (Id) and their packing modes in crystals. Reproduced with permission.79 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  (A) Chemical structures, phosphorescence lifetimes (τ) and phosphorescence quantum yields (ΦP) of C–Br and C–C4–Br and the intermolecular electronic coupling in their crystals. (B) Chemical structures of MCzT and MTOD and phosphorescence photographs under room temperature or 77 K. Reproduced with permission.81 Copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 15  (A) Chemical structures, phosphorescence emission wavelength, phosphorescence lifetimes and colorful UOP properties of functionalized CzEL, CzPL, CzBL, and CzFL. Molecular arrangement of CzEL (B) and CzFL (C) in single crystals. Reproduced with permission.83 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  (A) Chemical structures of R-PCzT and S-PCzT, and their phosphorescence lifetimes (τ), phosphorescence quantum yields (ΦP) and molecular packing modes in crystals. (B) Chemical structures of S-COOCz, R-COOCz and COOCz, and their RTP lifetimes. (C) Chemical structures of TPA-(R/S)-PEA and the RTP lifetimes. Reproduced with permission.85 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. Reproduced with permission.86 Copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 17  (A) The phenomenon and luminescence process of mechanoluminescence (ML). (B) The phenomenon of mechanochromism (MC).	 

 	Fig. 18  (A) Chemical structures of SNB-2Me and SNB-3Me, and their molecular packing modes in single crystals and ML activity. (B) Chemical structures of mono-DMACDPS and Me-DMACDPS, and their molecular packing modes in single crystals. ML: mechanoluminescence. Reproduced with permission.107 Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. Reproduced with permission.108 Copyright 2019, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 19  (A) Chemical structure of CzS-CH3, molecular packing mode (dimer) in a single crystal and the frontier orbital contributions of the CzS-CH3 dimer. (B) Chemical structure of CzS-C2H5, molecular packing mode (dimer) in a single crystal and the frontier orbital contributions of the CzS-C2H5 dimer. (C) and (D) Chemical structures of Cz-alkyl-6 and Cz-alkyl-7, and their molecular packing modes from different directions in single crystals. ML: mechanoluminescence. Reproduced with permission.109 Copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons. Reproduced with permission.110 Copyright 2018, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 20  (A) Chemical structures of AnPhn (n = 3, 6, 12) and the shift of the emission wavelength of the corresponding crystal under mechanical force (λ: maximum emission wavelength, Δλp–g = λground − λpristine, Δλp–m = λmelted − λpristine). (B) and (C) Chemical structures of PVBDAn (n = 2, 8, 12, 16) and CnPAHN (n = 2, 4, 8).	 

This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2021
