Combination of a large cation and coordinating additive improves carrier transport properties in quasi-2D perovskite solar cells   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TA12431A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TA12431A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 9175-9190Combination of a large cation and coordinating additive improves carrier transport properties in quasi-2D perovskite solar cells†

        
          
            Sylvester 
            Sahayaraj
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Eros 
            Radicchi
          
        
      bc, 
      
        
          
            Marcin 
            Ziółek
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Mateusz 
            Ścigaj
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Magdalena 
            Tamulewicz-Szwajkowska
          
        
      f, 
      
        
          
            Jarosław 
            Serafińczuk
          
        
      f, 
      
        
          
            Filippo 
            De Angelis
          
        
      bcg and 

        
          
            Konrad 
            Wojciechowski
          
        
      *ae
aSaule Research Institute, Wroclaw Technology Park, 11 Dunska, 54-130 Wroclaw, Poland
bDepartment of Chemistry, Biology and Biotechnology, University of Perugia, via Elce di Sotto 8, 06123 Perugia, Italy
cComputational Laboratory for Hybrid/Organic Photovoltaics (CLHYO), CNR-ISTM, via Elce di Sotto 8, 06123 Perugia, Italy
dFaculty of Physics, Adam Mickiewicz University, Uniwersytetu Poznańskiego 2, 61-614 Poznan, Poland
eSaule Technologies, Wroclaw Technology Park, 11 Dunska, 54-130 Wroclaw, Poland. E-mail: konrad.wojciechowski@sauletech.com
fDepartment of Nanometrology, Faculty of Microsystem Electronics and Photonics, Wroclaw University of Science and Technology, Janiszewskiego 11/17, Wroclaw, Poland
gCompuNet, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Via Morego 30, 16163 Genova, Italy
Received 
      23rd December 2020
    , Accepted 7th March 2021First published on 9th March 2021AbstractTwo-dimensional perovskite materials have attracted considerable attention from the photovoltaic community, primarily due to their superior environmental stability. It mainly originates from the presence of bulky organic spacer cations that enhance structural stability and moisture resistance. This feature comes with a price, as large cations reduce the anisotropic character of charge transport in 2D-perovskite films, making the cells less efficient than their 3D counterparts. The control of grain orientation in the out-of-plane direction is crucial for enabling efficient device operation. Here, a coordinating additive, thiosemicarbazide (TSC), is reported as an effective templating agent for highly oriented growth (out-of-plane orientation) of low dimensional perovskite crystallites. The effect of TSC is compared to that of ammonium thiocyanate (NH4SCN), which has been reported to stimulate vertical grain orientation. Furthermore, by introducing 4-fluorophenylethylammonium iodide (4F-PEAI) as an organic spacer into the perovskite composition containing TSC, significantly enhanced photovoltaic performance was obtained, reaching a power conversion efficiency of 14.1%. Spectroscopic characterization methods were employed to identify different low dimensional phases present in the perovskite layer, and their distribution across the film. The even spread of low n (2D-like) and bulk (3D-like) phases observed for the combination of TSC and 4F-PEAI is assigned to the improved charge transport characteristics. Furthermore, the new precursor formulation (containing TSC and 4F-PEAI) yields devices with significantly enhanced long-term reliability, which was tested under different aging conditions (elevated temperature and maximum power point tracking).
Introduction
New third-generation thin film photovoltaic (PV) technology based on metal halide perovskite photoactive layers has taken the PV research community by storm.1 Many experts have pinned very high hopes on perovskites, which have been regarded as potential game changers in the future PV landscape, primarily thanks to their extraordinary optoelectronic properties and very rapid technological improvements.2,3 Currently, the best reported lab-scale devices exceeded 25% efficiency, which was achieved in a record-short development time.4 Despite the fact that perovskite PV technology seems to be on the brink of market entrance, there are still a number of challenges and technical aspects, which need to be improved to reach full commercial potential of this technology.5,6 One of them is device reliability, and particularly the inherent stability of perovskite photoactive layers. The first perovskite solar cells (PSCs), demonstrated a decade ago, quickly degraded when exposed to air.7 Nowadays, we can find numerous reports of perovskite devices that can withstand harsh conditions for months.8 However, for perovskites to become a viable PV technology, further improvements in structural stability and feasible 20+ years of device reliability are needed.9,10 One promising approach is to use perovskite compositions of reduced dimensionality.
Particularly, (100)-oriented 2D perovskite materials have gained considerable research interest.11 These structures are described by the empirical formula: A′2An−1PbnX3n+1, where A′ is an organic cation with a large ionic radius (alkyl/aryl ammonium iodide) that does not fit into the 3D crystal lattice, A is a small cation (methylammonium, formamidinium, and caesium), X is a halide ion (I, Cl, and Br), and n refers to the number of inorganic [PbX6]4− sheets sandwiched between the two spacer cations.12 When n is larger than 1, the resulting material is commonly referred to as a quasi-2D perovskite, as in fact it retains some 3D character. The smaller the n, the larger the exciton binding energy, which in turn can affect the carrier diffusion length because of the limited ability of free carrier generation (strongly bound excitons due to dielectric confinement).13
Thanks to the combination of some optoelectronic properties characteristic of 3D perovskites, high emissivity, and enhanced stability, these materials have been explored for various optoelectronic applications.14–16 The latter feature originates from the hydrophobic nature of the organic spacer, which can significantly enhance the moisture resistance of the perovskite structure, provided that the n value is not larger than 5.17,18 It has stimulated increasing interest in using quasi-2D perovskites as photoactive layers in solar cells. The nominal material's formula is typically determined by the molar ratio of appropriate components dissolved in the precursor solution. In reality, deposited thin films contain a combination of different phases with varying n value.19 The caveat of these materials is the insulating nature of the long-chain organic spacer, which forms an electrostatic barrier between conducting inorganic slabs and results in anisotropic charge transport properties.20 Therefore, in planar heterojunction solar cell architectures, in order to satisfy efficient charge extraction out of the perovskite photoactive layer, a high level of grain orientation is essential (perovskite sheets need to be oriented perpendicularly to the substrate, i.e., ‘out-of-plane’). Various strategies of inducing preferential vertical alignment of 2D perovskite crystallites have been explored. Most of the studies focused on adjusting film formation dynamics via modified processing conditions, including hot casting,15 hot spinning,21 and solvent engineering methods.22 Additionally, there are reports on the use of coordinating additives such as NH4SCN or DMSO which can template the perpendicular orientation of perovskite crystallites.23,24
The use of highly electron-donating molecules, leading to the formation of Lewis acid–base adducts, has been a popular approach for making high quality 3D perovskite layers.25,26 It allows controlling the crystallization process via the formation of a stable intermediate phase, resulting in large and highly oriented perovskite crystallites. Out of different electron donating groups, sulphur-based compounds exhibit the highest coordination ability to PbI2 (higher than oxygen and nitrogen donors).25 Among different examples, thiourea and its derivatives were frequently reported as additives for highly efficient devices.27 Furthermore, the chemical characteristics of an organic spacer have a significant impact on various optical and electronic properties of 2D perovskite thin films.28 They also define the structural arrangement of the lattice. For solar cells, within (100)-oriented 2D structures, the Ruddlesden–Popper (RP) phase (monovalent bulky cation; adjacent inorganic sheets are shifted by half of a unit cell) and Dion–Jacobson (DJ) phase (divalent bulky cations; inorganic sheets are stacked directly on top of each other) are the most commonly used.11,29
In this work, we are reporting a new Lewis base additive, thiosemicarbazide (TSC), which we used as an additive for templated growth of quasi-2D perovskite thin films based on a phenylethylammonium spacer. TSC contains a sulphur-based electron donating moiety and displays strong coordination to PbI2. We show that TSC effectively stimulates the vertical alignment of perovskite crystallites, and we compare its effect to that of the NH4SCN additive. Optimized formulations yield perovskite thin films with a strong out-of-plane orientation, deposited in a facile and scalable process (static spin-coating, no antisolvent, and no hot casting). By applying transient absorption spectroscopy and crystallographic analysis, we systematically demonstrate how coordinating molecules influence phase distribution and grain orientation, which also has a strong impact on PV performance. Furthermore, we compare the effect of coordinating additives on perovskite compositions based on two different organic spacers, phenylethylammonium cation (PEA+) and 4-fluoro-phenylethylammonium cation (4F-PEA+). As a result, four different quasi-2D perovskite thin films are analysed, and the respective photovoltaic devices are compared. Using extensive characterization methods, we unveil the properties of our best perovskite formulation, which combines the TSC additive and 4F-PEAI cation and delivers a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 14.1%. Finally, we monitor the long-term stability of these devices under different conditions, including at the maximum power point and under thermal stress.
Experimental methods
Materials
All solution chemicals were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and used as-received without any other refinement unless otherwise specified. Methylammonium Iodide (MAI) was purchased from Lumtec and used as such. 4-Fluorophenethylammonium iodide (4F-PEAI) was purchased from Greatcell Solar, and phenethylammonium iodide (PEAI), ammonium thiocyanate (NH4SCN), ammonium chloride (NH4Cl), thiosemicarbazide (TSC), lead iodide (PbI2, beads), fullerene C60, and bathocuproine (BCP) were purchased from Sigma Aldrich. Pre-patterned substrates with indium tin oxide (ITO) (<15 Ohms per square) were obtained from Lumtec. Poly[bis(4-phenyl)(2,4,6-trimethylphenyl)amine] (PTAA) was purchased from Ossila. Silver (Ag) pellets were purchased from Kurt Leskar.
Device fabrication
Devices were prepared on conductive ITO-coated glass substrates. The substrates were cleaned extensively with deionized water, Milli-Q water, acetone and isopropanol in the mentioned order for 10 minutes in each solvent. The hole transport layer (HTL) solution was prepared by dissolving 20 mg of PTAA in 1 mL of anhydrous toluene. The solution was left to stay for a while and then before spin-coating it was shaken for a few minutes to enable full dissolution. The PTAA solution was spin-coated inside a glove box at 5000 rpm for 30 seconds at an acceleration of 1667 rpm s−1. The spin-coated PTAA layer was then hot plate annealed inside the glove box at 100 °C for 10 minutes. Prior to spin-coating the ITO/glass substrates were subjected to UV-ozone treatment for 15 minutes.
The perovskite precursor solutions were prepared by mixing PbI2, 4F-PEAI or PEAI, and CH3NH3I (MAI) in a stoichiometric ratio of 5:2:4, with a concentration of 0.7 mol L−1 in DMF. The additives NH4Cl and NH4SCN were added in a 1:1 molar ratio, corresponding to a 20 mol% ratio with respect to PbI2, unless otherwise stated. The precursor solution was subjected to continuous stirring overnight on a hot plate maintained at 70 °C.
The 2D perovskite absorber was prepared by spin-coating, followed by subsequent annealing inside a nitrogen filled glove box. 50 μL of the precursor solution was spin-coated on top of the PTAA layer at 5000 rpm for 45 s at an acceleration of 1000 rpm s−1. After the spin-coating was finished, the samples were allowed to dry beside the spin-coater experiencing the glove box environment for about 15 minutes during which the perovskite turns completely dark brown. After this, the dried perovskite layer was transferred to a hot plate for annealing. The perovskite layer was then annealed at 100 °C for 15 minutes. 30 nm of C60 was deposited on top of the perovskite layers by thermal evaporation, followed by thermal evaporation of 5 nm of BCP. Certain samples mentioned in the manuscript, instead of BCP, used a layer of SnOx deposited by atomic layer deposition (ALD). The deposition was carried out in a Beneq TFS-200 ALD reactor at 60 °C using tetrakis(dimethylamido)tin(IV) (TDMASn, Strem, 99%, heated to 45 °C) and water (held at room temperature) at a base pressure of 1.2 mbar. The characteristic times of the deposition were TDMA Sn pulsing of 1 s, TDMA Sn purging of 59 s, water pulsing of 100 ms and water purging of 35 s. Finally, 140 nm of Ag was deposited on top of BCP or SnOx to complete the full process.
Current–voltage measurements
Current density–voltage characterization and stabilized power output measurements were performed using a Keithley 2461 source measure unit (SMU) under simulated AM1.5G irradiation (100 mW cm−2) using an AAA-rated solar simulator (Abet Technologies, sun 2000) calibrated against an RR-208-KG5 silicon reference cell (Abet Technologies). Solar cells were masked to 0.06 cm2. JV measurements were performed in two scan directions, from −0.2 V to 1.5 V, which we call as the forward scan and from 1.5 V to −0.2 V, which we call as the reverse scan. The scan rate was set at 113 mV s−1. The stabilized power output (SPO) was measured at the maximum power point voltage for a duration of at least 60 seconds. For some devices, the SPO was measured for 5 minutes.
For the intensity dependent JV measurements, the JV curves were recorded in the forward direction. Optical density filters with optical densities ranging from 0.1 to 2 were used to cut down the intensity of the incoming radiation.
External quantum efficiency
The EQE spectra were recorded using a Bentham PVE300 photovoltaic characterization system and control software BenWin+.
Photoluminescence measurements
Steady-state photoluminescence (ss-PL) measurements were performed with an Edinburgh Instruments FS5 Spectrofluorometer, equipped with a time correlated single photon counting (TCSPC) unit. Samples were excited with a 405 nm laser diode (60 ps pulse; intensity: 5 mW cm−2).
Transient absorption measurements
Ultrafast dynamics were determined using a broad-band transient absorption (TA) setup (Helios spectrometer, Ultrafast Systems, and Spectra Physics laser system), described previously.30 The IRF (pump–probe cross correlation function) was about 200 fs (full width at half maximum), and transient absorption measurements were performed in the time range of up to 3 ns. One excitation wavelength was used: 490 nm, and the spectra were probed in the range of 500–830 nm. Transient absorption spectra were globally analysed with Surface Explorer Software (Ultrafast System). A multi-exponential function (convoluted with IRF) was fitted to the kinetic vectors of a selected number of singular values to obtain the characteristic time constants and associated wavelength-dependent amplitudes.
Scanning electron microscopy
Cross-sectional and top view images were obtained by employing a focused ion beam scanning electron microscope, FIB-SEM (FEI Helios 600), with an accelerating voltage of 2 kV. The samples were prepared by depositing carbon and platinum films on top of a sample. Only top-view morphology images were taken with a field emission SEM (Phenom ProX), with an accelerating voltage of 5 kV and a working distance of 8.0 mm.
X-ray diffraction measurements
X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were collected with an MRD-Philips diffractometer supported by a parallel beam optic with a 0.1 mm slit in the diffracted beam path (Cu Kα radiation; λ = 1.540597 Å). Using the above configuration, the respective samples were measured using Θ–2Θ scans.
Fourier transform infra-red measurements
The Fourier Transform Infra-Red (FTIR) measurements were performed with a Thermo Scientific instrument in the attenuated total reflectance mode using a diamond stage.
Results and discussion
As discussed above, a high level of grain orientation is required for making efficient solar cells based on quasi-2D perovskite photoactive layers. In order to improve the templating of perovskite grains in the out-of-plane direction, we applied a strong Lewis base as an additive to the perovskite precursor solution. For that we selected thiosemicarbazide (TSC), which was shown to exhibit high Pb-coordination ability,31 and we compared it with the commonly used ammonium thiocyanate (NH4SCN).24,28 In Fig. S1a, ESI,† we show the X-ray diffraction patterns of the PbI2 films processed from different DMF solutions (no additive, with NH4SCN, and with TSC). We assign the 12.7° reflection to PbI2, whereas numerous peaks in the 6–10° range are related to PbI2 coordination complexes with different ligands (solvent molecules and additives).32 In the case of the TSC additive, we observe few broad peaks in the complex range and low intensity of the PbI2 reflection, which confirms the strong coordination ability of this molecule. In the perovskite precursor solutions, we also used an ammonium chloride (NH4Cl) additive, which was previously shown to improve perovskite crystallization, leading to enhanced optoelectronic properties.24 We optimized the concentrations of both NH4Cl and NH4SCN based on the JV performance. The results are shown in Fig. S2, ESI.† We fabricated perovskite layers based on a phenylethylammonium cation spacer, and the nominal n value is equal to 5. The quasi-2D perovskite composition can be written as: (PEA)2MA4Pb5I16. In the process, we used precursor solutions with a varied amount of TSC additive and a reference with the NH4SCN additive. We performed FTIR measurements of perovskite films, with and without TSC, before and after annealing, to understand whether TSC molecules remain in the film after the perovskite crystallization process is completed. In order to better visualize chemical groups characteristic of TSC, we used a high additive content (30 mol% with respect to Pb). We show the spectra in Fig. S1b and c, ESI.† We assign the peak at 795 cm−1, clearly visible for the samples with the TSC additive, to the CS stretching vibration.33 The peak is shifted towards lower frequency compared to that of pure TSC (803 cm−1), which is a sign of S–Pb coordination taking place.34 Upon annealing, the intensity of this peak is largely preserved. This implies that TSC predominantly stays in the layer, which could affect perovskite's electronic properties (especially carrier transport), and it has to be taken into account.
The top surface morphologies of all the perovskite films grown on top of PTAA, analysed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM), are shown in Fig. S3, ESI.† The layer without any additives (‘NA’) does not show a full surface coverage and is characterized by numerous pinholes. Non-continuous morphologies would typically lead to reduced shunt resistance and in turn poor PV performance. With the addition of NH4Cl (‘Cl only’), there is an improvement in the surface coverage, with fewer pinholes. This is to some extent in accordance with the findings reported by Fu et al., who postulated that NH4Cl improves the perovskite crystallization, resulting in a more uniform morphology.24 The sample containing additionally incorporated NH4SCN (‘TC’) shows a dense and continuous morphology, similarly to the layer with TSC of 5 mol% concentration (‘TSC-5’), which is also added on top of the NH4Cl additive. As we increase the concentration of TSC from 5% to 10%, and 20%, we observe less compact morphologies. In Fig. 1a, we show the current density–voltage (JV) characteristics of the best solar cells based on different quasi-2D perovskite thin films, measured under AM1.5G illumination. It is evident that devices with both additives (NH4Cl + NH4SCN – ‘TC’ or NH4Cl + TSC – ‘TSC’) show superior PV performance, reaching a PCE of 11% for ‘TC’ and 10.8% for ‘TSC-5’. PV parameters corresponding to JV curves from Fig. 1a are listed in Table 1. In the set of cells with varied TSC content, we found that 5 mol%, the smallest TSC amount, resulted in the best performing cell (10.8% PCE), very close to the reference device containing the NH4SCN additive. When the TSC content was increased (‘TSC-10’ and ‘TSC-20’), the device performance dropped, which is largely influenced by deteriorated perovskite layer morphologies in these samples, as shown in Fig. S3, ESI.† The statistics of the photovoltaic parameters of a larger set of devices for all the studied variations are shown in Table 1 and Fig. S4, ESI.† The cell types, ‘TC’ and ‘TSC-5’, exhibit very similar average values for all four plotted parameters. Also, these devices show the smallest spread of results. We obtained the worst reproducibility for the cells of perovskite processed without additives; they reach nearly a PCE of 9%, but only for a very few pixels. Additionally, apart from the optimized ‘TC’ and ‘TSC-5’ devices, all the cells display a large hysteresis in JV curves, with the forward scan delivering higher PCE (see Fig. S5, ESI†). It is a well-known problem in perovskite solar cells, as a consequence of ion migration inside the photoactive layer, causing charge accumulation at interfaces, ensuing extraction problems and pronounced recombination losses.35,36
 Fig. 1  (a) Current density–voltage characteristics of the best quasi-2D perovskite solar cells with different combinations of additives and the PEA+ spacer; (b) stabilized power output measurements of the same devices; (c) X-ray diffractograms of the same quasi-2D perovskite film variations and their (d) low angle part. 
Table 1 Average photovoltaic parameters extracted from the JV characterization of a series of quasi-2D perovskite solar cells with PEA+ organic spacer and additive variations. The parameters of the champion devices of each type are in brackets




Cell type

J
avg±SDSC (mA cm−2)
FFavg±SD (%)

V
avg±SDOC (V)
PCEavg±SD (%)




NA
9.7 ± 0.9 (10.8)
50.4 ± 12.8 (59)
0.59 ± 0.21 (1.02)
4 ± 2.23 (8.3)


Cl only
12.6 ± 0.63 (13)
59 ± 13.9 (62)
0.85 ± 0.3 (1.08)
4.34 ± 2.18 (8.9)


TC
13.6 ± 0.5 (13.6)
67 ± 3.8 (71.6)
1.08 ± 0.02 (1.12)
9.8 ± 0.66 (10.9)


TSC-5
14.2 ± 0.6 (15)
68 ± 2.7 (68)
1.03 ± 0.09 (1.11)
9.5 ± 0.94 (10.8)


TSC-10
10.3 ± 0.45 (10.9)
59.5 ± 8 (75)
1 ± 0.09 (1.1)
6.6 ± 0.7 (7.3)


TSC-20
10.3 ± 2.2 (11.4)
63.2 ± 5.8 (64)
1.05 ± 0.07 (1.1)
7.1 ± 0.84 (7.9)




The ‘NA’ sample displays a significantly higher current density value in the reverse scan direction, after biasing the device. This implies fast redistribution of mobile ionic species, which can change the built-in field and temporarily improve the poor transport characteristics in this cell.37 Stabilized power output (SPO) measurements for the best cells of all variations are shown in Fig. 1b. SPO is the most reliable way to report the PV performance of a perovskite solar cell, and the ratio of SPO to JV-derived PCE gives an indication of the severity of ionic modulation and hysteretic effects.38 Large deviations from a value of 1 point to poor interfaces and strong influence of ionic charge effects. These ratios for all quasi-2D perovskite cell types are listed in Table S1, ESI.† As shown in Fig. 1b, SPO values are stable for all the devices which contain at least one type of additive, and the cell without additives displays a rapid decline. This again points to the presence of mobile ionic defects. Overall, poor carrier transport properties could arise from predominantly random crystallite orientations, which is expected for cold spin-coating processing and no templating additives in the precursor solution.39 The ‘TC’ and ‘TSC-5’ cells exhibit SPO values well matched with JV-derived efficiencies.
To get more insight into the characteristics of perovskite layers and explain the observed differences in PV performance, we performed structural and optical characterization of bare perovskite films (deposited on PTAA substrates, same as in functional solar cells). Crystallographic properties we studied by X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements. Fig. 1c shows the X-ray diffractograms of quasi-2D perovskite thin films of all discussed variations. All the layers are polycrystalline and two dominant reflections can be observed. We index these reflections to (110) and (220) according to the reference (01-085-5508) obtained from the ICDD PDF4 database. The planes belong to the family of {111} and {202} crystallographic planes, respectively.24,28 The former is related to the tilted vertical orientation and the latter describes the ideal out-of-plane alignment.40,41 Another minor reflection at 43° can be indexed to (313), and we assign the small peak at 12.7° to PbI2. Additionally, in Fig. 1d we show the low angle (2θ < 10°) part of the diffraction data for all the samples. The diffraction peaks observed in that range are assigned to the (0k0) planes of low-dimensional perovskite crystallites grown parallel to the substrate.42,43 The low angle reflections are absent in all the perovskite films except for the ‘NA’ sample, which had no additives in the precursor solution. The lack of distinct (0k0) planes and dominating (110) and (220) planes indicate the preferred vertical growth of perovskite crystallites.41 We also note that there are more peaks in the XRD patterns of the ‘NA’ and ‘Cl only’ samples, which indicates the presence of more crystallite orientations in these samples. In a 2D perovskite film, preferred grain orientation is required for efficient charge transport. Changes in the relative peak intensities for a polycrystalline material can provide information on the degree of crystallite preferential orientation, which can be referred to as ‘texture’.
In order to compare the templating effect of additives, we calculated the texture coefficient, given by eqn (1):44 (1)where I(hkl) is the peak intensity of the (hkl) plane of interest, Ir(hkl) is the intensity of the same peak in the reference spectrum, and n is the number of (hkl) planes being considered. In our case, we calculated the texture factor C(202), which corresponds to the 2D perovskite structure, and n in the formula equals 3, as there are only 3 strong reflections in the pattern. The degree of preferred orientation of each sample is given by eqn (2).44 (2)
For a thin film of completely random orientation, σ should equal 0 (Chkl for all the peaks should be 1), and it increases with a higher degree of preferred orientation.44
The texture coefficient values and the degree of orientation are functions of the number of peaks observed in the XRD pattern. In Fig. S6, ESI,† we plot the σ and Chkl values for the studied perovskite variations. For the dominant reflection of the (111) plane, in all the perovskite samples containing one of the templating additives (NH4SCN or TSC), the C(111) values vary between 1.32 and 1.48. Within this set, the lowest value was obtained for ‘TSC-5’ and it increases up to 1.48 for the highest TSC content. The degree of preferred orientation (σ) along the [111] direction shows small variations (0.23–0.34) for the samples with templating additives. The second strongest reflection, which was used for the texture calculations, was the (202) plane. In this direction, the highest texture coefficients were obtained for the ‘TC’ and ‘TSC-5’ samples, with the C(202) values of 1.35 and 1.38, respectively. For the films with a higher TSC content (‘TSC-10’ and ‘TSC-20’), the C(202) values dropped below 1.3. As a result, σ values in the [202] direction were the highest for ‘TC’ (0.25), and ‘TSC-5’ (0.27), the two samples yielding the best PV performance. Overall, we can conclude that the perovskite layers prepared with the appropriate amounts of sulphur-containing additives, NH4SCN or TSC, exhibit stronger out-of-plane grain alignment, which is desirable for making high performance solar cells.
Quasi-2D perovskite thin films of a nominal n ≤ 5 are typically comprised of a mixture of other low n phases (each phase has different bandgaps) and 3D-like phases of high n values.45 To identify these phases and understand their distribution, we performed transient absorption spectroscopy (TA) measurements. In order to explain the importance of the coordinating additive from an optical perspective, we limit our discussion to the following samples: ‘Cl only’, ‘TC’ and ‘TSC-5’. In Fig. 2a–f we show the pseudo-colour 2D representations of the TA spectra, recorded with an excitation wavelength of 490 nm (excitation from either the perovskite side or the glass side). The absorbance at a pump wavelength of 490 nm is high for all the samples, so the pump pulse excites mainly the perovskite at a small distance from the entrance, and most of the signal originates from the small penetration depth. The spectrum shows several distinct and strong photobleaching (PB) peaks at 568 nm, 610 nm, 644 nm and 760 nm, which are present in all the perovskite layers. These signals correspond to the phases n = 2, 3, 4, and ∞ (bulk, 3D phase), respectively.46 The bleach corresponding to n = 5 is around 675 nm. It cannot be seen clearly as the signal partially overlaps with the tail of the bulk phase bleach. As indicated by the colour scale bars on the right of each plot, the negative absorption changes (PB signals) correspond to yellow, green and blue colours (the more blue, the more negative), and signals close to zero correspond to orange, while the red colour indicates positive transient absorption signals. Upon excitation low dimensional bleaches appear, while the bulk bleach at around 755 nm is absent for the times below 1 ps. The electron and hole cooling to the edges of conduction and valence bands takes place on a sub-ps time scale, so the appearance of a sharp bleach signal due to band filling in the bulk phase takes place after ∼2 ps.47 Therefore, for the direct comparison between the amplitudes of low dimensional and bulk phases, the transient absorption signal at 2 ps is compared for all the samples. Keeping this in mind, it is evident from Fig. 2 that the bleaches corresponding to low n phases are intense when probed from the glass side. This already tells us that the proportion of the 2D phases is high towards the bottom of the layer. We calculated the proportion of each 2D phase from the contribution of its corresponding bleach using the method described by Zhao et al.48 The results are shown in Fig. S7, ESI† (separately for the perovskite-side and glass-side excitation modes). In the glass-side excitation, the percentage of 2D phases is the highest for the ‘TSC-5’ sample. The 2D phases contribute to over 70% of the entire signal, more than in the sample with the NH4SCN additive (58%). These findings clearly suggest that the use of TSC in optimum concentration favours not only the formation of vertically oriented crystallites, as seen previously from XRD analysis, but also enhances the proportion of the 2D phases that are formed during perovskite crystallization.
 Fig. 2  Pseudo-colour representations of transient absorption signals measured for quasi-2D perovskite films based on the PEA+ cation and different additive combinations, which were processed on glass/ITO/PTAA substrates. The samples were excited through the (a, c and f) perovskite side or (b, d and f) glass side. 
We have now clearly established the importance of using coordinating additives in the precursor solution for the optimal growth of quasi-2D perovskite films. We have also shown that both TSC and NH4SCN can be effectively used as templates for the preferred orientation of perovskite crystallites. So far, in the quasi-2D perovskite compositions we used the phenethylammonium cation (PEA+) as the organic spacer. The fluorinated derivative of this compound, namely 4-fluoro-phenethylammonium (4F-PEA+), was reported as a better alternative for the large cation, owing to a few beneficial characteristics.28,49 The fluorine substitution in the para position of the PEA group results in the reduction of the average ring centroid-to-centroid distances in the organic layer. As a result, orbital interactions between the adjacent inorganic layers are enhanced, leading to more efficient charge transport across the inorganic sheets. This single hack improves the stack alignment of the perovskite layers, allowing for a better interlayer coupling. The 4F-PEA+ cation also has a strong dipole interaction, which could enhance the dissociation of excitons in the perovskite absorber, leading to superior charge transport properties.49 Keeping in mind these advantages, we added 4F-PEAI to our processing routine, and compared it with the PEAI spacer. For each large cation variation, we also compared the effect of the optimized amount of coordinating additives discussed above (TSC or NH4SCN). Overall, we prepared 4 perovskite formulations for further analysis: ‘PEA + TSC’, ‘PEA + TC’, ‘4F-PEA + TSC’ and ‘4F-PEA + TC’.
The JV curves of the best PSCs embedding each perovskite variation are shown in Fig. 3a. Devices with the PEA+ cation yield a PCE of 11.0% and 10.8% for the NH4SCN and TSC additives, respectively. Both cells exhibit SPO very close to the JV-derived efficiency, as shown in Fig. 3b. Devices with the 4F-PEA+ cation deliver a PCE of 9% and 14.1% for the NH4SCN and TSC additives, respectively. We note that for the ‘4FPEA + TC’ device type, a large hysteresis is observed, as shown in Fig. S8, ESI.† SPO measurement for this cell results in a significantly lower efficiency value, and the power output continuously drops in the measuring time window (Fig. 3b). The ‘4F-PEA + TSC’ perovskite sample delivers the highest JV-derived PCE, with a minimal hysteresis, and a similar value of stabilized efficiency (13.8%). This cell type exhibits significantly higher short-circuit current densities, reaching 18.5 mA cm−2 The ‘4FPEA + TSC’ variation also displays an improved fill factor, and VOC values are similar for all device types. The JV parameters of the best performing cells and average values from a larger set of devices are listed in Table 2. We show the graphical representation of the statistics in Fig. S9, ESI.† We also characterized external quantum efficiency (EQE) for the representative cells of each type, and the spectra are shown in Fig. 4a. The ‘4FPEA + TSC’ device shows the highest EQE, which corroborates well with higher current densities in JV characteristics. The integrated JSC calculated from the EQE spectrum for all PSCs varies only by 5% from the values measured from the JV curves. The bandgap of the bulk phase can be deduced from the EQE cut-off. The obtained values for each perovskite type are in good agreement with the bandgap observed from the photoluminescence spectra, which will be discussed later (Fig. S13, ESI†).
 Fig. 3  (a) Current density–voltage characteristics of the best quasi-2D perovskite solar cells with different combinations of large cations and templating additives; (b) stabilized power output measurements of the same devices. 
Table 2 Average photovoltaic parameters extracted from the JV characterization of a series of quasi-2D perovskite solar cells, with different combinations of large cations and templating additives. The parameters of the champion devices of each type are in brackets




Cell Type

J
avg±SDSC (mA cm−2)
FFavg±SD (%)

V
avg±SDOC (V)
PCEavg±SD (%)




PEA + TC
13.6 ± 0.5 (13.6)
67 ± 3.8 (71.6)
1.08 ± 0.02 (1.12)
9.8 ± 0.66 (10.9)


PEA + TSC
14.2 ± 0.6 (15)
68 ± 2.7 (68)
1.03 ± 0.09 (1.11)
9.5 ± 0.94 (10.8)


4FPEA + TC
12.9 ± 0.8 (13.6)
66 ± 10.6 (58.6)
1.08 ± 0.05 (1.1)
8.7 ± 1.1 (9.1)


4FPEA + TSC
16.9 ± 0.75 (18.6)
73 ± 1.7 (73.2)
1.08 ± 0.03 (1.05)
13 ± 0.6 (14.1)




 Fig. 4  (a) EQE spectra of quasi-2D perovskite solar cells with different combinations of large cations and templating additives; (b) JSC and (c) VOC as a function of light intensity for the same cell variations; (d–g) c-AFM surface images for different quasi-2D perovskite films processed on glass/ITO/PTAA substrates and the corresponding line profiles of the current mapping. 
To understand better the differences in charge transport properties in the studied perovskite variations, we performed JSC measurements as a function of the incident light intensity (varied from 1 sun to 0.01 sun by using optical density filters). Since the JSC of a solar cell follows the power law defined as JSC ∝ Pα, a log–log plot of JSCversus light intensity (see Fig. 4b) provides the exponent α, which is a parameter that represents the losses that limit the measured photocurrent.50,51 In general, α = 1, when there is no charge carrier recombination loss in the studied light intensity range (efficient carrier transport and collection). A power exponent less than 1 could result from a number of factors, such as bimolecular recombination, space charge effects, variations in mobility between the two carrier types, or variations in the continuous distribution in the density of states.52 ‘4FPEA + TSC’ shows the highest α of 0.97, which translates to a high collection efficiency of charge carriers before they recombine (good transport properties). In contrast, ‘4FPEA + TC’ displays a significant deviation (α = 0.87), suggesting non-negligible carrier recombination before they can be effectively harvested. In Fig. 4c, we plot VOC values as a function of the incident light intensity (also varied from 1 sun to 0.01 sun), multiplied by JSC. The slope of the straight line obtained from the linear fit is given by the expression: nkT/q, where k is the Boltzmann constant, T is the temperature, and q is the elementary charge. Dividing this number by 0.026 mV (magnitude of kT/q at room temperature) provides the ideality factor (n) of a solar cell. Typically, an ideality factor close to 1 means that bimolecular recombination is a dominant annihilation pathway, and higher values, approaching 2, mean that trap-assisted Shockley–Read–Hall (SRH) recombination dominates.53 The cells ‘PEA + TC’, ‘PEA + TSC’ and ‘4FPEA + TSC’ have n values of 1.44, 1.45 and 1.52, respectively, indicating a certain degree of non-radiative recombination losses. The ‘4FPEA + TC’ sample shows an n value above 2, which points at complex recombination losses and non-optimal device operation. Overall, the n values only marginally differ for the solar cells showing good PV performance (>10%) and high VOC, and the change of the organic spacer does not significantly alter the recombination profile.
At this point, we have shown that the vertical orientation of the crystallites is crucial to the performance of 2D PSCs. The degree of orientation is very sensitive to the processing conditions and differs from one perovskite layer to another. In order to understand the electrical nature of the perovskite surface, we performed conductive AFM (c-AFM) measurements on the four different perovskite films. The 3D current maps of the different perovskite films are shown in Fig. S10a–d, ESI.† The ‘4FPEA + TC’ sample, which yielded poor JV performance, exhibits very low conductivity along the vertical direction. The conductivity is reasonably enhanced for the ‘PEA + TC’ sample, with some regions of the film showing high current values. Both of the perovskite films employing TSC show high and uniform currents, reaching values above 200 pA for the ‘4F-PEA + TSC’ sample. We can infer improved charge carrier transport along the z-axis for this perovskite variation. This significant difference is further illustrated in the line-profile comparison of the c-AFM results, which are combined with AFM topography images in Fig. 4d–g. The line profiles show a considerable improvement in the conductivity of the ‘4FPEA + TSC’ film. The waviness of the profiles (different areas in the scan show different current values), observed for all the samples, points to the specific spatial distribution of the 2D phases containing different n values. These results add additional evidence of the improved electrical characteristics of the perovskite films caused by the synergistic effect of the large cation (4F-PEA+) and coordinating additive (TSC).
We further investigated a range of physical and optoelectronic properties of different quasi-2D perovskite films. For this purpose, we used bare perovskite films, deposited on PTAA substrates. We show top-view SEM images depicting the four variations of the studied perovskite layers in Fig. S11, ESI.† All the films display a uniform morphology and continuous surface coverage, except for the ‘4FPEA + TC’ sample, which shows small bright particles dispersed on the surface. The cross-sectional images of the device structure for the different perovskite types are presented in Fig. S12a–d, ESI.† Again, the ‘4FPEA + TC’ sample shows inconsistencies in the form of cavities and small bright particles, whereas uniform and dense perovskite films were obtained for other variations. The use of the TSC additive leads to very compact films with both large cations, PEA+ and 4F-PEA+.
The XRD patterns of the four perovskite layers are shown in Fig. 5a, and the low angle range (5–10°) is given in Fig. 5b. All the samples exhibit intense (111) and (202) reflections, similarly to the diffractograms we have shown in Fig. 1c. With the inclusion of 4F-PEAI, we observe an increase of peak intensities for both coordinating additives (TSC and NH4SCN). The fluorinated cation has a larger ionic radius, which causes an increase in the lattice constant of the unit cell which results in a shift of peak positions to lower diffraction angles (see Fig. S12e, ESI†). For the ‘4FPEA + TSC’ sample there is a noticeable small reflection at 6.1°, which we assign to the (040) plane of the low dimensional phase (n = 2).54 XRD patterns were also recorded at a constant grazing incidence angle of 4°, which makes the measurement much more sensitive to the surface. We show the GI-XRD diffractograms in Fig. 5c and d. The relative peak intensities in the GI scan are very low in comparison to the conventional Θ–2Θ scan (Fig. S12f, ESI†). Similar to the Θ–2Θ scan, a (0k0) reflection that corresponds to the layered phase (n = 3) can be identified at 7.8° for the ‘4FPEA + TSC’ sample.54 These low n phases are oriented parallel to the substrate and are typically considered deleterious to the PV response, but it was not the case for this perovskite sample (the highest JSC values were obtained for the ‘4FPEA + TSC’, as shown in Table 2).
 Fig. 5  (a) X-ray diffractograms (XRD) of quasi-2D perovskite films with different combinations of large cations and templating additives, processed on glass/ITO/PTAA substrates; (b) low angle range of the same diffractograms; (c) grazing incidence X-ray diffractograms (GI-XRD) of the same set of quasi-2D perovskite films; (d) low angle range of GI-XRD; texture coefficients and corresponding σ values for the same perovskite samples, plotted for the (e) [111] direction and (f) [202] direction. 
In Fig. 5e and f, we show the Chkl texture coefficients and corresponding σ values for the four perovskite variations (following the procedure discussed above and shown in Fig. S6†). When the PEA+ cation is replaced with 4FPEA+, the intensity of the (202) reflection increases in the case of the TSC additive. This in turn yields higher C(202) and σ for this film. These values are the highest among all the studied perovskite samples. On the other hand, the ‘4FPEA + TC’ film displays the lowest C(202) and σ values. The same sample exhibits strong orientation in the [111] direction (the highest C(111) and corresponding σ). The other perovskites also show a high degree of texturing along the [111] axis. We note that bigger differences among these samples were observed in the level of texture along the [202] direction. The trend in this orientation agrees very well with the trend of the PV performances of respective solar cells (see Fig. 3). The (202) planes represent ideal vertical alignment of perovskite crystallites.28,55
In Fig. S13a, ESI,† we show the UV-Vis spectra of the perovskite samples. All the films show distinct absorption peaks at 570 nm, 610 nm and 646 nm, which we assign to the presence of quasi-2D phases, with n to 2, 3 and 4, respectively.56 Perovskite samples containing TSC exhibit stronger absorption of the low n phases, when compared to the films with NH4SCN. This observation is consistent with the previous findings that perovskite films with the TSC additive contain a higher proportion of 2D phases (Fig. S6, ESI†). In Fig. S13b, ESI,† we present PL spectra obtained with perovskite-side excitation in the scan range 680–850 nm. All the samples exhibit dominant emission arising from the bulk (3D-like) perovskite phase. The PL peak position shows minor variations between the different perovskite types. The ‘PEA + TC’ film has PL centred at 760 nm, and it gets blue-shifted to 740 nm when NH4SCN is replaced by TSC. When the PEA+ cation is replaced by 4F-PEA+, the emission peak redshifts to 770 nm. This implies a lower bandgap of the dominant bulk phase for the 4F-PEA-based film.28 It was also reported that the large dipole moment of the fluorinated cation can reduce dielectric confinement characteristics for the low dimensional phases and in turn reduce exciton binding energy, which could reflect in the observed red-shifts of excitonic peaks and absorption onset.28 We note that 4F-PEA-based devices show slightly lower VOC, which could be influenced by the bandgap reduction. The intensities of the recorded PL spectra are very similar for all the perovskite samples.
In order to explore the distribution of different 2D phases in the studied perovskite layers, we recorded transient absorption (TA) spectra in a similar manner as shown in Fig. 2. The spectra of the four perovskite variations, excited from the perovskite and glass sides, are shown in Fig. 6a and b. Similar to the response of the films we have shown earlier, the samples processed with 4F-PEAI also exhibit strong photo-bleaching peaks at 568 nm, 610 nm, 644 nm and 760 nm, which correspond to the phases of n equal to 2, 3, 4 and ∞ (bulk phase), respectively.46 We note that the response of ‘4FPEA + TSC’ is similar for both excitation sides. To exclude the possibility of an accidental effect due to spatial heterogeneity, we measured this sample at different areas in the film, for both excitation sides. We obtained almost the same response for all different spots (see Fig. 6c and d). Previously, we have shown that low n 2D phases are primarily located close to the substrate. However, in the case of ‘4FPEA + TSC’ the distribution of phases is more even throughout the layer. For each observed phase, we calculated the ratio of its occurrence on each side, defined as:  
 Fig. 6  TA signal measured for perovskite layers at a time delay of 2 ps, with the (a) perovskite-side excitation and (b) glass-side excitation; TA signals measured for the 4FPEA + TSC sample at different spots, excited from the (c) perovskite side and (d) glass side. 
We present the results in Table S3, ESI.† It is evident that the smallest differences between different phases were observed only for the ‘4FPEA + TSC’ sample, showing ratios close to 1. For the other three perovskite films, values higher than 1 were seen for the 2D phases (more low n phases are present near the substrate and fewer at the surface) and less than 1 for the bulk phase (more 3D-like phases at the surface). This implies a non-uniform distribution of the different phases across the layer's thickness. It was reported that quasi-2D perovskite films, where phase distribution starts with the smallest n close to the substrate and increases towards the largest n close to the surface, exhibit type-II band alignment of the mixed phases.28 It was suggested that a cascade of energy levels are formed, leading to holes being continuously transported uphill (from large to small n phases) and electrons transported downhill (from small to large n phases). In the ‘4FPEA + TSC’ sample, the ratios for all the phases are close to 1, implying uniform phase distribution throughout that layer. We postulate that the even distribution of low dimensional and bulk phases in this sample leads to more effective charge carrier transport through the photoactive layer (lower chance of encountering transport barriers). It is corroborated by higher JSC, FF and charge collection efficacy, which we have documented for the ‘4FPEA + TSC’ device. Lin et al. recently proposed that charge transport in quasi-2D perovskite films occurs predominantly via 3D-like phases (involving energy transfer from 2D to 3D), which would also strongly favour more even distributions.57 The benefits of such uniform phase spread, leading to enhanced photovoltaic performance, were also recently reported.21
We shed more light on the dynamics of the charge carriers by plotting the TA response (ΔA) as a function of the pump–probe delay time for the photo-bleached peaks. An example of such analysis, plotted for the ‘PEA + TSC’ sample is shown in Fig. S14, ESI.† The 4-exponential analysis is shown for both the global fits and single kinetics. It indicates that the low dimensional phases decay with the components of 450 fs, 36 ps and 300 ps (negative amplitudes in Fig. S13a†). The bulk phase population increases with 450 fs and 36 ps components (positive amplitudes) and decreases with 300 ps and 3.3 ns components (negative amplitudes). In general, for all the perovskite films the bleaches of the low n phases decay much faster than the long-wavelength bleach of the bulk phase. It means that the charges are transferred from the 2D phases to the bulk phase, consistent with a previously mentioned report.57
In Fig. 7 we show differences in the decay of the low dimensional bleaches (n = 2 and 3) and the bulk phase for different perovskite films (glass-side excitation). The bleaches at 573 nm and 613 nm decay very fast, and they contain an ultrafast component of 0.1–0.5 ps (due to exciton annihilation and/or charge cooling), and a longer component with an average decay time ranging from 100 to 700 ps. According to previous studies, a longer lifetime of the low n phases indicates more efficient charge transfer to the bulk phase.58,59 As we observe in Fig. 7, the contribution of the ultrafast component to the kinetics of low n phases is dominant for the layers ‘4FPEA + TC’ and ‘PEA + TC’, whereas for the other two layers containing TSC, the majority of the low dimensional phase decay takes place with the long component (average values: 240 ps for ‘PEA + TSC’ and 700 ps for ‘4FPEA + TSC’). The time constants of the low n decays correlate with the time constants of the increase of the bulk phase bleach. For the highest quality film, ‘4FPEA + TSC’, where the different phases are uniformly distributed, the decay time of the low n phases is the longest among all the samples. We also note that the decay of the bulk phase is the longest in the samples containing TSC. For a pump fluence of 20 μJ cm−2, the average time constant is 3.7–3.8 ns, whereas for the NH4SCN-based films it is about 2 ns. These time constants contain a contribution of second order radiative recombination, so they depend on the pump fluence (confirmed by fluence variation tests, ranging from 5 μJ cm−2 to 150 μJ cm−2). The longer bulk phase decay of the TSC-based samples (measured at the same fluence) suggests that the first order recombination is minimized in the films with TSC, as compared to NH4SCN.
 Fig. 7  (a–d) Kinetics of the transient absorption measurements taken for different quasi-2D perovskite films, corresponding to the bleaches at 573 nm (n = 2), 613 nm (n = 3), and 750 nm (n = ∞). The samples were excited from the glass side. The response of the bulk phase (n = ∞) for perovskite-side excitation is also added for comparison. 
There seems to be a broad consensus that the formation of quasi-2D perovskite thin films originates from a heterogeneous nucleation at the air–liquid interface.54,60,61 Furthermore, in these reports it was shown that the growth of quasi-2D perovskite crystallites can be characterized by the sequence starting from the sol–gel intermediate phases (first nucleation stage), followed by the textured 3D-like perovskite phases (second nucleation stage). Layered perovskite phases of low n values generally adopt in-plane (horizontal) orientations. With a higher ‘n’, the thickness of inorganic slabs in a single sheet increases, which raises the interfacial energy of the PbI2-terminated crystal surface at the film–air interface. This can lead to the PbI2-termination being thermodynamically more stable (as opposed to the large cation-termination) at the nucleation point (film–air interface), which would reflect in a vertical growth of perovskite crystallites.54 The precise structure and composition of lead-based coordination complexes in the precursor solution, which could act as early stage nucleation centres, seem to be very important for the orientation and phase distribution of the forming perovskite crystallites. We characterized the size distribution of the colloidal species present in the studied perovskite precursor solutions by the dynamic light scattering (DLS) technique. The spectra are shown in Fig. S15, ESI.† The solutions with the NH4SCN additive (with both PEAI and 4FPEAI) show a higher content of larger aggregates (particles of sizes above 1 mm), and a wider distribution of sizes than the solutions with the TSC additive. It could imply more structural variations of the colloids in the case of NH4SCN. Intermediate phases based on MAI–PbI2–ligand complexes were suggested as possible initial phases appearing in the beginning of the quasi-2D perovskite film formation.54,60 To understand the effect of a coordinating additive on the formation of these phases, we processed thin films from simple solutions of MAI and PbI2 in DMF, with different additives (no coordinating additive, TSC additive, or NH4SCN additive). In Fig. S16a ESI,† we show the diffractograms of these films, taken right after spin-coating, without any annealing. We have indexed different intermediate phases, visible in the low angle range (5–10°) of the XRD pattern (Fig. S16b, ESI†).62,63 Similar patterns were obtained for all the samples, but a higher number of Pb-complex phases were recorded for the films containing one of the templating additives (NH4SCN or TSC). The uniform phase distribution occurring in the ‘4FPEA + TSC’ perovskite film is in contrast with the other samples, where a gradient of n values across the film thickness can be inferred from the TAS data (decreasing n from the top to the bottom), consistent with literature reports.64,65 One possible explanation for this effect could be a lower content of the MA+ cations in the intermediate phases of the ‘4FPEA + TSC’ precursor, which trigger the nucleation onset, possibly due to a stronger interaction of the 4FPEA+ cation with the Pb-based species, and its higher participation in the coordination complexes. We also note that the presence of a parallel (0k0) low dimensional phase can be observed in this sample (see Fig. 5b and d), which would be consistent with the lower MA+ content in the initial nuclei phases, and the higher content of the ensuing low n layered phases, formed at the top of the film.54 We also compared the solubility of the used organic iodides (MAI, PEAI, and 4FPEAI) in DMF (Table S4, ESI†). The higher the solubility of the organic spacer, the lower the availability of these cations for the lattice incorporation in the initial stages of the perovskite nucleation. It could also contribute to the decrease of the n value from the top to the bottom of the layer. A similar effect was reported by Hu et al. for the perfluorophenethylammonium spacer cation.66
The identification of the colloidal species in the quasi-2D perovskite precursor solutions and the determination of the intermediate phase structures during different nucleation stages are non-trivial tasks and require the utilization of advanced experimental methods. The combination of in situ characterization techniques and molecular modelling could possibly provide the right insight to further understand the role of additives, such as TSC, in the formation of low dimensional perovskite films. The device data and the analysis of quasi-2D perovskite films presented above highlight the importance of vertical texture for obtaining good transport properties, but also indicate that this is not the only prerequisite. A good electronic contact between different phases and efficient charge transfer from the low n phases to the 3D-like perovskite bulk are equally important. In the case of the ‘4FPEA + TSC’ device, despite detectable in-plane low n phases at the top surface of this film, high currents and very good transport properties were obtained. We postulate that the specific coordination complexes present in this precursor solution lead to the crystallization of uniformly distributed layered and bulk phases, which provide efficient percolation pathways for charge carriers. Furthermore, it seems that a type I (straddling gap) heterojunction is predominantly formed between perovskite domains of different energy gaps in this layer. In such a case, both carrier types (electrons and holes) can be efficiently transferred from a low n phase (higher energy gap) to a large n phase (lower energy gap).67
One of the most attractive features of 2D perovskites is enhanced structural stability of these films, when compared with their 3D counterparts. At first, we monitored efficiency the evolution of solar cells as a function of storage time in an inert atmosphere (nitrogen-filled glovebox). All the PSCs show excellent storage stability, retaining over 90% (‘4FPEA + TSC’ sample over 93%) of their original performance over several months. We show the PCE evolution of these devices in Fig. S17a, ESI.† We also investigated the thermal stability of PSCs based on the four perovskite variations. The PCE evolutions are plotted in Fig. 8. We kept unencapsulated devices on a hot plate at an elevated temperature (70 °C) inside a glovebox. The efficiency of ‘PEA + TC’, ‘PEA + TSC’, and ‘4F-PEA + TSC’ increased for the first 360 hours. A similar effect was recently observed by Lian et al.; they reported a significant PCE enhancement of a quasi-2D perovskite solar cell upon the combined effect of heat and light.68 Both devices with TSC were able to retain their initial performance after an additional 480 hours. This was not the case for the solar cells that were processed with NH4SCN (‘PEA + TC’), where PCE dropped significantly after an additional 240 hours. These results demonstrate that the combination of the 4F-PEA+ cation and TSC additive improves the structural stability of the photoactive layer and overall device reliability.68 Then, we evaluated the operational stability of the unencapsulated champion device, ‘4FPEA + TSC’, by measuring its power output evolution under working conditions (constant illumination and applied bias), at low humidity (RH 5–10%). For this purpose, we incorporated a SnOx buffer layer grown by atomic layer deposition (ALD) into the device structure. ALD is known to yield thin layers that are extremely dense, conformal, and pinhole-free. This makes ALD-SnOx a very good barrier, preventing ion migration between the perovskite and metal electrode, a common mechanism of internal device failure.69 In Fig. S17b, ESI,† we show the optimization of the device performance for varied ALD-SnOx thickness. 5 nm of ALD-SnOx, used in place of standard bathocuproine (BCP), yielded comparable results. After 800 hours of operational aging, the cell retained 80% of its original efficiency, as we depict in Fig. 8b.
 Fig. 8  (a) Evolution of normalized PCE values measured for different non-encapsulated solar cells subjected to thermal stress (70 °C) inside a nitrogen-filled glovebox; (b) evolution of the normalized PCE value of the ‘4F-PEA + TSC’ device, which was kept at the maximum power point inside the glovebox (LED light source, intensity: 600 W m−2; temperature: 35–40 °C). 
Conclusions
In summary, we have demonstrated a highly coordinating Lewis base material, thiosemicarbazide, as an effective additive for the templated growth of quasi-2D perovskite thin films. The optimized amount of TSC in the precursor solution helps in obtaining compact and uniform layers, which exhibit a high degree of vertical orientation of perovskite crystallites. Films containing TSC also show a higher proportion of low dimensional phases when compared to the samples processed with another templating additive, NH4SCN. Notably, when we replaced the bulky organic cation, PEA+, with its fluorinated derivative, 4F-PEA+, we observed strongly improved photovoltaic performance for the TSC-based samples, reaching 14.1% efficiency. Detailed spectroscopic analysis has shown that quasi-2D perovskite films processed from the solution containing TSC and 4F-PEA+ display more uniform distribution of 2D and 3D phases in the layer thickness. It leads to improved charge transport properties in the out-of-plane direction. Our transient absorption study has also revealed that photogenerated charge transport in these quasi-2D structures predominantly occurs via bulk, 3D phases. Additionally, we have shown that the newly developed precursor formulation (containing TSC and 4F-PEAI) exhibits significantly enhanced operational (maximum power point) and thermal (70 °C) stability.
This work provides a facile additive approach (no hot casting and no solvent quenching) for fabricating high quality quasi-2D perovskite thin films, suitable for photovoltaic applications. Better understanding of the interplay between lead species, coordinating additives and bulky cations could lead to further improvements in the structural stability and charge transport properties of these materials.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge funding from the Foundation of Polish Science (First TEAM/2017-3/30). KW thanks the National Science Centre (Poland) for the NCN OPUS grant no. UMO-2016/23/B/ST5/02861. E. R. and F. D. A. acknowledge the support from the University of Perugia, under the “Dipartimenti di Eccellenza 2018-2022” (grant AMIS). The authors acknowledge the research team at Saule Technologies for their support.
Notes and references
J.-S. Yeo and Y. Jeong, Energy Rep., 2020, 6, 2075–2085 CrossRef .
H. J. Snaith, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 3623–3630 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Kim, J. B. Whitaker, Z. Li, M. F. A. M. van Hest and K. Zhu, Joule, 2018, 2, 1437–1451 CrossRef CAS .

Best Research-Cell Efficiency Chart, https://www.nrel.gov/pv/cell-efficiency.html, accessed December 7,  2020 Search PubMed.
K. Wojciechowski, D. Forgács and T. Rivera, Sol. RRL, 2019, 3, 1900144 CrossRef .
C. Case, N. Beaumont and D. Kirk, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 2760–2762 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen and N.-G. Park, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 2742–2786 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Snaith, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 372–376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Nat. Energy,  2020, 5, 1 Search PubMed.
F. Zhang, H. Lu, J. Tong, J. J. Berry, M. C. Beard and K. Zhu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 1154–1186 RSC .
L. N. Quan, M. Yuan, R. Comin, O. Voznyy, E. M. Beauregard, S. Hoogland, A. Buin, A. R. Kirmani, K. Zhao, A. Amassian, D. H. Kim and E. H. Sargent, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 2649–2655 CrossRef CAS .
S. Deng, E. Shi, L. Yuan, L. Jin, L. Dou and L. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 664 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tian, L. Zhao, X. Wang, Y.-W. Yeh, N. Yao, B. P. Rand and T.-L. Ren, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 12247–12256 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tsai, W. Nie, J.-C. Blancon, C. C. Stoumpos, R. Asadpour, B. Harutyunyan, A. J. Neukirch, R. Verduzco, J. J. Crochet, S. Tretiak, L. Pedesseau, J. Even, M. A. Alam, G. Gupta, J. Lou, P. M. Ajayan, M. J. Bedzyk, M. G. Kanatzidis and A. D. Mohite, Nature, 2016, 536, 312–316 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, C. Wu, D. Yang, Y. Jiang and S. Priya, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 4919–4929 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. M. Soe, G. P. Nagabhushana, R. Shivaramaiah, H. Tsai, W. Nie, J.-C. Blancon, F. Melkonyan, D. H. Cao, B. Traoré, L. Pedesseau, M. Kepenekian, C. Katan, J. Even, T. J. Marks, A. Navrotsky, A. D. Mohite, C. C. Stoumpos and M. G. Kanatzidis, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2019, 116, 58–66 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Hanmandlu, A. Singh, K. M. Boopathi, C.-S. Lai and C.-W. Chu, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2020, 83, 086502 CrossRef CAS .
R. Quintero-Bermudez, A. Gold-Parker, A. H. Proppe, R. Munir, Z. Yang, S. O. Kelley, A. Amassian, M. F. Toney and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 900–907 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. C. Smith, E. T. Hoke, D. Solis-Ibarra, M. D. McGehee and H. I. Karunadasa, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 11232–11235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, J. Qin, M. Wang, Y. Bai, H. Zou, J. K. Keum, R. Tao, H. Xu, H. Yu, S. Haacke and B. Hu, Joule, 2019, 3, 3061–3071 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qiu, Y. Zheng, Y. Xia, L. Chao, Y. Chen and W. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1806831 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yu, Y. Yan, Y. Chen, P. Chábera, K. Zheng and Z. Liang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 2015–2021 RSC .
W. Fu, J. Wang, L. Zuo, K. Gao, F. Liu, D. S. Ginger and A. K.-Y. Jen, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2086–2093 CrossRef CAS .
B. Li, D. Binks, G. Cao and J. Tian, Small, 2019, 15, 1903613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Hamill, O. Romiluyi, S. A. Thomas, J. Cetola, J. Schwartz, M. F. Toney, P. Clancy and Y.-L. Loo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 14496–14502 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang and K. Zhu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1902579 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shi, Y. Gao, X. Gao, Y. Zhang, J. Zhang, X. Jing and M. Shao, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1901673 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Mao, C. C. Stoumpos and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 1171–1190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Idígoras, G. Burdziński, J. Karolczak, J. Kubicki, G. Oskam, J. A. Anta and M. Ziółek, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 3931–3944 CrossRef .
Y. Wu, F. Xie, H. Chen, X. Yang, H. Su, M. Cai, Z. Zhou, T. Noda and L. Han, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701073 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Zhu, Y. Xu, P. Zhang, J. Shi, Y. Zhao, H. Zhang, J. Wu, Y. Luo, D. Li and Q. Meng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 20874–20881 RSC .
D. M. Wiles and T. Suprunchuk, Can. J. Chem., 1969, 47, 1087–1089 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, Z. Zhang, R. Li, J. J. Wang and A. Ali, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2016, 86, 876–884 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, A. Guerrero, A. Bou, A. M. Al-Mayouf and J. Bisquert, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2054–2079 RSC .
B. Chen, M. Yang, S. Priya and K. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 905–917 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Khassaf, S. K. Yadavalli, O. S. Game, Y. Zhou, N. P. Padture and A. I. Kingon, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 4029–4034 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Habisreutinger, N. K. Noel and H. J. Snaith, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2472–2476 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, G. Wu, W. Fu, M. Qin, W. Yang, J. Yan, Z. Zhang, X. Lu and H. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702498 CrossRef .
Y. Chen, Y. Sun, J. Peng, J. Tang, K. Zheng and Z. Liang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1703487 CrossRef PubMed .
D. H. Cao, C. C. Stoumpos, O. K. Farha, J. T. Hupp and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 7843–7850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, C. Liu, A. Mahata, M. Li, C. Roldán-Carmona, Y. Ding, Z. Arain, W. Xu, Y. Yang, P. A. Schouwink, A. Züttel, F. D. Angelis, S. Dai and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 3093–3101 RSC .
H. Lai, D. Lu, Z. Xu, N. Zheng, Z. Xie and Y. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2001470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zoppi, K. Durose, S. J. C. Irvine and V. Barrioz, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2006, 21, 763–770 CrossRef CAS .
R. Quintero-Bermudez, A. Gold-Parker, A. H. Proppe, R. Munir, Z. Yang, S. O. Kelley, A. Amassian, M. F. Toney and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 900–907 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, J. Lu, T. Zhang, Y. Shen and M. Wang, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1815–1823 CrossRef CAS .
T. C. Sum, N. Mathews, G. Xing, S. S. Lim, W. K. Chong, D. Giovanni and H. A. Dewi, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 294–302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. N. Quan, Y. Zhao, F. P. García de Arquer, R. Sabatini, G. Walters, O. Voznyy, R. Comin, Y. Li, J. Z. Fan, H. Tan, J. Pan, M. Yuan, O. M. Bakr, Z. Lu, D. H. Kim and E. H. Sargent, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 3701–3709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang, D. H. Kim, H. Lu, J.-S. Park, B. W. Larson, J. Hu, L. Gao, C. Xiao, O. G. Reid, X. Chen, Q. Zhao, P. F. Ndione, J. J. Berry, W. You, A. Walsh, M. C. Beard and K. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 5972–5979 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Bi, L. Yang, G. Boschloo, A. Hagfeldt and E. M. J. Johansson, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 1532–1536 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. J. A. Koster, V. D. Mihailetchi, H. Xie and P. W. M. Blom, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 203502 CrossRef .
S. R. Cowan, A. Roy and A. J. Heeger, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 82, 245207 CrossRef .
P. Caprioglio, C. M. Wolff, O. J. Sandberg, A. Armin, B. Rech, S. Albrecht, D. Neher and M. Stolterfoht, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000502 CrossRef CAS .
W. L. Tan, N. M. Kirby, Y.-B. Cheng and C. R. McNeill, Nano Energy, 2021, 83, 105818 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, C. Liu, O. A. Syzgantseva, M. A. Syzgantseva, S. Ma, Y. Ding, M. Cai, X. Liu, S. Dai and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2002966 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qing, X.-K. Liu, M. Li, F. Liu, Z. Yuan, E. Tiukalova, Z. Yan, M. Duchamp, S. Chen, Y. Wang, S. Bai, J.-M. Liu, H. J. Snaith, C.-S. Lee, T. C. Sum and F. Gao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800185 CrossRef .
Y. Lin, Y. Fang, J. Zhao, Y. Shao, S. J. Stuard, M. M. Nahid, H. Ade, Q. Wang, J. E. Shield, N. Zhou, A. M. Moran and J. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1008 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Zheng, D. Liu, Y. Wang, Y. Yang, H. Li, T. Zhang, H. Chen, L. Ji, Z. Chen and S. Li, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 389, 124266 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zheng, C. Zuo, M. Niu, C. Zhou, S. J. Bradley, C. R. Hall, W. Xu, X. Wen, X. Hao, M. Gao, T. A. Smith and K. P. Ghiggino, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 25980–25990 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, S. Luo, Y. Lin, Y. Chen, Y. Deng, Z. Li, K. Meng, G. Chen, T. Huang, S. Xiao, H. Huang, C. Zhou, L. Ding, J. He, J. Huang and Y. Yuan, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 582 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Hoffman, J. Strzalka, N. C. Flanders, I. Hadar, S. A. Cuthriell, Q. Zhang, R. D. Schaller, W. R. Dichtel, L. X. Chen and M. G. Kanatzidis, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2002812 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Petrov, I. P. Sokolova, N. A. Belich, G. S. Peters, P. V. Dorovatovskii, Y. V. Zubavichus, V. N. Khrustalev, A. V. Petrov, M. Grätzel, E. A. Goodilin and A. B. Tarasov, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 20739–20743 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cao, X. Jing, J. Yan, C. Hu, R. Chen, J. Yin, J. Li and N. Zheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 9919–9926 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Qing, X.-K. Liu, M. Li, F. Liu, Z. Yuan, E. Tiukalova, Z. Yan, M. Duchamp, S. Chen, Y. Wang, S. Bai, J.-M. Liu, H. J. Snaith, C.-S. Lee, T. C. Sum and F. Gao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800185 CrossRef .
N. Yantara, A. Bruno, A. Iqbal, N. F. Jamaludin, C. Soci, S. Mhaisalkar and N. Mathews, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800818 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Hu, I. W. H. Oswald, H. Hu, S. J. Stuard, M. M. Nahid, L. Yan, Z. Chen, H. Ade, J. R. Neilson and W. You, ACS Mater. Lett., 2019, 1, 171–176 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fakharuddin, M. Franckevičius, A. Devižis, A. Gelžinis, J. Chmeliov, P. Heremans and V. Gulbinas, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 2010076 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lian, H. Wu, L. Zuo, G. Zhou, X. Wen, Y. Zhang, G. Wu, Z. Xie, H. Zhu and H. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2004188 CrossRef CAS .
K. O. Brinkmann, J. Zhao, N. Pourdavoud, T. Becker, T. Hu, S. Olthof, K. Meerholz, L. Hoffmann, T. Gahlmann, R. Heiderhoff, M. F. Oszajca, N. A. Luechinger, D. Rogalla, Y. Chen, B. Cheng and T. Riedl, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 13938 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ta12431aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Current density–voltage characteristics of the best quasi-2D perovskite solar cells with different combinations of additives and the PEA+ spacer; (b) stabilized power output measurements of the same devices; (c) X-ray diffractograms of the same quasi-2D perovskite film variations and their (d) low angle part.	 

NA	9.7 ± 0.9 (10.8)	50.4 ± 12.8 (59)	0.59 ± 0.21 (1.02)	4 ± 2.23 (8.3)
Cl only	12.6 ± 0.63 (13)	59 ± 13.9 (62)	0.85 ± 0.3 (1.08)	4.34 ± 2.18 (8.9)
TC	13.6 ± 0.5 (13.6)	67 ± 3.8 (71.6)	1.08 ± 0.02 (1.12)	9.8 ± 0.66 (10.9)
TSC-5	14.2 ± 0.6 (15)	68 ± 2.7 (68)	1.03 ± 0.09 (1.11)	9.5 ± 0.94 (10.8)
TSC-10	10.3 ± 0.45 (10.9)	59.5 ± 8 (75)	1 ± 0.09 (1.1)	6.6 ± 0.7 (7.3)
TSC-20	10.3 ± 2.2 (11.4)	63.2 ± 5.8 (64)	1.05 ± 0.07 (1.1)	7.1 ± 0.84 (7.9)
	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 2  Pseudo-colour representations of transient absorption signals measured for quasi-2D perovskite films based on the PEA+ cation and different additive combinations, which were processed on glass/ITO/PTAA substrates. The samples were excited through the (a, c and f) perovskite side or (b, d and f) glass side.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Current density–voltage characteristics of the best quasi-2D perovskite solar cells with different combinations of large cations and templating additives; (b) stabilized power output measurements of the same devices.	 

PEA + TC	13.6 ± 0.5 (13.6)	67 ± 3.8 (71.6)	1.08 ± 0.02 (1.12)	9.8 ± 0.66 (10.9)
PEA + TSC	14.2 ± 0.6 (15)	68 ± 2.7 (68)	1.03 ± 0.09 (1.11)	9.5 ± 0.94 (10.8)
4FPEA + TC	12.9 ± 0.8 (13.6)	66 ± 10.6 (58.6)	1.08 ± 0.05 (1.1)	8.7 ± 1.1 (9.1)
4FPEA + TSC	16.9 ± 0.75 (18.6)	73 ± 1.7 (73.2)	1.08 ± 0.03 (1.05)	13 ± 0.6 (14.1)

 	Fig. 4  (a) EQE spectra of quasi-2D perovskite solar cells with different combinations of large cations and templating additives; (b) JSC and (c) VOC as a function of light intensity for the same cell variations; (d–g) c-AFM surface images for different quasi-2D perovskite films processed on glass/ITO/PTAA substrates and the corresponding line profiles of the current mapping.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) X-ray diffractograms (XRD) of quasi-2D perovskite films with different combinations of large cations and templating additives, processed on glass/ITO/PTAA substrates; (b) low angle range of the same diffractograms; (c) grazing incidence X-ray diffractograms (GI-XRD) of the same set of quasi-2D perovskite films; (d) low angle range of GI-XRD; texture coefficients and corresponding σ values for the same perovskite samples, plotted for the (e) [111] direction and (f) [202] direction.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 6  TA signal measured for perovskite layers at a time delay of 2 ps, with the (a) perovskite-side excitation and (b) glass-side excitation; TA signals measured for the 4FPEA + TSC sample at different spots, excited from the (c) perovskite side and (d) glass side.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a–d) Kinetics of the transient absorption measurements taken for different quasi-2D perovskite films, corresponding to the bleaches at 573 nm (n = 2), 613 nm (n = 3), and 750 nm (n = ∞). The samples were excited from the glass side. The response of the bulk phase (n = ∞) for perovskite-side excitation is also added for comparison.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Evolution of normalized PCE values measured for different non-encapsulated solar cells subjected to thermal stress (70 °C) inside a nitrogen-filled glovebox; (b) evolution of the normalized PCE value of the ‘4F-PEA + TSC’ device, which was kept at the maximum power point inside the glovebox (LED light source, intensity: 600 W m−2; temperature: 35–40 °C).	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ta12431a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
