Charge transfer in metal–organic frameworks  - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2CC05522H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2CC05522H
(Feature Article)
Chem. Commun., 2023, 59, 1569-1588Charge transfer in metal–organic frameworks

        
          
            Ritesh 
            Haldar
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Adrija 
            Ghosh
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Tapas Kumar 
            Maji
          
          
        
      *bc
aTata Institute of Fundamental Research (TIFR) Hyderabad, Hyderabad 500046, India. E-mail: riteshhaldar@tifrh.res.in
bNew Chemistry Unit (NCU), Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific Research, Jakkur, Bangalore-560064, India. E-mail: tmaji@jncasr.ac.in
cChemistry and Physics of Materials Unit (CPMU), School of Advanced Materials (SAMat), Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific Research, Jakkur, Bangalore-560064, India
Received 
      10th October 2022
    , Accepted 30th December 2022First published on 5th January 2023AbstractMetal–organic frameworks (MOFs, also known as porous coordination polymers or PCPs) are a novel class of crystalline porous material. The tailorable porous structure, in terms of size, geometry and function, has attracted the attention of researchers across all disciplines of materials science. One of the many exciting aspects of MOFs is that through directional and reversible coordination bonding, organic linkers (chromophores with metal-coordinating functional groups) and metal ions (and clusters) can be spatially organized in a preconceived geometry. The well-defined spatial geometry of the metals and linkers is very advantageous for optoelectronic functions (solar cells, light-emitting diodes, photocatalysts) of the materials. This feature article evaluates the scope of charge transfer (CT) interactions in MOFs, involving the organic linkers and metal ion or cluster components. Irrespective of the type (size, shape, electronic property) of organic chromophores involved, MOFs provide an insightful path to design and make the CT process efficient. The selected examples of MOFs with CT characteristics do not only illustrate the design principles but render a pathway towards understanding the complex photophysical processes and implementing those for future optoelectronic and catalytic applications.
Ritesh Haldar
Ritesh Haldar received his PhD (Chemistry) in 2015 under the supervision of Prof. Tapas Kumar Maji at the Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific Research (JNCASR), Bangalore, India. He joined the Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT) as an Alexander von Humboldt (AvH) postdoctoral fellow mentored by Prof. Christof Wöll, and later continued as a junior group leader until 2021. Since May, 2021 he has been a Reader at the Tata Institute of Fundamental Research (TIFR), Hyderabad, India. His research interests are inorganic–organic functional materials for chemical separation, catalysis and photophysical property studies.
Adrija Ghosh
Adrija Ghosh obtained her BSc in Chemistry from Presidency University, Kolkata in 2018. She completed her MS in Chemical Sciences from the New Chemistry Unit, Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific Research (JNCASR), Bangalore in 2021. She is currently pursuing her PhD under the guidance of Prof. Tapas Kumar Maji at JNCASR, Bangalore. Her research work mainly focuses on the design and synthesis of metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) by direct methodologies and post-synthetic modification for optoelectronics and catalysis.
Tapas Kumar Maji
Tapas Kumar Maji obtained his PhD in 2002 from the Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science (IACS), Kolkata. After a postdoctoral stint at Kyoto University, Japan he joined Jadavpur University as a lecturer. Then he moved to the Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific Research (JNCASR), Bangalore, where, he is currently a professor in the Chemistry and Physics of Materials Unit. His research focuses on the design and synthesis of bulk and nanoscale metal–organic frameworks (MOFs), organic porous polymers and metal–organic hybrid ‘soft’ materials for energy-storage and conversion, photo-physical analyses and photocatalysis. Prof. Maji has published 245 peer reviewed publications.
Introduction
The electronic structure and related function of an organic material relies on the spatial organization of the assembled molecules, i.e., “proximity and geometry” in its condensed phase. The decisiveness of the “proximity and geometry” effect is substantial, e.g. a highly emissive material can turn into nonemissive,1 and a conducting material starts behaving as an insulator.2 Fundamental photophysical processes, e.g. light absorption, radiative vs. nonradioactive decay, intersystem crossing, charge transfer (CT), electron transfer, and energy transfer, can be regulated by intermolecular interactions, i.e. by controlling the “proximity and geometry”. This large impact on the macroscopic properties of organic materials originates at the microscopic level molecular assembly process, which is governed by various noncovalent interactions (van der Waals, ionic, hydrogen bonds, π⋯π interactions). Noncovalent interactions are weak and unpredictable when compared to covalent and coordination bonds. Thus, the design of “proximity and geometry” by noncovalent interactions alone remains a significant challenge. These limitations can be overcome by using coordination bond-guided assembly in metal–organic frameworks (MOFs).3–5
Metal–organic frameworks (MOFs)5 or porous coordination polymers (PCPs)6,7 are constructed by linking inorganic nodes (metal/metal–oxo cluster) and organic linkers (chromophores with the metal-coordinating functional group) via coordination bonds. Known for their ultrahigh surface areas (>7000 m2 g−1)8 and foreseeable tailored structures, MOFs are explored for potential applications in gas storage,9–11 separation12–16 ion exchange and separation,17,18 energy harvesting19,20 and storage,21 water harvesting,22 sensing23–25 and catalysis.26,27 Noteworthy, in these structures, the optically active components (i.e. chromophores) can be assembled in a crystalline and tailorable geometry/position.1,28–32 Further, the geometry and inter-molecular (chromophore) distances can be preconceived either by isoreticular chemistry principles or in silico. These advantages are truly remarkable compared with organic self-assembled materials in which structure prediction and property correlation are challenging. These crystalline frameworks can allow intermolecular charge transfer interactions between two building blocks (linker-to-linker, linker-to-metal node). Furthermore, the well-defined nanopores of MOFs provide a suitable environment for confining electron donor and acceptor molecules. Considering these above-mentioned features, an emerging prospect is optoelectronics, and recently this has been emphasized on numerous occasions.29,33–35 Some of the exciting findings in the area of optoelectronics using MOFs are: (i) metallic conduction behavior in 2D MOFs (103 S m−1 at 300 K),36 (ii) high mobility band-like charge transport (220 cm2 V−1 S−1),37 (iii) photon upconversion at the MOF–MOF interface having a low threshold energy,38 (iv) highly efficient and anisotropic energy transfer,39–42 and (v) photoinduced charge generation.43 While these above-mentioned findings are primarily related to the organic-linker of the MOF structures, optoelectronic functions can also be modulated by introducing suitable metal-nodes. By tuning the energy levels of the metal node and linker, linker-to-metal, metal-to-linker or metal-to-metal charge transfer is feasible.44–46 Using these inter-strut (metal-node or linker) interactions, redox-based chemical reactions can be carried out.47 Furthermore, realizing CT interactions in MOFs allows appropriate engineering of the bandgap (<3 eV) as well as the valence and conduction band of the materials, which paves the way for harvesting visible light and ensuing applications in photocatalytic reactions, e.g. water splitting, CO2 reduction.48–54 These and many other frontiers of optoelectronic functions28,39,55–60 have been evaluated in this review and other previous reviews also.33,61 This account aims to highlight selective examples that detail the CT process; illustrate design guidelines and possible applications.
Charge transfer (CT)
For organic systems, an electron-rich (low ionization potential; donor or D) and a deficient (high electron affinity; acceptor or A) molecule in close proximity can form a CT state and can be defined as Dδ+–Aδ−. The exact definition of the “close proximity” that will lead to CT is difficult to establish. A common observation is that the dipoles of the D and A should be close to parallel and the distances should be within ∼4 Å. In the solution phase, a polar environment will be ideal for stabilizing the CT state because of its inherent ionic nature. The ground state association of Dδ+–Aδ− can be easily characterized by recording the absorption spectrum. Because of the partial redistribution of charges in the A and D, the association complex is energetically stabilized and hence will be characterized by a red-shifted broad absorption band in the visible range of the absorption spectrum (Fig. 1a and b). With a higher percentage of charge sharing, the Dδ+–Aδ− state will be energetically stabilized and hence the absorption band will make a red shift. In Fig. 1b, a CT state and its photophysical features are illustrated schematically.
 Fig. 1  Charge transfer in organic donor–acceptor assembly: (a) different excited state energy levels; (b) Dδ+–Aδ− CT state characterization by absorption spectra; (c) illustration of CT state vs. exciplex state. Note the broad featureless emission profile is common for exciplex and CT. The grey shaded absorption spectrum presented here, is typical for solid state materials. However, in the solution state vibronic features can be seen, and the CT state absorption can be very distinct. 
Note that the Dδ+–Aδ− complex is not similar to a radical ion pair (D˙+–A˙−), in which one electron is transferred from D to A. One easy way to distinguish these two states is to evaluate the excited state. Photoexcitation of the Dδ+–Aδ− state can result in a radiative decay, if radiative energy does not couple with the phonon modes of the structure. Hence the radiative decay in the Dδ+–Aδ− state is not always predictable, while the D˙+–A˙− state cannot show any radiative decay. The decay lifetime of the Dδ+–Aδ− excited state can be substantially longer than the individual D and A excited states. The typical exciton like feature of the CT excited state can be attributed to the low dielectric constant of the organic semiconductors, leading to an efficient localization of the charges (strongly bound Dδ+–Aδ−). Note, if the Dδ+–Aδ− state is ionizable at the excited state (low exciton binding energy), a D˙+–A˙− state can form.
Another type of excited state, which resembles the CT excited state, is an exciplex (Fig. 1c). In this case, the D–A association is in the excited state only, and hence the absorption spectrum will not exhibit any additional band for the exciplex formation. To distinguish these two states, the following experiment can be carried out: record the excitation spectrum at the low energy (red edge) of the emission spectrum and compare the spectrum with the absorption spectrum. A distinct low-energy broad band should confirm the CT state (illustrated in Fig. 1b). A similar excitation and absorption spectra will confirm the exciplex formation. This is illustrated schematically in Fig. 1c. In the later sections, we will discuss with specific examples how both of these two different excited states may coexist in one D–A system.
In a coordination compound, CT process can also involve a metal center. The redistribution of electron density occurs between the molecular orbital of the organic linker and the vacant or filled orbital of the metals to reduce or oxidize the metal center, respectively. These ligand to metal and metal to ligand CT (LMCT and MLCT) processes are spin allowed and Laporte allowed, resulting in a substantially higher molar extinction coefficient (i.e. intense color) compared to that of d–d transitions. Studies of the MLCT and MMCT bands and related properties are discussed elsewhere62,63 and an elaborate discussion64 is not in the scope of this feature article. We have discussed relevant cases in different sections of this feature article.
Charge transfer in metal–organic frameworks
The previous discussion of the CT complex clearly chalks out the requirements for CT type interactions. The geometric restriction that can endow dipole–dipole D–A interactions can be achieved by coordination driven self-assembly in MOFs. The MOF approach can be defined as follows: (i) the donor and acceptor chromophores are functionalized with –COOH, pyridine and other end-groups so that these can coordinate with the metal ions/clusters to form extended periodic structure, (ii) the metal-node can also act as one of the components of the D–A pair, (iii) in the periodic structure the distance between the donor–acceptor is well defined; this information helps to calculate the optical and electronic properties in a straightforward fashion, (iv) the distance between the donor–acceptor can be tuned by changing the length of the linkers (chromophores with metal-coordination functionalities), (v) donor or acceptor chromophores can also be used as a guest molecule, which fills ups the void space of the MOFs. A schematic illustration of the MOF structure containing D and A as the linker or guest simplifies the discussed design strategy (Fig. 2).
 Fig. 2  A schematic illustration of the MOF based assembly of donor–acceptor chromophores/metal-nodes exhibiting charge transfer interactions. The grey rods are organic linkers. 
The CT MOF topologies are very diverse. To simplify our discussion, we have categorized the CT MOFs as follows: (A) linker–linker CT, (B) linker–guest CT, (C) linker–metal CT and (D) metal–metal CT. A very distinct feature of these CT MOFs is their intrinsic porosity. The CT complexes formed in organic self-assembled structures, e.g. tetrathiofulvlene-7,7′,8,8′-tetracyanoquinodimethane (TTF–TCNQ),65 do not exhibit porosity. This additional advantage of CT MOFs has been well explored for sensing, as is discussed in the following sections.
(A) Linker–linker CT MOFs
In this type of CT MOF, the structure is constructed by a set of D–A pair linkers. The design principle of this type must also take care of the fact that the transition dipoles of the D and A linkers should not be orthogonal. In such a scenario, the electronic coupling becomes difficult. In the following examples, these geometric requirements are well illustrated.
Dincă and coworkers reported a pillared-layer interpenetrated MOF {Zn2(ndc)2(dpNDI)} (ndc = 2,6-naphthalenedicarboxylate, dpNDI = N,N′-di(4-pyridyl)-1,4,5,8-naphthalenediimide), and looked into the photophysical properties.66 In this case, an inter-net ndc:dpNDI π–π stacking is observed with a π–π distance of 3.42 Å. This close interaction resulted in a ground state CT, as can be realized by the appearance of a broad absorption band in the visible region of the absorption spectrum (Fig. 3a and b). The plot of the electron and hole density of the donor–acceptor pair further confirmed the CT interaction (Fig. 3c).
 Fig. 3  (a) View of the π–π donor–acceptor pair in the MOF structure, (b) absorption spectra of the linkers and the MOF, showing the appearance of the additional absorption band in the visible region, corresponding to the CT state, (c) calculated electron and hole density change in the donor–acceptor pairs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 66. 
Among the dpNDI-acceptor based MOFs, a common feature is inter-net (i.e. between the interpenetrated 3D nets) interactions. The nature of the interaction is variable, as the interpenetrated nets are dynamic in nature. In one particular case, the inter-net interactions lead to a radical ion pair (D˙+–A˙−) formation upon photoexcitation of the CT state, unlike the cases discussed above (Fig. 4a). This bipillared-layer interpenetrated MOF is {[Cd(bpdc)(dpNDI)]·guest} (bpdc = 4,4′-biphenyldicarboxylic acid, guest = 4.5 H2O and DMF). The 2D layer is formed by the Cd2(μ-OCO)2 node and bpdc linker, which acts as an electron donor, and dpNDI acts as pillar (Fig. 4b and c). The interpenetrated nets leave substantial void space (pore dimensions ∼6.4 × 7.1 Å) to accommodate aromatic guest molecules. It was observed that the pristine MOF exhibited the characteristic π–π* and n–π* transitions corresponding to bpdc and dpNDI, along with a very weak absorption band in the 400–600 nm region stemming from the CT interactions. Upon UV-light irradiation, new absorption peaks could be seen in the visible range of the absorption spectrum (at 478, 617, 737 and 821 nm), which are related to the dpNDI radical anion formation (Fig. 4d–g). By performing several control experiments, it was confirmed that photoinduced electron transfer (PET) occurs from the bpdc to the dpNDI. Either the carboxylate oxygen or the biphenyl chromophore acted as the electron donor (the shortest distances from dpNDI are 3.9 and 2.59 Å, respectively). Such a case of a strut-to-strut PET, which also makes the material photochromic, is a unique feature of MOFs.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic diagram of the ground-state strut-to-strut/guest-to-strut electron transfer in the redox-active interpenetrated 3D framework [Cd(bpdc)(dpNDI)]. Crystal structure of [Cd(bpdc)(dpNDI)] (b) 3D bipillared layer structure, (c) 2-fold interpenetrated net, (d) optical images showing the photochromic feature of the MOF, (e) donor–acceptor interaction in the MOF, (f) change in the absorption spectra upon UV-irradiation, exhibiting the radical anion peaks of the dpNDI, (g) EPR spectra of the MOF at a different time of UV-light exposure (blue: pristine, black: 3 min, red: 7 min), (h) guest encapsulation in the MOF, and their corresponding color change and EPR spectra confirming the radical ion generation, (i) appearance of the CT band after guest encapsulation in the absorption spectra, (j) cyclic voltammetry study confirming the reduced state of the dpNDI. Reproduced with permission from ref. 67. 
Although the pristine phase of the MOF indicated that the dpNDIs undergo aggregation, upon inclusion of aromatic guests (4,N,N-trimethylaniline (DMPT) and 1,5-/2,6-dinaphthol (1,5-/2,6-DAN)) host–guest CT formation was observed (Fig. 4h–j). Guest inclusion brought a drastic visible color change, as indicated by a strong, broad band in the visible range of the absorption spectra. Among the three guests, DMPT inclusion created a radical anion of bpNDI, without any UV-light excitation. This indicated that the DMPT and dpNDI interact strongly in the confined space of the interpenetrated MOF, and hence the activation energy of the electron transfer process from the donor guest to the acceptor host is reduced. By performing electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectroscopy formation of the radical anion was further confirmed. Such a linker–guest CT interaction is discussed with more examples in the next section.
More recently, a controlled, reversible strut-to-strut electron transfer was observed in a dynamic noninterpenetrated CT MOF, {[Zn2(adc)2(bpNDI)]·7DMF·2H2O}n (adc: 9,10-anthracenedicarboxylate) (Fig. 5). In this example, the D–A pair was adc and dpNDI. Using these two as a linker and pillar, respectively, a pillared-layer MOF was constructed. Because of the steric constraints, this framework did not have interpenetration, as can be seen in Fig. 5a and b. In the as synthesized structure, the bpNDI and adc (S0–S1) transition dipoles are orthogonal to each other (Fig. 5c). However, due to the favourable (S0–S2) dipole orientation of adc, adc-bpNDI exhibited a weak CT band at ∼500 nm (Fig. 5d). The closest C–C distance between the D–A pair is 2.59 Å, which is substantial for van der Waals interactions. The radiative decay of the MOF was found to be similar to the adc monomer decay, confirming the weak nature of the CT interaction. It was observed that the pristine MOF readily changes its visible color at room temperature and can revert back to the pristine color upon exposure to the DMF solvent (Fig. 5e). This is accompanied by a reversible structural change observed by XRD measurements (Fig. 5f). The EPR spectrum of the dried phase indicated the presence of a radical ion, and magnetic susceptibility measurements confirmed ∼92% radical state formation at 300 K. A distinct drop in the radiative decay time was also observed. The electron transfer at room temperature from adc to bpNDI is not astonishing, as the donor ionization energy is lower compared to the previously discussed cases. However, such a spontaneous charge separation is not possible if adc and bpNDI remain in an orthogonal geometry. Detailed Raman spectroscopic investigations revealed that the Zn(II) paddle–wheel node undergoes a reversible structural change leading to a stronger dipole–dipole D–A interaction, as illustrated in Fig. 5i. The radical anion thus formed remained stable for days because of the coordination driven spatial organization of the D–A chromophores in the MOF structure. This observation of reversible electron transfer, keeping the structural periodicity intact, is unique and can be applied to design advanced sensing devices.
 Fig. 5  (a) Pillared-layer structure of {[Zn2(adc)2(bpNDI)]·7DMF·2H2O}n, (b) view of the 2D layer, (c) view of the transition dipole geometry of the donor and acceptor, (d) emission spectra of adc monomer (in DMF, Excitation: 350 nm, gray) and MOF 1 pristine (Excitation: 370 nm, blue), (e) reversible color change of the MOF upon desolvation and resolvation, (f) PXRD patterns of the MOF in a different phase, (g) change in the fluorescence lifetime upon desolvation, (h) EPR spectra of the MOF in a different phase, (i) reversible change in the Zn-paddle-wheel structure upon desolvation and resolvation and accompanied change in the orientation of the adc linker, leading to an electron transfer from adc to dpNDI. Reproduced with permission from ref. 68. 
 Fig. 6  (a) NDI-based tetracarboxylate linker, used for the photochromic MOF synthesis, (b) chemical structure of tetrathiafulvalene tetrabenzoate (H4TTFTB) and N,N′-bis(4-pyridylmethyl)-1,4,5,8-naphthalenediimide (bpmNDI), (c–e) 2D layer MOF made by Co(II), TTFTB and bpmNDI, AB type packing and π–π stacking of the donor–acceptor chromophores, (f) UV-vis spectra of the linkers and MOF, (g) EPR spectra of the MOF before (blue) and after (red) 808 nm laser irradiation, (h and i) Photothermal conversion plots of the MOF in a PDMS film (Co-MOF@PDMS (0.6 wt%)). Reproduced with permission from ref. 70. 
In the context of NDI-based MOF, three photochromic MOFs were reported by Banerjee and coworkers.69 These MOFs were constructed by NDI-based tetracarboxylate linkers (Fig. 6a). The authors observed that the MOFs undergo reversible color change upon UV-light exposure, and a characteristic NDI-radical anion was detected by EPR and absorption spectroscopy. The origin of the charge separation, in this case, could be an intramolecular phenomenon, as no other linker was used to make a donor–acceptor MOF system. The carboxylate oxygens of the NDI-based linker can also be regarded as the electron donor, but no such experimental evidence could be seen.
Very recently, a tetrathiafulvalene:NDI D–A system was designed in a Co(II)-based MOF. The linkers are tetrathiafulvalene tetrabenzoate (H4TTFTB) and N,N′-bis(4-pyridylmethyl)-1,4,5,8-naphthalenediimide (bpmNDI) (Fig. 6b). The Co(II) connects via the TTFTB linker and bpmNDI to form a 2D layer, and these 2D layers are stacked in an AB fashion. In this framework, the TTF and NDI cores are face-to-face stacked with a dihedral angle of 8.17° and a distance of 3.451 Å (Fig. 6c–e). This arrangement facilitated the CT interaction between TTF-NDI, as can be seen from the strong CT band in the NIR region of the absorption spectrum (Fig. 6f). The EPR spectrum exhibited the two peaks corresponding to the radical anion of NDI and the radical cation of the TTF (Fig. 6g). Upon 808 nm laser irradiation, the % yield of the electron transfer was increased, as confirmed by Raman spectroscopy. As the radical pairs absorb in the NIR region, the authors investigated the possibility of photothermal conversion. Using an 808 nm laser with 0.7 W cm−2 power the temperature increased to 201 °C from room temperature within 10 s time, and the temperature then decreased dramatically within a short time. This photothermal efficiency was tested by a cycling test, as shown in Fig. 6h and i.
The natural photosynthetic system harvests solar light energy, and transfers the energy efficiently to a reaction center where charge separation occurs. Drawing inspiration from this, coupling energy transfer and CT in a self-assembled system is an exciting prospect. Deria and coworkers reported a Zr-based MOF, which assembled donor–acceptor chromophores and in which energy transfer and charge transfer process could be initiated by different excitation wavelengths (Fig. 7a): NU-1000 MOF, constructed by an 8-connected Zr-node and 1,3,6,8-tetrakis(p-benzoic acid)pyrene (H4TBAPy, acting as an energy donor and electron acceptor), was modified with a tetraphenylporphyrinato zinc(II) (TPPZn, acting as energy and electron donor). The postsynthetic modification was carried out by a solvent-assisted linker incorporation method, as shown in Fig. 7b. The energy level diagram, which was deduced electrochemically, indicated that the NU-1000 MOF excited state could transfer energy to the TPPZn to create a TPPZn excited state (Fig. 7c). The TPPZn excited state oxidation potential is 440 mV higher than the ground state reduction potential of NU-1000, and hence can transfer one electron to NU-1000. Using transient absorption spectroscopy, the authors could confirm the energy and charge transfer processes with a time scale of 2 ps and 80 ps, respectively. Along this line, Deria and coworkers have also reported a strategy to facilitate excited state complex (exciplex) formation, by tuning the ground state redox potential of the reaction center.72
 Fig. 7  (a) An illustration of the energy and electron transfer phenomena in the donor–acceptor NU-1000 MOF, (b) postsynthetic modification strategy for creating the TPPZn modified NU-1000 MOF, (c) energy levels of the ground and excited states in TPPZn modified NU-1000, exhibiting the prospect of energy and charge transfer processes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 71. 
(B) Linker–guest CT MOFs
The earliest example of linker–guest CT MOFs was reported by Kitagawa and coworkers as [Zn2(adc)2(dabco)] (adc: 9,10-anthracenedicarboxylate, dabco: 1,4-diazabicyclo[2.2.2]octane) (Fig. 8a), where, Zn-paddle-wheel nodes are linked by adc to form 2D sheets, which are pillared by dabco to make a 3D porous structure with pore window dimensions of 5.6 × 5.8 Å. The inclusion of the aromatic guests, N,N-dimethylaniline (DMA) and other substituted anilines in the nanopores of the MOF changed the absorption and emission features dramatically. In the absorption spectrum, a new broad band appeared and the emission spectrum exhibited a new red-shifted emission. The authors attributed this new ground state as an anthracene (acceptor):DMA (donor) CT complex (Fig. 8b). Further, the excited state emission is also considered as an exciplex in nature, without any elaborated discussion on the possibility of the coexistence of the CT and exciplex state.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of the guest encapsulated MOF and CT interaction, (b) UV-vis spectra of the pristine MOF (blue) and DMA adsorbed MOF (green), (c) emission spectra (solid) and excitation spectra (dotted) of the pristine MOF (blue) and DMA adsorbed MOF (green), (d) photographs of the pristine and guest adsorbed MOFs under UV-light illumination. Reproduced with permission from ref. 73. 
Later, in 2010 Kitagawa and coworkers reported a dynamic, interpenetrated framework which facilitated CT formation for various host–guest combinations. For a through space CT, alignment of the donor–acceptor dipole is important, and this is achieved by interpenetrated MOF nets. A pillared-layer MOF type ([Zn2(bdc)2(dpNDI)]) was chosen; the 2D layer is made of a Zn-based paddle-wheel node linked by 1,4-benzenedicarboxylate or (bdc) and these 2D layers are pillared by an electron acceptor N,N′-di(4-pyridyl)-1,4,5,8-naphthalenediimide (dpNDI). The void space in the 3D net allowed intergrowth of the second net, leading to an interpenetrated structure having two specific void spaces, shown as site A and site B (Fig. 9a). It was observed that to maximize inter-net interactions in an empty MOF (guest DMF molecule removed state), bdc and dpNDI bends to an unusual extent (Fig. 9b). However, the inclusion of an aromatic guest molecule (toluene) reduces the distortion, as dpNDI and the aromatic guest undergo a face-to-face π–π interaction (Fig. 9c). The authors observed that the inclusion of aromatic molecules (cyanobenzene, benzene, toluene, o-xylene, m-xylene, p-xylene, anisole, iodobenzene) of different ionization potentials in the pores resulted in different emission colors along with the appearance of new broad absorption bands (400–500 nm) (Fig. 9d and e). As the ionization potential of the aromatic guests decreases, the emission wavelength maximum shifts to red and the emission lifetime increases (Fig. 9f and g). This feature is ascribed as molecular decoding, using the fluorescence color as a readout signal. The origin of the broad absorption band, after the aromatic guest inclusion in site A, is attributed to a ground state CT between the dpNDI and the guest. The emission is from the exciplex state of the dpNDI:guest; as the electron-donating capacity of the guest aromatic molecules increases, the exciplex state is more stabilized, and hence a red shift of emission was observed.
 Fig. 9  View of the interpenetrated nets and void sites (A and B): (a) pristine MOF, (b) desolvated MOF, (c) toluene encapsulated MOF, (d) photographs of the guest encapsulated MOFs under UV light illumination, (e) UV-vis spectra of the guest encapsulated MOFs, (f) emission spectra of the guest encapsulated MOFs, (g) change in emission maximum vs. ionization potential of the donor guest molecules, (h) schematic illustration of the excited state photophysics in the guest encapsulated MOF. Reproduced with permission from ref. 75. 
Following these observations, the authors attempted to distinguish the contribution of the CT ((Dδ+–Aδ−)*CT) and exciplex state ((D–A)*EX) in the emission spectra.74 In general, more covalent character of the donor–acceptor should induce exciplex formation, and ionic character leads to CT. In the concerned interpenetrated MOF, site A provides a compact space for D–A orbital overlap leading to a higher covalent contribution and hence exciplex character. Site B offers more flexibility and the D–A interaction is ionic, i.e. a CT feature. The authors could evidence the existence of both the excited states by the four components fitting the excited state radiative decay. The first two short-lived excited states (τ1 and τ2) are attributed to the dpNDI excited state and the dpNDI-bdc excited state. Because bdc is coordinated to the Zn(II) metals, the electron-donating capacity is weak, and hence the dpNDI-bdc interaction is weak. The other two decay components (τ3 and τ4 respectively; relatively longer lived than the first two) are attributed to the (D–A)*EX and (Dδ+–Aδ−)*CT transitions). The authors noted that direct excitation of the CT (at 440 nm) resulted in more contribution from τ4, compared to that by a local excitation at 370 nm (for dpNDI), confirming that τ4 is related to (Dδ+–Aδ−)*CT deactivation. A linear dependency of τ3 and τ4 with the dipole moment and ionization potential of the guest aromatic molecules indicated the higher exciton and ionic contributions for (D–A)*EX and (Dδ+–Aδ−)*CT, respectively. Note that a weaker donor, benzonitrile, did not exhibit four component decay, as there is no D–A interaction, while a strong electron donor anisole exhibited three component decay, as the CT excited state leads to radical ion pair formation. All of the above possible excited state processes are summarized in Fig. 9h.
In the earlier example of a pillared-layer dpNDI-based MOF, exciplex and CT, both of the excited states were present. The dynamic nature of the excited states, as presented in Fig. 9h is rather a structure-specific case and may not be a general observation in the MOF structures. A straightforward experiment to identify the existence of dynamic excited states will be to record time-resolved fluorescence decays. As each excited state has a unique radiative decay rate, decay components will be the key to identifying the excited states. In the following, we will highlight a metal–organic supramolecular framework which exhibits a strong CT character with bright luminescence. Additionally, the supramolecular nature of the frameworks created a pathway to sensitize the CT excited state via a FRET (Förster resonance energy transfer) process.
Using 2,6-naphthalenedicarboxylate (ndc) and o-phen linkers with Zn(II) a 1D coordination polymer was synthesized by Maji et al. Through noncovalent interactions, this 1D polymer created a 3D framework structure having a coordination pocket created by two o-phen linkers from the two neighbouring 1D polymers, as illustrated in Fig. 10a–d. The void space is occupied by the guest solvent DMF and upon removal of which, the 3D framework contracts to minimize the empty space. The porous phase is regenerated upon CO2 adsorption or aromatic guest inclusion (confirmed by PXRD and adsorption experiments). The preference for the aromatic molecules is very evident from the fact that the void space is created by two aromatic o-phen molecules. We have already seen in the previous examples that chelated o-phen can act as an electron acceptor. In this case, when aromatic electron donors (aniline, N-methyl aniline, N,N′-dimethylaniline, N,N′-dimethyl p-toluidine) were introduced, an o-phen: aromatic guest D–A CT complex was formed (Fig. 10e–m). The strong absorption band in the visible range of the absorption spectra and red-shifted emission bands confirmed the CT state. The CT energy levels were in the order of ionization energies of the aromatic donor molecules, as can be seen from Fig. 10l. Crystal structure determination of the CT complexes revealed the π–π stacked geometry of the acceptor and donor, and the close proximity position of the ndc linker, which sensitizes the CT emission (as observed in the earlier examples). Interestingly, with N-methyl aniline and N,N′-dimethyl p-toluidine guests dual emission (CT and ndc emission) were observed, but in the case of N,N′-dimethylaniline only CT emission was observed. This different rate of FRET from ndc to the CT is related to the spectral overlap, i.e. overlap between the emission spectrum of ndc and the absorption spectra of the CT. Based on these features, the supramolecular framework could display different emission colors for the different aromatic amines (Fig. 10k), leading to molecular recognition phenomena.
 Fig. 10  (a) 1D structure of [Zn(o-phen)(ndc)], (b) 2D supramolecular structure through C–H–π interactions, (c) view of the pore window in the 3D supramolecular structure, (d) coordination space created between the o-phen units occupied by guest DMF, (e–g) NMA, DMA and DMPT in the pores of the supramolecular structure, respectively, (h–j) spatial positions of the aromatic guests in the coordination space, (k) photographs of the pristine and guest included MOFs under visible and UV-light, (l) emission spectra of the pristine and guest included MOFs (350 nm excitation), (m) fluorescence lifetime decay profiles of the guest included MOFs ((ii) at 545 nm, (iii) at 575 nm, (iv) at 595 nm). Reproduced with permission from ref. 76. 
The above-illustrated examples describe the ground state CT interactions, driven by the differences in ionization potentials and close proximity interactions. Similar interactions are also possible upon photoexcitation, as in the case of a porphyrin-fullerene dyad. In 2016, a fullerene-porphyrin framework was reported, in which the fullerene was modified to act as a linker in the framework.77 The schematic in Fig. 11a illustrates the design principle. The time-resolved fluorescence decay of the framework indicated a strong fluorescence quenching, either due to FRET from the porphyrin to the fullerene or a CT. Because the thermodynamics of the FRET and CT were found to be comparable by computational studies, none of the photophysical events could be ruled out.
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustration of a fullerene-based MOF structure with periodically organized donor–acceptors, (b) optimized structure of C60 encapsulated in a porphyrin-based MOF (thin film), (c) change in the conductivity of the C60 encapsulated porphyrin MOF thin film upon irradiation of different wavelengths of light (bias of 2V). Reproduced with permission from ref. 81. 
A later study by Heinke and coworkers illustrated that the D–A interaction upon photoexcitation could also lead to charge separation and photoconductivity.78 In this work, a porphyrin-based MOF thin film was synthesized using a liquid–phase epitaxy approach (Fig. 11b). The void space of the MOF could host C60, with a porphyrin: C60 ratio of ∼1:0.9. The UV-vis spectrum upon C60 encapsulation exhibited individual absorption bands of the porphyrin and C60, but did not exhibit any signs of the ground state CT. Probing the conductivity of this C60 encapsulated framework revealed that upon light irradiation (at the Soret band of the porphyrin, 455 nm), conductivity can increase by 4-orders of magnitude compared to the dark phase (Fig. 11c). Quantum chemical analysis revealed that a light-induced electron transfer event occurs from porphyrin to the C60, and the generated charge carriers flow in separate domains, holes and electrons in porphyrin and fullerene stacks, respectively. Thus large photoconductivity was realized. Using a similar host–guest assembly approach, Farha and coworkers reported a nickel(IV)bis(dicarbollide) encapsulated mesoporous MOF, NU-1000.79 NU-1000 is constituted by linking a pyrene-base tetracarboxylate linker (1,3,6,8-tetrakis(p-benzoate)pyrene or TBAPy4−) with hexa-Zr cluster. The pyrene and the electron deficient guest forms a charge transfer state, and this was evident from (i) quenching of the emission, (ii) a new absorption band in the visible range of the absorption spectrum, and (iii) a high electrical conductivity. It is explained as an efficient electron transfer from the pyrene excited state to the encapsulated guest.
Note that for fullerenes encapsulated in a MOF structure, a ground state CT formation is also possible. Close packing of the fullerene in an electron-rich environment, as observed in the case of NU-901, can lead to the formation of a ground-state ionic complex.80 In NU-901, the electron-rich linker is 1,3,6,8-tetrakis(p-benzoate)pyrene (TBAPy4−), which interacts with the guest C60 strongly enough, and forms a CT in the ground state (realized by broad absorption in the visible region and fluorescence quenching of the pyrene emission).
(C) Linker-to metal CT MOFs
In MOFs, ligand-to-metal charge transfer (LMCT) is a very effective strategy to prolong the lifetime of the excited states to form charge-separated states by preventing the rapid recombination of the photogenerated charges. For example, in the zeolitic imidazolate framework-67 (ZIF-67), constituted of Co(II) and the 2-methylimidazole linker, photoexcitation creates a LMCT state with a life-time of 2.9 μs.82 The evidence for the emergence of LMCT can be clearly observed by the emergence of low-energy absorption bands in the UV-vis absorption spectrum (Fig. 12b). Appropriate engineering of these CT interactions results in the suitable alignment of the HOMO and LUMO of the materials with respect to the chemical potentials required for specific reactions, thereby driving forward desired photocatalytic reactions (Fig. 12d).53,83–86 The design of the CT-based MOFs is an elegant approach for the development of novel photocatalysts. Such systems show low-energy CT bands in the visible range (400–800 nm), which further facilitates bandgap engineering of the photocatalyst to achieve impressive activity upon visible-light irradiation. To top it all, the ease of structural tunability in MOFs enables the modulation of the redox potentials of the donor and acceptor motifs, thereby resulting in intriguing photocatalytic activities and product tunability.
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic diagram for the design of CT-based MOF photocatalysts using different inorganic and organic components. Zr, Ce, Ti, C, N, O, P, Ru, and Ir atoms are denoted by sky blue, green, white, gray, brown, red, orange, blue, and cyan, respectively, (b) LMCT characterization via absorption spectrum; (c) MMCT characterization via emission spectra; (d) illustration of engineering the HOMO and LUMO in a photocatalyst via CT towards achieving specific reactions. 
To meet the ever-increasing global demand for energy, light-mediated catalytic reactions like H2O splitting and CO2 reduction are of utmost importance for the conversion of solar photons to chemical energy or potential fuels.87 Photocatalysis, as the name suggests, has two simple requirements, (i) a photosensitizing unit and (ii) a catalytic centre. The photocatalytic activity of a material is generally associated with the lifetime of the excited states of the system. TiIV, CeIV and ZrIV-based MOFs have been commonly reported as photocatalysts attributed to their high chemical stability, low toxicity, and the variable redox states of the metal center (TiIV/TiIII, CeIV/CeIII, ZrIV/ZrIII).52,88–106 The presence of variable redox states of these metals and the inherent presence of metal–ligand coordination bonds allows LMCT to take place from the excited ligand to the metal–oxo cluster (Fig. 12a). Electron-rich chromophoric linkers with light-harvesting properties, having their LUMO energy level above the redox potential energy level of the metal–oxo clusters can therefore facilitate photoinduced electron transfer from the former to the latter to achieve intriguing photocatalytic reactions.107 Although the mechanism of the reaction varies from system to system, in general, the facile transfer of electrons to the low-lying orbitals of the mentioned metal ions facilitates the generation of the TiIII, CeIII, and ZrIII intermediates, which can act as the catalytic centres for water splitting or CO2 reduction to take place. These intermediates possess unpaired electrons in their d orbitals and can be effectively trapped by electron spin resonance (ESR) analysis. Realizing CT interactions in MOFs opens up a pathway for enhanced photogenerated exciton stability and also makes way for engineering the bandgap and band positions of the photocatalyst towards achieving the desired product.108,109
In this regard, an amine-functionalized TiIV-based MOF NH2-MIL-125 was synthesized using H2ATA (2-aminoterephthalic acid) as a building block.110 The polar amino functionality not only enhances the CO2 uptake of the MOF but also brings about a significant change in the optical absorption of NH2-MIL-125.111 Pristine MIL-125 reveals absorption in the UV region, whereas bright yellow colored NH2-MIL-125 shows an extra absorption band in the visible-light region with the edge extending to around 550 nm stemming from LMCT from the –NH2 of H2ATA to TiIV. Visible light-driven photocatalytic CO2 reduction by NH2-MIL-125 was performed in acetonitrile (MeCN) medium, employing triethanolamine (TEOA) as a sacrificial donor to yield HCOO− as the reduction product. Upon light absorption in the LMCT band, photoinduced electron transfer occurs from the organic linker to the TiIV center. As a result, a TiIII intermediate is generated, which ultimately acts as the catalytic site for the reduction of CO2. In another study led by Mellot-Drazneiks and co-workers, NH2-MIL-125 was also utilized as a photocatalyst to study the oxidation of benzyl alcohol to benzaldehyde by a subsequent increase in the amounts of bdc-NH2 linkers.112
In a recent study, Lin and co-workers reported the design of two MOFs, Ti3-BPDC-Ir and Ti3-BPDC-Ru, by doping photosensitizers [Ir(ppy)2(dcbpy)]Cl or [Ru(bpy)2(dcbpy)]Cl2 (bpy = 2,2′-bipyridine, ppy = 2-phenylpyridine, dcbpy = 2,2′-bipyridine-5,5′-dicarboxylate) into the Ti3-BPDC framework (BPDC = biphenyl-4,4′-dicarboxylate) for a photocatalytic hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) by H2O reduction (Fig. 13a–c).113 The visible-light-driven HER of the MOFs was investigated in a MeCN:H2O (20:0.5 V/V) solvent mixture deploying 1,3-dimethyl-2-phenyl-2,3-dihydro-1H-benzo[d]imidazole (BIH) as the sacrificial donor. The turnover numbers (TONs) observed were 6632 for Ti3-BPDC-Ir and 786 for Ti3-BPDC-Ru after 72 h of reaction (Fig. 13d). One electron transfer from the reduced photosensitizer to Ti3IV(OH)2 SBUs takes place generating a TiIII intermediate (Fig. 13e–h). The energetic feasibility of the pathway was further verified by DFT analysis (Fig. 13i).
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic illustration of photocatalytic HER by Ti3-BPDC-Ir/Ru. Ti, Ir/Ru, O, and N atoms are depicted in blue, gold, red, and dark blue, respectively, (b) structures of photosensitizers [Ir(ppy)2(dcbpy)]Cl and [Ru(bpy)2(dcbpy)]Cl2, (c) optical photographs of Ti3-BPDC-Ir (left) and Ti3-BPDC-Ru (right) (scale bar is 50 μm), (d) time-dependent HER TONs of Ti3-BPDC-Ir and Ti3-BPDC-Ru along with homogeneous controls, (e) proposed catalytic cycle for the visible light-driven HER catalyzed by Ti3-BPDC-Ir, (f) detailed catalytic mechanism on the Ti site via the TiIV/TiIII cycle. EPR spectra of (g) Ti3-BPDC-Ir and (h) Ti3-BPDC-Ru, (i) DFT calculated energy changes in the HER steps through the TiIV/TiIII cycle. Reproduced with permission from ref. 113. 
A ZrIV-based MOF NNU-28 was reported wherein, {Zr6O4(OH)4(CO2)12} clusters are bridged by an anthracene-derived optically active chromophoric linker.114 NNU-28 exhibits broad-band visible light absorption up to 650 nm, which is highly desirable for photocatalytic applications. The presence of a visible light-responsive ligand in the MOF imparts it with light-induced charge generation properties, which is eminent from its wide-range surface photovoltage (SPV) response from 420 nm to 580 nm. Therefore, the photocatalytic CO2 reduction activity of the MOF was investigated in MeCN to afford 183.3 mmol h−1 mmol MOF−1 of HCOO−. The ESR signals at g = 2.009 and 2.030 in the case of NNU-28 were attributed to the sensitization of the Zr6-oxo cluster through the LMCT process by the anthracene moiety to generate a ZrIII species.
Alongside TiIV and ZrIV-based MOFs, MOFs built from Ce-oxo clusters are also promising candidates as photocatalysts owing to the presence of variable valence states (CeIV/CeIII) of the metal center. A theoretical study by Truhlar and co-workers demonstrated that the low-lying empty 4f orbitals of CeIV over TiIV and ZrIV promote improved LMCT to the CeIV-oxo clusters (Fig. 14a and b) in UiO-66.109 Owing to the facile CT, excited states are expected to be much longer-lived in CeIV-based UiO-66 than in UiO-66 MOFs with other metals. Moreover, the electronic structure of CeIV-based UiO-66 can be further engineered by using different mono- and disubstituted variants of the BDC linker to enhance its photocatalytic activity (Fig. 14c).
 Fig. 14  Cluster models of (a) UiO-66(Ce) and (b) UiO-66(Ce)-X. Color scheme: Ce, yellow; O, red; C, brown; H, light pink; substituent X, blue. (c) Band alignment of UiO-66(Ce)-X. For each case of UiO-66(Ce)-X, the HOCO and LUCO are calculated from the linker and the Ce, respectively. The red and blue dashed lines represent energy levels corresponding to redox potentials for water splitting, and the green region covers the energy levels of various CO2 reduction reactions. The band gaps are written in black and the vacuum aligned HOCO energies are written in white. Reproduced with permission from ref. 109. 
With that said, Lin and co-workers reported the synthesis of a CeIV-based metal–organic layer (MOL), a monolayer MOF comprising Ce6 SBUs and 1,3,5-benzenetribenzoate (BTB) linkers.115 Photosensitizing moieties [(MBA)Ir(ppy)2]Cl or [(MBA)Ru(bpy)2]Cl2 (MBA = 2-(5′-methyl-[2,2′-bipyridin]-5-yl)acetate, ppy = 2-phenylpyridine, bpy = 2,2′-bipyridine) were post-synthetically introduced into the MOL to afford Ce6-BTB-Ir or Ce6-BTB-Ru, respectively, for a photocatalytic HER (Fig. 15a). The photocatalytic HER activities of the MOLs were studied in MeCN with acetic acid (AcOH) as the proton source (MeCN:AcOH = 20:0.5 v/v) and BIH as the sacrificial donor. The proximity of the photosensitizing ligands to the Ce6 SBUs in the MOLs facilitates PET to drive photocatalytic HER under visible light with turnover numbers of 1357 and 484 for Ce6-BTB-Ir and Ce6-BTB-Ru, respectively (Fig. 15b). Mechanistically speaking, the photoreduced photosensitizer transfers electrons to the Ce6 SBU generating the CeIII species, followed by a second photoexcitation of CeIII to generate the CeIII* species via a 4f → 5d transition. The CeIII* promotes the HER to generate H2 and is oxidized to CeIV (Fig. 15c and d).
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic showing the synthesis of Ce6-BTB-Ru MOLs and a photocatalytic HER. Ce, Ru, N, and O atoms are shown in orange, pink, blue, and red, respectively, (b) time-dependent HER TONs of Ce6-BTB-Ir and Ce6-BTB-Ru along with homogeneous controls, (c) potential energy diagram of Ce6-BTB-Ru-catalyzed HER through a dual photoexcitation pathway. (d) Proposed photocatalytic cycle for the hydrogen production catalyzed by Ce6-BTB-Ru. Reproduced with permission from ref. 115. 
Using a CT approach different from the ones discussed earlier, a heterogenous photosystem comprising a polyoxometalate (POM) as a catalyst immobilized in the pores of porphyrinic MOF-545 was reported in collaborative work by the research groups of Dolbecq, Mellot-Drazneiks and Fontecave (Fig. 16a–d).116 The tetrakis(4-carboxyphenyl)porphyrin (TCCP) linker of the MOF acts as the visible light-harvesting unit, whilst the proximity of this linker to the POM ([(PW9O34)2Co4(H2O)2]10−) catalytic site inside the MOF pore makes way for PET from the former to the latter (Fig. 16e). The photocatalytic water oxidation of this photocatalyst named POM@MOF-545 was investigated in a pH 8 borate buffer under visible light irradiation with Na2S2O8 as the electron acceptor. O2 formation was observed, which increased linearly with time (TOF = 40 × 10−3 s −1 for the first 15 min) and finally saturated after 1 h of reaction (Fig. 16f).
 Fig. 16  Components of POM@MOF-545: (a) P2W18Co4 POM; (b) TCPP-H2 linker; (c) Zr-based unit; and (d) P2W18Co4@MOF-545. WO6, green polyhedra; ZrO8, blue polyhedra or spheres; Co, cyan spheres; O, red spheres; C, H, gray; N, dark blue, (e) proposed mechanism for the light-driven H2O oxidation by P2W18Co4@MOF-545, (f) kinetics of visible-light-driven O2 production over 0.5 mg of P2W18Co4@MOF-545 (blue ■), P2W18Co4@MOF-545 recycled once (red ▲), twice (pink ★), and TCPP-H2 and P2W18Co4 in solution (green ●). Reproduced with permission from ref. 116. 
(D) Metal–metal CT MOFs
Apart from being directly involved in the PET process, MOFs also often provide a confined nanospace for efficient CT between two motifs to take place. The structural tunability of MOFs also allows the incorporation of an external metal centre which can act either as the photosensitizer or the catalytic site (Fig. 12a). In cases like these, metal-to-metal charge transfer (MMCT) between a photosensitizing metal centre to a catalytic metal centre plays a crucial role towards photogenerated exciton stability, the underlying mechanism being similar to that discussed for LMCT, only instead of a photoexcited linker, the energetics of a photoexcited metal centre needs to be considered.117 The occurrence of MMCT is often verified by significant quenching of the emission spectra of the pristine material upon the incorporation of the acceptor metal centre (Fig. 12c). The nanopores of the MOF bring the two components in close proximity, providing a confined pocket for efficient CT to take place. In this section, we will elucidate the role of CT interactions in MOFs in the design of novel photocatalysts.
Recently, it has been demonstrated that the simultaneous covalent immobilization of the molecular [Ru(bpy)3]2+ photosensitizer and [Re(bpy)CO3Cl] catalyst in the confined nanospace of the MOF, leads to the efficient photoreduction of CO2 to CO (Fig. 17a).118 The integrated photocatalyst, namely, Zr-MBA-Ru/Re-MOF showed visible light absorption in the wavelength range of 400 nm to 700 nm with maxima at 467 and 482 nm stemming from MLCT of RuII (dπ → π*bpy) and ReI (dπ → π*bpy) respectively (Fig. 17b). This imparts Zr-MBA-Ru/Re-MOF with an optical bandgap of 2 eV and from a Mott–Schottky analysis, its LUMO position was calculated to be −0.63 V vs. NHE, making it extremely suitable as a photocatalyst for CO2 reduction to CO (Fig. 17c). A maximum CO production rate of 440 μmol g−1 h−1 was achieved in a purely aqueous medium without any additional sacrificial electron donor with selectivity >99% (Fig. 17d). The excited-state electron transfer from RuII to ReI was evident from the suppression of PL intensity related to the [MBA-Ru (bpy)2]2+ moiety for the Zr-MBA-Ru/Re-MOF at 610 nm (λex = 460 nm) compared to the Zr-MBA-Ru-MOF (Fig. 17e). This was also in line with the time-resolved photoluminescence data, where Zr-MBA-Ru-MOF showed a lifetime of 392 ns when monitored at 610 nm which was reduced to 162 ns for Zr-MBA-Ru/Re-MOF, thereby indicating that PET occurred between the two metal centers. This was corroborated by transient photocurrent responses and EIS-Nyquist plot analyses as well (Fig. 17g and h). The energetic feasibility of PET from the photosensitizer to the catalyst was verified from DFT calculations (Fig. 17f). These observations strongly highlight the crucial role of confinement of the photosensitizer and the catalyst in close proximity towards achieving efficient PET for photocatalysis.
 Fig. 17  (a) Schematic illustration for the synthesis of Zr-MBA-Ru/Re-MOF by immobilization of the molecular photosensitizer and catalyst towards CO2 reduction, (b) UV-vis absorption spectra of Zr-MBA-Ru/Re-MOF, (c) band alignment of Zr-MBA-Ru/Re-MOF, (d) CO production as a function of irradiation time by Zr-MBA-Ru/Re-MOF in pure aqueous medium, (e) photoluminescence spectra of Zr-MBA-Ru-MOF and Zr-MBA-Ru/Re-MOF (λex = 460 nm). Inset: optical photographs of Zr-MBA-Ru-MOF and Zr-MBA-Ru/Re-MOF under UV light, (f) HOMO–LUMO positioning of [MBA-Ru(bpy)2]Cl2 and [MBA-Re(CO)3Cl], depicting the possibility of charge transfer, (g) transient photocurrent responses and (h) EIS-Nyquist plots of Zr-MBA-Ru-MOF and Zr-MBA-Ru/Re-MOF. Reproduced with permission from ref. 118. 
In another report, a Keggin-type POM PW12O403− and a catalytic complex Cp*Rh(bpydc)Cl2 (bpydc = 2,2′-bipyridine-5,5′-dicarboxylic acid) were commobilized in the ZrIV based MOF UiO-67 to achieve photocatalytic CO2 reduction.119 The photocatalytic activity of the (PW12,Cp*Rh)@UiO-67 composite was investigated using MeCN as the solvent, TEOA as the electron and proton donor and [Ru(bpy)3]Cl2 as a photosensitizer. In a similar manner, as discussed in the previous example, the proximity of the photosensitizing and catalytic components drives efficient PET. It was established that an oxidative quenching mechanism occurs for CO2 reduction into HCOO− and H2 by the composite involving the Rh catalytic complex, which is assisted by the PW12 POM as a proton relay.
Outlook
We have summarized the observations and possible applications of charge transfer MOFs. The evaluated cases focus on the CT interactions between linker–linker, linker–guest, linker–metal and metal–metal MOFs. The spatial geometry, electron affinity, ionization potential and HOMO–LUMO energy levels are the key parameters which define the extent of charge transfer. Our discussion noted the cases where exciplex and CT excited states both coexisted. Such cases are omnipresent in the supramolecular constructs, as the structures are flexible in nature. However, we have pointed out the cases where the CT feature is dominant, primarily because of the confinement effect introduced by the MOFs. The compact or tight packing allows an ionic mode of interaction instead of covalent character. The photophysical features of the CT state in the MOF structures cannot be easily rationalized, as in the case of solvated CT complexes. The pore functionality, metal node and size of the cages of the MOFs can vary in a very subtle way to affect the extent of the CT interactions between the linkers or the linker–guest.
While we illustrate only the charge transfer states, to achieve optoelectronic functions such as photovoltaics and LEDs, the mobility of the charges and the lifetime of the separated charges are very important. More often, the separated charges are quickly recombined. We have observed in certain cases of MOF CT, that the CT state or radical ions remained stable in ambient conditions (without being quenched by triplet oxygen). This is again related to the confinement effect in MOFs. The mobility of the charges, i.e. hole and electron mobility, is a vital parameter. The factors affecting charge mobility are very different from the cases discussed in the CT MOFs. An independent diffusion path for the individual charges is very important to avoid recombination, and readers are encouraged to see other elaborative reviews on this topic.61
Considering all the points mentioned above, a very concise summary of charge transfer MOF design and future work is the following:
(i) The choice of a suitable donor and acceptor is the most important, either by adding a functional group to act as a linker in the MOF or as a guest.
(ii) The electronic coupling between the donor–acceptor is the key to achieving CT; i.e. the transition dipole distance and geometry. In the MOF structure, alignment of the dipoles can be achieved by using a reticular chemistry approach.
(iii) The ground state CT can be emissive and can be in equilibrium with the exciplex state. In the MOF construct, it is possible to correlate the nature of the excited state from structural insight, as MOFs are crystalline.
(iv) As the decay of the charge-separated state can be regulated in the MOFs (by a confinement effect), it should be possible to effectively utilize the free charges (electrons and holes) for chemical reactions or for electronic applications.
(v) MOFs with CT features can be explored for optoelectronic applications, particularly for transistors and sensors. The limitations are processibility; i.e. making a device from polycrystalline MOF powder is not straightforward. Using state-of-the-art fabrication techniques, such as chemical vapor deposition and liquid–phase epitaxy, it should be possible to overcome these limitations.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
RH acknowledges the intramural funds at TIFR Hyderabad from the Department of Atomic Energy (DAE), India, under Project Identification Number RTI 4007. AG acknowledges JNCASR for the fellowship. TKM acknowledges the Department of Science and Technology (DST, project no. CRG/2019/005951), RAK-CAM (from UAE), SSL, ICMS, and JNCASR for financial support. The SAMat research facility, Sheikh Saqr senior fellowship (TKM) are also gratefully acknowledged.
References
R. Haldar, A. Mazel, M. Krstić, Q. Zhang, M. Jakoby, I. A. Howard, B. S. Richards, N. Jung, D. Jacquemin, S. Diring, W. Wenzel, F. Odobel and C. Wöll, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2048 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Li, A. H. Balawi, P. J. Leenaers, L. Ning, G. H. L. Heintges, T. Marszalek, W. Pisula, M. M. Wienk, S. C. J. Meskers, Y. Yi, F. Laquai and R. A. J. Janssen, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2867 CrossRef PubMed .
O. M. Yaghi, M. O'Keeffe, N. W. Ockwig, H. K. Chae, M. Eddaoudi and J. Kim, Nature, 2003, 423, 705–714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Furukawa, K. E. Cordova, M. O’Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, Science, 2013, 341, 1230444 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Férey, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 191–214 RSC .
S. Horike, S. Shimomura and S. Kitagawa, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 695–704 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kitagawa, R. Kitaura and S.-I. Noro, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 2334–2375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. K. Farha, I. Eryazici, N. C. Jeong, B. G. Hauser, C. E. Wilmer, A. A. Sarjeant, R. Q. Snurr, S. T. Nguyen, A. Ö. Yazaydın and J. T. Hupp, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15016–15021 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. J. Murray, M. Dincă and J. R. Long, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1294–1314 RSC .
B. M. Connolly, D. G. Madden, A. E. H. Wheatley and D. Fairen-Jimenez, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 8541–8549 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Alezi, Y. Belmabkhout, M. Suyetin, P. M. Bhatt, J. Weseliński, V. Solovyeva, K. Adil, I. Spanopoulos, P. N. Trikalitis, A.-H. Emwas and M. Eddaoudi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 13308–13318 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Knebel and J. Caro, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2022, 17, 911–923 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Nalaparaju and J. Jiang, Adv. Sci., 2021, 8, 2003143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Qiu, M. Xue and G. Zhu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 6116–6140 RSC .
R. Lin, B. Villacorta Hernandez, L. Ge and Z. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 293–312 RSC .
Q. Qian, P. A. Asinger, M. J. Lee, G. Han, K. Mizrahi Rodriguez, S. Lin, F. M. Benedetti, A. X. Wu, W. S. Chi and Z. P. Smith, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 8161–8266 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. A. Kobielska, A. J. Howarth, O. K. Farha and S. Nayak, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2018, 358, 92–107 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, M. R. Hill, H. Wang and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2021, 6, 2000790 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang and C. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2005819 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Lee, O. K. Farha, B. J. Hong, A. A. Sarjeant, S. T. Nguyen and J. T. Hupp, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 15858–15861 CrossRef CAS .
T. Qiu, Z. Liang, W. Guo, H. Tabassum, S. Gao and R. Zou, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 520–532 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xu and O. M. Yaghi, ACS Cent. Sci., 2020, 6, 1348–1354 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L.-T. Zhang, Y. Zhou and S.-T. Han, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 15192–15212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ghosh, N. Sikdar and T. K. Maji, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2022, 10, 7558–7566 RSC .
L. E. Kreno, K. Leong, O. K. Farha, M. Allendorf, R. P. Van Duyne and J. T. Hupp, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 1105–1125 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yang and B. C. Gates, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 1779–1798 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bavykina, N. Kolobov, I. S. Khan, J. A. Bau, A. Ramirez and J. Gascon, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 8468–8535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Haldar, L. Heinke and C. Wöll, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1905227 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Rice, C. R. Martin, V. A. Galitskiy, A. A. Berseneva, G. A. Leith and N. B. Shustova, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 8790–8813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-H. Xiao, P. Weidler, S.-S. Lin, C. Wöll, Z.-G. Gu and J. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 32, 2204289 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yu, R. Anderson, X. Li, W. Xu, S. Goswami, S. S. Rajasree, K. Maindan, D. A. Gómez-Gualdrón and P. Deria, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 11192–11202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Mostaghimi, C. R. C. Rêgo, R. Haldar, C. Wöll, W. Wenzel and M. Kozlowska, Front. Mater., 2022, 9, 840644 CrossRef .
M. D. Allendorf, R. Dong, X. Feng, S. Kaskel, D. Matoga and V. Stavila, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 8581–8640 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Usman, S. Mendiratta and K.-L. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605071 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Mu, W. Wang, C. Sun, J. Wang, C. Wang and M. Knez, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 8, 2002151 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Dou, L. Sun, Y. Ge, W. Li, C. H. Hendon, J. Li, S. Gul, J. Yano, E. A. Stach and M. Dincă, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 13608–13611 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Dong, P. Han, H. Arora, M. Ballabio, M. Karakus, Z. Zhang, C. Shekhar, P. Adler, P. S. Petkov, A. Erbe, S. C. B. Mannsfeld, C. Felser, T. Heine, M. Bonn, X. Feng and E. Cánovas, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 1027–1032 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Oldenburg, A. Turshatov, D. Busko, S. Wollgarten, M. Adams, N. Baroni, A. Welle, E. Redel, C. Wöll, B. S. Richards and I. A. Howard, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8477–8482 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Rajasree, J. Yu, S. M. Pratik, X. Li, R. Wang, A. S. Kumbhar, S. Goswami, C. J. Cramer and P. Deria, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2022, 144, 1396–1406 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Gutiérrez-Arzaluz, J. Jia, C. Gu, J. Czaban-Jóźwiak, J. Yin, O. Shekhah, O. M. Bakr, M. Eddaoudi and O. F. Mohammed, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2021, 12, 4917–4927 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Haldar, M. Jakoby, A. Mazel, Q. Zhang, A. Welle, T. Mohamed, P. Krolla, W. Wenzel, S. Diring, F. Odobel, B. S. Richards, I. A. Howard and C. Wöll, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4332 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Jia, L. Gutiérrez-Arzaluz, O. Shekhah, N. Alsadun, J. Czaban-Jóźwiak, S. Zhou, O. M. Bakr, O. F. Mohammed and M. Eddaoudi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 8580–8584 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, W. Zhou, J. Liu, I. Howard, G. Kilibarda, S. Schlabach, D. Coupry, M. Addicoat, S. Yoneda, Y. Tsutsui, T. Sakurai, S. Seki, Z. Wang, P. Lindemann, E. Redel, T. Heine and C. Wöll, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 7441–7445 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Cai, Q. Loague and A. J. Morris, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 702–709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Liu and V. S. Thoi, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 8450–8459 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yoon, A. A. Talin, V. Stavila, A. M. Mroz, T. D. Bennett, Y. He, D. A. Keen, C. H. Hendon, M. D. Allendorf and M. C. So, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 52055–52062 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. G. Mariano, O. J. Wahab, J. A. Rabinowitz, J. Oppenheim, T. Chen, P. R. Unwin and M. Dincǎ, ACS Cent. Sci., 2022, 8, 975–982 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang, Q. Gao, A. M. Al-Enizi, A. Nafady and S. Ma, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2020, 7, 300–339 RSC .
S. Liu, C. Zhang, Y. Sun, Q. Chen, L. He, K. Zhang, J. Zhang, B. Liu and L.-F. Chen, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2020, 413, 213266 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liang, C. Qu, D. Xia, R. Zou and Q. Xu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 9604–9633 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-W. Yoon, J.-H. Kim, C. Kim, H. W. Jang and J.-H. Lee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2003052 CrossRef CAS .
M. Guo, M. Zhang, R. Liu, X. Zhang and G. Li, Adv. Sci., 2022, 9, 2103361 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhan, H. Gao, Y. Yang, X. Li and Q.-L. Zhu, Adv. Energy Sustainability Res., 2022, 3, 2200004 CrossRef .
X. Li, S. Surendran Rajasree, J. Yu and P. Deria, Dalton Trans., 2020, 49, 12892–12917 RSC .
R. Haldar, S. Bhattacharyya and T. K. Maji, J. Chem. Sci., 2020, 132, 99 CrossRef CAS .
J.-X. Wang, J. Yin, O. Shekhah, O. M. Bakr, M. Eddaoudi and O. F. Mohammed, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 9970–9986 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. C. So, G. P. Wiederrecht, J. E. Mondloch, J. T. Hupp and O. K. Farha, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 3501–3510 RSC .
R. Haldar, M. Jakoby, M. Kozlowska, M. Rahman Khan, H. Chen, Y. Pramudya, B. S. Richards, L. Heinke, W. Wenzel, F. Odobel, S. Diring, I. A. Howard, U. Lemmer and C. Wöll, Chem. – Eur. J., 2020, 26, 17016–17020 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Haldar, M. Kozlowska, M. Ganschow, S. Ghosh, M. Jakoby, H. Chen, F. Ghalami, W. Xie, S. Heidrich, Y. Tsutsui, J. Freudenberg, S. Seki, I. A. Howard, B. S. Richards, U. H. F. Bunz, M. Elstner, W. Wenzel and C. Wöll, Chem. Sci., 2021, 12, 4477–4483 RSC .
R. Haldar, Z. Fu, R. Joseph, D. Herrero, L. Martín-Gomis, B. S. Richards, I. A. Howard, A. Sastre-Santos and C. Wöll, Chem. Sci., 2020, 11, 7972–7978 RSC .
L. S. Xie, G. Skorupskii and M. Dincă, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 8536–8580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Hua, P. W. Doheny, B. Ding, B. Chan, M. Yu, C. J. Kepert and D. M. D’Alessandro, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 6622–6630 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. H. Dinolfo and J. T. Hupp, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 16814–16819 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ziegler and A. von Zelewsky, Coord. Chem. Rev., 1998, 177, 257–300 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wu, F. Wu, Q. Sun, J. Shi, A. Xie, X. Zhu and W. Dong, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 3316–3323 RSC .
B. D. McCarthy, E. R. Hontz, S. R. Yost, T. Van Voorhis and M. Dincă, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 453–458 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Sikdar, K. Jayaramulu, V. Kiran, K. V. Rao, S. Sampath, S. J. George and T. K. Maji, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 11701–11706 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Sikdar, A. Hazra, D. Samanta, R. Haldar and T. K. Maji, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 18479–18484 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Garai, A. Mallick and R. Banerjee, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 2195–2200 RSC .
T. Yan, Y.-Y. Li, J. Su, H.-Y. Wang and J.-L. Zuo, Chem. – Eur. J., 2021, 27, 11050–11055 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, J. Yu, D. J. Gosztola, H. C. Fry and P. Deria, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 16849–16857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, J. Yu, Z. Lu, J. Duan, H. C. Fry, D. J. Gosztola, K. Maindan, S. S. Rajasree and P. Deria, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 15286–15297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Tanaka, S. Horike, S. Kitagawa, M. Ohba, M. Hasegawa, Y. Ozawa and K. Toriumi, Chem. Commun., 2007, 3142–3144,  10.1039/B707947H .
V. Martínez-Martínez, S. Furukawa, Y. Takashima, I. López Arbeloa and S. Kitagawa, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 26084–26090 CrossRef .
Y. Takashima, V. M. Martínez, S. Furukawa, M. Kondo, S. Shimomura, H. Uehara, M. Nakahama, K. Sugimoto and S. Kitagawa, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 168 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Haldar, R. Matsuda, S. Kitagawa, S. J. George and T. K. Maji, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 11772–11777 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. E. Williams, E. A. Dolgopolova, D. C. Godfrey, E. D. Ermolaeva, P. J. Pellechia, A. B. Greytak, M. D. Smith, S. M. Avdoshenko, A. A. Popov and N. B. Shustova, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 9070–9074 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, M. Kozlowska, T. Okkali, D. Wagner, T. Higashino, G. Brenner-Weiß, S. M. Marschner, Z. Fu, Q. Zhang, H. Imahori, S. Bräse, W. Wenzel, C. Wöll and L. Heinke, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 9590–9595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-W. Kung, K. Otake, C. T. Buru, S. Goswami, Y. Cui, J. T. Hupp, A. M. Spokoyny and O. K. Farha, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 3871–3875 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Goswami, D. Ray, K.-I. Otake, C.-W. Kung, S. J. Garibay, T. Islamoglu, A. Atilgan, Y. Cui, C. J. Cramer, O. K. Farha and J. T. Hupp, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 4477–4482 RSC .
X. Liu, M. Kozlowska, T. Okkali, D. Wagner, T. Higashino, G. Brenner-Weiß, S. M. Marschner, Z. Fu, Q. Zhang, H. Imahori, S. Bräse, W. Wenzel, C. Wöll and L. Heinke, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 9590–9595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Pattengale, S. Yang, J. Ludwig, Z. Huang, X. Zhang and J. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 8072–8075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wu, C. Yuan, R. Chen, J. Wang, F. Dong, J. Li and Y. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 43741–43749 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Verma, A. Singh, F. A. Rahimi, P. Sarkar, S. Nath, S. K. Pati and T. K. Maji, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 7313 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Barman, A. Singh, F. A. Rahimi and T. K. Maji, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 16284–16292 CrossRef CAS .
P. Verma, A. Singh, F. A. Rahimi and T. K. Maji, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 13608–13614 RSC .
A. B. Djurišić, Y. He and A. M. C. Ng, APL Mater., 2020, 8, 030903 CrossRef .
S. Yuan, J.-S. Qin, H.-Q. Xu, J. Su, D. Rossi, Y. Chen, L. Zhang, C. Lollar, Q. Wang, H.-L. Jiang, D. H. Son, H. Xu, Z. Huang, X. Zou and H.-C. Zhou, ACS Cent. Sci., 2018, 4, 105–111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ghosh, S. Karmakar, F. A. Rahimi, R. S. Roy, S. Nath, U. K. Gautam and T. K. Maji, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 25220–25231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-Q. Xu, S. Yang, X. Ma, J. Huang and H.-L. Jiang, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 11615–11621 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lee, S. Kim, J. K. Kang and S. M. Cohen, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 5735–5738 RSC .
M. Elcheikh Mahmoud, H. Audi, A. Assoud, T. H. Ghaddar and M. Hmadeh, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 7115–7121 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-D. Xiao, Q. Shang, Y. Xiong, Q. Zhang, Y. Luo, S.-H. Yu and H.-L. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 9389–9393 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Gao, B. Guo, C. Guo, Q. Meng, J. Liang and J. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 24059–24065 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Parnicka, W. Lisowski, T. Klimczuk, A. Mikolajczyk and A. Zaleska-Medynska, Appl. Catal., B, 2022, 310, 121349 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ronda-Lloret, I. Pellicer-Carreño, A. Grau-Atienza, R. Boada, S. Diaz-Moreno, J. Narciso-Romero, J. C. Serrano-Ruiz, A. Sepúlveda-Escribano and E. V. Ramos-Fernandez, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2102582 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhan, H. Gao, Y. Yang, X. Li and Q.-L. Zhu, Adv. Sustainability Res., 2022, 3, 2200004 CrossRef .
D. Sun, Y. Fu, W. Liu, L. Ye, D. Wang, L. Yang, X. Fu and Z. Li, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 14279–14285 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Chen, T. Wu, H. Wu, H. Liu, Q. Qian, Z. Liu, G. Yang and B. Han, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 8890–8894 RSC .
H.-N. Wang, Y.-H. Zou, Y.-M. Fu, X. Meng, L. Xue, H.-X. Sun and Z.-M. Su, Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 16977–16985 RSC .
J. Li, H. Huang, W. Xue, K. Sun, X. Song, C. Wu, L. Nie, Y. Li, C. Liu, Y. Pan, H.-L. Jiang, D. Mei and C. Zhong, Nat. Catal., 2021, 4, 719–729 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zeng, Z. Wang, Y. Wang, J. Wang, Y. Guo, H. Hu, X. He, C. Wang and W. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 75–79 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D.-C. Liu, T. Ouyang, R. Xiao, W.-J. Liu, D.-C. Zhong, Z. Xu and T.-B. Lu, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 2166–2170 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, J. Wei, J. Dong, G. Liu, L. Shi, P. An, G. Zhao, J. Kong, X. Wang, X. Meng, J. Zhang and J. Ye, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 14310–14314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-S. Qin, S. Yuan, L. Zhang, B. Li, D.-Y. Du, N. Huang, W. Guan, H. F. Drake, J. Pang, Y.-Q. Lan, A. Alsalme and H.-C. Zhou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 2054–2060 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-Q. Xu, J. Hu, D. Wang, Z. Li, Q. Zhang, Y. Luo, S.-H. Yu and H.-L. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 13440–13443 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Li, W. Zhang and K. Zhou, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705512 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Jiao, Y. Wang, H.-L. Jiang and Q. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1703663 CrossRef PubMed .
X.-P. Wu, L. Gagliardi and D. G. Truhlar, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 7904–7912 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fu, D. Sun, Y. Chen, R. Huang, Z. Ding, X. Fu and Z. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 3364–3367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Hendon, D. Tiana, M. Fontecave, C. Sanchez, L. D’arras, C. Sassoye, L. Rozes, C. Mellot-Draznieks and A. Walsh, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 10942–10945 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. B. Chambers, X. Wang, L. Ellezam, O. Ersen, M. Fontecave, C. Sanchez, L. Rozes and C. Mellot-Draznieks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 8222–8228 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Song, Z. Li, Y. Zhu, X. Feng, J. S. Chen, M. Kaufmann, C. Wang and W. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 12219–12223 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chen, H. Xing, C. Wang and Z. Su, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 2657–2662 RSC .
Y. Song, Y. Pi, X. Feng, K. Ni, Z. Xu, J. S. Chen, Z. Li and W. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 6866–6871 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Paille, M. Gomez-Mingot, C. Roch-Marchal, B. Lassalle-Kaiser, P. Mialane, M. Fontecave, C. Mellot-Draznieks and A. Dolbecq, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 3613–3618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. P. Ireland, R. G. Palgrave, S. C. Bennett, A. W. J. Smith, J. H. Clark, J. R. Darwent, J. B. Claridge, S. Poulston and M. J. Rosseinsky, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 12479–12486 RSC .
S. Karmakar, S. Barman, F. A. Rahimi and T. K. Maji, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 2429–2440 RSC .
Y. Benseghir, A. Lemarchand, M. Duguet, P. Mialane, M. Gomez-Mingot, C. Roch-Marchal, T. Pino, M.-H. Ha-Thi, M. Haouas, M. Fontecave, A. Dolbecq, C. Sassoye and C. Mellot-Draznieks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 9428–9438 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:

Ritesh Haldar
	Ritesh Haldar received his PhD (Chemistry) in 2015 under the supervision of Prof. Tapas Kumar Maji at the Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific Research (JNCASR), Bangalore, India. He joined the Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT) as an Alexander von Humboldt (AvH) postdoctoral fellow mentored by Prof. Christof Wöll, and later continued as a junior group leader until 2021. Since May, 2021 he has been a Reader at the Tata Institute of Fundamental Research (TIFR), Hyderabad, India. His research interests are inorganic–organic functional materials for chemical separation, catalysis and photophysical property studies.

Adrija Ghosh
	Adrija Ghosh obtained her BSc in Chemistry from Presidency University, Kolkata in 2018. She completed her MS in Chemical Sciences from the New Chemistry Unit, Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific Research (JNCASR), Bangalore in 2021. She is currently pursuing her PhD under the guidance of Prof. Tapas Kumar Maji at JNCASR, Bangalore. Her research work mainly focuses on the design and synthesis of metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) by direct methodologies and post-synthetic modification for optoelectronics and catalysis.

Tapas Kumar Maji
	Tapas Kumar Maji obtained his PhD in 2002 from the Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science (IACS), Kolkata. After a postdoctoral stint at Kyoto University, Japan he joined Jadavpur University as a lecturer. Then he moved to the Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific Research (JNCASR), Bangalore, where, he is currently a professor in the Chemistry and Physics of Materials Unit. His research focuses on the design and synthesis of bulk and nanoscale metal–organic frameworks (MOFs), organic porous polymers and metal–organic hybrid ‘soft’ materials for energy-storage and conversion, photo-physical analyses and photocatalysis. Prof. Maji has published 245 peer reviewed publications.

 	Fig. 1  Charge transfer in organic donor–acceptor assembly: (a) different excited state energy levels; (b) Dδ+–Aδ− CT state characterization by absorption spectra; (c) illustration of CT state vs. exciplex state. Note the broad featureless emission profile is common for exciplex and CT. The grey shaded absorption spectrum presented here, is typical for solid state materials. However, in the solution state vibronic features can be seen, and the CT state absorption can be very distinct.	 

 	Fig. 2  A schematic illustration of the MOF based assembly of donor–acceptor chromophores/metal-nodes exhibiting charge transfer interactions. The grey rods are organic linkers.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) View of the π–π donor–acceptor pair in the MOF structure, (b) absorption spectra of the linkers and the MOF, showing the appearance of the additional absorption band in the visible region, corresponding to the CT state, (c) calculated electron and hole density change in the donor–acceptor pairs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 66.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic diagram of the ground-state strut-to-strut/guest-to-strut electron transfer in the redox-active interpenetrated 3D framework [Cd(bpdc)(dpNDI)]. Crystal structure of [Cd(bpdc)(dpNDI)] (b) 3D bipillared layer structure, (c) 2-fold interpenetrated net, (d) optical images showing the photochromic feature of the MOF, (e) donor–acceptor interaction in the MOF, (f) change in the absorption spectra upon UV-irradiation, exhibiting the radical anion peaks of the dpNDI, (g) EPR spectra of the MOF at a different time of UV-light exposure (blue: pristine, black: 3 min, red: 7 min), (h) guest encapsulation in the MOF, and their corresponding color change and EPR spectra confirming the radical ion generation, (i) appearance of the CT band after guest encapsulation in the absorption spectra, (j) cyclic voltammetry study confirming the reduced state of the dpNDI. Reproduced with permission from ref. 67.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Pillared-layer structure of {[Zn2(adc)2(bpNDI)]·7DMF·2H2O}n, (b) view of the 2D layer, (c) view of the transition dipole geometry of the donor and acceptor, (d) emission spectra of adc monomer (in DMF, Excitation: 350 nm, gray) and MOF 1 pristine (Excitation: 370 nm, blue), (e) reversible color change of the MOF upon desolvation and resolvation, (f) PXRD patterns of the MOF in a different phase, (g) change in the fluorescence lifetime upon desolvation, (h) EPR spectra of the MOF in a different phase, (i) reversible change in the Zn-paddle-wheel structure upon desolvation and resolvation and accompanied change in the orientation of the adc linker, leading to an electron transfer from adc to dpNDI. Reproduced with permission from ref. 68.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) NDI-based tetracarboxylate linker, used for the photochromic MOF synthesis, (b) chemical structure of tetrathiafulvalene tetrabenzoate (H4TTFTB) and N,N′-bis(4-pyridylmethyl)-1,4,5,8-naphthalenediimide (bpmNDI), (c–e) 2D layer MOF made by Co(II), TTFTB and bpmNDI, AB type packing and π–π stacking of the donor–acceptor chromophores, (f) UV-vis spectra of the linkers and MOF, (g) EPR spectra of the MOF before (blue) and after (red) 808 nm laser irradiation, (h and i) Photothermal conversion plots of the MOF in a PDMS film (Co-MOF@PDMS (0.6 wt%)). Reproduced with permission from ref. 70.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) An illustration of the energy and electron transfer phenomena in the donor–acceptor NU-1000 MOF, (b) postsynthetic modification strategy for creating the TPPZn modified NU-1000 MOF, (c) energy levels of the ground and excited states in TPPZn modified NU-1000, exhibiting the prospect of energy and charge transfer processes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 71.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of the guest encapsulated MOF and CT interaction, (b) UV-vis spectra of the pristine MOF (blue) and DMA adsorbed MOF (green), (c) emission spectra (solid) and excitation spectra (dotted) of the pristine MOF (blue) and DMA adsorbed MOF (green), (d) photographs of the pristine and guest adsorbed MOFs under UV-light illumination. Reproduced with permission from ref. 73.	 

 	Fig. 9  View of the interpenetrated nets and void sites (A and B): (a) pristine MOF, (b) desolvated MOF, (c) toluene encapsulated MOF, (d) photographs of the guest encapsulated MOFs under UV light illumination, (e) UV-vis spectra of the guest encapsulated MOFs, (f) emission spectra of the guest encapsulated MOFs, (g) change in emission maximum vs. ionization potential of the donor guest molecules, (h) schematic illustration of the excited state photophysics in the guest encapsulated MOF. Reproduced with permission from ref. 75.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) 1D structure of [Zn(o-phen)(ndc)], (b) 2D supramolecular structure through C–H–π interactions, (c) view of the pore window in the 3D supramolecular structure, (d) coordination space created between the o-phen units occupied by guest DMF, (e–g) NMA, DMA and DMPT in the pores of the supramolecular structure, respectively, (h–j) spatial positions of the aromatic guests in the coordination space, (k) photographs of the pristine and guest included MOFs under visible and UV-light, (l) emission spectra of the pristine and guest included MOFs (350 nm excitation), (m) fluorescence lifetime decay profiles of the guest included MOFs ((ii) at 545 nm, (iii) at 575 nm, (iv) at 595 nm). Reproduced with permission from ref. 76.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustration of a fullerene-based MOF structure with periodically organized donor–acceptors, (b) optimized structure of C60 encapsulated in a porphyrin-based MOF (thin film), (c) change in the conductivity of the C60 encapsulated porphyrin MOF thin film upon irradiation of different wavelengths of light (bias of 2V). Reproduced with permission from ref. 81.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic diagram for the design of CT-based MOF photocatalysts using different inorganic and organic components. Zr, Ce, Ti, C, N, O, P, Ru, and Ir atoms are denoted by sky blue, green, white, gray, brown, red, orange, blue, and cyan, respectively, (b) LMCT characterization via absorption spectrum; (c) MMCT characterization via emission spectra; (d) illustration of engineering the HOMO and LUMO in a photocatalyst via CT towards achieving specific reactions.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic illustration of photocatalytic HER by Ti3-BPDC-Ir/Ru. Ti, Ir/Ru, O, and N atoms are depicted in blue, gold, red, and dark blue, respectively, (b) structures of photosensitizers [Ir(ppy)2(dcbpy)]Cl and [Ru(bpy)2(dcbpy)]Cl2, (c) optical photographs of Ti3-BPDC-Ir (left) and Ti3-BPDC-Ru (right) (scale bar is 50 μm), (d) time-dependent HER TONs of Ti3-BPDC-Ir and Ti3-BPDC-Ru along with homogeneous controls, (e) proposed catalytic cycle for the visible light-driven HER catalyzed by Ti3-BPDC-Ir, (f) detailed catalytic mechanism on the Ti site via the TiIV/TiIII cycle. EPR spectra of (g) Ti3-BPDC-Ir and (h) Ti3-BPDC-Ru, (i) DFT calculated energy changes in the HER steps through the TiIV/TiIII cycle. Reproduced with permission from ref. 113.	 

 	Fig. 14  Cluster models of (a) UiO-66(Ce) and (b) UiO-66(Ce)-X. Color scheme: Ce, yellow; O, red; C, brown; H, light pink; substituent X, blue. (c) Band alignment of UiO-66(Ce)-X. For each case of UiO-66(Ce)-X, the HOCO and LUCO are calculated from the linker and the Ce, respectively. The red and blue dashed lines represent energy levels corresponding to redox potentials for water splitting, and the green region covers the energy levels of various CO2 reduction reactions. The band gaps are written in black and the vacuum aligned HOCO energies are written in white. Reproduced with permission from ref. 109.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic showing the synthesis of Ce6-BTB-Ru MOLs and a photocatalytic HER. Ce, Ru, N, and O atoms are shown in orange, pink, blue, and red, respectively, (b) time-dependent HER TONs of Ce6-BTB-Ir and Ce6-BTB-Ru along with homogeneous controls, (c) potential energy diagram of Ce6-BTB-Ru-catalyzed HER through a dual photoexcitation pathway. (d) Proposed photocatalytic cycle for the hydrogen production catalyzed by Ce6-BTB-Ru. Reproduced with permission from ref. 115.	 

 	Fig. 16  Components of POM@MOF-545: (a) P2W18Co4 POM; (b) TCPP-H2 linker; (c) Zr-based unit; and (d) P2W18Co4@MOF-545. WO6, green polyhedra; ZrO8, blue polyhedra or spheres; Co, cyan spheres; O, red spheres; C, H, gray; N, dark blue, (e) proposed mechanism for the light-driven H2O oxidation by P2W18Co4@MOF-545, (f) kinetics of visible-light-driven O2 production over 0.5 mg of P2W18Co4@MOF-545 (blue ■), P2W18Co4@MOF-545 recycled once (red ▲), twice (pink ★), and TCPP-H2 and P2W18Co4 in solution (green ●). Reproduced with permission from ref. 116.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Schematic illustration for the synthesis of Zr-MBA-Ru/Re-MOF by immobilization of the molecular photosensitizer and catalyst towards CO2 reduction, (b) UV-vis absorption spectra of Zr-MBA-Ru/Re-MOF, (c) band alignment of Zr-MBA-Ru/Re-MOF, (d) CO production as a function of irradiation time by Zr-MBA-Ru/Re-MOF in pure aqueous medium, (e) photoluminescence spectra of Zr-MBA-Ru-MOF and Zr-MBA-Ru/Re-MOF (λex = 460 nm). Inset: optical photographs of Zr-MBA-Ru-MOF and Zr-MBA-Ru/Re-MOF under UV light, (f) HOMO–LUMO positioning of [MBA-Ru(bpy)2]Cl2 and [MBA-Re(CO)3Cl], depicting the possibility of charge transfer, (g) transient photocurrent responses and (h) EIS-Nyquist plots of Zr-MBA-Ru-MOF and Zr-MBA-Ru/Re-MOF. Reproduced with permission from ref. 118.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
