Lithium-ion batteries for sustainable energy storage: recent advances towards new cell configurations  - Green Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7GC01328K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7GC01328K
(Critical Review)
Green Chem., 2017, 19, 3442-3467Lithium-ion batteries for sustainable energy storage: recent advances towards new cell configurations

        
          
            Daniele 
            Di Lecce
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Roberta 
            Verrelli
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Jusef 
            Hassoun
          
          
        
      *b
aSapienza University of Rome, Department of Chemistry, Piazzale Aldo Moro, 5, 00185, Rome, Italy
bDepartment of Chemical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Ferrara, Via Fossato di Mortara, 17, 44121, Ferrara, Italy. E-mail: jusef.hassoun@unife.it
Received 
      3rd May 2017
    , Accepted 31st May 2017First published on 31st May 2017AbstractThe recent advances in the lithium-ion battery concept towards the development of sustainable energy storage systems are herein presented. The study reports on new lithium-ion cells developed over the last few years with the aim of improving the performance and sustainability of electrochemical energy storage. Alternative chemistries involving anode, cathode and electrolyte components are herein recalled in order to provide an overview of state-of-the-art lithium-ion battery systems, with particular focus on the cell configurations currently proposed at the laboratory scale. Hence, the review highlights the main issues related to full cell assembly, which have been tentatively addressed by a limited number of reports, while many papers describe materials investigation in half-cells, i.e., employing lithium metal anodes. The new battery prototypes here described are evaluated in terms of their electrochemical performances, cell balance, efficiency and cycle life. Finally, the applicability of these suitable energy storage systems is evaluated in the light of their most promising characteristics, thus outlining a conceivable scenario for new generation, sustainable lithium-ion batteries.Daniele Di LecceDaniele Di Lecce has been a Postdoctoral Research Fellow at the University of Ferrara (Italy) and at the Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), Helmholtz Institute Ulm (HIU, Germany). He graduated in Industrial Chemistry in 2012 and obtained his PhD in Materials Science from the “Sapienza” University of Rome (Italy) in 2015, investigating new cathodes for lithium-ion batteries. His research interests currently lie in the fields of electrochemistry and materials science, with a focus on lithium-ion batteries of new configurations.Roberta VerrelliRoberta Verrelli graduated in Chemistry in 2012 at the “Sapienza” University of Rome. She obtained her PhD in Chemical Sciences in 2015 from the same university within the field of advanced lithium-ion batteries. Her research mainly focuses on electrochemical energy storage systems and materials science. She is currently pursuing postdoctoral studies at the ICMAB-CSIC (Spain).Jusef HassounJusef Hassoun is presently Associate Professor of Physical Chemistry and Electrochemistry at the University of Ferrara, Italy. After graduating in Chemistry at the “Sapienza” University of Rome he worked in an industrial company for 3 years before returning to academia to obtain his PhD degree in Materials Science in the field of advanced lithium-ion batteries in 2009. He has been an Assistant Research Scientist at the Department of Chemistry of the “Sapienza” University of Rome from 2011 to 2015, and a visiting professor at the Hanyang University in Seoul, South Korea. He is the co-author of more than 150 papers in international journals, and book chapters.
Introduction
The continuous growth of the world's population and the industrial and technological development of society triggered an increase in global energy demand, thus leading to serious challenges and environmental issues over the upcoming decades.1 The massive exploitation of fossil fuels and the consequent emission of CO2 and pollutants into the atmosphere may actually accelerate the global climate changes.2 Therefore, the exploitation of renewable sources, such as solar and wind energy, is attracting relevant attention in order to reduce the greenhouse gas emissions, as recently established within the Paris Agreement of 2016. Energy generated by intrinsically discontinuous and intermittent renewable sources requires efficient storage for grid stability and widespread distribution in order to be competitive with the currently most used fossil fuels. In this view, the development of rechargeable batteries of high energy and power density, fast cycling rates, long life, and, at the same time, reasonable cost is expected to allow the progressive transition towards environmentally sustainable energy supplies in the near future.3 Furthermore, the large-scale replacement of internal combustion engines with zero-emission electrified systems (i.e., EVs) may further decrease greenhouse gas pollution.4 Preliminary steps towards these directions have already been taken, with environmental policies becoming established in several countries encouraging the electro-mobility through consumer incentives. However, the actual diffusion of the electric vehicles hinges on the development of storage systems of high volumetric and gravimetric energy density and acceptable costs in order to compete with the traditional ones.5
Lithium-ion batteries (LIBs), the most versatile and attractive energy storage systems, have triggered the global scale diffusion of a vast array of portable electronic devices which rapidly became of daily use in the last 25 years,3 and still represent the most convincing choice for both electric vehicles and energy storage grids in the upcoming years. A great deal of effort from both academia and industry has been devoted towards the development of a new generation of batteries suitable for the emerging applications in terms of gravimetric and volumetric power and energy densities, as well as in terms of sustainability and environmental compatibility.6 Accordingly, LIB chemistry has been gradually improved since its first commercialization in 1991, thus leading to performances matching the requirements of new technologies. In the mid-1990s the most diffuse LIBs employed a graphite anode, an electrolyte based on a lithium salt and a carbonate solvent, and a LiCoO2 cathode, resulting in a gravimetric energy density of about 190 Wh kg−1.7 The conventional C/LiCoO2 cell has several intrinsic limitations, including (i) the relatively limited intercalation ability of graphite (i.e., of about 0.17 moles of Li per mole of carbon); (ii) the high cost and environmental issues posed by the use of Co; (iii) the low thermal stability of the Li1−xCoO2 phase formed during charge.8,9 The C/LiFePO4 configuration was introduced in the early 2000s in order to decrease the cost and toxicity of the battery.7 However, the relatively low operating voltage of the cathode (i.e., 3.45 V vs. Li+/Li) affected the energy density of the battery. Technological upgrade, optimization of conventional cells’ design as well as exploitation of alternative electrode chemistries have so far represented the most explored strategies for increasing the energy density.10,11 Besides cell technology improvement, the development of new anode, cathode and electrolyte materials with enhanced performances attracted a great deal of effort and, recently, increasing funds. Among the alternative anodes, alloying materials such as Sn or Si and metal oxide conversion materials, reversibly exchanging more than 1 mol of Li+ for 1 mol of active species, appear optimal candidates to achieve high specific capacities.12–16 Sn and Si electrodes, which have the additional advantage of being naturally abundant, have already been optimized up to the market level.17 A possible alternative to the conventional graphite anodes employed in several full cells and characterized by very high safety content is the Lithium Titanium Oxide (Li4Ti5O12).16 This anode has remarkable thermal stability and operates at 1.5 V vs. Li+/Li, thus avoiding lithium plating after charge. The material cycles at a very fast rate with a specific capacity of 170 mA h g−1.18
As for the cathode side, research has mostly focused on materials characterized by lower cost and toxicity than LiCoO2, as well as by higher specific capacity and/or working voltage in order to increase the battery energy density. Accordingly, LiCoO2 has been efficiently replaced by other layered compounds, namely LiNi1/3Mn1/3Co1/3O2 (NMC) and LiNi0.8Co0.15Al0.05O2 (NCA), which have lower Co content than LiCoO2, an average operating voltage of about 3.7 V vs. Li+/Li, higher reversible capacity (about 180–185 mA h g−1) and the additional advantage of higher thermal stability in their de-lithiated form.8,19,20 These cathode materials have been successfully launched onto the market and are currently employed in commercial LIBs.7 Furthermore, a great deal of attention is now devoted to Li-rich layered compounds, generally described by the chemical formula (1 − x)Li2MnO3·xLiMO2 (M = Co, Mn, Ni and Li/M ratio >1).21 Despite their remarkable capacity, i.e., exceeding 200 mA h g−1 and the advantage of high manganese content, these materials need further optimization in order to overcome the issues of structural instability, voltage hysteresis and decay after prolonged cycling.8 LiFePO4 olivine is a low cost and environmentally friendly cathode already used in commercial LIBs,22 as mentioned above, and it is characterized by remarkable chemical and electrochemical stability with respect to layered-structure materials.23 A vast array of polyanionic olivines characterized by higher working voltage than LiFePO4, such as LiFe0.5Mn0.5PO4 and LiCoPO4, have been recently investigated as viable cathodes for next generation batteries. These materials have higher theoretical energy density than LiFePO4.24 In particular, LiCoPO4 exchanges Li+ ions at potential vs. Li+/Li as high as 4.8 V;25 however, it is characterized by high expected cost and environmental concerns due to cobalt. A very interesting class of Co-free cathode materials suitable for high energy LIB batteries is represented by spinel-structured electrodes, such as LiMn2O4 and LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4, working at about 4.1 and 4.7 V vs. Li+/Li, respectively.26,27
Beyond conventional insertion cathodes, the exploitation of Li/O2 and Li/S battery systems, exhibiting much higher theoretical energy densities, may provide a real breakthrough in terms of battery performances and sustainability.1,9,28,29 These challenging fields of research have been continuously expanding in recent years: Li/O2 batteries are still at a research level and may be practically employed only from a mid- to long-term perspective, while recent progress achieved in Li/S batteries holds promise for their large-scale diffusion in the near future.
The increase of LIB performances, targeting to achieve satisfactorily high energy density, implies the use of very stable electrolyte solutions for ensuring cell safety and lifetime. Within the challenging research field of next generation LIBs’ electrolytes, several viable alternatives have been suggested, such as ionic liquids (ILs), which are considered “green” and sustainable alternatives to conventional electrolytes, as indeed demonstrated by several proof-of-concept battery prototypes exhibiting remarkable performances.30 Solvents, co-solvents and electrolyte additives have been intensively studied in order to achieve electrolyte solutions with optimized characteristics.31,32 Moreover, polymer and solid electrolytes have attracted increasing attention over the years, revealing promising features for the development of highly safe lithium and lithium-ion batteries.17,33,34 Several fluorine-free salts have been developed and studied in order to further decrease the toxicity and hazards of the cell.35
Relevant efforts have been devoted to the reduction of costs and environmental impact of electrode materials (synthesis and processing) as well as to the development of efficient and sustainable battery recycling methodologies.1,36 In this respect, attention has been focused mainly on the recovery of the valuable Co, Li and Mn metals from spent LIBs through combined mechanical and chemical treatments. The optimization of the recovery and recycling process of spent batteries through environmentally friendly routes (such as bioleaching) is expected to further enhance the overall sustainability of Li-ion energy storage systems.36
Furthermore, concerns over the geographical availability and cost of lithium metal have recently triggered the study and development of a “post-lithium” battery technology, based on more naturally abundant elements such as Na, Ca, Mg, K, Al, etc.37,38 Besides sodium, several open challenges still hinder the practical exploitation of Ca, Mg, K and Al based batteries.37 Moreover, batteries employing organic electrode materials are now emerging as very promising and “green” alternatives to conventional inorganic systems; however, their development is still at a preliminary research level.39
This review aims to shed light on the most recent advances in the LIB concept towards the development of high-performance energy storage systems. In particular, attention is focused on new LIB prototypes, suggested over the last few years as viable and sustainable alternatives to conventional cell configurations. A vast array of laboratory-scale and proof-of-concept batteries is herein critically discussed highlighting the main advantages and drawbacks of various configurations. Battery suitability for practical applications is herein rationalized by focusing attention on the electrochemical behavior under operating conditions of full lithium-ion cells combining novel anodes, cathodes and electrolytes. We recall several examples of LIB prototypes to discuss the critical issues associated with the full cell assembly and test, including the selection of optimal cathode/anode mass ratio and voltage limits. Particular attention is devoted to the role of the overall full cell balance in achieving prolonged battery stability and voltage retention and in avoiding active material losses due to parasitic reactions, which may continuously modify the anode/cathode ratio over cycling.40 The review includes four main sections according to the type of cathode employed, since the voltage, expected cost and environmental impact of the full cell strongly hinge on the positive electrode features. Thus, LIB prototypes using layered oxides, phospho-olivines, spinel oxides, as well as sulfur- and oxygen-based cathodes are reported and discussed individually. In particular, in the first section, the review surveys high-performance batteries based on LiCoO2 materials, i.e., the conventional cathode, and new cells employing layered oxides in which Co is partially substituted by Mn, Ni and Al, as well as preliminary examples of LIBs based on high-capacity Li-rich materials. The second section focuses on batteries using polyanionic LiFePO4 olivine, which have demonstrated relevant performance in terms of stability and cycling life, as well as on recent attempts at increasing the cell energy density by Fe substitution in the LiFe1−xMePO4 cathode. The increase of stored energy by the use of high-voltage cathodes is further discussed in the third section, which deals with new LIBs having spinel oxides as the positive electrode. The design of high-performance battery configurations through optimal electrode formulation and material engineering, the use of nano-architectures, the optimization of active material morphology and particle size, and the use of composite electrodes are covered by the sections. Hence, the fourth section of the review reports on lithium-ion batteries employing sulfur and oxygen cathodes, which represent a new attractive choice for the future development of an advanced and sustainable energy storage technology, with particular environmental and economical advantages. This section demonstrates the possible use of sulfur-based cathodes in lithium-ion cells with relevant performances and reveals the main issues currently affecting metal-free oxygen batteries shown by preliminary results.
According to the above description, Scheme 1 presents a flow chart including key principles and guidelines throughout the survey of the LIB prototypes reported in this review.
 Scheme 1  Schematic representation of the review structure, summarizing the main topics covered. 
Therefore, this paper highlights the crucial role of full cell prototype studies in demonstrating the applicability at the laboratory scale of recently proposed cathode, anode and electrolyte materials. In particular, the critical analysis of LIBs covered by this review may be of definite interest in order to outline the open challenges in the achievement of a sustainable, advanced energy storage technology in the near future.
Lithium-ion batteries using layered cathodes
Layered-structure cathodes, among which the most widely known is LiCoO2 (i.e., LCO), currently represent the cathode materials for use in combination with a graphite anode.8,9 Various configurations of layered cathodes in which cobalt is partially replaced by nickel/manganese (NMC) or nickel/aluminum (NCA) were reported to have an operating voltage of 3.8 V, specific capacities exceeding 200 mA h g−1 and an excellent rate capability, suitable characteristics for emerging applications such as electric vehicles.8,19–21 Furthermore, LIBs employing layered cathode materials and carbonaceous anode materials other than graphite, such as exfoliated graphite/graphene, have been widely investigated with remarkable results.41–45 A great deal of attention has been also focused on the use of unconventional composite anodes based on alloys,46–52 titanates53–57 and metal oxides58–64 for application in new configuration LIBs. Many recent literature studies investigated renewed LIBs using a benchmark, even commercial, LCO cathode. Although these cells often revealed remarkable improvement at the anode side, they suffer from the drawbacks associated with a Co-based layered oxide cathode which were previously discussed. However, these studies may actually facilitate the evaluation of the anode improvement. Further enhancement of the full cell features might be achieved by using such anodes with a new-generation layered cathode, such as NMC, NCA and Li-rich oxides.
Accordingly, alloy-based anodes have demonstrated good performances in combination with a LCO cathode. Nanocrystalline Si (c-Si) dispersed in amorphous Si (a-Si) encapsulating hard carbon (HC) derived from a natural polysaccharide (HC@c-Si@a-Si) was studied in a full cell in combination with LCO.65 Despite the use of such an environmentally friendly precursor for the hard carbon synthesis, a further carbon coating via thermal decomposition of acetylene was necessary to enhance the electronic conductivity and form the C–Si phase. The HC@c-Si@a-Si/LCO full cell showed an excellent rate capability and very stable, long-term cycle life. The battery exhibited a capacity retention, at a rate as high as 10C, of 50.8% with respect to the capacity delivered at 1C rate, and of 80% after 160 cycles at 1C rate.
One-pot decoration of the Si anode and the LCO cathode with colloidal nanoparticles composed of electroconductive antimony-doped tin oxide (ATO) actually enhanced the electronic conduction of the materials and mitigated unwanted interfacial side reactions between the electrodes and the electrolyte. Thus, a full ATO-Si/ATO-LCO cell was cycled within 2.5 V and 4.4 V, with a remarkable volumetric energy density (discharge capacity = 274 mA h cm−3) and capacity retention (83.9% after 100 cycles).66 However, the use of Sb, even in small amounts, further affects the environmental compatibility of the cell.67 Moreover, both cathode and anode syntheses involve high temperature solid-state annealing.
A Si–graphene/LCO cell reached volumetric energy densities of 972 and 700 Wh l−1 at the first and 200th cycles, respectively, 1.8 and 1.5 times higher than those of current commercial lithium-ion batteries.68 The anode was prepared by directly growing graphene over silicon nanoparticles without silicon carbide formation. This synthesis approach requires heating at high temperature (1000 °C) under CH4 and H2; therefore, it is expected to significantly affect the material cost for large-scale production. The graphene layers anchored onto the silicon surface accommodate the volume expansion of silicon associated with the Li-alloying via a sliding process between adjacent graphene layers.
A three-dimensional (3D) nanoarchitecture of Ge coated with carbon (3D-Ge-C) showed excellent electrochemical performance; hence it was studied in the full cell in combination with a LCO cathode.69 After anode pre-lithiation, the 3D-Ge-C/LCO cell exhibited charge and discharge capacities of 1901 and 1561 mA h g−1, respectively, taking into account the 3D-Ge-C mass, an initial Coulombic efficiency of about 82.1%, an outstanding rate capability, and a retention of 94.7% over 50 cycles. The possible application of LIB prototypes was also demonstrated by lighting up a 50-LED bulb array.69 The anode was prepared by a facile carbothermal reduction of nano GeO2 using polyvinylpyrrolidone as the precursor. It is noteworthy that germanium is a relatively nontoxic element that poses negligible threat to the environment.70
A very interesting LIB array is represented by the combination of a LCO cathode and a LTO anode. A flexible LIB using the abovementioned configuration, with reinforced electrode design in order to support the active layers of the battery and a freestanding carbon nanotube (CNT) as the current collector (Fig. 1a), showed remarkable performances.71 The CNT layer was prepared by spray painting on a stainless steel foil, while the active materials were embedded inside a porous membrane composed of non-woven fibers. The embedding process was performed by dipping the membrane into an ink bath. Then, the CNT layer was transferred from the stainless steel foil to the embedded membrane by simple dipping in a water bath. This approach led to an electrode tensile strength of one order of magnitude higher than standard electrodes. The freestanding CNT based current collector minimized the thickness of inactive components within the battery. This particular architecture led to areal-capacity enhancement and improved the tensile strength and mechanical flexibility of the electrodes. The cell delivered an areal capacity of about 1 mA h cm−2, a value 3–4 times higher than those of other reports on flexible lithium-ion batteries using LTO and LCO electrodes, and a capacity retention of around 94% after cycling the battery for 450 cycles at a C/2 rate (Fig. 1b). Tests at different current rates (Fig. 1c and d) showed a reversible capacity of about 117, 104, and 90 mA h g−1 at C/4, C/2, and 1C rates, respectively. Furthermore, the reinforced electrode allowed excellent capacity retention after repeated flexing to a bending radius ranging from 45 to 10 mm.
 Fig. 1  Characteristics of a flexible LTO/LCO lithium-ion cell. (a) Schematic representation of the pouch-cell. (b) Areal capacity (mA h cm−2) of the full cell cycled for 450 cycles at C/2 rate. The full cell had a total active area of 2.5 × 2.5 cm2 and LTO and LCO loadings of 13.4 and 12.5 mg cm−2, respectively. (c) Areal capacity (mA h cm−2) and Coulombic efficiency (%) of the full cell cycled between C/4 and 1C rates. (d) Galvanostatic charge/discharge curves for the full cell cycled between C/4 and 1C rates. The capacity at C/4, C/2 and 1C rates was 117, 104 and 90 mA h g−1, respectively. The Coulombic efficiency of all the batteries was above 99.5%. Electrolyte: 1 M solution of LiPF6 in EC:DEC 1:1. Reproduced with permission.71 Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Flexible LIBs were also reported by using Fe2N and MoO2 anodes in combination with a LCO cathode.72,73 Binder-free Fe2N nanoparticles (Fe2N NPs) revealed excellent performance within a flexible Fe2N/LCO configuration battery. The Fe2N NPs were prepared by hydrothermal treatment followed by annealing at 600 °C in NH3 gas flow.72 The full cell achieved a high power density (3200 W kg−1) by operating at a current density as high as 1000 mA g−1 and a high energy density (688 Wh kg−1) at lower current (200 mA g−1). Uniform MoO2 nanoparticle materials, evaluated as an intercalation-type lithium anode within the potential window of 1.0–2.5 V, showed comparable electrochemical behavior and higher capacity with respect to commercial Li4Ti5O12 in a half cell, and were therefore employed in a full LIB with a LCO cathode. The anode was synthesized by a simple hydrothermal pathway followed by annealing at 420 °C under a H2/Ar atmosphere.73 The MoO2/LCO cell delivered high energy density based on the total mass of cathode and anode active materials (179 Wh kg−1), and a capacity retention of 87% of the initial capacity after 500 cycles at 1C rate.
A very interesting LIB using a commercial LCO cathode and a composite, a core–shell nanowire anode based on TiO2–MoO3 (TO–MO mass ratio 1:1) is reported in Fig. 2.74 The nanostructured anode (Fig. 2a and b), prepared through a hydrothermal approach followed by a controlled electrodeposition process, was composed of a nano-MoO3 shell, which provided a large specific capacity and a high electrical conductivity, and an electrochemically stable TiO2 nanowire core, which ensured negligible volume change during Li+ insertion/desertion. Accordingly, the stable TiO2 core mitigated the cycling instability of the MoO3 shell and its array further provided a 3D scaffold for the electrodeposition of MoO3. The full-cell (Fig. 2c) showed outstanding performance (Fig. 2d–f), with a maximum power density of 1086 W kgtotal−1 (based on the total mass of the TO–MO and LiCoO2) and excellent energy density (285 Wh kgtotal−1), a high value with respect to several LIBs previously reported with metal oxide anodes. However, it is worth considering that molybdenum is not an abundant element and is mostly produced as a byproduct of copper mining and in a smaller amount from the primary ore. Therefore, its use in LIBs may further decrease the environmental compatibility of this type of cell. Furthermore, the Mo price is sensitive to copper production.75
 Fig. 2  Characteristics of a TiO2–MoO3/LCO lithium-ion cell. (a) Schematic illustration of the structural features of the synergistic TiO2–MoO3 nanowire array. (b) SEM image of the optimized TiO2–MoO3 hybrid array (optical image in the inset). (c) Schematic illustration of the full cell. (d) Stored charge of both the Li/TiO2–MoO3 half-cell and the TiO2–MoO3/LCO full cell at different currents. (e) The first three charge–discharge curves of the full cell. (f) Cycling performance and Coulombic efficiency of the full cell at 50 mA gtotal−1. Electrolyte: 1 M LiPF6 in EC:DEC 1:1 v/v. Voltage limits: 1.0–4 V. Reproduced with permission.74 Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
A relevant class of energy storage systems with high energy content is represented by LIBs combining NMC or NCA cathodes with carbonaceous,76–80 alloy,81–85 titanates,86,87 oxides88,89 and sulfites.90 Partial substitution of Mn, Ni, and Al for Co within the layered cathode structure may improve the thermal stability and reversible capacity of the cell, as well as decrease its cost and environmental concerns. It is worth mentioning that a limited content of Co and Ni within the layered structure may further enhance the battery sustainability.91 Among the studied cell configurations, the porous carbon–Fe3O4/Li[Ni0.59Co0.16Mn0.25]O2 full cell exhibited high areal and gravimetric capacities (748 mA h cm−2 and 150 mA h g−1, respectively) at about 3.2 V, which led to a theoretical energy density of 483 Wh kg−1 with respect to the cathode weight.92 The cathode powder was prepared by the coprecipitation method followed by high-temperature treatment (850 °C) under oxygen, while the anode was synthesized by the sol–gel approach with annealing (500 °C) under an Ar atmosphere. The battery reversibly operated within 50 and 800 mA g−1 current, with a retention of 63.8% after 1000 cycles at 0.505 mA (i.e., 50 mA g−1 with respect to the cathode). A bifunctional nanostructured anode based on a selenium/micro–mesoporous carbon sphere (Se-MPCS) was successfully employed in a LIB with a LiNi1/3Mn1/3Co1/3O2 cathode.93 Se-MPCS was prepared by introducing Se into a carbon matrix through heating a mixture of Se powder and carbon at 240 °C. The carbon host was synthesized by a low-temperature hydrothermal process. Furthermore, the negative electrode layers were prepared by a sustainable aqueous process employing carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC) and styrene butadiene rubber (SBR). The full Se-MPCS/NMC cell showed, at a rate of 1C, a reversible capacity of 110 mA h g−1 based on the cathode mass, with a Coulombic efficiency of approximately 100%, and retained 80% and 50% of the initial reversible capacity after 500 and 1000 cycles, respectively. A very stable and safe LIB employed a Pyr14TFSI-LiTFSI non-flammable ionic liquid (IL) electrolyte, a nanostructured Sn–C nanocomposite anode prepared by the sol–gel approach and a commercial layered NMC cathode (Fig. 3).94 The anode was synthesized by heating at 700 °C under Ar flow a resorcinol-formaldehyde gel infiltrated by an organometallic Sn precursor. The battery had outstanding characteristics in terms of cycle life, efficiency, optimal electrodes/electrolyte interface features and energy density (see Fig. 3a–c). The electrolyte ensured conductivity values varying from about 2 mS cm−1 at 40 °C to 7 mS cm−1 at 60 °C, and viscosity ranging from 144 mPs at 20 °C to 27 mPs at 60 °C, suitable values for battery application. The use of the Sn–C nanocomposite anode and the NMC layered cathode having remarkable structural integrity as demonstrated by the EIS/SEM study (Fig. 3c) guaranteed rather high cell energy density and long-term stability. Indeed, the cell was characterized by a reversible capacity with respect to the cathode mass of about 140 mA h g−1 and an average working voltage of about 3.4 V, thus leading to a theoretical energy density of approximately 476 Wh kg−1 with respect to the cathode. This value reflected practical energy density exceeding 200 Wh kg−1. Furthermore, the cell showed stability exceeding 400 galvanostatic cycles, high efficiency and capacity retention approaching 100%.
 Fig. 3  Characteristics of a Sn–C/Pyr14TFSI-LiTFSI/NMC lithium-ion cell. (a–b) Galvanostatic cycling performances in terms of (a) voltage profiles and (b) cycling behavior of the full cell. (c) Evolution of the interface resistance of the full cell after cycling and ex situ SEM images of the electrode materials (Sn–C and NMC) after cycling. Electrolyte: 0.2 mol kg−1 LiTFSI in Pyr14TFSI. Voltage limits: 2.5–4.0 V. Current rate: 25 mA g−1. Temperature: 40 °C. Reproduced with permission.94 Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
The surface reactivity of layered cathodes plays a crucial role in the electrochemical behavior of the cell. Therefore, mixed oxides having a concentration gradient of the transition metal ions from the particle core to the outer layer revealed, at the same time, relevant energy density and enhanced cycling stability, due to the improvement of the electrode/electrolyte interface. Accordingly, a nanostructured layered material based on lithium–nickel–manganese–cobalt oxide, where the manganese concentration remained a constant throughout the particle, while the nickel concentration decreased and the cobalt concentration increased linearly from the particle center to the surface, has been reported as a new, high performance cathode for LIBs (see Fig. 4a and b).95 The synthesis was carried out by using two continuously stirred tank reactors containing two aqueous solutions of Ni, Co, and Mn of different concentrations. After coprecipitation, the obtained precursor was mixed with LiOH and calcined at 850 °C in air. The resulting material had an average composition of Li[Ni0.60Co0.15Mn0.25]O2 and was composed of rod-shaped primary particles grown in radial directions with crystallographic texture. This particular morphology ensured a high rate capability, increased the low temperature performance, and improved the thermal stability compared to a benchmark cathode having the same composition and a fixed transition metal concentration. The electrode was tested in a full pouch cell (35 mA h) with a MCMB graphite anode between 3.0 V and 4.4 V at 25 °C and 55 °C with a specific current of 195 mA g−1 (1C = 180 mA g−1). The cell revealed good capacity retention (70.3%) after 1000 cycles, even at 55 °C (Fig. 4c and d).95 Following the same approach, a recent paper reported a concentration-gradient Ni-rich layered oxide electrode with an average composition of LiNi0.76Co0.1Mn0.14O2.96 Also in this case, the nickel content decreased gradually and the manganese content increased linearly from the center to the surface of each particle (Fig. 4e). The material was prepared by a three-step coprecipitation method using a tank reactor, followed by a lithiation process and thermal treatment at 750 °C under an oxygen atmosphere. Compared to a constant-concentration sample, the gradient sample exhibited a higher reversible capacity with superior cycling properties in a half-cell as a consequence of the higher content of inactive tetravalent Mn on the surface suppressing the reaction with the electrolyte (Fig. 4e). The improved cathode was employed in a pouch-type full cell with a graphite anode, which delivered a capacity as high as 19.6 mA h and a retention of 89% after 500 cycles at C/3 rate (1C = 200 mA g−1, Fig. 4f). Furthermore, a Li[Ni0.75Co0.1Mn0.15]O2 cathode with a Ni-rich core and a Ni-depleted shell and a continuous concentration gradient between the core and the shell was used in a LIB with a high capacity Si–C composite anode, internally wired with graphene sheets (IWGS, about 6 wt% of graphene). The anode was prepared by a scalable sol–gel process in water followed by annealing at 850 °C under an inert atmosphere.97 The battery operated within the 3.2–4.2 V range with a specific capacity per cathode mass of 200 mA h g−1 and 170 mA h g−1 at 0.1C and 1C rates, respectively. Therefore, the cell was characterized by excellent cycling stability up to 750 cycles at 1C rate, a theoretical energy density as high as 720 Wh kg−1, and an estimated practical energy density higher than 240 Wh kg−1.
 Fig. 4  Lithium-ion batteries based on concentration gradient layered cathodes. (a–d) Characteristics of a MCMB/Li[Ni0.60Co0.15Mn0.25]O2 lithium-ion cell. (a) Cross section SEM and EPMA mapping of Ni, Co, and Mn within a single lithiated Li[Ni0.60Co0.15Mn0.25]O2 cathode particle; (b) integrated atomic ratio of transition metals as a function of the distance from the center of the particle for the lithiated Li[Ni0.60Co0.15Mn0.25]O2 cathode. (c–d) Cycling performance in a laminated-type Al-pouch cell in terms of (c) specific discharge capacity (mA h g−1) and (d) discharge capacity (mA h). Electrolyte: 1.2 M LiPF6 in EC:EMC 3:7 v/v. Current rate: 1 C (corresponding to 180 mA g−1). Voltage limits: 3.0–4.4 V. Temperature: 25 °C and 55 °C. Reproduced with permission.95 Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (e–f) Characteristics of a Graphite/LiNi0.76Co0.1Mn0.14O2 lithium-ion cell. (e) Cycling performances of the LiNi0.76Co0.1Mn0.14O2 cathode in lithium half-cells at C/3 rate. Inset: elemental intensity ratio of Mn/Ni across the cycled cathode particle based on the EDS line-scanning data and cross section SEM image. (f) Cycling performance of the pouch-type full cell at C/3 rate (image in the inset). Electrolyte: 1.2 M LiPF6 in EC:EMC 3:7 v/v. Voltage limits: 2.5–4.4 V. Reproduced with permission.96 Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
A very recent class of materials belonging the layered oxide-structure is the Li-rich family characterized by the composition xLi2MnO3·(1 − x)LiNiaCobMncO2 (where a + b + c = 1). These materials have gained extensive attention due to their remarkable reversible capacity, i.e., higher than 250 mA h g−1. However, only a few papers reported on their application in full LIBs. A recent study reported the synthesis of a xLi2MnO3·(1 − x)LiNi0.7Co0.15Mn0.15O2 (x = 0, 0.03, 0.07, 0.10, 0.20, and 0.30) cathode, which combines the advantages of the high specific capacity of Ni-rich layered phase and the surface chemical stability of Li-rich layered phase materials. The cathode was studied in a LIB using a graphite anode.98 Interestingly, the material was prepared by simple grinding of a Ni0.7Co0.15Mn0.15(OH)2 precursor with MnCO3 and LiOH, followed by heating at 800 °C. The Ni0.7Co0.15Mn0.15(OH)2 precursor was synthesized by using a continuous stirring tank reactor. Fig. 5 shows standard and cross section electron micrographs (left panels) as well as SEM-EDS line scans (right panels) of the resulting xLi2MnO3·(1 − x)LiNi0.7Co0.15Mn0.15O2 particles with x = 0 (panels a) and x = 0.10 (panels b). Deep electrode characterization by X-ray diffraction, electron microscopy and electrochemical measurements confirmed the formation of a Li-rich layered phase with C2/m symmetry and revealed Li-rich nano-domain islands embedded into the conventional Ni-rich layered matrix (Rm), as shown by the scheme of Fig. 5c, right panel. Remarkably, a pouch-type LIB using the optimized cathode material (x = 0.07) and graphite anode revealed an initial capacity of 190 mA h g−1, retained by 74% after 900 cycles (Fig. 5d).98 Further LIBs using a Li-rich cathode in combination with a graphite anode, such as SnO2-coated Li1.2Mn0.54Co0.13Ni0.13O2 (with a reversible capacity of about 230 mA h g−1 retained by 87% over 150 cycles in the full cell99) and a Ti-substituted 0.5Li2MnO3–0.5LiNi0.5Mn0.5O2 cathode with the composition of Li1.5Ni0.25Mn0.75−xTixO2.5,100 have been recently reported.
 Fig. 5  Characteristics of a graphite/xLi2MnO3·(1 − x)LiNi0.7Co0.15Mn0.15O2 lithium-ion cell.98 SEM images and SEM-EDX line scan of Ni, Co, and Mn at the cross section of xLi2MnO3·(1 − x)LiNi0.7Co0.15Mn0.15O2 particles: (a) x = 0 and (b) x = 0.10. (c) Schematic representation of the phase composition of a xLi2MnO3·(1 − x)LiNi0.7Co0.15Mn0.15O2 particle. (d) Laminated full pouch-cell cycled at C/10 rate for the first 2 cycles and at C/3 rate for the rest of the cycles. Electrolyte: 1 M LiPF6 in EC:DEC 1:1 v/v. Voltage limits: 2.5–4.4 V. Temperature: 25 °C. Reproduced with permission.98 Copyright 2016 Elsevier B.V. 
Lithium-ion batteries using olivine cathodes
Olivine materials, in particular LiFePO4, are the most stable and long-life cathodes designed for LIB application. Furthermore, those based on manganese and iron are particularly appealing because of the low cost and environmental compatibility with respect to Co and Ni-based materials.1 LiFePO4 (i.e., LFP) can be efficiently employed in several LIB configurations using carbonaceous anodes. An interesting example is the flexible graphite/LFP battery integrated into a single paper structure, using nano-fibrillated cellulose both as an electrode binder material and as a separator material.101 The battery papers are made through a paper-making type process by sequential filtration of water dispersions containing the battery components. This process ensured a thin and robust paper cell. It is noteworthy that commercial Li-ion batteries employ separators based on polyethylene–polypropylene, which are synthesized from non-renewable petroleum products. As for conventional binders, they are F-containing polymers that require a coating process in organic toxic solvents. Therefore, the use of cellulose-based polymers is expected to significantly improve the environmental compatibility of the battery. The paper cell delivered reversible capacities of 146 mA h g−1 and 101 mA h g−1 with respect to the cathode mass at C/10 and 1C rates, respectively. The corresponding energy density at C/10 rate was 188 Wh kg−1.
An interesting lithium-ion cell characterized by relevant safety content was formed by coupling a LFP cathode with a graphene nanoplatelet (GNP) anode prepared by an easy-to-handle aqueous ink cast on cupper foil, in N-butyl-N-methyl-pyrrolidinium-bis (trifluoromethanesulfonyl) imide, lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide, ethylene carbonate, and dimethyl carbonate (Pyr1,4TFSI–LiTFSI–EC–DMC) electrolyte.102 The GNP/LFP battery delivered a capacity of the order of 150 mA h g−1 at 2.4 V, with an efficiency approaching 100%.
Another example of a cell based on a Cu-supported graphene nanoflake anode and LFP has been reported as a low cost and potentially scalable battery.103 A graphene nanoflake ink was prepared by easy exfoliation via ultrasonication in N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone. The lithium-ion cell achieved optimal performances by carefully balancing its composition and suppressing the initial irreversible capacity of the anode in the range of a few cycles. The cell delivered a specific capacity of 165 mA h g−1 at 1C rate for over 80 cycles with Coulombic efficiency approaching 100%. The related theoretical energy density was 380 Wh kg−1, with an estimated practical energy density of about 190 Wh kg−1. The good performance and the use of low cost and environmentally friendly materials make this cell configuration an interesting candidate for the development of sustainable batteries. However, the relatively large voltage slope of graphite/graphene materials may be an issue for practical applications. Other recent studies reported the use of carbonaceous anode materials in combination with LFP cathodes with promising results.45,104–107
Several advantages in terms of cycle life and safety content may be achieved by using LFP in combination with titanium oxide based anodes, e.g., TiO2 and Li4Ti5O12 (LTO). Furthermore, titanium is the ninth most abundant element in the Earth's crust and Ti-based oxides are environmentally benign.108 Hence, LTO/LFP batteries are particularly appealing as sustainable and safe energy storage systems. However, the relatively high and low voltages of the Ti-based anode and the LFP cathode, respectively, strongly affect the energy density of the cell. A LFP/C cathode networked with MWCNT of enhanced charge mobility was employed in a lithium-ion full cell using a Li4Ti5O12 anode, with a working voltage of about 1.9 V, and stable behavior after 100 cycles.109 Li4Ti5O12 nanopowder was synthesized by a solution–combustion synthesis using titanyl nitrate [TiO(NO3)2], LiNO3 and glycine, while LiFePO4 particles of about 20 nm were prepared through a sol–gel route employing adipic acid and then added with MWCNT in order to improve the electronic conductivity. An example of a LFP-based battery using anatase TiO2 delivered a reversible capacity of 103 mA h g−1 at about 1.4 V, an excellent cycling response at several current densities and capacity retention of 88% over 300 cycles under ambient conditions.110 The cell employed TiO2 hollow nanofibers prepared by a simple co-axial electrospinning route and a commercial LFP powder. Furthermore, a V-doped Li4Ti5O12-C composite material, prepared by a high-temperature solid-state method, demonstrated a high rate capability and cycling stability.111 The V-doped LTO-C/LFP full cell, limited at the anode, delivered discharge capacities of 181, 178, 167, 142, 110, and 78 mA h g−1 at 0.2, 0.5, 1, 3, 5, and 10C rates, respectively. The cell had excellent long-term stability after 400 cycles, with a fading rate lower than 0.0056% per cycle. Despite the suitable performances, the use of vanadium represents an issue in terms of safety and toxicity of the starting materials.112
Relevant volumetric and gravimetric energy densities, in addition to low cost, easy synthesis methodologies, high power densities and long cycle life, are key requirements for high-performance LIBs. However, too large a tap density generally compromises the charge transport and hence the power density. This issue has been recently addressed by using densely packed Li4Ti5O12 (LTO) submicrospheres, synthesized through a simple and easily scalable self-assembly process, ensuring at the same time high tap density, stable trend, long life and high rate capability.113 Indeed, compact LTO spheres were formed through a hydrolysis reaction followed by annealing under an Ar atmosphere. The abundant presence of grain boundaries between the LTO nanocrystallites in the submicron spheres led to a 3D interconnected network, which allowed fast Li-ion and electron transport, as indicated by large Li-ion diffusion coefficient and electronic conductivity values (6.2 × 10−12 cm2 s−1 at 52% state of charge and 3.8 × 10−6 S cm−1, respectively). The specific capacity for densely packed LTO was reported within the 150–130 mA h g−1 range at high current rates (10 and 20C), with a capacity retention of about 97% after 500 cycles at 10C rate in a lithium half-cell. The high-performance anode was combined with a commercial LFP cathode in a full pouch cell (Fig. 1 a and b). The LTO/LFP LIB delivered capacity values of 146, 129, 125, 110, 90, and 76 mA h g−1 at 0.5, 5, 10, 30, 60, and 80C rates (Fig. 6c and d). The cell had excellent cycling stability, without capacity decay over 8000 cycles at 30 C rate (Fig. 6e).113 Further proof of the efficient use of Ti-based anodes and LFP cathodes in full cells characterized by relevant stability has been reported in the literature.57,114–117
 Fig. 6  Characteristics of a LTO/LFP lithium-ion cell. Photographs of a LTO/LFP full cell (a) before and (b) after 8000 cycles at a current density of 30C rate. (c–d) Rate capability in terms of (c) cycling behavior and (d) voltage profiles of the LTO/LFP battery at various (dis)charge rates from 0.5C to 80C. (e) Cycling performance at a rate of 30C/30C (charge/discharge). Specific capacity calculated with respect to the LTO anode mass. Electrolyte: 1 M LiPF6 in EC/DEC/EMC 1:1:1 v/v. Voltage limits: 1.0–2.3 V. Temperature: 25 °C. Reproduced with permission.113 Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
Interestingly, a self-supported carbon nanofiber paper (CNFP)-sulfur composite, generally employed as the cathode in a lithium metal sulfur battery, was used as the anode in a CNFP-S/LFP LIB with an average working voltage of 3.0 V.118 A carbon nanofiber paper was first prepared through electrospinning of polyacrylonitrile followed by carbonization at 1000 °C and then infiltrated by sulfur. The reversible Li-ion storage ability of sulfur below 1.5 V vs. Li/Li+ in the CNFP matrix, apparently in contrast to the typical conversion reaction of sulfur to Li2S within 3.0–1.5 V vs. Li/Li+ potential range, was attributed to the rapid adsorption/desorption of Li-ions on the surface of sulfur. The cell delivered a reversible capacity of about 310 mA h g−1 with respect to the total mass of the electrode components, maintaining 95% capacity after 1000 cycles and exhibiting a higher power capability with respect to similar cells based on a graphite anode.118 Furthermore, the proposed configuration benefits from the low cost and sustainability of both the S-based anode and the LFP cathode. Metal oxide anodes have been efficiently used in combination with LFP cathodes. A recent work119 reported an all-nanosheet LIB employing a ZnMn2O4–graphene anode and a LiFePO4 cathode, characterized by short Li-ion diffusion length and easy charge transport due to the use of nanostructured electrodes (Fig. 7a). Both electrodes had 2-dimensional (2D) nanosheet morphology which enabled operation at high current (Fig. 7c). Indeed, comparison of the electrochemical performances of the all-nanosheet battery with those of a benchmark one using a conventional graphite anode and a commercial LiFePO4 cathode revealed it superior rate capability and cycling stability (Fig. 7b and c).119
 Fig. 7  (a–c) Characteristics of a 2D, all-nanosheet-based ZnMn2O4–graphene/LFP lithium-ion cell. (a) Scheme of the cell. (b) Cycling performances of the all-nanosheet-based full battery and a control full battery put together; Coulombic efficiency of the all-nanosheet-based full battery. Current rate: 0.2C. (c) Cycling performances of the all-nanosheet-based full battery at 2C, 5C and 10C. Electrolyte: 1 M LiPF6 in EC:DEC 1:1 v/v. Voltage limits: 0.9–3.9 V. Reproduced with permission.119 Copyright 2015 Elsevier Ltd. (d–e) Characteristics of a C-ZnFe2O4/LFP-multiwalled carbon nanotube (CNT) lithium-ion battery. (d) Long-term cycling stability applying a current density of 3 mA cm−2 and Coulombic efficiency of ZFO/LFP-CNT full cells employing anodes with different degrees of lithiation. (e) Selected electrode and cell voltage profile evolution after cycling. Specific capacity values are calculated with respect to the active material amount of both the limiting cathode (i.e., LFP) and the sum of the anode and cathode (i.e., TOT = LFP + ZFO). Electrolyte: 1 M LiPF6 in EC:DEC 3:7 v/v. A Li reference electrode was employed in the full-cells for monitoring individual electrode potentials. Temperature: 20 °C. Reproduced with permission.120 Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (f–h) Characteristics of a Sn–C/Pyr14FSI–LiTFSI/LFP lithium-ion cell. (f) Selected steady-state voltage signatures and (g) cycling behavior with Coulombic efficiency of the full cell cycled at increasing currents, i.e., 25, 50, 75, 100, 150, 200 and 250 mA g−1 (0.12, 0.24, 0.36, 0.48, 0.72, 0.96, and 1.2 mA cm−2, respectively). (h) Cycling behavior with Coulombic efficiency of the full cell in a long-term galvanostatic cycling test at 100 mA g−1 (1.2 mA cm−2). Electrolyte: 0.2 mol kg−1 LiTFSI in Pyr14FSI. Voltage limits: 2.0–3.8 V. Temperature: 40 °C. The specific capacity (mA h g−1) and specific current (mA g−1) are given with respect to the LFP cathode active mass. Reproduced with permission.124 Copyright 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
An environmentally friendly LIB using a LFP cathode and a transition metal oxide anode was proposed for high-power application:120 the battery was based on a carbon-coated ZnFe2O4 nanoparticle anode and a LiFePO4-multiwalled carbon nanotube cathode, both prepared by an aqueous procedure with Na-carboxymethyl cellulose. The use of water and cellulose instead of organic toxic solvents and fluorine-containing PVDF is expected to significantly increase the sustainability of the battery manufacturing process. The cell showed a remarkable rate capability and delivered 50% of its theoretical capacity at 20C rate with respect to the cathode. Furthermore, it exhibited remarkable stability, retaining up to 85% of its initial capacity after more than 10000 cycles at about 10C with respect to the LiFePO4 cathode (Fig. 7d). Pre-lithiation of the negative electrode allowed proper tuning of the cell potential (Fig. 7e), thus leading to high gravimetric energy and power density values of 202 Wh kg−1 and 3.72 kW kg−1, respectively.120 Other works reported the combination of Me-oxide anodes and LFP cathodes with suitable performances.64,121
Lithium alloying anodes (Ge, Sn, Si) have shown particular suitability for LIBs in combination with LFP cathodes. A germanium (Ge) nanowire electrode improved through passivation by a dodecanethiol monolayer was proposed as a suitable anode in LIBs using LFP, with an average discharge voltage of about 3.4 V and a reversible capacity slightly lower than that obtained in the half-cell, but sufficient to light up a green light-emitting-diode (LED). The same cell in a pouch-type configuration lighted up over 60 red LEDs and a white LED bulb and powered an audio device.122 However, the use of hazardous chemicals in the anode synthetic recipe, such as benzene, toluene and hydrofluoric acid,122 might decrease the sustainability of a possible large-scale manufacturing process of this battery. A further Ge/LFP LIB powering an LED array employed germanium microcubes with a hierarchical structure supported on titanium foil.123 The anode was prepared by heating GeO2 microcubes deposited on the Ti foil at 550 °C under a hydrogen atmosphere. The full cell tested at 0.1C rate showed a flat charge plateau around 3.1 V and an initial Coulombic efficiency of about 80%. After 100 cycles at 0.5C rate, the cell still kept a reversible capacity of 1123 mA h g−1 with respect to the anode mass. A rate capability test revealed a specific capacity at 0.1, 0.5, 1, and 2C rates (fixed lithiation rate of 0.2C) of 1150, 1109, 981, and 782 mA h g−1 with respect to the anode mass, respectively.123
A remarkable example of a battery employing a Li-alloy anode and a LFP cathode within a very safe and long-life configuration has been recently reported.124 The LIB was formed by a Sn–C nanocomposite anode, a LFP cathode, and an N-butyl-N-methylpyrrolidinium bis(fluoro-sulfonyl)imide (Pyr14FSI) lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (LiTFSI) IL-electrolyte, which allowed exceptional electrochemical performance in terms of reversible capacity, cycling stability, Coulombic efficiency and rate capability. The cell was expected to have low environmental impact, in view of the low cost and low toxicity of the electrode components, and high safety due to the use of a non-volatile, poorly-flammable electrolyte, and structurally stable olivine and Li-alloying electrodes. The Sn–C/Pyr14FSI–LiTFSI/LFP LIB delivered a maximum capacity of 160 mA h g−1 at an average working voltage of 3 V (Fig. 7f), a good rate capability (Fig. 7g), and a Coulombic efficiency higher than 99.9% over more than 2000 charge/discharge cycles (Fig. 7h). The same work reported several ionic liquid electrolytes of different chemical structures, ionic conductivities, viscosities, electrochemical properties and lithium-interphase stability for LIB application.124 The efficient combined use of Li-alloy anodes and LFP cathodes was further demonstrated by several reports.125–131
The substitution of Fe within the olivine framework leads to higher working voltage of the cathode, thus enhancing the energy content of the full lithium-ion battery. However, only a relatively few papers have studied transition metal-substituted olivine materials in full cell configurations. A recent polymer LIB, formed by combining a LiMn0.5Fe0.5PO4 olivine cathode, a nanostructured Sn–C anode, and a LiBOB-containing PVDF-based gel electrolyte, showed working voltage ranging from 2.8 to 3.6 V due to the Fe3+/Fe2+ and Mn3+/Mn2+ couples (Fig. 8a).132 The cell delivered a stable capacity of about 110 mA h g−1 with a Coulombic efficiency of about 99% for 70 galvanostatic cycles (see Fig. 8b). Hence, the battery had an estimated theoretical energy density of about 360 Wh kg−1 with respect to the cathode, a value expected to ensure a practical energy density comparable to commercial devices. The cell configuration has intrinsic high safety content as well as limited environmental issue due to the use of a fluorine-free lithium salt, a gelled electrolyte, an alloy anode and an olivine cathode characterized by a stable polyanionic framework.132 Furthermore, the LiMn0.5Fe0.5PO4 material was prepared by an eco-friendly low-temperature solvothermal pathway in a water/ethylene glycol mixture, followed by annealing at 700 °C under Ar.
 Fig. 8  (a–b) Characteristics of a Sn–C/GPE/LiMn0.5Fe0.5PO4 lithium-ion cell cycled at 0.2C rate with respect to the cathode (1C = 170 mA gcathode−1). (a) Galvanostatic response in terms of voltage profiles of the 1st, 5th, 10th, 15th, and 20th cycles of the Sn–C/GPE/LiMn0.5Fe0.5PO4 full cell; inset of panel a: voltage profiles of the 1st, 2nd, and 4th cycles of the full cell cycled at 40 °C using a 0.2C rate. (b) Cycling behavior and the corresponding Coulombic efficiency of the Sn–C/GPE/LiMn0.5Fe0.5PO4 full cell. Electrolyte: gel polymer electrolyte (GPE) based on PVDF and 0.7 M LiBOB in 1:1:3 EC:PC:DMC w/w. Voltage limits: 1.6–4.2 V. Temperature: 25 °C except for the inset of panel a. Reproduced with permission.132 Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (c–d) Characteristics of a graphite/Cr,Si–LiCo0.9Fe0.1PO4 lithium-ion cell in terms of (c) voltage profile of the 2nd (solid blue line) and 250th cycles (dashed red line) as well as (d) cycling behavior. Electrolyte: 1.2 M LiPF6 in EC:EMC 3:7 w/w with 2 wt% tris(trimethylsilyl) phosphite. Cycling procedure: the first cycle between 4.85 and 3.0 V at a constant C/20 current; subsequent cycles with charge at a C/2 constant current to 4.85 V, charge at a constant 4.85 V voltage until the current was less than C/15, and discharge at a 1C constant current to 3.5 V. Reproduced with permission.134 Copyright 2016 Elsevier B.V. 
The substitution of Co for Fe leads to a potential of 4.8 V vs. Li+/Li due to the Co3+/Co2+ couple, thus enabling high-energy 5 V batteries.133 However, the practical use of Co-based olivines is hindered by the environmental concerns due to the toxic and expensive cobalt.1 Furthermore, LiCoPO4 generally shows limited cycle life and reversible capacity lower than the theoretical value. These shortcomings were partially mitigated by introducing Fe, Cr and Si within the LiCoPO4 lattice. The cathode powders were prepared by solid-state treatment at 700 °C under nitrogen.134 Neutron and synchrotron diffraction data suggested higher Li-ion conductivity for the defect olivine structure of Cr,Si–LiCo0.9Fe0.1PO4 with respect to LiCo0.9Fe0.1PO4 and unsubstituted LiCoPO4. The cathode was studied in a LIB in combination with a graphite anode showing, for the initial cycles at 1C rate, a specific energy density as high as 550 Wh kg−1, based on the cathode active mass, owing to the high operating voltage (Fig. 8c). This specific energy density value is higher than that of the graphite/LiCoO2 array. However, the energy density decreased to 510 Wh kg−1 with respect to the cathode over 250 cycles (Fig. 8d).134 Alternative and interesting examples of LIBs using mixed olivines and Li-conversion/alloying anodes were reported in a recent paper, combining a LiFe0.25Mn0.5Co0.25PO4 olivine cathode, in which the Co-content was further decreased, either with Sn–Fe2O3–C or with Sn–C composites.135 The cathode synthesis consisted of a low-temperature solvothermal treatment in a water/ethylene glycol mixture and carbon coating at 700 °C under Ar. A similar heating procedure was used for the pyrolysis of a Sn-containing resorcinol-formaldehyde gel to synthesize the Sn–C composite, while the Sn–Fe2O3–C material was prepared by simple mechanical high-energy milling of the bare powders without any further thermal step. The resulting Sn–C/LiFe0.25Mn0.5Co0.25PO4 and Sn–Fe2O3–C/LiFe0.25Mn0.5Co0.25PO4 full cells were cycled at C/5 rate with respect to the cathode mass (1C = 170 mA g−1), delivering a steady-state reversible capacity ranging from 90 to 100 mA h gcathode−1 at about 3.5 and 3.2 V. Taking into account a correction factor for inactive material contributions of about 1/3, the estimated practical energy densities of the Sn–C/LiFe0.25Mn0.5Co0.25PO4 and Sn–Fe2O3–C/LiFe0.25Mn0.5Co0.25PO4 cells were about 120 and 100 Wh kgtotal−1.
Lithium-ion batteries using spinel cathodes
LiMn2O4 (LMO) spinel-type oxide and its Ni-substituted version (i.e. 5 V-LNMO spinel) are Co-free cathode materials, characterized by relatively high operating voltage and rate capability, which may lead to high energy and remarkable power capability. These materials combine interesting electrochemical features such as low cost, environmental compatibility and high power density with respect to conventional layered oxides, while they generally suffer from capacity fade above 50 °C.27 Spinel-type oxides were studied in full lithium-ion cells by several literature works reporting suitable performances.87,136–142 A highly efficient LIB using a commercial LMO cathode and a MnOx–C nanocomposite anode, i.e., low-cost and sustainable materials, has been reported (inset of Fig. 9a).143 The anode, prepared by the sol–gel route with pyrolysis at 850 °C in Ar, consisted of 5 to 30 nm-size MnOx crystals (mainly MnO with the Mn3O4 phase) embedded into a mesoporous carbon matrix (64 wt%). The full MnOx–C/LMO cell was assembled in a charged state following a preconditioning procedure in order to avoid the first cycle irreversible capacity loss. The cell showed a voltage profile reflecting the overall electrochemical process between 2.0 and 4.1 V at 0.2C rate (Fig. 9a), as well as a capacity of about 100 mA h g−1 with respect to the cathode. The cell capacity started to fade slowly from the 60th cycle to give 73% retention after 100 cycles. The initial capacity was almost completely recovered by lowering the C-rate to 0.1C (Fig. 9b), but with further slow fading and capacity retention of 60% after 188 cycles. Proper electrode balancing by increasing the anode loading produced the optimal negative/positive electrode mass ratio and increased the MnOx–C/LMO LIB stability up to 245 cycles at 2C rate (Fig. 9c and d).143 A very interesting example is a flexible, pouch-type LIB based on an environmentally benign Mn employed spinel-structure LiMn2O4 cathode and a conversion Mn2O3 anode, both within the nanowire configuration.144 The same precursors, i.e., MnOOH nanowires, formed from MnO2 nanoflakes, were directly attached on Ti foils and subsequently transformed into Mn2O3 and LiMn2O4 by thermal annealing and a reaction with a lithium salt, respectively (scheme of Fig. 9e). The one-dimensional nanowire structures provided a short lithium-ion diffusion path, good charge transport and volume flexibility for Li+ exchange, thus leading to good rate capability and cycling performance. The flexible Mn2O3/LiMn2O4 LIB delivered output voltage above 3 V and a specific capacity of 99 mA h g−1 based on the cathode mass and had a low thickness of 0.3 mm (see Fig. 9f). After 40 galvanostatic cycles, the capacity was about 80 mA h g−1.144 A LIB of interest belonging to the same class was formed by coupling a bare LiMn2O4 spinel cathode and a carbon-coated Li3Nd3W2O12 (C-Li3Nd3W2O12) insertion anode, which has voltage as low as 0.3 V vs. Li+/Li.145 The cell delivered at 1C rate a reversible capacity of 115 mA h g−1 operating within the 2.95–3.9 V voltage range, which leads to an energy density of about 390 Wh kg−1. Furthermore, the cell showed improved cycling at the higher current rate, retaining about 71% and 93% of its initial reversible capacity after 100 cycles at 1C and 2C rates, respectively. However, the use of neodymium-based electrode materials in commercial lithium-ion batteries might produce imbalance between the demand and supply of neodymium,146 thus likely hindering possible massive employment in scaled-up batteries.
 Fig. 9  (a–d) Characteristics of a MnOx–C/LiMn2O4 lithium-ion cell. (a) Voltage profile and schematic cell representation in the inset. (b) Cycling performance of a full cell with 4.5 and 1.2 mg cm−2 loading for the cathode and the anode, respectively, cycled at 0.2C rate for 100 cycles and then at 0.1C rate for up to 188 cycles. (c) Cycling performance of a full cell with 3.7 and 1.8 mg cm−2 loading for the cathode and the anode, respectively, cycled at 0.2C rate for up to 195 cycle, and (d) rate performance of the same cell. Electrolyte: 1 M LiPF6 in EC:DMC 3:7 v/v. Voltage limits: 2.0 and 4.1 V. Current rates and capacity reported with respect to the cathode mass (1C = 148 mA gcathode−1). Reproduced with permission.143 Copyright 2013 Elsevier B.V. (e–f) Characteristics of a flexible Mn2O3/LiMn2O4 lithium-ion cell. (e) Schematic of the synthesis and fabrication of the full cell. (f) Cycling performance (red curve) and Coulombic efficiency (black curve) of the full cell. The cell is fully extended in the first 20 cycles and folded from the 21st to 40th cycles, as shown by optical images and the black arrows in the insets. Electrolyte: 1 M LiPF6 in EC:DEC:DMC 1:1:1 w/w. Voltage limits: 4.2–1.5 V. Reproduced with permission.144 Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 and metal substituted analogues represent very promising materials due to their high voltage and rate capability. This class of cathodes has been considered to be particularly suitable in terms of energy density for LIBs exploiting anodes of higher working voltage with respect to graphite, such as alloying, conversion and Ti-based electrodes.147–152 A very efficient LIB operating at 4.4 V coupled a Sn–C nanostructured anode and a high-rate Li[Ni0.45Co0.1Mn1.45]O4 spinel cathode prepared by sol–gel and coprecipitation approaches, respectively.153 The battery delivered an estimated practical energy density of the order of 170 Wh kg−1, exhibited an extremely stable trend after 100 cycles at 1C rate with respect to the cathode and demonstrated high rate capability by retention of 85% of the initial capacity at 5C rate.153 A LIB comprising a high-performance amorphous columnar silicon thin film anode prepared by DC magnetron sputtering and a commercial LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 spinel cathode was proposed with a fluoroethylene carbonate (FEC)-based electrolyte solution (FEC/DMC 1:4 with 1 M LiPF6) with the aim of improving the cycle life.154 The battery demonstrated hundreds of cycles, excellent charge–discharge efficiency and rate capability (Fig. 10a and b).154 Another work155 used a commercial spinel cathode with a carbon-coated Si–Cu3Si–Al2O3 nanocomposite anode synthesized through a simple mechanochemical reaction. The incorporation of both the conductive Cu3Si and electrochemically stable Al2O3 phases enhanced the cycling stability and rate capability, but with a decrease of specific capacity with increasing amounts of Cu3Si. The Si–Cu3Si–Al2O3/LNMO battery cycled at 0.5C rate delivered a reversible capacity of about 95 mA h g−1 (based on the mass of the cathode material) at an average working voltage above 3.5 V, a relatively good capacity retention of about 77.2% after 50 cycles with a high initial efficiency of about 86.3%. The enhanced electrochemical performance was attributed to the buffer Cu3Si phase, which mitigated structural degradation and increased the anode conductivity.
 Fig. 10  (a–b) Characteristics of a Si/LNMO lithium-ion cell. Cell performances in terms of (a) voltage profiles and (b) cycling behavior. Electrolyte: 1 M LiPF6 in FEC:DMC 1:4. Current rate: 0.5C (10 initial cycles at C/8 rate). Reproduced with permission.154 Copyright 2013 Elsevier B.V. (c–d) Characteristics of a Li4Ti5O12/Li[Ni0.45Co0.1Mn1.45]O4 lithium-ion cell. Cell performances at several temperatures (i.e., from −20 to +55 °C) in terms of (c) voltage profiles and (d) cycling behavior at 1C and 0.5C rates. Electrolyte: 1.2 M LiPF6 in EC:DMC 3:7 v/v. Reproduced with permission.171 Copyright 2011 Macmillan Publishers Limited. (e) Characteristics of a CuO-MCMB/LNMO lithium-ion cell in terms of voltage profiles and (inset) cycling behavior at 1C rate with respect to the cathode (148 mA gcathode−1). Electrolyte: 1 M LiPF6 in EC:DMC 1:1 w/w. Voltage range: 1.5–5.0 V. Room temperature. Reproduced with permission.172 Copyright 2013 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) Characteristics of a Sn–Fe2O3–C/LNMO cell in terms of voltage profiles of the full cell (blue curve) and of its anodic and cathodic components (green and red curves, respectively), as well as (inset) full-cell cycling behavior. Electrolyte: 1 M LiPF6 in EC:DMC 1:1 w/w. Current rate: C/3 with respect to the cathode (50 mA gcathode−1). Three-electrode configuration. Room temperature. Reproduced with permission.174 Copyright 2015 Elsevier B.V. 
Graphite156 and graphene157 anodes were also used in lithium-ion batteries employing a LNMO cathode. Indeed, a graphite/LNMO LIB delivered a capacity of about 125 mA h g−1 at C/2 rate (30 °C), with a capacity retention of 81% and a high Coulombic efficiency (over 99.6%) after 100 cycles.158 The improvement of the LNMO electrochemical performance at high voltage in the above cell was achieved by the addition to the electrolyte of an organo-phosphorus compound with an organic substituent, i.e., tris(trimethylsilyl) phosphite (TMSP). TMSP mitigated the decomposition of LiPF6 by hydrolysis, thus suppressing HF formation and avoiding Mn/Ni dissolution from the cathode; furthermore, TMSP formed a protective layer on the cathode surface.158 Graphene and graphene oxide-based anodes have been widely explored in lithium half-cells, revealing remarkable performances. However, only a few works demonstrated the suitability of this material as anode in full lithium-ion cells, mostly due to the poor loading of a graphene-based electrode, which leads to a difficult N/P ratio setting during cell assembly. An attractive LIB has been recently obtained by coupling an exfoliated graphite/graphene nanosheet (EGN) anode and a high-voltage LNMO spinel-structure cathode synthesized by the wet chemistry route with calcination at 800 °C.159 The binder-free anode, prepared by simple exfoliation of graphite in a solvent medium and subsequent casting onto Cu support, showed a capacity exceeding by 40% that ascribed to commercial graphite in a lithium half-cell, at a very high C-rate, due to its particular structure and morphology, which allowed lithium intercalation into the graphite and insertion within the graphene nanosheets. The Li-ion battery operated at about 3.8 V, with a specific capacity of about 125 mA h g−1, excellent efficiency and rate capability, as well as a cycle life up to 150 cycles. The estimated practical energy density of the above cell was of the order of 260 Wh kg−1.159
Very significant and efficient examples of LIBs based on LNMO cathodes were obtained by employing titanate anodes.57,160–168 The interest in titanate was justified by its electrochemical characteristics which match both the capacity and rate capability of the LNMO cathode and facilitate the cell balance due to the flat voltage and relevant efficiency of the anode. Furthermore, LTO materials can be repeatedly cycled without inducing any electrolyte decomposition, since they operate at relatively high voltage values (about 1.5 V vs. Li+/Li), which fall within the electrochemical stability window of a large part of the electrolytes. Therefore, the combination of LTO with high voltage spinel cathodes, operating at about 4.7 V vs. Li+/Li, leads generally to LIBs with a working voltage of about 3.2 V. Accordingly, a spinel LNMO fiber cathode having a one dimensional (1D) architecture was synthesized by electrospinning followed by high-temperature treatment, structurally and morphologically analyzed by various techniques, and coupled with an anatase TiO2 fiber anode prepared using the same pathway. The full cell employed a gelled polyvinylidene fluoride-co-hexafluoropropylene (PVDF-HFP) electrolyte.169 The TiO2/LNMO cell delivered a reversible capacity of about 102 mA h g−1 at 0.1C rate (1C = 150 mA g−1) with an operating voltage centered at 2.8 V, excellent rate capability and stable cycling profiles with a retention of about 86% over 400 cycles. Efficient LTO/LNMO LIBs were also reported with a LiTFSI-pyrrolidinium bis(trifluoromethane-sulfonyl)imide ionic liquid electrolyte.170 The LIBs revealed improvements in terms of capacity retention and Coulombic efficiency with respect to a benchmark cell using a conventional carbonate-based electrolyte. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images and X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns have shown maintained pristine morphology and structure of LNMO particles after 50 cycles at 0.5C. An extremely efficient and stable LIB advantageously combined a LTO negative electrode with a modified, Co-doped Li[Ni0.45Co0.1Mn1.45]O4 spinel-type cathode.171 The LTO/Li[Ni0.45Co0.1Mn1.45]O4 battery operated following the expected, very flat voltage profile centered at 3 V with extremely limited hysteresis between charge and discharge, which indicates high reversibility and fast kinetics (Fig. 10c). The battery delivered 128 mA h g−1 with respect to the cathode at 1C rate for 500 cycles, with only 15% capacity loss (Fig. 10d). Moreover, the LIB has shown satisfactory performances and very stable capacity within temperature ranging from −20 to +55 °C (Fig. 10d).171
The high voltage delivered by the spinel-type cathodes enables the use of several anode materials characterized by penalties in terms of operating potential, such as the lithium conversion electrodes (e.g., metal oxides). Indeed, a recent work demonstrated the possible efficient use of the CuO–MCMB composite, synthesized by an easy high-energy ball milling process of low-cost precursors, in a LIB using a LNMO cathode.172 Such a high-energy milling approach did not require any further thermal treatment. The battery exhibited an average working voltage of 3.8 V, and delivered a capacity of about 120 mA h gcathode−1 for over 100 cycles at 1C rate (148 mA g−1) with respect to the cathode (Fig. 10e). Furthermore, rate capability tests up to 5C revealed reversible operation with capacity above 100 mA h gcathode−1. The CuO–MCMB/LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 battery had a theoretical energy density of the order of 420 Wh kg−1, which is a value not far from that provided by the common graphite/LiCoO2 system. Additional bonuses of this battery with respect to conventional systems were the lower cost and the limited environmental issues of the electrode materials. Other examples of LIBs combining conversion-type (NiO-MCMB)173 and conversion/alloying (Sn–Fe2O3–MCMB)174 anodes with high voltage spinel cathodes (LNMO) have been reported by the same group, with an estimated energy density content of about 120 Wh kg−1 (Fig. 10f).174 Moreover, the CuO–Fe2O3–MCMB/Li1.35Ni0.48Fe0.1Mn1.72O4 configuration has recently demonstrated very promising performances.175 A further LIB based on a CuO nanorod array anode and a commercial LNMO material with a hierarchical structure exhibited a capacity retention of 84% over 100 cycles at 0.5C rate with respect to the anode, and a capacity of about 240 mA h g−1 at a C-rate as high as 10C (both calculated with respect to the anode mass).176 A recent report studied a LIB based on 1D active materials prepared by a scalable procedure, i.e., a conversion-type α-Fe2O3 anode and an over-lithiated Li1.33Ni0.5Mn1.5O4 cathode. The electrode materials were prepared by electrospinning of fiber precursors followed by calcination.177 The cathode was electrochemically over-lithiated before cell assembly in order to overcome irreversible capacity loss (ICL) in α-Fe2O3. The α-Fe2O3/Li1.33Ni0.5Mn1.5O4 cell, which employed a PVDF-HFP-based gel electrolyte, revealed an average working voltage of about 3.3 V, and delivered an energy density of about 193 Wh kg−1 holding about 88% of the initial reversible capacity after 60 cycles when cycled at 100 mA g−1 (with respect to the anode mass). The energy density was calculated by multiplying the discharge capacity that takes into account the total mass of both active materials (about 59.02 mA h g−1) and the working voltage. Further works reported on the use of LNMO-based cathodes in full cell configurations, combined with conversion-type,178–180 NASICON-type phosphate,181 VS4,182 and vanadate anodes.64
Next generation lithium-ion batteries: sulfur and oxygen cathodes
Lithium–sulfur and lithium–oxygen batteries are certainly among the most attractive energy storage systems due to their extremely high energy content with respect to the conventional ones. Furthermore, they may actually decrease the lithium-ion battery issues in terms of cost and environmental concerns, due to the use of positive electrodes based on cheap and sustainable materials, i.e., carbon, oxygen and sulfur, instead of expensive and toxic Co-based oxides. Nevertheless, Li/S and Li/O2 cells suffer from a safety issue due to the use of lithium metal at the anode side. A possible solution to this problem, allowing large scale diffusion of these appealing systems, is the replacement of the metal anode by a lithium-ion one.
Lithium–sulfur batteries have been widely investigated as alternative systems to the currently used LIBs, especially for the low cost and environmental impact of sulfur-based cathodes. However, commercialization of lithium–sulfur batteries has so far been limited due to problems associated with both the sulfur cathode and the lithium metal anode. These issues have been mitigated by using sulfur-based cathodes in combination with high-capacity composite anodes.183–193 A first lithium-ion sulfur battery combined a Sn–C anode, a Li2S/C cathode prepared by low-energy ball milling under an Ar atmosphere of Li2S and carbon in 1:1 weight ratio, and a gel polymer electrolyte. The battery was characterized by theoretical gravimetric and volumetric energy densities of 2500 Wh kg−1 and 2800 Wh l−1, respectively, much greater values compared to those of any conventional lithium battery.194 Further Li metal-free batteries combined S-based cathodes with Si alloy anodes.195–197 Thus, a lithium-ion battery using a Li2S/mesoporous carbon composite cathode and a Si nanowire anode delivered a theoretical specific energy of 1550 Wh kg−1 and a discharge specific energy of 630 Wh kg−1 based on the mass of the active electrode materials.195 Another LIB based on a S-cathode and a silicon–carbon nanotube anode operated for over 1000 cycles delivering a specific capacity of 1470 mA h gsulfur−1 (720 mA h gcathode−1) with Coulombic efficiency approaching 99%.196 An interesting example of a polymer LIB based on a sulfur–carbon cathode and a Li–Sn–C nanostructured anode employed a PEO-polysulfide-added electrolyte.197 The cell delivered a stable capacity ranging from 500 to 1500 mA h gsulfur−1, depending on the cycling rate. The use of a polymer electrolyte and the replacement of the lithium metal with a Li–Sn–C nanostructured alloy improved the safety content of the battery. A Si/S LIB using lithiated Nafion-coated porous Si as the anode and sulfur as the cathode delivered a specific capacity of 330 mA h g−1 and an energy density of 590 Wh kg−1 based on the total mass of sulfur and silicon after 100 cycles.198
Recently, a highly reliable lithium-ion-sulfur battery, showing cycling performance comparable to that of lithium-ion batteries has been reported.199 The LIB employed a highly reversible, dual-type activated carbon (AC)-sulfur cathode (a solid sulfur electrode and a polysulfide catholyte) and a lithiated Si–SiOx nanosphere anode. The cathode was easily prepared by melting elemental sulfur with activated carbon in 1:1 weight ratio at 135 °C. Afterwards, the resulting mixture was cast onto a gas diffusion layer (GDL). The Si–SiOx/AC-S full cell showed remarkable battery performances in terms of high specific capacity, excellent charge–discharge efficiency, and remarkable cycle life. The cell delivered a specific capacity of 1100 mA h gsulfur−1 at 0.1C rate (1C = 1675 mA h gsulfur−1) with an average voltage of about 1.8 V, and a capacity of 750 mA h gsulfur−1 at 1C rate retained by 86% over 500 cycles, with an efficiency exceeding 98% (Fig. 11a and b).199 Furthermore, a B,N-Co-doped graphene supported sulfur (S@BNG) composite electrode was used in a lithium-ion-sulfur battery in combination with a high performance lithiated Ge anode.200 The BNG with enriched pyridinic-N and N–B/NB bonds as the conductive host for the sulfur electrode (having a S loading of 75%) revealed strong interactions with polysulfide, which efficiently trapped the active sulfur within the electrode. The full Ge/S@BNG battery exhibited a capacity of 530 mA h g−1 with respect to the cathode (150 mA h g−1 based on both the cathode and the anode) over 500 cycles at the rate of 1C. Therefore, it delivered a high reversible energy density of 350 Wh kg−1 (based on the mass of both the cathode and the anode) after 100 cycles.
 Fig. 11  (a–b) Characteristics of a Si–SiOx/dual-type activated carbon–S lithium-ion cell. (a) Cyclic behavior and (b) voltage profiles of the full cell cycled at 1C rate. Inset of panel a: schematic representation of the cell. Electrolyte: 0.05 M Li2S8, 1 M LiTFSI, 0.4 M LiNO3 in DME:DOL 1:1 v/v. Voltage limits: 2.8–0.8 V. 1C = 1675 mA h g−1versus overall sulfur weight. Temperature: 30 °C. Reproduced with permission.199 Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (c–d) Characteristics of a LixSi–C/C,O2 lithium-ion cell. (c) Schematic representation and (d) voltage profiles of the LixSi–C/C,O2 cell. Electrolyte: LiCF3SO3:TEGDME 1:4 mol/mol. Cycling current: 200 mA gcarbon−1. Room temperature. Reproduced with permission.201 Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
Few studies reported on metal-free, lithium-ion cells exploiting the Li/oxygen electrochemical process. A preliminary example evidencing the feasibility of this intriguing LIB employed a lithiated, nanostructured silicon–carbon composite at the anode side and oxygen supported by a gas diffusion layer, coated with Super-P carbon, at the cathode side (Fig. 11c).201 The results of the study, based on X-ray diffraction and galvanostatic charge–discharge analyses, demonstrated the reversibility of the electrochemical process of the battery. The LixSi–C/C,O2 cell exhibited a discharge voltage plateau centered at 2.40 V and was cycled by limiting both the charge and discharge capacity at 1000 mA h gcarbon−1 (Fig. 11d). Hence, the theoretical energy density of the complete (anode and cathode) LixSi–C/C,O2 battery was estimated to be 980 Wh kg−1, which is a remarkably higher value than that offered by conventional lithium-ion batteries. However, the cell showed a continuous voltage decay after cycling (Fig. 11d), which was likely attributed to oxygen attack on the LixSi–C anode by permeation across the electrolyte. Therefore, further work aimed at optimizing this cell design is required in order to solve this challenging issue. Obviously, the replacement of lithium metal with a lithium metal alloy entails a penalty in terms of both voltage and capacity; however, as for lithium-ion batteries, this drawback is favorably counterbalanced by the enhancement in safety. Therefore, the combined use of a lithium-ion anode with O2 needs further work aimed at addressing unsolved issues limiting the cycle life.202–204
Toward high-performance sustainable batteries
In the previous sections we focused on the advances in the LIB R&D towards the design of new and environmentally sustainable energy storage technologies, with particular emphasis on the strategies explored to improve the cycling performances. Several remarkable examples of LIBs of practical interest, employing layered, olivine, and spinel compounds as well as sulfur and oxygen-based cathodes, have been critically analyzed in terms of working voltage, cycling stability and Coulombic efficiency, with particular focus on the main characteristics of the adopted cell configuration. Chemical, electrochemical and technological strategies attempted in order to overcome the benchmarks of currently available batteries have been explored through an overview of advanced LIBs using high-performance materials. Thus, the analysis of various full cell configurations here reported highlights the prominent role of renewed battery chemistries at the anode, cathode and electrolyte sides, attempted by numerous research groups over the last few years, in determining remarkable progress of the LIB concept. Such an improvement nowadays meets the energy and power density requirements of a rising number of applications, ranging from advanced portable and mobile electronics to hybrid and full electric vehicles as well as large-size stationary storage. Besides novel active material formulations, the optimization of the electrode morphology and architecture (including the use of nano-structures, composites or concentration-gradient materials) proved to be a suitable strategy for addressing the electrochemical cycling issues affecting various cathodes and anodes. This approach mainly aims at further enhancing the electrochemical performances of alternative battery prototypes, to date only demonstrated as proof of concept, in order to favour their near-future transition from the laboratory to the production scale. The LIB studies taken into account in the above reported sections outline the importance of critically selecting optimal cathode/anode weight ratio and voltage limits in order to achieve stable cycling performances and hold the full cell mass balance throughout the entire lifespan. Moreover, anode pre-lithiation procedures before full cell assembly proved to ensure high efficiency and cell balance for prolonged cycling, thus allowing the use of materials affected by huge first-cycle irreversibility, such as alloying and conversion anodes.
The combination of high performance and sustainability is becoming crucial for the development of new battery materials. Current research is making great effort at optimizing new “green” electrodes and electrolytes able to ensure comparable or even higher performances than the conventional ones. In this respect, the replacement of oxide cathodes based on toxic and expensive metals, such as Co, with more sustainable active materials, containing Fe, Mn, and Al, may actually decrease the environmental issues of the battery. NMC and NCA electrodes, already on the market, represent a good compromise between satisfactory performances, reasonable safety and reduced environmental hazards. Following this trend, a few papers have recently demonstrated the use, in full cells, of Li-rich layered materials, which further enhances the electrochemical features of the battery.
Furthermore, LiMnyFexPO4 olivines are interesting eco-friendly compounds, characterized by suitable electrochemical behavior, low cost and remarkable chemical stability, which may drastically improve the battery safety, particularly if polymer- and/or IL-based electrolytes are used. Several LiMnyFexPO4 materials have been carefully optimized for application as high-performance positive electrodes in lithium half-cells,205,206 but only a few reports have demonstrated their possible use in full lithium-ion cells. Moreover, the low density of olivine materials may represent an issue affecting the volumetric energy density of the full cell, especially in view of possible automotive applications.207 LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 spinel cathodes are very promising materials, since they combine high voltage and suitable electrochemical performance, even at high current rates, with limited environmental issues as compared to layered cathodes. Many literature papers have recently reported a vast array of lithium-ion cells employing LNMO materials that showed satisfactory behavior. As for the electrolyte solution, the use of fluorine-free salts, such as LiBOB, attracted a great deal of attention due to their environmental compatibility, despite the decreased ionic conductivity of the resulting solutions which may affect the power capability of the cell.
The exploitation of low-temperature synthesis methodologies, including solvothermal and mechanical milling approaches, might improve the sustainability of the cell. However, it is worth mentioning that solvothermal methods, mostly employed for the synthesis of phospho-olivine/carbon and titanate/carbon composites, often require the use of organic co-solvents in addition to water, thus involving undesired byproducts in the synthesis pathway. The hydro/solvothermal step is generally carried out at temperatures below 250 °C; however, an additional high-temperature annealing under an inert atmosphere is usually needed to improve the electronic conductivity of the material.
An interesting approach to make “green” batteries is the use of aqueous electrode processing, generally involving cellulose-based electrode binders. Following this trend, eco-friendly polymers may be also employed to replace conventional separators.
Finally, further remarkable breakthroughs in battery sustainability may be achieved through the development of the lithium–sulfur and lithium–oxygen storage systems, holding the potential to allow a deep change of the LIB concept in the upcoming years. The encouraging results already achieved for lithium–sulfur batteries suggest rapid growth of this technology in the near future, while several issues to be addressed still limit the lithium–oxygen systems. These new approaches might cause real advances towards the development of new and environmentally sustainable systems able to de-couple the global energy needs from the consumption of fossil fuels.
Acknowledgements
The work was performed within the project “Fondo di Ateneo per la Ricerca Locale FAR 2016”, University of Ferrara and the collaboration project “Accordo di Collaborazione Quadro 2015” between University of Ferrara (Department of Chemical and Pharmaceutical Sciences) and Sapienza University of Rome (Chemistry Department).
References
D. Larcher and J.-M. Tarascon, Nat. Chem., 2014, 7, 19–29 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Poizot and F. Dolhem, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2003 CAS .
J. B. Goodenough, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 14–18 CAS .
A. Fotouhi, D. J. Auger, K. Propp, S. Longo and M. Wild, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 56, 1008–1021 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lu, X. Han, J. Li, J. Hua and M. Ouyang, J. Power Sources, 2013, 226, 272–288 CrossRef CAS .
F. Schipper, E. M. Erickson, C. Erk, J.-Y. Shin, F. F. Chesneau and D. Aurbach, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2017, 164, A6220–A6228 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Yoshino, in Lithium-Ion Batteries, ed. G. Pistoia, Elsevier,  2014, pp. 1–20 Search PubMed .
L. Croguennec and M. R. Palacin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 3140–3156 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Scrosati, J. Hassoun and Y.-K. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3287 CAS .
M. Armand and J.-M. Tarascon, Nature, 2008, 451, 652–657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Choi and D. Aurbach, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 1–16 Search PubMed .
W. J. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 13–24 CrossRef CAS .
C.-M. Park, J.-H. Kim, H. Kim and H.-J. Sohn, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 3115–3141 RSC .
S. Goriparti, E. Miele, F. De Angelis, E. Di Fabrizio, R. Proietti Zaccaria and C. Capiglia, J. Power Sources, 2014, 257, 421–443 CrossRef CAS .
V. Aravindan, Y.-S. Lee and S. Madhavi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1402225 CrossRef .

          Y. Nishi, in Lithium-Ion Batteries, ed. G. Pistoia, Elsevier,  2014, pp. 21–39 Search PubMed .
J. Hassoun and B. Scrosati, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, A2582–A2588 CrossRef CAS .
N. Takami, H. Inagaki, T. Kishi, Y. Harada, Y. Fujita and K. Hoshina, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, A128 CrossRef CAS .
P. Rozier and J. M. Tarascon, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, A2490–A2499 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Weaving, F. Coowar, D. A. Teagle, J. Cullen, V. Dass, P. Bindin, R. Green and W. J. Macklin, J. Power Sources, 2001, 97–98, 733–735 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Thackeray, S.-H. Kang, C. S. Johnson, J. T. Vaughey, R. Benedek and S. a. Hackney, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 3112 RSC .
J. Wang and X. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1110–1138 CAS .
K. Zaghib, A. Guerfi, P. Hovington, A. Vijh, M. Trudeau, A. Mauger, J. B. Goodenough and C. M. Julien, J. Power Sources, 2013, 232, 357–369 CrossRef CAS .
V. Aravindan, J. Gnanaraj, Y.-S. Lee and S. Madhavi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 3518–3539 CAS .
K. Amine, H. Yasuda and M. Yamachi, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2000, 3, 178–179 CrossRef CAS .
F. Mao, W. Guo, J. Ma, C. Zhao, X. Qian, V. Battaglia, R. Wang, Y.-S. Hu, S. Dai, T.-K. Sham, X. Sun, K. Amine and A. Williams, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 105248–105258 RSC .
D. Liu, W. Zhu, J. Trottier, C. Gagnon, F. Barray, A. Guerfi, A. Mauger, H. Groult, C. M. Julien, J. B. Goodenough and K. Zaghib, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 154–167 RSC .
H. D. Yoo, E. Markevich, G. Salitra, D. Sharon and D. Aurbach, Mater. Today, 2014, 17, 110–121 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ji, K. T. Lee and L. F. Nazar, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 500–506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kalhoff, G. G. Eshetu, D. Bresser and S. Passerini, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 2154–2175 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. G. Shim, T. H. Nam, J. G. Kim, H. S. Kim and S. I. Moon, J. Power Sources, 2007, 172, 901–907 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2006, 162, 1379–1394 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lu, H. Cheng and Y. Yang, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 3539–3546 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Bachman, S. Muy, A. Grimaud, H.-H. Chang, N. Pour, S. F. Lux, O. Paschos, F. Maglia, S. Lupart, P. Lamp, L. Giordano and Y. Shao-Horn, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 140–162 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Aravindan, J. Gnanaraj, S. Madhavi and H. K. Liu, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17, 14326–14346 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ordoñez, E. J. Gago and A. Girard, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 60, 195–205 CrossRef .
J. Muldoon, C. B. Bucur and T. Gregory, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11683–11720 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Yabuuchi, K. Kubota, M. Dahbi and S. Komaba, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11636–11682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xie and Q. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 7091–7106 CAS .
S. Passerini and B. Scrosati, Electrochem. Soc. Interface, 2016, 25, 85–87 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Abraham, M. M. Furczon, S. H. Kang, D. W. Dees and A. N. Jansen, J. Power Sources, 2008, 180, 612–620 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Jung, A. S. Cavanagh, L. Gedvilas, N. E. Widjonarko, I. D. Scott, S. H. Lee, G. H. Kim, S. M. George and A. C. Dillon, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 1022–1027 CrossRef CAS .
K. Rana, S. D. Kim and J.-H. Ahn, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 7065–7071 RSC .
J. Wang, Y. Mai, H. Luo, X. Yan and L. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2016, 334, 58–64 CrossRef CAS .
X. Su, C. Lin, X. Wang, V. A. Maroni, Y. Ren, C. S. Johnson and W. Lu, J. Power Sources, 2016, 324, 150–157 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cui, Y. Yang, C. Hsu and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2009, 9(9), 1–5 CrossRef PubMed .
M. H. Park, M. G. Kim, J. Joo, K. Kim, J. Kim, S. Ahn, Y. Cui and J. Cho, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3844–3847 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. H. Park, Y. Cho, K. Kim, J. Kim, M. Liu and J. Cho, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 9647–9650 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. W. Yuan and H. Y. Tuan, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 2172–2179 CrossRef CAS .
S. Choi, J. Kim, N. S. Choi, M. G. Kim and S. Park, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 2203–2212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, Z. Yang, Y. Fu, L. Qiao, D. Li, H. Yue and D. He, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 1858–1867 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, J. Liang, Z. Hou, W. Zhang, Y. Wang, Y. Zhu and Y. Qian, J. Power Sources, 2015, 293, 868–975 CrossRef CAS .
R. Bernhard, A. Latini, S. Panero, B. Scrosati and J. Hassoun, J. Power Sources, 2013, 226, 329–333 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Cheng, Z. Song, T. Ma, B. B. Smith, R. Tang, H. Yu, H. Jiang and C. K. Chan, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4969–4974 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, X. Sun, Y. Li, X. Wang, Y. Gao, K. Wu, N. Wu and B. Wu, J. Power Sources, 2014, 245, 371–376 CrossRef CAS .
J. Guo, W. Zuo, Y. Cai, S. Chen, S. Zhang and J. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 4938–4944 CAS .
N. Plylahan, M. Letiche, M. K. Samy Barr, B. Ellis, S. Maria, T. N. T. Phan, E. Bloch, P. Knauth and T. Djenizian, J. Power Sources, 2015, 273, 1182–1188 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, J. Zhang, X. Wang, G. Chen, D. Chen, C. Zhou and G. Shen, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3005–3011 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, X. Wang, B. Liu, S. Luo, Z. Liu, X. Hou, Q. Xiang, D. Chen and G. Shen, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 8650–8656 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Hou, X. Wang, B. Liu, Q. Wang, T. Luo, D. Chen and G. Shen, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 8858 RSC .
D. T. Ngo, R. S. Kalubarme, H. T. T. Le, C.-N. Park and C.-J. Park, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 2552–2560 RSC .
B. Wang, G. Wang and H. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 156, 1–10 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xie, L. Gu, F. Xia, B. Liu, X. Hou, Q. Wang, D. Liu and D. He, J. Power Sources, 2016, 327, 21–28 CrossRef CAS .
N. Ding, X. Feng, S. Liu, J. Xu, X. Fang, I. Lieberwirth and C. Chen, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 538–541 CrossRef CAS .
C. Kim, M. Ko, S. Yoo, S. Chae, S. Choi, E.-H. Lee, S. Ko, S.-Y. Lee, J. Cho and S. Park, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 10604–10610 RSC .
J.-I. Lee, E.-H. Lee, J.-H. Park, S. Park and S.-Y. Lee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301542 CrossRef .

          W. C. Butterman and H. E. Hilliard, Mineral Commodity Profiles: Antimony, U.S. Geological Survey,  2005 Search PubMed .
I. H. Son, J. Hwan Park, S. Kwon, S. Park, M. H. Rümmeli, A. Bachmatiuk, H. J. Song, J. Ku, J. W. Choi, J.-M. Choi, S.-G. Doo and H. Chang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7393 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. T. Ngo, H. T. T. Le, C. Kim, J.-Y. Lee, J. G. Fisher, I.-D. Kim and C.-J. Park, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3577–3588 CAS .

          B. W. C. Butterman and J. D. Jorgenson, Mineral Commodity Profiles: Germanium, U.S. Geological Survey,  2005 Search PubMed .
A. M. Gaikwad, B. V. Khau, G. Davies, B. Hertzberg, D. A. Steingart and A. C. Arias, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401389 CrossRef .
M. S. Balogun, M. Yu, Y. Huang, C. Li, P. Fang, Y. Liu, X. Lu and Y. Tong, Nano Energy, 2015, 11, 348–355 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, Z. Hou, X. Li, J. Liang, Y. Zhu and Y. Qian, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 213, 416–422 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, L. Wu, H. Wang, W. Zuo, Y. Li and J. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 3524–3533 CrossRef CAS .

          S. J. Kropschot, Molybdenum—A key component of metal alloys, U.S. Geological Survey,  2010 Search PubMed .
H. Zheng, Q. Sun, G. Liu, X. Song and V. S. Battaglia, J. Power Sources, 2012, 207, 134–140 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Lee, C. S. Yoon, K. Amine and Y. K. Sun, J. Power Sources, 2013, 234, 201–207 CrossRef CAS .
U. Ulissi, M. Agostini, S. Ito, Y. Aihara and J. Hassoun, Solid State Ionics, 2016, 296, 13–17 CrossRef CAS .
M. Evertz, F. Horsthemke, J. Kasnatscheew, M. Börner, M. Winter and S. Nowak, J. Power Sources, 2016, 329, 364–371 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qian, C. Schultz, P. Niehoff, T. Schwieters, S. Nowak, F. M. Schappacher and M. Winter, J. Power Sources, 2016, 332, 60–71 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ji, H. Zheng, A. Ismach, Z. Tan, S. Xun, E. Lin, V. Battaglia, V. Srinivasan and Y. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 164–171 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Elia, J. Wang, D. Bresser, J. Li, B. Scrosati, S. Passerini and J. Hassoun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 12956–12961 CAS .
A. Bordes, K. Eom and T. F. Fuller, J. Power Sources, 2014, 257, 163–169 CrossRef CAS .
K. Eom, T. Joshi, A. Bordes, I. Do and T. F. Fuller, J. Power Sources, 2014, 249, 118–124 CrossRef CAS .
M. Agostini, U. Ulissi, D. Di Lecce, Y. Ahiara, S. Ito and J. Hassoun, Energy Technol., 2015, 3, 632–637 CrossRef CAS .
A. Moretti, G. T. Kim, D. Bresser, K. Renger, E. Paillard, R. Marassi, M. Winter and S. Passerini, J. Power Sources, 2013, 221, 419–426 CrossRef CAS .
N. Takami, H. Inagaki, Y. Tatebayashi, H. Saruwatari, K. Honda and S. Egusa, J. Power Sources, 2013, 244, 469–475 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hassoun, P. Reale, S. Panero and B. Scrosati, Isr. J. Chem., 2008, 48, 229–234 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Kim, S. Choi, S. J. Lee, M. W. Seo, J. G. Lee, E. Deniz, Y. J. Lee, E. K. Kim and J. W. Choi, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 282–288 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Hwang, H. Kim and J. Cho, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4826–4830 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          R. Eisler, Nickel hazards to fish, wildlife, and invertebrates: a synoptic review, U.S. Geological Survey,  1998, vol. 34 Search PubMed .
J. Ming, W. J. Kwak, S. J. Youn, H. Ming, J. Hassoun and Y.-K. Sun, Energy Technol., 2014, 2, 778–785 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ye, Y.-X. Yin, S.-F. Zhang and Y.-G. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 13293 CAS .
G. A. Elia, U. Ulissi, F. Mueller, J. Reiter, N. Tsiouvaras, Y.-K. Sun, B. Scrosati, S. Passerini and J. Hassoun, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 6808–6814 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-J. Noh, Z. Chen, C. S. Yoon, J. Lu, K. Amine and Y.-K. Sun, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 2109–2115 CrossRef CAS .
J.-Y. Liao, S.-M. Oh and A. Manthiram, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 24543–24549 CAS .
C. Chae, H. J. Noh, J. K. Lee, B. Scrosati and Y. K. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 3036–3042 CrossRef CAS .
B. Song, W. Li, P. Yan, S.-M. Oh, C.-M. Wang and A. Manthiram, J. Power Sources, 2016, 325, 620–629 CrossRef CAS .
B. Li, J. Wang, Z. Cao, P. Zhang and J. Zhao, J. Power Sources, 2016, 325, 84–90 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yamamoto, H. Noguchi and W. Zhao, J. Power Sources, 2015, 278, 76–86 CrossRef CAS .
S. Leijonmarck, A. Cornell, G. Lindbergh and L. Wågberg, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 4671 CAS .
M. Agostini, L. G. Rizzi, G. Cesareo, V. Russo and J. Hassoun, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 2, 1500085 CrossRef .
J. Hassoun, F. Bonaccorso, M. Agostini, M. Angelucci, M. G. Betti, R. Cingolani, M. Gemmi, C. Mariani, S. Panero, V. Pellegrini and B. Scrosati, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4901–4906 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Fasciani, S. Panero, J. Hassoun and B. Scrosati, J. Power Sources, 2015, 294, 180–186 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gören, J. Mendes, H. M. Rodrigues, R. E. Sousa, J. Oliveira, L. Hilliou, C. M. Costa, M. M. Silva and S. Lanceros-Méndez, J. Power Sources, 2016, 334, 65–77 CrossRef .
G. Wang, S. Fang, D. Luo, L. Yang and S. Hirano, Electrochem. Commun., 2016, 72, 148–152 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Shi, W. Liu, Q. Qu, T. Gao, Y. Wang, G. Liu, V. S. Battaglia and H. Zheng, Carbon, 2017, 111, 291–298 CrossRef CAS .

          L. Woodruff and G. Bedinger, Titanium—Light, strong, and white, U.S. Geological Survey,  2013 Search PubMed .
P. Manikandan, P. Periasamy and R. Jagannathan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 15397 CAS .
X. Zhang, V. Aravindan, P. S. Kumar, H. Liu, J. Sundaramurthy, S. Ramakrishna and S. Madhavi, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 5973–5980 RSC .
C.-C. Yang, H.-C. Hu, S. J. J. Lin and W.-C. Chien, J. Power Sources, 2014, 258, 424–433 CrossRef CAS .

Toxicological Profile for Vanadium, Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry, Public Health Service, 2012.
C. Wang, S. Wang, Y.-B. He, L. Tang, C. Han, C. Yang, M. Wagemaker, B. Li, Q.-H. Yang, J.-K. Kim and F. Kang, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 5647–5656 CrossRef CAS .
L. Persi, F. Croce and B. Scrosati, Electrochem. Commun., 2002, 4, 92–95 CrossRef CAS .
D. Choi, D. Wang, V. V. Viswanathan, I. T. Bae, W. Wang, Z. Nie, J. G. Zhang, G. L. Graff, J. Liu, Z. Yang and T. Duong, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 378–381 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mancini, F. Nobili, R. Tossici, M. Wohlfahrt-Mehrens and R. Marassi, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 9665–9671 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hassoun, M. Pfanzelt, P. Kubiak, M. Wohlfahrt-Mehrens and B. Scrosati, J. Power Sources, 2012, 217, 459–463 CrossRef CAS .
T. Gao, Q. Qu, G. Zhu, Q. Shi, F. Qian, J. Shao and H. Zheng, Carbon, 2016, 110, 249–256 CrossRef CAS .
P. Xiong, L. Peng, D. Chen, Y. Zhao, X. Wang and G. Yu, Nano Energy, 2015, 12, 816–823 CrossRef CAS .
A. Varzi, D. Bresser, J. Von Zamory, F. Müller and S. Passerini, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1400054 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Hassoun, F. Croce, I. Hong and B. Scrosati, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13, 228–231 CrossRef CAS .
F.-W. Yuan, H.-J. Yang and H.-Y. Tuan, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 9932–9942 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, Z. Lin, Z. Yang, D. Xiao, P. Hu, H. Xu, Y. Duan, S. Pang, L. Gu and G. Cui, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 2189–2194 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Elia, U. Ulissi, S. Jeong, S. Passerini and J. Hassoun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3210–3220 CAS .
J. Hassoun, S. Panero, G. Mulas and B. Scrosati, J. Power Sources, 2007, 171, 928–931 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hassoun, G. Derrien, S. Panero and B. Scrosati, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 54, 4441–4444 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hassoun, A. Fernicola, M. A. Navarra, S. Panero and B. Scrosati, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 574–579 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yao, K. Okuno, T. Iwaki, T. Awazu and T. Sakai, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 2077–2081 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hassoun, M. Wachtler, M. Wohlfahrt-Mehrens and B. Scrosati, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 349–354 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hassoun, D. J. Lee, Y. K. Sun and B. Scrosati, Solid State Ionics, 2011, 202, 36–39 CrossRef CAS .
S. Brutti, J. Hassoun, B. Scrosati, C.-Y. Y. Lin, H. Wu and H.-W. W. Hsieh, J. Power Sources, 2012, 217, 72–76 CrossRef CAS .
D. Di Lecce, C. Fasciani, B. Scrosati and J. Hassoun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 21198–21207 CAS .
D. Di Lecce, S. Brutti, S. Panero and J. Hassoun, Mater. Lett., 2015, 139, 329–332 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Allen, J. L. Allen, T. Thompson, S. A. Delp, J. Wolfenstine and T. R. Jow, J. Power Sources, 2016, 327, 229–234 CrossRef CAS .
D. Di Lecce, R. Verrelli and J. Hassoun, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 220, 384–390 CrossRef .
V. Aravindan, N. Shubha, Y. L. Cheah, R. Prasanth, W. Chuiling, R. R. Prabhakar and S. Madhavi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, c, 308–316 Search PubMed .
V. Aravindan, J. Sundaramurthy, P. S. Kumar, N. Shubha, W. C. Ling, S. Ramakrishna and S. Madhavi, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 10636–10645 RSC .
L. J. Xi, H. K. Wang, S. L. Yang, R. G. Ma, Z. G. Lu, C. W. Cao, K. L. Leung, J. Q. Deng, A. L. Rogach and C. Y. Chung, J. Power Sources, 2013, 242, 222–229 CrossRef CAS .
R. Hu, W. Sun, Y. Chen, M. Zeng and M. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 9118–9125 CAS .
S. Jayaraman, V. Aravindan, P. Suresh Kumar, C. L. Wong, S. Ramakrishna and S. Madhavi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 8660–8666 CAS .
A. Chaturvedi, V. Aravindan, P. Hu, R. R. Prabhakar, L. H. Wong, C. Kloc and S. Madhavi, Appl. Mater. Today, 2016, 5, 68–72 CrossRef .
X. Xin, X. Zhou, J. Wu, X. Yao and Z. Liu, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 11035–11043 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Chae, H. Park, D. Kim, J. Kim, E.-S. Oh and J. K. Lee, J. Power Sources, 2013, 244, 214–221 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Y. Wang, D. Jia, Z. Peng, Y. Xia and G. Zheng, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1080–1084 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Satish, V. Aravindan, W. C. Ling, J. B. Goodenough and S. Madhavi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301715 CrossRef .

          T. G. Goonan, Rare Earth Elements—End Use and Recyclability, U.S. Geological Survey,  2011 Search PubMed .
J. Hassoun, S. Panero, P. Reale and B. Scrosati, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2006, 1, 110–121 CAS .
J. Hassoun, G. Mulas, S. Panero and B. Scrosati, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 2075–2081 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hassoun, P. Reale and S. Panero, J. Power Sources, 2007, 174, 321–327 CrossRef CAS .
F. Croce, M. L. Focarete, J. Hassoun, I. Meschini and B. Scrosati, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 921 CAS .
G. A. Elia, S. Panero, A. Savoini, B. Scrosati and J. Hassoun, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 90, 690–694 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Elia, F. Nobili, R. Tossici, R. Marassi, A. Savoini, S. Panero and J. Hassoun, J. Power Sources, 2015, 275, 227–233 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hassoun, K.-S. Lee, Y.-K. Sun and B. Scrosati, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 3139–3143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Fridman, R. Sharabi, R. Elazari, G. Gershinsky, E. Markevich, G. Salitra, D. Aurbach, A. Garsuch and J. Lampert, Electrochem. Commun., 2013, 33, 31–34 CrossRef CAS .
S.-O. Kim and A. Manthiram, J. Power Sources, 2016, 332, 222–229 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Park, X. Meng, J. W. Elam, S. Hao, C. Wolverton, C. Kim and J. Cabana, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 3128–3134 CrossRef CAS .
O. Vargas, Á. Caballero, J. Morales, G. A. Elia, B. Scrosati and J. Hassoun, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 20444–20446 RSC .
Y.-M. Song, J.-G. Han, S. Park, K. T. Lee and N.-S. Choi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 9506–9513 CAS .
M. Agostini, S. Brutti and J. Hassoun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 10850–10857 CAS .
D. Dambournet, I. Belharouak, J. Ma and K. Amine, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 2871–2874 CrossRef CAS .
J.-T. Han and J. B. Goodenough, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 3404–3407 CrossRef CAS .
V. Aravindan, W. C. Ling and S. Madhavi, ChemPhysChem, 2012, 13, 3263–3266 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Suresh Kumar, V. Aravindan, J. Sundaramurthy, V. Thavasi, S. G. Mhaisalkar, S. Ramakrishna and S. Madhavi, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 7983 RSC .
W. K. Pang, N. Sharma, V. K. Peterson, J.-J. Shiu and S. Wu, J. Power Sources, 2014, 246, 464–472 CrossRef CAS .
N. Plylahan, M. Letiche, M. Kenza, S. Barr and T. Djenizian, Electrochem. Commun., 2014, 43, 121–124 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Kim, N. P. W. Pieczonka, P. Lu, Z. Liu, R. Qiao, W. Yang, M. M. Tessema, Y. K. Sun and B. R. Powell, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 2, 1–13 Search PubMed .
U. Ulissi, J. Zimmermann, S. Brutti and J. Hassoun, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 201, 158–164 CrossRef CAS .
G. F. Ortiz, M. Cabello, M. C. López, J. L. Tirado, M. J. McDonald and Y. Yang, J. Power Sources, 2016, 303, 194–202 CrossRef CAS .
N. Arun, V. Aravindan, S. Jayaraman, N. Shubha, W. C. Ling, S. Ramakrishna and S. Madhavi, Nanoscale, 2014, 8926–8934 RSC .
X. Cao, X. He, J. Wang, H. Liu, S. Roeser, B. R. Rad, M. Evertz, B. Streipert, J. Li, R. Wagner, M. Winter and I. Cekic-Laskovic, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 25971–25978 CAS .
H.-G. Jung, M. W. Jang, J. Hassoun, Y.-K. Sun and B. Scrosati, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 516 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Verrelli, J. Hassoun, A. Farkas, T. Jacob and B. Scrosati, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 15329 CAS .
R. Verrelli and J. Hassoun, ChemElectroChem, 2015, 2, 988–994 CrossRef CAS .
R. Verrelli and J. Hassoun, J. Power Sources, 2015, 299, 611–616 CrossRef CAS .
D. Di Lecce, R. Verrelli, D. Campanella, V. Marangon and J. Hassoun, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 1607–1615 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, G. Ma, H. Gu, Z. Yang and H. Cheng, J. Power Sources, 2015, 273, 561–565 CrossRef CAS .
V. Aravindan, N. Arun, N. Shubha, J. Sundaramurthy and S. Madhavi, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 215, 647–651 CrossRef CAS .
R. Verrelli, R. Brescia, A. Scarpellini, L. Manna, B. Scrosati and J. Hassoun, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 61855–61862 CAS .
D. Lv, M. L. Gordin, R. Yi, T. Xu, J. Song, Y. B. Jiang, D. Choi and D. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 1059–1066 CrossRef CAS .
R. Verrelli, N. Laszczynski, S. Passerini and J. Hassoun, Energy Technol., 2016, 4, 700–705 CrossRef CAS .
V. Aravindan, W. Chuiling and S. Madhavi, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 7534–7539 RSC .
X. Xu, S. Jeong, C. S. Rout, P. Oh, M. Ko, H. Kim, M. G. Kim, R. Cao, H. S. Shin and J. Cho, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 10847–10853 CAS .
J. Hassoun, Y. K. Sun and B. Scrosati, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 343–348 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hassoun, J. Kim, D.-J. Lee, H.-G. Jung, S.-M. Lee, Y.-K. Sun and B. Scrosati, J. Power Sources, 2012, 202, 308–313 CrossRef CAS .
R. Elazari, G. Salitra, G. Gershinsky, A. Garsuch, A. Panchenko and D. Aurbach, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 14, 21–24 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zheng, Y. Chen, Y. Xu, F. Yi, Y. Zhu, Y. Liu and J. Yang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 10995–11003 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Agostini, J. Hassoun, J. Liu, M. Jeong, H. Nara, T. Momma, T. Osaka, Y. K. Sun and B. Scrosati, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 10924–10928 CAS .
K. Zhang, L. Wang, Z. Hu, F. Cheng and J. Chen, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 6467 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Moreno, M. Agostini, A. Caballero, J. Morales and J. Hassoun, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 14540–14542 RSC .
S. Thieme, J. Brueckner, A. Meier, I. Bauer, K. Gruber, J. Kaspar, A. Helmer, H. Althues, M. Schmuck and S. Kaskel, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 3808–3820 CAS .
L. Wang, Y. Wang and Y. Xia, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1551–1558 CAS .
C.-Y. Fan, S.-Y. Liu, H.-H. Li, H.-F. Wang, H.-C. Wang, X.-L. Wu, H.-Z. Sun and J.-P. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 28689–28699 CAS .
E. H. Mohan, B. V. Sarada, R. V. Ram, G. Salian, A. K. Haridas, B. V. A. Rao and T. N. Rao, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 219, 1–20 CrossRef .
J. Hassoun and B. Scrosati, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 2371–2374 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, M. T. McDowell, A. Jackson, J. J. Cha, S. S. Hong and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1486–1491 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Brückner, S. Thieme, F. Böttger-Hiller, I. Bauer, H. T. Grossmann, P. Strubel, H. Althues, S. Spange and S. Kaskel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 1284–1289 CrossRef .
M. Agostini and J. Hassoun, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 7591 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Shen, M. Ge, A. Zhang, X. Fang, Y. Liu, J. Rong and C. Zhou, Nano Energy, 2016, 19, 68–77 CrossRef CAS .
S.-K. Lee, S.-M. Oh, E. Park, B. Scrosati, J. Hassoun, M.-S. Park, Y.-J. Kim, H. Kim, I. Belharouak and Y.-K. Sun, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 2863–2868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Cai, J. Zhou, G. Li, K. Zhang, X. Liu, C. Wang, H. Zhou, Y. Zhu and Y. Qian, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 27679–27687 CAS .
J. Hassoun, H.-G. Jung, D.-J. Lee, J.-B. Park, K. Amine, Y.-K. Sun and B. Scrosati, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 5775–5779 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. A. Elia, R. Bernhard and J. Hassoun, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 21360–21365 RSC .
G. A. Elia, D. Bresser, J. Reiter, P. Oberhumer, Y.-K. Sun, B. Scrosati, S. Passerini and J. Hassoun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 22638–22643 CAS .
W.-J. Kwak, H.-J. Shin, J. Reiter, N. Tsiouvaras, J. Hassoun, S. Passerini, B. Scrosati and Y.-K. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 10467–10471 CAS .
Y.-K. Sun, S.-M. Oh, H.-K. Park and B. Scrosati, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5050–5054 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-M. Oh, S.-T. Myung, J. B. Park, B. Scrosati, K. Amine and Y.-K. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 1853–1856 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Andre, S. Kim, P. Lamp, F. Lux and F. Maglia, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 6709–6732 CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:
Daniele Di Lecce	Daniele Di Lecce has been a Postdoctoral Research Fellow at the University of Ferrara (Italy) and at the Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), Helmholtz Institute Ulm (HIU, Germany). He graduated in Industrial Chemistry in 2012 and obtained his PhD in Materials Science from the “Sapienza” University of Rome (Italy) in 2015, investigating new cathodes for lithium-ion batteries. His research interests currently lie in the fields of electrochemistry and materials science, with a focus on lithium-ion batteries of new configurations.
Roberta Verrelli	Roberta Verrelli graduated in Chemistry in 2012 at the “Sapienza” University of Rome. She obtained her PhD in Chemical Sciences in 2015 from the same university within the field of advanced lithium-ion batteries. Her research mainly focuses on electrochemical energy storage systems and materials science. She is currently pursuing postdoctoral studies at the ICMAB-CSIC (Spain).
Jusef Hassoun	Jusef Hassoun is presently Associate Professor of Physical Chemistry and Electrochemistry at the University of Ferrara, Italy. After graduating in Chemistry at the “Sapienza” University of Rome he worked in an industrial company for 3 years before returning to academia to obtain his PhD degree in Materials Science in the field of advanced lithium-ion batteries in 2009. He has been an Assistant Research Scientist at the Department of Chemistry of the “Sapienza” University of Rome from 2011 to 2015, and a visiting professor at the Hanyang University in Seoul, South Korea. He is the co-author of more than 150 papers in international journals, and book chapters.

 	Scheme 1  Schematic representation of the review structure, summarizing the main topics covered.	 

 	Fig. 1  Characteristics of a flexible LTO/LCO lithium-ion cell. (a) Schematic representation of the pouch-cell. (b) Areal capacity (mA h cm−2) of the full cell cycled for 450 cycles at C/2 rate. The full cell had a total active area of 2.5 × 2.5 cm2 and LTO and LCO loadings of 13.4 and 12.5 mg cm−2, respectively. (c) Areal capacity (mA h cm−2) and Coulombic efficiency (%) of the full cell cycled between C/4 and 1C rates. (d) Galvanostatic charge/discharge curves for the full cell cycled between C/4 and 1C rates. The capacity at C/4, C/2 and 1C rates was 117, 104 and 90 mA h g−1, respectively. The Coulombic efficiency of all the batteries was above 99.5%. Electrolyte: 1 M solution of LiPF6 in EC:DEC 1:1. Reproduced with permission.71 Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 2  Characteristics of a TiO2–MoO3/LCO lithium-ion cell. (a) Schematic illustration of the structural features of the synergistic TiO2–MoO3 nanowire array. (b) SEM image of the optimized TiO2–MoO3 hybrid array (optical image in the inset). (c) Schematic illustration of the full cell. (d) Stored charge of both the Li/TiO2–MoO3 half-cell and the TiO2–MoO3/LCO full cell at different currents. (e) The first three charge–discharge curves of the full cell. (f) Cycling performance and Coulombic efficiency of the full cell at 50 mA gtotal−1. Electrolyte: 1 M LiPF6 in EC:DEC 1:1 v/v. Voltage limits: 1.0–4 V. Reproduced with permission.74 Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 3  Characteristics of a Sn–C/Pyr14TFSI-LiTFSI/NMC lithium-ion cell. (a–b) Galvanostatic cycling performances in terms of (a) voltage profiles and (b) cycling behavior of the full cell. (c) Evolution of the interface resistance of the full cell after cycling and ex situ SEM images of the electrode materials (Sn–C and NMC) after cycling. Electrolyte: 0.2 mol kg−1 LiTFSI in Pyr14TFSI. Voltage limits: 2.5–4.0 V. Current rate: 25 mA g−1. Temperature: 40 °C. Reproduced with permission.94 Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 4  Lithium-ion batteries based on concentration gradient layered cathodes. (a–d) Characteristics of a MCMB/Li[Ni0.60Co0.15Mn0.25]O2 lithium-ion cell. (a) Cross section SEM and EPMA mapping of Ni, Co, and Mn within a single lithiated Li[Ni0.60Co0.15Mn0.25]O2 cathode particle; (b) integrated atomic ratio of transition metals as a function of the distance from the center of the particle for the lithiated Li[Ni0.60Co0.15Mn0.25]O2 cathode. (c–d) Cycling performance in a laminated-type Al-pouch cell in terms of (c) specific discharge capacity (mA h g−1) and (d) discharge capacity (mA h). Electrolyte: 1.2 M LiPF6 in EC:EMC 3:7 v/v. Current rate: 1 C (corresponding to 180 mA g−1). Voltage limits: 3.0–4.4 V. Temperature: 25 °C and 55 °C. Reproduced with permission.95 Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (e–f) Characteristics of a Graphite/LiNi0.76Co0.1Mn0.14O2 lithium-ion cell. (e) Cycling performances of the LiNi0.76Co0.1Mn0.14O2 cathode in lithium half-cells at C/3 rate. Inset: elemental intensity ratio of Mn/Ni across the cycled cathode particle based on the EDS line-scanning data and cross section SEM image. (f) Cycling performance of the pouch-type full cell at C/3 rate (image in the inset). Electrolyte: 1.2 M LiPF6 in EC:EMC 3:7 v/v. Voltage limits: 2.5–4.4 V. Reproduced with permission.96 Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  Characteristics of a graphite/xLi2MnO3·(1 − x)LiNi0.7Co0.15Mn0.15O2 lithium-ion cell.98 SEM images and SEM-EDX line scan of Ni, Co, and Mn at the cross section of xLi2MnO3·(1 − x)LiNi0.7Co0.15Mn0.15O2 particles: (a) x = 0 and (b) x = 0.10. (c) Schematic representation of the phase composition of a xLi2MnO3·(1 − x)LiNi0.7Co0.15Mn0.15O2 particle. (d) Laminated full pouch-cell cycled at C/10 rate for the first 2 cycles and at C/3 rate for the rest of the cycles. Electrolyte: 1 M LiPF6 in EC:DEC 1:1 v/v. Voltage limits: 2.5–4.4 V. Temperature: 25 °C. Reproduced with permission.98 Copyright 2016 Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 6  Characteristics of a LTO/LFP lithium-ion cell. Photographs of a LTO/LFP full cell (a) before and (b) after 8000 cycles at a current density of 30C rate. (c–d) Rate capability in terms of (c) cycling behavior and (d) voltage profiles of the LTO/LFP battery at various (dis)charge rates from 0.5C to 80C. (e) Cycling performance at a rate of 30C/30C (charge/discharge). Specific capacity calculated with respect to the LTO anode mass. Electrolyte: 1 M LiPF6 in EC/DEC/EMC 1:1:1 v/v. Voltage limits: 1.0–2.3 V. Temperature: 25 °C. Reproduced with permission.113 Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a–c) Characteristics of a 2D, all-nanosheet-based ZnMn2O4–graphene/LFP lithium-ion cell. (a) Scheme of the cell. (b) Cycling performances of the all-nanosheet-based full battery and a control full battery put together; Coulombic efficiency of the all-nanosheet-based full battery. Current rate: 0.2C. (c) Cycling performances of the all-nanosheet-based full battery at 2C, 5C and 10C. Electrolyte: 1 M LiPF6 in EC:DEC 1:1 v/v. Voltage limits: 0.9–3.9 V. Reproduced with permission.119 Copyright 2015 Elsevier Ltd. (d–e) Characteristics of a C-ZnFe2O4/LFP-multiwalled carbon nanotube (CNT) lithium-ion battery. (d) Long-term cycling stability applying a current density of 3 mA cm−2 and Coulombic efficiency of ZFO/LFP-CNT full cells employing anodes with different degrees of lithiation. (e) Selected electrode and cell voltage profile evolution after cycling. Specific capacity values are calculated with respect to the active material amount of both the limiting cathode (i.e., LFP) and the sum of the anode and cathode (i.e., TOT = LFP + ZFO). Electrolyte: 1 M LiPF6 in EC:DEC 3:7 v/v. A Li reference electrode was employed in the full-cells for monitoring individual electrode potentials. Temperature: 20 °C. Reproduced with permission.120 Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (f–h) Characteristics of a Sn–C/Pyr14FSI–LiTFSI/LFP lithium-ion cell. (f) Selected steady-state voltage signatures and (g) cycling behavior with Coulombic efficiency of the full cell cycled at increasing currents, i.e., 25, 50, 75, 100, 150, 200 and 250 mA g−1 (0.12, 0.24, 0.36, 0.48, 0.72, 0.96, and 1.2 mA cm−2, respectively). (h) Cycling behavior with Coulombic efficiency of the full cell in a long-term galvanostatic cycling test at 100 mA g−1 (1.2 mA cm−2). Electrolyte: 0.2 mol kg−1 LiTFSI in Pyr14FSI. Voltage limits: 2.0–3.8 V. Temperature: 40 °C. The specific capacity (mA h g−1) and specific current (mA g−1) are given with respect to the LFP cathode active mass. Reproduced with permission.124 Copyright 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a–b) Characteristics of a Sn–C/GPE/LiMn0.5Fe0.5PO4 lithium-ion cell cycled at 0.2C rate with respect to the cathode (1C = 170 mA gcathode−1). (a) Galvanostatic response in terms of voltage profiles of the 1st, 5th, 10th, 15th, and 20th cycles of the Sn–C/GPE/LiMn0.5Fe0.5PO4 full cell; inset of panel a: voltage profiles of the 1st, 2nd, and 4th cycles of the full cell cycled at 40 °C using a 0.2C rate. (b) Cycling behavior and the corresponding Coulombic efficiency of the Sn–C/GPE/LiMn0.5Fe0.5PO4 full cell. Electrolyte: gel polymer electrolyte (GPE) based on PVDF and 0.7 M LiBOB in 1:1:3 EC:PC:DMC w/w. Voltage limits: 1.6–4.2 V. Temperature: 25 °C except for the inset of panel a. Reproduced with permission.132 Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (c–d) Characteristics of a graphite/Cr,Si–LiCo0.9Fe0.1PO4 lithium-ion cell in terms of (c) voltage profile of the 2nd (solid blue line) and 250th cycles (dashed red line) as well as (d) cycling behavior. Electrolyte: 1.2 M LiPF6 in EC:EMC 3:7 w/w with 2 wt% tris(trimethylsilyl) phosphite. Cycling procedure: the first cycle between 4.85 and 3.0 V at a constant C/20 current; subsequent cycles with charge at a C/2 constant current to 4.85 V, charge at a constant 4.85 V voltage until the current was less than C/15, and discharge at a 1C constant current to 3.5 V. Reproduced with permission.134 Copyright 2016 Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a–d) Characteristics of a MnOx–C/LiMn2O4 lithium-ion cell. (a) Voltage profile and schematic cell representation in the inset. (b) Cycling performance of a full cell with 4.5 and 1.2 mg cm−2 loading for the cathode and the anode, respectively, cycled at 0.2C rate for 100 cycles and then at 0.1C rate for up to 188 cycles. (c) Cycling performance of a full cell with 3.7 and 1.8 mg cm−2 loading for the cathode and the anode, respectively, cycled at 0.2C rate for up to 195 cycle, and (d) rate performance of the same cell. Electrolyte: 1 M LiPF6 in EC:DMC 3:7 v/v. Voltage limits: 2.0 and 4.1 V. Current rates and capacity reported with respect to the cathode mass (1C = 148 mA gcathode−1). Reproduced with permission.143 Copyright 2013 Elsevier B.V. (e–f) Characteristics of a flexible Mn2O3/LiMn2O4 lithium-ion cell. (e) Schematic of the synthesis and fabrication of the full cell. (f) Cycling performance (red curve) and Coulombic efficiency (black curve) of the full cell. The cell is fully extended in the first 20 cycles and folded from the 21st to 40th cycles, as shown by optical images and the black arrows in the insets. Electrolyte: 1 M LiPF6 in EC:DEC:DMC 1:1:1 w/w. Voltage limits: 4.2–1.5 V. Reproduced with permission.144 Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a–b) Characteristics of a Si/LNMO lithium-ion cell. Cell performances in terms of (a) voltage profiles and (b) cycling behavior. Electrolyte: 1 M LiPF6 in FEC:DMC 1:4. Current rate: 0.5C (10 initial cycles at C/8 rate). Reproduced with permission.154 Copyright 2013 Elsevier B.V. (c–d) Characteristics of a Li4Ti5O12/Li[Ni0.45Co0.1Mn1.45]O4 lithium-ion cell. Cell performances at several temperatures (i.e., from −20 to +55 °C) in terms of (c) voltage profiles and (d) cycling behavior at 1C and 0.5C rates. Electrolyte: 1.2 M LiPF6 in EC:DMC 3:7 v/v. Reproduced with permission.171 Copyright 2011 Macmillan Publishers Limited. (e) Characteristics of a CuO-MCMB/LNMO lithium-ion cell in terms of voltage profiles and (inset) cycling behavior at 1C rate with respect to the cathode (148 mA gcathode−1). Electrolyte: 1 M LiPF6 in EC:DMC 1:1 w/w. Voltage range: 1.5–5.0 V. Room temperature. Reproduced with permission.172 Copyright 2013 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) Characteristics of a Sn–Fe2O3–C/LNMO cell in terms of voltage profiles of the full cell (blue curve) and of its anodic and cathodic components (green and red curves, respectively), as well as (inset) full-cell cycling behavior. Electrolyte: 1 M LiPF6 in EC:DMC 1:1 w/w. Current rate: C/3 with respect to the cathode (50 mA gcathode−1). Three-electrode configuration. Room temperature. Reproduced with permission.174 Copyright 2015 Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a–b) Characteristics of a Si–SiOx/dual-type activated carbon–S lithium-ion cell. (a) Cyclic behavior and (b) voltage profiles of the full cell cycled at 1C rate. Inset of panel a: schematic representation of the cell. Electrolyte: 0.05 M Li2S8, 1 M LiTFSI, 0.4 M LiNO3 in DME:DOL 1:1 v/v. Voltage limits: 2.8–0.8 V. 1C = 1675 mA h g−1versus overall sulfur weight. Temperature: 30 °C. Reproduced with permission.199 Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (c–d) Characteristics of a LixSi–C/C,O2 lithium-ion cell. (c) Schematic representation and (d) voltage profiles of the LixSi–C/C,O2 cell. Electrolyte: LiCF3SO3:TEGDME 1:4 mol/mol. Cycling current: 200 mA gcarbon−1. Room temperature. Reproduced with permission.201 Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
