Applying alloyed metal nanoparticles to enhance solar assisted water splitting   - RSC Advances (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4RA08216H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4RA08216H
(Paper)
RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 46697-46703Applying alloyed metal nanoparticles to enhance solar assisted water splitting†
Naimeh Naseri*a, 
Parvaneh Sangpourb and 
S. Hossein Mousavic
aDepartment of Physics, Sharif University of Technology, Tehran, Iran. E-mail: naseri@sharif.edu
bDepartment of Nanotechnology and Advanced Materials, Materials and Energy Research Center, Karaj, Iran. E-mail: p.sangpour@physics.sharif.ir
cMicroelectronics Research Center, Cockrell School of Engineering, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas, USA. E-mail: h.mousavi@gmail.com
Received 
6th August 2014
, Accepted 10th September 2014First published on 10th September 2014AbstractConsidering hydrogen as a future fuel, development of clean approaches based on solar energy conversion is the main human challenge. Here, for the first time, TiO2 photoanodes are decorated with Au–Ag alloy nanoparticles for efficient photoelectrochemical water splitting. The photoanodes were synthesized using a one-step co-sputtering method. The single surface plasmon resonance peak at 540 nm and also the observed shifts in photoelectron binding energies are fingerprints of homogenous alloyed nanoparticles. Scanning electron microscopy revealed the formation of nearly 40 nm particles on the surface, which was also verified by the simulation of the film's optical absorption. Photocurrent measurements showed a 30% increase in the presence of alloy nanoparticles, as well as a 50% reduction in charge transfer resistance of the electrodes. These observations are attributed to adjusting a suitable Schottky barrier in the junction of TiO2/metal particles, which introduces applying alloy noble metallic particles as a new effective strategy for energy and environmental purposes.
1. Introduction
The alarming depletion rate of the reserve of fossil fuels leading to a rapid increase in environmental pollution has caused an urgent need to develop efficient, clean and renewable energy resources. Many different approaches have been followed to overcome these challenges, one of which is solar energy.1,2 Sunlight is a free, sustainable and easily accessed energy source, and the solar-produced hydrogen that can be used in fuel cells to generate electricity or may be directly used in combustion engines, produces only water and no pollution. Hence, regarding hydrogen as a clean energy carrier, the scenario of renewable hydrogen economy has attracted considerable attention recently.3
Because of low operation temperature and strong synergies with contemporary research in the field of photovoltaics and nanomaterials, photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting is an emerging generation technology for the future of a hydrogen world.4–8 The concept of this method is based on a semiconductor photoelectrode device that excites with sunlight, oxidizes/reduces H2O molecules by a h+/e− pair and converts it to chemical energy (H2 gas). For an efficient PEC reaction, the selected semiconductor must possess a few critical properties: chemical stability, suitable band edge positions for absorbing sunlight, participation in water oxidation/reduction, high charge carrier mobility and also a variety of low cost synthetic methods.7,8
Among all metal oxide semiconductors, titanium dioxide is the most promising candidate that satisfies all these factors, except adversely, its narrow band gap. Another drawback of TiO2 is the fast recombination of photoexcited charges. Various attempts are in progress to solve these problems that would enhance the PEC performance of TiO2 photoanodes. In one approach, by applying nanostructured TiO2 the electrode/electrolyte interface increases, hole transfer is facilitated, and consequently, charge recombination is mitigated.9–13 Another trend is embedding noble metal nanoparticles inside TiO2 photoanode thin films to trap electrons on their Fermi energy level and easily transfer them to the back contact.14–19
During recent years, Au–Ag alloy nanoparticles have been considered as excellent catalysts as a result of their unique optical and electronic properties and also the Au and Ag synergistic effects.20,21 This bimetallic system has been widely used in CO oxidation reactions,22 aerobic glucose oxidation,23 dye-sensitized solar cells24 and also antibacterial applications.25 Recently, Tsukamoto et al. have reported photocatalytic H2O2 production from an ethanol/O2 system assisted by Au–Ag alloy nanoparticles.26 They changed the alloy composition (Ag/Au ratio) and found that the recombination rates can be tuned by this parameter, as well as H2O2 production yield. Despite these investigations, there is no published report on the effect of Au–Ag alloy nanoparticles on PEC performance of a semiconductor photoanode. Hence, it is unknown to what extent the photoresponse of TiO2 photoanode film can be enhanced and how the observed changes can be interpreted.
In this paper, we have decorated TiO2 thin films with Au–Ag alloy nanoparticles (called GSANPs-TiO2) synthesized by a single-step co-sputtering method and applied them to PEC water splitting reactions. The physical properties of the samples were characterized by various techniques. In addition, their electro/photoelectrochemical properties were thoroughly studied. Finally, a proper mechanism is suggested to shed light on the role of alloy nanoparticles in the semiconductor photoanode.
2. Experimental details
2.1. Synthesis of photoanodes
GSANPs-TiO2 films were deposited on both glassy slides and Ti as substrates using an RF reactive magnetron co-sputtering technique. The deposition chamber was evacuated to a base pressure of about 4 × 10−7 Torr. A quartz crystal oscillator was utilized to monitor film thickness in situ. The distance between the target and the substrate was about 70 mm. Two similar pieces of Au and Ag (1 mm in length) were symmetrically placed on a Ti target 50 mm in diameter. Co-sputtering of GSANPs-TiO2 was carried out by applying 50 W of RF power at a pressure of 20 mTorr in an Ar + O2 (60 + 40%) discharge gas at a deposition rate of 10 nm min−1. The “as-deposited” films with a thickness of about 100 nm were annealed at 600 °C in Ar + H2 (80% + 20%) atmosphere for 1 h. The reducing atmosphere has been chosen to prevent the oxidation of metallic particles and also to create oxygen vacancies in the TiO2 thin film, which is beneficial for the PEC activity of the systems.
2.2. Characterization methods
A UV-visible spectrophotometer (PerkinElmer-Lambda 25) was used to investigate the optical properties of the films in the wavelength range 300–1100 nm with 1 nm resolution. To calculate the extinction spectra of the semiconductor, we used the commercially available software COMSOL Multiphysics. The simulation domain included one unit cell, which enclosed one spherical nanoparticle inside the TiO2 film of thickness 60 nm atop an optically thick glass substrate. In both the lateral directions, the periodic boundary condition was setup to reproduce the large area of the sample and the incoming beam. The beam was assumed to illuminate the sample at normal incidence. The reflection spectrum R(ω) and the transmission spectrum T(ω) were obtained by calculating the outgoing Poynting flux. Then, the absorption spectrum A(ω) was calculated as 1 − R(ω) − T(ω).
An X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) instrument equipped with an Al-Kα X-ray source at energy of 1486.6 eV was employed to characterize the surface chemical composition of the films. The hemispherical energy analyzer (Specs EA 10 Plus) operating in a vacuum better than 10−7 Pa was used for binding energy analysis. All binding energy values were calibrated by fixing the C(1s) core level at the 285.0 eV. All the peaks were deconvoluted using SDP software (version 4.1) with 80% Gaussian-20% Lorentzian peak fitting. The surface morphology of the films was studied by a Thermomicroscopes Autoprobe CP-Research atomic force microscope (AFM) in air with a silicon tip of 10 nm radius, in contact mode, and also by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (VEGA/TESCAN) analysis.
To investigate the photoelectrochemical properties of all the prepared samples, a three-electrode galvanostat/potentiostat system (AutoLab PGSTAT) was used. All the PEC measurements were carried out in a single part pyrex cell with 1 M KOH aqueous solution as electrolyte. On one side of the cell, there was a quartz window for placing the photoanode behind (the synthesized nanostructure) it and illuminating the light. The counter electrode was a platinum wire and Ag/AgCl was used as the reference electrode. Annealed TiO2 and GSANPs-TiO2 thin films deposited on the Ti substrates were used as working electrodes. A xenon lamp with natural daylight continuous spectrum was used as the irradiation source. All the experiments were performed at room temperature. The electrical properties of the prepared samples were studied using electrochemical impedance spectroscopy. The equivalent circuits were also fitted by FRA software (version 4.9).
3. Results and discussions
3.1. Surface morphology
The surface structure of the as-prepared films was investigated by SEM and AFM analysis. As can be seen from bright spots in the SEM top view image of the GSANPs-TiO2 (Fig. 1a), a distribution of spherical metallic nanoparticles with average size of 40 nm accumulated on the surface.
 Fig. 1  (a) SEM and (b and d) AFM images of GSANPs-TiO2 films and (c and e) AFM image of the pure TiO2 sample. 
More details on surface morphology can be obtained from AFM images in Fig. 1b and c for GSANPs-TiO2 and TiO2 films, respectively. Their surface morphology can also be seen in higher resolution in Fig. 1d and e. The formation of GSA nanoparticles has been confirmed by Fig. 1b, whereas pure TiO2 film showed a smooth surface structure. Average surface roughness and surface ratio (the ratio of 3D real surface to projected area) of the GSANPs-TiO2 sample have been estimated as 12.8 nm and 1.05, respectively, whereas for pure TiO2 film these values were 1.5 nm and 1.00. Hence, growth of alloy nanoparticles caused a significant increase in the film roughness and layer/electrolyte interface. Moreover, according to our previous reports, these values were also higher than those for monometallic nanoparticles, including Au–TiO217,18 and Ag–TiO219 films with surface roughness of 3.6 and 2.7 nm, respectively. This result can be related to smaller size of alloyed particles as compared with Ag nanoparticles and also to more surface accumulation of Au–Ag alloyed NPs in comparison with monometallic Au NPs.
3.2. UV-visible spectrophotometry
One convenient method to recognize the formation of homogenous alloy nanoparticles is to study their absorption spectra. The absorption spectra of pure and Au–Ag alloy nanoparticle including TiO2 films are shown in Fig. 2a. On the basis of the figure for the TiO2 layer, the absorption edge was detected at 385 nm, which is in accordance with the reported band gap of TiO2 in an anatase phase (see also Fig. S1, ESI†). As for GSANPs grown in the film, a single absorption peak formed at λ = 540 nm correspond to the well-known surface plasmon resonance (SPR) of metal nanoparticles. Considering different SPR peak positions of gold (600 nm)17,18 and silver (470 nm)19 nanoparticles in a titania matrix, the notable point that can be extracted from the spectrum is the formation of homogenous Au–Ag bimetallic nanoparticles that is a fingerprint of the alloyed structures.20,21,26 Afterwards, the asymmetric shape of the SPR peak revealed that GSA nanoparticles formed in a spherical shape.27
 Fig. 2  (a) Experimental optical absorption spectra of pure TiO2 and GSANPs-TiO2 films. (b) Simulated optical absorption for different sizes and (c) Au/Ag ratio of Au–Ag alloyed nanoparticles embedded in TiO2 matrix. (Dashed and solid black lines refer to experimental and averaged simulated spectra, respectively.) 
The simulated optical absorption spectra of the GSANPs-TiO2 films are presented in Fig. 2b and c for various sizes and metallic portions of GSA nanoparticles, respectively. A dielectric slab with plasmonic inclusions supports a distinct peak associated with the plasmonic response of the nanoparticle. This resonance causes an enhanced optical absorption that was clear in the experimental data.28,29 The observed resonance at the wavelength around 540 nm was attributed to plasmonic resonance, which shifted with the shape and dielectric content of the particle. Fig. 2b shows the sensitivity of the absorption to the nanoparticle dimensions around this wavelength. Because there was a slight broad range of sizes in the fabricated sample, we simulated the experimentally relevant dimensions and took an average of all the resultant spectra (black solid line). As can be seen in the figure, this averaged spectrum compared well to the one obtained by photospectrometry, which confirmed the average size of 40 nm previously revealed by the SEM analysis.
To demonstrate the admixture proportion (Au/Ag ratio) of the nanoparticle, we simulated a few possible realizations of the alloy and compared the averaged (for the same ensemble of dimensions) spectra to the experimental data. As can be seen in Fig. 1c, the nanoparticle with an equal mixture of gold and silver represented a superior match with the absorption spectra experimentally obtained.
3.3. Surface chemistry
The surface chemical composition of the fabricated photoanodes was studied by XPS analysis. According to the wide range XPS spectra of the films (Fig. S2, ESI†), an impurity-free surface was detected for all the samples except for a trace of carbon that was related to adsorbed air contamination and CO/CO2 species in the laboratory room. Fig. 3a represents the Ti(2p) peak high resolution window of the annealed GSANPs-TiO2 film. Two separate Ti (2p3/2) and Ti(2p1/2) have been detected because of the spin–orbit splitting, whereas for the Ti(2p3/2), each peak has been deconvoluted to two different oxidation states: Ti4+ at 458.8 eV and Ti3+ at 456.7 eV.17–19,30 To investigate the origin of the observed Ti3+ state, which was related to the oxygen vacancies formed on the surface, the XPS analysis was also used for the as-deposited TiO2 films as can be seen in Fig. 3b. Using the area surrounded by this peak, the portion of Ti3+ state in the entire Ti(2p3/2) peak was calculated to be 3.3% and less than 1% for the annealed and the as-deposited films, respectively. Hence, it can be concluded that the small portion of Ti3+ on the surface of the annealed films originated from reducing annealing ambient condition (Ar + H2) resulting from oxygen vacancies in the system, which is beneficial for photoelectrochemical performance of the system as also has been previously reported for Ag–TiO2 nanocomposite systems.19
 Fig. 3  XPS high resolution spectra in (a) Ti(2p), (c) Au(4f) and (d) Ag(3d) region for the annealed GSANPs-TiO2 films. (b) is related to Ti(2p) region for the as-deposited GSANPs-TiO2 sample. 
The gold and silver surface chemical state of GSA-TiO2 film is illustrated in Fig. 3b and c, respectively. Because no Au1+ (at 84.5 eV) and/or Au3+ (at 86.1 eV) oxidized states were detected in the Au(4f) window spectra, the doublet Au(4f5/2) and Au(4f7/2) peaks can be assigned to the gold metallic state.31 However, for the Ag(3d3/2) and Ag(3d5/2) core level, two distinct peaks can be recognized at 368.2 and 367.6 eV, which were attributed to Ag0 and Ag1+ states, respectively.32 Consequently, a notable part (89%) of the entire surface silver was detected in nonzero-valent form.
A closer look at shifts in the binding energies of Au(4f) and Ag(3d), proved the formation of Au–Ag alloy nanoparticles. For the present GSA-TiO2 film, an Au(4f7/2) peak was detected at 83.8 eV, which was slightly shifted to higher binding energies as compared with monometallic Au nanoparticle with TiO2 films (83.5 eV). On the other hand, Ag(3d5/2) was observed at 367.8 eV, which revealed reduction of the binding energy value in comparison with the monometallic Ag–TiO2 system (386.2 eV). These shifts are indicative of Au–Ag alloy structures with a homogenous distribution of gold and silver atoms in the nanoparticles.30,33 During alloy particle formation, Au and Ag adjust their Fermi energy levels to the same value by a charge equilibration process. Considering the Fermi energy level in silver, which is higher than that in gold, few electron of Ag transferred to the other element and resulted in changes of their binding energy values.26 This positive/negative shift for Au(4f)/Ag(3d) in the Au–Ag alloy nanoparticles is known as evidence of their greater tendency to lose electrons and higher catalytic property, as also reported elsewhere.31
In addition, to clarify surface concentrations, the (Ag + Au)/Ti and Ag/Au ratios were obtained as 0.16 and 3.34, respectively. In this regard, because of more electronegativity and also a higher tendency of Ag to accumulate on the surface than Au, the Ag/Au ratio obtained was higher than one, the initial adjustment in the co-sputtering step.
3.4. Water splitting performance
To investigate the water splitting performance of a photoanode, the I–V characteristics of corresponding photoelectrochemical (PEC) cell should be studied. Fig. 4a represents the current density response of the GSANPs-TiO2 electrodes as compared with pure electrodes in a proper cathodic–anodic range of applied potential. On the basis of the curves recorded in a dark condition, it is clear that by sweeping the potential to more positive values, an increasing anodic current was detected for V > 0.7 V because of the oxidation of water based electrolyte. By applying a higher bias, this water-splitting phenomenon can result in simultaneous oxygen evolution on the anode and hydrogen generation on the cathode. However, in the case of the GSANPs-TiO2 electrode, the observed anodic current increased at the lower potentials (V > 0.4 V), which revealed that water-splitting reactions were facilitated in the presence of GSA nanoparticles. Furthermore, by illuminating the photoanodes, the current density significantly increased at all potentials, which was attributed to photoexcitation of the electron–hole pairs in the semiconductor photoanode and their participation in water oxidation/reduction process.
 Fig. 4  (a) I–V characteristics of TiO2 and GSANPs-TiO2 photoanodes under dark and illuminated conditions; (b) photoresponse of the corresponding films versus time; and (c) photo-conversion efficiencies of the systems. 
To explore the charge transfer process on the photoanode/electrolyte interface, Tafel plots have been extracted from the recorded curves under irradiation. According to Tafel equation: 
(1)where n, F, R, T and α were moles of electrons, faraday constant, gas constant, temperature and charge transfer coefficient, the charge exchange current density (io) can be measured.34 These values have been listed in Table 1 for the pure TiO2, as well as for GSANPs-TiO2 photoanodes. The increase of io from 48.7 for the TiO2 to 52.5 mA cm−2 for the GSANPs-TiO2 electrode confirmed that GSA nanoparticles facilitated the hole transfer from the photoanode to the electrolyte in the water oxidation reaction.
Table 1 Measured electrochemical parameters for GSANPs-TiO2 photoanodes




Photoanode
TiO2
GSANPs-TiO2




io (mA cm−2)
48.7
52.5


Rct (Ω)
83.6
48.2


ND (cm−3)
1.3 × 1023
2.2 × 1023




The photoactivity of the synthesized electrodes versus time has been scanned and shown in Fig. 4b, using a chronoamperometry technique in a fixed anodic bias of V = 0.5 V. It is obvious that for the both samples, the measured photoresponse was stable over time, which revealed that photogenerated holes had been exposed to the electrolyte, leading easily to a water oxidation reaction. Hence, the rate-determining step in the PEC performance was electron transfer to the back contact. Moreover, addition of alloy Au–Ag nanoparticles to the TiO2 increased the photocurrent density from 4.6 mA cm−2 to 5.9 mA cm−2, which indicates an enhancement of about 30%. In addition, to study the annealing ambient influence the results, in another experiment, as-deposited TiO2 and GSANPS-TiO2 samples were annealed in air (oxygen contained ambient) at the same temperature and the photoresponse of these samples was also measured under the same electrochemical conditions. The photocurrent density of these photoanodes was obtained to be 0.7 and 1.3 mA cm−2 for oxygen-treated TiO2 and GSANPS-TiO2 films, respectively. Hence, as expected, the reducing atmosphere, which caused formation of oxygen vacancies in the systems made a remarkable increase in photoresponses, whereas under both annealing conditions, addition of Au–Ag alloy particles also improved the PEC performance of the systems.
The water-splitting efficiency of the PEC cell can be explained by photo-conversion yield based on the following relation:35 
(2)Here, J and P are photocurrent density (mA cm−2) and irradiation intensity of light source (mW cm−2), respectively. These plots have been presented in Fig. 4c. The maximum efficiency of 1.2% has been obtained at V = 0.2 V for the TiO2 electrode, whereas this yield increased 25% and reached 1.5% at zero potential. This result illustrated that GSA nanoparticles not only enhance the water-splitting performance of the system, but also reduce the required applied bias to gain the yield.
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) is a powerful method for studying electrode charge transfer properties. The first approach is measuring real and imaginary parts of the electrode's impedance, which has been presented in Nyquist plot (Fig. 5). Similar to our previous reports,17–19 a proper equivalent circuit was utilized to fit and interpret the data, which also has been inserted in the figure. The most important parameter that can be extracted from EIS data is charge transfer resistance (Rct) to clarify the feasibility of the redox reaction in the electrode/electrolyte interface. These values for TiO2 and GSANPs-TiO2 photoanodes are listed in Table 1, under an illuminating condition. A 42% decrease in resistance of the photoanodes in the presence of GSA nanoparticles confirmed their catalytic facilitator role in water-splitting reactions, which coincides with the Tafel results.
 Fig. 5  Nyquist plots of TiO2 and GSANPs-TiO2 photoanodes obtained by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy. The inset scheme is the best equivalent circuit fitting the experimental data. 
Furthermore, Mott–Schottky plots of the prepared photoanodes have been recorded and are presented in Fig. S3.† These measurements revealed that the flat band potential of both pure and alloyed nanoparticles that included films were nearly the same (−1.02 and −1.05 V for TiO2 and GSANPs-TiO2, respectively), whereas the donor density of the system increased in the presence of Au–Ag alloyed particles. The obtained charge carrier density of the systems is listed in Table 1 for both photoanodes.
To shed light on the observed photocurrent enhancement, the role of bimetallic alloy nanoparticles in the TiO2 photoanode should be explained. On the basis of our previous results on Ag–TiO219 and Au–TiO217,18 nanocomposite electrodes, addition of metallic nanoparticles to a semiconductor photoanode improves PEC performance as a result of more facility in charge transfer processes. According to Tafel analysis and EIS data here (Table 1), this fact is also confirmed for the GSANPs-TiO2 system. However, the obtained photocurrent density for GSANPs-TiO2 films was higher than those reported for monometallic Ag–TiO2 and Au–TiO2 systems with the same metal surface concentration.17–19 The reason for this observation originates from different work functions in gold and silver.
For more efficient PEC water splitting, flow of photogenerated electrons to the back contact, and then an external circuit instead of surface recombinations was desired. In this regard, the Schottky barrier in metal–TiO2 junction was helpful. Considering the high work function of Au (5.1 eV), the formed surface barrier prevented electrons from e−/h+ recombination.13 On the other hand, metallic particles in the TiO2 layer were in charge of conducting electrons to the back contact. Here, the large Schottky barrier can suppress electron transfer from a semiconductor to a metallic particle. In comparison with gold, silver has lower work function (4.0 eV) and as a result of the electric equilibrium between their Fermi levels in alloy particles, the final Schottky barrier formed in GSANPs/TiO2 junction was smaller than Au/TiO2. Hence, a proper barrier was designed using Au–Ag alloy that simultaneously avoided recombination on the surface and facilitated electron transfers in the layer.26 This issue has been verified by measuring flat band potentials (Vfb) from Mott–Schottky plots. The obtained Vfb for GSANPs-TiO2 electrode was −1.2 V, which was less than the Vfb of Au–TiO2 (−1.5 eV) and more than that of the Ag–TiO2 (−1.1 eV) system. Recently, similar results have been obtained for photocatalytic H2O2 production using Au–Ag alloy nanoparticles loaded on TiO2.26 The suggested mechanism has been more clarified in Scheme 1.
 Scheme 1  Schematic band diagrams for Fermi levels and work functions of TiO2, Ag(ΦS), Au(ΦG) and Au–Ag alloyed particles (ΦGSA), as well as a suggested mechanism for electron–hole transfer in the GSANPS-TiO2 photoanodes during water-splitting reactions. 
Another important point is tuning the Ag portion in alloy nanoparticles. Based on XPS results, the major part of Ag in bimetallic particles was in Ag+ state. As it has been studied recently, these parts can act as recombination centers for electrons that lead to the reduction of the photocurrent response.17–19 Hence, adjusting the Ag/Au ratio in the alloy particles is a key point, which requires further deep investigation in the future, as well as controlling the size to improve visible excitations assisted by SPR effect.
4. Conclusions
In summary, Au–Ag alloy nanoparticles with a specific Au/Ag ratio have been grown in TiO2 films using a one-step co-sputtering method. The homogeneous formation of the alloy particles has been verified by observing single SPR intermediate peak in UV-visible spectroscopy and also by binding energy shifts in XPS. According to SEM and AFM analysis, the average size of the alloy particles was determined to be about 40 nm, as backed up by simulated absorption spectra. For the first time, TiO2 films decorated with GSA nanoparticles (GSANPs-TiO2) have been applied as a working electrode in a conventional photoelectrochemical (PEC) cell to split water. I–V and EIS characteristics of the GSANPs-TiO2 photoanodes indicated that the designed TiO2–alloy junction concurrently prevented charge recombination and facilitated electron transfer. This effect originated from work function adjustment in alloy particles that led to a 30% enhancement in the photoresponse of the system. We believe that decorating semiconductor photoanodes with alloy nanoparticles and controlling their shape, size and element portion will be a new gateway towards developing PEC water splitting with high performance, as well as to other photocatalytic reactions.
AcknowledgementsThe authors would like to thank Research and Technology Council of Sharif University of Technology and Iran National Science Foundation (INSF) for financial support. The useful assistance of Mr S. Rafiee for XPS measurements is also gratefully acknowledged.
Notes and referencesQ. Zhang, E. Uchaker, S. L. Candelariaza and G. Cao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 3127 RSC .X. Chen, C. Li, M. Gratzel, R. Kosteckid and S. S. Mao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 7909 RSC .M. Gratzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 338 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. Ding, W. Qin, N. Wang, G. Liu, Z. Wang, P. Yan, J. Shi and C. Li, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 15608 RSC .L. Lai, W. Gomulya, L. Protesescu, M. V. Kovalenko and M. A. Loi, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 7531 RSC .C. Liu, J. Tang, H. M. Chen, B. Liu and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2989 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Tachibana, L. Vayssieres and J. R. Durrant, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 511 CrossRef CAS .J. Brillet, J. H. Yum, M. Cornuz, T. Hisatomi, R. Solarska, J. Augustynski, M. Graetzel and K. Sivula, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 824 CrossRef CAS .M. Gholami, M. Qorbani, O. Moradlou, N. Naseri and A. Z. Moshfegh, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 7838 RSC .J. J. Park, D. Y. Kim, J. G. Lee, Y. H. Cha, M. T. Swihart and S. S. Yoon, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 8661 RSC .N. Naseri, M. Yousefi, O. Moradlou and A. Z. Moshfegh, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 4239 RSC .M. R. Bayati, R. Molaei, F. Wu, J. D. Budai, Y. Liu, R. Narayan and J. Narayan, Acta Mater., 2013, 61, 7805 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. R. Bayati, H. M. Alipour, S. Joshi, R. Molaei, R. J. Narayan, J. Narayan and S. T. Misture, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 7138 CAS .W. Fan, S. Jewell, Y. She and M. K. H. Leung, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 676 RSC .Y. C. Pu, G. Wang, K. D. Chang, Y. Ling, Y. K. Lin, B. C. Fitzmorris, C. M. Liu, Y. Lu, X. Tong, J. Z. Zhang and Y. J. Hsu, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3817 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Ide, R. Ogino, M. Sadakane and T. Sano, ChemCatChem, 2013, 5, 766 CrossRef CAS .N. Naseri, P. Sangpour and A. Z. Moshfegh, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 1150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .N. Naseri, M. Amiri and A. Z. Moshfegh, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2010, 43, 105405 CrossRef .N. Naseri, H. Kim, W. Choi and A. Z. Moshfegh, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 3056 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Pedireddy, A. Li, M. Bosman, I. Y. Phang, S. Li and X. Y. Ling, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 16640 CAS .C. W. Yen, L. K. Chu and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 9, 132 Search PubMed .J. H. Liu, A. Q. Wang, Y. S. Chi, H. P. Lin and C. Y. Mou, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 40 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. Tominaga, T. Shimazoe, M. Nagashima, H. Kusuda, A. Kubo, Y. Kuwahara and I. Taniguchi, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2006, 590, 37 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Q. Xu, F. Liu, Y. Liu, K. Cui, X. Feng, W. Zhang and Y. Huang, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1 Search PubMed .W. J. Kim, S. Kim, A. R. Kim and D. J. Yoo, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2013, 52, 7282 CrossRef CAS .D. Tsukamoto, A. Shiro, Y. Shiraishi, Y. Sugano, S. Ichikawa, S. Tanaka and T. Hirai, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 599 CrossRef CAS .Y. Herbani, T. Nakamura and S. Sato, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 21592 CAS .J. Schuller, E. S. Barnard, W. Cai, Y. C. Jun, J. S. White and M. L. Brongersma, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. H. Mousavi, A. B. Khanikaev, B. Neuner, Y. Avitzour, D. Korobkin, G. Ferro and G. Shvets, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 105, 176803 CrossRef .P. Sangpour, O. Akhavan and A. Z. Moshfegh, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2007, 253, 7438 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. Wang, J. Liu, S. D. Lin, T. Lin and C. Mou, J. Catal., 2005, 233, 186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Chiu, U. Rambabu, M. H. Hsu, H. P. D. Shieh, C. Y. Chen and H. H. Lin, J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 94, 1996 CrossRef PubMed .G. Mattei, G. Battaglin, V. Bello, G. De Marchi, C. Maurizio, P. Mazzoldi, M. Parolin and C. Sada, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2003, 322, 17 CrossRef CAS .A. J. Bard, F. Scholz, M. Stratmann and C. J. Pickett, Encyclopedia of Electrochemistry, Inorganic Chemistry, Wiley VCH,  2006, vol. 7a Search PubMed .R. V. Krol and M. Gratzel, Photoelectrochemical Hydrogen Production, Springer,  2012 Search PubMed .
Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c4ra08216hThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) SEM and (b and d) AFM images of GSANPs-TiO2 films and (c and e) AFM image of the pure TiO2 sample.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Experimental optical absorption spectra of pure TiO2 and GSANPs-TiO2 films. (b) Simulated optical absorption for different sizes and (c) Au/Ag ratio of Au–Ag alloyed nanoparticles embedded in TiO2 matrix. (Dashed and solid black lines refer to experimental and averaged simulated spectra, respectively.)	 

 	Fig. 3  XPS high resolution spectra in (a) Ti(2p), (c) Au(4f) and (d) Ag(3d) region for the annealed GSANPs-TiO2 films. (b) is related to Ti(2p) region for the as-deposited GSANPs-TiO2 sample.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) I–V characteristics of TiO2 and GSANPs-TiO2 photoanodes under dark and illuminated conditions; (b) photoresponse of the corresponding films versus time; and (c) photo-conversion efficiencies of the systems.	 

	(1)

io (mA cm−2)	48.7	52.5
Rct (Ω)	83.6	48.2
ND (cm−3)	1.3 × 1023	2.2 × 1023

	(2)

 	Fig. 5  Nyquist plots of TiO2 and GSANPs-TiO2 photoanodes obtained by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy. The inset scheme is the best equivalent circuit fitting the experimental data.	 

 	Scheme 1  Schematic band diagrams for Fermi levels and work functions of TiO2, Ag(ΦS), Au(ΦG) and Au–Ag alloyed particles (ΦGSA), as well as a suggested mechanism for electron–hole transfer in the GSANPS-TiO2 photoanodes during water-splitting reactions.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c4ra08216h

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
