Thermochemical conversion of lignin to functional materials: a review and future directions  - Green Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5GC01054C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5GC01054C
(Critical Review)
Green Chem., 2015, 17, 4888-4907Thermochemical conversion of lignin to functional materials: a review and future directions

        
          
            Wu-Jun 
            Liu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Hong 
            Jiang
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Han-Qing 
            Yu
          
        
      
CAS Key Laboratory of Urban Pollutant Conversion, Department of Chemistry, University of Science & Technology of China, Hefei 230026, China. E-mail: jhong@ustc.edu.cn
Received 
      17th May 2015
    , Accepted 6th July 2015First published on 6th July 2015AbstractLignin valorization is considered an important part of the modern biorefinery scheme. The unique structure and composition of lignin may offer many effective routes to produce several bulk chemicals and functional materials. Thermochemical conversion of lignin to synthesize value-added functional materials has recently attracted a lot of attention. In this review, we have presented currently available approaches and strategies for the thermochemical conversion of lignin to functional carbon materials. The transformation behavior and mechanism of lignin during the thermochemical process (e.g., pyrolysis and hydrothermal carbonization) are illuminated. The characteristics (structure and surface chemistry) of lignin-based functional carbon materials are summarized systematically. The advances in the functionalization of lignin-based carbon materials (surface functionality tuning and porosity tailoring) and the applications of lignin-based functional carbon materials in the fields of catalysis, energy storage, and pollutant removal are reviewed. Perspectives on how lignin-based functional materials would develop and, especially, in which fields the use of these functionalized materials could be expanded are discussed. This review clearly shows that a rational design of the functionalized lignin-based materials will lead to a rich family of hybrid functional carbon materials with various applications toward a green and sustainable future.
1. Introduction
The excessive consumption of fossil fuels and the associated environmental consequences (e.g., environmental pollution and global warming) have become global problems and have spurred people to vigorously look for low cost, clean, and renewable energy. The generation and storage of renewable clean energy from the sun, wind, hydrogen, and biomass is an effective solution to these problems. This solution is highly reliant on the synthesis of materials with high performance in the energy conversion and storage to allow for its efficient implementation. Therefore, it is very urgent to develop sustainable materials for this purpose. However, it is not a trivial task, since, ideally, the synthesis of these new materials should also be cost-effective, environmentally friendly, readily scalable, and based on renewable and naturally abundant resources. More importantly, the as-synthesized materials should also have high performances in renewable energy storage and conversion or pollutant removal.
Functional carbon materials, with potential applications in CO2 capture,3,4 catalysis and catalyst supports,5–7 pollutant adsorbents,8,9 gas storage,10,11 electrode materials for supercapacitors and fuel cells,12,13 are an alternative choice for solving the problems. Many methods, including carbonization of synthetic or natural polymers,14 chemical vapor deposition,15 and arc discharge synthesis,16 have been used for the synthesis of amorphous (activated carbon and carbon black) and crystalline (carbon nanotubes/nanofibers and graphene) carbon materials with controllable porosity or functionality. However, these methods often involve a tedious synthetic process as well as organic solvents or electrochemical treatment;17 furthermore, most of these methods require rather expensive fossil fuel-based precursors (e.g., CH4, C2H2, and C2H4), metal catalysts,18 or complicated apparatus involving high processing temperatures, which are not environmentally friendly or economically sustainable.
The lignocellulosic biomass, as a naturally abundant renewable resource, is considered a qualified carbon raw material for the synthesis of functional carbon materials.19 The lignocellulosic biomass is composed of three primary components, i.e., cellulose, hemicellulose, and lignin,20 among which lignin constitutes 15–35% of the typical dry lignocellulosic biomass, and it is the largest natural source of aromatics on the earth.21 In recent years, lignin has usually been viewed as a waste by-product or a low value product in paper production. It is estimated that the global annual production of chemical pulps is 150 million tons per year, and the total amount of lignin in pulp making is ca. 70 million tons globally. The largest current use of industrial lignin is directly burning it to generate energy, accounting for about 95% of the total lignin market,22,23 which has many disadvantages. For example, many persistent organic pollutants (e.g., polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), oxygenated PAHs (OPAHs), and dioxins)24–26 and particulate matters (e.g., PM 2.5 and PM 10)27,28 may form if the lignin is incompletely combusted, causing serious environmental problems. Lignin is also used as a replacement material for relatively low-value chemicals or materials, such as additives for concrete admixtures, dust control, feed and food additives, dispersants, resin and binder compositions, and oil well drilling, accounting for 65% of the remaining 5% lignin market.29 Besides, examples of smaller markets for industrial lignin include carbon black, water treatment, cleaning chemicals, emulsifiers, leather tanning, rubber additives, and battery expanders. For more information on the conventional applications of industrial lignin,30 the readers can refer to an excellent report presented by Holladay and co-workers.31
Besides the abovementioned conventional applications, the rapid growth of the lignin market in this century has also led to the quick development of a number of emerging applications of lignin based materials, some of which have even been piloted or demonstrated at larger than laboratory scale. Among all the emerging lignin valorizations, the synthesis of lignin based carbon fiber (LCF) materials by fiber-spinning technology may be the one with the largest market potential in terms of value, since the LCFs can be applied to high temperature insulating materials, CO2 and other gas capture sorbents, controlled adsorption and release of macromolecules, and supercapacitors.29,32 However, the development of high-quality structural LCFs is still very challenging and is hard to be commercialized since the existing carbon fiber spinning technologies cannot produce LCFs with high fiber tensile strength and elastic modulus, which are the two main factors influencing the functional applications of LCFs.33
Another emerging valorization approach is incorporation of lignin into polymeric materials as an additive material to improve the performance of the polymer for a certain application,34 in particular, in composite materials containing thermosets (phenol-formaldehyde, urea-formaldehyde, and epoxy resins)35–37 or thermoplastics (lignin blends for extrusion applications with polyesters, polyamides, polyacrylonitrile, and polyethylenes).38–41 The cornerstone of viable lignin incorporation into synthetic polymers is their compatibility with the chemical matrices, as the compatibility between lignin and synthetic polymers often makes the blends more hydrophobic than a single lignin or polymers, which is favorable for the application of the blends as structural materials.38
When considering the potential replacement of the main petrochemicals, such as ethylene, propylene, butadiene and aromatics (e.g., benzene, toluene, and xylene (BTX) isomers) by lignin, the emerging lignocellulosic biomass (lignin) biorefinery industry might lead to a new field for the high-value applications of industrial lignin. Take the United States as an example; it has been estimated by the US Department of Energy that 1.3 billion tons of biomass is available in the US alone for biorefining,42 of which 225 million tons of lignin could be utilized for fuels and chemicals.43 Assuming that 20% of the biorefinery lignin (45 million tons) will be converted into aromatic and linear hydrocarbons, it can replace ca. 10% of petrochemicals in America alone.
With the increasing concern about environmental pollution, how to environmentally friendly and sustainably recycle and utilize lignin has attracted a lot of attention. However, in spite of the apparent abundance of lignin, the sustainable recycle of lignin has not reached even the pilot plant scale due to the difficulty of both lignin depolymerisation and product separation.44 In addition, the structural variability of lignin in different lignocellulosic biomass species makes it difficult to develop a generally applicable protocol for lignin depolymerisation. More importantly, since the β-O-4 linkages, one of the main chemical bonds in the lignin matrix,22,45 are very difficult to be subjected to cleavage through conventional mild methods (e.g., micro-biological degradation and hydrolysis),20 lignin cannot be effectively depolymerised under mild conditions. Usually more rigorous conditions are required, for example, metal (e.g., Pt, Pd, and Ni) catalytic hydrogenolytic cleavage of the β-O-4 linkages under high temperature/pressure46–48 or homogeneous acid/base-catalyzed deconstruction at high temperature.49,50 These processes often involve complex operation procedures, complicated equipment or high cost catalysts, making them less sustainable and difficult to be used in industrialized applications.
As an alternative, thermochemical conversion of lignin to value-added chemicals or materials is an approved approach for dealing with the large-scale lignin,51–53 as it is cost-effective and easily operated. Various thermochemical conversion processes, including pyrolysis,54–60 hydrothermal carbonization,61–64 and gasification,65–70 have been used to convert the lignocellulosic biomass. There are many advantages of thermochemical conversion technologies over direct burning. For instance, the emission of harmful gases during the thermochemical process is much lower than that in the incineration process,71 and many value-added chemicals can also be produced in the thermochemical process.
Thermochemical depolymerisation of lignin to valuable chemicals and fuels has already become a research focus in the past few years. Various value-added phenolic compounds are produced in high yields through depolymerisation of lignin,48,72,73 due to its high content of aromatic portions in the macromolecule.74 More importantly, the efficient valorization of lignin also has both direct and indirect benefits with regard to reducing the greenhouse gas emissions. For example, it can directly produce renewable bio-fuels and chemicals with a low carbon footprint and imposing a minimal impact on food chains of human. In addition, the conversion of lignin to value-added products will promote the viability of lignocellulosic biorefineries. Consequently, even partial conversion of lignin can potentially have a large impact by enabling the conversion of the easier-to-convert fraction of biomass (i.e. carbohydrates) to biofuels.21 For details of the production of chemicals and fuels from the lignin streams, which is beyond the scope of this work, the reader can refer to the excellent reviews and book chapters by Azadi et al.,21 Norgren and Edlund,75 Zakzeski et al.,20 and Prakash et al.23
By the same token or uniquely, lignin is also regarded as a starting core for the synthesis of functional carbon materials, and a lot of functional carbon materials (e.g., carbon fibers and porous carbon), with different functionalities, can be synthesized from lignin through thermochemical methods (e.g., pyrolysis or hydrothermal carbonization).76,77 The main objective of this paper is to provide a comprehensive and critical review of the thermochemical conversion of lignin into sustainable carbon functional materials. We expect that such a review will provide a scientific insight into the thermochemical conversion of lignin and an outlook for the future development of lignin reuse and valorization. This review presents different approaches or strategies which have been reported so far to thermochemically convert lignin, with a focus on the synthesis of sustainable carbon functional materials. First, based on the chemistry and structure of lignin, the mechanism of the lignin thermochemical depolymerisation is illustrated. Next, the reported approaches and strategies for the functionalization of lignin-based carbon materials and the characteristics of lignin-based functional materials are critically reviewed. Then, the applications of lignin-based functional materials in catalysis, energy storage, and environmental protection are comprehensively summarized. Finally, the perspectives on how lignin-based functional materials will develop, and especially in which fields the use of the functionalized lignin-based functional materials could be expanded, are discussed in this review.
2. Thermochemical conversion of lignin to functional materials
Before discussing the thermochemical conversion of lignin to functional materials, a fundamental understanding of the structure and chemical properties of lignin, as well as the chemistry of the reactions happening in the thermochemical process, is essential. This understanding can provide some scientific support for rationally designing more effective processes and catalysts for the thermochemical conversion of lignin. In this regard, we will first summarize recent advances in the chemistry and structure of lignin, and illustrate the behavior and mechanism of the thermochemical conversion of lignin.
2.1 Chemistry and structure of lignin
Lignin is a complex and recalcitrant phenolic macromolecule comprising phenyl propane type units. In a typical lignocellulosic biomass, lignin fills the spaces between cellulose and hemicellulose, holding the lignocellulose matrix together (Fig. 1a).20 The lignin polymer mainly consists of three primary monomers, i.e., p-coumaryl alcohol, coniferyl alcohol, and sinapyl alcohol (Fig. 1b), which contains about 40% of the possible energy of the biomass because of its high carbon content.
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic analysis of the location and structure of lignin in the lignocellulosic biomass; (b) three primary monomers of the lignin. 
Structural elucidation of lignin indicated that 50% of its components are aromatic compounds, and there are 5 types of linkage patterns in the lignin matrix, i.e., β-O-4 ether bonds, β-5 phenylcoumaran bonds, β–β′ pinoresinol, diphenyl ether 4-O-5′, and β-1′ diphenyl methane (Fig. 2). The C–O–C bonds which exist either as ethers or as part of a furan ring are the most common bonding patterns in lignin. The relative abundance of these linkages in the lignin are summarized by Zakzeski and co-workers in one of their excellent reviews,20 which shows that the dominant linkage in both softwood- and hardwood-lignin is the β-O-4 linkage. The relative abundance of p-coumaryl, coniferyl, and sinapyl alcohols also varies in softwood- and hardwood-lignin. For example, coniferyl alcohols make up about 90% of softwood-lignin, while the contents of coniferyl alcohol and sinapyl alcohol are roughly equal in hardwood-lignin.78 Compared to softwood-lignin, hardwood-lignin has more linear structures as the additional methoxy groups on the aromatic rings may prevent the formation of 5–5 or dibenzodioxocin linkages (Fig. 3).
 Fig. 2  Five typical bonding patterns in a lignin matrix structure. 
 Fig. 3  Typical structure (left) and molecular model (right) of lignin derived from hardwood (a) and softwood (b). 
Due to its branched, racemic, and partly random structure, lignin is amorphous, and there has hardly been good lignin crystal structures reported previously.23 Compared to the other two polysaccharide components (e.g., cellulose and hemicelluloses) in the lignocellulosic biomass, lignin contains more aromatic structures, making it more hydrophobic. Since lignin possesses a high degree of aromatic structure polymerization through the β-O-4 linkage,44 it usually has poor solubility in water at acidic or neutral pH, but may be dissolved in alkali solution, or in many organic solvents, including chloroform and acetone. The carbon atoms in the lignin molecules are in a lower chemical valence than those in the polysaccharides, i.e., the average redox number of a carbon atom in the lignin molecule is around −0.4, whereas it is 0 in the polysaccharides, meaning that lignin has higher energy content than the polysaccharides in the lignocellulosic biomass.79
2.2 Behavior and mechanism of lignin in the thermochemical process
Because of the recalcitrant nature of the β-O-4 linkages in lignin molecules,80 there are still no commercially effective microorganisms and enzymes to biochemically depolymerize lignin to value-added chemicals. Alternatively, the thermochemical process, including pyrolysis, hydrothermal carbonization, and gasification, has been used to produce high value compounds from lignin. Many types of lignins, i.e., alkali lignin, sulfite lignin, and kraft lignin, derived from softwood and hardwood, can be subjected to these processes to produce value-added phenols and aromatic hydrocarbons. The physical process and chemical reactions happening in the thermochemical processes are very complex, which depend on the reaction conditions (e.g., reactor types, heating rates, and temperatures) and the nature of the lignin. Illumination of the behavior and mechanism of lignin in the thermochemical processes is critical to control the conversion of lignin to target products. Therefore, in the following section, we will discuss the physical process and chemical reactions happening to lignin during the thermochemical processes, including pyrolysis and hydrothermal carbonization.

2.2.1 Pyrolysis. 
Pyrolysis, a process of thermochemical decomposition of lignocellulosic biomass under anoxic conditions, has been intensively studied and commercially used in recent years.81,82 The pyrolysis process, based on the heating rates, can be roughly divided into fast pyrolysis and slow pyrolysis. In a typical pyrolysis process, apart from the renewable bioenergy, i.e., bio-oil and gas, large quantities of biochar are also yielded. The behavior of lignin in the pyrolysis process is highly affected by several factors, including the lignin type (i.e., alkali, sulfite, or kraft lignin), heating rate, reaction temperature, and catalyst.83 The main products produced in the pyrolysis of lignin include volatile compounds (e.g., methanol, acetone, and acetaldehyde), mono-lignols, mono-phenols (e.g., phenol, guaiacol, syringol, and catechol), and polysubstituted phenols, as well as gaseous compounds (e.g., H2, CH4, C2H4, C2H6, CO, and CO2). Besides the abovementioned liquid and gaseous compounds, a fraction of lignin is converted to a thermally stable solid product named biochar. These biochar materials, with abundant surface functional groups (e.g., CO, C–O, and OH) but limited surface area, can be used as functional carbon materials when subjected to a further functionalization process.
Compared to hemicellulose and cellulose, the pyrolysis of lignin is more complex and happens in a wider range of temperatures. During the pyrolysis process, lignin decomposition starts with the breaking of weaker bonds (e.g., hydrogen binding and C–OH binding) at low temperature and proceeds through cleavage of stronger bonds (e.g., β-O-4 linkages) with increasing temperature. Kosa et al.84 used the 1H and 31P NMR techniques to study the decomposition process of lignin during the pyrolysis process. It has been found that aldehydes, toluols, styrenes, and guaiacyl hydroxyls are the primary products of the lignin decomposition in the first stage, while p-hydroxy-phenols, catechols, and cresols are the products of further decomposition. Free radicals formed by the breaking of the β-O-4 linkage are considered to be the first step of the depolymerisation of the lignin chain.85,86 The radicals can capture the protons to form products such as vanillin and 2-methoxy-4-methylphenol, while the radicals are passed to other species for further reactions, leading to chain propagation. The reactions are not terminated until two radicals collide with each other to form stable compounds, and the polyaromatic biochar forms through random repolymerization of the radicals at temperatures higher than 350 °C (Fig. 4).85
 Fig. 4  The possible mechanism for the decomposition of lignin during the pyrolysis process. 
Based on the pyrolysis behaviour of lignin, it can be seen that besides the biochar, many bulk or fine chemicals can be also obtained from the products of lignin pyrolysis. The phenolic compounds and H2 gas are the main species that can be sustainably produced from lignin resources due to the naturally abundant nature of phenolic monomers and the hydrogen element in the lignin molecules.87 For example, Milne et al.88 have demonstrated the overall stoichiometry for catalytic steam reforming of liquid products (bio-oil, CxHyOz) of lignin pyrolysis at 750–850 °C over a Ni based catalyst, which gives a maximum yield of 17.2 g H2 for every 100 g bio-oil. The main reactions happening in the catalytic production of H2 from the liquid product (bio-oil) of lignin pyrolysis include three typical processes:89,90Steam reforming: CxHyOz + (x − z)H2O = xCO + (x − z + y)H2Partial oxidation: CxHyOz + (x − z)O2 = xCO + 0.5yH2Catalytic cracking: CxHyOz = zCO + yH2 + (x − z)C
By pyrolyzing lignin in a bubbling fluidized bed reactor equipped with a fractional condensation train, Li et al.91 obtained bio-oil with high concentrations of phenolic compounds. For example, the total phenolic compound content in the organic phase of bio-oil is more than 0.4 g (gallic acid equivalent) per gram of dry bio-oil. For a summary, Fig. 5 shows the main chemical reactions for the conversion of lignin to liquid fuels, chemicals, syngas and biochar.
 Fig. 5  The main chemical reactions for the conversion of lignin to liquid fuels, chemicals, syngas and biochar. 


2.2.2 Hydrothermal carbonization. 
Hydrothermal carbonization is defined as chemical and physical transformations of biomass under pressure-tight conditions at high temperature and high pressure liquid.92 The treatment of lignin under hydrothermal conditions can increase the solubility, accelerate the physical and chemical interactions between lignin and water, and finally lead to the formation of carbonaceous structures. In the hydrothermal carbonization process, hydrolysis and cleavage of the C–O–C and C–C bonds, de-methoxylation, alkylation, and condensation are the main reactions which are in competition with each other.93,94 The cleavage of the β-O-4 ether bonds and αC–βC bonds had the precedence in the hydrothermal carbonization of lignin,95 while the bonds in aromatic rings remained unaffected during the hydrothermal process.96 Shorter reaction time and lower temperature are favorable for the production of phenolic monomers and dimers from lignin through preliminary hydrolysis and cleavage of C–O–C bonds and aliphatic C–C bonds.97 With increasing temperature and reaction time, demethoxylation and alkylation of phenolic compounds may happen, producing more alkyl phenols (Fig. 6).94 Recently, Hu and co-workers98 investigated the changes in the structure of solid char residue during hydrothermal carbonization of lignin. The results indicate that the decomposition of lignin was enhanced with the increase of temperature. The char produced at higher temperature usually has a rough surface and few vesicles, and high-ordered crystalline structure. They also found that most of functional groups in char were eliminated above 350 °C, except for the OH group.
 Fig. 6  The mechanism of the lignin hydrothermal carbonization process. 
The main advantage of the hydrothermal carbonization over the pyrolysis process is that it can directly deal with the high-moisture lignin feedstock without energy-intensive pretreatment.97 However, unlike the pyrolysis technology which has been commercialized for decades,99 the fact remains that the hydrothermal carbonization technology has not been widely commercialized so far. One main reason for this is the high pressures required for processing, which often needs special reactor and separator designs, and the high capital investments. Meanwhile, feeding into the reactor at high pressures is always a challenge, which will become a major problem in the full-scale plants.97 Another important phenomenon that occurs is the wall effect in heat and mass transfer during the hydrothermal carbonization process, which may cause serious problems after scaling up if it is not understood at the lab-scale level.100 Though there are some disadvantages in commercialized utilization, the hydrothermal carbonization technology has immense potential for effective utilization of lignin functionality for the production of valuable chemicals and functional carbon materials once the abovementioned problems are overcome.

2.3 Functionalization of the biochar from thermochemical conversion of lignin
The original biochar from thermochemical conversion of lignin often has insufficient functional groups (C–O–C, CO, and OH) and limited surface area and porosity, and thus possesses very poor surface functionality, which impose great restrictions on the wide application of biochar as functional materials. For example, the sufficient surface functional groups can provide active sites for catalysis or pollutant adsorption when the char is used as a catalyst or adsorbent, and the good porosity or large surface area can facilitate high mass transfer or active loading, which is favorable for the energy storage or catalysis applications. Therefore, a pre-functionalization process is necessary for the lignin derived char when it is used as a functional material. Two main functionalization approaches, surface modification and pore structure tailoring, are reviewed below.

2.3.1 Surface modifications. 
The main objective of surface modifications is to increase the amount and type of functional groups on the surface of the lignin derived char. The functional groups, including OH, NH2, COOH, CO, and SO3H, are crucial for the application of the lignin derived char in many fields. For example, the OH and COOH groups may significantly improve the adsorption capacity when the lignin derived char is used as an adsorbent for heavy metal removal, since they can greatly improve the hydrophilicity of the materials,101 and interact with the metals via hydrogen bonding or complexation.102,103 The NH2 can endow the char with alkalinity, which may greatly improve its performance in CO2 capture and acidic pollutant removal,104–106 while the introduction of SO3H into the lignin derived char can make it become a solid acid material, which can be used as an alternative to the liquid acids to catalyze many chemical reactions.107 Surface oxidation, amination, and sulfonation are the main approaches for the introduction of these functional groups on the surface of the lignin derived char. H2O2, O3, KMnO4, and HNO3 are the most frequently used chemicals for the surface oxidation of the char.108–111 Most oxygenated functional groups, including carboxyl, phenolic hydroxyl, lactones, and peroxides, can be introduced to the surface of char through the reaction between the char and these chemicals under different conditions.
Concentrated H2SO4 and its derivatives (e.g., fuming H2SO4 and ClSO3H) are the main chemicals used for sulfonation of char to introduce high density of SO3H groups.112–118 Namchot et al.119 prepared a series of carbonaceous acid catalysts through slow pyrolysis and subsequent sulfonation of the lignin, sugarcane bagasse, and cellulose. It has been found that the lignin derived solid acid prepared by direct sulfonation had equal or even higher catalytic performance than solid acids prepared by pyrolysis and sulfonation of sugarcane bagasse and cellulose. NH3 treatment at high temperatures is a conventional technique which has been widely used to introduce the amino groups to the char surface,120–122 which is often coupled with a pre-oxidation process due to the poor reactivity of the char surface. Chemical modification by the amino-containing reagents (e.g., 3-chloropropylamine, tris(2-aminoethyl)amine, and polyethylenimine) is another method for the introduction of amino groups on the surface of char. Compared to the NH3 treatments, amino-containing reagent modification is more environmentally friendly, since the NH3 treatments often release NH3 to the environment and consume a large amount of energy. Amino-containing reagents have been successfully used to graft various organic amino groups to biochar materials.123 The resulting amino modified char represents a very powerful type of material which can be potentially used for the selective adsorption of acidic pollutants or as platforms for drug delivery.
As discussed above, the surface functionality of the lignin char can be easily modified to satisfy specific applications in various fields such as catalysis and environmental pollutant removal. However, the surface chemical heterogeneity and complexity is still a main challenge for the modification of the surface functionality of the lignin char.


2.3.2 Tuning of the porosity and surface area. 
Surface modification can introduce various functional groups to the lignin derived char, but it has no significant effect on its porosity and surface area. In fact, compared to conventional activated carbon, the char obtained directly from the thermochemical conversion of lignin often possesses only a small number of micropores with very limited surface area. A pre-activation process is necessary before the char is used as functional material for energy storage, catalysis, and pollutant removal. In situ catalytic pore formation during the pyrolysis process with the catalysis of certain chemicals,124,125 and post-activation via physical or chemical methods,126,127 are two most commonly used methods to increase the porosity and surface of char materials.
For the in situ catalytic pore formation process, H3PO4 and ZnCl2 are popular catalysts, which may suppress the tar formation, lower the pyrolysis temperature, and create more pore structures in the char materials. Montané et al.128 investigated the catalytic mechanism of H3PO4 during the pyrolysis of kraft lignin based on thermogravimetry (TG) and differential thermogravimetry (DTG). The results show that the catalytic pyrolysis of lignin proceeds through a set of pseudo-first-order reactions. These reactions include an initial reaction step between lignin and H3PO4, water formation from the dehydration of the excess of H3PO4 to P2O5, pyrolysis of lignin to char and volatiles, evaporation of water and P2O5, and partial volatilization of the carbon to light gases. During these processes, a lot of gas and volatiles compounds are released from the char matrix, producing the activated carbon with well-developed porosity and large surface area.
ZnCl2, another typical catalyst used for char activation, can swell lignin fibers at low temperatures, e.g., <200 °C, and intrude into the lignin matrix to facilitate the depolymerization process. Due to the low melting and boiling points of ZnCl2 (the melting and boiling points of ZnCl2 are 263 and 732 °C, respectively), it remains in a liquid state throughout the pyrolysis process, and may not inhibit the rearrangement of carbon molecules. The well-developed microporous structure finally generated in the char after the removal of ZnCl2 is evenly distributed in the carbon matrix. Gonzalez-Serrano and co-workers investigated the effects of temperature and ZnCl2 impregnation ratio on the porosity and surface area of the char produced from pyrolysis of kraft lignin.129 It has been found that most of the porosity in the lignin derived char develops within the pyrolysis temperature range of 400–500 °C, where increasing temperature leads to increasing micropore volume values (up to 1.0 cm3 g−1) and a wider distribution of micropore size. Increasing the ZnCl2 impregnation ratio has a similar effect on the evolution of the porous structure. The largest pore volume (1.8 cm3 g−1) and surface area (1800 m2 g−1) can be obtained when the impregnation ratio is 2.3 (ZnCl2/lignin) and the pyrolysis temperature is 500 °C.
Apart from the in situ catalytic pyrolysis process, the post-activation process is another effective and frequently used approach for tuning the porosity and surface area of lignin derived char. The post-activation technology mainly includes physical activation and chemical activation. For the physical activation process, the original lignin char goes through a controlled gasification with H2O steam, CO2, or their mixture, which can selectively eliminate most reactive carbon atoms from the original char, producing high porosity and surface area. The chemical reactions happening in the H2O and CO2 activation process are as follows:130 C + H2O → CO↑ + H2↑, ΔH = 117 kJ mol−1(1) C + CO2 → 2CO↑, ΔH = 159 kJ mol−1(2) CO + H2O ↔ CO2↑ + H2↑, ΔH = 41 kJ mol−1(3)
Fu et al.131 synthesized the activated carbon by physical activation of the char produced from the black liquor lignin at 450 °C with H2O steam. The pore structures of the lignin-based activated carbon were significantly influenced by the reaction conditions, including the pyrolysis temperature, activation temperature, and activation time. A comparison of kraft and hydrolytic lignins as precursors for physically activated carbons has been carried out by Carrott et al.,132 using CO2 or steam as activating reagents. It has been demonstrated that the presence of inorganic impurities (mainly Na2CO3 and Na2SO4) in the kraft lignins had a great effect on the pore structure of char in pyrolysis and activation processes. The kraft lignins have a very high reactivity during activation at 750 °C and the produced activated carbons had only low micropore volumes, while the hydrolytic lignin had a very low reactivity, particularly during activation with CO2. The as-synthesized porous char materials had BET surface areas of 1400–1600 m2 g−1 with micropore volumes of 0.5–0.6 cm3 g−1 and mean micropore widths of 1.2–1.4 nm. To further investigate the influence of alkali metals on the reactivity and porosity during physical activation of kraft lignin, Carrott and co-workers133 impregnated the demineralised kraft lignin with NaCl or KCl solution (6.2 and 50 wt%) and then physically activated in CO2 at 750 °C. The results show that activation time can be significantly reduced even at a comparatively low activation temperature, particularly when using KCl. It was possible to prepare predominantly ultramicroporous char materials with mean pore widths over the range 0.53–0.77 nm, by controlling the activation conditions.
For the chemical activation process, KOH is one of the conventionally used reagents, and the reactions happening in the KOH activation process can be illustrated as follows (eqn (4)–(7)): 2KOH + CO2 → K2CO3 + H2O↑(4) 2C + 2KOH → 2CO↑ + 2K↑ + H2↑(5) K2CO3 + C → K2O + 2CO↑(6) K2O + C → 2K↑ + CO↑(7)
First, some active functional groups (e.g., CO, OH, and COOH) of the original lignin char further decompose at a high activated temperature to release some volatiles (e.g., H2O and CO2), which can be captured by KOH to form K2CO3 (eqn (4)). Meanwhile, the newly formed H2O and CO2 during the activation process may also positively contribute to the growth of porosity via physical activation. At higher activated temperatures, the carbon matrix of char can react with the KOH to release CO and H2, and the newly formed metallic K (boiling point: 774 °C) can be gasified at high temperatures (eqn (5)),134 producing many pore structures. The in situ formed metallic K efficiently intercalates into the lattices of the carbon matrix during the activation process, leading to an expansion of the carbon lattices.135 When the activated temperature increases, the newly formed K2CO3 further reacts with the carbon to form more gaseous species (e.g., CO and K),136 producing more pores with large sizes (eqn (6) and (7)). After the removal of the intercalated K compounds through acid washing, activated char with high porosity and surface area is produced.
A range of micropore-dominant to mesopore-dominant highly porous activated carbon fibers has been successfully prepared by electro-spinning of aqueous solutions of alkali lignin followed by simultaneous pyrolysis and activation with KOH/NaOH at 850 °C under N2 flow.137 Activation with either NaOH or KOH was effective at significantly lower impregnation ratios to transform non-porous lignin–polyethylene oxide hybrid precursor fibers into highly porous activated carbon fibers with specific surfaces and pore volumes of up to 1400 m2 g−1 and 0.91 cm3 g−1, respectively. During the KOH activation process, KOH dosage and activation temperature are two of the main factors affecting the porosity and surface area of the char.138 Low KOH dosage can lead to a lower extent of activation of char, but is in favor of the formation of micropores with a narrow pore size distribution, while high KOH dosage is favorable for the development of the porosity and the increase of the surface area and pore volume.139–143
Apart from the conventional physical and chemical activation processes, the templating method has also been used to introduce porosity into the lignin derived char. In a typical templating process (Fig. 7), as demonstrated by Fierro et al.,144 a colloidal silica is first infiltrated with the lignin precursor, which is then subjected to pyrolysis to obtain the templated char. Subsequently, the original template is removed, and the mesopore can be introduced into the char framework. The as-synthesized mesopore char was then subjected to a physical activation with CO2 to create micropores, and finally the micro-mesopore carbon materials were produced. The resulting activated lignin-based carbons possess high specific surface area (up to 2000 m2 g−1), and micro-mesoporosity can be easily tuned by controlling activation conditions and optimizing the amount and particle size of the colloidal silica template.
 Fig. 7  A schematic illustration of the colloidal silica templated synthesis of microporous–mesoporous carbons from kraft lignin. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 144, copyright 2013, Elsevier Ltd.) 
Similarly, Saha and co-workers145 employed a surfactant (Pluronic F127) as a template to synthesize a mesoporous carbon from a pre-cross-linked lignin gel. The lignin gel was first impregnated with the Pluronic F127 as the pore-forming agent and then pyrolyzed to obtain the mesoporous carbon, which was further activated through physical (CO2) and chemical (KOH) methods to obtain the activated mesoporous carbon. The activated mesoporous carbons exhibited 1.5- to 6-fold increases in porosity with a maximum surface area of 1148 m2 g−1 and a pore volume of 1.0 cm3 g−1. Valero-Romero et al.146 synthesized a series of templated carbon materials (TCs) with hierarchical pore structure by liquid phase impregnation of different zeolite templates (e.g., zeolite Y, zeolite β, ZSM-5, and mordenite) using Alcell lignin solutions as carbon precursors. The results show that the cationic nature and the framework OH groups of zeolites strongly influence the surface chemistry of the carbon replicas. In this sense, the as-synthesized porous carbons show interesting surface chemistry features, with relatively high concentrations of N and O functional groups, including pyrrolic, pyridinic, OH, and CO, respectively. These groups are deemed to be transferred from the ammonia ions and oxygen of the zeolite template to the carbon materials during the pyrolysis process.

2.4 Characteristics of lignin-based functional materials

2.4.1 Surface chemistry. 
The surface of lignin derived char usually has various hydrophilic and hydrophobic functional groups with acidic or basic nature, and these functional groups are considered the main contributions to the reactivity of char.147 The surface of lignin derived char is highly heterogeneous due to the differences in electronegativity between the heteroatoms (e.g., O, N, P, and S) incorporated into the aromatic structure of char and the aromatic C atoms.148 The surface acid strengths of the char materials can be evaluated through Boehm titration.149 The functional groups that can react with NaHCO3 are regarded as strong acidic functional groups (e.g., COOH), while those which cannot react with NaHCO3 but can react with Na2CO3 and NaOH are intermediate acidic functional groups (e.g., phenolic OH and lactone). The functional groups which can only react with NaOH are weak acidic groups (e.g., CO). Maldhure and Ekhe150 prepared activated carbons by ZnCl2 activation of industrial waste lignin and found that the impregnation ratio and temperature have a great effect on the surface acid strengths of the activated char materials. As shown in Fig. 8, the total surface oxygen-containing functional groups decrease with the increase of pyrolysis temperature.
 Fig. 8  The surface oxygen functional groups determined by modified Boehm's method for activated carbons prepared by microwave and simple impregnation method at different temperatures and impregnation ratios from lignin (ACM means the activated carbon prepared by microwave pyrolysis, ACS means the activated carbon prepared by simple impregnation method, while CAC means the activated carbon prepared without ZnCl2 impregnation). (Reprinted with permission from ref. 149, copyright 2011 Elsevier B.V.) 
Sharma et al.1 investigated the changes of surface chemistry of the lignin derived char during oxidative pyrolysis (with 5% oxygen in helium as a carrier gas) of the lignin. It has been found that the yield of char decreased to about 15% at 550 °C, and the surface area was low with a maximum of 5 m2 g−1. 13C nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (CPMAS 13C NMR) was used to analyze the changes of surface functional groups during the oxidative pyrolysis process. As shown in Fig. 9, the CPMAS 13C NMR show a gradual decrease in the amounts of aromatic OH and aromatic O–CH3 with increasing temperature. As the pyrolysis temperature is increased to higher than 450 °C, the Ar–O (150 ppm) and carboxyl (180 ppm) structures disappear, resulting in more aromatic C structures (δ = 128 ppm);151 this confirms previous results that aromatic C is the main component in char produced at pyrolysis temperatures higher than 450 °C.
 Fig. 9  Temperature dependence of the 13C CPMAS NMR spectra of chars from alkali lignin, prepared in an oxidative atmosphere containing 5% O2 in helium. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 1, copyright 2004, Elsevier Ltd.) 
Temperature-programmed desorption (TPD), FTIR, and X-ray photoemission spectroscopy (XPS) are usually used to explore the surface chemistry of lignin derived char materials.152–154 The TPD allows identification (by mass-spectrometry) of the gaseous species escaping from the surface of a heated solid and the nature of the evolved gas, e.g., H2O, CO and CO2, at different temperatures. It has been suggested that the prominent groups present in lignin derived char are phenolic OH, C–O–C, COOH, lactone and carboxylic anhydrides.155 The analysis of the FTIR spectra of the pyrolyzed lignin shows a gradual decrease in the intensity of OH-containing group vibrations with increasing the pyrolysis temperature. The results also show that with increasing the activation time, a part of the alcoholic OH groups undergo deeper oxidation to COOH or CHO groups, as evidenced by the gradual increase in the intensity of the absorption bands at 1700–1720 cm−1 (CO stretching vibrations) and a decrease at 3330–3350 cm−1 (O–H stretching vibrations).156 The XPS is usually used to analyze the surface chemical composition of the lignin derived char. As determined by XPS, the surface of lignin derived char material consists of more than 89 at% of carbon, mainly in the form of graphite bonds C–C (binding energy = 284.4 eV). The remaining bonds include C–O bonds (ca. 23 mol%) in hydroxyl groups, ether groups, etc., and a small number of double bonds, e.g., CO and O–C–O.141 Based on the abovementioned techniques, it has been demonstrated that surface functionalities and compositions of the lignin derived char are highly dependent on the producing conditions (e.g., slow pyrolysis, fast pyrolysis, and hydrothermal carbonization) and the type of lignin. The oxygen functional groups, including OH, CO, and COOH, are found to be dominant in chars derived from fast pyrolysis, but are a minority in those derived from slow pyrolysis. Instead, the aromatic C–H is the most abundant group found in the char formed during the slow pyrolysis of lignin.


2.4.2 Structure. 
The structure of the lignin derived char, including the surface area, pore structure, microstructure, and morphology, can be characterized using many techniques. For example, the surface area and pore structure can be analyzed using N2 adsorption–desorption isotherms.157,158 The microstructure of the char can be characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD), Raman spectroscopy, and energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectroscopy,159–161 while its morphology was observed through scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM).157,162,163 The XRD measurements show that the lignin derived char is characterized by a significant content of amorphous phase in the structure of the carbon matrix, with a small amount of crystalline structure of highly conjugated aromatic sheets cross-linked in a random manner.141 With increasing the pyrolysis temperature, the crystallites of char increase in size, and its entire structure becomes more ordered.164 The N2 adsorption–desorption isotherms suggested that microporosity and widening of the micropore size distribution happen through physical activation in CO2, and the activated carbon produced also has a well developed meso- and macroporosity.165 The lignin activated carbon through chemical activation with ZnCl2 shows a high micropore volume of 1 cm3 g−1, and its porosity first increases with activation temperature up to 500 °C and then decreases significantly at 600 °C. The porosity and pore size have an increasing trend with the increase of impregnation ratio (ZnCl2/lignin from 0.4 to 2.3).166 The SEM images, as shown in Fig. 10, indicated that the pyrolysis led to the formation of melt, liquid phase, vesicles, precipitates of inorganic salts and surface etching on the lignin derived char.
 Fig. 10  SEM images of the lignin and its char produced at different temperatures. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 1, copyright 2004, Elsevier Ltd.) 

3. Applications of the lignin-based functional materials
The most appealing characteristic of the thermochemical conversion of lignin materials lies in the fact that it represents a cost-effective, green and readily scalable process. These functional carbon or hybrid materials have numerous practical applications in the fields of catalysis, energy storage and conversion, and environmental protection. In the following sections, examples where the lignin-based functional materials have proved to be effective in these fields have been introduced and discussed.
3.1 Catalysis applications
Most of the state-of-the-art catalytic processes applied in chemical industries involved metals or metal compounds, especially precious metals. Though metal catalysts can reach high catalytic activity and selectivity, they are often energy-consuming and resource-wasting.167 The lignin-based functional carbon materials, combining the advantages of environmental acceptability with good thermal conductivity, are a favorable alternative to some current industrialized chemical processes.
The surface functional groups of the lignin-based functional materials, including COOH, NH2, and SO3H groups, show interesting catalytic properties, and have been employed as catalysts in many chemical reactions. For example, the carbonaceous solid acid (containing SO3H groups) is a typical metal-free catalyst ubiquitously used in a variety of acid-catalyzed chemical reactions (e.g., hydrolysis, dehydration, and esterification).168–170 During these acid-catalyzed reactions, the high densities of hydrophilic SO3H groups can incorporate large amounts of hydrophilic molecules (e.g., H2O) into the carbon matrix.171 It facilitates access of reactants to the SO3H groups and leads to a high catalytic performance for many reactions, even though the as-synthesized solid acid catalysts often have relatively low surface areas.172,173 For instance, a solid acid catalyst synthesized from pyrolysis of the lignin at 400 °C for 1 h and then sulfonation at 150 °C shows high activity to catalyze the esterification of methanol and acidified soybean soapstock to produce the biodiesel. During the esterification reaction, the active Brønsted acid sites of SO3H groups act as proton donors. The mechanism of a solid acid catalyzed esterification reaction can be proposed as follows:174 (1) a positive carbon ion and SO3− were produced through the reaction of SO3H on the CO of oleic acid when the free fatty acids (FFAs) were absorbed on the surface of solid acid; (2) a tetrahedral intermediate (I) was generated under the nucleophilic attack of methanol on the positive carbon ion; (3) the proton of methanol hydroxyl was rearranged and transferred to the carbonyl oxygen of FFAs; (4) the tetrahedral intermediate (II) was dehydrated; (5) the proton of tetrahedral intermediate (II) was transferred to SO3; and (6) the biodiesel (methyl esters) was formed and active sites of SO3H were restored (Fig. 11). The lignin-based solid acid also shows favorable catalytic activity on the esterification of acetic acid with ethanol and hydration of 2,3-dimethyl-2-butene.175 Compared to conventional solid acid catalysts, e.g., strong acid cation exchange resin—Amberlyst 15 and sulfonated carbon, though the lignin-based solid acid has low concentration of SO3H groups, it has high catalytic activities over these two reactions. Such higher catalytic activity may be directly related to the contribution of the abundant macroporosity, which has an advantage for mass transfer, achieving good accessibility for reactants in solution to SO3H groups. Apart from the esterification and hydration reactions, the hydrolysis is also a conventional reaction which is catalyzed by the solid acid catalyst. As reported by Namchot et al.,119 the solid acid catalyst prepared by direct sulfonation of lignin without pyrolysis shows favorable performance on the catalytic hydrolysis of the sugarcane bagasse, cellulose, and starch, with the total reducing sugar yields of 65.0%, 46.0%, and 96.5%, respectively, much higher than those catalyzed by a sugarcane bagasse based solid catalyst.
 Fig. 11  A schematic illustration of the reaction mechanism for the esterification catalyzed by the lignin derived solid acid catalyst. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 174, copyright 2004, Elsevier Ltd.) 
Solid base is another type of catalyst which can be used in the catalysis of an esterification reaction. By simply mixing K2CO3 with kraft lignin (KL) and subsequently activating at 800 °C for 2 h under N2 flow, a solid base catalyst was synthesized. It can be employed as a catalyst for the transesterification of rapeseed oil with methanol. The lignin-based solid base catalyst shows favorable catalytic activity with a biodiesel yield of 99.6% and excellent cycle performance with the biodiesel yield remaining over 82.1% for the fourth time.176 The lignin-based solid base catalyst has features of a simple preparation method, is environmentally sustainable and cost-effective, and shows high catalytic activity and favorable reusability. It may be considered as an optional heterogeneous base catalyst candidate for scalable biodiesel production.
Besides the abovementioned catalysis applications, the lignin-based char materials have also been widely used as supports to stabilize metal or oxide nanoparticles for different catalytic applications due to the high surface functionalities and porosity. Zazo and co-workers177 reported the synthesis of activated carbon support iron nanoparticles by FeCl3-activation of lignin at 800 °C, and its use for the catalytic wet peroxide oxidation (CWPO) of phenol. As the authors stated, dosing FeCl3 in the chemical activation of lignin has two purposes: one is to produce carbon catalysts with a well-developed porous structure and the other is to introduce stable iron nanoparticles into the carbon matrix. These iron nanoparticles can act as an active phase in CWPO processes to avoid or substantially decrease the iron leaching under the reaction conditions. Indeed, the as-synthesized materials show a fairly good catalytic activity and a very high stability, with almost no iron leaching under the reaction conditions. The metal nanoparticles can also be loaded in situ onto char supports during the pyrolysis process, which can act as a catalyst. For example, Yan et al. reported a facile in situ route for the fabrication of Fe NPs encapsulated in char by thermally treating Fe(III)-impregnated lignin-rich woody biomass.178 The as-synthesized materials possessed a favorable catalytic activity in the Fischer–Tropsch synthesis tests for the conversion of bio-syngas to liquid fuels, with a good selectivity towards liquid hydrocarbons. Furthermore, the catalysts showed high stability, with a CO conversion of approximately 95% and a liquid hydrocarbon selectivity of approximately 68% after a 1500 hour run. The char-supported Fe catalyst was also used to catalyze the destruction of NOx precursors, e.g., HCN and NH3, and to convert tar derived from the pyrolysis of mallee biomass.179,180
As discussed above, the lignin-based catalyst shows favorable catalytic performance in various chemical reactions. However, because of the complex surface chemistry and heterogeneity of the lignin based catalyst materials, the catalytic activity and selectivity of these catalysts are usually greatly suppressed. In addition, the inorganic species (e.g., K, Na, Ca, and Mg) in the lignin-based materials may also have some catalytic activity on some side reactions, thus decreasing its catalytic selectivity when it was used in some high-temperature reactions.181 However, in view of the sustainability, its abundant inorganic species can also make the lignin char itself act as a specific catalyst for certain reactions. For example, Klinghoffer et al.182 reported that the inorganic species, which only make up ∼2% of a lignin-rich biomass derived char, played an important role in the catalytic high temperature methane cracking reactions, while the carbon fraction of the char can act as a support on which the inorganic species were dispersed.
3.2 Energy storage applications
A recognized strategy for solving the global energy crisis or greenhouse gas emission caused by excessive consumption of fossil fuels is to conveniently store and use the low cost, clean and renewable energy, such as solar, wind, and biomass.183 Supercapacitors, also known as electronic double layer capacitors (EDLCs), with long cycle-life, high energy and power density, and superior reversibility,184 offer a strategy for the fast storing of intermittent renewable energy,185,186 and have been widely used in consumer electronics, industrial power, and mobile electrical systems.184,187 The lignin-based char materials may be a favorable choice for the electrode materials of the supercapacitors, since the functional groups that may greatly enhance the pseudo-capacitance performance and increase the amount of energy stored in the supercapacitor can be easily introduced into the char material. In addition, many electrochemically inert functional groups on the char surface can improve the wettability of the carbon electrode, and consequently enhance the specific capacitance by increasing surface utilization and pore access.188 More importantly, the abundant oxygenated surface functional groups may prevent further oxidation of the carbon matrix under a wide range of potentials,189 thus enhancing the cycle stabilities of the electrode materials.
Lai et al.2 investigated the supercapacitor performance of a free-standing and mechanically flexible material consisting of electrospun carbon nanofibers (ECNFs) prepared from alkali lignin, in a 6 mol L−1 KOH aqueous electrolyte. The ECNFs were prepared by first electrospinning aqueous mixtures containing a natural product of alkali lignin and polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) into composite nanofiber materials, followed by stabilization in air and carbonization in an inert environment. The ECNFs with 70 wt% of lignin had an average diameter of 100 nm (Fig. 12a and b) and a surface area of 583 m2 g−1. The as-synthesized materials demonstrated favorable performance as free-standing and/or binder-free electrode materials for supercapacitors with high gravimetric capacitance (64 F g−1 at a current density of 400 mA g−1 and 50 F g−1 at 2000 mA g−1) and excellent cycle stability (only 10% reduction in the gravimetric capacitance after 6000 cycles of charge/discharge) (Fig. 12c and d).
 Fig. 12  (a) and (b) The SEM and TEM images of ECNF material with 70 wt% of lignin; (c) galvanostatic charge/discharge curves of ECNFs with 70 wt% of lignin at varied current densities; and (d) cycling stability of the ECNF (70/30) electrode at a current density of 2000 mA g−1. The inset shows the charge/discharge curves of the 1st, 100th, and 6000th cycles at 2000 mA g−1. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 2, copyright 2014, Elsevier B.V.) 
Hu and co-workers190 fabricated high energy density supercapacitors from lignin derived submicron activated carbon fibers in aqueous electrolytes. It has been found that the outstanding electrochemical performance of the as-synthesized materials can be attributed to their hydrophilic surface, high surface area and porosity, large-size nanographites, and good electrical conductivity. The maximum specific capacitance of the materials is 344 F g−1 with an energy density of 8.1 Wh kg−1, and over 96% capacitance retention rates were achieved after 5000 charge/discharge cycles. Such an excellent performance demonstrated the great potential of lignin-based carbons for electrical energy storage. Recently, a lignin derived nanoporous carbon with a narrow and tunable pore size distribution has been produced by activation with KOH and applied to organic-based supercapacitors.191 It has been found that the ability for non-Faradaic charge storage decreased with increasing the graphenization degree of the carbon materials, and capacitance values up to 87 F g−1 in an organic electrolyte were achieved. Similar results have been reported by Jeon and co-workers.192
Besides the EDLC based supercapacitors, another typical one is the pseudocapacitance based supercapacitors, which can be synthesized by loading electroactive species such as metal oxides on the carbon surface. Chen et al.193 reported the self-assembly of NiO nanoparticles in lignin-derived mesoporous carbons (NiO@MPC) for supercapacitor applications. The results show that the NiO@MPC composites have high specific capacitance (880.2 F g−1 at a current density of 1.0 A g−1), good retention (90.9% of the specific capacitance is retained when the current density changes from 1 A g−1 to 10 A g−1 in the charge–discharge tests), and a favorable cycle performance (93.7% of the specific capacitance is retained after 1000 charge–discharge cycles).
Li+-ion batteries are another choice to meet energy storage requirements because of their fast charge capability, robust cycle life, and high energy density, and have been frequently used in mobile phones, portable electronic devices, and large-scale energy storage. The functional carbon material is an important electrode material, which can act as either an anode or cathode material, depending on the redox potential of the Li-intercalation compound used in the batteries.12 A novel nitrogen-doped free-standing fused carbon fibrous mat was prepared from the lignin–polyethylene oxide (PEO) (90:10) blend via electrospinning followed by carbonization and thermal annealing in the presence of urea. The as-synthesized materials were used as the anode in Li+-ion batteries, which show favorable electrochemical performance with a high specific capacity of 576 mA h g−1 and still maintained a good capacity of about 200 mA h g−1 even at a high current rate of 2000 mA g−1.194 Jin et al. fabricated carbon nanofibers from polyacrylonitrile (PAN) and refined lignin via simple electrospinning followed by stabilization and carbonization and used it as free-standing and binder-free anodes for sodium ion batteries. The material presents a high rate capability (210 and 80 mA h g−1 at 0.4 and 1 A g−1, respectively) and excellent cycle stability (247 mA h g−1 reversible capacity with 90.2% capacity retention ratio at 0.1 A g−1 over 200 cycles).195 The above results demonstrated that lignin can be applied as an eligible precursor to fabricate low-cost and high performance carbon electrode materials for batteries.
As suggested by the abovementioned discussion, with abundant functional groups, high porosity, easy access of electrolyte ions, and short diffusion distances, the lignin-based functional materials show favorable performance in electrochemical energy storage. Furthermore, its complex surface chemistry and heterogeneity may contribute to an improvement of the energy storage performance. For example, the heteroatom doping on the surface of lignin derived char can contribute to pseudocapacitance for electrochemical energy storage. However, the cycle performances of lignin-based functional materials in supercapacitors and batteries are usually inferior compared to those of conventional carbon materials because of the instability of some surface functional groups.
3.3 Pollutant removal applications
Recently, much effort has been made to deal with the environmental pollution issue. Because of the abundant functional groups and high porosity, lignin-based functional materials may play important roles in environmental protection, such as heavy metal and organic pollutant removal.
Heavy metals and toxic organic compounds are the most hazardous environmental pollutants, which can be removed through adsorption with porous materials. Lignin-based functional materials have recently been extensively applied as adsorbents for the removal of pollutants since their surfaces contain many functional groups which may also act as active sorption sites. Moreover, these functional groups can be easily tuned through surface modifications to meet the application objectives, as discussed previously in section 2.3.1.
A lignin-based porous carbon with high surface area and porosity was employed as an adsorbent for the removal of Ni(II) from wastewater. The Ni(II) adsorption ability of the lignin-based porous carbon materials increased with the increase of pH, suggesting that an electrostatic attraction mechanism dominates the adsorption process.154 Compared to the chemical activated porous carbon with high surface area and porosity, the carbon materials produced from microwave pyrolysis of the lignin demonstrate a more favorable performance toward heavy metals although their surface area and porosity are relatively low. As shown by Maldhure et al.,150 the functional carbon materials produced from industrial waste lignin through microwave pyrolysis have excellent adsorption performance towards Cu2+, with a maximum capacity of 98.6 mg g−1. The authors proposed that besides the surface area and microporosity, the abundant surface oxygen functional groups also played important roles in the adsorption process. Gonzalez-Serrano and co-workers196 prepared activated carbons with a high BET surface area and a well-developed porosity through pyrolysis of H3PO4-impregnated lignin, and employed them as adsorbents for the removal of Cr(VI) from wastewater. The Cr(VI) adsorption capacity of the material is 92.6 mg g−1, surpassing many other activated carbons.
By changing the pyrolysis and carbonization temperatures, Cotoruelo et al. synthesized a series of activated carbon materials from acid-precipitated eucalyptus kraft lignin through physical activation with CO2 and used it as adsorbents for the removal of p-nitrophenol (PNP), an organic pollutant usually found in wastewater. The maximum adsorption capacity of the materials towards PNP is 4.4 mmol g−1. The adsorption performance is greatly influenced by the initial PNP concentration, adsorption temperature, pH, and contact time.152 They also found that lignin-based activated carbon materials can efficiently remove sodium dodecylbenzene sulfonate from wastewater.153 A series of activated carbon materials produced from kraft lignin through H3PO4 chemical activation with high surface area and well-developed micro and mesoporosity have been found to be good adsorbents for aqueous phase applications. The maximum adsorption capacities of 227.3 and 476.2 mg g−1 towards phenol and 2,4,5-trichlorophenol, respectively, were observed.196
It can be seen from the above discussions that lignin-based char materials show favorable performance for the removal of heavy metals and organic pollutants. However, some inherent pollutants in lignin-based char, such as persistent organic pollutants (polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons)197 and heavy metals,198 may be released to the environment, leading to a secondary pollution. To prevent this occurrence, future studies should focus on developing suitable and sustainable methods to functionalize char so as to reduce the release of pollutants during its adsorption process.
4. Conclusions and outlooks
Lignin is an important component of biomass from which several useful chemicals, fuels, and functional materials can be produced. Lignin valorization is regarded as an important component of the modern biorefinery scheme, and the variable structure and composition of lignin offer unique routes to produce several fine/bulk chemicals, fuels and functional materials.20 Thermochemical conversion, including pyrolysis and hydrothermal carbonization, is a well-recognized process for the valorization of lignin to chemicals and functional materials. In the preceding sections, we have presented currently available approaches and strategies for the thermochemical conversion of lignin to functional carbon materials. The behaviour and mechanism of lignin in the thermochemical process are first illuminated, and the structure and surface chemistry of the lignin-based functional carbon materials are summarized systematically. Generally, the char materials directly produced from the thermochemical conversion process usually have very limited surface functional groups and porosity, so a functionalization process is necessary before their application as functional materials. The abundant functional groups can be introduced to the surface of lignin-based char materials, such as CO, phenolic OH, COOH, NH2, and SO3H through oxidation, amination, and sulfonation. The high surface area and controllable pore size distribution of the char materials can be imparted through chemical or physical activation methods. The functional lignin-based char materials have found applications in catalysis, energy storage, and pollutant removal. In the catalysis applications, the functional groups in the lignin-based char materials have shown favorable activities for various chemical reactions including esterification, hydrolysis, and dehydration, while the char-supported metal nanoparticles also exhibit high performance for the catalysis of wet oxidation of phenol. In the energy storage applications, the lignin-based porous carbon materials show favorable performance, i.e., high specific capacitance and excellent cycle stability when used as supercapacitors and fuel cells. In the pollutant removal applications, lignin-based functional materials show favorable performance in the removal of both heavy metals and organic pollutants due to their highly abundant surface functional groups and easily tunable porosities.
Although great success has been achieved in developing many approaches for the thermochemical conversion of lignin into functional materials, there are still some critical issues which should be addressed in the future. Firstly, for the synthesis of lignin based functional materials, detailed information regarding the mechanism of lignin in the thermochemical process is still lacking, which is mainly rooted in the complex structure and composition of the native lignin polymer itself and the influence of different pretreatments on the lignin structure. It is expected that the char with controllable functionalities and porosities can be produced if the relationship between the textural features of char materials and the thermochemical conditions is elucidated. Accurate characterization and detection technologies may help researchers to deeply elucidate the mechanism and behavior of lignin during the thermochemical process. To solve this problem, future work should be directed to in situ detection or on-line monitoring technologies such as TG-FTIR-MS and Py-GC-MS,199–203 or advanced characterization methods, such as solid-state 13C NMR spectroscopy and synchrotron-based X-ray adsorption spectroscopy. These methods may provide new possibilities to understand the changes in the surface chemistry of the char, thus deeply clarifying the behavior and mechanism of lignin during the thermochemical conversion process. Moreover, since the currently available approaches for the functionalization of lignin-based char materials usually involve a complex process or toxic chemicals, future efforts should be directed to the development of environmentally friendly and effective approaches to control the surface functionality and porosity of char materials. The lignin polymer itself is abundant in functional groups (e.g., OH, CO, and COOH) which show high affinity to metal ions (e.g., Cu, Ni, and Zn).204–207 By pyrolysis of these metal-preloaded lignin precursors, a number of carbon support metal nanoparticles can be synthesized. Compared to the currently available functionalization methods, pyrolysis of the metal-preloaded lignin to synthesize functional materials is more eco-friendly and cost-effective since it does not need a complex process and toxic chemicals.
Secondly, for the application of lignin based functional materials, a deep understanding of the relationship between the surface functionality and porosity of lignin-based char materials and their catalytic activity, energy storage performance, and pollutant removal capacity is needed. It may open the door to the use of lignin-based char materials in catalysis, energy storage, and pollutant removal applications. Another research area should be devoted to the development of novel characterization and modeling technologies to understand the key elements that enable the rational design of functionalized materials for advanced catalytic, energy storage, and pollutant removal applications. Spectacular developments in in situ or high-resolution microscopy, such as 4D electron microscopy, electron tomography, aberration-corrected TEM, and dynamic TEM can offer new possibilities for the understanding of the surface chemistry of functionalized char materials in these application processes.
Besides the abovementioned critical issues, future work should be directed to the development of emerging and high value applications of lignin based functional materials. One field where these materials may be of great importance is chromatographic separation. To achieve this emerging application, the abundant surface functional groups of the lignin-based functional materials should be tuned, so that the surface polarity and hydrophilicity/hydrophobicity of the char materials can be controlled. These materials can find potential application as stationary phases in chromatographic separation, such as Hydrophilic Interactions Liquid Chromatography (HILC) or Reversed Phase Liquid Chromatography (RPLC).
Another field where lignin based functional materials may find applications is bio-medicine, such as bio-imaging and drug delivery. For drug delivery, materials should be synthesized with favourable biocompatibility and high stability. The lignin, as a biodegradable natural polymer, shows favourable biocompatibility and prominent antioxidant behaviour; meanwhile, the micro- and mesopore channels of lignin based functional materials can direct the drug toward concealed infected cells in the tissues.208 These features may make the lignin based functional materials successful drug delivery vehicles. Further improvement in drug curative accessibility can be achieved by developing drug-deliveries with high surface area and extended mesoporous dimensions, allowing thereby ease of transportation and regime discharging of drugs. For the bio-imaging, it is important to introduce the fluorescent surface functional groups into the lignin based materials, which facilitates the detection when the materials are transfused into the tissues.
Moreover, in analogy to the history of the petroleum refinery, with the development of thermochemical and catalytic technology, the lignin biorefinery would become an efficient, highly integrated system to meet the chemical, fuel and functional material requirements in the near future. In order to reach this goal, a cheap, efficient and green protocol must be developed for lignin depolymerisation: (1) an advanced deconstruction method with relatively mild reaction conditions and high efficiency can be developed, (2) an effective and cost-competitive separation/purification/isolation of valuable products is proposed, and (3) a scalable continuous flow process is used with the possibility of producing multifarious end products.
As demonstrated by the numerous examples discussed above in this review, lignin-based functional materials have already achieved great success in many practical applications in a variety of fields ranging from catalysis to energy storage and pollutant removal, but some challenges and questions which should draw scientific attention still remain: (1) how to discover and develop more economical processes which can retain the inherent character of lignin for its use as functional materials; (2) can we devise some strategies for near, medium, and long-term options effective for the utilization of lignin; (3) what are the detailed structure and properties of lignin with respect to the biomass and pretreatment process, and how to develop advanced analytical methods (physicochemical and spectroscopic techniques) for the characterization of these structures and properties. Solving the abovementioned challenges or questions in the near future may help to rationally design lignin-based functional materials, thus further expanding their practical applications.
Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from the Key Special Program on the S&T for the Pollution Control and Treatment of Water Bodies (no. 2012ZX07103-001), National 863 Program (2012AA063608-01), and National Key Technology R&D Program of the Ministry of Science and Technology (2012BAJ08B00).
Notes and references
R. K. Sharma, J. B. Wooten, V. L. Baliga, X. Lin, W. Geoffrey Chan and M. R. Hajaligol, Fuel, 2004, 83, 1469–1482 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lai, Z. Zhou, L. Zhang, X. Wang, Q. Zhou, Y. Zhao, Y. Wang, X.-F. Wu, Z. Zhu and H. Fong, J. Power Sources, 2014, 247, 134–141 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Jiménez, A. Ramírez-Lucas, J. A. Díaz, P. Sánchez and A. Romero, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2012, 46, 7407–7414 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Xing, C. Liu, Z. Zhou, L. Zhang, J. Zhou, S. Zhuo, Z. Yan, H. Gao, G. Wang and S. Z. Qiao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7323–7327 CAS .
W.-J. Liu, K. Tian, H. Jiang and H.-Q. Yu, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 4198–4205 RSC .
B. Li, J. Wang, Y. Yuan, H. Ariga, S. Takakusagi and K. Asakura, ACS Catal., 2011, 1, 1521–1528 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Su, S. Perathoner and G. Centi, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 5782–5816 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Dąbrowski, P. Podkościelny, Z. Hubicki and M. Barczak, Chemosphere, 2005, 58, 1049–1070 CrossRef PubMed .
O. G. Apul and T. Karanfil, Water Res., 2015, 68, 34–55 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xia, Z. Yang and Y. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem., A, 2013, 1, 9365–9381 CAS .
S. A. Shevlin and Z. X. Guo, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 211–225 RSC .
A. D. Roberts, X. Li and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 4341–4356 RSC .
L. L. Zhang and X. S. Zhao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 2520–2531 RSC .
Z. Yang, J. Shen, N. Jayaprakash and L. A. Archer, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7025 CAS .
X. Li, W. Cai, J. An, S. Kim, J. Nah, D. Yang, R. Piner, A. Velamakanni, I. Jung, E. Tutuc, S. K. Banerjee, L. Colombo and R. S. Ruoff, Science, 2009, 324, 1312–1314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Volotskova, I. Levchenko, A. Shashurin, Y. Raitses, K. Ostrikov and M. Keidar, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 2281–2285 RSC .
L. Wei, M. Sevilla, A. B. Fuertes, R. Mokaya and G. Yushin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 356–361 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-M. Titirici, R. J. White, C. Falco and M. Sevilla, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6796–6822 Search PubMed .
B. Hu, K. Wang, L. Wu, S.-H. Yu, M. Antonietti and M.-M. Titirici, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 813–828 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zakzeski, P. C. A. Bruijnincx, A. L. Jongerius and B. M. Weckhuysen, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 3552–3599 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Azadi, O. R. Inderwildi, R. Farnood and D. A. King, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2013, 21, 506–523 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. S. Chakar and A. J. Ragauskas, Ind. Crops Prod., 2004, 20, 131–141 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          A. Prakash, R. Singh, B. Balagurumurthy, T. Bhaskar, A. K. Arora and S. K. Puri, in Recent Advances in Thermo-Chemical Conversion of Biomass, ed. A. P. B. S. K. Sukumaran, Elsevier, Boston,  2015, pp. 455–478 Search PubMed .
G. Shen, S. Tao, W. Wang, Y. Yang, J. Ding, M. Xue, Y. Min, C. Zhu, H. Shen and W. Li, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2011, 45, 3459–3465 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Atkins, K. L. Bignal, J. L. Zhou and F. Cazier, Chemosphere, 2010, 78, 1385–1392 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Mandalakis, Ö. Gustafsson, T. Alsberg, A.-L. Egebäck, C. M. Reddy, L. Xu, J. Klanova, I. Holoubek and E. G. Stephanou, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2005, 39, 2976–2982 CrossRef CAS .
D. Tian, Y. Hu, Y. Wang, J. W. Boylan, M. Zheng and A. G. Russell, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2008, 43, 299–305 CrossRef .
D. Obrist, H. Moosmüller, R. Schürmann, L. W. A. Chen and S. M. Kreidenweis, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2007, 42, 721–727 CrossRef .

          A. Berlin and M. Balakshin, in Bioenergy Research: Advances and Applications, ed. V. K. Gupta, M. G. T. P. Kubicek and J. S. Xu, Elsevier, Amsterdam,  2014, pp. 315–336 Search PubMed .

          A. Higson and C. Smith, NNFCC http://www.nnfcc.co.uk/publications/nnfcc-renewable-chemicals-factsheet-lignin,  2011.

          J. Holladay, J. Bozell, J. White and D. Johnson, DOE Report PNNL,  2007, 16983 .
D. A. Baker and T. G. Rials, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2013, 130, 713–728 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. P. Maradur, C. H. Kim, S. Y. Kim, B.-H. Kim, W. C. Kim and K. S. Yang, Synth. Met., 2012, 162, 453–459 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Duval and M. Lawoko, React. Funct. Polym., 2014, 85, 78–96 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhao, G. Chen, Y. Liu, K. Hu and R. Wu, J. Mater. Sci. Lett., 2001, 20, 859–862 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jin, X. Cheng and Z. Zheng, Bioresour. Technol., 2010, 101, 2046–2048 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          Z. Wang, J. W. Xue, J. B. Qu and W. X. Liu, Synthesis of wood lignin-urea-formaldehyde resin adhesive,  2012 Search PubMed .
Y. Li and S. Sarkanen, Macromolecules, 2002, 35, 9707–9715 CrossRef CAS .
H. Nitz, H. Semke and R. Mülhaupt, Macromol. Mater. Eng., 2001, 286, 737–743 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ö. Seydibeyoğlu, BioMed. Res. Int., 2012, 2012 Search PubMed .
S. Casenave, A. Aït-Kadi and B. Riedl, Can. J. Chem. Eng., 1996, 74, 308–315 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          R. D. Perlack, L. L. Wright, A. F. Turhollow, R. L. Graham, B. J. Stokes and D. C. Erbach, Biomass as feedstock for a bioenergy and bioproducts industry: the technical feasibility of a billion-ton annual supply, DTIC Document,  2005 Search PubMed.

          T. Werpy, G. Petersen, A. Aden, J. Bozell, J. Holladay, J. White, A. Manheim, D. Eliot, L. Lasure and S. Jones, Top value added chemicals from biomass. Volume 1-Results of screening for potential candidates from sugars and synthesis gas, DTIC Document,  2004 Search PubMed.
C. Xu, R. A. D. Arancon, J. Labidi and R. Luque, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7485–7500 RSC .

          U. P. Agarwal, M. Balakshin, S. Braaten, E. Capanema, R. P. Chandra, H. Chang, Y. Chen, N. Cordeiro, A. R. Esteghlalia and D. Evtuguin, Characterization of Lignocellulosic Materials, Wiley-Blackwell, Oxford,  2008 Search PubMed .
A. L. Jongerius, P. C. Bruijnincx and B. M. Weckhuysen, Green Chem., 2013, 15, 3049–3056 RSC .
K. M. Torr, D. J. van de Pas, E. Cazeils and I. D. Suckling, Bioresour. Technol., 2011, 102, 7608–7611 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Sturgeon, M. H. O'Brien, P. N. Ciesielski, R. Katahira, J. S. Kruger, S. C. Chmely, J. Hamlin, K. Lawrence, G. B. Hunsinger, T. D. Foust, R. M. Baldwin, M. J. Biddy and G. T. Beckham, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 824–835 RSC .
M. Papatheofanous, E. Billa, D. Koullas, B. Monties and E. Koukios, Bioresour. Technol., 1995, 54, 305–310 CrossRef CAS .
V. Roberts, V. Stein, T. Reiner, A. Lemonidou, X. Li and J. A. Lercher, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17, 5939–5948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-S. Zhang, G.-X. Yang, H. Jiang, W.-J. Liu and H.-S. Ding, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1120 Search PubMed .
D. R. Dodds and R. A. Gross, Science, 2007, 318, 1250–1251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. P. Vispute, H. Zhang, A. Sanna, R. Xiao and G. W. Huber, Science, 2010, 330, 1222–1227 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Ateş, N. Miskolczi and N. Borsodi, Bioresour. Technol., 2013, 133, 443–454 CrossRef PubMed .
A. N. García, R. Font and A. Marcilla, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 1995, 31, 101–121 CrossRef .
A. M. Li, X. D. Li, S. Q. Li, Y. Ren, Y. Chi, J. H. Yan and K. F. Cen, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 1999, 50, 149–162 CrossRef CAS .
I. Velghe, R. Carleer, J. Yperman and S. Schreurs, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 2011, 92, 366–375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. K. Buah, A. M. Cunliffe and P. T. Williams, Process Saf. Environ. Prot., 2007, 85, 450–457 CrossRef CAS .
P. Baggio, M. Baratieri, A. Gasparella and G. A. Longo, Appl. Therm. Eng., 2008, 28, 136–144 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Luo, B. Xiao, Z. Hu and S. Liu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 93–97 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Toor, L. Rosendahl and A. Rudolf, Energy, 2011, 36, 2328–2342 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, P. Champagne and C. Xu, Energy, 2011, 36, 2142–2150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Akhtar and N. A. S. Amin, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2011, 15, 1615–1624 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I.-H. Hwang, H. Aoyama, T. Matsuto, T. Nakagishi and T. Matsuo, Waste Manage., 2012, 32, 410–416 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kageyama, S. Osada, H. Nakata, M. Kubota and H. Matsuda, Fuel, 2013, 103, 94–100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Björklund, M. Melaina and G. Keoleian, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2001, 26, 1209–1221 CrossRef .
M. He, B. Xiao, S. Liu, X. Guo, S. Luo, Z. Xu, Y. Feng and Z. Hu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2009, 34, 2174–2183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, G. Cheng, Y. You, B. Xiao, S. Liu, P. He, D. Guo, X. Guo and G. Zhang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 6503–6510 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Bellomare and M. Rokni, Renewable Energy, 2013, 55, 490–500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Arena, Waste Manage., 2012, 32, 625–639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Bhaskar, T. Matsui, J. Kaneko, M. A. Uddin, A. Muto and Y. Sakata, Green Chem., 2002, 4, 372–375 RSC .
V. M. Roberts, V. Stein, T. Reiner, A. Lemonidou, X. Li and J. A. Lercher, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17, 5939–5948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang and R. Rinaldi, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 1455–1466 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kijima, T. Hirukawa, F. Hanawa and T. Hata, Bioresour. Technol., 2011, 102, 6279–6285 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Norgren and H. Edlund, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2014, 19, 409–416 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Suhas, P. J. M. Carrott and M. M. L. Ribeiro Carrott, Bioresour. Technol., 2007, 98, 2301–2312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Gindl-Altmutter, C. Fürst, A. r. Mahendran, M. Obersriebnig, G. Emsenhuber, M. Kluge, S. Veigel, J. Keckes and F. Liebner, Carbon, 2015, 89, 161–168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          B. Kamm, P. R. Gruber and M. Kamm, Ullmann's Encyclopedia of Industrial Chemistry,  2007 Search PubMed .

          M. Crocker, Thermochemical conversion of biomass to liquid fuels and chemicals, Royal Society of Chemistry,  2010 Search PubMed .
A. G. Sergeev and J. F. Hartwig, Science, 2011, 332, 439–443 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. W. Huber, S. Iborra and A. Corma, Chem. Rev., 2006, 106, 4044–4098 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-H. Zhou, X. Xia, C.-X. Lin, D.-S. Tong and J. Beltramini, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 5588 RSC .
H. Yang, R. Yan, H. Chen, D. H. Lee and C. Zheng, Fuel, 2007, 86, 1781–1788 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kosa, H. Ben, H. Theliander and A. J. Ragauskas, Green Chem., 2011, 13, 3196 RSC .
S. Chu, A. V. Subrahmanyam and G. W. Huber, Green Chem., 2013, 15, 125–136 RSC .
H. Ben and A. J. Ragauskas, Energy Fuels, 2011, 25, 2322–2332 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Bu, H. Lei, A. H. Zacher, L. Wang, S. Ren, J. Liang, Y. Wei, Y. Liu, J. Tang, Q. Zhang and R. Ruan, Bioresour. Technol., 2012, 124, 470–477 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          T. Milne, C. Elam and R. Evans, Hydrogen from biomass, State of the art and research challenges. A report for the International Energy Agency. Agreement on the production and utilization of hydrogen task 16, hydrogen from carbon-containing materials,  2002 .

          M. t. Al-Alawi, Sustainable Energy Production and Consumption: Benefits, Strategies and Environmental Costing,  2008, pp. 273–280 Search PubMed .
N. Florin and A. Harris, Environmentalist, 2007, 27, 207–215 CrossRef .
D. Li, C. Briens and F. Berruti, Bioresour. Technol., 2015, 189, 7–14 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Peterson, F. Vogel, R. P. Lachance, M. Froling, J. M. J. Antal and J. W. Tester, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 1, 32–65 CAS .
J. Barbier, N. Charon, N. Dupassieux, A. Loppinet-Serani, L. Mahé, J. Ponthus, M. Courtiade, A. Ducrozet, A.-A. Quoineaud and F. Cansell, Biomass Bioenergy, 2012, 46, 479–491 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kang, X. Li, J. Fan and J. Chang, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2011, 50, 11288–11296 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ehara, S. Saka and H. Kawamoto, J. Wood Sci., 2002, 48, 320–325 CrossRef CAS .
W. Huajing, Z. Wang, C. Yao and G. Qingxiang, Acta Chim. Sin., 2009, 67, 893–900 Search PubMed .

          R. Singh, A. Prakash, B. Balagurumurthy and T. Bhaskar, in Recent Advances in Thermo-Chemical Conversion of Biomass, ed. A. P. B. S. K. Sukumaran, Elsevier, Boston,  2015, pp. 269–291 Search PubMed .
J. Hu, D. Shen, S. Wu, H. Zhang and R. Xiao, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 2014, 106, 118–124 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Czernik and A. V. Bridgwater, Energy Fuels, 2004, 18, 590–598 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Peterson, F. Vogel, R. P. Lachance, M. Fröling, M. J. Antal Jr. and J. W. Tester, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 1, 32–65 CAS .
H. He, T.-T. Qian, W.-J. Liu, H. Jiang and H.-Q. Yu, Chemosphere, 2014, 113, 175–181 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, Q. Liu, L. Guo, Y. Zhang, Z. Lou, Y. Wang and G. Qian, Bioresour. Technol., 2013, 141, 83–88 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Xu, Y. Zhao, K. Sun, B. Gao, Z. Wang, J. Jin, Z. Zhang, S. Wang, Y. Yan, X. Liu and F. Wu, Chemosphere, 2014, 111, 320–326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Yang, H. Chen, H. Qin and Y. Feng, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2014, 293, 299–305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Adelodun, Y. H. Lim and Y. M. Jo, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 2014, 108, 151–159 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, J. Chen, S. Chen, K. Tian and H. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9843–9850 CAS .
A. Takagaki, C. Tagusagawa, S. Hayashi, M. Hara and K. Domen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 82 CAS .
A. Anfruns, E. J. García-Suárez, M. A. Montes-Morán, R. Gonzalez-Olmos and M. J. Martin, Carbon, 2014, 77, 89–98 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wu, S. Sitamraju, J. Xiao, B. Liu, Z. Li, M. J. Janik and C. Song, Chem. Eng. J., 2014, 242, 211–219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Sun, C. E. Snape and H. Liu, Energy Fuels, 2013, 27, 3875–3882 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gokce and Z. Aktas, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2014, 313, 352–359 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Dehkhoda, A. H. West and N. Ellis, Appl. Catal., A, 2010, 382, 197–204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Dehkhoda and N. Ellis, Catal. Today, 2013, 207, 86–92 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Kastner, J. Miller, D. P. Geller, J. Locklin, L. H. Keith and T. Johnson, Catal. Today, 2012, 190, 122–132 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ormsby, J. R. Kastner and J. Miller, Catal. Today, 2012, 190, 89–97 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Li, Z. Gu, B. E. Bjornson and A. Muthukumarappan, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2013, 1, 1174–1181 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. Arancon, H. R. Barros Jr., A. M. Balu, C. Vargas and R. Luque, Green Chem., 2011, 13, 3162 RSC .
Y. Wu, Z. Fu, D. Yin, Q. Xu, F. Liu, C. Lu and L. Mao, Green Chem., 2010, 12, 696 RSC .
W. Namchot, N. Panyacharay, W. Jonglertjunya and C. Sakdaronnarong, Fuel, 2014, 116, 608–616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Shafeeyan, W. M. A. Wan Daud, A. Houshmand and A. Arami-Niya, Fuel, 2012, 94, 465–472 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. J. Jansen and H. van Bekkum, Carbon, 1994, 32, 1507–1516 CrossRef CAS .
B. Stöhr, H. P. Boehm and R. Schlögl, Carbon, 1991, 29, 707–720 CrossRef .
Y. Ma, W.-J. Liu, N. Zhang, Y.-S. Li, H. Jiang and G.-P. Sheng, Bioresour. Technol., 2014, 169, 403–408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          S. Gaspard, N. Passe-Coutrin, A. Durimel, T. Cesaire and V. Jeanne-Rose, in Biomass for Sustainable Applications: Pollution Remediation and Energy, The Royal Society of Chemistry,  2014, pp. 46–105 Search PubMed .

          P.-L. Taberna and S. Gaspard, in Biomass for Sustainable Applications: Pollution Remediation and Energy, The Royal Society of Chemistry,  2014, pp. 366–399 Search PubMed .
K. Yang, J. Peng, C. Srinivasakannan, L. Zhang, H. Xia and X. Duan, Bioresour. Technol., 2010, 101, 6163–6169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Passé-Coutrin, V. Jeanne-Rose and A. Ouensanga, Fuel, 2005, 84, 2131–2134 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Montané, V. Torné-Fernández and V. Fierro, Chem. Eng. J., 2005, 106, 1–12 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Gonzalez-Serrano, T. Cordero, J. Rodríguez-Mirasol and J. J. Rodríguez, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 1997, 36, 4832–4838 CrossRef CAS .

          R. C. Bansal, J.-B. Donnet and F. Stoeckli, Active Carbon, Marcel Dekker, New York,  1998 Search PubMed .
K. Fu, Q. Yue, B. Gao, Y. Sun and L. Zhu, Chem. Eng. J., 2013, 228, 1074–1082 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. J. M. Carrott, Suhas, M. M. L. R. Carrott, C. I. Guerrero and L. A. Delgado, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 2008, 82, 264–271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Suhas, P. J. M. Carrott and M. M. L. R. Carrott, Carbon, 2009, 47, 1012–1017 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Armandi, B. Bonelli, F. Geobaldo and E. Garrone, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2010, 132, 414–420 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. K. B. Gratuito, T. Panyathanmaporn, R. A. Chumnanklang, N. Sirinuntawittaya and A. Dutta, Bioresour. Technol., 2008, 99, 4887–4895 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang and S. Kaskel, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 23710–23725 RSC .
S. Hu and Y.-L. Hsieh, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 11279–11288 CAS .
M. Sevilla, A. B. Fuertes and R. Mokaya, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1400–1410 CAS .
H. Wei, S. Deng, B. Hu, Z. Chen, B. Wang, J. Huang and G. Yu, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 2354–2360 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, C. Liu, H. Cao, H. Zhao, Y. Zhang and Z. Fan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 14844–14851 CAS .
K. Babeł and K. Jurewicz, Carbon, 2008, 46, 1948–1956 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Fierro, V. Torné-Fernández and A. Celzard, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2007, 101, 419–431 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          V. Fierro, V. Torné-Fernández and A. Celzard, in Stud. Surf. Sci. Catal, ed. F. R.-R. J. R. P. L. Llewellyn and N. Seaton, Elsevier,  2007, vol. 160, pp. 607–614 Search PubMed .
C. M. Fierro, J. Górka, J. A. Zazo, J. J. Rodriguez, J. Ludwinowicz and M. Jaroniec, Carbon, 2013, 62, 233–239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Saha, Y. Li, Z. Bi, J. Chen, J. K. Keum, D. K. Hensley, H. A. Grappe, H. M. Meyer, S. Dai, M. P. Paranthaman and A. K. Naskar, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 900–910 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Valero-Romero, E. M. Márquez-Franco, J. Bedia, J. Rodríguez-Mirasol and T. Cordero, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2014, 196, 68–78 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. Lehmann and S. Joseph, Biochar for environmental management: science and technology, Earthscan,  2009 Search PubMed .
J. K. Brennan, T. J. Bandosz, K. T. Thomson and K. E. Gubbins, Colloids Surf., A, 2001, 187–188, 539–568 CrossRef CAS .
H. Boehm, Carbon, 1994, 32, 759–769 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Maldhure and J. D. Ekhe, Chem. Eng. J., 2011, 168, 1103–1111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-P. Chen, C.-H. Cheng, Y.-H. Huang, C.-T. Chen, C.-M. Lai, O. V. Menyailo, L.-J. Fan and Y.-W. Yang, Geoderma, 2014, 232–234, 581–588 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. M. Cotoruelo, M. D. Marqués, F. J. Díaz, J. Rodríguez-Mirasol, J. J. Rodríguez and T. Cordero, Chem. Eng. J., 2012, 184, 176–183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. M. Cotoruelo, M. D. Marqués, J. Rodríguez-Mirasol, J. J. Rodríguez and T. Cordero, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2009, 332, 39–45 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gao, Q. Yue, B. Gao, Y. Sun, W. Wang, Q. Li and Y. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2013, 217, 345–353 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Khezami, A. Chetouani, B. Taouk and R. Capart, Powder Technol., 2005, 157, 48–56 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Perezdrienko, T. Molodozhenyuk, B. Shermatov and M. Yunusov, Russ. J. Appl. Chem., 2001, 74, 1650–1652 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, W. Zhang, X. Hao and D. Zhou, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2012, 47, 821–828 CrossRef PubMed .
C. A. Masiello, Y. Chen, X. Gao, S. Liu, H.-Y. Cheng, M. R. Bennett, J. A. Rudgers, D. S. Wagner, K. Zygourakis and J. J. Silberg, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2013, 47, 11496–11503 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kappler, M. L. Wuestner, A. Ruecker, J. Harter, M. Halama and S. Behrens, Environ. Sci. Technol. Lett., 2014, 1, 339–344 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yip, M. Xu, C.-Z. Li, S. P. Jiang and H. Wu, Energy Fuels, 2010, 25, 406–414 CrossRef .
I. Dallmeyer, L. T. Lin, Y. Li, F. Ko and J. F. Kadla, Macromol. Mater. Eng., 2014, 299, 540–551 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. A. Spokas, J. M. Novak, C. A. Masiello, M. G. Johnson, E. C. Colosky, J. A. Ippolito and C. Trigo, Environ. Sci. Technol. Lett., 2014, 1, 326–332 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chatterjee, A. Clingenpeel, A. McKenna, O. Rios and A. Johs, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 4743–4753 RSC .
A. C. Lua, T. Yang and J. Guo, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 2004, 72, 279–287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Rodríguez-Mirasol, T. Cordero and J. Rodríguez, Energy Fuels, 1993, 7, 133–138 CrossRef .
E. Gonzalez-Serrano, T. Cordero, J. Rodriguez-Mirasol and J. Rodriguez, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 1997, 36, 4832–4838 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Su, J. Zhang, B. Frank, A. Thomas, X. Wang, J. Paraknowitsch and R. Schlögl, ChemSusChem, 2010, 3, 169–180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Nakajima and M. Hara, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 1296–1304 CrossRef CAS .
F. Su and Y. Guo, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 2934–2957 RSC .
K.-i. Shimizu and A. Satsuma, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3140–3153 CAS .
M. Toda, A. Takagaki, M. Okamura, J. N. Kondo, S. Hayashi, K. Domen and M. Hara, Nature, 2005, 438, 178–178 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Okamura, A. Takagaki, M. Toda, J. N. Kondo, K. Domen, T. Tatsumi, M. Hara and S. Hayashi, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 3039–3045 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hara, T. Yoshida, A. Takagaki, T. Takata, J. N. Kondo, S. Hayashi and K. Domen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 2955–2958 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Guo, Z.-L. Xiu and Z.-X. Liang, Appl. Energy, 2012, 98, 47–52 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Liang, Y. Song, C. Huang, J. Zhang and B. Chen, Catal. Commun., 2013, 40, 93–97 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-f. Li, Y. Zuo, Y. Zhang, Y. Fu and Q.-x. Guo, Fuel, 2013, 113, 435–442 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Zazo, J. Bedia, C. M. Fierro, G. Pliego, J. A. Casas and J. J. Rodriguez, Catal. Today, 2012, 187, 115–121 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Yan, C. Wan, J. Liu, J. Gao, F. Yu, J. Zhang and Z. Cai, Green Chem., 2013, 15, 1631–1640 RSC .
Z. Min, J.-Y. Lin, P. Yimsiri, M. Asadullah and C.-Z. Li, Fuel, 2014, 116, 19–24 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Min, S. Zhang, P. Yimsiri, Y. Wang, M. Asadullah and C.-Z. Li, Fuel, 2013, 106, 858–863 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. N. Bhandari, A. Kumar, D. D. Bellmer and R. L. Huhnke, Renewable Energy, 2014, 66, 346–353 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. B. Klinghoffer, M. J. Castaldi and A. Nzihou, Fuel, 2015, 157, 37–47 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 845–854 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Miller and P. Simon, Science, 2008, 321, 651–652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Aricò, P. Bruce, B. Scrosati, J.-M. Tarascon and W. Van Schalkwijk, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 366–377 CrossRef PubMed .
L. L. Zhang and X. Zhao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 2520–2531 RSC .
P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 845–854 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sevilla and R. Mokaya, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1250–1280 CAS .
R. Mysyk, E. Raymundo-Piñero, M. Anouti, D. Lemordant and F. Béguin, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 414–417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hu, S. Zhang, N. Pan and Y.-L. Hsieh, J. Power Sources, 2014, 270, 106–112 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Navarro-Suarez, J. Carretero-Gonzalez, V. Roddatis, E. Goikolea, J. Segalini, E. Redondo, T. Rojo and R. Mysyk, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 48336–48343 RSC .
J.-W. Jeon, L. Zhang, J. L. Lutkenhaus, D. D. Laskar, J. P. Lemmon, D. Choi, M. I. Nandasiri, A. Hashmi, J. Xu, R. K. Motkuri, C. A. Fernandez, J. Liu, M. P. Tucker, P. B. McGrail, B. Yang and S. K. Nune, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 428–432 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Chen, W. Zhou, H. Yao, P. Fan, J. Yang, Z. Fei and M. Zhong, Green Chem., 2013, 15, 3057–3063 RSC .
S.-X. Wang, L. Yang, L. P. Stubbs, X. Li and C. He, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 12275–12282 CAS .
J. Jin, B.-j. Yu, Z.-q. Shi, C.-y. Wang and C.-b. Chong, J. Power Sources, 2014, 272, 800–807 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Gonzalez-Serrano, T. Cordero, J. Rodriguez-Mirasol, L. Cotoruelo and J. J. Rodriguez, Water Res., 2004, 38, 3043–3050 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Keiluweit, M. Kleber, M. A. Sparrow, B. R. T. Simoneit and F. G. Prahl, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2012, 46, 9333–9341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Van Wesenbeeck, W. Prins, F. Ronsse and M. J. Antal, Energy Fuels, 2014, 28, 5318–5326 CrossRef CAS .
N. Gao, A. Li, C. Quan, L. Du and Y. Duan, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 2013, 100, 26–32 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Gu, X. Ma, L. Li, C. Liu, K. Cheng and Z. Li, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 2013, 102, 16–23 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ahamad and S. M. Alshehri, J. Hazard. Mater., 2012, 199–200, 200–208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Jiao, H. Xiao, Q. Wang and J. Sun, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 2013, 98, 2687–2696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhao, W. Xiuwen, J. Hu, Q. Liu, D. Shen and R. Xiao, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 2014, 108, 133–138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, Y. Ge and L. Wan, J. Hazard. Mater., 2015, 285, 77–83 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Guo, S. Zhang and X.-q. Shan, J. Hazard. Mater., 2008, 151, 134–142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. B. Šćiban, M. T. Klašnja and M. G. Antov, Ecol. Eng., 2011, 37, 2092–2095 CrossRef PubMed .
Q.-F. Lü, Z.-K. Huang, B. Liu and X. Cheng, Bioresour. Technol., 2012, 104, 111–118 CrossRef PubMed .
S. M. R. Wahba, A. S. Darwish, I. H. Shehata and S. S. Abd Elhalem, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2015, 48, 599–610 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic analysis of the location and structure of lignin in the lignocellulosic biomass; (b) three primary monomers of the lignin.	 

 	Fig. 2  Five typical bonding patterns in a lignin matrix structure.	 

 	Fig. 3  Typical structure (left) and molecular model (right) of lignin derived from hardwood (a) and softwood (b).	 

 	Fig. 4  The possible mechanism for the decomposition of lignin during the pyrolysis process.	 
Steam reforming: CxHyOz + (x − z)H2O = xCO + (x − z + y)H2
Partial oxidation: CxHyOz + (x − z)O2 = xCO + 0.5yH2
Catalytic cracking: CxHyOz = zCO + yH2 + (x − z)C

 	Fig. 5  The main chemical reactions for the conversion of lignin to liquid fuels, chemicals, syngas and biochar.	 

 	Fig. 6  The mechanism of the lignin hydrothermal carbonization process.	 
C + H2O → CO↑ + H2↑, ΔH = 117 kJ mol−1	(1)
C + CO2 → 2CO↑, ΔH = 159 kJ mol−1	(2)
CO + H2O ↔ CO2↑ + H2↑, ΔH = 41 kJ mol−1	(3)
2KOH + CO2 → K2CO3 + H2O↑	(4)
2C + 2KOH → 2CO↑ + 2K↑ + H2↑	(5)
K2CO3 + C → K2O + 2CO↑	(6)
K2O + C → 2K↑ + CO↑	(7)

 	Fig. 7  A schematic illustration of the colloidal silica templated synthesis of microporous–mesoporous carbons from kraft lignin. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 144, copyright 2013, Elsevier Ltd.)	 

 	Fig. 8  The surface oxygen functional groups determined by modified Boehm's method for activated carbons prepared by microwave and simple impregnation method at different temperatures and impregnation ratios from lignin (ACM means the activated carbon prepared by microwave pyrolysis, ACS means the activated carbon prepared by simple impregnation method, while CAC means the activated carbon prepared without ZnCl2 impregnation). (Reprinted with permission from ref. 149, copyright 2011 Elsevier B.V.)	 

 	Fig. 9  Temperature dependence of the 13C CPMAS NMR spectra of chars from alkali lignin, prepared in an oxidative atmosphere containing 5% O2 in helium. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 1, copyright 2004, Elsevier Ltd.)	 

 	Fig. 10  SEM images of the lignin and its char produced at different temperatures. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 1, copyright 2004, Elsevier Ltd.)	 

 	Fig. 11  A schematic illustration of the reaction mechanism for the esterification catalyzed by the lignin derived solid acid catalyst. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 174, copyright 2004, Elsevier Ltd.)	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) and (b) The SEM and TEM images of ECNF material with 70 wt% of lignin; (c) galvanostatic charge/discharge curves of ECNFs with 70 wt% of lignin at varied current densities; and (d) cycling stability of the ECNF (70/30) electrode at a current density of 2000 mA g−1. The inset shows the charge/discharge curves of the 1st, 100th, and 6000th cycles at 2000 mA g−1. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 2, copyright 2014, Elsevier B.V.)	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
