A novel synthesis and excellent photodegradation of flower-like ZnO hierarchical microspheres  - CrystEngComm (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3CE41754A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3CE41754A
(Paper)
CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 10272-10277A novel synthesis and excellent photodegradation of flower-like ZnO hierarchical microspheres

        
          
            Jinxin 
            Zhan
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hongxing 
            Dong
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Yang 
            Liu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yinglei 
            Wang
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Zhanghai 
            Chen
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Long 
            Zhang
          
        
      *a
aKey Laboratory of Materials for High-Power Laser, Shanghai Institute of Optics and Fine Mechanics, Chinese Academy of Science, Shanghai, 201800, China. E-mail: hongxingd@siom.ac.cn; lzhang@siom.ac.cn;  Fax: +86 21 69918932;   Tel: +86 21 69918196
bState Key Laboratory of Surface Physics and Department of Physics, Fudan University, Shanghai, 200083, China
Received 
      1st September 2013
    , Accepted 24th September 2013First published on 27th September 2013AbstractWe demonstrate an easy, novel synthesis of nanosheet-based flower-like ZnO microspheres without any catalyst and template. The layered hydroxide zinc acetate Zn5(OH)8(CH3COO)2·2H2O (LHZA) nanostructures, one of important and efficient precursors to synthesize three dimensional (3D) ZnO hierarchical microstructures, are first fabricated in aqueous solution at room temperature. The detailed crystal structure and formation mechanism of the LHZA are also investigated. It is noteworthy that the initial ZnO seed layer is crucial to the growth of the final nano/microarchitectures. We found that the as-synthesized hierarchical ZnO microspheres obtained from the decomposition of LHZA showed excellent photocatalytic activity for the photodegradation of rhodamine 6G. This facile, efficient, and economical work provides a new route to simply and mildly synthesize ZnO 3D hierarchical microspheres, which may be adopted to prepare other metal oxide microstructures.
Introduction
Microstructures with small dimensions have been extensively studied due to their abundant properties and potential applications. Among numerous microstructures, 3D porous material has triggered tremendous interest for applications in gas sensors,1–3 dye sensitized solar cells,4–6 and photocatalysts.7–9 ZnO, as an important semiconductor with a wide bandgap (~3.37 eV) and large exciton binding energy (60 meV), has attracted a great deal of interest due to its unique catalytic, electrical, optoelectronic and photochemical properties. Intense efforts have been undertaken over the past decade to obtain 3D ZnO hierarchical microstructures. Up to now, 3D ZnO microstructures have been investigated through different methods such as chemical bath deposition (CBD),10 wet-chemical route,11 hydrothermal method,12,13 ultrarapid sonochemistry,6 electrodeposition14 and so on. Among the reported methods, the two-step synthesis strategy is one of the extremely important and widely applied technologies, and consists of the formation of layered hydroxide zinc salts (LHZS) as precursors and then a phase conversion from the LHZS to ZnO.2,14–19 During the first process, the most critical step for synthesis of LHZS is bonding the zinc ion with OH− to gain a complex layer of [Zn5(OH)8(H2O)2]2+. For example, the LHZS has been fabricated by directly adding solution containing NaOH, LiOH, hexamethylenetetramine (HMTA), or some other organics as the source of OH− to Zn salts such as ZnCl2, Zn(NO3)2, Zn(Ac)2 at a certain temperature, usually above 60 °C. In these procedures, the additional OH− and the specific reaction temperature are both strictly necessary. This will inevitably lead to the introduction of some exotic ions except for OH−, which would cause impurities, and reaction temperature fluctuation might also affect the final results. In addition, Hosono et al.16 employed methanolic solutions of zinc acetate dehydrate as precursor solutions to synthesize the layered LHZA precursors. The reaction mechanism mainly involves dissolution of zinc acetate dehydrate by methanol forming methoxyacetate complexes, which then react with hydrated water molecules at 60 °C. In this non-aqueous system, the hydrated water acts as the reactant, and additional water needs to be avoided to ensure the controlled hydrolysis reaction. Besides, such layered LHZS precursors also can be obtained from an electrodeposition process.13 It can be seen that this two-step synthesis method is an efficient route, and the layered LHZS precursor is crucial for the formation of the final ZnO products. Despite great progress in the preparation of such 3D ZnO microstructures, the development of a new strategy and the understanding of growth mechanism need to be further studied. In addition, as a classical and important photocatalytic material, ZnO has been extensively studied. Due to the fact that a photocatalytic reaction occurs at the interface between catalyst material and organic pollutants, large specific surface area and low apparent density of structure play important roles in the enhancement of photocatalytic activity. Previous studies have found that many ZnO nano/microstructures with different morphologies, such as 0D nanoparticles,20,21 1D nanowires,22,23 nanorods,24 nanotubes,25 and 3D nano/microarchitectures9,26–28 show good photocatalytic performances. In particular, 3D ZnO hierarchical microstructures have been regarded as fascinating materials in the field of photocatalysis. Therefore, an important and interesting issue is to develop a new and efficient method for the controllable fabrication of such 3D ZnO hierarchical microstructures.
In this paper, we developed a novel but simple catalyst- and template-free aqueous solution method without any additional assistant conditions. We adopted a ZnO seed layer as the inducer to achieve the controlled preparation of LHZA at room temperature for the first time. The ZnO seed broke the hydrolysis of Zn(Ac)2 aqueous solution and speeded up the emergence of Zn–OH constantly, which is very important for the formation of the final LHZA microsphere precursors. Compared with previous reports, such layered LHZA precursors are first obtained in aqueous solution at room temperature. The structure and formation mechanism of the layered LHZA precursors and the final 3D ZnO microspheres are systematically studied. We also demonstrate that such nanosheet-based 3D hierarchical ZnO microspheres exhibit good photocatalytic activity for the photodegradation of rhodamine 6G. It is expected that this simple and modified route would be of assistance in improving the efficiency of preparing ZnO 3D hierarchical microstructures.
Experimental section
Sample preparation
The reagents, zinc acetate (Zn(Ac)2·2H2O, 98% purity) and zinc nitrate (Zn(NO3)2·6H2O, 98% purity), were used as received without any further purification. Firstly, 1.49 g zinc nitrate and 0.18 g zinc acetate were respectively dissolved in 10 mL ethanol and 10 mL water to prepare 0.5 M Zn(NO3)2 ethanol solution and 0.1 M Zn(Ac)2 aqueous solution. 0.2 mL Zn(NO3)2 solution was dropped onto a clean Si wafer (1.5 × 1 cm), and the Si wafer was kept at 50 °C in a drying oven for 60 min. Secondly, the Si wafer covered with dried Zn(NO3)2 film was put into a quartz boat and calcined under 400 °C to prepare the ZnO seed layer as the inducer. Finally, the Si wafer with ZnO seed was immersed into the 0.1 M Zn(Ac)2 aqueous solution for about 10 h at room temperature, and a layer of white product was found on the surface of the Si wafer. The products were washed with distilled water and ethanol, and then dried at room temperature. The final ZnO microspheres were obtained via the calcination of the as-prepared LHZA precursors at 200 °C for 12 h in a furnace under ambient pressure.
Characterization
The X-ray diffraction patterns (XRD) were recorded on a D/max-rB diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.54 Ǻ). Field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) pictures were recorded on JEOL 6400 instrument. Transmission electron microscope (TEM) observations and selected area electron diffraction (SAED) were performed on a JEOL 2010.
Photocatalytic activity measurements
In order to study the photocatalytic activity of the as-prepared flower-like ZnO microstructures, 10 mL 5.0 × 10−5 M rhodamine 6G aqueous solution was added into a glass beaker as a probe, and 5 mg ZnO microsphere products were immersed into the solution. The glass beaker was then exposed to UV irradiation (at 365 nm) from a 100 W Hg lamp at room temperature. The solution was collected every 30 minutes to monitor the degradation of rhodamine 6G by UV–vis spectra on Lambda 750 spectrometer.
Result and discussion
Morphology and structure

Fig. 1(a) exhibits a typical SEM image of the obtained flower-like ZnO sample, which is composed of many uniform microspheres with diameter about 4 μm. The high-magnification SEM image demonstrates the specific surface morphology of the microspheres. It reveals that the microspheres are actually composed of numerous nanosheets that perpendicularly insert into the surface of a sphere structure, forming a flower-like appearance. Such hierarchical microspheres usually have large surface area and very low apparent density (loose structure), which is in favour of their photodegradation performance. Fig. 1(b) shows the XRD pattern of the product obtained from the thermal decomposition of the LHZA microsphere precursors, in which the diffraction of standard hexagonal ZnO phase is presented (JCPDS no. 36-1451) and no other diffraction peaks are detected, indicating that no impurity exists. Further information about the prepared ZnO is obtained from TEM and HRTEM images and the corresponding SAED pattern in Fig. 1(c) and (d). It can be seen that the hierarchical 3D ZnO microsphere with diameter of about 3 μm is built of many thin nanosheets, which is in good accordance with the above SEM observations. From the HRTEM image of the edge of a typical isolate ZnO sphere, we can see that the ZnO nanosheet building block is apparently multilayered. The selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern in the inset of Fig. 1(d) reveals that the obtained ZnO microspheres are polycrystalline with the hexagonal wurtzite-type structure.
 Fig. 1  (a) SEM image and (b) XRD pattern of the flower-like ZnO hierarchical microspheres. (c) TEM image of one single ZnO microsphere. (d) HRTEM image and the corresponding SAED pattern obtained from one single nanosheet in (c). 
To understand the formation mechanism of the layered LHZA nanosheet-based microsphere precursors, we have systematically studied the growth process of LHZA by analyzing the samples at different growth stages. As shown in Fig. 2(a), at the early stage of growth after immersion for 8 h, irregular nanosheets are formed and some of them fold up together against the substrate surface. When the reaction time is prolonged to 24 h, the nanosheets grow and a large fraction of them self-assemble into incomplete flowers. After further increase of the reaction time to 36 h, newly formed nanosheets spontaneously insert into the as-assembled flowers, making them larger and denser. When the reaction time is prolonged to 4 days, a large amount of flower-like microspheres appear and pile up on the substrate. Our time-dependent experiments illustrate that the initial formed LHZA nanosheets are gradually organized into microspheres with increasing the reaction time. Hydrogen bond and van der Waals force should be taken into consideration for the formation of the self-assembly of microspheres.1,2
 Fig. 2  SEM images of LHZA microstructures deposited on the substrate after immersion for (a) 8 h, (b) 24 h, (c) 36 h, (d) 4 d. (e) XRD patterns of the products in different reaction time. (f) TEM image and the corresponding SAED pattern of one single LHZA microsphere. 
In Fig. 2(e), the XRD patterns of the products obtained after different reaction times demonstrate the evolution process of the final LHZA nanosheet precursors under the action of the ZnO seed inducer. Because of the highly crystalline ZnO seed layer and low quantity of the LHZA precursors after a short reaction time, only the ZnO diffraction peaks appeared in the XRD patterns after immersion for about 36 h. It is noted that some other diffraction peaks at about 33° and 59° (labelled by red star), which agree with the diffraction peaks of LHZA, are detected as well as for those of ZnO after immersion for longer period of 36 h. Combined with the SEM images, it can be deduced that the layered LHZA may account for the formation of nanosheet-based microspheres. And the phenomenon of the increasing peaks of LHZA and the weakening peaks of ZnO seed layer is more remarked as the reaction proceeds, indicating the formation of more and more LHZA precursors, which is in accordance with the above SEM observations. Upon further increase of the immersion time to 20 days, the diffraction peaks of the ZnO seed layer are greatly weakened or even disappear, demonstrating that the induced reaction has been completed and the final LHZA microsphere precursors are formed. In addition, the TEM and HRTEM images of one LHZA microsphere are provided in Fig. 2(f), where it is obvious that the microsphere is constructed by many nanosheets and exhibits a flower-like shape, which is consistent with ZnO hierarchical microsphere obtained by the decomposition of LHZA in Fig. 1(d). The corresponding SAED pattern shows the polycrystalline nature of the nanosheet.
Formation mechanism of the flower-like structures
Based on our above experimental results and analyses, we propose the following reaction mechanism. It is well known that there exists a weak hydrolysis in the Zn(Ac)2 aqueous solution as follows: Zn2+ + 2CH3COO− + 2H2O ↔ 2CH3COOH + Zn(OH)2(1)Generally, this reaction remains balanced without any external reactant. In our experiment, when the ZnO seed layer, which is quite sensitive to acid and alkali, was immersed in the Zn(Ac)2 aqueous solution, hydrolyzate CH3COOH would be slowly consumed via the reaction between CH3COOH and ZnO constantly producing Zn(CH3COO)2 and H2O: 2CH3COOH + ZnO → Zn(CH3COO)2 + H2O(2)As a result of this, the reaction balance in eqn (1) was destroyed, and the positive reaction would continue. Finally, more and more OH− was generated in the reaction system. Therefore, the generated plentiful OH− was bonded to Zn2+ in the solution and produced much Zn–OH, which constructed the “ol” bridge by linking with each other:16 Zn–OH + Zn–OH ↔ Zn–(OH)–Zn + OH(3)As soon as much Zn–(OH)–Zn appeared, a complex layer of [Zn5(OH)8(H2O)2]2+ could be produced. At the same time, owing to high reactivity of Ac− ions with zinc ions,18 acetate anions were intercalated between the layers, and constituted the crystal structure of LHZA.16 In this process, the ZnO seed layer not only initiated the reaction as an inducer but also maintained the process continuously at room temperature, and so played an indispensible role for the formation of the layer LHZA precursors. In addition, to confirm the significance of the ZnO seeds, we did put a clean Si wafer without any ZnO seed into the Zn(Ac)2 aqueous solution and other experimental conditions were the same as described earlier. After 10 h, no product appeared on the substrate or in the reaction system, which illustrates that the ZnO seed layer is indispensable in the reaction process. In comparison with the other reaction system, we used ZnO seed as inducer in our experiment, and firstly obtained such important layered LHZA precursors at room temperature. Such a novel but simple method will greatly improve the formation of 3D ZnO hierarchical microstructures, and could be employed to synthesize other semiconductor metal oxide nano/microstructures.
In order to further investigate the above reaction process, a ZnO film fabricated by magnetron sputtering and ZnO single-crystalline microrods grown by CVD method were used as the seed layer, respectively. The results after immersion for 6 h are shown in Fig. 3(a) and (b). We can see that similar flower-like microspheres are also obtained. It is noteworthy that heterogeneous nucleation of the LHZA structure on the surface of the ZnO microrods can be achieved easily, and we can further obtain the 1D microrods–3D microspheres composite, which could have potential applications in photovoltaic nanodevices. The results demonstrate the universality of our approach and the rationality of the proposed growth mechanism.
 Fig. 3  SEM images of Si substrate with (a) ZnO film and (b) ZnO single-crystalline nanowires as seed layer after immersing in Zn(Ac)2 aqueous solution for 6 h. 
Furthermore, we directly synthesized ZnO microrods by immersing a ZnO seed inducer into Zn(Ac)2 aqueous solution for 7 h when the temperature was raised to 80 °C, and other reaction conditions were kept the same. Fig. 4(a) shows the SEM image of the obtained samples. It can be seen that high density of short microrods with hexagonal cross-sections are directly grown on the Si substrate. The microrods have lengths in the range of 1–2 μm and an average diameter of about 3 μm. Fig. 4(b) shows the XRD spectrum of the obtained microrods. All diffraction peaks can be assigned to the hexagonal wurtzite-type ZnO (JCPD no. 65-3411). It is well known that the formation of the layered LHZA nanosheets depends on the link between Zn2+ and OH−. However, once the temperature is raised over 80 °C, the hydrolysis of Zn(CH3COOH)2 would proceed quickly and zinc hydroxide would experience an extremely fast decomposition generating the ZnO blocks with hexagonal cross section by: Zn(OH)2 → ZnO + H2O(4)Herein, using a simple temperature adjustment procedure, we could directly obtain ZnO microrods from the same experimental process.
 Fig. 4  (a) SEM image and (b) XRD pattern of the ZnO products obtained by immersing ZnO seed layer into Zn(Ac)2 aqueous solution for 7 h at 80 °C. 
On the basis of the above experimental results, it is worthy to point out that the reaction temperature and the reaction time are two important factors in controlling the morphology and crystal microstructure of the final products. At room temperature, to reduce the surface energy, the as-formed nanosheets further assemble together, finally forming 3D hierarchical microspheres. Then, the 3D ZnO hierarchical microspheres can be easily obtained using a simple calcination procedure. In addition, the ZnO microrods can also be directly obtained with an increase in immersion temperature. The whole evolution process of the ZnO samples with different morphologies under different experimental conditions is schematically illustrated in Fig. 5. Such a facile and efficient synthesis strategy may be extended to the preparation of other complex functional 3D microstructures with controlled and special physical properties.
 Fig. 5  Schematic illustration of the whole fabrication process of ZnO 3D hierarchical microspheres and short ZnO microrods. 
Photocatalytic activity
According to the photodegradation mechanism of ZnO, electron–hole pairs are formed on the ZnO surface when the catalyst is excited under the irradiation of a UV lamp. On the one hand, the generated hole (hVB+) can directly oxidize dye molecules to form oxidation of dye; on the other hand, the hVB+ would react with H2O or OH− to produce hydroxyl radical (OH˙) which permits the mineralization of dye molecules to degrade dyes.29 Both of these reactions take place at the interface of dye and catalyst, therefore, our flower-like ZnO microspheres with unique 3D hierarchical microstructures are extremely in favour of photodegradation. In addition, point defects in ZnO such as oxygen vacancies, which can capture photogenerated electrons to suppress the around recombination of e− and h+ and absorb O2 to produce ˙O2− radical groups, are beneficial to the photocatalytic performance of the catalyst.30 PL emission spectrum of our ZnO microspheres is shown in Fig. 6(a). The strong broad band in the visible region is attributed to large amount of oxygen vacancies, which would provide favourable conditions for photocatalysis.
 Fig. 6  (a) PL emission spectrum of flower-like ZnO microspheres. (b) Absorption spectra of the rhodamine 6G aqueous solution with ZnO microspheres for different durations. The inset shows digital photos showing the whole photocatalytic process. (c) Degradation curves of the ln(C0/C) vs. time for rhodamine 6G over photocatalyst-free (the red mark) and flower-like ZnO microspheres (the black mark), and the reaction rate constant from the fitted line. 
In our study, the photocatalytic performance was evaluated by photodegradation of the organic rhodamine 6G, a typical pollutant industry dye. The UV-vis absorption spectrum of rhodamine 6G aqueous solution after irradiation for different time is shown in Fig. 6(b). The rate of decolorization was recorded with respect to the change in intensity of characteristic absorption peak at 523 nm of rhodamine 6G. The inset vividly illustrates the colour change of rhodamine 6G during the degradation process. It can be seen that as the reaction progressed, absorption peaks corresponding to the dye solution within prepared ZnO hierarchical structures diminished rapidly and finally disappeared after 2 h, which demonstrated that the dyes had been completely degraded. Furthermore, the degradation ln(C0/C) of rhodamine 6G, where C0 is the initial concentration and C is the concentration data at any time, in a photocatalyst-free experiment and over flower-like ZnO microspheres were recorded after being exposed to ultraviolet irradiation. The curves of ln(C0/C) vs. time shown in Fig. 6(c) are linear, demonstrating that the photodegradation reaction is in line with the first-order rate law, ln(C0/C) = kt. The rate constants for the fitted lines were calculated to be 0.0321 min−1 and 0.0004 min−1 for rhodamine 6G with and without catalyst, respectively. The results fully demonstrate the excellent photocatalytic ability of these ZnO microflowers.
Conclusions
In summary, a novel but simple aqueous solution method, without any catalysts and templates, was reported to synthesize flower-like 3D ZnO hierarchical microspheres. The LHZA precursors were prepared firstly by immersing ZnO seed into zinc acetate aqueous solution at room temperature, and then transformed to ZnO through heat treatment under ambient pressure. According to a series of time-dependent morphological evolution, a growth mechanism was discussed. The flower-like LHZA precursors were produced mainly through the controlled hydrolysis of Zn(CH3COOH)2. Meanwhile, the ZnO seed played a vital part by breaking the hydrolysis equilibrium of Zn(CH3COOH)2, forming an “ol” bridge constantly. We further showed an experiment with another kind of ZnO seed and a confirmatory experiment without a ZnO seed layer to demonstrate the reasonable nature of the proposed growth mechanism. We found that the reaction temperature and the reaction time played important roles in governing the morphologies and the crystal microstructures of the final products. The as-prepared flower-like ZnO porous structures were demonstrated to work as an effective photocatalyst under UV irradiation. Moreover, this work further implies that this convenient and economical method can be adopted to synthesize other metal oxide complex microstructures by immersing ZnO seed into acid salt or basic salt.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported financially by the NSFC (61378074, 61108059, 50802103, 51072207).
Notes and references
M. S. Yao, P. Hu, Y. B. Cao, W. C. Xiang, X. Zhang, F. L. Yuan and Y. F. Chen, Sens. Actuators, B, 2013, 177, 562–569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. X. Dong, Y. Liu, G. H. Li, X. W. Wang, D. Xu, Z. H. Chen, T. Zhang, J. Wang and L. Zhang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2013, 178, 302–309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. N. Han, D. J. Wang, J. B. Cui, L. P. Chen, T. F. Jiang and Y. H. Lin, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 12915 RSC .
K. Kakiuchi, M. Saito and S. Fujihara, Thin Solid Films, 2008, 516, 2026–2030 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Xu, M. Dai, Y. N. Lu and L. T. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 114, 2776–2782 Search PubMed .
Y. T. Shi, C. Zhu, L. Wang, C. Y. Zhao, W. Li, K. K. Fung, T. L. Ma, A. Hagfeldt and N. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 1000–1012 CrossRef CAS .
C. K. King'ondu, A. Iyer, E. C. Njagi, N. Opembe, H. Genuino, H. Huang, R. A. Ristau and S. L. Suib, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 4186–4189 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. X. Li and Y. F. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 890–896 CAS .
H. Y. Sun, Y. L. Yu, J. Luo, M. Ahmad and J. Zhu, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 8626–8632 RSC .
H. H. Wang and C. S. Xie, J. Cryst. Growth, 2006, 291, 187–195 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-H. Ku, H.-H. Yang, G.-R. Chen and J.-J. Wu, Cryst. Growth Des., 2008, 8, 283–290 CAS .
X. F. Zhou, Z. L. Hu, Y. Q. Fan, S. Chen, W. P. Ding and N. P. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 11722–11728 CAS .
C.-L. Kuo, T.-J. Kuo and M. H. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 20115–20121 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Hou, L. Q. Zhu, H. L. Chen, H. C. Liu and W. P. Li, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 78, 55–64 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. B. Xia, J. Sha, Y. J. Fang, Y. T. Wan, Z. L. Wang and Y. W. Wang, Cryst. Growth Des., 2012, 10, 2759–2765 Search PubMed .
E. Hosono, S. Fujihara, T. Kimura and H. Imai, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2004, 272, 391–398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. H. Wang and C. S. Xie, J. Cryst. Growth, 2006, 291, 187–195 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Hosono, S. Fujihara, T. Kimura and H. Imai, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2004, 29, 71–79 CrossRef CAS .
L. L. Xu, Z. Li, Q. H. Cai, H. X. Wang, H. Gao, W. Lv and J. Liu, CrystEngComm, 2010, 12, 2166–2172 RSC .
Z. W. Deng, M. Chen, G. X. Gu and L. M. Wu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2008, 112, 16–22 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Xu, P. Zhang, A. Navrotsky, Z.-Y. Yuan, T.-Z. Ren, M. Halasa and B.-L. Su, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 5680–5686 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, Z. H. Chen, I. Shafiq, J. A. Zapien, I. Bello, W. J. Zhang and S. T. Lee, Cryst. Growth Des., 2009, 9, 7 Search PubMed .
T.-J. Kuo, C.-N. Lin, C.-L. Kuo and M. H. Huang, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 5143–5147 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Song, S. J. Zhang, X. Q. Wu and Q. W. Wei, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2012, 51, 4922–4926 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bae, J. B. Han, X.-M. Zhang, M. Wei, X. Duan, Y. Zhang and Z. L. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 10379–10383 CAS .
S. W. Liu, C. Li, J. G. Yu and Q. J. Xiang, CrystEngComm, 2011, 13, 2533–2539 RSC .
H. B. Lu, S. M. Wang, L. Zhao, J. C. Li, B. H. Dong and Z. X. Xu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 4228 RSC .
J.-J. Feng, Q.-C. Liao, A.-J. Wang and J.-R. Chen, CrystEngComm, 2011, 13, 4202 RSC .
S. K. Kansal, M. Singh and D. Sud, J. Hazard. Mater., 2007, 141, 581–590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Singh, K. C. Barick and D. Bahadur, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 4631 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) SEM image and (b) XRD pattern of the flower-like ZnO hierarchical microspheres. (c) TEM image of one single ZnO microsphere. (d) HRTEM image and the corresponding SAED pattern obtained from one single nanosheet in (c).	 

 	Fig. 2  SEM images of LHZA microstructures deposited on the substrate after immersion for (a) 8 h, (b) 24 h, (c) 36 h, (d) 4 d. (e) XRD patterns of the products in different reaction time. (f) TEM image and the corresponding SAED pattern of one single LHZA microsphere.	 
Zn2+ + 2CH3COO− + 2H2O ↔ 2CH3COOH + Zn(OH)2	(1)
2CH3COOH + ZnO → Zn(CH3COO)2 + H2O	(2)
Zn–OH + Zn–OH ↔ Zn–(OH)–Zn + OH	(3)

 	Fig. 3  SEM images of Si substrate with (a) ZnO film and (b) ZnO single-crystalline nanowires as seed layer after immersing in Zn(Ac)2 aqueous solution for 6 h.	 
Zn(OH)2 → ZnO + H2O	(4)

 	Fig. 4  (a) SEM image and (b) XRD pattern of the ZnO products obtained by immersing ZnO seed layer into Zn(Ac)2 aqueous solution for 7 h at 80 °C.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic illustration of the whole fabrication process of ZnO 3D hierarchical microspheres and short ZnO microrods.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) PL emission spectrum of flower-like ZnO microspheres. (b) Absorption spectra of the rhodamine 6G aqueous solution with ZnO microspheres for different durations. The inset shows digital photos showing the whole photocatalytic process. (c) Degradation curves of the ln(C0/C) vs. time for rhodamine 6G over photocatalyst-free (the red mark) and flower-like ZnO microspheres (the black mark), and the reaction rate constant from the fitted line.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
