Interfaces between water splitting catalysts and buried silicon junctions   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2EE23932A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2EE23932A
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 532-538Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsInterfaces between water splitting catalysts and buried silicon junctions†

        
          
            Casandra R. 
            Cox
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Mark T. 
            Winkler
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Joep J. H. 
            Pijpers
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Tonio 
            Buonassisi
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Daniel G. 
            Nocera
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Chemistry, 6-335, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77 Massachusetts Avenue Cambridge, MA 02139-4307, USA. E-mail: nocera@mit.edu
bDepartment of Mechanical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77 Massachusetts Avenue Cambridge, MA 02139-4307, USA. E-mail: buonassisi@mit.edu
Received 
      30th October 2012
    , Accepted 5th December 2012First published on 6th December 2012AbstractThe coupling of water-splitting catalysts to silicon photovoltaics enables direct solar-to-fuel conversion. Critical to the performance of such devices is the use of interfaces to protect silicon from the oxygen-evolving reaction (OER) and at the same time to provide Ohmic contact between the buried silicon junction and the immobilised OER catalyst. Presented herein are guidelines for constructing the Si|catalyst interface, which is a crucial building block for efficient direct solar-to-fuel conversion devices. We show that fluorinated-tin-oxide is an especially attractive interface for buried-junction devices.

Broader context
The coupling of water-splitting catalysts to photovoltaics enables for direct solar-to-fuel conversion. Crystalline silicon is particularly attractive as a PV material because it absorbs most of the solar spectrum, is earth abundant, and due to years of optimization has minimal losses associated with bulk carrier transport. The realization of a Si-based solar-to-fuel device hinges on overcoming the instability of Si in the presence of the highly oxidizing conditions and on the successful integration of water splitting-catalysts. Here we demonstrate that fluorinated-tin-oxide is an especially attractive interface for protecting Si as well as minimizing interfacial resistances as an earth-abundant support for highly active water-splitting catalysts.

Introduction
Low-cost energy storage is essential for the realization of large-scale deployment of renewable energy resources.1–3 Fuels are a particularly attractive form to store renewable energy owing to the high energy density of chemical bonds. Of the various fuel forming reactions, the splitting of water to produce hydrogen (and oxygen) is essential to any fuel forming process since it is in this reaction that the majority of the energy is stored.1
We have recently developed buried junctions comprising earth-abundant materials that perform direct solar-to-fuel water splitting. The construct comprises amorphous4 or crystalline5,6 silicon interfaced with a cobalt phosphate/borate (CoPi/CoBi)7,8 or nickel borate (NiBi)9 catalyst to drive the oxygen evolving reaction (OER). These catalysts are ideally suited to the buried junction because they operate at appreciable current densities in natural waters under benign environmental conditions (neutral or near-neutral pH, 1 atmosphere pressure)10 and they are stable by virtue of a self-healing mechanism.11 When interfaced with a hydrogen-evolving reaction (HER) catalyst, a stand-alone device (i.e., artificial leaf) may be constructed that splits water into oxygen and hydrogen under 1 sun (AM 1.5) illumination and under simply engineered conditions.4,12
The buried junction photoelectrochemical (BJ-PEC) cell differs from traditional solution junction photoelectrochemical (SJ-PEC) cells in significant ways. In an SJ-PEC, the semiconductor makes a rectifying junction with the solution, and accordingly is subject to more design limitations than in a BJ-PEC.13 First and foremost, in an SJ-PEC, water splitting catalysis is combined with charge separation, current rectification, and photovoltage generation. Most candidate materials are based on metal-oxides, but decades of research have shown that it is extremely difficult to produce a competent photovoltaic (PV) material that is at the same time capable of facilitating the demanding four-electron, four-proton chemistry of water splitting.14–23 Most oxides (e.g., TiO2, ZnO and WO3) known to date are wide-gap semiconductors that split water by taking advantage of an overwhelming overpotential where other less desirable mechanisms dominate (such as OER via high energy hydroxyl radical intermediates).24 At the thermodynamic water-splitting potential, the catalytic activity of such oxides for water splitting is feeble, if not non-existent. Second, in an SJ-PEC, the band edges of the semiconductor must straddle the thermodynamic potentials of OER and HER under the conditions of operation. These foregoing limitations are circumvented in a buried junction device. In a BJ-PEC, the rectifying junction is isolated from solution by Ohmic contacts, typically transparent conducting oxides (TCOs),25 which enable charge transfer to catalyst overlayers where OER and HER occur. In this design, water-splitting catalysis is separated from the internal junction where current rectification, charge separation, and photovoltage generation occur. For this reason, the OER and HER catalysts may be optimized independently from the PV device such that the maximum power characteristics of the PV and catalyst may be matched independently. Of equal significance, in a BJ-PEC, the potential drop across the outer Helmholtz layer adjusts automatically to move the Fermi levels to energetic positions that allow the water splitting reaction to proceed.26 For this reason, the photovoltages produced at buried junctions need not be fixed relative to a specific material flatband potential and consequently there is no requirement for the flatband potentials of the semiconductors to straddle the thermodynamic potentials of the OER and HER. There simply has to be a sufficient potential generated by the PV device to enable water splitting.
Realization of a high solar-to-fuel efficiency (SFE) in a PEC depends on matching the power output of the PV elements with the power consumption by the electrochemical load. More specifically, the electrochemical load for water splitting (defined by the Tafel behavior of HER and OER catalysts and cell resistances) should intersect the i–V curve of the solar cell at its maximum power point for maximal SFE to be realized.27–29 In the case of the BJ-PEC, these catalysts and PV power curves may be adjusted independently. A critical element of the BJ-PEC construct is the Ohmic interface between the catalyst and buried junction. Previous reports describing water splitting using BJ-PECs are primarily based on amorphous silicon solar cells or expensive group III–V multi-junction solar cells.28,30,31 In this regard, crystalline silicon (c-Si) is a particularly attractive PV material for BJ-PEC devices not only because it absorbs most of the solar spectrum, is earth abundant, and has minimal losses associated with bulk carrier transport but also because of the overwhelming market advantage of c-Si.32 However, silicon presents a challenge for BJ-PEC devices because it is unable to withstand the corrosive environment of the OER, especially in aqueous environments. For this reason, the interface on the p-side of the buried junction is critical because it protects the silicon surfaces from corrosion attendant to the OER reaction. At the same time, this interface must be a good conductor to permit the hole carriers to be transported from the buried junction to the catalyst. Optimization of the interface between the solar cell and the OER catalyst is therefore critical to the fabrication and performance of BJ-PECs. We note that the composition of the interface is a critical determinant of the overall electrode activity and is embodied by both the electrical resistance at the interface between the silicon and the protective layer and by the inherent activity of the catalyst. In this regard, the slope of Tafel plots (relating the rate of the water oxidation reaction to the overpotential) encompasses both the electrical interfacial resistance and inherent catalyst activity. Since the latter parameter is known for the catalysts studied here, the Tafel slope gives direct insight into the properties of the silicon/protective layer interface.
We report here a controlled study that examines electrode performance as it relates to the interface composition and the choice of OER catalyst (i.e. CoBi, NiBi and NiFeO). A goal of this study was to replace indium-tin-oxide (ITO) with less expensive and more earth-abundant materials including other TCOs and thin metal films. We show that fluorine-doped-tin-oxide (FTO) is well-suited as an interface for silicon-based BJ-PECs that perform OER under neutral aqueous conditions.
Experimental
Solar cell fabrication
Boron-doped p-type silicon was commercially purchased (International Wafer Service) and used as a starting material (3′′ diameter, 0.3–0.5 mm thick). The resistivity was 3 Ω cm, corresponding to a dopant concentration of 5 × 1015 cm−3. An np-Si junction was created via phosphorus diffusion by heating the substrate in a tube furnace while flowing phosphoryl chloride (POCl3) in a nitrogen carrier gas at 822 °C for 20 min, followed by 20 min of annealing in an O2–N2 atmosphere at 822 °C. In this configuration, phosphorus diffusion occurs on both sides of the wafer, resulting in an npn-wafer. As a result of the high-temperature treatment in air, the surface of the npn-wafer was covered with a phosphorus silicate glass surface layer, which was removed by dipping in 10% HF solution. To create the p+ layer, a 1 μm film of aluminum-doped silicon (1% Si) was sputtered onto one side of the npn-wafer, followed by a rapid thermal annealing (RTA) step in N2 at 900 °C. During the RTA step, Al diffuses through the n-Si layer and converts it to an npp+-Si wafer. A Si3N4 layer was employed on the n-Si surface as a passivation layer and as an anti-reflection coating layer. An emitter contact grid was patterned photolithographically. The grid was optimized for both series resistance and shadowing. Seven equally spaced grid lines (width 25 μm) collected current from a 1.10 cm2 device. The device possessed short circuit currents that ranged from 28 to 34 mA cm−2, open circuit voltages that ranged from 0.5 to 0.53, and fill factors that ranged from 0.7 to 0.77, to furnish cells with overall conversion efficiencies between 10 and 13%. Fig. S1† displays typical i–V curves of the as prepared npp+-Si solar cell.
A contact-passivation layer was deposited atop the aluminum contact to isolate it from catalytic processes. Films of indium-tin-oxide (ITO) or Ni were deposited on the p+-side of the npp+-Si wafer using an AJA International sputtering system (Orion 5). The AJA system is equipped with three 300 W guns, two of which are RF for either conductive or dielectric materials, and one of which is DC for conductive materials only. 100 nm thick ITO was reactively sputtered in an 11:1 mixture of Ar:O2. To improve the conductivity of the ITO layer,33 the entire silicon wafer was then annealed in a N2 atmosphere at 400 °C for 45 min. Nickel films 100 nm thick were sputtered in a pure Ar environment. In all cases, the pressure was ∼4 × 10−6 bar and deposition rates of all films were measured using a quartz crystal monitor (QCM) in a preliminary ‘conditioning’ run. FTO was deposited on the p+-side of the silicon wafer by spray pyrolysis.4 In a typical spray deposition, 60 mL of ethanol containing 4.2 g SnCl4·5H2O and 0.7 mL saturated NH4F was used to coat one 3′′ diameter wafer with FTO. Before the spray pyrolysis, the silicon wafer was heated to 400 °C in air. After spraying the FTO precursor solution, a transparent film formed on the wafer. This FTO coated wafer was annealed at 400 °C in air for 1 h.
Ti/Pd/Ag metal contacts were deposited (20/20/250 nm, Ti adjacent to Si) on the n-side of the silicon wafer; the residual Al from the formation of the p+ layer was used to contact the base of the PV device. Following metallization, the 3′′ diameter wafer was cut into 1.5 × 2.5 cm2 pieces using a 1064 nm YAG laser cutter.
Before exposing the solar cell to aqueous conditions, a glass slide was epoxied (Loctite Hysol® E-30CL) onto the n-sides of 1.5 × 2.5 cm2 individual pieces. The sides of the solar cells were protected with a thin layer of electrochemical stop-off masking lacquer (MICROStop, Tolber Chemical Division).
Catalyst preparation
Electrochemical experiments were performed using a CH Instruments 760D potentiostat and an Ag/AgCl reference electrode (BASi, MF-2052). All electrode potentials were converted to the NHE scale using E(NHE) = E(Ag/AgCl) + 0.197. Platinum mesh (Alfa Aesar) was used as the auxiliary electrode. Unless otherwise stated, the electrolyte was 0.5 M potassium borate (Bi) at a pH of 9.2 with 1.5 M KNO3 as a supporting electrolyte.
Catalyst films were deposited on completed PV devices that included a contact-passivation layer. Catalyst films of CoBi and NiBi electrodeposited in a two-compartment electrochemical cell with a glass frit junction of fine porosity. The working compartment was charged with ∼50 mL of solution comprising 25 mL of 0.2 M Bi electrolyte and 25 mL of 1 mM Co2+ or Ni2+ solution. The auxiliary compartment was charged with ∼50 mL of 0.1 M Bi electrolyte. The working electrode was a 1.5 × 2.5 cm2 piece of an npp+-silicon solar cell, fabricated as described above. Typically, a 1 cm2 area of the working electrode was immersed in the solution and electrolysis was performed by applying 0.85 V vs. NHE directly to the TCO–Ni side until 26 mC cm−2 of charge had passed for CoBi deposition, and 2.6 mC cm−2 of charge had passed for NiBi deposition. High-activity NiBi is achieved by anodizing NiBi films in 1 M KBi by passage of 3.5 mA cm−2 for 1 h with stirring.34
NiFeO catalyst films were deposited by reactive sputtering using the AJA International sputtering system, mentioned above. Films of 100 nm thickness were deposited by reactive sputtering from an iron-doped nickel sputtering target (19% Fe) in an Ar:O2 atmosphere of 9.6:2.4.
Scanning electron microscopy
SEM micrographs were obtained with a JSM-5910 microscope (JEOL). Before imaging, samples were rinsed with deionized water and allowed to dry in air before loading into the instrument. Images were obtained with an acceleration voltage of 5–10 kV.
Photoelectrochemical methods
Photoelectrochemistry experiments were performed in a one-compartment quartz cell. The light source was a Sol 2A solar simulator (Newport Corp.).
The Tafel behavior of surface-passivated, catalyst-functionalized, solar cells was measured in the region of water oxidation over a 200 mV range in 10–30 mV increments. The measurements were conducted in a solution containing 0.5 M KBi and 1.5 KNO3 at pH 9.2, using an Ag/AgCl reference electrode and a Pt auxiliary electrode.
An Ocean Optics oxygen sensor system (NeoFox® Phase Measurement System) was used for the quantitative detection of O2. The experiment was performed in a custom-built, two-compartment, gas-tight electrochemical cell. The electrolyte was a 0.5 M KBi and 1.5 M KNO3 solution at pH 9.2; the solution was purged by bubbling with high purity Ar for 2 h with vigorous stirring and it was then transferred to the electrochemical cell under Ar. The two-compartment cell comprised a catalyst-functionalized silicon solar cell working electrode, an Ag/AgCl reference electrode, and a Pt mesh counter-electrode. Measurements of the FOXY probe were recorded at 10 s intervals, and the data were converted into the partial pressure of O2 in the headspace using a calibration curve defined by air, 20.9% O2 and high purity N2 (0% O2). After recording the partial pressure of O2 for 2 h in the absence of an applied potential, the sample was illuminated with 1 sun AM 1.5 light and electrolysis was initiated at 0.6 V vs. NHE. Due to variations in the PV characteristics for each sample, a potential bias of 0.6 V vs. NHE produced operating current densities ranging from 1.5 to 5 mA cm−2. Electrolysis with O2 sensing was continued for ∼12 h to ensure that the O2 yield reached a plateau. At the conclusion of the experiment, the solution and the headspace volumes in the working compartment were measured (55 mL and 62 mL, respectively). The total charge passed in the electrolysis was divided by 4F to get the calculated O2 yield. The partial pressure of O2 was converted into μmols, and corrected using Henry's law for the O2 dissolved in solution. The total calculated and the experimental O2 yields were used to determine the Faradaic efficiency.
Results
Anode morphology

Fig. 1 shows a schematic of the BJ-PEC designed for this study. Because the n-side was illuminated, the p-side can be coated with conductive overlayers that are either transparent (TCO) or opaque (thin metal film). Fig. 2a and b show the SEM images of CoBi catalyst films deposited on FTO and Ni, respectively. In both cases, the morphology of the CoBi catalyst is similar and comprises a roughened surface that exhibits spherical nodules; the FTO|CoBi electrode exhibits larger aggregates of these nodules owing to longer deposition times. Ni is prone to oxidation at the potentials used for deposition; hence the amount of charged passed during a given time period does not correspond to a controlled CoBi thickness as in the case of an ITO or FTO electrode.
 Fig. 1  Schematic of the npp+-Si buried-junction solar cell used in this study. For electrochemical measurements, an external voltage may be applied to contacts at either side of the cell. A transparent conducting oxide (TCO) or Ni thin film serves to protect the Si and provide an interface for charge transport from the buried junction to the oxygen-evolving reaction (OER) catalyst. 
 Fig. 2  Plane view SEM images of OER-catalysts deposited on surface-protected npp+-Si electrodes. From left to right (A) npp+-Si|FTO|CoBi and (B) npp+-Si|Ni|CoBi. 
Activity
A cyclic voltammogram (CV) of a FTO-coated npp+-Si electrode functionalized with the CoBi catalyst is given in Fig. 3. These CV traces are representative of npp+-Si electrodes coated with the different interfaces (ITO, FTO and Ni) and functionalized with different OER catalysts (CoBi, NiBi and NiFeO). When applying the potential through the metal contact at the n-side, the dark current (black trace in Fig. 3) is negligible, which is consistent with the high impedance associated with the measurement of an anodic current across a reverse biased np-Si junction.35 When applying the potential through the FTO protective film (red trace), a large anodic current is observed with an onset potential of ∼1.0 V vs. NHE. In this measurement configuration, the PV device is essentially bypassed electrically and the measured current simply reflects the properties of the CoBi catalyst on an FTO substrate, independent of the PV device. All traces in Fig. 3 were measured in KBi electrolyte (pH 9.2) for which the thermodynamic potential for water oxidation is 0.68 V vs. NHE. As such, the onset for water oxidation at the CoBi catalyst (in the dark) occurs at an ∼0.4 V overpotential. When the npp+-Si|FTO|CoBi cell is subjected to 1 sun AM 1.5 illumination, and the potential is applied through the metal contact at the n-side, the blue trace in Fig. 3 is obtained. The onset for water oxidation is shifted negatively by ∼0.5 V. The Voc of the npp+-Si cell is 0.53 V. Thus, most of the photovoltage generated by the solar cell can be utilized to reduce the onset for OER.
 Fig. 3  CV curves of npp+-Si|FTO|CoBi in a 0.5 M KBi electrolyte in the dark with Vappl through the n-side of the cell in Fig. 1 (black line), with Vappl through the n-side under 1 sun AM 1.5 illumination (blue line), and in the dark with Vappl through the FTO layer (red dashed line). 
For a device exhibiting maximum performance, the photocurrent produced in the solar cells should be consumed only in the water-oxidation process and not contribute to any parasitic process (e.g., oxidation of the protective coating or even the underlying silicon) impairing the long-term stability of the electrode; additionally Ohmic resistive losses should be minimized within the cell. To assess the extent to which the current produced from the cells is consumed in the 4e−–4H+ water oxidation process to O2, the Faradaic efficiency of the OER-functionalized silicon electrodes was measured using a fluorescence based O2 sensor. Fig. 4 shows a comparison between Ni and FTO passivated solar cells, both functionalized with the CoBi catalyst. The Faradaic efficiency of a FTO-protected electrode is unity whereas that of the Ni protective coating is ca. 80%.
 Fig. 4  O2 production measured by a fluorescent sensor (red line) and the amount produced based on current passed assuming 100% Faradaic efficiency (green line) for (left) npp+-Si|FTO|CoBi and (right) npp+-Si|Ni|CoBi. 
Quantitative information on the steady-state activity of the functionalized electrodes can be obtained from the Tafel data for various interface and catalyst combinations. Fig. 5 shows representative Tafel plots for a CoBi-functionalized solar cell with the three different interfaces. Consistent with the results of Fig. 3, in all cases, the onset for water oxidation is shifted negatively by ∼0.5 V at any applied overpotential, thus indicating that the photovoltage of the solar cell is efficiently harnessed for solar-to-fuel conversion. Despite the similar voltage offset, different Tafel slopes are observed for the three systems. When applying the potential to the n-side, the dark currents (black dots Fig. 5) are related to shunt currents across the pn-junction. These shunt currents are localized at imperfections in the pn-junction and sample-to-sample variations in the quality of the in-house produced solar cells can account for the widely varying Tafel slopes in the dark (black dots Fig. 5). When applying the potential directly to the TCO–Ni interface in the dark (red dots Fig. 5), the PV element is electrically bypassed and the Tafel slopes reflect the lateral resistance of the protective layer in addition to the inherent activity of the OEC. Finally, when applying the potential to the n-side under illumination (blue dots Fig. 5) the photocurrents overwhelm the shunt currents, explaining why the variation in Tafel slopes is not as large compared to the dark situation (black dots). The remaining variation in the slopes of the blue dots can be fully attributed to different electrical resistances across the Si-TCO–Ni interface, since the composition of the protective layer is the only parameter that is varied between Fig. 5a–c. The Tafel slopes presented in Fig. 5 embody the behavior of the catalysis and Ohmic resistances of the cell, where the interfacial resistance contributes the most to the overall resistance. The CoBi and NiBi catalysts have intrinsic Tafel slopes of 60 and 30 mV per decade, respectively,36 arising from a one-electron and two-electron pre-equilibrium prior to the turnover limiting step. For the case of NiFeO, the Tafel slope is known to exhibit variance in the rate-limiting step depending on the Fe content,37 but is generally reported to be 45 mV per decade. The Tafel slopes for the various systems shown in Table 1 exceed the intrinsic Tafel slopes of the catalysts, thus indicating that there is a series resistance resulting from the interface.
 Fig. 5  Tafel plots of (a) npp+-Si|ITO|CoBi, (b) npp+-Si|FTO|CoBi and (c) npp+-Si|Ni|CoBi. With the potential applied to the metal front contact for measurements in the dark (black), under 1 sun of AM 1.5 illumination (blue), and in the dark with the potential applied through the protective coating at the back of the sample (red). 
Table 1 Summary of Tafel slopes for npp+-Si|interface|catalyst films under 1 sun AM 1.5 illumination




Electrode
Tafel slope(mV per decade)




npp+Si|ITO|CoBi
90


npp+Si|ITO|NiBi
86


npp+Si|FTO|CoBi
63


npp+Si|FTO|NiBi
63


npp+|Si|FTO|NiFeO
53


npp+Si|Ni|CoBi
68


npp+Si|Ni|NiBi
98


npp+Si|Ni|NiFeO
48




Silicon–metal interfaces are known to make very good Ohmic contacts,38 whereas the electrical properties of the TCO and therefore Ohmic contact between the Si|TCO interfaces depend strongly on the deposition conditions of the TCO.39,40 Resistive losses at this interface will reduce the activity of the electrode, since the resulting voltage drop results in an effective lower potential available for OER catalysis. Additionally, the sheet resistance of the protective coating will vary for different materials. The resistance of sputtered Ni films was measured to be very low (13 Ω sq−1). But the sheet resistance of the FTO films, as measured in a four-point probe measurement on an FTO film deposited on glass, was found to be 41 Ω sq−1. For commercial FTO on glass (prepared by chemical vapor deposition at 600 °C), the sheet resistance is 7 Ω sq−1. Using profilometry, we determined that our sprayed FTO films had a thickness of ∼400 nm, so the voltage drop due to resistive losses within such a thin FTO and/or ITO film are presumably not very large. However, we cannot exclude the presence of local inhomogeneities in the FTO/ITO film that could potentially lead to local voltage drops.
Discussion
The different Tafel slopes shown in Fig. 5 and listed in Table 1 depend both on catalytic activity and Ohmic resistances arising primarily between the catalyst|Si interface, and the variability in the data can be explained by one or a combination of the above explanations. To isolate the latter, we examined the anode activity of a variety of catalyst-protective coating combinations on the Si buried junction. For a given OER catalyst (e.g., CoBi), the trend is the same. The Tafel slope for a FTO-coated electrode is lower than that of ITO and Ni-coated electrodes exhibit high variability. We believe that the variance of the Ni interface arises from oxidation of the Ni film to NiO.41 The attenuated Faradaic efficiency of the Ni-coated electrode supports this contention inasmuch as some current would be appropriated for the oxidation of Ni to NiO. We note that formation of a NiO layer does not need to be detrimental to the overall OER process since NiO is known to be conductive and hence will not necessarily impair hole transport from the buried junction.37 This suggests that Tafel slopes do not necessarily reflect Ohmic resistances such as shown by npp+-Si|Ni|NiFeO in Table 1. However, the current does not necessarily translate to water splitting as indicated by Fig. 4 (right). It is conceivable that during oxidation of Ni to NiO, the contact of the protective film to the Si surface changes, leading to inhomogeneous interfacial properties and changes in anode activity, as we observed. We show in Fig. S10† that the consequences of Ni oxidation may be mitigated by using a more dense NiFeO catalyst (Faradaic efficiency of 92%). Given the good Ohmic contact between silicon and Ni, such an approach may contribute to optimization of electrode activity.
Conclusions
We demonstrate herein that the overpotential for water splitting by a BJ-PEC can be significantly improved through optimization of the interface between the Si junction and OER catalyst. FTO is a preferred coating as opposed to ITO because it avoids the use of indium and is also able to form highly conductive films as prepared by a variety of deposition techniques.42,43 Nickel is also an attractive interface for BJ-PEC architectures owing to its ability to make excellent Ohmic contact with silicon and to easily deposit it by a variety of techniques (e.g., sputtering, e-beam evaporation). However, this metal interface confronts the additional caveat that a NiO interlayer may also form and the Ohmic nature of this additional interface must also be controlled if optimal SFEs are to be achieved.
Importantly, the results reported herein establish that high overall SFEs can be achieved with FTO-coated artificial leaves. The overall solar-to-fuel efficiency (ηSFE) with which solar power is converted into chemical fuels is given by,44ηSFE = ηPV × ηC × ηWSwhere ηPV is the efficiency of the PV device, ηWS is the efficiency of water splitting (including resistive losses at the silicon–catalyst interface), and ηC is the coupling efficiency, describing to what extent the voltage of the electrical load (i.e. water-splitting chemistry) is matched with the voltage at the maximum power point of the PV. The results reported here show that interface optimization between the silicon solar cell and the OER catalyst results in a higher ηWS, and that ηPV × ηWS is as high as 8%. However, a low overall ηSFE is observed because we employ only a single junction solar cell (requiring an externally applied voltage for water splitting), which results in a very low value of ηC. The SFE can be drastically improved by connecting three silicon solar cells in series, alleviating the need for an external potential. Thus an overall ηSFE > 10% should be achievable by combining three single junction silicon solar cells in series with ηPV ∼ 20%.
Acknowledgements
We thank Kurt Broderick of the MIT Microelectronics Technology Laboratory for help with thin film processing. D.G.N. acknowledges AFOSR FA9550-09-1-0689 for support of this research. T.B. acknowledges NSF CAREER award ECCS-1150878. This work was performed in part at Harvard University's Center for Nanoscale Systems, a member of the National Nanotechnology Infrastructure Network, which is supported by the NSF under award no. ECS-0335765.
Notes and references
T. R. Cook, D. K. Dogutan, S. Y. Reece, Y. Surendranath, T. S. Teets and D. G. Nocera, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6474–6502 CrossRef CAS .
D. G. Nocera, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 10001–10017 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729–15735 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Reece, J. A. Hamel, K. Sung, T. D. Jarvi, A. J. Esswein, J. J. H. Pijpers and D. G. Nocera, Science, 2011, 334, 645–648 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. H. Pijpers, M. T. Winkler, Y. Surendranath, T. Buonassisi and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011, 108, 10056–10061 CrossRef CAS .
E. R. Young, R. Costi, D. G. Nocera and V. Bulović, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2058–2061 CAS .
M. W. Kanan and D. G. Nocera, Science, 2008, 321, 1072–1075 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Surendranath, M. Dincǎ and D. G. Nocera, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 2615–2620 CrossRef CAS .
M. Dincǎ, Y. Surendranath and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2010, 107(23), 10337–10341 CrossRef .
A. J. Esswein, Y. Surendranath, S. Y. Reece and D. G. Nocera, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 499–504 CAS .
D. A. Lutterman, Y. Surendranath and D. G. Nocera, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 3838–3839 CrossRef CAS .
D. G. Nocera, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 767–776 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446–6473 CrossRef CAS .
R. I. Cukier and D. G. Nocera, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 1998, 49, 337–369 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. V. Huynh and T. J. Meyer, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 5004–5064 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hammes–Schiffer, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1881–1889 CrossRef .
R. Eisenberg and H. B. Gray, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 1697–1699 CrossRef CAS .
P. E. M. Siegbahn, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 18238–18239 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Concepcion, J. W. Jurss, M. K. Brennaman, P. G. Hoertz, A. O. T. Patrocinio, N. Y. Murakami Iha, J. L. Templeton and T. J. Meyer, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1954–1965 CrossRef CAS .
T. A. Betley, Q. Wu, T. Van Voorhis and D. G. Nocera, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 1849–1861 CrossRef CAS .
T. A. Betley, Y. Surendranath, M. V. Childress, G. E. Alliger, R. Fu, C. C. Cummins and D. G. Nocera, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., B, 2008, 363, 1293–1303 CrossRef CAS .
J. L Dempsey, A. J. Esswein, D. R. Manke, J. Rosenthal, J. D. Soper and D. G. Nocera, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 6879–6892 CrossRef .
C. J. Chang, M. C. Y. Chang, N. H. Damrauer and D. G. Nocera, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 2004, 1655, 13–28 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Surendranath and D. G. Nocera, Prog. Inorg. Chem., 2011, 57, 505–560 CrossRef .
R. G. Gordon, Mater. Res. Soc. Bull., 2000, 25, 52–57 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Hanna and A. J. Nozik, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 100, 074510 CrossRef .
R. E. Rocheleau and E. L. Miller, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 1997, 22, 771–782 CrossRef CAS .
E. L. Miller, R. E. Rocheleau and X. M. Deng, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2003, 28, 615–623 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Surendranath, D. K. Bediako and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 39, 15617–15621 CrossRef .
N. Kelley and T. L. Gibson, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2006, 31, 1658–1673 CrossRef .
O. Khaselev and J. A. Turner, Science, 2008, 280, 425–427 CrossRef .
D. M. Powell, M. T. Winkler, H. J. Choi, C. B. Simmons, D. B. Needleman and T. Buonassisi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5874–5883 Search PubMed .
H. Hennig, K. H. Heckner, D. Hirsch and H. Ladwig, Phys. Status Solidi, 1982, 74, 133–139 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Bediako, B. Lassalle–Kaiser, Y. Surendranath, J. Yano, V. K. Yachandra and D. G. Nocera, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6801–6809 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Nelson, The Physics of Solar Cells, Imperial College Press, London, England,  2003 Search PubMed .
Y. Surendranath and D. G. Nocera, Prog. Inorg. Chem., 2011, 57, 505–560 CrossRef .
D. A. Corrigan, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1987, 134, 377–384 CrossRef CAS .
D. Schroder and D. Meier, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 1984, 3, 637–647 CrossRef .
K. L. Chopra, S. Major and D. K. Pandya, Thin Solid Films, 1983, 102, 1–46 CrossRef CAS .
T. Minami, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2005, 20, 35–44 CrossRef .
W. Visscher and E. Barendrecht, Electrochim. Acta, 1980, 25, 651–655 CrossRef CAS .
J. Proscia and R. G. Gordon, Thin Solid Films, 1992, 214, 175–187 CrossRef CAS .
M. Fantini and I. Torriani, Thin Solid Films, 1986, 138, 255–265 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. Kelly, T. L. Gibson, M. Cai, J. A. Spearot and D. B. Ouwerkerk, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 892–899 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: iV curve for npp+-Si solar cell, SEM images for NiBi functionalized catalyst films, cyclic voltammogams of various solar cells in the dark and under 1 sun illumination, Faradaic efficiency curves for oxygen evolution and Tafel plots. See DOI: 10.1039/c2ee23932aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

Broader context
The coupling of water-splitting catalysts to photovoltaics enables for direct solar-to-fuel conversion. Crystalline silicon is particularly attractive as a PV material because it absorbs most of the solar spectrum, is earth abundant, and due to years of optimization has minimal losses associated with bulk carrier transport. The realization of a Si-based solar-to-fuel device hinges on overcoming the instability of Si in the presence of the highly oxidizing conditions and on the successful integration of water splitting-catalysts. Here we demonstrate that fluorinated-tin-oxide is an especially attractive interface for protecting Si as well as minimizing interfacial resistances as an earth-abundant support for highly active water-splitting catalysts.


 	Fig. 1  Schematic of the npp+-Si buried-junction solar cell used in this study. For electrochemical measurements, an external voltage may be applied to contacts at either side of the cell. A transparent conducting oxide (TCO) or Ni thin film serves to protect the Si and provide an interface for charge transport from the buried junction to the oxygen-evolving reaction (OER) catalyst.	 

 	Fig. 2  Plane view SEM images of OER-catalysts deposited on surface-protected npp+-Si electrodes. From left to right (A) npp+-Si|FTO|CoBi and (B) npp+-Si|Ni|CoBi.	 

 	Fig. 3  CV curves of npp+-Si|FTO|CoBi in a 0.5 M KBi electrolyte in the dark with Vappl through the n-side of the cell in Fig. 1 (black line), with Vappl through the n-side under 1 sun AM 1.5 illumination (blue line), and in the dark with Vappl through the FTO layer (red dashed line).	 

 	Fig. 4  O2 production measured by a fluorescent sensor (red line) and the amount produced based on current passed assuming 100% Faradaic efficiency (green line) for (left) npp+-Si|FTO|CoBi and (right) npp+-Si|Ni|CoBi.	 

 	Fig. 5  Tafel plots of (a) npp+-Si|ITO|CoBi, (b) npp+-Si|FTO|CoBi and (c) npp+-Si|Ni|CoBi. With the potential applied to the metal front contact for measurements in the dark (black), under 1 sun of AM 1.5 illumination (blue), and in the dark with the potential applied through the protective coating at the back of the sample (red).	 

npp+Si|ITO|CoBi	90
npp+Si|ITO|NiBi	86
npp+Si|FTO|CoBi	63
npp+Si|FTO|NiBi	63
npp+|Si|FTO|NiFeO	53
npp+Si|Ni|CoBi	68
npp+Si|Ni|NiBi	98
npp+Si|Ni|NiFeO	48
ηSFE = ηPV × ηC × ηWS
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: iV curve for npp+-Si solar cell, SEM images for NiBi functionalized catalyst films, cyclic voltammogams of various solar cells in the dark and under 1 sun illumination, Faradaic efficiency curves for oxygen evolution and Tafel plots. See DOI: 10.1039/c2ee23932a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
