Evolution of low-dimensional material-based field-effect transistors  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0NR07548E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0NR07548E
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 5162-5186Evolution of low-dimensional material-based field-effect transistors

        
          
            Waqas 
            Ahmad
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Youning 
            Gong
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ghulam 
            Abbas
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Karim 
            Khan
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Maaz 
            Khan
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Ghafar 
            Ali
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Ahmed 
            Shuja
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Ayesha Khan 
            Tareen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Qasim 
            Khan
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Delong 
            Li
          
        
      *a
aInstitute of Microscale Optoelectronics, International Collaborative Laboratory of 2D Materials for Optoelectronics Science and Technology of Ministry of Education, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518060, P. R. China. E-mail: qasim@szu.edu.cn; lidl@szu.edu.cn
bNanomaterials Research Group, Physics Division, PINSTECH, Nilore 45650, Islamabad, Pakistan
cCentre for Advanced Electronics & Photovoltaic Engineering, International Islamic University, Islamabad, Pakistan
Received 
      21st October 2020
    , Accepted 20th February 2021First published on 22nd February 2021AbstractField-effect transistors (FETs) have tremendous applications in the electronics industry due to their outstanding features such as small size, easy fabrication, compatibility with integrated electronics, high sensitivity, rapid detection and easy measuring procedures. However, to meet the increasing demand of the electronics industry, efficient FETs with controlled short channel effects, enhanced surface stability, reduced size, and superior performances based on low-dimensional materials are desirable. In this review, we present the developmental roadmap of FETs from conventional to miniaturized devices and highlight their prospective applications in the field of optoelectronic devices. Initially, a detailed study of the general importance of bulk and low-dimensional materials is presented. Then, recent advances in low-dimensional material heterostructures, classification of FETs, and the applications of low-dimensional materials in field-effect transistors and photodetectors are presented in detail. In addition, we also describe current issues in low-dimensional material-based FETs and propose potential approaches to address these issues, which are crucial for developing electronic and optoelectronic devices. This review will provide guidelines for low-dimensional material-based FETs with high performance and advanced applications in the future.
1. Introduction
Electronic devices are important pillars of modern integrated circuits, which are diverse and can be amplified and rectified for versatile applications. The miniaturization abilities of coalescing semiconductors with widely differing lattice parameters allow the fabrication of novel effective and small-size devices. Currently, the semiconductor industry depends on FETs, which are the building blocks for communication technology, and their applications in modern technology mainly depend upon the transistor efficiency.1–6 Conventional FETs are mostly dependent on bulk or three-dimensional (3D) semiconductor channels, which are constructed from conventional materials such as silicon and III–V group semiconducting materials.
In last five decades, these conventional semiconducting materials have shrunk down to the nanoscale, making them more efficient and suitable for future commercial use. In line with Moore's law, the development of novel designed FETs based on new materials is highly desirable for the advent of modern electronics. The ever-shrinking FETs based on traditional materials face some problems such as high leakage, current which are due to the channel effects and unpredictability of their surface roughness during fabrication at the nanoscale level. The main issue with FET devices is to control the channel current by applying a voltage between the gate and source electrodes, Vgs, and source to drain electrodes, Vds.7–10 Thus, to overcome this issue, Chhowalla et al. proposed three important features with reference to FETs, including: (1) the insulator material should be ideal and there should be no leakage current between the three terminals (gate, source and drain electrodes). (2) There should be no leakage voltage drop between the contacts. (3) The device should be designed to avoid electron scattering in the channel. Consequently, based on these assumptions ideal FETs can be designed and fabricated.11
Additionally, environmental stability, controlled and stable doping, and uniform growth are the main features in developing effective FETs. It is challenging to develop a controllable phase and number of layers in transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs). However, recently, the development of new techniques makes it possible to develop stable and precisely controlled 2D material-based heterostructure and thin tunnel FETs. To achieve these properties, researchers have been focused on shrinking the size of FET devices and improving the fabrication techniques at the nanoscale using low-dimensional materials. Herein, we present a rigorous review and roadmap for better understanding conventional FETs compared to 2D material-based FETs, optimizing their electronic and optoelectronic applications, and their recent advances, challenges and possible solutions.
1.1. Classification of FET
FETs have broad range of applications in sensors, optical communication and bioelectronic devices. In the classification of FETs, there are two main types: (1) junction field-effect transistor (JFET), which is normally known as FET, a three-terminal semiconductor device operating in only the depletion mode and (2) metal oxide semiconductor field-effect transistor (MOSFET), a four-terminal semiconductor device operating in both depletion and enhancement modes. However, the simple function of an FET is to regulate the flow of the electrical charge carriers across three terminals, namely the source, drain, and gate. The source and drain are the two n-type semiconductor regions, which are disjointed by the substrate, known as the basic NMOS or n-channel MOSFET, as shown in Fig. 1(a). Classically, this technology is based on silicon as a faster charge carrier, which is being widely applied in the microelectronics industry. An insulating material such as silicon dioxide (SiO2) is deposited between the abovementioned two terminals (source and drain regions) and topped by a metal electrode, which is known as the gate. In the mechanism of biasing, a positive voltage is applied to the drain region, and the source and p-type substrate are grounded, and thus device goes to the reverse bias, and hence no current flows between the drain and the substrate regions. Due to this mechanism, the current flowing across the p–n junction is zero, and thus the transistor acts as an open switch.12–15
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of conventional MOSFET. (a) Conventional MOSFET. (b) Schematic diagram of n-channel MOSFET (DIBL effect). (c) Different types of multi-gate transistors. Reproduced with permission from ref. 15. Copyright 2011, Springer Nature. 
Due to the inherent limitations (such as large OFF-current, limited ON-current and the slow switching response) of the MOSFET, its disadvantage is that it does not behave as an ideal switch. Thus, to address these problems, one possible solution reported is to design the device in the vertical geometry, which can improve the performance of the transistor and enhance the electrostatic control over the channel.
In terms of the I–V characteristics of MOSFET, its ON and OFF current are 1 mA and 50 pA, respectively, when the drain voltage is 50 mV. There is no current below the gate voltage when the current is pinched on the linear scale region, which close to the threshold voltage value of 0.5 V. When the gate bias is applied, the current increases, which becomes higher than the threshold voltage. Subsequently, the drain current increases gradually with the gate voltage, and thus the OFF current is more than zero when the current is plotted on the algorithmic scale. The subthreshold slope (SS) is the parameter used to check the rate of current below the threshold voltage. The relationship of SS is given as15SS = dVg/d (log(Id)where Vg represents the gate voltage, Id represents the drain current, logarithm is in base 10 and SS is expressed in millivolts per decade. Another important phenomenon occurs in conventional FETs, named “short-channel effects”, which comes from the distribution of the electrical charges between the gate of the source and drain and channel regions. A depletion region is produced between the two source and drain terminals, which infiltrates the channel region from both sides of the gate. This penetration is amplified when the drain voltage is increased. Two of the main effects that are produced at this junction in the device are degradation effects, which then lead to an increase in subthreshold slope and drain-induced barrier lowering (DIBL), i.e., a reduction in the threshold voltage at higher drain voltages. This effect is responsible for the increased leakage current of transistors, which may further cause a reduction in the scaling of MOSFETs. This phenomenon can be described by the standard equation:15Δf/f = −2DIBL/VDD − VTHwhere f is the maximum operating frequency, VDD indicates the supply voltage and VTH is the threshold voltage.
Another type of MOSFET is the double-gate MOSFET, which is based on the fully depleted lean-channel transistor (DELTA), which was first reported in 1989 and has the advantage to control the vertically located silicon film. The fabricated MOSFETs included Fin-FETs based on a vertical channel, as shown in Fig. 1(c). Fig. 1(c (I)) shows s triple-gate MOSFET, which has a very thin silicon layer on the three sides of the gate. A schematic illustration of the typical structure the other improved devices, i.e., Π-gate MOSFETs and Ω-gate devices, is shown in Fig. 1(c (III and IV)), respectively. In 1990, an improved version of MOSFET was reported, which had the gate electrode covered on all sides of the channel region, as shown in Fig. 1(c (V)). In this device, the control of the electrostatic channel of the gate was without forming the p–n junction. Fig. 1(c (VI)) shows the geometry of the triple gate, where the gate is covered by the top sides of the generated tri-gate structure, which is produced by the ion implantation technique to construct the source and drain in the device region.15–18
The size of FETs has significantly shrunk in the last decade. By reducing their size, FETs exhibit a high OFF-state current and desirable movement of electrons between the source and drain terminals. The availability of a high OFF-state current raises the static power (combination of drain voltage and off-state current). When FETs are fabricated utilizing conventional materials such as Si and InGaAs, this can reduce their size to the nanoscale, giving rise into some issues like current leakage and heat dissipation due to static power, also known as the short-channel effect.19–22 The International Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors (ITRS) proposed that the charge density of transistors will be doubled after 3 years compared to Moor's law, which predicted 2 years for this progression. 3D semiconductor devices such as multi-gate transistors, Fin-FETs, and ultrathin body transistors (UTBs) were consequently explored to address the short channel effects.23,24
1.2. Brief introduction to low-dimensional materials
Semiconductor devices remain the backbone of the electronics industry, which has an annual volume of about 300 million US$. Normally, they can be split up into two regimes, namely, More Moore and More than Moore, as shown in Fig. 2(a).25 “More Moore” includes integrated circuits (ICs), where digital ICs, for example microchips and micro-processors, have approximately covered 70% of the overall electronics chip industry. Surprisingly, nowadays, semiconductors are fabricated on single ICs based on single semiconductor materials. For instance, Si-based transistors, Si-based MOSFETs, Si-based on complementary metal oxide semiconductor (CMOS) engaging with both the n-channel and p-channel. To make IC chips more convenient, reliable and controllable, engineers and scientists have presented CMOS, ICs with an increasing number of different MOSFETs in the vertical style and cost-effective transistors. Considering this, transistors have been shrinking as much as possible with an increase in the circuit according to the Moore limits.26,27 The evaluation of the gate length and prediction of the gate length based on the ITRS are shown in Fig. 2(b).25
 Fig. 2  Schematic diagram of the Moore trends. (a) Schematic illustration of the Moore trends. (b) Evaluation of the gate length and prediction of the gate length based on the ITRS. Reproduced with permission from ref. 25. Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
For the prospective fabrication of nanoscale electronic devices, it is very important to maintain the concepts of the three parameters smaller, faster, and efficient, while applying low-dimensional semiconductor materials and enhancing the performance. For decades, it has become more challenging to gain the desired parameters when reducing the Si MOSFET to the nanoscale. High carrier mobility has always been an important factor for the performance and power efficiency of FETs. The conventional material Si is the mainstay of the current More Moore circuits, which allow only restrained mobilities, and thus efforts are required for the substitution of high-mobility and power efficient MOSFET channel materials into Si CMOS. According to the recent edition of ITRS, it is a big challenge when the gate length is reduced to less than 5 nm to achieve high mobilities and light carrier effective mass. Thus, to overcome these problems, novel 2D materials play an effective role as semiconductor materials with higher mobilities and low short channel effects.28–30 “More than Moore” regimes concentrate on circuit complexity-based research and increasing the performance of IC-based electronic systems by merging with components of digital electronics, for instance, analogue radio frequency, high voltage-based circuits and sensors/actuators.31,32
All transistor-based devices are required to be compatible with CMOS technology, which is essential for digital logic. Consequently, the prediction of electronic technology based on silicon, which relies on the ITRS and International Roadmap for Devices and Systems (IRDS), is shown in Fig. 3. According to the TCAD predication in terms of the device design geometry and the predication from the ITRS and IRDS, silicon-based devices such as Fin-FET reach their limit at 22 nm node technology, whereas Moore's law up to 7 nm node technology is expected by 2021 and fully depleted silicon on insulator (FDSOI) is expected to reach up to the 10 nm technology node. ITRS and IRDS are alarming, in that there may be unresolved issues by 2021, and thus vertical gate all around (GAA) transistors and monolithic 3D design-based geometries are likely to be solutions for reaching the desired node and compatibility with CMOS technology.33–35
 Fig. 3  Schematic diagram for the prediction of technology nodes for FETs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 33. Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. 
Low-dimensional materials are becoming a hot area of research owing to their prospect of obtaining uniform thickness down to a monolayer in the absence of surface dangling bonds. 0D materials include fullerenes small organic molecules and quantum dots. 1D materials include single-wall carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs), semiconducting organic polymers and inorganic semiconducting nanowires. TMDCs are 2D materials that play a vital role in the development of next-generation semiconductor electronics.36–38 In 1923, the 2D structure was first reported by Pauling et al.39 In 1960, sixty TMDC materials were discovered and over 40 types were demonstrated to possess layered structures.40 Frindt et al. first developed an ultrathin molybdenum disulfide MoS2 layer in 1963.41 Monolayer MoS2 initially gained serious attention in 198642 and carbon nanotubes (CNTs) in 1990.43 Tenne et al. discovered tungsten disulfide (WS2) nanotubes, which became the roadmap for the development of 2D materials. After this breakthrough, a new wave of research began on 2D layer structured materials and their ultra-thin films.44,45 In the case of 2D materials, boron nitride (BN) behaves as an insulator and dielectric material, and tungsten diselenide (WSe2), MoS2, WS2, and zinc oxide (ZnO) behave as semiconductor materials. In contrast, niobium diselenide (NbSe2) and niobium disulfide (NbS2) behave as superconductors. Achieving the desired properties of devices based on 2D materials strongly depends on the synthesis method, design of geometry, and most importantly, bandgap tunning of 2D materials.46–49
To utilize these materials for applications in FETs and other electronic devices, it is necessary to investigate various semiconductor 2D materials to diminish the short channel effects and achieve compatibility with CMOS. Poisson's equations describe the characteristics of the FET scaling length of devices, which is given by:23  where ts, tb, εs and εb are the semiconductor thickness, gate dielectric thickness, semiconductor dielectric constant, and gate insulator dielectric constants, respectively. The poor electrostatic interaction between the channel current and gate voltage results in a leakage current and short channel effect in 3D semiconductors. However, in 2D semiconductors, the electrons are restrained in unsurprisingly atomically thin channels and evenly biased by the gate voltage.
1.3. Development of vertical and lateral heterostructure
For the construction of lateral and vertical heterostructures, numerous techniques have been reported, among which molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) and metal organic chemical vapour deposition (MOCVD) are the two commonly applied techniques for the development of directly grown vertical and lateral heterojunction structures. However, there are still several challenges in fabricating 2D material-based heterostructures. In 2D materials, weak van der Waals forces exist, causing dangling bonds and low defects between their surfaces. Furthermore, 2D-based vertical heterostructures have much less mismatch, and therefore allow high efficiency abrupt interfaces with lower densities.
Mechanical exfoliation is an efficient technique to develop layer-by-layer structures, which are used in stacking and to form heterostructure devices on a large scale. This technique depends on the mechanical exfoliation of bulk materials into atomically thin materials, which is extensively used for developing heterostructure devices. Presently, CVD is also used to grow thin films, as shown in Fig. 4(a). Normally, the chemical vapour deposition (CVD) technique is used to obtain a monolayer of 2D materials on a small scale.50,51 However, the size of the flake is not sufficiently large compared to that from mechanical exfoliation. This technique is also used for growing thin films of other 2D materials such as mono- and bi-layers of graphene and thin layers of 2D materials. However, to date, heterostructure fabrication on large scale is not possible by the CVD technique. It has been observed that the development of thin films mainly depends on factors such as the design geometry, implementation method, and quality of the material. The ideal techniques for developing films using 2D materials are CVD, MBE, and atomic layer deposition (ALD) in a controlled environment, but their disadvantages are that it is very hard to construct heterostructures using these techniques on a large scale, especially in a controlled twisted heterostructure, as shown in Fig. 4(b).33,52–54
 Fig. 4  Schematic illustration of the different techniques to develop heterostructures. (a) Vertical heterostructure using CVD and (b) controlled twisted heterostructure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 33. Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. 
2. FETs based on low-dimensional materials
2.1. FETs based on 0D materials
Metal chalcogenide complexes as the ligands of quantum dots (QDs) have gained research interest for the development of next-generation electronic and optoelectronic devices. Initial reports verified that various metal-free inorganic ions such as chalcogenide ions and trialkyl oxonium exhibit excellent performances in CdX and PbX (X = S, Se, Te) for developing QD-based FETs and can be used as replacements for long chain ligands in QD solutions. The development of QD-based FETs requires good quality thin films in the QD precursor solution. This condition is eagerly met by the QDs synthesised using the hot injection technique. QDs with a small size that can be synthesised directly or transferred to organic solvents such as hexane and acetone are desirable for the spin coating and layer-by-layer deposition techniques. With the use of long chain aliphatic ligands is it difficult to achieve high mobility carrier in electronic devices. Conversely, QDs developed using short chains may lack good quality solution due to the low rate solvent volatility. To obtain good quality single-component QDs, the size of the QDs must be narrow and spherical in shape. In terms of FET fabrication, two techniques are widely used, the bottom-gate configuration (top, Fig. 5(a)) and top-gate configuration (bottom, Fig. 5(a)). In the bottom gate configuration, two electrodes, the source and drain, are patterned by conventional lithography techniques, silicon acts as the gate, and QDs can be deposited by different techniques such as drop casting and spin coating. In contrast, in the top gate configuration, a dielectric layer such as SiO2, Al2O3 and ion gel can be used as a dielectric layer above the QDs.55 A PbS QD-based FET is demonstrated by M. Law's group with high air stability and mobility of up to 7 cm2 V−1 s−1.56,57
 Fig. 5  Schematic illustration of QD-based FETs. (a) Bottom-gate FET (top) and top-gate FET (bottom). Reproduced with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2013, Elsevier. (b) Schematic diagram of CdSe nanocrystal-based short channel FET. Reproduced with permission from ref. 59. Copyright 2019, the American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic diagram of Si nanoparticle-based FET. (d) Mobility vs. conductivity, dashed lines exhibit the power fitted law to the experimental value. (c and d) Reproduced with permission from ref. 60. Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic diagram of PbS QD-based thin film FET in which ionic gel was used as the gate dielectric. Reproduced with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society. (f) Schematic illustration of the process to develop a CMOS electronic device based on p-type and p-type FETs. (g) Transfer characteristics in which red line shows VDD = 5 V, black dotted lines show Vout = Vin, and blue line shows the derivative of the voltage transfer characteristics, inset: three inverters with CMOS compatibility (scale bar = 5 mm). (f and g) Reproduced with permission from ref. 63. Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. 
Colloidal QDs are an emerging class of semiconducting materials having various applications in electronic devices due to the zero dimensionality of colloids in nature. Shulga et al. fabricated a double gate FET based on colloidal QDs, in which a high-K insulating material was used as the top gate and the other gate was constructed using SiO2. They revealed that due to the high-K insulating material, the electrons and hole mobility increased to 1.1 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 6 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1, which are much higher than that of the mobility obtained for SiO2. Furthermore, double-gate FETs enable the threshold voltage to be reached in the ideal position and enhance the ON-current.58 Fan et al. demonstrated that a CdSe nanocrystal-based FET with ultra-short channel could achieve very high mobility. They observed that deposition of the nanocrystals with an organic/inorganic solution such as butylamine ligands allowed abrading of the nanocrystals by annealing at moderate temperature, which exhibited good transport properties such as high mobility of 8 cm2 V−1 s−1 in the saturation region. This is based on a solution processible technique, which does not involve any harsh conditions or the use of hydrazine. They constructed an FET in which the source and drain were vertically overlapped, achieving an ultra-short channel, as shown in Fig. 5(b). They claimed that this was the first short channel FET based on colloidal semiconductor nanocrystals fabricated to date. Owing to the short channel effect, the FET exhibited the high ON/OFF ratio and transconductance of 4.2 m V−1 s−1.59
Maintaining the electrical performance and stability of QD-based FETs is challenging. Thus, address this problem, Chryssikos et al. fabricated a thin film FET for unveiling the electrical properties, in which the channel of the FET was filled by Si nanoparticles, as shown in Fig. 5(c). To make the FET stable in terms of electrical properties, they gradually filled the channel of the device with Si nanoparticles and developed a technique in which the nanoparticles were deposited by device substrate absorption in nanoparticle ink extracted from the nanoparticles and chlorobenzene, which was realized by ultrasonication and annealing. They found that by increasing the dosage of nanoparticles in the channel of the FET, the electrical conductivity and charge mobility increase simultaneously, as shown in Fig. 5(d). Their work proved that this technique can be beneficial to enhance the charge mobility and electrical conductivity in electronic devices.60 Abbassi et al. demonstrated the emergence of QDs in graphene nanoribbon-based FETs. Graphene nanoribbons were used to determine the band structure of the QDs. They realized that during the emergence of QDs in graphene nanoribbons, 5-atom graphene nanoribbons were transferred to a 5 nm graphene gap. This device exhibited metallic behaviour with low electrical conductance at room temperature, whereas the device operated in Coulomb blockade and as a single electron tunnel at low temperature. Moreover, this QD mechanism could also be observed at the high temperature of 150 K.61
In most cases, the fabrication of QD-based FETs requires thermal annealing to get rid of organic residues and increase the charge carrier mobility. However, thermal annealing is a slow process and still some residues remain on the surface of the channel of the FET. Later, Nugraha et al. demonstrated a new technique in which a xenon flash lamp was used for the post-treatment of a PbS colloidal QD solution and to enhance the properties of the thin film FET. This technique is efficient, reliable and highly scalable to eliminate the organic residue, while keeping the quantum confinement effects and high channel current modulation. A schematic diagram of the thin film FET is shown in Fig. 5(e), in which SiO2 acts as a gate dielectric, showing the maximum mobility of 0.2 cm2 V−1 s−1. The mobility of the thin film FET increased to 3.7 cm2 V−1 s−1 by replacing the dielectric layer with a polymeric dielectric. This study revealed that flash lamp annealing is an effective technique to enhance the electrical performance of electronic devices.62 Recently, Yun et al. synthesised heavy metal-free CuInSe2 colloidal QDs to achieve an n-type FET and p-type FET with the same quantum dots as the Si-based CMOS. They synthesised the materials at a moderate temperature, which exhibited high crystallinity, using long organic ligands. They deposited inorganic halide-based ionic species as replacement for the organic molecules to enhance the stability, reduce the intra-dot spacing and increase the charge mobility. Modifying the electronic properties of colloidal QDs is possible by varying the ionic species, i.e., the behaviour of p-type QDs can be transformed into ambipolar. They observed that the halide-based surface in the presence of indium with controlled temperature annealing could provide a switch in conductance from p-type to n-type and the mobility could be enhanced by the controlled annealing process, which is also helpful to reduce the mismatch in electrical characteristics in both conductive regions. They realized that capping the device with Al2O3 can be beneficial to increase the transport properties of p-type and n-type FETs. Subsequently, they developed colloidal QD-based CMOS devices, including an inverter with p-type and n-type FETs. The complete steps for the fabrication of both these FETs are shown in Fig. 5(f and g), respectively. This technique did not need any patterning of colloidal QDs as required for conventional colloidal QD-based FETs and enabled the device for programming at the process of the deposition of metal contacts. This study provides a path for device scaling and practical application with the integration of CMOS circuits.63,64
2.2. FETs based on 1D materials
1D materials (i.e., CNTs) are promising materials with outstanding properties for the development of next-generation electronic and optoelectronic devices. The CNT-based FET was first reported by the IBM group, as shown in Fig. 6(a).65 It is quite similar to the conventional Si-based devices, but the underlying physics is somewhat complicated. In the conventional Si-based FETs, carriers are produced due to the doping level, which are extracted from the thermal excitation and the polarization of the FET depending on dopants, i.e., p-type or n-type, while CNT is certainly essential for the substitutional doping and controlled mechanism. The CNT-based FET had the highest carrier mobility with a perfect sp2 structure.66
 Fig. 6  Schematic illustration of 1D material-based FETs. (a) First CNT-based FET. Reproduced with permission from ref. 73, Copyright 2014, Elsevier. (b) Schematic representation of a top-gated CNT–FET. Reproduced with permission from ref. 70, Copyright 2002, the American Chemical Society. (c) p-type field-effect transistor (PFET) based on CNTs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 71, Copyright 2002, Elsevier. (d) Schematic diagram of n-type and p-type and top-gate CNT FET. Reproduced with permission from ref. 73, Copyright 2014, Elsevier. 
Due to their promising properties, FETs based on 1D materials such as CNTs and Si nanowires are compatible with structures involved in various applications in different sectors such as biotechnology-based sensors, mobile phones, and optoelectronic devices. These semiconducting materials have the ability to precisely control their dimensions, making them very favourable for the development of nanoscale electronics.67–69 Avouris et al. demonstrated a CNT-based semiconductor device in terms of geometry and carrier scattering effects. Furthermore, the electrical properties of CNTs were investigated, and the CNT–FETs were fabricated with an eventual comparison of electrical properties with the Si MOSFET, as shown in Fig. 6(b). Fig. 6(c) presents the structure of the p-type FETs based on CNTs and their mechanism. The same author also investigated the electronic properties of these devices and their fabrication based on single-walled (SW) and multi-walled (MW) CNT systems. They also analysed the breakdown process of the current induced in these composites, which was used to take part of each shell and characterize each shell of the MW carbon nanotube.70–72 Peng et al. demonstrated that CNT-based CMOS devices can be fabricated using a dopant-free technique, in which they constructed p- and n-type contacts using Pb and Sc materials, respectively, as shown in Fig. 6(d). The CNT could be reduced to 5 nm in the transistor technology and make it easier to control the channel current. It was also revealed that by using the metal gate for controlling the threshold voltage of the CNT-based FET, it is conceivable to reduce it to zero voltage. The process of ballistic transport and dopant-free CNTs also have a lower power consumption.73
CNT-based devices have very unique advantages over the conventional silicon-based devices. Specifically, CNT-based devices are easy to fabricate with less chance of fabrication error. More importantly, their channel length can be miniaturized, and hence they are called ballistic devices. However, one disadvantage of CNT-based devices is that they have both the properties of semiconductor and semi-metallic, which are not appropriate for electronic applications. Moreover, recent improvements in the area of CNT devices made it possible to separate the nanotubes and control the removal of metallic CNT.70,71,73 Rolling up graphene sheets can result in the formation of 1D SWCNTs, which have various applications in the electronics industry, optical devices and medical applications, strongly depending on their structure, wrapping direction, diameter and tunable bandgap.74 SWCNTs are widely used for developing transistors as a replacement of Si because they exhibit outstanding thermal stability, charge transport and excellent mechanical properties, making them promising candidates as channel materials in FETs. SWCNT samples have no semiconducting properties but have metallic behaviour. This metallic behaviour in SWCNTs restricts them to limited applications. Therefore, polarity control is a big issue in SWNTs for developing efficient FETs. Salazar-Rios et al. synthesised SWCNTs with chemical additives for developing FETs. With the assistance of additives, the SWCNT-based FET exhibited ambipolar behaviour with a hole mobility reaching up to 16 cm2 V−1 s−1. It was suggested that the fabricated devices with additives can be useful to overcome the polarity issue and successfully employed in future-generation transistors.75,76
CNTs are the leading 1D materials, which exhibit outstanding electrical, optical, and mechanical properties beyond Si-based FETs. Several CNTs act as a channel in FETs, whereas the traditional lithography technique is used to define the three terminals, i.e., the source, drain and gate regions, as shown in Fig. 7. CNT-based FETs exhibit ultra-high charge transport separation and integration with CMOS digital systems. Early reports suggested that the commercialization of these devices have some obstacles, and they must fulfil some requirements like Si-based FETs. There are three main requirements, including: (1) cost effectiveness, (2) compatibility with CMOS technology, and (3) higher performance compared to Si-based FETs. Bishop et al. fabricated and characterized CNT-based FETs for commercial applications. The fabricated CNTs were compatible with silicon-based technology, e.g., CNT deposition across 200 mm substrates, and thus high volume production was also possible with large-scale integration and purity of 99.9%.77–79
 Fig. 7  Synthesis and fabrication techniques for developing CNT-based FETs. (a and b) Methodology for developing CNTs. (c) Schematic diagram of CNT-based FET. (d) Characteristic of the absorption process. (e) Strength of substrate binding. Reproduced with permission from ref. 77, Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. 
FETs are known as the modern workhorse of the semiconductor industry, and thus it is not surprising that nanowire-based FETs are extensively used for making electronic devices smaller and more efficient. When using the conventional technique, it is very difficult to construct nano-devices on a very large scale. European research groups have done excellent work developing Si and InAs nanowires and focusing on bandgap engineering into the channel of the device, concluding that Si nanowires have the capability of delivering a higher current compared to the conventional Si devices.80 Bandgap engineering opens up new ways for the development of high-performance devices, which is a very useful phenomenon in the field of nano-device research. Specially in devices that have an organised number of wires per electrode, nanowire based-devices have been characterized for their suitable industrial needs. Besides FETs, other conventional devices are also candidates for the use of nanowires such as high-performance radio-frequency transistors.81,82
2.3. FETs based on 2D materials
2D materials including TMDCs exhibit excellent features in the field of electronics and optical devices.32,83–85 Their atomically thin channel thickness allows users to control the electrostatic gate voltage and abridge the short channel effects, which is beneficial for geometric scaling and low power consumption circuits. TMDCs and 2D materials are mostly found in bulk form, possessing tightly bonded layers with weak van der Waals forces (vdWs). Atomically thin layer 2D materials can be obtained by the exfoliation technique from the bulk or directly grown by the CVD technique. For instance, graphene obtained from graphite is the best example of the exfoliation technique. TMDCs are generated through the formula MX2, in which M is a transition metal element from group IV (Ti, Zr, Hf, etc.), group V (V, Nb, Ta, etc.), or group VI (Mo, W, etc.), and X is a chalcogen (S, Se, Te, etc.) with a layered structure. TMDCs are becoming a hot area of research because of their layer-dependent properties and bandgap.6,86,87 For instance, bulk and single-layer MoS2 have a bandgap of 1.3 eV to 1.8 eV, respectively.88 Shrinking conventional transistors based on the Si substrate is rapidly approaching 5 nm gate lengths. Below 5 nm, the transistors face different problems such as short channels effects, tunnelling from the source to gate, and poor control of gate electrostatic. Thus, to overcome these problems, TMDCs have been used as a replacement because they may control the electrostatics in ultra-short transistors. After the discovery of graphene in 2004, it was expected that graphene would be more efficient to achieve high mobility and reduced gate lengths at the nano-scale. However, graphene has no band gap, and therefore it was unable to achieve higher properties in FET-based devices. After the breakthrough of graphene, the development of single-layer MoS2-based transistors emerged in the field of electronic devices.8,11,89–93
In 2004, the first use of a TMDC material in an FET was reported based on WS2, which demonstrated a mobility approaching 500 cm2 V−1 s−1 and ON/OFF ratio of 104 at 60 K compared to the ideal single Si FET.94 Kis et al. reported a transistor based on MoS2 monolayer. The device showed excellent parameters such as a mobility of more than 200 cm2 V−1 s−1 at room temperature, subthreshold swing of 74 mV per decade and ON/OFF current ratio of 108. Furthermore, a high-k dielectric material such as HfO2 was used for improving the mobility of monolayer MoS2. High-k dielectrics were also used for top-gating geometry-based FETs for making the active channel a monolayer of WSe2 flakes, which enhanced the performance at room temperature to 250 cm2 V−1 s−1, subthreshold voltage of 60 mV per decade and ON/OFF ratio of 106.95–97
As discussed earlier, FETs are considered the building blocks for the future modern electronic industry, with series of exceptional advantages including low noise, less power consumption, easy to integrate and high input resistance. Traditional MOSFETs are approaching physical limitations in terms of their development and higher efficiency applications. The rapidly growing demand for FETs with better performance and higher integration density is necessary for the future development of electronics and optoelectronic devices. Together with the performance and efficiency, the channel materials play a prominent role in increasing the efficiency in FETs. Among the reported materials, 2D materials exhibit noteworthy properties as ideal channel materials. 2D materials possess better resistance against the short channel effects and enable practical applications in flexible optoelectronic devices. Another technique for improving the performance is interface engineering, which is presently effectively employed for enhancing the performance of conventional electronics and 2D layered semiconductor electronics. In the last few years, there have been extensive efforts in the development of 2D material-based high-performance FETs such as the modification of the Schottky barrier height and tuning the interface morphology. According to Moore's law, the density is doubled every two years. However, an exponential change in the increasing trend has been noted in the device operational performance with several nanometer silicon channel lengths.98–100
Further scaling in the FET unit is not very feasible because it includes many disadvantages such as short channel effects including hot-carrier injection and drain-induced barrier lowering. Traditionally, the thickness limit of silicon approaches ≈5 nm, whereas the FET channel length is reduced to several nanometers, which leads to a reduction in the overall performance of the device. Thus, it is necessary to look for alternative channel materials that are resistant to the short channel effects. Fortunately, materials such 2D semiconductors including TMDCs, black phosphorus and graphene have contributed to the future development of high-performance FETs. Furthermore, the atomically thin, flat structure of 2D materials, with efficient electrostatic control capability of the channel materials have overcome the disadvantages faced by conventional materials. The absence of dangling bonds on the surface on these materials makes them superior to the traditionally available semiconductor materials.100,101
Traditional FETs require at least 60 mV of gate voltage to enhance the ISD current by one order at ambient temperature. Numerous techniques have been employed to decrease the power consumption and lower the SS below 60 mV dec−1 such as tunnel FETs and negative capacitance using a ferroelectric gate. However, tunnel FETs have a low on-current, whereas a negative capacitance results in large hysteresis. Thus, to address these issues, foreign metallic cold sources are an efficient technique to develop steep slope FETs. Lyu et al. demonstrated the first model of a graphene cold-source FET. They observed that slight p-type doping in graphene opened its bandgap to around the Dirac point by interfacing with InSe, resulting in a reduction in the threshold voltage to 51 mV dec−1 compared to the conventional FET. They suggested that their findings provide a new avenue for the study of low-power electronic-based devices.102,103 Theoretical calculations revealed that noble metal dichalcogenides such as Pd, Pt and Ni have tremendous properties due to their narrow bandgap (0–0.25 eV) in the bulk form, achieving higher mobilities up to 1000 cm2 V−1 s−1. PdSe2- and PtSe2-based FETs with high mobilities and photodetectors for the VIS to IR regime have been reported. Recently, the narrow bandgap PtS2-based FET reported by W. Hu's group exhibited outstanding electronic properties such as a mobility exceeding 62.5 cm−2 V−1 s−1 and ON/OFF ratio of 106 at ambient temperature. Moreover, the device also exhibited optical properties such as photodetection in the visible (VIS) to mid-infrared (MIR) range and ultra-fast photoresponse of 175 μs at a wavelength of 830 nm. They revealed that their work provides a path towards the development of next-generation electronic and optoelectronic devices.104,105
Numerous techniques have been used to enhance the electrical properties of electronic devices such as ideal SS, low operating voltage devices and hysteresis-free FETs. Shin et al. demonstrated 2D material-based heterostructures to achieve a hysteresis-free FET comprised of MoS2, which acts as the channel material and GaS as the gate insulator. The FET exhibited high mobility of 83 cm2 V−1 s−1, ON/OFF ratio of 106, and SS of 63 mV dec−1 at the very low gate voltage 0.4 V. This study revealed that 2D heterostructures can be employed to fabricate high-performance interfaces without any defects and lattice mismatch.106 L. Wu and co-workers fabricated a heterostructure based on InSe/h-BN/graphite to achieve a high-performance FET. In this geometry scheme, InSe, h-BN and graphite act as the channel material, insulating material and gate, respectively. The fabricated device achieved high mobility of up to 1146 cm2 V−1 s−1 and high ON/OFF ratio of 1010 due to the flat insulating materials.107
BP is also suitable candidate for achieving high-performance electronic devices. For instance, fT and fMAX are two important parameters that indicate the working speed of the transistor and peak of the frequency to operate the power amplifier, respectively. Li et al. fabricated a heterostructure based on h-BN/BP/h-BN controlled by the local contact bias, which is responsible for decreasing the contact resistance and enhancing the ON current simultaneously. A schematic diagram of this structure is shown in Fig. 8(a). It was revealed that this design is efficient to achieve high frequency applications due to the local contact bias exhibiting the fT of 37 and fMAX of 22 GHz, as shown in Fig. 8(b).108 Xing et al. fabricated an FET based on the h-BN/BP heterostructure to achieve surface passivation, enhance the electron mobility and increase the stability rate at room temperature. After the deposition of the capping layer of h-BN on the device, they deposited HfO2 or MgO to enhance the performance of the FET. They revealed that the BP-based FET showed ambipolar characteristics with the high electron mobility of 305 cm2 V−1 s−1, hole mobility of 1150 cm2 V−1 s−1 and stability up to 30 days.109 Recently, W. Zhang's group developed a technique to protect BP-based FETs from air and humidity by selectively absorbing quantum dots on the surface of the channel, which act as a protecting layer. They observed that their technique is also effective to increase the mobility, ON/OFF ratio and electrical characteristics, which remained unchanged for over 24 h at 100 °C. This technique is also applicable to other air-sensitive 2D materials.110
 Fig. 8  Schematic diagram of the heterostructure based on h-BN/BP/h-BN. (b) Frequency vs. Gain indicates the values of fT and fMAX. (a and b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 108, Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society. (c) Optical image of ReS2-based FET and inset: schematic diagram. Reproduced with permission from ref. 112, Copyright 2020, John Wiley and Sons. (d) Schematic diagram of MoS2-based FET with PMMA coating. Reproduced with permission from ref. 114, Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic diagram of electrical characteristics of an MoS2-based top gated FET with high-k metal gate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 115, Copyright 2020, John Wiley and Sons. 
Contact engineering is an effective technique to increase the performance of FETs, especially at the interface of the metal and the semiconductor material. Jiang et al. demonstrated a vertical heterostructure based on InSe–Se to develop high mobility FETs. In this mechanism, the fabricated device showed outstanding electrical characteristics such as high stability in a 30 nm thickness layer, low lattice mismatch of 1.1%, and low resistance contacts and created an excellent InSe contact interface, which avoided chemical defects and Fermi level pinning. The Se layer acted as the capping layer on the surface, which prevented the device from the damage realized by metallization. Due to this geometry, the device exhibited an outstanding ON-state current of 10−3 and high mobility of up to 2500 cm2 V−1 s−1 at room temperature. Furthermore, the device exhibited stability up to two months and the degradation rate of about 3.46% was reported, which reveals that contact engineering is an efficient technique for developing modern electronic devices.111
Rhenium disulfide (ReS2) is new emerging material belonging to the family of 2D materials, which has a direct bandgap, enabling high carrier mobility compared to other 2D materials such as MoS2. Furthermore, it is a good light-absorbing material and possesses a layer-independent bandgap (1.4–1.5 eV). Owing to these properties, it is also efficient for use in the next-generation optoelectronic devices. Furthermore, the insulating material h-BN can be used to increase the charge mobility due to atomically flat electrostatic modulation. Mukherjee et al. developed a few-layer ReS2-based FET on the floating gate of a monolayer of graphene parted by a thin layer of h-BN with targeted application in non-volatile memory devices. The optical image of the fabricated device and a schematic diagram are shown in Fig. 8(c) and its inset, respectively. They revealed that the fabricated device exhibited a high ON/OFF ratio, which reveals that this device is suitable for FETs with good durability of >1000 cycles, stable retention of >104 s and possessing excellent characteristics for non-volatile memory devices. Furthermore, they observed that the device showed dual functionality, i.e., conventional memory and can collect laser signals, making possible to employ the fabricated device in quantum information processing-based devices.112
MoS2 is a widely studied and well investigated 2D material, which has many applications in electronic and optoelectronic devices. Recently, S. Conti and co-workers developed an MoS2-based FET on a paper substrate using the channel array technique. The fabrication of the FET involved three major steps: (1) designing the pattern of MoS2 flakes, (2) deposition of the dielectric layer and contacts, and (3) assembling the transistors and circuit fabrications. The fabricated device exhibited outstanding electronic characteristics such as a high ON/OFF ratio of 104, high mobility of up to 26 cm2 V−1 s−1 and full functionality with analog and digital electronic building blocks.113 Jiang et al. developed a new technique to enhance the mobility and electrical stability of 2D material-based FETs. They developed an MoS2-based FET by coating a double layer of polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) via spin coating, as shown in Fig. 8(d). In this mechanism, one PMMA layer is coated beneath MoS2, which acts as the dielectric gate, and other layer is coated on MoS2, which behaves as the caping layer. It was realized that by using this technique, the mobility increased from 41.8 to 104. 6 cm2 V−1 s−1, the electrical stability increased and only 1.4% of the mobility decreased and it was stable for 45 days in the air. They observed that interface impurities at the surface of the channel were responsible for the increase in the performance of the MoS2-based FET. This study also provides a facile way to understand the electrical property degradation phenomena in other 2D materials.114
TMDCs and 2D materials are effective to develop FETs and their counterparts. However, in most TMDC-based top-gated transistors, several doping effects occur such as a high-K dielectric deposition effect and metal gate, which restrict their practical applications. Recently, W. Bao's group investigated a thin-layer MoS2-based FET and the doping effect caused by various processing steps. The schematic diagram shown in Fig. 8(e) clearly exhibits the outcome of different factors in the gate stack such as dipole, fixed charge and interfacial trap, which can strongly affect the charge transport behaviour and electrical performance of the FET. They gave a simple strategy to achieve high performance and introduced a seeding layer in the device for improving the electrical performance of the FET. By adding the seeding layer to the top-gated FET, they observed that the device exhibited high mobility. Furthermore, they also demonstrated an MoS2-based inverter with tunable gate characteristics and competent voltage gain.115
Tunneling FETs are ideal candidates for application in low-power electronic devices such as low-power switching devices and digital logic operation devices. Tunneling FETs deliver a lower SS value compared to the Boltzmann limit, which is 60 mV dec−1. The operation of tunneling FETs is slightly different from conventional MOSFETs, which are based on thermionic emission, whereas tunneling FETs are based on band to band alignment. Among the 2D materials, InSe and BP have distinct electrical properties due to the fact that InSe belongs to the TMDC family and exhibits high electron mobility for FETs, whereas BP has a direct band gap. Thus, the heterostructure of these two materials can exhibit tremendous electrical and optoelectronic properties such as these two materials are located at the Brillouin zone cantered conduction band and construct type-II band alignment, which make them ideal candidates for the construction of tunnel FETs. Lv et al. demonstrated a BP/InSe heterostructure with graphene electrodes, where h-BN acts as the capping layer and dielectric for electrostatic gating, exhibiting a thin tunnel barrier to for easy charge transport. The optical image and schematic diagram are shown in Fig. 9(a). Owing to this technique the device worked in the low voltage, i.e., <0.5 V, and it was feasible to control and tune the modulation current across the junction. Moreover, it was observed that by increasing the thickness of BP from 6 nm to 60 nm, the device turned from forward rectification behaviour to Zener backward rectification.116
 Fig. 9  Optical image of InSe/BP-based tunnel FET and inset: schematic diagram. Reproduced with permission from ref. 116, Copyright 2020, John Wiley and Sons. (b) Schematic diagram of BP/Al2O3/BP sandwich heterostructure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 117, Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. (c) Schematic illustration of WSe2/MoS2-based heterostructure to achieve a tunneling FET. (d) Temperature-dependent transfer curve of the tunneling FET. (c and d) Reproduced with permission from ref. 118, Copyright 2020, John Wiley and Sons. (e) Schematic depiction of all-2D material-based tunnel FET. (f) SS values of different 2D material-based tunnel FETs and lower SS values achieved through h-BN/3L-MoS2/P+-MoS2. (e and f) Reproduced with permission from ref. 119, Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society. 
To gain high tunnelling efficiency in electronic devices, there are two factors that must fulfil the following conditions: (1) capability to modify the density of states along with Fermi level alignment and (2) without phonons, the momentum of the conversation of the source to end with momentum of the space. To fulfil these conditions, 2D BP is an ideal candidate owing to its tunable bandgap properties and band to band tunning efficiency without concern for the layer thickness, and the conduction band and the valence band occur on the Γ point at the Brillouin zone. Few-layer BP exhibits ambipolar characteristics due to the high concentration of electrons and holes, simultaneously. Xiong et al. constructed a unique heterostructure comprised of BP/Al2O3/BP to achieve an efficient tunnelling FET, as shown in Fig. 9(b). Although it was a conventional tunnelling FET device, the charge carrier moved in the transverse direction. In this phenomenon, the insulating layer Al2O3 modulates the charge carrier density and electrostatic effect, which is responsible for the large negative differential resistance together with high peak to valley ratio of 100 achieved at ambient temperature. Moreover, the device exhibited the capability of enabling a high abrupt ratio of 1/10 of the Boltzmann range across a wide temperature range of 70–360 K.117 Jeon et al. demonstrated a WSe2–MoS2 based heterostructure with an ion gel, which acts as the dielectric top gate to achieve a tunneling FET, as shown in Fig. 9(c). This unique structure provided a p-type concentration with lower SS value (34 mV dec−1) and excellent ON/OFF ratio (106) at room temperature. Furthermore, band to band alignment was realized by the temperature-dependent I–V characteristics, as shown in Fig. 9(d).118 Recently, Nakamura et al. developed the all 2D-based heterostructure h-BN/n-MoS2/p+-MoS2/h-BN to achieve lower SS values in tunnel FETs, as shown in Fig. 9(e). By using this geometry, type-III band alignment was achieved. It was observed that the integration of Al2O3 as the top gate resulted in the production of defect states in the device, while implanting h-BN as the top gate provided a defect-free interface, which is the reason for achieving the lower SS values in the tunnel FET at room temperature, as shown in Fig. 9(f). It was also suggested that the SS value can be further reduced if the device interface is more meticulously controlled.119
3. Applications of 2D materials in terms of MOSFET
The material used to build any circuit needs to fulfil certain conditions such as the switching ratio, excellent carrier mobility, cost effectiveness and low power consumption in standby condition. To make materials effective and suitable for the high switching ratio of single, few-layer and bulk MoS2, their band gap should be in the range of 1.2–2.5 eV.6,87 MoS2-based FETs have been reported with high ON/OFF ratios of >105 and high carrier charge mobility in the order of few tens of cm2 V−1 s−1 by mechanical exfoliation.85,120,121
As shown in Fig. 10, a monolayer MoS2-based FET was reported with a high ON/OFF ratio of 108 and high charge carrier mobility of 150 cm2 V−1 s−1 at room temperature, while a high k-material was used as the dielectric material and acted as a low power consumption device. Photoresponsivity is an important parameter for evolution of the performance of photodetectors. The MoS2-based photodetector showed very high photoresponsivity of 880 A W−1 at the wavelength of 561 nm. The WS2-based FET exhibited a high charge carrier mobility of 500 cm2 V−1 s−1 but it is not desirable for FET operation because it had a very small ON/OFF current ratio of <10, while bulk WS2 shows a large OFF current ratio.122–125
 Fig. 10  (a) Optical image of the monolayer MoS2-based FET. (b) Fabricated device based on monolayer MoS2. (c) Schematic diagram of the device. (d and e) Transfer curve and output curve of the device, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 95, Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. 
The FET structure and characterization based on 1D and 2D materials are shown in Fig. 11(A). The FET was developed using few-layer MoS2 in which ZrO2 was used as the gate dielectric, whereas SWCNTs were developed by CVD with dimensions of 50 nm on an Si substrate with a 1 nm gate length, as shown in Fig. 11(A). The optical image of the device is shown in Fig. 11(B). Fig. 11(C) shows the SEM image of the device, and the results revealed that four terminals, (1) gate based on SWCNTs, (2) source, (3) drain and (4) Si substrate, acted as the back gate. This device behaved as a junctionless transistor at a negative voltage, and after this, the SWCNT-based gate became locally exhausted, and then the device was turned off. Fig. 11(D) shows the SEM image of the device, showing that the SWCNT gate and ZrO2 gate thickness is approximately 5.8 nm and undoped Si acts as the substrate, whereas the bilayer of the MoS2 acts as the channel. Electron energy-loss spectroscopy (EELS) showed the regions of the device, as shown in Fig. 11(E). This indicated the location of the SWCNTs, ZrO2, and MoS2 in the device.126–128
 Fig. 11  (A) Schematic diagram of MoS2 (2D) and 1D (SWCNT)-based FET. (B) Optical image of MoS2-based FET. (C) SEM image of MoS2 and SWCNT-based FET. (D) TEM image of MoS2 and SWCNT-based FET. (E) Distribution map of carbon, zirconium and sulphur in the device, indicating existence of these atoms. Reproduced with permission from ref. 126, Copyright 2016, the American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
3.1. Heterojunction devices based on 2D materials
2D materials including graphene,129 black phosphorus, TMDCs, and other materials have attracted significant interest in optoelectronics due to their extraordinary features such as easy synthesis, cost effectiveness, easy to transfer to other substrates and compatibility with CMOS.130 Owing to the unique properties of 2D materials with stacked junctions, these 2D heterostructures show many surprising phenomena, which make them more popular and promising materials than normal 2D materials. The idea of layered materials was first proposed by Richard Feynman in 1959.131 Subsequently, 2D heterostructure materials attracted significant interest in the development and for application in electronic and optoelectronic devices. Ultra-thin layers of these materials provide a comprehensive range of essential building blocks for electronic devices, with different optical, and electrical properties, which do not exist in their bulk form. This scheme enables the possibility for different 2D materials to be reassembled by VdW interlayer interaction into differently stacked heterostructures. The recent advancements in these materials provide a way for directly synthesizing vertical and lateral heterojunctions. Interfacing two different semiconductors creates a heterojunction with modified electronic band structures. Many solid-state devices including hybrid photodetectors, solar cells, LEDs and lasers based on 2D materials and their heterostructures have already been reported. Artificial modification of the bandgap or band-structure profiles using heterostructures is possible via the epitaxial growth of some material systems including III–V, II–VI and IV–IV materials. Initiating the utilization of few nanometer heterostructure layers, researchers demonstrated new concepts about devices such as hot-electron or resonant tunneling transistors and graded-base bipolar transistors.132 By scaling down devices to nanometer sizes, the boundary between the devices and materials as a separate physical abstraction became blurred. Vertical and lateral 2D heterostructures represent device engineering technology above Si and Ge or III–V material systems. Graphene, h-BN133 and multiple phases of TMDCs allow the fabrication of different lateral 2D heterostructures134 and creation of additional place for atomistic scale device engineering with planar and vertical heterostructures.
The vertical FET designs can resolve the problem of shrinking FETs to less than micrometre channel lengths. Based on a vertical FET, Yang et al. reported a gate-tunable Schottky diode with graphene contact-based hydrogen passivated silicon, which exhibited an ON/OFF current ratio of 105, which is crucial for digital electronics. Mixed-dimensional-based p–n junction heterojunctions have an advantage over the Schottky diode or v-FET. Jariwala et al. reported n-type single-layer MoS2 and p-type semiconducting SWCNTs based on a gate-tunable p–n heterojunction. They exhibited high tunability and presented a distinctive anti-ambipolar transfer reaction. They found that it was hard to induce carriers in the p–n junction with vertically adjoint layers. Therefore, it was quite difficult to maintain the equality of doping on the both sides of the p–n heterojunction. To overcome this issue, gate-tunable 2D or 3D p–n junctions exhibit unique properties to maintain equilibrium between the doping levels and make it applicable for logic device applications. An example of this semiconductor is based on lightly doped p-type graphene and monolayer p-type MoS2. In addition, FET-based heterostructure devices have excellent properties, i.e., charge carrier mobility of 33 cm2 V−1s−1 and ON/OFF current ratio of 106 when MoS2 acts as the channel layer, h-BN is used as the top layer and graphene acts as the source, drain and top-gate electrode. Moreover, TMDC heterostructures also exhibit promising results. TMDC-based p–n junctions such as n-MoSe2/p-WSe2 present perfect modification with an ideal factor of 2 at 290 K and the semiconductor p-WSe2/n-MoS2 revealed promising gate-tunable resolving electrical characteristics. Furthermore, p–n junctions or heterostructures fabricated from InAs as the n-type and WSe2 as the p-type junction show uniform rectification with both sides with a current ratio of more than 106.135–138
2D materials and TMDCs have great potential in the fabrication of optoelectronic-based devices because of their great photo-detection capability in the visible to infrared range. Yin et al. reported the first light sensor based on monolayer MoS2, in which mechanical exfoliation of MoS2 was used to build a phototransistor. In the early research on 2D-based optoelectronics devices, high responsivity, high gain, high internal and external quantum efficiency were not achieved; however, recent development shows about a six-order larger gain in photoresponsivity compared to the conventional devices. Furthermore, TMDC-based photodetectors showed the same bandgap value when an additional layer was added to the single layer device.139–141 Graphene is an emerging material that has been successfully employed for the fabrication of transparent and flexible photodetectors. Previous reports suggest that graphene with particular quantum dots can be fabricated with high spectrum stability in the range of 300 to 2000 nm due to photoconductive gain. Polat et al. reported that graphene with quantum dot-based flexible and transparent photodetectors can be useful for monitoring the heartbeat rate and oxygen saturation level. Furthermore, they observed that this photodetector could be operated in the ultra-violet (UV) to near infrared (NIR) spectrum range, it is cost effective and can be used in wireless communication.142,143
Several heterojunction-based photodetectors have been reported for application in the VIS to NIR region. However, most of these heterojunctions lack light absorption for detecting light due to the limitation of their bandgap, especially in the NIR region. Therefore, several issues such as limited response, bandgap limitation, low performance, and high working voltage are the major concerns in heterojunction-based photodetectors. To overcome these difficulties, organic/inorganic perovskite materials play a vital role. Methylammonium lead triiodide (CH3NH3PbI3) is a type of perovskite material possessing outstanding properties such as a direct bandgap and high charge carrier diffusion that can efficiently be used in photodetection, nonlinear optical area, etc.144,145 Hu et al. fabricated a heterostructure photodetector based on germanium with CH3NH3PbI3, which could operate in the VIS to NIR region up to 1550 nm. This device exhibited excellent responsivity of 1.4 A W−1 at 1550 nm spectrum. They suggested that this heterostructure can be employed in optical communication and in next-generation photonic devices.146

3.1.1. Fabrication of 2D heterostructures. 
2D heterostructures can be synthesized using several techniques, including CVD, liquid exfoliation hydrothermal synthesis, micromechanical exfoliation, vdW epitaxial growth, and manual stacking using laterally stitched or vertically stacked 2D heterojunctions.84,147 Luo et al. developed the WSe2/Bi2O2Se p–n heterojunction to enhance the properties in optoelectronic devices. They constructed the heterojunction via the dry transfer method. In this mechanism, they firstly prepared nanoflakes of Bi2O2Se via the CVD technique on mica, and then transferred them to SiO2via the wet transfer technique. Conversely, the mechanical exfoliation technique was used to obtain multilayer WSe2 on PDMS, which was then transferred to the top of the Bi2O2Se nanoflakes. A schematic diagram and optical image of the fabricated WSe2/Bi2O2Se are shown in Fig. 12(a and b), respectively. This device exhibited outstanding optoelectronic properties such as self-powered photodetector, high ON/OFF ratio of 105, and detection capability from 365 nm to 2000 nm due to the strong interface coupling at the junction interface.148
 Fig. 12  (a and b) Schematic diagram and optical image of fabricated WSe2/Bi2O2Se. (a and b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 148, Copyright 2020, John Wiley and Sons. (c) Schematic diagram of direct CVD growth to form the lateral heterostructure based on graphene/GaS/graphene. Reproduced with permission from ref. 149, Copyright 2019, the American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic depiction of all-2D material-based vdW heterostructure and inset shows the optical image of the fabricated vdW heterostructure (scale bar = 50 μm). Reproduced with permission from ref. 150, Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic illustration of the lateral and vertical heterostructure based on hydroxide-assisted nucleation using a one-pot strategy. Reproduced with permission from ref. 152, Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society. 
In the CVD technique, it is possible to grow various devices to produce static and collaborative insight, giving a feasible way towards the scalable commercialization of 2D optoelectronic devices. Chen et al. demonstrated the direct CVD technique to develop a lateral heterostructure comprised of graphene/GaS/graphene, as shown in Fig. 12(c). In this technique, they deposited GaS nanomaterials into selectively grown graphene pores and observed that this technique is not useful for the VIS spectrum, but can be employed to detect light in the UV region up to 270 nm.149 J. H. Warner and co-workers fabricated a layer-by-layer vertical heterostructure via CVD, which was comprised of graphene:h-BN:WS2:h-BN:graphene, as shown in Fig. 12(d). In this structure, the top-bottom graphene was used as the electrode, whereas the insulating material h-BN acted as the tunnel barrier for direct carrier injection in the semiconducting 2D material WSe2. They fabricated ten of these devices on a single chip and observed that these devices strongly emitted red light continuously for 2 h at room temperature and exhibited a good stability and durability rate up to 90%. They suggested that this geometry provides an excellent roadmap for developing ultra-thin 2D material-based optoelectronic devices on a commercial scale.150
Ma et al. fabricated a lateral heterostructure via a two-step CVD growth approach, comprising CoSe (metal) and WSe2 (semiconductor). In this mechanism, WSe2 nanoparticles were synthesised via the vapour transport technique, and then used as a template for the lateral epitaxial growth of CoSe. In the second step, CoSe was synthesized and then deposited on the edge of bilayer WSe2 to form a lateral heterostructure. It was revealed that this system enhanced the quality of the ohmic contacts, which are responsible for an increase in the mobility of FET devices. It was realized that the metal–semiconductor heterostructure development by the two-step CVD technique is an effective strategy to enhance the electrical properties in next-generation electronic devices.151 The controllable and selective growth of vdW heterostructures is also an effective strategy to enhance the performance of optoelectronic and electronic devices. Zhu et al. developed a vertical and lateral heterostructure, comprising MoS2/WS2 heterostructures based on a one-pot technique to realize the selective growth of the heterostructures, as shown in Fig. 12(e). In this technique, they employed a hydroxide-assisted process to control the nucleation sites, which made it possible to fabricate lateral and vertical heterostructures. They claimed that owing to this technique, the size of the lateral heterostructure could be increased up to 1 mm, which is the highest size in the case of lateral heterostructures to date. Moreover, this structure is efficient to enhance the mobility and ON/OFF ratio in FETs. This study provides a path towards the controlled selective growth and understanding the surface chemistry behind lateral and vertical heterostructured 2D materials.152,153


3.1.2. Optoelectronic devices. 
With the increasing demand for the integration and functionalization of optoelectronic devices to meet the requirements of next-generation optoelectronic devices, 2D materials, TMDCs and their heterostructures are attracting attention due to their tremendous electronic and optoelectronic properties. Remarkably, these novel materials have the capability to realize fast charge carrier behavior and their heterostructures realize interlayer quantum coupling effects, which can achieve the novel physical properties. Thus, controlling the growth of 2D materials and their heterostructure is a promising strategy to construct next-generation electronic and optoelectronic devices.
Li et al. demonstrated a high-performance optoelectronic device based on the vdW heterostructure MoS2/MoSe2, as shown in Fig. 13(a). Direct growth via the CVD technique was used to construct the vertical heterostructure. The high-resolution atomic characterization revealed that the vdW heterostructure exhibited excellent crystal quality and heterostructure interface without any metal. The optoelectronic characterization demonstrated that the heterostructure showed ultrahigh photoresponsivity and detectivity of 36 A W−1 and 4.8 × 1011 Jones, respectively, as indicated in Fig. 13(b). This was obtained from the built-in electric field at the junction interface and Coulomb scattering effect.154,155 Chang et al. fabricated novel Bi2O2Se and graphene-based heterostructures for application in optoelectronic, neuromorphic and electronic devices. This novel device demonstrated the positive and negative photoresponsivity of 88 and −110 A W−1 in the VIS and UV regime under a very low intensity of light, respectively. This device exhibited the ability to achieve all optically stimulated long-term potentiation to mimic synaptic short-term and long-term plasticity, which was realized by different photodetection mechanisms such as the photoconductive, bolometric and photoinduced effects. Furthermore, this device could be applied in electronic applications such as AND or OR digital logic functions with full light modulation. This novel device structure based on optoelectronic devices was exhibited as an efficient building block for next-generation artificial neuromorphic systems.156,157 Y. Wen and co-workers fabricated gapless heterostructures comprised of PbS nanomaterials, where the bonding sites of MoS2 were connected through strong orbital hydration, which provided stronger interface coupling compared to PbS/MoS2 heterostructure bonding. A schematic diagram of the vdW heterostructure and gapless heterostructure based on PbS/MoS2 is shown in Fig. 13(c). This unique structure provided ultra-high photo-gain and photoresponsivity greater than 105 and detectivity of 1014 Jones. Furthermore, the gapless heterostructure exhibited excellent time-resolved properties of rising/falling (47 μs/49 μs), which were 5 orders larger than that of the transferred PbS/MoS2 heterostructures. This study revealed that the gapless heterostructure is an effective approach to enhance the performance of optoelectronic devices.158
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic diagram of MoS2/MoSe2-based vdW photodetector (inset: optical image, scale bar 10 μm). (b) Photoresponsivity and detectivity of MoS2/MoSe2-based photodetector at different power intensities. (a and b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 154, Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. (c) Schematic diagram of vdW heterostructure and gapless heterostructure based on PbS/MoS2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 158, Copyright 2019, the American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic diagram of NiTe2/MoS2-based heterostructure. (e and f) Rising and decaying photoresponse time in NiTe2/MoS2-based heterostructure and MoS2-based photodetector, respectively. (d–f) Reproduced with permission from ref. 159, Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society. 
Beyond TMDCs, metallic TMDCs such as VS2, NbS2, and TaS2 show great potential for the construction of next-generation optoelectronic and electronic devices and enhancing their electrical and optical performances. To date, very few optoelectronic and electronic devices have been reported based on metallic TMDCs. The fabrication of these types of devices and their heterostructures can exhibit tremendous optical and electrical properties through the Fermi level pinning effect and reducing the Schottky barrier in 2D electronic and optical devices. Zhai et al. developed the metal–semiconductor NiTe2/MoS2-based heterostructure via the two-step CVD technique and a schematic diagram of this system is shown in Fig. 13(d). They observed that owing to the built-in electric field between the heterostructures, the device exhibited superior electronic and optoelectronic properties compared to the pristine MoS2 monolayer. Furthermore, the NiTe2/MoS2-based photodetector showed an excellent rising and decaying photoresponse, which was three times faster than that of the pristine MoS2-based photodetector, as shown in Fig. 13(e and f). This study gives a path towards the enhancement of optoelectronic properties in next-generation optoelectronic devices.159,160

3.2. 2D Material-based photodetectors
Photodetectors are widely used in the conversion of photons into electrical signals. The conversion of light into electrical energy initiates novel research in optoelectronic devices, which have a tremendous influence on daily life. This is a breakthrough for applications in optical communication, video imaging, movement detection, sensing and security with higher performance materials and wide range integration technologies. For the conversion of photons into electrical signals, three effects are involved, including the photovoltaic effect (PVE), photoconductive effect (PCE) and photo-thermoelectric effect (PTE) or photo-bolometric effect (PBE).161,162 Photodetectors detect and gauge the output of a laser or some other typical source. Photodetectors transmute incident light into a measurable response, which is normally electrical in nature and proportional to the irradiance or intensity of the appearing light. In selecting a photodetector, one must consider its subsequent key characteristics that might impact the measurement.161–163
The growing interest in the development of photodetection technology in the last few years has made it a prominent candidate in IR, VIS and UV detection using HgCdTe, Si, and SiC, respectively. Thus, photodetectors based on 2D materials have been extensively studied for their detection mechanism and different structures.164–166 Tunable optical characteristics using electrostatic doping, small dissipation energy, and high carrier mobility enable 2D material photodetectors for ultrafast photon detection in the form of electrical signals. Compared with other materials, graphene is distinguished for photonic and optoelectronic applications due to several advantages including its gapless behavior, linear dispersion, polarization photodetection, and wide range energy spectrum by generating a large number of carriers by light absorption. This includes visible, short-wave and near infrared, ultraviolet, mid-infrared (MIR), and terahertz (THz) spectra.167–169
2D material-based photodetectors are more sensitive and superior in their response compared to 3D bulk material-based photodetectors over a broad electromagnetic spectrum due to their advantage of tunable bandgap in the range of 0 to 6 eV.170 The atomically thin layers of 2D materials make them mechanically flexible, which leads to the novel device architectures including flexible, stretchable, and wearable smart electronics. However, despite the unique characteristics of 2D material-based photodetectors, there are still some limitations in terms of poor light absorption and limited photoresponse, which restrict their practical and industrial utilization. Furthermore, the crystal quality of these 2D materials is also lower compared with other exfoliated samples for large scale and better performance to obtain ultrafast speed and ultrahigh response simultaneously. Thus, numerous attempts have been made in the past decades to overcome these issues.
Due to their unique characteristics, 2D materials have outstanding applications in optical-, electrical-, and biomedical-based devices. Recently, scientists have been concentrating on the development of new 2D materials and modified 2D materials to attain desired properties. Bandgap tuning is one of the most vital parameters to achieve the best device performance. Iqbal et al. fabricated a heterojunction structure of MoS2 monolayer, targeting band gap tuning and investigating its transport properties. They used the strategy of two dielectric constants at two different edges. Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM) was used for the device configuration, and electrical measurements revealed that direct study of the bandgap tuning and dielectric engineering is possible. The device showed good asymmetric rectification behaviour while investigating its electrical properties.169,171
2D materials and TMDCs play a crucial role in the fabrication of low-cost reliable devices such as flexible electronics, electronic skin, wearable electronic devices and bio-medical electronic devices. Due to their amazing features, they boosted the US economy by about 6 billion dollars in 2017 and expected to reach a gross of 33 billion dollars by 2024. Deep ultra-violet photodetectors (DUV PD) are mostly used for different applications such as satellite stations, automatization, and military purposes. However, this type of photodetector (DUV PD) requires materials with high thermal stability, high sensitivity, and high performance. Accordingly, Lin et al. developed DUV PD-based 2D hexagonal (h)-BN nanosheets structurally supported by 1D nano-fibrillated cellulose (NFC). They achieved outstanding thermal conductivity, three times higher than the reported value, and plastic-based substrates with high detectivity of up to 8.05 × 1010 cm Hz1/2 W−1 and fast photo-response (response and recovery times were 0.267 s and 0.393 s, respectively), making this device favourable for flexible electronics.172–175
TMDC materials have outstanding properties for designing and fabricating low-cost, air stable, and self-driven power-based devices. Electrical contact with high and low work function materials has different impacts on the device performance. The electrical and optical properties of the devices depend on the thickness of the layer. Yim et al. investigated electrical contacts of PtSe2 with different channel thicknesses using the transfer length method (TLM). They found that Ni and Ti were better candidates for electrical contacts of PtSe2. They observed that PtSe2 in its bulk form has zero band gap, while it behaved as semimetal, but when its thickness was reduced to monolayer or few layers, its band gap approached 1.2 eV, and interestingly it behaved like a semiconductor and a 0.5 nm thin layer of PtSe2 behaved like a p-type material. They also reported that the mobility of the PtSe2 device was around 0.6 cm2 V−1 S−1.28,176
To evaluate the performance of a photodetector, its photodetectivity, photoresponsivity, and high ON/OFF ratio the crucial parameters, and thus several studies have been reported to improve these parameters. Cai et al. used the technique of photogating modulation to increase the photosensitivity and photoresponsivity without affecting the device. This technique is based on heterostructure with band tuning, which allows unidirectional injection. They fabricated the structure based on a wide band gap via the physical vapor deposition (PVD) technique on 1,4-bis(4-methylstyryl)benzene (p-MSB) crystals, which were epitaxially grown on 2D WSe2. Also, p–n junction-based photodetectors are now attracting great interest from researchers. Gao et al. fabricated an avalanche photodetector based on the heterostructure strategy and sub-mean free path (MFP) scaled vertical InSe/BP. In this strategy, thin InSe was connected to the bottom side and BP was connected to the upper side on the substrate. During the measurement, they achieved an SS of <0.25 mV dec−1 for the impact ionization FET IMOS and a low threshold of <1 V for avalanche. These strategies provide clues towards new impact ionization, leading to a ballistic avalanche process.177–179
X. Zheng and co-workers developed a technique to deposit direct metal electrodes on a monolayer of MoS2. This technique is based on the double polymer stack chemical etching/lift off process combined with thermal scanning probe lithography (t-SPL). By using this technique, they obtained defect-free deposited metals on the device, which are not necessarily needed in electron beam lithography (EBL), thus making these devices very expensive. This technique allows simultaneous in situ patterning and imaging of the layers of graphene and other 2D materials. Due to this technique, X. Zheng and co-workers achieved outstanding parameters such as defect-free deposition, low cost technique, direct electrode metallization up to sub-10 nm resolution, and high on/off ratio of 1010.180
Strain engineering is an efficient technique that is mostly used for tuning the bandgap in 2D materials to control their electrical and optical properties. Strain engineering can also be applied for enhancing and improving the intrinsic properties of 2D materials. P. Gant and co-workers developed a single-layer MoS2-based photodetector with the help of the strain engineering technique. They observed that by controlling the strain engineering, the optical properties of the photodetector such as photoresponsivity could be enhanced by 2–3 orders and a response time less than 80 ms to 1.5 s was achieved. Furthermore, the fabricated photodetector exhibited flexibility and transparent characteristics with a gauge factor of 136 meV %−1.181
As discussed earlier, graphene has a gapless band structure, which exhibits a large dark current compared to other 2D and TMDCs materials. Beyond the graphene, the recently and rediscovered BP exhibits tremendous optical properties such as broadband wavelength spectrum from the VIS to MIR region due to its tunable bandgap. Further amendments revealed that BP-based photodetectors show high photoresponsivity, SNR, EQE and internal quantum efficiency (IQE). However, it is very difficult to maintain the performance of BP-based photodetectors in miniaturization due to their instability in air and light matter interaction. Thus, to overcome these issues, Ma et al. proposed and experimentally implemented a new technique named the slow light effect in photonic crystal waveguides, as shown in Fig. 14(a and b). In this system, the slow light effect in the photonic crystal waveguide and subwavelength grating waveguide share the same BP thin film, and then two BP-based photodetectors were developed. It was shown that the photoresponsivity was enhanced more than ten times in the photonic crystal waveguide system compared to the subwavelength grating system, as shown in Fig. 14(c and d), respectively. They revealed that the proposed new technique is efficient for designing slow light waveguide photodetectors for targeting different applications such as medical diagnostics, environmental monitoring and industrial process control.182,183
 Fig. 14  (a) Schematic diagram of two photodetectors based on a BP shared photonic system. (b) Magnified view in the square black box in (a). (c and d) Photoresponsivity of the photonic crystal waveguide and subwavelength grating waveguide, respectively. (d) Inset: fitting curve according to the Hornbeck–Haynes model. (a–d) Reproduced with permission from ref. 182, Copyright 2020, John Wiley and Sons. (e) Schematic illustration of MoS2/GaN-based vdW heterostructure. (f) Light intensity vs. photoresponsivity indicates that MoS2/GaN vdW heterostructure has better performance than MoS2-based photodetector. (e and f) Reproduced with permission from ref. 186, Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society. (g) Schematic depiction of NbS3-based Schottky photodetector. (h) Light intensity power vs. detectivity of NbS3-based Schottky photodetector for MIR to LIR range. (g and h) Reproduced with permission from ref. 187, Copyright 2020, John Wiley and Sons. 
Wang et al. fabricated a deep UV photodetector based on h-BN with carbon doping. They introduced carbon doping into the device to modulate the properties of the h-BN-based photodetector and increase the performance of the device. They deposited carbon atoms at a concentration rate of 0 to 10.2% by ion beam sputtering and found that there was no change in the h-BN phase, but the carbon atoms in the device quickly weakened the crystallinity of the h-BN. The photodetector exhibited a high photoresponsivity of 9.2 mA W−1, which is the highest value reported to date in the case of h-BN-based photodetectors.184 Wazir et al. developed a 2D heterostructure photodetector based on MoO2/MoSe2, which acts as a metallic and semiconductor, respectively. MoO2 has a high charge carrier density, and therefore it is a potential candidate for achieving high-performance devices. MoO2 is a metallic material, and thus its charge carrier density is higher by several orders of magnitude compared to semiconductor materials. Furthermore, this material has the ability to generate charge carriers by absorbing photons under light. MoO2 has a work function of 5.5 to 5.7 eV, similar to Ag and Au, and therefore, it is very hard to obtain monolayer or few-layer MoO2 by mechanical exfoliation due to the inability to get the vdW structure. Thus, they used the CVD technique to build the vertical-based MoO2/MoSe2 heterostructure. This study revealed that a 2D heterostructure can be obtained with a high photoresponsivity of 100.86 mA W−1, D* of 23.4 × 109 Jones and EQE of 23.4% at 532 nm.185
Zhang et al. fabricated an MoS2/GaN-based heterostructure to achieve an effective photodetector with enhanced properties for photodetection, as shown in Fig. 14(e). Thin layers of n-type GaN and p-type MoS2 flakes were used for the fabrication of the heterostructure. Due to the high crystal quality of GaN and built-in electric field at the surface of the interface, a high photoresponsivity of 328 A W−1 and fast photoresponse of 400 ms were achieved, which was faster than the pristine MoS2-based photodetector at a wavelength of 532 nm. Moreover, the device also had the capability to detect the spectrum in the UV range with the high photoresponsivity of 27.1 A W−1, as shown in Fig. 14(f), and fast photoresponse of 300 ms, which are also superior to that of the previously published MoS2-based UV photodetectors.186 Wang et al. introduced a novel transition metal trichalcogenide semiconductor sulfide niobium (NbS3) in the 2D material family. They investigated its properties both theoretically and experimentally and realized that this novel material has strong physical anisotropic characteristics with the bandgap of the monolayer (0.42 eV) and bulk (0.26 eV). Furthermore, they fabricated a Schottky photodetector based on NbS3 with different metal contacts such as Cr and Au, as shown in Fig. 14(g). They realized that the device showed outstanding optical characteristics such as a fast photoresponse (11.6 μs), low noise current, high quality reflective image and detectivity exceeding 107 Jones at a wavelength of 3000 nm, as shown in Fig. 14(h). These enhanced optical properties make it an ideal candidate in the 2D material family to develop next-generation IR optical devices.187
Besides 2D layered materials, non-layered 2D materials can also be used to develop electronic and optoelectronic devices because of their in-plane anisotropic properties. ZnSb is one of these 2D materials belonging to the family of the II–V group, which is an ideal candidate to develop next-generation optoelectronic and electronic devices. Chai et al. developed ZnSb non-layered nanoflakes via the CVD technique and observed that the ZnSb nanoflakes were orthorhombic via covalent bonding, with outstanding electronic and optoelectronic properties that are different from the conventional 2D layered materials. They realized that the synthesised ZnSb nanoflakes have anisotropic properties owing to their low-symmetric crystal structure. They fabricated a photodetector based on the ZnSb nanoflakes, which exhibited outstanding optoelectronic properties such as high photoresponsivity (89.2 A W−1), detectivity (1.7 × 107 Jones at 1550 nm wavelength spectrum) and good optical stability up to 4 months. This work revealed that besides 2D layered materials, non-layered 2D materials also have good potential for the development of IR optoelectronic devices.188,189
4. Role of charge carrier mobility in 2D material-based devices
The charge carrier mobility plays a dominant role in the research on semiconductor devices because the efficiency of the devices is generally dependent on the charge mobility, which can be increased by increasing the charge mobility of the devices. Theoretically, the predicted charge carrier values of 2D materials are generally very high, and the value of electron mobility in materials depends on different factors such as the dielectric environment and impurity density. The mobility of monolayer MoS2 is in the range of 10–1000 cm2 V−1 s−1 at room temperature and the low-temperature values are beyond 105 cm2 V−1 s−1. The mobility of a thin layer of MoS2 is two times lower than the mobility of the bulk material. The reason for the decease in mobility in the thin layer of MoS2 is that when the material is transformed from the bulk to a very thin layer, it becomes more sensitive and less air stable. Furthermore, there are other two factors responsible for the reduced mobility in 2D materials, which are the remote optical phonons and coulomb scattering. Increasing the temperature of the system results in an increase in thermal energy and the thermal velocity causes a reduction in scattering. Above 200 K, the phonon scattering phenomenon is the predominant mechanism.190–192
If more phonons are added in the scattering mechanism, the mobility of the device decreases. If high dielectric constant materials are used, for example, HfO2 doped on a single thin layer of MoS2, then the low temperature mobility can be enhanced. The mobility of devices begins to decrease above 20 K, while in the range of 100–300 K it shows the power law dependency of μ ≈ T−γ, where the value of γ is in the range 0.55–0.78 and the experimental value is very large, i.e., the bulk crystal value is γ = 2.6 and for a monolayer, γ = 1.4. This indicates that with an increase in the temperature of the device, the rate of mobility degradation can be reduced in the presence of a top gate.
There is another important factor named “dielectric environment engineering”, in which the device is encapsulated by a material such as h-BN to prevent it from contamination, which is very effective to increase the mobility of electronic devices and make them suitable for utilization in open air. However, it is beneficial to understand the mechanism of intrinsic electrical transport in 2D devices without a dielectric layer, which may affect the phenomena of charge impurity scattering when the mobility of the devices is desired to increase.193–195
There is another promising way to gain high charge mobility, which involves the elimination of external impurities, for example, the generation of absorbers from the atmosphere and impurities produced during the fabrication process. This process is called “in situ” in which the annealing process is performed under vacuum, which also increases the conductivity and mobility of the device. With this technique, using high dielectric constant substrates, the highest room temperature mobility for monolayer MoS2 deposited on HfO2 of 150 cm2 V−1 s−1 and mobility of MoS2 can be obtained by using polymer substrates with high optical phonons.86,122,196
5. Conclusion and future perspective
In the last few decades, extensive studies have been carried out to address the shrinkage of the channel length of FETs and to improve their mobility, ON/OFF ratio and drain current. Conventional substrate materials such as Si, GaAs, InGaAs, and GaN have almost reached their limits. Thus, currently, there is an urgent need for materials possessing outstanding properties for transistors, which are scalable without any defects, low-cost fabrication and have good properties for transistors and photodetectors. For instance, low-dimensional materials play an effective role in scaling down electronics to the nanoscale and increasing the performance of electronic devices and effective applications in the field of electronic- and optoelectronic-based devices. The increasing development of materials indicates the revolutionary growth of low-dimensional materials, atomically two-dimensional materials and TMDCs, including graphene, for application in FETs. 2D materials including TMDCs have excellent features, exhibiting high electron mobility, which is beneficial for FET devices and also essential for heterostructure formation. Charge carrier mobility is an important factor to be investigated in 2D material-based FETs. To increase the charge carrier mobility of FET-based devices, a large dielectric constant material was used as the top or back gate layer. This can increase the charge carrier mobility of FET devices by about 10–50 times. Dielectric materials such as HfO2 and Al2O3 were found to be quite effective to increase the charge mobility of mono or bulk layer MoS2, ranging between 150 to 500 cm2 V−1 s−1 when one of them such as h-BN was used as the top gate or back gate layer. Density function theory results showed that the mobility of MoS2 can be increased up to 400 cm2 V−1 s−1 at room temperature. This shows that MoS2 is an excellent material for future-generation electronics technology. TMDCs are proposed for the eventual scaling with a controlled thickness of the device on the nanoscale. Furthermore, for the processing and fabrication of TMDC-based devices on a large scale with a nano gate length, research issues still exist for future technologies. For example, research on emerging process-controlled devices, low-resistance ohmic contacts from TMDC semiconductor materials and reducing the gate length using high-k 2D insulators are important to improve the device performance.
It is significant to maximize the Ion/Ioff ratio and utilize cost-effective fabrication techniques on a large scale. By applying these concepts, two-dimensional materials can be grasped by the whole market for the electronics industry. 2D material semiconductors have very rich properties compared to the conventional bulk semiconductors, for instance, easy fabrication, mechanical flexibility, integration, and robustness. 2D materials have high mobilities and their band-gap can be tuned, and therefore these materials are very easy to be utilized in multifunction integrated photonics and electronics circuits.
TMDCs show different properties given that they are prepared via different methods to achieve outstanding characteristics for optical and electronics devices compared to their bulk counterparts. Due to their intrinsic and unique characteristics, TMDCs have the ability to form functional materials that can be utilized for future technological applications. Researchers claim that warped layers of 2D materials can alter the transport properties of the stacked layers of 2D materials. The deposition of new 2D materials in heterostructure-based devices, quantum engineering and band gap engineering are hot topics for new research for the development of effective FETs.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Science and Technology Innovation Commission of Shenzhen (JCYJ20190808142415003), National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 61905161).
References

          K. Mistry, C. Allen, C. Auth, B. Beattie, D. Bergstrom, M. Bost, M. Brazier, M. Buehler, A. Cappellani and R. Chau, 2007 IEEE International Electron Devices Meeting,  2007, pp. 247–250 Search PubMed .
X. Li, Z. Yu, X. Xiong, T. Li, T. Gao, R. Wang, R. Huang and Y. Wu, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaau3194 CrossRef PubMed .
V. K. Sangwan and M. C. Hersam, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2020, 1–12 Search PubMed .
J. Liu, Z. Qin, H. Gao, H. Dong, J. Zhu and W. Hu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1808453 CrossRef .
H. Chen, W. Zhang, M. Li, G. He and X. Guo, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 2879–2949 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Y. Chen, C. B. Liu and S. Mao, Nano-Micro Lett., 2020, 12, 95 CrossRef CAS .
C. Pitsalidis, M. Ferro, D. Iandolo, L. Tzounis, S. Inal and R. Owens, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaat4253 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, N. O. Weiss, X. Duan, H.-C. Cheng, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 1–17 Search PubMed .
S. Zhao, B. Dong, H. Wang, H. Wang, Y. Zhang, Z. V. Han and H. Zhang, Nanoscale Adv., 2020, 2, 109–139 RSC .
M. Waldrip, O. D. Jurchescu, D. J. Gundlach and E. G. Bittle, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 1904576 Search PubMed .
M. Chhowalla, D. Jena and H. Zhang, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 1–15 Search PubMed .
C. Qiu, F. Liu, L. Xu, B. Deng, M. Xiao, J. Si, L. Lin, Z. Zhang, J. Wang and H. Guo, Science, 2018, 361, 387–392 CrossRef CAS .
X. He, R. Wang, J. Wu and W. Li, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1–12 Search PubMed .
L. Nayak, S. Mohanty, S. K. Nayak and A. Ramadoss, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 8771–8795 RSC .
I. Ferain, C. A. Colinge and J.-P. Colinge, Nature, 2011, 479, 310–316 CrossRef CAS .
B. Doyle, S. Datta, M. Doczy, S. Hareland, B. Jin, J. Kavalieros, T. Linton, A. Murthy, R. Rios and R. Chau, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 2003, 24, 263–265 CAS .
J.-T. Park, J.-P. Colinge and C. H. Diaz, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 2001, 22, 405–406 Search PubMed .

          X. Huang, W.-C. Lee, C. Kuo, D. Hisamoto, L. Chang, J. Kedzierski, E. Anderson, H. Takeuchi, Y.-K. Choi and K. Asano, International Electron Devices Meeting 1999. Technical Digest (Cat. No. 99CH36318),  1999, pp. 67–70 Search PubMed .
L. Bao, J. Kang, Y. Fang, Z. Yu, Z. Wang, Y. Yang, Y. Cai and R. Huang, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 1–9 Search PubMed .
P.-F. Wang, X. Lin, L. Liu, Q.-Q. Sun, P. Zhou, X.-Y. Liu, W. Liu, Y. Gong and D. W. Zhang, Science, 2013, 341, 640–643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yin, C. Shao, C. Zhang, Z. Zhang, X. Zhang, J. Robertson and Y. Guo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 22378–22386 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Troughton and D. Atkinson, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 12388–12414 RSC .
S. Ahmed and J. Yi, Nano-Micro Lett., 2017, 9, 50 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Razavieh, P. Zeitzoff and E. J. Nowak, IEEE Trans. Nanotechnol., 2019, 18, 999–1004 CAS .
F. Schwierz, J. Pezoldt and R. Granzner, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 8261–8283 RSC .
L. Xiu, IEEE Solid-State Circuits Mag., 2019, 11, 39–55 Search PubMed .
M.-Y. Li, S.-K. Su, H.-S. P. Wong and L.-J. Li, Nature, 2019, 567, 169–170 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, X. Duan, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6388–6409 RSC .
W. Lu, Y. Lee, J. C. Gertsch, J. A. Murdzek, A. S. Cavanagh, L. Kong, J. A. del Alamo and S. M. George, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 5159–5166 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. N. Khan, D. A. Hounshell and E. R. Fuchs, Nat. Electron., 2018, 1, 14–21 CrossRef .
S. Kim, G. Myeong, W. Shin, H. Lim, B. Kim, T. Jin, S. Chang, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi and S. Cho, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2020, 1–4 Search PubMed .
Y. N. Gong, Z. T. Lin, Y. X. Chen, Q. Khan, C. Wang, B. Zhang, G. H. Nie, N. Xie and D. L. Li, Nano-Micro Lett., 2020, 12, 174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Iannaccone, F. Bonaccorso, L. Colombo and G. Fiori, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 183–191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Coughlin, IEEE Consum. Electron. Mag., 2019, 8, 97–99 Search PubMed .
W. Ahmad, S. Ahmed, M. Amjad, S. Akhtar and M. Ali, Optik, 2018, 155, 297–300 CrossRef CAS .
S. Karuthedath, Y. Firdaus, R. Z. Liang, J. Gorenflot, P. M. Beaujuge, T. D. Anthopoulos and F. Laquai, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1901443 CrossRef .
D. A. Hanifi, N. D. Bronstein, B. A. Koscher, Z. Nett, J. K. Swabeck, K. Takano, A. M. Schwartzberg, L. Maserati, K. Vandewal and Y. van de Burgt, Science, 2019, 363, 1199–1202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. M. Rajanna, H. Meddeb, O. Sergeev, A. P. Tsapenko, S. Bereznev, M. Vehse, O. Volobujeva, M. Danilson, P. D. Lund and A. G. Nasibulin, Nano Energy, 2020, 67, 104183 CrossRef CAS .
R. G. Dickinson and L. Pauling, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1923, 45, 1466–1471 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Wilson and A. Yoffe, Adv. Phys., 1969, 18, 193–335 CrossRef CAS .
R. Frindt and A. Yoffe, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 1963, 273, 69–83 Search PubMed .
P. Joensen, R. Frindt and S. R. Morrison, Mater. Res. Bull., 1986, 21, 457–461 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, D. C. Alsmeyer and R. L. McCreery, Chem. Mater., 1990, 2, 557–563 CrossRef CAS .
R. Tenne, L. Margulis, M. E. Genut and G. Hodes, Nature, 1992, 360, 444–446 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Feldman, E. Wasserman, D. Srolovitz and R. Tenne, Science, 1995, 267, 222–225 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Lv, H. Terrones, A. L. Elias, N. Perea-Lopez, H. R. Gutierrez, E. Cruz-Silva, L. P. Rajukumar, M. S. Dresselhaus and M. Terrones, Nano Today, 2015, 10, 559–592 CrossRef CAS .
P. Ares, T. Cea, M. Holwill, Y. B. Wang, R. Roldán, F. Guinea, D. V. Andreeva, L. Fumagalli, K. S. Novoselov and C. R. Woods, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1905504 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Hsu, R. Frisenda, R. Schmidt, A. Arora, S. M. De Vasconcellos, R. Bratschitsch, H. S. van der Zant and A. Castellanos-Gomez, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7, 1900239 CrossRef .
C. Tresca and M. Calandra, 2D Mater., 2019, 6, 035041 CrossRef CAS .
J.-W. Jiang, Acta Mech. Solida Sin., 2019, 32, 17–28 CrossRef .
B. Wang, H. Luo, X. Wang, E. Wang, Y. Sun, Y.-C. Tsai, H. Zhu, P. Liu, K. Jiang and K. Liu, ACS Nano, 2019, 14, 175–184 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Onodera, S. Masubuchi, R. Moriya and T. Machida, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2020, 59, 010101 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. Bolshakov, V. V. Fedorov, O. Y. Koval, G. A. Sapunov, M. S. Sobolev, E. V. Pirogov, D. A. Kirilenko, A. M. Mozharov and I. S. Mukhin, Cryst. Growth Des., 2019, 19, 4510–4520 CrossRef CAS .
G. Lu, G. Zhang, J. Sun, X. Wang, Z. Shi, D. Jiang, H. Wang, A. Li, T. Wu and Q. Yu, Carbon, 2019, 152, 521–526 CrossRef CAS .
F. Hetsch, N. Zhao, S. V. Kershaw and A. L. Rogach, Mater. Today, 2013, 16, 312–325 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, J. Tolentino, M. Gibbs, R. Ihly, C. L. Perkins, Y. Liu, N. Crawford, J. C. Hemminger and M. Law, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1578–1587 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kahmann, A. Shulga and M. A. Loi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1904174 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Shulga, L. Piveteau, S. Z. Bisri, M. V. Kovalenko and M. A. Loi, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2016, 2, 1500467 CrossRef .
X. Fan, D. Kneppe, V. Sayevich, H. Kleemann, A. Tahn, K. Leo, V. Lesnyak and A. Eychmüller, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 4025–4031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chryssikos, M. Wiesinger, O. Bienek, H. Wiggers, M. Stutzmann, A. Cattani-Scholz and R. N. Pereira, ACS Appl. Electron. Mater., 2020, 2, 692–700 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Abbassi, M. Perrin, G. B. Barin, S. Sangtarash, J. Overbeck, O. Braun, C. Lambert, Q. Sun, T. Prechtl and A. Narita, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 5754–5762 CrossRef PubMed .
M. I. Nugraha, E. Yarali, Y. Firdaus, Y. Lin, A. El-Labban, M. Gedda, E. Lidorikis, E. Yengel, H. Faber and T. D. Anthopoulos, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 31591–31600 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Yun, J. Lim, J. Roh, D. C. J. Neo, M. Law and V. I. Klimov, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1–10 Search PubMed .
A. Fuhr, H. J. Yun, S. A. Crooker and V. I. Klimov, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 2212–2223 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Burghard, H. Klauk and K. Kern, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2586–2600 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Javey and J. Kong, Carbon nanotube electronics, Springer Science & Business Media,  2009 Search PubMed .
R. Fang, K. Chen, L. Yin, Z. Sun, F. Li and H. M. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1800863 CrossRef .
S. Gao, S.-H. Yang, H.-Y. Wang, G.-S. Wang and P.-G. Yin, Carbon, 2020, 162, 438–444 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li and B. Mu, Appl. Energy, 2019, 242, 695–715 CrossRef CAS .
P. Avouris, Acc. Chem. Res., 2002, 35, 1026–1034 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Avouris, Chem. Phys., 2002, 281, 429–445 CrossRef CAS .

          P. Avouris, Z. Chen and V. Perebeinos, in Nanoscience and Technology: a Collection of Reviews from Nature Journals, World Scientific,  2010, pp. 174–184 Search PubMed .
L.-M. Peng, Z. Zhang and S. Wang, Mater. Today, 2014, 17, 433–442 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Bati, L. Yu, M. Batmunkh and J. G. Shapter, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1902273 CrossRef .
J. M. Salazar-Rios, A. A. Sengrian, W. Talsma, H. Duim, M. Abdu-Aguye, S. Jung, N. Fröhlich, S. Allard, U. Scherf and M. A. Loi, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2020, 6, 1900789 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ren, X. Yang, L. Zhou, J. Y. Mao, S. T. Han and Y. Zhou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1902105 CrossRef .
M. D. Bishop, G. Hills, T. Srimani, C. Lau, D. Murphy, S. Fuller, J. Humes, A. Ratkovich, M. Nelson and M. M. Shulaker, Nat. Electron., 2020, 1–10 Search PubMed .
G. Hills, C. Lau, A. Wright, S. Fuller, M. D. Bishop, T. Srimani, P. Kanhaiya, R. Ho, A. Amer and Y. Stein, Nature, 2019, 572, 595–602 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          T. Srimani, G. Hills, C. Lau and M. Shulaker, 2019 Symposium on VLSI Technology,  2019, pp. T24–T25 Search PubMed .
C. Thelander, P. Agarwal, S. Brongersma, J. Eymery, L.-F. Feiner, A. Forchel, M. Scheffler, W. Riess, B. Ohlsson and U. Gösele, Mater. Today, 2006, 9, 28–35 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liu, S. E. Bottle and P. Sonar, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1903882 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Tang, Y. Huang, L. Han, R. Liu, Y. Su, X. Guo and F. Yan, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 790–808 RSC .
Y. P. Liu, S. Y. Zhang, J. He, Z. M. M. Wang and Z. W. Liu, Nano-Micro Lett., 2019, 11, 13 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Zhang, S. Wang and L. M. Peng, Chin. Sci. Bull., 2012, 57, 135–148 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Kim, J. Lim, R. Sahu, O. Kasian, L. T. Stephenson, C. Scheu and B. Gault, Adv. Mater., 2020, 1907235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Chamlagain, Q. Li, N. J. Ghimire, H.-J. Chuang, M. M. Perera, H. Tu, Y. Xu, M. Pan, D. Xaio and J. Yan, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 5079–5088 CrossRef CAS .
X. Tong, E. Ashalley, F. Lin, H. D. Li and Z. M. M. Wang, Nano-Micro Lett., 2015, 7, 203–218 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Ryou, Y.-S. Kim, K. Santosh and K. Cho, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 1–8 CrossRef PubMed .
S.-H. Bae, H. Kum, W. Kong, Y. Kim, C. Choi, B. Lee, P. Lin, Y. Park and J. Kim, Nat. Mater., 2019, 18, 550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, C. Liu and S. Mao, Nano-Micro Lett., 2020, 12, 1–24 CrossRef PubMed .
S. S. Chee, D. Seo, H. Kim, H. Jang, S. Lee, S. P. Moon, K. H. Lee, S. W. Kim, H. Choi and M. H. Ham, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1804422 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Wang, X. Hu, X. Niu, J. Xie, S. Chu and Q. Gong, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 924–941 RSC .
D. Akinwande, C. Huyghebaert, C.-H. Wang, M. I. Serna, S. Goossens, L.-J. Li, H.-S. P. Wong and F. H. Koppens, Nature, 2019, 573, 507–518 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Podzorov, M. Gershenson, C. Kloc, R. Zeis and E. Bucher, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 84, 3301–3303 CrossRef CAS .
B. Radisavljevic, A. Radenovic, J. Brivio, V. Giacometti and A. Kis, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 147 CrossRef CAS .
D. Jena and A. Konar, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 98, 136805 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Fang, S. Chuang, T. C. Chang, K. Takei, T. Takahashi and A. Javey, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3788–3792 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhao, Z. Xie, Y.-P. Peng, K. Wang, H. Wang, X. Li, H. Wang, J. Chen, H. Zhang and X. Yan, Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7, 1495–1518 RSC .
H. Huang, R. Jiang, Y. Feng, H. Ouyang, N. Zhou, X. Zhang and Y. Wei, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 1325–1338 RSC .
L. Zhang, Z. Yang, T. Gong, R. Pan, H. Wang, Z. Guo, H. Zhang and X. Fu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 8813–8830 RSC .
Y. Wakayama, R. Hayakawa, K. Higashiguchi and K. Matsuda, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 10956–10974 RSC .
J. Lyu, J. Pei, Y. Guo, J. Gong and H. Li, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1906000 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Y. Illarionov, T. Knobloch, M. Jech, M. Lanza, D. Akinwande, M. I. Vexler, T. Mueller, M. C. Lemme, G. Fiori and F. Schwierz, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1–15 Search PubMed .
M. Long, Y. Wang, P. Wang, X. Zhou, H. Xia, C. Luo, S. Huang, G. Zhang, H. Yan and Z. Fan, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 2511–2519 CAS .
Z. Wang, P. Wang, F. Wang, J. Ye, T. He, F. Wu, M. Peng, P. Wu, Y. Chen and F. Zhong, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1907945 CrossRef CAS .
G. H. Shin, G.-B. Lee, E.-S. An, C. Park, H. J. Jin, K. J. Lee, D. S. Oh, J. S. Kim, Y.-K. Choi and S.-Y. Choi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 5106–5112 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wu, J. Shi, Z. Zhou, J. Yan, A. Wang, C. Bian, J. Ma, R. Ma, H. Liu and J. Chen, Nano Res., 2020, 1–6 Search PubMed .
C. Li, K. Xiong, L. Li, Q. Guo, X. Chen, A. Madjar, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, J. C. Hwang and F. Xia, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 2118–2125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Xing, Y. Yu, J. Yao, X. Niu, X. Yan, Y. Liu, X. Wu, M. Li, W. Guo and J. Sha, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 6595–6604 RSC .
V. Laxmi, W. Dong, H. Wang, D. Qi, Q. Hao, Z. Ouyang, W. Ahmad, M. N. U. Shah, Q. Yuan and W. Zhang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 538, 148089 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jiang, F. Meng, Q. Cheng, A. Wang, Y. Chen, J. Qiao, J. Pang, W. Xu, H. Ji and Y. Zhang, Small Methods, 2020, 2000238 CrossRef CAS .
B. Mukherjee, A. Zulkefli, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, Y. Wakayama and S. Nakaharai, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2001688 CrossRef CAS .
S. Conti, L. Pimpolari, G. Calabrese, R. Worsley, S. Majee, D. K. Polyushkin, M. Paur, S. Pace, D. H. Keum and F. Fabbri, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1–9 Search PubMed .
J. Jiang, Y. Zhang, A. Wang, J. Duan, H. Ji, J. Pang, Y. Sang, X. Feng, H. Liu and L. Han, ACS Appl. Electron. Mater., 2020, 2, 2132–2140 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sheng, X. Chen, F. Liao, Y. Wang, J. Ma, J. Deng, Z. Guo, S. Bu, H. Shen and F. Bai, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2020, 2000395 CrossRef .
Q. Lv, F. Yan, N. Mori, W. Zhu, C. Hu, Z. R. Kudrynskyi, Z. D. Kovalyuk, A. Patanè and K. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1910713 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xiong, M. Huang, B. Hu, X. Li, F. Liu, S. Li, M. Tian, T. Li, J. Song and Y. Wu, Nat. Electron., 2020, 3, 106–112 CrossRef CAS .
H. B. Jeon, G. H. Shin, K. J. Lee and S. Y. Choi, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2020, 2000091 CrossRef CAS .
K. Nakamura, N. Nagamura, K. Ueno, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe and K. Nagashio, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 51598–51606 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Auksztol, D. Vella, I. Verzhbitskiy, K. F. Ng, Y. W. Ho, J. A. Grieve, J. Viana-Gomes, G. Eda and A. Ling, ACS Photonics, 2019, 6, 595–599 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhao, X. Mu, C. Zheng, S. Liu, Y. Zhu, X. Gao and T. Wu, J. Hazard. Mater., 2019, 366, 240–249 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yu, Z. Y. Ong, Y. Pan, Y. Cui, R. Xin, Y. Shi, B. Wang, Y. Wu, T. Chen and Y. W. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 547–552 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Lopez-Sanchez, D. Lembke, M. Kayci, A. Radenovic and A. Kis, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 497–501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Joseph, P. M. Shafi and A. C. Bose, Energy Fuels, 2020, 34, 6558–6597 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jiang, Q. Zhang, A. Wang, Y. Zhang, F. Meng, C. Zhang, X. Feng, Y. Feng, L. Gu and H. Liu, Small, 2019, 15, 1901791 CrossRef PubMed .
S. B. Desai, S. R. Madhvapathy, A. B. Sachid, J. P. Llinas, Q. Wang, G. H. Ahn, G. Pitner, M. J. Kim, J. Bokor and C. Hu, Science, 2016, 354, 99–102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. M. Price, S. Najmaei, C. E. Ekuma, R. A. Burke, M. Dubey and A. D. Franklin, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2019, 2, 4085–4094 CrossRef CAS .
I. C. Gerber, E. Courtade, S. Shree, C. Robert, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, A. Balocchi, P. Renucci, D. Lagarde and X. Marie, Phys. Rev. B, 2019, 99, 035443 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hekmatikia and Y. Abdi, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 2017, 39, 216–219 Search PubMed .
L. Wang, I. Meric, P. Huang, Q. Gao, Y. Gao, H. Tran, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, L. Campos and D. Muller, Science, 2013, 342, 614–617 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          R. P. Feynman, California Institute of Technology, Engineering and Science magazine,  1960 Search PubMed .
A. K. Geim and I. V. Grigorieva, Nature, 2013, 499, 419–425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Eda, T. Fujita, H. Yamaguchi, D. Voiry, M. Chen and M. Chhowalla, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 7311–7317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-C. Lin, D. O. Dumcenco, Y.-S. Huang and K. Suenaga, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 391–396 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, J. Heo, S. Park, H. J. Song, D. H. Seo, K.-E. Byun, P. Kim, I. Yoo, H.-J. Chung and K. Kim, Science, 2012, 336, 1140–1143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Jariwala, V. K. Sangwan, C.-C. Wu, P. L. Prabhumirashi, M. L. Geier, T. J. Marks, L. J. Lauhon and M. C. Hersam, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2013, 110, 18076–18080 CrossRef CAS .
J. Miao, X. Liu, K. Jo, K. He, R. Saxena, B. Song, H. Zhang, J. He, M.-G. Han and W. Hu, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 2907–2915 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bertolazzi, P. Bondavalli, S. Roche, T. San, S. Y. Choi, L. Colombo, F. Bonaccorso and P. Samorì, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1806663 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Yin, H. Li, H. Li, L. Jiang, Y. Shi, Y. Sun, G. Lu, Q. Zhang, X. Chen and H. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 74–80 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Lee, S.-W. Min, Y.-G. Chang, M. K. Park, T. Nam, H. Kim, J. H. Kim, S. Ryu and S. Im, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3695–3700 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Flöry, P. Ma, Y. Salamin, A. Emboras, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, J. Leuthold and L. Novotny, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2020, 15, 118–124 CrossRef PubMed .
E. O. Polat, G. Mercier, I. Nikitskiy, E. Puma, T. Galan, S. Gupta, M. Montagut, J. J. Piqueras, M. Bouwens and T. Durduran, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaaw7846 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Goossens, G. Navickaite, C. Monasterio, S. Gupta, J. J. Piqueras, R. Pérez, G. Burwell, I. Nikitskiy, T. Lasanta and T. Galán, Nat. Photonics, 2017, 11, 366–371 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zheng, L. Gan, J. Zhang, F. Zhuge and T. Zhai, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1600316 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Song, X. Liu, D. Yu, C. Huo, J. Ji, X. Li, S. Zhang, Y. Zou, G. Zhu, Y. Wang, M. Wu, A. Xie and H. Zeng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 2801–2809 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Hu, H. Cong, W. Huang, Y. Huang, L. Chen, A. Pan and C. Xue, Light: Sci. Appl., 2019, 8, 1–10 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Wang, Z. Q. Li, H. Y. Chen, G. W. Deng and X. B. Niu, Nano-Micro Lett., 2019, 11, 48 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Luo, F. Wang, J. Qu, K. Liu, X. Hu, K. Liu and T. Zhai, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 2008351 Search PubMed .
T. Chen, Y. Lu, Y. Sheng, Y. Shu, X. Li, R.-J. Chang, H. Bhaskaran and J. H. Warner, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 48172–48178 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Hou, Q. Zhang, V. Shautsova and J. H. Warner, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 15533–15543 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Larentis, B. Fallahazad, H. C. Movva, K. Kim, A. Rai, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, S. K. Banerjee and E. Tutuc, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 4832–4839 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhu, W. Li, R. Huang, L. Ma, H. Sun, J.-H. Choi, L. Zhang, Y. Cui and G. Zou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 16276–16284 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kum, D. Lee, W. Kong, H. Kim, Y. Park, Y. Kim, Y. Baek, S.-H. Bae, K. Lee and J. Kim, Nat. Electron., 2019, 1–12 Search PubMed .
F. Li, B. Xu, W. Yang, Z. Qi, C. Ma, Y. Wang, X. Zhang, Z. Luo, D. Liang and D. Li, Nano Res., 2020, 1–7 Search PubMed .
W. Zheng, B. Zheng, C. Yan, Y. Liu, X. Sun, Z. Qi, T. Yang, Y. Jiang, W. Huang and P. Fan, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1802204 CrossRef .
C. M. Yang, T. C. Chen, D. Verma, L. J. Li, B. Liu, W. H. Chang and C. S. Lai, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 2001598 CrossRef CAS .
R. U. R. Sagar, U. Khan, M. Galluzzi, S. Aslam, A. Nairan, T. Anwar, W. Ahmad, M. Zhang and T. Liang, ACS Appl. Electron. Mater., 2020, 2, 2123–2131 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wen, P. He, Q. Wang, Y. Yao, Y. Zhang, S. Hussain, Z. Wang, R. Cheng, L. Yin and M. Getaye Sendeku, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 14519–14528 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhai, X. Xu, J. Peng, F. Jing, Q. Zhang, H. Liu and Z. Hu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 24093–24101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, X. Yang, Y. Liu, B. Huang, R. Wu, Z. Zhang, B. Zhao, H. Ma, W. Dang and Z. Wei, Nature, 2020, 579, 368–374 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, Z. Wang, L. Yin, R. Cheng, J. Wang, Y. Wen, T. A. Shifa, F. Wang, Y. Zhang and X. Zhan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6296–6341 RSC .
J. Miao and C. Wang, Nano Res., 2020, 1–11 Search PubMed .
H. Qiao, Z. Huang, X. Ren, S. Liu, Y. Zhang, X. Qi and H. Zhang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2020, 8, 1900765 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xie, C. Mak, X. Tao and F. Yan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1603886 CrossRef .
J. Yao and G. Yang, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 454–476 RSC .
W. Ahmad, M. U. Ali, V. Laxmi and A. S. Syed, Asian J. Nanosci. Mater., 2018, 1, 122–134 Search PubMed .
M. Long, P. Wang, H. Fang and W. Hu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1803807 CrossRef .
M.-Y. Li, M. Yu, S. Jiang, S. Liu, H. Liu, H. Xu, D. Su, G. Zhang, Y. Chen and J. Wu, Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7, 905–911 RSC .
A. Zada, P. Muhammad, W. Ahmad, Z. Hussain, S. Ali, M. Khan, Q. Khan and M. Maqbool, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1906744 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, C. Zhou and Y. Chai, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 8109–8118 RSC .
M. I. B. Utama, H. Kleemann, W. Zhao, C. S. Ong, H. Felipe, D. Y. Qiu, H. Cai, H. Li, R. Kou and S. Zhao, Nat. Electron., 2019, 2, 60–65 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Cafferty, V. E. Campbell, P. Rothemund, D. J. Preston, A. Ainla, N. Fulleringer, A. C. Diaz, A. E. Fuentes, D. Sameoto and J. A. Lewis, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2019, 4, 1800299 CrossRef .
M. Gibertini, M. Koperski, A. Morpurgo and K. Novoselov, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2019, 14, 408–419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Sung, N. Schnitzer, L. Brown, J. Park and R. Hovden, Phys. Rev. Mater., 2019, 3, 064003 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Lin, H.-C. Fu, B. Cheng, M.-L. Tsai, W. Luo, L. Zhou, S.-H. Jang, L. Hu and J.-H. He, npj 2D Mater. Appl., 2018, 2, 1–6 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yim, V. Passi, M. C. Lemme, G. S. Duesberg, C. Ó. Coileáin, E. Pallecchi, D. Fadil and N. McEvoy, npj 2D Mater. Appl., 2018, 2, 1–7 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gao, J. Lai, Y. Wang, Z. Zhu, J. Zeng, G. Yu, N. Wang, W. Chen, T. Cao and W. Hu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2019, 14, 217–222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sheng, T. Chen, Y. Lu, R.-J. Chang, S. Sinha and J. H. Warner, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 4530–4537 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kwon, S. Garg, J. H. Park, Y. Jeong, S. Yu, S. M. Kim, P. Kung and S. Im, npj 2D Mater. Appl., 2019, 3, 1–9 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zheng, A. Calò, E. Albisetti, X. Liu, A. S. M. Alharbi, G. Arefe, X. Liu, M. Spieser, W. J. Yoo and T. Taniguchi, Nat. Electron., 2019, 2, 17–25 CrossRef CAS .
P. Gant, P. Huang, D. P. de Lara, D. Guo, R. Frisenda and A. Castellanos-Gomez, Mater. Today, 2019, 27, 8–13 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ma, B. Dong, J. Wei, Y. Chang, L. Huang, K. W. Ang and C. Lee, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2020, 2000337 CrossRef CAS .
T.-Y. Chang, P.-L. Chen, J.-H. Yan, W.-Q. Li, Y.-Y. Zhang, D.-I. Luo, J.-X. Li, K.-P. Huang and C.-H. Liu, SPIE Future Sens. Technol., 2020, 11525, 115251A Search PubMed .
Y. Wang, J. Meng, Y. Tian, Y. Chen, G. Wang, Z. Yin, P. Jin, J. You, J. Wu and X. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 27361–27367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Wazir, R. Liu, C. Ding, X. Wang, X. Ye, X. Lingling, T. Lu, L. Wei and B. Zou, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2020, 3, 7543–7553 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, J. Li, Z. Ma, J. Zhang, B. Leng and B. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 47721–47728 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, P. Wu, Z. Wang, M. Luo, F. Zhong, X. Ge, K. Zhang, M. Peng, Y. Ye and Q. Li, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2005037 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Chai, Y. Chen, M. Zhong, H. Yang, F. Yan, M. Peng, Y. Sun, K. Wang, Z. Wei and W. Hu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 6388–6395 RSC .
Z. Q. Zheng, J. D. Yao, J. B. Li and G. W. Yang, Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7, 2185–2207 RSC .
A. Rudenko, S. Brener and M. Katsnelson, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2016, 116, 246401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Chang, X. Liu, F. Liu and G. Du, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 2018, 40, 333–336 Search PubMed .
J. Chen, X. Tan, P. Lin, B. Sa, J. Zhou, Y. Zhang, C. Wen and Z. Sun, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21, 21898–21907 RSC .
K. Kang, S. Xie, L. Huang, Y. Han, P. Y. Huang, K. F. Mak, C.-J. Kim, D. Muller and J. Park, Nature, 2015, 520, 656–660 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Dong, P. Han, H. Arora, M. Ballabio, M. Karakus, Z. Zhang, C. Shekhar, P. Adler, P. S. Petkov and A. Erbe, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 1027–1032 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Forsythe, X. Zhou, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, A. Pasupathy, P. Moon, M. Koshino, P. Kim and C. R. Dean, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 566–571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Fivaz and E. Mooser, Phys. Rev., 1967, 163, 743 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of conventional MOSFET. (a) Conventional MOSFET. (b) Schematic diagram of n-channel MOSFET (DIBL effect). (c) Different types of multi-gate transistors. Reproduced with permission from ref. 15. Copyright 2011, Springer Nature.	 
SS = dVg/d (log(Id)
Δf/f = −2DIBL/VDD − VTH

 	Fig. 2  Schematic diagram of the Moore trends. (a) Schematic illustration of the Moore trends. (b) Evaluation of the gate length and prediction of the gate length based on the ITRS. Reproduced with permission from ref. 25. Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic diagram for the prediction of technology nodes for FETs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 33. Copyright 2018, Springer Nature.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic illustration of the different techniques to develop heterostructures. (a) Vertical heterostructure using CVD and (b) controlled twisted heterostructure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 33. Copyright 2018, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic illustration of QD-based FETs. (a) Bottom-gate FET (top) and top-gate FET (bottom). Reproduced with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2013, Elsevier. (b) Schematic diagram of CdSe nanocrystal-based short channel FET. Reproduced with permission from ref. 59. Copyright 2019, the American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic diagram of Si nanoparticle-based FET. (d) Mobility vs. conductivity, dashed lines exhibit the power fitted law to the experimental value. (c and d) Reproduced with permission from ref. 60. Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic diagram of PbS QD-based thin film FET in which ionic gel was used as the gate dielectric. Reproduced with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society. (f) Schematic illustration of the process to develop a CMOS electronic device based on p-type and p-type FETs. (g) Transfer characteristics in which red line shows VDD = 5 V, black dotted lines show Vout = Vin, and blue line shows the derivative of the voltage transfer characteristics, inset: three inverters with CMOS compatibility (scale bar = 5 mm). (f and g) Reproduced with permission from ref. 63. Copyright 2020, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic illustration of 1D material-based FETs. (a) First CNT-based FET. Reproduced with permission from ref. 73, Copyright 2014, Elsevier. (b) Schematic representation of a top-gated CNT–FET. Reproduced with permission from ref. 70, Copyright 2002, the American Chemical Society. (c) p-type field-effect transistor (PFET) based on CNTs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 71, Copyright 2002, Elsevier. (d) Schematic diagram of n-type and p-type and top-gate CNT FET. Reproduced with permission from ref. 73, Copyright 2014, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 7  Synthesis and fabrication techniques for developing CNT-based FETs. (a and b) Methodology for developing CNTs. (c) Schematic diagram of CNT-based FET. (d) Characteristic of the absorption process. (e) Strength of substrate binding. Reproduced with permission from ref. 77, Copyright 2020, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic diagram of the heterostructure based on h-BN/BP/h-BN. (b) Frequency vs. Gain indicates the values of fT and fMAX. (a and b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 108, Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society. (c) Optical image of ReS2-based FET and inset: schematic diagram. Reproduced with permission from ref. 112, Copyright 2020, John Wiley and Sons. (d) Schematic diagram of MoS2-based FET with PMMA coating. Reproduced with permission from ref. 114, Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic diagram of electrical characteristics of an MoS2-based top gated FET with high-k metal gate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 115, Copyright 2020, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 9  Optical image of InSe/BP-based tunnel FET and inset: schematic diagram. Reproduced with permission from ref. 116, Copyright 2020, John Wiley and Sons. (b) Schematic diagram of BP/Al2O3/BP sandwich heterostructure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 117, Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. (c) Schematic illustration of WSe2/MoS2-based heterostructure to achieve a tunneling FET. (d) Temperature-dependent transfer curve of the tunneling FET. (c and d) Reproduced with permission from ref. 118, Copyright 2020, John Wiley and Sons. (e) Schematic depiction of all-2D material-based tunnel FET. (f) SS values of different 2D material-based tunnel FETs and lower SS values achieved through h-BN/3L-MoS2/P+-MoS2. (e and f) Reproduced with permission from ref. 119, Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Optical image of the monolayer MoS2-based FET. (b) Fabricated device based on monolayer MoS2. (c) Schematic diagram of the device. (d and e) Transfer curve and output curve of the device, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 95, Copyright 2020, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 11  (A) Schematic diagram of MoS2 (2D) and 1D (SWCNT)-based FET. (B) Optical image of MoS2-based FET. (C) SEM image of MoS2 and SWCNT-based FET. (D) TEM image of MoS2 and SWCNT-based FET. (E) Distribution map of carbon, zirconium and sulphur in the device, indicating existence of these atoms. Reproduced with permission from ref. 126, Copyright 2016, the American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a and b) Schematic diagram and optical image of fabricated WSe2/Bi2O2Se. (a and b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 148, Copyright 2020, John Wiley and Sons. (c) Schematic diagram of direct CVD growth to form the lateral heterostructure based on graphene/GaS/graphene. Reproduced with permission from ref. 149, Copyright 2019, the American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic depiction of all-2D material-based vdW heterostructure and inset shows the optical image of the fabricated vdW heterostructure (scale bar = 50 μm). Reproduced with permission from ref. 150, Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic illustration of the lateral and vertical heterostructure based on hydroxide-assisted nucleation using a one-pot strategy. Reproduced with permission from ref. 152, Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic diagram of MoS2/MoSe2-based vdW photodetector (inset: optical image, scale bar 10 μm). (b) Photoresponsivity and detectivity of MoS2/MoSe2-based photodetector at different power intensities. (a and b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 154, Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. (c) Schematic diagram of vdW heterostructure and gapless heterostructure based on PbS/MoS2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 158, Copyright 2019, the American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic diagram of NiTe2/MoS2-based heterostructure. (e and f) Rising and decaying photoresponse time in NiTe2/MoS2-based heterostructure and MoS2-based photodetector, respectively. (d–f) Reproduced with permission from ref. 159, Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Schematic diagram of two photodetectors based on a BP shared photonic system. (b) Magnified view in the square black box in (a). (c and d) Photoresponsivity of the photonic crystal waveguide and subwavelength grating waveguide, respectively. (d) Inset: fitting curve according to the Hornbeck–Haynes model. (a–d) Reproduced with permission from ref. 182, Copyright 2020, John Wiley and Sons. (e) Schematic illustration of MoS2/GaN-based vdW heterostructure. (f) Light intensity vs. photoresponsivity indicates that MoS2/GaN vdW heterostructure has better performance than MoS2-based photodetector. (e and f) Reproduced with permission from ref. 186, Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society. (g) Schematic depiction of NbS3-based Schottky photodetector. (h) Light intensity power vs. detectivity of NbS3-based Schottky photodetector for MIR to LIR range. (g and h) Reproduced with permission from ref. 187, Copyright 2020, John Wiley and Sons.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
