Rare-earth metal–organic frameworks: from structure to applications  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0CS00292E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0CS00292E
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 7949-7977Rare-earth metal–organic frameworks: from structure to applications

        
          
            Felix 
            Saraci†
ab, 
      
        
          
            Victor 
            Quezada-Novoa†
ab, 
      
        
          
            P. Rafael 
            Donnarumma†
ab and 

        
          
            Ashlee J. 
            Howarth
          
          
        
      *ab
aDepartment of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Concordia University, 7141 Sherbrooke St W., Montréal, QC H4B 1R6, Canada. E-mail: ashlee.howarth@concordia.ca
bCentre for NanoScience Research, Concordia University, Montréal, QC H4B 1R6, Canada
Received 
      28th March 2020
    First published on 13th July 2020AbstractIn the past 30 years, metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) have garnered widespread attention owing to their diverse chemical structures, and tunable properties. As a result, MOFs are of interest for a wide variety of potential applications spanning multiple scientific and engineering disciplines. MOFs have been synthesized using several elements from the periodic table, including those with metal nodes containing s-, p-, d-, and f-block elements. MOFs synthesized with rare-earth (RE) elements, which include scandium, yttrium and the series of fifteen lanthanides are an intriguing family of MOFs from the standpoint of both structure and function. While RE-MOFs can possess many of the same properties common to all MOF families (i.e., permanent porosity, tunable pore size/shape, accessible Lewis acidic sites), they can also display unique structures and properties owing to the high coordination numbers and distinct optical properties of RE-elements. In this review, we present the progress, and highlight several discoveries from research conducted on the topic of RE-MOFs. First, diverse structures of RE-MOFs are presented, divided into classes based on the composition of the RE-metal node being RE(III)-ions, RE(III)-chains, or RE(III)-clusters. Then, several potential applications of RE-MOFs are presented, highlighting examples in the areas of chemical sensing, white light emission, biological imaging, drug delivery, near infrared emission, catalysis, gas adsorption, and chemical separations.
Felix Saraci
Felix Saraci obtained his BSc (Honours) in Chemistry in 2018 from Queen's University. He is currently an MSc student at Concordia University in Montreal, under the direct supervision of Dr Ashlee Howarth. His research focuses on developing a catalogue of rare-earth (RE)-based MOFs for potential applications as chemical sensors in detecting contaminants in water.
Victor Quezada-Novoa
Victor Quezada-Novoa received his bachelor's degree (BSc) in Biochemistry from the Universidad de Concepcion, Chile, in 2018. In January 2019, he started his MSc in Chemistry in Dr Ashlee J. Howarth's research group at Concordia University. Recently he fast tracked to the PhD program in Chemistry. His research focus in the synthesis and characterization of novel RE-MOFs and their potential applications in the remediation of contaminated water. He is also interested in the synthesis of new organic linkers and utilization of MOFs as catalyst.
P. Rafael Donnarumma
P. Rafael Donnarumma received his bachelor's degree (BSs) in Chemistry in 2017 from the National University of Rosario, Argentina. In 2019, he joined the research group of Dr Ashlee Howarth at Concordia University, Canada. His current research focuses on the use of rare-earth based MOFs for catalytic applications.
Ashlee J. Howarth
Ashlee J. Howarth is an Assistant Professor of Chemistry at Concordia University in Montreal. Professor Howarth graduated from the University of Western Ontario in 2009 with an Honours BSc in Chemistry and then went on to do her PhD in inorganic materials chemistry at the University of British Columbia. Before joining the faculty at Concordia, she completed an NSERC Postdoctoral Fellowship at Northwestern University, where she worked primarily on the design and synthesis of MOFs for applications in wastewater remediation. She was recently recognized by Forbes Magazine as a “30 under 30” in Science. Research in the Howarth group at Concordia University focuses on designing new RE-MOFs for various environmental applications.
1. Introduction
The design and synthesis of new functional materials is a common goal that unites researchers in several fields of science, engineering, and technology. Since the initial works by Hoskins and Robson,1 and important early contributions from Yaghi,2–4 Kitagawa,5 and Férey,6 the discovery and potential application of scaffolding materials comprised of inorganic and organic building blocks has become a pillar of materials chemistry. Metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) (Fig. 1) have garnered significant attention as potential functional materials due to their high degree of synthetic tunability, a feature that allows for the programming of surface area, porosity, pore size/shape, density, stability, and varying chemical properties.7 MOFs, a subset of coordination polymers and networks, can be crystalline or amorphous in nature, extending in 2- or 3- dimensions, but are distinct from coordination polymers and networks in that the structure must be open with the potential for porosity.8,9
 Fig. 1  Schematic representation of a metal–organic framework (MOF). 
Introduced by Yaghi and O’Keeffe,10,11 reticular chemistry is the foundation of MOF synthesis, defined as the design and formation of ordered network materials with predetermined structures.12 This means that by understanding the geometry and connectivity of building blocks that are required to generate a particular network structure, there is the potential to build the same structure (or net) with several building blocks. These can be manipulated to have the same (or similar) geometry and connectivity, regardless of size.13 These building blocks are inorganic metal nodes (ions, chains, or clusters) and organic linkers, which come together to give secondary building units (SBUs) that assemble to form a framework material. The seemingly endless variety of inorganic nodes and organic linkers provides almost limitless combinations and possibilities for synthesizing MOFs.
The field of MOF chemistry and their potential applications has been rapidly expanding, in part, due to the multifunctional and tunable nature of these materials.10,11 MOFs have been shown to have remarkable permanent porosity, with record-holding materials displaying up to 90% free volume,14 surface areas of up to 7800 m2 g−1,15,16 and densities as low as 0.124 g cm−3,17 distinguishing MOFs from related materials such as zeolites, and 1D-coordination polymers.15,18,19 On account of their aforementioned properties, MOFs have established potential in various applications, including but not limited to, gas adsorption,20–22 catalysis,23–26 chemical sensing,27,28 water treatment,29–31 drug delivery,32,33 and bioimaging.34–36 In fact, the first commercial applications of MOFs were unveiled in 2016 by NuMat Technologies,37 and MOF Technologies,38 demonstrating that potential applications of MOFs can become a reality. To date, there are several well-established, reported MOF syntheses incorporating s-,34,39 p-,40,41 d-,23,42–44 and f-block34,45–47 metals with varying coordination numbers, geometries, and oxidation states. In all cases, however, there is still much left to be explored. One subset of MOFs that are of interest from both a fundamental synthetic, and application standpoint are those assembled using rare-earth (RE) metal nodes.48–50 RE-metals include the series of fifteen lanthanides as well as yttrium and scandium (Fig. 2). The term rare-earth is used throughout this review to encompass these elements since several of the highlighted works include scandium and yttrium. The coordination chemistry of RE-metals is very diverse, with only small energetic differences between different coordination numbers and geometries, and where geometry is dictated primarily by ligand steric effects.51 While this can make MOF structure prediction more complicated, it also opens the door for the discovery of several new structures, comprised of diverse metal nodes, and in some cases giving rise to highly connected nets, and the unique ability to merge multiple net structures using only one metal.52,53 Contrary to d-block metals, RE-metals have unique electronic properties dictated by their 4f electron configurations.54 Given that the 4f orbitals are shielded from their external environment by 5s and 5p orbitals, RE-metals have distinct electronic, and magnetic properties that are not significantly altered by coordinating ligands.54 By carefully tuning the RE-metal node and organic linker components, RE-MOFs can be assembled into fascinating structures with diverse and complex topologies, presenting endless possibilities for the development of functional materials. Herein, we present an overview of RE-MOFs, highlighting their variable structural characteristics, properties, and potential applications.
 Fig. 2  Periodic table highlighting the rare-earth (RE) elements. 
2. Rare-earth MOF structures
MOFs that are constructed using RE-elements have been shown to form intricate topologies and diverse network structures. In this review, the RE-MOFs structures are classified by the identity of the metal node, being metal ions, chains, or clusters. In the following sections, each classification is presented, highlighting some structural features, and physical properties of the RE-MOFs in each example.
2.1 Metal ion nodes
Amongst the plurality of structures that a MOF can present, those comprised of metal ion nodes are among the simplest from the perspective of the inorganic structural unit. Unlike s-, p-, and d-block metal ions, f-block metal ions possess high coordination numbers as well as numerous coordination modes, unlocking a variety of structures that are not accessible through use of the former.55–143 Although RE-MOFs with metal-chain nodes (Section 2.2) and metal-cluster nodes (Section 2.3) are more prevalent in the literature, there are several reported examples describing structures in which metal ion nodes are observed.
Early on, Loeb et al. reported the synthesis of a series of RE-MOFs (RE = Sm(III), Eu(III), Gd(III), Tb(III), Yb(III)) comprised of rotaxane linkers and RE(III)-ion nodes, resulting in a high volume cage (10000 Å3) albeit partially filled with an interpenetrating net.144 The structure obtained was found to depend on the identity of the RE(III), which adopts coordination number 7 (Yb(III)) or 8 (Sm(III), Eu(III), Gd(III) and Tb(III)). All MOFs in the series showed similar thermal stability up to 240 °C, and PXRD patterns for the desolvated MOFs demonstrate retention of the structure, though porosity was not experimentally measured. Another MOF with RE(III)-ion nodes and large cages (UTSA-61), was reported by He, Chen et al. in 2013.145 UTSA-61 is a mesoporous MOF with hey topology comprised of large octahedral cages (2.4 nm in diameter) and synthesized using a dendritic hexacarboxylic acid linker (Fig. 3). Despite having an exceptionally long linker, no interpenetration is observed in UTSA-61. These two examples highlight the use of large, sterically bulky linkers to give RE-MOFs comprised of RE(III)-ion nodes.
 Fig. 3  Structure of UTSA-61(Tb), highlighting the Tb(III)-ion node and hexacarboxylic acid linker. Tb = purple, C = black, O = red. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity. 
Although MOFs with zeolitic structures have been reported for several d-block metals,146–148 this structural motif is not as easily obtained with f-block metals. This is a consequence of the high coordination numbers and diverse coordination environments presented by f-block metals, making it difficult to form the 4-coordinate (or 4-connected) nodes common to zeolitic topologies. Qiu et al. reported a series of RE-MOFs (RE = Y(III), Tb(III), Ho(III), Er(III), Yb(III)) with ABW topology, RE(BTC)(DMF)(DMSO) where BTC is 1,3,5-benzenetricarboxylic acid.149 The RE(III)-ion nodes are connected to four structural organic linkers with two bidentate and two monodentate binding motifs. In a related example, Qiu et al. reported a series of microporous MOFs with the general formula [RE(BTC)(DMF)2]·H2O (Fig. 4).150 This MOF is comprised of RE(III)-ion nodes with the same connectivity found in the previous example, giving rise to a zeolite-like topology. It should be noted that other RE-MOFs with zeolitic topologies have been described by Shi, Zaworotko et al. The RE-ZMOF series, with variable Eu:Tb stoichiometry was the first RE-MOF reported with RHO topology,151 a net common to zeolites. In all zeolitic RE-MOFs, the topology could not be achieved without the RE(III)-ion nodes.
 Fig. 4  Structure of [RE(BTC)(DMF)2]·H2O highlighting the RE(III)-ion node and 1,3,5-benzenetricarboxylic acid linker. RE = Tb(III), Dy(III), Ho(III), Er(III), Tm(III), Yb(III). RE = purple, C = black, O = red. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity. 
In a unique approach used to access a RE-MOF comprised of RE(III)-ions nodes, Vittal et al. demonstrated the conversion of a 3D RE-MOF to a 2D MOF via solvent exfoliation.152 Using 9,10-anthracenedicarboxylic acid (ADC) as the linker and Nd(III), Gd(III), Pr(III), Ce(III) and Sm(III), they first reported a family of 3D RE-ADC-MOFs with dinuclear RE-cluster nodes. Through exfoliation of these 3D structures (soaking, sonicating, or heating under solvothermal conditions with dimethylacetamide (DMAc)), RE-ADC-MOF was found to transform to a 2D framework containing single metal ion nodes (Fig. 5a). The mechanism of this transformation involves the cleavage of two RE-L bonds to break the dinuclear cluster-node, with DMAc filling the empty coordination sites generated (Fig. 5b). This example highlights one route for obtaining metal ion nodes in a 2D-MOF.
 Fig. 5  (a) Structure of the 3D [RE2(ADC)3(DMF)4]·DMF highlighting the exfoliation process through which it transforms into 2D RE(ADC)1.5(DMAc)3. (b) Proposed mechanism of the exfoliation process RE = Nd(III), Gd(III), Pr(III), Ce(III), Sm(III). RE = purple, C = black, O = red. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity. 
Finally, despite the fact that RE ions display unusual coordination properties, in some cases they are found to behave like d-block elements. Using 1,3,5-cyclohexanetricarboxylic acid as a linker, Cahill et al. synthesized Er(III)- and Tb(III)-MOFs in water where the RE(III) ion was found to be 6-coordinate, a rare observation for RE metals.153 In addition, all 6 coordinated oxygen moieties come from structural organic linkers, without any terminal hydroxyl or water ligands found in the structure. These two isostructural RE-MOFs were also found to be remarkably thermally stable, with a decomposition temperature of 600 °C.
2.2 Metal chain nodes
Rare-earth-oxo/hydroxo chain nodes, also called rods,154 (Fig. 6) have been found for several RE-MOFs comprised of carboxylic acid linkers.155–164 The formation of dimeric and polymeric RE-oxo/hydroxo chains tends to be favoured in the presence of bridging carboxylic acid ligands,165 particularly if the ligand does not contain ortho substituted directing groups that can act to control hydrolysis of the RE-metal precursor (see Section 2.3 below).166–168
 Fig. 6  Example of rare-earth-oxo/hydroxo chain nodes observed in MOF-75, MOF-76, and MOF-80. RE = purple, C = black, O = red. 
In 1998, the first examples of open coordination networks comprised of carboxylic acid linkers and RE-chains were reported.169,170 Michaelides et al. demonstrated a 3D network comprised of La(III) and flexible ditopic adipic acid linkers, to give [La2(adipate)3(H2O)4]·6H2O.170 While this structure contains pores approximately 7 × 8 Å in size, evacuation (or dehydration) of the network resulted in a nonporous phase. In another example, Férey et al. reported a network comprised of RE(III)-chains linked by flexible ditopic glutaric acid linkers.169 The structure, named MIL-8, is comprised of edge-sharing REO8(H2O) polyhedra, and isostructural derivatives were reported using Nd(III), Pr(III), Sm(III), Eu(III), Gd(III), Dy(III), Ho(III), and Y(III). Although the structure of MIL-8 is open, with channel dimensions of 3 × 5 Å, the porosity of these materials was not experimentally demonstrated.
In 1999, Yaghi et al. reported a useful strategy to generate permanently microporous RE-MOFs, starting with dense networks comprised of RE-chains and rigid, linear organic linkers.171,172 In one example, the nonporous network Tb2(BDC)3(H2O)4 (where BDC = 1,4-benzenedicarboxylic acid) was treated at 115 °C under vacuum to remove coordinating water ligands, generating the permanently microporous Tb2(BDC)3. The porosity of Tb2(BDC)3 was confirmed by water adsorption experiments. In another example, Tb(BDC)NO3(DMF)2, a MOF comprised of Tb(III)-chains and rigid, linear ditopic linkers, was treated at 185 °C to remove coordinated DMF ligands. The permanent microporosity of this MOF was confirmed by CO2 adsorption–desorption analysis. These examples highlight the utility of liberating terminal coordinating solvent ligands from dense structures comprised of RE(III)-chains to give MOFs with accessible pores and thus measurable porosity.173,174 Several examples of MOFs comprised of RE(III)-chain nodes and ditopic carboxylic acid-based linkers containing terminal coordinating solvent ligands with the potential to be removed have been reported.158,173–181
Another approach used to achieve permanently porous RE-MOFs comprised of RE(III)-chain nodes involves the use of rigid, non-linear ditopic linkers. As demonstrated by Millange, Ferey et al. in 2004, the use of 1,3-adamantanedicarboxylic acid linkers with Eu(III) gives the open framework, MIL-83 (Fig. 7).182 MIL-83 is comprised of face-sharing Eu(III) polyhedra bridged by 1,3-adamantanedicarboxylic acid linkers to give a structure with 1D channels having dimensions of 4.2 × 4.2 Å. After activation at 100 °C under vacuum for 15 hours, MIL-83 displays a Langmuir surface area of 65 m2 g−1 as determined using nitrogen adsorption analysis. Rigid, non-linear ditopic linkers have been used to generate other open RE-MOFs comprised of RE(III)-chain nodes as well.183–187
 Fig. 7  Structure of MIL-83(Eu), highlighting the Eu(III)-chain node and 1,3-adamantanedicarboxylic acid linker. Eu = purple, C = black, O = red. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity. 
In addition to the standard solvothermal synthetic protocols used to obtain MOFs described thus far, MOFs comprised of RE(III)-chains and ditopic carboxylic acid linkers have also been synthesized using a template approach.188–190 One example of this includes GWMOF-6, a framework comprised of Pr(III)-chain nodes, adipic acid linkers, and templated by 4,4′-bipyridine.188 Reported by Cahill et al. in 2005, GWMOF-6 presents a more open framework structure than GWMOF-4, a related MOF prepared with the same structural components but without the 4,4′-bipyridine template. Although the template molecules could not be successfully removed, this report highlights the utility of a template approach for the construction of open, potentially porous RE-MOFs comprised of RE(III)-chain nodes.
Linkers with higher connectivity can also be used to create open frameworks with enhanced porosity. For example, O’Keeffe, Yaghi et al. reported MOF-76, a structure comprised of 1,3,5-benzenetricarboxylic acid linkers (BTC) and helical Tb(III)-chains (Fig. 8).34 Owing to the helical SBU connected by tritopic linkers, MOF-76 forms a complex, open structure with msx topology, and a Langmuir surface area of 335 m2 g−1 after activation at 200 °C under vacuum.
 Fig. 8  Structure of MOF-76(Tb), highlighting the Tb(III)-chain node and 1,3,5-benzenetricarboyxlic acid linker. Tb = purple, C = black, O = red. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity. 
In 2005, Devic, Férey et al. presented MIL-103, a highly porous Tb(III)-MOF that is comprised of extended, rigid, tritopic linkers, 1,3,5-benzenetrisbenzoic acid (BTB), and Tb(III)-chain nodes with edge-sharing Tb(III) polyhedra.161 The 3D framework gives rise to hexagonal pores with dimensions of 10 Å. At the time, MIL-103 exhibited the largest surface area ever reported for a RE-MOF, with a measured BET surface area of 930 m2 g−1 after activation at 150 °C under vacuum for 15 hours. The same BTB ligand has been used to construct other high surface area MOFs with RE(III)-chain nodes, including Ce(III),191 and La(III)192 (Fig. 9).
 Fig. 9  Structure of RE(BTB)(H2O), highlighting the RE(III)-chain node (RE = Ce(III) or La(III)) and 1,3,5-benzenetrisbenzoic acid linker. RE = purple, C = black, O = red. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity. 
It should be noted that all of the preceding examples discussed involve MOFs comprised of carboxylic acid linkers. Many of the underlying design rules for constructing RE-MOFs with RE(III)-chain nodes and open, porous structures, have also been applied to MOFs comprised of imidazole,159,193–197 pyrazole,198 sulfonic acid,199,200 phosphonic acid,156,201–205 and dinitrile-based206 linkers as well. A review on the subject of rod-like SBUs, which includes several examples of RE(III)-chain nodes and details on their structures, is also available.154
2.3 Metal cluster nodes
Significant research effort has been devoted to the synthesis and isolation of discrete, polynuclear RE-oxo/hydroxo clusters.207–209 In all cases, controlled hydrolysis of the RE precursor is required to ensure the synthesis of clusters as opposed to RE-chains, oxides, and hydroxides. Controlled hydrolysis can be achieved using ligands, which can act as structure directing agents (or modulators) but also as capping groups to stabilize the cluster. These same clusters can be generated and stabilized during the synthesis of RE-MOFs, functioning as SBUs for a wide range of structures discussed below.

2.3.1 Dinuclear cluster. 
In an early example, Yaghi et al. reported a Tb(III)-MOF with dinuclear cluster nodes connected by azobenzene-4,4′-dicarboxylic acid linkers, to give MOF-9 (Fig. 10).210 The Tb(III)-clusters of MOF-9 are 6-connected, and give an interpenetrated 3D structure with rectangular channels and overall pcu topology. In a related example, Sun, Zhou et al. showed that interpenetration in this type of structure could be controlled by the use of a sterically bulky linker, 2,3,5,6-tetramethyl-1,4-benzenedicarboxylate, and/or rigid, capping 1,10-phenanthroline co-ligands. The resulting MOF, comprised of 6-connected dinuclear cluster nodes of Er(III) and Tm(III) possesses an open structure with a Langmuir surface area of 140 m2 g−1 as measured by CO2 adsorption.211
 Fig. 10  Structure of MOF-9, highlighting the dinuclear Tb(III)-cluster node and azobenzene-4,4′-dicarboxylic acid linkers linker. Tb = purple, C = black, O = red, N = light blue. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity. 
Dinuclear RE-clusters that are 6-connected have since been found for MOFs comprised of ditopic,212–216 tritopic,217–220 and mixed linkers.221 Among these examples, in 2008, and 2009 Gamez, Reedijk, et al. reported a series of RE-MOFs (RE = Gd(III), Eu(III), Tb(III), Pr(III), and Dy(III)) comprised of 6-connected dinuclear metal cluster nodes bridged by 2-aminoterephthalic acid222,223 (Fig. 11). The octahedral SBUs with ditopic linkers yield a cubic network with pcu topology, MOF-LIC-1, where the cavities are occupied by coordinating, and non-coordinating DMF molecules. In this example, it seems that interpenetration, like that observed in MOF-9, is prevented by hydrogen-bonding interactions between the –NH2 functionalities on the structural linkers and guest solvent molecules in the pores. Although the guest molecules were not removed, the potential porosity of the MOF is evident by its resemblance to MOF-5.224
 Fig. 11  Structure of MOF-LIC-1, highlighting the dinuclear RE(III)-cluster node (RE = Gd(III), Eu(III), Tb(III), Pr(III), and Dy(III)) and 2-aminoterephthalic acid linker. RE = purple, C = black, O = red, N = light blue. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity. 
In an example where non-linear ditopic linkers were employed, Gao et al.225 showed a series of RE-MOFs (RE = Nd(III), Eu(III), and Gd(III)) comprised of 6-connected dinuclear cluster nodes and S,S-dioxodibenzothiophen-3,7-dicarboxylic acid linkers, to give RE2(DBTDC-O2)3(DMF)4 (Fig. 12). Although the dinuclear clusters have octahedral geometry similar to the previous examples, the non-linear geometry of the linker gives rise to a MOF with sxb topology as opposed to pcu. The main difference between these topologies is related to the way in which the sheets are interconnected by axial linkers. The cavities in the sxb topology MOFs are occupied by guest DMF molecules but heating the samples to remove these guests was found to result in amorphous materials.
 Fig. 12  Structure of RE2(DBTDC-O2)3(DMF)4, highlighting the dinuclear RE(III)-cluster node (RE = Nd(III), Eu(III), and Gd(III)) and S,S-dioxodibenzothiophen-3,7-dicarboxylic acid linker. RE = purple, C = black, O = red, S = yellow. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity. 
Tasiopoulos et al. reported UCY-2, a RE-MOF comprised of 6-connected dinuclear Nd(III)-cluster nodes, and flexible, tritopic, 5-(4-carboxybenzylideneamino)isophthalic acid linkers.220 The 6-connected nodes bridged by 3-connected linkers, give rise to an flu topology with cavities of 3–4 Å in diameter and interconnected by smaller pores of ∼2 Å. It was shown that the coordinating DMF molecules in single crystals of UCY-2 could be exchanged by different solvents (MeOH, EtOH, acetone, THF, or pyridine) while the overall structure of UCY-2 is maintained. Furthermore, all of these transformations were confirmed to occur via a single-crystal-to-single-crystal transformation, where single crystal X-ray diffraction (SCXRD) showed changes in the unit cell volume after each exchange, indicating some flexibility of UCY-2. More recently, Stylianou et al. reported the Eu(III)-MOF, SION-105.226 SION-105 is comprised of 6-connected, dinuclear Eu(III)-cluster nodes and tritopic tris(p-carboxylic acid)tridurylborane linkers (Fig. 13). The unique topology of SION-105 gives rise to small, zig-zag shaped channels that are accessible to CO2, giving a BET surface area of 215 m2 g−1. The three-coordinate B in the linker of SION-105 acts as a Lewis acid active site for interaction and detection of F− (as discussed in Section 3.1).
 Fig. 13  Structure of SION-105, highlighting the dinuclear Eu(III)-cluster node and tris(p-carboxylic acid)tridurylborane linker. Eu = purple, C = black, O = red, B = green. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity. 
Although all of the examples highlighted in this discussion are 6-connected, it should be noted that there are examples of MOFs comprised of dinculear RE-cluster nodes that are 4-connected,227,228 8-connected,229,230 and 12-connected231 as well.


2.3.2 Trinuclear clusters. 
Trinuclear cluster nodes are common for MOFs comprised of d-block metals,232–236 but are less commonly observed with rare-earth metals. In 2005, Cheng et al. reported two RE-MOFs, RE3(ATPT)2(HATPT)4, comprised of trinuclear Pr(III), and Nd(III)-cluster nodes.237 In this example, the RE(III) ions are arranged in a linear-like trinuclear cluster, bridged by 2-aminoterephtalic acid linkers to give a pcu topology (Fig. 14). Although the MOF remains intact after removal of guest water molecules, the porosity of the material was not measured. Similar linear-like trinuclear clusters have been observed with other linear ditopic linkers,238 as well as bent239 and linear tetratopic240 linkers.
 Fig. 14  Structure of RE3(ATPT)2(HATPT)4, highlighting the trinuclear RE(III)-cluster node (RE = Pr(III), and Nd(III)) and 2-aminoterephtalic acid linker. RE = purple, C = black, O = red, N = light blue. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity. 
Trinuclear RE(III)-clusters with bent geometry have also been observed, for example, Zhao et al. reported a series of isostructural MOFs based on Eu(III), Dy(III) and Yb(III) bridged by 1,3,5-benzenetribenzoic acid (BTB) (Fig. 15).241 The MOFs, RE2.5(BTB)3(OAc)0.5(H2O)3, are comprised of 1D channels of 3.28 to 6.55 Å in width and give a calculated void volume of 39.6%.
 Fig. 15  Structure of RE2.5(BTB)3(OAc)0.5(H2O)3, highlighting the trinuclear RE(III)-cluster node (RE = Eu(III), Dy(III), and Yb(III)) and 1,3,5-benzenetribenzoic acid linker. RE = purple, C = black, O = red. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity. 
Trigonal prismatic, trinuclear RE(III)-clusters that resemble those observed for several d-block element MOFs242,243 have been shown by Wang, Liu, et al. in JXNU-3. JXNU-3 is comprised of both nonanuclear and trinuclear RE(III)-cluster nodes, with isostructural nets synthesized using Gd(III), Tb(III) and Er(III).244 During the synthesis, the use of 2-fluorobenzoic acid was found to be of paramount importance as a modulator to generate the RE(III)-clusters. The trinuclear cluster [Ln3(μ3-O)(O2C–)6(HCO2)3(H2O)3] shows 6-fold symmetry, with a μ3-O in the center and six carboxylates from independent BTB linkers capping the cluster. Each RE(III) ion is coordinated by an additional formic acid bridging ligand that connects the trinuclear cluster to the nonanuclear unit. JXNU-3(Tb) shows a type I N2 isotherm with a BET surface area of 645 m2 g−1 and micropores of 8.5 Å. A similar, trigonal prismatic, trinuclear RE(III)-cluster was described recently by Farha et al., which when bridged by hexatopic linkers gives the MOF, NU-1500-Sc with acs topology (Fig. 16). NU-1500-Sc has 14 Å pores and is remarkably stable to activation, giving a BET surface area of 3720 m2 g−1.245
 Fig. 16  Structure of NU-1500-Sc, highlighting the trinuclear Sc(III)-cluster node and peripherally extended triptycene hexacarboxylic acid linker. Sc = purple, C = black, O = red. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity. 


2.3.3 Tetranuclear clusters. 
While MOFs comprised of linear-like tetranuclear RE(III) clusters have been reported, this section focuses primarily on examples with cubane-like, square planar, and rectangular tetranuclear RE(III)-clusters.
One of the earliest reports of a MOF comprised of tetranuclear RE(III)-cluster nodes was reported by Gao et al. in 2000 (Fig. 17).246 The Gd(III) and Dy(III)-MOFs are built from cubane-like RE4O4 nodes, bridged by L-proline or L-aspartic acid linkers, respectively. The open framework structure of the Dy(III) derivative, Dy4(μ3-OH)4(asp)3(H2O)8, gives pores of nearly 12 Å in diameter, though the guest water and perchlorate molecules were not removed to access the porosity. Similar cubane-like tetranuclear RE(III)-cluster nodes have been observed with other RE(III) ions and various flexible and rigid linkers.247–253
 Fig. 17  Structure of Dy4(μ3-OH)4(asp)3(H2O)8, highlighting the tetranuclear Dy(III)-cluster node and L-aspartic acid linker. Dy = purple, C = black, O = red, N = light blue. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity. 
In another example, Yang et al.254 reported a mixed metal MOF, comprised of two distinct metal nodes of Cu(I), and Y(III), Er(III) or Yb(III). Using linkers 2-pyrazinecarboxylic acid (PCA) and nicotinic acid (NA), the structure contains Cu(I) ions arranged in a chair-like cluster node and RE(III) ions in a cubane-like cluster node, giving rise to a potentially porous MOF. More recently, Petoud, Rosi, et al.255 described a series of isostructural RE-MOFs with pcu topology comprised of cubane-like tetranuclear RE(III)-clusters (Fig. 18).
 Fig. 18  Structure of MOF-1114(RE) and MOF-1115(RE), highlighting the tetranuclear RE(III)-cluster node (RE = Y(III), Sm(III), Eu(III), Gd(III), Tb(III), Dy(III), Ho(III), Er(III), Tm(III), and Yb(III)), and 2-aminoterephthalic acid or 4,4′-(9,10-anthracenediyl)bis(2-aminobenzoic acid) linker, respectively. RE = purple, C = black, O = red, N = light blue. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity. 
The MOFs, MOF-1114(RE) and MOF-1115(RE) are constructed from RE-metals (RE = Y(III), Sm(III), Eu(III), Gd(III), Tb(III), Dy(III), Ho(III), Er(III), Tm(III), Yb(III)) and linear ditopic carboxylic acid linkers with amino functional groups at the position ortho to the carboxylic acid (Fig. 18). It should be noted that several discrete RE(III)-clusters have been synthesized and stabilized by α-amino acids,256–258 and therefore the ortho-amino functionality was used as a structure directing group to facilitate the formation of the RE4(μ3-OH)4(COO)62+ cluster. MOF-1115(Tb), a structure comprised of the bulky linear linker 4,4′-(9,10-anthracenediyl)bis(2-aminobenzoic acid) could be activated, albeit with some loss of crystallinity, and was found to have a BET surface area of 265 m2 g−1.
In 2009, Zhou et al. reported a series of RE-MOFs, PCN-17, comprised of unique square planar tetranuclear RE(III)-clusters (Fig. 19). PCN-17 is built from tetranuclear clusters of Y(III), Dy(III), Er(III) or Yb(III), and the trigonal-planar ligand 4′,4′,4′′-s-triazine-2,4,6-triyl-tribenzoate (TATB).259 Although the pore sizes of PCN-17 are small, ∼3.5 Å, the materials were activated under dynamic vacuum at 250 °C and gave BET surface areas ranging from 600–820 m2 g−1 as measured by CO2 adsorption.
 Fig. 19  Structure of PCN-17, highlighting the tetranuclear RE(III)-cluster node (RE = Y(III), Dy(III), Er(III) and Yb(III)), and 4′,4′,4′′-s-triazine-2,4,6-triyl-tribenzoate linker. RE = purple, C = black, O = red, N = light blue. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity. 
Lastly, a novel rectangular tetranuclear RE(III)-cluster was reported by Trikalitis et al. in 2017 (Fig. 20).260 RE-csq-1, a series of RE(III)-MOFs with csq topology, is comprised of tetranuclear RE(III)-clusters (RE = Y(III), Tb(III), Dy(III), Ho(III), Er(III), or Yb(III)) and tetratopic linkers, 1,2,4,5-tetrakis(4-carboxyphenyl)-3,6-dimethyl-benzene. This example highlights the use of 2-fluorobenzoic acid as a modulator during the MOF synthesis to prevent the formation of metal chains and to facilitate the formation of the cluster RE4(μ3-O)2(COO−)8. RE-csq-MOF-1 features large hexagonal channels nearly 16 Å in diameter, surrounded by six smaller triangular channels of approximately 6 Å. The Y(III)-analogue was activated under vacuum at room temperature, and found to have a BET surface area of 870 m2 g−1 as measured by argon.
 Fig. 20  Structure of RE-csq-1, highlighting the tetranuclear RE(III)-cluster node (RE = Y(III), Tb(III), Dy(III), Ho(III), Er(III), and Yb(III)) and 1,2,4,5-tetrakis(4-carboxyphenyl)-3,6-dimethyl-benzene linker. RE = purple, C = black, O = red. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity. 


2.3.4 Hexanuclear clusters. 
The potential of RE(III)-hexanuclear clusters to be used as SBUs in MOFs was shown by Yao et al. in 2008.261 In this example, the octahedral unit [Er6(μ6-O)(μ3-OH)8]8+ is repeated in one direction to achieve a rod shaped structure, giving a hybrid between a RE(III)-chain and RE(III)-cluster node (Fig. 21a). Later, in a similar example published by Almeida Paz, Rocha et al. the hexanuclear cluster [Pr6(μ3-O)2(μ3-OH)6]8+ was found to be interconnected to other clusters through a single Pr(III) ion, creating another hybrid RE(III)-chain/cluster node (Fig. 21b).262 In both examples discussed above, the linkers used (3-hydroxy-pyrazine-2-carboxylic acid, and 2,5-pyridinedicarboxylic acid) contain a pyridine nitrogen adjacent to the carboxylic acid, but no other modulator was used to control the formation of the cluster.
 Fig. 21  Structure of (a) RE-hpzc highlighting the hexanuclear Er(III)-cluster node and 3-hydroxy-pyrazine-2-carboxylic acid linker; (b) RE-pydc highlighting the hexanuclear Pr(III)-cluster node and 2,5-pyridinedicarboxylic acid linker. Er and Pr = purple, C = black, O = red, N = light blue, Cu = teal. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity. 
In 2010, Monge et al. reported RPF9, a MOF comprised of isolated (i.e., not bridged to other clusters to form a chain-like SBU) octahedral RE(III)-hexanuclear cluster nodes and p-sulfonatocalix[4]arene linkers (Fig. 22).263 The cluster, with a μ6-OH located in the center, is connected to eight sulfonate groups from the p-sulfonatocalix[4]arene linkers and each ligand is connected to four clusters giving a structure with cavities of 11.87 Å (height) between calixarene molecules and 8.32 Å (width) between clusters. Similarly, Lang et al. reported the synthesis of a MOF with RE(III)-hexanuclear cluster nodes bridged by TPPS linkers (TPPS: 5,12,15,20-tetrakis(4-sulfonatophenyl)porphyrin), forming an open framework with pores of approximately 4 × 5 Å.264 In both of these examples, the MOFs were synthesized by controlling the pH of the reaction solution through the addition of triethylamine (TEA) or NaOH, respectively. This highlights another method for controlling the hydrolysis of the RE(III) precursor to generate cluster SBUs.
 Fig. 22  Structure of RPF9, highlighting the hexanuclear RE(III)-cluster node (RE = La(III), Pr(III), and Nd(III)) and p-sulfonatocalix[4]arene linker. RE = purple, C = black, O = red, S = yellow. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity. 
Recognizing the similarities between RE(III)-hexanuclear clusters and the Zr(IV)-hexanuclear clusters used as SBUs in several MOFs since 2008,265 Eddaoudi et al. reported a series of isoreticular RE(III)-MOFs with fcu topology.266 Using their molecular building block (MBB) approach, seven Y(III) and Tb(III)-MOFs comprised of linear fluorinated and nonfluorinated, homo and heterotopic linkers were reported (Fig. 23). For example, using 2-fluoro-4-(1H-tetrazol-5-yl)benzoic acid (FTZB) as a linker, the metal cluster [RE6(μ3-OH)8(O2C–)6(N4C–)6]2− (RE = Y(III) and Tb(III)) is generated and serves as a 12-connected node, leading to the first RE(III)-MOFs with fcu topology. The MOFs, with structures analogous to Zr-based UiO-66, and UiO-67 display BET surface areas of 1200–1300 m2 g−1. In examples where nonfluorinated linkers were employed, it was shown that 2-fluorobenzoic acid was required to obtain the hexanuclear cluster – an important observation that has since been used to generated other RE(III)-clusters (see Sections 2.3.2, 2.3.3 and 2.3.6). Eddaoudi et al. have since gone on to report other examples of RE(III)-MOFs with fcu topology, comprised of RE(III)-hexanuclear cluster nodes (RE = Y(III), Sm(III), Gd(III), Tb(III), Dy(III), Ho(III), Er(III)) bridged by fumaric acid, or 1,4-naphthalenedicarboxylic acid.22,267,268 In all cases, 2-fluorobenzoic acid was used as a modulator to drive the formation of the hexanuclear cluster node. Furthermore, Eddaoudi et al., and later Hong, Li et al. showed that through the use quadrangular tetratopic linkers, RE(III)-MOFs comprised of the same 12-connected hexanuclear cluster node but with ftw topology could be made with Y(III), Tb(III) or Yb(III), again with the addition of 2-fluorobenzoic acid.269,270
 Fig. 23  Structure of RE-fcu-MOF, highlighting the hexanuclear RE(III)-cluster node (RE = Y(III), and Tb(III)) and 3,3′-difluorobiphenyl-4,4′-dicarboxylic acid linker. RE = purple, C = black, O = red, F = lime green. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity. 
In an example highlighting the power of the MBB approach, Eddaoudi et al. reported a series of MOFs with novel sph topology (Fig. 24).271 The topology was designed by merging two known topologies, spn (3,6-connected), and hxg (6-connected) to give a highly complex 3,6,12-connected topology, that the authors named sph. The series of Tb-sph-MOFs is comprised of 12-connected Tb(III)-hexanuclear cluster nodes, bridged by tritopic and hexatopic linkers (or in some cases tritopic linkers that can pack to form a 6-connected unit). The Tb-sph-MOFs have two pores, a larger truncated tetrahedral cage (6.5–22 Å) and smaller tetrahedral cages (2.5–9.5 Å) with sizes corresponding to the size of the organic linkers used to build the framework. Upon activation, the Tb-sph-MOFs showed BET surface areas ranging from 1020–2170 m2 g−1 as measured by Ar adsorption.
 Fig. 24  Structure of sph-MOF-2, highlighting the hexanuclear Tb(III)-cluster node and benzotristhiophene carboxylate and 4,4′,4′′-(benzene-1,3,5-triyltris(benzene-4,1-diyl))tribenzoate linkers. Tb = purple, C = black, O = red, S = yellow. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity. 
In the examples discussed so far, the 12-connected RE(III)-hexanuclear clusters serve as cuboctahedron building units. In 2017, Eddaoudi et al. showed that the cluster can also serve as a hexagonal prism (or d6r) building unit when paired with a hexatopic linker, 2,4,6-trimethyl-1,3,5-tri(3,5-di(4-carboxyphenyl-1-yl)phenyl-1-yl)benzene (Me-TDCPB) to give RE-alb-MOF-1 (RE = Y(III) or Tb(III)) with alb topology.272 Y-alb-MOF-1 is a flexible MOF, containing cross-linked zigzag-shaped channels that give honeycomb pores with dimensions of 14.1 × 11.7 Å and a calculated free volume of 3094.6 Å3 (52.5% of the unit cell volume). RE-alb-MOF-1 was found to remain crystalline after activation, demonstrating a Langmuir surface area of 1550 m2 g−1 as measured by Ar adsorption.
Mixed linker RE(III)-MOFs, comprised of 12-connected hexanuclear RE(III)-clusters have also been reported by Zhou et al.273 A new series of MOFs, PCN-900(RE) (RE = Y(III), Eu(III), Tb(III), Dy(III), Yb(III)) based on the cuboctahedron cluster bridged by square-planar tetratopic and bent ditopic linkers was reported in 2018. The MOF possess the new tam topology, which is related to the 4,6-connected she topology of the Zr6-based MOF, PCN-224,274 but where the 6 remaining coordination sites on the RE(III)-cluster are occupied by bent ditopic linkers. In this MOF series, the bent 4,4′-dicarboxydiphenyl sulfone (DCDPS) linker can be replaced post-synthetically by linear ditopic linkers, such as BPDC (Fig. 25), to give a wide range of MOFs with different chemical functionalities. The PCN-900(Eu) series, comprised of varying ditopic linkers shows BET surface areas ranging from 1730–2525 m2 g−1. Zhou et al. also showed that the hexanuclear RE(III)-cluster can be 9-connected, presenting a triangular cupola building unit and giving rise to a MOF with sep topology when connected by tritopic linkers.275 On the other hand, Zhang, Sun et al. showed the synthesis of UPC-68, a MOF comprised of 8-connected RE(III)-hexanuclear cluster nodes and tritopic linkers giving the-a topology.276 These examples demonstrate the versatility of the hexanuclear RE(III) in terms of connectivity, driven by the geometry of the organic linkers employed in the MOF synthesis.
 Fig. 25  Structure of PCN-900(Eu)-TCPP-BPDC, highlighting the hexanuclear Eu(III)-cluster node and tetrakis(4-carboxyphenyl)porphyrin and biphenyl-4,4′-dicarboxylic acid linker. Eu = purple, C = black, O = red, N = light blue. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity. 


2.3.5 Heptanuclear metal clusters. 
To the best of our knowledge, there are very few reports of RE(III)-MOFs comprised of heptanuclear nodes. In one example, Gao et al. showed a MOF with a dicubane RE(III)-node (RE = Yb(III) and Ho(III)) bridged by 1,4-naphthalenedicarboxylic acid.277 While the materials appear to have potential porosity, the guest water molecules were not removed from the structure and porosity was not measured. The same heptanuclear RE(III)-cluster was observed by Zhang et al. in another MOF comprised of linear, ditopic linkers and Sm(III), Eu(III), or Tb(III).278
A trigonal prismatic heptanuclear RE(III)-cluster was observed by Yang et al. in a MOF comprised of linear, ditopic linkers with hxl topology. In this example, the cluster can be thought of as two trigonal trinuclear clusters bridged by a RE(III) ion (Fig. 26).279
 Fig. 26  Structure of RE7(μ3-OH)8L9(H2O)6, highlighting the heptanuclear RE(III)-cluster node (RE = Y(III), La(III), Gd(III), Dy(III), Er(III), and Yb(III)) and 4-pyridin-4-ylbenzoic acid linker. RE = purple, C = black, O = red, N = light blue. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity. 
The same cluster was shown by Wang et al. in a Tb(III)-MOF comprised of flexible, ditopic iminodiacetic acid (IDA) linkers.280


2.3.6 Nonanuclear metal clusters. 
In 2014, Eddaoudi et al. discovered two new topologies, gea and gez, by applying a nonanuclear RE(III)-cluster as an 18-connected molecular building block. gea-MOF-1 was synthesized using triangular tritopic BTB linkers, and possesses an intricate topology giving rise to 3 types of cavities and a BET surface area of 1490 m2 g−1 as measured by Ar.281 Using a similar approach, Zhou et al. reported PCN-918 comprised of 18-connected nonanuclear RE(III)-clusters but with asymmetric tritopic linkers to give the ytw topology.275
In their continued quest for exploring highly connected MBBs, Eddaoudi et al. reported pek-MOF-1 (Fig. 27) and −2 comprised of two types of metal nodes, a 12-connected nonanuclear, and 8-connected hexanuclear RE(III)-cluster. The generation of a 12-connected nonanuclear RE(III)-cluster was driven by the use of tritopic linkers (biphenyl-3,4,5-tricarboxylic acid) and 5-(4-carboxybenzyloxy)isophthalic acid, that are less symmetric than the BTB linkers found to give rise to the 18-connected nonanuclear cluster described above. In the same study, aea-MOF-1 was also reported, having only one type of nonanuclear cluster node that is 12-connected (albeit with three crystallographically independent variations).53 While both pek-MOF and aea-MOF were synthesized from less symmetric tritopic linkers, the difference in topology arises from the separation angle between the carboxylates, where for pek-MOF the linker angle is close to 120°, but for aea-MOF, the angle is 90°. The MOFs were found to be stable to activation under heat (55 °C or 160 °C) and vacuum, demonstrating surface areas ranging from 1330–1610 m2 g−1. The same 12-connected nonanuclear RE(III)-cluster, a d6r building unit, was reported by Eddaoudi et al. in RE-shp-MOF272,282 comprised of tetratopic linkers. Additionally, this d6r nonanuclear cluster building unit was found in another MOF with shp topology, RE-CU-10 (RE = Y(III), and Tb(III)), reported by Howarth et al. comprised of tetratopic pyrene-based linkers.283 In this example, the nonanuclear cluster was initially observed as an octodecanuclear RE(III)-cluster due to disorder in the structure solved by SCXRD, arising from the node being positioned in two different orientations within the MOF.
 Fig. 27  Structure of pek-MOF-1, highlighting the hexanuclear and nonanuclear RE(III)-cluster node (RE = Y(III), and Tb(III)) and biphenyl-3,4,5-tricarboxylic acid linker. RE = purple, C = black, O = red. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity. 
By altering the geometry of the tetratopic linker employed using their “molecular pivot-hinge” approach, Zhou et al. reported various RE(III)-MOFs with new topologies comprised of 12-connected nonanuclear RE(III)-cluster nodes (RE = Y(III), Eu(III), Tb(III), Dy(III), or Yb(III)).284 One of the reported structures, PCN-905-SO2 (Fig. 28) or –CH2, is comprised of 4-c nodes given by the bent tetratopic linker L-SO2 or L-CH2 with C2V symmetry, and 12-c Eu9 clusters [Eu9(μ3-OH)12(μ3-O)2(O2C–)12] formed by the presence of 2-FBA as modulator, giving the new dfs topology. The Eu9-clusters resemble hexagonal prism nodes (d6r) while the linker possesses a dihedral angle of 104.3° between the two central phenyl rings, and of 55.8° between the central phenyl group and the peripheral ones – a key feature driving the formation of this new topology. By applying a tetrahedral linker, L-O, the net was changed to give the new hjz topology of PCN-906-O. The –O– pivot group of L-O reduces the linker symmetry to C1, coordinating the d6r RE9-cluster in a different plane as compared to PCN-905. In this example, the linker exhibits a dihedral angle of 119.2° between the two central phenyl groups, and 76.6° between the central and peripheral phenyl rings. Interestingly, post-synthetic installation of linear linkers in PCN-905-SO2, yields a 14-c RE9 cluster [Eu9(μ3-OH)12(μ3-O)2(O2C–)14]3− interconnected by the bent tetratopic (4-c node) and the introduced BDC linker at the top and bottom of the former hexagonal prism, featuring a 4,14-c may net.
 Fig. 28  Structure of PCN-905-SO2, highlighting the nonanuclear RE(III)-cluster node (RE = Y(III), Eu(III), Tb(III), Dy(III), or Yb(III)) and 5′,5′′′′-sulfonylbis(2′-amino-[1,1′:3′,1′′-terphenyl]-4,4′′-dicarboxylic acid) linker. Eu = purple, C = black, O = red, S = yellow. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity. 
In all the MOFs comprised of nonanuclear RE(III)-cluster nodes, 2-fluorobenzoic acid was used as a modulator to control hydrolysis of the RE-precursor. It should be noted that a Dy26-MOF has been reported, and to the best of our knowledge, represents the highest nuclearity RE(III)-cluster MOF node.285 In this example, formic acid was used as a modulator. The porosity of the compound is difficult to discern however, and was not experimentally measured.

3. Rare-earth MOF applications
RE-MOFs have been studied for a wide variety of potential applications including, but not limited to, sensing,286,287 gas adsorption,288 chemical separations,289 catalysis,290,291 drug delivery,292,293 near infrared emission,294–296 proton conductivity,205 single molecule magnets,297 and lighting applications.298,299 While many of these potential applications are not exclusive to RE-MOFs, and have been studied across all MOF families, several examples do take advantage of the unique properties of RE-metals (more specifically lanthanides) to carry out the desired function. This section highlights examples of some potential applications of RE-MOFs, placing a focus on cases where the RE-ion plays an integral role in either the MOF structure or properties required for the application.
3.1 Sensing
The luminescent properties of RE-coordination polymers286,287,300 and RE-MOFs172,189,301–303 have been studied since the materials first emerged in the literature. Given that the molar extinction coefficients for lanthanide ions are low, structural organic linkers and/or guest molecules encapsulated in the pores of MOFs can be used as antennas to absorb photons and sensitize emission from the metal. Furthermore, information about the number of coordinated terminal water ligands on lanthanide MOF nodes can be obtained by analyzing emission decay times,172,304 a feature that can help discern the coordination number and formula of a MOF. This sensitivity of lanthanide ion emission decay times to the number of coordinated water (and to a lesser extent, hydroxyl) ligands can be harnessed to study these materials in sensing applications. While the majority of RE-MOF sensing studies are based on luminescence as a reporting mechanism, there are also examples of electrochemical sensors based on RE-MOFs. Over recent years, these MOFs have been applied to detect gases268 and vapours,160 small molecules,305,306 cations,307 anions,308,309 biomarkers,310 temperature variations,162 and pH changes.311

Gases. 
Given that MOFs has been studied extensively for gas storage and separations,312,313 a logical extension of this work is to use MOFs as sensors to detect gases. Eddaoudi et al. showed that RE-MOFs have potential to be applied as thin film active layers in electrochemical sensors for the detection of hydrogen sulfide (H2S) at room temperature.268 Y-fcu-MOF, comprised of hexanuclear Y(III)-cluster nodes and fumaric acid linkers (Fig. 23 shows the RE-fcu-MOF platform) was deposited on a capacitive interdigitated electrode (IDE), which was pre-functionalized with an OH-terminated self-assembled monolayer (SAM) (11-mercaptoundecanol). The Y-fcu-MOF thin film on an IDE showed excellent detection sensitivity for H2S with a low detection limit of 5.4 ppb. Additionally, the MOF was found to be highly stable to H2S under the conditions used, and was selective for H2S vs. methane, nitrogen dioxide, hydrogen, and toluene. Using a similar approach, a Y-fcu-MOF comprised of the same node, but with 1,4-naphthalenedicarboxylic acid linkers was found to act as an electrochemical sensor for the detection of ammonia at room temperature with a detection limit of 100 ppb.314


Vapour and solvents. 
In 2013, Song et al. reported a RE-MOF that demonstrates a selective luminescence response to DMF vapour.160 The MOF, shown in Fig. 29, is comprised of Eu(III)-chain nodes bridged by 2′,5′-bis(methoxymethyl)-[1,1′:4′,1′′-terphenyl]-4,4′′-dicarboxylic acid linkers giving rise to accessible open channels for solvent exchange to occur. When DMF from the synthesis is exchanged with water, the resulting RE-MOF exhibits weak emission from Eu(III) due to quenching caused by O–H oscillations from coordinated water ligands. Once exposed to DMF vapour, however, a turn-on luminescence is observed which is attributed to DMF replacing the terminal water ligands in the MOF. Additionally, the RE-MOF was found to be selective for DMF vapour, as increases in luminescence intensity were negligible in the presence of twelve other solvent vapours. A similar sensing mechanism was observed in an earlier example using Eu(BTC), a Eu(III)-analogue of MOF-76 (Fig. 8), comprised of Eu(III)-chain nodes and BTC linkers.306 In this example, liquid DMF was found to enhance luminescence from the Eu(III) ions while liquid acetone was found to quench the emission.
 Fig. 29  Structure of Eu2L3(H2O)4, highlighting the Eu(III)-chain node and 2’,5’-bis(methoxymethyl)-[1,1′:4′,1′′-terphenyl]-4,4′′-dicarboxylic acid linker. Eu = purple, C = black, O = red. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity. 


Cations. 
Although less common, in some cases, water and hydroxyl ligands have been found to enhance luminescence from Eu(III). It has been proposed that the O–H oscillations that normally enhance non-radiative decay and quench emission, can actually aid in internal conversion from Eu(III) 5D1 to 5D0 states giving rise to an enhancement in Eu(III) emission.315 This phenomenon was observed in UJN-Eu4, a MOF comprised of Eu(III)-chain nodes bridged by 6,6-dimethyl-3-oxabicyclo[3.1.0]hexane-2,4-dione linkers.307 UJN-Eu4 was found to be selective for the detection of Fe3+ and Cu2+ in aqueous solution through a turn-off luminescence mechanism. The luminescence quenching mechanism was attributed to competitive absorption between Fe3+ and UJN-Eu4, or an overlap between the emission spectrum of UJN-Eu4 and the absorption spectrum of Cu2+.


Anions. 
While replacement of terminal –OH and –OH2 ligands in RE(III)-MOFs can give rise to turn-on luminescence, analytes that hydrogen bond with these ligands can also minimize luminescence quenching effects caused by O–H oscillations. This mechanism was observed by Chen, Qian et al. in Tb-MOF-76 (Fig. 8) where hydrogen bonding between terminal methanol ligands and F− analytes was found to enhance luminescence from the MOF.309 Given that hydrogen bonding interactions with F− are quite strong, the MOF was selective for sensing F−vs. Cl−, Br−, NO3−, SO42−, and CO32−. Using a different approach to sensing F− with a RE(III)-MOF, Stylianou et al. reported SION-105, a MOF comprised of dinuclear Eu(III)-cluster nodes bridged by tris(p-carboxylic acid)tridurylborane linkers, shown in (Fig. 13), which acts as a selective, sensitive, and recyclable chemical sensor for detecting F− in drinking water.308 In this example, the F− interacts with the organic linker of SION-105, which contains a Lewis-acidic boron receptor. Turn-off sensing was observed, possibly due to changes in the absorption spectrum of the boron-based antenna ligand after coordination to F−.


Biomarkers. 
Shi, Zaworotko et al. reported two zeolite-like RE-MOFs with RHO topology, Eu-ZMOF and Tb-ZMOF, comprised of RE(III) ion nodes and 2,2′-bipyridine-6,6′-dicarboxylic acid.310 Tb-ZMOF and Eu-ZMOF were found to detect lysophosphatidic acid (LPA), a known biomarker for ovarian cancer, through fluorescence quenching and enhancement, respectively. As a result of the markedly different responses observed in the Tb(III) vs. Eu(III)-ZMOF, a mixed metal Eu(III)/Tb(III)-ZMOF was then synthesized and shown to be effective as a ratiometric luminescent sensor for LDA.


Temperature. 
Temperature-dependent luminescence is a commonly observed property in many chemical compounds, including RE-MOFs. This property of RE-MOFs can be harnessed to develop sensitive temperature sensors, or thermometers. One approach used by Qian, Chen et al. is to use a mixed Tb(III)/Eu(III)-MOF as a ratiometric temperature sensor.162 RE-DMBDC, a MOF comprised of Tb(III)/Eu(III)-chain nodes and 2,5-dimethoxy-1,4-benzenedicarboxylic acid linkers was found to exhibit dual emission from both Tb(III) and Eu(III) ions sensitized by the organic linkers (Fig. 30). As temperature is increased, the Tb(III) emission decreases while the Eu(III) emission increases, consistent with an energy transfer mechanism from Tb(III) to Eu(III) at increased temperatures. By tuning the triplet energy of the structural organic linker (or antenna) in the MOF, the energy transfer, and thus temperature sensing, could be made more sensitive.
 Fig. 30  Structure of the dual-emitting RE-DMBDC, highlighting the Eu/Tb(III)-chain node and 2,5-dimethoxy-1,4-benzenedicarboxylic acid linker. Eu/Tb = purple, C = black, O = red. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity. 

3.2 White light emission
RE-compounds (specifically lanthanide compounds) have been studied extensively for lighting applications owing to the intrinsic luminescent features of lanthanide ions.298,299 One particularly desirable goal in regards to lighting applications, is the design and synthesis of white light emitters.316–318 One way to achieve white light emission is to combine blue, red, and green emitters, or orange and blue emitters, in one material.318 RE-MOFs are particularly well-suited as a platform material for combining different coloured emitters, since incorporating multiple RE(III)-ions, and/or varying organic chromophores, in one framework material could achieve this goal.319
In one example, Chen et al. reported a RE-MOF, ZJU-1, comprised of dinuclear La(III)-cluster nodes bridged by pyridine-2,6-dicarboxylic acid linkers (Fig. 31).228 The original ZJU-1 emits blue light (λem = 408 nm) owing to the pyridine-2,6-dicarboxylic acid linkers. When doped with 1–2% Tb(III), and Eu(III)-ions, however, ZJU-1 emits blue, green (λem = 543 nm), and red (λem = 614 nm) light giving rise to white emission. With optimized doping concentrations of 1.0% Tb(III) and 2.0% Eu(III), the white light emission was demonstrated to have a quantum yield of 6.1% and Commission internationale de l'éclairage (CIE) coordinates of (0.3269, 0.3123), which is close to the pure white light coordinates of (0.3333, 0.3333).318 A similar approach using RE(III)-ions and organic linkers to give red, blue, and green emission has been demonstrated in other examples as well.320–323
 Fig. 31  Structure of ZJU-1, highlighting the dinuclear La(III)-cluster nodes and pyridine-2,6-dicarboxylic acid linkers. La = purple, C = black, O = red, N = light blue. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity. 
In a different example where the emission colours arise only from the RE(III)-ions, Sun et al. reported a series of RE-MOFs, LnL, comprised of RE(III)-chain nodes (RE = all RE(III) ions except Sc(III) and Pm(III)) bridged by 4,4′-((2-((4-carboxyphenoxy)methyl)-2-methylpropane-1,3 diyl)bis(oxy))dibenzoic acid linkers.324 By doping the Gd(III)-analogue (GdL) with varying ratios of red (Eu(III), Sm(III)), green (Tb(III)), and blue (Dy(III)) emitters, the white light emission from the MOF could be tuned to give CIE coordinates of (0.3550, 0.3130).
Rodrigues et al. demonstrated another unique approach, where different [RE2(Mell)(H2O)8] MOFs (RE = Eu(III), Tb(III) and Gd(III), Mell: mellitic acid) were deposited via layer-by-layer epitaxial growth, to obtain a white light emitting material.325 Several different thin film composites were synthesized by growing the RE-MOFs in different orders, and their energy transfer properties were evaluated after excitation with UV light. It was determined that energy transfer between layers plays a secondary role, and instead, each layer acts independently to maintain its red (Eu(III)), green (Tb(III)), and blue (Gd(III)) optical properties. Composites with CIE coordinates of (0.3370, 0.3360), (0.3390, 0.3300), (0.3380, 0.3370) and (0.3330, 0.3360) were achieved using this layering approach.
Lastly, in addition to tuning white light emission properties using organic linkers and RE(III)-ions, encapsulating dye molecules in MOF pores,326 or doping d-block metal MOFs with RE(III)-ions327 has also been demonstrated to be effective.
3.3 Biological applications
The ability to survey, distribute, and control the release of drug molecules within the human body is necessary for adequate diagnoses, and therapeutic processes. A focus on multifunctional nanomaterials has garnered much research attention within the realm of drug delivery and imaging applications as these materials supply a suitable platform for surveillance and targeted drug release.328–330 In recent years, numerous nanomaterial systems, which include, metal nanoparticles, polymer nanoparticles,331 and others have been widely studied for bioimaging and as drug carrier systems. MOFs have emerged as promising candidates for drug delivery,332–335 and bioimaging,336 while MOFs comprised of RE ions337 in particular may possess interesting magnetic and optical properties that can be exploited for these applications.

Bioimaging. 
In 2006, Lin et al. synthesized nanosized particles of the MOF Gd(BDC)1.5(H2O)2, comprised of Gd(III)-chain nodes and BDC linkers (Fig. 32).338 The ∼100 nm × 40 nm nanorods were synthesized by preparing a microemulsion of GdCl3 with bis(methylammonium)benzene-1,4-dicarboxylate in a solvent mixture containing cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB), isooctane, 1-hexanol and water. The Gd(III)-MOFs, comprised of a high density of paramagnetic Gd(III) nodes, were found to have promising relaxivities for potential use as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) contrast agents. In fact, the longitudinal (R1) and transverse (R2) relaxivity of the MOF was shown to be higher than the clinically used imaging agent OmniscanTM, when measured in water with 0.1% xanthan gum, demonstrating the potential for this material to be used as a T1 and T2 contrast agent.
 Fig. 32  Structure of Gd(BDC)1.5(H2O)2, highlighting the Gd(III)-chain node and 1,4-benzenedicarboxylic acid linker. Gd = purple, C = black, O = red. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity. 
In addition to MRI applications, RE(III)-MOFs have also been studied for their potential in optical imaging owing, in part, to the NIR emission signatures of several of the lanthanide ions. In comparison to visible light, NIR light is advantageous for biological imaging since (i) it interacts less with biological materials causing less potential damage to the region, (ii) tissue autofluorescence is low in the NIR region, and (iii) it scatters less, giving rise to better signal.339 To this end, Rosi, Petoud et al. reported a Yb(III)-based nanoMOF comprised of phenylenevinylene dicarboxylic acid (PVDC) linkers and Yb(III)-chain nodes (Fig. 33).339 The MOF shows NIR emission from the Yb(III) centers when excited through the PVDC antenna linkers, and the emission intensity was found to be stable for 13 hours in 0.1 M Hepes buffer as well as for 6 hours in HeLa and NIH 3T3 cells. After incubating HeLa and NIH 3T3 cells with the Yb(III)-MOF for 24 hours, NIR microscopy images were taken and demonstrate the potential for using the MOF as an optical imaging agent.
 Fig. 33  Structure of Yb-PVDC-3, highlighting the Yb(III)-chain node and phenylenevinylene dicarboxylic acid linker. Yb = purple, C = black, O = red. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity. 
More recently, Gallis et. al. reported a series of RE hexanuclear cluster-based MOFs comprised of 2,5-dihydroxyterephthalic acid linkers, giving rise to the fcu topology (RE = Eu(III), Nd(III), and Nd(III)/Yb(III), Fig. 23 shows the RE-fcu-MOF platform).340 The MOFs, named REDOBDC, demonstrate emission ranging from 614–1350 nm, a spectral range relevant for in vivo optical imaging. Using nanosized particles of EuDOBDC, synthesized via microwave irradiation, preliminary in vitro imaging studies were performed using HeLA (human cervical cancer cells) and RAW 264.7 (mouse macrophage cells). After 2 hours of incubation with EuDOBDC, hyperspectral confocal fluorescence microscopy was used to demonstrate the potential of the MOF in imaging applications, though the emission signal was found to decrease with longer incubation periods up to 48 hours. In related systems, postsynthetic linker modification,341 or incorporation of dyes in MOF pores342 have been used to red-shift the excitation wavelength of the antenna molecule to ensure that both excitation and emission wavelengths are centered in the deep red-NIR spectral window.


Drug delivery. 
In an early example demonstrating the potential of RE(III)-MOFs for drug delivery applications, Lin et al. reported an amorphous Tb(III)-MOF comprised of c,c,t-(diamminedichlorodisuccinato)Pt(IV) linkers.292 The spherical MOF nanoparticles were coated with a silica shell to stabilize the MOF from dissolution in water, while the delivery of the platinum drug molecules (i.e., the linkers in the framework) could be controlled by the thickness of the silica shell. By grafting c(RGDfK), a peptide sequence with a high binding affinity for αvβ3 integrin (a receptor upregulated in many cancer cells), onto the nanoMOF surface, the composite was found to have an IC50 between 9.7 to 11.9 μM, comparable to the 13 μM IC50 of cisplatin under the same in vitro conditions. A similar approach was used to deliver other anti-cancer drugs using amorphous La(III)293 and Gd(III) MOFs,343 respectively.
In 2014, Banerjee et al. demonstrated that 5–12 wt% of the anticancer drug, doxorubicin, could be loaded into the 1.9 × 1.2 nm channels of a Gd(III)-MOF, Gd-pDBI, comprised of 1,4-bis(5-carboxy-1H-benzimidazole-2-yl)benzene linkers shown in Fig. 34.344 Mechanochemical grinding was used to produce nanosized particles of the Gd(III)-MOF, MG-Gd-pDBI, and after loading with 5 wt% of doxorubicin, the MOF was found to release 44% of the loaded drug over 5 days at pH 5. In vitro testing revealed an IC50 of 75 μg mL−1 for the 5 wt% doxorubicin loaded MG-Gd-pDI material against the leukemia cancer cell line U937. Other RE-MOFs have also been studied for their potential in anti-cancer drug delivery applications, where the drug is encapsulated in the MOF pores and drug release is controlled by pH.345,346
 Fig. 34  Structure of Gd-pDBI, highlighting the Gd(III)-chain node and 1,4-bis(5-carboxy-1H-benzimidazole-2-yl)benzene linker. Gd = purple, C = black, O = red, N = light blue. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity. 

3.4 Near-Infrared (NIR) emission
In addition to applications in sensing, white-light emission, and bioimaging, RE-MOFs (specifically those comprised of lanthanides) display a wide range of unique electronic properties suitable for other applications that benefit from luminescent materials such as in barcodes,295,347–349 invisible ink,296,350 lasers,351 and optical coatings for telecommunications devices.352 As presented in a thorough review by Allendorf et al., MOFs can display luminescent behaviours that arise from the linker, metal, encapsulated guest, or surface functionalization.353 One common mechanism of luminescence in RE-MOFs occurs as a result of the antenna effect, where chromophoric linkers or guest molecules absorb photons and transfer energy to the electronic levels of the lanthanide ions, resulting in metal-based luminescence.353,354 Owing to the wide-range of organic linkers available, RE-MOFs have been tuned to absorb photons from the UV to the near-infrared (NIR) region.294–296,354,355 Similarly, the luminescence of RE-MOFs can be tuned by judicious choice of the metal, where Tb(III) is used to generate green emission,356–358 Eu(III)306,359,360 and Sm(III)302,361 for red emission, and Dy(III) for blue emission.362 NIR emission is most commonly observed for RE-MOFs comprised of Yb(III),342,363 Nd(III),364,365 and Er(III),366,367 and less commonly for Pr(III),347,368 Ho(III),369 and Sm(III).363
In an early example demonstrating NIR emission resulting from the antenna effect in a MOF, Petoud, Rosi et al., reported two RE-MOFs, Yb-PVDC-1 and Yb-PVDC-2, comprised of Yb(III)-chain nodes, and 4,4′-[(2,5-dimethoxy-1,4-phenylene)di-2,1-ethenediyl]bis-benzoic acid (H2-PVDC) linkers (Fig. 35).294 H2-PVDC was strategically chosen as the structural organic linker since it demonstrates strong absorptions in the visible region and has the ability to sensitize Yb(III) via the antenna effect. Yb-PVDC-1 was found to absorb light with maxima at 370 nm and 470 nm, values which are red-shifted in comparison to the free linker and a discrete Yb-PVDC molecular complex (λabs = 340 nm and 415 nm). The shift in absorption wavelength was attributed to linker-to-linker interactions occurring within the MOF, a phenomenon that was confirmed when studying Yb-PVDC-2, where the topology results in more linker-to-linker π-stacking giving rise to absorptions at 370 nm and 500 nm. Both Yb-PVDC-1 and Yb-PVDC-2 demonstrate NIR emission centered at 980 nm, confirming that the PVDC linker can act as an antenna for Yb(III)-based emission, and that the antenna effect can be used to elicit NIR emission in a MOF.
 Fig. 35  Structure of Yb-PVDC-1, highlighting the Yb(III)-chain nodes and 4,4′-[(2,5-dimethoxy-1,4-phenylene)di-2,1-ethenediyl]bis-benzoic acid (H2-PVDC) linker. Yb = purple, C = black, O = red. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity. 
Yb-PVDC-1 was further investigated as a platform material for potential barcode applications.295 In this work, the synthesis of Yb-PVDC-1 was modified to make mixed-metal MOFs comprised of Yb(III) and Er(III), giving four isostructural MOFs, Er0.32Yb0.68-PVDC-1, Er0.58Yb0.42-PVDC-1, Er0.70Yb0.30-PVDC-1, and Er0.81Yb0.19-PVDC-1. Yb(III) and Er(III) exhibit distinct, characteristic NIR emissions at 980 and 1530 nm respectively and through tuning the incorporation of Er(III) and Yb(III) in the MOF, predictable NIR emission profiles correlating to the ratio of cations in the MOF were observed. The ability to tune the emission profile (or barcode signature) of each MOF simply by varying the metal ratio is promising for barcoding applications where configurable materials with several encoding combinations are required.
Rodrigues, Junior et al. reported a series of MOFs, [RE2(Mell)·6H2O] (RE = Eu(III), Tb(III), Gd(III), and Nd(III)) comprised of RE(III)-chain nodes and mellitic acid linkers.296 The MOFs display red, green, blue or NIR emission when synthesized using Eu(III), Tb(III), Gd(III), or Nd(III), respectively. To study the potential of these MOFs to be used in printing applications, they were deposited onto flexible PET films, as well as several different types of paper, using an inkjet printer. A handful of invisible patterns were printed using the MOF ink, and were only visible under irradiation, demonstrating the potential for colour tuned emissive MOFs to be used in security applications.
3.5 Catalysis
RE-compounds have appealing Lewis acid characteristics, making them attractive as potential catalysts for a wide variety of transformations.370 While several RE compounds can be used as homogeneous catalysts,290,291,371,372 there are added advantages to designing stable, solid materials that can be used as heterogeneous catalysts such as reusability and recovery of the catalyst.373 MOFs are exceptional candidates for heterogeneous catalysis.374,375 MOF metal nodes can be tuned to have varying numbers of accessible Lewis acidic sites, while the organic linkers can be used to (i) tune pore size and shape for diffusion, (ii) introduce functional groups that may help with substrate-catalyst interactions and/or (iii) present additional catalytic sites for tandem catalysis. RE-MOFs are of interest for many of the same reasons as other MOF families, while the high variation and tunability in coordination number and modes of RE(III)-ions makes RE-MOFs a particularly diverse family of catalysts. In recent years, various studies have been conducted pertaining to the use of RE-MOFs as heterogeneous catalysts for organic reactions and some examples will be discussed.

Carbon dioxide valorization. 
One potential catalytic application of MOFs,376 including RE-MOFs, involves using waste CO2 as a reactant, by adsorbing it and subsequently transforming it into finer chemicals. In recent years, a handful of examples have been reported studying RE-MOFs as catalysts for this purpose.377–382
In one example, Gandara, Nguyen et al. synthesized a series of RE-MOFs (RE = Nd(III), Eu(III), and Tb(III)) comprised of benzoimidephenanthroline tetracarboxylic acid (H4BIPA-TC) linkers and RE(III)-chain nodes to give MOF-590, -591 and -592.378 In their study, the oxidative carboxylation of styrene using CO2 was examined using the RE-MOFs as catalysts. Although the entire series revealed promising catalytic activity when using co-catalysts, tetrabutylammonium bromide (TBAB), and anhydrous tert-butyl hydroperoxide, MOF-590 (Fig. 36) comprised of Nd(III)-nodes, demonstrated the best performance under mild conditions. Using MOF-590 as a catalyst, 93% of styrene was converted to product with 94% selectivity and 87% yield of styrene carbonate after 10 h at 80 °C under 1 atm of CO2. The reaction was performed in the absence of solvent, and with a MOF catalyst loading of 0.18 mol%. The catalytic activity in all cases was attributed to the RE-MOFs having a large number of coordinated H2O molecules that can be removed to yield accessible Lewis acid sites.
 Fig. 36  Oxidative carboxylation of styrene using CO2 catalyzed by MOF-590. Nd = purple, C = black, O = red, N = light blue. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity. 
Another approach to generating cyclic carbonates involves the cycloaddition of CO2 to epoxides. Gu et al. synthesized two series of RE-MOFs comprised of trinuclear RE(III)-cluster nodes (RE = Y(III), Er(III), and Tb(III)) and linear ditopic linkers, BDC or NDC to give structures with hcp topology (Fig. 37).383 The Y(III)-MOFs performed best as catalysts in cycloaddition reactions, consistent with Y(III) being more Lewis acidic than Er(III) and Tb(III). The Y(III)-MOFs showed conversions ranging from 72% to 95% for various epoxide substrates to yield the corresponding cyclic carbonates, when using TBAB as co-catalyst under a CO2 atmosphere of 1.0 MPa with 0.17 mol% loading of catalyst. Additionally, the Y(III)-MOFs displayed turnover numbers (TONs) in the range of 412–543, which are comparable to, or superior than, those obtained using other RE-based homogeneous or heterogeneous catalysts. Similarly, Cui, Zhao et al. described a RE-MOF comprised of unique wheel-like RE18 clusters (RE = Gd(III) and Dy(III)) and 1,1-cyclopropane-dicarboxylic acid linkers.377 This family of RE-MOFs contains a high density of accessible Lewis acidic sites and were explored as catalysts for the conversion of epoxides to cyclic carbonates utilizing CO2. When employing TBAB as a co-catalyst, the RE18-MOFs displayed conversions greater than 80% with TONs of around 30 for several epoxide substrates under 0.1 MPa CO2 atmosphere, with approximately 3 mol% loading of catalyst (based on mol of RE).
 Fig. 37  Cycloaddition of CO2 to propylene oxide catalyzed by RE-BDC. Y, Er, Tb = purple, C = black, O = red. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity. 
In another approach used to convert CO2 to value-added products, Kong et al. studied the photocatalytic reduction of CO2 using a RE-MOF catalyst.382 In this example, a Eu-Ru(phen)3-MOF (phen = 1,10-phenanthroline) comprised of Ru(phen)3-derived tricarboxylic acid linkers bridging dinuclear Eu(III)-cluster nodes was studied as a photocatalyst for solar-to-chemical energy conversion. This RE-MOF photocatalyst was found to perform visible-light-driven CO2 reduction to give HCOO−, demonstrating a rate of 321.9 μmol h mmolMOF−1. The authors proposed a photocatalytic mechanism in which the ligand [RuII(phen)3] is excited to generate a triplet metal-to-ligand charge transfer (3MLCT) excited state, which transfers an electron to the [EuIII-H2O-EuIII] node. This process happens twice generating a [EuII-H2O-EuII] active site that can selectively reduce CO2 to HCOO− in a two-electron process.


Carbon–carbon bond formation. 
Another class of reactions that can be catalyzed by RE-MOFs are those involving the formation of C–C bonds, which can occur through many different paths with varying substrates.384–398 One example includes the cyanosilylation of aldehydes, which was demonstrated in an early report on the use of RE-MOFs as catalysts.384 Later, Vale et al. studied a Eu(III)-MOF for its potential to be used as a Lewis acid catalyst for the cyanosilylation of benzaldehyde with trimethylsilyl cyanide.385 The MOF, [Eu2(Mell)(H2O)6] is comprised of Eu(III)-chain nodes bridged by mellitic acid linkers. By varying the amount of MOF catalyst from 5.3 mol% to 32.1 mol%, conversions of 72–100% were obtained for the reaction of benzaldehyde to O-TMS-phenylcyanohydrin. It was found that the efficiency of [Eu2(Mell)(H2O)6] as a catalyst could be improved by thermal treatment to yield surface defects in the structure, while the identity of the aldehyde substrate did not have significant influence in the catalytic activity observed. Monge et al. also explored the utility of RE-MOFs as catalysts for cyanosilylation reactions.386 They synthesized a series of RE-MOFs, RPF-20 (RE = Sm(III), Dy(III), Yb(III)), comprised of RE(III)-ion nodes bridged by 3,5-disulfobenzoic acid and 1,10-phenanthroline linkers. RPF-20 contains 2D sheets, which through π–π stacking interactions yield a 3D network structure. When used as catalysts for the cyanosilylation of benzaldehyde with trimethylsilyl cyanide, RPF-20-Sm, -Dy, -Yb showed conversions of 94%, 70% and 42%, respectively, within 3 hours with a catalyst loading of 2 mol%. The authors proposed that the higher catalytic activity of RPF-20-Sm could be attributed to the higher potential coordination number of Sm(III), with less steric hindrance around the larger ion node.
RE-MOFs have also been studied as catalysts for the Henry, or nitroaldol, C–C bond forming reaction. Pombeiro et al. reported five RE-MOFs (RE = La(III), Ce(III), Sm(III)) comprised of trinuclear RE(III)-cluster nodes and 2-acetamidoterephtalic acid (BDC-NHAc) or 2-benzamidoterephtalic acid (BDC-NHBz) linkers.387 The MOFs were studied as catalysts for the conversion of various benzaldehyde substrates in the presence of nitroethane and water, to give the corresponding β-nitroalkanol (Fig. 38). The Sm-BDC-NHAc MOF performed the best as a catalyst for this Henry reaction, producing optimized yields near 70% in all cases with a catalyst loading of 3.0 mol%. The superior catalytic activity of the Sm(III) derivative was attributed to the higher Lewis acidity of Sm(III) vs. Ce(III) and La(III).
 Fig. 38  Henry (nitroaldol) reaction catalyzed by RE-BDC-NHAc. La, Ce, Sm = purple, C = black, O = red, N = light blue. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity. 
Although in the majority of cases, the catalytic active site in RE-MOFs is the metallic node, there are some examples in which the ligand plays a significant role in the catalytic activity (i.e., not just in producing the MOF structure). In 2013, Cui et al. synthesized a RE-MOF comprised of tetranuclear Nd(III)-cluster nodes bridged by tris(p-carboxylic acid)tridurylborane linkers (Nd-B-MOF, Fig. 39).389 The B(III) centers in the linker act as a Lewis acid co-catalyst together with the Nd(III) ions in the cluster nodes. The authors performed allylation, Diels–Alder, and Strecker-type reactions using Nd-B-MOF with sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) in water, and in all cases observed better results for the MOF catalyst than with the individual organic and inorganic components alone. In another example, RE-MOFs comprised of hexanuclear RE(III)-cluster nodes (RE = Sm(III), Dy(III), Yb(III)) and 2-aminoterephthalic acid linkers (BDC-NH2) were used as catalysts for a one-pot tandem deacetalization–Knoevenagel condensation reaction.390 The MOFs present both Lewis acidic (RE ions in clusters) and Brønsted basic (amino-group in linkers) sites that can catalyze the deacetalization of benzaldehyde dimethyl acetal to give benzaldehyde and the Knoevenagel condensation between benzaldehyde and malononitrile, respectively. These reactions occurred with higher conversions (76–97%) when using MOFs with decreasing RE ion size (approximately 1.5 mol% catalyst loading), consistent with trends in Lewis acidity of the RE(III) ions.
 Fig. 39  (a) Diels–Alder and (b) allylation reactions catalyzed by Nd-B-MOF. Nd = purple, C = black, O = red, N = light blue, B = green. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity. 
Although some examples of reactions that can be catalyzed by RE-MOFs have been highlighted here, the list is not exhaustive. RE-MOFs have also been studied as catalysts in oxidation,399–401 polymerization,402 and condensation403 reactions, and as catalyst supports.404

3.6 Gas adsorption
The inherent porosity of RE-MOFs has been harnessed for studying gas adsorption, separation and purification processes.288,289 These potential applications rely on properties including, but not limited to, pore size/shape, chemical functionality of organic linkers, accessibility of metal sites, and interpenetration, which can affect the interaction between a MOF and sorbate. Several early studies on RE-MOFs presented N2 or CO2 adsorption data,158,211,405,406 albeit primarily in the context of measuring surface area and porosity. In 2008, Luo et al. reported a RE-MOF with optimal pore sizes for H2 adsorption, and showed using neutron diffraction experiments that the H2 molecules interact primarily with the pore walls rather than the metal nodes.407 The 6 Å square pores of Y(BTC) (isostructural to MOF-76, Fig. 8) are exactly twice the kinetic diameter of H2, leading to strong interactions between H2 and the MOF pore walls, with H2 molecules situated in the corner of each pore. Consequently, Y(BTC) was found to take up 1.57 wt% of H2 at 77 K and 1 bar (Table 1). In a different example where the metal node plays the key role in sorbate-sorbent interactions, Hong et al. reported a series of RE-MOFs, RE(TPO) (RE = Nd(III), Sm(III), Eu(III), Gd(III), TPO = tris-(4-carboxylphenyl)phosphineoxide) (Fig. 40) where the RE(III)-ion charge density was found to be the major factor in gas uptake performance.229 A gravimetric increase in gas adsorption (N2, H2, or CO2) was observed when going from Nd(TPO) to Gd(TPO) which is unexpected based on the atomic mass increase of the RE(III)-ion. As an example, H2 uptake in Nd(TPO), Sm(TPO), Eu(TPO) and Gd(TPO) was found to be 0.89 wt% (100 cm3 g−1), 1.02 wt% (134 cm3 g−1), 1.52 wt% (170 cm3 g−1), and 1.82 wt% (208 cm3 g−1) at 77 K and 1 bar, respectively. In addition, isosteric heats of adsorption derived from the Clausius–Clapeyron equation were calculated from H2 isotherms at 87 K and gave values ranging from 7.1 kJ mol−1 (Nd(III)) to 7.8 kJ mol−1 (Gd(III)). These results were attributed to the strength of the interaction between RE(III)-ions having increasing charge density with the quadrupole moment of H2 (Table 1).
Table 1 Summary of gas adsorption data for RE-MOFs discussed (Section 3.6)




Material
Common name
BET surface area (m2 g−1)
Pore volume (cm3 g−1)
Uptake temperature (K)
Pressure (bar)
Substance
Capacity
Ref.


wt%
mmol g−1




Surface areas calculated from N2 sorption (α), or Ar sorption isotherm (β).




Y(BTC)
—
Not reported
—
77
1
H2
1.57
7.86

407



10
2.10
10.51


87
10
1.90
9.51


[Nd(TPO)]
—
793α
0.344
77
1
H2
0.89
4.46

229



[Sm(TPO)]
994α
0.425
1.02
5.98


[Eu(TPO)]
1079α
0.456
1.52
7.59


[Gd(TPO)]
1163α
0.487
1.82
9.29


[La(BTB)]
—
393α closed form, 1014α open form
0.48
278
11
CO2
—
1.35

192



13
—
3


20
—
3.63


[Sm(HL)(DMA)2]
–
Not reported
0.19
273
1
CO2
—
0.35

408



H2
—
0.01


[(Tb9)(Tb6)(L)12]
Tb-pek-MOF-1
1330β
0.47
298
35
CH4
—
5.00

53



50
—
5.92


25
CO2
—
9.32


[(Y9)(Y6)(L)12]
Y-pek-MOF-1
1608β
0.58
298
35
CH4
—
6.56


50
—
7.66


25
CO2
—
12.61


[Y9(TCPP)3]
Y-shp-MOF-1
2200β
0.79
298
1
CO2
—
1.51

272



80
CH4
—
11.20


[Y9(Zn-TCPP)3]
Y-shp-MOF-1 (Zn)
2360β
0.85
298
1
CO2
—
1.75


80
CH4
—
13.30




 Fig. 40  Structure of RE(TPO), highlighting the dinuclear RE(III)-cluster node (RE = Nd(III), Sm(III), Eu(III), Gd(III)) and tris-(4-carboxylphenyl)phosphineoxide linker. RE = purple, C = black, O = red, P = orange. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity. 
Later Walton et al. presented a flexible RE-MOF, LaBTB (Fig. 9), that features a breathing effect when exposed to partial pressures of CO2, or N2 around 0.3.192 Variable temperature powder X-ray diffraction patterns revealed that LaBTB changes from an open to closed form when DMF molecules are removed from the pores, a process that is reversible upon resolvation or exposure to gas molecules. Gravimetric adsorption isotherms revealed hysteresis, confirming that the MOF opens upon exposure to N2 and CO2 and that the open form contributes to adsorption in both cases. In addition, kinetic studies revealed the closing process that occurs upon MOF activation is faster than the opening step. In another example describing a flexible RE-MOF, Zhao, Thomas et al. reported a RE-MOF comprised of rectangular tetracarboxylic acid linkers (5,5′-(2,3,5,6-tetramethyl-1,4-phenylene)-bis(methylene)-bis(azanediyl)diisophthalic acid, HL) and RE(III)-ion nodes where RE = La(III), Ce(III), Pr(III), Nd(III), Sm(III), Eu(III), Gd(III), Tb(III), Dy(III), and Er(III) (Fig. 41).408 The MOF, [RE(HL)(DMA)2]·DMA·2H2O, is flexible, having an open form that transforms to a closed form after activation. This reversible transformation was found to occur in a single-crystal-to-single-crystal fashion. The CO2 adsorption isotherm for the closed form shows a broad hysteresis loop, indicating an induced structural transformation to the open-framework. In all cases, the pressure transformation onset was found to be similar, indicating that the close-open transition was driven by the amount of adsorbed CO2 of approximately 0.60 mmol g−1 or 0.5 CO2 molecules per mole of MOF.
 Fig. 41  Structure of [RE(HL)(DMA)2], highlighting the RE(III) ion node (RE = La(III), Ce(III), Pr(III), Nd(III), Sm(III), Eu(III), Gd(III), Tb(III), Dy(III), and Er(III)) and 5,5′-(2,3,5,6-tetramethyl-1,4-phenylene)-bis(methylene)-bis(azanediyl) diisophthalic acid linker. RE = purple, C = black, O = red, N = light blue. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity. 
Eddaoudi et al. have studied the gas adsorption properties in several of the RE(III)-cluster based MOFs described in Section 2.3. In one example from 2015, it was demonstrated that Tb- and Y-pek-MOF-1 (Fig. 27)53 showed high volumetric uptake capacities for CH4 and CO2 at high pressures. Tb- and Y-pek-MOF-1 was found to take up 43 and 40 cm3 cm−3 of CH4 at 5 bar and 298 K, or 261 and 288 cm3 cm−3 of CO2 at 25 bar and 298 K, respectively (Table 1). These values are among the highest volumetric adsorption capacities reported in the literature for CH4 and CO2 adsorption in MOFs. The high performance of RE-pek-MOF-1 was attributed to a combination of high porosity and high localized charge density, provided by the presence of nonanuclear and hexanuclear RE(III)-clusters, while the CO2 capacity may have been further enhanced by the pendant 2-FBA moieties in the MOF pores. Eddaoudi et al. also reported Y-shp-MOF-1 comprised of nonanuclear Y(III)-cluster nodes bridged by 5,10,15,20-tetrakis(4-carboxyphenyl)porphyrin (TCPP) linkers.272 Upon metalating the porphyrin linker, Y-shp-MOF-1 showed an increase in the isosteric heat of adsorption for CO2 from 25.2 to 31.8 to 34.6 kJ mol−1 for the non-metalated, Fe(III), and Zn(II) derivatives, respectively. The CO2 uptake found for Y-shp-MOF-1(Zn) was 307 cm3 cm−3 at 25 bar and 298 K, a value that is among the highest reported in literature to date. Y-shp-MOF-1(Zn) also showed a high CH4 capacity with uptakes of 179, 232, and 249 cm3 cm−3 at 35, 65 and 80 bar at 298 K. The high CO2 and CH4 capacities in Y-shp-MOF-1(Zn) could be attributed to the high porosity, high density of RE(III)-ions in the nonanuclear cluster nodes, and the additional Zn(II) metal site.
In addition to gas adsorption, RE-MOFs have also been studied for the adsorption of liquid phase MeOH,216 and water vapour.282,409
3.7 Separations
In addition to adsorption, the porosity of RE-MOFs also lends itself to applications in chemical separations.289 Much like in other classes of MOFs, the chemical functionality, size, and shape of the pores in RE-MOFs can be tuned to aid in separating compounds based on size or chemical properties.
In an early example, Zhang, Chen et al. reported a RE-MOF, Yb-BPT, comprised of Yb(III)-chain nodes bridged by biphenyl-3,4′,5-tricarboxylic acid (BPT) linkers, and giving rise to square channels of 7.2 Å in size (Fig. 42).410 Owing to the permanent microporosity of Yb-BPT, the material was tested for uptake of CH4, CO2, and C2H2 and found to take up 5.4 cm3 g−1, 16.7 cm3 g−1 and 23.9 cm3 g−1 of the gases at 296 K and 1 bar, respectively. From this data, the Henry selectivity of Yb-BPT for CO2/CH4 as well as C2H2/CH4 was calculated to be 3.1 and 7.8, respectively. Although a hypothesis as to why this selectivity is observed in Yb-BPT was not given, it is possible that it's related to the pore size of Yb-BPT (7.2 Å) being just over twice the kinetic diameter of CO2 (3.3 Å) and C2H2 (3.3 Å), while it is only ∼1.9 times the kinetic diameter of CH4 (3.8 Å). In another example, Chen et al. reported UTSA-222, a RE-MOF comprised of Tb(III)-chain nodes and oxydiacetic acid (ODA) and biphenyl-4,4′-dicarboxylic acid (BPDC) linkers.411 UTSA-222 presents intersecting channels of 9.3 × 5.1 Å, and is selective for C2H2/CO2 and C2H2/CH4 with Ideal Adsorbed Solution Theory (IAST) selectivities of ∼4.3 and 16.0, respectively.
 Fig. 42  Structure of Yb-BPT highlighting the Yb(III)-chain node and biphenyl-3,4′,5-tricarboxylic acid linker. Yb = purple, C = black, O = red. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity. 
In another example by Krishna, Chen et al., UTSA-30, a RE-MOF comprised of Yb(III)-chain nodes and 5,5′,5′′′-benzene-1,3,5-triyl-1,1′,1′′-trinaphthoic acid linkers was found to selectively recover CH4 from a mixture of 8 gases.412 The IAST selectivity of UTSA-30 for CH4/N2 was found to be 5.0, which exceeds the selectivities of MFI and NaX Zeolites and led the authors to study CH4 separations in more challenging conditions. In a breakthrough experiment performed using an 8-component gas mixture, CH4–CO2–N2–C2H2–C2H4–C2H6–C3H6–C3H8, N2 was found to breakthrough first, followed by pure CH4, pure CO2, a mixture of C2 hydrocarbons (C2H6 + C2H4 + C2H2) and a mixture of C3 hydrocarbons (C3H6 + C3H8). This experiment demonstrated that UTSA-30 is capable of separating CH4 from other gases, and is a potential candidate for natural gas purification applications.
In an example demonstrating the role that MOF flexibility can play in separations, Rosseinsky et al. reported [Ce(HTCPB)·(EtOH)0.28(H2O)2.75], a MOF comprised of Ce(III)-chain nodes and 1,2,4,5-tetrakis(4-carboxyphenyl)benzene (TCPB) linkers.413 The flexible MOF was found to reorganize in the presence of meta-xylene and para-xylene. The activated MOF, Ce(HTCPB) was found to be selective for para-xylene over meta-xylene with a Henry selectivity of 4.5, a number close to the highest performing zeolites. Although the flexible MOF restructures in the presence of both meta-xylene and para-xylene, the accommodation of meta-xylene requires the unfavourable generation of a large channel within the structure, while the accommodation of para-xylene involves more favourable restructuring with only minor localized changes in pores, leading to selectivity of para-xylene over meta-xylene.
Angeli et al. demonstrated Xe/Kr separations using Y-csq-MOF-1 (Fig. 20),260 where single component adsorption isotherms for Xe measured at 273, 283 and 298 K up to 1 bar, showed uptake of 75.5 cm3 g−1 (3.37 mmol g−1), 63.0 cm3 g−1 (2.81 mmol g−1), and 43.4 cm3 g−1 (1.94 mmol g−1), respectively. On the other hand, Kr uptake in Y-csq-MOF-1 was lower, reaching 35.0 cm3 g−1 (1.56 mmol g−1), 24.2 cm3 g−1 (1.08 mmol g−1), and 13.8 cm3 g−1 (0.62 mmol g−1) at 273, 283 and 298 K, respectively. The Xe/Kr Henry selectivity at 298 K, was calculated to be 12.9, placing Y-csq-MOF-1 among the best adsorbents for Xe/Kr separation reported.
Finally, Eddaoudi et al. have studied several chemical separations using RE(III)-cluster based MOFs. For example, Eu-1,4-NDC-fcu-MOF (Fig. 23 shows the RE-fcu-MOF platform) showed promising selectivities for CO2 over C4-hydrocarbons n-C4H10 and iso-C4H10.414 The selectivity of CO2 in EU-1,4-NDC-fcu-MOF was attributed to the ideal aperture size of ∼5 Å coupled with strong CO2-framework interactions giving a Qst of 34.4 kJ mol−1. Using the same fcu-MOF platform, but with Y(III), or Tb(III) and fumaric acid linkers was found to be selective for linear (i.e., n-butane, kinetic diameter of 4.3 Å) vs. branched (i.e., isobutane, kinetic diameter of 5 Å) paraffins owing to the aperture size of 4.7 Å.267
4. Conclusions
As part of ongoing efforts to design and synthesize materials with diverse structure and function, RE-MOFs have emerged as strong candidate materials. In this review, we have shown several exciting discoveries involving RE-MOFs, including different techniques used to (i) enhance permanent porosity, (ii) generate different metal node structures, (III) produce diverse framework topologies, (iv) give varying luminescent properties, and (v) generate open and accessible metal sites.
The varying structures and properties of RE-MOFs arise from the unique nature of RE-metal coordination chemistry, where coordination numbers and geometries are generally dictated by ligand steric effects. Although this feature can make it difficult to control the resulting structures of RE-MOFs, researchers have found methods to direct the generation of RE(III)-chain vs. RE(III)-cluster nodes, which when coupled with the judicious choice of ligand geometry and connectivity, gives researchers precise control over the final structures obtained. As the field of MOFs has grown from some serendipitous discovery to design, so too has the subfield of RE-MOFs. With a better understanding of MOF design principles and performance, improvements can be made to materials synthesis feedback loops for targeted applications.
Nonetheless, there are still ongoing challenges in the design, synthesis, and application of RE-MOFs. For example, although great strides have been made in controlling the nature of the RE-node, it is still challenging to control the generation of, for example, tetranuclear vs. hexanuclear vs. nonanuclear cluster nodes, where in many cases two or more clusters have the potential to exist in the same network topology. However, through these challenges, there is significant uncharted territory to explore, making the future of RE-MOF chemistry vast and bright.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
AJH thanks Concordia University, NSERC (DGECR-2018-00344), and FRQNT (2020-NC-270099) for funding research in the Howarth group on RE-MOFs. All metal node, linker, and MOF structure images in this review article were made with VESTA 3.415
References
B. F. Hoskins and R. Robson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1989, 111, 5962–5964 CrossRef CAS .
O. M. Yaghi and H. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1995, 117, 10401–10402 CrossRef CAS .
O. M. Yaghi, G. Li and H. Li, Nature, 1995, 378, 703–706 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, M. Eddaoudi, M. O’Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, Nature, 1999, 402, 276–279 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kondo, T. Yoshitomi, H. Matsuzaka, S. Kitagawa and K. Seki, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1997, 36, 1725–1727 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Cheetham, G. Férey and T. Loiseau, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1999, 38, 3268–3292 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Furukawa, K. E. Cordova, M. O’Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, Science, 2013, 341, 1230444 CrossRef PubMed .
S. R. Batten, N. R. Champness, X.-M. Chen, J. Garcia-Martinez, S. Kitagawa, L. Öhrström, M. O’Keeffe, M. P. Suh and J. Reedijk, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 3001–3004 RSC .
S. R. Batten, N. R. Champness, X.-M. Chen, J. Garcia-Martinez, S. Kitagawa, L. Öhrström, M. O’Keeffe, S. M. Paik and J. Reedijk, Pure Appl. Chem., 2013, 85, 1715–1724 CAS .
O. M. Yaghi, M. O’Keeffe, N. W. Ockwig, H. K. Chae, M. Eddaoudi and J. Kim, Nature, 2003, 423, 705–714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. M. Yaghi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 15507–15509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. M. Yaghi, ACS Cent. Sci., 2019, 5, 1295–1300 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. O’Keeffe, M. A. Peskov, S. J. Ramsden and O. M. Yaghi, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1782–1789 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Furukawa, N. Ko, Y. B. Go, N. Aratani, S. B. Choi, E. Choi, A. O. Yazaydin, R. Q. Snurr, M. O’Keeffe, J. Kim and O. M. Yaghi, Science, 2010, 329, 424–428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. M. Hönicke, I. Senkovska, V. Bon, I. A. Baburin, N. Bönisch, S. Raschke, J. D. Evans and S. Kaskel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 13780–13783 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Chen, P. Li, R. Anderson, X. Wang, X. Zhang, L. Robison, L. R. Redfern, S. Moribe, T. Islamoglu, D. A. Gómez-Gualdrón, T. Yildirim, J. F. Stoddart and O. K. Farha, Science, 2020, 368, 297–303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Li, N. A. Vermeulen, C. D. Malliakas, D. A. Gómez-Gualdrón, A. J. Howarth, B. L. Mehdi, A. Dohnalkova, N. D. Browning, M. O’Keeffe and O. K. Farha, Science, 2017, 356, 624–627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Bai, Y. Dou, L.-H. Xie, W. Rutledge, J.-R. Li and H.-C. Zhou, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 2327–2367 RSC .
S. Barthel, E. V. Alexandrov, D. M. Proserpio and B. Smit, Cryst. Growth Des., 2018, 18, 1738–1747 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Mason, M. Veenstra and J. R. Long, Chem. Sci., 2013, 5, 32–51 RSC .
S. Ma and H.-C. Zhou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 11734–11735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D.-X. Xue, Y. Belmabkhout, O. Shekhah, H. Jiang, K. Adil, A. J. Cairns and M. Eddaoudi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 5034–5040 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Otake, Y. Cui, C. T. Buru, Z. Li, J. T. Hupp and O. K. Farha, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 8652–8656 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lee, O. K. Farha, J. Roberts, K. A. Scheidt, S. T. Nguyen and J. T. Hupp, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1450–1459 RSC .
D. Yang and B. C. Gates, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 1779–1798 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, B. An and W. Lin, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 130–146 CrossRef CAS .
L. E. Kreno, K. Leong, O. K. Farha, M. Allendorf, R. P. Van Duyne and J. T. Hupp, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 1105–1125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. A. Bauer, T. V. Timofeeva, T. B. Settersten, B. D. Patterson, V. H. Liu, B. A. Simmons and M. D. Allendorf, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 7136–7144 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Howarth, Y. Liu, J. T. Hupp and O. K. Farha, CrystEngComm, 2015, 17, 7245–7253 RSC .
R. J. Drout, L. Robison, Z. Chen, T. Islamoglu and O. K. Farha, Trends Chem., 2019, 1, 304–317 CrossRef .
P. A. Kobielska, A. J. Howarth, O. K. Farha and S. Nayak, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2018, 358, 92–107 CrossRef CAS .
P. Horcajada, C. Serre, G. Maurin, N. A. Ramsahye, F. Balas, M. Vallet-Regí, M. Sebban, F. Taulelle and G. Férey, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 6774–6780 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Orellana-Tavra, R. J. Marshall, E. F. Baxter, I. A. Lázaro, A. Tao, A. K. Cheetham, R. S. Forgan and D. Fairen-Jimenez, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2016, 4, 7697–7707 RSC .
N. L. Rosi, J. Kim, M. Eddaoudi, B. Chen, M. O’Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 1504–1518 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cui, B. Li, H. He, W. Zhou, B. Chen and G. Qian, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 483–493 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cui, Y. Yue, G. Qian and B. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 1126–1162 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Faust, Nat. Chem., 2016, 8, 990–991 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Nat. Chem.
           2016
          8
          987
         Search PubMed.
N. Joseph, H. D. Lawson, K. J. Overholt, K. Damodaran, R. Gottardi, A. P. Acharya and S. R. Little, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9, 1–11 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Robison, L. Zhang, R. J. Drout, P. Li, C. R. Haney, A. Brikha, H. Noh, B. L. Mehdi, N. D. Browning, V. P. Dravid, Q. Cui, T. Islamoglu and O. K. Farha, ACS Appl. Bio Mater., 2019, 2, 1197–1203 CrossRef CAS .
G. Férey, M. Latroche, C. Serre, F. Millange, T. Loiseau and A. Percheron-Guégan, Chem. Commun., 2003, 2976–2977 RSC .
D. Feng, Z.-Y. Gu, J.-R. Li, H.-L. Jiang, Z. Wei and H.-C. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 10307–10310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Feng, K. Wang, Z. Wei, Y.-P. Chen, C. M. Simon, R. K. Arvapally, R. L. Martin, M. Bosch, T.-F. Liu, S. Fordham, D. Yuan, M. A. Omary, M. Haranczyk, B. Smit and H.-C. Zhou, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 1–9 Search PubMed .
A. Phan, C. J. Doonan, F. J. Uribe-Romo, C. B. Knobler, M. O’Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, Acc. Chem. Res., 2010, 43, 58–67 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D.-X. Xue, A. J. Cairns, Y. Belmabkhout, L. Wojtas, Y. Liu, M. H. Alkordi and M. Eddaoudi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 7660–7667 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. A. Dolgopolova, A. M. Rice and N. B. Shustova, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 6472–6483 RSC .
S. L. Hanna, X. Zhang, K. Otake, R. J. Drout, P. Li, T. Islamoglu and O. K. Farha, Cryst. Growth Des., 2019, 19, 506–512 CrossRef CAS .
B. Li, H.-M. Wen, Y. Cui, W. Zhou, G. Qian and B. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8819–8860 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Pagis, M. Ferbinteanu, G. Rothenberg and S. Tanase, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 6063–6072 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cui, B. Chen and G. Qian, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2014, 273–274, 76–86 CrossRef CAS .
M. Seitz, A. G. Oliver and K. N. Raymond, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 11153–11160 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Jiang, J. Jia, A. Shkurenko, Z. Chen, K. Adil, Y. Belmabkhout, L. J. Weselinski, A. H. Assen, D.-X. Xue, M. O’Keeffe and M. Eddaoudi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 8858–8867 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Alezi, A. M. P. Peedikakkal, Ł. J. Weseliński, V. Guillerm, Y. Belmabkhout, A. J. Cairns, Z. Chen, Ł. Wojtas and M. Eddaoudi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 5421–5430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          S. Fordham, X. Wang, M. Bosch and H.-C. Zhou, in Lanthanide Metal-Organic Frameworks, ed. P. Cheng, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg,  2014, vol. 163, pp. 1–27 Search PubMed .
L.-Z. Yang, J. Wang, A. M. Kirillov, W. Dou, C. Xu, R. Fang, C.-L. Xu and W.-S. Liu, CrystEngComm, 2016, 18, 6425–6436 RSC .
H. Zhang, R. Fan, W. Chen, J. Fan, Y. Dong, Y. Song, X. Du, P. Wang and Y. Yang, Cryst. Growth Des., 2016, 16, 5429–5440 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liao, C. Liu, X. Wang, G. Zhu, X. Zhao and H. Zhang, CrystEngComm, 2009, 11, 2282–2284 RSC .
M. N. Akhtar, Y.-C. Chen, M. A. AlDamen and M.-L. Tong, Dalton Trans., 2017, 46, 116–124 RSC .
H. Xu, B. Zhai, C.-S. Cao and B. Zhao, Inorg. Chem., 2016, 55, 9671–9676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Cai, Y. Ren, H. Jiang, D. Zheng, D. Shi, Y. Qian and J. Chen, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 5285–5288 RSC .
Y. Zhang, B. Li, H. Ma, L. Zhang, H. Jiang, H. Song, L. Zhang and Y. Luo, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 7294–7301 RSC .
B. Zhao, X.-Y. Chen, Z. Chen, W. Shi, P. Cheng, S.-P. Yan and D.-Z. Liao, Chem. Commun., 2009, 3113–3115 RSC .
X. Feng, J.-L. Chen, L.-Y. Wang, S.-Y. Xie, S. Yang, S.-Z. Huo and S.-W. Ng, CrystEngComm, 2014, 16, 1334–1343 RSC .
X. Feng, B. Liu, L.-Y. Wang, J.-S. Zhao, J. G. Wang, N. S. Weng and X.-G. Shi, Dalton Trans., 2010, 39, 8038–8049 RSC .
B. Cai, Y. Ren, H. Jiang, D. Zheng, D. Shi, Y. Qian and H. Hu, Inorg. Chem. Commun., 2012, 15, 159–162 CrossRef CAS .
N. Sun and B. Yan, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 9174–9180 RSC .
Y. Ren, J. Lu, O. Jiang, X. Cheng and J. Chen, Chin. J. Catal., 2015, 36, 1949–1956 CrossRef CAS .
D. Y. Medina-Velazquez, B. Y. Alejandre-Zuniga, S. Loera-Serna, E. M. Ortiz, A. de, J. Morales-Ramirez, E. Garfias-Garcia, A. Garcia-Murillo and C. Falcony, J. Nanoparticle Res., 2016, 18, 352 CrossRef .
X. Yan, Z. Cai, C. Yi, W. Liu, M. Tan and Y. Tang, Inorg. Chem., 2011, 50, 2346–2353 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-P. Wu, G.-W. Xu, W.-W. Dong, J. Zhao, D.-S. Li, J. Zhang and X. Bu, Inorg. Chem., 2017, 56, 1402–1411 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ma, X. Huang, X. Song and W. Liu, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 3590–3595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-J. Jiang, M. Pan, J.-M. Liu, W. Wang and C.-Y. Su, Inorg. Chem., 2010, 49, 10166–10173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhou, Y.-P. Wu, Z.-H. Zhou, Z.-S. Qin, X. Ye, F.-Y. Tian and D.-S. Li, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2016, 453, 757–763 CrossRef CAS .
D.-D. Liu and Y.-G. Chen, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2013, 401, 70–75 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wu, X. Lan, Y. Zhang, M. Li and G. Bai, Dalton Trans., 2019, 48, 11063–11069 RSC .
R. Łyszczek, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2010, 257, 1736–1739 CrossRef .
R. A. de Jesus, L. L. da Luz, D. O. Santos, J. A. S. Costa, S. Navickiene, C. C. Gatto, S. A. Júnior and M. E. de Mesquita, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 17318–17325 RSC .
L.-M. Chang, X. Zhao, Z.-G. Gu, W.-J. Liu, Z.-Q. Wei, Y.-L. Liu, H.-H. Mo and S.-T. Yue, Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem., 2012, 638, 652–657 CrossRef CAS .
S.-S. Zhang, Y.-T. Yan, W.-Y. Zhang, F.-S. Guo and Y.-Y. Wang, ChemistrySelect, 2018, 3, 3214–3220 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-T. Liang, G.-P. Yang, B. Liu, Y.-T. Yan, Z.-P. Xi and Y.-Y. Wang, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 13325–13330 RSC .
Y.-P. He, Y.-X. Tan and J. Zhang, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 12758–12762 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Xia, Y. Cui, Y. Yang and G. Qian, ChemNanoMat, 2017, 3, 51–57 CrossRef CAS .
J. Rong, W. Zhang and J. Bai, CrystEngComm, 2016, 18, 7728–7736 RSC .
J.-C. Rybak, L. V. Meyer, J. Wagenhöfer, G. Sextl and K. Müller-Buschbaum, Inorg. Chem., 2012, 51, 13204–13213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-M. Fang, E. C. Sañudo, M. Hu, Q. Zhang, S.-T. Ma, L.-R. Jia, C. Wang, J.-Y. Tang, M. Du and C.-S. Liu, Cryst. Growth Des., 2011, 11, 811–819 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mohapatra, K. P. S. S. Hembram, U. Waghmare and T. K. Maji, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 5406–5412 CrossRef CAS .
C.-M. Liu, D.-Q. Zhang and D.-B. Zhu, Inorg. Chem. Commun., 2008, 11, 903–906 CrossRef CAS .
X. Feng, L. Liu, L.-Y. Wang, H.-L. Song, Z. Q. Shi, X.-H. Wu and S.-W. Ng, J. Solid State Chem., 2013, 206, 277–285 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Vitorino, T. Devic, M. Tromp, G. Férey and M. Visseaux, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2009, 210, 1923–1932 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, M. Zhu, L. Xia, Y. Wu, H. Hua and J. Xie, Sci. Rep. Nat. Publ. Group, 2016, 6, 29728 CAS .
H. Bai, Z. Wu and M. Hu, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2015, 427, 112–117 CrossRef CAS .
S.-S. Xu, P. Tao, C.-H. Zeng, Y. Wang, L.-F. Gao, Q.-Q. Nie, S.-L. Zhong and S. W. Ng, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2016, 447, 92–97 CrossRef CAS .
R. Li, X.-L. Qu, Y.-H. Zhang, H.-L. Han and X. Li, CrystEngComm, 2016, 18, 5890–5900 RSC .
A. Zurawski, J.-C. Rybak, L. V. Meyer and K. Müller-Buschbaum, Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem., 2013, 639, 261–267 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Wang, Y. J. Zhang, F. Jin, E. N. Wang, M. Y. Zhang and J. Chen, Russ. J. Coord. Chem., 2016, 42, 316–323 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Han, P. Yan, J. Sun, G. An, X. Yao, Y. Li and G. Li, Dalton Trans., 2017, 46, 4642–4653 RSC .
P. R. Matthes, C. J. Höller, M. Mai, J. Heck, S. J. Sedlmaier, S. Schmiechen, C. Feldmann, W. Schnick and K. Müller-Buschbaum, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 10179–10187 RSC .
X.-M. Cao, N. Wei, L. Liu, L. Li and Z.-B. Han, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 19459–19462 RSC .
S. Neogi and P. K. Bharadwaj, Polyhedron, 2006, 25, 1491–1497 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Loeb, Chem. Commun., 2005, 1511–1518 RSC .
Y. Gai, Q. Guo, K. Xiong, F. Jiang, C. Li, X. Li, Y. Chen, C. Zhu, Q. Huang, R. Yao and M. Hong, Cryst. Growth Des., 2017, 17, 940–944 CrossRef CAS .
J. Rocha, F. A. A. Paz, F.-N. Shi, D. Ananias, N. J. O. Silva, L. D. Carlos and T. Trindade, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2011, 2035–2044 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, M. Jiang, L. Yan, R. Peng, M. Huangfu, X. Guo, Y. Li and P. Wu, Inorg. Chem., 2016, 55, 12660–12668 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-M. Liu, J. Xiong, D.-Q. Zhang, B.-W. Wang and D.-B. Zhu, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 104854–104861 RSC .
B. Ay, E. Yildiz and İ. Kani, J. Solid State Chem., 2016, 233, 44–51 CrossRef CAS .
R. R. Ozer and J. P. Hinestroza, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 15198–15204 RSC .
Q.-Y. Yang, M. Pan, S.-C. Wei, C.-W. Hsu, J.-M. Lehn and C.-Y. Su, CrystEngComm, 2014, 16, 6469–6475 RSC .
M. V. Marinho, D. O. Reis, W. X. C. Oliveira, L. F. Marques, H. O. Stumpf, M. Déniz, J. Pasán, C. Ruiz-Pérez, J. Cano, F. Lloret and M. Julve, Inorg. Chem., 2017, 56, 2108–2123 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Liu, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. E: Struct. Rep. Online, 2012, 68, m415 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-C. Rybak, L. V. Meyer, J. Wagenhöfer, G. Sextl and K. Müller-Buschbaum, Inorg. Chem., 2012, 51, 13204–13213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-Y. Gong, B. M. Rambo, C. A. Nelson, V. M. Lynch, X. Zhu and J. L. Sessler, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 10186–10188 RSC .
D. Yue, J. Zhang, D. Zhao, X. Lian, Y. Cui, Y. Yang and G. Qian, J. Solid State Chem., 2016, 241, 99–104 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Ghosh and P. K. Bharadwaj, Inorg. Chem., 2004, 43, 2293–2298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Amghouz, S. García-Granda, J. R. García, R. A. S. Ferreira, L. Mafra, L. D. Carlos and J. Rocha, Inorg. Chem., 2012, 51, 1703–1716 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhou, Z.-G. Wang, H.-Y. Dong, K. Zhao, Y.-J. Hu, Z.-J. Gao, S.-N. Tie and H.-G. Zheng, Inorg. Chem. Commun., 2017, 78, 1–4 CrossRef CAS .
E. Gao, N. Sun, Y. Zhan, X. Qiu, Y. Ding, S. Zhang and M. Zhu, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 85704–85709 RSC .
D. Dang, Y. Bai, C. He, J. Wang, C. Duan and J. Niu, Inorg. Chem., 2010, 49, 1280–1282 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Z. Ahmad and B. Want, J. Appl. Phys., 2016, 119, 144104 CrossRef .
G.-B. Che, S.-Y. Liu, Q. Zhang, C.-B. Liu and X.-J. Zhang, J. Solid State Chem., 2015, 225, 378–382 CrossRef CAS .
A.-H. Yang, L.-H. Zhao, X.-J. Qi and Y.-W. Lu, Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem., 2014, 640, 2296–2300 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yu, X. Wang and M. Hu, J. Coord. Chem., 2015, 68, 520–528 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ding, J.-C. Zhong, X.-T. Qiu, Y.-Q. Sun and Y.-P. Chen, J. Solid State Chem., 2017, 246, 138–144 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mirzaei, H. Eshtiagh-Hosseini, N. Lotfian, A. Salimi, A. Bauzá, R. V. Deun, R. Decadt, M. Barceló-Oliver and A. Frontera, Dalton Trans., 2013, 43, 1906–1916 RSC .
D. T. de Lill and C. L. Cahill, Cryst. Growth Des., 2007, 7, 2390–2393 CrossRef CAS .
C. Brouca-Cabarrecq and J. C. Trombe, J. Chem. Crystallogr., 2009, 39, 786–798 CrossRef CAS .
J. Rong, W. Zhang and J. Bai, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 103714–103723 RSC .
J.-H. Liao, C.-Y. Lai and C.-L. Yang, J. Chin. Chem. Soc., 2014, 61, 1115–1120 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Liao, W.-S. Hwang and G.-Y. Chen, Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem., 2014, 640, 1793–1798 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, K.-Z. Tang, W.-S. Liu, Y. Tang and M.-Y. Tan, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2010, 5318–5325 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wu, F.-J. Yin, H. Wei, Z.-F. Liu and G. Yin, Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem., 2011, 637, 602–607 CrossRef CAS .
X.-Y. Li, Z.-J. Lin, Y.-Y. Yang and R. Cao, CrystEngComm, 2014, 16, 6425–6432 RSC .
D.-B. Dang, B. An, Y. Bai, G.-S. Zheng and J.-Y. Niu, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 2243–2245 RSC .
X.-H. Zhou, L. Li, A. Li, T. Yang and W. Huang, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2014, 413, 38–44 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, J.-Y. Zou, S.-Y. You, H.-M. Cui, G.-P. Zeng and J.-Z. Cui, Dalton Trans., 2017, 46, 16432–16438 RSC .
B. Cai, P. Yang, J.-W. Dai and J.-Z. Wu, CrystEngComm, 2011, 13, 985–991 RSC .
X.-D. Zhu, Z.-J. Lin, T.-F. Liu, B. Xu and R. Cao, Cryst.
Growth Des., 2012, 12, 4708–4711 CrossRef CAS .
S.-R. Zheng, S.-L. Cai, Q.-Y. Yang, T.-T. Xiao, J. Fan and W.-G. Zhang, Inorg. Chem. Commun., 2011, 14, 826–830 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-G. Jiang, Y.-K. Lv, J.-W. Cheng and Y.-L. Feng, J. Solid State Chem., 2012, 185, 253–263 CrossRef CAS .
C.-M. Liu, M. Xiong, D.-Q. Zhang, M. Du and D.-B. Zhu, Dalton Trans., 2009, 5666–5672 RSC .
P. Wang, R.-Q. Fan, X.-R. Liu, L.-Y. Wang, Y.-L. Yang, W.-W. Cao, B. Yang, W. Hasi, Q. Su and Y. Mu, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 1931–1949 RSC .
H. Xu, M. Fang, C.-S. Cao, W.-Z. Qiao and B. Zhao, Inorg. Chem., 2016, 55, 4790–4794 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Ma, R. Huo and X. Li, CrystEngComm, 2015, 17, 6575–6582 RSC .
M. Wei, C. He, Q. Sun, Q. Meng and C. Duan, Inorg. Chem., 2007, 46, 5957–5966 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Hoffart and S. J. Loeb, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 901–904 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. He, H. Furukawa, C. Wu, M. O’Keeffe and B. Chen, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 9328–9331 RSC .

          O. Yaghi, M. J. Kalmutzki and C. S. Diercks, Introduction to Reticular Chemistry, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd,  2019, pp. 463–479 Search PubMed .
K. S. Park, Z. Ni, A. P. Cote, J. Y. Choi, R. Huang, F. J. Uribe-Romo, H. K. Chae, M. O’Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 10186–10191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Eddaoudi, D. F. Sava, J. F. Eubank, K. Adil and V. Guillerm, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 228–249 RSC .
X. Guo, G. Zhu, Z. Li, Y. Chen, X. Li and S. Qiu, Inorg. Chem., 2006, 45, 4065–4070 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, G. Zhu, X. Guo, X. Zhao, Z. Jin and S. Qiu, Inorg. Chem., 2007, 46, 5174–5178 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-Y. Zhang, W. Shi, P. Cheng and M. J. Zaworotko, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 12203–12206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. Quah, L. T. Ng, B. Donnadieu, G. K. Tan and J. J. Vittal, Inorg. Chem., 2016, 55, 10851–10854 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. T. de Lill and C. L. Cahill, Chem. Commun., 2006, 4946–4948 RSC .
A. Schoedel, M. Li, D. Li, M. O’Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 12466–12535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kumar, L.-H. Wu, M. Kariem, A. Franconetti, H. N. Sheikh, S.-J. Liu, S. C. Sahoo and A. Frontera, Inorg. Chem., 2019, 58, 7760–7774 CrossRef PubMed .
N. E. Wong, P. Ramaswamy, A. S. Lee, B. S. Gelfand, K. J. Bladek, J. M. Taylor, D. M. Spasyuk and G. K. H. Shimizu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 14676–14683 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhao, X. He, Y. Zhang, J. Zhu, X. Shen and D. Zhu, Cryst. Growth Des., 2017, 17, 5524–5532 CrossRef CAS .
A. Michaelides and S. Skoulika, Cryst. Growth Des., 2005, 5, 529–533 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-Q. Sun, J. Zhang, Y.-M. Chen and G.-Y. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 5814–5817 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, S. Zhang and D. Song, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 710–713 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Devic, C. Serre, N. Audebrand, J. Marrot and G. Férey, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 12788–12789 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cui, H. Xu, Y. Yue, Z. Guo, J. Yu, Z. Chen, J. Gao, Y. Yang, G. Qian and B. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 3979–3982 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Tang, Y. Liu, S. Liu, D. He, J. Miao, X. Wang, G. Yang, Z. Shi and Z. Zheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 12444–12449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Tobin, S. Comby, N. Zhu, R. Clérac, T. Gunnlaugsson and W. Schmitt, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 13313–13316 RSC .
A. Ouchi, Y. Suzuki, Y. Ohki and Y. Koizumi, Coord. Chem. Rev., 1988, 92, 29–43 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zheng, Chem. Commun., 2001, 2521–2529 RSC .
R. Wang, H. D. Selby, H. Liu, M. D. Carducci, T. Jin, Z. Zheng, J. W. Anthis and R. J. Staples, Inorg. Chem., 2002, 41, 278–286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Wang, H. Liu, M. D. Carducci, T. Jin, C. Zheng and Z. Zheng, Inorg. Chem., 2001, 40, 2743–2750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Serpaggi and G. Férey, J. Mater. Chem., 1998, 8, 2737–2741 RSC .
V. Kiritsis, A. Michaelides, S. Skoulika, S. Golhen and L. Ouahab, Inorg. Chem., 1998, 37, 3407–3410 CrossRef CAS .
T. M. Reineke, M. Eddaoudi, M. O’Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1999, 38, 2590–2594 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. M. Reineke, M. Eddaoudi, M. Fehr, D. Kelley and O. M. Yaghi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 1651–1657 CrossRef CAS .
L. Pan, K. M. Adams, H. E. Hernandez, X. Wang, C. Zheng, Y. Hattori and K. Kaneko, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 3062–3067 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Michaelides, S. Skoulika, E. G. Bakalbassis and J. Mrozinski, Cryst. Growth Des., 2003, 3, 487–492 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zheng, C. Sun, S. Lu, F. Liao, S. Gao and L. Jin, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2004, 3262–3268 CrossRef CAS .
L. A. Borkowski and C. L. Cahill, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. C: Cryst. Struct. Commun., 2004, 60, m159–m161 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Guo, G. Zhu, F. Sun, Z. Li, X. Zhao, X. Li, H. Wang and S. Qiu, Inorg. Chem., 2006, 45, 2581–2587 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Huang, D. Wu, P. Zhou, W. Yan, D. Guo, C. Duan and Q. Meng, Cryst. Growth Des., 2009, 9, 1361–1369 CrossRef CAS .
E. Neofotistou, C. D. Malliakas and P. N. Trikalitis, CrystEngComm, 2010, 12, 1034–1037 RSC .
Y. Sun, B. Jiang, T. Cui, G. Xiong, P. F. Smet, F. Ding, E. Gao, T. Lv, K. V. den Eeckhout, D. Poelman and F. Verpoort, Dalton Trans., 2011, 40, 11581–11590 RSC .
M. Gustafsson, J. Su, H. Yue, Q. Yao and X. Zou, Cryst. Growth Des., 2012, 12, 3243–3249 CrossRef CAS .
F. Millange, C. Serre, J. Marrot, N. Gardant, F. Pellé and G. Férey, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14, 642–645 RSC .
C. Wang, Z. Wang, F. Gu and G. Guo, J. Mol. Struct., 2011, 1004, 39–44 CrossRef CAS .
M.-X. Wang, L.-S. Long, R.-B. Huang and L.-S. Zheng, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 9834–9836 RSC .
J. Xu, J. Cheng, W. Su and M. Hong, Cryst. Growth Des., 2011, 11, 2294–2301 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, R.-Q. Fan, C.-F. Sun, P. Wang, Y.-L. Yang, Q. Su and Y. Mu, Cryst. Growth Des., 2012, 12, 1337–1346 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, R. Fan, Y. Yang, X. Liu, W. Cao and B. Yang, J. Solid State Chem., 2012, 196, 441–450 CrossRef CAS .
D. T. de Lill, N. S. Gunning and C. L. Cahill, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 258–266 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. T. de Lill, A. de Bettencourt-Dias and C. L. Cahill, Inorg. Chem., 2007, 46, 3960–3965 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhang, X. Zhao, F. Dai and D. Sun, Inorg. Chem. Commun., 2011, 14, 948–951 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lin, R. Zou, J. Liang, W. Xia, D. Xia, Y. Wang, J. Lin, T. Hu, Q. Chen, X. Wang, Y. Zhao and A. K. Burrell, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 7813–7818 RSC .
B. Mu, F. Li, Y. Huang and K. S. Walton, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 10172–10178 RSC .
T. K. Maji, G. Mostafa, H.-C. Chang and S. Kitagawa, Chem. Commun., 2005, 2436–2438 RSC .
Y.-Q. Sun, J. Zhang and G.-Y. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2006, 4700–4702 RSC .
X. Feng, J. Wang, B. Liu, L. Wang, J. Zhao and S. Ng, Cryst. Growth Des., 2012, 12, 927–938 CrossRef CAS .
N. Chen, Y. Zhang, Z.-L. Yang and G. Li, J. Coord. Chem., 2012, 65, 1221–1231 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ma, J. Zhang, X. Jing, Q. Feng, B. Zheng, Y. Yu, Q. Huo and Y. Liu, Inorg. Chem. Commun., 2012, 20, 201–204 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, L.-S. Long, R.-B. Huang and L.-S. Zheng, Dalton Trans., 2008, 4714–4716 RSC .
R. F. D’Vries, M. Iglesias, N. Snejko, S. Alvarez-Garcia, E. Gutiérrez-Puebla and M. A. Monge, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 22, 1191–1198 RSC .
F. Gándara, A. García-Cortés, C. Cascales, B. Gómez-Lor, E. Gutiérrez-Puebla, M. Iglesias, A. Monge and N. Snejko, Inorg. Chem., 2007, 46, 3475–3484 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Plabst and T. Bein, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 4331–4341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. T. Wharmby, S. R. Miller, J. A. Groves, I. Margiolaki, S. E. Ashbrook and P. A. Wright, Dalton Trans., 2010, 39, 6389–6391 RSC .
R. M. P. Colodrero, K. E. Papathanasiou, N. Stavgianoudaki, P. Olivera-Pastor, E. R. Losilla, M. A. G. Aranda, L. León-Reina, J. Sanz, I. Sobrados, D. Choquesillo-Lazarte, J. M. García-Ruiz, P. Atienzar, F. Rey, K. D. Demadis and A. Cabeza, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 3780–3792 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. F. Vilela, D. Ananias, A. C. Gomes, A. A. Valente, L. D. Carlos, J. A. S. Cavaleiro, J. Rocha, J. P. C. Tomé and F. A. A. Paz, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 18354–18371 RSC .
S. Pili, P. Rought, D. I. Kolokolov, L. Lin, I. da Silva, Y. Cheng, C. Marsh, I. P. Silverwood, V. García Sakai, M. Li, J. J. Titman, L. Knight, L. L. Daemen, A. J. Ramirez-Cuesta, C. C. Tang, A. G. Stepanov, S. Yang and M. Schröder, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 7593–7602 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Höller and K. Müller-Buschbaum, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 10141–10149 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Zheng, Chem. Commun., 2001, 2521–2529 RSC .
R. Wang, H. Liu, M. D. Carducci, T. Jin, C. Zheng and Z. Zheng, Inorg. Chem., 2001, 40, 2743–2750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Wang, H. D. Selby, H. Liu, M. D. Carducci, T. Jin, Z. Zheng, J. W. Anthis and R. J. Staples, Inorg. Chem., 2002, 41, 278–286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. M. Reineke, M. Eddaoudi, D. Moler, M. O’Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 4843–4844 CrossRef CAS .
H. He, D. Yuan, H. Ma, D. Sun, G. Zhang and H.-C. Zhou, Inorg. Chem., 2010, 49, 7605–7607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-H. Liao, C.-S. Tsai and T.-K. Lin, Inorg. Chem. Commun., 2010, 13, 286–289 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li and D. Song, CrystEngComm, 2011, 13, 1821–1830 RSC .
S. Nayak, H. P. Nayek, C. Pietzonka, G. Novitchi and S. Dehnen, J. Mol. Struct., 2011, 1004, 82–87 CrossRef CAS .
P. W. Roesky, A. Bhunia, Y. Lan, A. K. Powell and S. Kureti, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 2035–2037 RSC .
C. G. Efthymiou, E. J. Kyprianidou, C. J. Milios, M. J. Manos and A. J. Tasiopoulos, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5061–5069 RSC .
N. Roques, D. Maspoch, I. Imaz, A. Datcu, J.-P. Sutter, C. Rovira and J. Veciana, Chem. Commun., 2008, 3160–3162 RSC .
Z.-J. Lin, B. Xu, T.-F. Liu, M.-N. Cao, J. Lü and R. Cao, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2010, 3842–3849 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, L. Sun, H. Xing, Z. Liang, J. Yu and R. Xu, Inorg. Chem. Commun., 2011, 14, 978–981 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Manos, E. J. Kyprianidou, G. S. Papaefstathiou and A. J. Tasiopoulos, Inorg. Chem., 2012, 51, 6308–6314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Mahata, K. V. Ramya and S. Natarajan, Chem. – Eur. J., 2008, 14, 5839–5850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Costa, P. Gamez, C. A. Black, O. Roubeau, S. J. Teat and J. Reedijk, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2008, 1551–1554 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Black, J. S. Costa, W. T. Fu, C. Massera, O. Roubeau, S. J. Teat, G. Aromí, P. Gamez and J. Reedijk, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 1062–1068 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, M. Eddaoudi, M. O’Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, Nature, 1999, 402, 276–279 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yan, Q. Yue, Q.-X. Jia, G. Lemercier and E.-Q. Gao, Cryst. Growth Des., 2009, 9, 2984–2987 CrossRef CAS .
F. M. Ebrahim, T. N. Nguyen, S. Shyshkanov, A. Gładysiak, P. Favre, A. Zacharia, G. Itskos, P. J. Dyson and K. C. Stylianou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 3052–3058 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Dai, D. Sun and D. Sun, Cryst. Growth Des., 2011, 11, 5670–5675 CrossRef CAS .
X. Rao, Q. Huang, X. Yang, Y. Cui, Y. Yang, C. Wu, B. Chen and G. Qian, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 3210–3214 RSC .
W. R. Lee, D. W. Ryu, J. W. Lee, J. H. Yoon, E. K. Koh and C. S. Hong, Inorg. Chem., 2010, 49, 4723–4725 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ma, C. Chen, B. Sun, X. Zhao and N. Zhang, Inorg. Chem. Commun., 2011, 14, 1532–1536 CrossRef CAS .
Q.-Y. Yang, K. Li, J. Luo, M. Pan and C.-Y. Su, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 4234–4236 RSC .
G. Férey, C. Serre, C. Mellot-Draznieks, F. Millange, S. Surblé, J. Dutour and I. Margiolaki, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 6296–6301 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Bhattacharjee, C. Chen and W.-S. Ahn, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 52500–52525 RSC .
G. Ma, J.-J. Zhang, L. Sun, Y.-X. Xu, H.-L. Gao, H.-Y. Zhang and X.-W. He, J. Cluster Sci., 2019 DOI:10.1007/s10876-019-01711-8 .
Z.-J. Ma and S.-H. Lu, J. Cluster Sci., 2019, 30, 243–249 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Dezotti, M. A. Ribeiro, K. R. Pirota and W. P. Barros, Cryst. Growth Des., 2019, 19, 5592–5603 CrossRef CAS .
X.-Y. Chen, B. Zhao, W. Shi, J. Xia, P. Cheng, D.-Z. Liao, S.-P. Yan and Z.-H. Jiang, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 2866–2874 CrossRef CAS .
A. Karmakar, S. Hazra, M. F. C. Guedes da Silva, A. Paul and A. J. L. Pombeiro, CrystEngComm, 2016, 18, 1337–1349 RSC .
B. Liu, W.-P. Wu, L. Hou and Y.-Y. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 8731–8734 RSC .
L. Zhang, T. Song, J. Xu, J. Sun, S. Zeng, Y. Wu, Y. Fan and L. Wang, CrystEngComm, 2014, 16, 2440–2451 RSC .
H. Xu, M. Fang, C.-S. Cao, W.-Z. Qiao and B. Zhao, Inorg. Chem., 2016, 55, 4790–4794 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. C. Sudik, A. P. Côté and O. M. Yaghi, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 2998–3000 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Serre, C. Mellot-Draznieks, S. Surblé, N. Audebrand, Y. Filinchuk and G. Férey, Science, 2007, 315, 1828–1831 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-J. Li, Y.-L. Wang and Q.-Y. Liu, Inorg. Chem., 2017, 56, 2159–2164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, P. Li, X. Zhang, P. Li, M. C. Wasson, T. Islamoglu, J. F. Stoddart and O. K. Farha, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 2900–2905 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B.-Q. Ma, D.-S. Zhang, S. Gao, T.-Z. Jin, C.-H. Yan and G.-X. Xu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2000, 39, 3644–3646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Wu, C. He, J. Wang, X. Peng, X. Li, Y. An and C. Duan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 14991–14999 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Han, S. Zhang, Y. Wang, X. Yan and X. Lu, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 786–788 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, H.-L. Sun, X.-S. Wu, X. Qiu and M. Du, Inorg. Chem., 2010, 49, 1865–1871 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-Y. Li, Y.-L. Wei, X.-Y. Dong, S.-Q. Zang and T. C. W. Mak, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 1327–1331 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yi, K. Bernot, G. Calvez, C. Daiguebonne and O. Guillou, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2013, 5879–5885 CrossRef CAS .
D. Savard, P.-H. Lin, T. J. Burchell, I. Korobkov, W. Wernsdorfer, R. Clérac and M. Murugesu, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 11748–11754 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Silva, L. Cunha-Silva, N. J. O. Silva, J. Rocha and F. A. A. Paz, Cryst. Growth Des., 2013, 13, 2607–2617 CrossRef CAS .
J.-W. Cheng, S.-T. Zheng, W. Liu and G.-Y. Yang, CrystEngComm, 2008, 10, 1047–1051 RSC .
T.-Y. Luo, C. Liu, S. V. Eliseeva, P. F. Muldoon, S. Petoud and N. L. Rosi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 9333–9340 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Maruyama, H. Kawabata, Y. Kikukawa and Y. Hayashi, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2019, 529–533 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, S. B. Peh, J. Wang, Y. Du, S. Xi, J. Dong, A. Karmakar, Y. Ying, Y. Wang and D. Zhao, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 4727–4730 RSC .
D. Zou, J. Zhang, Y. Cui and G. Qian, Dalton Trans., 2019, 48, 6669–6675 RSC .
S. Ma, D. Yuan, X.-S. Wang and H.-C. Zhou, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 2072–2077 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. K. Angeli, C. Sartsidou, S. Vlachaki, I. Spanopoulos, C. Tsangarakis, A. Kourtellaris, E. Klontzas, G. E. Froudakis, A. Tasiopoulos and P. N. Trikalitis, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 44560–44566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L.-F. Chen, J. Zhang, G.-Q. Ren, Z.-J. Li, Y.-Y. Qin, P.-X. Yin, J.-K. Cheng and Y.-G. Yao, CrystEngComm, 2008, 10, 1088–1092 RSC .
F.-N. Shi, L. Cunha-Silva, T. Trindade, F. A. A. Paz and J. Rocha, Cryst. Growth Des., 2009, 9, 2098–2109 CrossRef CAS .
F. Gándara, E. Gutiérrez-Puebla, M. Iglesias, N. Snejko and M. Á. Monge, Cryst. Growth Des., 2010, 10, 128–134 CrossRef .
J. Demel, P. Kubát, F. Millange, J. Marrot, I. Císařová and K. Lang, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 2779–2786 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Cavka, S. Jakobsen, U. Olsbye, N. Guillou, C. Lamberti, S. Bordiga and K. P. Lillerud, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 13850–13851 CrossRef PubMed .
D.-X. Xue, A. J. Cairns, Y. Belmabkhout, L. Wojtas, Y. Liu, M. H. Alkordi and M. Eddaoudi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 7660–7667 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. H. Assen, Y. Belmabkhout, K. Adil, P. M. Bhatt, D.-X. Xue, H. Jiang and M. Eddaoudi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 14353–14358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Yassine, O. Shekhah, A. H. Assen, Y. Belmabkhout, K. N. Salama and M. Eddaoudi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 15879–15883 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Hu, Z. Di, M. Wu, M. Hong and J. Li, Cryst. Growth Des., 2019, 19, 6381–6387 CrossRef CAS .
R. Luebke, Y. Belmabkhout, Ł. J. Weseliński, A. J. Cairns, M. Alkordi, G. Norton, Ł. Wojtas, K. Adil and M. Eddaoudi, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 4095–4102 RSC .
H. Jiang, J. Jia, A. Shkurenko, Z. Chen, K. Adil, Y. Belmabkhout, L. J. Weselinski, A. H. Assen, D.-X. Xue, M. O’Keeffe and M. Eddaoudi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 8858–8867 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, Ł. J. Weseliński, K. Adil, Y. Belmabkhout, A. Shkurenko, H. Jiang, P. M. Bhatt, V. Guillerm, E. Dauzon, D.-X. Xue, M. O’Keeffe and M. Eddaoudi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 3265–3274 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, S. Yuan, L. Feng, B. Guo, J.-S. Qin, B. Xu, C. Lollar, D. Sun and H.-C. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 5095–5099 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Feng, W.-C. Chung, Z. Wei, Z.-Y. Gu, H.-L. Jiang, Y.-P. Chen, D. J. Darensbourg and H.-C. Zhou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 17105–17110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, L. Feng, W. Fan, K.-Y. Wang, X. Wang, X. Wang, K. Zhang, X. Zhang, F. Dai, D. Sun and H.-C. Zhou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 6967–6975 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Feng, X. Xin, Y. Zhang, B. Guo, F. Li, X. Kong, Y. Wang, X. Wang, Y. Wang, L. Zhang and D. Sun, Cryst. Growth Des., 2019, 19, 1509–1513 CrossRef CAS .
X.-J. Zheng, L.-P. Jin and S. Gao, Inorg. Chem., 2004, 43, 1600–1602 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Guo, L. Zhang, N. Muhammad, Y. Xu, Y. Zhou, F. Tang and S. Yang, Inorg. Chem., 2018, 57, 995–1003 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-H. Fang, L. Cheng, L. Huang and G.-Y. Yang, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 6–8 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, Y. Wang, J. Xie, X. Yin, M. A. Silver, Y. Cai, H. Zhang, L. Chen, G. Bian, J. Diwu, Z. Chai and S. Wang, Inorg. Chem., 2018, 57, 8714–8717 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Guillerm, Ł. J. Weselińskii, Y. Belmabkhout, A. J. Cairns, V. D’Elia, Ł. Wojtas, K. Adil and M. Eddaoudi, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 673–680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. G. AbdulHalim, P. M. Bhatt, Y. Belmabkhout, A. Shkurenko, K. Adil, L. J. Barbour and M. Eddaoudi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 10715–10722 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Quezada-Novoa, H. M. Titi, A. Sarjeant and A. J. Howarth, ChemRxiv, 2020 DOI:10.26434/chemrxiv.12355406.v1 .
L. Feng, Y. Wang, K. Zhang, K.-Y. Wang, W. Fan, X. Wang, J. A. Powell, B. Guo, F. Dai, L. Zhang, R. Wang, D. Sun and H.-C. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 16682–16690 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, L. Huang, H. Miao, H. X. Wan, H. Mei, Y. Liu and Y. Xu, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 3234–3241 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. de Bettencourt-Dias and S. Viswanathan, Dalton Trans., 2006, 4093–4103 RSC .
W. Liu, T. Jiao, Y. Li, Q. Liu, M. Tan, H. Wang and L. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 2280–2281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Roy, A. Chakraborty and T. K. Maji, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2014, 273–274, 139–164 CrossRef CAS .

          B. Li and B. Chen, in Lanthanide Metal-Organic Frameworks, ed. P. Cheng, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg,  2015, pp. 75–107 Search PubMed .
N. N. Makhmudiyarova, I. R. Ishmukhametova, T. V. Tyumkina, A. G. Ibragimov and U. M. Dzhemilev, Tetrahedron Lett., 2018, 59, 3161–3164 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Barger, A. Motta, V. L. Weidner, T. L. Lohr and T. J. Marks, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 9015–9024 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Rieter, K. M. Pott, K. M. L. Taylor and W. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 11584–11585 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. C. Huxford-Phillips, S. R. Russell, D. Liu and W. Lin, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 14438–14443 RSC .
K. A. White, D. A. Chengelis, M. Zeller, S. J. Geib, J. Szakos, S. Petoud and N. L. Rosi, Chem. Commun., 2009, 4506 RSC .
K. A. White, D. A. Chengelis, K. A. Gogick, J. Stehman, N. L. Rosi and S. Petoud, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 18069–18071 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. L. da Luz, R. Milani, J. F. Felix, I. R. B. Ribeiro, M. Talhavini, B. A. D. Neto, J. Chojnacki, M. O. Rodrigues and S. A. Júnior, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 27115–27123 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. H. G. Kalinke, D. Cangussu, M. Mon, R. Bruno, E. Tiburcio, F. Lloret, D. Armentano, E. Pardo and J. Ferrando-Soria, Inorg. Chem., 2019, 58, 14498–14506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-C. G. Bünzli, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2017, 5058–5063 CrossRef .
J.-C. G. Bünzli, Trends Chem., 2019, 1, 751–762 CrossRef .
A. de Bettencourt-Dias, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 2734–2741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Serre, F. Millange, C. Thouvenot, N. Gardant, F. Pellé and G. Férey, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14, 1540–1543 RSC .
B. D. Chandler, D. T. Cramb and G. K. H. Shimizu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 10403–10412 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-Y. Wu, T.-T. Yeh, Y.-S. Wen, J. Twu and K.-L. Lu, Cryst. Growth Des., 2006, 6, 467–473 CrossRef CAS .
W. De, W. Horrocks and D. R. Sudnick, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1979, 101, 334–340 CrossRef .
Y. Xiao, L. Wang, Y. Cui, B. Chen, F. Zapata and G. Qian, J. Alloys Compd., 2009, 484, 601–604 CrossRef CAS .
B. Chen, Y. Yang, F. Zapata, G. Lin, G. Qian and E. B. Lobkovsky, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1693–1696 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-Y. Zhou, Y. Shi, B. Geng and Q.-B. Bo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 5337–5347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. M. Ebrahim, T. N. Nguyen, S. Shyshkanov, A. Gładysiak, P. Favre, A. Zacharia, G. Itskos, P. J. Dyson and K. C. Stylianou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 3052–3058 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Chen, L. Wang, F. Zapata, G. Qian and E. B. Lobkovsky, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 6718–6719 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-Y. Zhang, W. Shi, P. Cheng and M. J. Zaworotko, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 12203–12206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-J. Li, Y.-L. Wang and Q.-Y. Liu, Inorg. Chem., 2017, 56, 2159–2164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. J. Murray, M. Dincă and J. R. Long, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1294–1314 RSC .
J.-R. Li, R. J. Kuppler and H.-C. Zhou, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1477–1504 RSC .
A. H. Assen, O. Yassine, O. Shekhah, M. Eddaoudi and K. N. Salama, ACS Sens., 2017, 2, 1294–1301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Einkauf, T. T. Kelley, B. C. Chan and D. T. de Lill, Inorg. Chem., 2016, 55, 7920–7927 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kido, M. Kimura and K. Nagai, Science, 1995, 267, 1332–1334 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Reineke, F. Lindner, G. Schwartz, N. Seidler, K. Walzer, B. Lüssem and K. Leo, Nature, 2009, 459, 234–238 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. M. Farinola and R. Ragni, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 3467–3482 RSC .
Y. Cui, B. Chen and G. Qian, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2014, 273–274, 76–86 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wei, Q. Li, R. Sa and K. Wu, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 1820–1823 RSC .
M. Zhu, Z.-M. Hao, X.-Z. Song, X. Meng, S.-N. Zhao, S.-Y. Song and H.-J. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 1912–1914 RSC .
Y.-W. Zhao, F.-Q. Zhang and X.-M. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 24123–24130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Park and M. Oh, CrystEngComm, 2016, 18, 8372–8376 RSC .
S. Dang, J.-H. Zhang and Z.-M. Sun, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 8868–8873 RSC .
L. L. da Luz, B. F. Lucena Viana, G. C. O. da Silva, C. C. Gatto, A. M. Fontes, M. Malta, I. T. Weber, M. O. Rodrigues and S. A. Júnior, CrystEngComm, 2014, 16, 6914–6918 RSC .
Q. Yao, A. Bermejo Gómez, J. Su, V. Pascanu, Y. Yun, H. Zheng, H. Chen, L. Liu, H. N. Abdelhamid, B. Martín-Matute and X. Zou, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 5332–5339 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Jena, A. M. Kaczmarek, C. Krishnaraj, X. Feng, K. Vijayvergia, H. Yildirim, S.-N. Zhao, R. Van Deun and P. V. Der Voort, Cryst. Growth Des., 2019, 19, 6339–6350 CrossRef CAS .
M. Elsabahy and K. L. Wooley, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 2545–2561 RSC .
R. Mout, D. F. Moyano, S. Rana and V. M. Rotello, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 2539–2544 RSC .
T. L. Doane and C. Burda, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 2885–2911 RSC .
N. Kamaly, Z. Xiao, P. M. Valencia, A. F. Radovic-Moreno and O. C. Farokhzad, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 2971–3010 RSC .
W. Zhu, J. Guo, Y. Ju, R. E. Serda, J. G. Croissant, J. Shang, E. Coker, J. O. Agola, Q.-Z. Zhong, Y. Ping, F. Caruso and C. J. Brinker, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1806774 CrossRef PubMed .
A. D. Trofimov, A. A. Ivanova, M. V. Zyuzin and A. S. Timin, Pharmaceutics, 2018, 10, 167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Javanbakht and H. Namazi, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2018, 87, 50–59 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Horcajada, C. Serre, M. Vallet-Regí, M. Sebban, F. Taulelle and G. Férey, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 5974–5978 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-S. Wang, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2017, 349, 139–155 CrossRef CAS .
A. Escudero, A. I. Becerro, C. Carrillo-Carrión, N. O. Núñez, M. V. Zyuzin, M. Laguna, D. González-Mancebo, M. Ocaña and W. J. Parak, Nanophotonics, 2017, 6, 881–921 CAS .
W. J. Rieter, K. M. L. Taylor, H. An, W. Lin and W. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 9024–9025 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Foucault-Collet, K. A. Gogick, K. A. White, S. Villette, A. Pallier, G. Collet, C. Kieda, T. Li, S. J. Geib, N. L. Rosi and S. Petoud, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2013, 110, 17199–17204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. F. Sava Gallis, L. E. S. Rohwer, M. A. Rodriguez, M. C. Barnhart-Dailey, K. S. Butler, T. S. Luk, J. A. Timlin and K. W. Chapman, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 22268–22277 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T.-Y. Luo, C. Liu, S. V. Eliseeva, P. F. Muldoon, S. Petoud and N. L. Rosi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 9333–9340 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, S. V. Eliseeva, T.-Y. Luo, P. F. Muldoon, S. Petoud and N. L. Rosi, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 8099–8102 RSC .
R. C. Huxford, K. E. deKrafft, W. S. Boyle, D. Liu and W. Lin, Chem. Sci., 2011, 3, 198–204 RSC .
T. Kundu, S. Mitra, P. Patra, A. Goswami, D. Díaz Díaz and R. Banerjee, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 10514–10518 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P.-Y. Du, W. Gu and X. Liu, New J. Chem., 2016, 40, 9017–9020 RSC .
F.-J. Liu and B.-M. Xu, Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem., 2018, 644, 821–826 CrossRef CAS .
B.-B. Du, Y.-X. Zhu, M. Pan, M.-Q. Yue, Y.-J. Hou, K. Wu, L.-Y. Zhang, L. Chen, S.-Y. Yin, Y.-N. Fan and C.-Y. Su, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 12533–12536 RSC .
Y. Zhou and B. Yan, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 8413–8418 RSC .
H. Zhang, H. Liu, W. Jiang and S.-S. Zhao, Dyes Pigm., 2019, 171, 107665 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-M. Wang, X.-T. Tian, H. Zhang, Z.-R. Yang and X.-B. Yin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 22445–22452 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Y. Medina-Velazquez, U. Caldiño, A. Morales-Ramirez, J. Reyes-Miranda, R. E. Lopez, R. Escudero, R. Ruiz-Guerrero and M. F. Morales Perez, Opt. Mater., 2019, 87, 3–10 CrossRef CAS .
G. Bai, Z. Yang, H. Lin, W. Jie and J. Hao, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 9261–9267 RSC .
M. D. Allendorf, C. A. Bauer, R. K. Bhakta and R. J. T. Houk, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1330–1352 RSC .
T. N. Nguyen, S. V. Eliseeva, A. Gładysiak, S. Petoud and K. C. Stylianou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 10188–10192 RSC .
X. Wang, P. Yan, Y. Li, G. An, X. Yao and G. Li, Cryst. Growth Des., 2017, 17, 2178–2185 CrossRef CAS .
J. An, C. M. Shade, D. A. Chengelis-Czegan, S. Petoud and N. L. Rosi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 1220–1223 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhao, Y.-N. Wang, W.-W. Dong, Y.-P. Wu, D.-S. Li and Q.-C. Zhang, Inorg. Chem., 2016, 55, 3265–3271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Rao, T. Song, J. Gao, Y. Cui, Y. Yang, C. Wu, B. Chen and G. Qian, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 15559–15564 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-Z. Song, S.-Y. Song, S.-N. Zhao, Z.-M. Hao, M. Zhu, X. Meng, L.-L. Wu and H.-J. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 4034–4041 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zheng, H. Tan, Z. Xie, L. Zhang, X. Jing and Z. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 1078–1083 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-H. Liao, C.-S. Tsai and T.-K. Lin, Inorg. Chem. Commun., 2010, 13, 286–289 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ptak, M. Mączka, A. Gągor, P. Głuchowski and L. Macalik, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 1019–1028 RSC .
D. Zou, J. Zhang, Y. Cui and G. Qian, Dalton Trans., 2019, 48, 6669–6675 RSC .
J. Luo, B. S. Liu, C. Cao and F. Wei, Inorg. Chem. Commun., 2017, 76, 18–21 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-P. Wang, X.-Y. Li, H.-H. Li, H.-Z. Zhang, H.-Y. Sun, Q. Guo, H. Li and Z. Niu, Inorg. Chem. Commun., 2016, 70, 27–30 CrossRef CAS .
T. Li, X.-J. Hong, X. Liu, R. Chen, Q.-G. Zhan, X. Xu and Y.-P. Cai, CrystEngComm, 2014, 16, 3883–3889 RSC .
M. Li, S. Gul, D. Tian, E. Zhou, Y. Wang, Y. Han, L. Yin and L. Huang, Dalton Trans., 2018, 47, 12868–12872 RSC .
Y. Han, P. Yan, J. Sun, G. An, X. Yao, Y. Li and G. Li, Dalton Trans., 2017, 46, 4642–4653 RSC .
G. Tobin, S. Comby, N. Zhu, R. Clérac, T. Gunnlaugsson and W. Schmitt, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 13313–13316 RSC .

          H. Yamamoto and K. Ishihara, Acid Catalysis in Modern Organic Synthesis, Wiley-VCH, 1st edn,  2008 Search PubMed .
T. Wang, J. A. Glasper and B. H. Shanks, Appl. Catal., A, 2015, 498, 214–221 CrossRef CAS .
P. Ye, Y. Shao, X. Ye, F. Zhang, R. Li, J. Sun, B. Xu and J. Chen, Org. Lett., 2020, 22, 1306–1310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. H. Walrod II and D. A. Atwood, Encyclopedia of Inorganic and Bioinorganic Chemistry, American Cancer Society,  2012 Search PubMed .
M. Rimoldi, A. J. Howarth, M. R. DeStefano, L. Lin, S. Goswami, P. Li, J. T. Hupp and O. K. Farha, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 997–1014 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, O. K. Farha, J. Roberts, K. A. Scheidt, S. T. Nguyen and J. T. Hupp, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1450–1459 RSC .
M. H. Beyzavi, C. J. Stephenson, Y. Liu, O. Karagiaridi, J. T. Hupp and O. K. Farha, Front. Energy Res., 2015, 2, 63 Search PubMed .
T.-Q. Song, J. Dong, A.-F. Yang, X.-J. Che, H.-L. Gao, J.-Z. Cui and B. Zhao, Inorg. Chem., 2018, 57, 3144–3150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. T. D. Nguyen, Y. B. N. Tran, H. N. Nguyen, T. C. Nguyen, F. Gándara and P. T. K. Nguyen, Inorg. Chem., 2018, 57, 13772–13782 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xu, B. Zhai, C.-S. Cao and B. Zhao, Inorg. Chem., 2016, 55, 9671–9676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Ugale, S. S. Dhankhar and C. M. Nagaraja, Cryst. Growth Des., 2018, 18, 2432–2440 CrossRef CAS .
T. Jing, L. Chen, F. Jiang, Y. Yang, K. Zhou, M. Yu, Z. Cao, S. Li and M. Hong, Cryst. Growth Des., 2018, 18, 2956–2963 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhi-Hao, M.-H. Du, J. Liu, S. Jin, C. Wang, Z. Gui-Lin, X.-J. Kong, L. La-Sheng and Z. Lan-Sun, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1–9 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Wei, R.-X. Zuo, Y.-Y. Zhang, Z.-B. Han and X.-J. Gu, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 3224–3227 RSC .
O. R. Evans, H. L. Ngo and W. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 10395–10396 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. K. Batista, D. J. M. Alves, M. O. Rodrigues, G. F. de Sá, S. A. Junior and J. A. Vale, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2013, 379, 68–71 CrossRef CAS .
R. F. D’Vries, N. Snejko, M. Iglesias, E. Gutiérrez-Puebla and M. A. Monge, Cryst. Growth Des., 2014, 14, 2516–2521 CrossRef .
A. Karmakar, S. Hazra, M. F. C. Guedes da Silva, A. Paul and A. J. L. Pombeiro, CrystEngComm, 2016, 18, 1337–1349 RSC .
A. Karmakar, G. M. D. M. Rúbio, A. Paul, M. F. C. G. da Silva, K. T. Mahmudov, F. I. Guseinov, S. A. C. Carabineiro and A. J. L. Pombeiro, Dalton Trans., 2017, 46, 8649–8657 RSC .
Y. Liu, K. Mo and Y. Cui, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 10286–10291 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, L. Liu, N. Wei, M.-L. Gao, D. Zhao and Z.-B. Han, Inorg. Chem., 2018, 57, 2193–2198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Wei, M.-Y. Zhang, X.-N. Zhang, G.-M. Li, X.-D. Zhang and Z.-B. Han, Cryst. Growth Des., 2014, 14, 3002–3009 CrossRef CAS .
G. E. Gomez, A. M. Kaczmarek, R. Van Deun, E. V. Brusau, G. E. Narda, D. Vega, M. Iglesias, E. Gutierrez-Puebla and M. Á. Monge, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2016, 1577–1588 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, H. Lin, Z. Xiao, W. Fan, A. Huang, R. Wang, L. Zhang and D. Sun, Dalton Trans., 2016, 45, 3743–3749 RSC .
Y. Zhu, M. Zhu, L. Xia, Y. Wu, H. Hua and J. Xie, Sci. Rep. Nat. Publ. Group, 2016, 6, 29728 CAS .
H. He, H. Ma, D. Sun, L. Zhang, R. Wang and D. Sun, Cryst. Growth Des., 2013, 13, 3154–3161 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. R. Freitas, C. K. de Oliveira, E. C. Cunha, I. Malvestiti, S. Alves, R. L. Longo and P. H. Menezes, Tetrahedron Lett., 2013, 54, 1558–1561 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ren, J. Liang, J. Lu, B. Cai, D. Shi, C. Qi, H. Jiang, J. Chen and D. Zheng, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2011, 4369–4376 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gustafsson, A. Bartoszewicz, B. Martín-Matute, J. Sun, J. Grins, T. Zhao, Z. Li, G. Zhu and X. Zou, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 3316–3322 CrossRef CAS .
F. Gándara, A. García-Cortés, C. Cascales, B. Gómez-Lor, E. Gutiérrez-Puebla, M. Iglesias, A. Monge and N. Snejko, Inorg. Chem., 2007, 46, 3475–3484 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Gándara, E. G. Puebla, M. Iglesias, D. M. Proserpio, N. Snejko and M. Á. Monge, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 655–661 CrossRef .
F. Gándara, E. Gutiérrez-Puebla, M. Iglesias, N. Snejko and M. Á. Monge, Cryst. Growth Des., 2010, 10, 128–134 CrossRef .
M. J. Vitorino, T. Devic, M. Tromp, G. Férey and M. Visseaux, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2009, 210, 1923–1932 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ren, J. Lu, O. Jiang, X. Cheng and J. Chen, Chin. J. Catal., 2015, 36, 1949–1956 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, X. Zhang, P. Li, K. Otake, Y. Cui, J. Lyu, M. D. Krzyaniak, Y. Zhang, Z. Li, J. Liu, C. T. Buru, T. Islamoglu, M. R. Wasielewski, Z. Li and O. K. Farha, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 8306–8314 CAS .
Y. K. Park, S. B. Choi, H. Kim, K. Kim, B.-H. Won, K. Choi, J.-S. Choi, W.-S. Ahn, N. Won, S. Kim, D. H. Jung, S.-H. Choi, G.-H. Kim, S.-S. Cha, Y. H. Jhon, J. K. Yang and J. Kim, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 8230–8233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Pan, K. M. Adams, H. E. Hernandez, X. Wang, C. Zheng, Y. Hattori and K. Kaneko, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 3062–3067 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Luo, H. Xu, Y. Liu, Y. Zhao, L. L. Daemen, C. Brown, T. V. Timofeeva, S. Ma and H.-C. Zhou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 9626–9627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, L. Li, J. G. Bell, X. Lv, S. Tang, X. Zhao and K. M. Thomas, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 1502–1516 CrossRef CAS .
I. Skarmoutsos, M. Eddaoudi and G. Maurin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 26989–26999 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Guo, H. Xu, S. Su, J. Cai, S. Dang, S. Xiang, G. Qian, H. Zhang, M. O’Keeffe and B. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 5551–5553 RSC .
J. Ma, J. Guo, H. Wang, B. Li, T. Yang and B. Chen, Inorg. Chem., 2017, 56, 7145–7150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. He, S. Xiang, Z. Zhang, S. Xiong, F. R. Fronczek, R. Krishna, M. O’Keeffe and B. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 10856–10858 RSC .
J. E. Warren, C. G. Perkins, K. E. Jelfs, P. Boldrin, P. A. Chater, G. J. Miller, T. D. Manning, M. E. Briggs, K. C. Stylianou, J. B. Claridge and M. J. Rosseinsky, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 4592–4596 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D.-X. Xue, Y. Belmabkhout, O. Shekhah, H. Jiang, K. Adil, A. J. Cairns and M. Eddaoudi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 5034–5040 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Momma and F. Izumi, J. Appl. Crystallogr., 2011, 44, 1272–1276 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Authors contributed equally.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

Felix Saraci
	Felix Saraci obtained his BSc (Honours) in Chemistry in 2018 from Queen's University. He is currently an MSc student at Concordia University in Montreal, under the direct supervision of Dr Ashlee Howarth. His research focuses on developing a catalogue of rare-earth (RE)-based MOFs for potential applications as chemical sensors in detecting contaminants in water.

Victor Quezada-Novoa
	Victor Quezada-Novoa received his bachelor's degree (BSc) in Biochemistry from the Universidad de Concepcion, Chile, in 2018. In January 2019, he started his MSc in Chemistry in Dr Ashlee J. Howarth's research group at Concordia University. Recently he fast tracked to the PhD program in Chemistry. His research focus in the synthesis and characterization of novel RE-MOFs and their potential applications in the remediation of contaminated water. He is also interested in the synthesis of new organic linkers and utilization of MOFs as catalyst.

P. Rafael Donnarumma
	P. Rafael Donnarumma received his bachelor's degree (BSs) in Chemistry in 2017 from the National University of Rosario, Argentina. In 2019, he joined the research group of Dr Ashlee Howarth at Concordia University, Canada. His current research focuses on the use of rare-earth based MOFs for catalytic applications.

Ashlee J. Howarth
	Ashlee J. Howarth is an Assistant Professor of Chemistry at Concordia University in Montreal. Professor Howarth graduated from the University of Western Ontario in 2009 with an Honours BSc in Chemistry and then went on to do her PhD in inorganic materials chemistry at the University of British Columbia. Before joining the faculty at Concordia, she completed an NSERC Postdoctoral Fellowship at Northwestern University, where she worked primarily on the design and synthesis of MOFs for applications in wastewater remediation. She was recently recognized by Forbes Magazine as a “30 under 30” in Science. Research in the Howarth group at Concordia University focuses on designing new RE-MOFs for various environmental applications.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic representation of a metal–organic framework (MOF).	 

 	Fig. 2  Periodic table highlighting the rare-earth (RE) elements.	 

 	Fig. 3  Structure of UTSA-61(Tb), highlighting the Tb(III)-ion node and hexacarboxylic acid linker. Tb = purple, C = black, O = red. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity.	 

 	Fig. 4  Structure of [RE(BTC)(DMF)2]·H2O highlighting the RE(III)-ion node and 1,3,5-benzenetricarboxylic acid linker. RE = Tb(III), Dy(III), Ho(III), Er(III), Tm(III), Yb(III). RE = purple, C = black, O = red. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Structure of the 3D [RE2(ADC)3(DMF)4]·DMF highlighting the exfoliation process through which it transforms into 2D RE(ADC)1.5(DMAc)3. (b) Proposed mechanism of the exfoliation process RE = Nd(III), Gd(III), Pr(III), Ce(III), Sm(III). RE = purple, C = black, O = red. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity.	 

 	Fig. 6  Example of rare-earth-oxo/hydroxo chain nodes observed in MOF-75, MOF-76, and MOF-80. RE = purple, C = black, O = red.	 

 	Fig. 7  Structure of MIL-83(Eu), highlighting the Eu(III)-chain node and 1,3-adamantanedicarboxylic acid linker. Eu = purple, C = black, O = red. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity.	 

 	Fig. 8  Structure of MOF-76(Tb), highlighting the Tb(III)-chain node and 1,3,5-benzenetricarboyxlic acid linker. Tb = purple, C = black, O = red. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity.	 

 	Fig. 9  Structure of RE(BTB)(H2O), highlighting the RE(III)-chain node (RE = Ce(III) or La(III)) and 1,3,5-benzenetrisbenzoic acid linker. RE = purple, C = black, O = red. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity.	 

 	Fig. 10  Structure of MOF-9, highlighting the dinuclear Tb(III)-cluster node and azobenzene-4,4′-dicarboxylic acid linkers linker. Tb = purple, C = black, O = red, N = light blue. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity.	 

 	Fig. 11  Structure of MOF-LIC-1, highlighting the dinuclear RE(III)-cluster node (RE = Gd(III), Eu(III), Tb(III), Pr(III), and Dy(III)) and 2-aminoterephthalic acid linker. RE = purple, C = black, O = red, N = light blue. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity.	 

 	Fig. 12  Structure of RE2(DBTDC-O2)3(DMF)4, highlighting the dinuclear RE(III)-cluster node (RE = Nd(III), Eu(III), and Gd(III)) and S,S-dioxodibenzothiophen-3,7-dicarboxylic acid linker. RE = purple, C = black, O = red, S = yellow. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity.	 

 	Fig. 13  Structure of SION-105, highlighting the dinuclear Eu(III)-cluster node and tris(p-carboxylic acid)tridurylborane linker. Eu = purple, C = black, O = red, B = green. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity.	 

 	Fig. 14  Structure of RE3(ATPT)2(HATPT)4, highlighting the trinuclear RE(III)-cluster node (RE = Pr(III), and Nd(III)) and 2-aminoterephtalic acid linker. RE = purple, C = black, O = red, N = light blue. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity.	 

 	Fig. 15  Structure of RE2.5(BTB)3(OAc)0.5(H2O)3, highlighting the trinuclear RE(III)-cluster node (RE = Eu(III), Dy(III), and Yb(III)) and 1,3,5-benzenetribenzoic acid linker. RE = purple, C = black, O = red. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity.	 

 	Fig. 16  Structure of NU-1500-Sc, highlighting the trinuclear Sc(III)-cluster node and peripherally extended triptycene hexacarboxylic acid linker. Sc = purple, C = black, O = red. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity.	 

 	Fig. 17  Structure of Dy4(μ3-OH)4(asp)3(H2O)8, highlighting the tetranuclear Dy(III)-cluster node and L-aspartic acid linker. Dy = purple, C = black, O = red, N = light blue. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity.	 

 	Fig. 18  Structure of MOF-1114(RE) and MOF-1115(RE), highlighting the tetranuclear RE(III)-cluster node (RE = Y(III), Sm(III), Eu(III), Gd(III), Tb(III), Dy(III), Ho(III), Er(III), Tm(III), and Yb(III)), and 2-aminoterephthalic acid or 4,4′-(9,10-anthracenediyl)bis(2-aminobenzoic acid) linker, respectively. RE = purple, C = black, O = red, N = light blue. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity.	 

 	Fig. 19  Structure of PCN-17, highlighting the tetranuclear RE(III)-cluster node (RE = Y(III), Dy(III), Er(III) and Yb(III)), and 4′,4′,4′′-s-triazine-2,4,6-triyl-tribenzoate linker. RE = purple, C = black, O = red, N = light blue. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity.	 

 	Fig. 20  Structure of RE-csq-1, highlighting the tetranuclear RE(III)-cluster node (RE = Y(III), Tb(III), Dy(III), Ho(III), Er(III), and Yb(III)) and 1,2,4,5-tetrakis(4-carboxyphenyl)-3,6-dimethyl-benzene linker. RE = purple, C = black, O = red. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity.	 

 	Fig. 21  Structure of (a) RE-hpzc highlighting the hexanuclear Er(III)-cluster node and 3-hydroxy-pyrazine-2-carboxylic acid linker; (b) RE-pydc highlighting the hexanuclear Pr(III)-cluster node and 2,5-pyridinedicarboxylic acid linker. Er and Pr = purple, C = black, O = red, N = light blue, Cu = teal. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity.	 

 	Fig. 22  Structure of RPF9, highlighting the hexanuclear RE(III)-cluster node (RE = La(III), Pr(III), and Nd(III)) and p-sulfonatocalix[4]arene linker. RE = purple, C = black, O = red, S = yellow. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity.	 

 	Fig. 23  Structure of RE-fcu-MOF, highlighting the hexanuclear RE(III)-cluster node (RE = Y(III), and Tb(III)) and 3,3′-difluorobiphenyl-4,4′-dicarboxylic acid linker. RE = purple, C = black, O = red, F = lime green. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity.	 

 	Fig. 24  Structure of sph-MOF-2, highlighting the hexanuclear Tb(III)-cluster node and benzotristhiophene carboxylate and 4,4′,4′′-(benzene-1,3,5-triyltris(benzene-4,1-diyl))tribenzoate linkers. Tb = purple, C = black, O = red, S = yellow. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity.	 

 	Fig. 25  Structure of PCN-900(Eu)-TCPP-BPDC, highlighting the hexanuclear Eu(III)-cluster node and tetrakis(4-carboxyphenyl)porphyrin and biphenyl-4,4′-dicarboxylic acid linker. Eu = purple, C = black, O = red, N = light blue. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity.	 

 	Fig. 26  Structure of RE7(μ3-OH)8L9(H2O)6, highlighting the heptanuclear RE(III)-cluster node (RE = Y(III), La(III), Gd(III), Dy(III), Er(III), and Yb(III)) and 4-pyridin-4-ylbenzoic acid linker. RE = purple, C = black, O = red, N = light blue. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity.	 

 	Fig. 27  Structure of pek-MOF-1, highlighting the hexanuclear and nonanuclear RE(III)-cluster node (RE = Y(III), and Tb(III)) and biphenyl-3,4,5-tricarboxylic acid linker. RE = purple, C = black, O = red. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity.	 

 	Fig. 28  Structure of PCN-905-SO2, highlighting the nonanuclear RE(III)-cluster node (RE = Y(III), Eu(III), Tb(III), Dy(III), or Yb(III)) and 5′,5′′′′-sulfonylbis(2′-amino-[1,1′:3′,1′′-terphenyl]-4,4′′-dicarboxylic acid) linker. Eu = purple, C = black, O = red, S = yellow. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity.	 

 	Fig. 29  Structure of Eu2L3(H2O)4, highlighting the Eu(III)-chain node and 2’,5’-bis(methoxymethyl)-[1,1′:4′,1′′-terphenyl]-4,4′′-dicarboxylic acid linker. Eu = purple, C = black, O = red. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity.	 

 	Fig. 30  Structure of the dual-emitting RE-DMBDC, highlighting the Eu/Tb(III)-chain node and 2,5-dimethoxy-1,4-benzenedicarboxylic acid linker. Eu/Tb = purple, C = black, O = red. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity.	 

 	Fig. 31  Structure of ZJU-1, highlighting the dinuclear La(III)-cluster nodes and pyridine-2,6-dicarboxylic acid linkers. La = purple, C = black, O = red, N = light blue. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity.	 

 	Fig. 32  Structure of Gd(BDC)1.5(H2O)2, highlighting the Gd(III)-chain node and 1,4-benzenedicarboxylic acid linker. Gd = purple, C = black, O = red. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity.	 

 	Fig. 33  Structure of Yb-PVDC-3, highlighting the Yb(III)-chain node and phenylenevinylene dicarboxylic acid linker. Yb = purple, C = black, O = red. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity.	 

 	Fig. 34  Structure of Gd-pDBI, highlighting the Gd(III)-chain node and 1,4-bis(5-carboxy-1H-benzimidazole-2-yl)benzene linker. Gd = purple, C = black, O = red, N = light blue. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity.	 

 	Fig. 35  Structure of Yb-PVDC-1, highlighting the Yb(III)-chain nodes and 4,4′-[(2,5-dimethoxy-1,4-phenylene)di-2,1-ethenediyl]bis-benzoic acid (H2-PVDC) linker. Yb = purple, C = black, O = red. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity.	 

 	Fig. 36  Oxidative carboxylation of styrene using CO2 catalyzed by MOF-590. Nd = purple, C = black, O = red, N = light blue. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity.	 

 	Fig. 37  Cycloaddition of CO2 to propylene oxide catalyzed by RE-BDC. Y, Er, Tb = purple, C = black, O = red. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity.	 

 	Fig. 38  Henry (nitroaldol) reaction catalyzed by RE-BDC-NHAc. La, Ce, Sm = purple, C = black, O = red, N = light blue. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity.	 

 	Fig. 39  (a) Diels–Alder and (b) allylation reactions catalyzed by Nd-B-MOF. Nd = purple, C = black, O = red, N = light blue, B = green. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity.	 



Y(BTC)	—	Not reported	—	77	1	H2	1.57	7.86	
407

10	2.10	10.51
87	10	1.90	9.51
[Nd(TPO)]	—	793α	0.344	77	1	H2	0.89	4.46	
229

[Sm(TPO)]	994α	0.425	1.02	5.98
[Eu(TPO)]	1079α	0.456	1.52	7.59
[Gd(TPO)]	1163α	0.487	1.82	9.29
[La(BTB)]	—	393α closed form, 1014α open form	0.48	278	11	CO2	—	1.35	
192

13	—	3
20	—	3.63
[Sm(HL)(DMA)2]	–	Not reported	0.19	273	1	CO2	—	0.35	
408

H2	—	0.01
[(Tb9)(Tb6)(L)12]	Tb-pek-MOF-1	1330β	0.47	298	35	CH4	—	5.00	
53

50	—	5.92
25	CO2	—	9.32
[(Y9)(Y6)(L)12]	Y-pek-MOF-1	1608β	0.58	298	35	CH4	—	6.56
50	—	7.66
25	CO2	—	12.61
[Y9(TCPP)3]	Y-shp-MOF-1	2200β	0.79	298	1	CO2	—	1.51	
272

80	CH4	—	11.20
[Y9(Zn-TCPP)3]	Y-shp-MOF-1 (Zn)	2360β	0.85	298	1	CO2	—	1.75
80	CH4	—	13.30

 	Fig. 40  Structure of RE(TPO), highlighting the dinuclear RE(III)-cluster node (RE = Nd(III), Sm(III), Eu(III), Gd(III)) and tris-(4-carboxylphenyl)phosphineoxide linker. RE = purple, C = black, O = red, P = orange. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity.	 

 	Fig. 41  Structure of [RE(HL)(DMA)2], highlighting the RE(III) ion node (RE = La(III), Ce(III), Pr(III), Nd(III), Sm(III), Eu(III), Gd(III), Tb(III), Dy(III), and Er(III)) and 5,5′-(2,3,5,6-tetramethyl-1,4-phenylene)-bis(methylene)-bis(azanediyl) diisophthalic acid linker. RE = purple, C = black, O = red, N = light blue. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity.	 

 	Fig. 42  Structure of Yb-BPT highlighting the Yb(III)-chain node and biphenyl-3,4′,5-tricarboxylic acid linker. Yb = purple, C = black, O = red. Hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity.	 
Footnote
† Authors contributed equally.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
