Iron-catalyzed dehydrogenation reactions and their applications in sustainable energy and catalysis   - Catalysis Science & Technology (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7CY00879A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7CY00879A
(Minireview)
Catal. Sci. Technol., 2017, 7, 3177-3195Iron-catalyzed dehydrogenation reactions and their applications in sustainable energy and catalysis†

        
          
            Ekambaram 
            Balaraman
          
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Avanashiappan 
            Nandakumar
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Garima 
            Jaiswal
          
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Manoj K. 
            Sahoo
          
          
        
      ab
aCatalysis Division, CSIR-National Chemical Laboratory (CSIR-NCL), Dr. Homi Bhabha Road, Pune 411008, India. E-mail: eb.raman@ncl.res.in
bAcademy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), New Delhi 110 025, India
Received 
      3rd May 2017
    , Accepted 14th June 2017First published on 14th June 2017AbstractInspired by nature, chemists have designed new catalysts in the pursuit of selective bond activation and chemical transformations. Emergent biological systems often use earth-abundant first-row transition elements as catalytically active sites to facilitate specific and highly selective chemical processes. The design of a new catalytic system based on abundant and inexpensive catalysts, particularly the iron-based catalysts, for fundamentally significant synthetic transformations under environmentally benign conditions is an important paradigm in chemical synthesis. In recent times, iron-based catalytic systems have shown unprecedented reactivity in the acceptorless dehydrogenation reactions of feedstock chemicals, with the liberation of molecular hydrogen as the by-product, and have enabled greener chemical synthetic methods and alternative energy storage systems. Indeed, it has been demonstrated that the proper design of iron catalysts by judiciously choosing ligands, can aid in the development of new sustainable energy storage systems and catalysis. This tutorial review focuses on the recent development of iron-based dehydrogenation reactions of fundamentally important feedstock, as a route to sustainable chemical synthesis and energy storage applications. The emerging area of the iron-based dehydrogenation strategy provides an opportunity to make industrially applicable, cost-effective and environmentally benign catalytic systems.Ekambaram BalaramanDr. Ekambaram Balaraman received his M.Sc in Chemistry from University of Madras, India (2002). He was awarded a Ph.D in Chemistry for his research works at Central University of Hyderabad, India (2008). He was a FGC-Post Doctoral Fellow at Weizmann Institute of Science (2008–2012). Currently he is working as a Senior Scientist at CSIR-National Chemical Laboratory in the Catalysis Division. His research interests are focused on metal mediated organic transformations, and photoredox catalysis.Avanashiappan NandakumarDr. Avanashiappan Nandakumar graduated from Applied Chemistry at Anna University in 2009 and subsequently joined the CSIR-Central Leather Research Institute as a Ph.D student with Dr. P. T. Perumal. During his Ph.D studies, he focused on palladium-catalysed synthetic transformations of alkynes into heterocyclic compounds. Currently, He is working as a JSPS-Postdoctoral Fellow at Nano Medical Engineering Laboratory, RIKEN, Japan. He will be joining Dr. E. Balaraman's research group, focusing on transition-metal-catalysed annulation reactions.Garima JaiswalMs. Garima Jaiswal received her Bachelor's degree from Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi and Master's degree in Chemistry (2013) from Indian Institute of Technology-Delhi, India. Currently, she is working as a Senior Research Fellow under the guidance of Dr. E. Balaraman at CSIR-National Chemical Laboratory. Her research focuses on the development of new catalysts for sustainable organic transformations.Manoj K. SahooMr. Manoj K. Sahoo received his Bachelor degree in Chemistry from Narasingha Choudhury (Autonomous) College, Jajpur, affiliated with Utkal University. He received his Master's degree in Chemistry (2011) from Utkal University, Odisha. Currently he is working as a Senior Research Fellow under the guidance of Dr. E. Balaraman at CSIR-National Chemical Laboratory, India. His research focuses on photoredox catalysis and green chemistry.
1. Introduction
1.1 Scope and objective of review
Catalysis based on fundamentally important feedstock that enables the sustainable approach is an important tool in the advancement of chemical production and energy storage applications. In this regard, the global demand for energy does lead to a constant search for renewable feedstock, which can reduce the major dependency on the depleting fossil fuel. The consumption of limited, non-renewable fossil fuel leads to the emission of greenhouse gases, which cause harmful environmental damage that is related to global warming. Thus, the increasing global demand for energy and the concern for the environment have presented a challenge requiring the establishment of alternative energy sources for manifold practical applications such as transportation, electricity and as a reagent for chemical synthesis. There are, however, some obstacles to the deployment of renewable resources such as biomass, the wind, solar, and hydroelectricity as almost unlimited energy sources. These renewable resources are only available for a specific period and cannot be obtained on demand; thus, an efficient route for energy storage has to be established for a steady supply of energy on demand. Among many storage mediums, the hydrogen economy is an efficient and appealing alternative for the modern society. Hydrogen holds great potential as a secondary energy carrier, and the consumption of H2 leads to water as the only benign by-product. However, there are many unresolved problems associated with the hydrogen economy for practical applications. The production of hydrogen is currently effected mainly by fossil fuels, and the storage and transport of low volumetric energy density of hydrogen are major challenging tasks for providing safe and clean fuel technology.1
A few possibilities have been explored based on the physical storage of hydrogen in diatomic molecular form, such as high-pressure tanks, various carbon materials, zeolites, clathrate hydrates, and metal–organic frameworks. Most of these techniques are less energy efficient, due to the large energy gap in the storage and release process. In chemical hydrogen storage, hydrogen is stored by chemical binding instead of as molecular hydrogen: usually, a suitable chemical compound having a high hydrogen content is used, which can easily release hydrogen at ambient temperature via a catalytic or non-catalytic process. Examples of these molecules include alcohols, metal borohydrides, amine–borane adducts, formic acid, hydrous hydrazine, metal hydrides, etc. The suitability of these molecules in practical applications mainly depends on the choice of dehydrogenation strategy. Most interestingly, the recent developments in the molecular catalytic dehydrogenation strategy provide new opportunities for the utilization of organic compounds as safe, storable, and transportable media. In addition, the fundamental process of catalytic dehydrogenation chemistry also affects the production of hydrogen from renewable biomass derivatives, making the hydrogen economy an environmentally benign and sustainable energy source. Furthermore, catalytic dehydrogenation of renewable chemical feedstock with the liberation of molecular hydrogen opens a new avenue in contemporary organic synthesis to enable direct access to abundant organic substrates and it manifests practical applications for chemical production and energy storage.2,3
Over the past decade, organometallic catalysis has led to the significant development of molecularly-defined complexes, which have instigated the emergence of a revolutionary trend in organic synthesis, as well as the industrial production of value-added chemicals. Undeniably, catalytic dehydrogenation has been deployed mostly by using precious noble metal catalysts such as Pd, Rh, Ru, and Ir to afford the most eco-benign, and atom-economic strategy.4,5 However, the limited availability of the precious metal salts and their high prices urge chemists and chemical industries to search for new sustainable systems to facilitate practical applications. In recent times, catalysis based on the relatively abundant and economical first-row transition metals (Fe, Co, Ni and Cu) has become a more fascinating and appealing alternative to precious-metal based catalytic systems. However, the exploration of an efficient catalytic system based on first-row transition metals is extremely rare. This is mainly attributed to the very narrow energy gap between the d-orbitals of first-row transition metals and their propensity to participate in one electron chemistry, as opposed to the traditional two electron transformation, which is ubiquitous in the precious second- and third-row transition metals. Further, it is a challenge to work with paramagnetic materials that are kinetically labile in nature, with underdeveloped mechanistic studies. In recent years, the above challenges have been overcome by designing metal catalysts with appropriate ligands to enable successful progress in the development of new and sustainable systems for energy storage and catalysis.
Hydrogen processing in biological systems is an essential energy metabolism of metalloenzymes, which is the basis for many anaerobic bacteria, protozoa, fungi and algae. Although there are many enzymes that catalyse the reactions having dihydrogen as the substrate or generated product, three major types of metalloenzymes that involve the reversible inter-conversion of dihydrogen into proton/hydride are named hydrogenases (Hyd).6 These hydrogenases can be classified into [NiFe]-, [FeFe]- and [Fe]-hydrogenases on the basis of the metal composition of their respective active sites (Fig. 1). The [NiFe]- and [FeFe]-hydrogenases are involved in the interconversion of hydrogen into a proton and electron, which either provide reducing power from hydrogen oxidation, or act as an electron sink (eqn (1)). [NiFe]-hydrogenases are the most abundant and heterodimeric proteins. They consist of the redox active Ni(S-Cys)4 center, where two S-Cys ligands bridge to a redox inactive Fe(CN)2(CO) fragment. [FeFe]-hydrogenases contain a completely different protein structure and feature an active site comprising a [4Fe-4S] metalocubane linked to an apical S-Cys ligand in a [2Fe]-moiety. In contrast to the above hydrogenases, [Fe]-hydrogenases are also known as H2-forming methylenetetrahydromethanopterin (methenyl-H4MPT+) dehydrogenases, which involve the heterolytic cleavage of H2 to deliver the hydride (H−) to the organic substrate methenyltetrahydromethanopterin, along with the proton (H+) (eqn (2)). Besides these first row-transition metals based H2-ases, two component metalloenzymes consist of Mg(ATP) complexed Fe-protein associated with a MoFe-protein as the active site; e.g., nitrogenase catalyses the reduction of proton and dinitrogen to afford ammonia (eqn (3); Fig. 1).7 Therefore, understanding the comprehensive mechanistic insight of the intra-protein proton or hydrogen transfer process is the key to designing the molecular catalysts. H2 ⇌ 2H+ + 2e−(1) H2 + methenyl-H4MPT+ ⇌ H+ + methenyl-H4MPT(2) (3)
 Fig. 1  Active sites of hydrogenase and nitrogenase enzymes. 
In the recent past, there has been increasing interest in the use of cheaper and non-noble iron complexes in the dehydrogenation strategy. Iron catalysts for chemical synthesis have experienced a renaissance due to the abundance of iron in various biological systems; nevertheless, its reactivity and selectivity are presently comparable to the state-of-the-art precious metal catalysts. Iron-catalyzed synthetic transformations have been proved to be efficient, and have become one of the hot topics in modern science. A few interesting review articles have appeared on iron catalysis,8–15 however, there is no literature covering the combined information concerning iron-catalyzed dehydrogenation reactions and their applications in sustainable energy and catalysis, an intriguing area that has only recently emerged. In this respect, there is a strong need for a review article focused on the recent accomplishments of catalytic dehydrogenation and related reactions by iron-catalysts with mechanistic insights and their applications in sustainable energy and catalysis. In this review article, the recent accomplishments of the iron-catalyzed dehydrogenation strategy with mechanistic insights have been solely covered, with respect to sustainable energy and catalysis. This review article can be broadly divided into two major sections: a) sustainable energy carriers and b) sustainable catalytic processes to understand the role and significance of catalytic transformations. Representative examples of each section with mechanistic insights are given.
2. Dehydrogenation: applications in energy storage
2.1 Dehydrogenation of formic acid
Formic acid (FA), containing 4.4% of hydrogen with a volumetric capacity of 53.4 g L−1 at standard temperature and pressure, is a low-toxicity renewable liquid and has recently attracted much attention as a reversible hydrogen storage material. In earlier studies, formic acid and its conjugate base, the formate ion, have been extensively used in the transition-metal catalyzed transfer hydrogenation reactions. Catalytic dehydrogenation of formic acid offers zero-carbon footprint hydrogen storage (Fig. 2).3,16–18 Indeed, in the catalytic dehydrogenation of formic acid to gaseous H2 and CO2, the co-product CO2 can be hydrogenated back to formic acid and thus, completes the hydrogen storage and delivery cycle, or it can be utilized directly as an abundant C1-feedstock by mineral carbonation. Notably, the dehydration of formic acid into water and CO is considered as an undesired side reaction and deactivates the Pt-catalyst of the fuel cell. In this regard, the development of an efficient and sustainable catalytic system for the selective dehydrogenation of FA suppressing the undesired decarbonylation has received increasing attention.
 Fig. 2  HCO2H/CO2 involving hydrogen storage cycle. 
In the biochemical process, a complex formate hydrogenlyase (FHL) consisting of two metalloenzymes, namely formate dehydrogenase (FDH) and hydrogenase (Hyd), catalyzes the processing of the formate ion into molecular hydrogen and CO2 as the key step in bio-hydrogen production (Scheme 1).19 Formate dehydrogenase contains an active centre of a Mo atom coordinated to two ene-dithiolate ligands. The electronic and structural features of the above biocatalysts have inspired the design of artificial catalytic systems. Extensive research and development is still required to make this HCOOH/CO2 catalytic cycle viable for hydrogen storage applications. Several obstacles have been explored in the search for suitable catalysts, both under homogeneous and heterogeneous conditions, for the selective dehydrogenation of formic acid. However, the success of the selective dehydrogenation of formic acid using an earth-abundant, inexpensive metal catalyst remains elusive and very challenging.
 Scheme 1  FHL-complex of E. coli. 

2.1.1 Photochemical condition. 
Over the past decade, there have been reports based on the precious metal catalyzed selective dehydrogenation of formic acid to CO-free molecular hydrogen and reversible hydrogenation of carbon dioxide to formate salt.3 Notably, photo-triggered hydrogen evolution, by switching on and off the light source, was achieved using the [RuCl2(benzene)]2/dppe catalyst. The magnitude of hydrogen gas evolution and overall catalytic activity were enhanced in the presence of light activated systems.20 However, there is no industrial process that applies formic acid as an efficient, storable and transportable hydrogen carrier. The replacement of noble-metal with iron is of particular interest, due to its abundance and biological significance (Table 1). Notably, metalloenzymes that consist of iron or iron–nickel as the active site catalyse the formation and activation of H2 with the turnover frequencies of 103 to 104 at 30 °C.2 Based on this biological inspiration, the group of Ludwig and Beller reported the first in situ generated iron-catalytic system for the dehydrogenation of formic acid under the irradiation of visible light and ambient temperature in the presence of triethylamine.21In situ generated catalytic systems employing Fe3(CO)12, 2,2′;6′,2′′-terpyridine (tpy), and triphenylphosphine have been found to be efficient, with TOF of 200 h−1 at 60 °C (eqn (4)). The nature of the N-ligand contributes significant catalytic activity, in terms of turnover number and turnover frequency, by increasing the stability of the in situ generated iron complex, in addition to the fact that the hydrogen evolution can be easily controlled by switching the light source on and off. Mechanistic insights have proposed the [HFe(CO)3(PPh3)]− complex as the active catalyst involved in the dehydrogenation of formic acid. The same group reported significant progress in the dehydrogenation of FA using the in situ generated iron complex chelated with the PBn3 ligand.22 The catalytic system formed in the mixture HCO2H/NEt3 (5:1), [Fe3(CO)12], PBn3, and 2,2′: 6′2′′-terpyridine (tpy) showed the higher productivity of hydrogen (TON = 1266), which is one order of magnitude higher than that of the previous report. A mechanistic investigation by DFT and NMR studies of the pre-synthesised iron-complex [Fe(CO)3(PBn3)2], revealed that the formation of ortho-metalated iron species from Fe(PBn3) can account for the higher activity, and the nitrogen ligand can play a significant role in the catalytic stability (eqn (5)). (4) (5)
Table 1 Dehydrogenation of formic acid




S.No
Catalyst
Additive
Solvent

T (°C)
TON
TOF
Ref.





a Photoirradiation conditions.





1.
Fe3(CO)12/PPh3/tpy
—
NEt3
40a
200
—

21



2.
Fe3(CO)12/PBn3/tpy
—
NEt3
40a
1266
—

22



3.
[Fe(BF4)2]6H2O/PP3
—
PC
80
92417
9425

23



4.
[Fe(BF4)2]6H2O/PP3
—
PC
40
1942
—

24



5.
[Fe(BF4)2]6H2O/PP3
—
PC
60
8117
—

24



6.
[Fe(BF4)2]6H2O/rac-P4
—
PC
40
1000
—

25



7.
[(PNpyP)Fe(H)2(CO)]
NEt3
Dioxane
40
100000
836

30



8.
[(iPrPNHP)Fe(CO)H(COO)]
LiBF4
Dioxane
80
983642
196728

31







2.1.2 Thermal condition. 
Laurenczy, Ludwig, Beller, and co-workers reported an operationally simple protocol for the dehydrogenation of FA in the absence of additional base, visible light and highly sophisticated reaction setup, providing unexpectedly high catalytic activity at a near ambient temperature. A tetradentate ligand chelated iron complex [complexation of Fe(BF4)2·6H2O with tris[(2-diphenylphosphino)ethyl]phosphane (PP3, 1)] was reported for further exploration of a mild decomposition of FA (eqn (6)).23 This Fe-based catalytic system operates at a near-ambient temperature (40 °C), under base- and additive-free conditions, and propylene carbonate (PC) was used as a “green” solvent; interestingly, the pre-synthesized complex [FeH(PP3)]+ also showed similar catalytic activity, which further confirmed the tetradentate ligand coordinated iron-hydride complex as the active species in the catalytic cycle. Except for complex [FeCl(PPh3)]BF4, other well-defined complexes such as [FeH(PP3)]BF4, [FeH(η2-H2)(PP3)]BF4 and [FeH(η2H2)(PP3)]BPh4 showed excellent activity in FA decomposition. The addition of chloride ion to the iron-precursor dropped the activity to nearly zero. Two different catalytic cycles were proposed based on NMR and DFT studies, which involve [FeH(PP3)]+ as a common active species (Scheme 2). Furthermore, the in situ generated iron-tetradentate complex employing Fe(BF4)2·6H2O and PP3 in propylene carbonate, with no further additive and base, afforded high catalytic activity regarding TON (92417) and TOF (9425 h−1) at 80 °C, which is comparable to the best-known noble-metal catalysts. Kinetic and theoretical measurements confirmed that the rate-determining step in the dehydrogenation of formic acid catalyzed by [FeH(PP3)]+ is the β-hydride elimination process for hydride transfer from formate to Fe in the catalytic cycle. (6)
 Scheme 2  Proposed mechanism for the selective dehydrogenation of formic acid. 
Recently, detailed experimental and mechanistic studies were carried out on the dehydrogenation of FA using in situ generated iron complex chelated PP3 by varying the FeII/FeIII precursors.24 The activity of the catalytic system (3) depended highly on a solvent, the presence of halide ions, water content, and ligand to metal ratio (Scheme 3). The optimal condition was found to be the 1:2 ratio of Fe(BF4)2·6H2O/PP3 in propylene carbonate in the presence of trace amounts of water at ambient temperature. The presence of halide ions, except fluoride, as additives inhibited the catalytic activity in the dehydrogenation reaction. For example, the catalytically active species were deactivated in the presence of chloride ions, due to the formation of the inactive Fe–Cl complex, which was confirmed by spectroscopic measurements (Scheme 3). The formation of iron-formate species was identified using in situ transmission FTIR measurements by observing the 1543 cm−1 band, which could be correlated with the evolution of gas. Bertini et al. extended the success of tetradentate ligands using racemic isomers of linear tetraphosphine, 1,1,4,7,10,10-hexaphenyl-1,4,7,10-tetraphosphadecane (rac-P4, 4), chelated iron complex systems.25 The In situ generated iron-complex was found to be an effective catalyst, and complete conversion of formic acid in 6 h with TON of 1000 at 40 °C under additive- and base free conditions was observed (eqn (7)). (7)
 Scheme 3  Catalytically active species formation and deactivation pathway. 
Stathi et al. carried out an investigation on the catalytic activity of Fe(II)/PP3 in the presence of SiO2 nanoparticles as co-catalytic systems involving hydrogen evolution by the metallic decomposition of FA (eqn (8)).26 SiO2 nanoparticle size and specific surface area play a significant role in the enhancement of catalytic activity, in which larger nanoparticles possess better co-catalytic effects. The homogeneous Fe(II)/PP3 system showed the TOF of 1205 h−1 at 80 °C, while the presence of 10 mg of SiO2 accelerated the hydrogen evolution regarding TOF of 13882 h−1, associated with lowering the activation energy of the rate limiting step by 36 kJ mol−1 (ΔEa). The surficial Si–O–Si bridge is responsible for the co-catalytic activity, while adsorbed water retards the activity. The same author explored the heterogeneous catalytic systems consisting of covalently immobilized FeII-phosphine-complexes on SiO2 particles (FeII/RPPh2@SiO2 and FeII/polyRPhphos@SiO2) for the generation of hydrogen from FA (eqn (9)).27 Both the heterogeneous catalytic systems were remarkably stable and reusable and prone to producing H2 from FA at near ambient temperature, with high selectivity and activity. Importantly, the catalytic system FeII/RPPh2@SiO2 generates up to 14 L of H2 within 6 h while its homogeneous catalytic system is totally inactive. However, the present methodology would provide a cost-effective and environmentally benign protocol for the industrial production of hydrogen from FA, replacing precious and less-abundant transition metals. (8) (9)
The combination of Fe(II) and tetradentate PP3 catalytic systems makes a promising strategy for FA dehydrogenation and provides unprecedented selectivity over the known noble catalytic systems. In this regard, Laurenczy and co-workers successfully developed the aqueous phase FA dehydrogenation strategy with the use of water soluble PP3 analogues of m-trisulfonated-tris[2-(diphe nylphosphino)ethyl]phosphine sodium salt (PP3TS) as polydentate ligands (Fig. 3).28 The combination of the Fe(II)/PP3TS system provided an aqueous phase catalytic system for the production of hydrogen, eliminating organic solvent, base, and additives. Significantly, other first-row transition-metals such as Co, Mn, and Zn were also combined with PP3TS and none of them were successful in the dehydrogenation of FA. The water soluble catalytic system (Fe(II)/PP3TS) tolerates either oxygen, H2 or CO2 and remains active after many cycles, providing a good candidate for the high-pressure H2 generation.
 Fig. 3  Structure of water soluble PP3 analogues of m-trisulfonated-tris[2-(diphenylphosphino)ethyl]phosphine sodium salt (PP3TS). 
Milstein and co-workers reported significant progress in the hydrogenation of carbon dioxide into formate salt, using a well-defined pyridine based PNP pincer ligand chelated iron complex, 5, under mild hydrogen pressure, exhibiting noble metal activity.29 Mechanistically, the formation of the formate iron complex as a key intermediate was confirmed. In the presence of strong base and water, the complex released the formate salt and was regenerated into complex 5. Based on this insight, the formal reverse reaction of formic acid dehydrogenation was demonstrated by Milstein et al. (Scheme 4).30 The optimal catalytic activity was achieved in the presence of 50 mol% triethylamine. The initial turnover frequency of 836 h−1 was attained at 40 °C in the first hour, using 0.005 mol% of iron complex, which is much higher than reported above for the in situ generated catalytic system. Gratifyingly, the above catalytic system effectively catalyzed the dehydrogenation of formic acid into H2/CO2 with an excellent turnover number (up to 100000) in the presence of trialkyl amines at 40 °C. Experimental and DFT studies explained that the plausible mechanism involved novel non-classical intramolecular β-hydride elimination. The dissociation of the formate ion and subsequent re-coordination through the hydrogen atom can proceed at the iron centre in an intramolecular fashion. The rate of dehydrogenation of formic acid is favoured by the proton-mediated initial formation of coordinatively unsaturated complex 7 and triethylamine mediated stabilization of formate complex 8, whereas the hydrogenation of carbon dioxide was favoured in the presence of strong base.
 Scheme 4  Dehydrogenation of formic acid through the non-classical intramolecular β-hydride elimination. 
Noteworthy progress on iron-catalyzed dehydrogenation of FA was achieved using aliphatic PNP pincer supported iron catalyst 9 in the presence of Lewis acid (LA) as co-catalyst (eqn (10)).31 The rate of decarboxylation of the iron-formate complex is significantly increased in the presence of triethylamine, presumably through the action of HNEt3+ formed under the catalytic conditions. Mechanistically, the β-hydride elimination proceeded via intramolecular rearrangement to an H-bound formate, followed by CO2 elimination and was stabilized by Brønsted acid HNEt3+. Similarly, the addition of Lewis acid (LA, 10 mol%) as a co-catalyst promoted FA dehydrogenation. Most interestingly, very high TON (up to 983642) and TOF (196728 h−1) were achieved using alkali and alkaline-earth metal salts as co-catalysts. The enhanced activity of the catalytic process was due to the chemical affinity of carboxylate ion with alkali and alkaline-earth metals leading to heightening of the stability of the transition state of the H-bound formate complex (Scheme 5).
 Scheme 5  The mechanism for LA assisted dehydrogenation of formic acid. 
Recently, the reverse catalytic cycle for the hydrogenation of carbon dioxide was achieved using iron/LA as a catalytic system, with carbon dioxide as a cheap and abundant feedstock for hydrogen storage cycles (eqn (11)).32 The mechanistic consideration reveals that the release of formate from the iron complex was considered as both the rate determining step and catalytic resting state. The catalytic resting state was overcome by using the tertiary PNP ligand, which disrupts intramolecular hydrogen bonding between the PNP ligand N–H bond and the carbonyl oxygen of the formate ligand in the catalytic cycle. Iron-complexes containing the PNP-pincer ligand based on the 2,6-diaminopyridine scaffold were explored for the hydrogenation of CO2 and NaHCO3 to afford the formate under mild conditions.33 In this connection, Gonsalvi and co-workers explored the above hydrogenation catalytic systems in FA dehydrogenation under mild reaction conditions, providing quantitative yield and high TON (eqn (12)).34 Mechanistically, the labile bromide abstraction triggers the formation of the coordinatively unsaturated complex for formic acid activation, providing facile CO2 and H2 elimination. (10) (11) (12)

2.2 Dehydrogenation of methanol
Methanol represents a promising target for a chemical energy carrier as it has a high gravimetric hydrogen content of 12.6%. The combined advantages of methanol transportation under practical conditions and the efficiency of the proton exchange membrane fuel cell, reformed methanol fuel cell (RMFC) have been developed, where methanol reforming takes place according to eqn (13). Methanol steam reforming is usually promoted by heterogeneous catalysts and requires very high temperature, which limits the overall efficiency of the fuel cell (ca. 40%). In addition, the catalyst produces a significant amount of CO and poisons the Pt-electrode of the fuel cell. In recent times, Ru- and Ir-based homogeneous catalytic systems for complete dehydrogenation of methanol in an aqueous solution have been reported, which operate at a significantly lower temperature (80–100 °C) and produce less CO.2 However, the limited availability and high cost of noble metal catalytic systems strongly demand a new catalytic system based on abundant and inexpensive non-noble metal catalysts. (13)
Beller and co-workers reported the original example of the methanol/hydrogen economy system using molecularly defined iron-complexes. Aliphatic PNP pincer-type ligand HN(CH2CH2PiPr2)2 based molecularly defined iron complexes 11 and 12 were applied to accomplish the catalytic dehydrogenation of aqueous methanol in the presence of a base and afforded the TOF of 414 h−1 and 702 h−1, respectively, in the first hour (eqn (14)).35 The positive effect of a base on dehydrogenation could be amine deprotonation in the initial formation of catalytically active species and an intermediate formed in the catalytic cycles. A notable TON (up to 10000) was achieved with a minimum loading of the catalyst (1 μmol). (14)
Based on the success of the LA/iron-catalyzed dehydrogenation of formic acid, the group of Bernskoetter, Hazari, and Holthausen reported a base-free dehydrogenation of methanol catalyzed by the iron pincer complex.36 The activity of catalyst 9 on the dehydrogenation of non-aqueous methanol was remarkably increased in the presence of 10 mol% LiBF4 as a co-catalyst and afforded methyl formate with the extrusion of hydrogen gas (eqn (15)). However, complexes 14 and 15 showed poor activity under the optimized conditions, presumably due to non-productive side reactions with MeOH and water at room temperature. Surprisingly, iron complexes 9 and 13 showed increased activity in the dehydrogenation of aqueous methanol; albeit, it was proposed that they needed to access 14 and 15 in the catalytic cycle (eqn (16)). The success of the LA and iron-complex would provide an alternative strategy for the dehydrogenation process, which is presumably due to the facilitation of the decarboxylation reaction on the iron-formate complex to access the catalytically active species. (15) (16)
2.3 Dehydrogenation of the amine–borane adduct
In recent times, the ammonia–borane adduct (H3N:BH3, AB) has gained much attention, due to its potential for utilization as a chemical hydrogen storage material. It has a hydrogen content of 6.5, 13.1 and 19.6% for the step-wise release of the first, second and third equivalents of H2, respectively, which indeed, exceeds the wt% of gasoline. Thermal dehydrogenation and acid-catalyzed hydrolysis of the AB adduct are shown in eqn (17)–(20). Due to the high temperature and slow reaction rate of hydrogen release, the option to use AB for practical applications remains a challenge. In the past decades, a few advancements on the dehydrogenation of the AB adduct have been achieved at ambient temperature, using precious-metal based catalytic systems. Despite the great extent of hydrogen release, taking advantage of the high gravimetric content of hydrogen in AB system, the materials that emerge from the cheap and abundant metals are preferred for the large-scale hydrogen storage and transportation.37 Aside from hydrogen storage applications, the dehydrogenation of the AB adduct affords valuable inorganic materials such as the B–N bonded oligomer and/or polymer. (17) (18) (19) NH3BH3 + 2H2O → NH4+ + BO2− + 3H2(20)
Yan et al. reported the earth-abundant and inexpensive iron-nanoparticle based catalytic system for the hydrolytic dehydrogenation of ammonia–borane adduct in an aqueous medium at room temperature.38 The reaction was performed using pre-synthesized as well as in situ generated iron nanoparticles, employing ferrous sulphate reduction by sodium borohydride. Advantageously, in situ generated amorphous and zero valent Fe-nanoparticles showed higher activity, which was 20 times more reactive than a pre-synthesized catalyst. The above catalytic system is simple and efficient for the dehydrogenation of AB systems, even in open atmosphere, and can also be recovered and recycled. He et al. developed a FeB-nanoalloy of 2–5 nm for the catalytic dehydrogenation of solid AB adduct to afford about 1 and 1.5 equivalents of H2 at 60 and 100 °C, respectively.39 In contrast to the neat dehydrogenation of AB adduct, which results in the amorphous poly aminoborane (PAB), the FeB-nanoalloy system provided the crystalline solid PAB as a major product via the intramolecular dehydrogenation of the AB adduct, followed by chain growth polymerization mechanism. FeB alloy was synthesized by co-precipitation of 5 mol% FeCl3 with the AB adduct. Spectroscopic insights revealed that the Fe-doped AB adduct started to evolve H2 even at 55 °C, which is significantly lower than that of the neat AB adduct.
Liu and co-workers demonstrated the first-row transition metal based dehydrogenation of BN-methyl cyclopentane 16 as a liquid phase hydrogen storage material.40 Thus, upon treatment of a series of first-row transition metals with BN-methyl cyclopentane at 80 °C in toluene for 30 min with a modest catalytic loading, a trimeric product 17, with the release of 2 equiv. of H2 was observed. In the presence of 5 mol% FeCl2 catalyst, compound 16, under solventless conditions, showed the quantitative release of H2. Importantly, the catalyst was recovered and reused for up to three cycles without loss of its activity. A mercury poisoning study revealed that the active species involved in FeCl2 based dehydrogenation is heterogeneous in nature. Air- and moisture-stable compounds could represent a viable H2 storage option for mobile, portable, and carrier applications, as there is no change of phase observed in this reaction (eqn (21)). (21)
Manners and co-workers reported the versatile photoactive iron based catalytic system [{CpFe(CO)2}2] 18 for the conversion of primary and secondary amine–boranes and ammonia–borane adducts into oligomers and polymers with the liberation of hydrogen at 20 °C (eqn (22) and (23)).41 Secondary amine–borane adduct, Me2NH·BH3, in the presence of 5 mol% 18 in THF at 20 °C showed the quantitative conversion of cyclic diborazane 19, whereas the more sterically encumbered adduct iPr2NH·BH3 under a similar catalytic condition showed the formation of the dehydrogenated product 20. The primary amine adduct MeNH2·BH3 provided the poly aminoborane in 90% yield in 3 h under photo-irradiation conditions. Upon prolonged irradiation, the formation of N-methyl borazine 21 was observed in 60% yield. Under similar catalytic conditions, the AB adduct was converted into a major product of cyclo linear borane trimer 22 (65%) and a minor quantity of borazine 23 (35%) via the formation of H2NBH2. (22) (23)
The mechanistic investigation was carried out with secondary amine–borane adduct Me2NH·BH3 as a model substrate by using various catalytic species 18 and 24 (Scheme 6).42 Mechanistic insights revealed that the formation of heterogeneous nanoparticles from complex 18, via initial heterolytic cleavage of CO, is the active catalyst in the reaction. The dehydrogenative product, Me2NBH was proposed as a key intermediate for the formation of 19 from the secondary amine–borane adduct (Me2NH·BH3). The pre-catalyst 24 followed the homogeneous catalytic pathway to the conversion of Me2NH·BH3 to 19 through a linear diborazane intermediate and the active catalyst was formed by photolytic cleavage of CO and iodide (Scheme 6).
 Scheme 6  Photoactive induced formation of catalytically active species from pre-catalyst 18 and 24. 
Baker, Gordon, and co-workers reported iron-based catalytic systems (25–28) supported by a mixture of amide and phosphine ligands for the dehydrogenation of AB adduct (Scheme 7).43 All the above catalytic systems required heating conditions (60 °C) to initiate the dehydrogenation process, releasing the hydrogen content of 1–1.7 equivalents per AB adduct. The possible active species involved in this reaction is based on a zero valent iron system. Sonnenberg et al. developed a series of PNNP chelated iron based pre-catalytic systems (29–33) for dehydrocoupling of the AB adduct (Scheme 7).44 In the presence of a strong base, the above pre-catalytic system is likely to form zero-valent Fe-nanoparticles, which are stabilized by the PNNP ligands. The versatility of these catalytic systems in the dehydrogenation reaction was studied in protic and aprotic solvent conditions. Interestingly, the maximum amount of (2.9 equivalent) molecular hydrogen was released in isopropanol at 22 °C. Dehydrogenation in THF and diglyme showed the formation of B–N bonded oligomers and polymers with a turnover frequency of 3.66 H2 s−1. Bhattacharya et al. developed a series of POCOP pincer incorporated iron-based complexes (34–36) as stable and efficient catalytic systems for the extrusion of hydrogen from AB adduct (Scheme 7).45 The active catalytic species were formed in situ by the release of the phosphine ligand trans to the hydride at the iron centre. The stable pincer complexes released hydrogen of 2.3–2.5 equivalents per AB adduct at 60 °C in 24 h, perhaps the greatest amount of hydrogen in the known iron-based catalytic systems. Complex 36 showed the best catalytic activity in terms of the reaction rate and the extent of H2 release.
 Scheme 7  Iron based catalytic systems for the dehydrogenation of AB adduct. 
Grützmacher and co-workers reported bimetallic low-valent iron(I) complex (37 and 38) having trop-type ligands for the dehydrogenation of N,N-dimethylaminoborane at room temperature (eqn (24)).46 The optimum conditions revealed that the counter ion sodium containing complex 37 was catalytically more active than the corresponding Li-counter ion complex 38. Notably, the addition of 15-crown-5 or [(nBu)4N]Br decreased the rate of the reaction, which suggested that the solvent separated ion pair was not the catalytically active species. Kinetic isotopic studies showed that the deprotonation of the amino group was the rate limiting step. The catalyst retained its activity after dehydrogenation of 20 equiv. of DMAB, which was shown by the consecutive addition of fresh substrate. Catalytic poisoning experiments proved that the active species involved in the catalytic process was homogeneous in nature. The same group reported a series of active redox diazadiene (dad) diolefin incorporated low-valent iron complexes 39–41 and studied their activity patterns in the dehydrogenation of the methylamine borane adduct at 23 °C (eqn (25)).47 Complexes 40 and 41 showed improved activity in the formation of the corresponding polymerization product. (24) (25) (26)
Schneider and co-workers reported a well-defined aliphatic pincer chelated iron complex 14 as a highly active catalytic system for the dehydrogenation of AB adduct at room temperature (eqn (26)).48 Dehydrocoupling of the AB adduct afforded the linear poly aminoborane. Mechanistic insights revealed that the dehydrogenation of AB adducts and dehydrocoupling through B–N bond forming reactions are effected at the metal centre. The catalytic deactivation can be controlled by the catalytic addition of the amine to trap free BH3, which is formed by the aminoborane rearrangement.
2.4 Perspectives
As an attractive alternative to transition-metal catalysts, Iron-based dehydrogenation protocols are a rapidly growing field in the context of the hydrogen economy, appealing to the concept of, and demand for sustainable energy storage application. Hydrogenation/dehydrogenation (HY/DH) based hydrogen storage processes are promising strategies for circumventing the problem associated with physical hydrogen storage systems. For instance, liquid organic hydrogen storage (LOHC), such as heterocycles, alcohols, formic acid, etc., and fixation of H2 with nitrogen and nitrogen–boron systems are of particular interest, due to transportable and convenient secondary energy carrying systems. The efficiency of HY/DH systems in the hydrogen economy is mainly determined by the success and reversibility of two half-cell reactions, namely hydrogenation (reduction) and dehydrogenation (oxidation). Both the half-cell reactions, either together in cyclic devices or individually, were explored in the presence of precious noble metal catalysts. The significant contributions were made by Fukuzumi,49 Himeda,50 Laurenczy,51 Olah,52 Beller,53 Manners54 and Wills55 by providing unprecedented catalytic systems for HY/DH processes. In this regard, formic acid/formate based hydrogen storage systems possess great features as potential clean and efficient systems for energy storage applications. Although many catalytic systems with notable features have already been achieved in the presence of state-of-the-art noble metal catalytic systems, the need and demand for the sustainable dehydrogenation of FA have to be addressed using the earth abundant metal-based device systems. In the past century, earth abundant iron-based dehydrogenation of FA and its reversible reactions were explored. The significant progress in catalytic mechanistic studies was revealed in order to determine better alternatives to the noble metals. For instance, iron in combination with the tetradendate ligand system (PP3) provides a clean and efficient protocol for the dehydrogenation of FA without any additive and base, providing high reactivity in the presence of green solvent systems. Similarly, Milstein's pyridine based PNP-pincer catalytic systems showed excellent TON under mild reaction conditions. Moreover, the same catalytic system catalyzes the hydrogenation of CO2 to provide the formate salt, shedding light on the applicability of iron-systems for both the half-cell reactions. Secondly, well-defined iron-complexes were successfully demonstrated for the low temperature methanol reforming process, to expand the scope and applicability of iron complexes in the hydrogen economy. Aliphatic pincer chelated iron-complexes have shown an efficient strategy for the dehydrogenation of methanol in aqueous conditions, yielding CO2 as the end product out of three equivalents of hydrogen. Thirdly, the high gravimetric hydrogen content of the amine–borane adducts make them potential materials for hydrogen storage applications. The abundant metal-based catalytic dehydrogenation circumvents unsuitable thermal decomposition as well as precious metal-based dehydrogenation for practical applications. Notably, significant progress has been made using homogeneous and heterogeneous iron-catalytic systems. Many well-defined iron catalytic systems have been explored in order to understand the mechanistic insights of product distribution and selectivity in BN oligomers.
3. Dehydrogenation: applications in chemical synthesis
3.1 Dehydrogenation of alcohols
Alcohols are the common feedstocks for chemical synthesis, although they are quite unreactive. Several synthetic transformations would be more efficient and more eco-friendly if there were ways of making alcohols more reactive. An attractive and ideal approach for alcohol activation has been developed, which uses a catalyst to extract dihydrogen (a potential energy carrier) from adjacent atom centres of alcohol (H–H atoms). This process oxidizes the alcohol under oxidant-free conditions to form a highly reactive carbonyl compound. In view of this, the selective dehydrogenation of alcohols opens up an exciting area of research in the chemical synthesis and energy storage applications. However, traditionally, the dehydrogenation of alcohols has been achieved with the aid of stoichiometric amounts of sacrificial hydrogen acceptors. In nature, dehydrogenation of ethanol can be effected with the aid of the metalloenzyme, alcohol dehydrogenase (ALD), associated with the co-enzyme nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD), leading to the reversible formation of acetaldehyde. In this biological system, ALD activates the proton transfer process, whereas NAD receives hydride forming NADH and carbonyl compounds (Scheme 8).2 This is the classic example of the metal–ligand cooperative hydrogen transfer process that is directly implicated in the development of redox active ligands having catalytic systems. The acceptorless dehydrogenation (AD) strategy has made the renewable alcohols as a versatile starting materials for an assortment of synthetic transformations.4 Based on these insights, iron-based catalytic systems are explored to make this simple and clean acceptorless-dehydrogenation into a much more valuable and sustainable approach. Recently, it has been recognized that iron-based dehydrogenation processes, with the liberation of dihydrogen as the by-product, compete with the state-of-the-art precious metal-based catalytic systems.
 Scheme 8  Dehydrogenation pathway of alcohol dehydrogenase (ALD). 

3.1.1 Acceptorless dehydrogenation of alcohols. 
Casey et al. reported the well-defined iron complex (hydroxycyclopentadienyl)iron dicarbonyl hydride 42 as a catalyst for the efficient and chemoselective hydrogenation of aldehydes and ketones.56 Iron complex 42 was initially synthesized by Knölker et al., and the three-dimensional structure was assigned using X-ray analysis.57 Having the mechanistic insights of hydrogenation, the initial iron-based dehydrogenation of alcohols was achieved in the presence of acetone, which served as both solvent and hydrogen acceptor.58 Dehydrogenation reactions proceeded under mild conditions with a wide functional group tolerance, including easily interconvertible olefins and cyclopropyl motifs. However, this reaction was limited to secondary alcohol derivatives and conjugated primary alcohols, due to issues associated with the unfavorable equilibrium of the reversible reaction (eqn (27)). In 2014, iron-cyclopentadienyl complex 43 was reported for the first oxidant-free and acceptorless dehydrogenation of 2-pyridylmethanol derivatives.59 This complex was predominantly used to transform 2-pyridylmethanol derivatives into the corresponding carbonyl compounds with a turnover number up to 67000. Mechanistic insights revealed that the success of this catalytic process was due to the crucial involvement of the 2-pyridyl motif (substrate) in the catalytic cycle, which limits the scope of this methodology to solely 2-pyridyl derivatives (eqn (28)). (27) (28)
Song et al. developed a simple iron catalytic system for the selective dehydrogenation of secondary benzyl alcohol derivatives.60 The active iron-complex was generated in situ by mixing Fe(III) acetylacetonate, 1,10-phenanthroline, and K2CO3 under ambient conditions. Notably, other secondary alcohols and primary alcohols were ineffective, and no dehydrogenation was observed. The kinetic isotope effect reveals that C(α position of alcohol)–H cleavage is the rate limiting step, similar to other precious-metal based catalytic transformations (eqn (29)). (29)
The Jones and Schneider research teams have reported the well-defined iron-complex chelated aliphatic PNP pincer ligand 12 for the acceptorless dehydrogenation of alcohols based on the metal–ligand cooperation mechanism.61 This was the first iron-based homogeneous catalytic system explored for the dehydrogenation of both primary and secondary alcohols with the extrusion of hydrogen gas. Secondary alcohols were successfully converted into the corresponding ketones in good to excellent yields with a low catalytic loading (0.1 mol%, TON = 103). Interestingly, primary alcohols underwent dehydrogenative coupling, presumably via the Tishchenko reaction, to result in the formation of esters. Similarly, diols were selectively converted into the corresponding lactones, which are marked as biologically and synthetically significant building blocks. In the presence of both primary and secondary alcohols, the chemoselectivity of dehydrogenation proceeded with secondary alcohols over primary alcohols under similar catalytic conditions, which was observed with only a few noble-metal-based catalytic systems (eqn (30)). (30)
The success of iron-pincer complex 12 in acceptorless-dehydrogenation was further explored by Beller and co-workers for the construction of heterocycles such as lactones and lactams via the dehydrogenative tandem process.62 A broad range of 1,4-diol derivatives was converted into lactones with the liberation of molecular hydrogen. Similarly, under the same reaction conditions, 1,5 and 1,6-diols were also utilized to yield the corresponding lactones. Interestingly, 1,5 and 1,6-amino alcohols were transformed into cyclic amides (lactams). Thus, this method provided the broad spectrum of heterocyclic compounds from easily accessible alcohol derivatives with high atom economy (eqn (31)). The mechanism for the formation of lactones is postulated in Scheme 9. Initial dehydrogenation of primary alcohol, condensation, followed by the subsequent dehydrogenation of the secondary alcohol to afford the cyclic compounds is operative. (31)
 Scheme 9  The mechanism for the formation of lactones. 
Balaraman and co-workers developed a heterogeneous Fe-based acceptorless dehydrogenative coupling of alcohols with amines to yield imines with the concomitant liberation of molecular hydrogen under mild, eco-benign conditions (eqn (32)).63 The heterogeneous N-doped active Fe-catalyst was synthesised by the pyrolysis of an in situ generated Fe-phen complex employing Fe(acac)3 and 1,10-phenanthroline (1:1) on an exfoliated graphene oxide support at 800 °C. Notably, several benzyl alcohols/aromatic and aliphatic amines were studied under sustainable heterogeneous catalytic conditions to afford moderate to excellent yields of the corresponding imines with the elimination of water and dihydrogen as the only by-products. The reusable and magnetically separable above heterogeneous Fe-catalytic system provided an operationally simple, efficient and easily scalable strategy for the synthesis of imines from relatively abundant alcohols and amines. (32)


3.1.2 Dehydrogenative hydrogen transfer of alcohols. 

              3.1.2.1
             
              N-Alkylation of amines. 
Dehydrogenative hydrogen transfer, the so-called borrowing hydrogen strategy, consists of the initial dehydrogenation of an alcohol into an aldehydic intermediate with extrusion of H2, imine formation with the liberation of water, and the hydrogenation of the imine by utilizing the hydrogen liberated in the first step, leading to a net redox-neutral reaction. Recently, the noble-metal-based hydrogen transfer process set an emerging trend in organic synthesis to achieve the step- and atom-economical approach. In this aspect, the construction of the C–N bond through the N-alkylation of amine has evolved in terms of the atom-economical and eco-benign route, by utilizing renewable and easily accessible alcohol as the alkylating reagent with the release of water as the only by-product.4 The precious-metal based hydrogen transfer N-alkylation process has made significant progress in sustainable chemical synthesis ranging from fine chemicals to complex molecules. The mechanism for the transition-metal catalyzed N-alkylation process is shown in Scheme 10.
 Scheme 10  
N-alkylation of amine by alcohol over transition-metal (TM) catalyst. 
Yus and co-workers reported the N-alkylation of amine by using alcohols as alkylating agents catalyzed by a commercially available magnetite as a stable and recyclable heterogeneous catalyst (eqn (33)). This catalyst was recycled and reused up to eight cycles without loss of its activity.64 Similarly, an environmentally-benign and simple FeCl2/K2CO3 catalytic system was reported for the N-alkylation of sulphonamide with benzyl alcohols via the hydrogen transfer process (eqn (34)).65 (33) (34)
Significantly, the hydrogen transfer strategy was successfully applied to the synthesis and functionalization of privileged heterocyclic scaffolds using iron phthalocyanine (FePc) as a cheap, eco-benign, and versatile catalyst.66 Amino-substituents on heterocyclic scaffolds such as amino benzothiazoles, aminopyridines, and aminopyrimidines were selectively functionalized with alcohols as alkylating reagents in the presence of iron phthalocyanine catalyst. The iron–phthalocyanine complex was also applied for the construction of heterocyclic frameworks by the dehydrogenative coupling of ortho-substituted anilines (–NH2, –SH and –OH) to afford the benzimidazoles, benzothiazoles, and benzoxazoles. The coupling of benzyl alcohol derivatives with ortho-substituted anilines provided good to excellent (up to 99%) yields, whereas aliphatic alcohols showed moderate reactivity (eqn (35) and (36). (35) (36)
The general method for the N-alkylation of amines such as aliphatic and aromatic amines by alcohols was reported by using a well-defined homogeneous iron catalyst 44 using a cooperative ligand.67 The non-innocent ligand, cyclopentadienone plays an important role in the catalytic cycle during the dehydrogenation and hydrogenation process.68–71 The success of this catalyst is based on the suitability of both the initial dehydrogenation of alcohol and the final hydrogenation of imine at a sufficient rate through the metal–ligand cooperative mechanism. The catalytically active complex 45 was generated in situ from the air and moisture stable complex 44 in the presence of oxidant Me3NO. The effective mono-N-alkylation of anilines and benzyl amines was achieved using this methodology, and anilines possessing electron withdrawing groups such as ester, nitro and cyano groups were not successful in this process. The N-alkylation of amines with diols and diamines with diols was developed for the construction of various five- to seven-membered heterocyclic compounds, through the borrowing hydrogen strategy (eqn (37)). Similarly, the construction of benzylamines from readily available benzyl alcohols was reported using 44 as a catalyst, providing a variety of substituted secondary and tertiary benzylamines in moderate to excellent yields (eqn (38)).72 Many synthetically significant substituted benzyl alcohols with electron withdrawing and donating groups and heterocyclic containing motifs were successfully explored in this strategy. Moreover, the unprecedented synthetic transformation of renewable building block 2,5-furan-dimethanol to pharmaceutically relevant compounds was achieved using Fe-based hydrogen transfer as the key transformation. Sundararaju and co-workers developed the regiospecific transformation of allylic alcohols into allylic amines with the aid of 44, through the borrowing hydrogen strategy, competing with the traditional π-allylic activation pathway (eqn (39)).73 In addition, the significance of this strategy was applied to the direct synthesis of common drugs, cinnarizine, and naftifine from commercially available cinnamyl alcohol, eliminating water as the only by-product. Wills and co-workers reported the iron-tetraphenylcyclopentadienone complex 46 for the selective N-alkylation of aniline derivatives.74 In this reaction, aniline possessing ortho-positioned electron withdrawing substituents showed lower yields of the N-alkylation product, whereas the electron-releasing substituents showed good yields (eqn (40)). The catalytic activity and selectivity of similar types of complexes 44 and 46 reveal that turning off the electronic and steric factors of the non-innocent ligand can modify the catalytic properties of iron complexes. (37) (38) (39) (40)
In the arena of catalytic hydrogen transfer processes, significant progress has been made by the coupling of nitroarenes with alcohol to result in N-alkylated amines in the absence of external reductant. This strategy utilizes the nitroarene as an alternative source of the amino group, whereas the alcohol acts as both reducing reagent and substrate for the carbon backbone in the absence of external oxidant or reductant, thus avoiding the pre-functionalization of starting materials. In this process, Deng and co-workers reported the coupling reaction of o-nitrophenol and benzyl alcohol using 1,10-bis(diphenylphosphino)ferrocene (dppf) as a most efficient catalyst to afford 2-aryl benzoxazoles with the elimination of water as the by-product.75 The coupling reaction consists of the following series of reactions: initial alcohol oxidation, nitro group reduction, condensation, and dehydrogenation in a single operation without any external additives. This green methodology utilized alcohol as both reductant and coupling reagent, enabling a broad range of substrates, including various benzyl alcohols and o-nitrophenols (eqn (41)). The complementary method for the construction of medicinally important 2,3-diarylquinazolinones was reported by the coupling reactions of stable 2-nitro-N-arylbenzamides with benzyl alcohol derivatives using dppf as the iron catalyst.76 Other primary and secondary alcohols did not proceed with this redox condensation reaction (eqn (42)). (41) (42)
3.1.2.2 α-Alkylation of ketones. 
The functionalization of ketones through C–C bond formation is a fundamentally important process in increasing the carbon chain. In this regard, α-alkylation of the ketone by electrophilic alkylation of alkyl halides/pseudohalides with nucleophilic ketones in the presence of stoichiometric base results in a stoichiometric amount of salt waste. A new strategy that reduces the stoichiometric waste is highly desired to make a highly atom-economical and environmentally benign process for general applications. The progress of the catalytic hydrogen transfer strategy enables us to make use of alcohol as an alternative, inexpensive and renewable alkylating reagent for manifold synthetic applications. The initial report on the hydrogen-transfer alkylation process was given about one hundred years ago, where the self β-alkylation of primary alcohols was achieved.4 Various precious metals have been used to facilitate the α-alkylation of ketones, enabling an efficient, practical and atom-economical green process. The iron-cyclopentadienone complex, 44, reported for the α-alkylation of aromatic ketones to enable the simple and efficient up-grading of the carbon chain.77 Various primary alcohols were effectively utilized as alkylation reagents in the presence of catalytic amounts of the base (eqn (43)). Also, α-alkylation ketones with 2-aminobenzyl alcohol yielded the quinoline derivatives via the hydrogen transfer annulation in the presence of catalytic amounts of strong base, circumventing the need for 2-aminobenzaldehydes as self-condensation starting materials (eqn (44)). (43) (44)

3.2 Dehydrogenation of amines
Imines are versatile intermediates in organic synthesis and the synthesis of a wide range of value-added and biologically active compounds. Traditionally, they have been prepared by condensation of the amine with extremely reactive carbonyl compounds. The catalytic temporary oxidation of alcohol into aldehyde provides an alternative strategy for imine formation by the catalytic coupling reaction of aldehyde with amine, employing expensive rare metals as catalyst. Moreover, this approach requires high reaction temperature and control over the reduction of imine to the amine (borrowing the hydrogen strategy).78 Recently, the acceptorless dehydrogenation of amine to imine was accomplished by precious metals using the oxidant-free strategy with extrusion of dihydrogen as a by-product.4 These insights have been put to use for the development of more economical and environmentally friendly catalytic systems for the conversion of amines into imines. In view of this, the well-defined iron complex 12 was successfully applied for the acceptorless-dehydrogenation of a secondary amine into an imine, providing a green approach to the construction of N-heterocycles.79 The efficiency and activity complex for amine dehydrogenation was initially studied with 1,2,3,4-tetrahydroquinoline to afford quinoline with extrusion of dihydrogen. Mechanistic studies postulated the penta-coordinated iron-hydride complex 14 is as an active intermediate for the dehydrogenation reaction, and the presence of nitrogen in the substrate is crucial for the success of this catalytic process (eqn (45) and Scheme 11). The general applicability of this methodology was underscored with many heterocyclic scaffolds, such as 1,2,3,4-tetrahydroquinoline derivatives, 1,2,3,4-tetrahydroisoquinoline, 2-methylindoline, 2,6-dimethylpiperidine, 1,2,3,4-tetrahydroquinoxaline and 1,2,3,4-tetrahydroquinoxaline into the corresponding N-heteroaromatic compounds and thus enables the scope for a broad range of substrates. (45)
 Scheme 11  Acceptorless dehydrogenation of amine for heterocycle synthesis. 
3.3 Dehydrogenation of alkanes
Selective functionalization of abundant alkane substrates into value-added products is an attractive and challenging task in chemical science. Catalytic dehydrogenation of alkane feedstock has provided the important and valuable intermediate olefins or arenes that are widely used as a raw materials in many industrial processes.4 Dehydrogenation of an alkane is industrially achieved by hydrocarbon cracking under harsh conditions (high temperature, >500 °C), which limits their applicability in direct synthetic manipulations. For instance, thermodynamically favorable dehydrogenation of propane to propene requires the temperature of about 400 °C. However, the competing reaction of C–C bond cleavage of propane to afford methane and ethane is favorable at 200 °C. Both thermodynamic and kinetic considerations make this dehydrogenation protocol particularly more challenging. Yun and Lobo reported an iron-containing zeolite-framework for the catalytic dehydrogenation of propane.80 The synthesized iron-silicates showed nearly 20 times higher dehydrogenation rates than cracking rates. The redox catalytic cycle reveals that the hydrocarbon conversion over the isolated iron site proceeds with the formation of radical propane cations, since the protolytic mechanism is unable to explain the observed difference in the activation energy and selectivity (Scheme 12).
 Scheme 12  Selective dehydrogenation of propane. 
Similarly, Miller and Hock reported the synthesis of well-defined isolated FeII on silica for the non-oxidative dehydrogenation of propane.81 A highly active and stable dehydrogenation catalyst of isolated FeII on silica was employed in surface organometallic chemistry with the Fe(oCp)2 precursor and high temperature (650 °C) treatment in a hydrogen atmosphere. The active species involved in this process was found to be three coordinate FeII having a Lewis-acidic nature. Mechanistically, two possible non-redox mechanisms for dehydrogenation were proposed, involving heterolytic C–H cleavage as a common initial process (47–48). The resulting common intermediate iron-hydride species 49 could undergo two potential pathways: regeneration of three coordinate iron species with extrusion of hydrogen, or the direct sigma bond metathesis reaction of the Fe–H with propane (Scheme 13).
 Scheme 13  The mechanism for the dehydrogenation of propane using isolated FeII on silica. 
3.4 Perspectives
The advancement in organometallic chemistry breaks the limitation of first-row transition metal catalysis in chemical synthesis. In classical organometallic chemistry, the reversible conversion of the oxidation state of metal complexes through oxidation addition and reductive elimination processes limit the participation of the abundant first-row transition metals. The recent advancement of bio-mimetic cooperative ligand systems such as a pincer ligand, cyclopentadienone, etc., facilitate the iron-based transformation, namely, dehydrogenation. Although in the past decades, precious noble metal based dehydrogenation strategies worked well, providing an efficient and atom-economical strategy for the synthesis of highly valuable compounds, the broad concept is not equally implemented on a much larger scale, since the cost per mole of second and third row transition metals are much more expensive than the low atomic weight first row iron catalyst.82 Moreover, the relative toxicity of iron is lower than that of precious metal catalysts. The above features of iron-catalytic systems have outperformed traditional noble metal catalysts. Significantly, the aliphatic PNP iron complex 12 provided remarkable stability and activity in the dehydrogenative coupling of alcohols with low-catalytic loading and showed comparable catalytic activity to the previously reported Ru-catalyst.83 It is worth mentioning that Knölker complexes (44 and 46) have provided the general method for the construction of C–N and C–C bond forming hydrogen transfer process with a wide variety of substrates, thus involving the metal–ligand cooperation strategy. In addition to that, substantial progress in the dehydrogenation of other organic compounds such as N-heterocycles, alkanes, etc., have also been developed using homogeneous and heterogeneous iron-catalytic systems. However, there is still a need for the development of stable and efficient Fe-based catalytic systems for the technological improvements in chemical synthesis.
4. Summary and outlook
In this tutorial review, we have overviewed the recent examples in the development and progress of iron-based dehydrogenation strategies involving sustainable energy storage applications and benign chemical synthesis. In the first part of the review article, the abundant and economical iron-based hydrogen release strategy was delineated. The detailed progress on the dehydrogenation strategy reveals that chemical hydrogen storage is a promising method to achieve high gravimetric capacity material for a steady supply of energy from fluctuating sources. Particularly, iron-based dehydrogenation finds a significant position in the ‘hydrogen economy’ and marks a milestone in the progress of the dehydrogenation of formic acid as a green liquid hydrogen carrier. The reversibility of the formic acid dehydrogenation process has provided the opportunity to utilize cheap and abundant CO2 as feedstock, leading to environmentally benign and carbon footprint-free sustainable hydrogen storage systems. The basic research on hydrogen production from organic and inorganic compounds has found applications in gas-free hydrogenation processes, namely, transfer hydrogenation processes. In addition, the dehydrogenation of the amine–borane adduct has found manifold applications of ceramic precursor production and B–N polymer synthesis.
The iron-based dehydrogenation strategy that strictly follows the eco-benign and atom-economical pathway and eliminates only green by-products has been described in the second part of the review article. It is worth mentioning that the development of iron-based catalytic systems upgrades easily accessible and abundant organic substrates through dehydrogenation strategies, offering a new sustainable approach to important building blocks. The incorporation of non-innocent ligand systems at the iron metal centre converts the iron complex into a sustainable catalytic system in the homogeneous dehydrogenation process through the metal–ligand cooperation mechanism. In view of this, well-defined iron based catalytic systems improve the selectivity and activity of the dehydrogenation process by reducing the metal loading and ligand to metal ratio. Iron-based bifunctional catalysts make a significant contribution in achieving N- and C-alkylation by an alcohol through borrowing the hydrogen strategy. The important breakthrough has been achieved by making use of nitroarene as a versatile starting material for the construction of privileged heterocyclic compounds via the redox condensation process. It is clear that iron-based dehydrogenation is an excellent alternative to precious metals, regarding the most economical and environmentally benign process. The challenges associated with first-row transition metals are overcome with the introduction of strong field ligands and redox active ligand systems by which the stability and activity of the iron complex are tremendously increased in the homogeneous catalytic process.
Undeniably, this unified documentation of this premature topic should lead to significant progress involving the development of new iron-based catalytic systems with the incorporation of inexpensive ligand systems capable of promoting the high activity of the metal, which would require a deeper understanding of the mechanism and the roles of the metal and ligand in the fundamentally important steps. The detailed study of the electronic and steric properties of new sets of the non-innocent ligand system progressing to the accomplishment of novel synthetic transformations unveiling the structure and reactivity is highly desired. Bio-inspired iron-based catalytic systems are essential to accomplishing highly selective and active dehydrogenative transformations in organic synthesis under mild reaction conditions, since iron-based metalloenzymes are ubiquitous in nature for such a process. Most significantly, the earth-abundant iron-based acceptorless-dehydrogenation strategy would provide access to generating dihydrogen from renewable resources, such as biomass and carbohydrates, leading to a sustainable hydrogen production process.
Acknowledgements
This research is supported by the SERB (SB/FT/CS-065/2013) and EMR/2015/30 (under Green Chemistry programme). AN acknowledges Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS), Japan for postdoctoral fellowship. GJ thanks UGC and MKS thanks CSIR for fellowships.
Notes and references

Hydrogen as a Future Energy Carrier, ed. A. Zuttel, A. Borgschulte and L. Schlapbach, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2008 Search PubMed .
M. Trincado, D. Banerjee and H. Grützmacher, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2464–2503 CAS .
D. Mellmann, P. Sponholz, H. Junge and M. Beller, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 3954–3988 RSC .
C. Gunanathan and D. Milstein, Science, 2013, 341, 1229712 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Wang and D. Astruc, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 6621–6686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Schilter, J. M. Camara, M. T. Huynh, S. H. Schiffer and T. B. Rauchfuss, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 8693–8749 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. M. Lancaster, M. Roemelt, P. Ettenhuber, Y. Hu, M. W. Ribbe, F. Neese, U. Bergmann and S. DeBeer, Science, 2011, 334, 974–977 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-L. Sun, B.-J. Li and Z.-J. Shi, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 1293–1314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Quintard and J. Rodriguez, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 4044–4055 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. H. Morris, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 1494–1502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zell and D. Milstein, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 1979–1994 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Bauer and H.-J. Knölker, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 3170–3387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          N. Yoshikai, Iron-catalyzed C-C bond formation with C-H bond activation in I. Marek, I., Z. Rappoport, “From Chemistry of Organoiron Compounds”, Wiley,  2014, pp. 499–538, ISBN: 978-0-470-97359-2 Search PubMed .
C. Darcel, J.-B. Sortais and S. Q. Duque, RSC Green Chem. Ser., 2015, 26, 67–92 CAS .

          B. Plietker, Iron-catalysis fundamental and application Topics in organometallic chemistry, Springer, Berlin Heidelberg,  2011 Search PubMed .
S. Ott, Science, 2011, 333, 1714–1715 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Fink, M. Montandon-Clerc and G. Laurenczy, Chimia, 2015, 69, 746–754 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Singh, S. Singh and A. Kumar, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2016, 6, 12–40 Search PubMed .
S. Enthaler, J. Langermann and T. Schmidt, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1207–1217 CAS .
B. Loges, A. Boddien, H. Junge, J. R. Noyes, W. Baumanna and M. Beller, Chem. Commun., 2009, 4185–4187 RSC .
A. Boddien, B. Loges, F. Gartner, C. Torborg, K. Fumino, H. Junge, R. Ludwig and M. Beller, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 8924–8934 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Boddien, F. Gartner, R. Jackstell, H. Junge, A. Spannenberg, W. Baumann, R. Ludwig and M. Beller, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 8993–8996 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Boddien, D. Mellmann, F. Gärtner, R. Jackstell, H. Junge, P. J. Dyson, G. Laurenczy, R. Ludwig and M. Beller, Science, 2011, 333, 1733–1736 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Mellmann, E. Barsch, M. Bauer, K. Grabow, A. Boddien, A. Kammer, P. Sponholz, U. Bentrup, R. Jackstell, H. Junge, G. Laurenczy, R. Ludwig and M. Beller, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 13589–13602 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Bertini, I. Mellone, A. Ienco, M. Peruzzini and L. Gonsalvi, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 1254–1265 CrossRef CAS .
P. Stathi, Y. Deligiannakis and M. Louloudi, Catal. Today, 2015, 242, 146–152 CrossRef CAS .
P. Stathi, Y. Deligiannakis, G. Avgouropoulos and M. Louloudi, Appl. Catal., A, 2015, 498, 176–184 CrossRef CAS .
M. Montandon-Clerc, A. F. Dalebrook and G. Laurenczy, J. Catal., 2016, 343, 62–67 CrossRef CAS .
R. Langer, Y. D. Posner, G. Leitus, L. J. W. Shimon, Y. Ben-David and D. Milstein, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 9948–9952 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zell, B. Butschke, Y. Ben-David and D. Milstein, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 8068–8072 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. A. Bielinski, P. O. Lagaditis, Y. Zhang, B. Q. Mercado, C. Würtele, W. H. Bernskoetter, N. Hazari and S. Schneider, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 10234–10237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, A. D. Maclntosh, J. L. Wong, E. A. Bielinski, P. G. Williard, B. Q. Mercado, N. Hazari and W. H. Bernskoetter, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 4291–4299 RSC .
F. Bertini, N. Gorgas, B. Stöger, M. Peruzzini, L. F. Veiros, K. Kirchner and L. Gonsalvi, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 2889–2893 CrossRef CAS .
I. Mellone, N. Gorgas, F. Bertini, M. Peruzzini, K. Kirchner and L. Gonsalvi, Organometallics, 2016, 35, 3344–3349 CrossRef CAS .
E. Alberico, P. Sponholz, C. Cordes, M. Nielsen, H.-J. Drexler, W. Baumann, H. Junge and M. Beller, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 14162–14166 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. A. Bielinski, M. Förster, Y. Zhang, W. H. Bernskoetter, N. Hazari and M. C. Holthausen, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 2404–2415 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Hamilton, R. T. Baker, A. Staubitzc and I. Manners, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 279–293 RSC .
J.-M. Yan, X.-B. Zhang, S. Han, H. Shioyama and Q. Xu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 2287–2289 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. He, J. Wang, G. Wu, H. Kim, T. Proffen, A. Wu, W. Li, T. Liu, Z. Xiong, C. Wu, H. Chu, J. Guo, T. Autrey, T. Zhang and P. Chen, Chem. – Eur. J., 2010, 16, 12814–12817 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Luo, P. G. Campbell, L. N. Zakharov and S.-Y. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 19326–19329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Vance, A. P. M. Robertson, K. Lee and I. Manners, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17, 4099–4103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Vance, A. Schäfer, A. P. M. Robertson, K. Lee, J. Turner, G. R. Whittell and I. Manners, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 3048–3064 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. T. Baker, J. C. Gordon, C. W. Hamilton, N. J. Henson, P.-H. Lin, S. Maguire, M. Murugesu, B. L. Scott and N. C. Smythe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 5598–5609 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. F. Sonnenberg and R. H. Morris, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 1092–1102 CrossRef CAS .
P. Bhattacharya, J. A. Krause and H. Guan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 11153–11161 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lichtenberg, L. Viciu, M. Adelhardt, J. Sutter, K. Meyer, B. de Bruin and H. Grützmacher, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 5766–5771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lichtenberg, M. Adelhardt, T. L. Gianetti, K. Meyer, B. de Bruin and H. Grützmacher, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 6230–6240 CrossRef CAS .
A. Glüer, M. Förster, V. R. Celinski, J. S. auf der Günne, M. C. Holthausen and S. Schneider, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 7214–7217 CrossRef .
S. Fukuzumi, T. Kobayashi and T. Suenobu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 1496–1497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Himeda, Green Chem., 2009, 11, 2018–2022 RSC .
C. Fellay, N. Yan, P. J. Dyson and G. Laurenczy, Chem. – Eur. J., 2009, 15, 3752–3760 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kothandaraman, M. Czaun, A. Goeppert, R. Haiges, J.-P. Jones, R. B. May, G. K. S. Prakash and G. A. Olah, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 1442–1451 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Boddien, B. Loges, H. Junge, F. Gärtner, J. R. Noyes and M. Beller, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2009, 351, 2517–2520 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Jaska, K. Temple, A. J. Lough and I. Manners, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 9424–9434 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Morris, G. J. Clarkson and M. Wills, Organometallics, 2009, 28, 4133–4140 CrossRef CAS .
C. P. Casey and H. Guan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 5816–5817 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-J. Knölker, E. Baum, H. Goesmann and R. Klauss, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1999, 38, 2064–2066 CrossRef .
M. G. Coleman, A. N. Brown, B. A. Bolton and H. Guana, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2010, 352, 967–970 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kamitani, M. Ito, M. Itazaki and H. Nakazawa, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 7941–7944 RSC .
H. Song, B. Kang and S. H. Hong, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 2889–2895 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chakraborty, P. O. Lagaditis, M. Förster, E. A. Bielinski, N. Hazari, M. C. Holthausen, W. D. Jones and S. Schneider, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 3994–4003 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pena-Lopez, H. Neumann and M. Beller, ChemCatChem, 2015, 7, 865–871 CrossRef CAS .
G. Jaiswal, V. G. Landge, D. Jagadeesan and E. Balaraman, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 3232–3238 RSC .
R. Martinez, D. J. Ramon and M. Yus, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2009, 7, 2176–2181 CAS .
X. Cui, F. Shi, Y. Zhang and Y. Deng, Tetrahedron Lett., 2010, 51, 2048–2051 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bala, P. K. Verma, U. Sharma, N. Kumar and B. Singh, Green Chem., 2013, 15, 1687–1693 RSC .
T. Yan, B. L. Feringa and K. Barta, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5602 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-J. Knölker, J. Heber and C. H. Mahler, Synlett, 1992, 1002–1004 CrossRef .
H.-J. Knölker and J. Heber, Synlett, 1993, 924–926 CrossRef .
H.-J. Knölker, E. Baum and J. Heber, Tetrahedron Lett., 1995, 36, 7647–7650 CrossRef .
H.-J. Knölker, H. Goesmann and R. Klauss, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1999, 38, 702–705 CrossRef .
T. Yan, B. L. Feringa and K. Barta, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 381–388 CrossRef CAS .
B. Emayavaramban, M. Roy and B. Sundararaju, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 3952–3955 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Rawlings, L. J. Diorazio and M. Wills, Org. Lett., 2015, 17, 1086–1089 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wu, X. Hu, J. Liu, Y. Y. Liao and G.-J. Deng, Org. Lett., 2012, 14, 2722–2725 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, X. Cao, F. Xiao, S. Liu and G.-J. Deng, Org. Lett., 2013, 15, 4900–4903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Elangovan, J.-B. Sortais, M. Beller and C. Darcel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 14483–14486 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Largeron and M.-B. Fleury, Science, 2013, 339, 43–44 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Chakraborty, W. W. Brennessel and W. D. Jones, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8564–8567 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Yun and R. F. Lobo, J. Catal., 2014, 312, 263–270 CrossRef CAS .
B. Hu, N. M. Schweitzer, G. Zhang, S. J. Kraft, D. J. Childers, M. P. Lanci, J. T. Miller and A. S. Hock, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 3494–3503 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Bullock, Science, 2013, 342, 1054–1055 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Gnanaprakasam, J. Zhang and D. Milstein, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 1468–1471 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Dedicated to Professor David Milstein on the occasion of his 70th birthday.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:
Ekambaram Balaraman	Dr. Ekambaram Balaraman received his M.Sc in Chemistry from University of Madras, India (2002). He was awarded a Ph.D in Chemistry for his research works at Central University of Hyderabad, India (2008). He was a FGC-Post Doctoral Fellow at Weizmann Institute of Science (2008–2012). Currently he is working as a Senior Scientist at CSIR-National Chemical Laboratory in the Catalysis Division. His research interests are focused on metal mediated organic transformations, and photoredox catalysis.
Avanashiappan Nandakumar	Dr. Avanashiappan Nandakumar graduated from Applied Chemistry at Anna University in 2009 and subsequently joined the CSIR-Central Leather Research Institute as a Ph.D student with Dr. P. T. Perumal. During his Ph.D studies, he focused on palladium-catalysed synthetic transformations of alkynes into heterocyclic compounds. Currently, He is working as a JSPS-Postdoctoral Fellow at Nano Medical Engineering Laboratory, RIKEN, Japan. He will be joining Dr. E. Balaraman's research group, focusing on transition-metal-catalysed annulation reactions.
Garima Jaiswal	Ms. Garima Jaiswal received her Bachelor's degree from Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi and Master's degree in Chemistry (2013) from Indian Institute of Technology-Delhi, India. Currently, she is working as a Senior Research Fellow under the guidance of Dr. E. Balaraman at CSIR-National Chemical Laboratory. Her research focuses on the development of new catalysts for sustainable organic transformations.
Manoj K. Sahoo	Mr. Manoj K. Sahoo received his Bachelor degree in Chemistry from Narasingha Choudhury (Autonomous) College, Jajpur, affiliated with Utkal University. He received his Master's degree in Chemistry (2011) from Utkal University, Odisha. Currently he is working as a Senior Research Fellow under the guidance of Dr. E. Balaraman at CSIR-National Chemical Laboratory, India. His research focuses on photoredox catalysis and green chemistry.
H2 ⇌ 2H+ + 2e−	(1)
H2 + methenyl-H4MPT+ ⇌ H+ + methenyl-H4MPT	(2)
	(3)

 	Fig. 1  Active sites of hydrogenase and nitrogenase enzymes.	 

 	Fig. 2  HCO2H/CO2 involving hydrogen storage cycle.	 

 	Scheme 1  FHL-complex of E. coli.	 
	(4)
	(5)


1.	Fe3(CO)12/PPh3/tpy	—	NEt3	40a	200	—	
21

2.	Fe3(CO)12/PBn3/tpy	—	NEt3	40a	1266	—	
22

3.	[Fe(BF4)2]6H2O/PP3	—	PC	80	92417	9425	
23

4.	[Fe(BF4)2]6H2O/PP3	—	PC	40	1942	—	
24

5.	[Fe(BF4)2]6H2O/PP3	—	PC	60	8117	—	
24

6.	[Fe(BF4)2]6H2O/rac-P4	—	PC	40	1000	—	
25

7.	[(PNpyP)Fe(H)2(CO)]	NEt3	Dioxane	40	100000	836	
30

8.	[(iPrPNHP)Fe(CO)H(COO)]	LiBF4	Dioxane	80	983642	196728	
31

	(6)

 	Scheme 2  Proposed mechanism for the selective dehydrogenation of formic acid.	 
	(7)

 	Scheme 3  Catalytically active species formation and deactivation pathway.	 
	(8)
	(9)

 	Fig. 3  Structure of water soluble PP3 analogues of m-trisulfonated-tris[2-(diphenylphosphino)ethyl]phosphine sodium salt (PP3TS).	 

 	Scheme 4  Dehydrogenation of formic acid through the non-classical intramolecular β-hydride elimination.	 

 	Scheme 5  The mechanism for LA assisted dehydrogenation of formic acid.	 
	(10)
	(11)
	(12)
	(13)
	(14)
	(15)
	(16)
	(17)
	(18)
	(19)
NH3BH3 + 2H2O → NH4+ + BO2− + 3H2	(20)
	(21)
	(22)
	(23)

 	Scheme 6  Photoactive induced formation of catalytically active species from pre-catalyst 18 and 24.	 

 	Scheme 7  Iron based catalytic systems for the dehydrogenation of AB adduct.	 
	(24)
	(25)
	(26)

 	Scheme 8  Dehydrogenation pathway of alcohol dehydrogenase (ALD).	 
	(27)
	(28)
	(29)
	(30)
	(31)

 	Scheme 9  The mechanism for the formation of lactones.	 
	(32)

 	Scheme 10  
N-alkylation of amine by alcohol over transition-metal (TM) catalyst.	 
	(33)
	(34)
	(35)
	(36)
	(37)
	(38)
	(39)
	(40)
	(41)
	(42)
	(43)
	(44)
	(45)

 	Scheme 11  Acceptorless dehydrogenation of amine for heterocycle synthesis.	 

 	Scheme 12  Selective dehydrogenation of propane.	 

 	Scheme 13  The mechanism for the dehydrogenation of propane using isolated FeII on silica.	 
Footnote
† Dedicated to Professor David Milstein on the occasion of his 70th birthday.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
