Suppressing photo-oxidation of non-fullerene acceptors and their blends in organic solar cells by exploring material design and employing friendly sta ...  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9TA09961A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9TA09961A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 25088-25101Suppressing photo-oxidation of non-fullerene acceptors and their blends in organic solar cells by exploring material design and employing friendly stabilizers†

        
          
            Jing 
            Guo
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yao 
            Wu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Rui 
            Sun
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Wei 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jie 
            Guo
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Qiang 
            Wu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xiaofeng 
            Tang
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Chenkai 
            Sun
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Zhenghui 
            Luo
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Kai 
            Chang
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Zhuohan 
            Zhang
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Jun 
            Yuan
          
        
      f, 
      
        
          
            Tengfei 
            Li
          
        
      g, 
      
        
          
            Weihua 
            Tang
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Erjun 
            Zhou
          
        
      h, 
      
        
          
            Zuo 
            Xiao
          
        
      i, 
      
        
          
            Liming 
            Ding
          
        
      i, 
      
        
          
            Yingping 
            Zou
          
        
      f, 
      
        
          
            Xiaowei 
            Zhan
          
        
      g, 
      
        
          
            Chuluo 
            Yang
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Zhen 
            Li
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Christoph J. 
            Brabec
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Yongfang 
            Li
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Jie 
            Min
          
        
      *a
aThe Institute for Advanced Studies, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China. E-mail: min.jie@whu.edu.cn
bInstitute of Materials for Electronics and Energy Technology (I-MEET), Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nuremberg, Martensstraße 7, 91058 Erlangen, Germany
cBeijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences, CAS Key Laboratory of Organic Solids, Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 100190 Beijing, China
dHubei Key Lab on Organic and Polymeric Optoelectronic Materials, Department of Chemistry, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China
eSchool of Chemical Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing 210094, China
fCollege of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Central South University, Changsha 410083, China
gDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, College of Engineering, Key Laboratory of Polymer Chemistry and Physics of Ministry of Education, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China
hHenan Institutes of Advanced Technology, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou 450003, China
iCenter for Excellence in Nanoscience (CAS), Key Laboratory of Nanosystem and Hierarchical Fabrication (CAS), National Center for Nanoscience and Technology, Beijing 100190, China
Received 
      9th September 2019
    , Accepted 10th October 2019First published on 10th October 2019AbstractIn addition to a high power conversion efficiency, ambient stability is another impact factor for the successful commercialization of organic solar cells (OSCs). Understanding the role of photovoltaic materials is the key to address this challenge, but no such studies have been systematically performed on non-fullerene acceptors (NFAs). In this work, we firstly investigate the role of NFA photo-oxidation in device degradation. Relevant investigation of physical dynamics underlines the effects on the device performance for NFA photo-oxidation acting as trap states in exposed blends. In addition, taking ITIC as an example, we shed some light on the possible mechanisms of NFA photo-oxidation, which cannot be eliminated by relevant strategies and principles of material design. These results drive us to further investigate the photobleaching rates of thirty-three NFAs, including fused-ring electron acceptors and perylene diimide acceptor derivatives. Surprisingly, most of them show a higher optical density loss as compared to their fullerene-based counterparts. In view of relevant comparative analysis in the Discussion section, we further propose some design strategies to improve the photo-oxidation stability of NFAs. More importantly, we also find a stabilizer (namely nickel chelate S6) that can effectively suppress the photo-oxidation of NFAs and their blends and thus improve the ambient stability of OSCs.
1. Introduction
As an important source of renewable energy for a sustainable future, thin film solution processed bulk heterojunction (BHJ) organic solar cells (OSCs) have received significant attention over the last decade due to their unique advantages for commercial application, such as low cost, light-weight, flexibility and easy mass manufacture.1–4 Tremendous progress have been achieved to boost the power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of OSCs increasing from 9% to over 15% in these few years,5–10 primarily due to the recent development of a range of high performance fused-ring electron acceptor (FREA) materials like 2,2′-((2Z,2′Z)-((4,4,9,9-tetrahexyl-4,9-dihydro-s-indaceno[1,2-b:5,6-b′]dithiophene-2,7-diyl)bis(methanylylidene))bis(3-oxo-2,3-dihydro-1H-indene-2,1-diylidene))dimalononitrile (IDIC),11,12 3,9-bis(2-methylene-(3-(1,1-dicyanomethylene)-indanone))-5,5,11,11-tetrakis(4-hexylphenyl)-dithieno[2,3-d:2′,3′-d′]-s-indaceno[1,2-b:5,6-b′]dithiophene (ITIC),13 3,9-bis(2-methylene-((3-(1,1-dicyanomethylene)-6,7-difluoro)-indanone))-5,5,11,11-tetrakis(4-hexylphenyl)-dithieno[2,3-d:2′,3′-d′]-s-indaceno[1,2-b:5,6-b′]dithiophene (IT-4F),14 5Z,5′Z)-5,5′-(((4,4,9,9-tetraoctyl-4,9-dihydro-s-indaceno[1,2-b:5,6-b′]dithiophene-2,7-diyl)bis(benzo[c][1,2,5]thiadiazole-7,4-diyl))bis-(methanylylidene))bis(3-ethyl-2-thioxothiazolidin-4-one (O-IDTBR),15 and 2,2′-((2Z,2′Z)-((12,13-bis(2-ethylhexyl)-3,9-diundecyl-12,13-dihydro-[1,2,5]thiadiazolo[3,4-e]thieno[2,′′3′′:4′,5′]thieno[2′,3′:4,5]pyrrolo[3,2-g]thieno[2′,3′:4,5]thieno[3,2-b]indole-2,10-diyl)bis(me-thanylylidene))bis(5,6-difluoro-3-oxo-2,3-dihydro-1H-indene-2,1-diylidene))dima-lononitrile (Y6).7 Since their current PCEs are close to the theoretical value of device efficiency,16 the main Achilles heel is their limited operational stability.17–20
The potential degradation routes of OSCs are manifold, and some even deviate directly from their working principles. For instance, Heumueller et al. demonstrated that amorphous polymers generally lead to an open-circuit voltage (Voc) loss in devices measured under illumination, resulting in burn-in degradation caused by light-induced traps.19,21 Meanwhile, they found that the electron affinity of fullerene derivatives can dramatically influence the rate of irreversible polymer photo-bleaching in blend films.22 In addition, the optimized BHJ morphology generally is not in thermodynamic equilibrium, and their photo-stability and thermal stability issues cannot be solved completely.23,24 Besides, in most cases organic semiconducting materials can be easily photobleached in the presence of molecular oxygen, while their photo-oxidation generally proceeds by radical mechanisms, thus resulting in irreversible chemical reactions.18,25–29 In reality, in order to take full advantage of the cost reductions of OSCs from roll-to-roll printing, devices need to be fabricated under illumination in air and also be made on inexpensive flexible substrates. However, on one hand, the environmental factors in the fabricating process will unavoidably degrade the photovoltaic materials and their solar modules. On the other hand, although commercial flexible substrates such as poly(ethylene terephthalate) (PET) and poly(ethylene naphthalate) (PEN) provide a sufficient barrier layer to oxygen, their oxygen transmission rates are several orders of magnitude larger than the recommended transmission requirements for OSCs of 10−3 cm3 m−2 day−1 atm−1.20 Thus, enhancement of the inherent stability of photovoltaic materials, as a significant challenge for chemists and materials scientists, can not only reduce the air permeability requirements and encapsulation cost but also prolong the service life of devices. Actually, this challenge is no less important than the further improvement of the device efficiency and photo-thermal stability of photoactive layers.
Many studies show that photo-oxidative degradation generally results in breaking of polymer chains, forms the chemical defects of photovoltaic materials, reduces the molecular weight of polymers, causes deterioration of mechanical properties, and thus leads to rapid deterioration of device performance.18,27,30–33 In addition, under UV or visible illumination in air, [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) and other fullerene derivatives have been shown to undergo photo-oxidation reactions with two most commonly observed products of photo-oxidation, epoxide and carbonyl, on the fullerene cage,22,27,33 which can severely deteriorate the electronic properties of OSCs.17,20,34,35 In non-fullerene acceptors (NFAs), Luke et al. recently reported a three-phase degradation process based on the analysis of the photostability of planar O-IDTBR and nonplanar O-IDFBR.28 However, the studies regarding the photo-oxidative stability of NFAs are lagging far behind their fullerene-based counterparts even though their positive thermal stability and photo-stability have been highlighted.1,6,36–42 On one hand, the electronic properties of photo-oxidized NFAs and their influence on device performance and fundamental physics are poorly understood. On the other hand, strategies to effectively improve the photo-oxygen stability of materials and their blends need to be further explored.28
Herein, we focus our endeavor to tentatively solve these two questions as pointed out above. We firstly used the classical NFAs, including IDIC, ITIC, IT-4F, O-IDTBR and Y6, to analyze their photo-oxidation stability in OSCs based on two common polymers as donors, including poly[(4,8-bis(5-(tripropylsilyl)thiophen-2-yl)benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene)-co-(5,6-difluoro-2-(2-hexyldecyl)-4,7-di(thiophen-2-yl)-2H-benzo[d][1,2,3]triazole)] (J71)43 and poly[(2,6-(4,8-bis(5-(2-ethylhexyl)thiophen-2-yl)-benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene))-alt-(5,5-(1′,3′-di-2-thienyl-5′,7′-bis(2-ethylhexyl)benzo[1′,2′-c:4′,5′-c′]dithiophene-4,8-dione))] (PBDB-T).44 Surprisingly, the photo-oxidation stability of these FREAs in devices is inferior to that of [6,6]-phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM) with the exception of a Y6 based blend. Taking ITIC as an example, we systematically investigated the degradation of a J71:ITIC blend when exposed to light in air. Furthermore, we discussed the impact of photo-oxidized ITIC on the corresponding blend morphology and its fundamental physics. The relationship and difference between ITIC and PC71BM in the photo-oxidation reaction mechanisms are also analyzed. In the subsequent Discussion section, by introducing thirty-three NFAs, we systematically analyze the correlation between the material structure and photobleaching rate, and provide some design strategies for improving the photo-oxidation stability of NFAs. Importantly, by introducing six functional stabilizers as stabilizing additives, we find an effective and universal approach to improve the photo-oxidation stability of NFAs and their blends, thereby alleviating the above-mentioned cost of barrier materials and relevant technical requirements.
2. Results and discussion
Impact of photo-oxidation of electron acceptors on device performance
The OSCs in this study were constructed with a conventional architecture. Solution-processed poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrene-sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) and a perylene diimide derivative (PDINO) were employed as hole and electron transporting layers, respectively. The active layers are composed of donor polymer J71, blended with five different FREAs (including ITIC, IDIC, IT-4F, O-IDTBR and Y6), respectively, see Fig. 1A. In order to highlight the influence of photo-oxidation of FREAs, PC71BM as their fullerene counterpart has been introduced. We firstly investigated the device performance of J71:FREA solar cells under AM 1.5G illumination, while the normalized PCEs of J71:FREA blends degraded in dry air as a function of exposure time are depicted in Fig. 1B. As compared to the device performance of the J71:PC71BM blend film when exposed to oxygen, we were surprised to see that those of FREA based devices with the exception of the J71:Y6 system exhibited faster degradation over the time interval as compared to that of the J71:PC71BM blend. Similar to these results, the solar cells based on PBDB-T blended with four FREAs also exhibited obvious PCE losses when its BHJ blends were exposed to ambient conditions (Fig. S1, ESI†). Furthermore, we extended our studies by blending ITIC with two other polymer donors PTQ10 and P3HT, which were applied to construct a stable photovoltaic system. After 30 minutes of exposure to light and air, the photovoltaic performance of the corresponding aged blends decreased dramatically (Fig. S2, ESI†). It should be noted that the ambient temperature was controlled below 30 °C during the illumination of the films.
 Fig. 1  Molecule and device architectures as well as impact of photo-oxidation of different FREAs on device behaviors. (A) The investigated polymer J71, fullerene PC71BM and non-fullerene acceptors, including ITIC, IDIC, IT-4F, O-IDTBR and Y6; (B) normalized PCE of J71 devices based on degraded BHJ blends as a function of illumination time. (C) Schematic device architecture of solar cells as well as photo-oxidation process of FREA based BHJ and LbL blends. (D) Normalized PCE of J71:ITIC devices processed with BHJ and LbL structures. There are two differently processed LbL films: one is illuminating the J71/ITIC film before electrode deposition, and the other is illuminating the J71 film before ITIC deposition. (E) Current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of J71:ITIC devices, when their blends were exposed to air for different time scales, illuminated under simulated AM1.5G illumination. (F) Normalized PCEs as a function of photo-oxidized ITIC (O-ITIC) fraction for degraded J71:ITIC devices and pre-degraded ITIC devices. 
In order to verify whether the photo-oxidation of NFAs is the main reason of the attenuation of device performance, taking ITIC as an example we comprehensively compared the above-mentioned results with those of similar experiments using the conventional structure of ITO/MoO3/J71:ITIC/PDINO/Al and the inverted architecture of ITO/ZnO/J71:ITIC/MoO3/Ag, respectively. The normalized PCEs of J71:ITIC devices based on active layers degraded with increasing exposure time using different interlayers are plotted in Fig. S3 in the ESI.† Note that the PCEs of the fresh solar cells using PEDOT:PSS and MoO3 based conventional structures, and ZnO based inverted structure are 11.26%, 5.04%, and 10.37%, respectively. Obviously, the trends of degradation in the corresponding solar cells are identical to that of conventional devices. Thus, in order to further clarify the effects or respective contributions of donor materials and NFAs to device attenuation, we investigated the PCEs of J71:ITIC devices processed with layer-by-layer (LbL) structures as depicted in Fig. 1C, which exhibit comparable device efficiencies with BHJ solar cells (Fig. S4, ESI†). Note that there are two different photo-oxidation LbL device fabrication processes: one is photo-oxidation of the J71 layer prior to ITIC layer deposition, and then deposition of the fresh ITIC layer for device fabrication; the other is deposition of J71 and ITIC in sequence, and then exposure of the fresh J71/ITIC LbL film to light in air with ITIC enriched on the surface.45 As presented in Fig. 1D, the J71/aged-ITIC LbL film exhibits worse stability than the aged-J71/ITIC LbL film when exposed to light in air, but shows a similar trend of device attenuation to the J71:ITIC BHJ blend as a function of illumination time. These results highlight the influence of ITIC photo-oxidation on the main degradation in relevant devices. Besides, in order to identify the role of light or oxygen alone in the degradation of device performance, we investigated the relevant J71:ITIC devices exposed to light in a nitrogen glovebox for 60 minutes or exposed to dry air in the dark for 60 minutes. Note that the ambient temperature is around 25 °C. Both photovoltaic performances of the corresponding solar cells decreased slightly as depicted in Fig. S5,† and the photovoltaic performance parameters are listed in Table S1 in the ESI.† Combined with the similar surface morphologies of the investigated blends over the illumination time interval (Fig. S6, ESI†), our results powerfully indicate that the main degradation process of the J71:ITIC system as well as other FREA systems can be mainly driven by the photo-oxidation of the corresponding acceptor materials.
In order to further clarify the degradation behavior and mechanisms of NFAs in devices, we again took the J71:ITIC system as an example. Fig. 1E shows the evolution of the current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of J71:ITIC solar cells based on their active layers exposed to light and oxygen for different time periods, and the corresponding device parameters are compiled in Table S2 in the ESI.† An overall PCE loss of approximately 50% in the J71:ITIC solar cell can be found after only 10 seconds of light exposure, while its PCE was lost by ca. 70% within 1 minute of light exposure, and by more than 90% in less than 10 minutes. All of the parameters, including Voc, short-circuit current density (Jsc) and fill factor (FF), reduced simultaneously. In addition, we applied photo-oxidized ITIC (O-ITIC) that had been photo-oxidized in chlorobenzene (CB) solution to fabricate the fresh solar cells. The detailed preparation process can be found in the Experimental section. The relevant J–V characteristics of devices with different O-ITIC fractions are presented in Fig. S7 in the ESI,† and the corresponding photovoltaic parameters are concluded in Table S3.† Notably, the J–V characteristics of the active layer blended with different O-ITIC fractions (Fig. S7, ESI†) and the normalized PCEs (Fig. 1F) are similar to those of J71:ITIC films exposed to ambient conditions as a function of illumination time. Based on these results, it is expected that increased energetic disorder or defects that result from ITIC photo-oxidation act as trap states for electrons, which may also cause the main energy loss discussed in the following section.
Impact of NFA photo-oxidation on physical dynamics
To gain insight into the effects of ITIC photo-oxidation on the charge transport, space-charge-limited current (SCLC) measurements were performed on electron-only devices with the structure ITO/ZnO/J71:ITIC/Ca/Al made from J71:ITIC based blends exposed in air for different time periods. Relevant carrier mobilities in degraded J71:ITIC films are measured by analyzing the J–V characteristics of single carrier devices under dark conditions (Fig. S8, ESI†).46 As shown in Fig. 2A top, the current density at a given applied voltage drops significantly with extending exposure time of BHJ films under illumination in air. Here we also investigated the charge carrier mobility μ of the devices by employing the technique of photoinduced charge carrier extraction by linearly increasing voltage (photo-CELIV, Fig. S9, ESI†).45,47–49 Although the fresh device shows an average mobility value of 1.25 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 (Fig. 2A bottom), the exposed blends also show the continuous reduction of the total carrier mobility in devices. These results imply a correlation between the transport properties of exposed films and corresponding photovoltaic performance. Note that details of the measurement techniques in the SCLC and photo-CELIV methods are given in Note 1 in the ESI.†
 Fig. 2  Impact of ITIC photo-oxidation on blend film transport and recombination kinetics as well as relevant voltage losses. (A) Carrier transport properties of blend films as a function of degradation time and the relevant mobilities are calculated by the SCLC method and from photo-CELIV data. (B) Voc of devices based on different degraded films plotted against light intensity on a logarithmic scale. (C) Second order recombination coefficient (left) and transient time (right) calculated from time delayed collection field photo-CELIV as a function of degradation time. (D) Schematic illustrating how the density of electron states may evolve during photo-oxidation. The density of states (DOS) is predicted by charge extraction measurements. (E) Experimental Voc compared to ideal Voc for devices without ΔE1(Egap − qECT), ΔE2(qΔVrad,below gapoc), and ΔE3(qΔVnon-radoc) energy losses. 
In order to analyze the recombination dynamics of exposed blends, we studied the relative recombination losses as a function of light intensity and provided the basic knowledge in ESI Note 2.† The light intensity dependence of Voc of solar cells with various exposure time periods of active layers under illumination intensities ranging from 107 to 2 mW cm−2 are plotted in Fig. 2B. The gradually increased slope S values from 1.27 kT/q for 0 min to 1.96 kT/q for 30 min of Voc of J71:ITIC degraded devices imply that the trap-assisted recombination losses are clearly increased. This is also in agreement with the results of light intensity dependence of Voc of J71:ITIC:O-ITIC devices with various O-ITIC fractions (Fig. S10, ESI†). In addition, photo-CELIV measurements with delayed collection fields were employed to further identify the recombination dynamics of relevant degraded blends. The initial density of photogenerated carriers (n(0)) and the effective 2nd order recombination coefficient (τB) are calculated by fitting the corresponding time-dependence of the charge carrier density (, where γ is the time-independent parameter.).45,46 Moreover, the transient time (ttr) by using a formula (ttr = d2/μV, ttr = d2/μV where d is the film thickness) was also analyzed.48 Thus, a deep insight is gained by analyzing τB in parallel to ttr, as these two material parameters are independent of each other. As presented in Fig. 2C, it can be concluded that the gradually extended exposure time periods resulted in the increased 2nd order recombination coefficient and transient time in relevant devices based on blends exposed to light in air. These findings further underpin the role of photo-oxidative ITIC acting as a trap existing in blends, where the increased exposure time periods lead to generation of a more defect-rich microstructure.
In order to probe the effect of ITIC photo-oxidation on performance degradation with respect to energetic losses and understand the origin of the Voc reductions in relevant devices based on photo-oxidized blends, we turn our attention to characterizing trap states. Transient photocurrent (TPC) and charge extraction (CE) techniques provide an estimate of the distribution of trapped charges in the density of states (DOS) of the semiconductor. Mobile charges generally leave the device immediately while trapped charges leave the device more slowly and thus contribute to the current at longer times. Note that details of the measurement techniques in the TPC and CE methods are given in ESI Note 3.† As shown in Fig. S11,† TPC indicates that degraded devices contain more trapped charges than the fresh ones. Furthermore, in order to obtain independent evidence for this observation, we performed a CE measurement, which measured the density of photogenerated charges at open circuit. Fig. S12† shows how the CE curves change in response to exposure time periods of blends. The devices based on the exposed blends consistently display a lower photocurrent in the time interval compared to the fresh device, which is in accordance with their device performance (Fig. 1E). In addition, Fig. S13† suggests that the degraded devices can reach a lower Voc compared to the fresh one at a given density of photogenerated charges, which is expected because the photooxidative-induced defects or traps can result in smaller quasi-Fermi level splitting. Thus, these analyses can prove our hypothesis that the density of electron states may evolve during photo-oxidation of blends (Fig. 2D). This trend is also demonstrated by the photo-oxidation of fullerene-based active layers.27 Besides, combining transient photovoltage (TPV) and CE techniques, we are able to determine the charge carrier density in relation to the carrier lifetime via the equation (τ = τ0(n0/n)λ, where τ0 and n0 are constants and λ is the so-called recombination exponent.).50,51 Based on this point, we can calculate the non-geminate recombination order R (R = λ + 1) in relevant devices without and with O-ITIC doping, as shown in Fig. S14 in the ESI.†21,47 The fitting of the data yield R = 2.11 for the fresh device without O-ITIC doping, indicating a mechanism close to an ideal bimolecular recombination, justified by the FF of 71.12% as well as a high PCE of over 11% (Table S3†). In addition, we obtained R = 2.73 for the 0.7% O-ITIC blend and R = 3.47 for the 3.5% O-ITIC blend. The longer carrier lifetimes at fixed charge density existed in the O-ITIC based solar cells are associated with the more bulk traps as compared to the fresh J71:ITIC solar cells.
Here we further investigated the electroluminescence (EL) spectra and the EQEPV (the spectral photovoltaic external quantum efficiency) using Fourier-transform photocurrent spectroscopy (FTPS) measurements on a series of J71:ITIC devices, which were exposed to light and air for various time periods. The introduction of energy losses in devices and relative logic formula and methodology are also presented in ESI Note 4.† Details of the measurement results are given in Fig. S15 and S16.† The voltage loss ΔVoc due to radiative and nonradiative recombination (Fig. S15a, ESI†) can be described with the following equation: qΔV = ΔE1 + ΔE2 + ΔE3 = (Egap − qECT) + qΔVrad,below gapoc + qΔVnon-radoc.52 Furthermore, Table S4† summarizes the values measured and calculated from FTPS and EL measurements, and Fig. 2E presents the contributions to Voc losses regarding the difference and relationship of the optical band (Egap), CT state, Voc and the three terms of energy losses. In general, the difference between the resulting radiative-limit Voc,rad and the measured Voc can be assigned to non-radiative recombination losses (ΔVoc,non-rad). The relative size of the ΔVoc,non-rad component for solar cells with different exposure time periods should reflect the degree of non-radiative recombination in blends. It can be found that the main energy losses due to non-radiative recombination significantly increase with extending exposure time interval. As expected, the voltage losses measured by the FTPS technique are mirrored in the carrier transport properties and carrier recombination lifetime. Overall, the results of the charge transport and recombination dynamic analysis as well as the discussion of energy losses in relevant devices underline the effects of NFA photo-oxidation acting as trap states in exposed blends on device performance.
Possible mechanisms of NFA photo-oxidation
Taking ITIC as an example, here we shed some light on the possible mechanisms of NFA photo-oxidation, and compared them with that of fullerene derivatives (e.g. PC71BM), as depicted in Fig. 3. Fig. 3A shows the matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight (MALDI-TOF) mass spectrometry spectra of a neat ITIC film after 10 h exposure to light in air. It can be easily found that photo-oxidized ITIC species (with up to 4 oxygen atoms) in the exposed ITIC film were formed. The investigated photo-oxidized species is also found by using FTIR absorption spectra of the degraded ITIC film, which show a dramatic appearance of hydroxyl and carbonyl groups around 3500–3000 cm−1 and 1700 cm−1 (Fig. 3B), respectively. In addition, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements show that there is an obvious increase of the carbon–oxygen (C–O) bond in surface compositions after 10 h illumination (Fig. 3C). An analysis of the C–O bond areas reveals that a total of 15.3% photo-oxidized ITIC (O-ITIC) was found in the relevant ITIC film. A similar trend in the J71:ITIC blend is also found as shown in Fig. S17 in the ESI.† This result indicates that oxygen atoms are chemically attached to the ITIC under illumination in air, thus resulting in a dramatic structural change upon photo-oxidation.18,26,33 Besides, chemical processes related to degradation may lead to a reduction of average molar mass due to macromolecular chain bond scission. Fig. 3A also shows some pieces of broken molecules like the breaking of the cyano group in acceptor units and the rupture of end groups. This phenomenon is also demonstrated by the FTIR absorption spectra. During irradiation of the pristine ITIC, the intensity of signals in FTIR absorption spectra related to CH2 at 2929 cm−1 (νas) and 2846 cm−1 (νs), CN at about 2216 cm−1, and CC at 1536 cm−1 and 1395 cm−1 groups, shown in Fig. 3B, immediately starts to decrease which is related to the destruction of the π-conjugated system of ITIC.26 This phenomenon should be identical to the photo-oxidation behavior of other NFAs.
 Fig. 3  The analysis of possible chemical reactions of NFA photo-oxidation. (A) Negative ion mode MALDI-TOF measurement of the neat ITIC film degraded under one sun in dry air for 10 hours. (B) FTIR spectra of fresh and aged ITIC films with different exposure durations under one sun illumination in dry air (range: wavenumber from 4000 cm−1 to 400 cm−1). (C) XPS O(1s) spectrum of fresh pristine ITIC films before and after 10 h exposure to light in air. (D) Photographs of photo-oxidized ITIC and PC71BM pristine films upon different times of exposure. (E) UV-visible spectra of photo-oxidized ITIC and PC71BM pristine films upon different times of exposure. (F) The primary photo-oxidation reaction sites of ITIC and PC71BM. 
Chemical processes related to degradation leads to a reduction of average molar mass due to macromolecular chain bond scission. This reminds us to further investigate and discuss the differences and relationships between fullerene derivatives and NFAs. Fig. 3D exhibits photographs of photo-oxidized ITIC and PC71BM pristine films upon different times of exposure, while Fig. 3E shows the absorption spectra of photo-oxidized ITIC and PC71BM films. As compared to the PC71BM film, the absorption peak of ITIC significantly decreases in intensity and blue-shifted after a period of exposure to light in air. It is attributed to a loss in conjugation along the molecular backbone supported by the MALDI-TOF and FTIR measurements. In contrast, oxidation of the fullerene cage is not expected to obviously reduce absorption as appreciably. Notably, the absorption reduction caused by photo-oxidation of NFAs cannot directly explain the respective amount of irreversible performance reduction in OSCs. Due to the different electron affinity of photovoltaic materials, the photochemical reactions of acceptor materials are slightly different with the photo-degradation processes of their blends.34 These results suggest that the molecular structure of ITIC could provide more active photo-oxidation reaction sites, such as the double bond between the donor and acceptor units, the double bond on thiophene or bithiophene outlying central building blocks, side chains of donor units and so on, as depicted in Fig. 3F. Moreover, it is not possible to clear out the whole photochemical reactions in such a very complicated situation. Thus, theoretical principles and effective approaches for designing new NFAs and suppressing photo-oxidation of NFAs and their blends are very important and urgent, which will be discussed in the following section.
3. Discussion
Suppressing photo-oxidation of NFAs via material design
In order to find effective strategies to improve the photo-oxidation stability of NFAs, we select thirty-five acceptors, including thirty-three NFAs and two fullerene derivatives (PCBM and PC71BM) for comparison, as depicted in Fig. 4A. The provenances of materials are provided in Table S5 in the ESI.† Thin films of acceptor materials on quartz were made by spin-coating from solution and the UV-visible absorption spectrum of each film was measured at various time periods during continuous illumination with a xenon arc lamp exposed to an ambient atmosphere. The lamp provides an illumination intensity of 100 mW cm−2 (one sun illumination) and a spectrum that contains a wide spectral range from 300 to 1100 nm and has a close spectral match with the AM 1.5G spectrum over the visible wavelengths (Fig. S18, ESI†). In this work, we used three different films for each component to study its photo-oxidation behavior. The films of NFAs and fullerene derivatives were found to photo-bleach at substantially different rates varying from minutes to days. The time evolution of relevant pristine film absorption is shown in Fig. S19a–S53a in the ESI.† The normalized optical density loss per hour was calculated for each component by fitting the initial slope of the decay in the film absorption maxima, normalized by the initial peak absorption before aging (Fig. S19b–S53b, ESI†). Note that the time period corresponding to the ∼20% loss in optical density was used for the fit. As a result, Fig. 4B provides the photo-bleaching rates of NFAs and fullerene derivatives. It is found that the photo-bleaching rates of the investigated NFAs with the exception of IDIC-4F,53 IDIC-4Cl,53 O-IDTBR and l-IDTBTRh54 are slower than those of PCBM and PC71BM.
 Fig. 4  The Investigated non-fullerene and fullerene acceptors as well as their photo-bleaching rate. (A) Molecular structures of the investigated acceptors. (B) Photo-bleaching rate of acceptor materials, including non-fullerene acceptors and fullerene derivatives. 
It is well known that the amounts of NFAs, which contain five key constituent components including donor units, acceptor units, conjugated bridges, side chains, and heteroatom substitutions, have been developed to tune the blend morphology and improve the optoelectronic properties.55–60 Based on this view, the differences of photo-bleaching rates in these NFAs presented in Fig. 4B can also provide some promising inspiration for NFA design. From this perspective, we also analyze and summarize how to improve the photo-oxidation stability of NFAs via material design. In the acceptor units, IDIC, ITIC, FOIC61 and their derivatives based on different end groups (Fig. S54, ESI†) can be systematically investigated. By comparing IDIC-4F and IDIC-4Cl, IT-4F and IT-4Cl,62 and F8IC63 and C8IC,64 we find that the NFAs based on chlorine-substituted end groups are much more stable than fluorine-substituted acceptor units in FREAs. Moreover, 3,9-bis(2-methylene-(5&6-methyl-(3-(1,1-dicyanomethylene))-indanone))-5,5,11,11-tetrakis(4-hexylphenyl)-dithieno[2,3-d:2′,3′-d′]-s-indaceno[1,2-b:5,6-b′]-dithiophene (IT-M),65 IT-DM,65 3,9-bis(4-(1,1-dicyanomethylene)-3-methylene-2-oxo-cyclopenta[b]thiophen)-5,5,11,11-tetrakis(4-hexylphenyl)-dithieno[2,3-d′:2,3-d′]-s-indaceno[1,2-b:5,6-b′]-dithiophene (ITCC),66 ITTC67 and 3,9-bis(2-methylene-(3-(1,1-dicyanomethylene)-cyclopentane-1,3-dione[c]-1-methyl-thiophe))-5,5,11,11-tetrakis(4-hexylphenyl)-dithieno[2,3-d:2′,3′-d′]-s-indaceno-[1,2-b:5,6-b′]-dithiophene (MeIC)10 have the same order of magnitude of the photo-bleaching rate as ITIC based on 2-(3-oxo-2,3-dihydroinden-1-ylidene)malononitrile (INCN) units as end-capping groups, indicating that methyl-INCN, dimethyl-INCN, and thiophene-fused end groups (CPTCN) as well as methyl-CPTCN and Cl-CPTCN may not be able to enhance the photo-oxidation stability of FREAs. This conclusion is also demonstrated by the FOIC, F8IC and T8IC acceptors based on larger fused-rings, which show a similar trend of the photo-bleaching rate. Besides, O-IDTBR based on two dual acceptor units, including an ethyl-rhodanine unit and a benzothiadiazole unit, is more stable than IDIC based on INCN as the end group. Surprisingly, 2,2′-((2Z,2′Z)-((12,13-bis(2-ethylhexyl)-3,9-diundecyl-12,13-dihydro[1,2,5]thiadiazolo[3,4e]thieno [2′′,3′′:4′,5′]thieno[2′,3′:4,5]pyrrolo[3,2-g]thieno[2′,3′:4,5]thieno[3,2-b]indole-2,10-diyl)bis(methanylyli-dene))bis(3-oxo-2,3-dihydro-1H-indene-2,1-diylidene))dimalononitrile (Y5)68 without F atom substitutions shows a slightly lower optical density loss than Y6 with F-substituted INCN units, probably due to the different absorption spectra resulting in a difference in the number of photons absorbed in relevant films. In the donor units, the photo-bleaching rate of IHIC69 based on six-fused rings as the core is about one order lower than that of ITIC based on seven-fused rings as the core. However, by comparing IT-4F and F8IC, IT-4Cl and C8IC, and ITTC and T8IC with the same fused-ring structure, we find that extending the core from seven- to eight-fused rings can improve the stability of FREAs. However, in the perylene diimide (PDI) acceptor derivatives the thiophene based PDI molecule is more stable than PDI NFAs based on benzodithiophene (BDT) units as cores. Interestingly, introducing pyrene-fused units into PDI acceptor derivatives can effectively weaken the difference of photo-oxidation rates between thiophene-based and BDT-based PDI acceptors. Besides, some FREAs based on special cores, including COi8DFIC,60 Y6, and INPIC-4F,70 also show a faster photo-oxidation rate than their fullerene counterparts (Fig. 4B). Despite, the above-mentioned results suggest that replacing common central building blocks with other units with stronger electron-donating ability is an useful way to suppress photo-bleaching of FREAs.
Fine-tuning of the molecular structure, which in some cases resulted in huge differences in device performance, can also greatly change the photo-oxidation rate of the acceptor materials. In the alkyl side chains or end chains, for example, l-IDTBTRh based on alkoxybenzene units as side chains is more stable than the octyl-substituted O-IDTBR molecule. In addition, the photo-bleaching rate of alkylthiophene-substituted 3,9-bis(2-methylene-(3-(1,1-dicyanomethylene)-indanone))-5,5,11,11-tetrakis(4-hexylthienyl)-dithieno[2,3-d:2′,3′-d′]-s-indaceno[1,2-b:5,6-b′]-dithiophene (ITIC-Th)71 is slightly higher than that of alkylbenzene-substituted ITIC. Importantly, by introducing terminal hexyl chains into thieno[3,2-b]thiophene (TT) moieties of the indacenodithieno[3,2-b]thiophene (IDTT) core, the corresponding ITC6-IC72 shows a lower optical density loss, probably due to the increased steric hindrance of the double bond between the donor and acceptor units in FREAs.32,55 Notably, the differences of photo-bleaching rates between IT-4Cl without octyl-substitutions and NCBDT-4Cl73 with octyl substitutions attached to the benzene-ring of the IDTT core are not obvious. In these few years, more and more attention has also been paid to the isomerization design of NFAs.54 Here we also find that the isomers of FREAs can significantly make a difference in photo-oxidation stability, like ITTC and ITCNTC74 acceptors. Much to our surprise, the geometric shape of the angular indaceno[2,1-b:6,5-b′]dithiophene (a-IDT) and linear IDT (l-IDT) subunits (a-IDTBTRh and l-IDTBTRh) can play a pivotal role in governing the photo-oxidation stability with a photo-bleaching rate of 287% for a-IDTBTRh and a photo-bleaching rate of 0.04% for l-IDTBTRh, approximately four orders of magnitude difference. Note that a-IDT is an analog of l-IDT via intramolecular annulation, in which the central phenyl ring was linked to the β-position of the thiophene ring but fused on its α-position. Further research based on these two isomers is underway. It should be also noted that applying non-fused electron structures is another strategy to improve the photo-oxidization stability of relevant NFAs.75 Overall, our results indicate that fine-tuning and isomerization of the molecular structure can effectively improve the photo-oxidation stability of NFAs, which is relatively unfamiliar in previous studies.
Suppressing photo-oxidation of NFAs via introducing stabilizers
Considering the results and analysis of optical density loss of FREAs in the previous sections, it's very difficult to figure out the whole reaction routes due to multiple photo-degradation by-products on one hand. On the other hand, the photochemical processes not only include the photo-oxidation reaction, but also under the same conditions trigger various chemical reactions without oxygen participation, including the breaking of chemical bonds via light absorption,20 photo-induced side chain rearrangement (like the photo-Fires reaction),26 chain scission, crosslinking, etc.35,76 Thus, objectively speaking, it will become very difficult to solve the photo-oxidation issues through material design.
Here we focus our endeavor to choose some common stabilizers in anticipation of their abilities to inhibit photo-oxidation of NFAs and their blends. Fig. 5A shows the molecular structures of small molecule stabilizers, which are commercially available stabilizing additives for increasing the longevity of industrial products. Generally, their stabilization mechanisms are fully understood in biology and food industries; here we selected six different stabilizers including hydroperoxide decomposers (2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidinooxy (S1) and tris(2,4-di-ter-butylphenyl)phosphite (S3)),77,78 singlet and/or triplet quenchers (zinc dibutyldithiocarbamate (S5) and nickel dibutyldithiocarbamate (S6)),79,80 free-radical scavengers (S6)81 and single oxygen quenchers (2,6-di-t-butyl-4-methylphenol (S2), pentaerythrityl tetrakis[3-(3,5-di-tert-butyl-4-hydroxypheny)propionate] (S4) and S6).82,83Fig. 5B depicts the autoxidation cycle of NFAs and their primary reactive sites as discussed in Fig. 3F as well as the points of attack of stabilizing additives. As expected, the successful application of these stabilizers in other fields served as motivation to elucidate whether these stabilizers could also be employed to suppress photo-oxidation reactions of NFAs. Continuing with the ITIC as an example, we further analyzed the effects of these stabilizers on the photo-aging behavior of continuously irradiated ITIC films blended with 2 wt% stabilizers S1–S6. As shown in Fig. 5C, as compared to the pristine ITIC film, the additive doped ITIC films are more stable. Among these six stabilizers, S6 as a nickel chelate is the best quencher of reactive oxygen species (ROS), probably due to a low oxidation potential (Eox = −74 mV vs. Fc/Fc+).84Fig. 5D shows the changes of absorption spectra in the exposed ITIC films without and with 2 wt% S6, and Fig. 5E provides the degradation kinetics of the ITIC film as a function of the weight fraction of S6. After 6 h exposure to light and air, a plain ITIC film photo-bleaches by about 80%, while under the same conditions films containing 10 and 20 wt% S6 photo-bleach to a much lesser extent. In addition, Fig. 5F exhibits the photographs of photo-oxidized ITIC films upon different times of exposure in air without and with 2 wt% S6. Since photoluminescence (PL) is usually a much more sensitive probe of degradation than UV/vis absorption, we also compare the evolution of PL spectra of the illuminated ITIC films without and with 2 wt% S6 (Fig. S55†). Surprisingly, in the first 30 min, 2 wt% S6 inhibits almost fully the photo-oxidation of a thin film (change of <1% PL intensity), while during the same exposure time period the PL intensity of the un-doped ITIC film was reduced to 60% of its original level. All these data deliver an intuitive message of the role of S6 playing in the ITIC film when exposed to light in air, which can effectively suppress the breaking of molecular backbones. Besides, the photo-oxidation kinetics of films of IDIC, IT-4F and O-IDTBR, and of the corresponding blends with 2 wt% S6 (Fig. 5G, derived from the reaction spectra, see Fig. S56–S58†) further reveal its general applicability in protecting NFAs against photo-bleaching.
 Fig. 5  Suppressing photo-oxidation of NFAs and their blends as well as relevant devices through stabilizers. (A) The chemical structures of the stabilizers studied in this work. (B) Autoxidation cycle of NFAs and points of attack of stabilizing additives (ROS: reactive oxygen species; RH: pristine NFA; R*: carbon centered radical formed by H-abstraction; H-donor: pristine polymer donor). The reactive sites mainly include three parts: alkene based units, cyclopentadiene based units (e.g. thiophene) and alkyl chain based units. The ROS quencher or stabilizers can effectively inhibit the presence of ROS, and avoid the decomposer of NFAs. In addition, under illumination, free NFA radicals are formed. R* will quickly react with ground state molecular oxygen, O2, forming chain-initiating, oxygen-centered radicals, which further react to form hydroperoxides by hydrogen abstraction and thus open a second cycle.84,85 Antioxidants can be introduced to induce termination steps for autoxidation, forming stable radicals that suppress the autoxidation cycles. (C) Degradation kinetics of light-soaked ITIC pristine films in air without and with the 2 wt% stabilizers as pointed out above. (D) Photo-bleaching behavior of ITIC without and with 2 wt% S6. (E) Degradation kinetics of ITIC as a function of the weight fraction of S6. (F) Photographs of photo-oxidized ITIC films upon different times of exposure in air without and with 2 wt% S6. (G) Degradation kinetics of NFAs IDIC, IT-4F and O-IDTBR without and with 2 wt% S6 in air under illumination with a solar simulator (Fig. S16†). (H) Degradation behavior of ITIC and its J71:ITIC blends in the absence/presence of S6 under illumination of a one sun simulator in air. (I) Current density–voltage characteristics of J71:ITIC blends with the different contents of S6. (J) Semi-logarithmic representation of the Voc dependence on light intensity in relevant devices without and with 2 wt% S6. (K) Depiction of the temporal evolution of PCE of unencapsulated devices with a device structure of ITO/ZnO/J71:ITIC/MoO3/Ag which were continuously light soaked in dry air using a solar simulator (100 mW cm−2; an average of six devices). 

Fig. 5H shows the temporal evolution of the optical density of films processed from the polymer J71, NFA ITIC and their blends without and with 2 wt% S6. It is found that 2 wt% S6 cannot significantly inhibit the photo-oxidation of J71, as shown in Fig. S59.† The photo-oxidation degradation of the J71:ITIC blend can also be significantly suppressed by addition of S6. The changes of the optical density of the corresponding films are presented in Fig. S60.† Thus, the suppression of the photo-bleaching rate of ITIC phases in unstable blends not only confirms the antioxidative ability of S6, but also provides insight into the non-sacrificial mechanisms of stabilization by S6. Besides, similar trends can be found for other NFAs (including IDIC, IT-4F and O-IDTBR) and their blends with polymer J71 (Fig. S61–S63†). These results further suggest that an additional stabilizing effect of S6 in these systems is based on the reduction of 1O2 concentration, either by quenching of 1O2 itself and/or quenching of triplet excited states of the sensitizer.84
In addition to the photovoltaic materials in films, we also evaluated the impact of S6 additives on the photovoltaic performance of relevant devices based on J71:ITIC blends without and with various contents. Fig. 5I shows the J–V characteristics of fabricated devices with up to 2 wt% S6 integrated into J71:ITIC blends, and Table S6† presents the relevant photovoltaic parameters. Devices containing 2 wt% S6 exhibits a PCE of 6% but the photovoltaic performance drops slightly as compared to the reference devices, which is predominately related to a drop in Jsc and FF. We attribute the loss in Jsc and FF to the occurrence of trap-assisted recombination in the presence of S6. This conclusion emerges from the slope of light intensity dependence of Voc measurements as depicted in Fig. 5J, which for doped devices containing 2 wt% S6 increased to 1.30 kT/q compared to 1.13 kT/q for un-doped devices. Furthermore, we conducted the investigations of the protective nature of S6 in unencapsulated J71:ITIC solar cells containing 2 wt% stabilizer for evaluating the S6 role of improving the photo-oxidation stability of devices. It is apparent that the S6 doped devices exhibit higher ambient stability as compared to the devices without S6 measured under one sun illumination in air, as presented in Fig. 5K. Similar improvements were observed for other J71:NFA solar cells with their active layers directly exposed to light and oxygen for different time periods as shown in Fig. S60d–S63d,† highlighting the technological relevance of S6 in increasing the resilience of OSCs towards light and oxygen.
4. Conclusion
In summary, we investigate the impact of photo-oxidation of classical acceptors, including ITIC, IDIC, IT-4F, O-IDTBR and Y6, on device behaviors, and find that the photovoltaic parameters of corresponding solar cells based on J71 and PBDB-T as donor materials degraded dramatically when their BHJ blends were illuminated in air within a few minutes. Taking the J71:ITIC system as an example, we systematically analyze the degradation nature of relevant devices, mainly resulting from the ITIC photo-oxidation rather than the other factors (e.g. J71 photo-oxidation, interfacial layers and device structures). Furthermore, we establish a relationship between the presence of specific oxidative defects and the resulting change in the electronic properties of relevant J71:ITIC devices based on their blends exposed in air for different time periods. Meanwhile we depict the impact of ITIC photo-oxidation on charge transport and recombination kinetics as well as relevant energy losses in relevant blends. Notably, our results suggest that exposure of NFAs to oxygen provokes the irreversible intercalation of oxygen atoms and breaking of molecular backbones. Taking ITIC and PC71BM as an example, we shed some light on the possible mechanisms of NFA photo-oxidation. Based on this analysis, our findings highlight the highly photoactive nature of NFAs which must be taken into account for the choice of the manufacturing process for industrial products.
The large difference of photo-bleaching rates of ITIC and PC71BM films investigated drives us to further construct theoretical principles and find effective approaches for designing new NFAs and suppressing photo-oxidation of NFAs and their blends. For this purpose, we collected thirty-three NFAs and two fullerene derivatives, and measured and analyzed relevant photo-bleaching rates. As a result, some inspiration for guiding the design of new NFAs for weakening photochemical reactions is provided, although these strategies do not solve the photo-oxidation issue fundamentally. Fortunately, we have shown that a nickel chelate S6 can act as a potent antioxidizing agent for a wide range of NFAs and their blends. The photovoltaic and physical measurements of J71:ITIC devices suggest implications on the recombination behavior at higher loadings of S6 additives, most likely due to trap state formation. But importantly, the S6 doped device shows better photo-oxidation stability as compared to the un-doped device, indicating that using S6 and other similar compounds as antioxidants can represent a cost-effective route toward organic solar cells with extended longevity. For this, we strongly anticipate that similar compounds can be tailored to prevent energetic trapping and further enhance the stabilization efficiency. Ultimately, in their current state, the long term stability of organic solar cells will be not only reliant on effective barrier layers and successful encapsulation, but also depends on the choice of highly stable photovoltaic materials and/or effective and harmless stabilizers.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) (Grant No. 21702154 and 51773157) and supported by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (2042017kf0269). We also thank the opening project of the Key Laboratory of Materials Processing and Mold for support.
References
D. Baran, 
            et al., Reducing the efficiency-stability-cost gap of organic photovoltaics with highly efficient and stable small molecule acceptor ternary solar cells, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 363–369 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Huang, P. Cheng, Y. M. Yang, G. Li and Y. Yang, High-Performance Organic Bulk-Heterojunction Solar Cells Based on Multiple-Donor or Multiple-Acceptor Components, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705706 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Sun, 
            et al., A low cost and high performance polymer donor material for polymer solar cells, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 743 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Wu, 
            et al., Slot-die printed non-fullerene organic solar cells with the highest efficiency of 12.9% for low-cost PV-driven water splitting, Nano Energy, 2019, 61, 559–566 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, 
            et al., Nonfullerene Tandem Organic Solar Cells with High Performance of 14.11%, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1707508 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Zhang, Y. Qin, J. Zhu and J. Hou, Over 14% Efficiency in Polymer Solar Cells Enabled by a Chlorinated Polymer Donor, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800868 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Yuan, 
            et al., Single-Junction Organic Solar Cell with over 15% Efficiency Using Fused-Ring Acceptor with Electron-Deficient Core, Joule, 2019 Search PubMed .
J. Min, 
            et al., A Wide-bandgap D-A Copolymer Donor Based on Chlorine Substituted Acceptor Unit for High Performance Polymer Solar Cells, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019 Search PubMed .
Z. Xiao, X. Jia and L. Ding, Ternary organic solar cells offer 14% power conversion efficiency, Sci. Bull., 2017, 62, 1562–1564 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Luo, 
            et al., Fine-Tuning of Molecular Packing and Energy Level through Methyl Substitution Enabling Excellent Small Molecule Acceptors for Nonfullerene Polymer Solar Cells with Efficiency up to 12.54%, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706124 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Lin, 
            et al., Balanced Partnership between Donor and Acceptor Components in Nonfullerene Organic Solar Cells with 12% Efficiency, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706363 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Lin, 
            et al., A facile planar fused-ring electron acceptor for as-cast polymer solar cells with 8.71% efficiency, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 2973–2976 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lin, 
            et al., An electron acceptor challenging fullerenes for efficient polymer solar cells, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1170–1174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhao, 
            et al., Molecular Optimization Enables over 13% Efficiency in Organic Solar Cells, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 7148–7151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Holliday, 
            et al., High-efficiency and air-stable P3HT-based polymer solar cells with a new non-fullerene acceptor, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11585 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Min, 
            et al., Evaluation of Electron Donor Materials for Solution-Processed Organic Solar Cells via a Novel Figure of Merit, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700465 CrossRef .
J. Adams, 
            et al., Water Ingress in Encapsulated Inverted Organic Solar Cells: Correlating Infrared Imaging and Photovoltaic Performance, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1501065 CrossRef .
S. Alem, 
            et al., Degradation mechanism of benzodithiophene-based conjugated polymers when exposed to light in air, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 2993–2998 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Heumueller, 
            et al., Reducing burn-in voltage loss in polymer solar cells by increasing the polymer crystallinity, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2974–2980 RSC .
M. Jørgensen, K. Norrman and F. C. Krebs, Stability/degradation of polymer solar cells, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 686–714 CrossRef .
T. Heumueller, 
            et al., Disorder-Induced Open-Circuit Voltage Losses in Organic Solar Cells During Photoinduced Burn-In, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500111 CrossRef .
E. T. Hoke, 
            et al., The Role of Electron Affinity in Determining Whether Fullerenes Catalyze or Inhibit Photooxidation of Polymers for Solar Cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 1351–1357 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, 
            et al., Overcoming the Thermal Instability of Efficient Polymer Solar Cells by Employing Novel Fullerene-Based Acceptors, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601204 CrossRef .
J. Min, 
            et al., High efficiency and stability small molecule solar cells developed by bulk microstructure fine-tuning, Nano Energy, 2016, 28, 241–249 CrossRef CAS .
U. Aygül, 
            et al., Energy Level Alignment of a P3HT/Fullerene Blend during the Initial Steps of Degradation, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 4992–4998 CrossRef .
U. Dettinger, 
            et al., FTIR Study of the Impact of PC[60]BM on the Photodegradation of the Low Band Gap Polymer PCPDTBT under O2 Environment, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 2299–2308 CrossRef CAS .
H. K. H. Lee, 
            et al., The role of fullerenes in the environmental stability of polymer: Fullerene solar cells, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 417–428 RSC .
J. Luke, 
            et al., Twist and Degrade-Impact of Molecular Structure on the Photostability of Nonfullerene Acceptors and Their Photovoltaic Blends, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 7, 1803755 CrossRef .
E. M. Speller, 
            et al., Toward Improved Environmental Stability of Polymer: Fullerene and Polymer:Nonfullerene Organic Solar Cells: A Common Energetic Origin of Light- and Oxygen-Induced Degradation, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 846–852 CrossRef CAS .
P. Cheng and X. Zhan, Stability of organic solar cells: Challenges and strategies, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 2544–2582 RSC .
F. J. Lim, A. Krishnamoorthy and G. W. Ho, Device Stability and Light-Soaking Characteristics of High-Efficiency Benzodithiophene-Thienothiophene Copolymer-Based Inverted Organic Solar Cells with F-TiO(x) Electron-Transport Layer, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 12119–12127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. R. Mateker, 
            et al., Molecular Packing and Arrangement Govern the Photo-Oxidative Stability of Organic Photovoltaic Materials, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 6345–6353 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yamane, 
            et al., Photooxidation studies on indene-C60 adducts, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2015, 143, 135–140 CrossRef CAS .
I. Fraga Domínguez, A. Distler and L. Lüer, Stability of Organic Solar Cells: The Influence of Nanostructured Carbon Materials, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601320 CrossRef .
T. Heumueller, 
            et al., Morphological and electrical control of fullerene dimerization determines organic photovoltaic stability, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 247–256 RSC .
S. Badgujar, 
            et al., Highly efficient and thermally stable fullerene-free organic solar cells based on a small molecule donor and acceptor, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 16335–16340 RSC .
H. Cha, 
            et al., An Efficient, ‘Burn in’ Free Organic Solar Cell Employing a Nonfullerene Electron Acceptor, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701156 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Du, 
            et al., Efficient Polymer Solar Cells Based on Non-fullerene Acceptors with Potential Device Lifetime Approaching 10 Years, Joule, 2018 Search PubMed .
N. Gasparini, 
            et al., Burn-in Free Nonfullerene-Based Organic Solar Cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700770 CrossRef .
N. Liang, W. Jiang, J. Hou and Z. Wang, New developments in non-fullerene small molecule acceptors for polymer solar cells, Mater. Chem. Front., 2017, 1, 1291–1303 RSC .
G. E. Park, 
            et al., Eco-Friendly Solvent-Processed Fullerene-Free Polymer Solar Cells with over 9.7% Efficiency and Long-Term Performance Stability, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700566 CrossRef .
H. Li, Z. Xiao, L. Ding and J. Wang, Thermostable single-junction organic solar cells with a power conversion efficiency of 14.62%, Science Bulletin, 2018, 63, 340–342 CrossRef CAS .
H. Bin, 
            et al., 11.4% Efficiency non-fullerene polymer solar cells with trialkylsilyl substituted 2D-conjugated polymer as donor, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Qian, 
            et al., Design, Application, and Morphology Study of a New Photovoltaic Polymer with Strong Aggregation in Solution State, Macromolecules, 2012, 45, 9611–9617 CrossRef CAS .
J. Min, 
            et al., A Universal Layer-by-Layer Solution-Processing Approach for Efficient Non-fullerene Organic Solar Cells, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019 Search PubMed .
J. Min, 
            et al., Effects of Alkyl Terminal Chains on Morphology, Charge Generation, Transport, and Recombination Mechanisms in Solution-Processed Small Molecule Bulk Heterojunction Solar Cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500386 CrossRef .
N. Gasparini, 
            et al., The Physics of Small Molecule Acceptors for Efficient and Stable Bulk Heterojunction Solar Cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 7, 1703298 CrossRef .
J. Min, 
            et al., Time-Dependent Morphology Evolution of Solution-Processed Small Molecule Solar Cells during Solvent Vapor Annealing, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502579 CrossRef .
O. Semeniuk, 
            et al., Charge transport mechanism in lead oxide revealed by CELIV technique, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 33359 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Baran, 
            et al., Role of Polymer Fractionation in Energetic Losses and Charge Carrier Lifetimes of Polymer: Fullerene Solar Cells, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 19668–19673 CrossRef CAS .
J. Min, 
            et al., Gaining further insight into the effects of thermal annealing and solvent vapor annealing on time morphological development and degradation in small molecule solar cells, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 18101–18110 RSC .
Z. Luo, 
            et al., Reduced Energy Loss Enabled by a Chlorinated Thiophene-Fused Ending-Group Small Molecular Acceptor for Efficient Nonfullerene Organic Solar Cells with 13.6% Efficiency, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 3, 1900041 CrossRef .
J. Qu, 
            et al., Chlorine Atoms Induced Molecular Interlocked Network in a Non-Fullerene Acceptor, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 39992–40000 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Huang, 
            et al., Enhanced open circuit voltage of small molecule acceptors containing angular-shaped indacenodithiophene units for P3HT-based organic solar cells, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 12347–12354 RSC .
H. Wang, 
            et al., Molecular engineering of central fused-ring cores of non-fullerene acceptors for high-efficiency organic solar cells, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 4313–4333 RSC .
G. Zhang, 
            et al., Nonfullerene Acceptor Molecules for Bulk Heterojunction Organic Solar Cells, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 3447–3507 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, H. S. Tan, X. Guo, A. Facchetti and H. Yan, Material insights and challenges for non-fullerene organic solar cells based on small molecular acceptors, Nat. Energy, 2018, 115, 12666 Search PubMed .
W. Li, 
            et al., Correlating the electron-donating core structure with morphology and performance of carbonoxygen-bridged ladder-type non-fullerene acceptor based organic solar cells, Nano Energy, 2019, 61, 318–326 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Luo, 
            et al., Fine-Tuning of Molecular Packing and Energy Level through Methyl Substitution Enabling Excellent Small Molecule Acceptors for Nonfullerene Polymer Solar Cells with Efficiency up to 12.54%, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706124 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Xiao, 
            et al., 26 mA cm−2Jsc from organic solar cells with a low-bandgap nonfullerene acceptor, Science Bulletin, 2017, 62, 1494–1496 CrossRef CAS .
T. Li, 
            et al., Fused Tris(thienothiophene)-Based Electron Acceptor with Strong Near-Infrared Absorption for High-Performance As-Cast Solar Cells, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705969 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Zhang, 
            et al., Over 14% Efficiency in Organic Solar Cells Enabled by Chlorinated Nonfullerene Small-Molecule Acceptors, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800613 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Dai, 
            et al., Enhancing the Performance of Polymer Solar Cells via Core Engineering of NIR-Absorbing Electron Acceptors, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706571 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Chen, 
            et al., Modulation of End Groups for Low-Bandgap Nonfullerene Acceptors Enabling High-Performance Organic Solar Cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801203 CrossRef .
S. Li, 
            et al., Energy-Level Modulation of Small-Molecule Electron Acceptors to Achieve over 12% Efficiency in Polymer Solar Cells, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9423–9429 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yao, 
            et al., Achieving Highly Efficient Nonfullerene Organic Solar Cells with Improved Intermolecular Interaction and Open-Circuit Voltage, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 2700254 Search PubMed .
Z. Zhang, 
            et al., Achieving over 10% efficiency in a new acceptor ITTC and its blends with hexafluoroquinoxaline based polymers, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 11286–11293 RSC .
J. Yuan, 
            et al., Fused Benzothiadiazole: A Building Block for n-Type Organic Acceptor to Achieve High-Performance Organic Solar Cells, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1807577 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Wang, 
            et al., Fused Hexacyclic Nonfullerene Acceptor with Strong Near-Infrared Absorption for Semitransparent Organic Solar Cells with 9.77% Efficiency, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701308 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Sun, 
            et al., Dithieno3,2-b:2′,3′-dpyrrol Fused Nonfullerene Acceptors Enabling Over 13% Efficiency for Organic Solar Cells, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1707150 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Lin, 
            et al., High-Performance Electron Acceptor with Thienyl Side Chains for Organic Photovoltaics, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 4955–4961 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, 
            et al., Conformation Locking on Fused-Ring Electron Acceptor for High-Performance Nonfullerene Organic Solar Cells, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1705095 CrossRef .
B. Kan, 
            et al., A chlorinated low-bandgap small-molecule acceptor for organic solar cells with 14.1% efficiency and low energy loss, Sci. China: Chem., 2018, 61, 1307–1313 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Luo, 
            et al., Asymmetric thieno [2,3-b] thiophene-based electron acceptor featuring a seven fused-ring electron donor unit as core for nonfullerene organic photovoltaics, Org. Electron., 2018, 62, 82–88 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-P. Yu, 
            et al., Simple non-fused electron acceptors for efficient and stable organic solar cells, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2152 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Rivaton and J. L. Gardette, Photo-oxidation of aromatic polymers, Angew. Makromol. Chem., 1998, 262, 173–188 CrossRef .
K. J. Humphris and G. Scott, Mechanisms of antioxidant action: Reactions of phosphites with hydroperoxides, J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 2, 1973, 826–830 RSC .
P. P. Klemchuk and M. E. Gande, Stabilization mechanisms of hindered amines, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 1988, 22, 241–274 CrossRef CAS .
A. Adamczyk and F. Wilkinson, Triplet-state quenching by photostabilizers of polyolefins, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 1974, 18, 1225–1232 CrossRef CAS .
K. B. Chakraborty and G. Scott, Mechanisms of antioxidant action: Effect of amine complexing on the photo-antioxidant activity of zinc diethyldithiocarbamate in polypropylene, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 1986, 16, 1–12 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Howard and J. H. B. Chenier, Metal complexes as antioxidants. II. Reaction of nickel di-n-butyldithiocarbamate and nickel diisopropyldithiophosphate with alkylperoxy radicals, Can. J. Chem., 1976, 54, 382–389 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Guillory and C. F. Cook, Energy transfer processes involving ultraviolet stabilizers. Quenching of singlet oxygen, J. Polym. Sci., Polym. Chem. Ed., 1973, 11, 1927–1937 CrossRef CAS .
T. Matsuura, K. Omura and R. Nakashima, Photo-induced reaction. II. The photo-sensitized oxidation of hindered phenols, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 1965, 38, 1358–1362 CrossRef CAS .
M. Salvador, 
            et al., Suppressing photooxidation of conjugated polymers and their blends with fullerenes through nickel chelates, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 2005–2016 RSC .
K. Norrman, M. V. Madsen, S. A. Gevorgyan and F. C. Krebs, Degradation patterns in water and oxygen of an inverted polymer solar cell, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 16883–16892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta09961aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Molecule and device architectures as well as impact of photo-oxidation of different FREAs on device behaviors. (A) The investigated polymer J71, fullerene PC71BM and non-fullerene acceptors, including ITIC, IDIC, IT-4F, O-IDTBR and Y6; (B) normalized PCE of J71 devices based on degraded BHJ blends as a function of illumination time. (C) Schematic device architecture of solar cells as well as photo-oxidation process of FREA based BHJ and LbL blends. (D) Normalized PCE of J71:ITIC devices processed with BHJ and LbL structures. There are two differently processed LbL films: one is illuminating the J71/ITIC film before electrode deposition, and the other is illuminating the J71 film before ITIC deposition. (E) Current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of J71:ITIC devices, when their blends were exposed to air for different time scales, illuminated under simulated AM1.5G illumination. (F) Normalized PCEs as a function of photo-oxidized ITIC (O-ITIC) fraction for degraded J71:ITIC devices and pre-degraded ITIC devices.	 

 	Fig. 2  Impact of ITIC photo-oxidation on blend film transport and recombination kinetics as well as relevant voltage losses. (A) Carrier transport properties of blend films as a function of degradation time and the relevant mobilities are calculated by the SCLC method and from photo-CELIV data. (B) Voc of devices based on different degraded films plotted against light intensity on a logarithmic scale. (C) Second order recombination coefficient (left) and transient time (right) calculated from time delayed collection field photo-CELIV as a function of degradation time. (D) Schematic illustrating how the density of electron states may evolve during photo-oxidation. The density of states (DOS) is predicted by charge extraction measurements. (E) Experimental Voc compared to ideal Voc for devices without ΔE1(Egap − qECT), ΔE2(qΔVrad,below gapoc), and ΔE3(qΔVnon-radoc) energy losses.	 

 	Fig. 3  The analysis of possible chemical reactions of NFA photo-oxidation. (A) Negative ion mode MALDI-TOF measurement of the neat ITIC film degraded under one sun in dry air for 10 hours. (B) FTIR spectra of fresh and aged ITIC films with different exposure durations under one sun illumination in dry air (range: wavenumber from 4000 cm−1 to 400 cm−1). (C) XPS O(1s) spectrum of fresh pristine ITIC films before and after 10 h exposure to light in air. (D) Photographs of photo-oxidized ITIC and PC71BM pristine films upon different times of exposure. (E) UV-visible spectra of photo-oxidized ITIC and PC71BM pristine films upon different times of exposure. (F) The primary photo-oxidation reaction sites of ITIC and PC71BM.	 

 	Fig. 4  The Investigated non-fullerene and fullerene acceptors as well as their photo-bleaching rate. (A) Molecular structures of the investigated acceptors. (B) Photo-bleaching rate of acceptor materials, including non-fullerene acceptors and fullerene derivatives.	 

 	Fig. 5  Suppressing photo-oxidation of NFAs and their blends as well as relevant devices through stabilizers. (A) The chemical structures of the stabilizers studied in this work. (B) Autoxidation cycle of NFAs and points of attack of stabilizing additives (ROS: reactive oxygen species; RH: pristine NFA; R*: carbon centered radical formed by H-abstraction; H-donor: pristine polymer donor). The reactive sites mainly include three parts: alkene based units, cyclopentadiene based units (e.g. thiophene) and alkyl chain based units. The ROS quencher or stabilizers can effectively inhibit the presence of ROS, and avoid the decomposer of NFAs. In addition, under illumination, free NFA radicals are formed. R* will quickly react with ground state molecular oxygen, O2, forming chain-initiating, oxygen-centered radicals, which further react to form hydroperoxides by hydrogen abstraction and thus open a second cycle.84,85 Antioxidants can be introduced to induce termination steps for autoxidation, forming stable radicals that suppress the autoxidation cycles. (C) Degradation kinetics of light-soaked ITIC pristine films in air without and with the 2 wt% stabilizers as pointed out above. (D) Photo-bleaching behavior of ITIC without and with 2 wt% S6. (E) Degradation kinetics of ITIC as a function of the weight fraction of S6. (F) Photographs of photo-oxidized ITIC films upon different times of exposure in air without and with 2 wt% S6. (G) Degradation kinetics of NFAs IDIC, IT-4F and O-IDTBR without and with 2 wt% S6 in air under illumination with a solar simulator (Fig. S16†). (H) Degradation behavior of ITIC and its J71:ITIC blends in the absence/presence of S6 under illumination of a one sun simulator in air. (I) Current density–voltage characteristics of J71:ITIC blends with the different contents of S6. (J) Semi-logarithmic representation of the Voc dependence on light intensity in relevant devices without and with 2 wt% S6. (K) Depiction of the temporal evolution of PCE of unencapsulated devices with a device structure of ITO/ZnO/J71:ITIC/MoO3/Ag which were continuously light soaked in dry air using a solar simulator (100 mW cm−2; an average of six devices).	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta09961a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
