Review of strategies for the fabrication of heterojunctional nanocomposites as efficient visible-light catalysts by modulating excited electrons with  ...  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9TA02373A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9TA02373A
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 10879-10897Review of strategies for the fabrication of heterojunctional nanocomposites as efficient visible-light catalysts by modulating excited electrons with appropriate thermodynamic energy

        
          
            Ziqing 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Linlu 
            Bai
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zhijun 
            Li
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yang 
            Qu
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Liqiang 
            Jing
          
          
        
      *ab
aKey Laboratory of Functional Inorganic Materials Chemistry (Ministry of Education), School of Chemistry and Materials Science, International Joint Research Center for Catalytic Technology, Heilongjiang University, Harbin 150080, PR China. E-mail: quyang@hlju.edu.cn; jinglq@hlju.edu.cn
bKey Lab of Groundwater Resources and Environment of Ministry of Education, Key Lab of Water Resources and Aquatic Environment of Jilin Province, College of New Energy and Environment, Jilin University, Changchun 130012, PR China
Received 
      4th March 2019
    , Accepted 2nd April 2019First published on 2nd April 2019AbstractDue to the gradual depletion of fossil fuel reserves on the earth and increasing pollution in the environment, it is highly desirous to develop renewable technologies for clean energy production and environmental remediation through extensively employing semiconductor photocatalysis. With regard to efficient photocatalysis, apart from charge separation, possessing sufficient thermodynamic abilities are the prerequisites so that the photogenerated electrons and holes can induce redox reactions. For most visible-light-responsive semiconductor photocatalysts, photogenerated holes exhibit strong oxidation ability because of their appropriate valence band top levels. However, the ability of the photogenerated electrons to induce reduction reactions is weak, generally due to their low conduction band bottom levels. Hence, a feasible strategy would involve the rational construction of a heterojunctional system with thermodynamically appropriate energy platforms as a space-separated electron shuttle for further intensifying the reduction reactions for efficient visible-light photocatalysis. Obviously, it is considerably meaningful to develop an appropriate electron energy platform-dependent efficient heterojunctional photocatalyst under visible-light irradiation and to review recent developments in this field. In this review, special emphasis is paid to bridged heterojunction-related advances made by our group, focusing upon visible-light-responsive single-metal oxides like Fe2O3, bimetal oxides like BiVO4, plasmonic noble-metal nanoparticles like Au, and polymer-based nanomaterials like g-C3N4 as model photocatalysts. Apparently, it is imperative to design efficient nanophotocatalysts for fields related to energy production and environmental remediation from the scientific and engineering points of view.Ziqing ZhangZiqing Zhang received her PhD in inorganic chemistry from Jilin University in 2018, working at the State Key Laboratory of Inorganic Synthesis and Preparative Chemistry. Now, she is a lecturer in the School of Chemistry and Materials Science at Heilongjiang University, in Prof. Liqiang Jing's group researching on oxide–semiconductor photocatalysis.Linlu BaiLinlu Bai obtained her PhD in chemical engineering from Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, in 2015. Currently, she is a lecturer in the School of Chemical and Environmental Engineering, Harbin University of Science and Technology, along with being a postdoctoral researcher under Prof. Liqiang Jing in Heilongjiang University. Her research interests focus on photocatalytic organic synthesis and biomass conversion.Zhijun LiZhijun Li received his PhD in physical chemistry from Heilongjiang University in 2017. Now, he is working at the Key Laboratory of Functional Inorganic Materials Chemistry. He is working on the synthesis of copper-based oxides for photocatalytic energy production and environmental remediation.Yang QuYang Qu received his PhD from Jilin University in 2014. Currently, he is working in Prof. Liqiang Jing's group at Heilongjiang University. His current research concentrates on the synthesis of Bi-based multi-metal oxides and their applications in the fields of environmental remediation and solar fuel production.Liqiang JingLiqiang Jing is a full professor in Heilongjiang University. He received his PhD in environmental engineering from Harbin Institute of Technology in 2003, and completed a postdoctoral program in physical chemistry at Jilin University from 2004 to 2006. From 2009 to 2010, Professor Jing worked in professor Durrant's group as an academic visitor in the Department of Chemistry at Imperial College, London, UK. His research interests mainly include semiconductor photocatalysis for environmental remediation and energy production and photophysical sensors for environmental analysis. He has been one of the Most Cited Chinese Researchers (Elsevier) in recent years, and he is also a distinguished Changjiang Scholar Professor in Environmental Chemistry since 2017.
1. Introduction
1.1 Background
The rapid growth of population, massive consumption of natural resources, and excessive release of harmful wastes are beyond the acceptance capacity of nature, resulting in both environmental issues and energy crises. Despite the fact that nature can regenerate itself, the process takes thousands of years, far greater than the rate of pollution. As a result, at present, human beings face pressing issues involving the elimination of environmental pollution and production of clean energy. It is, therefore, urgently required to develop new and feasible routes for eliminating environmental contamination and producing sustainable clean energy. Solar energy is one of the most abundant energy resources on this planet, which is far in excess of the total requirement. The use of solar energy in an intelligent manner as a viable renewable energy source to replace fossil fuels in the future has been a dream for thousands of years. Although the conversion of solar energy by photovoltaics,1 solar-thermal processes,2 and artificial photosynthesis3,4 has been studied, the controllable utilization of this everlasting energy is still faced with severe challenges.
Photocatalysis is an advanced environmental decontamination and energy conversion technique that uses the continual natural solar energy with rationally designed semiconductors. It is widely accepted that photocatalysis is a promising route to resolve both environmental problems and energy crises.5,6 This promising technique can deeply oxidize organic pollutants by photogenerated holes or the photogenerated-electron-related reactive oxygen species (ROS) such as hydroxyl radicals (˙OH) and superoxide (˙O2−). It can also be applied in green energy production by using the photogenerated electrons for H2 production and CO2 reduction to solar fuels.7 It is predicted by Thomson Reuters that the sun is the largest source of energy on the planet and photocatalysts are making the process of harvesting and converting its energy much more than a novelty for the environmentally conscious in 2025. According to statistics from the Web of Science, nearly sixty thousand papers have been published from 2009 to 2018 (date: January 29, 2019) including “photocatalytic” as the keyword, as shown in Fig. 1. In particular, in the recent years, more than ten thousand papers have been published every year, which is continuously increasing. These works involve many subjects, such as chemistry, physics, electronics, materials, etc. Notably, nearly half of these publications are related to visible-light photocatalysis if the keyword changes to “visible-light photocatalytic.” Therefore, developing visible-light photocatalysts is currently popular in the field of photocatalysis.
 Fig. 1  Number of publications of photocatalysis-related papers during the last decade and the percentage of visible-light photocatalysis-related papers. (Source: Web of Science; date: January 29, 2019; keywords: “photocatalytic” and “visible-light photocatalytic”.) 
1.2 Basic principle
Photocatalysis is a complex photophysical and photochemical process, including charge excitation, migration, recombination, separation, and the subsequent photochemical reactions on the surfaces of semiconductors.8,9 The process of photocatalysis can be summarized in three key steps, as shown in Fig. 2: (i) photons with sufficient energy get absorbed by a semiconductor to generate electron–hole pairs; (ii) the generated electron–hole pairs are separated into reductive electrons and oxidizing holes at the energy-dependent level; (iii) the separated electrons and holes consequently participate in the redox reactions for environmental purification and energy production. It is well accepted that efficient charge separation and subsequent surface catalytic reactions related to charge energy are the key factors that determine photocatalytic activities. Emphatically, the thermodynamic energy of photogenerated electrons in the conduction band (CB) of semiconductors is the determinant for the ultimate photocatalytic activity, such as organic pollutant degradation, H2 production, and CO2 reduction.
 Fig. 2  Schematic of the main processes in a photocatalytic reaction. 
Photocatalytic pollutant degradation is a promising technique for eliminating the low-concentration, but highly toxic, organic pollutants in water like chlorophenols and endocrine disruptors; here, O2 is used as the oxidant to produce ROS with photogenerated electrons.10,11 Therefore, the photogenerated electrons must possess sufficient thermodynamic energy to activate O2 for efficient pollutant degradation. However, the O2 molecule has a triplet ground state with two spin-parallel electrons, indicating that one of the two electrons would be spin-reversed during the O2 reduction half-reaction, which is a spin-forbidden and kinetically unfavorable process.12 Therefore, it is understood that the activation of O2 by the photogenerated electrons with sufficient thermodynamic energy is the rate-determining step during the process of pollutant degradation.
On the other hand, photocatalytic H2 production and CO2 reduction are important applications of photocatalysis. In these reactions, the separated photogenerated electrons reduce H2O and CO2 to produce H2, CO, CH4, and other solar fuels. The thermodynamic energy and reduction capability of photogenerated electrons has a considerable effect on the activities of photocatalytic H2 production and CO2 reduction.13 In order to effectively initiate the photocatalytic reaction of H2 production and CO2 reduction, photogenerated electrons should have sufficient reductive energy close to the thermodynamic reduction potential. Photocatalysts with more negative CB levels can produce photogenerated electrons with strong reduction abilities that can favor H2 evolution, O2 reduction, and CO2 conversion.
Based on the information mentioned above, it is obvious that the photogenerated electrons with proper thermodynamic energy play a significant role in the photocatalytic reactions. According to the redox potentials of different photocatalytic elementary reactions, it can be understood that sufficient thermodynamic energy of electrons is the essential condition for efficient photocatalytic reactions. Hence, it is meaningful to address this conceptual strategy of thermodynamically electronic energy tuning to improve the activities of photocatalytic pollutant degradation, H2 production, and CO2 reduction.
1.3 Electron energy platform dependence
Since the first discovery of photocatalysis over TiO2 crystals in 1972, the development of semiconductor photocatalysis has undergone considerable research. Over the past 45 years, many wide-bandgap photocatalysts such as TiO2, KTaO3, and MgTiO3 have reportedly exhibited high photocatalytic activities for pollutant degradation, H2 production, and CO2 reduction under ultraviolet (UV)-light irradiation.14Fig. 3 shows the bandgap energy of typical semiconductors with different redox potentials vs. normal hydrogen electrode (NHE) at pH = 0.8,11 Generally speaking, the photogenerated electrons and holes possess sufficient thermodynamic energy to induce reduction and oxidation reactions, respectively, consequently leading to high photoactivities. Since nearly half the incoming solar energy consists of visible-light photons, it is essential to develop visible-light-driven photocatalysts. Over the years, continuous breakthroughs have been achieved in the development of visible-light-response photocatalysts such as CdS, BiVO4, Fe2O3, WO3, graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4), and plasmonic noble metals such as Ag and Au with improved photocatalytic activities. However, CdS has usually been reported to be unstable during photocatalysis because photocorrosion results in the easy oxidation of S2− in CdS rather than H2O by the photogenerated holes, along with the reduction of Cd2+.15 The same fate is met by other sulfide photocatalysts and their solid solutions, suggesting that these are unreliable for industrial applications. On the other hand, narrow-bandgap oxide semiconductors such as Bi2O3, Fe2O3, WO3, BiVO4, and BiFeO3 are much more stable for photocatalysis. However, their CB bottom usually ranges from positive to 0 eV vs. NHE (pH = 0), which is too positive for photogenerated electrons to induce reduction reactions. As for g-C3N4 and plasmonic metals, their visible-light-excited electrons possess sufficient energy to thermodynamically induce reduction reactions. However, their short charge lifetime exacerbates charge recombinations, leading to poor photoactivities. Therefore, effective strategies should be employed to improve the utilization of these excited electrons with high thermodynamic energy under visible-light irradiation.
 Fig. 3  Bandgap energies of typical semiconductors. 
Actually, according to the semiconductor energy band theory and theoretically calculated results via density functional theory (DFT), it is revealed that there are several empty orbitals in the bottom of the CB that can accept photogenerated electrons from the valence band (VB) by suitable energy excitation.16 As shown in Fig. 4, the excited electrons of oxides by appropriate visible-light photons can jump into higher energy levels, where they have sufficient energy to induce several reductive reactions such as O2 reduction or H2 production. However, these excited high-level-energy electrons (HLEEs) at much higher energy levels usually relax to the CB bottom (low energy levels) fairly quickly (within the picosecond timescale),17 implying that it is very difficult to utilize them in the subsequent photocatalytic reactions. Therefore, it is imperative to separate and prolong the lifetimes of HLEEs by constructing an appropriate electron energy platform for formulating efficient photocatalytic applications.
 Fig. 4  Schematic of HLEEs transfer in the fabricated heterojunctional nanocomposites. 
Heterojunctional photocatalysts with multiple integrated functional components have attracted considerable attention owing to their spatially enhanced charge separation.18,19 Until now, excellent studies have shown that constructing heterojunctional photocatalysts can effectively transfer and separate photogenerated electrons from one semiconductor to another so as to enhance charge separation.20 However, in common heterojunctions, semiconductors with a lower CB level as the electron-accepting platform are responsible for the decrease in the thermodynamic energy of the photogenerated electrons, which considerably affects the subsequent photocatalytic reduction reactions. Obviously, maintaining the thermodynamic energy of the photogenerated electrons in heterojunctional photocatalysts with an appropriate electron-accepting platform is crucial for improving the visible-light photocatalytic activities.
The thermodynamic energy of electrons in a photocatalytic reaction is strongly dependent on the relative CB potentials of the semiconductor photocatalysts and redox potentials of the reversible target reactions. That is, an electron-accepting platform with thermodynamically appropriate energy level is highly desired to maintain the thermodynamic energy of the photogenerated electrons in heterojunctional photocatalysts. It should be possible that based on the above discussions, semiconductors with negative CB bottom can be used as electron-accepting platforms for coupling with narrow-bandgap ones to improve the photocatalytic activities. In general, wide-bandgap semiconductors, such as TiO2, ZnO, and SnO2, could be applied as photocatalysts for H2 production and CO2 reduction due to their thermodynamically reasonable CB position. Assuming an appropriate wide-bandgap semiconductor is chosen as the visible-light-excited electron-accepting platform, the thermodynamic energy of these electrons can be maintained to trigger the consequent surface reactions, so that the charge separation and lifetime can be improved, too. These uncommon heterojunctional nanocomposites with wide-/narrow-bandgap semiconductors may open up new avenues for designing efficient visible-light-driven photocatalysts toward pollutant degradation, H2 production, and CO2 reduction.
1.4 Organization
In photocatalysis, sufficient thermodynamic energies of the photogenerated electrons and holes are the key factors to successfully induce redox reactions. For most visible-light-responsive oxide photocatalysts, oxidation abilities of their holes are usually strong, while the reductive abilities of the corresponding electrons are weak, mainly due to the fact that their CB bottoms are generally located below 0 eV (vs. NHE, pH = 0). Hence, it is more feasible to achieve efficient visible-light photocatalysis by constructing heterojunctions by coupling with rational wide-bandgap semiconductors to provide a thermodynamically appropriate energy platform so as to facilitate charge transfer and separation. Meanwhile, the transferred electrons possess sufficient energy to participate in the reduction reactions. Therefore, it is more meaningful to clarify appropriate electron energy platform-dependent efficient heterojunctional photocatalysts under visible-light irradiation and review recent advances made in this topic.
In this review, a special emphasis is directed toward the effective understanding of the developed appropriate thermodynamic energy platform strategies for narrow-bandgap semiconductors. Herein, we have summarized the latest developments in different kinds of visible-light heterojunctional photocatalysts, including single-metal oxides, bimetal oxides, plasmonic noble metal nanoparticles (NPs), and polymer g-C3N4-based heterojunctions. Distinctively, the developed thermodynamically appropriate electron energy platforms for formulating efficient heterojunctional photocatalysts under visible-light irradiation are summarized and discussed. The effects of the introduced appropriate electron energy platforms in different heterojunctional photocatalysts are described and explained. Finally, strategies on introducing an appropriate electron energy platform for visible-light-driven photogenerated electrons are concluded and future prospects in the related field are also proposed in the final section.
2. Single-metal oxides with narrow bandgaps
Single-metal oxides with a narrow bandgap, such as Fe2O3, Bi2O3, and WO3, have attracted considerable interest in photocatalysis due to their low cost, easy preparation, and wide visible-light response.21–23 However, a general problem with narrow-bandgap semiconductors is the insufficient thermodynamic energy of the photogenerated electrons owing to their much positive CB bottom levels. It is, therefore, difficult for these visible-light-excited electrons to energetically induce reduction reactions with O2, H2O, and CO2. To effectively improve their photocatalytic activities, a thermodynamically appropriate energy platform as a space-separated electron shuttle for further inducing reduction reactions should be introduced via constructing heterojunctions with wide-bandgap semiconductors. In this section, classical single-metal oxide-based heterojunctional photocatalysts with the strategy of introducing a thermodynamically appropriate energy platform via a wide-bandgap semiconductor have been reviewed and discussed.
2.1 Based on Fe2O3
Hematite (α-Fe2O3) with a bandgap between 1.9 and 2.2 eV is a thermodynamically stable and common semiconductor under ambient conditions and can be utilized as a photocatalyst for splitting water and degrading organic pollutants.24,25 However, the poor photocatalytic activity of α-Fe2O3 can be usually attributed to the sluggish charge separation mainly from the weak energy of the photogenerated electrons due to its positive CB bottom (∼+0.2 eV).26 Therefore, it is more meaningful to effectively utilize the HLEEs of α-Fe2O3 by introducing an appropriate energy platform to improve its photocatalytic activities.
Recently, our group has investigated the utilization of the HLEEs of α-Fe2O3-based photocatalysts for improving the photocatalytic activity by introducing wide-bandgap semiconductor platforms.27 TiO2 with CB bottom at approximately −0.16 eV was chosen as the available platform to facilitate the uncommon spatial transfer of visible-light-excited HLEEs from α-Fe2O3 to TiO2 to prolong the carrier lifetime and enhance charge separation, leading to obviously improved visible photoactivities. Furthermore, with the aim of promoting the interfacial charge transfer between the mismatched interfaces of α-Fe2O3 and TiO2, phosphate bridges were successfully constructed in TiO2–α-Fe2O3 nanocomposites.28 It was confirmed that phosphate bridges could effectively improve the quality of interfaces between the crystal-mismatched TiO2 and α-Fe2O3 and further favor charge transfer. Theoretically, the available wavelength range can be calculated from the photocurrent action spectra, as shown in Fig. 5A. From 400 to 550 nm, a large number of visible-light photons can be utilized in the fabricated TiO2–Fe2O3 heterojunctional photocatalysts. In particular, it was substantially confirmed that the photogenerated HLEEs of α-Fe2O3 under visible-light irradiation could transfer from α-Fe2O3 to TiO2 through the fabricated phosphate bridges, mainly based on ultra-low-temperature electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) signals, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) spectra, and normalized photocurrent action spectra. Distinctively, our group developed surface photovoltage techniques, such as atmosphere-controlled surface photovoltage spectroscopy (AC-SPS) and transient-state surface photovoltage (TS-SPV) responses, to reveal the photophysical process in photocatalysts; instinctively, it is useful to study the HLEE transfer mechanism.27,28 On the basis of these experimental results, a schematic for the transfer and separation of visible-light-excited HLEEs in phosphate-bridged TiO2–α-Fe2O3 nanocomposites is proposed, as shown in Fig. 5B. Emphatically, the important role of TiO2 as a platform and phosphate bridges as an electron transfer channel are impressed upon in such phosphate-bridged heterojunctional photocatalysts. Moreover, rutile TiO2 nanorods were selected to couple with α-Fe2O3 owing to the more suitable CB potential than those of anatase and their one-dimensional structure for charge transfer.29 It was demonstrated that the visible-light activities of α-Fe2O3 were considerably improved after coupling an appropriate amount of rutile TiO2 nanorods, particularly with the phosphate-modified one.
 Fig. 5  Normalized photocurrent action spectra under different monochromatic light irradiations at the bias of 0.4 V vs. Ag/AgCl (A), and the proposed process schematic of the transfer and spatial separation of visible-light-excited HLEEs in the fabricated phosphate-bridged TiO2/α-Fe2O3 nanocomposite (B). (F: bare Fe2O3 NPs; P-F: phosphate-bridged F; TF: TiO2-coupled F; PB-TF: phosphate-bridged TF.) Adapted with permission from ref. 27. Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Similarly, some other works have also revealed an uncommon photoelectron transfer from α-Fe2O3 to wide-bandgap semiconductors. W. Lin's group synthesized Fe2O3@TiO2 composite NPs through a simple, inexpensive, tunable, and scalable metal–organic framework template strategy and utilized them as photocatalysts for H2 production.30 Theoretically, the visible-light-excited electrons of α-Fe2O3 are unable to transfer to TiO2. Unexpectedly, they detected the presence of H2 gas under visible-light irradiation, demonstrating the transfer of HLEEs from Fe2O3 to TiO2 because the energy of the photogenerated electrons is obviously increased after TiO2 coupling. S. Zhu et al. deposited TiO2 on α-Fe2O3 to prepare hierarchical photocatalysts by using butterfly wings as the template.31 Interestingly, the H2 produced from the α-Fe2O3/TiO2 hierarchical structure was measured under visible-light irradiation, too. Since, in theory, the CB bottom of α-Fe2O3 could not thermodynamically evolve H2 by the photogenerated electrons, it was suggested that this uncommon phenomenon resulted from doping or band bending. In fact, it should be related to the similar HLEEs transfer from α-Fe2O3 to TiO2 as an appropriate energy platform.
Moreover, tin dioxide (SnO2) is a typical wide-bandgap semiconductor with higher electron mobility (100–200 cm2 V−1 s−1) than TiO2 (0.1–1 cm2 V−1 s−1).32,33 In addition, the CB bottom of SnO2 (∼0 eV) is marginally lower than that of TiO2 (∼−0.16 eV), suggesting that more visible-light-excited HLEEs of α-Fe2O3 can thermodynamically transfer such that they can be effectively utilized for photocatalytic reduction reactions.34 It is naturally expected that SnO2 is more suitable for coupling with α-Fe2O3 as an HLEE-accepting platform. Actually, we have recently demonstrated that the visible-light-driven photocatalytic activities of α-Fe2O3 for CO2 reduction and acetaldehyde degradation can be considerably improved after coupling with an appropriate amount of SnO2. This can be attributed to the obvious increase in the lifetime and separation of the photogenerated charges by transferring visible-light-excited HLEEs. When compared with TiO2 and ZrO2, it is more appropriate to use SnO2 as the HLEE-accepting platform for α-Fe2O3.34
2.2 Based on bismuth oxide (Bi2O3)
Bi2O3 has been widely applied in optical coatings, pigment, glass, and solid oxide fuel cells, owing to its high refractive index, high dielectric permittivity, and marked photoluminescence properties.35,36 Bi2O3 has also been proven as a good visible-light-driven photocatalyst for pollutant degradation.37 For example, W. Z. Wang and his group prepared Bi2O3 hierarchical nanostructures by a template-free aqueous method, yielding considerably higher photocatalytic activity as compared to commercial samples under visible-light irradiation.38 Bi2O3-based heterojunctions have been usually prepared with the purpose of improving the photocatalytic activity by enhancing charge separation. S. Y. Chai et al. reported BiOCl/Bi2O3 functional photocatalyst with visible-light response, and the heterojunctions of BiOCl/Bi2O3 exhibited worthwhile efficiency in decomposing organic compounds.39 Y. Peng et al. prepared a p–n junction photocatalyst comprising Bi2O3 nanorods and Bi2WO6 flowers via a three-step synthesis route, which yielded higher photocatalytic activity than individual Bi2O3 nanorods or Bi2WO6 flowers. This can be mainly attributed to the strong visible-light absorption and effective separation of photogenerated electrons and holes by the internal electrostatic field in the junction region.40 Although the above mentioned works exhibited considerably improved photocatalytic activities in certain cases, the photogenerated charge separation is still slow due to the low efficiency of HLEE utilization. Therefore, it is suggested that an appropriate energy platform is required for accepting HLEEs to enhance the charge separation of Bi2O3.
It is confirmed, but not clarified, in some excellent works that the platform effect and HLEEs transfer seem to be found in Bi2O3-based heterojunctional photocatalysts. Z. F. Bian et al. synthesized ordered mesoporous Bi2O3/TiO2 by an evaporation-induced self-assembly method and applied as visible-light-driven photocatalyst for the highly efficient photocatalytic degradation of liquid-phase p-chlorophenol.41 The authors attributed the improved photocatalytic performance to the synergetic effects between both Bi2O3 photosensitization and the unique structural characteristics. They suggested that in Bi2O3/TiO2, the photogenerated electrons could easily transfer from the CB of Bi2O3 to the neighboring CB of TiO2. Therefore, the recombination of photogenerated electrons and holes could be effectively inhibited, leading to a stronger response in the visible-light region. Apparently, this is a thermodynamically appropriate energy platform-dependent heterojunctional photocatalyst and TiO2, as a proper platform, can accept and maintain the thermodynamic energy of the electrons, improving the utilization of HLEEs of Bi2O3 for pollutant degradation.
Based on the utilization of the HLEEs of Bi2O3, our group prepared phase-mixed Bi2O3 hierarchical microspheres coupled with phosphate-bridged nanocrystalline SnO2 as an appropriate HLEE-accepting platform, as shown in Fig. 6A.42 It was found that the photogenerated charge separation of the optimized phase-mixed Bi2O3 could be further enhanced by coupling with nanocrystalline SnO2, particularly with the phosphate-bridged one, mainly supported by the SS-SPS responses and fluorescence spectra related to the formed hydroxyl radical amounts. The observed degradation reaction constant for the phosphate-bridged SnO2/phase-mixed Bi2O3 heterojunctional photocatalysts is about 6 times larger than that of P25 TiO2, which becomes 50 times larger if the surface area is considered (Fig. 6B).
 Fig. 6  Schematic for charge separation in phase-mixed Bi2O3 with phosphate-bridged nano-SnO2 (A) and photocatalytic activities for 2,4-DCP degradation (B) over different samples. (P25: commercial TiO2; BO440: bare phase-mixed Bi2O3; 5S-BO440: 5 wt% SnO2-coupled BO440; 5S-1.5P-BO44: 1.5 wt% phosphate-bridged 5S-BO440) Adapted with permission from ref. 41. Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
This work further confirms the importance of modulating the visible-light-excited electrons with appropriate thermodynamic energy in photocatalysis. Some other excellent works have confirmed that the coupled wide-bandgap semiconductor as a platform can obviously improve the photocatalytic activity of Bi2O3. F. Huang's group reported a heterojunction comprising Bi2O3/BaTiO3 as an efficient photocatalyst for degrading dyes. As mentioned by them, the improved photocatalytic activity could be attributed to the electric-field-driven electron–hole separation at the heterointerface.43 However, for BaTiO3, the function of the platform should not be ignored because the photocatalytic activity is improved when Bi2O3 is the main component with auxiliary BaTiO3 providing the wide bandgap. Therefore, an appropriate platform is required for Bi2O3 to thermodynamically maintain the energy of the photogenerated electrons and to enhance the charge separation of the visible-light-excited photogenerated electrons.
2.3 Based on other oxides
It is inferred that the strategy of modulating visible-light-excited electrons by introducing an appropriate thermodynamic energy platform can also be applied to other single-metal oxides with a narrow bandgap. Among many visible-light-active single-metal oxides, tungsten oxide (WO3) has been an ideal candidate because of its small bandgap (2.4–2.8 eV), high oxidation power of VB holes (+3.1–3.2 eV), nontoxicity, and stability.44,45 However, bare WO3 is not an efficient photocatalyst because of the lower CB bottom (+0.3–0.5 eV) that does not provide sufficient potential to reduce O2, H2O, or CO2.46 The inability of the reactants to scavenge CB electrons in WO3 results in fast recombination and poor photocatalytic activity. In this respect, the utilization of HLEEs for WO3 photocatalysts should be addressed. J. L. Zhang et al. prepared WO3/TiO2 composites via a template-free synthesis approach and applied them as photocatalysts for the degradation of methyl orange and 2,4-dichlorophenol under UV- and visible-light irradiation.47 They found that WO3/TiO2 composites containing 10% WO3 exhibited higher activity mainly due to the enhanced charge separation, attributable to the fact that coupled TiO2 may act as a platform for the HLEEs of WO3. Similarly, H. Z. Shen et al. prepared WO3/TiO2 composites and pointed out that the junction between WO3 and TiO2 played an important role in improving the activity of WO3/TiO2 composites.48 In addition to TiO2, ZnO—one of the most common wide-bandgap semiconductor photocatalyst—can also be utilized as a HLEE platform. S. Adhikari et al. synthesized WO3 nanocuboids and ZnO rectangular slabs by the hydrothermal and combustion methods. The photocatalytic activities of WO3 nanocuboid, ZnO rectangular slabs, and WO3–ZnO mixed oxide composites were investigated.49 They found that these composites exhibited optimal activity due to the reduction in the recombination of photogenerated electron–hole pairs by introducing ZnO as the platform.
Copper oxide (CuO) is regarded as a potential photocathode for photoelectrochemical water splitting owing to its low cost, natural abundance, and narrow bandgap (1.2–1.9 eV).50,51 Our group has clearly demonstrated that the visible-light activities of CuO nanoplates for PEC water reduction can be greatly improved after coupling with an appropriate amount of nanocrystalline anatase TiO2, attributable to the enhanced charge separation in the fabricated TiO2/CuO nanoplate composites.52 Moreover, it was deduced that the enhanced charge separation resulted from the transfer of visible-light-excited HLEEs from CuO to TiO2. The threshold wavelength of 650 nm for the HLEEs transfer was confirmed based on the single-wavelength photocurrent action spectra, which further supported the uncommon charge transfer of HLEEs. In addition, D. Sun's group reported a similar TiO2–CuO heterojunctional nanocomposite for photocatalytic H2 generation, where the TiO2 platform played a significant role in maintaining the thermodynamic energy of the photogenerated electrons, leading to improved photocatalytic activity.53 In spite of these typical oxides, the HLEEs of some other narrow-bandgap oxides, such as V2O5 and Co3O4, with a positive CB bottom can also be utilized by coupling platforms like TiO2.54,55 From some published works, it is understood that the visible-light photoactivities of such oxides can be improved after coupling with TiO2. It is obvious that the wide-bandgap oxides as platforms are effective and universal.
Summarily, we have reviewed and discussed the successful strategies for modulating the visible-light-excited HLEEs of narrow-bandgap single-metal oxides, such as Fe2O3, Bi2O3, WO3, and CuO, by introducing platforms (TiO2, ZnO, and SnO2) with appropriate thermodynamic energy levels to construct high-activity heterojunctional nanocomposite photocatalysts. By means of the photocurrent action spectra, TS-TPV, and other advanced characterizations, the available wavelengths of the narrow-bandgap single-metal oxides in the visible-light region for HLEEs, the HLEE separation mechanism and the positive effects of the consequent molecular bridges are undoubtedly confirmed. This smart design strategy is versatile for narrow-bandgap single-metal oxides with a positive CB bottom, and it can also be applied to other semiconductors.
3. Bimetal oxides with narrow bandgaps
Bimetal oxides, such as perovskite, spinel, and ilmenite, have been widely studied as photocatalysts in pollutant degradation, H2 production, and CO2 reduction due to their worthwhile stability, various adjustable structures, low cost, and high performance.56–59 However, the utilization of visible-light-excited HLEEs in bimetal oxides with a narrow bandgap is still not satisfactory as they also suffer similar scientific issues of low CB potential as that in single-metal oxides with a narrow bandgap. To further extend the universality of the platform-based HLEE-modulating strategy, it has been attempted to fabricate certain typical bimetal oxides with a narrow bandgap, such as BiVO4, BiFeO3, and LaFeO3. In this section, the synthesis strategies of modulating HLEEs by constructing efficient heterojunctional nanostructures to introduce appropriate platforms are summarized and discussed. In addition, enhancing the VB of the narrow-bandgap semiconductors by doping nonmetal elements have also been explored, which can effectively improve the catalytic performance and increase the utilization of HLEEs, further improving the platform-based HLEE-modulating strategy.
3.1 Based on bismuth vanadate (BiVO4)
BiVO4 is a new generation of environmentally friendly photocatalytic material with a dual-metal-oxide composition.60–62 Among the many different crystalline structures available, monoclinic scheelite-type BiVO4 with a narrow bandgap of 2.4 eV is a widely used visible-light-response photocatalyst that has been used for degrading organic pollutants and oxidizing water.63–65 Although BiVO4 is a robust light absorber and good photocatalyst, its photocatalytic activity still requires improvements because of high charge recombination, poor electron mobility, and weak reducing capacity (positive CB bottom level).66 In order to improve the photocatalytic activity of BiVO4, Y. Xie et al. took a polystyrene colloidal crystal as the template to prepare a three-dimensional (3DM) Mo:BiVO4 architecture film with the help of a sandwich solution infiltration method and adjustable post-heating time.67 The special 3DM inverse opal film photoelectrode showed superior photocatalytic performances and could be utilized as a promising photoelectrode model for solar conversion applications. However, it is very difficult to utilize the low-energy photogenerated electrons in the CB of BiVO4. Therefore, it is a viable approach for enhancing the charge separation of BiVO4 by constructing heterojunctions to modulate the thermodynamic energy of the photogenerated electrons via introducing a wide-bandgap semiconductor platform.
Our recent works have confirmed that an appropriate platform like TiO2 and ZnO NPs can possibly enhance charge separation and promote the visible-light photoactivity of BiVO4.68–70 When compared with the AC-SPS response of bare BiVO4 (Fig. 7A), it is evident that the fabricated TiO2/BiVO4 nanocomposite still exhibits a detectable SPS response in N2 (Fig. 7B), attributable to the uncommon transfer of photogenerated high-energy electrons from BiVO4 to TiO2. The TS-SPV technique was then employed to study the carrier kinetics. From the TS-SPV responses shown in Fig. 7C, it is evident that the charge lifetime of TiO2/BiVO4 nanocomposites is prolonged as compared to that of bare BiVO4 NPs. According to the experimental results, a schematic for the transfer and separation of photogenerated high-energy electrons of the fabricated TiO2/BiVO4 nanocomposite under visible-light illumination is shown in Fig. 7D. For bare BiVO4, the maximum excitation wavelength in the visible-light region is about 572 nm according to the following equation: λmax = 1240/Eg (Eg = 2.16 eV for BiVO4, according to the UV-vis DRS data). However, these excited photogenerated electrons were fairly weak in producing H2 due to the low thermodynamic energy. The coupled TiO2 platform can certainly facilitate the utilization of HLEEs. The maximum excitation wavelength for HLEEs transfer from BiVO4 to TiO2 is ∼532 nm, indicating that the visible-light region for TiO2/BiVO4 is available from 420 to 532 nm. Although about 40 nm of the visible-light region is abandoned, the transferred HLEEs are still energetic toward facilitating photocatalytic H2 evolution.
 Fig. 7  AC-SPS responses of different TiO2/BiVO4 nanocomposites: BV (A) and 5T-BV (B); TS-SPV responses under laser-pulse irradiation with 532 nm light of different TiO2/BiVO4 nanocomposites in air (C) and schematic of the transfer and separation of photogenerated HLEEs of fabricated TiO2/BiVO4 nanocomposites under visible-light illumination (D). (BV stands for bare BiVO4 NPs; T is TiO2 NPs.) Adapted with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. 
Despite the fact that the thermodynamic energy of the photogenerated electrons is maintained by the TiO2 platform for H2 evolution (the CB bottom of BiVO4 cannot thermodynamically produce H2), for TiO2/BiVO4 nanocomposites, Pt must be utilized as a cocatalyst for catalyzing H2 production. As Pt is expensive, an Ag–TiO2 dual-functional modifier was developed to couple with BiVO4, as shown in Fig. 8A.71 From the electrochemical curves (Fig. 8B), it can be understood that the introduction of Ag increased the surface catalytic ability of the TiO2–BiVO4 system. However, the photocatalytic H2 evolution of different noble metals introduced into TiO2–BiVO4 system (Fig. 8C) exhibited very similar photocatalytic activity, implying that the thermodynamic energy and interfacial transfer of HLEEs to TiO2 were considerably crucial. Besides the cocatalysts, the dimensional matching between the platform and oxides in the heterojunctions is also significant. Very recently, our group constructed a dimensional (D)-matched plasmonic Au/TiO2/BiVO4 nanocomposite, where BiVO4 nanoflakes were firstly obtained from a BiOCl nanosheet precursor via an ion-exchange process, subsequently coupling with (001)-facet-exposed anatase TiO2 nanosheets and then modifying the plasmonic Au nanorods.61 These composites possess exceptional visible-light photocatalytic activities toward CO2 conversion, since the proper energy platform of TiO2 can accept photogenerated electrons from BiVO4 such that charge separation is considerably enhanced, and the well-designed D-matched structure can further promote photogenerated charge transfer and separation. Plasmonic Au was introduced to extend the visible-light absorption ability and induce surface catalysis, which will be discussed in the subsequent section.
 Fig. 8  Mechanism of the photogenerated HLEEs on 7Ag-T/BV nanocomposite regarding the transfer and separation under visible-light illumination and their induced reactions for H2 evolution with Ag as the cocatalyst (A). Hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) performance of BV, Ag-BV, T/BV, and Ag-T/BV (B); photocatalytically induced H2 activities (C) of Au-T/BV, Pd-T/BV, Ag-T/BV, and Pt-T/BV under visible-light irradiation. (BV stands for bare BiVO4 NPs; T refers to TiO2 NPs.) Adapted with permission from ref. 70. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
Some other related works involving BiVO4 revealed similar phenomena regarding the transfer of photogenerated electrons from BiVO4 to the wide-bandgap semiconductors, thereby improving the photocatalytic activities. D. Li's group prepared BiVO4/TiO2 heterostructural photocatalysts for the highly efficient decomposition of gaseous benzene.72 They have proposed photogenerated electron transfer from BiVO4 to TiO2 with the explanation that this uncommon transfer is due to the Fermi level thermodynamic equilibrium effect. However, HLEEs transfer attributable to the platform should be considered in this work. Moreover, B. L. Su et al. used a hydrothermal method to synthesize 3DM BiVO4/TiO2 nanocomposites with extraordinarily high photocatalytic activities, and the following is suggested as the cause for the formed junctions between BiVO4 and TiO2. The photogenerated electrons can transfer from BiVO4 to TiO2, providing the highly prolonged lifetime and increased separation of visible-light-generated charges.73
ZnO is another candidate as a HLEE-accepting platform for BiVO4. In our earlier work, it was clearly demonstrated that the photogenerated charge separation of the resulting ZnO/BiVO4 nanocomposite could be enhanced by coupling with a ZnO platform, and it can be further enhanced after introducing silicate bridges that are favorable toward charge transfer. Hence, the visible-light photoactivity of silicate-bridged ZnO/BiVO4 nanocomposites was considerably improved.69 The optimal silicate-bridged ZnO/BiVO4 nanocomposites exhibited superior photoactivities for water oxidation to produce O2 and for colorless pollutant degradation under visible-light irradiation. Coincidentally, similar results were obtained in BiVO4/ZnO and BiVO4/TiO2 heterojunctions reported by J. W. Tang and his co-workers.74 From these works, the possible transfer of visible-light-excited electrons from BiVO4 to wide-bandgap ones like TiO2 and ZnO should be noticed, which could be regarded as an appropriate platform for maintaining the thermodynamic energy of the photogenerated electrons. Obviously, the introduced thermodynamic platform is important for improving the photocatalytic activities. Despite the fact that the improved photocatalytic activities in these works can be attributed to different reasons, it should not be denied that the HLEEs modulated by an appropriate platform play a significant role in efficient photocatalytic reactions.
3.2 Based on LaFeO3 (LFO)
LFO with a narrow bandgap of ∼2.65 eV is one of the most common perovskite-type oxides, which is widely applied in the photocatalytic degradation of organic pollutions and H2 production.75–77 Our group has previously synthesized nanosized perovskite LFO photocatalysts via a sol–gel method to improve the photoactivities for degrading Rhodamine B solution under visible-light irradiation.78 However, its photocatalytic activities for H2 production and CO2 reduction are not satisfactory owing to its low CB bottom. In order to overcome this problem, anatase TiO2/porous nanosized LFO (T/P-LFO) nanocomposites were fabricated using a simple wet chemical method.79 From the SS-SPS and photoluminescence spectra, it can be clearly seen that the photogenerated charge carriers of T/P-LFO nanocomposites with an appropriate amount of TiO2 displayed much higher charge separation than individual P-LFO, largely improving the photocatalytic activities toward the degradation of gas-phase acetaldehyde and liquid-phase phenol. According to the general knowledge of semiconductor physics, the energy difference between the VB top of LFO and the CB bottom of the introduced TiO2 determines the utilization of visible-light-excited HLEEs. Therefore, increasing the VB potential of LFO is conducive toward the utilization of visible-light-excited HLEEs. In this regard, TiO2-coupled N-doped porous perovskite-type LFO nanocomposites were successfully prepared by our group, exhibiting exceptional visible-light photocatalytic activities for 2,4-dichlorophenol (2,4-DCP) degradation with ∼3-time enhancement and for CO2 conversion into fuels with ∼4-time enhancement as compared to the resulting high-photoactivity porous LFO.80 It was clearly demonstrated that the obviously improved photoactivities were attributed to the extended visible-light absorption by creating surface states with N doping, and the promoted charge transfer and separation by coupling TiO2 as an appropriate platform for HLEEs transfer, as shown in Fig. 9. Our works suggest that for LaFeO3-based photocatalysts, the utilization of thermodynamic HLEEs by constructing an appropriate platform is significant toward the improvement of photocatalytic activities for pollutant degradation, H2 production, and CO2 conversion under solar light irradiation.
 Fig. 9  Schematic illustration for the energy bandgaps of LFO-AC, 6N-LFO-AC, and TiO2, and the visible-light-excited HLEEs transfer in 6T/6NLFO-AC nanocomposite along with the induced redox processes. (LFO-AC, 6N-LFO-AC, and 6T/6NLFO-AC represent porous LaFeO3 prepared by carbon sphere template method, N-doped porous LaFeO3, and 6% TiO2 loaded onto N-doped porous LaFeO3.) Adapted with permission from ref. 79. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
3.3 Based on other bimetal oxides
BiFeO3 (BFO), as another typical perovskite material with a narrow bandgap (Eg = 2.2–2.7 eV), is also a vital visible-light-responsive photocatalyst.81,82 Because of the ferroelectric property of BFO, spontaneous polarization can lead to band bending, making the photoinduced electrons and holes move in opposite directions, which enhances the separation efficiency of the photogenerated charges.83 In addition, the optical properties of microsized BFO crystals are strongly related to their shapes and sizes. In S. Li's work, it was determined that the magnetic responses are influenced by the morphology of BFO.84 However, the photocatalytic efficiency of BFO is not as high as expected because of the positive CB bottom potential and poor charge separation. To overcome these disadvantages, modulating HLEEs by introducing a thermodynamically appropriate energy platform is regarded as the most effective approach. Y. C. Yang et al. reported one-dimensional TiO2 and BFO heterojunctional nanofibers with high activities for degrading methylene blue under visible-light irradiation, which can be attributed to the excellent charge separation ability of the heterojunction formed between BFO and TiO2.85 Y. Zhang et al. synthesized TiO2 on BFO by a pulsed-laser deposition method and found that TiO2 was photochemically active under visible-light (460 nm) irradiation, revealing that the visible-light photoactivity of BFO would be enhanced by coupling with a certain amount of TiO2 as the proper energy platform.86
Recently, our group successfully prepared TiO2-coupled porous BFO (T/P-BFO) nanocomposites as high-activity visible-light photocatalysts for pollutant degradation and water reduction.87 When 9% (mole ratio) TiO2 was coupled, the lifetimes of the photogenerated charge carriers of P-BFO could be prolonged to the millisecond timescale, which can be attributed to the promoted spatial charge separation due to the presence of TiO2 as the thermodynamic platform for accepting HLEEs. This strategy can also be extended to other bimetal oxides, such as Bi2WO6. We have successfully prepared SnO2-coupled Bi2WO6 nanostructures via a mannitol-assisted hydrothermal method followed by a simple wet chemical process; this nanostructure exhibited higher photocatalytic activity than commercial P25 TiO2.88 The coupled ultrafine nanocrystalline SnO2 is a proper energy platform to accept visible-light-excited HLEEs from Bi2WO6, consequently prolonging the charge lifetime and enhancing the charge separation.
From the works mentioned in this section, it can be understood that (i) the poor photocatalytic activities of bimetal oxides with a narrow bandgap can be ascribed to the low utilization of HLEEs; (ii) HLEEs can be modulated by introducing an energy platform in the form of wide-bandgap oxides with appropriate CB potential; (iii) the utilization of visible-light-excited HLEEs could also be improved by increasing the VB of narrow-bandgap oxides after doping nonmetal elements. Remarkably, it could be concluded from this section that HLEEs transfer by introducing an appropriate platform is a versatile strategy for improving the photocatalytic activities of bimetal oxide semiconductors.
4. Plasmonic metal NPs
Since 2011, plasmonic photocatalysts such as Au, Ag, and Cu have aroused considerable attention owing to their visible-light response due to the localized surface plasmonic resonance (LSPR, or SPR) effects, as well as high activities toward catalyzing chemical transformations.89,90 Under visible-light irradiation, electrons are oscillated into high-energy levels due to the LSPR effect, which can attain the thermodynamic requirement of certain photocatalytic reactions. However, it is difficult to directly utilize these electrons in photocatalysis because their lifetimes are too short. Therefore, in practical applications, these plasmonic photocatalysts are usually combined with semiconductors to separate these hot electrons with high thermodynamic energy induced by LSPR effects. Under visible-light irradiation, electrons with sufficient energy get injected from the plasmonic metals to the CB of the contiguous semiconductors, and these separated electrons can be utilized toward the induction of photocatalytic reactions, such as H2 evolution, CO2 reduction, pollutants degradation, and even some organic selective oxidations.91 Owing to the alignment of the electronic states, in general, the plasmonic-metal/semiconductor systems only allow the transfer of energetic electrons from the metal to the semiconductor to overcome the Schottky barrier. As a result, the semiconductors adjacent to the plasmonic metals can function as a suitable electron energy platform to guarantee and respect the high energy of the transferred electrons. Therefore, to successfully construct a plasmonic-metal/semiconductor heterojunction as a typical visible-light photocatalyst, the choice of the semiconductor in the nanocomposites is critical in order to achieve highly efficient photocatalytic activities. In the following sections, the vital role of the semiconductors affording a suitable electron energy platform in forming effective plasmonic-metal/semiconductor photocatalysts would be highlighted and exhaustively discussed, with special emphasis on the behavior of single plasmonic metals such as Au, Ag, Cu, and Bi.
4.1 Au-based plasmonic photocatalysts
Au is the most extensively studied plasmonic metal in photocatalysis for the development of visible-light-response Au-based heterogeneous photocatalysts. In the pioneer communication in 2004, Y. Tian and T. Tatsuma studied a system composed of nanoporous TiO2 and Au NPs for the first time, which was a potentially improved photocatalyst based on the photoinduced electron transfer from Au NPs to the CB of TiO2.92 Recently, several studies have demonstrated that plasmonic photocatalysts can also dramatically improve the yield of the water splitting reaction, which is one of the most attractive reactions in the quest for clean energy.93 H. Garcia et al. reported that plasmonic Au/TiO2 composites showed a higher rate of hydrogen evolution half-reaction than TiO2 under broadband visible illumination (>400 nm).94 Except for water splitting, Au–TiO2 is also effective in other vital reactions used toward obtaining clean energy. A. Tanaka et al. fabricated Au/TiO2 samples that exhibited a high H2 formation rate from various organic compounds (e.g., 2-propanol, ethanol, methanol, ammonia, and benzyl alcohol) under visible-light irradiation.95 This was attributed to the fact that the hot electrons from triggered Au NPs were injected into the CB of TiO2, implying the electron energy was maintained by the TiO2 platform. Z. F. Bian et al. reported that the plasmonic Au–TiO2 photocatalyst showed very high photocatalytic activities for H2 production in visible-light-illuminated 50 vol% 2-propanol/water suspensions. The superior visible-light activity of Au–TiO2 plasmonic photocatalyst is attributed to enhanced charge separation since the injected electrons from the excited Au NPs could efficiently migrate toward TiO2 through nanocrystalline networks.96 This work further proves the platform role of TiO2 for separating the photogenerated electrons of the plasmonic Au photocatalyst.
Very recently, the HLEEs of plasmonic Au were modulated by coupling wide-bandgap oxides like TiO2. It was found that rutile TiO2 has lower CB potential, rendering more facile electron transfer between SPR Au and TiO2 when compared with anatase TiO2. Therefore, HF-modified Au/rutile TiO2 nanorod nanocomposites have been prepared as visible-light photocatalysts. Our results show that the HLEEs of Au can be transferred to the CB of rutile TiO2 under visible-light irradiation. However, when only rutile TiO2 is excited, electrons would transfer from the CB of rutile TiO2 to Au as an electron shuttle, also resulting in enhanced charge separation (Fig. 10A). In addition, the visible-light photoactivity can be further enhanced by modifying HF to improve O2 adsorption.97
 Fig. 10  Schematic of photogenerated charge separation and the induced photochemical reactions over HF-modified Au/TiO2 nanocomposites (A) and D-matched Au-loaded TiO2 nanosheet/BiVO4 nanoflake nanocomposites under visible-light irradiation (B). Adapted with permission from ref. 96. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society and ref. 60. Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
D-matched nanocomposites possess a closed interface to facilitate HLEEs transfer. Therefore, dimensional matching should be considered when constructing an appropriate thermodynamic platform. Therefore, D-matched plasmonic Au nanorod/TiO2 nanosheet/BiVO4 nanoflake nanocomposites have been successfully constructed, where two-dimensional TiO2 nanosheets were used as the D-matched platform for accepting HLEEs for plasmonic Au nanorods and BiVO4 (Fig. 10B). It was confirmed that the dimensional matching of Au nanorods, TiO2 nanosheets, and BiVO4 nanoflakes obviously improves the visible-light photocatalytic activity.61 All these referred works above indicate that Au–TiO2 is the most comprehensively reported effective plasmonic photocatalyst for the meaningful chemical transformations for clean energy. Besides the contribution of the plasmonic effect of Au, the excellent photocatalytic activities of Au–TiO2 are tightly associated with TiO2. The CB of TiO2 could function as an electron energy platform for visible-light-excited HLEEs from Au to prolong the lifetime of photogenerated electrons and in the meanwhile maintain their sufficient energy for the realization of chemical transformations.
As proposed in this review, apart from TiO2, SnO2 and other wide-bandgap semiconductors possess a negative CB position and the electrons transferred to the CB of these photocatalysts could satisfy the thermodynamic requirements of most photocatalytic transformations. Therefore, the integration of Au with semiconductors such as ZnO, SnO2, and Ta2O5 can also yield effective Au-based plasmonic catalysts for vital photocatalytic transformations. For example, Z. Han et al. reported the visible-light photocatalytic application of hierarchical Au–ZnO flower-rod heterostructures via SPR. The coupled ZnO enhances the charge separation of Au to promote photoactivity.98 M. H. Cho et al. applied the Au–SnO2 nanocomposite in the photoelectrochemical degradation of Congo red and methylene blue.99 When compared with bare SnO2, Au–SnO2 exhibited enhanced PEC activities that may be attributable to HLEEs injection into the appropriate platform of SnO2 in the same manner as those occurring in Au–TiO2 and Au–ZnO.
Some other semiconductors can also serve as suitable electron energy platforms, and hence, can be employed in the construction of effective Au–semiconductor plasmonic photocatalysts. Au@Ta2O5 and Au/KNbO3 have been reported to be highly effective in dye degradation under visible-light irradiation.100–102 For these photocatalysts, the commonality was that all these semiconductors possess negative CB potentials as platforms to accept photoexcited electrons from Au. Besides Au-based photocatalysts with two components, three-component Au/ZnFe2O4/ZnO nanocomposites have been reported by depositing ZnFe2O4 (ZFO) onto ZnO nanorods to form a heterojunction followed by a second deposition of Au NPs onto the ZFO/ZnO nanostructure.103 Au NPs were applied to trigger visible light to produce hot electrons with high energies. These hot electrons were injected into the CB band of adjacent ZFO and then transferred to the lower CB band of ZnO. Since the CB band of ZnO fits the thermodynamic requirement for the conversion of H+ into H2 as an appropriate energy platform, the transported photogenerated electrons possess sufficient energy to accomplish H2 evolution. The photocurrent densities of Au/ZFO/ZnO were five times and two times higher than those for ZnO and ZFO/ZnO samples, respectively.
The successful construction of effective Au-based plasmonic photocatalysts is intricately associated with the choice of the coupled semiconductor. Facilitated by the negative CB positions, wide-bandgap semiconductors such as TiO2, ZnO, and SnO2 along with some other semiconductors, such as Ta2O5 and KNbO3, yield higher-level energy platforms for HLEEs transfer from triggered Au with visible-light irradiation. Obviously, it is more important to select a proper wide-bandgap semiconductor to develop effective plasmonic photocatalysts.
4.2 Other plasmonic-metal-based photocatalysts
Silver (Ag) is probably one of the most important plasmonic materials having excellent light response in the visible and near-infrared regions from 300 to 1200 nm.104 Similar to Au, a thermodynamic platform is desired for fabricating high-performance visible-light-driven photocatalysts. D. H. Chen et al. used the hydrazine reduction of Ag+ ions and subsequent sol–gel coating of TiO2 to synthesize Ag@TiO2 NPs with significantly higher photocatalytic activities than TiO2 NPs for the degradation of Rhodamine B in the visible-light region. The high visible-light photoactivity can be attributed to the transfer of photogenerated electrons from the surface of Ag cores to the CB of TiO2 shells.105 H. G. Fu's group prepared Ag–TiO2 heterojunction nanopillars by effectively dispersing Ag NPs on the surface of TiO2 nanopillars.106 The resulting Ag–TiO2 heterojunction nanopillars exhibited excellent photocatalytic H2-production activities under visible-light irradiation without the need for using costly Pt, owing to the fact that TiO2 nanopillars as an appropriate platform can maintain the energy of the HLEEs transferred from Ag. It was also reported that the rate of photocatalytic oxygen evolution under broadband visible illumination (>400 nm) was significantly improved on the composites of plasmonic Ag and N-doped TiO2 (N-TiO2) when compared with pure Ag or N-TiO2.107 Recently, F. Dong's group reported a Ag(Au)/ZnIn2S4/TiO2 photocatalytic system as an efficient catalyst, which exhibited about 11-fold enhancement in photocatalytic H2 production and 16-fold improvement in photocatalytic CO2 reduction as compared to those for pure ZnIn2S4 nanosheets.108 A particular mechanism of multichannel-improved charge-carrier dynamics in well-designed heteronanostructured plasmonic photocatalysts was proposed. This implied that there are multichannel sensitization effects in the photocatalysts, including the semiconductor heterojunction effect, the SPR coupling effect, and the unique structural advantage, synergistically promoting the dynamics process of photoinduced charge carriers by a large electron transfer rate constant. However, it should be noted that TiO2 nanofibers used in this work play a significant role in maintaining the thermodynamic energy of the electrons to activate photochemical reactions, and the platform function of TiO2 should not be ignored.
With a similar mechanism, ZnO and SnO2 are also available as semiconductors to serve as an appropriate thermodynamic energy platform. A series of Ag–ZnO photocatalysts have been reported that are capable of degrading dyes under visible-light irradiation.109 D. H. Cho et al. reported Ag–SnO2 nanocomposites synthesized by using an electrochemically active biofilm. The prepared Ag–SnO2 nanocomposites exhibited obviously improved photocatalytic activity under visible-light irradiation for the degradation of methyl orange, methylene blue, 4-nitrophenol, and 2-chlorophenol when compared with bare SnO2 nanostructures. Here, SnO2 functions as a high-energy platform due to its suitable CB position, which yields photogenerated electrons with sufficient energy to reduce O2 to ˙O2− radicals.110
Different from Au and Ag, other metals like Cu and Bi are also worthwhile SPR-based materials for photocatalysis. Among them, Cu is 1000 times more abundant than Ag, while its price is 100 times less. Further, these Cu NPs exhibited strong SPR absorption in the visible-light range.111 However, there have been fewer reports regarding Cu-based plasmonic photocatalysts when compared with Au and Ag, mainly because of the poor chemical stability of Cu NPs under the catalytic reaction conditions.112 Nevertheless, A. Marimuthu et al. reported a sharp increase in the steady-state selectivity in propylene epoxidation on Cu NPs under visible-light illumination.113 Therefore, if an appropriate platform is provided, the construction of Cu-based plasmonic photocatalysts can be recommended for developing effective visible-light photocatalysts with lower costs. As discussed above, TiO2 is the primary choice to integrate with the pulsed electrochemical deposition method proposed by Cu. F. Peng and co-workers, where Cu NPs are deposited on TiO2 nanotube arrays (TNAs).114 When compared with pure TNAs, a new strong absorption peak appeared on Cu/TNAs in the visible-light region due to the SPR effect of Cu NPs. The novel Cu/TNAs heterogeneous nanocomposites showed a stable and high photocatalytic activity for H2 evolution without the need for a Pt cocatalyst, which was interpreted as the instance by which plasmon-induced excited hot electrons were partly injected into the CB of TiO2, resulting in the facile separation of electron–hole pairs in Cu NPs.
TiO2 as a hot-electron-accepting platform modulates the photogenerated electrons transfer and maintains sufficient appropriate energy to reduce H+ into H2. Similarly, ZnO is another platform that is capable of forming a HLEE-accepting platform. Until now, only a couple of works have reported about the photocatalytic activities of Cu–ZnO nanocomposites. Taking one of them as a classic example, Pal and co-workers introduced the SPR effect of Cu in the Cu–ZnO composite.115 To further improve the photocatalytic performance, Cu2O as a narrow-bandgap semiconductor was introduced to obtain the ZnO–Cu–Cu2O nanocomposite. In this typical work, it was found that for ZnO–Cu, the hot electrons could be injected from Cu into the CB of ZnO under visible-light irradiation, which possessed sufficient energy to initiate the reaction. While for ZnO–Cu–Cu2O, two suitable HLEE platforms have been introduced by ZnO and Cu2O. As a result, more hot electrons with sufficiently maintained energy could get involved in the reaction process, further enhancing the photocatalytic performance. This work further highlights the importance of an electron-accepting platform in visible-light photocatalysis.
Bismuth (Bi), a typical metalloid, has attracted considerable interest with its set of unique properties, such as very small effective mass, large mean free path, long Fermi wavelength, high carrier motilities, and very small band overlap energy.116,117 Moreover, elemental Bi and its oxides are environment-friendly and innocuous, and they are commonly used as stomach medicine. Similar to Au and Ag, Bi has been found to exhibit plasmonic properties under visible-light irradiation and can be applied in photocatalysis for degrading organic pollutants and removing NOx.118 F. Dong's group have focused the application of plasmonic Bi particles in visible-light photocatalysis.119–121 They have demonstrated that the cooperative contribution of SPR effects (450–600 nm) and enhanced carrier separation induced by Bi particles could result in an enhanced visible-light photocatalytic capability.122 However, a semiconductor is required to form heterojunctions such that the photogenerated electrons of plasmonic Bi can be transferred and utilized, such as BiOCl, BiOI, Bi2O3, and TiO2. In fact, coupled semiconductors play roles of a platform for accepting oscillating photogenerated electrons, resulting in enhanced charge separation and subsequent improvement in visible-light photocatalytic activities.
F. Dong and Y. Zhang recently deposited uniform Bi NPs on Degussa P25 by a facile eco-friendly synthesis method at room temperature; these NPs exhibited highly enhanced photocatalytic performance for the removal of ppb-level NO in air under visible-light irradiation.119 They have confirmed that the free photogenerated electrons could transfer from Bi to the CB of anatase and then to rutile TiO2. This terraced TiO2 platform effectively enhanced the charge separation by suppressing back recombinations, leading to high visible-light photocatalytic activity. In addition, SiO2@Bi microsphere nanocomposites have been recently prepared for visible-light photocatalysis to remove NO.120 By means of FT-IR, XPS, electron spin resonance, and in situ diffuse reflectance Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy, it was confirmed that the enhanced charge separation can be attributed to the use of Bi–O–Si as a transportation channel to accelerate charge transfer from plasmonic Bi to the SiO2 platform. This mechanism is very similar to those observed in phosphate-modified TiO2/α-Fe2O3 and silicate-bridged ZnO/BiVO4 nanocomposites. X. Yuan and his co-workers have prepared Bi NPs/ZnO nanocomposites via a facile chemical method.123 Their results show that the plasmonic charge separation is considerably enhanced after coupling with ZnO, leading to enhanced visible-light photocatalytic activity for aqueous Cr(VI) removal. According to their proposed mechanism, it is believed that the coupled ZnO is a platform for plasmonic Bi, which is similar to that in the abovementioned ZnO/BiVO4 nanocomposite.
In this section, we summarized four photocatalysts based on typical plasmonic metals (Au, Ag, Cu, and Bi) coupled with semiconductors possessing suitable CB positions as the HLEE platform and their applications in visible-light photocatalysis. Based on these reviewed works, it can be concluded that (i) the visible-light-excited photogenerated electrons of plasmonic metals can be transferred and utilized in photocatalysis; (ii) wide-bandgap semiconductors such as TiO2, ZnO, and SiO2 can yield an appropriate energy platform for the visible-light-excited photogenerated electrons of plasmonic metals; (iii) a high-quality interface at the metal/semiconductor contributes toward charge separation. This wide-bandgap-semiconductor-coupling strategy involving plasmonic metals comprehensively supports the concept of platform construction, yielding novel ideas for fabricating high-performance visible-light-responsive photocatalysts.
5. g-C3N4-based photocatalysts
Polymeric g-C3N4 is a layered material similar to graphene, possessing high thermal and chemical stabilities. It is a medium-bandgap (∼2.7 eV) semiconductor with CB and VB potentials of −1.3 and 1.4 eV, respectively; it is fairly suitable for applications involving water splitting, CO2 reduction, and pollutant degradation.124–126 The widespread investigation of this material as a catalyst for photocatalytic reactions has begun only after the work by X. C. Wang and co-workers in 2009.127 However, its visible-light photocatalytic activities are generally unsatisfactory due to its sluggish charge separation ability. Emphatically, to ensure that the thermodynamic energy of the electrons from g-C3N4 with a longer lifetime is maintained is equally important as those in the other oxide photocatalysts mentioned above. Therefore, the strategy of introducing a suitable energy platform for the photogenerated electrons should be considered by choosing a suitable semiconductor to couple with g-C3N4, aiming to improve the visible-light photocatalytic activities.
As discussed in the earlier sections, TiO2 has proven to be a suitable semiconductor that can form a suitable energy platform for photogenerated electrons. The disparity of the CB bands between g-C3N4 and TiO2 naturally leads to the migration of electrons from the CB of g-C3N4 to that of TiO2. Facilitated by the CB edge potential of TiO2, the migrated electrons possess sufficient energy to meet the need for inducing the reduction of H2O and O2.128 H. X. Li et al. reported size-controllable g-C3N4 quantum dots grafted onto single-crystalline TNAs to form TiO2/g-C3N4 nanotube nanocomposites, which displayed high activity in synergetic H2 evolution and organic pollutant degradation, attributable to the enhanced charge separation ability induced by the TiO2 nanotubes.129 J. Pan et al. prepared a Ti3+ self-doping black TiO2/g-C3N4 nanoheterojunction with a hollow core–shell structure, exhibiting activity enhancements of 18 times and 65 times than those of normal TiO2 and g-C3N4, respectively.130 Our group has fabricated g-C3N4-based nanocomposites with wide-bandgap semiconductors as efficient photocatalysts for organic pollutant degradation, H2 production, and CO2 reduction. With the aim of reasonably utilizing the photoexcited electrons from g-C3N4, we introduced ZnO, TiO2, and SnO2 as thermodynamic energy platforms to enhance charge separation and maintain the thermodynamic energy of the electrons from g-C3N4. Furthermore, we prepared Ag–TiO2/g-C3N4 nanocomposites for visible-light-driven photocatalytic H2 production with high photoactivities. It was found that the coupled nanocrystalline anatase TiO2 could accept visible-light-excited electrons from g-C3N4 to prolong the charge lifetime, and the decorated nanosized Ag possessed catalyst function for H2 evolution. The synergistic effects could considerably improve the visible-light catalytic activity of g-C3N4.131
Nonmetal doping is developed to extend the marginal visible-light absorption (less than 460 nm) of g-C3N4.132,133 Nevertheless, in such doping, an appropriate platform is still important for accepting the electrons with proper energy from g-C3N4. The TiO2-coupled boron-doped g-C3N4 nanocomposites (T/B-CN) have been prepared by our group, exhibiting rather high cocatalyst-free photoactivities for producing H2 and CH4 under visible-light irradiation with activity enhancements of ∼29 times and ∼16 times, respectively, as compared to that of bare CN.132 These excellent photoactivities could be attributed to the synergistic effects of the considerably enhanced photogenerated charge separation after doping boron and the suitable platform of TiO2 for maintaining the electrons from B-CN (Fig. 11). Moreover, visible-light absorption could be extended from 450 nm of g-C3N4 to 500 nm of B-CN for solar fuel production, providing much larger quantum efficiencies of 3.08% for H2 evolution and 1.68% for CH4 production at 420 nm.
 Fig. 11  Schematic of the mechanism for photogenerated charge transfer and separation and photocatalytic reactions for CO2 conversion and for pollutant degradation under visible-light irradiation on SnO2-coupled boron and phosphorus co-doped g-C3N4. Adapted with permission from ref. 128. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
Silicate-bridged ZnO/g-C3N4 nanocomposites as efficient photocatalysts for the degradation of phenol and production of H2 were also prepared by us.134 Significantly, after introducing silicate groups as linkers between ZnO and g-C3N4, the lifetime and separation of photogenerated charges were further enhanced, leading to the largely improved photocatalytic activity (4 times higher than that of bulk g-C3N4). Evidently, these silicate linkers resemble a bridge between the two components, considerably facilitating charge transfer and separation in the fabricated heterojunctional nanocomposites. This work further revealed that the connection of the heterogeneous interface is also important.
Furthermore, SnO2-coupled boron and phosphorus co-doped g-C3N4 (SO/B-P-CN) nanocomposites were successfully synthesized as efficient cocatalyst-free visible-light photocatalysts for both CO2 conversion and pollutant degradation, showing ∼9 times improvement in CO2 conversion and ∼7 times improvement in phenol and acetaldehyde degradations when compared with that of bare CN.135 It was suggested that the extended visible-light absorption from 460 to 550 nm after B-P co-doping and the coupled SO NPs as a proper-level energy platform synergistically enhanced the activity of SO/B-P-CN. Therefore, from our works involving g-C3N4-based photocatalytic systems, it can be inferred that the introduction of a proper oxide platform is vital for enhancing charge separation and prolonging the charge lifetimes, leading to improved photocatalytic activities. It must be emphasized that the interfacial connection should be taken into account in the heterojunctional system as interfacial charge transportation can affect charge separation.
The catalytic function of the separated photogenerated electrons with high energy on the platform should also be considered. Therefore, our group developed porous g-C3N4-based nanocomposites by decorating sheet-like nanostructured MnOx and subsequently coupling Au-modified nanocrystalline TiO2.136 The prepared Au–TiO2/g-C3N4-MnOx nanocomposites displayed exceptional photoactivities for CO2 conversion to CH4 and for H2 evolution, which were mainly attributed to their large surface area, and the specific modulation for electrons and holes by coupling Au–TiO2 and decorating MnOx, respectively. Similarly, G. Colón synthesized Pt–TiO2/g-C3N4-MnOx as a visible-light photocatalyst for H2 evolution and phenol degradation.137 In the same way, the photogenerated electrons could transfer from the CB band of g-C3N4 to that of TiO2 and then to Pt NPs, which facilitated photogenerated charge separation. The transferred electrons with sufficient energy further completed the reduction of O2 into ˙O2− radicals. Clearly, formulating an appropriate platform with catalytic functions is effective in improving the photocatalytic activity by maintaining the energy of the photogenerated electrons and then catalyzing the related reactions. Subsequently, in order to improve the visible-light photocatalytic activities of CN for degrading 2,4-DCP and bisphenol A (BPA), Au/TiO2/g-C3N4 nanocomposites were also prepared.138 When compared to CN, the activity of amount-optimized nanocomposite is ∼5- and 3-times improved toward 2,4-DCP and BPA, respectively, under UV-vis irradiation, which is much higher than that of P25 TiO2. These works distinctly provide a feasible strategy to synthesize highly efficient CN-based photocatalysts for solar fuel production and pollutant degradation.
Accordingly, to further extend the light absorption abilities, plasmonic metals were also introduced into the oxide platform on the g-C3N4-based system. Our group successfully synthesized plasmonic Au/SnO2/g-C3N4 (Au/SO/CN) nanocomposites that exhibited superior photocatalytic activities and favorable stability toward H2 evolution without any cocatalyst under visible-light irradiation.139 Based on the surface photovoltage spectra, photoelectrochemical I–V curves, fluorescence spectra related to the formed hydroxyl radicals, and photocurrent action spectra, the enhanced photoactivities are comprehensively attributed to the promoted photogenerated charge separation via the excited electron transfer from plasmonic Au (≈520 nm) and CN (470 > λ > 400 nm) to SO. Moreover, the Kelvin probe test revealed that the newly aligned CB of SO marginally shifted upward in the fabricated 2Au/6SO/CN, which was indispensable to assist in developing a proper energy platform for photocatalytic H2 evolution. A related scheme is shown in Fig. 12, which clearly illustrates charge separation in the fabricated 2Au/6SO/CN nanocomposite. These works further evidence the important role of a wide-bandgap semiconductor platform for plasmonic-assisted CN-based materials in visible-light photocatalysis.
 Fig. 12  Schematic for the energy-band levels and process mechanism on the photogenerated charge transfer and separation in the fabricated Au/SO/CN nanocomposite. (SO stands for SnO2 NPs; CN denotes g-C3N4 nanosheets.) Adapted with permission from ref. 135. Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. 
Moreover, some uncommon semiconductors with suitable CB potentials could also serve as suitable platforms that can assist in significantly enhancing the visible-light-driven photocatalytic activities. NaNbO3 as another typical perovskite semiconductor with CB and VB potentials at −0.60 and 2.81 eV, respectively, has also been reported to combine with g-C3N4 due to its suitable CB potential.140 In another study, novel visible-light-driven 2D–2D g-C3N4/KCa2Nb3O10 nanosheet heterojunction photocatalysts were constructed, which were derived from Dion–Jacobson phase-layer perovskites.141 When compared with bare KCa2Nb3O10 and g-C3N4, these 2D–2D heterojunction photocatalysts exhibited considerably improved photocatalytic activities for tetracycline hydrochloride degradation under visible-light irradiation. It is noteworthy that the CB and VB of KCa2Nb3O10 are estimated to be −0.784 and 2.596 eV, respectively, which fully proves the necessity of a high-energy platform in the effective construction of g-C3N4-based photocatalysts. Very recently, Y. Luo et al. focused on the interfacial interaction of g-C3N4/SrTiO3 nanocomposites in a photocatalytic reaction. They found that SrTiO3 coupling can promote the visible-light photoactivity of g-C3N4, implying the dual-metal oxides of SrTiO3 can also be an appropriate platform for g-C3N4.142
Different from metal oxides and multi-metal oxides, the CB of g-C3N4 is normally higher than those of most semiconductors. Under visible-light irradiation, the photogenerated electrons of CN naturally transfer to the CB of the coupling wide-bandgap semiconductor, resulting in enhanced charge separation and prolonged charge lifetime. When an appropriate platform of the semiconductor is introduced, sufficient energy of electrons can participate in the subsequent photocatalytic conversion, leading to high photocatalytic activity. Therefore, a semiconductor with suitable CB potential is still highly desirable to serve as a suitable energy electron platform to maintain the energy of the electrons. Similarly, typical wide-bandgap semiconductors like TiO2 and ZnO are appropriate choices for integrating with CN for efficient visible-light photocatalysis.
6. Conclusions and outlook
It has been widely accepted that heterogeneous photocatalysts with multiple integrated functional components could combine the advantages of its different components to overcome the drawbacks of single-component photocatalysts. Many hybrid strategies to fabricate nanocomposite photocatalysts, including semiconductor/semiconductor, metal/semiconductor, molecule/semiconductor, and multi-heterojunctions, have been explored for improving the photoactivities by increasing light absorption, enhancing charge separation and transportation, prolonging charge lifetime, and providing surface catalytic functions. Almost all light-response materials can be utilized to combine with one another to form heterojunctions with regard to light absorption, charge separation, and surface catalysis. However, the thermodynamic energy of the photogenerated electrons and holes are seldom considered in the construction of heterojunctions. In fact, the utilization of proper-energy-level electrons and prolonging their lifetimes are vital toward the creation of efficient photocatalytic reactions, such as H2 production, CO2 reduction, and pollutant degradation.
According to the reviewed works, we particularly emphasize upon the effective separation and reasonable utilization of proper-level-energy electrons with sufficient thermodynamic energy in narrow-bandgap semiconductors under visible-light irradiation. In this review, we have summarized four kinds of different efficient visible-light heterojunctional photocatalyst systems depending upon an appropriate electron energy platform, including single-metal oxides, bimetal oxides, and SPR-metal and polymer-based semiconductors. It was confirmed that visible-light-driven heterojunctional photocatalysts exhibit higher activities due to enhanced charge separation and prolonged charge lifetimes after the introduction of an appropriate platform for accepting HLEEs with high thermodynamic energies. Some typical wide-bandgap oxides such as TiO2, ZnO, and SnO2 were proven to be appropriate platforms due to their negative CB potentials. Further, it was demonstrated that charge transfer across the interfaces of different semiconductors would be suppressed when the crystallographic planes are mismatched, implying that an unobstructed channel should be built between them.143 Moreover, our group developed a feasible strategy of constructing bridges through small molecules such as O–P–O, O–Si–O, and O–Al–O between the crystal-mismatched heterojunctions to facilitate charge transfer.
The rational design of heterostructures that simultaneously facilitate efficient optical absorption, charge separation, and thermodynamic utilization, is paramount for the novel generation of highly efficient and robust photocatalysts. We do believe that this strategy of forming an appropriate electron-accepting platform in addition to an interfacial connection is versatile in the construction of high-performance heterojunctional photocatalysts. Hence, the following four perspectives should be addressed.
(i) Multi-metal-oxide-based heterojunctional photocatalysts. Some multi-metal semiconductors with narrow bandgaps, such as Bi4NbO8Cl,144 CaCu3Ti4O12,145 CsCa2Ta3O10,146 KCa2Nb3−xRhxO101−δ,147 and Cs2AgInCl6,148 have been reported to possess excellent visible-light responses. However, visible-light-excited photogenerated charge separation and utilization of electrons are limited. It is promising to combine an appropriate electron-accepting platform to effectively utilize HLEEs for typical photocatalytic reactions. We are confident that the visible-light-driven photocatalytic activities could be further improved by coupling other semiconductors with appropriate electron-accepting platforms.
(ii) Simultaneously promoting visible-light response and catalytic functions. It is necessary to further extend the visible-light response of current narrow-bandgap semiconductors, like g-C3N4. Plasmonic metals like Bi and Cu should be considered for improving the visible-light response. Meanwhile, owing to the fact that the platform acts as an electron collector where the catalytic reactions occur, its catalytic capacity should be promoted by introducing effective catalytic ingredients. It is proposed that certain molecular catalysts such as metal phthalocyanines are promising candidates to function as bifunctional components of light absorbers and catalytic centers: the tunable molecular structures can improve the visible-light response and the central metal can catalyze the reactions.
(iii) Nonmetal-doped narrow-bandgap semiconductors. According to the mechanism of HLEEs transfer, it should be noted that the VB of the narrow-bandgap semiconductors directly affects the utilization of HLEEs. Therefore, doping narrow-bandgap semiconductors with nonmetals such as N, S, P, and B to heighten their VB potentials can prove to be feasible to extend the visible-light absorption and improve their visible-light photocatalytic activity. The key issues are the stability of the doped semiconductor, including phase transformation, morphological changes, introduction of defects, and matching with an appropriate platform, are very significant.
(iv) Fundamentals of appropriate platform-dependent heterojunctional photocatalysts. The effects of platforms on the formation of active species, like ˙OH, ˙O2−, and H2O2, should be comprehensively investigated, which will further promote the rational design and wider applications in photocatalytic organic transformations required by the active species and higher selectivity. Fortunately, the energy of the visible-light-excited electrons can be tuned by the CB of the coupled platforms, yielding high selectivity toward typical chemical reactions. Therefore, it is imperative that well-designed heterojunctional photocatalysts with high activity should be designed and applied in photocatalytic selective organic transformations, such as the oxidation of alcohol, conversion of biomass, and epoxidation of alkene. Moreover, rationally designed heterojunctional photocatalysts with tunable platforms have many potential applications in certain challenging fields of current chemical reactions, such as artificial photosynthesis, photocatalytic nitrogen fixation, and activation of C–C and C–H bonds. Finally, we believe that a thermodynamic platform-dependent electron-modulating strategy would shine a bright light toward the ambiguous mechanisms involved in photocatalysis.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful for financial support from the NSFC project (U1805255, 91622119, and 21501052), the Program for Innovative Research Team in Chinese Universities (IRT1237) and UNPYSCT-2016173.
References
Y. Li, G. Xu, C. Cui and Y. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701791 CrossRef .
S. F. Ahmed, M. Khalid, W. Rashmi, A. Chan and K. Shahbaz, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 67, 450–460 CrossRef CAS .
F. A. Chowdhury, M. L. Trudeau, H. Guo and Z. Mi, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1707 CrossRef .
X. Li, C. H. Tung and L. Z. Wu, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2018, 2, 160–173 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 2603–2636 RSC .
Q. Wang, T. Hisatomi, Q. Jia, H. Tokudome, M. Zhong, C. Wang, Z. Pan, T. Takata, M. Nakabayashi, N. Shibata, Y. Li, I. D. Sharp, A. Kudo, T. Yamada and K. Domen, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 611–615 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, H. Li, G. Zhan and L. Zhang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 112–121 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253–278 RSC .
L. Li, P. A. Salvador and G. S. Rohrer, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 24–42 RSC .
Z. Li, Y. Luan, Y. Qu and L. Jing, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 22727–22740 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Hisatomi, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7520–7535 RSC .
C. Chen, W. Ma and J. Zhao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 4206–4219 RSC .
M. R. Hoffmann, S. T. Martin, W. Choi and D. W. Bahnemann, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 69–96 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Colmenares and R. Luque, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 765–778 RSC .
Y. Hu, X. Gao, L. Yu, Y. Wang, J. Ning, S. Xu and X. W. (David) Lou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 5636–5639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. B. Singh, H. Matsuzaki, Y. Suzuki, K. Seki, T. Minegishi, T. Hisatomi, K. Domen and A. Furube, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 17324–17331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Tang, J. R. Durrant and D. R. Klug, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 13885–13891 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Qu and X. Duan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2568–2580 RSC .
C. Zeng, Y. Hu, Y. Guo, T. Zhang, F. Dong, X. Du, Y. Zhang and H. Huang, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 194, 62–73 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jing, W. Zhou, G. Tian and H. Fu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 9509–9549 RSC .
N. Zhang, A. Jalil, D. Wu, S. Chen, Y. Liu, C. Gao, W. Ye, Z. Qi, H. Ju, C. Wang, X. Wu, L. Song, J. Zhu and Y. Xiong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 9434–9443 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Sun, Q. Meng, L. Jing, D. Liu and Y. Cao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 1358–1365 CrossRef CAS .
P. Luan, L. Jing, M. Xie, D. Liu and H. Fu, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 6180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Sivula, F. Le Formal and M. Grätzel, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 432–449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kment, F. Riboni, S. Pausova, L. Wang, L. Wang, H. Han, Z. Hubicka, J. Krysa, P. Schmuki and R. Zboril, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 3716–3769 RSC .
X. She, J. Wu, H. Xu, J. Zhong, Y. Wang, Y. Song, K. Nie, Y. Liu, Y. Yang, M. T. F. Rodrigues, R. Vajtai, J. Lou, D. Du, H. Li and P. M. Ajayan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700025 CrossRef .
M. Xie, Q. Meng, P. Luan, Y. Feng and L. Jing, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 52053–52059 RSC .
P. Luan, M. Xie, X. Fu, Y. Qu, X. Sun and L. Jing, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 5043–5050 RSC .
P. Luan, L. Jing, M. Xie, D. Liu and H. Fu, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 6180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. E. de Krafft, C. Wang and W. Lin, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2014–2018 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhu, F. Yao, C. Yin, Y. Li, W. Peng, J. Ma and D. Zhang, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2014, 190, 10–16 CrossRef CAS .
P. Tiwana, P. Docampo, M. B. Johnston, H. J. Snaith and L. M. Herz, ACS Nano, 2016, 5, 5158–5166 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Jiang, L. Zhang, H. Wang, X. Yang, J. Meng, H. Liu, Z. Yin, J. Wu, X. Zhang and J. You, Nat. Energy, 2016, 2, 16177 CrossRef .
Z. Li, P. Luan, X. Zhang, Y. Qu, F. Raziq, J. Wang and L. Jing, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 2321–2331 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xiao, R. Hu, C. Liu, C. Xing, C. Qian, X. Zuo, J. Nan and L. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 140–141, 433–443 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Hao, R. Wang, H. Lu, C. A. Xie, W. Ao, D. Chen, C. Ma, W. Yao and Y. Zhu, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 219, 63–72 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Peng, K. K. Wang, T. Liu, J. Xu and B. G. Xu, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 203, 946–954 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhou, W. Wang, H. Xu, S. Sun and M. Shang, Chem.–Eur. J., 2009, 15, 1776–1782 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Chai, Y. J. Kim, M. H. Jung, A. K. Chakraborty, D. Jung and W. I. Lee, J. Catal., 2009, 262, 144–149 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Peng, M. Yan, Q. G. Chen, C. M. Fan, H. Y. Zhou and A. W. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 8517–8524 RSC .
Z. Bian, J. Zhu, S. Wang, Y. Cao, X. Qian and H. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 6258–6262 CrossRef CAS .
N. Sun, Y. Qu, S. Chen, R. Yan, M. Humayun, Y. Liu, L. Bai, L. Jing and H. Fu, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2017, 4, 1147–1154 RSC .
X. Lin, J. Xing, W. Wang, Z. Shan, F. Xu and F. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 18288–18293 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ahmed, A. K. Ojha, A. Singh, F. Hirsch, I. Fischer, D. Patrice and A. Materny, J. Hazard. Mater., 2018, 347, 266–278 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Xiao, Z. Tang, Y. Yang, L. Tang, Y. Zhou and Z. Zou, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 220, 417–428 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zheng, J. Z. Ou, M. S. Strano, R. B. Kaner, A. Mitchell and K. Kalantar-zadeh, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 2175–2196 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. K. Leghari, S. Sajjad, F. Chen and J. Zhang, Chem. Eng. J., 2011, 166, 906–915 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shen, I. R. Ie, C. S. Yuan and C. H. Hung, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 195, 90–103 CrossRef CAS .
S. Adhikari, D. Sarkar and G. Madras, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 11895–11904 RSC .
S. Wang, H. Xu, L. Qian, X. Jia, J. Wang, Y. Liu and W. Tang, J. Solid State Chem., 2009, 182, 1088–1093 CrossRef CAS .
A. Nezamzadeh-Ejhieh and M. Karimi-Shamsabadi, Chem. Eng. J., 2013, 228, 631–641 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, Y. Qu, G. He, M. Humayun, S. Chen and L. Jing, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 351, 681–685 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xu and D. Sun, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2009, 34, 6096–6104 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xie, P. Liu, Z. Zheng, S. Weng and J. Huang, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 184, 347–354 CrossRef CAS .
Y. T. Ma and Q. L. Li, J. Inorg. Mater., 2016, 31, 841–844 CrossRef .
M. Ou, W. Tu, S. Yin, W. Xing, S. Wu, H. Wang, S. Wan, Q. Zhong and R. Xu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 13570–13574 CrossRef CAS .
I. Ibrahim, I. O. Ali, T. M. Salama, A. A. Bahgat and M. M. Mohamed, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 181, 389–402 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Shin, E. J. Yeom, W. S. Yang, S. Hur, M. G. Kim, J. Im, J. Seo, J. H. Noh and S. Il Seok, Science, 2017, 356, 167–171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Shan, F. Raziq, M. Humayun, W. Zhou, Y. Qu, G. Wang and Y. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 219, 10–17 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, T. Hisatomi, Q. Jia, H. Tokudome, M. Zhong, C. Wang, Z. Pan, T. Takata, M. Nakabayashi, N. Shibata, Y. Li, I. D. Sharp, A. Kudo, T. Yamada and K. Domen, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 611–615 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Bian, Y. Qu, X. Zhang, N. Sun, D. Tang and L. Jing, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 11838–11845 RSC .
R. Li, F. Zhang, D. Wang, J. Yang, M. Li, J. Zhu, X. Zhou, H. Han and C. Li, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1432 CrossRef PubMed .
H. L. Tan, X. Wen, R. Amal and Y. H. Ng, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 1400–1405 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, P. Chen, J. H. Yun, Y. Hu and L. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 8500–8504 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zou, H. Wang and X. Wang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 303–309 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Tan, R. Amal and Y. H. Ng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 16498–16521 RSC .
M. Zhou, J. Bao, Y. Xu, J. Zhang, J. Xie, M. Guan, C. Wang, L. Wen, Y. Lei and Y. Xie, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 7088–7098 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, W. Luo, M. Zhang, J. Feng and Z. Zou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 347–370 RSC .
X. Fu, M. Xie, P. Luan and L. Jing, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 18550–18557 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Xie, X. Fu, L. Jing, P. Luan, Y. Feng and H. Fu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1300995 CrossRef .
J. Bian, Y. Qu, R. Fazal, X. Li, N. Sun and L. Jing, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 11831–11836 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hu, D. Li, Y. Zheng, W. Chen, Y. He, Y. Shao, X. Fu and G. Xiao, Appl. Catal., B, 2011, 104, 30–36 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zalfani, B. van der Schueren, Z. Y. Hu, J. C. Rooke, R. Bourguiga, M. Wu, Y. Li, G. Van Tendelooc and B. L. Su, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 21244–21256 RSC .
S. J. A. Moniz, J. Zhu and J. Tang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301590 CrossRef .
S. Thirumalairajan, K. Girija, I. Ganesh, D. Mangalaraj, C. Viswanathan, A. Balamurugan and N. Ponpandian, Chem. Eng. J., 2012, 209, 420–428 CrossRef CAS .
G. Iervolino, V. Vaiano, D. Sannino, L. Rizzo and V. Palma, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 207, 182–194 CrossRef CAS .
X. Sun, D. Jiang, L. Zhang, S. Sun and W. Wang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 9965–9971 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jing, Y. Qu, H. Su, C. Yao and H. Fu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 12375–12380 CrossRef CAS .
M. Humayun, Z. Li, L. Sun, X. Zhang, F. Raziq, A. Zada, Y. Qu and L. Jing, Nanomaterials, 2016, 6, 22–32 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Humayun, Y. Qu, F. Raziq, R. Yan, Z. Li, X. Zhang and L. Jing, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2016, 50, 13600–13610 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Bai, J. Wei, B. Tian, Y. Liu, T. Reiss, N. Guiblin, P. Gemeiner, B. Dkhil and I. C. Infante, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 3595–3601 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, W. Mao, Z. Wu, X. Xu, H. You, A. X. Xue and Y. Jia, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 7343–7350 RSC .
A. Walsh, D. J. Payne, R. G. Egdell and G. W. Watson, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 4455–4463 RSC .
S. Li, Y. H. Lin, B. P. Zhang, Y. Wang and C. W. Nan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 2903–2908 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Yang, Y. Liu, J. H. Wei, C. X. Pan, R. Xiong and J. Shi, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 31941–31947 RSC .
Y. Zhang, A. M. Schultz, P. A. Salvador and G. S. Rohrer, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 4168–4174 RSC .
M. Humayun, A. Zada, Z. Li, M. Xie, X. Zhang, Y. Qu, F. Raziq and L. Jing, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 180, 219–226 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qu, Z. Li, N. Sun, X. Zhang, S. Chen and L. Jing, Catal. Today, 2019, 327, 288–294 CrossRef CAS .
S. Linic, P. Christopher and D. B. Ingram, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 911–921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, Y. L. Chen, R. S. Liu and D. P. Tsai, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2013, 76, 046401 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Hou and S. B. Cronin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1612–1619 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tian and T. Tatsuma, Chem. Commun., 2004, 16, 1810–1811 RSC .
A. Ayati, A. Ahmadpour, F. F. Bamoharram, B. Tanhaei, M. Mänttäri and M. Sillanpää, Chemosphere, 2014, 107, 163–174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Primo, A. Corma and H. Garcia, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 886–910 RSC .
A. Tanaka, S. Sakaguchi, K. Hashimoto and H. Kominami, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2012, 2, 907–909 RSC .
Z. Bian, T. Tachikawa, P. Zhang, M. Fujitsuka and T. Majima, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 458–465 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lu, Y. Qu, L. Sun, X. Chu, J. Li, Y. Liu, L. Bai and L. Jing, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 14652–14659 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Han, M. Luo, L. Chen, J. Chen and C. Li, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 402, 429–435 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Khan, S. A. Ansari, M. E. Khan, M. O. Ansari, B. K. Min and M. H. Cho, New J. Chem., 2015, 39, 2758–2766 RSC .
S. Anandan, N. Pugazhenthiran, T. Selvamani, S. H. Hsieh, G. J. Lee and J. J. Wu, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2012, 2, 2502–2507 RSC .
J. Lan, X. Zhou, G. Liu, J. Yu, J. Zhang, L. Zhi and G. Nie, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 5161–5167 RSC .
W. Zhu, S. Xiao, D. Zhang, P. Liu, H. Zhou, W. Dai, F. Liu and H. Li, Langmuir, 2015, 31, 10822–10830 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Sheikh, A. Yengantiwar, M. Deo, S. Kelkar and S. Ogale, Small, 2013, 9, 2091–2096 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Awazu, M. Fujimaki, C. Rockstuhl, J. Tominaga, H. Murakami, Y. Ohki, N. Yoshida and T. Watanabe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 1676–1680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Y. Chuang and D. H. Chen, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 105704 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Qu, W. Zhou, Z. Ren, C. Tian, J. Li and H. Fu, ChemPlusChem, 2014, 79, 995–1000 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, F. Peng, H. Wang, H. Yu, S. Zhang, J. Yang and H. Zhao, Catal. Commun., 2011, 12, 689–693 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Ansari, M. M. Khan, M. O. Ansari, J. Lee and M. H. Cho, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 26013–26021 RSC .
Z. Zhang, Y. Huang, K. Liu, L. Guo, Q. Yuan and B. Dong, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5906–5914 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zheng, C. Chen, Y. Zhan, X. Lin, Q. Zheng, K. Wei and J. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 10773–10777 CrossRef CAS .
S. Linic, U. Aslam, C. Boerigter and M. Morabito, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 567–576 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Guo, C. Hao, G. Jin, H. Y. Zhu and X. Y. Guo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 1973–1977 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Marimuthu, J. Zhang and S. Linic, Science, 2013, 339, 1590–1593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, B. Peng, S. Yang, H. Wang, H. Yu, Y. Fang and F. Peng, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 303–310 CrossRef CAS .
J. Pal, A. K. Sasmal, M. Ganguly and T. Pal, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 3780–3790 CrossRef CAS .
F. Dong, T. Xiong, Y. Sun, Z. Zhao, Y. Zhou, X. Feng and Z. Wu, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 10386–10389 RSC .
F. Y. Yang, K. Liu, C. L. Chien and P. C. Searson, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1999, 82, 3328 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, X. A. Dong, Y. Sun, W. Cen and F. Dong, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 226, 269–277 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhao, W. Zhang, X. Lv, Y. Sun, F. Dong and Y. Zhang, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2016, 3, 1306–1317 RSC .
Z. Ni, W. Zhang, G. Jiang, X. Wang, Z. Lu, Y. Sun, X. Li, Y. Zhang and F. Dong, Chin. J. Catal., 2017, 38, 1174–1183 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, W. Zhang, X. Li, J. Li, W. Cen, Q. Li and F. Dong, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 225, 218–227 CrossRef CAS .
F. Dong, Q. Li, Y. Sun and W. K. Ho, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 4341–4350 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yuan, Z. Feng, J. Zhao, J. Niu, J. Liu, D. Peng and X. Cheng, Catalysts, 2018, 8, 426–440 CrossRef .
Z. Sun, H. Wang, Z. Wu and L. Wang, Catal. Today, 2018, 300, 160–172 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, X. Wang and M. Antonietti, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 68–89 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Ong, L. L Tan, Y. H. Ng, S. T. Yong and S. P. Chai, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 7159–7329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. C. Wang, K. Maeda, A. Thomas, K. Takanabe, G. Xin, J. M. Carlsson, K. Domen and M. Antonietti, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 76–80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. L. Gu, F. X. Lu, C. Wang, S. Kuga, L. Z. Wu, Y. Huang and M. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 28674–28684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Li, Z. Lian, W. Wang, D. Zhang and H. Li, Nano Energy, 2016, 19, 446–454 CrossRef CAS .
J. Pan, Z. Dong, B. Wang, Z. Jiang, C. Zhao, J. Wang, C. Song, Y. Zheng and C. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 242, 92–99 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, X. Zhang, J. Li, J. Sun, J. Bian, J. Wang, Y. Qu, R. Yan, C. Qin and L. Jing, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 237, 50–58 CrossRef CAS .
F. Raziq, Y. Qu, X. Zhang, M. Humayun, J. Wu, A. Zada, H. Yu, X. Sun and L. Jing, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 98–107 CrossRef CAS .
S. Guo, Y. Tang, Y. Xie, C. Tian, Q. Feng, W. Zhou and B. Jiang, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 218, 664–671 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, C. Li, X. Fu, F. Raziq and L. Jing, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 37275–37280 RSC .
F. Raziq, Y. Qu, M. Humayun, A. Zada, H. Yu and L. Jing, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 201, 486–494 CrossRef CAS .
F. Raziq, L. Sun, Y. Wang, X. Zhang, M. Humayun, S. Ali, L. Bai, Y. Qu, H. Yu and L. Jing, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701580 CrossRef .
S. Obregón and G. Colón, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 144, 775–782 CrossRef .
A. Zada, Y. Qu, S. Ali, N. Sun, H. Lu, R. Yan, X. Zhang and L. Jing, J. Hazard. Mater., 2018, 342, 715–723 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Zada, M. Humayun, F. Raziq, X. Zhang, Y. Qu, L. Bai, C. Qin, L. Jing and H. Fu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1601190 CrossRef .
H. Shi, G. Chen, C. Zhang and Z. Zou, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 3637–3643 CrossRef CAS .
D. Jiang, T. Wang, Q. Xu, D. Li, S. Meng and M. Chen, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 201, 617–628 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Luo, B. Deng, Y. Pu, A. Liu, J. Wang, K. Ma, F. Gao, B. Gao, W. Zou and L. Dong, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 247, 1–9 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qu, N. Sun, M. Humayun, A. Zada, Y. Xie, J. Tang, L. Jing and H. Fu, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2018, 2, 549–552 RSC .
H. Fujito, H. Kunioku, D. Kato, H. Suzuki, M. Higashi, H. Kageyama and R. Abe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 2082–2085 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Clark, M. S. Dyer, R. G. Palgrave, C. P. Ireland, J. R. Darwent, J. B. Claridge and M. J. Rosseinsky, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 1016–1032 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ida, Y. Okamoto, M. Matsuka, H. Hagiwara and T. Ishihara, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15773–15782 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Okamoto, S. Ida, J. Hyodo, H. Hagiwara and T. Ishihara, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 18034–18037 CrossRef CAS .
J. Luo, S. Li, H. Wu, Y. Zhou, Y. Li, J. Liu, J. Li, K. Li, F. Yi, G. Niu and J. Tang, ACS Photonics, 2018, 5, 398–405 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:
Ziqing Zhang	Ziqing Zhang received her PhD in inorganic chemistry from Jilin University in 2018, working at the State Key Laboratory of Inorganic Synthesis and Preparative Chemistry. Now, she is a lecturer in the School of Chemistry and Materials Science at Heilongjiang University, in Prof. Liqiang Jing's group researching on oxide–semiconductor photocatalysis.
Linlu Bai	Linlu Bai obtained her PhD in chemical engineering from Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, in 2015. Currently, she is a lecturer in the School of Chemical and Environmental Engineering, Harbin University of Science and Technology, along with being a postdoctoral researcher under Prof. Liqiang Jing in Heilongjiang University. Her research interests focus on photocatalytic organic synthesis and biomass conversion.
Zhijun Li	Zhijun Li received his PhD in physical chemistry from Heilongjiang University in 2017. Now, he is working at the Key Laboratory of Functional Inorganic Materials Chemistry. He is working on the synthesis of copper-based oxides for photocatalytic energy production and environmental remediation.
Yang Qu	Yang Qu received his PhD from Jilin University in 2014. Currently, he is working in Prof. Liqiang Jing's group at Heilongjiang University. His current research concentrates on the synthesis of Bi-based multi-metal oxides and their applications in the fields of environmental remediation and solar fuel production.
Liqiang Jing	Liqiang Jing is a full professor in Heilongjiang University. He received his PhD in environmental engineering from Harbin Institute of Technology in 2003, and completed a postdoctoral program in physical chemistry at Jilin University from 2004 to 2006. From 2009 to 2010, Professor Jing worked in professor Durrant's group as an academic visitor in the Department of Chemistry at Imperial College, London, UK. His research interests mainly include semiconductor photocatalysis for environmental remediation and energy production and photophysical sensors for environmental analysis. He has been one of the Most Cited Chinese Researchers (Elsevier) in recent years, and he is also a distinguished Changjiang Scholar Professor in Environmental Chemistry since 2017.

 	Fig. 1  Number of publications of photocatalysis-related papers during the last decade and the percentage of visible-light photocatalysis-related papers. (Source: Web of Science; date: January 29, 2019; keywords: “photocatalytic” and “visible-light photocatalytic”.)	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic of the main processes in a photocatalytic reaction.	 

 	Fig. 3  Bandgap energies of typical semiconductors.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic of HLEEs transfer in the fabricated heterojunctional nanocomposites.	 

 	Fig. 5  Normalized photocurrent action spectra under different monochromatic light irradiations at the bias of 0.4 V vs. Ag/AgCl (A), and the proposed process schematic of the transfer and spatial separation of visible-light-excited HLEEs in the fabricated phosphate-bridged TiO2/α-Fe2O3 nanocomposite (B). (F: bare Fe2O3 NPs; P-F: phosphate-bridged F; TF: TiO2-coupled F; PB-TF: phosphate-bridged TF.) Adapted with permission from ref. 27. Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic for charge separation in phase-mixed Bi2O3 with phosphate-bridged nano-SnO2 (A) and photocatalytic activities for 2,4-DCP degradation (B) over different samples. (P25: commercial TiO2; BO440: bare phase-mixed Bi2O3; 5S-BO440: 5 wt% SnO2-coupled BO440; 5S-1.5P-BO44: 1.5 wt% phosphate-bridged 5S-BO440) Adapted with permission from ref. 41. Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 7  AC-SPS responses of different TiO2/BiVO4 nanocomposites: BV (A) and 5T-BV (B); TS-SPV responses under laser-pulse irradiation with 532 nm light of different TiO2/BiVO4 nanocomposites in air (C) and schematic of the transfer and separation of photogenerated HLEEs of fabricated TiO2/BiVO4 nanocomposites under visible-light illumination (D). (BV stands for bare BiVO4 NPs; T is TiO2 NPs.) Adapted with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.	 

 	Fig. 8  Mechanism of the photogenerated HLEEs on 7Ag-T/BV nanocomposite regarding the transfer and separation under visible-light illumination and their induced reactions for H2 evolution with Ag as the cocatalyst (A). Hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) performance of BV, Ag-BV, T/BV, and Ag-T/BV (B); photocatalytically induced H2 activities (C) of Au-T/BV, Pd-T/BV, Ag-T/BV, and Pt-T/BV under visible-light irradiation. (BV stands for bare BiVO4 NPs; T refers to TiO2 NPs.) Adapted with permission from ref. 70. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic illustration for the energy bandgaps of LFO-AC, 6N-LFO-AC, and TiO2, and the visible-light-excited HLEEs transfer in 6T/6NLFO-AC nanocomposite along with the induced redox processes. (LFO-AC, 6N-LFO-AC, and 6T/6NLFO-AC represent porous LaFeO3 prepared by carbon sphere template method, N-doped porous LaFeO3, and 6% TiO2 loaded onto N-doped porous LaFeO3.) Adapted with permission from ref. 79. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematic of photogenerated charge separation and the induced photochemical reactions over HF-modified Au/TiO2 nanocomposites (A) and D-matched Au-loaded TiO2 nanosheet/BiVO4 nanoflake nanocomposites under visible-light irradiation (B). Adapted with permission from ref. 96. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society and ref. 60. Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematic of the mechanism for photogenerated charge transfer and separation and photocatalytic reactions for CO2 conversion and for pollutant degradation under visible-light irradiation on SnO2-coupled boron and phosphorus co-doped g-C3N4. Adapted with permission from ref. 128. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic for the energy-band levels and process mechanism on the photogenerated charge transfer and separation in the fabricated Au/SO/CN nanocomposite. (SO stands for SnO2 NPs; CN denotes g-C3N4 nanosheets.) Adapted with permission from ref. 135. Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
