Atomic spectrometry update—X-ray fluorescence spectrometry  - Journal of Analytical Atomic Spectrometry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B611269M View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B611269M
(Atomic Spectrometry Update)
J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21, 1076-1107Atomic spectrometry update—X-ray fluorescence spectrometryPhilip J. Pottsa, Andrew T. Ellisb, Peter Kregsamerc, Christina Strelic, Christine Vanhoofd, Margaret West*e and Peter WobrauschekcaDepartment of Earth Sciences, The Open University, Walton Hall, Milton Keynes, UK MK7 6AAbOxford Instruments Analytical Ltd., Halifax Road, High Wycombe, Buckinghamshire, UK HP12 3SEcTU Wien, Atominstitut der Österreichischen Universitäten, Stadionallee 2, A-1020 Vienna, AustriadVITO, Environmental Measurements, Boeretang 200, B-2400 Mol, BelgiumeWest X-ray Solutions, 405 Whirlowdale Road, Sheffield, UK S11 9NFReceived 3rd August 2006First published on 11th September 2006Contents1 Introduction and reviews2 Instrumentation2.1 General instrumentation and excitation sources2.2 Detectors3 Spectrum analysis, matrix correction and calibration procedures3.1 Spectrum analysis3.2 Matrix correction and calibration procedures4 X-ray optics and microfluorescence5 Synchrotron radiation6 TXRF6.1 Applications7 Portable and mobile XRF8 On-line XRF9 Applications9.1 Sample preparation and preconcentration techniques9.2 Geological and industrial minerals9.3 Environmental9.4 Archaeological, cultural heritage and forensic9.5 Industrial9.6 Clinical and biological9.7 Thin films and coatings9.8 Chemical state, speciation and crystal characterisation10 AbbreviationsReferencesAbstractThis annual review of X-ray fluorescence covers developments over the period 2005–2006 in instrumentation and detectors, matrix correction and spectrum analysis procedures, X-ray optics and microfluorescence, synchrotron XRF, TXRF, portable XRF and on-line applications, as assessed from the published literature. The review also covers a survey of applications, including sample preparation, geological, environmental, archaeological, forensic, biological, clinical, thin films, chemical state and speciation studies. The trend set in previous years continues with large numbers of papers published in the areas of environmental, industrial and biological/clinical applications, followed this year by a significant contribution in the area of archaeological science and cultural heritage. Notable contributions this year are in areas of topical societal interest, including the rapid throughput screening for combatorial materials. Interest continues in nanotechnological applications as well as the related micro-analytical instrumentation that permits profiling and mapping of samples, which was previously undertaken by non-XRF techniques.1 Introduction and reviewsThis review continues the series of Atomic Spectrometry Updates in X-ray Fluorescence Spectrometry,1 this one covering developments as assessed from the published literature over the period 2005–6.Interest has continued in the use of XRF in characterising reference materials. Sturgeon et al.2 described the certification of a fish otolith reference material, based on data provided by a wide range of techniques, including XRF. This RM was designed for laboratories requiring quality assurance of measurements of the bulk elemental composition of otoliths and other marine aragonites. Eight new geochemical reference materials for XRF major and trace analysis were prepared by Lozano and Bernal,3 comprising a lateritic soil, dolomite, limestone, andesite, three different syentites, and a gabbro, all from Mexico. Provisional data were provided for 24 major and trace elements, FeO and LOI. Kurahashi et al.4 developed a method that will be applicable to the certification of reference materials, based on monochromatic X-ray excitation XRF. The method was evaluated by the determination of trace elements in sediment certified reference materials.An important aspect of all analytical measurements is the estimation of measurement uncertainty. Morgenstern et al.5 evaluated the Eurochem Guide ‘Quantifying uncertainty in analytical measurement’ specifically in the field of XRF analysis, taking account of the strong influence of the sample matrix on the analytical response. Their approach focused on the use of the intensity of the Compton scatter tube line as an internal standard to assess the effect of matrix.In order to simplify use of this review, contributions are divided into clearly labelled sections. However, each year contributions are published that are challenging to categorise. This year, the accolade goes to Rozic et al.6 who described the use of EDXRF in determining the elemental composition of ash remaining after burning writing, copying and computer printing papers. The results of this burning issue showed that paper from one manufacturer contained significantly higher concentrations of Pb, Sr and Zr and laser printer paper contained higher concentrations of Co, Cu, Fe, Mn and Ti than non-printer paper.2 Instrumentation2.1 General instrumentation and excitation sourcesThe increasing threat of the use of chemical warfare (CW) agents, not only in military activities but also against civilians by terrorists, has concentrated minds (and funding) on high throughput screening for combinatorial materials. Havrilla and Miller7 developed commercial μ-XRF instrumentation for high throughput screening of elemental composition of a broad spectrum of CW agents at the meso-scale. The technique was demonstrated by screening an oligopeptide library for selective binding of the degradation products of the nerve agent VX. The technique is non-destructive, requires minimal sample preparation or special tags for analysis and the screening time was reported to be dependent upon the desired sensitivity. Luo et al.8 developed a high throughput X-ray characterisation system that could screen the structure and composition of CW agent libraries using EDXRD, XRF and X-ray photoluminescence. Their system comprised an X-ray source, a polycapillary X-ray lens, one or two X-ray energy detectors and a fibre optic spectrometer plus associated software.Developments continue to be reported for pyroelectric X-ray sources, initially introduced as an ultra-portable X-ray generator for use in imaging and materials analysis. Geuther and Danon9 showed how a paired-crystal pyroelectric source could be used to excite the K shells of both thorium and lead. Teams at Kyoto University, Japan10,11 built on the earlier work of Terasawa by constructing a compact emission instrument for the production of soft X-rays through the application of a high voltage to an insulator. The X-ray intensity increased with increasing high voltage, demonstrating that X-rays could be produced without supplying electrons from a filament. Readers who understand the problem of Bremsstrahlung background interference due to electron–specimen interaction in a SEM, will be pleased to know that Bjeoumikhov et al.12 reported a reduction in background interference of two orders of magnitude by combining a micro-focus X-ray tube with efficient polycapillary optics that focused the emitted X-rays onto spots between 30 and 100 μm in diameter. In this way they were able to perform local fluorescence X-ray analysis at the same point where the electron beam hit the sample and gave examples for the application of this confocal scheme for EPMA and μXRF.Other instrumentation in this review period included the development of an atmospheric electron X-ray spectrometer by Urgiles et al.13 as a surface analysis tool for samples in ambient atmospheres. Moderate to high spectral resolution was reported through the use of a thin electron-transmissive SiN membrane to isolate the vacuum of a miniature 20 keV electron probe, obviating the need for the sample to be drawn into the probe vacuum. The equipment was tested using NIST and USGS traceable metal and mineral reference materials giving good agreement with certified composition for samples in atmospheric pressures up to 90 Torr. Grazing-exit XRF and μXRF methods were applied to chemical microchips by Tsuji et al.14 The analysing region was designed so that a sample solution could be dried and concentrated in an area corresponding to the size of the primary X-ray beam. In GE-XRF mode, the technique was reported to be feasible for trace element analysis and preliminary results in μXRF mode were encouraging. Bruker15 announced the launch of a new series of analysing crystals that could double the intensity of selected low atomic number elements. Coupled with the S4 Pioneer spectrometer, the XS series of crystals have been specially designed to improve the intensity performance of Be, B, C, F, Mg, N, Na and O.2.2 DetectorsSemiconductor detectors based upon silicon PIN or silicon drift devices remain the mainstay of EDXRF spectrometry and developments in each of these two types of detector were reported during the review period. Pantazis16,17 reported impressive energy resolution of around 135 eV with peaking times in the range 12–20 μs for a silicon PIN diode detector combined with a new digital pulse processor. The pulse processor was equipped with peaking times in the wide range of 0.8 to 102 μs and with software that could automatically optimise the peaking time for energy resolution, which is a valuable asset for users inexperienced in the field. The importance of a number of factors to reliable EDXRF measurements was recognised by Paepen and co-workers18 including not only energy resolution and throughput but also of stability of spectrometer gain, sensitivity and resolution over time and at varying throughputs. The authors characterised their so-called X-PIPS detector, which was a fully depleted, 0.5 mm thick silicon PIN with a passivated implanted front contact. Prior to some design changes, the authors reported a sensitivity decrease of 5.5 percent per day, which is clearly unacceptable for practical use. The new design showed no significant sensitivity change with time and only a very small gain change of 0.13 eV at 5.9 keV, which correlated with diurnal temperature change. The best energy resolution obtained for this silicon PIN detector was 182 eV at 5.9 keV and a maximum throughput of 7 kcps. The energy resolution increased to 215 eV at a maximum throughput of 31 kcps. An extremely impressive 60 mm² annular silicon drift detector (SDD) comprising twelve 5 mm² devices was used for μ-PIXE mapping by Doyle et al.19 on the nuclear microprobe at Sandia National laboratory. Very high solid angles of up to 1.09 sr were achieved by virtue of the close coupling of the detector to the sample and the proton beam passing through the central aperture in the annular detector array. Twelve discrete nucleonics channels were used for data acquisition and the typical energy resolution at 5.9 keV of 195 eV at 60 kcps total was reported for the summation of the twelve spectra. Count rates of 1 Mcps were used routinely and an energy resolution of <200 eV was maintained, which made for high-quality maps and reduced dwell and sample exposure times, so minimising sample damage. The same type of 12-channel SDD was also used by Longoni and co-workers20 in combination with a microfocus X-ray tube and polycapillary X-ray optic in a coaxial μ-XRF system that was used for an interesting variety of archaeometric, industrial and biological X-ray mapping studies. The average energy resolution at 5.9 keV of the twelve SDD elements was 155 eV with a shaping time of 0.5 µs. The only negative characteristic of this impressive detector array was a peak shift at 8.04 keV of around 40 eV over a count rate range of 10–180 kcps. A new coaxial SDD detector array comprising four 15 mm2
					“teardrop” SDDs was also reported by this team. The energy resolution at 5.9 keV of the four SDDs was impressive at 130.4, 130.45, 132.08 and 132.3 eV, which made this device much more attractive than the 12-element SDD array. In addition, the four SDD “cloverleaf” design had an equivalent solid angle to the SDD-12 and needed only four electronics channels. The energy resolution increased to 220 eV at 300 kcps and an impressive P/B ratio of 5000:1 was obtained, making this detector very attractive for high rate X-ray mapping when combined with a central microfocus X-ray tube and an optic to give an intense coaxial excitation beam. An interesting 16-element SDD array was also described by Marisaldi et al.,21 who used the device as a photodetector for light from an overlayer of CsI(Tl) scintillator material. The device was under development for deployment as a space-borne gamma ray detector. In another rather exotic set up, a silicon PIN diode X-ray detector was used by Hohl and colleagues22 to investigate the electron density and temperature in an electron cyclotron resonance ion source plasma.A review of the past 20 years of developments in cryogenic X-ray detectors was presented by Previtali,23 who indicated the great challenge for the future of making much larger detectors than are currently available. Further improvements in the NIST cryogenic microcalorimeter were described by Jach and colleagues24 who were able to reduce energy scale drift/peak shift from >10 eV per hour to 1–2 eV per hour. This improved performance resulted in the observation of XRF line widths ≤12 eV over an extended six hour counting time. A new, optimised filtering algorithm was reported by a team at Leicester, UK25 to improve energy and position resolution in transition edge sensor cryogenic detectors. In the field of superconducting tunnel junction (STJ) cryogenic detectors, Shafranjuk et al.26 used a double barrier Josephson junction design that was expected to yield a 10–100 fold improvement in charge amplification and lead to much higher sensitivity and better energy resolution. An STJ with aluminium trapping layers and a novel photosensitive polyimide insulator layer was shown by Yoshida et al.27 to be easier to fabricate and yielded an encouraging energy resolution at 5.9 keV of 86 eV.Activity was disappointingly low during the review period in the field of pixellated X-ray detectors. Kruger28 presented a comprehensive review of two-dimensional X-ray detectors in which he identified the trends to further improve sensor-to-electronics interconnects and signal processing systems and also the way in which detectors for particle physics and medical imaging were already diverging. A straightforward optical CCD coupled to an inexpensive plastic scintillating fibre array was reported by Naseri et al.29 for use in X-ray imaging while Tate and colleagues30 used simple, commercially available components in a similar arrangement comprising a 1024 by 1024 pixel CCD camera optically coupled to an X-ray sensitive phosphor screen with a standard 35 mm camera lens. Although relatively simple systems, their use is directed at medical imaging and they are of little interest for practical two-dimensional EDXRF system measurements. Commercially available large area avalanche photodiodes operated at room temperature or −20 °C were reported31 to yield a best energy resolution of 6.4 percent at 5.9 keV and a low energy threshold down to 0.5 keV. A fast signal collection time of 1.9 ns (FWHM) and low energy sensitivity were particular advantages and when used in conjunction with a scintillating crystal these detectors were also suitable for high energy X-ray and gamma ray detection.Turning now to detector materials other than silicon, Sun et al.32 briefly reviewed the state of the art in thin epitaxial gallium arsenide detectors and went on to show how recently available thicker and larger area layers could be used for X-ray imaging—albeit focusing primarily on medical imaging. A wet chemical etching technique was described33 for the checking of defects in gallium arsenide array detector material also destined for use in medical X-ray imaging applications. A new type of photovoltaic X-ray detector based upon epitaxial gallium arsenide structures was described.34 This type of detector was also planned to be used in X-ray detectors: however, only electrical characteristics were reported and not X-ray detection performance. Further work towards room temperature detectors was reported and included carrier trapping defects in thallium bromide semiconductor detectors,35 growth and properties of thick epilayers of cadmium telluride36 and the fabrication and performance of chemical vapour deposition (CVD) diamond-based X-ray detectors.There were only two reports of gas-filled detectors during the review period, the first of which described a two-dimensional gas microstrip detector operated at room temperature.37 Using a P10 gas mixture an energy resolution of 12.3 percent was obtained at 5.9 keV with a working count rate up to 1 kcps. A sealed gas proportional scintillation counter (GPSC) was described by Goganov and Schultz38 for use in industrial EDXRF systems. The combination of a xenon gas fill and a 50 μm beryllium entrance window yielded good efficiency over the whole energy range of 1.5 to 25 keV and the energy resolution was reported to be 18 percent for Al K (1.5 keV), 9 percent at 5.9 keV and 4.2 percent for Ag Kα at 22.2 keV and a maximum count rate of 50 kcps was indicated. The detector was claimed to be robust and even though fully sealed, the authors claimed a working lifetime for the detector in excess of five years and no evidence of performance degradation with total number of detected photons.3 Spectrum analysis, matrix correction and calibration procedures3.1 Spectrum analysisIn an interesting and comprehensive paper on peak fitting in EDXRF spectrometry Greaves et al.39 established that there was an optimum number of channels in the peak for minimising the precision of determining the peak centroid. A comprehensive theoretical treatise was presented and fitting of both theoretical and empirical spectra established that the optimum number of channels for the peak to establish the peak centroid was 2.5–3 channels for the FWHM value. Values greater than this led to a significant degradation in quality of the fitted peak position. The challenge of modelling the background from sample diffraction peaks in EDXRF spectra was taken on by Verkhovodov,40 who used the new concept of a virtual primary radiation source to establish the excitation spectrum of both characteristic and Bremsstrahlung radiation. The author then showed how Bragg diffraction in a polycrystalline sample gave rise to significant background in the detected energy dispersive spectrum.A detailed study of the background in Johansson optics WDXRF fixed channels led to a novel digital filtration method for reducing detected spectrum background.41 The authors connected a digital recording oscilloscope to the detector output between the shaping amplifier and the discriminator unit to sample the output in real time. An algorithm was then developed to apply a digital filter to the pulse amplitude distribution, which resulted in a reduction by a factor of 3 in spectrum background for a number of cases. This amplitude distribution filter was shown theoretically and experimentally to be a very attractive option compared with the use of a simple threshold and window discriminator, although the new approach may not be so simple and universally applicable as that of conventional discriminators.The knowledge and characterisation of XRF detector efficiency is key to optimised spectrometer design and accurate standardless analysis. Although perhaps of most interest to the microanalysis community, the careful characterisation by Schulze and Procop42 of commercially available low-energy ED detector windows will be of keen interest to some in the XRF field. The entrance windows typically comprise a grid-supported, aluminised polymer film and knowledge of the efficiency in the <1 keV energy range is often complicated by a lack of exact composition and dimensional data for these windows. The use of SR from a BESSY 2 beamline ensured that a calculable and highly characterised primary X-ray spectrum was available and the use of tuneable, monochromatised SR from a second beam line enabled careful high resolution measurements of detector efficiency to be made against a reference detector. By using these state of the art SR techniques the authors were able to fully characterise the detector windows and the measurement methods and reported data will be invaluable to those carrying out XRF measurements in the challenging sub-1 keV energy range. At the opposite end of the EDXRF spectrum, Yilmaz and co-workers43 studied the escape of Ge K X-rays, Compton scattered incident radiation and photoelectrons following excitation by 81 keV incident photons. Good agreement for Ge K and Compton escape was found between the authors' experimental and MC simulation data and with one other published MC simulation study. The observed and calculated photoelectron escape probabilities differed greatly, and although the authors indicated some factors that could influence this observation, there was no conclusion to fully understanding this significant escape mechanism.3.2 Matrix correction and calibration proceduresThe use of MC simulation to predict the complete EDXRF spectrum or the X-ray tube spectrum continued during the review period. Although directed at X-ray tubes for X-ray radiography, the MC method described by Gallardo et al.44 could doubtless be applied to lower energies typical of XRF spectrometry. Rather than making direct measurements of the tube output spectrum, which is clearly the optimum approach, the authors used the 90° Compton scattered spectrum from a Perspex scatter block measured by a HPGe detector. A full description was given of the mathematical and computational approach adopted by the team and good agreement was obtained between the calculated and observed scatter spectra, and where discrepancies were seen the authors proposed the likely reasons for them. A description of the development by Gardner and colleagues at North Carolina State University of the full MC library least squares code was given by Gardner and Guo.45 This comprehensive package has been developed over many years and benchmark results were presented for two typical stainless steel samples to demonstrate the effectiveness of the package in calculating the full EDXRF spectrum from these complex samples. Although in the field of medical imaging radiography, the use by Song et al.46 of so-called angular response functions that were themselves pre-computed by MC simulation reduced the overall simulation time by factors of up to 1000 when compared with a full MC simulation method. The authors’ proposed technique may be useful in XRF for studying the effects of various instrument configurations such as collimators, baffles and X-ray collection or focusing optics.Fundamental parameter (FP) based XRF analysis is widely used for bulk analysis and increasingly for thin film analysis. Kolbe and colleagues47 at PTB, Berlin, described an impressive reference-free FP method for accurate measurement of single and dual layer metal nanolayers. Samples comprised copper and nickel layers on silicon with a thickness in the range 5–50 nm, for which no suitable reference materials existed. X-ray reflectometry was used as the comparison method to check results from the fully characterised and absolutely calibrated XRF instrumentation. The use of such an approach yielded results from XRF that were statistically indistinguishable from those from X-ray reflectometry, thereby establishing the PTB XRF method as an accurate and absolute one for the quantitative measurement of the thickness and composition of these analytically challenging nanolayers. A study by Han et al.48 showed that FP XRF analysis was able to fully correct for matrix effects in several Japanese iron and steel, NIST glass and Chinese geological reference materials. In addition, the authors established, unsurprisingly, that further improvements in accuracy could be obtained using simple samples as similar standards when fully matrix-matched calibration samples were unavailable. A paper by Boto and Murphy49 described how the method of standard additions used in XRD could be improved when analyte concentrations were greater than 5% m/m. The authors also recommended their method for XRF but equal accuracy and much greater simplicity would doubtless be obtained through the use of one of the many FP algorithms available nowadays.The incorporation in quantitative analysis routines of correction for enhancement and secondary fluorescence is necessary in most cases, but is particularly important for certain sample types and instrument configurations. Karydas50 calculated and measured the self-element enhancement such as that for a K line of molybdenum enhancing the molybdenum L series emission from a pure molybdenum sample. In the case of monochromatic excitation the self-element K on L enhancement could account for 20–25 percent of the signal for elements in the Z range 38–46. As might be anticipated, the higher the energy of the monochromatic beam used for primary excitation, the greater the effect. Similar self-enhancement was reported for L–L and L–M interactions, albeit with reduced fluorescence intensities. The author reported generally good agreement between calculated and measured self-enhancement effects but the lack of reliable fundamental parameters for L–M enhancement calculations led the author to recommend the use of an experimental approach to estimating those effects. The contribution of scattering effects to the measured fluorescence intensities of analyte lines from low atomic number, highly-scattering matrix samples was investigated by Han et al.51 In their FP approach the authors took into account coherent and incoherent scatter within the fused bead samples. The enhancement due to additional excitation by scattered radiation was several percent in many cases and >10% in the case of the Pb L. series, which would clearly lead to substantial errors if the FP calculations did not include these effects. The accuracy of measurement, for an example, was shown to improve from an average relative error of 2.75% using NRLXRF with no inclusion of corrections for enhancement due to scatter, to 0.93% using their augmented FP algorithm. A similar study was reported by Bos and Vrielink,52 who also showed significant improvements for low-Z matrices when scattering enhancement effects were taken into account in their FP program, which was applicable to polychromatic excitation and complex samples. The interesting case for selective excitation of the light elements (C, F, N and O) by L and K lines of the matrix element was studied by Dukhanin and Pavlinsky.53 The analyte was 0.1% m/m in a metal matrix of 99.9% m/m, which is an uncommon analytical situation but served well to evaluate the magnitude of the effects. Initial studies were reported from an iron matrix in which Fe K and Fe L fluorescence lines were considered for their direct enhancement effect and the additional contribution for Fe K–L internal conversions was also included. X-ray tubes with a tungsten target and either a 300 or a 75 μm beryllium window were operated at 40 kV for this work, which showed that for an iron matrix the contribution to the observed fluorescence signal of the three enhancement mechanisms was 3.8, 11.4, 23 and 34% relative for C, N, O and F, respectively, when the 300 μm beryllium window was used. With the thin, 75 μm, beryllium window direct excitation improved and the enhancement by the matrix lines reduced to 10.2, 16.5 and 22.6% relative for N, O and F, respectively. The major contribution to the enhancement was, as would be expected, from the Fe L series, and in the case of excitation of F K fluorescence and the 300 μm beryllium window this enhancement alone contributed 26% relative in the total of 34% relative. The magnitudes of the other enhancements by Fe K lines or Fe K–L internal cascade transitions were similar to each other and a factor 5–10 times less than for enhancement by the Fe L lines. The authors also considered and tabulated the enhancement effects for the same analytes in a matrix of nickel and of zinc, showing a similar domination of the enhancement by the matrix L line emissions. It was also clear from this study how large was the effect on the fluorescence intensity of the excitation from photo- and Auger electrons, which contributed 29–90 percent of the signal for these low-Z analytes when using a 300 μm beryllium window. In a second paper by these two authors and others,54 the contribution of photo- and Auger electron excitation to C K X-ray fluorescence intensity in high Z matrices was studied. Extensive tabulations of the calculated effects were presented for both rhodium and chromium target X-ray tubes equipped with 75 μm beryllium windows and matrix concentrations of 99.9% m/m. Those tables showed the very high contribution to C K excitation made by these effects of up to around 90% relative. Without these effects being taken into account the FP calculations would, in one case quoted, be a factor of 5.6 times wrong! Good agreement was reported between calculated and experimental data on C in eight carbon compounds with elements covering the Z range of 3–82 including Li2CO3, MgCO3 and Pb(CH3COO)2.Finally, it was a disappointing year in terms of numbers of publications on chemometric and other techniques. In the sole paper on chemometrics, Serneels et al.55 described their so-called continuum regression (CR) method, which combined elements from ordinary least squares, partial least squares and principal component regression but yielded better prediction results than any of these techniques used alone. Problems of robustness were reported with CR for data sets that were not normally distributed or where there were outliers. The authors’ proposed technique of “robust continuum regression” was claimed to provide the robustness required to solve real analytical problems and its advantages were shown by improved data from XRF analysis of hydrometallurgical samples. Sitko56 described a new algorithm that was derived from the Sherman equation and which successfully corrected absorption and enhancement effects in samples of intermediate thickness by means of theoretical influence coefficients. In previous work enhancement had often been ignored in order to simplify the approach but this author included it and applied the calculations to all matrix elements. To simplify the calculations and avoid the need for an iterative solution, this author treated the matrix coefficients as constant for any given mass thickness, although this approach also required matrix diversity to be limited. The author demonstrated the validity of this approach with results from geological CRMs and ceramic samples.4 X-ray optics and microfluorescenceInvestigations into the use of polycapillary optics continue to appear in the literature with Sun and Ding57 presenting a study of the energy dependence of the focal spot size, transmission efficiency and output focal distance of a polycapillary X-ray lens measured over a broad energy range. Measurements were made using a low current micro-focus (50 μm) Mo X-ray tube and an axial scanning method was devised to determine the energy dependence of the output focal distance. Langer et al.58 studied the polychromatic X-ray excitation of Kossel patterns by an X-ray tube coupled to a focusing polycapillary lens, emphasising the advantages offered by the polycapillary device. Bjeoumikhov and colleagues59 reviewed the opportunities offered by use of a microfocus X-ray tube and capillary optic, particularly for the determination of heavy elements.A mathematical model to simulate the transport of X-ray photons inside an X-ray waveguide was described by Sanchez and Valentinuzzi,60 particularly in respect of waveguides designed for use in TXRF instrumentation. Modelling was undertaken for different kinds of beam guides in different configurations to assess the uniformity of photon distribution in the sample area, the range of incident angle for operation and the level of excitation under TXRF conditions with calculated results checked against preliminary experimental values. Karimov et al.61 undertook a numerical simulation to investigate the possibility of using planar C/C/C multilayers with a density contrast of 0.2 and 0.7 g cm−3 as a waveguide. The waveguide layer thicknesses were optimised to provide a high degree of resonant standing wave field intensity enhancement in the core at an incident energy of 13 keV. When results were compared with more traditional Mo/Be/Mo waveguides, C/C/C planar multilayers offered a very high standing wave field intensity resonant enhancement, so offering potential advantages. Gupta et al.62 demonstrated that X-ray waveguide structures can be used for depth profiling of a marker layer inside the guiding layer with an accuracy of better than 0.2 nm. The example studied was the effects of swift heavy ion irradiation on a Si/M/Si trilayer (M = Fe, W) forming the cavity of the waveguide structure in which Fe was found to be much more sensitive that W, even in thin film form. In a second contribution, Gupta63 further considered the issue of depth resolve structures in multilayers emphasising the benefit of generating X-ray standing waves inside the multilayer structure when using techniques such as XRF, X-ray absorption spectroscopy and nuclear resonance fluorescence. Although not strictly a waveguide study, Okotrub et al.64 measured the angular dependence of the intensity of C Kα radiation measured from a film of oriented carbon nanotubes. An increase in the yield of X-ray fluorescence along the growth direction of the nanotubes was detected and it was suggested that this phenomenon was caused either by reflection from the inner walls of the nanotubes (channelling) or an anomalous dispersion of C Kα photons in the carbon medium.Instrumental developments in this area are exemplified by the development of a model for the confocal volume of a 3D micro-X-ray fluorescence spectrometer by Malzer and Kannglesser.65 This work was designed to contribute to the development of reliable quantification procedures for this application. Tsuji et al.66 described a micro-X-ray fluorescence instrument developed in combination with an atomic force microscope. The μXRF was designed with a polycapillary lens targeted at a 5 or 10 μm pinhole drilled into the cantilever of the AFM device giving a combined capability of undertaking both surface morphology (AFM) and elemental concentration (μXRF) measurements. Wegrzynek and colleagues67 from the IAEA Laboratories described the micro-beam X-ray fluorescence and absorption imaging techniques available at these laboratories, with particular interest in 2D and 3D tomographic imaging of minute objects in X-ray absorption and fluorescence modes using instrumentation that incorporates both Si(Li) and silicon drift detectors.X-ray microfluorescence has been used for a wide range of applications over the current review period. One interesting use of instrumentation was in detecting visible and latent fingerprints in forensic applications by Worley et al.68 in a manner that was complementary to conventional procedures. Imaging depended on the detection of Cl and K originating from perspiration, but images were also possible from the use of lotion, saliva, banana and sunscreen. By contrast, Paternoster et al.69 used μXRF with a polycapillary conic collimator and μ-Raman to study some Roman mural paintings at archaeological sites near Naples (Oplonti) and Rome (Palatino), in Italy, to elucidate the preparation techniques and to confirm the hypothesis that these were not fresco paintings. Miller and colleagues70 undertook an innovative investigation of the use of automated printing technology (APT) as an alternative to manual dispensing for the preparation of liquid samples for micro X-ray fluorescence analysis. APT was used to deposit 20 and 50 nl volumes onto Kapton film and dried spots prepared in this way were generally circular in shape, with the advantage that multiple dried spots could be accurately and reproducibly deposited in the same location. Miller and Havrilla71 used μ-XRF for elemental imaging of pharmaceutical tablets comprising various drugs and vitamin supplements to measure elemental composition and homogeneity in a complementary manner to other molecular imaging techniques. These workers also collaborated with DeWitt72 to characterise small particles by μ-XRF, their specific interest being in homogeneous glass microspheres and heterogeneous soil particles. It was found that single particle μ-XRF measurements could be made down to a mass of 0.04 μg (mean diameter of 0.06 μm) as long as the particles were well separated on the substrate. Yusoff et al.73 used μ-XRF to contribute to the development of a silica-based thermoluminescence dosimeter. Hettiarachchi et al.74 used both μ-XRF and μ-XANES to identify Fe and Mn phases and their association with selected metals in two biosolids before and after treatment to remove organic carbon. The μ-XRF results showed a strong correlation between Fe and Cd, Cr, Pb or Zn before and after removal of most of the organic carbon—the strong Fe–Cu correlation disappeared after removal of organic carbon, suggesting that Cu may have been associated with organic carbon coating that may have been present on Fe compounds. Vogt and Dargel75 described a method of measuring layer thickness by μ-XRF using a calibration technique. Finally, Takahashi et al.76 used μ-XRF to measure the Cr content in Cr-induced malignant and pre-malignant bronchial lesions in the rat in a contribution designed to develop further the carcinogenetic properties of chromate in the lung.5 Synchrotron radiationInnovations in SR instrumentation have continued to be published in the current review period. Von Bohlen et al.77 reported a feasibility study of the use of wavelength dispersive XRF with synchrotron radiation. First results obtained at BESSY, Berlin, and DELTA, Dortmund, with a commercially available spectrometer attached to a scanning electron microscope were presented and showed that a spectrum resolution of 3 eV could be obtained. Patterson et al.78 described the materials science beamline facility at the Swiss Light Source, SLS, which comprises a double crystal monochromator capable of operating in the range 5–40 keV coupled to focusing mirror optics with an approximate 1:1 symmetry. Görner79 reported a dead time correction for SR-XRF measurements with a decaying storage ring current, based on corrections applied to account for the decay of short-lived isotopes in neutron activation analysis, although the advantages of this approach are not entirely clear to the present reviewers.Considering applications for the analysis of sediments, Daryin et al.80 investigated core bottom sediments from Teletskoe Lake, Russia, in order to reconstruct the palaeoclimate over the last millennium (i.e., back to 1200 AD). The authors claimed a time resolution of 1 year as their instrumentation could achieve a scanning resolution of 1 mm. A similar study by Goldberg et al.81 was conducted for sediment cores from the Okhotsk Sea, where a time resolution of 200 years could be achieved for the 80000 year core record, and their results showed the effects of abrupt warm spells in the Atlantic and Greenland during the last glacial period. The authors82 extended this study of the Okhotsk Sea to measure volcanic particles in the sediments and showed that Y/Rb and Y/Nb could be used as tracers of regional volcanic eruptions. Goldberg et al.83 also studied bottom sediments from Lake Baikal (U isotope investigation to produce a decade scale reconstruction of river input throughout the Holocene 0–11000 years BP) and Lake Teletskoe (multi-element data used to elucidate the geochemical response to climate change). Bobrov et al.84 analysed samples of plankton from the Beloe Sea and compared results with those from bottom sediments to allow the calculation of enrichment coefficients, which ranged for elements like As, Cd, Cr, Cu, Hg, Pb, Se, Sb, Sn and Zn from 10 to 1000. Fuhrmann and Lanzirotti85 studied the potential for phytoextraction of 241Am, 137Cs, Al, Fe, Mg, Pb and Sr by tobacco plants from soil that had been treated with various concentrations of EDTA, citric acid and ascorbic acid. They undertook measurements of the radial elemental distributions in roots and stems of the tobacco plants by μ-SRXRF.Bukowiecki et al.86 analyzed trace metals in ambient air and determined mass concentrations by SRXRF at hourly time intervals, which was only possible by taking advantage of the high sensitivity of SR. They used a three stage rotating drum impactor and obtained extremely low detection limits of <50 pg m−3 for most of the elements determined, which included Br, Cr, Cu, Fe, Mn, Pb and Zn. They claimed to gain relevant information when the time resolution for measurements was increased from the standard 1 day to 1 hour and found significantly different short term patterns for individual size fractions. VanCuren et al.87 analyzed Asian continental aerosols with a collection resolution of 3 hours and concluded that the aerosols in the lower free troposphere over the northeastern Pacific Ocean and western North America were dominated by continental outflow from Asia with little marine or North American continental influence.Developments in medical and biological applications were undertaken by Zöger et al.,88 who analysed brain tissue by μ-SRXRF to investigate the well known effect of lead exposure on cognitive deficiency. They studied the local distribution of Pb and other trace elements with a μ-beam (5 × 3 μm2, monochromatised to 16 keV) at ID-22, ESRF, France. Brain slices from frontal cortex, thalamus and hippocampus were selected. While elements like Br, Ca, Cu, Fe, S and Zn could be clearly assigned to brain vessels, Pb was inhomogeneously distributed, and no systematic increase could be observed in any brain compartments. Ide-Ektessabi et al.89 studied Pb in brain tissues from two groups of patients, one group suffering from diffuse neurofibrillary tangles with calcification (DNTC), a form of dementia, and the other from Alzheimer’s disease. Measurements were made with an excitation beam size of 4 × 6 μm2, monochromatized at 14.3 keV. The authors found Pb concentrations in the calcified areas of the brain tissues from patients with both DNTC and Alzheimer’s disease, but there was none in those with so-called non-calcified Alzheimer’s disease. In another area of brain disease, the causes of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and Parkinson’s disease are still not known, but there is evidence that metal ions can be involved, leading to degeneration and atrophy of neurons. Chwiej et al.90 examined thin slices of brain (substantia nigra) at the beam line ID 22 at ESRF, France, using polychromatic excitation. Some significant differences in elemental accumulations were correlated to biological structures. The same group91 continued these studies using μ-SRXRF for the determination of Ca, Fe and Zn, μ-XANES for speciation of Cu and SR-Fourier transformed infrared μ-spectroscopy for the analysis of the organic components for the analysis of central nervous system tissue. Higher levels of Ca, Fe and Zn were found in the tissue of Parkinson's disease patients compared with the control group. Feng et al.92 measured the spatial distribution of elements (Ca, Cl, Cu, Fe, Zn) in slices of rat brains and observed several correlations. Kühbacher et al.93 determined Se in electrophoretically separated proteins from homogenised rat testis and also the spatial distribution of Cu in brain sections of scrapie-infected hamsters, which was found to differ from that in the control group. A slice of the head of the femur from an osteopathic patient was investigated by Zhang et al.94 for its elemental content by μ-SRXRF and correlations between Ca, K, P, Sr and Zn were discussed to understand the loss of minerals. The same group95 undertook a similar study of rat bone. Abraham et al.96 investigated the elemental and structural composition of human dental calculus during several stages of maturity. The Ca/P molar ratio allowed the authors to follow the progressive transformation of the crystal structure from brushite to hydroxyapatite. HPLC was combined with SRXRF by Gao et al.97 to measure the distribution of metalloprotein (from determinations of Cu, Fe and Zn) in the cytosol of hepatocellular carcinomas and surrounding healthy tissue.To characterise samples more comprehensively, there is a trend to combine several synchrotron radiation-based analytical techniques at certain storage ring beam lines, e.g., μ-SRXRF, μ-EXAFS in fluorescence mode, μ-XANES and μ-XRD. Aerosol from yellow sand (kosa) affects the global environment as well as human health, because it migrates from the interior of China to other areas of Asia, absorbing various atmospheric elements. Tanaka et al.98 mounted individual particles, typically of several tens of μm in diameter, in an SR beam which was combined with an SEM so that the detailed topographic inspection could take place in situ, prior to the elemental analysis. By use of this technique it was concluded that atmospheric sulfur primarily adhered to Ca in the aerosol particles and this reaction caused roughening of the particle surface. Eriksson et al.99 characterized radioactive Pu/U particles (six from Thule, Greenland, one form Mururoa atoll) using various techniques in sequence (gamma ray detection, WDXRF, EDXRF, SEM, μ-SRXRF, μ-tomography and μ-XANES) and concluded that there were two different types of particles characterised by differences in the homogeneity of U and Pu and oxidation states. Denecke et al.100 used a combination of μ-SRXRF and μ-XANES to measure uranium speciation in a bore core section of a U rich sediment in order to assess the mechanisms leading to the immobilization of U during diagenesis. Isaure et al.101 used a combination of μ-SRXRF, μ-XRD and μ-EXAFS to study the mobility and speciation of Zn in soil covered by contaminated dredged sediment on a 50 m2 pilot-scale test site. Manceau et al.102 measured the speciation of Mn, Ni and Zn in clayey paddy soil using an SR μ-beam to make XRF, XRD and EXAFS measurements. Manganese was concentrated in the Fe–Mn soft mottles such as birnessite and lithiophorite. In the manganese layer of the natural lithiophorite Ni substituted for Mn, whereas Zn filled vacant sites in the gibbsitic layer of natural lithiophorite. Brenker et al.103 discovered the presence of a chemically distinct reservoir in the Earth’s deep convecting upper mantle. In situ structural analysis using μ-SRXRF and μ-Raman in combination with confocal μ-SRXRF imaging revealed the existence of a deep Ca-rich source in the absence of several common mantle minerals, e.g., olivine, garnet and low-Ca pyroxene. This reservoir might represent metasomatised oceanic lithosphere or metamorphosed carbonaceous sediments. Ryser et al.104 investigated the Se speciation in soils on reclaimed mine land in a phosphate resource area in order to predict and manage the availability of this element. Vantelon et al.105 measured the spatial distribution and speciation of Pb in soil surrounding corroding bullets at a shooting range site. Very high concentrations of up to 6.8% m/m Pb were found in the bullet weathering crust with a steep decrease into the surrounding soil matrix. In situ identification of mineral inclusions in natural diamonds was undertaken by Sitepu et al.,106 resulting in high resolution distribution maps of Cr, Cu, Fe, Ni, Ti and Zn. These data were combined with μ-XANES determination of the Cr oxidation and coordination state in selected inclusions. Miller et al.107 developed a so-called epi-fluorescence microscope, which integrated the simultaneous detection of visible fluorescence from a sample into a μ-SRXRF beam line. The authors claimed that such a module could be used with almost any μ-SRXRF beam line and presented examples to identify metal accumulations in Alzheimer’s disease plaques and the distribution of minerals in geological samples.Further work was published in the area of industrial and environmental applications of SRXRF. Frisia et al.108 studied stalagmites from Italy by μ-SRXRF and μ-XANES and measured variations in sulfate concentration and correlations with atmospheric anthropogenic and volcanic sources. Peaks in S concentration in a 5200–5000 a BP alpine stalagmite indicated that volcanic activity caused summer cooling that favoured the preservation of the Alpine Iceman mummy (Ötzi). A second publication by this group109 continued this research and showed that post-1850 AD, enhanced levels of sulfur were associated with anthropogenic sources. Eba et al.110 reported the possibility of XAFS μ-imaging with a 1000 × 1000 pixel CCD camera and tested this technique with MnCo2O4 prepared using 9 different synthesis conditions. With a very short exposure time (10 min) the various end products could be identified. Jones et al. 111,112 monitored changes (using μ-SRXRF and μ-tomography) in the composition of catalyst used in the Fischer–Tropsch process for the synthesis of clean fuel from natural gas. The aim of this work was to develop the next generation of catalysts. Punshon et al.113 used μ-SR spectrometry techniques to study biological tissues and metal bioavailability, specifically: (i) wheat grown in Ni and U contaminated soil, (ii) willow grown on a former radiological settling pond and (iii) the link between elevated Se concentration in sediments from a coal fly ash settling pond with deformation in parts of the mouths of bullfrogs. Terzano and his co-workers114 proposed a methodology to stabilise Cu present in polluted soils to influence the mobility and the availability of the metal. Micro-XRF tomography provided evidence that Cu could be entrapped as clusters inside the porous zeolite and coal fly ash modified structure, while μ-XANES revealed that Cu was present mainly as CuII hydroxide and CuII oxide. Ryan et al.115 discussed the complementary nature of PIXE/PIGE with its broad elemental sensitivity and the tunability of SR excitation in characterising geological samples. Buonassisi et al.116 determined the diffusion length of minority carriers in semiconductor devices by SR-based spectrally resolved X-ray beam induced current (XBIC) and compared it with data obtained by μ-SRXRF. Buonassisi et al.117 also combined X-ray fluorescence microscopy, absorption microscopy, XBIC, as well as spectrally resolved XBIC, to measure the diffusion length and chemical character of metal clusters in multicrystalline silicon solar cells.SR techniques continue to contribute to forensic and historical applications. Napoleon Bonapart cannot rest in peace. There are still interesting questions about the possible arsenic poisoning, which has been the object of investigations for over 40 years. A new contribution to this problem from Chevallier et al.118 claimed that 1 mm of hair was sufficient to investigate the trace element content using the μ-SRXRF at LURE (Orsay, France), based on a pair of monochromators made of HOPG to produce a monochromatized beam of about 1 mm in diameter. The study revealed the presence of many toxic elements, often far above the lethal content, with variations from one hair to another and even from one place to another on a single hair. Ten hairs out of 19 were taken from several locks cut during different periods ranging from 1805 to the day after his death in 1821. The authors concluded that this study did not seem to favour the simple arsenic poisoning hypothesis. Guerra et al.119 developed a fingerprinting technique for ancient gold alloys, based on determining the trace Pt content. The detection limits were inadequate by conventional PIXE (80 mg kg−1) but with monochromatic SRXRF the resulting limit of detection was 20 mg kg−1 Pt. Pagès-Camagna et al.120 published new results on the local chemical environment of Cu2+ in archaeological Egyptian blue and green and also modern Egyptian green by XANES. In Egyptian blue, results showed that Cu2+ was mainly found in square-planar sites in the crystalline cuprorivaite phase, whereas in Egyptian green Cu2+ was basically situated in a distorted octahedral site in an amorphous phase. Turning now to forensic applications, Kasamatsu et al.121 claimed that the Ag/Au ratio was sufficient to differentiate between gold foil particles found at a specific crime scene to link these particles with an indoor decoration. Kempson et al.122 reviewed the analytical benefits provided by SR sources for forensic applications. Finally, Suzuki et al.123 analysed fragments from 33 sheet-glass samples (smaller than 1 mm in diameter) by SRXRF and performed cluster analysis. They claimed that elemental analysis by SRXRF improved discrimination capability compared with conventional refractive index measurements.6 TXRFDuring the review period the 11th Conference on TXRF and Related Techniques took place in Budapest, so the proceedings will be published later this year, which might explain this issue′s reduced number of publications dealing with TXRF in comparison with the last review period.To increase the intensity by using focusing optics, a double curved crystal optic was used by Chen et al.124 Low power tubes with chromium, copper and molybdenum targets were used: the authors reported detection limits in the fg range, which seemed to be sensational without using synchrotron radiation as the excitation source. Korotkikh125 described an optical device with two curved mirrors, which was expected to correct the increased beam divergence inherent for focusing optics which was only acceptable to a limited extent for total reflection conditions. The experimental characterisation of beam guides for TXRF were reported by Sanchez and Valentinuzzi.126 The authors found the results in excellent agreement with the theoretically predicted ones.Turning now to interesting developments in the area of SR-TXRF, a new vacuum chamber was installed by Streli et al.127 at Hasylab at DESY, Hamburg, beamline L incorporating a translation and rotation sample stage for setting up routine microfocus analysis. As this beamline offered a multilayer monochromator as well as a crystal monochromator, XANES measurements in total reflection geometry could also be performed. Examples of Cr speciation in hazel pollen, as well as urban aerosol samples, were reported with detection limits of 40 pg for Cr. Detection limits for Ni after multilayer monochromatisation to 17 keV have been reported to be 15 fg using a 5 mm2 silicon drift detector. At the Brazilian SR facility NSLS samples from various fields have been investigated: Espinoza-Quinones et al.128 compared PIXE with SR-TXRF analysing river water and found As, Cr, Cu and Zn to be above the limits recommended by environmental legislation. Nagata et al.129 reported on the application of the best multivariate model based on partial least squares regression to overcome the serious peak overlap problem of As and Pb in the presence of bromine. Zucchi et al.130 analysed hypoglycaemiant plants for trace elements. Novikova et al.131 investigated the protective effect of xydiphone on membrane-bound enzyme damaged by lead ions. They determined the position of Pb ions within the molecular film by TXRF before and after the xydiphone treatment and found that xydiphone effectively eliminated the Pb ions incorporated in the Ca-ATPase molecules. Al2O3 ceramic powders were analysed by Peschel et al.132 using the SR-TXRF facility at Hasylab. SR-TXRF was used to check the homogeneity of elemental distribution, which limited the precision of the measurements.For routine surface analysis in the semiconductor industry, the standardisation of procedures for silicon wafer surfaces is very valuable. A summary of ISO/TC 201 Standard: XIX ISO 17331, which deals with chemical methods for the collection of elements from the surface of silicon wafers working reference materials and their determination by TXRF, was reported by Mori.133 This technical standard specified the deposition of Fe and/or Ni from the surface of silicon wafers for use as reference materials by vapour-phase decomposition method or the direct acid droplet decomposition method. The same author in collaboration with others134 also proposed a non-destructive technique for the entire surface characterisation, “Sweeping TXRF”, a surface mapping technique that used a very short acquisition time for each individual spot. Saturation effects in microdroplet residues obtained from preconcentration methods was investigated by Hellin et al.135 and several approaches were tested to overcome the problems.An increasingly interesting area in TXRF is the investigation of high κ material. Hellin et al.136 applied TXRF to novel metallic contaminants on conventional and alternative substrates such as silicon and germanium, high kappa dielectric contaminants and layers. This work reminds us that careful selection of the excitation sources results in better detection limits. Hellin and co-workers137 also reported the determination of Cl in nanometre thin high κ dielectric hafnium oxide layers. The silicon dioxide concentration in hafnium silicate gate dielectrics was determined by Sparks et al.138 The authors reported that TXRF was found to be a quick, accurate, non-destructive technique for hafnium silicate composition determination.Klockenkämper et al.139 studied near-surface density of ion-implanted (arsenic and cobalt) Si by TXRF and RBS. They found an expansion of the original silicon crystal in the near-surface region, in particular due to As implantation, and compression of the silicon crystal for deeper sub-layers, especially related to Co implantation.TXRF was used to monitor Fe and Cu in bulk silicon: Lee et al.140 found that the getter efficiency of Fe impurities in bulk silicon was improved by applying an electric field during isothermal annealing of the polysilicon layer. They reported this to be an effective method for reducing the iron content in silicon. The same authors141 also found a similar effect for Cu which can be used to minimise the Cu content in bulk silicon. By measuring the Cu concentration by TXRF, Vainola et al.142 found a quantitative correlation between the enhanced recombination rate and the Cu concentration and were able to detect down to 1010 cm−3 Cu by this method.6.1 ApplicationsTXRF continues to be used in a wide range of environmental and biological applications. Hatzistavros et al.143 applied a new method of sample preparation to the determination of U in water. Membranes containing a few micrograms of various complexing reagents in a polyvinyl chloride matrix were produced on quartz glass surfaces and immersed in water solutions. Excellent detection limits of 0.8 ng ml−1 were achieved by using dithizone and thiourea. Adebiyi et al.144 analysed Nigerian bitumen extracted from oil sands. The authors proposed high enrichment factors for As, Cr, Cu, Ni, Pb, V and Zn with implications for environmental degradation during exploration, refining and the transport of bitumen. Heavy metals in urban airborne particulate matter were determined by Zereini et al.145 Size fractions were collected on cellulose nitrate filters using an 8-stage Anderson impactor. Several techniques such as ICP-MS and adsorptive voltammetry were used to analyse the various elements, but only Pd was determined by TXRF. The elements As, Cd, Pb and V were found in mainly fine particles with diameter of <2.1 μm, whereas Cu, Mn, Pd, Pt, Rh, Sb and Zn occurred in high concentrations in particles with diameters between 1.1 and 4.7 μm. Koch et al.146 reported the production of a dielectric aerosol by near-infrared femtosecond laser ablation of silicate glass. They found that fluences larger than 5 J cm−2 were required to obtain measured compositions of the aerosol that corresponded to the bulk material. Otherwise, the differences are greater, indicating significant fractionation during the ablation process. Carvalho et al.147 investigated Cd effects on the cation content and cytological changes in sycamore cells from Acer pseudoplatanus. Cd was measured with TXRF whilst other cations were determined by EDXRF. An increase in Cu, Fe, Mn and Zn content and a decrease in K were observed in cadmium-stressed cells.Only a few industrial applications of interest were found to mention in this review. However, Misra et al.148 determined trace elements in uranium oxide after separation of the uranium matrix by solvent extraction using tri-n-butyl phosphate and trioctylphosphine oxide. In an intercomparison test the method showed a precision and accuracy better than 5% for most elements in the ng ml−1 range. An aged three way catalyst was investigated by Fernandez-Ruiz et al.,149 the most relevant catalytic components Pd, Rh and Zr being determined as well as contaminant elements such as Ca, Ni, P, Pb, Pt and Zn. A strong difference for elemental concentration in the interphase between the two blocks of the catalytic cartridges was found.In the development of grazing exit and related techniques, Tiwari et al.150 reported the well known influence of the primary beam divergence on the characterisation of single and multilayer thin films. They proposed that for sufficient modelling the divergence should be smaller than 0.005° for 17 keV excitation. Grazing exit techniques were further investigated by Xu et al.,151 who published results on their work on GE-XRF and application to thin film analysis, providing information on depth distribution, density and film thickness. In a review article, Tsuji152 published fundamentals and applications of GE-EPMA, demonstrating that the method improved the lateral resolution of the sample surface and could be applied to surface, thin film and particle analysis. Tetsuoka et al.153 reported an improvement in the reproducibility of angle adjustment by adding a laser beam and four separated photodetectors for adjusting the sample inclination.7 Portable and mobile XRFIn reviewing the progress in portable XRF instrumentation over the years, it is interesting to see the way in which advances in the portability and performance of instrumentation are now allowing the technique to invade a range of applications that were previously the preserve of conventional laboratory instrumentation. Current interest continues in the development of mainstream PXRF instrumentation, but also dual use XRF/XRD instrumentation. One example in the latter category is the work of Uda et al.,154 who described an instrument designed to record diffraction and fluorescence patterns in air from the same small area on a specimen. Measurements were made in two modes of operation, angle-rotation mode and energy dispersive mode, which permitted diffraction patterns and fluorescence spectra to be recorded simultaneously. The instrumentation was applied to a number of samples of archaeological interest, including a bronze mirror from the Eastern Han Dynasty (25–220 AD) and part of a painted statue from the Heian period (794–1192 AD). Instrumentation of this type is likely to have an important role in future space missions and Sarrazin et al.155 described both an XRF/XRD instrument designed for the Mars 2009 Science Laboratory Mission and its performance at a number of Mars analogue sites in Death Valley, California. Kawai and colleagues156,157 continued their work on the development of PXRF instrumentation based on a pyroelectric X-ray generator and extended it to the analysis of X-ray absorption spectra using a 9 V dry battery X-ray emitter in grazing incidence geometry.158 Romano et al.159 described a new PXRF spectrometer which allowed control of the energy and intensity stability of the emitted X-ray beam. This control was achieved by monitoring the K line intensities of Ag and Ba from double thin targets placed in the X-ray beam during measurement using an ancillary Si(PIN) detector. This instrumentation was evaluated for use in the field of cultural heritage.One of the applications driving PXRF technology is space missions and planetary research, one of the most successful of which was the NASA 2004 Mars Lander mission, which saw the deployment of two rovers that carried PXRF instrumentation. Jensen et al.160 described the attempts to analyse the thin dust layer that had accumulated on magnets on these rovers. These were designed to facilitate the analysis of the magnetic component of Martian soil, the presence of which had been identified by previous missions. The authors showed the need to take a more elaborate approach that took into account the different effective depths associated with particle excitation and fluorescence from a thin layer. Results indicated that the dust had a similar composition to the surrounding soil. Further work on these samples was reported by a multi-disciplinary group led by Goetz161 using Mossbauer spectroscopy and XRF to analyse this dust. Results showed that the dust had basaltic origins and contained magnetite and olivine. The dust was also found to contain ferric oxides, probably including nanocrystalline phases, indicating that some alteration or oxidation had occurred. Campbell and colleagues from the Guelph group162 developed a simulation code to predict the X-ray yields from minerals exposed to the alpha particle X-ray spectrometer which was used for rock and soil analysis during the same 2004 NASA Mars mission. They found agreement with yields obtained by measurement and spectrum fitting carried out by MPI Mainz. In support of future space missions, Li et al.163 used XRF to characterise nine lunar soil simulators prepared from a range of terrestrial basalts and anorthosites. These samples were required to support the microwave brightness data retrieval experiments on the future China space-borne lunar exploration microwave radiometer. The primary objectives of the Indian Chandrayaan-1 mission in the chemical, mineralogical and topographic mapping of the lunar surface were described by Bhandari.164 The XRF interest was in the remote mapping measurement of Al, Ca, Fe, Mg and Si from their K-line emissions in the 1–10 keV range.Turning now to the characterisation of rock and soil in the terrestrial environment, Potts et al.165 described the use of PXRF to characterise weathering on dolerite and rhyolite outcrops on the Preseli Mountains, South Wales. They undertook a laboratory study to investigate changes in the concentration of a wide range of major and trace elements in the weathered layer of representative hand specimens from this field area to see if a correction factor could be applied to surface measurements that would provide a better estimate of the fresh composition of the rock. This work was related to the provenancing of archaeological artefacts to specific outcrops in this field area. In an example of a mobile XRF application in a demanding environment, Wien et al.166 were concerned with ship-borne measurements of sediment cores to obtain high resolution depth profiles (as well as surface sample) by polarised EDXRF. Sample preparation and analysis techniques were adapted for shipboard use. In the analysis of contaminated soil, the influence of heterogeneity is an important and sometimes-overlooked issue. In continuing his work in characterising uncertainty in such measurements, Ramsey's group at the University of Sussex167 used in situ field PXRF and μXRF to characterise soil heterogeneity at two contrasting sites contaminated with heavy metals at sampling scales that ranged from 50 m to 0.001 m. The spatial heterogeneity of contaminants was found to differ between these two sites by a factor of two (largely due to the mode of deposition of the pollution) and that surprisingly, heterogeneity did not change systematically with the scale of measurements between sampling locations at either site. Giles et al.168 investigated the use of a large area proportional counter for the field measurement of 238Pu in soils: interestingly, the instrument was mounted on a pushcart with a computer and global positioning system so that the real time mapping of areas of potential contaminated could be undertaken down at concentrations of 1.9 Bq g−1238Pu. The sampling and mapping of soils, especially over large areas in Campana, Argentina, were described by Custo et al.169 Their aim was to demonstrate the use of the technique to allow the fast screening of soil composition in an area that could have been affected by pollution from heavy industry and the burning of forest, agricultural material and waste.Examples of PXRF in heritage and archaeological studies are more limited this year. However, Romano et al.170 used the portable beam-stabilised controlled XRF spectrometer referred to above to measure the trace element composition (Nb, Rb, Sr, Y, Zr) of pottery comprising votive deposits of San Francesco in Catania. Results were compared with measurements undertaken on a small number of samples, which were powdered prior to XRF analysis to demonstrate that the non-destructive technique could be used for the identification and grouping of this type of archaeological artefact. In a study from the same group, Pappalardo et al.171 used a combination of a portable PIXE-alpha spectrometer (to determine a range of elements from the K and L lines) and PXRF (to provide additional data for Cr and Y) to study gemstones (garnets) on gold Hellenistic jewellery (late 4th century BC, 1st AD) at the Benaki Museum, Athens. A comparison between the measured results and literature values provided a useful indication of the geographical provenance of these stones. Morgenstein and Redmount172 used PXRF to obtain geochemical analyses of ceramic shards at the El Hibeh field site, Egypt, for provenancing and other ceramic classification studies. They found that a triangular scatter diagram using Fe, Rb and Sr data was very effective in providing temporal and spatial separation of ceramic fabrics, origin and date, and could be correlated with the geological source materials used for pottery manufacture.Forensic applications were exemplified in this year's review by the work of Ida and Kawai,173 who investigated the capabilities of PXRF in analysing the contents of wrapped objects, for example metals, alloys and poisoned food (e.g., flour containing arsenic), without the need to remove the packaging. Elements of interest included Cr, Cu, Fe, Mo, Ni, Pb and Zn. When the packaged object contained Fe or Pb, the thickness of the wrapping material could be estimated from variations in the Fe Kβ/Kα or Pb Lβ/Lα ratios and results could be used to correct measured intensities from the object for attenuation in the packaging material. Investigations showed that the composition of brass and steel could be estimated to within an error of less than 30% by this technique. Ida,174 of the Kuoto Prefectural Police Headquarters, reviewed (in a Japanese article) applications of PXRF instruments. In an interesting cross fertilisation of fields, Schweitzer and colleagues175 discussed the way in which unattended and remotely operated XRF detection systems developed for space exploration, might be used to investigate scenes of crime. A PXRF instrument based on a 60 kV generator and CdTe detector was built and successfully used for the analysis of gunshot residues and a number of bodily fluids at crime scenes.Other PXRF applications included the analysis of rice and rice bran by Ishii et al.176 in which the PXRF spectrometer was capable of measuring Fe, K and Mn. Vegetable oils were measured by Bortoleto et al.177 in a study designed to classify complex organic matrices of different oils and, where appropriate, identify oil adulterations. The procedure was based on depositing 1 ml of sample on a thin polymer film and irradiating it for 100 s to measure the intensity of X-ray scattering. Principal component analysis was used to discriminate between different types of oil, largely on the basis of the presence or absence of water and the variable fatty acid contents. Although this study was undertaken on conventional laboratory instrumentation, the authors considered that it was equally adaptable to in situ measurements using portable instrumentation.8 On-line XRFThe principal contribution available for review this year was the work of Sokolov et al.178 who described an on-line EDXRF analyser for the analysis and quality testing of chrome–iron ores at Kemi mine in Finland. The challenge set by the authors was the difficult task of obtaining fully automated quantitative analysis of material on a conveyor belt. In doing so, the authors had to take into account variations in the distance to lumpy material of varying size on the conveyor belt, unknown and varying concentrations of unanalysed elements, changes in humidity and the moisture content of the ore. In order to meet these challenges, careful attention was paid to excitation and detection geometry and the use of a fundamental parameter correction programme. Accuracy in comparison with over 300 chemical analyses indicated that relative standard deviations of 1.1% for Cr and 0.8% for Fe could be achieved. A second innovative contribution was described by Hung et al.:179 in this case the use of XRF and X-ray reflectometry to monitor the process of atomic layer deposition on high-kappa dielectric film. In this scheme, XRF was used to monitor the atomic deposition rate in place of more conventional Rutherford backscattering in a manner that offered the significant advantages of avoiding both exposing the film to a non-production grade environment and degradations in film quality.9 Applications9.1 Sample preparation and preconcentration techniquesAn overview of preconcentration techniques for the determination of uranium and thorium was presented by Rao et al.180 Various methods were critically assessed in terms of enrichment factor, retention/sorption capacity, validation using CRMs and application to complex real samples. Sitko et al.181 were advocates of chemofiltration through zinc sulfide on to a membrane filter and this year turned their attention to the analysis of mercury in water. Analysis of both sides of the filter indicated that the ion exchange took place on the surface and consequently mercury was collected as a thin layer of mercury sulfide on the zinc sulfide. Their calibration using WDXRF gave a detection limit of 0.09 ng ml−1 for 100 ml of filtered water for Hg Lα with 100 s counting time and a Mo target tube operated at 50 kV and 40 mA. Jiang et al.182 presented a sensitive method for the preconcentration and determination of trace amounts of Co, Cu and Zn by EDXRF. The method was based on the fact that 4-(2-pyridylazo)-resorcinol (PAR) loaded Dowex anion-exchange resin could effectively adsorb Co, Cu and Zn at pH 9.0 to form PAR–metal complexes. Detection limits for Co, Cu and Zn in sea-water were 1.53, 0.31 and 0.21 μg kg−1, respectively. Belikov et al.183 described a fast and simple preconcentration procedure for recovering various cation impurities from potassium dihydrogenphosphate (KDP) single crystals and raw materials, followed by EDXRF analysis. The technique was based on the adsorption of metal–8-hydroxyquinoline complexes from aqueous solutions of KDP on activated carbon and the separation of the preconcentrate on a Nuclepore filter. To fix activated carbon powder on to a filter, 1-hexadecanol was added to the KDP solution during the preconcentration stage. A preconcentration factor of 100 was reported and detection limits for Bi, Co, Cu, Fe, Mn, Ni, Ti and Zn were down to 0.01 μg kg−1.Other preparation techniques included the determination of rare earth elements in apatites prior to analysis by WDXRF. The sample was digested in aqua regia, then pipetted onto a membrane filter. Absorption effects of the Ca and P matrix elements and the membrane filter were determined using the emission–transmission method. Demir et al.184 revisited errors in the preparation of pressed powder pellets for the analysis of Portland cement. Errors due to particle size, grinding time and press pressure were quantified and such factors must be considered when deciding whether to fuse or not to fuse. Fourcade et al.185 adapted a sample holder with a thermal control system to enable samples of polar ice to be analysed by μ-SRXRF. Artificial ice samples prepared from ultra-pure water were analysed to investigate possible contamination and/or experimental effects.9.2 Geological and industrial mineralsApplications published during the current review period continue to reflect the wide use of X-ray fluorescence spectroscopy in geological chemistry. Two critical reviews were published covering analytical developments for geological applications. Hergt et al.186 provided summaries of developments in bulk sample determinations employing XRF among other techniques, while Bedard and Wiedenbeck187 presented developments of XRF for in situ analysis and synchrotron μ-XRF, and a confocal X-ray set-up for 3D elemental imaging.A general description of the use and advantages of XRF in geological analysis was given by Brewer and Harvey.188 The benefits of EDXRF were also emphasised by Zhan,189 who validated a polarised EDXRF for over 30 elements in geochemical samples. The strength of EDXRF allowed its frequent use in the determination of the elemental composition of samples in order to investigate their origin. Jacob et al.190 analysed the major elements in Grahamstown (South Africa) clay deposits of a peneplain using XRF and revealed that there was a chemical variation in its distribution, both vertically and laterally. Sediment samples of the coastal zones of Costa Rica were investigated by Salazar et al.191 using EDXRF. They found that high Ca concentrations detected in samples from the beaches of the Caribbean and North Pacific regions could be associated with biogenic processes which form, for example, coral reefs, while high Fe values present in the beach samples of the Central and South Pacific indicated an important lithosphere contribution. Siyanbola et al.192 characterised Nigerian zircons using EDXRF. Besides the major element components of zircon (24–26% m/m of Zr), minor and trace concentrations of other elements and impurities were measured. Combining these results with scanning electron microscope data, the authors were able to define a 99.25% m/m ZrSiO4 structure. The various colorations of the crystals were attributed to variations in the concentration of the impurities. Gunter et al.193 compared XRF data of different commercial vermiculite samples to distinguish their origin. Trace element distributions of Ba, Cr and V, together with cluster analysis, provided a good distinction between the various ore types. Whole-rock and mineralogical composition of ooidal ironstones collected at 38 localities in 8 countries were investigated by Mucke and Farshad194 using XRF in combination with other techniques. Two types of ironstone, namely the chamosite and the kaolinite types, were identified, divided into unaltered, ferruginised and redeposited sub-types. The classification was based on varying (FeO + MnO):Fe2O3 ratios. Raju et al.195 presented a user-friendly WDXRF method for the quantification of heavy minerals in sand samples. The acquired results of the oxides and the elements were in good agreement with those obtained with the commonly used, although time-consuming and costly, microscopic grain-counting technique. The overall error was less than 20% and a coefficient of correlation of 0.98 was achieved. Determination of the rare earth elements in geological materials was described by Sitko et al.196 and Nakayama and Nakamura.197 The former analysed, with WDXRF, membrane filters on which digested solutions of apatites were pipetted. Analysis was performed using a La standard sample, theoretical overlap corrections for REE peaks and a theoretical calculation of the radiation intensity of REE. The latter set up an XRF method for the determination of the major and trace elements, including REE, in rocks using low dilution glass beads. With a 1:1 sample-to-flux ratio, detection limits for the different REE varied between 6.5 mg kg−1 (for Ce) and 0.5 mg kg−1 (for Th).A recurring issue in this review cycle was the implementation of XRF spectroscopy to study weathering and alteration processes. Schramm et al.198 studied the initial processes of low-temperature alteration and their influence on the mineralogical and chemical composition of the oceanic crust. Electron microprobe, ICP-MS, XRD and XRF analyses were carried out on rock samples collected in the East Pacific Rise basalts. A comparison of trace elements from altered whole rock samples and their appendant fresh glass chips provided a record of element mobility (e.g., Ba, Cs, K2O, Rb, U) during alteration, significantly affecting the composition of the oceanic crust. Aristizabal et al.199 quantified the degree of tropical chemical weathering of hillslope deposits and bedrock source (Colombian Andes) using XRD and XRF. Concentrations of CaO, K2O and Na2O decreased markedly in the weathering products compared with the fresh bedrock source, whereas the concentrations of Al2O3, Fe2O3 and MgO increased significantly. The study showed that prolonged warm and humid climatic conditions, in addition to tectonism, had undoubtedly influenced the slope evolution. Lehtonen et al.200 performed glacial dispersal studies around two eastern Finland kimberlites. Indicator minerals were characterised using ICP-MS and XRF. The study contributed to the overall understanding of the Quaternary history in that region and to provide key information for diamond exploration.In a contribution to studies of the palaeoclimate, an investigation of the speleothems from the Godarville tunnel using μ-SRXRF was carried out by Kuczumow et al.201 to correlate the chemical profile data with seasonal variations. The laminar structure of the stalagmites, ascribed to seasonal variations, was very clear and consisted of Ca as the main element, Sr as the minor element and Br, Fe, Pb and Zn as trace elements. An impressive correlation between the spatial distribution of Br and Sr with the optical linear profile of the sample demonstrated the seasonal variations of these elements. Driese et al.202 examined whether mean annual precipitation (MAP) could be used as a control on soil chemistry and if the observed chemical trends could be useful for interpreting the palaeoclimate records of palaeovertisols. Climate-sensitive chemical proxies, measured by XRF, were related to the bulk chemistry of soils and palaeosols from the Texas Coast Prairie. The study demonstrated evidence for a shift from a lower to a higher MAP palaeoclimate that was consistent with previous models and with the observed morphological changes in the palaeosols. Mojtahid et al.203 studied the palaeoclimatic and palaeoenvironmental signals from the glacial stages of Celtic margins over the last 360000 years. By using multidisciplinary techniques, including XRF for major element determinations, close correlation between deep-sea sedimentation and changes in the terrestrial environment of the adjacent continent could be confirmed. Moreover, the occurrence of laminated facies within the deglacial sequences was noted. The authors suggested that these laminations were formed by an annual cycle of meltwater and iceberg release from the disintegrating British–Irish Ice Sheet. Duntze et al.204 reconstructed the palaeoenvironment of two non-calcareous marshland soils using XRF, light microscopy and scanning electron microscopy. Profiles 1 and 2 showed respectively seven and two facies. The diatom composition revealed palaeoenvironments that were variable in time, which could be deduced amongst other things from the current Si:Al, Ca:Sr and Zr:Al ratios. The results suggested a decalcification during geopedogenesis. Finally, researchers205 observed spherules in the Maastrichtian bone bed sedimentary sequence from Barmer Basin (India) using various spectroscopic techniques. The presence of these spherules indicated that some high-temperature event had occurred in the Maastrichtian era.In the current review period X-ray fluorescence spectrometry featured as a characterisation tool for volcanic samples. Pluhar et al.206 demonstrated a method of rigorously separating difficult-to-distinguish lavas into eruptive units based on palaeomagnetic remanence direction and on XRF results for Nb, Rb, Sr, Y and Zr measured on polished palaeomagnetic core samples. This lava fingerprinting method was tested against the current established XRF methods. The validated technique was capable of distinguishing flows of similar chemistry and could also place constraints on the duration of emplacement of each eruptive unit. Viccaro et al.207 investigated the effects on the eruptive dynamics caused by the eruption of mixed magma during the 2001 event at Mount Etna (Italy). Major and trace element chemistry of rocks and minerals showed that magma mixing had occurred. To support their proposed model for the eruptive dynamics, elemental composition data were gathered as well as the mineral chemistry using EPMA, ICP-MS, LAM-ICP-MS, XRD and XRF. The most relevant aspect was the explosive nature of the mixed magma due to the presence of volatile substances. Pallister et al.208 studied the textural and petrologic features of deposits at an emergent island volcano caused by the 2003 phreatomagmatic eruptions of the Anatahan volcano. Data acquired by different techniques, including elemental concentrations determined by XRF, were applied to elucidate magma composition and the fact that phreatomagmatic explosions contributed to the formation of near-sea-level craters at the island. Finally, Ulianov et al.209 characterised hibonite from volcanic fields in Kenya, and Shikazono et al.210 estimated the dissolution rate constant of basalt glass in volcanic ash soil from Japan.For the characterisation of industrial raw materials and minerals, X-ray fluorescence spectrometry was used by several researchers. Gazulla et al.211 established a methodology for analysing natural and synthetic borates using multidisciplinary techniques, whilst Correia et al.212 determined the chemical and mineralogical composition of two different clays. X-ray fluorescence was used, mainly in combination with XRD, to characterise the following new crystalline materials: TlInS2 crystals,213 La0.8Sr0.2MnO3 powder,214 PbMoO4 crystals,215 polyoxomolybdate–lanthanide complexes,216 LaMgAl11O19 crystals,217 MgB2 superconductor,218 Ba1−xSrxTiO3 powders,219 FexTi1−xTel.45 tellurides,220 Bi2O3 doped ZnO ceramic varistors,221 a ZrPO4 fluoride,222 and BaTiO3 powders.2239.3 Environmental9.3.1 Atmospheric particulate matter. The group at Antwerp University224 presented their preliminary results on concentrations in ambient air using an EDXRF spectrometer with high energy polarised beam excitation. Lower limits of detection for the determination of Cd, Cr, Sb and V in aerosols deposited on filters were obtained from optimised measurement conditions that also offered the possibility of a significant reduction in analysis time or the time required for sampling. Kyotani225 determined fifteen elements (Al, Ba, Ca, Cr, Cu, Fe, K, Mg, Mn, Na, Pb, Si, Ti, V and Zn) in aerosols collected over the period from June 2000 to April 2001 at an altitude of 1100 m in the northern foothills of Mount Fuji. The seasonal variation of the basaltic aerosols was found to differ widely from that in general urban aerosols. He et al.226 used XRF in an investigation of the heterogeneous oxidation of carbonyl sulfide (OCS) on atmospheric particles and alumina. The study also involved both a closed and a flow system using in situ diffuse reflectance infrared Fourier transform spectroscopy (DRIFTS) to assist in the understanding of the oxidation process. An indication of the maturity of the XRF technique for the analysis of ambient aerosols can be found in a publication by Pancras et al.227 where XRF, laser ablation-ICP-MS and INAA were described as traditional filter analytical methods and were used to evaluate a multi-element simultaneous electrothermal atomic spectroscopy method for the determination of eleven marker elements in fine ambient aerosol slurry samples. Other publications on aerosol measurements can be found in section 5 of this review, reporting investigations using synchrotron radiation techniques.Epidemiological studies of particulate matter in urban air are concerned with both fine (PM2.5) particles and coarser (PM2.5–PM10) particles. The PM10 component manifests adverse human health effects in the unhealthy, the elderly and children, whereas PM2.5 particles tend to stay longer in the atmosphere and are prone to long distance transportation. Previous Updates have highlighted a number of studies related to the characterisation of Asian dusts in both urban and rural locations and this review includes reports on work that demonstrated attempts to improve air quality. Bangladesh became the first country in South Asia to ban the use of lead in gasoline in 1999, and in 2003 two-stroke engine auto-rickshaws were banned in Dhaka, the capital city of Bangladesh. In July and August 2003, PM2.5 particles were collected228 in Dhaka and in Rangpur in the north of the country to study the effect of the legislation. A Dewell–Higgins cyclone sampler equipped with 3 μm pore size Teflon filters collected day and night time samples. Analysis of the filters using an EDXRF spectrometer with three-axial geometry showed large variations of concentrations for most elements with higher daytime values in Dhaka, whereas the opposite was reported for Rangpur. The concentrations showed a significant influence by human activities and the weather. Despite the legislation to ban leaded gasoline, considerable concentrations of Pb were found. Three workers from the same group229 measured air pollution in two cities in developing countries where energy demand is expected to rise as the population increases. PM2.5 samples were collected using a cyclone sampler in Hanoi, Vietnam, during the months May to October 2000 and a dichotomous virtual impactor was used in Nairobi, Kenya, during February 2000. Using EDXRF, Cl, Fe, K and S levels were found to exceed atmospheric concentrations of 100 ng m−3 in both cities with values an order of magnitude higher than their respective rural towns. Traffic, biomass and waste burning emissions were implicated as the main sources of air pollution in Nairobi, whereas coal combustion and road transport were major sources in Hanoi. Lead and other toxic elements were found to be below WHO guidelines: however, the two cities are threatened by future high levels of air pollution due to the high rate of population growth and long term measurements are thought to be needed to monitor the expected deterioration. A combination of SEM and WDXRF was used by Vazquez et al.230 to measure multi-elemental composition and morphology of particulate matter samples to detect the presence of two potential pollutant emitters at four sites in the City of Campana, Argentina. A screening analysis was undertaken to explore similarities among sources and sample sites adopting the average concentration profile of the crustal rock as soil surrogate. This strategy was reported to be adequate to identify the sources responsible during a period of contamination. Elemental composition and reflectance of PM2.5 particles were measured231 over a one year period at 21 central urban monitoring sites in 20 cities of the European Community Respiratory Health Survey (ECRHS). EDXRF yielded valid results for 15 elements (Al, As, Br, Ca, Cl, Cu, Fe, K, Mn, Pb, S, Si, Ti, V and Zn). Annual and seasonal means of PM2.5 reflectance and elemental composition showed a wide range across Europe with the lowest levels found in Iceland and up to 80 times higher concentrations in Northern Italy. This pattern was found to hold for most pollution indicators with the mass concentration of S being the largest fraction of the analysed elements of PM2.5 at all locations. The crustal component varied from less than 10% up to 25%. Temporal correlations of daily values were found to vary considerably from city to city, depending on the indicator selected: nevertheless, correlations between estimates of long-term exposure, such as annual means, were high among indicators of PM2.5 from anthropogenic sources such as S, metals and reflectance. Sillanpaa et al.232 performed a series of 7-week sampling campaigns in urban background sites in 6 European cities: Duisburg (autumn), Prague (winter), Amsterdam (winter), Helsinki (spring), Barcelona (spring) and Athens (summer). The campaigns were scheduled to include seasons of local public health concern due to high particulate concentrations or findings in previous epidemiological studies. Aerosol samples were collected in parallel using two identical virtual impactors that divided air particles into PM2.5 and PM2.5–10 size ranges. Elemental carbon (EC) and organic carbon (OC) contents were analysed using a thermal-optical carbon analyser; total Al, Ca, Fe, K, Si and Ti by EDXRF; As, Cu, Ni, V and Zn by ICP-MS; Ca2+, succinate, malonate and oxalate by IC; and the sum of levoglucosan + galactosan + mannosan by LC-MS. From this mass of data it was anticipated that combustion emissions from vehicle engines affected the particulate organic matter (POM) content in PM2.5 from all the six sampling campaigns, but a comparison of mass concentration ratios of selected inorganic and organic tracers of common sources of organic material to POM suggested interesting differences in source dominance during campaign periods: Prague (biomass and coal combustion), Barcelona (fuel oil combustion, secondary photochemical organics) and Athens (secondary photochemical organics). Ongoing toxicological studies will clarify the health significance of these findings. Ariola et al.233 sampled PM1, PM2.5 and PM10 factions in the urban area of Genoa, a coastal town in northwest Italy. Two instruments, a continuous sampler (TEOM) and a sequential sampler (PARTISOL) were operated almost continuously on the same site from July 2001 to September 2004. The PARTISOL samples were weighed to determine PM concentration and then analysed by PIXE and by EDXRF for elements from Na to Pb. Some of the filters used in the TEOM microbalance were also analysed by EDXRF to calculate Pb concentrations averaged over 7–30 day periods.Workplace air quality and lung function amongst dental technicians exposed to dust and/or methyl methacrylate were reported by a group in Taiwan.234 The study measured the lung function of 45 dental technicians, before and after shifts, on 3 work days, and monitored workplace concentrations of PM2.5 and methyl methacrylate in 5 dental laboratories. XRF analyses found Co, Cr and Ni in the particulates and the levels of methyl methacrylate were low. The study concluded that PM2.5 was associated with a decrease in the lung function of those assessed. Harper et al.235 published the latest in a series of studies where different sampler types were used to collect airborne Pb in differing environments for presentation to a portable XRF analyser. In this study, personal samples were taken at a bronze foundry where lead was added to an alloy of Cu, Fe and Zn to improve casting. Mixed cellulose–ester filters were used in all five samplers tested; the close-face 37 mm cassette, the 37 mm GSP or “cone” sampler, the 25 mm Institute of Occupational Medicine (IOM) inhalable sampler, the 25 mm Button sampler and the open-face 25 mm cassette. Following XRF analysis, the samples were extracted with acid and analysed by ICP. This investigation found that the GSP, IOM and Button samplers were suitable candidates for further evaluation as compatible with on-site XRF analysis for Pb and other metals. The authors noted that it was important to check the manufacturer’s pre-set conditions as a bias in the calibration for copper was observed.Interest continues in the estimation of sources of anthropogenic particles in Asian dust. Han et al.236,237 investigated the transport of natural and anthropogenic particles to Gosan, Korea, in spring-time 2002. Such studies rely on positive matrix factorisation of the size and time resolved aerosol composition measured by XRF to estimate sources. In this study coarse particles were mainly influenced by soil, sea-salt, coal combustion and metallurgical emissions, whilst the fine particles were significantly attributed to several anthropogenic sources such as oil combustion, non-ferrous metal manufacture and municipal incineration. Sub-micron particles were correlated with motor vehicles and field burning emissions.The environmental consequences of intentional and accidental combustion feature in the literature during this review period. Biomass is increasingly used in energy plants of differing size and sophistication in Sweden, with incineration, in an environmentally friendly manner, being one of the key issues in government policy for sustainable development. Hence there are opportunities for research on the effects of this policy on the air in Swedish Cities. Lindgren et al.238 collected PM2.5 and PM2.5–10 fractions in the city of Vaxjo for subsequent analysis by EDXRF. Principal component analysis was performed on their concentration data to suggest that the K/Zn ratio will be useful as an indicator for biomass incineration. A group in Gothenburg239 investigated indoor and outdoor exposures of domestic wood burning by sampling PM2.5 with cyclone and impactors simultaneously in the winter of 2003 in a residential area where wood burning for domestic space heating is common. Twenty-four hour samples from both wood burning households and a control group were analysed for mass and elemental content using EDXRF and for black smoke levels using an EEL 43 reflectometer. Wood smoke particles were found to make statistically significant contributions of Ca, K and Zn for both personal exposure and indoor concentration, with the median levels of these analytes being 66–80% higher for the wood burning group. Additionally, Cl, Cu, Mn, Pb and Rb were found to be possible markers of wood smoke. Thy et al.240 compared XRF and INAA techniques for the evaluation of potassium and other elements in particulates from straw and other high-fouling biomass fuels. They reported that 20–25% of the original K2O content of straw ashes and slag could be lost during sample preparation prior to analysis. The loss was found to occur when the ashes were heated to determine loss on ignition, probably as a result of the breakdown of sylvite (KCl). The authors found that the loss may be significantly reduced, but not completely eliminated, if the analyses were performed on ashes that had not been previously heat treated. This work reminds readers that similar losses may occur during XRF analyses of other agricultural and soil samples containing high amounts of alkali halogens. Sillanpaa et al.241 reported chemical composition, mass size distribution and sources analysis of long-range transported wildfire smokes in Helsinki. The large chemical data set, based on analyses by ion chromatography, ICP-MS, XRF and smoke stain reflectometry, demonstrated that the PM2.5 fraction increased remarkably during an unusually dry one month period in the summer of 2002. Fires in residential and commercial properties are not uncommon and if such events involve roof mounted photovoltaic arrays, cadmium may be released from CdTe cells with consequences of associated health risk. Fthenakis et al.242 studied glass–glass CdTe photovoltaic arrays by heating sample modules to temperatures up to 1100 °C to simulate exposure during building fires. The temperature rate and duration of these experiments were defined according to standard protocols. Four different types of analysis were performed to investigate emissions and redistribution of elements in the matrix of heated CdTe: sample weight loss as a function of temperature; analysis of Cd and Te in the gaseous emissions; Cd distribution in the heated glass using SRXRF microprobe analysis; and chemical analysis for Cd and Te in the acid digested glass. The study showed that 99.5% of the Cd content of the photovoltaic modules was encapsulated in the molten glass matrix and that a small amount of Cd escaped from the perimeter of the samples before the two sheets of glass melted together. The authors concluded that the probability of sustained fires and subsequent emissions in adequately designed and maintained buildings appears to be zero.9.3.2 Other environmental. The strengths and weaknesses of various methods for monitoring arsenic in the environment were presented by Melamed243 in a review of available technologies with a potential for field measurements. Custo et al.244 described a sampling strategy for the use of portable XRF analysers for in situ soil analysis. The methodology covered a general approach to planning field investigations for any type of environmental study and was applied to soil characterisation in the Campana area of Argentina. The authors proved, once again, that portable XRF is a powerful means of providing immediate data as part of a fast general screening of soil composition.The British Geological Survey is responsible for the national strategic geochemical mapping of Great Britain. As part of this programme, the Geochemical Surveys of Urban Environments project was initiated in 1992 and, to date, 21 cities have been mapped245 by collecting top (0.05–0.20 m) and deeper (0.35–0.50 m) soil samples on a 500 m grid across the built environment with one sample per 0.25 km2. The samples were analysed for 46 elements by XRF plus determinations for pH and loss on ignition, as an indicator of organic matter content. The data provide an overview of the urban geochemical signature and may be readily compared with soils in the rural hinterland to assess the extent of urban contamination. During 1996/7 some 1500 samples of agricultural soils from 10 northern European countries (western Belarus, Estonia, Finland, northern Germany, Latvia, Lithuania, Norway, Poland, north-western Russia, and Sweden) were collected at 750 sites.246 The average sample density was one site per 2500 km. All the samples were analysed for up to 62 elements following ammonium acetate, aqua regia and HF extractions and for total element concentrations by XRF. Electrical conductivity, pH and loss on ignition were also determined. All this work was performed in one laboratory. Even at this low sample density, regional-scale geochemical patterns emerged to show the influence of factors such as geology, agriculture, pollution, topography, marine aerosols and climate. The impact of irrigation using arsenic-rich groundwater on soil and crops formed a geochemical case study in West Bengal Delta Plain, India.247 The study was carried out in an intensively cultivated agricultural area by analysing soil, plants and irrigation water from the Delta Plain. Irrigation water was found to contain up to 780 μg l−1 As but rice and wheat grains were not contaminated with about 0.3 and 0.7 mg kg−1, respectively. However, concentrations on the rice roots were found to be 169–178 mg kg−1 As, which was more than 20 times higher than values of 7.7 mg kg−1 at the uncontaminated reference site. A similar increase in As concentration was measured in the stems of the rice plants irrigated with the contaminated groundwater. Concentrations of As were also found in the uppermost soil layers of the rice paddy field (38 mg kg−1) which was roughly twice as high as that in the soil of the less intensively watered wheat field (18 mg kg−1) and five times higher than the soil of a control rice paddy (7 mg kg−1). Sequential extraction experiments showed that most of the mobile arsenic in the soils was bound to iron oxides.Voegelin et al.248 studied changes in zinc speciation in field soil after contamination with zinc oxide. The soil was artificially contaminated with ZnO containing filter dust from a brass foundry and monitored for 4 years using EXAFS spectroscopy and XRF. The work showed that ZnO dissolved within 9 months and that half the total Zn precipitated with the remaining Zn adsorbed to soil organic and inorganic particles. The rate limiting step was thought to be the supply of Al and Si from the soil minerals to the Zn-rich solutions around dissolving Zn grains. Krishna and Govil249 investigated the extent of heavy metal contamination in soil as a consequence of industrial development during the last decade in India. Soil samples were collected near the Thane–Belapur industrial belt in Mumbai for XRF analysis. The soils were found to be enriched with Co, Cr, Cu, Ni and Zn. The results highlighted the need for instituting a systematic and continuous monitoring programme to ensure that pollution does not become a serious problem in future. Cooper et al.250 investigated the origin of micro-aggregates in soils with ferralic horizons in Piracicaba, Brazil. A combination of optical microscopy, image analysis, SEM and elemental Fe determined by XRF showed three different types of micro-aggregates: oval micro-aggregates with well sorted quartz grains in their interiors; oval micro-aggregates without or with poorly sorted quartz grains in their interiors; and dense polyedric micro-aggregates. These observations, together with the XRF Fe determinations, revealed the contribution of more than one process for micro-aggregate formation: mechanical action, geochemical and biological processes plus the fissuration of the soil matrix by expansion and compression. Cousin et al.251 used an electron microprobe and μXRF to assess the distribution of major and trace elements at the aggregate scale. The structure of the aggregate was demonstrated to be complex, with an inner part richer in Fe and fine material and an outer part abundant in small quartz minerals. Concentrations of Cr, Cu and Fe were much higher in the inner part of the soil aggregates, whereas Ni and Zn were not related to any location in the aggregate. Waterlogging in winter was identified as a major process that modified the spatial location of Fe and the swelling and shrinking caused by seasonal changes was shown to be responsible for falls of allochthonous material from the upper part of the soil profile which results in modification of trace element concentrations in the outer part of the aggregate in soils. The influence of carbonate and other buffering substances in soils was investigated by Sulkowski and Hirner252 using a 3-step sequential extraction procedure for metal fractionation measurements. The original extraction scheme, where the extracts are analysed for only a limited number of metals, was extended to quantify almost all elements in the soils, quantified by XRF in the initial as well as in the residues of all the extraction steps.A problem with UV disinfection of wastewater is the accumulation of fouling materials at sleeve–water interfaces. It has been shown that automated chemical and/or mechanical cleaning can remove most fouling materials: however, permanent foulants, which cannot be removed completely, always remain on the quartz sleeves. These permanent foulants reduce UV transmittance, in turn reducing disinfecting effectiveness. Peng et al.253 investigated the origins , formation and composition of permanent fouling. Four instrumental techniques were used: atomic force microscopy, XRF, SEM and sleeve UV transmittance. It appeared that permanent foulants were trapped initially by micro-scale holes and peaks on fresh sleeve surfaces. The cleaning regimes scratched the sleeves, thereby easily trapping more foulants in the scratched sites. The XRF data showed that the main fouling components were Al, Ca, Fe, Mg and P. From this work, a revised cleaning regime was then devised to extend the life of the UV lamps. Somerset et al.254 reported a treatment of acid mine drainage with prepared fly ash zeolites that decreased Cd, Hg, Ni and Zn in the wastewaters. Durgo et al.255 used EDXRF to monitor the effectiveness of a purification process for wastewater from electroplating industries using ferrous sulfate and wood fly ash.Water conservation is a topical issue and those charged with its supply are sensitive to seepage problems. Ghobadi et al.256 were part of a team that investigated seepage from the Shahid Abbaspour dam in the Zagros mountains in southern Iran. In order to understand the hydrogeology, a series of boreholes were drilled to monitor fluctuations in groundwater level. A combination of tracer dye and XRF analyses was able to identify the seepage paths as being in the karstic limestone in the right abutment of the dam. Arsenic-rich scales are widely associated with geothermal fields and constitute a potential hazard to human health. The arsenic has been reported to be almost exclusively hosted by sulfide or oxide phases or occurring as surface species. However, Pascua et al.257 used XRF and XRD techniques to show that arsenic rich smectite was the predominant host in the geothermal precipitates from geothermal fields in north-western Japan. Arsenic K edge spectra of the smectite suggested the dominance of AsIII–O coordinated species. Both XPS and a magnesium chloride chemical extraction indicated minimal adsorption of arsenic on smectite surfaces, suggesting that the arsenic was predominantly either dissolved within the smectite or occurred within mineral occlusions. No such occlusions greater than 1 μm in size were observed in the samples examined. The potential for As-bearing clays should be considered when determining remediation strategies for geothermal environments or evaluating risks associated with the industrial usage of such precipitates. Concentrations of trace metallic elements, as well as micro-nutrients, were measured in water and plants from ponds and rivers by Espinoza-Quinones et al.258 to assist in the development of a metal abatement programme for river waters in Brazil. In a Portuguese language paper, Pataca et al.259 offered a simple, fast and inexpensive method for determining As in natural waters using XRF. Samples (50 μl) containing 100 mg l−1 of yttrium as internal standard were deposited on a 2.5 μm thick Mylar film and dried at 50 °C for 2 hours prior to analysis by EDXRF. The accuracy of the method was determined by analyte addition/recovery and by comparison with hydride generation AAS. A recovery of about 100% was obtained and the two techniques were in good agreement. The XRF method showed a relative standard deviation of 6.8% and a detection limit of 10.5 μg l−1 for arsenic. Readers interested in other methods of sample preparation may wish to refer to section 9.1 of this review covering sample preparation and pre-concentration techniques. Rao et al.260 published a review of methods for the determination of organometallics and radionuclides in sea-water.The maintenance of waterways generates large amounts of dredged sediments which are then deposited on adjacent land surfaces. These sediments are often rich in metal contaminants and may present a risk to the local environment. XRF is an ideal technique to assist in the understanding of how metals may be immobilised as part of effective metal containment strategies. Panfili et al.261 were concerned with the transformation of phases containing Zn by two graminaceous plants (Agrostis tenuis and Festuca rubra). Masuda et al.262 reported analytical data on arsenic compounds in inter-tidal sediments of Iriomote Island, Japan, whilst Wien et al.263 used a spectrometer on board a ship to determine Sr/Ca ratios in bulk sediments from the southern Cape Basin, South Atlantic. A rapid assessment of the relationship between Sr/Ca ratios and the SPECMAP record made it possible to easily transfer an age model to the newly collected cores during the cruise. Flooding of the river Elbe in August 2002 led to re-suspension of large amounts of sediment and elevated organic matter in the river. Pepelnik et al.264 showed that despite biogenous decalcification one year later, which led to increased organic matter, the concentrations of Bi, Cd and W in 2002 and 2003 sediment samples were still higher than those measured in 1998. A Spanish language paper265 reported XRF and INAA data to assist in the geochemical characterisation of sediment cores from the continental shelf off the north-western Iberian Peninsula. The down-core profiles showed evidence of recent contamination by As and Zn, although there was no evidence of exportation to the adjacent continental shelf.Gardeners amongst our readership will be aware of recent legislation to ban the use of chemicals often found in the potting sheds of our forefathers. Mino and Yukita266 analysed a selection of vegetables from an Osaka market and found potentially harmful levels of Br which suggested a need for regulation of fumigation methods in Japan. Studies of heavy metals in Portuguese fungi267 confirm evidence of pollution in wild species from traffic, soil pollution and nearby vineyards. Lead was attributed to nearby roads whilst Cu, Fe and Zn were correlated with pest control used to boost the grape harvest.Turning to other plant species, with the introduction of double low oilseed rape in the early 1990s a fast and reliable method for the determination of glucosinolates became important in order to separate different qualities of rape seeds. At that time, an indirect method was developed by Schnug and Haneklaus, based on the close relationship between sulfur determined by XRF and glucosinolates in the oilseed rape. Bloem et al.268 have now extended the method to enable those unfortunate laboratories that do not have XRF facilities to determine sulfur by ICP-AES. Both analytical techniques are now recommended for the determination of sulfur in Indian mustard seeds. Punshon et al.269 used SR-XRF compositional imaging to investigate the spatial distribution of Cu, Fe, Mn, Ni and Zn in annual rings of black willow (Salik nigra) collected from an area contaminated by metals. The contaminants were found to be constrained by the boundaries in an annual ring and therefore related to growth of the plant. Margui et al.270 compared EDXRF and ICP-OES (after microwave digestion) for the analysis of plant species grown in waste landfills surrounding an abandoned factory built for the production of Pb–Zn ore concentrates. Once again, we are reminded that acid digestion sometimes proves to be problematic and the authors proposed that the EDXRF method was an effective tool for the determination of metals in vegetation. Workers in Turkey271 used a radioisotope excited portable XRF analyser for the qualitative analysis of Ba, Ca, Fe, K and Ti in lichens growing in Giresum and Ordu province.A group at The Open University272 exploited the rapid and non-destructive nature of XRF for the analysis of flue gas treatment residues and fly ash from solid waste incinerators to satisfy current and proposed European Union regulations that call for the characterisation of materials destined for disposal. Two publications273,274 used both XRF and XRD for the characterisation of different fly ashes for their application in the synthesis of zeolite as a cation exchanger for soil remediation.Other environmental applications included an investigation by Nakano et al.275 into the increase in the amount of copper alloy scrap resulting from legislation to limit the amount of lead permitted in drinking water. Large quantities of copper alloy scrap containing lead are now adding to our mountains of industrial waste. The authors reported a new technique for the removal of lead from these copper alloys. The process was monitored by EPMA and XRF to confirm that lead-free copper alloys can be produced from copper alloy scrap, thereby solving this particular environmental problem. Gezer et al.276 described an XRF method for monitoring the removal of As, Cr and Cu from treated yellow pine timber by oleic acid. Adebiyi et al.277 used TXRF to characterise bituminous sands from south-western Nigeria as part of an exercise to evaluate their potential environmental hazard. Vitrification techniques are gaining popularity as an effective technique for the immobilisation of toxic waste materials. The process generates a durable product that greatly reduces the volume and surface area of the original waste material. Johnson278 used XRF and ICP-MS to analyse soil contaminated with Cs and the resultant vitrified glass to assist in the understanding of the technique. A comprehensive review of all aspects of environmental analysis can also be found in our companion Atomic Spectroscopy Update.2799.4 Archaeological, cultural heritage and forensicSpectroscopic techniques are widely used in the field of cultural heritage research, so it is timely that Bitossi et al.280reviewed the application of selected techniques, including FTIR, XRF, PIXE, Raman, Mossbauer and UV/visible/fluorescence spectroscopy.The analysis of building materials (and the corrosion thereof) has a part to play in archaeological and cultural heritage studies. XRF contributed to an XRD study of historical bricks from the Great Palace of the Byzantine Emperors in Istanbul by Ballato et al.,281 who showed particular interest in characterising different chemical compositions (low and high calcium content), variable firing temperature and the different amounts of soluble salts as damage products. Martin-Gil and colleagues282 were interested in the orange–brown patina on the surfaces of Salisbury Cathedral. Again, using XRF as part of a multi-technique approach, they concluded that although their results could not unambiguously distinguish between a biological and man-made origin, they favoured the latter in which the orange–brown colour was deliberately applied as a stucco comprising plaster mixed with ochre-coloured powdered bone and a binder. Black crusts and patinas on Pentelic marble from the Parthenon and Erechtheum were studied again by a range of techniques, including EDXRF, by Maravelaki-Kalaitzaki,283 who concluded that the black crusts comprising gypsum, calcite and a range of elements (Al, Fe, Mn, Pb, Si, Ti, Zn) originated from the interaction between the marble surface and atmospheric pollutants, whereas patinas should be preserved as they may represent original decorations on the monuments. Lan et al.284 also looked at the corrosion of marble under field exposure by atmospheric pollution and climatic factors in the Southern part of Vietnam. This study, principally by XRD and XRF, demonstrated that the most important factors were rainfall, sulfur dioxide concentration in air and relative humidity.Human habitation and activities were the subjects of a number of studies. Marwick285 measured changes in the P content (by XRF) as well as C in sediments and other sediment attributes, stone artefacts and faunal remains at an archaeological site in Western Australia. The study concluded that increases in the concentration of P and C, together with an increase in discard rate or stone artefacts, indicated an increase in site-use that was interpreted as representative of an increase in regional population density. The burial age of the ‘Augustus’ villa at the foot of the northern slopes of Mt Vesuvius was studied by Kaneko et al.,286 using a combination of the petrological characteristics of the deposits and carbon dating of charcoal pieces. The earliest burial deposits were found to have the same whole-rock chemical composition as the AD 472 eruption, coinciding with carbon-14 ages. XRF, XRD and SEM analyses were used by Flad et al.287 to provide evidence of early salt production in China, whereas Cook and colleagues288 undertook a geochemical soil survey using XRF to determine Cu, Pb and Zn and ICP-MS to quantify Ag, Au and Sr in order to investigate evidence of early Roman precious metal and copper alloy working at the Roman town of Calleva Atrebatum (Silchester, Hampshire, UK). XRF was used to measure K and ICP-MS to determine U and Th to estimate the self-radiation dose rates of chert from the red Win area in Ontario, Canada, in a thermal activation/thermal luminescence study that investigated whether prehistoric toolmakers used heat-treated chert as the raw material to manufacture stone tools. The study showed that chert affected by heat treatment could easily be detected but was not apparent in any of the archaeological artefacts that were examined. A geochemical provenance study of obsidian artefacts from Ethiopia was undertaken by Negash and Shackley289 and of recently excavated stone adzes from Dongshan Island, Fujian Provence, China, by Guo et al.290 This latter study indicated that trade exchange networks had developed along the southeast coast of China as early as 4300–5000 BP.The analysis of pottery and ceramics is one of the more common archaeological uses of XRF and Maggetti291 used this technique to contribute to a study of the provenance of 454 shards from the 11th to the 6th centuries BC to investigate the trading of pottery across the Alps. XRF was used in particular to identify the pottery ‘temper’ and results indicated that two north–south trade routes across the Alps existed. Barone et al.292 used XRF to characterise 79 fragments of Archaic and Hellenistic pottery from various sites in Sicily. PCA was used to group the pottery and with additional FT-IR data, results were interpreted as demonstrating local production. XRF, XRD and optical microscopy were used by del Rio and colleagues293 to interpret pottery manufacturing techniques and functionality of Bronze Age ceramics from Southwest Spain. XRF was also one of a number of techniques contributing to the analysis of cooking and painted ware from a Late Antique kiln at San Giusto, Lucera, Foggia, Italy, with particular interest in elucidating the diverse use of raw materials, relatively complex paste preparation techniques and variable firing temperature for cooking and painted ware. Fortina et al.294 were interested in reconstructing the production technology of Sienese ‘archaic’ majolica ware in the early decades of the 14th century. Results showed that ceramics were rejected for a variety of reasons and that the same raw material continued to be used over the whole period studied. Archaic majolica as well as late medieval transparent glazed pottery from Orvieto (central Italy) were studied by Ricci et al.295 by XRF, XRD and SEM to identify the composition of both the bodies and the coatings. Prinsloo and colleagues296 used a combination of techniques, including XRF, to characterise Chinese celadon shards excavated at a 13th century iron age site in South Africa (Mapungubwe Hill). Results indicated that the shards originated from the Yuan (1279–1368 AD) or even early Ming (1368–1644 AD) dynasties, rather than the Song (1127–1279 AD) dynasty as originally thought, provoking the need for further research on Chinese celadon shards found at archaeological sites in South Africa. Other studies included an EDXRF analysis of white porcelain from a kiln in the Tang dynasty297 and a study of glaze on green-glazed porcelain shards at the famous Ru Guan kiln of the Northern Song dynasty (960–1126 AD) in China.Bianchin et al.298 used a range of techniques, including XRF, to investigate the technology of medieval and renaissance glass-making in Valdelsa (Florence), with a particular interest in defining more appropriately the glass production cycle and its evolution from the 14th to 16th centuries. Jackson et al.299 were also interested in glass making technology and investigated three glass making alkalis with a view to understanding how the compositions of these raw materials were carried through to the final glass. Garcia-Heras and colleagues300 investigated the neo-renaissance–neo-baroque stained glass windows from Madrid, signed by the prestigious Maumejean Freres company as part of a restoration and conservation project. Most of the samples demonstrated an acceptable state of conservation: however, not surprisingly for an urban environment, a slow blackening of panels was observed owing to the influence of soot and dirt particles. Another conservation study was undertaken by Carmona et al.,301 this time on glass and grisailles of Flemish origin at a 15th century monastery in Burgos, Spain. The potassium–lime–silicate glasses had suffered strong superficial de-alkalinisation, causing destruction of the glass structural network and formation of insoluble deposits from corrosion by-product, caused by chemical degradation and biological activity. Wolf and colleagues302 used WDXRF to investigate the composition and manufacture of early medieval coloured glass from an early Christian cemetery church in Sion (Rhone Valley) in Switzerland. Results indicated that raw glass was widely traded with the artisans of Sion still using the highly developed techniques of Roman glass production in the 5th or 6th centuries AD.There continues to be significant interest in the use of XRF in the chemical characterisation of coins. Giovannelli and colleagues303 used XRF, XRD and microscopy techniques to study early western Greek incuse coins, in particular silver didrachmae from the Archaean colonies of Metapontum and Caulonia. The aim of this work was to elucidate metal sources, fabrication processes and degradation phenomena from a detailed investigation of composition and the identification of inclusions and defects. Mondio et al.'s interest304 was in the compositional inhomogeneity of an unusual Selinunte coin using XRF and XPS. The coin was made from Sn–Pb alloy and was ascribed to either funerary use, or more probably to coin production carried out during a period of economic difficulty immediately preceding the year 409 BC, when the city of origin was destroyed by Carthaginian armies. Another specific examination was carried out by Erusalimchik et al.305 of Moscow State Technical University on the silver coin ‘Sobol’, demonstrating that coin blackening was associated with the formation of silver sulfide. Fifteen Indian coins were analysed by EDXRF and PIXE by Santra et al.306 and comparability between the results evaluated.Turning now to other metallurgical studies, Giumlia-Mair307 presented an overview of Bronze Age and Roman copper and copper alloys from the southeastern Alps with a particular interest in the evolution and development of metallurgy. In a second review, this author308 considered the conservation of artefacts and the influence not only of the material and manufacturing process, but also the environment and type of soil in which they had been deposited. In this context, surface analysis methods have an important role. Giumlia-Mair309 also considered a number of copper-based objects that had tin-rich layers on the surface for a number of possible reasons, including the use of high-tin alloys for distinctive objects in the Bronze Age. In a further contribution with Lucchini,310 the role of surface analysis in distinguishing modern and ancient fake bronze and copper objects was discussed. Craddock311 investigated the patinated metal represented by the bidri wares of India and considered that the patinated layer might be finely divided amorphous copper oxide. XRF was one of a range of techniques used by Raj and colleagues312 to characterise the Delhi iron pillar. By contrast, Pantos et al.'s interest313 lay in a Corinthian-type bronze helmet. The principal XRF contribution was to show that the nose guard, which contains Zn in high abundance compared with the main body of the helmet (copper–tin alloy), was a modern substitute fabricated for restoration purposes.XRF was also used in a diverse range of other applications in the field of archaeology and cultural heritage. Creagh314 reviewed the use of a range of electromagnetic and particle excitation techniques in the preservation of a society's cultural heritage and described examples in the characterisation of Australian Aboriginal bark paintings, a suit of armour belonging to a famous Australian outlaw and the degradation of a colour motion picture film. Adriaens315 gave an overview of the non-destructive analysis and testing of museum objects undertaken as part of a pan-European network project: COST. Ramos and Ruisanchez316 proposed a data fusion system to process, as a unique signal, the Raman and XRF spectra obtained from the first microRaman-XRF instrument. This system was evaluated in the classification of real spectra of ancient pigments. Verbi et al.317 used X-ray spectroscopy based on a Rh tube-EDXRF system to detect organic modifications in paints demonstrating that the method could distinguish between latex, correcting fluid and varnish applied to wood on the basis of Compton and Rayleigh scattering. XRF contributed to a study by Braziewicz et al.318 of wooden sculptures from the atat of Viet Stross, Cracow, Poland. Variations in the Cl and Pb content of the wood on comparing the front and back were interpreted in the context of earlier restoration and renovation processes. Nowik et al.319 analysed a series of Gallo-Roman clothes and miscellaneous textile fragments originating from the 1st and 2nd centuries from the Puy de Dome region of France. The aim of the research was to identify dyestuffs with XRF supporting HPLC-PDA in contributing to the results. Further work has been undertaken this year on a fossilized calotte (skull cap) from Lagoa Santa, Brazil, by Anjos et al.320 The calotte and rock samples from two sites had similar compositions, taking account elements associated with limestone complex where the archaeological samples were found. Small differences (especially the Ca/Sr ratio) in different parts of the calotte were interpreted as indicating that the calotte had been mounted with pieces from different origins.9.5 IndustrialThe characterisation of new materials using multidisciplinary techniques including X-ray spectrometry remains of significant interest. Several papers on this subject were recently published in the companion ASU review on Industrial Analysis: Metals, Chemicals and Advanced Materials.321 An overview of the recent developments in analytical techniques for the determination of trace element impurities in ultra-pure materials was given by Balaram.322The synthesis or modification of nano-materials, in the course of which XRF was used as a characterisation tool, was presented in several publications. Pitchumani et al.323 tuned the synthesis of nano-structured SBA-15 silica using phosphoric acid. XRF measurements of the calcined samples indicated the presence of P, which might provide additional Brønsted acid sites for catalysis applications. Nano-composite catalysts for methane-reforming were studied by Li et al.324 and Moronta et al.325 The former characterised Ni/ZrO2 catalysts by XRF, while the latter evaluated the performance of Ni catalysts supported on MgO/smectite type nano-composites. Sorensen et al.326 studied Co substitution into a nano-porous zinc phosphate framework by measuring the relative amount of Co and Zn with EDXRF. The amount of Co incorporation was measured as a function of the amount of Co present in the synthesis mixture. A relatively broad substitution range was observed. Vallepu et al.327 evaluated the synthesis of liebenbergite nano-crystallites from silicate precursor gels. By use of XRF in combination with other techniques, it was shown that the content of the inorganics was a function of pH. The NiO content of the gels increased with increasing pH values, while the Na2O content increased gradually with increasing pH up to 5.87% m/m at pH 12.1. Once in excess of pH 12.6 the content decreased abruptly down to 1.5–2% m/m levels. This trend enabled the preparation of stoichiometric liebenbergite gels having lower Na2O contamination.X-ray spectrometry, mostly supported by other analytical techniques, continued to be a widely used method for the characterisation of catalyst materials. The determination of Pd, Pt and Rh in a spent automotive catalyst was performed by Yoon et al.328 using just XRF. The XRF technique was preferred above ICP-MS because of its non-destructive capabilities. However, XRF suffered from strong matrix-dependent interference effects. The researchers compared the effect of various matrices such as Al, Cu, Fe and Ni on the determination of PGM. Granados et al.329 characterised two used three-way catalysts from automobiles with different mileages using TXRF and XRD. Possible contaminants, such as P, Pb and Zn, were determined in used and a fresh counterpart catalyst. Although other secondary effects might occur, the study showed that Pb poisoning exerted a definite impact on the deactivation of the catalytic activity. Readers interested in this topic are invited to turn to section 6.4 of this review for similar applications using TXRF. Catalyst materials frequently characterised in the current review period were modified mesoporous molecular sieves. MCM-41 and the silica-rich MCM-22 zeolites were modified by several workers and the resulting catalytic activity was evaluated. Thanabodeekij et al.330 showed their impressive results of an oxidative bromination reaction using Ti–MCM-41 as catalyst. Wang et al.331 prepared Sn–MCM-41 by reaction of tetrabutyltin with the surface silanol groups of calcined MCM-41 followed by thermal treatment under oxygen. De-aluminated MCM-22 was studied by Zhu et al.332 and cobalt-modified MCM-22 was characterised by Ravinshankar et al.333 using XRF. Vralstad et al.334 demonstrated the pH dependence of Co levels in Co–MCM-41 and Co–MCM-48. The addition of increasing amounts of Co salts to an MCM-48 synthesis gel caused a change in the mesoporous structure from cubic Ia3d to hexagonal. Additional research in mesoporous molecular sieves was given in further contributions.335–338 Bichinho et al.339 analysed Ziegler–Natta catalysts based on Ti and Mg derivatives. XRF was used to determine the Mg and Ti content, which was in accordance with those obtained by a complexometric titration for Mg and a UV–visible spectrometric method for Ti. The same workers340 validated a quantitative XRF method using synthetic calibrators with a wax matrix for the determination of catalyst metal residues in polyethylene. The reported detection limits were 12 mg kg−1 for Mg and below 2 mg kg−1 for Cr, Ti, V and Zr. Loureiro et al.341 performed comparative analyses of the metal content of supported zirconocene catalysts using XRF and RBS. The grafted metal content, situated between 0.37 and 0.53% m/m Zr/SiO2, was shown to be in agreement for both techniques. Altinisik et al.342 compared two reducing agents, i.e., hypophosphite and CoII complexes for the preparation of glass tablets plated by Pd. XRF analyses showed that a hypophosphite-based bath, resulting in a Pd:Si ratio of 4.6, was much more successful in Pd plating than the CoII complex bath. Additional information on catalysts may be found in the companion ASU review mentioned above.321Industrial processes and materials are often subjected to wear and corrosion. To provide insights into the cause of these failures, XRF was frequently used as an analytical tool. Kim et al.343 evaluated the environmental effects on the susceptibility to stress corrosion cracking of Cr–Mo steel tubes in steam generators under simulated crevice conditions. The amount and distribution of chromium carbide on grain boundaries was investigated by XRF measurements. A post-mortem study of the Al2O3/SiC/C/MgAl2O4 refractory lining used in torpedo wagons was conducted by Justus et al.344 to determine the corrosion mechanism. Chemical analysis using XRF in combination with other techniques showed that a slag containing a large amount of calcium aluminium silicate interacted with the refractory microstructure causing corrosion. The paper prescribed some corrective measures for the improvement of the refractory lining service life. Fox et al.345 quantified wear by the analytical characterisation of particles in a plastic film generated by an extruder. The influences of particle size, film thickness and particle location on the intensity of the Fe Kα peak, the Fe Kβ:Kα intensity ratio and the Compton scattering peak intensity were discussed. Two synthetic matrices, vaseline and transparent tape, were studied and compared with simulated results.Several workers studied the trace elements released during the combustion of coals in power plants. Li et al.346 analysed the major and trace elements in feed coal, bottom ash, fly ash and flue ash after the combustion of seam composite samples using various techniques including WDXRF. Trace element behaviour was deduced from the results indicating that most trace elements, especially As, Ba, Co, Cr, Mn and Ni, were partitioned in the bottom ash, whilst As, Pb and Se were present in the fly ash fraction and the volatiles Cl, Hg and S in the flue gas fraction. Reddy et al.347 performed a study of the As, Cd, Co, Cr, Cu, Hg, Fe, Mn, Ni, Pb, Se and Zn emissions from a coal- and a fuel oil-fired power plant. The content of these potentially toxic pollutants in coal, oil, oil waste, bottom ash and fly ash was determined by XRF and showed that trace metal emissions were higher in the coal-based power plant than in the fuel oil-fired power plant. The effect of combustion conditions on ash formation and deposition in a coal-fired utility boiler was investigated by Wee et al.348 The ash deposits formed under various operating conditions were characterised using SEM imaging, XRD and XRF. The oxidising environment of the deposits was verified by measuring the amount of ferrous and ferric iron. The presence of various amounts of Ca, Fe, K and P in the aluminosilicate glass phases of the deposits indicated that the fluxing agents responsible for ash deposit growth were the minerals containing these elements. The re-use of fly ash, a combustion by-product, as an additive in aluminium alloys to improve their physical and mechanical properties, was evaluated by Gikunoo et al.349 The properties were controlled using multidisciplinary techniques. Miskolczi et al.350 investigated the determination of S in fuels and fuel-like fractions using EDXRF spectroscopy and compared the results with values from the combustion technique. Good correlations, although matrix-dependent, were observed and detection limits of 1.0 mg kg−1, 1.1 mg kg−1 and 0.9 mg kg−1 for S in gasoline, diesel oil and white oil, respectively, were achieved.In the framework of the EU Directives on Restrictions on Hazardous Waste (RoHs) and Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment (WEEE) several test methodologies were presented during the current review period. Araki et al.351 used μ-EDXRF to check the purity of a Pb-free tin–silver–copper solder coating in electrical equipment. Screening of the micrometre sized areas was performed using the fundamental parameter method for a thin film. The measurement error was in the range of 25%, whilst the detection limit for Pb was 0.04% m/m. ICP-MS and SEM measurements were used to evaluate the accuracy of the method. To provide their commercial products with a non-containment verification label for RoHs-prohibited substances, Ozaki and Yamagishi352 set up an efficient control system. The implemented procedure involved screening select parts that have a high substance-containment probability and from which subsequently the concentration was determined using XRF spectrometry. Morf et al.353 investigated the occurrence of brominated flame retardants by using the XRF technique to screen the output material of a Swiss recycling plant for Br, which was used as an indicator of the presence of brominated substances.9.6 Clinical and biologicalThe implementation of microbeam synchrotron radiation X-ray fluorescence spectrometry (μ-SRXRF) for determining the elemental content in tissue samples in order to investigate the progress of disease was frequently presented in the literature this year. Waern et al.354 studied the intracellular distribution of transition metals in hamster lung cells treated with antitumor metallocenes in which Mo, Nb, Ti and V were determined by μ-SRXRF. Whilst significantly higher concentrations of Mo and Nb were found in treated cells compared with control cells, distinct differences were observed in the distribution of each metal. The level of Ti and V in treated cells was low and situated around the XRF detection limit. Kwiatek et al.355 showed significant differences in elemental concentrations of Co, Fe, Mn, Ni and Zn in cancerous and in healthy parts of prostate tissue using μ-SRXRF. The study indicated that the advancement of prostate cancer was related to the content of Cu, Fe and Zn. The investigation of pathological tissues in neurodegenerative disorders (Alzheimer’s, Parkinson’s, etc.) using μ-SRXRF was performed by Ide-Ektessabi and Rabionet.356 The chemical state of the element was determined using XANES, while EDXRF provided the spatial distribution. Results from the analysed tissues revealed distinct imbalances in metallic elements such as Cu and Zn as well as the Fe2+/Fe3+ redox pair, which point to oxidative stress as a crucial factor in the neurodegeneration process. Chwiej et al.357 evaluated the method of preparation for μ-SRXRF analyses. Changes in elemental composition caused by fixing in formalin or paraformaldehyde and embedding in paraffin were examined. The same workers358 applied μ-SRXRF to topographic and quantitative elemental analysis of human spinal cord tissue sections in their study of neurodegenerative disorders. Moreover, the feasibility of using tissue sections fixed and embedded in paraffin for μ-SRXRF was tested. The results showed significant differences in elemental accumulation between the analysed amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) cases. Varga et al.359 determined trace elements in human liver biopsy samples in an investigation of hepatic steatosis. Concentrations of Cr, Cu, Fe, Mn, Ni, Pb, Rb and Zn were determined by ICP-MS after microwave digestion. TXRF measurements were performed using Y as an internal standard and an evaluation of accuracy was undertaken by the analysis of NIST SRM 1577a Bovine Liver. Remarkably, an uneven distribution of Ni in the samples was observed with concentrations between 0.7 and 12 mg kg−1 in 38 samples and extremely high concentrations of 36–693 mg kg−1 in several samples. The results indicated an association of steatosis with high concentrations of Ni in human liver biopsies taken from living patients. Finally, EDXRF was used as the analytical technique for trace element determination in human tissues by Custodio et al.360 Direct analysis of human blood from mothers and newborn infants was performed and correlations between various elements such as Br, Ca, Cu, Fe, K and Zn could be deduced from these data.A recurring issue in this review cycle is the determination of Pb in bone using the 109Cd K-shell X-ray fluorescence technique. An interesting overview of developments in in vivo X-ray fluorescence measurements of Pb in bone over three decades was presented by Chettle.361 The most challenging task in these experiments was still the improvement of detection limits. Nie et al.362 developed a new 109Cd gamma-ray induced K-XRF bone Pb measurement system using an array of four detectors. Tibia measurements revealed that the new system was three times more sensitive than the conventional system. As a result, only 50% of the tibia Pb concentrations were below the minimum detection limit instead of 85%. Ahmed et al.363 investigated the effects of overlying soft tissue on the measurement uncertainty of the in vivo109Cd K-shell X-ray fluorescence technique. Increasing the overlying tissue thickness from 3.2 to 14.6 mm resulted in an improvement of the average uncertainty by a factor of 2.4, whereas the detection limits increased by a factor of 2.46. Bone Pb measurements of 34 young adults living in the state of Vermont (USA) and the province of New Brunswick (Canada) were also performed.364 Measurement parameters were varied using the same XRF system for both populations. Mean tibia lead concentrations were 0.7 mg kg−1 and 0.5 mg kg−1, respectively. The improved measurement uncertainty in the New Brunswick subjects was attributed to reduced source-to-skin distance (5 mm) and a longer measurement time (3600 s) using a weaker radioisotope source (≤0.42 GBq). Carew et al.365 performed bone Cd measurements using source-excited K-shell X-ray fluorescence analysis both experimentally and computationally. Minimum detection limits for Cd in phantoms comprising plaster of Paris (bone) and wax (soft tissue) of 3–4 mg kg−1 were achieved for overlying tissue thicknesses of up to 5 mm and using the 88 keV gamma-rays from a 109Cd source. Alternative sources tested were 125I and 241Am, but the results were not convincing.The use of XRF for the analysis of plant species and herbal drugs has increased over the last few years. Margui et al.366 developed a WDXRF method for the determination of major elements (Al, Ca, K, Mg, Na, P and S), trace elements (As, Co, Fe, Mn and Zn) and non-essential elements (Sr and Pb) in vegetation specimens. A calibration was set up using dried, pulverised and pressed calibrators consisting of plant reference materials and several spiked synthetic cellulose standards. Matrix effects were corrected using the influence coefficient method. Recoveries obtained from a certified reference material ranged between 94% and 107%. Another publication by these workers is reviewed in section 9.3.2 dealing with environmental applications. Farkov et al.367 evaluated the potential of WDXRF in the determination of C, N and O in plant and animal samples. Test samples and amino acids were pelleted on a boric acid support. Data were acquired and compared using both linear regression with absorption correction and multiple regression; the accuracy was evaluated by comparison with the reference method, i.e., pyrolysis-gas chromatography. Remarkably, the reported method error was 1–2% at a concentration level between 10 and 50% m/m, and 25% at a nitrogen concentration of 1–2% m/m. Rodriguez et al.368 used complementary techniques to determine the internal iron mineralisation in a perennial grass. Mossbauer spectroscopy and XRD were used to determine the iron species, SEM to locate iron biominerals among plant tissue structure, and energy dispersive X-ray microanalysis, ICP-MS and TXRF to confirm the elemental composition. The results suggested a complex management of iron in the plant, probably as a consequence of the environmental conditions of its habitat. A study performed by Fu et al.369 also showed that plants adapt themselves to the surrounding environmental conditions. Using EDXRF, laser-scanning confocal microscopy and SEM, the Ca2+ concentration and its distribution under chilling conditions were investigated in an alpine subnival plant species. The results demonstrated that the difference in the Ca2+ distribution was a response by the plant to adapt itself to the alpine subnival environment and the accumulation of Ca2+ could play an important role in actively developing its tolerance to cold. Other contributions of interest in the determination of metals in herbal drugs and medicines were presented by Mino and Yamada370 and Razic et al.371In the food production industry, the X-ray fluorescence technique continued to be used on a regular basis as a simple and rapid control method for measuring the amount of major and trace elements. A review describing various detection strategies, including WDXRF for genetically modified organisms in food products, was presented by Deisingh and Badrie.372 Two contributions were published by Perring et al.373,374 covering the validation of XRF methods for food analysis. The first contribution described the determination of Cu, Fe and Zn in food pre-mixes using EDXRF, whilst in the second paper a WDXRF method was validated for multi-mineral determination in infant cereal matrices. Both methods were established using commercially available samples. Reference values were obtained by ICP-AES after microwave acid digestion. Blanc et al.375 used EDXRF to confirm the identity of inorganic salts typically used as raw materials during food production. Intensities of Ca, Cl, Cu, Fe, K, Mg, Mn, Na, P, S and Zn were measured, and these data were compared with an available database resulting in a total of 98% of samples being correctly identified. Carvalho et al.376 performed an assessment of the essential and toxic elements in edible fish muscle using EDXRF and FAAS for ultra-trace element determinations. The EDXRF results for all samples studied showed that Ca and K were present at the highest concentrations, from 0.6 to 1.3% m/m and 0.04 to 0.08% m/m, respectively, followed by Zn, Fe, Sr, Se and Rb. In octopus samples a different pattern was observed, with higher concentrations of Fe than Zn being found. Low concentrations of Cd, Cr, Hg, Ni and Pb, determined using FAAS, were observed in all samples. Finally, Noda et al.377 determined the P content of potato starch using EDXRF, Tirasoglu et al.378 analysed coal samples using an XRF system equipped with 55Fe and 241Am radioactive sources, Louhelainen et al.379 validated an EDXRF method for the determination of S in black liquor and Zucchi et al.380 used SRTXRF for the analysis of commercial soft drinks and related plastic bottles for their multi-element content.Other biological applications included a study by Janssen et al.381 to assess the relationship between PM2.5 (and its elemental content) with cardiovascular disease. This was undertaken by investigating the exposure of Dutch and Finnish panels of cardiovascular patients to fine particulate matter in various environments. The elemental content, mostly measured using EDXRF, showed that personal and indoor concentrations were lower than and highly correlated with outdoor concentrations. The highest correlations were found with sulfur and particle absorbance, both representing fine mode particles from an outdoor origin. Elements such as Ca, Cl, Cu and Si, representing the coarser fraction of PM2.5 particles, showed the lowest correlation. Lippman et al.382 performed experiments on mice exposed to concentrated ambient particles, to elucidate the association between PM2.5 particles from individual sources and both heart rate and heart rate variability. The major sources of PM2.5 were categorised as secondary sulfate, re-suspended soil, residual oil combustion and other particulates largely from motor vehicle traffic. Readers interested in studies of other particulates may wish to turn to section 9.3.1 of this review. Martin et al.383 used SRXRF to determine lead in a hair sample collected from a lead smelter worker. The results indicated that direct exposure from the environment was a more important source of hair lead than ingestion. Humar et al.384 investigated the leaching behaviour of As, Cr and Cu from old CCA treated waste wood in the case of fungal infestation. Inoculation experiments of CCA treated wood with different brown rot fungal strains were carried out, by which the concentration of the remaining As, Cr and Cu in the wood samples was determined using XRF. The study demonstrated that the exposure to Cu tolerant and Cu sensitive fungal strains significantly increased leaching of As and Cr from the specimens. A preliminary investigation performed by Graham et al.385 demonstrated the feasibility of using XRF to detect the presence of Ag in the mammary glands of dairy cows injected with a mild silver protein suspension. By comparing the amplitude of the Ag Kα peak to the background, a minimum detection time required for evidence of injected Ag suspension was calculated to be 2.8 ± 0.2 s. Concluding this section, additional biological and clinical applications can be consulted in our companion Atomic Spectrometry Update.386,3879.7 Thin films and coatingsGallium arsenide has become an increasingly important compound and semiconductor material suited for high speed digital circuits, microwaves and detectors for high energy physics. Ghita et al.388 studied the production of ohmic contacts on GaAs semi-insulating wafers in a high vacuum chamber (10−8 Torr) followed by rapid thermal annealing at 450 °C in low vacuum. The Schottky barrier height on Au–Ti/GaAs was 0.7325 V in accordance with mean values on n and p type GaAs (0.5–0.8 V). The aim of this work was to fabricate a competitive X-ray detector. Lutzenkirchen-Hecht et al.389 described a miniature sputter deposition chamber for the in situ study of thin film growth processes. Conventional X-ray reflectometry, XRF and XRD techniques were used to investigate the film production that had been previously restricted to studies by synchrotron radiation facilities. Formica and Lee390 designed a fast response XRF system with monolithic polycapillary focusing optics for in situ composition profiling of thin films during deposition. XRF line scans from Ge1−xSnx thin films were used to map Sn concentration versus surface composition. Wakana et al.391 examined the deposition conditions for SrSnO3 insulating layers for single flux quantum circuits. The layers were prepared by rf magnetron sputtering. XRF and ICP analyses showed that the Sn/Sr ratio for the films was close to unity. Zhang et al.392 used XRF, XRD and SEM to study the relationship between processing parameters, microstructures and dielectric properties of (Ba1−xSrx)TiO3 thin films on Pt/SiO2/Si by the sol–gel method. Nakamura et al.393 reported an XRF examination of the oxidation state in metal–organic chemical vapour deposition of manganese oxide films. Krishnan et al.394 reported aqueous tape casting for microwave substrates. These highly-filled fluoropolymeric matrix composites with a uniform microstructure have become highly sought after. The tapes were stacked, binder burnt and thermo-laminated to form substrates and XRF analysis of samples at different locations confirmed the uniform distribution of the ceramic filler material. Photoconductive antimony sulfide-selenide thin films produced by the chemical bath method were studied by Suarez-Sandoval et al.395 Their XRF analysis indicated that loss of S and Se from the films was up to 25% and 45%, respectively, during the formation of the solid solution.Zhao et al.396 determined the Mn concentration in GaMnAs thin films by XRF and used high resolution XRD for the characterisation of thin films. The results showed that the films were highly crystalline and that the growth was reproducible. Yamaguchi et al.397 measured the Cu:(In + Ga):Se atomic ratio in films prepared from ternary compounds for photovoltaic devices. EPMA showed that the surface of the film was Cu-rich and XRD confirmed that some films had a chalcopyrite structure whilst others also contained a “foreign” phase. Structural characterisation of V2O5–TiO2 thin films deposited by rf sputtering from a titanium target with a vanadium inset was reported by Alessandri et al.398 using μXRF. The V/Ti atomic ratio of samples treated at 300 °C was found to be 0.18, 0.25 and 0.82. The Vanadium content was found to decrease as the temperature increased. A self-assembled zirconia-based film, produced at the air–water interface using sodium dodecyl sulfate as the template, was characterised by Henderson et al.399 using ED X-ray reflectometry, XRD and XRF. The film was thought to contain zirconium polyoxo ions and surfactant.Dakhel and Ahmed400 used XRF and XRD data to characterise thermally evaporated nickel dimethylglyoxine thin films prepared on Si substrates to assist in the construction of metal insulator semiconductor devices. Dakhel also published his work on MnIII films deposited on Si(p) substrates401–403 and Er doped Gd oxide films on Si(100) substrates. Lee et al.404 studied the surface, structure and electrical properties of C54TiSi2 films grown on n-Si(100) substrates for potential applications in Si-based ultra-large scale integration devices. Kim et al.405 used XRF and X-ray reflectivity to investigate the nano-structure in Si1−xGex epilayers grown on Si by molecular beam epitaxy. These publications serve to demonstrate that XRF has become accepted as a powerful technique to assist those striving to understand the complex processes involved in the development, production and characterisation of thin films for a host of electrical devices.X-ray reflectometry was the method of choice for Kolbe et al.406 to determine the thickness of nanolayered systems. However, in view of the known limitations of the technique for extremely thin or laterally inhomogeneous layers, the authors compared the results with fundamental parameter-based XRF analysis using synchrotron radiation. The results from both methods for a set of samples with transition metal layers of various thicknesses deposited on Si wafers were compared and showed good agreement within their respective uncertainties. It was also recognised that the techniques offer complementary information, in that X-ray reflectometry provided density data and XRF gave data on trace elements within the layers and the layer homogeneity. Tsunoda and Mauri407 used XRF for thickness measurements and oxygen content of Al2O3 barriers on magnetic tunnel junction films. Gao et al.408 used a micobeam WDXRF system with a spatial resolution of 25 μm and a 50 W air-cooled X-ray tube to measure the thickness of a 25 nm tantalum underlayer and achieved a limit of detection of 0.18 nm. The results were equivalent to those from a conventional 4 kW XRF system. The impact from adjacent patterned zones with different active area densities on current density and electrodeposited layer thickness distribution over a wafer substrate was examined by Pantleon et al.409 They used XRF for the thickness measurements, plus atomic force microscopy for Cu line patterns on wafers.Phosphating is the most widely used process for the surface treatment and finishing of both ferrous and non-ferrous metals. Because of its economy, speed of operation and ability to afford excellent corrosion and wear resistance, adhesion and lubrication properties, it plays a significant role in the automobile, process and appliance industries. Changes in the end use of phosphated articles have resulted in the development of innovative production methods to achieve the desired coating properties. Narayanan410 published a review of this new technology and the associated analytical techniques used to develop and monitor the processes. Zimmermann et al.411 used XRF and SEM to monitor the nucleation and growth rate of Ni2+ coatings of Zn–Ni alloys in such a new phosphating process.9.8 Chemical state, speciation and crystal characterisationAlthough XRF is used for elemental analysis, high resolution measurements can be used to reveal a chemical shift in a characteristic line due to the change of its chemical environment. Both the line width and peak shift of the Kα1 line are strongly correlated with the number of unpaired 3d electrons, hence valency, in transition metal compounds. Kawai et al.412 studied the Ni Kα spectra of oxides and halides and performed molecular orbital calculations at the ground state and the 1 s−1 hole states to prove that the chemical effect originated from the charge-transfer mechanism. Konishi et al.413 were interested in valency measurements of Mn Kα1 spectra in battery cathode materials. Plots of the valence against the full width at half maximum and the chemical shift of the Kα1 spectra gave a curve and a linear relationship, respectively. The coefficient of correlation (R2) for the latter plot was 0.989 between valency II and VII. From III to IV R2 = 0.995, which enabled the oxidation number of Mn atoms in a Ni ion-doped spinel structure, LiMn2O4 (LiNixMn2−xO4 with 0.2 < x < 0.42) to be determined. It was concluded that the Ni ion was divalent. Ying and Chen414 studied the peak position and line shape of S Kα, S Kβ satellite lines and the ratio of (S Kα/S Kβ), (Cu Lα/Cu Kα) and (Fe Lα/Fe Kα) of copper ore concentrate samples to show that the oxidation state was influenced by the method of storage. Jarocki et al.415 measured Mn Kβ5 spectra for Mn metal, TbMn2 and TbMn2D2. The Kβ5 lines in the Tb–Mn compounds were reduced to one third of those in the elemental Mn. As the Kβ5 line is believed to be due to an electron quadrupole transition from Mn 3d to the 1 s−1 hole, the observed shape of this line was used to probe the d-states of Mn. Izumi et al.416 monitored vanadium site transformations on titania using V Kα1. Bezrodna et al.417 were also interested in Ti, where polydispersed anatase particles were shown to exhibit nanocrystallites containing different cations (Fe3+, Co2+ and Cu2+). Moving down the periodic table, Nishibu et al.418 and Kurmaev et al.419 looked at F Kα spectra in various fluorides whilst Kikas et al.420 were interested in both F 1s in LiF and O 1s in MgO crystals. This type of work reminds us of the considerable advances in instrumentation that now enable spectroscopists not only to measure these low atomic number analytes but also confidently study their peak profiles.Radiative Auger spectra are weak X-ray emission spectra near the characteristic X-ray lines that manifest an intrinsic energy loss process in an atom when a characteristic X-ray photon is emitted. As the energy loss spectra correspond to the unoccupied conduction band structure of materials, the radiative Auger effect is an alternative tool to EXAFS and XANES and is now sometimes referred to as EXEFS, extended X-ray emission fine structure. Kawai421 has published a review on this subject which has been of considerable interest to him for many years. The EXEFS technique has now been adopted in many industries in Japan, proving the success of researchers in this specialised field.Others publications include work by Dukhanin et al.422 on the influence of photo and Auger electrons of elements with high atomic numbers on carbon spectra. It was found that ionisation of outer orbital shells (L, M and N) effectively excite atoms of carbon. The influence was observed using a matrix with Z > 30: however, in a matrix with Z > 50 the effect was more pronounced. Oxidation state changes of metallic ions423 were found to be involved in the generation and biological defence against reactive oxygen species. Readers interested in other clinical and biological applications are invited to return to section 9.6 of this review. Similarly those interested in section 9.3 on environmental applications may wish to read a publication424 on the oxidation state of selenium in mine waste rocks that led to a better understanding of the biogeochemical cycling of Se in US phosphate mining activities.10 AbbreviationsAASAtomic absorption spectrometryADAnno DominiALSAmyotrophic lateral sclerosisBCBefore ChristBPBefore presentCCAChromated copper arsenateCCDCharge coupled detectorCRMCertified reference materialCVDChemical vapour depositionCWChemical warfareDDimensionalDNTCDiffuse neurofibrillary tangles with calcificationDRIFTSDiffuse reflectance infrared Fourier transform spectroscopyECElemental carbonECRHSEuropean Community Respiratory Health SurveyEDXEnergy dispersive X-ray analysisEDXRDEnergy dispersive X-ray diffractionEDXRFEnergy dispersive X-ray fluorescenceEPMAElectron probe microanalysisETAASElectrothermal atomic absorption spectrometryEUEuropean UnionEXAFSExtended X-ray absorption fine structureEXEFSExtended X-ray emission fine structureFAASFlame atomic absorption spectrometryFTIRFourier transform infrared spectroscopyGE-XRFGrazing exit X-ray fluorescenceGE-EPMAGrazing exit electron probe microanalysisHPLCHigh-performance liquid chromatographyHOPGHighly orientated pyrolytic graphiteICP-AESInductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectrometryICP-MSInductively coupled plasma mass spectrometryICP-OESInductively coupled plasma optical emission spectroscopyINAAInstrumental neutron activation analysisIOMInstitute of Occupational MedicineISOInternational Organisation for StandardisationKDPPotassium dihydrogenphosphateLAM-ICP-MSLaser ablation microprobe-inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometryMAPMean annual precipitationMCMonte CarloMPIMax Planck InstituteNASANational Aeronautical Space AdministrationNISTNational Institute of Standards and TechnologyOCOrganic carbonPAR4-(2-Pyridylazo)resorcinolPCAPrincipal component analysisPGMPlatinum group metalsPIGEParticle induced gamma emissionPIXEParticle induced X-ray emissionPMParticulate matterPOMParticulate organic matterPXRFPortable X-ray fluorescenceRBSRutherford backscattering spectrometryREERare earth element(s)RfRadiofrequencyRoHSRestriction on Hazardous SubstancesSEMScanning electron microscopySi(Li)Lithium-drifted siliconSi(PIN)Silicon ‘PIN’ detector deviceSRSynchrotron radiationSR-TXRFSynchrotron radiation total reflection X-ray fluorescenceTXRFTotal reflection X-ray fluorescenceUSGSUnited States Geological SurveyUVUltravioletWDXRFWavelength dispersive X-ray fluorescenceWEEEWaste electrical and electronic equipmentWHOWorld Health OrganisationXAFSX-ray absorption fine structureXANESX-ray absorption near edge structureXBICX-ray beam induced currentXPSX-ray photon spectroscopyXRDX-ray diffractionXRFX-ray fluorescenceXRFMicro-X-ray fluorescence11 ReferencesP. J. Potts, A. T. Ellis, P. Kregsamer, C. Streli, C. Vanhoof, M. West and P. Wobrauschek, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(10), 1124–1154 RSC .R. E. Sturgeon, S. N. Willie, L. Yang, R. Greenberg, R. O. Spatz, Z. Chen, C. Scriver, V. Clancy, J. W. Lam and S. Thorrold, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(10), 1067–1071 RSC .R. Lozano and J. P. Bernal, Rev. Mex. Cienc. Geol., 2005, 22(3), 329–344 Search PubMed .M. Kurahashi, J. Mizutani and A. Hioki, Anal. Sci., 2005, 21, 827 CrossRef CAS .P. Morgenstern, L. Bruggemann and R. Wennrich, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2005, 60(9–10), 1373–1379 CrossRef .M. Rozic, M. R. Macefat and V. Orescanin, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2005, 229(1), 117–122 CrossRef CAS .G. J. Havrilla and T. C. Miller, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2005, 76(6) Search PubMed  , art. no.-062201.Z. L. Luo, B. Geng, J. Bao, C. H. Liu, W. H. Liu, C. Gao, Z. G. Liu and X. L. Ding, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2005, 76(9) Search PubMed .J. A. Geuther and Y. Danon, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 97(10) Search PubMed  , art. no.-104916.H. Murakami, R. Ono, A. Hirai, Y. Hosokawa and J. Kawai, Anal. Sci., 2005, 21(7), 881–884 CrossRef CAS .N. Inada, K. Maeda and J. Kawai, Anal. Sci., 2005, 21, 877 CrossRef CAS .A. Bjeoumikhov, V. Arkadiev, F. Eggert, V. D. Hodoroaba, N. Langhoff, M. Procop, J. Rabe and R. Wedell, X-Ray Spectrom., 2005, 34(6), 493–497 CrossRef CAS .E. Urgiles, R. Toda and J. Z. Wilcox, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2006, 77(1) Search PubMed .K. Tsuji, T. Emoto, Y. Nishida, E. Tamaki, Y. Kikutani, A. Hibara and T. Kitamori, Anal. Sci., 2005, 21(7), 799–803 CrossRef CAS .B. A. A. Bulletin., 2006 (Feb).T. Pantazis, Spectroscopy, 2005, 9–9 Search PubMed .T. Pantazis, Spectroscopy, 2005, 8–8 Search PubMed .J. Paepen, V. Osorio, P. Van Espen, O. Evrard, L. Van Buul, M. Keters, V. T. Jordanov and P. Burger, X-Ray Spectrom., 2005, 34(5), 417–420 CrossRef CAS .B. L. Doyle, D. S. Walsh, P. G. Kotula, P. Rossi, T. Schülein and M. Rohde, X-Ray Spectrom., 2005, 34, 279–284 CrossRef CAS .A. Longoni, C. Fiorini, C. Guazzoni, S. Buzzetti, M. Bellini, L. Struder, P. Lechner, A. Bjeoumikhov and J. Kemmer, X-Ray Spectrom., 2005, 34(5), 439–445 CrossRef CAS .M. Marisaldi, C. Fiorini, C. Labanti, A. Longoni, F. Perotti, E. Rossi and H. Soltau, Nucl. Phys. B, Proc. Suppl., 2006, 150, 190–193 CrossRef CAS .M. Hohl, P. Wurz and P. Bochsler, Plasma Sources Sci. Technol., 2005, 14(4), 692–699 CrossRef CAS .E. Previtali, Nucl. Phys. B, Proc. Suppl., 2006, 150(3–8) Search PubMed .T. Jach, J. A. Small and D. E. Newbury, Powder Diffr., 2005, 20(2), 134–136 CrossRef CAS .S. J. Smith, C. H. Whitford and G. W. Fraser, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2006, 556(1), 237–245 CrossRef CAS .S. E. Shafranjuk, J. B. Ketterson and I. P. Nevirkovets, IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond., 2005, 15(2), 944–947 CrossRef CAS .M. Yoshida, K. Hoshino, T. Taino, H. Myoren, S. Takada, K. Kikuchi, H. Nakagawa, M. Aoyagi, H. Sato and H. M. Shimizu, IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond., 2005, 15(2), 606–608 CrossRef CAS .H. Kruger, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2005, 551(1), 1–14 CrossRef .M. M. Nasseri, Q. L. Ma, Z. J. Yin and D. M. Zhu, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2005, 234(3), 362–368 CrossRef CAS .M. W. Tate, D. Chamberlain and S. M. Gruner, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2005, 76(8) Search PubMed  , art. no.-081301.J. Kataoka, T. Saito, Y. Kuramoto, T. Ikagawa, Y. Yatsu, J. Kotoku, M. Arimoto, N. Kawai, Y. Ishikawa and N. Kawabata, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2005, 541(1–2), 398–404 CrossRef CAS .G. C. Sun, N. Manez, M. Zazoui, A. Al-Ajili, D. W. Davidson, V. O'Shea, F. Quarati, K. M. Smith, D. Chambellan, O. Gal, P. Pillot, M. Lenoir, J. P. Montagne, A. Bchetnia and J. C. Bourgoin, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2005, 546(1–2), 140–147 CrossRef CAS .J. Skriniarova, A. Perd'ochova, M. Hruzik, M. Vesely, B. Bendjus, L. Haupt, I. Besse and M. Herms, Vacuum, 2005, 80(1–3), 218–222 CrossRef CAS .R. A. Achmadullin, V. V. Artemov, V. F. Dvoryankin, G. G. Dvoryankina, Y. M. Dikaev, M. G. Ermakov, O. N. Ermakova, V. B. Chmil, A. G. Holodenko, A. A. Kudryashov, A. I. Krikunov, A. G. Petrov, A. A. Telegin and A. P. Vorobiev, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2005, 554(1–3), 314–319 CrossRef CAS .A. G. Kozorezov, J. K. Wigmore, A. Owens, R. den Hartog, A. Peacock and H. A. Al-Jawhari, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2005, 546(1–2), 209–212 CrossRef CAS .N. Lovergine, P. Prete, L. Tapfer, F. Marzo and A. M. Mancini, Cryst. Res. Technol., 2005, 40(10–11), 1018–1022 CrossRef CAS .Q. F. Su, Y. B. Xia, L. J. Wang, Y. Yang and W. M. Shi, Mod. Phys. Lett. A, 2005, 20(29), 2253–2259 CrossRef CAS .D. A. Goganov and A. A. Schultz, X-Ray Spectrom., 2006, 35(1), 47–51 CrossRef CAS .E. D. Greaves, L. Bennum, F. Palacios and J. A. Alfonso, X-Ray Spectrom., 2005, 34(3), 194–199 CrossRef CAS .P. O. Verkhovodov, X-Ray Spectrom., 2005, 34(2), 169–171 CrossRef CAS .A. Y. Portnoi and G. V. Pavlinskii, J. Anal. Chem., 2005, 60, 838–844 CrossRef CAS .F. Scholzel and M. Procop, X-Ray Spectrom., 2005, 34(6), 473–476 CrossRef .E. Yilmaz, R. Pekoz and C. Can, X-Ray Spectrom., 2006, 35, 42–46 CrossRef CAS .S. Gallardo, D. Ginestar, G. Verdu, J. Rodenas, V. Puchades and J. I. Villaescusa, X-Ray Spectrom., 2006, 35, 63–70 CrossRef CAS .R. P. Gardner and W. Guo, Powder Diffr., 2005, 20(2), 146–152 CrossRef CAS .X. Song, W. P. Segars, Y. Du, B. M. W. Tsui and E. C. Frey, Phys. Med. Biol., 2005, 50(8), 1791–1804 CrossRef CAS .M. Kolbe, B. Beckhoff, M. Krumrey and G. Ulm, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2005, 60(4), 505–510 CrossRef .X. Y. Han, S. J. Zhuo, R. X. Shen, P. L. Wang and A. Ji, J. Quant. Spectrosc. Radiat. Transfer, 2006, 97(1), 68–74 CrossRef CAS .K. G. Boto and L. J. Murphy, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2005, 552(1–2), 36–41 CrossRef CAS .A. G. Karydas, X-Ray Spectrom., 2005, 34(5), 426–431 CrossRef CAS .X. Y. Han, S. J. Zhuo, P. L. Wang, G. Y. Tao and A. Ji, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2005, 538(1–2), 297–302 CrossRef CAS .M. Bos and J. A. M. Vrielink, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2005, 545(1), 92–98 CrossRef CAS .A. Y. Dukhanin and G. N. Pavlinsky, X-Ray Spectrom., 2006, 35, 137–140 CrossRef CAS .A. Y. Dukhanin, G. N. Pavlinsky, E. O. Baranov, A. Y. Portnoy and A. V. Kujn, X-Ray Spectrom., 2006, 35, 34–39 CrossRef CAS .S. Serneels, P. Filzmoser, C. Croux and P. J. Van Espen, Chemom. Intell. Lab. Syst., 2005, 76(2), 197–204 CrossRef CAS .R. Sitko, X-Ray Spectrom., 2006, 35, 93–100 CrossRef CAS .T. Sun and X. Ding, X-Ray Spectrom., 2006, 35, 120–124 CrossRef CAS .E. Langer, S. Dabritz, W. Hauffe and M. Haschke, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2005, 252(1), 240–244 CrossRef CAS .A. Bjeoumikhov, N. Langhoff, S. Bjeoumikhova and R. Wedell, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2005, 76(6) Search PubMed  , art. no.-063115.H. J. Sanchez and M. C. Valentinuzzi, X-Ray Spectrom., 2005, 34(2), 164–168 CrossRef CAS .P. Karimov, J. Kawai and E. Z. Kurmaev, Anal. Sci., 2005, 21, 811 CrossRef CAS .A. Gupta, P. Rajput, A. Saraiya, V. R. Reddy, M. Gupta, S. Bernstorff and H. Amenitsch, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 72(7) Search PubMed  , art. no.-075436.A. Gupta, Hyperfine Interact., 2005, 160(1–4), 123–142 CrossRef CAS .A. V. Okotrub, S. B. Dabagov, A. G. Kudashov, A. V. Gusel'nikov, I. Kinloch, A. H. Windle, A. L. Chuvilin and L. G. Bulusheva, JETP Lett., 2005, 81(1), 34–38 CrossRef CAS .W. Malzer and B. Kanngiesser, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2005, 60(9–10), 1334–1341 CrossRef .K. Tsuji, T. Emoto, Y. Matsuoka, Y. Miyatake, T. Nagamura and X. Ding, Powder Diffr., 2005, 20(2), 137–140 CrossRef CAS .D. Wegrzynek, A. Markowicz, S. Bamford, E. Chinea-Cano and M. Bogovac, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2005, 231, 176–182 CrossRef CAS .C. G. Worley, S. S. Wiltshire, T. C. Miller, G. J. Havrilla and V. Majidi, J. Forensic Sci., 2006, 51(1), 57–63 CrossRef .G. Paternoster, R. Rinzivillo, F. Nunziata, E. M. Castellucci, C. Lofrumento, A. Zoppi, A. C. Felici, G. Fronterotta, C. Nicolais, M. Piacentini, S. Sciuti and M. Vendittelli, J. Cult. Herit., 2005, 6(1), 21–28 CrossRef .T. C. Miller, E. P. Hastings and G. J. Havrilla, X-Ray Spectrom., 2006, 35, 131–136 CrossRef .T. C. Miller and G. J. Havrilla, Powder Diffr., 2005, 20(2), 153–157 CrossRef CAS .T. C. Miller, H. L. DeWitt and G. J. Havrilla, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2005, 60(11), 1458–1467 CrossRef .A. L. Yusoff, R. P. Hugtenburg and D. A. Bradley, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 2005, 74(6), 459–481 CrossRef CAS .G. M. Hettiarachchi, K. G. Scheckel, J. A. Ryan, S. R. Sutton and M. Newville, J. Environ. Qual., 2006, 35(1), 342–351 CrossRef CAS .C. Vogt and R. Dargel, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2005, 252(1), 53–56 CrossRef CAS .Y. Takahashi, K. Kondo, S. Ishikawa, H. Uchihara, H. Fujino, N. Sawada, T. Miyoshi, S. Sakiyama, K. Izumi and Y. Monden, Environ. Res., 2005, 99(2), 267–272 CrossRef CAS .A. von Bohlen, R. Hergenroder, C. Sternemann, M. Paulus, M. Radtke and H. Riesemeier, Instrum. Sci. Technol., 2005, 33(2), 137–150 CrossRef CAS .B. D. Patterson, R. Abela, H. Auderset, Q. Chen, F. Fauth, F. Gozzo, G. Ingold, H. Kuhne, M. Lange, D. Maden, D. Meister, P. Pattison, T. Schmidt, B. Schmitt, C. Schulze-Briese, M. Shi, M. Stampanoni and P. R. Willmott, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2005, 540(1), 42–67 CrossRef CAS .W. Gorner, X-Ray Spectrom., 2005, 34(5), 432–434 CrossRef .A. V. Daryin, I. A. Kalugin, N. V. Maksimova, L. G. Smolyaninova and K. V. Zolotarev, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2005, 543(1), 255–258 CrossRef CAS .E. L. Goldberg, S. A. Gorbarenko, A. D. Shaporenko, A. A. Bosin, V. Y. Leskov and E. P. Chebykin, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2005, 543(1), 284–287 CrossRef CAS .E. L. Goldberg, S. A. Gorbarenko, A. D. Shaporenko, M. A. Phedorin, A. V. Artemova, A. A. Bosin and K. V. Zolotarev, Nucl.
Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2005, 543(1), 280–283 CrossRef CAS .E. L. Goldberg, M. A. Grachev, E. P. Chebykin, M. A. Phedorin, I. A. Kalugin, O. M. Khlystov and K. V. Zolotarev, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2005, 543(1), 250–254 CrossRef CAS .V. A. Bobrov, M. A. Phedorin, G. A. Leonova and Y. P. Kolmogorov, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2005, 543(1), 259–265 CrossRef CAS .M. Fuhrmann and A. Lanzirotti, J. Environ. Radioact., 2005, 82(1), 33–50 CrossRef CAS .N. Bukowiecki, M. Hill, R. Gehrig, C. N. Zwicky, P. Lienemann, F. Hegedus, G. Falkenberg, E. Weingartner and U. Baltensperger, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2005, 39(15), 5754–5762 CrossRef CAS .R. A. VanCuren, S. S. Cliff, K. D. Perry and M. Jimenez-Cruz, J. Geophys. Res., [Atmos.], 2005, 110(D9) Search PubMed  , art. no.-D09S90.N. Zoeger, C. Streli, P. Wobrauschek, C. Jokubonis, G. Pepponi, P. Roschger, S. Bohic and W. Osterode, Powder Diffr., 2005, 20(2), 158–160 CrossRef CAS .A. Ide-Ektessabi, Y. Ota, R. Ishihara, Y. Mizuno and T. Takeuchi, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2005, 241(1–4), 681–684 CrossRef CAS .J. Chwiej, K. Fik-Mazgaj, M. Szczerbowska-Boruchowska, M. Lankosz, J. Ostachowicz, D. Adamek, A. Simionovici and S. Bohic, Anal. Chem., 2005, 77(9), 2895–2900 CrossRef CAS .M. Szczerbowska-Boruchowska, J. Chwiej, M. Lankosz, D. Adamek, S. Wojcik, A. Krygowska-Wajs, B. Tomik, S. Bohic, J. Susini, A. Simionovici, P. Dumas and M. Kastyak, X-Ray Spectrom., 2005, 34(6), 514–520 CrossRef .L. X. Feng, H. Q. Xiao, X. He, Z. Y. Zhang, N. Q. Liu, Y. L. Zhao and Y. Y. Huang, High Energy Phys. Nucl. Phys., 2005, 29(10), 1012–1016 Search PubMed .M. Kuhbacher, G. Weseloh, A. Thomzig, H. Bertelsmann, G. Falkenberg, M. Radtke, H. Riesemeier, A. Kyriakopoulos, M. Beekes and D. Behne, X-Ray Spectrom., 2005, 34(2), 112–117 CrossRef CAS .Y. X. Zhang, F. Cheng, D. Y. Li, Y. S. Wang, G. L. Zhang, W. S. Liao, T. T. Tang, Y. Y. Huang and W. He, Biol. Trace Elem. Res., 2005, 103(2), 177–185 CrossRef CAS .X. L. Li, W. S. Yue, J. F. Liu, T. M. Wan, Y. Li, G. L. Zhang, C. H. Yan, Z. D. Zhang, Y. Y. Huang and W. He, High Energy Phys. Nucl. Phys., 2005, 29, 65–67 Search PubMed .J. Abraham, M. Grenon, H. J. Sanchez, C. Perez and R. Barrea, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., 2005, 75A(3), 623–628 CrossRef CAS .Y. X. Gao, Y. B. Liu, C. Y. Chen, B. Li, W. He, Y. Y. Huang and Z. F. Chai, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(5), 473–475 RSC .Y. Tanaka, Y. Taniguchi, D. Tanaka, M. Toyoda, H. Ishii, T. Tanabe, Y. Terada, S. Hayakawa and J. R. Kawai, Anal. Sci., 2005, 21(7), 839–843 CrossRef CAS .M. Eriksson, J. Osan, J. Jernstrom, D. Wegrzynek, R. Simon, E. Chinea-Cano, A. Markowicz, S. Bamford, G. Tamborini, S. Torok, G. Falkenberg, A. Alsecz, H. Dahlgaard, P. Wobrauschek, C. Streli, N. Zoeger and M. Betti, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2005, 60(4), 455–469 CrossRef .M. A. Denecke, K. Janssens, K. Proost, J. Rothe and U. Noseck, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2005, 39(7), 2049–2058 CrossRef CAS .M. P. Isaure, A. Manceau, N. Geoffroy, A. Laboudigue, N. Tamura and M. A. Marcus, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2005, 69(5), 1173–1198 CrossRef CAS .A. Manceau, C. Tommaseo, S. Rihs, N. Geoffroy, D. Chateigner, M. Schlegel, D. Tisserand, M. A. Marcus, N. Tamura and Z. S. Chen, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2005, 69(16), 4007–4034 CrossRef CAS .F. E. Brenker, L. Vincze, B. Vekemans, L. Nasdala, T. Stachel, C. Vollmer, M. Kersten, A. Somogyi, F. Adams, W. Joswig and J. W. Harris, Earth Planet. Sci. Lett., 2005, 236(3–4), 579–587 CrossRef CAS .A. L. Ryser, D. G. Strawn, M. A. Marcus, S. Fakra, J. L. Johnson-Maynard and G. Moller, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2006, 40(2), 462–467 CrossRef CAS .D. Vantelon, A. Lanzirotti, A. C. Scheinost and R. Kretzschmar, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2005, 39(13), 4808–4815 CrossRef CAS .H. Sitepu, M. G. Kopylova, D. H. Quirt, J. N. Cutler and T. G. Kotzer, Am. Mineral., 2005, 90(1112), 1740–1747 CrossRef CAS .L. M. Miller, R. J. Smith, M. E. Ruppel, C. H. Ott and A. Lanzirotti, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2005, 76(6) Search PubMed  , art. no.-066107.S. Frisia, A. Borsato, J. Susini and A. Somogyi, Archaeometry, 2005, 47, 209–219 CrossRef CAS .S. Frisia, A. Borsato, I. J. Fairchild and J. Susini, Earth Planet. Sci. Lett., 2005, 235(3–4), 729–740 CrossRef CAS .H. Eba and K. Sakurai, Chem. Lett., 2005, 34(6), 872–873 CrossRef CAS .K. W. Jones, H. Feng, A. Lanzirotti and D. Mahajan, Top. Catal., 2005, 32(3–4), 263–272 CrossRef CAS .K. W. Jones, H. Feng, A. Lanzirotti and D. Mahajan, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2005, 241(1–4), 331–334 CrossRef CAS .T. Punshon, B. P. Jackson, A. Lanzirotti, W. A. Hopkins, P. M. Bertsch and J. Burger, Spectrosc. Lett., 2005, 38(3), 343–363 CrossRef CAS .R. Terzano, M. Spagnuolo, L. Medici, B. Vekemans, L. Vincze, K. Janssens and P. Ruggiero, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2005, 39(16), 6280–6287 CrossRef CAS .C. G. Ryan, B. E. Etschmann, S. Vogt, J. Maser, C. L. Harland, E. van Achterbergh and D. Legnini, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2005, 231, 183–188 CrossRef CAS .T. Buonassisi, A. A. Istratov, M. D. Pickett, M. A. Marcus, G. Hahn, S. Riepe, J. Isenberg, W. Warta, G. Willeke, T. F. Ciszek and E. R. Weber, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87(4) Search PubMed  , art. no.-044101.T. Buonassisi, A. A. Istratov, M. A. Marcus, M. Heuer, M. D. Pickett, B. Lai, Z. Cai, S. M. Heald and E. R. Weber, in Gettering and Defect Engineering in Semiconductor Technology Xi, Trans Tech Publications Ltd, Zurich-Uetikon,  2005, vol. 108–109, pp. 577–584 Search PubMed .P. Chevallier, I. Ricordel and G. Meyer, X-Ray Spectrom., 2006, 35(125) Search PubMed .M. F. Guerra, T. Calligaro, M. Radtke, I. Reiche and H. Riesemeier, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2005, 240(1–2), 505–511 CrossRef CAS .S. Pages-Camagna, I. Reiche, C. Brouder, D. Cabaret, S. Rossano, B. Kanngiesser and A. Erko, X-Ray Spectrom., 2006, 35, 141–145 CrossRef CAS .M. Kasamatsu, Y. Suzuki, T. Nakanishi, O. Shimoda, Y. Nishiwaki, N. Miyamoto and S. Suzuki, Anal. Sci., 2005, 21(7), 785–787 CrossRef CAS .I. M. Kempson, K. P. Kirkbride, W. M. Skinner and J. Coumbaros, Talanta, 2005, 67(2), 286–303 CrossRef CAS .Y. Suzuki, M. Kasamatsu, S. Suzuki, T. Nakanishi, M. Takatsu, S. Muratsu, O. Shimoda, S. Watanabe, Y. Nishiwaki and N. Miyamoto, Anal. Sci., 2005, 21(7), 855–859 CrossRef CAS .Z. W. Chen, N. Mail, F. Z. Wei, C. A. MacDonald and W. M. Gibson, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2005, 60(4), 471–478 CrossRef .E. M. Korotkikh, X-Ray Spectrom., 2006, 35, 116–119 CrossRef CAS .H. J. Sanchez and M. C. Valentinuzzi, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 2005, 73(5), 243–247 CrossRef CAS .C. Streli, G. Pepponi, P. Wobrauschek, C. Jokubonis, G. Falkenberg and G. Zaray, X-Ray Spectrom., 2005, 34(5), 451–455 CrossRef CAS .F. R. Espinoza-Quinones, S. M. Palacio, R. M. Galante, F. L. Rossi, D. C. Zenatti, I. R. A. Pereira, R. A. Welter, N. Rossi, C. L. Obregon, J. M. T. de Abreu, M. A. Rizzutto, N. Added and M. H. Tabacniks, Braz. J. Phys., 2005, 35(3B), 757–760 Search PubMed .N. Nagata, P. G. Peralta-Zamora, R. J. Poppi, C. A. Perez and M. Bueno, X-Ray Spectrom., 2006, 35(1), 79–84 CrossRef CAS .O. Zucchi, S. Moreira, E. F. O. De Jesus, H. S. Neto and M. J. Salvador, Biol. Trace Elem. Res., 2005, 103(3), 277–290 CrossRef CAS .N. N. Novikova, E. A. Yurieva, S. I. Zheludeva, M. V. Kovalchuk, N. D. Stepina, A. L. Tolstikhina, R. V. Gaynutdinov, D. V. Urusova, T. A. Matkovskaya, A. M. Rubtsov, O. D. Lopina, A. I. Erko and O. V. Konovalov, J. Synchrotron Radiat., 2005, 12, 511–516 CrossRef CAS .B. U. Peschel, U. E. A. Fittschen, G. Pepponi, C. Jokubonis, C. Streli, P. Wobrauschek, G. Falkenberg and J. A. C. Broekaert, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2005, 382(8), 1958–1964 CrossRef CAS .Y. Mori, Surf. Interface Anal., 2005, 37(5), 522–523 CrossRef CAS .Y. Mori, K. Uemura, H. Kohno, M. Yamagami and Y. Iizuka, IEEE Trans. Semicond. Manufact., 2005, 18(4), 569–574 CrossRef .D. Hellin, J. Rip, V. Geens, T. Delande, T. Conard, S. De Gendt and C. Vinckier, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(7), 652–658 RSC .D. Hellin, S. De Gendt, J. Rip and C. Vinckier, IEEE Trans. Device Mater. Reliab., 2005, 5(4), 639–651 Search PubMed .D. Hellin, A. Delabie, R. Puurunen, P. Beaven, T. Conard, B. Brip, S. De Gendt and C. Vinckier, Anal. Sci., 2005, 21, 845 CrossRef CAS .C. M. Sparks, P. Lysaght and T. Rhoad, Powder Diffr., 2005, 20(2), 161–164 CrossRef CAS .R. Klockenkamper, M. Becker, A. von Bohlen, H. W. Becker, H. Krzyzanowska and L. Palmetshofer, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 98(3) Search PubMed .W. P. Lee, E. P. Teh, H. K. Yow, C. L. Choong and T. Y. Tou, J. Electron. Mater., 2005, 34(7), L25–L29 Search PubMed .W. P. Lee, E. P. Teh, H. K. Yow, C. L. Choong and T. Y. Tou, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2004, 7(12), G299–G301 CrossRef CAS .H. Vainola, E. Saarnilehto, M. Yli-Koski, A. Haarahiltunen, J. Sinkkonen, G. Berenyi and T. Pavelka, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87(3) Search PubMed  , art. no.-032109.V. Hatzistavros, P. Koulouridakis and N. Kallithrakas-Kontos, Anal. Sci., 2005, 21(7), 823–826 CrossRef CAS .F. M. Adebiyi, O. I. Asubiojo and T. R. Ajayi, Fuel, 2006, 85(3), 396–400 CrossRef CAS .F. Zereini, F. Alt, J. Messerschmidt, C. Wiseman, I. Feldmann, A. Von Bohlen, J. Muller, K. Liebl and W. Puttmann, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2005, 39(9), 2983–2989 CrossRef CAS .J. Koch, H. Lindner, A. von Bohlen, R. Hergenroder and K. Niemax, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(9), 901–906 RSC .M. L. Carvalho, L. Ascensao, T. Magalhaes and A. Casimiro, X-Ray Spectrom., 2005, 34(5), 406–410 CrossRef CAS .N. L. Misra, K. D. S. Mudher, V. C. Adya, B. Rajeswari and V. Venugopal, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2005, 60(6), 834–840 CrossRef .R. Fernandez-Ruiz, F. Cabllo Galisteo, C. Larese, M. Lopez Granados, R. Mariscal and J. K. Fierro, Analyst, 2006, 131, 590–594 RSC .M. K. Tiwari, S. R. Naik, G. S. Lodha and R. V. Nandedkar, Anal. Sci., 2005, 21, 757–760 CrossRef CAS .Q. Xu, X. J. Wei, Y. Y. Huang and W. He, High Energy Phys. Nucl. Phys., 2005, 29, 80–83 Search PubMed .K. Tsuji, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2005, 60(11), 1381–1391 CrossRef .K. Tetsuoka, T. Nagamura and K. Tsuji, X-Ray Spectrom., 2006, 35, 89–92 CrossRef CAS .M. Uda, A. Ishizaki, R. Satoh, K. Okada, Y. Nakajima, D. Yamashita, K. Ohashi, Y. Sakuraba, A. Shimono and D. Kojima, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2005, 239(1–2), 77–84 CrossRef CAS .P. Sarrazin, D. Blake, S. Feldman, S. Chipera, D. Vaniman and D. Bish, Powder Diffr., 2005, 20(2), 128–133 CrossRef CAS .J. Kawai, H. Ida, H. Murakami and T. Koyama, X-Ray Spectrom., 2005, 34(6), 521–524 CrossRef CAS .H. Ida and J. Kawai, X-Ray Spectrom., 2005, 34(3), 225–229 CrossRef CAS .H. Ishii and J. Kawai, Anal. Sci., 2005, 21(7), 783–784 CrossRef CAS .F. P. Romano, G. Calvi, E. Furia, S. Garraffo, C. Marchetta, G. Pappalardo, L. Pappalardo, F. Rizzo and A. Rovelli, X-Ray Spectrom., 2005, 34(2), 135–139 CrossRef CAS .J. Jensen, F. Folkmann, H. P. Gunnlaugsson, J. P. Merrison, K. Kinch, J. M. Knudsen, P. Nornberg, P. Bertelsen and M. B. R. Madsen, X-Ray Spectrom., 2005, 34(4), 359–362 CrossRef CAS .W. Goetz, P. Bertelsen, C. S. Binau, H. P. Gunnlaugsson, S. F. Hviid, K. M. Kinch, D. E. Madsen, M. B. Madsen, M. Olsen, R. Gellert, G. Klingelhofer, D. W. Ming, R. V. Morris, R. Rieder, D. S. Rodionov, P. A. de Souza, C. Schroder, S. W. Squyres, T. Wdowiak and A. Yen, Nature, 2005, 436(7047), 62–65 CrossRef CAS .M. Omand, J. L. Campbell and J. A. Maxwell, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2005, 229(1), 123–136 CrossRef CAS .D. H. Li, J. S. Jiang, J. Wu, D. H. Zhang and X. H. Zhang, Chin. Sci. Bull., 2005, 50(10), 1034–1043 Search PubMed .N. Bhandari, J. Earth Syst. Sci., 2005, 114(6), 699 Search PubMed .P. J. Potts, F. Bernardini, M. C. Jones, O. Williams-Thorpe and P. C. Webb, X-Ray Spectrom., 2006, 35(1), 8–18 CrossRef CAS .K. Wien, D. Wissmann, M. Kolling and H. D. Schulz, Geo-Mar. Lett., 2005, 25(4), 248–264 Search PubMed .P. D. Taylor, M. H. Ramsey and P. J. Potts, J. Environ. Monit., 2005, 7(12), 1364–1370 RSC .J. R. Giles, J. K. Hartwell, K. M. Miller and S. L. Howard, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2005, 264(1), 113–119 CrossRef CAS .G. Custo, S. Boeykens, L. Dawidowski, L. Fox, D. Gómez, F. Luna and C. Vázquez, Anal. Sci., 2005, 21(751) Search PubMed .F. P. Romano, G. Pappalardo, L. Pappalardo, S. Garraffo, R. Gigli and A. Pautasso, X-Ray Spectrom., 2006, 35(1), 1–7 CrossRef CAS .L. Pappalardo, A. G. Karydas, N. Kotzamani, G. Pappalardo, F. P. Romano and C. Zarkadas, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2005, 239(1–2), 114–121 CrossRef CAS .M. Morgenstein and C. A. Redmount, J. Archaeol. Sci., 2005, 32(11), 1613–1623 Search PubMed .H. Ida and J. Kawai, Forensic Sci. Int., 2005, 151(2–3), 267–272 CrossRef CAS .H. Ida, Bunseki Kagaku, 2005, 54(10), 1021–1022 CAS .J. S. Schweitzer, J. I. Trombka, S. Floyd, C. Selavka, G. Zeosky, N. Gahn, T. McClanahan and T. Burbine, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2005, 241(1–4), 816–819 CrossRef CAS .H. Ishii, N. Sato, M. Kawano, T. Mesaki and J. Kawai, Bunseki Kagaku, 2005, 54(4), 321–324 CrossRef CAS .G. G. Bortoleto, L. C. M. Pataca and M. Bueno, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2005, 539(1–2), 283–287 CrossRef CAS .A. D. Sokolov, D. Docenko, E. Bliakher, O. Shirokobrod and J. Koskinen, X-Ray Spectrom., 2005, 34(5), 456–459 CrossRef CAS .P. Y. Hung, C. Gondran, A. Ghatak-Roy, S. Terada, B. Bunday, H. Yeung and A. Diebold, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B, 2005, 23(5), 2244–2248 CrossRef CAS .T. P. Rao, P. Metilda and J. M. Gladis, Talanta, 2006, 68(4), 1047–1064 CrossRef CAS .R. Sitko, B. Zawisza and Z. Mzyk, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21(1), 13–18 RSC .Z. T. Jiang, J. C. Yu and H. Y. Liu, Anal. Sci., 2005, 21(7), 851–854 CrossRef CAS .K. N. Belikov, L. I. Mikhailova, Z. M. Spolnic and R. Van Grieken, X-Ray Spectrom., 2006, 35, 112–115 CrossRef CAS .F. Demir, G. Budak, E. Baydas and Y. Sahin, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2006, 243(2), 423–428 CrossRef CAS .M. C. M. Fourcade, J. M. Barnola, J. Susini, R. Baker, G. Durand, M. de Angelis and P. Duval, J. Glaciol., 2005, 51(173), 325–332 Search PubMed .J. M. Hergt, L. P. Bedard, E. Deloule, K. L. Linge, P. J. Sylvester, M. Wiedenbeck and J. D. Woodhead, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2005, 29(1), 5–6 Search PubMed .L. P. Bedard and M. Wiedenbeck, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2005, 29(1), 23–25 Search PubMed .T. S. Brewer and P. K. Harvey, Spectrosc. Eur., 2005, 17(3), 10–16 CAS .X. C. Zhan, X-Ray Spectrom., 2005, 34(3), 207–212 CrossRef CAS .R. E. Jacob, V. R. Mitha and D. MacPherson, S. Afr. J. Sci., 2004, 100(11–12), 560–564 Search PubMed .A. Salazar, O. G. Lizano and E. J. Alfaro, Rev. Biol. Trop., 2004, 52, 61–75 Search PubMed .W. O. Siyanbola, A. Y. Fasasi, I. I. Funtua, M. K. Fasasi, I. A. Tubosun, D. A. Pelemo and T. A. Adesiyan, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2005, 239(4), 426–432 CrossRef CAS .M. E. Gunter, E. Singleton, B. R. Bandli, H. A. Lowers and G. P. Meeker, Am. Mineral., 2005, 90(4), 749–754 CrossRef CAS .A. Mucke and F. Farshad, Ore Geol. Rev., 2005, 26(3–4), 227–262 CrossRef .R. D. Raju, G. S. Ravi, K. Shivkumar, L. S. R. Reddy and S. Rohatgi, J. Geol. Soc. India, 2005, 66(4), 401–406 Search PubMed .R. Sitko, B. Zawisza and M. Czaja, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(8), 741–745 RSC .K. Nakayama and T. Nakamura, Anal. Sci., 2005, 21(7), 815–822 CrossRef CAS .B. Schramm, C. W. Devey, K. M. Gillis and K. Lackschewitz, Chem. Geol., 2005, 218(3–4), 281–313 CrossRef CAS .E. Aristizabal, B. Roser and S. Yokota, Eng. Geol., 2005, 81(4), 389–406 CrossRef .M. L. Lehtonen, J. S. Marmo, A. J. Nissinen, B. S. Johanson and L. K. Pakkanen, J. Geochem. Explor., 2005, 87(1), 19–43 CrossRef CAS .A. Kuczumow, D. Genty, P. Chevallier, J. Nowak, M. Florek and A. Buczynska, X-ray Spectrom., 2005, 34(6), 502–508 CrossRef CAS .S. G. Driese, L. C. Nordt, W. C. Lynn, C. A. Stiles, C. I. Mora and L. P. Wilding, J. Sediment. Res., 2005, 75(3), 339–349 Search PubMed .M. Mojtahid, F. Eynaud, S. Zaragosi, J. Scourse, J. F. Bourillet and T. Garlan, Mar. Geol., 2005, 224(1–4), 57–82 CrossRef .O. Duntze, F. Watermann and L. Giani, J. Plant Nutr. Soil Sci., 2005, 168(1), 53–59 CrossRef CAS .S. C. Mathur, S. D. Gaur, R. S. Loyal, A. Tripathi, R. P. Tripathi and A. Gupta, Curr. Sci., 2005, 89(7), 1259–1268 CAS .C. J. Pluhar, R. S. Coe, D. E. Sampson, J. M. G. Glen, F. C. Monastero and S. B. Tanner, Geochem. Geophys. Geosyst., 2005, 6 Search PubMed  , art. no.-Q04001.A. Viccaro, C. Ferlito, L. Cortesogno, R. Cristofolini and L. Gaggero, J. Volcanol. Geotherm. Res., 2006, 149(1–2), 139–159 CrossRef .J. S. Pallister, F. A. Trusdell, I. K. Brownfield, D. F. Siems, J. R. Budahn and S. F. Sutley, J. Volcanol. Geotherm. Res., 2005, 146(1–3), 208–225 CrossRef CAS .A. Ulianov, A. Kalt and T. Pettke, Eur. J. Mineral., 2005, 17(2), 357–366 CrossRef CAS .N. Shikazono, A. Takino and H. Ohtani, Geochem. J., 2005, 39(2), 185–196 CrossRef CAS .M. F. Gazulla, M. P. Gomez, M. Orduna and G. Silva, Bol. Soc. Esp. Ceram. Vidrio, 2005, 44(1), 21–31 Search PubMed .S. L. Correia, K. A. S. Curto, D. Hotza and A. M. Segadaes, in Advanced Powder Technology IV, Trans Tech Publications Ltd, Zurich-Uetikon,  2005, vol. 498, 499, pp. 447–452 Search PubMed .K. Allakhverdiev, S. Hanna, A. Kulibekov, S. Ozbek, E. Gunay and D. Huseinova, Int. J. Infrared Millimeter Waves, 2005, 26(12), 1741–1755 Search PubMed .M. C. Brant, J. A. Zani and F. S. Lameiras, in Advanced Powder Technology IV, Trans Tech Publications Ltd, Zurich-Uetikon,  2005, vol. 498, 499, pp. 630–635 Search PubMed .H. B. Chen, C. X. Ge, R. S. Li, J. H. Wang, C. G. Wu and X. L. Zeng, Bull. Mater. Sci., 2005, 28(6), 555–560 Search PubMed .D. Drewes and B. Krebs, Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem., 2005, 631(13–14), 2591–2594 CrossRef CAS .W. W. Ge, H. J. Zhang, J. Y. Wang, D. G. Ran, S. Q. Sun, H. R. Xia, J. H. Liu, X. G. Xu, X. B. Hu and M. H. Jiang, J. Cryst. Growth, 2005, 282(3–4), 320–329 CrossRef CAS .G. Giunchi, C. Orecchia, L. Malpezzi and N. Masciocchi, Physica C, 2006, 433(3–4), 182–188 CrossRef CAS .Y. B. Khollam, S. B. Deshpande, H. S. Potdar, S. V. Bhoraskar, S. R. Sainkar and S. K. Date, Mater. Charact., 2005, 54(1), 63–74 CrossRef CAS .O. Y. Pankratova, A. V. Zabolotnaya, V. V. Panchuk, V. G. Semenov, R. A. Zvinchuk and A. V. Suvorov, Russ. J. Gen. Chem., 2004, 74(11), 1637–1640 CrossRef CAS .M. Peiteado, M. A. de la Rubia, M. J. Velasco, F. J. Valle and A. C. Caballero, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2005, 25(9), 1675–1680 CrossRef CAS .Z. Sun, Z. Liu, L. Xu, Y. Yang and Y. He, in Recent Advances in the Science and Technology of Zeolites and Related Materials, Pts A-C,  2004, vol. 154, pp. 1056–1059 Search PubMed .Q. Z. Yan, L. Y. Zhao, X. T. Su, W. F. Zhang and C. C. Ge, in PRICM 5 The Fifth Pacific Rim International Conference on Advanced Materials and Processing Pts 1–5,  2005, vol. 475–479, pp. 1643–1646 Search PubMed.Z. Spolnik, K. Belikov, K. Van Meel, E. Adriaenssens, F. De Roeck and R. Van Grieken, Appl. Spectrosc., 2005, 59(12), 1465–1469 CrossRef CAS .T. Kyotani, Water, Air, Soil Pollut., 2005, 164(1–4), 43–56 CrossRef CAS .H. He, J. F. Liu, Y. J. Mu, Y. B. Yu and M. X. Chen, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2005, 39(24), 9637–9642 CrossRef CAS .J. P. Pancras, J. M. Ondov and R. Zeisler, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2005, 538(1–2), 303–312 CrossRef CAS .J. Boman, M. J. Gatari, A. Wagner and M. I. Hossaini, X-Ray Spectrom., 2005, 34(5), 460–467 CrossRef .M. Gatari, A. Wagner and J. Boman, Sci. Total Environ., 2005, 341(1–3), 241–249 CrossRef CAS .C. Vazquez, G. Custo, L. Dawidowski, D. Gomez, M. Villegas, M. Ortiz and M. R. Miyagusuku, Anal. Sci., 2005, 21(7), 763–767 CrossRef CAS .T. Gotschi, M. E. Hazenkamp-von Arx, J. Heinrich, R. Bono, P. Burney, B. Forsberg, D. Jarvis, J. Maldonado, D. Norback, W. B. Stern, J. Sunyer, K. Toren, G. Verlato, S. Villani and N. Kunzli, Atmos. Environ., 2005, 39(32), 5947–5958 CrossRef .M. Sillanpaa, A. Frey, R. Hillamo, A. S. Pennanen and R. O. Salonen, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 2005, 5, 2869–2879 CAS .V. Ariola, A. D'Alessandro, F. Lucarelli, G. Marcazzan, F. Mazzei, S. Nava, I. Garcia-Orellana, P. Prati, G. Valli, R. Vecchi and A. Zucchiatti, Chemosphere, 2006, 62(2), 226–232 CrossRef CAS .S. W. Hu, Y. Y. Lin, T. C. Wu, C. C. Hong, C. C. Chan and S. C. C. Lung, Am. J. Ind. Med., 2006, 49(2), 85–92 CrossRef CAS .M. Harper, B. Pacolay and M. E. Andrew, J. Environ. Monit., 2005, 7(6), 592–597 RSC .J. S. Han, K. J. Moon, S. Y. Ryu, Y. J. Kim and K. D. Perry, Atmos. Environ., 2005, 39(17), 3113–3125 CrossRef CAS .J. S. Han, K. J. Moon, S. J. Lee, Y. J. Kim, S. Y. Ryu, S. S. Cliff and S. M. Yi, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 2006, 6, 211–223 CAS .E. S. Lindgren, D. Henriksson, M. Lundin, P. Therning, J. Laursen and N. Pind, X-Ray Spectrom., 2006, 35(1), 19–26 CrossRef CAS .P. Molnar, P. Gustafson, S. Johannesson, J. Boman, L. Barregard and G. Sallsten, Atmos. Environ., 2005, 39(14), 2643–2653 CrossRef CAS .P. Thy, S. Grundvig, B. M. Jenkins, R. Shiraki and C. E. Lesher, Energy Fuels, 2005, 19(6), 2571–2575 CrossRef CAS .M. Sillanpaa, S. Saarikoski, R. Hillamo, A. Pennanen, U. Makkonen, Z. Spolnik, R. Van Grieken, T. A. Koskentalo and R. O. Salonen, Sci. Total Environ., 2005, 350(1–3), 119–135 CrossRef .V. M. Fthenakis, M. Fuhrmann, J. Heiser, A. Lanzirotti, J. Fitts and W. Wang, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2005, 13(8), 713–723 CAS .D. Melamed, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2005, 532(1), 1–13 CrossRef CAS .G. Custo, S. Boeykens, L. Dawidowski, L. Fox, D. Gomez, F. Luna and C. Vazquez, Anal. Sci., 2005, 21(7), 751–756 CrossRef CAS .F. M. Fordyce, S. E. Brown, E. L. Ander, B. G. Rawlins, K. E. O'Donnell, T. R. Lister, N. Breward and C. C. Johnson, Geochem. Explor., Environ., Anal., 2005, 5, 325–336 CrossRef CAS .C. Reimann, Geochem.-Explor.
Environ. Anal., 2005, 5, 311–323 CrossRef CAS .S. Norra, Z. A. Berner, P. Agarwala, F. Wagner, D. Chandrasekharam and D. Stuben, Appl. Geochem., 2005, 20(10), 1890–1906 CrossRef CAS .A. Voegelin, S. Pfister, A. C. Scheinost, M. A. Marcus and R. Kretzschmar, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2005, 39(17), 6616–6623 CrossRef CAS .A. K. Krishna and P. K. Govil, Environ. Geol., 2005, 47(8), 1054–1061 Search PubMed .M. Cooper, P. Vidal-Torrado and V. Chaplot, Sci. Agric., 2005, 62(3), 256–263 Search PubMed .I. Cousin, S. Cornu, J. Rose, V. Deschatrettes, D. Montagne, B. Clozel and P. Chevallier, Soil Sci., 2005, 170(7), 516–529 CrossRef CAS .M. Sulkowski and A. V. Hirner, Appl. Geochem., 2006, 21(1), 16–28 CrossRef CAS .J. Peng, Y. Qiu and R. R. Gehr, Water Environ. Res., 2005, 77(4), 309 Search PubMed .V. Somerset, L. Petrik and E. Iwuoha, J. Environ. Sci. Health, Part A, 2005, 40(8), 1627–1636 Search PubMed .K. Durgo, T. Horvat, V. Orescanin, L. Mikelic, J. Franekic, J. F. Colic and S. Lulic, J. Environ. Sci. Health, Part A, 2005, 40(5), 949–957 Search PubMed .M. H. Ghobadi, G. R. Khanlari and H. Djalaly, Eng. Geol., 2005, 82(2), 119–126 CrossRef .C. Pascua, J. Charnock, D. A. Polya, T. Sato, S. Yokoyama and M. Minato, Min. Mag., 2005, 69(5), 897–906 Search PubMed .F. R. Espinoza-Quinones, C. E. Zacarkim, S. M. Palacio, C. L. Obregon, D. C. Zenatti, R. M. Galante, N. Rossi, F. L. Rossi, I. R. A. Pereira, R. A. Welter and M. A. Rizzutto, Braz. J. Phys., 2005, 35(3B), 744–746 Search PubMed .L. C. M. Pataca, G. G. Bortoleto and M. Bueno, Quim. Nova, 2005, 28(4), 579–582 CAS .T. P. Rao, P. Metilda and J. M. Gladis, Rev. Anal. Chem., 2005, 24(4), 285–310 Search PubMed .F. R. Panfili, A. Manceau, G. Sarret, L. Spadini, T. Kirpichtchikova, V. Bert, A. Laboudigue, M. A. Marcus, N. Ahamdach and M. F. Libert, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2005, 69(9), 2265–2284 CrossRef CAS .H. Masuda, Y. Yamatani and M. Okai, J. Geochem. Explor., 2005, 87(2), 73–81 CrossRef CAS .K. Wien, M. Kolling and H. D. Schulz, Geo-Mar. Lett., 2005, 25(4), 265–271 Search PubMed .R. Pepelnik, B. Karrasch, R. Niedergesass, B. Erbsloh, M. Mehrens, U. Link, M. Herzog and A. Prange, Acta Hydrochim. Hydrobiol., 2005, 33(5), 430–448 CrossRef CAS .C. Corredeira, M. F. Araujo, A. Gouveia and J. M. Jouanneau, Cienc. Mar., 2005, 31(1B), 319–325 Search PubMed .Y. Mino and M. Yukita, J. Health Sci., 2005, 51(3), 365–368 Search PubMed .M. L. Carvalho, A. C. Pimentel and B. Fernandes, Anal. Sci., 2005, 21(7), 747–750 CrossRef CAS .E. Bloem, S. Haneklaus and E. Schnug, Landbauforsch. Volk., 2005, 55(4), 205–210 Search PubMed .T. Punshon, A. Lanzirotti, S. Harper, P. M. Bertsch and J. Burger, J. Environ. Qual., 2005, 34(4), 1165–1173 CrossRef CAS .E. Margui, I. Queralt, M. L. Carvalho and M. Hidalgo, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2005, 549(1–2), 197–204 CrossRef CAS .A. Aslan, G. Budak, E. Tirasoglu and A. Karabulut, J. Quant. Spectrosc. Radiat. Transfer, 2006, 97(1), 10–19 CrossRef CAS .D. Robertson, R. S. Barratt, S. J. Burnley, P. Webb and J. S. Watson, J. Environ. Monit., 2005, 7(5), 416–418 RSC .R. Terzano, M. Spagnuolo, L. Medici, F. Tateo and P. Ruggiero, Fresenius’ Environ. Bull., 2005, 14(4), 263–267 CAS .A. Rujiwatra, M. Phueadpho and K. Grudpan, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2005, 66(6), 1085–1090 CrossRef CAS .A. Nakano, N. T. Rochman and H. Sueyoshi, Mater. Trans., 2005, 46(12), 2719–2724 Search PubMed .E. D. Gezer, U. Yildiz, S. Yildiz, E. Dizman and A. Temiz, Build. Environ., 2006, 41(3), 380–385 CrossRef .F. M. Adebiyi, O. I. Asubiojo, T. R. Ajayi and E. I. Obiajunwa, Chem. Ecol., 2005, 21(5), 369–380 Search PubMed .M. C. Johnson, Environ. Eng. Sci., 2005, 22(3), 294–309 CrossRef CAS .O. T. Butler, J. M. Cook, C. F. Harrington, S. J. Hill, J. Rieuwerts and D. L. Miles, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21, 217–243 RSC .G. Bitossi, R. Giorgi, M. Mauro, B. Salvadori and L. R. Dei, Appl. Spectrosc. Rev., 2005, 40(3), 187–228 CrossRef CAS .P. Ballato, G. Cruciani, M. C. Dalconi, B. Fabbri and M. Macchiarola, Eur. J. Mineral., 2005, 17(5), 777–784 CrossRef CAS .J. Martin-Gil, F. J. Martin-Gil, M. D. C. Ramos-Sanchez and P. Martin-Ramos, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 2005, 12(5), 285–289 CrossRef CAS .P. Maravelaki-Kalaitzaki, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2005, 532(2), 187–198 CrossRef CAS .T. T. N. Lan, R. Nishimura, Y. Tsujino, Y. Satoh, N. T. P. Thoa, M. Yokoi and Y. Maeda, Corrosion Sci., 2005, 47(4), 1023–1038 Search PubMed .B. Marwick, J. Archaeol. Sci., 2005, 32(9), 1357–1368 Search PubMed .T. Kaneko, S. Nakada, M. Yoshimoto, T. Fujii, A. Yasuda, M. Yoneda and M. Aoyagi, Geochem. J., 2005, 39(6), 573–578 CrossRef CAS .R. Flad, J. P. Zhu, C. S. Wang, P. C. Chen, L. von Falkenhausen, Z. B. Sun and S. C. Li, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2005, 102(35), 12618–12622 CrossRef CAS .S. R. Cook, A. S. Clarke and M. G. Fulford, J. Archaeol. Sci., 2005, 32(5), 805–812 Search PubMed .A. Negash and M. S. Shackley, Archaeometry, 2006, 48, 1–12 CrossRef CAS .Z. F. Guo, A. L. Jiao, B. V. Rolett, J. Q. Liu, X. C. Fan and G. W. Lin, Geoarchaeology, 2005, 20(8), 765–776 CrossRef .M. Maggetti, Archaeometry, 2005, 47, 389–401 CrossRef CAS .G. Barone, A. Lo Giudice, P. Mazzoleni, A. Pezzino, D. Barilaro, V. Crupi and M. Triscari, Archaeometry, 2005, 47, 745–762 CrossRef CAS .A. P. del Rio, L. G. Sanjuan, V. H. Perez and M. J. H. Arnedo, Geoarchaeology, 2005, 20(3), 263–284 CrossRef .C. Fortina, A. S. Barbone and I. T. Memmi, Archaeometry, 2005, 47, 535–555 CrossRef CAS .C. Ricci, I. Borgia, B. G. Brunetti, A. Sgamellotti, B. Fabbri, M. C. Burla and G. Polidori, Archaeometry, 2005, 47, 557–570 CrossRef CAS .L. C. Prinsloo, N. Wood, M. Loubser, S. M. C. Verryn and S. Tiley, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2005, 36(8), 806–816 CrossRef CAS .X. Ling, Z. W. Mao, M. Feng, Y. W. Hu, C. S. Wang and H. M. Liu, Spectrosc. Spectral Anal., 2005, 25(7), 1145–1150 CAS .S. Bianchin, N. Brianese, U. Casellato, F. Fenzi, P. Guerriero, P. A. Vigato, L. Nodari, U. Russo, M. Galgani and M. Mendera, J. Cult. Herit., 2005, 6(1), 39–54 CrossRef .C. M. Jackson, C. A. Booth and J. W. Smedley, Archaeometry, 2005, 47, 781–795 CrossRef CAS .M. Garcia-Heras, N. Carmona, C. Gil and M. A. Villegas, J. Cult. Herit., 2005, 6(2), 91–98 CrossRef .N. Carmona, M. Garcia-Heras, C. Gil and M. A. Villegas, Bol. Soc. Esp. Ceram. Vidrio, 2005, 44(4), 251–258 Search PubMed .S. Wolf, C. M. Kessler, W. B. Stern and Y. Gerber, Archaeometry, 2005, 47, 361–380 CrossRef CAS .G. Giovannelli, S. Natali, B. Bozzini, A. Siciliano, G. Sarcinelli and R. Vitale, Archaeometry, 2005, 47, 817–833 CrossRef CAS .G. Mondio, T. Serafino, M. A. Mastelloni, M. Donghi, G. Delfinis, G. Lico and M. Romeo, Nuovo Cimento Soc. Ital. Fis., C, 2004, 27(5), 545–552 Search PubMed .I. G. Erusalimchik, M. N. Filippov and I. V. Marav'eva, Prot. Met., 2005, 41(2), 203–204 Search PubMed .S. Santra, D. Mitra, M. Sarkar, D. Bhattacharya, A. Denker, J. Opitz-Coutureau and J. Rauschenberg, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2005, 229(3–4), 465–470 CrossRef CAS .A. Giumlia-Mair, Archaeometry, 2005, 47, 275–292 CrossRef .A. Giumlia-Mair, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2005, 239(1–2), 35–43 CrossRef CAS .A. Giumlia-Mair, Surf. Eng., 2005, 21(5–6), 359–367 Search PubMed .A. Giumlia-Mair and E. Lucchini, Surf. Eng., 2005, 21(5–6), 406–410 Search PubMed .P. T. Craddock, Surf. Eng., 2005, 21(5–6), 333–339 Search PubMed .B. Raj, P. Kalyanasundaram, T. Jayakumar, C. B. Rao, B. Venkataraman, U. K. Mudali, A. Joseph, A. Kumar and K. V. Rajkumar, Curr. Sci., 2005, 88(12), 1948–1956 CAS .E. Pantos, W. Kockelmann, L. C. Chapon, L. Lutterotti, S. L. Bennet, M. J. Tobin, J. F. W. Mosselmans, T. Pradell, N. Salvado, S. Buti, R. Garner and A. Prag, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2005, 239(1–2), 16–26 CrossRef CAS .D. C. Creagh, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 2005, 74(6), 426–442 CrossRef CAS .A. Adriaens, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2005, 60(12), 1503–1516 CrossRef .P. M. Ramos and I. Ruisanchez, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2006, 558(1–2), 274–282 CrossRef CAS .F. M. Verbi, E. R. Pereira-Filho and M. Bueno, Microchim. Acta, 2005, 150(2), 131–136 CrossRef CAS .J. Braziewicz, R. Dudzik, M. Jaskola, A. Kubala-Kukus, W. Kretschmer, J. Rutkowski, J. Semaniak, A. Scharf, M. Stankiewicz and T. Uhl, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2005, 240(1–2), 544–548 CrossRef CAS .W. Nowik, S. Desrosiers, I. Surowiec and M. Trojanowicz, Archaeometry, 2005, 47, 835–848 CrossRef CAS .M. J. Anjos, R. T. Lopes, S. de Souza and E. F. de Jesus, X-Ray Spectrom., 2005, 34(3), 189–193 CrossRef CAS .A. S. Fisher, P. S. Goodall, M. W. Hinds and D. M. Penny, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(12), 1398–1424 RSC .V. Balaram, Bull. Mat. Sci., 2005, 28(4), 345–348 Search PubMed .R. Pitchumani, W. J. Li and M. O. Coppens, Catal. Today, 2005, 105(3–4), 618–622 CrossRef CAS .Y. Li, Y. H. Wang and B. Q. Xu, Chem. J. Chin. Univ., 2005, 26(7), 1325–1329 Search PubMed .A. Moronta, N. Iwasa, S. I. Fujita, M. Shimokawabe and M. Arai, Clays Clay Miner., 2005, 53(6), 622–630 CrossRef CAS .M. B. Sorensen, R. G. Hazell, J. Chevallier, N. Pind and T. R. Jensen, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2005, 84(1–3), 144–152 CrossRef CAS .R. Vallepu, A. Mikuni, R. Komatsu and K. Ikeda, J. Mineral. Petrol. Sci., 2005, 100(4), 159–167 Search PubMed .H. Yoon, C. S. Park, C. Yoon, J. Hong, N. S. Kim and K. N. Han, Miner. Metall. Process., 2005, 22(2), 101–106 Search PubMed .M. L. Granados, C. Larese, F. C. Galisteo, R. Mariscal, J. L. G. Fierro, R. Fernandez-Ruiz, R. Sanguino and M. Luna, Catal. Today, 2005, 107–108, 77–85 .N. Thanabodeekij, W. Tanglumlert, E. Gulari and S. Wongkasemjit, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 2005, 19(9), 1047–1054 CrossRef CAS .X. X. Wang, H. B. Xu, X. Z. Fu, P. Liu, F. Lefebvre and J. M. Basset, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2005, 238(1–2), 185–191 CrossRef CAS .X. X. Zhu, S. L. Liu, Y. Q. Song and L. Y. Xu, Catal. Commun., 2005, 6(11), 742–746 CrossRef CAS .R. Ravishankar, M. M. Li and A. Borgna, Catal. Today, 2005, 106(1–4), 149–153 CrossRef CAS .T. Vralstad, G. Oye, M. Ronning, W. R. Glomm, M. Stocker and J. Sjoblom, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2005, 80(1–3), 291–300 CrossRef CAS .X. W. Cheng, Y. Zhong, J. Wang, J. Guo, Q. Huang and Y. C. Long, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2005, 83(1–3), 233–243 CrossRef CAS .J. M. Du, H. L. Xu, J. Shen, J. J. Huang, W. Shen and D. Y. Zhao, Appl. Catal., A, 2005, 296(2), 186–193 CrossRef CAS .P. Shah, A. V. Ramaswamy, R. Pasricha, K. Lazar and V. Ramaswamy, in Recent Advances in the Science and Technology of Zeolites and Related Materials Pts A–C,  2004, vol. 154, pp. 870–877 Search PubMed .B. J. Xu, H. Y. Li, W. M. Hua, Y. H. Yue and Z. Gao, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2006, 88(1–3), 191–196 CrossRef CAS .K. M. Bichinho, G. P. Pires, J. H. Z. dos Santos and C. R. Wolf, X-Ray Spectrom., 2005, 34(2), 131–134 CrossRef CAS .K. M. Bichinho, G. P. Pires, F. C. Stedile, J. H. Z. dos Santos and C. R. Wolf, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2005, 60(5), 599–604 CrossRef .S. R. Loureiro, F. Silveira, G. P. Pires, M. D. Alves, F. C. Stedile, J. H. Z. dos Santos, K. M. Bichinho and T. Teranishi, X-Ray Spectrom., 2005, 34(2), 101–105 CrossRef CAS .O. Altinisik, M. Dogan and G. Dogu, Catal. Today, 2005, 105(3–4), 641–646 CrossRef CAS .H. J. Kim, D. W. Seo and J. K. Lim, in Advances in Fracture and Strength, Pts 1–4, Trans Tech Publications Ltd, Zurich-Uetikon,  2005, vol. 297–300, pp. 958–962 Search PubMed .S. M. Justus, S. N. Silva, F. Vernilli, A. Mazine, R. G. Toledo, R. M. Andrade, O. R. Marques, E. Longo, J. B. Baldo and J. A. Varela, Ceram. Int., 2005, 31(7), 897–904 CrossRef CAS .R. Fox, A. Dedik, P. Hoffmann and H. M. Ortner, X-Ray Spectrom., 2005, 34(3), 218–224 CrossRef CAS .Z. Li, A. H. Clemens, T. A. Moore, D. Gong, S. D. Weaver and N. Eby, Int. J. Coal Geol., 2005, 63(1–2), 98–116 CrossRef CAS .M. S. Reddy, S. B. Basha, H. V. Joshi and B. Jha, J. Hazard. Mater., 2005, 123(1–3), 242–249 CrossRef CAS .H. L. Wee, H. W. Wu, D. K. Zhang and D. French, Proc. Combust. Inst., 2005, 30, 2981–2989 CrossRef .E. Gikunoo, O. Omotoso and I. N. A. Oguocha, Mater. Sci. Technol., 2005, 21(2), 143–152 CrossRef CAS .N. Miskolczi, L. Bartha, F. Antal and C. Dudas, Talanta, 2005, 66(5), 1264–1271 CrossRef CAS .W. Araki, K. Mizoroki, M. Oki and M. R. Takenaka, Anal. Sci., 2005, 21(7), 869–872 CrossRef CAS .M. Ozaki and Y. Yamagishi, Fujitsu Sci. Tech. J., 2005, 41(2), 209–216 Search PubMed .L. S. Morf, J. Tremp, R. Gloor, Y. Huber, M. Stengele and M. Zennegg, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2005, 39(22), 8691–8699 CrossRef CAS .J. B. Waern, H. H. Harris, B. Lai, Z. H. Cai, M. M. Harding and C. T. Dillon, J. Biol. Inorg. Chem., 2005, 10(5), 443–452 CrossRef CAS .W. M. Kwiatek, A. Banas, M. Gajda, M. Galka, B. Pawlicki, G. Falkenberg and T. Cichocki, J. Alloys Compd, 2005, 401(1–2), 173–177 CrossRef CAS .A. Ide-Ektessabi and M. Rabionet, Anal. Sci., 2005, 21(7), 885–892 CrossRef CAS .J. Chwiej, M. Szczerbowska-Boruchowska, M. Lankosz, S. Wojcik, G. Falkenberg, Z. Stegowski and Z. Setkowicz, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2005, 60(12), 1531–1537 CrossRef .J. Chwiej, M. Szczerbowska-Boruchowska, S. Wojcik, M. Lankosz, M. Chlebda, D. Adamek, B. Tomik, Z. Setkowicz, G. Falkenberg, Z. Stegowski and A. Szczudlik, J. Alloys Compd, 2005, 401(1–2), 184–188 CrossRef CAS .I. Varga, A. Szebeni, N. Szoboszlai and B. Kovacs, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2005, 383(3), 476–482 CrossRef CAS .P. J. Custodio, M. L. Carvalho, F. Nunes, S. Pedroso and A. Campos, J. Trace Elem. Med. Biol., 2005, 19(2–3), 151–158 Search PubMed .D. R. Chettle, X-Ray Spectrom., 2005, 34(5), 446–450 CrossRef CAS .H. L. Nie, D. Chettle, L. Q. Luo and J. O'Meara, Phys. Med. Biol., 2006, 51(2), 351–360 CrossRef CAS .N. Ahmed, D. E. B. Fleming, D. Wilkie and J. M. O'Meara, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 2006, 75(1), 1–6 CrossRef CAS .N. Ahmed, N. A. Osika, A. M. Wilson and D. E. B. Fleming, J. Environ. Monit., 2005, 7(5), 457–462 RSC .S. E. Carew, J. Gastaldo, H. A. Roels, J. M. O'Meara and D. R. Chettle, X-Ray Spectrom., 2005, 34(6), 498–501 CrossRef CAS .E. Margui, M. Hidalgo and I. Queralt, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2005, 60(9–10), 1363–1372 CrossRef .P. M. Farkov, L. N. Il'icheva and A. L. Finkel'shtein, J. Anal. Chem., 2005, 60(5), 426–430 CrossRef CAS .N. Rodriguez, N. Menendez, J. Tornero, R. Amils and V. de la Fuente, New Phytol., 2005, 165(3), 781–789 Search PubMed .X. Y. Fu, J. F. Chang, L. Z. An, M. X. Zhang, S. J. Xu, T. Chen, Y. H. Liu, H. Xin and J. H. Wang, Environ. Exp. Bot., 2006, 55(3), 282–293 CrossRef CAS .Y. Mino and Y. Yamada, J. Health Sci., 2005, 51(5), 607–613 Search PubMed .S. Razic, S. Dogo, L. Slavkovic and A. Popovic, J. Serb. Chem. Soc., 2005, 70(11), 1347–1355 CrossRef CAS .A. K. Deisingh and N. Badrie, Food Res. Int., 2005, 38(6), 639–649 CrossRef CAS .L. Perring, D. Andrey, M. Basic-Dvorzak and D. Hammer, J. Food Compos. Anal., 2005, 18(7), 655–663 CrossRef CAS .L. Perring, D. Andrey, M. Basic-Dvorzak and J. Blanc, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2005, 53(12), 4696–4700 CrossRef CAS .J. Blanc, S. Populaire and L. Perring, Anal. Sci., 2005, 21(7), 795–798 CrossRef CAS .M. L. Carvalho, S. Santiago and M. L. Nunes, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2005, 382(2), 426–432 CrossRef CAS .T. Noda, S. Tsuda, M. Mori, S. Takigawa, C. Matsuura-Endo, S. J. Kim, N. Hashimoto and H. Yamauchi, Food Chem., 2006, 95(4), 632–637 CrossRef CAS .E. Tirasoglu, U. Cevik, B. Ertugral, G. Apaydin, H. Baltas and M. Ertugrul, J. Quant. Spectrosc. Radiat. Transfer, 2005, 94(2), 181–187 CrossRef CAS .J. Louhelainen, R. Alen and J. R. Isoaho, J. Pulp Pap. Sci., 2005, 31(1), 57–61 Search PubMed .O. Zucchi, S. Moreira, M. J. Salvador and L. L. Santos, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2005, 53(20), 7863–7869 CrossRef CAS .N. A. H. Janssen, T. Lanki, G. Hoek, M. Vallius, J. J. de Hartog, R. Van Grieken, J. Pekkanen and B. Brunekreef, Occup. Environ. Med., 2005, 62(12), 868–877 CrossRef CAS .M. Lippmann, J. S. Hwang, P. Maciejczyk and L. C. Chen, Environ. Health Perspect., 2005, 113(11), 1575–1579 .R. R. Martin, I. M. Kempson, S. J. Naftel and W. M. Skinner, Chemosphere, 2005, 58(10), 1385–1390 CrossRef CAS .M. Humar, D. Hribar and F. Pohleven, Wood Res., 2005, 50(4), 29–34 Search PubMed .S. A. Graham, J. M. O'Meara and H. Dobson, Can. J. Vet. Res., 2005, 69(2), 123–127 Search PubMed .A. Taylor, S. Branch, D. Halls, M. Patriarca and M. White, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(4), 323–369 RSC .A. Taylor, S. Branch, D. Halls, M. Patriarca and M. White, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21(4), 439–491 RSC .R. V. Ghita, C. Logofatu, C. Negrila, A. S. Manea, M. Cernea and M. F. Lazarescu, J. Optoelectron. Adv. Mater., 2005, 7(6), 3033–3037 Search PubMed .D. Lutzenkirchen-Hecht, K. Bruder, U. Haake, P. Keil, C. Markert, C. Ringpfeil and R. R. Frahm, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2005, 76(7) Search PubMed  , art no.-073905.S. P. Formica and S. M. Lee, Thin Solid Films, 2005, 491(1–2), 71–77 CrossRef CAS .H. Wakana, A. Kamitani, S. Adachi, K. Nakayama, Y. Ishimaru, Y. Tarutani and K. Tanabe, Physica C, 2005, 426, 1495–1501 CrossRef .R. B. Zhang, C. S. Yang, G. P. Ding and J. Feng, Mater. Res. Bull., 2005, 40(9), 1490–1496 CrossRef CAS .T. Nakamura, R. Tai, T. Nishimura and K. Tachibana, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152(9), C584–C587 CrossRef CAS .B. Krishnan, K. Sasidharan and R. Natarajan, Ferroelectrics, 2005, 327, 3–9 CrossRef CAS .D. Y. Suarez-Sandoval, M. T. S. Nair and P. K. Nair, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153(2), C91–C96 CrossRef CAS .L. X. Zhao, R. P. Campion, P. F. Fewster, R. W. Martin, B. Y. Ber, A. P. Kovarsky, C. R. Staddon, K. Y. Wang, K. W. Edmonds, C. T. Foxon and B. L. Gallagher, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2005, 20(5), 369–373 CrossRef CAS .T. Yamaguchi, V. Naka, S. Niiyama and T. Imanishi, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2005, 66(11), 2000–2003 CrossRef CAS .I. Alessandri, E. Comini, E. Bontempi, G. Sberveglieri and L. E. Depero, Sens. Actuators, B, 2005, 109(1), 47–51 CrossRef .M. J. Henderson, A. Gibaud, J. F. Bardeau, A. R. Rennie and J. W. White, Phys. B (Amsterdam, Neth.), 2005, 357(1–2), 27–33 Search PubMed .A. A. Dakhel and Y. A. M. Ahmed, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2005, 66(6), 1080–1084 CrossRef CAS .A. A. Dakhel, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2005, 351(4042), 3204–3208 CrossRef CAS .A. A. Dakhel, Solid-State Electron., 2005, 49(12), 1996–2001 CrossRef CAS .A. A. Dakhel, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 496(2), 353–359 CrossRef CAS .S. Lee, D. Y. Kim and K. L. Wang, J. Mater. Sci., 2005, 40(19), 5173–5176 CrossRef CAS .S. Kim, G. Kioseoglou, S. Huang, Y. H. Kao, Y. L. Soo, X. Zhu and K. L. Wang, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 98(7) Search PubMed .M. Kolbe, B. Beckhoff, M. Krumrey and G. Ulm, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2005, 252(1), 49–52 CrossRef CAS .T. Tsunoda and D. Mauri, IEEE Trans. Magn., 2005, 41(10), 2658–2660 CrossRef CAS .N. Gao, Z. W. Chen and Q. F. Xiao, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2005, 76(12) Search PubMed .K. Pantleon, B. Van den Bossche, M. Purcar, P. Bariani and G. Floridor, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2005, 35(6), 589–598 CrossRef CAS .T. Narayanan, Rev. Adv. Mater. Sci., 2005, 9(2), 130–177 Search PubMed .D. Zimmermann, A. G. Munoz and J. W. Schultze, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2005, 197(2–3), 260–269 CrossRef CAS .J. Kawai, M. Ohta and T. Konishi, Anal. Sci., 2005, 21(7), 865–868 CrossRef CAS .T. Konishi, T. Tsubata, M. Oku, Y. M. Todorov and M. Yoshio, Anal. Sci., 2005, 21(7), 861–864 CrossRef CAS .X. H. Ying and S. H. Chen, Spectrosc. Spectral Anal., 2005, 25(6), 952–954 CAS .E. Jarocki, A. Kozlowski and H. Figiel, J. Alloys Compd, 2005, 404, 160–162 CrossRef .Y. Izumi, F. Kiyotaki, N. Yagi, A. M. Vlaicu, A. Nisawa, S. Fukushima, H. Yoshitake and Y. Iwasawa, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109(31), 14884–14891 CrossRef CAS .T. Bezrodna, G. Puchkovska, V. Shymanovska and A. Hauser, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2005, 66(6), 1057–1063 CrossRef CAS .S. Nishibu, S. Yonezawa and M. Takashima, J. Fluor. Chem., 2005, 126(7), 1048–1053 Search PubMed .E. Z. Kurmaev, A. Moewes, R. Wilks, L. D. Nechkina, D. A. Zatsepin, T. Kawashima and E. Takayama-Muromachi, Phys. Solid State, 2005, 47(7), 1211–1215 CrossRef CAS .A. Kikas, T. Kaambre, V. Kisand, A. Saar, K. Kooser, E. Nommiste and I. Martinson, J. Electron Spectrosc. Relat. Phenom., 2005, 144, 845–848 CrossRef .J. Kawai, Anal. Sci., 2005, 21(7), 733–735 CrossRef CAS .A. Y. Dukhanin, G. V. Pavlinsky, E. O. Baranov, A. Y. Portnoy and A. V. Kujn, X-Ray Spectrom., 2006, 35(1), 34–39 CrossRef CAS .K. Nakashima, T. Takeuchi and T. Shirakawa, Biol. Trace Elem. Res., 2005, 108(1–3), 105–114 CrossRef CAS .A. L. Ryser, D. G. Strawn, M. A. Marcus, J. L. Johnson-Maynard, M. E. Gunter and G. Moller, Geochem. Trans., 2005, 6(1), 1–11 Search PubMed .This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2006
Table Content:
AAS	Atomic absorption spectrometry
AD	Anno Domini
ALS	Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
BC	Before Christ
BP	Before present
CCA	Chromated copper arsenate
CCD	Charge coupled detector
CRM	Certified reference material
CVD	Chemical vapour deposition
CW	Chemical warfare
D	Dimensional
DNTC	Diffuse neurofibrillary tangles with calcification
DRIFTS	Diffuse reflectance infrared Fourier transform spectroscopy
EC	Elemental carbon
ECRHS	European Community Respiratory Health Survey
EDX	Energy dispersive X-ray analysis
EDXRD	Energy dispersive X-ray diffraction
EDXRF	Energy dispersive X-ray fluorescence
EPMA	Electron probe microanalysis
ETAAS	Electrothermal atomic absorption spectrometry
EU	European Union
EXAFS	Extended X-ray absorption fine structure
EXEFS	Extended X-ray emission fine structure
FAAS	Flame atomic absorption spectrometry
FTIR	Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy
GE-XRF	Grazing exit X-ray fluorescence
GE-EPMA	Grazing exit electron probe microanalysis
HPLC	High-performance liquid chromatography
HOPG	Highly orientated pyrolytic graphite
ICP-AES	Inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectrometry
ICP-MS	Inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry
ICP-OES	Inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectroscopy
INAA	Instrumental neutron activation analysis
IOM	Institute of Occupational Medicine
ISO	International Organisation for Standardisation
KDP	Potassium dihydrogenphosphate
LAM-ICP-MS	Laser ablation microprobe-inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry
MAP	Mean annual precipitation
MC	Monte Carlo
MPI	Max Planck Institute
NASA	National Aeronautical Space Administration
NIST	National Institute of Standards and Technology
OC	Organic carbon
PAR	4-(2-Pyridylazo)resorcinol
PCA	Principal component analysis
PGM	Platinum group metals
PIGE	Particle induced gamma emission
PIXE	Particle induced X-ray emission
PM	Particulate matter
POM	Particulate organic matter
PXRF	Portable X-ray fluorescence
RBS	Rutherford backscattering spectrometry
REE	Rare earth element(s)
Rf	Radiofrequency
RoHS	Restriction on Hazardous Substances
SEM	Scanning electron microscopy
Si(Li)	Lithium-drifted silicon
Si(PIN)	Silicon ‘PIN’ detector device
SR	Synchrotron radiation
SR-TXRF	Synchrotron radiation total reflection X-ray fluorescence
TXRF	Total reflection X-ray fluorescence
USGS	United States Geological Survey
UV	Ultraviolet
WDXRF	Wavelength dispersive X-ray fluorescence
WEEE	Waste electrical and electronic equipment
WHO	World Health Organisation
XAFS	X-ray absorption fine structure
XANES	X-ray absorption near edge structure
XBIC	X-ray beam induced current
XPS	X-ray photon spectroscopy
XRD	X-ray diffraction
XRF	X-ray fluorescence
XRF	Micro-X-ray fluorescence

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2006
