Langmuir films and uniform, large area, transparent coatings of chemically exfoliated MoS 2 single layers   - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7TC02637D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7TC02637D
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 11275-11287Langmuir films and uniform, large area, transparent coatings of chemically exfoliated MoS2 single layers†

        
          
            Yefeng 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Luzhu 
            Xu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Wesley R. 
            Walker
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Collin M. 
            Tittle
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Christopher J. 
            Backhouse
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Michael A. 
            Pope
          
        
      *a
aQuantum-Nano Centre, Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Waterloo, Waterloo N2L 3G1, Canada. E-mail: michael.pope@uwaterloo.ca
bQuantum-Nano Centre, Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Waterloo, Waterloo N2L 3G1, Canada
Received 
      13th June 2017
    , Accepted 17th July 2017First published on 17th July 2017AbstractBy manipulating colloidal dispersions of chemically exfoliated molybdenum disulfide (MoS2) into an appropriate spreading solvent, we demonstrate, for the first time, the ability to form stable, floating MoS2 Langmuir films without the use of surfactants or significant material loss into the aqueous sub-phase. While the floating sheets can be compressed into a densely tiled film by the barriers of a traditional Langmuir–Blodgett trough, we also report an edge-to-edge aggregation and spreading driven densification phenomena that allows the film to be built up from the outside of the trough inwards during the deposition process. Continued deposition allows us to fill the entire trough with a dense (85–95% coverage) film of discretely tiled 1T MoS2 nanosheets and to coat substrates as large as 130 cm2. The transfer efficiency is found to be as high as 120 m2 of coated area per gram of deposited MoS2. Comparing the transfer efficiency to the theoretical specific surface area of MoS2 provides a method to estimate film thickness and exfoliation efficiency. Atomic force microscopy and optical absorption measurements are used to corroborate this estimate of 2.7 layers for the traditional n-butyllithium exfoliation method used. We demonstrate that the films can be built up layer-by-layer and investigate the optical and electrical properties of the films before and after conversion from the 1T to 2H polymorph.
Introduction
Molybdenum disulfide (MoS2) is a transition metal dichalcogenide (TMD) that has attracted significant attention due to its special electronic, optical, and chemical properties.1–6 MoS2 and other 2D metal dichalcogenides can exist in various polymorphs. Bulk MoS2 is typically found in the 2H polymorph which is a semiconductor possessing an indirect bandgap of ∼1.2 eV.7 This can be converted from the 2H to the 1T polymorph, a metallic phase, through chemical exfoliation.8 However, this 1T polymorph is metastable and can be converted back to the 2H polymorph by thermal annealing at ∼150–450 °C.4,9 A layer number dependency has been observed in both the optical and electrical properties of MoS2.4 With a decreasing layer number, an increase in the bandgap to 1.9 eV as well as a transition from an indirect to direct bandgap has been observed.4 These properties have established MoS2 as a promising material for future applications in electronic and photonic devices such as transparent semiconductors,10,11 solar cells,6,12 supercapacitors5,13,14 and sensors.15 Furthermore, metallic MoS2 has demonstrated significant promise as an efficient electrocatalyst for the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER)16–19 as well as in photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting.3,20,21
Significant research has been carried out to discover and improve synthesis methods of MoS2 nanosheets by chemical and solution exfoliation of bulk precursors.5,22,23 However, there has been comparatively less development of well-controlled film deposition techniques. While physical and chemical vapor deposition (CVD) yield fine control over film properties, the high temperatures, high vacuum conditions and required transfer steps currently hinder scale-up.6,24 On the other hand, traditional methods such as vacuum filtration offer a fast and cost-effective way to prepare thin films.5 However, these methods are either limited to small area coatings or lack nanometer-scale control of the film thickness. Recently, a more advanced film forming process was developed for depositing WSe2, another member of the TMD family, by assembling the material at the ethylene glycol–hexane liquid–liquid interface.25 Since both ethylene glycol and hexane are non-solvents for WSe2, the liquid–liquid interface offers a strong spatial confinement for WSe2 flakes, reducing the possibility of aggregation and overlapping.25 A similar and earlier approach for MoS2 was reported where the MoS2 was confined at the water–1-hexene interface by shaking the two immiscible liquids.26 These reports both demonstrated thin films with excellent overall uniformity. However, transfer of the films to a substrate is challenging.
In contrast to all abovementioned methods, the preparation of Langmuir films at the air–water interface, their densification through compression, and film transfer to substrates by the Langmuir–Blodgett (LB) deposition technique, is recognized as a facile and powerful approach to controllably fabricate molecular monolayer thin films on a variety of substrates.27 This method was originally used to prepare ordered thin films of amphiphilic molecules such as lipids or surfactants,14,15 but has recently been extended to prepare thin films of various other nanomaterials such as gold and silver nanoparticles,28,29 single-walled carbon nanotubes,30–32 and graphene oxide.33–37 Notably, in 2008, Cote et al.36 reported the first successful attempt of using the LB assembly technique to fabricate floating monolayers of graphene oxide (GO). They demonstrated that the density or surface coverage of the floating, repulsive GO sheets could be tuned by compressing the floating film using the moveable barriers of a commercial LB trough. Around the same time, Li et al.38 reported the successful LB transfer of graphene sheets from the air–water interface. With multiple depositions, they were able to prepare a three-layer film with a sheet resistance of 8 kΩ and transparency over 80%. While, in principle, this method could also be applied to exfoliated MoS2, so far, there have been no reported attempts to directly assemble MoS2 at the air–water interface. This is likely because exfoliated MoS2 sheets form stable dispersions mainly in water or water-miscible solvents (e.g. DMF, NMP, isopropanol, etc.). However, ideally a water-immiscible solvent should be used to avoid mixing between the spreading solvent and the sub-phase water to limit material loss within and contamination of the sub-phase water. To facilitate transfer of MoS2 to the air–water interface, researchers have used charged, amphiphilic molecules to coordinate with the negatively charged MoS2.39 Specifically, dihexadecyldimethylammonium bromide (DHA+Br−) was spread on the surface of a chemically exfoliated MoS2/H2O suspension to create a uniform monolayer of DHA+Br−. Due to the electrostatic interaction between positively charged DHA+ and the negatively charged MoS2, a hybrid DHA+/MoS2 film was formed and could be transferred to substrates by LB deposition. While theoretically, a densely-packed MoS2 thin film can then be achieved by further removing the cationic amphiphilic components, practically, it is challenging to do so without either disturbing the film or leaving residue.
To overcome these challenges, in this work, we report a mixed-solvent colloidal dispersion strategy that allows us to transfer nearly 100% of chemically exfoliated 1T MoS2 to the air–water interface without the assistance of any surfactants. When a high concentration spreading dispersion is used, we observe that MoS2 sheets spontaneously aggregate into densely tiled islands near the LB trough edge. We hypothesize that this directed film assembly is correlated with the spreading pressure exerted by the spreading solvent during the dripping process (i.e. spreading-assisted assembly). Using this approach, we demonstrate the assembly of large area MoS2 thin films which cover the entire trough surface without the use of any adjustable barriers to densify the films. Compression with barriers is a requirement of the typical LB approach that limits film area and precludes continuous material deposition and transfer. Using our barrier-free method, we estimate transfer efficiencies as high as 120 m2 of covered area per gram of deposited MoS2. This allows us to calculate an average layer number of ∼2.7 using the theoretical specific surface area of MoS2 as calculated from crystal lattice parameters. This estimate is confirmed by analysis of height distribution data extracted from AFM images as well as by analyzing the optical absorption of the resulting film. This agreement suggests that we achieve nearly 100% transfer efficiency. While the average film thickness is 2.7 layers, the film is composed of 40–50% single layers, 10–15% double layers and 10–15% triple layers with a small population of thicker sheets which varies slightly from sample to sample. We study the film formation process as a function of time to elucidate the dynamics involved in film growth by video microscopy. We also demonstrate that this process can be carried out with simple and inexpensive equipment (i.e., a Teflon coated glass dish). The directionality of the 2D aggregation process lends itself to the possibility of continuous film deposition and transfer, which has the potential to provide a simple and versatile path towards coatings for advanced electronic and optoelectronic applications.
Experimental methods
Chemical exfoliation and annealing
The chemical exfoliation method was adapted from ref. 4. Briefly, 0.5 g of MoS2 powder (Sigma Aldrich, ∼6 μm) was mixed with 7 mL of 1.6 M n-butyllithium solution in hexane (Sigma Aldrich) in a 25 mL flask filled with nitrogen gas for three days. The intercalated MoS2 was washed with 80 mL of hexane, collected by filtration through Whatman™ 42 filter paper and then transferred to a large beaker in a glove bag filled with nitrogen gas. 150 mL of DI water was added to the beaker immediately after the transfer. The beaker was then bath ultrasonicated (TruSonik, 2.5 L, 120 W) for 1 h to aid in exfoliating the material. During the sonication process, ice was added to the bath water every 20 min to avoid overheating the solution. XRD analysis of MoS2 powder before and after chemical exfoliation were obtained in a PANalytical Empyrean diffractometer using Cu Kα radiation. Zeta potential was measured in various pH buffers using a Malvern Zetasizer Nano ZS90 instrument with freshly prepared MoS2 aqueous dispersion. The MoS2 aqueous dispersion was prepared by washing the MoS2 dispersion obtained from chemical exfoliation with deionized water. Citrate buffer was used for pH = 3 with an ionic strength of 100 mM. HEPES (4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid) buffer was used for pH = 7.6 with an ionic strength of 10 mM and phosphate buffer was used for pH = 6, 7, 8 with an ionic strength of 100 mM.
Solvent exchange
After bath sonication, 80 mL of the dispersion was transferred to two beakers and 0.48 mL of 10% HCl solution was added to each to adjust the pH of the dispersion to 2. The dispersion was then left undisturbed for 12 h at room temperature. Afterwards, the top two thirds of the solvent in each beaker was removed by pipetting and the aggregates of MoS2 at the bottom of both beakers were collected by filtration using Whatman 42 filter paper and washed with 5 mL of water followed by 5 mL of dimethylformamide (DMF). The filter cake was not allowed to dry completely to avoid the formation of aggregates that could not be redispersed (i.e., hard aggregates). The filter cake was transferred to a centrifuge tube and 40 mL of DMF was then added to the tube. The aggregate was redispersed by bath-sonication for 30 min and then centrifuged at 2000 rpm for 15 min using a Thermo Scientific Centra CL2 centrifuge. The top 35 mL of the dispersion was collected for future use. The MoS2 concentration of the as-prepared MoS2/DMF dispersion was determined by measuring the mass difference before and after evaporating 5 mL of the dispersion in a glass vial using a vacuum oven. The final spreading dispersion was prepared by mixing the as-made MoS2/DMF dispersion with residue-free 1,2-dichloroethane (DCE) (Fisher Scientific, 99%) at a 1:1 volume ratio. The MoS2/DCE dispersion was prepared similarly, except using DCE as the solvent to disperse MoS2.
Langmuir–Blodgett trough analysis
The surface pressure–area (π–A) isotherm was measured using a KSV Minitrough (System 2). The polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) trough was cleaned by wiping with chloroform and rinsing with deionized (DI) water. Approximately 180 mL of deionized water (∼18 MΩ) was added to the trough and the cleanliness of the water surface was examined by monitoring the change in surface pressure while the barriers of the trough were being closed. The surface was cleaned by a vacuum aspirator until the surface pressure changed by less than 0.02 mN m−1 after compression. In a typical spreading process, the MoS2/DMF/DCE dispersion was dripped onto the water surface (∼250 cm2) at a flow rate of 0.1 mL min−1 controlled by a syringe pump (KD Scientific) using PTFE tubing with 0.312 mm outer diameter. The distance between the tip of the tubing and the water surface was made as close as possible without the drop touching the air–water interface to prevent the liquid drop (which is denser than water) from penetrating through the interface and into the water. The spreading process was stopped when about half of the water surface was covered by MoS2 as could be observed visually as a faint dark film. The compression of the film was carried out at a barrier speed of 15 mm min−1 until the surface pressure reached ∼14 mN m−1. The expansion process was carried out at the same speed immediately after the compression.
Spreading-assisted film densification
For most experiments, a custom glass trough with PTFE-coated walls and a PTFE-coated barrier were extensively washed with DI water to remove any possible water-soluble contaminants and wiped with DCE to remove any possible organic contaminants. The trough was then filled with deionized water. The glass syringe was washed with DI water first and then with DCE for the same purpose. For the spreading, the same syringe, tubing, pump and flow rate were applied as in the LB assembly. The total available water surface area (15.8 cm × 12.7 cm) for the spreading is ∼200 cm2. The film was deposited by dripping the dispersion through a PTFE tube with inner and outer diameter of 0.159 and 0.312 mm, respectively. The flow rate was set to 0.1 mL min−1via the syringe pump. The deposition of the film was carried out using the horizontal precipitation method: freshly cleaved mica or clean glass slides to be coated were placed in the trough below the level of the water sub-phase (before cleaning the air–water interface) and the film was slowly lowered onto the substrate by withdrawing water from the trough.40 To convert the as-deposited MoS2 films to the semiconducting 2H polymorph, the samples were annealed in a tube furnace at 150 °C for 1 h under Ar gas by evacuating and filling the tube with ultrahigh purity Ar (99.999%) three times.
Film characterization
The UV-Vis absorption spectra of MoS2/DMF dispersions were taken using an Agilent 8453 instrument. The transmittance measurements of deposited films on glass substrate were carried out using the same instrument. AFM images were taken using a Digital Instruments Nanoscope IV in contact mode using silicon nitride tips (Bruker, NP-STT10). The fractional coverage and average sheet thickness of the deposited MoS2 film was determined by analyzing AFM images of these films using a custom Python script. Briefly, the AFM image was divided into quadrants (to reduce variations in the substrate height over the large 10 × 10 μm scan area), then the sum of 20 Gaussian curves was fit to the raw height data of each quadrant before combining all four outputs. The initial guesses for the curve parameters were determined by manually measuring the step height at substrate–monolayer and monolayer–bilayer junctions. The fractional coverage was defined as the area under each curve in their respective bin. Absorption measurements for the Tauc analysis and optical thickness estimates were taken with a Shimadzu UV-1601PC UV-Vis double-beam spectrometer and the absorption was measured from 900 to 300 nm. A 150 W Xenon light source with a 10 nm beam width monochromator was used to provide excitation light. Raman spectra were collected using a Horiba HR800 spectrometer operating at λ = 532 nm.
A standard challenge in electrical characterization is to contact samples without damaging or substantially changing their characteristics. In clean room fabrication, electrodes are often lithographically deposited onto samples. However, such an approach is not conducive to rapid prototyping. To contact MoS2 samples on glass substrates, a fabrication procedure for conformal electrodes made from a heterostructure of carbon tape and indium tin oxide (ITO) coated plastic was developed. This allowed for electrodes to be adhered to previously prepared samples without damaging the fragile monolayers or substantially changing their electrical properties. The carbon tape/ITO interdigitated electrode structures were fabricated using ITO-coated polyethylene terephthalate (PET, Adafruit, 1309), 8 mm wide carbon tape (Ted Pella, 16073), copper tape with a conductive adhesive (Ted Pella, 16072-1), and 22 AWG copper wires. The carbon tape is adhered to the ITO side of a small section of PET. The pattern, designed in Asymptote was cut through the carbon tape and ITO, leaving just the PET support intact, using an IR laser (Universal Laser Systems VLS 2.30 CO2 laser 10.6 μm) at 8% power, 10% speed, 1000 ppi and a focus of 0.1 mm. The design left a 100 μm gap over a length of 408 mm between the two electrode contacts. As the ITO has a very low resistance, the main source of resistance in this configuration is the vertical resistance through the carbon tape. Thus, the effective series resistance is comprised of the vertical resistance through the carbon tape combined with the transverse resistance through the ITO to the contacts on the exterior. Each end of the structure is contacted by the adhesive copper tape which has negligible resistance relative to the rest of the structure. Wire leads are soldered onto the copper tape for reproducible contact with alligator clips. The effective resistance of the electrode structure was measured by adhering a sheet of ITO to an electrode structure. An Agilent 1252A Digital Multimeter was used to measure the resistance of the various samples. The system was validated by measuring the conductivity of ITO.
Results and discussion
Mixed-solvent colloidal dispersion
To efficiently transfer the exfoliated MoS2 to the air–water interface, a water-immiscible and volatile spreading solvent such as chloroform or DCE is preferred.41 However, the MoS2 nanosheets obtained from the chemical exfoliation method are well dispersed in water. Thus, our first goal was to engineer a non-aqueous colloidal dispersion to facilitate efficient transfer of material to the air–water interface. As described schematically in Fig. 1, we carried this out through a reversible aggregation and solvent exchange method. MoS2 was chemically exfoliated by first lithiating MoS2 with n-butyllithium, followed by exfoliation of this reactive material by mixing with water.4,5 It is known that this causes the decomposition of water and the build-up of H2 gas between adjacent sheets of MoS2 which results in their exfoliation.23,42 The resulting dark coloured and colloidally stable dispersion in water is shown in Fig. 1a. The addition of HCl to this dispersion caused the MoS2 to flocculate. Previous studies have shown that chemically exfoliated MoS2 will precipitate in HCl solution at a pH ∼ 2.43 While the mechanism of this aggregation behaviour has not been explored, it is likely due to the shielding of the electrostatic double layer force between MoS2 which are known to be negatively charged after being reduced by n-butyllithium to produce the salt Li+MoS2−.44 To confirm the charge on the MoS2 nanosheets, the zeta potential in water was estimated to be between about −39 mV to −49 mV over a pH range of 4–8, assuming that the flat plates behave hydrodynamically as spherical particles. This is congruent with several other reports which have measured a zeta potential of −43 mV, presumably, at near neutral pH.9,45 As a result of the charge screening by dissolved HCl, the attractive van der Waals forces between MoS2 nanosheets overcomes their electrostatic repulsion, leading to their flocculation. After 12 h, the aggregated MoS2 sediments to the bottom of the vial (Fig. 1a).
 Fig. 1  (a) Solvent exchange method. Middle picture: adjusting the pH to ∼2 causes the aggregation of MoS2. (b) UV-Vis absorption spectra of the MoS2/DMF dispersion after solvent exchange. The inset shows the stability analysis of the MoS2/DMF/DCE dispersion: (i) the freshly prepared dispersion; (ii) the dispersion after one week; (iii) the bottom of the vial after slowly removing the dispersion – no precipitate was found at the bottom of the vial for the dispersion after 1 week. (c) XRD profiles of MoS2 powders before (black line) and after (red line) chemical exfoliation, HCl – induced flocculation and drying. (d) Plot of zeta potential as a function of pH for the MoS2 dispersion in water. 
The precipitates were collected by filtration and could be redispersed in non-aqueous solvents by low power bath ultrasonication. The fact that the precipitates could be redispersed may be explained by considering that the sheets remained solvated in the aggregate, which provides steric hindrance against irreversible aggregation. To show the versatility of our solvent exchange method, we prepared both the MoS2/DMF dispersion and MoS2/DCE dispersion in preliminary trials. To confirm the successful exfoliation of MoS2 by our procedure, we conducted UV-Vis measurements on the as-prepared MoS2/DMF dispersion. It is known that the MoS2 will undergo a transition from the 2H polymorph to the 1T polymorph during the chemical exfoliation process. The resulting 1T MoS2 is metallic and thus no absorbance peaks should be observed at ∼610 nm and ∼660 nm which correspond to the A1 and B1 direct excitonic transitions in 2H MoS2.4 This is confirmed by the absorbance spectra of the dispersion (Fig. 2b) where no discernable peaks are observed between 600 nm and 700 nm, which indicates that our chemical exfoliation is effective. Furthermore, XRD carried out after drying the washed precipitate indicates that the (00l) reflections, such as (002), (004) and (006), are significantly broadened and reduced in intensity. This confirms that our chemical exfoliation and centrifugation approach eliminated most large MoS2 crystallites. A detailed analysis of the width of the (002) peak indicates that, after drying, the partially restacked powder has a fraction of crystallites which are approximately 10 layers thick.46
 Fig. 2  The LB assembly of MoS2 nanosheets using the mixed solvent DMF/DCE dispersion. (a) MoS2 nanosheets floating on the water surface. (b) The aggregated MoS2 nanosheets after expansion. (c) The compression–expansion isotherm. 
For spreading, DCE is an ideal solvent since it is water-immiscible, spontaneously spreads at the air–water interface, and is volatile. However, we found that MoS2 was poorly dispersed in DCE after solvent exchange and the resulting MoS2/DCE dispersion was unstable. On the other hand, we observe that the MoS2/DMF dispersion is stable over long periods of time but DMF is non-volatile and completely miscible with water. Since both DMF and DCE are miscible, we also tried mixtures of the two solvents to disperse MoS2. We hypothesized that in this mixed-solvent colloidal system, the DMF would help stabilize the MoS2 nanosheets and the DCE would help reduce the mixing of solvent and sub-phase water during repetitive dripping. As shown in Fig. 1c, to test our hypothesis, we first studied the stability of the MoS2/DMF/DCE dispersion with a ratio of DMF to DCE of 1:1 (vol/vol). As illustrated in Fig. 1(b), the dispersion was found to remain stable even after one week, with no detectable sediment at the bottom of the vial.
Traditional Langmuir–Blodgett approach
To illustrate the importance of DCE in terms of transfer efficiency during the deposition, we conducted two experiments using a commercial LB trough. First, we tried to directly spread the MoS2/DMF dispersion at the air–water interface. We observed that most drops entered the water sub-phase during the spreading process. Very few MoS2 nanosheets were found floating on the water surface after a large volume of the dispersion was added. This observation indicated a strong mixing process occurred during the spreading since DMF is a water-miscible solvent. Next, we tested our mixed solvent (DMF/DCE) dispersion. After only a small volume was added, MoS2 could be observed as a yellowish brown film by the naked eye. More careful observation found that MoS2 nanosheets near the trough edge were aggregated into small islands. As more and more material was added to the air–water interface, these small islands were observed to form larger islands which eventually grew to a locally uniform film (i.e. in terms of its color) as shown in Fig. 2a. Once the film covered nearly 50% of the trough surface, the moveable barriers of the LB trough were used to collect surface pressure–area (π–A) isotherms. The surface pressure is defined as π = γwater − γ where γwater is the surface tension of pure water (confirmed to be 72 mN m−1 before the start of the experiment) and γ is the measured surface tension during compression. The π–A isotherm is shown in Fig. 2c. Initially, π is nearly constant from 250 cm2 to 150 cm2 with a slight increase from zero due to the reduction in surface tension caused by the dissolution of DMF in the sub-phase water. At about 150 cm2, π increased significantly and corresponds to the point where the islands begin to coalesce. At 14 mN m−1, a dense film covered the entire tough. Expansion was carried out immediately after compression to 14 mN m−1. The π–A isotherm upon expansion decreased more rapidly as the larger islands that formed upon compression broke into smaller fragments as shown in Fig. 2b.
The dispersion concentration was reduced to determine its impact on the observed 2D aggregates. It was found that the islands shrunk in size when a more dilute dispersion was spread at the air–water interface. However, this required us to add a significant volume of dispersion to the trough and larger islands eventually grew. Unfortunately, due to limitations in the expansion ratio of the trough used, defined as the total expanded trough area to the smallest compressed area ∼3, it was not possible to compress a dilute film to a density where a measurable pressure increase could be observed. Therefore, it was not possible to use the LB trough in the typical way; traditionally when small molecules such as lipids are added to the trough, the concentration of the spreading solution is often quite high (10–100 mg mL−1) and only one drop of material or injection from a syringe is required to generate a film in the gas phase. The gas phase is compressed until it transitions to liquid, liquid-condensed and solid phases. The resulting uniform films can be compressed and expanded reversibly so that they can be deposited repetitively on substrates by dip coating via the traditional Langmuir–Blodgett process.34,36 The formation of aggregates, in our case, precludes such a process as the islands do not coalesce uniformly over the trough area during barrier compression. This aggregation phenomenon is surprising considering the relatively high zeta potential of MoS2 measured in water (>−40 mV). For example, it has been suggested that graphene oxide, with a similar zeta potential, acts as repulsive objects when floating on water. However, others have shown that attractive van der Waals forces and other long-range attractive forces can dominate under certain conditions.47 The graphene oxide case is also complicated by the fact that much of the material is lost into the sub-phase; G. J. Silverberg et al. report up to 99% loss.47
Spreading-assisted film densification
Instead of stopping the process of material transfer to the air–water interface and using the trough barriers to compress the film, we carried out an experiment where dripping was continued. Since barriers of a commercial LB trough were not required for this experiment, we simply used a clean glass water bath with Teflon tape to make the edges hydrophobic and a Teflon tape wrapped fixed barrier. Fig. 3 shows the evolution of the film as more MoS2 dispersion is added at the air–water interface. The islands grow from the trough edges and eventually spanned the entire width of the trough growing towards the center. The dripping was stopped when the available area for spreading the dispersion was so small that the solvent began to pool and the next drop no longer spread, forming a solvent lens at the injection point. At this point, the entire trough area was covered with a film of uniform tint. The as-formed MoS2 film was stable at the air–water interface, as shown in Fig. 3c, where a clear film boundary remained for hours after the fixed barrier was removed suggesting that the floating film had reached the solid phase and was clearly not repulsive.
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration of the spreading-assisted assembly process. (b) Video snapshots of film growth as a function of time. Due to the transparency of the growing film, red arrows are used to guide the reader's eye. The film grows from the trough edge towards the center. The white bar is the fixed barrier (c) photograph of a stable MoS2 thin film floating on the water surface after the fixed barrier is removed. (d) Photograph of a large-area coating of MoS2 film on a glass substrate deposited by the horizontal precipitation method (i.e. lowering the film onto the glass by withdrawing sub-phase water from the coating bath). A smartphone is used for scale. 
The film growth phenomenon was further examined by analyzing video taken during the deposition process. (see Videos in ESI†) Upon spreading of the first drop of dispersion, isolated aggregates could be observed and were distributed randomly about the trough surface. The second drop then spread, and apart from depositing more material, pushed the floating MoS2 deposited in the first drop towards the trough edge. As more and more material was added, more of the islands were pushed towards the edge of the trough by the spreading front of the solvent and, as shown in Fig. 3b, a faint continuous film could be observed. As is apparent from the videos, when the solvent spreading front reached the film, the evaporation and contraction of the spreading solvent lead to the rearrangement of the MoS2 with each additional drop. However, several centimeters into the film, the material appears to have formed a nearly incompressible solid phase. As the film grows further, a clear circular boundary was made by the spreading drop as it compressed more material against the film. When the circular boundary was only a few centimeters in diameter, the solvent could not evaporate before the next drop was added which resulted in the pooling of the dispersion and formation of a liquid lens at the center of the trough. This 2D aggregation behaviour of MoS2 nanosheets at air–water interface is also affected by the MoS2 concentration. Specifically, when the initial MoS2 concentration is high (∼0.2 mg mL−1), the MoS2 tend to form islands early in the spreading process. When the initial MoS2 concentration is low (∼0.05 mg mL−1), the solid phase of the film is not observed until the later stages of spreading. This suggests that the MoS2 nanosheets can act as repulsive, floating particles under certain deposition conditions. A more detailed study regarding the effects of MoS2 concentration on the aggregation behaviour and the final film formation will be carried out in the future.
From these videos, we hypothesize that the lateral pressure from the spreading solvent plays an important role in the film densification. When a solvent is spread at the air–water interface, the change in interfacial tensions between the air–water interface and the newly formed liquid–liquid and liquid–air interfaces dominates the spreading process once the film is thin enough that gravity no longer plays a role.48 At the leading edge of the spreading front, the gradient of the interfacial tension (i.e. the Marangoni effect) at the boundary also contributes to the force which acts on the growing film.49 These forces are likely responsible for the film densification in our repetitive dripping process. The thermodynamic spreading pressure (S) could be estimated for the system if the solvent–air (γsa), water–air (γwa) and solvent–water (γsw) interfacial tensions were known according to S = γwa − γsa − γsw. For pure DCE these values are known, and thus S for pure DCE is estimated to be SDCE = 72.5 − 32.23 − 28.2 = 12.1 mN m−1.50,51 Due to the miscibility of DMF with water, γDMF–water cannot be easily determined experimentally but is expected to be smaller than γDCE–water due to the more favorable polar–polar interactions between the two liquids while γDMF–air is slightly larger at 37.1 mN m−1. Thus, the spreading coefficient for DMF is expected to be similar to that of DCE. Comparing these values to the pressure exerted by the moveable barriers to compress the film above, as well as the typical pressures required to achieve solidification of lipids and similar 2D nanomaterials like graphene oxide, it seems plausible that the solvent spreading pressure exerted by the solvent on the film during material deposition is capable of condensing the floating material into a solid phase. Cote et al. reported that graphene oxide single sheets were able to sustain surface pressures up to 30 mN m−1 at the air–water interface before the sheets started folding and overlapping at the sheet edges36 and from our estimates above, the spreading pressure exerted by the solvent should be well below this. By using this barrier-free spreading-assisted assembly approach, we are able to deposit a film as large as the trough area. As shown in Fig. 3d, a uniform film ∼130 cm2 in area can be coated, which is about twice the size of a large screen size smart phone. The upper limit of the film area produced by our assembly method may be further increased by using a larger trough. A similar phenomenon has been reported for other materials. For example, Kim et al. reported the self-assembly of multi-walled carbon nanotubes, Ketjen-Black carbon, super-P carbon and silica nanospheres by continuous injection of the suspension at the air–water interface.52 This method allowed them to obtain a densely packed film with only the assistance of solvent spreading. However, they were unable to achieve monolayer film thickness. On the other hand, Zhang et al. reported the self-assembly of LB films of graphene-based molybdenum oxide nanohybrid sheets (mRGO-MoO3−x) by repetitively dripping via a similar method to ours and were able to produce molecular monolayers but could not control film density as their demonstration was carried out in a small beaker.53
We further investigated the effects of MoS2 concentration on the properties of the final film. We prepared three dispersions with different MoS2 concentration (i.e. 0.22 mg mL−1, 0.11 mg mL−1, 0.055 mg mL−1) and repeated the spreading experiment. By knowing the mass of material deposited and the trough area, a transfer efficiency can be estimate in terms of what we will refer to as the Langmuir specific surface area (LSSA) calculated using the following formula: (1)where Afilm is the total area of the film on water surface, ν is the deposition rate (in mL min−1) controlled by the syringe pump, t is the total deposition time and C is the MoS2 concentration. Fig. 4 shows that the average LSSA increases as the dispersion is diluted. This may be due to the fact that the probability of the overlapping of MoS2 nanosheets during the spreading process decreases as the MoS2 concentration decreases. However, the difference in LSSA is relatively small, at least for the 0.011 and 0.055 mg mL−1 cases. This indicates that the overlapping is not significant as we increase the MoS2 concentration. Therefore, the thickness of the final film may only depend on the thickness of the initial MoS2 nanosheets.
 Fig. 4  The effect of the MoS2 spreading suspension concentration on the Langmuir specific surface area (i.e. LSSA). 
Assuming that the film deposited is fully dense (which will be discussed later) it is possible to estimate the expected LSSA for a single layer of MoS2 from crystal lattice parameters. Given the unit cell for 2H MoS2 has lattice vectors , where a = 3.125 Å,54 we can calculate the area of the top-facing side of the unit cell as 8.457 Å2. The mass of a MoS2 single layer per unit cell, m, is 160.07 g mol−1. Thus, the LSSA is given by: (2)
Alternatively, the LSSA can be roughly calculated by multiplying the bulk MoS2 density by the monolayer spacing and inverting the result, giving an LSSA of 321 m2 g−1, which is in very good agreement with the previous calculation. To compare this to the widely reported specific surface area of graphene (2630 m2 g−1), we multiply our LSSA by a factor of two to account for the surface area on both sides of the sheet which leads to the theoretical specific surface area of MoS2 being about 636 m2 g−1. Interestingly, despite the large volume of work done on MoS2, to our knowledge, this number has not been reported previously. Knowing the theoretical value of the LSSA allows us to estimate an average layer thickness for our film deposited from 0.055 mg mL−1 of ∼318/112 = 2.8 layers assuming the film is fully dense.
To determine the film coverage and sheet thicknesses, we took AFM images of the films deposited from various areas in the trough. Fig. 5a shows a relatively large magnification (∼10 × 10 μm) AFM image of our MoS2 deposited onto a mica substrate at a concentration of 0.055 mg mL−1, wherein a high density of tiled MoS2 sheets is observed. Zooming into the third quadrant of this image (Fig. 5b), the exposed mica substrate can be seen more easily. Manually extracting the height profiles at substrate–monolayer and monolayer–bilayer junctions, as shown in Fig. 5c, indicates an average MoS2 layer thickness of ∼1.34 nm. Interestingly, the average substrate–monolayer thickness is significantly larger at 1.97 nm, likely due to surface defects or leftover spreading solvent trapped under the monolayers. These values are in line with previously reported thicknesses of chemically-exfoliated MoS2 deposited onto silicon substrates.55 As mentioned in the Experimental Methods section, the sheet thickness distribution of our film was determined by fitting the sum of Gaussian line-shapes to the height profile data. This is shown for the third quadrant in Fig. 5d, with the inset showing the output of this analysis. The first Gaussian fit around 2 nm corresponds to the substrate and gives an indication of the uncertainty in this estimate (standard deviation ∼0.4 nm) due to difficulties in leveling the entire image. Repeating this operation on all 4 quadrants of our film, the estimate indicates that, for this sample, we achieve 83% surface coverage, with 35% of the surface being covered by monolayers, 12% covered by bilayers, and the remaining 36% of the surface being covered by trilayers or larger. This was one of the lowest coverage samples observed and is displayed to make the contrast between sheets and substrate more apparent to the reader. The coverage estimated in all AFM images analyzed suggests that the films are most often between 85 and 95% density. Overall, we find average sheet thicknesses of 2.7, 2.6, and 2.8 layers for the 0.055, 0.11, and 0.22 mg mL−1 depositions, respectively. This corresponds to LSSAs of 120, 124, and 113 m2 g−1, from low to high concentrations, implying that the LSSA is not a function of concentration. This is in contrast to the results shown in Fig. 4 which demonstrated that the LSSA decreases slightly with increasing concentration. This discrepancy may be a result of the fact that the experimentally determined LSSA takes sub-phase loss into account, whereas the AFM determined LSSA does not. This might imply that higher concentration dispersions result in greater sub-phase loss, with the 0.055 mg mL−1 dispersion undergoing almost no sub-phase loss at all. However, due to the small variations in our LSSA (calculated by either method) and the uncertainty in our analysis, a more rigorous statistical study on many more films would have to be carried out. Therefore, our assumption of a fully dense film in the LSSA analysis is an underestimate by about 10%.
 Fig. 5  (a) AFM image of the as-prepared MoS2 film on a mica substrate deposited from a 0.055 mg mL−1 dispersion. The scale bar is 2 μm. (b) Magnified view of region indicated in (a). The scale bar is 1 μm. (c) Height profiles of monolayer–bilayer and substrate–monolayer junctions extracted from the red and black lines in (b), respectively. (d) Height distribution of image shown in (b) with Gaussian fits shown. The inset shows the fractional coverage estimated by the area under each Gaussian for each layer number with layer ‘0’ being the substrate. 
Optical and electrical properties of films
Using this spreading-assisted assembly method, we repeatedly coated glass substrates (Fig. 6a inset) and measured their transmittance. As shown in Fig. 6a, the transmittance of a single-coating film at 550 nm is around 90%. This value is comparable to that reported for a 2H phase MoS2 thin film prepared by the CVD method.56 The transmittance decreased by about 8–10% per layer deposited. Raman spectroscopy results are shown in Fig. 6b. 2H MoS2 has two main Raman modes: the in-plane mode, E12g, and the out-of-plane mode, Alg. After chemical exfoliation, we observed three distinguished features in the case of 1T MoS2 labeled as J1, J2 and J3 peaks at 154.0 cm−1, 226.1 cm−1 and 326.4 cm−1. These peak intensities, characteristic of the 1T polymorph, decreased after being annealed at 150 °C, suggesting restoration of the 2H polymorph and confirming previous reports.4,9 Furthermore, the Alg mode shifted from 408.2 cm−1 to 406.7 cm−1 for bulk and monolayer samples, respectively, while the E12g mode remained consistent at 382.7 cm−1. This is also evidence that suggests that the films formed are only a few-layers in thickness.4
 Fig. 6  (a) Transmittance study of the as-made MoS2 films (solid line: 1T, dash line: 2H) as a function of different coating layers. Magenta: one-layer coating; blue: two-layer coatings; black: three-layer coatings; red: four-layer coatings. The inset shows the as-prepared 1T MoS2 thin film coated glass slides. (b) Raman spectra of bulk MoS2 powder (black), as-prepared 1T MoS2 thin film (red), as-prepared 2H MoS2 thin film (blue). The spectra are normalized to the intensity of A1g peak. (c) Tauc plot of as-prepared 2H MoS2 thin film. Three curves represent three samples from the same batch. The inset shows the optical depth corresponding to a single coating. (d) Sheet resistance measurements of as-prepared 1T (black) and 2H (red) MoS2 thin film as a function of different coating layers. The green and blue line represent upper and lower measurement limits. 
The inset of Fig. 6c shows optical absorbance measurements of as-prepared MoS2 films after heat treatment was carried out on a one-layer deposition. Much more pronounced A and B excitonic transitions were observed at ∼660 and ∼610 nm in all samples, suggesting restoration of the 2H polymorph after heat treatment.4 In order to estimate the number of layers in the film from optical absorbance results, we approximate the film as being uniform in thickness. The estimated average layer number can be correlated to the optical depth A, (in OD), which is given by A = α·sln(10)(3)where s is the thin film thickness, α is absorption coefficient which is given by α = 4πk/λ = 4πkf/c. Therefore, eqn (2) can be rewritten as: A = 4πk·N·tln(10)/λ(4)where t is the thickness per layer (assumed to be 0.7 nm), N is the number of layers, and λ is the wavelength. Yim et al.57 reported that k for MoS2 is approximately 1 for illumination with a 600 nm wavelength and we measured 0.06 for the OD at the same wavelength. Therefore, we are able to estimate that the film is approximately 2.5 layers thick, which is in line with the value we obtained from both our LSSA estimate (2.9 layers) as well as the AFM analysis (2.7 layers).
We also investigated the photoluminescence properties of our samples. However, our films gave very weak photoluminescence responses using a standard spectrometer. Therefore, instead, we further analyzed the absorbance data using a Tauc analysis to determine the average optical gap in the film.57–59Fig. 6c shows a direct band gap Tauc analysis carried out on the absorbance data collected from three different MoS2 LB films (one deposition thick). The results suggested an absorption tail to about 1.6 eV followed by a regime from 1.7 to 2.0 eV that could readily be fit with a linear function. The extrapolation of that fitted function consistently predicted direct bandgaps of about 1.6 eV for the various samples tested. A similar analysis was carried out using an indirect bandgap Tauc analysis and a linear fit seemed appropriate in the range of 2.2–2.7 eV, which suggested bandgaps of about 1.2 eV. However, such a value seems inappropriate compared to literature values.57,60 This suggests that the direct bandgap analysis is more appropriate for the films studied here. Given our discussion above, all data suggests that our film has an average layer number between 2 and 3 with a large percentage of monolayers (∼45%) and bilayers (13%). One would generally expect monolayer MoS2 to be a direct semiconducting material, while the multilayer (bilayer and thicker) are generally considered to be indirect semiconducting materials. However, recent works have shown that bilayer films may still have a direct bandgap due to superlattice,61 orientation,62 and lattice spacing63 effects.
The resistances of our as-prepared MoS2 films were measured using a soft contacting technique. A laser patterned ITO/carbon tape electrode structure was simply pressed against the film, avoiding the need for cleanroom deposition. This resulted in a 100 μm gap between the two electrodes over a length of 408 mm. Fig. 6d shows the layer-dependent sheet resistivity measurement before and after heat treatment of the MoS2 films. A decrease in sheet resistance of approximately an order of magnitude per layer was observed. This indicates that our deposition method provides high control over layer numbers as well as film uniformity and reproducibility. We also observed that the heat-treated films are approximately 3 orders of magnitude less conductive than the films which have a larger proportion of 1T. This is consistent with the expectation of the enrichment of the 2H polymorph upon heating. We note that 1 and 2 layer semiconducting films were tested. However, their resistances were above the upper sensitivity limit of the fixture used. When compared with previous reports, our films appear to have a much lower conductivity. However, this can be explained by the much larger gap width (100 μm) compared to other works and a potentially different ratio of 1T/2H polymorphs in the deposited films prior to annealing.4,5 Resistance through the MoS2 is comprised of two main factors: in-sheet resistance (intrinsic) and sheet-to-sheet or percolation resistance. While the intrinsic resistance is independent of electrode separation, the much higher percolation resistance is not. Wider electrode separation means electrons must hop from nanosheet to nanosheet more times to reach an electrode. For example, Eda et al. reported the resistivity of films deposited by vacuum filtration to be ∼1 MΩ sq−1 but used contacts which were 20–50 μm apart.4,5 Our four-layer films with larger contact separation are measured to be about 100 MΩ sq−1. While the long range conductivities of the Langmuir films deposited by this approach are low, it is likely that this material would be interfaced with other transparent conductors such as graphene or ITO in a device architecture. Due to the high resistance between the flakes, such a device would not rely on charge transfer laterally through the film but within the nanometer-scale thickness of the deposited layers. The method presented provides a convenient way to carry out this coupling over large areas and may be useful to engineer a wide variety of heterostructure-based optoelectronic devices such as thin film solar cells or large area, transparent electrodes for photoelectrochemical water splitting.
Conclusions
We have demonstrated a mixed-solvent, colloidal dispersion which enables the high yield deposition (up to 120 m2 g−1) of chemically exfoliated MoS2 nanosheets onto the air–water interface. Upon deposition, we observed a 2D aggregation phenomenon during traditional Langmuir–Blodgett deposition, despite the large negative zeta potential of the sheets in water. Taking advantage of this phenomenon, we studied the solvent spreading-assisted assembly and deposition of large area, transparent, densely-packed MoS2 films which could be prepared without barrier compression. Video analysis of film formation suggests that forces induced by solvent spreading (including the Marangoni effect) are responsible for the film densification. The high density and uniformity of these films allow us to directly assess exfoliation efficiency and to estimate film thickness or exfoliation efficiency by comparing the transfer efficiency to the theoretical specific surface area of MoS2, estimated to be 636 m2 g−1 (the area of two sides of the MoS2 nanosheet). Furthermore, the directionality of the 2D aggregation process lends itself to be adapted to continuous film transfer methods which will provide a simple and versatile path towards well-controlled coatings for advanced electronic and optoelectronic applications.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to acknowledge funding support from the National Science and Engineering Council of Canada's Discovery Grant program.
Notes and references
B. Radisavljevic, A. Radenovic, J. Brivio, V. Giacometti and A. Kis, Single-layer MoS2 transistors, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6(3), 147–150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. F. Mak, C. Lee, J. Hone, J. Shan and T. F. Heinz, Atomically Thin MoS2: A New Direct-Gap Semiconductor, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 105(13), 136805 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Han and Y. H. Hu, MoS2 as a co-catalyst for photocatalytic hydrogen production from water, Energy Sci. Eng., 2016, 4(5), 285–304 CrossRef CAS .
G. Eda, H. Yamaguchi, D. Voiry, T. Fujita, M. Chen and M. Chhowalla, Photoluminescence from Chemically Exfoliated MoS2, Nano Lett., 2011, 11(12), 5111–5116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Acerce, D. Voiry and M. Chhowalla, Metallic 1T phase MoS2 nanosheets as supercapacitor electrode materials, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10(4), 313–318 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-L. Tsai, S.-H. Su, J.-K. Chang, D.-S. Tsai, C.-H. Chen and C. Wu, 
            et al., Monolayer MoS2 Heterojunction Solar Cells, ACS Nano, 2014, 8(8), 8317–8322 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. B. Roxlo, R. R. Chianelli, H. W. Deckman, A. F. Ruppert and P. P. Wong, Bulk and surface optical absorption in molybdenum disulfide, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 1987, 5(4), 555–557 CAS .
X. R. Qin, D. Yang, R. F. Frindt and J. C. Irwin, Real-space imaging of single-layer MoS2 by scanning tunneling microscopy, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1991, 44(7), 3490–3493 CrossRef .
K. C. Knirsch, N. C. Berner, H. C. Nerl, C. S. Cucinotta, Z. Gholamvand and N. McEvoy, 
            et al., Basal-Plane Functionalization of Chemically Exfoliated Molybdenum Disulfide by Diazonium Salts, ACS Nano, 2015, 9(6), 6018–6030 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. B. Desai, S. R. Madhvapathy, A. B. Sachid, J. P. Llinas, Q. Wang and G. H. Ahn, 
            et al., MoS2 transistors with 1-nanometer gate lengths, Science, 2016, 354(6308), 99–102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yin, H. H. Li, H. H. Li, L. Jiang, Y. Shi and Y. Sun, 
            et al., Single-layer MoS2 phototransistors, ACS Nano, 2012, 6(1), 74–80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Bernardi, M. Palummo and J. C. Grossman, Extraordinary sunlight absorption and one nanometer thick photovoltaics using two-dimensional monolayer materials, Nano Lett., 2013, 13(8), 3664–3670 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. G. da Silveira Firmiano, A. C. Rabelo, C. J. Dalmaschio, A. N. Pinheiro, E. C. Pereira and W. H. Schreiner, 
            et al., Supercapacitor Electrodes Obtained by Directly Bonding 2D MoS 2 on Reduced Graphene Oxide, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4(6), 1301380 CrossRef .
A. Winchester, S. Ghosh, S. Feng, A. L. Elias, T. Mallouk and M. Terrones, 
            et al., Electrochemical Characterization of Liquid Phase Exfoliated Two-Dimensional Layers of Molybdenum Disulfide, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6(3), 2125–2130 CAS .
R. Samnakay, C. Jiang, S. L. Rumyantsev, M. S. Shur and A. A. Balandin, Selective chemical vapor sensing with few-layer MoS 2 thin-film transistors: comparison with graphene devices, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106(2), 023115 CrossRef .
B. Hinnemann, P. G. Moses, J. Bonde, K. P. Jørgensen, J. H. Nielsen and S. Horch, 
            et al., Biomimetic Hydrogen Evolution: MoS2 Nanoparticles as Catalyst for Hydrogen Evolution, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127(15), 5308–5309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Calandra, Chemically
exfoliated single-layer MoS2: stability, lattice dynamics, and catalytic adsorption from first principles, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 88(24), 245428 CrossRef .
Y. Yin, J. Han, Y. Zhang, X. Zhang, P. Xu and Q. Yuan, 
            et al., Contributions of Phase, Sulfur Vacancies, and Edges to the Hydrogen Evolution Reaction Catalytic Activity of Porous Molybdenum Disulfide Nanosheets, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138(25), 7965–7972 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Lukowski, A. S. Daniel, F. Meng, A. Forticaux, L. Li and S. Jin, Enhanced Hydrogen Evolution Catalysis from Chemically Exfoliated Metallic MoS2 Nanosheets, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135(28), 10274–10277 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Ding, B. Song, P. Xu and S. Jin, Efficient Electrocatalytic and Photoelectrochemical Hydrogen Generation Using MoS2 and Related Compounds, Chem., 2016, 1(5), 699–726 CAS .
Y. Liu, Y.-X. Yu and W. Zhang, MoS2/CdS Heterojunction with High Photoelectrochemical Activity for H2 Evolution under Visible Light: The Role of MoS2, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117(25), 12949–12957 CAS .
M. Chhowalla, H. S. Shin, G. Eda, L. Li, K. P. Loh and H. Zhang, The chemistry of two-dimensional layered transition metal dichalcogenide nanosheets, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5(4), 263–275 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Joensen, R. F. Frindt and S. R. Morrison, Single-Layer MoS2, Mater. Res. Bull., 1986, 21(4), 457–461 CrossRef CAS .
C. Muratore, J. J. Hu, B. Wang, M. A. Haque, J. E. Bultman and M. L. Jespersen, 
            et al., Continuous ultra-thin MoS2 films grown by low-temperature physical vapor deposition, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104(26), 261604 CrossRef .
X. Yu, M. S. Prévot, N. Guijarro and K. Sivula, Self-assembled 2D WSe2 thin films for photoelectrochemical hydrogen production, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6(May), 7596 CrossRef PubMed .
W. M. R. Divigalpitiya, S. R. Morrison and R. F. Frindt, Thin oriented films of molybdenum disulphide, Thin Solid Films, 1990, 186(1), 177–192 CrossRef CAS .

          G. L. Gaines, Insoluble Monolayer at Liquid-Gas Interfaces, Interscience Publishers, New York,  1966 Search PubMed .
C. P. Collier, Reversible Tuning of Silver Quantum Dot Monolayers Through the Metal-Insulator Transition, Science, 1997, 277(5334), 1978–1981 CrossRef CAS .
P. Yang and F. Kim, Langmuir – Blodgett assembly of one-dimensional nanostructures, ChemPhysChem, 2002, 3(6), 503–506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-H. Lee, W.-S. Kang, C. K. Najeeb, B.-S. Choi, S.-W. Choi and H. J. Lee, 
            et al., A hydrogen gas sensor using single-walled carbon nanotube Langmuir–Blodgett films decorated with palladium nanoparticles, Sens. Actuators, B, 2013, 188, 169–175 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Choi, W. S. Kang, J. H. Lee, C. K. Najeeb, H. S. Chun and J. H. Kim, Patterning of hierarchically aligned single-walled carbon nanotube langmuir-blodgett films by microcontact printing, Langmuir, 2010, 26(19), 15680–15685 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, L. Zhang, X. Wang, I. Shimoyama, X. Sun and W. K. Seo, 
            et al., Langmuir-Blodgett assembly of densely aligned single-walled carbon nanotubes from bulk materials, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129(16), 4890–4891 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kim, L. J. Cote, F. Kim, W. Yuan, K. Shull and J. Huang, Graphene Oxide Sheets at Interfaces, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132(14), 8180–8186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. L. Nie, X. Dou, Z. Tang, H. D. Jang and J. Huang, High-Yield Spreading of Water-Miscible Solvents on Water for Langmuir-Blodgett Assembly, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137(33), 10683–10688 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zheng, L. Shi and J. Yang, Langmuir-Blodgett assembly of ultra-large graphene oxide films for transparent electrodes, Trans. Nonferrous Met. Soc. China, 2012, 22(10), 2504–2511 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. Cote, F. Kim and J. Huang, Langmuir–Blodgett Assembly of Graphite Oxide Single Layers, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131(3), 1043–1049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Mangadlao, C. M. Santos and M. J. L. Felipe, de Leon a CC, Rodrigues DF, Advincula RC. On the antibacterial mechanism of graphene oxide (GO) Langmuir–Blodgett films, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51(14), 2886–2889 RSC .
X. Li, G. Zhang, X. Bai, X. Sun, X. Wang and E. Wang, 
            et al., Highly conducting graphene sheets and Langmuir-Blodgett films, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3(9), 538–542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Taguchi, R. Kimura, R. Azumi, H. Tachibana, N. Koshizaki and M. Shimomura, 
            et al., Fabrication of Hybrid Layered Films of MoS2 and an Amphiphilic Ammonium Cation Using the Langmuir−Blodgett Technique, Langmuir, 1998, 14(22), 6550–6555 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Pope, C. Punckt and I. A. Aksay, Intrinsic Capacitance and Redox Activity of Functionalized Graphene Sheets, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115(41), 20326–20334 CAS .

          H.-J. Butt, K. Graf and M. Kappl, Physics and Chemistry of Interfaces, John Wiley, FRG: Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KgaA, Weinheim,  2003 Search PubMed .
G. Eda, T. Fujita, H. Yamaguchi, D. Voiry, M. Chen and M. Chhowalla, Coherent atomic and electronic heterostructures of single-layer MoS2, ACS Nano, 2012, 6(8), 7311–7317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Goloveshkin, Structural Properties and Phase Transition of Exfoliated-Restacked Molybdenum Disulfide, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117(16), 8509–8515 CAS .
G. Ma, H. Peng, J. Mu, H. Huang, X. Zhou and Z. Lei, In situ intercalative polymerization of pyrrole in graphene analogue of MoS2 as advanced electrode material in supercapacitor, J. Power Sources, 2013, 229, 72–78 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liu, X. Yang, Y. Zhang, M. Xu and H. Chen, Ultra-stable two-dimensional MoS2 solution for highly efficient organic solar cells, RSC Adv., 2014, 4(62), 32744–32748 RSC .
P. Joensen, R. F. Frindt and S. R. Morrison, Single-layer MoS2, Mater. Res. Bull., 1986, 21(4), 457–461 CrossRef CAS .
G. J. Silverberg, P. Pearce and C. D. Vecitis, Controlling self-assembly of reduced graphene oxide at the air-water interface: Quantitative evidence for long-range attractive and many-body interactions, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7(6), 3807–3815 CAS .
C. Huh, M. Inoue and S. Mason, Uni-directional spreading of one liquid on the surface of another, Can. J. Chem. Eng., 1975, 53, 367–371 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. Dussaud and S. M. Troian, Dynamics of spontaneous spreading with evaporation on a deep fluid layer, Phys. Fluids, 1998, 10(1), 23–38 CrossRef CAS .
B. Hou, N. Laanait, H. Yu, W. Bu, J. Yoon and B. Lin, 
            et al., Ion distributions at the water/1,2-dichloroethane interface: Potential of mean force approach to analyzing X-ray reflectivity and interfacial tension measurements, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2013, 117(17), 5365–5378 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. A. Dean, Lange's Handbook of Chemistry, McGraw-Hill, Inc., New York,  1999, p. 5.93 Search PubMed .
M. S. Kim, L. Ma, S. Choudhury, S. S. Moganty, S. Wei and L. A. Archer, Fabricating multifunctional nanoparticle membranes by a fast layer-by-layer Langmuir? Blodgett process: application in lithium? sulfur batteries, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4(38), 14709–14719 CAS .
H. Zhang, K.-W. Jeon and D.-K. Seo, Equipment-Free Deposition of Graphene-Based Molybdenum Oxide Nanohybrid Langmuir–Blodgett Films for Flexible Electrochromic Panel Application, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8(33), 21539–21544 CAS .
A. Molina-Sánchez and L. Wirtz, Phonons in single-layer and few-layer MoS2 and WS2, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84(15), 155413 CrossRef .
X. Fan, P. Xu, Y. C. Li, D. Zhou, Y. Sun and M. A. T. Nguyen, 
            et al., Controlled Exfoliation of MoS2 Crystals into Trilayer Nanosheets, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138(15), 5143–5149 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lee, J. Lee, H. Bark, I.-K. Oh, G. H. Ryu and Z. Lee, 
            et al., Synthesis of wafer-scale uniform molybdenum disulfide films with control over the layer number using a gas phase sulfur precursor, Nanoscale, 2014, 6(5), 2821–2826 RSC .
C. Yim, M. O’Brien, N. McEvoy, S. Winters, I. Mirza and J. G. Lunney, 
            et al., Investigation of the optical properties of MoS 2 thin films using spectroscopic ellipsometry, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104(10), 103114 CrossRef .
J. T. Tauc and R. Grigorovici, Optical Properties and Electronic Structure of Amorphous Germanium, Phys. Status Solidi B, 1966, 15, 627 CrossRef CAS .
G. Papadimitropoulos, N. Vourdas, A. Kontos, M. Vasilopoulou, D. N. Kouvatsos and N. Boukos, 
            et al., Hot-wire vapor deposition of amorphous MoS2 thin films, Phys. Status Solidi C, 2015, 12(7), 969–974 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Park, H. S. So, S. Kim, S.-H. Choi, H. Lee and J. Lee, 
            et al., Optical properties of large-area ultrathin MoS2 films: Evolution from a single layer to multilayers, J. Appl. Phys., 2014, 116(18), 183509 CrossRef .
J. T. Jiang, S. L. Xiu, M. M. Zheng, T. T. Jia, H. Y. Liu and Y. Zhang, 
            et al., Indirect–direct bandgap transition and gap width tuning in bilayer MoS2 superlattices, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2014, 613, 74–79 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, Q. Chen and J. Wang, Electronic Structure of Twisted Bilayers of Graphene/MoS2 and MoS2/MoS2, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119(9), 4752–4758 CAS .
J. Xiao, M. Long, X. Li, Q. Zhang, H. Xu and K. S. Chan, Effects of van der Waals interaction and electric field on the electronic structure of bilayer MoS2, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2014, 26(40), 405302 CrossRef PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7tc02637dThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Solvent exchange method. Middle picture: adjusting the pH to ∼2 causes the aggregation of MoS2. (b) UV-Vis absorption spectra of the MoS2/DMF dispersion after solvent exchange. The inset shows the stability analysis of the MoS2/DMF/DCE dispersion: (i) the freshly prepared dispersion; (ii) the dispersion after one week; (iii) the bottom of the vial after slowly removing the dispersion – no precipitate was found at the bottom of the vial for the dispersion after 1 week. (c) XRD profiles of MoS2 powders before (black line) and after (red line) chemical exfoliation, HCl – induced flocculation and drying. (d) Plot of zeta potential as a function of pH for the MoS2 dispersion in water.	 

 	Fig. 2  The LB assembly of MoS2 nanosheets using the mixed solvent DMF/DCE dispersion. (a) MoS2 nanosheets floating on the water surface. (b) The aggregated MoS2 nanosheets after expansion. (c) The compression–expansion isotherm.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration of the spreading-assisted assembly process. (b) Video snapshots of film growth as a function of time. Due to the transparency of the growing film, red arrows are used to guide the reader's eye. The film grows from the trough edge towards the center. The white bar is the fixed barrier (c) photograph of a stable MoS2 thin film floating on the water surface after the fixed barrier is removed. (d) Photograph of a large-area coating of MoS2 film on a glass substrate deposited by the horizontal precipitation method (i.e. lowering the film onto the glass by withdrawing sub-phase water from the coating bath). A smartphone is used for scale.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 4  The effect of the MoS2 spreading suspension concentration on the Langmuir specific surface area (i.e. LSSA).	 
	(2)

 	Fig. 5  (a) AFM image of the as-prepared MoS2 film on a mica substrate deposited from a 0.055 mg mL−1 dispersion. The scale bar is 2 μm. (b) Magnified view of region indicated in (a). The scale bar is 1 μm. (c) Height profiles of monolayer–bilayer and substrate–monolayer junctions extracted from the red and black lines in (b), respectively. (d) Height distribution of image shown in (b) with Gaussian fits shown. The inset shows the fractional coverage estimated by the area under each Gaussian for each layer number with layer ‘0’ being the substrate.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Transmittance study of the as-made MoS2 films (solid line: 1T, dash line: 2H) as a function of different coating layers. Magenta: one-layer coating; blue: two-layer coatings; black: three-layer coatings; red: four-layer coatings. The inset shows the as-prepared 1T MoS2 thin film coated glass slides. (b) Raman spectra of bulk MoS2 powder (black), as-prepared 1T MoS2 thin film (red), as-prepared 2H MoS2 thin film (blue). The spectra are normalized to the intensity of A1g peak. (c) Tauc plot of as-prepared 2H MoS2 thin film. Three curves represent three samples from the same batch. The inset shows the optical depth corresponding to a single coating. (d) Sheet resistance measurements of as-prepared 1T (black) and 2H (red) MoS2 thin film as a function of different coating layers. The green and blue line represent upper and lower measurement limits.	 
A = α·sln(10)	(3)
A = 4πk·N·tln(10)/λ	(4)
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7tc02637d

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
