Biexciton dynamics in halide perovskite nanocrystals  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2CP02826C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2CP02826C
(Perspective)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2022, 24, 22405-22425Biexciton dynamics in halide perovskite nanocrystals

        
          
            Go 
            Yumoto
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Yoshihiko 
            Kanemitsu
          
          
        
      *
      Institute for Chemical Research, Kyoto University, Uji, Kyoto 611-0011, Japan. E-mail: kanemitu@scl.kyoto-u.ac.jp
Received 
      22nd June 2022
    , Accepted 6th September 2022First published on 15th September 2022AbstractLead halide perovskite nanocrystals are attracting considerable interest as next-generation optoelectronic materials. Optical responses of nanocrystals are determined by excitons and exciton complexes such as trions and biexcitons. Understanding of their dynamics is indispensable for the optimal design of optoelectronic devices and the development of new functional properties. Here, we summarize the recent advances on the exciton and biexciton photophysics in lead halide perovskite nanocrystals revealed by femtosecond time-resolved spectroscopy and single-dot spectroscopy. We discuss the impact of the biexciton dynamics on controlling and improving the optical gain.
Go Yumoto
Go Yumoto received his PhD from The University of Tokyo in 2017. Currently, he is working as an assistant professor at the Institute for Chemical Research, Kyoto University. His research interests include optical properties of low-dimensional halide perovskite nanostructures, opto-spintronic properties of halide perovskites, and nonlinear optics in semiconductor nanostructures.
Yoshihiko Kanemitsu
Yoshihiko Kanemitsu received his PhD from The University of Tokyo in 1986. He is a professor at the Institute for Chemical Research, Kyoto University. Currently, his research interests include fundamental optical and electronic properties of halide perovskites, dynamics of biexcitons and trions in nanocrystal quantum dots, nonlinear optics of semiconductors under extremely strong electric fields, and photophysics of solar cell devices.
1. Introduction
Currently, halide perovskites described by the formula ABX3 are receiving much attention as novel semiconductor materials which show intriguing optoelectronic properties from viewpoints of the fundamental physics and optoelectronic device applications.1–16 In particular, halide perovskites with the B site occupied by Pb have a stable structure, where organic molecules (MA = CH3NH3, FA = HC(NH2)2) or cesium can be used as the A-site cation, and iodine, bromine, and chloride can be used as the X-site halide (Fig. 1a). High-quality thin films and bulk crystals of lead halide perovskites (LHPs) can be simply prepared by solution-based synthesis methods, and actual implementation as light-weight flexible solar cell materials is expected since they also show very high solar-cell conversion efficiencies.17–26 The superior solar cell characteristics of LHPs arise from their unique optoelectronic properties such as steep absorption edges, large absorption coefficients, and long diffusion lengths of free carriers.27–37 Furthermore, along with the low defect densities within the bandgap, the high photoluminescence (PL) efficiencies and the high transmittance for light with the photon energy below the bandgap38–41 suggest that LHPs are one of the promising materials for light-emitting devices and nonlinear optics. In fact, they are attracting much attention for potential applications as high-efficiency light-emitting diodes (LEDs), low-threshold optical gain media, photodetectors, optical modulators, etc.42–47
 Fig. 1  (a) Crystal structure of lead halide perovskites APbX3. (b) Illustration of exciton and multiexciton states, which determine the optical responses of lead halide perovskite nanocrystals. Solid (open) circles represent electrons (holes). (c) Schematics of multiple exciton generation (MEG) and Auger recombination processes. 
Low-dimensional nanostructures of LHPs exhibit superior PL properties.48–51 In these low-dimensional perovskites, the enhancement of the density of states at the band edge and quantum confinement effects increase the PL efficiency with keeping the excellent optical properties of the three-dimensional bulk crystals. In particular, LHP nanocrystals (NCs), i.e. zero-dimensional quantum dots, have been intensively studied since the first report on their synthesis in 201452 and much effort has been devoted to structural characterization and realizing highly efficient PL.48,49 Among these studies, it was reported in 2015 that, without a special surface passivation such as a core/shell structure, stable all-inorganic CsPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, I) perovskite NCs can be synthesized and they show extremely high PL quantum yields.53 Moreover, LHP NCs show a well-defined cubic shape and narrow size distribution and exhibit interesting optical properties that differ from those of conventional semiconductor colloidal NCs. For example, LHP NCs naturally form a superlattice structure when the solvent is evaporated, which was reported to show superfluorescence.54
Halide substitution and control of the NC size and shape make it possible to tune the bandgap energy of LHP NCs over the entire visible region.53,55–57 In addition to such good tunability of the bandgap, their low defect density in the bandgap and high PL quantum yields make LHP NCs promising for potential applications as LEDs, lasers, etc.58–60 A large optical gain is expected to occur due to the quantum confinement of carriers in NCs. In fact, it has been observed in CsPbX3 NCs that light amplification with a low threshold occurs in the entire visible region.57,58 As shown in Fig. 1b, in such nonlinear optical responses, not only excitons (which are pairs of an electron and a hole), but also exciton complexes such as charged excitons (or trions, which are states where one electron or one hole is added to an exciton) and biexcitons (which are bound states consisting of two excitons) are formed.61–64 Because LHP NCs are ionic crystals, trions play an important role in optical responses.61
It is known that, if biexcitons and multiexcitons exist in a semiconductor NC, the optical gain is strongly influenced by exciton many-body effects.62–68 Due to their band structure characteristics, the influence of exciton–exciton interactions on the optical responses is especially important in the LHP NCs.69,70 In particular, because the biexciton dynamics determines the lifetime of the optical gain, its detailed understanding is important with respect to the development of optimal laser designs and optical-gain switching devices.70–74 The biexciton generation and relaxation dynamics are also inevitable for the understanding of many-body effects such as multiple exciton generation (MEG) and Auger recombination processes. Efficient MEG is induced by single-photon excitation in nanomaterials such as NCs, carbon nanotubes, and coupled NC films.75–83 The MEG and Auger recombination processes in NCs are shown in Fig. 1c. Photoexcitation with a photon energy much larger than the bandgap energy generates an electron and a hole, which possess a large excess energy. An electron–hole pair with such large excess energy creates another electron–hole pair through the MEG process. The Auger recombination process is a non-radiative process where the electron–hole recombination energy is not emitted as a photon, but is transferred to another electron or hole.84 The MEG process is important in terms of improving the performance of solar cells and photodetectors.85,86 The Auger process plays a key role in understanding the blinking phenomenon in NCs87–89 and the efficiency reduction of LEDs under high voltages, i.e. the droop phenomenon.90,91 Colloidal NCs are also known to serve as a single photon emitter.92,93 A biexciton emits a single photon in single NCs when a biexciton relaxes to the exciton state via a non-radiative Auger recombination process. It has been reported that LHP NCs exhibit excellent properties as room-temperature single-photon sources,94,95 which also shows the importance of biexciton dynamics in LHP NCs.
In this Perspective, we provide a summary of recent advances on biexciton dynamics in LHP NCs. We highlight that the exciton–exciton interactions play an important role in the optical responses and especially in the optical gain characteristics of LHP NCs. First, in Section 2 we describe the electronic states of LHPs, which are revealed by nonlinear optical measurements. Then, in Section 3 we discuss the exciton and biexciton dynamics in LHP NCs measured by femtosecond transient absorption spectroscopy, time-resolved PL spectroscopy, and single-dot spectroscopy. In Section 4 we show that the many-body interactions between excitons significantly impact the optical properties of LHP NCs, and that the biexciton is important in controlling and improving the optical gain characteristics. Finally, in Section 5 we present conclusions and perspectives.
2. Band-edge structure of lead halide perovskite semiconductors
The electronic states of APbX3 consist of conduction-band states that are mainly composed of the Pb 6p orbitals and valence-band states that are characterized by the Pb 6s orbital (Fig. 2a).96 Furthermore, the large spin–orbit interaction resulting from the presence of the heavy Pb atom splits the conduction-band states into low- and high-energy states, which are separated by the spin–orbit splitting energy Δso.97 The split-off conduction-band states with the total angular momentum J = 1/2 (|±1/2〉so) are formed at the band edge while the heavy- and light-electron conduction-band states with J = 3/2 (|±3/2〉he and |±1/2〉le, respectively) appear at higher energies. Here, |m〉 denotes the electronic state with a total electron angular momentum projection along the light propagation direction of m. In Fig. 2b, we show the energy diagram of the electronic states and the optical selection rules.97–101 The electronic states at the band edge of APbX3 can be described by rather simple doubly degenerate states for both the conduction band and the valence band: the valence- and conduction-band states with J = 1/2 (|±1/2〉v and |±1/2〉so, respectively). Due to these band-edge states, the band-edge optical responses are characterized to be circular polarization dependent optical transitions.98,101
 Fig. 2  (a) Electronic band structure of lead halide perovskites. le, light-electron conduction band; he, heavy-electron conduction band; so, split-off conduction band; v, valence band. (b) Optical transition selection rules between band-edge states and between conduction band states. Δso denotes the spin-orbit splitting energy. (c) Excitation energy dependences of two-photon absorption coefficient (top panel) and dichroism (bottom panel). The top and bottom axes are the excitation energy ℏω and twice of that 2ℏω, respectively. The dotted curves are theoretical results. The vertical dashed lines represent the lowest energy of the heavy- and light-electron conduction bands. (d) Schematics of the two-level optical Stark effect in lead halide perovskites. The upper panel shows that when the band-edge optical transition from |−1/2〉v to |+1/2〉so (from |+1/2〉v to |−1/2〉so) is driven by right- (left-) handed circularly polarized laser pulse, the energy spacing between the two states shifts from E0 to E0 + δE only during the laser excitation. The lower panel is the corresponding description with the exciton picture. (e) Pump energy dependence of the energy shift for σ+-pump and σ+-probe pulses, observed in CsPbBr3 nanocrystals. The top and bottom axes are the pump energy ℏω and the pump detuning energy defined as E0–ℏω, respectively. The red and black curves show the calculated energy shift based on the Autler–Townes effect and the two-level optical Stark effect, respectively. (f) Energy level diagram and optical transition selection rules for exciton (|±1〉ex) and biexciton (|XX〉) states. Panels (b) and (e) are reproduced from ref. 101. Copyright 2021, The Authors, Published by Springer Nature under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International license. Panel (c) is reproduced with permission from ref. 104. Copyright 2021, American Physical Society. 
Nonlinear optical measurements are an effective method to reveal this band structure.101–104 Two-photon absorption (TPA) is the third-order nonlinear optical effect where excitation light with photon energy Eph generates photoexcited carriers with an energy of 2Eph. The excitation-energy dependence of the TPA coefficient β of an MAPbBr3 single crystal is shown in the top panel of Fig. 2c.104 While β gently increases for two-photon energies 2Eph from 2.3 to 3.2 eV, a steep increase appears as 2Eph exceeds 3.2 eV. The value of 2.3 eV, where the onset of TPA is observed, corresponds to the bandgap energy of MAPbBr3. On the other hand, the steep increase starting from 3.2 eV reflects the contribution from the high-energy states of the conduction band (Fig. 2a). This is clearly seen from the excitation-energy dependence of the TPA dichroism (Fig. 2c, bottom panel). The TPA dichroism can be obtained by measuring β for linearly and circularly polarized excitation lights. From the local minimum in the TPA dichroism, a spin–orbit splitting energy Δso is estimated to be 0.8 eV. We note that in wide-gap perovskites, exciton effects play an essential role in optical spectra even at room temperarure.102,103
The multi-level electronic structure originating from a large spin–orbit interaction has also been revealed by optical Stark spectroscopy of CsPbBr3 NCs.101 As shown in Fig. 2b, the band-edge optical responses of LHP NCs are determined by optical transitions from |−1/2〉v to |+1/2〉so and from |+1/2〉v to |−1/2〉so, which can be excited by right- (σ+) and left- (σ−) handed circularly polarized lights, respectively. In the exciton picture, the σ+- and σ−-active optical transitions correspond to the excitation of the excitons with total exciton angular momentum projections of Jex = +1 and −1, respectively. Consequently, when σ+ (σ−)-laser light with a photon energy of ℏω < E0 (E0: the exciton energy) irradiates LHP NCs, the exciton energy of |+1〉ex (|−1〉ex) shifts from E0 to E0 + δE only during the laser excitation. This ultrafast energy shift is called the optical Stark effect (Fig. 2d).101,105–109Fig. 2e shows the pump energy dependence of the energy shift of |+1〉ex in CsPbBr3 NCs, which was observed in pump–probe measurements with σ+-pump and σ+-probe pulses.101 In the visible excitation region, the energy shift decreases with decreasing pump-photon energies, which can be explained by the optical Stark effect in two-level systems (Fig. 2e, black curve). On the other hand, when the pump-photon energy is reduced further and is in near-infrared region, the energy shift starts to increase. This behavior is in contrast to that expected for the optical Stark effect in two-level systems (Fig. 2e, red curve). It has been revealed that the origin of the energy shift enhancement in the near-infrared region is the Autler–Townes effect resulting from the interaction between light and a multi-level electronic system.101
The nonlinear optical measurements have revealed the electronic structure as shown in Fig. 2a and the spin–orbit splitting energy. The doubly degenerate conduction- and valence-band edge states show that at most two electrons and two holes can be excited in a LHP NC. Therefore, the band-edge optical responses of LHP NCs can be determined by excitons, trions, and biexcitons. Since the excitation of the biexciton state reflects the optical selection rules for excitons, a selective excitation is possible by using circularly polarized laser light.73 Hence, polarization-resolved spectroscopy is an effective method for understanding the biexciton state (Fig. 2f). The low degeneracy of the band-edge states also means that population inversion occurs at low excitation intensities. This shows that compared to conventional inorganic semiconductor NCs, LHP NCs are promising materials for low-threshold optical-gain media.110 Moreover, the absence of higher-order multiexcitons such as triexcitons (which are generated if three excitons form a bound state) shows that LHP NCs have great potential for application in single-photon sources.94,111
Inversion symmetry breaking and strong spin–orbit interaction bring about unique spin-split electronic states in solids. The Rashba splitting is the spin splitting without external magnetic field.112,113 Because the Rashba spin–orbit interaction can be considered as an effective magnetic field depending on the momentum of the electron k, the interaction induces the spin splitting whose energy spacing is determined by k. Due to the strong spin–orbit interactions in LHPs, there has been an active discussion on whether the Rashba splitting modifies the energy structure near the band edge (Fig. 3a).114–118 In solids with Rashba-split band structure, circular photogalvanic effect occurs, where the photocurrent can be generated without electric field and the direction of the photocurrent is reversed depending on whether the excitation light is right- or left-handed circularly polarized. In LHPs, the circular photogalvanic effect has been reported.115
 Fig. 3  (a) Rashba spin-split band structure in lead halide perovskites. (b) Schematic for how the Rashba effect modifies the energy structure of exciton states in lead halide perovskite nanocrystals. (c) Size dependence of the absorption band edge energy in lead halide perovskite nanocrystals. Data are taken from ref. 53, 133, and 134. The solid curves are calculated results based on ref. 132. (d) Top left: Optical absorption and PL spectra of CsPbBr3/Cs4PbBr6 (upper panel) and CsPbBr3 bulk crystals (lower panel). Top right: Dependence of the external quantum efficiency on the excitation power density for the CsPbBr3/Cs4PbBr6 crystal. Excitation photon energy was 3.1 eV. Bottom: Stability of the PL intensity against light exposure for the CsPbBr3/Cs4PbBr6 (red data) and the CsPbBr3 bulk crystal (green data) under continuous-wave photoexcitation in air at room temperature. Panel (b) is adopted with permission from ref. 119. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. Panel (d) is adopted with permission from ref. 137. Copyright 2022, American Physical Society. 
The Rashba effect has been reported to play an important role in determining the electronic states of LHP NCs. As shown in Fig. 3b,119 the energies of the bright exciton states with a total exciton angular momentum of J = 1 can become lower than that of the dark exciton state with J = 0 due to the Rashba effect. Since the energy shift is a few meV, the influence of the Rashba effect has intensively studied in the exciton dynamics at low temperatures.100,120 The exciton recombination lifetimes in CsPbX3 NCs at low temperatures have been observed to be very short (<∼100 ps) compared to the recombination lifetimes of other inorganic semiconductor NCs.100 In contrast, it has been experimentally reported that the lowest state in FAPbX3 NCs is dark, like in conventional semiconductor NCs.120,121 The question whether or not the lowest energy level of LHP NCs changes by the Rashba effect should be solved, and further thorough investigations, e.g. on the role of the organic molecule at low temperatures, are needed. The understanding of the exciton fine structures122–124 and the lowest electronic level100,120,121 is particularly important for the development of quantum light sources based on LHP NCs.
One of characteristics of NCs is the size-dependent bandgap energy.125–127 So far, investigations on the quantum confinement effects in the semiconductor NCs have been focused on NCs with an almost spherical shape. For example, CdSe NCs with a strong confinement (individual confinement)128,129 and CuCl NCs with a weak confinement (exciton confinement)130,131 have been studied, and the size confinement effect on the optical properties has been clarified. On the other hand, the LHP NCs are different from these conventional inorganic semiconductor NCs: they have a cubic shape and their size is relatively large. In ref. 132, the size effect in LHP NCs with an intermediate confinement was calculated and discussed in detail. As shown in Fig. 3c, these calculations well reproduce the experimentally obtained size dependence of the absorption band edge energy of LHP NCs, where the experimental data are taken from ref. 53, 133, and 134. In addition, LHP NCs with higher photo and water stability have recently been explored, and one of them is the structure consisting of CsPbBr3 NCs embedded in a Cs4PbBr6 crystal.135–137 Its green PL is emitted with a high efficiency of more than 90% and is very stable compared to bare colloidal CsPbBr3 NCs (Fig. 3d).137 Below we review the biexciton photophysics of cubic-shaped LHP NCs synthesized by colloidal methods.
3. Recombination dynamics in lead halide perovskite nanocrystals
3.1 Biexciton recombination dynamics
The ultrafast dynamics of excitons, trions, and biexcitons in LHP NCs can be investigated in detail by using femtosecond transient absorption spectroscopy and time-resolved PL spectroscopy.61,69–74,138–144 In transient absorption spectroscopy, excitons, trions, and biexcitons generated by a pump pulse can be measured via the change in the transmission of a probe pulse. As shown in Fig. 4a, the transmission of the probe pulse with photon energies around the band edge depends on the number of electrons and holes excited in the NC. The temporal change of this number is mainly determined by non-radiative Auger recombination and radiative recombination, and the recombination rates of the electrons and holes also strongly differ for excitons, trions, and biexcitons. The transient absorption measurements can probe the dynamics in the time scale typically ranging from the femtoseconds (on the order of the laser pulse width) to nanoseconds. The NCs dispersed solution samples are usually used and samples are stirred with a magnetic stirrer during the transient absorption measurements to avoid sample degradation. Monitoring the absorption spectra of the NCs after the measurements can confirm that the samples are not degraded.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematics of how the photoexcited states determine the transmission of the probe pulse with photon energies around the band edge. The green and black arrows represent stimulated emission and absorption, respectively. When stimulated emission overcomes absorption, the probe light is amplified and optical gain appears. (b) Dynamics of the pump-induced change in transmission for various excitation fluences in CsPbBr3 nanocrystals. The dashed curves are the global fitting results using the triple exponential function. (c) Pump photon fluence dependence of estimated amplitudes of the exciton (AX), trion (AX+), and biexciton (AXX). The solid curve shows the fitting result using the Poisson distribution. (d and e) PL dynamics (d) and fast-decay components of the PL curves (e) of CsPbBr3 nanocrystals for different excitation fluences. Panel (b) is adopted and panel (c) is reproduced with permission from ref. 142. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. Panels (d) and (e) are adopted with permission from ref. 139. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
In Fig. 4b, we show typical examples of the dynamics of the pump-induced change in transmission ΔT/T in LHP NCs, which were measured in CsPbBr3 NCs (an average edge length of 7.6 nm) using the pump pulses with a photon energy of 2.82 eV and the probe pulses with photon energies around the band-edge exciton energy of 2.44 eV.139,142 When the pump photon fluence j is small, ΔT/T decays with a single exponential function that has relaxation lifetime on the nanosecond time scale. On the other hand, as j is increased, fast decay components appear and the dynamics can be reproduced using triple exponential functions, which represent the exciton, trion, and biexcition components. By fitting to the dynamics of ΔT/T for different j with the triple exponential functions, the lifetimes of the exciton (τX), trion (τX+), and biexciton (τXX) can be estimated to be 5.1 ns, 280 ps, and 52 ps, respectively.142 In addition to the lifetimes, the j dependence of the amplitudes of the exciton (AX), trion (AX+), and biexciton (AXX) can be obtained (Fig. 4c). The j dependence of AX can be explained by considering that the generation probability of excitons in a NC is described by the Poisson distribution.62,138,139 In order to generate an exciton, it is necessary that one or more photons are absorbed by a NC. Therefore, using the Poisson distribution, the exciton generation probability PX is given by 1 − e−〈N〉. Here, the average number of absorbed photons per NC, 〈N〉, is written as 〈N〉 = jσ, where σ is the NC absorption cross-section for the pump photon energy. Because AX corresponds to the number of excitons generated in a NC, AX can be well reproduced by 1 − e−〈N〉 as shown in Fig. 4c. This also shows that τX and AX represent the exciton dynamics. Moreover, by using the value of σ = 1.8 × 10−14 cm2 estimated from the fitting, we can determine 〈N〉 as shown in the top axis of Fig. 4c. It can be seen that AX+ and AXX rapidly increase as 〈N〉 becomes larger.
These results of transient absorption spectroscopy well agree with those of time-resolved PL spectroscopy (Fig. 4d).139,140 Under weak excitation conditions 〈N〉 ≪ 1, the PL dynamics are determined only by the exciton, which has a long relaxation lifetime on the nanosecond time scale. As 〈N〉 becomes larger, fast decay components corresponding to the relaxation of trions and biexcitons appear in the PL dynamics immediately after optical excitation. In contrast, the PL dynamics at sufficiently late times after the optical excitation can be described by the exciton with a lifetime of τX = 5.7 ns. The data in Fig. 4e are the decay curves for 〈N〉 ≥ 0.25 obtained by subtracting the slow decay component of τX = 5.7 ns from the PL dynamics. It can be clearly confirmed that two fast decay components appear under strong excitation conditions. The observed fast decay is caused by non-radiative Auger recombination processes.
3.2 Single-dot and single-photon spectroscopy
The above-mentioned transient absorption and time-resolved PL measurements are performed on NC ensembles where NCs are dispersed in a solution. Therefore, the observed results are ensemble averages of the carrier dynamics in NCs with different sizes. Since the lifetimes of trions and biexcitons are expected to exhibit a size dependence, single-dot spectroscopy is a powerful tool for revealing the intrinsic properties of LHP NCs.94,95,111,134,139–141,145 In particular, by measuring the second-order photon correlation g(2)(t) of a single NC, we can clarify the PL and biexciton recombination processes.139,146–148 The g(2)(t) function can be obtained by using a Hanbury–Brown–Twiss interferometer (Fig. 5a), where the emission from a single NC is split into two beams and each of them is measured by a single-photon detector. A biexciton can simultaneously emit two photons via the exciton state, and this process is called biexciton–exciton cascade emission (Fig. 5b). A non-zero g(2)(t) at t = 0 means the presence of two-photon emission from the biexciton.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic of a Hanbury–Brown–Twiss interferometer. APD denotes avalanche photodiode. (b) Illustration of the biexciton–exciton cascade emission. (c and d) Second-order correlation function (c) and PL dynamics of trion and first photons (d) observed for a single CsPbBr3 nanocrystal. IRF denotes instrument response function. (e) Calculated 〈N〉 dependence of gc/gs for different values of ηXX/ηX. Panels (c) and (d) are adopted with permission from ref. 139. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. Panel (e) is adopted with permission from ref. 147. Copyright 2017, American Physical Society. 
In Fig. 5c, we show g(2)(t) observed for a single CsPbBr3 NC.139 The pulse repetition frequency of the excitation laser is 1/trep (trep = 200 ns). The peaks at t ≠ 0 correspond to the case where each of two excitation pulses with time interval of t induces one photon emission. On the other hand, the center peak at t = 0 shows that two-photon emission is caused by one excitation pulse, which corresponds to biexciton–exciton cascade emission. In Fig. 5c, the area ratio of the center peak to the side peak at t = ±200 ns takes a small value of 0.1. This shows that one excitation pulse almost certainly leads to the single photon emission from the single CsPbBr3 NC. A similar behavior has also been observed for MAPbBr3 and FAPbBr3 NCs. Therefore, independently of the A-site cation, LHP NCs possess characteristics of single photon sources.145
By investigating the first photon emission at the center peak in g(2)(t), we can further clarify the biexciton relaxation dynamics. This is because the first photon emission is induced by the transition from the biexciton state to the exciton state. Fig. 5d shows the PL dynamics of trions and the first photons.139 This reveals that the biexciton lifetime is equal to or shorter than the time resolution of the measurement system (∼200 ps), and is shorter than the trion lifetime of 410 ps.
Because the center peak is related to the biexciton PL, the center-peak value at weak excitation conditions (〈N〉 ≪ 1) can be used to estimate the PL quantum yield (QY) of the biexciton emission. The general method reported in ref. 146 is only applicable to very weak excitation conditions. In this situation, the biexciton PL can be blurred by the exciton PL because the PL QY of the biexciton emission is relatively small due to the Auger recombination. Therefore, the alternative estimation method which can be applied to rather strong excitation conditions is required. To solve this issue, a versatile method has been developed that allows us to correctly calculate the PL QY ratio of the biexciton emission to exciton emission ηXX/ηX from the center-to-side-peak ratio of g(2)(t), gc/gs, even under strong excitation conditions. A simultaneous measurement of the PL decay curve in addition to g(2)(t) can provide the PL intensity ratio of the biexciton emission to exciton emission IXX/IX and gc/gs, which enables the determination of ηXX/ηX at various excitation intensities.147 As shown in Fig. 5e, in the weak-excitation regime 〈N〉 ≪ 1, the two-photon cascade emission QY, ηXX/ηX, becomes equal to gc/gs and can be determined only by using g(2)(t). Therefore, single-dot spectroscopy can clearly distinguish the exciton and biexciton PL properties and is exceptionally useful in understanding biexciton dynamics.
The biexciton lifetime can be described by using the lifetimes of negative (τX−) and positive (τX+) trions as follows: τXX−1 = 2(τX−−1 + τX+−1) (Fig. 6a).140,149 A negative (positive) trion consists of an exciton with one additional electron (hole). By using this relation, the biexciton lifetime can be estimated by single-dot spectroscopy. Fig. 6b shows the relation between τX− and τX+ obtained by single-dot spectroscopy of FAPbBr3 NCs, which is estimated to be τX−/τX+ = 1.7.140 Both of negative and positive trion states were prepared by adding a hole quencher to FAPbBr3 NCs. Fig. 6c is the histogram of the biexciton lifetimes estimated from the trion lifetimes for individual single NCs, where the average biexciton lifetime is 103 ps. This value agrees with the biexciton lifetime of 85 ps determined from transient absorption measurements of a FAPbBr3 NC ensemble dispersed in a hexane solution. As described above, femtosecond transient absorption spectroscopy realizes a superior time resolution while single-dot spectroscopy can reduce the effects of inhomogeneity of NCs. Therefore, utilizing both of these spectroscopic methods enables us to reveal the dynamics of excitons, trions, and biexcitons in LHP NCs.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematics of recombination pathways in negative and positive trions, and biexciton. (b) Relationship between the negative and positive trion lifetimes in FAPbBr3 nanocrystals. The dashed line is a linear fit. (c) Histogram of the biexciton lifetime estimated from the lifetimes of negative and positive trions. The red arrow indicates the biexciton lifetime of the ensemble nanocrystals obtained from transient absorption measurements. Panels (b) and (c) are adopted with permission from ref. 140. Copyright 2018, American Physical Society. 
One of the phenomena where the three states of exciton, trion, and biexciton are involved, is blinking.61,89 As is known from conventional inorganic semiconductor NCs, e.g. CdSe NCs, there are two types of blinking and it can be classified into type A and type B.150 In LHP NCs, these two types can also be observed.94,141,151 Type A is the type of PL intermittency that is characterized by two discrete states consisting of an on state with a high PL intensity (Fig. 7a; intensity region colored in red) and an intermediate state with a low PL intensity (Fig. 7a; intensity region colored in blue). On the other hand, with respect to type B, the PL intensity changes continuously and the surface charge trapping occurs (Fig. 7b).141
 Fig. 7  (a and b) PL intensity time traces which show type A (a) and type B (b) blinking, obtained from single FAPbBr3 nanocrystals. (c and d) Correlation between PL intensity and lifetime for type A (c) and type B (d) blinking. (e and f) Correlation between PL intensity and PL peak energy for type A (e) and type B (f) blinking. (g) Illustration of two mechanisms for formation of ionized nanocrystals. When the ionized nanocrystals are photoexcited, trion is formed. Panels (a), (b), (d), and (f) are adopted and panels (c) and (e) are reproduced with permission from ref. 141. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
To obtain deeper understanding of these two types of blinking, the correlation between the PL lifetime and intensity is plotted in Fig. 7c and d.141 For type A, the PL from two states is observed: that from the exciton (X) with a high PL intensity and a long PL lifetime, and that from the trion (X+) with a low PL intensity and a short PL lifetime (Fig. 7c). This is also confirmed from the correlation between the PL intensity and peak energy (Fig. 7e). On the other hand, for type B, the PL intensity, lifetime, and peak energy strongly fluctuate (Fig. 7d and f). While for type A the fast component shows a clear size dependence and is caused by the biexciton or the trion, for type B no size dependence is observed for the fast component. This indicates that type B has an extrinsic origin such as surface states or the surrounding environment. This interpretation is further confirmed by the fact that by chemical modification of the NC surface, type B almost disappears and the PL quantum efficiency strongly improves.141
Since the first report of the two types of blinking in LHP NCs,94 there has been a comprehensive and active discussion on the mechanisms including Auger ionization and surface traps. Fig. 7g illustrates the overview of the mechanisms: the trion formation caused by biexcitons and that caused by surface traps. In addition, a fluctuation of PL that is similar to blinking in NCs has been recently reported in the LHP micrometer-sized crystals.152–154 This unexpected result also suggests that further studies are required to reveal the complete picture of the underlying physics. In particular, the ionization of NCs is a very important issue in the development of light sources such as LEDs and lasers. The dynamics of ionization and neutralization have been intensively investigated, and some details are provided in ref. 142, 143, and 155. Similar approaches for CdSe–CdS core–shell NCs, e.g., a core–thick-shell NC and a CdSe–CdSeS–CdS core–alloyed interface–shell NC,89,149,156–158 would be very useful for suppression of the Auger recombination and ionization of LHP NCs.
3.3 Biexciton binding energy
The energy level of the biexciton states is shifted due to exciton–exciton interactions, and the biexciton energy is different from the sum of two exciton energies, as illustrated in Fig. 8(a). There have been many discussions concerning the value of the biexciton binding energy ΔEXX in LHP NCs. Here, note that we define ΔEXX as the difference between the energy of two excitons, 2EX and the biexciton energy EXX, that is, ΔEXX = 2EX − EXX (Fig. 8a). The exciton–exciton interaction energy ΔXX is determined from the biexciton binding energy through the relation of ΔXX = −ΔEXX. A negative ΔXX (positive ΔEXX) means that the exciton–exciton interaction is attractive and the biexciton state is stable.62,65 On the other hand, a positive ΔXX (negative ΔEXX) means that the exciton–exciton interaction is repulsive.
 Fig. 8  (a) Energy level diagram of exciton and biexciton states. ΔEXX is the biexciton binding energy. (b) Two-dimensional spectrum of CsPbBr3 nanocrystals measured by polarization-dependent two-dimensional spectroscopy at 10 K with the cross-circular excitations. The energy difference between the red (I) and blue (II) lines at an excitation energy corresponds to ΔEXX. (c) PL spectrum of a single FAPbBr3 nanocrystal at 5.5 K. Five PL peaks correspond to exciton, trion, and biexciton PL and two LO phonon replicas. The PL intensity is shown in log scale. The inset shows the optical transitions related to exciton and biexciton PL. (d) Size dependence of the binding energies of biexcitons (ΔEXX) and trions (ΔEX+). The solid curves are fits using a function of ΔEXX(X+) = A/L2 + B/L + C. (e) Size dependence of biexciton binding energy in inorganic semiconductor nanocrystals, where the binding energy and the size are normalized by the bulk exciton binding energy and the exciton Bohr radius, respectively. Data are taken from ref. 131, 134 and 164. Panel (b) is adopted with permission from ref. 73. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. Panels (c) and (d) are reproduced with permission from ref. 134. Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. 
In CsPbBr3 NCs, it was reported that ΔEXX has a huge value of about three times that of CdSe NCs and its value reaches approximately 100 meV.69 However, in the subsequent reports, the values of ΔEXX were scattered over a wide range and the value including the sign is still under debate. It has been pointed out that the initially reported very large ΔEXX of 100 meV was related to sample sintering.159 In many studies on the biexciton binding energy in LHP NCs, it has been reported that the exciton–exciton interaction is attractive and ΔEXX is a few tens of millielectronvolts or less.70,74,160–162
The value of ΔEXX has been mainly investigated by using transient absorption spectroscopy and time-resolved PL spectroscopy of NC ensembles. The reported values in CsPbBr3 NCs are scattered over a wide range69,160,161 and even a negative value (the repulsive exciton–exciton interaction) has been reported.163 One of the reasons for such inconsistencies should be that the measurements were performed on NC ensembles, which have a finite NC size distribution. Because ΔEXX depends on the NC size and the excitation energy,69,70,74,164,165 a significant influence of the size distribution of the measured NCs is considered to appear. By using polarization-dependent two-dimensional spectroscopy, it has recently reported that the size-dependent biexciton binding energy in CsPbBr3 NCs can be determined even with NC ensembles and ΔEXX is estimated to be less than about 40 meV with ΔEXX being positive, i.e. the attractive exciton–exciton interaction (Fig. 8b).73
With the ability to obtain the PL spectrum of a single NC, single-dot spectroscopy is a powerful method that can directly measure the NC-size dependence of ΔEXX.122,134 The PL linewidth of ensemble NCs at room temperature is relatively broad because of the interaction with phonons and the NC-size distribution. In contrast, the PL spectra of single NCs at low temperature show narrow PL linewidths, which enables a high precision measurement of ΔEXX. Fig. 8c shows the PL spectrum of a single FAPbBr3 NC at 5.5 K.134 On the low-energy side of the exciton emission peak, four emission peaks are observed, which are characterized by the trion and biexciton PL and two LO phonon replicas. The biexciton emission energy corresponds to the biexciton–exciton transition energy as shown in the inset of Fig. 8c. Because the biexciton–exciton transition energy is shifted from the exciton energy by ΔEXX, ΔEXX can be estimated from the difference between the peak energies of the biexciton and exciton emission spectra. The binding energy of the trion can be determined in the same way. Fig. 8d shows the observed NC-size dependence of the binding energies of trions and biexcitons. As the NC size becomes smaller, both of the trion and biexciton binding energies increase. Such a size-dependent biexciton binding energy has also been observed in CsPbBr3 NCs.69,73 Moreover, the size dependence of the biexciton binding energy has been also observed for CuCl131 and CdSe/ZnS NCs164 and theoretically calculated.165Fig. 8e plots the normalized biexciton binding energy of several inorganic semiconductor NCs as a function of the normalized NC size, where the binding energy and the size are normalized by the bulk exciton binding energy and the exciton Bohr radius, respectively. It can be seen that the normalized biexciton binding energy in LHP NCs is on the same level as those in other representative inorganic semiconductor NCs, and that the normalized size dependence shows the same behavior irrespective of the semiconductor materials. We note that in single-dot spectroscopy measurements at low temperatures, all biexciton binding energies in LHP NCs are observed to be positive and thus the exciton–exciton interaction is attractive.
4. Hot-biexciton effect and control of optical gain
4.1. Exciton–exciton interactions and optical gain dynamics
CsPbX3 NCs show excellent properties for optical gain media such as high PL quantum efficiencies exceeding 90% and low-threshold light amplification in the entire visible region.53,57,58 Biexcitons play a significant role in nonlinear optical responses such as light amplification and thus the optical gain is strongly influenced by exciton–exciton interactions.62–74 Because the biexciton dynamics in LHP NCs are very fast, femtosecond transient absorption spectroscopy is suitable to investigate the optical gain dynamics.
In Fig. 9a, we show the change in the absorption spectrum −Δαd of CsPbI3 NCs (an average edge length of 7.0 nm) at different pump–probe delay times tpp, where the pump intensity is set to be 〈N〉 = 0.1 and the excess energy Eex is 0.47 eV.70Eex is the difference between the pump photon energy and the band-edge exciton energy. A long-lasting (tpp > 500 ps) bleaching signal (−Δαd > 0) appears around the band-edge due to the state-filling effect as described in Fig. 4a. In addition to this bleaching signal, an induced absorption signal (−Δαd < 0) appears immediately after excitation (tpp < 2 ps) on the low-energy side of the band-edge. The induced absorption signal is ascribed to the biexciton effect.62,70,74,138,160 The biexciton effect can be described as follows (Fig. 9b). First, a hot exciton with an excess energy of Eex is generated by the pump pulse. This hot exciton and the band-edge exciton generated by the probe pulse interact with each other via a Coulomb interaction. Consequently, the band-edge transition energy shifts from Eg to Eg + ΔXX, where Eg is the band-edge transition energy under the absence of the hot exciton. Because the exciton–exciton interaction in CsPbI3 NCs is attractive (ΔXX < 0), the band-edge transition redshifts. While the relaxation of the hot exciton is not completed (0 ps < tpp < 2 ps), this redshift brings about the induced absorption and bleaching signals around the band edge, which results in a derivative-like feature of −Δαd. On the other hand, after the relaxation of the hot exciton (tpp > 2 ps), a strong bleaching signal appears near the band edge due to the state-filling effect, and the induced absorption signal disappears.
 Fig. 9  (a) Change in the absorption spectrum −Δαd of CsPbI3 nanocrystals at different pump–probe delay times tpp for 〈N〉 = 0.1 and the excess energy Eex of 0.47 eV. (b) Schematics of how the biexciton effect modifies the spectra of −Δαd at different delay times. The black and blue shaded areas represent the absorption bleaching (centered at Eg) and induced absorption (centered at Eg + ΔXX) signals, respectively. The spectral shape of −Δαd is determined by the sum of the two spectra (red shaded areas), which shows a derivative-like feature at 0 ps < tpp < 2 ps. (c) Excess energy dependence of the exciton–exciton interaction energy (red dots). The top axis shows the corresponding pump photon energy. The black and gray curves are steady-state absorption spectrum and its second derivative, respectively. (d) Nonlinear absorption spectra at tpp = 0.3 ps for three different pump excess energies Eex = 0.05, 0.11, and 0.26 eV, where 〈N〉 = 1. The gray dashed curve is the steady-state absorption spectrum. The shaded spectral region corresponds to the optical gain region. (e) Dynamics of the normalized change in the absorption spectrum probed at 1.80 eV for Eex = 0.05, 0.11, and 0.26 eV and 〈N〉 = 1. The inset shows the induced absorption (blue curve) and bleaching (red curve) components obtained from the fit to the pump-induced dynamics for Eex = 0.26 eV. All panels are adopted with permission from ref. 70. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 

Fig. 9c plots the Eex dependence of ΔXX. It can be seen that ΔXX takes negative values, and |ΔXX| increases monotonically and reaches a constant value as Eex is increased. This clearly shows that the strength of the exciton–exciton interaction between the hot exciton and the band-edge exciton depends on the hot-exciton state.70 The hot-exciton-state-dependent exciton–exciton interaction significantly influences the optical gain behavior. In Fig. 9d, we show the nonlinear absorption spectra αNLd = α0d + Δαd (α0d: steady-state absorption spectrum) immediately after excitation (tpp = 0.3 ps) for 〈N〉 = 1 and different values of Eex. For Eex = 0.05 eV, αNLd is smaller than zero at probe photon energies below 1.80 eV, showing that optical gain occurs. On the other hand, with increasing Eex, the optical gain spectral region redshifts and vanishes. Moreover, in Fig. 9e, we show the tpp dependence of the normalized change in the absorption spectrum −Δα/α0 at the probe photon energy of 1.80 eV. It can be seen that tpp when the optical gain appears (−Δα/α0 > 1) is longer for larger Eex. This results from the fact that the induced absorption signal immediately after excitation suppresses the optical gain. These findings show that the optical gain is significantly modulated by the hot-exciton state through the exciton–exciton interactions, which suggests a novel approach to the optical gain control on the picosecond time scale.
4.2. Optical gain control by symmetry engineering of multiexciton states
As we mentioned above, the optical gain in LHP NCs can be controlled by exciton–exciton interactions which depend on the excited state. Therefore, an improvement of the optical gain is expected by manipulating the excited state. Because double-pump transient absorption spectroscopy can realize various excited states, the symmetry of hot excitons and hot biexcitons can be controlled and the optical gain dynamics can be further clarified.74 In Fig. 10a, we provide a brief description of this method. Excitons are generated by the first and second pump pulses, which have the same intensity and are separated by a time interval Δt. The dynamics of the optical gain spectra are measured by a white-light probe pulse separated from the second pump pulse by a time interval t. In the case of a single pump excitation, either a hot exciton or a symmetric hot biexciton (which consists of a pair of hot excitons with equal energy) is formed immediately after excitation (Fig. 10b). On the other hand, in the case of a double-pump excitation, after the hot exciton generated by the first pump relaxes to a ground exciton state, it is possible to generate an asymmetric hot biexciton via the additional excitation by the second pump (Fig. 10b). An asymmetric hot biexciton is a state in which one hot exciton and one band-edge exciton exist within a single NC. In Fig. 10b, Δ(i)XX denotes the band-edge exciton energy shift under the presence of i (i = h, hh, g, and hg) state, where h, hh, g, and hg mean a hot exciton, a symmetric hot biexciton, a band-edge exciton, and an asymmetric hot biexciton, respectively.
 Fig. 10  (a) Illustration of carrier excitation and relaxation dynamics under double-pump photoexcitation. (b) Photoexcited states in lead halide perovskite nanocrystals. Eg is the energy of the lowest energy state of a single exciton. Δ represents the energy shifts induced by exciton–exciton interactions. The superscript h (g) shows that the pump-induced state is one hot (ground) exciton. (c) Pump-pulse interval dependence of the band-edge exciton energy shift for a fixed probe delay time of 0.1 ps in CsPbI3 nanocrystals. The dotted curve is the fitting result. (d) Pump-pulse interval dependence of the optical gain threshold. The dotted line is the threshold observed from single-pump measurements. Panels (a) and (b) are reproduced and panels (c) and (d) are adopted with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. 

Fig. 10c shows the Δt dependence of ΔXX in CsPbI3 NCs, where ΔXX contains contributions from all excited states. The intensities of the first and second pump pulses, 〈N1st〉 and 〈N2nd〉, are fixed to 〈N1st〉 = 〈N2nd〉 = 2. By fitting to the Δt dependence of ΔXX with a model considering contributions from all excited states, we obtained the values Δ(h+hh)XX = −36 ± 2 meV, Δ(g)XX = −3 ± 6 meV, and Δ(hg)XX = −27 ± 4 meV. For asymmetric hot biexcitons, the absolute value of the energy shift becomes smaller than the values for hot excitons and symmetric hot biexcitons. The larger the redshift of the band-edge exciton energy due to the interaction between excitons is, the larger the reabsorption of amplified light becomes, which leads to the lowering of the optical gain performance. If a double-pump pulse can generate an excited state which provides a small band-edge energy shift, the optical gain performance would be improved. Therefore, we estimated the optical gain threshold 〈Ng〉 in CsPbI3 NCs for the cases of single- and double-pump measurements. Fig. 10d plots the Δt dependence of the estimated 〈Ng〉. It can be seen that 〈Ng〉 at around Δt = 0 ps agrees with 〈Ng〉 for single-pump measurements (〈Ng〉 = 7.3). As Δt is increased, 〈Ng〉 becomes smaller than the value for single-pump measurements at Δt = 10–30 ps and then starts to increase monotonically.
Such a Δt dependence of 〈Ng〉 can be understood by considering the excited state dynamics. In the single-pump experiment, the presence of hot excitons and symmetric hot biexcitons suppresses the optical gain immediately after the excitation. On the other hand, in the double-pump experiment, the fraction of asymmetric hot biexcitons is more significant. Because asymmetric hot biexcitons show a small energy shift, the effective band-edge energy shift becomes smaller. Therefore, the reabsorption effect becomes weaker and the optical gain threshold is lowered (Δt < 30 ps). When Δt is increased further, the time interval between the first pump pulse and the probe pulse starts to become longer than the biexciton lifetime (τXX = 60 ps). This leads to an increase in the fraction of the biexcitons that recombine before the probe pulse arrives. Therefore, as Δt is increased, the fraction of the biexcitons contributing to the optical gain decreases, and thus the effective optical gain threshold increases (Δt > 100 ps). Consequently, in double-pump transient absorption spectroscopy, the competition between the two effects changes depending on the pump interval Δt, which decreases or increases the optical gain threshold, and a reduction of the optical gain threshold is realized in a specific time range.
In the above, we discussed that the relaxation of hot excitons or hot carriers is important for biexciton properties and also for the optical gain. In addition, it has been reported that, compared to the conventional inorganic semiconductors, the intra-band relaxation of photoexcited carriers in LHPs is very slow, that is, the hot carriers possess a long lifetime.166–173 The electron–lattice interactions in LHPs are very unique, and a peculiar hot-phonon bottleneck effect has been observed. Because the hot-phonon bottleneck effect significantly influences the exciton and photocarrier behaviors,174,175 these observations revealed that LHPs are materials where hot-carrier and hot-exciton effects can be clearly observed, and they are promising materials systems for hot-carrier-based optoelectronic applications. Hot carrier relaxation in LHPs was reported to be characterized by a slow relaxation time constant of a few tens of picoseconds under strong excitation conditions, which is about three orders of magnitude longer than in bulk GaAs under the same excitation conditions.11,167 This shows that when the carriers have a large excess energy at high excitation densities, the relaxation time constant becomes slow. The increase of the hot-carrier lifetime in high-density carrier systems is very similar to the results previously observed in III–V quantum wells and can be understood in terms of a hot-phonon bottleneck mechanism. If the decay of LO phonons into acoustic phonons is suppressed, the LO phonons are again absorbed by carriers and a high carrier temperature is maintained. Several possible origins of the hot-phonon bottleneck effect in LHPs have been proposed, and an overview is provided in ref. 10 and 11. Although there are many unresolved issues on the hot-carrier relaxation dynamics in LHPs, it is most likely true that the characteristic phonon modes of LHPs with the strong electron–lattice interactions and strong anharmonicity play important roles. By utilizing the long-lived hot carriers, LHP-based novel optical devices are expected in the future.
5. Conclusions and perspectives
We have reviewed the recent results on the biexciton dynamics in LHP NCs, which are attracting considerable interest as next-generation photonic and optoelectronic materials. Related to the electronic structure of LHP semiconductors, the optical responses of these NCs are governed by the dynamics of excitons, trions, and biexcitons. This has been revealed by femtosecond transient absorption spectroscopy, time-resolved PL spectroscopy, and single-dot spectroscopy. The biexciton has a short lifetime of a few tens of picoseconds due to Auger recombination, which results in the suppression of the two-photon emission via the biexciton–exciton radiative cascade. Single-dot spectroscopy has shown that LHP NCs have superior characteristics for single-photon sources. Moreover, we discussed that it is possible to control and improve the optical gain characteristics by manipulating the excited biexciton state, which is revealed by using single- and double-pump transient absorption spectroscopy. In terms of device applications, non-radiative Auger recombination process of biexcitons mostly leads to efficiency reduction of devices such as LEDs and lasers. On the other hand, the optical gain controllability through exciton–exciton interactions in LHP NCs would realize novel photonics devices, such as ultra-fast optical switches and low-threshold lasers.
The biexciton-symmetry dependence of exciton–exciton interactions provides a new way to control and improve the optical gain. At the same time, this property would also be beneficial for quantum information applications, such as sources of indistinguishable single photons and entangled photon pairs. Recently, a peculiar exciton fine structure originating from the Rashba effect has been reported for CsPbX3 NCs.100 Due to this characteristic structure, short radiative lifetimes and long optical coherence times have been observed and these properties show the great potential of CsPbX3 NCs for next-generation quantum emitters.176 However, if a non-degenerate exciton level is formed by exciton fine-structure splitting, a two-photon entanglement via a biexciton–exciton cascade emission is inhibited.177,178 Therefore, in order to obtain entangled photon pairs, the exciton fine structure should be controlled by applying external fields such as magnetic field,179 light,178etc. On the other hand, it has been proposed that, even if a non-degenerate exciton level exists, entangled photon pairs can be obtained if the biexciton–exciton transition energy is equal to the exciton energy.180,181 Such an exciton- and biexciton-energy control has been realized by applying biaxial strain.182 Control of the biexciton binding energy via the biexciton symmetry engineering would become an alternative approach to the conventional energy-state control method.
With their long hot-carrier lifetimes, LHPs are promising materials for fabrication of novel hot-carrier devices. For such applications, a detailed understanding of the biexciton symmetry and the exciton–exciton interactions is crucial. Therefore, we hope that a theoretical framework will be established that describes the biexciton-symmetry-dependent exciton–exciton interactions by considering the extension and overlap of the electron and hole wavefunctions in a NC together with the electronic structure of LHPs.
In addition to a simple cubic shape, various nanostructure shapes of LHPs have also been fabricated, including nanoplatelets55,183,184 and atomically thin 2D perovskites.185–187 Therefore, it is expected that the electronic structure and the exciton dynamics in such LHP nanostructures will be clarified and that new optical functionalities will be developed. In fact, in addition to characteristic exciton properties,188 unique spin-related optical responses, such as chiral-induced spin selectivity189 and formation of spin-polarized exciton halo,190 have recently been observed. One of new research directions is the exciton physics at homo- and hetero-interfaces of atomically thin LHP films. These materials systems are expected to become important as novel two-dimensional materials beyond transition metal dichalcogenides. In addition, a growing number of ferroelectric 2D perovskites has been reported.191 Thus, another research direction is the study of photophysics coupled to ferroelectricity. Such ferroelectricity-related optical responses have recently be investigated in a metal-free ferroelectric halide perovskite,192 which exhibits both visible PL and ferroelectricity, and visible PL correlated with local ferroelectricity has been observed.193 The detail characterization of the fundamental physical properties by precise laser spectroscopy will become even more important in the future.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank H. Tahara, N. Yarita, T. Handa, T. Yamada, S. Nakahara, K. Ohara, N. Hiroshige, K. Cho, E. Kobiyama, H. Hirori, F. Sekiguchi, T. Tadano, H. Suzuura, M. Saruyama, T. Kawawaki, R. Sato, and T. Teranishi for collaboration, help with the experiments, and discussions. Part of this work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI (Grant No. JP19H05465) and JST CREST (Grant No. JPMJCR16N3 and JPMJCR21B4).
References
S. D. Stranks and H. J. Snaith, Metal-halide perovskites for photovoltaic and light-emitting devices, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 391–402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Even, L. Pedesseau, C. Katan, M. Kepenekian, J.-S. Lauret, D. Sapori and E. Deleporte, Solid-state physics perspective on hybrid perovskite semiconductors, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 10161–10177 CrossRef CAS .
B. R. Sutherland and E. H. Sargent, Perovskite photonic sources, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 295–302 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Herz, Charge-Carrier Dynamics in Organic-Inorganic Metal Halide Perovskites, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2016, 67, 65–89 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Miyata, T. L. Atallah and X.-Y. Zhu, Lead halide perovskites: crystal-liquid duality, phonon glass electron crystals, and large polaron formation, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1701469 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yamada, T. Yamada and Y. Kanemitsu, Free carrier radiative recombination and photon recycling in lead halide perovskite solar cell materials, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2017, 90, 1129–1140 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kanemitsu and T. Handa, Photophysics of metal halide perovskites: from materials to devices, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2018, 57, 090101 CrossRef .
C. Katan, A. D. Mohite and J. Even, Entropy in halide perovskites, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 377–379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jiang, X. Wang and A. Pan, Properties of excitons and photogenerated charge carriers in metal halide perovskites, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1806671 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, J. Fu, Q. Xu and T. C. Sum, Slow Hot-Carrier Cooling in Halide Perovskites: Prospects for Hot-Carrier Solar Cells, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1802486 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. P. Joshi, S. F. Maehrlein and X.-Y. Zhu, Dynamic Screening and Slow Cooling of Hot Carriers in Lead Halide Perovskites, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1803054 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kanemitsu, T. Yamada, T. Handa and M. Nagai, Optical responses of lead halide perovskite semiconductors, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2020, 35, 093001 CrossRef CAS .
M. Baranowski and P. Plochocka, Excitons in metal halide perovskites, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903659 CrossRef CAS .
T. Handa, T. Yamada, M. Nagai and Y. Kanemitsu, Phonon, thermal, and thermo-optical properties of halide perovskites, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2020, 22, 26069 RSC .
R. Su, A. Fieramosca, Q. Zhang, H. S. Nguyen, E. Deleporte, Z. Chen, D. Sanvitto, T. C. H. Liew and Q. Xiong, Perovskite semiconductors for room-temperature exciton polaritonics, Nat. Mater., 2021, 20, 1315–1324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yamada and Y. Kanemitsu, Electron–phonon interactions in halide perovskites, NPG Asia Mater., 2022, 14, 48 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, Organometal Halide Perovskites as Visible-Light Sensitizers for Photovoltaic Cells, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Lee, J. Teuscher, T. Miyasaka, T. N. Murakami and H. J. Snaith, Efficient hybrid solar cells based on meso-superstructured organometal halide perovskites, Science, 2012, 338, 643–647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-S. Kim, C.-R. Lee, J.-H. Im, K.-B. Lee, T. Moehl, A. Marchioro, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, J.-H. Yum, J. E. Moser, M. Grätzel and N.-G. Park, Lead iodide perovskite sensitized all-solid-state submicron thin film mesoscopic solar cell with efficiency exceeding 9%, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 591 CrossRef PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, Y. C. Kim, W. S. Yang, S. Ryu and S. I. Seok, Solvent engineering for high-performance inorganic-organic hybrid perovskite solar cells, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 897–903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kanemitsu, Luminescence spectroscopy of lead-halide perovskites: materials properties and application as photovoltaic devices, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 3427–3437 RSC .
T. Handa, A. Wakamiya and Y. Kanemitsu, Photophysics of lead-free tin halide perovskite films and solar cells, APL Mater., 2019, 7, 080903 CrossRef .
J. P. Correa-Baena, M. Saliba, T. Buonassisi, M. Grätzel, A. Abate, W. Tress and A. Hagfeldt, Promises and challenges of perovskite solar cells, Science, 2018, 358, 739–744 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Rong, Y. Hu, A. Mei, H. Tan, M. I. Saidaminov, S. I. Seok, M. D. McGehee, E. H. Sargent and H. Han, Challenges for commercializing perovskite solar cells, Science, 2018, 361, eaat8235 CrossRef PubMed .
J. W. Lee, S. Tan, S. I. Seok, Y. Yang and N. G. Park, Rethinking the A cation in halide perovskites, Science, 2022, 375, eabj1186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Green, E. D. Dunlop, J. Hohl-Ebinger, M. Yoshita, N. Kopidakis and X. Hao, Solar cell efficiency tables (version 59), Prog. Photovotaics, 2022, 30, 3 CrossRef .
S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini, C. Menelaou, M. J. P. Alcocer, T. Leijtens, L. M. Herz, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Electron-hole diffusion lengths exceeding 1 micrometer in an organometal trihalide perovskite absorber, Science, 2013, 342, 341–344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xing, N. Mathews, S. Sun, S. S. Lim, Y. M. Lam, M. Grätzel, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Long-range balanced electron- and hole-transport lengths in organic-inorganic CH3NH3PbI3, Science, 2013, 342, 344–347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yamada, T. Nakamura, M. Endo, A. Wakamiya and Y. Kanemitsu, Near-band-edge optical responses of solution-processed organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite CH3NH3PbI3 on mesoporous TiO2 electrodes, Appl. Phys. Express, 2014, 7, 032302 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. A. Leguy, P. Azarhoosh, M. I. Alonso, M. Campoy-Quiles, O. J. Weber, J. Yao, D. Bryant, M. T. Weller, J. Nelson, A. Walsh, M. van Schilfgaarde and P. R. F. Barnes, Experimental and theoretical optical properties ofmethylammonium lead halide perovskites, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 6317–6327 RSC .
M. Shirayama, H. Kadowaki, T. Miyadera, T. Sugita, M. Tamakoshi, M. Kato, T. Fujiseki, D. Murata, S. Hara, T. N. Murakami, S. Fujimoto, M. Chikamatsu and H. Fujiwara, Optical Transitions in Hybrid Perovskite Solar Cells: Ellipsometry, Density Functional Theory, and Quantum Efficiency Analyses for CH3NH3PbI3, Phys. Rev. Appl., 2016, 5, 014012 CrossRef .
Y. Yamada, T. Nakamura, M. Endo, A. Wakamiya and Y. Kanemitsu, Photocarrier recombination dynamics in perovskite CH3NH3PbI3 for solar cell applications, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 11610–11613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Stranks, V. M. Burlakov, T. Leijtens, J. M. Ball, A. Goriely and H. J. Snaith, Recombination kinetics in organic-inorganic perovskites: Excitons, free charge, and subgap states, Phys. Rev. Appl., 2014, 2, 034007 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yamada, T. Yamada, L. Q. Phuong, N. Maruyama, H. Nishimura, A. Wakamiya, Y. Murata and Y. Kanemitsu, Dynamic optical properties of CH3NH3PbI3 single crystals as revealed by one- and two-photon excited photoluminescence measurements, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 10456–10459 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yamada, Y. Yamada, Y. Nakaike, A. Wakamiya and Y. Kanemitsu, Photon emission and reabsorption processes in CH3NH3PbBr3 single crystals revealed by time-resolved two-photon-excitation photoluminescence microscopy, Phys. Rev. Appl., 2017, 7, 014001 CrossRef .
T. Yamada, Y. Yamada and Y. Kanemitsu, Photon recycling in perovskite CH3NH3PbX3 (X = I, Br, Cl) bulk single crystals and polycrystalline films, J. Lumin., 2020, 220, 116987 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Pazos-Outon, M. Szumilo, R. Lamboll, J. M. Richter, M. Crespo-Quesada, M. Abdi Jalebi, H. J. Beeson, M. Vruini, M. Alsari, H. J. Snaith, B. Ehrler, R. H. Friend and F. Deschler, Photon recycling in lead iodide perovskite solar cells, Science, 2016, 351, 1430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Deschler, M. Price, S. Pathak, L. E. Klintberg, D.-D. Jarausch, R. Higler, S. Hüttner, T. Leijtens, S. D. Stranks, H. J. Snaith, M. Atatüre, R. T. Phillips and R. H. Friend, High photoluminescence efficiency and optically pumped lasing in solution-processed mixed halide perovskite semiconductors, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1421–1426 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yamada, T. Handa, Y. Yamada and Y. Kanemitsu, Light emission from halide perovskite semiconductors: Bulk crystals, thin films, and nanocrystals, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2021, 54, 383001 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wenger, P. K. Nayak, X. Wen, S. V. Kesava, N. K. Noel and H. J. Snaith, Consolidation of the optoelectronic properties of CH3NH3PbBr3 perovskite single crystals, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 590 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Handa, H. Tahara, T. Aharen and Y. Kanemitsu, Large negative thermo-optic coefficients of a lead halide perovskite, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaax0786 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Dou, Y. Yang, J. You, Z. Hong, W.-H. Chang, G. Li and Y. Yang, Solution-processed hybrid perovskite photodetectors with high detectivity, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5404 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yakunin, M. Sytnyk, D. Kriegner, S. Shrestha, M. Richter, G. J. Matt, H. Azimi, C. J. Brabec, J. Stangl, M. V. Kovalenko and W. Heiss, Detection of X-ray photons by solutionprocessed lead halide perovskites, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 444–449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-K. Tan, R. S. Moghaddam, M. L. Lai, P. Docampo, R. Higler, F. Deschler, M. Price, A. Sadhanala, L. M. Pazos, D. Credgington, F. Hanusch, T. Bein, H. J. Snaith and R. H. Friend, Bright light-emitting diodes based on organometal halide perovskite, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 687–692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xing, N. Mathews, S. S. Lim, N. Yantara, X. Liu, D. Sabba, M. Gratzel, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Low-temperature solution-processed wavelength-tunable perovskites for lasing, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 476–480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tahara, T. Aharen, A. Wakamiya and Y. Kanemitsu, Photorefractive Effect in Organic-Inorganic Hybrid Perovskites and Its Application to Optical Phase Shifter, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6, 1701366 CrossRef .
H. Hirori, P. Xia, Y. Shinohara, T. Otobe, Y. Sanari, H. Tahara, N. Ishii, J. Itatani, K. L. Ishikawa, T. Aharen, M. Ozaki, A. Wakamiya and Y. Kanemitsu, High-order harmonic generation from hybrid organic–inorganic perovskite thin films, APL Mater., 2019, 7, 041107 CrossRef .
M. V. Kovalenko, L. Protesescu and M. I. Bodnarchuk, Properties and potential optoelectronic applications of lead halide perovskite nanocrystals, Science, 2017, 358, 745–750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. A. Akkerman, G. Rainò, M. V. Kovalenko and L. Manna, Genesis, challenges and opportunities for colloidal lead halide perovskite nanocrystals, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 394–405 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Shamsi, A. S. Urban, M. Imran, L. De Trizio and L. Manna, Metal Halide Perovskite Nanocrystals: Synthesis, Post-Synthesis Modifications, and Their Optical Properties, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 3296–3348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. P. García de Arquer, D. V. Talapin, V. Klimov, Y. Arakawa, M. Bayer and E. H. Sargent, Semiconductor quantum dots: Technological progress and future challenges, Science, 2021, 373, eaaz8541 CrossRef PubMed .
L. C. Schmidt, A. Pertegás, S. González-Carrero, O. Malinkiewicz, S. Agouram, G. Mínguez Espallargas, H. J. Bolink, R. E. Galian and J. Pérez-Prieto, Nontemplate synthesis of CH3NH3PbBr3 perovskite nanoparticles, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 850–853 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Protesescu, S. Yakunin, M. I. Bodnarchuk, F. Krieg, R. Caputo, C. H. Hendon, R. X. Yang, A. Walsh and M. V. Kovalenko, Nanocrystals of cesium lead halide perovskites (CsPbX3, X = Cl, Br, and I): Novel optoelectronic materials showing bright emission with wide color gamut, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3692–3696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Rainò, M. A. Becker, M. I. Bodnarchuk, R. F. Mahrt, M. V. Kovalenko and T. Stöferle, Superfluorescence from lead halide perovskite quantum dot superlattices, Nature, 2018, 563, 671–675 CrossRef PubMed .
J. A. Sichert, Y. Tong, N. Mutz, M. Vollmer, S. Fischer, K. Z. Milowska, R. García Cortadella, B. Nickel, C. Cardenas-Daw, J. K. Stolarczy, A. S. Urban and J. Feldmann, Quantum Size Effect in Organometal Halide Perovskite Nanoplatelets, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 6521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. A. Akkerman, V. D’Innocenzo, S. Accornero, A. Scarpellini, A. Petrozza, M. Prato and L. Manna, Tuning the optical properties of cesium lead halide perovskite nanocrystals by anion exchange reactions, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 10276–10281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, X. Li, J. Song, L. Xiao, H. Zeng and H. Sun, All-inorganic colloidal perovskite quantum dots: A new class of lasing materials with favorable characteristics, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7101–7108 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yakunin, L. Protesescu, F. Krieg, M. I. Bodnarchuk, G. Nedelcu, M. Humer, G. De Luca, M. Fiebig, W. Heiss and M. V. Kovalenko, Low-threshold amplified spontaneous emission and lasing from colloidal nanocrystals of caesium lead halide perovskites, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8056 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, Y. Wu, S. Zhang, B. Cai, Y. Gu, J. Song and H. Zeng, CsPbX3 quantum dots for lighting and displays: Room-temperature synthesis, photoluminescence superiorities, underlying origins and white light-emitting diodes, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 2435–2445 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yuan, L. N. Quan, R. Comin, G. Walters, R. Sabatini, O. Voznyy, S. Hoogland, Y. Zhao, E. M. Beauregard, P. Kanjanaboos, Z. Lu, D. H. Kim and E. H. Sargent, Perovskite energy funnels for efficient light-emitting diodes, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 872–877 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kanemitsu, Trion dynamics in lead halide perovskite nanocrystals, J. Chem. Phys., 2019, 151, 170902 CrossRef PubMed .
V. I. Klimov, Spectral and dynamical properties of multiexcitons in semiconductor nanocrystals, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2007, 58, 635–673 CrossRef CAS .
V. I. Klimov, A. A. Mikhailovsky, S. Xu, A. Malko, J. A. Hollingsworth, C. A. Leatherdale, H. J. Eisler and M. G. Bawendi, Optical gain and stimulated emission in nanocrystal quantum dots, Science, 2000, 290, 314–317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Woggon, O. Wind, F. Gindele, E. Tsitsishvili and M. Müller, Optical transitions in CdSe quantum dots: From discrete levels to broad gain spectra, J. Lumin., 1996, 70, 269–280 CrossRef CAS .
V. I. Klimov, S. A. Ivanov, J. Nanda, M. Achermann, I. Bezel, J. A. McGuire and A. Piryatinski, Single-exciton optical gain in semiconductor nanocrystals, Nature, 2007, 447, 441–446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. R. Cooney, S. L. Sewall, D. M. Sagar and P. Kambhampati, Gain control in semiconductor quantum dots via state-resolved optical pumping, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 102, 127404 CrossRef PubMed .
S. L. Sewall, R. R. Cooney, E. A. Dias, P. Tyagi and P. Kambhampati, State-resolved observation in real time of the structural dynamics of multiexcitons in semiconductor nanocrystals, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 235304 CrossRef .
H. Jung, N. Ahn and V. I. Klimov, Prospects and challenges of colloidal quantum dot laser diodes, Nat. Photonics, 2021, 15, 643–655 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Castañeda, G. Nagamine, E. Yassitepe, L. G. Bonato, O. Voznyy, S. Hoogland, A. F. Nogueira, E. H. Sargent, C. H. B. Cruz and L. A. Padilha, Efficient biexciton interaction in perovskite quantum dots under weak and strong confinement, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 8603–8609 CrossRef .
G. Yumoto, H. Tahara, T. Kawawaki, M. Saruyama, R. Sato, T. Teranishi and Y. Kanemitsu, Hot biexciton effect on optical gain in CsPbI3 perovskite nanocrystals, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 2222–2228 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Nagamine, J. O. Rocha, L. G. Bonato, A. F. Nogueira, Z. Zaharieva, A. A. R. Watt, C. H. de Brito Cruz and L. A. Padilha, Two-photon absorption and two-photon-induced gain in perovskite quantum dots, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 3478–3484 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhao, Z. Qin, C. Zhang, G. Wang, X. Huang, B. Li, X. Dai and M. Xiao, Optical gain from biexcitons in CsPbBr3 nanocrystals revealed by two-dimensional electronic spectroscopy, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 1251–1258 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, L. Chen, C. Zhang, Z. Qin, B. Yu, X. Wang and M. Xiao, Inhomogeneous biexciton binding in perovskite semiconductor nanocrystals measured with two-dimensional spectroscopy, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 10173–10181 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Kobiyama, H. Tahara, R. Sato, M. Saruyama, T. Teranishi and Y. Kanemitsu, Reduction of optical gain threshold in CsPbI3 nanocrystals achieved by generation of asymmetric hot-biexcitons, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 3905–3910 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. D. Schaller and V. I. Klimov, High efficiency carrier multiplication in PbSe nanocrystals: implications for solar energy conversion, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 92, 186601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Ellingson, M. C. Beard, J. C. Johnson, P. Yu, O. I. Micic, A. J. Nozik, A. Shabaev and Al. L. Efros, Highly efficient multiple exciton generation in colloidal PbSe and PbS quantum dots, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 865–871 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ueda, K. Matsuda, T. Tayagaki and Y. Kanemitsu, Carrier multiplication in carbon nanotubes studied by femtosecond pump-probe spectroscopy, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 233105 CrossRef .
S. Wang, M. Khafizov, X. Tu, M. Zheng and T. D. Krauss, Multiple exciton generation in single-walled carbon nanotubes, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2381–2386 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kanemitsu, Multiple exciton generation and recombination in carbon nanotubes and nanocrystals, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1358–1366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Shabaev, C. S. Hellberg and Al. L. Efros, Efficiency of multiexciton generation in colloidal nanostructures, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1242–1251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tahara, M. Sakamoto, T. Teranishi and Y. Kanemitsu, Harmonic quantum coherence of multiple excitons in PbS/CdS core-shell nanocrystals, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2017, 119, 247401 CrossRef .
O. E. Semonin, J. M. Luther, S. Choi, H.-Y. Chen, J. Gao, A. J. Nozik and M. C. Beard, Peak External Photocurrent Quantum Efficiency Exceeding 100% via MEG in a Quantum Dot Solar Cell, Science, 2011, 334, 1530 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tahara, M. Sakamoto, T. Teranishi and Y. Kanemitsu, Collective enhancement of quantum coherence in coupled quantum dot films, Phys. Rev. B, 2021, 104, L241405 CrossRef CAS .
V. I. Klimov, A. A. Mikhailovsky, D. W. McBranch, C. A. Leatherdale and M. G. Bawendi, Quantization of multiparticle Auger rates in semiconductor quantum dots, Science, 2000, 287, 1011–1013 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Nozik, M. C. Beard, J. M. Luther, M. Law, R. J. Ellingson and J. C. Johnson, Semiconductor quantum dots and quantum dot arrays and applications of multiple exciton generation to third-generation photovoltaic solar cells, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6873–6890 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Pietryga, Y. S. Park, J. Lim, A. F. Fidler, W. K. Bae, S. Brovelli and V. I. Klimov, Spectroscopic and device aspects of nanocrystal quantum dots, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 10513–10622 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Nirmal, B. O. Dabbousi, M. G. Bawendi, J. J. Macklin, J. K. Trautman, T. D. Harris and L. E. Brus, Fluorescence intermittency in single cadmium selenide nanocrystals, Nature, 1996, 383, 802–804 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Efros and M. Rosen, Random telegraph signal in the photoluminescence intensity of a single quantum dot, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1997, 78, 1110–1113 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Efros and D. J. Nesbitt, Origin and control of blinking in quantum dots, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 661–671 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Iveland, L. Martinelli, J. Peretti, J. S. Speck and C. Weisbuch, Direct measurement of Auger electrons emitted from a semiconductor light-emitting diode under electrical injection: identification of the dominant mechanism for efficiency droop, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2013, 110, 177406 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Shirasaki, G. J. Supran, M. G. Bawendi and V. Bulović, Emergence of colloidal quantum-dot light-emitting technologies, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 13–23 CrossRef CAS .
P. Michler, A. Imamoğlu, M. D. Mason, P. J. Carson, G. F. Strouse and S. K. Buratto, Quantum correlation among photons from a single quantum dot at room temperature, Nature, 2000, 406, 968–970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Brokmann, G. Messin, P. Desbiolles, E. Giacobino, M. Dahan and J. P. Hermier, Colloidal CdSe/ZnS quantum dots as single-photon sources, New J. Phys., 2004, 6, 99 CrossRef .
Y.-S. Park, S. Guo, N. S. Makarov and V. I. Klimov, Room temperature single-photon emission from individual perovskite quantum dots, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 10386–10393 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          C. Zhu, M. Marczak, L. Feld, S. C. Boehme, C. Bernasconi, A. Moskalenko, I. Cherniukh, D. Dirin, M. I. Bodnarchuk, M. V. Kovalenko and G. Rainò, Room-Temperature, Highly Pure Single-Photon Sources from All-Inorganic Lead Halide Perovskite Quantum Dots, Nano Lett.,  2022, 22, 3751–3760 Search PubMed .
T. Umebayashi, K. Asai, T. Kondo and A. Nakao, Electronic structures of lead iodide based low-dimensional crystals, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2003, 67, 155405 CrossRef .
J. Even, L. Pedesseau, J.-M. Jancu and C. Katan, Importance of spin–orbit coupling in hybrid organic/inorganic perovskites for photovoltaic applications, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 2999–3005 CrossRef CAS .
D. Giovanni, H. Ma, J. Chua, M. Grätzel, R. Ramesh, S. Mhaisalkar, N. Mathews and T. C. Sum, Highly spin-polarized carrier dynamics and ultralarge photoinduced magnetization in CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite thin films, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 1553–1558 CrossRef CAS .
Z. G. Yu, Effective-mass model and magneto-optical properties in hybrid perovskites, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 28576 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Becker, R. Vaxenburg, G. Nedelcu, P. C. Sercel, A. Shabaev, M. J. Mehl, J. G. Michopoulos, S. G. Lambrakos, N. Bernstein, J. L. Lyons, T. Stöferle, R. F. Mahrt, M. V. Kovalenko, D. J. Norris, G. Rainò and A. L. Efros, Bright triplet excitons in caesium lead halide perovskites, Nature, 2018, 553, 189–193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Yumoto, H. Hirori, F. Sekiguchi, R. Sato, M. Saruyama, T. Teranishi and Y. Kanemitsu, Strong spin-orbit coupling inducing Autler-Townes effect in lead halide perovskite nanocrystals, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 3026 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Yamada, T. Aharen and Y. Kanemitsu, Near-band-edge optical responses of CH3NH3PbCl3 single crystals: Photon recycling of excitonic luminescence, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2018, 120, 057404 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ohara, T. Yamada, H. Tahara, T. Aharen, H. Hirori, H. Suzuura and Y. Kanemitsu, Excitonic enhancement of optical nonlinearities in perovskite CH3NH3PbI3 single crystals, Phys. Rev. Mater., 2019, 3, 111601 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ohara, T. Yamada, T. Aharen, H. Tahara, H. Hirori, H. Suzuura and Y. Kanemitsu, Impact of spin-orbit splitting on two-photon absorption spectra in a halide perovskite single crystal, Phys. Rev. B, 2021, 103, L041201 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Autler and C. H. Townes, Stark effect in rapidly varying fields, Phys. Rev., 1955, 100, 703–722 CrossRef .
A. Von Lehmen, D. S. Chemla, J. E. Zucker and J. P. Heritage, Optical stark effect on excitons in GaAs quantum wells, Opt. Lett., 1986, 11, 609–611 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. J. Sie, J. W. McIver, Y.-H. Lee, L. Fu, J. Kong and N. Gedik, Valley-selective optical stark effect in monolayer WS2, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 290–294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Giovanni, W. K. Chong, H. A. Dewi, K. Thirumal, I. Neogi, R. Ramesh, S. Mhaisalkar, N. Mathews and T. C. Sum, Tunable room-temperature spin-selective optical stark effect in solution-processed layered halide perovskites, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1600477 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yang, M. Yang, K. Zhu, J. C. Johnson, J. J. Berry, J. van de Lagemaat and M. C. Beard, Large polarization-dependent exciton optical stark effect in lead iodide perovskites, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wu, Y. S. Park, J. Lim and V. I. Klimov, Towards zero-threshold optical gain using charged semiconductor quantum dots, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 1140–1147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Hu, H. Zhang, C. Sun, C. Yin, B. Lv, C. Zhang, W. Yu, X. Wang, Y. Zhang and M. Xiao, Superior Optical Properties of Perovskite Nanocrystals as Single Photon Emitters, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 12410–12416 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zheng, L. Z. Tan, S. Liu and A. M. Rappe, Rashba spin–orbit coupling enhanced carrier lifetime in CH3NH3PbI3, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 7794–7800 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kepenekian. and J. Even, Rashba and Dresselhaus couplings in halide perovskites: accomplishments and opportunities for spintronics and spin−orbitronics, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 3362–3370 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Isarov, L. Z. Tan, M. I. Bodnarchuk, M. V. Kovalenko, A. M. Rappe and E. Lifshitz, Rashba effect in a single colloidal CsPbBr3 perovskite nanocrystal detected by magneto-optical measurements, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 5020–5026 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Niesner, M. Hauck, S. Shrestha, I. Levchuk, G. J. Matt, A. Osvet, M. Batentschuk, C. Brabec, H. B. Weber and T. Fauster, Structural fluctuations cause spin-split states in tetragonal (CH3NH3)PbI3 as evidenced by the circular photogalvanic effect, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2018, 115, 9509–9514 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Frohna, T. Deshpande, J. Harter, W. Peng, B. A. Barker, J. B. Neaton, S. G. Louie, O. M. Bakr, D. Hsieh and M. Bernardi, Inversion symmetry and bulk Rashba effect in methylammonium lead iodide perovskite single crystals, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1829 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Ogawa, H. Tahara, N. Igarashi, Y. Yamada and Y. Kanemitsu, Spectral characterization of the Rashba spin-split band in a lead halide perovskite single crystal by photocurrent heterodyne interference spectroscopy, Phys. Rev. B, 2021, 103, L081201 CrossRef CAS .
E. Lafalce, E. Amerling, Z.-G. Yu, P. C. Sercel, L. Whittaker-Brooks and Z. V. Vardeny, Rashba splitting in organic–inorganic lead–halide perovskites revealed through two-photon absorption spectroscopy, Nat. Commun., 2022, 13, 483 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. C. Sercel, J. L. Lyons, D. Wickramaratne, R. Vaxenburg, N. Bernstein and Al. L. Efros, Exciton fine structure in perovskite nanocrystals, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 4068–4077 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Tamarat, M. I. Bodnarchuk, J. B. Trebbia, R. Erni, M. V. Kovalenko, J. Even and B. Lounis, The ground exciton state of formamidinium lead bromide perovskite nanocrystals is a singlet dark state, Nat. Mater., 2019, 18, 717–724 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Tamarat, L. Hou, J.-B. Trebbia, A. Swarnkar, L. Biadala, Y. Louyer, M. I. Bodnarchuk, M. V. Kovalenko, J. Even and B. Lounis, The dark exciton ground state promotes photon-pair emission in individual perovskite nanocrystals, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 6001 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Yin, L. Chen, N. Song, Y. Lv, F. Hu, C. Sun, W. W. Yu, C. Zhang, X. Wang, Y. Zhang and M. Xiao, Bright-Exciton Fine-Structure Splittings in Single Perovskite Nanocrystals, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2017, 119, 026401 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Fu, P. Tamarat, H. Huang, J. Even, A. L. Rogach and B. Lounis, Neutral and Charged Exciton Fine Structure in Single Lead Halide Perovskite Nanocrystals Revealed by Magneto-optical Spectroscopy, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 2895–2901 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          K. Cho, H. Tahara, T. Yamada, H. Suzuura, T. Tadano, R. Sato, M. Saruyama, H. Hirori, T. Teranishi and Y. Kanemitsu, under review.
A. L. Efros and A. L. Efros, Interband Absorption of Light in Semiconductor Sphere, Sov. Phys. Semicond., 1982, 16, 772–775 Search PubMed .
L. E. Brus, Electron-Electron and Electron-Hole Interactions in Small Semiconductor Crystallites: The Size Dependence of the Lowest Excited Electronic State, J. Chem. Phys., 1984, 80, 4403–4409 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kayanuma, Quantum-size effects of interacting electrons and holes in semiconductor microcrystals with spherical shape, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1988, 38, 9797 CrossRef PubMed .
A. L. Efros, M. Rosen, M. Kuno, M. Nirmal, D. J. Norris and M. Bawendi, Band-edge exciton in quantum dots of semiconductors with a degenerate valence band: Dark and bright exciton states, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1996, 54, 4843 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Empedocles and M. G. Bawendi, Quantum-confined stark effect in single CdSe nanocrystallite quantum dots, Science, 1997, 278, 2114–2117 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Itoh, M. Furumiya, T. Ikehara and C. Gourdon, Size-dependent radiative decay time of confined excitons in CuCl microcrystals, Solid State Commun., 1990, 73, 271–274 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Masumoto, S. Okamoto and S. Katayanagi, Biexciton binding energy in CuCl quantum dots, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1994, 50, 18658 CrossRef CAS .
P. C. Sercel, J. L. Lyons, N. Bernstein and Al. L. Efros, Quasicubic model for metal halide perovskite nanocrystals, J. Chem. Phys., 2019, 151, 234106 CrossRef PubMed .
M. C. Brennan, J. E. Herr, T. S. Nguyen-Beck, J. Zinna, S. Draguta, S. Rouvimov, J. Parkhill and M. Kuno, Origin of the size-dependent Stokes shift in CsPbBr3 perovskite nanocrystals, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 12201–12208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Cho, T. Yamada, H. Tahara, T. Tadano, H. Suzuura, M. Saruyama, R. Sato, T. Teranishi and Y. Kanemitsu, Luminescence Fine Structures in Single Lead Halide Perovskite Nanocrystals: Size Dependence of the Exciton–Phonon Coupling, Nano Lett., 2021, 21, 7206–7212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. N. Quan, R. Quintero-Bermudez, O. Voznyy, G. Walters, A. Jain, J. Z. Fan, X. L. Zheng, Z. Y. Yang and E. H. Sargent, Highly emissive green perovskite nanocrystals in a solid state crystalline matrix, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605945 CrossRef .
X. Chen, F. Zhang, Y. Ge, L. Shi, S. Huang, J. Tang, Z. Lv, L. Zhang, B. Zou and H. Zhong, Centimeter-sized Cs4PbBr6 crystals with embedded CsPbBr3 nanocrystals showing superior photoluminescence: nonstoichiometry induced transformation and light-emitting applications, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1706567 CrossRef .
Y. Kajino, S. Otake, T. Yamada, K. Kojima, T. Nakamura, A. Wakamiya, Y. Kanemitsu and Y. Yamada, Anti-Stokes photoluminescence from CsPbBr3 nanostructures embedded in a Cs4PbBr6 crystal, Phys. Rev. Mater., 2022, 6, L043001 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Makarov, S. Guo, O. Isaienko, W. Liu, I. Robel and V. I. Klimov, Spectral and dynamical properties of single excitons, biexcitons, and trions in cesium–lead-halide perovskite quantum dots, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 2349–2362 CrossRef CAS .
N. Yarita, H. Tahara, T. Ihara, T. Kawawaki, R. Sato, M. Saruyama, T. Teranishi and Y. Kanemitsu, Dynamics of charged excitons and biexcitons in CsPbBr3 perovskite nanocrystals revealed by femtosecond transient-absorption and single-dot luminescence spectroscopy, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 1413–1418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Yarita, T. Aharen, H. Tahara, M. Saruyama, T. Kawawaki, R. Sato, T. Teranishi and Y. Kanemitsu, Observation of positive and negative trions in organic-inorganic hybrid perovskite nanocrystals, Phys. Rev. Mater., 2018, 2, 116003 CrossRef CAS .
N. Yarita, H. Tahara, M. Saruyama, T. Kawawaki, R. Sato, T. Teranishi and Y. Kanemitsu, Impact of postsynthetic surface modification on photoluminescence intermittency in formamidinium lead bromide perovskite nanocrystals, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 6041–6047 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nakahara, H. Tahara, G. Yumoto, T. Kawawaki, M. Saruyama, R. Sato, T. Teranishi and Y. Kanemitsu, Suppression of trion formation in CsPbBr3 perovskite nanocrystals by postsynthetic surface modification, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 22188–22193 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nakahara, K. Ohara, H. Tahara, G. Yumoto, T. Kawawaki, M. Saruyama, R. Sato, T. Teranishi and Y. Kanemitsu, Ionization and neutralization dynamics of CsPbBr3 perovskite nanocrystals revealed by double-pump transient absorption spectroscopy, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 4731–4736 CrossRef CAS .
W. Gao, J. Ding, Z. Bai, Y. Qi, Y. Wang and Z. Lv, Multiple excitons dynamics of lead halide perovskite, Nanophotonics, 2021, 10, 3945–3955 CrossRef CAS .
S. Masada, T. Yamada, H. Tahara, H. Hirori, M. Saruyama, T. Kawawaki, R. Sato, T. Teranishi and Y. Kanemitsu, Effect of A-site cation on photoluminescence spectra of single lead bromide perovskite nanocrystals, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 4022–4028 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Nair, J. Zhao and M. G. Bawendi, Biexciton quantum yield of single semiconductor nanocrystals from photon statistics, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1136–1140 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Hiroshige, T. Ihara and Y. Kanemitsu, Simultaneously measured photoluminescence lifetime and quantum yield of two-photon cascade emission on single CdSe/ZnS nanocrystals, Phys. Rev. B, 2017, 95, 245307 CrossRef .
N. Hiroshige, T. Ihara, M. Saruyama, T. Teranishi and Y. Kanemitsu, Coulomb-enhanced radiative recombination of biexcitons in single giant-shell CdSe/CdS core/shell nanocrystals, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 1961–1966 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-S. Park, W. K. Bae, J. M. Pietryga and V. I. Klimov, Auger recombination of biexcitons and negative and positive trions in individual quantum dots, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 7288–7296 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Galland, Y. Ghosh, A. Steinbrück, M. Sykora, J. A. Hollingsworth, V. I. Klimov and H. Htoon, Two Types of Luminescence Blinking Revealed by Spectroelectrochemistry of Single Quantum Dots, Nature, 2011, 479, 203–207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. T. Trinh, D. N. Minh, K. J. Ahn, Y. Kang and K. G. Lee, Verification of Type-A and Type-B-HC Blinking Mechanisms of Organic–Inorganic Formamidinium Lead Halide Perovskite Quantum Dots by FLID Measurements, Sci. Rep., 2020, 10, 2172 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhu, L. Men, Y. Guo, Q. Zhu, U. Bhattacharjee, P. M. Goodwin, J. W. Petrich, E. A. Smith and J. Vela, Shape Evolution and Single Particle Luminescence of Organometal Halide Perovskite Nanocrystals, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 2948–2959 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tian, A. Merdasa, M. Peter, M. Abdellah, K. Zheng, C. S. Ponseca, Jr., T. Pullerits, A. Yartsev, V. Sundström and I. G. Scheblykin, Giant Photoluminescence Blinking of Perovskite Nanocrystals Reveals Single-Trap Control of Luminescence, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 1603–1608 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wen, A. Ho-Baillie, S. Huang, R. Sheng, S. Chen, H.-C. Ko and M. A. Green, Mobile Charge-Induced Fluorescence Intermittency in Methylammonium Lead Bromide Perovskite, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 4644–4649 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, T. Ding, J. Leng, S. Jin and K. Wu, Intact Carrier Doping by Pump−Pump−Probe Spectroscopy in Combination with Interfacial Charge Transfer: A Case Study of CsPbBr3 Nanocrystals, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 3372–3377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-S. Park, W. K. Bae, L. A. Padilha, J. M. Pietryga and V. I. Klimov, Effect of the core/shell interface on Auger recombination evaluated by single-quantum-dot spectroscopy, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 396–402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. K. Bae, L. A. Padilha, Y.-S. Park, H. McDaniel, I. Robel, J. M. Pietryga and V. I. Klimov, Controlled alloying of the core–shell interface in CdSe/CdS quantum dots for suppression of Auger recombination, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 3411–3419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Nasilowski, P. Spinicelli, G. Patriarche and B. Dubertret, Gradient CdSe/CdS quantum dots with room temperature biexciton unity quantum yield, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3953–3958 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. E. Shulenberger, M. N. Ashner, S. K. Ha, F. Krieg, M. V. Kovalenko, W. A. Tisdale and M. G. Bawendi, Setting an upper bound to the biexciton binding energy in CsPbBr3 perovskite nanocrystals, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 5680–5686 CrossRef CAS .
J. Aneesh, A. Swarnkar, V. Kumar Ravi, R. Sharma, A. Nag and K. V. Adarsh, Ultrafast exciton dynamics in colloidal CsPbBr3 perovskite nanocrystals: Biexciton effect and Auger recombination, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 4734–4739 CrossRef CAS .
X. Shen, S. Wang, C. Geng, L. Li, E. Zhao, J. Sun, W. Wu, L. An and K. Pan, Red shift of bleaching signals in femtosecond transient absorption spectra of CsPbX3 (X = Cl/Br, Br, Br/I) nanocrystals induced by the biexciton effect, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2021, 125, 5278–5287 CrossRef CAS .
G. Lubin, G. Yaniv, M. Kazes, A. C. Ulku, I. M. Antolovic, S. Burri, C. Bruschini, E. Charbon, V. J. Yallapragada and D. Oron, Resolving the controversy in biexciton binding energy of cesium lead halide perovskite nanocrystals through heralded single-particle spectroscopy, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 19581–19587 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. N. Ashner, K. E. Shulenberger, F. Krieg, E. R. Powers, M. V. Kovalenko, M. G. Bawendi and W. A. Tisdale, Size-dependent biexciton spectrum in CsPbBr3 perovskite nanocrystals, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 2639–2645 CrossRef CAS .
M. Achermann, J. A. Hollingsworth and V. I. Klimov, Multiexcitons confined within a subexcitonic volume: Spectroscopic and dynamical signatures of neutral and charged biexcitons in ultrasmall semiconductor nanocrystals, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2003, 68, 245302 CrossRef .
T. Takagahara, Biexciton states in semiconductor quantum dots and their nonlinear optical properties, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1989, 39, 10206 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Zhu, K. Miyata, Y. Fu, J. Wang, P. P. Joshi, D. Niesner, K. W. Williams, S. Jin and X.-Y. Zhu, Screening in crystalline liquids protects energetic carriers in hybrid perovskites, Science, 2016, 353, 1409–1413 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, D. P. Ostrowski, R. M. France, K. Zhu, J. van de Lagemaat, J. M. Luther and M. C. Beard, Observation of a hot-phonon bottleneck in lead-iodide perovskites, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 53–59 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Price, J. Butkus, T. C. Jellicoe, A. Sadhanala, A. Briane, J. E. Halpert, K. Broch, J. M. Hodgkiss, R. H. Friend and F. Deschler, Hot-carrier cooling and photoinduced refractive index changes in organic–inorganic lead halide perovskites, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8420 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, S. Bhaumik, T. W. Goh, M. S. Kumar, N. Yantara, M. Gratzel, S. Mhaisalkar, N. Mathews and T. C. Sum, Slow cooling and highly efficient extraction of hot carriers in colloidal perovskite nanocrystals, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14350 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Fu, Q. Xu, G. Han, B. Wu, C. H. A. Huan, M. L. Leek and T. C. Sum, Hot carrier cooling mechanisms in halide perovskites, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1300 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Yang, X. Wen, H. Xia, R. Sheng, Q. Ma, J. Kim, P. Tapping, T. Harada, T. W. Kee, F. Huang, Y.-B. Cheng, M. Green, A. Ho-Baillie, S. Huang, S. Shrestha, R. Patterson and G. Conibeer, Acoustic-optical phonon up-conversion and hot-phonon bottleneck in lead-halide perovskites, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14120 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Shen, T. S. Ripolles, J. Even, Y. Ogomi, K. Nishinaka, T. Izuishi, N. Nakazawa, Y. Zhang, C. Ding, F. Liu, T. Toyoda, K. Yoshino, T. Minemoto, K. Katayama and S. Hayase, Slow hot carrier cooling in cesium lead iodide perovskites, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2017, 111, 153903 CrossRef .
F. Sekiguchi, H. Hirori, G. Yumoto, A. Shimazaki, T. Nakamura, A. Wakamiya and Y. Kanemitsu, Enhancing the Hot-Phonon Bottleneck Effect in a Metal Halide Perovskite by Terahertz Phonon Excitation, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2021, 126, 077401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. Shah, Hot carriers in semiconductor nanostructures: Physics and applications, Academic Press, Inc., San Diego, CA,  1992 Search PubMed .
J. A. Kash, J. C. Tsang and J. M. Hvam, Subpicosecond time-resolved Raman spectroscopy of LO phonons in GaAs, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1985, 54, 2151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Utzat, W. Sun, A. E. K. Kaplan, F. Krieg, M. Ginterseder, B. Spokoyny, N. D. Klein, K. E. Shulenberger, C. F. Perkinson, M. V. Kovalenko and M. G. Bawendi, Coherent single-photon emission from colloidal lead halide perovskite quantum dots, Science, 2019, 363, 1068–1072 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Santori, D. Fattal, M. Pelton, G. S. Solomon and Y. Yamamoto, Polarization-correlated photon pairs from a single quantum dot, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2002, 66, 045308 CrossRef .
A. Muller, W. Fang, J. Lawall and G. S. Solomon, Creating polarization-entangled photon pairs from a semiconductor quantum dot using the optical stark effect, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 103, 217402 CrossRef PubMed .
R. M. Stevenson, R. J. Young, P. Atkinson, K. Cooper, D. A. Ritchie and A. J. Shields, A semiconductor source of triggered entangled photon pairs, Nature, 2006, 439, 179–182 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. E. Avron, G. Bisker, D. Gershoni, N. H. Lindner, E. A. Meirom and R. J. Warburton, Entanglement on demand through time reordering, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 100, 120501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Plumhof, R. Trotta, A. Rastelli and O. G. Schmidt, Experimental methods of post-growth tuning of the excitonic fine structure splitting in semiconductor quantum dots, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2012, 7, 336 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Ding, R. Singh, J. D. Plumhof, T. Zander, V. Křápek, Y. H. Chen, M. Benyoucef, V. Zwiller, K. Dörr, G. Bester, A. Rastelli and O. G. Schmidt, Tuning the exciton binding energies in single self-assembled InGaAs/GaAs quantum dots by piezoelectric-induced biaxial stress, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 104, 067405 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Tyagi, S. M. Arveson and W. A. Tisdale, Colloidal organohalide perovskite nanoplatelets exhibiting quantum confinement, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 1911–1916 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tong, F. Ehrat, W. Vanderlinden, C. Cardenas-Daw, J. K. Stolarczyk, L. Polavarapu and A. S. Urban, Dilution-Induced Formation of Hybrid Perovskite Nanoplatelets, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 10936–10944 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Dou, A. B. Wong, Y. Yu, M. Lai, N. Kornienko, S. W. Eaton, A. Fu, C. G. Bischak, J. Ma, T. Ding, N. S. Ginsberg, L.-W. Wang, A. P. Alivisatos and P. Yang, Atomically thin two-dimensional organic-inorganic hybrid perovskites, Science, 2015, 349, 1518–1521 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, Y. Sun, J. Peng, J. Tang, K. Zheng and Z. Liang, 2D Ruddlesden–Popper perovskites for optoelectronics, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1703487 CrossRef .
J.-C. Blancon, J. Even, C. C. Stoumpos, M. G. Kanatzidis and A. D. Mohite, Semiconductor physics of organic–inorganic 2D halide perovskites, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2020, 15, 969–985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-C. Blancon, A. V. Stier, H. Tsai, W. Nie, C. C. Stoumpos, B. Traoré, L. Pedesseau, M. Kepenekian, F. Katsutani, G. T. Noe, J. Kono, S. Tretiak, S. A. Crooker, C. Katan, M. G. Kanatzidis, J. J. Crochet, J. Even and A. D. Mohite, Scaling law for excitons in 2D perovskite quantum wells, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2254 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Lu, J. Wang, C. Xiao, X. Pan, X. Chen, R. Brunecky, J. J. Berry, K. Zhu, M. C. Beard and Z. V. Vardeny, Spin-dependent charge transport through 2D chiral hybrid lead-iodide perovskites, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaay0571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Yumoto, F. Sekiguchi, R. Hashimoto, T. Nakamura, A. Wakamiya and Y. Kanemitsu, Rapidly expanding spin-polarized exciton halo in a two-dimensional halide perovskite at room temperature, Sci. Adv., 2022, 8, eabp8135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Siwach, P. Sikarwar, J. S. Halpati and A. K. Chandiran, Design of above-room-temperature ferroelectric two-dimensional layered halide perovskites, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 8719–8738 RSC .
H.-Y. Ye, Y.-Y. Tang, P.-F. Li, W.-Q. Liao, J.-X. Gao, X.-N. Hua, H. Cai, P.-P. Shi, Y.-M. You and R.-G. Xiong, Metal-free three-dimensional perovskite ferroelectrics, Science, 2018, 361, 151–155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Handa, R. Hashimoto, G. Yumoto, T. Nakamura, A. Wakamiya and Y. Kanemitsu, Metal-free ferroelectric halide perovskite exhibits visible photoluminescence correlated with local ferroelectricity, Sci. Adv., 2022, 8, eabo1621 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2022
Table Content:

Go Yumoto
	Go Yumoto received his PhD from The University of Tokyo in 2017. Currently, he is working as an assistant professor at the Institute for Chemical Research, Kyoto University. His research interests include optical properties of low-dimensional halide perovskite nanostructures, opto-spintronic properties of halide perovskites, and nonlinear optics in semiconductor nanostructures.

Yoshihiko Kanemitsu
	Yoshihiko Kanemitsu received his PhD from The University of Tokyo in 1986. He is a professor at the Institute for Chemical Research, Kyoto University. Currently, his research interests include fundamental optical and electronic properties of halide perovskites, dynamics of biexcitons and trions in nanocrystal quantum dots, nonlinear optics of semiconductors under extremely strong electric fields, and photophysics of solar cell devices.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Crystal structure of lead halide perovskites APbX3. (b) Illustration of exciton and multiexciton states, which determine the optical responses of lead halide perovskite nanocrystals. Solid (open) circles represent electrons (holes). (c) Schematics of multiple exciton generation (MEG) and Auger recombination processes.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Electronic band structure of lead halide perovskites. le, light-electron conduction band; he, heavy-electron conduction band; so, split-off conduction band; v, valence band. (b) Optical transition selection rules between band-edge states and between conduction band states. Δso denotes the spin-orbit splitting energy. (c) Excitation energy dependences of two-photon absorption coefficient (top panel) and dichroism (bottom panel). The top and bottom axes are the excitation energy ℏω and twice of that 2ℏω, respectively. The dotted curves are theoretical results. The vertical dashed lines represent the lowest energy of the heavy- and light-electron conduction bands. (d) Schematics of the two-level optical Stark effect in lead halide perovskites. The upper panel shows that when the band-edge optical transition from |−1/2〉v to |+1/2〉so (from |+1/2〉v to |−1/2〉so) is driven by right- (left-) handed circularly polarized laser pulse, the energy spacing between the two states shifts from E0 to E0 + δE only during the laser excitation. The lower panel is the corresponding description with the exciton picture. (e) Pump energy dependence of the energy shift for σ+-pump and σ+-probe pulses, observed in CsPbBr3 nanocrystals. The top and bottom axes are the pump energy ℏω and the pump detuning energy defined as E0–ℏω, respectively. The red and black curves show the calculated energy shift based on the Autler–Townes effect and the two-level optical Stark effect, respectively. (f) Energy level diagram and optical transition selection rules for exciton (|±1〉ex) and biexciton (|XX〉) states. Panels (b) and (e) are reproduced from ref. 101. Copyright 2021, The Authors, Published by Springer Nature under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International license. Panel (c) is reproduced with permission from ref. 104. Copyright 2021, American Physical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Rashba spin-split band structure in lead halide perovskites. (b) Schematic for how the Rashba effect modifies the energy structure of exciton states in lead halide perovskite nanocrystals. (c) Size dependence of the absorption band edge energy in lead halide perovskite nanocrystals. Data are taken from ref. 53, 133, and 134. The solid curves are calculated results based on ref. 132. (d) Top left: Optical absorption and PL spectra of CsPbBr3/Cs4PbBr6 (upper panel) and CsPbBr3 bulk crystals (lower panel). Top right: Dependence of the external quantum efficiency on the excitation power density for the CsPbBr3/Cs4PbBr6 crystal. Excitation photon energy was 3.1 eV. Bottom: Stability of the PL intensity against light exposure for the CsPbBr3/Cs4PbBr6 (red data) and the CsPbBr3 bulk crystal (green data) under continuous-wave photoexcitation in air at room temperature. Panel (b) is adopted with permission from ref. 119. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. Panel (d) is adopted with permission from ref. 137. Copyright 2022, American Physical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematics of how the photoexcited states determine the transmission of the probe pulse with photon energies around the band edge. The green and black arrows represent stimulated emission and absorption, respectively. When stimulated emission overcomes absorption, the probe light is amplified and optical gain appears. (b) Dynamics of the pump-induced change in transmission for various excitation fluences in CsPbBr3 nanocrystals. The dashed curves are the global fitting results using the triple exponential function. (c) Pump photon fluence dependence of estimated amplitudes of the exciton (AX), trion (AX+), and biexciton (AXX). The solid curve shows the fitting result using the Poisson distribution. (d and e) PL dynamics (d) and fast-decay components of the PL curves (e) of CsPbBr3 nanocrystals for different excitation fluences. Panel (b) is adopted and panel (c) is reproduced with permission from ref. 142. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. Panels (d) and (e) are adopted with permission from ref. 139. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic of a Hanbury–Brown–Twiss interferometer. APD denotes avalanche photodiode. (b) Illustration of the biexciton–exciton cascade emission. (c and d) Second-order correlation function (c) and PL dynamics of trion and first photons (d) observed for a single CsPbBr3 nanocrystal. IRF denotes instrument response function. (e) Calculated 〈N〉 dependence of gc/gs for different values of ηXX/ηX. Panels (c) and (d) are adopted with permission from ref. 139. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. Panel (e) is adopted with permission from ref. 147. Copyright 2017, American Physical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematics of recombination pathways in negative and positive trions, and biexciton. (b) Relationship between the negative and positive trion lifetimes in FAPbBr3 nanocrystals. The dashed line is a linear fit. (c) Histogram of the biexciton lifetime estimated from the lifetimes of negative and positive trions. The red arrow indicates the biexciton lifetime of the ensemble nanocrystals obtained from transient absorption measurements. Panels (b) and (c) are adopted with permission from ref. 140. Copyright 2018, American Physical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a and b) PL intensity time traces which show type A (a) and type B (b) blinking, obtained from single FAPbBr3 nanocrystals. (c and d) Correlation between PL intensity and lifetime for type A (c) and type B (d) blinking. (e and f) Correlation between PL intensity and PL peak energy for type A (e) and type B (f) blinking. (g) Illustration of two mechanisms for formation of ionized nanocrystals. When the ionized nanocrystals are photoexcited, trion is formed. Panels (a), (b), (d), and (f) are adopted and panels (c) and (e) are reproduced with permission from ref. 141. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Energy level diagram of exciton and biexciton states. ΔEXX is the biexciton binding energy. (b) Two-dimensional spectrum of CsPbBr3 nanocrystals measured by polarization-dependent two-dimensional spectroscopy at 10 K with the cross-circular excitations. The energy difference between the red (I) and blue (II) lines at an excitation energy corresponds to ΔEXX. (c) PL spectrum of a single FAPbBr3 nanocrystal at 5.5 K. Five PL peaks correspond to exciton, trion, and biexciton PL and two LO phonon replicas. The PL intensity is shown in log scale. The inset shows the optical transitions related to exciton and biexciton PL. (d) Size dependence of the binding energies of biexcitons (ΔEXX) and trions (ΔEX+). The solid curves are fits using a function of ΔEXX(X+) = A/L2 + B/L + C. (e) Size dependence of biexciton binding energy in inorganic semiconductor nanocrystals, where the binding energy and the size are normalized by the bulk exciton binding energy and the exciton Bohr radius, respectively. Data are taken from ref. 131, 134 and 164. Panel (b) is adopted with permission from ref. 73. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. Panels (c) and (d) are reproduced with permission from ref. 134. Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Change in the absorption spectrum −Δαd of CsPbI3 nanocrystals at different pump–probe delay times tpp for 〈N〉 = 0.1 and the excess energy Eex of 0.47 eV. (b) Schematics of how the biexciton effect modifies the spectra of −Δαd at different delay times. The black and blue shaded areas represent the absorption bleaching (centered at Eg) and induced absorption (centered at Eg + ΔXX) signals, respectively. The spectral shape of −Δαd is determined by the sum of the two spectra (red shaded areas), which shows a derivative-like feature at 0 ps < tpp < 2 ps. (c) Excess energy dependence of the exciton–exciton interaction energy (red dots). The top axis shows the corresponding pump photon energy. The black and gray curves are steady-state absorption spectrum and its second derivative, respectively. (d) Nonlinear absorption spectra at tpp = 0.3 ps for three different pump excess energies Eex = 0.05, 0.11, and 0.26 eV, where 〈N〉 = 1. The gray dashed curve is the steady-state absorption spectrum. The shaded spectral region corresponds to the optical gain region. (e) Dynamics of the normalized change in the absorption spectrum probed at 1.80 eV for Eex = 0.05, 0.11, and 0.26 eV and 〈N〉 = 1. The inset shows the induced absorption (blue curve) and bleaching (red curve) components obtained from the fit to the pump-induced dynamics for Eex = 0.26 eV. All panels are adopted with permission from ref. 70. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Illustration of carrier excitation and relaxation dynamics under double-pump photoexcitation. (b) Photoexcited states in lead halide perovskite nanocrystals. Eg is the energy of the lowest energy state of a single exciton. Δ represents the energy shifts induced by exciton–exciton interactions. The superscript h (g) shows that the pump-induced state is one hot (ground) exciton. (c) Pump-pulse interval dependence of the band-edge exciton energy shift for a fixed probe delay time of 0.1 ps in CsPbI3 nanocrystals. The dotted curve is the fitting result. (d) Pump-pulse interval dependence of the optical gain threshold. The dotted line is the threshold observed from single-pump measurements. Panels (a) and (b) are reproduced and panels (c) and (d) are adopted with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2022
