Control the size and surface chemistry of graphene for the rising fluorescent materials  - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2CC31201H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2CC31201H
(Feature Article)
Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 4527-4539Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsControl the size and surface chemistry of graphene for the rising fluorescent materials

        
          
            Shoujun 
            Zhu
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Shijia 
            Tang
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Junhu 
            Zhang
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Bai 
            Yang
          
          
        
      *
      State Key Laboratory of Supramolecular Structure and Materials, College of Chemistry, Jilin University, Changchun, 130012, P. R. China. E-mail: byangchem@jlu.edu.cn;  Fax: +86-431-85193423;   Tel: +86-431-85168478
Received 
      17th February 2012
    , Accepted 15th March 2012First published on 15th March 2012AbstractFluorescent graphene-based materials, labelled as a sort of fluorescent carbon-based nanomaterial, have drawn increasing attention in recent years. When the size and structure of graphene were controlled properly, photoluminescence was induced in graphene, resulting in the so-called fluorescent graphene (FG). FG has a size-, defect-, and wavelength-dependent luminescence emission, which is similar to traditional semiconductor-based quantum dots. Moreover, with excellent chemical stability, fine biocompatibility, low toxicity, up-conversion emission, pH-sensitivity and resistance to photobleaching, FG promises to offer substantial applications in numerous areas: bioimaging, photovoltaics, sensors, etc. Currently, research works have allowed FG to be produced by many approaches ranging from simple oxidation of graphene to cutting carbon sources and organic synthesis from small molecules. In this Feature Article, we summarize the reported fluorescent graphenes, with emphasis on their category, properties, synthesis and applications. Meanwhile, we give a perspective on their subsequent developments and compare the features of FG and other fluorescent carbon-based materials.
Shoujun Zhu
Shoujun Zhu was born in 1986. He obtained his BS in Applied chemistry at the College of Chemistry, Jilin University in 2009. He is currently a PhD student under the supervision of Prof. Bai Yang at Jilin University. His research is centered on synthesis and applications of fluorescent carbon-based materials.
Shijia Tang
Shijia Tang is currently an undergraduate student in the College of Chemistry, Jilin University. She has been working as a research assistant in Prof. Bai Yang’s group since 2010. She assists Shoujun Zhu in synthesis and developing applications of graphene-based fluorescent materials.
Junhu Zhang
Junhu Zhang received his PhD degree in the field of polymer chemistry and physics in 2003 under the supervision of Prof. Bai Yang from Jilin University. He is currently a professor at the College of Chemistry, Jilin University. His current research interests focus on biomimetic and smart polymer microstructures.
Bai Yang
Bai Yang is currently a professor of chemistry and the director of the State Key Lab of Supramolecular Structure and Materials in College of Chemistry, Jilin University. He received his PhD degree in polymer physics and chemistry in 1991 under the supervision of Prof. Jiacong Shen at Jilin University. His research interests relate to the composite assembly of nanoparticles in polymers, fabrication of ordered microstructures, high performance and functional polymer nanocomposite optical materials.
1. General introduction
Fluorescent materials, with their significance in practical applications and scientific explorations, have always been at the center of research efforts. Particularly, the last several decades have witnessed an exciting revolution in fluorescent materials1–3 such as semiconductor nanocrystals,1 rare earth,2 and organic fluorescent materials,3 owing to their innovative applications in photoelectric devices,4 sensors,5 and biological fields.1b,5 However, conventional fluorescent materials have deficiencies in stability, biocompatibility as well as functionalization, limiting their further applications in biosystems. Therefore, in recent years, carbon-based fluorescent materials, primarily including carbon dots,6–13 nanodiamond,14 fluorescent carbon nanotubes,15 and fullerene,16 have been investigated as alternatives. Their excellent biocompatibility, chemical inertness and low cytoxicity6–16 make them natural candidates for applications in biotechnology.
Graphene, a novel one-atom-thick two-dimensional graphitic carbon system, possessing large surface area, high carrier transport mobility, superior mechanical flexibility, excellent thermal/chemical stability as well as biocompatibility, has attracted enormous attention ever since discovered in 2004.17–26 In principle, the bandgap of graphene can be tuned from 0 eV to that of benzene by cutting sizes and destroying the integrality of π system, both inducing a band gap and thus making graphene a rising carbon-based fluorescent material. Consequently, two routine methods have been developed to achieve fluorescent graphene (FG). One is to cut graphene into ribbons and quantum dots,27 and the other one is to tailor its surface π electron network through chemical or physical treatment.28,29
In this Feature Article, we mainly focus on synthesis of FGs and their applications induced by fluorescent properties. In section 2 of this article, we summarize the categories of graphene materials based on chemical structures as well as sizes and their corresponding properties. In section 3, we review recent innovated routes to obtain graphene oxide (GO), reduced GO (r-GO), modification of GO, doped r-GO, nano-GO and graphene quantum dots (GQDs). Section 4 covers the applications of FG in biosensing, bioimaging, drug/gene delivery and other fields. In section 5, we discuss some critical issues of FG awaiting further explorations, such as effective synthetic methods to achieve graphene materials with narrow size distributions or multicolor fluorescence and comprehensive explanations of the photoluminescence (PL) mechanism. Besides, we aim to investigate FG as a simple model system for understanding properties and PL mechanism in all fluorescent carbon materials due to their structural and compositional similarities. Moreover, we hope this article can inspire more and more researches around the origins of the unique properties and PL mechanism of FG, and further expand the boundaries of their applications.
2. Categories and properties
2.1 Categories
Graphene is a one atom thick material consisting of sp2 bonded carbon with a honeycomb structure.17–25 Electrons in graphene obey a linear dispersion relation and behave like massless relativistic particles.26 The absence of a bandgap in graphene constitutes one of the fundamental obstacles that needs to be overcome before exploiting it as a fluorescent material. Until now, several approaches have proven effective to induce a bandgap: cutting the size of graphene,27 tuning the edge of graphene,27c and controlling chemical structures or layers of graphene.28,29 In detail, the size of graphene can be changed into 2D nanomesh,30 1D nanoribbons31 and 0D quantum dots;27a the edge can manifest as either zig–zag tracks or arm-chair tracks; major fluorescent derivatives resulting from tuning surface chemistry are GO, doped GO and r-GO; whereas controlling the layers of graphene realizes the transition from GQDs (monolayer or few layers) to carbon quantum dots (CQDs) (multilayers). Based on previously reported fluorescent graphene, its derivatives and theoretical results,28–61 we can classify the FG as: GO, r-GO, modified GO, doped r-GO, nano-GO and GQDs (graphene nanoribbon was not included).
2.2 Physical and chemical properties

2.2.1 Absorbance and photoluminescence. 
FGs typically show strong optical absorption in the UV region (230–320 nm), with a tail extending into the visible range. For a GO sample, a maximum peak at ca. 230 nm is ascribed to π–π* transition of aromatic C–C bonds, while a shoulder at 300 nm attributes to n–π* transition of CO bonds.32 In the case of r-GO and GQDs, the maximum peak red-shifts to ca. 270 nm with the shoulder peak shifting to over 300 nm.33,49 These observed deviations in spectra data, at least to some extent, indicate the differences of compositions or structures in different graphene derivatives. See absorption spectra of GO and GQDs (Fig. 1).
 Fig. 1  UV-vis spectra of GO, r-GO and GQDs. (a) UV-vis absorption spectra of GO in water as a function of elapsed time during chemical reduction by hydrazine. Reproduced with permission from ref. 32b, copyright 2008, Nature Publishing Group. (b) UV-vis absorption spectra of GQDs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 50, copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH. 
PL behaviors of FG are the most important property for fundamental research and practical applications. Interestingly, the band gap has been induced in graphene by Hummers and Offeman in 1958 (the first well-known example may also be put forward by B. C. Brodie in 1859) long before its discovery, who invented the widely employed Hummers method to prepare GO.34,35 In particular, the PL of GO has attracted increasing attention in recent years.36,37 Generally speaking, GO with a range of lateral dimensions such as several micrometers possess low energy fluorescence in the red to NIR region.36 Notably, however, changes in the oxidation/reduction degree or surface chemistry (doping/functionalization) of GO shift their PL peaks to shorter wavelength and even to the blue fluorescence range (Fig. 2). For instance, blue emission was obtained by moderately reducing the GO (excess reduction may quench the weak PL of GO),38 connecting GO with alkylamines39 and bonding Mn2+ to r-GO.40 In addition, tunable visible fluorescence was obtained in the nanosized N-doped GO with different oxidation degrees.41
 Fig. 2  PL spectra of GO and r-GO. (a) Normalized PL spectra of solid and liquid GO excited at 500 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 36, copyright 2009 American Institute of Physics. (b) PL spectra of reduced GO thin films (the total time of exposure to hydrazine is noted in the legend). Reprinted with permission from ref. 38, copyright 2009 Wiley-VCH. 
Apart from the PL mentioned above, rising reports are focusing on “small” graphene (mainly focused on GQDs), which possesses strong PL from blue to green color.49–58 Particularly, blue PL was obtained from GQDs prepared by hydrothermally cutting r-GO, and this PL has excitation dependent behaviors.49 When the resulting GQDs were grafted with methylene blue, the PL peak red shifts to 525 nm and shows a green color.56 The blue PL was also obtained by N-doping GQDs.51 In addition, green PL was observed in GQDs prepared by an electrochemical route as well as a solvothermal method in which the observed PL has excitation and solvent dependent behaviors, as shown in Fig. 3.50,52,53
 Fig. 3  (a) The excitation-dependent PL behaviors of GQDs. When the GQDs aqueous were excited at wavelengths from 400 to 540 nm (20 nm interval), the PL peak shifts from 515 nm to 570 nm and the PL intensity decreases remarkably. (b) Effect of solvents on the fluorescence of GQDs (at 375 nm excitation). From left to right, the solvents are THF, acetone, DMF, water, respectively; inset: photograph of the four dispersions taken under UV light. Reprinted with permission from ref. 52, copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Very recently, Yang's group innovated a successful separation of GQDs with gradient oxidation degrees, obtaining controllable PL from blue to green color.53 Moreover, Peng et al. reported a size controllable PL in GQDs, which exhibit changed emission colors from blue to yellow with increasing sizes (Fig. 4).
 Fig. 4  The GQDs with tunable PL. (a) UV–vis spectra of tunable GQDs A, B, and C. Inset of panel (a) is a photograph of the corresponding GQDs under UV light with 365 nm excitation. (b) PL spectra of GQDs with different emission colors excited at 318, 331, and 429 nm, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 58, copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
While enough discussions have been made on PL colors and peaks, an enhancement in PL quantum yield of FG is an equally important issue awaiting further investigations. Previously involved pristine GO and r-GO possess much lower PL yields that are hard to measure.36–38 In strong contrast, PL yields of GQDs and modified GO are enhanced to be 5%–13%.39,49–58 In summary, it is safe and common to manipulate PL yields of FG through size and surface chemistry control.


2.2.2 Physiological solubility and stability. 
Physiological solubility and stability are highly significant to exploit FG materials in practical applications.49–55 Bonding with carboxyl, epoxy and hydroxyl groups, GO tends to stably disperse as single layers due to the electrostatic repulsion and solvation provided by these negatively charged oxygenated species.18 In addition, compared to GO, GQDs have another advantage in their extremely small size, which makes them difficult to congregate. As a consequence, GQDs have more stable PL than that of GO.52 No distinct photobleaching was found in GQDs when lighted by a hand UV lamp or Hg lamp with low power. Also importantly, GQDs maintain their PL intensity and the peak characteristics in a range of physical salt concentrations (Fig. 5).
 Fig. 5  Stability of GQDs: effect of ionic strengths on the fluorescence intensity of GQDs (ionic strengths were controlled by various concentrations of KCl). Reprinted with permission from ref. 52, copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry. 


2.2.3 pH-sensitivity. 
GO has been reported to possess pH-dependent solubility and amphiphilicity.42,62,63 The pH-dependent PL was studied by Chen et al. Fluorescence intensity of GO decreased as the pH increased from 2.0 to 12.0. In particular, the vis–NIR fluorescence intensity at 650 nm decreased linearly as the pH increased from 4.0 to 8.0, see Fig. 6a.42
 Fig. 6  pH-sensitive properties of FG. (a) Change of vis–NIR fluorescence spectra of GO with pH in the presence of 10 mM NaCl. Reprinted with permission from ref. 42, copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry. (b–d) pH-dependent PL spectra of different GQDs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 49, copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH (b); ref. 54, copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry (c); ref. 53, copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry (d). 
The GQDs prepared by as-mentioned hydrothermal method also exhibit pH-dependent PL behaviors (Fig. 6b).49 The GQDs emit strong PL under alkaline conditions, whereas the PL is almost completely quenched under acidic conditions. When pH is switched repeatedly between 13 and 1, the PL intensity varies reversibly. This reversible phenomenon can be well explained according to the proposed structural models and the PL mechanism of GQDs.49
Additionally, GQDs possess different pH-sensitive PL behaviors from that reported previously,53,54 as shown in Fig. 6c and d, PL intensity decreases in a solution of high or low pH. Interestingly, in an alkaline solution, the PL peak of the GQDs blue-shifts (showing blue color to the naked eyes) and the full width at half maximum (FWHM) becomes narrow (Fig. 6d). Therefore, acid–base may be identified by the naked eye, and the pH can be measured by the fluorescent intensity using such GQDs as probes. This phenomenon greatly deviates from that of GQDs prepared by hydrothermal method, owing to a different PL mechanism (see PL mechanism section).


2.2.4 Up-conversion. 
The up-conversion luminescence of GQDs was firstly reported by Shen et al.54,55 The GQDs show up-converted emissions at 525 nm when excited by a 980 nm laser. At the same time, when the excitation wavelength is changed from 600 to 800 nm, the up-converted emission peaks shifted from 390 nm to 468 nm (Fig. 7a). There is a linear function between Em and Ex, that is Em = 1.00Ex + dE (R2 = 0.9983), with dE = 1.1 eV. They speculated that the up-converted emissions in GQDs were the anti-Stokes photoluminescence (ASPL). From Fig. 7b, when a bunch of low-energy photons excite the electrons of the π orbital, the π electrons always transition between LUMO and HOMO. Specifically, when the electrons transition back to the σ orbital, up-converted PL emissions would be observed. In another perspective, the up-converted PL property of GQDs was also hypothesized to derive from multiphoton active process.53
 Fig. 7  (a) Up-converted PL properties of GQDs, inset is the energy of the excitation light as a function of the emission, and the function of the fit line is Em = 1.00Ex + dE (R2 = 0.9983) with dE = 1.1 eV. (b) A schematic illustration of various typical electronic transition processes of GQDs. Normal PL mechanism in GQDs for small size (a) and large size (b); Up-converted PL mechanism in GQDs for large size (c) and small size (d). Reprinted with permission from ref. 54, copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry. 


2.2.5 Biocompatibility and toxicity. 
Until now, investigations in various research groups have demonstrated that FG possessed fine biocompatibility and low toxicity (the smaller and the higher oxidation, the finer biocompatibility and lower toxicity). Liao et al. performed fibroblast cytotoxicity of GO and r-GO in vitro.64 They used two methods, the methylthiazolyldiphenyl-tetrazolium bromide (MTT) and the water-soluble tetrazolium salt (WST-8), to investigate interaction between GO (and r-GO) and human skin fibroblast cells. From Fig. 8a, the MTT results for both GO and r-GO showed no dose-dependent effect on the activity of cells, while the WST-8 data showed that the r-GO had dose-dependent effect on the viability of cells. In addition, the work also proved that smaller GO exhibited higher biocompatibility than that of larger GO, and GO with a high surface oxygen content showed higher biocompatibility compared to r-GO with a low surface oxygen content. In the work by Liu and co-workers,65 the toxicity of GO with noncovalently linked polyethyleneimine (PEI) was studied. They found loading of PEI-1.2k or PEI-10k lead to higher cell viability than GO at high concentrations. This may be accounted by the improved stability of GO-PEI in physiological environments.
 Fig. 8  (a) Cell viability of human skin fibroblast cells determined from MTT and WST-8 assay after 24 h exposure to different concentrations of GO and r-GO. Reprinted with permission from ref. 64, copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (b) Cellular toxicity of GQDs: effect of GQDs on MG-63 cells viability. Reprinted with permission from ref. 52, copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Previously reported GQDs both have oxygenous groups and small sizes which contribute to their fine biocompatibility.49–52 Our groups have investigated the cytotoxicity of GQDs for living cells.52 Adding up to 400 μg of GQDs to 150 μL of culture medium (104 cells) did not weaken the cell activity significantly (as shown by the MTT assay in Fig. 8b), indicating its outstanding biocompatibility.

3. Synthetic routes
To endow graphene with fluorescence, currently existing synthetic approaches mainly focus on two strategies: tuning surface chemistry as well as size. Surface chemistry-tuned methods include varying the oxidation of graphene, modification of GO, and doping r-GO.32–40,42–45 Size-tuned methods consist of separating GO into nano-GO,46–48 cutting the carbon nanotubes to nanosized GO,41 cutting carbon resources such as graphene, GO, carbon fibers and C60 to GQDs,49–59 as well as bottom-up methods to GQDs.66–73 Notably, most reported graphene-based fluorescent materials are oxidized on their surfaces, making them operable in solution and thus beneficial to practical applications; while the GQDs with no surface defects,66–73 similar to graphene nanoribbon,27 are highly significant to understand the PL mechanism of FG.
3.1 Surface chemistry-tuned approaches

3.1.1 Oxidation methods to GO. 
To induce the fluorescence of graphene, an efficient method is turning graphene into GO with an appropriate oxidation degree. PL from GO has attracted considerable attention and been studied in recent years. There are several oxidation methods to obtain the fluorescent GO. A typical method to obtain the GO is the well-known Hummers method (the other modified Hummers methods are also contained), in which GO is synthesized from natural graphite powder or flakes. The precise structure of GO is unknown, so we give out the widely accepted chemical structure in Fig. 9. They have –OH, epoxy and defects on the surface and –COOH at the edges. These polar groups make them widely used in solution-based ways.
 Fig. 9  Structural models of (a) graphene, (b) GO and (c) r-GO. Reprinted with permission from ref. 25, copyright 2010 Elsevier. 
T. Gokus et al. reported that the strong photoluminescence could be induced in single-layer graphene by employing an oxygen plasma treatment to etch graphene samples.29 For short time treatments (1–6 s), spatially resolved bright PL and localized emission were observed, whereas the PL is strong and spatially homogeneous for oxygen plasma treatment of a longer time (Fig. 10).
 Fig. 10  PL obtained in graphene using an oxygen plasma treatment. (a) Confocal PL image excited at 473 nm for a graphene sample oxidized for 3 s. Scale bar is 5 μm. The bright PL spots are spatially localized. (b) Uniform emission after 5 s. Scale bar is 10 μm. For position 3 in (b), PL is bleached intentionally by intense laser irradiation. (c) Spectra detected at the positions marked in (b) corrected for detector response. These have broad PL centered ca. 700 nm. (d) PL transients detected at the positions indicated in (b). The dynamics can be described by a triple-exponential with decay times 40, 200, and 1000 ps. Reprinted with permission from ref. 29, copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. 
In addition, Loh's group has developed a unified one-pot electrochemistry method to prepare fluorescent carbon nanoribbons, nanoparticles, and graphene sheets from the exfoliation graphite electrode.45 In a sense, the prepared method was also a kind of surface oxidation route.


3.1.2 Reduction methods to r-GO. 
r-GO is the product of reducing GO. However, interesting PL changes are observed after GO is transformed to r-GO. Luo et al. reported GO with comparable fluorescence lying in the visible range followed by a long infrared emission tail in both the suspensions and solid samples.36 For solid GO, the PL redshifts to NIR with increased exposure time in hydrazine atmosphere. For liquid GO, the changes were quite different and showed a development of a flatter spectral profile for increased reducing time. However, most of the reported r-GO exhibits weak blue to ultraviolet fluorescence;36–38 the shift in the fluorescence peaks of the suspension and solid sample may be attributed to the differences in the dielectric properties of the surrounding medium, but further work on suspended samples is required to understand the influence of the environment. Eda et al. demonstrated that the fluorescence intensity of deposited GO can be greatly increased upon short exposure to hydrazine vapour (Fig. 2b). During reduction, little or no peak shift of the blue fluorescence was observed. Optical and electrical measurements on the thin films indicated that maximum fluorescence intensity was achieved when GO was only slightly reduced. Similarly, recent studies have shown that reduction of GO leads to an appearing or enhanced blue fluorescence while simultaneously quenching the initial low-energy fluorescence centered at yellow to red wavelengths.38


3.1.3 Modification methods to modified GO. 
Another approach to enhance the PL of GO is to modify the GO with efficient chemical groups. It has been proved that the epoxy and carboxylic groups usually induce non-radiative recombination of localized electron–hole (e–h) pairs, which leads to the nonemissive property of GO. Mei et al. reported a nucleophilic reaction to connect alkylamines with both the epoxy and carboxylic groups in GO.39 The passivation of non-radiative recombination sites is expected to transform GO nanosheet into a highly efficient emitter, which achieve brightly blue fluorescence with a maximum quantum yield up to 13%. Also, the resultant GO exhibits tunable surface properties such as hydrophilic, hydrophobicity and negative charges based on the connected groups.


3.1.4 Doping r-GO. 
Doping GO or r-GO with other elements or metal ions is a recently innovated strategy to enhance PL in GO. Gan et al. fabricated fluorescent Mn2+-bonded r-GO.40 They started from blending and reacting aqueous GO with KMnO4 powders, then put the intermediate products into a hydrothermal reactor, and finally dispersed and dialyzed the black deposit. The hydrothermal treatment changed the MnO2-decorated GO to Mn2+-bonded r-GO. The observed great enhancement of PL intensity on the low energy side is speculated to be attributed to resonant energy transfer between Mn2+ and sp2 clusters.

3.2 Size-tuned methods

3.2.1 Separation methods to nano-GO. 
Previously, involved synthetic methods always prepared GO with a wide size distribution from a few nanometers to several micrometers. Large size-distributed GO tends to induce aggregation in solution or restrict its biologically related applications. Sun et al. developed a separation method to obtain ultrasmall nano-graphene oxide (NGO) with lateral dimensions down to 10 nm.46,47 Starting by activating GO with chloroacetic acid, the GO-COOH had more carboxylic acid groups and thus increased water solubility was obtained. Then 6-arm branched polyethylene glycol (PEG) molecules were grafted with GO-COOH, accompanied by sonication in the reactions and a density gradient ultracentrifugation method, and finally obtaining nano-GO with controllable sizes, see in the Fig. 11. Furthermore, they insightfully investigated the density gradient ultracentrifuge separation method for sorting chemically modified graphene by sheet size and surface chemistry.48
 Fig. 11  A photograph of an ultracentrifuge tube after density gradient separation of NGO-PEG and AFM images of NGO-PEG fractions at different locations in the centrifuge tube, scale bar is 50 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 46, copyright 2008 Springer. 
Due to the special chemical structure of GO, it can be separated by other methods as well. For example, Huang's group found the pH and size could tune the amphiphilicity of GO.62 In their experiment, when the GO dispersion was spread onto the air–water interface of a LB assembly, larger sheets (>5 μm) floated on the water surface while smaller ones (≤1 μm) sank. In the work by Shi's group,63 a facile separation method based on the pH-dependent amphiphilicity of GO sheets was reported, and two portions with large and small lateral dimensions were obtained, respectively. However, these methods can only get finite size scales and failed to obtain GO with nano-sizes below 100 nm.


3.2.2 Cutting the graphene, GO to GQDs. 
To open the band gap of graphene for theoretical researches and transistor devices fabrication, widely used methods are electron-beam lithography, reactive plasma etching, local electrochemical etching and O2 plasma etching with suitable templates.27,74 However, these methods have high costs that severely restrict their feasibility in large scale production. In contrast, the rising solution-based cutting methods have distinguished advantages for producing fluorescent GQDs in large scale manner. Pan et al. developed a hydrothermal route to cut graphene sheets into blue photoluminescent GQDs.49 The starting material GO underwent thermal deoxidization, a second oxidation as well as hydrothermal treatments, and the obtained GQDs had an average diameter of 9.6 nm while consisting of 1–3 layers of graphene (Fig. 12) and exhibiting a quantum yield of 6.9% using quinine sulfate as a reference.
 Fig. 12  The morphology of hydrothermally prepared GQDs. (a) TEM image of the GQDs. (b) Diameter distribution of the GQDs. (c) AFM image of the GQDs deposited on freshly cleaved mica substrates. (d) Height distribution of the GQDs. (e) Height profile along the line A–B in (c). Reprinted with permission from ref. 49, copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH. 
Besides the above approaches, Li et al. reported an electrochemical means of synthesizing green-luminescent GQDs with a uniform size of 3–5 nm.50 The reaction was performed in phosphate buffer solution (PBS) with a filtration-formed graphene film as the working electrode. The oxygen containing groups on the surface of the GQDs contributed to better aqueous solubility and facilitated further surface functionalization. In the recent work, they modified their electrochemical routes by using N-containing tetrabutylammonium perchlorate (TBAP) in acetonitrile as the electrolyte and brought up the synthesis of nitrogen-doped GQDs with oxygen-rich functional groups (Fig. 13).51 After purification, N-GQDs showed diameters in the range of ca. 2–5 nm and height of 1–2.5 nm.
 Fig. 13  The morphology of N-GQDs prepared by an electrochemical method. (a, b) TEM images of the as-prepared N–GQDs under different magnifications, (c) AFM image of the N–GQDs on a Si substrate, and (d) the height profile along the lines in (c). Insets in (b) and (c) show the size and height distribution of N–GQDs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 51, copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
In the work by Shen et al., blue PL GQDs passivated by PEG were prepared.54 Briefly, the GO was further oxidized by HNO3 to be cut into small GO sheets, then PEG was linked to the surface of the cutting GO, and finally the precursor was reduced by hydrazine to prepare the GQDs with diameter about 5–13 nm. In the following work, they also reported the fabrication of GQDs by one-pot hydrothermal of PEG and the cutting of GO.55
In our group, we developed a method for the synthesis of strongly green PL GQDs using a one-step solvothermal route from graphene oxide.52 The prepared GQDs possess strong fluorescence with PL quantum yields as high as 11.4%. In the following work, we used a two-step separation method to obtain GQDs with controllable surface oxidation (GQD 1–3). The separated GQDs possess tunable PL from blue to green color with similar chemical groups and sizes (average 3.4 nm, Fig. 14). However, the increasing oxidation degree from GQD 1–3 induces the tunable PL.53
 Fig. 14  Morphology of GQDs obtained by solvothermal and separated methods. (a) TEM image of GQD 1. (b) TEM image of GQD 2. (c) TEM image of GQD 3 and (d) is the enlarged image. (e) The size distribution of GQD 3. (f–g) AFM image of the GQD 3 and their height distribution (the three GQDs have similar TEM and AFM characterization so only the AFM of GQDs 3 was shown). Reprinted with permission from ref. 53, copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry. 


3.2.3 Bottom-up methods to GQDs. 
Bottom-up solution-based synthetic routes to GQDs have been studied by many groups. Take Müllen's group for example.67 Based on oxidative condensation reactions, they synthesized graphene with a certain size. Also importantly, recent work in Li's group reported the synthesis of GQDs based on the modified oxidation condensation method, achieving the largest stable colloidal GQDs in the reported work.69–73
Müllen's group has also reported a bottom-up self-assembly method for the fabrication of photoluminescent GQDs with uniform morphology.66 The processing diagram for the preparation of GQDs is shown in Fig. 15. They used hexa-peri-hexabenzocoronene (HBC) as a precursor followed by a process of carbonization, oxidization, surface functionalization, and reduction. The prepared monodispersed disk-like GQDs possess 60 nm diameter and 2–3 nm thickness. This kind of supramolecular method provided a new self-assembly way to synthesize GQDs with controllable size and surface chemistry.
 Fig. 15  Processing diagram for the preparation of photoluminescent GQDs by bottom-up self-assembly method using HBC as carbon source. Reprinted with permission from ref. 66, copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 


3.2.4 FG from other carbon materials. 
The graphene-based fluorescent materials belong to carbon materials, and thus, there are reasonable routes to transform carbon materials to FG. For example, Qian et al. fabricated the nanosized N-doped GO by the cutting and unzipping of N-doped carbon nanotubes (NCNTs).41 The NCNTs were synthesized by chemical vapor deposition and then treated by mixed concentrated acids (H2SO4:HNO3, ratio 3:1). Different degrees of oxidation of the nanosized N-doped GO were controlled by the length of time of acid treatment. They found that the nanotubes disappeared and nanosized pieces of N-doped GO with relatively thick layers formed during the short oxidation time. Meanwhile, as the level of oxidation increased, the N-doped GO became thinner and smaller. These reported experiments prove the fact that the fluorescence emission redshifts as the degree of oxidation increases, and these kinds of PL result from defects trapping excitons. In addition, they proved that the cutting and unzipping method used in this work was different from that used for graphene nanoribbons prepared by the unzipping of multi-walled carbon nanotubes.75
Loh's groups have reported that the geometrically well-defined GQDs can be synthesized on a ruthenium surface using C60 molecules as a precursor.59 From Fig. 16, the C60-derived clusters were prepared successfully after annealing. However, this method also suffers from the limit in production scale for practical applications. Very recently, in the work reported by Peng et al., GQDs were also prepared by the acid treatment and chemical exfoliation of carbon fibers.58
 Fig. 16  Morphology of GQDs prepared by C60 on Ru (0001). (a) 0.03 ML C60 on Ru (0001). Inset: magnified view of one C60 molecule after annealing the sample at 450 K. (b, d, e) Bright dots observed after flash annealing at 725 K for 2 min: mushroom-shaped dots (b) and flower-shaped dot (d); and three flower-shaped dots obtained at 825 K (e). Insets (b, d, e): magnified views of these dots. Top inset of b: line contour of an individual C60 molecule (green curve) and bright dots in (b) (white curve). (c) Surface diffusion and combination of C60-derived fragments (STM image size, 4.5 × 4.2 nm). (f) Histogram of dot size distribution at different annealing temperatures: 725 K for 2 min and 825 K for 1 min. Reprinted with permission from ref. 59, copyright 2011 Nature Publishing Group. 

4. Applications
With its superior fluorescence, physiological stability, pH sensitivity, up-conversion PL property, fine biocompatibility and low toxicity, FG and its derivatives have offered substantial application perspectives. Meanwhile, rapid development in synthesizing FG materials with controllable sizes, tailorable chemical structures, as well as strong PL, further speeds up their applications. Until now, much effort has been centered on biological and other applications.
4.1 Drug/gene delivery
The chemical groups of FG such as –OH, epoxy/ether, –COOH contribute to their excellent solubility and stability in physiological circumstances. Moreover, the high specific surface area of FG endows its capability to load drugs or genes via chemical conjugation or physisorption approaches. Consequently, FG is a natural candidate for effective drug and gene delivery. Also importantly, due to the PL of FG, the delivery complex can be observed without further modifying it with another marker dye.

4.1.1 Drug delivery. 
Dai et al. reported a pivotal research in exploiting NGO as a robust nanocarrier for drug delivery.47 In their approach, GO was prepared by a modified Hummers method. Then ultrasmall NGO (<50 nm) with its pegylation of an amine-terminated, six-armed PEG was obtained. NGO-PEG was covalently conjugated by SN38 (a potent topoisomerase I inhibitor) and showed high solubility and stability in PBS and mouse serum, respectively. They found that NGO-PEG-SN38 afforded highly potent cancer cell killing ability for various cancer cell lines. In addition, NGO-PEG can also attach to other types of insoluble aromatic drug molecules via simple adsorption and function as powerful drug nanocarriers. However, the problem is that the fluorescence of NGO could be quenched by the drug molecules.


4.1.2 Gene delivery. 
A major challenge for effective gene delivery is to find a gene vector that protects DNA from nuclease degradation and facilitates cellular uptake of the DNA with high transfection efficiency. Recently, Liu and his co-workers demonstrated the potential of graphene as a non-toxic nano-vehicle for efficient gene transfection.65 In their research, GO was first conjugated with PEI of two molecular weights (1.2 kDa and 10 kDa) by electrostatic interactions (Fig. 17). Next, GO-PEI complexes were further loaded with a DNA plasmid (pDNA) for intracellular transfection of the enhanced green fluorescence protein (EGFP) via a layer-by-layer (LBL) assembly process. From fluorescence microscopy images, much higher EGFP expressions were observed in Hela cells treated by GO-PEI-1.2k, while GO-PEI-10k exhibited an inappreciable enhancement in EGFP expression but had a lower toxicity compared with PEI-10k. This work also inspires researchers to image the gene delivery via the self-given fluorescence of GO instead of combining other fluoresceins.
 Fig. 17  Schematic illustration showing the synthesis of GO-PEI-DNA complexes via a LBL assembly process. Firstly, GO was noncovalently functionalized by PEI polymers, forming positively charged GO-PEI complexes. Next, negatively charged pDNA was loaded on the GO-PEI complexes also by electrostatic interactions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 65a, copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry. 

4.2 Bioimaging
FG materials are promising in bioimaging and medical diagnostics due to their chemical inertia and nontoxicity in physiological conditions. Dai's group reported the fabrication of NGO with lateral dimensions down to 10 nm. Intrinsic PL in the visible and infrared regions were observed in NGO sheets, which could be taken up by living cells, for bioimaging in near-infrared (NIR) with little background.46 The intrinsic NIR PL of NGO-PEG was detected selectively on positive Raji B-cell surfaces and not on negative CEM T-cells (Fig. 18). This work established NGO as a NIR fluorophore for selective biological detections and imaging which can take advantage of the minimal cellular auto-fluorescence in the NIR region.
 Fig. 18  NGO used for bioimaging in near-infrared: NIR fluorescence image of CD20 positive Raji B-cells (left) and negative CEM T-Cells (right) treated with the NGO PEG Rituxan conjugate. The scale bar shows the intensity of total NIR emission (in the range 1100–2200 nm). Images are false-colored green. Reprinted with permission from ref. 46, copyright 2008 Springer. 
Recently, GQDs with high quantum yields were also exploited as fluorescent probes in bioimaging. They possess excellent solubility in physiological conditions and small sizes while bringing minimum invasion to treated cells. These characteristics make GQDs promising materials for bioimaging. For example, our group has applied GQDs with strongly green PL to bioimaging.52 After culturing MC3T3 cells in GQD solutions (10 μg GQDs/150 μL culture medium) for 12 h, bioimaging experiments were performed under a confocal fluorescence microscope as shown in Fig. 19. Excited at 405 nm, bright green luminescence was observed inside the cells, providing an indication that GQDs had successfully translocated through the cell membrane and could be used as efficient bioimaging probes.
 Fig. 19  GQDs were used for bioimaging. (a, b) Washed MG-63 cells imaged under bright field and 405 nm excitations, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 52, copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
4.3 Electrochemical biosensors
With their outstanding and unique electrical properties, graphene materials also have potential for electrical response related applications. Recently, Li and co-workers prepared an electrochemical biosensor based on GQDs platform.57 In their work, GQDs were modified onto the surface of a pyrolytic graphite electrode. Then the probe single-strand-DNA-1 (ssDNA-1) was immobilized due to the electrostatic interactions between the nucleobases and graphene. Using [Fe(CN)6]3−/4− as the electrochemically active species, they observed a significant decrease in the peak current of [Fe(CN)6]3−/4− at the GQD-modified electrode, proving the binding between ssDNA-1 and the nanomaterials. Furthermore, with respective additions of ssDNA-2 and thrombin with increasing concentrations, enhancements in the peak current of [Fe(CN)6]3−/4− were obtained, indicating a disturbed immobilization of the probe ssDNA due to the formation of double stranded DNA or binding to thrombin. In contrast, an unmodified pyrolytic graphite electrode cannot distinguish between the conformational changes of the probe ssDNA, either when hybridizing with the target ssDNA or when binding to thrombin. These results demonstrate that GQDs have potential in label-free biosensing.
4.4 Other potential applications

4.4.1 Photovoltaic conversion. 
Theoretical calculations and experimental tests suggested that cutting bulk graphene into ribbons and quantum dots or chemical/physical treatment can manipulate their bandgap and optical properties.27,28 Thus FG has attracted increasing attention in their perspectives of energy conversion especially photovoltaic (PV) conversion.76 In this section, we mainly center on the applications of fluorescent GQDs in photoelectric conversion devices.50,56
First of all, Qu's group has prepared green-luminescent GQDs as electron-acceptors for PV conversion with a power conversion efficiency of 1.28%.50 In their work on GQD-based bulk heterojunction polymer solar cells, ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:GQDs/Al were fabricated and characterized. The enhancement in PV device behaviors compared with undoped solar cells might be explained by the GQD effective exciton separation at interfaces and carrier transporting pathways, thus resulting in a significant increase in the short-circuit current and fill factor. Further work was reported by Gupta et al. They prepared a conjugated polymer connected with GQDs acceptors exhibiting a significant enhancement in organic photovoltaic (OPV) characteristics.56 In their work, the aniline (ANI) was functionalized with hydrothermal GQDs. Next, solar cells ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:ANI-GQDs/LiF/Al and ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:ANI-GSs/LiF/Al were fabricated to further test the OPV characteristics of the functionalized GQDs. The obtained data indicated that ANI-GQD PV devices possessed a higher FF (0.53), owing to the uniform and fine features of morphology of the P3HT/ANI-GQDs blend film. Nanoscale phase separation of this film dramatically enhanced the exciton migration to the donor/acceptor interface, leading to a higher FF.


4.4.2 Photocatalysis. 
Most recently, Zhao et al. reported a facile ultrasonic route for the fabrication of GQDs with up-converted emission. The as-prepared GQDs exhibit excitation-independent down-conversion and up-conversion PL behaviors. Moreover, the complex photocatalysts (rutile TiO2/GQD and anatase TiO2/GQD systems) were designed to harness the visible spectrum of sunlight (see Fig. 20).81
 Fig. 20  The photocatalysis property of GQDs: relationship between methylene blue (MB) concentration and reaction time for different catalysts: rutile TiO2/GQDs, CaIn2O4, anatase TiO2/GQDs, GQDs, rutile TiO2 NPs, and anatase TiO2 NPs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 81, copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 

5. The problems for the synthesis and applications of FG
5.1 Fairly effective synthetic methods
Until now, a series of methods to obtain FG have been developed as mentioned in section 3. However, many scientific issues are still waiting for further explorations to obtain FG and related derivatives. Current synthetic methods mainly have deficiencies in accurately controlling lateral dimensions as well as surface chemistry, and obtaining multicolor FG with high quantum yields.

5.1.1 Narrow size distributions. 
Many modified methods and separation techniques have been employed to synthesize graphene-based materials with narrow size distributions.62,63 However, these methods can only separate GO sheets to limited ranges, in which the corresponding size distribution is still large. On the other hand, the density gradient ultracentrifugation method in Dai's work can obtain ultrasmall NGO with decreasing sizes, however, those NGO with different sizes exhibited similar optical absorbance, PL and PL excitation (PLE) spectra, contradicting what the quantum size effect had predicted.46 Therefore, the exemplified work indicates that further exploration is necessary for the separation strategy. The narrow size distributions may affect the full width at half maximum (FWHM) of PL, which is highly important for single color applications. However, the reported FWHMs of GQDs are always over 70 nm, suggesting greater space to improve.
To date, the widely accepted powerful approaches to synthesize FG with controllable size and surface chemistry are the solution chemistry methods developed by Müllen's and Li's groups.67,69 Also notably, this method can be used as a model system for understanding the properties and PL mechanism of FG. Nevertheless, solution chemistry has relatively complicated synthetic processes, which might set obstacles for facile production.
From discussions above, we can see the breakthroughs in obtaining controlled sized FG. However, existing separation or synthetic methods have more or fewer deficiencies in obtaining FG with gradient sizes ranging from several nanometers to boundaries of micrometers. Meanwhile, more facile, economic, and highly efficient synthetic routes are expected in the near future.


5.1.2 Multicolor fluorescence with high quantum efficiency. 
In the former part, we summarized the current challenges in obtaining narrowly distributed graphene materials. According to the quantum confinement effect, these materials should have size-dependent PL behaviors, which means that obtaining graphene materials with uniform size also holds significance in controlling the colors of fluorescence. On the other hand, it has been proved to be feasible to tailor the PL colors of graphene by tuning the chemical structures on their surface (e.g., by oxidation, reduction and surface modification).41,53 Unfortunately, most of the reported PL colors achieved to date are blue to green; although the visible and NIR colors have been observed in GO, their quantum yields are relatively low. As a result, future explorations should be endurably focusing on extending their PL spectra to all visible wavelengths, NIR and even IR, all of which will greatly contribute to biological applications such as bioimaging, drug delivery and therapeutics. Meanwhile, the PL quantum yields need to be greatly enhanced (the current highest record is less than 15%), thus contributing to effective applications in biological systems with lower concentrations and fewer invasions.

5.2 Reasonable photoluminescent mechanism
Although considerable development in preparing FG has been witnessed in the last few years, researchers are having a tough time to figure out a clear and reasonable PL mechanism. There are three factors (size, surface structure and edge effects) contributing to the PL mechanism of FG. Recently, Eda et al. revealed that size dependent PL behaviors are intrinsically based on the sizes of sp2 domains embedded in the sp3 matrix of GO (Fig. 21a).38Fig. 21b explains that the blue PL derives from excitation and recombination among the discrete energy levels of small sp2 fragments. Moreover, Pan et al. suggested that blue PL of GQDs might be attributed to free zigzag sites with a carbine-like triplet ground state (Fig. 21c).49 On the other hand, our group reported a separation strategy to obtain GQDs with different oxidation degrees. We studied their PL mechanism which we believe is the synergic effect of both zigzag sites and surface defects (also called energy traps).53 With an increasing degree of surface oxidation, the emission peaks red shift, indicating that surface defects can control the PL behavior to some extent. Currently, deeper investigation in this issue is under way in our lab.77
 Fig. 21  Electronic structure and fluorescence of FG. (a) Calculated energy gap of π–π* transitions as a function of the number of fused aromatic rings (N). (b) Schematic band structure of GO. Smaller sp2 domains have a larger energy gap due to a stronger confinement effect. Photogeneration of an e–h pair on absorption of light (Eexc) followed by non-radiative relaxation and radiative recombination resulting in fluorescence is depicted. Black arrows denote the transitions of electrons and holes during this process. DOS, electronic density of states. (c) Schematic of the electronic structure at a carbene-like zigzag edge site. Dashed and solid arrows indicate electronic transitions associated with excitation and relaxation events, respectively, from the σ- and π- states. Reprinted with permission from: (a) and (b), ref. 38 copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH; (c), ref. 49 copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH. 
A reasonable PL mechanism will be monumental not only in guiding the synthesis of graphene materials with multi-colors, high quality and enhanced quantum yields, but also in expanding their great potential in nanoelectronics, photovoltaic devices, bio-detection, as well as disease diagnostics/therapeutics. With the development of synthetic, separation techniques, this PL mechanism will be gradually revealed and investigated.
6. Conclusions and outlook
When we control the size and structure of graphene, a rising and interesting carbon-based material (FG) comes to light up the nano-world, bringing great significance for theoretical study as well as practical applications. Present tunable factors for PL in FG guide the invention of possible synthetic methods: tuning the surface chemistry; cutting to quantum size; switching the edges between zig–zag tracks or arm-chair tracks. Meanwhile, due to its low cost, excellent chemical stability, fine biocompatibility/low toxicity, up-conversion properties and pH-sensitivity, FG has shown primary potential in bioimaging, photovoltaics, sensor and related applications.
Additionally, FG belongs to the family of fluorescent carbon based materials which also contain carbon dots, nanodiamond, fluorescent carbon nanotubes and fullerene. The close relationships and differences (in chemical structure, size, edge, and layers) between graphene systems and other carbon-based fluorescent materials provide great opportunities to investigate the PL mechanism in fluorescent carbon-based materials thoroughly, and the FG could be a simple model system for this target. For example, the same sized FG with different oxidation degrees or different sized FG with the same oxidation degree will be tuned to understand the influences of surface structure and size effects in the PL mechanism.78,79 When fixing composition and sizes, we can employ CQDs and GQDs (both possessing high sp2 carbon content with very low non-carbon contents) to examine the influences of edge and layer.80 Also noteworthy, some reported GQDs are not “true GQDs” according to the strict definition, since they always possess relatively high oxygen content and defects.49–55 Therefore, the size effect is not an exclusive factor in the PL mechanism, and we believe PL properties are controlled by the synergic effect of size, surface chemistry and edge. Competition among these factors will be studied in detail in the near future.
Although current synthetic approaches to FG are fairly effective, they still lack maturity in several issues. Notably, it is necessary to innovate facile methods to FG with controllable surface chemistry as well as sizes. Also, for achieving or approaching an ideal fluorophore that emits strongly in the near-infrared/far red region, it is highly urgent to successfully control the emission colors of FG and enhance its quantum yields; the up-conversion PL of FG may provide a strong tool as well. In addition, the properties of FG are not clear enough and waiting for systematic studies. Therefore in the future, we expect more facile and robust synthesizing routes and creative applications to better realize the potential of the rising fluorescent graphene materials.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Science Foundation of China (Grand No. 91123031, 20921003, 50973039, 21074048).
Notes and references

  (a) S. Empedocles and M. Bawendi, Acc. Chem. Res., 1999, 32, 389 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) X. Michalet, F. F. Pinaud, L. A. Bentolila, J. M. Tsay, S. Doose, J. J. Li, G. Sundaresan, A. M. Wu, S. S. Gambhir and S. Weiss, Science, 2005, 307, 538 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) H. Zhang, J. Han and B. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1533 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) X. Wang, J. Zhuang, Q. Peng and Y. Li, Nature, 2005, 437, 121 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Z. Zhou, H. Hu, H. Yang, T. Yi, K. Huang, M. Yu, F. Li and C. Huang, Chem. Commun., 2008, 4786 RSC ; 
  (c) C. Wang, D. Zhang, L. Xu, Y. Jiang, F. Dong, B. Yang, K. Yu and Q. Lin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 7587 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) R. H. Friend, R. W. Gymer, A. B. Holmes, J. H. Burroughes, R. N. Marks, C. Talian, D. D. C. Bradley, D. A. D. Santos, J. L. Brédas, M. Lögdlund and W. R. Salaneck, Nature, 1999, 397, 121 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) G. Ulrich, R. Ziessel and A. Harriman, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 1184 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) B. N. G. Giepmans, S. R. Adams, M. H. Ellisman and R. Y. Tsien, Science, 2006, 312, 217 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) M. A. Baldo, M. E. Thompson and S. R. Forrest, Nature, 2000, 403, 750 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) W. Yu, H. Zhang, Z. Fan, J. Zhang, H. Wei, D. Zhou, B. Xu, F. Li, W. Tian and B. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2831 RSC .
I. L. Medintz, H. T. Uyeda, E. R. Goldman and H. Mattoussi, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 435 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Baker and G. A. Baker, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 6726 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) Y. P. Sun, B. Zhou, Y. Lin, W. Wang, K. A. S. Fernando, P. Pathak, M. J. Meziani, B. A. Harruff, X. Wang, H. Wang, P. G. Luo, H. Yang, M. E. Kose, B. Chen, L. M. Veca and S. Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 7756 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) X. Wang, L. Cao, S. T. Yang, F. Lu, M. J. Meziani, L. Tian, K. W. Sun, M. A. Bloodgood and Y. P. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 5310 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) A. B. Bourlinos, A. Stassinopoulos, D. Anglos, R. Zboril, M. Karakassides and E. P. Giannelis, Small, 2008, 4, 455 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) A. B. Boulinos, A. Stassinopoulos, D. Anglos, R. Zboril, V. Georgakilas and E. P. Giannelis, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 4539 CrossRef ; 
  (c) B. R. Selvi, D. Jagadeesan, B. S. Suma, G. Nagashankar, M. Arif, K. Balasubramanyam, M. Eswaramoorthy and T. K. Kundu, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3182 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) D. Pan, J. Zhang, Z. Li, C. Wu, X. Yan and M. Wu, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 3681 RSC .

  (a) Z. C. Yang, M. Wang, A. M. Yong, S. Y. Wong, X. H. Zhang, H. Tan, A. Y. Chang, X. Li and J. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 11615 RSC ; 
  (b) Y. Yang, J. Cui, M. Zheng, C. Hu, S. Tan, Y. Xiao, Q. Yang and Y. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 380 RSC .
H. Liu, T. Ye and C. Mao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 6473 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) H. Li, X. He, Z. Kang, H. Huang, Y. Liu, J. Liu, J. Liu, S. Lian, C. H. A. Tsang, X. Yang and S. T. Lee, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 122, 4430 CrossRef ; 
  (b) Q. L. Zhao, Z. L. Zhang, B. H. Huang, J. Peng, M. Zhang and D. W. Pang, Chem. Commun., 2008, 5116 RSC .

  (a) H. Zhu, X. Wang, Y. Li, Z. Wang, F. Yang and X. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2009, 5118 RSC ; 
  (b) J. Zong, Y. Zhu, X. Yang, J. Shen and C. Li, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 764 RSC ; 
  (c) X. Li, H. Wang, Y. Shimizu, A. Pyatenko, K. Kawaguchi and N. Koshizaki, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 932 RSC ; 
  (d) S. Chandra, S. Mitra, D. Laha, S. Bag, P. Das, A. Goswami and P. Pramanik, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 8587 RSC .

  (a) H. Zheng, Q. Wang, Y. Long, H. Zhang, X. Huang and R. Zhu, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 10650 RSC ; 
  (b) Y. Zhang, H. Goncalves, J. C. G. E. Silva and C. D. Geddes, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 5313 RSC ; 
  (c) Y. Fang, S. Guo, D. Li, C. Zhu, W. Ren, S. Dong and E. Wang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 400 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) A. Krueger, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2445 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) I. P. Chang, K. C. Hwang, K. C. Hwang and C. S. Chiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 15476 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) V. N. Mochalin and Y. Gogotsi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 4594 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) D. M. Jang, Y. Myung, H. S. Im, Y. S. Seo, Y. J. Cho, C. W. Lee, J. Park, A. Y. Jee and M. Lee, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 696 RSC ; 
  (e) S. J. Yu, M. W. Kang, H. C. Chang, K. M. Chen and Y. C. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 17604 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) Y. Zhu, J. Li, W. Li, Y. Zhang, X. Yang, N. Chen, Y. Sun, Y. Zhao, C. Fan and Q. Huang, Theranostics, 2012, 2, e0015 Search PubMed .

  (a) K. Welsher, Z. Liu, S. P. Sherlock, J. T. Robinson, Z. Chen, D. Daranciang and H. Dai, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 773 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) G. Hong, S. M. Tabakman, K. Welsher, H. Wang, X. Wang and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 15920 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) J. Jeong, M. Cho, Y. T. Lim, N. W. Song and B. H. Chung, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 5296 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) H. Li, Y. Zhang, Y. Luo and X. Sun, Small, 2011, 7, 1562 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Dreyer, S. Park, C. W. Bielawski and R. S. Ruoff, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 228 RSC .
S. Park and R. S. Ruoff, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 217 CrossRef CAS .
C. N. R. Rao, A. K. Sood, K. S. Subrahmanyam and A. Govindaraj, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 7752 CrossRef CAS .
K. P. Loh, Q. Bao, P. K. Ang and J. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 2277 RSC .
G. Eda and M. Chhowalla, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2392 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, Z. Yin, S. Wu, X. Qi, Q. He, Q. Zhang, Qi. Yan, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Small, 2011, 7, 1876 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pumera, Mater. Today, 2011, 14, 308 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, F. Kim and J. Huang, Mater. Today, 2010, 13, 28 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) B. Trauzettel, D. V. Bulaev, D. Loss and G. Burkard, Nat. Phys., 2007, 3, 192 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. Güttinger, T. Frey, C. Stampfer, T. Ihn and K. Ensslin, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 105, 116801 CrossRef ; 
  (c) K. A. Ritter and J. W. Lyding, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 235 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) L. Ma, J. Wang and F. Ding, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 1161 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) Y. W. Son, M. L. Cohen and S. G. Louie, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 97, 216803 CrossRef .
K. P. Loh, Q. Bao, G. Eda and M. Chhowalla, Nat. Chem., 2010, 2, 1015 CrossRef CAS .
T. Gokus, R. R. Nair, A. Bonetti, M. Böhmler, A. Lombardo, K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, A. C. Ferrari and A. Hartschuh, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3963 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bai, X. Zhang, S. Jiang, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 190 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, X. Wang, L. Zhang, S. Lee and H. Dai, Science, 2008, 319, 1229 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) T. V. Cuong, V. H. Pham, Q. T. Tran, S. H. Hahn, J. S. Chung, E. W. Shin and E. J. Kim, Mater. Lett., 2010, 64, 399 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) D. Li, M. B. Mller, S. Gilje, R. B. Kaner and G. G. Wallace, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 101 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen and X. Yan, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 4328 RSC .
B. C. Brodie, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, 1859, 149, 249 CrossRef .
W. S. Hummers and R. E. Offeman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1958, 80, 1339 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Luo, P. M. Vora, E. J. Mele, A. T. C. Johnson and J. M. Kikkawa, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 111909 CrossRef .
G. Eda, C. Mattevi, H. Yamaguchi, H. Kim and M. Chhowalla, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 15768 CAS .
G. Eda, Y. Y. Lin, C. Mattevi, H. Yamaguchi, H. A. Chen, I. S. Chen, C. W. Chen and M. Chhowalla, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 505 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Mei, K. Zhang, G. Guan, B. Liu, S. Wang and Z. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 7319 RSC .
Z. X. Gan, S. J. Xiong, X. L. Wu, C. Y. He, J. C. Shen and P. K. Chu, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3951 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Qian, J. Zhou, J. Chen, C. Wang, C. Chen and H. Feng, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 17635 RSC .
J. Chen and X. Yan, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 3135 RSC .
K. S. Subrahmanyam, P. Kumar, A. Nag and C. N. R. Rao, Solid State Commun., 2010, 150, 1774 CrossRef CAS .
G. Xin, H. Wang, N. Kim, W. Hwang, S. M. Cho and H. Chae, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 405 RSC .
J. Lu, J. Yang, J. Wang, A. Lim, S. Wang and K. P. Loh, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 2367 CrossRef CAS .
X. Sun, Z. Liu, K. Welsher, J. T. Robinson, A. Goodwin, S. Zaric and H. Dai, Nano Res., 2008, 1, 203 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, J. T. Robinson, X. Sun and Hongjie Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 10876 CrossRef CAS .
X. Sun, D. Luo, J. Liu and D. G. Evans, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3381 CrossRef CAS .
D. Pan, J. Zhang, Z. Li and M. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 734 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Y. Hu, Y. Zhao, G. Shi, L. Deng, Y. Hou and L. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 776 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Y. Zhao, H. Cheng, Y. Hu, G. Shi, L. Dai and L. Qu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhu, J. Zhang, C. Qiao, S. Tang, Y. Li, W. Yuan, B. Li, L. Tian, F. Liu, R. Hu, H. Gao, H. Wei, H. Zhang, H. Sun and B. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 6858 RSC .
S. Zhu, J. Zhang, X. Liu, B. Li, X. Wang, S. Tang, Q. Meng, Y. Li, C. Shi, R. Hu and B. Yang, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 2717 RSC .
J. Shen, Y. Zhu, C. Chen, X. Yang and C. Li, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 2580 RSC .
J. Shen, Y. Zhu, X. Yang, J. Zong, J. Zhang and C. Li, New J. Chem., 2012, 36, 97 RSC .
V. Gupta, N. Chaudhary, R. Srivastava, G. D. Sharma, R. Bhardwaj and S. Chand, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 9960 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, G. Chen, L. Zhu and G. Li, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13, 31 CrossRef CAS .
J. Peng, W. Gao, B. K. Gupta, Z. Liu, R. R. Aburto, L. Ge, L. Song, L. B. Alemany, X. Zhan, G. Gao, S. A. Vithayathil, B. A. Kaipparettu, A. A. Marti, T. Hayashi, J. J. Zhu and P. M. Ajayan, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 844 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lu, P. S. E. Yeo, C. K. Gan, P. Wu and K. P. Loh, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 247 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shen, L. Zhang, M. Liu and Z. Zhang, Theranostics, 2012, 2, e0013 Search PubMed .
J. Wang, X. Xin and Z. Lin, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 3040 RSC .
J. Kim, L. J. Cote, F. Kim, W. Yuan, K. R. Shull and J. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 8180 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, H. Bai and G. Shi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 6338 CrossRef CAS .
K. Liao, Y. Lin, C. W. Macosko and C. L. Haynes, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 2607 CAS .

  (a) L. Feng, S. Zhang and Z. Liu, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 1252 RSC ; 
  (b) L. Zhang, Z. Lu, Q. Zhao, J. Huang, H. Shen and Z. Zhang, Small, 2011, 7, 460 CrossRef CAS .
R. Liu, D. Wu, X. Feng and K. Müllen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 15221 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, W. Pisula and K. Müllen, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 718 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liang, W. Pisula and K. Müllen, Pure Appl. Chem., 2009, 81, 2203 CrossRef .
L. Li and X. Yan, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2572 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yan, X. Cui and L. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 5944 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yan, X. Cui, B. Li and L. Li, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1869 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Mueller, X. Yan, B. Dragnea and L. Li, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 56 CrossRef CAS .
I. P. Hamilton, B. Li, X. Yan and L. Li, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1524 CrossRef CAS .
S. Neubeck, L. A. Ponomarenko, F. Freitag, A. J. M. Giesbers, U. Zeitler, S. V. Morozov, P. Blake, A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Small, 2010, 6, 1469 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jiao, L. Zhang, X. Wang, G. Diankov and H. Dai, Nature, 2009, 458, 877 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liu, Z. Liu, X. Zhang, L. Yang, N. Zhang, G. Pan, S. Yin, Y. Chen and J. Wei, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 894 CrossRef CAS .
H. K. Jeong, M. H. Jin, K. P. So, S. C. Lim and Y. H. Lee, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2009, 42, 065418 CrossRef .
Y. Lin, B. Zhou, R. B. Martin, K. B. Henbest, B. A. Harruff, J. E. Riggs, Z. Guo, L. F. Allard and Y. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 14779 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Strano, C. B. Huffman, V. C. Moore, M. J. O'Connell, E. H. Haroz, J. Hubbard, M. Miller, K. Rialon, C. Kittrell, S. Ramesh, R. H. Hauge and R. E. Smalley, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 6979 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Bourlinosa, V. Georgakilasa, R. Zborilb, A. Bakandritsosc, A. Stassinopoulosd, D. Anglosd and E. P. Giannelis, Carbon, 2009, 47, 519 CrossRef .
S. Zhao, M. Shao and S. T. Lee, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1059 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

Shoujun Zhu
	Shoujun Zhu was born in 1986. He obtained his BS in Applied chemistry at the College of Chemistry, Jilin University in 2009. He is currently a PhD student under the supervision of Prof. Bai Yang at Jilin University. His research is centered on synthesis and applications of fluorescent carbon-based materials.

Shijia Tang
	Shijia Tang is currently an undergraduate student in the College of Chemistry, Jilin University. She has been working as a research assistant in Prof. Bai Yang’s group since 2010. She assists Shoujun Zhu in synthesis and developing applications of graphene-based fluorescent materials.

Junhu Zhang
	Junhu Zhang received his PhD degree in the field of polymer chemistry and physics in 2003 under the supervision of Prof. Bai Yang from Jilin University. He is currently a professor at the College of Chemistry, Jilin University. His current research interests focus on biomimetic and smart polymer microstructures.

Bai Yang
	Bai Yang is currently a professor of chemistry and the director of the State Key Lab of Supramolecular Structure and Materials in College of Chemistry, Jilin University. He received his PhD degree in polymer physics and chemistry in 1991 under the supervision of Prof. Jiacong Shen at Jilin University. His research interests relate to the composite assembly of nanoparticles in polymers, fabrication of ordered microstructures, high performance and functional polymer nanocomposite optical materials.

 	Fig. 1  UV-vis spectra of GO, r-GO and GQDs. (a) UV-vis absorption spectra of GO in water as a function of elapsed time during chemical reduction by hydrazine. Reproduced with permission from ref. 32b, copyright 2008, Nature Publishing Group. (b) UV-vis absorption spectra of GQDs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 50, copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 2  PL spectra of GO and r-GO. (a) Normalized PL spectra of solid and liquid GO excited at 500 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 36, copyright 2009 American Institute of Physics. (b) PL spectra of reduced GO thin films (the total time of exposure to hydrazine is noted in the legend). Reprinted with permission from ref. 38, copyright 2009 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) The excitation-dependent PL behaviors of GQDs. When the GQDs aqueous were excited at wavelengths from 400 to 540 nm (20 nm interval), the PL peak shifts from 515 nm to 570 nm and the PL intensity decreases remarkably. (b) Effect of solvents on the fluorescence of GQDs (at 375 nm excitation). From left to right, the solvents are THF, acetone, DMF, water, respectively; inset: photograph of the four dispersions taken under UV light. Reprinted with permission from ref. 52, copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 4  The GQDs with tunable PL. (a) UV–vis spectra of tunable GQDs A, B, and C. Inset of panel (a) is a photograph of the corresponding GQDs under UV light with 365 nm excitation. (b) PL spectra of GQDs with different emission colors excited at 318, 331, and 429 nm, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 58, copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  Stability of GQDs: effect of ionic strengths on the fluorescence intensity of GQDs (ionic strengths were controlled by various concentrations of KCl). Reprinted with permission from ref. 52, copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 6  pH-sensitive properties of FG. (a) Change of vis–NIR fluorescence spectra of GO with pH in the presence of 10 mM NaCl. Reprinted with permission from ref. 42, copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry. (b–d) pH-dependent PL spectra of different GQDs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 49, copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH (b); ref. 54, copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry (c); ref. 53, copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry (d).	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Up-converted PL properties of GQDs, inset is the energy of the excitation light as a function of the emission, and the function of the fit line is Em = 1.00Ex + dE (R2 = 0.9983) with dE = 1.1 eV. (b) A schematic illustration of various typical electronic transition processes of GQDs. Normal PL mechanism in GQDs for small size (a) and large size (b); Up-converted PL mechanism in GQDs for large size (c) and small size (d). Reprinted with permission from ref. 54, copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Cell viability of human skin fibroblast cells determined from MTT and WST-8 assay after 24 h exposure to different concentrations of GO and r-GO. Reprinted with permission from ref. 64, copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (b) Cellular toxicity of GQDs: effect of GQDs on MG-63 cells viability. Reprinted with permission from ref. 52, copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  Structural models of (a) graphene, (b) GO and (c) r-GO. Reprinted with permission from ref. 25, copyright 2010 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 10  PL obtained in graphene using an oxygen plasma treatment. (a) Confocal PL image excited at 473 nm for a graphene sample oxidized for 3 s. Scale bar is 5 μm. The bright PL spots are spatially localized. (b) Uniform emission after 5 s. Scale bar is 10 μm. For position 3 in (b), PL is bleached intentionally by intense laser irradiation. (c) Spectra detected at the positions marked in (b) corrected for detector response. These have broad PL centered ca. 700 nm. (d) PL transients detected at the positions indicated in (b). The dynamics can be described by a triple-exponential with decay times 40, 200, and 1000 ps. Reprinted with permission from ref. 29, copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  A photograph of an ultracentrifuge tube after density gradient separation of NGO-PEG and AFM images of NGO-PEG fractions at different locations in the centrifuge tube, scale bar is 50 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 46, copyright 2008 Springer.	 

 	Fig. 12  The morphology of hydrothermally prepared GQDs. (a) TEM image of the GQDs. (b) Diameter distribution of the GQDs. (c) AFM image of the GQDs deposited on freshly cleaved mica substrates. (d) Height distribution of the GQDs. (e) Height profile along the line A–B in (c). Reprinted with permission from ref. 49, copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 13  The morphology of N-GQDs prepared by an electrochemical method. (a, b) TEM images of the as-prepared N–GQDs under different magnifications, (c) AFM image of the N–GQDs on a Si substrate, and (d) the height profile along the lines in (c). Insets in (b) and (c) show the size and height distribution of N–GQDs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 51, copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  Morphology of GQDs obtained by solvothermal and separated methods. (a) TEM image of GQD 1. (b) TEM image of GQD 2. (c) TEM image of GQD 3 and (d) is the enlarged image. (e) The size distribution of GQD 3. (f–g) AFM image of the GQD 3 and their height distribution (the three GQDs have similar TEM and AFM characterization so only the AFM of GQDs 3 was shown). Reprinted with permission from ref. 53, copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 15  Processing diagram for the preparation of photoluminescent GQDs by bottom-up self-assembly method using HBC as carbon source. Reprinted with permission from ref. 66, copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  Morphology of GQDs prepared by C60 on Ru (0001). (a) 0.03 ML C60 on Ru (0001). Inset: magnified view of one C60 molecule after annealing the sample at 450 K. (b, d, e) Bright dots observed after flash annealing at 725 K for 2 min: mushroom-shaped dots (b) and flower-shaped dot (d); and three flower-shaped dots obtained at 825 K (e). Insets (b, d, e): magnified views of these dots. Top inset of b: line contour of an individual C60 molecule (green curve) and bright dots in (b) (white curve). (c) Surface diffusion and combination of C60-derived fragments (STM image size, 4.5 × 4.2 nm). (f) Histogram of dot size distribution at different annealing temperatures: 725 K for 2 min and 825 K for 1 min. Reprinted with permission from ref. 59, copyright 2011 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 17  Schematic illustration showing the synthesis of GO-PEI-DNA complexes via a LBL assembly process. Firstly, GO was noncovalently functionalized by PEI polymers, forming positively charged GO-PEI complexes. Next, negatively charged pDNA was loaded on the GO-PEI complexes also by electrostatic interactions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 65a, copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 18  NGO used for bioimaging in near-infrared: NIR fluorescence image of CD20 positive Raji B-cells (left) and negative CEM T-Cells (right) treated with the NGO PEG Rituxan conjugate. The scale bar shows the intensity of total NIR emission (in the range 1100–2200 nm). Images are false-colored green. Reprinted with permission from ref. 46, copyright 2008 Springer.	 

 	Fig. 19  GQDs were used for bioimaging. (a, b) Washed MG-63 cells imaged under bright field and 405 nm excitations, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 52, copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 20  The photocatalysis property of GQDs: relationship between methylene blue (MB) concentration and reaction time for different catalysts: rutile TiO2/GQDs, CaIn2O4, anatase TiO2/GQDs, GQDs, rutile TiO2 NPs, and anatase TiO2 NPs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 81, copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 21  Electronic structure and fluorescence of FG. (a) Calculated energy gap of π–π* transitions as a function of the number of fused aromatic rings (N). (b) Schematic band structure of GO. Smaller sp2 domains have a larger energy gap due to a stronger confinement effect. Photogeneration of an e–h pair on absorption of light (Eexc) followed by non-radiative relaxation and radiative recombination resulting in fluorescence is depicted. Black arrows denote the transitions of electrons and holes during this process. DOS, electronic density of states. (c) Schematic of the electronic structure at a carbene-like zigzag edge site. Dashed and solid arrows indicate electronic transitions associated with excitation and relaxation events, respectively, from the σ- and π- states. Reprinted with permission from: (a) and (b), ref. 38 copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH; (c), ref. 49 copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
