Advanced space- and time-resolved techniques for photocatalyst studies  - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9CC07128H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9CC07128H
(Feature Article)
Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 1007-1021Advanced space- and time-resolved techniques for photocatalyst studies

        
          
            Yuying 
            Gao
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Wei 
            Nie
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Xiuli 
            Wang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Fengtao 
            Fan
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Can 
            Li
          
          
        
      a
aState Key Laboratory of Catalysis, Dalian National Laboratory for Clean Energy, The Collaborative Innovation Centre of Chemistry for Energy Materials (iChEM), Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Zhongshan Road 457, Dalian 116023, China. E-mail: ftfan@dicp.ac.cn
bUniversity of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China
Received 
      12th September 2019
    , Accepted 4th December 2019First published on 9th December 2019AbstractNanoparticle photocatalysts present the obvious characteristic of heterogeneity in structure, energy, and function at spatial and temporal scales. Understanding the nature of spatial variations and reaction dynamics in photosynthetic solar energy conversion systems at the single particle level is of crucial importance to clarify the underlying mechanism of photocatalytic reactions. In this review, we focus on advanced characterization tools employed to reveal the physical and chemical properties of photocatalysts in space and time. We highlight the recent significant progress to elucidate the microscopic mechanisms of photogenerated charge generation, transfer and recombination and surface reaction kinetics. We also discuss the primary advantages and limitations of these characterization approaches and the development of powerful tools in photocatalysis in the future.
Yuying Gao
Yuying Gao received a BSc degree in applied chemistry from Lanzhou university in 2013. She is currently pursuing a PhD in physical chemistry under the guidance of Prof. Fengtao Fan and Prof. Can Li in the State Key Laboratory of Catalysis (SKLC) and the Dalian National Laboratory for Clean Energy (DNL) at Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics (DICP). Her work focuses on studying charge transfer and spatial distribution in hybrid systems for solar energy conversion.
Wei Nie
Wei Nie received a BSc degree from Zhengzhou university in 2014. He is currently a PhD candidate under the supervision of Prof. Fengtao Fan and Prof. Can Li in the State Key Laboratory of Catalysis (SKLC) and the Dalian National Laboratory for Clean Energy (DNL) at Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics (DICP). His research interests focus on scanning electrochemical microscopy for in situ probing chemical reaction sites and reaction kinetics.
Xiuli Wang
Xiuli Wang received a BSc degree in Chemistry from Nankai University in 2004 and a PhD degree in Physical Chemistry from Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics (DICP), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS) in 2011, under the supervising of Prof. Can Li. She has been working as a professor in DICP since 2019. She did postdoctoral research at Imperial College-London from 2012 to 2013 with Prof. James Durrant. Her research interest lies in the time-resolved spectroscopic study of photo(electro)catalytic process and mechanism.
Fengtao Fan
Fengtao Fan has received his PhD degree in Physical Chemistry from Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics in 2010. He was promoted to full professor in 2015 and has been a visiting professor at the Utrecht University. Currently, he is the group leader in Solar Energy Research Division and the vice director of State Key Laboratory of Catalysis. His research interests include (1) operando spectroscopy (Correlated Raman spectroscopy, Mass spectrometry and Electrochemistry), (2) Photoelectrical imaging spectroscopy (KPFM, SPV imaging microscopy), (3) Development of Deep Ocean UV Raman spectrograph.
Can Li
Can Li has received his PhD degree in Physical Chemistry from Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics in 1989. He was promoted to full professor in 1993 and has been a visiting professor at the Université Pierre et Marie Curie (Paris VI), the Lehigh University, the University of Liverpool, and the Queensland University. He did his postdoctoral work at Northwestern University in 1994–1996. Currently, he is the head of Solar Energy Research Division and the director of the Dalian National Laboratory for Clean Energy (DNL). His research interests include (1) UV Raman spectroscopy and time-resolved spectroscopy, (2) environmental and green catalysis, (3) chiral catalysis and bio-catalysis, and (4) solar energy utilization based on photo(electro)catalysis and photovoltaic cells.
1. Introduction
Solar energy conversion is envisioned as a promising strategy for developing sustainable energy and addressing the global energy crisis.1 Conversion of solar energy into high-value fuels and chemicals on photocatalysts through various photocatalytic reaction processes has attracted considerable attention in recent years.2–6 Although much effort has been made towards developing efficient photocatalytic nanomaterials, detailed understanding of the structural properties of photocatalysts, the driving force for charge separation and the spatial distribution of reaction active sites is very challenging. The main challenge lies in the fact that the photocatalytic reaction is a rather complex process which usually involves multiple electron/hole transfers as well as a number of reaction intermediates and reaction pathways.7 Many factors such as the chemical environment of reaction active sites, the driving force for transport of energetic charge to absorbed reactant molecules and the lifetimes of high reactivity intermediates significantly affect the fundamental reaction mechanisms, and largely determine the reaction product distribution and solar energy utilization efficiency.3,8 Accordingly, in-depth understanding of these issues is the interesting and important topic in photocatalysis research.
To address these issues, many important experimental techniques have been developed to investigate the photo-induced charge transfer and reactive intermediate species of photocatalysis by means of ensemble-averaged measurements.7,9–12 Such measurements can provide experimental evidence to support the observed catalytic behavior. However, these characterization methods usually only provide information averaged over all the nanoparticles of the catalytic system, making it hard to exactly identify the active nanostructures from the complex structures of the photocatalysts. In fact, heterogeneity is a universal phenomenon in heterogeneous catalysis since photocatalysts often exhibit spatial variations in crystal phase, composition, doping concentration and defects.13 Moreover, charge dynamics in photocatalytic processes involved multiple timescales, and reaction intermediates and surface species are in a dynamic state over time.14–16 As such, some spectroscopic and microscopic techniques with high spatial and/or temporal resolution have been recently developed to understand their catalytic reaction mechanism,17–20 in particular, studying at working conditions.
Among the various techniques, the pump–probe technique is an attractive spectroscopic method to study the ultrafast electronic dynamics in photocatalysis, allowing us to monitor optical response with high temporal resolution.7,21 Combining the ultrafast technique with spatial resolution imaging tools, including optical microscopy, electron microscopy, scanning probe microscopy and X-ray microscopy, a range of powerful methods has been used to probe catalytic processes occurring on photocatalysts in a spatiotemporal manner: photo-generated charge carriers with the time domain from femtoseconds to milliseconds and the space domain from 0.1 nm to 10 μm are well characterized (Fig. 1). Because the behavior of photocatalysts is closely related to their environmental conditions, including the kind and concentration of electrolyte solution, atmosphere and temperature,14 more advanced characterization methods are now being developed to monitor reaction processes under operating conditions. Such a capability of mapping single nanoparticles with physical and chemical states in photocatalytic reactions is of particular interest in solar energy conversion research.
 Fig. 1  Characterizing photocatalysts in space and time. 
Since numerous approaches available for spatially imaging the chemical properties of photocatalysts have emerged over recent years and are evolving constantly, in this review, we focus on the advanced space- and time-resolved characterization techniques, including optical microscopy-based techniques, electron microscopy-based techniques and scanning probe-based techniques, with the ability to investigate photocatalysts at the single particle level. Table 1 lists the experimental techniques reviewed in this article for chemical imaging of photocatalysts with high spatial and/or temporal resolution. The combination of microscopy and the pump–probe technique enables us to study the ultrafast process at the nanometer scale. The spatial resolution, temporal resolution and applications of the different methods are also listed and compared in Table 1. It should be noted that synchrotron radiation-based X-ray techniques are also very useful imaging techniques. Because X-ray imaging techniques have been well summarized in review papers, readers are referred to some reviews for more details.22,23 We then present the significant applications of these approaches to study the fundamental problems in photocatalysis. Moreover, the advantages and limitations of the different techniques are discussed, and we conclude with the future challenges and developments of these advanced characterization techniques for photocatalysis studies.
Table 1 Overview of experimental techniques explored in this review with high spatial and/or temporal resolution




Technique
Spatial resolution
Temporal resolution
Applications




This table lists the spatial and temporal resolution of the advanced techniques reviewed in this article, but experimental techniques that have already been successfully applied to the studies of photocatalysts in space and time go far beyond that.




Fluorescence microscopy (including super-resolution microscopy)
∼30 nm
∼100 ms
Imaging reactive sites, kinetic mechanism, charge transfer


Raman microscopy (including TERS)
∼10 nm
ms
Chemical, physical, and optical properties of catalyst surfaces


Transient absorption microscopy
∼100 μm
Sub ps
Imaging charge dynamics, lifetimes of electronic and vibrational states


Ultrafast electron microscopy
Atomic scale
Sub ps
Imaging charge relaxation, diffusion and recombination


Kelvin probe force microscopy
1–10 nm
∼100 ms
Imaging charge spatial distribution, minority charge diffusion length, doping concentration, surface work function, electric field distributions


Electrostatic force microscopy
1–10 nm
μs–ns
Surface charge distribution and potential imaging, local charge dynamics, ionic transport, phase image, electrostatic field


Conductive AFM
1–10 nm
∼100 ms
Imaging photocurrent, charge transfer and recombination, electrical properties


Ultrafast scanning tunneling microscopy
Atomic scale
Sub ps
Charge dynamics, spin precession and dynamics, bond formation, molecular vibration and rotation


Scanning electrochemical microscopy
100 nm
∼100 ms
Imaging catalytic activity, kinetic rate constants, charge transfer, chemical species analysis




2. Optical microscopy-based techniques
Optical microscopy is commonly employed to investigate the morphological features of materials. In optical microscopy measurements, visible light illuminates the sample under observation and passes through a lens or multiple lenses, leading to magnified images of the sample. This technique exploits scattering light or transmission light from samples and can be used as a basis for spatially resolved optical spectroscopy. A wide range of optical microscopy techniques is available to meet experimental requirements, such as high spatial resolution, high speed data collection and high contrast, which make them usually suitable for collecting optical spectroscopy data at an area of interest of photocatalysts. Optical microscopy has been used to study the mechanism of surface catalytic reactions on single nanoparticles in aqueous solution.24 Here, we focus mainly on the introduction of fluorescence microscopy, Raman microscopy and transient absorption microscopy and show their significant applications in understanding the mechanism of photocatalytic reactions in space and time.
2.1 Fluorescence microscopy (FM)
Photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy is an important analytic technique for characterizing the crystal structures, particle size, and defect states of catalytic materials at the ensemble level.25 PL is a light emission process when photo-excited charges decay from one energy level to another lower energy state. The charge relaxation process and fluorescence lifetime can be studied using time-resolved fluorescence spectroscopy.26 FM is a widely used technique for spatially probing the structural and electronic properties of materials and determining species transport behaviors, using fluorescent probes. Spatially-resolved PL imaging techniques can ascertain the heterogeneous distribution of the structural and electronic properties of materials and determine species transport processes on single nanoparticles.27–29
Single-molecule fluorescence microscopy is capable of imaging catalytically active sites on single nanoparticles with high spatial resolution, and can detect a fluorescent product at the single molecule level.17,24,30 In this method, a catalytic reaction involving the transformation of a nonfluorescent reactant molecule into a highly fluorescent product molecule occurs on an individual catalyst.31 The high emission efficiency of each product molecule makes single-molecule detection possible, which enables us to image single molecules in solution and monitor their spectral properties in real time. A fluorescence image is obtained by capturing the fluorescent light emitted from fluorophores using a digital detector. Using super-resolution imaging, subnanometer spatial resolution is achievable, which allows us to locate the reaction products and trace the fluorescence intensity trajectories in individual fluorescence spots.32 The off–on fluorescence signals in the time trajectory are directly related to the time for fluorescent molecule formation at a reactive site and reactant molecule transfer to the reactive site from the solution. As such, the kinetic mechanism of the photocatalytic reaction taking place on single nanoparticles can be revealed in their native environment.33 Recently, a series of high-resolution FM techniques has been developed to observe weak emissions from a single fluorophore on single particles, such as total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy (TIRFM) and confocal fluorescence microscopy.25 A TIRFM uses an evanescent wave, which formed only when the incident light is totally internally reflected at the glass/solution interface, to selectively excite fluorophores adjacent to the glass/solution interface. Thus, this approach effectively eliminates the luminescence, scattering light and stray light, leading to a very low background noise.24 Confocal fluorescence microscopy (CFM) can offer high image contrast over conventional optical microscopy. CFM uses the confocal technique and the pinhole filtering technique for suppressing stray light on the out-of-focus plane and improving optical resolution. When collecting an image, the point light source from the laser needs scanning across the sample surface. CFM can also reconstruct 3D images through a series of images that are collected by varying the depth using optical sectioning. In addition, CFM can provide fluorescence scanning images of different spectral segments at the same time by using a multi-channel image acquisition tool.24 Because of these advantages, CFM is the most common technique for single-molecule spectroscopy on photocatalytic materials.
The combination of confocal microscopy with the time-correlated single-photon counting (TCSPC) system can be used to study the spatial and temporal correlations between specific fluorescent probe molecules and sample structural information. By measuring the single photon events over many cycles, it is able to reconstruct the fluorescence decay profile. Due to its high sensitivity and single-reaction temporal resolution, the single-molecule fluorescence microscopy technique is widely used to address the fundamental problems in the processes of photocatalytic reaction, such as the effect of adsorption,34–36 surface morphology,35,37,38 incident energy,39 cocatalyst deposition location40 and crystal facets29,41 on the catalytically active site distribution and catalytic activity.
Taking TiO2 as an example, the most important and representative semiconductor material for studying the fundamental properties of photocatalysis, as an example, Majima et al.41 studied the dependence of the inherent photocatalytic activity on the exposed crystal facets of an anatase TiO2 crystal. The precise spatial position where the single fluorescent molecule formed can be identified by fitting the fluorescence profile with the point spread function (PSF) (Fig. 2A). The authors used electron-involved reduction of the nitro-functionalized BODIPY dye (DN-BODIPY) developed by their own group as a fluorogenic probe to identify the catalytically reactive sites. After excitation of the TiO2 crystal with localized 365 nm UV light (the spot diameter is 2 μm), the nonfluorescent DN-BODIPY transformed into a highly fluorescent product (Fig. 2B). The authors observed fluorescence spots preferentially located on the crystal {101} facet, indicating that this facet has higher reduction activity than the {001} facet (the inset in Fig. 2C). On-time distribution analysis showed the crystal-facet dependence of adsorption dynamics (Fig. 2C), which is also attributed to the spatial heterogeneity of reactivity. After integrating Au nanoparticles into the TiO2 surface, fluorescence images indicated that plasmon-induced reaction sites located over a distance of a few tens of nanometers around the Au nanoparticles.26 Single-particle kinetic analysis of the fluorescent products demonstrated the photocatalytic activity dependence on the reactant concentration, excitation light intensity and Au nanoparticle size.42 Chen et al.40 creatively used prism-type TIRFM to spatiotemporally probe both the electron- and hole-driven photo(electro)catalytic sites on single TiO2 nanorods under a controllable electrochemical potential. The distribution of reaction rates along the single nanorods is heterogeneous but the high-activity sites of the hole-induced oxidation and electron-induced reduction reactions are the same locations (Fig. 2D). The strong correlation between the water oxidation efficiency and surface hole and electron effective rate constants proved that the photogenerated electrons and holes accumulated at the same sites (Fig. 2E). By carefully controlling the applied potential and light intensity, a quantitative single-particle image was obtained, which indicated that Amplex™ red oxidation on TiO2 nanorods proceeds via surface adsorbed hydroxyl radical species.43 This photocurrent mapping platform can provide insight into photo-induced surface reactions’ active site distribution and catalytic reaction kinetics on single particles, providing strategies for rationally designing photo(electro)catalytic materials in which cocatalysts optimally deposited on photocatalysts for significantly improving catalytic performance. These studies illustrate that single-molecule fluorescence microscopy has the capability to study photogenerated charge transfer and spatial distribution, the lifetimes of reaction products and the photocatalytic reaction rates on individual particles under reaction conditions. However, the current temporal resolution of single-molecule fluorescence microscopy is limited to milliseconds, making it difficult to probe ultrafast processes in catalytic reactions.17 The most attractive advantage of single-molecule fluorescence microscopy in studying catalytic processes over other high spatial resolution microscopies, for example electron microscopy, is that it uses light as a probe. Light causes less radiation damage and the light source device is simple and convenient, which makes single-molecule fluorescence microscopy much more accessible and available in experiments. In addition, this approach can probe the formation time of the product and the spatial distribution of catalytic reaction active sites under continuous, steady-state reaction conditions via coupling to a microfluidic flow cell. The most notable drawback of single-molecule fluorescence microscopy is that the measurement is excessively dependent on the choice of fluorescent dye, which requires high fluorescence quantum yields and high photostability. The kinetic analysis of fluorophores’ redox reaction on photocatalysts may not reflect the actual details of the photo(electro)catalytic reaction, such as water oxidation, the hydrogen evolution reaction, and CO2 reduction. To addresses this problem, it is necessary to design a specific experiment to indirectly study photocatalytic activities on individual nanoparticles. For example, Chen et al.44 showed that the evaluation of catalyst activity beyond fluorogenic reactions can be scaled up significantly to directly identify high activity catalyst particles.
 Fig. 2  (A) Fluorogenic probe reaction for single-molecule fluorescence imaging of a TiO2 anatase crystal. (B) Schematic of the photocatalytic reaction on the {101} facets with DN-BODIPY under localized UV light excitation. (C) On-time probability distribution for the {001} (blue) and {101} (red) facets of the TiO2 crystal, respectively. The inset shows an optical transmission image with detected reductive product positions mapped onto the TiO2 crystal. Reprinted with permission from ref. 41. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (D) Left: Scatter plot of hole-induced Amplex red oxidation reactions and electron-induced resazurin reduction reactions on TiO2 nanorods. Right: Steady-state anodic photocurrent and the oxidation/reduction rate dependence on the potential. (E) Correlation of kh with η and with ke at different spots. kh and ke represent effective rate constants of hole and electron surface activities, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 40. Copyright 2016 Nature Publishing Group. 
2.2 Raman microscopy (RM)
If an incoming photon interacts with a molecule, elastic scattering and inelastic scattering can occur. The elastic scattering process cannot change the energy of the incoming photon, which is termed Rayleigh scattering. The inelastic scattering process induces molecule vibrational state transition, leading to change in the energy of the scattered photon, and is known as Raman scattering. Raman spectroscopy gives the signal intensity as a function of the wavenumber shift of the scattered photon relative to the incoming photon. Different from the electronic information offered by fluorescence spectroscopy, Raman signals provide information on molecular vibration and rotation, which offers a valuable ‘fingerprint’ for chemical recognition. Raman microscopy (RM) is the integration of Raman spectroscopy and optical microscopy. The incident laser light enters the microscope and is focused on the sample surface. The spectral signals are received by the objective lenses and filtered out by the optical mirror to obtain Raman signals. RM is a label-free, rapid and high-precision surface scanning mapping technique. Due to the high heterogeneity of the chemical components in catalysts, RM is receiving increasing attention for probing chemical component spatial distribution on sample surfaces using Raman characteristic peaks. RM is easily applicable in an aqueous environment, allowing in situ study of the distributions of surface adsorbed molecules, reaction intermediates and products on catalysts. Confocal Raman microscopy (CRM) is even characterized by an excellent z axis spatial resolution and enables three dimensional Raman imaging and depth profiles to be acquired, which offers an approach to visualize the structural anisotropy of catalysts. CRM provides a spatial resolution of sub-micrometers due to the utilization of confocal optics; thus, it can be employed to study structural changes of the adsorbates on the catalyst surface and reaction intermediates during the catalytic reaction.45 Weckhuysen and co-workers used in situ Raman microscopy to observe the spatial distribution of Mo complexes over support catalysts during the preparation as a function of time.46 Remarkably, upon increasing the preparation time, the Mo complex concentration gradient decreased. This work indicated that Raman microscopy is capable of quantitative analysis of the spatial distribution of different chemical species on catalysts, which provides insights into how to improve catalytic performance by controlling active species on catalysts. In situ Raman microscopy can also study the structure and properties of electrode/solution interfaces,47 which is helpful for understanding the basic problems of electrochemical interface structures at the molecular level.
Raman microscopy generally suffers from very low signal intensities due to the low yield of Raman scattered photons. Thus, a good signal to noise ratio requires a long counting time, which limits the time resolution. Surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS) is emerging as a surface-sensitive technique that enhances Raman scattering by means of coinage-metal nanostructures.48,49 The Raman enhancement mechanism is attributed to the fact that the surface plasmon resonance (SPR) of metallic nanoparticles produces a largely magnified electromagnetic field, which enhances the Raman scattering and Raman polarizability of molecules that are located at or are very close to metal nanoparticles.50 In principle, the SERS enhancement factor is approximately proportional to the fourth power of the intensity of the enhanced electromagnetic field.48 It has been evidenced that the Raman signal of molecules located within a strong electromagnetic field can be enhanced by 4–12 orders of magnitude,51 which enables a high sensitivity for detecting and analysing single molecules.52 However, only a few metals, such as Au, Ag and Cu, can produce an enhanced electromagnetic field on their surface. To overcome this challenge, Tian et al.53 developed a new SERS-active substrate in which an ultrathin oxide layer is deposited on a plasmonic metal surface for enhancing Raman signals, known as shell-isolated nanoparticle-enhanced Raman spectroscopy.48 This substrate avoids direct contact between molecules and plasmonic metal nanoparticles, so the Raman signals are only from the molecules adsorbed on the shell surface. The method can theoretically be applied to any material's surface to obtain high quality Raman spectra.
Besides their SERS enhancements, plasmonic metal nanoparticles can generate hot charge as a result of plasmonic nonradiative relaxation pathways, which can drive photochemical reactions on plasmonic nanoparticle surfaces, for example, as in Baumberg and co-workers’ study to demonstrate plasmonic hot-electron-induced photoreduction reaction.54 By monitoring changes in the SERS signals of adsorbates on Au nanoparticles over time, hot charge generation and transport and single-molecule redox processes at plasmonic hotspots can be observed in real-time. In this case, the SPR of Au nanoparticles works for two purposes: enhancing Raman signals and generating hot charge. A similar Raman signal enhancement can be obtained at the tip of a plasmonic metal-coated AFM probe, and this method is known as tip-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (TERS). TERS combining scanning probe microscopy with SERS offers the possibility to detect enhanced Raman signals of adsorbates at nanometer resolution, which is advantageous for probing the spatial distribution of each individual species on catalysts’ surfaces.55 By monitoring TERS signals at different catalytic sites, it was demonstrated that the reactivity at the Pd step edge was higher than that at the Pd terrace, which was caused by the difference in d-band electronic structure between them.56
There are some limitations of Raman spectroscopy, which are as follows: (1) the Raman scattering cross section is small, and the fluorescence phenomenon easily affected Raman spectral analysis. (2) Different vibration peaks may overlap. (3) The controllable preparation of SERS substrate materials is a problem. A useful SERS active substrate needs good uniformity, high stability, and good reproducibility.
2.3 Transient absorption microscopy (TAM)
Ultrafast spectroscopy is an indispensable experimental technique to study ultrafast electronic dynamics processes.
Combining the ultrafast spectroscopic method and optical microscopy technique together offers a powerful approach for studying charge absorption properties in both space and time, which is known as transient absorption microscopy (TAM).57 TAM relies on the photo-induced absorption change of photocatalysts. In measurement, a pump laser pulse excites the sample and a delayed probe interacts with the photoexcited sample. The change in the detected probe intensity caused by the pump laser is recorded as the absorbance change in the sample at delay time τ. The increase or decrease in transient absorption is termed an absorption or a bleach signal, respectively. Two configurations are available for TAM measurement of samples: transmission and reflection. A typical TAM system is presented in Fig. 3A. The delay time between the pump and probe pulses is controlled by guiding the pump/probe beam through a computer-controlled delay line. The pump beam is chopped at a high frequency using an acousto-optic modulator.58 A high-repetition rate laser beam modulated with pulse pickers is preferable in measurement to get an ideal signal-to-noise ratio using the averaging method. The wavelengths of the pump and probe pulses are usually different in order to spectrally filter the pump beam using an optical filter. A transient absorption microscopy image is obtained by scanning the sample position using a closed loop piezo-stage or optical pathway control elements. Imaging excited-state dynamics in materials offers important information for understanding how the charge-transfer dynamics in photocatalysts is affected by micro- and nanoscale structural and compositional heterogeneities.57
 Fig. 3  (A) Experimental setup for TAM. (B) Fixed pump-scanned probe TAM employed for imaging Si nanowires. Reprinted with permission from ref. 60. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (C) Three distinct transport regimes of perovskites at different delay times. (D) TAM images of perovskites, and hot carrier transport length plotted as a function of pump–probe delay time. Reprinted with permission from ref. 64. Reprinted with permission from AAAS. 
TAM has been used to image the effect of charge dynamics of inhomogeneous graphene.59 Transient absorption traces demonstrated the fast and slow decay processes in graphene. The fast decay is attributed to coupling between the excited charge carriers and optical phonons in graphene, while the slow decay is assigned to the hot phonon effect. Later, Papanikolas and coworkers employed spatially-separated TAM to realize direct visualization of charge clouds over time in silicon nanowires (Fig. 3B).60 In this experiment, the pump and probe beams were separated. The pump spot was held at a fixed point of interest of the sample using the x–y sample stage. The independent probe beam was scanned relative to the pump beam through the adjustment of two mirrors to form an image. After excitation, the initial positive (colored red in the images) transient absorption signal is attributed to free carriers. As the decay time increases, the positive signal spots expand out of the excitation point along the Si nanowire, traversing 4–5 μm in length within 0–500 ps. After 700 ps, a negative signal (colored blue in the images) appears at the location of the excitation spot and broadens at longer times, which is attributed to the trap charge motion. This approach allows us to visualize the photo-induced charge diffusion and recombination in the sample over time. Moreover, the charge diffusion length, the carrier diffusion coefficient, the mean free path length and the exciton lifetime of semiconductor materials can be determined using TAM,61,62 providing fundamental parameters for understanding charge diffusion behavior in photocatalysts.
Perovskites have attractive band structures, long carrier diffusion lengths and long charge lifetimes, which make them appealing absorbers for solar energy harvesting and conversion.63 Huang's group imaged the hot charge migration in a perovskite thin film by TAM, uncovering the three hot charge transport regimes (Fig. 3C).64 Initially (0 ps), the transport distance of hot charge within the pulse width is dependent on pump beam energy, indicating a quasiballistic transport (Fig. 3D). After 300 fs, the positive transient signal appeared, demonstrating a hot charge cooling process. Due to the acoustic phonon scattering between hot charge and ion lattices, large polarons quickly (∼1 ps) formed. This process leads to the nonequilibrium charge cooling time reaching up to 10 picoseconds and the transport distance of hot charge reaching up to ∼600 nm, which is longer than that in conventional semiconductors. After reaching thermal equilibrium between charge and lattice, diffusive transport occurred since the transport distance increases linearly with decay time. The slow charge cooling process associated with long charge transport length is critical for photocatalytic reactions.
In contrast to FM, TAM has some advantages in application to photocatalytic studies. First, TAM relies on absorption signals of excited charge or excitons and can be applied to any photocatalytic materials. Second, it is a label-free technique. Third, it can be used to study ultrafast dynamics in materials with femtosecond time resolution. However, a high density of excited states in TAM measurement could easily lead to singlet–singlet annihilation processes, which would introduce artifacts in signals.
3. Electron-based characterization techniques
Using an accelerated electron beam instead of light as a source for exciting samples, electron-based characterization techniques attain extremely high resolution for imaging material structures and chemical components. Electron microscopy is based on the interaction between electrons and samples. When high-energy incident electrons impinge on a sample surface, the excited region generates secondary electrons, Auger electrons, backscattered electrons, transmitted electrons, characteristic X-rays, etc., as well as electron–hole pairs, lattice vibrations and electron oscillations. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) mainly uses secondary electrons and backscattered electrons to observe samples. Transmitted electrons are related to the microscopic composition, thickness, crystal structure and orientation, etc., which can be used to image samples, known as transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Equipping transmission attachment in SEM allows us to obtain the internal structural information of samples using the transmission mode (scanning transmission electron microscopy, STEM). Electron microscopy plays an irreplaceable role in observing the microstructure of materials. Electron microscopy needs to operate in a vacuum, so an in situ observation of the catalyst surface structure under reaction conditions is difficult. With the development of technology, the operation conditions of environmental electron microscopy will gradually approach the real catalytic reaction conditions for observing the dissolution, solidification and crystallization processes of catalysts.65–67 Ultrafast electron microscopy, a combination of the ultrafast technique and traditional electron microscopy, is a new characterization method for studying materials at spatial and temporal scales. Here, we focus on the recent progress of scanning transmission electron microscopy and ultrafast electron microscopy for catalytic materials.
3.1 Scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM)
Scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) is a powerful method which combines the principles and characteristics of SEM and TEM. In this approach, a very finely focused beam of electrons scans across the specimen sample, and the transmitted or elastically scattered electrons are analyzed. STEM is one of the most used tools for the atomic-scale characterization of the atomic and electronic structures of semiconductor materials due to its advantages of high spatial resolution and single atom sensitivity.68 In STEM, transmitted beam electrons with a relatively scattered large angle are detected using a high angle annular dark field (HAADF) detector. HAADF-STEM imaging is often referred to as Z-contrast imaging because the high-angle elastic scattering of electrons by atomic nuclei is strongly dependent on the atomic number. STEM coupled with electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) as well as energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) allows highly localized elemental analysis at atomic spatial resolution, which specially has great advantages for studying single atom catalysts.
Recently, our group used STEM to probe the spatial distribution of photodeposition products on a plasmonic Au/TiO2 photocatalyst to identify water oxidation reaction sites, as shown in Fig. 4A.69 Under visible light irradiation, the excitation of the surface plasmons of Au nanoparticles generated hot electrons and hot holes, which can drive photoreduction and photooxidation reactions, respectively. HAADF-STEM and EDS mapping images indicated that the photooxidation deposition product PbO2 was selectively deposited on the Au nanoparticle surfaces and Au/TiO2 interface (Fig. 4B), which directly demonstrated the spatial distribution of plasmonic hot holes. After annealing treatment of the photodeposition sample, the aggregation of PbO2 species formed nanoparticles which migrated to the interface between Au and TiO2 (Fig. 4C). Thus, the Au/TiO2 interface was embedded with PbO2 particles in the annealed sample, which exhibited lower water oxidation activity compared to an untreated Au/TiO2 sample. These results demonstrated that the Au/TiO2 interface is the water oxidation reaction site.
 Fig. 4  (A) Schematic illustration of the photooxidation deposition of PbO2 and annealing treatment of Au/TiO2. (B) STEM images and EELS elemental mapping of PbO2/Au/TiO2. (C) STEM images and EELS elemental mapping of annealed PbO2/Au/TiO2. Adapted with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
3.2 Four-dimensional ultrafast electron microscopy (4D-UEM)
By combining the excellent spatial resolution of electron microscopy with the temporal resolution of ultrafast laser-based spectroscopy, four-dimensional ultrafast electron microscopy (4D-UEM) is becoming one of the most important tools for studying time-dependent phenomena in catalytic reactions at the nanometer scale.70 In this method, a femtosecond laser pulse is used to excite the area of interest of a specimen, and a time-resolved image is formed by detecting secondary electrons (SEs) emitted from the sample surface at different delay times using pulsed electron packets from a photocathode source. The observed image contrast is sensitive to the local electron/hole density change with respect to a reference image. The charge relaxation, diffusion and recombination in space and time of diverse materials can be visualized. Furthermore, with 4D-UEM, it becomes possible to acquire the dynamics events of the observed signals, enabling temporal information on chemical and local charge density to be obtained, which is helpful to understand the effects of specific chemical components of catalysts on spatiotemporal information in photocatalytic reactions.
Najafi et al.71 demonstrated the capability of 4D-UEM to study the carrier excitation, transport, and recombination in a silicon p–n junction, with a well-defined interface on the nanoscale (Fig. 5A). A pulse green light (515 nm) excited electrons to the conduction band of silicon, and an electron packet was used to image the SE density of the specimen at some time delay relative to the excitation pulse, as shown in Fig. 5B. The contrast image at −470.0 ps displayed the unperturbed SE density signal of the p–n junction. Immediately after the excitation (+6.70 ps), both the n-type and p-type exhibited bright contrast due to the generation of excited carriers. Then, the carriers diffused towards the junction and were separated by the depletion layer within the p–n interface. Such carrier transport and spatial separation result in excess electrons and holes in the n-type and p-type, respectively, which causes a drastic difference in contrast. Extending the delay time (653.3 ps, 3.32 ns), the carriers in this system approached the equilibrium state after relaxation and recombination. Later, the authors also studied the rich dynamics of carriers in hydrogenated amorphous silicon by 4D-UEM (Fig. 5C).72 They observed fast diffusion immediately after photoexcitation, forming a bright disk. As time passed, the bright ring further expanded and the contrast at the centre of the disk became darker. These studies demonstrate that 4D-UEM has the ability to unravel the spatiotemporal behavior of charge transport and recombination after excitation in semiconductors, and even in heterogeneous photocatalysts. In the TAM technique, the collected dynamic information mostly originates from the bulk materials being investigated due to the large penetration depth of the laser beam. However, 4D-UEM can probe the surface properties of different depths in specimens by varying the energy of the impinging photoelectron pulses.73,74
 Fig. 5  (A) Schematic illustration of 4D-UEM imaging of the p–n junction. (B) Left panel: Schematic diagram showing the principle of imaging in negative and positive charges. Right panel: UEM images of the p–n junction at different time delays. Reprinted with permission from ref. 71. Reprinted with permission from AAAS. (C) 4D-UEM images of amorphous silicon. Reprinted with permission from ref. 72. Copyright 2017 Nature Publishing Group. 
Recently, liquid-cell four-dimensional electron microscopy has been employed to probe the photomorphic reaction dynamics of gold nanoparticles in water solution at the nanometer–nanosecond scale under an external light illumination stimulus.75 After fs-laser pulse irradiation, the dispersed Au nanoparticles in the aqueous solution began to aggregate with their neighboring particles. Under high laser fluence, the adjacent particles further aggregated and transformed into nanoplates through particle coalescence within tens of nanoseconds. Besides, gas-phase electron microscopy is one of the most attractive methods for observing the atomic and electronic rearrangements on catalysts’ surfaces, which plays a fundamental role in understanding the mechanism of the gas–solid phase catalytic reaction.76
Environmental electron microscopy also has some drawbacks. Sample preparation and control over measurement conditions are complicated. The incident high-energy electrons can destroy samples by collision and heating. The thin liquid on catalyst surfaces dramatically reduces the spatial resolution and the formation of bubbles in the liquid layer would produce artifacts in signals. Because TEM can be used to only observe very thin samples, it is possible that the structure of the catalyst's surface is different from the structure inside the catalysts. Besides, the sample needs to be stable in liquid under an electron beam and light radiation.
4. Scanning probe microscopy-based techniques
Scanning probe microscopy (SPM) generally uses a cantilever with a sharp tip that scans the sample surface to detect electrostatic force and flowing current between the probe and sample. SPM can operate in a wide variety of environments such as gaseous, vacuum and liquid environments, allowing in situ study of the nanoscale properties of materials. SPM has many variants and has been successfully implemented to investigate the basic questions in photocatalytic reactions, which is important for advancing the state-of-knowledge of heterogeneity in photocatalysts. Thus, SPM is undoubtedly a versatile tool to provide detailed information on the surface morphology, conductivity, photo-induced charge distribution and surface reaction active sites of catalysts at the nanometer scale.
4.1 Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM)
KPFM measures the work function difference between a conductive tip and a sample surface. The difference in the work functions is called the contact potential difference (CPD). In measurement, a DC voltage is applied to the tip to offset electrostatic forces between the tip and the sample, while simultaneously an AC signal is applied to the tip to drive cantilever vibration at a specific frequency (ω). A lock-in amplifier is used to detect electrostatic forces at the oscillation frequency ω to obtain the CPD. By scanning the sample surface using the conductive tip, the work function of the sample surface can be imaged at nanometer resolution. A detailed introduction to KPFM can be found in recent review articles.19 Mapping the local CPD of samples is helpful for the determination of energy band depth profiles.77
Photogenerated charge separation and transfer is a critical step in redox photochemical reactions. Achieving effective charge spatial separation to improve charge utilization efficiency is at the heart of photo(electro)catalytic reactions. Elucidation of photogenerated charge separation and spatial distribution is thus of crucial importance to thoroughly understand the subsequent reaction mechanisms and rationally design efficient photocatalysts. Our group is working towards the capabilities of spatial imaging of the charge distribution of photocatalysts at the single particle level. We used light-irradiated KPFM to image photogenerated charge spatial distribution on an individual BiVO4 crystal under ambient conditions (Fig. 6A).78 Light-irradiated KPFM opens the door to directly observe the photo-induced CPD change in the sample at the nanometer scale.79–81 A CPD variation, termed surface photovoltage (SPV), reflects the local charge density change on the sample surface induced by charge generation, separation and transfer after light illumination. We directly observed a highly anisotropic photogenerated charge separation between different facets of a single BiVO4 particle. Photo-induced holes preferentially transfer to the exposed {011} facets of the BiVO4 crystals due to their larger upward band bending. After photodeposition of MnOx and Pt cocatalyst on a BiVO4 single particle, the photogenerated charge transfer behavior is quite different (Fig. 6B).82 The SPV is nearly 80 times as high as that measured over a bare BiVO4 particle. This is ascribed to the fact that deposition of dual cocatalysts leads to an increase of the upward energy band bending at the {011} facets and a small downward band bending at the {010} facets, resulting in strong capability for charge separation. Obviously, the SPV image in Fig. 6C shows that photogenerated electrons and holes are separated toward the {010} and {011} facets on the single BiVO4 particle, respectively. The result confirms that the reasonable assembly of a cocatalyst on a photocatalyst particle is helpful to form a strong additive built-in electric field, resulting in vectorial charge transfer across a single particle. More recently, our group pioneered SPV microscopy (SPVM) to demonstrate the possibility of efficient photogenerated charge separation in a high-symmetry Cu2O photocatalyst particle under asymmetric light irradiation (Fig. 6D).83 Photogenerated electrons and holes are preferentially transferred to the shadow and illuminated regions, respectively, due to the intrinsic difference between electron and hole mobilities, also known as the photo-Dember effect. The drift and diffusion processes of photogenerated charges both generate SPV signals. The diffusion SPV is highly dependent on the length of charge transport. Reducing the Cu2O particle size, the dominated charge separation process becomes from the diffused process to drift process. As a result, photogenerated electrons were distributed to both the illuminated and shadow facets. The spatial distribution and transfer direction of photogenerated charges in the Cu2O crystal can be significantly influenced by defects distributed near the surface.84
 Fig. 6  (A) Principle of SPVM operation. (B) SPV signals measured at different BiVO4 particles. (C) SPVM image of a single BiVO4 particle with MnOx and Pt dual cocatalysts. Reprinted with permission from ref. 82. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (D) SPVM image of a single Cu2O particle under asymmetric illumination. Reprinted with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2018 Nature Publishing Group. 
With the superior capability of KPFM based SPV methods, some new insights into how to promote charge separation in photocatalysts have been provided. It is proposed that breaking the symmetry of photocatalysts by inequivalent crystal facets, asymmetric light illumination, spatially inhomogeneously distributed defects and cocatalysts will be the key rules to construct driving force for efficient charge separation. Symmetry breaking will become a new rule to establish strong built-in electric fields facilitating charge separation for the design and synthesis of highly efficient photocatalysts.
An interface is a key component in heterogeneous catalysts to support concurrent ionic and electronic transport, which plays a crucial role in the performance of photocatalysis. To clearly understand photo-induced charge transfer at a phase junction interface, our group imaged the surface potential distribution at an anatase/rutile phase junction with nanometer resolution (Fig. 7A).81 The difference in CPD between rutile and anatase leads to a built-in field at the phase junction interface with the direction toward rutile. The built-in electric field intensity is up to 1 kV cm−1, which is significantly stronger than that in pure phase TiO2. The SPV signal of the TiO2 phase junction is increased by 6 times compared to pure TiO2 (Fig. 7B), which provides direct evidence that the phase junction benefits photogenerated charge spatial separation. Analysis of the SPV phase values provided direct evidence that photogenerated electrons transfer to anatase, while holes accumulate in the rutile phase. This technique was recently used to probe plasmon-induced hot charge spatial distribution in Au/TiO2 nanostructures (Fig. 7C).69 Plasmon-induced photochemical reactions offer an alternative route for solar energy conversion.85–87 Because of the short lifetime of hot charge,85 efficient separation of hot charge is a key problem in plasmon-induced chemical reactions. SPVM has high spatial resolution and high signal sensitivity, which can provide experimental evidence of the plasmonic hot charge accumulation location and the local charge density. Under SPR excitation, hot electrons can transfer to TiO2 by overcoming the interfacial Schottky barrier, while plasmonic hot holes accumulated in the Au/TiO2 interface (Fig. 7D). This hot charge spatial separation effectively prolongs the lifetimes of hot electrons, making them capable of driving various surface chemical reactions. The SPV image in Fig. 7E demonstrates the heterogeneous spatial distribution of hot holes in Au/TiO2. These studies provide a thought towards the use of nanoscopy to unveil charge separation at the nanointerface in complex materials.
 Fig. 7  (A) Schematic of KPFM imaging on a TiO2 phase junction interface and a surface potential image of interfacial rutile/anatase. (B) Spatially resolved SPV spectroscopy of the TiO2 phase junction. Reprinted with permission from ref. 81. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (C) Schematic of plasmon-induced hot charge spatial separation of Au/TiO2 nanostructures. (D) SPVM image of an individual Au nanoparticle on the TiO2 crystal after SPR excitation. (E) SPV line profile of Au/TiO2 nanostructures. Reprinted with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
Researchers have attempted to implement KPFM in liquid aimed to in situ study and understand charge distribution at the solid–liquid interface.88 Rodriguze et al.89 developed electrochemical force microscopy (EcFM) similar to the principle of KPFM to probe the surface potential and visualize the spatial variation of local electrochemical properties in aqueous solution. A potential limitation of EcFM is the electric double layer due to the surface charge screened by the surrounding counter ions in aqueous solutions, which significantly deteriorates the spatial resolution in electrical measurement.
The high sensitivity and high spatial resolution of KPFM make it an ideal tool for investigating the surface potential, charge separation and spatial distribution on individual particles or nanointerfaces of photocatalysts. However, KPFM also has some disadvantages. It is difficult to implement KPFM measurement under aqueous solution conditions because of the directional migration of ions in the solution under an AC voltage. In addition, the measured sample needs to exhibit good conductivity and to be fixed on a substrate, and thus the influence of charge transfer between the sample and the substrate should be considered.
4.2 Electrostatic force microscopy (EFM)
Alternatively, electrostatic force microscopy (EFM), as a type of scanning probe microscopy, also has the ability to investigate the mechanical properties, surface charge distribution and surface work function with high spatial resolution. EFM is based on the electrostatic force between the sample surface and the biased tip. Because electrostatic force is a long range force, EFM using the lift mode to measure the electrical properties of the sample can reduce the influence of the surface morphology. Mews's group studied the charge transfer and distribution of individual CdSe nanowires upon local illumination using EFM.90 This method enables the direct visualization of charge flow and transfer in single nanostructures at the nanometer scale. EFM directly measures the electrostatic force Fω between tip and sample using a lock-in amplifier, but the value cannot be determined accurately. Quantification of the number of accumulated photo-induced charges in a sample can be achieved by calibrating the tip-sample capacitance and tip effective size in advance.91 EFM has much better sensitivity than KPFM for studying the charging process and defect trapping information. Combined with a high-speed data acquisition system, time-resolved EFM (trEFM) offers the ability to measure photo-induced charge dynamics on the millisecond time scale by tracking the cantilever frequency shift.92 A series of EFM techniques have been developed to improve temporal resolution.93 However, in EFM, the signal-to-noise ratio is easily influenced by the surrounding dielectric environment. The screening effect created by free-moving electrons on the sample surface affects EFM image contrast. Under light excitation of the sample, charge transfer and redistribution results in the time-dependence of the capacitance gradient between the tip and sample, which makes the extraction of time signals more complicated.
4.3 Conductive AFM (C-AFM)
Conductive AFM (C-AFM) can simultaneously measure the topography of a sample and the electric current flow between the tip and sample surface, thereby enabling the exploration of electrical and charge transport characterization of photo(electro)catalysts at the nanoscale level.94,95 The main difference between C-AFM and scanning photocurrent microscopy is that C-AFM requires an electrically conductive tip in contact with the sample surface. Photoconductive atomic force microscopy (PC-AFM) can provide photocurrent images at an applied bias, offering an approach to reveal the spatial heterogeneity of optoelectronic characteristics and the charge transport mechanism.96
The adsorption and desorption of molecules on catalysts’ surfaces are some of the critical steps in photocatalytic reactions.5 Toma et al.97 used KPFM and PC-AFM to reveal the role of surface adsorbed oxygen and water molecules in photogenerated charge transport in BiVO4 thin films. The environment-dependent SPV demonstrated that the surface adsorbed oxygen molecule induces a trap state involved charge transfer process, whereas the surface adsorbed water molecule does not change surface photo-induced charge transport. PC-AFM can be performed under different atmospheres, and can be used to study the effect of the atmosphere and the adsorbed molecules on the photocatalyst surface on the behavior of charge transport.
PC-AFM can also be utilized to characterize the local electrical properties of the facet plane, facet boundary and grain boundaries of a BiVO4 film.96 Photocurrent images showed a heterogeneous photocurrent distribution in the BiVO4 photoanode, and demonstrated that ground boundaries were not the recombination sites. C-AFM also has been employed to explore the effect of the chemical composition on photogenerated charge transfer of photocatalysts.98
By combining C-AFM and dark-field TEM (DF-TEM), the structural features of an α-Fe2O3 photoanode can be correlated with the sizes of the current-carrying regions, allowing researchers to identify champion nanoparticle aggregates that contribute to the majority of photocurrent (Fig. 8A).94 Statistical analysis of the DF-TEM images showed that the number of single principal crystallographic orientations in the 6L sample was largely higher than that in the 2L sample. The two or more orientations in the 2L sample resulted in a lower PEC performance due to the recombination centers and potential barrier at grain boundaries (Fig. 8B). C-AFM images provide clear evidence that the majority carrier current was limited by grain boundaries, which was consistent with DF-TEM measurements. This study demonstrates that the C-AFM approach can identify excellent nanoparticles contributing to large photocurrent in photoelectrodes. The finding provides important implications for design strategies to facilitate charge transfer in photoelectrodes.
 Fig. 8  (A and B) Dark field TEM and C-AFM images and PEC performance of an α-Fe2O3 photoanode. 2L and 6L indicate that the electrodes were prepared at heater set temperatures/air flow rates of 475 °C/2 litres min−1 and 545 °C/6 litres min−1 respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2013 Nature Publishing Group. (C) Schematic of an ultrafast STM system. (D) USTM image and time-resolved signal measured at bare GaAs and a cobalt nanoparticle. Reprinted with permission from ref. 105. Copyright 2010 Nature Publishing Group. 
Although C-AFM has proven to be a powerful tool for nanoscale characterization to correlate the structural and optoelectronic properties of materials, some drawbacks remain in measurement. C-AFM is operated in contact mode, and the tip is easily worn out and contaminated. The currents flowing through the tip–sample system can be affected by many factors, such as the applied force on the probe and the contact area between the probe and sample.
4.4 Ultrafast scanning tunneling microscopy (USTM)
Scanning tunneling microscopy (STM), based on the quantum mechanical tunneling effect, is a reliable method to investigate the microscopic properties of a semiconductor near-surface at the atomic scale as well as the underlying mechanisms of photocatalytic reactions.99 Due to the feedback circuit of the microscope and the circuit bandwidth of the amplifier, the temporal resolution of STM is limited to microseconds. The combination of STM and ultrafast optical techniques, known as ultrafast STM (USTM), can overcome this limitation of temporal resolution.100 The well-known “pump–probe” technique was successfully applied to probe the ultrafast dynamics of samples under investigation with the temporal resolution limited only by the laser pulse width.101 USTM can measure the ultrafast dynamics of photo-induced carriers on an atomic scale, achieving unprecedented spatiotemporal resolution (1 nm/sub-picosecond). In USTM measurement, the sample is illuminated with a sequence of paired laser pulses separated by a time interval. The first optical pulse from a modulated pulse picker activates the switch to create an excited state in the sample, while the second optical pulse on the sample probes a dynamic process which is related to the decay of the excited state caused by the first optical pulse.102 By varying the delay time between the two pulses and measuring the averaged tunneling current of the system as a function of delay time td, one can map the time-resolved signal of the surface dynamics process. Such measurements provide information about the spatial heterogeneity in the dynamics of the excited state in the sample.
Shigekawa et al.103 used optical USTM to study optically oriented spin dynamics in GaAs in the picosecond range. They also studied the dynamics of the bonding states of molecules and local-bond contributions to conductance.104 Shigekawa and co-workers used a mechanical shaker in a USTM system to ensure its thermal stability.105 This system is known as a shaken-pulse-pair excited STM (SPPX-STM). The SPPX-STM coupled with an ultrafast optical pulse pair has been employed to image the transient carrier dynamics of semiconductors (Fig. 8C).105 The time-resolved STM image in Fig. 8D demonstrates that the photo-induced hole capture rates were obviously different between a cobalt nanoparticle and GaAs. The short decay time at the cobalt induced by the electrons injected from the STM tip to the gap-state at the cobalt site, which markedly accelerates photocarrier recombination. The decay constant of cobalt nanoparticle (42 ns) is shorter than that of bare GaAs surface (223 ns). Furthermore, the authors also applied this method to investigate charge dynamics in a GaAs–PIN junction after photoexcitation.106 These studies show that USTM can provide tremendous spatiotemporal information on the diffusion, distribution and capture of photo-induced charge, which will deepen the knowledge of charge transport and transient processes on photocatalyst surfaces.
A limitation of USTM is that the electrons tunneling between the sample and tip may change the intrinsic dynamics of the sample, especially at large tunneling currents. Besides, it is difficult to accurately measure rough surfaces using USTM and most of the studies are focused on simple model systems.
4.5 Scanning electrochemical microscopy (SECM)
Determining the nature of reaction activities and understanding their reaction mechanism on photocatalyst surface are of paramount importance for the rational design of improved formulations of efficient catalysts for solar energy conversion. With regard to the heterogeneity of photocatalytic reaction activity on photocatalyst surfaces, one of the central issues is to determine where reaction sites contribute to most of the photoelectrode's photocurrent. In this respect, scanning electrochemical microscopy (SECM) is remarkably successful in probing the catalytic reaction activity spatial distribution and reaction dynamics on catalyst surfaces in aqueous solution.107–109 SECM uses ultramicroelectrode (UME) or nanoelectrode scanning across the sample surface to obtain surface morphological and local activity images simultaneously. The faradaic current resulting from the electrochemical reaction at the tip (iT) varies with the separation distance (d) between the tip and the substrate, which is referred to as an approach curve (iTvs. d plot). Quantitative analysis of the approach curve is available to obtain kinetics information including diffusion processes and steady-state processes.109 SECM can be performed in multiple modes, including the feedback mode, generation/collection mode, redox competition mode, and surface interrogation mode. Because the local activity is measured by monitoring the reaction products and intermediates at the scanning tip, SECM can also identify surface species by tuning the potential of the electrode.110 Talin et al.111 detected the reaction products of hydrogen on patterned Pt islands in a metal–insulation–semiconductor photocathode architecture, and found that the spillover-assisted evolution of hydrogen existed using scanning photocurrent/electrochemical microscopy (SPCM/SECM) (Fig. 9A). At positive potentials, photocurrent was mainly generated for optical excitation near the edges of the collectors. At −0.1 V RHE, SECM maps demonstrated that H2 evolved not only from the collector surface, but also from the surrounding SiO2 because of the lateral transport of minority carriers within the inversion layer (Fig. 9B). The SPCM/SECM (SPCM) images provide evidence of the lateral photovoltage driving minority carrier transport through an inversion layer. But the spatial resolution of conventional UME is on the micrometer level, which hampers the understanding of the heterogeneity of photocatalysts on single nanoparticles. Recently, nanoelectrode-based scanning probe microscopy has been developed to sense the surface electrochemical potential under operating conditions112 and to track electrochemical currents.113 A conical conductive tip in the center of the nanoelectrode can record the electrochemical current of the redox reaction that occurred in the probe after the diffusion of the reaction products formed on the catalyst surface to the probe (Fig. 9C). This new probe with a spatial resolution of ∼100 nm offers accessibility to correlate the catalytic reactivity with the local surface morphology at the nanometer level. Brunschwig et al.113 studied the nanoelectrical and SECM images of Pt nanoparticles deposited on a p+-Si substrate (Fig. 9C). The SECM current of the deposited Pt nanoparticles indicated that only a fraction of Pt nanoparticles is contributed to the whole electrochemical activity of silicon electrode.
 Fig. 9  (A) Schematic overview of the SPCM/SECM setup. (B) Scanning photocurrent microscopy images and SECM UME tip current images of a MIS photocathode. Reprinted with permission from ref. 111. Copyright 2013 Nature Publishing Group. (C) Upper panel: SECM image of a Pt/p+-Si sample. Reprinted with permission from ref. 113. Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Lower panel: The nanoelectrode-based AFM tip senses the surface electrochemical potential of the electrocatalyst. Reprinted with permission from ref. 112. Copyright 2018 Nature Publishing Group. (D) Synchronous topographical and electrochemical maps of GC-supported Au nanoplates. Reproduced from ref. 114 with permission of the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Considering that chemical reaction processes across the electrode/liquid interface in PECs have long been recognized to be extremely complicated, the SECM technique is capable of studying the underlying mechanism of water-splitting reaction under operando conditions and has immeasurable value for understanding catalytic reaction mechanisms. A potential limitation of SECM is that the UME with micron level dimensions employed by conventional SECM in constant height mode often makes the tip current signal convolution with the surface morphology signal. The diffusion broadening effect obstructs the spatial resolution down to the nanometer level. Thus, multifunctional tips are developed to combine advanced imaging techniques, such as atomic force microscopy (AFM) and scanning electrochemical cell microscopy (SECCM). SECCM has been used to map the spatial heterogenous activity at the nanometer scale by employing a nanopipette probe.114 The synchronous maps of the morphology and electrochemical flux movies were obtained on MoS2 and individual Au nanoparticles (Fig. 9D). Bentley and Unwin found that the catalytic [N2H5]+ oxidation reaction on the Au nanoplates was not uniform due to their structural heterogeneity.
SECM has the ability of single-particle resolution to directly and locally map the electrochemical reaction sites and to reveal the underlying mechanism of the electrochemical reaction under in situ conditions.20 It is not risky to predict that the method is on the way to play a prominent role in photo(electro)catalysis. Precursor studies were done by Bard et al.115,116 and Conzuelo et al.117 using scanning photoelectrochemical microscopy (SPECM). Conzuelo et al.117 presented an in-depth evaluation of a photosystem 1 (PS1)/Os-complex modified redox polymer-based biocathode by collecting H2O2, and hence provided evidence for the formation of reduced oxygen species under light conditions. In brief, SECM is proving to be increasingly powerful in photo(electro)catalysis, such as in detecting intermediate species, revealing reaction active sites and quantifying the electron-transfer kinetics, which can provide useful information of photocatalysts at spatial and temporal scale.
5. Conclusion and outlook
There has been great progress in the past few years in developing advanced spectroscopies with spatial resolution and/or temporal resolution for the characterization of heterogeneous photocatalysts and photocatalytic processes. Monitoring the photocatalytic reaction on single particles plays an indispensable role in advancing the state-of-knowledge of reaction mechanisms in space and time. The pioneering studies highlighted in this review proved that these advanced techniques have very powerful capability to study the heterogeneity in chemical structure, charge transfer and distribution and catalytically active sites of photocatalysts. Accessing such information about the microscopic details of how the optical, electronic and chemical properties of photocatalysts determine catalytic reactions is of great significance for the development and optimization of photocatalytic materials.
In research on the microscopic mechanism of photocatalytic reactions, various materials have been investigated mainly by electron microscopy; in particular, liquid-phase processes such as nanoparticle growth processes and phase transformations can be directly observed by environmental electron microscopy.118 More attention to AFM-based methods should be encouraged because the setup is simple and capable of investigating various nanoscale properties of materials, such as their structural, mechanical, optical, chemical, and electrical properties.119 Since the fast scan AFM method has been evidenced in some publications,92,120 this technique will provide a hopeful possibility for a real-time “look” into how the physical and chemical properties of photocatalysts change under light illumination. Therefore, AFM-based methods hold immense potential for in situ spatiotemporal characterization that is capable of providing four-dimensional chemical reaction information on photocatalysts under ambient solution conditions.
With the experimental advances, new and more powerful characterization techniques are being rapidly developed to achieve high sensitivity and spatial and temporal resolution. In the space-resolved and time-resolved methods, nearly all of them use photons or electrons as the excitation source (Fig. 10), which provide microscopic information for understanding how the nanomaterial's structures affect the charge transfer, molecular activation and chemical reaction path under excitation. By undertaking detailed analysis of the data, it is possible to logically design efficient photocatalysts at the nanometer scale to achieve excellent electrical properties, high stability, etc. Because the nanoparticles often have high surface energy and complex surface microstructures, each nanoparticle in catalysis processes may undergo dynamic surface state or even surface shape change.121 Therefore, an in situ/operando characterization method is highly desirable for solving a broad set of existing problems in photocatalysis, such as the photo-induced charge separation, the real active structure and the spatial distribution of reactive intermediates.
 Fig. 10  Spatiotemporal information for rationally designing photocatalysts in the future. 
It is without any doubt that advanced characterization methods play a critical role in the development of photocatalysis. The use of multi-technique approaches can provide comprehensive information on photocatalytic reactions. For example, combining ultrafast spectroscopy with AFM offers an avenue to deliver charge transfer dynamics and structural information of materials.62 The multi-functional in situ spatiotemporal technique is challenging and provides ample opportunity for future research. Of course, advanced characterization methods for spatially and temporally exploring the key issues of photocatalysis processes are far more than those mentioned above. We believe that all spatiotemporal characterization methods for studying the dynamics events and spatial information of materials will be of great benefit to elegant design of high-performance photocatalysts.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 21633015, 21773228), the CAS Interdisciplinary Innovation Team (Grant No. JCTD-2018-10), the DICP Innovation Foundation (Grant No. DICPSZ201801), and the Strategic Priority Research Program and Equipment Development Project of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (Grant No. XDB17000000, YJKYYQ20170002).
Notes and references
N. Kornienko, J. Z. Zhang, K. K. Sakimoto, P. D. Yang and E. Reisner, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 890–899 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Chen, T. Takata and K. Domen, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 1–17 Search PubMed .
Y. Ma, X. L. Wang, Y. S. Jia, X. B. Chen, H. X. Han and C. Li, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 9987–10043 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. M. He and D. W. Wang, Chem, 2018, 4, 405–408 CAS .
P. Zhang, T. Wang and J. L. Gong, Chem, 2018, 4, 223–245 CAS .
F. E. Osterloh, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2294–2320 RSC .
S. Corby, L. Francas, S. Selim, M. Sachs, C. Blackman, A. Kafizas and J. R. Durrant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 16168–16177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253–278 RSC .
I. Grigioni, M. Abdellah, A. Corti, M. V. Dozzi, L. Hammarstrom and E. Selli, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 14042–14045 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, Q. Xu, Z. Feng, M. Li and C. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 1766–1769 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. C. Hurum, A. G. Agrios, K. A. Gray, T. Rajh and M. C. Thurnauer, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 4545–4549 CrossRef CAS .
Z. C. Lian, M. Sakamoto, H. Matsunaga, J. J. M. Vequizo, A. Yamakata, M. Haruta, H. Kurata, W. Ota, T. Sato and T. Teranishi, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2314 CrossRef PubMed .
I. L. C. Buurmans and B. M. Weckhuysen, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 873–886 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. V. Esposito, J. B. Baxter, J. John, N. S. Lewis, T. P. Moffat, T. Ogitsu, G. D. O’Neil, T. A. Pham, A. A. Talin, J. M. Velazquez and B. C. Wood, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2863–2885 RSC .
J. B. Baxter, C. Richter and C. A. Schmuttenmaer, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2014, 65, 423–447 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Schneider, M. Matsuoka, M. Takeuchi, J. L. Zhang, Y. Horiuchi, M. Anpo and D. W. Bahnemann, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 9919–9986 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Hesari, X. W. Mao and P. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 6729–6740 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 2485–2508 RSC .
R. T. Chen, F. T. Fan, T. Dittrich and C. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 8238–8262 RSC .
C. L. Bentley, J. Edmondson, G. N. Meloni, D. Perry, V. Shkirskiy and P. R. Unwin, Anal. Chem., 2019, 91, 84–108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cabanillas-Gonzalez, G. Grancini and G. Lanzani, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5468–5485 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Sakdinawat and D. Attwood, Nat. Photonics, 2010, 4, 840–848 CrossRef CAS .
I. Robinson and R. Harder, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 291–298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kondo, W. J. Chen and G. S. Schlau-Cohen, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 860–898 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Tachikawa and T. Majima, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 4802–4819 RSC .
T. Tachikawa, T. Yonezawa and T. Majima, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 263–275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Amirav and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 13049–13053 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Tachikawa, T. Ishigaki, J. G. Li, M. Fujitsuka and T. Majima, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 5348–5352 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Tachikawa, T. Ochi and Y. Kobori, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 2250–2256 CrossRef CAS .
G. De Cremer, B. F. Sels, D. E. De Vos, J. Hofkens and M. B. J. Roeffaers, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 4703–4717 RSC .
J. B. Sambur and P. Chen, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2014, 65, 395–422 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Chen, X. C. Zhou, H. Shen, N. M. Andoy, E. Choudhary, K. S. Han, G. K. Liu and W. L. Meng, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 4560–4570 RSC .
W. L. Xu, J. S. Kong, Y. T. E. Yeh and P. Chen, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 992–996 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Naito, T. Tachikawa, M. Fujitsuka and T. Majima, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 1048–1059 CrossRef CAS .
K. Naito, T. Tachikawa, M. Fujitsuka and T. Majima, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 934–936 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Z. Li, C. C. Chen and J. C. Zhao, Langmuir, 2001, 17, 4118–4122 CrossRef CAS .
N. M. Zou, X. C. Zhou, G. Q. Chen, N. M. Andoy, W. Jung, G. K. Liu and P. Chen, Nat. Chem., 2018, 10, 607–614 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Han, G. K. Liu, X. C. Zhou, R. E. Medina and P. Chen, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1253–1259 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Ha, T. P. A. Ruberu, R. Han, B. Dong, J. Vela and N. Fang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 1398–1408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Sambur, T. Y. Chen, E. Choudhary, G. Q. Chen, E. J. Nissen, E. M. Thomas, N. M. Zou and P. Chen, Nature, 2016, 530, 77–80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Tachikawa, S. Yamashita and T. Majima, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 7197–7204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Wang, T. Tachikawa and T. Majima, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 891–900 RSC .
J. B. Sambur and P. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 20668–20676 CrossRef CAS .
X. C. Zhou, E. Choudhary, N. M. Andoy, N. M. Zou and P. Chen, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 1448–1453 CrossRef CAS .
C. Fokas and V. Deckert, Appl. Spectrosc., 2002, 56, 192–199 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Bergwerff, T. Visser, B. R. G. Leliveld, B. D. Rossenaar, K. P. de Jong and B. M. Weckhuysen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 14548–14556 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Y. Li, J. B. Le, Y. H. Wang, S. Chen, Z. L. Yang, J. F. Li, J. Cheng and Z. Q. Tian, Nat. Mater., 2019, 18, 697–701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Ding, J. Yi, J. F. Li, B. Ren, D. Y. Wu, R. Panneerselvam and Z. Q. Tian, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 1–16 Search PubMed .
A. B. Zrimsek, N. H. Chiang, M. Mattei, S. Zaleski, M. O. McAnally, C. T. Chapman, A. I. Henry, G. C. Schatz and R. P. Van Duyne, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 7583–7613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Christopher and M. Moskovits, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2017, 68, 379–398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kim, K. M. Kosuda, R. P. Van Duyne and P. C. Stair, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 4820–4844 RSC .
R. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Z. C. Dong, S. Jiang, C. Zhang, L. G. Chen, L. Zhang, Y. Liao, J. Aizpurua, Y. Luo, J. L. Yang and J. G. Hou, Nature, 2013, 498, 82–86 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. F. Li, Y. F. Huang, Y. Ding, Z. L. Yang, S. B. Li, X. S. Zhou, F. R. Fan, W. Zhang, Z. Y. Zhou, D. Y. Wu, B. Ren, Z. L. Wang and Z. Q. Tian, Nature, 2010, 464, 392–395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. de Nijs, F. Benz, S. J. Barrow, D. O. Sigle, R. Chikkaraddy, A. Palma, C. Carnegie, M. Kamp, R. Sundararaman, P. Narang, O. A. Scherman and J. J. Baumberg, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 994 CrossRef PubMed .
E. M. van Schrojenstein Lantman, T. Deckert-Gaudig, A. J. G. Mank, V. Deckert and B. M. Weckhuysen, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 583–586 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Zhong, X. Jin, L. Y. Meng, X. Wang, H. S. Su, Z. L. Yang, C. T. Williams and B. Ren, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 132–136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Beane, T. Devkota, B. S. Brown and G. V. Hartland, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2019, 82 Search PubMed .
G. V. Hartland, Chem. Sci., 2010, 1, 303–309 RSC .
L. B. Huang, G. V. Hartland, L. Q. Chu, Luxmi, R. M. Feenstra, C. X. Lian, K. Tahy and H. L. Xing, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1308–1313 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Gabriel, J. R. Kirschbrown, J. D. Christesen, C. W. Pinion, D. F. Zigler, E. M. Grumstrup, B. P. Mehl, E. E. M. Cating, J. F. Cahoon and J. M. Papanikolas, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1336–1340 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. N. Cui, F. Ceballos, N. Kumar and H. Zhao, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 2970–2976 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Guo, J. S. Manser, Y. Wan, P. V. Kamat and L. B. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7471 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini, C. Menelaou, M. J. P. Alcocer, T. Leijtens, L. M. Herz, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2013, 342, 341–344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Guo, Y. Wan, M. J. Yang, J. Snaider, K. Zhu and L. B. Huang, Science, 2017, 356, 59–62 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, Z. Y. Zeng, J. Kang, S. Betzler, C. Czarnik, X. W. Zhang, C. Ophuss, C. Yu, K. Bustillo, M. Pan, J. S. Qiu, L. W. Wang and H. M. Zheng, Nat. Mater., 2019, 18, 970–976 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. A. Jose, H. C. Zeng and A. A. Lapkin, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9 Search PubMed .
N. M. Schneider, J. H. Park, J. M. Grogan, D. A. Steingart, H. H. Bau and F. M. Ross, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8 Search PubMed .
D. A. Muller, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 263–270 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Wang, Y. Y. Gao, S. Miao, T. F. Liu, L. C. Mu, R. G. Li, F. T. Fan and C. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 11771–11778 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. M. Vanacore, A. W. P. Fitzpatrick and A. H. Zewail, Nano Today, 2016, 11, 228–249 CrossRef CAS .
E. Najafi, T. D. Scarborough, J. Tang and A. Zewail, Science, 2015, 347, 164–167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. L. Liao, E. Najafi, H. Li, A. J. Minnich and A. H. Zewail, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 871–876 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Sun, A. Adhikari, B. S. Shaheen, H. Z. Yang and O. F. Mohammed, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 985–994 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Adhikari, J. K. Eliason, J. Sun, R. Bose, D. J. Flannigan and O. F. Mohammed, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 3–16 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Fu, B. Chen, C. Li, H. Li, Z. M. Liao, D. Yu and A. H. Zewail, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 4045–4052 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Wu, H. Shan, W. L. Chen, X. Gu, P. Tao, C. Y. Song, W. Shang and T. Deng, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9686–9712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Chen, L. Mao, Y. W. Li, T. Kong, N. Wu, C. Q. Ma, S. Bai, Y. Z. Jin, D. Wu, W. Lu, B. Wang and L. W. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7745 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhu, F. T. Fan, R. T. Chen, H. Y. An, Z. C. Feng and C. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 9111–9114 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. U. Nanayakkara, G. Cohen, C. S. Jiang, M. J. Romero, K. Maturova, M. Al-Jassim, J. van de Lagemaatt, Y. Rosenwaks and J. M. Luther, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1278–1284 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Lee, S. W. Lee, T. Oh, S. H. Petrosko, C. A. Mirkin and J. W. Jang, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 109–116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Y. Gao, D. Zhu, H. Y. An, P. L. Yan, B. K. Huang, R. T. Chen, F. T. Fan and C. Li, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 1419–1423 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhu, S. Pang, T. Dittrich, Y. Y. Gao, W. Nie, J. Y. Cui, R. T. Chen, H. Y. An, F. T. Fan and C. Li, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 6735–6741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. T. Chen, S. Pang, H. Y. An, J. Zhu, S. Ye, Y. Y. Gao, F. T. Fan and C. Li, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 655–663 CrossRef CAS .
R. T. Chen, S. Pang, H. Y. An, T. Dittrich, F. T. Fan and C. Li, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 426–432 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. Zhang, S. He, W. X. Guo, Y. Hu, J. W. Huang, J. R. Mulcahy and W. D. Wei, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 2927–2954 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Li, S. K. Cushing, F. K. Meng, T. R. Senty, A. D. Bristow and N. Q. Wu, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 601–607 CrossRef CAS .
S. Linic, P. Christopher and D. B. Ingram, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 911–921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Collins, S. Jesse, J. I. Kilpatrick, A. Tselev, M. B. Okatan, S. V. Kalinin and B. J. Rodriguez, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol., 2015, 6, 201–214 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Collins, S. Jesse, J. I. Kilpatrick, A. Tselev, O. Varenyk, M. B. Okatan, S. A. L. Weber, A. Kumar, N. Balke, S. V. Kalinin and B. J. Rodriguez, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3871 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Schafer, Z. Wang, R. Zierold, T. Kipp and A. Mews, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2672–2677 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Costi, G. Cohen, A. Salant, E. Rabani and U. Banin, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2031–2039 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. C. Coffey and D. S. Ginger, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 735–740 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mascaro, Y. Miyahara, T. Enright, O. E. Dagdeviren and P. Grutter, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol., 2019, 10, 617–633 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Warren, K. Voitchovsky, H. Dotan, C. M. Leroy, M. Cornuz, F. Stellacci, C. Hebert, A. Rothschild and M. Gratzel, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 842–849 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Economou, S. Mubeen, S. K. Buratto and E. W. McFarland, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3328–3334 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Eichhorn, C. Kastl, J. K. Cooper, D. Ziegler, A. M. Schwartzberg, I. D. Sharp and F. M. Toma, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2597 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Eichhorn, C. Kastl, A. M. Schwartzberg, I. D. Sharp and F. M. Toma, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 35129–35136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. J. Liu, J. Eichhorn, C. M. Jiang, M. C. Scott, L. H. Hess, J. M. Gregoire, J. A. Haber, I. D. Sharp and F. M. Toma, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2019, 3, 127–135 RSC .
E. Lira, S. Wendt, P. P. Huo, J. O. Hansen, R. Streber, S. Porsgaard, Y. Y. Wei, R. Bechstein, E. Laegsgaard and F. Besenbacher, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 6529–6532 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          G. Gerber, J. Y. Grand, R. Moller and W. Pfeiffer, Ultrafast Processes in Spectroscopy,  1996, pp. 589–593 Search PubMed .

          D. A. Yarotski and A. J. Taylor, Ultrafast Dynamical Processes in Semiconductors,  2004, vol. 92, pp. 57–97 Search PubMed .
Y. Tian, F. Yang, C. Y. Guo and Y. Jiang, Surf. Rev. Lett., 2018, 25, 1–19 CrossRef .
S. Yoshida, Y. Aizawa, Z. H. Wang, R. Oshima, Y. Mera, E. Matsuyama, H. Oigawa, O. Takeuchi and H. Shigekawa, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 588–593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Taninaka, S. Yoshida, Y. Sugita, O. Takeuchi and H. Shigekawa, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 5951–5959 RSC .
Y. Terada, S. Yoshida, O. Takeuchi and H. Shigekawa, Nat. Photonics, 2010, 4, 869–874 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yoshida, Y. Terada, R. Oshima, O. Takeuchi and H. Shigekawa, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 757–761 RSC .
C. E. Gardner and J. V. Macpherson, Anal. Chem., 2002, 74, 576–584 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Conzuelo, K. Sliozberg, R. Gutkowski, S. Grutzke, M. Nebel and W. Schuhmann, Anal. Chem., 2017, 89, 1222–1228 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Polcari, P. Dauphin-Ducharme and J. Mauzeroll, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 13234–13278 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zigah, J. Rodriguez-Lopez and A. J. Bard, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 12764–12772 RSC .
D. V. Esposito, I. Levin, T. P. Moffat and A. A. Talin, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 562–568 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Nellist, F. A. L. Laskowski, J. J. Qiu, H. Hajibabaei, K. Sivula, T. W. Hamann and S. W. Boettcher, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 46–52 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Jiang, Z. Q. Huang, C. X. Xiang, R. Poddar, H. J. Lewerenz, K. M. Papadantonakis, N. S. Lewis and B. S. Brunschwig, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 4657–4663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. L. Bentley and P. R. Unwin, Faraday Discuss., 2018, 210, 365–379 RSC .
J. Y. Kim, H. S. Ahn and A. J. Bard, Anal. Chem., 2018, 90, 3045–3049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. X. Liang, H. S. Ahn and A. J. Bard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 4854–4858 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhao, S. Hardt, V. Hartmann, H. J. Zhang, M. M. Nowaczyk, M. Rogner, N. Plumere, W. Schuhmann and F. Conzuelo, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1973 CrossRef PubMed .
N. de Jonge and F. M. Ross, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 695–704 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. M. Tennyson, C. Gong and M. S. Leite, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2761–2777 CrossRef CAS .
G. Schitter, P. Menold, H. F. Knapp, F. Allgower and A. Stemmer, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2001, 72, 3320–3327 CrossRef CAS .
F. Meirer and B. M. Weckhuysen, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2018, 3, 324–340 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

Yuying Gao
	Yuying Gao received a BSc degree in applied chemistry from Lanzhou university in 2013. She is currently pursuing a PhD in physical chemistry under the guidance of Prof. Fengtao Fan and Prof. Can Li in the State Key Laboratory of Catalysis (SKLC) and the Dalian National Laboratory for Clean Energy (DNL) at Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics (DICP). Her work focuses on studying charge transfer and spatial distribution in hybrid systems for solar energy conversion.

Wei Nie
	Wei Nie received a BSc degree from Zhengzhou university in 2014. He is currently a PhD candidate under the supervision of Prof. Fengtao Fan and Prof. Can Li in the State Key Laboratory of Catalysis (SKLC) and the Dalian National Laboratory for Clean Energy (DNL) at Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics (DICP). His research interests focus on scanning electrochemical microscopy for in situ probing chemical reaction sites and reaction kinetics.

Xiuli Wang
	Xiuli Wang received a BSc degree in Chemistry from Nankai University in 2004 and a PhD degree in Physical Chemistry from Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics (DICP), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS) in 2011, under the supervising of Prof. Can Li. She has been working as a professor in DICP since 2019. She did postdoctoral research at Imperial College-London from 2012 to 2013 with Prof. James Durrant. Her research interest lies in the time-resolved spectroscopic study of photo(electro)catalytic process and mechanism.

Fengtao Fan
	Fengtao Fan has received his PhD degree in Physical Chemistry from Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics in 2010. He was promoted to full professor in 2015 and has been a visiting professor at the Utrecht University. Currently, he is the group leader in Solar Energy Research Division and the vice director of State Key Laboratory of Catalysis. His research interests include (1) operando spectroscopy (Correlated Raman spectroscopy, Mass spectrometry and Electrochemistry), (2) Photoelectrical imaging spectroscopy (KPFM, SPV imaging microscopy), (3) Development of Deep Ocean UV Raman spectrograph.

Can Li
	Can Li has received his PhD degree in Physical Chemistry from Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics in 1989. He was promoted to full professor in 1993 and has been a visiting professor at the Université Pierre et Marie Curie (Paris VI), the Lehigh University, the University of Liverpool, and the Queensland University. He did his postdoctoral work at Northwestern University in 1994–1996. Currently, he is the head of Solar Energy Research Division and the director of the Dalian National Laboratory for Clean Energy (DNL). His research interests include (1) UV Raman spectroscopy and time-resolved spectroscopy, (2) environmental and green catalysis, (3) chiral catalysis and bio-catalysis, and (4) solar energy utilization based on photo(electro)catalysis and photovoltaic cells.

 	Fig. 1  Characterizing photocatalysts in space and time.	 


Fluorescence microscopy (including super-resolution microscopy)	∼30 nm	∼100 ms	Imaging reactive sites, kinetic mechanism, charge transfer
Raman microscopy (including TERS)	∼10 nm	ms	Chemical, physical, and optical properties of catalyst surfaces
Transient absorption microscopy	∼100 μm	Sub ps	Imaging charge dynamics, lifetimes of electronic and vibrational states
Ultrafast electron microscopy	Atomic scale	Sub ps	Imaging charge relaxation, diffusion and recombination
Kelvin probe force microscopy	1–10 nm	∼100 ms	Imaging charge spatial distribution, minority charge diffusion length, doping concentration, surface work function, electric field distributions
Electrostatic force microscopy	1–10 nm	μs–ns	Surface charge distribution and potential imaging, local charge dynamics, ionic transport, phase image, electrostatic field
Conductive AFM	1–10 nm	∼100 ms	Imaging photocurrent, charge transfer and recombination, electrical properties
Ultrafast scanning tunneling microscopy	Atomic scale	Sub ps	Charge dynamics, spin precession and dynamics, bond formation, molecular vibration and rotation
Scanning electrochemical microscopy	100 nm	∼100 ms	Imaging catalytic activity, kinetic rate constants, charge transfer, chemical species analysis

 	Fig. 2  (A) Fluorogenic probe reaction for single-molecule fluorescence imaging of a TiO2 anatase crystal. (B) Schematic of the photocatalytic reaction on the {101} facets with DN-BODIPY under localized UV light excitation. (C) On-time probability distribution for the {001} (blue) and {101} (red) facets of the TiO2 crystal, respectively. The inset shows an optical transmission image with detected reductive product positions mapped onto the TiO2 crystal. Reprinted with permission from ref. 41. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (D) Left: Scatter plot of hole-induced Amplex red oxidation reactions and electron-induced resazurin reduction reactions on TiO2 nanorods. Right: Steady-state anodic photocurrent and the oxidation/reduction rate dependence on the potential. (E) Correlation of kh with η and with ke at different spots. kh and ke represent effective rate constants of hole and electron surface activities, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 40. Copyright 2016 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 3  (A) Experimental setup for TAM. (B) Fixed pump-scanned probe TAM employed for imaging Si nanowires. Reprinted with permission from ref. 60. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (C) Three distinct transport regimes of perovskites at different delay times. (D) TAM images of perovskites, and hot carrier transport length plotted as a function of pump–probe delay time. Reprinted with permission from ref. 64. Reprinted with permission from AAAS.	 

 	Fig. 4  (A) Schematic illustration of the photooxidation deposition of PbO2 and annealing treatment of Au/TiO2. (B) STEM images and EELS elemental mapping of PbO2/Au/TiO2. (C) STEM images and EELS elemental mapping of annealed PbO2/Au/TiO2. Adapted with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (A) Schematic illustration of 4D-UEM imaging of the p–n junction. (B) Left panel: Schematic diagram showing the principle of imaging in negative and positive charges. Right panel: UEM images of the p–n junction at different time delays. Reprinted with permission from ref. 71. Reprinted with permission from AAAS. (C) 4D-UEM images of amorphous silicon. Reprinted with permission from ref. 72. Copyright 2017 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 6  (A) Principle of SPVM operation. (B) SPV signals measured at different BiVO4 particles. (C) SPVM image of a single BiVO4 particle with MnOx and Pt dual cocatalysts. Reprinted with permission from ref. 82. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (D) SPVM image of a single Cu2O particle under asymmetric illumination. Reprinted with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2018 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 7  (A) Schematic of KPFM imaging on a TiO2 phase junction interface and a surface potential image of interfacial rutile/anatase. (B) Spatially resolved SPV spectroscopy of the TiO2 phase junction. Reprinted with permission from ref. 81. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (C) Schematic of plasmon-induced hot charge spatial separation of Au/TiO2 nanostructures. (D) SPVM image of an individual Au nanoparticle on the TiO2 crystal after SPR excitation. (E) SPV line profile of Au/TiO2 nanostructures. Reprinted with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (A and B) Dark field TEM and C-AFM images and PEC performance of an α-Fe2O3 photoanode. 2L and 6L indicate that the electrodes were prepared at heater set temperatures/air flow rates of 475 °C/2 litres min−1 and 545 °C/6 litres min−1 respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2013 Nature Publishing Group. (C) Schematic of an ultrafast STM system. (D) USTM image and time-resolved signal measured at bare GaAs and a cobalt nanoparticle. Reprinted with permission from ref. 105. Copyright 2010 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 9  (A) Schematic overview of the SPCM/SECM setup. (B) Scanning photocurrent microscopy images and SECM UME tip current images of a MIS photocathode. Reprinted with permission from ref. 111. Copyright 2013 Nature Publishing Group. (C) Upper panel: SECM image of a Pt/p+-Si sample. Reprinted with permission from ref. 113. Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Lower panel: The nanoelectrode-based AFM tip senses the surface electrochemical potential of the electrocatalyst. Reprinted with permission from ref. 112. Copyright 2018 Nature Publishing Group. (D) Synchronous topographical and electrochemical maps of GC-supported Au nanoplates. Reproduced from ref. 114 with permission of the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 10  Spatiotemporal information for rationally designing photocatalysts in the future.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
