Silicon nanowires for Li-based battery anodes: a review  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3TA11714F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3TA11714F
(Feature Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 9566-9586Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsSilicon nanowires for Li-based battery anodes: a review

        
          
            Mihai Robert 
            Zamfir
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hung Tran 
            Nguyen
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Eric 
            Moyen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Young Hee 
            Lee
          
        
      ac and 

        
          
            Didier 
            Pribat
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Energy Science, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, 440–746, Korea. E-mail: didier53@skku.edu
bInstitute of Chemistry & Materials Science, 17 Hoang Sam, Ha Noi, Vietnam
cCenter for Integrated Nanostructure Physics, Institute for Basic Science, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 440–746, Korea
Received 
      1st May 2013
    , Accepted 25th June 2013First published on 26th June 2013AbstractAfter more than 20 years of steady progress, lithium-ion batteries still exhibit modest energy capacities that seem to have reached their asymptotic values with the present combination of graphite at the anode and insertion oxide or phosphate materials at the cathode. New applications, particularly for all-electric vehicles are pushing the development of electrode materials with higher Li storage capabilities, for both electrodes. Silicon, which exhibits the highest known Li-alloying capacity is one of the most promising anode materials. However, Li alloying with Si is accompanied by a large volume change which induces cracking and rapid pulverization of Si-based anodes. Significant improvements in the anode's lifetime as well as charge–discharge rates have been obtained over the past few years by employing Si nanostructures, particularly nanowires. In this paper, we present the main synthesis methods for Si nanowires as well as the alloying properties of Li with Si and review how the use of Si-based nanowires has evolved, thanks to sophisticated material/structure combinations, including core–shell nanowires, composites as well as hollowed nanotube-like approaches.
1 Introduction
It suffices to have experienced the suffocating atmosphere of some of the most populated and busy cities around the world to realize that burning fuel for transportation must come to an end. Amongst other pollutants (such as NOx, CHx, CO, particles,1etc.), a gasoline-powered car will emit ∼4.5 tons of CO2 per year (on the basis of 25000 km per year and an average consumption of 10 liters per 100 km), which multiplied by the world wide fleet of ∼650 × 106 cars makes about 3 Gtons of CO2 released in the atmosphere per year, accounting for about 10% of the overall CO2 world-wide generation. Moreover, while CO2 sequestration strategies can be implemented on large thermal power plants that burn fossil fuels, it is economically unrealistic to do the same thing on mobile platforms such as cars powered by internal combustion engines. So the transition to electric power in cars (and light vehicles such as motorbikes and scooters) is not simply an option, but rather imperative if we want to stabilize the global warming of the planet and clean the atmosphere of our cities. Fuel cells burning H2 are probably the best option for the long term (although only for extra-urban driving conditions2), but they are not yet ready for mass production (still bulky and very expensive, especially due to catalysts) and the H2 storage problem is not satisfactorily solved either. The only serious option for the electric car in the near future remains the battery, particularly for urban and low-speed extra-urban driving conditions.2
However, in spite of remarkable progress over more than 2 decades,3 Li-ion batteries (the most advanced and appealing electrochemical energy storage system4,5 ubiquitous in all our mobile devices such as phones, computers, tablets, organizers etc.) do not provide enough specific energy (energy per unit weight) or energy density (energy per unit volume) to be competitive with liquid fuels6 and the driving range of most full electric cars is still well below the one of gasoline-powered vehicles. Lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) can store up to ∼200 W h kg−1 at an average voltage of 3.8 V. LIBs contain no Li in the metallic form (the latter exhibiting a capacity of ∼3800 mA h g−1 (ref. 7)), because of the formation of dendrites upon recharging, which can result in cell short-circuiting, causing serious safety concerns. Instead, Li ions are intercalated in host materials at both the cathode and the anode8 and for most commercial products, Li ions are shuttled back and forth between a graphite anode and an oxide cathode9 (LiMO2, with M being a transition metal such as Co, Mn or Ni) or a phosphate cathode9 (e.g., LiFePO4) as the battery is charged and discharged (the so-called “rocking chair” operation). The capacity of cathode materials, whether they are oxides or phosphates, is typically below 180 mA h g−1, which represents a rather small value.10 For the anode, graphite is the most reliable material, since it can host 1 lithium atom for 6 carbons (LiC6), with only a ∼10% increase of the interlayer graphite spacing (c-axis) and less than 1% expansion in the basal graphite plane.11 However, LiC6 corresponds to an electrode capacity of 372 mA h g−1, which is also a modest value.
In order to improve lithium-based batteries and extend the driving range of electric cars, electrodes with higher capacities are currently studied, particularly air-based or sulfur-based cathodes12,13 as well as alloy-based anodes.14,15 Note that alloying Li with a host metal is a different process from Li insertion inside a lamellar compound like graphite, since in general alloying induces major changes in the crystal structure of the host material. Actually, anode alloy materials exhibiting higher capacities than graphite have been studied for a long time (e.g., Sn, Sb, Al, Si… and their alloys16), but few, if any, have reached the market place, because of poor capacity retention upon cycling, due to electrode cracking and pulverization problems related to phase transformations and/or huge volume expansions17 upon repeated Li alloying–dealloying. Schematically, the more Li can be packed in the host anode material, the larger the volume expansion and the associated mechanical degradation problems upon repeated alloying–dealloying.
This is particularly true for Si, which exhibits up to 320% volume expansion17,18 upon complete alloying with Li, thus inducing a rapid degradation of Si-based anodes.19,20 However, despite its mechanical instability upon alloying with Li, Si remains a very interesting material for LIB anodes since it provides the highest known specific capacity for room temperature (RT) electrochemical lithiation (∼3800 mA h g−1), one order of magnitude larger than that of graphite. Also, Si has a low delithiation potential, around 0.4 V against Li/Li+, so that high battery voltages can still be reached with the classical oxide- or phosphate-based cathodes and also with lithium peroxide (Li2O2) or hydroxide (LiOH) in Li–air cathodes. Finally, Si is an environment-friendly material and it is the second most abundant material in the Earth crust, which guarantees availability at low cost for future industrial use.
In order to overcome the pulverization problems of alloy-type anodes, many studies have dealt with some kind of structuring, particularly in the nanosize range.21,22 Actually, it has been shown recently that because of their high surface-to-volume ratio, nanostructures can better withstand stress and limit cracking, thanks to surface effects.23 Nanostructured anode materials present the add-on advantage of shorter diffusion distances for Li species, thus offering the possibility to increase charging and discharging rates (i.e., battery power).
As far as silicon and silicon anodes are concerned, several review papers have already been published over the past few years, concerning powders and thin films24 and more recently nanostructures,24–27 which indicates a rapidly moving research field of particular interest. Here, we shall essentially concentrate on Si nanowires (NWs). NWs naturally provide a highly porous medium, which allows for an easy Si expansion upon alloying with Li. Also, crystalline Si NWs have been shown to resist alloying-induced cracking below a certain diameter,28 which is a definite advantage for anode reliability. The same behavior has been observed for crystalline Si nanoparticles.29 Finally, NWs can be directly connected to the anode current collector (when a growth process is used to synthesize them, see below), meaning that neither a binder nor conductive additives are needed for fabricating the anode, an advantage over other nanostructures such as nanoparticles.
This paper is organized as follows: after this short introduction, the next paragraph is devoted to the synthesis of Si NWs and the major techniques that may be employed are briefly described. The third section then presents the main features of the electrochemical alloying of Li with Si at room temperature and how those features apply to nanowires. In the fourth section we summarize the major results obtained so far in the literature for anodes based on Si NWs as well as on derived structures, such as core–shell Si NWs, coated Si NWs, composite Si NWs and hollow, nanotube-like Si structures. We try to emphasize the relative merits of each of the above structures and discuss various anode degradation mechanisms. Finally, we conclude this review by underlining some future research directions for anodes based on Si NWs.
2 Synthesis of Si nanowires
Various approaches have been used to synthesize Si NW arrays, which can be categorized as growth methods30 on the one hand and etching methods on the other hand. These are briefly presented below, with some comments on their potential advantages and drawbacks.
Concerning growth methods, the most popular one is based on the so-called vapor–solid–liquid (VLS) mechanism, discovered about 50 years ago by Wagner and Ellis.31 VLS growth is usually performed in a chemical vapor deposition (CVD) reactor under a flowing silicon-bearing gas (e.g., silane – SiH4 or silicon tetrachloride – SiCl4) and at temperatures ranging from ∼300 up to well above 1000 °C depending on the gas precursor and the type of metal catalyst employed.30 In the VLS growth mechanism, a divided metal catalyst first forms a liquid solution (usually droplets of eutectic composition) with Si atoms, the latter originating from the thermal decomposition of the Si-bearing gas. As more Si atoms are added, the liquid droplets become supersaturated with Si and precipitation occurs at the solid–liquid interface. A dynamic equilibrium is rapidly established, where the flux of Si atoms incorporated in the liquid eutectic drop is balanced by the flux of Si atoms precipitating at the liquid–solid interface. Since the surface of the liquid eutectic alloy is ideally rough, growth is highly anisotropic, resulting in long, whisker-like crystals with a spherical eutectic cap at their tips. As far as Si is concerned, the VLS mechanism operates across a wide range of wire diameters, from several nm to hundreds of microns. Si NWs can also be grown from a number of different catalysts, which can be schematically classified into 3 types.30 Type A catalysts exhibit a phase diagram with Si comprising a simple eutectic (e.g., Au, Cu, Ag…); type B catalysts also show a simple eutectic, but at much lower concentration, typically around 1% or below (In, Ga, Zn are examples); type C catalysts form silicides and examples are Ni, Pt or Ti. For the latter elements, the lowest eutectic temperature is higher than 800 °C.30 The VLS-grown Si NWs are generally monocrystalline, even if they can be highly twinned. Three families of growth directions are usually observed depending on the NW's diameter: 〈111〉, 〈110〉 and 〈112〉. For NWs with their diameter below 20 nm, the 〈110〉 growth direction is mostly encountered, whereas above 50 nm, the 〈111〉 direction is favoured. For diameters between 20 and 50 nm the 〈112〉 direction is often observed, see ref. 30 and references therein for more detail.
Having said this, there are a number of subtleties in the VLS growth process, which can yield very different NW structures and morphologies. For instance, Au-catalyzed VLS growth in a hot wall CVD reactor will yield long and straight NWs with low defect densities,32 whereas highly kinked and curved NWs are obtained after Au-catalyzed growth in a hot plate (cold wall) reactor.33 This stark difference in NW morphology is related to the peculiarities of the VLS growth mechanism, where the liquid eutectic droplet at the tip of the NW tends to migrate towards high temperature regions34 (the liquid droplet is said to climb the liquidus of the phase diagram). Consequently, since in a hot wall reactor the tube wall tends to be at a higher temperature than the substrate at the center of the tube, a radial growth of long NWs is observed. On the other hand, when a planar furnace is used, the temperature in the gas phase above the furnace decreases rapidly so that after a short period of vertical growth in the stagnant layer, the wires will tend to kink and curve their growth direction towards the substrate where the temperature is higher. Because of this change in growth direction, the NWs become highly entangled and they can then be interconnected by modifying the deposition conditions during the CVD growth sequence, thus yielding a highly porous and rigid block, from which individual specimens cannot detach.33 The net result is an improvement in the Si NW anode stability as will be discussed in Section 4 below. The growth situations explained above are summarized in Fig. 1.
 Fig. 1  Temperature gradients and their effects on the VLS growth process. (a–d) A hot plate furnace (cold wall reactor) induces bending of the Si NWs during growth because of a negative thermal gradient above the substrate. (e–h) In a hot wall reactor, Si NWs grow straight because the thermal gradient above the substrate is positive. 
Another Si NW synthesis approach, whose mechanism is similar to that of the VLS process, has been developed by the Korgel's group in the US.35 Typically, metal nanoparticles (e.g., Au colloids) are mixed in a solvent (hexane, toluene, benzene…) with a silane-based reactant (alkylsilane, arylsilane, polysilane…) and the mixture is heated above the metal–Si eutectic temperature (363 °C for Au) inside a high pressure vessel (the pressure can reach 100–200 atm, depending on the solvent). In such conditions, the silane reactant decomposes, releasing Si atoms which alloy with the metal, inducing eutectic formation, followed by Si precipitation and nanowire growth from the Si-saturated nanoparticles. With this solution-based, VLS-like method (called supercritical fluid–liquid–solid, SFLS, because the solvent becomes supercritical under the temperature and pressure conditions) bulk quantities of Si NWs can be synthesized during each run. By using high boiling temperature solvents, Si NW growth can be performed at atmospheric pressure, transforming the process into a simpler solution–liquid–solid (SLS) mechanism.36 Battery anodes have been fabricated with SFLS-grown Si NWs (see Section 4 below); however, NWs grown this way are not directly connected to any current collector and they usually need to be further engineered according to a traditional battery electrode process, i.e., be incorporated into a slurry containing a binder (polymer) as well as a conductive additive (carbon-based powder) and solvent(s). This slurry is subsequently deposited on the current collector of the battery electrode, typically by tape casting (also called the “doctor blade” method37) and dried in an oven before being used, in order to remove the solvent(s) from the slurry.
To conclude this section on growth, let us mention electrodeposition as another technique of NW synthesis. For instance, Mallet et al.,38 have obtained amorphous Si NWs by using an electrolytic bath composed of SiCl4 dissolved in an ionic liquid (1-butyl-1-methylpyrrolidinium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (P1,4)). They electrodeposited Si in porous ion-track etched polycarbonate membranes, with pore diameters of 15, 110 and 400 nm, resulting in NWs with respectively identical diameters. These nanowires (deposited at room temperature) can be crystallized by moderate temperature annealing, although for battery anode application, there is no need to use crystalline Si as we shall see below in Section 3.
As quoted above, Si NWs can also be obtained by simply etching standard crystalline Si substrates. Various approaches can be used, such as deep reactive ion etching (D-RIE) using Cl2- or SF6-based chemistry in a plasma reactor.39,40 However, RIE-type techniques are usually not cheap to implement (vacuum processing + expensive substrate), even though submicron lithography operations can be avoided to synthesize NWs with diameters in the 100 nm range. For instance, in ref. 39 and 40, the authors have used a monolayer of submicron diameter silica beads deposited on the Si wafer surface as a hard mask.
Alternatively, Si NWs with high aspect ratios can be obtained by metal-assisted wet chemical etching (MaCE), which can simply be performed in a beaker. In the MaCE process, the Si NWs are fabricated by localized catalytic etching of silicon substrates in aqueous acid solutions.41 The catalysts are metal nanoparticles obtained by a galvanic displacement reaction (usually called electroless deposition) on the surface of the substrate. For instance, starting with an aqueous solution containing HF and AgNO3, the galvanic displacement reaction between Ag+ ions and Si first produces local deposition of metallic Ag clusters as well as a concomitant local oxidation of Si, under the Ag cluster. The so-formed SiO2 is readily dissolved by HF, locally producing a nanocup, right under the Ag cluster. As more Ag is deposited from the solution on top of the original cluster, the formation and subsequent dissolution of SiO2 proceeds, thus “digging” the Si substrate underneath the Ag particle. The result is an array of Si NWs, corresponding to unetched Si between buried Ag nanoparticles. A faster, two-step MaCE process has also been developed,42,43 where the nucleation and deposition of Ag nanoparticles on the Si surface take place in a first bath (as explained above) and Si etching is subsequently performed in separate HF/Fe(NO3)3 or HF/H2O2 solutions (see ref. 42 and 43, as well as a recent review paper for details44). Fig. 2 shows an example of an array of MaCE Si NWs synthesized in our laboratory with a 2-step process using first an AgNO3/HF solution to deposit Ag nanoparticles, followed by etching in a second HF/H2O2 solution. Note that if etching is stopped and started again, the NWs are laterally etched at the interface between the 2 etching operations,45 which eases their fracture and detachment from the substrate, using e.g., a very brief ultrasonic treatment. Interestingly, starting with highly doped Si substrates, the MaCE process can produce highly porous NWs, which is an advantage for battery applications (see Section 4.1). Again, NWs synthesized using a MaCE process need to be harvested and further suspended into some kind of slurry before being spread on the anode current collector by tape casting.
 Fig. 2  Metal-assisted chemical etching (MaCE) of Si. (a) Schematics of the 2-step MaCE mechanism; (i) precipitation of an Ag nanoparticle and Si oxidation under it in a first AgNO3-based bath, (ii) details of the Ag-assisted oxidation and etching of Si in a second H2O2 + HF bath, (iii) continuous etching leaves pillars (i.e., NWs) in-between nanoholes. (b) SEM cross-sectional view of a Si NW array synthesized by a 2-step metal-assisted wet chemical etching of a (100)-oriented, p-doped Si wafer. The second etching step in H2O2 + HF was interrupted and started again after rinsing in order to induce an easy fracture plane, which is highlighted by the white dotted line. (c–e) TEM pictures showing the structure of one p-doped Si NW obtained by the MaCE process. Note the high porosity of the NW, particularly in the enlarged view of (e). 
As a final remark on this section devoted to synthesis, we would like to stress that while etching processes can be employed at the laboratory scale to fabricate Si NWs and demonstrate their interest in battery anodes, it is difficult to consider their use for industrial developments, because of the high cost of crystalline Si substrates, even those cheaper multicrystalline plates, manufactured for the solar cell industry.46 The fabrication of Si wafers or solar substrates is a high temperature, energy-hungry process, where melting of Si above 1410 °C is always involved.46 Moreover, machining as well as slicing operations can consume up to 40% of the original ingot,47 and a MaCE-type etching would probably waste at least another ∼50% of the original wafer/plate, resulting in a mere 20% of the original ingot being used, which seems to be an economical aberration. Also, the surface area of Si wafers/solar plates is relatively small, typically below 0.25 m2, which would limit productivity in an industrial fabrication line. So some innovative ways of synthesizing the Si NWs would have to be found, such as the use of Si powders instead of wafers as the starting material (see ref. 109 for an interesting approach). In comparison, VLS Si NWs can be grown at moderate temperatures, around 450 °C, and on very large area substrates. For instance, in the active matrix liquid crystal display industry, silicon thin films are routinely deposited by plasma-enhanced CVD over ∼9 m2 substrates48 (the so-called “Generation 10” substrates/equipment). Finally, the VLS-CVD synthesis of Si NWs consumes essentially the Si which is needed for growing the wires (plus admittedly some stray deposition on the walls of the reactor, which can be minimized), resulting in much less Si waste. SFLS or SLS growth approaches also seem more economically viable than etching techniques.
3 Silicon electrochemical alloying with lithium at room temperature
The electrochemical alloying of Li with Si and the main features of silicon-based anodes at RT, including phase transformations, have essentially been studied in the past using Si powders49–52 or Si thin films.49,53 The Li–Si phase diagram shows the existence of 5 distinct crystalline intermetallic phases, namely LiSi, Li12Si7, Li7Si3, Li13Si4 and Li22Si5.54 The electrochemical alloying of lithium with silicon follows the phase diagram at a high temperature (415 °C),55 except for the formation of LiSi. It seems that LiSi does not appear in standard conditions, due to kinetic factors, which explains why this compound is absent from early Li–Si phase diagrams.56 For instance, Stearns et al. have synthesized LiSi at high pressure (1–2.5 GPa) and high temperature (500–700 °C).57 Note that the Li22Si5 compound obtained at 415 °C (ref. 55) represents the maximum possible lithiation of Si (4.4 Li per Si), corresponding to a capacity of 4200 mA h g−1. This value is often quoted as the theoretical capacity of Si anodes, but as explained below, it can only be reached at high temperatures.
In contrast with high temperature experiments, the RT electrochemical lithiation of Si leads to the progressive amorphization of the starting crystalline material (c-Si).49 Perhaps the RT reaction of Li with Si can be better followed with the help of constant current (galvanostatic) electrochemical lithiation–delithiation curves, such as those shown in Fig. 3. These curves have been recorded on Si NW arrays grown by Cu-catalyzed VLS on stainless steel substrates at 500 °C. Note that there is no binder or conductive additive (usually some form of black carbon) in those VLS-Si NW electrodes, so that we do not observe any parasitic signal originating from the reaction of Li with carbon-based materials; also we do not observe any parasitic reaction with the metal catalyst, since Cu, as opposed to Au does not react with Li (Cu foils are actually used as passive anode current collectors in commercial products). Even if there might be differences between nanosized and microsized or bulk Si, those curves capture the major features (and the ones of interest here) of the RT lithiation of Si. In Fig. 3, the representations of the various atomic structures have been obtained with the Crystal Maker software. The atomic coordinates for building the Li15Si4 structure were taken from ref. 50.
 Fig. 3  Galvanostatic and cyclic voltammetry curves recorded on arrays of crystalline Si NWs grown by Cu-catalyzed VLS and mounted in half-cell geometry with a Li counter electrode. (a) The first galvanostatic cycle, showing a gently sloping plateau, starting at around 100 mV and corresponding to the equilibrium between c-Si and a-Li3.5Si (black curve, left-hand side). At the end of lithiation, when the voltage approaches 0 V, c-Si has totally disappeared and transformed to a-Li3.75Si that may suddenly crystallize into the c-Li15Si4 phase, depending on NW conductivity as well as on other parameters not clearly identified yet. Delithiation (black curve, right-hand side) produces a steep rise in potential, followed by a plateau at ∼430 mV, which corresponds to an equilibrium between c-Li15Si4 (or a-Li3.75Si) and a-Li2Si. At the end of the delithiation step, when Li is totally extracted from the alloy, Si is left amorphous. The atomic structures of the various elements or alloys corresponding to particular alloying states have been constructed with the Crystal Maker software. (b) The three first galvanostatic curves of the Si NW array emphasizing the difference in lithiation behavior between the first cycle (c-Si, black curve) and the following ones (a-Si, red and blue curves). The 1st lithiation curve is of course identical to the one in (a), whereas the 2nd and 3rd lithiation curves show the 2 sloping plateaus which are typical of a-Si lithiation. Upon delithiation, the 3 curves are similar. The inset shows the 2 first cyclic voltammetry curves recorded on similar Si NW arrays. There is a single sharp peak for the first lithiation (black curve, peak marked as “1”) corresponding to the one step, 2-phase lithiation of c-Si. Note that since the NWs are undoped, there is no peak corresponding to the crystallization of Li15Si4, which should occur below 80 mV (see discussion in Section 3 of the text). The second lithiation produces 2 peaks (red curve, peaks marked as “1” and “1-a”), corresponding to the 2-step lithiation of a-Si. Upon delithiation, the curves for the first and second cycle are qualitatively similar, exhibiting 2 peaks (labeled 2 and 3) at approximately the same voltage. 
3.1 The first lithiation of crystalline Si at room temperature
Upon the first lithiation of c-Si, a long, gently sloping plateau is observed in the galvanostatic lithiation curve (Fig. 3a), which suggests a two-phase equilibrium58 between c-Si and an amorphous a-LixSi alloy.52 The plateau is not strictly horizontal probably because of some complications in the lithiation mechanism arising from abnormal stress effects at the interface between a-LixSi and c-Si in confined NWs (see the discussion below on the kinetics of lithiation). However, from our own experiments and from the lithiation curves in ref. 61, we note that when a thick c-Si wafer is used and there is no spatial confinement, the plateau is horizontal. From X-ray diffraction data coupled with electrochemical tests, Li and Dahn52 have found x ∼ 3.5 for the composition of the a-LixSi alloy in equilibrium with c-Si, whereas Limthongkul et al.49 have found a value of 2.17. A recent study using valence electron energy loss spectroscopy in a transmission electron microscope (TEM) concludes that x ∼ 2.9.59 In yet another study, x ∼ 3.4 is derived from 7Li nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) experiments.60 So even though there is no agreement on the composition of the a-LixSi alloy in the literature, x = 3.4–3.5 seems to be the more reliable value. At the end of the plateau-like lithiation stage (corresponding to a voltage of ∼60 mV vs. Li/Li+), when c-Si has totally disappeared, the capacity of the electrode reaches 3350 mA h g−1. If the voltage is further decreased below 60 mV, the saturated a-Li3.5Si alloy rapidly crystallizes into a Li15Si4 metastable phase, which is the compound with the highest Li content that can be reached at RT and corresponds to a capacity of 3570 mA h g−1. Actually this Li15Si4 phase exists over a range of compositions, exhibiting a degree of non-stoichiometry (and yielding a maximum capacity of up to ∼3800 mA h g−1), so that Li and Dahn have labeled it Li15±δSi4 (ref. 52). Consequently, the maximum theoretical capacity of Si anodes at RT is ∼3800 mA h g−1 (equivalent to that of pure Li) and not 4200 mA h g−1.
Transmission electron microscope observations have confirmed the electrochemically driven solid state amorphization of c-Si and shown that during the first lithiation of bulk c-Si, the interface between a-Li3.5Si and c-Si was extremely sharp, the conversion process of c-Si to a-Li3.5Si taking place over ∼1 nm.61 Also, following the pioneering work of Huang et al.62 and Wang et al.63 several powerful experiments have been reported, where the lithiation of crystalline Si NWs (or Si nanoparticles) is followed in real time by in situ TEM observations.29,64–66 For these experiments, a “nanobattery” is constructed inside the TEM, whose anode is the Si NW (or Si nanoparticle) being investigated. The electrolyte is either an ionic liquid (compatible with ultra-high vacuum exposure because of its extremely low vapor pressure) or Li2O (acting as a solid Li ion conductor) and the lithium source is metallic lithium (as in a standard half-cell configuration) or LiCoO2 acting as a cathode. Atomic scale, real time in situ TEM imaging of the sharp a-Li3.5Si–c-Si interface indicates that the lithiation is controlled by the migration of this interface, which progresses by breaking Si–Si bonds at step edges laterally receding on the (111)-type atomic planes of c-Si.65 In other words, Si atoms are peeled off the crystal at the ledges of (111) terraces, from where they are directly incorporated in the amorphous phase (see Fig. 4). This model evokes, in negative print, the solid phase crystallization of amorphous silicon, where the atoms from the amorphous phase are progressively attached to the edges of (111) facets of the crystalline phase.67 The breakage of Si–Si bonds at the a-Li3.5Si–c-Si interface is facilitated by the high Li concentration there, which increases the electron density, thus populating the antibonding states and locally softening the Si covalent network.68,69 While the velocity of the a-Li3.5Si–c-Si sharp interface is claimed to be constant (for a given crystalline orientation) when c-Si wafers are lithiated,61 it decreases as lithiation progresses when nanoparticles or NWs are of concern.66,70 This behavior has been explained by the increase of interface stress as the lithiation front moves inside the nanoparticle/NW, which directly affects the energetic balance of the overall lithiation reaction.66
 Fig. 4  Similarities of the two-phase lithiation mechanism in c-Si and a-Si. (a) HRTEM image showing the sharp phase boundary between c-Si and a-Li3.5Si. (b) A snapshot from molecular dynamics simulation showing the atomic structures near the amorphous–crystalline boundary. (c) The high Li concentration (red atoms) at the amorphous–crystalline boundary softens the Si–Si covalent bonds, facilitating the peeling of Si atoms (blue) from the c-Si surface. (d) HRTEM image showing the sharp boundary between a-Si and a-Li2.5Si (corresponding to the first sloping plateau of the galvanostatic lithiation curve of a-Si, see Fig. 3(b), red curve). (e) A snapshot from molecular dynamics simulation showing the atomic structures near the a-Si–a-Li2.5Si interface. The a-Si consists of a continuous random network of Si atoms. (f) Schematics of the model for the formation of a-Li2.5Si at the interface with a-Si. Here again, the concentration of Li at the interface is high, facilitating Si–Si bond breaking. Reprinted with permission from Wang et al., ref. 87. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. 
The model for the lithiation mechanism developed in ref. 65 also explains the strong orientation-dependent lithiation effects recently reported in c-Si, where Li is preferentially inserted along 〈110〉-type directions.28,71–73 Also, Long et al.74 have studied the influence of dopants on the onset of the first lithiation of c-Si: for n-type wafers, lithiation starts around 90 mV, whereas it starts at 680 mV for p-doped ones, which makes a considerable difference. Moreover, these authors report that ∼1.5 times more Li can be packed in n-type c-Si than in the corresponding p-type material.74
The crystallization of the Li15Si4 phase (always polycrystalline, even if the starting Si material is monocrystalline) at the end of the plateau-like region of the galvanostatic curve has also been directly observed in the TEM, but as far as NWs are concerned, it seems to occur only for heavily doped or/and carbon-coated specimens, whereas the lithiation of undoped Si NWs is incomplete (the very core of the NW remains unlithiated) and no Li15Si4 crystallization is observed at the end of the first lithiation step.64 Note that this is in contrast with the in situ TEM observations of McDowell et al., who indeed, find the crystallization of Li15Si4 in undoped NWs,75 using the same NW biasing conditions (−4 V for lithiation) and the same LiCoO2 anode as in ref. 64. At this point, we would like to point out that, although in situ TEM observations can provide unique information on alloying mechanisms and phase determination, the in situ lithiation conditions can be quite different from one experiment to the other (and from those used in a real battery) and care must be exercised when comparing the results corresponding to different situations. In particular, high overpotentials are usually necessary in the TEM (because of non-optimized, very small contacts as well as the low ionic conductivity of ionic liquids or Li2O), which can influence phase transformation pathways.76 Also, the lithiation currents are too small (only one or a few NWs are usually involved) to be controlled, so that galvanostatic operation is not possible in the TEM and correlations are difficult with quantitative electrochemical data. Moreover, crystallization can be induced by the irradiation conditions in the TEM (bean current and energy). Last but not least, in most (but not all77) in situ TEM nanobattery configurations, NWs only have a small part of their outer surface in contact with the electrolyte, whereas in a real battery the whole NW is immersed in the electrolyte (the so-called “flooded geometry”). Again this may modify the kinetics and pathways of the phase transformations in the TEM.
From the findings of ref. 64, even when Li15Si4 crystallization occurs in the Si NWs at the end of the first lithiation step (for doped or C-coated NWs), it does not seem to take place on second lithiation. Note that in some recent papers, the terminal phases after the first lithiation of Si NWs are indicated as amorphous Li4.4Si78 or crystalline Li22Si5.79 In ref. 79, the authors suggest that reaching 4.4 Li per Si would be specific of the use of NWs, but those results and conclusions are strongly questioned in ref. 64.
Other characterization methods such as NMR of 7Li and high energy X-ray diffraction/diffusion have been used to identify the crystalline Li15Si4 phase (and no other phase such as Li22Si5 was found) after deep lithiation of c-Si powders.60,68 In particular, the analysis of the pair distribution function obtained from high energy X-ray diffusion/diffraction experiments shows a broad peak centered at ∼4.75 Å, which appears when the lithiation voltage has been pushed down to 0 V.68 This peak is characteristic of the long range order in crystalline Li15Si4. However, its important width indicates a large degree of disorder in the c-Li15Si4 compound.
3.2 The first delithiation at room temperature
During the first de-lithiation, the Li15±δSi4 polycrystalline phase (when present) progressively disappears, being replaced by an amorphous lithium–silicon phase, a-LiySi, with y ∼ 2 (ref. 52); here again the two phases coexist during most of the delithiation step (see Fig. 3a, black curve on the right-hand side, the plateau at ∼430 mV). If the end product of the first lithiation was the amorphous a-Li3.75Si phase, the equilibrium during delithiation takes place between the 2 amorphous phases, a-Li3.75Si and a-Li2Si. Upon complete disappearance of Li15±δSi4 (or a-Li3.75Si), Li is further extracted from a-Li2Si, resulting in a single amorphous phase of variable composition a-LitSi, with 0 < t < 2 (ref. 52) towards the end of delithiation. When the Li is totally removed, Si is left in an amorphous state. However, it is unlikely that the structure of amorphous silicon obtained in this way (a-Sidelith) corresponds to the well-known covalently bonded continuous random network (CRN) model of amorphous silicon (a-Si).80 In the ideal CRN for a-Si, the Si atoms are tetra-coordinated (as with c-Si, which means that the radius of the first coordination sphere in a-Si is 2.35 Å) and the basic tetrahedra of the c-Si structure are preserved, with some small (≤10–12°) angle distortions (so that the radius of the second coordination shell in a-Si is ∼3.8 Å, again as with c-Si), but the structure is not periodic in space (the basic tetrahedra are not regularly stacked). Actually, the radial distribution function (RDF) of a-Sidelith obtained after the first delithiation in ref. 68 (see Fig. 7 and 9 there) is quite different from the one carefully measured on a “perfect” a-Si sample obtained by amorphization of c-Si by MeV self-ion implantation81 or obtained by some well-known deposition method.82 In particular, the second peak in a-Sidelith (3.8 Å) seems to be much broader, which would indicate larger angle distortions than in a-Si. Also, in the perfect a-Si structure, there is no peak at ∼5 Å in the RDF (there is actually a dip) whereas in the structure of a-Sidelith there is one; in a-Si there are no significant features in the RDF between 3 and 3.8 Å, whereas there seems to be a peak in a-Sidelith. This being said, in most studies so far concerning anodes, a-Si obtained by a deposition method is considered equivalent to a-Sidelith (at least as far as electrochemical properties are concerned) and the galvanostatic lithiation curves of the two materials are very similar, exhibiting in particular the two characteristic sloping plateaus; compare for instance a-Si lithiation curves in ref. 53 and 83, with that for the 2nd cycle in ref. 68 (a-Sidelith), as well as with the red and blue curves of Fig. 3b in the present paper (also a-Sidelith).
3.3 The second lithiation and the lithiation of amorphous silicon
From what we just saw, the second lithiation always starts with an amorphous silicon material, a-Sidelith, and Fig. 3b (red curve) shows the 2 characteristic sloping plateau regions in the galvanostatic curve, separated by a steeper step. Upon deep alloying (below ∼50 mV) the Li15±δSi4 compound crystallizes again51–53,68 except maybe for NWs (whatever their doping level) as seen above64 and also except when the size parameter (e.g. thickness of thin films in ref. 53) is below a critical value.
Li et al. have studied the sloping plateaus behavior, using Sn-doped a-Si powders obtained by sputtering.83 From 119Sn Mossbauer spectroscopy measurements on the Sn-doped a-Si anodes, they have shown that at the composition corresponding to the steep step in the galvanostatic curve (Li/Si ∼ 2.3), the first coordination shell of Sn atoms (used as a probe and assumed to be representative of the Si behavior in the Li–Si alloy) is formed by Li atoms only.83 This means that at this stage of lithiation most Si–Si bonds have been broken and the a-Si phase should have disappeared. This also means that beyond this composition, any added Li atom will only have Li first neighbors (Si atoms are sort of shielded) inducing a chemical potential closer to that of metallic Li, hence the potential drop in the galvanostatic curve leading to the 2nd sloping plateau region.83 Also, a quick look at the structure of Li15Si4 in Fig. 3a tells us that in this crystal, all the Si atoms have 12 Li neighbors (not all at the same distance), so that the amorphous phase obtained for Li/Si = 2.3 (with the Si atoms totally surrounded by Li atoms) would be a kind of precursor of the Li15Si4 phase,84 and would enable an easy crystallization (i.e. involving only minute atomic displacements) of this particular phase at the end of lithiation, as observed experimentally. Note that the Li15Si4 phase is the only one in the series of crystalline Li12Si7, Li7Si3, and Li13Si4 alloys (i.e. with Li/Si below 3.75) where Si is completely surrounded by Li and there are no Si–Si close neighbors.85 Also note that the structure of the amorphous Li3.75Si phase seems to be close to that of c-Li15Si4, as deduced from the very similar intensity distribution and ring positions of electron diffraction patterns in the TEM (see e.g., Fig. 3 of ref. 86).
At the end of the first plateau-like region of the galvanostatic curve, Key and coworkers68 still see the 2.35 Å peak of the pair distribution function, corresponding to Si–Si residual bonds in the a-Si structure, which somehow contradicts the results of ref. 83. This peak continues losing intensity during the second plateau-like region, but does not totally disappear, even upon complete lithiation (0 V in the galvanostatic curve), which is rather strange because there are no Si–Si distances corresponding to 2.35 Å in c-Li15Si4. There may be some unlithiated Si particles disconnected from the current collector after the first lithiation remained in their samples. Alternatively, these authors suggest that c-Li15Si4 can accommodate defects such as Si–Si dumbbell-like clusters. On the other hand, the 4.7 Å peak characteristic of the long range order of crystalline Li15Si4 is observed after deep lithiation down to 0 V, confirming that crystallization does occur in the Si powders they were using (again, in contrast with what was observed in some undoped NWs64 as discussed above). If the lithiation is stopped at around 80 mV or above during the first or subsequent cycles, the crystallization of the Li15Si4 phase does not take place,51,68 which is an advantage for the lifetime of the electrode since amorphous materials tend to expand and contract isotropically. However in this situation, the electrode capacity is necessarily limited, since the charge corresponding to the end of the lithiation step (from say 80 mV, down to 0 mV) is lost.
Because the galvanostatic lithiation curve of amorphous Si does not show clear plateaus but sloping regions instead, it has long been thought that the lithiation reaction of a-Si occurred via a single-phase mechanism (see e.g., ref. 51 and 75). However, two very recent in situ TEM studies clearly show that, at least for the first sloping plateau region of the galvanostatic curve, the lithiation is a two-phase reaction which is controlled by Si–Si bond breaking at a very sharp interface between two different amorphous phases,87,88 namely a-Si and LizSi, with z ∼ 2.5. This value of 2.5 has been determined from swelling calibrations (and it is close to the value of 2.3 observed in Li et al. Mossbauer experiments83). From the mechanism point of view, this situation is very similar to the lithiation of c-Si, as summarized in Fig. 4 taken from ref. 87. Following the total transformation of a-Si to a-Li2.5Si, the final lithiation of a-Li2.5Si (corresponding to the second sloping plateau in the galvanostatic curve and ending with the formation of a-Li3.75Si or crystalline Li15Si4) seems to be very fast and no distinct phases could be observed in the experiments of Wang and coworkers.87 We note that in another in situ TEM experiment performed on amorphous Si nanorods, the authors claim to obtain Li22Si5 (identified by indexing electron diffraction patterns) at the end of the lithiation.89 Again, this is in contrast with results from ref. 64 and 75, and if confirmed, would suggest that the starting structure of a-Si plays a significant role in the nature of the end phases that can be obtained.
Finally (and interestingly), as far as thin films of a-Si are concerned, it seems that the crystallization of a-LizSi into Li15±ySi4 upon deep lithiation (down to 0 V) can be avoided when the film thickness is below a critical value, of the order of 2.5 μm for the sputtered films investigated in ref. 53. This would explain the good stability observed on anodes made of very thin a-Si films.90 However, this critical value is likely to change depending on the way the a-Si films are obtained (sputtering, thermal evaporation, CVD, a-Sidelith…). In any case, the work of ref. 53 suggests that there exist size effects in the kinetics of phase transformation in the Li–Si system, which could also explain differences in the behavior of NWs.
Before shifting to the next paragraph, we would like to briefly summarize what we have seen above: upon lithiation, crystalline Si (in the powder or thin film form) first transforms into an amorphous a-Li3.5Si alloy and then suddenly crystallizes into the Li15±δSi4 compound at the end of the first lithium alloying step. Following this first lithiation, there is no more crystalline Si involved in the following charge–discharge cycles and the only crystalline phase that can be obtained upon deep lithiation is Li15±δSi4, depending on some critical size parameter (e.g., film thickness for thin films) of the Si material. The overall situation is summarized in Table 1.
Table 1 Summary of the major phases and their composition during the 2 first lithiation–delithiation cycles of c-Si. The 2-phase regions producing plateaus in the galvanostatic curves are also indicated, together with their corresponding voltages (vs. Li/Li+). The first and second delithiation steps are identical. Actually, after the first full cycle, the following ones are similar (except for some capacity loss). If amorphous Si is the starting material (instead of c-Si) the reaction paths for any cycle are those of the second lithiation–delithiation cycle in the table. It is not clear at present whether the second lithiation step of a-Si is a 2-phase process or not




First full lithiation (of c-Si)





First delithiation





Second full lithiation





Second delithiation







For NWs, the situation is more confusing, since the crystallization of Li15±δSi4 may or may not take place, depending on the overall NW conductivity (including possible conductive coatings) and also depending on some other parameters not clearly identified yet (size, orientation, lithiation conditions, contacts,…). For instance, for similar in situ TEM conditions (cathode, electrolyte, lithiation voltage), no Li15±δSi4 crystallization is found in undoped NWs with diameters in the 140–190 nm range (ref. 64), whereas in ref. 75, Li15±δSi4 is identified at the end of lithiation in ∼80 nm diameter NWs, also undoped. This is the reason why we have indicated c-Li15±δSi4 or a-Li3.75Si as terminal products in Table 1. We finally point out that the terminal phase in NWs (or nanorods) is sometimes identified as Li22Si5 (ref. 78, 79 and 89), which adds to the confusion.
Our own findings are summarized in Fig. 5, which shows TEM pictures of various NWs after electrochemical lithiation in a half cell configuration. We only observe the formation of c-Li15Si4 in doped NWs, whereas in undoped specimens, the terminal phase is amorphous and for such samples, lithiation seems to be self-limited, since even when the voltage has been taken down to 0 V, there remains a crystalline, unlithiated region at the core of the NWs. This is consistent with the findings of ref. 64. Note that for the TEM observations shown in Fig. 5, the NWs were not cleaned after lithiation, so that the decomposition products from the electrolyte (see Section 4) are still present on their surface. Obviously, there is much more electrolyte decomposition when the NWs are conducting, as evidenced by the rough NW surface (inset, Fig. 5b) and the presence of spots in the electron diffraction pattern that can be matched with those of LiF (a common electrolyte decomposition product, see below).
 Fig. 5  High resolution TEM images of Si NWs before and after the first lithiation. (a) A pristine NW that grew along the [112] direction. The inset shows an electron diffraction pattern typical of twinned monocrystalline Si. (b) HRTEM image of a fully lithiated, highly phosphorus-doped NW, showing small crystalline grains which we assign to the c-Li15Si4 phase. The inset shows a low magnification view of the NW, which exhibits a rough surface, due to electrolyte decomposition products; bar chart = 200 nm. The NW has not been cleaned after lithiation (only quickly rinsed with acetonitrile). (c) The corresponding electron diffraction pattern can be indexed with c-Li15Si4 (red) and LiF (blue) diffraction features. LiF can be unambiguously distinguished from Li15Si4 through the (111) diffraction dots (full blue circle). (d) HRTEM image of a fully lithiated, undoped NW showing no crystalline phase; the picture was taken away from the core. The inset is a lower magnification view of 2 NWs, showing a clear contrast between the core (unlithiated) and outer region of the NWs; bar chart = 200 nm. Also note that the surface of the NWs is smoother, indicating that less electrolyte decomposition products are present on the surface. (e) The corresponding electron diffraction pattern shows amorphous rings, as well as dots originating from the remaining unlithiated monocrystalline c-Si core. 
4 Some recent results for anodes based on Si NWs
To the best of our knowledge, the first paper dealing with the RT electrochemical lithiation of Si NWs was published in 1999.91 Although the authors were essentially interested in the controlled doping of those wires, they noted: “… the Si NWs have a reversible capacity of more than 1700 mA h g−1Si, which is five times higher than that of current carbonaceous material in commercial lithium ion batteries (<370 mA h g−1C)”. The same authors published a second paper one year later, this time within the context of LIB anodes, where they evidenced the amorphization process of crystalline Si NWs upon Li insertion.92 They did not observe the crystallization of Li15Si4 at the end of lithiation, in agreement with the results of ref. 64 (as well as with our own results – Fig. 5) for undoped wires. Another study concerning the lithiation of mixtures of Si NWs and Si nanoparticles synthesized by laser ablation was published in 2001.93 Probably because the synthesis of Si NWs was not so widespread at the time (even though there was an intense research activity on the topic, see ref. 30 and references therein), these 3 papers went quite unnoticed from the battery community which was rather studying Si nanoparticles, and it took ∼7 more years to see the following papers appear on the topic almost at the same time.32,78 Since then, many studies have been published, aiming at circumventing the major problems related to anodes based on Si NWs, namely the pulverization of NWs, the adhesion of NWs on the current collector and the stabilization of the interface between the NWs and the electrolyte.
At this point, a few words of preliminary explanation are necessary concerning this NW–electrolyte interface. Typically, upon the first lithiation of the anode, when the voltage goes down to zero (against Li/Li+), some of the electrolyte decomposes. This induces the formation of the so-called solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) film on the surface of the anode.5,94 Ideally, this SEI film, whose composition depends on the particular electrolyte used in the battery, is permeable to lithium ions, but it is an electronic insulator, which prevents further electrolyte decomposition during subsequent cycles.5,94 Typically, for the most common electrolytes, based on alkyl carbonate compounds and LiFP6 salt, Li2CO3 and LiF are the major inorganic constituents of the SEI layer on graphite.95,96 Note that the formation of stable SEI films on graphite-based anodes is another reason for their good cycling performance.97 Also note that additives are incorporated in electrolytes to improve the quality of the SEI on graphite.98 However, when it comes to Si, even though the composition of the SEI layer is not so different from the one on graphite,99,100 and even if additives such as fluoroethylene carbonate are mixed with the electrolyte to improve the SEI,101 the major difference is the large Si volume variation upon lithiation–delithiation. Because of this, the SEI film is found to crack during charge–discharge cycling, rendering the passivation inefficient and repeatedly exposing parts of the bare Si surface to the electrolyte.102,103 During each lithiation step, some SEI reforms on the bare Si, trapping more Li into electrolyte decomposition products such as Li2CO3, LiF, etc. Because the amount of cyclable Li is limited by the cathode content, continued Li trapping induces capacity fading as cycling is carried on. Moreover, because of incomplete surface passivation, side reactions between the electrolyte and the Si material can be anticipated,33,104 which also consume some of the electrode, thus contributing to the capacity fading phenomenon.
In order to circumvent the above-mentioned problems of NW cracking, detachment, SEI instability, as well as low cycling rate, various structures based on Si NWs have been explored during the past few years, which can be schematically categorized as (i) simple NWs, (ii) core–shell NWs, (iii) coated NWs, (iv) embedded NWs and (v) nanotube-like Si structures. Of course certain studies mix some of the above categories, involving e.g., core–shell NWs coated with a surface-passivating film.105
4.1 Simple NWs
In the simplest configuration, Si NWs are grown by VLS-CVD on a metallic current collector (Cu, stainless steel…) and mounted in a half-cell, with a Li counter electrode for testing.32,78 Actually, unless particular care is taken during growth, simple NWs are often core–shell structures, with a c-Si core and an a-Si shell (see e.g., ref. 33). Anodes based on simple NWs tend to degrade rapidly and keeping their diameters below some critical value is of prime importance to avoid cracking: ∼between 240 and 360 nm for c-Si NWs (depending on the lithiation–delithiation rate28) and around 900 nm for a-Si NWs, assuming that results obtained on nanoparticles88 roughly apply to NWs. Improvements in the anode lifetime can also be obtained by using highly interconnected NWs, thus preventing the detachment of individual specimens from the current collector on which they are grown.33 Chockla and coworkers106 have systematically studied the effects of the binder, electrolyte and the presence of gold seeds on the performance of anodes based on SFLS-grown Si NWs. Their best results were obtained on Au-catalyzed SFLS wires, using a sodium alginate binder107 for the slurry and adding fluoroethylene carbonate to the electrolyte.
 Fig. 6  Maximum C rate (blue curve) and average Si loading mass on the anode (black dotted curve) as a function of Si NW diameter. The NWs were grown interconnected by VLS-PECVD at 475 °C, using Au as a catalyst (ref. 33). The SEM pictures show top views of some of the NWs; the scale bar in each picture represents 400 nm. 
Alternatively, simple NWs etched in monocrystalline Si wafers by the MaCE process have been used.108 A refinement of the MaCE technique, which represents an interesting approach towards cost reduction, uses c-Si powders (instead of c-Si wafers) in which NWs can also be etched.109 It has been shown that highly porous NWs can be obtained when the starting Si was highly doped (see Fig. 2d and e), and that the cycling properties of anodes based on those highly porous NWs were improved compared to non-porous NWs.110,111 For instance, in ref. 110, the authors have reached 2000 charge–discharge cycles at a 1 C rate (a N C rate corresponds to a total charge or discharge of the electrode in 1/N hour), using such porous NWs and again an alginate-based binder for the fabrication of the slurry.
As seen in paragraph 3 above, c-Si becomes amorphous after the first lithiation–delithiation cycle. Even if c-Si can be made reasonably conducting by doping, a-Sidelith is certainly a very poor conductor, which limits the charge–discharge rate (i.e., the power) of Si-based electrodes. Actually, McDowell and Cui have measured several orders of magnitude conductivity ratios between lithiated (remember Li behaves as a shallow donor in Si112,113) and delithiated Si NWs.114 Similar results had previously been reported by Mai et al.115 This indicates that the poor Si conductivity (particularly at the beginning of lithiation for the second and following cycles, when the Li doping effect is still compensated by the high defect density in a-Sidelith), could limit the rate of the electrode. On the other hand, assuming a diffusion coefficient of 10−12 cm2 s−1 for Li in a-Si,116 it would take ∼225 s for Li to diffuse radially inside a 300 nm-diameter a-Si NW (corresponding to a 16 C rate), which indicates that Li diffusion could also be the physical process limiting the charge–discharge rate. In a recent paper, Gohier et al., have studied the influence of Si NW diameter on the rate capability of the corresponding anodes117 and concluded that Li diffusion was the limiting process. However, it seems that the maximum rate they have reached is 5 C with ∼65 nm-diameter Si NWs. Still assuming ∼10−12 cm2 s−1 for the diffusion coefficient of Li in Si, it would take ∼10 s for Li to diffuse radially in a 65 nm-diameter Si NW. This would correspond to a 360 C rate, never reached with Si (except for particular in situ TEM experiments64). Therefore, it seems more likely that the charge–discharge rate is controlled by Si conductivity, particularly at the beginning of the second cycle (and following ones), when the starting material is always amorphous and the doping effect of Li is highly compensated by defects and not yet significant. In other words, the Fermi level in a-Sidelith is pinned around mid-gap by the high defect density. So, in order to improve the overall conductivity of the Si NWs, several groups have explored the use of core–shell NW structures (with a conducting core that preferably does not react with Li), or more recently, the use of conductive coatings. Before switching to the next paragraph, we summarize some results concerning simple NWs in Table 2.
Table 2 Some properties of simple Si NWsa




NW type
Synthesis method
Average NW diameter (nm)
Doping
Potential window (V)
First cycle
Maximum C rate
Capacity after X cycles at Y C rate
Ref.


Capacity 1st charge (mA h g−1)
Capacity 1st discharge (mA h g−1)
Coulombic efficiency (%)
C rate



X


Y

Capacity (mA h g−1)





a VLS = vapor–liquid–solid; SFLS = supercritical fluid–liquid–solid; MaCE = metal assisted chemical etching; CVD = chemical vapor deposition; HF-CVD = hot-filament chemical vapor deposition.





Grown
VLS-CVD
89 ± 45
No
0–2
4277
3124
73
C/20
1 C
20
C/5
3500

78



Grown
SFLS
60
No
0–1
3172
2660
84
C/20
2 C
100
C/20
1815

106



Etched
MaCE


No
0–1.2
2660
2410
91
C/10
3 C
70
C/5
≈2400

109



Etched
MaCE
≈200
P-type
0–2
3354
3038
91
C/10
2.4 C
200
C/2
>1960

110



Etched
MaCE
80–100
Low P-type
0–1.5
3290
2560
78
C/10
C/5
20
C/10
1080

111



50
C/10
530


High P-type
0–1.5




98


C/5
50
C/10
1450


Grown
VLS HF-CVD
65


0.02–3
5698
3720


C/10
5 C
50
1.3 C
2670

117



210
3678
2593










490
3681
1806












4.2 Core–shell NWs
Because a-Si lithiation occurs at a higher potential than c-Si lithiation (at least for the first step of the reaction, as seen in Section 3 above), by using c-Si–a-Si core–shell structures and by controlling the lithiation potential around 150 mV, the a-Si shell can be used to store Li, while the c-Si core (which is not amorphized when lithiation is limited to a voltage above ∼100 mV) can distribute electrons all along the interior of the NW.118 Cui et al. have shown that indeed, the core Si NW remained crystalline when lithiation was limited to 150 mV, whereas it became amorphous when lithiation was carried on down to 10 mV.118
We have also grown such c-Si–a-Si core–shell structures and measured the maximum rate that could be reached as a function of NW diameter. For these experiments, the core c-Si NWs were first grown by VLS using Au as a catalyst (from a 50 nm-thick film) and the a-Si shell was deposited in the same pump-down operation, by simply dropping the growth temperature and adjusting the SiH4 pressure inside the CVD reactor. In such conditions, the increase in NW diameter is essentially due to the increase in thickness of the a-Si shell around the c-Si core. The corresponding anodes were lithiated (in half cells) down to 120 mV only, in order to avoid amorphization of the core NWs. As can be seen from Fig. 6, a high rate of more than 20 C can be obtained with NWs having their diameter below 100 nm. However, limiting the NW diameter strongly limits the Si mass on the electrode. Typical commercial graphite-based anodes can store a charge of ∼4 mA h cm−2, because they use ∼50 μm thick films on the current collector. So, assuming a Si capacity of 3800 mA h g−1, an areal mass of more than 1 mg cm−2 of Si is needed, in order to be competitive with graphite anodes. Fig. 6 shows that for this condition to be met, NWs with their diameter in the ∼300 nm range have to be grown, which will limit the rate around 3 C. This example shows that compromises are necessary and that it is difficult to have both a high rate and a high Si mass for a given NW-based Si anode. Note that we have been unable to fit the rate versus diameter curve with a D/r2 law (D is the diffusion coefficient of Li in a-Si and r is the NW diameter) which would correspond to Li-diffusion limited electrode operation. Again here, we believe that the overall NW conductivity (including possible Schottky contact effects; remember Si is a semiconductor, not a metal) is the major limitation for the rate of the electrode.
Other NW core–shell structures have been studied, with a carbon-based core (either carbon nanofibers119,120 or carbon nanotubes121–124) and a silicon shell. The advantage of these structures is that there is no need to avoid the lithiation-induced amorphization of the core, as with c-Si, and thus lithium insertion can be performed down to low voltages, yielding higher capacities. A drawback is that carbon-based nanostructures, particularly multiwall carbon nanotubes (MWNTs) tend to suffer from Li-induced embrittlement125 (because the concentric and closed structure of MWNTs does not allow expansion of graphene sheets in the c-axis or radial direction as in graphite, when Li is inserted, thus inducing large stress levels), which of course may have a deleterious influence on ageing, particularly on board of an automotive, where high levels of vibrations are anticipated. Some other core–shell NW structures have also been investigated, with their core based on metals126 or metal silicides.105,127,128 Note that in one study, Si has been synthesized by electrodeposition on Ni NWs.129 Overall, the use of core–shell structures yields improvements in NW-based electrode cycling rate and also lifetime. Table 3 summarizes the main results concerning those core–shell nanowires.
Table 3 Some properties of core–shell Si NWsa




Core
Core average diameter (nm)
Shell
Shell thickness
Potential window (V)
First cycle
Coulombic efficiency (%)
Maximum C rate
Capacity after X cycles at Y C rate
Ref.


Capacity1st charge (mA h g−1)
Capacity 1st discharge (mA h g−1)
C rate



X


Y

Capacity (mA h g−1)





a CNF = carbon nano-fibers; CNT = carbon nanotubes; VACNT = vertically aligned CNT; TMV1 = tobacco mosaic virus; PVD = physical vapor deposition; CVD = chemical vapor deposition; LPCVD = low pressure CVD; PECVD = plasma enhanced CVD.





CVD Si NWs


a-Si CVD


0.01–2






98
1.6
30
0.2 C



118





0.15–2






98
100
0.2 C
1060




0.15–2






99.2–99.9
5/95
0.1 C/0.8 C
860




0.15–2






99.3–99.9
5/95
0.1 C/1.6 C
≈800


CNF


a-Si CVD


0.01–1






98–99.5
1 C
30
C/5
≈2000

119



25
>1650




0.1–1






98–99.6
2
C/15
1700


45
C/5
1300


10
C/15
1600




0.1–1






NS
5
C/5
NS


60
1 C
800


15
C/5
1300


CNF


Si CVD




1787
1045
25 mA g−1




20
50 mA g−1
766

120







1956
954
50 mA g−1






CVD grown CNTs
40–50
Si clusters CVD


0.02–1.2
2552
2049
C/10
80.3
2.5 C
100
C/10
≈1000

121



LPCVD VACNTs


LPCVD a-Si + thin C
70
0.01–1










250
C/5
3300

122



C/2
2000


CVD VACNTs
5–10
CVD-Si nanoparticles
10–20
0.02–3
1616
1400
10 C
87
15 C
3
1.3 C
800

123



97
10 C


PECVD VACNTs
150
PECVD-Si


0–1.2






99
12 C
80
0.2 C
2510

124



TMV1 + Ni(CD)
18
Si (PVD)
≈300
0–1.5








4 C
340
1 C
1000

126



120
2 C


75
4 C


PECVD NiSi NWs


a-Si PECVD
≈50
0–2










520
4.2 A g−1
1200

105



a-Si PECVD + Al2O3
≈50
0–2






≈100
5 C
5/90
C/20/C/4
3500/3000








750
4.2 A g−1
1200








1280
1.2 A g−1
1200


CVD NiSi NWs
20
a-Si CVD
190
0.01–2








2 C
50
0.1 C
3000

127



CVD TiSi2 nanonet
15–20
Si particles CVD
20–30
0.15–2






97.9–99.3
5 C
100
2 C
1310

128



CVD TiSi2 NWs
Si particles CVD








100
2 C
1008


TMV1 + Ni
Ni ≈ 50
Si electrodep.
≈80
0–1.5






99.5
4 C
173
0.25 C
1200

129





4.3 Coated NWs
Another way of increasing the overall conductivity of Si NWs is to use a conductive coating, the latter having to be sufficiently permeable (i.e. porous in most cases) to let Li ions go through. The idea of employing a conductive coating on Si material was probably borrowed from Li-ion battery cathode technology, since to the best of our knowledge, Ravet and coworkers were the first to propose a carbon coating to improve the properties of LiFePO4.130 This was soon followed by the first experiments of carbon deposition on Si powders for anodes.131 After those early studies, C coating of Si NWs was revisited in 2008 (ref. 132) and since then it has clearly been demonstrated that such C coatings could significantly increase not only the NWs' cycling rate64,133 but also the electrode lifetime.133 Carbon-coated Si NWs grown by the SFLS process (see Section 2) have been used recently as self-standing, paper-like fabrics for Li-ion battery anodes, without any binder or conductive additives.134 Coatings consisting of conducting polymers such as PEDOT have also been used to improve the cycling properties of Si NWs.135
Metallic conductive coatings have been explored more recently, such as porous (or non-continuous) Cu deposits on Si thin films,136 soon followed by Cu coating on Si NWs.137 An increase in cycling efficiency, rate capability and also a higher capacity retention upon cycling were reported. In ref. 137, the authors have compared the effects of Cu and C coatings and they have concluded that Cu-coated Si NWs exhibited a higher capacity retention after 30 cycles than their C-coated homologues. Aluminum138 and magnesium139 coatings on Si NWs have been investigated as well, but no improvement in rate capability was observed, particularly with Mg coating. We note however that contrary to Cu, Al and Mg do react and alloy with Li at RT,16,140,141 which complicates the situation.
The use of non-conducting coatings on Si-based anodes has been investigated as well, but for the purpose of protecting the electrode (i.e., improving the SEI), rather than increasing its conductivity (and rate). Oxide coatings (MgO, Al2O3, SiO2, TiO2, ZnO, SnO2, ZrO2…) have been investigated in the past, essentially for cathodes of LIBs,142 in order to prevent the direct contact of the active material with the electrolyte. For instance, surface coating of LiCoO2 cathodes can prevent over-delithiation, which is known to induce a transition from the monoclinic to the hexagonal phase and a deterioration of electrochemical performance.142 Thin Al2O3 coatings (<10 nm) obtained by atomic layer deposition (ALD) have also been tested on thin film Si anodes143,144 and Si NWs.105 Upon the first lithiation, Al2O3 transforms into an Al–Li–O glass,145 which is a good Li ion conductor and an electronic insulator, thus exhibiting most of the attributes of a good substitute for the SEI layer. Even though the Al2O3 deposit does not withstand the ∼300% volume expansion of Si upon lithiation without cracking, it still provides some protective patches, resulting in a 45% increase of the anode lifetime with Al2O3-coated Si NWs compared with uncoated ones; 1280 charge–discharge cycles at 1 C rate have been obtained from anodes based on such Al2O3-coated Si NWs.105Table 4 presents a summary of the main papers dealing with coatings.
Table 4 Some properties of coated Si NWsa




Structure
Synthesis method
Average NW diameter
Coating
Potential window (V)
First cycle
Coulombic efficiency (%)
Maximum C rate
Capacity after X cycles at Y C rate
Ref.


Capacity 1st charge (mA h g−1)
Capacity 1st discharge (mA h g−1)
C rate



X


Y

Capacity (mA h g−1)





a VLS = vapor–liquid–solid; CVD = chemical vapor deposition; LPCVD = low pressure CVD; PECVD = plasma enhanced CVD.





Si NWs
Electroless deposition in templates
6.5 nm
Carbon
0–1.5
3664
3163
0.2 C
86
3 C
80
0.2 C
2738

132



Si NWs
VLS-CVD


Carbon evaporated
0.02–2
3701.8
3081.6
C/20
83.2–>95
1 C
30
C/20
2150

133



Si NWs
VLS-CVD




0.02–2
3125.1
2170.8
C/20
69.5–>95
C/2
15
C/20
1992.1


Si NWs fabric
SFLS
10–50 nm
Carbonaceous layer
0.01–3
1485
C/20




20
C/20
804

134



Si NWs
VLS-CVD
≈100 nm
PEDOT
0.01–1
3850
3445
C/10
89


100
C/5
2510

135



Si NWs
VLS-CVD


0.02–2
3125
2171
C/20
69.5
C/2
30
C/20
1582

137



30
C/10
1493


30
C/2
1360


Carbon
3702
3082
83.2
30
C/20
2180


30
C/10
2094


30
C/2
2169


Copper
2967
2679
90.3
30
C/20
2138


30
C/10
2050


30
C/2
2216


Si NWs/SS
VLS-CVD
100 nm


0.01–2
3050
2571
C/10
84.3









138



Si NWs/TiN


105 nm


3581
3307
93.1


100
C/10
1090








Aluminum various thicknesses
2832–3400
2597–3185
92–93.9


100


785–1292


Si NWs
VLS-LPCVD
114


0.01–2
3576
C/10
92









139









Magnesium various thicknesses
3030–3338


93–95.8
5 C
100
C/10
850–1000


Core–shell NiSi NWs/a-Si
PECVD




0–2










520
4.2 A g−1
1200

105





Al2O3ALD (9 nm)
0–2
≈100
5 C
5
C/20
3500








90
C/4
3000








750
4.2 A g−1
1200








1280
1.2 A g−1
1200




4.4 Embedded NWs
Embedding the Si NWs in a conducting network such as entangled carbon nanotubes (CNTs) is yet another way to improve the overall conductivity of the electrode as well as the connectivity between the Si NWs. Moreover, the resulting CNT-based anode is usually flexible and self-standing, which can be an advantage for some applications.146 Chou et al.,147 have grown Si NWs (or rather Si nanoworms) by pulsed laser deposition on a single wall carbon nanotube (SWNT) paper.148 More recently, this idea has been improved by Li et al.,149 who grew Si NWs by the VLS method, from MWNTs decorated with Au nanoparticles and deposited on stainless steel substrates. Chan et al.150 have employed the traditional slurry-based processing method for anode fabrication and mixed MWNTs with Si NWs synthesized by the SFLS method (see Section 2). They compared the anode capacity with the one obtained from NWs grown by VLS directly on the current collector and found a much higher value for the latter, which they attributed to a better contact with the current collector. Also, the SFLS NWs seem to exhibit unclean surfaces (which do not favor contact with MWNTs) as well as a high percentage of Si nanoparticles, which are more difficult to connect/contact with the MWNTs than NWs. On the other hand, the cycling stability of anodes made with SFLS NWs mixed with MWNTs was better than that of Si NWs directly grown by VLS on the current collector.150
Because it is a two-dimensional material, graphene151 is intuitively more appealing than CNTs to “wrap” and embed Si nanostructures such as nanoparticles and NWs. Actually, although high temperature CVD processes on transition metal foils have been (and still are) developed for the synthesis of large area, electronic grade graphene,152 the simpler way to obtain graphene flakes/films for use in batteries or supercapacitors relies on solution-based processes involving the chemical exfoliation of graphite or graphite derivatives such as graphite oxide.153 A typical preparation sequence for the fabrication of “reassembled” graphene films from liquid suspensions will first include the chemical oxidation of graphite particles with mixtures of strong acids and oxidants (e.g., concentrated H2SO4 + NaNO3 and KMnO4 as in the Hummers method,154 eventually followed by H2O2 treatment155), which after ultrasonication in water will yield stable colloidal suspensions of hydrophilic graphite oxide (GO) sheets. GO which is a brittle and insulating material is subsequently reduced back to (defect-decorated) graphene (actually called reduced graphite oxide, RGO), either chemically (e.g., using hydrazine hydrate156) or thermally.155 Note that there is no need for a high crystalline quality graphene material for energy storage applications and large lattice defect concentrations are even necessary to let the Li ions and electrolyte molecules permeate through the gas-tight carbon network.157 Several recent papers have explored this solution-based route for the realization of Si-embedded anodes,158–168 from relatively simple structures, where the Si nanoparticles or NWs are just embedded within RGO sheets, to more sophisticated ones where the Si NWs are first “wrapped” within a CVD graphene-like deposit and then further embedded within RGO sheets.162,166 The latter structure is schematically shown in Fig. 7, taken from ref. 166. Table 5 summarizes some of the recently published achievements concerning embedded Si NWs.
 Fig. 7  Schematic of the fabrication (upper panel) and adapting (lower panel) of Si NWs first wrapped in a graphene-like film and then embedded in RGO sheets. The fabrication process mainly includes (I) chemical vapor deposition (CVD) growth of graphene sheets on as-synthesized Si NWs to form SiNW@G nanocables, and (II) vacuum filtration of an aqueous SiNW@G–graphene oxide (GO) dispersion followed by thermal reduction. The resulting SiNW@G@RGO can transform between an expanded state and a contracted state during lithiation–delithiation cycles, thus enabling the stabilization of the silicon material. Reprinted with permission from Wang et al., ref. 166. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. 
Table 5 Some properties of embedded Si NWsa




Material type
Synthesis method
Embedding material
Potential window (V)
First cycle
Coulombic efficiency (%)
Capacity after X cycles at Y C rate
Ref.


Capacity 1st charge (mA h g−1)
Capacity 1st discharge (mA h g−1)
C rate



X


Y

Capacity (mA h g−1)





a PLD = pulsed laser deposition; VLS = vapor–liquid–solid; MaCE = metal assisted chemical etching; CNT = carbon nanotubes; SWCNT = single wall CNT; MWCNT = multiwall CNT; RGO = reduced graphite oxide; CVD = chemical vapor deposition.





Si nanoworms 2.2%
PLD
SWCNT paper
0.01–2
2628


25 mA g−1
16
50
25 mA g−1
163

147



Si nanoworms 11.0%
1668






50
25 mA g−1
189


Si NWs
VLS CVD
CNT array








86.3–98.5
24
C/20
3050

149



Si NWs
SFLS
MWCNT
0.01–2.5
4250


C/20


30
C/20
1500

150



Si NWs
VLS CVD
RGO
0.002–2
1650


840 mA g−1
50–98
50
840 mA g−1
≈1650

166











100
2.1 A g−1
≈80% × 1600


Si NWs
MaCE
Graphitic layer 20 nm
0.01–1
1390


600 mA g−1
95
45
600 mA g−1
800

162



50 nm
2100




89
1040


Doped graphitic layer 20 nm
1950




85
1090


50 nm


2140




92




1260


Si NWs
VLS CVD
RGO
0–2
3350




72–95
20
C/5
3350

165





As a final remark concerning this paragraph, we would like to point out that although embedding Si nanostructures in graphene or RGO sheets seems a very attractive solution for providing a highly deformable and flexible electrical contact which can adapt Si expansion and contraction, the deposition of the SEI film around the Si nanoparticles or NWs is likely to block electron circulation, thus isolating some Si nanostructures from the conducting graphene or RGO sheets and yielding capacity loss. Wrapping the Si NWs inside a first graphene envelope, loose enough to withstand NW swelling could prevent the direct interaction of Si with the electrolyte, but at the risk of losing contact with the electrically conducting graphene envelope, when the NW is delithiated and graphene does not follow the accompanying volume contraction. The latter situation is all the more likely to happen since the graphene envelope will be rigidified by the SEI deposit after the first lithiation. This again will lead to capacity loss.
4.5 Hollowed, nanotube-like Si structures
The use of a hollow Si nanostructure seems attractive, since the inside empty space of such a structure can absorb some of the volume increase during lithiation, thus limiting the overall swelling of the structure. Several papers have explored this route and interesting results have been obtained. Park et al.169 have synthesized their nanotube-like Si structures inside porous anodic alumina (PAA) templates (by reduction of SiCl4 with sodium naphthalenide, NaC10H8, followed by impregnation of the PAA, firing at 1000 °C and subsequent dissolution of the PAA template) and they have obtained a good stability upon charge–discharge cycling in a half cell, together with high charge–discharge rates of up to 5 C. They also built a complete battery, with a LiCoO2 cathode, which exhibited an 89% capacity retention after 200 charge–discharge cycles at 1 C rate. Song and coworkers170 deposited a conformal Si shell on sacrificial ZnO NW cores and subsequently removed the ZnO using a moderate temperature (600 °C) reduction process; their mechanical model shows that free expansion at the inner surface of the Si nanotubes eases the volume increase during Si lithiation. Following these ideas, Wu et al.103 synthesized their Si nanotubes by using sacrificial carbon fibers on which a CVD Si shell was deposited. The core carbon fibers were subsequently removed by a 500 °C thermal treatment in air which also provided a protective SiO2 coating around the Si nanotubes. This outside SiO2 coating (permeable to Li ions) served as a mechanical clamping layer, preventing expansion of the outer surface of the Si nanotubes during lithiation, while the volume increase was accommodated by partially filling up the empty core. Because the outside surface of the Si nanotubes does not, or only slightly expands, the SEI which deposits on it is mechanically stable and serves as an efficient passivation layer. As a consequence, the stability of anodes based on those Si nanotubes is excellent, as 85% of the original capacity is still retained after 6000 charge–discharge cycles at 12 C, which to the best of our knowledge represents the highest number of cycles reported so far for Si nanostructures. The authors also report charging rates of up to 20 C which is one of the highest values reached for Si (if we expect the results of ref. 64 obtained inside the TEM in particular conditions). A rather severe drawback is that the areal Si mass is small, typically below 0.1 mg cm−2, see ref. 103 for details.
5 Conclusions
Because they can offer a much larger capacity than existing graphite-based insertion anodes, Si-based anodes bear a real potential for applications in Li-based battery technology. While the first attempts to use Si were largely unsuccessful, due to the rapid degradation of the corresponding anodes, the situation has clearly been improved over the past few years. Thanks to the use of nanostructured Si material, there are now a number of published works showing charge–discharge stability over more than 1000 cycles, with typical electrode capacities over 1200 mA h g−1. In this review, we have tried to emphasize the specificities of Si nanowires compared to other forms of Si, particularly powders and thin films, thoroughly studied in the past. Other types of nanostructures, such as nanoparticles,171,172 yolk–shell nanoparticles173 are also interesting, but probably more difficult to electrically contact and interconnect in practical applications. We believe that NWs present strong advantages over other nanostructures, because of their high aspect ratio facilitating interconnection and the possibility to grow them directly on a current collector, thus avoiding the use of binders and conductive fillers.
Thanks to the development of in situ TEM observations over the past few years, significant progress has been made in the understanding of lithiation-induced stress build-up and fracture in nanostructures. On the other hand, modeling has also progressed and all these efforts must be pursued, so that precise guidelines can be established for the synthesis of application-tailored structures based on Si NWs. Any NW-based structure preventing or minimizing the radial volume expansion will contribute to the SEI stability, promoting enhanced anode stability upon repeated charge–discharge operations. Another area of potential progress is in the field of coatings, particularly those able to follow the expansion and contraction of the nanowires during lithiation–delithiation steps.
The conditions/parameters leading to the crystallization of the Li15Si4 phase in NWs, at the end of deep lithiation are not entirely clear, particularly after the first cycle. There seem to be significant differences between doped (or conductive, for example carbon- or Cu-coated) and undoped NWs, although reports in the literature are contradictory. A clear understanding of how this crystallization occurs in NWs and what are the parameters governing it would certainly be beneficial for electrodes' stability, since phase transitions in electrode materials, usually accompanied by strong atomic re-organizations and abrupt volume changes, should be avoided.
Because Si is a semiconductor, contact problems may arise, such as Schottky barrier formation, either with the current collector (when NWs are grown by VLS) or with the conducting particles (when NWs are incorporated in a slurry), or with the graphene sheets (when NWs are embedded), which can limit carrier injection and consequently the electrode's charge–discharge rate (i.e., the power of the battery). This contact problem has been quite neglected in the literature so far, but it should be thoroughly investigated if improvements are to be made in the lithiation–delithiation rate of anodes based on Si NWs.
Increasing the areal “mass loading” (mg cm−2) of anodes based on Si NWs (without sacrificing charge–discharge rates) is another challenge for the future, particularly for those electrodes making use of VLS-grown NWs. Typical mass loadings of several mg cm−2 of active material, i.e., ∼10 times more than those presently obtained should be reached. This areal mass loading is a general drawback of nanomaterials, even when they are used in slurries where more inert binder and conductive additives are necessary. Finally, as with all industrial products, manufacturing and material costs will prevail in the end, so that simple, low temperature and repeatable processes should be favored, with particular attention paid to their sustainable and environment-friendly aspects.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to acknowledge partial funding from the WCU (World Class University) program through the National Research Foundation of Korea funded by the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology (R31-2008-10029). Part of this work was also supported by the research center program of Institute for Basic Science.
References
T. C. Bond, S. J. Doherty, D. W. Fahey, P. M. Forster, T. Berntsen, B. J. DeAngelo, M. G. Flanner, S. Ghan, B. Kärcher, D. Koch, S. Kinne, Y. Kondo, P. K. Quinn, M. C. Sarofim, M. G. Schultz, M. Schulz, C. Venkataraman, H. Zhang, S. Zhang, N. Bellouin, S. K. Guttikunda, P. K. Hopke, M. Z. Jacobson, J. W. Kaiser, Z. Klimont, U. Lohmann, J. P. Schwarz, D. Shindell, T. Storelvmo, S. G. Warren and C. S. Zender, J. Geophys. Res.: Atmos., 2013, 118, 1–173 Search PubMed .
M. Contestabile, G. J. Offer, R. Slade, F. Jaeger and M. Thoennes, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3754–3772 Search PubMed .
Li-ion batteries were first commercialized in 1991; see   T. Nagaura and K. Tozawa, Prog. Batteries Sol. Cells, 1990, 9, 20–24 Search PubMed .
M. Armand and J. M. Tarascon, Nature, 2008, 451, 652–658 CrossRef CAS  , and references therein.
J. B. Goodenough and Y. Kim, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 587–603 CrossRef CAS  , and references therein.
The energy content of gasoline is about 13 kW h kg−1. Note however that the efficiency of internal combustion engines is more than 3 times lower than that of electric motors (∼25% at best, compared to ∼85–90%).
The performance of battery electrodes are usually measured by their capacities, expressed in A h (1 A h = 3600 coulombs) per unit weight (or unit volume); the capacity represents the actual electrical charge (i.e., the number of Li ions) that can be accommodated in the host material, whether at the anode or the cathode.
M. Lazzari and B. Scrosati, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1980, 127, 773–774 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Whittingham, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4271–4301 CrossRef CAS .
Higher voltage (5 V) cathode materials are currently studied to increase the energy density of Li-ion batteries. See:   A. Kraytsberg and Y. Ein-Eli, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 922–939 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qi, H. Guo, L. G. Hector Jr and A. Timmons, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 15, A558–A566 CrossRef .
P. G. Bruce, S. A. Freunberger, L. J. Hardwick and J.-M. Tarascon, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 19–29 CrossRef CAS .
J. Christensen, P. Albertus, R. S. Sanchez-Carrera, T. Lohmann, B. Kozinsky, R. Liedtke, J. Ahmed and A. Kojic, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159, R1–R30 CrossRef CAS .
C.-M. Park, J.-H. Kim, H. Kim and H.-J. Sohn, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 3115–3141 RSC .
W.-J. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 13–24 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Tirado, Mater. Sci. Eng., 2003, R40, 103–136 CAS .
L. Y. Beaulieu, K. W. Eberman, R. L. Turner, L. J. Krause and J. R. Dahn, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2001, 4, A137–A140 CrossRef CAS .
L. Y. Beaulieu, T. D. Hatchard, A. Bonakdarpour, M. D. Fleischauer and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2003, 150, A1457–A1465 CrossRef CAS .
J. O. Besenhard, J. Yang and M. Winter, J. Power Sources, 1997, 68, 87–90 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Ryu, J. W. Kim, Y.-E. Sung and S. M. Oh, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2004, 7, A306–A309 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hassoun, S. Panero, P. Simon, P. L. Taberna and B. Scrosati, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1632–1635 CrossRef CAS .
P. G. Bruce, B. Scrosati and J.-M. Tarascon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 2930–2946 CrossRef CAS .
R. Deshpande, Y.-T. Cheng and M. W. Verbrugge, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 5081–5088 CrossRef CAS .
U. Kasavajjula, C. Wang and A. J. Appleby, J. Power Sources, 2007, 163, 1003–1039 CrossRef CAS .
R. Teki, M. K. Datta, R. Krishnan, T. C. Parker, T.-M. Lu, P. N. Kumta and N. Koratkar, Small, 2009, 5, 2236–2242 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Szczech and S. Jin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 56–72 CAS .
H. Wu and Y. Cui, Nano Today, 2012, 7, 414–429 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Lee, M. T. McDowell, L. A. Berla, W. D. Nix and Y. Cui, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 4080–4085 CAS .
X. H. Liu, L. Zhong, S. Huang, S. C. Mao, T. Zhu and J. Y. Huang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1522–1531 CrossRef CAS .
V. Schmidt, J. V. Wittemann and U. Gösele, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 361–388 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Wagner and W. C. Ellis, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1964, 4, 89–91 CrossRef CAS .
B. Laïk, L. Eude, J.-P. Pereira-Ramos, C. S. Cojocaru, D. Pribat and E. Rouvière, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 5528–5532 CrossRef .
H. T. Nguyen, F. Yao, M. R. Zamfir, C. Biswas, K. P. So, Y. H. Lee, S. M. Kim, S. N. Cha, J. M. Kim and D. Pribat, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 1154–1161 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Wagner and W. C. Ellis, Trans. Metall. Soc. AIME, 1965, 233, 1053–1064 CAS .
J. D. Holmes, K. P. Johnston, R. C. Doty and B. A. Korgel, Science, 2000, 287, 1471–1473 CrossRef CAS .
A. T. Heitsch, D. D. Fanfair, H.-Y. Tuan and B. A. Korgel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5436–5437 CrossRef CAS .
See e.g.,   G. Howatt and R. Breckenridge, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1947, 30, 237–239 CrossRef CAS ; 
          G. N. Howatt, US Pat., 2582993, 1948.
J. Mallet, M. Molinari, F. Martineau, F. Delavoie, P. Fricoteaux and M. Troyon, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3468–3474 CrossRef CAS .
C.-M. Hsu, S. T. Connor, M. X. Tang and Y. Cui, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93(133109), 1–3 Search PubMed .
E. Garnett and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1082–1087 CrossRef CAS .
K.-Q. Peng, Y.-J. Yan, S.-P. Gao and J. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 1164–1167 CrossRef CAS .
K.-Q. Peng, J. J. Hu, Y. J. Yan, H. Fang, Y. Xu, S. T. Lee and J. Zhu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 387–394 CrossRef CAS .
V. A. Sivakov, G. Brönstrup, B. Pecz, A. Berger, G. Z. Radnoczi, M. Krause and S.
H. Christiansen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 3798–3803 CAS .
Z. Huang, N. Geyer, P. Werner, J. de Boor and U. Gösele, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 285–308 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Weisse, D. R. Kim, C. H. Lee and X. Zheng, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1300–1305 CrossRef CAS .
See e.g.,   M. A. Green, Energy Policy, 2000, 28, 989–998 CrossRef CAS ; M. A. Green, Solar Energy, 2003, 74, 181–192 CrossRef  , and references therein.
T. Y. Wang, Y. C. Lin, C. Y. Tai, R. Sivakumar, D. K. Rai and C. W. Lan, J. Cryst. Growth, 2008, 310, 3403–3406 CrossRef CAS .
See e.g., http://www.appliedmaterials.com/technologies/library/akt-pecvd-system-si-tft-lcd.
P. Limthongkul, Y.-I. Jang, N. J. Dudney and Y.-M. Chiang, Acta Mater., 2003, 51, 1103–1113 CrossRef CAS .
M. N. Obrovac and L. Christensen, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2004, 7, A93–A96 CrossRef CAS .
M. N. Obrovac and L. J. Krause, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2007, 154, A103–A108 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2007, 154, A156–A161 CrossRef CAS .
T. D. Hatchard and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2004, 151, A838–A842 CrossRef CAS .
H. Okamoto, J. Phase Equilib. Diffus., 2009, 30, 118–119 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Wen and R. A. Huggins, J. Solid State Chem., 1981, 37, 271–278 CrossRef CAS .
See e.g.,   C. van der Marel, G. J. B. Vinke and W. van der Lugt, Solid State Commun., 1985, 54, 917–919 CrossRef CAS .
L. A. Stearns, J. Gryko, J. Diefenbacher, G. K. Ramachandran and P. F. McMillan, J. Solid State Chem., 2003, 173, 251–259 CrossRef CAS .
From the Gibbs phase rule, the variance v of a closed system in equilibrium is given at constant pressure and temperature by v = c − φ, where c is the number of constituents (here Si and Li) and φ the number of phases. A plateau region in the galvanostatic lithiation (or delithiation) curve indicates that the voltage cannot evolve during Li insertion (or extraction), which corresponds to v = 0. Hence, insofar as there are two constituents, there are two distinct phases coexisting as long as the plateau is present on the galvanostatic lithiation curve.
J. Danet, T. Brousse, K. Rasim, D. Guyomard and P. Moreau, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 220–226 RSC .
B. Key, R. Bhattacharyya, M. Morcrette, V. Seznéc, J.-M. Tarascon and C. P. Grey, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 9239–9249 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Chon, V. A. Sethuraman, A. McCormick, V. Srinivasan and P. R. Guduru, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2011, 107(045503), 1–4 Search PubMed .
J. Y. Huang, L. Zhong, C. M. Wang, J. P. Sullivan, W. Xu, L. Q. Zhang, S. X. Mao, N. S. Hudak, X. H. Liu, A. Subramanian, H. Fan, L. Qi, A. Kushima and J. Li, Science, 2010, 330, 1515–1520 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Wang, W. Xu, J. Liu, D. Choi, B. Arey, L. V. Saraf, J. Zhang, Z. Yang, S. Thevuthasan and D. R. Baer, J. Mater. Res., 2010, 25, 1541–1547 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Liu, L. Qiang Zhang, L. Zhong, Y. Liu, H. Zheng, J. W. Wang, J.-H. Cho, S. A. Dayeh, S. T. Picraux, J. P. Sullivan, S. X. Mao, Z. Z. Ye and J. Y. Huang, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2251–2258 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Liu, J. W. Wang, S. Huang, F. Fan, X. Huang, Y. Liu, S. Krylyuk, J. Yoo, S. A. Dayeh, A. V. Davydov, S. X. Mao, S. T. Picraux, S. Zhang, J. Li, T. Zhu and J. Y. Huang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 749–756 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. McDowell, I. Ryu, S. W. Lee, C. Wang, W. D. Nix and Y. Cui, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 6034–6041 CrossRef CAS .

          F. Spaepen and D. Turnbull, in Laser annealing of semiconductors, ed. J. M. Poate and J. W. Mayer, Academic Press,  1982, pp. 15–42, see Fig. 5 therein Search PubMed .
B. Key, M. Morcrette, J.-M. Tarascon and C. P. Grey, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 503–512 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kim, C.-Y. Chou, J. G. Ekerdt and G. S. Hwang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 2514–2521 CAS .
X. H. Liu, F. Fan, H. Yang, S. Zhang, J. Y. Huang and T. Zhu, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 1495–1503 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Lee, M. T. McDowell, J. W. Choi and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3034–3039 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Liu, H. Zheng, L. Zhong, S. Huang, K. Karki, L. Q. Zhang, Y. Liu, A. Kushima, W. T. Liang, J. Wei Wang, J.-H. Cho, E. Epstein, S. A. Dayeh, S. T. Picraux, T. Zhu, J. Li, J. P. Sullivan, J. Cumings, C. Wang, S. X. Mao, Z. Z. Ye, S. Zhang and J. Y. Huang, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3312–3318 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Goldman, B. R. Long, A. A. Gewirth and R. G. Nuzzo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 2412–2422 CrossRef CAS .
B. R. Long, M. K. Y. Chan, J. P. Greeley and A. A. Gewirth, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 18916–18921 CAS .
M. T. McDowell, S. W. Lee, C. Wang and Y. Cui, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 401–410 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-M. Chiang, Science, 2010, 333, 1485–1486 CrossRef .
L. Zhong, X. H. Liu, G. F. Wang, S. X. Mao and J. Y. Huang, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2011, 106(248302), 1–4 Search PubMed .
C. K. Chan, H. L. Peng, G. Liu, K. McIlwrath, X. F. Zhang, R. A. Huggins and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 31–35 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kang, H. S. Lee, D. W. Han, G. S. Kim, D. Lee, G. Lee, Y. M. Kang and M. H. Jo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96(053110), 1–3 Search PubMed .
D. E. Polk, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 1971, 5, 365–376 CrossRef CAS ; G. T. Barkena and N. Mousseau, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2000, 62, 4985–4990 CrossRef .
K. Laaziri, S. Kycia, S. Roorda, M. Chicoine, J. L. Robertson, J. Wang and S. C. Moss, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1999, 60, 13520–13533 CrossRef CAS .
S. Roorda, W. C. Sinke, J. M. Poate, D. C. Jacobson, S. Dierker, B. S. Dennis, D. J. Eaglesham, F. Spaepen and P. Fuoss, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1991, 44, 3702–3725 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, A. Smith, R. J. Sanderson, T. D. Hatchard, R. A. Dunlap and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, A283–A288 CrossRef CAS .
V. L. Chevrier and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, A454–A458 CrossRef CAS .
V. L. Chevrier, J. W. Zwanziger and J. R. Dahn, J. Alloys Compd., 2010, 496, 25–36 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Liu, Y. Liu, A. Kushima, S. Zhang, T. Zhu, J. Li and J. Y. Huang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 722–741 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Wang, Y. He, F. Fan, X. H. Liu, S. Xia, Y. Liu, C. T. Harris, H. Li, J. Y. Huang, S. X. Mao and T. Zhu, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 709–715 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. McDowell, S. W. Lee, J. T. Harris, B. A. Korgel, C. Wang, W. D. Nix and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 758–764 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ghassemi, M. Au, N. Chen, P. A. Heiden and R. S. Yassar, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 7805–7811 CrossRef CAS .
T. Takamura, S. Ohara, M. Uehara, J. Suzuki and K. Sekine, J. Power Sources, 2004, 129, 96–100 CrossRef CAS .
G. W. Zhou, H. Li, H. P. Sun, D. P. Yu, Y. Q. Wang, X. J. Huang, L. Q. Chen and Z. Zhang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1999, 75, 2447–2449 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, X. Huang, L. Chen, G. Zhou, Z. Zhang, D. Yu, Y. J. Mo and N. Pei, Solid State Ionics, 2000, 135, 181–191 CrossRef CAS .
B. Gao, S. Sinha, L. Fleming and O. Zhou, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 816–819 CrossRef CAS .
E. Peled, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1979, 126, 2047–2051 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Andersson, A. Henningson, H. Siegbahn, U. Jansson and K. Edström, J. Power Sources, 2003, 119–121, 522–527 CrossRef CAS .
K. Edström, M. Herstedt and D. P. Abraham, J. Power Sources, 2006, 153, 380–384 CrossRef .
D. Aurbach, J. Power Sources, 2000, 89, 206–218 CrossRef CAS .
See e.g.,   K.-C. Möller, H. J. Santner, W. Kern, S. Yamaguchi, J. O. Besenhard and M. Winter, J. Power Sources, 2003, 119–121, 561–566 CrossRef .
Y. M. Lee, J. Y. Lee, H.-T. Shim, J. K. Lee and J.-K. Park, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2007, 154, A515–A519 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-C. Yen, S.-C. Chao, H.-C. Wu and N.-L. Wu, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, A95–A102 CrossRef CAS .
N.-S. Choi, K. H. Yew, K. Y. Lee, M. Sung, H. Kim and S.-S. Kim, J. Power Sources, 2006, 161, 1254–1259 CrossRef CAS .
M. Winter and J. O. Besenhard, Electrochim. Acta, 1999, 45, 31–50 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wu, G. Chan, J. W. Choi, I. Ryu, Y. Yao, M. T. McDowell, S. W. Lee, A. Jackson, Y. Yang, L. Hu and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 310–315 CrossRef CAS .
S. F. Lux, I. T. Lucas, E. Pollak, S. Passerini, M. Winter and R. Kostecki, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 14, 47–50 CrossRef CAS .
H. T. Nguyen, M. R. Zamfir, L. D. Duong, Y. H. Lee, P. Bondavalli and D. Pribat, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 24618–24626 RSC .
A. M. Chockla, T. D. Bogart, C. M. Hessel, K. C. Klavetter, C. B. Mullins and B. A. Korgel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 18079–18086 CAS .
I. Kovalenko, B. Zdyrko, A. Magasinski, B. Hertzberg, Z. Milicev, R. Burtovyy, I. Luzinov and G. Yushin, Science, 2011, 334, 75–79 CrossRef CAS .
K. Peng, J. Jie, W. Zhang and S.-T. Lee, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93(033105), 1–3 Search PubMed .
B. M. Bang, H. Kim, H.-K. Song, J. Cho and S. Park, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 5013–5019 CAS .
M. Ge, J. Rong, X. Fang and C. Zhou, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2318–2323 CrossRef CAS .
B. M. Bang, H. Kim, J.-P. Lee, J. Cho and S. Park, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3395–3399 CAS .
R. L. Aggarwal, P. Fisher, V. Mourzine and A. K. Ramdas, Phys. Rev., 1965, 138, A882–A893 CrossRef .
R. K. Crouch and T. E. Gilmer, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 1969, 30, 2037–2043 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. McDowell and Y. Cui, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 894–900 CrossRef CAS .
L. Mai, Y. Dong, L. Xu and C. Han, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4273–4278 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Tritsaris, K. Zhao, O. U. Okeke and E. Kaxiras, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 22212–22216 CAS .
A. Gohier, B. Laïk, J.-P. Pereira-Ramos, C. S. Cojocaru and P. Tran-Van, J. Power Sources, 2012, 203, 135–139 CrossRef CAS .
L.-F. Cui, R. Ruffo, C. K. Chan, H. Peng and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 491–495 CrossRef CAS .
L.-F. Cui, Y. Yang, C.-M. Hsu and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3370–3374 CrossRef CAS .
G. K. Simona, B. Maruyamab, M. F. Durstockb, D. J. Burtonc and T. Goswamid, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 10254–10257 CrossRef .
W. Wang and P. N. Kumta, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2233–2241 CrossRef CAS .
K. Evanoff, J. Khan, A. A. Balandin, A. Magasinski, W. J. Ready, T. F. Fuller and G. Yushin, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 533–537 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gohier, B. Laïk, K.-H. Kim, J.-L. Maurice, J.-P. Pereira-Ramos, C. S. Cojocaru and P. Tran Van, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2592–2597 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fan, Q. Zhang, C. Lu, Q. Xiao, X. Wang and B. k. Tay, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 1503–1506 RSC .
Y. Liu, H. Zheng, X. H. Liu, S. Huang, T. Zhu, J. Wang, A. Kushima, N. S. Hudak, X. Huang, S. Zhang, S. X. Mao, X. Qian, J. Li and J. Y. Huang, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 7245–7253 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, K. Gerasopoulos, J. Guo, A. Brown, C. Wang, R. Ghodssi and J. N. Culver, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5366–5372 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kang, K. Song, H. Heo, S. Yoo, G.-S. Kim, G. Lee, Y.-M. Kang and M.-H. Jo, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 1090–1093 RSC .
J. Xie, X. G. Yang, S. Zhou and D. W. Wang, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 9225–9231 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, K. Gerasopoulos, J. Guo, A. Brown, C. Wang, R. Ghodssi and J. N. Culver, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 380–387 CrossRef CAS .
N. Ravet, Y. Chouinard, J. F. Magnan, S. Besner, M. Gauthier and M. Armand, J. Power Sources, 2001, 97–98, 503–507 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yoshio, H. Wang, K. Fukuda, T. Umeno, N. Dimov and Z. Ogumi, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2002, 149, A1598–A1603 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kim and J. Cho, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3688–3691 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, Z. Dong, Y. Fu and Y. Yang, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2010, 14, 1829–1834 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Chockla, J. T. Harris, V. A. Akhavan, T. D. Bogart, V. C. Holmberg, C. Steinhagen, C. B. Mullins, K. J. Stevenson and B. A. Korgel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 20914–20921 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yao, N. Liu, M. T. McDowell, M. Pasta and Y. Cui, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7927–7930 CAS .
V. A. Sethuraman, K. Kowolik and V. Srinivasan, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 393–398 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, Y. Xiao, L. Wang and Y. Yang, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 6657–6662 CrossRef CAS .
E. L. Memarzadeh, W. P. Kalisvaart, A. Kohandehghan, B. Zahiri, C. M. B. Holta and D. Mitlin, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 6655–6668 RSC .
A. Kohandehghan, P. Kalisvaart, M. Kupsta, B. Zahiri, B. S. Amirkhiz, Z. Li, E. L. Memarzadeh, L. A. Bendersky and D. Mitlin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 1600–1612 CAS .
Y. Hamon, T. Brousse, F. Jousse, P. Topart, P. Buvat and D. M. Schleich, J. Power Sources, 2001, 97–98, 185–187 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Shia, M. Liua, D. Naikb and J. L. Gole, J. Power Sources, 2001, 92, 70–80 CrossRef .
C. Li, H. P. Zhang, L. J. Fu, H. Liu, Y. P. Wu, E. Rahm, R. Holze and H. Q. Wu, Electrochim. Acta, 2006, 51, 3872–3883 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xiao, P. Lu and D. Ahn, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3911–3915 CrossRef CAS .
Y. He, X. Yu, Y. Wang, H. Li and X. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4938–4941 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, N. S. Hudak, D. L. Huber, S. J. Limmer, J. P. Sullivan and J. Y. Huang, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4188–4194 CrossRef CAS .
L. Nyholm, G. Nyström, A. Mihranyan and M. Strømme, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3751–3769 CAS .
S.-L. Chou, Y. Zhao, J.-Z. Wang, Z.-X. Chen, H.-K. Liu and S.-X. Dou, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 15862–15867 CAS .
For a simple fabrication process of CNT paper (also called buckypaper), see   D. Wang, P. Song, C. Liu, W. Wu and S. Fan, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19(075609), 1–6 Search PubMed .
X. Li, J.-H. Cho, N. Li, Y. Zhang, D. Williams, S. A. Dayeh and S. T. Picraux, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 87–93 CrossRef CAS .
C. K. Chan, R. N. Patel, M. J. O'Connell, B. A. Korgel and Y. Cui, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1443–1450 CrossRef CAS .
Graphene is a one atom-thick layer of sp2-bonded carbon atoms. See,   A. Geim and K. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183–188 CrossRef CAS  . Graphene films can be grown in large area (∼30 inch diagonal) by roll-to-roll processes:   S. Bae, H. Kim, Y. Lee, X. Xu, J.-S. Park, Y. Zheng, J. Balakrishnan, T. Lei, H. R. Kim, Y. I. Song, Y.-J. Kim, K. S. Kim, B. Özyilmaz, J.-H. Ahn, B. H. Hong and S. Iijima, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 574–580 CrossRef .
See e.g.,   R. S. Edwards and K. S. Coleman, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 23–30 CrossRef CAS .
S. Park and R. S. Ruoff, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 217–224 CrossRef CAS .
W. S. Hummers and R. E. Offeman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1958, 80, 1339 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Becerril, J. Mao, Z. Liu, R. M. Stoltenberg, Z. Bao and Y. Chen, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 463–470 CrossRef CAS .
S. Stankovich, D. A. Dikin, R. D. Piner, K. A. Kohlhaas, A. Kleinhammes, Y. Jia, Y. Wu, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Carbon, 2007, 45, 1558–1565 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Bunch, S. S. Verbridge, J. S. Alden, A. M. van der Zande, J. M. Parpia, H. G. Craighead and P. L. McEuen, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2458–2462 CrossRef CAS .
S.-L. Chou, J.-Z. Wang, M. Choucair, H.-K. Liu, J. A. Stride and S.-X. Dou, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 303–306 CrossRef CAS .
J.-Z. Wang, C. Zhong, S.-L. Chou and H.-K. Liu, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 1467–1470 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao, C. M. Hayner, M. C. Kung and H. H. Kung, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 1079–1084 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xiang, K. Zhang, G. Ji, J. Y. Lee, C. Zou, X. Chen and J. Wu, Carbon, 2011, 49, 1787–1796 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Cho, H. S. Kim, H. Im, Y. Myung, G. B. Jung, C. W. Lee, J. Park, M.-H. Park, J. Cho and H. S. Kang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 9451–9457 CAS .
T. Yoon, M. Cho, Y.-W. Suh, E.-S. Oh and J. K. Lee, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2011, 11, 10193–10200 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhou, Y.-X. Yin, L.-J. Wan and Y.-G. Guo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 1086–1090 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, X. Li, B. Luo, Y. Jia and L. Zhi, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 1470–1474 RSC .
B. Wang, X. Li, X. Zhang, B. Luo, M. Jin, M. Liang, S. A. Dayeh, S. T. Picraux and L. Zhi, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 1437–1445 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wen, Y. Zhu, A. Langrock, A. Manivannan, S. H. Ehrman and C. Wang, Small, 2013 DOI:10.1002/smll.201202512  , to be published.
M. Zhou, T. Cai, F. Pu, H. Chen, Z. Wang, H. Zhang and S. Guan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 3449–3455 CAS .
M.-H. Park, M. G. Kim, J. Joo, K. Kim, J. Kim, S. Ahn, Y. Cui and J. Cho, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3844–3847 CrossRef CAS .
T. Song, J. Xia, J.-H. Lee, D. H. Lee, M.-S. Kwon, J.-M. Choi, J. Wu, S. K. Doo, H. Chang, W. I. Park, D. S. Zang, H. Kim, Y. Huang, K.-C. Hwang, J. A. Rogers and U. Paik, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1710–1716 CrossRef CAS .
D. Mazouri, B. Lestriez, L. Roue and D. Guyomard, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2009, 12, A215–A218 CrossRef .
H. Kim, M. Seo, M.-H. Park and J. Cho, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 2146–2149 CrossRef CAS .
N. Liu, H. Wu, M. T. McDowell, Y. Yao, C. Wang and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3315–3321 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Temperature gradients and their effects on the VLS growth process. (a–d) A hot plate furnace (cold wall reactor) induces bending of the Si NWs during growth because of a negative thermal gradient above the substrate. (e–h) In a hot wall reactor, Si NWs grow straight because the thermal gradient above the substrate is positive.	 

 	Fig. 2  Metal-assisted chemical etching (MaCE) of Si. (a) Schematics of the 2-step MaCE mechanism; (i) precipitation of an Ag nanoparticle and Si oxidation under it in a first AgNO3-based bath, (ii) details of the Ag-assisted oxidation and etching of Si in a second H2O2 + HF bath, (iii) continuous etching leaves pillars (i.e., NWs) in-between nanoholes. (b) SEM cross-sectional view of a Si NW array synthesized by a 2-step metal-assisted wet chemical etching of a (100)-oriented, p-doped Si wafer. The second etching step in H2O2 + HF was interrupted and started again after rinsing in order to induce an easy fracture plane, which is highlighted by the white dotted line. (c–e) TEM pictures showing the structure of one p-doped Si NW obtained by the MaCE process. Note the high porosity of the NW, particularly in the enlarged view of (e).	 

 	Fig. 3  Galvanostatic and cyclic voltammetry curves recorded on arrays of crystalline Si NWs grown by Cu-catalyzed VLS and mounted in half-cell geometry with a Li counter electrode. (a) The first galvanostatic cycle, showing a gently sloping plateau, starting at around 100 mV and corresponding to the equilibrium between c-Si and a-Li3.5Si (black curve, left-hand side). At the end of lithiation, when the voltage approaches 0 V, c-Si has totally disappeared and transformed to a-Li3.75Si that may suddenly crystallize into the c-Li15Si4 phase, depending on NW conductivity as well as on other parameters not clearly identified yet. Delithiation (black curve, right-hand side) produces a steep rise in potential, followed by a plateau at ∼430 mV, which corresponds to an equilibrium between c-Li15Si4 (or a-Li3.75Si) and a-Li2Si. At the end of the delithiation step, when Li is totally extracted from the alloy, Si is left amorphous. The atomic structures of the various elements or alloys corresponding to particular alloying states have been constructed with the Crystal Maker software. (b) The three first galvanostatic curves of the Si NW array emphasizing the difference in lithiation behavior between the first cycle (c-Si, black curve) and the following ones (a-Si, red and blue curves). The 1st lithiation curve is of course identical to the one in (a), whereas the 2nd and 3rd lithiation curves show the 2 sloping plateaus which are typical of a-Si lithiation. Upon delithiation, the 3 curves are similar. The inset shows the 2 first cyclic voltammetry curves recorded on similar Si NW arrays. There is a single sharp peak for the first lithiation (black curve, peak marked as “1”) corresponding to the one step, 2-phase lithiation of c-Si. Note that since the NWs are undoped, there is no peak corresponding to the crystallization of Li15Si4, which should occur below 80 mV (see discussion in Section 3 of the text). The second lithiation produces 2 peaks (red curve, peaks marked as “1” and “1-a”), corresponding to the 2-step lithiation of a-Si. Upon delithiation, the curves for the first and second cycle are qualitatively similar, exhibiting 2 peaks (labeled 2 and 3) at approximately the same voltage.	 

 	Fig. 4  Similarities of the two-phase lithiation mechanism in c-Si and a-Si. (a) HRTEM image showing the sharp phase boundary between c-Si and a-Li3.5Si. (b) A snapshot from molecular dynamics simulation showing the atomic structures near the amorphous–crystalline boundary. (c) The high Li concentration (red atoms) at the amorphous–crystalline boundary softens the Si–Si covalent bonds, facilitating the peeling of Si atoms (blue) from the c-Si surface. (d) HRTEM image showing the sharp boundary between a-Si and a-Li2.5Si (corresponding to the first sloping plateau of the galvanostatic lithiation curve of a-Si, see Fig. 3(b), red curve). (e) A snapshot from molecular dynamics simulation showing the atomic structures near the a-Si–a-Li2.5Si interface. The a-Si consists of a continuous random network of Si atoms. (f) Schematics of the model for the formation of a-Li2.5Si at the interface with a-Si. Here again, the concentration of Li at the interface is high, facilitating Si–Si bond breaking. Reprinted with permission from Wang et al., ref. 87. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society.	 
First full lithiation (of c-Si)	


First delithiation	


Second full lithiation	


Second delithiation	



 	Fig. 5  High resolution TEM images of Si NWs before and after the first lithiation. (a) A pristine NW that grew along the [112] direction. The inset shows an electron diffraction pattern typical of twinned monocrystalline Si. (b) HRTEM image of a fully lithiated, highly phosphorus-doped NW, showing small crystalline grains which we assign to the c-Li15Si4 phase. The inset shows a low magnification view of the NW, which exhibits a rough surface, due to electrolyte decomposition products; bar chart = 200 nm. The NW has not been cleaned after lithiation (only quickly rinsed with acetonitrile). (c) The corresponding electron diffraction pattern can be indexed with c-Li15Si4 (red) and LiF (blue) diffraction features. LiF can be unambiguously distinguished from Li15Si4 through the (111) diffraction dots (full blue circle). (d) HRTEM image of a fully lithiated, undoped NW showing no crystalline phase; the picture was taken away from the core. The inset is a lower magnification view of 2 NWs, showing a clear contrast between the core (unlithiated) and outer region of the NWs; bar chart = 200 nm. Also note that the surface of the NWs is smoother, indicating that less electrolyte decomposition products are present on the surface. (e) The corresponding electron diffraction pattern shows amorphous rings, as well as dots originating from the remaining unlithiated monocrystalline c-Si core.	 

 	Fig. 6  Maximum C rate (blue curve) and average Si loading mass on the anode (black dotted curve) as a function of Si NW diameter. The NWs were grown interconnected by VLS-PECVD at 475 °C, using Au as a catalyst (ref. 33). The SEM pictures show top views of some of the NWs; the scale bar in each picture represents 400 nm.	 




Grown	VLS-CVD	89 ± 45	No	0–2	4277	3124	73	C/20	1 C	20	C/5	3500	
78

Grown	SFLS	60	No	0–1	3172	2660	84	C/20	2 C	100	C/20	1815	
106

Etched	MaCE	
	No	0–1.2	2660	2410	91	C/10	3 C	70	C/5	≈2400	
109

Etched	MaCE	≈200	P-type	0–2	3354	3038	91	C/10	2.4 C	200	C/2	>1960	
110

Etched	MaCE	80–100	Low P-type	0–1.5	3290	2560	78	C/10	C/5	20	C/10	1080	
111

50	C/10	530
High P-type	0–1.5	
	
	98	
	C/5	50	C/10	1450
Grown	VLS HF-CVD	65	
	0.02–3	5698	3720	
	C/10	5 C	50	1.3 C	2670	
117

210	3678	2593	
	
	
	

490	3681	1806	
	
	
	





CVD Si NWs	
	a-Si CVD	
	0.01–2	
	
	
	98	1.6	30	0.2 C	
	
118


	0.15–2	
	
	
	98	100	0.2 C	1060

	0.15–2	
	
	
	99.2–99.9	5/95	0.1 C/0.8 C	860

	0.15–2	
	
	
	99.3–99.9	5/95	0.1 C/1.6 C	≈800
CNF	
	a-Si CVD	
	0.01–1	
	
	
	98–99.5	1 C	30	C/5	≈2000	
119

25	>1650

	0.1–1	
	
	
	98–99.6	2	C/15	1700
45	C/5	1300
10	C/15	1600

	0.1–1	
	
	
	NS	5	C/5	NS
60	1 C	800
15	C/5	1300
CNF	
	Si CVD	
	
	1787	1045	25 mA g−1	
	
	20	50 mA g−1	766	
120


	
	1956	954	50 mA g−1	
	

CVD grown CNTs	40–50	Si clusters CVD	
	0.02–1.2	2552	2049	C/10	80.3	2.5 C	100	C/10	≈1000	
121

LPCVD VACNTs	
	LPCVD a-Si + thin C	70	0.01–1	
	
	
	
	
	250	C/5	3300	
122

C/2	2000
CVD VACNTs	5–10	CVD-Si nanoparticles	10–20	0.02–3	1616	1400	10 C	87	15 C	3	1.3 C	800	
123

97	10 C
PECVD VACNTs	150	PECVD-Si	
	0–1.2	
	
	
	99	12 C	80	0.2 C	2510	
124

TMV1 + Ni(CD)	18	Si (PVD)	≈300	0–1.5	
	
	
	
	4 C	340	1 C	1000	
126

120	2 C
75	4 C
PECVD NiSi NWs	
	a-Si PECVD	≈50	0–2	
	
	
	
	
	520	4.2 A g−1	1200	
105

a-Si PECVD + Al2O3	≈50	0–2	
	
	
	≈100	5 C	5/90	C/20/C/4	3500/3000

	
	
	750	4.2 A g−1	1200

	
	
	1280	1.2 A g−1	1200
CVD NiSi NWs	20	a-Si CVD	190	0.01–2	
	
	
	
	2 C	50	0.1 C	3000	
127

CVD TiSi2 nanonet	15–20	Si particles CVD	20–30	0.15–2	
	
	
	97.9–99.3	5 C	100	2 C	1310	
128

CVD TiSi2 NWs	Si particles CVD	
	
	
	
	100	2 C	1008
TMV1 + Ni	Ni ≈ 50	Si electrodep.	≈80	0–1.5	
	
	
	99.5	4 C	173	0.25 C	1200	
129





Si NWs	Electroless deposition in templates	6.5 nm	Carbon	0–1.5	3664	3163	0.2 C	86	3 C	80	0.2 C	2738	
132

Si NWs	VLS-CVD	
	Carbon evaporated	0.02–2	3701.8	3081.6	C/20	83.2–>95	1 C	30	C/20	2150	
133

Si NWs	VLS-CVD	
	
	0.02–2	3125.1	2170.8	C/20	69.5–>95	C/2	15	C/20	1992.1
Si NWs fabric	SFLS	10–50 nm	Carbonaceous layer	0.01–3	1485	C/20	
	
	20	C/20	804	
134

Si NWs	VLS-CVD	≈100 nm	PEDOT	0.01–1	3850	3445	C/10	89	
	100	C/5	2510	
135

Si NWs	VLS-CVD	
	0.02–2	3125	2171	C/20	69.5	C/2	30	C/20	1582	
137

30	C/10	1493
30	C/2	1360
Carbon	3702	3082	83.2	30	C/20	2180
30	C/10	2094
30	C/2	2169
Copper	2967	2679	90.3	30	C/20	2138
30	C/10	2050
30	C/2	2216
Si NWs/SS	VLS-CVD	100 nm	
	0.01–2	3050	2571	C/10	84.3	
	
	
	
	
138

Si NWs/TiN	
	105 nm	
	3581	3307	93.1	
	100	C/10	1090

	
	
	Aluminum various thicknesses	2832–3400	2597–3185	92–93.9	
	100	
	785–1292
Si NWs	VLS-LPCVD	114	
	0.01–2	3576	C/10	92	
	
	
	
	
139


	
	
	Magnesium various thicknesses	3030–3338	
	93–95.8	5 C	100	C/10	850–1000
Core–shell NiSi NWs/a-Si	PECVD	
	
	0–2	
	
	
	
	
	520	4.2 A g−1	1200	
105


	Al2O3ALD (9 nm)	0–2	≈100	5 C	5	C/20	3500

	
	
	90	C/4	3000

	
	
	750	4.2 A g−1	1200

	
	
	1280	1.2 A g−1	1200

 	Fig. 7  Schematic of the fabrication (upper panel) and adapting (lower panel) of Si NWs first wrapped in a graphene-like film and then embedded in RGO sheets. The fabrication process mainly includes (I) chemical vapor deposition (CVD) growth of graphene sheets on as-synthesized Si NWs to form SiNW@G nanocables, and (II) vacuum filtration of an aqueous SiNW@G–graphene oxide (GO) dispersion followed by thermal reduction. The resulting SiNW@G@RGO can transform between an expanded state and a contracted state during lithiation–delithiation cycles, thus enabling the stabilization of the silicon material. Reprinted with permission from Wang et al., ref. 166. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society.	 




Si nanoworms 2.2%	PLD	SWCNT paper	0.01–2	2628	
	25 mA g−1	16	50	25 mA g−1	163	
147

Si nanoworms 11.0%	1668	
	
	
	50	25 mA g−1	189
Si NWs	VLS CVD	CNT array	
	
	
	
	86.3–98.5	24	C/20	3050	
149

Si NWs	SFLS	MWCNT	0.01–2.5	4250	
	C/20	
	30	C/20	1500	
150

Si NWs	VLS CVD	RGO	0.002–2	1650	
	840 mA g−1	50–98	50	840 mA g−1	≈1650	
166


	
	
	
	100	2.1 A g−1	≈80% × 1600
Si NWs	MaCE	Graphitic layer 20 nm	0.01–1	1390	
	600 mA g−1	95	45	600 mA g−1	800	
162

50 nm	2100	
	
	89	1040
Doped graphitic layer 20 nm	1950	
	
	85	1090
50 nm	
	2140	
	
	92	
	
	1260
Si NWs	VLS CVD	RGO	0–2	3350	
	
	72–95	20	C/5	3350	
165


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
