Physical processes-aided periodic micro/nanostructured arrays by colloidal template technique: fabrication and applications  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3CS35482B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3CS35482B
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 3614-3627Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsPhysical processes-aided periodic micro/nanostructured arrays by colloidal template technique: fabrication and applications

        
          
            Yue 
            Li
          
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Guotao 
            Duan
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Guangqiang 
            Liu
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Weiping 
            Cai
          
          
        
      *
      Key Laboratory of Materials Physics, Anhui Key Laboratory of Nanomaterials and Nanotechnology, Institute of Solid State Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hefei, 230031, Anhui, China. E-mail: yueli@issp.ac.cn; wpcai@issp.ac.cn
Received 
      27th November 2012
    First published on 12th February 2013AbstractIt has been proven that the use of colloidal templates is a facile, flexible strategy to create the periodic micro/nanostructured arrays in comparison with photolithography, electron beam lithography etc. Utilizing colloidal monolayers as templates or masks, different periodic micro/nanostructured arrays including nanoparticle arrays, pore arrays, nanoring arrays and nanorod/nanotube arrays can be fabricated by chemical and physical processes. Chemical routes, including direct solution/sol dipping strategy, wet chemical etching, electrodeposition, electrophoretic deposition etc. have advantages of simple operation and low costs. However, they have some disadvantages of impurities on surface of arrays due to incomplete decomposition of precursors, residue of surfactants in self-assembling or electrochemical deposition. More importantly, it is quite difficult to achieve very uniform morphology of micro/nanostructure arrays on a large-area by the above routes. Whereas another method, a physical route (for instance: reactive ion etching, pulsed laser deposition, thermal evaporation deposition, atomic layer deposition, sputtering deposition), combining with colloidal monolayer template can well resolve these problems. In this review, we focus on introducing the recent progress in creating micro/nanostructured arrays based on colloidal templates with physical routes. The parameters of the microstructure or nanostructure can be tuned by colloidal templates with different periodicity and experimental conditions of the physical processes. The applications of micro/nanostructured arrays with controllable morphology and arrangement parameters in self-cleaning surfaces, enhanced catalytic properties, field emitters etc. are also presented in the following sections.
Yue Li
Yue Li received his PhD in Condensed Matter Physics at the Institute of Solid State Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS) in 2005. He worked as a Postdoctoral Fellow or Visiting Scientist in the Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), and Max Planck Institute of Colloids and Interfaces, respectively, after he got his PhD degree. He is a professor in Institute of Solid State Physics, CAS since 2011. His research interests mainly focus on the fabrications, applications and devices of micro/nano-structured arrays based on the colloidal monolayer template techniques.
Guotao Duan
Guotao Duan received his PhD in 2007 from the Institute of Solid State of Physics, CAS under the supervision of Prof. Weiping Cai. Then, he worked in Institute of Solid State Physics in CAS after obtaining PhD. From Apr. 2009 to Mar. 2010, he did postdoctoral work with Prof. Kazuaki Sakoda in the National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS) in Japan. His current research interests focus on micro/nanofabrication, ordered micro/nanostructured arrays, and micro/nanodevices.
Guangqiang Liu
Guangqiang Liu received his PhD degree in 2008 at the Institute of Solid State of Physics, CAS. His doctoral work dealt with the study of assemblies of noble metal nanoplates directly on the substrate in CAS and National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS) in Japan. He has been working in the Institute of Solid State of Physics, CAS since 2012. His research interests: fabrication of noble metal micro/nano-structured arrays, SERS effect and the application, plasmon engineering for NIR-SERS and detection devices.
Weiping Cai
Weiping Cai received B.S. and M.S. degrees in Materials Sciences from Northeast University in 1982 and 1984, respectively, In 1997, he obtained a PhD from Huazhong University of Science & Technology in Materials Sciences. Since 1997, he has been a professor at the Institute of solid State Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences. His research interests include micro/nanostructured patterns and detection devices, nanomaterials for environmental applications.
1. Introduction
Periodic micro/nanostructured arrays have attracted much interest due to their wide applications in enhanced wettability, surface enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS), photocatalysis, field emission, photonic crystals, microfluidic devices, electrochemical devices, etc.1–5 Their properties are morphology- and arrangement-parameter dependent, and hence the creation of micro/nanostructured arrays with controlled morphologies and structures becomes more important on a large scale. The most widely used techniques are conventional lithography, including photolithography, electron beam lithography, scanning tunneling microscopic and atomic force microscopic lithography etc.6–8 Photolithography has the disadvantage of low resolution due to its diffraction-limited resolution, ca. λ/2 (λ is the photowavelength) and hence it cannot be widely used in nanostructural fabrication.6 Other lithographic routes such as electron beam lithography, scanning tunneling microscopy, and atomic force microscopic lithography, have advantages in preparing micro/nanostructured arrays with high quality, however, they cannot be afforded by most laboratories owing to their high costs and small sample size throughout. Besides lithography, the anodic aluminum oxide (AAO) templates are often applied to fabricate micro/nanostructured arrays (for instance, nanowire/nanotube arrays or nanoparticle arrays).9–11 This method has advantages of cheapness, high aspect ratio, and good repetition, however, the AAO templates are very limited in structural parameter tenability, being very brittle in the operating process. Additionally, the one dimensional (1D) nanowire or nanotube arrays obtained by AAO always need supporting by these templates. If the templates are removed, these 1D nanostructured units will aggregate with each other, even collapsing due to no support, which seriously restricts the further application of such periodic 1D nanostructured arrays in nanodevices. Besides, the figure breath method, i.e., a kind of strategy to create periodic arrays using self-assembling water droplet as template, is mainly used to fabricate the periodic polymer porous arrays with pore sizes larger than 500 nm due to the feature of this method.12
Recently, another conventional lithography, colloidal lithography has been well developed to fabricate periodic micro/nanostructured arrays. In the past decades, with the development of the colloidal science and self-assembling technique, scientists can prepare monolayer colloidal crystals (or called colloidal monolayers) with large areas using highly monodispersed colloidal spheres (polystyrene, silica, PMMA etc.) with a small size deviation of less than 5%.13,14 The monolayer colloidal crystals are monolayered colloidal microsphere arrays with hexagonal-close-packed (hcp) arrangement obtained by self-assembling process. Such an hcp colloidal monolayer can also be tuned to a hexagonal-non-close-packed (hncp) one by further reactive ion etching due to a reducing colloidal sphere size in situ and increase in the void interspaces among the spheres.15
These colloidal monolayers with hcp or hncp arrangement can act as natural diffraction gratings or microlens arrays. Moreover, they can be used as a flexible template to create periodic micro/nanostructured arrays with different morphologies, such as nanoparticle arrays, nanohole arrays, nanopore arrays, nanobowl arrays or nanoring arrays by using various methods after the removal of colloidal spheres by suitable solvents (for instance, PS: dichloromethane, toluene), mechanical methods (ultrasonic treatment or peeling off by tape).16–20 The different approaches combining with the colloidal monolayer template can be roughly divided into chemical routes and physical ones.21–27 Chemical routes, for instance direct solution/sol dipping strategy, wet chemical etching, electrodeposition and electrophoretic deposition, possess advantages of simple operation and low costs. However, they also have some disadvantages of impurities on surface of arrays, due to incomplete decomposition of precursors, and residue of surfactants in self-assembling or electrochemical deposition. It is quite difficult to achieve micro/nanostructure arrays with very uniform morphology on a large-area by the above routes. Whereas, physical routes, combining with a colloidal monolayer template, for example reactive ion etching, pulsed laser deposition, thermal evaporation deposition, atomic layer deposition or sputtering deposition, could well resolve these problems. The parameters of the microstructure or nanostructure can be tuned by the colloidal templates with different periodicity and experimental conditions of physical deposition. In this review, we focus on an introduction of the recent progresses in the creation of micro/nanostructured arrays with controllable morphology and arrangement parameters based on colloidal templates with physical processes, and their applications, mainly including (1) direct colloidal monolayer template strategies to fabricate micro/nanostructured arrays combining with physical processes such as thermal evaporation deposition, e-beam evaporation, sputtering, pulsed laser deposition (PLD), atomic layer deposition (ALD), reactive ion etching, and electron irradiation; (2) indirect colloidal monolayer template strategies to create periodic arrays combining with shadow effect deposition as well as catalytic growth and reactive ion etching on the basis of nanoparticle arrays obtained by colloidal monolayer; (3) applications and devices using micro/nanostructured arrays obtained by physical processes combining with colloidal templates.
2. Direct colloidal monolayer template strategies
Colloidal monolayers can be directly used as a template to prepare periodic micro/nanostructured arrays including nanoparticle arrays, nanowell arrays, pore arrays and nanorod arrays, by combining with thermal evaporation, electron beam (e-beam) evaporation, sputtering, pulsed laser deposition, reactive ion etching and electron irradiation etc.
2.1 Thermal evaporation deposition
Usually, thermal evaporation deposition is suitable for metals due to their relatively low melting points compared with those of metal oxides. Additionally, there is a very high vacuum in the chambers of thermal evaporation, and evaporated atoms or molecules from the targets can keep line-of-sight deposition on the substrates due to almost no other gas molecules colliding with them. For instance most metals with low melting points, such as Au, Ag, Cu, Pd, Pt, Ni, Fe, Co et al., can be deposited by thermal evaporation deposition. By this route, the different ordered nanostructured arrays including nanoparticle, nanochain, nanogap, and nanoring arrays could be achieved based on colloidal monolayer masks by controlling the experimental parameters, i.e. an angle (θ) between the normal direction of the substrate with colloidal monolayer and the deposition direction, rotation (ω) of substrate, as demonstrated in Scheme 1.28–32 For instance, if the deposition direction is along the normal of colloidal monolayer on substrate (θ = 0°), the evaporated atoms or molecules will pass through the interstice among three close neighboring colloidal spheres straight to substrates and a triangle in-plane shaped nanoparticle will further be formed. After removal of colloidal monolayer mask, a periodic nanoparticle array with p6mm symmetry could be obtained as shown in Fig. 1a, which is consistent with the interstice array in the colloidal monolayer.28,29 In this route, the nanoparticle sizes are mainly controlled by the periodicity of monolayered colloidal crystal masks and deposition time. The spacing between the neighboring nanoparticles is determined by colloidal monolayer periodicity. Based on their previous work, P. R. Van Duyne et al. developed an interesting angle-resolved nanosphere lithographic (AR NSL) technique to fabricate more complex nanoparticle arrays with nanooverlapping (Fig. 1b), nanochain (Fig. 1d), nanocontact and nanogap (Fig. 1c) structures.29 In this route, the rotation (ω) of the substrate is kept at 0 rpm, and the angles (θ) between the normal of substrate and the propagation vector of evaporated materials from targets are stepwise controlled for multiple deposition.24 D. Y. Wang and G. Zhang further developed a heterogeneous (bimetal of Au and Ag) binary array of particles by stepwise deposition based on a colloidal mask.30 Interestingly, M. Giersig et al. found that, if the deposition direction is not along the normal of the colloidal mask on the substrate but at an angle θ ranging from 15° to 25°, and additionally the substrate with the colloidal mask can continuously rotate (ω keeps a certain value), periodic nanoring arrays will be formed (Fig. 1e),31 and if the rotation of substrate is incomplete, splitting nanoring arrays will be obtained, as shown in Fig. 1f.32
 Scheme 1  Illustration of thermal evaporation deposition under colloidal monolayer mask. Herein θ: angle between normal direction of substrate with colloidal monolayer and deposition direction; ω: rotation of substrate. 
 Fig. 1  Images of periodic nanostructure arrays using colloidal monolayers as masks by thermal evaporation. (a–d): atomic force microscopic (AFM) images, (e,f): field emission scanning electronic microscopic (FESEM) images.31 (a): Au nanoparticle array by thermal evaporation, θ = 0°.28 (b–d): Ag complex nanoparticle arrays by AR NSL with multiple deposition.29 (b): Nanooverlapping array, θ1 = 0°, θ2 = 17.5° (c): Nanogap array, θ1 = 0°, θ2 = 30°. (d): Nanochain array, θ1 = 0°, θ2 = 15°, θ3 = 15°. (Here θn means the different θ value in the nth deposition.) (e): Ag nanoring array, θ = 20°, continuous rotation of substrate; (f): Ag splitting nanoring array, θ = 20°, incomplete rotation of substrate. 
2.2 Electron-beam evaporation deposition
In the electron-beam (e-beam) evaporation deposition process, the target is bombarded by an electron beam with high energy and the atomic gaseous phase is formed. These atoms then deposit onto desired substrates within line of sight under a high vacuum in the chamber. This method can deposit the most metals (Au, Ag, Pd, et al.) and semiconductors or ceramics (ZnO, ZnS, TiO2, Al2O3et al.) with a relatively high deposition rate and at a low substrate temperature. Due to sight-lined movement of evaporated atoms, the colloidal monolayer can also be used as a mask to fabricate the periodic array by e-beam evaporation deposition,33,34 as for thermal evaporation deposition. Besides the periodic nanoparticle arrays, the special column nanostructured arrays can also be fabricated by glancing angle deposition (GLAD) based on e-beam evaporation using colloidal monolayers as substrates. So-called GLAD is a material deposition process where there exists a very large incident angle (θ) between the deposition flux and the surface normal and the substrate rotation.35–37 GLAD can form columnar structured arrays due to shadowing effect during film growth, and the shape of the columns is controlled by substrate rotation. Y.-P. Zhao et al. created the amorphous Si vertical nanocolumn arrays and square spiral arrays on the monolayer colloidal substrates by controlling θ and the rotation of the substrates, as illustrated in Fig. 2.37 They found that the diameter of the Si nanocolumn can be well controlled by changing the size of the colloidal microsphere compared to one obtained on a bare substrate without using a colloidal monolayer in the deposition process. The periodic vertical nanocolumn arrays were obtained with a θ of 85° as well as a constant rotational speed of the substrate during deposition, and the square spiral ones were achieved by keeping the same θ and changing the rotational speed at intervals.
 Fig. 2  Cross-sections of periodic Si nanocolumn arrays by e-beam evaporation assisted GLAD on the colloidal monolayer substrate.37 (a) Vertical nanocolumn arrays, PS sphere size: 89 nm; θ: 85°; the rotational speed of substrate: 0.0019 rev s−1. (b) Square spiral arrays, PS sphere size: 830 nm; θ: 85°; the rotational speed of substrate: changing rotation at intervals. 
2.3 Sputtering deposition
In the sputtering process, an inert gas such as argon is usually introduced into a vacuum chamber to create gaseous plasma with relatively higher gas pressure. The accelerated ions from this plasma will bombard the target material to produce neutral particles including individual atoms, clusters of atoms or molecules via energy transfer. Sputtering deposition can be applied for the deposition of metals (Au Ag, Pt, Ta et al.) and semiconductors or ceramics (Si, ZnO, CuO, Fe2O3, Al2O3et al.). Most of these particles often collide with other gas molecules existing in the chamber to change their movement path, and hence it is difficult to keep them in sight-line motion from the target to substrate in the chamber. Therefore the sputtering deposition is usually not suitable for fabrication of the periodic nanoparticle arrays using colloidal monolayers as masks. However, some other ordered structured arrays can be obtained by direct deposition of materials on colloidal monolayer substrates.
N. Koshizaki et al. developed a route to prepare unique hncp alumina hierarchical micro/nanostructured array via magnetron sputtering deposition using a PS colloidal monolayer as the substrate and Ar as the background gas at room temperature, as demonstrated in Fig. 3a and b.38 The columned unit is cushioned by a semi-shell, which is composed of a semishell-shaped cushion at the bottom and a vertical column on the top of the cushion. It possesses a very rough surface and consists of many nanocolumns. Therefore this periodic array possesses a hierarchical, porous structure and a high surface area. They also investigated the formation of such periodic arrays by tracing the morphological evolution of hierarchical arrays with the sputtering deposition time, and found that such special hierarchical arrays are induced by PS-templated plasma etching/sputtering deposition at the same time. D. Gall and C. M. Zhou prepared Ta nanocolumn arrays by colloidal monolayer assisted GLAD via sputtering. Each column is composed of crystalline nanobranches (Fig. 3c).39 D. Gall and C. M. Zhou further developed a conventional GLAD technique for simultaneous opposite glancing-angle deposition (SO-GLAD) to fabricate the two component nanorod arrays using colloidal monolayers as substrates.40 In the SO-GLAD process, two different materials are deposited simultaneously from incident angles on opposite sides onto the colloidal monolayer. Atomic shadowing effect results in selective deposition only on the side exposed to the deposition flux, leading to nanorods composed of two laterally separated components (Fig. 3d).41
 Fig. 3  FE-SEM (a, c) and TEM (b, d) images of the arrays obtained by sputtering using a PS colloidal monolayer as the substrate. (a) Hierarchical alumina ordered arrays.38 (b) A unit in image (a).38 (c) The Ta nanocolumn array on an SiO2 colloidal monolayer formed at 200 °C, θ: 84°, the rotational speed of substrate: 60 rpm.39 The arrows indicate column branching into subcolumns and the circle highlights a surface protrusion. (d) The two component array of Si–Ta.40 
2.4 Pulsed laser deposition (PLD)
In the PLD process, high power pulsed lasers are used to melt, evaporate and ionize the material of a target. A transient, highly luminous plasma plume is produced consisting of neutrals, ions, electrons etc. The vaporized materials expand rapidly away from the target surface and then condense (or deposit) on the substrate to form a film. If a colloidal monolayer is used as a substrate in the PLD process, a special periodic array might be produced. Y. Li, N. Koshizaki et al. developed a route to create hierarchical micro/nanostructured arrays by colloidal monolayer assisted PLD at room temperature using oxygen as the background gas, as shown in Fig. 4.42 In this special array, the nanorods stand vertically on the top of the PS colloidal spheres, and nanobranches in each nanorod grow in a radiation-like manner, perpendicular to the PS sphere surface. The presented strategy is universal, and the hcp hierarchical micro/nanostructured arrays of Au, Ag, Pt, Si, TiO2, SnO2, WO3, Co3O4, CuO, Fe2O3, ZnO, C etc. can be fabricated just by changing the corresponding targets in the PLD process.42–46 They also investigated the formation mechanism of the hierarchical arrays by tracing the morphologies of the colloidal clusters with different sphere numbers after PLD, and found that formation of this array is mainly ascribed to a shadow effect between two neighboring PS microspheres and multiple directional deposition caused by collisions between the ions, electrons, molecules and clusters of the ejected species and the background gas, as shown in Scheme 2. Such as-prepared hierarchical micro/nanostructured arrays could be peeled off from the present substrate by dissolving the bottom PS colloidal monolayer in an organic solution (i.e. CH2Cl2). It could retain their integrity on the solution surface due to the van der Waals force between the neighboring micro/nanostructured units. They could thus be successfully transferred onto any other desired substrates by a picking up process. The transferability avoids restrictions on substrates in the fabrication process of periodic arrays, which is helpful in the design and fabrication of new micro-/nano-devices on any desired substrates.
 Fig. 4  Morphology of amorphous TiO2 hierarchical micro/nanorod array obtained by PLD using an Si substrate covered with a PS colloidal monolayer (PS sphere size: 350 nm; deposition time: 70 min; a background O2 pressure of 6.7 Pa).42 (a) FE-SEM image of cross-section. (b) TEM image of single nanorod. The inset in (b) is the corresponding electron diffraction pattern. 
 Scheme 2  Formation mechanism of hierarchical micro/nanostructured arrays by PLD based on a colloidal monolayer.42 
Y. Li, N. Koshizaki et al. also found that the porosity and specific surface area of the nanorods in the array can be tuned by varying the background gas pressure in PLD process.45,46 The porosity and surface area increase with an increase of the background gas pressure (Fig. 5a–c). After annealing at 650 °C for 2 h, amorphous TiO2 hcp nanorod arrays could be changed to crystalline anatase TiO2 hncp nanorod arrays due to the shrinking of each unit on the PS sphere during annealing process.46 The spacings between neighboring anatase nanorods in an hncp array, after annealing, can be tuned by background gas pressures during PLD. The spacing will increase with increasing background gas pressure (Fig. 5(a’–c’) and (a’’–c’’)). Such hncp nanorod arrays have important applications in field emission.
 Fig. 5  FE-SEM images of the amorphous hcp TiO2 nanorod array and anatase hncp TiO2 nanorod arrays obtained by PLD under different background gas pressures and subsequent annealing.46 PLD was performed in oxygen (a) at 2.0 Pa for 200 min; (b) at 16.8 Pa for 43 min; (c) at 26.8 Pa for 30 min. (a–c) Before annealing, (a’–c’) top views after annealing, (a’’–c’’) tilted view with 45° angle after annealing. 
2.5 Atomic layer deposition (ALD)
Atomic layer deposition (ALD) is a thin film fabrication technique. It utilizes the reactions of two chemical precursors on a surface for a certain time in a sequential style and the repeated exposure of the precursors to the growth surface to form a thin film. Therefore, it has a feature of angstrom-resolution, layer-by-layer growth of films. Although ALD has a very slow deposition speed, it can produce uniform, ultrathin films over a wide range of materials with a very good quality. So far, ALD has been developed to deposit Si, Ge, W, Ru, Cu, Ni, Pt, Pd, Al2O3, SiO2, TiO2, ZrO2, ZnO, ZnS, CdS, TiN et al. by choosing different suitable chemical precursors.47 Using a colloidal monolayer as a template or a substrate, it has been found that the deposited thin film could be well uniformly coated on the whole surface of a colloidal microsphere by ALD technique compared with the other routes (such as, thermal deposition or e-beam evaporation deposition), as reported by P. V. Braun et al.48 Utilizing this feature of ALD, the periodic hollow microsphere arrays can be easily fabricated. H. J. Fan et al. prepared TiO2 hollow sphere arrays by ALD, using colloidal monolayers as templates, TiCl4 and deionized water as the Ti and oxygen precursors, respectively, after removal of the colloidal sphere template, as displayed in Fig. 6a.49 Z. L. Wang et al. first prepared TiO2 coated on colloidal monolayers by ALD and then used ion beam milling to remove the top-half of the sphere. The PS hemispheres left on the substrate were finally etched by toluene, forming a periodic array of TiO2 nanobowl arrays, as shown in Fig. 6b.50 By layer-by-layer growth of ALD, the materials will deposit not only on the whole surface of the PS spheres, but also on the part of substrate without contacting with the colloidal spheres. Hence periodic hole arrays underneath colloidal monolayer could be created after lifting off the spherical composites with the coating formed in ALD process, as reported by Y. R. Do et al.51 Additionally, ALD can also be used to prepare the opal structured materials by using 3D colloidal crystals as templates because the precursors can well diffuse into the 3D colloidal crystal templates.52
 Fig. 6  (a) TiO2 hollow sphere array by ALD and subsequent thermal annealing.49 (b) TiO2 nanobowl arrays obtained by ALD, subsequent ion beam milling and removal of the bottom-half sphere on the substrate.50 
2.6 Electron beam irradiation
Electron beam irradiation is a powerful tool to change the morphologies and the chemical structures of organic materials. If a polymer comprising conjugated bonds is irradiated with an electron beam, the molecular bonds can be broken by the irradiation. As a result, both crosslinking and scission of the molecular chains occur inside the irradiated polymer. The ratio of the crosslinking to the scission depends on the type of the polymer and the irradiation parameters. Particularly, the electron irradiation technique is useful to prepare interesting nanostructures from polymer colloidal monolayers.
S. O. Cho et al. found that when poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA, a kind of radiation-degrading polymer) nanospheres were electron-irradiated, a pore is formed inside each sphere.53 The formation of the pore in a PMMA nanosphere is attributed to the non-uniform energy transfer from the electron beam to the spheres. An electron irradiation induces surface charging on the electrically-insulating sphere, which generates an electric field. The electric field focuses an electron beam into the central region of a sphere and hence the central region of the sphere is more rapidly decomposed than the outside region of the sphere. This also indicates that the pore size can be controlled by the irradiation time. Consequently, a periodic array of nanometer-scaled pores with tunable sizes can be readily produced by electron irradiation of PMMA colloidal crystals (Fig. 7a).
 Fig. 7  (a) Periodic pore array fabricated by the electron-beam irradiating the PMMA colloidal monolayer at the electron fluence of 1.8 × 1015 cm−2, PMMA sphere size: 400 nm.53 (b) Carbonaceous network arrays after electron irradiation at the electron fluence of 1.7 × 1018 cm−2 and subsequent heating at 360 °C for 2 hours, PS size: 350 nm.54 
S. O. Cho et al. also found that when PS nanospheres were electron-irradiated, the chemical structure of PS was gradually converted into polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs).54 As a consequence, if the electron dose is high enough, PS is transformed into hydrogenated amorphous carbon (a-C:H). A subsequent thermal treatment can remove polymeric materials inside the irradiated PS, and hence the morphologies of the irradiated PS can be modified by changing the electron dose or the thermal treatment time. Based on this fact, they successfully prepared carbonaceous periodic arrays with units of network-like, star-like, and hncp nanodots (Fig. 7b).55
2.7 Reactive ion etching
The reactive ion etching (RIE) is an etching technique used in micro/nano-fabrication.56 It utilizes the dissociation and ionization of neutral gases in an alternating electrical field and chemically reactive plasma to remove material from the sample. The ions obtained by ionization of gas are accelerated to collide with the sample under an electrical field induced by charges on one electrode and react chemically with surface material of the samples to form volatile matters, which are evacuated from the reaction chamber by a vacuum pump. Interestingly, a polystyrene (PS) colloidal monolayer with an hcp arrangement can be changed to an hncp structure by RIE with introduction of oxygen. For instance, M. Giersig et al. prepared a PS hncp colloidal monolayer by RIE with etching ion-compositions including argon and oxygen.56 They found that the PS colloidal microsphere size is reduced and void interspaces among the microspheres are increased with increasing RIE etching time while the periodicity remains the same as before. They further used such an hncp colloidal monolayer as a mask to prepare a plasmonic nanohole array by physical deposition.56 Such colloidal monolayers with hcp or hncp arrangement can be used as a mask; if the proper gases are selected, one could create periodic patterns of variable materials by RIE process.
T. Yu et al. transferred a PS colloidal monolayer onto a SiO2/Si substrate with a graphene sheet and then O2 RIE was subsequently applied to etch a portion of the graphene sheets that was not protected by the colloidal spheres. A periodic graphene nanodisk array was finally formed on the substrate after removal of the colloidal mask,57,58 as shown in Fig. 8a. Similarly, R. P. Van Duyne et al. fabricated ordered triangular nanopore or nanowell arrays on the substrate using PS colloidal monolayers as masks by RIE with CF4.59 Additionally, J.-H. He et al. prepared Si nanopillar arrays using PS colloidal monolayers as templates by RIE with mixture of SF6/O2, as shown in Fig. 8b,60 the height of the nanopillar increases with the etching duration.
 Fig. 8  SEM images of periodic nanostructured arrays by RIE. (a) Graphene nanodisk array,58 (b) Si nanopillar array.60 
L. F. Chi et al. used a similar route to create Si nanopillar arrays with different reactive gases (SF6 and CHF3) in the RIE process.61 H. Lim et al. reduced PS sphere sizes in the colloidal monolayer by oxygen plasma treatment and then fabricated glass nanopillar arrays with cone and rod-like units with the same periodicity on a glass substrate by RIE with CF4 and H2 using the above colloidal masks.62 P. Jiang et al. used the hncp silica colloidal monolayer as a mask to create an Si nanopillar array by a chlorine RIE process and subsequently dissolving the silica sphere in low concentration HF.63
Furthermore, C. L. Cheung et al. developed an artful route to prepare Si nanopillar arrays with large aspect ratio based on the PS colloidal monolayer tailored by oxygen plasma etching and deep RIE process in an alternant flow of SF6 and C4F8.64 In this process, the diameter of the nanopillar can be easily tuned by the PS sphere size, which could be tailored by oxygen plasma etching, and its length can be controlled by deep RIE time. It is easy to achieve the nanopillars with an aspect ratio larger than 10 by this method.
D. Y. Xia et al. developed an interesting approach to fabricate hierarchical nanoparticle arrays based on a combination of a colloidal monolayer mask and further reactive ion etching.65 A uniform nanoparticle film (particle size less than 50 nm) was first deposited on a substrate. And then a colloidal monolayer composed of microsized spheres was self-assembled into well-ordered patterns atop the nanoparticle film. Using the upper colloidal monolayer as a mask, parts of the initial nanoparticle film were removed by RIE with a mixture of O2 and CHF3. Hierarchical nanoparticle patterns are finally obtained on flat surfaces after selective removal of the remaining upper colloidal layer. This route offers a novel lithography-free method to fabricate patterned nanoparticle films that will be highly helpful for material growth, biosensing, and catalysis etc.
3. Indirect colloidal monolayer template strategies
Combining the colloidal monolayer with physical deposition or other processes, periodic micro/nanostructured arrays with different morphologies (nanoparticle, nanohole, nanoplate, nanopillar, nanorod etc.) can be created. These derivatives from colloidal templates can be used as second templates or masks to create the new periodic arrays including nanorod arrays, nanotube arrays, nanopore arrays by sputtering, RIE, PLD, ALD, CVD et al.
3.1 Reactive ion etching based on pore arrays or nanoparticle arrays
The pore arrays and nanoparticle arrays templated from colloidal monolayers can be used as masks to fabricate the other new ordered structure arrays including grapheme pore arrays and Si nanopillar arrays. J. M. Tour et al. coated a silica colloidal monolayer on the substrate with a coating of a graphene sheet and then etched it from hcp into hncp arrangement by RIE process with CF4.66 A metal layer was deposited on it and the hncp colloidal monolayer was selectively removed to form a metal mask. A graphene pore array was finally produced by RIE process with a CF4/O2 mixture and subsequent removal of the mask, as displayed in Fig. 9a. W. A. Goedel et al. used the colloidal monolayer as a template to obtain an hcp gold nanodot array on a Si substrate by two step replication, and then a silicon pillar array was created by a deep RIE process using the Au nanodots as the masks.67 P. Chen et al. created the periodic Si nanopillar arrays based on metal nanoparticle arrays obtained from the colloidal monolayer masks and subsequent RIE technique.68 They prepared Cr nanoparticle arrays templated from the colloidal monolayer and then used them as the masks to fabricate the Si nanopillar arrays by the RIE with a mixture of CHF3 and O2 (Fig. 9b).
 Fig. 9  (a) SEM image of periodic graphene pore array obtained by two step replication using a colloidal monolayer composed of 110-nm-sized silica particles.66 (b) Si nanopillar array by RIE using Cr nanoparticle array as mask.68 
3.2 Shadow effect deposition based on nanoparticle arrays or hole arrays
The periodic nanoparticle arrays or hole arrays templated from colloidal monolayers can be used to fabricate nanopillar arrays by glancing angle deposition (GLAD) due to the shadow effect of nanoparticle or hole wall.69,70 D. Gall et al. prepared Cr nanoparticle arrays using a SiO2 colloidal monolayer as a mask by e-beam evaporation deposition, and then fabricated Ta nanopillar arrays by magnetron sputtering deposition on such periodic nanoparticle arrays using GLAD (Fig. 10a).69 Additionally, they also prepared a hexagonal inverted pyramid hole array by metal deposition and subsequent anisotropic etching of Si using sodium hydroxide solution, and they found that such a hole array can also used as a substrate to prepare nanopillar arrays by GLAD based on sputtering deposition, as shown in Fig. 10b.69
 Fig. 10  SEM images of Ta nanopillar arrays by GLAD technique.69 Nanopillar arrays on: (a) Cr nanoparticle array, (b) Si hole array. 
3.3 Catalytic growth based on nanoparticle arrays
If periodic catalyst nanoparticle arrays are fabricated on a substrate using the colloidal monolayers as masks, periodic patterns composed of one dimensional units (nanorods, nanotubes etc.) can be further created by chemical vapor deposition (CVD), molecular beam epitaxy (MBE), chemical beam expitaxy (CBE) using these catalyst patterns. S. S. Xie et al. prepared Au nanoparticle arrays from a colloidal monolayer template and then fabricated periodic ZnO nanorod arrays.71,72 An Au catalyst nanodot array under a colloidal monolayer was obtained via selective wet-etching of Au layer with the self-assembled monolayer (SAM) of octadecanethiol (ODT) defined by PS sphere on the substrate. After plasma etching, removal of the PS spheres and wet etching with etchants, Au nanodot arrays were achieved and ZnO nanorod arrays were finally grown for use as patterned catalysts. Z. L. Wang et al. directly templated Au catalyst nanoparticle arrays to grow hexagonally aligned ZnO nanorod arrays by CVD on a substrate.73 Z. F. Ren et al. first prepared Ni nanoparticle arrays using the colloidal monolayers as masks and subsequently fabricated large-area, well-aligned carbon nanotube (CNT) arrays on it by plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD) using the Ni nanoparticles as catalysts74,75 (Fig. 11). U. Gösele et al. developed a route to grow periodic Si nanorod arrays by MBE using Au droplet arrays on Si(111) substrates templated from the colloidal monolayer.76 Additionally, B. Fuhrmann et al. fabricated periodic InP nanorod arrays on Si(111) by CBE growth on a similar gold array.77
 Fig. 11  SEM images of 1D nanostructured unit arrays obtained by catalytic growth on the nanoparticle arrays templated from colloidal monolayers. (a) ZnO nanorod array grown on a Au catalyst array.71 (b) CNT array catalytically grown on a Ni catalyst array.74 
4. Structure-enhanced performances and applications
Assisted by physical processes, including thermal/e-beam evaporation deposition, reactive ion etching, pulsed laser deposition, atomic layer deposition, sputtering deposition etc., different nanostructured arrays of nanoparticles, nanopores, nanoholes, nanorods, nanowires nanotubes etc. can be fabricated with high purity and very uniform morphology on a large-area based on strategies of directed or indirected colloidal monolayer templates or masks. The periodic nanostructured arrays could demonstrate excellent micro/nanostructure-enhanced properties such as extreme wettability, field emission, catalytic performances, antireflectivity, surface enhanced Raman scattering (SERS), and can be applied in self-cleaning surfaces, field emitters, light-emitting diode (LED) and solar cells.38,42–46,78–94
4.1 Extreme wettability
Extreme wettability includes superhydrophilicity [water contact angle (CA) less than 10°] and superhydrophobicity [water CA exceeding 150° and sliding angle (SA) less than 10°], which have many applications in the prevention of snow, fog, and raindrops from the adhesion to antennas and windows, self-cleaning, antioxidation, and microfluidic devices.78–82 Wettability is generally controlled by surface roughness, morphologies and free energy. It can be enhanced to an extreme case by increasing the surface roughness according to the Wenzel model. Surfaces that are rough enough can enhance hydrophobic and/or hydrophilic performances to superhydrophobicity and/or superhydrophilicity.83 The periodic micro/nanostructured arrays templated by colloidal monolayers are actually rough films, which could induce extreme wettability on the surface due to their high roughness. For instance, Y. R. Do et al. prepared dual-triangularly patterned hierarchical micro/nano-rod arrays by a simple combination of microsized sphere lithography–RIE process and subsequent the nanosized sphere lithography–RIE process. These special arrays possess a very rough surface and hence display excellent superhydrophobicity after modification with a kind of low free energy material, fluoroalkylsilane, as shown in Fig. 12.84 L. Li et al. fabricated Co3O4 hierarchical hncp micro/nanorod arrays by PLD assisted colloidal lithography and annealing at 450 °C for 3 h. After chemical modification with fluorosilane, the surface of such an array showed superhydrophobicity with water with a CA of 152.6° and a very small SA.85 In addition to the superhydrophobicity, the periodic micro/nanostructured arrays can also induce the superhydrophilicity. For instance, Y. Li, N. Koshizaki et al. fabricated amorphous, porous hierarchical TiO2 micro/nanostructured arrays by PLD based on colloidal monolayer templates (Fig. 4).42 These arrays demonstrated excellent superhydrophilicity. The water droplet, dropped on their surfaces, spread out rapidly and showed a water CA of ∼0° without UV irradiation (Fig. 13), which originates from the combination of the hydrophilicity produced by PLD and the special rough structures of hcp hierarchical arrays.
 Fig. 12  Hierarchical SiO2 micro/nanostructured arrays and their superhydrophobicity.84 (a) SEM images of top and side views; (b) photography of water droplets staying on the superhydrophobic hierarchical micro/nanostructured arrays using the combined two-step RIE approach. 
 Fig. 13  Water-contacting behavior at different times on the amorphous TiO2 superhydrophilic periodic micro/nanostructured array film.42 
4.2 Field emitters
Field-emission (FE) properties have many applications in displays, accelerators and other microelectronic devices.86 FE performance is generally determined by the cathode materials, geometry and size of cathode. Therefore, it can be further enhanced by optimizing the geometry and size of cathode. By introducing periodic micro-/nano-structured arrays on it, excellent FE performances, including faster turn-on time, compactness, sustainability, low operating voltage and stable current, could been achieved by the elimination of the shield effect on densely packed 1D nanostructured arrays in field emission.87
As demonstrated in Section 2.4, Y. Li, N. Koshizaki et al. fabricated a periodic hncp TiO2 nanorod array by PLD using a colloidal monolayer template and subsequent annealing (Fig. 5).46 This hncp nanorod array presents a good FE performance with a low turn-on field and a high field-enhancement factor (β), compared with a TiO2 nanoparticle film by PLD and nanorod array with top aggregation. It has been indicated that such good FE properties of the periodic TiO2 hncp nanorod array originate from the aligned and periodic hncp nanorod structures. They also found that β decreased with the increase of periodicity of the hncp nanorod array, which is mainly attributed to a decreasing number density of nanorods with an increase in the hncp array periodicity.
A smaller periodicity of 350 nm is fixed for an hncp nanorod array. The spacing between neighboring nanorods can be tuned by changing the background gas pressure during the PLD process (Fig. 5). By increasing the spacing of neighboring ones, the field-enhancement factor was increased and the turn-on field decreased (Fig. 14). When the spacing was increased to 110 nm, the best FE properties with a field-enhancement factor, β of 9.39 × 102 and a turn-on field of 5.3 V mm−1 were achieved (Fig. 14). The increase of β with the increase of nanorod spacing can be easily understood according to relationship (β ∝ h/r) between β and the geometry of an emitter, where h is the height and r is the curvature radius of an emitting center, when the periodicity of hncp nanorod array is fixed. With the increase of the nanorod spacing, the effective diameter of an individual nanorod and the curvature radius r would decrease, resulting in an increase of β according to the above relationship. The above results suggest that optimal FE properties can be achieved by increasing the nanorod spacing by controlling the experimental parameters.
 Fig. 14  FE performances varying with neighboring nanorod spacing in an hncp array when periodicity is fixed to 350 nm.46 
4.3 Catalytic properties
The hierarchical micro/nanostructured arrays obtained from colloidal monolayers demonstrate a large specific surface area. Therefore, they should possess important potential applications in catalytic fields due to their high surface activity. For example, hierarchical alumina micro/nanostructured arrays (Fig. 3a) display very good catalytic properties for organic reactions of ethyl acetoacetate isomerization between keto and enol.38 The keto isomer is generally more stable than the enol one. However, if using the hierarchical alumina micro/nanostructured arrays as catalysts, the keto isomer could be efficiently converted into the enol isomer. This catalytic reaction can be estimated by monitoring the UV-vis spectra. The high absorption values at around 244 nm correspond to absorption of the conjugation system in the enol isomer. The catalytic activity of the hncp alumina array was estimated based on the isomerization of ethyl acetoacetate by monitoring the UV-vis absorption spectra (Fig. 15a). In the isomerization process, the increase in the absorption at 244 nm indicates that the proportion of enol isomer is gradually increased, demonstrating the transition of the keto isomer to the enol isomer and verifying successful isomerization in the presence of the hncp alumina array. These results reflect that the hncp alumina array exhibits efficient catalytic activity for the isomerization of ethyl acetoacetate (Fig. 15b).
 Fig. 15  (a) Catalytic activity of hncp Al2O3 arrays. (b) Catalytic activity evaluation of different structures based on the absorbance ratio A/A0 as a function of reaction time. A and A0 are the absorbance at 244 nm after a given reaction time and that from the initial solution.38 
Additionally, the hcp amorphous TiO2 micro/nanostructured array on a colloidal monolayer obtained by PLD assisted colloidal lithography also displayed an excellent enhanced photocatalytic activity, compared with an amorphous TiO2 film by PLD without using a colloidal monolayer and the annealing-induced anatase TiO2 rod array.42 Anatase is usually deemed to be more photocatalytically active than the rutile and amorphous TiO2. However, the other factors including the specific surface area, crystal composition, and material microstructures also significantly affect the catalytic performance of TiO2. In this case, the amorphous hcp hierarchical micro/nano rod array has a porous structure and a much higher specific surface area than that of an anatase rod array, which contributes the better photocatalytic properties.
4.4 Optical applications
The aligned micro/nano structured arrays by physical process-assisted colloidal template techniques also have important optical applications in SERS and photonic crystal antireflective coatings, owing to rough surfaces or their good periodicities. For instance, such metal arrays with rough surfaces are highly helpful for use in SERS applications in the identification and detection of organic molecules because they could be used as the SERS-active substrates. Additionally, the periodicity of such arrays has proved to be useful to further increase SERS signals.88,89 For example, H. J. Fan et al. developed a route to prepare a periodic noble metal particle-in-bowl (PIB) nanostructured array by the colloidal monolayer replication combining with ALD, as shown in Fig. 16a and b.90 The metal particle size and gap could be well controlled. This special array demonstrates a large field enhancement for SERS applications. This structured array is composed of an Ag particle located at the bottom of an Au bowl and they are separated by a precisely controlled nanoscaled dielectric layer obtained by ALD. It showed the spatially averaged SERS enhancement factor of 3.8 × 107 (Fig. 16). In addition to SERS applications, the periodic arrays can be also used as antireflective coatings for photovoltaic devices to further improve the conversion efficiencies of sunlight. Generally, the materials used in photoelectric conversion possess high refractive indexes (30% reflection for crystalline Si, GaAs, and 40% reflection for GaSb) and reflect back a large percentage of the incident light from their surface, resulting in a low conversion efficiency. The researchers found that the reflective index gradient caused by hncp subwavelength structured arrays can effectively prevent them from reflecting in visible range, which is inspired by a natural phenomenon, i.e. reduced reflection of the corneas of moths.91 Based on this fact, P. Jiang et al. prepared an Si hncp nanopillar array by RIE using an hncp silica colloidal monolayer as a mask.92 Such hncp Si nanopillar arrays exhibited excellent broadband anti-reflection properties, even better than the crystalline Si solar cell with a commercial SiNx antireflective coating.92 Due to their periodicity, the micro/nanostructured arrays can be also used as photonic crystals. Z. F. Ren et al. created large-scale periodic CNT arrays, which demonstrated the strong diffraction of visible light.74,75 Such a CNT array can act as 2D photonic band gap crystals due to the variable dielectric constants from the environment.
 Fig. 16  SERS performance of the Ag-particle-in-Au-bowl structured array with ALD Al2O3 separation layer of 5 nm.90 The reference is a SERS signal of a 10 mM R6G aqueous solution evaporated on a single crystal gold foil and is magnified 10 times. Inset figures: (a) the model of PIB; (b) morphology of the Ag-particle-in-Au bowl array. 
5. Conclusions and perspectives
On the basis of colloidal sphere templates or masks, the physical process-induced periodic micro/nanostructured arrays possess advantages of uniform morphology, clear surface without impurities and stable properties, compared with those by chemical routes. Utilizing physical processes including RIE, electron beam irradiation, thermal/e-beam deposition, sputtering deposition, ALD, PLD etc., various periodic micro/nanostructured arrays, for instance nanoparticle arrays, nanogap arrays, nanoring arrays, nanopillar/rod arrays, nanotube arrays, can be achieved. The parameters of microstructure or nanostructure could be well controlled by the sphere sizes in the colloidal monolayer and the experimental conditions of the physical process. These periodic arrays demonstrated some excellent micro/nanostructure enhanced properties in self-cleaning surfaces, catalytic performance, field emission, antireflective coating and SERS etc.
Aided by physical processes, more novel micro/nanostructured arrays can be produced, according to design and need by selecting suitable routes, for different practical applications. A series of micro/nanostructured patterns can be created by combining colloidal monolayers with physical processes, however, they generally keep the hexagonal arrangements, which is completely inherited from templates or masks of the hexagonal colloidal sphere arrays obtained by the self-assembling process according to the principle of minimum energy. If one wants to achieve periodic arrays with other alignments, i.e. square arrays, other techniques (photolithography, e-beam lithography etc.) should be considered. Additionally, although fabricating techniques of monolayer colloidal crystals have been well developed and large areas with cm2 size can be easily fabricated by self-assembly, the monolayer colloidal crystals are general composed of many domains and a few defects (i.e. a microsphere missing) inevitably exist, produced in the self-assembling process. The strategy of colloidal monolayer templates might not be suitable for the researches or applications with requirements of strict periodicity without defects. The periodicity of the ordered micro/nanostructured arrays is large, which is mainly determined by colloidal sphere size (generally larger than 150 nm) in colloidal monolayer. Such large periodicity is not beneficial to some applications in bit patterned media and nanoplasmonics. Therefore, templates with small periodicity are expected. Recently, the preparation of monodispersed nanoparticles of metal or semiconductor with very small size ranging from 10 nm to 150 nm has been well developed. A periodic nanoparticle array with hcp arrangement can be easily fabricated using these monodispersed nanoparticles by self-assembly at the water/oil interface,95,96 which might be used as an alternative template or mask to prepare nanostructured arrays with small periodicities, based on the physical processes. With further improvement of colloidal sphere lithography or nanoparticle lithography aided by physical processes, more new periodic arrays could be obtained and applied in different micro/nanodevices in the future.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the financial support from the National Basic Research Program of China (Grant No.2012CB932303), Recruitment Program of Global Experts (C), Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant Nos.50831005, 10974203), and Anhui Provincial Natural Science Foundation for Distinguished Young Scholar (Grant No. 1108085J20).
Notes and references
J. X. Wang, Y. Z. Zhang, S. T. Wang, Y. L. Song and L. Jiang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2011, 44, 405 CrossRef CAS .
M. Morariu, N. Voicu, E. Schäffer, Z. Lin, T. P. Russell and U. Steiner, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 48 CrossRef CAS .
Z. L. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 3553 CrossRef CAS .
R. Yan, D. Gargas and P. Yang, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 569 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Cobley, J. Chen, E. C. Cho, L. V. Wang and Y. Xia, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 44 RSC .
G. M. Wallraff and W. D. Hinsberg, Chem. Rev., 1999, 99, 1801 CrossRef CAS   and references therein.
G.-Y. Liu, S. Xu and Y. Qian, Acc. Chem. Res., 2000, 33, 457 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Piner, J. Zhu, F. Xu, S. Hong and C. A. Mirkin, Science, 1999, 283, 661 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lei, W. P. Cai and G. Wilde, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2007, 52, 465 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, Y. W. Yang, G. H. Li and L. D. Zhang, Small, 2006, 2, 548 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, S. S. Pan, X. C. Dou, Y. G. Zhu, X. H. Huang, Y. W. Yang, G. H. Li and L. D. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 7288 CAS .
D. Gentili, G. Foschi, F. Valle, M. Cavallini and F. Biscarini, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 4430 RSC .
Y. N. Xia, B. Gates, Y. D. Yin and Y. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 693 CrossRef CAS .
O. D. Velev and S. Gupta, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1897 CrossRef CAS .
B. J.-Y. Tan, C.-H. Sow, K.-Y. Lim, F.-C. Cheong, G.-L. Chong, A. T.-S. Wee and C.-K. Ong, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 18575 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhang and D. Wang, Chem.–Asian J., 2009, 4, 236 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Xu, N. Lu, H. B. Xu, D. P. Qi, Y. D. Wang and L. F. Chi, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 11216 CrossRef CAS .
D. Y. Xia, Z. Ku, S. C. Lee and S. R. J. Brueck, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 147 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, W. P. Cai, B. Q. Cao, G. T. Duan, F. Q. Sun, C. C. Li and L. C. Jia, Nanotechnology, 2005, 17, 238 CrossRef .
S. M. Yang, S. G. Jang, D. G. Choi, S. Kim and H. K. Yu, Small, 2006, 2, 458 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Yang, Y. F. Li, X. M. Zhang and B. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4249 CrossRef .
X. Z. Ye and L. M. Qi, Nano Today, 2011, 6, 608 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lei, S. K. Yang, M. H. Wu and G. Wilde, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 1247 RSC .
L. Li, T. Y. Zhai, H. B. Zeng, X. S. Fang, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 40 RSC .
Y. Li, G. T. Duan and W. P. Cai, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 615 CrossRef CAS .
P. Patoka and M. Giersig, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 16783 RSC .
J. C. Hulteen and R. P. Van Duyne, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 1995, 13, 1553 Search PubMed .
F. Sun, W. Cai, Y. Li, G. Duan, W. T. Nichols, C. Liang, N. Koshizaki, Q. Fang and I. W. Boyd, Appl. Phys. B: Lasers Opt., 2005, 81, 765 CrossRef CAS .
C. L. Haynes and R. P. Van Duyne, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 939 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhang and D. Y. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5616 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kosiorek, W. Kandulski, H. Glaczynska and M. Giersig, Small, 2005, 1, 439 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Gwinner, E. Korokany, L. Fu, P. Patoka, W. Kandulski, M. Giersig and H. Giessen, Small, 2009, 5, 400 CrossRef CAS .
D. L. J. Vossen, D. Fific, J. Penninkhof, T. van Dillen, A. Polman and A. van Blaaderen, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1175 CrossRef CAS .
G. Y. Mak, W. Y. Fu, E. Y. Lam and H. W. Choi, Phys. Status Solidi C, 2009, 6, S654 CrossRef .
L. Li, T. Sasaki, Y. Shimizu and N. Koshizaki, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 15948 CAS .
L. Li, X. S. Fang, H. G. Chew, F. Zheng, T. H. Liew, X. J. Xu, Y. X. Zhang, S. S. Pan, G. H. Li and L. D. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 1080 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-P. Zhao, D.-X. Ye, P. Wang, G.-C. Wang and T.-M. Lu, Int. J. Nanomed., 2002, 1, 87 CAS .
S. Y. Gao, N. Koshizaki, Y. Li and L. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 2087 RSC .
C. M. Zhou and D. Gall, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 203117 CrossRef .
C. M. Zhou and D. Gall, Small, 2008, 4, 1351 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Zhou, H. F. Li and D. Gall, Thin Solid Films, 2008, 517, 1214 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, T. Sasaki, Y. Shimizu and N. Koshizaki, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 14755 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, N. Koshizaki, Y. Shimizu, L. Li, S. Gao and T. Sasaki, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1, 2580 CAS .
L. Li, Y. Li, S. Gao and N. Koshizaki, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 8366 RSC .
Y. Li, T. Sasaki, Y. Shimizu and N. Koshizaki, Small, 2008, 4, 2286 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, X. Fang, N. Koshizaki, T. Sasaki, L. Li, S. Gao, Y. Shimizu, T. Sasaki, Y. Bando and M. Golberg, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 19, 2467 CrossRef .
S. M. George, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 111 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yu, L. Shi, D. Han, J. Zi and P. V. Braun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1910 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, H. Hu, D. Li, Z. Shen, Q. Xiong, S. Li and H. J. Fan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 2180 CAS .
X. D. Wang, E. Graugnard, J. S. King, Z. L. Wang and C. J. Summers, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 2223 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Oh, J. H. Moon, H. K. Park, J. H. Park, H. Chung, J. Jeong, W. Kim and Y. R. Do, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 5025 RSC .
A. Rugge, J. S. Becker, R. G. Gordon and S. H. Tolbert, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 1293 CrossRef CAS .
S. O. Cho, H. Y. Jun and S. K. Ahn, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 120 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Lee, Y. N. Kim, B. H. Kim, S. O. Kim and S. O. Cho, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2094 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, E. J. Lee, W. P. Cai, K. Y. Kim and S. O. Cho, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 1108 CrossRef CAS .
P. Patoka and M. Giersig, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 16783 RSC .
Y. Zhou and K. P. Loh, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3615 CrossRef CAS .
C. X. Cong, T. Yu, Z. H. Ni, L. Liu, Z. X. Shen and W. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 6529 CAS .
A. V. Whitney, B. D. Myers and R. P. Van Duyne, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1507 CrossRef CAS .
K. Y. Lai, Y.-R. Lin, H.-P. Wang and J.-H. He, CrystEngComm, 2011, 13, 1014 RSC .
H. B. Xu, N. Lu, D. P. Qi, J. Y. Hao, L. G. Gao, B. Zhang and L. F. Chi, Small, 2008, 4, 1972 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ji, J. Park and H. Lim, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 4603 RSC .
W.-L. Min, P. Jiang and B. Jiang, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 475604 CrossRef .
C. L. Cheung, R. J. Nikolić, C. E. Reinhardt and T. F. Wang, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 1339 CrossRef CAS .
D. Y. Xia, Z. Ku, D. Li and S. R. J. Brueck, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 1847 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sinitskii and J. M. Tour, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 14730 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ladenburger, A. Reiser, J. Konle, M. Feneberg, R. Sauer, K. Thonke, F. Yan and W. A. Goedel, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 101, 034302 CrossRef .
C.-W. Kuo, J.-Y. Shiu and P. Chen, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 2917 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Zhou and D. Gall, Thin Solid Films, 2007, 516, 433 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Zhou and D. Gall, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 093103 CrossRef .
D. F. Liu, Y. J. Xiang, X. C. Wu, Z. X. Zhang, L. F. Liu, L. Song, X. W. Zhao, S.
D. Luo, W. J. Ma, J. Shen, W. Y. Zhou, G. Wang, C. Y. Wang and S. S. Xie, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2375 CrossRef CAS .
D. F. Liu, Y. J. Xiang, Q. Liao, J. P. Zhang, X. C. Wu, Z. X. Zhang, L. F. Liu, W. J. Ma, J. Shen, W. Y. Zhou and S. S. Xie, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 405303 CrossRef .
X. D. Wang, C. J. Summers and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 423 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, J. Rybczynski, D. Z. Wang, K. Kempa, Z. F. Ren, W. Z. Li and B. Kimball, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 4741 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kempa, B. Kimball, J. Rybczynski, Z. P. Huang, P. F. Wu, D. Steeves, M. Sennett, M. Giersig, D. V. G. L. N. Rao, D. L. Carnahan, D. Z. Wang, J. Y. Lao, W. Z. Li and Z. F. Ren, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 13 CrossRef CAS .
B. Fuhrmann, H. S. Leipner, H.-R. Höche, L. Schubert, P. Werner and U. Gösele, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 2524 CrossRef CAS .
G. Radhakrishnan, A. Freundlich and B. Fuhrmann, J. Cryst. Growth, 2009, 311, 1855 CrossRef CAS .
A. Nakajima, K. Hashimoto and T. Watanabe, Monatsh. Chem., 2001, 132, 31 CrossRef CAS .
T. Sun, L. Feng, X. Gao and L. Jiang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2005, 38, 644 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, X. J. Huang, S. H. Heo, C. C. Li, Y. K. Choi, W. P. Cai and S. O. Cho, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 2169 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, C. Li, S. O. Cho, G. Duan and W. Cai, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 9802 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, E. J. Lee and S. O. Cho, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 14813 CAS .
R. N. Wenzel, J. Phys. Colloid Chem., 1949, 53, 1446 CrossRef .
H. K. Park, S. W. Yoon and Y. R. Do, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 14035 RSC .
L. Li, Y. Li, S. Y. Gao and N. Koshizaki, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 8366 RSC .
S. S. Fan, M. G. Chapline, N. R. Franklin, T. W. Tombler, A. M. Cassell and H. J. Dai, Science, 1999, 283, 512 CrossRef CAS .
X. S. Fang, Y. Bando, U. K. Gautam, C. H. Ye and D. Golberg, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 509 RSC .
L. Lu, I. Randjelovic, R. Capek, N. Gaponik, J. Yang, H. Zhang and A. Eychmuller, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 5731 CrossRef CAS .
G. T. Duan, W. P. Cai, Y. Y. Luo, Y. Li and Y. Lei, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 061112 CrossRef .
X. L. Li, Y. Z. Zhang, Z. X. Shen and H. J. Fan, Small, 2012, 8, 2548 CrossRef CAS .
P. B. Clapham and M. C. Hutley, Nature, 1973, 244, 281 CrossRef .
C.-H. Sun, P. Jiang and B. Jiang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 061112 CrossRef .
C.-Y. Wang, L.-Y. Chen, C.-P. Chen, Y.-W. Cheng, M.-Y. Ke and M.-Y. Hsieh, Opt. Express, 2008, 16, 10549 CrossRef CAS .
L.-Y. Chen, Y.-Y. Huang, C.-H. Chang, Y.-H. Sun, Y. Chen and J. J. Huang, Opt. Express, 2010, 18, 7664 CrossRef CAS .
Y. G. Sun, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013 10.1039/c2cs35289c .
A. Tao, J. X. Huang and P. D. Yang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1662 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

Yue Li
	Yue Li received his PhD in Condensed Matter Physics at the Institute of Solid State Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS) in 2005. He worked as a Postdoctoral Fellow or Visiting Scientist in the Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), and Max Planck Institute of Colloids and Interfaces, respectively, after he got his PhD degree. He is a professor in Institute of Solid State Physics, CAS since 2011. His research interests mainly focus on the fabrications, applications and devices of micro/nano-structured arrays based on the colloidal monolayer template techniques.

Guotao Duan
	Guotao Duan received his PhD in 2007 from the Institute of Solid State of Physics, CAS under the supervision of Prof. Weiping Cai. Then, he worked in Institute of Solid State Physics in CAS after obtaining PhD. From Apr. 2009 to Mar. 2010, he did postdoctoral work with Prof. Kazuaki Sakoda in the National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS) in Japan. His current research interests focus on micro/nanofabrication, ordered micro/nanostructured arrays, and micro/nanodevices.

Guangqiang Liu
	Guangqiang Liu received his PhD degree in 2008 at the Institute of Solid State of Physics, CAS. His doctoral work dealt with the study of assemblies of noble metal nanoplates directly on the substrate in CAS and National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS) in Japan. He has been working in the Institute of Solid State of Physics, CAS since 2012. His research interests: fabrication of noble metal micro/nano-structured arrays, SERS effect and the application, plasmon engineering for NIR-SERS and detection devices.

Weiping Cai
	Weiping Cai received B.S. and M.S. degrees in Materials Sciences from Northeast University in 1982 and 1984, respectively, In 1997, he obtained a PhD from Huazhong University of Science & Technology in Materials Sciences. Since 1997, he has been a professor at the Institute of solid State Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences. His research interests include micro/nanostructured patterns and detection devices, nanomaterials for environmental applications.

 	Scheme 1  Illustration of thermal evaporation deposition under colloidal monolayer mask. Herein θ: angle between normal direction of substrate with colloidal monolayer and deposition direction; ω: rotation of substrate.	 

 	Fig. 1  Images of periodic nanostructure arrays using colloidal monolayers as masks by thermal evaporation. (a–d): atomic force microscopic (AFM) images, (e,f): field emission scanning electronic microscopic (FESEM) images.31 (a): Au nanoparticle array by thermal evaporation, θ = 0°.28 (b–d): Ag complex nanoparticle arrays by AR NSL with multiple deposition.29 (b): Nanooverlapping array, θ1 = 0°, θ2 = 17.5° (c): Nanogap array, θ1 = 0°, θ2 = 30°. (d): Nanochain array, θ1 = 0°, θ2 = 15°, θ3 = 15°. (Here θn means the different θ value in the nth deposition.) (e): Ag nanoring array, θ = 20°, continuous rotation of substrate; (f): Ag splitting nanoring array, θ = 20°, incomplete rotation of substrate.	 

 	Fig. 2  Cross-sections of periodic Si nanocolumn arrays by e-beam evaporation assisted GLAD on the colloidal monolayer substrate.37 (a) Vertical nanocolumn arrays, PS sphere size: 89 nm; θ: 85°; the rotational speed of substrate: 0.0019 rev s−1. (b) Square spiral arrays, PS sphere size: 830 nm; θ: 85°; the rotational speed of substrate: changing rotation at intervals.	 

 	Fig. 3  FE-SEM (a, c) and TEM (b, d) images of the arrays obtained by sputtering using a PS colloidal monolayer as the substrate. (a) Hierarchical alumina ordered arrays.38 (b) A unit in image (a).38 (c) The Ta nanocolumn array on an SiO2 colloidal monolayer formed at 200 °C, θ: 84°, the rotational speed of substrate: 60 rpm.39 The arrows indicate column branching into subcolumns and the circle highlights a surface protrusion. (d) The two component array of Si–Ta.40	 

 	Fig. 4  Morphology of amorphous TiO2 hierarchical micro/nanorod array obtained by PLD using an Si substrate covered with a PS colloidal monolayer (PS sphere size: 350 nm; deposition time: 70 min; a background O2 pressure of 6.7 Pa).42 (a) FE-SEM image of cross-section. (b) TEM image of single nanorod. The inset in (b) is the corresponding electron diffraction pattern.	 

 	Scheme 2  Formation mechanism of hierarchical micro/nanostructured arrays by PLD based on a colloidal monolayer.42	 

 	Fig. 5  FE-SEM images of the amorphous hcp TiO2 nanorod array and anatase hncp TiO2 nanorod arrays obtained by PLD under different background gas pressures and subsequent annealing.46 PLD was performed in oxygen (a) at 2.0 Pa for 200 min; (b) at 16.8 Pa for 43 min; (c) at 26.8 Pa for 30 min. (a–c) Before annealing, (a’–c’) top views after annealing, (a’’–c’’) tilted view with 45° angle after annealing.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) TiO2 hollow sphere array by ALD and subsequent thermal annealing.49 (b) TiO2 nanobowl arrays obtained by ALD, subsequent ion beam milling and removal of the bottom-half sphere on the substrate.50	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Periodic pore array fabricated by the electron-beam irradiating the PMMA colloidal monolayer at the electron fluence of 1.8 × 1015 cm−2, PMMA sphere size: 400 nm.53 (b) Carbonaceous network arrays after electron irradiation at the electron fluence of 1.7 × 1018 cm−2 and subsequent heating at 360 °C for 2 hours, PS size: 350 nm.54	 

 	Fig. 8  SEM images of periodic nanostructured arrays by RIE. (a) Graphene nanodisk array,58 (b) Si nanopillar array.60	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) SEM image of periodic graphene pore array obtained by two step replication using a colloidal monolayer composed of 110-nm-sized silica particles.66 (b) Si nanopillar array by RIE using Cr nanoparticle array as mask.68	 

 	Fig. 10  SEM images of Ta nanopillar arrays by GLAD technique.69 Nanopillar arrays on: (a) Cr nanoparticle array, (b) Si hole array.	 

 	Fig. 11  SEM images of 1D nanostructured unit arrays obtained by catalytic growth on the nanoparticle arrays templated from colloidal monolayers. (a) ZnO nanorod array grown on a Au catalyst array.71 (b) CNT array catalytically grown on a Ni catalyst array.74	 

 	Fig. 12  Hierarchical SiO2 micro/nanostructured arrays and their superhydrophobicity.84 (a) SEM images of top and side views; (b) photography of water droplets staying on the superhydrophobic hierarchical micro/nanostructured arrays using the combined two-step RIE approach.	 

 	Fig. 13  Water-contacting behavior at different times on the amorphous TiO2 superhydrophilic periodic micro/nanostructured array film.42	 

 	Fig. 14  FE performances varying with neighboring nanorod spacing in an hncp array when periodicity is fixed to 350 nm.46	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Catalytic activity of hncp Al2O3 arrays. (b) Catalytic activity evaluation of different structures based on the absorbance ratio A/A0 as a function of reaction time. A and A0 are the absorbance at 244 nm after a given reaction time and that from the initial solution.38	 

 	Fig. 16  SERS performance of the Ag-particle-in-Au-bowl structured array with ALD Al2O3 separation layer of 5 nm.90 The reference is a SERS signal of a 10 mM R6G aqueous solution evaporated on a single crystal gold foil and is magnified 10 times. Inset figures: (a) the model of PIB; (b) morphology of the Ag-particle-in-Au bowl array.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
