Emerging techniques in bioethanol production: from distillation to waste valorization  - Green Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8GC02698J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8GC02698J
(Tutorial Review)
Green Chem., 2019, 21, 1171-1185Emerging techniques in bioethanol production: from distillation to waste valorization

        
          
            Mohsen 
            Gavahian
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Paulo E. S. 
            Munekata
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Ismail 
            Eş
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Jose M. 
            Lorenzo
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Amin 
            Mousavi Khaneghah
          
        
      de and 

        
          
            Francisco J. 
            Barba
          
        
      *f
aProduct and Process Research Center, Food Industry Research and Development Institute, No. 331 Shih-Pin Rd., Hsinchu, 30062, Taiwan, Republic of China
bCentro Tecnológico de la Carne de Galicia, rúa Galicia no. 4, Parque Tecnológico de Galicia, San Cibrao das Viñas, Ourense, Spain
cDepartment of Material and Bioprocess Engineering, School of Chemical Engineering, University of Campinas (UNICAMP), Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil
dDepartment of Food Science, Faculty of Food Engineering, University of Campinas (UNICAMP), Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil
eDepartment of Technology of Chemistry, Azerbaijan State Oil and Industry University, Baku, Azerbaijan
fNutrition and Food Science Area, Preventive Medicine and Public Health, Food Science, Toxicology and Forensic Medicine Department, Faculty of Pharmacy, Universitat de València, Avda. Vicent Andrés Estellés, s/n, 46100 Burjassot, València, Spain. E-mail: Francisco.barba@uv.es
Received 
      24th August 2018
    , Accepted 7th December 2018First published on 2nd January 2019AbstractEthanol production from biomass, especially waste biomass, and the use of such ethanol as fuel can reduce fossil fuel consumption and ameliorate the hidden costs of burning fossil fuels such as its environmental impact. However, bioethanol production suffers from several limitations such as being energy-intensive and generating a sizeable amount of waste. This review briefly describes the aspects related to bioethanol production and focuses on both theoretical and practical approaches for process improvements. Several green emerging distillation techniques, such as ohmic-assisted hydrodistillation, membrane-assisted distillation, and heat integrated techniques, are shown to be energy-saving alternatives to the conventional distillation processes. Besides, a number of valuable components, such as pectin and bioactive compounds (e.g., phenolic compounds), have been recently isolated from the waste materials of bioethanol plants through various environmentally friendly valorization methods. These emerging distillation and extraction techniques can be integrated to evolve a greener bioethanol production process in the future.
Introduction
The consumption of fossil-based fuels in the transportation sector, which accounts for 60% of total world-wide fuel consumption, has inevitably increased. Consequently, it has increased the safety concerns linked to environmental impact due to carbon dioxide (CO2) and carbon monoxide (CO) emissions.1 In this context, replacing fossil fuels with biofuels is an indispensable solution to reduce environmental impact. Bioethanol is a sustainable alternative to reduce the consumption of crude oil and its environmental impact. Basic properties of bioethanol such as higher heats of vaporization, higher flame speed, and higher octane number, in comparison with gasoline, are some of the main reasons to encourage its production.2 Although bioethanol is currently produced worldwide, the United States and Brazil are the world's leading bioethanol producing countries, responsible for more than 80% of global production3 (Fig. 1). The United States is the main ethanol producer in the world with an estimated production of more than 15000 million of gallons per year, which accounts for more than half of global production, while estimated production of Brazil is more than 7000 millions of gallons per year.4
 Fig. 1  Bioethanol production around the world in 2017. https://www.statista.com/statistics/281606/ethanol-production-in-selected-countries/ (accessed on 2018/09/19). 
One of the main operations to obtain fuel-grade ethanol is the distillation of fermented broths. Distillation is an energy-intensive consuming operation, which separates ethanol from fermented broths and accounts for a relevant share of bioethanol production cost, particularly for conventional distillation/dehydration operation.5 It is worth mentioning that one of the main characteristics of conventional distillation columns is the recovery of ethanol with low energy efficiency, which is limited by the azeotrope formed with water.6 Due to the importance of distillation in the processing of ethanol, several environmentally friendly and energy saving approaches have been proposed to improve this operation. Most of the strategies are based on the physicochemical properties of the ethanol–water mixture and the equipment configuration such as heat integrated distillation,7 membrane-assisted vapor stripping8 and feed-splitting.9
Another important aspect of bioethanol processing is the generation of residues. Although residues generated from bioethanol processing can be reused as alternative fuel in the bioethanol process to reduce processing costs,10 the loss of high-added value compounds with potential biological activity also occurs. Moreover, compounds with biological activity, such as flavonoids and anthocyanins, are discarded as contaminants.11
Therefore, the search for alternative processing tools to improve productivity/reduce energy demand and valorization of residues generated from bioethanol production are important advances for the current bioethanol scenario. This review focuses first on energy-saving strategies to improve energy use during the distillation of fermented broths to obtain bioethanol and second, on the use of environmentally friendly approaches for the recovery of compounds with potential bioactivity.
The overall process of bioethanol production
Ethanol can be produced from any materials containing sugar molecules (e.g., sugarcane, corn, sugar beet, rice straw, sweet sorghum, and algae) (Fig. 2 and 3). Generally, this process can be divided into three distinct steps, namely: preparation of the fermentable sugar-containing solution; fermentation of the sugar-containing solution leading to ethanol production; and finally by recovering and concentrating the ethanol from the fermented solution12–15 (Table 1).
 Fig. 2  Schematic representation of the “generation” steps during bioethanol production using different renewable resources. 
 Fig. 3  A schematic representation of bioethanol production from three common sources: corn, sugarcane, and cellulosic biomass. 
Table 1 The typical techniques involved in bioethanol production from crops and their conventional by-products13–15




Plant type
Harvest technique
Plant material conversion to sugar
Typical process energy source




Crops: * Sugary. ** Starchy. *** Cellulosic. **** Waste biomass. Typical process energy source: 1 Crushed cane (bagasse). 2 Fossil fuel. 3 Lignin and excess cellulose. 4 Sugar conversion to alcohol: Fermentation and alcohol distillation.




*,1Sugarcane (Saccharum officinarum)
Cane stalk cut, mainly from field
Crushing, soaking, chemical process
Heat electricity molasses


*,2Sugar beet (Beta vulgaris)
Beets harvested while foliage left on the field
Sugar extraction
Animal feed fertilizer


**,2Corn (Zea mays)
Starchy parts harvested while stalks left on the field
Starch separation milling, conversion to sugar by enzyme application
Animal feed


**,2Wheat (Triticum)
Starchy parts harvested while stalks left on the field
Starch separation milling, conversion to sugar by enzyme application
Animal feed


**,2Potatoes (Solanum tuberosum)
Potatoes harvested while foliage left on the field
Washing, cooking, starch separation, conversion to sugar by enzyme application
Animal feed industrial use


***,3Grasses (several species)
Grass cut with regrowth
Sacarification
Heat electricity animal feed bio-plastics


***,3Trees (several species)
Full plant above ground harvested
Cellulose conversion to sugar by enzymatic hydrolysis (sacarification)
Heat electricity animal feed bio-plastics


****,3Crop residue, Forestry waste
Collected, separated, and cleaned to extract material with high cellulose content
Sacarification
Heat electricity animal feed bio-plastics




It should be noted that several parameters, including the type of raw material and conversion technology, can affect the overall process of ethanol production. Once the sugar-containing biomass arrives at the bioethanol factory, required precautions are taken to protect the biomass against bacterial contamination and undesirable early fermentation by controlling storage conditions. Afterward, carbohydrate molecules are extracted or exposed for further extraction through some pretreatments. The type of raw material and pretreatment conditions determine the amounts of fermentable sugars after the pretreatment step (Fig. 3). Fig. 3 illustrates that all of these raw materials require almost the same fermentation and ethanol concentration processes.
However, bioethanol producers can apply different approaches to release sugars, which yield different co-products. For instance, sugar can be directly extracted from sugarcane, and the residual bagasse can be used as a boiler fuel as a source of extraction energy.
When corn is used as the raw material, it should be ground and hydrolyzed by using appropriate enzymes to convert starch molecules into fermentable sugars that are required for ethanol production, whereas corn oil, protein, and fiber can be recovered from residues for valorization processes. When the raw material is cellulosic biomass, either thermal, acidic, or enzymatic hydrolysis of cellulose and hemicellulose should be performed to release sugar molecules, which are further fermented to ethanol. On the other hand, lignin and other wastes can be used as an energy source for extraction or can be valorized to produce value-added products.16
In many processes, large amounts of biomass fibers might be kept for conversion into simple sugars molecules through hydrolytic reactions. The production of bioethanol can be conducted by different types of processes: batch, fed-batch, and continuous processes. The batch fermentation process is composed of several components such as hydrolysate (source of fermentable sugars), nutrients, and yeasts to be fed into a bioreactor before starting the process. Differently, in the fed-batch process, these materials can be progressively added along the fermentation period. Finally, the continuous input of ingredients and constant removal of fermentation products from the bioreactors are the main operation characteristics of continuous processes. In order to enhance fermentation efficiency, the cell density can be maintained at high levels by recycling or immobilizing yeasts to enhance their activity, which can result in high concentration of ethanol in the fermented broth.16
The typical fermentation temperature and fermentation time for bioethanol production are about 25–30 °C and 6–72 h, respectively. However, optimization studies carried out to determine the appropriate temperature and fermentation time depend on several parameters including yeast species, cell density, and composition of the hydrolysate. The concentration of ethanol in the fermented biomass is usually expected to be between 8 and 14%. Higher concentrations of ethanol in the broth can inhibit the activity of yeasts and negatively affect the process. Once the fermentation stage is over, the ethanol is recovered by distilling the fermented broth. However, conventional distillation concentrates ethanol up to its azeotropic point with water (around 95% ethanol), which is also known as “hydrous” or “hydrated” ethanol. The continuous dehydration of azeotropic ethanol produces “anhydrous” alcohol (99.6% ethanol). Distillation also produces a residual flow known as vinasse, which can be valorized as a by-product.
The valorization of residual flows and materials includes the traditional valorization practices (such as animal feed production or soil fertilization) and the innovative approaches (Fig. 4) such as bioactive compound recovery.17 Khambhaty et al. (2012) discussed the crucial considerations for cost-effective production of bioethanol from algae. For instance, using enzymatic saccharification and salt-tolerant yeasts to eliminate the desalting stage was highlighted by authors.18
 Fig. 4  Some of the value-added compounds that have been successfully extracted from bioethanol waste through green valorization techniques. 
Emerging energy saving distillation technologies
As distillation is one of the most energy-consuming steps in the ethanol production,19 many researchers proposed several energy-saving techniques, including heat integrated, membrane-based, feed-splitting, and ohmic-assisted distillation methods, to overcome this issue7–9,19–28 (Table 2). However, it should be noted that further studies are required to examine the sustainability and the exact energy demands of these newly proposed techniques. Other relevant aspects are the necessity to improve the consistency of process variable units and to establish appropriate benchmarks among green technologies. A comprehensive comparison of traditional energy-saving methods, including vapor recompression, multiple heat-integrated columns, and heat integration systems, was previously conducted by Collura et al.29 Therefore, this section mainly focuses on the novel energy-saving techniques for bioethanol production.
Table 2 A summary of recently proposed energy-saving approaches for bioethanol distillation




Technique
Key findings
Ref.




Feedstock: 1 Sugarcane. 2 Diluted alcohol. 3 Azeotropic mixture. 4 Industrial fermented corn broth.




Heat integrated distillation

1Replacing the conventional distillation with the double-effect system, an increase of 26% in bioethanol production would be obtained by using only 10% of sugarcane bagasse as fuel in the system
Dias et al.22


Dias et al.7



2Heat integrated distillation can reduce the distillation cost
Diaz & Tost21


Membrane-based technologies

2The membrane system concentrated ethanol solution from 10 to 60%
Liu et al.20



2The proposed membrane system concentrated ethanol from 10 to 91%
Ueno et al.8



2Vinyltriethoxysilane-g-silicalite-1/PDMS/PAN was used to manufacture a membrane which could increase the ethanol concentration to about 60%
Yi and Wan28



2A carbon nanotube/PDMS membrane was developed which enhanced the ethanol concentration to 38%
Xue et al.27



2A PDMS membrane increased the ethanol concentration to about 85%
Song, Oh and Bae26



2A PDMS membrane and carboxymethyl cellulose increased the ethanol concentration to about 80% and 98.9, respectively
Nigiz and Hilmioglu30



2A NaA zeolite membrane increased the ethanol concentration to about 99.5%
Wei, Tsai, and Weng25



2A polyethyleneimine (PEI)/sodium alginate (SA) membrane yielded ethanol with the concentration of 90%
Li et al.31


Feed-splitting

3Feed-splitting system to reduce energy consumption
Tavan & Shahhosseini9


Ohmic-assisted distillation

3OAHD was run in the multiple-distillation mode and yielded ethanol with the concentration of 84%. It was superior in terms of process control, process time and consumed energy.
Gavahian et al.24



4OAHD successfully increased the ethanol concentration of fermented broth
Gavahian, Farahnaky & Sastry19



3OAHD successfully increased the ethanol concentration from 10 to 50%. The proposed method saved both distillation time and distillation energy in comparison with the electric mantle heater energy source.
Gavahian, Farahnaky, & Sastry23




Heat integrated distillation
The concept of heat integrated distillation consists of improving the use of energy initially applied to the distillation system. The system configuration used to achieve improved energy-saving distillation varies according to the strategy. It was reported that this technique could reduce the energy consumption of biofuel production by up to 40%.7,21,22 Researchers also explored the possibility of reducing energy consumption by using various devices (e.g., heat exchangers, heat pumps, multiple-effect columns, and adiabatic columns). Although this approach is considered of great value to reduce the demand for fossil fuels and the environmental impact of industrial operation, major theoretical and experimental advances are still necessary to increase its feasibility.32
Studies carried out over the last few decades have strengthened the role of such technology as a relevant alternative in conventional distillation processes. Dias et al.22 evaluated the impact of a double-effect distillation system in a conventional bioethanol plant. The study considered the combined use of the sugarcane extract and bagasse in the production of ethanol. The authors observed that replacing the conventional distillation by the double-effect system, an increase of 26% of bioethanol production would be obtained by using only 10% of sugarcane bagasse as fuel in the system. In a further study, Dias et al.7 simulated and evaluated the impact of three thermal integration configurations to reduce energy demand for bioethanol production from sugarcane. The most efficient cogeneration system was the Biomass Integrated Gasification Combined Cycle (BIGCC) in comparison with the current system used in the Brazilian bioethanol industries (Rankine Cycle) with either backpressure steam turbine or condensing steam turbine. The authors also stated that a double-effect distillation system could reduce the consumption of steam. However, a limitation highlighted by the authors is the lack of specific equipment to distillate bioethanol by the BIGCC system.
Biotechnological production of butanol has recently attracted the attention of researchers since it was shown to be a potential biofuel.33 The conventional biotechnological approach for butanol production comprises the fermentation performed by mesophilic solvent-producing strains such as Clostridium saccharobutylicum, C. beijerinckii, and C. acetobutylicum.34 ABE, which refers to the mixture of acetone, butanol, and ethanol, is the product of this fermentation process which can be used as a biofuel. However, a low concentration (15–30 g l−1) of this valuable mixture in the fermented biomass makes the recovery of ABE an energy-intensive process and research revealed that about 15 MJ-fuel is required to produce one kilogram of ABE.35
In this context, Diaz & Tost21 proposed 4 processes of heat-integrated distillation and assessed the energy consumption while conducting the fermentation process with several biocatalysts. According to the results, the processes composed of four distillation columns and three distillation columns needed a similar amount of energy (8–12 MJ-fuel per kg-ABE). The authors also indicated that the double-effect system with four columns was the most economical process as the production of 1 kilogram of ABE through this method only cost 0.12–0.16 USD which was cheaper than other studied methods. The authors also mentioned that ABE recovery from dilute solutions by the double-effect system required 6–9 MJ fuel per kg-ABE. Among all the studied methods, vapor compression system distillation required the lowest amount of energy, i.e., 5–7 MJ fuel per kg-ABE.
Moreover, recovering ABE by the double-effect and vapor compression distillation needs a lower amount of energy as compared to integrated reactors. This research revealed that the energy requirements for ABE production were 1.3 to 2.0-fold greater than those of other biofuels, such as isobutanol and ethanol, whereas the energy efficiency of ABE production was similar to that of isobutanol and ethanol production.21
Membrane technology
The mechanism involved in the recovery of ethanol from aqueous solutions by membrane technology can be explained by the higher partial pressure of ethanol concerning water. This difference favors the transport of ethanol from the fermented broth to membrane pores. The processes have been improved to accelerate the recovery of ethanol by reducing the pressure or gas flow in the permeate side of the membrane. Under this condition, the transport of the target compound is facilitated by a concentration gradient across the membrane, which is known as pervaporation. The primary industrial applications are dedicated to removing water from concentrated ethanolic solutions due to the kinetic diameter of water and ethanol (0.32 vs. 0.57 nm, respectively).36
The membrane composition plays a central role in the capacity to effectively separate ethanol from binary solutions and fermented broths (from either glucose solutions or fermentable sugars extracted from natural sources). The study carried out by Liu et al.20 revealed that a membrane composed of ZSM-5 zeolites (Si/Al = 300) and polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) could yield an ethanolic solution of 60.0 wt% from a 10.0 wt% solution (operating at 80 L h−1, 60 °C, and 2300 Pa). Besides, the column was also tested for 1000 h wherein the ethanolic content of the permeate remained constant throughout the testing period. Similarly, Ueno et al.8 using a silicate-1 membrane obtained a more concentrated ethanolic solution of 91.0 wt%. The authors fed the membrane system with a 10 wt% ethanolic solution and observed the same efficiency after 8 h of operation (total flow of 3 kg m−2 h−1 at 323 K).
Due to the complex composition of fermented broths, many researchers proposed and evaluated different membrane systems to recover bioethanol using glucose solution with nutritional supplements for microbial fermentation or fermented broths from several sources of fermentable sugars. The experiment performed by Yi and Wan28 tested a membrane made of vinyltriethoxysilane (VTES)-g-silicalite-1/PDMS/PAN to separate ethanol from a fermented glucose solution and achieve a final ethanol content of 60.0 wt% (total flow of 2.0 L min−1, at 35 °C, at 210 Pa, for up to 8 h). Xue et al.27 also observed a similar effect but with lower final ethanol concentration: 38 wt%. The authors developed a carbon nanotube (CNT)/PDMS membrane that operated with a total flow of 1.2 L min−1, at 60 °C, under pressure lower than 20 kPa, for up to 34 h.
The promising outcomes observed in these studies were also reported with the fermented broth obtained from more complex fermentable sugar sources. The production and concentration of bioethanol from Jerusalem artichoke tubers were evaluated by Song, Oh and Bae.26 In this research, the fermented broth was pervaporated in the PDMS membrane (flow of 1.8 L min−1 and pressure of 5 mmHg). The final ethanolic solution displayed an ethanol content of 85.3 wt%. A similar ethanolic yield was obtained by Nigiz and Hilmioglu,30 who evaluated the fermentation of molasses. The authors obtained 80.0 wt% ethanol solution in the permeate of a PDMS membrane. Similarly, Wei, Tsai, and Weng25 studied the use of a commercial NaA zeolite membrane to pervaporate a rice straw fermented broth. The authors reported a final ethanol concentration of 99.5 wt% with the following operational conditions: the total flow of 6 L h−1, the temperature of 100 °C, and pressure of 5–7 bar.
Purified concentrated ethanolic solutions with >95 wt% ethanol are not easily dehydrated due to the azeotrope formed with water. Under these conditions, the use of membranes focuses on removing water. Li et al.31 tested the efficiency of a polyethyleneimine (PEI)/sodium alginate (SA) membrane to concentrate a 90 wt% ethanolic solution. The authors observed that operating this membrane with a flow of 1.90 kg m−2 h−1, at 80 °C, and the pressure of 100 Pa, the water content in the permeant had a concentration of 99.75 wt%. The experiment carried out by Nigiz, and Hilmioglu30 enhanced the ethanol concentration from 95 to 98.99 wt% by using a carboxymethyl cellulose membrane operating at 25 °C. In this study, the ethanol was produced by fermenting molasses.

Membrane-assisted vapor stripping. 
Vapor stripping is a technique involving the passage of vapor, usually from water in the ethanolic solution of the fermented broth to volatilize ethanol. After that, the vapor flow is separated into two flows: one retentate and one permeate that contain either high or low ethanol concentration dependent on membrane properties. A limited number of configurations have been proposed so far: a batch and a continuous system.37
The experiment conducted by Vane et al.38 evaluated the recovery of ethanol from a 5 wt% ethanol solution in a combined system with a stripping column and a hydrophilic membrane. The operation yielded ethanol-rich retentate vapor containing 80 wt% of ethanol. In a further experiment, Vane et al.37 evaluated the efficiency to recover ethanol from a fermented broth (ethanol content of 35.9 wt%) as a function of the vapor flow rate in the system. The separation was carried out using a membrane composed of hydrophilic cellulose ester layer overcoated by silicone rubber after a vapor stripping step. The authors observed that using vapor flows in the range of 0.02–0.06 kmol h−1, the concentration of ethanol in the retentate was around 90 wt%.
Vane et al.39 evaluated the recovery of ethanol, along with acetone and butanol, from the fermented broth in a membrane filled with a hydrophilic cellulose ester layer overcoated by silicone rubber after a vapor stripping stage. This system displayed the capacity to obtain an ABE-rich fraction (95 wt%) wherein ethanol comprised around 10 wt% of the membrane retentate. In addition, the authors also estimated that the proposed system could reduce energy consumption by 25% in comparison with a simple vapor stripping process. An interesting experiment conducted by Xue et al.27 evaluated the recovery of ABE in a membrane assisted vapor stripping system in comparison with simple gas tripping pervaporation operation. The experiment revealed that the condensate produced from the combined system contained 8.3–8.6 g L−1 of ethanol, while the other two separation strategies produced condensates with 6.3–6.7 (pervaporation) and 7.4–7.7 (gas tripping) g L−1 of ethanol.


Combining extractive and azeotropic distillation. 
Extractive distillation is a technique which separates both close boiling point and azeotropic mixtures. The mechanism is simple: a miscible solvent (entrainer) is added and facilitates the separation of one of the volatile components. Under these conditions, a simple distillation column can be applied to separate the target component. Another similar approach is the azeotropic distillation of ethanolic solutions. This strategy is similar to that applied for extractive distillation of ethanolic solutions, but the entrainer has a different purpose. The entrainer forms an azeotrope with the target component which is vaporized and obtained on the top of the distillation column. The other component is recovered in the bottom of the distillation column. In a posterior conventional distillation column, the target component and the entrainer can be separated.40
The term IBE, which is the abbreviation for isopropanol, butanol, and ethanol, is an emerging biofuel. However, the concentration of this biofuel is more complicated and energy-intensive than conventional bioethanol distillation due to the presence of three binary azeotropes in the fermented broth, i.e., ethanol, butanol, and isopropanol. To overcome this challenge, Díaz and Tost41 designed and developed a novel distillation system, which operates based on a combination of azeotropic and extractive distillation. They also evaluated the proposed system by using computer software, i.e., Aspen Plus® software, and observed that the recovery system needed 6.5–8.2 MJ-fuel per kg-IBE. Moreover, this new distillation technique reduced the fuel requirement using steam compression distillation to 3.4–4.1 MJ-fuel per kg-IBE. According to the results, the energy efficiency of IBE dehydration was in the range of 0.7–0.8. Furthermore, the authors compared the recovery of IBE with alternative biofuels and reported that the energy requirement of IBE was about 1.4–2.4 and 0.9–1.4 times greater than that of ethanol and isobutanol dehydration, respectively. According to the authors, biofuel recovery from the fermented broth through the heat-integrated distillation method represents the highest energy efficiency.

Feed-splitting
Feed splitting is a strategy to improve energy efficiency in a distillation system. A heat exchanger is used to heat the feed flow by cooling the bottom product flow.42 To the best of our knowledge, only a single study explored, using process simulation, the separation of azeotropic ethanol.
Tavan & Shahhosseini9 proposed a feed-splitting system to reduce the energy consumption in the recovery process of azeotropic mixtures such as the fermented broth of the biofuel industry. In this context, the authors employed Hysys process simulation software and relevant optimization analysis. The proposed system could reduce energy consumption by 27% as compared to the conventional system. The authors concluded that the proposed feed-splitting process could be regarded as an energy-saving alternative to the conventional ethanol–water azeotropic process.
Ohmic-assisted hydrodistillation
The term ohmic-assisted hydrodistillation (OAHD) refers to a system that consists of an ohmic heater and condenser sections. While the former generates heat volumetrically (based on the Joule's law), the latter collects and cools down the vapor produced by the heating section.43 The major components of the ohmic heater section are the power supply, electrodes, and a non-electroconductive chamber (flask). This simple design might be combined with other sections, such as safety systems, variable transformers to control the input power, frequency, and variable transformers, data acquisition systems along with thermocouples, voltmeters and other sensors.44,45 Although the OAHD system was first proposed as an energy-saving tool for essential oil extraction,46 later research revealed its potential application for ethanol concentration.19 For instance, an OAHD equipment in the Ohio State University was updated from its primary design: OAHD system to recover essential oils.46 The condenser section of the distillation system was modified to collect ethanol instead of essential oil. This approach successfully separated ethanol from a fermented corn feedstock source from a bioethanol plant and enhances the ethanol concentration from 10% to 47%.24 The authors found that OAHD can save up to 77% of the required energy in the ethanol distillation process.
A further study of this research team explored the applicability of the OAHD technique in producing higher concentrations of bioethanol that can comply with the ASTM standard.47 In this regard, Gavahian, Farahnaky, & Sastry23 combined three consecutive processes of OAHD. According to the authors, the proposed multiple effect arrangement enhanced the concentration of ethanol from 10% to 50%, 76%, and 84% after the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd steps of OAHD, respectively. However, the authors raised the safety concerns regarding the applicability of OAHD for the production of concentrated ethanol (such as above 90%) as this involves distillation of a flammable compound which can lead to disaster due to ignition of high ethanol concentration feed in the case of generation of electrical sparks during the OAHD process. However, it was demonstrated that the proposed method could save more than one-third of both consumed energy and distillation time as compared with the conventional hydrodistillation system. The research also pointed out that OAHD is superior to conventional distillation method regarding process control.
Green extraction of bioactive products
During the bioethanol production process, great amounts of wastes and by-products are produced. These materials are rich sources of high-added value compounds, which can be used as potential food additives and/or nutraceuticals, among other applications.48 In this line, tremendous efforts have been made for new sustainable “green and innovative” technologies in order to reduce extraction time, temperature, and the use of an excessive amount of solvent, which in some cases can be toxic. Moreover, it is also possible to reduce water and energy consumption, as well as CO2 emission and carbon footprint.49–51 The most commonly innovative green and non-thermal technologies include electrotechnologies (pulsed electric fields and high voltage electrical discharges),52 ultrasound,53,54 microwaves,55–57 supercritical fluid extraction,58 high pressure processing,59 supercritical CO2 and, gas-assisted mechanical expression,60,61 enzyme-assisted extraction62 and solar energy,63 which attract considerable interest as alternative tools for “Green” processing.64–67
Pulsed electric fields
The use of pulsed electric fields can potentially enhance the recovery of bioactive compounds.68,69 The mechanism of PEF treatment consists of the disruption of natural dipole between two molecules that are trapping bioactive compounds. For instance, the average distance among membrane components of living cells is increased, particularly those associated with transport, due to the influence of the electric field. Likewise, plant tissue can be disrupted, which facilitates the release of intracellular components.66,68 The control of processing conditions is crucial to improving the yield of extraction. In this sense, selecting the number of pulses, the intensity of field strength and energy input, time of treatment and temperature can be of great value to extract target compounds from a complex matrix.52
Although the amount of information related to the application of pulsed electric field as the extraction technique is limited, a promising result was obtained by Almohammed, Mhemdi, and Vorobiev70 who studied the extraction of fermentable sugars for ethanol fermentation. The sugar-rich extract obtained by pulsed electric field treatment (intensity of 450 V cm−1 for 10 min) had 3.75 times more sugar than the extract obtained by a solid–liquid extraction, which suggests that the sugar beet matrix is influenced by pulsed electric fields. According to the authors, the results support the application of pulsed electric field and also increase the possibility for the valorization of sugar beet residues. Moreover, the potential of PEF for food waste and by-product valorization has been extensively described by several authors. For an interesting review see the study by Puértolas and Barba.52
High voltage electrical discharges
The operation of high voltage electrical discharges consists of placing samples between electrodes and directly applying an electrical discharge for a short time. The samples are usually submerged in aqueous solution for extraction purposes.52 Although the mechanism of high voltage electrical discharges in the liquid medium remains partially explained, it is accepted that components are ionized leading to multiplication of charge carriers and consequent energy transportation to the sample matrix. In more detail, the process is initiated with the formation of vapor channels that are formed between electrodes. Once the vapor channels are formed, the conductivity increases. This condition increases the current and reduces the voltage between electrodes. The whole process occurs in few nanoseconds. The impact of high voltage electrical discharges on the structure is dependent on electrical discharge intensity, frequency, time of operation, and temperature, for instance. The integrity of membranes and complex structures is impaired leading to fragmentation of the matrix and enhancing mass transfer.52,71
Recently, pectin was extracted by high voltage electrical discharges from sugar beet pulp (residue generated from sucrose extraction). The study revealed that the number of pulses, the intensity of pulses, temperature and pH were relevant variables to improve the recovery of pectin. The authors observed that pectin extraction was maximized by applying 100 pulses but no significant recovery yield was obtained with 200 and 500 pulses. The optimization of pectin recovery revealed that pH = 1.5 and 2.0 maximized the extraction of pectin. Similarly, pulse intensity and temperature were proportional to extraction yield wherein the highest yield was obtained with 40 kV and 90 °C, respectively. The authors observed that maximum extraction yield was 53.4% (13.5 g per 100 g DM) in the optimized treatment.72
Enzyme-assisted extraction
Enzyme-assisted extraction is an interesting strategy to recover bioactive compounds from a complex matrix. The concept of such a strategy relies on enzymatic degradation of the matrix to facilitate the removal of target compounds. The use of cellulases, pectinases and other enzymes to disrupt cell walls to recover phenolic compounds with antioxidant activity is a common example of enzyme-assisted extraction.62 The control relies on the characteristics of the matrix and optimum enzymatic activity, which involves variables such as temperature, pH, particle size and solvent/solid ratio.73–75
Zykwinska et al.76 evaluated the effect of cellulases and proteases as a green approach to recover pectin from sugar beet pulp. The extraction of pectin was carried out at 50 °C for 4 h, which yielded 4% pectin extract. The authors also evaluated the composition of pectin and observed that sugar beet pectin was mainly composed of galacturonic acid (403 mg g−1) and arabinan (103 mg g−1). Concha-Olmos and Zúñiga-Hansen77 evaluated the recovery of pectin and pectic-oligosaccharides from sugar beet pulp by the activity of Rohapect DA6L and Macer8 FJ (commercial enzymes). Both enzymes produced extracts predominately composed of oligosaccharides with a polymerization degree greater than 6. However, the study also revealed that Rohapect DA6L was the most effective to release pectic oligosaccharides (94.9% recovery of total pectin) in comparison with Macer8 FJ. Additionally, the authors also characterized the extracted pectin and observed that it was mainly formed by low methoxyl pectin (which in combination with calcium forms low-calorie gels).
Likewise, a study conducted by Holck et al.78 revealed the impact of lyase (pH = 8, 50 °C, 15 h) and rhamnogalacturonan I lyase (pH = 7.8, 60 °C, 2 h) on sugar beet pectin to extract prebiotic oligosaccharides. The authors obtained and characterized homogalacturonans (7 compounds, recovery of 200 mg g−1 pectin) and rhamnogalacturonide (6 compounds, recovery of 67 mg g−1 pectin). In addition, the authors also observed that the homogalacturonide fraction could be considered as a promising prebiotic by inducing the regulation of probiotics in vitro.
Ultrasound-assisted extraction
The propagation of ultrasound in a liquid medium causes a phenomenon known as cavitation. Cavitation is the result of ultrasound wave propagation in a liquid which reduces the pressure and leads to the formation of vapor cavities. The eventual collapse of such cavities creates micro-jetting on the surface of the matrix subjected to ultrasound treatment which increases the interaction between the solvent and high-added value compounds from plant materials (e.g., pectin and bioactive compounds), thus promoting their subsequent recovery.53,65 The main mechanisms associated with ultrasound extraction are capillarity, detexturation, erosion, fragmentation, and sonoporation. Moreover, these mechanisms are suggested to co-occur as a consequence of the matrix composition, structure, and ultrasound treatment conditions.79–81
The use of ultrasound to assist the extraction of bioactive components from bioethanol processing was evaluated in a previous study. Zheng et al.82 extracted potential bioactive compounds from sugarcane bagasse by ultrasound (40 kHz). The results obtained from the 30% hydroalcoholic fraction indicated that sugarcane bagasse contains phenolic compounds with antioxidant activity (using DPPH, ABTS and ORAC assays) and inhibitory activity against sucrase and maltase while reducing insulin resistance. The authors identified the main phenolic compounds in such a fraction: p-coumaric acid, genistein, genistin, quercetin, and tricin 4-O-guaiacol glyceryl ether-7-O-glucopyranoside. A similar experiment was carried out by Juttuporn et al.,83 who explored the ultrasound technology (20–40 W, 3–9 min) to increase the extraction of phenolic compounds from steam-exploded sugarcane bagasse. The authors obtained the highest yield of extraction (47.65 mg g−1), total phenolic content (29.11 mg GAE g−1), flavonoid content (1.47 mg QE g−1), and ABTS radical scavenging activity (82.54 mg TE g−1) by carrying out the ultrasound extraction at 40 W for 6 min. In addition, the optimized ultrasound extraction also produced extracts with the lowest minimum inhibitory concentration against Staphylococcus aureus (1.875 mg mL−1) and Escherichia coli O157:H7 (7.5 mg mL−1).
Likewise, sugar beet molasses is a source of phenolic compounds (with antioxidant activity) which can be recovered by ultrasound extraction.84 The ultrasound treatment maximized the total phenolic recovery to 17.36 mg GAE per 100 mL extract and total anthocyanin content to 31.81 mg per 100 g extract. Antioxidant activity (using ABTS radical scavenging activity assay) was also improved by ultrasound treatment wherein a maximum of 16.66 mg TE g−1 was reported by the authors. The authors optimized the solvent composition (1.55–1.72 mol L−1 HCl and 57–63% ethanol), temperature (41–48 °C), and time requirement (66–73 min). The study also revealed that main active compounds in sugar beet molasses were flavonoids (e.g., catechin), phenolic acids (such as hydroxybenzoic acid and syringic acid), and anthocyanins (e.g., cyanidin-3-O-rutinoside and delphinidin-3-O-glucuronide).
Microwave-assisted extraction
The use of microwave technology is an emerging approach to recover pectin and bioactive compounds.65 The fast heating of the extraction solvent is explained by the simultaneous ionic conduction and dipole rotation of solvent molecules by the influence of the electromagnetic field. While ionic induction causes the migration of solvent molecules (friction), the dipole rotation by means of continuous alignment and realignment of solvent molecules (4.9 × 109 times per s) increases the solvent temperature. The appropriate selection of solvents depends on their capacity to dissipate energy to other molecules, which is dependent on the dielectric constant. Water is usually used for microwave-assisted extraction due to its higher dielectric constant (78.3 at 20 °C) in comparison with other solvents such as ethanol and methanol (24.3 and 32.6 at 20 °C, respectively). Three main strategies can be used (alone or combined) to extract bioactive compounds from the matrix: first, the use of a solvent (or a mixture) with high capacity to absorb microwave energy; second, the use of a mixture formed by a strong and weak microwave absorbing energy; and third, the use of a solvent that does not absorb microwave energy, while the matrix has a high dielectric loss.85
Regarding the use of microwaves to recover high added-value compounds, Fishman et al.86 optimized the extraction of pectin from sugar beet pulp. The experiment evaluated the impact of processing time (3–20 min), and pressure (25–75 psi) wherein the matrix was irradiated with 1200 W of microwave power at a frequency of 2450 MHz. The highest recovery of pectin (16.80%) was obtained by processing sugar beet pulp for 10 min at 50 psi. The authors also argued that the molecular mass of extracted pectin was influenced by pressure and temperature, particularly at mild pressure and low temperature. An interesting experiment was carried out by Peng et al.87 wherein ultrasound and microwave techniques were combined to extract pectin from sugar beet pulp. The authors optimized the extraction with a solid-to-solvent ratio of 1:30, at 92 °C, for 37 min. The pectin extracted by the optimized method displayed higher average molecular weight, viscosity, emulsifying activity and stability than pectin extracted by a conventional method.
Subcritical fluid extraction
The subcritical fluids are produced by combining pressure and heating to obtain a saturated liquid with unique characteristics wherein temperature is held between atmospheric boiling and critical points.88 The system also requires pressures high enough to prevent liquid vaporization. Particularly for water (temperature between 100 and 374 °C), its properties as a solvent are improved: enhanced diffusion rate and reduced viscosity and surface tension which facilitates the extraction of target compounds.89
Subcritical fluid extraction was used by Sato et al.90 to recover neutral sugars (mainly arabinooligosaccharides and feruloylated arabino-oligosaccharides) and ferulic acid (free and ester form) from sugar beet fiber by two systems (batch and flow systems). The experiment was carried out at temperatures between 160 and 180 °C for 5–15 min in both batch and continuous systems. According to the authors, the highest extraction yields for neutral sugars (28.5 wt%) and total ferulic acid (0.55 wt%) were obtained at 160 °C for 12 min in the batch system. In the flow reactor system, the authors evaluated the impact of extraction time (7–12 min), while the temperature was set at 170 °C. The extraction yield of neutral sugars (27.3–27.7 wt%) and ferulic acid (0.52–0.54 wt%) was in the same range of results obtained by the batch system.
An interesting experiment combining ultrasound (pre-treatment) and subcritical water to extract pectin-related materials and ferulic acid from sugar beet pulp was carried out by Chen, Fu, and Luo.91 The authors performed the ultrasound pre-treatment prior to subcritical water extraction: sonic frequency of 25 kHz at an ultrasonic intensity of 1 W cm−2 for 10 min. The effect of pressure, temperature, time and solvent-to-solid ratio on the extraction of pectin materials by subcritical water extraction was studied. The maximum yield of pectin-related materials (24.63%) was obtained by conducting the extraction at 10.7 MPa, for 30.49 min, at 120.7 °C and the solvent-to-solid ratio of 44.03. The authors also characterized the composition of extracted pectin, which was mainly composed of galacturonic acid (59.1%) and arabinose (21.6%).
Ohmic-assisted extraction
The terms ohmic heating and moderate electric field are used to designate the electrical treatment of materials. While the former profoundly increase the temperature of materials, the latter are usually performed at relatively lower temperatures.45 In addition, electroporation and enhanced cell permeability mechanisms, which can accelerate the extraction of valuable compounds, are more intense in moderate electric field. Both these techniques have been successfully used as a green energy-saving technique for the extraction of bioactive compounds from soybean slurry,92 rapeseed slurry,93 and rice bran,94 colored potato,95 and microalgae.96,97 Furthermore, a proposed combination of ohmic heating and traditional systems by Gavahian et al.46 has been successfully used for the extraction of bioactive compounds from thyme,43 mint,98–100 oregano,54 and citronella.101 This method has been shown to be a time- and energy saving approach for the extraction of bioactive compounds.44,45 A comprehensive review of this extraction approach showed that further studies on the sustainability and safety aspects of OAHD are the prerequisite for its industrial adaptation.45
Techno-economic evaluation
Techno-economic evaluation of emerging green technologies in both distillation of ethanol and extraction of bioactive compounds is of great interest to select the most appropriate approach due to the variety of raw materials and high added-value products. Although the amount of information about this topic is scarce, the current results available in the literature show a promising scenario for such technologies.
Regarding the techno-economic evaluation of green distillation technologies, Dias et al.102 compared the consumption of energy (kW) between a conventional distillation and a double-effect distillation column. The integrated approach can reduce the energy consumption (hot utility demand) by using sugarcane bagasse as fuel. The authors also argued that additional fermentable sugar could be obtained from the exceeding sugarcane bagasse, which could lead to increasing production of ethanol. However, the surplus of electricity produced is reduced from 33.0 to 13.5 kW h t−1 cane.
In another study, Dias et al.7 obtained promising theoretical results about the use of double-effect, heat integration and co-generation systems for a bioethanol refinery. The study indicated that the most relevant reduction in hot utility demand was obtained by combining a double-effect column with thermal integration. In addition, electricity and bagasse surpluses were obtained when the Rankine cycle was used in the cogeneration system depending on the type of turbine installed in the system. According to the authors, condensing steam turbine and back pressure steam turbine resulted in electricity and bagasse surpluses, respectively. It is worth mentioning that authors also evaluated the cost of energy for the abovementioned system as well as for a Biomass Integrated Gasification Combined Cycle (BIGCC). Although no bagasse surplus was obtained in this configuration, the energy surplus was enhanced and production cost was decreased.
Regarding the final price of ethanol, the theoretical evaluation performed by Quintero et al.103 revealed the potential economic benefit to produce ethanol from lignocellulosic raw materials combined with a BIGCC system to co-regenerate energy in the process. According to authors, the use of such a system reduced the final cost of ethanol (for all lignocellulosic raw materials) from 0.578–0.767 (conventional distillation) to 0.487–0.684 (BIGCC system) US$ per L. The authors also highlighted the importance of commercializing the surplus of electricity in the processing plant operating with the cogeneration approach in order to reduce the production cost of ethanol. It is also important to mention that the final price for ethanol under such conditions can differ from other studies, as indicated by the authors. A similar conclusion was obtained by Rincón et al.104 who estimated the influence of conventional, Biomass Steam Turbine (BST) and BIGCC systems on the production cost of ethanol. In addition to improving energy use, both technologies (BST and BIGCC) reduced the production cost of ethanol from 0.51 US$ per L (obtained from the conventional process) to 0.46–0.48 in the BST and 0.42–0.43 US$ per L in the BIGCC system. It is important to note that such reductions are also attributed to the commercialization of electricity surplus.
In the case of membrane assisted separation of ethanol–water mixtures, the price for m2 is an important indicator regarding processing viability. An interesting approach to estimate the net present value profits (indicates the time required to obtain a positive balance between inflow and outflow cash) was used to evaluated the economic viability of such technology. The study indicated that expensive membranes (costing $1000 per m2) would not return a profit after a 20-year period. Differently, the reasonable payback period of 4 years could be achieved by using $500 per m2 membranes, which can be proportionally reduced to 1 year as membrane price is reduced to $100 per m2. The authors also argued that relevant investment in membrane development (such as the production of thinner and less expensive supports) is an important strategy to reduce the final price of membranes.105
The membrane technology was also related to lower energy consumption in comparison with azeotropic distillation.106 The operational cost in the azeotropic system was estimated to be 0.350€ per kg ethanol in the configuration of one practical azeotropic distillation. Moreover, operational cost could be improved to 0.550 and 0.742€ per kg ethanol by using two and three practical azeotropic distillation systems, respectively. Conversely, the operational cost for membrane technology was estimated to be 0.168€ per kg ethanol and cost of conventional distillation was estimated to be 0.157€ per kg ethanol.
The combination of approaches to carrying out bioethanol separation was also evaluated in the literature. For instance, Vázquez-Ojeda et al.107 evaluated the utility costs in an interesting approach wherein extractive distillation and energy integration were combined to improve the energy efficiency of bioethanol separation from water. Two main outcomes were obtained from this study. Energy integration was associated with reduced utility cost in both conventional and extractive distillation. In contrast, the cost associated with extractive distillation was associated with higher values than those obtained from conventional extraction. The authors concluded that conventional distillation with energy integration was the best processing condition to distill bioethanol.
To the best of our knowledge, no techno-economic evaluation of industrial-scale green technologies for bioactive compound extraction from bioethanol residues has been carried out. However, it is relevant to comment that important advances were reported for the green extraction technologies discussed in this review. For instance, pilot scale studies about pulsed electric field,108 high voltage electrical discharges,109 and solvent-free microwave110 extractions were reported in the literature.
Although comparisons between green technologies are difficult due to the characteristics of each approach, selected variables, production scale and amount of information available in the scientific literature, it is also important to highlight that some green technology can influence the total utility requirement. For instance, Kunnakorn et al.106 proposed an azeotropic and membrane distillation of ethanol as a green approach for conventional distillation. The authors estimated higher energy consumption in azeotropic distillation than in conventional and membrane distillation (18.20 vs. 8.18 and 9.31 MJ kg−1 ethanol, respectively). Differently, Vázquez-Ojeda et al.107 simulated and compared the utility cost of distilling ethanol in four systems: conventional, extractive distillation and combining both technologies with the heat-integration approach. The most energy efficient distillation system was obtained combining conventional and heat integrated distillation.
The use of green technologies in the distillation of ethanol and extraction of bioactive compounds has potential to reduce the environmental impact to obtain both products but the investment to achieve such an operational condition is substantially higher than conventional process operation, which comprises relatively simple equipment and systems. However, prospective advances in the engineering and system design may reduce the equipment cost to address this limitation.111
Consequently, scaling up green technologies remains a major challenge in the current scenario. For instance, more studies are necessary to estimate the operational conditions at different scales and then perform experiments to evaluate the real operational conditions, define suitable control systems, and calculate the operational cost for heat-integration distillation.32 A similar condition can be observed in membrane technology. This technology requires advances regarding modeling processing operation, development of materials with higher separation performance, reduced manufacture cost, enhanced ethanol extraction, and improved flux and resistance against ethanol and temperature.112
In addition, one can speculate about the potential mismatch in demand between ethanol production and extraction of bioactive compounds in an integrated biorefinery scenario. Since these processes explore different compounds from the same raw materials (fermentable sugar for ethanol production and other secondary compounds as bioactive agents) the ethanol and bioactive compound productivities are spectated to be proportionally influenced. This scenario is different from that usually observed for ethanol and sugar refineries.113
Nonetheless, the current scenario of green technologies, at least at a theoretical level, supports further development of such approaches and related technological advance to obtain both ethanol and bioactive compounds. At the practical level, membrane technology is the most advanced strategy among all green options for ethanol distillation due to important advances in the development of materials and separation performance.
Conclusions
Energy-saving strategies have been showing promising results as alternatives to conventional distillation to obtain ethanol, both zeotropic and anhydrous, from fermented broths. Most of the recently conducted studies reveal that these emerging technologies can reduce the environmental impact and processing cost, and enable bioethanol plants to achieve pre-established ethanol purity. On the other hand, the practical implementation of the proposed systems remains the main obstacle to establish energy-saving technologies in the bioethanol production industry.
The green technologies to extract bioactive compounds are underused strategies to reduce environmental impact and to improve the economic value of the bioethanol processing chain. The identification and quantification of bioactive compounds must receive more attention along with characterization of the bioactive mechanism due to the promising results obtained so far. However, such results are still at the laboratory scale, and a limited amount of information is known about the efficacy of up-scale units in the recovery of bioactive compounds. Furthermore, recommending the most suitable process for bioactive compound extraction is challenging at this moment due to the limited number of publications in this area of the science and the diversity of information in the literature. Therefore, further research should focus on the development of economically viable energy saving distillation systems, the impact of processing variables on the extraction of bioactive, the scale-up of such operations, and the characterization of extracted bioactive compounds.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
Mohsen Gavahian wants to acknowledge the support from the Ministry of Economic Affairs, project no. 107-EC-17-A-22-0332, Taiwan, Republic of China. Amin Mousavi Khaneghah wishes to acknowledge the support from CNPq-TWAS Postgraduate Fellowship (Grant # 3240274290). Francisco J. Barba would like to acknowledge the support from “Generalitat Valenciana” through the project for emerging research groups GV/2018//040. Paulo E. S. Munekata acknowledges postdoctoral fellowship support from Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness (MINECO, Spain) “Juan de la Cierva” program (FJCI-2016-29486). José M. Lorenzo and Paulo E. S. Munekata are members of the MARCARNE network, funded by CYTED (ref. 116RT0503).
References

          IEA, Key world energy statistics,  2017 Search PubMed .
M. Balat, H. Balat and C. Öz, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2008, 34, 551–573 CrossRef CAS .

          Anonymous, Ethanol production in selected countries, https://www.statista.com/statistics/281606/ethanol-production-in-selected-countries/ (accessed on 2018/09/19),  2018 Search PubMed .

          RFA, World fuel ethanol production, https://ethanolrfa.org/resources/industry/statistics/ (access on 17.08.2018),  2018 Search PubMed .
D. J. ÓBrien, L. H. Roth and A. J. McAloon, J. Membr. Sci., 2000, 166, 105–111 CrossRef .
Z. Olujić, M. Jödecke, A. Shilkin, G. Schuch and B. Kaibel, Chem. Eng. Process. Process Intensif., 2009, 48, 1089–1104 CrossRef .
M. O. S. Dias, M. Modesto, A. V. Ensinas, S. A. Nebra, R. M. Filho and C. E. V. Rossell, Energy, 2011, 36, 3691–3703 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ueno, H. Negishi, T. Okuno, T. Saito, H. Tawarayama, S. Ishikawa, M. Miyamoto, S. Uemiya, Y. Sawada and Y. Oumi, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2017, 187, 343–354 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tavan and S. Shahhosseini, Energy Technol., 2016, 4, 424–428 CrossRef CAS .
W. T. Tsai, M. K. Lee and Y. M. Chang, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 2006, 76, 230–237 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, Z. Ma and S. Yao, Food Bioprod. Process., 2015, 94, 547–554 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin and S. Tanaka, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2006, 69, 627–642 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          D. Rutz and R. Janssen, Biofuel Technology Handbook, WIP Renewable Energies, Munich,  2007 Search PubMed .

          M. W. Graeme, Bioethanol science and technology of fuel alcohol, Graeme M. W. and Ventus Publishing ApS, London,  2010 Search PubMed .

          Y. Yacob Gebreyohannes Hiben, KTH School of Industrial Engineering and Management, Energy Technology EGI-2013-ECS, Division of Energy and Climate Studies,  2013 .

          C. E. Wyman, Ethanol fuel, in Encyclopedia of Energy, ed. C. J. Cleveland, R. U. Ayres, R. Costanza and J. Goldemberg, Elsevier Science, Amsterdam,  2004, pp. 541–555 Search PubMed .

          E. Gnansounou, Fuel ethanol current status and outlook, in Handbook of Plant Based Biofuel, ed. A. Pandey, CRC Press, Ohio,  2009, pp. 57–71 Search PubMed .
Y. Khambhaty, K. Mody, M. R. Gandhi, S. Thampy, P. Maiti, H. Brahmbhatt, K. Eswaran and P. K. Ghosh, Bioresour. Technol., 2012, 103, 180–185 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Gavahian, A. Farahnaky and S. Sastry, Food Bioprod. Process., 2016, 98, 44–49 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, J. Chen, X. Zhan, M. Fang, T. Wang and J. Li, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2015, 150, 257–267 CrossRef CAS .
V. H. G. Díaz and G. O. Tost, Chem. Eng. Process. Process Intensif., 2016, 108, 117–124 CrossRef .
M. O. S. Dias, A. V. Ensinas, S. A. Nebra, R. Maciel Filho, C. E. V. Rossell and M. R. W. Maciel, Chem. Eng. Res. Des., 2009, 87, 1206–1216 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gavahian, A. Farahnaky and S. Sastry, Food Bioprod. Process., 2016, 100, 85–91 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gavahian, A. Farahnaky, M. Shavezipur and S. Sastry, Innovative Food Sci. Emerging Technol., 2016, 35, 45–51 CrossRef CAS .
H.-J. Wei, T.-Y. Tsai and Y.-H. Weng, Korean J. Chem. Eng., 2016, 33, 1362–1368 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Song, C. Oh and H.-J. Bae, Bioresour. Technol., 2017, 244, 1068–1072 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xue, Z. Wang, S. Wang, X. Zhang, L. Chen, Y. Mu and F. Bai, Biotechnol. Biofuels, 2016, 9, 1–9 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Yi and Y. Wan, J. Membr. Sci., 2017, 524, 132–140 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Collura and W. L. Luyben, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 1988, 27, 1686–1696 CrossRef CAS .
F. U. Nigiz and N. D. Hilmioglu, Energy Sources, Part A, 2016, 38, 3348–3353 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, X. Si, X. Li, N. Wang, Q. An and S. Ji, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2018, 192, 205–212 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Jana, Appl. Energy, 2010, 87, 1477–1494 CrossRef CAS .

          N. Qureshi, S. Liu and T. C. Ezeji, Cellulosic Butanol Production from Agricultural Biomass and Residues: Recent Advances in Technology, in Advanced Biofuels and Bioproducts, ed. J. Lee, Springer, New York,  2013, pp. 247–265 Search PubMed .
S. Y. Lee, J. H. Park, S. H. Jang, L. K. Nielsen, J. Kim and K. S. Jung, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 2008, 101, 209–228 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Qureshi, S. Hughes, I. S. Maddox and M. A. Cotta, Bioprocess Biosyst. Eng., 2005, 27, 215–222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Wei, L.-H. Cheng, L. Zhang, X.-H. Xu, H.-L. Chen and C.-J. Gao, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2014, 30, 388–400 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Vane, F. R. Alvarez, L. Rosenblum and S. Govindaswamy, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2013, 52, 1033–1041 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Vane, F. R. Alvarez, Y. Huang and R. W. Baker, J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., 2010, 85, 502–511 CAS .
L. M. Vane, F. R. Alvarez, L. Rosenblum and S. Govindaswamy, J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., 2013, 88, 1448–1458 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lei, C. Li and B. Chen, Sep. Purif. Rev., 2003, 32, 121–213 CrossRef CAS .
V. H. G. Diaz and G. O. Tost, Chem. Eng. Process. Process Intensif., 2017, 112, 56–61 CrossRef .
G. Soave and J. A. Feliu, Appl. Therm. Eng., 2002, 22, 889–896 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gavahian, A. Farahnaky, K. Javidnia and M. Majzoobi, Innovative Food Sci. Emerging Technol., 2012, 14, 85–91 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gavahian and A. Farahnaky, Trends Food Sci. Technol., 2018, 72, 153–161 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gavahian, Y.-H. Chu and S. Sastry, Compr. Rev. Food Sci. Food Saf., 2018, 17, 1040–1052 CrossRef .
M. Gavahian, A. Farahnaky, M. Majzoobi, K. Javidnia, M. J. Saharkhiz and G. Mesbahi, Int. J. Food Sci. Technol., 2011, 46, 2619–2627 CrossRef CAS .

          ASTM, Standard specification for denatured fuel ethanol for blending with gasolines for use as automotive spark-ignition engine fuel: D4806-18, in Annual Book of ASTM standards, A. S. for Testing and Materials, American Society for Testing and Materials, Philadelphia, PA,  2018 Search PubMed .
D. Granato, D. S. Nunes and F. J. Barba, Trends Food Sci. Technol., 2017, 62, 13–22 CrossRef CAS .
N. N. Misra, M. Koubaa, S. Roohinejad, P. Juliano, H. Alpas, R. S. Inàcio, J. A. Saraiva and F. J. Barba, Food Res. Int., 2017, 97, 318–339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Clark, RSC Green Chem., 2016, 2016–Janua, 1–11 Search PubMed .
J. H. Clark, T. J. Farmer, L. Herrero-Davila and J. Sherwood, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 3914–3934 RSC .
E. Puértolas and F. J. Barba, Food Bioprod. Process., 2016, 100, 172–184 CrossRef .
E. Roselló-Soto, C. M. Galanakis, M. Brnčić, V. Orlien, F. J. Trujillo, R. Mawson, K. Knoerzer, B. K. Tiwari and F. J. Barba, Trends Food Sci. Technol., 2015, 42, 134–149 CrossRef .
S. M. B. Hashemi, A. Mousavi Khaneghah, M. Koubaa, F. J. Barba, E. Abedi, M. Niakousari and J. Tavakoli, Process Biochem., 2018, 65, 197–204 CrossRef CAS .
M. Koubaa, H. Mhemdi, F. J. Barba, S. Roohinejad, R. Greiner and E. Vorobiev, Food Res. Int., 2016, 85, 59–66 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Şahin, R. Samli, A. S. B. Tan, F. J. Barba, F. Chemat, G. Cravotto and J. M. Lorenzo, Molecules, 2017, 22, 1056 CrossRef .
M. Bouras, M. Chadni, F. J. Barba, N. Grimi, O. Bals and E. Vorobiev, Ind. Crops Prod., 2015, 77, 590–601 CrossRef CAS .
E. Roselló-Soto, M. M. Poojary, F. J. Barba, J. M. Lorenzo, J. Mañes and J. C. Moltó, Innovative Food Sci. Emerging Technol., 2018, 45, 306–312 CrossRef .
F. J. Barba, N. S. Terefe, R. Buckow, D. Knorr and V. Orlien, Food Res. Int., 2015, 77(Part 4), 725–742 CrossRef .
M. Koubaa, L. Lepreux, F. J. Barba, H. Mhemdi and E. Vorobiev, J. Cleaner Prod., 2017, 166, 387–394 CrossRef CAS .
M. Koubaa, F. J. Barba, H. Mhemdi, N. Grimi, W. Koubaa and E. Vorobiev, Innovative Food Sci. Emerging Technol., 2015, 32, 172–180 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhu, S. Li, J. He, R. Thirumdas, D. Montesano and F. J. Barba, Food Res. Int., 2018, 111, 291–298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Afzal, A. Munir, A. Ghafoor and J. L. Alvarado, Renewable Energy, 2017, 113, 22–29 CrossRef CAS .
F. J. Barba, Z. Zhu, M. Koubaa, A. S. Sant'Ana and V. Orlien, Trends Food Sci. Technol., 2016, 49, 96–109 CrossRef CAS .
M. Marić, A. N. Grassino, Z. Zhu, F. J. Barba, M. Brnćić and S. Rimac Brnćić, Trends Food Sci. Technol., 2018, 76, 28–37 CrossRef .
P. Putnik, D. Bursać Kovacević, A. Režek Jambrak, F. J. Barba, G. Cravotto, A. Binello, J. M. Lorenzo and A. Shpigelman, Molecules, 2017, 22, 680 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Pateiro, F. J. Barba, R. Domínguez, A. S. Sant'Ana, A. Mousavi Khaneghah, M. Gavahian, B. Gómez and J. M. Lorenzo, Food Res. Int., 2018, 113, 156–166 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. J. Barba, O. Parniakov, S. A. Pereira, A. Wiktor, N. Grimi, N. Boussetta, J. A. Saraiva, J. Raso, O. Martin-Belloso, D. Witrowa-Rajchert, N. Lebovka and E. Vorobiev, Food Res. Int., 2015, 77, 773–798 CrossRef .
E. Puértolas, M. Koubaa and F. J. Barba, Food Res. Int., 2016, 80, 19–26 CrossRef .
F. Almohammed, H. Mhemdi and E. Vorobiev, Appl. Energy, 2016, 162, 49–57 CrossRef CAS .
O. Parniakov, F. J. Barba, N. Grimi, N. Lebovka and E. Vorobiev, Food Res. Int., 2014, 65, 337–343 CrossRef CAS .
F. Almohammed, M. Koubaa, A. Khelfa, M. Nakaya, H. Mhemdi and E. Vorobiev, Food Bioprod. Process., 2017, 103, 95–103 CrossRef CAS .
K. Vilkhu, R. Mawson, L. Simons and D. Bates, Innovative Food Sci. Emerging Technol., 2008, 9, 161–169 CrossRef CAS .
M. Puri, D. Sharma and C. J. Barrow, Trends Biotechnol., 2012, 30, 37–44 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Roselló-Soto, O. Parniakov, Q. Deng, A. Patras, M. Koubaa, N. Grimi, N. Boussetta, B. K. Tiwari, E. Vorobiev, N. Lebovka and F. J. Barba, Food Eng. Rev., 2016, 8, 214–234 CrossRef .
A. Zykwinska, M.-H. Boiffard, H. Kontkanen, J. Buchert, J.-F. Thibault and E. Bonnin, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2008, 56, 8926–8935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Concha-Olmos and M. E. Zúñiga-Hansen, Chem. Eng. J., 2012, 192, 29–36 CrossRef CAS .
J. Holck, K. Hjernø, A. Lorentzen, L. K. Vigsnæs, L. Hemmingsen, T. R. Licht, J. D. Mikkelsen and A. S. Meyer, Process Biochem., 2011, 46, 1039–1049 CrossRef CAS .
N. N. Misra, A. Martynenko, F. Chemat, L. Paniwnyk, F. J. Barba and A. R. Jambrak, Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr., 2018, 58, 1832–1863 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Giacometti, D. Bursać Kovaćević, P. Putnik, D. Gabrić, T. Bilušić, G. Krešić, V. Stulić, F. J. Barba, F. Chemat, G. Barbosa-Cánovas and A. Režek Jambrak, Food Res. Int., 2018, 113, 245–262 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Chemat, N. Rombaut, A.-G. Sicaire, A. Meullemiestre, A.-S. Fabiano-Tixier and M. Abert-Vian, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2017, 34, 540–560 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Zheng, S. Su, H. Zhou, H. Yan, J. Ye, Z. Zhao, L. You and X. Fu, Ind. Crops Prod., 2017, 101, 104–114 CrossRef CAS .
W. Juttuporn, P. Thiengkaew, A. Rodklongtan, M. Rodprapakorn and P. Chitprasert, Sugar Tech, 2018, 20, 599–608 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chen, Y. Zhao and S. Yu, Food Chem., 2015, 172, 543–550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Sparr Eskilsson and E. Björklund, J. Chromatogr. A, 2000, 902, 227–250 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Fishman, H. K. Chau, P. H. Cooke and A. T. Hotchkiss Jr., J. Agric. Food Chem., 2008, 56, 1471–1478 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-Y. Peng, T.-H. Mu, M. Zhang, H.-N. Sun, J.-W. Chen and M. Yu, Int. J. Food Sci. Technol., 2015, 50, 758–765 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhu, R. Zhang, S. Zhan, J. He, F. J. Barba, G. Cravotto, W. Wu and S. Li, Molecules, 2017, 22, 1788 CrossRef PubMed .

          A. H. Asl and M. Khajenoori, Subcritical water extraction, in Mass Transfer - Advances in sustainable energy and environment oriented numerical modeling, ed. H. Nakajima, IntechOpen Ltda., London,  2013, pp. 459–487 Search PubMed .
N. Sato, Y. Takano, M. Mizuno, K. Nozaki, S. Umemura, T. Matsuzawa, Y. Amano and S. Makishima, J. Supercrit. Fluids, 2013, 79, 84–91 CrossRef CAS .
H.-M. Chen, X. Fu and Z.-G. Luo, Food Chem., 2015, 168, 302–310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Pare, A. Nema, V. K. Singh and B. L. Mandhyan, J. Food Sci. Technol., 2014, 51, 1606–1611 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Sakharam, J. P. Pandey, A. Singh, A. Kumar and A. K. Shukla, Int. J. Innov. Res. Sci. Technol., 2016, 2, 211–215 Search PubMed .
G. R. Nair, V. R. Divya, L. Prasannan, V. Habeeba, M. V. Prince and G. V. Raghavan, J. Food Sci. Technol., 2014, 51, 2692–2698 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. N. Pereira, R. M. Rodrigues, Z. Genisheva, H. Oliveira, V. de Freitas, J. A. Teixeira and A. A. Vicente, LWT–Food Sci. Technol., 2016, 74, 493–503 CrossRef CAS .

          G. Fraccola, B. D. O. Fernandes, P. Geada, G. Pataro, G. Ferrari, A. A. Vicente and R. N. C. Pereira, in Poster session presentation at the meeting of the 2016 IFT, Chicago,  2016 Search PubMed .
N. Yodsuwan, P. Kamonpatana, Y. Chisti and S. Sirisansaneeyakul, J. Biotechnol., 2018, 267, 71–78 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Gavahian, R. Farhoosh, K. Javidnia, F. Shahidi and A. Farahnaky, Innovative Food Sci. Emerging Technol., 2015, 29, 161–169 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gavahian, A. Farahnaky, R. Farhoosh, K. Javidnia and F. Shahidi, Food Bioprod. Process., 2015, 94, 50–58 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gavahian, R. Farhoosh, A. Farahnaky, K. Javidnia and F. Shahidi, Int. Food Res. J., 2015, 22, 283–288 CAS .
M. Gavahian, Y.-T. Lee and Y.-H. Chu, Innovative Food Sci. Emerging Technol., 2018, 48, 33–41 CrossRef CAS .
M. O. S. Dias, A. V. Ensinas, S. A. Nebra, R. Maciel Filho, C. E. V. Rossell and M. R. W. Maciel, Chem. Eng. Res. Des., 2009, 87, 1206–1216 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Quintero, J. Moncada and C. A. Cardona, Bioresour. Technol., 2013, 139, 300–307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. E. Rincón, L. A. Becerra, J. Moncada and C. A. Cardona, Waste Biomass Valorization, 2014, 5, 189–198 CrossRef .
N. Mittal, P. Bai, J. I. Siepmann, P. Daoutidis and M. Tsapatsis, J. Membr. Sci., 2017, 540, 464–476 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kunnakorn, T. Rirksomboon, K. Siemanond, P. Aungkavattana, N. Kuanchertchoo, P. Chuntanalerg, K. Hemra, S. Kulprathipanja, R. B. James and S. Wongkasemjit, Renewable Energy, 2013, 51, 310–316 CrossRef CAS .
M. Vázquez-Ojeda, J. G. Segovia-Hernández and J. M. Ponce-Ortega, Chem. Eng. Technol., 2013, 36, 1865–1873 CrossRef .
E. Puértolas, N. López, G. Saldaña, I. Álvarez and J. Raso, J. Food Eng., 2010, 98, 120–125 CrossRef .
N. Boussetta, E. Vorobiev, T. Reess, A. De Ferron, L. Pecastaing, R. Ruscassié and J. Lanoisellé, Innovative Food Sci. Emerging Technol., 2012, 16, 129–136 CrossRef CAS .
A. Filly, X. Fernandez, M. Minuti, F. Visinoni, G. Cravotto and F. Chemat, Food Chem., 2014, 150, 193–198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. N. Hamelinck, G. Van Hooijdonk and A. P. C. Faaij, Biomass Bioenergy, 2005, 28, 384–410 CrossRef CAS .
G. Lewandowicz, W. Białas, B. Marczewski and D. Szymanowska, J. Membr. Sci., 2011, 375, 212–219 CrossRef CAS .
M. Oliveira, D. S. Dias, R. Maciel, P. Eduardo, O. Cavalett, C. Eduardo, V. Rossell and A. Bonomi, Environ. Dev., 2015, 15, 35–51 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Bioethanol production around the world in 2017. https://www.statista.com/statistics/281606/ethanol-production-in-selected-countries/ (accessed on 2018/09/19).	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic representation of the “generation” steps during bioethanol production using different renewable resources.	 

 	Fig. 3  A schematic representation of bioethanol production from three common sources: corn, sugarcane, and cellulosic biomass.	 


*,1Sugarcane (Saccharum officinarum)	Cane stalk cut, mainly from field	Crushing, soaking, chemical process	Heat electricity molasses
*,2Sugar beet (Beta vulgaris)	Beets harvested while foliage left on the field	Sugar extraction	Animal feed fertilizer
**,2Corn (Zea mays)	Starchy parts harvested while stalks left on the field	Starch separation milling, conversion to sugar by enzyme application	Animal feed
**,2Wheat (Triticum)	Starchy parts harvested while stalks left on the field	Starch separation milling, conversion to sugar by enzyme application	Animal feed
**,2Potatoes (Solanum tuberosum)	Potatoes harvested while foliage left on the field	Washing, cooking, starch separation, conversion to sugar by enzyme application	Animal feed industrial use
***,3Grasses (several species)	Grass cut with regrowth	Sacarification	Heat electricity animal feed bio-plastics
***,3Trees (several species)	Full plant above ground harvested	Cellulose conversion to sugar by enzymatic hydrolysis (sacarification)	Heat electricity animal feed bio-plastics
****,3Crop residue, Forestry waste	Collected, separated, and cleaned to extract material with high cellulose content	Sacarification	Heat electricity animal feed bio-plastics

 	Fig. 4  Some of the value-added compounds that have been successfully extracted from bioethanol waste through green valorization techniques.	 


Heat integrated distillation	
1Replacing the conventional distillation with the double-effect system, an increase of 26% in bioethanol production would be obtained by using only 10% of sugarcane bagasse as fuel in the system	Dias et al.22
Dias et al.7

2Heat integrated distillation can reduce the distillation cost	Diaz & Tost21
Membrane-based technologies	
2The membrane system concentrated ethanol solution from 10 to 60%	Liu et al.20

2The proposed membrane system concentrated ethanol from 10 to 91%	Ueno et al.8

2Vinyltriethoxysilane-g-silicalite-1/PDMS/PAN was used to manufacture a membrane which could increase the ethanol concentration to about 60%	Yi and Wan28

2A carbon nanotube/PDMS membrane was developed which enhanced the ethanol concentration to 38%	Xue et al.27

2A PDMS membrane increased the ethanol concentration to about 85%	Song, Oh and Bae26

2A PDMS membrane and carboxymethyl cellulose increased the ethanol concentration to about 80% and 98.9, respectively	Nigiz and Hilmioglu30

2A NaA zeolite membrane increased the ethanol concentration to about 99.5%	Wei, Tsai, and Weng25

2A polyethyleneimine (PEI)/sodium alginate (SA) membrane yielded ethanol with the concentration of 90%	Li et al.31
Feed-splitting	
3Feed-splitting system to reduce energy consumption	Tavan & Shahhosseini9
Ohmic-assisted distillation	
3OAHD was run in the multiple-distillation mode and yielded ethanol with the concentration of 84%. It was superior in terms of process control, process time and consumed energy.	Gavahian et al.24

4OAHD successfully increased the ethanol concentration of fermented broth	Gavahian, Farahnaky & Sastry19

3OAHD successfully increased the ethanol concentration from 10 to 50%. The proposed method saved both distillation time and distillation energy in comparison with the electric mantle heater energy source.	Gavahian, Farahnaky, & Sastry23

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
