Preparation of nano dumbbell-shaped silver bismuth iodide perovskite hybrids and their enhanced photocurrent properties   - New Journal of Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D3NJ01064C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D3NJ01064C
(Paper)
New J. Chem., 2023, 47, 11669-11674Preparation of nano dumbbell-shaped silver bismuth iodide perovskite hybrids and their enhanced photocurrent properties†

        
          
            Sellan 
            Premkumar
          
        
      *acd, 
      
        
          
            Thankappan 
            Thrupthika
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Maheswari 
            Palanivel
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Dan 
            Liu
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Devaraj 
            Nataraj
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Wei 
            Lei
          
        
      d and 

        
          
            Jianzhou 
            Gui
          
        
      *ab
aState Key Laboratory of Separation Membranes and Membrane Processes, and School of Material Science and Engineering, Tiangong University, Tianjin 300387, China. E-mail: guijianzhou@tiangong.edu.cn; sivajiisro@gmail.com
bTianjin Key Laboratory of Green Chemical Technology and Process Engineering, School of Chemistry, Tiangong University, Binshui West Road 399, Tianjin 300387, China. E-mail: liudan@tiangong.edu.cn
cQuantum Materials and Devices Laboratory, Department of Physics, Bharathiar University, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu-641046, India
dJoint International Research Laboratory of Information Display and Visualization, School of Electronic Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, People's Republic of China
Received 
      7th March 2023
    , Accepted 18th May 2023First published on 21st May 2023AbstractDumbbell-like silver bismuth iodide perovskite heterostructures were fabricated via the growth of heterogeneous silver using a modified emulsion method. Owing to the immiscibility between DMF and hexane, the silver bismuth iodide precursors in DMF could be dispersed as microscopic droplets in hexane under vigorous stirring. Subsequently, the addition of acetone as a demulsifier provided the driving force for crystallization to form dumbbell-shaped silver bismuth iodide perovskite heterostructures. In this synthesis, we added a high concentration of Ag precursors to DMF, which influenced the morphology changes to form a silver-metal-head dumbbell-shaped silver bismuth iodide perovskite hybrid system. However, in the dumbbell heterostructure, a large silver domain was exclusively grown on a single side of the AgBi2I7 system. Further, the as-prepared dumbbell-shaped AgBi2I7 heterostructure sample was used to fabricate a photo-sensitive device and its time-dependent photocurrent properties were analysed. The dumbbell-shaped metal-perovskite heterostructure sample exhibited a higher photocurrent magnitude of ∼21 and 70 μA for 0.1 and 0.2 V bias voltage, with a high ON–OFF ratio of 3.1 × 104 and 3.2 × 104, respectively. The improved photocurrent indicates that the transfer of photogenerated electrons was facilitated from the perovskite system to the metal head.
Introduction
Lead halide perovskite nanostructure-based photovoltaic devices have attracted great attention from scientists due to their appropriate band gap, large absorption coefficients, long excitation diffusion length, and great carrier mobility.1–5 Thus far, lead halide perovskite-based solar cells have achieved a photoconversion efficiency of up to 25.5%.6–9 Consequently, they have also successfully developed as practical solar cells. Additionally, they are fabricated using cost-effective earth-abundant materials and their films can be produced from solution or vapor deposition. However, the toxicity of lead is the primary concern in the large-scale production and regular usage of lead-based solar cells. Therefore, the development of lead-free eco-friendly perovskite solar cells is highly desirable. Furthermore, the inherent instability of lead-halide perovskites in the ambient atmosphere is also an issue for the continuous performance of perovskite-based photovoltaic devices.10,11 Accordingly, to address these problems in Pd-halide based perovskite systems, non-toxic bivalent-substitutes such as tin and germanium have been explored together with halides.12,13 However, the instability of these materials results in the unstable operation and performance of the corresponding devices. According to recent works, bismuth has been demonstrated to be a good alternative for lead with low toxicity and high stability for the fabrication of stable and efficient perovskite-based devices. Pd and Bi are isoelectronic in nature with 6s2 cations, and thus Bi(III) can be a good alternative for the preparation of lead-free halide perovskites.14 Various studies have been carried out on the use of Bi-based halide perovskite nanostructures as good photon absorbers. Also, several Bi-based ternaries and quaternary perovskite nanostructures such as (CH3NH3)3Bi2I9,15 Cs2AgBiX6 (X = Cl, Br)16–18 and Cs2AgBiBr619,20 have been well established as wide band gap materials for potential photovoltaic applications. Interestingly, rudorffites structure-type silver-incorporated bismuth halide perovskite with a direct band gap of about 1.7 eV to 1.83 eV is a suitable material as an efficient visible photon absorber. The silver bismuth heterostructure rudorffite-type perovskites, including Ag3BiI6,21–23 Ag2BiI5,24,25 AgBiI426,27 and AgBi2I7,28 possess comparatively higher stability under ambient atmospheric conditions. Accordingly, the rudorffite structure has become a good candidate for photovoltaic applications, resulting in a solar cell efficiency of up to 4% for Ag3BiI6.21 Similarly, according to recent research, AgBi2I7 and Ag2BiI5 also achieved a PCE of about 1.22% and 2.1%, respectively.21,29–31 The combination of different materials to form a nanostructure results in the combination of their electronic and optical properties in a single system for several applications. Accordingly, several metal perovskites with different nanostructures, such as core–shell,32 nanowire,33 Janus and dumbbell shape have been reported for various applications.33–35 Recently, Huang and co-workers synthesized Ag-CsPbBr3 nanostructures for application in high plasmon-induced hot carrier devices.36 Alternatively, perovskite heterostructures have been scarcely discussed and less investigated for photovoltaic applications. Kai Shen et al. improved the photocurrent by coupling the properties of CsPbBr3 with ZnO to form a nanocomposite.37 Herein, we have synthesized an AgBi2I7 dumbbell-shaped nanostructure via a modified emulsion technique for improved photocurrent behavior. The fabrication of photo-responsive devices using suitable materials as photon absorbers to produce a photocurrent is desired for renewable energy production.
In the present work, we prepared a silver bismuth iodide perovskite dumbbell nanostructures-based photocurrent device. The dumbbell-shaped silver bismuth iodide was prepared via a modified emulsion method using DMF and acetone as an anti-solvent. The structural and optical studies were carried out in the metal-head perovskite heterostructure before constructing the device for photocurrent measurements. A planar-type photosensitive device was fabricated to determine the photo-responsive behavior of the prepared dumbbell-shaped silver bismuth iodide. The photosensitive device showed the maximum photocurrent in the visible region. Subsequently, we fabricated a photo-responsive device that was also responsive to UV photon irradiation. The obtained results were evaluated and discussed for the metal-head perovskite heterostructure.
Experimental methods
Chemicals
Silver iodide (99.5%, Aladdin), bismuth iodide (99.99%, Aladdin), oleylamine (OLA, 80%, Macklin), N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF, 99.5%, Aladdin), oleic acid (OA, AR 99%, Macklin), n-octylamine, and ethyl acetate (AR 99%, Aladdin), and acetone (99.8%), hexane (AR, Aladdin) were purchased and used as received without further purification.
Synthesis of dumbbell-like silver bismuth iodide nanocrystals
Silver bismuth iodide perovskite nanocrystals were synthesized according to a previously reported method (Zhang et al., 2015). Dumbbell-like silver bismuth iodide perovskite nanocrystals were fabricated via a modified emulsion synthesis. Firstly, AgI (0.2 mmol) and BiI3 (0.2 mmol) were dissolved in 5 mL DMF and sonicated for 10 min to form solution A. Solution B was prepared by mixing n-hexane (5 mL), n-octylamine (300 μL) and oleic acid (200 μL). Then, solution A was added dropwise to solution B under vigorous magnetic stirring at 40 °C. With the addition of solution A, the color of the solution mixture gradually turned from clear to a light red colour, indicating the formation of an emulsion system. Then, 5 mL of acetone was added to the emulsion system as a demulsifier to initiate the demulsification process. The limited solubility of the silver bismuth iodide precursors in acetone induced the formation of dumbbell-like nanocrystals. The mixture was stratified into two phases after removing the magnetic stirrer. The top layer was collected as a dispersion of perovskite nanocrystals in hexane for further characterization.
Photocurrent device fabrication
The photocurrent device structure planned for the photocurrent measurement was FTO/TiO2/photosensitizer/MoO3/Al. Different layers of the device were deposited on precleaned FTO-coated glass slides. Then, TiO2 was coated on the FTO substrate via the doctor blade method, and the remaining layers, such as an active light-sensitive layer of dumbbell-shaped perovskite hybrid, the hole transport layer of MoO3, were fabricated using previously reported methods. The photosensitizer was deposited by the spin coating method over the TiO2 films and dried under vacuum at room temperature. The MoO3 (hole transport layer) and Al top electrodes were deposited (electrode area (0.5 × 0.5 cm2)) via the thermal evaporation method. The constructed devices were subjected to photocurrent measurements.
Characterization
HRTEM analysis was carried out using a JEOL JEM-2100 at an operating voltage of 200 kV. UV-Vis absorption measurements were carried out using an Agilent CARY 60 spectrophotometer. PL excitation and emission measurements were carried out using a Horiba Jobin Yvon fluoromax-4 spectrofluorimeter. PL lifetime measurements were carried out using an IBH time-correlated single-photon counting (TCSPC) system. X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements were conducted on a diffractometer (Bruker D8 Advance A25) at 40 kV and 40 mA in the 2θ range of 10° to 80° using a Cu source. Photocurrent measurements were carried using a 300 Watt xenon lamp as the illumination source and a source measuring unit (Agilent B2912A) was used to record the photocurrent values.
Results and discussion
In the present work, we synthesized dumbbell-shape silver bismuth iodide perovskite heterostructures via a modified emulsion method using n-octylamine and oleic acid as ligands. The synthesis of the dumbbell-shape silver bismuth iodide heterostructure can be explained as follows. The nonaqueous emulsion synthesis was carried out in two steps, as schematically shown in Scheme 1, i.e., emulsion formation and demulsification. Initially, a pair of immiscible polar and nonpolar solvents as well as a surfactant were mixed to form an emulsion. Subsequently, the demulsifier was added to initialize the mixing of the precursors. The reagents encapsulated inside the inverted micelles became mixed with the polar solvent. The solubility change induced the formation of colloidal nanoparticles. In our system, DMF was used as the “aqueous phase”, n-hexane as the “oil phase”, oleic acid (OA) as the surfactant, and acetone as the demulsifier. The synthesis was accomplished in a water-in-oil emulsion system, as shown in different colors in Scheme 1. Primarily, AgI was dissolved in 5 mL DMF and stirred for 10 min to form a homogeneous solution. Subsequently, a solution of BiI3 was prepared by mixing n-hexane, n-octylamine, and oleic acid. Then, the solution was added dropwise to the AgI solution mixture under vigorous magnetic stirring at 40 °C. The color of the solution mixture gradually turned from milky white to a light red color, indicating the formation of an emulsion system. Then, the required amount of acetone was added to the emulsion system as a demulsifier to initiate the demulsification process. The mixture solution was separated into two phases at the end of the reaction. The synthesized samples were subjected to morphological and photophysical characterization.
 Scheme 1  Schematic representation of the formation of dumbbell-shaped silver bismuth iodide perovskite hybrids via a modified emulsion method. 
Optical and structural properties
UV-Vis absorption and photoluminescence (PL) emission spectroscopy were utilized to investigate the absorption and emission characteristics of the as-synthesized silver bismuth iodide sample. The prepared sample showed weak absorption edges at 405 nm and 480 nm. (Fig. 1), corresponding to a direct bandgap value of 3.0 and 2.5 eV, respectively.27,31 The emission properties of the metal-head perovskite heterostructure were studied by recording the PL emission spectrum at different excitation wavelengths (Fig. S1(a), ESI†). The metal-head perovskite heterostructure exhibited a PL emission maximum at 517 nm under an excitation wavelength of 350 nm (Fig. 1). A slight red-shifted PL emission peak maximum was obtained compared to the previously reported silver bismuth iodide sample.
 Fig. 1  UV-Vis absorbance (a) and photoluminescence emission (b) spectra of dumbbell-like silver bismuth iodide sample. 
The optical stability of the as-prepared perovskite samples was investigated over time by comparing the PL emission behavior of the freshly prepared and aged samples, as shown in Fig. S1(b) (ESI†). The prepared sample exhibited good optical stability. The n-octylamine stabilized the perovskite quantum dots via hydrogen bonding, i.e., the interaction between the ammonium group and the halide atoms (iodide, bromine, and chlorine) present at the edges. This could be the reason for the stability of our prepared perovskite quantum dots under ambient conditions.
The transmission electron microscopy (TEM) study was performed to confirm the formation of perovskite quantum dots and their distribution. As shown in Fig. 2(a and b), the TEM images of the prepared silver bismuth sample clearly show the formation of dumbbell-shaped nanocrystals. The high-resolution TEM images show the formation of a silver head with a diameter of up to 8–10 nm, while on other end, the silver bismuth iodide (AgBi2I7) system was formed (Fig. 2c and d).
 Fig. 2  (a and b) TEM images of dumbbell-like silver bismuth iodide sample and (c and d) high resolution TEM images with measured lattice spacing value (d = 0.35 nm). 
The as-proposed three-step synthesis method and the formation mechanism are shown in Scheme 1, where firstly, Ag(+) was randomly reduced on the surface of the seed perovskite nanocrystals, forming small clusters of Ag(0), then followed by Ostwald ripening-type intraparticle aggregation, leading to the formation of dumbbell-shape Ag-head AgBi2I7 perovskite heterostructures.38 However, in the dumbbell heterostructure, a large silver domain exclusively grew on a single side of the AgBi2I7 system with a solid contact, similar to the connection between the silver head and the AgBi2I7 system.39,40 The dark dots observed on the surfaces of silver bismuth iodide are considered Ag(0) particles, which are clearly distinguished by the contrast differences in the HR-TEM image (Fig. 2). The average diameter of the Ag nanoparticle is around ∼8–10 nm, and the obtained AgBi2I7 diameter is around 30 nm.
Besides metal-perovskite heterostructures, recently, Gong et al. reported a template-mediated colloidal approach for synthesizing metal alloy-perovskite AuCu/CsPbCl3 core/shell nanocrystals.41 Importantly, while the synthesis of all the above-reported heterostructures followed nucleation of a secondary material on seed CsPbBr3 nanocrystals,33 this is an example of the nucleation of perovskite nanostructures on metal alloy seed crystals. The observed XRD patterns corresponding to the perovskite crystal structure are similar to the rudorffite structure of silver bismuth iodide nanostructure.
Based on the obtained X-ray diffraction pattern and TEM- electron diffraction pattern results (ESI,† Fig. S2), the crystal structures of AgBi2I7 were identified as the cubic space group of Fd3m. A schematic of the crystal structures is drawn and included in the ESI,† Fig. S2. Further, we subjected the prepared silver bismuth iodide sample to TCSPC lifetime analysis. The PL decay curves of the silver bismuth iodide samples were fitted using triexponential decay functions. Fig. 3 shows the PL decay curves of the silver bismuth iodide samples. The calculated average exciton lifetime value was 4.8 ns. It should be noted that the faster component, i.e., the short-lived PL decay component of the AgBi2I7 perovskite quantum dot samples, is due to the defect state-mediated non-radiative recombination.26,42
 Fig. 3  TCSPC lifetime decay curve of dumbbell-like silver bismuth iodide sample. 
Photocurrent studies for silver bismuth iodide perovskite quantum dots
A schematic representation of the fabricated photocurrent devices using the silver bismuth iodide sample AgBi2I7 as a light-absorbing material and the relative energy level band diagram are shown in Fig. 4.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic representation of photocurrent device fabrication process and (b) energy level diagram of the system. 
The photocurrent devices contained a multilayered structure with the electron transport layer consisting of (i) commercial TiO2 with an average particle diameter of around 50 nm (coated on FTO substrate via the doctor blade method), (ii) perovskite dumbbell nanostructure as the photosensitizer (coated by spin-coating technique), (iii) MoO3 layer as the hole transport material in the device, and finally, an aluminium metal electrode on top, fabricated by the reported methods (Fig. 4a). The conduction band (CB) of TiO2 is in a favorable position near the perovskite conduction band (CB) to receive photoexcited electrons from the perovskite. Also, the perovskite has a longer excited-state lifetime, which will result in an increase in the electron–hole pair population in the nanostructured system. Consequently, the photoexcited electrons get transferred from the perovskite to the titanium dioxide with minimum energy losses. A schematic representation of the electron transfer process is shown in Fig. 4b.
The photocurrent recorded for the as-prepared dumbbell-shaped perovskite heterostructure-based devices at different biasing voltages of 0.1 and 0.2 V are shown in Fig. 5. The silver bismuth iodide samples generated the maximum photocurrent values of ∼21 and 70 μA for the biasing voltages of 0.1 and 0.2 V, with a high ON–OFF ratio of 3.18 × 104 and 3.27 × 104, respectively (ESI† Table S1). This new metal-perovskite nanostructure with high photocurrent paves the way to realize hot-carrier devices with a performance potentially exceeding that of conventional devices.28,43 Heterostructures consisting of metal and semiconductor nanoparticles have been widely studied for plasmon-derived hot-electron devices (i.e., metal–semiconductor Schottky junction devices). The performances of these devices strongly depend on the efficiencies of plasmon-hot electron conversion at the metal-semiconductor interfaces.36 In the past few years, this plasmon-hot electron conversion scenario has been intensively studied, for which distinct mechanisms have been proposed including the plasmon-induced hot-electron transfer from metal to semiconductor.44
 Fig. 5  (a) Time-dependent photocurrent spectra of dumbbell-like silver bismuth iodide sample at different bias of 0.1 V and 0.2 V. (b) Time delay responsive photocurrent curve. 
Herein, photogenerated electron–hole pairs with higher excited state lifetime played an important role in producing higher photocurrent values and enhanced the efficiency of our photocurrent device. The longer average lifetime of the AgBi2I7 sample, to which the silver metal head was attached, could be the reason for the increased photocurrent value. We observed zero dark currents in the dumbbell-shaped silver bismuth iodide heterostructure system, which may consist of silver-induced surface plasmon resonance between the silver head and the perovskite system.44 Direct transitions from semiconductor to metal have been reported in multiple metal hybrid systems, which can avoid the energy loss related to carrier thermalization. Fig. 6 shows the recorded UV photocurrent response curves of the constructed photodetector device using the dumbbell-shape AgBi2I7 sample as a photosensitizer, which displayed the maximum photocurrent values of 0.12 μA at zero biasing voltage. The device exhibited a higher magnitude photocurrent value under a low-intensity (8 μW power) UV light source with an ON/OFF ratio of IUV/Idark = 327 at zero biasing voltage, together with a fast response and recovery time. The calculated responsivity of the dumbbell-shaped AgBi2I7 perovskite photodetector was 0.012 A W−1. The silver bismuth iodide perovskite device demonstrated a better response to UV light based on the current–voltage curves.
 Fig. 6  (a) Time dependent photocurrent spectra of dumbbell-like silver bismuth iodide sample at UV 390 nm with zero bias (b) (I–V curve). 
Conclusions
In summary, we prepared a dumbbell-shape metal head connected to silver bismuth iodide (AgBi2I7) perovskite heterostructure and investigated its surface, morphological, and photophysical properties. The as-prepared samples were used to fabricate the photocurrent devices. The dumbbell-shaped metal-perovskite heterostructure sample exhibited a higher magnitude photocurrent of ∼21 and 70 μA for 0.1 and 0.2 V bias voltage, with a high ON–OFF ratio of 3.18 × 104 and 3.27 × 104, respectively. Further, we constructed the UV photodetector device and obtained a higher magnitude photocurrent value of 0.12 μA under low-photon intensity of UV light.
Author contributions
S. P. and J. G. conceived the idea. S. P. prepared the samples and performed the optical and morphological characterization, and collected the data. S. P. conceived the idea for photocurrent device construction. T. T. and M. P supporting for samples testing. D. N. W. L contributed to the characterization support of TCSPC and Time-dependent Photocurrent Measurements. S. P. D. L. and J. G. wrote the manuscript, and all other authors took part in their respective data analysis.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
Author S. P. acknowledges the Tiangong University, Southeast University, for providing a Postdoctoral Fellowship, and the authors are grateful for the financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21576211), Tianjin Municipal Science and Technology Programme (No. 22ZYJDSS00060, No. 22YDTPJC00920), Program for Tianjin Innovative Research Team in Universities (No. TD13-5031), and Tianjin 131 Research Team of Innovative Talents.
Notes and references
E. Bi, H. Chen, F. Xie, Y. Wu, W. Chen, Y. Su, A. Islam, M. Grätzel, X. Yang and L. Han, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Chan, M. C. Wu, K. M. Lee, W. C. Chen, T. H. Lin and W. F. Su, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 18044 RSC .
A. H. Slavney, T. Hu, A. M. Lindenberg and H. I. Karunadasa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 2138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Shekhirev, J. Goza, J. D. Teeter, A. Lipatov and A. Sinitskii, J. Chem. Educ., 2017, 94, 1150 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lv, L. Li, M. Xu, J. Hong, X. Tang, L. Xu, Y. Wu, R. Zhu, R. Chen and W. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900682 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Pitaro, R. Pau, H. Duim, M. Mertens, W. T. M. V. Gompel, G. Portale, L. Lutsen and M. A. Loi, Appl. Phys. Rev., 2022, 9, 021407 CAS .
F. Qiu, J. Sun, Z. Zhang, T. Shen, H. Liu and J. Qi, Mater. Today Energy, 2021, 21, 100837 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, J. Duan, X. Yang, Y. Duan, P. Yang and Q. Tang, Nano Energy, 2021, 80, 105526 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ye, M. M. Byranvand, C. O. Martínez, R. L. Z. Hoye, M. Saliba and L. Polavarapu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 21636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, M. Cai, G. Wu, L. Zhu, X. Liu, H. Lv and S. Dai, Cryst. Growth Des., 2021, 21, 5840 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yang, J. Chen, S. Yang, F. Hong, L. Sun, P. Han, T. Pullerits, W. Deng and K. Han, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 5359 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-G. Ju, J. Dai, L. Ma and X. C. Zeng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 8038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kar, R. Sarkar, S. Pal and P. Sarkar, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2021, 125, 74 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pandiyarajan, G. Manobalaji, M. Senthilkumar, S. M. Babu and S. Subashchandran, Mater. Res. Express, 2019, 6, 066418 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, C. Wu, Y. Yan, B. Chi, J. Pu, J. Li and S. Priya, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 3994 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, H. Yang, J. Wang, Y. Yuan, K. Hills-Kimball, T. Cai, P. Wang, A. Tang and O. Chen, Nano Lett., 2021, 21, 1620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Kubicki, M. Saski, S. MacPherson, K. Gałkowski, J. Lewiński, D. Prochowicz, J. J. Titman and S. D. Stranks, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 8129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Chen, T. Cai, W. Li, K. Hills-Kimball, H. Yang, M. Que, Y. Nagaoka, Z. Liu, D. Yang, A. Dong, C. Y. Xu, R. Zia and O. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 16855 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. A. Connor, L. Leppert, M. D. Smith, J. B. Neaton and H. I. Karunadasa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 5235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Greul, M. L. Petrus, A. Binek, P. Docampo and T. Bein, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 19972 RSC .
N. Pai, J. Lu, T. R. Gengenbach, A. Seeber, A. S. R. Chesman, L. Jiang, D. C. Senevirathna, P. C. Andrews, U. Bach, Y.-B. Cheng and A. N. Simonov, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803396 CrossRef .
A. Crovetto, A. Hajijafarassar, O. Hansen, B. Seger, I. Chorkendorff and P. C. K. Vesborg, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 3385 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ünlü, M. Deo, S. Mathur, T. Kirchartz and A. Kulkarni, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2022, 55, 113002 CrossRef .
K. W. Jung, M. R. Sohn, H. M. Lee, I. S. Yang, S. D. Sung, J. Kim, E. Wei-Guang Diau and W. I. Lee, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2018, 2, 294 RSC .
S. Premkumar, Z. Jin, D. Liu, D. Nataraj, B. B. Mamba, A. T. Kuvarega and J. Gui, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2021, 4, 9895 CrossRef CAS .
S. Premkumar, D. Liu, Y. Zhang, D. Nataraj, S. Ramya, Z. Jin, B. B. Mamba, A. T. Kuvarega and J. Gui, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2020, 3, 9141 CrossRef CAS .
M. Khazaee, K. Sardashti, C.-C. Chung, J.-P. Sun, H. Zhou, E. Bergmann, W. A. Dunlap-Shohl, Q. Han, I. G. Hill, J. L. Jones, D. C. Lupascu and D. B. Mitzi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 2095 RSC .
A. Merker, M. Morgenroth, M. Scholz, T. Lenzer and K. Oum, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2023, 127, 1487 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, C. Wu, X. Qi, F. Lv, Z. Zhang, Y. Liu, S. Wang, B. Qu, Z. Chen and L. Xiao, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 3651 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kulkarni, A. K. Jena, M. Ikegami and T. Miyasaka, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 4031 RSC .
Y. Kim, Z. Yang, A. Jain, O. Voznyy, G. Kim, M. Liu, L. Quan, F. P. García de Arquer, R. Comin, J. Fan and E. Sargent, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 9586–9590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fu, H. Zhu, J. Chen, M. P. Hautzinger, X. Y. Zhu and S. Jin, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2019, 4, 169 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bera and N. Pradhan, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 2858 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, C.-H. Liu, T. Debnath, Y. Wang, D. Pohl, L. V. Besteiro, D. M. Meira, S. Huang, F. Yang, B. Rellinghaus, M. Chaker, D. F. Perepichka and D. Ma, Nat. Commun., 2023, 14, 541 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yang, L. Wei, L. Jing, J. Liang, X. Zhang, M. Tang, M. J. Monteiro, Y. Chen, Y. Wang, S. Gu, D. Zhao, H. Yang, J. Liu and G. Q. M. Lu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 8459 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, H. Li, C. Zhang, S. Tan, Z. Chen, L. Chen, Z. Lu, X. Wang and M. Xiao, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1163 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Shen, X. Li, H. Xu, M. Wang, X. Dai, J. Guo, T. Zhang, S. Li, G. Zou, K.-L. Choy, I. P. Parkin, Z. Guo, H. Liu and J. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 6134 RSC .
F. Wang, V. N. Richards, S. P. Shields and W. E. Buhro, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 5 CrossRef CAS .
S.-M. Shau, C.-C. Chang, C.-H. Lo, Y.-C. Chen, T.-Y. Juang, S. A. Dai, R.-H. Lee and R.-J. Jeng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 1897 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-G. Park, J. D. Förster and E. R. Dufresne, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 5960 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. H. Ahmed, J. Yin, O. M. Bakr and O. F. Mohammed, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 1340 CrossRef CAS .
S. Premkumar, D. Nataraj, G. Bharathi, O. Y. Khyzhun and T. D. Thangadurai, ChemistrySelect, 2017, 2, 10771 CrossRef CAS .
S. Premkumar, D. Nataraj, G. Bharathi, S. Ramya and T. D. Thangadurai, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9, 18704 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sistani, M. G. Bartmann, N. A. Güsken, R. F. Oulton, H. Keshmiri, M. A. Luong, Z. S. Momtaz, M. I. Den Hertog and A. Lugstein, ACS Photonics, 2020, 7, 1642 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d3nj01064cThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2023
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  Schematic representation of the formation of dumbbell-shaped silver bismuth iodide perovskite hybrids via a modified emulsion method.	 

 	Fig. 1  UV-Vis absorbance (a) and photoluminescence emission (b) spectra of dumbbell-like silver bismuth iodide sample.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a and b) TEM images of dumbbell-like silver bismuth iodide sample and (c and d) high resolution TEM images with measured lattice spacing value (d = 0.35 nm).	 

 	Fig. 3  TCSPC lifetime decay curve of dumbbell-like silver bismuth iodide sample.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic representation of photocurrent device fabrication process and (b) energy level diagram of the system.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Time-dependent photocurrent spectra of dumbbell-like silver bismuth iodide sample at different bias of 0.1 V and 0.2 V. (b) Time delay responsive photocurrent curve.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Time dependent photocurrent spectra of dumbbell-like silver bismuth iodide sample at UV 390 nm with zero bias (b) (I–V curve).	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d3nj01064c

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2023
