Understanding the temperature-dependent charge transport, structural variation and photoluminescent properties in methylammonium lead halide perovskit ...  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8TC01717D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8TC01717D
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 6556-6564Understanding the temperature-dependent charge transport, structural variation and photoluminescent properties in methylammonium lead halide perovskite single crystals†

        
          
            Jiyu 
            Zhou
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Na 
            Lei
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Huiqiong 
            Zhou
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Yuan 
            Zhang
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Zhiyong 
            Tang
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Lei 
            Jiang
          
        
      a
aSchool of Chemistry, Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Biomedical Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, P. R. China. E-mail: yuanzhang@buaa.edu.cn
bSchool of Electrical & Information Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, P. R. China
cCAS Key Laboratory of Nanosystem and Hierarchical Fabrication, CAS Center for Excellence in Nanoscience, National Center for Nanoscience and Technology, Beijing 100190, P. R. China
Received 
      12th April 2018
    , Accepted 22nd May 2018First published on 22nd May 2018AbstractMethyammonium lead tri-halide perovskites (MAPbX3) are highly promising for energy conversion and photonic devices. Here, we present a comprehensive investigation into the temperature (T)-dependent carrier transport, phase transition and photoluminescence properties in single crystals of MAPbI3 (MSC, X = I), with an aim to attain an understanding of the mechanisms governing the carrier motion and phase transition in halide perovskites. We identify a tetragonal to orthorhombic phase at around 150 K. Thermal evolution of the photoluminescent (PL) peak broadening with temperature points to a dominant longitudinal-optical (LO) phonon interaction in MSCs within a wide T-range across two phase transition points. In the tetragonal phase, the hole and electron mobilities in MSC along the direction normal to the main (110) crystallographic plane exhibit an opposite T-coefficient with the one for the holes exhibiting the ∼T−1.6 dependence and that for electrons roughly following the impurity scattering at ∼T1.8. Such distinct behaviours may be understood by the electron traps due to the specific surface conditions in solution-grown MSCs, which tend to play an increasing role at lower T. Thus, seeking viable passivation approaches is critical for the realistic applications of MSCs. These findings enrich the fundamental insight into some key photophysical properties in halide perovskites and can act as a guide for advancing the application of perovskite single crystals targeted at device operation within a wide T-window.
Introduction
Emerging organic–inorganic lead halide perovskites have enabled high-performance solar cells, light-emitting diodes (LEDs), photon-detectors and lasers.1–11 The recent progress made in forming high-quality crystalline films, optimizing device configurations and interface engineering has led to state-of-the-art power conversion efficiencies (PCE) exceeding 20% for solar cell applications.12 Successes in these materials primarily arises from their high charge-carrier mobility (μ),13–15 excellent crystallinity,16 appropriate dielectric properties17,18 and long exciton diffusion length.19,20 These merits have been attributed to the ultrafast charge dissociation with low charge-recombination rates in perovskite solar cells and efficient electroluminescence in LEDs.9,19–21
To date, the majority of high-performance perovskite devices are formed in polycrystalline films with non-negligible levels of defects and grain boundaries, which induce hurdles to unravel the intrinsic electrical and photophysical properties in these materials. Single crystals have much fewer densities of defects and a more supreme charge-transport capability with outstanding carrier diffusion lengths (>100 micrometres),22 which enable them to serve as an ideal testbed for fundamental investigations. To date, there have been a handful of exemplary attempts to probe charge transport in MSCs or MAPbI3 thin films utilizing field-effect transistors (FET),23,24 Hall measurements25,26 or optical transients.23,24,27 Although insights have been attained into the structural properties (phase transition) or charge-carrier dynamics in perovskites with these experiments, concerns have been raised when using the extracted information to interpret operational device behaviours. For example, the probing transport direction and temporal regimes with these techniques may differ from those in operating photovoltaic devices with sandwich device configuration.26 Besides, the sample geometry of MSCs fabricated with a solution-growth method may impose challenges when performing Hall measurements, which generally require a specific aspect ratio of samples and electrodes patterning. As alternatives, there have been several reports using steady-state diode transport measurements to determine the steady-state carrier mobility in MSCs (X = I or Br) in the space-charge limited current (SCLC) regime, allowing assessing the vertical transport in MSCs.22,28 Admittedly, the space-charge limited current (SCLC) method was derived for trap-free systems, but for perovskites, it is appreciated that the SCLC mobility provides an acceptable estimation of the steady-state transport in MSCs,29 which is relevant to the actual carrier transport direction in solar cells or sandwich photodetectors. As the operation of optoelectronic devices relies on both carriers, the balance between them is of importance. It has been pointed out that a significant mobility imbalance tends to accelerate charge recombination, which unfavourably lowers the device efficiency.30,31 Unfortunately, in many of the documented transport studies, the mobility difference (between the two carriers) has not been clearly disentangled, particularly in terms of the temperature (T) dependence (or T-coefficient), which is important as obtaining this parameter helps understand the mechanism governing the T-dependent transport of the two carriers. On the other hand, MAPbX3, as for soft ionic materials, tends to experience a re-orientation of the crystal structure with the variation of T, resulting in a phase transition.32 In MAPbI3 polycrystalline thin films, such a structural change can lead to distinct recombination kinetics33 and electronic structures,34 and ultimately can affect the device behaviour.35,36 In contrast, T-dependent structural properties in MSCs and their impact on the mobility are far less clear. To this end, probing the charge transport of the two carriers alongside their optical/structural properties at various T enables attaining insights into the fundamentals of the interactions between the carries and lattice vibrations (phonons).
In this article, we comparatively investigate T-dependent charge transport in solution-processed single crystals of MAPbX3 (MSC, X = I) utilizing the SLCL method. We focus on the transport direction normal to the main crystallographic (110) plane (the largest natural crystal facade) and that along the (110) plane. We also probe the T-dependent structural and photoluminescence (PL) properties. MSCs were attained through the inverse temperature crystallization method and the resultant crystals displayed a hexagonal-shaped facade with a diagonal length of ∼6 mm and thickness of ∼2.5 mm (see the detailed crystal growth procedure in the Experimental section and Fig. S1 in the ESI†).28 We attained direct evidence of the phase transition in MSCs from a tetragonal to orthorhombic (T–O) lattice structure by T-variable X-ray diffractometry (XRD) and PL measurements. In a wide T-range across the phase transition points, whereby the PL displayed a blue-shift and monotonous broadening with increasing T, the latter of which was roughly described by the longitudinal-optical (LO) phonon scattering. Based on the T-dependent transport measurements, we observed an SCLC mobility (μ) of holes (∼587 cm2 V−1 s−1) near RT associated with a reverse T-dependence as ∼T−1.6 in the tetragonal phase of MSC, resembling the trend of electron-photon scattering. Meanwhile, a moderately reduced μ of electrons (∼183 cm2 V−1 s−1) was observed at RT with a positive T-coefficient of 1.8. Such contrast in the T-behaviour may be connected to the influences of traps that appear to play a larger role in the electron mobility due to the specific surface conditions. As confirmation, we observed a pronounced reduction in the mobility of MSC planar diodes, where the lateral transport (along the crystal facade) mainly occurs near the surface region. We ascribed the stronger T-dependence in MSC planar diodes to the variation of disorder in methyammonium polarization with T. These findings enrich the fundamental insights into the key photophysical characteristics in MSCs and provide relevance for applying MSCs in solution-processed optoelectronic devices operated in a wide T-window.
Results and discussion

T-Variable structure in MSCs and photoluminescence properties
As a background study, we performed T-dependent X-ray diffractometry (XRD) and PL analyses of the MSCs. From the snapshots of their power XRD patterns (see Fig. S2, ESI†), the spectra at 300 K were consistent with the results of MSCs reported previously,29 suggesting the formation of a 3D tetragonal structure (see power XRD at RT in Fig. S2b, ESI†). To acquire knowledge about the structural variations in MSC with decreasing T, we selectively compared the XRD patterns assigned to the (110) and (220) planes at different T based on point-to-point comparisons with the crystallographic data of MSCs reported in the literature,28 which corresponded to diffraction angles at 14.1 deg and 28.4 deg at 300 K. As shown by the zoomed-in diffractograms in Fig. 1A and B, both XRD peaks display a gradual shift towards higher 2θ when decreasing T within 50–300 K. This trend indicates an increased stress of MSCs during the cooling process, similar to the observation in MAPbI3 polycrystalline films.37 Of note, these XRD patterns at around 150 K display more abrupt shifts towards higher 2θ in association with a peak broadening. Such a non-gradual variation in the XRD can be correlated to the transition from a tetragonal phase to orthorhombic (T–O) phase for T below 150 K. This result agrees with the reported T–O phase transition temperature for MAPbI3 polycrystalline films that ranges between 140 K and 170 K,38,39 depending on the crystal size.40
 Fig. 1  Zoomed-in spectra of powder XRD patterns on MSCs measured at different temperatures (T) for selected peaks at the (A) (110) and (B) (220) planes. At around 150 K, more abrupt shifts towards 2θ are observed, which can be correlated to the phase transition (from a tetragonal to orthorhombic structure) in MSCs. (C and D) Schematic illustration for the crystal structure of MAPbI3 orthorhombic (C), and tetragonal (D) phases. 
Although the identified T–O phase transition agrees with the reported values in the literature, an accurate determination of the transition T in MSCs seems difficult because a mixture of tetragonal and orthorhombic phases (their respective lattice structures are schematically illustrated in Fig. 1C and D41) is likely below the T–O transition. The presence of a mixed phase tends to result in an extended transition (instead of a sharp transition), which depends on details of T-cycling, including the direction of T-variation and the interval.37 It should be noted that this phenomenon was also observed in polycrystalline films, which may be due to spatial inhomogeneity. However, the T-dependent XRD suggests that the degree of transition extension can be low in our MSCs. For temperatures between 150 K and 300 K, the tetragonal phase should be dominant in MSCs.40
To obtain insights into the structural impact on the photophysical properties, we examined steady-state PL between 10 K to 300 K, which is across the T–O phase transition in MSCs, and the results are displayed in Fig. 2A. The PL spectrum at room temperature (RT) is centred at around 786 nm, similar to the value reported with MSCs.22 We note a broadening of the emission at higher T regime, which can be ascribed to the electron–phonon coupling.42 With decreasing T, the PL peak exhibits a gradual shift. To better illustrate this effect, we plotted the central peak energy at different T (see Fig. 2B). In a wide T-range between 60 K and 300 K, we noted a red-shift in PL with deceasing T. This tendency seems to contrast with the observation in conventional inorganic semiconductors (e.g. GaAs), which indicates a reduced band gap at lower T, possibly due to contraction of the lattice.43 The ‘abnormal’ variation of the band gap has been attributed to the anti-bonding feature in the valence band in MAPbI3.43–46 From Fig. 2B, we note an abrupt increase of the PL peak energy around 150 K when decreasing T. As the band gap of MSC in the orthorhombic phase tends to be larger than that in the tetragonal phase,40 this result is consistent with the identified T–O transition using T-variable XRD. We further examined the PL of MSCs above RT at which the crystal should be dominated by the cubic phase. We did not observe any abrupt shift in PL, but noted a gradual change of about 15 meV (blue-shift) with increasing T. A similar PL behaviour across the tetragonal to cubic phase transition has been observed in MAPbI3 polycrystalline (MPC) films.14
 Fig. 2  (A) T-Variable steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectra of MSCs. (B) Evolution of PL peak energy with T. The oval in red highlights the abrupt change in the peak energy, which can approximately correspond to the T–O phase transition at ∼150 K. (C) Full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the PL spectra of MSCs as a function of T together with the fitting based on the LO phonon scattering model (black line). Inset: Absorption spectroscopy of MSC and MAPbI3 polycrystalline film (MPC). (D) PL mapping of MSC (upper panel) and MPC (lower panel) captured by confocal laser microscopy excited at 432 nm. (E) Steady-state PL spectra registered in the marked areas by the dotted circles. 
Examination of the linewidth (here, we refer to the full width at half maximum or FWHM) of PL provides an assessment of how the carriers interact with the lattice vibration in the semiconductor.47 We extracted the FWHM of the PL in Fig. 2A as a function of T (see the results in Fig. 2C). The PL displays a visible broadening with increasing T, leading to a FWHM of more than 100 millivolts near RT. Such PL broadening can be partially related to the mobile carriers in the MSC under photoexcitation near RT, due to the low exciton binding energy.43 With the presence of mobile carriers, one expects an extended absorption towards lower energy in MSCs. Indeed, the absorption of MSCs presents a red-shift with respect to MAPBI3 polycrystalline (MPC) films (see the UV-vis spectra in Fig. 2C inset). At lower T, the narrowed PL can originate from the free excitonic recombination, which has been similarly observed in single crystalline perovskites.43,48 Whereas, as shown in Fig. 2C, the T-dependence on the FWHM is very weak for T < 80 K, which suggests other contributions. It has been argued that the broadening of PL with at lower T also may be attributed to the influence of traps45 in perovskites. In this context, the tendency shown in Fig. 2C points to an insignificant role of traps in the PL in the low T regime. The linewidth of PL in the semiconductor is generally described by the relation Γ(T) = Γ0 + γacT + γLON(T) with N(T) = exp[(ELO/kBT) − 1],45 where Γ0 is the temperature-independent inhomogeneous broadening, Γac and γLON(T), respectively, depict the scattering by the acoustic phonons and the LO optical phonons with the coupling strength γac and γLO, and ELO denotes the energy of the optical phonons.45 By taking the dominant LO phonon interaction (γLON(T)), a decent fitting for the linewidth was obtained (see the line in Fig. 2C). The determined γLO and ELO values were 62 ± 1.6 meV and 18.7± 0.8 meV, respectively. These values appear larger than previously reported values45 which may be related to the difference in crystal growth procedures. At this moment, we cannot completely rule out the scattering of traps as this can also contribute to the total Γ following the Arrhenius-relation as ∼γimpexp(Eb/kBT) (with the scattering strength γimp and average binding energy Eb). More insights into this aspect will be attained using T-dependent transport measurements in the following section.
To shed light on the PL properties at the microscopic level, we examined the mapping of PL in MSCs using confocal laser microscopy, which allows probing the spatial distribution and uniformity of emission. Fig. 2D (upper image) displays representative images of the PL mapping measured on MSCs. The PL exhibits a homogeneous distribution, which to a large degree can be correlated to the near absence of grain boundaries in the MSC samples. For comparison, the PL distribution in MPC (see the lower image in Fig. 2D) was comparatively examined, where we can observe a reduced homogeneity, reflected by those marked dark areas by dotted circles (see Fig. 2D). The decrease of the PL uniformity can be related to the presence of non-radiative grains or grain boundaries (GB) in MPC.34 The substantially enlarged grains with a near absence of GBs in MAPbI3 single crystals promote an enhancement of PL homogeneity. We further compared the steady-state PL spectra (Fig. 2E) recorded at selected areas on the two samples (see dotted circles in Fig. 2D). In both samples, the PL position (∼780 nm for MSC and ∼770 nm for MPC) is hardly shifted with the varied scanning location; whereas the peak exhibits a red-shift (∼7 nm) in MSC with respect to the emission from MPC. This behaviour may not necessarily indicate any changes in the optical band gap; instead, it can be rationalized by the photon-cycling in MSCs, in which higher energy photons tend to experience a re-absorption process in the event of exciton migration due to the large diffusion length.49,50 We also observed a slightly decreased FWHM in MSC, which can be interpreted by the reduced amount of traps or/and tail states in MSC. The latter agrees with the sharper absorption cut-off in single crystalline MAPbI3, as shown in the inset of Fig. 2C.

T-Dependent hole transport in MSCs
With the T-dependent structural and optical characterizations, we focused on the charge transport in MSCs in the T-range of 120–300 K, in which the MSCs should have a dominant tetragonal phase. We purposely applied the T-cycling across the T–O transition down to 120 K, by which the impact of structural variation in MSCs can be disentangled. We first examined the transport along the direction normal to the main (110) plane (the largest natural crystal facade). To separately quantify the mobility of the two carriers, we adopted single carrier devices based on a sandwich architecture (see sketch of the hole-only devices in Fig. 3A). The utilization of Au contacts allowed for an Ohmic hole injection through which the majority carriers were the holes. For electrical analysis on perovskites, care needs to be taken concerning the associated ionic transport.26,51 It was argued that the applied bias could induce an electrical poling effect to artificially raise the conductivity in perovskites due to vacancy migration.52 Acknowledging this, we first examined the influence of the scan sequence on the transport in MSCs. As shown in Fig. S3 (ESI†), we observed a notable electrical poling, as revealed by the increase of current with the scan time. To minimize such effects, hereinafter, all measurements were taken from initial scans unless stated otherwise. Fig. 3B shows the T-dependent I–V characteristics of MSC hole-only (HO) devices in the upward scan (defined for bias increasing from zero to positive). I–V curves in both scan directions at various T are shown in Fig. S4a in ESI.† In a large bias range, the hole current exhibited a quadratic voltage dependence, a fingerprint of space-charge limited transport. Of importance, the I–V characteristics were T-reversible, i.e. after the T-cycle, the I–V curve at 300 K nearly overlaps with that in the initial scan at 295 K (see Fig. S4b, ESI†). This assures the accuracy of the T-dependent electrical analyses being without notable device degradation. In Fig. 3C, we compare the I–V characteristics in different scan directions at selected T. We observed a visible hysteresis in an anti-clockwise direction (lower current in the upward scan and higher one in the downward scan). In the downward scan, the increased current was associated with a reduced voltage dependence (or smaller slope in the I–V curve), deviating from the SCLC behaviour. This may be interpreted by the enlarged electrical conductivity induced by the ion motions under biasing.53 Note that the direction of hysteresis in Fig. 3C differs from that induced by charge trapping. Generally, the latter impedes carrier injection due to the presence of trapped carriers, such that the current in the backward scan becomes lower.54,55 To this end, the hysteresis can be partially correlated to the ionic motion in MSCs, a ubiquitous phenomenon in halide perovskites that can induce electrochemical doping and redistribution of the electrical field.53 As shown in Fig. 3C, the hysteresis is slightly enlarged with increasing T. Such a tendency (with a positive T-dependence) is consistent with the identified thermal activation for ionic motion in perovskites.56
 Fig. 3  (A) Illustrated device architecture for the HO diodes used to determine the hole mobility (μh) along the out-of-plane direction (normal to the natural crystal facade in MSCs). (B) Current versus voltage (I–V) characteristics in double-logarithm scale of MSC HO diodes scanned in a large bias range at different T. The solid line is the guide line with slope = 2. (C) Comparison of hysteresis in I–V characteristics measured at 300 K and 200 K. The arrows depict the voltage scan direction. (D) Determined μh as a function of T in double-logarithm scale. The solid line is the linear fit to measurements within 150–300 K with γ denoting the T-coefficient. The coloured area indicates the approximate T-range for the dominant tetragonal phase in MSC. 
To examine the impact of the electrical field on the hole transport in MSCs, we also measured the T-dependent I–V characteristics at lower driving bias up to 10 V (see Fig. S5, ESI†). We reproducibly observed the dominant SCLC behaviour in a wide T-range. Besides, the HO devices based on MSCs were T-reproducible, manifested by the unchanged current at 300 K after the T-cycle (see Fig. S5, ESI†). At low bias (up to 1 V), an Ohmic current with a linear voltage dependence was noted, which perhaps resulted from the slightly increased electrical conductivity with scan sequences, leading to variations in the background carrier densities. Consistently, an anti-clockwise hysteresis was seen with a (10-fold) reduced electrical field. As the ionic transport in MAPbX3 is a thermally activated process with possibly an exponential T-dependence,57 the contribution of ion-conductance to the hole current should be weakened at lower T. This was indeed reflected by the decreased hysteresis with decreasing T (Fig. 3C). Based on these observations, the ion motion tends to be non-negligible in our HO devices, which to some degree is tuned by temperature.
Based on the observed transport behaviour dominated by SCLC, we estimated the hole mobility μh (in the upward scan) with the well-established Mott–Gurney law as, (1)where J is the current density, ε0εr is the dielectric constant of MSC (∼25 in our case), μh(e) is the SCLC mobility of holes (or electrons), Vbi is the built-in potential (which was extracted from the voltage corresponding to the transition from diffusion to drift current), and L is the thickness of the MSC. Fig. 3D shows the determined μh as a function of T based on the results in Fig. 3B within the cooling-to-heating thermal cycle. We attained a μh of 587 cm2 V−1 s−1 at RT, which is consistent with the values for MSCs based on solution-growth methods.22,28,29 We did not see a pronounced trap-limited current (or TLC) at small bias,22 characteristic of a strong voltage dependence.58 This may be related to the filling of traps by those background carriers induced by electrical poling, which appears inevitable even at a low electrical field (∼4 × 103 V m−1).
Clearly, the μh in Fig. 3D displays two opposite T-dependencies within 120–300 K, with the maximal μh occurring at 150 K. Based on power law fittings, we extracted the T-coefficient (γ) for μh, yielding a negative γ = −1.6 between 150 K and 300 K. It was argued that the scattering time governing charge-carrier mobility in MAPbI3 films exhibits a ∼T−3/2 dependence, indicating the dominant acoustic phonon scattering;23 whereas the results on the linewidth for PL in Fig. 2C provides evidence for the dominant LO photon interaction. On this basis, such T-dependent behaviour for μh may not necessarily affirm the mechanism of acoustic phonon interaction for the carrier motion in MSCs, while the converse agreement holds true. The dominance of LO phonon scattering tends to be more reasonable given the polar nature of MAPbI3 perovskites.59 On the other hand, we noted an abrupt reduction in μh below 150 K (T = 120 K), as confirmed by the mobility measurements with both large and small scan biases. According to our XRD spectra and results in the literature,14,60 the crystal structure of MSCs at 120 K should be in the orthorhombic phase, in which varied dielectric properties or polarization are expected.40 These changes might affect the mobility of charge carriers with a polaronic nature.61 Note that the freezing of ion motion in MAPbI3 was found at T approximately below 170 K.62 As a result, the decreased contribution of ionic conduction in this temperature regime may, in part, reconcile the reduction in μh as well. These results suggest that phase transition should be a concerning factor when practically applying MSCs in T-variable conditions.

T-Dependent electron transport in MSCs
With the identified T-dependent hole transport, we next explored the transport by counterpart electrons in MSCs along the same direction in MSCs using electron-only (EO) devices that contain the PC61BM hole-blocking interlayer (see device architecture in Fig. 4A). To minimize the voltage drops across the PC61BM layer at larger currents, the EO devices were measured and analysed with a smaller bias (up to 10 V). Fig. 4B displays representative I–V characteristics of EO devices in the upward scan (see the curves in both scan directions in Fig. S6a, ESI†). The attained electron current falls in the same order as in HO devices under similar voltages, both exhibiting a weak T-dependence, except for the outlier point at 120 K, at which a pronounced reduction in electron current was observed. The EO device also exhibited a good T-reproducibility, as evidenced by the overlapping I–V curves at 300 K before and after the T-cycle (see Fig. S6b, ESI†). In an analogous fashion to the HO devices, the electron transport in Fig. 4B exhibits the SCLC behaviour. We further examined the hysteresis in EO devices. As shown in Fig. 4C, the same anti-clockwise direction was noted, which seems to suggest the same origin of the occurring hysteresis in the electron transport, which partially can arise from the ionic motion with biasing. Note that the electrical field applied to EO diodes is about 1/10 of that in HO diodes. As a result, the rate of ionic motion inside the MSC should be less severe, which is indeed reflected by the overall reduction of hysteresis in Fig. 4C.
 Fig. 4  (A) Illustrated device structure of EO diodes used to determine the electron mobility (μe) in the out-of-plane direction. (B) I–V characteristics in double-logarithm scale of MSC EO devices measured at various T. The solid line is a guide for the eye with slope = 2 to indicate the SCLC behaviour. (C) Comparison of the hysteresis in I–V characteristics of EO diodes at 295 K and 150 K. (D) μe in EO diodes as a function of T. Also included is the value for γ (= 1.8) determined by power law fittings. 
In Fig. 4D, we plot the determined electron mobility (μe) as a function of T based on the Mott–Gurney law fittings. The μe was ∼183 cm2 V−1 s−1 near RT, approximately 1/3 of the mobility of counterpart holes. Calculations using density functional theory predicted a similar effective mass of the two carriers. Thus, the μh and μe should be comparable according to the Drude model, at least in a theoretical perspective. The difference between the SCLC mobilities in our MSCs can be due to a couple of factors, including the traps or contact properties. Actually, a considerably imbalanced transport has been observed in thermally evaporated MAPbI3 polycrystalline films due to severe electron trapping.63 Our results reveal that the imbalance of carrier transport in perovskites can be beneficially mitigated in the form of a single crystal. In Fig. 4D, we note that the T-dependence for μe displays an opposite tendency when compared to that of μh. Besides, the electron mobility decreases sharply at 120 K, likely transiting to the orthorhombic phase. Through power law fittings, we obtained a value of γ of +1.8. A positive T-coefficient was observed previously in MSCs identified with shallow electron traps.64 Of interest, the determined γ roughly follows the mechanism governed by impurity scattering with a ∼T3/2 dependence.65 This result indicates that the thermal activation for electron transport (in the tetragonal phase) tends to be subject to the influence of impurities/traps. Analysis of the PL linewidth in Fig. 2C points to the insignificance of impurity scattering for the PL broadening, while the impurities/traps seem to be more important for electron transport. Such a discrepancy can be understood in terms of the different surface conditions. Our contactless PL measurements were based on samples laminated from ground MSC powders and the resultant surface may not necessarily mirror the natural crystal surface but rather the average of bulk grown crystals. Differently, the electronic devices were fabricated directly based on solution-grown crystals in which the non-passivated surface may be populated with under-saturated ions, serving as traps. As a confirmation, we performed X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) on the surface of MSCs (see the zoomed-in spectra of I 3d and Pb 4f in Fig. S7, ESI†). Based on the calculated peak percentage, we attained an I/Pb ratio of ∼2, which strongly indicates a Pb-rich surface in our MSC samples. This result agrees with a recent study using transient reflectivity spectroscopy and elemental analysis in which the effect of I-deficiency near the surface of MSCs was identified, suggestive of non-stoichiometry.66 The presence of under-saturated Pb can trap charges in the vicinity of the MSC surface. This impact, to some degree, reconciles the mobility difference of the two carriers at RT. The positive T-dependence for μe tends to magnify the mobility difference of the two carriers at lower T. Thus, seeking viable passivation approaches is a necessity towards the realistic applications of MSCs.
Impact of temperature on carrier transport in MSC planar diodes
To shed more light on the influence of traps on the electrical behaviours in MSCs, we further examined the transport along the natural crystal facade or (110) plane using a lateral device structure (see inset of Fig. 5D). This is based on the rationale that, with the geometry of a lateral device, charge carriers primarily transport in a narrow depth near the surface area, and thus are subject to more influences of any surface traps. Fig. 5A shows the I–V characteristics (upward scan) of MSC lateral devices at different T (I–V curves in both scan directions are shown in Fig. S8, ESI†). We observed a negative T-coefficient, consistent with the trend in sandwich HO devices, while the T-dependence was stronger. The sign of the T-coefficient indicates that the current in Fig. 5A can be dominantly carried by the holes, which are more effortlessly injected through the Au electrode. In Fig. 5B, we compare the hysteresis of I–V characteristics at RT and 120 K. The hysteresis at 120 K is lower than that near RT (see Fig. 5B), likely due to the suppressed ion motion at such low T. Of interest, the hysteresis at low T display a clockwise direction, reverse to that near RT. This behaviour seems to hint at the electron trapping fingerprinted by a reduced current in the backward scan.67 This result points to an increased surface charge trapping with descending T, agreeable with the enlarged charge trapping observed in MAPbI3 polycrystalline films at lower T.68
 Fig. 5  (A) Dark I–V characteristics of an MSC planar diode at various T in double-logarithm scale. The red line is a guide for the eye with a slope = 2. (B) Comparison of I–V hysteresis as a function of scan history at RT and 120 K with arrows indicting the voltage scan direction. (C) Hole mobility in MSC lateral diodes as a function of T along with the linear fitting (γ = –3.2). (D) I–V characteristics of planar lateral diodes in the dark and under while light illumination at 150 K. Lines are guides for the eye with slopes of 2 (black) and 3.2 (red). Inset: Illustration of the MSC lateral diode under irradiation. 
We further estimated the carrier mobility in MSC-based lateral devices. It should be mentioned that an accurate determination of μ in the lateral device was obstructed by the uncertainty of the charge transporting depth. For approximation, we simply assumed a depth equivalent to the carrier diffusion length in MSCs (∼170 μm).22 Based on this depth, Fig. 5C shows the estimated SCLC mobility versus T extracted by the Mott–Gurney law. The mobility in the lateral diodes amounted to ∼4 cm2 V−1 s−1 at 300 K, comparable to the values extracted by Hall measurements.25,69 The mobility along the (110) plane was around 100-fold lower than the μh in sandwich HO devices, which, to some extent, can be ascribed to the elevated influences of surface traps. Based on the T-dependence of μ in Fig. 5A, we attained a γ of −3.2 within 150–300 K. This result apparently cannot be described by the acoustic photon scattering mechanism with a −T3/2 dependence, which further supports our argument for the dominant LO phonon interaction. In a recent study on MAPbI3 transistors, it was pointed out that the enhanced mobility in perovskites alongside the observed T-coefficient (between −2.6 and ∼−3.2) could be mainly governed by the decrease in MA polarization disorder with decreasing T.46 Combining the results of charge transport in different orientations, this indicates that the interplaying influences of optical phonons, traps and changes of polarization disorder can be responsible for the thermal activation of carrier mobility in MSCs.
Given the identified surface trapping on dark transport, it was of interest to examine the behaviour in devices under irradiation with the expected trap filling. Fig. 5D comparatively shows dark and illuminated (white light) I–V characteristics at 150 K. After irradiation, the current was enhanced by more than 2 orders of magnitude at low bias. In the dark, a weak TLC behaviour (indicated by the line with the slope >2 in Fig. 5D) was noted, possibly ascribed to the surface trapping at low T. Upon illumination, the TLC transited to an evident SCLC behaviour at low bias (<10 V). This phenomenon can be explained by the trap-filling with photo-generated carriers near the surface regime. This considerably enhanced photoconductivity opens an opportunity for light detection applications using MSCs.
Conclusions
To summarize, we comprehensively investigated T-dependent carrier mobility, structural and photoluminescence properties in solution-grown MSCs, identifying the thermal evolution of the broadening and blue-shift in PL alongside the T–O phase transition occurring around 150 K. The result of linewidth analysis of the PL indicated a dominant LO phonon interaction in a wide T-range. The transport of the two carriers in MSCs along the direction normal to the (110) crystal plane displayed a 3-fold difference in mobility at RT, which became more imbalanced at lower T. In the tetragonal phase (150–300 K), we observed a negative T-coefficient (of −1.6) for the hole mobility, which coincidently agreed with the electron–phonon scattering. In contrast, the mobility of counterpart electrons (along the same orientation) displayed an opposite positive T-coefficient (∼1.8), seemingly following the tendency predicted by impurity scattering. Such distinct T-behaviour can be reconciled by the enlarged impacts of electron traps. Through examining the transport near the surface regime of MSCs in the lateral direction, we identified a reduced (by ∼2 orders of magnitude) mobility in association with an increased (negative) T-coefficient. The larger temperature coefficient deviating from the T−3/2 may be due to the interplay between disorder in MA polarization, traps and optical phonon scattering. Given the theoretically predicted transport isotropy, the reduced mobility may be reconciled by the elevated influence of surface traps in lateral devices. With this feature, the gain of photocurrent in MSC lateral diodes under irradiation can primarily arise from the trap-filling process, which enables an opportunity for use in photon-detection applications. This work enriches the fundamental insights into the key properties in single-crystal perovskite materials and can act as a guide for future work in perovskite related optoelectronic devices targeted for operation in a wide T-window.
Experimental
Materials
CH3NH3I was purchased from Dyesol Limited (Australia). Lead iodide (99%) and gamma-butyrolactone (GBL) used for sample preparation were purchased from Sigma Aldrich. All the materials were used as received without further purification.
Seed crystal synthesis
The precursor solution of MAPbI3 seed single crystal was prepared by mixing CH3NH3I (0.103 g) and PbI2 (0.297 g) in 0.6 mL of GBL solvent. The solution was heated up to 90 °C and kept for 12 h, leading to the formation of seed crystals.
Crystal growth procedure
The crystalline seeds were merged in GBL solution (0.6 mL) in the same concentration (wt) as the precursor solution and kept at 90 °C. The solvent was changed every 12 h for a total of 3 times. MAPbI3 single crystals were formed with dimensions up to 6 mm × 4 mm × 3 mm. The sample was stored in a N2-purged glove box before use.
MSC single carrier device fabrication
Electrical contacts in sandwich hole-only (HO) devices were attained by thermally evaporating 80 nm of Au (∼80 nm) on both sides of the MSC sample through shadow masks (effective work area = 12 mm2). For electron-only (EO) devices, 30 nm of a PCBM hole-blocking layer was solution-cast atop both facades of the grown crystals followed by thermal evaporation of the Au contacts (80 nm) on the PCBM layer. MCSs containing the finished electrodes were transferred onto the pre-cleaned ITO substrate pre-applied with metallic melted Ga as the interlayer. MSC planar diodes were fabricated by thermally depositing two Au electrodes on the same surface of MSCs through shadow masks, leading to a channel distance (length) of 90 μm and channel width of 1 mm.
Characterization
Powder X-ray diffraction patterns (room temperature) were recorded on a Rigaku D/MAX-TTRIII (CBO) diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.542 Å) operated at 40 kV and 200 mA.

T-Dependent XRD patterns were collected by using a D8 Advanced (Bruker) diffractometer. The powder sample was placed in a nylon loop using cryo-oil and cooled by liquid nitrogen flow at a rate of 5 °C min−1 controlled by an Oxford Cryosystem (model: Croystream Plus).

T-Dependent photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy was attained by using a Horriba Fluorolog-III spectrofluorometer sourced by a Xeon lamp (slit < 5 nm). The sample was mounted in a closed cycle refrigerator cryostat (Janis Research) mechanistically adjusted to fit the sample chamber in the fluorimeter. The temperature was controlled by a LakeShore temperature controller.
PL mappings of MSC and MAPbI3 thin film were captured by a Witec Alpha scanning near-field optical microscopic system under Raman scanning mode. The sample was excited by a laser beam at 432 nm (Omnichrome Series 74), which was focused through a series of microscopic lens (×60, Nikon Inc.).
Current–voltage characteristics were measured in a LakeShore vacuum probe station using a Keithley 4200-SCS semiconductor parameter analyser. The sample was cooled by a liquid nitrogen flow with the temperature controlled by a LakeShore temperature controller.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The work is finally supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 21674006) and 100 Top Young Scientists Program by Chinese Academy of Sciences (QYZDB-SSW-SLH033). Y. Z. thanks the “One Thousand Young Talents Program of China” and the “111 Project” (B14009).
References
H. J. Snaith, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 3623 CrossRef .
P. Docampo, S. Guldin, T. Leijtens, N. K. Noel, U. Steiner and H. J. Snaith, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4013 CrossRef PubMed .
N.-G. Park, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 2423 CrossRef .
L. Dou, Y. Yang, J. You, Z. Hong, W.-H. Chang, G. Li and Y. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5404 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Gao, M. Gratzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2448 Search PubMed .
M. Gratzel, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 838 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Kazim, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and S. Ahmad, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 2812 CrossRef PubMed .
O. Malinkiewicz, A. Yella, Y. H. Lee, G. M. Espallargas, M. Graetzel, M. K. Nazeeruddin and H. J. Bolink, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 128 CrossRef .
H. Zhu, Y. Fu, F. Meng, X. Wu, Z. Gong, Q. Ding, M. V. Gustafsson, M. T. Trinh, S. Jin and X. Y. Zhu, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 636 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Zhong, B. Cai, X. Wang, Z. Yang, Y. Xing, S. Miao, W.-H. Zhang and C. Li, Nano Energy, 2015, 11, 409 CrossRef .
C. Yang, Y. Wu, Q. Ma and W.-H. Zhang, J. Energy Chem., 2018, 27, 622 CrossRef .
X. Li, D. Bi, C. Yi, J.-D. Décoppet, J. Luo, S. M. Zakeeruddin, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Science, 2016, 353, 58 CrossRef PubMed .
T. M. Brenner, D. A. Egger, A. M. Rappe, L. Kronik, G. Hodes and D. Cahen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4754 CrossRef PubMed .
R. L. Milot, G. E. Eperon, H. J. Snaith, M. B. Johnston and L. M. Herz, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 6218 CrossRef .
C. Motta, F. El-Mellouhi and S. Sanvito, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 12746 CrossRef PubMed .
J. M. Frost, K. T. Butler, F. Brivio, C. H. Hendon, M. Van Schilfgaarde and A. Walsh, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2584 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Onoda-Yamamuro, T. Matsuo and H. Suga, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 1992, 53, 935 CrossRef .
Q. Lin, A. Armin, R. C. R. Nagiri, P. L. Burn and P. Meredith, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 106 CrossRef .
G. Li, Z.-K. Tan, D. Di, M. L. Lai, L. Jiang, J. H.-W. Lim, R. H. Friend and N. C. Greenham, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 2640 CrossRef PubMed .
J. S. Manser and P. V. Kamat, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 737 CrossRef .
A. Paulke, S. D. Stranks, J. Kniepert, J. Kurpiers, C. M. Wolff, N. Schön, H. J. Snaith, T. J. K. Brenner and D. Neher, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 108, 113505 CrossRef .
Q. Dong, Y. Fang, Y. Shao, P. Mulligan, J. Qiu, L. Cao and J. Huang, Science, 2015, 347, 967 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Karakus, S. A. Jensen, F. D’Angelo, D. Turchinovich, M. Bonn and E. Cánovas, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4991 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Oga, A. Saeki, Y. Ogomi, S. Hayase and S. Seki, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 13818 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liu, Z. Yang, D. Cui, X. Ren, J. Sun, X. Liu, J. Zhang, Q. Wei, H. Fan, F. Yu, X. Zhang, C. Zhao and S. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5176 CrossRef PubMed .
H. T. Yi, X. Wu, X. Zhu and V. Podzorov, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6509 CrossRef PubMed .
D. A. Valverde-Chavez, C. S. Ponseca, C. C. Stoumpos, A. Yartsev, M. G. Kanatzidis, V. Sundstrom and D. G. Cooke, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3700 Search PubMed .
M. I. Saidaminov, A. L. Abdelhady, B. Murali, E. Alarousu, V. M. Burlakov, W. Peng, I. Dursun, L. Wang, Y. He, G. Maculan, A. Goriely, T. Wu, O. F. Mohammed and O. M. Bakr, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7586 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Shi, V. Adinolfi, R. Comin, M. Yuan, E. Alarousu, A. Buin, Y. Chen, S. Hoogland, A. Rothenberger, K. Katsiev, Y. Losovyj, X. Zhang, P. A. Dowben, O. F. Mohammed, E. H. Sargent and O. M. Bakr, Science, 2015, 347, 519 CrossRef PubMed .
V. D. Mihailetchi, J. Wildeman and P. W. M. Blom, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 94, 126602 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Y. Chin, D. Cortecchia, J. Yin, A. Bruno and C. Soci, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7383 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Baikie, Y. Fang, J. M. Kadro, M. Schreyer, F. Wei, S. G. Mhaisalkar, M. Graetzel and T. J. White, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5628 Search PubMed .
E. M. Hutter, M. C. Gelvez-Rueda, A. Osherov, V. Bulovic, F. C. Grozema, S. D. Stranks and T. J. Savenije, Nat. Mater., 2016, 16, 115 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Wehrenfennig, M. Liu, H. J. Snaith, M. B. Johnston and L. M. Herz, APL Mater., 2014, 2, 081513 CrossRef .
T. J. Jacobsson, W. Tress, J.-P. Correa-Baena, T. Edvinsson and A. Hagfeldt, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 11382 Search PubMed .
H. Zhang, X. Qiao, Y. Shen, T. Moehl, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Grätzel and M. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 11762 Search PubMed .
A. Osherov, E. M. Hutter, K. Galkowski, R. Brenes, D. K. Maude, R. J. Nicholas, P. Plochocka, V. Bulović, T. J. Savenije and S. D. Stranks, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 10757 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Galkowski, A. Mitioglu, A. Miyata, P. Plochocka, O. Portugall, G. E. Eperon, J. T.-W. Wang, T. Stergiopoulos, S. D. Stranks and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 962 Search PubMed .
V. D’Innocenzo, G. Grancini, M. J. P. Alcocer, A. R. S. Kandada, S. D. Stranks, M. M. Lee, G. Lanzani, H. J. Snaith and A. Petrozza, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3586 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Li, G. Wang, H.-C. Cheng, C.-Y. Chen, H. Wu, Y. Liu, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11330 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Feng and b. Xiao, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1719 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Wehrenfennig, M. Liu, H. J. Snaith, M. B. Johnston and L. M. Herz, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1300 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Diab, G. Trippé-Allard, F. Lédée, K. Jemli, C. Vilar, G. Bouchez, V. L. R. Jacques, A. Tejeda, J. Even, J.-S. Lauret, E. Deleporte and D. Garrot, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 5093 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Even, L. Pedesseau, C. Katan, M. Kepenekian, J.-S. Lauret, D. Sapori and E. Deleporte, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 10161 Search PubMed .
A. D. Wright, C. Verdi, R. L. Milot, G. E. Eperon, M. A. Perez-Osorio, H. J. Snaith, F. Giustino, M. B. Johnston and L. M. Herz, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11755 Search PubMed .
S. P. Senanayak, B. Yang, T. H. Thomas, N. Giesbrecht, W. Huang, E. Gann, B. Nair, K. Goedel, S. Guha, X. Moya, C. R. McNeill, P. Docampo, A. Sadhanala, R. H. Friend and H. Sirringhaus, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, 1601935 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Rudin, T. L. Reinecke and B. Segall, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1990, 42, 11218 CrossRef .
J. Tilchin, D. N. Dirin, G. I. Maikov, A. Sashchiuk, M. V. Kovalenko and E. Lifshitz, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 6363 CrossRef PubMed .
L. M. Pazos-Outón, M. Szumilo, R. Lamboll, J. M. Richter, M. Crespo-Quesada, M. Abdi-Jalebi, H. J. Beeson, M. Vrućinić, M. Alsari, H. J. Snaith, B. Ehrler, R. H. Friend and F. Deschler, Science, 2016, 351, 1430 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yamada, T. Yamada, L. Q. Phuong, N. Maruyama, H. Nishimura, A. Wakamiya, Y. Murata and Y. Kanemitsu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 10456 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Eames, J. M. Frost, P. R. F. Barnes, B. C. O’Regan, A. Walsh and M. S. Islam, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7497 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Li, S. Tscheuschner, F. Paulus, P. E. Hopkinson, J. Kießling, A. Köhler, Y. Vaynzof and S. Huettner, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2446 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Xiao, Y. Yuan, Y. Shao, Q. Wang, Q. Dong, C. Bi, P. Sharma, A. Gruverman and J. Huang, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 193 CrossRef PubMed .
J. G. Labram, D. H. Fabini, E. E. Perry, A. J. Lehner, H. Wang, A. M. Glaudell, G. Wu, H. Evans, D. Buck, R. Cotta, L. Echegoyen, F. Wudl, R. Seshadri and M. L. Chabinyc, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 3565 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Kuik, G.-J. A. H. Wetzelaer, J. G. Laddé, H. T. Nicolai, J. Wildeman, J. Sweelssen and P. W. M. Blom, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 4502 CrossRef .
J. M. Frost and A. Walsh, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 528 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Tombe, G. Adam, H. Heilbrunner, D. H. Apaydin, C. Ulbricht, N. S. Sariciftci, C. J. Arendse, E. Iwuoha and M. C. Scharber, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 1714 RSC .
X. Zhang, S. Bi, J. Zhou, S. You, H. Zhou, Y. Zhang and Z. Tang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 9376 RSC .
G. E. Stillman, C. M. Wolfe and J. O. Dimmock, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 1970, 31, 1199 CrossRef .
H.-H. Fang, R. Raissa, M. Abdu-Aguye, S. Adjokatse, G. R. Blake, J. Even and M. A. Loi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 2378 CrossRef .
X. Y. Zhu and V. Podzorov, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4758 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zou and R. J. Holmes, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501994 CrossRef .
G. J. Wetzelaer, M. Scheepers, A. M. Sempere, C. Momblona, J. Avila and H. J. Bolink, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1837 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Adinolfi, M. Yuan, R. Comin, E. S. Thibau, D. Shi, M. I. Saidaminov, P. Kanjanaboos, D. Kopilovic, S. Hoogland, Z.-H. Lu, O. M. Bakr and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3406 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Conwell and V. F. Weisskopf, Phys. Rev., 1950, 77, 388 CrossRef .
Y. Yang, M. Yang, David T. Moore, Y. Yan, Elisa M. Miller, K. Zhu and Matthew C. Beard, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 16207 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, B. de Boer and P. W. M. Blom, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 81, 085201 CrossRef .
Y. Yuan, T. Li, Q. Wang, J. Xing, A. Gruverman and J. Huang, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, 1602164 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liu, Y. Zhang, Z. Yang, D. Yang, X. Ren, L. Pang and S. F. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9204 CrossRef PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8tc01717dThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Zoomed-in spectra of powder XRD patterns on MSCs measured at different temperatures (T) for selected peaks at the (A) (110) and (B) (220) planes. At around 150 K, more abrupt shifts towards 2θ are observed, which can be correlated to the phase transition (from a tetragonal to orthorhombic structure) in MSCs. (C and D) Schematic illustration for the crystal structure of MAPbI3 orthorhombic (C), and tetragonal (D) phases.	 

 	Fig. 2  (A) T-Variable steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectra of MSCs. (B) Evolution of PL peak energy with T. The oval in red highlights the abrupt change in the peak energy, which can approximately correspond to the T–O phase transition at ∼150 K. (C) Full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the PL spectra of MSCs as a function of T together with the fitting based on the LO phonon scattering model (black line). Inset: Absorption spectroscopy of MSC and MAPbI3 polycrystalline film (MPC). (D) PL mapping of MSC (upper panel) and MPC (lower panel) captured by confocal laser microscopy excited at 432 nm. (E) Steady-state PL spectra registered in the marked areas by the dotted circles.	 

 	Fig. 3  (A) Illustrated device architecture for the HO diodes used to determine the hole mobility (μh) along the out-of-plane direction (normal to the natural crystal facade in MSCs). (B) Current versus voltage (I–V) characteristics in double-logarithm scale of MSC HO diodes scanned in a large bias range at different T. The solid line is the guide line with slope = 2. (C) Comparison of hysteresis in I–V characteristics measured at 300 K and 200 K. The arrows depict the voltage scan direction. (D) Determined μh as a function of T in double-logarithm scale. The solid line is the linear fit to measurements within 150–300 K with γ denoting the T-coefficient. The coloured area indicates the approximate T-range for the dominant tetragonal phase in MSC.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 4  (A) Illustrated device structure of EO diodes used to determine the electron mobility (μe) in the out-of-plane direction. (B) I–V characteristics in double-logarithm scale of MSC EO devices measured at various T. The solid line is a guide for the eye with slope = 2 to indicate the SCLC behaviour. (C) Comparison of the hysteresis in I–V characteristics of EO diodes at 295 K and 150 K. (D) μe in EO diodes as a function of T. Also included is the value for γ (= 1.8) determined by power law fittings.	 

 	Fig. 5  (A) Dark I–V characteristics of an MSC planar diode at various T in double-logarithm scale. The red line is a guide for the eye with a slope = 2. (B) Comparison of I–V hysteresis as a function of scan history at RT and 120 K with arrows indicting the voltage scan direction. (C) Hole mobility in MSC lateral diodes as a function of T along with the linear fitting (γ = –3.2). (D) I–V characteristics of planar lateral diodes in the dark and under while light illumination at 150 K. Lines are guides for the eye with slopes of 2 (black) and 3.2 (red). Inset: Illustration of the MSC lateral diode under irradiation.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8tc01717d

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
