A bottom-up approach from molecular nanographenes to unconventional carbon materials   - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B717585J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B717585J
(Feature Article)
J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 1472-1484Show CompoundsA bottom-up approach from molecular nanographenes to unconventional carbon materials†

        
          
            Linjie 
            Zhi
          
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Klaus 
            Müllen
          
          
        
      *
      Max-Planck Institute for Polymer Research, Ackermannweg 10, D-55128 Mainz, Germany. E-mail: zhi@mpip-mainz.mpg.de; muellen@mpip-mainz.mpg.de;   Tel: (+49) 6131-379-151
Received 
      13th November 2007
    , Accepted 10th January 2008First published on 8th February 2008AbstractStrategies used to grow large graphenes and graphene-based materials through chemical approaches are discussed. Molecular graphenes are believed to be suitable precursors for growing large graphenes as well as fabricating graphene-based materials. The structure of the precursor and the thermolysis procedure determine the structure of the carbonaceous product; and a chemically driven method for the growth and integration of graphenes is thus developed. This paper gives a brief overview of the recent research works concerning chemical and thermal approaches toward large graphenes and graphene-based carbonaceous materials, including the selection of structurally-defined precursors, the template-assisted integration of molecular graphenes into unconventional carbon nanoobjects, the importance of the thermolysis procedures, and the function and application of the obtained materials.Linjie ZhiLinjie Zhi received his PhD in 2000 at the Institute of Coal Chemistry, CAS. Since 2003 he worked with Prof. Müllen at the Max-Planck Institute for Polymer Research for two years before assuming the position of project leader there until the end of 2007. He is currently a professor in the National Center for Nanoscience and Technology of China. His research interests focus on carbon-rich materials.Klaus MüllenKlaus Müllen received his habilitation in 1977 at the ETH Zurich (Diploma at the Univ. of Cologne and PhD at the Univ. of Basel). In 1979 he became a Professor in Organic Chemistry at the Univ. of Cologne, and in 1983 at the Univ. of Mainz. Since 1989, he has been director of the Max-Planck Institute for Polymer Research. His research interests focus on synthetic macromolecular chemistry and materials science.
1. Introduction
Graphene, as an integral part of graphite, is a two dimensional (2D) aromatic monolayer of carbon atoms.1 This atomic layer was believed to be unstable with respect to the formation of curved structures such as 0D fullerenes and 1D tubes,2–4 until a free-standing piece was unexpectedly observed several years ago.5 Follow-up experimental studies6–7 confirmed that graphene exhibits unique electronic behaviour, for instance, transport properties in which the charge-carriers mimic massless relativistic particles. From these and other results graphene has emerged as a rapidly rising star in the field of material science.8
There are serious drawbacks, however, which hamper further progress. Developing reliable methods to produce processable graphene sheets in large amounts is one of the major obstacles. Obviously, mechanical exfoliation of highly oriented pyrolytic graphite5 (as a top-down method) or heat treatment of silicon carbide wafers9 (as a bottom-up method) can only prepare graphene materials useful for fundamental studies, but not for large-scale applications. Oxidation of graphite is an alternative top-down method of producing dispersed graphenes in large quantity.1 However, this method inevitably introduces defects into the graphenes due to the formation of oxygen-containing groups. Alternative approaches towards high yielding syntheses of defect-free graphene are therefore needed.
To clarify the approach described in this article, graphene is classified into three groups according to its size: molecular graphene (diameter less than 5 nm along the 2D direction of the graphene), nanographene (diameter between 5 and 500 nm), and macrographene (diameter more than 500 nm).
Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) are generally known to the chemist as model compounds of organic chemistry. On the other hand, PAHs are typical molecular graphenes composed of all-sp2 carbons. The advantages of PAHs as molecular graphenes are (i) the structure is precisely defined, (ii) their preparation on a large-scale is possible, and (iii) they have tunable solubility and good processability. The molecular graphenes can thus be used not only as model π systems for chemistry, but also as building blocks to fabricate various electronic and optoelectronic devices,10–12 in which the graphene structures serve as important media to transfer electrons. The disadvantage is that the size of these graphenes is too small to handle with the presently available methods of condensed-matter physics, such as confocal electron-beam or ion-beam lithography technologies. One of the driving forces for us, therefore, is to extend the size of molecular graphenes to nanographenes and macrographenes by means of bottom-up chemical synthesis.
Generally, two chemical approaches can be used to grow PAHs into larger graphenes. One is through a controlled chemical reaction under mild conditions in solution. A dendritic or hyperbranched precursor is thereby first synthesized and transformed into the target structure by cyclodehydrogenation and planarization. This method produces almost pure graphenes with a molecular diameter of up to several nanometres, while the extension is definitely limited to the nanoscale (mostly less than 5 nm). Another approach is through thermolysis, starting from well-defined carbon-rich precursors, such as smaller PAHs, followed by reactions at higher temperature to fuse or grow the PAHs into larger graphenes. Although it is not so clean, the second protocol is extremely versatile for growing nano- and macrographenes.
The purpose of searching for larger graphenes is based on the application aspect, for which a larger size is easier to handle and integrate into functional objects. An ideal approach is of course to grow and integrate the graphenes simultaneously. This approach, however, is made difficult by solution reactions, but this can be facilitated by thermolysis of carefully selected precursors.
The thermolysis approach towards graphene formation and integration is better understood if the chemical activity of the precursors at higher temperatures is considered. These include the formation and organization of molecular structures, and the possible intermolecular or intra-molecular reactions occurring at different temperatures. Obviously, with this approach, the structure of the precursor together with the thermal reactions will determine the structure of the product; this is the principle we will follow to develop a chemically driven method for the growth and integration of graphenes. This article summarizes part of our research work: first, the selection of structurally-defined precursors; second, the template-assisted integration of molecular graphenes into unconventional carbon nanoobjects; third, the importance of the thermolysis procedures; and finally the function and application of the obtained materials.
2. Structurally-defined carbon-rich precursors
2.1 Dendritic polyphenylenes
With the graphene structure in mind, a precursor containing all-benzene subunits would be favorable for conversion into graphenes. Dendritic polyphenylenes (DPPs), including mono-dispersed dendrimers and poly-dispersed hyperbranched polyphenylenes, as a reservoir of benzene rings, are thus ideal candidates as precursors for chemical graphene formation. The synthetic protocol to access a variety of mono-dispersed DPPs is based on two simple approaches. The first approach is through the cyclotrimerization of diphenylacetylenes, 1,13 resulting in hexaphenylbenzenes 2, a dendritic all-benzene molecule (Scheme 1). In this way, not only can other functional groups such as thiophene be introduced into the dendritic structure14 but, more interestingly, large DPPs of a higher generation are also accessible, as shown in Scheme 2.15 The second approach for preparing DPPs is to utilize the highly versatile Diels–Alder cycloaddition of phenyl-substituted alkynes, 7, with tetraphenyl-substituted cyclopentadienones, 8, (CPs) (Scheme 3).16–18 Different CPs and alkyne derivatives can be integrated with this reaction, leading to a variety of substitution types and molecular topologies. By employing different alkyne structures as building blocks, DPPs with versatile geometries and large sizes have been achieved, as shown in Scheme 4.19–21 In addition, repetitive Diels–Alder reactions of CPs with an alkyne core can grow the DPPs to third, fourth, fifth, and even higher generations with a molecular weight of up to 271000 g mol−1 and a molecular size of approx. 28 nm.22
 Scheme 1  Cyclotrimerization of diphenylacetylenes toward dendritic molecules. 
 Scheme 2  Large DPPs are also accessible by cyclotrimerization of diphenylacetylene derivatives. 
 Scheme 3  DPPs prepared by Diels–Alder cycloaddition of phenyl-substituted alkynes with tetraphenyl-substituted cyclopentadienones. 
 Scheme 4  Various DPPs have been prepared from different alkynes via Diels–Alder cycloaddition. 
To grow even larger all-benzene molecules, another type of DPP, the poly-dispersed hyperbranched polyphenylenes, are of interest. These DPPs can be synthesized by utilizing AB2 functionalized building blocks. Earlier synthetic examples include the report from Kim and Webster with the metal-catalyzed intra-molecular coupling of, for example, 3,5-dibromophenylbronic acid or 3,5-dihalophenyl Grignard reagents .23 The Diels–Alder cycloaddition of a CP and a di-alkyne compound is a more favorable alternative approach.24 One of the interesting building blocks is the AB2 functionalized CP, 16, consisting of cyclopentadienondiene and alkyne dienophile units. This precursor can easily undergo intra-molecular Diels–Alder cycloaddition to form hyperbranched polyphenylene 17 (Scheme 5) with highly condensed phenyl rings and almost unlimited extension of the structure.24,25
 Scheme 5  Intra-molecular Diels–Alder cycloaddition toward hyperbranched polyphenylenes. 
2.2 Molecular nanographenes
All-benzene DPPs are in some way rigid 3D molecules, even though the stiff parts of higher generation DPPs are flexible.22 To fuse the phenyl rings into a 2D graphene, dehydrogenation is necessary. This can be done by an effective oxidative cyclodehydrogenation reaction, for which predissolved iron (III) chloride in nitromethane is used as both Lewis acid and oxidizing reagent. The reaction is generally carried out in dichloromethane at room temperature, and produces completely fused discotic molecules. Hexabenzocoronene (HBC), 18, a molecular graphene, is thus obtained in high yield by dehydrogenation of hexaphenylbenzene (Scheme 6).26–28
 Scheme 6  Cyclodehydrogenation of DPPs towards molecular graphenes. 
On the basis of the above cyclodehydrogenation reactions, mono-dispersed molecular graphenes of various geometries and sizes were synthesized using the corresponding DPPs as starting compounds (Fig. 1). Although a complete cyclodehydrogenation of large DPPs needs careful control of experimental conditions such as time, oxidants, and the amount of reagents, the preparation of a giant molecular graphene carrying 222 sp2 carbon atoms from cyclodehydrogenation of DPP 6 was successful.29 The insoluble product was characterized by isotope-resolved matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization time-of-flight (MALDI-TOF) mass spectroscopy as well as solid-state NMR spectroscopy. However, cyclodehydrogenation of larger DPPs with, for example, 474 carbon atoms produced only a mixture of completely fused planar graphene and partially fused propeller molecules with triphenylbenezene and benzene cores respectively,30 which implied the difficulty of large graphene growth in solution.
 Fig. 1  Tool box of mono-dispersed molecular graphenes prepared from cyclodehydrogenation of DPPs. 
The utilization of poly-dispersed DPPs mentioned above enables alternative chemical approaches toward larger nanographenes. One typical example is the synthesis of graphene ribbons, an extension of the graphene structure of HBC in one dimension, which has been achieved by Diels–Alder polymerization of 1,4-bis(2,4,5-triphenylcyclopentadienone-3-yl) benzene and diethynylterphenyl to form soluble DPP oligmers or polymers followed by oxidative cyclodehydrogenation.31 Although the insolubility of the resulting graphene ribbon precluded standard spectroscopic structure elucidation, graphitic structures with extended conjugated behaviour and aromatic interaction between the graphenes have been probed by solid-state UV-Vis, Raman, and high resolution transmission electron microscopy  analysis. Nevertheless, due to poor solubility, it is difficult to separate and further characterize the graphene obtained.
Other approaches to growing nanographenes in a 1D direction, which contribute to a better understanding of the chemical formation of graphenes, have recently been developed by our group. As illustrated in Scheme 7, the Suzuki–Miyaura coupling reaction of bis-boronic ester of hexaphenylbenzene 21 with 1,4-diiodo-2,3,5,6-tetraphenylbenzene19 gave DPP oligomers 22 in 75% yield with good solubility in commonly used solvents. Subsequent intra-molecular oxidative cyclodehydrogenation with FeCl3 as an oxidative reagent at room temperature for two days provided graphene oligomers 23 as a black solid in 65% yield, which is still partially soluble in THF.32 The MALDI-TOF mass measurement of the graphenes probed a series of peaks up to 20000 with nominal masses corresponding to integer multiples of the repeating structure. Single graphenes with a length of up to 6 nm were visible under scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) (Fig. 2a). Strong aromatic interactions of the graphenes were detected by high resolution transmittance electron microscopy (HRTEM) characterization in which densely packed layered-structures with a basal distance of 0.34 nm were observed (Fig. 2b).
 Scheme 7  An alternative approach towards nanographene ribbons. 
 Fig. 2  Single nanographene ribbons (a), and orderly stacked graphenes (b), observed by STM and HRTEM characterization, respectively. 
An alternative chemical approach towards nanographene ribbons can be achieved by employing well-defined Diels–Alder cycloadditions as described in Scheme 8. A microwave-assisted Diels–Alder reaction of 4,9-di-tert-butyl-1,2:6,7-bis(2,5-di-p-dodecylcyclopenta-2,4-dienone)pyrene 24 with bis-substituted acetylene  provided pyrene-integrated DPP oligomers 25 with up to 11 repeat units detectable by MALDI-TOF analysis. Subsequent oxidative cyclodehydrogenation afforded poly-dispersed graphene ribbons 26 with good solubility in THF.33 Drop-casting the dilute THF solution of a dehydrogenated trimer on amorphous carbon resulted in thin films of molecular graphenes. Layer-by-layer stacking of the graphenes was occasionally visible under an electron-beam of TEM  as shown by the arrows in Fig. 3. However, selected area electron diffraction (SAED) analysis could not detect the π–π interaction of the graphenes. Instead, two crystal planes corresponding to d-spacing of 0.218 nm [indices (110)] and 0.128 nm [indices (210)] were found by SAED (inset of Fig. 3a), which is consistent with the results reported for single or double layer graphenes.34 The crystal lattice of the (110) plane was clearly observed when the selected area of the image (square marked) was zoomed in on, as shown in Fig. 3b, in which approx. 5 graphene layers were visibly stacked with each other (indicated by arrow). For the first time, the (110) plane has been observed directly on a chemically synthesized nanoscale graphene.
 Scheme 8  An alternative approach towards nanographene ribbons. 
 Fig. 3  HRTEM and SAED (inset of a) characterizations disclosed the lattice structure of the graphenes along the (110) direction. 
Oxidative cyclodehydrogenation of DPPs to molecular graphenes works well. However, the reaction becomes more difficult for higher generations of DPP. Besides the poly-dispersed hyperbranched DPPs, which can grow to micrometre scale, the mono-dispersed DPPs can also have a molecular size of up to more than 25 nm as mentioned previously.22 Nevertheless, the biggest mono-dispersed molecular graphene synthesized so far is C222, which can be characterized as a “defined molecule”. Although graphenes with a size of up to 10 nm have been detected by STM, they are difficult to purify and clarify from the standpoint of synthetic chemistry. It seems that the chemical synthesis in solution faces limitations for graphenes exceeding sizes of approx. 5 nm. Alternative methods are therefore needed to grow the graphenes beyond this. From this perspective, the DPPs or molecular graphenes selected here will be ideal building units.
3. Integration of molecular graphenes into carbonaceous nanoobjects
In order to use the molecular graphene or nanographene as a building block for growing larger graphenes or for fabricating functional carbonaceous materials, one must take a closer look at the chemical and physical behaviours of these graphenes. Molecular graphenes have strong aromatic interactions due to their large conjugated systems,35 which lead to the formation of highly ordered columnar structures in the liquid crystalline (LC) phase of the graphenes, and are thus interesting as semi-conductive electron transfer media for applications in various organic electronic devices.12 On the other hand, the LC order is a better controlled form of a carbon mesophase in the graphitization towards carbon materials.36 The LC phase formation, as a result of the nanophase separation between the hard aromatic core and the soft alkyl chains of the molecular graphenes, is closely related to the functional moieties attached to the peripheral position of the graphenes.37 The charge-carrier pathways of the material can thus be tuned by changing the periphery moieties.38 Interestingly, amphiphilic graphenes containing charged groups on the periphery, 27,39 or in the conjugated system, 29,40 (Fig. 4) can self-assemble with the assistance of a polar solvent into ordered ion-containing 1D nanoobjects, in which both aromatic interactions and ionic interactions are involved. More interestingly, other forces such as electric fields or laser irradiation can also be applied to promote the self-assembly of the graphenes.41,42 For example, drop-casting of a nonpolar molecular graphene hexa(para-n-dodecylphenyl)-hexabenzocoronene in an electric field produced long-range oriented columnar structures;41 a soft-landing processing through solvent-free matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization of the nanographenes and subsequent gas phase deposition led to ultrapure crystalline graphene films.42
 Fig. 4  Amphiphilic graphenes containing charged species on the periphery (27) or in the conjugated system (28). 
The formation of the above nanoobjects involved mainly molecular interactions such as π–π interactions or ionic interactions, which are not very stable and can lead to deformation of the ordered structure under harsh conditions such as elevated temperatures or high pressures. To solve this problem, stabilizing the order chemically by, for example, covalent cross-linking of the molecular graphenes is necessary. A simple approach is to attach chemically active groups on the peripheral positions of the graphene. After formation of the ordered columnar structure, these groups on the surface of neighbouring columns react with each other, leading to a covalent connection of the columns. For example, HBC derivatives decorated with methacrylate or acrylate moieties could be cross-linked in their LC phase by thermal or irradiation treatment, rendering insoluble materials with pre-formed order being preserved.43,44
However, as the conjugated system has not been fully extended through covalent bonding, this method is not so efficient at integrating the function of graphenes into the product. A more efficient strategy is to fuse the molecular graphenes into larger ones, and at the same time maintain the columnar order of the mesophase. One possible approach to fusing the graphenes is by thermal reaction. The columnar structure formed by self-assembly of PAHs, however, is not stable due to the phase transition of the material at higher temperatures. This problem has been solved by using template-assisted thermolysis. One typical example is the thermolysis of alkylphenyl-substituted HBC (HBC-PhC12) toward unconventional carbon nanotubes.45 With a porous alumina membrane as a template, HBC-PhC12 was introduced into the nanoscale channels of the membrane by a solution processing method. These HBC molecular graphenes formed ordered columnar structures by self-assembly on the inner surface of the channels. Progressive thermolysis of the pre-organized graphenes, first at 400 °C to cross-link the molecules and finally at 900 °C to carbonize the structure, led not only to connection but also to fusion of the molecular graphenes into large graphene layers (Scheme 9). After removal of the template, unconventional graphitic carbon nanotubes with nanographene layers oriented perpendicular to the tube axis were obtained (Fig. 5). As the tube wall is similar to a wall made of bricks, we called these tubes brick-walled carbon nanotubes (BWNTs). These BWNTs are expected to have different electronic properties due to the unique wall structures, while the mechanical properties are not as good as those of the conventional carbon nanotubes.
 Scheme 9  Schematic illustration of the preparation of BWNTs. 
 Fig. 5  HRTEM characterization of the BWNTs showed unconventional orientation of the graphenes in the tube wall. 
By employing this method as a strategy to integrate molecular graphenes, multifunctions are available through the selection of well-defined precursors as building blocks. Naphthalocyanine (Nc) is a typical nitrogen-containing discotic molecule. Alkyl chain-substituted Nc with or without metal complexation has good solution processibility. Template-assisted thermolysis of Nc at 400 °C produced unconventional nanotubes with an ordered columnar wall structure composed of cross-linked Nc discs (Scheme 10).46 Further thermal treatment at temperatures higher than 600 °C produced graphitic nanotubes containing nitrogen and/or metal, which may be interesting as multifunctional nanoobjects for application in various electronic devices.46
 Scheme 10  Schematic illustration of the preparation of Nc nanotubes: (1) pre-organization and thermal treatment of Ni-BNc in the template channels; (2) removal of porous alumina template. 
Obviously, the formation of unconventional nanotubes is closely related to the structure of the precursors. When other molecules, instead of molecular graphenes, were selected as precursors, template-assisted thermolysis produced nanoobjects with totally different structures and functions. Thus, hyperbranched polyphenylene nanotubes can be obtained by utilizing AB2 functionalized CP as a precursor, followed by solid-state thermal reactions in the nanoscale channel of the alumina template.47 Further carbonization of the polyphenylene tube led to carbonaceous nanotubes with highly porous wall structures (Fig. 6). The homogeneously dispersed 3D porous structure of the tube wall was attributed to the removal of the highly flexible alkyl chains at higher temperatures. The surface area of these tubes could be as high as 1200 m2 g−1, which makes it very suitable as a host material to capture other guest species. Further applications of these host–guest materials are anticipated (details will be discussed in section 5).
 Fig. 6  HRTEM characterization of the highly porous carbonaceous tubes. 
Of course, different templates can be used to prepare carbonaceous materials containing hierarchical structures. Thus, when 3D porous inverse silica opal was chosen as a template, thermolysis of alkyl chain-substituted HBC 29 in the pores following the removal of the template produced monodisperse orderly aligned graphitic microbeads (Fig. 7a). More interestingly, when other molecules, such as CP 30 and carbazole derivative 31, were selected as alternative precursors, carbonaceous particles were obtained after thermal treatment, which had similar morphologies to the microbeads formed from HBC 29, but possessed totally different structures. The spherical particles obtained from CP 30 were highly porous with nanoscale channels connected to each other (Fig. 7b), while carbon spheres with complete hollow cavities were produced from thermolysis of precursor 31 (Fig. 7c).48
 Fig. 7  The structure of the carbonaceous product is closely related to the structure of the precursors. 
From the above discussion, one can conclude that the template-assisted, precursor-controlled pyrolysis is an effective approach towards carbonaceous nanoobjects in a controlled fashion. A deeper understanding of the thermal behaviour of the precursors in a confined environment is crucial in this method, which is totally different from the mechanism of metal-assisted growth of conventional carbon nanotubes. The method enables both the bottom-up growth of large graphenes and the preparation of various carbonaceous nanoobjects.
4. Precursor-controlled solid-state pyrolysis
Generally, the structure of the carbonaceous materials is related to the structure of the precursors even in bulk state carbonizations.36 For instance, carbonization of sugars  always produces “hard” carbon which is impossible to highly graphitize because of the 3D cross-linking of the carbon atoms; carbonization of coal tar pitches, on the other hand, results in “soft” carbon which can be graphitized into highly crystalline graphite due to the favorable mesophase formation of the pitch molecules. Although the control of the high temperature reactions in the solid-state is not as easy as in a confined nanoscale environment, in principle precursor-controlled pyrolysis is suitable for direct solid-state pyrolysis. Pyrolysis of HBCs in the solid-state, for example, afforded graphitic carbon particles with various morphologies.49 The strong tendency to self-assembly and the pyrolysis in the mesophase are obviously the main reasons for the graphitic structure formation.
Metals are known to be catalytically active in the growth of carbon nanotubes. Small organic–metal complexes such as ferrocene, Fe(CO)5, have been used as both catalyst and carbon sources in the gas phase to synthesize carbon nanotubes.50,51 Shortly after that, solid-state pyrolysis of oligoalkyne metal complexes was observed to produce metal encapsulating carbon nanotubes.52,53 With certain precursors, even quantitative yield of carbon nanotubes has been achieved.54 One may argue here that the formation of CNTs is mainly due to the existence of metal species; that the influence of the structure of the carbon source on the growth of CNT is limited. This is mostly true for the growth of CNTs in the gas phase. However, during solid-state pyrolysis, the role of the precursor changes and sometimes even becomes crucial for the structure formation of the carbonaceous products.55–57 For example, solid-state pyrolysis of dicobalthexacarbonyl-functionalized poly(p-phenylenethynylene)s, 35, resulted in cobalt–carbon spheres with cobalt nanoparticles distributed homogeneously in the carbon matrix.55 In comparison, when tetrakis(4-ethynylphenyl)methane-tetrakis(dicobalt hexacarbonyl), 32, was selected as a precursor, solid-state pyrolysis produced 1D carbon–cobalt hybrids with square-shaped cross-sections (Fig. 8),56 suggesting that both the carbon–cobalt sphere and the unprecedented 1D carbon–cobalt nanorod are closely related to the structure of the precursors.
 Fig. 8  Solid-state pyrolysis of 32 produced 1D carbon–cobalt hybrids with a square-shaped cross-section. 
Further investigations demonstrated that various carbon nanoparticles, including graphitic carbon nanotubes, graphitic carbon rods, and carbon–metal hybrid particles can be obtained from the solid-state pyrolysis of DPP-metal complexes with discotic, linear, and dendritic geometries (Fig. 9).57 The ultimate structures of these carbon nanoparticles have been found to be dependent on the structure and composition of the starting compounds. Precursors containing discotic units always result in graphitic CNTs in high yield, whereas dendritic precursors give rod-like carbon materials. Nevertheless, linear oligo(arylethylene) precursors afford mostly carbon–metal hybrids, in which a large amount of amorphous carbon is obtained. Furthermore, the structure of the particles could be controlled by adjusting the carbon–metal ratio, the type and position of the metal incorporated into the precursor, and the mode of pyrolysis.
 Fig. 9  Precursor tool box of the selected DPP–metal complexes. 
Simpler organometallic complexes, such as metal-phthalocyanines, can be employed not only as precursors in template-assisted pyrolysis but also for solid-state pyrolysis. Heat treatment of cobalt-phthalocyanine in the solid-state produced highly curved CNTs,58 while thermolysis of iron-phthalocyanine afforded straight CNTs with sometimes ultra-long single crystalline ion carbide filling the tubes (Fig. 10), suggesting that the method of precursor-controlled pyrolysis works even with smaller precursors. Further proof includes the solid-state pyrolysis of ferrocenyl complexes toward carbon nanocapsules.59
 Fig. 10  Carbon–iron carbide cable structures with single crystalline iron carbide filled in the CNTs. 
Accordingly, metals are not only catalytically active to grow CNTs but also effective for growing graphenes and amorphous carbon. What is important about the role of metal for us is to place it in a specific position together with carbon atoms so that its catalytic activity can be controlled. In addition, the specific position of the metal against the carbon atoms will influence the thermal reactions occurring at higher temperatures to achieve dispersion or encapsulation of metal nanoparticles in the carbon matrix, which will introduce further functions into the products. In the precursor-controlled pyrolysis method, the various precursors, simple procedures, and close relationship between the precursors and products afford great opportunity to prepare unique and unconventional carbon or carbon–metal nanoparticles with graphenes integrated inside as well as with functions tunable for various applications.
5. Functions and applications of the obtained carbon nanoobjects
Generally, integration of molecular graphenes or nanographenes into functional materials or devices is still challenging due to the limited tools we have at present for handling them. However, precursor-controlled pyrolysis as discussed above provides a promising approach toward effective integration of these graphenes into functional carbonaceous nanoobjects. As we expected, the unconventional BWNTs prepared from template-assisted pyrolysis of HBCs displayed semi-conductive behaviour (the resistance of the tube ranged from 1 to 100 MΩ) along the tube axis, and fabrication of miniaturized electronic devices is anticipated (related work is ongoing in our group). On the other hand, deposition of molecular graphenes such as C96 on the surface of different substrates, and subsequent thermolysis, resulted in transparent, highly conductive graphene films (TCGFs).60 Chemical modification of graphite provides another interesting precursor, exfoliated graphite oxide, for the production of TCGFs by solution deposition followed by thermal reduction of the films on substrates.61 These graphene films are a promising alternative to indium tin oxide (ITO), commonly used for window electrodes in various optoelectronic devices. However, these metal oxides appear to be increasingly problematic due to (i) the limited availability of the element indium on earth, (ii) their instability in the presence of acid or base, (iii) their susceptibility to ion diffusion into polymer layers, and (iv) their limited transparency in the near-infrared region.62–64 The search for new electrode materials with good stability, high transparency and excellent conductivity is therefore a crucial goal for optoelectronics.65–67 Experimental investigations in our group disclosed that the graphene film as prepared has: (i) excellent conductivity, (ii) good transparency in both the visible and near-infrared regions, (iii) ultra-smooth surface with tunable wettability, (iv) high chemical and thermal stabilities, and (v) flexibility for transfer between alternative substrates,61 which render the graphene-based window electrodes versatile for applications in various optoelectronic devices. Solar cells, including organic solar cells and dye-sensitized solar cells, based on these graphene films as anode material have been fabricated in our group. Comparable cell performance to the ITO-based cell under monochromatic light of 510 nm was achieved (Table 1).60,61
Table 1 The performance of a solar cell based on transparent graphene film and ITO as anodes (Isc, short-circuit photocurrent density; Voc, open-circuit voltage; FF, calculated filling factor; η, overall power conversion efficiency)




Light
Anode

I
sc/mA cm−2

V
oc/V
FF

η





Monochromic light of 510 nm
ITO
0.04
0.14
0.30
1.50


 
TCCF
0.05
0.13
0.23
1.53


Simulated solar light
ITO
1.00
0.41
0.48
1.17


 
TCCF
0.36
0.38
0.25
0.29




In addition, as previously discussed, with the help of metal nanoparticles, graphenes can be fabricated on the particle surface by precursor-controlled pyrolysis to form various carbon–metal nanoobjects. For example, cobalt particles in the 1D carbon–cobalt hybrid shown in Fig. 7 were catalytically active. When an extra carbon source was supplied to the surface of these hybrids at 800 °C, CNTs started to grow on the hybrid surface to form CNT-wrapped carbon–cobalt nanorods,68 which could be interesting as nanoscale probes in highly sensitive gas sensors. By utilizing cobalt acetylacetonate as a precursor, solid-state pyrolysis produced graphene-covered cobalt nanoparticles (Fig. 11). Further oxidation afforded graphene-covered cobalt oxide, which was discovered to be an ideal anode material in lithium ion secondary batteries.68 Compared with the naked cobalt oxide nanoparticles, the graphene-covered cobalt oxide displayed excellent properties with a reversible capacity of about 940 mA h g−1 after 20 cycles, whereas the reversible capacity of the nano-sized Co3O4 sample rapidly decayed to around 120 mA h g−1 after 20 cycles (Fig. 12). This could be attributed to the multifunctional graphene layers which play a role not only as an effective buffer to avoid large volume expansion during Li insertion but also as suitable media for electron transport. Although cobalt oxide nanoparticles have been reported to produce improved electrochemical properties when encapsulated into carbonaceous materials,69,70 the use of graphene as a shielding layer of metal oxide particles affords dramatic improvement in the capacitance and reversibility.
 Fig. 11  Typical carbon–cobalt composite with graphene-shell–cobalt-core structures. 
 Fig. 12  Galvanostatic discharge (Li insertion, voltage decreases)/charge (Li extraction, voltage increases) curves of: (a) oxidized carbon–cobalt composites (OCMCs); (b) nano-sized Co3O4 electrodes cycled at a rate of C/5 (8 lithium per formula unit (Co3O4) discharged/charged in 5 h); (c) first cycle differential capacity plots of an OCMC electrode (solid line) and a nano-sized Co3O4 electrode (dotted line) [note: C is capacity, V is cell voltage, d(C)/d(V) is differential capacity]; (d) comparison of the cycling performance between the OCMCs and nano-sized Co3O4 electrodes. 
Furthermore, this method has been successfully employed to encapsulate tin particles with carbon, which are difficult to capture due to the low melting point (232 °C). Solid-state pyrolysis of allyltriphenyltin led to the formation of carbon-encapsulated hollow and/or solid tin nanoparticles (Fig. 13).71 Tin-based materials are known to have quite a high theoretical capacity (Sn, 990 mAh g−1, SnO2, 790 mAh g−1, compared to 372 mAh g−1 for graphite) as anode materials in lithium ion batteries.72–74 However, the application of tin anodes alone is still hampered by their poor cycling stability inherently resulting from the large volume change during the lithium insertion/extraction process.75 Compared with other nano-sized Sn–carbon composite materials, where unsatisfactory cycling performance was observed and the specific capacity of the first cycle was reported as 452 mAh g−1,76 a highly stable and reversible capacity of about 550 mAh g−1 was achieved in the prepared carbon-encapsulated tin particles.71 Obviously, well-controlled structure is crucial for affecting the performance of the obtained carbon–metal hybrids. The reasonable combination of graphene and metal/metal oxide nanoparticles will afford significant improvement of the functions of the product.
 Fig. 13  HRTEM characterization of the carbon-covered hollow and/or solid tin nanoparticles. 
Other examples include the solid-state thermolysis of hexaphenylbenzene into disordered all-carbon material, which showed a specific capacity of around 600 mAh g−1 even after 200 cycles as anode material in lithium ion batteries.77,78 Meanwhile, complexation of isoprene with ruthenium chloride and subsequent one-step thermolysis produced carbon–ruthenium composites with Ru nanoparticles homogeneously dispersed into a highly porous carbon matrix, which was suitable as an electrode material for supercapacitors after electro-oxidation of the Ru particles to hydrous RuO2 in sulfuric acid.79
Further functionalization and various applications of the carbonaceous nanoobjects obtained by precursor-controlled thermolysis have also been investigated. One typical example is the further functionalization of the 1D porous carbon tubes shown in Fig. 5. Utilizing a feasible electrochemical method, very small Pt nanoparticles were easily deposited in the pores of the tube wall to form a highly porous carbon–Pt composite.80 BET characterization demonstrated that the surface area of the composite was still as high as 1100 m2 g−1 even after loading with Pt nanoparticles. Small Pt nanoparticles with a narrow size distribution were homogeneously dispersed in the interconnected porous carbon matrix (Fig. 14). Electrocatalytic characterization demonstrated that these carbon–Pt composites have excellent catalytic activities in the oxygen reduction reaction, one of the key reactions in fuel cell processing. The exchange current density of the composite is significantly higher than that of commercially available platinum black.
 Fig. 14  One dimensional highly porous carbon–Pt nanoobject with a surface area higher than 1100 m2 g−1. 
Much work has been done to understand the behaviour of carbonaceous materials from the perspective of functions and applications, such as electron transfer, mechanical properties, thermal and chemical stability, and others. However, it is always challenging, especially on the nanoscale level, to utilize these functions and to combine them with other functional materials. The application examples investigated here suggested that precursor-controlled pyrolysis is actually a good method not only to approach but also to combine functions in a simple but controlled fashion. Various multifunctional carbon-based materials suitable as electrode materials for optoelectronic devices, Li ion secondary batteries, supercapacitors, catalysts for fuel cells, heterogeneous catalytic reactions, and many other functional materials for diverse applications can be prepared in this way.
6. Conclusion
Although extensive efforts are still needed to handle the high temperature reactions precisely, precursor-controlled thermolysis is a promising strategy for growing molecular graphenes into nano- and macrographenes, and to integrate these graphenes into functional materials. Careful design of precursors and synthetic reactions will be the crucial step. Obviously, molecular graphenes and their synthesis discussed here are the starting point toward that end. Besides the challenge of chemical reactions in solution to make nanographenes, further investigations for graphene growth will mainly focus on the thermal reactions in the gas phase or in the solid-state in which the DPPs or molecular graphenes will act as building blocks.
The integration of graphenes into functional materials or devices is another attractive topic. Utilizing free-standing macrographenes as building units to construct functional graphene architectures is a rational method towards the target. However, due to the difficulty of quantitative production of free-standing large graphenes, developing an alternative method of forming and simultaneously integrating nano- or macrographenes in a functional product is more promising. By employing molecular graphenes as fabricating units, precursor-controlled thermolysis can provide flexible choices to handle the graphenes at a molecular level. A deeper understanding of the chemical nature, the thermal behaviour of various precursors and their structure–product relationship is thus crucial. From this perspective, not only will the multifunctional carbonaceous nanoparticles discussed above become accessible but also the “designed” various miniaturized devices, such as nanoscale cells or batteries.
Further applications of these carbonaceous materials can be expected, especially in the area of energy supply and environment protection. Besides their excellent performance as electrode materials in solar cells, lithium ion batteries, fuel cells, and supercapacitors, these carbonaceous materials also showed exciting properties as energy storage media,81 sensors,82 and high performance catalysts.83,84 In conclusion, precursor-controlled pyrolysis furnishes an extensive crossover of chemistry and materials science at higher temperatures, which will provide great opportunities to study the thermal chemistry of precursors and more importantly to promote the chemical structure into real applications.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank all our co-workers who performed the work we have presented and all our distinguished collaborators who have assisted in the progress of the research. Financial support from the European Commission (Projects DISCEL, MACMES, and NIAMO), the Deutsche Forschungsgesellschaft (DFG, chwerpunktprogramm organische Feldeffekttransistoren SFB 625), and the Max Planck Society through the program of ENERCHEM, is gratefully acknowledged.
References
S. Stankovich, D. A. Dikin, G. H. B. Dommett, K. M. Kohlhaas, E. J. Zimney, E. A. Stach, R. D. Piner, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Nature, 2006, 442, 282 CrossRef CAS .
N. D. Mermin, Phys. Rev., 1968, 176, 250 CrossRef .
E. Fradkin, Phys. Rev. B, 1986, 33, 3263 CrossRef .
K. S. Novoselov, D. Jiang, F. Schedin, T. J. Booth, V. V. Khotkevich, S. V. Morozov and A. K. Geim, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2005, 102, 10451 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, M. I. Katsnelson, I. V. Grigorieva, S. V. Dubonos and A. A. Firsov, Nature, 2005, 438, 197 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, J. W. Tan, H. L. Stormer and P. Kim, Nature, 2005, 438, 201 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183 CrossRef CAS .
C. Berger, Z. Song, X. Li, X. Wu, N. Brown, C. Naud, D. Mayou, T. Li, J. Hass, A. N. Marchenkov, E. H. Conrad, P. N. First and W. A. de Heer, Science, 2006, 312, 1191 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Berresheim, M. Müller and K. Müllen, Chem. Rev., 1999, 99, 1747 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Watson, A. Fechtenkötter and K. Müllen, Chem. Rev., 2001, 101, 1267 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, W. Pisula and K. Müllen, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 718 CrossRef CAS .
K. P. C. Vollhardt, Acc. Chem. Res., 1977, 10, 1 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Geng, A. Fechtenkötter and K. Müllen, J. Mater. Chem., 2001, 11, 1634 RSC .
V. S. Iyer, M. Wehmeier, J. D. Brand, M. A. Keegstra and K. Müllen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1997, 36, 1604 CrossRef CAS .
O. Diels and K. Alder, Liebigs Ann. Chem., 1928, 98, 460 .
W. Dilthey, Chem. Ber., 1934, 67, 2004 CrossRef .
S. Ito, M. Wehmeier, J. D. Brand, C. Kübel, R. Epsch, J. P. Rabe and K. Müllen, Chem.–Eur. J., 2000, 6, 4327 CrossRef CAS .
T. Weil, U. M. Wiesler, A. Herrmann, R. Bauer, J. Hofkens, F. C. D. Schryver and K. Müllen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 8101 CrossRef CAS .

          C. D. Simpson, PhD Thesis, University of Mainz,  2003 .
Ž. Tomovic, M. D. Watson and K. Müllen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 755 CrossRef CAS .

          C. G. Clark, R. J. Wenzel, E. V. Andreitchenko, W. Steffen, R. Zenobi and K. Müllen, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2007, 129, p. 3292 Search PubMed.
Y. H. Kim and O. W. Webster, Macromolecules, 1992, 25, 5561 CrossRef CAS .
F. Morgenroth and K. Müllen, Tetrahedron, 1997, 53, 15349 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhi, J. Wu, J. Li, M. Stepputat, U. Kolb and K. Müllen, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 1492 CrossRef CAS .
C. Kübel, K. Eckhardt, V. Enkelmann, G. Wegner and K. Müllen, J. Mater. Chem., 2000, 10, 879 RSC .
P. Herwig, C. W. Kayser, K. Müllen and H. W. Spiess, Adv. Mater., 1996, 8, 510 CAS .
A. Fechtenkötter, K. Saalwächter, M. A. Harbison, K. Müllen and H. W. Spiess, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1999, 38, 3039 CrossRef CAS .
C. D. Simpson, J. D. Brand, A. J. Berresheim, L. Przybilla, H. J. Räder and K. Müllen, Chem.–Eur. J., 2000, 8, 1424 .
C. D. Simpson, G. Mattersteig, K. Martin, L. Gherghel, R. E. Bauer, H. J. Räder and K. Müllen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 3139 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, L. Gherghel, M. D. Watson, J. Li, Z. Wang, C. D. Simpson, U. Kolb and K. Müllen, Macromolecules, 2003, 36, 7082 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, X. Dou, A. Rouhanipour, L. Zhi, H. J. Räder and K. Müllen, J. Am. Chem. Soc. DOI:10.1021/ja710234t .

          Y. Fogel, L. Zhi, A. Rouhanipour, D. Andrienko, M. Kastler, H. J. Räder and K. Müllen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., in preparation Search PubMed.
J. C. Meyer, A. K. Geim, M. I. Katsnelson, K. S. Novoselov, T. J. Booth and S. Roth, Nature, 2007, 446, 60 CrossRef CAS .
C. D. Simpson, J. Wu, M. D. Watson and K. Müllen, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14, 494 RSC .

          R. Setton, P. Bernier and S. Lefrant, Carbon Molecules and Materials, CRC press, London,  2002 Search PubMed .
W. Pisula, Z. Tomovic, C. Simpson, M. Kastler, T. Pakula and K. Müllen, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 4296 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kaslter, W. Pishula, F. Laquai, A. Kumar, R. J. Davies, S. Baluschev, M. Garcia-Gutiérrez, D. Wasserfallen, H. J. Butt, C. Riekel, G. Wegner and K. Müllen, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2255 CrossRef .
B. El Hamaoui, L. Zhi, W. Pishula, U. Kolb, J. Wu and K. Müllen, Chem. Commun., 2007, 2384 RSC .
D. Wu, L. Zhi, G. J. Bodwell, G. Cui, N. Tsao and K. Müllen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 5417–5420 CrossRef CAS .
A. Cristadoro, G. Lieser, H. J. Räder and K. Müllen, ChemPhysChem, 2007, 8, 586 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Räder, A. Rouhanipour, A. M. Talarico, V. Palermo, P. Samori and K. Müllen, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 276 CrossRef .
J. D. Brand, C. Kübel, S. Ito and K. Müllen, Chem. Mater., 2000, 12, 1638 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kastler, W. Pisula, R. J. Davies, T. Gorelik, U. Kolb and K. Müllen, Small, 2007, 8, 1438 CrossRef .
L. Zhi, J. Wu, J. Li, U. Kolb and K. Müllen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 2120 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhi, T. Gorelik, J. Wu, U. Kolb and K. Müllen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 12792 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhi, J. Wu, J. Li, M. Stepputat, U. Kolb and K. Müllen, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 1492 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhi, J. Wang, G. Cui, M. Kastler, B. Schmaltz, U. Kolb, U. Jonas and K. Müllen, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1849 CrossRef CAS .
L. Gherghel, C. Kübel, G. Lieser, H. J. Räder and K. Müllen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 13130 CrossRef CAS .
C. N. R. Rao, R. Sen, B. C. Satishkumar and A. Govindaraj, Chem. Commun., 1998, 1525 RSC .
O. A. Nerushev, M. Sveningsson, L. K. L. Falk and F. Rohmund, J. Mater. Chem., 2001, 11, 1122 RSC .
P. I. Dosa, C. Erben, V. S. Iyer, K. P. C. Vollhardt and I. M. Wasser, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 10430 CrossRef CAS .
M. Laskoski, W. Steffen, J. G. M. Morton, M. D. Smith and U. H. F. Bunz, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 13814 CrossRef CAS .
V. S. Iyer, K. P. C. Vollhardt and R. Wilhelm, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 4379 CrossRef CAS .
S. Scholz, P. J. Leech, B. C. Englert, W. Sommer, M. Weck and U. H. F. Bunz, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 1052 CrossRef CAS .
B. El Hamaoui, L. Zhi, J. Wu, U. Kolb and K. Müllen, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2957 CrossRef .
B. El Hamaoui, L. Zhi, J. Wu, J. Li, N. T. Lucas, Z. Tomovic, U. Kolb and K. Müllen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1179 CrossRef .
L. Zhi, T. Gorelik, R. Friedlein, J. Wu, U. Kolb, W. R. Salaneck and K. Müllen, Small, 2005, 1, 798 CrossRef CAS .
D. Jain, A. Winkel and R. Wilhelm, Small, 2006, 2, 752 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, L. Zhi, N. Tsao, Ž. Tomović, J. Li and K. Müllen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008 DOI:10.1002/anie.200704909 .
X. Wang, L. Zhi and K. Müllen, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 323 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Schlatmann, D. W. Floet, A. Hilberer, F. Garten, P. J. M. Smulders, T. M. Klapwijk and G. Hadziioannou, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1996, 69, 1764 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Scott, J. H. Kaufman, P. J. Brock, R. Dipietro, J. Salem and J. A. Goitia, J. Appl. Phys., 1996, 79, 2745 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, Y. Yang, T. J. Marks, Z. Liu and S. T. Ho, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 161107 CrossRef .
Z. Wu, Z. Chen, X. Du, J. M. Logan, J. Sippel, M. Nikolou, K. Kamaras, J. R. Reynolds, D. B. Tanner, A. F. Hebard and A. G. Rinzler, Science, 2004, 305, 1273 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cui, A. Wang, N. L. Edleman, J. Ni, P. Lee, N. R. Armstrong and T. J. Marks, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 1476 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, S. Fang, A. A. Zakhidov, S. B. Lee, A. E. Aliev, C. D. Williams, K. R. Atkinson and R. H. Baughman, Science, 2005, 309, 1215 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhi, Y. S. Hu, B. El Hamaoui, X. Wang, I. Lieberwirth, U. Kolb, J. Maier and K. Müllen, Adv. Mater., 2008 DOI:10.1002/adma.200702654 .
R. Yang, Z. Wang, J. Liu and L. Chen, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2004, 7, A496 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Needham, G. X. Wang, K. Konstantinov, Y. Tournayre, Z. Lao and H. K. Liu, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2006, 9, A315 CrossRef CAS .
G. Cui, Y. Hu, L. Zhi, D. Wu, I. Lieberwirth, J. Maier and K. Müllen, Small, 2007, 3, 2066 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Idota, T. Kubota, A. Matsufuji, Y. Maekawa and T. Miyasaka, Science, 1997, 276, 1395 CrossRef CAS .
M. Winter, O. J. Besenhard, M. E. Spahr and P. Novak, Adv. Mater., 1998, 10, 725 CrossRef CAS .
T. P. Kumar, R. Ramesh, Y. Lin and G. T. Fey, Electrochem. Commun., 2004, 6, 520 CrossRef CAS .
L. Y. Beaulieu and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147, 3237 CAS .
K. T. Lee, Y. S. Jung and S. M. Oh, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 5652 CrossRef CAS .
F. Bonino, S. Brutti, P. Reale, B. Scrosati, L. Gherghel, J. Wu and K. Müllen, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 743 CrossRef CAS .
T. Renouard, L. Gherghel, M. Wachtler, F. Bonino, B. Scrosati, R. Nuffer, C. Mathis and K. Müllen, J. Power Sources, 2005, 139, 242 CrossRef CAS .
G. Cui, L. Zhi, A. Thomas, I. Lieberwirth, U. Kolb and K. Müllen, ChemPhysChem, 2007, 8, 1013 CrossRef CAS .
G. Cui, L. Zhi, A. Thomas, U. Kolb, I. Lieberwirth and K. Müllen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 3464 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ströbel, J. Garche, P. T. Moseley, L. Jörissen and G. Wolf, J. Power Sources, 2006, 159, 781 CrossRef .
B. S. Sherigara, W. Kutner and F. D'Douza, Electroanalysis, 2003, 15, 753 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, M. Comotti, F. Schüth, R. Schlögl and D. S. Su, Chem. Commun., 2007, 1916 RSC .
J. J. Delgado, D. S. Su, G. Rebmann, N. Séller, A. Gajovic and R. Schlögl, J. Catal., 2006, 244, 126 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† This paper is part of a Journal of Materials Chemistry theme issue on carbon nanostructures.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2008
Table Content:
Linjie Zhi	Linjie Zhi received his PhD in 2000 at the Institute of Coal Chemistry, CAS. Since 2003 he worked with Prof. Müllen at the Max-Planck Institute for Polymer Research for two years before assuming the position of project leader there until the end of 2007. He is currently a professor in the National Center for Nanoscience and Technology of China. His research interests focus on carbon-rich materials.
Klaus Müllen	Klaus Müllen received his habilitation in 1977 at the ETH Zurich (Diploma at the Univ. of Cologne and PhD at the Univ. of Basel). In 1979 he became a Professor in Organic Chemistry at the Univ. of Cologne, and in 1983 at the Univ. of Mainz. Since 1989, he has been director of the Max-Planck Institute for Polymer Research. His research interests focus on synthetic macromolecular chemistry and materials science.

 	Scheme 1  Cyclotrimerization of diphenylacetylenes toward dendritic molecules.	 

 	Scheme 2  Large DPPs are also accessible by cyclotrimerization of diphenylacetylene derivatives.	 

 	Scheme 3  DPPs prepared by Diels–Alder cycloaddition of phenyl-substituted alkynes with tetraphenyl-substituted cyclopentadienones.	 

 	Scheme 4  Various DPPs have been prepared from different alkynes via Diels–Alder cycloaddition.	 

 	Scheme 5  Intra-molecular Diels–Alder cycloaddition toward hyperbranched polyphenylenes.	 

 	Scheme 6  Cyclodehydrogenation of DPPs towards molecular graphenes.	 

 	Fig. 1  Tool box of mono-dispersed molecular graphenes prepared from cyclodehydrogenation of DPPs.	 

 	Scheme 7  An alternative approach towards nanographene ribbons.	 

 	Fig. 2  Single nanographene ribbons (a), and orderly stacked graphenes (b), observed by STM and HRTEM characterization, respectively.	 

 	Scheme 8  An alternative approach towards nanographene ribbons.	 

 	Fig. 3  HRTEM and SAED (inset of a) characterizations disclosed the lattice structure of the graphenes along the (110) direction.	 

 	Fig. 4  Amphiphilic graphenes containing charged species on the periphery (27) or in the conjugated system (28).	 

 	Scheme 9  Schematic illustration of the preparation of BWNTs.	 

 	Fig. 5  HRTEM characterization of the BWNTs showed unconventional orientation of the graphenes in the tube wall.	 

 	Scheme 10  Schematic illustration of the preparation of Nc nanotubes: (1) pre-organization and thermal treatment of Ni-BNc in the template channels; (2) removal of porous alumina template.	 

 	Fig. 6  HRTEM characterization of the highly porous carbonaceous tubes.	 

 	Fig. 7  The structure of the carbonaceous product is closely related to the structure of the precursors.	 

 	Fig. 8  Solid-state pyrolysis of 32 produced 1D carbon–cobalt hybrids with a square-shaped cross-section.	 

 	Fig. 9  Precursor tool box of the selected DPP–metal complexes.	 

 	Fig. 10  Carbon–iron carbide cable structures with single crystalline iron carbide filled in the CNTs.	 

Monochromic light of 510 nm	ITO	0.04	0.14	0.30	1.50
 	TCCF	0.05	0.13	0.23	1.53
Simulated solar light	ITO	1.00	0.41	0.48	1.17
 	TCCF	0.36	0.38	0.25	0.29

 	Fig. 11  Typical carbon–cobalt composite with graphene-shell–cobalt-core structures.	 

 	Fig. 12  Galvanostatic discharge (Li insertion, voltage decreases)/charge (Li extraction, voltage increases) curves of: (a) oxidized carbon–cobalt composites (OCMCs); (b) nano-sized Co3O4 electrodes cycled at a rate of C/5 (8 lithium per formula unit (Co3O4) discharged/charged in 5 h); (c) first cycle differential capacity plots of an OCMC electrode (solid line) and a nano-sized Co3O4 electrode (dotted line) [note: C is capacity, V is cell voltage, d(C)/d(V) is differential capacity]; (d) comparison of the cycling performance between the OCMCs and nano-sized Co3O4 electrodes.	 

 	Fig. 13  HRTEM characterization of the carbon-covered hollow and/or solid tin nanoparticles.	 

 	Fig. 14  One dimensional highly porous carbon–Pt nanoobject with a surface area higher than 1100 m2 g−1.	 
Footnote
† This paper is part of a Journal of Materials Chemistry theme issue on carbon nanostructures.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2008
