Elemental red phosphorus-based materials for photocatalytic water purification and hydrogen production  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0NR01748E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0NR01748E
(Minireview)
Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 13297-13310Elemental red phosphorus-based materials for photocatalytic water purification and hydrogen production

        
          
            Yukun 
            Zhu
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jun 
            Ren
          
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Xiaoli 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Dongjiang 
            Yang
          
          
        
      *a
aSchool of Environmental Science and Engineering, State Key Laboratory of Bio-fibers and Eco-textiles, Shandong Collaborative Innovation Center of Marine Biobased Fibers and Ecological Textiles, Qingdao University, Qingdao 266071, China. E-mail: d.yang@qdu.edu.cn
bSchool of Chemical Engineering and Technology, North University of China, Taiyuan 030051, China. E-mail: jun.ren@nuc.edu.cn
cState Centre for International Cooperation on Designer Low-Carbon & Environmental Materials, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou 450001, China
Received 
      1st March 2020
    , Accepted 23rd May 2020First published on 27th May 2020AbstractSemiconductor-based photocatalysis is a renewable and sustainable technology to solve global environmental pollution and energy shortage problems. It is essential to exploit highly efficient photocatalyst materials. Recently, Earth-abundant elemental red phosphorus (RP) with broader light-harvesting and appropriate band structure characteristics has been widely studied in photocatalysis. In this review, the crystal and electronic structures of RP (e.g., amorphous, Hittorf's and fibrous phosphorus) materials are firstly summarized along with the current advancement in the synthesis strategies of RP and RP-based materials in photocatalysis accompanied by a thorough discussion of the applications of RP-based materials in photocatalytic pollutant degradation, bacterial inactivation, and water splitting. Finally, this review also offers some guidance and perspectives for the future design of efficient visible-light-driven photocatalysts.Yukun ZhuYukun Zhu received his Ph.D. in Applied Physics from Jilin University in 2018. After that, he joined Prof. Dongjiang Yang's group as a postdoctoral fellow at Qingdao University. His research interests are mainly focus on the development of novel photocatalysts and photoelectrodes for solar-light driven water splitting.Jun RenProf. Jun Ren received his Ph.D. in Physical Chemistry from the Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2007. Then he went to Technische Universität Chemnitz in Germany to work as a senior visiting scholar. He joined North University of China as an associate professor in 2009. Recently, he has finished his research professor project at Inha University in Korea which spanned from 2017–2019. His research interests are focused on the design of photoelectric materials and the catalytic reaction mechanisms and cobalt-based Fischer Tropsch synthesis reaction mechanism using DFT.Xiaoli ZhangDr Xiao Li Zhang received her Bachelor's degree (2001) in Chemistry at Shandong University, China; she received both her Master's degree (2005) and PhD (2008) in Material Chemistry under Professor Young Soo Kang at Pukyong National University, South Korea. Then she worked as Research Fellow with Professor Yi-Bing Cheng and Professor Udo Bach at Monash University, Australia. After shortly being trained in the University of Melbourne as a Research Fellow, she joined the University of New South Wales, Australia, as a Vice-Chancellor's Research Fellow (2012) working with Professor Rose Amal. In 2016, she took a full Professor position at Zhengzhou University, China.Dongjiang YangProf. Dongjiang Yang received his Ph.D. in Physical Chemistry from the Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2006. Then he went to the Queensland University of Technology and Griffith University to work as a postdoctoral fellow. He joined Qingdao University as a Professor in 2012. His current research interests are mainly focused on the synthesis of functional materials for energy storage and conversion, such as photocatalysis, fuel cells, and zinc-air/lithium/sodium-ion batteries.
1. Introduction
Nowadays, environmental pollution and energy shortage caused by economic development have become two major severe issues in human society. Semiconductor-based photocatalysis technologies are considered as one of the most promising strategies to overcome the above-mentioned crises simultaneously.1,2 Through photocatalysis processes, we can convert solar energy to sustainable energy carriers (such as hydrogen) and remove environmental pollutants.3,4 The key to photocatalytic technology is seeking highly efficient photocatalysts that can harvest photons from solar light and then produce electron–hole carriers to participate in surface redox reactions.5 To efficiently utilize the solar spectrum, various visible-light-driven metal-based semiconductor compounds, including metal sulfides, oxides, nitrides, and oxynitrides have been used in the past decades.6–10 However, the practical application of employing these materials in an efficient photocatalytic reaction is still unsatisfactory.
More recently, elemental metal-free semiconductor materials that have a simpler composition, including α-sulfur, silicon, selenium, and phosphorus have attracted significant attention.11–16 Particularly, phosphorus with a broader range of light absorption is considered as an alternative photocatalyst. As we know, phosphorus is one of the most common chemical elements found in both the Earth and the human body. Elemental phosphorus has three common allotropes, including white, red, and black phosphorus. Among them, layered black phosphorus (BP) with a tunable bandgap has been widely used as a promising material in photodetectors, field-effect transistors, and photocatalysis.17,18 Compared with the BP allotrope, red phosphorus (RP) is more inexpensive, less-toxic, chemically stable, and easily available. According to the literature, several allotropes of RP have been investigated, including amorphous (type I), type II (hexagonal), type III (unstable), fibrous (type IV, triclinic), and violet or Hittorf's (type V, monoclinic) phosphorus.19–22 Among them, the most studied allotropes in photocatalysis were amorphous, Hittorf's and fibrous phosphorus with strong optical absorption and high stability. In this review, we mainly focus on these three kinds of RP and RP-based materials in photocatalysis applications.
The fundamental principles of semiconductor photocatalysis are shown in Scheme 1.23–28 In general, the basic photocatalytic process involves three main steps: (i) absorption of photons to generate electron–hole pairs; (ii) separation and migration of charge carriers to the photocatalyst surface; and (iii) surface reactions of electrons and holes with absorbed electron donors (D) and electron acceptors (A). The overall efficiency of photocatalytic reactions is determined by the balance of thermodynamics and kinetics of the above three steps altogether.
 Scheme 1  Schematic illustration of the basic photocatalytic process. 
To maximize the incident photons converted into charge carriers, the development of materials which absorb a broader spectrum of solar light is essential to optimize the generation of electron–hole pairs. The more or less red in the colour of RP has a light absorption edge up to 600 nm or even longer wavelengths, where the colour itself characterizes the electronic and optical band gaps, making it a promising visible-light-driven photocatalyst. For the second charge-transfer step, it is imperative to suppress the recombination of electron–hole pairs to transport sufficient number of electrons and holes to the catalyst surface. Due to the poor crystallization of amorphous phosphorus, the rapid recombination of photoinduced electron–hole pairs lowers its photocatalytic activity to unsatisfactory levels. Generally, the density of defects that serve as recombination centres decreases with increasing crystallinity. Hence, compared with amorphous phosphorus, the crystalline Hittorf's and fibrous phosphorus exhibit efficient photocatalytic performance. However, bare RP cannot satisfy the demand for high-performance photocatalysis. For this reason, combining with other semiconductors to construct heterostructures has been considered as an effective way. The RP in the heterostructure system can serve as a light sensitizer to harvest photons efficiently. Moreover, the interface that is formed between the RP and other semiconductors can facilitate the separation of electron–hole pairs and induce faster carrier transport. Furthermore, the co-catalysts loaded on the surface of RP-based materials which have lower reaction overpotential can also improve the photocatalytic efficiency.
In the present review, we aim to cover all the recent research reported on elemental RP-based materials for the application of photocatalytic environmental remediation and water splitting. First, the crystal and electronic structures of amorphous, Hittorf's and fibrous phosphorus are summarized followed by the summary of synthesis strategies of RP and RP-based materials for photocatalysis. Furthermore, the specific applications for photocatalytic water purification, such as pollutant removal and water disinfection are discussed. Finally, the progress in photocatalytic water splitting to hydrogen is also discussed. Furthermore, perspectives and outlooks for the future design of RP materials are addressed. This review points out the advantage of using metal-free elemental RP materials in photocatalysis and provides further guidance for designing efficient photocatalysts.
2. Structure properties of RP
Based on the structure–property relationship, it is quite attractive and meaningful to understand the fundamental crystal and electronic structure properties of RP (such as amorphous, Hittorf's and fibrous phosphorus) as a semiconductor photocatalyst.
2.1 Crystal structure
To date, there are four proposed molecular linear chain structures of amorphous phosphorus (Fig. 1a).29–32 But the fundamental molecular structure of amorphous phosphorus is still unclear. Recently, based on the theoretical single-molecule elasticity and experimental single-molecule atomic force microscopy results of amorphous phosphorus, Cui et al.33 found that amorphous phosphorus has the zig-zag ladder linear structure which consists of tetrahedral four phosphorus atom ([P4]) molecules (structure 2 inset of Fig. 1a).
 Fig. 1  (a) Four proposed molecular linear chain structures of amorphous phosphorus. The structure feature is double triangle [P4] for 1, zig-zag ladder [P4] for 2, [P8][P2] for 3, and [P10][P2] for 4. Reproduced with permission from ref. 33, Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH. (b) Repeating [P9]P2[P8]P2 unit of the tubes in fibrous phosphorus and Hittorf's phosphorus. Reprinted with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. Linkage of the phosphorus strands and stacking of the layers in (c) Hittorf's phosphorus and (d) fibrous phosphorus. The blue tubes are added to emphasize the fibrous nature. 
Hittorf first discovered Hittorf's phosphorus in 1865,34 and Thurn and Krebs subsequently determined its crystal structure in 1966.35 Until recently, Ruck et al.36 first confirmed the structure of fibrous phosphorus in 2005 using single-crystal X-ray diffraction (XRD) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) methods. The crystal structure of fibrous phosphorus is very close to that of Hittorf's phosphorus. Both of them consist of polymeric tubular repeating units with a pentagonal cross-section. As shown in Fig. 1b, eight and nine phosphorus atoms, which are expressed as [P8] and [P9] cages are connected alternately in a zigzag shape via two phosphorus atom ([P2]) bridges to build the pentagonal tubes ([P9]P2[P8]P2).37 The main difference between Hittorf's phosphorus and fibrous phosphorus is the stacking mode of the tubular units covalently cross-linked through the bridging phosphorus atoms in [P9] cages (P21 in Fig. 1b). The double tubular units are connected in a perpendicular arrangement for Hittorf's phosphorus, while a parallel arrangement is seen for fibrous phosphorus (Fig. 1c and d).19,21,36–43 Moreover, the double tube layers are stacked in the c direction for Hittorf's phosphorus and held together via van der Waals forces. In contrast, the double tubes of fibrous phosphorus are stacked along the a direction.36,37
2.2 Electronic structure
Hittorf's phosphorus and fibrous phosphorus contain a layered structure so they can be exfoliated to few layers even monolayer. The binding energy for each layer per area is the energy needed to completely exfoliate or separate the bulk material into single layers. For exfoliating bulk Hittorf's phosphorus to monolayer Hittorf's phosphorene, the binding energy is 0.35 J m−2 obtained by Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof (PBE) + Tkatchenko and Scheffler (TS) based density functional theory (DFT) calculation,44 which is smaller than the value of black phosphorene of 0.40 J m−2, and is comparable with that of the exfoliation of graphite into graphene, 0.34 J m−2.45,46 These results strongly suggest the possibility of exfoliation of monolayer Hittorf's and fibrous phosphorene in experiments.
According to the DFT calculations based on PBE + TS, the monolayer Hittorf's phosphorene has a direct bandgap at the Z point (Fig. 2a), while Hittorf's phosphorus exhibits an indirect bandgap (Fig. 2b). The bandgap obtained using the hybrid Heyd–Scuseria–Ernzerhof functional (HSE06) is approximately 2.52 eV and 2.17 eV for Hittorf's phosphorene and Hittorf's phosphorus, respectively.44 What's more, the total density of states (DOS) shows that the conduction band minimum (CBM) and valence band maximum (VBM) are predominated by P 2p states.41,47 The effective mass of electrons and holes can be used to quantitatively calculate the carrier mobility by fitting the band structures at the CBM and VBM with the nearly free electron model. This shows that the Hittorf's phosphorene has high mobility up to 3000–7000 cm2 V−1 s−1, which is in the same order of magnitude as the theoretical predictions of black phosphorene (10000 cm2 V−1 s−1).48 From Fig. 2c and d, it is obvious that the VBM is more positive than the oxidation redox potential of H2O/O2, and the CBM is more negative than the reduction redox potential of H+/H2. These results provide direct evidence that the overall water splitting by Hittorf's phosphorus and Hittorf's phosphorene is energetically feasible.47,49 The band structure of fibrous phosphorus with the exposed (0–10) facet is shown in Fig. 2e, and the calculated bandgap over 2-layers of double tubular units is about 1.5 eV with a direct bandgap. More importantly, its CBM position is located at about −0.9 V vs. reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE), which is much lower than that of Hittorf's phosphorus and Hittorf's phosphorene.50
 Fig. 2  Band structure, total DOS, and partial DOS of (a) Hittorf's phosphorene and (b) Hittorf's phosphorus based on PBE + TS. Reprinted with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (c) The location of the VBM and CBM for Hittorf's phosphorene with respect to the vacuum level (0 eV). Reproduced from ref. 47 with permission from the PCCP Owner Societies. (d) The DFT band structure for Hittorf's phosphorus slab. Reproduced with permission from ref. 49. Copyright 2012 Elsevier B.V. (e) Theoretical calculation of the band structure of fibrous phosphorus. Reproduced with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH. The positions for the reduction potential of H+/H2 and oxidation potential of H2O/O2 are marked with dashed lines. 
The advantages of narrow bandgap, suitable band edge and high mobility over RP may make it one of the most promising candidate semiconductors for photocatalytic water purification and hydrogen production under solar light illumination.
3. Synthesis strategies of RP-based photocatalysts
Recently, an increasing number of researchers have been committed to developing synthesis strategies to obtain RP and RP-based materials for photocatalysis. In general, the synthesis methods can be classified into three main categories: hydrothermal, ball milling, and vacuum ampoule methods.
3.1 Hydrothermal method
The hydrothermal method is usually used as a pre-treatment process to remove the oxide layers on the bulk commercial RP materials. Then the treated RP is used as a precursor or directly as a photocatalyst. For example, Liu et al. fabricated nano-sized RP particles by a hydrothermal method followed by ultrasonic treatment using commercial RP as a precursor.51 The obtained RP nanoparticles can effectively degrade p-nitrophenol and rhodamine B (RhB) under visible light.
3.2 Ball milling method
Mechanical ball milling is a conventional method for materials preparation owing to its advantages such as simplicity, low cost, and controllable synthesis. By tuning the rotation speed, treatment time, and precursors, high-performance RP-based photocatalysts could be obtained. A schematic diagram of the ball milling process is shown in Fig. 3a.52 The commercial RP microparticles were converted into Hittorf's phosphorus nanoparticles and were highly crystalline (Fig. 3b and c). Yu et al.53 prepared a BP–RP heterostructure by grinding commercial RP powder with hardened balls. The BP nanoparticles could in situ grow on amorphous RP microparticles during the ball milling process (Fig. 3d and e). Similarly, Ansari and co-authors used the ball milling method for the facile and scale-up synthesis of RP-graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) and RP-TiO2 heterostructures for the efficient photocatalytic degradation of methyl orange (MO), RhB and 4-nitrophenol.54,55
 Fig. 3  (a) The schematic diagram for the ball milling of RP. (b) TEM and (c) HRTEM images of Hittorf's phosphorus nanoparticles. Reproduced from ref. 52 with permission from the PCCP Owner Societies. (d) SEM and (e) HRTEM images of BP–RP heterostructure. Reproduced from ref. 53 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 

3.3 Vacuum ampoule method. 
Compared with the ball milling process, the vacuum ampoule method exhibits several advantages, such as uniform deposition of RP, high crystallinity, and intimate contact between RP and the substrate. As illustrated schematically in Fig. 4a,56 this method typically includes the following processes. Firstly, the mixture of RP powders and specific photoactive or photoinactive substrates was sealed in a vacuum ampoule. Then, the ampoule was calcined at a high temperature. When the temperature reaches higher than the sublimation points of RP (ca. 400 °C), phosphorus vapor will diffuse in the whole ampoule driven by a vacuum environment. Finally, during low-temperature condensation procedures, RP would be deposited on the surface of the substrate. Therefore, the vacuum ampoule method is also called a chemical vapor deposition (CVD) technique. In the past several years, by tuning the reaction parameters (substrate, pressure, amount of precursor, calcination temperature, etc.), various kinds of RP-based photocatalysts, such as elemental RP,49,50,57 RP/g-C3N4,58–60 and RP/TiO256,61 were synthesized by the vacuum ampoule method. For example, Yu and co-authors prepared a series of fibrous phosphorus fibre photocatalysts from commercial RP on p-Si (100) nanowire wafer substrates (Fig. 4b),57 and different substrates were employed to achieve a controllable growth of different allotropic RP, e.g., fibrous phosphorus, type II phosphorus and Hittorf's phosphorus. As shown in Fig. 4c, RP nanorod decorated g-C3N4 heterostructures were prepared by Chen et al. using amorphous RP and g-C3N4 as starting materials in a sealed quartz tube, which delivered efficient photocatalytic H2 evolution (94.2 μmol h−1) and RhB degradation activities.62
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of the process of the vacuum ampoule method. Reproduced with permission from ref. 56. Copyright 2019 Elsevier B.V. (b) SEM image fibrous phosphorus fibres. Reproduced from ref. 57 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) SEM image of RP/g-C3N4 composites. Reprinted with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 
The photocatalytic applications of elemental RP and RP-based materials synthesized by the above method will be discussed in detail in the following sections, particularly their applications in photocatalytic organic pollutant degradation, bacterial inactivation, and hydrogen production from water splitting.

4. RP-based materials for photocatalytic water purification
4.1 Photocatalytic pollutant degradation
Water pollution caused by widespread dyes, antibiotics, phenols, and heavy metals has become a global severe environmental problem. The presence of these toxic pollutant compounds indicates emerging risks on the health of ecosystems and humans.63–66 Consequently, various purification methods have been devoted to the removal of persistent pollutants from wastewater and minimize the risk of pollution problems, such as adsorption, membrane filtration, ion exchange, chemical precipitation, and advanced oxidation.67–69 Due to their incomplete removal during wastewater purification treatment processes, the semiconductor-based photocatalytic process has emerged as a promising route for the degradation of persistent pollutants.70–72 However, the degradation activity of the traditional photocatalysts is limited by weak light-harvesting, and most of the metal-based photocatalysts would leach toxic metal ions, which may bring secondary pollution risks. Therefore, it is of great importance to seek a novel visible-light-driven metal-free photocatalyst for wastewater pollutant degradation. The non-toxic elemental RP materials exhibit great potential for visible-light-driven photocatalytic pollutant degradation from wastewater.
The rapid recombination of photoinduced electron–hole pairs limits the photocatalytic efficiency of amorphous RP. So, the fabrication of crystalline RP is an effective method to improve its photocatalytic activity. Yu et al.57 developed an ampoule CVD method for the economic and controlled synthesis of single-crystalline RP materials. By tuning the lattice matching between the substrates and obtained RP products, fibrous phosphorus and type II phase phosphorus were fabricated directly from an amorphous RP precursor (Fig. 5a and b). Compared with amorphous and type II RP, the fibrous phosphorus fibres with a layered crystal structure were favorable for the charge separation and then could degrade RhB and 2,3,6-trichlorophenol more efficiently under visible light irradiation (Fig. 5c), and the time-dependent fluorescence spectra illustrate that the hydroxyl radicals (˙OH) are the main reactive species in the photocatalytic degradation system. More recently, Yu's group73 also fabricated single-crystalline Hittorf's phosphorus microbelts with the catalysis of liquid bismuth nanodroplets via a thermal vacuum ampoule method (Fig. 5d and e). The apparent MO degradation rate (Fig. 5f) and hydrogen evolution rate over Hittorf's phosphorus microbelts have a six-fold and ten-fold enhancement than that over amorphous RP, respectively. The improved photocatalytic activity of Hittorf's phosphorus microbelts is due to the unique charge distribution and polarization of photo-electrons under illumination. In accordance with the experimental results and theoretical calculations, the photo-electrons are more likely to accumulate at the (013) facet of Hittorf's phosphorus microbelts. In addition, crystalline Hittorf's phosphorus nanoparticles prepared by Ansari et al.52 exhibited a degradation rate constant of approximately 6 and 5 times higher than that of amorphous RP for RhB and 2-chlorophenol, respectively. The significant enhancement can be ascribed to the improvement in surface area, crystallinity, and visible light absorption, which will produce more ˙OH radicals for pollutant degradation.
 Fig. 5  SEM images of (a) fibrous phosphorus fibres and (b) type II phosphorus rods. (c) Photocatalytic RhB degradation performances of fibrous and type II phosphorus. Reproduced from ref. 57 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) SEM and (e) HRTEM images of Hittorf's phosphorus microbelts. (f) The photocatalytic degradation of MO over Hittorf's phosphorus microbelts and amorphous RP. Reproduced with permission from ref. 73. Copyright 2019 Elsevier B.V. 
Coupling with other semiconductor materials to construct heterostructures is another efficient way to improve photocatalytic performances. The introduction of RP in a heterostructure system could improve the light absorption, and the fabricated heterojunctions could facilitate photogenerated charge carrier separation and transfer efficiency. Yu et al.53 reported elemental hetero-phase junctions composed of BP and RP by the mechanical ball milling method applying commercial RP as the starting material. Compared with commercial RP, the BP–RP heterostructure with efficient charge separation and transfer ability has better photocatalytic performances for RhB degradation, and the fluorescence spectra reveal that ˙OH radicals are the dominant active species for the RhB degradation. Wang et al.74 have synthesized a novel type-I heterostructure between RP and g-C3N4 for efficient photocatalytic degradation of acute toxicity metsulfuron methyl and RhB. The band alignment between RP and g-C3N4 could increase the charge separation ability, which will produce more ˙OH and superoxide radicals (˙O2−) to participate in the organic pollutant degradation reaction. In addition, Chen and co-workers61 prepared a fibrous phosphorus/rutile TiO2 (FP/TiO2) heterojunction for the photodegradation of RhB (Fig. 6a and b). The intimate contact heterojunction between FP and TiO2 can synergistically enhance the visible light absorption and facilitate the separation and transport of photogenerated carriers. Then, they further fabricated a full-spectrum-response Cr2O3:P@fibrous phosphorus (Cr2O3:P@FP) core–shell heterostructure in an evacuated quartz tube (Fig. 6c).75 As shown in Fig. 6d, the obtained heterojunction photocatalysts exhibit outstanding photodegradation MO activities under ultraviolet (UV), visible, and even near-infrared (NIR) light irradiation, and the trapping experiments revealed that photogenerated holes (h+) and ˙O2− are the dominant reactive oxygen species in these two photodegradation processes (Fig. 6e).
 Fig. 6  (a) TEM and (b) HRTEM images of the FP/TiO2 heterojunction. Reproduced with permission from ref. 61. Copyright 2018 Elsevier B.V. (c) SEM image, (d) photocatalytic MO degradation performance, and (e) photocatalytic and charge transfer processes of the Cr2O3:P@FP core–shell hybrid. Reproduced from ref. 75 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Apart from the photocatalytic degradation of organic dyes and phenol pollutants, the photocatalytic reduction of highly toxic Cr(VI) to Cr(III) can also be achieved using the RP-based photocatalyst. Liu et al. fabricated nano-sized RP by a facile hydrothermal-ultrasonic method. The Cr(VI) with an initial concentration of 20 mg L−1 (pH = 2.0) can be reduced entirely to Cr(III) in the presence of RP after 36 min visible light illumination.76 Moreover, Fan et al.77,78 reported MoS2/RP and RP/g-C3N4 heterostructures for the simultaneous photocatalytic removal of Cr(VI) and RhB, and the enhanced activities were attributed to the improved light harvesting and charge separation efficiency.
4.2 Photocatalytic water disinfection
Drinking water safety is an imperative concern worldwide, especially in developing countries, owing to pathogenic microorganisms in drinking water, including fungi, bacteria, viruses, spores, protozoa, and so on, which have caused waterborne infectious diseases.79 To address this urgent issue, various technologies, such as ozonation, microbial chlorine degradation, and UV irradiation, have been extensively employed for water disinfection. But these conventional methods have several drawbacks such as the production of toxic by-products, high-cost, and low efficiency. Hence, it is desirable to explore innovative disinfection techniques and materials. Recently, water disinfection by photocatalysis has been proposed to be a safe, economical, and effective disinfection technology.80–83 It can catalyze the dissolved water/oxygen to produce reactive oxygen species (ROS), such as ˙OH, ˙O2−, and H2O2, and these ROSs would serve as powerful oxidants to inactivate various pathogens. Accordingly, in this section, we will focus on the photocatalytic antibacterial applications of the reported RP-based materials.
Yu et al.84 first applied the low toxicity and cost commercial RP under visible light and sunlight to inactivate Escherichia coli (E. coli). The amorphous RP microparticles with a size of 2–10 μm (Fig. 7a) and a narrower bandgap (1.42 eV) were purified simply via a hydrothermal method. E. coli with a concentration of 2 × 107 CFU mL−1 was used to examine the photocatalytic bacterial inactivation performance. Complete inactivation was achieved within 60 min and 90 min under sunlight and visible light irradiation, respectively (Fig. 7b). Even under longer wavelength (610–650 nm) light, E. coli destruction could also be obtained. As shown in Fig. 7c, both ˙OH and ˙O2− are dominant ROSs in the bacterial inactivation process. These ROSs first oxidize cell membrane-associated proteins, which increases cell membrane permeability. The permeability increase consequently could accelerate intracellular protein carboxylation and DNA degradation, ultimately leading to bacterial death. More recently, Yu's group85 fabricated g-C3N4/RP (CNP) hybrid nanosheets by a simple sonochemical method. Lots of RP nanoparticles are chemically anchored onto the surface of the g-C3N4 sheet by P–N bonds (Fig. 7d). The intimate interface between g-C3N4 and RP leads to efficient photoinduced charge separation. Thus, the as-obtained CNP heterojunctions display significantly improved photocatalytic bacterial inactivation activity. As shown in Fig. 7e, the optimized CNP sample can totally inactivate 7-log CFU mL−1E. coli K-12 within 80 min. The inactivation rate value of CNP is 1.51 × 10−3 min−1, which exhibits an enhancement factor of about 6.23 and 1.58 times higher than that of pure g-C3N4 and RP, respectively. Interestingly, even under 700 nm longer wavelength light irradiation, the bacterial cells still can be inactivated. The photogenerated h+ and its derived H2O2 could directly kill the E. coli cells. Except for amorphous RP, crystalline fibrous phosphorus as a photocatalyst for water disinfection has also been studied by Kumar et al.86 The obtained fibrous phosphorus shows an urchin-like morphology with micron-sized fibres. The photocatalytic disinfection using fibrous phosphorus was performed under direct sunlight with an initial E. coli concentration of 108 CFU mL−1, and total disinfection was achieved in 30 min. They found that H2O2, ˙OH, and ˙O2−·are the primary ROSs in the photocatalytic bacterial inactivation by fibrous phosphorus.
 Fig. 7  (a) SEM image of amorphous RP, inset is the HRTEM image. (b) Photocatalytic inactivation kinetics under a xenon lamp and sunlight irradiation in the presence of RP. (c) Illustration for the proposed bactericidal mechanism of RP under visible light. Reprinted with permission from ref. 84. Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society. (d) TEM image of the CNP. (e) Photocatalytic inactivation efficiencies against E. coli K-12 for the as-prepared samples. Reproduced with permission from ref. 85. Copyright 2018 Elsevier B.V. 
There is an increasing demand for developing rapid photocatalytic disinfection routes to decrease the required time.87 In heterostructured photocatalysts, photoexcited charge carrier separation ability can be facilitated at the interface between two components. Wu et al.88 developed two heterojunction thin films for rapid photocatalytic bacterial inactivation. Firstly, an RP/ZnO heterostructure film was fabricated by CVD deposition of the RP thin film on the Ti substrate followed by atomic layer deposition of a nano ZnO film on the RP layer. By tuning the deposition parameters, a vertical lamellar nanostructured RP/ZnO film with an average thickness of ∼1.55 μm can be deposited on the Ti foils (Fig. 8a). As shown in Fig. 8b, a lattice fringe with a d-spacing of 5.81 Å is consistent with the (001) facet of fibrous phosphorus, and a clear heterojunction interface between RP (001) and ZnO (002) can be found. Hence, the ZnO (002) and RP (001) facet interface with a geometrical lattice match was chosen in the following DFT calculations (Fig. 8c). The three-dimensional charge density difference plot of the optimized RP (001)/ZnO (002) interface reveals that the charge redistribution mostly occurs in the interface region. Therefore, the photoelectrons can transfer from the RP (001) to the ZnO (002) by the interface efficiently, resulting in an excellent transfer and separation efficiency of the photoexcited carriers at the interface, and effectively prolonging the lifetime of photoinduced carriers. As shown in Fig. 8d, the RP/ZnO thin film shows a rapid bacterial inactivation performance; 99.63% inactivation for S. aureus at 20 min, and 99.72% inactivation for E. coli at 10 min were obtained under simulated solar light, and 99.92% inactivation for Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus) at 15 min and 99.86% inactivation for E. coli at 7 min were achieved under real sunlight irradiation. The rapid apoptosis of S. aureus and E. coli is attributed to the enhanced ROS (˙OH and ˙O2−) production (Fig. 8e). Then, they constructed a graphene oxide (GO) layer modified Ti-RP film to form a Ti-RP/GO hybrid.89 The Ti-RP/GO composites also showed rapid inactivation with the antibacterial efficiency of about 99.9% to S. aureus with an initial concentration of 0.8 × 107 CFU mL−1 in 20 min, and 99.91% to E. coli (1 × 107 CFU mL−1) in 15 min under sunlight irradiation. Accordingly, the resulting agar plates reveal that both E. coli and S. aureus have obviously reduced bacterial growth after solar light illumination in the presence of Ti-RP/GO. In addition, an effective antibacterial effect can also be found under visible and NIR light (808 nm).
 Fig. 8  (a) SEM image of Ti-RP/ZnO, inset is a cross-sectional view of Ti-RP/ZnO. (b) HRTEM image of RP/ZnO. (c) Theoretically calculated crystal structure of the RP(001)/ZnO(002) interface. (d) Inactivation kinetics of S. aureus and E. coli for Ti-RP/ZnO under solar simulator and real sunlight. (e) Schematic diagram of the photocatalytic mechanism. Reproduced with permission from ref. 88. Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH. 
5. RP-based materials for photocatalytic hydrogen production
With the world facing severe energy challenges, the development of renewable and clean energy techniques has become increasingly imperative worldwide. Hydrogen energy is considered as an ideal power carrier candidate for future society. The evolution of hydrogen from water splitting by solar-driven photocatalysis has been recognized as a sustainable and attractive technology to solve the energy crisis and environmental issues simultaneously.90–93 Therefore, various semiconductor-based photocatalysts have been developed in this field. In fact, the ideal photocatalyst for water splitting requires an optimum bandgap smaller than 2.0 eV for highly efficient harvesting of solar light and suitable band edge position for the water redox potentials, but also needs to be low-cost and environment-friendly. In particular, RP exhibits narrow bandgap energy (<1.9 eV) values, which is suitable for incident photon absorption even up to the NIR region. In addition, the CBM position is more negative than the water reduction potentials of E°(H+/H2) (0 V vs. RHE), which makes it a promising candidate for hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) photocatalysts. However, it showed limited photocatalytic solar-to-hydrogen efficiency because of the high recombination rate of photoinduced electron-hole pairs.
The application of RP as a new class of material for photocatalytic water splitting has been comprehensively studied since 2012.49 Yu and co-workers have synthesized single-crystal crystalline monoclinic Hittorf's phosphorus by treating commercial RP in a vacuum tube at 450 °C for 12 h. The as-prepared product is composed of microparticles with a layer of nanorods on their surface (Fig. 9a). Compared with amorphous RP, the crystalline Hittorf's phosphorus displays an enhanced photocatalytic HER activity under visible light irradiation. With the addition of methanol as a hole sacrificial agent, the bare crystalline Hittorf's phosphorus exhibits an HER rate of 0.08 μmol h−1, and the HER rate increased to 0.95 μmol h−1 after the deposition of Pt (1 wt%) as the co-catalyst (Fig. 9b). More importantly, a molar ratio of H2/O2 of nearly 2/1 can be obtained with steady production under irradiation for photocatalytic pure water splitting (Fig. 9c). In addition to Hittorf's phosphorus, they also distributed submicron-sized fibrous-phase RP on the SiO2 fibres (FP/SiO2) by a CVD process.50 From the SEM image (Fig. 9d), some one-dimensional nanorods with the size of ca. 500 nm–1 μm can be observed, and the d-spacing of 5.81 Å showed in the HRTEM image is characteristic of the (001) facet of fibrous-phase RP (Fig. 9e). Under visible light illumination, the photocatalytic HER rate of this FP/SiO2 is high at 633 μmol h−1 g−1 in the presence of methanol as a sacrificial agent and Pt as a cocatalyst, which is much higher than the above previous amorphous RP and Hittorf's phosphorus. Moreover, this value holds the record in the family of previously reported elemental-based photocatalysts (Fig. 9f). The experimental results and DFT calculations indicate that the high photocatalytic HER performance can be attributed to the high CBM (−0.9 V vs. RHE), microstructure, and faster charge transfer efficiency of fibrous phosphorus.
 Fig. 9  (a) SEM image of crystalline Hittorf's phosphorus. (b) Time course of the HER from aqueous methanol solution by 1 wt% Pt loaded Hittorf's phosphorus under visible light and the full spectrum of xenon lamp irradiation. (c) Time courses of H2 and O2 production from pure water over Hittorf's phosphorus under visible light irradiation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 49. Copyright 2012 Elsevier B.V. (d) SEM image of FP/SiO2. (e) HRTEM image of phosphorus in FP. (f) Comparison of the activity of photocatalytic HER on different elemental photocatalysts under visible light irradiation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH. (g) TEM and (h) HRTEM images of FP/g-C3N4. (i) Comparison of HER activity of different samples. Reproduced with permission from ref. 59. Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH. 
As an efficient visible-light-driven metal-free photocatalyst, g-C3N4, which can be synthesized from nitrogen-rich precursors by a simple pyrolysis method, has been well studied for decades. Thus, the coupling of g-C3N4 with RP to make a heterostructure would improve the photocatalytic HER activity of RP by facilitating the photo-induced charge carrier transfer and separation efficiency. Xue et al.94 reported an RP/g-C3N4 composite photocatalyst by simple calcination of the RP and g-C3N4 mixture. The introduction of g-C3N4 onto the RP surface led to considerable enhancement in the photocatalytic HER activity (up to 10 μmol h−1). Yu et al.59 adopted a one-step CVD strategy for the synthesis of crystalized fibrous phosphorus nanoparticle anchored g-C3N4 sheets (FP/g-C3N4). By tuning the content of RP, the fibrous phosphorus nanoparticles with a particle size of about 6 nm were uniformly distributed on the g-C3N4 surface (Fig. 9g and h). During the heating process, some P atoms may be pre-doped in the g-C3N4 structure by the replacement of C and N atoms, which can not only decrease the defects in the g-C3N4 but also built a robust chemical interaction at the interface of fibrous phosphorus and g-C3N4. As expected, compared with bare FP (90 μmol h−1 g−1), the optimized FP/g-C3N4 composite exhibits a significantly improved photocatalytic HER rate of 2565 μmol h−1 g−1 under visible light (Fig. 9i). The time-resolved transient absorption experiments indicated that the effective charge extraction of g-C3N4 by fibrous phosphorus nanoparticles could significantly prolong the lifetime of photo-electrons, which can induce such drastic improvement in the HER. As mentioned in the photocatalytic water disinfection section, the g-C3N4/RP hybrid nanosheets fabricated by Yu's group also exhibit a remarkably enhanced photocatalytic HER rate of 67.76 μmol h−1 compared to bare RP (1.28 μmol h−1), and the apparent quantum efficiency (AQE) at 420 nm is about 2.6%.85
As mentioned above, when RP materials were used as a hydrogen production photocatalyst, the noble metal Pt was usually used as a co-catalyst. The expensiveness and scarcity of Pt would raise economic cost in terms of large-scale applications. Therefore, seeking low-cost and effective alternatives to replace Pt as co-catalysts has attracted much attention. Zhao et al.95 used MoS2 as a co-catalyst to prepare a g-C3N4/RP/MoS2 ternary composite. The HER rate of 2.58 μmol h−1 was obtained using this hybrid under visible light irradiation. Dong et al.96 prepared Ni(OH)2 nanoparticles as co-catalyst loaded RP composites with an increased photocatalytic HER activity reaching 1.65 μmol h−1. Liu et al.97 fabricated a Ni2P/RP heterojunction by an in situ hydrothermal strategy using the commercial RP and NiCl2·6H2O as the starting materials. The introduction of Ni2P could not only enhance the light-harvesting ability but also improve the charge separation efficiency. The Ni2P/RP hybrid with an optimized amount of Ni2P exhibits an excellent photocatalytic HER performance over 65.49 μmol h−1 under visible light illumination. Chen et al.98 loaded elemental orthorhombic α-S as a new type of co-catalyst on RP particles by a hydrothermal process. The α-S in the heterojunction acting as a co-catalyst would cause an efficient separation of photocarriers for RP. Thus, the α-S/RP composite exhibits an enhanced HER rate of 4.19 μmol h−1, which is 2.8-fold higher than that of pure RP.
In the above discussed research, the h+ sacrificial agents such as methanol, L-ascorbic acid, triethanolamine, and Na2S/Na2SO3 have been frequently added into the reaction solution to improve the photocatalytic HER activity. However, the addition of sacrificial agents will incur additional high-costs, which is highly undesirable for practical applications. Therefore, it is highly imperative to explore efficient RP-based photocatalysts for pure water splitting without sacrificial agents. Chen et al. constructed a BP/RP hetero-phase junction photocatalyst through a phase transformation process.99 The as-prepared BP/RP heterojunction displays an ultrathin sheet-like nanostructure with a size of 50–200 nm (Fig. 10a). The HRTEM image gives direct evidence for a high-quality interface between the crystallized BP and amorphous RP (Fig. 10b). Benefiting from the perfect interface at the atomic level and appropriate band structure alignment, a built-in electric field at the interface is formed, thus efficient photogenerated carrier separation and transfer can be realized via the Z-scheme pathway (Fig. 10c). The BP/RP junction has an excellent photocatalytic HER activity of 0.66 μmol h−1, which is 3.3-fold higher than that of pristine RP. After loading metal Co as the cocatalyst, the HER performance of Co-incorporated BP/RP was further improved to 5.92 μmol h−1 with an AQE up to 1.21% at 420 nm. Surprisingly, instead of O2, ˙OH radicals and H2O2 were the main water oxidation products. Then, Chen's group prepared another BP/RP quantum dot (BP/RP-QD) Z-scheme heterostructure for photocatalytic pure water splitting in the absence of sacrificial agents.100 The BP/RP-QD and Co-BP/RP-QD have a moderate HER rate of 0.37 μmol h−1 and 3.66 μmol h−1, respectively.
 Fig. 10  (a) TEM and (b) HRTEM images of the BP/RP hetero-phase junction. (c) Schematic illustration of the direct Z-scheme charge-transfer pathway in BP/RP. Reproduced with permission from ref. 99. Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH. HRTEM images of (d) TiO2(B)/RP and (e) TiO2(A)/RP composites. (f) Photocatalytic HER from pure water activities of the TiO2/RP composite. Reproduced with permission from ref. 56. Copyright 2019 Elsevier B.V. (g) SEM images of PCN@HP. (h) TEM images of HP nanorods in PCN@HP. (i) Photocatalytic HER rates from the pure water splitting of PCN@HP(x). Reproduced with permission from ref. 60. Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH. 
Recently, our group has prepared a series of RP decorated TiO2 (A: anatase and B: TiO2(B)) nanofibres (TiO2/RP) by a vaporization–deposition strategy.56 From the HRTEM images, all the samples retain the 1-D fibril mesoporous morphology, and a uniform amorphous RP nanolayer with a thickness of 6–7 nm was deposited on the surface of TiO2 nanofibres after the vaporization–deposition process (Fig. 10d and e). The XRD patterns indicate that the RP nanolayer corresponds to the monoclinic Hittorf's phosphorus phase. Furthermore, a disordered layer with a thickness of ca. 1.5 nm was also formed at the interface of TiO2 nanofibres and the RP nanolayer, which indicates that some defects were introduced into the surface region of TiO2 nanofibres during the synthesis process. The X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), electron paramagnetic resonance, and X-ray absorption structure spectroscopy (XAS) spectra further indicated that this disordered layer was formed by the oxygen vacancies (VO), and the VO was created by the introduction of P5+ dopants at some Ti4+ sites. The TiO2(B)/RP and TiO2(A)/RP heterojunctions with optimized RP contents show an excellent HER rate reaching up to 11.4 and 5.3 μmol h−1 by photocatalytic pure water splitting without any sacrificial reagents under simulated solar illumination (Fig. 10f). It is noteworthy that the HER rate of the TiO2(B)/RP composite stands at the highest level of the previously reported TiO2-based photocatalysts for pure water splitting. Interestingly, H2O2 that exists in liquid phases was produced by photogenerated h+ by a two-electron water oxidation process, which avoids the problem of gas separation of H2via overall water splitting. The optical absorption spectra suggest that the light-sensitive RP nanolayer causes a strong and broad optical absorption in the visible light region, and DFT calculations revealed that the P5+ doping induced VO could decrease the value of the effective mass of electrons/holes, which would reduce the charge carrier's recombination. These results demonstrate that the improved photocatalytic HER activity is attributed to the synergetic improvement in optical light-harvesting and photoinduced charge separation efficiency by the introduction of RP. Subsequently, we first fabricated Hittorf's phosphorus with a specific crystallographic orientation in photocatalytic HER from pure water.60 Polymeric carbon nitride (PCN) was employed as a substrate to achieve a controllable growth of [001]-oriented Hittorf's phosphorus (HP) nanorods by tuning the calcination temperature in the CVD procedure. As shown in the SEM images, hexagonal-shaped HP nanorods with a length of about 1–2 mm and a diameter of tens of nanometres were vertically grown on PCN (Fig. 10g). The HRTEM image illustrates that the Hittorf's phosphorus nanorods with exposed {110} facets were grown along the [001] direction (Fig. 10h). The mechanism for the [001]-oriented Hittorf's phosphorus crystal growth was due to the lattice matching between the Hittorf's phosphorus and PCN. XPS and XAS spectra suggest that an intimate chemical interaction at the PCN@HP interface through P–N bonds was formed by partial substitution of P atoms at C sites during the CVD process. By in situ photodeposition and 3 wt% Pt as the cocatalyst, the optimized PCN@HP composites exhibited greatly improved photocatalytic HER rates of 33.2 μmol h−1 and 17.5 μmol h−1 for water splitting under simulated solar light (λ > 300 nm) and visible light (λ > 420 nm) illumination, respectively (Fig. 10i). Particularly, the PCN@HP sample displayed a quite high AQY reaching up to 3.59% at 420 nm. Even at the longer 550 nm light wavelength, the AQY is still as high as 1.21%. The photocatalytic HER performance is superior to most of the previously reported phosphorus and PCN-based photocatalysts. Interestingly, consistent with the TiO2/RP sample, H2O2 was also generated by h+-mediated water oxidation, with an H2/H2O2 production amount ratio (1:0.9) close to 1:1. The band alignment between PCN and HP indicates that the photo-electrons were migrated from the CBM of PCN to HP through P–N bonds. Furthermore, the DFT calculations of carrier effective masses along the specific crystal directions demonstrate the highest electron mobility along the [001] direction of HP. So, the excellent photocatalytic HER activity of PCN@HP originated from the coupling of PCN and HP nanorods, which can improve the visible-light absorption and facilitate photo-electron separation along the [001] direction in HP.
6. Conclusions and perspectives
In this review, recent progress in RP-based materials, including the crystal and electronic structure properties, synthesis procedure, and their applications in photocatalytic water purification and water splitting to hydrogen was summarized. Among the five RP allotropes, amorphous, Hittorf's and fibrous phosphorus with high chemical stability, broad visible light absorption, and appropriate band structure have been considered as promising photocatalysts and are the most studied in recent years. Although elemental RP is a good candidate photocatalyst, the lower photogenerated carrier separation ability has resulted in RP with the photocatalytic efficiency at an unsatisfactory level. To improve the photocatalytic activity, several studies have been focused on crystalline modification, loading cocatalysts, and constructing heterostructures, and the detailed performance improvement mechanism has been discussed by experimental results and theoretical calculations. Although considerable developments in RP-based photocatalysts have been achieved, there are still various problems and challenges to be solved in future research.
(1) In recent years, the theoretical calculations of RP-based materials have resulted in significant progress in understanding the crystal and electronic structures, and reaction thermodynamics and kinetics at the molecular and atomic levels. These studies can help and guide the design of photocatalysts and in real photocatalytic application.101 Hittorf's phosphorus, and fibrous phosphorus have a layered structure with lower binding energy per layer, so they are a promising two-dimensional semiconductor material for photocatalysis.44 Nevertheless, very limited experimental studies were carried out on the synthesis of few layer or even monolayer red phosphorus. Chueh et al. expanded a plasma-assisted technique for the fabrication of atomically layered Hittorf's phosphorus over the InN/InP substrate with high carrier mobility.102 Hittorf's phosphorene has been exfoliated from Hittorf's phosphorus single crystals by both liquid ultrasonication and mechanical methods under ambient conditions for the first time by Zhang et al.43 But the application of monolayer phosphorene in photocatalysis has not been reported. Moreover, to the best of our knowledge, the theoretical and experimental investigations on monolayer fibrous phosphorus have not been performed to date. Therefore, the discovery of two-dimensional monolayer RP under the guidance of theory in photocatalysis is valuable and urgent.
(2) Furthermore, the effective masses of electrons and holes along specific crystal orientations have significant influences on charge mobilities.103,104 The large difference between the value of effective masses of electrons and holes led to efficient charge separation. Hence, tailoring the crystallographic orientation of crystalline RP is an effective way to improve the photocatalytic performance. In the heating–cooling CVD synthesis procedure of RP, the lattice mismatch between crystalline RP and the substrate is the critical factor for its controllable crystal epitaxial growth. It is essential to choose an appropriate substrate (photoinactive or semiconductor) that has a suitable lattice mismatch with Hittorf's or fibrous phosphorus during crystal growing, and further studies are also essential to understand the formation mechanisms of these phosphorus allotropes.
(3) To date, most of the crystalline RP applied for photocatalysis is synthesized by the CVD method in a sealed quartz ampoule. However, the high pressure during the heating process and the existence of flammable white phosphorus as a by-product may cause some safety considerations. Therefore, the development of other safe wet-chemistry methods is necessary.
(4) The construction of heterostructures with RP and other semiconductor-based materials is an effective way to enhance the photocatalytic activities. Due to the broader visible light absorption of RP, these as-synthesized heterostructures have superior light-harvesting performance. To promote the electron–hole pair separation and transfer ability, the semiconductor materials that are used to construct heterojunctions should have band alignment with RP, so the charge transfer can be more thermodynamically favorable. The hydrothermal, ball milling and vacuum ampoule methods are common synthesis strategies to make RP-based heterostructures. However, due to the strong reducibility of RP vapor, the traditional metal oxide-based semiconductors, such as α-Fe2O3, WO3, Cu2O, α-Bi2O3, BiOI, BiOBr, BiOCl, BiVO4, Bi2WO6, and Bi2MoO6 would be reduced by RP vapor during the vacuum ampoule CVD process. Only the semiconductor materials (e.g., TiO2, TaON, Ta3N5, and g-C3N4) with high stability can be used to construct heterojunctions with RP by the vacuum ampoule method.
(5) In the previous reports, the photocatalytic water oxidation product of RP-based photocatalysts is H2O2 in the absence of a hole sacrificial agent.56,60,100 Compared with the low economic value of O2, the H2O2 products are value-added chemicals. They can be used as an alternative solar fuel with higher energy density and are widely used as a clean oxidant. Moreover, this system can avoid the problem of gas separation over the H2 and O2 production systems because H2 and H2O2 exist in gas and liquid phases, respectively. So, the design and fabrication of highly active RP-based photocatalysts for H2O2 production are significant and necessary.
(6) Apart from photocatalytic pollutant removal, water disinfection, and water splitting, the application of RP-based materials for photothermal and photodynamic therapy in cancer treatments and other human health problems is also very promising.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank the financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51672143 and 51808303), Taishan Scholar Program of Shandong Province, Outstanding Youth of Natural Science in Shandong Province (JQ201713), Key Research and Development Program of Shandong Province (2017GSF18128), China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2018M632630), Applied Basic Research of Qingdao City (Special Youth Project) (19-6-2-74-cg), the Qingdao Postdoctoral Applied Research Project Funding, and Postdoctoral Innovation Project of Shandong Province.
References
H. Tong, S. Ouyang, Y. Bi, N. Umezawa, M. Oshikiri and J. Ye, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 229 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253 RSC .
W. J. Ong, L. L. Tan, Y. H. Ng, S. T. Yong and S. P. Chai, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 7159 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Liu, C. Huang, C. X. Liu, R. Shi and Y. Chen, Chem. – Eur. J., 2020, 26, 4449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Quan, J. Zhang, D. Li, Y. Zhu, Y. Wang, Y. Bu, Y. Qin, Y. Xia, S. Komarneni and D. Yang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 14911 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, S. Shen, L. Guo and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6503 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, T. Takata and K. Domen, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 17050 CrossRef CAS .
R. Marschall, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 2421 CrossRef CAS .
F. E. Osterloh, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2294 RSC .
G. Liu, P. Niu, L. Yin and H. M. Cheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 9070 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Liu, P. Niu and H. M. Cheng, ChemPhysChem, 2013, 14, 885 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Sakthivel, X. Huang, Y. Wu and S. Rtimi, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 379, 122297 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yan, P. Verma, Y. Kuwahara, K. Mori and H. Yamashita, Small Methods, 2018, 2, 1800212 CrossRef .
Z. Hu, Z. Shen and J. C. Yu, Green Chem., 2017, 19, 588 RSC .
S. A. Ansari, Z. Khan, M. O. Ansaric and M. H. Cho, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 44616 RSC .
J. Pang, A. Bachmatiuk, Y. Yin, B. Trzebicka, L. Zhao, L. Fu, R. G. Mendes, T. Gemming, Z. Liu and M. H. Rummeli, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702093 CrossRef .
W. Lei, G. Liu, J. Zhang and M. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 3492 RSC .
Z. Chen, Y. Zhu, Q. Wang, W. Liu, Y. Cui, X. Tao and D. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 295, 230 CrossRef CAS .
F. Bachhuber, J. Appen, R. Dronskowski, P. Schmidt, T. Nilges, A. Pfitzner and R. Weihrich, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 11629 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Smith, D. Hagaman, D. DiGuiseppi, R. Schweitzer-Stenner and H. F. Ji, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 11829 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. E. M. Amaral, G. P. Nieman, G. R. Schwenk, H. Jing, R. Zhang, E. B. Cerkez, D. Strongin and H. F. Ji, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 6766 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253 RSC .
K. Maeda, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2011, 12, 237 CrossRef CAS .
R. Marschall, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 2421 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bai, J. Jiang, Q. Zhang and Y. Xiong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2893 RSC .
J. Ran, J. Zhang, J. Yu, M. Jaroniec and S. Qiao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7787 RSC .
K. Takanabe, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 8006 CrossRef CAS .
S. Böcker and M. Häser, Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem., 1995, 621, 258 CrossRef .
M. Hart, E. R. White, J. Chen, C. M. McGilvery, C. J. Pickard, A. Michaelides, A. Sella, M. S. P. Shaffer and C. G. Salzmann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 8144 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Pauling and M. Simonetta, J. Chem. Phys., 1952, 20, 29 CrossRef CAS .
M. Haeser, U. Schneider and R. Ahlrichs, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1992, 114, 9551 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, H. Qian, Z. Liu, H. Ju, Z. Lu, H. Zhang, L. Chi and S. Cui, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 1659 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Hittorf, Ann. Phys. Chem., 1865, 126, 193 CrossRef .
H. Thurn and H. Krebs, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1966, 5, 1047 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ruck, D. Hoppe, B. Wahl, P. Simon, Y. Wang and G. Seifert, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 7616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Baumer, Y. Ma, C. Shen, A. Zhang, L. Chen, Y. Liu, D. Pfister, T. Nilges and C. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 4105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Pfitzner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. L. Winchester, M. Whitby and M. S. P. Shaffer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 3616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Bachhuber, J. Appen, R. Dronskowski, P. Schmidt, T. Nilges, A. Pfitzner and R. Weihrich, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 11629 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ding, L. Wen, S. Huang, Y. Li, Y. Zhang and Y. Lu, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 80872 RSC .
H. Huang, L. Zhang, B. Xiao, Y. Cheng and J. Zhang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2019, 115, 163101 CrossRef .
L. Zhang, H. Huang, B. Zhang, M. Gu, D. Zhao, X. Zhao, L. Li, J. Zhou, K. Wu, Y. Cheng and J. Zhang, Angew. Chem., 2020, 59, 1074 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Schusteritsch, M. Uhrin and C. J. Pickard, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 2975 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Sansone, L. Maschio, D. Usvyat, M. Schütz and A. Karttunen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Spanu, S. Sorella and G. Galli, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 103, 196401 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. L. Lu, S. Dong, W. Zhou, S. Dai, B. Zhou, H. Zhao and P. Wu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 11967 RSC .
J. Qiao, X. Kong, Z. X. Hu, F. Yang and W. Ji, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4475 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, W. K. H. Ng, J. C. Yu, H. Zhu, C. Li, L. Zhang, Z. Liu and Q. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 111–112, 409 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Hu, L. Yuan, Z. Liu, Z. Shen and J. C. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 9580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ren, D. Li, Q. Xue, J. Li, Y. Sun, R. Zhang, Y. Zhai and Y. Liu, Catal. Today, 2020, 340, 115 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Ansari, M. S. Ansari and M. H. Cho, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 3921 RSC .
Z. Shen, S. Sun, W. Wang, J. Liu, Z. Liu and J. C. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 3285 RSC .
S. A. Ansari, M. O. Ansari and M. H. Cho, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 27713 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Ansari and M. H. Cho, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 25405 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, J. Li, C. L. Dong, J. Ren, Y. C. Huang, D. Zhao, R. Cai, D. Wei, X. Yang, C. Lv, W. Theis, Y. Bu, W. Han, S. Shen and D. Yang, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 255, 117764 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Shen, Z. Hu, W. Wang, S. F. Lee, D. K. L. Chan, Y. Li, T. Gu and J. C. Yu, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 14163 RSC .
J. Feng, D. Zhang, H. Zhou, M. Pi, X. Wang and S. Chen, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 6342 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jing, R. Zhu, D. L. Phillips and J. C. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1703484 CrossRef .
Y. Zhu, C. Lv, Z. Yin, J. Ren, X. Yang, C. L. Dong, H. Liu, R. Cai, Y. C. Huang, W. Theis, S. Shen and D. Yang, Angew. Chem., 2020, 59, 868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, D. Zhang, J. Deng and S. Chen, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 516, 215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Feng, D. Zhang, H. Zhou, M. Pi, X. Wang and S. Chen, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 6342 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lyu, H. Han, Q. Wu, H. Ma, C. Ma, X. Dong and Y. Fu, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2019, 23, 847 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhao, X. Tu, X. Wang, B. Dai, L. Zhang, J. Xu, Y. Feng, N. Sheng and F. Zhu, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 361, 1173 CrossRef .
F. Wang, Y. Wang, Y. Wu, D. Wei, L. Li, Q. Zhang, H. Liu, Y. Liu, W. Lv and G. Liu, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2019, 6, 2565 RSC .
W. Zhao, Y. Feng, H. Huang, P. Zhou, J. Li, L. Zhang, B. Dai, J. Xu, F. Zhu, N. Sheng and D. Y. C. Leung, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 245, 448 CrossRef CAS .
M. Khan and I. M. C. Lo, Water Res., 2016, 106, 259 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Fu and Q. Wang, J. Environ. Manage., 2011, 92, 407 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Homem and L. Santos, J. Environ. Manage., 2011, 92, 2304 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wu, F. Wang, X. Jin, X. Zheng, Y. Wang, D. Wei, Q. Zhang, Y. Feng, Z. Xie, P. Chen, H. Liu and G. Liu, Water Res., 2020, 172, 115492 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lyu, G. Sun, L. Zhu, H. Ma, C. Ma, X. Dong and Y. Fu, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2020, 24, 375 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhao, J. Li, B. Dai, Z. Cheng, J. Xu, K. Ma, L. Zhang, N. Sheng, G. Mao, H. Wu, K. Wei and D. Y. C. Leung, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 369, 716 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, Z. Hu and J. C. Yu, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 247, 100 CrossRef CAS .
T. Muhmood, M. Xia, W. Lei and F. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 238, 568 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhou, S. Xu, D. Zhang, S. Chen and J. Deng, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 3196 RSC .
D. Li, J. Li, Q. Jin, Z. Ren, Y. Sun, R. Zhang, Y. Zhai and Y. Liu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 537, 256 CrossRef CAS .
X. Bai, J. Wan, J. Jia, X. Hu, Y. He, C. He, E. Liu and J. Fan, Mater. Lett., 2018, 222, 187 CrossRef CAS .
E. Liu, Y. Du, X. Bai, J. Fan and X. Hu, Arabian J. Chem., 2020, 13, 3836 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Teng, N. Yang, H. Lv, S. Wang, M. Hu, C. Wang, D. Wang and G. Wang, Chem, 2019, 5, 664 CAS .
Y. Li, X. Liu, L. Tan, Z. Cui, D. Jing, X. Yang, Y. Liang, Z. Li, S. Zhu, Y. Zheng, K. W. K. Yeung, D. Zheng, X. Wang and S. Wu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1900946 CrossRef .
W. Wang, G. Huang, J. C. Yu and P. K. Wong, J. Environ. Sci., 2015, 34, 232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, J. Zhang, J. Yu, Y. Zhang, Z. Cui, Y. Sun and B. Hou, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 220, 57 CrossRef CAS .

          T. An, H. Zhao and P. K. Wong, Advances in Photocatalytic Disinfection, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg,  2017 Search PubMed .
D. Xia, Z. Shen, G. Huang, W. Wang, J. C. Yu and P. K. Wong, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2015, 49, 6264 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, G. Lia, T. An, D. K. L. Chan, J. C. Yu and P. K. Wong, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 238, 126 CrossRef CAS .
M. Roshith, M. S. Kumar, A. K. N. Kumar, S. Ramasubramanian, J. Stanley, T. G. S. Babu and D. V. R. Kumar, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2019, 384, 112034 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, D. Kong, P. Hsu, H. Yuan, H. Lee, Y. Liu, H. Wang, S. Wang, K. Yan, D. Lin, P. A. Maraccini, K. M. Parker, A. B. Boehm and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 1098 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, X. Liu, L. Tan, Y. Liang, Z. Cui, X. Yang, S. Zhu, Z. Li, Y. Zheng, K. W. K. Yeung, X. Wang and S. Wu, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1900048 CrossRef .
Q. Zhang, X. Liu, L. Tan, Z. Cui, Z. Li, Y. Liang, S. Zhu, K. W. K. Yeung, Y. Zheng and S. Wu, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 383, 123088 CrossRef .
Y. Zhu, X. Zhao, J. Li, H. Zhang, S. Chen, W. Han and D. Yang, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 764, 341 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, T. Kong and S. Shen, Small, 2019, 15, 1900772 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhu, J. Li, J. Cao, C. Lv, G. Huang, G. Zhang, Y. Xu, S. Zhang, P. Meng, T. Zhan and D. Yang, APL Mater., 2020, 8, 041108 CrossRef .
X. Xu, G. Feng and F. Yuan, Funct. Mater. Lett., 2020, 13, 1950090 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yuan, S. Cao, Y. Liao, L. Yin and C. Xue, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 140–141, 164 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhao, S. Sun, Y. Wu, P. Jiang, Y. Dong and Z. J. Xu, Carbon, 2017, 119, 56 CrossRef CAS .
H. Dang, X. Dong, Y. Dong, H. Fan and Y. Qiu, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 44823 RSC .
E. Liu, L. Qi, J. Chen, J. Fan and X. Hu, Mater. Res. Bull., 2019, 115, 27 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Cao, M. Guo, J. Cao, H. Lin, Y. Chen and S. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 13160 RSC .
F. Liu, R. Shi, Z. Wang, Y. Weng, C. Che and Y. Chen, Angew. Chem., 2019, 131, 11917 CrossRef .
R. Shi, F. Liu, Z. Wang, Y. Weng and Y. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 12531 RSC .
G. Chang, J. Ren, X. She, K. Wang, S. Komarneni and D. Yang, Sci. Bull., 2018, 63, 155 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Tsai, C. C. Lai, C. H. Hsiao, H. Medina, T. Y. Su, H. Ouyang, T. H. Chen, J. H. Liang and Y. L. Chueh, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 13723 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Liao and E. A. Carter, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2401 RSC .
Z. Li, Y. Dai, X. Ma, Y. Zhu and B. Huang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 3267 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:
Yukun Zhu	Yukun Zhu received his Ph.D. in Applied Physics from Jilin University in 2018. After that, he joined Prof. Dongjiang Yang's group as a postdoctoral fellow at Qingdao University. His research interests are mainly focus on the development of novel photocatalysts and photoelectrodes for solar-light driven water splitting.
Jun Ren	Prof. Jun Ren received his Ph.D. in Physical Chemistry from the Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2007. Then he went to Technische Universität Chemnitz in Germany to work as a senior visiting scholar. He joined North University of China as an associate professor in 2009. Recently, he has finished his research professor project at Inha University in Korea which spanned from 2017–2019. His research interests are focused on the design of photoelectric materials and the catalytic reaction mechanisms and cobalt-based Fischer Tropsch synthesis reaction mechanism using DFT.
Xiaoli Zhang	Dr Xiao Li Zhang received her Bachelor's degree (2001) in Chemistry at Shandong University, China; she received both her Master's degree (2005) and PhD (2008) in Material Chemistry under Professor Young Soo Kang at Pukyong National University, South Korea. Then she worked as Research Fellow with Professor Yi-Bing Cheng and Professor Udo Bach at Monash University, Australia. After shortly being trained in the University of Melbourne as a Research Fellow, she joined the University of New South Wales, Australia, as a Vice-Chancellor's Research Fellow (2012) working with Professor Rose Amal. In 2016, she took a full Professor position at Zhengzhou University, China.
Dongjiang Yang	Prof. Dongjiang Yang received his Ph.D. in Physical Chemistry from the Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2006. Then he went to the Queensland University of Technology and Griffith University to work as a postdoctoral fellow. He joined Qingdao University as a Professor in 2012. His current research interests are mainly focused on the synthesis of functional materials for energy storage and conversion, such as photocatalysis, fuel cells, and zinc-air/lithium/sodium-ion batteries.

 	Scheme 1  Schematic illustration of the basic photocatalytic process.	 

 	Fig. 1  (a) Four proposed molecular linear chain structures of amorphous phosphorus. The structure feature is double triangle [P4] for 1, zig-zag ladder [P4] for 2, [P8][P2] for 3, and [P10][P2] for 4. Reproduced with permission from ref. 33, Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH. (b) Repeating [P9]P2[P8]P2 unit of the tubes in fibrous phosphorus and Hittorf's phosphorus. Reprinted with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. Linkage of the phosphorus strands and stacking of the layers in (c) Hittorf's phosphorus and (d) fibrous phosphorus. The blue tubes are added to emphasize the fibrous nature.	 

 	Fig. 2  Band structure, total DOS, and partial DOS of (a) Hittorf's phosphorene and (b) Hittorf's phosphorus based on PBE + TS. Reprinted with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (c) The location of the VBM and CBM for Hittorf's phosphorene with respect to the vacuum level (0 eV). Reproduced from ref. 47 with permission from the PCCP Owner Societies. (d) The DFT band structure for Hittorf's phosphorus slab. Reproduced with permission from ref. 49. Copyright 2012 Elsevier B.V. (e) Theoretical calculation of the band structure of fibrous phosphorus. Reproduced with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH. The positions for the reduction potential of H+/H2 and oxidation potential of H2O/O2 are marked with dashed lines.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) The schematic diagram for the ball milling of RP. (b) TEM and (c) HRTEM images of Hittorf's phosphorus nanoparticles. Reproduced from ref. 52 with permission from the PCCP Owner Societies. (d) SEM and (e) HRTEM images of BP–RP heterostructure. Reproduced from ref. 53 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of the process of the vacuum ampoule method. Reproduced with permission from ref. 56. Copyright 2019 Elsevier B.V. (b) SEM image fibrous phosphorus fibres. Reproduced from ref. 57 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) SEM image of RP/g-C3N4 composites. Reprinted with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  SEM images of (a) fibrous phosphorus fibres and (b) type II phosphorus rods. (c) Photocatalytic RhB degradation performances of fibrous and type II phosphorus. Reproduced from ref. 57 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) SEM and (e) HRTEM images of Hittorf's phosphorus microbelts. (f) The photocatalytic degradation of MO over Hittorf's phosphorus microbelts and amorphous RP. Reproduced with permission from ref. 73. Copyright 2019 Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) TEM and (b) HRTEM images of the FP/TiO2 heterojunction. Reproduced with permission from ref. 61. Copyright 2018 Elsevier B.V. (c) SEM image, (d) photocatalytic MO degradation performance, and (e) photocatalytic and charge transfer processes of the Cr2O3:P@FP core–shell hybrid. Reproduced from ref. 75 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) SEM image of amorphous RP, inset is the HRTEM image. (b) Photocatalytic inactivation kinetics under a xenon lamp and sunlight irradiation in the presence of RP. (c) Illustration for the proposed bactericidal mechanism of RP under visible light. Reprinted with permission from ref. 84. Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society. (d) TEM image of the CNP. (e) Photocatalytic inactivation efficiencies against E. coli K-12 for the as-prepared samples. Reproduced with permission from ref. 85. Copyright 2018 Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) SEM image of Ti-RP/ZnO, inset is a cross-sectional view of Ti-RP/ZnO. (b) HRTEM image of RP/ZnO. (c) Theoretically calculated crystal structure of the RP(001)/ZnO(002) interface. (d) Inactivation kinetics of S. aureus and E. coli for Ti-RP/ZnO under solar simulator and real sunlight. (e) Schematic diagram of the photocatalytic mechanism. Reproduced with permission from ref. 88. Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) SEM image of crystalline Hittorf's phosphorus. (b) Time course of the HER from aqueous methanol solution by 1 wt% Pt loaded Hittorf's phosphorus under visible light and the full spectrum of xenon lamp irradiation. (c) Time courses of H2 and O2 production from pure water over Hittorf's phosphorus under visible light irradiation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 49. Copyright 2012 Elsevier B.V. (d) SEM image of FP/SiO2. (e) HRTEM image of phosphorus in FP. (f) Comparison of the activity of photocatalytic HER on different elemental photocatalysts under visible light irradiation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH. (g) TEM and (h) HRTEM images of FP/g-C3N4. (i) Comparison of HER activity of different samples. Reproduced with permission from ref. 59. Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) TEM and (b) HRTEM images of the BP/RP hetero-phase junction. (c) Schematic illustration of the direct Z-scheme charge-transfer pathway in BP/RP. Reproduced with permission from ref. 99. Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH. HRTEM images of (d) TiO2(B)/RP and (e) TiO2(A)/RP composites. (f) Photocatalytic HER from pure water activities of the TiO2/RP composite. Reproduced with permission from ref. 56. Copyright 2019 Elsevier B.V. (g) SEM images of PCN@HP. (h) TEM images of HP nanorods in PCN@HP. (i) Photocatalytic HER rates from the pure water splitting of PCN@HP(x). Reproduced with permission from ref. 60. Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
