 En route to artificial photosynthesis: the role of polyoxometalate based photocatalysts  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2TA02243E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2TA02243E
(Highlight)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 13152-13169
En route to artificial photosynthesis: the role of polyoxometalate based photocatalysts

        
          
            Abhik 
            Paul
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Subhasis Das 
            Adhikary
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Sandhya 
            Kapurwan
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Sanjit 
            Konar
          
          
        
      *
      Molecular Magnetism Lab, Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Science Education and Research Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh, India-462066. E-mail: skonar@iiserb.ac.in
Received 
      21st March 2022
    , Accepted 14th May 2022First published on 16th May 2022AbstractAs a consequence of increasing global energy demand and depleting fossil fuels, artificial photosynthesis, i.e., subsequent photocatalytic water oxidation and CO2 reduction, has become significant for providing renewable energy resources. To construct an ideal artificial photosynthetic system, three components are essential: photosensitizer, water oxidation catalyst, and CO2 reduction catalyst. As assembling these three components in a single integrated device is extremely difficult, an alternative strategy is to divide the overall process into two half-reactions: water oxidation and CO2 reduction. Once each half-cell reaction is well-understood and optimized, these two reactions can be coupled in a single integrated device to convert solar energy efficiently. The structural diversity and tunable redox properties of polyoxometalates (POMs) connect these strategies, like “killing two birds with one stone” to save the environment and fulfill future energy demands. This highlight focuses on the active role of POMs in reducing the activation energy barrier and sluggish reaction dynamics in carrying out the artificial photosynthesis process. The photochemical and catalytic properties of POMs in separate water oxidation, CO2 reduction, and CO2 reduction coupled with water oxidation have been outlined.Abhik PaulAbhik Paul received his BSc degree in Chemistry from the University of Calcutta in 2015 and MSc degree in Chemical Sciences from Pondicherry University in 2017. He then joined IISER Bhopal to pursue his doctoral research under the supervision of Prof. Sanjit Konar. His research interest focuses on photochemical conversion of small molecules, redox-switchable behaviour of metal–organic hybrid capsules, and crystal engineering aspects of the magnetic bistability of organic radicals.Subhasis Das AdhikarySubhasis Das Adhikary received his PhD in Chemistry from the Indian Institute of Technology Ropar in 2020 under the supervision of Dr Debaprasad Mandal. His doctoral research was focused on polyoxometalate catalyzed water oxidation, organic transformations, and electrocatalysis. After completing his PhD, he moved to IISER Bhopal, where he is currently working as a postdoctoral research associate on polyoxometalate catalyzed photochemical carbon dioxide reduction coupled with water oxidation under the supervision of Prof. Sanjit Konar.Sandhya KapurwanSandhya Kapurwan received her BSc degree in Chemistry in 2013 and M.Sc. in 2016 from HNB Garhwal University. She then joined IISER Bhopal in 2017 to pursue her doctoral research under the supervision of Prof. Sanjit Konar. Her current research is focused on single-molecule magnet behavior, luminescence, and photo- and electro-catalytic applications of polyoxometalates.Sanjit KonarSanjit Konar received his PhD from the Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science, Kolkata. After that, he worked as a postdoctoral fellow at the University of Notre Dame and Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, USA. He is a recipient of an Alexander von Humboldt Fellowship and has worked at Universität Bielefeld, Germany. Currently, he is working as a Professor in the Department of Chemistry, IISER Bhopal, India. His research interests are in the area of molecular magnetic materials, multifunctional metal–organic frameworks, and polyoxometalates. He has published 145+ peer-reviewed journal articles. He currently serves as an associate editor of the ACS journal Crystal Growth and Design. He is also an editorial advisory board member of the Wiley journal European Journal of Inorganic Chemistry and MDPI journal Magnetochemistry.
Introduction
To quench the world's increased energy thirst, the sustainable production of renewable chemical fuels plays a significant role in the global energy economy.1–4 Currently, the global energy sources are dependent on non-renewable energy, mainly fossil fuels. However, the increasing consumption of fossil fuels over the past century has led to a substantial increase in the amount of CO2 in the atmosphere. Thus, it is presumed to affect global warming. Additionally, fossil fuels are predicted to be depleted within the century. Therefore, it will significantly limit the quality of our lives.5 Such a scenario has mandated intensive efforts to realize the production of renewable chemical fuels from alternative energy resources.6 A great deal of this effort is directed toward utilizing solar energy to produce electron-rich compounds from CO2 and water.7 A cost-effective, reliable, and promising approach in this broad endeavour is artificial photosynthesis, to store solar energy as chemical energy to create renewable fuels.2,4,8–16
In natural photosynthesis, solar energy converts to chemical energy, where water is oxidized to oxygen and CO2 is reduced to produce carbohydrates.17 Energy research in the past few decades has been spun around developing water-splitting reactions consisting of two half-cell reactions: the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and the oxygen evolution reaction (OER), the latter being more kinetically demanding.18–29 The evolved H2 could be used as a direct energy source or to reduce CO2 to furnish fuels and chemicals, resulting in a complete artificial photosynthesis system.30–34 Although such carbon dioxide reduction processes mainly furnish C1 products either by C–O bond cleavage to CO or hydrogenation of CO2 to C1 oxygenates (i.e., formate, methanol, etc.) or methane, the highest value CO2 reduction process is to produce carbon and hydrogen-rich C2+ products (i.e., long-chain hydrocarbons, alcohols, and carboxylates).35,36 However, in carrying out such chemistry, there are several challenges in effecting extensive carbon–carbon bond formation with selectivity and high solar energy efficiency.37
To construct an ideal artificial photosynthesis system, three components are vital, namely photosensitizer, water oxidation catalyst (WOC), and CO2 reduction catalyst (CO2RC) (Scheme 1). A great effort toward artificial photosynthesis has led to three efficient classes of catalysts harvesting light: semiconductors,38–43 enzymes,44–46 and transition-metal complexes.17,47,48 However, these systems suffer from either electron–hole (e−/h+) recombination or the decomposition of organic ligands under the harsh reaction conditions of water oxidation and CO2 reduction catalysis. Additionally, the photochemical conversion of CO2 and water in a single integrated system using solar energy is the goal of artificial photosynthesis, where a single component will act as a photosensitizer, WOC, and CO2RC. In such systems, the photogenerated charge carriers, i.e., protons and electrons obtained from the water-splitting reaction, can reduce CO2 to valuable chemical feedstock depending on the redox potential enabling the generation of renewable transportation fuels (Fig. 1).49,50 Single integrated systems are significant from the standpoint of minimizing the balance of each component, which is essential for large-scale applications. However, the challenging requirements are as follows: (i) all the individual components, i.e., the photosensitizer, WOC, and CO2RC, should operate efficiently under the same reaction conditions, (ii) all these components should be stable under harsh reaction conditions (primarily the pH of the solution), which are likely to limit the durability of the photosensitizer and the catalysts, and therefore, restrict the efficiency towards CO2 reduction coupled with water oxidation.
 Scheme 1  Schematic representation of water oxidation with the CO2 reduction reaction. The WOC and CO2RC are coupled by a conductive linker. Additionally, the WOC and CO2RC both act as photosensitizers as well. 
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the photogenerated charge carriers (electrons and holes) upon the absorption of photons, along with relevant redox potentials at pH = 7. Reproduced from ref. 50 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2017. 
A breakthrough in the research field of artificial photosynthesis was achieved by discovering efficient, all-inorganic-based catalysts taken from the pool of nano-sized, water-soluble metal-oxide clusters, otherwise known as polyoxometalates (POMs).51 These clusters provide a unique mimicry of nature's oxygen-evolving complex (Mn4CaO5) present in photosystem II (Fig. 2).5,52–54 Additionally, POMs can act as photosensitizers and electron and proton reservoirs to improve electron–hole charge separation as well as electron donors.55 Such combined characteristics of these molecules make them potential candidates for water oxidation and CO2 reduction reactions.56 The transition metal ions of POMs functioned as catalytically active sites for adsorbing and activating CO2 molecules.57,58 Recently, POMs have been reported as a single integrated catalyst system for photochemical CO2 reduction coupled with water oxidation, where POMs can act as a photosensitizer, WOC and CO2RC.59
 Fig. 2  Representation of bio-mimicking POMs (Si–Ru4 and P–Co4) containing cubane or quasi-cubane cores as water oxidation catalysts for photocatalytic water oxidation. Si–Ru4 = [(Ru4(μ-O)4(μ-OH)2(H2O)4)(SiW10O36)2]10− and P–Co4 = [Co4(H2O)2(PW9O34)2]10−. Images generated from the CIFs available online. 
Several excellent reviews covering POM catalysed photochemical water oxidation and CO2 reduction reactions are reported.56,60–65 However, there is no review on POM catalysed photochemical CO2 reduction coupled with water oxidation to the best of our knowledge. Therefore, this highlight focuses on the recent advancements, advantages, and challenges of POM-based photocatalysts in (i) water oxidation, (ii) CO2 reduction, and (iii) CO2 reduction coupled with water oxidation in a single integrated system, which is a step forward toward achieving the goal of artificial photosynthesis. The present knowledge of CO2RR product selectivity is rather empirical and based on experimental results obtained from a handful of examples and additional future research and theoretical models are required to design photocatalysts with enhanced efficiency and selectivity towards the complete process of mimicking natural photosynthesis. Furthermore, this highlight article outlines some approaches to overcome the challenges in POM-based catalytic applications and increase the overall efficiency of artificial photosynthesis, which needs to be addressed urgently.
Polyoxometalates
General characteristics of polyoxometalates
POMs are a large group of molecular metal oxide anions based on early transition metals (W, Mo, V, Nb, and Ta) in their highest oxidation states (d0 or d1 electronic configuration) connected by oxygen atoms.66–71 POMs are structurally and chemically diverse, with reactivity leading to their use in catalysis,63,72–77 technological applications,78,79 batteries,80,81 macromolecular crystallography,82 electrochemistry,83–85 materials sciences,86 and molecular magnetism.87–90 Among several applications, POM chemistry has enabled breakthroughs in catalysis because of its fascinating properties. POM based catalysts have the following merits over transition metal-complex/metal oxide catalysts: (i) robust structure and structural diversity, (ii) high stability (hydrolytic and thermal), (iii) tuneable solubility, unlike metal oxides, (iv) inherent resistance to oxidative decomposition, (v) the enormous scope of electrostatic and non-covalent interactions, (vi) multiple active sites, (vii) tunable acidity and multi-electron redox properties depending on the counter cations and the transition metals present in the cluster, and (viii) photoexcitation upon UV or visible light irradiation. These emerging properties, especially the reversible redox activity derived from the valence differences in the incorporated transition metals and the constituent elements of the framework, enable POMs to carry out multi-electron catalysis like water oxidation, CO2 reduction, etc.91,92
Photochemistry of polyoxometalates
The intrinsic charge carrier transfer behaviour of POMs is undoubtedly the cornerstone for their diverse applications as photocatalysts. Apart from chemical and electrochemical reactivity, the photoactivity of POMs has been known in the literature for several decades.93–97 Particularly, in the presence of an efficient electron donor such as 2-propanol or benzyl alcohol, molybdenum (Mo) and tungsten (W) based salts with organoammonium counter ions readily undergo photochemical reduction in molecular solvents, resulting in the formation of intensely blue-coloured reduced molybdates or tungstates, the so-called heteropoly blues.98–100 This reactivity can result in substrate oxidation or reduction and be used for a wide range of substrate molecules.
In 2012, Carsten Streb reviewed the POM photoredox chemistry, enabling a better understanding of POM-based photocatalysis.101 Under UV or visible light (200–500 nm), the transition metal centres of POMs turn to their excited state via the ligand-to-metal charge transfer (LMCT) of O → M bands. Upon light irradiation, one of the coupled electrons from the oxygen atom of POMs with opposite spin orientation is promoted from the doubly occupied bonding orbital (HOMO) to an empty, antibonding orbital (LUMO) in the transition metal centres, resulting in an oxo-centred radical in the photo-excited POM cluster (Fig. 3a).102,103 The presence of this oxo-centred radical species can be selectively confirmed through a change in the colour of the solution and UV-vis spectroscopic analysis (Fig. 3b).103 As a consequence, the photoexcited species become highly reactive and act as a better oxidizing and reducing agent than the corresponding ground-state species, which helps the POMs behave as bi-functional photocatalysts. Recently, the Roy group has reported such unique features of POMs, where POMs were used as CO2 reduction and water oxidation catalysts.104 However, as light absorption by POMs usually occurs in the region of λ = 200–500 nm, the attachment of photosensitizers (either covalently attached to POMs or as cationic counterparts, which could be associated with POMs via electrostatic interactions) might be considered as one strategy for accessing visible light absorption.
 Fig. 3  (a) Simplified orbital picture diagram of the ground state and the excited state orbital occupation of POM clusters. Photoexcitation promotes an electron from the HOMO to the LUMO. The excited state of POM cluster species exhibits lower ionization energy (EI) and higher electron affinity (Eea) than the ground state species. Reproduced from ref. 101 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Change in the colour and UV-vis absorption spectra of a solution containing lacunary POM [γ-SiW10O36]8−; (inset) molecular diagram of the lacunary POM [γ-SiW10O36]8−. Reproduced from ref. 103 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2015. 
Polyoxometalates toward artificial photosynthesis
In natural photosynthesis, the oxygen-evolving complex (OEC) is responsible for effectively accelerating the catalytic oxygen evolution from water. The OEC (the Mn4CaO5 cluster, present in photosystem II) consists of three Mn ions and a Ca ion forming a cubane-like structure with four metal ions linked by oxo-bridges, and a fourth Mn ion is linked to cubane by two oxo-bridges (Fig. 2). In the complicated process of natural photosynthesis (Scheme 2), the photosynthetic pigments absorb light and initiate a series of energy transfer and charge separation processes, followed by the oxidation of water to molecular oxygen by the OEC. At the same time, the reducing equivalents are used to reduce CO2 to carbohydrates.
 Scheme 2  Schematic diagram of natural photosynthesis. 
The aim of artificial photosynthesis is similar to natural photosynthesis as far as water oxidation is concerned.105
However, the reducing equivalents will eventually drive the CO2 reduction differently. Therefore, the desired end product could be a range of suitable fuels or carbon-based building blocks for chemicals, such as carbon monoxide, methanol, methane, ethane, formaldehyde, and formic acid (Fig. 1).17
An effective artificial photosynthesis device is based upon: (i) ideal photosensitizers, with broad absorption in the solar spectrum, stable excited states, high charge carrier mobility, and (ii) efficient catalysts (WOC and CO2RC) with high intrinsic activity and stability. Molecular dyes106–108 or an external device such as semiconductors109 and quantum dots110,111 are conventionally considered ideal photosensitizers. However, the latter is arguably more efficient in the conversion efficiency of solar into electrical energy. On the other hand, efficient WOC and CO2RC catalysts must overcome the high reaction energy barriers, lower the overpotential and accelerate the reaction rate. Molecular metal-complex-based catalysts are known to perform subsequent water oxidation and CO2 reduction where separate components (photosensitizer, WOC, and CO2RC) are required to complete the process.
The whole process can be divided into four steps (Scheme 3): light-harvesting or capturing of energy of solar radiation by the photosensitizers (step 1), followed by the charge transfer from the photosensitizers to the catalysts (step 2), which are then used to oxidize water by the WOC liberating protons and electrons (step 3), and subsequently the reduction of carbon dioxide by the CO2RC (step 4). Although metal-complex catalysts can perform photochemical CO2 reduction with water oxidation, the emergence of the properties to perform the whole process by utilizing a single material is challenging. The unique structural and electronic properties of POMs make them a suitable candidate for artificial photosynthesis, where a single POM can act as a photosensitizer, in addition to being the WOC and CO2RC (Scheme 4).
 Scheme 3  Schematic diagram of molecular metal-complex based catalyst systems in subsequent water oxidation and carbon dioxide reduction. 
 Scheme 4  Schematic diagrams of artificial photosynthesis based on POM catalysts, where a single POM can act as a photosensitizer, WOC and CO2RC. 
Polyoxometalate catalysed photochemical water oxidation
To construct an efficient photochemical water oxidation cycle, two components are essential, namely (i) WOC and (ii) photosensitizer.112 Both homogeneous and heterogeneous water oxidation catalysis are reported, and photosensitizers are utilized accordingly along with a POM-based WOC. In homogeneous water oxidation, [Ru(bpy)3]2+ is the most studied photosensitizer, which after absorbing light energy, converts to a photoexcited state followed by an electron transfer to generate [Ru(bpy)3]3+. After that, this RuIII complex oxidizes the POM WOC, which, in turn, oxidizes water to oxygen. The overall mechanistic pathway is shown in Scheme 5a. However, in heterogeneous catalysis, semiconductors or metal–organic frameworks are reported to act as a photosensitizer. For semiconductor-based photosensitizers, a charge-separated state is generated after photoexcitation, providing a thermodynamic driving force for desired chemical reactions (Scheme 5b). In MOF-based POM composites, the photoexcited MOF oxidizes the POM, further oxidizing water (Scheme 5c). The following subsections highlight the homogeneous and heterogeneous water oxidation reactions following these reaction pathways.
 Scheme 5  The plausible reaction mechanism of (a) POM catalyzed homogeneous photochemical water oxidation and heterogeneous photochemical water oxidation by (b) the POM-based composite and (c) the POM@MOF photosystem. 
Homogeneous photochemical water oxidation
By mimicking nature's OEC, several POM-based WOCs were prepared where the all-inorganic oxidative resistance ligands stabilize the cubane or quasi-cubane cores (Fig. 2).113 A breakthrough in the field of photochemical water oxidation research was achieved in 2009 when both the Hill and Bonchio groups reported a tetra-ruthenium POM [(Ru4(μ-O)4(μ-OH)2(H2O)4)(SiW10O36)2]10− (Si–Ru4), which was the first POM based molecular catalyst for photochemical water oxidation.52,53 As reported by the Hill group, Si–Ru4 shows homogeneous photochemical water oxidation in the presence of [Ru(bpy)3]2+ as a photosensitizer, following the usual homogeneous catalytic mechanism (Scheme 5a).52 Meanwhile, the Bonchio group estimated O2 evolution at pH ≈ 0.6 using excess CeIV as an oxidant.53 In contrast, the isostructural POM [RuIV4O5(OH)(H2O)4(PW10O36)2]9− (P–Ru4) shows photochemical water oxidation with TON up to 120 and TOF up to 0.13 s−1 at pH 5.8 in the presence of [Ru(bpy)3]2+ and persulfate.114
Apart from noble metal (ruthenium)-based catalysts, non-noble transition metal-based sandwich POMs are extensively used in homogeneous water oxidation for low cost and high efficiency. A tetra-cobalt POM [Co4(H2O)2(PW9O34)2]10− (P–Co4) was reported as an efficient catalyst for photochemical water oxidation with a high quantum yield of 30% in pH 8.54 Notably, P–Co4 shows ten times more efficiency than Si–Ru4 under the same reaction conditions. Meanwhile, an isostructural vanadium-centred tetra-cobalt POM [Co4(H2O)2(VW9O34)2]10− (V–Co4) shows swift catalytic activity (twice as compared to P–Co4) because of the higher selectivity for water oxidation vs. bpy ligand oxidation.115 The significant role of V is further supported by the first WOC [(VIV5VV)O7(OCH3)12]−, which contains V as addenda atoms in the mixed-valance states.116 Unlike earlier reports, where the POM scaffolds are used to stabilize the catalytically active heteroatoms (Ru, Co, etc.), in this case, the POM framework acts as the catalytically active centre.
Afterward, the Bonchio group reported the first manganese-containing POM [MnIII3MnIVO3(CH3COO)3(SiW9O34)]6− (Si–Mn4) with a mixed-valent MnIII3MnIVO3 cubane core towards photochemical water oxidation at pH ≈ 5.117 The coordination environment helps in stepwise one-electron oxidation of the Mn4 core and to access high-valent Mn states responsible for water oxidation. Similarly, a penta-nickel POM [Ni5(OH)6(OH2)3(Si2W18O66)]12− (Si–Ni5)118 and its iso-structural penta-copper POM [Cu5(OH)4(H2O)2(Si2W18O66)]10− (Si–Cu5) were reported to show efficient photochemical water oxidation with an O2 yield of 12.3%.119 Further studies on similar complexes have confirmed that the catalytic activity is not directly related to the number of metal ions but the structure.
Despite a considerable development in the field of POM based WOCs, not much attention has been paid to Keggin POMs as they do not possess suitable active sites for water oxidation (unless there is any addenda atom substitution by transition metals).120,121 The Song group, in 2013, reported a cobalt-containing Keggin POM [CoIIICoII(H2O)W11O39]7−(CoIIICoIIW11) for the first time, which shows photochemical as well as thermal water oxidation.120 This study demonstrates that the unique structural features of the mixed-valent central and peripheral Co atoms are essential in maintaining both catalytic efficiency and stability.
The number of active catalytic sites and structural motifs of POMs influence the photocatalytic water oxidation activity. In 2014, the Wang group reported a series of cobalt-phosphate molecular POM catalysts [(Co4(OH)3(PO4)4(XW9O34)4]32− (X–Co16, where X = Si, Ge, P, As), with different hetero-atoms in lacunary building blocks.73 The structural analysis of these POMs shows the presence of Co4O4 cubane units, which mimic the [Mn3CaO4] core of the OEC in PS II. The photochemical water oxidation of all POMs in pH 9.0 shows oxygen evolution in the order P–Co16 ≤ Si–Co16 < As–Co16 < Ge–Co16, highlighting the significance of heteroatoms in photochemical water oxidation reactions. Further work in this direction reported three polynuclear nickel POMs [Ni12(OH)9(CO3)3(PO4)(SiW9O34)3]24− (Si–Ni12), [Ni13(H2O)3(OH)9(PO4)4(SiW9O34)3]25− (Si–Ni13), and [Ni25(H2O)2OH)18(CO3)2(PO4)6(SiW9O34)6]50− (Si–Ni25) with Ni3O3 or Ni4O4 quasi-cubane/cubane units, similar to nature's OEC core.122 The photochemical water oxidation exhibits a high TON of 128.2, 147.6, and 204.5 for Si–Ni12, Si–Ni13, and Si–Ni25. The bandgap structure analysis of the compounds shows that the potential difference [ΔE = HOMO(Ru(bpy)3) − HOMO (POM)] between the Ru(bpy)3 photosensitizer and POMs increases from Si–Ni4 to Si–Ni25, which results in increasing order of charge transfer efficiencies between Ru(bpy)3 and POMs, in turn increasing the photocatalytic efficiency respectively. Meanwhile [Ni4(H2O)2(SiW9O34)2]12− (Si–Ni4) does not show any catalytic activity under similar reaction conditions.
An iron-based POM [Fe11(H2O)14(OH)2(W3O10)2(SbW9O33)6]27− (Sb–Fe11) shows exceptional photocatalytic water oxidation activity with a TON of 1815 and TOF of 6.3 s−1.123 Additionally, Sb–Fe11 contains two μ-OH, and fourteen aqua ligands are bonded directly to the FeIII centres, which help O–O formation and subsequent water oxidation to oxygen. Furthermore, Lin and co-workers reported a novel organic–inorganic hybrid mono-capped/bi-capped Keggin POM based on [PMo8VIMo4VO40]7−, which shows a maximum O2 yield of 17% in borate buffer solution (Fig. 4).124
 Fig. 4  Proposed reaction mechanism of organic–inorganic hybrid POM catalyzed photochemical water oxidation, using [Ru(bpy)3]2+ as a photosensitizer. Reproduced from ref. 124 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Recently, Xu and co-workers reported a macro wheel cluster (Co24Mo24) having twenty-four MoV atoms and twenty-four CoII ions, representing a giant nuclear MoV–Co–phosphate cluster.125 The photochemical water oxidation of Co24Mo24 shows WOC using Na2S2O8 as the oxidant without the high-cost [Ru(bpy)3]2+ photosensitizer.
Heterogeneous photochemical water oxidation
Beyond the homogeneous POM WOC, some approaches are adopted to fabricate heterogeneous photosystems for recyclable utilization. In such cases, POMs are immobilized onto different supports such as carbon nanodots (CDs), g-C3N4, graphene, carbon nanotubes, MOFs, etc.126–128 Moving in this direction, in 2018, Kim and co-workers reported a hybrid colloidal composite of CDs and a POM, which is very efficient for photochemical water oxidation.129 Alginate-based CDs were used as a photosensitizer having excellent electron and hole donating ability in the presence of light, and P–Co4 was used as the WOC. The electrostatic interaction between the POM and CDs with a plausible reaction mechanism of CD/P–Co4 catalysed photochemical water oxidation is shown in Fig. 5. The CD/P–Co4 hybrid composite provides a suitable bandgap and band edge position required for an effective water oxidation reaction. Using BiVO4 as a light-harvesting material and Sb–Fe11 as a cocatalyst, a robust semiconductor photocatalytic WO system with a quantum efficiency of 25.3% was constructed.130
 Fig. 5  Electrostatic interaction of a POM with carbon nanodots (CDs) and their mechanistic illustration for photoinduced water oxidation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 129. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 
POMs can also be incorporated into MOF cavities to construct POM@MOF composites as a heterogeneous photocatalyst for photochemical water oxidation, where MOFs act as a light harvester.61 In 2019, the immobilization of P–Co4 in the pores of zirconium porphyrinic MOF-545 was reported to form a P–Co4@MOF-545 composite.131 The superior performance of this photocatalytic system was attributed to (i) the increased oxidization power of the MOF by the porphyrin ligand and (ii) the stabilization of the active site by the confinement of the POM inside the pore of MOF-545. Improved efficiency was achieved using thin films of P–Co4 over a TiO2 support, which overcame the problem of the random orientation of active sites and hindrance of light penetration.132 An increase in the absorption capacity and charge separation at the POM@MOF junction by transferring electrons from the MOF to the POM has been attributed to the increased efficiency. Recent developments towards the encapsulation of POMs inside covalent organic frameworks (COFs) also open up a new platform for the heterogenization of POMs and their potential use in catalytic applications, including photochemical water oxidation.133,134
Polyoxometalate catalysed photochemical CO2 reduction
The key challenge in the photochemical CO2 reduction process is the design of robust photocatalysts absorbing visible light, CO2 activation, and the electron coupled proton transferability to facilitate the photoreduction process.50,135,136 Owing to the high thermodynamic stability associated with the strong bond energy of CO (750 kJ mol−1) in CO2 and the linear structure with a net dipole moment of zero, there is a limited scope for electron transfer and chemical transformations to occur.137 In addition, CO2 possesses a high absorption tolerance in the 200–900 nm wavelength range. The activation includes one-electron transfer generating the active CO2˙− species, eventually transforming the CO2 geometry from linear to bent. However, further reduction involves multiple electrons and corresponding protons, reflecting the multicomponent steps observed in the natural photosynthesis process (Scheme 6a).138,139 Therefore, the desirable photocatalysts should have certain features, such as (i) a suitable bandgap (1.75 to 3.0 eV) for absorbing photons, (ii) an efficient separation and transport of photogenerated electron–hole pairs, and (iii) plenty of adsorption and reaction sites for mediating photocatalytic reactions.140–142
 Scheme 6  (a) Relative energy diagram of different CO2 reduction products indicating the number of electrons and protons required and range of the charge transfer reaction timescale. The range of charge transfer reactions includes light absorption (blue), charge migration (brown), charge transfer and reaction kinetics (green), and charge recombination (red). (b) Simplified Fischer–Tropsch CO insertion chain growth mechanism, compared to methanation. 
The fast and multi-electron transfer behaviour of POMs can relieve the quick recombination process of photogenerated e− and h+ pairs, which is believed to be a fatal barrier to high-performance photocatalytic reactions.38 Moreover, reduced POMs can also act as electron reservoirs in multi-electron transfers for the CO2 photoreduction process.143 However the solubility of traditional POM clusters has been a limiting factor for catalytic durability and, thus, a primary concern. Additionally, as per our knowledge, high dimensional POMs usually show an extended solar spectrum absorption range compared the POM monomers investigated in several photocatalytic reactions.144 However, the efficient source of protons and electrons to reduce CO2 to valuable carbon-based chemical feedstock has been a substantial challenge in renewable energy research.145 Organic amines (such as Et3N or (EtO)3N) are frequently used as hydrogen (proton and electron) donors in catalytic CO2 reduction.146 Besides, strong nucleophilic amines can form a stable zwitterionic complex with CO2, facilitating the photoreaction.
Product selectivity toward the photocatalytic CO2RR
One of the main limitations of the photocatalytic CO2RR is the lack of product selectivity, particularly high value added chemicals.147–149 The reduction steps (breaking of CO bonds and formation of C–H bonds) involve several radical intermediates, which tend to recombine resulting in a variety of products, namely CO, HCHO, CH4, CH3OH (C1 products), C2H5OH, and higher hydrocarbons (Cn products, n ≥ 2) depending on specific reaction conditions (Scheme 7).138 For example, at acidic pH, C2/C3 pathways are kinetically blocked, while at basic pH, the dimerization of *CO intermediates lead to Cn products, kinetically suppressing the C1 pathways.150 Photocatalytic CO2 reduction in the gas phase generally leads to CH4 or CO as the major product, while HCOOH (or HCOO−) is commonly observed in the liquid phase. Although the glyoxal pathway for CH4 formation (Scheme 7) involves several C2 compounds in a complex sequence of both oxidation and reduction steps, it is difficult to selectively control which reaction pathway is in effect.151 Since multiple electron coupled proton transfer (MECPT) reactions and C–C coupling are considered as the elementary steps towards the formation of CO2 reduction products (Scheme 6a), it appears that systems favouring MECPT can lead to high value added C2+ products. However, the consumption of charge carriers through the fast e−/h+ recombination process generates thermal energy limiting the transfer of multiple electrons and is detrimental to the photocatalytic efficiency, driving the product selectivity toward C1 products. In view of the higher energy density (higher than 8e− and 8H+) required for selective and efficient production of C2+ products, the electrocatalytic CO2RR is more favourable, although the search for superior electrocatalysts with excellent electrochemical activity stands as a great challenge.
 Scheme 7  Proposed reaction pathways of CO2 reduction to CO, CH4 and CH3OH involving several intermediate states. 
The scarcity of photoassisted processes generating C2+ hydrocarbons152 contrasts with the conventional Fischer–Tropsch synthesis (FTS), known for generating liquid hydrocarbon fuels.153 However, the conventional FTS includes harsh reaction conditions with CO2 efficiency from 25% to 50%, which encourages the development of low-energy technologies to make the CO2RR more sustainable.154 In a nutshell, the hydrogenation of CO2 to produce hydrocarbons (and oxygenated compounds) can be divided into two categories: (i) methanol-mediated and (ii) non methanol-mediated.155,156 The first approach involves the reaction of CO2 and H2 to produce methanol, which is subsequently transformed into other hydrocarbons through the methanol reforming process. On the other hand, the second approach involves two steps: (a) the reverse water–gas-shift (RWGS) reaction (CO2 + H2 → CO + H2O) and (b) FTS. In addition, the complete hydrogenation of CO2 to produce CH4 (CO2 + 4H2 → CH4 + 2H2O) is also an important catalytic pathway for CO2 capture and storage,157 as the non-oxidative coupling of methane provides a highly desirable way to generate ethane and ethylene, otherwise thermodynamically unfavourable.158
To date, very few reports actually focused on the photochemical FTS process for generating C2+ products, and the catalysts mainly are based on metal oxides deposited on semiconductor surfaces.159 Similarly, selectivity toward a single product from the mixture of hydrocarbons remains a substantial issue. However, POM photocatalysed Cn products are yet to be achieved. The following section divides the POM catalysed CO2 conversion reactions into subgroups based on the photoreaction's end product (CO, CH4, and HCOOH).

CO2 to CO. 
Neumann's group reported the photoreduction of CO2 to CO using a Keggin POM [(C6H13)4N}5[RuIII(H2O)SiW11O39], proposing that excitation at the ligand to metal charge transfer (LMCT) band in the POM initiates the photoreduction.160 It has been concluded that CO2 is coordinated preferably in a side-on manner to the Ru active site of the POM through Ru–O bond formation. Employing NMe3 as a sacrificial electron donor results in the formation of an O2C–NMe3 zwitterion, which causes the bending of CO2 and stabilizes the sp2 hybridization. Similarly, excitation at the LMCT band of a metal–organic–POM hybrid complex constituted of two [PW12O40]3− units and one ReI(L)(CO)3(CH3CN) (L = 15-crown-5-phenanthroline) unit selectively photo-reduces CO2 to CO when H2 replaced the sacrificial electron donor (amine).4 In the presence of Pt/C, the POM [PW12O40]3− can oxidize H2 to generate two H+/e− equivalents, which in turn reduce CO2 to CO. Detailed theoretical studies161 by the Poblet group demonstrate that after light irradiation, one e− transfers from the photo-excited POM moiety to the ReI centre, which facilitates Re–C bond formation followed by dehydration affording CO selectively (Scheme 8). This mechanistic insight illustrates that the POM acts as a photosensitizer, electron reservoir, and electron donor.
 Scheme 8  Proposed reaction mechanism of photochemical CO2 to CO reduction by a ReI–POM hybrid complex. 
The low abundance of noble metal catalysts made the use of semiconductor catalysts based on naturally abundant elements like C, H, or N an efficient way to cut down the material cost.162 Specifically visible light-responsive photocatalysts like graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) have grabbed the attention because of their appealing bandgap structure and high physicochemical stability.163 However, the fast recombination of photoinduced electrons and holes inhibits the CO2 photoreduction efficiency of pure g-C3N4. Fabricating a semiconductor heterojunction composite (P–Co4@g-C3N4) using the tetra-cobalt POM (P–Co4) with g-C3N4 overcomes this problem with high selectivity towards CO production (94%) by increasing surface catalytic activity (Fig. 6).126
 Fig. 6  P–Co4 POM modified g-C3N4 for the photochemical CO2 reduction reaction. Reprinted with permission from ref. 126. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
A hybrid photocatalyst Au@NENU-10, composed of Au nanoparticles (Au-NPs), a Ti-substituted Keggin POM [PTi2W10O40]7− (PTi2), and a Cu based MOF (HKUST-1), has achieved further advancement in this direction for facile CO2 reduction to CO in a one-pot method.164 During the reaction, PTi2 acts as the electron and proton reservoir, and the active centre is encaged within HKUST-1 to boost CO2 reduction, along with the Au-NPs harvesting visible light. The mechanistic pathway of the photoreduction shows that the Au-NPs adsorb water and PTi2 adsorbs CO2 molecules, respectively (Scheme 9). Under visible light irradiation (λ > 420 nm), Au-NPs generate electrons and holes, where the holes oxidize H2O molecules to form 2e− and 2H+, which eventually reduce CO2 to CO. Moreover, the strong protonation ability of PTi2 weakens the H+ dissociation ability, improving the selectivity of CO formation more than H2. The higher reduction potential of CO2/CO (−0.52 V) vs. SHE at pH = 7 than that of H+/H2 (−0.41 V) or CO2/CH4 (−0.24 V) makes the reduction more selective towards CO formation.
 Scheme 9  Photochemical reduction of CO2 to CO by a hybrid photocatalyst Au@NENU-10. 
The high nuclear-mixed metal-oxo POM [{Co4(OH)3(VO4)}4(SiW9O34)4]32− shows excellent photocatalytic activation of CO2 to CO with a high selectivity of 99.6%, using [Ru(phen)3]3+ as the photosensitizer and triethanolamine (TEOA) as the sacrificial electron donor.165 Photoluminescence studies revealed that the visible light (λ = 450 nm) excitation of the Ru-photosensitizer is followed by an efficient electron transfer to the POMs to reduce CO2.
The coupling of electrons and protons generated during the dehydrogenation of hydrocarbons seems to be an advantageous route to explore CO2 reduction. A three-component assembly (g-C3N4/PW12/[Re]) was constructed, including a bimetallic Re-based CO2 photoreduction catalyst Re2(bipyNNH2bipy)(CO)6Cl2, bipy = 2,2′-bipyridine, g-C3N4 as a blue light absorber, and Keggin POM PW12O403− (PW12) as an electron acceptor to improve hole–electron charge separation.166 The Z-scheme diagram for the electron transfer phenomenon in the reaction is shown in Scheme 10. Detailed mechanistic investigations show that this process is driven by the relative energy differences of the LUMO levels of the g-C3N4 and POM.167 Upon red light irradiation, the reduced POM transfers two electrons to the Re catalyst. The activated catalyst then reduces CO2 to CO. At the same time, the proton-rich POM transfers two protons to generate the reduction co-product H2O. In the overall process, the POM acts as an electron/proton switch, promotes the dehydrogenation of the hydrocarbon (cyclohexane or cyclohexadiene) by increasing the electron/hole separation, and facilitates the transfer of protons and electrons to the Re catalyst.
 Scheme 10  Z-scheme diagram for three-component assembly g-CN/PW12/[Re]. Reproduced from ref. 166 with permission from Wiley-VCH. Copyright 2020. 


CO2 to CH4. 
The photocatalytic reduction of CO2 to CH4 is a promising but challenging process due to the eight electron transfer to the substrate. The first report of such photoreduction in an aqueous medium includes two heterogeneous catalysts, NENU-605 and NENU-606, containing host POM structures constructed with strong reductive [P4MoV6] units, homo/hetero-transition metal ions (MnII/CoIIMnII) and alkali metal ions (K+ and Na+).168 The [P4MoV6] cluster acts as a multi-electron donor in the photocatalytic reaction, where the transition metal ions function as catalytically active sites for adsorbing and activating CO2 molecules. The higher selectivity towards CH4 comes from the better separation efficiency of photoinduced electron–hole pairs and the faster interfacial charge transfer process resulting from the different MnII/CoII active sites. The detailed mechanistic pathway for the photoreduction reaction is presented in Scheme 11.
 Scheme 11  Proposed mechanism of photocatalytic CO2 reduction to CH4 using NENU-605 and NENU-606. 
POM grafted metalloporphyrin coordination frameworks (POM-CFs) constructed with a reductive Zn-ε-Keggin POM [PMoV8MoVI4O40Zn4] and photosensitive tetrakis-(4-carboxy phenyl)porphyrin (H2TCCP) linkers showed high selectivity towards CH4 formation (Scheme 12).169 Notably, the introduction of POM clusters with eight MoV can donate eight electrons, facilitating high photochemical selectivity for CH4 formation. The photo-excited electrons easily flow to the POM by efficient inter-coupling between the reductive Zn-ε-Keggin unit and TCCP linker. A recent report by Ryu and co-workers demonstrated that a Zn-based POM [Zn4(PW9O34)2]10− (P–Zn4) selectively catalyses the production of CH4 in the presence of an Ir-based photosensitizer.170 Photophysical and computational analyses elucidate that the selective photoreduction is attributed to (i) exceptionally fast transfer of photogenerated electrons from the photosensitizer to P–Zn4 through the strong molecular interactions between them and (ii) effective transfer of the electrons from P–Zn4 to the *CO intermediates due to the significant overlap of the d-orbital of Zn and the p-orbital of C in *CO.
 Scheme 12  Proposed reaction mechanism of CO2 reduction over POM grafted metalloporphyrin coordination frameworks under visible light irradiation. 


CO2 to HCOOH. 
The construction of a heterogeneous composite using POMs with linkers to construct POM-based metal–organic frameworks (POMOFs) can not only retain the advantageous electronic properties of the POM but also keep the composite stable in an aqueous solution.171 The hydrophobic POMOF NNU-29 containing a strongly reducible [Zn4PMo8VMo4VI] unit shows strong chemical stability. Additionally, the sensitive photocurrent response of NNU-29 enables a high separation efficiency of photoinduced electron–hole pairs to perform efficient heterogeneous photocatalytic conversion of CO2 to HCOOH in water, reducing the competitive H2 production reaction.172
In the latest study, the co-immobilization of PW12 and an Rh catalyst [Cp*Rh(bpydc)Cl]+ in the UiO MOF (PW12, Cp*Rh@UiO-67) demonstrated high photocatalytic activity for CO2 reduction to formate.173 The performance of this composite was doubled compared to the Rh catalyst. However, PW12 has minimal effect on the electronic structure of the composite but acts as a proton relay.
The first report of isolated and soluble polyoxotitanium clusters applied in the CO2 reduction reaction has been reported by Lan and co-workers.174 TiIV-based clusters [Ti16(OH)4O20(PO4)(OiPr)16] (PTi16, HOiPr = isopropanol) and [Ti12O15(PO4)(iPrPO4)3(OiPr)12](CHA)3(H2O) (PTi12, CHA = cyclohexylammonium) can efficiently participate in the photocatalytic reduction of CO2 in CH3CN medium using TEOA as an electron donor. HCOOH is the only liquid product during this process, while other gaseous products, including H2, CO, and CH4, are also observed. The plausible mechanism concludes that the TiIV in the Ti-oxo cluster was reduced to TiIII by receiving photoexcited electrons transferred from O2− while the corresponding photogenerated holes are quenched by TEOA (Scheme 13).
 Scheme 13  Schematic diagram of photocatalytic reduction of CO2 to HCOOH by the Ti polyoxo cluster. Reproduced from ref. 174 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2019. 
Modifying the ligands in the photocatalyst can effectively change the bandgap of the resultant catalysts, regulating the light absorption range.175 The attachment of 1,1-ferrocene dicarboxylic acid (fcdc) in the polyoxo-titanium cluster Ti6 and Ti8 expands the light absorption range to the visible region and triggers the ability to quickly transfer the electrons between Ti-oxo nucleus and fcdc ligands to conduct a visible photochemical photocatalytic CO2 reduction reaction in water.176
A highly stable and eco-friendly catalyst system for CO2 reduction has been synthesized from Ti and calix[8] arene (C8A).177 The water-soluble catalysts derived from [Ti4O2(C8A)(OiPr)4(HOiPr)] (Ti4–C8A, HOiPr = isopropanol) and [Ti7O4(C8A)(CH3O)12] (Ti7–C8A) can reduce CO2 to HCOOH with high selectivity (96% and 99.5%, respectively) (Scheme 14). Most importantly, their light absorption ranges are extended to the visible light region through strong charge transfer between the titanium-oxo core and the hydroxyl groups of the C8A ligand.
 Scheme 14  Proposed photocatalytic reaction mechanism of HCOOH formation by calix[8]arene constructed polyoxotitanium clusters. 

Polyoxometalate catalysed photochemical CO2 reduction coupled with water oxidation
To immaculately imitate the natural photosynthesis process in the laboratory, the most viable route is to couple the CO2 reduction process with water oxidation in the presence of an efficient photocatalyst, which absorbs in the visible range of the light spectrum. This strategy is somewhat helpful, as the demand for any additional sacrificial electron donor and the proton source in the reaction medium is diminished (Scheme 15).49,178 However, connecting these two half-cell reactions in a single assembly is exceptionally challenging, not only because of the high energy requirements or different reaction conditions but also because of the low selectivity of the reduction products. In addition, the HER, which occurs more easily, decreases the CO2 reduction rate, ultimately affecting the reduction efficiency.179 Besides, reoxidation of the CO2 reduction product by the water oxidation catalyst and the quenching of the photoexcited state by the evolved oxygen remain a substantial challenge, along with selectivity and quantum yield.180–184
 Scheme 15  Schematic diagram of photocatalytic CO2 reduction coupled with the water oxidation process. Reproduced from ref. 139 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2017. 
Despite the hurdles associated with photochemical CO2 reduction in water, POMs are used as an efficient catalyst because of their fast multi-electron transfer properties. Additionally, they can relieve the quick recombination process of photogenerated electron and hole pairs, a fatal barrier for high-performance photocatalytic reactions. Extensive studies on this concept have been performed by Roy and co-workers using the self-aggregated giant assemblies of POMs, termed softoxometalates (SOM).59 The recent developments in this direction so far are summarized in Table 1. A breakthrough in this research field was achieved in 2016 using a vesicle-like SOM, which can reduce CO2 to HCHO/HCOOH without any external photosensitizer (Scheme 16).185 Three active catalysts were reported, based on (Mo154)1165 (prepared by dispersion of Mo154 in water), a blackberry type SOM (Mn6P3W24)931 (prepared by the dispersion of [Mn6P3W24O94(H2O)2]17− in water), and a new composite material of Mo132 grafted on reduced graphene oxide ({Mo132}1064@RGO), increasing the effective surface area of the catalysts.
Table 1 Summary of photochemical CO2 reduction with water oxidation by polyoxometalate/softoxometalate based catalystsa




Entry
Catalyst
Solvent
Products
TON
TOF
Ref





a TON refers to the turnover number and TOF refers to the turnover frequency of the catalysts.





1
(Mo154)1165 (where [Mo154O462H14(H2O)70]14− ≡ Mo154)
H2O
HCOOH, HCHO
778
377 s−1

185



(Mn6P3W24) (where [Mn6P3W24O94(H2O)2]17− ≡ Mn6P3W24)
HCOOH
270
56 s−1


(Mo132)1064@rGO (where [Mo132O372(CH3COO)30(H2O)72]42− ≡ Mo132, rGO = reduced graphene oxide)
HCOOH, HCHO
1366
610 s−1


2
{[K6.5Cu(OH)8.5(H2O)7.5]0.5[K3PW12O40]}
H2O
HCOOH
613
47.15 h−1

186



3
(NH4)3[MoV9O28] ≡ {MoV9} {MoV9}n (n = 1332–3600)
H2O
HCOOH
3.19 × 105
—

187



4
Mo7/PANI/TiO2 SOM composite (PANI = polyaniline)
H2O
HCOOH
782
234 h−1

188



5
[H16{Mo6O21(H2O)6}8{–Mo6O21(H2O)3(SO4)}32{Mo2O3(H2O)2}16{Mo2O(t)O(br)3(SO4)}8{–Mo2O(t)4O(br)(SO4)}8{MoO(H2O)}64]48− ≡ Mo368
H2O
HCOOH
27666
4611 h−1

189



6
[Mo72VIMo62VO372(CH3COOH)30(H2O)72]42− ≡ Mo132
H2O
HCOOH
—
12.5 h−1

192



7
[{(CH3)NH2}4{(MoV2O4)6(μ2-OH)10(μ2-O)2(μ3-OH)2(μ3-O)2(MoVIO3H)4}]0.94[{(MoV2O4)6(μ2-OH)10(μ2-O)2(MoVIO3H)4}{MoVI(μ3-O)4}]0.06 ≡ Mo16
H2O
HCOOH, HCHO
546
—

193



8
[MoVI126MoV28O462H14(H2O)70]0.5[MoVI124MoV28O457H14(H2O)68]0.515− ≡ Mo154
H2O
HCOOH
—
—

194





 Scheme 16  POM catalyzed photochemical CO2 reduction with concomitant water oxidation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 186. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
In continuation, {[K6.5Cu(OH)8.5(H2O)7.5]0.5[K3PW12O40]} (Cu-PW12) was reported as a stable and efficient catalyst without any photosensitizer for the photochemical CO2 reduction reaction in water (Scheme 16).186 It was deduced that after the photoexcitation of the POM, the released electrons from the water oxidation reduce CO2 to formic acid selectively, which is closest to the conduction band (−1.00 V vs. NHE).
The successive work followed the same strategy using the POM clusters with excellent selectivity towards HCOOH.187–189 It should be noted that all of these clusters contain MoV and MoVI atoms, which results in the photoexcited electron–hole pairs diminishing the importance of any additional photosensitizers. Additionally, the close positions of the conduction bands of the photoexcited POMs to the CO2/HCOOH reduction couple help to obtain HCOOH selectively over other more reduced products like HCHO or CO.
The employment of a Janus catalyst, i.e., a dual functional catalyst190,191 based on Mo132 clusters, reduces CO2 to HCOOH, and the consecutive water oxidation is coupled with hydration of acetylenic bonds (phenylacetylene) to synthesize a ketone (acetophenone).192 The mixed valent MoV/MoVI centres act as the redox centres of the catalyst, and such abundance of the mixed-valent centres (MoV/MoVI = 0.83) accounts for the catalyst's efficiency. Surprisingly, an increase in the number of such reduced metal centres (MoV/MoVI = 3) results in the generation of more reduced products like HCHO.193
The most recent development in this direction has been achieved using a charge-stabilized dispersion of Mo154 POM as a hollow spherical entity (Scheme 17).194 The unique shape of the catalyst enables the catalytically produced HCOOH to be available in two forms: (i) in the external phase, accessible to the bulk reaction phase, and (ii) embedded inside the cavity. The easily accessible HCOOH is converted to benzyl formate in the external phase by benzyl alcohol. Changing the pH releases the internal HCOOH, which reacts with ethanol to produce ethyl formate. This unique strategy comprehends the compartmentalization strategy to achieve particular products from a single reaction component.
 Scheme 17  Plausible reaction pathway of photocatalytic CO2 reduction coupled with water oxidation by wheel-shaped POM Mo154 in the presence of [Ru(bpy)2]2+ (PS). The catalytically produced HCOOH is embedded inside the cavity, which converts to ethyl formate in the presence of ethanol (red arrow). HCOOH present in the bulk solution is converted to benzyl formate in the presence of benzyl alcohol (blue arrow). 
A closer outlook on the SOM/POMs reveals that several factors influence the overall surface energy and reactivity. As this field is still very young, there is a vast scope to explore POM-based materials, as they can undergo different and continuous pattern formation caused by controlled nucleation on any surface; thus, their properties can be tuned.
Outlook and conclusion
The critical importance of an artificial photosynthesis system relies on scalability because of the requirement for the impact on fuel consumption. Moreover, designing an efficient catalyst that works under varying reaction conditions employing sustainable resources like solar energy is extremely necessary. Based on their unique physical properties, POM photocatalysts present outstanding advantages for water oxidation or CO2 reduction, particularly in improved durability and, in some cases, practical applications. However, employing these two systems in a single integrated system or “to kill two birds with one stone” remains a substantial challenge.
Firstly, the exploration of a more active catalyst that can efficiently retard the charge (h+ and e−) recombination and capture the broad solar spectrum, preferably in the visible region, is paramount. Bandgap engineering of POMs via lowering of the HOMO and activation of the LUMO by introducing various metal ions or p-block elements into vacant sites of POMs can provide a simple route to improve activity. Alternatively, POM-based-MOFs, with modified POM units directly connected with organic ligands or POM anions as pillars, can provide the simultaneous effect of POMs and MOFs: a gigantic size providing a higher active surface area and a tunable optical absorption range provided by the ligands. Low bandgap semiconductors can also impart better light-harvesting properties. The encapsulation of POMs inside scaffolds of highly stable covalent organic frameworks (COFs) can open up new opportunities for the heterogenization of POMs. The luminescent properties of COFs would also allow them to be utilized as potential photosensitizers for photochemical water splitting reactions, which is an entirely unexplored area. Hybrid zwitterionic COFs could also be used, where POMs present as the counter anions, possibly embedded inside the pores of the COFs, can act as catalytically active sites, whereas the luminescent COFs can serve the purpose of harvesting light in the visible region, increasing the sustainability and the overall efficiency of the catalytic process.
The adsorption of CO2 and H2O over photocatalysts can affect the activity and selectivity of the process. Usually, high surface area and porous materials increase the density of the active sites available for the chemical binding and activation of CO2. Advanced synthetic methods in terms of facet/surface engineering and porous construction can maximize the charge carrier lifetimes and consequent electron transfer to CO2 to integrate the catalytic efficiency. Understanding the catalytic cycle and nature of the surface sites on photocatalysts via exploring the atomic structure is vital since these considerations influence the ongoing fundamental research fields.
Last but not least, combining the CO2RR and WOR in a single integrated system remains a considerable challenge till now. Charge-separated state quenching by the solvent water and evolved oxygen followed by the possibility of O2 reduction by CO2 reduction catalysts makes this strategy arduous for scientific and technological advancement. It is thus commendable to select a catalyst that has the potential to carry out desired reactions selectively or use a composite of two materials, where the photogenerated electrons can be transferred preferentially to one material and the holes (h+) to the other, reducing the chance of charge recombination. Because the CO2RR is a multi-electron process, several products can be generated in the solution and gaseous phase depending on the electrons and protons. These products cannot be separated using standard techniques. Thus, employing a successive reaction, preferably by organic transformations, fixes the product of the CO2RR or WOR, thereby shifting the equilibrium in the forward direction and enabling a stoichiometric reaction. Additionally, the production of C2+ hydrocarbons by light driven CO2 hydrogenation is still extremely challenging. The integration of the reverse water–gas-shift reaction and Fischer–Tropsch process (CO2 + H2 → CO + H2O and then CO + H2 → hydrocarbons) or a methanol-mediated process (CO + 3H2 → CH3OH + H2O and then CH3OH → hydrocarbons) might be advantageous toward high value-added liquid chemical fuels.
In general, photocatalytic CO2 reduction with water oxidation serves as a win–win situation, as it can provide a package solution to the current global warming and energy problems. Finally, a deeper understanding of the photocatalytic CO2 conversion reaction is necessary for optimizing the reaction conditions, to narrow the gap between today's knowledge and performance requirements for industry. A combination of experimental and theoretical results from fundamental studies and computer simulations should be preferred, as it gives a proper understanding of the sustainable reaction pathway. However, excited state DFT calculations, which are highly relevant to photocatalytic reactions, remain in their infancy, but are highly necessary to provide critical information for understanding the reaction mechanisms. Although research in this direction is one of the hot topics nowadays, obtaining an ideal system is far from over. Thus, developing a system with high cyclability, performance, efficiency, and broad spectral response under solar irradiation has critical significance both in theory and practice.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
AP and SK thank CSIR, India, and UGC, India, respectively, for their SRF fellowships. SDA thanks SERB, India (Project No. SERB/CRG/2018/00072), for the fellowship. S. Konar acknowledges SERB (Project No. SERB/CRG/2018/00072), BRNS, India (Project No. 58/14/08/2021-BRNS/37101) and IISER Bhopal for the financial support.
Notes and references
J. Marshall, Nature, 2014, 510, 22–24 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhang and L. Sun, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 2216–2264 RSC .
M. D. Symes, R. J. Cogdell and L. Cronin, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A, 2013, 371, 20110411 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Ettedgui, Y. Diskin-Posner, L. Weiner and R. Neumann, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 188–190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Najafpour, G. Renger, M. Hołyńska, A. N. Moghaddam, E.-M. Aro, R. Carpentier, H. Nishihara, J. J. Eaton-Rye, J.-R. Shen and S. I. Allakhverdiev, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 2886–2936 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. K. Dogutan and D. G. Nocera, Acc. Chem. Res., 2019, 52, 3143–3148 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. G. Nocera, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 616–619 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Faunce, S. Styring, M. R. Wasielewski, G. W. Brudvig, A. W. Rutherford, J. Messinger, A. F. Lee, C. L. Hill, H. deGroot, M. Fontecave, D. R. MacFarlane, B. Hankamer, D. G. Nocera, D. M. Tiede, H. Dau, W. Hillier, L. Wang and R. Amal, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1074–1076 RSC .
K. Hurst James, Science, 2010, 328, 315–316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Kim, E. Edri and H. Frei, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 1634–1645 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Oh and X. Hu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2253–2261 RSC .
L. Zhang, D. Zhu, G. M. Nathanson and R. J. Hamers, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 9746–9750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Izumi, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2013, 257, 171–186 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chang, T. Wang and J. Gong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2177–2196 RSC .
R. Kuriki, H. Matsunaga, T. Nakashima, K. Wada, A. Yamakata, O. Ishitani and K. Maeda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 5159–5170 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Takeda, K. Ohashi, A. Sekine and O. Ishitani, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 4354–4357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, S. Inagaki and J. Gong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 14924–14950 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, H. Suzuki, J. Xie, O. Tomita, D. J. Martin, M. Higashi, D. Kong, R. Abe and J. Tang, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 5201–5241 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Kärkäs, O. Verho, E. V. Johnston and B. Åkermark, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11863–12001 CrossRef PubMed .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446–6473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, D. Wang, H. Han and C. Li, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1900–1909 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, S. Shen, L. Guo and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6503–6570 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. E. Osterloh, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2294–2320 RSC .
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253–278 RSC .
Y. Park, K. J. McDonald and K.-S. Choi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2321–2337 RSC .
Y. Tachibana, L. Vayssieres and J. R. Durrant, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 511–518 CrossRef CAS .
L. Qin, R. Wang, X. Xin, M. Zhang, T. Liu, H. Lv and G.-Y. Yang, Appl. Catal. B Environ., 2022, 312, 121386 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jiao, Y. Dong, X. Xin, L. Qin and H. Lv, Appl. Catal. B Environ., 2021, 291, 120091 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, X. Xin, Y. Feng, J. Zhang, H. Lv and G.-Y. Yang, Appl. Catal. B Environ., 2022, 303, 120893 CrossRef CAS .

          D. Philo, H. El-Hosainy, S. Luo, H. Huang, F. Ichihara and J. Ye, in System-Materials Nanoarchitectonics, Springer,  2022, pp. 233–263 Search PubMed .
M. D. Karkas, O. Verho, E. V. Johnston and B. r. Åkermark, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11863–12001 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Berardi, S. Drouet, L. Francàs, C. Gimbert-Suriñach, M. Guttentag, C. Richmond, T. Stoll and A. Llobet, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7501–7519 RSC .
V.-H. Nguyen, P. Singh, A. Sudhaik, P. Raizada, Q. Van Le and E. T. M. Helmy, Mater. Lett., 2022, 131781 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, H. Li, J. Zhang, H. Lv and G.-Y. Yang, Chin. J. Catal., 2021, 42, 855–871 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kim, K. H. Kim, C. Oh, K. Zhang and J. H. Park, Carbon Energy, 2022, 4, 21–44 CrossRef CAS .
J. Albero, Y. Peng and H. García, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 5734–5749 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fu, K. Jiang, X. Qiu, J. Yu and M. Liu, Mater. Today, 2020, 32, 222–243 CrossRef CAS .
W. Tu, Y. Zhou and Z. Zou, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4607–4626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, K. P. Rakesh, L. Ravindar and H.-L. Qin, Green Chem., 2018, 20, 4790–4833 RSC .
T. Hisatomi, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7520–7535 RSC .
H. Tada, T. Mitsui, T. Kiyonaga, T. Akita and K. Tanaka, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 782–786 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zhang, J. Zhang and J. Gong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 4395–4422 RSC .
M. Z. Rahman, C. W. Kwong, K. Davey and S. Z. Qiao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 709–728 RSC .
R. K. Yadav, J.-O. Baeg, G. H. Oh, N.-J. Park, K.-j. Kong, J. Kim, D. W. Hwang and S. K. Biswas, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 11455–11461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Magnuson, M. Anderlund, O. Johansson, P. Lindblad, R. Lomoth, T. Polivka, S. Ott, K. Stensjö, S. Styring, V. Sundström and L. Hammarström, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1899–1909 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. H. Proppe, Y. C. Li, A. Aspuru-Guzik, C. P. Berlinguette, C. J. Chang, R. Cogdell, A. G. Doyle, J. Flick, N. M. Gabor, R. van Grondelle, S. Hammes-Schiffer, S. A. Jaffer, S. O. Kelley, M. Leclerc, K. Leo, T. E. Mallouk, P. Narang, G. S. Schlau-Cohen, G. D. Scholes, A. Vojvodic, V. W.-W. Yam, J. Y. Yang and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2020, 5, 828–846 CrossRef CAS .
D. L. Ashford, M. K. Gish, A. K. Vannucci, M. K. Brennaman, J. L. Templeton, J. M. Papanikolas and T. J. Meyer, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 13006–13049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Concepcion, J. W. Jurss, M. K. Brennaman, P. G. Hoertz, A. O. T. Patrocinio, N. Y. Murakami Iha, J. L. Templeton and T. J. Meyer, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1954–1965 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Kim, B. A. McClure, E. Edri and H. Frei, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 3221–3243 RSC .
X. Wang, F. Wang, Y. Sang and H. Liu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700473 CrossRef .
N. I. Gumerova and A. Rompel, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2018, 2, 0112 CrossRef CAS .
Y. V. Geletii, B. Botar, P. Kögerler, D. A. Hillesheim, D. G. Musaev and C. L. Hill, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 3896–3899 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Sartorel, M. Carraro, G. Scorrano, R. D. Zorzi, S. Geremia, N. D. McDaniel, S. Bernhard and M. Bonchio, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5006–5007 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Huang, Z. Luo, Y. V. Geletii, J. W. Vickers, Q. Yin, D. Wu, Y. Hou, Y. Ding, J. Song, D. G. Musaev, C. L. Hill and T. Lian, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 2068–2071 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Gao, I. Trentin, L. Schwiedrzik, L. González and C. Streb, Molecules, 2020, 25, 157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Li, J. Liu, B.-X. Dong and Y.-Q. Lan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 20779–20793 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-S. Wang and G.-Y. Yang, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 4893–4962 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yang, J. Lei, J.-M. Fan, R.-M. Yuan, M.-S. Zheng, J.-J. Chen and Q.-F. Dong, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2005019 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Das and S. Roy, J. Mol. Eng. Mater., 2020, 08, 2030002 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Walsh, A. M. Bond, R. J. Forster and T. E. Keyes, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2016, 306, 217–234 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, C. Tang, M. Cheng, M. Chen, S. Chen, L. Lei, Y. Chen, H. Yi, Y. Fu and L. Li, ACS Catal., 2021, 11, 13374–13396 CrossRef CAS .
I. Ullah, A. Munir, A. Haider, N. Ullah and I. Hussain, Nanophotonics, 2021, 10, 1595–1620 CrossRef CAS .
K. Suzuki, N. Mizuno and K. Yamaguchi, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 10809–10825 CrossRef CAS .
R. Sivakumar, J. Thomas and M. Yoon, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2012, 13, 277–298 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, J. Liu, S.-L. Li, Z.-M. Su and Y.-Q. Lan, EnergyChem, 2019, 1, 100021 CrossRef .
Y.-F. Song and R. Tsunashima, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 7384–7402 RSC .
B. S. Bassil, M. Ibrahim, R. Al-Oweini, M. Asano, Z. Wang, J. van Tol, N. S. Dalal, K.-Y. Choi, R. Ngo Biboum, B. Keita, L. Nadjo and U. Kortz, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 5961–5964 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D.-L. Long, E. Burkholder and L. Cronin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2007, 36, 105–121 RSC .
Q. Zheng, L. Vilà-Nadal, Z. Lang, J.-J. Chen, D.-L. Long, J. S. Mathieson, J. M. Poblet and L. Cronin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 2595–2601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Todea, J. Szakács, S. Konar, H. Bögge, D. C. Crans, T. Glaser, H. Rousselière, R. Thouvenot, P. Gouzerh and A. Müller, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 6635–6642 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. A. Weinstock, R. E. Schreiber and R. Neumann, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 2680–2717 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lv, Y. V. Geletii, C. Zhao, J. W. Vickers, G. Zhu, Z. Luo, J. Song, T. Lian, D. G. Musaev and C. L. Hill, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 7572–7589 RSC .
X.-B. Han, Z.-M. Zhang, T. Zhang, Y.-G. Li, W. Lin, W. You, Z.-M. Su and E.-B. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 5359–5366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Blasco-Ahicart, J. Soriano-López, J. J. Carbó, J. M. Poblet and J. R. Galan-Mascaros, Nat. Chem., 2018, 10, 24–30 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhang, G. Sun, S. Ding, H. Asakura, J. Zhang, P. Sautet and N. Yan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 8185–8197 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Singh, S. D. Adhikary, A. Tiwari, D. Mandal and T. C. Nagaiah, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 4253–4264 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Adhikary and D. Mandal, Tetrahedron, 2020, 76, 131245 CrossRef CAS .
B. Nemeth, M. D. Symes, A. G. Boulay, C. Busche, G. J. T. Cooper, D. R. S. Cumming and L. Cronin, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1238–1242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ji, L. Huang, J. Hu, C. Streb and Y.-F. Song, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 776–789 RSC .
V. Singh, A. K. Padhan, S. D. Adhikary, A. Tiwari, D. Mandal and T. C. Nagaiah, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 3018–3023 RSC .
B. Huang, D.-H. Yang and B.-H. Han, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 4593–4628 RSC .
S. Konar and A. Clearfield, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 3492–3494 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Adhikary, A. Tiwari, T. C. Nagaiah and D. Mandal, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 38872–38879 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. C. Nagaiah, D. Gupta, S. D. Adhikary, A. Kafle and D. Mandal, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 9228–9237 RSC .
Y. Shimoyama, N. Ogiwara, Z. Weng and S. Uchida, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2022, 144, 2980–2986 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. N. Miras, J. Yan, D.-L. Long and L. Cronin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 7403–7430 RSC .
P. K. Sahu, A. Mondal and S. Konar, Dalton Trans., 2021, 50, 3825–3831 RSC .
J. M. Clemente-Juan, E. Coronado and A. Gaita-Ariño, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 7464–7478 RSC .
J. Lehmann, A. Gaita-Arino, E. Coronado and D. Loss, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 312–317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Duan, J. M. Clemente-Juan, C. Giménez-Saiz and E. Coronado, Front. Chem., 2018, 6 DOI:10.3389/fchem.2018.00231 .
D.-L. Long, R. Tsunashima and L. Cronin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 1736–1758 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Efremenko and R. Neumann, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 20669–20680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Streb, K. Kastner and J. Tucher, Phys. Sci. Rev., 2019, 4 DOI:10.1515/psr-2017-0177 .
Y. Zhu, Y. Huang, Q. Li, D. Zang, J. Gu, Y. Tang and Y. Wei, Inorg. Chem., 2020, 59, 2575–2583 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhu, C. Hessin, A. Salamé, L. Sosa-Vargas, D. Kreher, C. Adachi, A. Proust, P. Mialane, J. Marrot, A. Bouchet, M. Sliwa, S. Méry, B. Heinrich, F. Mathevet and G. Izzet, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 8419–8424 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Cameron, D. J. Wales and G. N. Newton, Dalton Trans., 2018, 47, 5120–5136 RSC .
D. Ravelli, S. Protti and M. Fagnoni, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 2232–2242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. L. Hill and D. A. Bouchard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1985, 107, 5148–5157 CrossRef CAS .
E. Papaconstantinou, Chem. Soc. Rev., 1989, 18, 1–31 RSC .
A. Müller and C. Serain, Acc. Chem. Res., 2000, 33, 2–10 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Streb, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 1651–1659 RSC .
T. Yamase, Catal. Surv. Asia, 2003, 7, 203–217 CrossRef CAS .
K. Suzuki, J. Jeong, K. Yamaguchi and N. Mizuno, Chem.–Asian J., 2015, 10, 144–148 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. Lodh and S. Roy, in Vanadium Catalysis, The Royal Society of Chemistry,  2021, pp. 165–204, DOI:  10.1039/9781839160882-00165 .
G. Renger, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 2011, 104, 35–43 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo, L. Sun, L. Kloo and H. Pettersson, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6595–6663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Argazzi, N. Y. Murakami Iha, H. Zabri, F. Odobel and C. A. Bignozzi, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2004, 248, 1299–1316 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Kirner and R. G. Finke, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 19560–19592 RSC .
T. Yao, X. An, H. Han, J. Q. Chen and C. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800210 CrossRef .
Y. Xu, X. Wang, W. L. Zhang, F. Lv and S. Guo, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 586–625 RSC .
H.-L. Wu, X.-B. Li, C.-H. Tung and L.-Z. Wu, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700684 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Tao, Y. Zhao, S. Wang, C. Li and R. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2022, 51, 3561–3608 RSC .
A. Sartorel, M. Bonchio, S. Campagna and F. Scandola, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2262–2280 RSC .
C. Besson, Z. Huang, Y. V. Geletii, S. Lense, K. I. Hardcastle, D. G. Musaev, T. Lian, A. Proust and C. L. Hill, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 2784–2786 RSC .
H. Lv, J. Song, Y. V. Geletii, J. W. Vickers, J. M. Sumliner, D. G. Musaev, P. Kögerler, P. F. Zhuk, J. Bacsa, G. Zhu and C. L. Hill, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 9268–9271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-P. Santoni, G. La Ganga, V. Mollica Nardo, M. Natali, F. Puntoriero, F. Scandola and S. Campagna, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8189–8192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Al-Oweini, A. Sartorel, B. S. Bassil, M. Natali, S. Berardi, F. Scandola, U. Kortz and M. Bonchio, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 11182–11185 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhu, E. N. Glass, C. Zhao, H. Lv, J. W. Vickers, Y. V. Geletii, D. G. Musaev, J. Song and C. L. Hill, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 13043–13049 RSC .
L. Yu, X. Du, Y. Ding, H. Chen and P. Zhou, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 17443–17446 RSC .
F. Song, Y. Ding, B. Ma, C. Wang, Q. Wang, X. Du, S. Fu and J. Song, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1170–1184 RSC .
P.-E. Car, M. Guttentag, K. K. Baldridge, R. Alberto and G. R. Patzke, Green Chem., 2012, 14, 1680–1688 RSC .
X.-B. Han, Y.-G. Li, Z.-M. Zhang, H.-Q. Tan, Y. Lu and E.-B. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 5486–5493 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Du, Y. Ding, F. Song, B. Ma, J. Zhao and J. Song, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 13925–13928 RSC .
C. Zhang, X. Lin, Z. Zhang, L. S. Long, C. Wang and W. Lin, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 11591–11594 RSC .
R.-K. Kang, Y.-Y. Dong, J.-P. Cao, X.-M. Luo, Z.-Y. Du, D. Zhu and Y. Xu, Chem.–Eur. J., 2021, 27, 1301–1305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhou, W. Chen, C. Sun, L. Han, C. Qin, M. Chen, X. Wang, E. Wang and Z. Su, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 11689–11695 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhou and B.-H. Han, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 2717–2722 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, W. Chen, L. Chen, X. Zheng, G. Zhu and E. Wang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6, 1800225 CrossRef .
Y. Choi, D. Jeon, Y. Choi, J. Ryu and B.-S. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 13434–13441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Hu, X. Meng, Y. Dong, Q. Han, Y. Wang and Y. Ding, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 11778–11781 RSC .
G. Paille, M. Gomez-Mingot, C. Roch-Marchal, B. Lassalle-Kaiser, P. Mialane, M. Fontecave, C. Mellot-Draznieks and A. Dolbecq, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 3613–3618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Paille, M. Gomez-Mingot, C. Roch-Marchal, M. Haouas, Y. Benseghir, T. Pino, M.-H. Ha-Thi, G. Landrot, P. Mialane, M. Fontecave, A. Dolbecq and C. Mellot-Draznieks, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 47837–47845 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ma, B. Liu, B. Li, L. Zhang, Y.-G. Li, H.-Q. Tan, H.-Y. Zang and G. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 5897–5903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ma, N. Liu, T.-T. Lin, T. Zhao, S.-L. Huang and G.-Y. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 8548–8553 RSC .
D. G. Nocera, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 767–776 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Morris, G. J. Meyer and E. Fujita, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1983–1994 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Xie, Q. Zhang, G. Liu and Y. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 35–59 RSC .
W.-H. Wang, Y. Himeda, J. T. Muckerman, G. F. Manbeck and E. Fujita, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 12936–12973 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wu, Y. Huang, W. Ye and Y. Li, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1700194 CrossRef PubMed .
J. L. White, M. F. Baruch, J. E. Pander, Y. Hu, I. C. Fortmeyer, J. E. Park, T. Zhang, K. Liao, J. Gu, Y. Yan, T. W. Shaw, E. Abelev and A. B. Bocarsly, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 12888–12935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Meng, L. Liu, S. Ouyang, H. Xu, D. Wang, N. Zhao and J. Ye, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6781–6803 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, J. Wen, J. Low, Y. Fang and J. Yu, Sci. China Mater., 2014, 57, 70–100 CrossRef .
Y. Cao, Q. Chen, C. Shen and L. He, Molecules, 2019, 24, 2069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Gu, W. Chen, G. G. Shan, G. Li, C. Sun, X. L. Wang and Z. Su, Mater. Today Energy, 2021, 21, 100760 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sekizawa, K. Maeda, K. Domen, K. Koike and O. Ishitani, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 4596–4599 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, J. Yu, M. Jaroniec and X. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 3962–4179 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-D. Xiao and H.-L. Jiang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2019, 52, 356–366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Voiry, H. S. Shin, K. P. Loh and M. Chhowalla, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2018, 2, 0105 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Sun, N. Talreja, H. Tao, J. Texter, M. Muhler, J. Strunk and J. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 7610–7627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xiao, T. Cheng, W. A. Goddard and R. Sundararaman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 483–486 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. N. Habisreutinger, L. Schmidt-Mende and J. K. Stolarczyk, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 7372–7408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Saeidi, N. A. S. Amin and M. R. Rahimpour, J. CO2 Util., 2014, 5, 66–81 CrossRef CAS .
D. Unruh, K. Pabst and G. Schaub, Energy Fuels, 2010, 24, 2634–2641 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chu, P. Ou, P. Ghamari, S. Vanka, B. Zhou, I. Shih, J. Song and Z. Mi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 7869–7877 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. W. Dorner, D. R. Hardy, F. W. Williams and H. D. Willauer, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 884–890 RSC .
K. Fujimoto and T. Shikada, Appl. Catal., 1987, 31, 13–23 CrossRef CAS .
P. Frontera, A. Macario, M. Ferraro and P. Antonucci, Catalysts, 2017, 7, 59 CrossRef .
P. Tang, Q. Zhu, Z. Wu and D. Ma, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2580–2591 RSC .
G. Chen, G. I. N. Waterhouse, R. Shi, J. Zhao, Z. Li, L.-Z. Wu, C.-H. Tung and T. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 17528–17551 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Khenkin, I. Efremenko, L. Weiner, J. M. L. Martin and R. Neumann, Chem.–Eur. J., 2010, 16, 1356–1364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ci, J. J. Carbó, R. Neumann, C. d. Graaf and J. M. Poblet, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 6422–6428 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, Y. Liu, N. Liu, Y. Han, X. Zhang, H. Huang, Y. Lifshitz, S. T. Lee, J. Zhong and Z. Kang, Science, 2015, 347, 970–974 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-J. Ong, L.-L. Tan, Y. H. Ng, S.-T. Yong and S.-P. Chai, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 7159–7329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-M. Liu, Z. Zhang, X. Li, H. Jia, M. Ren and S. Liu, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1801062 CrossRef .
L. Qiao, M. Song, A. Geng and S. Yao, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2019, 30, 1273–1276 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yu, E. Haviv and R. Neumann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 6219–6223 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, R. Neumann, C. de Graaf and J. M. Poblet, ACS Catal., 2021, 11, 1495–1504 CrossRef CAS .
S.-L. Xie, J. Liu, L.-Z. Dong, S.-L. Li, Y.-Q. Lan and Z.-M. Su, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 185–190 RSC .
Q. Huang, J. Liu, L. Feng, Q. Wang, W. Guan, L.-Z. Dong, L. Zhang, L.-K. Yan, Y.-Q. Lan and H.-C. Zhou, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2020, 7, 53–63 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Kim, J. S. Nam, J. Jo, J. Seong, H. Kim, Y. Kwon, M. S. Lah, J. H. Lee, T.-H. Kwon and J. Ryu, Nanoscale Horiz., 2021, 6, 379–385 RSC .
D.-Y. Du, J.-S. Qin, S.-L. Li, Z.-M. Su and Y.-Q. Lan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 4615–4632 RSC .
X.-X. Li, J. Liu, L. Zhang, L.-Z. Dong, Z.-F. Xin, S.-L. Li, X.-Q. Huang-Fu, K. Huang and Y.-Q. Lan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 25790–25795 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Benseghir, A. Lemarchand, M. Duguet, P. Mialane, M. Gomez-Mingot, C. Roch-Marchal, T. Pino, M.-H. Ha-Thi, M. Haouas, M. Fontecave, A. Dolbecq, C. Sassoye and C. Mellot-Draznieks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 9428–9438 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Li, J. Liu, J.-J. Liu, L.-Z. Dong, S.-L. Li, B.-X. Dong, Y.-H. Kan and Y.-Q. Lan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 17260–17264 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-X. Liu, M.-Y. Gao, W.-H. Fang, L. Zhang and J. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 5160–5165 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-J. Liu, N. Li, J.-W. Sun, J. Liu, L.-Z. Dong, S.-J. Yao, L. Zhang, Z.-F. Xin, J.-W. Shi, J.-X. Wang, S.-L. Li and Y.-Q. Lan, ACS Catal., 2021, 11, 4510–4519 CrossRef CAS .
N. Li, J.-J. Liu, J.-W. Sun, B.-X. Dong, L.-Z. Dong, S.-J. Yao, Z. Xin, S.-L. Li and Y.-Q. Lan, Green Chem., 2020, 22, 5325–5332 RSC .
S. Sato, T. Arai and T. Morikawa, Inorg. Chem., 2015, 54, 5105–5113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhai, S. Xie, W. Fan, Q. Zhang, Y. Wang, W. Deng and Y. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 5776–5779 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-C. Yang, Y.-H. Yu, B. van der Linden, J. C. S. Wu and G. Mul, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 8398–8406 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, Y. Zhou, Q. Liu, Z. Li, J. Liu and Z. Zou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 3372–3377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Teramura, S. Iguchi, Y. Mizuno, T. Shishido and T. Tanaka, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 8008–8011 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sato, T. Arai, T. Morikawa, K. Uemura, T. M. Suzuki, H. Tanaka and T. Kajino, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 15240–15243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yan, J. Wang, H. Gao, N. Wang, H. Yu, Z. Li, Y. Zhou and Z. Zou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1839–1845 CrossRef CAS .
S. Das, S. Biswas, T. Balaraju, S. Barman, R. Pochamoni and S. Roy, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 8875–8887 RSC .
S. Das, S. Kumar, S. Garai, R. Pochamoni, S. Paul and S. Roy, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 35086–35094 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Barman, S. Das, S. S. S, S. Garai, R. Pochamoni and S. Roy, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 2369–2372 RSC .
S. Biswas, R. Pochamoni and S. Roy, ChemistrySelect, 2018, 3, 2649–2654 CrossRef CAS .
S. Das, T. Balaraju, S. Barman, S. S. Sreejith, R. Pochamoni and S. Roy, Front. Chem., 2018, 6 DOI:10.3389/fchem.2018.00514 .
S. Garai, H. Bögge, A. Merca, O. A. Petina, A. Grego, P. Gouzerh, E. T. K. Haupt, I. A. Weinstock and A. Müller, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 6634–6637 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Garcia-Ratés, P. Miro, A. Müller, C. Bo and J. B. Avalos, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 5545–5555 CrossRef .
J. Lodh, A. Mallick and S. Roy, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 20844–20851 RSC .
S. Barman, S. S. Sreejith, S. Garai, R. Pochamoni and S. Roy, ChemPhotoChem, 2019, 3, 93–100 CrossRef CAS .
K. Das, R. De, F. Verpoort and S. Roy, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 13355–13365 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:
Abhik Paul	Abhik Paul received his BSc degree in Chemistry from the University of Calcutta in 2015 and MSc degree in Chemical Sciences from Pondicherry University in 2017. He then joined IISER Bhopal to pursue his doctoral research under the supervision of Prof. Sanjit Konar. His research interest focuses on photochemical conversion of small molecules, redox-switchable behaviour of metal–organic hybrid capsules, and crystal engineering aspects of the magnetic bistability of organic radicals.
Subhasis Das Adhikary	Subhasis Das Adhikary received his PhD in Chemistry from the Indian Institute of Technology Ropar in 2020 under the supervision of Dr Debaprasad Mandal. His doctoral research was focused on polyoxometalate catalyzed water oxidation, organic transformations, and electrocatalysis. After completing his PhD, he moved to IISER Bhopal, where he is currently working as a postdoctoral research associate on polyoxometalate catalyzed photochemical carbon dioxide reduction coupled with water oxidation under the supervision of Prof. Sanjit Konar.
Sandhya Kapurwan	Sandhya Kapurwan received her BSc degree in Chemistry in 2013 and M.Sc. in 2016 from HNB Garhwal University. She then joined IISER Bhopal in 2017 to pursue her doctoral research under the supervision of Prof. Sanjit Konar. Her current research is focused on single-molecule magnet behavior, luminescence, and photo- and electro-catalytic applications of polyoxometalates.
Sanjit Konar	Sanjit Konar received his PhD from the Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science, Kolkata. After that, he worked as a postdoctoral fellow at the University of Notre Dame and Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, USA. He is a recipient of an Alexander von Humboldt Fellowship and has worked at Universität Bielefeld, Germany. Currently, he is working as a Professor in the Department of Chemistry, IISER Bhopal, India. His research interests are in the area of molecular magnetic materials, multifunctional metal–organic frameworks, and polyoxometalates. He has published 145+ peer-reviewed journal articles. He currently serves as an associate editor of the ACS journal Crystal Growth and Design. He is also an editorial advisory board member of the Wiley journal European Journal of Inorganic Chemistry and MDPI journal Magnetochemistry.

 	Scheme 1  Schematic representation of water oxidation with the CO2 reduction reaction. The WOC and CO2RC are coupled by a conductive linker. Additionally, the WOC and CO2RC both act as photosensitizers as well.	 

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the photogenerated charge carriers (electrons and holes) upon the absorption of photons, along with relevant redox potentials at pH = 7. Reproduced from ref. 50 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 2  Representation of bio-mimicking POMs (Si–Ru4 and P–Co4) containing cubane or quasi-cubane cores as water oxidation catalysts for photocatalytic water oxidation. Si–Ru4 = [(Ru4(μ-O)4(μ-OH)2(H2O)4)(SiW10O36)2]10− and P–Co4 = [Co4(H2O)2(PW9O34)2]10−. Images generated from the CIFs available online.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Simplified orbital picture diagram of the ground state and the excited state orbital occupation of POM clusters. Photoexcitation promotes an electron from the HOMO to the LUMO. The excited state of POM cluster species exhibits lower ionization energy (EI) and higher electron affinity (Eea) than the ground state species. Reproduced from ref. 101 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Change in the colour and UV-vis absorption spectra of a solution containing lacunary POM [γ-SiW10O36]8−; (inset) molecular diagram of the lacunary POM [γ-SiW10O36]8−. Reproduced from ref. 103 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2015.	 

 	Scheme 2  Schematic diagram of natural photosynthesis.	 

 	Scheme 3  Schematic diagram of molecular metal-complex based catalyst systems in subsequent water oxidation and carbon dioxide reduction.	 

 	Scheme 4  Schematic diagrams of artificial photosynthesis based on POM catalysts, where a single POM can act as a photosensitizer, WOC and CO2RC.	 

 	Scheme 5  The plausible reaction mechanism of (a) POM catalyzed homogeneous photochemical water oxidation and heterogeneous photochemical water oxidation by (b) the POM-based composite and (c) the POM@MOF photosystem.	 

 	Fig. 4  Proposed reaction mechanism of organic–inorganic hybrid POM catalyzed photochemical water oxidation, using [Ru(bpy)3]2+ as a photosensitizer. Reproduced from ref. 124 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 5  Electrostatic interaction of a POM with carbon nanodots (CDs) and their mechanistic illustration for photoinduced water oxidation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 129. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Scheme 6  (a) Relative energy diagram of different CO2 reduction products indicating the number of electrons and protons required and range of the charge transfer reaction timescale. The range of charge transfer reactions includes light absorption (blue), charge migration (brown), charge transfer and reaction kinetics (green), and charge recombination (red). (b) Simplified Fischer–Tropsch CO insertion chain growth mechanism, compared to methanation.	 

 	Scheme 7  Proposed reaction pathways of CO2 reduction to CO, CH4 and CH3OH involving several intermediate states.	 

 	Scheme 8  Proposed reaction mechanism of photochemical CO2 to CO reduction by a ReI–POM hybrid complex.	 

 	Fig. 6  P–Co4 POM modified g-C3N4 for the photochemical CO2 reduction reaction. Reprinted with permission from ref. 126. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Scheme 9  Photochemical reduction of CO2 to CO by a hybrid photocatalyst Au@NENU-10.	 

 	Scheme 10  Z-scheme diagram for three-component assembly g-CN/PW12/[Re]. Reproduced from ref. 166 with permission from Wiley-VCH. Copyright 2020.	 

 	Scheme 11  Proposed mechanism of photocatalytic CO2 reduction to CH4 using NENU-605 and NENU-606.	 

 	Scheme 12  Proposed reaction mechanism of CO2 reduction over POM grafted metalloporphyrin coordination frameworks under visible light irradiation.	 

 	Scheme 13  Schematic diagram of photocatalytic reduction of CO2 to HCOOH by the Ti polyoxo cluster. Reproduced from ref. 174 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2019.	 

 	Scheme 14  Proposed photocatalytic reaction mechanism of HCOOH formation by calix[8]arene constructed polyoxotitanium clusters.	 

 	Scheme 15  Schematic diagram of photocatalytic CO2 reduction coupled with the water oxidation process. Reproduced from ref. 139 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2017.	 


1	(Mo154)1165 (where [Mo154O462H14(H2O)70]14− ≡ Mo154)	H2O	HCOOH, HCHO	778	377 s−1	
185

(Mn6P3W24) (where [Mn6P3W24O94(H2O)2]17− ≡ Mn6P3W24)	HCOOH	270	56 s−1
(Mo132)1064@rGO (where [Mo132O372(CH3COO)30(H2O)72]42− ≡ Mo132, rGO = reduced graphene oxide)	HCOOH, HCHO	1366	610 s−1
2	{[K6.5Cu(OH)8.5(H2O)7.5]0.5[K3PW12O40]}	H2O	HCOOH	613	47.15 h−1	
186

3	(NH4)3[MoV9O28] ≡ {MoV9} {MoV9}n (n = 1332–3600)	H2O	HCOOH	3.19 × 105	—	
187

4	Mo7/PANI/TiO2 SOM composite (PANI = polyaniline)	H2O	HCOOH	782	234 h−1	
188

5	[H16{Mo6O21(H2O)6}8{–Mo6O21(H2O)3(SO4)}32{Mo2O3(H2O)2}16{Mo2O(t)O(br)3(SO4)}8{–Mo2O(t)4O(br)(SO4)}8{MoO(H2O)}64]48− ≡ Mo368	H2O	HCOOH	27666	4611 h−1	
189

6	[Mo72VIMo62VO372(CH3COOH)30(H2O)72]42− ≡ Mo132	H2O	HCOOH	—	12.5 h−1	
192

7	[{(CH3)NH2}4{(MoV2O4)6(μ2-OH)10(μ2-O)2(μ3-OH)2(μ3-O)2(MoVIO3H)4}]0.94[{(MoV2O4)6(μ2-OH)10(μ2-O)2(MoVIO3H)4}{MoVI(μ3-O)4}]0.06 ≡ Mo16	H2O	HCOOH, HCHO	546	—	
193

8	[MoVI126MoV28O462H14(H2O)70]0.5[MoVI124MoV28O457H14(H2O)68]0.515− ≡ Mo154	H2O	HCOOH	—	—	
194


 	Scheme 16  POM catalyzed photochemical CO2 reduction with concomitant water oxidation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 186. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Scheme 17  Plausible reaction pathway of photocatalytic CO2 reduction coupled with water oxidation by wheel-shaped POM Mo154 in the presence of [Ru(bpy)2]2+ (PS). The catalytically produced HCOOH is embedded inside the cavity, which converts to ethyl formate in the presence of ethanol (red arrow). HCOOH present in the bulk solution is converted to benzyl formate in the presence of benzyl alcohol (blue arrow).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
