Methanol steam reforming reactor design for efficient photovoltaic–thermochemical power generation  - Sustainable Energy & Fuels (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2SE01746F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2SE01746F
(Paper)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2023, 7, 2997-3013Methanol steam reforming reactor design for efficient photovoltaic–thermochemical power generation

        
          
            Zhenyu 
            Tian†
ab, 
      
        
          
            Kai 
            Zhao†
ab, 
      
        
          
            Yidian 
            Zhang
          
        
      abd, 
      
        
          
            Lingzhi 
            Yang
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            Yu 
            Shao
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Yong 
            Hao
          
        
      *ab
aInstitute of Engineering Thermophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, PR China. E-mail: haoyong@iet.cn
bUniversity of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, PR China
cXi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710049, PR China
dChina Electric Power Planning Engineering Institute, Beijing 100120, PR China
Received 
      19th December 2022
    , Accepted 3rd March 2023First published on 3rd March 2023AbstractThe photovoltaic-thermochemical (PVTC) hybrid system is an emerging technology for improving the efficiencies and dispatchability of solar power via complementation between concentrated solar PV and solar thermochemical conversions. In order to improve the PV efficiency and decrease the heat losses of the reactor, the concentration ratio is usually as high as 500–1000 in the PVTC hybrid system. However, the high concentration ratio presents a serious challenge to reactor temperature uniformity and energy conversion performance. In order to improve the heat transfer performance of the reactor and the solar-electric efficiency of the PVTC hybrid system, four compact reactors for methanol steam reforming were designed and manufactured with different internal structures. Through analysis on heat transfer, flow field and reaction via numerical simulation and experimental test of the four reactors, it is found that the reactor structure has a great influence on the heat transfer and the reaction performances. At 250 °C and 1.50 ml min−1 methanol solution flow rate, the methanol conversion of the six-chamber reactor is 87.3%, 23.0 percentage points higher than that of the cavity reactor. The optimal net solar-electric efficiency of the PVTC system with the six-chamber reactor can reach 42.2% at 250 °C and 1.75 ml min−1 methanol solution flow rate, which is 3.5 percentage points higher than that of the previous study at the same operating temperature.
1 Introduction
Solar energy is considered to be one of the best choices among renewable energy sources to reduce CO2 emissions and achieve carbon neutrality goals.1–4 As one of the solar energy utilization technologies, the photovoltaic thermal (PVT) hybrid system has attracted more and more interests. The PVT conversion generally refers to a technology that combines concentrated photovoltaic (PV) and solar thermal utilization.5–7 It can produce electricity and thermal energy simultaneously. As the PV-dissipated heat is collected in the PVT system, a high energy utilization efficiency of 80–90% has been achieved in PVT demonstrations.8 But the electric contribution is still predominantly from the PV part with an efficiency below 17%.9 This is because the low-temperature PV heat has a low heat-electric efficiency and limited application scenarios (mainly providing heat or cooling).10–13 Besides, fluctuating electric output of the PVT system and the potentially required expensive energy storage system remain common barriers to its effective solar utilization. An efficient and stable solar power supply is still the key challenge to be solved.14–16
In order to improve the net solar-electric (NSE) efficiency and achieve a stable electric output without the expensive battery storage system,17–19 in recent years, we proposed a photovoltaic-thermochemical (PVTC) hybrid system.20,21 Solar energy is first converted to electricity by PV cells. The PV-dissipated heat in this process is collected by the constituent thermochemical reactor and used for driving endothermic reaction, such as methanol steam reforming (MSR),22 ethanol reforming,23 and methane reforming24 reactions. Taking the MSR reaction as an example, by using the PV heat to drive the MSR reaction, the low-temperature thermal energy is upgraded to chemical energy of syngas.25 It not only improves the power generation efficiency of low-temperature PV heat but also provides a stable electric output by generating thermochemical power on demand and smoothing out the fluctuation of the PV power generated. As a result, the PVTC hybrid system achieves a high NSE efficiency (51.5%, theoretical) as well as high dispatchability.20 As the cooler of the PV cell and the venue of the MSR reaction, the MSR reactor is an important component which significantly affects the performance of the PVTC hybrid system. It needs to maintain both the PV cell at a stable temperature and a high-concentration solar flux, and distribute the PV heat evenly within the reactor for the thermochemical reactions. On one hand, the high operating temperature will attenuate the performance of the PV component because of the negative temperature coefficient.26,27 The heat transfer-enhanced reactor will conduct the PV heat away from the PV cell to the reactor more quickly and maintain a lower PV temperature for a higher PV efficiency. On the other hand, uniform reactor temperature distribution is beneficial to MSR reaction, which improves the methanol conversion and converts more PV heat into chemical energy in the syngas. It also requires the reactor to distribute the PV heat evenly. In our previous study, for an 80 mm × 80 mm × 60 mm reactor, when the methanol flow rate was 1.5 ml min−1 at 230 °C, the methanol conversion was only 30%.28 According to the thermodynamic analysis of the MSR reaction, the methanol conversion shall be nearly 99% under the above operating conditions.29 It suggested that the methanol conversion of the thermochemical part still had sufficient room for improvement. Meanwhile, as an important part of the PVTC hybrid system, thermochemical power generation accounts for 30–50% of the total power generation of the PVTC hybrid system.20,21 Thus, the low methanol conversion means inefficient use of PV heat and would thus affect the power generation efficiency of the thermochemical part. Reactor optimization aims to enhance the heat and mass transfer processes within the reactor, improve the utilization efficiency of PV-dissipated heat of the reactor, and optimize the NSE efficiency of the PVTC hybrid system.
Many numerical simulations and experimental studies on MSR reactor optimization have been carried out in the literature. In order to maximize the methanol conversion, many MSR reactors with different structures, such as rectilinear channels, pin-hole, coil-based, radial, and topological reactors,30–32 were optimized by improving their performance of the heat transfer, pressure drop, flow pattern, and velocity profile.33–35 Ribeirinha et al.36 compared the MSR reaction in parallel channel, radial flow, and tubular micro-reactors. The results showed that the parallel channel structure micro-reactor was the best solution among these three different structures because the high metallic surface area improved heat transfer performance and provided a lower temperature difference in the reactor. Fazeli et al. analyzed the MSR reaction in a zigzag channel and straight channel.37 It showed that the uniformity of temperature distribution of the zigzag channel reactor was better than that of the straight channel reactor. Meanwhile, the MSR reaction in the zigzag channel structure was more selective for hydrogen and less selective for CO than in the straight channel. Kundu et al.38 manufactured parallel and serpentine channel MSR reactors and compared their performances. Because the reacting vapor had a longer residence time in the serpentine reactor, in the reaction temperature range of 200–260 °C, the methanol conversion of the serpentine channel MSR reactor was higher than that of the parallel reactor. The durability of the serpentine reactor was also better than that of the parallel reactor. Kumaran et al.34 designed headers with different depths and studied the inlet/outlet configurations in flow maldistribution in parallel micro-channel reactors. The results showed that when the header depth was 7 mm, the flow distribution, pressure drop, and mal-distribution factor of the reactor reached the optimum. Hsueh et al.39 developed a numerical model and analyzed the influence of the height and width ratio on the gas flow distribution and the methanol conversion of the plate micro-reactor. A lower aspect ratio was in favor of temperature distribution uniformity and improved the H2 production rate and methanol conversion. The aforementioned research provided valuable references for the design and fabrication of more efficient MSR reactors.
For the PVTC hybrid system, the heat transfer performance is required to be further improved in the MSR reactor for better power generation performances. In order to improve the PV efficiency and decrease the heat losses of the reactor, the concentration ratio was as high as 500–1000.20 Thus, the heat flux input into the MSR reactor is more concentrated and higher than that into the conventional reactors, which presents a more serious challenge to the reactor temperature uniformity. Previously, we developed a PVTC hybrid reactor model and the maximum temperature difference in the reactor was nearly 20 °C, which led to a low methanol conversion (i.e., 30% at 230 °C),28 while the corresponding net solar-electric efficiency was 38.7%. However, based on our investigation on structural optimization of MSR reactors, those with heat inputs through one surface or all outer surfaces of the reactor was more suitable for external combustion-driven autothermal reforming/partial oxidation of methanol or industrial waste heat-driven methanol conversion. The heat sources for such scenarios were uniform for the methanol reactor. Thus, the reactors tended to be flat or long tube shape for a large heat transfer surface area with the heat source and uniform temperature in the reactor.30 If a high-flux heat source is pinpointed onto a flat or tubular reactor, it will inevitably lead to a severe temperature difference. Therefore, in the PVTC hybrid system, a compact reactor with low aspect ratio is a better choice for improving temperature distribution uniformity. In order to improve the heat transfer and methanol conversion performances of MSR reactors for PVTC hybrid systems, this paper investigates the influence of the reactor inner structure on the performance of MSR reactors intended for PVTC applications. In particular, we designed and fabricated four MSR reactors with different equivalent diameters. By experimental tests and numerical analysis, we compare and summarize the performance of MSR reactors with different designs.
2 Experimental set-up and model description
2.1 System description
The working process of the PVTC hybrid system is shown in Fig. 1. Sunlight is concentrated on the InGaP/InGaAs/Ge three-junction PV cell through the Fresnel lens. Only a fraction (about 30–40%, ref. 40 and 41) of the solar energy is converted to electricity and the rest (about 60–70%) becomes PV heat. The methanol solution is pumped into the preheater and vaporized by the PV heat. Then, the vaporized reactants flow into the reactor, where the methanol steam reforming reaction (MSR, CH3OH(g) + H2O(g) → CO2(g) + 3H2(g), ΔH200 °CΘ = 56.71 kJ mol−1) takes place. In this process, the thermal energy dissipated by the PV cell is converted to the chemical energy of syngas and stored. The stored product can be used to generate electricity by solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs) or other devices, which is much more efficient than low-temperature solar thermal power generation. The combination of the PV cell and thermochemical part not only improves the net solar-electric efficiency but also stores a part of solar energy as chemical energy. Because the reactor and preheater act as the heat sink of the PV cell and the venue of the MSR reaction, their heat transfer performance has a great influence on the performance of the PV cell and MSR reaction, and further affects the net solar-electric efficiency of the PVTC hybrid system.
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the modular photovoltaic-thermochemical hybrid reactor. 
2.2 Structure of the flow channel in MSR reactors

Fig. 2 shows the schematic illustration and photos of the four microreactors with different flow channel designs. Each microreactor consists of inlet and outlet pipes, upper and bottom covers, reactor body, catalyst, electric heater, thermocouples, bolts and nuts. The external dimensions of each reactor are 40 mm × 40 mm × 60 mm (length × width × height). The material of the upper and bottom covers, inlet, and outlet pipes is 304 stainless steel and the reactor body is made of aluminum alloy. The reactor body is a 40 mm × 40 mm × 40 mm cube with flow channels of different equivalent diameters. The flow channels in the reactors (except the cavity reactor) adopt a serpentine arrangement. For the cavity reactor, in order to make the gas flow in the flow channels more uniform, the upper and bottom covers adopt a triangular airflow baffle design, which is based on the triangular inlet head in ref. 34. The flow channels are filled by finely ground catalyst, which is the main space in which the MSR reaction takes place. The equivalent diameter De of different flow channels is in the range of 6 to 35 mm, which is defined as: De = 4Ac/Lc(1)where Ac is the cross-sectional area of the flow channel and Lc is the perimeter of the flow channel cross-section.
 Fig. 2  Overall design of the methanol steam reforming reactors; (a) external design; (b)–(e) cross section of reactor interior with four different flow channel designs, i.e., cavity, four-chamber, six-chamber and 6 mm channel, respectively; (f) picture of the interior of different MSR reactors. 
According to the flow path characteristics, these four reactors are named the cavity reactor, four-chamber reactor, six-chamber reactor, and 6 mm channel reactor, respectively, as shown in Fig. 2(b)–(e). Pictures of the four MSR reactor bodies are shown in Fig. 2(f). Table 2 summarizes the main geometrical parameters of these four reactors. Among them, the cavity reactor has the largest equivalent diameter (35.0 mm) and internal volume (49.0 ml). The 6 mm channel reactor has the smallest equivalent diameter (6.0 mm) and internal volume (26.0 ml).
2.3 Experimental set-up
In order to assess methanol conversion and thermochemical efficiency of the MSR reactors at various temperatures and methanol solution flow rates, a reactor evaluation system was built. The schematic diagram of this system is shown in Fig. 3(a). Methanol solution was pumped by a constant flow pump from the storage tank to the preheater (the structure of the preheater is the same as that of the reactor shown in Fig. 2(e)) and then vaporized and overheated to 130 °C to ensure the full vaporization of the reactants. The constant flow pump (Dalian Elite analytical instruments Co., Ltd, Fig. 3(b)) was set at a flow rate of 1–2 ml min−1 with an accuracy < 0.3%. The preheater was heated by an electric heating plate to simulate the PV heat. The temperature of the preheater was controlled by a temperature control box using the proportion integration differentiation (PID) control strategy (Xiamen Yudian automation technology Co., Ltd., Fig. 3(c)). The preheater was connected to the reactor in series (Fig. 3(d)). The overheated mixture of methanol and steam flowed into the reactor and participated in the MSR reaction. The operating temperature of the reactor was also controlled by the PID strategy. Both the reactor and preheater were put into a box filled by asbestos for thermal insulation. After the reaction, the products were cooled down and the unreacted methanol and water were condensed by a gas–liquid separator (Fig. 3(e)). In the reactor, the channel was filled by the CNZ-1 type commercial CuO/ZnO/Al2O3 catalyst (Sichuan Shutai Chemical Technology Co., Ltd., Fig. 3(f)) that was ground into 1–2 mm diameter particles. Before evaluating the reactors, the catalyst was reduced by a N2 and H2 mixture to expose the active sites. The molar ratio of N2 and H2 was 4:1, which was controlled by the mass-flow meters (Beijing Sevenstar electronic technology Co., Ltd., Fig. 3(g)).
 Fig. 3  Schematic diagram and pictures of the reactor performance evaluation platform: (a) schematic diagram of the platform; (b) constant flow pump; (c) temperature control box; (d) preheater and reactor; (e) condenser; (f) CuO/ZnO/Al2O3 catalyst; (g) mass-flow meters. 
2.4 Numerical methods
In order to investigate the effect of flow channel design and equivalent diameter on the distribution of temperature, gas velocity and reaction, numerical models of the four reactors were developed. To simplify the analysis process of the numerical studies, several assumptions are made:34,36
(1) The reactants are fully vaporized in the preheater.
(2) In the reactor, the gas flow is an incompressible flow at a steady state.
(3) The effect of gravity on the flow of the fluid is negligible.
(4) The catalyst inside the flow channel is an isotropic porous medium.

2.4.1 Governing equations. 
In the MSR reactor, heat transfer, gas flow, and chemical reactions occur simultaneously and are strongly coupled with each other. For a complete study of the temperature, velocity, and concentration fields, governing equations of mass, momentum, and energy conservation for gas flow in the porous medium are solved: ∇·(ρmix) = 0(2) (3) ρCp,mix·∇T = ∇·(kmix∇T) + (4)where ρmix,  and p are the density, velocity vector, and pressure of the gas mixture, respectively;  is the unit tensor; μmix is the dynamic viscosity coefficient of gas mixture; εp is the bed porosity, taken as 0.49; dp is the catalyst equivalent diameter, taken as 1 mm. κ is the bed permeability, which can be calculated by: (5)
The governing equation of energy conservation for the reactor body can be expressed as: ∇2T = 0(6)The mass balance equation of all gas-phase species is solved altogether, in which both Fick diffusion43 and convection–diffusion are considered. ∇·(−Dg,i∇ci) + ·∇ci = Ri(7)where Dg,i is the gas diffusion coefficient; the subscripts i = 1, 2, 3, 4 represent CH3OH, H2O, CO2, and H2, respectively; ci is the gas volume fraction; Ri is the destruction or production rate of species i per unit volume. It can be calculated as follows: Ri = (1 − εp)ρcatrM(8)where ρcat is the density of the catalyst and rM is the chemical reaction rate per unit mass of catalyst. The MSR reaction rate adopts the equation proposed by Lee et al.:44 (9)where R0 is the universal gas constant; T, pM and pH are the reaction temperature, methanol partial pressure, and hydrogen partial pressure, respectively.


2.4.2 Numerical model and boundary conditions. 
Corresponding to the governing equations, the whole reactor model is divided into three main regions: solid region, fluid region, and porous media region. We take the 6 mm channel reactor as an example. The computation grid of the whole reactor is shown in Fig. 4(a). The solid region includes inlet and outlet pipes, electric heating plate, upper and lower end covers, and reactor body. The fluid part is shown by the yellow region of Fig. 4(b), which mainly includes the gases in the inlet and outlet pipes. The flow channel part in the four MSR reactors is treated as porous media, shown in the blue region of Fig. 4(b). Except for the flow channel part where the grids differs significantly, the grids in the other parts of the four reactors are basically the same. The grids of the four reactor flow channel parts are shown in Fig. 4(c)–(h). Grid independence tests are completed for each reactor to ensure that the simulated results are independent of the number of grids. The main grid parameters of the four reactors are summarized in Table 3. In general, the smaller the equivalent diameter is, the denser the grid and the greater the total number of grids in the reactor become.
 Fig. 4  Computation grids of the four types of reactor in the PVTC hybrid system. (a) The grid of the whole reactor; (b) the gird in the fluid part and the flow channel part of the reactor; (c)–(f), the grid in the flow channel part of the cavity reactor, four-chamber reactor, six-chamber reactor and 6 mm channel reactor, respectively. 
The boundary conditions of the reactor model mainly include fluid boundary conditions, temperature boundary conditions, and reactant concentration boundary conditions, corresponding to the flow, temperature and concentration fields, respectively. Based on the 1.00–2.00 ml min−1 methanol solution flow rate in the experiment, the inlet velocity of the reactors is set to 1.48–2.97 m s−1. The outlet boundary condition of the flow field is the pressure boundary condition with the outlet pressure of standard atmospheric pressure. The wall of the electric heating plate is set by the temperature boundary condition, which is considered to be the reactor temperature. The reactor temperature range is set at 190–250 °C to be consistent with the experimental conditions. The mass fractions of methanol and water at the inlet are set to 59.72% and 40.28%, respectively, corresponding to a steam-to-methanol molar ratio of 1.2.


2.4.3 Validation of the numerical model. 
In order to make sure that the simulation results are independent of the number of grids, a grid independence test has been conducted, which is shown in Fig. 5(a). The methanol conversion is relatively stable in the range of 62.8–63.2% at 250 °C and 1.50 ml min−1 with the grid number of 1.18–8.24 million. Although the results are more accurate with more grid numbers in the simulation, the scheme of 1.68 million grids was finally chosen considering tradeoffs between the simulation time and accuracy. To verify the accuracy of the model, we compared the simulation results with experimental results. Taking the cavity reactor as an example, we compare the simulated and experimental results of methanol conversion at 250 °C in Fig. 5(b). The maximum difference between the experimental and simulated values is 2.2%. The differences between simulations and experiments of the four MSR reactors at 250 °C and 1.50 ml min−1 methanol solution flow rate are shown in Fig. 5(c). The maximum difference is 1.3% for the cavity reactor. The experiment results verifies that the numerical model is accurate enough to analyze the processes inside the reactors.
 Fig. 5  Validation of the numerical model. (a) Grid independence test of the cavity reactor at 250 °C and 1.50 ml min−1 methanol solution flow rate; (b) comparison of experimental methanol conversion results and simulated results of the cavity reactor at 250 °C; (c) comparison of experimental methanol conversion results and simulated results of the four reactors at 250 °C and 1.50 ml min−1 methanol solution flow rate. 

2.5 The reactor and PVTC hybrid system performance criteria
The power output of the PVTC hybrid system consists of two parts: power generated by the PV part and that by the thermochemical part. The net solar-electric efficiency of the system is defined as:45 (10)where solar is the solar energy input into the PVTC hybrid system; PPV and Ptc are the power output from the PV cell and the thermochemical part (resulting from the difference between the total enthalpy of the products of the endothermic MSR reaction and that of the methanol input for the MSR reaction) in the PVTC hybrid system, respectively; ηPV is the photovoltaic module efficiency; ηtc is the thermochemical efficiency of the MSR reactor, and ηc–e is the efficiency of SOFCs,42 taken as 0.5; ηopt is the optical efficiency of the concentrator, set as 0.8.46 The detailed parameters of the PVTC hybrid prototype are listed in Table 1. ηabs is solar energy collection efficiency, which is calculated as follows: (11)where C is the concentration ratio and I is the direct normal irradiance (DNI); σ is the Stefan–Boltzmann constant; TPV and Ten are PV cell temperature and ambient temperature, respectively.
Table 1 Structure and operating parameters of the PVTC hybrid system




Parameters
Value




PV cell type
GaInP/GaAs/Ge three-junction PV cell


Dimension of the PV cell
10 × 10 × 1 mm3


Optical efficiency
0.80


Fuel cell type
SOFC


Efficiency of the fuel cell42
0.50




Table 2 The main geometry parameters of the four MSR reactors




Reactor name
Channel size (length × width × height)
Number of channels
Equivalent diameter
Internal volume




Cavity reactor
35 mm × 35 mm × 40 mm
1
35.0 mm
49.0 ml


Four-chamber reactor
17 mm × 17 mm × 40 mm
4
17.0 mm
46.2 ml


Six-chamber reactor
17 mm × 10 mm × 40 mm
6
12.6 mm
44.9 ml


6 mm channel reactor

Φ6 mm × 40 mm (length)
23
6.0 mm
26.0 ml




Table 3 The number of grids in the four reactor models




Reactor name
Number of grids in the flow channel region
Number of grids in total




Cavity reactor
702480
1687980


Four-chamber reactor
798034
1459642


Six-chamber reactor
1206008
2145262


6 mm channel reactor
1683556
2465937





η
PV in eqn (10) can be calculated (by ref. 45): ηPV(TPV) = [0.298 + 0.0142lnC + (−0.000715 + 6.97 × 10−5lnC) × (TPV − 298.15)] × ηmod(12)where ηmod is the ratio of the efficiency of the entire PV module to that of an individual PV cell, which is taken as 0.9.47,48
The energy balance of the concentrated solar PV part can be described as: I × C × APV × ηopt × ηabs = PPV + PV,heat(13)where APV is the area of the PV cell. The left side of eqn (13) represents the solar energy collected by the PV cell. PPV and PV,heat are the PV power and the PV heat rate generated by the PV cell, respectively. The PV heat is collected by the preheater/reactor and absorbed by the endothermic MSR reaction. In order to simplify the PVTC hybrid system, a heating plate was applied to simulate the PV heat source for the MSR reaction, because this paper is focused on the reactor structure design and optimization. The PV power output can be calculated from the PV heat rate and the PV efficiency, which is PV,heat × (ηPV/(1 − ηPV)). The PV heat can be calculated as: PV,heat = sen + chem + loss(14)where sen is the sensible heat absorption rate of the methanol solution for vaporation and overheating to the reaction temperature; chem is the heat absorption rate of the endothermic MSR reaction; loss is the heat loss of the system. When there is no thermal mass going into and out of the preheater and reactor, it is considered that the heating power that maintains a stable temperature is equal to the heat loss of this system according to the energy balance of the reactor.
The methanol conversion X is defined as: (15)where ṅ is the molar flow rate of methanol;  is the energy needed for 1 mole of methanol to be completely converted by the MSR reaction. The energy consumption per mole of methanol involved in the MSR reaction is calculated using Aspen Plus.
In the model, 1 mole of methanol and 1.2 moles of water are heated up from 25 °C to 130 °C in the preheater. Then, they are overheated and reformed in the reactor. In order to distinguish the thermal energy allocation between the overheating process and reaction process, the reactor in the PVTC hybrid system is further divided into two models in the Aspen Plus model, which include a heater model and a reactor model. The heater model is used to calculate the energy consumed to overheat the reactants to the reaction temperature; the reactor model calculates the heat absorption during the MSR reaction. The thermal energy absorbed at the set temperature in the reactor model corresponds to  in eqn (15).
Thermochemical efficiency refers to the ratio of the chemical energy change between the output reaction product (syngas) and the input reactant (methanol) to solar thermal energy input into the system, which reflects the ability to convert thermal energy into chemical energy, defined as: (16)where ṅ is the molar flow rate of methanol, HHVsyn is the average higher heating value of syngas (66.6% H2 and 33.4% CO2) and HHVme is the higher heating value of methanol. Unlike PV generation, the thermochemical generation part is easy to control and can be dispatched to smooth out the fluctuation of the former. The dispatchability γ, a parameter to evaluate the stability of solar power output of the PVTC system is defined as follows, which represents the ratio of the solar electricity generated by the thermochemical part to the total solar electricity generated by the PVTC hybrid system: (17)
To evaluate the gas flow uniformity, the maldistribution factor Cν is adopted49 in this work, which is defined as: (18)where σν is the standard deviation of the cross-sectional speed.  is the average speed of the cross-section.
3 Results and discussion
3.1 The methanol conversion of MSR reactors
Methanol conversion is one of the key indicators of the performance of MSR reactors. Fig. 6 shows the methanol conversion of the four reactors at different methanol solution flow rates and reactor temperatures. The general trend of methanol conversion of different reactors with respect to methanol solution flow rate is similar. That is, in the reaction temperature range of 190–250 °C, methanol conversion monotonically decreases with increasing methanol solution flow rate for all the reactor designs. This is because lower methanol solution flow rate means longer residence time of the reactants in contact with the catalysts in favor of higher conversion of the MSR reaction. The second general trend is that the higher the temperature is, the higher the methanol conversion becomes for all the reactor designs and methanol solution flow rates. This is because high temperature shifts the equilibrium of the endothermic MSR reaction forward, and also improves the kinetics of the MSR reaction. The third general trend is that the methanol conversion shows the greatest magnitude of increase in the temperature range of 190–210 °C, followed by that in the range of 210–230 °C, also for all the reactor designs and methanol solution flow rates. This is likely due to the interplay between two critical factors: (1) the forward shift of MSR reaction equilibrium and the increase of MSR reaction kinetics with respect to temperature, and (2) the transport limitations of energy and mass imposed by the limited supply of reactants, with more detailed discussions to follow.
More importantly, attention shall be directed to reactor-design-specific effects on methanol conversion. When the reaction temperature is relatively low (190–210 °C), the 6 mm channel reactor shows the highest methanol conversion. It reaches 46.8% at 190 °C and 1.00 ml min−1 methanol solution flow rate, which is much higher than that of the cavity reactor, 21.6%, at the same operating conditions. Based on the methanol conversion performance at the same temperature and methanol solution flow rate, 6 mm channel reactor > six-chamber reactor > four-chamber reactor > cavity reactor. When the reaction temperature increases to the higher range of 230–250 °C, the six-chamber reactor becomes the one with the highest methanol conversion. For the six-chamber reactor, the methanol conversion is consistently above 80% at 250 °C and 2.00 ml min−1 methanol solution flow rate. In contrast, for the cavity reactor, the methanol conversion is only 52.5% under the same operating conditions, and the order of methanol conversion of different reactors changes to six-chamber reactor > 6 mm channel reactor > four-chamber reactor > cavity reactor. A direct comparison between the two temperature regions (i.e., Fig. 6(a) and (b)vs. (c) and (d)) shows that the performance of the six-chamber and 6 mm channel reactors consistently prevails over that of the four-chamber and cavity reactors. This emphasizes the importance of temperature uniformity (and thus the transport of thermal energy for the endothermic MSR reaction) across the reactor in the first place. For example, by the corss-section pictures shown in Fig. 2, the 6 mm channel reactor has more metal baffles than all the other reactors. As the thermal conductivity of the metal baffles (aluminum alloy, 301 W m−1 K−1 (ref. 50)) is over an order of magnitude higher than that of the catalyst (CuO/ZnO/Al2O3, 20 W m−1 K−1 (ref. 51)), the temperature distribution of the 6 mm channel reactor is much more uniform and the average reaction temperature is higher than the others, which is favorable for the MSR reaction. The same comparison further reveals the importance of metal baffle design to temperature uniformity. Although the six-chamber and four-chamber reactors have almost identical areal percentage of metal baffles (i.e., 31.1% and 31.6%, respectively), the former leads the latter by ∼10 percentage points on average in terms of methanol conversion, since the metal baffle design of the former results in an apparently shorter distance of thermal energy diffusion to the catalyst beds.
Meanwhile, it is also interesting to note the gradual switch of the leading position between the 6 mm channel reactor and the six-chamber reactor as temperature increases from 190 °C to 250 °C. At this point, it must be pointed out that the 6 mm channel reactor actually has the lowest areal percentage of catalyst loading in the corss-section pictures of Fig. 2 (58.4%, 66.8%, 67.0% and 42.6% for cavity, four-chamber, six-chamber and 6 mm channel reactors, respectively), but shows the highest methanol conversion among all the reactor designs for all the flow rates tested between 190 °C and 210 °C. This because when temperature is relatively low, the total demand on thermal power input by the endothermic MSR reaction is relatively small, so that the reactor design with the best temperature uniformity (i.e., shorter distance of thermal energy diffusion) results in the most efficient utilization of MSR catalyst, and thus a relatively low catalyst loading would suffice for a high performance. However, as temperature increases to 230 °C and beyond, not only the kinetic reaction rate of MSR reaction is significantly faster, but the total demand on thermal power input of the entire reactor is also significantly greater due to the forward shift of MSR reaction equilibrium. Therefore, not only temperature uniformity is important to methanol conversion, but the role of total catalyst loading also becomes increasingly important. Higher catalyst loading not only means more reactive surface sites for MSR reaction, but also means longer residence time of the reactants due to the higher internal volume of the flow channels (see Section 3.2). So the six-chamber reactor, with a catalyst loading volume 73% higher than that of the 6 mm channel reactor (i.e., 44.9 ml vs. 26.0 ml; Table 2), considerably outperforms the latter in the temperature range of 230–250 °C.
Overall, the consistently better performance of the six-chamber and 6 mm channel reactors over the other two, especially the consistently better performance of the six-chamber reactor over that of the four-chamber reactor (with very close areal percentages of metal baffle and catalyst loading volumes) clearly shows that effective delivery of thermal energy across the entire reactor is the most important consideration for MSR reactor design. To this end, enhancement of temperature uniformity via rational design of metal baffles has proven a feasible approach. Relatively speaking, catalyst loading is a secondary contributor to methanol conversion performance within the parameter space explored, which manifests itself better at higher temperatures and higher flow rates. The cavity reactor, with the worst temperature uniformity, shows consistently the poorest performance among all the reactor designs for all the temperatures and flow rates tested, even though its catalyst loading volume is the highest (Table 2). On the other hand, the six-chamber reactor, with an excellent metal baffle design in favor of temperature uniformity and a relatively high catalyst loading, delivers the best performance for most temperatures and flow rates tested (only second to the 6 mm channel reactor at low temperatures). Such design with both high temperature uniformity and high catalyst loading is particularly important for MSR reactors targeting at practical applications that usually require high inputs of both thermal energy and chemical energy.
 Fig. 6  Methanol conversion of the four MSR reactors at various methanol solution flow rates and reactor temperatures of (a) 190 °C, (b) 210 °C, (c) 230 °C, and (d) 250 °C. 
3.2 Numerical model results
The structure of a reactor has a significant influence on the temperature distribution, velocity field distribution, and catalyst loading capacity of the reactor, and further affects its methanol conversion and thermochemical efficiency. To investigate the mechanism of the effect of equivalent diameter on the reactor performance, we mainly focus on the effects of the equivalent diameter on temperature distribution, velocity field, and chemical reaction rate of the MSR reactor in the following discussions.

3.2.1 The temperature distribution. 
In order to investigate the effect of equivalent diameter on temperature distribution, the catalyst bed temperature distribution in the reactor is compared. Fig. 7 shows the temperature distribution (a)–(d) and average temperature (e) of the four reactors at 250 °C and 1.50 ml min−1 methanol solution flow rate. As the PV cell (i.e., electric heating plate in the experiment) is the heat source of the whole reactor, the catalyst bed temperature is the highest near the PV cell. The maximum temperature of the catalyst in the four reactors is about the same at approximately 247 °C. But the temperature uniformity of the catalyst has slight differences in different reactors. The temperature difference within the catalyst across a flow channel gradually increases as its equivalent diameter increases. The maximum temperature difference of the catalyst increases from 14 °C in the 6 mm channel reactor to 19 °C in the cavity reactor. This is because the larger the equivalent diameter, the lower the proportion of the aluminum alloy frame in the whole reactor, and the more inhomogeneous the temperature of the catalyst is, which is detrimental to the endothermic MSR reaction.
 Fig. 7  Temperature distribution of the catalyst bed at 250 °C and 1.50 ml min−1 methanol solution flow rate in the (a) cavity reactor, (b) four-chamber reactor, (c) six-chamber reactor, (d) 6 mm channel reactor and (e) the corresponding catalyst average temperature. 

Fig. 7(e) summarizes the average temperature of the catalyst bed in the four reactors at 250 °C. Because the minimum temperature of the catalyst is inside the catalyst rather than on the surface, the average temperature of the catalyst is sometimes lower than the minimum surface temperature of the catalyst shown in Fig. 7(a)–(d). The equivalent diameter has a significant effect on the reactors' heat transfer performance. For a given flow rate of methanol solution, the average temperature of catalysts decreases first and then increases with the increase of equivalent diameter. Because the thermal conductivity of the catalysts (20 W m−1 K−1 (ref. 51)) is much lower than that of the metal baffle (301 W m−1 K−1 (ref. 50)) in the reactor, an increase in the flow channel equivalent diameter means that the distance between the catalyst core and the reactor flow channel edge is enlarged, so that the temperature difference between the core and surface of the catalyst bed is higher (not shown in Fig. 7), and the average catalyst temperature is lower. Because temperature has a great influence on the performance of the MSR reaction, although the catalyst loading capacity of the four-chamber reactor (46.2 ml) is greater than that of the six-chamber reactor (44.9 ml), its lower average reaction temperature leads to a lower methanol conversion than that of the six-chamber reactor. Interestingly, although the average reaction temperature of the 6 mm channel reactor is higher than that of the six-chamber reactor, the methanol conversion of the former at 250 °C is lower than that of the latter. When the reaction temperature is high, the reaction rate of the MSR reaction is enhanced exponentially. Due to the small internal volume and catalyst loading capacity (26.0 ml) of the 6 mm channel reactor, the amount of catalyst and the residence time of reactants in the reactor becomes another major limiting factor of methanol conversion. This also explains why the methanol conversion is higher in the 6 mm channel reactor than that in the other three reactors when the reaction temperature is low, such as 190 °C, as the reaction rate of MSR reaction is greatly decelerated by lower temperatures. It is also interesting to find that the average temperature of the catalyst increases slightly when the equivalent diameter increases from 17.0 mm (four-chamber reactor) to 35.0 mm (cavity reactor). This is because the methanol conversion of the cavity reactor (64.2% at 1.50 ml min−1) is lower than that of the four-chamber reactor (74.5% at 1.50 ml min−1), so that the heat absorption of the whole reactor is lower. Similarly, for the same reactor, the higher the flow rate of the methanol solution is, the higher the total amount of heat absorbed by the reaction becomes, so that the average catalyst temperature decreases as the flow rate increases.


3.2.2 Flow speed distribution. 
To study the effect of equivalent diameter on the gas flow, we examine the flow speed distribution of the flow channels on the horizontal cross-section at z = 20 mm. The speed distribution is shown in Fig. 8(a)–(d). The speed in the cross-section increases as the equivalent diameter decreases. The maximum speed inside the 6 mm channel reactor is 3.1 m s−1, while the maximum speed in the cavity reactor is only 0.08 m s−1.
 Fig. 8  Speed distribution of the flow channels on the horizontal corss-section at z = 20 mm at 250 °C, 1.50 ml min−1 methanol solution flow rate in the (a) cavity reactor, (b) four-chamber reactor, (c) six-chamber reactor, (d) 6 mm channel reactor; (e) flow speed and speed maldistribution of the reactors as functions of equivalent diameter of their flow channels. 
Besides speed magnitude, the equivalent diameter also affectes the uniformity of speed within flow channels. We use the maldistribution factor defined by eqn (18) as an indicator of flow nonuniformity. The blue curve in Fig. 8(e) shows that as the equivalent diameter increases, the maldistribution factor of the gas speed at the cross section decreases first and then increases. This is partly because, on one hand, the average speed becomes smaller (black curve in Fig. 8(e)) with the increase of equivalent diameter, which contributes to the uniformity of the speed. On the other hand, the speed of the gas flow at the wall52 is 0 due to the non-slip boundary condition. The best uniformity of gas flow is achieved with the lowest maldistribution factor of 0.33 at the equivalent diameter of 12.6 mm (six-chamber reactor). In contrast, the maldistribution factor of the cavity reactor is the highest, which is 0.83. Because the equivalent diameter of the cavity reactor is relatively large (35.0 mm), the reactant flow rate in the reactor is very low, resulting in poor heat transfer between the reactor surface and the interior. Since the heat transfer of the cavity reactor mainly depends on the aluminum alloy frame of the reactor wall, the temperature near the reactor wall is high, but the reactant flow rate in this area is low. In contrast, the reaction temperature in the core region of the reactor is lower, but the reactant flow rate there is faster. This mismatch between the temperature and reactant flow rate causes most methanol in the cavity reactor to pass through the relatively low-temperature part of the reactor, which adversely affects both the MSR reaction rate and the methanol conversion. As a result, the methanol conversion of the cavity reactor is lower even at higher average reaction temperature than that of the four-chamber reactor (Fig. 7(e)).


3.2.3 Chemical reaction rate. 
To investigate the effect of equivalent diameter on reaction rate, Fig. 9 compares the reaction rate of the four reactors. Along the flow direction, the reaction rate shows a gradual decrease trend. For example, the reaction rate in a 6 mm channel reactor can reach 6.98 mol m−3 s−1 at the surface near the inlet pipe but only 0.61 mol m3 s−1 near the outlet because the concentration of reactants is higher and the concentration of products is lower near the inlet. According to eqn (8), higher reactant concentrations and lower product concentrations are beneficial to the reaction rate. For the four reactors, as the methanol concentrations are similar at the inlets of different reactor, the maximum reaction rates of the four reactors are affected by the reaction temperature. According to Fig. 9, they are 6.23, 5.84, 6.41, and 6.98 mol m−3 s−1 for cavity, four-chamber, six-chamber, and 6 mm channel reactors, respectively, which is in the same order as that of the reaction temperatures in Fig. 7. At the outlet of the reactor, the six-chamber reactor has the lowest MSR reaction rate, which is 0.51 mol m3 s−1. This means that the methanol concentration is the lowest while methanol conversion is the highest at the outlet. Although the average reaction temperature of the 6 mm channel reactor is 236.4 °C, which is higher than that of the six-chamber reactor (232.5 °C), the reaction rate of the 6 mm channel reactor is 0.61 mol m3 s−1 at the outlet. This is because the internal volume of the 6 mm channel reactor, 26.0 ml, is the smallest among the four reactors, and the residence time of the reactants is the lowest also. As a result, although its average reaction temperature is the highest, its methanol conversion is still lower than that of the six-chamber reactor.
 Fig. 9  Reaction rate distribution of the four reactors at 250 °C, 1.50 ml min−1 methanol solution flow rate in (a) cavity reactor, (b) four-chamber reactor, (c) six-chamber reactor, and (d) 6 mm channel reactor. 

3.3 Thermochemical efficiency
The thermochemical efficiency of the four reactors at different reaction temperatures are compared in Fig. 10. Among the four reactors, the six-chamber and 6 mm channel reactors exhibit the highest thermochemical efficiency, while the cavity reactor show the lowest thermochemiacal efficiency. Specifically, when the reaction temperature is relatively low (e.g., 190 °C), as the flow rate of the methanol solution increases, the thermochemical efficiency of the four reactors decreases monotonically. With the increase of methanol solution flow rate, the heat input into the system increases as well. Because methanol conversion is low, only a small portion of the increased heat is converted to chemical energy. As a result, the thermochemical efficiency decreases with increasing methanol solution flow rate. For example, the heat input rate into the six-chamber reactor increases from 45.0 W to 52.8 W as the methanol solution flow rate increases from 1.00 ml min−1 to 1.25 ml min−1. At the same time, the methanol conversion decreases from 40.9% to 34.5% and the heat absorption rate of the endothermic MSR reaction, chem, increases from 15.4 W to 16.2 W. As a result, the thermochemical efficiency decreases from 34.2% to 30.7% accordingly. Based on the performance at the same temperature and methanol solution flow rate, the reactors are ranked as 6 mm channel reactor > six-chamber reactor > four-chamber reactor > cavity reactor. When the reaction temperature and the methanol conversion are both high enough, the thermochemical efficiency of the reactor increases first and then decreases with the increase of methanol solution flow rate. We take the six-chamber reactor at 250 °C as an example. The heat input rate into the system increases from 69.4 W to 80.6 W when the methanol solution flow rate increases from 1.25 ml min−1 to 1.50 ml min−1. Because methanol conversion remains at a high level and only slightly decreases from 88.9% to 87.3%, the heat absorption rate of the MSR reaction, chem, increases from 42.2 W to 49.1 W. Therefore, the thermochemical efficiency still increases from 63.3% to 63.7% with the increase of methanol solution flow rate from 1.25 ml min−1 to 1.50 ml min−1. However, when the methanol solution flow rate keeps increasing, the methanol conversion further decreases, so that the heat absorption rate due to MSR reaction increases not as quickly as the thermal energy consumption to heat the flow up. Therefore, the thermochemical efficiency starts to decrease with the increase of methanol solution flow rate. Based on the thermochemical efficiency performance, the order of the four reactors changes to six-chamber reactor > 6 mm channel reactor > four-chamber reactor > cavity reactor when the reaction temperature is high. This is consistent with the order of reactor performance obtained by comparing methanol conversion at the same temperature.
 Fig. 10  Comparison of thermochemical efficiency of the four reactors at various methanol solution flow rates at (a) 190 °C, (b) 210 °C, (c) 230 °C, (d) 250 °C. 

Table 4 summarizes the performance of the MSR reactors applied in solar thermal utilization systems in the literature. Among the four reactors investigated by this study, when methanol conversion reaches 84.6% in the six-chamber reactor, the thermochemical efficiency reaches 61.5%, which is the highest value by far as compared with results reported in the literature. According to eqn (10), higher thermochemical efficiency means that the reactor can convert a higher portion of solar thermal energy into chemical energy for power generation and get a higher net solar-electric (NSE) efficiency.
Table 4 Comparison of the MSR reactors' performance with that of similar studies in the literature




Temperature (°C)

R
s–m




X (%)

η
tc (%)
Reactor
Method
Literature





a Steam-to-methanol ratio.





255
1
90
28
Concentrating tubular reactor
Experiment
Ref. 53


300
1
87.1
57.3
Concentrating tubular reactor
Simulation
Ref. 54


250
1.2
57.7
49
Non-concentrating reactor
Experiment
Ref. 55


250
1
99
35.2
Concentrating membrane tubular reactor
Simulation
Ref. 56


273
1
97.6
51.7
Concentrating tubular reactor
Simulation
Ref. 57


290
—
79.0
45.5
Concentrating tubular reactor
Experiment
Ref. 58


250
1.2
79.0
53.7
Cavity reactor
Experiment
This study


250
1.2
77.0
54.5
Four-chamber reactor
Experiment
This study


250
1.2
84.6
61.5
Six-chamber reactor
Experiment
This study


250
1.2
76.9
56.6
6 mm channel reactor
Experiment
This study




3.4 Net solar-electric efficiency and dispatchability
The power output from the PVTC hybrid system is mainly composed of two parts: the PV electricity from the PV cell and the thermochemical electricity from the fuel cell. As chemical energy is easy to store and dispatch, the combination of a PV part and a thermochemical part as in the PVTC hybrid system is an effective way to solve the fluctuation problem of direct solar power generation. Fig. 11 illustrates the contribution of photovoltaic and thermochemical power generation to the net solar-electric efficiency and the dispatchability of the PVTC hybrid system. The efficiencies of the PV part and thermochemical part are both affected by the reactor temperature. The solar-electric efficiencies of the PV part, thermochemical part, and the PVTC hybrid system at different operating temperatures are shown in Fig. 11(a) for the six-chamber reactor with 1.50 ml min−1 methanol solution flow rate. In the reactor temperature range of 190–250 °C, as the reactor temperature increases, the solar-electric efficiency of the PV cell gradually decreases from 25.8% to 25.2%. Meanwhile, for the thermochemical part, solar-electric efficiency rapidly grows from 7.7% to 17.0%. As a result, although the PV efficiency decreases with the increase of reactor temperature, the NSE efficiency of the PVTC hybrid system still increases from 33.6% to 42.2%. However, as high temperature could attenuate the life-time of the three-junction GaAs PV cell, the operating temperature of the PVTC hybrid system is not suitable to exceed 250 °C (ref. 59) for high NSE efficiencies. As a result, the thermochemical performance of the four reactors at higher operating temperatures is not further investigated in this paper.
 Fig. 11  Performance of the PVTC hybrid system at 1.50 ml min−1 methanol solution flow rate: (a) contribution of photovoltaic (PV) and thermochemical (TC) power generation to the net solar-electric efficiency at different reactor temperatures; (b) influence of direct normal irradiance and concentration ratio on the net solar-electric efficiency; (c) dispatchability of PVTC system as a function of methanol solution flow rate. 
The influences of the direct normal irradiance (DNI) and the concentration ratio on the PVTC hybrid system are shown in Fig. 11(b). The solid curves correspond to the concentration ratio of 900 (typical for Fresnel concentrators) and the dashed curves correspond to the concentration ratio of 100 (typical for parabolic trough concentrators). It shows that the NSE efficiency increases monotonically with the increase of DNI under both concentration ratios. This is because higher DNI increases the solar energy collection efficiency of the PVTC hybrid system and leads to the increase of NSE, according to eqn (10) and (11). Similarly, as the concentration ratio increases, the NSE efficiency of the PVTC hybrid system increases as well. When the concentration ratio is high, the NSE efficiency is less likely to be affected by the DNI. For example, when the DNI increases from 100 W m−2 to 1000 W m−2, the NSE efficiency of the PVTC hybrid system under the concentration ratio of 900 increases from 41.1% to 42.2% at 250 °C, which increases by 1.1 percentage points. In contrast, the NSE efficiency of the PVTC hybrid system under the concentration ratio of 100 increases from 28.6% to 38.5% under the same conditions, which increases by 9.9 percentage points.
As the chemical energy generated by the thermochemical part is easy to store, electricity generated by this part could be controlled and used to smooth out the fluctuation of the PV power output. Fig. 11(c) shows the dispatchability of the PVTC hybrid system based on the six-chamber reactor at different temperatures and methanol solution flow rates. The dispatchability increases as the temperature increases. This is because a higher reaction temperature promotes the thermochemical reaction and limits the PV power generation, as shown in Fig. 11(a), which increases the proportion of the thermochemical power generation. When the temperature is constant, the dispatchability is only affected by the performance of the thermochemical part. In Fig. 10(a) and (b), when the operating temperature is low, the thermochemical efficiency is easily affected by the methanol solution flow rate. With the increase of methanol solution flow rate, the thermochemical efficiency decreases monotonically, which leads to less thermal energy being upgraded to chemical energy and thus lower dispatchability. Similarly, when the operating temperature is high, the dispatchability is less affected by the methanol solution flow rate because the thermochemical efficiency is relatively stable (shown in Fig. 10(c) and (d)) in the range of 1.00–2.00 ml min−1 methanol solution flow rate.
The NSE efficiency of the four reactors at 250 °C and different methanol flow rates is shown in Fig. 12(a). The six-chamber reactor shows the best performance among the investigated reactors and high tolerance on the variation of methanol solution flow rate. The NSE efficiency of the PVTC hybrid system based on the six-chamber reactor is 41.4–42.2% in the range of 1.00–2.00 ml min−1 methanol solution flow rate. Similar to its thermochemical efficiency performance, the NSE efficiency performance of the cavity reactor is also susceptible to the change of methanol flow rate and shows the lowest performance among the four reactors. The NSE efficiency difference among the four reactors maximizes at 250 °C and 2.00 ml min−1 methanol solution flow rate, which is 4.1 percentage points (42.2% for the six-chamber reactor and 38.1% for the cavity reactor). Fig. 12(b) summarizes the optimal NSE efficiency of PVTC hybrid system based on each of the four reactors and the corresponding optimal methanol solution flow rate. With the increase of equivalent diameter, the NSE efficiency increases first and then decreases in the PVTC hybrid system, and the optimal methanol flow rate shows the same trend. For the equivalent diameter of 12.6 mm (six-chamber reactor), the optimal NSE efficiency is the highest (42.2%) with 1.75 ml min−1 optimal methanol solution flow rate. For the equivalent diameter of 35.0 mm (cavity reactor), the optimal NSE efficiency of the PVTC hybrid system decreases to 39.9% with 1.00 ml min−1 optimal methanol solution flow rate because of the low methanol conversion and low thermochemical efficiency at high methanol flow rate. The NSE efficiency of the PVTC hybrid system based on the optimized reactor is 3.5 percentage points higher than that of the previous study at the same operating temperature.28
 Fig. 12  The NSE efficiencies of the PVTC system based on the four different reactors investigated in this study (a) as a function of methanol solution flow rate, and (b) as a function of equivalent diameter with corresponding optimal methanol solution flow rate. 
4 Conclusions
Four methanol steam reforming reactors are designed and evaluated by optimizing the inner structure of the reactor and improving the net solar-electric efficiency of the PVTC hybrid system based on such reactors. Experimental results show that the structure of the reactor greatly affects the performance of the thermochemical part in the PVTC hybrid system. The methanol conversion of the reactors tends to increase and then decrease with the increase of equivalent diameter. Among the four reactors we designed, the six-chamber reactor with an equilibrium diameter of 12.6 mm exhibits the best thermochemical performance. The methanol conversion of the six-chamber reactor is 87.3%, which is 23.0 percentage points higher than that of the cavity reactor, under 1.50 ml min−1 methanol solution flow rate and 250 °C operating conditions. Numerical simulation results show that temperature has a great influence not only on the MSR reaction, but also on the uniformity of reactant flow. In order to improve the gas flow uniformity and temperature uniformity, metal baffles should be added to the reactor, but to a reasonable level at the same time to avoid adversely impacting the catalyst loading capacity of the reactor. Although the 6 mm channel reactor has the largest number of metal baffles and the best heat transfer performance, whose average temperature (238 °C) is the highest at 250 °C and 1.5 ml min−1 methanol solution flow rate, the catalyst loading capacity is only 26.0 ml, resulting in a methanol conversion of only 79.2%. By contrast, the six-chamber reactor has relatively fewer metal baffles and an average temperature of 235 °C under the same operating conditions, but the catalyst loading capacity is significantly increased to 44.9 ml, resulting in the highest methanol conversion. The thermochemical efficiency of the six-chamber reactor exceeds 60% in the PVTC hybrid system, so that the optimal NSE efficiency of the PVTC system based on such reactor design can reach 42.2% at 250 °C and 1.75 ml min−1 methanol solution flow rate, which is 3.5 percentage points higher than that of the previous study at the same operating temperature. Meanwhile, the dispatchability of the system can reach a high level of 40.3% under these operating conditions. We expect that the findings of this study shall provide useful guidance for the design of high-performance reactors for the efficient conversion and utilization of solar energy in thermochemical complementation with methanol driven by concentrated solar energy.
Author contributions
Z. T.: conceptualization, methodology, data curation, formal analysis, writing – original draft, writing – review & editing. K. Z.: methodology, data curation, formal analysis, writing – original draft, writing – review & editing. Y. Z.: data curation, writing – review & editing. L. Y.: validation, writing – review & editing. Y. S.: validation, writing – review & editing. Y. H.: conceptualization, supervision, funding acquisition, writing – review & editing.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Basic Science Center Program for Ordered Energy Conversion of National Natural Scientific Foundation of China (No. 51888103).
References
J. A. Herron, J. Kim, A. A. Upadhye, G. W. Huber and C. T. Maravelias, A general framework for the assessment of solar fuel technologies, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 126–157 RSC .
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocerats, Powering the planet: Chemical challenges in solar energy utilization, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., 2006, 103, 15729–15735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yu, Y. M. Tang, K. Y. Chau, R. Nazar, S. Ali and W. Iqbal, Role of solar-based renewable energy in mitigating CO2 emissions: Evidence from quantile-on-quantile estimation, Renewable Energy, 2022, 182, 216–226 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zou, B. Xiong, H. Xue, D. Zheng, Z. Ge, Y. Wang, L. Jiang, S. Pan and S. Wu, The role of new energy in carbon neutral, Pet. Explor. Dev., 2021, 48, 480–491 Search PubMed .
T. T. Chow, A review on photovoltaic/thermal hybrid solar technology, Appl. Energy, 2010, 87, 365–379 CrossRef CAS .
A. Vossier, J. Zeitouny, E. A. Katz, A. Dollet, G. Flamant and J. M. Gordon, Performance bounds and perspective for hybrid solar photovoltaic/thermal electricity-generation strategies, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2018, 2, 2060–2067 RSC .
A. Radwan, T. Katsura, S. Memon, E. M. Abo-Zahhad, O. Abdelrehim, A. A. Serageldin, M. R. Elmarghany, A. Khater and K. Nagano, Development of a new vacuum-based photovoltaic/thermal collector, and its thermal and exergy analyses, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2020, 4, 6251–6273 Search PubMed .
B. M. Ziapour, V. Palideh and M. Baygan, Performance comparison of four passive types of photovoltaic–thermal systems, Energy Convers. Manage., 2014, 88, 732–738 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mellor, D. Alonso Alvarez, I. Guarracino, A. Ramos, A. Riverola Lacasta, L. Ferre Llin, A. J. Murrell, D. J. Paul, D. Chemisana, C. N. Markides and N. J. Ekins-Daukes, Roadmap for the next-generation of hybrid photovoltaic-thermal solar energy collectors, Sol. Energy, 2018, 174, 386–398 CrossRef .
J. Zhou, X. Zhao, X. Ma, Z. Qiu, J. Ji, Z. Du and M. Yu, Experimental investigation of a solar driven direct-expansion heat pump system employing the novel PV/micro-channels-evaporator modules, Appl. Energy, 2016, 178, 484–495 CrossRef .
H. Chen, Z. Li and B. Sun, Performance evaluation and parametric analysis of an integrated diurnal and nocturnal cooling system driven by photovoltaic-thermal collectors with switchable film insulation, Energy Convers. Manage., 2022, 254, 115197 CrossRef .
B. S. M. C. Borba, L. F. Henrique and D. C. Malagueta, A novel stochastic optimization model to design concentrated photovoltaic/thermal systems: A case to meet hotel energy demands compared to conventional photovoltaic system, Energy Convers. Manage., 2020, 224, 113383 CrossRef .
J. Lin, S. Liu, X. Ju, C. Xu, X. Ju and H. Liu, Investigation of two-stage concentrating splitting photovoltaic/thermal system with a flexible heat-electricity ratio based on nanofluid, Energy Convers. Manage., 2022, 258, 115531 CrossRef CAS .

          NREL, Opportunities for Research and Development of Hybrid Power Plants,  2020 Search PubMed.
N. Gallandat, J. Bérard, F. Abbet and A. Züttel, Small-scale demonstration of the conversion of renewable energy to synthetic hydrocarbons, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2017, 1, 1748–1758 RSC .
S. Davidsson Kurland and S. M. Benson, The energetic implications of introducing lithium-ion batteries into distributed photovoltaic systems, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2019, 3, 1182–1190 Search PubMed .
H. M. Branz, W. Regan, K. J. Gerst, J. B. Borak and E. A. Santori, Hybrid solar converters for maximum exergy and inexpensive dispatchable electricity, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3083–3091 Search PubMed .
N. S. Lewis, Research opportunities to advance solar energy utilization, Science, 2016, 351, aad1920 CrossRef PubMed .
A. O. Gbadegesin, Y. Sun and N. I. Nwulu, Techno-economic analysis of storage degradation effect on levelised cost of hybrid energy storage systems, Sustain. Energy Technol. Assessments, 2019, 36, 100536 CrossRef .
W. Li and Y. Hao, Explore the performance limit of a solar PV – thermochemical power generation system, Appl. Energy, 2017, 206, 843–850 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li and Y. Hao, Efficient solar power generation combining photovoltaics and mid-/low-temperature methanol thermochemistry, Appl. Energy, 2017, 202, 377–385 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zheng, W. Zhou, X. Li, H. You, Y. Yang, W. Yu, C. Zhang, X. Chu, K. San Hui and W. Ding, Structural design of self-thermal methanol steam reforming microreactor with porous combustion reaction support for hydrogen production, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 22437–22447 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bac, S. Keskin and A. K. Avci, Recent advances in sustainable syngas production by catalytic CO2 reforming of ethanol and glycerol, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2020, 4, 1029–1047 RSC .
Z. Ou, Z. Zhang, C. Qin, H. Xia, T. Deng, J. Niu, J. Ran and C. Wu, Highly active and stable Ni/perovskite catalysts in steam methane reforming for hydrogen production, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2021, 5, 1845–1856 RSC .
H. Hong, H. Jin, J. Ji, Z. Wang and R. Cai, Solar thermal power cycle with integration of methanol decomposition and middle-temperature solar thermal energy, Sol. Energy, 2005, 78, 49–58 CrossRef CAS .
A. Anand, A. Shukla, H. Panchal and A. Sharma, Thermal regulation of photovoltaic system for enhanced power production: A review, J. Energy Storage, 2021, 35, 102236 Search PubMed .
C. Arkar, T. Žižak, S. Domjan and S. Medved, Comparative analysis of free cooling of photovoltaics – phase change versus evaporative cooling, J. Energy Storage, 2022, 49, 104162 CrossRef .
W. Li, Y. Hao, H. Wang, H. Liu and J. Sui, Efficient and low-carbon heat and power cogeneration with photovoltaics and thermochemical storage, Appl. Energy, 2017, 206, 1523–1531 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, N. Zhang and N. Lior, Performance comparison of two low-CO2 emission solar/methanol hybrid combined cycle power systems, Appl. Energy, 2015, 155, 740–752 CrossRef CAS .
A. Iulianelli, P. Ribeirinha, A. Mendes and A. Basile, Methanol steam reforming for hydrogen generation via conventional and membrane reactors: A review, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2014, 29, 355–368 CrossRef CAS .
F. R. García-García, S. C. Tsang and K. Li, Hollow fibre based reactors for an enhanced H2 production by methanol steam reforming, J. Membr. Sci., 2014, 455, 92–102 CrossRef .
Y. Chen, C. Zhang, R. Wu and M. Shi, Methanol steam reforming in microreactor with constructal tree-shaped network, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 6366–6373 Search PubMed .
F. Yao, Y. Chen and G. P. Peterson, Hydrogen production by methanol steam reforming in a disc microreactor with tree-shaped flow architectures, Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 2013, 64, 418–425 CrossRef CAS .
R. Manikanda Kumaran, G. Kumaraguruparan and T. Sornakumar, Experimental and numerical studies of header design and inlet/outlet configurations on flow mal-distribution in parallel micro-channels, Appl. Therm. Eng., 2013, 58, 205–216 CrossRef .
H. An, A. Li, A. P. Sasmito, J. C. Kurnia, S. V. Jangam and A. S. Mujumdar, Computational fluid dynamics (CFD) analysis of micro-reactor performance: Effect of various configurations, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2012, 75, 85–95 Search PubMed .
P. Ribeirinha, M. Boaventura, J. C. B. Lopes, J. M. Sousa and A. Mendes, Study of different designs of methanol steam reformers: Experiment and modeling, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 19970–19981 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fazeli and M. Behnam, Hydrogen production in a zigzag and straight catalytic wall coated micro channel reactor by CFD modeling, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 9496–9503 Search PubMed .
A. Kundu, J. H. Jang, H. R. Lee, S.-H. Kim, J. H. Gil, C. R. Jung and Y. S. Oh, MEMS-based micro-fuel processor for application in a cell phone, J. Power Sources, 2006, 162, 572–578 CrossRef CAS .
C.-Y. Hsueh, H.-S. Chu and W.-M. Yan, Numerical study on micro-reformer performance and local transport phenomena of the plate methanol steam micro-reformer, J. Power Sources, 2009, 187, 535–543 CrossRef CAS .

          NREL transforming energy, Best research-cell efficiency chart, https://www.nrel.gov/pv/cell-efficiency.html,  2022, accessed 08 October 2022 Search PubMed.

          NREL transforming energy, Champion Photovoltaic Module Efficiency Chart, https://www.nrel.gov/pv/module-efficiency.html,  2022, accessed 08 October 2022 Search PubMed.
A. B. Stambouli and E. Traversa, Solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs): a review of an environmentally clean and efficient source of energy, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2002, 6, 433–455 Search PubMed .
D. L. Koch and J. F. Brady, Dispersion in fixed beds, J. Fluid Mech., 1985, 154, 399–427 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Lee, J. B. Ko and D. H. Kim, Methanol steam reforming over Cu/ZnO/Al2O3 catalyst: kinetics and effectiveness factor, Appl. Catal., A, 2004, 278, 25–35 Search PubMed .
A. Kribus and G. Mittelman, Potential of Polygeneration With Solar Thermal and Photovoltaic Systems, J. Sol. Energy Eng., 2008, 130, 011001 CrossRef .
A. Parretta, A. Antonini, E. Milan, M. Stefancich, G. Martinelli and M. Armani, Optical efficiency of solar concentrators by a reverse optical path method, Opt. Lett., 2008, 33, 2044–2046 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kurtz, I. Repins, W. K. Metzger, P. J. Verlinden, S. Huang, S. Bowden, I. Tappan, K. Emery, L. L. Kazmerski and D. Levi, Historical Analysis of Champion Photovoltaic Module Efficiencies, IEEE J. Photovoltaics, 2018, 8, 363–372 Search PubMed .
G. Mittelman, A. Kribus and A. Dayan, Solar cooling with concentrating photovoltaic/thermal (CPVT) systems, Energy Convers. Manage., 2007, 48, 2481–2490 CrossRef CAS .
C.-J. Hsu, S.-S. Hsiau, Y.-S. Chen and J. Smid, Investigation of the gas inlet velocity distribution in a fixed granular bed filter, Adv. Powder Technol., 2010, 21, 614–622 CrossRef CAS .

          J. G. Cook, J. P. Moore, T. Matsumura and M. P. van der Meer, The Thermal and Electrical Conductivity of Aluminum, Thermal Conductivity 14, Springer, Boston, MA,  1976, pp. 65–71 Search PubMed .
Q. Zhang, Y.-Z. Zuo, M.-H. Han, J.-F. Wang, Y. Jin and F. Wei, Long carbon nanotubes intercrossed Cu/Zn/Al/Zr catalyst for CO/CO2 hydrogenation to methanol/dimethyl ether, Catal. Today, 2010, 150, 55–60 CrossRef CAS .

          F. P. Incropera, D. P. DeWitt, T. L. Bergman and A. S. Lavine, Fundamentals of Heat and Mass Transfer, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 6th edn,  2007 Search PubMed .
H. Hong, Q. Liu and H. Jin, Operational performance of the development of a 15kW parabolic trough mid-temperature solar receiver/reactor for hydrogen production, Appl. Energy, 2012, 90, 137–141 CrossRef CAS .
L. Dou, Y. Zhang, X. Li, M. Mu and B. Ding, Numerical study and structural optimization of mid-and-low temperature solar absorber/reactor for methanol decomposition, Appl. Therm. Eng., 2023, 218, 119290 Search PubMed .
D. Real, I. Dumanyan and N. Hotz, Renewable hydrogen production by solar-powered methanol reforming, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 11914–11924 Search PubMed .
H. Wang, R. Yang, B. Wang, Z. Wei, H. Kong, X. Lu and J. Jin, Thermodynamic performance of solar-driven methanol steam reforming system for carbon capture and high-purity hydrogen production, Appl. Therm. Eng., 2022, 209, 118280 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Q. Liu, J. Lei and H. Jin, A three-dimensional simulation of a mid-and-low temperature solar receiver/reactor for hydrogen production, Sol. Energy, 2016, 134, 273–283 CrossRef CAS .
T. Liu, Z. Bai, Z. Zheng, Q. Liu, J. Lei, J. Sui and H. Jin, 100 kWe power generation pilot plant with a solar thermochemical process: design, modeling, construction, and testing, Appl. Energy, 2019, 251, 113217 CrossRef CAS .
R. H. van Leest, K. de Kleijne, G. J. Bauhuis, P. Mulder, H. Cheun, H. Lee, W. Yoon, R. van der Heijden, E. Bongers, E. Vlieg and J. J. Schermer, Degradation mechanism(s) of GaAs solar cells with Cu contacts, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 10232–10240 RSC .

Footnote† The first two authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the modular photovoltaic-thermochemical hybrid reactor.	 
De = 4Ac/Lc	(1)

 	Fig. 2  Overall design of the methanol steam reforming reactors; (a) external design; (b)–(e) cross section of reactor interior with four different flow channel designs, i.e., cavity, four-chamber, six-chamber and 6 mm channel, respectively; (f) picture of the interior of different MSR reactors.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic diagram and pictures of the reactor performance evaluation platform: (a) schematic diagram of the platform; (b) constant flow pump; (c) temperature control box; (d) preheater and reactor; (e) condenser; (f) CuO/ZnO/Al2O3 catalyst; (g) mass-flow meters.	 
∇·(ρmix) = 0	(2)
	(3)
ρCp,mix·∇T = ∇·(kmix∇T) + 	(4)
	(5)
∇2T = 0	(6)
∇·(−Dg,i∇ci) + ·∇ci = Ri	(7)
Ri = (1 − εp)ρcatrM	(8)
	(9)

 	Fig. 4  Computation grids of the four types of reactor in the PVTC hybrid system. (a) The grid of the whole reactor; (b) the gird in the fluid part and the flow channel part of the reactor; (c)–(f), the grid in the flow channel part of the cavity reactor, four-chamber reactor, six-chamber reactor and 6 mm channel reactor, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 5  Validation of the numerical model. (a) Grid independence test of the cavity reactor at 250 °C and 1.50 ml min−1 methanol solution flow rate; (b) comparison of experimental methanol conversion results and simulated results of the cavity reactor at 250 °C; (c) comparison of experimental methanol conversion results and simulated results of the four reactors at 250 °C and 1.50 ml min−1 methanol solution flow rate.	 
	(10)
	(11)

PV cell type	GaInP/GaAs/Ge three-junction PV cell
Dimension of the PV cell	10 × 10 × 1 mm3
Optical efficiency	0.80
Fuel cell type	SOFC
Efficiency of the fuel cell42	0.50

Cavity reactor	35 mm × 35 mm × 40 mm	1	35.0 mm	49.0 ml
Four-chamber reactor	17 mm × 17 mm × 40 mm	4	17.0 mm	46.2 ml
Six-chamber reactor	17 mm × 10 mm × 40 mm	6	12.6 mm	44.9 ml
6 mm channel reactor	
Φ6 mm × 40 mm (length)	23	6.0 mm	26.0 ml

Cavity reactor	702480	1687980
Four-chamber reactor	798034	1459642
Six-chamber reactor	1206008	2145262
6 mm channel reactor	1683556	2465937
ηPV(TPV) = [0.298 + 0.0142lnC + (−0.000715 + 6.97 × 10−5lnC) × (TPV − 298.15)] × ηmod	(12)
I × C × APV × ηopt × ηabs = PPV + PV,heat	(13)
PV,heat = sen + chem + loss	(14)
	(15)
	(16)
	(17)
	(18)

 	Fig. 6  Methanol conversion of the four MSR reactors at various methanol solution flow rates and reactor temperatures of (a) 190 °C, (b) 210 °C, (c) 230 °C, and (d) 250 °C.	 

 	Fig. 7  Temperature distribution of the catalyst bed at 250 °C and 1.50 ml min−1 methanol solution flow rate in the (a) cavity reactor, (b) four-chamber reactor, (c) six-chamber reactor, (d) 6 mm channel reactor and (e) the corresponding catalyst average temperature.	 

 	Fig. 8  Speed distribution of the flow channels on the horizontal corss-section at z = 20 mm at 250 °C, 1.50 ml min−1 methanol solution flow rate in the (a) cavity reactor, (b) four-chamber reactor, (c) six-chamber reactor, (d) 6 mm channel reactor; (e) flow speed and speed maldistribution of the reactors as functions of equivalent diameter of their flow channels.	 

 	Fig. 9  Reaction rate distribution of the four reactors at 250 °C, 1.50 ml min−1 methanol solution flow rate in (a) cavity reactor, (b) four-chamber reactor, (c) six-chamber reactor, and (d) 6 mm channel reactor.	 

 	Fig. 10  Comparison of thermochemical efficiency of the four reactors at various methanol solution flow rates at (a) 190 °C, (b) 210 °C, (c) 230 °C, (d) 250 °C.	 


255	1	90	28	Concentrating tubular reactor	Experiment	Ref. 53
300	1	87.1	57.3	Concentrating tubular reactor	Simulation	Ref. 54
250	1.2	57.7	49	Non-concentrating reactor	Experiment	Ref. 55
250	1	99	35.2	Concentrating membrane tubular reactor	Simulation	Ref. 56
273	1	97.6	51.7	Concentrating tubular reactor	Simulation	Ref. 57
290	—	79.0	45.5	Concentrating tubular reactor	Experiment	Ref. 58
250	1.2	79.0	53.7	Cavity reactor	Experiment	This study
250	1.2	77.0	54.5	Four-chamber reactor	Experiment	This study
250	1.2	84.6	61.5	Six-chamber reactor	Experiment	This study
250	1.2	76.9	56.6	6 mm channel reactor	Experiment	This study

 	Fig. 11  Performance of the PVTC hybrid system at 1.50 ml min−1 methanol solution flow rate: (a) contribution of photovoltaic (PV) and thermochemical (TC) power generation to the net solar-electric efficiency at different reactor temperatures; (b) influence of direct normal irradiance and concentration ratio on the net solar-electric efficiency; (c) dispatchability of PVTC system as a function of methanol solution flow rate.	 

 	Fig. 12  The NSE efficiencies of the PVTC system based on the four different reactors investigated in this study (a) as a function of methanol solution flow rate, and (b) as a function of equivalent diameter with corresponding optimal methanol solution flow rate.	 
Footnote
† The first two authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
