Advances in manganese-based oxides for oxygen evolution reaction  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TA05116K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TA05116K
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 14400-14414Advances in manganese-based oxides for oxygen evolution reaction

        
          
            Lin 
            Tian
          
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Xiuhui 
            Zhai
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xiang 
            Wang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jun 
            Li
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Zhao 
            Li
          
          
        
      *a
aSchool of Materials and Chemical Engineering, Xuzhou University of Technology, China. E-mail: xzittl@xzit.edu.cn; xzitlz@xzit.edu.cn
bAnalysis and Testing Center, School of Materials and Chemical Engineering of Xuzhou University of Technology, China
Received 
      19th May 2020
    , Accepted 30th June 2020First published on 3rd July 2020AbstractHydrogen production by water electrolysis, characterized by sufficient sources of raw materials, cost-effectiveness, and environment-friendly merits, has attracted increasing attention. Nevertheless, the inherent high reaction energy barrier and four-electron mechanism of anodic oxygen evolution reaction (OER) result in higher reaction overpotential, slower reaction rate, and more power consumption, affording low hydrogen evolution efficiency in the cathodic half reaction. This considerably limits practical applications. Manganese-based oxides (MnOx) show great promise for driving OER due to their worthwhile intrinsic properties, such as well-controlled morphology, structure, and electronic state. Moreover, a large number of unsaturated edge sites on the surface of MnOx can not only improve the active area to increase the number of active sites, but they also help adsorb OH− in alkaline solutions, thereby facilitating oxygen production. From this perspective, we review the emerging applications of a series of MnOx materials as highly efficient electrocatalysts for OER. By highlighting the reaction mechanisms, superiorities, and challenges of each type of MnOx, we hope to provide guidance for constructing more efficient MnOx electrocatalysts and reveal the bright future for future applications in the highly exciting energy-conversion-related areas.Lin TianLin Tian received his PhD from the China University of Mining and Technology in 2017. Currently, he is a Lecturer in the School of Materials and Chemical Engineering at Xuzhou University of Technology. He mainly focuses on the development of carbon-based nonprecious metal nanomaterials for electrochemical applications, such as electrocatalysis, supercapacitors, and electrochemical sensing.Xiuhui ZhaiXiuhui Zhai is currently studying for her BS in the School of Materials and Chemical Engineering at Xuzhou University of Technology. Her research focuses on Mn-based electrocatalysts for water splitting.Xiang WangXiang Wang is receiving his BS in the School of Materials and Chemical Engineering at Xuzhou University of Technology. He is proficient in illustrating research papers and focuses on electrocatalysts derived from MOFs for water splitting.Zhao LiZhao Li received her PhD from the China University of Mining and Technology in 2019. Currently, she is a Lecturer in the School of Materials and Chemical Engineering at Xuzhou University of Technology. Her research focuses on energy storage and conversion (including water splitting, fuel cells, and supercapacitors).
1. Introduction
Hydrogen, because of its high energy density, low molecular weight, clean and pollution-free nature, and abundant sources, is considered to be an ideal alternative energy source to alleviate the global energy crisis and environmental pollution problems.1–4 Among the various hydrogen production technologies, the conversion of renewable energy such as wind energy and solar energy into electrical energy is an effective strategy and then produce hydrogen via water electrolysis.5–7 Nevertheless, the relatively higher reaction energy barrier and four-electron mechanism of the electrocatalytic oxygen evolution reaction (OER) afford larger reaction overpotential, slower reaction rate, and more electrical energy consumption, resulting in lower hydrogen evolution efficiency in the cathodic half reaction.8–12 Therefore, developing highly active electrocatalysts for oxygen evolution is the key to overcome the bottleneck in hydrogen production from water electrolysis. At present, precious metal oxides such as IrOx and RuOx are generally considered to be the state-of-the-art electrocatalysts for OER,13–15 while their high price and limited reserves significantly impede their industrial applications.16–18 To this end, 3d transition metal oxides represented by Fe, Co, Ni, and Mn have been extensively studied as OER electrocatalysts.19–23 Although the current electrocatalytic oxygen evolution activity of manganese oxides (MnOx) is not as high as those of Fe-, Co-, and Ni-based oxides,24–26 as the only catalytic activity center for oxygen evolution in natural photosynthesis,27 Mn has inherent catalytic oxygen evolution properties that are unmatched by other metals.28 In addition, MnOx catalysts have many advantages in the nanostructure form. (1) A large number of unsaturated edge sites on the surface of MnOx can not only improve the active area to expose more surface active sites, but also facilitate the adsorption of reaction intermediate species.29 (2) When compared with other metal oxides, MnOx catalysts have numerous morphologies and structures, and their electronic states are also well regulated to be favorable for electrocatalytic OER. (3) MnOx catalysts also have the advantages of low price, low toxicity, rich content, and low calorific value. All these favorable terms render MnOx to be promising electrocatalysts for OER.
Despite MnOx materials showing great promise for driving OER, their electrocatalytic activities are still not comparable to those of IrOx and RuOx catalysts due to their relatively lower intrinsic activity, limited available active sites, and poor electrical conductivity.9 Taking these issues into consideration, considerable efforts have been devoted toward promoting the electrocatalytic activities of MnOx catalysts by enhancing the intrinsic activities, increasing the active sites, and improving the electrical conductivity of MnOx materials.
Herein, we provided an overview and discussed the recent progresses made in MnOx catalysts for OER. First, we illustrated the influence of the oxidation state (Mn2+, Mn3+, and Mn4+) of Mn on the electrocatalytic performance of MnOx catalysts; this is because many oxidation states of MnOx catalysts are involved in the electrocatalytic OER process. Hence, having a comprehensive understanding of the real active sites of MnOx catalysts is crucial for synthesizing more efficient MnOx OER electrocatalysts. Secondly, the advantages of MnOx as OER electrocatalysts in terms of structure and electronic properties are highlighted and discussed. After that, we provided the summaries of the recent progresses made in designing MnOx catalysts for OER, including morphology design, surface and interface engineering, defect regulation, and electrical conductivity improvement. Subsequently, the classification of MnOx catalysts and their applications in OER are also presented. Finally, the limitations and challenges in this field are also clearly discussed and presented, and some promising solutions are proposed to further enhance their electrocatalytic performance and boost their practical applications.
2. Fundamentals of OER mechanism based on MnOx
In nature, photosystem II efficiently catalyzes water oxidation by the oxygen-evolving center (OEC) under neutral conditions, where a cluster comprising manganese and calcium elements (Mn4Ca) and its unique ligand environment have exhibited properties similar to those of OEC for driving water oxidation.30 Inspired by the water oxidation of this photosystem, Mn-based catalysts, particularly MnOx catalysts, have received increasing interest.31 Despite the significant progress achieved in constructing MnOx catalysts, existing discrepancies in the activity severely limit their practical applications. To address these issues, having a better understanding of the mechanisms underlying the OER electrocatalytic performance of MnOx electrocatalysts is necessary.
Generally, it has been well demonstrated that the electrocatalytic activity of MnOx catalysts is associated with the structural parameters related to the binding of reactants or adsorbates. To be specific, the Mn–O/Mn–Mn local distances can significantly affect the binding energies between the active sites and reactants and the oxygen-containing intermediates (O*, OH*, and OOH*). For instance, Robinson et al. reported the fabrication of Mn2O3 and Mn3O4 that exhibited moderate Mn–O/Mn–Mn bonding lengths, which could exhibit excellent catalytic performance for water oxidation.32 Besides these local distances, the electronic configuration of the 3d orbital is also reported to be significant for determining the catalytic activity of MnOx catalysts since the eg orbital participates in the formation of σ bonding with the anionic adsorbates, and the occupancy of this orbital could directly influence the binding strength between the active sites and reactant species, resulting in a volcano-shaped activity curve. From the perspective of the electrocatalytic OER mechanism, the optimized electronic configuration for Mn-based and other transition metal catalysts is suggested to be the e1g orbital.33,34 In addition, the oxygen evolution process of MnOx catalysts involves three oxidation states, namely, Mn2+, Mn3+, and Mn4+, among which Mn3+ has been well demonstrated to be the main active center.
However, the inherent instability of Mn3+ can induce the formation of Mn2+ and Mn4+, resulting in low catalytic activity. For example, Nakamura's group deposited δ-MnO2 on fluorine-doped tin oxide electrodes to catalyze water oxidation at pH ranging from 4 to 13, which demonstrated that Mn3+ acted as the active center for OER (Fig. 1a and b).35 In particular, unstable Mn3+ ions in acidic/neutral solutions commonly underwent a disproportionation reaction to generate inactive Mn2+ and Mn4+, as shown in eqn (1). Mn3+ ions were free from this disproportionation reaction and were effectively stabilized by a comproportionation reaction with an increase in pH (eqn (2)). From the equilibrium constants for the disproportionation and comproportionation reactions of MnO2, it was estimated that the concentration of Mn3+ ions was as low as 10−14% of the initial concentration of the precursors in acidic/neutral solutions, while the concentration of Mn3+ ions reached as high as 99.9% after the stabilization of the comproportionation reaction in a basic solution. These results are consistent with the analyses of OER activity, which confirmed the crucial role played by the concentration and stabilization of Mn3+ ions in determining their catalytic performance. 2Mn3+(aq) + 2H2O → MnO(s) + Mn2+(aq) + 4H+(1) MnO2(s) + Mn(OH)2 → Mn2O3(s) + H2O(2)
 Fig. 1  Oxidation states of Mn ions involved in the OER on a δ-MnO2 electrode at (a) pH 4–8 and (b) pH ≥ 9. (c) Schematic of the band structure of the activated catalyst system derived from the δ-MnO2 model. (a and b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 35. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. (c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 36. Copyright 2018, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 
Chan et al. introduced Mn3+ into MnO2via a comproportionation reaction with Mn3+, where the introduced Mn3+ decreased the Mn–O coordination number to reduce the HOMO–LUMO gap (Fig. 1c).36 Moreover, Mn3+ could also be stabilized by rich oxygen, which led to the domination of HOMO by the oxygen states. Therefore, both reduced HOMO–LUMO gap and oxygen-enriched HOMO facilitated oxygen evolution, resulting in higher OER activity. To this end, constructing MnOx catalysts comprising the t32ge1g orbital and highly stable Mn3+ was crucial for improving the catalytic performance.
3. Design principle of MnOx catalysts
As discussed above, the electrocatalytic performances of MnOx catalysts are associated with their intrinsic activity, number of active sites, electronic structure, and electrical conductivity.28,37,38 Accordingly, in order to realize the synthesis of high-quality MnOx catalysts for OER, it is necessary to precisely tune MnOx catalysts with higher intrinsic activity, larger number of active sites, optimized electronic structure, and higher electrical conductivity (Scheme 1).39 In the following section, we provide the design principle for fabricating high-performance MnOx electrocatalysts.
 Scheme 1  Schematic illustration of MnOx as advanced electrocatalysts. 
3.1 Intrinsic activity
From the viewpoint of OER mechanism on MnOx catalysts, the intrinsic activities of MnOx catalysts are associated with Mn–O/Mn–Mn local distances, electronic configuration, and concentrations of Mn3+ ions.40–42 Therefore, constructing MnOx catalysts with moderate binding strength between the active sites and reactants/intermediates, optimized electronic configuration, and large and stable Mn3+ ions are effective strategies to improve their electrocatalytic OER performance. Following these guidelines, considerable efforts have been devoted toward the fabrication of high-quality MnOx catalysts for OER. For example, Nakamura and Nam's group demonstrated the synthesis of uniform MnO nanoparticles that were enriched with stable Mn(III) species through a proton-coupled electron transfer pathway (Fig. 2a).43 As demonstrated by in situ spectroscopic and electrokinetic analyses (Fig. 2b), it was revealed that the formation of Mn(IV)O intermediates species indicated a concerted one-proton and one-electron transfer occurring as the quasi-equilibrium step, followed by a chemical rate-determining step (Fig. 2c), resulting in high electrocatalytic OER performance. More recently, they also prepared a highly active, rutile MnO2 electrocatalyst for OER by optimizing the exposed crystal facet.44 In particular, the OER current density observed on the metastable (101) surfaces was 3 times higher than that of (110) surfaces due to the significantly enhanced stability of Mn3+ ions (Fig. 2d). Interestingly, Mn4+ in the (101) surfaces of β-MnO2 could be reduced to Mn2+, where the newly generated Mn2+ and Mn4+ in the second layer commonly underwent a comproportionation reaction to form Mn3+, while a similar reaction could not occur in the (110) surfaces (Fig. 2e).
 Fig. 2  (a) TEM image of MnO nanoparticles. (b) Schematic illustration of water oxidation to generate oxygen based on MnO nanoparticles. (c) Proposed OER mechanisms of conventional Mn electrocatalysts (top) and MnO nanoparticles (bottom). Schematic illustration of the surface valency changes on the (d) (101) and (e) (110) surfaces of β-MnO2. (a and b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 43. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (c–e) Reproduced with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Moreover, Li et al. demonstrated that the crystal phase optimization of MnOx catalysts was also favorable for enhancing their electrocatalytic water oxidation performances.45 They realized the successful phase transformation from the H0.5MnO2 phase to nascent δ-MnO2via facile solid-to-solid phase transition, which led to the formation of ample defects; further, the generated Mn vacancy near the active site facilitated the adsorption of OH− in the basic solution, resulting in significant enhancement in the OER performance (Fig. 3).
 Fig. 3  Schematic image of the phase transformation process and adsorption of OH by Mn vacancy for boosting OER. Reproduced with permission from ref. 45. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
3.2 Morphology
Morphology is a crucial factor that strongly affects the electrocatalytic performances of catalysts as the electrochemical reactions commonly occur on the surface of the catalyst.46–49 The morphology of a catalyst is primarily associated with the accessible surface area and redox active sites. Generally, a catalyst with a well-defined geometric structure exhibits high surface active areas and typically exposes more surface active sites for the reactants.50–53 Besides, nanostructures enriched with a unique surface area can facilitate mass transport and electron transfer and therefore can improve the electrocatalytic performance.54–56 Therefore, rationally designing and constructing a well-defined nanostructure is important for fabricating high-performance electrocatalysts. Recent studies have demonstrated the significant progresses made in the design and construction of MnOx materials with well-defined nanostructures for OER. For example, Nam's group reported the fabrication of zero-dimensional (0D) Ni-doped Mn3O4 nanoparticles, where 5 nm-sized Mn3O4 nanoparticles exposed large surface active areas to provide rich surface active sites; further, the incorporated elemental Ni significantly enhanced the conductivity of Mn3O4 nanoparticles to boost the electron transfer.34 Both these merits contributed toward the large promotion of electrocatalytic OER performance. Besides the nanoparticles, 0D and one-dimensional (1D) nanostructures have also been demonstrated to be favorable for boosting the OER activity.57 For instance, Gu et al. utilized an ionic liquid (IL) as the structure-directing agent to convert β-MnO2 nanorods into α-MnO2 nanowires (Fig. 4a and b).58 Further, electrochemical tests demonstrated that the as-obtained α-MnO2 nanowires showed significantly improved electrocatalytic performance toward OER as compared to β-MnO2 nanorods (Fig. 4c). A mechanistic study revealed that the large surface area of the nanowire structure and high-concentration Mn3+ ions in the α-MnO2 nanowires accounted for its higher electrocatalytic performance.
 Fig. 4  (a) TEM and (b) elemental EDS mapping images of IL-modified MnO2 nanowires. (c) OER polarization curves of MnO2–IL0.5 catalysts with different reaction times in 1 M KOH solution. TEM images of (d) MnO2 and (e) Ni-doped MnO2 nanosheets. (f) OER polarization curves of Ni–MnO2, Co–MnO2, Zn–MnO2, Cu–MnO2, Fe–MnO2, MnO2, and carbon paper. (g) TEM and (h) HRTEM images of 3D Pd–MnO2/CS. (i) OER polarization curves of Pd/C, Pd/CS, MnO2/CS, and Pd–MnO2/CS in 1 M KOH solution. (a–c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 58. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (d–f) Reproduced with permission from ref. 64. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (g–i) Reproduced with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2016, Elsevier Inc. 
In addition to 0D and 1D nanostructures, two-dimensional (2D) nanostructures, particularly 2D ultrathin nanosheets, have attracted increasing attention in electrocatalysis due to their large surface area and unique electronic properties.40,59,60 For one thing, an ultrathin nanosheet can provide the maximum number of exposed active sites for the reactant species, thereby enhancing the electrocatalytic reaction efficiency.40,61 Further, an ultrathin nanosheet structure also facilitates efficient charge transfer at the electrode–electrolyte interface.62,63 Inspired by these two advantages, the design and construction of ultrathin nanosheet structures have received increasing attention. For example, Yang et al. reported the fabrication of MnO2 nanosheets by intercalation with transition metal ions, such as Fe2+, Co2+, Ni2+, Zn2+, and Cu2+ (Fig. 4d and e).64 Among them, the as-obtained Ni-doped MnO2 nanosheets showed the highest OER activity with overpotential of only 330 mV at 10 mA cm−2 (Fig. 4f). A mechanistic study revealed that the activity enhancement originated from the Ni dopant and ultrathin nanosheet structure, where the doped Ni element considerably strengthened the Mn–O bond to facilitate interlayer catalysis and the ultrathin nanosheet exposed rich surface active sites available for the reactant species to accelerate the mass transport and electron transfer, thereby enhancing the electrocatalytic OER.
Three-dimensional (3D) nanocatalysts with accessible active areas are also a class of fascinating nanostructures for electrocatalytic reactions.65,66 On one hand, a unique 3D nanostructure can facilitate mass transport and electron transfer; on the other hand, the inherent rigidity of the 3D nanostructure can protect the nanocatalysts from collapse and corrosion during long-term electrochemical tests, thereby yielding high electrocatalytic performance.39,67,68 In this case, tremendous efforts have been devoted toward the fabrication of well-defined 3D nanostructures for electrocatalysis. For instance, Zhang et al. developed 3D Pd–MnO2/carbon sphere (CS) by depositing urchin-like MnO2 nanorods on the CS, followed by the deposition of Pd nanoparticles on the surface of MnO2 nanorods (Fig. 4g and h).69 These 3D nanostructures efficiently provided active sites fully available to the OER via exposing a higher surface area of the electrode. Besides, the surface MnO2 nanorods and CS substrate considerably boosted the diffusion of intermediated species and charge of electrons. More importantly, the introduced Pd could function as an electron adsorbate to induce the generation of active centers. All these inherent properties enabled 3D Pd–MnO2/CS to exhibit excellent electrocatalytic performance for OER (Fig. 4i).
3.3 Defects
Since the electronic properties and surface composition of the electrode materials directly determine the electrocatalytic reaction rate and charge transfer process, the electrocatalytic performances of electrode materials, therefore, can vary with a change in their electronic structures.70–72 Recently, defect engineering has been demonstrated to be an effective approach for modifying the surface properties and internal electronic structures of electrode materials, resulting in a significant enhancement in the electrical conductivity and electrochemical performances.73–77 Taking inspiration from this, enormous efforts have been devoted toward the design and construction of high-quality nanostructures via defect engineering.78,79 With regard to MnOx catalysts, defect engineering is also significant for tailoring their electrochemical properties, which can be mainly ascribed to the formation of Mn3+ active sites and oxygen vacancies. Mn3+ active sites can enhance the conductivity of MnOx catalysts to accelerate the electron transfer, while the ample oxygen vacancies can modulate the electronic structure to optimize the adsorption/desorption of the intermediates (O*, OH*, and OOH*),36,80,81 significantly enhancing the electrocatalytic activity and stability toward OER. For example, Wang's group formulated a deep understanding on the significant role played by defects in the electrode materials for rechargeable batteries and fuel cells, which could effectively modify the atomic structure and alter the charge distribution to enhance both charge transfer and ion diffusion. Besides, defect engineering has been demonstrated to be effective for the optimization of catalysts for OER. For example, Zhang's group reported the fabrication of nickel foam (NF)-supported ultrathin δ-MnO2 nanosheets via a facile in situ method (Fig. 5a).82 It is worth mentioning that these as-prepared ultrathin δ-MnO2 nanosheets consisted of ample oxygen vacancies, affording the formation of abundant Mn3+ active sites (Fig. 5b). Interestingly, the ample oxygen vacancies could significantly promote the adsorption of OH− in alkaline media, while the presence of Mn3+ active sites introduced half-metallicity into δ-MnO2 to enhance their conductivity for accelerating electron transfer during the redox reactions (Fig. 5c). As a result, defect-engineered ultrathin δ-MnO2 nanosheets showed excellent electrocatalytic performance toward OER with overpotential of only 320 mV at 10 mA cm−2 (Fig. 5d and e), as well as a small Tafel slope of 40 mV dec−1. More importantly, such a defect engineering strategy also enabled δ-MnO2 nanosheets to exhibit outstanding hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) activity (Fig. 5f and g), with overpotential of only 190 mV at 10 mA cm−2, as well as a small Tafel slope of 67 mV dec−1, rendering δ-MnO2 nanosheets as a promising electrocatalysts for overall water splitting.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the formation of NF-supported ultrathin δ-MnO2 nanosheets. (b) TEM and (c) HRTEM images of ultrathin δ-MnO2 nanosheets. (d) OER polarization curves of δ-MnO2, NF, and IrO2 catalysts in 1 M KOH solution. (e) Crystal structure model of δ-MnO2. (f) Adsorption energies of H2O on the surfaces of Ni, NiO, MnO2, and oxygen-vacancies-enriched δ-MnO2 nanosheets. (g) Gibbs free energies of HER on pure MnO2 and oxygen-vacancies-enriched δ-MnO2 nanosheets. Reproduced with permission from ref. 82. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
3.4 Conductivity
Electrical conductivity is also crucial for electrocatalysis since it governs the charge transfer capability and diffusion of electrolyte ions at the reaction interface during redox reactions.83–85 With regard to transition metal oxides, the major obstacles for efficient electrocatalysis are poor conductivity (10−3 to 10−4 S m−1) and high electrical impedance.86 Therefore, improving the electrical conductivity of MnOx catalysts to boost electron transfer during electrocatalytic reactions is imperative for enhancing their electrocatalytic performance.87 In recent years, two efficient approaches have been developed for improving the electrical conductivity of MnOx catalysts. One of them involves growing MnOx catalysts on the surface of a conductive substrate such as metal foam (NF, iron foam, copper foam, etc.) and carbon supports (i.e. graphene, carbon fiber, carbon black, carbon nanotubes (CNTs), etc.) or other conducting polymers (polyaniline (PANI), polydopamine (PDA), polypyrrole (PPy), etc.).88–90 For example, He et al. synthesized a NiO/MnO2 composite (Fig. 6b and c) and hierarchical mesoporous NiO/MnO2@PANI core−shell microspheres (Fig. 6b and d), where the introduced PANI largely enhanced the electrical conductivity of the composite and significantly boosted the charge transfer during electrochemical reactions.91 Further, the charge transfer resistance of NiO/MnO2@PANI was calculated to be 62 Ω, which was much smaller than those of γ-MnO (276 Ω) and NiO/MnO2 (80 Ω), indicating faster electron transfer and favorable OER kinetics (Fig. 6e). Owing to the high surface area, accessible mesoporous structure, strong synergistic effect of core–shell structures, and high electrical conductivity, the NiO/MnO2@PANI core–shell microspheres exhibited excellent electrocatalytic performance toward OER in alkaline media (Fig. 6f).
 Fig. 6  (a) TEM and (c) HAADF-STEM elemental mapping images of the NiO/MnO2 composite. (b) TEM and (d) HAADF-STEM images of the NiO/MnO2@PANI composite. (e) Nyquist plots (at 1.71 V vs. RHE) and (f) OER polarization curves of different catalysts in 1 M KOH solution. Reproduced with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Besides CNTs, our group also introduced carbon quantum dots (CQDs) to considerably improve the electrical conductivity of MnO2 and boost electron transfer during the electrochemical reaction.92 In particular, we demonstrated a facile microwave-assisted hydrothermal method for constructing MnO2/CQDs composites, where the introduced CQDs not only enhanced the conductivity of the composite to boost the electron transfer, but also modified the morphology of the composite to expose more surface active areas, leading to a considerable improvement in the electrocatalytic OER performance.
Another efficient strategy is to dope MnOx catalysts with other metal elements, such as Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, etc., where the doped metal elements can efficiently modify the electronic structure of MnOx catalysts to promote electron transfer and optimize the adsorption of reactants species and intermediates.93,94 For instance, Teng et al. demonstrated a simple spontaneous redox reaction to develop a novel Fe–Mn–O hybrid nanosheet on the surface of carbon cloth (Fig. 7a–c).95 Interestingly, these Fe–Mn–O nanosheets afforded much smaller transport impedance of 3.92 Ω and interfacial charge transfer resistance of 1.84 Ω as compared to those of MnO2 nanosheets (Fig. 7d), demonstrating superior charge transfer capability and faster reaction kinetics. As a result, benefitting from the enhanced charge transfer kinetics and strong synergistic action of Mn and Fe oxides, the as-obtained Fe–Mn–O nanosheets showed significantly enhanced electrocatalytic performance for OER in 1 M KOH solution, with overpotential of 273 mV at 10 mA cm−2 and small Tafel slope of 63.9 mV dec−1 (Fig. 7e and f). Further, the mechanistic study revealed that the atomic-scale synergistic action of Mn and Fe was favorable for promoting the intrinsic activity of Fe–Mn–O nanosheets, and the high conductivity ensured efficient charge transfer.
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration of the Fe–Mn–O nanosheets. (b) SEM and (c) TEM images of Fe–Mn–O nanosheets. (d) Nyquist plots of different catalysts at 1.60 V. (e) LSV polarization curves and (f) Tafel plots of different catalysts in 1 M KOH solution. Reproduced with permission from ref. 95. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
4. Applications of MnOx for OER
Mn-containing clusters (Mn4O8Ca) in photosystem II exhibit high water oxidation activity, which can be an inspiration from nature. Therefore, Mn-based catalysts have been widely researched as efficient electrocatalysts for OER.96–99 As shown in Table 1, MnOx catalysts have been well demonstrated to be promising for OER due to its substantial advantages, such as rich edge sites, tunable morphology and electronic structure, easily induced defects, and so on. In the following section, we will provide an overview of the recent achievements of MnOx catalysts as electrode materials for OER.
Table 1 Summary of electrocatalytic OER activity of the reported Mn-based electrocatalysts




Catalysts
Design principle
Electrolyte
Overpotential (mV @ 10 mA cm−2)
Ref.




NiO/MnO2@PANI
Morphology/conductivity
1 M KOH
345

91



δ-MnO2
Defect
1 M KOH
320

82



Ni-doped Mn3O4
Morphology
0.5 M PBS
458

34



Fe–Mn–O
Morphology/conductivity
1 M KOH
273

95



MnO2/CQD
Morphology/conductivity
1 M KOH
343

92



MnO2–IL0.5
Morphology
1 M KOH
394

58



Ni–MnO2
Intrinsic activity
1 M KOH
333

64



Metal-doped MnO2
Conductivity
1 M KOH
390

93



Mn3O4@CoxMn3−xO4
Intrinsic activity/defect
1 M KOH
246

80



Co–MnO2
Defect
1 M KOH
279

53



Co-intercalated layered MnO2
Intrinsic activity
1 M KOH
360

96





4.1 MnO for OER
Emerging as potential alternatives, transition metal oxides (TMOs), such as MnOx, FeOx, CoOx, and perovskite oxides, have attracted increasing attention as oxygen electrocatalysts.100–103 Among the various TMOs, MnOx species have received special attention due to their promising superiorities such as low cost, abundance in nature, environmental benignity, and worthwhile electrochemical properties. As one of the family members of MnOx species, MnO not only inherits the inherent physicochemical properties of MnOx species, but also exhibits good electrochemical properties, which were extensively studied subsequently as efficient catalysts for electrochemical reactions.104,105 For example, Lee and Tang's group utilized MnO as bifunctional electrode materials to drive oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) and OER.106 In particular, they developed a scalable sol–gel process and subsequent heat treatment method for the construction of Ni–MnO/rGO composites (Fig. 8a). The as-prepared Ni–MnO nanoparticles were highly dispersed on the surface of rGO with a high Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) specific surface area (109 m2 g−1) and mass of meso- and macropores (Fig. 8b and c). Doped metallic Ni element and rGO effectively boosted the electron transfer to improve the conductivity of MnO. The 3D porous rGO networks could also provide the maximum number of active sites of the catalyst, as well as prevent Ni–MnO nanoparticle aggregation, detachment, and Ostwald ripening, thereby enhancing the long-term electrochemical stability. Besides, metallic Ni also modified the electronic structure of MnO to optimize the adsorption/desorption of the reaction intermediates. Benefitting from these advantages, the as-obtained Ni–MnO/rGO composite exhibited not only superior OER performance, but also excellent ORR performance (Fig. 8d and e). Notably, the Ni–MnO/rGO composite required overpotential of only 370 mV at 10 mA cm−2 in 1 M KOH solution, which was superior to that of commercial RuO2 catalysts (380 mV).
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic diagram of the synthesis of Ni–MnO/rGO. (b) SEM and (c) HRTEM images of Ni–MnO/rGO composite. (d) OER polarization curves of different catalysts obtained in 1 M KOH solution. (e) Compositional and structural advantages of Ni–MnO/rGO for OER and ORR. Reproduced with permission from ref. 106. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Lou's group reported the construction of MnO/Co on the surface of porous graphitic carbon (MnO/Co/PGC) polyhedrons through a facile hydrothermal–calcination approach.107 Owing to the abundant MnO/Co heterointerfaces, high conductivity, and additional strong catalyst–support interaction, the as-obtained MnO/Co/PGC exhibited outstanding electrocatalytic performance for ORR and OER. These analyses confirmed the positive influences of MnO enhancing the electrocatalytic OER performance in alkaline media.
4.2 MnO2 for OER
As a classic representative of MnOx catalysts, MnO2 has been investigated for over a century due to its complexities. The MnO2 family possesses ample crystalline structures due to the different connection modes of the [MnO6] octahedron (Fig. 9).108 These modes can generate and share the edge or corner with the adjacent ones, affording complex grids.91 Therefore, from the perspective of natural MnO2 crystal texture, MnO2 can be classified into three major groups, i.e., 1D tunnel structure (i.e., α-, β-, γ-, and ε-MnO2), 2D layered structure (δ-MnO2), and 3D network structure (λ-MnO2).86,109 Due to the richness of the MnO2 crystal structure, the electrochemical properties of MnO2 are, therefore, distinctive. In the following section, we will comprehensively discuss the electrocatalytic performance of MnO2 with different crystal structures toward OER.
 Fig. 9  Crystal structures of MnO2 polymorphs. (a) α-MnO2, (b) β-MnO2, (c) γ-MnO2, (d) ε-MnO2, (e) δ-MnO2, and (f) λ-MnO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 109. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 

4.2.1 α-MnO2 for OER. 
α-MnO2, with a 1D tunnel structure, comprises [MnO6] octahedron double chains that are corner-sharing with the adjacent double chains in the plane.108,110 Computational calculations revealed that the large α-MnO2 tunnel structure could effectively provide efficient space for mass transport and electron transfer, as well as facilitate the release of O2 during electrocatalytic OER.81 Moreover, the large space in α-MnO2 could also relieve structural strain caused by repeated ion insertion/extraction processes, endowing α-MnO2 with good structural stability. Taking inspiration from the above merits, high-quality α-MnO2 nanocatalysts have been effectively developed as efficient electrocatalysts for OER. For example, Peng's group demonstrated the synthesis of α-MnO2 nanowires by converting β-MnO2 nanorods through a facile IL-assisted hydrothermal methods.111 Interestingly, the synergistic effects from the ultralong nanowire structure, appropriate tunnel structure with rich di-μ-oxo bridges, alkali-metal incorporation, and high concentration of Mn3+ rendered α-MnO2 nanowires as advanced electrocatalysts for OER (Fig. 10a). As a result, the as-obtained α-MnO2 nanowires showed high electrocatalytic activity toward OER with overpotential of merely 394 mV at 10 mA cm−2 in 1 M KOH solution, which was much lower than that of β-MnO2 nanorods (Fig. 10b). Moreover, the α-MnO2 nanowires also possessed a small Tafel slope of 49 mV dec−1, which was comparable to commercial RuO2 catalysts. Antoni et al. developed simple thermal treatment for the construction of a class of α-(K)MnO2 electrocatalysts with higher ratio of Mn3+, abundant structural defects, and large number of mono-oxo bridges.112 The unique physicochemical properties of α-(K)MnO2 after the thermal treatments enabled α-(K)MnO2 to display higher current density and faster reaction kinetics for OER, rendering them as a class of promising electrocatalysts for OER.
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of the transformation of β-MnO2 nanorods into α-MnO2 nanowires. (b) OER polarization curves of MnO2 catalysts treated with different amounts of IL in 1 M KOH solution. Reproduced with permission from ref. 111. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 


4.2.2 β-MnO2 for OER. 
Similar to α-MnO2, β-MnO2 structures are composed of [MnO6] octahedron single chains by vertex-sharing, forming a [1 × 1] tunnel structure.86 Among all the MnO2 crystal structures, the β-MnO2 structure has been widely considered as the most thermodynamically stable structure, which could serve as a highly stable electrocatalyst for OER. For example, Meng et al. reported the fabrication of β-MnO2 nanocatalysts and employed them as electrocatalysts for OER, which could display excellent electrocatalytic OER performance.113 Besides, they also prepared other three MnO2 nanocatalysts (α-MnO2, amorphous, and δ-MnO2) and evaluated their electrocatalytic activities for OER. After electrochemical measurements, it was found that the catalytic performance for OER was highly dependent on the crystallographic structure since the OER catalytic activity followed the order of α-MnO2-SF > amorphous > β-MnO2 > δ-MnO2. The mechanistic study revealed that the highest OER activity of α-MnO2–SF could be attributed to the abundant μ2-oxo-O(H) active sites that existed in the edge-shared [MnO6] octahedron analogous to the OEC complex in PS-II, large surface areas (112 m2 g−1) affording high accessibility to water, as well as the efficient charge and mass transport. These results not only confirmed the high electrocatalytic OER performance of β-MnO2, but also demonstrated that the OER activity of MnO2 was primarily dependent on the crystallographic structure.


4.2.3 δ-MnO2 for OER. 
Different from α-MnO2, β-MnO2, and γ-MnO2, the crystalline structure of δ-MnO2 is a layered structure, which enables them to provide more specific surface area as compared to tunnel-type nanostructured MnO2.114 In addition, the interlayer spaces of δ-MnO2 structures were always occupied by heterogeneous atoms, which, in turn, significantly stabilized the layered structure, making δ-MnO2 a promising class of electrocatalysts for electrochemical reactions.94,115 Therefore, substantial efforts have been devoted toward the fabrication of high-performance δ-MnO2 for OER. Nevertheless, the electrocatalytic OER performance of δ-MnO2 could not meet the high requirements for practical applications. To this end, efficient strategies for promoting the electrocatalytic performance of δ-MnO2 have also been widely proposed. Among them, modification of the δ-MnO2 lattice by doping with other metallic elements has been widely regarded as an effective approach. For one thing, the incorporation of other elements can effectively enhance the conductivity of δ-MnO2 to accelerate the electron charge during electrochemical reactions. Further, the electronic structure of δ-MnO2 could also be modified after the incorporation of other elements, optimizing the adsorption/desorption of the reactant and intermediated species. Furthermore, the introduction of other elements could also create a high ratio of Mn3+, leading to significant enhancement in the intrinsic activity for OER. Inspired by these, many studies involving δ-MnO2 for OER have been developed. For example, McKendry et al. reported the fabrication of Co-doped birnessite (KxFe[Co0.16Mn0.84O2]) through facile intercalation procedures (Fig. 11a).116 Iron hydrazine intercalation procedures not only effectively decreased the particle size to enlarge the surface areas, but they also significantly increased the Mn3+ defects to promote the intrinsic activity of the catalysts. As a result, the as-obtained Co-doped birnessite exhibited low overpotential of 375 mV at 10 mA cm−2 and small Tafel slope of 56 mV dec−1 in 1 M KOH solution, showing great promise for practical applications (Fig. 11b).
 Fig. 11  (a) Atomic models of Co-doped birnessite. (b) OER polarization curves of different catalysts in 1 M KOH solution. (c) HRTEM image of IrO2/δ-MnO2 composite. (d) Schematic diagram for Ir–Ir shells and the crystal structure of IrO2. (e) OER polarization curves of different catalysts in 1 M KOH solution. (a and b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 116. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (c–e) Reproduced with permission from ref. 114. Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Besides, Yang's group also synthesized the IrO2/δ-MnO2 composite to drive OER.114 IrO2 underwent z-extension Jahn–Teller distortion and the eg orbital is partly filled after coupling with δ-MnO2, which significantly optimized the bond strength between the active sites and oxygen-related intermediate species (Fig. 11c and d). Moreover, δ-MnO2 could serve as the substrate to enlarge the exposed surface areas for confronting the active sites of IrO2, leading to enhanced promotion in the electrocatalytic performance for OER (Fig. 11e).

4.3 Mn2O3 for OER
Mn2O3, as another typical MnOx catalyst, shows great promise for applications in electrochemical energy conversion and storage field.117 α-Mn2O3 also possessed an orthorhombic crystal structure (Pcab space group), where the Mn3+ cations are octahedrally coordinated by O2− anions. These [MnO6] octahedra share corners and edges.118 Due to the fact that the 3d3 spin state of Mn(III) in α-Mn2O3 is found in the lattice, variations are observed in the Mn–Mn and Mn–O distances, which may be beneficial for OER.119,120 In view of these merits, some studies regarding the design and synthesis of α-Mn2O3 have been conducted. For example, Kim's group demonstrated the synthesis of 1D RuO2/Mn2O3 hollow architectures via single-nozzle electrospinning followed by heating-speed-controlled calcination (Fig. 12a–d).121 The as-obtained RuO2/Mn2O3 hollow nanocatalysts could serve as high-performance electrocatalysts for ORR and OER. The hollow architecture not only offered rich accessibility to the water molecules, but also boosted the release of O2, providing a beneficial influence on OER. Moreover, the inherent electrochemical properties of RuO2 and Mn2O3 are also conducive toward oxygen evolution (Fig. 12e and f). Furthermore, the synergistic effect between RuO2 and Mn2O3 could largely improve their electrocatalytic performance.
 Fig. 12  TEM and HRTEM images of RuO2/Mn2O3 for (a) fiber-in-tube and (c) tube-in-tube nanostructures. Elemental EDS mapping images of RuO2/Mn2O3 for (b) fiber-in-tube and (d) tube-in-tube nanostructures. (e) OER LSV polarization curves and (f) Tafel plots of different catalysts in 1 M KOH solution. Reproduced with permission from ref. 121. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
Kölbach et al. reported the fabrication of α-Mn2O3 films, where the high electrical conductivity and large electrochemical active areas ensured that the α-Mn2O3 films exhibited excellent electrocatalytic activity for OER.122 Jahan et al. prepared the single-crystal orthorhombic-phase Mn2O3 prisms bounded with the (100) facets, which are highly active toward OER.123 Therefore, the as-prepared α-Mn2O3 prisms with stabilized Mn(III) species and (100) facets exhibited higher electrocatalytic performance for OER.
4.4 Mn3O4 for OER
Inspired by the remarkably active Mn4CaO5 clusters for water oxidation, Mn3O4 with high-concentration and stable Mn3+ has, therefore, been extensively researched as an efficient electrocatalyst for OER.124 In the spinel structure Mn2+Mn23+O4, Mn existed as Mn2+ and Mn3+; here, Mn3+ occupied the octahedral site and Mn2+ ion occupied the tetrahedral site. The coexistence of Mn2+ and Mn3+ offers excellent OER activity. Therefore, numerous studies have focused on exploring high-quality Mn3O4 catalysts for efficient electrocatalytic OER. Further, earlier studies have also demonstrated that Mn3O4 electrocatalysts are highly active toward OER in neutral and alkaline media. For example, Nam's group reported the fabrication of 4 and 8 nm Mn3O4 nanoparticles (Fig. 13a and b).33 Owing to the enlarged surface area and improved electrical conductivity, the as-obtained Mn3O4 nanoparticles showed apparently higher OER activity in comparison with other Mn oxides (Fig. 13c). Remarkably, the optimized 8 nm Mn3O4 nanoparticles that were loaded on the surface of NFs exhibited outstanding OER activity with overpotential of only 395 mV at 10 mA cm−2 under neutral conditions, which was much superior to those of Fe-, Co-, and Ni-based oxides. As demonstrated by Maruthapandian et al., Mn3O4 catalysts also showed excellent electrocatalytic performance for OER in basic solutions (Fig. 13d and e).125 In particular, they demonstrated the synthesis of Ni-doped Mn3O4 catalysts, which showed significantly enhanced OER electrocatalytic activity in 1 M KOH solution with overpotential of 283 mV at 10 mA cm−2 (Fig. 13f). Further, a mechanistic study revealed that the largely improved OER performance could be ascribed to the enhanced adsorption/desorption of hydroxide and oxygen atoms, boosting the formation of metal oxyhydroxide/hydroperoxo. Moreover, the efficient electron charge between the electrolyte and Mn3O4 and enlarged electrochemical surface active sites facilitated the promotion of electrocatalytic OER performance.
 Fig. 13  TEM images of (a) 4 and (b) 8 nm Mn3O4 nanoparticles. (c) OER polarization curves of 4 and 8 nm Mn3O4 nanoparticles in Na–Pi electrolyte at pH 7. (d) HRTEM and (e) SAED images of Ni-doped Mn3O4. (f) Schematic illustration of the OER mechanism of Ni-doped Mn3O4 electrode. (a and b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 33. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d–f) Reproduced with permission from ref. 125. Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Peng's group prepared porous carbon (PC)-supported Mn3O4@C nanoparticles, where the as-obtained Mn3O4@CS/CP showed a minimum barrier for the transformation of O* to OOH*, affording remarkably high OER activity.126 Rani et al. demonstrated the excellent electrocatalytic performance of the Mn3O4 nanostructure for OER under neutral and alkaline chemical environments.127
4.5 Other MnOx catalysts for OER
In addition to MnO, MnO2, Mn2O3, and Mn3O4 catalysts, other MnOx catalysts have also been developed for OER, such as Mn3O4@MnxCo3−xO4, Fe–Mn–O, etc. Due to the combination of the inherent high activity of MnOx catalysts, strong synergistic effect between the different components, and unique heterointerface effect, MnOx composites can exhibit excellent electrocatalytic performance for OER. For example, Gong's group designed core–shell Mn3O4@MnxCo3−xO4 oxides that were bounded with abundant edge sites, where the edge sites with unsaturated coordination facilitated the adsorption of OH− in the basic solution, contributing to the significantly enhanced electrocatalytic performance for OER (Fig. 14a–c).80 As a result, the edge-site-enriched Mn3O4@MnxCo3−xO4 oxides exhibited small overpotential of 246 mV at 10 mA cm−2 and a low Tafel slope of 46 mV dec−1 in 1 M KOH solution. Besides MnOx composites, MnO2 with other crystal structures have also been reported for OER (Fig. 14d and e). For instance, Li et al. fabricated well-defined γ-MnO2 and employed it as an efficient electrocatalyst for OER in acidic solutions, which could not only exhibit high catalytic activity, but also superior long-term stability for more than 8000 h.128
 Fig. 14  (a) TEM and (b and c) HRTEM images of Mn3O4@MnxCo3−xO4 nanoparticles. (d) Structural model of edge-site-enriched Mn3O4@MnxCo3−xO4 oxides with unsaturated coordination. (e) LSV polarization curves of different catalysts for OER in 1 M KOH solution. Reproduced with permission from ref. 80. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
4.6 MnOx-based composites for OER
Coupling MnOx catalysts with other electroactive materials or conductive substrates is also demonstrated to be an efficient strategy for fabricating high-performance electrocatalysts for electrochemical reactions. On one hand, the inherently high intrinsic activity of different components rendered them as active centers for electrocatalytic reactions. On the other hand, the strong synergistic effects between the different components and efficient charge transfer at the heterointerfaces also significantly contributed toward the higher promotion of electrocatalytic performance. Furthermore, the utilization of MnOx catalysts with tunable morphology and structure provides a platform for studying the surface and interface engineering of multiple components toward electrocatalytic reactions. Therefore, numerous works have been reported for the construction of high-quality MnOx-based composites for OER. Until now, various MnOx-based composites have been designed and developed, including MnOx/TMO, MnOx/transition metal phosphides (TMPs), MnOx/transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), and so on, which were demonstrated to be highly active for OER. For example, Xiong et al. reported the fabrication of intertwined Ni3S2/MnO2 nanosheet arrays, where the exposed interface active sites, interface electron transfer, and strong synergistic effect between the different components contributed toward the significantly enhanced reaction kinetics, resulting in high OER performance in alkaline media.129 He's group constructed the CoNi–S/MnO2 composite, which exhibited excellent electrocatalytic performance for OER in alkaline media due to the exposure of abundant surface active sites and modification of electronic structure after the formation of heterostructured composites.130 These suggested that the as-prepared MnOx-based composites were highly active OER electrocatalysts.
5. Summary and outlook
In this featured review, we have summarized the recent achievements and limitations of MnOx catalysts for electrocatalytic OER, followed by the plausible remedies suggested for them. MnOx catalysts showed abundant merits for driving electrocatalytic OER. For one thing, the easy regulation of their geometric morphology endows MnOx catalysts with well-defined nanostructures, which can not only expose rich active surface area, but also facilitate mass and electron transport. Further, a large number of unsaturated edge sites on the surface of MnOx catalysts are favorable for adsorbing OH− in alkaline solutions, boosting oxygen evolution. Furthermore, the crystal phase and electronic structure of MnOx catalysts are well regulated, which are beneficial for acquiring high-quality MnOx catalysts for OER. Benefitting from such ample merits, MnOx catalysts have been widely investigated as efficient electrocatalysts for OER, and many efficient strategies have been proposed to further improve the electrocatalytic performance of MnOx catalysts. In this regard, we summarized the proposed strategies for improving the OER performance of MnOx catalysts. From the mechanistic investigation viewpoint, Mn(III) species are the main active centers in MnOx catalysts for boosting OER. Therefore, rationally increasing the surface or interface contents of Mn3+ ions is an efficient strategy to improve their OER performance, which could be realized by surface, interface, and defect engineering. Heterogeneous reactions, particularly electrochemical reactions, are common occurrences on the surface of the catalyst, which are, therefore, surface-sensitive. To this end, rationally tailoring the crystal phase of MnOx catalysts to expose highly active facets is also another efficient approach for improving their electrocatalytic performance. By fully utilizing these strategies, the electrocatalytic OER performances of MnOx catalysts have seen dramatic improvements over the past few decades. Nevertheless, it is still distant from actual commercial applications, and several challenging issues need to be addressed before practical hydrogen production by water electrolysis can become reality.
As per the above discussions, the content of Mn(III) species in MnOx catalysts played a significant role in determining the electrocatalytic performance of MnOx catalysts, while increasing the content of Mn3+ on the surface of MnOx catalysts seemed difficult. In this case, further expanding the synthesis strategies for the fabrication of Mn3+-rich MnOx catalysts is meaningful. Besides the content of Mn3+ on the surface of MnOx catalysts, the instability of Mn(III) species during the adsorption/desorption of oxygen-containing intermediates commonly leads to the formation of inactive Mn2+ and Mn4+ states, resulting in poor electrocatalytic OER activity. To this end, developing a method that can increase the content of Mn(III) species and simultaneously stabilize them is crucial for realizing commercial applications. For all the Mn-based oxides, realizing the controlled synthesis of MnOx catalysts with precise particle size and well-defined morphology is imperative for enhancing their catalytic activities. On one hand, MnOx catalysts with precise particle size and well-defined morphology can expose more active surface areas available for the reactants and intermediated species. On the other hand, the controlled construction of MnOx catalysts exposed with specific facets is also favorable for enhancing their intrinsic activities, leading to a significant improvement in the electrocatalytic performance. Despite these merits, the controlled synthesis of MnOx catalysts with precise particle size and well-defined morphology is crucial but challenging. Hence, more future efforts should be devoted. Electron transfer during electrocatalytic OER is significant for directly determining the OER performance of the catalyst. In this regard, the electrical conductivity of the catalyst is also crucial. Therefore, rationally introducing an appropriate support is also very important for enhancing the electrocatalytic performance. Electrochemical reactions are surface-dominated; therefore, rationally regulating the surface electronic state and fabricating ample surface defects are two effective methods for improving the electrocatalytic performance of MnOx catalysts.
Although the appropriate introduction of carbon support can significantly enhance the conductivity of MnOx catalysts, the possible corrosion of the carbon support under highly anodic potential conditions may lower the electrocatalytic activity of the catalysts, leading to poor electrochemical stability and therefore severely hindering their practical applications. In order to promote the electrocatalytic activity and stability of MnOx catalysts, more attention should be focused on avoiding the possible corrosion of carbon supports. One of the efficient strategies is to use other materials to replace carbon materials, such as metal foams (NF, iron foam, copper foam, etc.) and conducting polymers (PANI, PDA, PPy, etc.). Another efficient approach is to couple two or more carbon supports with strong interactions, where high strength between the different carbon supports could significantly enhance the stability of the composites. In addition, the strong coupling effect between the different carbon supports could promote the charge transfer and ionic motion during electrocatalytic reactions, thereby promoting the electrocatalytic performance.
In summary, MnOx catalysts showed great promise for driving electrocatalytic water oxidation, but was also challenging for commercial applications. With the development of new characterization methods and synthesis breakthroughs, we hope this featured review provides some constructive advice for the fabrication of high-quality MnOx catalysts and boosting the development of energy-conversion-related techniques.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by The Natural Science Foundation of the Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions of China (19KJB150019). Youth Science and Technology Talents Enrollment Project of the Jiangsu Association of Science and Technology, we also thanked the Analysis and Testing Center, School of Materials and Chemical Engineering of Xuzhou University of Technology.
Notes and references
N. T. Suen, S. F. Hung, Q. Quan, N. Zhang, Y. J. Xu and H. M. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 337–365 RSC .
Z. Zhao, H. Liu, W. Gao, W. Xue, Z. Liu, J. Huang, X. Pan and Y. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 9046–9050 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xiong, J. Li, J. Shi, X. Zhang, N.-T. Suen, Z. Liu, Y. Huang, G. Xu, W. Cai, X. Lei, L. Feng, Z. Yang, L. Huang and H. Cheng, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 341–348 CrossRef CAS .
X. Tian, X. Zhao, Y. Q. Su, L. Wang, H. Wang, D. Dang, B. Chi, H. Liu, E. J. M. Hensen, X. W. D. Lou and B. Y. Xia, Science, 2019, 366, 850–856 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, H. Yao, Z. Yu, S. M. Islam, H. He, M. Yuan, Y. Yue, K. Xu, W. Hao, G. Sun, H. Li, S. Ma, P. Zapol and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 10417–10430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Rausch, M. D. Symes, G. Chisholm and L. Cronin, Science, 2014, 345, 1326–1330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Gong, W. Zhou, M. C. Tsai, J. Zhou, M. Guan, M. C. Lin, B. Zhang, Y. Hu, D. Y. Wang, J. Yang, S. J. Pennycook, B. J. Hwang and H. Dai, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4695 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Detsi, J. B. Cook, B. Lesel, C. Turner, Y. L. Liang, S. Robbennolt and S. H. Tolbert, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 540–549 RSC .
L. Tian, X. Zhai, X. Wang, X. Pang, J. Li and Z. Li, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 337, 135823 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yin, S. Zhao, K. Zhao, A. Muqsit, H. Tang, L. Chang, H. Zhao, Y. Gao and Z. Tang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. T. Garcia-Esparza, T. Shinagawa, S. Ould-Chikh, M. Qureshi, X. Peng, N. Wei, D. H. Anjum, A. Clo, T. C. Weng, D. Nordlund, D. Sokaras, J. Kubota, K. Domen and K. Takanabe, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 5780–5784 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Balogun, W. Qiu, Y. Huang, H. Yang, R. Xu, W. Zhao, G. R. Li, H. Ji and Y. Tong, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702095 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Pi, Q. Shao, X. Zhu and X. Huang, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 7371–7379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Pi, Q. Shao, P. Wang, J. Guo and X. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1700886 CrossRef .
N. Zhang, Q. Shao, Y. Pi, J. Guo and X. Huang, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 5009–5015 CrossRef CAS .
L. Tian, Z. Li, P. Wang, X. H. Zhai, X. Wang and T. X. Li, J. Energy Chem., 2020 DOI:10.1016/j.jechem.2020.06.057 .
C. Hu, M. Li, J. Qiu and Y. P. Sun, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 2315–2337 RSC .
Y. Zhu, X. Ji, C. Pan, Q. Sun, W. Song, L. Fang, Q. Chen and C. E. Banks, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3665 RSC .
B. Wang, C. Tang, H. F. Wang, X. Chen, R. Cao and Q. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1805658 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhao, R. Nakamura, K. Kamiya, S. Nakanishi and K. Hashimoto, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2390 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Sun, X. Jin, B. Cong, X. Zhou, W. Hong and G. Chen, J. Catal., 2019, 379, 1–9 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wu, W. Chen, X. Zheng, D. He, Y. Luo, X. Wang, J. Yang, Y. Wu, W. Yan, Z. Zhuang, X. Hong and Y. Li, Nano Energy, 2017, 38, 167–174 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, L. Yu, B. Y. Guan, S. Song and X. W. D. Lou, Adv. Mater., 2018, e1801211,  DOI:10.1002/adma.201801211 .
S.-K. Park, J. K. Kim and Y. Chan Kang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 18823–18830 RSC .
K. Li, J. Zhang, R. Wu, Y. Yu and B. Zhang, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1500426 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liu, H. Cheng, M. Lyu, S. Fan, Q. Liu, W. Zhang, Y. Zhi, C. Wang, C. Xiao, S. Wei, B. Ye and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 15670–15675 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Zaharieva, M. M. Najafpour, M. Wiechen, M. Haumann, P. Kurz and H. Dau, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2400 RSC .
S. F. Jafri, E. S. Koumousi, M. A. Arrio, A. Juhin, D. Mitcov, M. Rouzieres, P. Dechambenoit, D. Li, E. Otero, F. Wilhelm, A. Rogalev, L. Joly, J. P. Kappler, C. Cartier Dit Moulin, C. Mathoniere, R. Clerac and P. Sainctavit, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 3470–3479 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Park, Y. H. Lee, S. Choi, H. M. Seo, M. Y. Lee, M. Balamurugan and K. Nam, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020 10.1039/d0ee00815j .
J. Kern, R. Chatterjee, I. D. Young, F. D. Fuller, L. Lassalle, M. Ibrahim, S. Gul, T. Fransson, A. S. Brewster, R. Alonso-Mori, R. Hussein, M. Zhang, L. Douthit, C. de Lichtenberg, M. H. Cheah, D. Shevela, J. Wersig, I. Seuffert, D. Sokaras, E. Pastor, C. Weninger, T. Kroll, R. G. Sierra, P. Aller, A. Butryn, A. M. Orville, M. Liang, A. Batyuk, J. E. Koglin, S. Carbajo, S. Boutet, N. W. Moriarty, J. M. Holton, H. Dobbek, P. D. Adams, U. Bergmann, N. K. Sauter, A. Zouni, J. Messinger, J. Yano and V. K. Yachandra, Nature, 2018, 563, 421–425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Hayashi, A. Yamaguchi, K. Hashimoto and R. Nakamura, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 13760–13763 RSC .
D. R. Robinson, Y. B. Go, M. Mui, G. Gardner, Z. Zhang, D. Mastrogiovanni, E. Garfunkel, J. Li, M. Greenblatt and G. C. Dismukes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 3494–3501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. H. Cho, H. Seo, S. Park, Y. H. Lee, M. Y. Lee, N. H. Cho and K. T. Nam, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1910424 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Hong, H. Seo, Y. H. Lee, K. H. Cho, C. Ko, S. Park and K. T. Nam, Small Methods, 2020, 4, 1900733 CrossRef CAS .
T. Takashima, K. Hashimoto and R. Nakamura, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 1519–1527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Morgan Chan, D. A. Kitchaev, J. Nelson Weker, C. Schnedermann, K. Lim, G. Ceder, W. Tumas, M. F. Toney and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2018, 115, E5261–E5268 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Li, L. Cai, M. Song, Y. Shen, X. Wang, J. Li, J. Wang, P. Wang and L. Tian, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 339, 135886 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yang, Z. Wang, W. Zhang and S. Guo, Trends Chem., 2019, 1, 259–271 CrossRef .
D. B. Xu, T. Xia, H. M. Xu, W. Q. Fan and W. D. Shi, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 392, 124838 CrossRef CAS .
C. Luan, G. Liu, Y. Liu, L. Yu, Y. Wang, Y. Xiao, H. Qiao, X. Dai and X. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 3875–3885 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Y. Chen, Y. Zhang, X. Zhang, T. Tang, H. Luo, S. Niu, Z. H. Dai, L. J. Wan and J. S. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703311 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. P. Zhu, C. Guo, Y. Zheng and S. Z. Qiao, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 915–923 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Jin, H. Seo, T. Hayashi, M. Balamurugan, D. Jeong, Y. K. Go, J. S. Hong, K. H. Cho, H. Kakizaki, N. Bonnet-Mercier, M. G. Kim, S. H. Kim, R. Nakamura and K. T. Nam, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 2277–2285 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kakizaki, H. Ooka, T. Hayashi, A. Yamaguchi, N. B. Mercier, K. Hashimoto and R. Nakamura, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 1706319 CrossRef .
Y.-F. Li and Z.-P. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 1783–1792 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Shao, P. Wang, T. Zhu and X. Huang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2019, 52, 3384–3396 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Shao, P. Wang and X. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1806419 CrossRef .
N. Zhang, Q. Shao, X. Xiao and X. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1808161 CrossRef .
Z. Li, Z. Jiang, W. Zhu, C. He, P. Wang, X. Wang, T. Li and L. Tian, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 504, 144368 CrossRef .
Z. Li, G. Qiu, Y. Shen, X. Wang, W. Zhuang, J. Li, M. Song, P. Wang and L. Tian, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 820, 153161 CrossRef CAS .
D. Su, X. Zhang, A. Wu, H. Yan, Z. Liu, L. Wang, C. Tian and H. Fu, NPG Asia Mater., 2019, 11, 78–89 CrossRef CAS .
H. Fang, T. Huang, Y. Sun, B. Kang, D. Liang, S. Yao, J. Yu, M. M. Dinesh, S. Wu, J. Y. Lee and S. Mao, J. Catal., 2019, 371, 185–195 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, J. Zhang, W. Wu, X. Guo, P. Xiong, H. Liu and G. Wang, Nano Energy, 2018, 54, 129–137 CrossRef CAS .
S.-H. Han, H.-M. Liu, P. Chen, J.-X. Jiang and Y. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801326 CrossRef .
Y. Kang, Q. Xue, R. Peng, P. Jin, J. Zeng, J. Jiang and Y. Chen, NPG Asia Mater., 2017, 9, e407 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bai, G. R. Xu, S. H. Xing, J. H. Zeng, J. X. Jiang and Y. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 33635–33641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wei, X. Ren, H. Ma, X. Sun, Y. Zhang, X. Kuang, T. Yan, H. Ju, D. Wu and Q. Wei, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 1533–1536 RSC .
Y. Gu, G. Yan, Y. Lian, P. Qi, Q. Mu, C. Zhang, Z. Deng and Y. Peng, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 23, 252–260 CrossRef .
K. Chu, Y.-p. Liu, Y.-b. Li, Y.-l. Guo and Y. Tian, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 7081–7090 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Kou, T. Wang, Q. Gu, M. Xiong, L. Zheng, X. Li, Z. Pan, H. Chen, F. Verpoort, A. K. Cheetham, S. Mu and J. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803768 CrossRef .
L. Tian, G. Qiu, Y. Shen, X. Wang, J. Wang, P. Wang, M. Song, J. Li, T. Li, W. Zhuang and X. Du, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 58, 14098–14105 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Vishnu Prataap and S. Mohan, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 3365–3368 RSC .
H. Fan, H. Yu, Y. Zhang, Y. Zheng, Y. Luo, Z. Dai, B. Li, Y. Zong and Q. Yan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 12566–12570 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, X. Su, L. Zhang, P. Kerns, L. Achola, V. Hayes, R. Quardokus, S. L. Suib and J. He, ChemCatChem, 2019, 11, 1689–1700 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xu, H. Shang, L. Jin, C. Chen, C. Wang and Y. Du, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 26905–26910 RSC .
B. Chen, Z. Zhang, S. Kim, M. Baek, D. Kim and K. Youg, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 259, 118017 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chu, D. Zhang, B. Jin and M. Yang, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 255, 117744 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhu, R. Jiang, X. Chen, Y. Chen and L. Wang, Sci. Bull., 2017, 62, 1373–1379 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Zhang, J.-Y. Feng, T. Zhu, Z.-L. Liu, Q.-Y. Li, S.-Z. Chen and C.-W. Xu, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 196, 661–669 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yilmaz, C. F. Tan, Y.-F. Lim and G. W. Ho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1802983 CrossRef .
K. Liu, W. Wang, P. Guo, J. Ye, Y. Wang, P. Li, Z. Lyu, Y. Geng, M. Liu and S. Xie, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1806300 CrossRef .
C. Hu, L. Zhang, Z. J. Zhao, A. Li, X. Chang and J. Gong, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1705538 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Li, J. Yin, L. An, M. Lu, K. Sun, Y. Q. Zhao, D. Gao, F. Cheng and P. Xi, Small, 2018, 14, 1801070 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Wei, J. He, W. Zhang, X. Zhao, S. Qiu and C. An, Inorg. Chem., 2018, 57, 7380–7389 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Liu, Y. Wang, D. Liu, Y. Zou and S. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701546 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Sun, Y. Zhao, K. Molhave, M. Zhang and J. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 14431–14441 RSC .
L. Xu, Q. Jiang, Z. Xiao, X. Li, J. Huo, S. Wang and L. Dai, Angew. Chem., 2016, 55, 5277–5281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jia, L. Zhang, G. Gao, H. Chen, B. Wang, J. Zhou, M. T. Soo, M. Hong, X. Yan, G. Qian, J. Zou, A. Du and X. Yao, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700017 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Song and S. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 14050–14060 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Hu, L. Zhang, Z. J. Zhao, J. Luo, J. Shi, Z. Huang and J. Gong, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705538 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Huynh, C. Shi, S. J. Billinge and D. G. Nocera, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 14887–14904 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. X. Zhao, C. Chang, F. Teng, Y. F. Zhao, G. B. Chen, R. Shi, G. I. N. Waterhouse, W. F. Huang and T. R. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700005 CrossRef .
Y. F. Bao, H. Liu, Z. Liu, F. L. Wang and L. G. Feng, Appl. Catal. B: Environ., 2020, 274, 119106 CrossRef CAS .
T. Liu, F. Yang, G. Cheng and W. Luo, Small, 2018, 14, 1703748 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Seo, K. Jin, S. Park, K. H. Cho, H. Ha, K.-G. Lee, Y. H. Lee, D. T. Nguyen, H. Randriamahazaka, J.-S. Lee and K. T. Nam, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 10595–10604 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hu, Y. Wu and J. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1802569 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Tian, X. Zhai, X. Wang, X. Pang, J. Li and Z. Li, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 337, 135823 CrossRef CAS .
X. Shang, J. F. Qin, J. H. Lin, B. Dong, J. Q. Chi, Z. Z. Liu, L. Wang, Y. M. Chai and C. G. Liu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 523, 121–132 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ma, H. Yuan, L. Cai, X. Wang, H. Long, Y. Chai and Y. H. Tsang, Mater. Today Chem., 2018, 9, 133–139 CrossRef CAS .
X.-D. Wang, H.-Y. Chen, Y.-F. Xu, J.-F. Liao, B.-X. Chen, H.-S. Rao, D.-B. Kuang and C.-Y. Su, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 7191–7199 RSC .
J. He, M. Wang, W. Wang, R. Miao, W. Zong, S.-Y. Chen, S. Poges, T. Jafari, W. Song, J. Liu and S. L. Suib, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 42676–42687 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Tian, J. Wang, K. Wang, H. Wo, X. Wang, W. Zhuang, T. Li and X. Du, Carbon, 2019, 143, 457–466 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ye, T. Li, G. Ma, Y. Dong and X. Zhou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1704083 CrossRef .
L. Yan, L. Niu, C. Shen, Z. Zhang, J. Lin, F. Shen, Y. Gong, C. Li, X. Liu and S. Xu, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 306, 529–540 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Teng, X.-D. Wang, J.-F. Liao, W.-G. Li, H.-Y. Chen, Y.-J. Dong and D.-B. Kuang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1802463 CrossRef .
J. Ning, J. W. Furness, Y. Zhang, A. C. Thenuwara, R. C. Remsing, M. L. Klein, D. R. Strongin and J. Sun, J. Catal., 2019, 374, 143–149 CrossRef CAS .
R. Frydendal, L. C. Seitz, D. Sokaras, T.-C. Weng, D. Nordlund, I. Chorkendorff, I. E. L. Stephens and T. F. Jaramillo, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 230, 22–28 CrossRef CAS .
K. Selvakumar, S. M. Senthil Kumar, R. Thangamuthu, G. Kruthika and P. Murugan, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 21024–21036 CrossRef CAS .
K. L. Pickrahn, S. W. Park, Y. Gorlin, H.-B.-R. Lee, T. F. Jaramillo and S. F. Bent, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 1269–1277 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chen, C. L. Dong, Y. Zou, D. Su, Y. C. Huang, L. Tao, S. Dou, S. Shen and S. Wang, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 11969–11975 RSC .
L. Zhang, T. Mi, M. A. Ziaee, L. Liang and R. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 1639–1647 RSC .
N. Li, W.-Y. Xia, J. Wang, Z.-L. Liu, S.-Z. Chen, C.-W. Xu and X.-H. Lu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 21308–21313 RSC .
A. R. Jadhav, J. M. C. Puguan and H. Kim, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 11069–11079 CrossRef CAS .
K. Selvakumar, S. M. S. Kumar, R. Thangamuthu, P. Rajput, D. Bhattacharyya and S. N. Jha, ChemElectroChem, 2018, 5, 3980–3990 CrossRef CAS .
K. Jin, A. Chu, J. Park, D. Jeong, S. E. Jerng, U. Sim, H.-Y. Jeong, C. W. Lee, Y.-S. Park, K. D. Yang, G. Kumar Pradhan, D. Kim, N.-E. Sung, S. Hee Kim and K. T. Nam, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 17473 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Fu, X. Yan, Y. Chen, L. Xu, D. Sun, J. M. Lee and Y. Tang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1701609 Search PubMed .
X. F. Lu, Y. Chen, S. Wang, S. Gao and X. W. Lou, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1902339 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Ge, Y. Sun, J. Guo, X. Yan, C. Fernandez and Q. Peng, Small, 2019, 15, e1902220 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Liu, Y. Sun, L. Liu, S. Xu and X. Yan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1704973 CrossRef .
T. Zhang, S. Zhang, S. Cao, Q. Yao and J. Y. Lee, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 8270–8279 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yan, Y. Lian, Y. Gu, C. Yang, H. Sun, Q. Mu, Q. Li, W. Zhu, X. Zheng, M. Chen, J. Zhu, Z. Deng and Y. Peng, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 10137–10147 CrossRef CAS .
H. Antoni, D. M. Morales, J. Bitzer, Q. Fu, Y.-T. Chen, J. Masa, W. Kleist, W. Schuhmann and M. Muhler, J.
Catal., 2019, 374, 335–344 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Meng, W. Song, H. Huang, Z. Ren, S. Y. Chen and S. L. Suib, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 11452–11464 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhou, W. Q. Zaman, W. Sun, L. M. Cao, M. Tariq and J. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 4959–4962 RSC .
N. Kaabi, B. Chouchene, W. Mabrouk, F. Matoussi and E. S. B. H. Hmida, Solid State Ionics, 2018, 325, 74–79 CrossRef CAS .
I. G. McKendry, L. J. Mohamad, A. C. Thenuwara, T. Marshall, E. Borguet, D. R. Strongin and M. J. Zdilla, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2280–2285 CrossRef CAS .
K. K. Hazarika, C. Goswami, H. Saikia, B. J. Borah and P. Bharali, Mol. Catal., 2018, 451, 153–160 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yuan, W. Chen, L. Zhang, Z. Liu, J. Liu, T. Liu, G. Li and Q. Wang, Small, 2019, 15, e1903311 CrossRef PubMed .
S. E. Balaghi, C. A. Triana and G. R. Patzke, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 2074–2087 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ramírez, P. Hillebrand, D. Stellmach, M. M. May, P. Bogdanoff and S. Fiechter, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 14073–14081 CrossRef .
K. R. Yoon, G. Y. Lee, J. W. Jung, N. H. Kim, S. O. Kim and I. D. Kim, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 2076–2083 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kölbach, S. Fiechter, R. van de Krol and P. Bogdanoff, Catal. Today, 2017, 290, 2–9 CrossRef .
M. Jahan, S. Tominaka and J. Henzie, Dalton Trans., 2016, 45, 18494–18501 RSC .
M. Li, L. Bai, X. Wen and J. Guan, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 15807–15814 CrossRef CAS .
V. Maruthapandian, T. Pandiarajan, V. Saraswathy and S. Muralidharan, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 48995–49002 RSC .
M. W. Li, M. H. Fu, Y. Cao, H. Wang, H. Yu, Z. Qiao, H. Liang and F. Peng, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 359–368 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Rani, G. Ravi, R. Yuvakkumar, S. I. Hong, D. Velauthapillai, M. Thambidurai, C. Dang and B. Saravanakumar, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2020, 247, 122864 CrossRef CAS .
A. Li, H. Ooka, N. Bonnet, T. Hayashi, Y. Sun, Q. Jiang, C. Li, H. Han and R. Nakamura, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 5054–5058 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xiong, L. Xu, C. Jin and Q. Sun, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 254, 329–338 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Hu, X. Liu, B. Zhu, G. Li, L. Fan, X. Chai, Q. Zhang, J. Liu and C. He, J. Power Sources, 2018, 398, 159–166 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:
Lin Tian	Lin Tian received his PhD from the China University of Mining and Technology in 2017. Currently, he is a Lecturer in the School of Materials and Chemical Engineering at Xuzhou University of Technology. He mainly focuses on the development of carbon-based nonprecious metal nanomaterials for electrochemical applications, such as electrocatalysis, supercapacitors, and electrochemical sensing.
Xiuhui Zhai	Xiuhui Zhai is currently studying for her BS in the School of Materials and Chemical Engineering at Xuzhou University of Technology. Her research focuses on Mn-based electrocatalysts for water splitting.
Xiang Wang	Xiang Wang is receiving his BS in the School of Materials and Chemical Engineering at Xuzhou University of Technology. He is proficient in illustrating research papers and focuses on electrocatalysts derived from MOFs for water splitting.
Zhao Li	Zhao Li received her PhD from the China University of Mining and Technology in 2019. Currently, she is a Lecturer in the School of Materials and Chemical Engineering at Xuzhou University of Technology. Her research focuses on energy storage and conversion (including water splitting, fuel cells, and supercapacitors).
2Mn3+(aq) + 2H2O → MnO(s) + Mn2+(aq) + 4H+	(1)
MnO2(s) + Mn(OH)2 → Mn2O3(s) + H2O	(2)

 	Fig. 1  Oxidation states of Mn ions involved in the OER on a δ-MnO2 electrode at (a) pH 4–8 and (b) pH ≥ 9. (c) Schematic of the band structure of the activated catalyst system derived from the δ-MnO2 model. (a and b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 35. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. (c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 36. Copyright 2018, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America.	 

 	Scheme 1  Schematic illustration of MnOx as advanced electrocatalysts.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) TEM image of MnO nanoparticles. (b) Schematic illustration of water oxidation to generate oxygen based on MnO nanoparticles. (c) Proposed OER mechanisms of conventional Mn electrocatalysts (top) and MnO nanoparticles (bottom). Schematic illustration of the surface valency changes on the (d) (101) and (e) (110) surfaces of β-MnO2. (a and b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 43. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (c–e) Reproduced with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic image of the phase transformation process and adsorption of OH by Mn vacancy for boosting OER. Reproduced with permission from ref. 45. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) TEM and (b) elemental EDS mapping images of IL-modified MnO2 nanowires. (c) OER polarization curves of MnO2–IL0.5 catalysts with different reaction times in 1 M KOH solution. TEM images of (d) MnO2 and (e) Ni-doped MnO2 nanosheets. (f) OER polarization curves of Ni–MnO2, Co–MnO2, Zn–MnO2, Cu–MnO2, Fe–MnO2, MnO2, and carbon paper. (g) TEM and (h) HRTEM images of 3D Pd–MnO2/CS. (i) OER polarization curves of Pd/C, Pd/CS, MnO2/CS, and Pd–MnO2/CS in 1 M KOH solution. (a–c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 58. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (d–f) Reproduced with permission from ref. 64. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (g–i) Reproduced with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2016, Elsevier Inc.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the formation of NF-supported ultrathin δ-MnO2 nanosheets. (b) TEM and (c) HRTEM images of ultrathin δ-MnO2 nanosheets. (d) OER polarization curves of δ-MnO2, NF, and IrO2 catalysts in 1 M KOH solution. (e) Crystal structure model of δ-MnO2. (f) Adsorption energies of H2O on the surfaces of Ni, NiO, MnO2, and oxygen-vacancies-enriched δ-MnO2 nanosheets. (g) Gibbs free energies of HER on pure MnO2 and oxygen-vacancies-enriched δ-MnO2 nanosheets. Reproduced with permission from ref. 82. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) TEM and (c) HAADF-STEM elemental mapping images of the NiO/MnO2 composite. (b) TEM and (d) HAADF-STEM images of the NiO/MnO2@PANI composite. (e) Nyquist plots (at 1.71 V vs. RHE) and (f) OER polarization curves of different catalysts in 1 M KOH solution. Reproduced with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration of the Fe–Mn–O nanosheets. (b) SEM and (c) TEM images of Fe–Mn–O nanosheets. (d) Nyquist plots of different catalysts at 1.60 V. (e) LSV polarization curves and (f) Tafel plots of different catalysts in 1 M KOH solution. Reproduced with permission from ref. 95. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

NiO/MnO2@PANI	Morphology/conductivity	1 M KOH	345	
91

δ-MnO2	Defect	1 M KOH	320	
82

Ni-doped Mn3O4	Morphology	0.5 M PBS	458	
34

Fe–Mn–O	Morphology/conductivity	1 M KOH	273	
95

MnO2/CQD	Morphology/conductivity	1 M KOH	343	
92

MnO2–IL0.5	Morphology	1 M KOH	394	
58

Ni–MnO2	Intrinsic activity	1 M KOH	333	
64

Metal-doped MnO2	Conductivity	1 M KOH	390	
93

Mn3O4@CoxMn3−xO4	Intrinsic activity/defect	1 M KOH	246	
80

Co–MnO2	Defect	1 M KOH	279	
53

Co-intercalated layered MnO2	Intrinsic activity	1 M KOH	360	
96


 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic diagram of the synthesis of Ni–MnO/rGO. (b) SEM and (c) HRTEM images of Ni–MnO/rGO composite. (d) OER polarization curves of different catalysts obtained in 1 M KOH solution. (e) Compositional and structural advantages of Ni–MnO/rGO for OER and ORR. Reproduced with permission from ref. 106. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 9  Crystal structures of MnO2 polymorphs. (a) α-MnO2, (b) β-MnO2, (c) γ-MnO2, (d) ε-MnO2, (e) δ-MnO2, and (f) λ-MnO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 109. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of the transformation of β-MnO2 nanorods into α-MnO2 nanowires. (b) OER polarization curves of MnO2 catalysts treated with different amounts of IL in 1 M KOH solution. Reproduced with permission from ref. 111. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Atomic models of Co-doped birnessite. (b) OER polarization curves of different catalysts in 1 M KOH solution. (c) HRTEM image of IrO2/δ-MnO2 composite. (d) Schematic diagram for Ir–Ir shells and the crystal structure of IrO2. (e) OER polarization curves of different catalysts in 1 M KOH solution. (a and b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 116. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (c–e) Reproduced with permission from ref. 114. Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 12  TEM and HRTEM images of RuO2/Mn2O3 for (a) fiber-in-tube and (c) tube-in-tube nanostructures. Elemental EDS mapping images of RuO2/Mn2O3 for (b) fiber-in-tube and (d) tube-in-tube nanostructures. (e) OER LSV polarization curves and (f) Tafel plots of different catalysts in 1 M KOH solution. Reproduced with permission from ref. 121. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  TEM images of (a) 4 and (b) 8 nm Mn3O4 nanoparticles. (c) OER polarization curves of 4 and 8 nm Mn3O4 nanoparticles in Na–Pi electrolyte at pH 7. (d) HRTEM and (e) SAED images of Ni-doped Mn3O4. (f) Schematic illustration of the OER mechanism of Ni-doped Mn3O4 electrode. (a and b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 33. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d–f) Reproduced with permission from ref. 125. Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) TEM and (b and c) HRTEM images of Mn3O4@MnxCo3−xO4 nanoparticles. (d) Structural model of edge-site-enriched Mn3O4@MnxCo3−xO4 oxides with unsaturated coordination. (e) LSV polarization curves of different catalysts for OER in 1 M KOH solution. Reproduced with permission from ref. 80. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
