Ultrahigh thermoelectric performance in Cu 2 Se-based hybrid materials with highly dispersed molecular CNTs   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7EE01737E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7EE01737E
(Communication)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1928-1935Ultrahigh thermoelectric performance in Cu2Se-based hybrid materials with highly dispersed molecular CNTs†

        
          
            Raghavendra 
            Nunna‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Pengfei 
            Qiu‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Meijie 
            Yin
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Hongyi 
            Chen
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            Riley 
            Hanus
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Qingfeng 
            Song
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            Tiansong 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Mei-Yin 
            Chou
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Matthias T. 
            Agne
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Jiaqing 
            He
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            G. Jeffrey 
            Snyder
          
        
      *d, 
      
        
          
            Xun 
            Shi
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Lidong 
            Chen
          
        
      *a
aState Key Laboratory of High Performance Ceramics and Superfine Microstructure, Shanghai Institute of Ceramics, Chinese Academy of Science, Shanghai 200050, China. E-mail: xshi@mail.sic.ac.cn; cld@mail.sic.ac.cn
bDepartment of Physics, South University of Science and Technology of China, Shenzhen 518055, China
cUniversity of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
dMaterials Science and Engineering, Northwestern University, Evanston IL 60208, USA. E-mail: jeff.snyder@northwestern.edu
eInstitute of Atomic and Molecular Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei 10617, Taiwan
Received 
      21st June 2017
    , Accepted 27th July 2017First published on 27th July 2017AbstractHere, by utilizing the special interaction between metal Cu and multi-walled carbon nanotubes (CNTs), we have successfully realized the in situ growth of Cu2Se on the surface of CNTs and then fabricated a series of Cu2Se/CNT hybrid materials. Due to the high degree of homogeneously dispersed molecular CNTs inside the Cu2Se matrix, a record-high thermoelectric figure of merit zT of 2.4 at 1000 K has been achieved.

Broader context
Hybrid materials are composites consisting of two constituents at the nanometer or molecular scale that display new properties or characteristics beyond those of the matrix materials, but they are greatly restricted in thermoelectrics due to the difficulties of achieving an extremely uniform distribution of organic materials at such a small length-scale. Here, by utilizing the special interaction between metal Cu and multi-walled carbon nanotubes (CNTs), we have successfully realized the in situ growth of Cu2Se on the surface of CNTs and then fabricated a series of Cu2Se/CNT hybrid materials with a high degree of homogeneously dispersed molecular CNTs inside the Cu2Se matrix. Beyond the traditional mixing rule, large reductions in lattice thermal conductivity and carrier concentration are observed, leading to a record-high thermoelectric figure of merit zT of 2.4 at 1000 K. This work opens a new window to optimize thermoelectric performance through hybridizing organic/inorganic materials at nanometer or molecular scales.

Thermoelectric (TE) technology is attracting increasing attention as a means to address the global energy crisis and reduce greenhouse gas emissions.1 By using TE technology, electricity can be directly generated from the huge amount of waste heat that is currently too difficult to be re-used. TE technology combines the advantages of no moving parts, no noise and exceptional reliability, and it exhibits great potential in applications such as harvesting waste heat from automobiles and industrial operations.1 The energy conversion efficiency of a TE material is primarily determined by the TE figure of merit zT (=S2σT/κ), where S is the Seebeck coefficient, σ is the electrical conductivity, T is the absolute temperature, and κ is the thermal conductivity. In order to achieve high energy conversion efficiencies, large S and σ and low κ are required. However, these three parameters are strongly interdependent, making improving zT values challenging.
In the past 20 years, the development in thermoelectrics has led to greatly improved TE performances in many old and new materials.2 Various strategies have been proposed to optimize TE performance and consequently high zTs have been successfully achieved in either single-phase compounds or multi-phase composites containing either nano- or micro-scale impurities.3–7 In particular, nanostructuring is a very effective and prevailing approach, which has been used to successfully enhance zTs in single phase compounds by introducing nano-scale grain boundaries8,9 or in composites through introducing nano-scale secondary phases.4,10 The latter strategy is quite simple and theoretically can be applied to various materials. However, extrinsic nanometer-sized impurities agglomerate easily forming micro- or macro-scale impurities during sample fabrication processes, resulting in the TE properties of a classical composite which cannot improve the zT above that of each component.11 Differing from the traditional composites where the constituents are usually at the micrometer to millimeter scale, hybrid materials consist of two constituents at the nanometer or molecular scale which display new properties or characteristics beyond those observed for the original matrix materials.12 Commonly, one compound in a hybrid material is inorganic and the other one is organic. Hybrid materials have been successfully used in decorative coatings, scratch-resistant coatings, light-emitting diodes, photodiodes, solar cells, gas sensors, field effect transistors, and lithium batteries or supercapacitors and others.12 In thermoelectrics, the investigations on hybrid materials mostly focus on the introduction of a minor amount of inorganic impurities into organic conducting polymers to improve the TE performance of organic materials.13,14 Adding organic impurities (e.g. CNTs or graphene) into inorganic TE compounds is very rare. This is usually realized using a wet-chemical method,15,16 but such a process usually introduces unexpected or unwanted impurities that may significantly deteriorate the material's TE performance, especially for oxygen and water sensitive materials. Developing a universal method to fabricate organic impurity hybrid TE materials without generating extra phase impurities is urgently required. In this study, by utilizing a ball milling physical process starting from high purity Cu and multi-walled carbon nanotubes (CNTs), we successfully fabricated Cu2Se/CNT hybrid materials with a high degree of purity and homogeneity with CNTs dispersed along the nano-grained Cu2Se boundaries. This method takes advantage of the preferred chemical interaction between Cu and CNTs (see Fig. 1(a)), leading to a record-high TE figure of merit zT of 2.4 at 1000 K (see Fig. 1(b)).
 Fig. 1  (a) Total energy as a function of initial vertical distance d between the Cu and CNT when putting a Cu atom on the surface of a single CNT. The right inset shows the charge density of the left inset picture when d = 1.83 Å. (b) Temperature dependence of TE figure of merit zT for the Cu2Se/x wt% CNT (x = 0, 0.25, 0.5, and 0.75) hybrid materials. (c) Fabrication process and formation mechanism of the Cu2Se/CNT hybrid materials. 
CNTs are a very special one-dimensional material with interesting physical, chemical, and mechanical properties. They have very high charge carrier mobilities, large aspect ratio, superhydrophilic properties, high thermal conduction, and high strength, etc.,17,18 and thus have been used to fabricate various composites. However, the high surface energy and flexible character of CNTs make them hard to be separated. The challenge to use CNTs for TE and other applications is developing a technique to uniformly distribute the CNTs in the matrix material. In fact, due to the presence of free π electrons, the CNTs' surface has a high chemical reactivity and it can interact with many polymers, oxides, and even pure metals.19–21 These interactions could be used to separate the agglomerated CNTs and effectively disperse them in the host matrix material. Fig. 1(a) shows the calculated total energy of a system with a Cu atom sitting on the top of the carbon hexagon center on the surface of a single CNT. The result reveals that Cu has a strong interaction with CNT. The largest bonding energy is 0.24 eV when the distance between the Cu atom and CNT is 1.83 Å, comparable with those calculated by Krasheninnikov et al. and Bittencourt et al.19,21 As shown in the inset of Fig. 1(a), an obvious charge density accumulation in the interfacial area between the Cu atom and CNT is observed, further proving that they are chemically bonded. Similar results have been also observed in the interfacial area between the Cu atom and graphene (ESI,† Fig. S1).
The chemical interactions between Cu2Se and the CNTs are well supported by the Raman spectroscopy and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements. As presented in Fig. 2(a), the Raman spectrum of the pristine CNTs exhibits two typical peaks at 1580 cm−1 (G-band) and at 1300 cm−1 (D-band). Generally, the G-band is assigned as the vibrations of sp2-hybridized carbon atoms while the D-band depends on the disorder of carbon basal plane lattices (e.g., impurities, edges, and defects) that are absent in defect-free CNTs.22 Thus, the ratio (ID/IG) between the integral intensities of the D- and G-bands reflects the degree of structural disorder of the CNTs. It is clear that the ID/IG value in the Cu/30 wt% CNTs is much higher than that in the pristine CNTs, which comes from the reduced sp2-hybridized carbon atoms or the enhanced disorder of the carbon basal plane lattices, or both.22 Furthermore, X-ray photoemission measurements shown in Fig. 2(b) also prove the presence of a low percentage of sp2-hybridized bonds in the Cu/30 wt% CNT samples based on the fitting of the C1s X-ray photoemission peak. All these results strongly suggest that the Cu atoms have chemical interactions with the CNTs. By using this kind of chemical interaction, we attempted to fabricate Cu2Se/CNT hybrid materials with the detailed process as shown in Fig. 1(c). A high energy ball-milling technique has been used to sufficiently mix multi-walled CNTs, Cu powders, and Se powders together. During this process, the Cu powders interacted with the CNTs to separate the agglomerated CNTs. At the same time, Cu atoms adhered on the surface of the CNTs reacted with Se to form nano-grained Cu2Se in situ. Finally, the Cu2Se/CNT hybrid materials were consolidated into bulk pellets by spark plasma sintering (SPS).
 Fig. 2  (a) Raman spectra of the pristine CNTs and ball milled Cu/30 wt% CNTs. (b) C 1s line XPS core level spectra of the pristine CNT and ball milled Cu/30 wt% CNT samples. The black solid lines represent the experimental data. The red dashed lines represent the total fitting data including C1 (sp2, 284.9 eV), C2 (sp3, 285.4 eV), and C3 (satellite peaks). 
The presence of Cu2Se/CNT hybrid materials with well distributed single CNTs at the molecular level has been confirmed by the microstructure analysis, which is shown in Fig. 3. Using the Cu2Se/0.75 wt% CNT samples as an example, both the bright-field image (Fig. 3(a)) and high angular annular dark field (HAADF) images (Fig. 3(b)) detect a high concentration of single CNTs that are uniformly dispersed within the Cu2Se matrix without any agglomeration. The distances between the nearby CNTs are around dozens of or several hundreds of nanometers. The diameters of the CNTs are around 10 nm and the lengths are around several hundreds of nanometers. This implies that the ball-milling process only shortened the length of CNTs without destroying their inherent one-dimensional character. Fig. 3(c) shows that each single CNT is densely surrounded by Cu2Se nano-grains. The Cu atoms adhered on the CNTs can act as the nucleus that allows a direct heterogeneous nucleation of Cu2Se on the CNTs' surface. With increasing CNT content, the number of nucleation centers is also increased to greatly suppress the grain size of Cu2Se. This is confirmed by the scanning electron microscopy analysis (SEM) shown in the ESI,† Fig. S2. The dimensions of the Cu2Se grains are significantly reduced with increasing CNT content. In the pristine Cu2Se with stoichiometric ratios, the dimensions are in the micro-scale, but they are reduced to only about one hundred or dozens of nanometers in the Cu2Se/0.75 wt% CNT sample. This in situ growth of Cu2Se on the CNTs' surface ensures Cu2Se nano-grains densely surrounding the CNTs' surface to effectively prevent CNT re-agglomeration. In addition, we also checked the orientation relationships between the CNTs and the adjacent Cu2Se nano-grains by viewing the CNTs along and as-normal to the tube directions, as shown in Fig. 3(d) and (e), respectively. The Cu2Se nano-grains have no preferential orientation, which might be due to the twisted character of the CNTs.
 Fig. 3  Densely distributed CNTs inside the Cu2Se matrix observed by (a) low-magnification TEM and (b) low-magnification HAADF. The CNTs are displayed with a light contrast in Fig. 3(a) and with a dark contrast in Fig. 3(b). (c) High-magnification image of CNTs at Cu2Se grain boundaries. (d) and (e) High-magnification images obtained by viewing the CNTs along and as-normal to the tube directions. The insets are the corresponding Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) patterns for the areas marked in Fig. 3(e). 
The TE properties of the Cu2Se/CNT hybrid materials are shown in Fig. 4. Marked discontinuities are observed around 400 K due to the α–β phase transition. Although the stoichiometric ratio of Cu2Se is a wide band gap semiconductor (Eg = 1.23 eV),5 Cu–ion vacancies are always generated during the fabrication process. Therefore, all samples exhibit positive Seebeck coefficients (S) with holes as the major charge carriers. The Seebeck coefficients in the α phase (300–350 K) are between 60 and 100 μV K−1 and in the β-phase range of temperatures from 450 to 1000 K reach values between 100 and 300 μV K−1. The electrical conductivities (σ) of all samples decrease with increasing temperature over the whole temperature range, displaying typical heavily doped semiconducting behavior. Increasing the content of CNTs in Cu2Se slightly increases S while decreasing σ in the whole measured temperature range. The power factor (PF = S2σ) for these CNT-included Cu2Se hybrid materials is slightly lower than that of pristine Cu2Se. Interestingly, the thermal conductivity is greatly reduced when adding CNTs into Cu2Se. The κ value for Cu2Se/0.75 wt% CNTs is only around 0.4 W m−1 K−1 in the entire temperature range, about 65% and 50% reductions as compared with Cu2Se at 300 K and 1000 K, respectively. Based on the measured electrical and thermal transport properties, the Cu2Se/CNT hybrid materials possess greatly improved zTs with a maximum value of 2.4 at 1000 K for Cu2Se/0.75 wt% CNTs, which is about 30% higher than that of the pristine Cu2Se (see Fig. 1(b)). The thermal stability of these hybrid materials is shown in the ESI,† Fig. S3. From 400 K to 750 K, they possess good repeatability during the heating and cooling process. The small hysteresis below 400 K should be attributed to the Cu2Se α–β phase transition.
 Fig. 4  Temperature dependences of (a) Seebeck coefficient, (b) electrical conductivity, (c) power factor, and (d) thermal conductivity for the Cu2Se/x wt% CNT (x = 0, 0.25, 0.5, and 0.75) hybrid materials. 
These unusual phonon and electron transport properties are mainly attributed to the special Cu2Se/CNT hybrid interface, which is shown in Fig. 5(a) by the Spherical aberration corrected Scanning Transmission Electron Microscope (Cs-corrected STEM) image. The projected image is free of delocalization due to the correction of spherical aberration. The phase boundary between the Cu2Se and CNT is very clean without any visible cracks or amorphous phases. The nearest distances from the atoms in Cu2Se to the outermost carbon atoms in the CNT are around 1–3 Å, suggesting that there should be interfacial strain and electronic hybridization at the atomic or molecular level between Cu2Se and the adjacent CNT. In particular, as shown in the bottom-right of the Cs-corrected TEM image, the Cu2Se/CNT hybrid material looks like a natural layered compound, in which the CNT's tube walls are parallel with the Cu2Se's (111) lattice planes with a similar crystalline interplanar spacing of around 3.36 Å. This scenario is consistent with the description mentioned above that Cu atoms are first chemically adhered on the CNTs' surface and then directly react with the Se atoms to grow the layered Cu2Se in situ.
 Fig. 5  (a) Spherical aberration corrected Scanning Transmission Electron Microscope images for the Cu2Se/0.75 wt% CNT sample. The right picture shows the sketch map of the hole and phonon transport in the Cu2Se/CNT hybrid materials. (b) Lattice thermal conductivity (κL) as a function of the CNT content for the Cu2Se/x wt% CNT (x = 0, 0.25, 0.5, and 0.75) hybrid materials at 450 K. The data of the pure CNTs come from ref. 17. The dashed line represents the rule of mixtures. (c) Hall hole concentration and Hall mobility as a function of the content of CNTs at 300 K. The data for the pristine Cu2Se reported in ref. 26 and 27 are also included for comparison. (d) Schematic of the fully depleted layer (blue color area) in the interfacial areas of the Cu2Se/CNT hybrid materials. 
The special opportunity of hybrid materials is that they might possess novel properties beyond that of their components,12 as demonstrated here with the significantly reduced thermal conductivity in the Cu2Se/CNT hybrid materials. We calculated the lattice thermal conductivity (κL) by subtracting the carrier part κc from the total κ, where κc is calculated by the Wiedemann–Franz law (κc = LTσ, where L is the Lorenz number, L = 1.6 × 10−8 V2 K−2).5 It is interesting that the κL decreases as the CNT content increases (see Fig. 5(b)). When the added CNT content is x = 0.5 wt% or 0.75 wt%, κL is reduced to 0.2–0.3 W m−1 K−1 at 450 K, which is surprisingly low considering the theoretical minimum κL in Cu2Se. The reduction of κL in the Cu2Se/CNT composites may be partially rationalized by a reduction in the average vibrational frequency, which has been shown to be highly correlated with the speed of sound.30 Using a diffusive limit of thermal transport and the experimental speed of sound measurements (see the ESI†),23 the minimum κL of the composites is estimated to be 0.28 W m−1 K−1, in relative agreement with experiments. In addition, the low phonon frequencies due to the liquid-like nature of Cu2Se leaves room for additional phonon scattering from CNTs as described below. The intrinsic κL of pure CNTs along the tube direction is as high as 102–103 W m−1 K−1,17 about 3–4 orders of magnitude higher than that of Cu2Se (about 0.68 W m−1 K−1 at 300 K). In classical composites, according to the rule of mixtures, the κL should be between that of the two component materials with a value much higher than that observed in Cu2Se/CNT hybrid materials. Therefore, the highly dispersed CNTs at the molecular level in the Cu2Se/CNT hybrid materials must act as isolated impurities to scatter phonons in Cu2Se and suppress the heat conduction more than they contribute to heat conduction by transporting heat within the tube.
The panoscopic Cu2Se/CNT hybrid materials containing phonon scattering structures at various length scales4 work together for extraordinarily low lattice thermal conductivity because the different scattering mechanisms are effective at different frequencies (see the right inset in Fig. 5(a)).24 The clean Cu2Se/CNT interfaces suggest that interfacial strain scattering should augment the point defect scattering.24 Interfacial effects also lower the longitudinal and transverse speeds of sound (see Fig. 6(a)) from the already low values of pristine Cu2Se. This softening of the structure combined with additional scattering can explain the extremely low κL values achieved in these unique hybrid materials.
 Fig. 6  (a) Longitudinal and transverse speed of sound for the Cu2Se/x wt% CNT (x = 0, 0.25, 0.5, and 0.75) hybrid materials. (b) Carrier mobility as a function of carrier concentration at 300 K for Cu2Se-based materials. Some data reported before are also included for comparison. 
The intimate interaction of CNT with Cu2Se also leads to significant differences in the electrical transport properties. As shown in Fig. 4(b), the σ is unexpectedly reduced with increasing CNT content. For a classical mixture either an increase in σ is expected because CNTs have high electrical conductivity (>104 S m−1 for the CNTs in this study) or little change in σ is expected from the very small volume proportion (less than 5–6%) of CNTs as reported previously for Bi2Te3.25 Thus the σ decrease must originate from the unique interaction of Cu2Se and CNTs in the synthesis presented here.
The decrease in σ can be traced to a decrease in hole concentration p. Using the Hall effect we measure (Fig. 5(c)) the carrier concentration p and carrier mobility μH using σ = peμH, where e is the elemental charge. Very surprisingly, p gradually decreases with increasing content of CNTs. The p for Cu2Se/0.75 wt% CNTs is 3.3 × 1020 cm−3 at 300 K, only about half of that for the pristine Cu2Se. Such a large p reduction in Cu2−δSe is typically due to the filling of available copper.5 We suspect the CNT is acting as a facile reservoir of copper either adhering on the CNTs' surface or in-between the carbon layers. When Cu2Se forms during the fabrication process (Fig. 1(c)), there may be still some Cu atoms left inside the CNTs. Such CNTs with intercalated Cu can also absorb holes from Cu2Se by supplying Cu that can enter the Cu2Se to reduce the carrier concentration during the sintering process.
The hole mobility μH in the Cu2Se/CNT hybrid materials is well maintained without any obvious deterioration despite the additional interfaces. As shown in Fig. 5(c), all Cu2Se/CNT hybrid materials possess similar μH values comparable with that of Cu2Se, showing that the well-distributed CNTs insignificantly scatter charge carriers. These μH values are also similar to those Cu2Se-based materials reported before (see Fig. 6(b)).26,27
The similar work functions between Cu2Se and the CNTs shown in Fig. 5(d) which lead to a thin depletion layer can explain the minimal deterioration of the carrier mobility. The work function (W) of 4.8(±0.1) eV for Cu2Se is obtained by subtracting the Fermi level from the vacuum energy level by ab initio calculations. The metallic multi-walled CNTs with diameters larger than 10 Å have a work function about 4.5 eV.28 As shown in the ESI†, the calculated depletion layer is only about 0.7 Å, which is much smaller than the Fermi wave-vector (kF) in Cu2Se (2.5 nm at 300 K that is calculated by the free electron gas model kF = (3π2n)1/3 under a carrier concentration of n = 5.3 × 1020 cm−3).29 Thus, the charge carriers can easily transfer through the interfaces without being scattered, leading to similar μH values in the Cu2Se/CNT hybrid materials compared with that observed in the pristine Cu2Se.
In summary, this work demonstrates that the preferred chemical interaction between metal Cu and CNTs can be exploited to fabricate Cu2Se/CNT hybrid materials with homogeneously distributed CNTs. The special electrical and thermal transport properties and ultrahigh TE performance beyond the traditional mixing rule strongly suggest that organic/inorganic hybridization at the nano-meter or molecular level can play a significant role in the field of thermoelectrics. Besides Cu, many other metals such as Ag, Ti, Ni, Pd, and Pt,19 also have similar chemical bonding interactions with CNTs or other carbon-based materials such as graphite and graphene. Therefore, we greatly expect that the present study can be easily extended to other TE materials containing these metal elements to fabricate high TE performance hybrid materials.
Experimental section
Polycrystalline Cu2Se/x wt% CNT (x = 0, 0.25, 0.5 and 0.75) materials were prepared by high energy ball-milling. Raw elements, Cu (powder, 99.95%, Alfa Aesar, ∼100 mesh), Se (powder, 99.9%, Alfa Aesar, ∼100 mesh), and multi-walled CNTs (carbon purity >95 wt%, Timesnano, <10 nm in diameter, 0.5–2 μm in length, density ∼1.5 g cm−3, electrical conductivity >104 S m−1) were weighed out in stoichiometric proportions, and sealed in a tungsten carbide jar inside a glove box. Tungsten carbide balls were used as milling media with a ball/material weight ratio of 10:1. Mechanical alloying was conducted by rotating the vial at 500 rpm for 5 h using a spex Miller. Then, the products were taken out from the tungsten carbide jar and sintered by Spark Plasma Sintering (SPS, Sumitomo SPS-2040) at around 753 K for 8 min under a pressure of 65 MPa. Electrically isolating and thermally conducting BN layers were sprayed onto the carbon foils and the inner sides of the graphite die before the SPS process to prohibit DC pulsed currents going through the powders. High densities (>95% of the theoretical density) were obtained for all bulk samples.
The phase purity of all Cu2Se/x wt% CNT hybrid materials is characterized by using X-ray diffraction (Rigaku, Rint 2000) with a Cu-Kα source. Polarized Raman spectra were recorded using a Dilor LabRam-1B by adjusting the holder over various angles (λ = 785 nm). The photoelectron spectra (XPS) were measured on the pressed pellets by using a Thermo Fisher Scientific ESCALAB 250 with monochromatic Al Kα X-rays (1486.74 eV). The carbon 1s peak was used as a reference to calibrate the binding energies of the other core level spectra. The sample morphologies were measured by field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM, Magellan-400) and transmission electron microscopy (FEI Tectai F30 and Themis Z). The electrical conductivity (σ) and Seebeck coefficient (S) were measured simultaneously using an Ulvac ZEM-3 system. Thermal diffusivity (D) was measured using the laser flash method (Netzsch, LFA-457). The specific heat (Cp) was measured by differential scanning calorimetry (Netzsch DSC 404F3). The result is shown in the ESI,† Fig. S4. The density (d) was measured by using the Archimedes method. The total thermal conductivity (κ) was calculated according to the relationship κ = dCpD. The uncertainties in the electrical conductivity, Seebeck coefficient, and thermal conductivity were within 5%, 7%, and 5%, respectively. The Hall coefficient (RH) at 300 K was collected using a physical properties measurement system (PPMS-9, Quantum Design, USA). The hole concentration (p) is calculated using p = 1/RHe. The Hall carrier mobility (μH) was calculated according to the relationship μH = RH/ρ. The speed of sound was measured by using the pulse-echo method on a homemade instrument, where the time delay was determined by maximizing the cross-correlation of two subsequent reflections.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Basic Research Program of China (973-program) under Project No. 2013CB632501, the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) under the No. 51625205, and the Key Research Program of Chinese Academy of Sciences (Grant No. KGZD-EW-T06). X. S. is thankful for the support by the Shanghai Government (Grant No. 15JC1400301) and the International S&T Cooperation Program of China (2015DFA51050). P. Q. is thankful for the support by the Youth Innovation Promotion Association of CAS under Grant No. 2016232. M. Y. and J. H. are thankful for the support by the Technology and Innovation Commission of Shenzhen Municipality under Grant No. KQTD2016022619565991 and KQCX2015033110182370. The contributions of R. H., M. T. A., and G. J. S. are supported as part of the Solid-State Solar-Thermal Energy Conversion Center (S3TEC), an Energy Frontier Research Center funded by the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), Office of Science, Basic Energy Sciences (BES), under Award # DE-SC0001299/DE-FG02-09ER46577.
Notes and references
J. Yang and T. Caillat, MRS Bull., 2006, 31, 224 CrossRef CAS .
X. Shi, L. Chen and C. Uher, Int. Mater. Rev., 2016, 61, 379 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Pei, X. Shi, A. LaLonde, H. Wang, L. Chen and G. J. Snyder, Nature, 2011, 473, 66 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. K. Biswas, J. He, I. D. Blum, C. I. Wu, T. P. Hogan, D. N. Seidman, V. P. Dravid and M. G. Kanatzidis, Nature, 2012, 489, 414 CrossRef PubMed .
H. L. Liu, X. Shi, F. F. Xu, L. L. Zhang, W. Q. Zhang, L. D. Chen, Q. Li, C. Uher, T. Day and G. J. Snyder, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. I. Kim, K. H. Lee, H. A. Mun, H. S. Kim, S. W. Hwang, J. W. Roh, D. J. Yang, W. H. Shin, X. S. Li, Y. H. Lee, G. J. Snyder and S. W. Kim, Science, 2015, 348, 109 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. G. Fu, S. Q. Bai, Y. T. Liu, Y. S. Tang, L. D. Chen, X. B. Zhao and T. J. Zhu, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8144 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Poudel, Q. Hao, Y. Ma, Y. Lan, A. Minnich, B. Yu, X. Yan, D. Wang, A. Muto, D. Vashaee, X. Chen, J. Liu, M. S. Dresselhaus, G. Chen and Z. Ren, Science, 2008, 320, 634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Joshi, H. Lee, Y. C. Lan, X. W. Wang, G. H. Zhu, D. Z. Wang, R. W. Gould, D. C. Cuff, M. Y. Tang, M. S. Dresselhaus, G. Chen and Z. F. Ren, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 4670 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. F. Hsu, S. Loo, F. Guo, W. Chen, J. S. Dyck, C. Uher, T. Hogan, E. K. Polychroniadis and M. G. Kanatzidis, Science, 2004, 303, 818 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Bergman and O. Levy, J. Appl. Phys., 1991, 70, 6821 CrossRef .

          G. Kickelbick, Hybrid Materials, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2006 Search PubMed .
N. E. Coates, S. K. Yee, B. McCulloch, K. C. See, A. Majumdar, R. A. Segalman and J. J. Urban, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1629 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. He, F. Qiu and Z. Lin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1352 Search PubMed .
C. Wan, X. Gu, F. Dang, T. Itoh, Y. Wang, H. Sasaki, M. Kondo, K. Koga, K. Yabuki, G. J. Snyder, R. Yang and K. Koumoto, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 622 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zong, R. Hanus, M. Dylla, Y. Tang, J. Liao, Q. Zhang, G. J. Snyder and L. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 183 CAS .
M. Fujii, X. Zhang, H. Xie, H. Ago, K. Takahashi, T. Ikuta, H. Abe and T. Shimizu, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 95, 065502 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Michael, L. De Volder, S. H. Tawfick, R. H. Baughman and A. John Hart, Science, 2013, 339, 535 CrossRef PubMed .
A. V. Krasheninnikov, P. O. Lehtinen, A. S. Foster, P. Pyykkö and R. M. Nieminen, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 102, 126807 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Amft, S. Lebègue, O. Eriksson and N. V. Skorodumova, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2011, 23, 395001 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Bittencourt, X. Ke, G. Van Tendeloo, S. Thiess, W. Drube, J. Ghijsen and C. P. Ewels, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2012, 535, 80 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Pimenta, G. Dresselhaus, M. S. Dresselhaus, L. G. Cancado and A. Jorio, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2007, 9, 1276 RSC .
S. A. Danilkin, M. Yethiraj and G. J. Kearley, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn., 2010, 79, 25 CrossRef .
H. Kim, S. D. Kang, Y. Tang, R. Hanus and G. J. Snyder, Mater. Horiz., 2016, 3, 234 RSC .
Y. H. Yeo and T. S. Oh, Mater. Res. Bull., 2014, 58, 54 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ballikaya, H. Chi, J. R. Salvador and C. Uher, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 12478 CAS .
T. W. Day, K. S. Weldert, W. G. Zeier, B. Chen, S. L. Moffitt, U. Weis, K. P. Jochum, M. Panthöfer, M. J. Bedzyk, G. J. Snyder and W. Tremel, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 7018 CrossRef CAS .
W. S. Su, T. C. Leung and C. T. Chan, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 76, 235413 CrossRef .

          C. Kittel, Introduction to Solid State Physics, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York,  2004 Search PubMed .

          M. T. Agne, et al., in preparation.

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Some calculation details; charge density of the Cu–graphene system (Fig. S1); fractured secondary electron images (Fig. S2); repeatability data (Fig. S3), and heat capacity (Fig. S4) for Cu2Se/x wt% CNT hybrid materials. Model used for estimating κmin of Cu2Se (Fig. S5). See DOI: 10.1039/c7ee01737e‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

Broader context
Hybrid materials are composites consisting of two constituents at the nanometer or molecular scale that display new properties or characteristics beyond those of the matrix materials, but they are greatly restricted in thermoelectrics due to the difficulties of achieving an extremely uniform distribution of organic materials at such a small length-scale. Here, by utilizing the special interaction between metal Cu and multi-walled carbon nanotubes (CNTs), we have successfully realized the in situ growth of Cu2Se on the surface of CNTs and then fabricated a series of Cu2Se/CNT hybrid materials with a high degree of homogeneously dispersed molecular CNTs inside the Cu2Se matrix. Beyond the traditional mixing rule, large reductions in lattice thermal conductivity and carrier concentration are observed, leading to a record-high thermoelectric figure of merit zT of 2.4 at 1000 K. This work opens a new window to optimize thermoelectric performance through hybridizing organic/inorganic materials at nanometer or molecular scales.


 	Fig. 1  (a) Total energy as a function of initial vertical distance d between the Cu and CNT when putting a Cu atom on the surface of a single CNT. The right inset shows the charge density of the left inset picture when d = 1.83 Å. (b) Temperature dependence of TE figure of merit zT for the Cu2Se/x wt% CNT (x = 0, 0.25, 0.5, and 0.75) hybrid materials. (c) Fabrication process and formation mechanism of the Cu2Se/CNT hybrid materials.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Raman spectra of the pristine CNTs and ball milled Cu/30 wt% CNTs. (b) C 1s line XPS core level spectra of the pristine CNT and ball milled Cu/30 wt% CNT samples. The black solid lines represent the experimental data. The red dashed lines represent the total fitting data including C1 (sp2, 284.9 eV), C2 (sp3, 285.4 eV), and C3 (satellite peaks).	 

 	Fig. 3  Densely distributed CNTs inside the Cu2Se matrix observed by (a) low-magnification TEM and (b) low-magnification HAADF. The CNTs are displayed with a light contrast in Fig. 3(a) and with a dark contrast in Fig. 3(b). (c) High-magnification image of CNTs at Cu2Se grain boundaries. (d) and (e) High-magnification images obtained by viewing the CNTs along and as-normal to the tube directions. The insets are the corresponding Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) patterns for the areas marked in Fig. 3(e).	 

 	Fig. 4  Temperature dependences of (a) Seebeck coefficient, (b) electrical conductivity, (c) power factor, and (d) thermal conductivity for the Cu2Se/x wt% CNT (x = 0, 0.25, 0.5, and 0.75) hybrid materials.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Spherical aberration corrected Scanning Transmission Electron Microscope images for the Cu2Se/0.75 wt% CNT sample. The right picture shows the sketch map of the hole and phonon transport in the Cu2Se/CNT hybrid materials. (b) Lattice thermal conductivity (κL) as a function of the CNT content for the Cu2Se/x wt% CNT (x = 0, 0.25, 0.5, and 0.75) hybrid materials at 450 K. The data of the pure CNTs come from ref. 17. The dashed line represents the rule of mixtures. (c) Hall hole concentration and Hall mobility as a function of the content of CNTs at 300 K. The data for the pristine Cu2Se reported in ref. 26 and 27 are also included for comparison. (d) Schematic of the fully depleted layer (blue color area) in the interfacial areas of the Cu2Se/CNT hybrid materials.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Longitudinal and transverse speed of sound for the Cu2Se/x wt% CNT (x = 0, 0.25, 0.5, and 0.75) hybrid materials. (b) Carrier mobility as a function of carrier concentration at 300 K for Cu2Se-based materials. Some data reported before are also included for comparison.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Some calculation details; charge density of the Cu–graphene system (Fig. S1); fractured secondary electron images (Fig. S2); repeatability data (Fig. S3), and heat capacity (Fig. S4) for Cu2Se/x wt% CNT hybrid materials. Model used for estimating κmin of Cu2Se (Fig. S5). See DOI: 10.1039/c7ee01737e
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
