Designing multimodal carbon nanotubes by covalent multi-functionalization  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6NR06728J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6NR06728J
(Minireview)
Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 18596-18611Designing multimodal carbon nanotubes by covalent multi-functionalization

        
          
            Bhimareddy 
            Dinesh
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Alberto 
            Bianco
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Cécilia 
            Ménard-Moyon
          
          
        
      *
      University of Strasbourg, CNRS, Immunopathology and therapeutic chemistry, UPR 3572 67000 Strasbourg, France. E-mail: c.menard@ibmc-cnrs.unistra.fr
Received 
      24th August 2016
    , Accepted 25th October 2016First published on 26th October 2016AbstractCarbon nanotubes (CNTs) are a unique tool in nanotechnology owing to their exceptional properties that offer a variety of opportunities for applications in different fields. Nevertheless, their low dispersibility in organic solvents and in aqueous media hampers their development. The functionalization of their surface allows overcoming this issue, while exploiting and tuning their properties. Thanks to their high specific surface area, multi-functionalization strategies give the possibility to conjugate several copies of different molecules to endow the nanotubes with multiple functionalities. In this context, this review wishes to focus on the preparation of multimodal CNTs designed by covalent multi-functionalization. More specifically, we describe the different approaches that have been developed to prepare multi-functionalized CNTs through double and triple covalent functionalization of the nanotube framework. We also emphasize the strategies used to control the derivatization of multi-functionalized CNTs with molecules of interest mainly via sequential or simultaneous methodologies.Bhimareddy DineshBhimareddy Dinesh obtained his PhD degree from the University of Mysore in India in 2008. He then worked in a biotechnology company for six months in Bangalore before joing the group of Prof. P. Balaram at IISc, India as postdoctoral fellow. He worked on β and γ hybrid peptide foldamers until November 2013. Currently, he is postdoctoral researcher in the group of Dr Alberto Bianco at CNRS in Strasbourg (France) since December 2013. His research interests include the functionalization of peptides and carbon-based nanomaterials for biological applications.Alberto BiancoAlberto Bianco received his PhD in 1995 from the University of Padova (Italy). As a visiting scientist, he worked at the University of Lausanne, Tübingen (as an Alexander von Humboldt fellow) and Padova. He is currently Research Director at the CNRS in Strasbourg. His research interests focus on the design and functionalization of carbon-based nanomaterials (carbon nanotubes, graphene and adamantane) for therapeutic, diagnostic and imaging applications. He is co-author of over 230 papers. He is also in the Advisory Board of Nanomedicine, Nanotechnology Reviews and the Journal of Peptide Science. In 2011 he has been appointed as Editor of Carbon.Cécilia Ménard-MoyonDr Cécilia Ménard-Moyon obtained her PhD in 2005 at CEA/Saclay in France. After a 1-year post-doc at the University of York in the UK and 1.5 year in industry in Belgium, she joined the group of Dr Alberto Bianco in Strasbourg (France) in 2008 as CNRS researcher. She works on the functionalization of carbon-based nanomaterials, mainly carbon nanotubes and graphene, for biomedical applications. Since 2013 she is Member of the Committee of experts of the French Observatory for Micro & NanoTechnologies (OMNT) in the Micro- & Nanomedicine group. She has published more than 60 publications and 7 book chapters.
1. Introduction
Among nanoparticles and nanomaterials, carbon nanotubes (CNTs) have been playing a key role in the nanotechnology revolution. Indeed, the advancement of research on nanotubes is remarkable over the past two decades.1 Owing to their outstanding electrical, mechanical, thermal, and structural properties, they are attractive nanomaterials for a wide variety of applications in many fields, including electronics,2 materials science,3 solar energy conversion,4 optical sensors,5 and nanomedicine.6,7 Depending on the number of walls, single-walled CNTs (SWCNTs) are distinguished from multi-walled nanotubes (MWCNTs) that are constituted of several concentric tubes. As-produced (namely pristine) CNTs present some drawbacks as they are insoluble in organic solvents and in water. Additionally, they have a high tendency to form bundles due to hydrophobic and π–π interactions. Therefore, chemical modification of their surface is fundamental to exploit and tune their properties, and a precise control of their functionalization is required.8 In particular, a well-controlled surface chemistry is very important for interfacing nanomaterials with biology.9 Different approaches have been developed based on covalent10 and non-covalent11 functionalization of the nanotube sidewall and tips, as well as endohedral filling of their inner cavity.12,13 Thanks to their high specific surface area, strategies for multiple functionalization have been developed.14 The design of CNTs as multi-functional nanomaterials has attracted increasing attention for various applications. Hence, there is a high motivation to improve the existing methodologies to modify the nanotube surface with more than one molecule in a controlled, selective, and efficient way. For instance, for applications in the biomedical field like drug delivery, CNTs endowed with multiple functions are highly beneficial. The different functionalities can be imaging probes for tracking and detection, and biologically active molecules for targeting and/or bioactivity.15 Our previous review in 2012 described the strategies for the multi-functionalization of CNTs including covalent and non-covalent approaches for biomedical applications.14 In the current review article, we aim at discussing the design of multimodal CNTs by covalent multi-functionalization of the nanotube framework. Covalent functionalization ensures a high stability of CNT conjugates, contrary to non-covalent approaches, which can be reversible but have the advantage to preserve the electronic and optical properties of the nanotubes.16 In particular, in the case of nanomedicine, the strong covalent bonding of bioactive molecules to the CNT carrier is essential to avoid early release and metabolization/degradation before reaching the target site. Here, we have categorized our review by the strategies used for the covalent double and triple functionalization of the CNT backbone and by the methods developed to control the subsequent derivatization of the multi-functionalized nanotubes with the molecules of interest. We also highlight the main ligation strategies used to derivatize multi-functionalized CNTs, including the insertion of cleavable linkers to control the release of the desired molecules.
2. Covalent double functionalization of the backbone of carbon nanotubes
Many reactions can be performed on the π-conjugated framework of CNTs and on oxygenated groups introduced by oxidation at the defect sites (also named “defect site chemistry”).17,18 Owing to their high specific surface area, multiple copies of different molecules can be grafted on the nanotube sidewall, thus allowing to perform multi-functionalization. The general reported covalent approaches on CNTs are mainly amidation, cycloaddition, arylation, and alkylation reactions. Herein, the combinations of the most frequently reported covalent functionalization methodologies applied on the nanotube backbone to confer two functionalities are categorically discussed below. The first representative study in the respective category of the functionalization approach is described, whereas similar studies are reported in Table 1. Further, strategies with modified methods to the first studies are also discussed.
Table 1 Studies reported on the covalent double and triple functionalization of CNTs using different approaches




Functionalization approach
Type of CNTs
Ref.




1,3-Dipolar cycloaddition and amidation (or esterification)
SWCNTs

21, 38, 63, 64 (azomethine ylide and amidation)



23, 26 (nitrile imine and esterification)



29 (nitrile oxide and esterification)


MWCNTs

19, 22, 65–71 (azomethine ylide and amidation)


Double amidation (or esterification)
SWCNTs

31, 32 (esterification), 72


MWCNTs

30, 73 (esterification), 74, 75


Double arylation
SWCNTs

34, 35, 76



Arylation (or alkylation) and amidation (or esterification)
SWCNTs

34, 38 (alkylation and esterification)


MWCNTs

37 (esterification)


Amidation and cyclopropanation
SWCNTs

39 (carbene), 42 (Bingel reaction)


MWCNTs

40 (carbene)


Double 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition of azomethine ylides
MWCNTs

46, 47, 71



1,3-Dipolar cycloaddition of azomethine ylides and arylation
SWCNTs

48, 77



Esterification and Diels–Alder reaction
SWCNTs

49



Alkylation/second functionalization via nanotube anion formation
SWCNTs
Polymerization: 50, 78–80


Grafting of carbonyl derivatives: 51–54


Grafting of hydroxyl-terminated compounds: 54


Alkylation: 55, 56, 81–83


MWCNTs
Polymerization: 84


Grafting of hydroxyl-terminated compounds: 85


Alkylation: 55, 86–89


Radical addition of xanthates and peroxides
SWCNTs & MWCNTs

58, 59



Nitrene cycloaddition and perfluoroalkylation
MWCNTs

60



Double polymerization
MWCNTs

61



Triple arylation
SWCNTs

90



MWCNTs

90, 91





2.1 1,3-Dipolar cycloaddition and amidation (or esterification)
The idea of covalent multi-functionalization of CNTs has greatly evolved in developing drug delivery systems in the last ten years. Our group has envisaged a strategy to introduce two functionalities on the nanotube surface by exploiting the amidation and 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition reactions (Scheme 1A).19 The primary requirement to follow this approach is to oxidize the pristine CNTs by treatment with strong acids like sulfuric acid and nitric acid mixtures, in order to increase defects and thereby rise the number of oxygen-containing functions. These oxygenated groups are mostly carboxylic acids, which are mainly located at the nanotube tips.20 The COOH functions are subjected to amidation via the formation of acyl chlorides, followed by 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition of azomethine ylides on the sidewall of the amidated CNTs. The cycloaddition is achieved by thermal condensation of an aldehyde moiety and an amino acid derivative, leading to the formation of a reactive iminium intermediate, which upon thermal decarboxylation generates the azomethine ylide. This 1,3-dipolar species attacks efficiently the π-system of the CNTs forming a pyrrolidine ring. With this approach, a fluorescent probe (fluorescein) and an antibiotic (amphotericin B) were linked to the CNTs.19 When amidation is performed after 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition, coupling agents such as 1-(3-(dimethylamino)propyl)-3-ethylcarbodiimide (EDC) and hydroxybenzotriazole (HOBt), or O-(7-azabenzotriazol-1-yl)-N,N,N′,N′-tetramethyluronium hexafluorophosphate (HATU) are used as alternative to the formation of acyl chlorides that requires harsh conditions (e.g., chlorinating agents like oxalyl chloride or thionyl chloride) that may not be compatible with the functional groups on the pyrrolidine ring.21,22
 Scheme 1  Different approaches for the covalent double functionalization of CNTs. For the sake of clarity, only one type of functional groups is shown in all schemes. 
F. Langa and coworkers have developed strategies of combined esterification and different cycloaddition reactions. 1,3-Dipolar cycloaddition of nitrile imines has been performed on the sidewall of oxidized CNTs previously functionalized with n-pentyl chains by esterification (Scheme 1B).23 The nitrile imines were prepared in situ from hydrazine derivatives. The [3 + 2] cycloaddition led to the formation of pyrazoline rings on the nanotube surface. The alkyl chains at the tips provided sufficient dispersibility in organic solvents. A strong electron acceptor (3,5-bis(trifluoromethyl)phenyl) or an electron donor (4-(N,N-dimethylamino)phenyl) was introduced on the pyrazoline ring for photochemical studies. Microwave (MW) irradiation is a source of energy that has proven to be beneficial for cycloaddition reactions not only to reduce the reaction times, but also to increase the yields.24,25 In a recent work, a MW-accelerated strategy has also been designed for 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition of nitrile imines on readily n-butyl ester-functionalized CNTs.26 The reaction between CNTs and the nitrile imine dipole generated in situ from the condensation of an aromatic hydrazonoyl chloride derivative and triethylamine under MW irradiation, was favored by the active double bonds in the nanotube graphitic structure imparted by the electron withdrawing effect of the ester groups. The CNTs were further functionalized with thiophenol and the thiol-terminated nanotubes were used as template for the immobilization of gold nanopopcorns. The gold nanoparticle–CNT hybrid showed a high capacity for photothermal killing of bacteria. MW irradiation helped in reducing the reaction time to 1 hour contrary to days under reflux conditions. The strong MW absorption displayed by CNTs induces efficient dielectric heating. This property has been widely exploited for functionalization of their sidewall, in particular via cycloaddition reactions.27,28
In another work, the pentyl ester-CNTs have been functionalized by 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition of nitrile oxides leading to the formation of isoxazoline rings (Scheme 1C).29 The reaction was performed between the ester-functionalized CNTs and a chlorine derivative of 4-pyridylcarboxaldehyde oxime in the presence of triethylamine under MW irradiation. The pyridyl isoxazolino-CNTs were coordinated to a metallo-porphyrin for photochemical studies.
2.2 Double amidation or double esterification
Double amidation is an alternative approach for the covalent conjugation of two different functionalities on the carboxylic acids of CNTs. The COOH groups have to be activated either by conversion into acyl chlorides using chlorinating agents or by using conventional coupling agents enabling for final coupling with linkers or molecules of choice bearing a primary amine. This strategy has been used to exploit CNTs in photovoltaics30 or as drug delivery system by conjugation of a targeting ligand of cancer cells and a drug or an imaging probe.31
In another work, one end of oxidized CNTs has been covalently linked by esterification to a substrate covered with a gold film modified with a self-assembled monolayer (SAM) of 11-mercaptoundecanol using dicyclohexylcarbodiimide (DCC) as coupling agent, while the other end of the nanotube was esterified with ethanol.32 This construct was studied in the frame of the development of rectifying molecular diodes.
2.3 Double arylation
Methods to introduce two different moieties that are covalently linked to the nanotube surface through aryl groups are discussed in this section (Scheme 1D). Functionalization of CNTs via the use of aryl diazonium salts has been initially developed by Tour and coworkers.33 Here, the nanotubes sequentially react with two different aryl diazonium reactive species that are synthesized in situ from the corresponding substituted aniline derivatives by reaction with sodium nitrite or isoamyl nitrite. The diazonium salts are highly unstable in the presence of CNTs and generate very reactive species, presumably radicals, which add on the nanotube surface, thereby yielding nanotubes with two different molecules linked through a phenyl ring. For instance, CNTs have been doubly functionalized in two steps by introducing sulfonated 4-chlorophenyl moieties on the nanotube surface using a mixture of oleum (i.e., sulfuric acid with dissolved SO3), 4-chloroaniline, sodium nitrite, and azobisisobutyronitrile, followed by treatment with various aryl diazonium salts to result in doubly arylated CNTs.34 A one-pot reaction using two anilines in a single experiment has also been recently described, resulting in an equimolar ratio of both aryl moieties.35 This approach was compared to the sequential methodology. In this case, it was found that the first step was dominant, leading to a higher functionalization degree. Amine groups were tagged by Au nanoparticles thanks to their strong affinity for gold. Observation by transmission electron microscopy allowed localizing the functional groups. The CNTs were heavily and homogeneously covered with the nanoparticles.
2.4 Arylation (or alkylation) and amidation (or esterification)
In this section, reports on the double covalent functionalization of CNTs using a combination of arylation with either amidation or esterification are summarized. For instance, CNTs have been doubly functionalized through the combination of arylation and amidation.34 In the first step, oxidized nanotubes prepared by treatment with a mixture of oleum and concentrated nitric acid were amidated using DCC and an amine-terminated poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) compound. A phenyl moiety was then introduced on the surface of the PEGylated CNTs via arylation using a series of diazonium salts diversely substituted at the para position. A triazene derivative was used as a stable diazonium source36 to directly graft a biotin-terminated linker on the nanotube surface.34
In another work, the arylation of oxidized CNTs has been followed by esterification with PEG via ring opening oligopolymerization of ethylene carbonate in basic conditions.37
Besides, diazonium salts can also be formed from primary alkyl amines. But, they are extremely unstable and are thus generated usually in situ. This strategy has been applied to alkylate oxidized CNTs, followed by esterification of the COOH groups.38
2.5 Amidation and cyclopropanation
CNTs have been doubly functionalized by amidation and [2 + 1] cycloaddition of carbenes.39 For this purpose, oxidized nanotubes were first derivatized with octadecylamine via the formation of acyl chlorides. Then, the second function dichlorocarbene was generated in situ by heating the precursor Seyferth reagent (PhHgCCl2Br), resulting in the formation of cyclopropane rings on the nanotube sidewall. In a recent work, oxidized CNTs have been first functionalized with oleyl amine by amidation and then with phenyl butyric acid methyl ester, which has excellent electrical and optical properties, through carbene addition.40 In this case, the carbene intermediate was generated from the corresponding diazo compound prepared in situ by reaction of methyl 4-benzoylbutyrate p-tosylhydrazone with sodium methoxide. The functionalized CNTs were exploited in organic photovoltaics for solar energy conversion.
The Bingel reaction is an alternative cyclopropanation reaction involving a brominated derivative of a malonate ester in the presence of a base. It has been widely used for the functionalization of fullerenes under mild conditions.41 In the case of CNTs, this reaction has been applied for the sidewall functionalization of nanotubes previously amidated with octadecylamine in order to increase their dispersibility (Scheme 2A).42 The Bingel reaction was performed using benzyl 2-ethylhexyl malonate, I2, and 1,8-diazabicyclo[5.4.0]undec-7-ene (DBU) as a base either under MW irradiation or conventional heating conditions. The reaction rate was ∼50 times faster using microwaves. Indeed, MW activation allowed reducing the reaction time (down to 30 min) and increasing the level of functionalization by changing the output power. The intrinsic electronic properties of the SWCNTs used in this study were preserved after functionalization,43 which opens the door to the development of new molecular devices. Noteworthy, in most cases of covalent functionalization of CNTs, the rehybridation of the derivatized sp2 carbon atoms into sp3 generally affects the electronic and optical properties of the nanotubes.44,45
 Scheme 2  Other approaches for the covalent double functionalization of CNTs. 
2.6 Double 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition
The covalent double functionalization of CNTs by 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition of azomethine ylides is described in this section. The grafting of two different moieties on the nanotube surface via cycloaddition reactions is possible by using contemporaneously equimolar amounts of azomethine ylides at once. In this context, our group has reported the double functionalization of CNTs conducted in the concomitant presence of an equimolar amount of two different amino acid derivatives and paraformaldehyde.46 This strategy was exploited to prepare a multimodal drug delivery system in which a fluorescent probe, fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC), and an anticancer drug, methotrexate, were covalently grafted onto the CNTs.
Alternatively, the double functionalized CNTs have been prepared by two successive 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition of azomethine ylides.47 The first cycloaddition was performed in the presence of a phthalimide-protected amino acid derivative and paraformaldehyde, followed by a second reaction using a Boc-protected amino acid compound. The CNTs were sequentially derivatized with a specific peptide sequence able to target the mitochondria and with FITC.
2.7 1,3-Dipolar cycloaddition and arylation
MW irradiation has been applied to prepare double functionalized CNTs using a combination of 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition of azomethine ylides and arylation.48 The reaction was achieved in 1 hour under solvent-free conditions using MW instead of 5 days required under conventional thermal conditions. Sequentially, the arylation was carried out by addition of diazonium salts in water under MW irradiation. As the arylation allowed reaching higher levels of functionalization compared to 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition, it was better to do first the cycloaddition reaction and then the arylation. Indeed, the 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition of azomethine ylides proceeded to a much lesser extent on arylated CNTs compared to pristine nanotubes, probably because most of the reactive sites were saturated by aryl moieties.
2.8 Esterification and Diels–Alder reaction
Double functionalized CNTs have been prepared by performing a Diels–Alder [4 + 2] cycloaddition of o-quinodimethane onto n-pentyl ester-functionalized CNTs under MW irradiation (Scheme 2B).49 The o-quinodimethane was generated in situ from a sultine, namely 4,5-benzo-1,2-oxathiin-2-oxide. The functionalized CNTs were characterized by 1H NMR spectroscopy in solution and compared to the spectrum of the corresponding fullerene adduct.
2.9 Other double functionalization approaches
Other methods of double covalent functionalization of CNTs have been developed by exploiting different combinations of reactions including alkylation, photochemistry, radical addition, and plasma-induced polymerization.
CNTs having two different functional groups have been prepared one-pot via the formation of a nanotube anion intermediate by treatment with an organometallic reagent such as butyllithium (n-, sec-, or tert-BuLi) with concomitant addition of the organic part of the organolithium. The nucleophilic reactive CNTs (namely carbon nanotubides) were then reacted with a variety of reagents such as styrene, resulting in the grafting of polystyrene chains on the nanotube surface, in addition to the alkyl part of the organolithium compound.50 In this case, the CNTs were used as initiators of anionic polymerization. Both alkyl- and carboxyl-, formyl- or ester-functionalized nanotubes were synthesized using butyllithium and subsequently carbon dioxide,51N-formylpiperidine,52 or alkyl chloroformates,53 respectively. The portfolio of carbonyl-based electrophiles was extended to ketones, esters, and acyl chlorides yielding CNTs doubly functionalized with alkyl and keto or hydroxyl functionalities.54 Finally, double alkylated CNTs were obtained using a variety of alkyl halogenated electrophiles (Scheme 2C).55,56 A recent report has been extensively reviewed dedicating to the surface functionalization of CNTs by anionic approach.57
Besides, a radical addition strategy for the covalent double functionalization of CNTs has been reported by using xanthates as radical precursors and peroxides such as lauroyl peroxide as radical initiator (Scheme 2D).58,59 Xanthates are known to react with both activated and unactivated olefins in the presence of peroxides to form new carbon–carbon bonds. A concomitant grafting of radicals from both the xanthate and the peroxide was observed, although the amount of grafted sulfur moiety from the xanthate-derived radicals was significantly lower than that of the fragment arising from the peroxide, according to X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy showing a negligible sulfur content.58 The maximum yields were obtained when the xanthate and the peroxide were used in stoichiometric amounts.
Finally, both tips of CNTs have been selectively derivatized with two different moieties to obtain the so-called asymmetrically end-functionalized nanotubes. For this purpose, a prealigned CNT film was sequentially floated on two different photoreactive solutions, namely 3′-azido-3′-deoxythymidine (AZT) and perfluorooctyl iodide solutions, under UV irradiation (Scheme 2E).60 The photolysis of the azide derivative generates a nitrene intermediate, which is highly reactive and adds on the nanotubes by forming aziridine rings. Hence, AZT and perfluorooctyl chains were attached on either ends of the CNTs, thereby resulting in amphiphilic nanotubes. Moreover, another study has also reported an approach based on the asymmetric functionalization of CNTs to design superhydrophilic/superhydrophobic nanotubes.61 To this end, vertically aligned CNTs grown on a silica substrate were coated on top by polymerization of 1H,1H,2H-heptadecafluoro-1-decene as hydrophobic layer under plasma treatment. Subsequently, the CNTs were peeled off from the substrate and transferred onto a silicon wafer. Then, the bottom end of the nanotube forest was functionalized by plasma-induced polymerization of PEG methacrylate as superhydrophilic tip coating. The infiltration of the organic monomers and plasma treatment for polymerization allowed functionalizing only the nanotube tips up to a few micrometers in depth. The asymmetrically end-modified CNTs could potentially offer opportunities for a range of intriguing applications, such as hygroscopic scaffolds for water harvesting and storage from atmospheric air,61 nanoscale biofuel cells, or the development of CNT channels to control ion transport.62
3. Covalent triple functionalization of the backbone of carbon nanotubes
The possibility of covalently functionalizing CNTs with more than two functional moieties opens up interesting opportunities for their use as advanced functional nanomaterial. To this end, our group has developed an original one-pot protocol for the covalent introduction of three different functional groups on the sidewall of CNTs (pristine or oxidized).90 The strategy was based on the simultaneous functionalization with an equimolar mixture of three different aryl diazonium salts generated in situ from the corresponding anilines, resulting in triple aryl-functionalized CNTs in only one step. The functional groups contained amines blocked by three quasi-orthogonal protecting groups. The selective deprotection of each amine function using specific conditions allowed the controlled attachment of three molecules of choice in a sequential mode (cf. section 4.1.1).91
4. Controlled derivatization of multi-functionalized carbon nanotubes
Most of the reactions used to covalently functionalize the nanotube framework usually require harsh experimental conditions that are weakly compatible with sensitive organic or biological compounds. As a consequence, the grafting of the desired molecules is generally performed on previously functionalized CNTs. Hence, various strategies have been designed to control the derivatization of the functionalized nanotubes using mainly sequential and simultaneous methods. The different approaches are summarized in Table 2.
Table 2 Studies reported on the controlled derivatization of multi-functionalized CNTs




Functionalization strategy
Type of CNTs
Ref.




Sequential derivatization
Selective removal of orthogonal protecting groups of amines
SWCNTs

63



MWCNTs

19, 46, 47, 66, 69–71, 91



Sequential derivatization
Stepwise derivatization of amines using substoichiometric amounts of reagents
SWCNTs

96, 97, 99–102



MWCNTs

98



Sequential derivatization
Sequential CuAAC reactions
SWCNTs

105



Sequential derivatization
Derivatization of COOH and NH2 functions of BSA
SWCNTs

109



Simultaneous derivatization
Simultaneous CuAAC reactions
SWCNTs

110, 111



MWCNTs

112



Simultaneous derivatization
Conjugation of multi-functionalized dendrimers
MWCNTs

113



“One-shot” functionalization by 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition
SWCNTs

105





4.1 Sequential derivatization
The derivatization of multi-functionalized CNTs can be achieved by performing successive reactions. The main strategies developed so far rely on the functionalization of amine groups either via selective and sequential removal of orthogonal protecting groups or by using substoichiometric amounts of reagents.

4.1.1 Selective removal of orthogonal protecting groups of amines. 
Our group has designed strategies for the derivatization of double functionalized CNTs using a combination of two orthogonal protecting groups: tert-butyloxycarbonyl (Boc)/phthalimide (Pht) or Boc/benzyloxycarbonyl (Z).19,46 Orthogonal methodologies are widely used in synthetic organic chemistry and have been applied to materials and polymer chemistry.92,93 For instance, CNTs doubly functionalized via a combination of 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition and amidation with two molecules bearing a triethylene glycol linker terminated by a Boc and a Pht group, respectively, were first treated with a solution of hydrazine in ethanol to remove the Pht moiety (Scheme 3A).19 The amount of free amine functions was evaluated by the Kaiser test, which is a colorimetric assay commonly used in peptide synthesis.94,95 The amines were then conjugated to FITC. The Kaiser test performed after the derivatization of the amine functions gave an indication on the efficiency of the functionalization strategy. Subsequently, the Boc group was cleaved by dilute hydrochloric acid and the corresponding ammonium moieties were coupled to amphotericin B using coupling reagents. Thus, the stepwise selective cleavage of Pht, followed by the removal of the Boc group, allowed controlling the sequential attachment of two active molecules onto the sidewalls and tips of CNTs.
 Scheme 3  Two approaches for the controlled derivatization of functionalized CNTs based on a sequential methodology. LC-SMCC stands for succiminidyl-4-(N-maleimidomethyl)cyclohexane-1-carboxy-(6-amidocaproate). 
This approach of selective removal of orthogonal protecting groups of amines was recently used to prepare CNTs functionalized with the chelating agent diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid (DTPA) and an antibody (or a fragment)69,70 or a targeting peptide.71 The degree of functionalization was assessed by thermogravimetric analysis. Similarly, Ojima and coworkers designed a comparable strategy based on the use of alkyl linkers terminated with Boc- and Pht-protected amines to conjugate fluorescein and biotin onto CNTs.63 Besides, the combination of quasi-orthogonal Boc and Z protecting groups was also found successful. After cleavage of the Boc moiety and derivatization of the ammonium functions, the Z group was removed by action of a mixture of trifluoroacetic acid, trimethylsilyl trifluoromethanesulfonate, and p-cresol.46 Finally, the combination of the three quasi-orthogonal Boc/Pht/Z protecting groups has recently been used to control the derivatization of CNTs with the antitumor agent gemcitabine, folic acid as targeting ligand, and fluorescein.91 Each of the protecting groups was sequentially and selectively removed using specific conditions without inducing the cleavage of the other groups, followed by conjugation of the amine functions with the desired molecules. The derivatization of the triple functionalized CNTs was carefully controlled to avoid the degradation of the linked molecules by testing the conditions on model compounds. This methodology of using orthogonal protecting groups of amine functions is versatile and useful for the design of advanced multi-functional CNTs.


4.1.2 Stepwise derivatization of amines using substoichiometric amounts of reagents. 
Scheinberg and coworkers have used a different strategy to covalently graft two or three molecules onto CNTs. Amino groups introduced by 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition were derivatized sequentially with a substoichiometric amount of the desired molecules, for instance an antibody and an imaging agent, such as a fluorophore or 1,4,7,10-tetraazacyclododecane-1,4,7,10-tetraacetic acid (DOTA), a chelating agent of radionuclides (Scheme 3B).96–98 This approach allowed to derivatize first a fraction of the primary amines, while leaving the other fraction available for further conjugation. Using a similar strategy, ammonium groups introduced onto the nanotube surface by amidation of the carboxylic acids, were sequentially derivatized with the anticancer drug 10-hydroxycamptothecin, followed by the conjugation of the remnant amino groups with either fluorescein or DTPA for chelation with technetium-99m radionuclide.99 In another work, amino-functionalized CNTs were partially derivatized with 4-hydrazinobenzoic acid and the hydrazine moiety was converted to hydrazone via reaction with the salinomycin drug previously modified with a ketone linker.100 Next, the remaining amine functions were derivatized with a periodate-activated antibody to form an imine bond. Last but not least, CNTs functionalized with three imaging agents (DOTA and two fluorophores) were also prepared following the methodology of using substoichiometric amounts of reagents.101,102 Overall, this procedure has the advantage to be faster compared to the use of orthogonally protecting groups. Nevertheless, the derivatization of the amine functions may be more difficult to control. Usually, excess of reagents are used to reach high levels of functionalization as side products may form in the course of the reaction.


4.1.3 Other strategies. 
The copper(I)-catalyzed azide–alkyne cycloaddition (CuAAC) “click” reaction allows to covalently link azido-derivatives and molecules bearing a terminal acetylene via the formation of a triazole ring in mild conditions.103,104 Similarly to the previous approach on the stepwise derivatization of amines using substoichiometric amounts of reagents, two successive CuAAC reactions have been performed between alkyne-derivatized CNTs and first a β-cyclodextrin (β-CD) bearing an azide group, followed by derivatization of the remaining triple bonds with an azido-DOTA chelating agent (Scheme 4A).105 The reaction was carried out in the presence of copper sulfate and ascorbic acid. The alkyne-CNTs were prepared by 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition using tyrosine and octanal under MW activation, followed by propargylation of the hydroxyl group of tyrosine. The presence of β-CD on the nanotube surface allows the immobilization of organic molecules via host–guest interactions. β-CD-CNT conjugates offer many opportunities, in particular in electrochemistry,106 for biosensing107 and as drug delivery system.108
 Scheme 4  Two approaches for the controlled derivatization of functionalized CNTs based on a sequential methodology. The BSA crystal structure is taken from the RCSB protein data bank. The grafting of fluorescein, the CNTs, and the antibody onto the protein is randomly drawn. 
An alternative sequential strategy relies on the derivatization of CNTs with a multi-functional linker. For instance, the protein bovine serum albumin (BSA) possesses two different types of binding sites for the conjugation of molecules. In fact, BSA displays 60 amine functions present in the lateral chain of lysines and 99 carboxylic acids as part of aspartic and glutamic acid residues. The amine and carboxylic acid groups available on the surface of the protein have been exploited to covalently link two types of molecules. Indeed, the amine functions of BSA were first coupled to fluorescein previously activated as N-hydroxysuccinimide (NHS) ester.109 The fluorescein-labeled BSA was then attached onto the carboxylic acids of oxidized CNTs having the anticancer drug doxorubicin adsorbed on their sidewall, by amidation via one of the remaining amine functions of the protein (Scheme 4B). Finally, a targeting antibody was conjugated to the COOH groups of BSA. As multiple copies of molecules can be linked to one BSA protein, this approach allowed reaching high loadings.

4.2 Simultaneous derivatization
Functionalized CNTs have also been derivatized in a one-pot sequence by using equimolar amounts of two different reactive molecules or by exploiting the many end groups of dendrimers.

4.2.1 CuAAC “click” reactions. 
The use of an equimolar amount of reagents is a versatile strategy for the derivatization of multi-functionalized CNTs. For instance, Giambastiani and coworkers have developed a strategy based on the derivatization of phenylazido-functionalized nanotubes with a 1:1 mixture of two acetylene derivatives in a CuAAC approach (Scheme 5A).110 The CNTs were derivatized either with amine functions protected with Boc and Pht groups, or with ferrocene and a Pht-protected amine. This strategy led to an efficient heterodecoration of the nanotube surface with a combination of organic/organometallic frameworks. The level of functionalization was determined spectroscopically using UV-Vis spectroscopy and the Kaiser test, and electrochemically by means of cyclic voltammetry to assess the loading of ferrocene. This methodology of heterodecoration of CNTs through CuACC chemistry was also applied to graft both a fluorophore (boron dipyrromethene (BODIPy)) and a disulfide linker or biotin as targeting agent of cancer cells.111,112
 Scheme 5  Different approaches for the controlled derivatization of CNTs based on simultaneous (A, B) and “one-shot” derivatization (C). 


4.2.2 Conjugation of multi-functionalized dendrimers. 
Dendrimers can be used as a multi-functional platform to prepare multimodal CNTs. For example, the generation 5 poly(amidoamine) (PAMAM) dendrimer functionalized with both FITC and folic acid (FA) has been covalently conjugated to oxidized CNTs by amidation (Scheme 5B).113 Hence, in only one step, the nanotubes were derivatized with two active molecules.

4.3 “One-shot” functionalization by 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition of azomethine ylides
A straightforward approach (“one-shot”) has been designed for the direct functionalization of CNTs with β-CD and DOTA by 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition in a single step (Scheme 5C).105 For this purpose, an equimolar ratio of an amino acid β-CD derivative and a DOTA aldehyde derivative was mixed with CNTs and heated using MW to generate the azomethine ylide in situ. The level of functionalization was assessed by TGA, along with phenolphthalein inclusion into β-CD, and Gd chelation by DOTA using UV-Vis spectroscopy and inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP/MS), respectively. This strategy is rapid but uncommon as the conditions, in particular the very reactive 1,3-dipole and the high temperature required, may not be compatible with some molecules of interest, mainly those having a biological activity. It is an alternative to the approach based on two sequential CuAAC reactions using an azido-β-CD derivative and an azido-DOTA molecule (cf. section 4.1.3), which led comparatively to a lower functionalization degree.
5. Ligation strategies
Controlling the derivatization of functionalized CNTs is essential to design advanced multi-functional nanotubes. This section describes the main ligation strategies used for the derivatization of multi-functionalized nanotubes with molecules of choice. Apart from amidation and CuAAC reactions discussed in the previous sections, the thiol–ene reaction has been widely used in the context of CNT chemistry (Scheme 3B last step). This chemoselective ligation reaction involves a maleimide ring on the nanotube surface, which selectively reacts with a thiol-containing compound to form a thioether bond. It is considered as a “click” reaction being highly efficient with high yield and no side product formation. It is extensively used in organic and polymer synthesis.114,115 This reaction has been exploited to covalently conjugate antibodies (or fragments of antibodies)69,96 and peptides21,71 onto CNTs previously functionalized with a linker terminated by a maleimide group. Peptides can be synthesized with a terminal cysteine, while thiol groups are introduced within the antibody sequence using 2-iminothiolane (Traut's reagent)116,117 because of the absence of cysteine amino acid residues with free thiol groups. Another approach relies on the derivatization of sulfonic acid-functionalized CNTs with amine derivatives into sulfonamides (Scheme 6 first step).35 Last but not least, amine groups introduced on the nanotube surface have been easily derivatized with molecules bearing an isothiocyanate function to form a thiourea bond (Scheme 6 last step). For example, FITC19,35,91 and an isothiocyanate-DOTA derivative96 that are both commercially available, have been widely used to prepare CNT conjugates for fluorescence and positron emission tomography (PET) imaging after labeling of DOTA with a radionuclide, respectively. The reaction proceeds spontaneously at room temperature.
 Scheme 6  Two ligation strategies used for the controlled derivatization of multi-functionalized CNTs. The presence of ammonium groups likely arose from a partial Boc cleavage of the protected benzylamine moieties due to the acidic character of sulfanilic acid used as aniline precursor of the benzenesulfonic acid-functionalized nanotubes, and from the use of thionyl chloride that generates HCl in the first step. The premature deprotection of the amines was exploited to graft FITC. 
Alternative ligation approaches could be applied to the derivatization of functionalized CNTs, such as the Staudinger ligation and inverse electron-demand Diels–Alder cycloadditions (e.g., tetrazine ligation) that are commonly used in bioorthogonal chemistry.118,119 For instance, a modified Staudinger–Bertozzi reaction has been used for the covalent mono-functionalization of CNTs with an azide group site-specifically incorporated into a protein of interest.120 The nanotubes were previously derivatized with a triarylphosphine moiety. The expansion of the “click” chemistry toolbox will undeniably accelerate progress in the field of CNT functionalization.
The diversity of organic linkers offers great opportunity to impart nanotubes with specific functions. For instance, cleavable linkers have been inserted between biologically-relevant molecules and CNTs to allow their controlled release under appropriate chemical and biological settings when the target tissue is reached. Disulfide bonds have been commonly used in chemical biology and applied to CNT chemistry for insertion between the nanotubes and a drug.63 This strategy has also been exploited to conjugate short interfering RNA (siRNA) for gene silencing,121 or a protein onto mono-functionalized CNTs.122 Following the internalization of the nanotube conjugate, the high intracellular thiol concentration (arising mainly from glutathione and thioredoxin) induces the reduction of the S–S bond, thus triggering the release of the bioactive molecule from the nanotube surface in the cell. In most cases, disulfide bonds are formed by reaction between CNTs derivatized with pyridine-2-thiolate and thiol end-capped molecules (Scheme 7A).111,121,122 As alternative cleavable group, a hydrazone bond has been used as pH-sensitive linker exploiting the acidic environment in endosomal and lysosomal compartments, as well as differences in pH between normal and tumor tissues. For instance, CNTs have been derivatized with a benzaldehyde linker that can react with the molecule of interest previously modified with a hydrazine function, such as a morpholino oligonucleotide complementary to a modified antibody (cMORF) (Scheme 7B).98 The cMORF-CNT conjugate was able to target cancer cells that were pretargeted with antibodies modified with oligonucleotide strands complementary to those on the nanotubes. Another method for hydrazone insertion was reported to rely on the derivatization of CNTs with a hydrazine linker, followed by the reaction with a drug tethered-ketone.100
 Scheme 7  Insertion of cleavable linkers between CNTs and molecules of choice: a disulfide (A) or a hydrazone bond (B). 
Peptides that are cleaved by peptidases can also be used as linkers. For example, a tetrapeptide (Gly-Leu-Phe-Gly), which is selectively cleaved by proteases overexpressed in tumor cells, has been used as cleavable linker between CNTs and methotrexate.22 This conjugate showed a higher cytotoxic activity in vitro compared to a construct with 6-hydroxyhexanoic ester as an esterase-sensitive linker between the drug and the nanotubes. This higher therapeutic efficacy was explained by the efficient enzymatic hydrolysis of methotrexate linked by the tetrapeptide inside the cells in comparison to the more stable ester bond.
6. Conclusions
In this review, we have emphasized the different approaches developed to prepare CNTs covalently multi-functionalized. The combination of reactions used to double and triple functionalize the nanotube backbone have been categorized and discussed. We have also highlighted the numerous strategies designed to control the derivatization of the multi-functionalized CNTs in a sequential or simultaneous way. The multi-functionalization allows imparting additional properties to the nanotubes to develop advanced conjugates for applications mainly in nanomedicine, but also in other fields like optoelectronics and photochemistry. Despite great progress, the multi-functionalization of CNTs is still a major challenge for chemists. Combination of covalent and non-covalent approaches can extend the field of applications of multi-functional CNTs. Indeed, even more sophisticated nanotube-based constructs can be designed by exploiting the remaining surface available for immobilization of desired molecules by adsorption through non-covalent interactions. Nevertheless, some efforts should be dedicated henceforth to control even better the covalent functionalization of CNTs, in particular the level of functionalization, the localization of the functional groups, as well as preventing incomplete surface functionality transformation and avoiding non-desired adsorption of reagents or side products. Notwithstanding, the heterogeneity of CNTs, particularly in terms of defects and length, is an obstacle to get homogeneous nanotube samples and accelerate the development of applications, predominantly in the biomedical field. But, concomitant progress to overcome these issues and the expansion of orthogonal methodologies as well as “click” chemistry will certainly give very interesting future perspectives for the applications of functionalized CNTs in nanomedicine and in other fields.
Acknowledgements
This work was partly supported by the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS), by the Agence Nationale de la Recherche (ANR) through the LabEx project Chemistry of Complex Systems (ANR-10-LABX-0026_CSC), by the International Center for Frontier Research in Chemistry (icFRC), and by the ANR NANOMULTISENS project (ANR-13-BS10-0003-02).
References
M. F. L. De Volder, S. H. Tawfick, R. H. Baughman and A. J. Hart, Science, 2013, 339, 535–539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. Shin, R. Farzad, A. Tamayol, V. Manoharan, P. Mostafalu, Y. S. Zhang, M. Akbari, S. M. Jung, D. Kim, M. Comotto, N. Annabi, F. E. Al-Hazmi, M. R. Dokmeci and A. Khademhosseini, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3280–3289 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-S. Balogun, Y. Luo, W. Qiu, P. Liu and Y. Tong, Carbon, 2016, 98, 162–178 CrossRef CAS .
E. Anaya-Plaza, M. Moreno Oliva, A. Kunzmann, C. Romero-Nieto, R. D. Costa, A. de la Escosura, D. M. Guldi and T. Torres, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 7418–7427 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Giraldo, M. P. Landry, S.-Y. Kwak, R. M. Jain, M. H. Wong, N. M. Iverson, M. Ben-Naim and M. S. Strano, Small, 2015, 11, 3973–3984 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Hong, S. Diao, A. L. Antaris and H. Dai, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 10816–10906 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Marchesan, K. Kostarelos, A. Bianco and M. Prato, Mater. Today, 2015, 18, 12–19 CrossRef CAS .

          C. Ménard-Moyon, Covalent organic functionalization and characterization of carbon nanotubes, in Chemistry of organo-hybrids: synthesis and characterization of functional nano-objects, ed. E. Lacôte, B. Charleux and C. Copéret, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,  2015, pp. 1–35 Search PubMed .
G. De Crozals, R. Bonnet, C. Farre and C. Chaix, Nano Today, 2016, 11, 435–463 CrossRef CAS .
P. Singh, S. Campidelli, S. Giordani, D. Bonifazi, A. Bianco and M. Prato, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 2214–2230 RSC .
Y.-L. Zhao and J. F. Stoddart, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1161–1171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Marega and D. Bonifazi, New J. Chem., 2013, 38, 22–27 RSC .
M. Martincic and G. Tobias, Expert Opin. Drug Delivery, 2015, 12, 563–581 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Lamanna, A. Battigelli, C. Ménard-Moyon and A. Bianco, Nanotechnol. Rev., 2012, 1, 17–29 CAS .
A. Battigelli, C. Ménard-Moyon, T. Da Ros, M. Prato and A. Bianco, Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev., 2013, 65, 1899–1920 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lee and K. E. Geckeler, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4076–4083 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Tasis, N. Tagmatarchis, A. Bianco and M. Prato, Chem. Rev., 2006, 106, 1105–1136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Karousis, N. Tagmatarchis and D. Tasis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 5366–5397 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wu, S. Wieckowski, G. Pastorin, M. Benincasa, C. Klumpp, J.-P. Briand, R. Gennaro, M. Prato and A. Bianco, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 6358–6362 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Bonifazi, C. Nacci, R. Marega, S. Campidelli, G. Ceballos, S. Modesti, M. Meneghetti and M. Prato, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1408–1414 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Villa, M. R. McDevitt, F. E. Escorcia, D. A. Rey, M. Bergkvist, C. A. Batt and D. A. Scheinberg, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 4221–4228 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Samorí, H. Ali-Boucetta, R. Sainz, C. Guo, F. M. Toma, C. Fabbro, T. da Ros, M. Prato, K. Kostarelos and A. Bianco, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 1494–1496 RSC .
M. Alvaro, P. Atienzar, P. de la Cruz, J. L. Delgado, H. Garcia and F. Langa, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 12691–12697 CrossRef CAS .
W. Cieslik, M. Serda and R. Musiol, Curr. Org. Chem., 2015, 19, 1410–1427 CrossRef CAS .
P. Appukkuttan, V. P. Mehta and E. V. Van der Eycken, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 1467–1477 RSC .
T. J. Ondera and A. T. Hamme II, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2014, 2, 7534–7543 RSC .
E. Vázquez and M. Prato, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3819–3824 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Langa and P. de la Cruz, Comb. Chem. High Throughput Screening, 2007, 10, 766–782 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Alvaro, P. Atienzar, P. de la Cruz, J. L. Delgado, V. Troiani, H. Garcia, F. Langa, A. Palkar and L. Echegoyen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 6626–6635 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Sadhu, N. A. Nismy, A. A. D. T. Adikaari, S. J. Henley, M. Shkunov and S. R. P. Silva, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 265607 CrossRef PubMed .
A. A. Bhirde, V. Patel, J. Gavard, G. Zhang, A. A. Sousa, A. Masedunskas, R. D. Leapman, R. Weigert, J. S. Gutkind and J. F. Rusling, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 307–316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wei, M. Kondratenko, L. H. Dao and D. F. Perepichka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 3134–3135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Bahr, J. Yang, D. V. Kosynkin, M. J. Bronikowski, R. E. Smalley and J. M. Tour, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 6536–6542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Stephenson, J. L. Hudson, A. D. Leonard, B. K. Price and J. M. Tour, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 3491–3498 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. González-Domínguez, A. Santidrián, A. Criado, C. Hadad, M. Kalbáč and T. Da Ros, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 18631–18641 CrossRef PubMed .
J. L. Hudson, H. Jian, A. D. Leonard, J. J. Stephenson and J. M. Tour, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 2766–2770 CrossRef CAS .
D. Iannazzo, A. Pistone, S. Galvagno, S. Ferro, L. De Luca, A. M. Monforte, T. Da Ros, C. Hadad, M. Prato and C. Pannecouque, Carbon, 2015, 82, 548–561 CrossRef CAS .
L. Rodríguez-Pérez, R. García, M. Á. Herranz and N. Martín, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 7278–7286 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Hu, B. Zhao, M. A. Hamon, K. Kamaras, M. E. Itkis and R. C. Haddon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 14893–14900 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Roy, N. Tiwari, K. Mukhopadhyay, T. Shripathi and A. K. Saxena, ChemPhysChem, 2014, 15, 3839–3847 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Fujiwara, K. Komatsu, G. W. Wang, T. Tanaka, K. Hirata, K. Yamamoto and M. Saunders, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 10715–10720 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Umeyama, N. Tezuka, M. Fujita, Y. Matano, N. Takeda, K. Murakoshi, K. Yoshida, S. Isoda and H. Imahori, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 9734–9741 CAS .
Y.-S. Lee and N. Marzari, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 97, 116801 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhao, H. Park, J. Han and J. P. Lu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 4227–4230 CrossRef CAS .
C. Fantini, M. L. Usrey and M. S. Strano, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 17941–17946 CAS .
G. Pastorin, W. Wu, S. Wieckowski, J.-P. Briand, K. Kostarelos, M. Prato and A. Bianco, Chem. Commun., 2006, 1182–1184 RSC .
G. Ficociello, A. Salemme, D. Uccelletti, S. Fiorito, A. R. Togna, L. Vallan, J. M. González-Domínguez, T. Da Ros, S. Francisci and A. Montanari, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 67232–67241 RSC .
F. G. Brunetti, M. A. Herrero, J. de M. Muñoz, A. Díaz-Ortiz, J. Alfonsi, M. Meneghetti, M. Prato and E. Vázquez, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 8094–8100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Delgado, P. de la Cruz, F. Langa, A. Urbina, J. Casado and J. T. L. Navarrete, Chem. Commun., 2004, 1734–1735 RSC .
G. Viswanathan, N. Chakrapani, H. Yang, B. Wei, H. Chung, K. Cho, C. Y. Ryu and P. M. Ajayan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 9258–9259 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, W. Shen, G. Wu, D. Chen and M. Jiang, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2005, 402, 312–317 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Bayazit, A. Suri and K. S. Coleman, Carbon, 2010, 48, 3412–3419 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Bayazit and K. S. Coleman, J. Mater. Sci., 2014, 49, 5190–5198 CrossRef CAS .
B. Gebhardt, Z. Syrgiannis, C. Backes, R. Graupner, F. Hauke and A. Hirsch, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 7985–7995 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Roubeau, A. Lucas, A. Pénicaud and A. Derré, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2007, 7, 3509–3513 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Maeda, T. Kato, T. Hasegawa, M. Kako, T. Akasaka, J. Lu and S. Nagase, Org. Lett., 2010, 12, 996–999 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Adachi and Y. Tsukahara, Curr. Opin. Chem. Eng., 2016, 11, 106–113 CrossRef .
B. Vanhorenbeke, C. Vriamont, F. Pennetreau, M. Devillers, O. Riant and S. Hermans, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 852–856 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Pennetreau, C. Vriamont, B. Vanhorenbeke, O. Riant and S. Hermans, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2015, 1804–1810 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Lee, L. Li and L. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 4122–4123 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ozden, L. Ge, T. N. Narayanan, A. H. C. Hart, H. Yang, S. Sridhar, R. Vajtai and P. M. Ajayan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 10608–10613 CAS .
M. Burghard, Small, 2005, 1, 1148–1150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, S. Chen, X. Zhao, L. V. Kuznetsova, S. S. Wong and I. Ojima, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 16778–16785 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Singh, C. Ménard-Moyon, A. Battigelli, F. M. Toma, J. Raya, J. Kumar, N. Nidamanuri, S. Verma and A. Bianco, Chem. – Asian J., 2013, 8, 1472–1481 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Gaillard, G. Cellot, S. Li, F. M. Toma, H. Dumortier, G. Spalluto, B. Cacciari, M. Prato, L. Ballerini and A. Bianco, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2903–2908 CrossRef CAS .
M. Benincasa, S. Pacor, W. Wu, M. Prato, A. Bianco and R. Gennaro, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 199–208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Fabre, C. Samorí and A. Bianco, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2012, 665, 90–94 CrossRef CAS .
V. A. Zamolo, G. Valenti, E. Venturelli, O. Chaloin, M. Marcaccio, S. Boscolo, V. Castagnola, S. Sosa, F. Berti, G. Fontanive, M. Poli, A. Tubaro, A. Bianco, F. Paolucci and M. Prato, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 7989–7997 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T.-W. Wang, C. Fabbro, E. Venturelli, C. Ménard-Moyon, O. Chaloin, T. Da Ros, L. Methven, A. Nunes, J. K. Sosabowski, S. J. Mather, M. K. Robinson, J. Amadou, M. Prato, A. Bianco, K. Kostarelos and K. T. Al-Jamal, Biomaterials, 2014, 35, 9517–9528 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T.-W. Wang, N. Rubio, H. Kafa, E. Venturelli, C. Fabbro, C. Ménard-Moyon, T. Da Ros, J. K. Sosabowski, A. D. Lawson, M. K. Robinson, M. Prato, A. Bianco, F. Festy, J. E. Preston, K. Kostarelos and K. T. Al-Jamal, J. Controlled Release, 2016, 224, 22–32 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kafa, J. T.-W. Wang, N. Rubio, R. Klippstein, P. M. Costa, H. A. F. M. Hassan, J. K. Sosabowski, S. S. Bansal, J. E. Preston, N. J. Abbott and K. T. Al-Jamal, J. Controlled Release, 2016, 225, 217–229 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Bhirde, S. Patel, A. A. Sousa, V. Patel, A. A. Molinolo, Y. Ji, R. D. Leapman, J. S. Gutkind and J. F. Rusling, Nanomedicine, 2010, 5, 1535–1546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Anbarasan and C. A. Peng, J. Mater. Sci., 2011, 46, 992–998 CrossRef CAS .
R. Li, R. Wu, L. Zhao, Z. Hu, S. Guo, X. Pan and H. Zou, Carbon, 2011, 49, 1797–1805 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, X. He, A. Han, Q. Tu, G. Fang, J. Liu, S. Wang and H. Li, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 16851–16856 RSC .
F. Wang, K.-J. Deng, L. Zhou, J.-B. Zhao, X.-H. Ke and L.-L. Wen, J. Inorg. Organomet. Polym., 2012, 22, 1182–1188 CrossRef CAS .
N. Rubio, M. A. Herrero, A. de la Hoz, M. Meneghetti, M. Prato and E. Vázquez, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2010, 8, 1936–1942 CAS .
S. Chen, D. Chen and G. Wu, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2006, 27, 882–887 CrossRef CAS .
P. Li, L. Niu, Y. Chen, J. Wang, Y. Liu, J. Zhang and W. J. Blau, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 015204 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Cui, J. Yu, X. Yu, Y. Lv, G. Li and S. Zhou, Polym. J., 2013, 45, 834–838 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Díez-Pascual and M. Naffakh, Carbon, 2012, 50, 857–868 CrossRef .
Y. Maeda, K. Saito, N. Akamatsu, Y. Chiba, S. Ohno, Y. Okui, M. Yamada, T. Hasegawa, M. Kako and T. Akasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 18101–18108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Maeda, Y. Takehana, M. Yamada, M. Suzuki and T. Murakami, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 13462–13465 RSC .
F.-C. Li, S.-C. Tsai, C.-Y. Yeh, J.-Y. Yeh, Y.-S. Chou, J.-R. Ho and R. C.-C. Tsiang, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2014, 14, 5019–5027 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Sun, K. Adachi and Y. Tsukahara, Polym. Prepr. Jpn., 2013, 62, 3903 Search PubMed .
R. Blake, Y. K. Gun'ko, J. Coleman, M. Cadek, A. Fonseca, J. B. Nagy and W. J. Blau, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 10226–10227 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-P. Tessonnier, A. Villa, O. Majoulet, D. S. Su and R. Schlögl, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 6543–6546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Villa, J.-P. Tessonnier, O. Majoulet, D. S. Su and R. Schlögl, Chem. Commun., 2009, 4405–4407 RSC .
A. Villa, J.-P. Tessonnier, O. Majoulet, D. S. Su and R. Schlögl, ChemSusChem, 2010, 3, 241–245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ménard-Moyon, C. Fabbro, M. Prato and A. Bianco, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17, 3222–3227 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Ménard-Moyon, H. Ali-Boucetta, C. Fabbro, O. Chaloin, K. Kostarelos and A. Bianco, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 14886–14892 CrossRef PubMed .
C.-H. Wong and S. C. Zimmerman, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 1679–1695 RSC .
F. Albericio, Biopolymers, 2000, 55, 123–139 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Kaiser, R. L. Colescott, C. D. Bossinger and P. I. Cook, Anal. Biochem., 1970, 34, 595–598 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. K. Sarin, S. B. Kent, J. P. Tam and R. B. Merrifield, Anal. Biochem., 1981, 117, 147–157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. McDevitt, D. Chattopadhyay, B. J. Kappel, J. S. Jaggi, S. R. Schiffman, C. Antczak, J. T. Njardarson, R. Brentjens and D. A. Scheinberg, J. Nucl. Med., 2007, 48, 1180–1189 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ruggiero, C. H. Villa, J. P. Holland, S. R. Sprinkle, C. May, J. S. Lewis, D. A. Scheinberg and M. R. McDevitt, Int. J. Nanomed., 2010, 5, 783–802 CAS .
J. J. Mulvey, C. H. Villa, M. R. McDevitt, F. E. Escorcia, E. Casey and D. A. Scheinberg, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 763–771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wu, R. Li, X. Bian, Z. Zhu, D. Ding, X. Li, Z. Jia, X. Jiang and Y. Hu, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 2740–2750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Al Faraj, A. S. Shaik, E. Ratemi and R. Halwani, J. Controlled Release, 2016, 225, 240–251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ruggiero, C. H. Villa, E. Bander, D. A. Rey, M. Bergkvist, C. A. Batt, K. Manova-Todorova, W. M. Deen, D. A. Scheinberg and M. R. McDevitt, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2010, 107, 12369–12374 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Alidori, R. L. Bowman, D. Yarilin, Y. Romin, A. Barlas, J. J. Mulvey, S. Fujisawa, K. Xu, A. Ruggiero, V. Riabov, D. L. J. Thorek, H. D. S. Ulmert, E. J. Brea, K. Behling, J. Kzhyshkowska, K. Manova-Todorova, D. A. Scheinberg and M. R. McDevitt, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Rana and J. W. Cho, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 2550–2556 RSC .
G. Clavé and S. Campidelli, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 1887–1896 RSC .
E. C. Gaudino, S. Tagliapietra, K. Martina, A. Barge, M. Lolli, E. Terreno, D. Lembo and G. Cravotto, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2014, 12, 4708–4715 Search PubMed .
H. N. Le and H. K. Jeong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 18671–18677 CAS .
M. Holzinger, L. Bouffier, R. Villalonga and S. Cosnier, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2009, 24, 1128–1134 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Iannazzo, A. Mazzaglia, A. Scala, A. Pistone, S. Galvagno, M. Lanza, C. Riccucci, G. M. Ingo, I. Colao, M. T. Sciortino, F. Valle, A. Piperno and G. Grassi, Coll. Surf., B, 2014, 123, 264–270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Heister, V. Neves, C. Tîlmaciu, K. Lipert, V. S. Beltrán, H. M. Coley, S. R. P. Silva and J. McFadden, Carbon, 2009, 47, 2152–2160 CrossRef CAS .
G. Tuci, C. Vinattieri, L. Luconi, M. Ceppatelli, S. Cicchi, A. Brandi, J. Filippi, M. Melucci and G. Giambastiani, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 8454–8463 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Tuci, L. Luconi, A. Rossin, F. Baldini, S. Cicchi, S. Tombelli, C. Trono, A. Giannetti, I. Manet, S. Fedeli, A. Brandi and G. Giambastiani, ChemPlusChem, 2015, 80, 704–714 CrossRef CAS .
S. Fedeli, A. Brandi, L. Venturini, P. Chiarugi, E. Giannoni, P. Paoli, D. Corti, G. Giambastiani, G. Tuci and S. Cicchi, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2016, 4, 3823–3831 RSC .
X. Shi, S. H. Wang, M. Shen, M. E. Antwerp, X. Chen, C. Li, E. J. Petersen, Q. Huang, W. J. Weber and J. R. Baker, Biomacromolecules, 2009, 10, 1744–1750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. O. Machado, C. Sayer and P. H. H. Araujo, Eur. Polym. J., 2016 DOI:10.1016/j.eurpolymj.2016.02.025 .
A. B. Lowe, Polym. Chem., 2014, 5, 4820–4870 RSC .
R. R. Traut, A. Bollen, T. T. Sun, J. W. Hershey, J. Sundberg and L. R. Pierce, Biochemistry, 1973, 12, 3266–3273 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Jue, J. M. Lambert, L. R. Pierce and R. R. Traut, Biochemistry, 1978, 17, 5399–5406 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Shieh and C. R. Bertozzi, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2014, 12, 9307–9320 CAS .
D. M. Patterson, L. A. Nazarova and J. A. Prescher, ACS Chem. Biol., 2014, 9, 592–605 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Yoshimura, S. Khan, S. Ohno, T. Yokogawa, K. Nishikawa, T. Hosoya, H. Maruyama, Y. Nakayama and K. Takeyasu, Bioconjugate Chem., 2012, 23, 1488–1493 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. W. S. Kam, Z. Liu and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 12492–12493 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-Z. You, C.-Y. Hong and C.-Y. Pan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 16161–16166 CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:
Bhimareddy Dinesh	Bhimareddy Dinesh obtained his PhD degree from the University of Mysore in India in 2008. He then worked in a biotechnology company for six months in Bangalore before joing the group of Prof. P. Balaram at IISc, India as postdoctoral fellow. He worked on β and γ hybrid peptide foldamers until November 2013. Currently, he is postdoctoral researcher in the group of Dr Alberto Bianco at CNRS in Strasbourg (France) since December 2013. His research interests include the functionalization of peptides and carbon-based nanomaterials for biological applications.
Alberto Bianco	Alberto Bianco received his PhD in 1995 from the University of Padova (Italy). As a visiting scientist, he worked at the University of Lausanne, Tübingen (as an Alexander von Humboldt fellow) and Padova. He is currently Research Director at the CNRS in Strasbourg. His research interests focus on the design and functionalization of carbon-based nanomaterials (carbon nanotubes, graphene and adamantane) for therapeutic, diagnostic and imaging applications. He is co-author of over 230 papers. He is also in the Advisory Board of Nanomedicine, Nanotechnology Reviews and the Journal of Peptide Science. In 2011 he has been appointed as Editor of Carbon.
Cécilia Ménard-Moyon	Dr Cécilia Ménard-Moyon obtained her PhD in 2005 at CEA/Saclay in France. After a 1-year post-doc at the University of York in the UK and 1.5 year in industry in Belgium, she joined the group of Dr Alberto Bianco in Strasbourg (France) in 2008 as CNRS researcher. She works on the functionalization of carbon-based nanomaterials, mainly carbon nanotubes and graphene, for biomedical applications. Since 2013 she is Member of the Committee of experts of the French Observatory for Micro & NanoTechnologies (OMNT) in the Micro- & Nanomedicine group. She has published more than 60 publications and 7 book chapters.

1,3-Dipolar cycloaddition and amidation (or esterification)	SWCNTs	
21, 38, 63, 64 (azomethine ylide and amidation)

23, 26 (nitrile imine and esterification)

29 (nitrile oxide and esterification)
MWCNTs	
19, 22, 65–71 (azomethine ylide and amidation)
Double amidation (or esterification)	SWCNTs	
31, 32 (esterification), 72
MWCNTs	
30, 73 (esterification), 74, 75
Double arylation	SWCNTs	
34, 35, 76

Arylation (or alkylation) and amidation (or esterification)	SWCNTs	
34, 38 (alkylation and esterification)
MWCNTs	
37 (esterification)
Amidation and cyclopropanation	SWCNTs	
39 (carbene), 42 (Bingel reaction)
MWCNTs	
40 (carbene)
Double 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition of azomethine ylides	MWCNTs	
46, 47, 71

1,3-Dipolar cycloaddition of azomethine ylides and arylation	SWCNTs	
48, 77

Esterification and Diels–Alder reaction	SWCNTs	
49

Alkylation/second functionalization via nanotube anion formation	SWCNTs	Polymerization: 50, 78–80
Grafting of carbonyl derivatives: 51–54
Grafting of hydroxyl-terminated compounds: 54
Alkylation: 55, 56, 81–83
MWCNTs	Polymerization: 84
Grafting of hydroxyl-terminated compounds: 85
Alkylation: 55, 86–89
Radical addition of xanthates and peroxides	SWCNTs & MWCNTs	
58, 59

Nitrene cycloaddition and perfluoroalkylation	MWCNTs	
60

Double polymerization	MWCNTs	
61

Triple arylation	SWCNTs	
90

MWCNTs	
90, 91


 	Scheme 1  Different approaches for the covalent double functionalization of CNTs. For the sake of clarity, only one type of functional groups is shown in all schemes.	 

 	Scheme 2  Other approaches for the covalent double functionalization of CNTs.	 

Sequential derivatization	Selective removal of orthogonal protecting groups of amines	SWCNTs	
63

MWCNTs	
19, 46, 47, 66, 69–71, 91

Sequential derivatization	Stepwise derivatization of amines using substoichiometric amounts of reagents	SWCNTs	
96, 97, 99–102

MWCNTs	
98

Sequential derivatization	Sequential CuAAC reactions	SWCNTs	
105

Sequential derivatization	Derivatization of COOH and NH2 functions of BSA	SWCNTs	
109

Simultaneous derivatization	Simultaneous CuAAC reactions	SWCNTs	
110, 111

MWCNTs	
112

Simultaneous derivatization	Conjugation of multi-functionalized dendrimers	MWCNTs	
113

“One-shot” functionalization by 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition	SWCNTs	
105


 	Scheme 3  Two approaches for the controlled derivatization of functionalized CNTs based on a sequential methodology. LC-SMCC stands for succiminidyl-4-(N-maleimidomethyl)cyclohexane-1-carboxy-(6-amidocaproate).	 

 	Scheme 4  Two approaches for the controlled derivatization of functionalized CNTs based on a sequential methodology. The BSA crystal structure is taken from the RCSB protein data bank. The grafting of fluorescein, the CNTs, and the antibody onto the protein is randomly drawn.	 

 	Scheme 5  Different approaches for the controlled derivatization of CNTs based on simultaneous (A, B) and “one-shot” derivatization (C).	 

 	Scheme 6  Two ligation strategies used for the controlled derivatization of multi-functionalized CNTs. The presence of ammonium groups likely arose from a partial Boc cleavage of the protected benzylamine moieties due to the acidic character of sulfanilic acid used as aniline precursor of the benzenesulfonic acid-functionalized nanotubes, and from the use of thionyl chloride that generates HCl in the first step. The premature deprotection of the amines was exploited to graft FITC.	 

 	Scheme 7  Insertion of cleavable linkers between CNTs and molecules of choice: a disulfide (A) or a hydrazone bond (B).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
