Ultrathin electron and proton-conducting membranes for nanoscale integrated artificial photosystems  - Sustainable Energy & Fuels (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D3SE00499F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D3SE00499F
(Perspective)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2023, 7, 3213-3231Ultrathin electron and proton-conducting membranes for nanoscale integrated artificial photosystems

        
          
            Heinz 
            Frei
          
        
      
Molecular Biophysics and Integrated Bioimaging Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA. E-mail: HMFrei@lbl.gov
Received 
      17th April 2023
    , Accepted 10th June 2023First published on 12th June 2023AbstractReducing the thickness of separation membranes without compromising their selectivity and robustness is the most effective way of maximizing the areal conductivity. This is especially important for the integration of visible light-driven water oxidation and carbon dioxide (or proton) reduction into a complete artificial photosystem on the shortest possible length scale – the nanoscale – because of the efficiency advantages over macroscale photosystems. In addition to their excellent separation property, ultrathin membranes of 10 nm thickness or less need to exhibit sufficient electrical and proton conductivity in order for the photocatalytic rates to keep up with the photon flux at maximum solar intensity. Two materials, graphene and amorphous silica with embedded molecular wires, have emerged as promising ultrathin membranes for the development of nanoscale integrated solar-fuel systems. Moreover, electrically conducting metal–organic or covalent–organic frameworks can be used to fabricate high surface area-supports that enable the use of molecular catalysts and/or light absorbers at an adequate areal density for nanoscale integration with graphene membranes. Following an overview of the electron and proton conductivity of these ultrathin materials and recent examples of photoelectrocatalytic applications that take advantage of some but not all the properties that constitute a complete functional membrane, the status and future opportunities for complete nanoscale integrated photosystems featuring an ultrathin membrane are discussed.
1. Introduction
The urgent need for energy-dense liquid hydrocarbon fuels for sustainable transportation on a global scale that avoid the use of fossil carbon sources and for the long-term storage of renewable electricity is well established by now.1 The generation of renewable fuels by artificial photosynthesis offers an attractive solution to a significant extent because this approach for making fuels from sunlight, an inexhaustible source of energy, obviates the need for the use of land needed for growing crops. Impressive progress has been achieved over the past decade in the development of efficient integrated systems for H2 production by solar water splitting, and for the conversion of CO2 and H2O to CO or formate driven by sunlight, with power efficiencies reaching upto 20%.2–11 However, a major challenge for achieving artificial photosynthesis technology on a global scale is the need to reach a sufficient scale of impact to persuade producers to leave the remaining fossil carbon resources in the ground and to utilize renewable resources instead, which requires production in the order of 10 terawatt of synthetic fuel from solar and wind in the coming decades.1 While the most recently reported H2O splitting and CO2 reduction systems meet the essential requirement of exclusively using Earth-abundant materials, this alone is not sufficient. Scalability at such an unprecedented level demands a minimal set of systems components and, in particular, the avoidance of those components that require replenishment or frequent replacement for a sustained operation. However, these factors are not adequately addressed by existing artificial photosystems.
Natural photosynthesis, which makes sugar molecules from atmospheric CO2 and H2O using the energy of the sun, is the only existing system for making high-energy chemicals on the terawatt scale (120 TW).12 Therefore, the design principles that enable the scaling of natural photosynthesis are worth considering. An important design aspect of a natural photosystem is that it closes the photosynthetic cycle of oxidizing H2O and generating the primary reduction intermediate (Nicotinamide Adenine Dinucleotide Phosphate cofactor (NADPH)) on the nanometer scale under membrane separation in incompatible redox catalysis environments. A key feature in natural systems is the less than 10 nm thick thylakoid separation membrane that enables electron transfer along the embedded, hierarchically arranged molecular charge-transfer components (chlorophyll, pheophytins, quinones, plastocyanines) and that also enables the transport of protons by cyctochrome bf and ATPase enzymes (ATP = adenosine triphosphate). At the same time, the thylakoid membrane blocks the products O2 and NAPDH from crossing over the membrane, thereby preventing efficiency-degrading back and side reactions.13 Such an ultrathin electron- and proton-conducting separation membrane may hold the key to enabling the scalability of an artificial photosystem on the TW scale because it would allow minimizing the number of systems components and avoid the use of ingredients prone to rapid degradation, especially by exploring designs exclusively involving gaseous reactants. Moreover, completing the photosynthetic cycle on the nanometer scale would allow bypassing the major efficiency-degrading processes intrinsic to the macroscale, in particular resistance losses caused by ion transport over micrometer and longer distances, and the loss of charge by providing the shortest possible, molecularly defined transfer pathways.
Robust artificial membranes sufficiently thin to enable the nanoscale integration of artificial photosystems (<10 nm) are far less developed than other essential systems components, i.e., light absorbers and catalysts. An important membrane criterion is direct, controlled electron transfer and proton transport at high enough rates to keep up with the photon flux at the maximum solar intensity while blocking small molecules like O2 from crossover. The majority of existing separation membranes used in the field of artificial photosynthesis are based on organic polymers, such as Nafion (perfluorosulfonic acid polytetrafluoroethylene copolymer) or Neosepta (polymer consisting of trimethylammonium substituents on an arylalkane backbone), that are H+ or OH− conducting and gas separating, but not electrically conducting.14,15 The ion conductivity of these materials is based on fixed charged groups, such as sulfonate or ammonium, that promote the transfer of H+ (OH−) ions while blocking mobile ions with the same charge. However, while suitable for membrane thicknesses of tens of μ, these cation- and anion-exchange membranes are not adequate for the separation of small molecules with thicknesses in the 10 nm range. The same holds for polymer membranes that are simultaneously electron conducting, such as poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)-poly(styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS).14,16 Furthermore, ultrathin organic polymer membranes do not block the crossover of energy-dense hydrocarbon fuel products from deep CO2 reduction.
Following a brief account of the early explorations of ultrathin layers for the spatial compartmentalization of photocatalytic components, this article focuses on recent progress in the development of ultrathin membranes (<10 nm) that can prevent the crossover of small molecules while exhibiting adequate charge and proton conductivity. Specifically, two types of materials have emerged, namely ultrathin amorphous silica layers and graphene sheets. Furthermore, for artificial photosystems featuring molecular catalysts, ultrathin 2D metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) or 2D covalent–organic frameworks (COFs) with adequate electron and proton conductivity may play a critical role in enabling the integration of such catalysts at a sufficiently high areal density with ultrathin separation membranes. The transport properties of these materials and opportunities for building nanoscale integrated photosystems featuring ultrathin membranes, including the approaches for their assembly into macroscale systems, are discussed herein.
2. Early exploration of ultrathin layers for spatial compartmentalization of the photocatalytic components
Ultrathin layer-type materials in the form of 2D metal oxide nanosheets with light-induced charge-transfer characteristics were identified in the early 1980s as candidates for increasing the photocatalytic efficiency by spatially organizing the catalytic components. Following the demonstration of layered metal oxides as semiconductor photocatalysts for overall water splitting by Domen, Onishi, and coworkers,17,18 Mallouk exploited the occlusion of small, H2-evolving (<1 nm) Pt catalyst particles in interlayer spaces for blocking the efficiency-degrading back-charge-transfer reactions.19–21 Specifically, Pt-loaded layered niobates, like K4Nb6O17 functionalized by the adsorbed photosensitizer RuL3 (L = 4,4′-dicarboxy-2,2′-bipyridine) afforded the visible-light-driven generation of H2 from HI by virtue of blocking the concurrently produced I3− upon I− oxidation from accessing the Pt catalyst, as the negatively charged niobate sheets repel triiodide anions. This finding subsequently led to the development of Z-schemes for overall water splitting using I−/I3− shuttles for charge transfer between Pt-loaded visible-light-sensitized niobate reduction and WO3-based O2-evolution photocatalysts, the most efficient system of which is displayed in Fig. 1.22–24 The suppression of I3− back reactions at Pt by compartmentalization of the catalyst nanoparticles is critical for the efficiency of this system.
 Fig. 1  Z-scheme tandem system for visible-light-driven overall water splitting using Al2O3-modified niobate nanosheets with a Pt nanoparticle catalyst for H+ reduction compartmentalized in the interlayer spaces and I−/I3− as the electron-transfer shuttle. Efficiency enhancement is achieved by blocking the access of I3− to Pt by electrostatic repulsion of the negatively charged niobate sheets. Reproduced from ref. 23 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2020. 
While the use of 2D metal oxide nanosheets could block specific undesired back or side reactions, such as those involving charge-transfer shuttles, the approaches to date lack designs for the rigorous blocking of the crossover and back reactions of small molecules in general, such as O2 generated at the H2O-oxidation sites or the intermediates of CO2 conversion produced at reduction sites. Furthermore, the nanosheets lacked the required proton permeability of artificial photosynthetic membranes.
Mimicking the natural photosystem, studies into ultrathin artificial soft materials, such as lipid bilayers, for compartmentalizing photosynthetic functions were initiated decades ago. Early examples include the spatial separation of organic electron donors from acceptors upon photo-induced charge separation25 and the accumulation of proton gradients for driving an ATP synthase proton pump.26,27 Most recently, an approach mimicking the thylakoid membrane was implemented in a MOF-based 2-photon Z-scheme for H2O splitting to H2 and O2 in the form of a several-nm-thick liposome bilayer.28 This biomimetic membrane used randomly diffusing chemical shuttles for the transport of charges between the oxidizing and reducing MOF photocatalysts.
For an abiotic engineered solar-fuel system, the fragile vesicle structures suitable for living cells need to be replaced by much more durable ultrathin materials. Similarly, approaches based on the liquid-phase boundaries of biphasic solutions for suppressing undesired back charge-transfer reactions,29,30 which may be appropriate for specialty chemical syntheses, lack the durability and rigorous separation properties required for solar-fuel-generating systems.
3. Single graphene layer as a photosynthetic membrane
Single-layer graphene has emerged as a robust, atom-thick charge-conducting 2D material31,32 that can block the crossover of the smallest molecules, including H2 and even He atoms, while possessing the ability to transmit protons (Fig. 2a).33,34 Hence, graphene sheets possess all the required properties for an ultrathin separation membrane of an artificial photosystem. Specifically, they have the potential for use as efficient ohmic contacts between semiconductor or molecular photocatalysts for H2O oxidation and CO2 or H+ reduction in a 2-photon Z-scheme configuration while simultaneously functioning as a H+-transmitting and molecule-separating membrane. Before discussing the opportunities for developing complete nanoscale integrated artificial photosystems with incorporated graphene membranes, the quantitative aspects of charge and proton conductivity are described, and the use to date of graphene as a charge-transfer component in photocatalytic systems is summarized.
 Fig. 2  Graphene. (a) Defect-free single graphene layer. (b) Graphene oxide. (c) Reduced graphene oxide (RGO). Reproduced from ref. 34 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2019. WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) Carbon (1s) XPS of graphene oxide before (top) and after reduction by the visible-light excitation of a BiVO4 photocathode for 3 h (bottom). The C–O (epoxy and hydroxyl, 286.6 eV) and carboxylate CO (288.9 eV) signals showed sharp decreases, while the C–C signal (284.5 eV) increased. Reproduced from ref. 51 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2018. 
3.1 Transport properties of graphene
Graphene's metal-like charge conductivity and perfect gas-blocking property under ambient conditions were established in the early days of graphene research,35,36 while the passage of protons through the material is a more recent finding. Specifically, crystallographically perfect single graphene sheets of 102 to over 103 μ2 size, prepared by the mechanical exfoliation of graphite crystals and free of pinholes, were found by standard conductivity measurements to possess an areal conductivity of 3 mS cm−2 when in contact with aqueous HCl solution or when interfaced on both sides with Nafion exposed to saturated H2O vapor at ambient temperature (experimental proton-transport barrier Ea = 0.78 eV).32,37,38 Importantly, illumination with visible light drastically boosted the proton conductivity when the graphene layer was in contact with metal nanoparticles, which resulted in an n-type doping of the graphene, such as Pt, Ni, etc. Specifically, at low electrical bias (<100 mV), illumination of the graphene layer with a solar simulator source (100 mW cm−2) resulted in a 15-fold increase in the proton current density, which boosted the areal proton conductivity to 45 mS cm−2 without degradation of the integrity of the layer upon prolonged illumination.39 The linear increase in the proton-transport rate with increasing the light intensity from H2O-oxidation sites across the graphene layer (flat wavelength response throughout the visible and near infrared regions) could satisfy the increased demand for protons at the catalytic CO2-reduction sites on the opposing side of the graphene separation membrane. The enhanced H+ conductivity can be explained by the development of a local photovoltage in the vicinity of the metal nanoparticles due to transient hot electrons being generated upon light absorption by the metal nanoparticles.39
It is interesting to note that single-sheet graphene obtained by the mechanical exfoliation of crystalline graphite is impermeable to any other types of ions,37 and no proton permeability is observed for bi- and higher multilayer graphene, but only if each layer is defect free.33 On the other hand, graphene made by chemical vapor deposition features nano-sized defects and has shown an areal H+ conductivity as large as 4 S cm−2.40 It should be added that there are single-sheet-graphene analogues that have exhibited higher proton conductivity than pristine graphene layers, like hexagonal boron nitride (1 S cm−2 at room temperature, Ea = 0.3 eV), but they lack charge conductivity.33
3.2 Graphene as an ohmic contact for photocatalytic systems
Over the past decade, the ohmic property of graphene sheets has been exploited for boosting the efficiency of semiconductor-based 2-photon Z-scheme systems for overall H2O splitting, as well as for CO2 reduction by H2O (Fig. 3a).41–50 These breakthroughs were preceded by the observation of a photoelectrocatalytic enhancement in 1-photon constructs when utilizing graphene as an electron-transfer mediator between semiconductor photocatalysts and an electrode,51 as an efficient charge separator,52 and as a reduction co-catalyst.53
 Fig. 3  Graphene serving as an ohmic contact in a Z-scheme tandem photosystem. (a) ohmic contact enabling the charge flow of a TiO2–Si Z-scheme heterostructure for photocatalytic H2O splitting. The photogenerated electrons in Si and holes in TiO2 move to the aqueous interface to perform water splitting, while the holes in Si and electrons in TiO2 recombine at the ohmic contact between the two semiconductors. Reproduced from ref. 50 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2013. (b) Photosystem for H2O splitting with graphene contact between BiVO4–CoOx oxidation and CuGaS–Pt reduction photocatalysts. Reproduced from ref. 44 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2016. (c) Photosystem for CO2 reduction by H2O with graphene contact between CdS oxidation and Fe2V4O13 reduction photocatalyst. Reproduced from ref. 45 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In this section, recent progress in engaging the excellent electron-transfer property of graphene is reviewed. The full membrane functions of graphene, which includes chemical separation and proton conductivity, have not yet been exploited in the systems reported thus far.
The majority of systems use few-layer-thick graphene obtained by the chemical or photochemical reduction of graphene oxide rather than structurally perfect single graphene layers made by the mechanical exfoliation method.54 Graphene oxide is synthesized by the oxidation of graphite using chemical oxidants and is typically adhered to the photocatalyst surface prior to reduction. The products of such graphene oxide reduction (abbrev. RGO) include epoxy, hydroxyl, carbonyl, and carboxylate groups at tens of percent concentration,43,51 and are often accompanied by adjacent defects in the form of Angstrom-sized holes in the graphene layer (Fig. 2b).55 While the reduction process removes a large fraction of O moieties, as evidenced by XPS (X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy) and FT-IR (Fourier-transform infrared) measurements (Fig. 2d), the graphene defects usually remain (Fig. 2c).51 Prominent recent examples of water-oxidation and H+-reduction photocatalysts coupled by graphene are O2-evolving BiVO4 photocatalyst nanoparticles interfaced by RGO layers with H2-evolving Ru-doped SrTiO3 nanoparticles, the latter decorated with a Rh co-catalyst. This nanocomposite achieved a 3-fold increase in water-splitting activity compared to particles with direct contact between BiVO4 and Ru/SrTiO3:Rh.41 A similar efficiency enhancement was reported in a subsequent study that introduced RGO contacts for visible light Z-scheme constructs consisting of p-type metal sulfide for CO2 (or H2O) reduction (e.g., CuGaS2) and n-type BiVO4 decorated with a CoOx co-catalyst for O2 evolution (Fig. 3b).44 In another example, the coupling of CdS nanoparticles for H2O oxidation with Fe2V4O13 platelets for CO2 reduction by a graphene interface was found to be able to substantially boost the photocatalytic efficiency of this visible-light-driven heterostructure for the conversion of a gaseous CO2 and H2O mixture (Fig. 3c).45 Here, the graphene interface opens up a means for the efficient combination of CdS conduction band electrons with Fe2V4O13 holes, thereby enabling the Z-scheme mechanism.
While free-standing graphene has a favorable Fermi level (−0.08 V vs. SHE)56 for creating efficient ohmic contacts between photocatalytic materials for H2O oxidation and H+ or CO2 reduction, it is nevertheless important to evaluate in each case the actual Fermi level upon interfacing the graphene sheet with the photocatalytic materials in order to allow for graphene's Fermi level modulation, with the aim of minimizing the contact resistance for ensuring the maximum photocatalytic efficiency. Specifically, the Fermi level of graphene should be lower (less reducing) than the conduction band minimum of the electron-donor material but higher than the valence band maximum of the hole-donor component, as illustrated by the ZnO–CdS Z-scheme.49 This would enable graphene to be able to efficiently accept the photoexcited electrons from ZnO and holes from CdS.
It is important to note that the use of graphene as an electron-transfer mediator is feasible not just for solids, but for molecular photocatalysts as well. For example, molecular-light-absorber-catalyst assemblies can be anchored on graphene sheets through aromatic moieties.55,57 However, ensuring an adequate areal density of the molecular catalysts is critical for achieving practical photocatalytic rates for fuel generation. Therefore, charge-conducting high-surface-area supports for molecular systems need to be introduced, as discussed in Section 5.
3.3 Single graphene layer as a membrane for nanoscale integrated artificial photosystems
Because of their H+-conducting and chemical-separation properties, on top of their excellent charge conductivity, the incorporation of single graphene sheets into artificial photosynthetic units offers the opportunity to block the efficiency-degrading back reactions and drastically reduce the charge- and proton-transfer distances. The sample constructs employed so far for evaluating the H+ conductivity of single graphene layers33,39,58 provide a starting point for building complete, nanoscale integrated artificial photosystems featuring a graphene separation membrane. As an example, a single graphene sheet tightly covering a ∼10 μ diameter hole etched through a Si wafer will allow for the facet-selective deposition of photocatalyst nanoparticles for H2O oxidation on one side and CO2 (or H+) reduction on the other side of the membrane (prepared by drop or spin casting, chemical vapor deposition),45,57 enabled by the straightforward manipulation of the macro-sized Si wafer. To benefit from the large H+ conductivity enhancement upon illumination, metal nanoparticles need to be kept in contact with graphene on at least one facet. This could be achieved, for example, by using Ni co-catalyst nanoparticles for H+ reduction or Cu nanoparticles for CO2 reduction on the surface of semiconductor particles for photoreduction (whereby contact with both Ni and Cu would result in the n-type graphene doping required for the enhancement of the H+ conductivity by light).39,58 The deposited photocatalytic nanoparticles need to be separated by nano-sized spaces in order to maintain the H+ conductivity across the membrane because semiconductor materials are typically proton impermeable. A proposed example of such a complete visible-light-driven 2-photon tandem photosystem integrated on the nanoscale that features a graphene separation membrane would be BiVO4/CoOx nanoparticles for H2O oxidation on one side and CuGaS2/Pt nanoparticles for H2 evolution on the opposite side. The efficiency of this Z-scheme system was previously demonstrated in the form of an aqueous particle suspension using RGO as a solid-state electron mediator.44 Here, the Pt co-catalyst particles in direct contact with the graphene surface provided a H+ conductivity-boosting effect upon photo-illumination.
In the case of Z-scheme systems for which one or both photocatalysts for the two half reactions are molecules, non-covalent attachment methods are preferred because they can retain the high charge conductivity and chemical-separation property of graphene, which cannot be assumed for covalent attachment via functional groups introduced into graphene sheets. The favored non-covalent anchors are those that can provide strong π–π interactions, such as pyrene, naphthalene, perylene, and other aromatic or heteroaromatic moieties.57 However, such non-covalent attachments might be too weak to prevent detachment under sustained photocatalytic conditions. Furthermore, a monolayer coverage of molecular photocatalysts on graphene membranes may provide a far-too-low active-site density for building systems whose catalytic rate can keep up with the photon flux at maximum solar intensity. Here, the recent emergence of charge-conducting MOFs and COFs can provide high-surface-area supports for molecular photocatalytic assemblies suitable for developing viable photosystems using molecular components (Section 5).
4. Ultrathin amorphous silica with embedded molecular wires as a photosynthetic membrane
Pinhole-free amorphous silica layers of several nm thickness prepared by atomic layer deposition (ALD) were reported to possess sufficient H+ conductivity for serving as ultrathin separation membranes for artificial photosynthesis.59 The required charge conductivity was enabled in a recently developed method for embedding organic molecular wires into such amorphous SiO2 layers.60,61 In this section, we discuss the synthesis and structure of SiO2 nanolayers with embedded wires, followed by a quantitative evaluation of the charge conductivity, H+ conductivity, and chemical-separation property of such a structure. A complete nanoscale artificial photosynthetic unit in the form of an inorganic core–shell nanotube and a square-inch-sized array of such nanotubes is described in the following that constitutes a macroscale photosynthetic system that can retain the conductivity and separation property of the nanotubes.
4.1 Structure, conductivity, and separation property
Ultrathin conformal layers of amorphous silica provide robust separation barriers for small molecules. Recent studies have established the adequate proton conductivity of such pinhole-free SiO2 layers with a few nanometer thickness and found that they can achieve the tight encapsulation of organic molecular wires for controlled charge transport.59–61 This approach takes advantage of the high precision with which the structure and energetics of molecular systems can be manipulated for achieving maximum charge-transfer efficiency. In the example illustrated in Fig. 4a, a SiO2-based, 3 nm thick membrane separates the visible-light photocatalyst in the form of a heterobinuclear metal-to-metal charge-transfer unit (MMCT) for CO2 reduction (Zr–O–CoII) anchored on the SiO2 surface from a H2O oxidation catalyst, here Co3O4. The wires employed to date are usually made of oligo(p-phenylenevinylene) molecules with 3 aryl units (abbrev. PV3), with the length of the backbone commensurate with the thickness of the SiO2 layer.60–69 Through synthetic modification of the aryl or ethenyl moieties by electron-donating or -withdrawing groups, the HOMO (highest occupied molecular orbital) and LUMO (lowest unoccupied molecular orbital) energies of the wire molecules can be fine-tuned in order to optimize the energetics of the charge flow and impose a rectifying property.60,65Fig. 4b shows a favorable energy-level alignment of the HOMO of PV3 for spontaneous hole charge-transfer from a light absorber to the Co3O4 catalyst while minimizing the efficiency-degrading back reaction with the excited light-absorber electron through the highly negative potential of the wire LUMO, which is unable to be populated by the former.
 Fig. 4  Ultrathin amorphous silica membrane with embedded molecular wires. (a) Schematic of visible-light-driven hole transfer from transient CoIII formed by ZrIVOCoII → ZrIIIOCoIII charge-transfer photoexcitation via the embedded molecular wire to the Co3O4 catalyst. Reproduced from ref. 62 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2018. (b) Energy level alignment of a light absorber, PV3 wire, and catalyst for light-induced directional charge transfer for driving H2O oxidation and CO2 reduction. Oxidation and reduction catalysis occur at the gas/solid interface, with an H+ gradient developing across the nanomembrane during photocatalytic H2O oxidation. The SiO2 membrane blocks the crossover of reactants and products, except for H+. Adapted from ref. 82 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The synthetic approach for embedding wire molecules with the desired electronic properties, orientation, and density into amorphous silica nanolayers involves a two-step assembly process. First, tripodal anchors in the form of trimethoxysilylaryl moieties are attached to the solid surface on one side of the membrane (in the example shown in Fig. 4, this is to a Co oxide catalyst, but it could also be another solid material, such as a semiconductor photocatalyst). This type of anchor imposes a vertical orientation upon the subsequent covalent attachment of the PV3 wire by an amide bond or by click chemistry, thereby ensuring that the charge-conducting molecules span the entire silica layer, from one side to the other.60,65,66 The free choice of the number of aryl rings allows for the accurate matching of the wire length and silica thickness, while the chosen wire-to-anchor ratio determines the wire density. Casting of the wire molecules into amorphous silica by atomic layer deposition (ALD) at close to room temperature results in a tight encapsulation of the organic molecule under preservation of its chemical integrity and spatial orientation. Moreover, the method keeps the separation property of the SiO2 membrane intact, as verified by electrochemical measurements combined with surface-sensitive polarized Fourier-transform infrared reflection absorption spectroscopy analysis (FT-IRRAS).60,61,65,66

4.1.1 Charge conductivity. 
For evaluating the charge conductivity by photocurrent measurements, planar SiO2 layers with embedded molecular wires were prepared on Co oxide nanolayers deposited on a planar Pt electrode (100 nm Pt e-beam evaporated onto Si wafer).60 Accurate tuning of the density of the visible-light absorber, here the familiar Ru(bpy)3 (bpy = 2,2′-bipyridyl) photosensitizer with one of the three ligands modified for surface attachment, was accomplished by using the two-step anchoring method discussed above for attachment to the silica membrane.60,66 Short-circuit photocurrent measurements using the three-electrode configuration shown in Fig. 5a allowed us to quantify the charge flux through the membrane. Comparisons of samples with and without embedded molecular wires but otherwise an identical composition confirmed that the charges were conducted exclusively through the embedded wire molecules, and no degradation of the integrity of the silica membrane was noted upon its exposure to the photocurrent. In particular, no pinholes developed, as confirmed by control cyclic voltammetry (CV) experiments.60
 Fig. 5  Short-circuit photocurrent measurements for assessing electron conductivity. (a) Schematic of a three-electrode cell with a working Pt electrode onto which 12 nm Co3O4 followed by a 3 nm silica membrane with embedded TMS-Am-PV3-SO3 wires were deposited. Covalently anchored [Ru(bpy)2(dcbpy)]2+ light absorbers are also shown. (b) Wire density dependence of the photocurrent. (c) Energy level alignment of the HOMO of the molecular wires with the HOMO of the Ru light-absorber and Co3O4 catalyst valence band. Anchored wires are abbreviated OMe for E-PV3-OMe, SO3Et for E-PV3-SO3Et, F5 for E-PV3-F5, and SO3 for A-PV3-SO3. The corresponding molecular structures are shown in Fig. 6. (d) Photocurrent dependence on the HOMO potential of the embedded wire molecule, normalized for a wire density of 0.6 nm−2. Reproduced from ref. 60 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2021. 
Enhancing the charge flux across the membrane by optimizing the molecular wire density through photocurrent measurements for a wide range of loadings revealed a linear, approx. 10-fold increase from 0.5 to 4 nm−2 (Fig. 5b). Quantitative determination of the wire and light-absorber densities of each sample was then performed by the combined use of FT-IRRAS and UV–vis spectroscopy.60 The observed photocurrent increased with increasing the wire density, reflecting an enhanced electronic coupling and lowered reorganization energy, resulting from the shortened average spatial separation of the anchored light absorber and terminal aryl ring of the embedded wire molecule.70 A density around 5 nm−2 was found to be optimal since higher loadings could compromise the integrity of the separation function of the silica membrane, mainly because the spaces between adjacent embedded wire molecules became too small for depositing adequate amounts of SiO2.
A similarly steep enhancement of charge transfer across the ultrathin silica membrane was observed when optimizing the energy-level alignment of the embedded molecular wire with the light absorber and catalyst. By varying the HOMO potential of the embedded wire molecule using various electron-donating or -withdrawing substituents on the terminal aryl moiety (SO3, F, and OCH3 were selected based on the HOMO potential estimates by density functional theory (DFT))60 and alternate types of chemical bonding for the wire attachment to the tripodal anchors (amide, click linkage) displayed in Fig. 6, the driving force (free-energy change) for charge hopping from the light absorber to the wire, and from the wire to the catalyst could be optimized (Fig. 5c). These charge-transfer steps were directly observed by ultrafast optical absorption spectroscopy.69 A 10-fold increase in the photocurrent density was found upon replacement of the amide by a triazole (click) linkage (Fig. 5d), with the driving force of charge transfer from the Ru(bpy)3 light absorber to the wire identified as the most influential parameter (step 1, Fig. 5c). While the observed photocurrents for the systems shown were still mere tens of nA cm−2, replacing the initially used persulfate electron acceptor in solution that activates the photoexcited light absorber by a much more efficient solid oxide electron acceptor, here the conduction band of a TiO2 nanolayer, could afford photocurrents as high as 6.4 μA cm−2. This result pertains to the comparatively inefficient amide-linked wire and the as-yet un-optimized wire density.60 Therefore, if replaced by the more efficient click-attached wire at an optimal density of 5 nm−2, a photocurrent of 0.1 mA cm−2 could be achieved. The current density for the planar geometry was adequate for reaching the 10 mA cm−2 target for an artificial photosystem71 because of the high surface area of its nanostructured architecture, as is discussed in Section 4.2. Similar to the optimization of the HOMO potential of the wire molecules for hole conduction, matching the LUMO for optimal electron transfer via embedded wire molecules to catalytic reduction sites was achieved by introducing strongly electron-withdrawing NO2 and CN substituents on aryl and ethenyl backbone moieties.65
 Fig. 6  Functionalized wire molecules with electron-donating and -withdrawing groups. (a) Free wires. (b) Wires attached to an anchor by an amide or triazole linker. The corresponding HOMO potentials of the wire linked to the anchor (vs. NHE) are shown in the schematic in Fig. 4c. Reproduced from ref. 60 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2021. 


4.1.2 Proton conductivity. 
By using planar amorphous SiO2 layers of variable thickness in the few nm range prepared by ALD on Pt electrodes, the proton transport-resistance was determined by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). The measurement method used was based on monitoring the reduction of H+ transferred through the silica layer to hydrogen (i.e., Pt–H) upon arrival at the SiO2/Pt interface at potentials short of the onset for H2 evolution (termed H under potential deposition (abbrev. Hupd)).72 As shown in the CV curves in Fig. 7a, sweeps in N2-saturated aqueous solution at pH 4 revealed cathodic currents in the range 0.4 to 0 V (vs. RHE) originating from the reduction of H+ to Pt–H. The formation of the latter, and its Pt–D counterpart in D2O, were spectroscopically verified by the accompanying FT-IRRAS measurements (with signal peaks at 2090 and 1470 cm−1, respectively).59 By holding the potential at Vupd = 0.096 V vs. RHE, EIS measurements gave H+-transport impedance values that reflected a modest conductivity of 4 × 10−8 S cm−1 (Fig. 7b),59 which agreed with literature values for μ-thick amorphous silica when extrapolated to room temperature. Yet, due to the ultrathin nature of the layer, H+ fluxes of 4900, 1900, and 1250 s−1 nm−2 were achieved for 2, 4, and 6 nm layers, respectively, when exposed to pH 4 aqueous solution.59,61 These flux values ranged from close to matching, to greatly exceeding the photon flux at a maximum solar intensity of 1500 s−1 nm−2.73
 Fig. 7  Proton conductivity and O2-blocking property of an ultrathin silica membrane. (a) Cyclic voltammogram (CV) of a bare Pt electrode (black trace) and Pt covered with 2, 4, and 6 nm SiO2 (red, blue, and green traces) at 298 K in N2-saturated aqueous 0.5 M Na2SO4 solution at pH 4. (b) Electrochemical impedance spectra in the N2-saturated pH 4 electrolyte solution used for (a). Applied potential 0.096 V vs. RHE. The dots in the plot are the experimental data while the solid lines represent the results of fitting the data to the equivalent circuit (Randles circuit) shown in the inset. (c) CV in O2-bubbled electrolyte solution under the same conditions as used for (a). Reproduced from ref. 59 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2019. WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
At the same time, silica ALD layers as thin as 2 nm completely blocked the crossover of molecules as small as O2, as demonstrated by the fact that the characteristic O2 reduction wave of bare Pt exposed to the O2-saturated solution was absent in the CVs of any of the ultrathin SiO2 layers (Fig. 7c). Like in the case of O2-free solution, only the Hupd currents were observed. The H+-conductivity and O2-blocking properties were preserved in the presence of the embedded wire molecules.65 These results established the feasibility of using ultrathin silica layers with embedded wires as separation membranes, based on which nanoscale artificial photosystems can be developed.
The mechanism of H+ diffusion through conformal silica layers can be understood as H+ hopping according to the Grotthuss mechanism, in which H+ ions transiently bind and dissociate from O atoms (Si–O–Si bridges, SiOH or SiO− moieties) throughout the interior of the solid.74–76 The hopping mechanism is consistent with the low activation barrier for H+ diffusion of 5 kcal mol−1 derived from our data, which agreed well with the reported ab initio calculations.59,77 It is important to add that H+ transfer across the interfaces between the SiO2 membrane and adjacent Co3O4 catalyst, or other metal oxide layers, was facilitated by interfacial Si–O–Co bridges as uncovered by the FT-IRRAS technique.59

4.2 Ultrathin silica membranes for developing nanoscale integrated artificial photosystems
The synthetic methods developed for silica nanomembranes are suitable for any morphology and, hence, open up the development of a complete nanoscale artificial photosystem with a suitable geometry for the separation of the incompatible CO2-reduction and H2O-oxidation environments. Moreover, the flexible choice of the morphology for the nanoscale units allows for their assembly into macroscale photosystems (∼square inch) in a manner that would preserve the separation of the H2O-oxidation and CO2-reduction environments already achieved at the nanoscale. A specific example is the tube morphology for the nanoscale photosynthetic unit that forms the basis of our integrated systems design, as graphically sketched and shown in Fig. 8a. In this design, a core–shell nanotube consisting of a Co3O4 inner tube of about 10 nm thickness (core) is surrounded by a 3 nm-thick SiO2 membrane with embedded wires (the shell). Visible-light-absorbing photocatalysts for CO2 reduction, here robust ZrOCo MMCT units, are attached to the outside silica membrane surface. A cross-sectional HR-TEM image of the wall of a single nanotube is shown in Fig. 8b. Transient ZrIII generated by the separation of positive and negative charges upon the photoexcitation of ZrIVOCoII groups reduces the vapor-phase CO2 to CO on the outside of the tube.61,62,78–82 The hole charge on transient CoIII is then transferred to Co3O4via the embedded molecular wires, driving H2O-vapor oxidation to O2 on the inside of the tube.
 Fig. 8  Co oxide-silica core–shell nanotube featuring a silica nanomembrane as a complete photosynthetic unit for CO2 photoreduction by H2O. (a) Schematic of the design. (b) HR-TEM image showing a longitudinal cross-section of a single Co3O4–SiO2 core–shell nanotube wall. Inset: fast Fourier transform (FFT) image of the crystalline Co3O4 layer. Reproduced from ref. 83 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2018. (c) Schematic of a core–shell nanotube array. (d) SEM of a section of the macroscale Co3O4/SiO2/TiO2 nanotube array after complete removal of the sacrificial Si template. Scale bar: 500 nm. Reproduced from ref. 61 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Assembling such core–shell nanotubes, each independently driving the photoconversion of CO2 and H2O vapor to CO and O2 under membrane separation, into arrays with a square-inch size, as schematically shown in Fig. 8c, allows the extension of the product separation from the nano-to the macroscale.61,81 A section of the nanofabricated array is shown in the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image in Fig. 8d. The fabrication process was based on a sacrificial Si nanorod templating technique and combined ALD of the various inorganic oxide layers with the wire functionalization protocol first optimized for planar samples, as described above.83 By adding a top and bottom cover to the array with the tube opening piercing through them as discussed in Section 6, the O2-gas evolving inside the nanotubes can escape into the surrounding atmosphere and is spatially completely separated from the CO2-reduction sites and evolving fuel generated in the gallery space between the two covers.61,81,83 The 100-fold larger surface area of the nanotube array when compared to its footprint allows for an adequate density of the light absorber and catalytic sites, such that the photocatalysis rate can keep up with the solar photon flux (10 mA cm−2 electron flow density, ≥1 S cm−2 areal proton conductivity). Thus, the ultrathin SiO2 membrane possesses the required properties for an efficient separation membrane for the nanoscale integration of artificial photosystems. It is important to add that for optimizing the overall conversion efficiency for CO2 photoreduction by H2O, the single-light-absorber systems investigated thus far need to be replaced by a two-photon Z-scheme light-absorber system, rendered feasible by the hierarchical nature of the assembly of core–shell nanotubes. This can be achieved by introducing two binuclear light absorbers with complementary optical properties and matched redox potentials, coupled in tandem by SiO2-embedded wire molecules with properly aligned HOMO and LUMO energetics.
5. Electron- and proton-conducting 2D metal–organic and covalent–organic frameworks as molecular photocatalyst supports
While a variety of atomically and molecularly precise deposition techniques are available for the coupling of heterogeneous photocatalysts to graphene or ultrathin silica-based membranes for building nanoscale artificial photosystems, the coupling of molecular photocatalytic components to such membranes for adequate photocatalytic activity poses a special challenge.84 Sufficiently large catalytic rates for keeping up with the solar photon intensity typically require much higher areal catalyst concentrations than that afforded by the monolayer coverage of flat surfaces. Yet, exploring systems based on molecular catalysts is attractive because of the comparative ease and precision of tuning their electronic and chemical properties by synthetic manipulation, which is the key for maximizing the efficiency and product selectivity. Therefore, high-surface-area nanoporous layers of tens of nm thickness that possess adequate electron and proton conductivity are needed.
The recent development of 2D metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) and 2D covalent–organic frameworks (COFs, the metal-free variants) with appropriate electron and proton conductivity presents opportunities for addressing this challenge. Molecular electrocatalysts can be incorporated into their frameworks, thereby allowing for a high areal catalyst density and, hence, the desired electrochemical activity.84–86 These types of frameworks were first mainly explored as molecularly defined, high-surface-area porous solids for the selective adsorption of small gaseous molecules, including CO2 and H2, for the purpose of storage, or for serving as separation membranes.87–92 For the latter application, ultrathin MOF and COF membranes of tens of nm thickness have recently been developed.93 As such, MOFs and COFs are typically electric insulators. Thus, methods needed to be explored for introducing electron (or hole) conductivity into their frameworks, and for enhancing their capacity for transporting protons.
After discussing recent progress in charge- and proton-conducting MOFs and COFs, this section describes the current status of electrocatalytic MOFs for H2O splitting and CO2 reduction. As such, MOFs and COFs are not suitable as separation membranes for artificial photosystems because they do not block small molecules (H2O, O2, small hydrocarbons intermediates and products). Thus, opportunities for integrating these frameworks with graphene membranes are discussed below.
5.1 Electron and proton conductivity of metal–organic frameworks
Charge conduction in MOFs can occur through covalent linkages of the coordination polymers that constitute the porous framework (through-bond mechanism), the pairing of transition metals with ligands containing chelating functional groups (extended conjugation mechanism), non-covalent interactions (through-space mechanism), or through electron-transfer guest species loaded into the pores (guest-promoted charge transport).85,86 The early examples of conductive MOFs based on the hopping-type through-bond approach were frameworks using metal bis(dithiolene) moieties, with the covalency of the metal–sulfur bonds being a critical factor (conductivity around 10−4 S cm−1).94 Very high conductivities were achieved more recently with Fe-based MOFs (mixed-valence Fe2+/3+) featuring azolate ligands (ranging from 10−3 to 1 S cm−1) (Fig. 9a and b).95–98 Particularly favorable as electron-conducting ultrathin MOFs are those with extended conjugation because their π–d conjugation imparts efficient charge delocalization, and hence exceptional conductivity in the plane of the 2D transition metal-chelating ligand structure (e.g., aromatic diols, diamines, dithiols). At the same time, non-covalent π–π interactions between the stacked planes assure good conductivity in the perpendicular direction. The through-space conductivity of planar-conjugated organic ligands enabled by π–π interactions (e.g., tetrathiafulvalene, naphthalene, anthracene, and naphthalenediimide) offers the opportunity for exquisite control by fine-tuning the stacking structure and the intermolecular distances provided by the highly ordered MOF architectures. The first cases of MOFs with through-space conductivity featured π–π stacked tetrathiafulvalene tetrabenzoate ligands of Mn, Co, Zn, or Cd complexes, which gave rise to conductivities in the 10−6 to 10−4 S cm−1 range.99,100 Recently reported MOF systems with a Cu3(HOTP)2 (HOTP = hydroxytriphenylene) (Fig. 10a) and Ni3(HITP)2 structure (Fig. 10b) achieved very high conductivities of 1 and 40 S cm−1, respectively, with the latter able to serve as an efficient O2-evolving electrocatalyst.101,102
 Fig. 9  Highly electron conductive mixed-valence Fe azolate MOFs. (a) Iron tetrazolate MOF crystal structure (left) and (Fe–N–N)∞ chains serving as charge-transport conduits (right). Fe, green dots; N, blue dots. Reproduced from ref. 96 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2018. (b) Structure of the secondary building unit of MOF Fe(1,2,3-triazolate)2(BF4)x (left) and Fe–N sublattice (right). Reproduced from ref. 98 with permission from the American Chemical Society. copyright 2018. 
 Fig. 10  Highly conductive two-dimensional MOFs. (a) 2D honeycomb layers of Cu3(HOTP)2 with square planar Cu centers bridging triphenylene-based linkers (top). The continuous slipped stacking arrangement of Cu3(HOTP)2 layers providing π–π interaction is also shown (bottom). Reproduced from ref. 101 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2019. (b) Two-dimensional layered structure of Ni3(HITP)2 MOF. Reproduced from ref. 102 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2016. 
In addition to the pathways mentioned so far, all featuring charge-transfer moieties as part of the framework, the space provided by the pores themselves can be utilized for introducing extrinsic electroactive species to engineer charge-transfer conduits (guest-promoted transport). Electron (or hole) hopping between guest species at high loading, or between the guest and framework moieties, can impart conductivity over a wide range (10−8 to 1 S cm−1).85 The typical electroactive guest species are I2/I− and polyiodides, aromatic (e.g., tetracyanoquinodimethane, methylviologen, C60) or organometallic species (e.g., metallocenes) that can undergo charge transfer to the framework moieties. A possible limit of this approach is the reduced porosity, which might impair the reactant and/or product transport through the MOF. Also, conductive polymers or 1D metal oxide chains have been synthesized from monomeric precursors inside MOF channels, resulting in embedded wire-like structures that resemble the embedded wire silica membranes discussed in Section 4. Such materials include 2D layers as thin as 10 nm or less with good electron conductivity.103–105
Regarding proton conductivity, the high versatility offered by introducing tailored functionalities into the framework or accommodating guest molecules in the pores for boosting the proton concentration and mobility has been increasingly exploited in the past 10 years. This effort has been driven in part by the need for new types of proton-exchange membranes for solid-electrolyte fuel cells.106–108 Proton conductivities in the range 10−4 to 10−2 S cm−1 were recently reported for both humid and anhydrous reaction conditions,106 exceeding by orders of magnitude the conductivity required for keeping up with the catalysis rates at maximum solar photon flux. Given the wide range of synthetic modifications available for organic framework components, it is reasonable to assume that adequate proton conductivity can be achieved by the additional modification of practically any MOF or COF with favorable electrical conductivity and catalytic property.
5.2 MOF-supported molecular electrocatalysts for artificial photosynthesis
The growing effort dedicated to the development of MOFs and COFs for electrocatalysis for energy that takes advantage of charge and proton conductivity includes systems for H2 evolution,84,109–111 H2O oxidation,112–116 O2 reduction,102 and CO2 reduction.117–120 The areal density of Co dithionene, a H2-producing molecular catalyst supported on a charge-conducting triphenylene hexathiol-based MOF, was found to be 2 orders of magnitude higher than that for the same molecular catalyst anchored on a flat surface.84 Similarly, a MOF featuring an Fe porphyrin CO2-reduction catalyst as a linker was determined by chronoamperometry to afford a 1000-fold increase in the areal density of electrically addressable, catalytically active sites compared to the monolayer coverage of a flat electrode surface. The Fe porphyrin linkers could serve both as redox-hopping conduits and catalytic sites, with the rate of electron diffusion through the MOF limiting the catalysis rate in this case119 (it is interesting to note that when the photoelectrocatalytic linker was introduced at too low a density, it was the electron transfer through the MOF that limited the photocatalytic efficiency).115 The well-established CO2-reduction catalyst Co phthalocyanine octaol was incorporated into the framework as a tetratopic linker, which resulted in high electrocatalytic activity enabled by the proton and electron conductivity of the metal-catecholate MOF framework. This Co phthalocyanine Fe catecholate MOF exhibited a 16.5 mA cm−2 catalytic current density for CO2 reduction to CO (VRHE = −0.63 V, overpotential 0.52 V), which was 10 times higher than those of non-conductive MOFs featuring porphyrin catalysts with a similar TOF as Co phthalocyanine.107,120 Utilizing the charge mobility enabled by π conjugation and π–π stacking, COFs featuring a Co porphyrin catalyst incorporated into the framework achieved a 26-fold improvement in electrocatalytic CO2 to CO conversion compared to the free molecular catalyst.118 In a related system, the incorporation of Co porphyrin as part of a MOF featuring an Al2(OH)2 backbone allowed the electrochemical conversion of CO2 to CO at high selectivity. UV–vis spectroelectrochemical measurements directly demonstrated the electrical connectivity of the vast majority of the catalytic metal centers of this MOF. It is important to note that for MOF film thicknesses of hundreds of nm and larger, the fraction of electrochemically accessible Co sites decreases rapidly with increasing the thickness as electron and proton transfer become hindered, rendering 2D MOF thicknesses in the range from tens of nm to about 200 nm as optimal.111,117
By exploiting the synergistic catalytic effect of two different metal centers electronically coupled in the framework, a remarkably high electrocatalytic current density for O2 evolution of 10 mA cm−2 at a 189 mV overpotential was achieved for a NiCo benzenedicarboxylic acid-based 2D MOF in alkaline solution (pH 14), whose structure and polarization curves are shown in Fig. 11a and b, respectively.112 Even further reductions in the overpotential for water oxidation were recently achieved with other bi- and trimetallic MOF electrocatalysts.121,122
 Fig. 11  Ultrathin bimetallic NiCo MOF for electrocatalytic O2 reduction. (a) MOF crystal structure. (b) Polarization curves of the bimetallic NiCo MOF (dark blue trace) compared with monometallic Ni (red), Co (light blue), RuO2 (purple), and bulk NiCo MOF (black). Reproduced from ref. 112 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2016. 
5.3 Integration of molecular catalyst-loaded 2D MOFs and COFs with an ultrathin separation membrane in nanoscale artificial photosystems
For molecular-catalyst-based artificial photosystems that take advantage of the high loading density achievable by their incorporation into 2D MOFs or COFs, two possible configurations are envisioned for integration with a graphene separation membrane. In one configuration, the MOFs would feature both the light absorption and the catalytic function in the form of molecular linkers or metal nodes, with the photocatalytic MOF for H2O oxidation forming an interface on one side of a graphene membrane and the photocatalytic MOF for CO2 (or H+) reduction on the opposite side, akin to a recently reported construct consisting of a graphene sheet sandwiched between thin nanoporous silica layers on either side, as sketched in Fig. 12a.123 A variety of synthetic approaches for interfacing MOFs with graphene have been demonstrated and comprehensively reviewed, with one example illustrated in Fig. 12b.124–126 For the H2O oxidation half-reaction, transient hole charges generated upon light absorption drive the O2-evolution catalyst inside the MOF, while the excited electrons are transferred to the graphene interface. According to the Z-scheme mechanism, the electrons combine with holes generated in the fuel-forming photoreductive MOF on the opposite side of the graphene membrane. A variant of this configuration may additionally feature semiconductor metal oxide nanolayers inserted between the graphene layer and the MOFs. In such a case, the MOF on each side is deposited onto an appropriate large bandgap oxide nanolayer according to established methods127 and serves as electron (hole) conduit to the ohmic graphene interface. For example, a NiO nanolayer could serve as a hole acceptor of the photoreductive MOF and a TiO2 layer as an electron acceptor of the H2O-oxidation MOF, with the graphene sandwiched between the two metal oxide nanolayers. This variant is reminiscent of the molecular photocatalyst-NiO photocathode and analogous to TiO2 photoanode assemblies developed by Meyer's128,129 and Wasielewski's130 groups.
 Fig. 12  Proposed designs using ultrathin conductive separation membranes for nanoscale integrated photosystems. (a) Schematic of a graphene membrane sandwiched between nanoporous silica layers of tens of nm thickness with vertically aligned pores. Reproduced from ref. 123 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2017. WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) MOF with the structure Zr6O4(OH)4(bdc-NH2)6, bdc-NH2 = 2-amino-1,4-benzenedicarboxylate (blue/yellow) interfaced with a graphene membrane (red). Reproduced from ref. 124 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2022. (c) Section of an array of a semiconductor particle Z-scheme, here in the form of nanorods, with graphene sheet serving as the ohmic contact of the photoanode/cathode and as a proton-transmitting separation membrane. Portion of figure adapted from ref. 136 under Creative Commons licence https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. (d) Complete Co oxide-silica nanotube array with a top and bottom cover for permanent separation, at all length scales, of the evolving CO2-reduction products (gallery space between the top and bottom covers) and O2 (inside the tubes and external space). Reproduced from ref. 82 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
An alternate configuration of a MOF-based nanoscale artificial photosystem might be composed of a semiconductor Z-scheme for visible-light absorption and charge separation, featuring a sandwiched graphene separation membrane as the ohmic contact, and 2D MOFs with incorporated molecular oxidation and reduction catalysts deposited on opposite sides of the semiconductor construct. As an example, the photocatalytic system could consist of a visible two-photon tandem semiconductor unit for efficient solar-light absorption, such as GaAs/graphene/Si, with a MOF for H2O oxidation deposited on the Si surface and a MOF for CO2 (or H+) reduction deposited on the GaAs surface using techniques established for other III–V semiconductor surfaces.131 For maximum photocatalytic efficiency, a critical property to optimize will be the energy-level alignment of the electron and valence band edges of the tandem semiconductor unit with the respective potentials of the electron- and hole-transfer conduits of the MOFs. Furthermore, the samples should be made in the form of nanoparticle films with free, uncovered nano-sized graphene spaces in between to ensure an adequate proton flux, because semiconductor materials are typically proton impermeable.
6. Conclusions and outlook
Ultrathin charge- and proton-transmitting membranes of ∼10 nm thickness capable of separating O2, H2O, CO2, and small carbon-based molecules open up opportunities for developing complete nanoscale integrated artificial photosystems to overcome the efficiency limitations of the existing integrated systems based on traditional, orders-of-magnitude thicker membranes. Graphene and ultrathin amorphous silica with embedded molecular wires possess the required membrane properties for enabling the exploration of both solid and molecular photocatalyst integration. In addition to chemical separation, the efficiency of electron (hole) and H+ transport are critical for the development of nanoscale integrated solar-fuel systems. The recent progress in the quantitative assessment of these transport properties described in this article provides guidance for designing assemblies for the incorporation of nanoscale photosynthetic units into efficient macroscale photosystems.
A critical task of developing macroscale artificial photosystems based on such nanoscale integrated units is to retain the membrane separation of the catalytic oxidation sites and the O2 evolving from the reduction sites and the emerging fuel product at all length scales, from the nanometer up to inch-sized units and beyond. For semiconductor nanoparticulate Z-scheme tandem light absorbers featuring a graphene ohmic contact and metal (or metal oxide) co-catalysts on either side, a possible approach is to replace the perforated Si wafer referred to in Section 3 with a free-standing inch-sized porous (∼1–10 μ) silica or alumina support. Each pore would be covered by a graphene sheet decorated with the nanoparticle photocatalysts, shown in Fig. 12c in the form of nanorods. In this way, the membrane separation of the catalytic half reactions and evolving products would extend to the macroscale. Both silica and alumina supports are known to be able to provide an adequate adhesion of the graphene layers by van der Waals forces between an exfoliated single graphene sheet and the oxide surface to withstand the development of leaks.33 For MOF-supported molecular light-absorber/catalyst systems with a graphene membrane serving as an ohmic contact for the Z-scheme, whose nanoscale integration is outlined in Section 5, a similar macroscale construct may be feasible. Here, continued improvement of the efficiency of electron (or hole) transfer through the frameworks by fine-tuning the MOF electronic states is another urgent task to pursue.
Whether such a single square-inch sheet exposed to sunlight is adequate for productively utilizing the majority of the impinging photons at maximum intensity, or whether a stack of multiple sheets is required, will depend mainly on two factors. One is the loading density of the photocatalyst nanoparticles (or molecular photocatalysts), and the other is the areal H+ conductivity of the graphene. As mentioned in Section 3, RGO sheets typically feature a sufficient density of defects such that the sheet can sustain an areal H+ conductivity of 1 S cm−2 or higher. Defect-free single graphene sheets have an areal H+ conductivity around 0.05 S cm−2, which would require up to 20 stacked sheets for sustaining an adequate H+ flux under maximum solar irradiation. In this case, the sheet facets would need to be oriented such that the reactant spaces between the sheets would alternate between O2 evolution and fuel production.
For assemblies of Co oxide-silica core–shell nanotube photosynthetic units featuring ultrathin silica membranes with embedded molecular wires, square-inch-sized nanotube arrays (Fig. 8) provide one approach for extending the product separation from the nano to the macroscale. Completion of the nanotube array by installing a top and bottom cover plate with the nanotube opening piercing through them, as pictured in Fig. 12d, requires replacement of the sacrificial Si nanorod template approach by the anodized aluminum oxide (AAO) method.132–139 The use of AAO as sacrificial template for growing core–shell nanotube arrays by ALD has been well established.134,137,138 Installation of the top and bottom SiO2 covers of the nanotube array involves performing sequences consisting of selective partial AAO etching, temporary protection by organic fillers, silica ALD, and mechanical polishing, as previously demonstrated for the fabrication of various nanotube and nanorod arrays.132,137,139 The flexibility of the AAO method for tuning the tube diameter, length, and pitch, CO2 and H2O gas flow, and photocatalysis product desorption, as well as the photonic properties, can allow for optimization of the system for achieving the maximum sunlight to fuel conversion efficiency.
Beyond graphene and silica, the continued exploration of inorganic 2D materials as ultrathin membranes for artificial photosystems is important. An example is the broad class of 2D charge-conducting MXenes, for which exploration of their potential for adequate H+ conductivity is a key next task to pursue.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Director, Office of Science, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, Division of Chemical, Geological and Biosciences of the US Department of Energy under contract no. DE-AC02-05CH11231. Funding for support of the work on ultrathin silica membranes was in part provided by the Energy and Biosciences Institute through the EBI-Shell program.
References

          IPCC, Climate Change 2022: Mitigation of Climate Change. Contribution of Working Group III to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, ed. P. R. Shukla, J. Skea, R. Slade, A. Al Khourdajie, R. van Diemen, D. McCollum, M. Pathak, S. Some, P. Vyas, R. Fradera, M. Belkacemi, A. Hasija, G. Lisboa, S. Luz and J. Malley, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK and New York, NY, USA,  2022 Search PubMed .
S. Y. Reece, J. A. Hamel, K. Sung, T. D. Jarvi, A. J. Esswein, J. J. H. Pijpers and D. G. Nocera, Science, 2011, 334, 645–648 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Verlage, S. Hu, R. Liu, J. R. Jones, K. Sun, C. Xiang, N. S. Lewis and H. A. Atwater, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3166–3172 RSC .
K. Sun, R. Liu, Y. Chen, E. Verlage, N. S. Lewis and C. Xiang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600379 CrossRef .
J. L. Young, M. A. Steiner, H. Doescher, R. M. France, J. A. Turner and T. G. Deutsch, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17028 CrossRef CAS .
F. F. Abdi, L. Han, A. H. M. Smets, M. Zeman, B. Dam and R. van de Krol, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2195 CrossRef PubMed .
W. H. Cheng, M. H. Richter, I. Sullivan, D. M. Larsen, C. Xiang, B. S. Brunschwig and H. A. Atwater, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 470–476 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, J. Tang, H. M. Chen, B. Liu and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2989–2992 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Luo, J. M. Im, M. T. Mayer, M. Schreier, M. K. Nazeeruddin, N. G. Park, S. D. Tilley, H. J. Fan and M. Graetzel, Science, 2014, 345, 1593–1596 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhou, R. Liu, K. Sun, Y. Chen, E. Verlage, S. A. Francis, N. S. Lewis and C. Xiang, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 764–770 CrossRef CAS .
W. H. Cheng, M. H. Richter, M. M. May, J. Ohlmann, D. Lackner, F. Dimroth, T. Hannappel, H. A. Atwater and H. J. Lewerenz, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1795–1800 CrossRef CAS .

          N. A. Campbell, J. B. Reece, M. R. Taylor and E. J. Simon, Biology: Concepts & Connections, Educational Pearson, New York, 5th edn,  2006 Search PubMed .

Anoxygenic Photosynthetic Bacteria, ed. R. E. Blankenship, M. T. Madigan and C. E. Bauer, Kluwer Academic, Dortrecht,  1995 Search PubMed .
S. Chabi, K. M. Papadantonakis, N. S. Lewis and M. S. Freund, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1320–1338 RSC .
S. L. McFarlane, B. A. Day, K. McEleney, M. S. Freund and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1700–1703 RSC .
J. M. Spurgeon, M. G. Walter, J. Zhou, P. A. Kohl and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1772–1780 RSC .
K. Domen, A. Kudo, A. Shinozaki, A. Tanaka, K. Maruya and T. Onishi, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1986, 356–357 RSC .
A. Kudo, A. Tanaka, K. Domen, K. Maruya, K. Aika and T. Onishi, J. Catal., 1988, 111, 67–76 CrossRef CAS .
Y. I. Kim, S. Salim, M. J. Huq and T. E. Mallouk, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1991, 113, 9561–9563 CrossRef CAS .
Y. I. Kim, S. J. Atherton, E. S. Brigham and T. E. Mallouk, J. Phys. Chem., 1993, 97, 11802–11810 CrossRef CAS .
G. B. Saupe, T. E. Mallouk, W. Kim and R. H. Schmehl, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 2508–2513 CrossRef CAS .
R. Abe, K. Shinmei, N. Koumaura, K. Hara and B. Ohtani, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 16872–16884 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Oshima, S. Nishioka, Y. Kikuchi, S. Hirai, K. Yanagisawa, M. Eguchi, Y. Miseki, T. Yokoi, T. Yui, K. Kimoto, K. Sayama, O. Ishitani, T. E. Mallouk and K. Maeda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 8412–8420 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Maeda and T. E. Mallouk, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2019, 92, 38–54 CrossRef CAS .
I. M. Tsvetkov, E. R. Buyonova, S. V. Lymar and V. N. Parmon, React. Kinet. Catal. Lett., 1983, 22, 159–163 CrossRef CAS .
G. Steinberg-Yfrach, P. A. Liddell, S. C Hung, A. L. Moore, D. Gust and T. A. Moore, Nature, 1997, 385, 239–241 CrossRef CAS .
G. Steinberg-Yfrach, J. L. Rigaud, E. N. Durantini, A. L. Moore, D. Gust and T. A. Moore, Nature, 1998, 392, 479–482 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Hu, Z. Wang, L. Cao, L. Zeng, C. Zhang, W. Lin and C. Wang, Nat. Chem., 2021, 13, 358–366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Hong, Y. M. Lee, W. Nam and S. Fukuzumi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2022, 144, 695–700 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Itagaki, S. Takizawa, H. C. Chang and A. Nakada, Dalton Trans., 2022, 51, 9467–9476 RSC .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, M. I. Katsnelson, I. V. Grigorieva, S. V. Dubonos and A. A. Firsov, Nature, 2005, 438, 197–200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Geim, Science, 2009, 324, 1530–1534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hu, M. Lozada-Hidalgo, F. C. Wang, A. Mishchenko, F. Schedin, R. R. Nair, E. W. Hill, D. W. Boukhvalov, M. I. Katsnelson, R. A. W. Dryfe, I. V. Grigorieva, H. A. Wu and A. K. Geim, Nature, 2014, 516, 227–230 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Bullock and C. Bussy, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 6, 1900229 CrossRef .
J. S. Bunch, S. S. Verbridge, J. S. Alden, A. M. van der Zande, J. M. Parpia, H. G. Craighead and P. L. McEuen, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2458–2462 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183–191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Mogg, S. Zhang, G. P. Hao, K. Gopinadhan, D. Barry, B. L. Liu, H. M. Cheng, A. K. Geim and M. Lozada Hidalgo, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 4243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Lozada Hidalgo, S. Hu, O. Marshall, A. Mishchenko and A. N. Grigorenko, Science, 2016, 351, 68–70 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Lozada Hidalgo, S. Zhang, S. Hu, V. G. Kravets, F. J. Rodriguez, A. Berdyugin, A. Grigorenko and A. K. Geim, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 300–303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. I. Walker, P. Braeuinger Weimer, R. S. Weatherup, S. Hofmann and U. F. Keyser, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 107, 213104 CrossRef .
A. Iwase, Y. H. Ng, Y. Ishiguro, A. Kudo and R. Amal, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 11054–11057 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zhou, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4920–4935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, F. Wang and J. He, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 11291–11297 RSC .
A. Iwase, S. Yoshino, T. Takayama, Y. H. Ng, R. Amal and A. Kudo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 10260–10264 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Li, Y. Zhou, H. Li, Q. Xu, X. Meng, X. Wang, M. Xiao and Z. Zou, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 800–803 RSC .
H. Li, Y. Zhou, W. Tu, J. Ye and Z. Zou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 998–1013 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, W. Tu, Y. Zhou and Z. Zou, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1500389 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Low, J. Yu, M. Jaroniec, S. Wageh and A. A. Al-Ghamdi, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1601694 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Wang, L. Yin and G. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 3460–3463 RSC .
C. Liu, J. Tang, H. M. Cheng, B. Liu and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2989–2992 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Ng, A. Iwase, A. Kudo and R. Amal, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2607–2612 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, X. Lv, Y. Li, Y. Wang and J. Li, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 380–386 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Tu, Y. Zhou, Q. Liu, S. Yan, S. Bao, X. Wang, M. Xiao and Z. Zou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1743–1749 CrossRef CAS .
W. Tu, Y. Zhou and Z. Zou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 4996–5008 CrossRef CAS .
K. P. Loh, Q. L. Bao, P. K. Ang and J. X. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 2277–2289 RSC .
R. Czerw, B. Foley, D. Tekleab, A. Rubio, P. M. Ajayan and D. L. Carroll, Phys. Rev. B, 2002, 66, 033408 CrossRef .
V. Georgakilas, M. Otyepka, A. B. Bourlinos, V. Chandra, N. Kim, K. C. Kemp, P. Hobza, R. Zboril and K. S. Kim, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 6156–6214 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. P. Surwade, S. N. Smirnov, I. V. Vlassiouk, R. R. Unocic, G. M. Veith, S. Dai and S. M. Mahurin, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 459–464 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Jo, G. Katsoukis and H. Frei, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1909262 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, I. Weiss, I. Rudra, W. J. Jo, S. Kellner, G. Katsoukis, E. Galoppini and H. Frei, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 23532–23546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          W. J. Jo, H. Zhang, G. Katsoukis and H. Frei, in Ultrathin Oxide Layers for Solar and Electrocatalytic Systems, Energy Environ. Ser., ed. H. Frei and D. V. Esposito, The Royal Society of Chemistry, London, 2022, vol. 30, ch. 11, pp. 298–341 Search PubMed .
G. Katsoukis and H. Frei, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 31422–31432 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. Soo, A. Agiral, A. Bachmeier and H. Frei, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 17104–17116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Agiral, H. S. Soo and H. Frei, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 2264–2273 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Cornejo, H. Sheng, E. Edri, C. A. Ajo-Franklin and H. Frei, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2263 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Katsoukis, W. J. Jo and H. Frei, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 18905–18913 CrossRef CAS .
E. Edri and H. Frei, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 28326–28334 CrossRef CAS .
G. Katsoukis and H. Frei, J. Chem. Phys., 2019, 150, 041501 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Edri, J. K. Cooper, I. D. Sharp, D. M. Guldi and H. Frei, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 5458–5466 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. Marcus and N. Sutin, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 1985, 811, 265–322 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sun, I. A. Moreno Hernandez, W. C. Schmidt, X. Zhou, J. C. Crompton, R. Liu, F. H. Saadi, Y. Chen, K. M. Papadantonakis and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 87–1002 Search PubMed .
N. Y. Labrador, E. L. Songcuan, C. DeSilva, H. Chen, S. J. Kurdziel, R. K. Ramachandran, C. Detavernier and D. V. Esposito, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 1767–1778 CrossRef CAS .

Solar Spectra, National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Golden, CO, USA, https://rredc.nrel.gov/solar/spectra/am1.5, accessed February 2023 Search PubMed.
C. J. T. de Grotthuss, Ann. Chim., 1806, 25, 54–74 Search PubMed .
G. Lockwood and S. H. Carofalini, J. Chem. Phys., 2009, 131, 074703 CrossRef PubMed .
J. C. Fogarty, H. M. Aktulga, A. Y. Grama, A. C. T. van Duin and S. A. Pandit, J. Chem. Phys., 2010, 132, 174704 CrossRef PubMed .
H. A. Kurtz and S. P. Karna, IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., 1999, 46, 1574–1579 CAS .
M. L. Macnaughtan, H. S. Soo and H. Frei, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 7874–7885 CrossRef CAS .
W. Kim, G. Yuan, B. A. McClure and H. Frei, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 11034–11042 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. D. Hill, G. Katsoukis and H. Frei, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 20176–20185 CrossRef CAS .
W. Kim, E. Edri and H. Frei, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 1634–1645 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Kim, B. A. McClure, E. Edri and H. Frei, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 3221–3243 RSC .
E. Edri, S. Aloni and H. Frei, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 533–541 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Clough, J. W. Yoo, M. H. Mecklenburg and S. C. Marinescu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 118–121 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. S. Xie, G. Skorupskii and M. Dinca, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 8536–8580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. M. Johnson, S. Ilic and A. J. Morris, ACS Cent. Sci., 2021, 7, 445–453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Furukawa, K. E. Cordova, M. O'Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, Science, 2013, 341, 1230444 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Virmani, J. M. Rotter, A. Maehringer, T. von Zons, A. Godt, T. Bein, S. Wuttke and D. D. Medina, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 4812–4819 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Sumida, D. L. Rogow, J. A. Mason, T. M. McDonald, E. D. Bloch, Z. R. Herm, T. H. Bae and J. R. Long, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 724–781 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. P. Suh, H. J. Park, T. K. Prasad and D. W. Lim, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 782–835 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Mason, M. Veenstra and J. R. Long, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 32–51 RSC .
K. Adil, Y. Belmabkhout, R. S. Pillai, A. Cadiau, P. M. Bhatt, A. H. Assen, G. Maurin and M. Eddaoudi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 3402–3430 RSC .
S. Zhang, L. Shen, H. Deng, Q. Liu, X. You, J. Yuan, Z. Jiang and S. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2108457 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Takaishi, M. Hosoda, T. Kajiwara, H. Miyasaka, M. Yamashita, Y. Nakanishi, Y. Kitagawa, K. Yamaguchi, A. Kobayashi and H. Kitagawa, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 9048–9050 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Aubrey, B. M. Wiers, S. C. Andrews, T. Sakurai, S. E. Reyes-Lillo, S. M. Hamed, C. J. Yu, L. E. Darago, J. A. Mason, J. O. Baeg, F. Grandjean, G. J. Long, S. Seki, J. B. Neaton, P. Yang and J. R. Long, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 625–632 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. S. Xie, L. Sun, R. Wan, S. S. Park, J. A. DeGayner, C. H. Hendon and M. Dinca, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 7411–7414 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Gandara, F. J. Uribe-Romo, D. K. Britt, H. Furukawa, L. Lei, R. Cheng, X. Duan, M. O'Keefe and O. M. Yaghi, Chem.–Eur. J., 2012, 18, 10595–10601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. G. Park, M. L. Aubrey, J. Oktawiec, K. Chakarawet, L. E. Darago, F. Grandjean, G. J. Long and J. R. Long, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 8526–8534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. C. Narayan, T. Miyakai, S. Seki and M. Dinca, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 12932–12935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Park, E. R. Hontz, L. Sun, C. H. Hendon, A. Walsh, T. Van Voorhis and M. Dinca, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 1774–1777 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. W. Day, D. K. Bediako, M. Rezaee, L. R. Parent, G. Skorupskii, M. Q. Arguilla, C. H. Hendon, I. Stassen, N. Gianneschi, P. Kim and M. Dinca, ACS Cent. Sci., 2019, 5, 1959–1964 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. M. Miner, T. Fukushima, D. Sheberla, L. Sun, Y. Surendranath and M. Dinca, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10942 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Solomos, F. J. Claire and T. J. Kempa, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 23537–23562 RSC .
M. Ko, L. Mendecki and K. A. Mirica, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 7873–7891 RSC .
W. Zheng, C. S. Tsang, L. Y. S. Lee and K. Y. Wong, Mater. Today Chem., 2019, 12, 34–60 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ye, L. Gong, S. Xiang, Z. Zhang and B. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1907090 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. T. T. Nguyen, H. Furukawa, F. Gandara, C. A. Trickett, H. M. Jeong, K. E. Cordova and O. M. Yaghi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 15394–15397 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sadakiyo, T. Yamada and H. Kitagawa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 9906–9907 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Dong, M. Pfeffermann, H. Liang, Z. Zheng, X. Zhu, J. Zhang and X. Feng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 12058–12063 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Dong, Z. Zheng, D. C. Tranca, J. Zhang, N. Chandrasekhar, S. Liu, X. Zhuang, G. Seifert and X. Feng, Chem.–Eur. J., 2017, 23, 2255–2260 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. A. Downes, A. J. Clough, K. Chen, J. W. Yoo and S. C. Marinescu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 1719–1727 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhao, Y. Wang, J. Dong, C. T. He, H. Yin, P. An, K. Zhao, X. Zhang, C. Gao, L. Zhang, J. Lv, J. Wang, J. Zhang, A. M. Khattak, N. A. Khan, Z. Wei, J. Zhang, S. Liu, H. Zhao and Z. Tang, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16184 CrossRef CAS .
J. Duan, S. Chen and C. Zhao, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Navalon, A. Dhakshinamoorthy, M. Alvaro, B. Ferrer and H. Garcia, Chem. Rev., 2023, 123, 445–490 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lin, Y. Pineda Galvan, W. A. Maza, C. C. Epley, J. Zhu, M. C. Kessinger, Y. Pushkar and A. J. Morris, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 514–522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wu, J. Wang, W. Jin and Z. Wu, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 18497–18522 RSC .
N. Kornienko, Y. Zhao, C. K. Kley, D. Kim, S. Lin, C. J. Chang, O. M. Yaghi and P. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 14129–14135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lin, C. S. Diercks, Y. B. Zhang, N. Kornienko, E. M. Nichols, Y. Zhao, A. R. Paris, D. Kim, P. Yang, O. M. Yaghi and C. J. Chang, Science, 2015, 349, 1208–1213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Hod, M. D. Sampson, P. Deria, C. P. Kubiak, O. K. Fahra and J. T. Hupp, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 6302–6309 CrossRef CAS .
R. Matheu, E. Gutierrez-Puebla, M. A. Monge, C. S. Diercks, J. Kang, M. S. Prevot, X. Pei, N. Hanikel, B. Zhang, P. Yang and O. M. Yaghi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 17081–17085 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Xue, C. Li, F. L. Li, H. W. Gu, P. Braustein and J. P. Lang, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 4816–4825 RSC .
P. Thangasamy, S. Shanmuganathan and V. Subramanian, Nanoscale Adv., 2020, 2, 2073–2079 RSC .
Z. M. Wang, W. Peng, Y. Takenaka, N. Yoshizawa, K. Kosuge, W. Wang and G. A. Ozin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1704066 CrossRef .
K. Jayaramulu, S. Mukherjee, D. M. Morales, D. P. Dubal, A. K. Nanjundan, A. Schneemann, J. Masa, S. Kment, W. Schuhmann, M. Otyepka, R. Zboril and R. A. Fischer, Chem. Rev., 2022, 122, 17241–17338 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wang, K. N. Hui, K. S. Hui, S. Peng and Y. Xu, Chem. Sci., 2021, 12, 5737–5766 RSC .
Y. Zheng, S. Zheng, H. Xue and H. Pang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1804950 CrossRef .
J. Multia and M. Karppinen, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 9, 2200210 CrossRef CAS .
F. Niu, D. Wang, F. Li, Y. Liu, S. Shen and T. J. Meyer, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1900399 CrossRef .
T. T. Li, B. Shan and T. J. Meyer, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 629–636 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Kamire, M. B. Majewski, W. L. Hoffeditz, B. T. Phelan, O. K. Farha, J. T. Hupp and M. R. Wasielewski, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 541–549 RSC .
S. Zhang, L. Shen, H. Deng, Q. Liu, X. You, J. Yuan, Z. Jiang and S. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2108457 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Perego, S. Franz, M. Bestetti, L. Cattaneo, S. Brivio, G. Tallarida and S. Spiga, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 045302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wen, R. Xu, Y. Mi and Y. Lei, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 244–250 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. A. Park, S. Liu, Y. Oh, P. A. Salvador, G. S. Rohrer and M. F. Islam, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 2150–2159 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Marden, M. C. Asensio, J. Avila, P. Dudin, A. Barinov, P. Moras, P. M. Shewerdyaeva, T. W. White, I. Maskery, G. Costantini, N. R. Wilson and G. R. Bell, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2013, 7, 643–646 CrossRef .
Y. Tchoe, J. Jo, H. S. Kim, H. Kim, H. Baek, K. Lee, D. Yoo, W. J. Choi, M. Kim and G. C. Yi, NPG Asia Mater., 2021, 13, 33 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Sander, M. J. Cote, W. Gu, B. M. Kile and C. P. Tripp, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 2052–2057 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ruiz Clavijo, O. Caballero Calero and M. Martin-Gonzalez, Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 2227–2265 RSC .
S. J. Ku, G. C. Jo, C. H. Bak, S. M. Kim, Y. R. Shin, K. H. Kim, S. H. Kwon and J. B. Kim, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 085301 CrossRef PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Z-scheme tandem system for visible-light-driven overall water splitting using Al2O3-modified niobate nanosheets with a Pt nanoparticle catalyst for H+ reduction compartmentalized in the interlayer spaces and I−/I3− as the electron-transfer shuttle. Efficiency enhancement is achieved by blocking the access of I3− to Pt by electrostatic repulsion of the negatively charged niobate sheets. Reproduced from ref. 23 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 2  Graphene. (a) Defect-free single graphene layer. (b) Graphene oxide. (c) Reduced graphene oxide (RGO). Reproduced from ref. 34 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2019. WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) Carbon (1s) XPS of graphene oxide before (top) and after reduction by the visible-light excitation of a BiVO4 photocathode for 3 h (bottom). The C–O (epoxy and hydroxyl, 286.6 eV) and carboxylate CO (288.9 eV) signals showed sharp decreases, while the C–C signal (284.5 eV) increased. Reproduced from ref. 51 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 3  Graphene serving as an ohmic contact in a Z-scheme tandem photosystem. (a) ohmic contact enabling the charge flow of a TiO2–Si Z-scheme heterostructure for photocatalytic H2O splitting. The photogenerated electrons in Si and holes in TiO2 move to the aqueous interface to perform water splitting, while the holes in Si and electrons in TiO2 recombine at the ohmic contact between the two semiconductors. Reproduced from ref. 50 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2013. (b) Photosystem for H2O splitting with graphene contact between BiVO4–CoOx oxidation and CuGaS–Pt reduction photocatalysts. Reproduced from ref. 44 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2016. (c) Photosystem for CO2 reduction by H2O with graphene contact between CdS oxidation and Fe2V4O13 reduction photocatalyst. Reproduced from ref. 45 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 4  Ultrathin amorphous silica membrane with embedded molecular wires. (a) Schematic of visible-light-driven hole transfer from transient CoIII formed by ZrIVOCoII → ZrIIIOCoIII charge-transfer photoexcitation via the embedded molecular wire to the Co3O4 catalyst. Reproduced from ref. 62 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2018. (b) Energy level alignment of a light absorber, PV3 wire, and catalyst for light-induced directional charge transfer for driving H2O oxidation and CO2 reduction. Oxidation and reduction catalysis occur at the gas/solid interface, with an H+ gradient developing across the nanomembrane during photocatalytic H2O oxidation. The SiO2 membrane blocks the crossover of reactants and products, except for H+. Adapted from ref. 82 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 5  Short-circuit photocurrent measurements for assessing electron conductivity. (a) Schematic of a three-electrode cell with a working Pt electrode onto which 12 nm Co3O4 followed by a 3 nm silica membrane with embedded TMS-Am-PV3-SO3 wires were deposited. Covalently anchored [Ru(bpy)2(dcbpy)]2+ light absorbers are also shown. (b) Wire density dependence of the photocurrent. (c) Energy level alignment of the HOMO of the molecular wires with the HOMO of the Ru light-absorber and Co3O4 catalyst valence band. Anchored wires are abbreviated OMe for E-PV3-OMe, SO3Et for E-PV3-SO3Et, F5 for E-PV3-F5, and SO3 for A-PV3-SO3. The corresponding molecular structures are shown in Fig. 6. (d) Photocurrent dependence on the HOMO potential of the embedded wire molecule, normalized for a wire density of 0.6 nm−2. Reproduced from ref. 60 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 6  Functionalized wire molecules with electron-donating and -withdrawing groups. (a) Free wires. (b) Wires attached to an anchor by an amide or triazole linker. The corresponding HOMO potentials of the wire linked to the anchor (vs. NHE) are shown in the schematic in Fig. 4c. Reproduced from ref. 60 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 7  Proton conductivity and O2-blocking property of an ultrathin silica membrane. (a) Cyclic voltammogram (CV) of a bare Pt electrode (black trace) and Pt covered with 2, 4, and 6 nm SiO2 (red, blue, and green traces) at 298 K in N2-saturated aqueous 0.5 M Na2SO4 solution at pH 4. (b) Electrochemical impedance spectra in the N2-saturated pH 4 electrolyte solution used for (a). Applied potential 0.096 V vs. RHE. The dots in the plot are the experimental data while the solid lines represent the results of fitting the data to the equivalent circuit (Randles circuit) shown in the inset. (c) CV in O2-bubbled electrolyte solution under the same conditions as used for (a). Reproduced from ref. 59 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2019. WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 8  Co oxide-silica core–shell nanotube featuring a silica nanomembrane as a complete photosynthetic unit for CO2 photoreduction by H2O. (a) Schematic of the design. (b) HR-TEM image showing a longitudinal cross-section of a single Co3O4–SiO2 core–shell nanotube wall. Inset: fast Fourier transform (FFT) image of the crystalline Co3O4 layer. Reproduced from ref. 83 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2018. (c) Schematic of a core–shell nanotube array. (d) SEM of a section of the macroscale Co3O4/SiO2/TiO2 nanotube array after complete removal of the sacrificial Si template. Scale bar: 500 nm. Reproduced from ref. 61 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  Highly electron conductive mixed-valence Fe azolate MOFs. (a) Iron tetrazolate MOF crystal structure (left) and (Fe–N–N)∞ chains serving as charge-transport conduits (right). Fe, green dots; N, blue dots. Reproduced from ref. 96 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2018. (b) Structure of the secondary building unit of MOF Fe(1,2,3-triazolate)2(BF4)x (left) and Fe–N sublattice (right). Reproduced from ref. 98 with permission from the American Chemical Society. copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 10  Highly conductive two-dimensional MOFs. (a) 2D honeycomb layers of Cu3(HOTP)2 with square planar Cu centers bridging triphenylene-based linkers (top). The continuous slipped stacking arrangement of Cu3(HOTP)2 layers providing π–π interaction is also shown (bottom). Reproduced from ref. 101 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2019. (b) Two-dimensional layered structure of Ni3(HITP)2 MOF. Reproduced from ref. 102 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 11  Ultrathin bimetallic NiCo MOF for electrocatalytic O2 reduction. (a) MOF crystal structure. (b) Polarization curves of the bimetallic NiCo MOF (dark blue trace) compared with monometallic Ni (red), Co (light blue), RuO2 (purple), and bulk NiCo MOF (black). Reproduced from ref. 112 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 12  Proposed designs using ultrathin conductive separation membranes for nanoscale integrated photosystems. (a) Schematic of a graphene membrane sandwiched between nanoporous silica layers of tens of nm thickness with vertically aligned pores. Reproduced from ref. 123 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2017. WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) MOF with the structure Zr6O4(OH)4(bdc-NH2)6, bdc-NH2 = 2-amino-1,4-benzenedicarboxylate (blue/yellow) interfaced with a graphene membrane (red). Reproduced from ref. 124 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2022. (c) Section of an array of a semiconductor particle Z-scheme, here in the form of nanorods, with graphene sheet serving as the ohmic contact of the photoanode/cathode and as a proton-transmitting separation membrane. Portion of figure adapted from ref. 136 under Creative Commons licence https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. (d) Complete Co oxide-silica nanotube array with a top and bottom cover for permanent separation, at all length scales, of the evolving CO2-reduction products (gallery space between the top and bottom covers) and O2 (inside the tubes and external space). Reproduced from ref. 82 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
