Recent developments of photoelectrochemical biosensors for food analysis  - Journal of Materials Chemistry B (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9TB01644A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9TB01644A
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. B, 2019, 7, 7283-7300Recent developments of photoelectrochemical biosensors for food analysis

        
          
            Lan 
            Ge
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Qian 
            Liu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Nan 
            Hao
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Wang 
            Kun
          
        
      *ab
aKey Laboratory of Modern Agriculture Equipment and Technology, School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang 212013, P. R. China. E-mail: haonanlabs@163.com; wangkun@ujs.edu.cn
bKey Laboratory of Sensor Analysis of Tumor Marker, Ministry of Education, College of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, Qingdao University of Science and Technology, Qingdao 266042, P. R. China
Received 
      4th August 2019
    , Accepted 24th October 2019First published on 31st October 2019AbstractThe scientific analysis of food safety issues and the establishment of rapid and efficient food safety detection methods are of great significance for safeguarding the health of consumers, ensuring the healthy development of food safety systems and realizing food safety strategies. As an emerging electrochemical analysis technology, photoelectrochemical (PEC) biosensors, which combine the advantages of biological analysis and optical analysis, have attracted extensive attention. Due to the complete separation of the excitation source (light) and the detection signal (current), the background signal of PEC biosensors is greatly decreased, and their sensitivity is high. The detection principle is that under illumination, the biological recognition effect between the bio-specific recognition element and the corresponding target causes a change in the signal generated by the photoactive nanomaterial. This review aims to cover the most recent advances of PEC biosensing in the field of food analysis, including mycotoxins, heavy metals, antibiotics, and pesticide residues. The future prospects in this field are also discussed.
1. Introduction
Photoelectrochemistry is a new branch of science developed on the basis of electrochemistry; it mainly involves the influence of light on photoelectrodes or interface materials and the photoelectric conversion process.1–3 The core of this research is the photoelectric conversion process; the photoelectric nanomaterial absorbs photons and is in an excited state, and the generated carriers undergo charge separation and transfer, completing the process of converting light energy into electric energy.4–6 During the photoelectrochemical (PEC) process, the photogenerated electron–hole pairs of the photoelectric nanomaterial are separated and transferred to the interface between the electrode surface and the electrolyte solution to generate an oxidation–reduction reaction, thus generating a photocurrent or photovoltage.7–9 Electrochemical analysis is an analytical method based on the electrical and electrochemical properties of substances.10,11 PEC sensors are a new sensing technology based on the development of electrochemical sensors, in which the photoelectric conversion ability of photoactive nanomaterials is usually utilized to detect the content of the target.12,13 Under illumination conditions, a PEC sensor uses the received optical signal as the excitation source, and the converted electrical signal acts as the response signal; this can be considered as the reverse of electrochemiluminescence (ECL).14–16 The background signal of the PEC sensing technology is much lower than those of traditional electrochemical detection methods due to the difference in the energy forms of the excitation source signal and the converted electrical signal.17–19
With the development of electrochemical analysis and biological analysis, PEC bioanalysis has attracted enormous attention.20–22 The use of a PEC biosensor is a promising analytical technique newly developed in the fields of bioanalytical chemistry and PEC sensing owing to its attractive potential for future bioanalysis with high sensitivity and specificity.23–25 A PEC biosensor not only inherits a series of the advantages of traditional electrochemical bioanalysis, which can realize rapid, simple, sensitive and specific detection of a target, but also has the characteristics of low cost, simple equipment and facile miniaturization compared to optical methods; therefore, PEC biosensors have been widely applied in the field of bioanalysis.26–28 The key to construct PEC biosensors lies in the design and preparation of photoelectric active nanomaterials with high photoelectric conversion efficiency and unique biocompatibility.29–31 An excellent photoactive nanomaterial can amplify the detection signal to improve sensitivity and also can be used as a carrier of biomolecules to achieve specific detection.32,33 Therefore, great efforts have been made in the design of photoactive nanomaterials for the construction of highly efficient PEC biosensors. These photoelectrical functional nanomaterials include organic/inorganic semiconductors, semiconductor–semiconductor nanocomposites, semiconductor–carbon-based nanocomposites, biomaterials and other nanocomposites.34–37 Photoactive nanomaterials with various structures have excellent electrical conductivity, superior PEC properties and unique biocompatibility; thus, various nanomaterials are applied to construct PEC biosensor platforms, which can achieve high sensitivity and good specificity for target detection.
It is said that “Food is the paramount necessity of the people.”38 As the material premise of human survival and development, food is the essential foundation for the reproduction of human society; it should be non-toxic, harmless, and have corresponding nutritional value, while not causing chronic, subacute or acute harm to the human body.39,40 However, with the development of industrial society, the use of large numbers of pesticides in agricultural production and the discharge of industrial wastewater have caused some chemical pollution of food (including pesticide residues, heavy metal ions, mycotoxins, and antibiotics), which poses a serious threat to human health.41,42 Therefore, the establishment of rapid and efficient food safety detection methods is of great significance for safeguarding the health of consumers, ensuring the healthy development of food safety systems, and realizing food safety strategies. Currently, various analytical methods for food analysis have been developed, including high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC),43 liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS),44 colorimetric analysis,45,46 capillary electrophoresis (CE),47 fluorescence,48 and chemiluminescence.49 Although the aforementioned classical methods can provide precise and sensitive detection in food analysis, all these methods usually have at least one restriction, such as time-consuming operation procedures, expensive equipment or professional technical skills. Therefore, it is urgently needed to develop a rapid, simple, low-cost and specific method for effective detection in food analysis. Thus, PEC biosensors have attracted scientific attention as an emerging analytical method due to their advantages of low cost, rapidity, high sensitivity and good selectivity; increasing efforts are being devoted to the development of PEC biosensors for food analysis.
As can be seen in Fig. 1, the development of novel photoactive nanomaterials and the appearance of effective sensing strategies are two important factors in constructing PEC biosensors. This review summarizes the latest progress of photoactive nanomaterials and presents an overview of the latest applications of PEC biosensors in food analysis.
 Fig. 1  Schematic of the instrument composition, detection principle and applications of PEC biosensors. 
2. Principles of PEC biosensors
2.1 Composition of PEC biosensors
A PEC biosensing setup is mainly composed of a light source, electrochemical workstation and signal acquisition system. In contrast to electroanalytical methods, there are two essential key factors in PEC bioanalysis: one is a photoelectric active material based on efficient photoelectric conversion and unique biocompatibility, and the other is a biological recognition component that is in direct contact with the sensor. Photoactive nanomaterials are generally organic and inorganic semiconductor nanomaterials, and biological recognition components include enzymes, antibodies, and nucleic acids.8,50 Typical PEC sensors require an excitation light source, generally ultraviolet or visible light. Ultraviolet light can excite photoactive nanomaterials to produce high photocurrent, which readily results in damage to the biomolecules.51,52 Thus, visible light-responsive photoactive nanomaterials are more appropriate for fabricating PEC biosensors.
2.2 Mechanism of photocurrent generation
In a PEC biosensor, the important principle of conversion of light energy to an electrical signal is due to the existence of a photoactive semiconductor nanomaterial. As can be seen in Fig. 2, when the semiconductor nanomaterial is excited by light, photogenerated electrons and hole pairs of the semiconductor are generated. The electron donor D in the solution transfers electrons to the semiconductor to neutralize the holes, and electrons at the conduction band migrate to the electrodes, generating an anode photocurrent. Conversely, if the conduction band electrons are transferred to the electron acceptor A in solution, the electrode donates electrons to neutralize the holes in the semiconductor, producing a cathode photocurrent. Therefore, photoelectric conversion is realized inside the semiconductor.9
 Fig. 2  (A) Anodic and (B) cathodic photocurrent generation mechanisms of semiconductor nanoparticles (NPs) in connection with electrodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 9. Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society. 
2.3 Classification of PEC biosensors
According to their different biological recognition components, PEC biosensors are divided into DNA sensing, enzyme sensing, immunoassay, and cell sensing biosensors. DNA biosensors use integrated probe DNA as the biorecognition element, where the single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) probe fragment is initially immobilized on the surface of the photoactive material as the recognition layer for subsequent capture of the target DNA by a hybridization process.9,53,54 Based on this, the detection signal is changed to realize detection of the target.
The PEC immunoassay is a detection technique based on the specific recognition ability between antigens and antibodies and various chemical sensing methods. As a new sensing mode, PEC immunoassays utilize both the PEC process and immunochemical processes. Due to the insulating properties of most antigenic antibodies, it is necessary to introduce photoactive semiconductor elements to achieve a photoelectric immune reaction process.55–57
The PEC enzymatic sensing method is a biosensing technology which combines the catalytic reaction of an enzyme and the PEC reaction. In a PEC enzyme sensing system, the enzyme is generally in direct contact with the PEC active element. After the formation of the complexes, the photoactive elements interact with the products of the enzyme-catalyzed reaction, which results in a change in the photocurrent signal.58–60
Currently, PEC cell sensing technology generally utilizes the combination of a specific component of the cell surface and a specific recognition probe on the surface of the sensor. Then, a steric resistance effect is produced on the electrode, and the sensing analysis of the target cell is realized by the change in the PEC response.
2.4 Mechanism of PEC biosensor detection
PEC biosensors are a new detection technology that combines the properties of the PEC reaction and specific recognition of an analytical probe. The photoactive nanomaterials and the bio-specific recognition element used as the recognition probe are usually immobilized on the electrode surface by a covalent bond or an intermolecular force. The target combines with the recognition probe, which causes a change in the photocurrent of the photoactive nanomaterial through physical or chemical reactions. Therefore, it is possible to determine the specific content of the analyte through the change in the electrical signal.61–64
3. Photoactive nanomaterials
3.1 Semiconductors
Semiconductor nanomaterials are important photoactive nanomaterials in the field of PECs.65–67 The electronic states of the valence band and conduction band of the semiconductor will change depending on the influence of the temperature, light source, magnetic field or electric field, which will present unique photoelectric, photoluminescence, electroluminescence and thermoelectric properties.68 With the development of nanomaterial technology, the emergence of various semiconductor nanomaterials with excellent properties has greatly promoted the development of PEC biosensors.
Semiconductor oxides that can be processed in oxygen-containing environments display better stability. Due to their strong light absorption ability, facile separation of carriers and large specific surface areas, semiconductor oxides have broad application prospects.69 Classical semiconductor oxides such as TiO2,70 WO3,71 α-Fe2O3,72 ZnO73 and Cu2O74 are widely applied in the field of PECs. Wu et al. used defect-engineered TiO2 nanotube photonic crystals (TiO2 NTPCs) as photoactive nanomaterials. The synergy between the defect engineering for electronic structure modification and the morphology design improved the PEC performance of TiO2 NTPCs under near-infrared (NIR) illumination, thus promoting NIR PEC analysis as a versatile analysis method.75 Han et al.76 (Fig. 3A) employed oriented hierarchical ZnO flower-rod architectures (ZnO FRs) and DNA dendrimers. As a photoactive nanomaterial, the ZnO FRs produce a photocurrent of up to 23 μA. Once the probe DNA and the target DNA oligonucleotide are hybridized, the photogenerated electron transfer is inhibited, and the photocurrent intensity is decreased, thus achieving the purpose of detecting the DNA. These semiconductor oxides play great roles in the early stage of PEC analysis and promote the development of PEC sensors. However, due to their own defects, such as fast transfer of carriers, rapid recombination of photoinduced electron–hole pairs, response only to ultraviolet light, and poor surface chemical states, they cannot meet the challenge of the rapid development of PEC biosensing.
 Fig. 3  Schematics of PEC biosensors based on semiconductors: (A) schematic of (a) the fabrication of a proposed biosensor based on ZnO and (b) the formation processes of dendrimer DNA hybridization. Reproduced with permission from ref. 76. Copyright (2017) Tsinghua University Press and Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg. (B) Schematic of a signal-on PEC biosensor for a PNK assay with MnME@AuNPs-P2 catalytic insoluble precipitation on Bi2S3 nanorods as the photoactive material. Reproduced with permission from ref. 77. Copyright (2018) American Chemical Society. (C) Schematic of the fabricating steps of a PEC immunosensor based on LaFeO3 nanoparticles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 83. Copyright (2018) Tsinghua University Press and Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg. 
In order to meet this growing demand, increasing numbers of semiconductors have emerged, such as semiconducting metallic sulfides, multinary semiconductors, quantum dots (QDs), and semiconducting metallic sulfides, including Bi2S3,77 Ag2S,78 and CdS.79 Cui et al.77 developed a peroxide mimic bismuth sulfide (Bi2S3) nanorod-based PEC biosensor for signal-on detection of polynucleotide kinase (PNK) (Fig. 3B). This signal-on PEC biosensor exhibited high sensitivity, with a detection limit of 1.27 × 10−5 U mL−1, and an extremely large dynamic range of 5 orders of magnitude. A series of emerging multinary semiconductors, such as BiVO4,80 CuWO4,81 BiFeO3,82 LaFeO3,83 Bi2MoO6,84 and Bi2WO6,85 have been identified as promising photoactive nanomaterials. Liu et al.83 established a novel high-efficiency PEC immunoassay (Fig. 3C) based on LaFeO3 nanoparticles which were deposited on fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) conducting glass via dipping-lifting and calcination. The well-established PEC immunoassay showed a linear current response in the range of 0.1 pg mL−1 to 0.1 μg mL−1 and a detection limit as low as 33 fg mL−1.
However, the photogenerated electron–hole pairing of pristine semiconductor oxides has a fast recombination rate, which limits their application. In order to improve the PEC properties of these oxides, metal nanoparticles are introduced to suppress the recombination of photogenerated electron–hole pairs. Wang et al. prepared Au nanorod@TiO2 core–shell nanostructures (AuNR@TiO2) and a melanin-like L-DOPA polymer (PD). The AuNR core enhances the harvesting of long-wavelength light, and the AuNR@TiO2 core–shell structure enhances the electron transfer to TiO2. In addition, the novel PD/AuNR@TiO2 photocatalyst shows good biocompatibility and stability; it can be used as a versatile PD/AuNR@TiO2 biosensing platform to provide a biocompatible environment and improve detection sensitivity.61 Kang et al. designed a photoanode consisting of plasmonic gold nanoparticles-modified zinc oxide nanorod arrays (Au NPs @ZnO NRs) that was used in a glutathione PEC bioassay. Due to the introduction of the Au/ZnO interface, the heterostructure exhibited enhanced PEC properties. Under visible light irradiation, hot electrons from the surface plasmon resonance (SPR) of the Au NPs were injected into the adjacent ZnO and then driven to the photocathode to produce a good PEC response.2 Qiao et al. fabricated a simple and novel PEC sensor for selective detection of bisphenol A (BPA) based on Au nanoparticles to activate surface plasmon resonance of ZnO nanoparticles, demonstrating excellent analytical performance.86 The addition of metal particles greatly improves the photoelectric properties of metal semiconductors.
3.2 Semiconductor–semiconductor nanocomposites
Due to advances in nanotechnology, the emergence of semiconductor–semiconductor nanocomposites has attracted great attention. In order to obtain photoactive nanomaterials with excellent properties, various strategies are usually adopted to design and prepare nanomaterials, such as constructing heterojunctions and morphology control.
Heterojunctions are an effective method to promote effective separation and inhibit recombination of photogenerated electrons and holes. There have been many reports of heterostructures composed of various combinations of semiconductors for PEC biosensors.35,87–92 Zang et al.87 developed a CdS/MoS2 heterojunction-based PEC biosensor (Fig. 4A) for sensitive detection of DNA. Considering the high photoconversion efficiency of the CdS/MoS2 heterojunction, the biosensor showed favorable performance in a wide linear range, excellent sensitivity and desirable selectivity. A CuS–TiO2 heterojunction composite was prepared by Tang et al.92 and was then used to construct a PEC aptasensor for sensitive detection of microcystin-LR (MC-LR) in aquatic environments (Fig. 4B). Attributed to the features of the composite, the proposed aptasensor showed an ultrasensitive PEC detection of MC-LR with a wide linear range and a detection limit as low as 2.0 × 10−5 nM. In our previous work,93 a heterojunction-mediated PEC biointerface was constructed for selective detection of MC-LR by introducing a direct Z-scheme heterojunction as an efficient visible-light driven photoactive species (Fig. 4C). The Z-scheme type CdTe–Bi2S3 heterojunction was designed and synthesized as an ideal photoactive material. The developed PEC aptasensor demonstrated great advantages in selectivity and sensitivity. Therefore, in these reports, the formation of the p–n heterojunction was beneficial to the efficient visible-excited charge transfer and effectively restrained the recombination of photoinduced electron–hole pairs, resulting in enhanced PEC performance. The PEC biosensors based on these excellent photoactive materials show excellent analytical performance with wide linear ranges and low detection limits.
 Fig. 4  Schematics of PEC biosensors based on semiconductor–semiconductor heterojunctions: (A) schematic of a CdS/MoS2 heterojunction-enhanced PEC sensing strategy coupled with CHA and hemin-mediated chemiluminescence. Reproduced with permission from ref. 87. Copyright (2018) Elsevier. (B) Schematic of the assembly and PEC mechanism of an aptasensor based on a CuS–TiO2 composite. Reproduced with permission from ref. 92. Copyright (2018) Elsevier. (C) Schematic of the enhanced photocurrent generation mechanism of a direct Z-scheme CdTe/Bi2S3 heterojunction. Reproduced with permission from ref. 93. Copyright (2018) American Chemical Society. (D) Synthesis of a TiO2–MoS2–AuNP composite; fabrication steps of a kanamycin aptasensor and its PEC mechanism for detection. Reproduced with permission from ref. 96. Copyright (2018) Elsevier. 
Regulating the morphology of a semiconductor surface can increase its active sites and enhance its intrinsic reactions. Carefully regulating the morphology is beneficial to inhibit the recombination of electron–hole pairs. Therefore, photoactive nanomaterials with regulated morphologies have excellent PEC properties and have been used for PEC bioassays.94–99 Liu et al.96 developed a sensitive PEC aptasensor for kanamycin detection using an enhanced photocurrent response strategy, which is based on the surface plasmon resonance effect of gold nanoparticles deposited on 3D TiO2–MoS2 flower-like heterostructures (Fig. 4D). The PEC aptasensor presented good detection selectivity, a low detection limit of 0.05 nM and a wide linear range of 0.2 to 450 nM.
C3N4 is a newly emerged polymer nonmetal semiconductor with a graphite-like phase structure and a large π conjugated system formed by sp2 hybridization of N and C atoms with good thermal stability, chemical stability and PEC properties.100 The band gap of g-C3N4 is 2.7 eV, which has good visible light response in addition to advantages of low cost, simple synthesis and environmental friendliness. It has good application prospects in energy, the environment and analysis.31,101,102 Therefore, g-C3N4-based PEC functional nanomaterials are widely applied in the field of PEC biosensors.67,103–108 Li et al.103 first proposed a novel enhanced PEC DNA biosensor based on a compact g-C3N4/MoS2 heterojunction and co-sensitization effects with CdSe QDs for simple and accurate analysis of short ssDNA. In our previous work,108 WO3 nanoparticle-decorated ultrathin graphite-like carbon nitride (utg-C3N4) semiconductor nanoheterostructures were engineered by a facile thermal treatment method. Based on the excellent PEC performance of the as-prepared utg-C3N4/WO3, a high sensitivity PEC sensor was fabricated for a glucose assay. These reported studies showed that g-C3N4, as an excellent photoactive nanomaterial, can be used in the construction of PEC biosensors and has great development potential in the field of PEC biological analysis.
3.3 Semiconductor–carbon nanomaterials
Carbon-based materials are composed of carbon elements. Due to the diverse electronic structures of C elements (sp, sp2 and sp3 hybridization), various carbon-based nanomaterials continue to emerge; these materials occupy a pivotal position in the field of nanomaterials due to their unique electrical, mechanical and physical stability, thermochemical stability, and biocompatibility.109 Carbon-based nanomaterials are widely applied in many fields, including nanomaterials science, energy production and storage, environmental science, biology and medicine, due to their good chemical and physical stability.110 Therefore, in the field of PEC bioanalysis, many scientists have attempted to couple carbon-based nanomaterials with semiconductor nanomaterials to obtain photoactive nanomaterials with excellent performance for constructing PEC biosensors.
Graphene is a two-dimensional honeycomb lattice structure formed of tightly bonded single-layer carbon atoms; it is a basic unit for constructing other carbon nanomaterials.111,112 Due to its high mechanical strength, large specific surface area, and good electrical and thermal conductivity, graphene has shown great prospects in many fields, such as energy, life sciences, the environment and sensors.113–115 Shang et al.116 developed a high-performance PEC sensor based on an amorphous molybdenum sulfide (a-MoSx)/reduced graphene oxide (RGO) hybrid film (Fig. 5A). Three-dimensional graphene hydrogels (3DGH) not only inherit the superiority of graphene, but also show enhanced properties, including larger surface area, better mechanical stability and higher catalytic activity. Kang et al.117 combined a 3D graphene foam network with a ZnO NRs array and further introduced this mixed-dimensional heterostructure into a PEC biosensing system. In our work, we prepared a Ag/TiO2/3D nitrogen-doped graphene hydrogel (3DNGH), and the photocurrent of this material was greatly enhanced. On the basis of the excellent PEC properties of Ag/TiO2/3DNGH, a sensitive label-free PEC biosensor was successfully established for the determination of thrombin118 (Fig. 5B). Moreover, BiPO4/three-dimensional nitrogen-doped graphene hydrogel (3DNGH) nanocomposites were prepared for the first time via a facile one-pot hydrothermal route. Based on the excellent PEC properties of BiPO4/3DNGH, a label-free PEC aptasensor for selective and sensitive detection of tetracycline119 was successfully established.50 Based on the above work, graphene, as an emerging carbon-based nanomaterial, has the advantages of large specific surface area, good electrical conductivity and good biocompatibility; it can be used as an ideal candidate for functional enhancement biosensors. Graphene is widely used in the construction of PEC biosensors; it facilitates the introduction of biological recognition components, thereby improving sensor specificity and sensitivity.
 Fig. 5  Schematics of PEC biosensors based on carbon–semiconductors: (A) schematic of the preparation of a-MoSx/RGO hybrid film and the mechanism for PEC detection of glucose. Reproduced with permission from ref. 116. Copyright (2018) Elsevier. (B) Schematic of the as-fabricated Ag/TiO2/3DNGH aptasensor for detecting thrombin. Reproduced with permission from ref. 118. Copyright (2018) Elsevier. (C) (a) Schematic of the preparation of NPC–ZnO nanopolyhedra and (b) mechanism of an NPC–ZnO nanopolyhedra-based PEC biosensor for an alkaline phosphatase (ALP) assay. Reproduced with permission from ref. 121. Copyright (2017) American Chemical Society. 
Other carbon-based nanomaterials with excellent physical and chemical properties are applied for constructing PEC biosensors, such as graphene nanoribbons, carbon nanotubes, and carbon quantum dots. Liu et al.120 fabricated a simple and highly sensitive PEC biosensor of microcystin-LR (MC-LR) based on surface molecular imprinted TiO2-coated multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MI-TiO2@CNTs) hybrid nanostructures. Yang et al.121 prepared a novel photoactive material, nitrogen-doped porous carbon–ZnO (NPC–ZnO) nanopolyhedra, to fabricate an NPC–ZnO nanopolyhedra-based PEC biosensor (Fig. 5C). In our previous work,122 a Ag/TiO2/nitrogen-doped graphene nanoribbon (Ag/TiO2/N-GNR) ternary composite was applied as a photoactive material to construct a label-free and sensitive PEC detection method of a transgene from the CaMV 35S promoter. Thus, the various carbon-based materials have unique properties which are beneficial to suppress the recombination of photogenerated electron–hole pairs and accelerate charge transfer, improve the PEC properties of semiconductor materials, and prepare excellent photoactive nanomaterials for the construction of PEC biosensors.
In addition, with the development of materials science, increasing numbers of new materials are emerging with more unique morphologies and better physicochemical properties. The PEC biosensors constructed with novel photoactive materials show better analytical performance. Recently reported black TiO2 nanomaterials are unequivocally accepted sun light harvesters which facilitate maximum solar energy absorption from the ultraviolet (UV) to infrared (IR) regions of the solar spectrum due to their improved optical absorption properties in comparison to normal white TiO2.123 Wang et al.124 successfully constructed a novel PEC immunosensor for N6-methyladenine (m6A) detection based on the photoactive materials black titanium dioxide (B-TiO2) and bismuth trioxide (Bi2O3) and the signal amplification unit of a [Ru(bpy)3]2+-doped metal organic framework (MOF). The fabricated PEC biosensor displayed high specificity, selectivity, stabilization and repeatability. Halide perovskite materials have emerged as a new class of revolutionary photovoltaic and optoelectronic nanomaterials; they are currently the focus of considerable research efforts due to their fascinating optical and electrical properties and promising applications in various fields.125 Yang et al.126 reported the synthesis of dual-functional molecularly imprinted polymer (MIP)-modified organometal lead halide perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3) and its application for PEC bioanalysis of salicylic acid (SA). This work not only featured the use of MIPs/CH3NH3PbI3 for PEC detection of SA but also provided a new horizon for the design and implementation of functional polymers/perovskite materials in the field of PEC sensors and biosensors.
4. Applications of PEC biosensors for food analysis
4.1 Mycotoxins
Mycotoxins are a class of natural toxic substances; their pollution of food is a worldwide public health problem. Mycotoxins are secondary metabolites produced by filamentous fungi that cause acute and chronic poisoning in humans and animals and widely contaminate crops and by-products.127,128 Mycotoxins have low molecular weight and high heat resistance and show carcinogenic, mutagenic, teratogenic, immunotoxic and estrogen effects in humans and animals. They can accumulate in animal bodies via the food chain, causing poisoning.129,130 At present, there are more than 200 types of mold. During the processing, transportation and storage of crops, toxic metabolites will be produced when conditions permit.131 The typical mycotoxins which are most common in agricultural products and are more harmful to humans and animals mainly include fumonisin B1 (FB1), ochratoxin A,105 and aflatoxin B1 (AFB1). Therefore, it is necessary to develop simple, sensitive and low-cost detection methods for mycotoxins, and PEC biosensors have been widely applied for the detection of mycotoxins due to their high sensitivity and specificity.
FB1 is an important mycotoxin produced by Fusarium moniliforme;132 it is the most toxic of all fumonisins,133,134 and it mainly contaminates corn and corn products. The International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) defines FB1 as a Class 2B carcinogen.135 Intake of FB1 poses a potential threat to human and animal health, such as brain, liver, lung and kidney damage. Available data indicate that FB1 can cause horse brain softening, porcine pulmonary edema and primary liver cancer in rats,136 and it has immunosuppressive effects on poultry. In addition, the study found that FB1 may induce cancer of the human esophagus, liver, stomach, etc. For these reasons, the draft guidance issued by the US Food and Drug Administration states that the standard content of fumonisin (FB1, FB2, FB3) in corn products should be less than 2 mg kg−1.137 Mao et al.138 constructed a rapid and ultrasensitive molecularly imprinted PEC (MIP-PEC) sensing platform based on an ITO electrode modified with a GO–CdS heterojunction for ultrasensitive measurement of FB1 (Fig. 6A). In phosphate buffer solution (PBS), it was clearly observed that the non-elution MIP-PEC sensor had almost no photocurrent response, which is due to its slower electron transfer speed. When the MIP-PEC sensor was eluted in ethanol, its photocurrent response was significantly restored; this is because the template molecules were washed away, and electron donors entered the holes and accelerated the electron transfer. Its photocurrent response was decreased because the holes were blocked when the MIP-PEC sensor was formed in the template molecule culture fluid. This phenomenon fully showed that the MIP-PEC sensor could specifically detect the target. Thus, this work showed a linear range from 0.01 to 1000 ng mL−1 with a detection limit of 4.7 pg mL−1 for FB1.
 Fig. 6  Schematics of PEC biosensors for detection of mycotoxins: (A) schematic of the fabrication process of an MIP-PEC sensor for detection of FB1 and the mechanism of photocurrent generation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 138. Copyright (2019) Elsevier. (B) Schematic of the PEC immunosensor fabrication process for detection of OTA. Reproduced with permission from ref. 142. Copyright (2015) Elsevier. (C) Preparation of BiVO4@Ag+-anti-AFB1 labels (a) and fabrication of a competitive-type PEC immunosensor for detection of AFB1 (b). Reproduced with permission from ref. 147. Copyright (2018) Elsevier. (D) (a) Fabrication procedure of a PEC immunosensor for detection of AFB1 and (b) the mechanism of the photo-initiated electron transfer pathways and the structure of dendritic SiPcs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 148. Copyright (2016) Elsevier. 
Ochratoxins are a class of structurally similar compounds produced by Aspergillus or Penicillium from contaminated crops; the most common ochratoxin is OTA. OTA is nephrotoxic, which is closely related to endemic nephropathy.139 OTA will accumulate for a long time in the bodies of humans and animals; it poses great threats to body health, decreases immune function, and even induces cancer, genetic mutations, malformations, etc.140 Tan et al.141 facilely prepared well-defined Ag@AgCl nanocubes loaded on reduced graphene oxide plasmonic heterostructures (Ag@AgCl/RGO) by a sacrificial salt-crystal-template process and ethylene glycol-assisted reduction. Based on the superior photocurrent response and stability of Ag@AgCl/RGO, the PEC immunosensor was employed for OTA detection with a competitive-type format and exhibited excellent analytical performance. Under the optimized conditions, the photocurrent increased with the concentration of OTA in the dynamic range of 0.05 to 300 nM with a LOD of 0.01 nM (4.0 pg mL−1). The immunosensor also showed high sensitivity, good reproducibility, and satisfactory accuracy. Yang et al.142 manufactured a general label-free PEC platform by assembly of a CdSe NPs-sensitized anatase TiO2-functionalized electrode via layer-by-layer (LBL) strategy (Fig. 6B). Under the optimized conditions, the photocurrent was proportional to the OTA concentration range from 10 pg mL−1 to 50 ng mL−1 with a detection limit of 2.0 pg mL−1.
Aflatoxin (AF) is a type of metabolite produced by Aspergillus flavus and Aspergillus parasiticus, and more than 20 subtypes have been isolated and identified.143 Among these, AFB1 is currently known as the most toxic mycotoxin,144 with strong carcinogenicity, teratogenicity and mutagenicity. AFB1 has been classified as a Class I carcinogen by the World Health Organization (WHO) and IARC.145 Therefore, many countries and organizations in the world have set maximum standards for AF. The United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) stipulates that the maximum allowable amount of AF in food (AFB1 + AFB2 + AFG1 + AFG2) should be less than 15 μg kg−1. The European Union stipulates that the maximum amount of AFB1 should not exceed 2 μg kg−1.146 Feng et al.147 successfully utilized a competitive PEC immunosensor for quantitative detection of AFB1 (Fig. 6C). The Ag ions-modified bismuth vanadate nano-polyhedrons (BiVO4 @Ag+) were utilized as a label for immobilization of anti-AFB1 through affinity-specific binding. Under optimal conditions, the competitive PEC immunosensor showed a wide linear range from 1.0 pg mL−1 to 120 ng mL−1. Li et al.148 established a new PEC sensor for AFB1 detection based on all-carbon nanohybrids as a transducer scaffold accompanied with quasi-octahedral TiO2 mesocrystal (QOTM)-absorbed dendritic Si phthalocyanines (SiPcs) (Fig. 6D). The all-carbon nanocomposites exhibited fine photoelectric properties because the photo-generated electrons of the carbon quantum dots could be rapidly accepted by the conductive carbon nanohorns, which evidently expedited the electron transport; these nanohybrids were employed as an affinity support to anchor AFB1 antibody. In this competitive immunosensor, the AFB1 sample competes with the labeled AFB1, leading to decreased photocurrent with increasing target concentration in a wide linear range of 10−6 to 102 ng mL−1. Based on the above reports, various mycotoxins are extremely harmful to human health, and there is an urgent need to develop analytical methods for rapid and sensitive detection of mycotoxins; PEC biosensors can be used for the detection of mycotoxins with good performance. Compared with traditional analysis methods, PEC biosensors have obvious advantages of lower cost and higher sensitivity and specificity.
4.2 Heavy metals
A heavy metal is a metal element with a metal atom density greater than 5 g cm−3. Due to the increase of industrial activities, heavy metal pollution in the natural environment is a very serious problem. As a source of pollution of the biosphere worldwide, heavy metal ions are non-biodegradable contaminants in water, soil, plants and animals that eventually accumulate in the human body through the food chain. After heavy metal ions are taken into the body through food, the heavy metal has strong enrichment ability and is difficult to excrete from the body, thereby causing damage to the human body. Long-term intake of excessive amounts of heavy metals can seriously damage human health.149,150 Therefore, these metals are considered to be a serious source of biosphere pollution worldwide and lead to many health problems and physical diseases. Common heavy metal ions such as mercury (Hg),151 copper (Cu),152 lead,39,153 cadmium (Cd)154 and chromium (Cr)98 are very harmful to humans and are carcinogenic. Many analytical methods for heavy metal detection have been reported, and PEC biosensors have attracted attention due to their specificity.
Mercury is one of the most toxic elements that affect human and ecosystem health.155 The highly toxic ions can be converted into methylmercury compounds, which can be concentrated by biological circulation; this can cause various diseases, such as pneumonia, enteritis and bronchitis.156 Mercury species are listed as priority pollutants in many countries due to their high toxicity, environmental persistence and bioaccumulation.157 Zhao et al.158 developed a highly sensitive and selective PEC biosensor for Hg2+ detection on the basis of the synergistic effect of exciton energy transfer159 between CdS QDs and Au NPs coupled with sensitization of rhodamine 123 (Rh123) for signal amplification (Fig. 7A). The linear range was 10 fM to 200 nM, with a detection limit of 3.3 fM. Zhang et al.155 presented a ‘‘turn-on’’ PEC sensor for Hg2+ detection based on thymine–Hg2+–thymine interactions using a thymine-rich oligonucleotide film and a double-strand DNA intercalator. Under the optimized conditions, a linear relationship between the photocurrent and Hg2+ concentration was obtained over the range of 0.1 nM to 10 nM Hg2+, with a detection limit of 20 pM. Ma et al.160 used CdS QD-tagged mercury-specific oligonucleotides to successfully fabricate a novel folding-based PEC sensor for reagentless and highly sensitive Hg2+ detection (Fig. 7B). Li et al.161 successfully constructed a novel aptamer-based PEC sensor to selectively detect femtomole level mercury ions. The electrode response for mercury ion detection was in the linear range from 0.01 pmol L−1 to 1.00 pmol L−1 with a detection limit of 3.33 fmol L−1.
 Fig. 7  Schematics of PEC biosensors for detection of heavy metals: (A) fabrication procedure of a PEC biosensor for Hg2+ detection. Reproduced with permission from ref. 158. Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society. (B) Schematic of the fabrication of a folding-based Hg2+ biosensor and PEC analysis of Hg2+ through the T–Hg2+–T complex. Reproduced with permission from ref. 160. Copyright (2014) the Royal Society of Chemistry. (C) Schematic of the stepwise modification of an ITO/RGO/CdS/aptamer sensing platform and “signal-on” PEC detection. Strategy of Pb2+ detection on the basis of duplex–quadruplex conversion and the RET process between CdS QDs and Au NPs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 162. Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society. (D) Schematic of the preparation of the as-fabricated “on–off–on” switch system-based PEC aptasensor for detection of Pb2+. Reproduced with permission from ref. 166. Copyright (2016) Elsevier. 
Lead ions (Pb2+) are a major and persistent environmental pollutant that can cause severe health risks. Exposure of Pb2+ to humans can present serious hazards to the brain, kidneys, and nervous system.162 Zang et al.162 designed a “signal-on” PEC sensing strategy for selective determination of Pb2+ based on the combination of Pb2+-induced conformational conversion, the amplified effects of reduced graphene oxide (RGO) and resonance energy transfer between CdS QDs and Au NPs (Fig. 7C). Wang et al.163 successfully designed a “signal-on” PEC strategy for a Pb2+ assay based on a target-induced G-quadruplex aptamer configuration conversion, which in situ released a photosensitizer (hemin) for a p-type NiO electrode to form a self-operating photocathode. This PEC aptasensor exhibited good sensitivity and selectivity. Zhang et al.164 developed a PEC sensor based on ZnO nanoflowers for the detection of Pb2+ using 8-17E DNAzyme as the recognition unit and Ru(bpy)2(dppz)2+ as the signal reporter. Shi et al.165 fabricated an ultrasensitive PEC aptasensor for lead ion (Pb2+) detection based on MoS2–CdS:Mn nanocomposites and the sensitization effect of CdTe QDs. This proposed PEC aptasensor provided a new sensing strategy for various heavy metal ions at ultralow levels. In our previous work,166 we successfully designed a novel “on–off–on” switch system to construct a high performance PEC aptasensor for Pb2+ based on an NGR/Ag–TiO2 ternary composite (Fig. 7D). With the association of the “on–off–on” switch system, a wide linear response for Pb2+ detection was obtained from 1 pM to 5 nM with a detection limit as low as 0.3 pM.
It has been proven that hexavalent chromium Cr(VI) is a highly toxic, bioaccumulating, potentially persistent and severe environmental nonbiodegradable pollutant.167 Dashtian et al.98 successfully designed Pb5S2I6-containing PDA-coated nanoporous TiO2 to fabricate an efficient visible-light-driven PEC sensor for Cr(VI) ion detection. Under optimal conditions, due to effective suppression of electron–hole recombination, the proposed sensor showed a very low detection limit of 3.0 nM over a broad linear concentration range of 0.01 to 80 μM.
4.3 Antibiotics
Antibiotics are secondary metabolites or artificially synthesized analogues produced by microorganisms. Antibiotics are selective, and different antibiotics have different effects on different pathogenic bacteria; even low-concentration antibiotics can selectively function in pathogenic microorganisms. Thus, antibiotics are the most effective medicines for treating microbial infections of humans and animals.159,168 Due to the high-efficiency and low-cost characteristics of antibiotics, they are widely applied in various fields; this inevitably causes the problem of abuse of antibiotics, which has become an issue worldwide.169 The abuse of antibiotics can cause antibiotics to remain in animals and in the human body, thus causing great threats to the ecological environment and human health.170,171 In addition, allergic reactions may occur, along with a number of hazards such as teratogenicity, carcinogenicity, and mutagenicity.172 Therefore, whether the residue is found in animals and plants or in pollution of the ecological environment, antibiotic residues will eventually act on humans and pose a threat to human health. Therefore, in order to guarantee food safety, it is necessary to develop simple, sensitive and low-cost methods for detecting antibiotic residues.
Tetracycline119 is a broad spectrum antibiotic that is effective against both Gram-negative and Gram-positive microorganisms;173 it is extensively used in human and veterinary treatment as well as in feed additives due to its low cost and high antimicrobial activity.174 Consequently, the abuse of Tc has led to its accumulation in humans directly from drugs or indirectly from animal products consumed by humans; this can provoke some serious risks, such as increasing drug resistance of microbial strains, allergic or toxic reactions among hypersensitive individuals, and inhibited bone growth.175,176 The European Union177 has set the maximum residue limits (MRLs) for Tc as 0.3 mg kg−1 in liver, 0.6 mg kg−1 in kidney, 0.2 mg kg−1 in eggs, and 0.1 mg kg−1 (about 200 nM) in milk or muscle tissues.46 Liu et al.176 prepared g-C3N4 sensitized with CdS QDs to fabricate a novel visible-light PEC aptasensor for Tc (Fig. 8A). The sensor showed a linear PEC response to Tc in the concentration range from 10 to 250 nM with a detection limit of 5.3 nM. Li et al.178 developed a simple and novel PEC aptasensor for Tc using the enhanced photocurrent response strategy by localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) of nano-Au and dual-function quercetin. Under the optimized conditions, the PEC response was linear with the concentration of Tc in the range from 0.3 to 1600 nM with a detection limit of 0.1 nM. The same concentrations of other conventional organics did not interfere with the detection of Tc, and the recovery was between 93.7% and 105.3%. In our previous work,50 a label-free PEC aptasensor for highly sensitive and selective detection of Tc was successfully constructed using BiPO4/3DNGH as a visible light-responsive material and an aptamer as a biorecognition element. Under optimized conditions, the proposed PEC aptasensor exhibited a wide linear range from 0.1 nM to 1 μM. In addition, oxytetracycline (OTC), a common tetracycline antibiotic, is widely used in human therapy and animal husbandry.179 However, OTC residues may cause adverse reactions, such as allergic reactions and antibiotic resistance.180 WHO stipulates that the MRL for OTC in pharmaceuticals and human foods is 0.1 μg−1.181 Yan et al.180 proposed a novel cathodic “signal-off” PEC aptasensing strategy for OTC. The fabricated sensor exhibited high sensitivity and selectivity, good reproducibility, and long-term stability. Peng et al.181 reported a facile and sensitive self-powered cathodic PEC aptasensor for the detection of OTC based on Au nanoparticles-decorated phosphorus-doped porous ultrathin g-C3N4 nanosheets (Au/PCN-S). In the self-powered PEC biosensing of OTC, the device exhibited high sensitivity and presented a wide detection range from 0.5 to 200 nM and a detection limit of 0.34 nM, as well as selectivity, reproducibility and stability.
 Fig. 8  Schematics of PEC biosensors for the detection of antibiotics: (A) schematic of PEC aptasensing of Tc based on g-C3N4–CdS composites. Reproduced with permission from ref. 176. Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society. (B) Fabrication process of a PEC aptasensor for CAP detection. Reproduced with permission from ref. 183. Copyright (2019) Elsevier. (C) Schematic of an STR PEC aptasensor based on CdTe–SWCNHs nanocomposite. Reproduced with permission from ref. 187. Copyright (2017) Elsevier. (D) Schematic of PEC aptasensing of SDM based on Bi2S3/NGQDs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 193. Copyright (2019) Elsevier. 
Chloramphenicol (CAP) is a broad spectrum antimicrobial substance that is effective against infections caused by different types of micro-organisms.182 Due to its low cost and efficient antibacterial effects, CAP has been widely used in the food industry as well as in livestock and poultry breeding. Overdose of CAP intake from food or medicine can result in bone marrow suppression, kidney damage and leukemia.183 The United States Food and Drug Administration has set the minimum required performance limit of CAP as 0.3 μg kg−1 for the detection of its residues in food products.184 Qin et al.183 designed an ultrasensitive PEC aptasensor for CAP detection based on graphene quantum dots-sensitized TiO2 nanotube arrays (GQDs/TiO2 NTs) (Fig. 8B). In this signal-on proposal, the aptasensor was used for the label-free analysis of CAP by monitoring the increase in photocurrent that resulted from the formation of aptamer-CAP bioaffinity complexes with ascorbic acid as an efficient electron donor for scavenging photogenerated holes. Under the optimized conditions, the aptasensor showed a wide linear range from 0.5 nM to 100 nM for CAP detection with a low detection limit of 57.9 pM. Liu et al.185 constructed a PEC sensing platform for CAP detection using nitrogen-doped graphene quantum dots (N-GQDs) as transducer species and an aptamer as a biological recognition element. This aptamer/N-GQDs-based sensor showed a linear PEC response to CAP concentrations in the range of 10 to 250 nM with a detection limit of 3.1 nM. Sui et al.171 fabricated a signal-off PEC biosensor for chloramphenicol detection based on g-C3N4 nanosheets and DNA-Fc. The developed method showed a wide linear range from 1 pM to 100 nM and a low detection limit of 0.22 pM. Zhou et al. described a method for PEC determination of CAP. It is based on the use of (a) aptamers protected with photoactive WS2 nanosheets and (b) DNase I-assisted target recycling. Under optimal experimental conditions, the linear response is in the 10 pM to 10 nM CAP concentration range. Wang et al. described a visible-light driven PEC aptasensor that is capable of detecting CAP. Under optimal conditions, the linear response is in the range of 1.0 pM to 3.0 nM CAP concentration, with a detection limit of 0.36 pM. In our previous work,182 based on the high PEC performance of the MoS2/NGH heterostructure, a novel sensitive PEC sensor was developed for the determination of CAP with the assistance of an aptamer. Excellent linearity was obtained in the concentration range from 32.3 ng L−1 to 96.9 μg L−1.
Streptomycin7 is an aminoglycoside antibiotic that is mainly used to treat tuberculosis. To date, it has been widely used in the veterinary treatment of bacterial infections.186 In addition, it is widely used as a broad-spectrum antibiotic bactericide for the prevention of various vegetable diseases and animal feed additives. However, excessive or uncontrolled use of STR can cause drug residues in soil, crops and ecological environments; also, it causes serious side effects to humans, such as photodermatitis and allergies.187,188 Xu et al.187 synthesized a novel CdTe quantum dots-single walled carbon nanohorns (CdTe–SWCNHs) nanocomposite via a one-pot method for PEC aptasensing detection of STR (Fig. 8C). The as-fabricated PEC aptamer sensor exhibited a linear response ranging from 0.1 nM (0.15 μg kg−1) to 50 nM (72.85 μg kg−1) with a detection limit of 0.033 nM (0.05 μg kg−1). Okoth et al.186 fabricated a highly sensitive and stable PEC aptamer sensor for SRT detection based on the photoactive hybrid material of G/Mo-BiVO4. The developed sensor was successfully applied to detect SRT in veterinary drugs. Kanamycin (KAN) is also an aminoglycoside antibacterial drug. Excessive use or residue of this drug in animal-derived foods can cause ototoxicity, nephrotoxicity and antibiotic resistance, posing a threat to human health.96,189 Li et al.190 developed a novel PEC aptamer sensor for the specific detection of kanamycin using water-dispersible graphite-like carbon nitride (w-g-C3N4) as a visible light-active material and an aptamer as the biorecognition element. The PEC response of the sensor was found to be linearly proportional to the concentration of kanamycin in the range from 1 nM to 230 nM with a detection limit of 0.2 nM.
Sulfadimethoxysulfonamide (SDM) is a broad-spectrum antibiotic of sulfonamides that has been widely used in veterinary treatment of coccidiosis and other bacterial infections.191 However, SDM can be released into the environment, and even low concentrations of SDM in the environment may have toxic effects not only on the target organism but also on the green algae that are vital to the entire ecosystem. The European Commission and China have set MRLs of 100 μg L−1 for SDM in animal foods.192 In our previous work,193 we established a simple PEC aptasensor for sensitive and selective detection of SDM based on Z-scheme Bi2S3/NGQDs with superior photo-electric conversion efficiency (Fig. 8D). On this basis, the proposed sensor exhibited a wide linear range of 0.1 to 120 nM and a detection limit of 0.03 nM for SDM, with high sensitivity (0.075 μA nM−1) and good selectivity and stability. These reports indicate that a variety of highly sensitive and highly specific PEC biosensors have been constructed for the detection of antibiotics, exhibiting excellent analytical performance for antibiotic detection with wide linear ranges and low detection limits. This provides a new path for the detection of antibiotics in actual production, which helps decrease the impact of antibiotic residues on human health.
4.4 Pesticide residues
Pesticides are a general term for chemical substances used to control and eliminate pests and diseases of plants or animals.194 Pesticides can be divided into herbicides, insecticides, and fungicides; these involve different compounds, most of which are arsenides, carbamates, organophosphates, pyrethroids, or nitrophenol derivatives.195 Most of these compounds are highly toxic and can affect the central nervous system.196 Due to the high toxicity of pesticides, environmental agencies have set maximum values for pesticide contamination in drinking water and surface water.197,198 Due to their water solubility, pesticides can be present in soil and in surface water and groundwater. Pesticide residues have been detected in soil, water, atmosphere, edible grains, vegetables, fruits, milk, and even in industrial products such as cosmetics. If a practical food contains highly toxic or highly toxic pesticide residues, it will cause acute poisoning in the human body. After long-term consumption of foods with excessive pesticide residues, the toxins will be enriched in the human body, leading to chronic poisoning and resulting in a variety of various physiological diseases. Pesticide-degrading compounds can be found in animals, vegetables, and water sources, and they become more concentrated as they enter the top of the food chain.199 Therefore, the development of techniques for sensing, monitoring, degrading, and removing pesticides has attracted wide interest among researchers. In recent years, pesticide residues have attracted widespread attention as environmental and food safety issues, and PEC bioanalysis has also been gradually applied to pesticide residue detection.
Organophosphorus (OPs) pesticides are the most toxic species commonly found in pesticides because of their high toxicity, their ability to accumulate, and their mobility; they have serious effects on organisms.200,201 The presence of OPs blocks the action of acetylcholinesterase,46 which is a key central nervous system enzyme. Liu et al.202 constructed a novel visible light PEC platform coupled with enzyme inhibition for rapid and sensitive determination of OPs based on a dual-functional Cd0.5Zn0.5S–reduced graphene oxide (Cd0.5Zn0.5S–rGO) nanocomposite. Based on the notable change in the PEC response of the AChE–Cd0.5Zn0.5S–rGO modified electrode and using Dursban as a model, a simple and effective method for PEC monitoring of OPs was proposed which showed a wide linear range of 0.001 to 1 μg mL−1 and a low detection limit of 0.3 ng mL−1. Li et al.203 presented a sensitive PEC biosensor for detection of OPs using a nanocomposite of CdSe@ZnS QDs and graphene deposited on an ITO-coated glass electrode as a photoactive electrode. Under the optimal experimental conditions, the photocurrents were proportional to the logarithms of paraoxon and dichlorvos within the concentration range of 10−12 to 10−6 M. The detection limits (LOD) of the proposed biosensor for paraoxon and dichlorvos were as low as 10−14 M and 10−12 M, respectively. Chlorpyrifos is one of the most commonly used organophosphorus pesticides; it has been used to control pests of various crops. However, this compound can inhibit cholinesterase activity, causing cholinergic dysfunction and death; thus, it poses a potential health risk to humans and animals exposed to chlorpyrifos-contaminated environments. Cheng et al.37 constructed a novel visible light driven self-powdered PEC biosensor for chlorpyrifos detection (Fig. 9A). The prepared PEC biosensor can achieve the sensitive detection of chlorpyrifos with a broad detection range from 0.001 mg mL−1 to 1.5 mg mL−1 and a detection limit of about 0.07 ng mL−1. In our previous work,204 we designed a novel PEC chlorpyrifos biosensor based on a dual signal amplification strategy that coupled dual inhibition effects. Based on the dual inhibition of AChE activity by chlorpyrifos and the formation of a Cu–chlorpyrifos complex, which hinders the electron transfer of CuFe2O4 MNCs toward the electrode surface, the proposed AChE-based biosensor can be applied to the quantification of chlorpyrifos with a linear range from 0.001 μg mL−1 to 1 μg mL−1 and a detection limit of 0.3 ng mL−1.
 Fig. 9  Schematics of PEC biosensors for detection of pesticides: (A) schematic of the preparation process of a PEC biosensor for chlorpyrifos detection. Reproduced with permission from ref. 37. Copyright (2018) Elsevier. (B) Schematic of the fabrication of a PEC acetamiprid aptasensor based on an “on–off–on” strategy. Reproduced with permission from ref. 208. Copyright (2017) Elsevier. (C) The construction of a TiO2 nanotube array enzymatic bioreactor and in situ synthesis of CdS QDs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 210. Copyright (2018) Elsevier. (D) (A) Fabrication process of the GOx/CS/NH2-MIL-125(Ti)/TiO2 biosensor and (B) the corresponding electron-transfer mechanism. Reproduced with permission from ref. 211. Copyright (2017) the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
As novel actin-like insecticides, acetamide insecticides have been widely used as alternatives to organophosphates and other conventional insecticides.205 However, when exposed to contaminated food, water and the main pathways of the environment, it still poses potential health risks to humans.206,207 Li et al.205 constructed a PEC aptasensor of acetamiprid based on a Co-doped ZnO diluted magnetic semiconductor as a novel photoelectric beacon. The fabricated aptasensor showed a linear response to the concentration of acetamiprid in the range of 0.5 to 800 nmol L−1 with a detection limit of 0.18 nmol L−1. In our previous work,208 a novel PEC aptasensing strategy was successfully designed for acetamiprid detection based on a thiophene-sulfur-doped graphene/ZnO nanocomposite (t-SG/ZnO) nanocomposite as a photoelectric beacon; it was prepared by a facile one-step thermal-treatment method (Fig. 9B). Due to the high specificity of the aptamer, the proposed “on–off–on” PEC aptasensor demonstrated satisfactory performance, including a wide linear range, low detection limit, and good selectivity. In addition, we designed a visible-light-driven “on–off–on” PEC sensing strategy for sensitive and selective determination of acetamiprid by employing MWCNTs/reduced graphene oxide nanoribbons (MWCNTs/rGONRs) as a PEC signal amplifier and ideal support for anchored QDs.209 Under optimal conditions, the resulting PEC aptasensor response was found to be linearly proportional to the logarithm of the target acetamiprid concentration in the range from 0.5 pM to 10 μM with a detection limit of 0.2 pM.
Metronidazole (MNZ, 1-(2-hydroxyethyl)-2-methyl-5-nitroimidazole) is widely used as an antibacterial and antiprotozoal drug. However, MNZ has been shown to be genotoxic and carcinogenic. Li et al.31 proposed a simple, facile and sensitive PEC bioassay protocol for MNZ detection in common oral medicine samples under visible-light irradiation, where novel hierarchical coral-like g-C3N4 nanoarchitectures (cg-C3N4) were first explored as a PEC sensing platform. This newly constructed PEC immunoassay displays excellent performance for MNZ determination with high sensitivity and selectivity. Under the optimal conditions, this bioassay protocol exhibits a linear range of 0.01 to 100 μM with a detection limit of 0.005 μM. In addition, Tian et al.210 constructed an inhibition-effect PEC biosensor for determination of asulam based on the in situ generation of CdS QDs on TNA using an enzymatic reaction (Fig. 9C). Asulam (methyl 4-aminobenzenesulfonyl carbamate) is a broadly biologically active pesticide that acts by preventing cell division and growth of plant tissues. Because of its high solubility in water and soil, it can accumulate and remain in the environment; therefore, it is necessary to develop appropriate analytical methods for its detection. Under the optimal experimental conditions, the constructed PEC biosensor exhibited a satisfying linear range (0.02 to 2.0 ng mL−1), low limit of detection (4.1 pg mL−1) and good selectivity towards asulam detection. Jin et al.211 fabricated a new and sensitive PEC biosensor which is visible-light-activated based on the ability of acetochlor to inhibit glucose oxidase (GOx) activity (Fig. 9D). Acetochlor, one of the most important herbicides in the world, has been widely used as a pesticide in agriculture for weed control. However, acetochlor use has defined limits in many countries because it has been classified by the US Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) as a B-2 carcinogen. Therefore, it is necessary to develop a biosensor for acetochlor detection; the inhibition of the photocurrent was proportional to the concentration of acetochlor in the range from 0.02 to 1.0 nM and in the range from 10 to 200 nM with a detection limit of 0.003 nM. Therefore, PEC biosensors have been widely used for the detection of pesticide residues and have lower detection limits and wider linear ranges than traditional analysis methods.
5. Conclusion and perspectives
PEC biosensors are emerging analytical technologies that combine the advantages of electrochemical analysis, optical analysis, and bioanalysis. The key to constructing PEC biosensors is the design and preparation of photoactive nanomaterials with high photoelectric conversion efficiency and high biocompatibility. This review summarizes the composition, classification, and analytical principles of PEC biosensors, the photocurrent generation principles and categories of photoactive nanomaterials, and their applications in food analysis, such as mycotoxins, heavy metals, antibiotics and pesticide residues. PEC biosensors have shown great application prospects for food analysis. There are still many tasks to be carried out, such as screening of photoelectronic nanomaterials with excellent PEC properties, realizing analytical applications in actual production, and improving analysis performance. Based on the research status and actual needs, we can further study the following aspects: (1) with the continuous emergence of new technologies and new materials, the development of PEC nanomaterials that are inexpensive, easy to prepare, environmentally friendly, and high-performing is still a focus of future research. One promising approach is to design internal defects in semiconductor materials. A large number of studies have shown that intrinsic defects and external impurities in metal oxide semiconductors have an important influence on some important physicochemical properties. Another method is to combine them with some carbon-based materials and introduce heteroatoms or control the different morphologies of the carbon-based materials. These prepared nanocomposite materials have more active sites, which is beneficial to the fixation of the biological recognition components. Because the construction of PEC biosensors requires the introduction of a biological recognition component, it is necessary to design photoactive nanomaterials with visible or near-infrared response to avoid damage to the biological recognition components. (2) Various pollution damages in daily life are not unique. The coexistence of various pollution sources has led to a doubling of toxicity and a significant increase in threats to human health and the ecological environment. At present, PEC sensing technology that detects only one type of pollutant does not meet actual needs and cannot provide accurate and comprehensive information for food analysis. In view of this, the development of PEC biosensing technology that simultaneously detects multiple harmful substances can better satisfy actual needs. Recently, specific biometric identification elements of various pollutants have been screened, laying a foundation for further multi-component detection of pollutants.
(3) In order to meet the needs of food safety on-site analysis, PEC biosensor equipment should be streamlined, such as the use of micro-electrochemical workstations, sunlight as a driving source, and coupled screen printing electrodes or transparent paper-based conductive electrodes with high light transmittance as working electrodes to construct portable PEC biosensor components to achieve on-site analysis in actual production.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported under the National Natural Science Foundation of China (no. 21675066, 61601204, 21375050 and 21876068), Provincial Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu (no. BK20160542), the Research Foundation of Zhenjiang Science and Technology Bureau (no. NY2016011), and the Foundation of Key Laboratory of Sensor Analysis of Tumor Marker, Ministry of Education, Qingdao University of Science and Technology (no. SATM201807).
References
M. Gratzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 338–344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Kang, X. Yan, Y. Wang, Y. Zhao, Z. Bai, Y. Liu, K. Zhao, S. Cao and Y. Zhang, Nano Res., 2015, 9, 344–352 CrossRef .
Y. Zang, J. P. Lei and H. X. Ju, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2017, 96, 8–16 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. M. Peter, Chem. Rev., 1990, 90, 753–769 CrossRef CAS .
G. B. Anders Hagfeldt, L. Sun, L. Kloo and H. Pettersson, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6595–6663 CrossRef PubMed .
A. J. Bard, Science, 1980, 207, 139–144 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. H. Ham, J. H. Choi, A. A. Boghossian, E. S. Jeng, R. A. Graff, D. A. Heller, A. C. Chang, A. Mattis, T. H. Bayburt, Y. V. Grinkova, A. S. Zeiger, K. J. Van Vliet, E. K. Hobbie, S. G. Sligar, C. A. Wraight and M. S. Strano, Nat. Chem., 2010, 2, 929–936 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-W. Zhao, J.-J. Xu and H.-Y. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 729–741 RSC .
W. W. Zhao, J. J. Xu and H. Y. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 7421–7441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Labib, E. H. Sargent and S. O. Kelley, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 9001–9090 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hui, Z. T. Gossage, D. Sarbapalli, K. Hernandez-Burgos and J. Rodriguez-Lopez, Anal. Chem., 2019, 91, 60–83 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Z. Kevin Sivula, F. Le-Formal, R. Robert, A. Weidenkaff, J. Tucek, J. Frydrych and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 7436–7444 CrossRef PubMed .
H. N. Li, Y. W. Mu, J. R. Yan, D. M. Cui, W. J. Ou, Y. K. Wan and S. Q. Liu, Anal. Chem., 2015, 87, 2007–2015 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Y. Yu, Y. Y. Wang, X. M. Chen, K. B. Wu, D. C. Chen, M. Ma, Z. J. Huang, W. Z. Wu and C. Y. Li, Anal. Chem., 2015, 87, 4237–4244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. X. Li, H. Y. Wang, J. Shen and B. Tang, Anal. Chem., 2015, 87, 4283–4291 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zang, J. Lei, P. Ling and H. Ju, Anal. Chem., 2015, 87, 5430–5436 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhu, G. C. Fan, E. S. Abdel-Halim, J. R. Zhang and J. J. Zhu, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2016, 77, 339–346 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. X. Liu, H. M. Ma, Y. Zhang, X. H. Pang, D. W. Fan, D. Wu and Q. Wei, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2016, 86, 439–445 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. T. Long, C. Kong, D. W. Li, Y. Li, S. Chowdhury and H. Tian, Small, 2011, 7, 1624–1628 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Gill, M. Zayats and I. Willner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 7602–7625 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Freeman, J. Girsh and I. Willner, ACS Appl. Mater.
Interfaces, 2013, 5, 2815–2834 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yue, F. Lisdat, W. J. Parak, S. G. Hickey, L. Tu, N. Sabir, D. Dorfs and N. C. Bigall, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 2800–2814 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. H. Wang, H. S. Yin, Y. L. Zhou, X. J. Meng, G. I. N. Waterhouse and S. Ai, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 365, 351–357 CrossRef CAS .
F. J. Mo, J. L. Wu, M. Chen, H. Meng, Q. Han and Y. Z. Fu, Sens. Actuators, B, 2019, 289, 269–276 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Wang, H. S. Yin, Y. L. Zhou, C. J. Sui, Y. Wang, X. G. Meng, G. I. N. Waterhouse and S. Ai, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2019, 128, 137–143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. W. Zhao, X. Y. Dong, J. Wang, F. Y. Kong, J. J. Xu and H. Y. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 5253–5255 RSC .
B. Sun, L. Chen, Y. Xu, M. Liu, H. Yin and S. Ai, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2014, 51, 164–169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-W. Zhao, Z.-Y. Ma, P.-P. Yu, X.-Y. Dong, J.-J. Xu and H.-Y. Chen, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 917–923 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Yu, L. Zhang, L. B. Zhu, Y. Gao, G. C. Fan, D. M. Han, G. X. Chen and W. W. Zhao, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2019, 393, 9–20 CrossRef CAS .
D. Jiang, X. J. Du, L. Zhou, H. N. Li and K. Wang, Anal. Chem., 2017, 89, 4525–4531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, Y. J. Yuan, X. M. Pan, L. Z. Zhang and J. M. Gong, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2019, 123, 7–13 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ge, Q. Liu, D. Jiang, L. J. Ding, Z. R. Wen, Y. S. Guo, C. F. Ding and K. Wang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2019, 135, 145–152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. L. Qiu, J. Shu and D. P. Tang, Anal. Chem., 2018, 90, 12214–12220 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. W. Si, N. Q. Pan, X. D. Zhang, J. J. Liao, M. N. Rumyantseva, A. M. Gaskov and S. Lin, Sens. Actuators, B, 2019, 289, 106–113 CrossRef CAS .
L. B. Mao, M. T. Gao, X. J. Xue, L. L. Yao, W. Wen, X. H. Zhang and S. F. Wang, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2019, 1059, 94–102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, K. Yan, Z. Xu, J. Wu and J. D. Zhang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2019, 131, 79–87 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Q. Zhao and S. N. Ding Coordin, Chem. Rev., 2019, 391, 1–14 CAS .
N. Hao and K. Wang, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2016, 408, 7035–7048 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Barlow, A. R. Boobis, J. Bridges, A. Cockburn, W. Dekant, P. Hepburn, G. F. Houben, J. Koenig, M. J. Nauta, J. Schuermans and D. Banati, Trends Food Sci. Technol., 2015, 46, 176–188 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, Z. Xie, W. Zhang, X. Cao and X. Pei, Food Control, 2013, 30, 162–167 CrossRef .
V. Garcia-Canas, C. Simo, M. Herrero, E. Ibanez and A. Cifuentes, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 10150–10159 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Amine, H. Mohammadi, I. Bourais and G. Palleschi, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2006, 21, 1405–1423 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Carballo-Marrero, M. S. Prats-Moya, S. E. Maestre-Perez and J. L. Todoli-Torro, Food Chem., 2019, 300, 125203 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Bousova, H. Senyuva and K. Mittendorf, J. Chromatogr. A, 2013, 1274, 19–27 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ramezani, N. Mohammad Danesh, P. Lavaee, K. Abnous and S. Mohammad Taghdisi, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2015, 70, 181–187 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hou, H. C. Zhang, Q. Yang, M. Z. Li, L. Jiang and Y. Song, Small, 2015, 11, 2738–2742 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. S. Ibarra, J. A. Rodriguez, J. M. Miranda, M. Vega and E. Barrado, J. Chromatogr. A, 2011, 1218, 2196–2202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. L. Tan, C. J. Ma, Y. H. Song, F. G. Xu, S. H. Chen and L. Wang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2013, 50, 447–452 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hassanzadeh, H. A. J. Al Lawati and I. Al Lawati, Anal. Chem., 2019, 91, 10631–10639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ge, H. N. Li, X. J. Du, M. Y. Zhu, W. Chen, T. Y. Shi, N. Hao, Q. Liu and K. Wang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2018, 111, 131–137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Xu, X. M. Zhou, Z. D. Gao, Y. Y. Song and P. Schmuki, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 593–597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. B. Chen, H. Nan, X. Zhang, Y. Yan, Z. Zhou, Y. Zhang and K. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 3718–3727 RSC .
Z. Qiu, J. Shu, J. Liu and D. P. Tang, Anal. Chem., 2019, 91, 1260–1268 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, S. Lei, L. N. Zou, G. P. Li, L. L. Xu and B. X. Ye, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2019, 131, 113–118 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, G.-C. Fan, F. Gao, Y. Cui, W. Wang and X. Luo, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2019, 127, 64–71 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-T. Cao, B. Wang, Y.-X. Dong, Q. Wang, S.-W. Ren, Y.-M. Liu and W.-W. Zhao, ACS Sens., 2018, 3, 1087–1092 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. W. Zhao, J. J. Xu and H. Y. Chen, Anal. Chem., 2018, 90, 615–627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Y. Lee, H. S. Park, J. C. Fontecilla-Camps and E. Reisner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 5971–5974 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, L. Tu, S. Zhao, G. Liu, Y. Wang, Y. Wang and Z. Yue, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2015, 67, 296–302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. W. Zhao, J. J. Xu and H. Y. Chen, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2017, 92, 294–304 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, Y. Meng, C. Zhang, H. Xiao, Y. Li, Y. Tan and Q. Xie, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 9394–9404 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, W. Liang, R. Yuan and Y. Chai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 11834–11840 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Hao, J. W. Lu, M. Chi, M. Xiong, Y. Zhang, R. Hua and K. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2019, 7, 1133–1141 RSC .
Y. X. Chu, A.-P. Deng, W. J. Wang and J.-J. Zhu, Anal. Chem., 2019, 91, 3619–3627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Z. Han, R. Y. Wang, B. Xing, T. Zhang, M. S. Khan, D. Wu and Q. Wei, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2018, 99, 493–499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Li, C. Xiong, Y. N. Zheng, W. B. Liang, R. Yuan and Y. Q. Chai, Anal. Chem., 2018, 90, 8211–8216 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Y. Wang, C. L. Qi, W. H. He, M. H. Wang, W. J. Jiang, H. S. Yin and S. Y. Ai, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2018, 99, 281–288 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zang, J. Fan, Y. Ju, H. G. Xue and H. Pang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2018, 24, 14010–14027 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jian, G. S. Jiang, R. van de Krol, B. Q. Wei and H. Q. Wang, Nano Energy, 2018, 51, 457–480 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hoang, S. P. Berglund, N. T. Hahn, A. J. Bard and C. B. Mullins, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 3659–3662 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Y. Wang, Y. C. Ling, H. Y. Wang, X. Y. Yang, C. C. Wang, J. Z. Zhang and Y. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6180 RSC .
I. C. Andreas Kay and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 15714–15721 CrossRef PubMed .
A. W. Xunyu Yang, G. Wang, A. Sobo, R. C. Fitzmorris, F. Qian, J. Z. Zhang and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2009, 2331–2336 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Paracchino, V. Laporte, K. Sivula, M. Gratzel and E. Thimsen, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 456–461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. L. Wu and Z. H. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 4883–4889 RSC .
Z. Z. Han, M. Luo, L. Chen, H. B. Pan, J. H. Chen and C. Y. Li, Microchim. Acta, 2017, 184, 2541–2549 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cui, J. Hu, M. Wang, X. K. Diao, C. C. Li and C. Y. Zhang, Anal. Chem., 2018, 90, 11478–11485 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. H. Wang, M. J. Li, Y. N. Zheng, T. Hu, Y. Q. Chai and R. Yuan, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2018, 120, 71–76 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Qileng, S. Y. Yang, J. Wei, N. Lu, H. T. Lei, Y. J. Liu and W. P. Liu, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 267, 216–223 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Tan, R. Amal and Y. H. Ng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 16498–16521 RSC .
S. Chen, M. N. Hossain and A. Chen, ChemElectroChem, 2018, 5, 523–530 CrossRef CAS .
F. Gao, X. Y. Chen, K. B. Yin, S. Dong, Z. F. Ren, F. Yuan, T. Yu, Z. G. Zou and J. M. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2889–2892 CrossRef CAS .
X.-P. Liu, X.-L. Xie, Y.-P. Wei, C.-J. Mao, J.-S. Chen, H.-L. Niu, J.-M. Song and B.-K. Jin, Microchim. Acta, 2018, 185 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. H. Wu, Y. X. Wang, Y. Xu, J. Ming, M. Zhou, R. Xu, Q. Fu and Y. Lei, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 23647–23653 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. W. Huang, R. R. Cao, S. X. Yu, K. Xu, W. C. Hao, Y. G. Wang, F. Dong, T. R. Zhang and Y. H. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 219, 526–537 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qiao, J. Li, H. Li, H. Fang, D. Fan and W. Wang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2016, 86, 315–320 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zang, J. P. Lei, Q. Hao and H. X. Ju, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2016, 77, 557–564 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Wang, C. M. Gao, S. G. Ge, J. H. Yu and M. Yan, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2016, 85, 205–211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. H. Pang, Y. Zhang, J. H. Pan, Y. X. Zhao, Y. Chen, X. Ren, H. Ma, Q. Wei and B. Du, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2016, 77, 330–338 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, J. Li, G. C. Pan, W. Xu, J. Y. Zhu, D. L. Zhou, D. Li, C. Chen, G. Y. Lu and H. W. Song, Sens. Actuators, B, 2019, 289, 131–137 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, Y.-L. Shen, G.-C. Fan, M. Xiong, X.-D. Yu and W.-W. Zhao, Microchim. Acta, 2019, 186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. F. Tang, Y. Chai, X. Q. Liu, L. L. Li, L. W. Yang, P. P. Liu, Y. M. Zhou, H. X. Ju and Y. Z. Cheng, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2018, 117, 224–231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liu, J. Huan, N. Hao, J. Qian, H. Mao and K. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 18369–18376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. N. Wang, Z. B. Liu, D. D. Wang, S. Ni, D. X. Han, W. Wang and L. Niu, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2017, 94, 107–114 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Z. Su, S. Y. Yang, W. P. Liu, L. Qiao, J. Yan, Y. J. Liu, S. S. Zhang and Y. P. Fang, Microchim. Acta, 2017, 184, 4065–4072 CrossRef CAS .
X. Q. Liu, P. P. Liu, Y. F. Tang, L. L. Yang, L. L. Li, Z. C. Qi, D. L. Li and D. K. Y. Wong, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2018, 112, 193–201 CrossRef CAS .
P. C. Yan, D. S. Jiang, H. N. Li, J. Biao, L. Xu, J. C. Qian, C. Chen and J. X. Xia, Sens. Actuators, B, 2019, 279, 466–475 CrossRef CAS .
K. Dashtian, M. Ghaedi and S. Hajati, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2019, 132, 105–114 CrossRef CAS .
R. N. Wang, M. Zu, S. Y. Yang, S. Q. Zhang, W. Y. Zhou, Z. Y. Mai, C. Y. Ge, Y. H. Xu, Y. P. Fang and S. S. Zhang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 270, 270–276 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhu, L. Zhang, B. Cheng and J. Yu, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 224, 983–999 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. She, L. Liu, H. Y. Ji, Z. Mo, Y. P. Li, L. Y. Huang, D. L. Du, H. Xu and H. M. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 187, 144–153 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Wu, X. F. Wang, F. Z. Wang and H. G. Yu, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 247, 70–77 CrossRef CAS .
P. P. Li, X. P. Liu, C. J. Mao, B. K. Jin and J. J. Zhu, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2019, 1048, 42–49 CrossRef CAS .
P. C. Yan, D. S. Jiang, Y. H. Tian, L. Xu, J. C. Qian, H. N. Li, J. Xia and H. M. Li, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2018, 111, 74–81 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Motaghed Mazhabi, L. Ge, H. Jiang and X. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2018, 6, 5039–5049 RSC .
H. Y. Wang, P. Liu, W. J. Jiang, X. Li, H. S. Yin and S. Y. Ai, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 244, 458–465 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lv, Y. Li, K. Zhang, Z. Lin and D. Tang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 38336–38343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Y. Chen, D. Jiang, X. J. Du, L. Zhou, L. Huang, J. Qian, Q. Liu, N. Hao, Y. P. Li and K. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 215, 305–312 CrossRef CAS .
R. Rauti, M. Musto, S. Bosi, M. Prato and L. Ballerini, Carbon, 2019, 143, 430–446 CrossRef CAS .
B. Bayatsarmadi, Y. Zheng, A. Vasileff and S. Z. Qiao, Small, 2017, 13 Search PubMed .
M. Terrones, A. R. Botello-Mendez, J. Campos-Delgado, F. Lopez-Urias, Y. I. Vega-Cantu, F. J. Rodriguez-Macias, A. L. Elias, E. Munoz-Sandoval, A. G. Cano-Marquez, J.-C. Charlier and H. Terrones, Nano Today, 2010, 5, 351–372 CrossRef .
C. Li and G. Q. Shi, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3992–4012 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, C. G. Hu, Y. Hu, H. H. Cheng, G. Q. Shi and L. T. Qu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 11371–11375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. W. Yu, M. Zhang, J. Chen, Y. R. Li and G. Q. Shi, Adv.
Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501492 CrossRef .
J. J. Yang, D. M. Chen, Y. Zhu, Y. M. Zhang and Y. F. Zhu, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 205, 228–237 CrossRef CAS .
M. X. Shang, H. Qi, C. C. Du, H. Huang, S. Y. Wu, J. L. Zhang and W. B. Song, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 266, 71–79 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Kang, Y. Li, S. Y. Cao, Z. H. Zhang, H. J. Guo, P. W. Wu, L. X. Zhou, S. C. Zhang, X. M. Zhang and Y. Zhang, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2018, 5, 364–369 RSC .
N. Hao, R. Hua, S. B. Chen, Y. Zhang, Z. Zhou, J. Qian, Q. Liu and K. Wang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2018, 101, 14–20 CrossRef CAS .
P. Cottingham and R. L. Brutchey, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 5246–5249 RSC .
M. C. Liu, X. Ding, Q. W. Yang, Y. Wang, G. H. Zhao and N. J. Yang, J. Hazard. Mater., 2017, 331, 309–320 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Y. Yang, X. X. Yan, Y. M. Li, X. H. Zhang and J. H. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 42482–42491 CrossRef CAS .
H. N. Li, M. Y. Zhu, S. S. Wang, W. Chen, Q. Liu, J. Qian, N. Hao and K. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 8999–9005 RSC .
S. G. Ullattil, S. B. Narendranath, S. C. Pillai and P. Periyat, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 343, 708–736 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, H. Yin, X. Li, G. I. N. Waterhouse and S. Ai, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2019, 131, 163–170 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xue, Z. Zhang, F. Zheng, Q. Xu, J. Xu, G. Zou, L. Li and J. J. Zhu, Anal. Chem., 2017, 89, 8212–8216 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Yang, Y. Gao, Z. P. Ji, L. B. Zhu, C. Yang, Y. Zhao, Y. Shu, D. Q. Jin, Q. Xu and W. W. Zhao, Anal. Chem., 2019, 91, 9356–9360 CrossRef CAS .
F. Dridi, M. Marrakchi, M. Gargouri, A. Garcia-Cruz, S. Dzyadevych, F. Vocanson, J. Saulnier, N. Jaffrezic-Renault and F. Lagarde, Sens. Actuators, B, 2015, 221, 480–490 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Vidal, L. Bonel, A. Ezquerra, S. Hernandez, J. R. Bertolin, C. Cubel and J. R. Castillo, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2013, 49, 146–158 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Al-Taher, K. Banaszewski, L. Jackson, J. Zweigenbaum, D. Ryu and J. Cappozzo, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2013, 61, 2378–2384 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Q. Song, N. Liu, Z. Y. Zhao, E. Njumbe Ediage, S. L. Wu, C. P. Sun, S. De Saeger and A. B. Wu, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 4995–5001 CrossRef CAS .
Y. K. Wang, Y. X. Yan, S. Q. Li, H. A. Wang, W. H. Ji and J. H. Sun, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2013, 61, 10948–10953 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. C. A. Gelderblom, S. Catherine Bezuidenhout, C. P. Gorst-Allman, R. Marthinus Horak, G. Spiteller, W. F. O. Marasas and R. Vleggaar, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1988, 743–745 Search PubMed .
F. A. Martins, F. M. D. Ferreira, F. D. Ferreira, É. Bando, S. B. Nerilo, E. Y. Hirooka and M. Machinski, Food Control, 2012, 26, 614–618 CrossRef CAS .
T. Chotchuang, W. Cheewasedtham, T. J. Jayeoye and T. Rujiralai, Microchim. Acta, 2019, 186 Search PubMed .
M. Shu, Y. Xu, D. Wang, X. Liu, Y. P. Li, Q. H. He, Z. Tu, Y. L. Qiu, Y. W. Ji and X. X. Wang, Talanta, 2015, 143, 388–393 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Munawar, A. H. M. Safaryan, A. De Girolamo, A. Garcia-Cruz, P. Marote, K. Karim, V. Lippolis, M. Pascale and S. A. Piletsky, Food Chem., 2019, 298 Search PubMed .
Y.-S. Li, Y. Zhou, S.-Y. Lu, D.-J. Guo, H.-L. Ren, X.-M. Meng, B.-H. Zhi, C. Lin, Z. Wang, X.-B. Li and Z.-S. Liu, Food Control, 2012, 24, 72–77 CrossRef CAS .
L. B. Mao, K. L. Ji, L. L. Yao, X. J. Xue, W. Wen, X. H. Zhang and S. F. Wang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2019, 127, 57–63 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. L. Sun, Y. F. Zhang, G. P. Sun, X. N. Wang and D. Tang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2017, 89, 659–665 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. TunÇEl, E. M. ÖNcÜ Kaya, Ü. D. Uysal and T. GÜRay, Turk. J. Chem., 2015, 39, 372–381 CrossRef .
J. Tang, P. Y. Xiong, Y. Cheng, Y. Chen, S. W. Peng and Z. Q. Zhu, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2019, 130, 125–131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Yang, P. C. Gao, Y. X. Liu, R. X. Li, H. M. Ma, B. Du and Q. Wei, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2015, 64, 13–18 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. X. Yang, G. K. Liu, H. M. Mehedi, Q. Ouyang and Q. S. Chen, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2017, 986, 122–130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, Y. H. Zhang, Y. G. Chu, H. M. Ma, Y. Li, D. Wu, B. Du and Q. Wei, Talanta, 2016, 147, 556–560 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. L. Zheng, J. Teng, L. Cheng, Y. W. Ye, D. D. Pan, J. J. Wu, F. Xue, G. D. Liu and W. Chen, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2016, 80, 574–581 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. L. Li, L. X. Cao, Y. J. Zhang, P. S. Yan and D. W. Kirk, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 247, 1052–1059 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Feng, Y. Y. Li, Z. Q. Gao, H. Lv, X. B. Zhang, Y. H. Dong, P. Wang, D. W. Fan and Q. Wei, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 270, 104–111 CrossRef CAS .
Y. L. Li, S. P. Zhang, H. Dai, Y. Y. Lin, B. S. Zeng and Z. S. Hong, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2016, 783, 242–249 CrossRef CAS .
B. Peng, L. Tang, G. Zeng, Y. Zhou, Y. Zhang, B. Long, S. Fang, S. Chen and J. Yu, Curr. Anal. Chem., 2018, 14 Search PubMed .
L. Cui, J. Wu and H. X. Ju, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2015, 63, 276–286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, G. M. Zeng, L. Tang, J. Chen, Y. Zhu, X. X. He and Y. He, Anal. Chem., 2015, 87, 989–996 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. M. Wu, H. Wang, S. X. Yang, H. Y. Tian, Y. G. Liu and B. G. Sun, Food Chem., 2019, 284, 23–27 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          C. Zhang, Y. Zhou, L. Tang, G. Zeng, J. Zhang, B. Peng, X. Xie, C. Lai, B. Long and J. Zhu, Nanomaterials, 2016.
J. Zhu, Y. Chen, C. Lv, W. Wu and S. Qin, Food Control, 2019, 106, 614–618 Search PubMed .
B. Zhang and L. H. Guo, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2012, 37, 112–115 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Chung, J. H. Kim, J. Jung and B. H. Chung, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2013, 41, 827–832 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Leopold, M. Foulkes and P. Worsfold, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2010, 663, 127–138 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhao, G.-C. Fan, J.-J. Chen, J.-J. Shi and J.-J. Zhu, Anal. Chem., 2015, 87, 12340–12347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kumar, S. Jaiswal, K. K. Sodhi, P. Shree, D. K. Singh, P. K. Agrawal and P. Shukla, Environ. Int., 2019, 124, 448–461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Y. Ma, J. B. Pan, C. Y. Lu, W. W. Zhao, J. J. Xu and H. Y. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 12088–12090 RSC .
H. B. Li, Y. Xue and W. Wang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2014, 54, 317–322 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zang, J. P. Lei, Q. Hao and H. X. Ju, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 15991–15997 CrossRef CAS .
G.-L. Wang, T.-T. Gu, Y.-M. Dong, X.-M. Wu and Z.-J. Li, Electrochem. Commun., 2015, 61, 117–120 CrossRef CAS .
B. T. Zhang, L. Lu, Q. Hu, F. Huang and Z. Lin, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2014, 56, 243–249 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Shi, J. C. Zhu, M. Zhao, Y. Wang, P. Yang and J. He, Talanta, 2018, 183, 237–244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Jiang, X. J. Du, D. Y. Chen, L. Zhou, W. Chen, Y. Li, N. Hao, J. Qian, Q. Liu and K. Wang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2016, 83, 149–155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Challagulla, R. Nagarjuna, R. Ganesan and S. Roy, ACS Sustainable
Chem. Eng., 2016, 4, 974–982 CrossRef CAS .
L. Y. Lan, Y. Yao, J. F. Ping and Y. B. Ying, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2017, 91, 504–514 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G.-k. Liu, H. Zheng and J.-l. Lu, Trends Environ. Anal. Chem., 2017, 16, 16–23 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Chaudhary, Acta Pharm. Sin. B, 2016, 6, 552–556 CrossRef PubMed .
C. J. Sui, Y. L. Zhou, M. Y. Wang, H. S. Yin, P. Wang and S. Y. Ai, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 266, 514–521 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, S. Yin, Y. X. Li, D. Lu, J. Zhang and C. J. Sun, TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem., 2017, 95, 1–22 CrossRef CAS .
L. Shen, J. Chen, N. Li, P. L. He and Z. Li, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2014, 839, 83–90 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Gan, Z. X. Shi, J. Y. Sun and Y. M. Liu, Talanta, 2014, 121, 187–193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-J. Xu, M. R. An, R. Yang, Z. J. Tan, J. Hao, J. Cao, L.-Q. Peng and W. Cao, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2016, 64, 2647–2654 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, K. Yan and J. D. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 28255–28264 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Lee, J. Teuscher, T. Miyasaka, T. N. Murakami and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2012, 643–647 CrossRef PubMed .
H. B. Li, J. Li, Y. F. Qiao, H. L. Fang, D. H. Fan and W. Wang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 243, 1027–1033 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, Y. Wang, W. Xu, X. Q. Leng, H. Z. Wang, Y. N. Guo and J. D. Huang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2017, 88, 181–187 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yan, Y. Liu, Y. Yang and J. D. Zhang, Anal. Chem., 2015, 87, 12215–12220 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Peng, L. Tang, G. M. Zeng, S. Y. Fang, X. L. Ouyang, B. Q. Long, Y. Y. Zhou, Y. C. Deng, Y. N. Liu and J. J. Wang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2018, 121, 19–26 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Jiang, X. J. Du, Q. Liu, N. Hao and K. Wang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2019, 126, 463–469 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. F. Qin, Q. Q. Wang, L. P. Geng, X. L. Shu and Y. Wang, Talanta, 2019, 197, 28–35 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. A. Karaseva and T. N. Ermolaeva, Talanta, 2012, 93, 44–48 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, K. Yan, O. K. Okoth and J. D. Zhang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2015, 74, 1016–1021 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. K. Okoth, K. Yan and J. D. Zhang, Carbon, 2017, 120, 194–202 CrossRef CAS .
X. X. Xu, D. Liu, L. J. Luo, L. B. Li, K. Wang and T. Y. You, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 251, 564–571 CrossRef CAS .
N. D. Zhou, J. Y. Wang, J. Zhang, C. Li, Y. P. Tian and J. Wang, Talanta, 2013, 108, 109–116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. M. Song, M. Cho, H. Jo, K. Min, S. H. Jeon, T. Kim, M. S. Han, J. K. Ku and C. Ban, Anal. Biochem., 2011, 415, 175–181 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Z. Li, Y. Liu, L. Cheng, C. Z. Yang and J. D. Zhang, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 9372–9375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. M. Song, E. Jeong, W. Jeon, H. Jo and C. Ban, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2012, 33, 113–119 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. K. Okoth, K. Yan, Y. Liu and J. D. Zhang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2016, 86, 636–642 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. H. You, M. Y. Zhu, L. J. Ding, Y. Xu and K. Wang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2019, 130, 230–235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Capoferri, F. Della Pelle, M. Del Carlo and D. Compagnone, Foods, 2018, 7 Search PubMed .
F. N. Zhao, J. Wu, Y. B. Ying, Y. X. She, J. Wang and J. F. Ping, TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem., 2018, 106, 62–83 CrossRef CAS .
D. Rawtani, N. Khatri, S. Tyagi and G. Pandey, J. Environ. Manage., 2018, 206, 749–762 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Lu, S. S. Li, B. Yin, J. Y. Mi and H. L. Zhai, Food Chem., 2019, 290, 72–78 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-W. Zhou, X.-M. Zou, S.-H. Song and G.-H. Chen, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2018, 66, 1307–1319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yan, H. X. Li and X. G. Su, TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem., 2018, 103, 1–20 CrossRef CAS .
H. B. Li, J. Li, Q. Xu, Z. J. Yang and X. Y. Hu, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2013, 766, 47–52 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Song, S. Wu, P. P. Xing, Y. Q. Zhao and J. L. Yuan, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2018, 1001, 24–31 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liu, J. R. Cai, J. Huan, X. Y. Dong, C. K. Wang, B. J. Qiu and K. Wang, Analyst, 2014, 139, 1121–1126 RSC .
X. Y. Li, Z. Z. Zheng, X. F. Liu, S. L. Zhao and S. Q. Liu, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2015, 64, 1–5 CrossRef PubMed .
H. P. Mao, Y. T. Yan, N. Hao, Q. Liu, J. Qian, S. B. Chen and K. Wang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 238, 239–248 CrossRef CAS .
H. B. Li, Y. F. Qiao, J. Li, H. L. Fang, D. H. Fan and W. Wang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2016, 77, 378–384 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. F. Fan, G. H. Zhao, H. J. Shi, M. C. Liu and Z. X. Li, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2013, 43, 12–18 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Q. Jin, Q. Xu, L. G. Yu, A. R. Mao and X. Y. Hu, Food Chem., 2016, 194, 959–965 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. T. Yan, H. N. Li, Q. Liu, N. Hao, H. P. Mao and K. Wang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 251, 99–107 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liu, J. Huan, X. Y. Dong, J. Qian, N. Hao, T. Y. You, H. P. Mao and K. Wang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2016, 235, 647–654 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Tian, Y. Li, J. J. Dong, M. J. Huang and J. S. Lu, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2018, 110, 1–7 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Q. Jin, A. Q. Gong and H. Zhou, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 17489–17496 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic of the instrument composition, detection principle and applications of PEC biosensors.	 

 	Fig. 2  (A) Anodic and (B) cathodic photocurrent generation mechanisms of semiconductor nanoparticles (NPs) in connection with electrodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 9. Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematics of PEC biosensors based on semiconductors: (A) schematic of (a) the fabrication of a proposed biosensor based on ZnO and (b) the formation processes of dendrimer DNA hybridization. Reproduced with permission from ref. 76. Copyright (2017) Tsinghua University Press and Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg. (B) Schematic of a signal-on PEC biosensor for a PNK assay with MnME@AuNPs-P2 catalytic insoluble precipitation on Bi2S3 nanorods as the photoactive material. Reproduced with permission from ref. 77. Copyright (2018) American Chemical Society. (C) Schematic of the fabricating steps of a PEC immunosensor based on LaFeO3 nanoparticles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 83. Copyright (2018) Tsinghua University Press and Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematics of PEC biosensors based on semiconductor–semiconductor heterojunctions: (A) schematic of a CdS/MoS2 heterojunction-enhanced PEC sensing strategy coupled with CHA and hemin-mediated chemiluminescence. Reproduced with permission from ref. 87. Copyright (2018) Elsevier. (B) Schematic of the assembly and PEC mechanism of an aptasensor based on a CuS–TiO2 composite. Reproduced with permission from ref. 92. Copyright (2018) Elsevier. (C) Schematic of the enhanced photocurrent generation mechanism of a direct Z-scheme CdTe/Bi2S3 heterojunction. Reproduced with permission from ref. 93. Copyright (2018) American Chemical Society. (D) Synthesis of a TiO2–MoS2–AuNP composite; fabrication steps of a kanamycin aptasensor and its PEC mechanism for detection. Reproduced with permission from ref. 96. Copyright (2018) Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematics of PEC biosensors based on carbon–semiconductors: (A) schematic of the preparation of a-MoSx/RGO hybrid film and the mechanism for PEC detection of glucose. Reproduced with permission from ref. 116. Copyright (2018) Elsevier. (B) Schematic of the as-fabricated Ag/TiO2/3DNGH aptasensor for detecting thrombin. Reproduced with permission from ref. 118. Copyright (2018) Elsevier. (C) (a) Schematic of the preparation of NPC–ZnO nanopolyhedra and (b) mechanism of an NPC–ZnO nanopolyhedra-based PEC biosensor for an alkaline phosphatase (ALP) assay. Reproduced with permission from ref. 121. Copyright (2017) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematics of PEC biosensors for detection of mycotoxins: (A) schematic of the fabrication process of an MIP-PEC sensor for detection of FB1 and the mechanism of photocurrent generation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 138. Copyright (2019) Elsevier. (B) Schematic of the PEC immunosensor fabrication process for detection of OTA. Reproduced with permission from ref. 142. Copyright (2015) Elsevier. (C) Preparation of BiVO4@Ag+-anti-AFB1 labels (a) and fabrication of a competitive-type PEC immunosensor for detection of AFB1 (b). Reproduced with permission from ref. 147. Copyright (2018) Elsevier. (D) (a) Fabrication procedure of a PEC immunosensor for detection of AFB1 and (b) the mechanism of the photo-initiated electron transfer pathways and the structure of dendritic SiPcs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 148. Copyright (2016) Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematics of PEC biosensors for detection of heavy metals: (A) fabrication procedure of a PEC biosensor for Hg2+ detection. Reproduced with permission from ref. 158. Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society. (B) Schematic of the fabrication of a folding-based Hg2+ biosensor and PEC analysis of Hg2+ through the T–Hg2+–T complex. Reproduced with permission from ref. 160. Copyright (2014) the Royal Society of Chemistry. (C) Schematic of the stepwise modification of an ITO/RGO/CdS/aptamer sensing platform and “signal-on” PEC detection. Strategy of Pb2+ detection on the basis of duplex–quadruplex conversion and the RET process between CdS QDs and Au NPs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 162. Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society. (D) Schematic of the preparation of the as-fabricated “on–off–on” switch system-based PEC aptasensor for detection of Pb2+. Reproduced with permission from ref. 166. Copyright (2016) Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematics of PEC biosensors for the detection of antibiotics: (A) schematic of PEC aptasensing of Tc based on g-C3N4–CdS composites. Reproduced with permission from ref. 176. Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society. (B) Fabrication process of a PEC aptasensor for CAP detection. Reproduced with permission from ref. 183. Copyright (2019) Elsevier. (C) Schematic of an STR PEC aptasensor based on CdTe–SWCNHs nanocomposite. Reproduced with permission from ref. 187. Copyright (2017) Elsevier. (D) Schematic of PEC aptasensing of SDM based on Bi2S3/NGQDs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 193. Copyright (2019) Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematics of PEC biosensors for detection of pesticides: (A) schematic of the preparation process of a PEC biosensor for chlorpyrifos detection. Reproduced with permission from ref. 37. Copyright (2018) Elsevier. (B) Schematic of the fabrication of a PEC acetamiprid aptasensor based on an “on–off–on” strategy. Reproduced with permission from ref. 208. Copyright (2017) Elsevier. (C) The construction of a TiO2 nanotube array enzymatic bioreactor and in situ synthesis of CdS QDs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 210. Copyright (2018) Elsevier. (D) (A) Fabrication process of the GOx/CS/NH2-MIL-125(Ti)/TiO2 biosensor and (B) the corresponding electron-transfer mechanism. Reproduced with permission from ref. 211. Copyright (2017) the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
