Improving performance of polymer photovoltaic devices using an annealing-free approach via construction of ordered aggregates in solution  - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B719945G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B719945G
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 1984-1990Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsImproving performance of polymer photovoltaic devices using an annealing-free approach via construction of ordered aggregates in solution

        
          
            Ligui 
            Li
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Guanghao 
            Lu
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Xiaoniu 
            Yang
          
        
      *
      State Key Laboratory of Polymer Physics and Chemistry, Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Graduate School of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Changchun 130022, P. R. China. E-mail: xnyang@ciac.jl.cn
Received 
      2nd January 2008
    , Accepted 26th February 2008First published on 11th March 2008AbstractLow crystalline order has been proved to be one of the main hindrances for achieving high performance devices based on thin films composed of crystallizable polymer. In this work, we use a facile method to substantially improve crystallinity of poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) in its pure or composite film via the construction of ordered precursors in the solution used for thin film deposition. These improvements have been confirmed by bright-field transmission electron micrography, electron diffraction, UV-Vis absorption and wide-angle X-ray diffraction. The electrical conductivity of thus obtained P3HT films is increased by almost two orders of magnitude. Polymer solar cells based on P3HT:PCBM ([6,6]-phenyl C61 butyric acid methyl ester) composite fabricated using this method achieve power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) as high as 3.9%, which is almost four times that of pristine devices and also higher than thermally-annealed devices under the same measurement conditions. This simple method paves the way for the fabrication of high performance devices with an “annealing-free” approach, and enriches the ways to improve crystalline order in thin films comprising crystallizable polymers.
Introduction
The discovery of conjugated polymers has opened a new and fast developing research field in association with fields such as polymer science, optoelectronics and material science. On one hand, as a type of polymer, conjugated polymers could be easily processed by using low cost solution-based thin film deposition technology, thus obtained films are flexible, large-area and lightweight.1–3 On the other hand, by utilizing their unique (opto)electronic properties, conjugated polymers have great potential in numerous applications such as chemical sensors,4,5 optical devices,6,7 light-emitting diodes,8,9 thin film transistors,10–12polymer solar cells.13,14
Competing with traditional inorganic semiconductor materials, one of the main disadvantages of the conjugated polymers (organic semiconductors) is the lower charge carrier mobility,15 which frequently leads to low-performance or even failure of the devices based on these organic semi-conducting materials. Therefore, how to improve charge carrier mobility is one of the most important requirements for conjugated polymers.16 Besides the intrinsic molecular structure of the polymer, another important factor that plays a key role in determining charge carrier mobility is the crystalline order of the polymer in its thin film.17,18 It should be noted that the conjugated polymer is typically applied to the corresponding device in a state of thin film or thin composite film as the functional layer. The crystallization of the components is therefore substantially retarded by both the less ordered molecular architecture of dissolvable conjugated polymers and the very fast solvent evaporation during thin film deposition, which is a kinetically unfavorable circumstance for crystal growth. In order to improve the solubility of the conjugated polymer in common solvents so that solution-based thin film deposition technology could be applied for device fabrication, the polymer has to be decorated with various soluble side-chains onto its main backbone. The addition of these substituted groups decreases the symmetry of the polymer chain and its crystallization capability is thus greatly hampered. As a typical thin film deposition method, spin coating could achieve a large-scale homogeneous film. However, the nature of very fast solvent evaporation associated with this method also substantially suppresses crystallization of the components involved, particularly for those relatively low crystallizable components such as conjugated polymers.13,19 To mend this drawback, post-thermal treatment14,20,21 or solvent-annealing22–25 are frequently employed as a compensation for further re-crystallization. Nevertheless, the crystallinity enhancement via post-thermal treatment is highly dependent on the annealing temperature and time used. Annealing at lower temperatures or with shorter times doesn't increase crystallinity that much. While annealing at higher temperatures or with longer times not only induces large-scale phase separation for those multi-component systems,26–28 but also introduces oxidation or degradation risks to the functional layer.29 For these reasons, Berson et al.30 have developed a new method to increase the crystallinity of poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) in the active layer by preparing nano-fibers of this conjugated polymervia cooling down its saturated solution, which is subsequently separated using centrifugation and filtration, and finally re-dispersed in a fresh solvent. Kietzke et al.31 have also developed an approach to control the phase separation in a polymer–polymer (PFB:F8BT) photovoltaic (PV) device via dispersion of pre-formed polymer nanospheres. Unfortunately, the performance of thus fabricated devices is still rather low. Previously, Kiriy et al. introduced a method of successfully constructing polyalkylthiophene nanorods in dilute solution by adding a poor solvent to the solution.32 Very recently or exactly parallel to our work, Moulé and Meerholz have introduced a similar method to control the morphology of composite films, which gives substantially increased device performance.33 Additionally, there are still a few studies on the “annealing-free” approach to achieve high performance poly(3-alkylthiophene) (P3AT)-based photovoltaic cells without post thermal annealing.34
Here we use P3HT and its composite with a methanofullerene, [6,6]-phenyl C61 butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM)13,21,35,36 as an example to present a facile and effective thin film deposition method to significantly increase the crystallinity of the conjugated polymer therein. In this simple method, ordered aggregates of P3HT are firstly constructed via gradual addition of poor solvent into a well-dissolved P3HT–o-dichlorobenzene (ODCB) (or P3HT–chloroform) solution. The obtained solution is used for conventional thin film deposition by using for example, spin coating. Both the conductivity of the thin P3HT film and performance of the photovoltaic devices based on P3HT:PCBM composite have been significantly improved by using this facile method.
Experimental
Materials

          Poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) with Mw = 100000 g mol−1, with regioregularity better than 98%, was purchased from Rieke Metals Inc. PCBM and o-dichlorobenzene (ODCB, anhydrous, 99%) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich Co. Ltd. n-Hexane was purchased from Beijing Chemical Reagent Co. Ltd, China. All these materials were used as received without further treatment.

          Sample preparations
        
The solutions with pure solvent (ODCB or CHCl3) were prepared by putting a certain amount of P3HT or P3HT–PCBM (1 : 1, w/w) in the solvent to achieve solutions with concentrations of P3HT–solvent of 8.0 mg ml−1. This mixture was stirred in the dark for more than 5 h.
The P3HT or P3HT–PCBM (1 : 1, w/w) solutions using mixed solvents were prepared as follows: a P3HT-only solution with a concentration of 8.0 mg ml−1 was firstly prepared in the pure good solvent (ODCB or CHCl3); Afterwards, drops of n-hexane were slowly (∼0.2 ml min−1 per 1 ml ODCB or CHCl3) and gradually titrated into the solution with continuous gentle stirring to avoid local high concentrations of hexane, which is the key point for this experiment. Upon the addition of hexane into P3HT–ODCB (or CHCl3), the color of the solution gradually changed from yellow brown to dark brown. The optimized ratio of hexane : ODCB is around 1 : 2 for the purpose of achieving homogenous thin films in this investigation. The calculation of ageing time of the solution started as the last drop of hexane was added to the solution. The difference in preparing P3HT : PCBM (1 : 1, w/w) composite films with various ageing times is that the designated amount of PCBM is added to the hexane–ODCB solution after the solution have been aged for certain time. After the addition of PCBM, the solution with mixed solvents was continuously stirred for another 3 h so that PCBM could be dissolved completely. Therefore, the actual ageing time of the solution for composite film preparation is the summation of the ageing time of P3HT in hexane–ODCB solution and an additional 3 h for PCBM dissolution.
The thin films for UV-Vis and wide-angle X-ray diffraction (WAXD) measurements were obtained viaspin coating (Laurell Spin Processor WS-400B 6 NPP Lite) the as prepared solutions onto pre-cleaned glass cover slides. A spin coating speed within 800–1200 rpm was selected so as to eventually achieve homogeneous thin films having dimensions of the order of a square centimetre with thickness of ca. 80 nm.

          PV
          cells were fabricated under ambient conditions according to standard device fabrication procedures, i.e. firstly, a ∼60 nm thick poly(ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) layer was spin coated onto a well-cleaned14 glass substrate covered with a 100 nm thick layer of indium tin oxide (ITO). Second, the photoactive layer was fabricated by depositing the prepared solution viaspin coating. The thickness of the photoactive layer is around 80 nm for all the devices. Finally, the devices were completed by evaporation of a 1 nm LiF layer and subsequently a 100 nm Al back electrode.
Characterization

          WAXD profiles were obtained by using a Bruker D8 Discover Reflector with X-ray generation power of 40 kV tube voltage and 40 mA tube current. The diffraction was recorded at a θ–2θ symmetry scanning mode with scan angle from 2θ = 3°–18°. The thickness of the film was determined by the same instrument working in reflectivity mode (XRR).

TEM was performed on a JEOL JEM-1011 transmission electron microscope operated at an acceleration voltage of 100 kV. To quantitatively relate the diffraction intensity in SAED patterns to the crystallinity of the specimen investigated, all these SAED patterns were performed using a standard recording mode, i.e. fixed magnification, field-limiting aperture of 100 μm, current density of 0.6 pA cm−2 and exposure time of 11.0 s for SAED acquisition. Identical time and conditions were used for film development. All the negatives were digitalized using the same settings.

UV-Vis
absorption spectra were acquired on a Lambda 750 spectrometer (Perkin-Elmer, Wellesley, MA).
The film samples for electrical conductivity measurements were prepared by drop casting the solutions on pre-cleaned glass substrates and dried in the dark under a nitrogen atmosphere for 24 h at room temperature. Films of comparable thickness (∼1 μm) were ensured for the convenience of comparison. A 2-probe method was used for conductivity measurements.
The performance characterization for the PV cells was carried out with a Keithley-2400 source meter. The cells are illuminated by a tungsten-halogen lamp (filtered by a Schott KG1 and GG385 filter resulting in a spectral range of 400–900 nm with a maximum at 650 nm) at an intensity of 40 mW cm−2.
Results and discussion
As shown in Fig. 1, only one peak at λ = 465 nm can be resolved from well-dissolved P3HT–ODCB solution with a concentration of ca. 8.0 mg ml−1 (P3HT–ODCB). This peak is associated with the intra-chain π–π* transition of P3HT.34,37–39 However, upon addition of hexane, a poor solvent for P3HT, into this P3HT–ODCB solution, an absorption peak at 607 nm occurs and its intensity gets higher as the ratio of hexane in the mixed solvents increases. It has been confirmed that this additional absorption peak at 607 nm comes from the interchain transition of P3HT, and its intensity is correlated to the degree of interchain order.39,40
 Fig. 1  
UV-Vis spectra of P3HT in hexane–ODCB demonstrate the formation of ordered P3HT aggregates in the solution as the ratio of poor solvent hexane to good solvent ODCB for P3HT increases. 
Therefore, the occurrence of this absorption peak hints at the presence of ordered aggregates associated with interchain π–π stacking in the solution.34,37,41–43 The subsequent appearance of a vibronic shoulder peak at 558 nm, which also increases with hexane concentration in the solution, is attributed to the absorptions of extended conjugation lengths32 resulting from the ordered packing of P3HT backbones in the solid state such as in thin films.39
It should be noted that the formation of ordered precursors in solution is a relatively slow process. As a result, the amount of those ordered precursors in solution is gradually increased with ageing time. As shown in Fig. 2, the absorption intensity of the peak at 607 nm gets higher with ageing time in hexane–ODCB (1 : 2, v/v) solution, indicating a gradual formation of ordered aggregates. However, the maximum absorption intensity of the peak at 607 nm is obtained at an ageing time of around 18 h, which hints that an equilibrium state has been already reached in hexane–ODCB solution. In order to ensure a large-scale homogeneous thin film, we eventually choose an optimized ageing time of about 16 h for device fabrication.
 Fig. 2  
UV-Vis spectra of P3HT in hexane–ODCB (1 : 2, v/v) solution demonstrate the gradual formation of ordered P3HT aggregates in the solution as ageing time increases. 
Since ordered aggregates have been successfully constructed in the solution, we are curious whether these domains could significantly contribute to the crystalline order development in the corresponding thin films. Fig. 3 shows the comparisons of transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images and corresponding selected-area electron diffraction (SAED) patterns of P3HT films deposited from the solutions without and with ordered aggregates. Due to the high volatility of the solvent chloroform, P3HT film prepared from this solution using a spin coating method usually results in very low crystallinity, as shown in Fig. 3a. In contrast, highly crystallized P3HT film is obtained from the solution with ordered aggregates even applying the identical parameters to thin film deposition. Numerous fibrillar P3HT crystals with lengths of the order of microns densely overlapped within the thin film (Fig. 3b), which contributes to the substantially increased crystallinity. With respect to the P3HT film prepared from ODCB solution, thanks to the relative slower evaporation of ODCB during spin coating, which allows formation of a few short (ca. several hundreds nanometres) and imperfect fibrillar P3HT crystals, as shown in Fig. 3c. Definitely, the crystallinity of this film is still much lower in comparison with its competitor as prepared from the solution with ordered aggregates upon addition of hexane. Similar to the film prepared from hexane/chloroform solution, the film deposited from hexane–ODCB solution also comprises numerous fibrillar P3HT crystals with even longer length and more straight (Fig. 3d) appearance. Therefore, we can conclude that ordered aggregates constructed in the solutions do favor the significantly improved crystallinity of the thin P3HT films.
 Fig. 3  
Bright-field transmission electron microscopy (BF-TEM) images and corresponding selected-area electron diffraction (SAED) patterns show substantially increased crystallinity of P3HT in thin films as prepared from the solutions with ordered aggregates: (a) from CHCl3 solution without aggregation; (b) from hexane–CHCl3 solution with ordered aggregates; (c) from ODCB solution without aggregation; (d) from hexane–ODCB solution with ordered aggregates. Scale bar: 500 nm. 
It would be of interest to verify whether the increased crystallinity of P3HT could really contribute to a significantly increased electric conductivity in its thin film. As illustrated in Fig. 4, the conductivity of P3HT films substantially increases with ageing time of the solution-based on mixed hexane–ODCB solvents. In particular, the conductivity of the film prepared from the solution with an ageing time of 16 h shows one order of magnitude higher than that from the solution without any ordered precursors i.e. from pure ODCB solution which is denoted as an ageing time of 0 in Fig. 4. This observation unambiguously confirms that the increased P3HT crystallinity via the method introduced in this work could significantly improve electric conductivity of the thin film.
 Fig. 4  Conductivity of P3HT films drop cast from hexane–ODCB (1 : 2, v/v) solution with increased ageing times. The curve is a guide to the eyes. 
It has been well-documented that the crystallization of a polymer component in its blend (or composite) is usually suppressed compared to that of its pure bulk state.44–46 This crystallinity reduction is even more obvious for those compatible blend systems due to the smaller phase dimensions of each component. For the P3HT–PCBM composite, a polymer/small organic molecule composite which is so far the most successful electron donor–acceptor combination for application in polymer solar cells in terms of performance, it has been shown that the crystallinity of P3HT in the composite film is much lower compared to its pure thin film.44 As a consequence, post thermal-annealing is frequently employed to increase its crystallinity so as to achieve a better device performance. For this sense, it would be extremely expected that highly crystalline P3HT could be directly achieved in this composite film via a conventional thin film deposition method such as spin coating. The idea to finalize this expectation here is basically the same as that in the P3HT-only solution. For blends in the solution, however, additional attention should be paid to the other component upon addition of another solvent, which has the risk of inducing this component to directly precipitate from the solution. After choosing the 1 : 2 optimized volume ratio between solvent hexane and ODCB, this difficulty has been overcome. Consequently, the ordered aggregates of P3HT are successfully constructed in the P3HT–PCBM solution, as confirmed by UV-Vis absorption spectra, as shown in Fig. 5. Again, the occurrence of an absorption peak at 607 nm hints at the presence of π–π stacking interactions upon gradual addition of hexane into the solution.
 Fig. 5  
UV-Vis spectra of P3HT–PCBM blends in solution and their corresponding composite films. 
However, what we are most interested in is the crystallinity of P3HT in the composite film. Typically, the optical absorption spectrum of the P3HT-PCBM composite film is simply a superposition of PCBM film and P3HT film with typical absorption peaks at 335 nm for PCBM, and the main π–π* absorption band at 515 nm and two vibronic absorption shoulders at 558 nm and 607 nm, respectively, for P3HT in the solid state. As shown in Fig. 5, for the pristine P3HT–PCBM composite film directly prepared from well-dissolved ODCB solution, these three absorption peaks associated to P3HT are not well-resolved, in particular the absorption at 607 nm, which hints that the crystallinity of P3HT as well as π–π stacking in the composite film is low and requires to be further improved. For the thermally-annealed composite film, the intensity of all the absorption peaks associated to P3HT components has been increased, although the resolvability of these peaks is still the same compared to the pristine film. With respect to the UV-Vis spectrum of the pristine composite film prepared from solution with ordered aggregates, the absorption contributed from the PCBM component is almost the same compared to the composite film from the ODCB-only solution. The absorption associated to P3HT, however, is substantially increased compared to the composite film from the solution without aggregation. The more impressive improvement is that all the three vibronic absorption peaks of P3HT become more resolvable, in particular the peak associated with the transition of π–π stacking at 607 nm. All these features show that the crystallinity of P3HT in the pristine composite film directly spin-coated from the solution with ordered aggregates has been substantially increased.

        TEM images to support the above conclusion of significantly enhanced P3HT crystallization in the composite film are given in Fig. 6. Only a few short fibers can be resolved in the film spin-coated from ODCB solution (Fig. 6a). The weak diffraction ring in the corresponding SAED pattern again confirms low crystallinity of this composite film from the conventional ODCB-only solution. For the composite film from the solution with ordered aggregates, as shown in Fig. 6b, on one hand, numerous homogenously distributed fibrillar P3HT crystals (up to several micrometres) are observed having light contrast with respect to the background.13 On the other hand, after the addition of the poor solvent to the solution nano-scale instead of large-scale (up to micrometres) phase segregation was constructed in the composite film,33,47 which is desirable for efficient exciton dissociation. The corresponding SAED pattern (inset of Fig. 6b) again confirms the increased crystallinity of the P3HT component in the composite film.
 Fig. 6  
          TEM images of P3HT–PCBM composite films (a) from ODCB solution without aggregation; (b) from hexane–ODCB solution with ordered aggregates. 
To further verify the increased crystallinity of P3HT in its composite film from the solution with ordered aggregates, X-ray diffraction working in θ–2θ out-of-plane scanning mode is employed to carry out crystallinity measurements. Due to the high precision nature of X-ray diffraction with respect to d-spacing in crystals, the slight variations of d(h00)-spacing of P3HT crystals obtained from the above different preparation methods are further disclosed. Also by using this X-ray diffraction method, we could simultaneously demonstrate the gradual aggregation process with time in the solution upon addition of a poor solvent. As shown in Fig. 7, one main peak around 5.4° could be resolved in all the composite films, which is assigned to the reflection of the crystallographic (100) plane of P3HT crystals.48 For the specimens deposited from the solutions with different ageing times as of the addition of the last drop of hexane, their diffraction intensities from crystalline P3HT are significantly increased with more ageing time. The position of this reflection, however, gradually shifts to high angles simultaneously, giving a slightly decreased d-spacing of (100) plane. This confirms that upon addition of hexane, P3HT chains in the mixed solvents gradually collapse and they tend to form aggregates as they meet each other, which is actually a self-assembly process and results in the formation of ordered domains in the solution. However, this process should be under control to reach a compromise so that enough ordered aggregates could be constructed in the solution and simultaneously a homogeneous thin film could still be achieved out of this solution. The slightly decreased d-spacing of (h00) with ageing time from 1.65 nm (from ODCB-only solution) to 1.60 nm (from hexane–ODCB solution with an ageing time of 16 h) hints that interdigitation or tilting of the side groups took place during formation of the ordered aggregates in the solution and they induced crystallization during film deposition. However, this slightly decreased d-spacing of (100) plane will increase back to the typical value as the composite films are thermally-annealed, which also results in further enhanced crystallinity of P3HT, as shown in Fig. 7b. Anyway, these X-ray diffraction measurements have verified that the crystallinity of P3HT in its pristine composite films deposited from the solution with ordered aggregates is substantially increased. The diffraction intensity of P3HT in this pristine composite film is even higher than that in thermally-annealed composite films from the ODCB-only solution.
 Fig. 7  
X-Ray diffraction profiles (out-of-plane scanning mode) of P3HT-PCBM composite films: (a) obtained from hexane–ODCB solution aged (with gentle stirring) for a given time; (b) post thermally-annealed. All the composite films have a comparable thickness of ∼80 nm. 
Nevertheless, the most exciting expectation is still the performance of the ultimate photovoltaic (PV) devices which consist of a standard ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/LiF/Al architecture. As shown in Fig. 8, current density–voltage (J–V) measurements under the illumination of a tungsten-halogen lamp with an intensity of 40 mW cm−2 reveal that, for the device fabricated from the solution with mixed hexane–ODCB solvents, a more than 3 times improvement of the short circuit current (JSC) (from 1.47 to 6.00 mA cm−2) and also an increased fill factor (FF) from 0.46 to 0.52 in contrast to the pristine device prepared from ODCB solution has been achieved. However, the open-circuit voltage (VOC) is decreased from 0.64 to 0.50 V, which is attributed to the enhanced electric conductivity of the composite film resulted from substantially increased crystallinity of the P3HT included. This phenomenon was also observed in the recent work of Moulé et al.33 Although a somewhat low VOC is achieved, these parameters eventually still result in an improvement of power conversion efficiency (PCE) from 1.08% for the pristine device to up to 3.9% for the device fabricated using the method introduced in this work. For comparison, the pristine device has been thermally-annealed at 150 °C for 15 min in an inert atmosphere for performance improvement, which leads to a device with JSC =4.80 mA cm−2, VOC =0.59 V, FF = 0.52 and PCE = 3.68% under the same measurement conditions. A detailed comparison of these parameters for the photovoltaic devices is summarized and listed in Table 1. To evaluate the reproducibility of this novel method, a number of devices were fabricated to compare with those devices subjected to post thermal annealing. The average PCE of the devices fabricated using this method is 3.3%, in contrast to the average PCE of 3.1% for post thermally-annealed devices.
Table 1 Comparison of the polymer solar cells employing P3HT–PCBM composite film prepared by using the pristine, post-annealed and mixed solvents method. All the cells are illuminated by a tungsten-halogen lamp (filtered by a Schott KG1 and GG385 filter resulting in a spectral range of 400–900 nm with a maximum at 650 nm) at an intensity of 40 mW cm−2 under ambient conditions





                  PV device parameters

J
sc/mA cm−2

V
oc/V

                  FF
                
PCE (%)





                  Pristine
                
1.47
0.64
0.46
1.08


Annealed
4.80
0.59
0.52
3.68


Mixed solvents
6.00
0.50
0.52
3.90




 Fig. 8  Current density–voltage characteristics of P3HT–PCBM (1 : 1 by weight) polymer photovoltaic cells under illumination by a tungsten-halogen lamp (filtered by a Schott KG1 and GG385 filter resulting in a spectral range of 400–900 nm with a maximum at 650 nm) at an intensity of 40 mW cm−2 under ambient conditions. 
Anyway, the PV devices prepared via the construction of ordered precursors in the solution lead to performance, if not higher, at least comparable to the PV devices undergoing traditional post-thermal treatment. The remarkable performance improvement of devices fabricated by using this facile “annealing-free” method could be attributed to both the improved absorption with sunlight and enhanced charge carrier mobility from the longer and inter-connected P3HT fibrils of the photoactive layer. Nevertheless, further improvement in device performance will be achieved by optimizing the ordered precursors in the solution, combined with adjustment of the thickness of the photoactive layer and the ratio between donor and acceptor materials used.
Conclusions
We have used a facile “annealing-free” method to substantially increase crystallinity of P3HT in both its pure and composite film by titrating poor solvent, e.g.hexane into well-dissolved P3HT–ODCB solution. As confirmed by UV-Vis spectra, upon the gradual titration of poor solvent into P3HT solution using good solvents such as ODCB and chloroform, the random coil P3HT backbones will undergo aggregation via interchain π–π stacking, allowing formation of ordered domains in the dispersion. We infer that these ordered precursors not only contribute to the increased crystallinity themselves, but also induce more P3HT chains which are still dissolved in the mixed solvents to achieve high crystallinity during thin film formation, which eventually contributes to almost a two orders of magnitude increment of electric conductivity of thus prepared P3HT film. By applying this method in the fabrication of PV cells, we are also able to obtain homogenously distributed fibrillar P3HT crystals in the photoactive layer, which not only enhances the light absorption but also improves the morphology of the composite film. And via this method, devices with performances as high as 3.9% PCE are obtained, in contrast to 1.08% for the conventionally pristine device and 3.68% for the post thermally-annealed device. We note that this method could be extended to other crystalline polymers or systems comprising crystallizable components and developed into a universal approach for device fabrication. This “annealing-free” method is exclusively important for those multi-layer devices of which previously deposited layers are not allowed to have further, e.g., thermal treatment. Through more delicate controls over the amount of ordered aggregates via tuning the ratio of poor–good solvents in the solution, the morphology of the thin composite film could be pre-designed and realized directly during film deposition, and device performance could be further improved via this facile approach.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 20604029). We thank Prof. Wenjing Tian at Jilin University for the assistance in metal contact deposition during device fabrication. X. N. Y. thanks the support from the Fund for Creative Research Groups (Grant No. 50621302).
References
C. J. Brabec, N. S. Sariciftci, J. C. Hummelen, F. Padinger, T. Fromherz and J. C. Hummelen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2001, 11, 15 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hoppe and N. S. Sariciftci, J. Mater. Res., 2004, 19, 1924 CAS .
K. M. Coakley and M. D. McGehee, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 4533 CrossRef CAS .
F. Naso, F. Babudri, D. Colangiuli, G. M. Farinola, F. Quaranta, R. Rella, R. Tafuro and L. Valli, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 9055 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Kim, E. K. Ji, S. M. Woo, H. W. Lee and D. J. Ahn, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 1118 CrossRef CAS .
G. Koeckelberghs, M. Vangheluwe, I. Picard, L. De Groof, T. Verbiest, A. Persoons and C. Samyn, Macromolecules, 2004, 37, 8530 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Turnbull, P. Andrew, W. L. Barnes and I. D. W. Samuel, Phys. Rev. B, 2003, 67, 165107 CrossRef .
C.-K. Shin and H. Lee, Synth. Met., 2004, 140, 177 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Kwon, S. Y. Paik and J. S. Yoo, Synth. Met., 2002, 130, 55 CrossRef CAS .
H. G. O. Sandberg, G. L. Frey, M. N. Shkunov, H. Sirringhaus, R. H. Friend, M. M. Nielsen and C. Kumpf, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 10176 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, T. Hirasa, D. Moses and A. J. Heeger, Synth. Met., 2004, 146, 127 CrossRef CAS .
L. Bürgi, T. J. Richards, R. H. Friend and H. Sirringhaus, J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 94, 6129 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yu, J. Gao, J. C. Hummelen, F. Wudl and A. J. Heeger, Science, 1995, 270, 1789 CrossRef CAS .
X. N. Yang, J. Loos, S. C. Veenstra, W. J. H. Verhees, M. M. Wienk, J. M. Kroon, M. A. J. Michels and R. A. J. Janssen, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 579 CrossRef CAS .
E. Zhou, Z. Tan, L. Huo, Y. He, C. Yang and Y. Li, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 26062 CrossRef CAS .
W. U. Huynh, J. J. Dittmer, W. C. Libby, G. L. Whiting and A. P. Alivisatos, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 73 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cho, K. Lee, J. Yuen, G. Wang, D. Moses, A. J. Heeger, M. Surin and R. Lazzaroni, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 100, 114503 CrossRef .
I. Mcculloch, M. Heeney, C. Bailey, K. Genevicius, I. Macdonald, M. Shkunov, D. Sparrowe, S. Tierney, R. Wagner, W. M. Zhang, M. L. Chabinyc, K. R. J., M. D. Mcgehee and M. F. Toney, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 328 CrossRef CAS .
J.-F. Chang, B. Sun, D. W. Breiby, M. M. Nielsen, T. I. Sölling, M. Giles, I. McCulloch and H. Sirringhaus, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 4772 CrossRef CAS .
W. L. Ma, C. Y. Yang, X. Gong, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1617 CrossRef CAS .
F. Padinger, R. S. Rittberger and N. S. Sariciftci, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 85 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, V. Shrotriya, J. Huang, Y. Yao, T. Moriarty, K. Emery and Y. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 864 CAS .
Y. Zhao, Z. Xie, Y. Qu, Y. Geng and L. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 043504 CrossRef .
G. H. Lu, L. G. Li and X. N. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3594 CrossRef CAS .
S. Miller, G. Fanchini, Y.-Y. Lin, C. Li, C.-W. Chen, W.-F. Su and M. Chhowalla, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 306 RSC .
G. Li, C.-W. Chu, V. Shrotriya, J. Huang and Y. Yang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 253503 CrossRef .
H. Hoppe and N. S. Sariciftci, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 45 RSC .
X. N. Yang and J. Loos, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 1353 CrossRef CAS .
H. Neugebauer, C. J. Brabec, J. C. Hummelen and N. S. Sariciftci, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2000, 61, 35 CrossRef CAS .
S. Berson, R. D. Bettignies, S. Bailly and S. Guillerez, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1377 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kietzke, D. Neher, M. Kumke, R. Montenegro, K. Landfester and U. Scherf, Macromolecules, 2004, 37, 4882 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kiriy, E. Jähne, H.-J. Adler, M. Schneider, A. Kiriy, G. Gorodyska, S. Minko, D. Jehnichen, P. Simon, A. A. Fokin and M. Stamm, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 707 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Moulé and K. Meerholz, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 240 CrossRef .
J. Peet, C. Soci, R. C. Coffin, T. Q. Nguyen, A. Mikhailovsky, D. Moses and G. C. Bazana, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 252105 CrossRef .
J. C. Hummelen, B. W. Knight, F. LePeq, F. Wudl, J. Yao and C. L. Wilkins, J. Org. Chem., 1995, 60, 532 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zheng, Q. Zhou, X. Deng, M. Yuan, G. Yu and Y. Cao, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 11921 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yamamoto, D. Komarudin, M. Arai, B.-L. Lee, H. Suganuma, N. Asakawa, Y. Inoue, K. Kubota, Shintaro Sasaki, T. Fukuda and H. Matsuda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1998, 120, 2047 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Sandstedt, R. D. Rieke and C. J. Eckhardt, Chem. Mater., 1995, 7, 1057 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. Brown, D. S. Thomas, A. Köhler, J. S. Wilson, J.-S. Kim, C. M. Ramsdale, H. Sirringhaus and R. H. Friend, Phys. Rev. B, 2003, 67, 064203 CrossRef .
M. C. Gurau, D. M. Delongchamp, B. M. Vogel, E. K. Lin, D. A. Fischer, S. Sambasivan and L. J. Richter, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 834 CrossRef CAS .
G. Bidan, S. Guillerez and V. Sorokin, Adv. Mater., 1996, 8, 157 CAS .
S. D. D. V. Rughooputh, S. Hotta, A. J. Heeger and F. Wudl, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 1987, 25, 1071 CAS .
K. J. Ihn, J. Moulton and P. Smith, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 1993, 31, 735 CrossRef CAS .
P. Vanlaeke, A. Swinnen, I. Haeldermans, G. Vanhoyland, T. Aernouts, D. Cheyns, C. Deibel, J. D'Haen, P. Heremans, J. Poortmans and J. V. Manca, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 2150 CrossRef CAS .
X. N. Yang, G. H. Lu, L. G. Li and E. L. Zhou, Small, 2007, 3, 611 CrossRef CAS .
D. Saikia and A. Kumar, Eur. Polym. J., 2005, 41, 563 CrossRef CAS .
J. Peet, J. Y. Kim, N. E. Coates, W. L. Ma, D. Moses, A. J. Heeger and G. C. Bazan, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 497 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sirringhaus, P. J. Brown, R. H. Friend, M. M. Nielsen, K. Bechgaard, B. M. W. Langeveld-Voss, A. J. H. Spiering, R. A. J. Janssen, E. W. Meijer, P. Herwig and D. M. de Leeuw, Nature, 1999, 401, 685 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2008
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  
UV-Vis spectra of P3HT in hexane–ODCB demonstrate the formation of ordered P3HT aggregates in the solution as the ratio of poor solvent hexane to good solvent ODCB for P3HT increases.	 

 	Fig. 2  
UV-Vis spectra of P3HT in hexane–ODCB (1 : 2, v/v) solution demonstrate the gradual formation of ordered P3HT aggregates in the solution as ageing time increases.	 

 	Fig. 3  
Bright-field transmission electron microscopy (BF-TEM) images and corresponding selected-area electron diffraction (SAED) patterns show substantially increased crystallinity of P3HT in thin films as prepared from the solutions with ordered aggregates: (a) from CHCl3 solution without aggregation; (b) from hexane–CHCl3 solution with ordered aggregates; (c) from ODCB solution without aggregation; (d) from hexane–ODCB solution with ordered aggregates. Scale bar: 500 nm.	 

 	Fig. 4  Conductivity of P3HT films drop cast from hexane–ODCB (1 : 2, v/v) solution with increased ageing times. The curve is a guide to the eyes.	 

 	Fig. 5  
UV-Vis spectra of P3HT–PCBM blends in solution and their corresponding composite films.	 

 	Fig. 6  
          TEM images of P3HT–PCBM composite films (a) from ODCB solution without aggregation; (b) from hexane–ODCB solution with ordered aggregates.	 

 	Fig. 7  
X-Ray diffraction profiles (out-of-plane scanning mode) of P3HT-PCBM composite films: (a) obtained from hexane–ODCB solution aged (with gentle stirring) for a given time; (b) post thermally-annealed. All the composite films have a comparable thickness of ∼80 nm.	 


                  Pristine
                	1.47	0.64	0.46	1.08
Annealed	4.80	0.59	0.52	3.68
Mixed solvents	6.00	0.50	0.52	3.90

 	Fig. 8  Current density–voltage characteristics of P3HT–PCBM (1 : 1 by weight) polymer photovoltaic cells under illumination by a tungsten-halogen lamp (filtered by a Schott KG1 and GG385 filter resulting in a spectral range of 400–900 nm with a maximum at 650 nm) at an intensity of 40 mW cm−2 under ambient conditions.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2008
