Covalent layer-by-layer films: chemistry, design, and multidisciplinary applications  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7CS00406K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7CS00406K
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 5061-5098Covalent layer-by-layer films: chemistry, design, and multidisciplinary applications

        
          
            Qi 
            An
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Tao 
            Huang
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Feng 
            Shi
          
          
        
      *b
aBeijing Key Laboratory of Materials Utilization of Nonmetallic Minerals and Solid Wastes, National Laboratory of Mineral Materials, School of Materials Science and Technology, China University of Geosciences, Beijing, 100083, China. E-mail: an@cugb.edu.cn
bBeijing Advanced Innovation Center for Soft Matter Science and Engineering & Beijing Laboratory of Biomedical Materials, Beijing University of Chemical Technology, Beijing, 100029, China. E-mail: shi@mail.buct.edu.cn
Received 
      24th December 2017
    First published on 16th May 2018AbstractCovalent layer-by-layer (LbL) assembly is a powerful method used to construct functional ultrathin films that enables nanoscopic structural precision, componential diversity, and flexible design. Compared with conventional LbL films built using multiple noncovalent interactions, LbL films prepared using covalent crosslinking offer the following distinctive characteristics: (i) enhanced film endurance or rigidity; (ii) improved componential diversity when uncharged species or small molecules are stably built into the films by forming covalent bonds; and (iii) increased structural diversity when covalent crosslinking is employed in componential, spacial, or temporal (labile bonds) selective manners. In this review, we document the chemical methods used to build covalent LbL films as well as the film properties and applications achievable using various film design strategies. We expect to translate the achievement in the discipline of chemistry (film-building methods) into readily available techniques for materials engineers and thus provide diverse functional material design protocols to address the energy, biomedical, and environmental challenges faced by the entire scientific community.
Qi An
Dr Qi An is currently an Associate professor at School of Materials Sciences and Technology in China University of Geosciences (Beijing). She received her PhD degree in the Chemistry Department of Tsinghua University, China, in the year 2010 under the supervision of Prof. Dr Guangtao Li. After a two-year postdoctoral work under the joint supervision of Prof. Dr Jurriaan Huskens and Prof. Dr Pascal Jonkheijm at the MESA+ Institute for Nanotechnology, University of Twente, the Netherlands, she joined China University of Geosciences (Beijing) and later became an Associate Professor in the year 2013. She was a visiting scholar at Dr Ling Xingyi's Group at Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, in 2018. Her current research interests include chemistry, nanotechnology, and functional materials.
Tao Huang
Tao Huang received his BA degree from China University of Mining and Technology (CUMT, China) in 2014, and completed his Master degree under the joint supervision of Prof. Dr Yihe Zhang and Dr Qi An, at China University of Geosciences (Beijing). In November 2017 he joined the group of Prof. Gianaurelio Cuniberti at Dresden University of Technology, Germany, as a PhD student. His current research interests focus on visible light-driven micromotors.
Feng Shi
Feng Shi is a full Professor at Beijing University of Chemical Technology. He obtained his BSc and MSc from Jilin University in 2004, and PhD degree from Tsinghua University in 2007 under the supervision of Professor Xi Zhang. In 2007–2008, he worked as a postdoctoral researcher at Max Planck Institute for Polymer Research with Professor Wolfgang Knoll. In 2008, he joined Beijing University of Chemical Technology as a full Professor. His research interest is macroscopic supramolecular assembly including interpretation of the assembly mechanism and exploitation of applications towards tissue scaffold fabrication and bio-chips. He has been awarded with Young Changjiang Scholar (2015), Excellent Young Scientist Foundation of NSFC (2014), Fok Ying Tung Education Foundation from Ministry of Education (2012), New Century Excellent Talents in University (2011) and Beijing Nova Program of China (2009).
1. Introduction
Layer-by-layer (LbL) assembly is a powerful method used to construct various functional ultrathin films that allows flexible design and arrangement of film composites and structures. Iler reported in 1966 that colloidal particles with alternating surface charges could be iteratively assembled on substrate surfaces, and this piece of work is reckoned as the first report on the LbL technique.1 However, because of the lack of characterization methods, the technique of LbL remained inactive and was only rediscovered by Decher and co-workers in the early 1990s.2–4 Conventionally, the LbL assembly method involves the facile alternate deposition of species with complementary chemical interactions in a cycled manner to fabricate and control composite films. The assembly process is entropy-driven due to the release of small molecules in the process. This technique has many advantages, including being:5,6 (i) quite simple and generally without the requirement of complicated facilities; (ii) finely tunable, enabling accurate control of the structure of multilayers down to the nanometer scale; and (iii) compatible with flat/non-flat and macroscopic/nanoscopic substrates. More importantly, the development of LbL assembly has always been closely interrelated to the contemporarily thriving scientific disciplines: nanotechnology, biomedicine, and electro-optical functional materials. On the one hand, the achievements in the fields of nanotechnology have permitted a deeper understanding of the structures of LbL multilayers and have provided a larger variety of building blocks to realize diverse functions of the multilayered films. On the other hand, the LbL technique has responded well to the requirements of the aforementioned disciplines by providing a facile method to assemble the intended structures, serving corresponding biomedical or electro-optical purposes.7–10
Over these years, with significant developments in the building units (nanoparticles, carbon nanotubes, dendrimers, enzymes, polymer micelles), molecular interaction types employed in building the films (hydrogen bonds, coordination bonds, charge-transfer interactions, biospecific interactions, guest–host interactions, cation–dipole interactions), and assembly methods (spin-assisted LbL, spray-assisted LbL), LbL assembly has found continually enriched applications, and its use has been pursued not only in laboratories but also in industry, where commercial products have been developed. However, the extended applications of LbL multilayered films present pressing challenges to the stability of the films, which are mostly assembled using multiple non-covalent interactions (also called weak interactions). For example, applications in biomedicine, which require long-term stability of the materials, present a challenge to the stability of LbL films assembled using supramolecular interactions. In addition, the LbL multilayered films held by multiple weak interactions in circumstances such as in solutions with high ionic strengths or extreme pH values have insufficient stability even in the short term. In response to these challenges and to increase the stability of the multilayers, covalently assembled multilayers were developed.
Various strategies have been reported to prepare covalently assembled multilayers. For the building blocks, the chemical units with reactive groups for assembly are either commercially available or synthesized as designed. A wide variety of chemical reactions are applied to stabilize the multilayers, including amide or anhydride formation through heating or a catalyzed reaction, amine alkylation reactions, click reactions, aldol reactions, or Schiff base reactions. In addition, specific reaction parameters are needed during the preparation process, such as the use of room temperature or heated conditions, exposure to UV or visible light irradiation, or the use of a specific solvent. For the formation of the chemical bonds, there are two general methods: one is using non-covalent interactions to construct multilayers followed by a post chemical reaction to induce crosslinking; the other is the direct use of the chemical reaction to stepwise deposit two reactive building blocks consecutively. To establish a logical framework in summarizing these reports, in this review, we divided these methods into three hierarchical levels. The primary level was determined according to the preparation procedures of covalent LbL films, i.e. post-covalent conversion after LbL assembly or covalent consecutive fabrication during LbL processes. The second level focuses on the building block resource: either commercially available or synthesized chemicals. Finally, the third level concerns the type of chemical reaction.
With the mushrooming development of covalently assembled LbL multilayers, the applications of covalent LbL films have received increasing attention. The distinctive characteristics made possible by covalent crosslinking instead of non-covalent interactions are (i) enhanced film endurance or rigidity; (ii) improved componential diversity when uncharged species or small molecules are stably built into the films by forming covalent bonds; and (iii) increased structural diversity when covalent crosslinking is employed in componential, spacial, or temporal (labile bonds) selective manners. Compared with regular LbL films built using non-covalent interactions, two additional factors besides the film building units also strongly affect the film properties: (1) the chemical reaction that crosslinks the films and the extent of the reaction and (2) the domains or the locations at which the chemical reactions are applied (structural engineering strategy) (Scheme 1). In this review, we discuss the functionalities of covalent LbL films related to the chemistry involved in the covalent crosslinking: the reaction feature with reversibility or irreversibility and the structural engineering strategies that are dependent on the crosslinking degree (highly, partially, or spatially discriminated crosslinked films). Therefore, we discuss the applications of covalent LbL films based on three types of crosslinked states: films crosslinked at the highest possible degrees, partially (componentially or spatially discriminated) crosslinked films, and reversible crosslinked films using labile covalent bonds.
 Scheme 1  The functionalities of covalent LbL films are determined collectively by three factors: (i) the film building units, (ii) the chemistry used to form the covalent crosslinking; and (iii) the structural engineering strategies employed. 
As the multidisciplinary research on covalent LbL multilayers, nanofabrication, biomedicine, and electro-optical materials has defined new frontiers for the LbL multilayer technique, the topic of covalent LbL multilayers deserves thorough documentation, with the expectation of summarizing recent developments as well as inspiring further research efforts. Despite the rapid development of covalently assembled LbL multilayered films and the interdisciplinary effects on scientific development, a thorough review focusing on covalent LbL multilayers, including updated chemical strategies and their applications, is lacking.11,12 To this end, the aim of this review is to summarize the developments in the field of covalent LbL multilayers with an emphasis on recent progress. The first section summarizes the chemical strategies used to fabricate these films. The following section describes the applications of polymeric multilayers and highlights applications in relation to their structural diversity. Following the documentation of the reported work, challenges in the field of covalent LbL films are presented and discussed. Some related topics concerning LbL multilayers from different perspectives, such as the assembly of regular (non-covalent) LbL films;13,14 construction of capsules using LbL strategies (with both covalent and non-covalent bonds);15,16 the fabrication of thick polymeric films using LbL strategies;17 LbL assemblies in nanoporous membranes;18 LbL deposition around living cells;19 and applications of LbL films for forming layered functional structures,20 drug delivery,21–23 and electrochemical and energy storage and conversion24 have been documented in elegant reviews elsewhere, and readers with corresponding interests are directed to those publications.
2. Chemical strategies for covalent assembly of LbL films
LbL-assembled multilayer films are generally susceptible to changes in environmental conditions such as pH, ionic strength, and redox reagents mainly because weak non-covalent interactions are used in the film construction. One strategy to overcome this problem is to convert these non-covalent interactions into strong covalent bonds. Two building strategies were identified from all the reported covalent LbL films. They are termed “post covalent conversion” and “consecutive covalent fabrication”, respectively (Scheme 2). “Post covalent conversion” refers to the initial construction of the multilayers using non-covalent interactions (most often electrostatic interactions) followed by the application of covalent reaction conditions (which are achieved by adding bifunctional reagents, increasing the temperature, or using light irradiation) to convert the non-covalent films into covalently woven ones. The special advantages of this “post covalent conversion” strategy lie in the time, labor, material, and energy savings because the fabrication of the non-covalent multilayered film via self-assembly in the first stage generally occurs in an ambient environment in aqueous solutions. Because cycles of iterative assembly are used to build a multilayered film, the self-assembly method helps to minimize the experimental labor required in this stage. After the film is assembled in a non-covalent manner, one-step covalent conversion is then performed to complete the preparation. Other merits of the post covalent conversion strategies, such as controllability and adjustability of the crosslinking degree and related properties (such as the permittivity or stability) have also been actively explored. The building blocks with reactive moieties can either be obtained commercially or by synthesis, depending on their availability.
 Scheme 2  Schematic assembly processes using (a) post covalent conversion and (b) consecutive covalent fabrication. 
If the building units of choice lack multiple assembly functional groups, then the building strategy of “consecutive covalent fabrication” must be used. In this strategy, the films are built in each step using covalent reactions. The labor and energy required for different types of reactions vary significantly. Some reactions occur at elevated temperatures in organic solutions and require 2–3 h for each step, whereas others can easily occur simultaneously in aqueous solution at room temperature. However, in the latter case, labor is sometimes required in the step before film building (the synthesis of a highly reactive building polymer). There are also circumstances under which films can be built using the consecutive covalent fabrication procedures with commercially available building units and under ambient conditions, such as the reaction between poly(acid chloride) and polyamines. In addition to being compatible with uncharged building units, another merit of the consecutive covalent fabrication method is that it allows small molecules to be included in the multilayers. Small molecules usually exhibit insufficient charges to be assembled noncovalently, and a covalent reaction provides stable linkage between the small molecules and the previous layer. The selection of building units and reactions is jointly determined by the application conditions, intended functions, and available resources. Table 1 lists the advantages and disadvantages of the two types of fabrication methods.
Table 1 Advantages and disadvantages of the “post covalent conversion” and “consecutive covalent fabrication” methods






Post covalent conversion
Covalent consecutive fabrication




General advantages
• Economy in labor, energy, and time
• Compatible with un-charged building units


• Film properties (e.g. thicknesses, hydrophilicity) easily adjusted by a number of experimental parameters (e.g. solution pH, ionic strength, cross-linking degrees)
• Is able to include small molecules as building units


Inconvenience
Requires multiple charged or polar groups for each building unit for LbL assembly
Might be labor, time, and energy intensive in film building




In the following section, the chemical reactions used to prepare covalent LbL films for “post covalent conversion” and “consecutive covalent fabrication” are introduced. In each of these categories, the reactions are further classified depending on whether the reagents are commercially available. Tables 2 and 3 and the reaction schemes and characteristics shown in the figures in this section serve as a convenient index for readers to locate the type of film that best applies to specific circumstances. In addition to the tables and reaction schemes, each type of reaction is also described in detail.
Table 2 Reaction schemes and features of post covalent conversion using commercially available building units











Table 3 Reaction schemes and features in the consecutive covalent fabrication strategy using commerically available building units











2.1 Post covalent conversion

2.1.1 Commercially available building blocks. 
2.1.1.1 Amide formation between amines and carboxylic acids upon heating. 
The reactions to build covalent LbL films using post covalent conversion with commercially available units are listed in Table 2. Among the chemical reactions used to build covalently woven multilayers, reactions between amines and amine-reactive species are the most frequently employed. Amide bonds are typically synthesized from the union of carboxylic acids and amines; however, the unification of these functional groups with the necessary elimination of water does not occur spontaneously at ambient temperature, and the system generally needs to be heated (∼200 °C) for the reaction to occur. A typical example is the building of poly(allylamine hydrochloride)/poly(acrylic acid) (PAH/PAA) covalent multilayers.25
2.1.1.2 Amide formation between amines and carboxylic acids catalyzed by coupling agents. 
In certain applications, the harsh conditions of heating carboxylic acids and amines to form amides are harmful to the building components (e.g., proteins) or the substrates (e.g., cells). Thus, amide formation under milder conditions has been explored. For these reactions, it is necessary to first activate the carboxylic acid, a process that usually occurs by converting the –OH of the acid into a good leaving group before reacting with the amine. So-called coupling reagents can be used to activate the carboxylic acid groups. After activation, the –COOH groups are converted into acid chlorides, anhydrides, or active esters.26,27 If the molecular weight of the coupling agent (and thus its volume) is relatively small, such as for dicyclohexylcarbodiimide (DCC), diisopropylcarbodiimide (DIC), 1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)carbodiimide (EDC), or N-hydroxysuccinimide (NHS), then it can be used in the “post covalent conversion” strategy for post infiltration into the multilayers built by polyamines and poly(carboxylic acids) followed by initiation of the interlayer covalent crosslinking.
2.1.1.3 Anhydride formation between poly(carboxylic acids). 
PAA is a widely used building unit for covalent LbL films. In addition to forming covalent bonds via the aforementioned two reactions, when heated, the PAA undergoes chemical reactions between its own carboxylic acid groups, forming an anhydride below 150 °C and a ketone at higher temperatures.28 Ji and coworkers prepared antibacterial [heparin (HEP)/chitosan (CHI)]10–[polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP)/PAA]10 multilayer films.29 The construction of the PVP/PAA multilayers was realized using hydrogen bonding. Then, crosslinking between PAA was induced by thermal treatment. Treatment at 110 °C led to the formation of anhydride bonds, which were hydrolyzable, and the films resisted bacterial adhesion because the PVP/PAA films disintegrated gradually over 24 h. Elevated heating at 170 °C led to the formation of ketones, which were stable, and bacteria easily accumulated on the films.
2.1.1.4 Genipin as a crosslinker of amine-bearing polymers. 
Genipin is a chemical compound found in gardenia fruit extract that possesses two reactive groups toward amines in each molecule. This compound is a natural crosslinker for proteins, collagen, gelatin, and chitosan.30 The reaction between genipin and amines occurs at room temperature but can be accelerated at elevated temperatures. Genipin has a low toxicity and is considered much less toxic than glutaraldehyde and is thus appealing in building biocompatible covalent LbL multilayers. After film assembly by non-covalent interactions, genipin can be introduced into these LbL films by infiltration. Genipin-crosslinked CHI/hyaluronic acid (HA) and CHI/alginate (ALG) multilayers or nanotubes were built, and the effect of the material properties on cell behaviors were studied.31,32
2.1.1.5 Photochemical reaction of DAS. 
Commercially available 4,4′-diazostilbene-2,2′-disulfonic acid disodium salt (DAS) is considered a general crosslinker for many types of LbL films. The azido groups in DAS can form covalent bonds with a wide range of organic species including C–H, O–H, and N–H bonds via photochemistry. A post covalent converter method was developed by us to build several types of covalently held multilayers, including PAH/PAA, PAH/polystyrene sulfonate (PSS), and nanoparticle/PAH films.33–35 First, electrolyte multilayers were fabricated using the traditional LbL method, assembled by using electrostatic interactions in aqueous solutions. Then, the bifunctional molecule DAS was infiltrated into the multilayers, followed by subsequent crosslinking under UV irradiation. The stability of the photo-crosslinked multilayer was significantly improved based on its assessment under ultrasonication in saturated SDS aqueous solutions or in basic solutions with pH 11.5. This strategy, termed “post-infiltration followed by subsequent photochemical crosslinking,” helps avoid the need for a tedious synthesis process for the functionalized polymer and is compatible with a large variety of building blocks. Thus, it is considered a “general” method to prepare covalent multilayers.
The mechanism of the reaction remains a matter of debate. The general picture of the reaction process is that under UV irradiation, azido groups decompose to generate highly reactive nitrene intermediates and are inserted (by direct insertion and rearrangement) into their adjacent C–H, O–H, or N–H bond in an unselective manner. Other competing reaction paths, including subtraction and dimerization, have also been suggested for the reactions involving azidos.36,37 Despite the debatable nature of the reaction mechanisms, the reaction has been shown to be highly reliable and efficient for the formation of covalent LbL multilayers.
2.1.1.6 Reaction between a phenol group and primary amine. 
Cui et al. reported the building of crosslinked multilayers via reaction between the phenol group in [poly(4-vinylphenol)] and primary amine polyethyleneimine (PEI) under visible light irradiation with catalysis by a Ru(II) complex.38,39 The native multilayer films were first constructed via H-bonding between phenolic and amino groups using the conventional LbL technique; then, the Ru(II) complex ([Ru(2,2′-bipy)3]Cl2) was infiltrated into the film, and the crosslinked films were obtained by the catalysis by the Ru(II) complex with visible light irradiation. This method is an efficient and greener technique for the fabrication of robust multilayer films at room temperature or physiological temperature.
2.1.1.7 Amine-alkylation reaction. 
Amine alkylation (amino-de-halogenation) is an organic reaction between an alkyl halide and ammonia or an amine and can occur under mild conditions, e.g., at room temperature. Huskens and coworkers employed BrC3H6Br vapor to crosslink LbL films of poly(4-vinylpyridine) at room temperature.40 The LbL films were first built using PAA and poly(4-vinylpyridine) in methanol via hydrogen bonding. Then, the BrC3H6Br vapor was used to initiate the covalent conversion. Because of the mild reaction conditions, the amine-alkylation reaction was also employed to crosslink the synthesized polymers. Möhwald and coworkers used 1,5-diiodopentane (DIP) to crosslink a synthetic biodegradable polymer to deliver DNA.41 Vancso et al. synthesized redox-active polymer poly(ferrocenyl(3-bromopropyl)methylferrocene) (PFS) and reacted it with PEI to fabricate covalent LbL multilayers as a functional electrode for electrochemical sensing.42 Multilayers of polythiophene were also fabricated using the amine-alkylation reaction.43


2.1.2 Synthesized building units. 
2.1.2.1 Reaction of dopamine. 
The reaction of dopamine or molecules with similar structures has recently received attention for surface coatings, inspired by the observation that mussels can strongly attach to diverse substrates with high binding strength. In the secretion of mussels, polydopamine has been shown to be an effective adhesive molecular ingredient because it can react with a large variety of groups.44 The reaction between dopamine and 3,4-dihydroxyphenyl groups shown in Fig. 1(a) has been used in building covalently held LbL films.45 The dopamine and 3,4-dihydroxyphenyl groups were coupled to the PEI and HA backbones, respectively, by room-temperature coupling reactions. The construction of the LbL films was built using electrostatic interactions. The film crosslinking reaction between the 3,4-dihydroxyphenyl groups was initiated by changing the solution pH to 8.5 and took 12 h to complete. Because the reaction conditions were mild, the multilayers were able to form around yeast cells. The cell viability slightly decreased during crosslinking, possibly caused by the generation of oxidized species during the crosslinking process. The reaction between polydopamine and amines in PEI shown in Fig. 1(b) was also used to build LbL multilayers at room temperature upon sequential exposure of the substrate to the solutions of the building polymers.46 The assembly was first built using electrostatic interaction, followed by covalent bond formation. The crosslinking reaction was nucleophilic attack between the amine groups on PEI and the C5 carbon atoms of the catechol groups in dopamine, during which a Michael-type addition and Schiff base reaction were believed to significantly intensify the assembly process.
 Fig. 1  Schematic reactions of dopamine functional groups and reaction features. (a) The reaction between dopamine and 3,4-dihydroxyphenyl groups and (b) the reaction between polydopamine and amines in PEI. Adapted with permission by ref. 45 and 46. Copyright © 2013 American Chemical Society & © 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
2.1.2.2 Reaction between active esters and amines. 
Amide formation between active esters and amines has also been employed to form both ionic and covalently bonded LbL films using the post conversion method.47 In this interesting work, the starting material was a commercially available polyanhydride, poly(isobutylene-alt-maleic anhydride) (PIAMA). With the aid of the coupling agent 4-(dimethylamino)pyridine (DMAP), the anhydrides in PIAMA were partially converted to methyl esters, and the rest of the anhydride groups were hydrolyzed by NaOH to generate carboxylic acid groups. Thus, the resultant polymer (named P1) with methyl ester groups (intended for crosslinking) and carboxylic groups (for anionic character and water solubility) was used as the film-building unit. First, electrostatically assembled films were formed between P1 and PEI, followed by covalent conversion at 60 °C under vacuum to initiate amide formation between the methyl esters and amines (Fig. 2), leading to the formation of covalent interlayer amide bonds. The carboxylic acid groups, which provided electrostatic interaction, were conserved to provide the multilayers with stimuli-responsive properties.
 Fig. 2  Synthesis of polyanion P1 and reaction schemes in film building using P1 and PEI. Adapted with permission by ref. 47. Copyright © 2013 American Chemical Society. 
2.1.2.3 Photochemical polymerization of styrene. 
Many reported “post covalent conversion” methods employ photochemistry. Compared with other chemical disciplines, photochemistry provides relatively fast reaction rates, high efficiency, environmental friendliness, and compatibility with complex three-dimensional objects.48 In addition, the development of photolithography has enabled the generation of patterns and gradients on substrate surfaces, making photochemistry an appealing strategy for micro- and nanofabrication. Because of these advantages, the use of photochemistry has been intensively pursued in the construction of covalent LbL multilayers. Photo-crosslinkable LbL multilayers were pioneered by Laschewsky et al.49 In their report, a polycation containing a styrene functional group and positive charges was synthesized and assembled in the LbL fashion with multiple polyanions, underwent crosslinking with UV irradiation at 254 nm and formed multilayers with increased stability against organic solvents.
2.1.2.4 Photochemical reaction of diazoresin. 
Diazoresin (DAR) has been extensively studied in the construction of covalent LbL multilayers with photochemical irradiation. The two special merits of diazoresin are that (1) its charged nature facilitates LbL assembly and (2) its general reactivity toward a large variety of functional groups makes the reaction applicable to various building units. The positively charged diazoresin contains the photoactive species of aryl diazonium salts, which can be converted into carbocations under UV irradiation. These highly reactive intermediates then rapidly combine with adjacent organic groups to form covalent linkages (Fig. 3). The multilayers are usually fabricated first using electrostatic attraction between DAR (polycations) and its counterpart polyanions. Afterwards, UV irradiation is employed to trigger the interlayer crosslinking reactions. Diazoresin has been used to fabricate covalently assembled multilayers with anionic polymers containing multiple carboxylic acid groups,50,51 sulfonate groups,52–54 phosphate groups,55 hydroxyl groups,56,57 and various nanoparticles bearing such functional groups.58–60 The strategy has been proven to be highly reliable and facile for the fabrication of covalently assembled LbL functional systems.61,62
 Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of the mechanism of the photochemical reaction of diazoresin with organic species. The SO3− in the figure can be replaced by COOH, PO43−, O–H, S–H, etc. 
2.1.2.5 Photochemical reaction of benzophenone. 
Benzophenone (BP) is another widely used photoactive functional group in building covalent LbL films. Under UV irradiation, BP induces hydrogen abstraction from C–H bonds, generating radicals that form covalent bonds between BP and organic species. The photochemical reaction between BP and C–H bonds can be excited by long-wavelength UV radiation (typically 365 nm), which is favorable for biomolecule immobilization because of the minimal damage caused by irradiation. To build LbL films, BP is grafted onto PAA or PAH, and the polymers are further employed in constructing the LbL multilayers using electrostatic interactions (Fig. 4).63,64 The hydrogen atom present in the multilayered film is easily abstracted by the benzophenone triplet (3BP*). The benzophenone ketyl radical and a polymer on-chain radical readily recombine to generate a new C–C bond, resulting in crosslinking within polyelectrolyte films.
 Fig. 4  Molecular structures of (a) PAH-BP and (b) PAA-BP. (c) Illustration of reaction of a benzophenone-grafted polymer with C–H bonds in counterpart polymers. 
2.1.2.6 Aldol reaction. 
The aldol reaction is a powerful means of forming carbon–carbon bonds in organic chemistry. Aldehydes can be converted into enols or enolates under acid or basic conditions to provide nucleophilic capabilities and enable reaction with electrophiles, followed by condensation to form C–C bonds. The use of multilayers and the aldol reaction to enable the tuning of both ionic and covalent crosslinking in a quantitative fashion has been reported. The films were assembled using a polyanionic copolymer (P2) and a crosslinkable polycationic polymer (P3) (Fig. 5).65 The crosslinking reaction was performed by immersing the film in a solution of terephthalaldehyde in methanol with piperidine used as the catalyst at room temperature. The distinguishing feature of this method is that the number of charged groups was not changed during the crosslinking reaction. The crosslinking process could be monitored using UV-vis spectroscopy because of the characteristic absorbance band of the coupling product.
 Fig. 5  Chemical structure of (a) P2, poly(sodium 3-(4-vinylbenzylsufanyl)-propane-1-sulfonate)-co-poly(2-hydroxyethyl-vinylbenzyl sulfoxide), and (b) P3, poly(4-methyl-1-(4-vinylbenzyl)-pyridinium chloride). (c) Aldol reaction between P3 and terephthalaldehyde for film crosslinking. Adapted with permission from ref. 65. Copyright © 2010, Royal Society of Chemistry. 

2.2 Consecutive covalent fabrication

2.2.2 Commercially available building units. 
2.2.1.1 Amide formation between acid chlorides and amines. 
The special advantages of building multilayers using consecutive covalent reactions are (i) molecules with no charges or functional groups that provide other types of non-covalent interactions can be included in LbL films and (ii) not only reactive polymers but also small molecules can be used to prepare multilayers on surfaces. Small molecules can rarely be used in traditional electrostatic LbL assembly because of the insufficient electrostatic interactions (or other types of non-covalent interactions); however, by employing covalent bonding, small molecules can be assembled in an LbL manner, such as the assembly between terephthaloyl chloride and molecules containing binary- or tetra-amines.66 It should be noted that in building covalent LbL films using consecutive methods, bifunctional monomers often lead to sub-linear layer growth due to a loss of reactive end groups, and in order to compensate this effect at least one tri- or multifunctional monomer should be used.66 The reactions to build the LbL films using consecutive covalent reactions using commercially available compounds are listed in Table 3.
2.2.1.2 1,4-Conjugate addition. 
The reaction of 1,4-conjugate addition was employed in covalent LbL assembly of PEI and a small-molecule dipentaerythritol pentaacrylate.67 The assembly occurred by 1,4-conjugate addition without the formation of amide functionality. The prepared multilayers consisted of ample reactive functional groups on their surfaces, thus facilitating further covalent modification of the films.
2.2.1.3 Reaction between amines and epoxies. 
The reaction of amines with epoxies occurs under relatively mild conditions and has been used to fabricate covalent LbL multilayers on silicon sheets, quartz wafers, and silica particles.68 For example, the reactive LbL assembly between the epoxide poly(glycidyl methylacrylate) (PGMA) and the amines in PAH occurred in a THF solution at 55 °C for 4 h. Capsules with ultrathin walls and high mechanical strength were obtained by cycling the assembly procedure followed by core etching using HF.68
2.2.1.4 Reaction between Gantrez and amines/hydroxyls. 
Gantrez, a poly(maleic anhydride)-c-poly(methyl vinyl ether) copolymer often used in skincare products, contains multiple anhydrides, which form amide bonds with amines and carbonate bonds with hydroxyls at room temperature. A covalent LbL film of Gantrez and PAMAM was prepared using consecutive assembly, and imidization of the film was further induced by heat treatment to obtain highly impermeable surface coatings.69
2.2.1.5 Reactions between polyisocyanates and PVA/PEI. 
The isocyanate group, –NCO, is highly reactive toward hydroxyls and amines at room temperature, making it useful in building crosslinked LbL films. Many polyisocyanates are commercially available and are soluble in organic solvents; however, they are reactive toward water. Thus, they should be dissolved in organic solutions such as DMF when applied. Caution should be taken during the reaction because some polyisocyanates are toxic. Xu and coworkers employed a branched polyisocyanate with four isocyanate groups in one molecule (termed HAPI by the authors) together with polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) and LAPONITE® to build crosslinked LbL films at room temperature using spin coating.70 Both, PVA and LAPONITE® bear multiple hydroxyls that reacted with isocyanate. The assembly and crosslinking occurred at room temperature and during the spin-coating process. The films could be exfoliated from the substrate and were free standing. The method was also expected to be applicable for building free-standing LbL films with other polymers or inorganic particles with multiple amines or hydroxyls, such as bentonite, montmorillonite, alginic acid, hyaluronic acid, grapheme oxide, and chitosan.
2.2.1.6 Schiff base reactions. 
Labile bonds have recently attracted considerable attention for the fabrication of responsive polymeric materials.71 LbL films assembled using labile covalent bonds are dynamic in nature. They may disintegrate under certain conditions because of the breakage of the covalent bonds. These features make labile (or dynamic) covalent reactions suitable for the fabrication of systems with special usage, such as for stimuli-responsive drug-release carriers or smart devices.
A Schiff base is a widely studied labile bonding structure; it is a compound with a functional group that contains a CN bond with the nitrogen atom connected to an aryl or alkyl group (but not hydrogen). The CN bond is relatively stable in neutral environments but breaks in acidic solutions because of rapid hydrolysis. The Schiff base formed between amines in proteins and glutaraldehyde (GA) is generally used to prepare LbL films of proteins.72–75 By grafting the reactive groups to an appropriate polymer backbone, films of chitosan and sodium alginate76,77 and of a redox-active polymer containing ferrecene78,79 have been achieved.
2.2.1.7 Reaction between polyphosphazenes and amines. 
Polyphosphazenes are a class of biocompatible and hydrolytically degradable polymers with a long-chain backbone of alternating phosphorus and nitrogen atoms and organic side groups that determine their hydrolytic behaviors. The degradation products of polyphosphazenes are mainly phosphates and ammonia, and the products of the side group cleavage are usually not toxic to the human body. Polyphosphazenes have been used as a microparticulate system for drug and protein delivery. Gao et al. reported the fabrication of polyphosphazene microcapsules using the direct covalent assembly of polydichlorophosphazene (PDCP) and hexamethylenediamine (HDA).80 The LbL covalent assembly was based on the substituting reaction of the amino groups. The microcapsules could be hydrolytically degraded in a phosphate buffer at biological pH.


2.2.2 Synthesized building units. 
2.2.2.1 Amide formation between active esters and amines. 
Synthesis of a reactive LbL building block typically serves one or more of the following purposes: (i) the reaction occurs rapidly under mild conditions or (ii) the assembled LbL film exhibits special functionality arising from the building unit, such as being bioactive or stimuli-responsive. An active ester is highly reactive toward primary amino groups, and some active esters are sufficiently stable to be stored for a reasonable period. Thus, polymers with active ester groups and their counterparts with amines have been used to build covalent LbL multilayers using the consecutive reaction strategy. Liang and Wang functionalized poly(p-phenylenevinylene) polymers, a well-known class of conjugated polymers, with amino and pentafluorophenyl ester groups on the side chains.81 The amide bonds between the amino and pentafluorophenyl ester groups were readily formed under ambient conditions. The bond formations led to the irreversible adsorption of one polymer layer as well as crosslinking within the polymer film. In a related report, poly(pentafluorophenyl-4-vinylbenzoate) (P4) and poly(pentafluorophenylacrylate) (P5) polymers were assembled with PAH to effectively yield LbL multilayers (Fig. 6).82
 Fig. 6  Fabrication of covalent LbL multilayers using activated polyester P4 (or P5) and polyamines. Adapted with permission from ref. 82. Copyright © 2010, American Chemical Society. 
2.2.2.2 Amide formation from amines and azlactone. 
Lynn et al. reported LbL assembly and subsequent lift-off of azlactone-containing polymer multilayers (Fig. 7).83,84 The building units were dissolved in acetone. Because of the high reactivity of the building units, the attachment of each additional polymer layer required only 20 s at room temperature. The covalently crosslinked multilayers fabricated using poly(2-vinyl-4,4-dimethylazlactone) (PVDMA) and PEI could be delaminated from planar glass and silicon surfaces by immersion in mildly acidic aqueous environments to yield flexible free-standing membranes. These free-standing membranes were robust and withstood exposure to strong acids or bases and incubation in high-ionic-strength solutions. The residual reactive azlactone groups on the film surfaces enabled further chemical modifications by various amine-functionalized small molecules.
 Fig. 7  Reaction between azlactone-containing polymers and amines. Adapted with permission from ref. 84. Copyright © 2013, American Chemical Society. 
2.2.2.3 Amide formation between amines and p-nitrophenyloxycarbonyl groups. 
Covalent LBL assembly of p-nitrophenyloxycarbonyl-group-terminated hyperbranched polyether (HBPO-NO2) and PEI was reported by Ji et al. (Fig. 8).85 The in situ chemical reaction between HBPO-NO2 and PEI onto aminolyzed substrates was rapid and mild. First, HBPO terminated with multiple hydroxyl groups was converted into HBPO-NO2 by reacting with 4-nitrophenyl chloroformate in dried THF. Then, multilayers built with HBPO-NO2 and PEI were fabricated by alternate immersion of the substrate into solutions of HBPO-NO2 and PEI in chloroform. Each step only required 10 min at ambient temperature. Rinsing with chloroform between each cycle was necessary to remove the 4-nitrophenol byproduct generated during the covalent reaction. In addition, the outermost layer of the (HBPO-NO2/PEI)n/HBPO-NO2 multilayers could be further functionalized because of its reactivity toward amino groups.
 Fig. 8  Reaction between HBPO-NO2 and primary amines. Adapted with permission from ref. 85. Copyright © 2011, American Chemical Society. 
2.2.2.4 Thiol–ene reaction. 
Thiol–ene coupling occurs via a free-radical chain mechanism. Upon UV irradiation at 365 nm with a photoinitiator (PI) or at 254 nm in the absence of a PI, heterolytic cleavage of the thiol group affords a thiyl radical. Addition of the thiyl radical to the double bond of an ene functionality (propagation step 1) and subsequent hydrogen abstraction from a thiol group by a carbon-centered radical produces a thiyl radical (propagation step 2) that sustains the chain reaction.
Buriak et al. reported that through successive contact of an interface with dithiol and diene molecules under UV irradiation for short periods (∼30 min, room temperature), well-defined thin films could be obtained (Fig. 9(a)).86 Linear increases in the film thickness with layer number were achieved for shorter aliphatic dienes and dithiols; however, with longer molecules and aromatic substrates, a self-limiting situation occurred whereby both ends of the molecule reacted with the surface, arresting film growth. Ravoo et al. showed that covalent LbL assembly using a highly branched decaallyl ferrocene and thiol–ene chemistry resulted in electrochemical reactive multilayers (Fig. 9(b)).87 The characterization results indicated that the multilayer growth was linear for at least sixteen layers. In addition, surface patterning of the redox reactive multilayer was achieved using microcontact printing.
 Fig. 9  (a) LbL multilayers constructed by successive attachment of dithiol and diene molecules. Adapted with permission from ref. 86. Copyright © 2009, American Chemical Society. (b) LbL multilayers assembled using a highly branched decaallylferrocene via the thiol–ene reaction. Adapted with permission from ref. 87. Copyright © 2012, Wiley publication group. 
2.2.2.5 Click chemistry. 
Click chemistry refers to a set of covalent reactions with high reaction yields that can be performed under extremely mild conditions. The most widely studied click reaction is the Cu(I)-catalyzed variant of the Huisgen 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition of azides and alkynes to form 1,2,3-triazoles. LbL depositions using this reaction were pioneered by Caruso and coworkers using poly(acrylic acid) with azide functionality (PAA-Az) and alkyne functionality (PAA-Alk) (Fig. 10(a)).88 The polymers were synthesized using living radical polymerization. LbL assembly was performed by sequentially exposing the substrates (quartz, silicon, or gold) to PAA-Az and PAA-Alk solutions containing copper sulfate and sodium ascorbate for 20 min, with water rinsing after the deposition of each layer. This reaction was shown to be an efficient method for the preparation of stable covalently assembled multilayers.
 Fig. 10  Schematic illustration of the construction of an LbL multilayer by (a) regular click chemistry and (b) electrochemically triggered click chemistry. Adapted with permission from ref. 88. Copyright © 2006, American Chemical Society, and ref. 95. Copyright © 2010, American Chemical Society. 
The effect of reaction conditions of click LbL and the incorporation of functional elements using the click LbL strategy have also been studied recently.89–93 Du Prez and Ravoo developed an ultrafast LbL assembly method using triazolinedione click chemistry. Up to 58 covalently linked molecular layers were prepared on a silicon wafer at room temperature.94
Because the Cu(I) species used as the catalyst in click chemistry is unstable in solution, Schaaf and coworkers developed an electrochemical trigger to convert Cu(II), the stable species in solution, to Cu(I) to obtain an LbL film built using click chemistry (Fig. 10(b)).95 Film build-up was achieved by applying electrical potentials in the absence of any reducing agent or ligand. Film construction occurred on gold electrodes whose potentials were more negative than a critical value (between −70 and −150 mV vs. a Ag/AgCl ref electrode). The film thickness increase per bilayer appeared to be independent of the applied voltage as long as it was more negative than the critical potential; however, the value depended on the Cu(II) and polyelectrolyte concentrations in solution and on the reduction time of Cu(II) during each deposition step. An increase of any of these latter parameters led to an increase of the mass deposited per layer.
2.2.2.6 Organosiloxanes/silanes. 
The reaction of organosiloxanes/silanes provides a versatile methodology to combine surface anchoring and polymer crosslinking and can be used to form long-lasting coatings on either reactive or inert surfaces. Polymers containing reactive alkoxysilane groups form strong Si–O–Si links to oxide surfaces, thereby anchoring the polymer chains at multiple points. The inter-chain crosslinking of the methoxysilane groups provides additional durability to coatings and makes them highly resistant to solvents (Fig. 11). A good example was provided by Sen et al.96 In their study, methoxysilane groups were introduced to pyridine groups in the polymer using 1-bromopropyltrimethoxy silane via nucleophilic displacement under mild conditions. These polymers could condense with free –OH groups on oxide surfaces (glass, ceramics), metals, and cellulose (wood, cotton, paper) to covalently anchor to the substrates. Further crosslinking between neighboring polymer chains led to the formation of stable polymer coatings on inert surfaces (noble metals, polymers), where the nanometer-thick, insoluble crosslinked polymer coating remained tightly bound to the surface. The molecular structure of the organosilanes could be further engineered to introduce structural diversity or functionality to the coatings.97,98
 Fig. 11  Schematic illustration of the attachment of organosilanes to oxide surfaces. Adapted with permission from ref. 96. Copyright © 2008, American Chemical Society and ref. 97. Copyright © 2002, American Chemical Society. 
A similar reaction process was extended to Ti(OBu)4, which was covalently integrated to form multilayers with organosilica. Moriyama and Pac et al. reported LbL multilayers built using Ti–O–Si covalent bonds between Ti(OBu)4 and phthalocyanines bearing four or eight peripheral (triethoxy)silylalkoxy substituents, (EtO)3Si–(CH2)nO– (n = 11 or 5).99
2.2.2.7 Oxime bonds. 
The formation of an oxime bond between aldehyde and amino–oxy groups occurs at room temperature. Polymers with aldehyde or amino–oxy bonds have been synthesized, yielding multilayers with molecular-level thickness control (Fig. 12).100
 Fig. 12  Procedure of forming oxime bonds to build covalently assembled multilayers. 
2.2.2.8 Disulfide bonds. 
The disulfide bond is a type of labile covalent bond that is usually derived by the coupling of two thiol groups under mild oxidizing environments (the reaction of forming a disulfide bond can occur automatically in air). The disulfide bond is strong enough to maintain stable multilayers but is approximately 40% weaker than C–C or C–H bonds. In addition, the disulfide bond is susceptible to scission by polar reagents, either electrophiles or nucleophiles, and can be destroyed in reducing environments (Fig. 13(a)). These characteristics make disulfide bonds competitive candidates for the construction of stimuli-responsive devices. Disulfide bonds were first used to fabricate LbL multilayers by Haynie and coworkers in a biomimetic manner by employing polypeptides.101 The oppositely charged peptides containing several cysteine residues became crosslinked under mild oxidizing conditions (by drying the multilayers in air). The multilayers could be disassembled in a reducing environment (50 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride buffer at pH 2.0). Multilayers fabricated using thiol-functionalized polyelectrolytes were also explored by Zhang and coworkers. Using PAA-SH60, which is a PAA with 60% of its carboxylic acid groups grafted with thiol groups, as the fabrication unit of the multilayers, pH/reductant dually controllable release of small molecules was achieved (Fig. 13(b)).102 The fabrication of multilayers using thiol-containing polymers and their degradation behaviours and possible applications were also extensively explored by Caruso et al.103–105 Hydrogen-bonded multilayer thin films were constructed using PVP and poly(methacrylic acid) (PMAA) functionalized with cysteamine (Fig. 13(c)). The resulting crosslinked films were stable at physiological pH. The films prepared without disulfide bonds were readily disassembled at physiological pH, whereas those with disulfide bonds swelled upon exposure to this pH (7) but remained assembled. The addition of a common thiol–disulfide exchange reagent, dithiothreitol (DTT), at pH 7 led to disassembly of the multilayer films. The films were also prepared on colloidal substrates and used to release a model drug (fluorescently labelled transferrin) in response to the addition of DTT. This approach shows potential for in vivo application of hollow capsules, as thiol–disulfide exchange leading to deconstruction of the capsules is possible with the assistance of intracellular agents such as glutathione.
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic illustration showing the reversible nature of the disulfide bond. Chemical structures used to fabricate disulfide-stabilized LbL multilayers: (b) PAH and PAA-SH60 and (c) PVP and poly(methacrylic acid)-SH. Adapted with permission from ref. 102 and 103. Copyright © 2007 & © 2006, American Chemical Society. 
2.2.2.9 Phenylboronate ester bonds. 
A phenylboronate ester bond can also be used to prepare labile LbL films. A pH-dependent equilibrium exists between phenylboronic acid (and its derivatives) and phenylboronate ions, and a slightly basic pH environment favours the formation of a phenylboronate ion which reacts reversibly with cis-diol groups to form a phenylboronate ester.106,107 Because of the reversible nature of the bond of the phenylboronte ester and the equilibrium between phenylboronic acid and phenylboronate ion, acidic pH environments and/or low concentrations of phenylboronate ion accelerate the breaking of the phenylboronate ester bonds, leading to the disassembly of the multilayers (Fig. 14).108 The rate of the disassembly is affected by the solution pH.
 Fig. 14  Schematic illustration of reversible assembly through phenylboronate ester bonds. 

3. Applications of covalently assembled polymer-based LbL multilayers
The applications of LbL films are based on their properties, which are collectively determined by the nature of the building units, the chemistry of the crosslinking, and the structural features of the film. Compared with regular (non-covalent) LbL films, covalent LbL films provide remarkable structural diversity. The structures of LbL films can be engineered by controlling the crosslinking degrees, locations (spatially or vertically selective crosslinking), and stabilities (stable covalent bonds or labile bonds). Because of the important role of film structural features in film applications, this section on film applications is structured according to film structural features.
The functions of covalently assembled LbL films are highly dependent on the crosslinking degree. At high crosslinking degrees, polymer-based multilayers can be rigid, immiscible, and insoluble, thus exhibiting properties of high stability, mechanical strength, packing density, and structural regularity for various practical uses as free-standing, anti-abrasion, antifouling, and antibacterial films. At medium crosslinking degrees with insufficient chemical reactions within the multilayers, several situations with controlled or uncontrolled reactions lead to corresponding functions: (1) assisted by photolithography methods, the multilayers can be spatial-selectively crosslinked, resulting in patterned surfaces; (2) by controlling reaction parameters such as the reaction time and concentrations, the crosslinking density can remain at a moderate level, at which the film can be highly permeable or swollen for loading of targeted molecules or to act as a smart material; and (3) by partial reaction with template molecules within the multilayer, the flexibility of the multilayer can be maintained for releasing and re-loading of targeted molecules, which is meaningful for molecular imprinting materials. These properties are detailed below in the section on fully crosslinked, partially crosslinked, and temporarily crosslinked LbL films. In addition to using traditional covalent bonds to control the crosslinking degree, labile covalent bonds can be used for preparing multilayers for stimulus-responsive systems for drug loading, delivery, and release applications. The applications of LbL films held by labile covalent bonds are presented at the end of the section of LbL film applications.
The following section introduces the applications of covalently assembled LbL multilayers and provides typical examples. The primary title of the outline is given based on the different crosslinking degrees, as illustrated in Table 4: high, partial, or reversible. Under each category of crosslinking degree, the corresponding physical/chemical properties are used as the second rule for classification such as stability, mechanical properties, or structural regularity. For each property, specific application examples are provided and listed case by case. Rational connections between the crosslinking degree and final achieved functions are discussed in each case.
Table 4 Structure–property–application relationships of covalent LbL films











3.1 Films crosslinked at highest possible degrees

3.1.1 Enhanced stability and mechanical properties. 
3.1.1.1 Ultrahigh stiffness, anti-wearing, and free-standing properties. 
Covalent crosslinking increases LbL film stability and mechanical strength. After effective crosslinking, a polymeric film can become strong enough to become free standing.109,110 In addition, fiber/platelet nanostructures can be employed in covalent LbL films to further enhance the film strength. Kotov et al. prepared covalently crosslinked ((PEI/PAA)/(PEI/single walled carbon nanotube (SWNT)))6–8 multilayered films using heat- or GA-induced crosslinking (Fig. 15(a)).111 Both crosslinking methods resulted in remarkable enhancements of the film's mechanical strength, though to variant extents. After being delaminated from the substrate, the crosslinked film exhibited ultrastrong tensile strength approaching that of hard ceramics. After optimizing the nanotube–polymer interface interactions, a film with record-high tensile strength of approximately 504.5 MPa, stiffness of 15.6 GPa, and toughness of 121.2 J g−1 was achieved. The toughness of this LbL composite even exceeded that of Kevlar by three times. The author attributed the superior mechanical performance of the LbL composite film to the synergistic combination of the high degree of SWNT exfoliation, efficient SWNT–PVA binding, crack surface roughening, and fairly efficient distribution of local stress over the SWNT network.112 In addition to carbon nanotubes, quasi-two-dimensional clay particles can also be used to achieve a strong LbL composite. Interestingly, clay-built composite LbL films can be transparent (Fig. 15(b and c)).113 Composite LbL films of highly oriented montmorillonoid (MTM) and PVA crosslinked by GA exhibited a tensile strength as high as 400 MPa and a modulus of 106 GPa. GA crosslinking increased the strength, stiffness, and brittleness of the PVA/MTM composites. The tensile strength increased by nearly a factor of three compared with that of the non-crosslinked PVA/MTM film. A high level of ordering of the nanoscale building blocks combined with dense covalent and hydrogen bonding as well as stiffening of the polymer chains led to highly effective load transfer between the nanosheets and polymer. Other fillers such as Au nanoparticles can also be included in covalently woven LbL films to adjust the film's mechanical properties.114 A direct use of the enhanced stiffness stemming from the covalent crosslinking is improved abrasion resistance.115,116 Decher et al. proposed that covalently woven epoxy/PEI LbL multilayers could perform as robust protective films against abrasion. The epoxy resine covalently reacted with PEI in the LbL film, and the abrasion resistance of the covalently woven film was greatly enhanced compared with that of electrostatically assembled AuNP/PAH LbL films. The critical thickness for the protective LbL coating on top of the weak multilayer was approximately 6 layer pairs, corresponding to only ∼10 nm. At this thickness, the protective film withstood at least 25 abrasion cycles with a reduction of the total thickness of only approximately 2%.
 Fig. 15  (a) Enhanced film mechanical strength arising from varying crosslinking chemistries. Reprinted with permission of ref. 112. Copyright © 2009, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic illustration and (c) digital photos of a free-standing LbL film prepared from crosslinked PVA and MTM clay nanosheets, reprinted with permission from ref. 113. Copyright © 2007, American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
3.1.1.2 Enhanced endurance. 
The stability and endurance of LbL films are not only useful in their own right in free-standing or anti-corrosion films but are also key parameters that help prolong the endurance of the films in numerous applications (Fig. 16). For example, antifouling or antibacterial films are expected to have long lifetimes; biocompatible interfaces should be stable enough to work in cell culturing media and should sustain cell growth for a required period ranging from several days to sometimes months; interfacial modification with superwettability properties should provide abrasion or etching resistance; flexible substrates for arrays should withstand chemically reactive conditions in the subsequent reaction steps; electrode interfaces should survive electric potentials in electrolytes with high ionic strengths; sample extraction or dye enrichment interfaces should retain their integrity during elution by various solutions;117,118 and anti-flame multilayers should withstand etching and abrasion conditions that are generally experienced by these materials in addition to fires.119 In these applications, the covalent crosslinking of the LbL film will enhance the material endurance and allow the film functions stemming from the film component to last longer, thereby enhancing the applicability of these films.
 Fig. 16  (a) Illustrative scheme comparing the rapid disassembly of a non-crosslinked film with the stability of a covalently crosslinked film. The crosslinked stable film can be used for (b) antifouling and (c) antibacterial applications, (d) cell culturing, (e) superhydrophobic substrate preparation, and the generation of (f) catalytic or (g) flexible reactive substrates. 
Antifouling and antibacterial properties. 
The property of protecting a substrate against the adhesion of bioactive species is termed antifouling behaviour. Antifouling properties are appealing in multiple applications ranging from laboratory handling to marine ship maintenance.47 Polyethylene glycol (PEG) is among the most often used molecules to achieve surface hydrophilicity and antifouling properties. Through post-modification of crosslinked PEI and PAA multilayers using PEG, antifouling layers on poly(dimethylsiloxane) (PDMS) substrates were achieved, and the surface wettability characteristics of the film was preserved for over 5 months.120 A free-standing anti-biofouling nanosheet prepared by combining thermally crosslinked LbL PAH/PAA multilayers and atom transfer radical polymerization of poly(2-methacryloyloxyethyl phosphorylcholine) (PMPC) was obtained and could be used as an antifouling cell culture substrate.121 Antifouling layers prepared using diazoresin (DAR) and PEG/PVA (polyvinyl alcohol) inside a capillary column suppressed basic protein adsorption on the inner surface of the capillary, thus leading to a baseline separation of lysozyme, cytochrome c, and BSA.122,123 Compared with their counterpart non-covalent films, the covalently woven multilayers provided the capillary electrophoresis (CE) device with better stability and repeatability. This study demonstrated that electrostatic interactions play a major role in protein adsorption and that LbL films bind more proteins with opposite charges but less of those with like charges. Cells and bacteria exhibited high adhesion on positively charged surfaces but much lower adhesion on neutral and negatively charged surfaces because both cells and bacteria are negatively charged on the outer surface.124
Materials with robust interfaces and antibacterial properties are highly demanded for applications ranging from medical devices to personal possessions such as doorknobs or baby toys. However, the lack of long-term stability of electrostatically built LbL films limits their applications as antimicrobial coatings; therefore, covalent LbL films are more appealing in these applications. Chan et al. prepared covalent PEI–Ag nanoparticle films for use as stable antibacterial films by repeatedly soaking covalent PEI/terephthalaldehyde (TA) multilayers in solutions of NaBH4 and AgNO3, where Ag+ was reduced into Ag nanoparticles in situ. Their research revealed that the PEI multilayers effectively killed Staphylococcus aureus and Escherichia coli upon contact. The inclusion of Ag nanoparticles in the PEI films not only enhanced the antimicrobial property against adherent bacteria but also led to the inhibition of bacterial growth in suspended culture via the long-term release of Ag+ into the liquid medium.125 In addition to incorporating conventionally used amines or Ag+ as antibacterial agents, organoselenium species have also been incorporated in covalently woven LbL films to simultaneously achieve antimicrobial and antithrombotic functions.126 Carboxyl-ebselen was covalently grafted onto PEI backbones. The modified PEI was subsequently assembled with ALG and covalently crosslinked by immersion into a solution of NHS and EDC. The covalently held films exhibited high stability and long-term bioactivities. The bio-active film was able to generate NO when R-nitrosothiol, an endogenous species, was present. Interestingly, the organoselenium also reacted with oxygen to produce a superoxide (O2−), which was able to inhibit bacterial adhesion to surfaces.
Biocompatible interfaces. 
Biocompatible polymers are frequently used to build covalent LbL multilayers to enhance substrate biocompatibilities. In general, the covalent crosslinking provides the film with high chemical resistance during preparation or handling and long-term stabilities in physiological environments. With such considerations, biocompatible interfaces of covalently woven HEP/PEG and CHI/HEP-mimetic polymeric films and CHI/HA multilayers were developed, respectively.127–129 The studies further revealed that the film coating exhibited low cell toxicity and high compatibilities for cell proliferation. Kumta and coworkers developed covalent ALG and poly-L-lysine LbL multilayers on magnesium alloys. Their study revealed that both substrate pre-treatment and LbL coating play vital roles in the biocompatibility of the final product. Covalent crosslinking using EDC–NHS and polyamines greatly enhanced the biocompatibility of the substrate compared with that of the non-crosslinked substrates, and further modification of the polyelectrolyte multilayers with fibronectin enhanced MC3T3 cell adhesion and proliferation on these substrates.130
Superhydrophobic surfaces. 
Superwettability requires two simultaneous features: (i) micrometer- and nanometer-scale roughnesses and (ii) an interfacial molecular cover with high (hydrophilic) or low (hydrophobic) surface energy. Covalently crosslinked multilayers incorporating micro- and nanoparticles (silica, latex particles, or carbon nanotubes)131–133 provide the hierarchical surface roughness required by superwettability interfaces, and combined with post-modification of the outermost layer with appropriate molecules, superwettable interfaces can be achieved. The covalently built multilayers exhibit more durable superhydrophobic or superhydrophilic properties than their non-covalent counterparts. For example, Guittard and coworkers prepared hybrid organic/inorganic surfaces by building layers of large silica nanoparticles (∼100 nm in diameter) and smaller latex nanoparticles (10–20 nm in diameter). The multilayers exhibited hierarchical integration of nanoscale textures. The hydrophobicity of the last layer was introduced by grafting a highly fluorinated aldehyde, which led to superhydrophobicity of the multilayers.134 Batteas and Bergbeiter et al. prepared superhydrophobic films using aminated multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWNT) and PEI using only five covalent LbL deposition steps. They observed that the covalently assembled films were chemically robust, whereas their ionically assembled counterparts were labile in acidic solution.133 The superhydrophobic films could be further employed to protect the underlying water-sensitive substrates. Lynn et al. covalently assembled superhydrophobic multilayers with PVDMA and PEI in organic solutions.135 After surface functionalizing with hydrophobic n-decylamine, the hydrophobic multilayers prolonged dissolution and release of the underlying water-soluble substrates. Fabrication of thicker PEI/PVDMA films resulted in coatings with superhydrophobic properties that could serve as barriers to protect the underlying water-sensitive substrates. Covalently held films maintain integrity in various solutes, and this feature was employed by Batteas and Bergbeiter et al. to prepare interfaces with adjustable wettabilities.136 They prepared covalently assembled films using poly(N-isopropyl acrylamide) (PNIPAM) as a component, and taking advantage of the solute-dependent hydration capabilities of PNIPAM, they obtained interfaces with wettabilities responding to different solute types and concentrations. In addition, because the LbL technique is compatible with substrates with arbitrary morphologies, the multilayered superhydrophobic films could be built around cotton fabrics and were durable against acids, bases, and organic solvents as well as repeated machine washing.37,136
Reactive substrates. 
Covalent LbL multilayers stable in solvent conditions (high ionic strength, acidic or basic environment, and redox conditions) are applicable in chemical reactions. A frequently encountered chemical reaction situation is post-modification of the LbL films. Linford and coworkers prepared covalent PAA/PAH multilayers and post-converted the surface amines into sulfhydryl groups using Traut's reagent (2-iminothiolane).137 The prepared films could be further employed in thiol–ene reactions. Reaction with bio-relevant molecules is typically needed to provide the LbL films with biomedical functionalities. Because many multilayers are built using reactions involving amines, the residual amine-reactive species are usually further employed to react with amines in bio-relevant polymers.138 Lynn and Smith et al. clearly demonstrated the stability of covalent LbL films as reactive substrates.139 They post-modified PEI/PVDMA films with D-glucamine or 4-amino-a-butanol, yielding hydroxyl-functionalized films suitable for the maskless array synthesis of oligonucleotide arrays. These arrays could be exposed to multiple hybridization/dehybridization cycles with only moderate loss of the hybridization density. According to the authors, their results demonstrated that the covalently built films were robust and able to withstand the ∼450 individual chemical processing steps as well as dehybridization of the arrays without large-scale cracking, peeling, or delamination of the thin films.
Another frequently encountered situation is the immobilization of a catalyst into LbL multilayers and further use of LbL films for catalytic reactions. Sabar prepared (TiO2/CS) LbL films on glass substrates and used epichlorohydrin (ECH) or GA to crosslink the films.140 The films exhibited excellent reusability and complete removal of the RR4 dye from the first to at least the fourth cycle. In addition, the selection of the crosslinker affected the catalytic performance of the films, presumably because of the mechanical and optical characteristics. TiO2/CS-ECH catalyzed the decomposition of RR4 with higher efficiency than TiO2/CS-GA multilayers. Yang prepared covalent LbL films incorporating AuNPs using the reaction between boronic acid and poly(vinyl alcohol).141 By employing the residual boronic acid groups on the surface of the thin film, the glycosylated-protein horseradish peroxidase (HRP) was further immobilized into the films, which exhibited good catalytic activity for H2O2 decomposition. Patil and Dhar prepared covalent LbL films incorporating AuNPs as the catalyst to catalyze the conversion of p-nitrophenol to p-aminophenol.142 The catalytic capabilities of the film were assayed multiple times, and the catalytic efficiency was observed to be directly related to the number of layers, nanoparticle sizes, and membrane porosity.
Electrical devices. 
Covalent crosslinking is applied in LbL films used in electrical devices to achieve high film stability (Fig. 17). Because electrochemistry experiments are performed in electrolytes with high ionic strength and the electrodes sometimes need to be subjected to corrosive solvents as a step in device treatment, enhanced film stabilities are necessary in real applications. Stable and electroactive (apo) ferritin protein cage/synthetic polymer LbL multilayers were built using the EDC crosslinking method.143 The films were stable in 0.01 M NaOH solution and showed clear signals corresponding to the ferrihydrite core. Covalently held graphene LbL films have been frequently studied.144 These films exhibited a specific capacitance of 150.4 F g−1 at a sweeping rate of 10 mV s−1 with 97% of the capacitance retained after 10000 charge–discharge cycles under a scanning rate of 1000 mV s−1.145 Chen, Hu, and Liu et al. prepared highly stable graphene-based covalent LbL films and explored their applications as source/drain electrodes in organic field-effect transistors (OFETs). When more than two bilayers of the rGO films were used, the OFETs displayed much better electrical performance than devices based on 40 nm Au electrodes. Compared with the electrostatically assembled films, the covalently built film provided higher reproducibility even after ultrasonication for 135 min in water. From a practical aspect, covalent crosslinking is desired for electrochemistry applications because the corresponding films must withstand multistep post-production processes during device preparation.146 In a recent report, mechanically strong and chemically resistant reduced graphene oxide (rGO)/poly(vinylamine) (PVAm) LbL films crosslinked by GA with damage detection capabilities were built.147 These films possessed a high elastic modulus exceeding 30 GPa and a hardness of 1.8 GPa. Taking advantage of the adjustability of LbL processes, the thicknesses of the PVAm sublayers were adjusted by controlling the assembly pH. The thickness of the PVAm sublayer in turn affected the electrical conductivity of the films. Because scratches in the films can be instantaneously detected by a simple electrical resistance measurement, the multilayers could be potentially used in damage-reporting packaging. Another stimuli-responsive chemiresistor was reported that used crosslinked gold nanoparticles on polyethylene and showed resistive responses to tensile strains and vapors.148 The gold nanoparticles were covalently assembled using bithiols or tetrathiols as the crosslinkers. Strain-induced formation and extension of nanocracks played important roles in signal transduction. In addition, these films also responded to the existence of toluene, 4-methyl-2-pentanone, 1-propanol, or water vapor over concentrations of 50–10000 ppm. Interestingly, under tensile stress (1% strain), all the chemiresistors showed a reversible increase in their response amplitudes of approximately 30%.
 Fig. 17  (a) Schematic illustration of the use of covalent LbL to prepare electrode materials. (b) Optical image of (APTMS-rGO) microelectrode arrays (upper) and I–V curve of the (APTMS-rGO)n (n = 1–5) films. Inset: Conductivity as a function of n. (c) Schematic illustration of the defect-detecting rGO/poly(vinylamine) covalent LbL film and resistance response to film deformation or the presence of defects, adapted with permission from ref. 147. Copyright © 2016, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic illustration of the layered electrochromical device for which the electrode was prepared using covalent LbL films of PAA/PEO/PAA/PEI. Adapted with permission from ref. 150. Copyright © 2011, American Chemical Society. (e) Electrochemical sensing LbL films prepared by incorporating a redox-active polymer PFS containing ferrocene groups (left) and the amperometric response of (PFS/PEI)4–PFS and (PFS/PEI)8–PFS to H2O2 at −0.1 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) constant potential. Each step represents 25 μM H2O2, adapted with permission from ref. 42. Copyright © 2013, American Chemical Society. 
In addition to increasing film stabilities, the covalent assembly method can be used to incorporate hydrophobic but conductive building units. The conventional LbL method, which uses electrostatic interactions in film building, requires water-soluble building units that are thus solvated to carry charges. However, many electrically conductive polymers possess a conjugated-π system and are poorly soluble in water. Fortunately, many covalent reactions occur in organic solutions and can be used to assemble LbL films therein. Wang and coworkers used EDC coupling between amines and carboxylic acid groups in THF to prepare LbL multilayers of conjugated polymers and CdSe nanoparticles.149 A preliminary application of the hybrid films in the development of organic photovoltaics was presented. Upon illumination with white light at 10 mW cm−2, the self-assembled multilayers exhibited steady photocurrent responses with an overall optical-to-electrical power conversion efficiency of 0.71%.
Depending on the selected material system, the covalent crosslinking might either enhance or limit the electric transfer processes. In most reported polymeric LbL films, covalent crosslinking decreases the film's electronic transfer capabilities. Hammond, Lee, and coworkers prepared an LbL solid polymer electrolyte for electrochromic devices.150 They selected linear PEI and PEO to enhance the dissolution of lithium salt and the ionic transport through segmental motions of polymer chains and PAA as the bridging species to form electrostatic and covalent interactions with PEI. The (PEI/PAA/PEO/PAA)n multilayers were heated to achieve crosslinking between PEI and PAA after they were assembled using electrostatic interactions and hydrogen bonds. They reported that during the heating process, two processes, covalent bonding between PEI and PAA and the segregation of the PEO crystalline phase, occurred simultaneously, which resulted in a moderate decrease of the conductivity in the electrolyte after heating. They proceeded to fabricate an electrochromic device and demonstrated that the LbL multilayers effectively served as flexible solid electrodes. In support of this trend, the fact that covalent crosslinks cause a decrease in conductivity was observed by Na and coworkers.151 These researchers prepared LbL films for direct methanol fuel cells (DMFCs). They employed polymers rich in sulfonic acid and carboxylic acid groups to improve the proton conductivities in the films. However, after heat-induced crosslinking between the amines and carboxylic acid groups, the proton conductivity slightly decreased. They attributed this decrease to the reduced water uptake after crosslinking. Nonetheless, a unique advantage of the crosslinked film, the decreased methanol permeability, effectively offset the slight disadvantage of the decreased conductivity, resulting in high selectivity in conducting protons over methanol permeability, which is a crucial selective factor for evaluating the potential performance of DMFC membranes.
Unlike previous studies, Kim and coworkers recently reported an rGO-based ultrathin supercapacitor electrode in which crosslinking facilitated the charge-transfer process.152 The prepared film possessed a very high capacitance of 354 F cm−3 at a scan rate of 20 mV s−1. The high capacitance was achieved by employing not only rGO but also an electroconductive polymer, poly(3,4-ethylene dioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS), into the multilayers. Thus, the electrode possessed not only electric double-layer capacitance (EDLC) but also pseudocapacitance. Crosslinking using the diazoresin chemistry resulted in a considerable increase in the volumetric capacitance by 54%. This unique feature stemmed from their unique system: the rigid rGO framework firmly protected the PEDOT:PSS structure during the redox reaction, and rGO prevented side reactions such as the directional crosslinking between diazoresin and PEDOT.
For similar reasons as in the building of electronic devices, covalently crosslinked LbL films are required in electrochemical sensing because the enhanced film stability stemming from covalent crosslinks ensures film integrity under electrochemical conditions and permits stable sensing performance after extended device storage. rGO, carbon nanotubes,111,118 and gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) have been frequently incorporated into electrochemical sensing multilayers because of their high conductivity and sometimes electrocatalytic activity. Chemically active species such as glucose oxidase153–155 or a redox-active polymer, PFS,42 have also been incorporated into the LbL film on electrode surfaces. Using films that include these components, various molecules, including redox-active H2O2, ascorbic acid, paracetamol,156 dihydronicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH),157 dissolved oxygen,158 or DNA can be detected.159,160
3.1.1.3 Capsules. 
A rapid increase in the construction of capsules has occurred in the past decade (Fig. 18). The construction of the core, a nano- or microscopic particle, is typically the first step in preparing capsules. Assembly of polymeric species is then performed around the core to form the shell, and finally, the core is selectively removed to form the hollow capsules. Several templates are frequently employed to fabricate core–shell structures and can be subsequently removed by specific solvent etching. SiO2, CaCO3, and latex (PS) templates can be removed by HF, EDTA or acids, and HTF, respectively. Capsules have great potential for use as or in functional systems, especially as therapeutic delivery or diagnostic apparatuses in biomedicine. LbL assembly has been shown to be appropriate for achieving such structures because of its ability to accurately control the thickness of the polymer shells down to a resolution of ∼1 nm and because of its simplicity in terms of the fabrication devices required. However, LbL shells assembled using electrostatic interactions suffer from inadequate stabilities during the core etching and application processes, which has recently raised increasing concerns. Consequently, capsules held by covalently crosslinked shells have been developed to provide increased stability and more functionalities to LbL capsules.161
 Fig. 18  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation process for LbL capsules. (b) Confocal fluorescent images of LbL four-component capsules of PPV/DAR/PAA/PSS, with the fluorescence derived from the modified PPV. (c) Fluorescent intensity of crosslinked and non-crosslinked capsules after washing with a dissociation agent. Adapted with permission from ref. 166. Copyright © 2015, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic illustration of a half capsule prepared from lipid bilayer (for the encapsulation of proteins and sensitive bioactive molecules). (e) Schematic illustration of integration of lipid capsules into a micro-needle patch for therapeutic delivery, with permission from ref. 172. Copyright © 2012, American Chemical Society. 
Covalent LbL assembly strategies enable the harsh conditions of solvent etching in the core-removal process to be withstood and enable the construction of stable and stimuli-responsive capsules. In principle, the chemical strategies employed to fabricate covalently assembled multilayers on planar substrates could also be used to fabricate core–shell composite particles and capsules. Caruso reported in 2001 that photochemically crosslinked DZR/PSS capsules were mechanically robust and highly stable in various chemical environments and were thus more resistant to etching by solvents than their ionically assembled counterparts.162 Zhang, Xu, and coworkers prepared covalently built LbL capsules with highly stable shells in the organic solvent THF.163 In addition to using polymers as merely the covalent building units, various functional particles can be incorporated into the capsule shells by careful selection of the functional building units. Guo and Qian et al. prepared hollow LbL carbon nanotube microspheres using covalent bonding between DZR and the carboxylic acid group around the carbon nanotubes.132 Li and coworkers prepared hemoglobin (Hb) protein hollow shells using GA as the crosslinker to react with free amino sites of Hb. The prepared Hb hollow shells retained their heme electroactivity.164 Du Prez and coworkers prepared giant hollow capsules by microfluidic templating combined with the DAR crosslinking method.165 The dextran-based microgel cores were smoothly hydrolyzed and removed without rupture of the polyelectrolyte/nanoparticle membrane. In a recent report, Fan and coworkers synthesized fluorescent core–shell microspheres with functional groups that provide potential for bioconjugation.166 In their report, four polymeric building units were employed in preparing these microspheres, a poly(phenylenevinylene) (PPV) precursor, DAR, PAA, and PSS. After LbL assembly around a latex core, thermal treatment was used to simultaneously induce the conversion of the PPV precursor into fluorescent PPV and the crosslinking reaction between DAR and the polyanions. The carboxyl groups present on the surface of the sphere were further employed to immobilize BSA to demonstrate the potential biomedical applications. The crosslinked spheres were observed to be highly resistant to common solvents and retained a high degree of fluorescence after washing in water or a “dissociation agent” (Fig. 18(b and c)).
Another functional advantage of the covalently held LbL capsules is that they can be applied under various pH conditions.167 Li and Zhao prepared covalent LbL capsules and altered the solution pH to adjust the loading and release of a protein, BSA, which possesses a PI of 5. The authors observed that loading of BSA was higher at pH values below 5 and that release of BSA was more efficient at pH values above 5. They attributed this adjustability to the tuned electrostatic interactions between BSA and the capsule walls, with stronger interactions favoring loading and weaker interactions favoring release. The advantages of crosslinked LbL are not limited to the aforementioned improved mechanical and chemical stabilities. By adjusting the crosslinking strategies, the functionalities of the capsules can be further tailored. These advantages are, in principle, not only applicable to capsules but also to LbL films on planar substrates, which will be discussed in the corresponding sections.
Lipid vesicles have attracted particular research interest because they protect the bioactivities of proteins, peptides, and DNA. Lipid molecules form vesicles via self-assembly without requiring a template (Fig. 18(d)). Covalent LbL lipid capsules have also attracted intense research interest.168 Caruso demonstrated that lipid vesicle–LbL polyelectrolyte double-shell capsules can be used as long-term delivery vehicles for protein therapeutics. Fournier and coworkers prepared covalent LbL films around protein-loaded lipid vesicles and showed that an enzyme encapsulated in such a hybrid container by repeated cycles of freezing and thawing maintains its biological activity, permitting the use of such structures as nanoreactors.169 In such structures, the liposome shells provide a biologically compatible pH and ionic concentration for the encapsulated protein while the crosslinked multilayer polyelectrolyte shell provides a robust structure to protect it.
In a recent report, Irvine and coworkers prepared covalently crosslinked multilamellar vesicles as synthetic vaccines that induced potent humoral and cellular immune responses (Fig. 18(e)).170,171 Their vesicles possessed typical LbL structures. The phospholipid component contained 1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (DOPC), 1,2-di(9Z-octadecenoyl)-sn-glycero-3-phospho-(1′-rac-glycerol) (DOPG), and a maleimide-headgroup lipid (MPB). They introduced interlayer covalent crosslinks between DTT and the maleimide head groups of the lipid component, effectively stabilizing the multilamellar vesicles. The surface of these vesicles was further functionalized by PET-SH. These interbiolayer-crosslinked multilamellar vesicles (ICMVs) encapsulated and stably retained high levels of proteins and released entrapped cargo very slowly when exposed to serum for over 30 days. Nonetheless, these ICMVs were rapidly degraded in the presence of lipases, which are normally found at high levels within intracellular compartments. Hammond and Irvine further incorporated these ICMVs into microneedle surfaces by LbL assembly together with biodegradable cationic poly(β-amino ester) (PBAE) for enhanced transcutaneous vaccine delivery.172 Following application of microneedle arrays to the skin of mice for 5 min, the (PBAE/ICMV) films were rapidly transferred from the microneedle surfaces into the cutaneous tissue and remained in the skin following removal of the microneedle arrays. The lipid capsules were then effectively uptaken by antigen-presenting cells in local tissue, and their immune response were activated in situ.


3.1.2 Enhanced packing density and limited permeation: protective layers. 
In addition to mechanical protection provided by crosslinking, protection against permeation is another useful property provided by covalent LbL films (Fig. 19). Protection of substrates from corrosive atmospheres, e.g., O2, H2S, or water, can be achieved by taking advantage of the decreased permeation provided by crosslinking. Grunlan and coworkers studied crosslinked PEI and PAA multilayers and observed that the crosslinking method used remarkably affected their oxygen and water-vapor barrier properties.173 Three different crosslinking strategies, (i) thermal crosslinking and coupling-agent-assisted crosslinking using (ii) GA or (iii) EDC under milder conditions, were evaluated with respect to film thickness and barrier properties. Varying film surface morphologies were observed for these three strategies. The GA-crosslinked surfaces were rougher than the other surfaces. The oxygen transmission rates of chemically crosslinked PEI/PAA assemblies were enhanced at 100% relative humidity (RH) for the films crosslinked with both GA and EDC relative to 0% RH but at varying degrees, suggesting that the crosslinking chemistry affected the barrier properties. A 551 nm-thick, 8-bilayer PEI/PAA assembly exhibited an oxygen permeability (<5.9 × 1021 cm−2 s−1 Pa−1) rivaling that of SiOx thin films. Thermally crosslinked films show improvement as moisture barriers; however, this feature requires a higher number of layers. Bruening and coworkers constructed covalently assembled PAA/PAH films by forming an amide by heating on an Al substrate that provided oxide resistance because of the passivation of the surface oxide.174 Compared with non-crosslinked PAA/PAH films, the crosslinked multilayers exhibited larger electrical resistance, as determined by impedance measurements. These results suggested that an increase in film resistance plays a role in oxide passivation in this system. Langecker and coworkers reported ultrathin, flexible, and transparent polymer multilayer composites for the protection of silver surfaces from corrosion against an H2S atmosphere, taking advantage of the basic nature of polyamines.175 The multilayers were composed of polyanhydrides and polyamines/-imines. The hydrophobicity of the surfaces was further adjusted by terminating the multilayers with palmitoyl derivatives. Corrosion tests in a H2S atmosphere demonstrated the good protective effect of the palmitoyl-terminated composites.
 Fig. 19  Schematic illustration depicting the high permeability of non-crosslinked LbL films to corrosive gases and moisture compared with the less permeable nature of more compact crosslinked films. 


3.1.3 Enhanced structural regularity: electro-optic superlattices & non-linear optical films. 
Covalent crosslinks help maintain a higher degree of internal order in multilayered films (Fig. 20(a)). For example, in LbL films of polymers and PtNPs, covalent crosslinking effectively suppressed PtNP segregation or interlayer fusing that occurred in the non-crosslinked multilayered films (Fig. 20(b)).176 A similar UV-induced crosslinking method between photo-crosslinkable polystyrene (PS-N3) and functional nanoparticles with azide or thiol surface groups was employed by Bang, Cho, and coworkers to prepare free-standing nanocomposite multilayers with adjustable internal structures and various functionalities (Fig. 20(c and d)).177 The thickness of individual layers could be controlled from a few to hundreds of nanometers, producing a highly ordered internal structure, and the resulting nanocomposite multilayers, consisting of polymer and inorganic nanoparticles (CdSe@ZnS, Au, and Pt), exhibited various interesting physical properties. These films could provide prolonged photoluminescent durability, facile color tuning capability, and a one-dimensional photonic band and could be patterned by photolithography. This robust and tailorable method was demonstrated to be effective for the fabrication of functional film devices based on nanocomposite multilayers.
 Fig. 20  (a) Schematic illustration comparing the internal order of a covalent LbL film with that of a non-crosslinked film over time. (b) TEM image of the cross-section of a covalent LbL film assembled using polymers and PtNPs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 176. Copyright © 2008, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Photoluminescence spectra and photographs of (PS-N3:PS-N3-SH-QDs)3 multilayers prepared from blue-, green-, and red-emitting QDs (left). Schematic illustration of sequential assembly of blue, red, and green QDs (middle) to obtain a white-light-emitting substrate (middle) and photograph of the resulting substrate (right). (d) Photographs and fluorescent images of flexible free-standing LbL films prepared using red, green, and blue QDs (left) and photograph of QD pattern (right). Reprinted with permission from ref. 177. Copyright © 2009, American Chemical Society. (e) Scheme showing LbL fabrication of NLO films. Reprinted with permission from ref. 179. Copyright © 2004, American Chemical Society. 
The construction of second-order nonlinear optical (NLO) films with high thermal stabilities also relies on the high internal molecular structural regularity of covalent LbL films (Fig. 20(e)).178 Yang and coworkers prepared highly thermally stable organic second-order NLO LbL thin films using low-molecular-weight chromophoric (LMWC) molecules assisted by an electric field.179,180 Under a dc electric field, the density of the oriented BCPE chromophores deposited on the substrate remarkably increased. After crosslinking, the resulting NLO films possessed excellent environmental stability and high thermal stability (the resulting films retained 92% of the polar order up to 200 °C). In a similar study, azobenzene- and stilbazolium-based organic superlattices were built using a siloxane-functionalized high-β chromophore.98 The very large surface densities (Nmax ∼ 50 Å2 per chromophore) and high degrees of net polar orientation of the large hyperpolarizability chromophore resulted in very large second-order responses, χ(2) ≈ 370 pm V−1, and a large macroscopic electro-optic coefficient, r33 ≈ 120 pm V−1 at λ0 = 1064 nm.

3.2 Partially crosslinked films
Taking advantage of the selectivity of chemical reactions, the film crosslinking reactions can be engineered to discriminatively occur at specific locations, among specific components, or to various degrees. By delicate control of the crosslinking parameters, a higher level of diversity of film functionalities can be achieved. This section introduces partially crosslinked LbL films and is divided into three subsections: (i) spatially discriminated crosslinked films, (ii) component-selectively crosslinked films, and (iii) films crosslinked at various degrees.

3.2.1 Spatially crosslinked films. 
Films crosslinked spatially selective in the horizontal direction can be obtained using a photoactive building component in combination with photolithography. Zhang and coworkers reported that UV irradiation of DAR/PAA multilayers through a photolithography mask followed by appropriate rinsing in SDS solution led to a patterned surface (Fig. 21(a)).181 Because covalent crosslinks were generated only in the areas in which the films were UV irradiated, the films in the UV-blocked area retained their electrostatic assembly nature and were disassembled by the SDS rinsing. A similar surface-patterning strategy was reported by Shi, An, and coworkers.182 using the photochemistry of azide groups. They used DAS as the photoactive crosslinker and prepared well-defined surface patterns of PAA/PAH multilayers. In addition, Cong and coworkers prepared conductive surface patterns using carbon nanotubes as the building unit together with DAR using a similar photolithography method.183
 Fig. 21  (a) Schematic illustration of the patterning process on LbL films. Inset: AFM image showing the morphology of the obtained patterns. Adapted with permission from ref. 181. Copyright © 2002, Wiley publication group. (b) Schematic illustration of vertically selective crosslinking in an LbL film for which only the surface layers were crosslinked. The bioactive molecules in the film were free to diffuse through the loose (non-crosslinked) inner layers, and the crosslinked rigid film surface promoted cell adhesion. Adapted with permission from ref. 184. Copyright © 2011, American Chemical Society. 
An LbL film with structural complexity in the vertical direction with respect to the substrate was reported by Tasell et al. (Fig. 21(b)).184 They prepared LbL films crosslinked only at the outermost layer by incorporating reactive polymers only in the last assembly cycle. Their purpose was to obtain a rigid film surface without decreasing the diffusability of bioactive species within the film matrices. Cell adhesion was higher on their vertically selectively crosslinked films than on a non-crosslinked film because of the enhanced film rigidity but was lower than that on fully crosslinked films.


3.2.2 Component-selective crosslinking. 
3.2.2.1 Porous or single-component multilayers with molecular loading capacity. 
A frequent purpose of applying component-selective covalent crosslinking in LbL assembly is to wash away the non-crosslinked component and ultimately obtain single-component films. The free spaces left by the washed-away component can be used to load biomedically active molecules (Fig. 22(a)). For example, PVP forms hydrogen bonds with polyelectrolytes with amines or carboxylic acid groups while being chemically inert to reaction conditions that crosslink amines or carboxylic acids. After the polyelectrolytes are crosslinked using reactions involving amines or carboxylic acids, PVP is selectively removed by adjusting the pH values that break the hydrogen bonds within the films. Sukhishvili and coworkers prepared LbL films using PVP and PMAA.185 After PMAA was crosslinked using a diamine crosslinker, PVP was removed to make space in the film to load an antibacterial cationic peptide. The peptide was then slowly released from the film in response to the pH changes during bacterial growth. In this manner, a multilayered film with prolonged antibacterial capability was obtained. Shiratori and coworkers prepared porous films using chitosan, alginate, and PVP.186 After the assembled film was crosslinked using EDC chemistry, PVP was removed. The generated porous film was hydrophobized by surface modification and loaded with almond oil to obtain slippery liquid-infused porous surfaces. Blood easily flowed over this biodegradable and biocompatible antithrombogenic film without leaving stains. The prepared film was expected to be applicable in nonfouling medical devices (Fig. 22(b)).
 Fig. 22  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation of single-component films with molecular loading capacity via component-selective crosslinking in LbL films. (b) Stain-free blood drop rolling on a film loaded with almond oil. Adapted with permission from ref. 186. Copyright © 2015, American Chemical Society. (c) Porous film on a PDMS stamp surface for enhanced loading of protein ink (left) and the generated fluorescent protein pattern (right). Inset: FL intensity profile. Adapted with permission from ref. 40. Copyright © 2009, American Chemical Society. (d) Enhanced cell adhesion and spreading on the particle-templated film with increased album loading. Adapted with permission from ref. 188. Copyright © 2013 Wiley-VCH. 
Other orthogonal chemistry can also be used to generate porous films by selective crosslinking of one or two components followed by removal of the other film-building component. Kaplan and Sukhishvili et al. prepared porous films using PAH and PMAA.187 After crosslinking PAA using glutaraldehyde, the PMAA was removed to obtain a porous film. The film was further employed to load the enzyme dispersin B, which disperses bacterial biofilms through enzymatic cleavage of the extracellular biofilm matrix. The loaded film effectively inhibited biofilm formation of Staphylococcus epidermidis and did not inhibit attachment or growth of cultured human osteoblast cells. These films are expected to perform as biocompatible surfaces with high antibacterial efficiency. Huskens, Lammertink, and Xu et al. prepared porous films on PDMS stamps for protein printing (Fig. 22(c)).40 The LbL films were assembled by alternate deposition of PAA and poly(4-vinylpyridine) via electrostatic interactions and hydrogen bonds. Afterwards, the PAA was removed by rinsing the film in aqueous NaOH solution (0.1 M), and the residue film was post crosslinked by a vapor phase reaction using BrC3H6Br between poly(4-vinylpyridine). The crosslinked porous film acted as a protein reservoir and was able to repeatedly transfer protein, leading to a patterned surface. Films without crosslinking were unstable on the PDMS surface. During protein transfer, not only proteins but also the polymeric film was transferred onto the substrates. Instead of using a building polymer as the porous template, Tassel and Pauthe et al. used latex particles in the preparation of porous LbL biomaterials (Fig. 22(d)).188 The latex particles were included during the LbL assembly of poly(L-lysing) (PLL) and poly(glutamic acid) (PGA). After being crosslinked using the EDC–NHS method, the latex particles were removed by exposure of the film to THF to obtain a porous film. The film had a high capacity (approximately 10% of the film mass) of bioactive-species loading and was mechanically strong enough to support pre-osteoblastic MC3T3-E1 cell growth. These films are promising candidates for cell-contacting materials.
3.2.2.2 Single-component biocompatible multilayers. 
The second purpose served by component-selective films is to build biocompatible films by selective removal of the incompatible component. Caruso and coworkers attached the cancer therapeutic drug doxorubicin (DOX) onto alkyne-functionalized PGA (PGA–DOX) and prepared LbL films and capsules using PGA–DOX and PVP. After film stabilization using diazide crosslinkers, PVP was removed by altering the solution pH. The drug-loaded capsules could be degraded enzymatically, resulting in the sustained release of active DOX for over 2 h. These drug-loaded biodegradable capsules are expected to be promising candidates for carrier systems for biomedical applications.189
3.2.2.3 Single-component films with enhanced swelling. 
Selective crosslinking of one component of the LbL film followed by removal of the other component results in space not only for molecular loading but also for managed swelling (Fig. 23(a)). Kharlampieva and coworkers demonstrated that a single-component multilayered film of PVP exhibited significant and manageable swelling upon exposure to varying environmental pH values.190 PVP is water soluble under acidic conditions because of the protonation of its pyridine groups (pKa 3–4.5) but precipitates in neutral and basic solutions. The pH-responsive multilayers were prepared with PVP and PMAA followed by selective crosslinking of PVP and removal of PMAA. The film collapsed to the thickness of the dry films when the pH was above 5 but exhibited a fast (within seconds) and drastic 10-fold increase in thickness at pH < 5. Both the crosslinking degree and film assembly conditions determined the film swelling capabilities. The same group also reported that the single-component PMAA LbL capsules experienced shape switching in response to environmental pH changes (Fig. 23(b)). The cubic capsules transformed into bulged structures at basic pH values.191 The shape-switching behavior was unique to the single-component capsule. The (PMAA-PVP) crosslinked capsules only increased in size while retaining their shape in response to pH changes.192 In addition to pH-responsive swelling, thermo-responsive swelling has also been realized in single-component capsules by employing a thermo-sensitive building polymer poly(N-vinylcaprolactam) (PVCL).193 The capsules were prepared using PVCL/PMAA multilayers, followed by selective crosslinking of the PVCL species and removal of the PMAA. The degree of film shrinkage, defined as the ratio of the wet thickness at 25 °C to that at 50 °C, was 1.9 and 1.3 for the films made from PVCL-7 (7 layers of PVCL) and PVCL-14 copolymers, respectively. In contrast, no thermo-responsive behaviors were observed for the non-crosslinked two-component PVCL/PMAA film precursors, demonstrating the necessity of using the single-component film to achieve large responsive swelling capabilities. The authors proceeded to prepare spherical and cubical capsules using these thermo-responsive films and observed that the capsule sizes decreased upon increasing the environmental temperature and that the capsule shapes were maintained during the swelling–shrinkage processes.
 Fig. 23  (a) Scheme of component-selective crosslinked films: single-component film for enhanced film swelling. (b) Single-component (PMAA)n capsules changed shape from cubic to spherical in response to pH changes. The scale bar is 3 μm. (c) Incorporation of AuNPs enabled the films to indicate pH variations by changes in the UV-vis spectra induced by swelling-induced alterations of interparticular distances. Reprinted with permission from ref. 194. Copyright © 2008, American Chemical Society. (d) pH-Induced capsule shape changes led to different cell internalization efficiencies. Reprinted with permission from ref. 195. Copyright © 2014 American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic illustration of swelling of single-component film around a yeast cell, which can be used to regulate molecular trans-membrane transport and is expected to regulate cell growth and functions. Adapted with permission from ref. 196. Copyright © 2012, American Chemical Society. 
The responsiveness of these films has been further employed in sensors and biomaterials. LbL hydrogels incorporating gold nanorods were built for use as pH-sensitive optical materials (Fig. 23(c)).194 The materials were PMAA single-component LbL films loaded with gold nanorods. The loaded films displayed absorbance spectral changes when exposed to solutions with pH of 8 and 5 because the plasmonic spectra of gold nanorods are highly sensitive to the interparticular distances, which were altered during hydrogel swelling or shrinkage. Godin and Kharlampieva et al. prepared red-cell mimicking capsules that changed shape in response to pH changes (because the pH value of tumor tissues is usually more acidic than that of the normal tissue environment) and studied cell internalization of these particles.195 They observed a 24-fold volume change for the single-component (PMAA)15 capsules and a moderate 2.3-fold volume change for (PMAA/PVPON)5 capsules when the solution pH was varied between 7.4 and 4. By studying the cell behaviors of J774A.1 macrophages, HMVEC endothelial cells, and 4T1 breast cancer cells, they reported that the discoidal capsules showed a 60% lower internalization than the spherical capsules. In addition, the size of the hydrogel capsules decreased 2-fold upon internalization. These findings provided a unique example of pH-triggered cell behavior via the pH-induced morphological changes of the capsules (Fig. 23(d)).
Tsukruk and coworkers reported that lightly crosslinked PMAA multilayers around yeast cells could potentially serve as pH-responsive cell-behavior-regulating layers (Fig. 23(e)).196 The yeast cells exhibited a high viability rate of approximately 90% when encapsulated in the lightly crosslinked PMAA multilayers. In addition, increasing the pH above the isoelectric point of the polymer shell led to a delay in the growth rate without affecting the expression of the enhanced green fluorescent protein. The authors suggested that the charges and structural (size) changes in response to the environmental pH values of the PMAA layers affected membrane transport, which led to the regulation of the yeast cells. These pH-responsive multilayers are expected to be used to control cell growth and cell function, which could further be used for external chemical control of cell-based biosensors.
3.2.2.4 Molecularly imprinted multilayers. 
Molecularly imprinted polymers (MIPs) provide a general and versatile means to generate specific binding sites in polymer matrices and are potentially applicable for molecular enrichment and sensing. However, they suffer from limitations associated with the limited accessibility to the imprinted sites due to the long diffusion paths required because of the bulk volume of the polymer. Molecularly imprinted sites can be built in LbL multilayers while circumventing this problem by generating binding sites only close to surfaces. Covalently crosslinked multilayers permitted the generation of molecularly imprinted sites and enabled selective taking up of the targeted molecule with high repeatability and fidelity. Shi and An et al. reported the construction of molecularly imprinted multilayers using covalent PAA/PAH LbL using the “post-infiltration and subsequent crosslinking” method.197 In their method, the template molecule meso-tetra(4-carboxyphenyl)-porphine (Por) was implanted into the multilayers during the assembly of multilayers using electrostatic interactions. A bifunctional crosslinking agent DAS was infiltrated into the multilayers, and the covalent crosslinking of the multilayers was subsequently initiated using UV light. The crosslinker reacted with only the polyelectrolyte, and the template molecule was immune to the reaction. Because of the stability provided by the crosslinking step, the template molecule could be repeatedly removed and reloaded into the multilayers. The MIP multilayers absorbed the template molecule with higher selectivity than the untemplated film in the working concentration window of the MIP film. The combination of templating and crosslinking was the core factor in achieving high fidelity and high efficiency of the MIP-LbL device. Using a similar method, Pan and coworkers prepared MIP LbL on electrospun polyacrylonitrile (PAN) nanofiber substrates (Fig. 24).198 The binding capacity of Por reached 2.1 mg g−1 when 3.5 bilayers were deposited on the nanofibers. After six cycles of extraction and reabsorption, the binding capacity of Por remained at 83%. Moreover, the Por-template film highly selectively absorbed Por but rejected the molecule fast green, which has a similar molecular structure and charge as Por.
 Fig. 24  MIP films: (a) schematic illustrations of the preparation of MIP LbL film incorporating template molecules. (b) Template molecule (Por) extraction in imprinted and non-imprinted film and (c) comparison of film extraction of the template molecule (Por) and non-template molecule (fast green). Reprinted with permission from ref. 198. Copyright © 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. 


3.2.3 Adjustment of crosslinking degree. 
3.2.3.1 Adjusted permeation: drug encapsulation and release. 
The regulation of drug-release profiles holds significance for biomedical applications and tissue engineering.199 LbL films can regulate drug release via various mechanisms. The number of layers, building polymer characteristics (e.g., polymer hydrophobicity, polymer charges, drug–polymer affinity), film structure changes, and crosslinking degrees can each affect the molecular diffusion and drug-release properties in LbL films.64,200–205 Increase of the number of layers would impose a stronger diffusion barrier against molecular diffusion within the film matrices and thus suppress drug release.199 The effects of film charges or hydrophobicity and crosslinking degrees have been explored by many researchers and will be discussed here. Drug release by reversibly altering the film structure or charges in response to environmental stimuli will be discussed in the following section. Furthermore, the mechanism to regulate drug release via film disassembly will be discussed in the section on labile crosslinked LbL films.
Crosslinking enables suppression of molecular release because of the larger barrier opposed during drug diffusion (Fig. 25(a)); however, for some crosslinking methods, significant swelling of the film occurs during the reaction process, and film permeation is thus enhanced. Therefore, the selection of the crosslinking method remarkably affects the permeation of LbL films. PAA/PEI films crosslinked by EDC–NHS treatment exhibited increased permeation and accelerated release, whereas heat-induced crosslinking decreased the film permeation and significantly suppressed the molecular release compared with a non-crosslinked film (Fig. 25(b)).206 Gentamicin gradually released from a thermally treated film maintained a bacteria-inhibition zone against S. aureus that was significantly larger than that of a non-crosslinked film. Furthermore, varying the crosslinking degree by controlling the thermal treatment time systematically affected the molecular (dexamethasone) release rate from the multilayers. Cell differentiation into osteoblasts of human mesenchymal stem cells cultured on these multilayers was adjusted in a dose-dependent manner (Fig. 25(c and d)).207 Consistent with this trend, the decreased film permeation with thermally induced crosslinking has also been reported for cyclodextrin polyelectrolyte multilayers.208
 Fig. 25  Variation of the crosslinking degree results in modification of molecular release profiles. (a) Schematic illustration of the variation of the film crosslinking degree leading to films with different compactness levels. (b) Plot showing the adjustment of dexamethasone release using film crosslinking chemical methods. Reprinted with permission from ref. 206. Copyright © 2016, American Chemical Society. (c) Adjustment of release profile by elongating the thermal treatment at 150 °C (for the crosslinking reaction). Reprinted with permission from ref. 207. Copyright © 2012, Controlled Release Society. (d) Human mesenchymal stem cells after 14 day-culture on (d1) film without dexamethasone and (d2) film loaded with dexamethasone. Reprinted with permission from ref. 207. Copyright © 2012, Controlled Release Society. (e) Molecular release inhibition from capsules due to increased capsule hydrophobicity after crosslinking of DAR. Reprinted with permission from ref. 210. Copyright © 2013, American Chemical Society. 
In addition to thermal treatment, photochemical crosslinking can also reduce film permeation and result in extended drug release. Expectedly, increasing the film crosslinking degrees by elongation of light irradiation time suppressed drug releases. For example, UV irradiation for 1, 2, or 3 min towards an electrostatically assembled capsule that involved benzophenone in the building units resulted in capsules with increasing crosslinking degrees and elongated releases of the encapsulated RhB molecules.209 An alternative mechanism to adjust molecular releases using photochemical crosslinking was to change film wettability by eliminating the building unit charges. An example was the regulated molecular release from DAR/Nafion capsules (Fig. 25(e)).210 The capsules assembled using electrostatic interactions were permeable to RhB, whereas UV irradiation induced chemical reaction of DAR and eliminated its positive charges. Consequently, the capsule shell became remarkably more hydrophobic, and the shell permeation toward RhB was effectively reduced. As a result, the capsules retained RhB more effectively than the non-crosslinked capsules.
3.2.3.2 Adjusted swelling. 
Swelling is an important property of LbL materials that affects functionalities such as permeation, molecular loading and preservation, and mechanical stability. Compared with the enhanced swelling in single-component LbL films, as discussed previously, partial crosslinks suppress film swelling to various extents determined by the degree of crosslinking. The non-crosslinked LbL film usually swells remarkably, with disassembly at extreme conditions. Cross-linked LbL films were effectively stabilized at high or low pH values; however, at the same time, the film swelling was suppressed.211 Lower crosslinking degrees resulted in larger swelling ratios, and vice versa.212 Chang and coworkers prepared LbL microcapsules using click chemistry between azido- and acetylene-functionalized PNIPAM.213,214 The prepared capsules exhibited both pH- and thermo-responsive swelling capabilities. The crosslinking degree in the capsule walls was adjusted by controlling the number of reactive functional groups. Because of the varied crosslinking degrees, in addition to the surface morphology and wall thickness of the capsules, the swelling ratios were also adjusted in response to moisture or temperature changes. Sukhishvili and coworkers further increased the structural complexity of the swelling of LbL films and systematically studied the effect of the crosslinking degree on the swelling ratio and molecular permeation properties of multilayers.215 In their report, tertiary multilayers composed of PNIPAM, clay nanosheets, and PMAA were prepared and crosslinked using ethylenediamine as the crosslinker between carboxylic groups in the multilayers (Fig. 26(a)). The crosslinking degree was adjusted by modifying the heating time between 2 and 8 h. The multilayers displayed complex temperature-, salt-concentration-, and pH-stimuli-responsive behaviors. The swelling of the multilayers further led to regulation of molecular permeation through the films. The crosslinking degree of the films provided effective control over the swelling properties, with longer crosslinking times resulting in smaller swelling ratios.
 Fig. 26  Effect of crosslinking on film swelling. Effect of crosslinking on swelling of (PNIPAM/clay/PNIPAM/PMAA)m in response to (a1) pH variation and (a2) temperature changes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 215. Copyright © 2011, American Chemical Society. The scale bar in (b) is 10 μm. (b) Crosslinked GO LbL membrane allows water filtration while rejecting salts: (b1) water flux and (b2) salt and organic dye rejection for different numbers of GO layers. Reprinted with permission from ref. 217. Copyright © 2013, American Chemical Society. (c) Suppressed molecular cross-membrane diffusion regulated by LbL GO films and long-term stable release up to 9 days. Reprinted with permission from ref. 218. Copyright © 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Surface wrinkles generated by crosslinked (PAA/PEG)n films on PDMS for n = 6 (upper left), 12 (upper right), and 18 (lower left) and wrinkle wavelength as a function of n (lower right). Reprinted with permission from ref. 220. Copyright © 2014, American Chemical Society. (e) Cationic reaction in crosslinked PEI/PAA multilayers to generate metal nanoparticles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 221. Copyright © 2012, American Chemical Society. 
Because film permeation is highly relevant to film swelling, management of film swelling using the highest possible crosslinking degree is usually necessary to ensure stable performance of molecular diffusion under various application conditions. Tight multilayers with high salt or molecular rejection rates were realized by employing high crosslinking degrees in films using graphene or clay nanosheet building units. Hammond and coworkers prepared films with a tetralayer structure of LAPONITE® (LAP) clay nanosheets, poly(diallyldimethylammonium) (PDDA), PAH, and PAA.216 The film was further crosslinked by amide bond formation during thermal treatment, and film swelling was effectively suppressed. The prepared film exhibited high water permeability with a maximum salt rejection of 89%. Mi and Hu prepared GO multilayers by intercalating with the small molecular crosslinker 1,3,5-benzenetricarbonyl trichloride (TMC).217 The crosslinked film permitted water flow through the nanochannels between GO layers while rejecting salts and molecules via size exclusion and charge effects. The prepared GO membrane flux ranged between 80 and 276 LMH/MPa, roughly 4–10 times higher than that of most commercial nanofiltration membranes. The film exhibited relatively low rejection (6–46%) of monovalent and divalent salts, a moderate rejection (46–66%) of methylene blue (MB), and a high rejection (93–95%) of rhodamine B (RhB) (Fig. 26(b)). Zhang, An, and coworkers prepared free-standing few-layered GO films intercalated with PAH, and the film was crosslinked by a photochemically active small molecule DAS.218 Regulation of the permeation of various small molecules with molecular sizes of approximately 1 nm by the film was achieved by adjusting the number of bilayers. Molecules of larger sizes, such as short peptides or proteins, were effectively blocked by the film. Stable and lasting delivery of MB, RhB, and fluorescein disodium salt was achieved for up to 9 days. The film served as a promising controlled delivery film for long-lasting drug or fertilizer release (Fig. 26(c)).
Suppressed film swelling is not only useful for achieving molecular rejection or delayed release but is also necessary to achieve pre-programmed film permeation in response to external stimuli. Advincula and coworkers prepared pH-sensitive bipolar ion-permselective ultrathin films using benzophenone-modified PAA (PAA-BP) and PAH-BP, and the multilayers were further photochemically crosslinked.63 Because PAA and PAH are both weak polyelectrolytes, after film decomposition or swelling was suppressed by the crosslinks, the film charges could be finely tuned by changing the pH of the dipping solutions. As a result, the film exhibited pH-switchable permselectivity for both cationic (pH = 10) and anionic (pH = 3) probe molecules in a single film. Sun and coworkers achieved UV-controlled and pH-switchable film permeation using an azobenzene-containing polyanion and the polycation diazoresin.219 Upon UV irradiation, the charged diazoresin was converted into uncharged covalent bonds, and the remaining carboxylic acid groups enabled film-selective permeation of positively charged species. Further treatment with intense UV irradiation resulted in decomposition of the azobenzene groups into imine groups. Thus, the resultant film contained both imine and carboxylic groups, enabling the permeation of negatively charged species and pH-switchable permselectivity for positively charged species.
Whereas film swelling is suppressed in heavily crosslinked films, which can be used as filter membranes to effectively reject salts and molecules, lightly crosslinked films can be employed in applications in which controlled swelling is needed. Wrinkled surfaces have been prepared using lightly crosslinked multilayers (Fig. 26(d)).220 The wrinkled surfaces evolved from PAA/PEG multilayers, and Pt was sputtered onto the multilayer surfaces or a piece of PS layer was placed on top of the multilayer. The multilayers were further heated for 1 h at 120 °C after assembly to induce crosslinking. The crosslinked films were immersed in a pH-2.5 solution to achieve controlled swelling and were subsequently placed under vacuum or subjected to heating to generate deswelling-induced surface wrinkles. Both the swelling conditions and the number of assembly cycles affected the generated surface patterns. Yoo and coworkers employed managed multilayer swelling to form hierarchical metal nanoflakes in LbL matrices (Fig. 26(e)).221 PEI/PAA multilayers were crosslinked using EDC coupling reagent overnight. The crosslinked multilayers still allowed cationic exchange reactions within the film and were employed to absorb metallic ions. Subsequent reduction induced in situ complexation of metallic nanoparticles with a PEM matrix, causing accumulation of lateral compressive stress for surface wrinkling. The wrinkled surfaces were further processed to form vertically aligned and hierarchically ordered nanoflakes after selective removal of the PEM matrix with plasma ashing.
3.2.3.3 Adjusted stiffness: cell culturing substrate and bioactive interfaces. 
Many LbL films used in cell-culturing circumstances employ crosslinked films because crosslinking of the multilayers enables prolonged endurance of the films, permitting their use in biological media. However, the increased stabilities are not the only merit of the covalently crosslinked films. Studies have repeatedly shown that the crosslinked films are able to induce better cell adhesion and proliferation (Fig. 27(a)). Although various properties are affected by film crosslinking, including the film stiffness, swelling (hydrophobicity), and sometimes surface charges, the adjusted stiffness is considered the major factor affecting cell behaviours.
 Fig. 27  Adjustment of cell adhesion by controlling the crosslinking degree. (a) Schematic illustration of enhanced cell adhesion on films with higher crosslinking degrees. (b) DAPI-phalloidin staining of L929 on CHI/ALG multilayers containing a gradient of crosslinking degrees (film stiffness) along the glass slide (scale bar 100 μm) and (c) number of cells attached along the gradient film. Reprinted with permission from ref. 229. Copyright © 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Localization of total actin (green) and smooth muscle α-actin (red) in A7r5 cells cultured on native (d1–d3) and heat-induced crosslinked (d4–d6) (PAH/PAA)PAH-coated coverslips. The scale bar is 10 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 226. Copyright © 2009 American Chemical Society. (e) Optical image of EDS crosslinked free-standing (CHI/ALG)200 film. (f) μCT images of BMP-2 loaded film implanted under the skin of mice for up to 52 days, inducing the formation of bone nodules (indicated by red arrows). Reprinted with permission from ref. 232. Copyright © 2015 Acta Materialia Inc. Published by Elsevier Ltd. 
Pioneering work revealed that the well-studied polyelectrolyte multilayers such as crosslinked PAA/PAH films and other synthetic polymer LbL films222,223 can sustain cell activities sufficiently. The film composition, terminal layer, and film stiffness are key factors affecting cell behaviors. The film mechanical rigidity, surface charge, and biorecognition property of PAA/PAH multilayers were adjusted by thermal crosslinking and protein modification. Cellular phenotypic changes in adhesion, proliferation, and morphology on these LbL films were observed and analyzed for three different cell types (normal cells 184B5, MCF10F, and CAMA-1). The cell phenotypical quantification results indicated that the cell spreading area per cell and optical density are useful parameters in distinguishing metastatic cancer cells from normal or fibrocystic disease cells on these LbL films.224 Tassel and coworkers studied the attachment and function of hepatic cells on various multilayered films as a function of film composition, terminal layer, rigidity, and charge as well as the presence of biofunctional species.225 Human hepatocellular carcinoma (HepG2) cells, adult rat hepatocytes (ARH), and human fetal hepatoblasts (HFHb) were used in the study, and 18 different multilayer systems with components of a binary combination of CHI, ALG, PLL, poly(L-glutamic acid) (PGA), PAH, and PSS were employed. Crosslinking and surface modification of the collagen layer further enriched the survey parameters. HepG2 reached confluence after 7 days of culture on only 2 of 18 candidate multilayer systems: (PAH–PSS)n and crosslinked (PLL–ALG)n–PLL. The crosslinked PLL–ALG and PLL–PGA films supported attachment and function of ARH, independent of the terminal layer, provided that collagen was adsorbed to the top of the film. The (PAH–PSS)n, crosslinked (PLL–ALG)n, and crosslinked (PLL–PGA)n–PLL films all supported attachment, layer confluence, and function of HFHb, with the latter film promoting the greatest level of function at 8 days. Overall, the film composition, terminal layer, and rigidity were the key variables promoting attachment and function of hepatic cells, and the film charge and biofunctionality were somewhat less important. The study indicated that the synthetic polyelectrolyte multilayers were able to support cell culturing after parameter optimizations and were expected to be candidate multilayer biomaterials for human liver tissue engineering applications.
Möhwald and coworkers studied cell adhesion and gene transfection using bioreducible poly(2-dimethylaminoethylmethacrylate) (PDMAEMA) and DNA multilayers. 1,5-Diiodopentane (DIP) was used to crosslink the film.41 The film surface morphology, swelling behaviour, and rigidity were adjusted by crosslinking. The researchers observed that crosslinking enhanced cell (mouse fibroblast cells and smooth muscle cells) adhesion and prolonged the duration of cellular transfection. The muscle cells were sensitive to the substrate stiffness and accordingly transformed from a motile, proliferative “synthetic” phenotype to a sessile, “contractile” phenotype. Schlenoff et al. reported that the Young's modulus of (PAH/PAA)n multilayers varied from 6 MPa to more than 8 GPa upon heating to form covalent amide bond crosslinks between the layers.226 Rat aortic A7r5 smooth muscle cells cultured on native PEMs exhibited the morphology and motility of synthetic cells and expression of the synthetic phenotype markers vimentin, tropomyosin4, and nonmuscle myosin heavy chain IIB. In comparison, cells cultured on maximally cross-linked PEMs exhibited the phenotype markers calponin, smooth muscle myosin heavy chain, myocardin, transgelin, and smooth muscle R-actin that are characteristic of the smooth muscle “contractile” phenotype. Consistent with these cells being “contractile”, A7r5 cells grown on cross-linked PEMs produced a contractile force when stimulated with a Ca2+ ionophore. Although most studies have reported that the various cells adhere and spread better on LbL films with higher stiffness, Caruso and coworkers reported that HeLa cells enhanced cell adhesion with decreasing film stiffness.227 The films were prepared using a synthetic polymer, a commercial PMA precursor modified with target percentages of 5, 10, 15, and 20 mol % pendant-thiol functionality. They attributed the contrary cell adhesion–hydrogel stiffness correlation to that previously reported to the extremely soft nature of the films studied. The film with low stiffness provided a greater cell–film contact area and enabled the development of adhesive focal contacts.
Recently, an increasing number of studies on natural or biocompatible polyelectrolyte multilayers constituting collagen, ALG, and CHI have been reported because these films are biodegradable in vivo and are thus believed to have a higher potential for use as the functional part of medical implants.228 The consensus is that various cell types, including L929 fibroblast cells and bone cells, adhere and function better on crosslinked films with larger crosslinking degrees. Mano and coworkers established a gradient of crosslinking degree on the cm scale in CHI and ALG multilayers by varying the reaction time with the crosslinker genipin. They observed that L929 cells spread more in stiffer regions (Fig. 27(b)).229 They further prepared free-standing films using CHI and ALG. Although the diffusion of glucose and oxygen decreased with increasing crosslinking degrees, the more crosslinked film sustained better cell adhesion and spreading of L929 cells because of the increased film stiffness.230
The effect of the film stiffness adjusted by varying the crosslinking degree on bone cells has received increasing attention. Labat and coworkers reported that genipin-crosslinked CSA/PLL (CSA, chondroitin sulfate A) multilayers induced drastically varying bone cell responses depending on whether they were crosslinked.231 The non-crosslinked LbL films were cytophobic because of their low stiffness. In contrast, the crosslinked films significantly promoted adhesion, proliferation, and early and late differentiation of preosteoblasts. Picart and coworkers prepared free-standing membranes using LbL CHI and ALG, and the EDC–NHS crosslinking method was employed to stiffen the films.232 The more crosslinked FS membranes enabled more efficient myoblast differentiation in myotubes. In addition, only the more crosslinked membranes were observed to be osteoinductive in vivo. These polysaccharide-based membranes were thus expected to act as a periosteum-mimetic scaffold for bone tissue regeneration (Fig. 27(e and f)).

3.3 Reversible crosslinking using labile covalent bonds

3.3.1 Protein-based materials: capsules prepared using a Schiff base. 
Reversible crosslinking using labile bonds can be applied in building stimuli-responsive materials, with potential applications in biomedicine. The structure of a Schiff base is often used to incorporate proteins or peptides, taking advantage of the amines in these bioactive species. Reagents containing aldehyde groups such as glutaraldehyde, dialdehyde heparin (DHP), or alginate dialdehyde have been used together with the proteins to form the covalent Schiff base structure.72–75 The formation of a Schiff base occurs under mild conditions in which bioactive species can be kept viable. Li and coworkers conducted extensive research exploring the potential application of LbL capsules held by a Schiff base structure as bioactive materials.233 They prepared bioluminescent microcapsules uploading D-luciferin using the covalent assembly of firefly luciferase and alginate dialdehyde using an LbL technique. These assembled microcapsules produced visible light in the range of 520–680 nm, which could activate the photosensitizers rose bengal and hypocrellin B after the addition of ATP. The microcapsules with rose bengal or hypocrellin B prevented the proliferation of tumor cells in the dark. The assembled bioluminescent microcapsules can be potentially used as photon donors for bioimaging, ATP detection, and photodynamic therapy. Recently, Hb-based LbL capsules have been intensively studied.234 The crosslinking action prevents the rapid breakdown of Hb tetramers into dimers, which increases the half-life and eliminates nephro toxicity. The (Hb/DHP)6 microcapsules exhibited an anticoagulant property to a certain extent and excellent blood compatibility. The oxygen-carrying capacity of the microcapsules was demonstrated by converting the deoxy-Hb state of the microcapsules into the oxy-Hb state (Fig. 28(a and b)).75 In a parallel study, highly loaded Hb capsules were prepared by templated LbL assembly. Surface modification by PEG greatly protected the Hb spheres against immune response, prolonged their vascular retention time, and resulted in a more stable and semipermeable system. The as-prepared Hb spheres may have potential as artificial oxygen carriers in the future.235
 Fig. 28  (a) Scheme of Hb-loaded CaCO3 sphere wrapped by glutaraldehyde-Hb multilayers and (b) absorption spectra showing that the Hb-loaded spheres were able to carry oxygen and were thus potentially useful as artificial oxygen carriers in therapies. Reprinted with permission from ref. 235. Copyright © 2012, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic representation of the coupled reaction of GOD and CAT on the GA–glucose oxidase capsule wall and enhanced permeability of the capsule for the release of insulin. (d) Release profiles of coated insulin particles in PBS (black) and glucose solution (red). Reprinted with permission from ref. 237. Copyright © 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. 
In addition to being compatible with bioactive species, the Schiff base structure is also pH responsive. Being stable in a neutral environment, the Schiff base structure undergoes decomposition in acidic conditions and is thus employed in pH-responsive materials.76 Li and coworkers prepared autofluorescent pH-redox-dual-responsive alginate dialdehyde/cystamine dihydrochloride (CM) microcapsules as a biomedical deliverer.236 The fluorescent properties were hypothesized to stem from the n–p* transitions of CN bonds in the Schiff bases formed during the crosslinking reaction. The microcapsules became permeable to FITC–dextran (2000 kDa) when the environmental pH dropped from 7.4 to 5.0. The permeability was attributed to the hydrolysis of the Schiff base structure in acidic solutions. Because the disulfide bond in cystamine dihydrochloride decomposed in response to redox perturbations, the capsules also released their cargos in reducing environments. Cell culturing experiments indicated that the Schiff bases undergo hydrolysis in an intracellular low pH environment, which provided insight into the use of the microcapsules as pH-sensitive autofluorescent carriers. The same group also reported triggered release of insulin from glucose-sensitive enzyme LbL shells held by a Schiff base structure.237 In their work, glucose oxidase (GOD) and catalase (CAT) were alternately assembled on insulin particles and crosslinked by glutaraldehyde. The assembled particle released an increasing amount of insulin in response to the existence of glucose in the surrounding solutions (Fig. 28(c and d)). The responsive release was attributed to the catalytic reaction of the CAT/GOD shells to glucose, which leads to the production of H+ and, consequently, the decomposition of the Schiff base structure in response to the decrease in pH.


3.3.2 Disulfide bond: biocompatibility and stimuli-responsive decomposition. 
The disulfide bond forms under mild conditions and decomposes upon exposure to reducing agents such as glutathione GSH. Capsules fabricated using the disulfide bond have been extensively explored by Caruso, with potential applications for the delivery and controlled release of bioactive species, including DNA, peptides, and proteins (Fig. 29(a)). Thiol-functionalized PMAA (PMAA-SH) and PVP have been frequently used in the fabrication of LbL films or capsules.238,239 After shell crosslinking by forming a disulfide bond, the template (silica nanoparticles) could be removed while the LbL capsules were kept integrated. The capsules were used to deliver RNA, DNA, DOX, and peptide or protein vaccines. When used to deliver RNA and DNA, the single-stranded RNA or DNA sequences were absorbed by electrostatic interactions on the silica template surface. The particles were then wrapped with the LbL multilayers at pH 4. At this pH, the carboxylic groups of PMASH are largely uncharged (pKa 6.5), and as a result, only minor displacement of DNA from the particles into the bulk solution (2%) was observed. Formation of disulfide bonds was then induced in the multilayers. The capsules were stabilized by disulfide linkages at physiological pH and retained the oligonucleotides for at least 72 h. Being stabilized solely through disulfide linkages, these capsules underwent deconstruction upon exposure to a thiol–disulfide exchange reagent, rapidly releasing the oligonucleotides into bulk solution. Capsules stabilized by the disulfide bond were also used in the delivery of DOX.240 The uptake and intracellular fate of the capsules were carefully studied. The results indicated that the disulfide bonds were deconstructed during cellular uptake, leading to the release and wide intracellular distribution of DOX, and exhibited cytotoxicity to LIM1899 cells. The internalized PMAA-SH capsules were distorted and accumulated in late endosomal or lysosomal compartments. The distribution of DOX within the cells was significantly different from that obtained when free DOX was incubated with the cells with a 5000-fold increase in efficacy compared with free DOX. The LbL-assembled disulfide crosslinked PMAA-SH hydrogel capsules were further employed to deliver OVA protein and multiple OVA peptide vaccines.241 OVA-containing PMAA-SH capsules were internalized by mouse APCs, resulting in presentation of OVA epitopes and subsequent activation of OVA-specific CD4 and CD8 T cells in vitro. OVA-specific CD4 and CD8 T cells were also activated to proliferate in vivo following intravenous vaccination of mice with OVA protein- and OVA peptide-loaded PMAA-SH hydrogel capsules. In addition, the encapsulation of OVA within the PMASH capsules resulted in at least 6-fold greater proliferation of OVA-specific CD8 T cells and 70-fold greater proliferation of OVA-specific CD4 T cells in vivo compared with the equivalent amount of OVA protein administered alone. These results highlight the potential of nanoengineered hydrogel capsules for vaccine delivery.
 Fig. 29  (a) Scheme showing disulfide crosslinked capsule delivery of therapies in transcellular membranes and release of cargoes inside cells. (b) Degradation profiles of PDPA65% (red squares), PDPA87% (green triangles), PDPA93% (blue triangles), and PDPA98% (purple diamonds) capsules crosslinked with a bisazide thiol linker. The subscript denotes the crosslinking degree. (c) Deconvolution optical microscopy images of JAWS II cells incubated with degradable PDPA65%, PDPA87%, PDPA93%, and PDPA98% (green) capsules and non-degradable PDPA capsules (red, crosslinking degree 87%). Capsule/cell ratio of 20:1. Each row focuses on the same cells over time. The time frames that show the first evidence of capsule degradation are highlighted in red. Reprinted with permission from ref. 241. Copyright © 2012, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic procedure for cell surface engineering with crosslinked LbL multilayers of PDMAEM-co-PPDEM and PMA-co-PMEM (x: 0.33; y: 0.67). Reprinted with permission from ref. 242. Published by The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Further studies revealed that the rate of intracellular degradation of the poly(2-diisopropylaminoethyl methacrylate) (PDPA) capsules could be controlled between 0 and 6 h by altering the degree of crosslinking in the polymer capsules.241 Interestingly, the cellular degradation of highly crosslinked capsules (>90%) was significantly delayed compared with that in simulated cellular conditions. This finding suggests that the naturally occurring cellular reducing environment is rapidly depleted and that a significant delay occurs before the cells can replenish the reducing environment. The modular and versatile nature of this approach lends itself to application for a wide range of polymer carriers and thus offers significant potential for the design of polymer-based systems for drug and gene delivery (Fig. 29(b)).
In a recent study, the biocompatibility of the disulfide bond formation reaction was demonstrated.242 A thiol exchange reaction that occurred in a highly biocompatible environment (aqueous solution at pH 7.4 and room temperature) was employed to interface with living cells. Films of PDMAEM-co-PPDEM/PMA-co-PMEM (PDMAEM-co-PPDEM): poly(2-(dimethylamino)ethyl methacrylate-co-2-(pyridyl disulfide)ethyl methacrylate; PMA-co-PMEM: poly(methacrylate-co-2-mercaptoethyl methacrylate)) were coated around individual yeast cells and broken on demand in response to external stimuli, such as GSH, while maintaining cell viability (Fig. 29(c)). The coating was mechanically tough and capable of protecting living cells by suppressing the penetration of lyticase.

4. Challenges
The impressive number of film structural engineering strategies and application fields for covalent LbL films presented in this review demonstrates their vast potential for engineering interfacial materials. The emergence of covalent LbL films occurred over 30 years ago, and investigation into covalent LbL has been increasing. The strong vitality of covalent LbL films stems from their structural and componential diversity and their intense interactions with developing and ongoing research trends such as electro-optic and/or biomedical devices. It is crucial for many advanced applications that several routes are available to obtain well-defined thin films of the targeted material using different chemical covalent crosslinking methods and structural traits. New types of polymers and nanomaterials are being reported and can serve as potential building blocks for LbL films, and considering the structural diversity of films built using each of these types of materials, the number of possible LbL film types is virtually infinite. In view of this vast flexibility of covalent LbL films, we expect to see further development of covalent LbL films toward advanced interfacial or film materials with novel, complex, integrated, or even unforeseen functionalities.
Regarding the construction of covalent LbL films, especially films with high-quality structural control and stable performance, many challenges in film fabrication still need to be addressed, including the development of (i) chemical crosslinking methods to meet the specific requirements or restrictions placed by the building blocks or targeted applications; (ii) characterization methods that provide an accurate overall description of film components, crosslinking degrees, and structural characteristics; (iii) covalent LbL films with componential, structural, and functional integrity; and (iv) conductive covalent LbL films.
4.1 Development of chemical crosslinking methods
Appropriate chemical crosslinking strategies are core to the preparation of successful covalent LbL films. It has been challenging to find appropriate chemical reactions for sensitive film substrates or building blocks such as cells or proteins. To crosslink protein building blocks, reactions between amines and carboxylic acids at ambient temperatures assisted by coupling agents such as EDC and NHS were first explored and remain widely used. The coupling between proteins using glutaraldehyde has also been well studied. However, the cytotoxicity of these coupling agents is not fully understood. To prepare covalent LbL films with improved biocompatibility, crosslinking reactions such as the coupling between amines by genipin (fruit extract) and the coupling reaction between dopamine groups have been recently developed. These reactions result in films with higher biocompatibilities and facilitate the employment of LbL films in biomedical applications. When crosslinked LbL films have been built around the cell surface to regulate cell behaviors, the cells exhibited chemical-induced strains in response to the crosslinking chemical reagents. Although the crosslinking of LbL cell–polymer films or cell sheets has not been reported, the exploration of these structures is of interest because of their potential applications in tissue engineering. However, the chemical reaction selected to perform the crosslinking reaction deserves special consideration, and new types of chemical reactions that are more compatible with biomedical applications or cells should be further explored.
Chemical bonds that are not only biocompatible but also responsive to cellular cues are also highly appealing. A good example provided by Caruso and coworkers was the capsules held by disulfide bonds, which led to disintegration of the capsules upon entering cells in response to the reducing chemical environment in the cells. However, the cellular reducing environment was rapidly depleted by the addition of the capsules. To leave the cellular environment untouched during the capsule disassembly, the disassembly of the capsules in response to other remote cues such as IR irradiation would be needed.
The development of photochemical reactions to crosslink LbL films has enabled the application of lithography during film crosslinking and has facilitated the preparation of patterned electrodes. Reports of photochemical crosslinking applicable to a wide range of LbL films using commercially available reagents such as DAS have further facilitated the application of photochemically crosslinked films. The developments of these types of chemical reactions have led to new functionalities of covalent LbL films. It is highly expected that with the exploration of new types of chemical reactions to crosslink the films, wider functionalities can be derived from LbL film materials.
The second layer of understanding the LbL film covalent reaction means obtaining a deeper understanding of film structural changes during the crosslinking processes. Take the example of the covalent coupling between the amines in PAH and the carboxylic acid groups in PAA. Several coupling reactions are needed for the crosslinking. These possible reactions include heat-induced amide formation, coupling under ambient conditions in aqueous solutions assisted by coupling agents such as EDC and NHS, and film coupling using photochemical reaction by employing DAS as the molecular linker. These three types of reactions lead to different film structures. The heat-induced crosslinking is mostly conducted in air, the reaction with EDC–NHS coupling occurs in neutral solutions, and the infiltration of DAS is usually conducted in acidic solutions to increase loading. Film swelling during the infiltration of the coupling agents significantly affects the film structures and leads to different film permeation properties. However, a detailed study of film structural changes is lacking and should be emphasized to produce films with stable performance.
4.2 Development of characterization methods
The characterization methods used for covalent LbL films include SEM (including elemental mapping), AFM (morphological and mechanical characterizations), XPS, UV-vis, FTIR, and QCM. The combination of these methods provides an overall description of the film growth profiles, surface morphologies, thicknesses, and composition. However, it remains difficult to characterize film crosslinking degrees as well as film morphologies and/or moduli in solutions. The determination of crosslinking degrees is only applicable to a few types of films such as those crosslinked by reactive amines.230 For the many other types of films, accurate characterization of the crosslinking degree is still out of reach. To date, the best solution for assessing the film crosslinking degree is to characterize film properties such as the film moduli or stability and then relate these properties with the parameters (reagent concentration, reaction temperature, or reaction period) of the crosslinking reactions, generate a property–reaction parameter relationship for each type of film, and use this relationship as a guide for future practices. Quantitatively assessing the film crosslinking degree remains a challenge to researchers. Another challenge in film characterization is the evaluation of film properties in solutions. Although LbL films are frequently used in solution environments, such as in cell culturing and for sensing electrode and delivery capsule applications, film characterization in a solution environment is rare. AFM tests conducted in liquid cells would be helpful for providing information about the swelled film morphology and moduli. QCM would be useful for obtaining information on film swelling. Electrochemistry can provide information on film permeability, film capacitance, and interfacial charge-transfer resistance. It is expected that film properties in a solution environment, which would be more akin to actual applications, will be increasingly studied.
4.3 Covalent LbL films with componential, structural, and functional integrity
Covalent LbL films have the distinctive property of precise control over structural traits compared with films built using other techniques such as doctor-blade casting, tape casting, and hot pressing. The control of the structural traits is highlighted by the accurate control over both the film thickness (by controlling the assembly parameters and number of cycles) and the assembly sequence of the building units. Many excellent studies have employed fine structural control to obtain functionally integrated films composed of multiple sections of components, with each section playing a different role.
Using covalent assembly between carboxylic acid groups and amines, a dual-shell particle was fabricated in which liposomes were first loaded with biologically active proteins and then used as templates for the LbL deposition of polyelectrolytes (Fig. 30(a)).169 The multilayered polyelectrolyte shell was further stabilized by covalent crosslinking. Each of the shells served a different purpose: the liposome shell provided a biologically compatible pH and ion concentration for the encapsulated protein, whereas the crosslinked multilayer polyelectrolyte shell provided a robust physical structure to protect the liposome shell. It was demonstrated that an enzyme encapsulated in such a hybrid container by repeated cycles of freezing and thawing maintained its biological activity, permitting the use of such structures as nanoreactors. In another example, compartmentalized nanoparticles were constructed using both electrostatic and covalent LbL methods around a AuNP core.243 The outermost layer of the nanoparticles was fabricated covalently, stabilizing the multilayers while also facilitating the post covalent-functionalization of the nanoparticle with drugs that were only released after endocytosis and enzymatic cleavage. This system serves as a proof-of-concept of multifunctional cytotoxic stealth nanoparticles. In work by Sun and coworkers, a crosslinked (PAA/PAH)30 multilayered film was integrated with a UV-cured polymer NOA 63.244 Employing the great ability of the PAA/PAH layer to absorb water and its moisture-induced expansion, an actuator was fabricated from the asymmetric film, and the film was further built into a walking device driven by alteration of the environmental humidity (Fig. 30(b)). Considering the functional integrity is highly important in various fields such as for energy conversion and utilization devices and electron–hole transport devices, the potential of covalent LbL films in functional integrity devices remains to be explored.
 Fig. 30  (a) Schematic illustration of nanoparticles coated with integrated multilayer shells as new drug delivery systems, reprinted with permission from ref. 243. Copyright © 2011 American Chemical Society. (b) Walking device prepared using asymmetric film of crosslinked PAA/PAH and UV-cured NOA63. Schematic illustration of structure (b1), SEM cross-sectional image (b2), and optical image (b3) of the asymmetric film. (b4) Schematic and optical images of the functioning of the walking device. Reprinted with permission from ref. 244. Copyright © 2011 Wiley-VCH. 
4.4 Conductive covalent LbL films
High conductivity is the core property in multiple applications including electrodes in capacitance or electric cells, catalytic films (to transport electrons and holes), and many other electrochemically driven devices such as electrochromism or electroluminescent devices. LbL films are flexible thin films with high potential for building flexible wearable electrodes, capacitors, solar cells, and other devices. In particular, the intensively studied two-dimensional inorganic sheets have high potential for use as LbL building blocks because of their outstanding electro-optical properties. However, to date, studies on electronically conductive LbL films remain limited. Covalent films prepared using graphene or nanocarbon146 or PEI/PAA/PEO combinations150 have been shown to be electronically or ionically conductive and possess relatively high stability to sustain stable device performance. However, research on the preparation of conductive covalent LbL films using 2D sheets other than graphene has been sparse. Exploring new types of electronically or ionically conductive covalent LbL films would undoubtedly facilitate film building using other 2D nanosheets. In addition, taking advantage of their electro-optical properties in functional films would promote the application of LbL films in various wearable electronic devices while contributing to the development of the fast-developing field of electro-optical materials by providing the specific merits of covalent LbL films such as control of the film endurability and structural stability.
5. Conclusions
This review systematically summarized recent developments in the field of covalent LbL films. Following a brief discussion of the unique merits of LbL films and the need for covalent LbL in certain circumstances, we documented the chemical methods used to prepare LbL films reported in the literature. Two strategies to build covalent LbL films, (i) post covalent conversion of the non-covalently built film and (ii) film building by consecutive covalent reactions, were identified from all the reported methods. In presenting each strategy, the different methods were classified according to whether they employed commercially available building units or required the synthesis of units with specific functional groups. The characteristics regarding the chemical reactions, such as their applicability to proteins, their ability to be conducted at ambient temperature, and whether the chemical bonds formed were labile, were highlighted.
The applications of covalent LbL films depend on a comprehensive consideration of the film building units, nature of the covalent bonds, and film structural traits after covalent crosslinking. Although these factors are somewhat interrelated, each of these factors can be adjusted to a certain extent. Thus, the ultimate film properties determined by the combination of these factors are rather diverse. Because of the diversity of the film properties, a large variety of film applications have been reported. The applications were documented according to whether the films were fully crosslinked (crosslinked to the highest possible degree), partially crosslinked, or crosslinked using labile bonds, to emphasize the structure–application correlations. We hope that this documentation style provided a clear statement about the role played by the film structures in the film functions. Although robust polymeric films can be constructed both in the laboratory and in industry using various methods, including spin coating, doctor blading, and thermosetting, the strategy of LbL assembly possesses distinct advantages in controlling and adjusting the thickness of the films on the nanoscale. The structural diversity of covalent LbL films is an additional merit and should be considered as a different dimension in addition to the chemical methods in engineering LbL films as it should contribute significantly to accessing larger film functional spaces.
Despite the development of covalent LbL films achieved thus far, several challenges remain. The exploration of chemical reactions to build covalent LbL films would enlarge the pool of the types of their building units. Characterization methods that can more accurately determine film structures, components, and crosslinking degrees will provide detailed film information that is important to both fundamental study and application explorations. More importantly, with the rapid developments in the fields of biomedicine, electro-optical devices, and energy conversion, the demands for functional materials are unprecedentedly high. To meet these requirements, functional integrated LbL films and electronically conductive LbL films should be highly pursued. We hope that this documentation of the development of the field of covalent LbL films will translate this achievement in the discipline of chemistry (film building methods) into readily available techniques for materials engineers. In addition, we expect that this summary of the achievements in covalent LbL will inspire further research in this field and provide diverse functional materials to address the energy, biomedical, and environmental challenges faced by the entire scientific community.
Abbreviations and symbols

PAHPoly(allylamine hydrochloride)
PAAPoly(acrylic acid)
DCCDicyclohexylcarbodiimide
DICDiisopropylcarbodiimide
EDC1-Ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)carbodiimide
NHS
N-Hydroxysuccinimide
HEPHeparin
CHIChitosan
PVPPolyvinylpyrrolidone
HAHyaluronic acid
ALGAlginate
DAS4,4′-Diazostilbene-2,2′-disulfonic acid disodium salt
PSSPolystyrene sulfonate
PEIPolyethyleneimine
DIP1,5-Diiodopentane
PFSPoly(ferrocenyl(3-bromopropyl)methylferrocene)
PIAMAPoly(isobutylene-alt-maleic anhydride)
DMAP4-(Dimethylamino)pyridine
BPBenzophenone
DARDiazoresin
PGMAPoly(glycidyl methylacrylate)
PVAPolyvinyl alcohol
PDCPPolydichlorophosphazene
HDAHexamethylenediamine
PVDMAPoly(2-vinyl-4,4-dimethylazlactone)
HBPO-NO2
p-Nitrophenyloxycarbonyl-group-terminated hyperbranched polyether
PAA-AzPoly(acrylic acid) with azide functionality
PAA-AlkPoly(acrylic acid) with alkyne functionality
PMAAPoly(methacrylic acid)
GAGlutaraldehyde
DTTDithiothreitol
SWNTSingle walled carbon nanotube
MTMMontmorillonoid
PEGPolyethylene glycol
PDMSPoly(dimethylsiloxane)
PMPCPoly(2-methacryloyloxyethyl phosphorylcholine)
TATerephthalaldehyde
MWNTMultiwalled carbon nanotubes
PNIPAMPoly(N-isopropyl acrylamide)
ECHEpichlorohydrin
HRPHorseradish peroxidase
rGOReduced graphene oxide
PVAmPoly(vinylamine)
PEDOT:PSSPoly(3,4-ethylene dioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate)
HBHemoglobin
PPVPoly(phenylenevinylene)
DOPC1,2-Dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine
DOPG1,2-Di(9Z-octadecenoyl)-sn-glycero-3-phospho-(1′-rac-glycerol)
MPBMaleimide-headgroup lipid
PBAECationic poly(β-amino ester)
PLLPoly(L-lysing)
PGAPoly(glutamic acid)
DOXDoxorubicin
PVCLPoly(N-vinylcaprolactam)
LAPLAPONITE®
PDDAPoly(diallyldimethylammonium)
MBMethylene blue
RhBRhodamine B
PGAPoly(L-glutamic acid)
PDMAEMAPoly(2-dimethylaminoethylmethacrylate)
DIP1,5-Diiodopentane
CSAChondroitin sulfate A
DHPDialdehyde heparin
GODGlucose oxidase
CATCatalase
GSHGlutathione
PDPAPoly(2-diisopropylaminoethyl methacrylate)
HepG2Human hepatocellular carcinoma
ARHAdult rat hepatocytes
HFHbHuman fetal hepatoblasts
PIPhotoinitiator
CECapillary electrophoresis
DMFCDirect methanol fuel cells
EDLCElectric double-layer capacitance
ICMVsInterbiolayer-crosslinked multilamellar vesicles
RHRelative humidity

Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflicts.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Natural Science Foundation of China (21674009, 21673209, 51422302), and the Open Project of State Key Laboratory of Supramolecular Structure and Materials (SKLSSM201801).
References
R. Iler, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 1966, 21, 569–594 CrossRef .
G. Decher and J. D. Hong, Macromol. Symp., 1991, 46(1), 321–327 CrossRef .
G. Decher and J. Hong, Bunsen-Ges. Phys. Chem. Ber., 1991, 95, 1430–1434 CrossRef .
G. Decher, Science, 1997, 277, 1232–1237 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, H. Chen and H. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2007, 1395–1405 RSC .
K. Ariga, J. P. Hill and Q. Ji, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2007, 9, 2319–2340 RSC .
G. G. Wallace, M. J. Higgins, S. E. Moulton and C. Wang, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 4327–4347 RSC .
J.-S. Lee, J. Cho, C. Lee, I. Kim, J. Park, Y.-M. Kim, H. Shin, J. Lee and F. Caruso, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 790–795 CrossRef PubMed .
G. F. Payne, E. Kim, Y. Cheng, H.-C. Wu, R. Ghodssi, G. W. Rubloff, S. R. Raghavan, J. N. Culver and W. E. Bentley, Soft Matter, 2013, 9, 6019–6032 RSC .
N. J. Shah, M. N. Hyder, J. S. Moskowitz, M. A. Quadir, S. W. Morton, H. J. Seeherman, R. F. Padera, M. Spector and P. T. Hammond, Sci. Transl. Med., 2013, 5, 191ra183 Search PubMed .
D. E. Bergbreiter and K.-S. Liao, Soft Matter, 2009, 5, 23–28 RSC .
G. Rydzek, P. Schaaf, J.-C. Voegel, L. Jierry and F. Boulmedais, Soft Matter, 2012, 8, 9738–9755 RSC .
F.-X. Xiao, M. Pagliaro, Y.-J. Xu and B. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 3088–3121 RSC .
J. Borges and J. F. Mano, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 8883–8942 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Loretta, P. Rivera-Gil, A. Z. Abbasi, M. Ochs, C. Ganas, I. Zins, C. Sönnichsen and W. J. Parak, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 458–467 RSC .
W. Tong, X. Song and C. Gao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 6103–6124 RSC .
Y. Li, X. Wang and J. Sun, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 5998–6009 RSC .
O. Azzaroni and K. A. Lau, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 8709–8724 RSC .
R. F. Fakhrullin, A. I. Zamaleeva, R. T. Minullina, S. A. Konnova and V. N. Paunov, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 4189–4206 RSC .
K. Ariga, Q. Ji, J. P. Hill, Y. Bando and M. Aono, NPG Asia Mater., 2012, 4, e17 CrossRef .
A. L. Becker, A. P. Johnston and F. Caruso, Small, 2010, 6, 1836–1852 Search PubMed .
S. De Koker, R. Hoogenboom and B. G. De Geest, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 2867–2884 RSC .
J.-W. Yoo, D. J. Irvine, D. E. Discher and S. Mitragotri, Nat. Rev. Drug Discovery, 2011, 10, 521–535 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Xiang, S. Lu and S. P. Jiang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 7291–7321 RSC .
J. J. Harris, P. M. DeRose and M. L. Bruening, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 1978–1979 CrossRef .
E. Valeur and M. Bradley, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 606–631 RSC .
R. Higuchi, M. Hirano, M. Ashaduzzaman, N. Yilmaz, T. Sumino, D. Kodama, S. Chiba, S. Uemura, K. Nishiyama and A. Ohira, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 7478–7487 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Maurer, D. Eustace and C. Ratcliffe, Macromolecules, 1987, 20, 196–202 CrossRef .
B.-l. Wang, K.-f. Ren, H. Chang, J.-l. Wang and J. Ji, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 4136–4143 Search PubMed .
F. Song, L.-M. Zhang, C. Yang and L. Yan, Int. J. Pharm., 2009, 373, 41–47 CrossRef PubMed .
A. L. Hillberg, C. A. Holmes and M. Tabrizian, Biomaterials, 2009, 30, 4463–4470 CrossRef PubMed .
J. M. Silva, A. R. C. Duarte, C. A. Custódio, P. Sher, A. I. Neto, A. Pinho, J. Fonseca, R. L. Reis and J. F. Mano, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2014, 3, 433–440 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhang, C. Jiang, M. Cheng, Y. Zhou, X. Zhu, J. Nie, Y. Zhang, Q. An and F. Shi, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 7096–7100 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, Q. An, Y. Zhou, Y. Niu, R. Akram, Y. Zhang and F. Shi, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2015, 3, 562–569 RSC .
L. Xu, F. Lv, Y. Zhang, X. Luan, Q. Zhang and Q. An, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 20357–20362 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhou, M. Cheng, X. Zhu, Y. Zhang, Q. An and F. Shi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 11329 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhao, Z. Xu, X. Wang and T. Lin, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 6328–6335 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yu, H. Zhang and S. Cui, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 3819–3824 RSC .
Y. Yu, H. Zhang, C. Zhang and S. Cui, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 929–931 RSC .
H. Xu, A. Gomez-Casado, Z. Liu, D. N. Reinhoudt, R. G. Lammertink and J. Huskens, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 13972–13977 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Blacklock, T. K. Sievers, H. Handa, Y.-Z. You, D. Oupicky, G. Mao and H. Möhwald, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2010, 114, 5283–5291 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Feng, A. Cumurcu, X. Sui, J. Song, M. A. Hempenius and G. J. Vancso, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 7257–7265 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Jayaraman, D. Rajarathnam and M. Srinivasan, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2010, 168, 45–54 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, K. Ai and L. Lu, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 5057–5115 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Lee, S. H. Yang, S. P. Hong, D. Hong, H. Lee, H. Y. Lee, Y. G. Kim and I. S. Choi, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2013, 34, 1351–1356 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Tian, C. Zhang, H. Wu, Y. Song, J. Shi, X. Wang, X. Song, C. Yang and Z. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2014, 2, 4346–4355 RSC .
X. Zhu, D. Jańczewski, S. S. C. Lee, S. L.-M. Teo and G. J. Vancso, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 5961–5968 Search PubMed .
P. Yang and W. Yang, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 5547–5594 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Laschewsky, E. Wischerhoff, P. Bertrand and A. Delcorte, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 1997, 198, 3239–3253 CrossRef .
J. Wang, X. Jia, H. Zhong, Y. Luo, X. Zhao, W. Cao, M. Li and Y. Wei, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 2854–2858 CrossRef .
H. Cong, J. Chen and W. Cao, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2003, 263, 665–668 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Chen, L. Huang, L. Ying, G. Luo, X. Zhao and W. Cao, Langmuir, 1999, 15, 7208–7212 CrossRef .
J. Sun, T. Wu, Y. Sun, Z. Wang, X. Zhang, J. Shen and W. Cao, Chem. Commun., 1998, 1853–1854 RSC .
J. Sun, Z. Wang, Y. Sun, X. Zhang and J. Shen, Chem. Commun., 1999, 693–694 RSC .
Q. Li, J. Ouyang, J. Chen, X. Zhao and W. Cao, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2002, 40, 222–228 CrossRef .
Y. Zhaohui and C. Weixiao, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2003, 41, 3103–3108 CrossRef .
T. Cao, J. Chen, C. Yang and W. Cao, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2001, 22, 181–184 CrossRef .
H. Zhong, J. Wang, X. Jia, Y. Li, Y. Quin, J. Chen, X. S. Zhao, W. Cao, M. Li and Y. Wei, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2001, 22, 583–586 CrossRef .
L. Xu, J. Zhang, W. Cao, A. Wu and Z. Li, Mater. Lett., 2004, 58, 3441–3446 CrossRef .
S. Zhao, X. Li, M. Yang and C. Sun, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14, 840–844 RSC .
L. Huang, G. Luo, X. Zhao, J. Chen and W. Cao, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2000, 78, 631–638 CrossRef .
Y. Egawa, R. Hayashida and J.-i. Anzai, Polymer, 2007, 48, 1455–1458 CrossRef .
M.-K. Park, S. Deng and R. C. Advincula, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 13723–13731 CrossRef PubMed .
A. M. Lehaf, M. D. Moussallem and J. B. Schlenoff, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 4756–4763 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Ott, J. Gensel, S. Roesler, K. Trenkenschuh, D. Andreeva, A. Laschewsky and A. Fery, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 3323–3331 CrossRef .
R. Zhou and M. Srinivasan, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2013, 392, 158–166 CrossRef PubMed .
S. L. Bechler and D. M. Lynn, Biomacromolecules, 2012, 13, 1523–1532 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Feng, Z. Wang, C. Gao and J. Shen, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3687–3691 CrossRef .
M. Zhao, Y. Liu, R. M. Crooks and D. E. Bergbreiter, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 923–930 CrossRef .
W. Ren, R. Wu, P. Guo, J. Zhu, H. Li, S. Xu and J. Wang, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2015, 53, 545–551 CrossRef .
R. J. Wojtecki, M. A. Meador and S. J. Rowan, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 14–27 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Tong, C. Gao and H. Möhwald, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2006, 27, 2078–2083 CrossRef .
W. Tong, C. Gao and H. Möhwald, Polym. Adv. Technol., 2008, 19, 817–823 CrossRef .
W. Tong, C. Gao and H. Möhwald, Colloid Polym. Sci., 2008, 286, 1103 Search PubMed .
Y. Jia, Y. Cui, J. Fei, M. Du, L. Dai, J. Li and Y. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 1446–1453 CrossRef .
B. Mu, C. Lu and P. Liu, Colloids Surf., B, 2011, 82, 385–390 CrossRef PubMed .
U. Manna, J. Dhar, R. Nayak and S. Patil, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 2250–2252 RSC .
J. L. DeLuca, D. P. Hickey, D. A. Bamper, D. T. Glatzhofer, M. B. Johnson and D. W. Schmidtke, ChemPhysChem, 2013, 14, 2149–2158 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Zhang, L. Dai and S. Ji, AIChE J., 2011, 57, 2746–2754 CrossRef .
Z. Feng, G. Fan, H. Wang, C. Gao and J. Shen, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2009, 30, 448–452 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Liang and Q. Wang, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 9600–9606 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Seo, P. Schattling, T. Lang, F. Jochum, K. Nilles, P. Theato and K. Char, Langmuir, 2009, 26, 1830–1836 CrossRef PubMed .
M. E. Buck and D. M. Lynn, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 16134–16140 CrossRef PubMed .
A. H. Broderick, M. C. Carter, M. R. Lockett, L. M. Smith and D. M. Lynn, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 5, 351–359 Search PubMed .
X. Hu and J. Ji, Biomacromolecules, 2011, 12, 4264–4271 CrossRef PubMed .
Y.-h. Li, D. Wang and J. M. Buriak, Langmuir, 2009, 26, 1232–1238 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Schulz, S. Nowak, R. Fröhlich and B. J. Ravoo, Small, 2012, 8, 569–577 CrossRef PubMed .
G. K. Such, J. F. Quinn, A. Quinn, E. Tjipto and F. Caruso, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 9318–9319 CrossRef PubMed .
D. E. Bergbreiter and B. S. Chance, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 5337–5343 CrossRef .
L. c. Jierry, N. Ben Ameur, J.-S. b. Thomann, B. t. Frisch, E. Gonthier, J.-C. Voegel, B. Senger, G. Decher, O. Felix and P. Schaaf, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 3994–3997 CrossRef .
R. Vestberg, M. Malkoch, M. Kade, P. Wu, V. V. Fokin, K. Barry Sharpless, E. Drockenmuller and C. J. Hawker, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2007, 45, 2835–2846 CrossRef .
A. Krawicz, J. Palazzo, G.-C. Wang and P. H. Dinolfo, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 7513–7522 RSC .
A. E. El Haitami, J.-S. b. Thomann, L. c. Jierry, A. Parat, J.-C. Voegel, P. Schaaf, B. Senger, F. Boulmedais and B. t. Frisch, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 12351–12357 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Vonhören, O. Roling, K. De Bruycker, R. Calvo, F. E. Du Prez and B. J. Ravoo, ACS Macro Lett., 2015, 4, 331–334 CrossRef .
G. Rydzek, J.-S. Thomann, N. Ben Ameur, L. c. Jierry, P. Mésini, A. Ponche, C. Contal, A. E. El Haitami, J.-C. Voegel and B. Senger, Langmuir, 2009, 26, 2816–2824 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Sambhy, B. R. Peterson and A. Sen, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 7549–7558 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Baptiste, A. Gibaud, J. Bardeau, K. Wen, R. Maoz, J. Sagiv and B. Ocko, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 3916–3922 CrossRef .
M. E. Van der Boom, P. Zhu, G. Evmenenko, J. E. Malinsky, W. Lin, P. Dutta and T. J. Marks, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 3704–3707 CrossRef .
S. Kato, H. Moriyama, K. Takahashi and C. Pac, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 8403–8410 RSC .
E. W. Chan, D.-C. Lee, M.-K. Ng, G. Wu, K. Y. C. Lee and L. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 12238–12243 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Li and D. T. Haynie, Biomacromolecules, 2004, 5, 1667–1670 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Niu, F. Shi, Z. Liu, Z. Wang and X. Zhang, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 6377–6384 CrossRef PubMed .
A. N. Zelikin, J. F. Quinn and F. Caruso, Biomacromolecules, 2006, 7, 27–30 CrossRef PubMed .
A. N. Zelikin, Q. Li and F. Caruso, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 2655–2661 CrossRef .
S.-F. Chong, A. Sexton, R. De Rose, S. J. Kent, A. N. Zelikin and F. Caruso, Biomaterials, 2009, 30, 5178–5186 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Deng, M. J. Derry, C. J. Mable, Y. Ning and S. P. Armes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 7616–7623 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Matsumoto, S. Ikeda, A. Harada and K. Kataoka, Biomacromolecules, 2003, 4, 1410–1416 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhang, Y. Guan and Y. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 16299–16305 RSC .
Q. Zhao, J. Qian, Q. An and B. Du, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 8448–8455 RSC .
J. Zhang, B. Yuan, Z. Wang and T. Chen, Colloid Polym. Sci., 2014, 292, 1235–1240 Search PubMed .
A. A. Mamedov, N. A. Kotov, M. Prato, D. M. Guldi, J. P. Wicksted and A. Hirsch, Nat. Mater., 2002, 1, 190–194 CrossRef PubMed .
B. S. Shim, J. Zhu, E. Jan, K. Critchley, S. Ho, P. Podsiadlo, K. Sun and N. A. Kotov, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 1711–1722 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Podsiadlo, A. K. Kaushik, E. M. Arruda, A. M. Waas, B. S. Shim, J. Xu, H. Nandivada, B. G. Pumplin, J. Lahann and A. Ramamoorthy, Science, 2007, 318, 80–83 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Lu, I. Dönch, M. Nolte and A. Fery, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 6204–6210 CrossRef .
S. S. Qureshi, Z. Zheng, M. I. Sarwar, O. Félix and G. Decher, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 9336–9344 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Yang, H. Ma, L. Yu and P. Zhang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2009, 333, 776–781 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Yuan, J.-F. Xu, C.-L. Sun, H. Nicolas, M. Schönhoff, Q.-Z. Yang and X. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 8, 3679–3685 Search PubMed .
W. Zhang, J. Zhang, T. Bao, W. Zhou, J. Meng and Z. Chen, Anal. Chem., 2013, 85, 6846–6854 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Alongi, A. Di Blasio, F. Carosio and G. Malucelli, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 2014, 107, 74–81 CrossRef .
H. Makamba, Y.-Y. Hsieh, W.-C. Sung and S.-H. Chen, Anal. Chem., 2005, 77, 3971–3978 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Fujie, H. Haniuda and S. Takeoka, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 9112–9120 RSC .
B. Yu, P. Liu, H. Cong, J. Tang and L. Zhang, Electrophoresis, 2012, 33, 3066–3072 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Yu, W. Cui, H. Cong, M. Jiao, P. Liu and S. Yang, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 20010–20015 RSC .
X. Zhu, S. Guo, T. He, S. Jiang, D. Jańczewski and G. J. Vancso, Langmuir, 2016, 32, 1338–1346 CrossRef PubMed .
T. He and V. Chan, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., 2010, 95, 454–464 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Cai, J. Wu, C. Xi, A. J. Ashe and M. E. Meyerhoff, Biomaterials, 2011, 32, 7774–7784 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Aumsuwan, S.-H. Ye, W. R. Wagner and M. W. Urban, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 11106–11110 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Ma, C. Cheng, C. He, C. Nie, J. Deng, S. Sun and C. Zhao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 26050–26062 Search PubMed .
X. Hu and X. Gong, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2016, 470, 62–70 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Kunjukunju, A. Roy, M. Ramanathan, B. Lee, J. E. Candiello and P. N. Kumta, Acta Biomater., 2013, 9, 8690–8703 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Qin, D. Qin, W. T. Ford, Y. Zhang and N. A. Kotov, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 2131–2135 CrossRef .
M. Tang, Y. Qin, Y. Wang and Z.-X. Guo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 1666–1671 Search PubMed .
K.-S. Liao, A. Wan, J. D. Batteas and D. E. Bergbreiter, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 4245–4253 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Amigoni, E. Taffin de Givenchy, M. Dufay and F. Guittard, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 11073–11077 CrossRef PubMed .
A. H. Broderick, U. Manna and D. M. Lynn, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 1786–1795 CrossRef .
K.-S. Liao, H. Fu, A. Wan, J. D. Batteas and D. E. Bergbreiter, Langmuir, 2008, 25, 26–28 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Madaan, N. Romriell, J. Tuscano, H. Schlaad and M. R. Linford, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2015, 459, 199–205 CrossRef PubMed .
E. M. Saurer, R. M. Flessner, M. E. Buck and D. M. Lynn, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 1736–1745 RSC .
A. H. Broderick, M. R. Lockett, M. E. Buck, Y. Yuan, L. M. Smith and D. M. Lynn, Chem. Mater., 2011, 24, 938–945 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Sabar, M. Nawi and W. Ngah, Desalin. Water Treat., 2016, 57, 5851–5857 CrossRef .
Y. Ma, L. Qian, H. Huang and X. Yang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2006, 295, 583–588 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Dhar and S. Patil, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 1803–1812 Search PubMed .
K. Uto, K. Yamamoto, N. Kishimoto, M. Muraoka, T. Aoyagi and I. Yamashita, J. Nanopart. Res., 2013, 15, 1516 CrossRef .
X. Liu, N. Wen, X. Wang and Y. Zheng, Nanomater. Nanotechnol., 2015, 5, 14 CrossRef .
Z. Xiong, T. Gu and X. Wang, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 522–532 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Ou, L. Jiang, P. Chen, M. Zhu, W. Hu, M. Liu, J. Zhu and H. Ju, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 2422–2435 CrossRef .
T. Guin, B. Stevens, M. Krecker, J. D’Angelo, M. Humood, Y. Song, R. Smith, A. Polycarpou and J. C. Grunlan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 6229–6235 Search PubMed .
N. Olichwer, E. W. Leib, A. H. Halfar, A. Petrov and T. Vossmeyer, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 6151–6161 Search PubMed .
Z. Liang, K. L. Dzienis, J. Xu and Q. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 542–548 CrossRef .
C. A. Nguyen, A. A. Argun, P. T. Hammond, X. Lu and P. S. Lee, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 2142–2149 CrossRef .
J. Wang, C. Zhao, H. Lin, G. Zhang, Y. Zhang, J. Ni, W. Ma and H. Na, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 5432–5437 CrossRef .
K. Jo, M. Gu and B.-S. Kim, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 7982–7989 CrossRef .
S. Zhang, W. Yang, Y. Niu and C. Sun, Sens. Actuators, B, 2004, 101, 387–393 CrossRef .
S. Zhang, W. Yang, Y. Niu and C. Sun, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2004, 523, 209–217 CrossRef .
Y. Sun, F. Yan, W. Yang and C. Sun, Biomaterials, 2006, 27, 4042–4049 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Li, S. Feng, S. Li, Y. Zhang and Y. Zhong, Sens. Actuators, B, 2014, 190, 999–1005 CrossRef .
Y. Sun, Q. Ren, X. Liu, S. Zhao and Y. Qin, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2013, 39, 289–295 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Sun, H. Wang and C. Sun, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2008, 24, 22–28 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Ma, L. Zhang, Y. Pan, K. Zhang and Y. Zhang, Electroanalysis, 2008, 20, 1220–1226 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, H. Ma, K. Zhang, S. Zhang and J. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 54, 2385–2391 CrossRef .
P. Liu, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2014, 207, 178–188 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Pastoriza-Santos, B. Scholer and F. Caruso, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2001, 11, 122–128 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, S. Yang, Y. Guan, W. Cao and J. Xu, Macromolecules, 2003, 36, 4238–4240 CrossRef .
L. Duan, Q. He, X. Yan, Y. Cui, K. Wang and J. Li, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun., 2007, 354, 357–362 CrossRef PubMed .
M. T. Gokmen, B. G. De Geest, W. E. Hennink and F. E. Du Prez, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 6, 1196–1202 Search PubMed .
T. Qiu, Y. Chen, J. Song and L.-J. Fan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 8260–8267 Search PubMed .
Q. Zhao and B. Li, Nanomedicine, 2008, 4, 302–310 CrossRef PubMed .
J. W. Maina, J. J. Richardson, R. Chandrawati, K. Kempe, M. P. van Koeverden and F. Caruso, Langmuir, 2015, 31, 7776–7781 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Germain, S. Grube, V. Carriere, H. Richard-Foy, M. Winterhalter and D. Fournier, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2868–2871 CrossRef .
J. J. Moon, H. Suh, A. Bershteyn, M. T. Stephan, H. Liu, B. Huang, M. Sohail, S. Luo, S. H. Um and H. Khant, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 243–251 CrossRef PubMed .
J. J. Moon, H. Suh, A. V. Li, C. F. Ockenhouse, A. Yadava and D. J. Irvine, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 1080–1085 CrossRef PubMed .
P. C. DeMuth, J. J. Moon, H. Suh, P. T. Hammond and D. J. Irvine, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 8041–8051 CrossRef PubMed .
Y.-H. Yang, L. Bolling, M. Haile and J. C. Grunlan, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 12355–12363 RSC .
J. Dai, D. M. Sullivan and M. L. Bruening, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2000, 39, 3528–3535 CrossRef .
J. Langecker, H. Ritter, A. Fichini, P. Rupper, M. Faller and B. Hanselmann, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 619–627 Search PubMed .
S. Al Akhrass, F. Gal, D. Damiron, P. Alcouffe, C. J. Hawker, F. Cousin, G. Carrot and E. Drockenmuller, Soft Matter, 2009, 5, 586–592 RSC .
S. Lee, B. Lee, B. J. Kim, J. Park, M. Yoo, W. K. Bae, K. Char, C. J. Hawker, J. Bang and J. Cho, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 2579–2587 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Wang, L. Zhao, X. Zhang, Z. Shi, Z. Cui and Y. Yang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2009, 336, 470–476 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, X. Wang, Y. Guo, Z. Cui, Q. Lin, W. Yu, L. Liu, L. Xu, D. Zhang and B. Yang, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 8952–8954 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Wang, L. Zhao, X. Zhang, X. Zhang, Z. Shi, Z. Cui, X. Chen and Y. Yang, Polym. Int., 2009, 58, 933–938 CrossRef .
F. Shi, B. Dong, D. Qiu, J. Sun, T. Wu and X. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 805–809 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, C. Jiang, M. Cheng, Y. Zhou, X. Zhu, J. Nie, Y. Zhang, Q. An and F. Shi, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 7096–7100 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Yu, X. Liu, H. Cong, Z. Wang, Y. Lian and J. Tang, Fullerenes, Nanotubes, Carbon Nanostruct., 2015, 23, 320–325 CrossRef .
J. A. Phelps, S. Morisse, M. Hindié, M.-C. Degat, E. Pauthe and P. R. Van Tassel, Langmuir, 2010, 27, 1123–1130 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Pavlukhina, Y. Lu, A. Patimetha, M. Libera and S. Sukhishvili, Biomacromolecules, 2010, 11, 3448–3456 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Manabe, K.-H. Kyung and S. Shiratori, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 4763–4771 Search PubMed .
S. V. Pavlukhina, J. B. Kaplan, L. Xu, W. Chang, X. Yu, S. Madhyastha, N. Yakandawala, A. Mentbayeva, B. Khan and S. A. Sukhishvili, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 4708–4716 Search PubMed .
C. Wu, S. Aslan, A. Gand, J. S. Wolenski, E. Pauthe and P. R. Van Tassel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 66–74 CrossRef .
C. J. Ochs, G. K. Such, Y. Yan, M. P. van Koeverden and F. Caruso, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1653–1663 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, V. Kozlovskaya, I. G. Arcibal, D. M. Cropek and E. Kharlampieva, Soft Matter, 2013, 9, 9420–9429 RSC .
V. Kozlovskaya, W. Higgins, J. Chen and E. Kharlampieva, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 8352–8354 RSC .
V. Kozlovskaya, Y. Wang, W. Higgins, J. Chen, Y. Chen and E. Kharlampieva, Soft Matter, 2012, 8, 9828–9839 RSC .
X. Liang, V. Kozlovskaya, Y. Chen, O. Zavgorodnya and E. Kharlampieva, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 3707–3719 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Kozlovskaya, E. Kharlampieva, B. P. Khanal, P. Manna, E. R. Zubarev and V. V. Tsukruk, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 7474–7485 CrossRef .
V. Kozlovskaya, J. F. Alexander, Y. Wang, T. Kuncewicz, X. Liu, B. Godin and E. Kharlampieva, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 5725–5737 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Drachuk, O. Shchepelina, M. Lisunova, S. Harbaugh, N. Kelley-Loughnane, M. Stone and V. V. Tsukruk, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 4266–4278 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhou, M. Cheng, X. Zhu, Y. Zhang, Q. An and F. Shi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 8308–8313 Search PubMed .
Y. Liu, B. Cao, P. Jia, J. An, C. Luo, L. Ma, J. Chang and K. Pan, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2015, 119, 6661–6667 CrossRef PubMed .
D. P. Go, S. L. Gras, D. Mitra, T. H. Nguyen, G. W. Stevens, J. J. Cooper-White and A. J. O’Connor, Biomacromolecules, 2011, 12, 1494–1503 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Lv, L. Xu, Y. Zhang and Z. Meng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 19104–19111 Search PubMed .
Y. Li, Q. An, Y. Hu, X. Luan, Q. Zhang, T. Zhang and Y. Zhang, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2015, 631-632, 118–123 CrossRef .
J. Choi, T. Konno, M. Takai and K. Ishihara, Biomaterials, 2009, 30, 5201–5208 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Zhu and M. J. McShane, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 424–430 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Kang and L. Dähne, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 4627–4634 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Choi, T. Konno, M. Takai and K. Ishihara, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2009, 9, e259–e262 CrossRef .
B. Wang, T. Jin, Q. Xu, H. Liu, Z. Ye and H. Chen, Bioconjugate Chem., 2016, 27, 1305–1313 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Hong, L. M. Alvarez, N. J. Shah, Y. Cho, B.-S. Kim, L. G. Griffith, K. Char and P. T. Hammond, Drug Delivery Transl. Res., 2012, 2, 375–383 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Junthip, N. Tabary, F. Chai, L. Leclercq, M. Maton, F. Cazaux, C. Neut, L. Paccou, Y. Guinet and J. N. Staelens, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., 2016, 104, 1408–1424 CrossRef PubMed .
M.-K. Park, S. Deng and R. C. Advincula, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 5272–5277 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Yi and G. B. Sukhorukov, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 6723–6731 Search PubMed .
B. G. De Geest, A. G. Skirtach, T. R. De Beer, G. B. Sukhorukov, L. Bracke, W. R. Baeyens, J. Demeester and S. C. De Smedt, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2007, 28, 88–95 CrossRef .
O. V. Khutoryanskaya, M. Potgieter and V. V. Khutoryanskiy, Soft Matter, 2010, 6, 551–557 RSC .
C.-J. Huang and F.-C. Chang, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 5155–5166 CrossRef .
C.-J. Huang, C.-W. Hong, F.-H. Ko and F.-C. Chang, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 10850–10855 RSC .
A. Zhuk, R. Mirza and S. Sukhishvili, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 8790–8799 CrossRef PubMed .
J. R. Kovacs, C. Liu and P. T. Hammond, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 13375–13383 Search PubMed .
M. Hu and B. Mi, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2013, 47, 3715–3723 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Huang, Q. An, X. Luan, Q. Zhang and Y. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 2003–2010 RSC .
E.-H. Kang, X. Liu, J. Sun and J. Shen, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 7894–7901 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Hou, Q. Li, X. Han and C. Lu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2014, 118, 14502–14509 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. H. Kim, Y. M. Lee, J. Y. Lee, M. J. Ko and P. J. Yoo, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1082–1093 CrossRef PubMed .
L. J. Goujon, S. Hariharan, B. Sayyar, N. A. Burke, E. D. Cranston, D. W. Andrews and H. D. Stöver, Langmuir, 2015, 31, 5623–5632 CrossRef PubMed .
J. S. Martinez, K. D. Kelly, Y. E. Ghoussoub, J. D. Delgado, T. C. Keller III and J. B. Schlenoff, Biomater. Sci., 2016, 4, 689–698 RSC .
J. Seo, H. Lee, J. Jeon, Y. Jang, R. Kim, K. Char and J.-M. Nam, Biomacromolecules, 2009, 10, 2254–2260 CrossRef PubMed .
C. R. Wittmer, J. A. Phelps, C. M. Lepus, W. M. Saltzman, M. J. Harding and P. R. Van Tassel, Biomaterials, 2008, 29, 4082–4090 CrossRef PubMed .
M. D. Moussallem, S. G. Olenych, S. L. Scott, T. C. Keller III and J. B. Schlenoff, Biomacromolecules, 2009, 10, 3062–3068 CrossRef PubMed .
J. P. Best, S. Javed, J. J. Richardson, K. L. Cho, M. M. Kamphuis and F. Caruso, Soft Matter, 2013, 9, 4580–4584 RSC .
W. Li, P. Zhao, C. Lin, X. Wen, E. Katsanevakis, D. Gero, O. Félix and Y. Liu, Biomacromolecules, 2013, 14, 2647–2656 CrossRef PubMed .
J. M. Silva, S. G. Caridade, N. M. Oliveira, R. L. Reis and J. F. Mano, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2015, 3, 4555–4568 RSC .
J. M. Silva, A. R. C. Duarte, S. G. Caridade, C. Picart, R. L. Reis and J. o. F. Mano, Biomacromolecules, 2014, 15, 3817–3826 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Gaudière, S. Morin-Grognet, L. Bidault, P. Lembré, E. Pauthe, J.-P. Vannier, H. Atmani, G. Ladam and B. A. Labat, Biomacromolecules, 2014, 15, 1602–1611 CrossRef PubMed .
S. G. Caridade, C. Monge, J. Almodóvar, R. Guillot, J. Lavaud, V. Josserand, J.-L. Coll, J. F. Mano and C. Picart, Acta Biomater., 2015, 15, 139–149 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhao, J. Fei, L. Gao, W. Cui, Y. Yang, A. Wang and J. Li, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 4548–4555 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Jia, L. Duan and J. Li, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 1312–1318 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Duan, X. Yan, A. Wang, Y. Jia and J. Li, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 6897–6904 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Gao, J. Fei, J. Zhao, W. Cui, Y. Cui and J. Li, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 3185–3192 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Qi, X. Yan, J. Fei, A. Wang, Y. Cui and J. Li, Biomaterials, 2009, 30, 2799–2806 CrossRef PubMed .
A. N. Zelikin, Q. Li and F. Caruso, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 7743–7745 CrossRef PubMed .
A. N. Zelikin, A. L. Becker, A. P. Johnston, K. L. Wark, F. Turatti and F. Caruso, ACS Nano, 2007, 1, 63–69 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yan, A. P. Johnston, S. J. Dodds, M. M. Kamphuis, C. Ferguson, R. G. Parton, E. C. Nice, J. K. Heath and F. Caruso, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2928–2936 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Liang, G. K. Such, Z. Zhu, S. J. Dodds, A. P. Johnston, J. Cui, H. Ejima and F. Caruso, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 10186–10194 CrossRef PubMed .
S. H. Yang, J. Choi, L. Palanikumar, E. S. Choi, J. Lee, J. Kim, I. S. Choi and J.-H. Ryu, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 4698–4703 RSC .
G. F. Schneider, V. Subr, K. Ulbrich and G. Decher, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 636–642 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Ma, Y. Zhang, B. Wu, W. Sun, Z. Li and J. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 123, 6378–6381 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

Qi An
	Dr Qi An is currently an Associate professor at School of Materials Sciences and Technology in China University of Geosciences (Beijing). She received her PhD degree in the Chemistry Department of Tsinghua University, China, in the year 2010 under the supervision of Prof. Dr Guangtao Li. After a two-year postdoctoral work under the joint supervision of Prof. Dr Jurriaan Huskens and Prof. Dr Pascal Jonkheijm at the MESA+ Institute for Nanotechnology, University of Twente, the Netherlands, she joined China University of Geosciences (Beijing) and later became an Associate Professor in the year 2013. She was a visiting scholar at Dr Ling Xingyi's Group at Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, in 2018. Her current research interests include chemistry, nanotechnology, and functional materials.

Tao Huang
	Tao Huang received his BA degree from China University of Mining and Technology (CUMT, China) in 2014, and completed his Master degree under the joint supervision of Prof. Dr Yihe Zhang and Dr Qi An, at China University of Geosciences (Beijing). In November 2017 he joined the group of Prof. Gianaurelio Cuniberti at Dresden University of Technology, Germany, as a PhD student. His current research interests focus on visible light-driven micromotors.

Feng Shi
	Feng Shi is a full Professor at Beijing University of Chemical Technology. He obtained his BSc and MSc from Jilin University in 2004, and PhD degree from Tsinghua University in 2007 under the supervision of Professor Xi Zhang. In 2007–2008, he worked as a postdoctoral researcher at Max Planck Institute for Polymer Research with Professor Wolfgang Knoll. In 2008, he joined Beijing University of Chemical Technology as a full Professor. His research interest is macroscopic supramolecular assembly including interpretation of the assembly mechanism and exploitation of applications towards tissue scaffold fabrication and bio-chips. He has been awarded with Young Changjiang Scholar (2015), Excellent Young Scientist Foundation of NSFC (2014), Fok Ying Tung Education Foundation from Ministry of Education (2012), New Century Excellent Talents in University (2011) and Beijing Nova Program of China (2009).

 	Scheme 1  The functionalities of covalent LbL films are determined collectively by three factors: (i) the film building units, (ii) the chemistry used to form the covalent crosslinking; and (iii) the structural engineering strategies employed.	 

 	Scheme 2  Schematic assembly processes using (a) post covalent conversion and (b) consecutive covalent fabrication.	 

General advantages	• Economy in labor, energy, and time	• Compatible with un-charged building units
• Film properties (e.g. thicknesses, hydrophilicity) easily adjusted by a number of experimental parameters (e.g. solution pH, ionic strength, cross-linking degrees)	• Is able to include small molecules as building units
Inconvenience	Requires multiple charged or polar groups for each building unit for LbL assembly	Might be labor, time, and energy intensive in film building







 	Fig. 1  Schematic reactions of dopamine functional groups and reaction features. (a) The reaction between dopamine and 3,4-dihydroxyphenyl groups and (b) the reaction between polydopamine and amines in PEI. Adapted with permission by ref. 45 and 46. Copyright © 2013 American Chemical Society & © 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 2  Synthesis of polyanion P1 and reaction schemes in film building using P1 and PEI. Adapted with permission by ref. 47. Copyright © 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of the mechanism of the photochemical reaction of diazoresin with organic species. The SO3− in the figure can be replaced by COOH, PO43−, O–H, S–H, etc.	 

 	Fig. 4  Molecular structures of (a) PAH-BP and (b) PAA-BP. (c) Illustration of reaction of a benzophenone-grafted polymer with C–H bonds in counterpart polymers.	 

 	Fig. 5  Chemical structure of (a) P2, poly(sodium 3-(4-vinylbenzylsufanyl)-propane-1-sulfonate)-co-poly(2-hydroxyethyl-vinylbenzyl sulfoxide), and (b) P3, poly(4-methyl-1-(4-vinylbenzyl)-pyridinium chloride). (c) Aldol reaction between P3 and terephthalaldehyde for film crosslinking. Adapted with permission from ref. 65. Copyright © 2010, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 6  Fabrication of covalent LbL multilayers using activated polyester P4 (or P5) and polyamines. Adapted with permission from ref. 82. Copyright © 2010, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  Reaction between azlactone-containing polymers and amines. Adapted with permission from ref. 84. Copyright © 2013, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  Reaction between HBPO-NO2 and primary amines. Adapted with permission from ref. 85. Copyright © 2011, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) LbL multilayers constructed by successive attachment of dithiol and diene molecules. Adapted with permission from ref. 86. Copyright © 2009, American Chemical Society. (b) LbL multilayers assembled using a highly branched decaallylferrocene via the thiol–ene reaction. Adapted with permission from ref. 87. Copyright © 2012, Wiley publication group.	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematic illustration of the construction of an LbL multilayer by (a) regular click chemistry and (b) electrochemically triggered click chemistry. Adapted with permission from ref. 88. Copyright © 2006, American Chemical Society, and ref. 95. Copyright © 2010, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematic illustration of the attachment of organosilanes to oxide surfaces. Adapted with permission from ref. 96. Copyright © 2008, American Chemical Society and ref. 97. Copyright © 2002, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  Procedure of forming oxime bonds to build covalently assembled multilayers.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic illustration showing the reversible nature of the disulfide bond. Chemical structures used to fabricate disulfide-stabilized LbL multilayers: (b) PAH and PAA-SH60 and (c) PVP and poly(methacrylic acid)-SH. Adapted with permission from ref. 102 and 103. Copyright © 2007 & © 2006, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  Schematic illustration of reversible assembly through phenylboronate ester bonds.	 




 	Fig. 15  (a) Enhanced film mechanical strength arising from varying crosslinking chemistries. Reprinted with permission of ref. 112. Copyright © 2009, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic illustration and (c) digital photos of a free-standing LbL film prepared from crosslinked PVA and MTM clay nanosheets, reprinted with permission from ref. 113. Copyright © 2007, American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Illustrative scheme comparing the rapid disassembly of a non-crosslinked film with the stability of a covalently crosslinked film. The crosslinked stable film can be used for (b) antifouling and (c) antibacterial applications, (d) cell culturing, (e) superhydrophobic substrate preparation, and the generation of (f) catalytic or (g) flexible reactive substrates.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Schematic illustration of the use of covalent LbL to prepare electrode materials. (b) Optical image of (APTMS-rGO) microelectrode arrays (upper) and I–V curve of the (APTMS-rGO)n (n = 1–5) films. Inset: Conductivity as a function of n. (c) Schematic illustration of the defect-detecting rGO/poly(vinylamine) covalent LbL film and resistance response to film deformation or the presence of defects, adapted with permission from ref. 147. Copyright © 2016, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic illustration of the layered electrochromical device for which the electrode was prepared using covalent LbL films of PAA/PEO/PAA/PEI. Adapted with permission from ref. 150. Copyright © 2011, American Chemical Society. (e) Electrochemical sensing LbL films prepared by incorporating a redox-active polymer PFS containing ferrocene groups (left) and the amperometric response of (PFS/PEI)4–PFS and (PFS/PEI)8–PFS to H2O2 at −0.1 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) constant potential. Each step represents 25 μM H2O2, adapted with permission from ref. 42. Copyright © 2013, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation process for LbL capsules. (b) Confocal fluorescent images of LbL four-component capsules of PPV/DAR/PAA/PSS, with the fluorescence derived from the modified PPV. (c) Fluorescent intensity of crosslinked and non-crosslinked capsules after washing with a dissociation agent. Adapted with permission from ref. 166. Copyright © 2015, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic illustration of a half capsule prepared from lipid bilayer (for the encapsulation of proteins and sensitive bioactive molecules). (e) Schematic illustration of integration of lipid capsules into a micro-needle patch for therapeutic delivery, with permission from ref. 172. Copyright © 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 19  Schematic illustration depicting the high permeability of non-crosslinked LbL films to corrosive gases and moisture compared with the less permeable nature of more compact crosslinked films.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Schematic illustration comparing the internal order of a covalent LbL film with that of a non-crosslinked film over time. (b) TEM image of the cross-section of a covalent LbL film assembled using polymers and PtNPs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 176. Copyright © 2008, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Photoluminescence spectra and photographs of (PS-N3:PS-N3-SH-QDs)3 multilayers prepared from blue-, green-, and red-emitting QDs (left). Schematic illustration of sequential assembly of blue, red, and green QDs (middle) to obtain a white-light-emitting substrate (middle) and photograph of the resulting substrate (right). (d) Photographs and fluorescent images of flexible free-standing LbL films prepared using red, green, and blue QDs (left) and photograph of QD pattern (right). Reprinted with permission from ref. 177. Copyright © 2009, American Chemical Society. (e) Scheme showing LbL fabrication of NLO films. Reprinted with permission from ref. 179. Copyright © 2004, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Schematic illustration of the patterning process on LbL films. Inset: AFM image showing the morphology of the obtained patterns. Adapted with permission from ref. 181. Copyright © 2002, Wiley publication group. (b) Schematic illustration of vertically selective crosslinking in an LbL film for which only the surface layers were crosslinked. The bioactive molecules in the film were free to diffuse through the loose (non-crosslinked) inner layers, and the crosslinked rigid film surface promoted cell adhesion. Adapted with permission from ref. 184. Copyright © 2011, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation of single-component films with molecular loading capacity via component-selective crosslinking in LbL films. (b) Stain-free blood drop rolling on a film loaded with almond oil. Adapted with permission from ref. 186. Copyright © 2015, American Chemical Society. (c) Porous film on a PDMS stamp surface for enhanced loading of protein ink (left) and the generated fluorescent protein pattern (right). Inset: FL intensity profile. Adapted with permission from ref. 40. Copyright © 2009, American Chemical Society. (d) Enhanced cell adhesion and spreading on the particle-templated film with increased album loading. Adapted with permission from ref. 188. Copyright © 2013 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Scheme of component-selective crosslinked films: single-component film for enhanced film swelling. (b) Single-component (PMAA)n capsules changed shape from cubic to spherical in response to pH changes. The scale bar is 3 μm. (c) Incorporation of AuNPs enabled the films to indicate pH variations by changes in the UV-vis spectra induced by swelling-induced alterations of interparticular distances. Reprinted with permission from ref. 194. Copyright © 2008, American Chemical Society. (d) pH-Induced capsule shape changes led to different cell internalization efficiencies. Reprinted with permission from ref. 195. Copyright © 2014 American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic illustration of swelling of single-component film around a yeast cell, which can be used to regulate molecular trans-membrane transport and is expected to regulate cell growth and functions. Adapted with permission from ref. 196. Copyright © 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 24  MIP films: (a) schematic illustrations of the preparation of MIP LbL film incorporating template molecules. (b) Template molecule (Por) extraction in imprinted and non-imprinted film and (c) comparison of film extraction of the template molecule (Por) and non-template molecule (fast green). Reprinted with permission from ref. 198. Copyright © 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 25  Variation of the crosslinking degree results in modification of molecular release profiles. (a) Schematic illustration of the variation of the film crosslinking degree leading to films with different compactness levels. (b) Plot showing the adjustment of dexamethasone release using film crosslinking chemical methods. Reprinted with permission from ref. 206. Copyright © 2016, American Chemical Society. (c) Adjustment of release profile by elongating the thermal treatment at 150 °C (for the crosslinking reaction). Reprinted with permission from ref. 207. Copyright © 2012, Controlled Release Society. (d) Human mesenchymal stem cells after 14 day-culture on (d1) film without dexamethasone and (d2) film loaded with dexamethasone. Reprinted with permission from ref. 207. Copyright © 2012, Controlled Release Society. (e) Molecular release inhibition from capsules due to increased capsule hydrophobicity after crosslinking of DAR. Reprinted with permission from ref. 210. Copyright © 2013, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 26  Effect of crosslinking on film swelling. Effect of crosslinking on swelling of (PNIPAM/clay/PNIPAM/PMAA)m in response to (a1) pH variation and (a2) temperature changes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 215. Copyright © 2011, American Chemical Society. The scale bar in (b) is 10 μm. (b) Crosslinked GO LbL membrane allows water filtration while rejecting salts: (b1) water flux and (b2) salt and organic dye rejection for different numbers of GO layers. Reprinted with permission from ref. 217. Copyright © 2013, American Chemical Society. (c) Suppressed molecular cross-membrane diffusion regulated by LbL GO films and long-term stable release up to 9 days. Reprinted with permission from ref. 218. Copyright © 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Surface wrinkles generated by crosslinked (PAA/PEG)n films on PDMS for n = 6 (upper left), 12 (upper right), and 18 (lower left) and wrinkle wavelength as a function of n (lower right). Reprinted with permission from ref. 220. Copyright © 2014, American Chemical Society. (e) Cationic reaction in crosslinked PEI/PAA multilayers to generate metal nanoparticles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 221. Copyright © 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 27  Adjustment of cell adhesion by controlling the crosslinking degree. (a) Schematic illustration of enhanced cell adhesion on films with higher crosslinking degrees. (b) DAPI-phalloidin staining of L929 on CHI/ALG multilayers containing a gradient of crosslinking degrees (film stiffness) along the glass slide (scale bar 100 μm) and (c) number of cells attached along the gradient film. Reprinted with permission from ref. 229. Copyright © 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Localization of total actin (green) and smooth muscle α-actin (red) in A7r5 cells cultured on native (d1–d3) and heat-induced crosslinked (d4–d6) (PAH/PAA)PAH-coated coverslips. The scale bar is 10 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 226. Copyright © 2009 American Chemical Society. (e) Optical image of EDS crosslinked free-standing (CHI/ALG)200 film. (f) μCT images of BMP-2 loaded film implanted under the skin of mice for up to 52 days, inducing the formation of bone nodules (indicated by red arrows). Reprinted with permission from ref. 232. Copyright © 2015 Acta Materialia Inc. Published by Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 28  (a) Scheme of Hb-loaded CaCO3 sphere wrapped by glutaraldehyde-Hb multilayers and (b) absorption spectra showing that the Hb-loaded spheres were able to carry oxygen and were thus potentially useful as artificial oxygen carriers in therapies. Reprinted with permission from ref. 235. Copyright © 2012, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic representation of the coupled reaction of GOD and CAT on the GA–glucose oxidase capsule wall and enhanced permeability of the capsule for the release of insulin. (d) Release profiles of coated insulin particles in PBS (black) and glucose solution (red). Reprinted with permission from ref. 237. Copyright © 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.	 

 	Fig. 29  (a) Scheme showing disulfide crosslinked capsule delivery of therapies in transcellular membranes and release of cargoes inside cells. (b) Degradation profiles of PDPA65% (red squares), PDPA87% (green triangles), PDPA93% (blue triangles), and PDPA98% (purple diamonds) capsules crosslinked with a bisazide thiol linker. The subscript denotes the crosslinking degree. (c) Deconvolution optical microscopy images of JAWS II cells incubated with degradable PDPA65%, PDPA87%, PDPA93%, and PDPA98% (green) capsules and non-degradable PDPA capsules (red, crosslinking degree 87%). Capsule/cell ratio of 20:1. Each row focuses on the same cells over time. The time frames that show the first evidence of capsule degradation are highlighted in red. Reprinted with permission from ref. 241. Copyright © 2012, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic procedure for cell surface engineering with crosslinked LbL multilayers of PDMAEM-co-PPDEM and PMA-co-PMEM (x: 0.33; y: 0.67). Reprinted with permission from ref. 242. Published by The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 30  (a) Schematic illustration of nanoparticles coated with integrated multilayer shells as new drug delivery systems, reprinted with permission from ref. 243. Copyright © 2011 American Chemical Society. (b) Walking device prepared using asymmetric film of crosslinked PAA/PAH and UV-cured NOA63. Schematic illustration of structure (b1), SEM cross-sectional image (b2), and optical image (b3) of the asymmetric film. (b4) Schematic and optical images of the functioning of the walking device. Reprinted with permission from ref. 244. Copyright © 2011 Wiley-VCH.	 
PAH	Poly(allylamine hydrochloride)
PAA	Poly(acrylic acid)
DCC	Dicyclohexylcarbodiimide
DIC	Diisopropylcarbodiimide
EDC	1-Ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)carbodiimide
NHS	
N-Hydroxysuccinimide
HEP	Heparin
CHI	Chitosan
PVP	Polyvinylpyrrolidone
HA	Hyaluronic acid
ALG	Alginate
DAS	4,4′-Diazostilbene-2,2′-disulfonic acid disodium salt
PSS	Polystyrene sulfonate
PEI	Polyethyleneimine
DIP	1,5-Diiodopentane
PFS	Poly(ferrocenyl(3-bromopropyl)methylferrocene)
PIAMA	Poly(isobutylene-alt-maleic anhydride)
DMAP	4-(Dimethylamino)pyridine
BP	Benzophenone
DAR	Diazoresin
PGMA	Poly(glycidyl methylacrylate)
PVA	Polyvinyl alcohol
PDCP	Polydichlorophosphazene
HDA	Hexamethylenediamine
PVDMA	Poly(2-vinyl-4,4-dimethylazlactone)
HBPO-NO2	
p-Nitrophenyloxycarbonyl-group-terminated hyperbranched polyether
PAA-Az	Poly(acrylic acid) with azide functionality
PAA-Alk	Poly(acrylic acid) with alkyne functionality
PMAA	Poly(methacrylic acid)
GA	Glutaraldehyde
DTT	Dithiothreitol
SWNT	Single walled carbon nanotube
MTM	Montmorillonoid
PEG	Polyethylene glycol
PDMS	Poly(dimethylsiloxane)
PMPC	Poly(2-methacryloyloxyethyl phosphorylcholine)
TA	Terephthalaldehyde
MWNT	Multiwalled carbon nanotubes
PNIPAM	Poly(N-isopropyl acrylamide)
ECH	Epichlorohydrin
HRP	Horseradish peroxidase
rGO	Reduced graphene oxide
PVAm	Poly(vinylamine)
PEDOT:PSS	Poly(3,4-ethylene dioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate)
HB	Hemoglobin
PPV	Poly(phenylenevinylene)
DOPC	1,2-Dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine
DOPG	1,2-Di(9Z-octadecenoyl)-sn-glycero-3-phospho-(1′-rac-glycerol)
MPB	Maleimide-headgroup lipid
PBAE	Cationic poly(β-amino ester)
PLL	Poly(L-lysing)
PGA	Poly(glutamic acid)
DOX	Doxorubicin
PVCL	Poly(N-vinylcaprolactam)
LAP	LAPONITE®
PDDA	Poly(diallyldimethylammonium)
MB	Methylene blue
RhB	Rhodamine B
PGA	Poly(L-glutamic acid)
PDMAEMA	Poly(2-dimethylaminoethylmethacrylate)
DIP	1,5-Diiodopentane
CSA	Chondroitin sulfate A
DHP	Dialdehyde heparin
GOD	Glucose oxidase
CAT	Catalase
GSH	Glutathione
PDPA	Poly(2-diisopropylaminoethyl methacrylate)
HepG2	Human hepatocellular carcinoma
ARH	Adult rat hepatocytes
HFHb	Human fetal hepatoblasts
PI	Photoinitiator
CE	Capillary electrophoresis
DMFC	Direct methanol fuel cells
EDLC	Electric double-layer capacitance
ICMVs	Interbiolayer-crosslinked multilamellar vesicles
RH	Relative humidity

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
