Solution processed reduced graphene oxide /metal oxide hybrid electron transport layers for highly efficient polymer solar cells  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3TA11822C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3TA11822C
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 9922-9927Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsSolution processed reduced graphene oxide/metal oxide hybrid electron transport layers for highly efficient polymer solar cells

        
          
            K. D. G. Imalka 
            Jayawardena
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Rhys 
            Rhodes
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Keyur K. 
            Gandhi
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            M. R. Ranga 
            Prabhath
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            G. Dinesha M. R. 
            Dabera
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Michail J. 
            Beliatis
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Lynn J. 
            Rozanski
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Simon J. 
            Henley
          
        
       and 

        
          
            S. Ravi P. 
            Silva
          
        
      *
      Advanced Technology Institute, University of Surrey, Guildford, GU2 7XH, UK. E-mail: s.silva@surrey.ac.uk;  Fax: +44 (0)1483 686081
Received 
      8th May 2013
    , Accepted 14th June 2013First published on 9th July 2013AbstractWe report new solution processable electron transport layers for organic photovoltaic devices based on composites of metal oxides and reduced graphene oxides. Low bandgap polymer cells fabricated using these nanohybrid transport layers display power conversion efficiencies in the range of 7.4–7.5% which is observed to be an improvement over conventional metal oxide or thermally evaporated electron transport layers. This efficiency enhancement is driven mainly by improvements in the short circuit current (from ∼14.8 to ∼15.0 mA cm−2) as well as the fill factor (∼65% to ∼68%) upon the inclusion of reduced graphene oxide with the metal oxides. This is attributed to the reduced graphene oxide providing charge transfer pathways between the metal oxide nanoparticles. In addition, the metal oxide/reduced graphene oxide nanohybrids also lead to more balanced electron and hole mobilities which assist in the improvement of the fill factor of the device. The versatile nature of these nanohybrids is increased due to the wrapping of the graphene layers around the metal oxide nanoparticles, which leads to very smooth films with surface roughness of ∼3 nm. The improvement observed in this study upon the incorporation of RGO as well as the solution processable nature of the interfacial layers brings the organic photovoltaic technology a step closer towards realising an all solution processed solar cell.
1 Introduction
Growing concerns with regard to the diminishing supply of fossil fuels and the impact of such non-renewables on global warming have made solar energy generation an important area of research. Of the many types of solar-energy converting systems, organic photovoltaics have attracted significant interest due to their low cost, lightweight and the printable nature on flexible substrates.1,2 Bulk heterojunction (BHJ) organic solar cells are one of the material systems extensively investigated for this purpose, where an electron donating conjugated polymer and an electron accepting small molecule fullerene are blended to form the active material.1,3 Although initially considered to be less promising in comparison to their inorganic counterparts, recent developments in the engineering of high performing low bandgap polymers4,5 assisted by ingenuitive device design6 have led to a rapid increase in the device power conversion efficiency (PCE) to a level that is now showing promise for wide scale deployment. The performance of BHJ organic solar cells is driven by the following key processes: (1) absorption of a significant fraction of photons from the solar spectrum, (2) generation of excitons and their dissociation at the donor (D)–acceptor (A) interface (giving rise to the internal quantum efficiency), (3) transport of the free charges towards contacts, and (4) extraction of these charges at the contacts to generate useful power (the incident photon to current efficiency or IPCE). Of the above processes, (1)–(3) have received significant attention through suitable tailoring of donor polymers,5 use of solvent additives,4,7 co-solvents as well as thermal treatment8 for proper phase separation. Not only has this allowed a significant fraction of the solar spectrum to be utilised, but has also led to a more efficient exciton dissociation3 and subsequent charge transport to the respective electrodes.
In addition to the above developments within the photoactive layer, another important component of the organic photovoltaic (OPV) device architecture that has been receiving significant interest of late has been the interfacial layers. Such layers are known to significantly affect the device performance through improved light transmission into the active layer,6 better spatial distribution of the incident light within the active layer through optical spacer effects9 as well as improved charge extraction due to their charge selective nature.10
At present, two primary techniques are used in the processing of such charge extraction layers: thermal evaporation11 and solution processing.12 Although thermally evaporated calcium is used as an electron transport layer (ETL),4 bathocuproine (BCP), a small molecule, that can also be deposited through thermal evaporation has also been used as an ETL.11,13 However, recent investigation has been focused on solution processed metal oxide layers which have emerged as an alternative to thermally deposited ETLs.10 Such solution processable interlayers are acknowledged to possess several benefits over their thermally evaporated counterparts. First and foremost, the solution processable nature of these interlayers, especially in solvent systems that are known to be non-toxic, makes them amenable for integration into roll-to-roll printing processes.10 Secondly, most ETLs, especially those based on metal oxides are known to act as optical spacers3 allowing a significant improvement in light coupling and hence device performance.14 In addition to the above, interlayers based on metal oxides are widely recognised for their importance in stable and long-lived devices due to the moisture and oxygen scavenging nature of the metal oxides.15 This has led to their popularity as ETLs; especially in inverted device architectures such interfacial layers are consistently observed to have poor charge transport properties leading to the observation of S curves due to unbalanced electron and hole extraction. This in turn has necessitated the need for additional light soaking treatments10,14 as well as doping in order to obtain satisfactory charge extraction properties and overcome detrimental effects on the device performance.
One possible route towards mitigating such poor charge transport properties in the metal oxides is through the inclusion of conducting channels within such layers. Recently, graphene and its derivatives such as graphene oxide have been used as promising candidates for organic electronic applications ranging from transparent conducting alternatives to indium tin oxide16 and replacement hole transport layers for PEDOT:PSS.17 In addition to the above, Wang et al.18 have also reported the insertion of an oxidized graphene layer through a stamping process between a metal oxide electron transport layer and an Al cathode as a means of enhancing device performance. Despite the promising nature of the above architectures, it is worth noting that the thermal treatments used are detrimental to the performance of polymer solar cells utilizing recently developed low bandgap polymers. As such, it is preferable if any modifications carried out on these architectures are free of thermal treatments. Furthermore, it is also preferable if any modification to the transport layers is conducted in a manner such that the layers are solution processable, allowing the development of printable solar cells.
In this manuscript, we report a new solution processable interfacial layer for OPVs in the form of metal oxides/reduced graphene oxide (RGO). The performance of these new interlayers is investigated for the high performing low bandgap [3,4-b]thiophene/benzodithiophene (PTB7) polymer system with device active areas of 28.3 mm2 for a standard (i.e. non-inverted) architecture. The use of a standard architecture is considered to be preferable as this allows solution processable hole transport layers such as carbon nanotubes to be used in a manner such that the performance of the active layer is not degraded. The results obtained for such standard architectures with our novel nanohybrid layers are investigated in comparison to metal oxide only transport layers as well as thermally evaporated bathocuproine (BCP), the successful integration of which has been widely reported.2,6,11 While such nanocomposite systems have been actively investigated with regard to dye sensitized solar cells19 and electrochemical water splitting,20 there appears to be a lack of investigation on the benefits of such nanocomposite layers on OPVs. The incorporation of RGO is considered to be extremely attractive especially with regard to the better charge transporting properties of graphene based nanostructures in comparison to conventional metal oxides.21 Although RGO is not expected to possess the same mean free path for charge transport as graphene due to defects in the structure, it is reasonable to expect that RGO is likely to possess mean free paths sufficiently long enough for charge transfer between two nanocrystals, thereby acting as a bridging contact between the nanocrystals. This is expected to eliminate the need for additional light soaking treatments usually expected for metal oxide transport layers. Furthermore, unlike in the work reported by Wang et al.,18 the completely solution processable and depositable nature of the hybrid metal oxide/RGO ETLs introduced in this study paves the way towards improving the performance of OPVs with routes towards roll-to-roll polymer solar cell manufacture.
2 Experimental methods
2.1 Preparation of nanohybrids
In this work, TiO2 solutions were prepared using P25 samples from Degussa while ZnO nanocrystals were used as purchased from Fisher Scientific. In order to prepare the metal oxide/graphene hybrids, reduced graphene oxide was initially prepared using the method described by Hummers and Offeman.27 Preparation of TiO2/RGO was carried out using P25 (Degussa) and graphene oxide synthesized following the method described by Fan et al.28 while a similar procedure was followed using commercially purchased ZnO for the preparation of ZnO/RGO hybrids.
2.2 Device fabrication and characterization
Photovoltaic devices were fabricated on indium tin oxide (ITO) coated glass substrates (sheet resistance of 15 Ω □−1) precleaned using acetone and methanol followed by oxygen plasma ashing. PEDOT:PSS (Baytron PVP AI 4083) was then spin coated onto ITO and dried at 140 °C for 15 min to form the hole transport layer. Subsequently, the blend of PTB7 (1-material)/[6,6]-phenyl C70 butyric acid methyl fullerene (PC70BM, Solenne) (25 mg ml−1 at a 1:1.5 ratio) in a mixed solvent system of chlorobenzene–1,8-diiodooctane (0.97:0.03) was spin coated on top of the hole transport layer to form an 80–100 nm thick active layer. This was followed by either spin coating of ZnO, TiO2, ZnO/RGO, TiO2/RGO (∼30 to 50 nm) or thermal evaporation of BCP (4 nm) to form the ETL followed by the deposition of the Al cathode through thermal evaporation. The overlap area for ITO and Al for the resulting devices was ∼63 mm2. The photovoltaic device performance of the above devices was characterized in air (without encapsulation) using a 300 W Xe arc lamp solar simulator (Abet Technologies) fitted with an Air Mass 1.5 G Global (AM 1.5G) filter calibrated to an intensity of 100 mW cm−2 and a Keithley 2425 sourcemeter. The IPCE measurements for the devices were carried out using a Bentham PVE300 system. In order to minimize edge effects, all measurements were carried out using an aperture that gives an active area of 28.3 mm2. For studies on the electron mobility based on space charge limited current (SCLC) analysis, electron only devices were fabricated by replacing the PEDOT:PSS layer in the architecture described above with a solution processed titanium suboxide layer (∼5 nm) deposited through spin coating of titanium isopropoxide precursor solution prepared using the technique described by Kim et al.9 and subsequent thermal treatment in air at 80 °C for 10 min.3 Except for the drying of PEDOT:PSS and the titanium suboxide layer, no other thermal treatment was carried out following the deposition of the active layer as this was observed to lead to the degradation of the device performance.
2.3 Characterisation of nanohybrids
Atomic force microscopy analysis for investigation on the coverage and surface roughness of the nanohybrids on the active layer was carried out using a Veeco Dimension 3000 atomic force microscope. Deposition of the interfacial layers and the active layer was carried out as described under Section 2.2. All films were prepared on ITO coated glass substrates.
Electron microscopy analysis was carried out using a Hitachi HD2300 transmission electron microscope operating at 200 kV. Samples were prepared by drop casting the nanohybrids onto holey carbon grids.
3 Discussion
The architecture used for the polymer solar cells in this work is highlighted in Fig. 1(a) with the energy level alignment for the layers as shown in Fig. 1(b).
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic of the energy levels of ITO, PEDOT:PSS, PTB7, PC70BM, ZnO, TiO2, RGO, BCP and Al, (b) schematic of the device architecture employed. The boxed areas in (b) indicate the different solution processed layers used in the device. 
While ZnO, TiO2 and RGO are observed to have favourably inclined band alignments for electron extraction from the active layer, the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of BCP is expected to inhibit electron extraction. Despite this unfavourable band alignment, BCP is known to be an efficient electron extraction layer, primarily due to intermediate states existing in the bandgap that favour selective electron extraction from the active layer.17 Furthermore, BCP is also known to act as an exciton blocking layer that prevents the quenching of excitons generated in the active layer as a result of diffusion towards the Al contact, a diffusion layer that acts to prevent contact between hot Al and BCP. This leads to the formation of an Ohmic contact and an interface layer that prevents the unfavourable dipole formation between Al and fullerenes which inhibits electron extraction.18
The surface morphologies of the different nanostructures/layers spin cast on the PTB7:PC70BM active material are shown in Fig. 2(a)–(d). Analysis of the surface roughness over a scan area of 3 μm × 3 μm indicates values of 2.46 nm, 3.03 nm, 3.22 nm and 3.34 nm respectively for TiO2, ZnO, TiO2/RGO and ZnO/RGO. Furthermore, AFM scans carried out on a 4 nm thick BCP layer (Fig. 2(e)) deposited on the PTB7:PC70BM active material indicate a surface roughness of ∼2.47 nm. This indicates that, with the exception of solution deposited TiO2, the deposition of oxides and metal oxide/RGO composites leads to a slight increase in the surface roughness in comparison to BCP. However, we note that the surface roughness observed here is unlikely to negatively impact the performance of the devices through increased leakage currents that manifest as a lowered shunt resistance and in turn a reduced fill factor (FF). The low surface roughness is observed to result in excellent fill factors in the performance of photovoltaic devices incorporating these nanohybrids which are presented later on.
 Fig. 2  AFM scans of (a) ZnO, (b) ZnO/RGO, (c) TiO2, (d) TiO2/RGO and (e) 4 nm thick BCP layer on PTB7:PC70BM. The scale bars on the figures indicate 750 nm. All thin films were observed to possess very low surface roughness values of 3.03 nm (for ZnO), 3.34 nm (for ZnO/RGO), 2.46 (for TiO2) and 3.22 nm (for TiO2/RGO) which are similar to the surface roughness of 4 nm BCP (2.47 nm) on the active layer. 
The observation of a low surface roughness in the presence of RGO within the nanocomposite layers raises the question of the actual configuration of the RGO in the ETL. Transmission electron microscopy analysis carried out on such nanohybrid samples (Fig. 3) indicates that contrary to the expectation, the RGO is wrapped around the metal oxide nanoparticles leading to the realisation of a core–shell type structure in a manner similar to that reported by Son et al.22 While this explains the low surface roughness noted above, the core–shell nature of these nanostructures opens up a range of possible applications for these nanostructures including as ETLs for inverted device architectures. This is due to the reduced possibility of device short-circuiting that can result from the presence of micron sized RGO layers protruding from the transport layer.
 Fig. 3  Transmission electron micrographs of (a) ZnO/RGO and (b) TiO2/RGO nanohybrids utilised in the device fabrication. The core–shell nature of the metal oxide/RGO nanostructures is evident in the above micrographs with the RGO forming a shell around the ZnO and TiO2 nanoparticles. 
The performance of the PV devices (current density (J)–voltage (V) characteristics) incorporating the metal oxides, metal oxide/reduced graphene oxide and BCP under AM 1.5G (100 mW cm−2) illumination is shown in Fig. 4(a), with the device operation parameters given in Table 1. The performance of the best PTB7:PC70BM bulk solar cells using solution processed ZnO, TiO2 as the ETL is noted to be on par with the performance obtained using thermally evaporated BCP. However, incorporation of RGO to the metal oxide (both TiO2 and ZnO) ETLs is observed to lead to improvements in the power conversion efficiency of the devices in comparison to those based on metal oxide only or BCP ETLs. Together with the enhancements in the power conversion efficiency, the solution processable nature in user friendly solvents makes the nanocomposite ETL layers a more attractive candidate for roll-to-roll printed OPVs. The short circuit current density (Jsc) obtained from the J–V measurements is in agreement with those calculated using the IPCE spectra presented in Fig. 4(b). We note that the utilisation of the nanocomposites positively affects two important device performance parameters: Jsc and FF. It is notable that both ZnO/RGO and TiO2/RGO improve the Jsc above 15 mA cm−2 and FF above 68%. A comparison between ZnO/RGO and TiO2/RGO suggests that this improvement is more pronounced for the former interlayer. This is more than likely due to the mixed crystalline nature of the P25 TiO2 sample used in this work. Further analysis of the device characteristics appears to indicate that the OPVs with the metal oxide/RGO ETLs have a reduced series resistance (Rs) compared to the metal oxide only or BCP ETLs confirming that in line with our initial expectations, the RGO positively affects the charge extraction (transportation) in the OPVs studied. It is noted here that a similar improvement has been observed for several of our large area devices indicative of the reproducibility in the performance of devices utilising these transport layers.
 Fig. 4  (a) J–V characteristics of the photovoltaic devices fabricated using different ETLs, (b) the IPCE of the devices measured in (a) and (b) SCLC analysis for electron only devices incorporating ZnO, TiO2, ZnO/RGO, TiO2/RGO and BCP as the ETL. 
Table 1 OPV performance parameters for different ETLs, with their field independent electron mobility calculated using the Mott–Gurney equation




ETL

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)

η (%)

R
s (Ω cm−2)

μ (cm2 V−1 s−1)




ZnO
0.74
14.90
66.9
7.39
5.24
5.3 × 10−4


ZnO/RGO
0.72
15.19
68.6
7.50
4.92
3.7 × 10−4


TiO2
0.74
14.84
65.7
7.22
5.47
4.9 × 10−4


TiO2/RGO
0.74
14.99
67.2
7.46
5.41
4.5 × 10−4


BCP
0.74
14.92
67.7
7.47
5.48
5.3 × 10−4




Previously, in the work reported by You et al.10 for the inverted device architecture, UV irradiation was required prior to the satisfactory performance of the devices with metal oxide ETLs. In the absence of such UV irradiation, the device performance characteristics of OPVs are known to display an S shape indicative of unbalanced charge extraction10 due to reasons such as poor charge transport in the ETL as well as charge extraction barriers at the contact. Such unbalanced charge extraction has been attributed to poor charge transport properties of the interfacial layer.10 We note that in their recently reported work, Zhou et al.23 have indicated the possibility of eliminating charge extraction barriers existing between the ETL and the electrode through the incorporation of polymers containing aliphatic amine groups. It is interesting to note that in the case of the work reported in this manuscript, no such light soaking or coating with a polymer was required for satisfactory device performance. Although the lack of a UV filter in the solar simulator used in this work could be ascribed as a possible reason, it is noted that the absorption due to the glass substrate and the presence of the photo-active polymer layers is likely to cut off a significant portion of the UV content. Therefore the observed high device performance close to record levels of ∼7.4 to 7.5% over relatively large areas (electrode overlap area of ∼63 mm2 and active area of 28.3 mm2) with off-the-shelf solutions in the case of all oxide based ETLs can be attributed to several different causes with the simplest being the doped nature of commercially available metal oxides. However, in the present case, it is more than likely that the deposition of hot Al species onto the metal oxides leads to the diffusion of the metal into the metal oxide resulting in a doped nanostructure which assists in the formation of satisfactory Ohmic contact (as evidenced from measurements for electron only devices) and also eliminates the need for any post UV treatment.
Having understood that no post treatment is necessary to improve the charge extraction capability with the novel metal oxide and metal oxide/RGO nanohyrbid transport layers, we now proceed to obtain a fundamental understanding of these ETLs on the effect of charge extraction through Space Charge Limited Conduction (SCLC) analysis for electron only devices using the field independent Mott–Gurney equation:24  where, εr is the relative permittivity of the active layer which is taken to be 3.0, ε0 is the permittivity of free space, V is the applied potential to the device, Vbi is the built in potential, L is the device thickness (taken to be 100 nm) and μ the charge mobility (in this case the electron mobility) of the device. For calculation of μ, the linear region of the J–(V − Vbi)2 plots (Fig. 5) was analysed under dark conditions. The built-in potential was estimated at the intersection point of the photo- and dark characteristics of the electron only devices.25 The electron mobilities calculated based on the above analysis are given in Table 1.
 Fig. 5  SCLC analysis for electron only devices incorporating ZnO, TiO2, ZnO/RGO, TiO2/RGO and BCP as the ETL. 
With regard to the charge mobilities of PTB7:PC70BM devices, the hole mobility of PTB7:PC70BM has been reported to be two orders of magnitude lower than its electron mobility.24 Such an imbalance in the charge mobilities usually leads to the build up of charges in the active layer and hence charge recombination which results in a low FF and Jsc. In the case of the devices studied in this work, the SCLC analysis indicates that the electron mobility is decreased upon the incorporation of RGO compared to metal oxide only as well as BCP only based electron only devices. Furthermore, the values observed here (3.7–4.5 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1) are also an order of magnitude lower than those reported on solution processed ETLs.26 Although an order of magnitude reduction in electron mobility can at first appear to be detrimental to the device performance, it is noted here that the hole mobility of PTB7:PC70BM as previously reported by us (∼1 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1)6 as well as Zhou et al.24 is ∼10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1. Therefore, the reduction in the electron mobility is beneficial in achieving a balanced charge management/extraction. This balanced charge extraction property also explains the improvements in FF (approaching 68%) and Jsc (exceeding 15 mA cm−2 in the case of ZnO/RGO and ∼15 mA cm−2 for TiO2/RGO) upon the incorporation of RGO to the metal oxide. We note that the balanced charge extraction achieved in this work can be widely utilised for other active material systems in organic photovoltaics. Although the reduction in electron mobilities appears to contradict the expectation of an enhanced mobility with graphene-like structures, we note that in this case, the graphene is formed through a reduction of graphene oxide in the presence of the metal oxide. As a result, the metal oxides are expected to be doped further leading to lower charge mobility.
Furthermore, it is noted here that the dark characteristics obtained for the electron only devices indicate an initial linear behaviour prior to the onset of SCLC indicating that an Ohmic contact has been formed which supports the observed device characteristics. Taking into consideration the following facts: (i) graphene is known to form Ohmic contacts with most metals, (ii) the RGO in our nanohybrids forms core–shell structures with RGO forming the shell and (iii) the charge extraction properties are improved upon the incorporation of RGO to metal oxides, the nanoscale engineering carried out here is considered to be a new way of looking at forming solution processable, universal low work function contacts especially for solution processable optoelectronic devices in general.
4 Conclusions
In conclusion, novel solution processable metal oxide/reduced graphene oxide nanohybrid layers have been tested as electron transport layers for polymer solar cells. The results obtained indicate that the incorporation of graphene oxide to form reduced graphene oxides with metal oxides leads to enhanced device performance over and above those observed for devices incorporating metal oxide (only) transport layers, indicating the beneficial nature of such complementary systems for electron extraction. Furthermore, the performance of the devices incorporating these nanohybrid layers is also observed to be comparable to the best performing devices utilizing thermally evaporated BCP as the ETL. The PCEs obtained in this work for the PTB7:PC70BM active layer combined with the solution processed metal oxide/RGO ETLs (∼7.4 to 7.5%) are also noted to be superior to those of inverted PTB7:PC70BM devices with metal oxide ETLs where PCEs of ∼7.2% or less are reported in the literature.10 This enhancement is observed to be driven mainly through an improved short circuit current density approaching 15 mA cm−2 which indicates an efficient charge extraction process. Combined with the added advantage of solution processability, the high performances achieved over relatively large areas with these nanohybrid layers indicate a promising future towards all solution processed polymer solar cells.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank the E.ON International Research Initiative and the Surrey Knowledge Transfer Account for funding the work described here. The authors are also grateful to EPSRC for the Postdoctoral Fellowships (I. J. and M. B.), the University of Surrey for the Overseas Research Student Scholarship and the University Research Student Scholarships (ORS/URS) (D. D.) and the South East Physics Network for the Scholarship (R. P.).
Notes and references
A. A. D. T. Adikaari, D. M. N. M. Dissanayake and S. R. P. Silva, IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron., 2010, 16, 1595 CrossRef .
N. A. Nismy, K. D. G. I. Jayawardena, A. A. D. T. Adikaari and S. R. P. Silva, 
            et al.
          , Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3796 CAS .
S. H. Park, A. Roy, S. Beaupre, S. Cho, N. Coates, J. S. Moon, D. Moses, M. Leclerc, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 297 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liang, Z. Xu, J. Xia, S.-T. Tsai, Y. Wu, G. Li, C. Ray and L. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E135 CrossRef CAS .
L. Dou, J. You, J. Yang, C.-C. Chen, Y. He, S. Murase, T. Moriarty, K. Emery, G. Li and Y. Yang, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 180 CrossRef CAS .
G. D. M. R. Dabera, 
            et al.
          , ACS Nano, 2013, 22, 556 CrossRef .
J. Peet, J. Y. Kim, N. E. Coates, W. L. Ma, D. Moses, A. J. Heeger and G. C. Bazan, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 497–500 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, V. Shrotriya, J. Huang, Y. Yao, T. Moriarty, K. Emery and Y. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 864–868 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Kim, S. H. Kim, H.-H. Lee, W. Ma, X. Gong and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 572 CrossRef CAS .
J. You, C.-C. Chen, L. Dou, S. Murase, H.-S. Duan, S. A. Hawks, T. Xu, H. J. Son, L. Yu, G. Li and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5267 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. Nismy, A. A. D. T. Adikaari and S. R. P. Silva, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 033105 CrossRef .
S. J. Han, A. A. D. T. Adikaari, K. D. G. I. Jayawardena, N. A. Nismy and S. R. P. Silva, J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 112, 066103 CrossRef .
M. Vogel, S. Doka, Ch. Breyer, M. Ch. Lux-Steiner and K. Fostiropoulos, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 163501 CrossRef .
Z. He, C. Zhong, S. Su, M. Xu, H. Wu and Y. Cao, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 591–595 Search PubMed .
S. Cho, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1941 CrossRef CAS .
H. Park, j. A. Rowehl, K. K. Kim, V. Bulovic and J. Kong, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 505204 CrossRef .
I. P. Murray, 
            et al.
          , J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 3006 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Wang, J. K. Kim, J. H. Seo, I. Park, B. H. Hong, J. H. Park and A. J. Heeger, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 2874 CrossRef CAS .
X. Dang, H. Yi, M.-H. Ham, J. Qi, D. S. Yun, R. Ladewski, M. S. Strano, P. T. Hammond and A. M. Belcher, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 377–384 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Ng, A. Iwase, A. Kudo and R. Amal, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2607–2612 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Ng, I. V. Lightcap, K. Goodwin, M. Matsumura and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2222–2227 CrossRef CAS .
D. I. Son, B. W. Kwon, D. H. Park, W.-S. Seo, Y. Yi, B. Angadi, C.-L. Lee and W. K. Choi, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 465–471 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Zhou, 
            et al.
          , Science, 2012, 336, 327–332 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. Zhou, Y. Zhang, J. Seifter, S. D. Collins, C. Luo, G. C. Bazan, T.-Q. Nguyen and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1646 CrossRef .
N. M. Dissanayake and Z. H. Zhong, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 286 CrossRef CAS .
Z. He, C. Zhong, X. Huang, W.-Y. Wong, H. Wu, L. Chen, S. Su and Y. Cao, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4636 CrossRef CAS .
W. S. Hummers and R. E. Offeman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1958, 80, 1339 CrossRef CAS .
W. Fan, Q. Lai, Q. Zhang and Y. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 10694 CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic of the energy levels of ITO, PEDOT:PSS, PTB7, PC70BM, ZnO, TiO2, RGO, BCP and Al, (b) schematic of the device architecture employed. The boxed areas in (b) indicate the different solution processed layers used in the device.	 

 	Fig. 2  AFM scans of (a) ZnO, (b) ZnO/RGO, (c) TiO2, (d) TiO2/RGO and (e) 4 nm thick BCP layer on PTB7:PC70BM. The scale bars on the figures indicate 750 nm. All thin films were observed to possess very low surface roughness values of 3.03 nm (for ZnO), 3.34 nm (for ZnO/RGO), 2.46 (for TiO2) and 3.22 nm (for TiO2/RGO) which are similar to the surface roughness of 4 nm BCP (2.47 nm) on the active layer.	 

 	Fig. 3  Transmission electron micrographs of (a) ZnO/RGO and (b) TiO2/RGO nanohybrids utilised in the device fabrication. The core–shell nature of the metal oxide/RGO nanostructures is evident in the above micrographs with the RGO forming a shell around the ZnO and TiO2 nanoparticles.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) J–V characteristics of the photovoltaic devices fabricated using different ETLs, (b) the IPCE of the devices measured in (a) and (b) SCLC analysis for electron only devices incorporating ZnO, TiO2, ZnO/RGO, TiO2/RGO and BCP as the ETL.	 

ZnO	0.74	14.90	66.9	7.39	5.24	5.3 × 10−4
ZnO/RGO	0.72	15.19	68.6	7.50	4.92	3.7 × 10−4
TiO2	0.74	14.84	65.7	7.22	5.47	4.9 × 10−4
TiO2/RGO	0.74	14.99	67.2	7.46	5.41	4.5 × 10−4
BCP	0.74	14.92	67.7	7.47	5.48	5.3 × 10−4

 		 

 	Fig. 5  SCLC analysis for electron only devices incorporating ZnO, TiO2, ZnO/RGO, TiO2/RGO and BCP as the ETL.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
