Comprehensive review on material requirements, present status, and future prospects for building-integrated semitransparent photovoltaics (BISTPV)  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6TA01016D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6TA01016D
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 8512-8540Comprehensive review on material requirements, present status, and future prospects for building-integrated semitransparent photovoltaics (BISTPV)

        
          
            Muhammad 
            Saifullah
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Jihye 
            Gwak
          
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Jae Ho 
            Yun
          
          
        
      *ab
aUniversity of Science & Technology, Yuseong-Gu, Daejeon, 305-350, Korea
bPhotovoltaic Laboratory, Korea Institute of Energy Research, Yuseong-Gu, Daejeon, 305-343, Korea. E-mail: yunjh92@kier.re.kr
Received 
      1st February 2016
    , Accepted 25th April 2016First published on 26th April 2016AbstractPhotovoltaics (PV) is a potential alternative to the world's quickly depleting fossil fuel and can be a mean of curtailing green-house gas emissions as well. In regions in which there is a shortage of free land and no fossil fuel reserves, building-integrated photovoltaics with an additional attribute of semitransparency (BISTPV) can help to realize sustainable economic growth. The net electricity savings in dwellings and commercial edifices can be substantially enhanced by using BISTPV shrewdly. In addition to building applications, semitransparent (ST) solar cells can be used in yacht hatches, signboards on express-ways, automobiles, electronic displays, and other applications. It is anticipated that in the foreseeable future, dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs), amorphous silicon (a-Si:H) solar cells, and chalcopyrite solar cells based BISTPV modules will replace aesthetically repulsive c-Si-based ST modules, which are currently the key player in the BIPV market. DSSCs are superior to a-Si:H and chalcopyrite-based PV in terms of the appropriate choice of dyes, for which wavelengths that have a low eye sensitivity factor can be selectively harnessed. The transparency, or ability to see-through, can be further increased by making use of highly transparent photoanodes and counter electrodes. However, the stability issues that are associated with DSSCs have halted their propagation to the BIPV market. In contrast, ST a-Si:H solar cells have been well developed on a laboratory scale, and ST panels made by various companies are available on the market. Apart from ST DSSCs and a-Si:H solar cells, which have evolved considerably, chalcopyrite STPV has only recently started the journey of its development on a laboratory scale although it has a large potential for BISTPV. Therefore, considerable efforts must be made for it to emerge in the BIPV market. This article will present a detailed review of the material requirements for fabricating ST dye-sensitized-, amorphous silicon (a-Si:H)-, and chalcopyrite-based solar cells, especially for BIPV applications. Furthermore, the present status and future prospects of semitransparent photovoltaics (STPV) and strategies to enhance photocurrent in STPV will also be discussed.Muhammad SaifullahMuhammad Saifullah is currently a doctoral student at the Korea Institute of Energy Research (KIER) campus, University of Science and Technology (UST), South Korea. He received BS and MS degrees at the University of Agriculture and Pakistan Institute of Engineering and Applied Sciences, respectively, in Pakistan. Before joining UST as a doctoral student, he worked as a researcher at the Pakistan Institute of Nuclear Science and Technology, Pakistan for around three years. At present, he is working on semitransparent chalcopyrite-based solar cells.Jihye GwakJihye Gwak is currently a principal researcher of the Photovoltaic Laboratory at KIER as well as a professor of the Renewable Energy Engineering major at UST. After she received her BS and MS degrees in Chemistry from Ewha Womans University, she joined Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology (SAIT). After 2 years working at SAIT, she moved to France and was awarded a Ph.D. from Université Montpellier II in 2003. She also worked in the Eco-materials Center at the National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS), Tsukuba in Japan for 2 years, and joined KIER in 2005. She has been working on compound solar cells since 2009. Her main research interest is CIGS-based thin film solar cells.Jae Ho YunJae Ho Yun is a principal researcher at the Photovoltaic Laboratory at KIER as well as a professor of the Renewable Energy Engineering major at UST. He has been working on solar cells since 1997. In 2003, he joined KIER after he received his BS and MS degrees in Materials Engineering from the Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST) and a Ph.D. from the same institution in 2004, based on the research of CdTe compound solar cells. He focused on CIGS thin film solar cells after joining KIER. He is also interested in CZTSSe as well as earth-abundant material-based solar cells.
1. Introduction
Global concerns over the continuous increase of green-house gases (GHGs) over the past few decades have alarmed policy makers, academics, and even the general public; therefore, serious effort has already begun to exploit renewable energy resources as a replacement of fossil fuels, which are the main cause of global warming. Most of the states in Europe have energy related per capita CO2 emissions in the range of 1 to 3 tons.1 Global annual CO2 equivalent emissions from the power industry were 10.9 gigatons in 2005, which are expected to increase to 18.7 gigatons per year by 2030.2 The European Union has set the target of reducing GHG emissions by 20% by 2020 from its emission levels in 1990.3 More specifically, according to the agreement of COP21, Paris, global warming will be kept well below 2 °C by reducing GHG emissions.4 The IEA reported that use of renewable energy including photovoltaics (PV) and the wind would be the main strategy for solving the global warming issue.5
Furthermore, countries with deficient natural resources must import oil, coal, and gas to meet their energy requirements. Therefore, renewable energy is extremely important to eliminate foreign dependence and for sustainable economic growth. The solar energy received by the earth every year is 1.5 × 1018 kW h, which is 10000 times larger than its annual requirement.6 Thus, the exploitation of solar radiation that reaches the earth's surface can be a major source of power in the near future. In fact, grid parity has already been realized in a few parts of Europe.7,8 It is expected that in the foreseeable future, owing to the advent of cheaper solar cell materials and mass scale production, energy payback time will reduce to 5 years.9 The extent of interest in PV as a potential clean energy resource can be taken from the fact that by the end of 2014, PV installations mounted to 177 GW (a 670% increase over the past five years). Only in 2014, PV modules with an electricity generation capacity of 38.7 GW were installed.10 Mercom Capital Group has forecasted 57.4 GW of PV installations in 2015.11
While the accumulated installation capacity increases, a shortage of installation sites would be a critical concern to a standalone PV, which is becoming more crucial especially in energy glutton metropolitan areas, where the availability of free space is limited. This issue can be resolved by making PV a part of commercial and domestic buildings, and such PV can generally be called building photovoltaics (BPV). Raugei and Frankl (2009) have mentioned BPV as one of the four factors that are needed to accelerate widespread PV propagation in the near future and the other three factors are cost reduction, efficiency enhancement, and development of large energy storage systems.12 BPV has the added advantage of reducing line losses by producing electricity at the same place, where it is required. This BPV connected to the grid can act as mini dispatchable power generators. Prosumer-type PV systems are unraveled in areas in which urban feeders peak in the day-time because this approach can help in peak shaving. Jardim et al. (2008) used the effective load carrying capacity (ELCC) for tactical positioning of BPV in priority areas, where they can provide the most benefit.13 Theoretically, for a given value of PV penetration level, the region with the highest value of ELCC should have the highest priority for installing PV. ELCC can be calculated using eqn (1):13 (1)where peakC (kW) and peakCPV (kW) are the historic demand value and historic demand value minus PV generation, respectively, and PV is the capacity of the installed modules.
1.1. Categorization of building photovoltaics
BPV can be broadly categorized into building-attached photovoltaics (BAPV) and building-integrated photovoltaics (BIPV). BAPV are mounted on a roof-top in the form of a standoff array or rack-mounted array. Such an installation can be accomplished after the completion of the building construction.14 However, BIPV should be rigorously designed and integrated into the building structure from the first day, in such a way that it could receive sufficient exposure from the sun and additionally meet aesthetic standards.15 BIPV can serve as awnings,16 balustrades on balconies,15 curtain walls, windows, ventilated/non-ventilated facades,16,17 atria,16 canopies, and skylights, therefore, it can aid in lowering the material and labor costs.14 A straightforward distinction between BIPV and BAPV can be made on the basis of whether the removal of the PV component affects the functioning of the building. If the functioning is muddled, it means the PV component is the active part of the envelope, which makes it BIPV, otherwise, it will be BAPV.
With the current increase in urbanization, more high-rise buildings are being built. For example, in Japan, the annual rate of increase in the electricity demand for commercial buildings is 1.6%, which is higher than the domestic (1.4%), industrial (−0.5%), and transportation sector (0.2%).18 Although with each passing day, energy-efficient systems are coming into the market, the energy consumption in commercial buildings is increasing due to the increasing floor area. This change necessitates the introduction of novel strategies for reducing electricity usage, especially in commercial sector buildings. The roof areas of these skyscrapers are much smaller than the side areas, thus, BIPV can be more beneficial than BAPV in such a situation. Moreover, this advantage will help in developing more harmonious architectures compared to BAPV. BIPV can promote thermal insulation and shielding against electro-smog (which is important in areas of sensitive electrical activity). According to the CEO of IBC SOLAR, “BIPV represents great contemporary, innovative potential, an excellent way for the buildings of the future to be truly green”.15 According to Pike Research Report, the BIPV installed capacity will increase to 4.6 GW by 2017.19
1.2. Instigation for semitransparent PV
To make PV an integral part of curtain walls, skylights, awnings, and other related structures, semitransparency is a precondition. Such an approach will not only trim down the construction and material cost but also reduce the electricity that is required by interior lighting and heating loads because of solar radiation penetration through building-integrated semitransparent photovoltaics (BISTPV). Apart from the economic aspect, natural daylight would be beneficial for the personnel working inside the building. Moreover, a window, atrium, balustrade, or skylight integrated with STPV can also be a source of electricity. On the other hand, in winter, heat loss through BISTPV can be curtailed by combining an electrochromic assembly with BISTPV (Section 7). In modern day edifices, BISTPV can have an enormous impact on the net electricity consumption of the buildings.1 For example, in Hong Kong, the building stock in the commercial sector accounts for 2/3 of the total electricity used, in which a major portion is attributed to air conditioning and artificial lighting.20 Under such circumstances, STPV could be exploited well. It would be better to say that semitransparency is a feature of PV, which frees it from the confines of roof/land and allows it to be utilized in many diverse building-related situations and other applications.
1.3. Factors that are important toward energy-efficient buildings
The effects of PV window design and many other parameters on the energy efficiency of buildings have been scrutinized in various studies. To maximize the positive effect of fenestration integrated with PV (FIPV) on the overall electricity demand of a structure, factors such as the window-to-wall ratio,21 orientation (azimuth, tilt angle, and building self-shading),16,22,23 light dimming control in relation to natural light,21,22,24 PV module temperature, insulation coverage,25 fresh air infiltration,16 mass of the floor and ceiling,16 glazing,16 solar heat gain coefficient,26 conversion efficiency,26 and transparency21,25 should be considered according to the surrounding climatic conditions.25
For a specific zone in the building, the ratio of the area of FIPV compared to the total area exposed to the solar radiation (FIPV/TEA) along with its transparency (T) (%) is important to control the incoming solar cell radiation. FIPV/TEA is in fact the window-to-wall ratio (WWR) (%), which is often used in the literature. WWR and T can be important in reducing the heating, cooling, and lighting loads. Aside from these concerns, electricity produced from PV will also reduce the net electricity that is required. Yoon et al. (2011) reported that in Korea (latitude = 37°30′ north and longitude = 127°12′ east), with a WWR of 50%, the energy savings were maximal in the south-east zone, when the PV transparency was 10%, whereas the savings were minimal in the north-east, south-west, and south-east zones, where the transmittance was fixed at 60%.27 Apart from the WWR and transmittance, automatic control of artificial light in response to interior day-light can also have a substantial influence on the total electricity consumption. For example, Miyazaki et al. (2005) mentioned that when T varied from 10 to 80% with a fixed WWR of 30% with dimming control, the electricity consumption decreased by ∼35%. However, without the dimming control, with an increase in the FIPV T from 10 to 80% for a fixed value of WWR (50%), the percentage decrease in electricity consumption became 23.6%.21 For the same zone, a T of 80% and 40% was found to be optimum for a WWR of 30% and 50%, respectively, which indicates that the transmittance and WWR are interdependent parameters. A variation in T with a fixed WWR without dimming control resulted in an increase in electricity consumption. This relationship manifests that having a dimming control system that responds to the interior lighting conditions could substantially reduce the overall electricity usage. For a case study in Hong Kong by Li et al. (2009), installation of semitransparent FIPV brought down the annual power expenditure of a building by 12% when dimming control was also included.24
The heating and cooling demands of a zone depend on its orientation as well because the orientation governs the solar gain.16 For the case study in Japan, with a fixed WWR of 50%, when T varied from 10 to 80%, the power used decreased by 36% for the southern zone and 21% for the northern zone. Thus, if the fenestrations are arranged on different walls of the same zone, then WWR and T should be optimized with respect to all of the respective wall orientations. The electricity savings can be up to 55% compared with the standard model case, if WWR and T are optimized with regard to the zone orientation.21 In another study, the performance measurement of FIPV in conjunction with the theoretical study showed that the electricity generation can be boosted by 47% upon changing the structure's azimuth angle and minimizing the projection of the shading self-mass. However, the azimuth angle was found to be more dominating in enhancing the power output than the building's self-shadow.23 It is important to realize that there is no standard value of T that the PV module should have for it to be used in the BIPV application, and instead, many factors, such as orientation, WWR, and climate, taken together, will decide the appropriate value.21
The infiltration level is also relatively important for determining the total electricity demand of a structure. In Mediterranean climates (warm), low infiltration with highly transparent FIPV causes a high cooling demand and thus a high overall electricity demand. For a dwelling, the module transparency will remain the same once it is installed, thus, in such a case, regulating the infiltration level can reduce the electricity demand.16 Similarly, the glazing material on top of the FIPV will impede the passage of the IR portion of the solar spectrum and consequently, the cooling demand will be curtailed.16 In another investigation on FIPV for commercial edifices/dwelling in cold regions, transparent insulation was applied to allow solar radiation to penetrate during the daytime and stop heat dissipation during the night. On the other hand, when the temperatures were moderate, the insulation stopped the excessive solar intake during the day and prevented heat loss during the night. Under the optimized conditions, the electricity required for heating was reduced by 8.7% using FIPV that had 50% transmittance.25 The heat transfer process through the BISTPV module was investigated by Fung et al. (2008).28 It was observed that the net solar heat gain strongly follows the pattern of solar radiation heat transfer rather than the conductive heat transfer. Additionally, the net heat gain through the module weakly relied on the solar cell efficiency and module thickness, whereas it was significantly influenced by the orientation and area covered by the solar cell in the module. There are several examples in which STPV modules have been employed for building applications.29–33 Various other applications of STPV modules can be found elsewhere.34–46
1.4. Environmental impact of BISTPV
The effect of STPV on the reduction of GHG emissions is summarized in Table 1. These data show that the integration of ST solar cells into windows, facades, skylights, awnings, and other structures in commercial sector buildings can lead to a considerable reduction in GHG emissions. Given that the life of a building is usually 40–50 years, these BISTPV can provide enormous environmental benefits.
Table 1 Effect of STPV module on the GHG and particulate emissions




Solar cell type
Structure type
Reduction in GHG and particulate emissions


CO2 (ton)
SO2 (ton)
NOx (ton)
Particulate (ton)




Multi-crystalline Si solar cell-based ST module22
Atrium (50 m2)
44.42
0.14
0.08
0.01


a-Si:H solar cell-based ST module24
Windows of 40-storey building (WWR = 43%)
852.00
2.62
1.15
0.11




1.5. Future prospects
As discussed earlier, STPV can have a huge impact on the GHG emissions and electricity demand of a building. A report by Pike Research predicts that the BIPV installed capacity will reach 2.4 GW in 2016 (an increase of 10-fold compared with its level in 2010).46 This portended increase in BIPV installations might be because the EU nations will ensure designing net zero-energy edifices (i.e., a building should generate its own electricity from renewable energy resources, which should be almost equivalent to the energy consumed by the occupants) by December, 2020.47,48 The expected enormous growth in the installed BIPV volume will result in the generation of almost $4 billion in revenue per annum.46 In contrast to c-Si based rooftop BIPV (i.e., already a 67% contribution in the global BIPV market at present), the curtain wall BIPV will flourish more in the subsequent years, as stated in the Transparency Market Research Report. In addition, the thin-film-based BIPV market share has been forecasted to reach 19% of the market share.49 In fact, the former prediction reinforces the latter forecast. The attribute of ST in solar modules can undoubtedly help to accomplish the anticipated share of thin-film-based BIPV and help in the realization of zero-energy edifices.
Aside from crystalline silicon, which is already a leader in the BIPV market, thin-film based BISTPV has enormous potential for obtaining a substantial portion of the BIPV market due to its multifaceted applications. Among the various solar cell technologies, dye-sensitized-, amorphous silicon (a-Si:H)-, and Cu(In,Ga)Se2 (CIGSe)-based solar cells have more favorable traits for their adoption in the BISTPV market. Perovskite solar cells, a descendant of DSSCs, which recently have achieved record efficiency of 22.1%, also have favorable attributes for BISTPV applications.50 In contrast to ST a-Si:H solar cells, which have already been commercialized, DSSC-based ST photovoltaics are still in the developmental stage. Some practical demonstrations of the applicability of ST DSSCs in BIPV have already been shown, which points to the fact that progress is going in the right direction. On the other hand, CIGSe-based STPV is still in its infancy although CIGSe-based solar cells have achieved more than 22% conversion efficiency.50 More details about each of these solar cell types from a materials requirement perspective and their present status on a laboratory scale will be discussed in their respective sections.
2. Semitransparent photovoltaics
This section will discretely discuss the possible semitransparency introduction pathways in PV cells and PV modules.
2.1. ST solar cells
ST solar cells can be categorized into aperture-type solar cells and penetration-type solar cells.

2.1.1. Aperture-type solar cell. 
This type of ST solar cell is made by forming micro-holes in the structure of the cell. This type of solar cell was also called the punch-through type of solar cell by Hamakawa (1990).51 This approach will render some parts of the solar cell to convert sunlight into electricity, while the other regions, which do not have any active film, will allow the light to pass through. The transparency of such cells depends on the integrated holes/uncovered area (Fig. 1a). In the thin-film based PV, holes of any shape and pattern can be created by laser scribing52,53 or by chemical etching.52 However, for making crystalline silicon-based STPV, mechanical saw dicing is required.54–57 Laser patterning can produce uniformly distributed micro-holes in the cell, but it takes a long time to cover a small-area, whereas chemical etching is fast but its resolution depends on the photo-resist.52 Etchants are mostly strong acids, which could have environmental issues. Kuhn et al. (1999) used a precision dicing saw to create grooves on the front and back side of the Czochralski (Cz) silicon, and the intersection of these grooves gave rise to micro-holes (dia: 200 μm), as is shown in Fig. 1b.54 A similar strategy has also been beneficial, which is to deposit amorphous silicon solar cell on a Microshade™ substrate (which consists of inclined micro-perforations) as shown by the schematic in Fig. 1c. This cell will act as an electricity generator with the added advantage of solar shading.58 These microhole-assisted strategies might be feasible for solid-state solar cells with certain limitations but cannot be employed to attain visibility in the dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC) due to its different working principle.
 Fig. 1  (a) Laser patterned amorphous silicon solar cell (reprinted with permission),52 (b) SEM image of Czochralski silicon with micro-holes created through mechanical dicing (reprinted with permission),54 and (c) schematic of the MicroShade™ substrate (perforated with inclined holes) deposited with an amorphous silicon solar cell. 


2.1.2. Penetration-type solar cell. 
The view-through type of solar cell can also be made by simply reducing the thickness of the photoactive film. In this way, a portion of the solar spectrum in the visible range will be partially harvested by the absorber and the remainder of the visible solar spectrum will pass through without any interaction and, thus, will impart semitransparency to the solar cell. The degree of transparency will depend on how much of visible part of the solar spectrum can pass through, which in turn will depend on the absorber's thickness. Moon et al. (2014) fabricated a translucent Cu(In,Ga)S2 (CIGS) solar cell using the same strategy for a window application.59 The advantage of the penetration-type solar cell over the aperture-type solar cell is that in the former the power output is not strongly influenced by the change in the transparency. Using this approach, semitransparency can be introduced in all sorts of thin-film solar cells.

2.2. ST module
ST modules can be produced by distributing micro-solar cells all over the substrate with a predefined inter-cell distance that is predetermined based on the desired transparency. In a study by Yoon et al. (2008), microcells were prepared on (111) Czochralski Si wafer by photolithography and then removed using an elastomeric stamp. In a subsequent process, these microcells were transferred/printed to the substrate.60 The image of the final ST mini module can be seen in Fig. 2a. In another exploration, micro-spherical solar cells were prepared on a transparent substrate to attain semitransparency. These 3D power generators can utilize direct, diffuse, and reflected light unlike planar cells, thus they remain active most of the day time. A module (Fig. 2c) that contains 361 individual cells (c-Si based) with only a 9.18% surface coverage produced 100.7 mW cm−2.61 These 3D solar cells can be very effective in preparing semitransparent modules for BIPV applications, but this approach requires sophisticated technology to produce cells at the high rate and may have low throughput. Another variation of this type is the arrangement of large-area solar cells rather than microcells on large transparent supports separated by an inter-cell gap of 3 to 50 mm, depending on the required transparency.2,62 Such modules might not be aesthetically appealing because of opaque large-area cells. However, both of these modules have superiority in that they are colored neutral. However, the exploitation of the penetration-type ST solar cells in such modules can make their appearance slightly pleasing.
 Fig. 2  (a) Mono-crystalline microcells produced by photolithography and printed on a substrate with a controllable inter-cell distance (reprinted with permission),60 (b) diffused solar cell composed of a light diffusive plate (composite of pristine polycarbonate resin and commercial diffusive nanoparticles (ITC-30)) sandwiched between two glass plates (reprinted with permission),63 and (c) single crystal spherical solar cells on a flexible substrate (reprinted with permission).61 
An ST module can also be fabricated by a combination of a diffusive solar cell window (DSCW) and an ordinary high-efficiency solar cell. The DSCW is built by sandwiching a diffusive nanocomposite plate between the two light-guiding layers (Fig. 2b). The outer two plates trap the light inside the diffusive nanocomposite plate owing to their different refractive indexes. This assembly scatters most of the incident light in the lateral direction, and the extent of light scattering depends on the concentration of diffusive nanoparticles in the composite. The higher the density of nanoparticles is in the composite, the more the light will scatter laterally and, hence, the smaller will be the transparency. Sidewise scattered light can be harvested by gluing the solar cells on the edges of the DSCW. In the literature, this type of ST module has been referred to as diffused solar cell (DSC). DSC can also be regarded as a type of concentrated solar cell. These so-called DSC have been placed under the category of ST module because multiple cells could be required to surround the DSC window. Detailed information on the design of a DSC can be obtained elsewhere.63 The idea behind the DSC originated from luminescence/organic solar concentrator-based photovoltaics, which also works on a somewhat similar principle. The only difference here is that the scattering centers are replaced with fluorescent dye molecules, which absorb a wide spectrum of light and re-emit it in a narrow range of wavelengths. These dyes are dispersed in a transparent waveguide, which directs the emitted photons to the solar cells adjoined at the edges.64 These organic dyes in the DSC can be substituted by inorganic luminescent materials such as CaAlSiN3:Eu2+65 and TiO2/PMMA nanocomposite,66 which has already shown potential in this domain.
In the remainder of this article, the important material aspects to realize ST DSSCs, perovskite solar cells, a-Si:H solar cells, and chalcopyrite solar cells will be illustrated. Only penetration-type solar cells will be emphasized because they are more aesthetically appealing, easier to fabricate, and can be utilized in many other niche applications besides building integration.
The transparency of a solar cell can be determined by the ISO standard method (ISO 9050:2003),67 which is as follows:68 (2)where τ(λ) is the solar cell transmittance, Dλ is the spectral distribution of light incident on the solar cell (AM1.5 in our case), V(λ) is the eye sensitivity factor, and Δλ is the step size in the wavelength. Different ways of citing a cell's visible transparency have been adopted in different studies (see Tables 3–5). In order to be able to compare the T values of the cells prepared by the different groups, it is recommended to use eqn (2), which takes into account a very important factor with regard to ST solar cells, i.e., eye sensitivity response.
3. Dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC)
The dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC) also known as the Grätzel cell can be of great utility in the BISTPV due to the potential for low cost,69 eco-friendly property, transparency,27 color control,70 efficiency improvement under low light conditions, and sustained efficiency at high-angle solar incidence.71 DSSC is made by a non-vacuum approach, which renders its fabrication process smoothly adaptable to mass scale production. DSSC consists of the photoanode, counter electrode (CE), and electrolyte. Fabrication of the photoanode starts with the deposition of transparent conducting oxide (TCO) on glass by sputtering. Afterwards, mesoporous TiO2 is coated on the TCO-glass by the screen printing of TiO2 paste.72,73 Later, mesoporous TiO2-coated TCO-glass is sensitized with the dye molecules (S). For making a CE, Pt is usually coated by depositing Pt precursor paste by screen printing, coating drops of Pt precursor solution by spin coating,72 or by sputtering of Pt target on FTO-glass.74 In the end, the photoanode and CE are joined together, and the electrolyte is filled through the hole that is present in the CE, which is sealed in the end.75 A schematic for the DSSC is shown in Fig. 3. Typically, in a DSSC, light enters the cell from the photoanode side, however, light could also penetrate the cell from the CE side if its transmittance is comparable to or better than that of the photoanode. The energetics and kinetics of the reaction should be carefully considered, when choosing materials for the DSSC. More in-depth details on the working principle of each component of the DSSC can be found in the reviews by Hagfeldt et al. (2010),76 Kong et al. (2007),77 and Baxter (2012).78
 Fig. 3  Schematic for the DSSC (reprinted with permission).79 
TiO2, due to its lower conduction band level, collects electrons from the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of the excited dye molecules. The kinetics of this process should be in such a way that the electrons during migration to the TiO2 should not recombine with the oxidized dye molecule or oxidized redox species. Electrons from the TiO2 conduction band are later delivered to the external circuit through the TCO. The transparency of a DSSC depends on the TiO2 particle size, the thickness of the TiO2 layer, the concentration of the dye, the nature of the dye, the CE material, and the CE thickness.
3.1. Choice of photoanode
A layer that is few microns thick and that is made with TiO2 particles with sizes of 15–20 nm has a transparency of more than 75% in the visible range and, therefore, is an appropriate choice for a semitransparent DSSC.80 In contrast, relatively thick TiO2 film made with relatively large particles is good in terms of enhancing the Jsc by diffusive scattering but is not suited for imparting translucency to the solar cell.80,81 The microstructure of the TiO2 film can be controlled by its synthesis parameters such as the precursor type, temperature and pH of the hydrothermal process, degree of peptization, amount of binder, and the sintering temperature and time.81 Electron collection by TiO2 has been further improved by TiCl4 post treatment owing to particles accumulation at the interparticle neck, which enhances the electron percolation from one particle to another.81 Transmittance values of DSSCs with photoanodes having various thicknesses of the TiO2 layer are given in Table 2.27 Apart from reducing the TiO2 thickness, the transmittance of TiO2 can be further improved by doping it with SiO2 during a hydrothermal process (see Table 2). The ionic radius of Si4+ is smaller than that of Ti4+, which results in an increase in the bandgap. This modification resulted in a conversion efficiency of 9.13% (2.87% higher than the TiO2 photoanode-based DSSC efficiency) with 7 wt% SiO2 doping in TiO2 because of the reduced TiO2 catalytic activity, fewer recombinations, and relatively more dye loading.82 A TCO glass substrate with vertically grown ZnO nanowires has also been used as a photoanode in a DSSC.83–86 An efficiency of 7% has been achieved using the ZnO nanowire-based photoelectrode.87 Nanowires have a low surface area compared with a mesoporous TiO2 layer, therefore, a sensitizer with a high molar extinction coefficient can be used only to gain photocurrent that is comparable to a TiO2 photoanode-based DSSC. However, the advantage is that because of the large space between the nanowires, solid-state electrolytes can be used. From the viewpoint of semitransparency, the inter-distance between the nanowires and the length of the nanowires can be modulated to achieve the required transparency.
Table 2 Transmittance values of DSSCs with different thicknesses of TiO2 layer in the photoanode, SiO2 doped TiO2 photoanode, and Pt-based CE




Component type
Material type
Thickness/deposition time
Averaged transmittance





a Thickness/deposition time is unavailable.





DSSC solar cell
TiO2 (ref. 27)
8.13 μm
24.17% (300–800 nm)


16.50 μm
19.63% (300–800 nm)


32.20 μm
13.31% (300–800 nm)


Photoanode
7% SiO2 in TiO2 (ref. 82)
10.00 μm
46.92% (300–800 nm)


Counter electrode
Pt74
N.A.a
62.20% (300–800 nm)


Graphene-coated glass88
1 min
79.21% (200–750 nm)


20 min
61.27% (200–750 nm)




A sensitizer (composed of photoactive organic molecules) is also of vital importance to control the transparency of DSSCs. For ST DSSCs, those dyes will be most suitable that have an absorption peak with a minimum of overlap with the absorption maxima of the eye sensitivity curve (λmax = 555 nm).80Fig. 4 shows the cell's transparency (τv) (calculated using eqn (2)), eye sensitivity response (V(λ)), and short circuit current density (Jsc).74 The sharp decline in the transmittance from 90.5% to 12.7% while the wavelength changes from 500 nm to 600 nm (i.e., the high eye sensitivity region) shows that the human eye is more sensitive to this spectral range. Therefore, utilization of dyes that have a λmax above or below the 500–600 nm region can impart visible transparency to DSSCs. Such a phenomenon can be exploited more efficaciously in organic solar cells by the manipulation of excitons, where only ultraviolet (UV), near-infrared (NIR), or both will be converted to electricity, while the visible (Vis) portion will render transparency to the solar cell. Such excitonic PV structures, because of their absorption in the UV and NIR range, and non-absorption in the Vis region, can exhibit the theoretical and practical efficiency of 21% and 11%, respectively.89 NIR organic PV (OPV) with a transparency and efficiency of >65% and 1.3%, respectively, has been realized.90 OPV will not be discussed further in this review due to its exceptionally low stability under real world conditions. Readers interested in ST OPV can consult the excellent review article by Emmott et al. (2015).91
 Fig. 4  Plot that shows the cell transmittance (τv), human eye sensitivity response (V(λ)), and corresponding short circuit current density (Jsc) (reprinted with permission).74 
The second important factor is the possibility of dye molecules stacking through van der Waals interactions, when the dye's concentration increases beyond a certain level. Such molecular stacking can cause excitonic exchange with the molecules (difficulty in electron collection by TiO2), which is not beneficial for both inducing semitransparency and achieving high-efficiency. In the case of semitransparent DSSCs, a high concentration of dye can be retained by TiO2 without any adverse effect on the carrier collection if another dye (preferentially with a smaller structure) with a different λmax could be mixed. This method is known as cosensitization. Colonna et al. (2012) achieved 10% high Jsc in semitransparent DSSCs using the cosensitization concept compared to the sum of the Jsc of cells, when individual dyes were employed for sensitization.68

Fig. 5a shows that Y1 (the donor–π–acceptor dye) has a high absorbance in the UV region, whereas HSQ5 (modified squaraine dye) has absorption in both the UV and IR regions.74 Due to the high transmittance in the eye's peak sensitivity region in HSQ5, this dye in combination with Y1 can be exploited to form visibly transparent DSSCs. On the other hand bipyridine ruthenium N719, a commonly used dye, has a high absorbance in the eye peak sensitivity region and, therefore, cannot serve our purpose of achieving high semitransparency. Using this approach, a DSSC made with a mixture of Y1 and HSQ5 dyes exhibited an efficiency of 3.66% with a transmittance of over 60%.74 Both of the aforementioned points, i.e., cosensitization and selection of dyes with λmax above or below the spectral range of 500–600 nm, were employed in this device to achieve high visible transparency and efficiency. The physical appearance of this DSSC based on the dye cocktail approach is shown in Fig. 5b.
 Fig. 5  (a) Transmission curves for Y1 (donor–π–acceptor type dye), a cocktail of Y1 and HSQ5 (modified Squaraine dye), HSQ5, and bipyridine ruthenium N719 dye and (b) a photograph of a DSSC cell made with a mixture of Y1 and HSQ5 (reprinted with permission).74 
3.2. Selection of the counter electrode
The Pt electrode, due to its high reflectivity and low transmittance, precludes the DSSC with respect to being used in fenestration or other areas for which transparency is desired. A 2 nm thick Pt layer on fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) is the conventional CE material in a DSSC,92 but its thickness can be further be reduced to 0.5 nm without a significant decrease in the conversion efficiency.70 A 0.5 nm Pt layer has high transmittance in the visible region, which makes it an appropriate CE material for DSSC.70 The dilemma with Pt is its high price, possibly limited availability in the near future, and dissolution by a I−/I3− redox couple-based electrolyte, therefore, it is inevitable to explore new electrode materials as a replacement to Pt, considering that the electrolytes that are used in a DSSC are highly corrosive. Dodoo-Arhin et al. (2013) synthesized graphene by chemical vapor deposition and transferred it to a glass substrate.88 This graphene-coated glass was employed as a counter electrode, and an efficiency of 3.98% has been realized for the graphene coating time of 20 min. The transmittance values of graphene- and Pt-based CE can be found in Table 2. A high transmittance in UV as well as in the whole Vis region for graphene-coated glass compared to the Pt-based CE makes it a suitable choice as a CE for DSSCs in a bifacial configuration. A more detailed literature survey on the application of graphene as a CE can be found in the other reviews.93,94 Another study indicated that polyaniline (PANI) made by chemical deposition (CD) is a potent substitute for Pt because of its high transmittance in the wavelength range, where the dye absorbs, whereas it had a low transmittance in the whole spectral range when deposited by electrochemical deposition. The idea of the effectiveness of the PANI-based CE can be taken from its performance on rear-side illumination. A DSSC made with a CE based on PANI modified with 4-aminothiophenol deposited by CD showed a 4.15% efficiency on illumination from the CE side, whereas the rear side efficiency was 2.73% for the Pt CE-based DSSC.95 In another study, a DSSC using a PANI-based CE resulted in PV performance that was equivalent to that of the DSSC made using the Pt CE.96
There are many other explorations, in which DSSCs have been made using a CE prepared from in situ polymerization of polypyrrole (PPy) on FTO glass (η = 5.74%),97 PPy nanoparticles on FTO glass (η = 7.66%),98 PPy vapor phase polymerization on FTO glass (η = 4.4%)99 and nickel–fiber substrate (η = 3.30%),100 and PPy electropolymerization on FTO glass (η = 3.2%).99 A CE that is based on PPy, depending on the preparation method, could have better or similar semitransparency compared to that of an ultrathin Pt-based CE. In addition to the options mentioned previously, a CE made on ITO glass by depositing a composite film of 1 wt% graphene in polystyrene sulfonate-doped poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) has a transmittance of more than 80%, and the consequence is a DSSC with 4.35%.101 Moreover, a CE has also been made from graphene-based multi-walled carbon nanotubes, and the DSSC that was based on such a CE showed an efficiency of 3%.102 Furthermore, Lee et al. (2008) reported a large-area DSSC with a 4.23% efficiency using carbon as a counter electrode (Pt CE-based cell efficiency = 5.26%).103 In another study on 0.36 cm2 cells, a carbon CE-based DSSC had an efficiency that was comparable to the Pt CE-based DSSC.104 Similarly, Huang et al. (2007) utilized a carbon-based CE and demonstrated an efficiency of 5.7% for a small area cell (0.15 cm2), which is 0.8% lower than that of a Pt CE-based DSSC.105 The transmittance of a carbon electrode is considerably less than that of a Pt electrode, which makes carbon unsuitable for a semitransparent DSSC.103 Examples presented here from the literature show that there are many other possibilities for alternative CE materials that have better or similar optical transmittance and similar transport properties to those of the Pt CE, which makes them suitable for translucent DSSC applications. Comprehensive details on alternative CE materials for DSSCs can be found in the other review articles.79,106,107
3.3. Electrolyte preference
I−/I3− redox couple mixed in acetonitrile is the most frequently used electrolyte in high-efficiency DSSC devices. However, its redox potential is 0.55 V higher than the N3 (dye) HOMO level, which results in a lower photovoltage. The utilization of an electrolyte that has a redox potential that matches with the HOMO level of the dye can enhance the photovoltage of the cell, because photovoltage is the energy difference between the redox potential of the electrolyte and the conduction band of the semiconductor. In contrast, moving the HOMO level close to the redox potential of the electrolyte will result in an increase in the photocurrent.78
The transparency of the finalized DSSC module also depends on the type of glazing material. This transparency-controlling parameter is not related to any of the DSSC internal components. The DSSC is sandwiched between clear glasses with airgaps between them and was found to have low transmittance compared to the case in which gaps were replaced with a silicone encapsulant. The encapsulant material's refractive index should match the refractive index of the panel materials. This silicone-based encapsulation not only gives strength to the DSSC panel but also results in an increase in the transparency of 6% and an increase in the efficiency of 7% (due to increase in the Jsc).108 Zhang et al. (2014) introduced a factor Teff to see the proficiency of DSSC for effective light utilization.74 The higher the value of Teff is for a cell, the better its light utilization will be. The relationship for calculating Teff is as follows:74 Teff = 100η × 100τv(3)where η and τv are the conversion efficiency and visible transmittance, respectively. This relationship can be used to compare the performances of all types of ST solar cells with each other if we assume that the same method for citing visible transmittance is followed, which unfortunately is not the case in the literature.
3.4. Present status and future prospects
Lab-scale DSSC efficiencies with their corresponding transmittance values are given in Table 3. A DSSC with a transmittance of more than 60% and an η value of more than 3.5% has been realized (Table 3), but the reliability and durability issues with DSSCs due to solvent leakage and photochemical degradation of sealants, solvents, and dyes have created a hurdle for its promulgation. Due to this reason, all of the companies that make ST DSSCs are in the developmental stage.109–114 Titania is a very good catalyst, which would cause the deterioration of all the aforementioned constituents. Thermal stress caused by the day/night cycle is another cause of intrinsic chemical degradation. Various strategies have been cited in the literature to eliminate these complications. For example, the leaking problem can be resolved by the replacement of the liquid electrolyte with a gel electrolyte that is based on a poly(methyl methacrylate) matrix with embedded CH3CN as the liquid electrolyte and propylene carbonate as a solvent.115 This cell had a 50% transparency, but a stability test revealed a reduction in the efficiency from 0.79% to 0.20% in only 1 h under AM 1.5 G conditions. The cell's efficiency increased to 0.53% upon placing it in the dark for 9 h.115 Another way to resolve the problem of leakage is to use solvent-free ionic liquids. Using this method, Ito et al. (2008) demonstrated a DSSC with a ∼6% conversion efficiency upon bifacial illumination. The ratio of the efficiencies for the front and back side irradiation was quite high, i.e., 0.91.116 Alternatively, a low boiling point solvent can also be replaced with a high boiling point solvent117 or ionic solvents.118 Sommeling et al. (2004) conducted a long-term stability test of DSSCs with different solvents that had different contents of iodine simultaneously at 85 °C and under a constant illumination of 1 sun (simulated conditions). All of the cells experienced severe deterioration in the cell performance due to thermal stress, however, cells that had solvents with higher iodine content and in the absence of tert-butylpyridine and lithium iodide were slightly insensitive toward the testing conditions.119 Outdoor stability testing for a half year on a DSSC module composed of 64 DSSC cells connected in series showed a gradual decline in the power output.120 There are many other studies on stability testing of DSSCs.121–124 Despite the facts that the DSSC was discovered ∼24 years ago69 and a large amount of effort has been devoted to it, there are still some existing stability issues that have been impediments toward the expansion of this technology.
Table 3 Conversion efficiencies of lab-scale DSSCs along with their transparencies and modifications, which have helped to obtain these parameters




Serial

η (%)

T (380–780 nm) (%)
Modification




1 (ref. 80)
5
33.5
Cosensitization and TiO2 thickness optimization


2 (ref. 68)
4.2
23.0
Cosensitization


3 (ref. 27)
5.1
32 (600 nm)
8.13 μm thick TiO2 layer


4 (ref. 74)
3.66
60.3 (using eqn (2))
Cosensitization




Development of semiconductor oxides other than TiO2, metal-free dyes, solid electrolytes, and CE materials other than Pt along with in-depth understanding of the structure and design effects on the charge transfer properties of the photoelectrodes is imperative before realizing DSSC-based BISTPV. Moreover, since the discovery of DSSCs, there has not been an enormous increase in the efficiency (at present, 11.9% for a small-area cell).50 Therefore, the modification and replacement of more than one component in combination with computational optimization studies are desired.
Values of η and T in lab-scale cells from the literature are shown in Table 3. Some of the authors mentioned the transmittance at a single wavelength, while others gave averaged values over the visible range. In such illustrations, T was mentioned as it is in Table 3. In the literature, no standard method has been adopted to cite the degree of transparency. On many occasions, a claim was made to make semitransparent DSSCs, but the transmittance values were not given, therefore, such data are not included in Table 3.
3.5. Perovskite solar cells (PSCs)
Perovskite solar cell (PSC), which is the immediate successor of DSSC125 will be shortly discussed here. PSCs have the attributes such as easy processability, potential for low cost, high absorption coefficient (∼104 to 105 cm−1), high carrier mobility, long carrier diffusion length, high conversion efficiency (especially very high Voc), and easy adaptability for mass-scale production.126–128 Methylammonium lead trihalides (CH3NH3PbX3) (X = Cl, Br, I) are the most commonly studied perovskite materials in PSCs.129 CH3NH3PbI3 has a bandgap of 1.60 eV which can be enhanced to 2.25 eV by replacing I with Br.130,131 Besides substituting halide ions, the alkyl group (CH3) in CH3NH3PbX3 can be replaced with other alkyl groups to regulate the bandgap.132–134 Recently, lead has been replaced with tin due to environmental concerns over lead usage.135 Currently, the record efficiency for the PSC is 22.1%,50 which was only 3.8% in 2009.132 Fabrication of the typical PSC starts with the deposition of a mesoporous/compact TiO2 layer (electron transport layer) by spin coating,136 screen printing,127,137 or spray pyrolysis on FTO-glass.133 Afterwards, the perovskite layer is deposited by one-step precursor deposition, sequential deposition method, dual-source vapor deposition, or vapor assisted solution process.129 Later, 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N-di-4-methoxyphenylamino)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-MeOTAD) (hole injecting layer) is deposited by spin coating.126,136 The cell is completed by depositing an Au or Ag top electrode by thermal evaporation.127,136 Usually, a PSC cell is exposed to light from the FTO side, as a result, the photo-generated electron–hole pairs are collected by their respective electrodes. Various options in the electron transport layer (HTL), perovskite absorber, and hole transport layer (HTL) can be found in another published review.129
Ideally speaking, all the layers constituting a PSC should be highly transparent to realize a semitransparent solar cell. First, the commonly used Au top electrode should be replaced with a transparent electrode such as In2O3:H,126 ITO,138 Al:ZnO,139 amorphous indium zinc oxide,140 silver nanowires,128,130,141 poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS),142 laminated carbon nanotubes,125 laminated graphene,143 or nickel grid embedded in a conductive polymer144 to make ST PSCs. But these transparent top electrodes should be deposited at low temperature by the solvent-free process because high temperature and solvent may affect the functionality of spiro-MeOTAD and perovskite layers. Otherwise, the procedure for depositing the top electrode should be modified not to affect the underlying layers.128 Visible transparency can be further modulated by varying the thickness of the perovskite layer127,145,146 and by increasing the bandgap of the active layer. Moreover, in PSCs with a transparent top electrode, when light is exposed to the cell from the rear electrode side, light with the shorter wavelength is absorbed by the spiro-MeOTAD (HTL), which does not contribute to the photocurrent.126,127,141 Therefore, spiro-MeOTAD should be replaced with some other HTL to realize a high-efficiency semitransparent/bifacial device130 otherwise its thickness should be substantially reduced.147 Efficiencies of PSCs with corresponding transparencies prepared at the laboratory scale are given in Table 4. Cells with high transmittance in the NIR region but with low transmittance around ∼555 nm (eye peak sensitivity wavelength) are not mentioned in Table 4.126,139
Table 4 Summary of lab-scale PSC conversion efficiencies with their corresponding transparencies




Serial
Transmittance (%)

η (%)
Modification





a Spectral range is not available.





1 (ref. 136)
30.0 (370–740 nm)
3.5
Perovskite island approach


2 (ref. 127)
31.0 (370–740)
5.3
Dielectric–metal–dielectric top electrode


3 (ref. 145)
29.0 (460–800 nm)
6.41
Organic charge transport layers


4 (ref. 128)
28.4 (N.A)a
8.5
Silver nanowire-based top electrode


5 (ref. 130)
77 (800 nm), ∼3.0 (555 nm)
12.7
Silver nanowire-based top electrode


6 (ref. 141)
55 (800 nm), 10.8 (555 nm)
4.56
Silver nanowire-based top electrode


7 (ref. 143)
50 (700 nm), 20.9 (555 nm)
5.98
Graphene-based top electrode


8 (ref. 132)
28.1 (370–740 nm)
5.20
Replacement of methylammonium lead iodide and Ag electrode with formamidinium lead iodide and a transparent conductive adhesive electrode containing Ni mesh, respectively; perovskite island approach


9 (ref. 148)
17.3% (N.A)a
12.55
ITO top-electrode




Besides the fact that the ST PSC has achieved efficiency more than 8% and visible transmittance over 25% (see Table 4), PSCs suffer from current–voltage (J–V) hysteresis,130,149 methylammonium iodide egression,150 photo-oxidation,151 and corrosion of metal electrodes due to the halide content present in the active layer.152 Various reasons for hysteresis in the J–V curve are discussed in detail elsewhere.151 In the literature, several modifications have been made to reduce or eliminate the J–V hysteresis.126,128,132,145,153 Moreover, PSCs are also sensitive to moisture present in the environment131 because of the formation of CH3NH3PbX3's mono- and di-hydrates, which eventually convert to PbX.154 Among various transparent electrodes discussed before, Ag nanowire based electrodes are not suitable due to the reaction of Ag with the halide present in the active layer, which is detrimental to device performance.155 ITO in combination with Al:ZnO-based buffer has been used to cope with CH3NH3PbX3 egression and thermal and environmental instability (moisture insensitiveness). A cell based on this idea reached 80% efficiency compared with its initial efficiency when exposed to 100 °C for 124 h.156 Currently, PSCs are not stable enough for BISTPV applications. The aforementioned stability issues must be addressed before using PSCs for practical applications.
4. Amorphous silicon (a-Si:H) solar cell
Hydrogenated amorphous silicon (a-Si:H) was first made in 1969 by Chittick and coworkers.157 A major breakthrough in this area occurred in 1975, when p-type and n-type a-Si:H were made by supplementing phosphine and diborane, respectively.158 An a-Si:H-based PV cell in a p–i–n configuration was first made by Carlson and Wronski in 1976 with an efficiency of 2.4%,159 which increased to ∼12% in 1989 because of effort made by various research groups.158 Currently, the highest efficiency for the a-Si:H-based cell is 13.6%.50 The hydrogen incorporation mitigates the dangling bonds, which results in a drop in the defect density of 1020 cm−3 eV−1 to 1018 cm−3 eV−1.160 The a-Si:H solar cell contains an appreciably lower amount of Si compared with the mono- and poly-crystalline solar cells, therefore, the energy-payback time is shorter by a factor of 2.161 In addition, the a-Si:H cell has a low-temperature coefficient (−0.1%/K), is easily synthesizable, and has mature commercial fabrication technology.162 Furthermore, it has the potential for semitransparency, which would widen its range of applications.163
In a-Si:H solar cells, p-type amorphous silicon (p-a-Si:H), intrinsic amorphous silicon (i-a-Si:H), and n-type amorphous silicon (n-a-Si:H) layers are usually deposited by plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD), where the front and back TCO is deposited through sputtering.164 An a-Si:H solar cell with a p–i–n structure is made by depositing a p-a-Si:H layer on a TCO-coated substrate (glass or plastic) followed by the deposition of i-a-Si:H and n-a-Si:H layers. Finally, the cell is completed by depositing the top electrode, which must be TCO in the case of ST solar cells.165 In the superstrate configuration, which is the most commonly used configuration, exposure of light from the back side (p-a-Si:H) demands the high transparency of the substrate/TCO. Illumination from the n-a-Si:H side is not suitable for cell performance due to the inferior mobility of holes compared to that of the electrons.166 The electron–hole pair that is generated as a result of photon absorption in the active layer will be separated by the built-in electric-field. The band diagram and collection of the electrons and holes toward their respective electrodes are shown in Fig. 6.
 Fig. 6  Band diagram for the p–i–n junction of an a-Si:H solar cell with TCO electrodes for both the front and back-contact, where Ev, Ec, and Ef are valence band, conduction band, and Fermi level, respectively. 
The problem of the decrease in the photo- and dark conductivity of a-Si:H by nearly four orders of magnitude upon prolonged illumination was initially observed by Staebler and Wronski in 1977 (commonly known as the Staebler–Wronski effect).167 This photo-induced degradation was reversed by annealing the film at 170 °C.167 This phenomenon creates defects, which assist in the electron–hole recombination and are undesirable in the a-Si:H solar cells. For efficient minority carrier collection, the ratio of the carrier collection length (dC) and absorber thickness (d) should be greater than 10.
The optical properties of the front and back electrodes along with the thickness and bandgap of the p-a-Si:H, i-a-Si:H, and n-a-Si:H layers are important factors to be considered for achieving transparency in a-Si:H solar cells.
4.1. Preferable attributes of the front and back electrodes
The front electrode in an a-Si:H solar cell should be highly conductive to enhance the shorter wavelength response. To improve the carrier collection at the back-contact, the n-a-Si:H layer can be replaced with microcrystalline Si that has better conductivity, which ensures superior minority carrier collection. However, in cases in which semitransparency is required, such a back-contact would not be suitable because of the low bandgap.158
The thickness of the top TCO should be optimized in accordance with the a-Si:H layer thickness. With a specific thickness of the TCO, the incident light could suffer optical interference, which would result in a reduction in the visible transmittance. A TCO with a thickness of 300 nm to 500 nm was found to be optimal for achieving the optimum efficiency (5.46%) and transmittance (21.6%), when the i-a-Si:H (absorber layer), p-a-Si:H, and n-a-Si:H layer thicknesses were fixed at 150 nm, 15 nm, and 35 nm, respectively.168
Applying a metal/dielectric (ITO, ZnO, or SnO2) structure as a back-contact, instead of only TCO, can exhibit dual functionality. This structure will act as an internal reflector for the incoming light as well as an antireflector. On the one hand, it will increase the Jsc and on the other hand, it will keep the cell transparent. When the thickness of the metal layer is less than the skin depth, the light will pass through, but if both are comparable or the thickness of the metal layer is larger, the light will reflect back. The skin depth (δ) of the metal can be determined by eqn (4). The reflectivity coefficient (R) can be determined using eqn (5) after knowing the value of δ. The values for δ and R for Ag at 600 nm were found to be 2.85 nm and 94%, respectively.169 (4) (5)where μ and σ are the permeability and conductivity of the metal, respectively, and δ is the skin depth. An a-Si:H solar cell with an i-a-Si:H layer thickness of 350 nm with a metal (Ag = 10 nm)/dielectric (ZnO = 45 nm) back-contact layer demonstrated a conversion efficiency of 6.87% and a transmittance of 20% at a 700 nm wavelength.169
4.2. Influence of the bandgap
Theoretical calculations have shown that to achieve high-efficiency, the optimum bandgap for the i-a-Si:H layer is 1.5 eV.170,171 Thus far, the best cells based on the 0.5 μm thick intrinsic layer were found to have a bandgap of ∼1.65–1.70 eV.172 ST a-Si:H solar cells can be realized by employing a high bandgap absorber film. The bandgap of the i-a-Si:H layer can be increased by increasing the hydrogen (H) content, decreasing the deposition temperature, or alloying with carbon. Solar cells made from the a-SiC:H active layer with the optical bandgap ranging from 1.9 to 2.0 eV resulted in the efficiency of 6.3% with a visible transparency of more than 25%. This cell had p-a-SiC:H (15–20 nm)/i-a-SiC:H (200 nm)/n-μc-Si:H (30–50 nm) heterostructure.45 For the sake of comparison, two series of cells, one based on a-SiC:H (wide-bandgap) and the other based on a-Si:H with a range of transparencies were made. In the a-Si:H-based cells, the transmittance varied by changing the i-a-Si:H layer thickness, whereas in the a-SiC:H-based cell, the transmittance was modulated by changing the optical bandgap of the active layer. The extent of decrease in the performance of the a-SiC:H-based cells at higher transmittance values was lower than that of the a-Si:H-based cells.45
Si-rich SixC1−x as an active layer material has also been used to fabricate semitransparent solar cells. Such film can be prepared by hydrogen-free PECVD, where the bandgap of the film depends on the Si/C ratio, which in turn depends on the RF plasma power. The bandgap was red-shifted from 2.4 to 1.4 eV when the RF power changed from 100 W to 20 W. Si-rich SixC1−x film grown at lower plasma power had a higher a-Si content. The solar cell with a quartz/Al/p-SiC (25 nm)/i-SiC (25 nm)/n-SiC (25 nm)/TCO configuration showed a 1.7% conversion efficiency.173
4.3. Consequence of thickness reduction
The conversion efficiency of the a-Si:H solar cell decreases with the decrease in the thickness of the i-a-Si:H layers (Eg = 1.8 eV). However, the tradeoff between the performance and transmittance remains active for the i-a-Si:H layer thickness of 400 nm. Beyond this thickness, the efficiency becomes stabilized rather than having the transmittance be further decreased.45 The i-a-Si:H film before light exposure has a defect density of 3 × 1015 cm−3, and to fulfill the condition of dC/d > 10, the film should have a thickness of 1 μm. However, after light-induced degradation, the defect density increases to 1017 cm−3. With this value for the defect density, the i-a-Si:H layer should have a thickness of 200 nm to satisfy the condition of dC/d > 10.158 This relationship reveals that the impact of the Staebler–Wronski effect can be curtailed or diminished upon reducing the thickness of the i-a-Si:H layer to 200 nm or less, which can also serve the purpose of achieving high visible transparency.
The main challenge that is confronted when decreasing the thickness of the p-a-Si:H layer is the sharp decline in Voc due to increased surface recombination, which is caused by a high density of dangling bonds at the interface because of compositional fluctuation and morphological disorder. These interfacial defect states are a consequence of the weakening of the electric-field.174 A sudden drop in Voc has been minimized by the insertion of a wide-bandgap buffer layer between the i-a-Si:H and p-a-Si:H layers. Various buffer layers such as carbon-doped a-Si:H (p-type),175–177 protocrystalline a-Si:H,178 boron-doped microcrystalline silicon,179 nanocrystalline silicon,174 and a-Si:H180 have been explored in bulk amorphous silicon solar cells. In another investigation, buffer layers on both p–i and i–n interfaces were employed.181
In the case of ST a-Si:H solar cells, the effect of only the a-Si:H buffer layer has been scrutinized, where the thicknesses of the i-a-Si:H and p-a-Si:H layers were substantially lower than their corresponding thicknesses in the bulk cells. The incorporation of a wide-bandgap a-Si:H buffer layer in a semitransparent a-Si:H solar cell not only sustained Voc but also slightly increased FF, while improving the transmittance. A wide-bandgap buffer layer strengthens the electric-field, which diminishes the accumulation of charges at the interface and, in turn, causes the upholding of Voc. Employing the concept of a buffer layer and reducing the thickness of the p-a-Si:H layer from 15 nm to 7.5 nm, Lim et al. (2013) achieved an efficiency of 5.36% with an average transmittance of 30.72% in the spectral range of 500 to 800 nm.182
In the case of an a-Si:H ST solar cell (i-a-Si:H layer = 150 nm) with a fixed buffer layer at the p–i interface, the influence of incorporating different combinations of wide-bandgap a-Si:H buffer layers at the i–n interface on the photovoltaic conversion efficiency has also been examined. The insertion of buffer layers with an appropriate sequence of bandgaps can improve shunt resistance (RSH) while sustaining its Voc and visible transparency. The reverse V bandgap buffer profile with a total thickness of 10 nm from the i-a-Si:H layer to an n-a-Si:H layer resulted in the efficiency of 6.61%. This cell had a 2% lower transparency and 6.1% higher RSH than the reference cell (which had no buffer), however, Voc did not suffer any degradation.183 The bandgap of the a-Si:H buffer layer at the p–i or i–n interface varied by altering R, which is the ratio of H2 and SiH4. The lower the value of R is, the higher its bandgap is.
Another requirement for the dissemination of ST BIPV is a low cost, light weight, and flexible substrate. A large-area a-Si:H-based semitransparent solar cell (T ∼ 40% at 600 nm) with an active area efficiency of 3% has been prepared on an inexpensive plastic substrate at the slightly low deposition temperature of 150 °C.184
4.4. Colored a-Si:H solar cell
Fabry–Perot (F–P) resonator integration with a photo absorber layer can result in semitransparent colored PV. In such a method, the color can be controlled by varying the active layer thickness. Most of the incident photons with energy higher than the active layer's bandgap will be harnessed due to multiple passes from the absorber, while a narrow wavelength range will be transmitted, which will determine the perceived color of the solar cell.187 Simulated transmission curves by the transfer matrix method using refractive indices of all of the employed layers and measured transmission curves for the F–B cavities based on 6, 11, and 31 nm thick a-Si:H are shown in Fig. 7b. The problem in such PV is the variation in the viewed color upon changing the angle or by varying the polarization of the incident light. Angle-insensitive and polarization-independent PV can be made by making use of the remarkable phase change of light that reflects from an extremely thin absorber–metal interface, which gives rise to constructive interference. Light will experience a negligible phase difference upon passing through an ultrathin absorber, which thus imparts angle insensitive color to the solar cell.186
 Fig. 7  (a) ST solar cells based on the optical resonance principle using an a-Si:H layer with thickness of (i) 6 nm (blue), (ii) 11 nm (green), and (iii) 31 nm (red).186 (b) Simulated and measured transmission curves for F–B cavities composed by sandwiching 6, 11, and 31 nm a-Si:H layers between the dielectric–metal–dielectric structured electrodes (reprinted with permission).186 
Semitransparent angle-insensitive colored amorphous silicon solar cells based on F–P optical resonance have been made by exploiting the ultrathin layer of undoped a-Si:H (10–30 nm), where the ultrafine photoactive film (27 nm) was sandwiched between the two electrodes (anode: dielectric–metal–dielectric structure, cathode: metal). The 27 nm thick a-Si:H layer enclosed between the two mentioned electrodes exhibited a cyan color, whereas its transmittance value was not described.188 In another investigation for fabricating the transmissive colored PV cells using a similar principle, various thicknesses of a-Si:H layers were sandwiched between the two electrodes, where the anode is composed of a dielectric (WO3)–metal (Ag)–dielectric (V2O5) structure along with perylenetetracarboxylic bis-benzimidazole as a wetting layer on WO3 for Ag deposition, and the cathode has an indene-C60 bisadduct (electron transport layer)/bis-adduct fullerene surfactant/Ag/WO3 configuration.186,189 The physical appearances of cells based on 6, 11, and 31 nm thick a-Si:H layers are shown in Fig. 7a.186 The green cell (Fig. 7a(ii)) made with an 11 nm thick a-Si:H layer approached a 1.94% power conversion efficiency and 25% transmittance at 550 nm.186
Semitransparent a-Si:H solar cells with tunable colors can also be prepared by incorporating a color-adjusting layer (CAL) above or below the top TCO. The refractive index and thickness of the optical function layer are the drivers for controlling the reflection spectrum of its surface, which in turn controls the color of the cell. Dielectric materials such as TiO2, SiO2, and Al2O3 manifest strong interference and could be used as the CAL but they possess high resistivity, which makes them inapplicable for such an application. Cu2O, which has lower resistivity, has benefited a-Si:H solar cells in achieving multicolors and translucency. A cell with 70 nm thick Cu2O above the TCO was reported to have a 4.78% efficiency and almost ∼19% transmittance at 600 nm (extrapolated from the transmission spectra).190 By changing the sequence of CAL from above the TCO to below the TCO, various colors can be realized. These multicolor solar cells are constructed to exploit optical resonance or, by employing CAL, are aesthetically admissible for BISTPV applications.
The Staebler–Wronski effect, a phenomenon responsible for performance degradation in a-Si:H solar cells, can be circumvented by decreasing the absorber thickness to less than 200 nm. An a-Si:H solar cell with a transmittance of ∼25% and an efficiency of over 6% has been made on a laboratory scale (Table 5). But the slight disadvantage of a-Si:H-based PV is their limited prospects for efficiency enhancement, given the fact that the current world's best a-Si:H cell has the efficiency of 13.6%.50 ST a-Si:H modules are already on the market and are being used in BIPV applications. Details of commercial ST a-Si:H PV modules manufactured by several companies can be found elsewhere.191–203
Table 5 Conversion efficiencies with their corresponding transparencies for lab-scale a-Si:H-based solar cells




Serial
Efficiency (%)
Transmittance (380–780 nm) (%)
Modification




1 (ref. 53 and 184)
3
40 (600 nm)
Inexpensive plastic substrate


2 (ref. 182)
5.36
30.72 (500 to 800 nm)
Buffer layer between the p-a-Si:H layer and i-a-Si:H layer


3 (ref. 168)
5.46
21.6 (400 to 800 nm)
Optimization of the top TCO thickness


4 (ref. 168)
5.93
17.9 (400 to 800 nm)
Ga alloyed a-Si:H


5 (ref. 185)
6.5
20 (400 to 800 nm)
Replacement of Novo Vellum laminate with Radeva laminate (transparent)


6 (ref. 183)
6.61
18.9 (500 to 800 nm)
Reverse V bandgap shape buffer layer between the i-a-Si:H and n-a-Si:H layer


7 (ref. 45)
6.3
25 (using eqn (2))
Utilizing a wide-bandgap i-a-SiC layer


8 (ref. 169)
6.87
20 (700 nm)
Metal/dielectric back-contact


9 (ref. 186)
1.94
25 (550 nm)
Fabry–Perot resonator




5. Chalcopyrite-based solar cells
Chalcopyrite solar cells have long-term stability,204 the potential of low cost,205 a high absorption coefficient,206 benign grain boundaries,207 a tunable bandgap,208 and high conversion efficiency.209 Conventionally, high-efficiency Cu(In,Ga)Se2 (CIGSe) devices are prepared on DC magnetron sputtered back-contact by a thermal co-evaporation process using a 3-stage process. Later, a CdS buffer layer and front-electrode are deposited by chemical bath deposition and RF magnetron sputtering, respectively. The cell is completed by depositing a Ni–Al grid through the mask using thermal or e-beam evaporation.210 Solar cells based on ∼2 μm thick CIGSe (Eg ∼ 1.15 eV) with a PV conversion efficiency over 20% have been fabricated in various studies.209–211 Current world's best efficiency for a CIGSe solar cell is 22.3%.50 The band diagram for a CIGSe solar cell is shown in Fig. 8. This cell is prepared in a substrate configuration, where sunlight penetrates the cell from the front TCO side. The front electrode is a high bandgap material and, therefore, will not result in parasitic losses of solar energy. However, some portion of the incident photons will be absorbed by the CdS buffer layer, which has a negative impact on the photo-current. The portion of the solar spectrum remaining after passing through the buffer layer will be absorbed by the CIGSe absorber layer. Eventually, the generated electron–hole pairs will be collected by the respective electrodes as shown in Fig. 8. In-depth details on the underlying physics of CIGSe solar cells can be found here.212–214
 Fig. 8  Band diagram for a typical CIGSe cell with a molybdenum (Mo) back-contact, where Ec, Ev, and Ef are the conduction band, valence band, and Fermi level, respectively. 
Just like amorphous a-Si:H-based solar cells, a chalcopyrite-based cell can also be made semitransparent by decreasing the thickness and increasing the bandgap of the absorber. Of course, transparent front and back electrodes are imperative for making see-through solar cells.
5.1. Effects of absorber thickness reduction
The value of transmittance at a wavelength of 700 nm for Cu(In,Ga)S2 (CIGS) (Eg ∼ 1.50 eV) prepared on ITO glass decreases from 12.7% to 0.6% upon increasing the CIGS thickness from 400 nm to 1200 nm.59 Several problems associated with ultrathin chalcopyrite-based solar cells will be discussed in the upcoming section.

5.1.1. High shunt conductance. 
A decrease in thickness may result in the creation of shunt conductance pathways because the surface roughness becomes almost comparable to the thickness of the film, e.g., it has been reported that 0.47 μm thick CIGSe films had a roughness of 0.35 μm.215 Films with this high surface roughness are unable to fully cover the back electrode. The consequence of this is the reduction of the shunt resistance. Devices based on CIGSe, grown on a molybdenum (Mo) back electrode, experienced an increase in shunt conductance from 3.87 mS cm−2 to 10.32 mS cm−2 upon thinning the absorber from 1.74 μm to 0.43 μm,216 which caused a drop in both FF and Voc.215,216 Schematic of a proposed model for conducting pathways along the grain boundaries by Braunger et al. (1996) can be found in Fig. 9.217 The CuS remaining on the surface after deposition of CuInS2 (CIS) under the condition of excess Cu is usually removed by NaCN/KCN etching. This step leaves behind exposed grain boundaries.218 CdS, which is the most commonly used buffer layer, will deposit onto these grain boundaries and will become conductive on photo-illumination, especially by photons of shorter wavelength. This will therefore connect the top electrode to the conducting grain boundaries, which consequently will deteriorate the FF and Voc.217 This model was tested, when a 0.47 μm CIGSe film with a reduced surface roughness of 0.23 μm was prepared by modifying the method of preparation and a significant improvement in FF and Voc was observed.215 This is why, achieving a uniform surface with dense grain morphology is crucial to attaining a chalcopyrite absorber with high shunt resistance.
 Fig. 9  Schematic of a model on shunt pathways along the grain boundaries of CuInS2 (reprinted with permission).217 


5.1.2. Back-surface recombination (BSR). 
Interfaces are always rich in defects that provide the ground for carrier recombination. Recombination caused by these defects at the back-contact–absorber interface is known as back-surface recombination (BSR). In the case of ultrathin chalcopyrite-based devices because of the drop in Voc, BSR has a pivotal role in realizing high-efficiency.219–224 In ultrathin absorbers, the back interface becomes relatively closer to the depletion region compared with thicker absorbers. Therefore, a large proportion of the photo-generated carriers, rather than being collected by the depletion region, will recombine at the back-contact due to the high concentration of recombination sites available there.219,225 Deep-level capacitance profilometry (DLCP) on thick (2.5 μm) and thin (0.4 μm) CIGSe devices has shown the increase in deep-level defect density at the back interface as a result of decreasing the absorber thickness.226
Back-surface recombination can be mitigated by bandgap grading at the back-contact (back-grading) or by employing rear-surface passivation with nano-sized local rear-point contacts. First, we will discuss the effect of back-grading. Back-grading can be created by inserting a wide-bandgap region (the upward extension of the conduction band) between the back electrode and the absorber. This wide-bandgap region at the back-contact (back-grading) due to an additional electric-field can reflect the electron away from the interface and toward the depletion region.227 Three types of back-grading, i.e., partial-grading,219 full-grading,219 and electron back reflector (EBR),219,220 are shown in Fig. 10a and can be employed to suppress the BSR. A back-grading height (ΔEBa) (the bandgap difference between the absorber and the high bandgap region) of 0.2 eV has been proposed to be propitious for increasing the Voc and ultimately the conversion efficiency because it may suppress the BSR by a factor of 103.219
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematics for partial-grading, full-grading, and electron reflector (reprinted with permission)219 and (b) schematic for a CIGSe absorber having a passivation layer (PL) with nano-sized local rear-point contacts. 
Partial/full-grading in ultrathin CIGSe solar cells can result in an increase in the bandgap and, therefore, can have the consequence of absorption losses. The negative contribution of this grading toward short circuit current density (Jsc) is greater than the positive contribution of increasing Voc. Therefore, partial-/full-grading can be relatively more beneficial in thick CIGSe solar cells compared to thinner CIGSe solar cells. Full-grading resulted in a 2% gain in efficiency for a 0.3 μm thick CIGSe-based solar cell.219 Lundberg et al. (2005) mentioned 2.5% gain in efficiency due to the increase in Voc and FF by incorporating partial-grading in CIGSe solar cells with a thickness of 0.5 μm.227
On the other hand, Touafek and Muhamdi (2014) have theoretically shown that EBR is more beneficial in ultrathin CIGSe (0.5 to 1.0 μm) solar cells compared to bulk CIGSe solar cells unlike partial- or full-grading. The beneficial effects of EBR were less pronounced, when the back-surface recombination velocity was smaller than 103 cm s−1. However, EBR with a height (ΔEBa) of (bandgap difference between absorber and reflector) 0.2 eV was found to be very effective in the case of high recombination velocity. An EBR thickness of ∼5% with respect to the thickness of the absorber has been found to be optimum.220 For a CIGSe absorber thickness of 0.3 μm, it was expected that an EBR with ΔEBa = 0.2 eV can enhance efficiency by 3%.219 Gloeckler and Sites (2005) have also shown by simulation that if thinning of the absorber to 0.5 μm does not change its parameters other than the introduction of steep back-grading, it can lead to efficiency enhancement of ∼2%.228
It can be summarized that the electron back reflector (nonlinear grading) with ΔEBa = 0.2 eV is most suitable for ultrathin CIGSe solar cells. However, the realization of such nonlinear grading is impractical because of elemental inter-diffusion at the interface. Lundberg et al. (2003) created a back-surface field by inserting a CuGaSe2 (Eg = 1.67 eV) layer before the Cu(In,Ga)Se2 (Eg = 1.17 eV) deposition, where the thickness of the wide-bandgap bottom layer was ∼10% of the thickness of the absorber layer.229 This back-surface field, a result of partial-grading, resulted in the sustained FF and Voc for CIGSe thickness up to 0.4 μm.
The second method to reduce BSR is CIGSe back-surface passivation with additional nano-sized local rear-point contacts for transport of charges to the back electrode. This idea is borrowed from high-efficiency crystalline Si solar cells.230,231 Vermang et al. (2013) has applied this concept to 1.5 μm thick CIGSe-based solar cells.232 The schematic of this approach can be viewed in Fig. 10b. Utilization of a 2 nm Al2O3 passivation layer (PL) with rear local point contact resulted in a 14 mV enhancement in Voc due to a drop in the back-surface recombination velocity from 3 × 104 cm s−1 (unpassivated) to 1 × 102 cm s−1 (passivated). CIGSe passivated with Al2O3 has 35% lesser surface defect.233 Al2O3 has a bandgap of ∼5.4 eV234 and, therefore, can be used as a passivation layer in the ST CIGSe solar cell without affecting its transparency.

5.2. Past studies on ultrathin chalcopyrite-based solar cells
Until now, many studies have been performed to highlight the challenges and to improve the PV properties of ultrathin (<1 μm) chalcopyrite-based solar cells.215,216,222,223,226,227,235–239 The PV properties as the function of the absorber thickness in the substrate configuration (S configuration) and back wall superstrate configuration (BWS configuration) with opaque and transparent back electrodes have been summarized in Fig. 11. In the S configuration, where the absorber is grown on the Mo back-contact and the light enters the cell from the front electrode side, the conversion efficiency continuously dropped from 15.0% to 4.8% upon decreasing the absorber thickness from 1050 nm to 150 nm. Here, the drop in Jsc was primarily responsible for the diminishing efficiency because both FF and Voc values were maintained at 71.1% and 0.61 V, even for an absorber thickness of 250 nm.240 In this case, absorber thickness was reduced by decreasing the deposition time, which may yield a poor quality absorber due to a high density of defects. In contrast, when the absorber was thinned using etching, it had large grain morphology like that of the thick absorber. For this reason, an etched absorber in the S configuration on a Mo back-contact exhibited slightly higher efficiencies (9% for a 400 nm (ref. 241) and 10.3% for a 500 nm (ref. 222) absorber). In the case of the S configuration using ITO as the back-contact, efficiency drastically dropped from 12.6% to 1.8% on decrementing the photoactive layer thickness from 1000 nm to 400 nm.242,243 The reasons for this decrease in efficiency using an ITO back electrode are discussed in Section 5.4. In the BWS configuration, where the absorber was grown on an ITO back-contact and light enters the cell from the substrate side, efficiency substantially improved due to the insertion of a MoO3−x (ref. 244–246) or MoS2 layer246 between the CIGSe and ITO, or by pretreatment (sulfurization) of the ITO back-contact.246 The in-depth details on how these interlayers or pretreatment improve the PV properties for an ITO back-contact will be discussed in Section 5.4. It is of prime importance to emphasize here that all of the available data on ultrathin chalcopyrites are limited to small bandgaps, where improving the transparency for BIPV applications was not the motive. To date, only a few studies have been conducted on wide-bandgap ultrathin chalcopyrites. Unfortunately, in those rare studies, Mo has been used as the back-contact, which makes the cell opaque.
 Fig. 11  Efficiency of solar cells based on 150 nm,227 250 nm,240 300 nm,240 400 nm,247 500 nm,223,248 570 nm,216 700 nm,238 800 nm,236 860 nm,249 and 1050 nm (ref. 236) CIGSe on a Mo back-contact in the substrate configuration (S configuration) (red circles with trend line), 400 nm (ref. 242) and 1000 nm (ref. 243) CIGSe on ITO in the S configuration (black squares with dotted line), 400 nm (ref. 241) and 500 nm (ref. 222) CIGSe on Mo in the S configuration, where the thickness was reduced using an etchant (blue squares with dotted line), and 300 nm (ref. 242 and 245) CIGSe on ITO glass in the back wall superstrate (BWS) configuration (magenta stars). The text inside brackets in the legend specifies the back-contact material. 
5.3. Choice of bandgap
For an absorber layer, it is logical that larger the bandgap is, the greater will be its visible transparency. Moreover, 200 nm thick CuInSe2 (CISe) (Eg ∼ 1.02) can absorb >90% of the incident solar spectrum.59 This observation signifies the fact that reducing only the absorber thickness might not be helpful for achieving high translucency. In contrast, both the thickness and bandgap should be carefully selected while keeping the PV conversion efficiency in mind. A very high bandgap can be helpful in obtaining highly transparent solar cells but may not be helpful in making useful ST solar cells because wide-bandgap chalcopyrite solar cells have poor PV characteristics (see Table 6). Next, we will discuss the bandgap in conjunction with PV performance.
Table 6 Wide-bandgap chalcopyrites along with their corresponding PV conversion efficiencies




Material
Bandgap (eV)
Efficiency (%)




CIGSSe
≥1.5
11.9 (ref. 267)


CIS
1.53
>10,218,268,269 11.4,217,270,271 12.5 (ref. 266)


CIGS
1.53
12.6 (ref. 265)


CIGSe
1.53
11.0 (ref. 272)


ACIGSe
1.63
13.0 (ref. 273)


ACIGSe
1.65
12.0 (ref. 274)


CGSe
1.67
10.2 (ref. 275)


AIGSe
1.70
10.2 (ref. 264)




In Cu(In1−xGax)(SySe1−y) (CIGSSe), replacing Se with S can enlarge the bandgap. For instance, CuInS2 (CIS) and CuGaS2 (CGS) have bandgaps of 1.50 eV and 2.43 eV, respectively. The bandgap of CIS is optimum, whereas the bandgap of CGS is higher for any type of solar application. Moreover, partially replacing In with Ga can also produce a wide-bandgap CIGS. The bandgaps of ternary, quaternary, or pentanary chalcopyrites can be calculated using eqn (6), where both X and Y can change from 0 to 1.250 ECIGSSeg(X, Y) = (1.00 + 0.13X2 + 0.08X2Y + 0.13XY + 0.55X + 0.54Y) eV(6)
The ternary or quaternary chalcopyrites such as CuGaSe2 (CGSe), CuGaS2 (CGS), and Cu(In,Ga)S2 (CIGS) with a high Ga content have undesirable grain morphology. Such absorbers have an undesirable microstructure (small grain size) due to the high Ga content. Fig. 12 shows the cross-sectional SEM micrographs for Cu(InGa)Se2 thin-films with various Ga/(In + Ga) contents.251 It is clear from the SEM images that the grain size becomes increasingly small as the Ga content is increased. The sample with a large Ga content has a greater density of defects due to the presence of a large grain boundary area. An associated step to gain semitransparency is to decrease the thickness of the absorber layer. It will further raise the defect density. Ramanathan et al. (2006) found an increase in the defect density of 2 orders of magnitude, when CIGSe (Eg ∼ 1.2 eV) was reduced from 2.5 μm to 0.4 μm.226 Therefore the utilization of an absorber with a high Ga content, which already has a high defect density, may not be the appropriate choice when its thickness needs to be reduced.
 Fig. 12  Cross-sectional scanning electron micrographs for Cu(InGa)Se2 films grown on a Mo back-contact electrode with Ga/(Ga + In) content of, (a) 0.18, (b) 0.64, and (c) 0.78 (reprinted with permission).251 
Another way to widen the bandgap is by alloying with silver252,253 or completely replacing the Cu with Ag, i.e., AgInSe2 (AISe), AgGaSe2 (AGSe), AgInS2 (AIS), and AgGaS2 (AGS). Silver-based selenized ternary chalcopyrites, i.e., AISe and AGSe have slightly higher bandgaps than their Cu counterparts.254 The bandgap of AISe (Eg ∼ 1.37 eV)255,256 is insufficient to be exploited in visibly transparent solar cells, although, AGSe (Eg ∼ 1.79 eV) has an admissible bandgap for ST solar cell application. The potential of AGSe in STPV devices has not been extensively explored. On the other hand, silver-based sulfurized chalcopyrites such as AIS and AGS have bandgaps of 1.87 eV (ref. 257 and 258) and 2.71 eV,259 respectively. There are some reports, in which AIS has been proposed as a potential top layer of a tandem solar cell due to its comparable lattice parameters to form a coherent interface with CdS or CISe.260–263 However, there has been no practical demonstration of applying AIS in any PV device. In contrast, the bandgap of AGS is too large to be utilized in any PV device.
Regarding elemental composition, there are many other possibilities to play with (quaternary and pentanary compound semiconductors) to obtain the desired bandgap. Here, it is recommended that the chosen semiconductor should preferably have a lower Ga content due to the undesirable grain morphology associated with high Ga content, especially in Ag-free chalcopyrites. Bandgap enhancement should be accomplished by partially or fully replacing Cu with Ag or Se with S but when the Ga content is high then it must have Ag as an alloying element. This is because the melting-point of Ag-containing compounds is 200 °C less than that of Cu-containing compounds.254 The low-melting-point causes this compound thin-film to exhibit a larger grain size than a CIGSe with an equivalent Ga content (Ga/(Ga + In) = 0.8) but without silver alloying.251,264
Solar cells fabricated with wide-bandgap semiconductors usually have low efficiencies due to their low Jsc and loss in Voc. Therefore, both bandgap and PV performance should be considered while finalizing the particular chalcopyrite for BISTPV applications. Various large-bandgap chalcopyrites with corresponding cell efficiencies are listed in Table 6. As mentioned earlier, an Ag-free ternary chalcopyrite with a high Ga content such as CGSe might not be a good candidate for ST solar cell application because the material, which already is rich in defects, will become much more defective upon thinning. In the case of sulfurized chalcopyrites with no or low Ga content, i.e., CIS, CIGS, and CIGSSe, the efficiency is slightly better than CGSe due to their slightly lower bandgap and better morphology, as is evident in Table 6. In fact, CIGS (Eg ∼ 1.5 eV) has already been used to make ST cells.59 However, the problem with sulfurized chalcopyrite is that an additional step for removing the CuS layer from the surface of the absorber using KCN etching is usually required before depositing the buffer layer,265,266 which slightly disqualifies this material. Moreover, Ag(In0.20Ga0.80)Se2 (AIGSe) as shown in Table 6 manifests an efficiency equivalent to those of the sulfurized chalcopyrites even though it has a 0.2 eV higher bandgap. Apparently, AIGSe has great prospects for the fabrication of ST solar cells. So far, no examples have been reported in which the application of AIGSe has been demonstrated in this domain. Partially Ag-alloyed CIGSe such as (Ag0.25Cu0.75)(In0.20Ga0.80)Se2 (ACIGSe), which has a bandgap that is 0.07 eV lower than AIGSe, exhibits an efficiency of 13.0%. This material has a wide-bandgap with an acceptable PV conversion efficiency that therefore might also be a workable photoactive material for ST chalcopyrite solar cells.
A rational comparison of wide-bandgap materials on the basis of their transparency and PV properties has shown us that chalcopyrites such as AGSe, AIS, AIGSe, and ACIGSe are the most appropriate absorber candidates for ST chalcopyrite-based solar cells. All of these wide-bandgap absorbers have lower melting-points than their Cu counterparts and, therefore, can be deposited at lower temperatures with exceptional grain morphology (lower bulk-defect density). This low-temperature deposition will also reduce the deposition cost.
5.4. Back-contact electrode
The back-contact barrier (ΦB) can considerably influence the PV properties of submicron chalcopyrite-based solar cells. ΦB, i.e., the difference between the Fermi level and valence band, can be altered by choosing the back-contact material based on its work function. Simulation results by Gloeckler & Sites (2005) showed that for a CIGSe absorber with a carrier density of 2 × 1016 cm−3 and a thickness less than 0.3 μm, the Voc was found to drop by 0.7 − ΦB for every 0.1 eV increase in ΦB. However, the Jsc remained undisturbed in ultrathin CIGSe solar cells. Increasing the back-contact barrier from 0.1 eV to 0.5 eV resulted in the drop of efficiency from 14% to 8%.219 Thick CIGSe-based solar cells were relatively insensitive toward the back-contact material as compared to ultrathin CIGS solar cells.
Along with the nature of the back-contact material, the depositing temperature (Ts) for CIGSe is a factor that is important for good PV performance. Usually, high-efficiency CIGSe devices on a Mo back-contact are prepared at a Ts of greater than 550 °C.276 However, for making ST photovoltaic cells, TCO is an imperative component of the cell. It has been observed in multiple studies that when a chalcopyrite with Ga in its composition is deposited on a TCO back electrode above 500 °C for fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) glass and above 520 °C for indium-doped tin oxide (ITO) glass, Ga2O3 forms at the CIGSe–TCO interface.277–280 Moreover, the resistivities of the ITO and FTO also increase, when the Ts goes beyond these critical temperatures.277,278,280 Ga2O3 is known to have n-type conductivity, so it forms a p–n junction with p-type CIGSe. This junction will act in the opposite direction to that of the buffer/CIGSe junction, and this undesirable situation of having two opposing junctions is unsuitable in a PV device. Furthermore, Ga2O3 has a bandgap of 4.4 eV, so it forms a spike in the valence band alignment. This also impedes the hole transport toward the back-contact.281 This highly resistive phase along with the high resistivity of TCO has adverse effects on the photovoltaic properties due to a reduction in the values of both FF and Voc (Table 7). Therefore, the formation of a stable interface is obligatory in the fabrication of high-efficiency chalcopyrite solar cells.
Table 7 Details of the interlayers and back-contact pretreatment to avoid Ga2O3 formation at the chalcopyrite–TCO interface (Ref. in the table represents the devices without any interlayer at the chalcopyrite–TCO interface or TCO pre-treatment)




Absorber
Modification
TCO

T
s (°C)

t (μm)

V
oc (V)
FF (%)
Eff. (%)




CIGSe (1.2 eV)277
Ref.
SnO2
500
—
0.61
62.6
13.7


Ref.
ITO
520
—
0.65
68.2
15.2


Ref.
ITO
550
—
0.56
51.8
9.6


Mo (60 nm)
ITO
550
—
0.55
67.8
12.8


Ref.
Al:ZnO
520
—
0.27
26.9
0.04


CIGSe (1.2 eV)246
Ref.
ITO
550
0.3
0.56
70.2
5.9


CIGSe (1.2 eV)246
MoO3−x (10 nm)
ITO
550
0.3
0.61
70.1
9.0


ACIGSe (1.28 eV)246
Ref.
ITO
550
0.3
0.50
46.2
3.6


ACIGSe (1.28 eV)246
MoO3−x (10 nm)
ITO
550
0.3
0.64
63.8
9.7


CIGSe (1.2 eV)246
Sulfurization
ITO
550
0.3
0.55
62.8
7.9


CIGSe (1.2 eV)246
MoS2 (2 nm)
ITO
550
0.3
0.59
61.5
7.6




At high CIGSe deposition temperatures, various strategies have been suggested in the literature to avoid the formation of this unwanted phase. Insertion of a thin layer of Mo between the ITO and CIGSe has been found to avoid the formation of Ga2O3. During the CIGSe deposition, Mo converts to MoSe2, which has a bandgap of 1.41 eV and p-type conductivity. The MoSe2 layer has a dual purpose because it avoids the Ga2O3 phase formation and also creates a sort of back-grading, thus increasing the efficiency of the cell to 12.8% (Table 7) on the ITO back-contact at a deposition temperature (Ts) of 550 °C while the efficiency at the same Ts in the absence of the Mo layer is 9.6%.277,278 In another approach, a pronounced improvement in efficiency (see Table 7) was noticed upon depositing a 10 nm MoO3−x layer on the ITO back electrode before depositing the ACIGSe or CIGSe absorber (Ts = 550 °C).244–246 Depth-dependent XPS analysis of the ACIGSe–MoO3−x interface showed that the MoO3−x layer suppressed the formation of Ga2O3,246 however, no information about Ga2O3 formation at the CIGSe-MoO3−x interface was provided, despite the fact that the MoO3−x layer also boosted the CIGSe solar cell PV properties.245,246 In another route, sulfurization of the ITO before deposition of CIGSe (Ts = 550 °C) has been scrutinized to observe its effect on the inhibition of the formation of Ga2O3.246 Sulfur was found to react with indium and tin to form In2S3 and SnS2 phases, respectively, due to their negative Gibbs free energies. During the deposition of CIGSe, Ga reacted with the In2S3, SnS2, or sulfur present on the surface to form Ga2S3, thus, the formation of the unacceptable Ga2O3 was inhibited. In the last approach, the MoS2 layer was utilized at the CIGSe-ITO interface to prevent the formation of Ga2O3. This layer also resulted in a gain of efficiency due to less Ga2O3 formation compared with the reference case, when CIGSe was deposited on a bare ITO glass. A summary of the various interlayers and TCO pretreatment to avoid Ga2O3 formation and their subsequent effects on the PV properties is given in Table 7.
It is apparent from the data that a MoO3−x interlayer was most effective in sustaining FF and Voc at 0.61 V and 70.1%, respectively, even in the case of the 0.3 μm thick CIGSe solar cells. It is definite from this discussion that the origin of this problem of deterioration of FF and Voc is the formation of Ga2O3, which is a consequence of high deposition temperatures. All of the absorbers given in Table 7 have (Ga)/(Ga + In) contents from 0.30 to 0.35. Therefore, the probability of Ga2O3 formation can be much higher in the case of chalcopyrites that are heavily alloyed with Ga, such as CGSe and CIGSe. It is therefore recommended to select low-melting-point chalcopyrites such as AGSe, AIS, AIGSe, and ACIGSe as discussed in Section 5.3. These compounds can generate good-quality absorbers at lower values of Ts and thus can rule out the problem.
5.5. Wide-bandgap buffer layer
CdS with a bandgap of 2.40 eV is the most commonly used buffer layer in high-efficiency CIGSe solar cells.282 When the solar radiation that is incident on a cell in the substrate configuration passes through the CdS buffer before reaching the absorber, all the photons having energy higher than that of the CdS bandgap are lost in the buffer layer, and as a consequence, the Jsc is reduced. This parasitic loss due to the CdS buffer layer can be circumvented by using a wide-bandgap buffer layer such as ZnS, In2S3, etc. ZnS has a bandgap of 3.72 eV and 3.77 eV, when its crystal structure is zinc blende and wurtzite, respectively.283 However, the ZnS-based thin-film bandgap grown through chemical bath deposition remains slightly lower because of the inclusion of ZnO and Zn(OH)2 phases. The optical transmittance of ZnS has been found to be 26% higher than that of CdS in the spectral range of 380 to 600 nm.284 Replacement of the CdS layer with a ZnS-based layer (Zn(O,S)) could possibly enhance the Jsc. Pettersson et al. (2013) have been able to obtain a value for Jsc that is 4 mA cm−2 higher when Zn(O,S) was applied instead of CdS as the buffer layer to a CIGSe absorber with a thickness of 300 nm.221 The increase in Jsc was due to improvement in the internal quantum efficiency (IQE) at shorter and longer wavelength. The improvement at shorter wavelengths was due to the high bandgap buffer, whereas the improved collection at longer wavelengths was due to the absence of acceptor states at the buffer–CIGSe interface. In ultrathin CIGSe solar cells, the Zn(O,S) buffer out-performed CdS buffer in terms of conversion efficiency. This increase in photocurrent will be at no cost to the visible transparency of cell.
5.6. Present status and future prospects
On the laboratory scale, there are just two studies cited in the literature that had been specifically oriented to develop chalcopyrite-based ST solar cells for fenestration products.59,285 In the first exploration, a porous CIGS (Eg ∼ 1.5 eV) prepared by a non-vacuum method was used as an active layer. In this work, the solar cell that was most nearly perfect for ST fenestration product application was fabricated with 400 nm thick CIGS, which showed a conversion efficiency of 3.03% on bifacial illumination (1.70% with front side illumination only). The average transmittance of this cell in the spectral range of 600 nm to 750 nm was ∼20%. The values of FF and Voc of a ST CIGS cell for BISTPV application by Moon et al. (2014) were 0.52 V and 44.7% upon front side illumination.59 There is considerable room to improve Voc and FF and thus the conversion efficiency. In the second investigation, 1.2 μm thick CuIn(SSe)2 (CISSe) was deposited on the FTO glass with 30 nm of MoO3 at the CISSe–FTO interface to form an ohmic contact.285 This cell exhibited an efficiency of 5.6%. The visible transmittance for this cell was not provided, however, the combination of the approximated bandgap (i.e., 1.1 eV) from the EQE response and the large absorber thickness suggests that this cell must have inferior translucency. Conversion efficiencies and transparencies of both these cells are quite low compared with DSSCs (Table 3), PSCs (Table 4) and a-Si:H solar cells (Table 5).
Until now, CIGSe-based solar cells have only been employed for BIPV in the form of shingles.286,287 According to Dow Chemical, these power-generating shingles will generate $5 billion in 2015 and $10–$11 billion by 2020.287 CIGSe modules (composed of opaque cells) for integration in roof tops,286 curtain walls,48 sunshades,48 and skylights48 are also available on the market. The BIPV market share of CIGSe is intended to reach 17% in the near future.288 Currently, there is not a single example, where ST chalcopyrite solar cells, either of the penetration type or the punch-through type, are being made on a mass scale and are being deployed in building-integrated fenestration products or other related applications. Thus, adding the see-through capability to the chalcopyrite-based solar cells would catalyze the progress to realize the expected value of 17% of the market share and significantly beyond this value.
6. Photocurrent enhancement strategies
In all types of the see-through solar cells reviewed in this article, semitransparency was achieved at the expense of the visible portion of the solar spectrum. There are two courses to augment the photocurrent. In both of these methods, the visible transparency will be slightly affected but the value of Jsc may be considerably improved. These approaches might work well in penetration-type ST solar cells but may not have much effect in microhole-assisted ST solar cells. The first method is to transform the ST solar cell into an angle-sensitive semitransparent solar cell (ASSSC). This cell is engineered in such a way that it allows normal incident light to pass through the structure, while solar rays impinging at high elevation angles are strongly absorbed in the photoactive layer. Using this technique, PV cells that are semitransparent in the normal direction and opaque at the higher angle of incidence can be realized. The introduction of structures such as metal nanoparticles, metal nanorods, or nanoporous dielectrics behind the thin-film ST absorber can result in an angle-selective photovoltaic structure.289 Such an approach has an additional advantage of not interfering with the electrical properties of the solar cell. Metal nanoparticles or nanorods selectively scatter the light exploiting their local surface plasmon (LSP) resonance properties. In the case of a 2D LSP structure, the shape, aspect ratio, arrangement, orientation, and distance from the absorber film are the parameters that need to be optimized to demonstrate the desired angular selectivity.290,291 Roberts et al. (2012) theoretically optimized such a system by using Al nanorods as a LSP-resonance structure array behind the solar cell along with a dielectric stack before and after the active film.292 It was found that the overall solar absorbance can be increased by a factor of 2.3 as compared with the solo cell, while maintaining orthogonal transparency to 70% with respect to the transparency of the parent cell. A review of the fabrication techniques for aligned nanostructures of a similar type and ways to tailor their morphologies for efficient photon management has been reported.293 Unfortunately, some of the optical energy may be lost due to heating of the plasmonic metal nanostructure and by the limited band width of the back scattering by the plasmons. To reduce these losses, nano-porous anodized aluminum oxide (AAO) has been used as the angle-dependent back reflector. Placing an AAO template (200 nm pore diameter, 300 nm inter-pore separation, and 60 μm total thickness) behind the solar cells raised the photocurrent by 30% when the light was incident at 45° while at the same time maintaining the orthogonal transmittance by more than 85%.294 ASSSC can be a good candidate for BISTPV applications, where normal transparency is important. A schematic of a STPV integrated with a LSP-resonance structure is shown in Fig. 13a.
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic of a ST solar cell integrated with a LSP-resonance structure based on metal nanorods and (b) schematic diagram coupled with the SEM micrograph for a-Si:H solar cell with selectively transparent and conducting photonic crystal (STCPC) (reprinted with permission).162 
A similar approach to enhance the Jsc value is to selectively reduce the transmitted portion of the solar spectrum by applying a 1D photonic crystal (also known as a distributed Bragg reflector (DBR)) to the rear contact in thin-film solar cells.295 In the penetration-type solar cell short wavelengths in the visible region are strongly absorbed in the photoactive film, while the far end portion of the visible region and the near-infrared wavelengths are weakly absorbed. Percentages of solar photon flux in the ultraviolet (UV), visible (Vis), and near-infrared (NIR) regions are 3.9%, 22.6%, and 73.5%, respectively.89 Moreover, the human eye sensitivity drops to 0.2 beyond 640 nm according to the International Commission on Illumination (CIE, 1978).296 Therefore, the far end portion of the Vis spectrum and NIR, where human eyes responsiveness is low, can be reflected back to the absorber using a DBR. A Bragg reflector can be made up of alternatively stacked two SiO2 films with varying degree of porosity,297 a SiO2/TiO2 thin-film stack,90 an ITO/antimony-doped tin oxide stack (ATO),298 a hydrogenated amorphous silicon/amorphous silicon nitride stack,296 and an a-SiN:H thin-film stack with high and low N contents.296 Selectively transparent and conducting photonic crystals (a Bragg reflector) made up by alternately coating ITO and SiO2 layers can strongly reflect a specific wavelength range of the solar spectrum back into the active layer, while the rest of the solar spectrum will be transmitted. This reflectance can be as great as ∼95% with a full-width half-maximum larger than 200 nm depending on the dielectric contrast between the Bragg reflector and the photoactive film.33 The Bragg reflection peak resulting from a STCPC structure can be tuned to avoid the region to which human eyes are sensitive, i.e., 500 nm to 600 nm, thus increasing the photocurrent without adversely affecting the visible transparency. Considering the refractive index of the component layers in a DBR structure, the respective thicknesses of the layers can be calculated using eqn (7).33 (7)where t1 and t2 are the thicknesses, while n1 and n2 are the refractive indices of two layers at the Bragg's reflection peak of interest (λp).
A DBR made up of alternative layers of ITO (90 nm) and SiO2 (100 nm) has been employed in a-Si:H solar cells, which resulted in the improvement of the relative Jsc and efficiency by 15.4% and 10.3%, respectively, compared to a reference cell with an ITO back-contact.162 A schematic diagram and SEM micrograph for a STCPC-based see-through a-Si:H solar cell is shown in Fig. 13b. Moreover, a DBR can also be used to control the color of a solar cell. Photographs and reflection peaks of Bragg reflectors based on indium tin oxide (ITO) and antimony-doped tin oxide stack (ATO) are shown in Fig. 14. ST colored PV cells based on this approach can be good candidates for BISTPV applications. Hence, incorporation of an LSP or DBR in the solar cell structure can result in an increase in the Jsc, which leads to an increase in efficiency while yet transmitting a considerable range of the Vis portion of the solar spectrum.
 Fig. 14  Reflection spectra and physical appearance of green (5.5 bilayers of 80 nm ATO and 60 nm ITO), yellow (5.5 bilayers of 80 nm ATO and 80 nm of ITO), and red (5.5 bilayers of 80 nm ATO and 100 nm ITO) Bragg reflectors (reprinted with permission).298 
7. BISTPV integrated electrochromic devices (BISTPV-EC)
In BISTPV with fixed transparency, excessive solar radiation can penetrate to the interior of the building in the summer, therefore raising the interior ambient temperature. For example, 10–30% of the peak electricity demand in US buildings is caused by solar heat gain.299 In such a situation, additional air conditioning is required to keep the working temperature in the comfort zone. Further, excessive solar penetration can also cause uncomfortable glare. Similarly in winter, loss of interior thermal heat to the outside through windows may require additional heating. Both of these situations will result in energy-inefficient buildings. Thus, to realize energy-efficient buildings, both the inward penetration of solar radiation and outward loss of thermal energy should be modulated in accordance with lighting conditions and interior temperature. Integration of an electrochromic (EC) device with ST solar cells can be the solution to these problems because such an integrated system may have variable-absorption or variable-reflectance light apertures and has the additional benefit of generating electricity. There are several illustrations of monolithic integration of EC windows with ST a-SiC:H solar cells.300–306 However, the integration of ST DSSCs and PSCs with EC devices can rarely be found in the literature.307,308 The field of ST CIGSe solar cells so far has not flourished, and therefore no study experimentally demonstrating the admissibility of monolithic integration of ST chalcopyrite with an EC assembly was found.
8. Conclusions
Widespread dissemination of BIPV can help in accomplishing the targets set by the EU regarding GHG emissions reduction and realization of zero-energy buildings. In buildings, integration of STPV can be of greater utility than opaque PV and therefore will be able to give an additional thrust to our attempts to achieve goals set by the EU. In the foreseeable future, thin-film-based BIPV are expected to flourish more than opaque BIPV (i.e., c-Si-based PV), which has already penetrated the market sufficiently well. Various theoretical models and on-ground studies have indicated that by proficient exploitation of BISTPV, net electricity consumption of buildings can substantially be curtailed. Many factors such as the degree of transparency, window-to-wall ratio, building orientation, mass of floor and ceiling, infiltration rate, solar heat-gain coefficient, etc. are important to consider for diminishing the grid dependency.
Semitransparency in PV modules can be introduced by laterally distributing the opaque/ST solar cells on the transparent support with some inter-cell gap. Modules with opaque solar cells might be aesthetically repulsive if the solar cell area is large. The aesthetic appeal of such modules can be comparatively more delightful if microcells could be used instead of macro-cells. However, modules with ST solar cells with or without inter-cell gaps depending upon our choice are more amiable compared with opaque cell-based modules. Additionally in STPV, penetration-type solar cells compared with punch-through type solar cells are easy to fabricate and do not need any additional process to induce ST.
The dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC) with multiple colors and semitransparency has immense commercialization potential due to its low cost. A DSSC with visible transmittance beyond 60% and conversion performance more than 3.5% has already been designed at the laboratory scale. Right now, stability issues associated with the DSSC are a predicament to its global acceptance for BISTPV applications. This is the reason that companies planning to commercialize ST DSSCs are still in their development stages. Research efforts to develop metal-free dyes, solid-state electrolytes, and materials alternative to Pt and TiO2 would be needed for their recognition in the BIPV/BISTPV market. Moreover, replacement or modification of more than one component at a time on the basis of theoretical considerations should be conducted to further improve their performance parameters. Recently, ST perovskite solar cells (PSCs), a successor of DSSCs, have achieved visible transparency and efficiency over 25% and 8%, respectively. But the stability issues in PSCs like in DSSCs have been the hurdle for their application in BISTPV.
On the other hand, the a-Si:H solar cell is more stable than the DSSC and many commercial ST modules based on this material are available in the market. Photo-induced degradation due to the Staebler–Wronski effect in a-Si:H solar cells can be avoided using a thin i-a-Si:H layer (∼200 nm or less). Adverse effects on the performance of ST cells due to reduction in the thickness of the p-a-Si:H layer and n-a-Si:H layer have been minimized by employing wide-bandgap buffer layers at both p–i and i–n interfaces and therefore ST a-Si:H solar cells with average transmittance and efficiency greater than 18.9% (500–800 nm) and 6.61%, respectively, have been prepared on a laboratory scale. Multicolored ST a-Si:H solar cells have also been made by exploiting the Fabry–Perot resonator structure and color-adjusting layer, however, ST cells based on these concepts are not available in the market yet. High stability, color applicability, high transmittance, and acceptable conversion efficiency make a-Si:H-based solar cells a good candidate for BISTPV applications.
Chalcopyrite (CIGSe) solar cells on the laboratory scale have exhibited efficiencies beyond 22%, which is considerably superior to both DSSCs and a-Si:H solar cells. Regardless of this fact, only a few studies have been aimed at the development of ST chalcopyrite solar cells. Because of this, chalcopyrite-based BISTPV (penetration or punch-through type) have not been introduced in the market yet. The high shunt conductance and back-surface recombination (BSR) in submicron absorbers and the low efficiency of wide-bandgap chalcopyrites are among the primary impediments toward the development of chalcopyrite-based BISTPV. Low-melting absorbers such as AGSe, AIS, AIGSe, and ACIGSe in concert with back-grading can cope with the problem of low shunt resistance and high BSR and hence can help in the realization of BISTPV. Exploitation of a wide-bandgap buffer layer in coordination with the aforementioned adaptation/modification can result in highly efficient ST solar cells. This material has enormous potential for BISTPV applications, therefore, concentrated studies are still required for its development.
Employing LSP-resonance structures or a distributed Bragg reflector (DBR) can increase the photocurrent in a-Si:H-, dye-sensitized-, perovskite-, and chalcopyrite-based penetration-type ST solar cells at little expense to their transparency. DBR along with photocurrent enhancement can also impart color to ST solar cells. Angle-sensitive ST solar cells as a result of LSP-resonance structure integration and colored ST solar cells based on DBR can be good candidates for BISTPV applications due to their enhanced performance.
BISTPV with fixed transparency may cause solar heat gain/loss and glare issues. Therefore, the transparency of BISTPV should be regulated based on the dwelling's lighting conditions and temperature. Consolidation of STPV with EC assembly can circumvent this problem. This would also be beneficial for boosting the photocurrent, when the EC device is operating in fully reflective mode.
Lastly, in the literature, different methods have been adopted for citing the degree of transparency, so the direct comparison of PV devices prepared by the different groups is not possible. Therefore, it is recommended to follow the ISO standard method (ISO 9050:2003) for calculating device transmittance, which takes into account the incident light spectral distribution, device transmittance, and eye sensitivity factor.67,68 If the same method for citing the transmittance of PV devices could be followed then the relationship (eqn (3)) by Zhang et al. (2014) can be used to evaluate the solar cells based on their transparencies and conversion efficiencies.74
Abbreviation

PVPhotovoltaics
BPVBuilding photovoltaics
BIPVBuilding-integrated photovoltaics
BAPVBuilding-attached photovoltaics

T
Visible transmittance
DSCDiffused solar cell
PSCPerovskite solar cell
STSemitransparent
BISTPVBuilding-integrated semitransparent photovoltaics
WWRWindow-to-wall ratio
DSSCDye-sensitized solar cell
TCOTransparent conducting oxide
CECounter electrode

η
Photovoltaic conversion efficiency
a-Si:HHydrogenated amorphous silicon
p-a-Si:Hp-Type hydrogenated amorphous silicon
n-a-Si:Hn-Type hydrogenated amorphous silicon
i-a-Si:HIntrinsic hydrogenated amorphous silicon
EBRElectron back reflector
ASSSCAngle-sensitive semitransparent solar cell
LSPLocal surface plasmon
AAOAnodized aluminum oxide
DBRDistributed Bragg reflector
ECElectrochromic
STPV-ECSemitransparent photovoltaics integrated with electrochromic device

Acknowledgements
This work was conducted under the framework of the Research and Development Program of the Korea Institute of Energy Research (KIER) (B6-2418), and also partly supported by the Center for Advanced Meta-Materials (CAMM) funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT and Future Planning as Global Frontier Project (CAMM-No. 2015M3A6B3063703).
References
C. G. Granqvist, Smart Materials Bulletin, 2002, 9–10 CrossRef .
B. P. Jelle, C. Breivik and H. D. Røkenes, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 100, 69–96 CrossRef .

          Pathways to a low-Carbon economy, Version 2 of the Global Greenhouse Gas Abatement Cost Curve, McKinsey & Company,  2009 Search PubMed .
Paris Agreement, http://ec.europa.eu/clima/policies/international/negotiations/future/index_en.htm, accessed January 2015.

          Energy and Climate Change, International Energy Agency,  2015 Search PubMed.
T. V. Ramachandra and B. V. Shruthi, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2007, 11, 1460–1480 CrossRef .
J. D. Mondol and S. K. Hillenbrand, Int. J. Ambient Energy, 2014, 35, 200–210 CrossRef CAS .
E. Karakaya, A. Hidalgo and C. Nuur, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2015, 43, 1090–1098 CrossRef .

          M. S. Keshner and R. Arya, Study of Potential Cost Reductions Resulting from Super-large-scale Manufacturing of PV Modules, National Renewable Energy Laboratory,  2004 Search PubMed .

2014 Snapshot of Global PV Markets, IEA International Energy Agency,  2015 Search PubMed.
Mercom Capital Group reiterates global solar forecast, installations to reach 57.4 GW in 2015, http://mercomcapital.com/mercom-capital-group-reiterates-global-solar-forecast-installations-to-reach-57.4-gw-in-2015#sthash.wbi977Ct.dpuf, accessed November, 2015.
M. Raugei and P. Frankl, Energy, 2009, 34, 392–399 CrossRef .
C. D. S. Jardim, R. Ruther, I. T. Salamoni, T. D. S. Viana, S. H. Rebechi and P. J. Knob, Energ. Build., 2008, 40, 365–370 CrossRef .
C. Peng, Y. Huang and Z. Wu, Energ. Build., 2011, 43, 3592–3598 CrossRef .
A. Henemann, Renewable Energy Focus, 2008, 9, 14–19 CrossRef .

          B. J. D. Boer and W. G. J. V. Helden, Presented in Part at the 9th Internation Conference on Solar Energy in High Latitudes, Leiden, The Netherlands,  2001 Search PubMed .

          E. Vartiainen, K. Mäki-Petäys and P. D. Lund, Presented in Part at the ISES European Solar Congress, Copenhagen, Denmark,  June, 2000 Search PubMed .

          M. Evans, B. Shui and T. Takagi, Country report on building energy codes in Japan,  2009 Search PubMed .
Building integrated photovoltaics report 2012, http://www.navigantresearch.com/, accessed November, 2015.

          Hong Kong energy end-use Data 2013, The Energy Efficiency Office, Electrical & Mechanical Services Department, Kowloon Bay, Hong Kong,  2013 Search PubMed.
T. Miyazaki, A. Akisawa and T. Kashiwagi, Renewable Energy, 2005, 30, 281–304 CrossRef .
D. H. W. Li, T. N. T. Lam and K. L. Cheung, Energy Convers. Manage., 2009, 50, 1981–1990 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Yoon, J. Song and S.-J. Lee, Sol. Energy, 2011, 85, 723–733 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. W. Li, T. N. T. Lam, W. W. H. Chan and A. H. L. Mak, Appl. Energy, 2009, 86, 722–729 CrossRef CAS .
P. W. Wong, Y. Shimoda, M. Nonaka, M. Inouea and M. Mizunob, Renewable Energy, 2008, 33, 1024–1036 CrossRef .
J. W. Lee, J. Park and H.-J. Jung, Energ. Build., 2014, 81, 38–47 CrossRef .
S. Yoon, S. Tak, J. Kim, Y. Jun, K. Kang and J. Park, Building and Environment, 2011, 46, 1899–1904 CrossRef .
T. Y. Y. Fung and H. Yang, Energ. Build., 2008, 40, 341–350 CrossRef .

          D. Prasad and M. Snow, Designing with Solar Power: a Source Book for Building Integrated
Photovoltaic (BIPV), The Images Publishing Group Pty Ltd., Victoria, 1st edn,  2005 Search PubMed .

          B. J. D. Boer and W. G. J. V. Helden, Presented in Part at the NorthSun 2001 9th International Conference on Solar Energy in High Latitudes, Leiden The Netherlands,  May, 2001 Search PubMed .
H. Kaan and T. Reijenga, Progress in Photovoltaics: Research and Applications, 2004, 12, 395–408 CrossRef .

          IEA International Energy Agency, PVPS Annual Report,  2002 Search PubMed.
P. G. O'Brien, A. Chutinan, P. Mahtani, K. Leong, G. A. Ozin and N. P. Kherani, Opt. Express, 2011, 19, 17040–17052 CrossRef PubMed .
C. J. M. Emmott, J. A. Rohr, M. Campoy-Quiles, T. Kirchartz, A. Urbina, N. J. Ekins-Daukes and J. Nelson, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1317–1328 CAS .
C. Campiotti, C. Bibbiani, F. Dondi, M. Scoccianti and C. Viola, J. Sustainable Bioenergy Syst., 2011, 2, 51–56 Search PubMed .
M. Kadowaki, A. Yano, F. Ishizu, T. Tanaka and S. Noda, Bioprocess Biosyst. Eng., 2012, 3, 290–297 CrossRef .
A. Marucci, D. Monarca, M. Cecchini, A. Colantoni, A. Manzo and A. Cappuccini, Math. Probl. Eng., 2012, 2012, 451934 Search PubMed .
M. Carlini, T. Honorati and S. Castellucci, Math. Probl. Eng., 2012, 2012, 743764 Search PubMed .
J. Perez-Alonso, M. Perez-Garcıa, M. Pasamontes-Romera and A. J. Callejon-Ferre, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2012, 16, 4675–4685 CrossRef .
A. Yano, M. Kadowaki, A. Furue, N. Tamaki, T. Tanaka, E. Hiraki, Y. Kato, F. Ishizu and S. Noda, Bioprocess Biosyst. Eng., 2010, 106, 367–377 CrossRef .
A. Yano, M. Onoe and J. Nakata, Bioprocess Biosyst. Eng., 2014, 122, 62–73 CrossRef .
P. J. Sonneveld, G. L. A. M. Swinkels, B. A. J. V. Tuijl, H. J. J. Janssen, J. Campen and G. P. A. Bot, Sol. Energy, 2011, 85, 432–442 CrossRef .
ULMA and Tecnalia conduct crop testing with a special photovoltaic panel for greenhouses, http://www.basqueresearch.com/new/1556#.UIFOmMXA_Sh, accessed November, 2015.

          M. Cossu, L. Murgia, M. Caria and A. Pazzona, Presented in Part at the Work Safety and Risk Prevention in Agro-food and Forest Systems: International Conference Ragusa SHWA2010, Ragusa Ibla Campus- Italy,  2010, pp. 648–655 Search PubMed .
K.-I. Hanaki, Y. Hattori, H. Nakabayashi, S. Yamaguchi and Y. Hamakawa, MRS Online Proc. Libr., 1989, 149 DOI:10.1557/proc-149-395 .

Chemical Buisness,  2010, vol. 24, p. 24 Search PubMed.

          B. Berton, Commercial Property Executive,  2015, pp. 43–44 Search PubMed .

          http://www.epbd-ca.eu/themes/nearly-zero-energy, accessed August 2015.
A. Mourant, Renewable Energy Focus, 2014, 15, 20–23 Search PubMed .
Best Research-Cell Efficiencies, http://www.nrel.gov/ncpv/images/efficiency_chart.jpg, accessed March, 2016.

          Y. Hamakawa, 1st World Renewable Energy Congress, Pergamon Press,  1990, pp. 39–48 Search PubMed .
A. Takeoka, S. Kouzuma, H. Tanaka, H. Inoue, K. Murata, M. Morizane, N. Nakamura, H. Nishiwaki, M. Ohnishi, S. Nakano and Y. Kuwano, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1993, 29, 243–252 CrossRef CAS .
I. Matulionis, J. Hu, A. Stavrides, N. Call, A. Kunrath and A. Madan, MRS Online Proc. Libr., 2006, 973 DOI:10.1557/PROC-0973-BB06-01 .
R. Kuhn, A. Boueke, A. E. Kress, P. Fath, G. P. Willeke and E. Bucher, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 1999, 46, 2013–2017 CrossRef CAS .

          W. Jooss, M. Klenkl, J. Isenbart, S. Keller, C. Marckmann, L. Weber, P. Fath, A. Boueke, H. Nussbaumer and R. Burkhardtl, 3rd World Conference on Photovoltaic Energy Conversion IEEE,  2003, pp. 1439–1442 Search PubMed .
G. Willeke and P. Fath, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1994, 64, 1274–1276 CrossRef CAS .
P. Fatha, H. Nussbaumerb and R. Burkhardt, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2002, 74, 127–131 CrossRef .

          C. Denizot, S. Faÿ, J. Bailat, C. Ballif, S. Jensen, A. Johansson, M. Lillemose and E. Bezzel, Presented in Part at the 24th EU PVSEC, Hamburg, Germany,  2009 Search PubMed .
S. H. Moon, S. J. Park, Y. J. Hwang, D.-K. Lee, Y. Cho, D.-W. Kim and B. K. Min, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 4408 Search PubMed .
J. Yoon, A. J. Baca, S.-I. Park, P. Elvikis, J. B. Geddes, L. Li, R. H. Kim, J. Xiao, S. Wang, T.-H. Kim, M. J. Motala, B. Y. Ahn, E. B. Duoss, J. A. Lewis, R. G. Nuzzo, P. M. Ferreira, Y. Huang, A. Rockett and J. A. Rogers, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 907–915 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Biancardo, K. Taira, N. Kogo, H. Kikuchi, N. Kumagai, N. Kuratani, I. Inagawa, S. Imoto and J. Nakata, Sol. Energy, 2007, 81, 711–716 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Kang, N.-G. Park, Y. J. Park, K. S. Ryu and S. H. Chang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2003, 75, 475–479 CrossRef CAS .
R.-T. Chen, J. L. H. Chau and G.-L. Hwang, Renewable Energy, 2012, 40, 24–28 CrossRef .
M. J. Currie, J. K. Mapel, T. D. Heidel, S. Goffri and M. A. Baldo, Science, 2008, 321, 226–228 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, R. Deng, Y. Gong, C. Zou, Y. Liu, X. Zhou and B. Li, Int. J. Photoenergy, 2014, 290952 Search PubMed .
J. L. H. Chau, R.-T. Chen, G.-L. Hwang, P.-Y. Tsai and C.-C. Lin, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 588–591 CrossRef CAS .
Glass in building – Determination of light transmittance, solar direct transmittance, total solar energy transmittance, ultraviolet transmittance and related glazing factors (ISO 9050:2003), http://www.iso.org/iso/home/store/catalogue_tc/catalogue_detail.htm?csnumber=35062, accessed September 2015.
D. Colonna, V. Capogna, A. Lembo, T. M. Brown, A. Reale and A. D. Carlo, Appl. Phys. Express, 2012, 5, 022303 CrossRef .
B. O'Regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737–740 CrossRef .
H. Otaka, M. Kira, K. Yano, S. Ito, H. Mitekura, T. Kawata and F. Matsui, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2004, 164, 67–73 CrossRef CAS .
G. E. Tulloch, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2004, 164, 209–219 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ito, T. N. Murakami, P. Comte, P. Liska, C. Grätzel, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Thin Solid Films, 2008, 516, 4613–4619 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mathew, A. Yella, P. Gao, R. Humphry-Baker, F. E. CurchodBasile, N. Ashari-Astani, I. Tavernelli, U. Rothlisberger, K. NazeeruddinMd and M. Grätzel, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 242–247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Zhang, C. Qin, X. Yang, A. Islam, S. Zhang, H. Chen and L. Han, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4 DOI:10.1002/aenm.201301966 .
J. KawaKita, Science and technology trends, Q. Rev., 2010, 35, 70–82 Search PubMed .
A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo, L. Sun, L. Kloo and H. Pettersson, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6596–6663 CrossRef PubMed .
F.-T. Kong, S.-Y. Dai and K.-J. Wang, Adv. OptoElectron., 2007, 2007, 13 Search PubMed .
J. B. Baxter, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2012, 30, 020801 Search PubMed .
M. Wu and T. Ma, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 1343–1357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Tagliaferro, D. Colonna, T. M. Brown, A. Reale and A. Di Carlo, Opt. Express, 2013, 21, 3235–3242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Barbe, F. Arendse, P. Comte, M. Jirousek, F. Lenzmann, V. Shklover and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1997, 80, 3157 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yuan, Q. Tang, B. He, L. Men and H. Chen, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 125, 646–651 CrossRef CAS .
M. Law, L. E. Greene, J. C. Johnson, R. Saykally and P. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 455–459 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Barpuzary, A. S. Patra, J. V. Vaghasiya, B. G. Solanki, S. S. Soni and M. Qureshi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 12629–12639 CAS .
J. B. Baxter and E. S. Aydil, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 053114 CrossRef .
J. Fan, Y. Hao, A. Cabot, E. M. J. Johansson, G. Boschloo and A. Hagfeldt, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 1902–1906 CAS .
C. Xu, J. Wu, U. V. Desai and D. Gao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 8122–8125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Dodoo-Arhin, M. Fabiane, A. Bello and N. Manyala, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2013, 52, 14160–14168 CrossRef CAS .
R. R. Lunt, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 043902 CrossRef .
R. R. Lunt and V. Bulovic, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 113305 CrossRef .
C. J. M. Emmott, J. A. Rohr, M. Campoy-Quiles, T. Kirchartz, A. Urbina, N. J. Ekins-Daukes and J. Nelson, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1317–1328 CAS .
C. H. Yoon, R. Vittal, J. Lee, W.-S. Chae and K.-J. Kim, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 2890–2896 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang and Y. H. Hu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8182–8188 CAS .
J. D. Roy-Mayhew and I. A. Aksay, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 6323–6348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wu, Y. Li, Q. Tang, G. Yue, J. Lin, M. Huang and L. Meng, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 4028 Search PubMed .
Q. Tai, B. Chen, F. Guo, S. Xu, H. Hu, B. Sebo and X.-Z. Zhao, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 3795–3799 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Bu, Q. Tai, Y. Liu, S. Guo and X. Zhao, J. Power Sources, 2013, 221, 78–83 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, Q. Li, L. Fan, Z. Lan, P. Li, J. Lin and S. Hao, J. Power Sources, 2008, 181, 172–176 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xia, L. Chen and S. Yanagida, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 4644–4649 RSC .
J. Xu, M. Li, L. Wu, Y. Sun, L. Zhu, S. Gu, L. Liu, Z. Bai, D. Fang and W. Xu, J. Power Sources, 2014, 257, 230–236 CrossRef CAS .
W. Hong, Y. Xu, G. Lu, C. Li and G. Shi, Electrochem. Commun., 2008, 10, 1555–1558 CrossRef CAS .
H. Choi, H. Kim, S. Hwang, W. Choi and M. Jeon, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 323–325 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Lee, E. Ramasamy, D. Y. Lee and J. S. Song, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2008, 194, 27–30 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Lee, E. Ramasamy, D. Y. Lee and J. S. Song, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 814–818 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Huang, X. Liu, K. Li, D. Li, Y. Luo, H. Li, W. Song, L. Chen and Q. Meng, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 596–598 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wu and T. Ma, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16727–16742 CAS .
Y. T. Tang, S. Y. D. Xu Pan, C. N. Zhang and H. J. Tian, Key Eng. Mater., 2010, 451, 63–78 CrossRef .
J.-G. Kang, J.-H. Kim, H.-B. Jang and J.-T. Kim, Int. J. Photoenergy, 2015, 2015, 7 CrossRef .
Dyesol Ltd., http://www.dyesol.com, accessed March, 2016.
G24Power Ltd., http://gcell.com, accessed March, 2016.
Glass 2 Energy Ltd., http://www.g2e.ch, accessed March, 2016.
Solaronix, http://www.solaronix.com, accessed March, 2016.
Nissha, http://www.nissha.com, accessed March, 2016.
Brite, http://www.britesolar.com, accessed March, 2016.
M. Biancardo, K. West and F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 2575–2588 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ito, S. M. Zakeeruddin, P. Comte, P. Liska, D. Kuang and M. Gartzel, Nat. Photonics, 2008, 2, 693–698 CrossRef CAS .
O. Kohle, M. Gratzel, A. F. Meyer and T. B. Meyer, Adv. Mater., 1997, 9, 904–906 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hinsch, J. M. Kroon, R. Kern, I. Uhlendorf, J. Holzbock, A. Meyer and J. Ferber, Progress in Photovoltaics: Research and Applications, 2001, 9, 425–438 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Sommeling, M. Späth, H. J. P. Smit, N. J. Bakker and J. M. Kroon, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2004, 164, 137–144 CrossRef CAS .
T. Toyoda, T. Sano, J. Nakajima, S. Doi, S. Fukumoto, A. Ito, T. Tohyama, M. Yoshida, T. Kanagawa, T. Motohiro, T. Shiga, K. Higuchi, H. Tanaka, Y. Takeda, T. Fukano, N. Katoh, A. Takeichi, K. Takechi and M. Shiozawa, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2004, 164, 203–207 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kato, Y. Takeda, K. Higuchi, A. Takeichi, E. Sudo, H. Tanaka, T. Motohiro, T. Sano and T. Toyoda, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 893–897 CrossRef CAS .
H. Pettersson and T. Gruszecki, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2001, 70, 203–212 CrossRef CAS .
R. Harikisun and H. Desilvestro, Sol. Energy, 2011, 85, 1179–1188 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Hinsch, J. M. Kroon, M. Späth, J. A. M. V. Roosmalen, N. J. Bakker, P. Sommeling, N. V. D. Burg, R. Kinderman, R. Kern, J. Ferber, C. Schill, M. Schubert, A. Meyer, T. Meyer, I. Uhlendorf, J. Holzbock and R. Niepmann, 16th European Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conference and Exhibition, Taylor & Francis,  2000, pp. 1–7 Search PubMed .
Z. Li, S. A. Kulkarni, P. P. Boix, E. Shi, A. Cao, K. Fu, S. K. Batabyal, J. Zhang, Q. Xiong, L. H. Wong, N. Mathews and S. G. Mhaisalkar, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 6797–6804 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Fu, T. Feurer, T. Jager, E. Avancini, B. Bissig, S. Yoon, S. Buecheler and A. N. Tiwari, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6 DOI:10.1038/ncomms9932 .
E. Della Gaspera, Y. Peng, Q. Hou, L. Spiccia, U. Bach, J. J. Jasieniak and Y.-B. Cheng, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 249–257 CrossRef CAS .
F. Guo, H. Azimi, Y. Hou, T. Przybilla, M. Hu, C. Bronnbauer, S. Langner, E. Spiecker, K. Forberich and C. J. Brabec, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 1642–1649 RSC .
P. Gao, M. Gratzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2448–2463 CAS .
C. D. Bailie, M. G. Christoforo, J. P. Mailoa, A. R. Bowring, E. L. Unger, W. H. Nguyen, J. Burschka, N. Pellet, J. Z. Lee, M. Gratzel, R. Noufi, T. Buonassisi, A. Salleo and M. D. McGehee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 956–963 CAS .
J. H. Noh, S. H. Im, J. H. Heo, T.
N. Mandal and S. I. Seok, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1764–1769 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. E. Eperon, D. Bryant, J. Troughton, S. D. Stranks, M. B. Johnston, T. Watson, D. A. Worsley and H. J. Snaith, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 129–138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. S. Yang, J. H. Noh, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Science, 2015, 348, 1234–1237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, W. S. Yang, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Nature, 2015, 517, 476–480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. K. Noel, S. D. Stranks, A. Abate, C. Wehrenfennig, S. Guarnera, A.-A. Haghighirad, A. Sadhanala, G. E. Eperon, S. K. Pathak, M. B. Johnston, A. Petrozza, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3061–3068 CAS .
G. E. Eperon, V. M. Burlakov, A. Goriely and H. J. Snaith, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 591–598 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mei, X. Li, L. Liu, Z. Ku, T. Liu, Y. Rong, M. Xu, M. Hu, J. Chen, Y. Yang, M. Grätzel and H. Han, Science, 2014, 345, 295–298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Loper, S.-J. Moon, S. Martin de Nicolas, B. Niesen, M. Ledinsky, S. Nicolay, J. Bailat, J.-H. Yum, S. De Wolf and C. Ballif, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 1619–1629 RSC .
L. Kranz, A. Abate, T. Feurer, F. Fu, E. Avancini, J. Löckinger, P. Reinhard, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Grätzel, S. Buecheler and A. N. Tiwari, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 2676–2681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Werner, G. Dubuis, A. Walter, P. Löper, S.-J. Moon, S. Nicolay, M. Morales-Masis, S. De Wolf, B. Niesen and C. Ballif, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2015, 141, 407–413 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kaiyu, L. Fushan, Z. Jianhua, V. Chandrasekar Perumal and G. Tailiang, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27, 095202 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Jiang, T. Liu, S. Zeng, Q. Zhao, X. Min, Z. Li, J. Tong, W. Meng, S. Xiong and Y. Zhou, Opt. Express, 2015, 23, A83–A91 CrossRef PubMed .
P. You, Z. Liu, Q. Tai, S. Liu and F. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3632–3638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Bryant, P. Greenwood, J. Troughton, M. Wijdekop, M. Carnie, M. Davies, K. Wojciechowski, H. J. Snaith, T. Watson and D. Worsley, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 7499–7504 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Roldan-Carmona, O. Malinkiewicz, R. Betancur, G. Longo, C. Momblona, F. Jaramillo, L. Camacho and H. J. Bolink, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2968–2973 CAS .
L. K. Ono, S. Wang, Y. Kato, S. R. Raga and Y. Qi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3989–3993 CAS .
S. Wang, L. K. Ono, M. R. Leyden, Y. Kato, S. R. Raga, M. V. Lee and Y. Qi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 14631–14641 CAS .
J. H. Heo, H. J. Han, M. Lee, M. Song, D. H. Kim and S. H. Im, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2922–2927 CAS .
H. J. Snaith, A. Abate, J. M. Ball, G. E. Eperon, T. Leijtens, N. K. Noel, S. D. Stranks, J. T.-W. Wang, K. Wojciechowski and W. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1511–1515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Conings, J. Drijkoningen, N. Gauquelin, A. Babayigit, J. D'Haen, L. D'Olieslaeger, A. Ethirajan, J. Verbeeck, J. Manca, E. Mosconi, F. D. Angelis and H.-G. Boyen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5 DOI:10.1002/aenm.201500477 .
T. Leijtens, G. E. Eperon, N. K. Noel, S. N. Habisreutinger, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5 DOI:10.1002/aenm.201500963 .
Y. Kato, L. K. Ono, M. V. Lee, S. Wang, S. R. Raga and Y. Qi, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 2 DOI:10.1002/admi.201500195 .
J. H. Heo, H. J. Han, D. Kim, T. K. Ahn and S. H. Im, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1602–1608 CAS .
J. Yang, B. D. Siempelkamp, D. Liu and T. L. Kelly, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 1955–1963 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Leijtens, G. E. Eperon, S. Pathak, A. Abate, M. M. Lee and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2885 Search PubMed .
K. A. Bush, C. D. Bailie, Y. Chen, A. R. Bowring, W. Wang, W. Ma, T. Leijtens, F. Moghadam and M. D. McGehee, Adv. Mater., 2016 DOI:10.1002/adma.201505279 .
R. C. Chittick, J. H. Alexander and H. F. Sterling, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1969, 116, 77–81 CrossRef CAS .

          R. A. Street, Hydrogenated Amorphous Silicon, Cambridge University Press, New York, 1st edn,  1991 Search PubMed .
D. E. Carlson and C. R. Wronski, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1976, 28, 671–673 CrossRef CAS .
J. I. B. Wilson and D. Weaire, Nature, 1978, 275, 93–96 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Shah, H. Schade, M. Vanecek, J. Meier, E. Vallat-Sauvain, N. Wyrsch, U. Kroll, C. Droz and J. Bailat, Progress in Photovoltaics: Research and Applications, 2004, 12, 113–142 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, P. G. O. Brien, G. A. Ozin and N. P. Kherani, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 221109 CrossRef .
H. Maurus, M. Schmid, B. Blersch, P. Lechner and H. Schade, Refocus, 2004, 5, 22–27 CrossRef .
B. Rech and H. Wagner, Appl. Phys. A, 1999, 69, 155–167 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Luque and S. Hegedus, Handbook of Photovoltaic Science and Engineering, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd., West Sussex, 2nd edn,  2003 Search PubMed .

          N. Wyrsch, S. Dunand and C. Ballif, Proceedings of Numos,  2007, pp. 289–295 Search PubMed .
D. L. Staebler and C. R. Wronski, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1977, 31, 292–294 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Lim, S. H. Lee, D. J. Lee, Y. J. Lee and S. J. Yun, Thin Solid Films, 2013, 547, 212–215 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. I. Schropp, K. Adachi, N. Imajyo, J. A. D. Cueto, P. K. Bhat and A. Madan, MRS Online Proc. Libr., 1989, 149 DOI:10.1557/proc-149-429 .

          S. Yamanaka, M. Konagai and K. Takahashi, The IEEE 20th Photovoltaic Specialists Conference (PVSC20), IEEE,  1988, pp. 160–165 Search PubMed .

          P. Fiorini, A. Mittiga, I. Chambouleyron and F. Evangelisti, The 21th IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists Conference (PVSC38), IEEE,  1990, pp. 1526–1528 Search PubMed .
D. E. Carlson, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 1980, 35, 707–717 CrossRef .
C.-H. Cheng, Y.-H. Lin, J.-H. Chang, C.-I. Wu and G.-R. Lin, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 18397–18405 RSC .
S. Liu, X. Zeng, W. Peng, H. Xiao, W. Yao, X. Xie, C. Wang and Z. Wang, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2011, 357, 121–125 CrossRef CAS .
W. Y. Kim, H. Tasaki, M. Konagai and K. Takahashi, J. Appl. Phys., 1987, 61, 3071–3076 CrossRef CAS .
B. Rech, C. Beneking and H. Wagner, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1996, 41–42, 475–483 CrossRef .
B. Vet and M. Zeman, Thin Solid Films, 2008, 516, 6873–6876 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Pearce, R. J. Koval, A. S. Ferlauto, R. W. Collins, C. R. Wronski, J. Yang and S. Guha, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 77, 3093–3095 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Lee, J. W. Jeon and K. S. Lim, J. Appl. Phys., 2000, 87, 8778–8785 CrossRef CAS .
T. Y. Lee, W. H. Son, S. K. Lee and S. Y. Choi, Mol. Cryst. Liq. Cryst., 2013, 586, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
D. Lundszien, F. Finger and H. Wagner, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2002, 74, 365–372 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Lim, D. J. Lee and S. J. Yun, ECS Solid State Lett., 2013, 2, Q47–Q49 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Lee, S. J. Yun, S. H. Lee and J. W. Lim, ETRI Journal, 2013, 35, 730–733 CrossRef .

          X. Zhang, M. Saemann, J. Hu, A. Kunrath, A. Berger and A. Madan, Presented in Part at the IEEE 4th World Conference on Photovoltaic Energy Conversion, Waikoloa, HI,  2006, pp. 1517–1520 Search PubMed .
G. M. Ablayev, A. I. Kosarev, A. V. Kukin, M. Y. Semerukhin, M. Z. Shvarts, E. I. Terukov and D. V. Zhilina, J. Phys.: Conf. Ser., 2014, 572, 012049 CrossRef .
J. Y. Lee, K.-T. Lee, S. Seo and L. J. Guo, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 4192 Search PubMed .
Y.-H. Chen, C.-W. Chen, Z.-Y. Huang, W.-C. Lin, L.-Y. Lin, F. Lin, K.-T. Wong and H.-W. Lin, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1129–1134 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          K. T. Lee, J. Y. Lee, S. Seo and L. Jay Guo, Conference on Laser and Electro-optics (CLEO), IEEE,  2014, pp. 1–2 Search PubMed .

          L. Jae Yong, L. Kyu-Tae, S. Sungyong and L. J. Guo, Conference on Lasers and Electro-optics (CLEO), IEEE,  2014, pp. 1–2 Search PubMed .
S. H. Lee, S. J. Yun, M. Shin and J. W. Lim, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 117, 519–525 CrossRef CAS .
Polysolar, http://www.polysolar.co.uk, accessed March, 2016.
Onyx Solar, http://www.onyxsolar.com, accessed March, 2016.
SCHOTT solar, http://www.us.schott.com, accessed March, 2016.
Sun Well Solar, http://www.sunwellsolar.com, accessed March, 2016.
Schüco, http://www.schueco.com, accessed March, 2016.
Xiamen Solar First Energy Technology Co. Ltd., http://www.esolarfirst.com, accessed March, 2016.
Wuhan Rixin Technology Co., Ltd., http://www.rixinsolar.com, accessed March, 2016.
Hangzhou Amplesun Solar Technology Co., Ltd., http://www.ample-sun.com, accessed March, 2016.
Tangshan Shaiyang Solar Technology Co., Ltd., http://en.worldsolar.com.cn, accessed March, 2016.
Zhejiang Ganghang Solar Technology Co., Ltd., http://www.zjghenergy.com, accessed March, 2016.
Yueqing Saip Electric Co., Ltd., http://www.saipgroup.com, accessed March, 2016.
QS Solar, http://www.qssolar.com, accessed March, 2016.
Tianwei New Energy Holdings Co., Ltd, http://www.twnesolar.com, accessed March, 2016.

          J. S. Britt, E. Kanto, S. Lundberg and M. E. Beck, The IEEE 4th World Conference OnPhotovoltaic Energy Conversion, IEEE,  2006, pp. 352–355 Search PubMed .
T. K. Todorov, O. Gunawan, T. Gokmen and D. B. Mitzi, Progress in Photovoltaics: Research and Applications, 2013, 21, 82–87 CrossRef CAS .

          S. R. Kodigala, in Cu(In1−xGax)Se2 Based Thin Films Solar Cells, ed. K. Subba Ramaiah, Academic Press, Burlington,  2010, vol. 35, ch. 5, pp. 195–317 Search PubMed .
S. Siebentritt, M. Igalson, C. Persson and S. Lany, Progress in Photovoltaics: Research and Applications, 2010, 18, 390–410 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2008, 69, 330–334 CrossRef CAS .
P. Jackson, D. Hariskos, R. Wuerz, O. Kiowski, A. Bauer, T. M. Friedlmeier and M. Powalla, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2015, 9, 28–31 CrossRef CAS .
P. Jackson, D. Hariskos, R. Wuerz, W. Wischmann and M. Powalla, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2014, 8, 219–222 CrossRef CAS .
P. Jackson, D. Hariskos, E. Lotter, S. Paetel, R. Wuerz, R. Menner, W. Wischmann and M. Powalla, Progress in Photovoltaics: Research and Applications, 2011, 19, 894–897 CrossRef CAS .
U. P. Singh and S. P. Patra, Int. J. Photoenergy, 2010, 2010, 468147 CrossRef .

          U. Rau, in Advances in Solid State Physics, ed. B. Kramer, Springer, Berlin, 1st edn,  2004, vol. 44, ch. 3, pp. 27–38 Search PubMed .

          S. R. Kodigala, in Cu(In1−xGax)Se2 Based Thin Films Solar Cells, Academic Press, Burlington, 1st edn,  2010, vol. 35, ch. 8, pp. 505–679 Search PubMed .

          T. Negami, S. Nishiwaki, Y. Hashimoto and N. Kohara, Proc. 2nd World Conf. Photovolt. Energy Convers,  1998, pp. 1181–1184 Search PubMed .
A. Han, Y. Zhang, W. Song, B. Li, W. Liu and Y. Sun, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2012, 27, 035022 CrossRef .
D. Braunger, D. Hariskos, T. Walter and H. W. Schock, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1996, 40, 97–102 CrossRef CAS .
R. Klenk, U. Blieske, V. Dieterle, K. Ellmer, S. Fiechter, I. Hengel, A. Jäger-Waldau, T. Kampschulte, C. Kaufmann, J. Klaer, M. C. Lux-Steiner, D. Braunger, D. Hariskos, M. Ruckh and H. W. Schock, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1997, 49, 349–356 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gloeckler and J. R. Sites, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 98, 103703 CrossRef .
N. Touafek and R. Mahamdi, International Journal of Renewable Energy Research, 2014, 4, 958–964 Search PubMed .
J. Pettersson, T. Torndahl, C. Platzer-Bjorkman, A. Hultqvist and M. Edoff, IEEE Journal of Photovoltaics, 2013, 3, 1376–1382 CrossRef .
Z. Jehl, F. Erfurth, N. Naghavi, L. Lombez, I. Gerard, M. Bouttemy, P. Tran-Van, A. Etcheberry, G. Voorwinden, B. Dimmler, W. Wischmann, M. Powalla, J. F. Guillemoles and D. Lincot, Thin Solid Films, 2011, 519, 7212–7215 CrossRef CAS .

          D. Ledinek, B. Vermang and M. Edoff, 29th European Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conference and Exhibition,  2014, pp. 1832–1836 Search PubMed .
N. Amin, P. Chelvanathan, M. I. Hossain and K. Sopian, Energy Procedia, 2012, 15, 291–298 CrossRef CAS .
U. Rau and H. W. Schock, Appl. Phys. A, 1999, 69, 131–147 CrossRef CAS .

          K. Ramanathan, R. Noufi, B. To, D. L. Young, R. Bhattacharya, M. A. Contreras, R. G. Dhere and G. Teeter, Photovoltaic Energy Conversion, Conference Record of the 2006 IEEE 4th World Conference on,  2006, pp. 380–383 Search PubMed .
O. Lundberg, M. Edoff and L. Stolt, Thin Solid Films, 2005, 480–481, 520–525 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gloeckler and J. R. Sites, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2005, 66, 1891–1894 CrossRef CAS .
O. Lundberg, M. Bodegård, J. Malmström and L. Stolt, Progress in Photovoltaics: Research and Applications, 2003, 11, 77–88 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Zhao, A. Wang and M. A. Green, Photovoltaic Specialists Conference, 1990, Conference Record of the Twenty First IEEE,  1990, pp. 333–335, vol. 331 Search PubMed .
M. A. Green, A. W. Blakers, J. Zhao, A. M. Milne, A. Wang and X. Dai, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 1990, 37, 331–336 CrossRef CAS .
B. Vermang, V. Fjällström, J. Pettersson, P. Salomé and M. Edoff, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 117, 505–511 CrossRef CAS .
W.-W. Hsu, J. Y. Chen, T.-H. Cheng, S. C. Lu, W.-S. Ho, Y.-Y. Chen, Y.-J. Chien and C. W. Liu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 023508 CrossRef .
K. S. Shamala, L. C. S. Murthy and K. Narasimha Rao, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2004, 106, 269–274 CrossRef .

          W. N. Shafarman, R. W. Birkmire, S. Marsillac, M. Marudachalam, N. Orbey and T. Russell, Proceedings of the 26th IEEE PVSEC,  1997, pp. 331–334 Search PubMed .
M. Edoff, S. Schleussner, E. Wallin and O. Lundberg, Thin Solid Films, 2011, 519, 7530–7533 CrossRef CAS .

          L. C. Andreani, P. A. Kowalczewski, C. I. Mura, M. Patrini, M. Acciarri, S. Binetti, A. Sassella and S. Marchionna, 27th European Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conference and Exhibition,  2012, pp. 2334–2337 Search PubMed .
P. Reinhard, F. Pianezzi, L. Kranz, S. Nishiwaki, A. Chirilă, S. Buecheler and A. N. Tiwari, Progress in Photovoltaics: Research and Applications, 2015, 23, 281–289 CrossRef CAS .

          K. Kim, H. Park, W. K. Kim, G. M. Hanket and W. N. Shafarman, Photovoltaic Specialists Conference (PVSC),  2012, vol. 2, pp. 1–5, IEEE 38th, 2012 Search PubMed .
K. Kim, H. Park, W. K. Kim, G. M. Hanket and W. N. Shafarman, IEEE Journal of Photovoltaics, 2013, 3, 446–450 CrossRef .

          W. N. Shafarman, R. S. Huang and S. H. Stephens, 4th World Conference on Photovoltaic Energy Conversion, IEEE,  2006, pp. 420–423 Search PubMed .
H. Simchi, J. Larsen, K. Kihwan and W. Shafarman, IEEE Journal of Photovoltaics, 2014, 4, 1630–1635 CrossRef .

          T. Nakada, Y. Kanda, S. Kijima, Y. Komiya, D. Ohmori, H. Ishizaki and N. Yamada, Presented in Part at the 20th European Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conference, Barcelona Spain,  June, 2005, pp. 1736–1739 Search PubMed .
H. Simchi, B. E. McCandless, T. Meng, J. H. Boyle and W. N. Shafarman, MRS Online Proc. Libr., 2013, 1538, 173–178 CrossRef .
J. K. Larsen, H. Simchi, P. Xin, K. Kim and W. N. Shafarman, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 033901 CrossRef .
H. Simchi, J. Larsen, K. Kihwan and W. Shafarman, IEEE Journal of Photovoltaics, 2014, 4, 1630–1635 CrossRef .

          K. Ramanathan, R. Noufi, B. To, D. L. Young, R. Bhattacharya, M. A. Contreras, R. G. Dhere and G. Teeter, 4th World Conference on Photovoltaic Energy Conversion, IEEE,  2006, pp. 380–383 Search PubMed .

          S. Marsillac, V. Ranjan, K. Aryal, S. Little, Y. Erkaya, G. Rajan, P. Boland, D. Attygalle, P. Aryal, P. Pradhan and R. W. Collins, The 38th IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists Conference (PVSC38), IEEE,  2012, pp. 001492–001494 Search PubMed .
T. Negami, S. Nishiwaki, Y. Hashimoto and N. Kohara, 2nd World Conference and exhibition on photovoltaic solar energy conversion, Eur. Comm., 1998, 1181–1184 CAS .
M. Bär, W. Bohne, J. Röhrich, E. Strub, S. Lindner, M. C. Lux-Steiner, C.-H. Fischer, T. P. Niesen and F. Karg, J. Appl. Phys., 2004, 96, 3857–3860 CrossRef .
S. Jung, S. Ahn, J. H. Yun, J. Gwak, D. Kim and K. Yoon, Curr. Appl. Phys, 2010, 10, 990–996 CrossRef .
C. Lei, L. Jinwoo and W. N. Shafarman, IEEE Journal of Photovoltaics, 2014, 4, 447–451 CrossRef .
Y. Tauchi, K. Kihwan, P. Hyeonwook and W. Shafarman, IEEE Journal of Photovoltaics, 2013, 3, 467–471 CrossRef .
P. Erslev, G. M. Hanket, W. N. Shafarman and D. J. Cohen, MRS Online Proc. Libr., 2009, 1165 DOI:10.1557/proc-1165-m01-07 .

          C. A. Arredondo, J. I. Clavijo, A. J. Aristizabal and G. Gordillo, Photovoltaic Specialists Conference (PVSC), 2009 34th IEEE,  2009, pp. 000886–000891 Search PubMed .

          C. A. Arredondo, F. Mesa and G. Gordillo, Photovoltaic Specialists Conference (PVSC), 2010 35th IEEE,  2010, pp. 002433–002438 Search PubMed .
S. H. You, K. J. Hong, B. J. Lee, T. S. Jeong, C. J. Youn, J. S. Park and S. N. Baek, J. Cryst. Growth, 2002, 245, 261–266 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Shay, B. Tell, L. M. Schiavone, H. M. Kasper and F. Thiel, Phys. Rev. B: Solid State, 1974, 9, 1719–1723 CrossRef CAS .
L. Artus and Y. Bertrand, J. Phys. C: Solid State Phys., 1987, 20, 1365 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Akaki, S. Kurihara, M. Shirahama, K. Tsurugida, S. Seto, T. Kakeno and K. Yoshino, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2005, 66, 1858–1861 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. A. Aguilera, J. R. A. Hernández, M. A. G. Trujillo, M. O. López and G. C. Puente, Thin Solid Films, 2007, 515, 6272–6275 CrossRef CAS .
W. Vallejo, C. A. Arredondo and G. Gordillo, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2010, 257, 503–507 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nakamura and S. Seto, Phys. Status Solidi C, 2009, 6, 1137–1140 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nakada, K. Yamada, R. Arai, H. Ishizaki and N. Yamada, MRS Online Proc. Libr., 2005, 865 DOI:10.1557/proc-865-f11.1 .
S. Merdes, R. Mainz, J. Klaer, A. Meeder, H. Rodriguez-Alvarez, H. W. Schock, M. C. Lux-Steiner and R. Klenk, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 864–869 CrossRef CAS .
J. Klaer, J. Bruns, R. Henninger, K. Siemer, R. Klenk, K. Ellmer and D. Bräunig, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 1998, 13, 1456 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Nishiwaki and W. Shafarman, 4th World Conference on Photovoltaic Energy Conversion, IEEE,  2006, pp. 461–464 Search PubMed .
O. Yoshitaka, J.-W. Arnulf, H. Yoshio and I. Kentaro, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., Part 1, 1994, 33, L1775 Search PubMed .
R. Scheer, T. Walter, H. W. Schock, M. L. Fearheiley and H. J. Lewerenz, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1993, 63, 3294–3296 CrossRef CAS .
K. Siemer, J. Klaer, I. Luck, J. Bruns, R. Klenk and D. Bräunig, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2001, 67, 159–166 CrossRef CAS .
T. Unold, I. Sieber and K. Ellmer, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 213502 CrossRef .

          M. A. Contreras, L. M. Mansfield, B. Egaas, L. Jian, M. Romero, R. Noufi, E. Rudiger-Voigt and W. Mannstadt, The 37th IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists Conference (PVSC37), IEEE,  2011, pp. 000026–000031 Search PubMed .

          G. M. Hanket, J. H. Boyle and W. N. Shafarman, The 34th IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists Conference (PVSC34), IEEE,  2009, pp. 001240–001245 Search PubMed .

          G. M. Hanket, J. H. Boyle, W. N. Shafarman and G. Teeter, The 35th IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists Conference (PVSC35), IEEE,  2010, pp. 003425–003429 Search PubMed .
D. L. Young, J. Keane, A. Duda, J. A. M. AbuShama, C. L. Perkins, M. Romero and R. Noufi, Progress in Photovoltaics: Research and Applications, 2003, 11, 535–541 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Contreras, L. M. Mansfield, B. Egaas, J. Li, M. Romero, R. Noufi, E. Rudiger-Voigt and W. Mannstadt, Progress in Photovoltaics: Research and Applications, 2012, 20, 843–850 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nakada, Thin Solid Films, 2005, 480–481, 419–425 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nakada, Y. Hirabayashi, T. Tokado, D. Ohmori and T. Mise, Sol. Energy, 2004, 77, 739–747 CrossRef CAS .

          T. Nakada, Y. Hirabayashi, T. Tokado and D. Ohmori, Photovoltaic Energy Conversion, 2003. Proceedings of 3rd World Conference on,  2003, vol. 2883, pp. 2880–2884 Search PubMed .

          T. Tokado and T. Nakada, Photovoltaic Energy Conversion, 2003. Proceedings of 3rd World Conference on,  2003, vol. 531, pp. 539–542 Search PubMed .
M. Passlack, E. F. Schubert, W. S. Hobson, M. Hong, N. Moriya, S. N. G. Chu, K. Konstadinidis, J. P. Mannaerts, M. L. Schnoes and G. J. Zydzik, J. Appl. Phys., 1995, 77, 686–693 CrossRef CAS .
P. D. More, J. Surf. Eng. Mater. Adv. Technol., 2013, 3, 5 Search PubMed .
X. Fang, Y. Bando, U. K. Gautam, C. Ye and D. Golberg, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 509–522 RSC .
L. Larina, D. H. Shin, N. Tsvetkov and B. T. Ahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, D469–D473 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Zhaoning, A. B. Phillips, P. W. Krantz, R. R. Khanal and M. J. Heben, The IEEE 40th Photovoltaic Specialist Conference (PVSC40), IEEE,  2014, pp. 1712–1717 Search PubMed .

          www.dowsolar.com, accessed September 2015.
R. Coons, Chem. Week, 2009, 171, 9 Search PubMed .
B. Petter Jelle, C. Breivik and H. Drolsum Røkenes, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 100, 69–96 CrossRef CAS .

          B. Robertsa and P.-C. Ku, Proc. SPIE 9358, Physics, Simulation, and Photonic Engineering of Photovoltaic Device IV, 935809, SPIE,  2015,  DOI:10.1117/1112.2079541 .
B. Roberts, D. M. Nanditha, M. Dissanayake and P.-C. Ku, Opt. Express, 2012, 20, 265–269 CrossRef PubMed .
D. M. N. M. Dissanayake, B. Roberts and P.-C. Ku, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 113306 CrossRef .

          B. Roberts, M. Boyd and P.-C. Ku, Presented in Part at the the 38th IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists Conference (PVSC38), Austin, TX,  June, 2012, pp. 87–91 Search PubMed .
J. Zhu, Z. Yu and Y. C. Shanhui Fan, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2010, 70, 330–340 CrossRef .
D. M. N. M. Dissanayake, B. Roberts and P.-C. Ku, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 063302 CrossRef .
X. Sheng, J. Liu, I. Kozinsky, A. M. Agarwal, J. Michel and L. C. Kimerling, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 843–847 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          E. Fathi and A. Sazonov, The 35th IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists Conference (PVSC35), IEEE,  2010, pp. 001500–001504 Search PubMed .
F. Duerinckx, I. Kuzma-Filipek, K. Van Nieuwenhuysen, G. Beaucarne and J. Poortmans, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 2006, 27, 837–839 CrossRef CAS .
P. G. O'Brien, D. P. Puzzo, A. Chutinan, L. D. Bonifacio, G. A. Ozin and N. P. Kherani, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 611–616 CrossRef PubMed .
D. K. Benson and H. M. Branz, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1995, 39, 203–211 CrossRef CAS .

          S. K. Deb, Presented in Part at the World Renewable Energy Congress VI, Brighton, U.K,  2000 Search PubMed .
J. N. Bullock, C. Bechinger, D. K. Benson and H. M. Branz, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 1996, 198–200, 1163–1167 CrossRef CAS .
W. Gao, P. Liu, R. S. Crandall, S.-H. Lee, D. K. Benson and H. M. Branz, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2000, 266–269, 1140–1144 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Deb, S.-H. Lee, C. Edwin Tracy, J. Roland Pitts, B. A. Gregg and H. M. Branz, Electrochim. Acta, 2001, 46, 2125–2130 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Lee, W. Gao, C. E. Tracy, H. M. Branz, D. K. Benson and S. Deb, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1998, 145, 3545–3550 CrossRef CAS .

          J. N. Bullock, Y. Xu, D. K. Benson and H. M. Branz, Proc. SPIE 2531, Optical Materials Technology for Energy Efficiency and Solar Energy Conversion XIV, SPIE,  1995, pp. 35–41 Search PubMed .
J. N. Bullock, C. Bechinger, Y. Xu, D. K. Benson and H. M. Branz, MRS Online Proc. Libr., 1996, 420 DOI:10.1557/proc-420-183 .
K.-S. Ahn, S. J. Yoo, M.-S. Kang, J.-W. Lee and Y.-E. Sung, J. Power Sources, 2007, 168, 533–536 CrossRef CAS .
A. Cannavale, G. E. Eperon, P. Cossari, A. Abate, H. J. Snaith and G. Gigli, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1578–1584 CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:
Muhammad Saifullah	Muhammad Saifullah is currently a doctoral student at the Korea Institute of Energy Research (KIER) campus, University of Science and Technology (UST), South Korea. He received BS and MS degrees at the University of Agriculture and Pakistan Institute of Engineering and Applied Sciences, respectively, in Pakistan. Before joining UST as a doctoral student, he worked as a researcher at the Pakistan Institute of Nuclear Science and Technology, Pakistan for around three years. At present, he is working on semitransparent chalcopyrite-based solar cells.
Jihye Gwak	Jihye Gwak is currently a principal researcher of the Photovoltaic Laboratory at KIER as well as a professor of the Renewable Energy Engineering major at UST. After she received her BS and MS degrees in Chemistry from Ewha Womans University, she joined Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology (SAIT). After 2 years working at SAIT, she moved to France and was awarded a Ph.D. from Université Montpellier II in 2003. She also worked in the Eco-materials Center at the National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS), Tsukuba in Japan for 2 years, and joined KIER in 2005. She has been working on compound solar cells since 2009. Her main research interest is CIGS-based thin film solar cells.
Jae Ho Yun	Jae Ho Yun is a principal researcher at the Photovoltaic Laboratory at KIER as well as a professor of the Renewable Energy Engineering major at UST. He has been working on solar cells since 1997. In 2003, he joined KIER after he received his BS and MS degrees in Materials Engineering from the Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST) and a Ph.D. from the same institution in 2004, based on the research of CdTe compound solar cells. He focused on CIGS thin film solar cells after joining KIER. He is also interested in CZTSSe as well as earth-abundant material-based solar cells.
	(1)


Multi-crystalline Si solar cell-based ST module22	Atrium (50 m2)	44.42	0.14	0.08	0.01
a-Si:H solar cell-based ST module24	Windows of 40-storey building (WWR = 43%)	852.00	2.62	1.15	0.11

 	Fig. 1  (a) Laser patterned amorphous silicon solar cell (reprinted with permission),52 (b) SEM image of Czochralski silicon with micro-holes created through mechanical dicing (reprinted with permission),54 and (c) schematic of the MicroShade™ substrate (perforated with inclined holes) deposited with an amorphous silicon solar cell.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Mono-crystalline microcells produced by photolithography and printed on a substrate with a controllable inter-cell distance (reprinted with permission),60 (b) diffused solar cell composed of a light diffusive plate (composite of pristine polycarbonate resin and commercial diffusive nanoparticles (ITC-30)) sandwiched between two glass plates (reprinted with permission),63 and (c) single crystal spherical solar cells on a flexible substrate (reprinted with permission).61	 
	(2)

 	Fig. 3  Schematic for the DSSC (reprinted with permission).79	 


DSSC solar cell	TiO2 (ref. 27)	8.13 μm	24.17% (300–800 nm)
16.50 μm	19.63% (300–800 nm)
32.20 μm	13.31% (300–800 nm)
Photoanode	7% SiO2 in TiO2 (ref. 82)	10.00 μm	46.92% (300–800 nm)
Counter electrode	Pt74	N.A.a	62.20% (300–800 nm)
Graphene-coated glass88	1 min	79.21% (200–750 nm)
20 min	61.27% (200–750 nm)

 	Fig. 4  Plot that shows the cell transmittance (τv), human eye sensitivity response (V(λ)), and corresponding short circuit current density (Jsc) (reprinted with permission).74	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Transmission curves for Y1 (donor–π–acceptor type dye), a cocktail of Y1 and HSQ5 (modified Squaraine dye), HSQ5, and bipyridine ruthenium N719 dye and (b) a photograph of a DSSC cell made with a mixture of Y1 and HSQ5 (reprinted with permission).74	 
Teff = 100η × 100τv	(3)

1 (ref. 80)	5	33.5	Cosensitization and TiO2 thickness optimization
2 (ref. 68)	4.2	23.0	Cosensitization
3 (ref. 27)	5.1	32 (600 nm)	8.13 μm thick TiO2 layer
4 (ref. 74)	3.66	60.3 (using eqn (2))	Cosensitization


1 (ref. 136)	30.0 (370–740 nm)	3.5	Perovskite island approach
2 (ref. 127)	31.0 (370–740)	5.3	Dielectric–metal–dielectric top electrode
3 (ref. 145)	29.0 (460–800 nm)	6.41	Organic charge transport layers
4 (ref. 128)	28.4 (N.A)a	8.5	Silver nanowire-based top electrode
5 (ref. 130)	77 (800 nm), ∼3.0 (555 nm)	12.7	Silver nanowire-based top electrode
6 (ref. 141)	55 (800 nm), 10.8 (555 nm)	4.56	Silver nanowire-based top electrode
7 (ref. 143)	50 (700 nm), 20.9 (555 nm)	5.98	Graphene-based top electrode
8 (ref. 132)	28.1 (370–740 nm)	5.20	Replacement of methylammonium lead iodide and Ag electrode with formamidinium lead iodide and a transparent conductive adhesive electrode containing Ni mesh, respectively; perovskite island approach
9 (ref. 148)	17.3% (N.A)a	12.55	ITO top-electrode

 	Fig. 6  Band diagram for the p–i–n junction of an a-Si:H solar cell with TCO electrodes for both the front and back-contact, where Ev, Ec, and Ef are valence band, conduction band, and Fermi level, respectively.	 
	(4)
	(5)

 	Fig. 7  (a) ST solar cells based on the optical resonance principle using an a-Si:H layer with thickness of (i) 6 nm (blue), (ii) 11 nm (green), and (iii) 31 nm (red).186 (b) Simulated and measured transmission curves for F–B cavities composed by sandwiching 6, 11, and 31 nm a-Si:H layers between the dielectric–metal–dielectric structured electrodes (reprinted with permission).186	 

1 (ref. 53 and 184)	3	40 (600 nm)	Inexpensive plastic substrate
2 (ref. 182)	5.36	30.72 (500 to 800 nm)	Buffer layer between the p-a-Si:H layer and i-a-Si:H layer
3 (ref. 168)	5.46	21.6 (400 to 800 nm)	Optimization of the top TCO thickness
4 (ref. 168)	5.93	17.9 (400 to 800 nm)	Ga alloyed a-Si:H
5 (ref. 185)	6.5	20 (400 to 800 nm)	Replacement of Novo Vellum laminate with Radeva laminate (transparent)
6 (ref. 183)	6.61	18.9 (500 to 800 nm)	Reverse V bandgap shape buffer layer between the i-a-Si:H and n-a-Si:H layer
7 (ref. 45)	6.3	25 (using eqn (2))	Utilizing a wide-bandgap i-a-SiC layer
8 (ref. 169)	6.87	20 (700 nm)	Metal/dielectric back-contact
9 (ref. 186)	1.94	25 (550 nm)	Fabry–Perot resonator

 	Fig. 8  Band diagram for a typical CIGSe cell with a molybdenum (Mo) back-contact, where Ec, Ev, and Ef are the conduction band, valence band, and Fermi level, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic of a model on shunt pathways along the grain boundaries of CuInS2 (reprinted with permission).217	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematics for partial-grading, full-grading, and electron reflector (reprinted with permission)219 and (b) schematic for a CIGSe absorber having a passivation layer (PL) with nano-sized local rear-point contacts.	 

 	Fig. 11  Efficiency of solar cells based on 150 nm,227 250 nm,240 300 nm,240 400 nm,247 500 nm,223,248 570 nm,216 700 nm,238 800 nm,236 860 nm,249 and 1050 nm (ref. 236) CIGSe on a Mo back-contact in the substrate configuration (S configuration) (red circles with trend line), 400 nm (ref. 242) and 1000 nm (ref. 243) CIGSe on ITO in the S configuration (black squares with dotted line), 400 nm (ref. 241) and 500 nm (ref. 222) CIGSe on Mo in the S configuration, where the thickness was reduced using an etchant (blue squares with dotted line), and 300 nm (ref. 242 and 245) CIGSe on ITO glass in the back wall superstrate (BWS) configuration (magenta stars). The text inside brackets in the legend specifies the back-contact material.	 

CIGSSe	≥1.5	11.9 (ref. 267)
CIS	1.53	>10,218,268,269 11.4,217,270,271 12.5 (ref. 266)
CIGS	1.53	12.6 (ref. 265)
CIGSe	1.53	11.0 (ref. 272)
ACIGSe	1.63	13.0 (ref. 273)
ACIGSe	1.65	12.0 (ref. 274)
CGSe	1.67	10.2 (ref. 275)
AIGSe	1.70	10.2 (ref. 264)
ECIGSSeg(X, Y) = (1.00 + 0.13X2 + 0.08X2Y + 0.13XY + 0.55X + 0.54Y) eV	(6)

 	Fig. 12  Cross-sectional scanning electron micrographs for Cu(InGa)Se2 films grown on a Mo back-contact electrode with Ga/(Ga + In) content of, (a) 0.18, (b) 0.64, and (c) 0.78 (reprinted with permission).251	 

CIGSe (1.2 eV)277	Ref.	SnO2	500	—	0.61	62.6	13.7
Ref.	ITO	520	—	0.65	68.2	15.2
Ref.	ITO	550	—	0.56	51.8	9.6
Mo (60 nm)	ITO	550	—	0.55	67.8	12.8
Ref.	Al:ZnO	520	—	0.27	26.9	0.04
CIGSe (1.2 eV)246	Ref.	ITO	550	0.3	0.56	70.2	5.9
CIGSe (1.2 eV)246	MoO3−x (10 nm)	ITO	550	0.3	0.61	70.1	9.0
ACIGSe (1.28 eV)246	Ref.	ITO	550	0.3	0.50	46.2	3.6
ACIGSe (1.28 eV)246	MoO3−x (10 nm)	ITO	550	0.3	0.64	63.8	9.7
CIGSe (1.2 eV)246	Sulfurization	ITO	550	0.3	0.55	62.8	7.9
CIGSe (1.2 eV)246	MoS2 (2 nm)	ITO	550	0.3	0.59	61.5	7.6

 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic of a ST solar cell integrated with a LSP-resonance structure based on metal nanorods and (b) schematic diagram coupled with the SEM micrograph for a-Si:H solar cell with selectively transparent and conducting photonic crystal (STCPC) (reprinted with permission).162	 
	(7)

 	Fig. 14  Reflection spectra and physical appearance of green (5.5 bilayers of 80 nm ATO and 60 nm ITO), yellow (5.5 bilayers of 80 nm ATO and 80 nm of ITO), and red (5.5 bilayers of 80 nm ATO and 100 nm ITO) Bragg reflectors (reprinted with permission).298	 
PV	Photovoltaics
BPV	Building photovoltaics
BIPV	Building-integrated photovoltaics
BAPV	Building-attached photovoltaics

T
	Visible transmittance
DSC	Diffused solar cell
PSC	Perovskite solar cell
ST	Semitransparent
BISTPV	Building-integrated semitransparent photovoltaics
WWR	Window-to-wall ratio
DSSC	Dye-sensitized solar cell
TCO	Transparent conducting oxide
CE	Counter electrode

η
	Photovoltaic conversion efficiency
a-Si:H	Hydrogenated amorphous silicon
p-a-Si:H	p-Type hydrogenated amorphous silicon
n-a-Si:H	n-Type hydrogenated amorphous silicon
i-a-Si:H	Intrinsic hydrogenated amorphous silicon
EBR	Electron back reflector
ASSSC	Angle-sensitive semitransparent solar cell
LSP	Local surface plasmon
AAO	Anodized aluminum oxide
DBR	Distributed Bragg reflector
EC	Electrochromic
STPV-EC	Semitransparent photovoltaics integrated with electrochromic device

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
