Charge separation and fullerene triplet formation in blend films of polyfluorene polymers with [6,6]-phenyl C61 butyric acid methyl ester   - Dalton Transactions (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B910675H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B910675H
(Paper)
Dalton Trans., 2009, 10000-10005Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsCharge separation and fullerene triplet formation in blend films of polyfluorene polymers with [6,6]-phenyl C61 butyric acid methyl ester†Jessica J. Benson-Smitha, Hideo Ohkitab, Steffan Cookc, James R. Durrantc, Donal D. C. Bradleya and Jenny Nelson*aaDepartment of Physics, Imperial College London, London, UK, SW7 2BWbDepartment of Polymer Chemistry, Graduate School of Engineering, Kyoto University, Yoshida, Sakyo, Kyoto 606-8501, JapancDepartment of Chemistry, Imperial College London, Exhibition Road, London, UK, SW7 2AZReceived 1st June 2009, Accepted 21st September 2009First published on 6th October 2009AbstractTransient and steady state optical spectroscopies were used to study thin films made from a series of polyfluorene polymers blended with [6,6]-phenyl C61 butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) in order to determine the influence of polymer ionisation potential on photoinduced charge separation. We find that the energy of the charge separated state ΔECS, given by the energy difference between the ionisation potential of the polymer and the electron affinity of the fullerene, must be smaller than a threshold value of about 1.6 eV for charge separation to occur. When ΔECS is greater than this threshold, PCBM triplet formation is observed in preference to charge pair generation. If ΔECS is similar to the threshold value, both PCBM triplet formation and charge separation occur in the blend film, with a tendency for charge separation to dominate over PCBM triplet formation as PCBM concentration increases. The mechanism of triplet formation is believed to be energy transfer to the PCBM singlet state followed by intersystem crossing. The threshold value of ΔECS is found to be similar to the PCBM singlet energy.IntroductionOrganic bulk heterojunction solar cells operate on the principle of photoinduced charge transfer, usually from a donor to an acceptor molecule within a solid blend film. Provided that continuous paths exist within each phase from the donor:acceptor interface to the electrodes, the charges, once separated, can travel to the electrodes where preferential collection of electrons by the cathode and holes by the anode gives rise to a photocurrent. Although the highest reported power conversion efficiency (PCE) values are relatively modest at around 5%,1,2 models have been proposed to rationalise the improvement of performance through the optimisation of donor and acceptor energy levels.3,4 One strategy is to reduce the optical gap of either component, so extending the range of solar photon wavelengths absorbed and increasing the short circuit current density, Jsc.2 An alternative is to increase the donor ionisation potential (IP), or reduce the acceptor electron affinity (EA), so increasing the maximum separation of the electron and hole quasi Fermi levels and hence the available open circuit voltage (VOC).5,6 Both strategies, however, result in a lower driving force for charge separation, ΔG, quantified by the offset in LUMO (HOMO) levels in the case of charge transfer from donor to acceptor (acceptor to donor), which may be detrimental since a certain free energy difference must be supplied to overcome the Coulombic attraction binding the charges. A key question is how large this offset energy must be. This question has been the subject of several recent studies some of which demonstrate a correlation between charge generation yield and ΔG,7 and others which indicate that the yield is also influenced by the charge transport and charge screening properties of the local media,8 as well as by the specific chemical structure of the components.9A second open question is the influence on charge separation of the charge separated state energy, ΔECS, quantified by the difference between the donor HOMO and acceptor LUMO energies. For charge separation to be thermodynamically favoured, ΔECS should be smaller than the singlet and triplet state energies of both donor and acceptor and any charge transfer excited state such as an exciplex. Studies of polymer-polymer blends have shown that triplet exciton formation can occur, possibly following geminate charge pair generation,10,11 in cases where the charge separated state energy ΔECS is high.In the case of polymer:fullerene blends, fullerene triplets have been observed in the case of a high ΔECS combination, poly (9,9-dioctylfluorene-co-benzothiadiazole) (F8BT) as donor with [6,6′]-phenyl butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) as acceptor, apparently through a mechanism involving energy transfer to the fullerene singlet state rather than via the recombination of geminate charge pairs.12 However, no study has yet determined the threshold in ΔECS for efficient triplet formation in polymer:fullerene blends, nor addressed the mechanism in detail.In this paper we use transient and steady state optical spectroscopies to study the formation and kinetics of photoexcited states in blend films of fluorene copolymers with PCBM, as a function of the ionisation potential of the polymer. The selected polymers have IP values that range from 5.0 to 5.9 eV, similar chemical structures, and well characterized optical and electrical properties. Polyfluorenes are an interesting contrast to the thiophene polymers that were studied in ref. 7 because they have relatively high photoluminescence yields, which could favour emissive energy transfer processes. We focus mainly on blend films of low PCBM content in order to minimise the effects of PCBM content on polymer chain packing. As a tool to probe excited state yield and dynamics, transient absorption spectroscopy (TAS) has the advantage that it can be performed under conditions (temperature, light intensity and sample structure) that are representative of solar cell operating conditions. We observe formation of PCBM triplets for high ΔECS while separated charge pairs are formed at low ΔECS. At intermediate ΔECS values the efficiency of charge pair formation is also influenced by the blend composition, suggesting an influence of domain size or dielectric properties on the charge separation process. The relationship between the energetic driving force for charge separation and the efficiency of charge pair generation appears to be in agreement with recent reports for other polymer:fullerene blends.Table 1 shows the chemical structures of the polyfluorene polymers that were used in this study along with their respective IP values. The IP/HOMO values were determined electrochemically in solution. The LUMO/EA levels were determined from the optical bandgap of the respective polymers.
Table 1 Chemical structures of the materials used in this study, their ionization potentials, and the excited species found in the blend films using transient absorption spectroscopy

Chemical StructureIonization Potential/eVChemical NameΔG/eVΔECS/eVExcited SpeciesF8BT-5.913poly(9,9-dioctylfluorene-co-benzothiadiazole)0.232.2PCBM3PFO−5.814poly(9,9-dioctylfluorene)0.82.1PCBM3F8T2−5.515poly(9,9-dioctylfluorene-alt-bithiophene)0.61.8PCBM3RedF−5.3161) 50%, 2) 5%, 3) 40%, 4) 5%0.531.6PCBM3 & PolaronsTFMO−5.217poly[9,9–dioctylfluorene-co-N-(4-methoxy-phenyl) diphenylamine1.41.5N/A (Polarons?)PCBM−6.1[6,6]-phenyl C61 butyric acid methyl ester  PCBM3ExperimentalPolymer:PCBM blend films were cast from chlorobenzene solutions (20 mg/ml) with 5wt% PCBM in the blend. In some cases, 50 wt% PCBM concentrations were also examined. Blend films of PCBM in polystyrene (PS) were spin coated from chlorobenzene solution (20 mg/ml) containing 11 wt% PCBM in the blend. Films were spin coated on Spectrosil B quartz substrates (Kaypul Optics Inc.) which had been cleaned in ultrasonic baths of acetone and 2-propanol consecutively for ten minutes each and were dried with a flow of air. Film thicknesses ranged from 60-100 nm resulting in optical densities of 0.2-0.6 at peak absorbance. Transient absorption measurements were carried out as described previously.12 The device samples were cast on 1.2 cm × 1.2 cm indium tin oxide (ITO) coated glass substrates which were cleaned as above. The semitransparent aluminium electrode (∼15 nm) was vacuum deposited at 3 × 10−6 mbar over half of the sample in a manner that the perpendicular to the strip of ITO. The TAS measurements for these devices were performed in transmission mode through the semitransparent aluminium electrode.ResultsNormalized transient absorption spectra are shown in Fig. 1(a) for blend films made from each of the three polymers with the highest IP values studied, F8BT (IP = 5.9 eV), PFO (IP = 5.8 eV), and F8T2 (IP = 5.5 eV), blended with 5 wt% PCBM. The transient absorption spectrum of a blend film made with 11 wt% PCBM in polystyrene (PS) is also shown. All the spectra resemble the spectrum of the PCBM triplet, consisting of a peak at ∼720 nm and a shoulder at ∼830 nm, that has been observed previously using transient absorption spectroscopy of polymer:PCBM blend films12 and using flash photolysis measurements on solutions of methanofullerenes in benzene.18 The reported PCBM triplet spectrum is reproduced in Fig. 1(a) for comparison. From Fig. 1(a), it appears that the primary excited species that is formed in these three polyfluorene:PCBM films is the PCBM triplet. Further evidence of the triplet nature of these excited species is given by the monoexponential decay kinetics (lifetimes 10-20 μs) of the blend films shown in Fig. 1(b). The monophasic kinetics and ∼10 μs lifetimes are consistent with previous studies of the PCBM triplet state. Additionally, the presence of PCBM triplet states is confirmed because the TAS signal for all of the blend films mentioned above was quenched in the presence of oxygen and was recovered when the film was put into an inert environment.In Fig. 2, the emission spectra of the three blend films over the wavelength range 650-850 nm are shown. All three high IP polymer blends show a weak emission peak at ∼720 nm, where the PCBM singlet is known to emit.19 This peak is absent in the PL spectra of the pristine polymers. This suggests that photoexcitation of these polymer:PCBM blends result in singlet energy transfer to the PCBM, with the PCBM triplet then being formed by intersystem crossing from the singlet state. Fig. 1  (a): The normalized transient absorption spectra for polymer:PCBM blend films with 5 wt% PCBM. The figure shows that the spectra for 5 wt% PCBM blended with F8BT (open circles), PFO (open squares), F8T2 (filled triangles), and for 11 wt% PCBM in a polystyrene matrix (stars). The solid grey line is the PCBM triplet spectrum reported in ref. 18. (b): Transient absorption decay kinetics in argon atmospheres for (a) 5 wt% PCBM:PFO, (b) 5 wt% PCBM:F8BT, (c) 5 wt% PCBM:RedF, and (d) 5 wt% PCBM:F8T2 films. The decays are monoexponential with lifetimes between 10 and 20 μs and are offset for clarity. The measurements for (a), (b) and (c) were taken with 720 nm probe wavelength and the measurement for (d) was taken with a probe wavelength of 790 nm. The pump wavelength for (b) and (d) was 490 nm, for (a) 440 nm and for (c) 420 nm.  Fig. 2  Photoluminescence spectra over the 650-850 nm range for blend films of 5 wt% PCBM:PFO (open squares), 5 wt% PCBM:F8BT (open circles), 5 wt% PCBM:F8T2 (filled triangles) and 5 wt% PCBM:TFMO (solid line). The three high IP polymers show a weak PL emission peaking at ∼720 nm, characteristic of the PCBM singlet emission. All films were excited at 340 nm. In the case of the polymer studied with the lowest IP values, TFMO (IP = 5.2 eV), no PCBM triplet formation is observed in transient absorption experiments. TAS spectra of the blend films contain a weak, featureless absorption band extending from 700 nm into the infrared which may be indicative of polaron formation, but the signal amplitude was too low to record its kinetics. However, transient absorption measurements taken in transmission on devices with the structure glass/indium tin oxide/poly(3,4-ethylenedioxylenethiophene)-polystyrene sulfonic acid (PEDOT:PSS)/TFMO:PCBM/Al revealed more clearly a broad absorption feature from 700 to beyond 950 nm (see electronic supplementary information, ESI†). In comparison with TAS studies of TFMO:silole blend films, this could be attributed to the positive polaron in TFMO.20 A higher polaron density in device structures is reasonable given the higher optical absorbance in the thin film and the possible influence of the built-in electric field on charge separation. We have shown previously that TFMO:PCBM blend devices deliver external quantum efficiencies approaching 20%,21 clearly indicating that photoinduced charge separation does indeed occur in the TFMO:PCBM blend films. Furthermore, Fig. 2 shows that there is no clear evidence of PCBM singlet emission in the TFMO:PCBM blend; the weak emission peak at longer wavelengths has previously been related to an emissive charge transfer state.21The observation of PCBM triplet absorption can be correlated to the energy of the charge separated state for the blend films discussed so far. Referring to Table 1, we note that PCBM triplet formation occurs when ΔECS is greater than or equal to 1.8 eV, whilst charge pair separation occurs and PCBM triplet formation is not visible when ΔECS is less than or equal to 1.5 eV. (In determining the value of ΔECS in Table 1, the LUMO energy of PCBM is taken as −3.7 eV, as measured by cyclic voltammetry (see ESI†) and as reported in ref. 22) The observation of emission at ∼720 nm in those cases where triplet absorption is observed suggests that the mechanism of triplet formation is via energy transfer to the singlet state of PCBM followed by intersystem crossing to the PCBM triplet. However, a possible contribution to triplet formation from the transfer of excitation from the triplet state of a charge transfer state to the triplet excited state, as has been reported for some similar systems,23 cannot be ruled out. The appearance of the PCBM triplet following photoexcitation of blends with ΔECS≥ 1.8 eV indicates that the energy of the PCBM singlet must be ≤1.8 eV, in order to compete successfully with the charge separated state. By the same argument, the results for TFMO:PCBM indicate that the energy of the PCBM singlet must be ≥1.5 eV. This range of values corresponds well with literature values of the PCBM singlet state (1.7-1.8 eV).12,19,24,25 Consideration of ΔECS values for other polymer:PCBM blend systems for which charge generation has been shown to be efficient, including MDMO-PPV:PCBM (ΔECS≈ 1.4 eV) and poly-3-hexylthiophene:PCBM (ΔECS≈ 1.2 eV), support this picture.We now focus on a polymer whose IP lies in the region between 5.2 and 5.5 eV, to explore the transition between the two regimes studied above. Red F has IP = 5.3 eV and therefore the energy of the charge separated state (ΔECS = 1.6 eV) is close to the singlet energy of PCBM. The transient absorption spectrum for 5 wt% PCBM:Red F blend films is shown in Fig. 3(a), in comparison with the spectrum for 50 wt% PCBM:Red F and the PCBM triplet spectrum from ref. 18. The kinetics for the blend films containing 5 wt% PCBM:Red F and 50 wt% PCBM:Red F are shown in Fig. 3(b).The transient optical decay of 5 wt% PCBM:Red F blend films exhibits a triplet-like, monoexponential decay while the 50 wt% PCBM:Red F blend exhibits a power-law form (see Fig. 3(b)). Power law decays have been observed for several polymer:PCBM blend films on the microsecond to millisecond time scales and have been attributed to recombination of photogenerated polarons in the blend films.26 In this case we assign the bulk of the photoinduced absorption at wavelengths longer than 750 nm in the 50 wt% PCBM:Red F blend to polarons in Red F. This assignment is made because of the power-law kinetic decay in this blend, because the shape of the spectrum in this blend remains unchanged over several microseconds, and because the kinetics were insensitive to the presence of oxygen, in contrast to the case of the 5 wt% PCBM:Red F blend. The transient absorption spectrum of the 5 wt% PCBM:Red F films (dotted line) appears to be a superposition of the PCBM triplet-triplet absorption feature (black line), with a peak at 720 nm and a shoulder at 830 nm, and the Red F polaron absorption spectrum (open circles) which further supports this hypothesis.One explanation of the composition dependent TAS results for RedF:PCBM blend films is that both energy transfer and charge separation may occur in the blend but at low PCBM concentration, energy transfer followed by triplet formation dominates in the RedF:PCBM blend film, while at higher PCBM concentration, charge pair formation dominates. A similar PCBM content dependent probability of charge separation was reported recently by Veldmann et al. for blend films of an alternating polyfluorene with PCBM.8 They attributed the increased efficiency of charge separation at high PCBM content to an increase in the net dielectric constant, reducing the Coulombic binding energy between the charges. Other factors may be the increased density of available states for separated charges resulting from larger PCBM domains, and the increased likelihood of electron transport away from the interface for larger PCBM domains. In each case the free energy gained by charge separation is increased, favouring the probability of charge pair formation relative to singlet energy transfer. Such close competition between charge pair formation and energy transfer is reasonable at room temperature since the energy difference between ΔECS for Red F:PCBM blend films (1.6 eV) and the PCBM singlet energy (1.7-1.8 eV) is only 0.1-0.2 eV, providing a weak driving force in favour of charge separation. For such similar energies, relatively small changes in the energy of the charge separated state due to increased PCBM content are capable of changing the branching ratio between PCBM triplet formation and to charge pair generation. Fig. 4 summarises the excited state formation in PCBM:Red F blend films in comparison with PFO:PCBM blend films in terms of the energy of the various excited states. Fig. 3  (a) Transient absorption spectra of 5 wt% PCBM:RedF film (dotted line), and 50 wt% PCBM:ReddF (open circles) taken at 1 microsecond in comparison with the spectrum for the PCBM triplet (solid line). The pump and probe wavelengths were 490 nm and 790 nm respectively and the spectra were recorded in an argon atmosphere. (b) The transient optical decays for films of 5 wt% PCBM:RedF (dotted line), and 50 wt% PCBM:RedF (open circles) showing the different decay character of the two different composition films.  Fig. 4  Diagram of singlet and triplet state energy levels in Red F, PCBM and PFO polymers and the energy of the charge separated state formed in the blends of Red F:PCBM and PFO:PCBM. In the case of PFO:PCBM blends, singlet energy transfer from PFO to PCBM is energetically preferred to charge separation, while in the case of Red F:PCBM blends, both charge separation and singlet energy transfer from Red F to PCBM may occur. We note here that the process of PCBM triplet state formation for these blend films of PCBM with polyfluorene polymers appears to be more likely than for thiophene polymer:PCBM blends of similar ΔECS.7 This may be explained by the higher singlet emission efficiency of the polyfluorene that the thiophene polymers.We now comment briefly on the relationship between the driving force for charge transfer, ΔG, and the appearance of separated charges for the blend films studied here. Ohkita et al. showed that for a series of thiophene polymers blended with PCBM the probability of charge generation depended strongly on the value of ΔG, determined from the difference between the donor singlet energy (determined from the 0-0 transition in the polymer/s absorption and emission spectra) and ΔECS.7 In particular they found that efficient charge pair formation occurs only for ΔG values greater than ∼0.6 eV. (Note that the comparison of ΔG to charge generation probability is only meaningful when the charge separated state is the lowest energy state in the system.) Considering the ΔG values for the blend films studied here for which ΔECS is low, we find that while the lowest IP polymers are consistent with the trend reported in ref. 7, the Red F:PCBM blend, with ΔG ≈ 0.5, appears to generate charges more efficiently than expected from ref. 7. This may be explained by the specific chemical structure of the Red F polymer, which leads to the LUMO and HOMO are localised on different parts of the molecule. This intrachain charge transfer character may assist charge separation by spatially separating the positive charge distribution from the negatively charged acceptor following exciton dissociation. A similar mechanism is proposed in ref. 9 to explain the high charge separation yield achieved for blends of poly-cyclopentadithiophene benzothiadiazole with PCBM.With regard to the selection of donor materials for higher polymer:PCBM solar cell efficiency, these results indicate an upper limit to the donor IP of around 5.3 eV (ΔECS = 1.6 eV) which, by comparison with the case of P3HT:PCBM, will limit the Voc to around 0.9-1 eV which has also been found in ref. 23 and ref. 27. Maximising the PCE of polymer:PCBM devices should thus be achieved not by attempting to increase Voc beyond 1 V, but by choosing lower optical gap polymers with the requisite intrachain character to allow charge separation even at relatively low ΔG values. Alternatively, different acceptor materials with higher lying singlet and triplet states may permit higher Voc values. Here we note that in the case of PCBM, the energy difference between the (electrochemical) HOMO-LUMO gap (2.4 eV) and the singlet emission energy (1.7 eV) is large compared to many other π-conjugated materials, possibly as a result of the fact that the lowest lying excited states of PCBM are relatively dark. Other acceptors with different electronic symmetry may impose less stringent limits on Voc.ConclusionsIn this work, we have shown that the probability of photoinduced charge separation in polyfluorene:PCBM blend films relative to PCBM triplet formation is related to the energy of the charge separated state. If the energy of the charge separated state, ΔECS, is greater than a threshold value of approximately 1.6 eV, energy transfer to the PCBM singlet occurs, followed by intersystem crossing to the PCBM triplet state. When ΔECS is less than this value, charge separation is favoured. When ΔECS is similar to the threshold, either type of excited state may be observed, with the dominant type being dependent upon the blend film composition. In particular, large PCBM domains appear to assist charge separation, as reported previously.8 This condition for efficient charge separation imposes an upper limit of around 1 V on the open circuit voltage that can be obtained for polymer:PCBM blends. Analysis of the dependence of charge generation on the driving force for charge separation, ΔG, shows that efficient charge generation can occur for ΔG values as low as ∼0.5 eV, for a polymer with intrachain donor–acceptor character. Together, these results comprise important design rules for organic bulk heterojunction solar cells.
AcknowledgementsThe authors are grateful to BP Solar and the UK Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (Supergen programme) for financial support, and to the Sumitomo Chemical Company for providing the polymers used in this work.ReferencesM. D. Irwin, B. Buchholz, A. W. Hains, R. P. H. Chang and T. J. Marks, p-Type semiconducting nickel oxide as an efficiency-enhancing anode interfacial layer in polymer bulk-heterojunction solar cells, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2008, 105, 2783 CrossRef CAS .J. Peet, J. Y. Kim, N. E. Coates, W. L. Ma, D. Moses, A. J. Heeger and G. C. Bazan, Efficiency enhancement in low-bandgap polymer solar cells by processing with alkane dithiols, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 497 CrossRef CAS .L. J. A. Koster, V. D. Mihailetchi and P. W. M. Blom, Ultimate efficiency of polymer/fullerene bulk heterojunction solar cells, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 093511 CrossRef .M. C. Scharber, D. Wuhlbacher, M. Koppe, P. Denk, C. Waldauf, A. J. Heeger and C. L. Brabec, Design rules for donors in bulk-heterojunction solar cells - Towards 10% energy-conversion efficiency, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 789 CrossRef CAS .M. Lenes, G. Wetzelaer, F. B. Kooistra, S. C. Veenstra, J. C. Hummelen and P. W. M. Blom, Fullerene bisadducts for enhanced open-circuit voltages and efficiencies in polymer solar cells, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2116 CrossRef CAS .E. G. Wang, L. Wang, L. F. Lan, C. Luo, W. L. Zhuang, J. B. Peng and Y. Cao, High-performance polymer heterojunction solar cells of a polysilafluorene derivative, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 033307 CrossRef .H. Ohkita, S. Cook, Y. Astuti, W. Duffy, S. Tierney, W. Zhang, M. Heeney, I. McCulloch, J. Nelson, D. D. C. Bradley and J. R. Durrant, Charge carrier formation in polythiophene/fullerene blend films studied by transient absorption spectroscopy, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 3030 CrossRef CAS .D. Veldman, O. Ipek, S. C. J. Meskers, J. Sweelssen, M. M. Koetse, S. C. Veenstra, J. M. Kroon, S. S. van Bavel, J. Loos and R. A. J. Janssen, Compositional and electric field dependence of the dissociation of charge transfer excitons in alternating polyfluorene copolymer/fullerene blends, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 7721 CrossRef CAS .T. Clarke, A. Ballantyne, F. Jamieson, C. Brabec, J. Nelson and J. Durrant, Transient absorption spectroscopy of charge photogeneration yields and lifetimes in a low bandgap polymer/fullerene film, Chem. Commun., 2009, 89 RSC .D. Veldman, T. Offermans, J. Sweelssen, M. M. Koetse, S. C. J. Meskers and R. A. J. Janssen, Triplet formation from the charge-separated state in blends of MDMO-PPV with cyano-containing acceptor polymers, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 511–512, 333 CrossRef CAS .S. Westenhoff, I. A. Howard, J. M. Hodgkiss, K. R. Kirov, H. A. Bronstein, C. K. Williams, N. C. Greenham and R. H. Friend, Charge recombination in organic photovoltaic devices with high open-circuit voltages, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 13653 CrossRef CAS .S. Cook, H. Ohkita, J. R. Durrant, Y. Kim, J. J. Benson-Smith, J. Nelson and D. D. C. Bradley, Singlet exciton transfer and fullerene triplet formation in polymer-fullerene blend films, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 101128 CrossRef .A. J. Campbell and D. D. C. Bradley, Dispersive electron transport in an electroluminescent polyfluorene copolymer measured by the current integration time-of-flight method, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 79, 2133 CrossRef CAS .S. Janietz, D. D. C. Bradley, M. Grell, C. Giebeler, M. Inbasekaran and E. P. Woo, Electrochemical determination of the ionization potential and electron affinity of poly(9,9-dioctylfluorene), Appl. Phys. Lett., 1998, 73, 2453 CrossRef CAS .P. Ravirajan, S. A. Haque, J. R. Durrant, D. Poplavskyy, D. D. C. Bradley and J. Nelson, Hybrid nanocrystalline TiO2 solar cells with a fluorene-thiophene copolymer as a sensitizer and hole conductor, J. Appl. Phys., 2004, 95, 1473 CrossRef CAS .R. Pacios, J. Nelson, D. D. C. Bradley and C. J. Brabec, Composition dependence of electron and hole transport in polyfluorene: [6,6]-phenyl C-61-butyric acid methyl ester blend films, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 83, 4764 CrossRef CAS .M. Bernius, M. Inbasekaran, E. Woo, W. Wu and L. Wujkowski, Fluorene-based polymer-preparation and applications, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2000, 11, 111 CrossRef CAS .R. V. Bensasson, E. Bienvenue, C. Fabre, J. M. Janot, E. J. Land, S. Leach, V. Leboulaire, A. Rassat, S. Roux and P. Seta, Photophysical properties of three methanofullerene derivatives, Chem.–Eur. J., 1998, 4, 270 CrossRef CAS .J. K. J. van Duren, X. N. Yang, J. Loos, C. W. T. Bulle-Lieuwma, A. B. Sieval, J. C. Hummelen and R. A. J. Janssen, Relating the morphology of poly(p-phenylene vinylene)/methanofullerene blends to solar-cell performance, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2004, 14, 425 CrossRef CAS .Clare Dyer-Smith, Jessica J. Benson-Smith, Donal D. C. Bradley, Hideyuki Murat, William J. Mitchell, Sean E. Shaheen, Saif A. Haque and Jenny Nelson, The effect of ionization potential and film morphology on exciplex formation and charge generation in blends of polyfluorene polymers and silole derivatives, J. Phys. Chem. C DOI:10.1021/jp9020307 .J. J. Benson-Smith, L. Goris, K. Vandewal, K. Haenen, J. V. Manca, D. Vanderzande, D. D. C. Bradley and J. Nelson, Formation of a ground-state charge-transfer complex in polyfluorene/[6,6]-phenyl-C-61 butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) blend films and its role in the function of polymer/PCBM solar cells, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 451 CrossRef CAS .M. Al-Ibrahim, H. K. Roth, M. Schroedner, A. Konkin, U. Zhokhavets, G. Gobsch, P. Scharff and S. Sensfuss, The influence of optoelectronic properties of poly(3-alkythiophenes) on device parameters in flexible polymer solar cells, Org. Electron., 2005, 6, 65 CrossRef CAS .D. Veldman, S. C. J. Meskers and R. A. J. Janssen, The Energy of Charge-Transfer States in Electron Donor–Acceptor Blends: Insight into the Energy Losses in Organic Solar Cells, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1939 CrossRef CAS .L. Goris, A. Poruba, L. Hod'akova, M. Vanecek, K. Haenen, M. Nesladek, P. Wagner, D. Vanderzande, L. De Schepper and J. V. Manca, Observation of the subgap optical absorption in polymer-fullerene blend solar cells, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 052113 CrossRef .L. Goris, K. Haenen, M. Nesladek, P. Wagner, D. Vanderzande, L. D. Schepper, J. D'Haen, L. Lutsen and J. V. Manca, Absorption phenomena in organic thin films for solar cell applications investigated by photothermal deflection spectroscopy, J. Mater. Sci., 2005, 40, 1413 CrossRef CAS .J. Nelson, Diffusion-limited recombination in polymer-fullerene blends and its influence on photocurrent collection, Phys. Rev. B, 2003, 67 Search PubMed .R. Schueppel, K. Schmidt, C. Uhrich, K. Schulze, D. Wynands, J. L. Bredas, E. Brier, E. Reinold, H. B. Bu, P. Baeuerle, B. Maennig, M. Pfeiffer and K. Leo, Optimizing organic photovoltaics using tailored heterojunctions: A photoinduced absorption study of oligothiophenes with low band gaps, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 77, 085311 CrossRef .Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Additional experimental results. See DOI: 10.1039/b910675hThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2009
Table Content:

F8BT	-5.913	poly(9,9-dioctylfluorene-co-benzothiadiazole)	0.23	2.2	PCBM3
PFO	−5.814	poly(9,9-dioctylfluorene)	0.8	2.1	PCBM3
F8T2	−5.515	poly(9,9-dioctylfluorene-alt-bithiophene)	0.6	1.8	PCBM3
RedF	−5.316	1) 50%, 2) 5%, 3) 40%, 4) 5%	0.53	1.6	PCBM3 & Polarons
TFMO	−5.217	poly[9,9–dioctylfluorene-co-N-(4-methoxy-phenyl) diphenylamine	1.4	1.5	N/A (Polarons?)
PCBM	−6.1	[6,6]-phenyl C61 butyric acid methyl ester	 	 	PCBM3

 	Fig. 1  (a): The normalized transient absorption spectra for polymer:PCBM blend films with 5 wt% PCBM. The figure shows that the spectra for 5 wt% PCBM blended with F8BT (open circles), PFO (open squares), F8T2 (filled triangles), and for 11 wt% PCBM in a polystyrene matrix (stars). The solid grey line is the PCBM triplet spectrum reported in ref. 18. (b): Transient absorption decay kinetics in argon atmospheres for (a) 5 wt% PCBM:PFO, (b) 5 wt% PCBM:F8BT, (c) 5 wt% PCBM:RedF, and (d) 5 wt% PCBM:F8T2 films. The decays are monoexponential with lifetimes between 10 and 20 μs and are offset for clarity. The measurements for (a), (b) and (c) were taken with 720 nm probe wavelength and the measurement for (d) was taken with a probe wavelength of 790 nm. The pump wavelength for (b) and (d) was 490 nm, for (a) 440 nm and for (c) 420 nm.	 

 	Fig. 2  Photoluminescence spectra over the 650-850 nm range for blend films of 5 wt% PCBM:PFO (open squares), 5 wt% PCBM:F8BT (open circles), 5 wt% PCBM:F8T2 (filled triangles) and 5 wt% PCBM:TFMO (solid line). The three high IP polymers show a weak PL emission peaking at ∼720 nm, characteristic of the PCBM singlet emission. All films were excited at 340 nm.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Transient absorption spectra of 5 wt% PCBM:RedF film (dotted line), and 50 wt% PCBM:ReddF (open circles) taken at 1 microsecond in comparison with the spectrum for the PCBM triplet (solid line). The pump and probe wavelengths were 490 nm and 790 nm respectively and the spectra were recorded in an argon atmosphere. (b) The transient optical decays for films of 5 wt% PCBM:RedF (dotted line), and 50 wt% PCBM:RedF (open circles) showing the different decay character of the two different composition films.	 

 	Fig. 4  Diagram of singlet and triplet state energy levels in Red F, PCBM and PFO polymers and the energy of the charge separated state formed in the blends of Red F:PCBM and PFO:PCBM. In the case of PFO:PCBM blends, singlet energy transfer from PFO to PCBM is energetically preferred to charge separation, while in the case of Red F:PCBM blends, both charge separation and singlet energy transfer from Red F to PCBM may occur.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Additional experimental results. See DOI: 10.1039/b910675h

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2009
