Distributed research: a new paradigm for undergraduate research and global problem solving   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B919523H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B919523H
(Opinion)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 509-511Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsDistributed research: a new paradigm for undergraduate research and global problem solving†

        
          
            Bruce 
            Parkinson
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemistry, School of Energy Resources, University of Wyoming, Laramie, WY 82071
Received 
      18th September 2009
    , Accepted 18th November 2009First published on 1st February 2010Bruce ParkinsonBruce Parkinson received his BS in chemistry at Iowa State University in 1972 and his PhD from Caltech in 1977 and post doctoral studies at Bell Laboratories in 1978. He then spent time at the Ames Laboratory and the Solar Energy Research Institute (now known as the National Renewable Energy Laboratory). He moved to the Central Research and Development Department of the DuPont Company in 1985 and in 1991, he became Professor of Chemistry at Colorado State University until his recent departure to join the Department of Chemistry and the School of Energy Resources at the University of Wyoming. His current research covers a wide range of areas including materials chemistry, UHV surface chemistry and photoelectrochemical energy conversion. He has more than 175 publications and holds 5 US patents.
There is no question that identifying and developing new renewable energy sources is a top priority for mankind. Solar energy is the only available source of energy capable of continually providing the immense amounts of carbon-free energy necessary to keep CO2 levels in the atmosphere below dangerous levels. Photoelectrolysis of water with sunlight to produce hydrogen solves the problem of intermittent and unevenly distributed sunlight, by storing the solar energy in a form that can be transported to provide fuel for combustion or a future generation of fuel cells for transportation and electricity generation at night.
The problem is that no known material can efficiently and cheaply photoelectrolyze water and be stable under illumination in an electrolyte solution for the many years necessary to justify the expense of building a photoelectrolysis system. A number of years ago, when I was thinking about this problem, it became clear to me that a nanostructured oxide semiconductor had the best chance of being stable, cheap and efficient. But which oxide? There are about 60 metals in the periodic table and the special combination of properties, including stability, light absorption over a large part of the solar spectrum and catalytic evolution of hydrogen and oxygen would, in my view, require a complex multi-component oxide material. Good examples of oxides with very special properties are the high Tc superconductors, where the record high transition temperature materials contain four or five metals. Given the large number of possible ternary or quaternary metal oxides, a combinatorial search for the holy grail of photoelectrochemistry was required.
Therefore, based on some previous combinatorial materials techniques and some previous work where we used nitrate salts as precursors to prepare thin films of oxide superconductors,1 I devised a method for the fast production and screening of metal oxides for photoelectrolysis activity. The technique uses an off the shelf ink jet printer to print metal oxide precursors in overlapping gradient patterns onto conductive glass substrates. Subsequent firing of the substrates at ∼500 °C produced patterns of mixed metal oxides. The substrate with the metal oxide film is then immersed into an electrochemical cell containing an electrolyte solution and a visible light laser is rastered over the pattern. Measuring the photocurrent as a function of laser position produces a false color photocurrent image of the photoelectrolysis activity in the metal oxide “library”. False color representations of the photocurrent data reveal areas, associated with a particular composition, that have photoelectrolysis activity greater than α-Fe2O3 or CuO. Precursors to these two elemental oxide semiconductors are printed on every substrate as internal standards since they have some activity for photoproduction of oxygen and hydrogen, respectively (see Fig. 1).
 Fig. 1  Printing and screening a four-metals-three-at-a-time pattern and a compositional zoom for a Fe–Cs–Nd–Cu system. (A) False color template showing the positions and gradients used for printing the four metal precursor solutions. (B) Photograph of the printed and fired film. Note the triangular internal standards of α-Fe2O3 and CuO (upper right and left, respectively) with thickness gradients (bottom to top) that are used as internal standards. (C) False color photocurrent image of the film shown in (B) using 514.5 nm illumination under 0.5 V bias in a 0.5 M NaOH solution. The photocurrent produced at a particular “pixel”, relative to the others in the two-dimensional array, is represented by its relative brightness, with the most photocurrent in a particular direction (water oxidation in this case) being the brightest. (D) Photocurrent scan at 514.5 nm of a triangular composition zoom in on the brightest area of the Fe–Cs–Nd triangle shown in (C), which has a maximum incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) value approximately twice that of the α-Fe2O3 internal standard (smaller triangle to the lower right). Expanding the printing gradients within the brightest region of the n-type material created the “zoom in”. Reproduced, with permission, from ref. 1. 
At this point in our research, I realized that this research design is extremely simple and inexpensive and, given the large number of possible materials to be printed and screened, that there was an enormous amount of work to do. I thought that getting some undergraduates involved in the project would be useful, but then realized that there is potentially a large number of students who might be interested and not just at Colorado State University, my home institution at that time. After all, it is the young people who have their future prosperity at stake if energy and climate change problems are not addressed. So, the idea of a “distributed research project” was born, where simple and inexpensive printing and screening kits would be developed to distribute to willing young scientists. This project is unlike other distributed research projects, such as SETI and Folding@home, since it engages the hands and minds of the participants and not just their spare computing power.
The kits needed simple, inexpensive and flexible apparatus to facilitate the involvement of a large number of students. Since I have teenage children, I was aware of the Lego Mindstorms® sets, configurable and programmable building sets made by Lego that contain motors, gears shafts etc., and since they are a consumer item, were not nearly as expensive as scientific equipment. Many young people interested in science and engineering already have experience in robotics competitions using these kits. The photo in Fig. 2 shows a laser scanner that uses an inexpensive green laser pointer and mirrors moved with Lego motors for x and y rastering of the beam over the printed and fired sample plates and all the additional components of a SHArK kit. The Lego laser scanner was designed and built by students working in my lab and does the same job as a system costing many thousands of dollars that we use in our research (you can see a movie of the scanner in operation on our web site http://www.thesharkproject.org and in the ESI†). Initial testing of our concept was done in an undergraduate research laboratory course with an enrolment of four dedicated freshman chemistry majors who were willing test subjects for this educational concept. The students learned about photoelectrochemistry, constructed their Lego apparatus and printed and screened metal oxide compositions. Several of them discovered some promising compositions and even seemed to enjoy doing it!
 Fig. 2  What is in a SHArK kit? In addition to the HP printer on the left and the Lego Mindstorms® kit are: empty ink jet cartridges and modified CD/DVD holder for the printer (on top of printer), metal nitrate salt solutions, “aquarium” cell, graphite counter electrode, electrode clips, green laser pointer, laser safety goggles, NaOH electrolyte (other electrolytes can also be used), custom USB powered electronics box (right), extra Lego parts and conductive glass substrates (a stack shown lower middle). 
After several years of attempts to get this idea externally funded, we obtained a seed grant from the Camille and Henry Dreyfus Foundation allowing us to develop our “beta” kits. In May 2008, we assembled kits containing all the necessary components for producing and screening libraries of metal oxides for water photoelectrolysis activity. (The project has been termed “The SHArK Project” for Solar Hydrogen Activity research Kit—see logo in the graphical abstract). The kits contain a Lego Mindstorms® kit along with a some extra Lego parts needed to construct the laser scanner, a green laser pointer, a custom designed USB powered electronics box that controls the electrode potential, switches the laser on and off and collects photocurrent data, a simple electrochemical cell constructed from plate glass and aquarium cement, laser safety goggles, empty ink jet cartridges, software developed to control the laser scanner and assorted supplies for supporting the ink jet printer (see Fig. 2). We estimate the kits cost about $850 each (not including the ink jet printer, the computer and a laboratory furnace). In the summer of 2008, we distributed 10 of these beta kits to undergraduate researchers across the country to test. With the valuable experience we obtained from our summer “beta” program, we are actively working to improve the protocols and reduce the cost of the kits. We are also designing a simple furnace capable of 500 °C that can be included for participants that don't have access to such a furnace. We are also expecting that the ingenuity of the enthusiastic undergraduates will produce innovative low-cost solutions for some of the remaining problems. The SHArK web site was created for the young researchers to communicate with each other and to give them access to our database of previously tested compositions and for them to upload their own data. Recently, we have been fortunate to be included in a large multi-institutional NSF-funded Center for Chemical Innovation entitled “Powering the Planet”, also researching solar photoelectrolysis, and for the next five years this center will be our instrument for further development, testing and distribution of our kits.
Realistically, discovery of a stable oxide semiconductor that can efficiently photoelectrolyze water is only the beginning of the solution to building a large-scale photoelectrolysis system that is economically viable. The students, who may be working at a small primarily undergraduate institution, or even a high school, will not have access to the sophisticated analysis tools required to adequately determine the structure, electronic properties and stoichiometry of their discovery. In addition, the morphology of the oxide semiconductor in a practical device will undoubtedly involve nanostructuring to overcome the limitations of poor optical absorbance and carrier transport inherent in most oxide semiconductors, again requiring sophisticated synthesis and analysis tools. Industrial, government and academic materials research laboratories will have to be recruited to assist with the follow-up on promising materials. Indeed, we found that a full year or more of research is needed for even a cursory follow-up study of a new potential metal oxide semiconductor.2 We hope to eventually be able to offer incentives to our most successful young researchers, such as a summer research experience or PhD fellowships to go to a materials laboratory to follow up on their own discoveries.
We have had a tremendous response from researchers, educators, students, businesses and even parents to the SHArK project and we have had more demand for kits than we are presently able to accommodate. However, we are in the process of scaling up the project. There are now over 20 SHArK sites in the United States and one in Germany. We feel that this enthusiasm is due to the unique approach of the SHArK project to engage the hands and minds of young people to learn about and participate in actual research to help solve a global scale problem that has largely been thrust upon them. In addition, they will also be learning about, among other things, solid-state chemistry, semiconductor physics, solar energy conversion, electrochemistry and performing scientific research. The exciting part is that these young people will have a real opportunity to discover a material that can make a difference in the future of energy production and storage, where a mix of renewable energy options will include photoelectrolysis panels that produce hydrogen from sunlight and water. Perhaps clever people can devise other distributed research programs to use budding scientific talent to attack other pressing scientific and societal problems.
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank all the people and organizations that have helped the SHArK project get off the ground and then expand. The organizations include Hewlett Packard for initial help with ink jet printing, the Dreyfus Foundation for the seed grant and the National Science Foundation by funding the Center for Chemical Innovation entitled “Powering the Planet”, centered at Caltech. The people include the students at Colorado State and at all the SHArK sites around the country and faculty members at the SHArK sites with a special thanks to Maggie Geselbracht for her enthusiasm and coming up with the SHArK acronym. Additional thanks go to Dr Robert Herrick for software and web site development, Aaron Wolfe for help with early development of the Lego concept and Harry Gray for his enthusiastic support. Jennifer Schuttlefield, Craig Markum and Tamara Sibray have kept the project going at the University of Wyoming and have conducted SHArK workshops. I would also like to thank Andrew Foster for help in promoting the SHArK project.
Reference
Michael Woodhouse, G. S. Herman and B. A. Parkinson, A Combinatorial Approach to Identification of Catalysts for the Photoelectrolysis of Water, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 4318–4324 CrossRef CAS .
Michael Woodhouse and B. A. Parkinson, Combinatorial Discovery and Optimization of a Complex Oxide with Water Photoelectrolysis Activity, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20(7), 2495–2502 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: A movie of the SHArK kit in action. See DOI: 10.1039/b919523hThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
Table Content:
Bruce Parkinson	Bruce Parkinson received his BS in chemistry at Iowa State University in 1972 and his PhD from Caltech in 1977 and post doctoral studies at Bell Laboratories in 1978. He then spent time at the Ames Laboratory and the Solar Energy Research Institute (now known as the National Renewable Energy Laboratory). He moved to the Central Research and Development Department of the DuPont Company in 1985 and in 1991, he became Professor of Chemistry at Colorado State University until his recent departure to join the Department of Chemistry and the School of Energy Resources at the University of Wyoming. His current research covers a wide range of areas including materials chemistry, UHV surface chemistry and photoelectrochemical energy conversion. He has more than 175 publications and holds 5 US patents.

 	Fig. 1  Printing and screening a four-metals-three-at-a-time pattern and a compositional zoom for a Fe–Cs–Nd–Cu system. (A) False color template showing the positions and gradients used for printing the four metal precursor solutions. (B) Photograph of the printed and fired film. Note the triangular internal standards of α-Fe2O3 and CuO (upper right and left, respectively) with thickness gradients (bottom to top) that are used as internal standards. (C) False color photocurrent image of the film shown in (B) using 514.5 nm illumination under 0.5 V bias in a 0.5 M NaOH solution. The photocurrent produced at a particular “pixel”, relative to the others in the two-dimensional array, is represented by its relative brightness, with the most photocurrent in a particular direction (water oxidation in this case) being the brightest. (D) Photocurrent scan at 514.5 nm of a triangular composition zoom in on the brightest area of the Fe–Cs–Nd triangle shown in (C), which has a maximum incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) value approximately twice that of the α-Fe2O3 internal standard (smaller triangle to the lower right). Expanding the printing gradients within the brightest region of the n-type material created the “zoom in”. Reproduced, with permission, from ref. 1.	 

 	Fig. 2  What is in a SHArK kit? In addition to the HP printer on the left and the Lego Mindstorms® kit are: empty ink jet cartridges and modified CD/DVD holder for the printer (on top of printer), metal nitrate salt solutions, “aquarium” cell, graphite counter electrode, electrode clips, green laser pointer, laser safety goggles, NaOH electrolyte (other electrolytes can also be used), custom USB powered electronics box (right), extra Lego parts and conductive glass substrates (a stack shown lower middle).	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: A movie of the SHArK kit in action. See DOI: 10.1039/b919523h

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
