Superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticulate system: synthesis, targeting, drug delivery and therapy in cancer  - Dalton Transactions (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9DT00459A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9DT00459A
(Perspective)
Dalton Trans., 2019, 48, 9490-9515Superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticulate system: synthesis, targeting, drug delivery and therapy in cancer

        
          
            Sathyadevi 
            Palanisamy
          
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Yun-Ming 
            Wang
          
          
        
      *abc
aDepartment of Biological Science and Technology, Institute of Molecular Medicine and Bioengineering, National Chiao Tung University, 75 Bo-Ai Street, Hsinchu 300, Taiwan. E-mail: ymwang@mail.nctu.edu.tw;  Fax: +886-3-5729288;   Tel: +886-3-5712121 ext. 56972
bCenter For Intelligent Drug Systems and Smart Bio-devices (IDS2B), National Chiao Tung University, 75 Bo-Ai Street, Hsinchu 300, Taiwan
cDepartment of Biomedical Science and Environmental Biology, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung 807, Taiwan
Received 
      31st January 2019
    , Accepted 5th June 2019First published on 5th June 2019AbstractCancer is a global epidemic and is considered a leading cause of death. Various cancer treatments such as chemotherapy, surgery, and radiotherapy are available for the cure but those are generally associated with poor long-term survival rates. Consequently, more advanced and selective methods that have better outcomes, fewer side effects, and high efficacies are highly in demand. Among these is the use of superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles (SPIONs) which act as an innovative kit for battling cancer. Low cost, magnetic properties and toxicity properties enable SPIONs to be widely utilized in biomedical applications. For example, magnetite and maghemite (Fe3O4 and γ-Fe2O3) exhibit superparamagnetic properties and are widely used in drug delivery, diagnosis, and therapy. These materials are termed SPIONs when their size is smaller than 20 nm. This review article aims to provide a brief introduction on SPIONs, focusing on their fundamental magnetism and biological applications. The quality and surface chemistry of SPIONs are crucial in biomedical applications; therefore an in-depth survey of synthetic approaches and surface modifications of SPIONs is provided along with their biological applications such as targeting, site-specific drug delivery and therapy.Sathyadevi PalanisamySathyadevi Palanisamy received her M.S. degree from Madurai Kamaraj University in 2007. She received her M.Phil. degree from Bharathiar University in 2009. She obtained her Ph.D. degree at Bharathiar University in 2012. Currently, she is working as a Post-doctoral fellow under the supervision of Prof. Yun-Ming Wang at the Department of Biological Science and Technology, Institute of Molecular Medicine and Bioengineering, National Chiao Tung University, Taiwan. Her research interests focus on coordination compounds, bio-inorganic chemistry, biosensors, electrochemical sensors and metal–organic frameworks.Yun-Ming WangYun-Ming Wang received his Ph.D. degree in chemistry from National Tsing Hua University, Taiwan in 1990, with Prof. Chung-Sun Chung. He is currently a Professor at National Chiao Tung University Taiwan. His research interests focus on the development of MRI contrast agents and optical imaging probes, cancer diagnosis and therapy, and biosensors and bioelectronics.
1 Introduction
Nanotechnology offers a variable platform for the evolution of successful therapeutic materials which can combine with a target and generate an appropriate response. Nanoparticles have emerged as a substantial tool for diverse nanomedicine applications owing to their properties inherent to the nanoscale.1–4 Among the nanomaterials studied, iron oxide-based nanomaterials have appeared as a prominent candidate for cancer treatment. Iron-based nanoparticles received particular attention since iron is a well-proven biocompatible material. A majority of their uses are a result of magnetic characteristics that significantly vary from the properties of bulk materials.5 The SPIONs applied in various biological applications are illustrated in Fig. 1.
 Fig. 1  SPIONs applied in biomedical applications. 
Recently, various research studies have been conducted on SPIONs in the field of biomedical applications.6 The magnetic behavior of SPIONs gained special attention during the 20th century due to the development of domain theory. This theory explains that the size of the particle significantly tunes magnetic behavior. The superparamagnetic behavior is noticed for a particle when the size is smaller than the corresponding exchange interaction ability with a usual size of 10–15 nm at a particular temperature. The SPIONs cannot exhibit any magnetization right after removing them from an external magnetic field. Hence, the aggregation effect should be carefully avoided.7 This kind of SPION received special attention when applied in biological applications involving magnetic resonance (MR) imaging, drug delivery, cancer therapy, and other aspects.8–13 In addition, the presence of a small size, high surface area, and potential magnetic and optical effects also created a new opening for SPION applications.14
Owing to their facile synthetic approaches, unique magnetic behavior, and effective biocompatibility, SPIONs have been broadly developed for a variety of biomedical uses such as drug delivery,15,16 molecular imaging,17,18 hyperthermia treatment,19,20 stem cell tracking,21,22 and tissue repair.23,24 The inherent superparamagnetic behavior provides more benefits for biological applications. A typical SPION possesses three major components: (1) an iron oxide nanoparticle (IONP) core which can act as a carrier agent in cancer treatment and a contrast agent in MR imaging, (2) a surface coated IONP can assist beneficial interactions between the SPION and the involved biological unit, and (3) a targeting ligand required to carry out a specific in vivo application such as identifying the overexpressed receptors on the cancer cell surface.25
The targeting, drug delivery, and cancer treatment are important factors required for a favorable prognosis. Cancer targeting and therapeutics are emerging fields in nanotechnology. Tremendous attempts in the biomedical research area have been made to increase the sensitivity and specificity of cancer diagnosis and therapy with the help of early detection systems.26–28 The tunable magnetic behaviors of SPIONs play a prominent role in their applications such as imaging, targeting, and treatment, and sometimes as multifunctional platforms with a combination of two or more applications.29,30 The superparamagnetic effect is a crucial property chiefly existing in single-domain nanoparticles. The SPION magnetic properties are prominently dependent on their structure, size, shape, surface coating thickness, and functionalization.31,32 The therapeutic applications of surface engineered SPIONs are depicted in Fig. 2.
 Fig. 2  Schematic representation of surface engineered SPIONs for therapeutic applications: (a) SPIONs containing iron oxide as the core with different coating materials, and (b) surface engineered SPIONs composed of polymer micelles with a hydrophilic shell and a hydrophobic core. The hydrophilic surface conjugated with targeting antibodies, peptides, aptamers, and small molecules. 
Some other interesting properties of SPIONs were also revealed along with their biocompatible, biodegradable and potential non-toxicity characteristics. It is interesting to know about their superparamagnetic behavior, additional magnetic anisotropic contributions, high field saturation, irreversibility of high field magnetization, etc.33 Hence, these particles cannot exhibit magnetization when removed from the magnetic field. Based on these unique behaviors, SPION-integrated biomolecules can be tagged and magnetically detected to demonstrate their utility in targeting, drug delivery, and therapeutic applications.34–36 Recently, there has been an increase in the production of nanomaterials for selective targeting. An appropriate particle size is critical for magnetic drug targeting.37 In addition, the particles should undergo magnetization when supplied with an external magnetic field.13,36 Chemotherapeutic treatments often result in a multitude of adverse side effects due to systemic toxicities of these treatments. Localized hyperthermia has also been shown as an adjunct medical treatment.38 However, a potential method for site-specific drug release is still required.
With the aim of improving therapeutic efficiency of drugs and minimizing side effects, investigations were carried out on nanoparticles by employing them as drug delivery vehicles. The architecture of SPIONs as multimodal systems combined with different targeting moieties and drugs routes them towards cancer cells for site-specific drug release.39 A higher efficiency is noted when compared to administering drugs alone. It is fundamentally connected to various drug delivery mechanisms that SPION drugs bypass healthy areas and thus induce little adverse effects.40–42 This review deals with the synthesis of SPIONs based on both aqueous and non-aqueous methods.
Recently, inorganic nanocarriers have become the center of interest in biomedicine research owing to their specific physiochemical features including magnetism, optical properties, size distribution, shape and their capacity to function as imaging and therapeutic drug platforms. Most of these carriers are presently at preclinical stages rather than at clinical trials.43 It has been revealed that the nanocarriers can be used in drug delivery and cancer treatment since they can deliver drugs on the specific tumor site thereby overcoming the systemic toxicity risks.44 Furthermore, the biocompatibility can be increased by integrating them with targeting moieties such as antibodies, nucleic acids, enzymes, and cell lines. The multifunctional applications of organized SPIONs have an intense impact on different areas of cancer therapy. In addition, they are capable of improving their contrasting qualities in drug delivery, imaging, and hyperthermia due to their biocompatible and biodegradable features.45–48
The different physiochemical properties of SPIONs are shown in Fig. 3. These unique characteristics received special attention among active researchers to introduce new findings into their biomedical practices, which have been included in this review. To start with, a brief introduction of SPIONs is discussed, followed by various types of synthetic methods. Then the biomedical applications of SPIONs are reviewed under three major heads as targeting, drug delivery, and treatment which further revealed that SPIONs possess significant abilities for various biomedical applications owing to their unique characteristics. The unique magnetic characteristics and excellent tumor targeting efficacy of SPIONs may lead to effective cancer treatments. This review discusses the potential utility of SPIONs in cancer biology such as targeting, drug delivery, and therapy.
 Fig. 3  The physiochemical properties of SPIONs affect their bio-kinetics and fates in vivo. These changes can be observed in uptake, distribution, metabolism, and excretion of SPIONs from the body. The protein corona is yet another factor that is influenced by various physiochemical features of nanoparticles and can, in turn, affect the targeting capabilities of SPIONs in imaging applications. Not only can the protein corona alter the toxicity, uptake, targeting, and circulation time of SPIONs, but it can also affect the relaxivity of SPIONs as MR imaging contrast agents. Reproduced with permission from ref. 49. 
It is evident that the applications of SPIONs have created new prospects for image-guided cancer therapy upon integrating them with various therapeutic agents such as chemical drugs and gene therapeutics. Many reviews have discussed the formation, surface functionalization, and biofunctionalization of SPIONs. This review discusses several synthesis aspects of SPIONs, chemistry and properties of SPIONs, and SPIONs in targeting, drug delivery and cancer therapeutics. Many studies dealt with different synthetic methods but no review discussed all the available synthetic methods. Hence, it is decided to discuss all the synthetic methods in this review. In addition, chemistry and properties of SPIONs and the role of SPIONs in targeting, drug delivery, and therapeutics are also discussed.31 Moreover, challenges and difficulties involved in the development of SPION-based nanoplatforms as active agents for targeting, drug delivery, and therapeutic treatments were also discussed.
2 Synthesis of SPIONs
Several SPION synthetic methods are available in the literature so far.50 The synthesis can be carried out based on physical and chemical approaches, including traditional methods, and chemical synthesis to more fascinating techniques. Chemical synthesis is generally applied when aimed to prepare SPIONs with a uniform size and composition. However, the interconnection of SPION properties plays a critical role in displaying their characteristics.
2.1 Co-precipitation method
This is one of the most widely used standard methods for aqueous phase SPION synthesis.51 In simple terms, Fe2+ and Fe3+ salts in 2:1 molar ratio are prepared in aqueous solution followed by the addition of sodium hydroxide (NaOH) or ammonium hydroxide (NH4OH) at elevated temperatures to precipitate the nanoparticles. This is carried out in a pH range of 9–14. The surfaces of the nanoparticles are found to be rich in hydroxyl groups which further helps them to dissolve in water.52 It is important that the particle size and shape are maintained within the desired range. To this aim, it is necessary to consider (1) the molar ratio of salts, (2) types of iron sources used for example, chloride, nitrate, or sulfate salts, (3) pH in solution, (4) temperature, and (5) ionic strength of the reaction mixture.53 The drawback of this method is the oxidation/reduction potential of iron salts used since they affect both the physical and chemical properties of the prepared nanoparticles. To overcome this issue, the precipitation should be performed in an inert environment under nitrogen as this will prevent deterioration of the SPIONs.54
2.2 Thermal decomposition
This is the conventional technique to prepare nanocrystals of a smaller size than other methods. It results in the transformation of iron-based organometallics in the presence of organic solvents and surfactants at a high boiling point.55 The coordination/organometallic compounds used are iron(III) acetylacetonate Fe(acac)3, tris(acetylacetonato)iron(III) (Fe(C5H7O2)3), and iron pentacarbonyl (Fe(CO)5).56 This method is similar to that used for producing high-quality nanocrystals and oxide semiconductors.57 Precise size and shape control is mainly determined by the ratios and volumes of different reagents as well as the reaction conditions. Hyeon et al. described a thermal decomposition strategy to produce 20–160 nm sized monodisperse nanocubes using oleic acid and benzyl ether at 260 °C.58 They noted that the particle sizes differ by varying reactions and 4-biphenylcarboxylic acid yielded a smaller particle size than oleic acid. The main drawbacks of this method are: (1) high reaction temperatures, (2) the use of toxic reagents, and (3) nanoparticles can be dispersed only in organic solvents.
2.3 Hydrothermal method
This method is a popular chemical approach for synthesizing inorganic nanocrystals mainly for metals and their oxides.59 This method requires relatively high pressure and temperature to generate nanocrystals. Merits of this method are: (1) high reactivity of reagents, (2) ease of control of the morphology of the compounds, and (3) good crystallization. However, it is crucial that the solubility of reactants is maintained to produce desired products under such conditions. Moreover, there is a possibility of forming metastable and condensed phases. The nanospheres, nanoparticles, nanosheets, nanoplates, nanorods, nanocubes, nanorings, and nanowires have been successfully synthesized using this method.60 Chen et al. were able to prepare quasi-sphere polyhedron nanocrystalline particles of 50 nm. They used sodium thiosulphate (Na2S2O3) as a phase controlling agent and the ratio of sodium sulfite (Na2SO3)/iron(II) sulphate (FeSO4) determined whether the Fe3O4 phase can be produced.61
2.4 Hydrothermal and solvothermal syntheses
The hydrothermal method utilizes an aqueous solution to prepare SPIONs. This method also employs high pressure and temperature to produce nanocrystals. The advantages of this method include: (1) low cost of reactants, (2) simple reaction conditions, and (3) high purity and degree of crystallinity along with great water solubility of products.62 For example, Ge et al. produced highly pure crystalline nanoparticles with high tunable saturation magnetization, using an oxidative reaction of FeCl2·4H2O and oxygen in a basic solution at 134 °C and 2 bar pressure.63 The size of nanoparticles was also controlled between 15 and 30 nm by varying the concentration of the reactants. Moreover, Wang et al. were able to hydrothermally synthesize SPIONs in NaOH using diamine hydrate as an oxidant for transforming Fe2+ into Fe3+.64 The increase in the particle size and high crystallinity were achieved by increasing the reaction temperature.
The synthetic procedure of the solvothermal method mimics that of the hydrothermal synthetic method. This method works in an organic medium. Stojanović et al. developed a simple solvothermal method to prepare SPIONs in which the water–ethanol–oleic acid system served as a reaction medium.65 The oleate anion and glucose were used as stabilizing and reducing agents, respectively. The size and morphological properties of the synthesized SPIONs are better than those obtained from the hydrothermal method. The main disadvantages are its surface hydrophobicity which may result in poor water solubility and further affects its biocompatibility.
2.5 Thermal parsing
This technique requires high temperatures and intricate operation for the production of SPIONs with a controllable size.66 Highly uniform SPIONs are obtained by thermal parsing of organometallic composites and oxidation in an organic medium. The medium contains most commonly used surfactants such as oleic acid and hexadecylamine.67,68 The accurate particle size, starting reagents used, morphology, time, and temperature were controlled following the reported article69 in order to produce the nanoparticles using the thermal parsing method. They found that after covering, MR imaging of the heterograft tumor animal model proved the benefits of the manufactured SPIONs against LumirenVR.70 However, the disadvantage of this method lies in the solubility, i.e. the nanoparticles synthesized by this method can be dissolved only in non-polar solvents.
2.6 Mild reduction
The nanoparticles are synthesized using the reduction of Fe3+ under specific reaction conditions which are stabilized by polymers via photochemical in situ polymerization.71 The general principles for a mild reduction are: (1) Fe3+ is partially reduced to Fe2+ by sodium sulfate and (2) ammonium hydroxide is added to co-precipitate Fe3+/Fe2+ salts to obtain nanoparticles.
Shi et al. created polyethyleneimine (PEI)-coated nanoparticles using a modified mild-reduction method to obtain nanoparticles with high r2 relaxivity.72 Their results showed that the synthesized nanoparticles exhibited an ultrahigh r2 relaxivity value (461.29 nM−1 s−1) and a large r2/r1 ratio,73 implying that the PEI-coated nanoparticles had significant influence on T2-weighted MR imaging applications. They reported that the exact mechanism of the ultrahigh r2 relaxivity is unclear but it should be inspected under two main different aspects such as high magnetic moments of Fe3O4 as per the reported protocol,74 and the coating of Fe3O4 with PEI. Do et al. outlined the contribution of PEI, 0.5 wt%, by generating nanoparticles with high r2 relaxivity (22.7 nM−1 s−1) when compared with 0.02 and 0.08 wt% PEI (45 nM−1 s−1 and 29.5 nM−1 s−1, respectively).75 This is because of the fact that there is no bigger cluster size because of the obvious aggregation of nanoparticles prepared at 0.05 wt%. Thus, both the reasonable hydrodynamic cluster size and limited aggregation of the particles contribute to a higher r2 value of the particles.
2.7 Reduction–precipitation method
Qu et al. first reported this method as an improvement to the co-precipitation method for the synthesis of SPIONs.76 This method can produce sub-10 nm spherical shaped SPIONs using ferric chloride (FeCl3) as the starting material. This can be reduced to Fe3+ in the presence of Na2S2O3 and ammonia. The formation of a red-colored intermediate prevents the re-oxidation of iron employed in this synthesis, which is the main advantage of this method.
2.8 Reverse micelle method
This method helps to synthesize metallic magnetic nanoparticles by employing hydrazine and cetyltrimethylammonium bromide as a reducing agent and a surfactant, respectively. The prepared micelles are a surfactant stabilized water-in-oil (W/O) microemulsion by forming nano-reactors for synthesis.77 Since then, the reaction conditions for this method are well established to obtain good yields.78 This method is also named “growth confined co-precipitation method” because the reactants are similar to those used in co-precipitation and reduction–precipitation methods. The advantage is the use of a nanoreactor capable of controlling the size and morphology by limiting crystal growth and preventing aggregation of the particles. The disadvantages are: (1) low yield with poor solubility in water compared to that of the other two methods, (2) broader size distribution, (3) biosafety concerns of the surfactants and those attached to the nanoparticles, and (4) complexity in the purification process which hampers mass production.
2.9 Polyol method
The polyol method aims to synthesize water-soluble SPIONs. In this process, a thermal decomposition takes place with organometallic compounds in the presence of polyol solvents which could serve both as a surfactant and/or a reducing agent.79 Hu et al. synthesized SPIONs under a one-pot reaction. They obtained ultra-small sized (3–6 nm) particles with a uniform size and structure, and medium solubility in water.80 However, the major disadvantage of this method lies in the difficulty in the removal of polyol solvents used.
2.10 Micro/nanoemulsion
Immiscible solvents are the backbone of emulsion where precursors are generally soluble in low or high dielectric solvents. Ultrasonication of precursors creates a homogeneous environment before creating a micro/nanoemulsion system composed of metals, coating agents, and targeting moieties. This is followed by the addition of a dispersant with a dielectric constant which helps to dissolve the combined reagents under vigorous mixing.81 It is important to establish (O/W) or similar solvents that solubilized the targeting molecule forming corresponding beads dispersed in a lower dielectric solvent medium to obtain an oil phase. In some cases, it may be preferred to establish an O/W system as shown in Fig. 4. A similar method is the membrane emulsion method which uses synthetic membranes to create microbeads. Another crucial factor to this method is the development of separate phases using a capping agent and an iron core dissolved in the same phase. Often it is easy to generate a bead emulsion of polystyrene monomers through ultrasonication or membrane sonication.82
 Fig. 4  Schematic illustration of the microemulsion method (O/W reaction) for nanoparticle synthesis. 
2.11 Physical vapor deposition (PVD)
PVD is referred to as a vacuum deposition method that can deposit thin films using a condensation method of the material used. This process is purely physical with high-temperature vacuum evaporation with subsequent condensation. Many reports are available for the preparation of iron oxides using PVD. Pulsed laser deposition, sputtering, and molecular beam epitaxy are the most commonly used PVD methods for growing spinel ferrites. Pandya et al. deposited a SPION film on Si(100) under the aid of the pulsed DC sputtering method and electric field. The formation of γ-Fe2O3 or Fe3O4 can be confirmed using X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns or Raman or Mossbauer spectroscopy.83–86 XRD is one of the most commonly used techniques for the nanoparticle characterization. The XRD technique provides detailed information on the crystalline structure, crystallite size, nature of the phase and lattice parameters. The main advantage of using XRD techniques is the usage of samples in a powder form, generally after drying respective colloidal solutions which further results in statistically indicative, volume-averaged values. The particle composition can also be identified upon comparing the peak intensity and position with the reference patterns that are already available from the standard International Centre for Diffraction Data (ICDD) database. However, this pattern is not suitable for amorphous materials and broad XRD peaks will appear for particles possessing 3 nm or below.
2.12 Chemical vapor deposition (CVD)
CVD is reported for synthesizing SPIONs; however, fewer reports are available. Tristao et al. showed that CVD can be utilized to prepare carbon-based SPIONs upon γ-Fe2O3 reduction in the presence of nitrogen and methane.87 Recently, Mantovan et al. used the CVD method to synthesize a Fe3O4 based thin film with an organometallic compound as a precursor and they noted an improvement in the stoichiometric ratio when compared with the starting precursor.88,89 Meanwhile, the CVD pulses can regulate the Fe3O4 thickness but this method is not suitable to produce iron oxide in the nanoparticle form. Some other reports are available that require post-synthesis treatments to tune the iron particles into their nanoparticles like scrapping powder from substrates and the same can be dispersed in a solvent by using the sonication method or surface modification.
2.13 Electrodeposition
It is similar to the vapor deposition method and it deposits the starting materials into a substrate to produce nanostructures. The solubilized Fe2+/Fe3+ ions are the precursors and the reaction is carried out at room temperature. The mass production of SPIONs can be achieved using this approach.90 Reports from the literature indicate that changing the composition of the electrolyte used can alter the film formation, size, and crystallinity.87 It is also found that acetate played a crucial role in modulating the ratios of Fe3O4 and γ-Fe2O3.
2.14 High-temperature (thermal) decomposition using organometallic precursors
It is highly challenging to produce nanoparticles with an optimized size and distribution. The difficulty in achieving their crystallinity and control on the shape of the particles is also reported.91 This is due to an occurrence of low-temperature co-precipitation reactions where the kinetics can be regulated by reagent concentration and thus results in limited nucleation. Thus, by using high-temperature the crystallization is also improved and it is very easy to modulate high temperature synthetic methods.
2.15 Sedimentation technique
This procedure is an easy and convenient method to synthesize SPIONs. It involves resuscitation of metals using salt solution and base at high/room temperatures. The sedimentation technique proved that the attributes of the SPIONs like the size and shape are prominently dependent on the salt source, temperature, pH, and ionic strength.92 High yield is the main advantage of applying this technique but it is highly challenging to control the distribution of the particles since kinetic doers are monitoring the crystal growth. Despite this, uniform nanoparticles are usually synthesized through homogeneous sedimentation reactions.50,93 There are two processes involved: (1) nucleation blast when the sample concentration exceeds the saturation and (2) a slow development of nuclei using the dissemination technique of the surface solutes.94 Magnetic fluid (MF) prepared by this method showed excellent performance and a rapid magnetothermal reaction. This method is extensively used because of the comfort in implementation and the lack of need for risky materials and action.95 The sedimentation method is extensively applied in the production of SPIONs for cancer diagnosis and therapy.
2.16 Sonochemical method
In this method, high energy ultrasound is used for the synthesis of SPIONs. Ultrasound generates cavitation bubbles which can be used to transform the reactants into desired products at ambient temperature. The size and shape of the SPIONs can be controlled by regulating the refluxing temperature, power, and irradiation time. Recently, Dolores et al. synthesized SPIONs using ethylene glycol as a surfactant. It was found that increasing reaction time increased the particle formation at a specific ultrasonic frequency.96
2.17 Microwave-assisted synthesis
Microwaves from the electromagnetic spectrum can also be used for the synthesis of SPIONs consuming less energy and in shorter time. In this method, the reaction container provides uniform microwave energy to all sides of the container which results in synthesizing stable and highly crystalline nanoparticles. However, lower energy surface crystallinity makes these particles to get reduced surface reactivity but the low surface reactivity can increase the particle stability. This property is determined based on the particle and water interactions and the agglomeration effect. Finally, manipulation of the surfactant dose, reaction/irradiation time, and power allows controlled SPION properties.97,98
3 SPIONs (Fe3O4 and γ-Fe2O3): chemistry, geometry, and physiochemical properties
3.1 Chemistry
Magnetic iron oxide nanoparticles have attracted particular interest in many biomedical applications owing to their superparamagnetic properties and low toxicity.99,100 These nanoparticles are superparamagnetic when the size of the particles is below 20 nm.101 The nano-sized diameter and magnetic characteristics enable SPIONs to exhibit diverse functions.102 During the past few decades, SPIONs have been widely used in clinical applications such as MR imaging, gene delivery, and drug delivery.100,103,104 The Fe3O4 & γ-Fe2O3 particles possess superparamagnetism since they can be oriented in the direction of the magnetic field and can be retained in their original state after removing from the external magnetic field. SPIONs are originally positively charged and can be readily incorporated with negatively charged materials such as drugs and nucleic acids105 which also contribute to clinical applications.
SPIONs are considered as Fe3O4 and they become γ-Fe2O3 when oxidized.. These particles are explored in biomedical applications. These particles can be easily metabolized and can be transported by proteins and stored in endogenous iron pools for later use.106 The nanoparticles derived from Fe3O4 vary from the IONPs due to the existence of iron in the forms of Fe2+ and Fe3+. The divalent ions occupy the octahedral sites whereas the trivalent ions can be arranged across both the tetrahedral and octahedral sites. However, trivalent ions in α-Fe2O3 reside in their octahedral sites but the Fe3+ ions in the case of γ-Fe2O3 are distributed in both the sides along with the formation of Fe2+ ion vacancies in octahedral sites.107
Oxygen in both Fe3O4 and γ-Fe2O3 particles can form a cubic close-packed crystal system. Fe3O4 possesses an inverse spinel structure and the ions are arranged randomly between tetrahedral and octahedral sites whereas the Fe2+ ions occupy octahedral sites.13,108 γ-Fe2O3 has a similar structure to Fe3O4 but varies in the presence of cation vacancies formed at the octahedral sites in which almost the iron is present in its trivalent state and more than half of the sites are occupied by Fe3+ ions in a regular distribution with two filled sites being followed by one vacant site.13,108 The iron atoms present on the surface behave as Lewis acids by coordinating with other compounds with electron donating ability. The iron oxide is in the form of hydroxyls owing to its binding ability with water present in an aqueous solution. The isoelectric point of iron oxide nanoparticles is around pH 6.8 and dependent on the solution pH; the nanoparticle surface can be positive or negative. Below the isoelectric point, nanoparticles undergo protonation and lead to the formation of FeOH2+ whereas above the isoelectric point, deprotonation is observed and results in the formation of Fe–O− on the nanoparticle surface. Thus, pH-dependent surface charge has a great influence on the coating materials that are being attached onto the surface.13,109
3.2 Geometry
Magnetite, Fe3O4, is a ferromagnetic oxide. The electronic configuration of Fe3+ ions present in Fe3O4 is 1s22s22p63s23p63d5. The Fe3+ present in Fe3O4 has five unpaired electrons in the ground state. It possesses a high Curie temperature (Tc = 858 K). It has a face-centered cubic (fcc) unit cell with a length of a = 0.839 nm based on the total 32 O2− ions along the [111] direction and each unit cell contains 8 formula units. The formula is given as Fe3+(A)[Fe2+Fe3+](B)O4 since the structure possesses octahedral/mixed octahedral and tetrahedral stacked layers along [111]. A in the formula refers to the tetrahedral site possessing Fe3+ ions enclosed with 4 oxygen atoms whereas B refers to the octahedral sites with mixed Fe2+/Fe3+ ions enclosed with 6 oxygen atoms. Thus, Fe3+ engages both tetrahedral and octahedral sites.110
The Fe3O4 magnetic properties are attributed to splitting of a 3d orbital. Due to the presence of the oxide ligand, the 3d orbital is divided into two subsets and hence all Fe3+ and Fe2+ ions contain four unpaired electrons. The Fe2+/Fe3+ ions in the octahedral site are coupled ferromagnetically via the double exchange method. The electron spin located in the opposite direction of the rest is interchanged between two sites. In contrast, Fe3+ ions in mixed sites are associated antiferromagnetically through the oxygen. It indicates that the Fe3+ spins cancel out each other and the unpaired spins of Fe2+ found in the octahedral site are solely responsible for causing magnetization. In Fe3O4, the electrons bouncing between divalent and trivalent ions at B sites can generate conductivity. This can behave like a half metal since the polarization arrives from negative polarization at the Fermi level.111,112 Maghemite (γ-Fe2O3) is a ferromagnetic oxide and the electronic configuration of Fe2+ ions in γ-Fe2O3 is 1s22s22p63s23p63d6. The Fe2+ present here contains two and four unpaired electrons. The electronic, magnetic and some other spectroscopic characteristics are determined by the availability of 3d electrons in the iron. The difference between magnetite and maghemite lies in oxidation states balanced by cation vacancies. The unit cell has 64/3 Fe3+ ions, 32 O2−, and 7/3 vacancies. One cation occupied the tetrahedral site and the rest are randomly distributed in the octahedral sites but are limited to octahedral sites.
3.3 Optical properties
Fe3O4 and γ-Fe2O3 are the major forms of stable iron oxide that exist in the environment. They are available in the forms of rocks, soils, and bacterial species, as well as in the human body. The magnetite can be oxidized to maghemite over time and can be converted to hematite when subjected to high temperature.113 Many investigations are made on the optical properties of hematite. These studies show that hematite has a 2.1–2.2 eV band gap which is strong enough for solar energy conversion.114 Magnetite is an important member for solar applications owing to its absorption from the visible to infrared region. In particular, magnetite in the ferrofluid state composed of small-sized nanoparticles has various applications including biological applications. Magnetite gained much importance in the earlier days owing to its transition of a semiconductor to metal state at a Verwey transition temperature of constant interest.
Despite various interpretations for different transitions, the structure of the electronic band of Fe3O4 is still a matter of debate. Bulk Fe3O4 possesses a fcc lattice and an inverse spinel structure with the expression (Fe3+)[Fe3+Fe2+](O2−)4 in which the (A) tetrahedral site is occupied by trivalent ions and roughly mixed Fe2+/Fe3+ ions engage in the (B) octahedral site. Previous reports revealed that the valence band of the oxygen 2p orbital is separated from the empty iron 4s orbital by 4–6 eV.115 The crystal field bands of octahedral/tetrahedral sites having the metal 3d orbital lie between these bands. Experimental and theoretical studies show that the energy gap due to crystal field splitting into octahedral and tetrahedral sites is ∼2.2 eV and ∼0.9 eV. Alvarado et al. showed the one-electron energy level of Fe3O4 based on various terms such as the energy distribution curve, photoelectron spectroscopy, crystal field model and electron spin polarization to explain the photoelectronic excitation properties.116 Balberg et al. provided complete results by incorporating Alvadro's study of the Fe3O4 one-electron energy level.117 By assuming that FeO, Fe3O4, and γ-Fe2O3 possess the same spectral properties, the reflection and absorption studies were carried out over 0.1–0.5 eV and 0.5–0.6 eV, respectively. These studies showed the appearance of an absorption edge at 2 eV which is attributed to the transition of the last occupied d band to a 4s band of iron. The energy level diagram of Fe3O4 octahedral sites is illustrated based on the results obtained from crystal field splitting (Δcf = 1.7 eV), Hund's rule exchange splitting (Δex = 2.7 eV), cathodoluminescence,118 and soft X-ray studies, as shown in Fig. 5. Antonov et al. also investigated the Kerr effect and electronic properties of Fe3O4 using local spin density approximations (LSDAs)119 and the obtained results were consistent with the theoretical studies carried out using LSDA methods.
 Fig. 5  A one-electron energy scheme of an octahedral site in Fe3O4. The interpretations of the various optical transitions are represented by the dashed arrows. Interpretations of other spectroscopic transitions are also indicated. Reproduced with permission from ref. 117. Copyright 1978, Elsevier. 
3.4 Electronic properties and charge carrier dynamics
Knowledge on the electronic band structures and charge carrier dynamics of iron oxide is critical in order to apply it in biomedical and magneto-optic device fields. Many researchers reported the band structure of iron oxide nanoparticles based on photoluminescence, photoelectrophoresis, etc.120 The charge carrier dynamics of these particles is studied using absorption, fluorescence, and photoluminescence methods.121 Photoluminescence is an important technique applied on bulk materials to study light emission characteristics but recent reports revealed that each nanoparticle system such as quantum dots, gold nanorods, silicon nanorods, and zinc nanorods is studied for its photoluminescence to exhibit its emission characteristics using the same method. The photoemission properties of these materials are exhibited between visible to infrared regions and their corresponding mechanisms fall from excitation of quantum dots to surface plasmons in nanoparticles. Sadat et al. subjected the broad-sized (10 nm–5 μm) Fe3O4 nanoparticles to this measurement. Three prominent peaks at 560, 695, and 840 nm were noted when irradiated under 407 nm laser light, as shown in Fig. 6a. Similar results were obtained from optical measurements when excited at 350 nm, as shown in Fig. 6b. The spatial arrangement of Fe3O4 in the polystyrene matrix and its appropriate electronic band structures obtained from photoluminescence measurements and the corresponding model are given in Fig. 6c–d. The peak around 565 nm was ascribed to the transition of radiation of moving electrons from t2g → eg with 2.2 eV on the octahedral site whereas the peak around 690 nm was responsible for the transition of the octahedral site to O(2p) or t2g → O(2p) of the tetrahedral site. The peak around 840 nm was attributed to the transition of trapped electrons on the tetrahedral site. Along with these changes, a blue shift was also noticed due to the confinement effect of Fe3O4 particles that are coated with polyacrylic acid (PAA) (10 nm diameter). Higher luminescence intensity can be noticed when the particles are embedded in a polystyrene matrix because of its emission. The conversion efficacy of the nanoparticles embedded in the polyacrylic matrix was better (76%) than that of the particles embedded in the polystyrene matrix (28%) after photothermal measurements at 785 nm.122
 Fig. 6  (a) The PL spectra of different surface modified iron oxide nanoparticles. The spectra represented in (a) are the cumulative peak fit to the experimental PL data; the vertical dashed lines show the shift in the PL peak due to the quantum confinement effect; (b) fluorescence spectra of Fe3O4 nanoparticles as a function of emission wavelength; (c) schematic representation of spatially confined Fe3O4 nanoparticles embedded in a spherical polystyrene matrix, denoted as PS/Fe3O4 and Si/PS/Fe3O4. (d) Schematic energy bands of the Fe3O4 nanoparticle systems. Reproduced with permission from ref. 119. Copyright 2014, AIP Publishing. 
Boxall et al. revealed that colloidal Fe3O4 particles displayed well-defined moving out at 1.8, 2.2, and 3.1 eV that are in good agreement with the electronic band structure of Fe3O4. Based on these data, it was claimed that both Fe3O4 and γ-Fe2O3 possess nearly identical electronic band structures.123 To carry out a charge carrier dynamics study of these particles, transient absorption studies were performed. Here, the particles were excited with picosecond (ps) or femtosecond (fs) laser pulses. The excited species was probed again using one more laser pulse which is detained with an excitation laser; Cherepy et al. reported the electronic dynamics in different sized Fe2O3 such as γ-Fe2O3 (1–2 nm), commercial γ-Fe2O3 (50 nm), and spindle-shaped α-Fe2O3 (1 × 5 nm). The decay profiles were not dependent on the pH, power, and wavelength of the probe. The optical properties of these particles demonstrated great features identical to their electronic structure. The weak emission from these particles indicates the non-radiative decay process. The exhibited photothermal effect due to the non-radiative process can have great applications in cancer therapy.121
3.5 Superparamagnetic feature
Superparamagnetism is considered as an essential property of IONPs since it allows their detection by diagnostic methods.124 The particles are said to be paramagnetic when the particle size is small enough; they should have any quantifiable dipole moment in the absence of an applied magnetic field.125 The nanoparticle suspension possesses greater magnetic susceptibility when compared to the paramagnetic materials. It can be highly magnetized only in the presence of an applied magnetic field.126 The superparamagnetic property is not only dependent on the core size but also on surface modifications. The surface coating is particularly important since it can reduce magnetic dipole–dipole interactions.127 The pictorial representation of multilayered SPIONs containing a nanoparticle core, coatings, and targeting moieties is shown in Fig. 7.
 Fig. 7  Pictorial representation of multilayered SPIONs containing a nanoparticle core, coatings and targeting moieties. 
The probes used in molecular imaging typically consist of nanoparticles functionalized with some targeting moieties. Some elements show a strong magnetic effect and some elements exhibit weak magnetic behavior. Bulk or macroscale materials possess multiple domains and exhibit strong ferromagnetic properties. Such materials tend to possess only one domain when the size is reduced below 20 nm. Depending on the presence or absence of electromagnetic forces, the paramagnetic or ferromagnetic properties can be displayed in that particular state.128 This kind of phenomenon is termed superparamagnetism and can be observed in particles smaller than a certain size. When the magnetic field is removed, the loop cannot be seen and probably the paramagnetic behavior cannot be observed.129 Another characteristic feature to be mentioned is Neel relaxation formed as a result of energy absorption. When SPIONs are treated under alternating magnetic fields, their corresponding dipole moments can be rapidly rearranged based on factors including the particle size, magnetic field strength, frequency, and temperature. The energy can be dissipating in heat and further increase the temperature in the environment. This methodology is utilized in the treatment of magnetic hyperthermia to eradicate cancer cells.130
3.6 Design considerations
The therapeutic design of the nanocore can help in the recognition of certain agents. This approach generates end products that fulfill the requirements for in vivo monitoring, targeting, and therapy. Therapeutic agents are usually chosen for biocompatibility while performing their functions. The process is complex since these agents are well-connected with biological units and there are some limitations in understanding the interactions. The integrity should be regulated for the assembly of these materials during their mobility inside the human bodies until they reach the tumor site. The binding of these agents is considered a complex process.131
3.7 Superparamagnetic core
The conversion of particles from the macro to nanoscale can bring out distinct physical properties. The iron oxide is termed superparamagnetic when the particle is composed of a single magnetic domain. In addition, thermal energy must be stronger to handle the energy barrier below 20 nm. In MR imaging, SPIONs in the human body make that particular region darker. This approach is used to calculate the amount of SPION uptake to determine the efficacy of targeting.132 Hyperthermia also can be performed with the availability of an alternating magnetic field and SPIONs.133 Among these, manganese doped SPIONs exhibited a higher efficiency. Therefore, magnetic properties can be fine-tuned upon controlling the dopant types and dose of the SPION. The size and shape also affect magnetic properties. An improved MR imaging contrast effect and hyperthermia effect can be achieved by increasing the SPION aspect ratio and coercivity. In addition, small-sized SPIONs generally have a high surface area and this helps to generate smaller mass magnetizations when compared with larger SPIONs due to their major help with the non-magnetic layer available on the particle surface. Therefore, it is concluded that larger SPIONs have good magnetic properties but no other properties due to their size.
3.8 Attractive SPION features
Stable, biocompatible, and non-toxic nanoparticles may be efficient tools in biological applications. The SPIONs possess the following features when designed as part or whole in cancer therapeutics:
• Small size and high magnetization
• Improved contrast enhancement for tracking and imaging
• Surface coating using biodegradable compounds to avoid agglomeration
• Conjugation with a wide range of targeting moieties
• Targeting and site-specific drug delivery
• A requirement of standard and optimized zeta potential values
• Improved half-life
• Need greater influence with heat, pH, and magnetic field.
3.9 Tailor-made SPIONs with targeting moieties
SPION-based systems typically contain a surface coated inorganic core to obtain stability, biocompatibility, and solubility in aqueous solution. Tuning the size and surface characteristics can alter the circulation time and biodistribution of nanoparticles. Generally, solid tumors have a poor developed lymphatic drainage system and damaged vasculatures. Nanoparticles usually occupy these systems to a higher extent in a process known as passive targeting, due to enhanced permeability and retention (EPR) of the tumors.134 Some reports indicated that such a targeting approach is particularly effective when dextran-coated SPIONs were applied on gliosarcoma and the efficiency was 10-fold higher than that of the normal brain tissue animal model.135 The first generation SPIONs applied in this technique showed poor specificity and hence in the second generation SPIONs, surface modifications using several targeting agents including small ligands, monoclonal antibodies, and aptamers enabled recognition of the corresponding receptors. This active targeting136 is applied to increase its specificity to accumulate abundant nanoparticles in the target area. Active targeting of nanoparticles reduces off-target and harmful side effects. An alternative targeting methodology called magnetic targeting makes use of inherent magnetic properties that are found in magnetic particles including SPIONs. Here, magnetic field is applied externally to a specific site to promote accumulation of the magnetic particles. The SPION targeting mechanisms are clearly explained in the review article.
4 SPIONs in targeting, drug delivery, and cancer therapeutics
4.1 Targeting and mechanisms
The interactions between magnetic nanoparticles, magnetic forces, and other forces have a great impact on targeting efficacy. Therefore, it is of particular importance to discuss those effects. SPIONs can be used for tumor targeting through different mechanisms including active targeting, antibody-based targeting, nucleic acid-based targeting, aptamer-based targeting, passive targeting, and magnetic targeting upon using an applied magnetic field.137 In the passive targeting approach, nano-based drug assembly easily enters the tumors using tumor vasculatures due to its small size and ability to attain longer retention time and enhanced cell permeability.138 This feature suffers from drawbacks of selectivity that may cause nonspecific SPION distribution. To avoid this issue, SPION targeting is improved by inserting unique targeting molecules on their surfaces. The antibodies, peptides, and vitamins are most commonly used targeting agents for this purpose. Kumar et al. prepared folic acid-conjugated SPIONs which bind effectively to folate receptors and showed an enhanced effect in imaging application compared to that of free SPIONs. Wang et al. developed a SPION cluster which contains folic acid and Pluronic F127 for combined applications such as targeting, diagnosis, and therapy. Lee et al. reported Mtb antibody conjugated SPIONs for biomarker imaging involved in extra pulmonary Mtb infection.139–141
He et al. demonstrated that anti-chemokine 4 receptor (CXCR4) antibody bound SPIONs bind pancreatic tumor cells expressing CXCR4 receptors.142 Meng et al. described luteinizing hormone releasing hormone combined with SPIONs for targeting breast cancer cells.143 These reports clearly conveyed the use of active targeting towards cancer treatment and its sensitivity and selectivity. When compared with the traditional techniques, active targeting has improved internalization ability for SPIONs and a minimized dosage level of drugs is needed for cancer treatment. Another popular technique is magnetic targeting in the presence of external magnets.144 Neodymium–iron–boron magnets are used to produce highly magnetized SPIONs in the tumor sites. One of the studies revealed that DNA conjugated SPIONs and coated with chitosan express an enhanced green fluorescent protein. When an external magnetic field with 25 gausses was applied for 6 h, effective targeting towards heart and kidneys was noted.40 A scheme for different targeting mechanisms is given in Fig. 8.
 Fig. 8  Scheme for different targeting mechanisms. 

4.1.1 Active targeting. 
Active targeting of magnetic drugs through functional moieties such as antibodies and peptides is a promising approach for tumor targeting. Magnetic drugs make use of SPIONs with some active molecules.145 Magnetic drug targeting operates under an external magnetic field to apply on the tumor surface which maintains magnetic nanoparticles conjugated with active molecules into the target site. Consistent results were obtained from clinical trials and animal experimental studies.146 The delivery of the magnetic targeting is improved by using the external magnetic force. For example, magnetic aerosol helped in the treatments of lung cancer, respiratory infections, chronic pulmonary disease, and cystic fibrosis.147


4.1.2 Antibody-based targeting. 
Antibody-based targeting is an effective method to improve the sensitivity and selectivity of SPIOs. This approach integrates targeting agents into SPIONs for efficient delivery to tumor sites rather than depending on an EPR effect to enhance the SPION accumulation in the tumor tissues. Different targeting agents including aptamers, nucleic acids, antibodies, and small molecules are used for this purpose. Antibodies possess greater binding affinity and selectivity for antigen detection. For instance, Chen et al. evaluated Herceptin (Her)-immobilized SPIONs toward breast cancer cells to diagnose Her/neu receptors in cancer for about 15–25% patients.148 Different antigens (prostate specific membrane (PSMA) and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA)) were also detected using the corresponding antibodies.149 Although antibody showed promising results as a targeting agent, it has disadvantages. First is the immune response generated by immunogenicity of the antibody since the antibody used is derived from the nonhuman source. The use of humanized antibody shows reduced immunogenicity but still produces immune reactions.150 Second is the use of high molecular weight antibodies which retards the penetration of the antibody-coupled SPIONs into tumors.151 To overcome this issue, antibody fragments (Fab’ or single chain variable fragments), owing to their low molecular weight, may be used. For example, Natarajan et al. reported an anti-Muc-1 antibody fragment-conjugated SPION targeted Muc-1 protein that is overexpressed in human epithelial cancer cells.152


4.1.3 Nucleotide-based targeting. 
Some of the short nucleotides, aptamers have a tendency to bind with various target molecules including antigens, nucleic acids, and small ligands. The size, low resistance, ease of production, and high specificity make aptamers an ideal candidate for targeting. For example, Wang et al. produced an aptamer-based targeting moiety, A10RNA aptamers that can specifically identify the extracellular PSMA domains.153 PSMA is generally expressed in prostate cancer cells, and the SPION-aptamers can selectively recognize PSMA-expressing androgen-sensitive human prostate adenocarcinoma cells (LNCaP) compared to the PC3 cancer cells that do not express PSMA. The uptake efficiency of MR imaging result studies clearly indicated the specificity of SPION-aptamers towards PSMA-expressing LNCaP prostate cells.


4.1.4. Receptor ligand-based targeting. 
Different receptors including the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), vascular endothelial growth factor receptor (VEGFR), and folate receptors are commonly expressed on the cancer cell surface. This specific characteristic makes their ligand a potential targeting agent.154 Landmark et al. prepared folic acid-conjugated SPIONs and applied them toward folate expressing KB tumor cells (an oral epidermoid carcinoma cell line) to monitor their uptake efficiency and binding affinity.155 Li et al. utilized SPION-conjugated octreotide (OCT) and somatostatin (SST) analogs and detected the corresponding receptors which are overexpressed in breast cancer cells.156 The delivery of the SPION-conjugated urokinase plasminogen activator (uPAR) to pancreatic tumor tissues was also carried out because its corresponding receptor uPAR is highly expressed in a majority (86%) of pancreatic cancer tissues. SPION-conjugated transferrin has also been used to deliver SPIONs to tumor sites through transferring receptor pathways.157


4.1.5. Peptide-based targeting. 
The small size, minimized immunogenicity, and ease of production make the peptides attracting targeting agents.158 Currently, peptide-conjugated SPIONs are fabricated for targeted cancer diagnoses and treatments. Peptide-based targeting agents can be recognized by different methods. Generally, they are obtained from the specific binding site of a desired protein. The peptide-targeting moieties can be identified by the phage display methodology. A cyclic peptide called cilengitide having integrin binding is in clinical practice for pancreatic/non-small lung cancer.159 Medarova et al. reported a breast tumor targeted drug to particularly direct siRNA to breast cancer while subsequently permitting non-invasive siRNA delivery.160 The drug used is a nanodrug which contains SPIONs for diagnosing, cyanine 5.5 (Cy5.5) dye for optical imaging and siRNA for knocking down BIRC5 antiapoptotic gene. It is known that underglycosylated mucin-1 (uMuc-1) is abundantly expressed by breast cancer cells. Researchers designed a nano-drug conjugated with uMuc-1 targeting peptides (EPPT). Dextran-coated SPIONs were prepared and Cy5.5 dye is incorporated on the nanoparticle surface to produce SPION-Cy5.5. Similarly, fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) labeled siRNA and EPPT peptides are conjugated with SPION-Cy5.5 and the final composition exhibits diagnostic and therapeutic properties. Zhang et al. reported a brain tumor targeting probe based on chlorotoxin (CTX) that can selectively accumulate on brain tumors across the blood–brain barrier.161 CTX is a peptide composed of 36 amino acids which acts as a targeting agent owing to its permeability across the blood–brain barrier.162 Cheresh et al. utilized an arginine–glycine–aspartic acid (RGD) sequence peptide as a targeting agent towards integrin αvβ3 to design a liposomal Dox for metastatic disease treatments.163 Lee et al. also developed a similar drug with a lung tumor-targeted peptide.164


4.1.6 Aptamer-based targeting. 
In 2004, the FDA approved Pegaptanib, a VEGF165 targeted aptamer for neovascular treatment. Another nucleolin aptamer, AS1411, is under a phase II clinical trial.165 However, aptamers have drawbacks such as degradation by nucleases, and rapid blood clearance. To overcome such properties, pyrimidine and chemical modifications have been carried out with PEG to improve their pharmacokinetic properties.166 Jon et al. reported a CG-rich duplex made of iron oxide nanoparticle conjugated PSMA aptamers as a prostate cancer-specific theranostic agent.167


4.1.7 Small molecule-based targeting. 
Folic acid is a commonly studied small molecule as a targeting agent. Fast cell division and growth during embryonic development are regulated by folates, a water-soluble vitamin.168 Some of the currently available folate agents in the clinical trials are the 99mTc-folate conjugate (E20), diacetylvinylblastine hydrazide folate (EC154), and folate-linked fluorescent hepten (EC17). These agents can be coupled with an inorganic core or targeting agents to perform targeted drug delivery. Carbohydrate is another class of small molecule targeting agents. It can specifically bind with lectins.169 The asislo glycoprotein (ASGP) is found on hepatocytes and has the ability to readily bind with carbohydrates coupled on targeting agents.170,171 Riboflavin vitamin is abundant in metabolically active cells and an endogenous riboflavin carrier protein (RCP) ligand, and flavin mononucleotide (FMN) can serve a target agent towards these active cells.172


4.1.8 Passive targeting. 
Passive targeting is considered as an essential approach since diagnosis could be improved by accumulating the magnetic nanoparticles in tumor regions. The abnormal vessels are produced by cancer-induced angiogenesis and the nanoparticles can target this specific site.173 The particle size, hydrophobicity, and surface charge of nanoparticles play a vital role in passive targeting.145 The nanoparticles with small sizes (<20 nm) are excreted by kidneys whereas particles over 30–150 nm or large are found to be accumulated in the heart, stomach, bone marrow, liver and spleen. Furthermore, suitably sized particles show an improved permeability and retention effect. Defects in lymphatic and vasculature systems in tumors can increase the particle pore size and result in the retention effect. The end result is that the small particles can penetrate easily into the tumors whereas the large-sized particles have a great difficulty with permeability. Based on these factors, it is believed that nanoparticles ranging from 10–100 nm in size can favorably accumulate in the tumor sites. The positively charged particles with hydrophobic nature result in short circulation time owing to the opsonisation whereas negatively charged particles with a hydrophilic character have a longer circulation time.174 Even though leaky vasculature is advantageous for tumor targeting, the passive targeting does not accumulate sufficient nanoparticles in the tumor site for diagnosis and treatment.

4.2 The biomedical applications of SPIONs in drug delivery

4.2.1 Effect of theranostic medicines on cancer treatments. 
The field of nanomedicine utilizes nanotechnology in various applications such as diagnosis, targeting and treatment. Theranostic nanomedicine based on nanoparticles is capable of performing multiple functions at the same time. The aim of the production of nanomedicine is not only limited to improving detection ability but also to increasing the efficacy of cancer treatment. Hence, it is important to target and deliver the drugs to a specific location. The main use of this medicine in cancer treatment is to decide whether to follow the next stage of treatment or to continue the same therapy.175 Magnetic nanoparticles are increasingly applied in cancer treatment and seem to possess important features required for cancer therapy including their paramagnetic properties, active targeting ability, and ability to generate heat.176,177 In general, combined regimens are required for cancer treatment such as chemotherapy, surgery, thermal therapy, radiotherapy or magnetic nanoparticles with different anticancer agents or synthetic compounds that can provide a nanomaterial-based agent for combined treatments against different cancer.178


4.2.2 SPIONs in site-specific drug delivery. 
The term drug delivery refers to any pharmaceutical drug that is encapsulated within, or integrated with, or attached onto the core, inorganic particles or an organic polymer. The use of these agents helps to increase drug safety, and potential and new targeted therapies are possible.179 The SPIONs may be used for diagnosis and therapeutic applications simultaneously. They are a multifunctional carrier used to improve the specific targeting and potential delivery of upcoming therapeutics such as nucleotides, proteins, and chemical drugs.180
Dumitrescu et al. prepared nickel ferrite for drug delivery by incorporating nickel ferrite into the matrix made of a polyacrylamide-based hydrogel.181 Nacev et al. studied the properties of magnetic nanoparticles in blood vessels and surrounding tissues. The samples displayed high antimicrobial activity with high purity. Many factors, such as diffusion, extravasation, and external magnetic field, can alter the SPION properties.182 The magnetic and luminescent up conversion abilities of nanoribbons are also used for targeting drug delivery. Some nanocarriers possessing magnetic silicon dioxide may be used for drug delivery and targeting.183 A controlled drug release was observed using these nanocarriers, as shown in Fig. 9. Furthermore, stimuli-responsive agents were also prepared. The change in the morphology and aggregation properties of these agents can vary under different physical conditions in order to regulate controlled drug release.184
 Fig. 9  SPION based drug delivery system. 
The SPION systems for site-specific targeting and drug delivery have been tested for various cancer treatments and some have reached the clinical use.185,186 Chemotherapy is the long lasting technique ever used for cancer treatment but the traditional methods depend on the circulatory unit for drug delivery into tumor cells thereby lacking specificity. This regimen demands a higher quantity of drugs to enhance toxicity against tumors and, however, can damage normal tissues. This dilemma may be solved by targeted drug delivery which focuses on specific sites and has gained great attention as a replacing methodology to chemotherapy.187 SPION-based drug delivery is more favorable over the other methods and utilizes diverse methods such as ultrasound, applied magnetic field, etc. Magnetic targeted drug delivery (MTD) makes use of altered SPIONs to attach with drugs. The nanodrug is then directed towards tumor sites upon introducing magnetic field. Furthermore, it can help to enhance the accumulation of nano-drugs at the target area and perform cancer treatment. Many factors play crucial roles in MTD.188 Karamipour et al. designed SPIONs conjugated with folic acid [Fe3O4/Au/Cys-Folate] to target folate receptors overexpressed on cancer for a site-specific drug delivery.189 Elbialy et al. demonstrated Fe3O4/Au Css [Fe3O4/Au-PEG-Dox] as a Dox carrier in MTD therapy at various pH levels.190 The dose of 100 μg Dox per mg is the maximum loading capacity of Css. Drug delivery was tested at different pH levels but best efficiency was found at pH 5.5. In vitro results on MCF-7 cells showed more therapeutic potential with nontoxic effects when compared to free Dox coupled Css. Similarly, Ramos-Tejada et al.189 investigated Dox and Bevacizumab (BEV) antibody functionalized Fe3O4/Au Css and found an enhanced therapeutic effect using Dox.191
The main disadvantages of chemotherapy are its non-specificity that kills both the affected and normal cells. SPIONs can be used to rectify this issue by site-specific delivery of drugs to chosen regions, unloading the drugs at the tumor site using an external magnetic field. Site-specific, controlled, drug delivery requires maintenance of a right amount of dosage at that site, removing over dosage and dipping side effects. The targeting agent can be combined either on the SPION surface or can be immobilized within the nanocomposites. This methodology protects the drug until it reaches the specific site. The active release of drugs in SPION-based drug delivery is also carried out under various conditions such as pH, heat, or degradation of targeting agents. Zhang et al. reported the reduced magnetic field on drug delivery rates owing to its accumulation.192 Yu et al. designed SiO2 based magnetic nanoparticles and revealed that particles were found to be pH and magnetic field sensors.193 Shakeri-Zadeh et al. developed 5-fluorouracil conjugated poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA) magnetic capsules for magnetic targeting to CT26 colon tumors.194 Liposome loaded magnetic particles can permit magnetic targeting; thus, the lipid vesicles can behave more like artificial cells. The major use is their ability to combine with cellular membranes that permit drug delivery to different cells.195 In various cancer treatments, multidrug resistance is a major obstacle which results from the overexpression of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) binding cassette (ABC)-type receptors on the cell surface that pumps out various hydrophobic chemotherapeutic drugs out of cancer cells.196 Kievit et al. helped out to overcome this issue by examining free Dox and SPION conjugated Dox by using Dox-resistant C6 and wild C6 cells and comparison with free drug groups.197 The results revealed that Dox conjugated SPIONs improved difficulties that stemmed from MDR.

4.3 SPIONs in therapies

4.3.1 Chemotherapy. 
Many chemotherapeutic drugs inhibit DNA replication and they need to access the nucleus to carry out this inhibition. Other drugs affect activities of the mitochondria and cell motility, among others. Drug delivery at the tumor site potentially improves the therapeutic efficiency. The usage of the limited dose is the main disadvantages of chemotherapy and the cancer cells acquire drug resistance on using these drugs. The multimodal nanoparticles provide better drug biodistribution and permit administration of high drug doses.198 To improve the therapy outcome, therapeutic systems are developed by combining the diagnostic probe, targeting moieties, and therapeutic drugs. Among the available nanodrug systems, a unique core–shell structure is created by self-assembled nanoparticles or polymeric micelles. The hydrophilic and hydrophobic cores serve as a particle stabilization agent and a carrier agent for hydrophobic drugs, respectively.199
The stability of hydrophobic drugs can be increased by loading to SPIONs. For example, Jian et al. used poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) and poly(propylene oxide) (PPO) diblock copolymer, pluronic F127 to attach on oleic acid-coated SPIONs.132 The SPION uptake was also monitored using MR imaging. Drugs can be directly conjugated with SPIONs to offer better control over the drug loading and release but the presence of fewer functional moieties on the SPION surface results in low drug loading capacity. A docking molecule is employed to improve drug loading efficacy by binding with a large capacity of drugs before being coupled with SPIONs. One commonly chosen docking molecule is PEI which helps to attach Dox with SPIONs which has a capacity to occupy over 1000 Dox. Dox combined SPIONs in this method showed high drug accumulation on tumor sites and overcame multidrug resistance in glioblastoma.


4.3.2 Protein therapy. 
The aim of this approach is to send protein drugs into the cancer cells as a therapy. This approach is considered safe and direct in cancer treatment. In protein therapy, blocking of receptors or intracellular protein delivery involved in carcinogenesis or cell signaling to either induce apoptosis or slow cell growth is conducted. However, protein delivery is also challenging since proteins used in therapy undergo protease degradation before reaching the tumor site. SPIONs play a major role in protecting these proteins and enhance the protein delivery by acting as a intracellular access vehicle. In addition, this kind of therapy can be improved via the multivalent effect by arranging more proteins on the particle surface and the effect is stronger than using a single moiety on the nanoparticle surface. For example, CTX-coated SPIONs exhibited a greater inhibition for glioblastoma compared to free CTX.200 By using EGFRvariant III (EGFRvIII) antibody bound SPIONs, the inhibition of cancer was achieved.201 These SPIONs can enhance delivery to specifically inhibit EGFRvIII to induce apoptosis, thereby increasing the survival time. Cytochrome c can induce apoptosis only after internalization, but a poor uptake by cells. When cytochrome c is loaded into nanoparticles, it can induce apoptosis in breast cancer cells by increasing its cytoplasmic concentration.


4.3.3 Gene therapy. 
This is a novel treatment which involves the transfer of DNA or RNA into a targeted cell.202 Finding a potential transfection method is a main goal owing to rapid enzymatic degradation of RNA/DNA and poor permeability across cell membranes. Magnetofection is a commonly used method for non-viral transfection. Nucleic acid-bound nanoparticles can target cells when applying a magnetic field.203 Most of the gene delivery systems make use of the positively charged, functionalized polymers and the proton sponge effect to release iron oxide-polymer-nucleic acid from lysosomes to the cytoplasm.
Designing a nanoscale delivery system possessing iron oxide nanoparticles with various dendrimer polymers could overcome the issues related to this method such as diffusion across the cell membrane and enzymatic degradation. For example, Pan et al. synthesized polyamidoamine (PAMAM)-coated SPIONs and attained efficient gene therapy.204 Prijic et al. fabricated PAA and PEI-functionalized SPIONs and proved that they are effective for magnetofection of cells and mice tumors.48 Kievit et al. designed SPIONs conjugated with PEG/PEI and revealed high loading and protection of nucleic acids.205 A high level of DNA expression makes it an efficient member of DNA delivery gene therapy in a xenograft mouse model. Wang et al. reported hapten derived SPIONs for targeting gene expression by multimodality imaging.206


4.3.4 Photodynamic therapy. 
The photodynamic therapy (PDT) is a promising method for cancer therapy.207 This method makes use of a photosensitizing agent and a lower power light source to produce singlet oxygen or free radicals in tumor tissues.208 PDT utilizes low optical densities to evade the cancer cells.209 No systemic phototoxicity is seen since the ROS is generated under a local light-activated process.210 Porphyrin-based molecules are a representative example of commonly employed photosensitizers (PS). Most of the PS used are hydrophobic, allowing accumulation in the lipid layers of organelle cancer cell membranes211 but the majority of PS inhibit their systemic administration.212 Based on this context, PS carriers are really needed and two different methodologies are adapted to generate SPION based PS carriers for PDT (1) Usage of synthetic or polymer-coated biodegradable nanoparticles since they allow enzymatic degradation or hydrolysis and can be readily excreted from the biological system, and (2) use of non-biodegradable metals or ceramic-coated nanoparticles which cannot undergo degradation.
To create new PDT carriers, a near-infrared (NIR) laser is required since it could excite the PDT carriers with good tissue penetration. For example, Li et al. designed Chlorin e6 (Ce6) (PS molecule) loaded iron oxide nanoclusters.213 The Ce6-loaded complex exhibited a red shift from 650 nm to 700 nm which was attributed to the formation of chemical bonding instead of simple physical adsorption between SPIONs and Ce6. The SPION carrier has several advantages: (1) enhancement in the cellular uptake is noticed due to the polymer coated nanoclusters which further leads to a better efficiency in the PDT effect and (2) internal magnetism enables these nanocomplexes to show potential magnetic targeting under magnetic field. This further allows accumulation of these compounds into the tumor sites and results in an efficient PDT effect under low-power laser irradiation towards tumor cells. The PS-combined particles displayed some benefits such as an increase in water solubility, and enhanced accumulation; nanoparticle carriers alone can improve the PDT potential. For example, Shi et al. fabricated fullerene (C60)-Fe3O4-PEG-conjugated iron oxide nanocomposites by constructing NPs on the C60 surface, followed by PEGylation to improve their biocompatibility and water solubility. This was followed by addition of PS, hematoporphyrin monomethyl ether (HMME) into (C60)-Fe3O4-PEG to produce (C60)-Fe3O4-PEG-HMME. Upon magnetic targeting, the HMME added (C60)-Fe3O4-PEG was able to accumulate on the tumor site, resulting in an efficient PDT effect under laser irradiation. C60 has inherent potential to generate ROS; thus C60-based SPIONs were able to exhibit improved PDT on cancer cells.


4.3.5 Photothermal therapy (PTT). 
Generally, PTT does not use direct oxygen species generated from the photosensitizers; instead this approach employs heat to cause tissue damage upon light absorbance by the nanomaterials. In order to achieve high thermal ablations, high absorptivity materials are used. Moreover, the nanomaterials should have access to the near-infrared therapeutic window range. This method has a major disadvantage called photobleaching when organic or polymeric materials are used. This can be overcome by replacing those materials with inorganic materials, graphene oxide conjugated SPIONs, gold, etc. For example, Zhang et al. studied the molar extinction coefficient and self-assembly correlation of nanoparticles.214 They showed a two-fold increased molar extinction coefficient of SPIONs when using polypyrrole as a PTT agent. Fu et al. reported another PTT agent called Prussian blue which is widely used by growing it on the SPION surface up to a thickness of around 3–6 nm.215 Prussian-coated SPIONs were found to evade 80% of Hela cancer cells at a minimal dosage. It achieves 87% tumor hindrance effect upon NIR irradiation and targeting. Wang et al. reported one-dimensional (1D) magnetic nanoparticles containing fluorescent carbon and Dox to perform disease diagnosis, fluorescence imaging and PTT.216 Similarly, Alegret et al. developed Dox-loaded SPIONs (graphene oxide and PEG coupled SPIONs) for cancer therapy.217 Shi et al. produced a metal and graphene oxide-based nanocomposite for imaging and therapy using electrostatic interactions of PEI.218 When applying this material on 4T1 tumors and performing 5 min laser irradiation, a noticeable temperature change is observed due to laser irradiation. The tumor volume in the mice was reduced to a greater extent, than the control group, upon laser irradiation.


4.3.6 Hyperthermia. 
Hyperthermia is an alternative method available for cancer treatment. This method deals with the body tissues when exposed to a high temperature range of 42 to 48 °C. Generally, the tumor cells are more sensitive to heat than normal ones. Thus, it is expected that exposure of tumor cells/tissues to a high temperature can result in cell/tissue death. It is shown that cell apoptosis can take place when a temperature of 42–46 °C is applied, whereas cell necrosis can be seen when temperature exceeds 46–48 °C and both necrosis and apoptosis can lead to tumor cell death. Such therapy may be limited to tumors thus reducing damage to normal cells.219


4.3.7 Magnetic fluid hyperthermia. 
SPIONs or magnetic nanoparticle-based hyperthermia have also received great attention in cancer therapy. In this strategy, SPIONs are targeted to the tumor site and heat is produced under a magnetic field. These particles display the Neel and Brownian losses and generate heat. The SPIONs lack magnetization when the external magnetic is stopped, thus minimizing aggregation of particles.220 Some of the reviews are reported by Salunkhe et al. for the SPION-based magnetic fluid hyperthermia.221 Bakhtiary and Piñeiro et al. explained the effects of combined therapies of magnetic hyperthermia with MR imaging and controlled drug delivery.222–224 Lee et al. tuned the magnetic properties using exchange coupling properties of magnetically soft and hard cores (MnFe2O4 and CoFe2O4) with some power loss.225 These tuned particles (SPIONs-Cs) achieved magnetic-induced hyperthermia operating under 44–430 Hz, compared to other magnetic nanoparticles that require kHz to MHz operating frequencies.226 Temperature change was observed between modified and unmodified SPIONs under the same reaction conditions. Experimental results revealed that the modified SPIONs can reach the therapeutic temperature faster than the free SPIONs and 4–5 fold improved heat generation was noted. In addition, less cytotoxic effect was achieved when tested against Michigan Cancer Foundation-7 (MCF 7)-breast carcinoma cell lines and H9c2 cardiomyoblasts. These results make these modified SPIONs a potential candidate for MHF based cancer treatment.


4.3.8 Optical hyperthermia. 
Optical hyperthermia referred to as the product of the PTT effect regulated the electromagnetic radiation (EMR) with the iron core through surface plasmon resonance (SPR) and absorption. The PTT effect of Fe3O4 is generally achieved by application of EMR in the NIR region.227 This EMR spectrum matches with the average minimal absorption of water, and oxygenated and deoxygenated hemoglobin. It is highly suitable to use the nanoparticle system along with this combined absorption that can trigger a photo-thermal response when exposed to EMR in the NIR region. This can be seen in the temperature profile of PAA/Fe3O4 particles when irradiated at 785 nm laser and 38.5 kW m−2. At least a minimum of 42 °C is needed for a normal cellular thermal ablation to take place, which can either lead to the apoptosis or necrosis pathway.228 Based on clinical oncology, removal of tumor lesions and the time required for complete thermal ablation at 42 °C are not practical only when operated under thermal energy. Therefore, a specific set up using the nanoparticle architecture, dosage, EMR wavelength, local environment, and irradiance power is required in order to allow for a temperature greater than 42 °C or to create new treatment modalities.


4.3.9 Magnetic hyperthermia. 
Magnetic hyperthermia refers to the cancer therapy in which a heat-triggered tumor treatment takes place. SPIONs as heat generators can be performed systemically or locally. The magnetic targeting is used to localize SPIONs near the tumor site and an external magnetic field is applied for certain time to generate heat about 42–45 °C to induce apoptosis. Heat generation may vary depending on certain factors such as the size, shape, magnetic properties, crystallinity of SPIONs, and magnetic field applied. The efficiency is measured using the specific absorption rate (SAR) that helps to convert the magnetic field into heat, based on Neel and Brownian relaxations of SPIONs involved. This hyperthermia helps to reduce the side effects. For example, Cervadoro et al. described the relaxations needed for heat generation of SPIONs of 5, 7, and 14 nm size, <1 MHz. Heat generation is ineffective when tested over 30 MHz. The same group reported that a magnetic nanoflake composed of chitosan polymer-coated nanocubes resulted in a high SAR value of 373.8 ± 2.3 W gFe−1, 512 kHz when compared to free nanocubes. Furthermore, hyperthermia can be enhanced by doping the SPIONs with metal atoms.229 Hayashi et al. prepared a folic acid-conjugated magnetic cluster and tested it in CB17/Icr-Prkdcscid mice at 8 kA m−1 magnetic field and 230 kHz frequency.230 They showed that the tumor size decreased to 1/10 of tumors in control mice. In addition, the lifespan extended 4 weeks after treatment with hyperthermia in the mouse model. Hainfeld et al. reported similar results in which the tumor volume was reduced using a specific dose of magnetic nanoparticles at 38 kA m−1 and 980 kHz.231


4.3.10 Magnetofection. 
Transfection carried out using SPIONs is termed magnetofection, in which magnetic nanoparticles are conjugated with negatively charged nucleic acid via electrostatic attractions, or positively charged polyethyleneimine. PEI is commonly used to encapsulate the SPIONs and performing magnetofection. Furthermore, PEI may trigger a sponge effect to avoid enzyme degradation within a cell. Furthermore, optimization of the size and zeta potential of the SPION-coated polymer is required to carry out effective nucleic acid delivery. Prijic et al. developed DNA-conjugated PAA-PEI functionalized SPIONs and tested the transfecting efficacy on B16F1 cells.48 They showed a greater than 12-fold increase in DNA transfection when subjected to an external magnetic field. Prosen et al. studied the magnetofection potential of the SPIONS-PAA-PEI in another report and demonstrated enhanced efficiency in a basic medium.232 Prosen et al. also achieved the potential silencing of melanoma cell adhesion via magnetofection when pDNA is coupled with SPION-PEI.233 Li et al. reported HepG2 cancer cell inhibition upon transfecting with modified disulphide-PEI-SPIONs carrying siRNA that inhibited telomerase reverse transcriptase gene expression.234


4.3.11 Magnetothermal treatment. 
This effect is directly dependent on frequency (f) and amplitude (H) of a given magnetic field. It is suggested that the Hf value should be below 5 × 109 Am−1 s−1.235 For instance, Megaforce Nano Therm therapy is approved for brain tumor treatment in Europe in which 100 kHz frequency and 2–15 kA m−1 are used.236 Various efforts have been taken to expand the heating efficacy of nanoparticles at a provided frequency and amplitude and also to increase the magnetic field. In a conventional magnet set up, SPIONs dispersed in both normal and affected tissues are evenly heated since the alternating magnetic field is nonspecifically applied within the solenoid. Such a type of non-specific heating is the most serious drawback in this approach. The behavior of SPIONs in a magnetic thermal system is shown in Fig. 10.
 Fig. 10  Behavior of SPIONs in a magnetic thermal system. 
Accuracy and high resolution temperature readings are critical in thermal therapy.237 Fluorescent dyes (DyLight549) and thermoresponsive poly(N-isopropyl acrylamide)-fluorescent modified acrylamide (pNIPAM-co-FMA) coupled on SPIONs change their fluorescence intensity based on the environmental temperature. The pictorial representation of a magneto-photothermal mechanism for tumor ablation is shown in Fig. 11. The detection of real temperature is also possible. The limitations of this method are spatial resolution and high cost. Thus, the low cost and readily available ultrasound technique seems to be an alternating strategy to measure imaging temperature.238
 Fig. 11  Pictorial representation of the magneto-photothermal mechanism for tumor ablation. 


4.3.12 Apoptotic hyperthermia. 
In general, thermal ablation receives the merit for quick removal of the tumor. Healthy tissues around the target site are possibly damaged when operating at a high temperature to kill cancer cells. The temperature range of 42–45 °C can preferentially destroy the cancer cells.239 Some SPIONs with stabilizers or encapsulated in liposomes have also been investigated for magnetic hyperthermia and approved for clinical tests for glioblastoma in Europe.240 Current reports show two venues to improve the potential of magnetic hyperthermia. First, carboxymethyl dextran-coated magnetic particles coupled with EGFR help to target the corresponding receptors in cancer cells. Wang et al. reported folic acid-coupled PEG-SPIONs as a non-invasive system for imaging folate receptors. Another folic acid-conjugated PEG-SPION Nc produced by the click reaction is intravenously injected to inhibit tumor growth in a mice model along with a magnetic field of 8 kA m−1 and 230 kHz. A study of dextran-coated SPIONs for prostate cancer was also reported. In the study, nanoparticle treatment in conjunction with an applied magnetic field and laser irradiation caused significant tumor cell death.230,241,242


4.3.13 Direct injection of SPIONs into the tumor. 
The new treatment method employs SPION injection directly into tumors. The particles are dispersed in aqueous solution, carefully transferred and applied with an external magnetic field to generate heat and carry out site-specific drug release.243 The aminosilane-coated iron oxide nanoparticles were injected intravenously into glioblastoma tumor bearing mice and 4.5 fold longer survivals have been noticed. They remained in the tumor and allow repeated thermotherapy without additional injections. Reduced proliferation and tumor necrosis were clearly observed.244

5 Concluding remarks
Nanoparticles have their own unique chemical, physical, and biological properties when compared to other materials. Thus, they have gained growing interest in biomedical sciences. Among these, magnetic nanoparticles such as SPIONs are considered as most promising materials because of their multimodal functions. Moreover, SPIONs also use super paramagnets, which are advantageous to target specific tumor sites within a body. SPION synthesis with optimized properties is ideal for in vivo applications. It is important to carefully design particle surfaces so that they are able to cross biological barriers and target the desired sites. For a successful application, synthesis of SPIONs with desired surface properties and a tunable size is widely required as this will: (1) reduce nonspecific uptakes by unintended cells, (2) decrease its toxicity, (3) increase the quantity of drugs directed to the tumor site, and (4) stimulate its responses in a magnetic field. However, cytotoxicity and other challenges regarding SPIONs are not well addressed. Nonetheless, SPIONs remain efficient, reliable and versatile tools in the development of cancer theranostics. These particles can also be utilized as targeting/site-specific drug delivering and treatment agents. In this review, commonly used targeting mechanisms are illustrated with a view that more advances are forthcoming in the biomedical field. There are also other hurdles which must be surpassed in order to realize the full potential of SPION-based drug delivery systems. Among these is the burst effect of drugs encapsulated within the nanoparticles. It is possible to control this pitfall by utilizing PEG coated SPIONs. This will reduce the amount of drug escaping and toxicity. Thus, identifying and synthesizing polymer-coated SPIONs could help to increase its stability. Another concerning issue is the ability of SPIONs to absorb in vivo protein molecules which can affect their function; thus, researchers are formulating the particle surface to be filled with lower protein-affinity molecules. Ultimately, this progress may improve the efficacy in cancer therapy in clinics.
6 Current challenges and future perspectives
SPIONs can function as an effective theranostic tool and this review focused on the theranostic and drug delivery aspects of SPIONs. Despite outstanding results and research advances obtained using SPIONs as a theranostic material, some challenges are left unaddressed. There can be a focus on poor sensitivity and low resolution of particles when used as contrast agents. The dose required for imaging and therapeutic treatment is not always the same, and this fact should be addressed before use in clinical studies. SPION-based nanoplatforms possess several compartments that increased the complexity of the multifaceted system. Another great challenge is the mass-production of the SPIONs. Hence, a simple theranostic SPION platform design through an easy methodology is urgently required for clinical evaluation in the near future.
Many experiments are under trial even after attaining useful clinical results and there are many challenges to defeat before using NPs as probes for theranostic applications. Even though the SPIONs have been approved by the FDA, further analyses are needed to better understand the physicochemical properties. In addition, the targeting of SPION-based nanoplatforms requires further improvements. Ideally, SPIONs should be delivered to targeting sites without side effects. The short term and long-term in vivo effects and their corresponding mechanisms at a molecular level should be revealed. The multifunctional SPION-based NPs can be applied to a greater extent in translational medicine after resolving all these issues. Regarding synthesis, aqueous phase methods have been used for SPION synthesis but some challenges remain to be addressed. Care should be taken on the irregular morphology, uniform particle size and improved monodispersity of the particles prepared. Effective strategies can be followed to overcome these challenges upon reducing the reaction rate and increasing the corresponding reaction time. Concerning the organic phase synthesis, the methods may be further optimized by using hydrophilic stabilizers and post-synthetic surface modification strategies to enhance water solubility. The purification of the synthesized materials can be accomplished by removing the byproducts formed during the reactions using different purification methodologies.
Tremendous efforts have been invested in the developments of SPIONs and their utility in biomedical applications. Some success has emerged as SPIONs are approved in the name of NanoTherm for hyperthermia. With the appropriate evolution, SPIONs can provide new and effective cancer treatments by improving their targeting, drug delivery, and in therapy. Being a matter of deep exploration within the past few decades, a detailed survey of SPIONs has been added in this review article to reveal their ability to change the medical field through their roles as nano-based theranostics. The majority of the probing techniques involve the use of metal nanoparticles and their corresponding derivatives. The efficacy of such systems is improved by conjugating with chemotherapeutic agents, targeting ligands, and fluorophores. The complete risk profile has not been fully agreed. To realize the role of SPIONs in nanomedicine in the near future, pre-clinical inventions are required to overcome some limits hindering their development towards a potential tool for targeting, drug delivery, and therapy.
Conflicts of interest
Authors declare that there is no conflicts of interest.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to the Ministry of Science and Technology, Taiwan, R.O.C. for financial support under MOST 106-2113-M-009-023, 107-2218-E-009-010, and 106-3114-E-009-005. This work was financially supported by the “Center For Intelligent Drug Systems and Smart Bio-devices (IDS2B)” from The Featured Areas Research Center Program within the framework of the Higher Education Sprout Project by the Ministry of Education (MOE) in Taiwan.
References
Z. Qiao and X. Y. Shi, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2015, 44, 1–27 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gao, H. Gu and B. Xu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1097–1107 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Hao, R. Xing, Z. Xu, Y. Hou, S. Gao and S. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2729–2742 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, S. S. Gambhir and J. Cheon, Acc. Chem. Res., 2011, 44, 841 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Conde, J. T. Dias, V. Grazu, M. Moros, P. V. Baptista and J. M. de la Fuente, Front. Chem., 2014, 2, 48 Search PubMed .
H. Gupta, P. Paul and N. Kumar, Procedia Mater. Sci., 2014, 5, 198–203 CrossRef CAS .
B. Jagannathan, N. Suriyanarayanan and J. Rajan, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 2014, 362, 135–140 CrossRef .
K. M. Bennett, J. Jo, H. Cabral, R. Bakalova and I. Aoki, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2014, 74, 75–94 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Chatterjee, S. Sarkar, K. Jagajjanani Rao and S. Paria, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2014, 209, 8–39 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Colombo, S. Carregal-Romero, M. F. Casula, L. Gutiérrez, M. P. Morales, I. B. Böhm, J. T. Heverhagen, D. Prosperi and W. J. Parak, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 4306–4334 RSC .
N. Freidoonimehr, M. M. Rashidi and S. Mahmud, Int. J. Therm. Sci., 2015, 87, 136–145 CrossRef CAS .
Y. G. Ko and U. S. Choi, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2013, 79, 77–86 CrossRef CAS .
L. H. Reddy, J. L. Arias, J. Nicolas and P. Couvreur, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 5818–5878 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Nedyalkova, B. Donkova, J. Romanova, G. Tzvetkov, S. Madurga and V. Simeonov, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2017, 249, 192–212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. T. T. Huong, N. H. Nam, D. H. Doan, H. T. M. Nhung, B. T. Quang, P. H. Nam, P. Q. Thong, N. X. Phuc and H. P. Thu, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2016, 172, 98–104 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhang, J. Wang, Z. Wang, R. Wang, L. Song, T. Zhang, X. Lin, P. Shi, H. Xin and X. Pang, Sci. Adv. Mater., 2015, 7, 1058–1064 CrossRef CAS .
X. Shi, S. H. Wang, S. D. Swanson, S. Ge, Z. Cao, M. E. Van Antwerp, K. J. Landmark and J. R. Baker Jr., Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1671–1678 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yuan, Z. Ding, J. Qian, J. Zhang, J. Xu, X. Dong, T. Han, S. Ge, Y. Luo, Y. Wang, K. Zhong and G. Liang, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 2686–2691 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. H. Bae, M. Park, M. J. Do, N. Lee, J. H. Ryu, G. W. Kim, C. Kim, T. G. Park and T. Hyeon, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5266–5273 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. V. Kolen'ko, M. Bañobre-López, C. Rodriguez-Abreu, E. Carbo-Argibay, A. Sailsman, Y. piñeiro, M. Cerqueira, D. Petrovykh, K. Kovnir, O. Lebedev and J. Rivas, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 8691–8701 CrossRef .
T. Kim, E. Momin, J. Choi, K. Yuan, H. Zaidi, J. Kim, M. Park, N. Lee, M. T. McMahon, A. Quinones-Hinojosa, J. W. Bulte, T. Hyeon and A. A. Gilad, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 2955–2961 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. P. Lara, P. Caramelli, A. L. Teixeira, M. T. Barbosa, K. C. Carmona, M. G. Carvalho, A. P. Fernandes and K. B. Gomes, Clin. Chim. Acta, 2013, 423, 18–22 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Son, H. D. Kim, M. Kim, J. A. Kim, J. Lee, H. Shin, N. S. Hwang and T. H. Park, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2015, 4, 1339–1347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang, B. Chen, M. Cao, J. Sun, H. Wu, P. Zhao, J. Xing, Y. Yang, X. Zhang, M. Ji and N. Gu, Biomaterials, 2016, 86, 11–20 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. M. Kievit and M. Zhang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2011, 44, 853–862 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Torres Martin de Rosales, R. Tavare, A. Glaria, G. Varma, A. Protti and P. J. Blower, Bioconjugate Chem., 2011, 22, 455–465 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Misri, D. Meier, A. C. Yung, P. Kozlowski and U. O. Hafeli, Nanomedicine, 2012, 8, 1007–1016 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. K. Kirui, I. Khalidov, Y. Wang and C. A. Batt, Nanomedicine, 2013, 9, 702–711 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Horák, B. Rittich, A. Španová and M. J. Beneš, Polymer, 2005, 46, 1245–1255 CrossRef .
T. Neuberger, B. Schöpf, H. Hofmann, M. Hofmann and B. von Rechenberg, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 2005, 293, 483–496 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kandasamy and D. Maity, Int. J. Pharm., 2015, 496, 191–218 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Tombacz, R. Turcu, V. Socoliuc and L. Vekas, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun., 2015, 468, 442–453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Mahmoudi, S. Sant, B. Wang, S. Laurent and T. Sen, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2011, 63, 24–46 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Dobson, Drug Dev. Res., 2006, 67, 55–60 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Gupta and M. Gupta, Biomaterials, 2005, 26, 3995–4021 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Laurent, A. A. Saei, S. Behzadi, A. Panahifar and M. Mahmoudi, Expert Opin. Drug Delivery, 2014, 11, 1449–1470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Alexiou, R. Jurgons, R. J. Schmid, C. Bergemann, J. Henke, W. Erhardt, E. Huenges and F. Parak, J. Drug Targeting, 2003, 11, 139–149 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Chicheł, J. Skowronek, M. Kubaszewska and M. Kanikowski, Rep. Pract.
Oncol. Radiother., 2007, 12, 267–275 CrossRef .
A. Latorre, P. Couleaud, A. Aires, A. L. Cortajarena and A. Somoza, Eur. J. Med. Chem., 2014, 82, 355–362 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kumar, P. K. Jena, S. Behera, R. F. Lockey, S. Mohapatra and S. Mohapatra, Nanomedicine, 2010, 6, 64–69 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. F. Medeiros, A. M. Santos, H. Fessi and A. Elaissari, Int. J. Pharm., 2011, 403, 139–161 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Salas, C. Casado, F. J. Teran, R. Miranda, C. J. Serna and M. P. Morales, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 21065–21075 RSC .
S. R. Sirsi and M. A. Borden, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2014, 72, 3–14 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Singh, G. J. S. Jenkins, R. Asadi and S. H. Doak, Nano Rev., 2010, 1, 5358 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Wadajkar, J. Menon and K. Nguyen, Rev. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2012, 1, 284–297 CrossRef CAS .
F. Dilnawaz, A. Singh, C. Mohanty and S. K. Sahoo, Biomaterials, 2010, 31, 3694–3706 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Lee, Y. T. Nguyen, M. Muthiah, H. Vu-Quang, R. Namgung, W. J. Kim, M. K. Yu, S. Jon, I. K. Lee, Y. Y. Jeong and I. K. Park, J. Biomed. Nanotechnol., 2012, 8, 361–371 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Prijic, L. Prosen, M. Cemazar, J. Scancar, R. Romih, J. Lavrencak, V. B. Bregar, A. Coer, M. Krzan, A. Znidarsic and G. Sersa, Biomaterials, 2012, 33, 4379–4391 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sharifi, H. Seyednejad, S. Laurent, F. Atyabi, A. A. Saei and M. Mahmoudi, Contrast Media Mol. Imaging, 2015, 10, 329–355 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Laurent, D. Forge, M. Port, A. Roch, C. Robic, L. Vander Elst and R. N. Muller, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 2064–2110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. T. Wu, P. C. Kuo, Y. D. Yao and E. H. Tsai, IEEE Trans. Magn., 2001, 37, 2651–2653 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liang, X. Wang, J. Zhuang, Y. Chen, D. Wang and Y. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 1805–1813 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, J. Wu, H. Liao, Y. Hou and S. Gao, Chem. Commun., 2009, 29, 4378–4380 RSC .
M. F. Casula, Y.-w. Jun, D. J. Zaziski, E. M. Chan, A. Corrias and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 1675–1682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. X. Redl, C. T. Black, G. C. Papaefthymiou, R. L. Sandstrom, M. Yin, H. Zeng, C. B. Murray and S. P. O'Brien, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 14583–14599 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xie, K. Chen, H. Y. Lee, C. Xu, A. R. Hsu, S. Peng, X. Chen and S. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 7542–7543 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. O'Brien, L. Brus and C. B. Murray, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 12085–12086 CrossRef .
D. Kim, N. Lee, M. Park, B. H. Kim, K. An and T. Hyeon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 454–455 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhu and G. Diao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 18923–18934 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, Z. Si, Y. Lei, J. Tang, S. Wang, S. Su, S. Song, L. Zhao and H. Zhang, CrystEngComm., 2010, 12, 2060–2063 RSC .
R. Fan, X. H. Chen, Z. Gui, L. Liu and Z. Y. Chen, Mater. Res. Bull., 2001, 36, 497–502 CrossRef CAS .
G. S. Demirer, A. C. Okur and S. Kizilel, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2015, 3, 7831–7849 RSC .
S. Ge, X. Y. Shi, K. Sun, C. P. Li, C. Uher, J. R. Baker, M. M. B. Holl and B. G. Orr, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 13593–13599 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, J. J. Sun, Q. Sun and Q. W. Chen, Mater. Res. Bull., 2003, 38, 1113–1118 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Stojanović, M. Otoničar, J. Lee, M. M. Stevanović, M. P. Hwang, K. H. Lee, J. Choi and D. Uskoković, Colloids Surf., B, 2013, 109, 236–243 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Wu, Q. G. He and C. Z. Jiang, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2008, 3, 397–415 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Shokrollahi, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2013, 33, 2476–2487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. H. Lu, E. L. Salabas and F. Schuth, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 1222–1244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Prashant, M. Dipak, C. T. Yang, K. H. Chuang, D. Jun and S. S. Feng, Biomaterials, 2010, 31, 5588–5597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Lai, J. K. Hsiao, H. P. Yu, C. W. Lu, C. C. Huang, M. J. Shieh and P. S. Lai, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 15160–15167 RSC .
J. Hong, D. M. Xu, J. H. Yu, P. J. Gong, H. J. Ma and S. D. Yao, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 135608 CrossRef PubMed .
J. C. Li, Y. Hu, J. Yang, W. J. Sun, H. D. Cai, P. Wei, Y. P. Sun, G. X. Zhang, X. Y. Shi and M. W. Shen, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2015, 3, 5720–5730 RSC .
K. Cheng, M. Yang, R. P. Zhang, C. X. Qin, X. H. Su and Z. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 9884–9896 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. H. Zhao, Z. J. Zhou, J. F. Bao, Z. Y. Wang, J. Hu, X. Q. Chi, K. Y. Ni, R. F. Wang, X. Y. Chen, Z. Chen and J. H. Gao, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2266 CrossRef PubMed .
M. A. Do, G. J. Yoon, J. H. Yeum, M. Han, Y. Chang and J. H. Choi, Colloids Surf., B, 2014, 122, 752–759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Qu, H. Yang, D. Ren, S. Kan, G. Zou, D. Li and M. Li, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 1999, 215, 190–192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. T. Seip and C. J. O'Connor, Nanostruct. Mater., 1999, 12, 183–186 CrossRef .
C. Okoli, M. Sanchez-Dominguez, M. Boutonnet, S. Jaras, C. Civera, C. Solans and G. R. Kuttuva, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 8479–8485 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Hachani, M. Lowdell, M. Birchall, A. Hervault, D. Mertz, S. Begin-Coline and N. T. K. Thanh, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 3278–3287 RSC .
F. Q. Hu, K. W. MacRenaris, E. A. Waters, T. Y. Liang, E. A. Schultz-Sikma, A. L. Eckermann and T. J. Meade, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 20855–20860 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xu, L. L. Cui, N. H. Tong and H. C. Gu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 15582–15583 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Joscelyne and G. Tragardh, J. Membr. Sci., 2000, 169, 107–117 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kado, J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 103, 043902 CrossRef .
G. E. Sterbinsky, J. Cheng, P. T. Chiu, B. W. Wessels and D. J. Keavney, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B: Microelectron. Nanometer Struct. – Process., Meas., Phenom., 2007, 25, 1389–1392 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yanagihara, M. Myoka, D. Isaka, T. Niizeki, K. Mibu and E. Kita, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2013, 46, 175004 CrossRef .
A. Kumar, D. K. Pandya and S. Chaudhary, J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 112, 073909 CrossRef .
J. C. Tristao, A. A. S. Oliveira, J. D. Ardisson, A. Dias and R. M. Lago, Mater. Res. Bull., 2011, 46, 748–754 CrossRef CAS .
R. Mantovan, S. Vangelista, S. Cocco, A. Lamperti and O. Salicio, J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 111, 07B107 CrossRef .
S. Vangelista, R. Mantovan, S. Cocco, A. Lamperti, O. Salicio and M. Fanciulli, Thin Solid Films, 2012, 520, 4617–4621 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chatman, A. J. G. Noel and K. M. Poduska, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 98, 113902 CrossRef .
T. Xia, J. Wang, C. Wu, F. Meng, Z. Shi, J. Lian, J. Feng and J. Meng, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 5741–5744 RSC .
W. B. Grant, Anticancer Res., 2012, 32, 2220–2220 Search PubMed .
R. Hao, R. J. Xing, Z. C. Xu, Y. L. Hou, S. Gao and S. H. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2729–2742 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Bitar, C. Kaewsaneha, M. M. Eissa, T. Jamshaid, P. Tangboriboonrat, D. Polpanich and A. Elaissari, J. Colloid Sci. Biotechnol., 2014, 3, 3–18 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kossatz, R. Ludwig, H. Dahring, V. Ettelt, G. Rimkus, M. Marciello, G. Salas, V. Patel, F. J. Teran and I. Hilger, Pharm. Res., 2014, 31, 3274–3288 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Dolores, S. Raquel and G. L. Adianez, Ultrason.
Sonochem., 2015, 23, 391–398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Pascu, E. Carenza, M. Gich, S. Estradé, F. Peiró, G. Herranz and A. Roig, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 15108–15116 CrossRef CAS .
E. Carenza, V. Barcelo, A. Morancho, J. Montaner, A. Rosell and A. Roig, Acta Biomater., 2014, 10, 3775–3785 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Pradhan, J. Giri, F. Rieken, C. Koch, O. Mykhaylyk, M. Doblinger, R. Banerjee, D. Bahadur and C. Plank, J. Controlled Release, 2010, 142, 108–121 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yang, Y. Zhuang, Y. Sun, A. Dai, X. Shi, D. Wu, F. Li, H. Hu and S. Yang, Biomaterials, 2011, 32, 4584–4593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Maeng, D. H. Lee, K. H. Jung, Y. H. Bae, I. S. Park, S. Jeong, Y. S. Jeon, C. K. Shim, W. Kim, J. Kim, J. Lee, Y. M. Lee, J. H. Kim, W. H. Kim and S. S. Hong, Biomaterials, 2010, 31, 4995–5006 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Alam, C. Anand, K. Ariga, T. Mori and A. Vinu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 7358–7361 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. G. Varallyay, L. L. Muldoon, S. Gahramanov, Y. J. Wu, J. A. Goodman, X. Li, M. M. Pike and E. A. Neuwelt, J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab., 2009, 29, 853–860 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xie, Y. Zhu, W. Jiang, Q. Zhou, H. Yang, N. Gu, Y. Zhang, H. Xu, H. Xu and X. Yang, Biomaterials, 2011, 32, 495–502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Lunov, T. Syrovets, B. Buchele, X. Jiang, C. Rocker, K. Tron, G. U. Nienhaus, P. Walther, V. Mailander, K. Landfester and T. Simmet, Biomaterials, 2010, 31, 5063–5071 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. B. Santhosh and N. P. Ulrih, Cancer Lett., 2013, 336, 8–17 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wu, Z. Wu, T. Yu, C. Jiang and W. S. Kim, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2015, 16, 023501 CrossRef PubMed .
A. S. Teja and P.-Y. Koh, Prog. Cryst. Growth Charact. Mater., 2009, 55, 22–45 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. El-Hammadi and J. L. Arias, Expert Opin. Ther. Pat., 2015, 25, 691–709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ju, T. Y. Cai, H. S. Lu and C. D. Gong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 13780–13786 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Sun and H. Zeng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 8204–8205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang and S. Satpathy, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1991, 44, 13319–13331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Tang, M. Myers, K. A. Bosnick and L. E. Brus, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 7501–7506 CrossRef CAS .
W. F. J. Fontijn, P. J. van der Zaag, M. A. C. Devillers, V. A. M. Brabers and R. Metselaar, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1997, 56, 5432–5442 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zaanen, G. A. Sawatzky and J. W. Allen, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1985, 55, 418–421 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. F. Alvarado, M. Erbudak and P. Munz, Physica B+C, 1977, 86–88, 1188–1190 CrossRef .
I. Balberg and H. L. Pinch, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 1978, 7, 12–15 CrossRef .
I. Balberg and J. I. Pankove, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1971, 27, 1371–1374 CrossRef CAS .
V. N. Antonov, B. N. Harmon, V. P. Antropov, A. Y. Perlov and A. N. Yaresko, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2001, 64, 134410 CrossRef .
M. E. Sadat, M. K. Baghbador, A. W. Dunn, H. P. Wagner, R. C. Ewing, J. M. Zhang, H. Xu, G. M. Pauletti, D. B. Mast and D. L. Shi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 091903 CrossRef .
N. J. Cherepy, D. B. Liston, J. A. Lovejoy, H. M. Deng and J. Z. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 770–776 CrossRef CAS .
D. Shi, M. E. Sadat, A. W. Dunn and D. B. Mast, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 8209–8232 RSC .
C. Boxall, G. Kelsall and Z. Zhang, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1996, 92, 791–802 RSC .
Y. X. Wang, S. M. Hussain and G. P. Krestin, Eur. Radiol., 2001, 11, 2319–2331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Tartaj, M. D. Morales, S. Veintemillas-Verdaguer, T. Gonzalez-Carreno and C. J. Serna, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2003, 36, R182–R197 CrossRef CAS .
U. Jeong, X. W. Teng, Y. Wang, H. Yang and Y. N. Xia, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 33–60 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bedanta and W. Kleemann, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2009, 42, 013001 CrossRef .
R. S. Chaughule, S. Purushotham and R. V. Ramanujan, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., India, Sect. A, 2012, 82, 257–268 CrossRef CAS .
K. Elersic, J. I. Pavlic, A. Iglic, A. Vesel and M. Mozetic, Chem. Phys. Lipids, 2012, 165, 120–124 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Balivada, R. S. Rachakatla, H. Wang, T. N. Samarakoon, R. K. Dani, M. Pyle, F. O. Kroh, B. Walker, X. Leaym, O. B. Koper, M. Tamura, V. Chikan, S. H. Bossmann and D. L. Troyer, BMC Cancer, 2010, 10, 119 CrossRef PubMed .
F. M. Kievit and M. Q. Zhang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2011, 44, 853–862 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. K. Jain, S. P. Foy, B. Erokwu, S. Dimitrijevic, C. A. Flask and V. Labhasetwar, Biomaterials, 2009, 30, 6748–6756 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. S. Day, J. G. Morton and J. L. West, J. Biomech. Eng., 2009, 131, 074001 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Fang, H. Nakamura and H. Maeda, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2011, 63, 136–151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Moore, E. Marecos, A. Bogdanov Jr. and R. Weissleder, Radiology, 2000, 214, 568–574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Byrne, T. Betancourt and L. Brannon-Peppas, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2008, 60, 1615–1626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Dobson, Drug Dev. Res., 2006, 67, 55–60 CrossRef CAS .
H. Maeda, J. Wu, T. Sawa, Y. Matsumura and K. Hori, J. Controlled Release, 2000, 65, 271–284 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Wu, J. Chen, H. C. Wang, M. Y. Chou, T. Y. Chang, S. S. Yuan, C. Y. Chen, M. F. Hou, J. T. A. Hsu and Y. M. Wang, Theranostics, 2016, 6, 118–130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Wu, Y. J. Chen, Y. J. Lin, T. H. Wu and Y. M. Wang, J. Med. Chem., 2013, 56, 9100–9109 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. N. Lee, Y. M. Wang, W. F. Lai, T. J. Chen, M. C. Yu, C. L. Fang, F. L. Yu, Y. H. Tsai, W. H. S. Chang, C. S. Zuo and P. F. Renshaw, Clin. Microbiol. Infect., 2012, 18, E149–E157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. L. He, W. Song, J. Lei, Z. Li, J. Cao, S. Huang, J. Meng, H. Y. Xu, Z. Y. Jin and H. D. Xue, Acta Radiol., 2012, 53, 1049–1058 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Meng, J. Fan, G. Galiana, R. T. Branca, P. L. Clasen, S. Ma, J. Zhou, C. Leuschner, C. S. S. R. Kumar, J. Hormes, T. Otiti, A. C. Beye, M. P. Harmer, C. J. Kiely, W. Warren, M. P. Haataja and W. O. Soboyejo, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2009, 29, 1467–1479 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Haik, J. Chatterjee and C. Jen Chen, J. Nanopart. Res., 2005, 7, 675–679 CrossRef CAS .
O. Veiseh, J. W. Gunn and M. Zhang, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2010, 62, 284–304 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. E. Krown, D. W. Northfelt, D. Osoba and J. S. Stewart, Semin. Oncol., 2004, 31, 36–52 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Dames, B. Gleich, A. Flemmer, K. Hajek, N. Seidl, F. Wiekhorst, D. Eberbeck, I. Bittmann, C. Bergemann, T. Weyh, L. Trahms, J. Rosenecker and C. Rudolph, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 495–499 CrossRef PubMed .
T. J. Chen, T. H. Cheng, C. Y. Chen, S. C. Hsu, T. L. Cheng, G. C. Liu and Y. M. Wang, J. Biol. Inorg. Chem., 2009, 14, 253–260 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. E. Serda, N. L. Adolphi, M. Bisoffi and L. O. Sillerud, Mol. Imaging, 2007, 6, 277–288 CrossRef CAS .
P. Debbage and W. Jaschke, Histochem. Cell Biol., 2008, 130, 845–875 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. H. Peng, X. Qian, H. Mao, A. Y. Wang, Z. G. Chen, S. Nie and D. M. Shin, Int. J. Nanomed., 2008, 3, 311–321 CAS .
A. Natarajan, C. Y. Xiong, C. Gruettner, G. L. DeNardo and S. J. DeNardo, Cancer Biother. Radiopharm., 2008, 23, 82–91 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Z. Wang, V. Bagalkot, C. C. Vasilliou, F. Gu, F. Alexis, L. Zhang, M. Shaikh, K. Yuet, M. J. Cima, R. Langer, P. W. Kantoff, N. H. Bander, S. Jon and O. C. Farokhzad, ChemMedChem, 2008, 3, 1311–1315 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. S. Lee, J. Svensson, S. W. Lee, Y. W. Park and E. E. Campbell, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2006, 6, 1325–1330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. J. Landmark, S. DiMaggio, J. Ward, C. V. Kelly, S. Vogt, S. Hong, A. Kotlyar, A. Myc, T. P. Thomas, J. E. Penner-Hahn, J. R. Baker, M. M. B. Holl and B. G. Orr, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 773–783 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. B. Li, X. K. Du, T. L. Huo, X. Liu, S. Zhang and F. Yuan, Acta Radiol., 2009, 50, 583–594 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Hogemann-Savellano, E. Bos, C. Blondet, F. Sato, T. Abe, L. Josephson, R. Weissleder, J. Gaudet, D. Sgroi, P. J. Peters and J. P. Basilion, Neoplasia, 2003, 5, 495–506 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Z. Wang, F. Gu, L. F. Zhang, J. M. Chan, A. Radovic-Moreno, M. R. Shaikh and O. C. Farokhzad, Expert Opin. Biol. Ther., 2008, 8, 1063–1070 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Desai, V. Trieu and Z. Yao, Clin. Cancer Res., 2006, 12, 3869–3869 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kumar, M. Yigit, G. P. Dai, A. Moore and Z. Medarova, Cancer Res., 2010, 70, 7553–7561 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Veiseh, C. Sun, C. Fang, N. Bhattarai, J. Gunn, F. Kievit, K. Du, B. Pullar, D. Lee, R. G. Ellenbogen, J. Olson and M. Q. Zhang, Cancer Res., 2009, 69, 6200–6207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Lyons, J. O'Neal and H. Sontheimer, Glia, 2002, 39, 162–173 CrossRef PubMed .
E. A. Murphy, B. K. Majeti, L. A. Barnes, M. Makale, S. M. Weis, K. Lutu-Fuga, W. Wrasidlo and D. A. Cheresh, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2008, 105, 9343–9348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. F. He, M. H. Na, J. S. Kim, G. Y. Lee, J. Y. Park, A. S. Hoffman, J. O. Nam, S. E. Han, G. Y. Sim, Y. K. Oh, I. S. Kim and B. H. Lee, Mol. Pharmaceutics, 2011, 8, 430–438 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Mongelard and P. Bouvet, Curr. Opin. Mol. Ther., 2010, 12, 107–114 CAS .
P. R. Bouchard, R. M. Hutabarat and K. M. Thompson, Annu. Rev. Pharmacol., 2010, 50, 237–257 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. K. Yu, D. Kim, I. H. Lee, J. S. So, Y. Y. Jeong and S. Jon, Small, 2011, 7, 2241–2249 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. McCarthy, J. Bhaumik, M. R. Karver, S. S. Erdem and R. Weissleder, Mol. Oncol., 2010, 4, 511–528 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. L. Zhang, Y. Ma and X. L. Sun, Med. Res. Rev., 2010, 30, 270–289 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Y. Shen, W. Wei, H. Tanaka, K. Kohama, G. H. Ma, T. Dobashi, Y. Maki, H. H. Wang, J. X. Bi and S. Dai, Pharmacol. Res., 2011, 64, 410–419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. X. Yang, Z. W. Zhang, L. L. Chen, W. W. Gu and Y. P. Li, Biomacromolecules, 2010, 11, 927–933 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. B. Foraker, C. M. Khantwal and P. W. Swaan, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2003, 55, 1467–1483 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ranganathan, S. Madanmohan, A. Kesavan, G. Baskar, Y. R. Krishnamoorthy, R. Santosham, D. Ponraju, S. K. Rayala and G. Venkatraman, Int. J. Nanomed., 2012, 7, 1043–1060 CAS .
C. B. He, Y. P. Hu, L. C. Yin, C. Tang and C. H. Yin, Biomaterials, 2010, 31, 3657–3666 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Ahmed, H. Fessi and A. Elaissari, Drug Discovery Today, 2012, 17, 928–934 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kettering, H. Richter, F. Wiekhorst, S. Bremer-Streck, L. Trahms, W. A. Kaiser and I. Hilger, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 505102 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Xu, L. Cheng, C. Wang, X. Ma, Y. Li and Z. Liu, Biomaterials, 2011, 32, 9364–9373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Hayashi, M. Nakamura, H. Miki, S. Ozaki, M. Abe, T. Matsumoto, W. Sakamoto, T. Yogo and K. Ishimura, Theranostics, 2014, 4, 834–844 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Mahmoudi, S. Sant, B. Wang, S. Laurent and T. Sen, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2011, 63, 24–46 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xie, G. Liu, H. S. Eden, H. Ai and X. Chen, Acc. Chem. Res., 2011, 44, 883–892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Dumitrescu, T. Slatineanu, A. Poiata, A. R. Iordan, C. Mihailescu and M. N. Palamaru, Colloids Surf., A, 2014, 455, 185–194 CrossRef CAS .
A. Nacev, C. Beni, O. Bruno and B. Shapiro, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 2011, 323, 651–668 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zhang, W. Huang, H. Xu, S. Chang, C. Cao, M. Kong and Y. He, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2014, 188, 86–92 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-S. Li, J. S. Church and A. L. Woodhead, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 2012, 324, 1543–1550 CrossRef CAS .
F. M. Muggia, J. D. Hainsworth, S. Jeffers, P. Miller, S. Groshen, M. Tan, L. Roman, B. Uziely, L. Muderspach, A. Garcia, A. Burnett, F. A. Greco, C. P. Morrow, L. J. Paradiso and L. J. Liang, J. Clin. Oncol., 1997, 15, 987–993 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Yan, Y. Wang, S. Z. He, S. T. Ku, W. Gu and L. Ye, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Med., 2013, 24, 2371–2379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, J. Shen, Y. Y. Li, Z. Y. Wei, G. X. Cao, Z. Gai, K. L. Hong, P. Banerjee and S. Q. Zhou, Biomater. Sci., 2014, 2, 915–923 RSC .
N. S. Elbialy, M. M. Fathy and W. M. Khalil, Int. J. Pharm., 2015, 490, 190–199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Karamipour, M. S. Sadjadi and N. Farhadyar, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2015, 148, 146–155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. S. Elbialy, M. M. Fathy and W. M. Khalil, Phys. Med., 2014, 30, 843–848 CrossRef PubMed .
M. D. M. Ramos-Tejada, J. L. Viota, K. Rudzka and A. V. Delgado, Colloids Surf., B, 2015, 128, 1–7 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, D. K. Pan, K. Zou, J. He and X. Duan, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 3069–3077 RSC .
S. Yu, G. Wu, X. Gu, J. Wang, Y. Wang, H. Gao and J. Ma, Colloids Surf., B, 2013, 103, 15–22 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Shakeri-Zadeh, S. Khoee, M.-B. Shiran, A. M. Sharifi and S. Khoei, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2015, 3, 1879–1887 RSC .
E. Ebrahimi, A. Akbarzadeh, E. Abbasi, A. A. Khandaghi, F. Abasalizadeh and S. Davaran, Artif. Cells, Nanomed., Biotechnol., 2016, 44, 290–297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Szakacs, J. K. Paterson, J. A. Ludwig, C. Booth-Genthe and M. M. Gottesman, Nat. Rev. Drug Discovery, 2006, 5, 219–234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. M. Kievit, F. Y. Wang, C. Fang, H. Mok, K. Wang, J. R. Silber, R. G. Ellenbogen and M. Zhang, J. Controlled Release, 2011, 152, 76–83 CrossRef CAS .
M. Y. Hua, H. W. Yang, C. K. Chuang, R. Y. Tsai, W. J. Chen, K. L. Chuang, Y. H. Chang, H. C. Chuang and S. T. Pang, Biomaterials, 2010, 31, 7355–7363 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Otsuka, Y. Nagasaki and K. Kataoka, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2003, 55, 403–419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Veiseh, C. Sun, C. Fang, N. Bhattarai, J. Gunn, F. Kievit, K. Du, B. Pullar, D. Lee, R. G. Ellenbogen, J. Olson and M. Zhang, Cancer Res., 2009, 69, 6200–6207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. G. Hadjipanayis, R. Machaidze, M. Kaluzova, L. Wang, A. J. Schuette, H. Chen, X. Wu and H. Mao, Cancer Res., 2010, 70, 6303–6312 CrossRef CAS .
D. E. Dorer and D. M. Nettelbeck, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2009, 61, 554–571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Scherer, M. Anton, U. Schillinger, J. Henke, C. Bergemann, A. Kruger, B. Gansbacher and C. Plank, Gene Ther., 2002, 9, 102–109 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Pan, D. Cui, Y. Sheng, C. Ozkan, F. Gao, R. He, Q. Li, P. Xu and T. Huang, Cancer Res., 2007, 67, 8156–8163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. M. Kievit, O. Veiseh, N. Bhattarai, C. Fang, J. W. Gunn, D. Lee, R. G. Ellenbogen, J. M. Olson and M. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 2244–2251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Cheng, P. Y. Chu, K. H. Chuang, S. R. Roffler, C. H. Kao, W. L. Tseng, J. Shiea, W. D. Chang, Y. C. Su, B. M. Chen, Y. M. Wang and T. L. Cheng, Cancer Gene Ther., 2009, 16, 83–90 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Lucky, K. C. Soo and Y. Zhang, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 1990–2042 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Celli, B. Q. Spring, I. Rizvi, C. L. Evans, K. S. Samkoe, S. Verma, B. W. Pogue and T. Hasan, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 2795–2838 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, X. Zhi, M. Yang, J. Zhang, L. Lin, X. Zhao, W. Hou, C. Zhang, Q. Zhang, F. Pan, G. Alfranca, Y. Yang, J. M. de la Fuente, J. Ni and D. Cui, Theranostics, 2017, 7, 1650–1662 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. E. Dolmans, D. Fukumura and R. K. Jain, Nat. Rev. Cancer, 2003, 3, 380–387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. N. Konan, R. Gurny and E. Allemann, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 2002, 66, 89–106 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cheng, J. D. Meyers, A. M. Broome, M. E. Kenney, J. P. Basilion and C. Burda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 2583–2591 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, C. Wang, L. Cheng, H. Gong, S. Yin, Q. Gong, Y. Li and Z. Liu, Biomaterials, 2013, 34, 9160–9170 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, X. Xu, T. Li, M. Lin, X. Lin, H. Zhang, H. Sun and B. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 14552–14561 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Fu, W. Liu, Y. Li, Y. Jin, L. Jiang, X. Liang, S. Feng and Z. Dai, Bioconjugate Chem., 2014, 25, 1655–1663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, Q. Zhang, X. F. Luo, J. Li, H. He, F. Yang, Y. Di, C. Jin, X. G. Jiang, S. Shen and L. Fu de, Biomaterials, 2014, 35, 9473–9483 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Algret, A. Criado and M. Prato, Curr. Med. Chem., 2017, 24, 529–536 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Shi, H. Gong, Y. Li, C. Wang, L. Cheng and Z. Liu, Biomaterials, 2013, 34, 4786–4793 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ding, P. Liu, D. Hu, Z. Sheng, H. Yi, G. Gao, Y. Wu, P. Zhang, S. Ling and L. Cai, Biomater. Sci., 2017, 5, 762–771 RSC .
R. A. Bohara, N. D. Thorat and S. H. Pawar, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 43989–44012 RSC .
A. B. Salunkhe, V. M. Khot and S. H. Pawar, Curr. Top. Med. Chem., 2014, 14, 572–594 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Piñeiro, Z. Vargas, J. Rivas and M. A. López-Quintela, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2015, 2015, 4495–4509 CrossRef .
Z. Bakhtiary, A. A. Saei, M. J. Hajipour, M. Raoufi, O. Vermesh and M. Mahmoudi, Nanomedicine, 2016, 12, 287–307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. A. Quinto, P. Mohindra, S. Tong and G. Bao, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 12728–12736 RSC .
J.-H. Lee, J.-t. Jang, J.-s. Choi, S. H. Moon, S.-h. Noh, J.-w. Kim, J.-G. Kim, I.-S. Kim, K. I. Park and J. Cheon, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Mohammad, G. Balaji, A. Weber, R. M. Uppu and C. S. S. R. Kumar, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 19194–19201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Tian, J. Hu, Y. Zhu, R. Zou, Z. Chen, S. Yang, R. Li, Q. Su, Y. Han and X. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 8571–8577 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Sapareto and W. C. Dewey, Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys., 1984, 10, 787–800 CrossRef CAS .
A. Cervadoro, C. Giverso, R. Pande, S. Sarangi, L. Preziosi, J. Wosik, A. Brazdeikis and P. Decuzzi, PLoS One, 2013, 8, e57332 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Hayashi, M. Nakamura, W. Sakamoto, T. Yogo, H. Miki, S. Ozaki, M. Abe, T. Matsumoto and K. Ishimura, Theranostics, 2013, 3, 366–376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. Huang and J. F. Hainfeld, Int. J. Nanomed., 2013, 8, 2521–2532 Search PubMed .
L. Prosen, S. Prijic, B. Music, J. Lavrencak, M. Cemazar and G. Sersa, Mol. Ther. – Nucleic Acids, 2014, 3, e205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Prosen, B. Markelc, T. Dolinsek, B. Music, M. Cemazar and G. Sersa, Mol. Ther. – Nucleic Acids, 2014, 3, e205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Li, X. Tang, B. Pulli, C. Lin, P. Zhao, J. Cheng, Z. Lv, X. Yuan, Q. Luo, H. Cai and M. Ye, Int. J. Nanomed., 2014, 9, 3347–3361 Search PubMed .
P. Guardia, R. Di Corato, L. Lartigue, C. Wilhelm, A. Espinosa, M. Garcia-Hernandez, F. Gazeau, L. Manna and T. Pellegrino, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3080–3091 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. B. Salunkhe, V. M. Khot and S. H. Pawar, Curr. Top. Med. Chem., 2014, 14, 572–594 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. García-Jimeno, R. Ortega-Palacios, M. Cepeda-Rubio, A. Vera, L. Leija and J. Estelrich, Prog. Electromagn. Res., 2012, 128, 229–248 CrossRef .
R. Sharma and C. J. Chen, J. Nanopart. Res., 2009, 11, 671–689 CrossRef CAS .
A. E. Deatsch and B. A. Evans, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 2014, 354, 163–172 CrossRef CAS .
B. Thiesen and A. Jordan, Int. J. Hyperthermia, 2008, 24, 467–474 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. J. Chen, T. H. Cheng, Y. C. Hung, K. T. Lin, G. C. Liu and Y. M. Wang, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., 2008, 87a, 165–175 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. T. Yin, B. P. Shah and K. B. Lee, Small, 2014, 10, 4106–4112 CAS .
K. Maier-Hauff, F. Ulrich, D. Nestler, H. Niehoff, P. Wust, B. Thiesen, H. Orawa, V. Budach and A. Jordan, J. Neurooncol., 2011, 103, 317–324 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Jordan, R. Scholz, K. Maier-Hauff, F. K. van Landeghem, N. Waldoefner, U. Teichgraeber, J. Pinkernelle, H. Bruhn, F. Neumann, B. Thiesen, A. von Deimling and R. Felix, J. Neurooncol., 2006, 78, 7–14 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:
Sathyadevi Palanisamy	Sathyadevi Palanisamy received her M.S. degree from Madurai Kamaraj University in 2007. She received her M.Phil. degree from Bharathiar University in 2009. She obtained her Ph.D. degree at Bharathiar University in 2012. Currently, she is working as a Post-doctoral fellow under the supervision of Prof. Yun-Ming Wang at the Department of Biological Science and Technology, Institute of Molecular Medicine and Bioengineering, National Chiao Tung University, Taiwan. Her research interests focus on coordination compounds, bio-inorganic chemistry, biosensors, electrochemical sensors and metal–organic frameworks.
Yun-Ming Wang	Yun-Ming Wang received his Ph.D. degree in chemistry from National Tsing Hua University, Taiwan in 1990, with Prof. Chung-Sun Chung. He is currently a Professor at National Chiao Tung University Taiwan. His research interests focus on the development of MRI contrast agents and optical imaging probes, cancer diagnosis and therapy, and biosensors and bioelectronics.

 	Fig. 1  SPIONs applied in biomedical applications.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic representation of surface engineered SPIONs for therapeutic applications: (a) SPIONs containing iron oxide as the core with different coating materials, and (b) surface engineered SPIONs composed of polymer micelles with a hydrophilic shell and a hydrophobic core. The hydrophilic surface conjugated with targeting antibodies, peptides, aptamers, and small molecules.	 

 	Fig. 3  The physiochemical properties of SPIONs affect their bio-kinetics and fates in vivo. These changes can be observed in uptake, distribution, metabolism, and excretion of SPIONs from the body. The protein corona is yet another factor that is influenced by various physiochemical features of nanoparticles and can, in turn, affect the targeting capabilities of SPIONs in imaging applications. Not only can the protein corona alter the toxicity, uptake, targeting, and circulation time of SPIONs, but it can also affect the relaxivity of SPIONs as MR imaging contrast agents. Reproduced with permission from ref. 49.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic illustration of the microemulsion method (O/W reaction) for nanoparticle synthesis.	 

 	Fig. 5  A one-electron energy scheme of an octahedral site in Fe3O4. The interpretations of the various optical transitions are represented by the dashed arrows. Interpretations of other spectroscopic transitions are also indicated. Reproduced with permission from ref. 117. Copyright 1978, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) The PL spectra of different surface modified iron oxide nanoparticles. The spectra represented in (a) are the cumulative peak fit to the experimental PL data; the vertical dashed lines show the shift in the PL peak due to the quantum confinement effect; (b) fluorescence spectra of Fe3O4 nanoparticles as a function of emission wavelength; (c) schematic representation of spatially confined Fe3O4 nanoparticles embedded in a spherical polystyrene matrix, denoted as PS/Fe3O4 and Si/PS/Fe3O4. (d) Schematic energy bands of the Fe3O4 nanoparticle systems. Reproduced with permission from ref. 119. Copyright 2014, AIP Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 7  Pictorial representation of multilayered SPIONs containing a nanoparticle core, coatings and targeting moieties.	 

 	Fig. 8  Scheme for different targeting mechanisms.	 

 	Fig. 9  SPION based drug delivery system.	 

 	Fig. 10  Behavior of SPIONs in a magnetic thermal system.	 

 	Fig. 11  Pictorial representation of the magneto-photothermal mechanism for tumor ablation.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
