Green approaches for the synthesis of metal and metal oxide nanoparticles using microbial and plant extracts  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1NR08144F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1NR08144F
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2022, 14, 2534-2571Green approaches for the synthesis of metal and metal oxide nanoparticles using microbial and plant extracts

        
          
            Jaison 
            Jeevanandam
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Siaw Fui 
            Kiew
          
        
      bc, 
      
        
          
            Stephen 
            Boakye-Ansah
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Sie Yon 
            Lau
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Ahmed 
            Barhoum
          
        
      fg, 
      
        
          
            Michael K. 
            Danquah
          
        
      h and 

        
          
            João 
            Rodrigues
          
        
      *ai
aCQM – Centro de Química da Madeira, MMRG, Universidade da Madeira, Campus da Penteada, 9020-105 Funchal, Portugal. E-mail: jaison.jeevanandam@staff.uma.pt; joaor@uma.pt
bCurtin Malaysia Research Institute, Curtin University Malaysia, CDT 250, 98009 Miri Sarawak, Malaysia
cSarawak Biovalley Pilot Plant, Curtin University Malaysia, CDT 250, 98009 Miri Sarawak, Malaysia
dRowan University, Henry M. Rowan College of Engineering, Department of Chemical Engineering, 201 Mullica Hill Rd, Glassboro, NJ 08028, USA
eDepartment of Chemical Engineering, Curtin University Malaysia, CDT 250, 98009 Miri Sarawak, Malaysia
fNanostruc, Research Group, Chemistry Department, Faculty of Science, Helwan University, Helwan 11795, Egypt
gSchool of Chemical Sciences, Dublin City University, Dublin 9, D09 Y074 Dublin, Ireland
hChemical Engineering Department, University of Tennessee, Chattanooga, 615 McCallie Ave, Chattanooga, TN 37403, USA
iSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Center for Nano Energy Materials, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi'an 710072, China
Received 
      11th December 2021
    , Accepted 11th January 2022First published on 15th January 2022AbstractGreen synthesis approaches are gaining significance as promising routes for the sustainable preparation of nanoparticles, offering reduced toxicity towards living organisms and the environment. Nanomaterials produced by green synthesis approaches can offer additional benefits, including reduced energy inputs and lower production costs than traditional synthesis, which bodes well for commercial-scale production. The biomolecules and phytochemicals extracted from microbes and plants, respectively, are active compounds that function as reducing and stabilizing agents for the green synthesis of nanoparticles. Microorganisms, such as bacteria, yeasts, fungi, and algae, have been used in nanomaterials’ biological synthesis for some time. Furthermore, the use of plants or plant extracts for metal and metal-based hybrid nanoparticle synthesis represents a novel green synthesis approach that has attracted significant research interest. This review discusses various biosynthesis approaches via microbes and plants for the green preparation of metal and metal oxide nanoparticles and provides insights into the molecular aspects of the synthesis mechanisms and biomedical applications. The use of agriculture waste as a potential bioresource for nanoparticle synthesis and biomedical applications of biosynthesized nanoparticles is also discussed.
Introduction
Nanomaterials and nanoparticles possess unique properties that can be tailored to obtain new and modified functionalities compared to their bulk counterparts. Nanoparticles exhibit novel and improved properties based on their nanoscale dimensions, molecular distribution, and morphology. Their smaller size and unusual characteristics gained attention for use in chip technology, and the capability to fine-tune the nanomaterial's properties offers broad applications in optoelectronics, photovoltaic, biomedical, waste water treatment,25 and thermo-electric fields.36,42 Furthermore, semiconductor quantum dots showcase the impressive progress of nanomaterials in the field of electronics.54 These nanomaterials are intermediaries between molecules and particulates with an extensive range of elemental and material compositions, such as organics, inorganics, and hybrid structures, along with excellent surface functionality. Furthermore, nanomaterials are synthesized with relatively less raw materials, lower cost, and less energy than micro-sized or bulk materials.65
Researchers are widely focusing on preparing noble metal nanoparticles, as they can exhibit improved physical and chemical properties due to their reduced size, extensive surface area, quantum size effect, and electronic configuration.78 Common noble metals, such as silver, gold, platinum, and palladium, retain characteristic non-interaction features with other elements, and their modification to nanosized improves their properties. Moreover, the properties of nanosized metal particles can be fine-tuned by controlling parameters such as size, shape, composition, and surface functionalization. Alterations in the nanoparticles’ size will lead to distinct optical, chemical, magnetic, and electrical properties that are beneficial for several applications.87 It is noteworthy that an atom at the surface of a nanoparticle exhibits improved properties compared with the properties of an atom on the surface of the bulk material. The unique properties shown by the atoms at different crystal locations in a nanoparticle are due to their surface or quantum effects.94 Thus, several novel nanomaterials are being developed by researchers with new properties and applications.
In general, nanoparticles and nanomaterials are synthesized via smart techniques that utilize hazardous solvents and toxic chemicals, such as pyrolysis, the sol–gel technique, chemical vapor deposition, etching, and the supercritical fluid approach.101 Even though nanoparticles are extensively beneficial for several applications, high energy consumption, the huge cost of production, the use of toxic chemicals, and the formation of undesirable by-products are some of the limitations, while considering a physical or chemical approach for nanoparticle synthesis.65 Hence, a synthesis approach that can diminish hazardous reaction and waste generation is inevitable to convert nanoparticles from the laboratory to commercial products. Numerous methodologies have been developed for the natural and cost-effective synthesis of nanomaterials without the use of harmful chemical solvents.101 Recently, green protocols have gained significance as a novel route to the preparation of nanoparticles to reduce synthesis approach-mediated toxicity towards living organisms and the environment. Green synthesis approaches for nanomaterial preparation are highly promising as they promote the use of non-toxic and renewable materials and efficient and reduced energy consumption compared with traditional synthesis approaches that rely on harmful chemicals and solvents, such as sodium borohydride or hydrazine.116 In green synthesis methods, water is mostly used as the solvent along with renewable and eco-friendly materials as reducing and stabilizing agents.120 The biomolecules and phytochemicals extracted from microbes and plants, respectively, are extensively utilized biological reducing and stabilizing agents for the green synthesis of nanoparticles.124 Extensive use of microorganisms, such as bacteria, yeasts, fungi, and algae, are involved in the biological synthesis of nanomaterials with minimum contamination. Furthermore, the use of plants or plant extracts for metal and metal based hybrid nanoparticle synthesis is currently a brand of new research focus that has gained wide acceptance.134,135 Thus, the aim of this article is to provide an overview of several biosynthesis approaches via microbes and plants for the green preparation of metal and metal oxide nanoparticles as well as to provide an insight into the synthesis mechanism. In addition, the use of agricultural waste as a source of biomass for nanoparticle synthesis and potential applications and opportunities are discussed.
Biosynthesis of metal and metal oxide nanoparticles
In general, the term ‘biosynthesis’ refers to the synthesis of a particle via biological organisms (either dead or alive) or their extracts as reducing, capping, and stabilizing agents.141 The biosynthesis of metal and metal oxide nanoparticles is widely employed as a green synthesis and bottom-up approach, as the demand for these nanoparticles is high and offers an environmentally-friendly synthesis approach. Biosynthesis as a bottom-up approach leads to the formation of nanoparticles by utilizing biomolecules as reducing and stabilizing agents to convert the precursor into ions. Later, the ions are transformed into atoms, followed by nucleation and growth processes to form nanoparticles.147 For instance, gold nanoparticles, which are commonly synthesized using toxic chemicals, such as sodium borohydride151 and trialanine phosphine152 as reducing and capping agents, can yield smaller sized nanoparticles with toxic by-products.155 The by-products can cause environmental toxicity during the synthesis and purification of gold nanoparticles.159 Furthermore, it can be noted that gold nanoparticles that are synthesized via conventional and biosynthesis approaches are toxic in nature at a threshold concentration or dose, as they can induce the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in live cells and inhibit their growth.162 Hence, physically and chemically synthesized nanoparticles possess toxic chemicals on their surface, whereas biosynthesized nanoparticles possess functional capping biomolecules. Thus, nanoparticles synthesized via conventional approaches must be purified to reduce the potentially toxic and hazardous functional groups on their surface, especially for biomedical applications,165 a challenging, time-consuming, and costly process. Once the biosynthesized nanoparticles possess biomolecules as surface functional groups, they also possess certain biological properties that reduce their critically toxic nature.167 Furthermore, the production cost is lower for the biomolecule-mediated green synthesis of nanoparticles due to the ease of availability of raw materials (especially plants) and non-requirement of additional purification processes, compared with conventional approaches.168
In several cases, the biosynthesis approach has been proven to improve the biological properties of metal and metal oxide nanoparticles, in addition to reducing toxicity.169 The bioavailability; biocompatibility (compatible with biological systems – humans, microbes, animals, and plants); and cell internalization properties, which helps to cross the blood–brain barrier, of metallic nanoparticles can also be improved via the biosynthesis approach.170
The biosynthesis of metallic nanoparticles is broadly classified as microbe and plant-mediated (phyto-) synthesis methods.172 In both these methods, live and dead organisms can be utilized for nanoparticle synthesis. Microbes and plants possess the enhanced potential to reduce complex bulk materials (metal precursors) to simpler forms by reducing their sizes (top-down approach) or assemble metal ions in solution (bottom-up approach) and utilize them as nutrients.173 This characteristic of live microbes and plants is highly beneficial for the synthesis of nanoparticles. However, in most cases, this strategy is not recommended as the nanoparticles will be formed within the organism (intracellular) and must be isolated via several tedious and expensive processes.174 Furthermore, bioaccumulation of nanoparticles during this process may lead to toxicity in the organism, cause an unfavorable reaction, and inhibit their growth175 or even result in death. Again, the growth of microbes will be inhibited for the extraction of specific metabolites, which will be utilized for nanoparticle preparation.176 Likewise, plants from agricultural waste were also considered potential biomolecule sources for nanoparticle biosynthesis.24 However, the biomolecules will not be stable after the organism's death and start to degrade immediately, which will lead to the improper formation of nanoparticles.177 Thus, a mixture of biomolecules, such as enzymes, proteins, and peptides extracted from microbes and phytochemicals from plants, is widely used to synthesize metallic nanoparticles with distinct morphologies,178 as shown in Fig. 1. In addition, this approach also proved to be beneficial for the synthesis of metallic nanoparticles with distinct morphologies in recent times.179 It has recently been identified that the process parameters, such as temperature, pH, mixing ratio, incubation period, and aeration in the biosynthesis approach, can facilitate the formation of nanoparticles with distinct morphologies.9,180
 Fig. 1  Stages involved in the biosynthesis of metallic nanoparticles. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 9 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018. 
Microbial synthesis
The microbial synthesis approach is extensively used in recent times to generate nanosized metallic particles due to their ability to reduce bulk materials into nanosized forms via biological activities using enzymes, vitamins, peptides, or proteins.181 Bacteria, fungi, and algae are the microbes utilized for the preparation of metallic nanoparticles, as listed in Tables 1–3. The metabolites secreted by these microbes act as reducing and stabilizing agents for the formation of nanoparticles.182 Furthermore, microbial synthesis is classified as intracellular and extracellular approaches,173 as mentioned in the previous section.
Table 1 List of bacteria and their biomolecules involved in the synthesis of metallic nanoparticles




Microorganisms
Nanoparticle
Size and shape
Capping and stabilizing agent from microbes/microbial extracts
Ref.





Bacteria




Salmonella enterica subspecies enterica serovar Typhi
Gold
Irregular shaped 42 nm
STY4669-hypothetical protein

17




Paracoccus haeundaensis BC74171T
Gold
20.93 ± 3.46 nm sized spherical
Enzymes, proteins and metabolites

30




Escherichia coli

Gold
∼10 nm sized spherical
Sulfite reductase enzyme

44




Bacillus brevis (NCIM 2533)
Silver
41–68 nm, spherical
Proteins

57




Lactobacillus casei WK2G-3A and Lactobacillus fermentum E10-15
Silver
0.7–10 nm and 1.4–10 nm
Ester, carboxylic acid, aldehyde, ether, hydroxyl groups, amino acids and proteins

67



Several bacterial strain
Silver
2–100 nm, spherical, cuboid, fiber, oval, hexagonal, cubic, triangular, rod and disc shaped
Bacterial cell wall proteins or soluble enzymes

79




Cupriavidus metallidurans CH34
Palladium
20–40 nm, dendritic shaped
Pyruvate, formate and lactate

85




Citrobacter bacterial species
Palladium
11–16 nm
Complex enzymes

93




Shewanella loihica

Copper
10–16 nm and spherical
Cytochrome c, organic acids, vitamins, electron donating NADH/NADPH via soluble proteins

102




Lactobacillus plantarum strain TA4
Zinc oxide
Monodisperse
Carboxyl and amide groups

107




Pseudomonas putida

Zinc oxide
25–45 nm, spherical
Amino acids and carbohydrates

112




Lactobacillus casei subspecies casei
Copper oxide
30–75 nm, spherical
Amine, amide in membrane and carbonyl in peptides

118




Streptomyces pseudogriseolus Acv-11 and S. zaomyceticus Oc-5
Copper oxide
78 nm, spherical
Peptide bonds, alcohols, N–H bending, aliphatic primary amines and alkene groups

125




Lactobacillus fermentum

Iron oxide
10–15 nm, spherical
Histidine, ketones, cysteine and aldehydes

131




Bacillus cereus strain HMH1
Iron oxide
29.3 nm, spherical
Carboxyl group, primary amines, carbonyl, ester and ether or ester covalent bonds

138




Burkholderia rinojensis

Magnesium oxide
26.7 nm, spherical granular shape
Proteins with methylene groups and aliphatic amino acids

144




Streptomyces species HC1
Titanium dioxide
43–67 nm, spherical
Metabolites

149




Halomonas elongata IBRC-M10214
Titanium dioxide
104.63 nm, spherical
Alkyne, alcohol, alkyl halide and alkene

156




Desulfosporosinus species
Uranium dioxide
1.5–2.5 nm, spherical
—

158




Shewanella oneidensis

Uranium dioxide
—
—

161




Shewanella loihica

Manganese oxide
Amorphous spherical
—

164




Shewanella oneidensis MR-1
Palladium–iron oxide
5.5 nm (spherical) and 7–17 nm in width (rod)
Amide II and III, carboxyl groups, fatty acids and carbohydrates

166




Shewanella oneidensis MR-1
Gold–iron oxide
15.4 nm (spherical) and 10–18 nm in width (rod)
Amide II and III, carboxyl groups, fatty acids and carbohydrates

166




Shewanella oneidensis MR-1
Palladium–gold–iron oxide
8.3 nm (spherical) and 8–18 nm in width (rod)
Amide II and III, carboxyl groups, fatty acids and carbohydrates

166




Gluconacetobacter hansenii bacterial cellulose fibrils
Copper oxide–cellulose
Interwoven fiber networks
Alkanes, asymmetrical hydrocarbons and alcoholic groups

171





Table 2 List of fungi and their biomolecules involved in the synthesis of metallic nanoparticles




Microorganisms
Nanoparticle
Size and shape
Capping and stabilizing agent from microbes/microbial extracts
Ref.





Fungi



29 thermophilic fungi
Gold
6–40 nm
Monosaccharides, cofactors, antibiotics, amino acids, melanin or biopolymers and proteins

16




Cladosporium cladosporides

Gold
∼60 nm sized spherical
NADH-dependent reductase and nitrate reductase

29




Aspergillus species WL-Au fungi
Gold
Rod shaped, 24–31 nm (length) and 5.1–7.3 nm (width)
Aliphatic acids, phenols, primary and secondary amines, amide II group

37




Aspergillus brunneoviolaceus

Silver
6–16 nm, spherical
Nitro, sulfur compounds, alcohols, phenols, alkenes or amines, aliphatic amines and alkynes

49



55 strains from white rot fungal species
Silver
15–20 nm, spherical to round
Proteins, polysaccharides, vitamins, amino acids and nitrate reductase

60




Fusarium oxysporum

Platinum
∼25 nm
Polysaccharides, amides, proteins and long chain fatty acids

70




Trichoderma species and Rhizopus stolonifera
Iron
100 nm
Carboxyl, alkene, phenol, sulfhydryl and mercaptan

74 and 75



Xylaria acuta

Zinc oxide
40–55 nm, hexagonal
Hydroxyl groups and polyphenols

77




Cordyceps militaris

Zinc oxide
10.15 nm, flower morphology
Amine and phenol

86




Periconium species
Zinc oxide
16–78 nm, spherical
Alcohols, aldehydes, carboxylic groups, esters, hydroxyl primary amines and amide I

96




Trichoderma asperellum

Copper oxide
10–190 nm, spherical
Amide and aromatic groups

103




Penicillium chrysogenum

Copper oxide
9.70 nm, spherical
Hydrogen, N–H bonds and amide groups

108




Aspergillus niger BSC-1
Iron oxide
20–40 nm, needle or flake-like
Hydrocarbon, carboxyl, amide II and amide I bonds, NADH-dependent hydrolase enzyme

114




Phialemoniopsis ocularis, Trichoderma asperellum and Fusarium incarnatum
Iron oxide
25, 13.13 and 30.56 nm, spherical
Amide I and II bonds from proteins

119




Penicillium chrysogenum

Magnesium oxide
5–12.8 nm, spherical
Indolic, carboxyl groups, pyrrolic patterns, methane moiety and aromatic hydrogen–carbon bonds in fungal melanin

127




Aspergillus flavus

Titanium dioxide
62–74 nm, spherical and oval shaped
Metabolites with peroxo, proteins with peptide linkages, maleic anhydride, carbonyl, amide I and amide II

133




Curvularia lunata

Cerium oxide
5–20 nm
—

139




Fusarium solani

Cerium oxide
20–30 nm, spherical
Proteins, amines and heterocyclic compounds

145




Aspergillus niger

Cerium oxide
5–20 nm, cubical and spherical
Hydroxyl molecules

150




Fusarium oxysporum

Bismuth oxide and barium titanate
—
—

154




Saccharomyces cerevisae

Antimony oxide
—
—

154



MSR3 strain of Neurospora discreta
Graphene oxide
Irregular and rough surface
Polysaccharides, amides of protein and chitin, carbonyl, epoxy and alkoxy groups in fungal hyphae

160





Table 3 List of algae or cyanobacteria and their biomolecules involved in the synthesis of metallic nanoparticles




Microorganisms
Nanoparticle
Size and shape
Capping and stabilizing agent from microbes/microbial extracts
Ref.





Algae or cyanobacteria




Cladosiphon okamuranus and Kjellamaniella crassifolia
Gold
Spherical, hexagonal, triangular, octahedral, diamond-shaped
Fucoidans with sulphated polysaccharides

13




Cystoseira baccata

Gold
8.4 nm sized spherical
Polyphenols, proteins and fucoidans with sulfonic acids of polysaccharides

26




Lyngbya majuscule

Gold
41.7 nm
Protein shells

28 and 25



Botryococcus braunnii

Silver
40–90 nm, spherical, cubic and truncated triangles
Long chain fatty acids, amides, proteins and polysaccharides

38



Polysiphonia
Silver
5–25 nm, spherical
Proteins, carbohydrates and amino acids

40




Portieria hornemanni

Silver
70–75 nm, spherical
Proteins, carbohydrates and amino acids

53




Desertifilum species and Microchaete NCCU-342
Silver
4.5–26 nm and 60–80 nm, spherical
Proteins and polysaccharides

55 and 56



Botryococcus braunii

Platinum
86.96 nm and monodisperse
Polysaccharides, proteins, long chain fatty acids and amides

69




Botryococcus braunii

Copper
10–70 nm, elongated spherical and cubic
Polysaccharides, long-chain fatty acids, proteins and amides

82



Endophytic actinomycetes
Copper
50 nm, clustered
Metal-resistant gene, peptides, proteins, organic materials and reducing cofactors

89




Dictyota dicotoma, Chloroccum and Chlorella species
Iron
20–80 nm
Glycoproteins and carbohydrates

98




Chlorella species
Zinc oxide
20 ± 2.2 nm, hexagon
Peptides, proteins, carbohydrates, fat, vitamins and certain fibers

104




Withania coagulans

Zinc oxide
Nanoflower, 360–550 nm
Phenolic molecular groups, amide linkages and amino acids

111




Ulva fasciata

Zinc oxide
Rod-shaped
N–H, CC, CO and NO2

117




Anabena cylindrica

Copper oxide
40–60 nm, rod-like
Polysaccharides, flavones and terpenoids

123




Sargassum muticum

Copper oxide
20 nm, spherical
Alpha, beta-unsaturated ketones, olefinic carbons, primary and secondary alcohols, aliphatic hydrocarbon groups

129




Colpomenia sinuosa and Pterocladia capillacea
Iron oxide
11.24–33.71 and 16.85–22.47 nm
Polysaccharides, hydroxy or sulfate groups

136




Sargassum wighitii

Magnesium oxide
68.06 nm, flower shaped
Carbohydrates, saturated primary alcohols, aromatic groups, chlorophyll molecules and polysaccharides

143




Chlorella pyrenoidosa

Titanium dioxide–graphene oxide
50 nm, spherical
—

148





Metal nanoparticles
Gold, silver, copper, and platinum are the most common nanosized metallic nanoparticles that are widely synthesized via microbial approaches.183 In addition, the possibility of forming other nanoparticles, such as iron, zinc, silicon, and rare earth metals, via microbes was also demonstrated.184 It is noteworthy that spherically shaped metallic nanoparticles are yielded via extracellular microbial synthesis, in most cases, as the biomolecules reduce the metals, engulf them to stabilize them and prevent agglomeration.185 Later, thermal, acid hydrolysis or solvent mediated centrifugation treatments will be used to eliminate surface bound biomolecules and yield pure nanoparticles.186
Gold nanoparticles
Gold is the most commonly biosynthesized metal nanoparticles due to its wide range of biological applications. However, bacterial synthesis of gold nanoparticles is not recommended due to the tedious purification processes required as the binding affinity of the bacterial metabolites is high towards gold ions. Thus, few attempts to synthesize smaller gold nanoparticles for specific biological applications were made in recent times. Patil et al. (2019) prepared ∼21 nm sized gold particles via extracellular, cell-free supernatant extracted from a marine bacteria named Paracoccus haeundaensis sp. nov. BC74171T.187 The study revealed that extracellular synthesis yielded polydisperse spherical gold nanoparticles with primary amine, amide, nitro compounds, aromatics, and alcohol or carboxylic acids as their surface functional groups. These results indicated that the gold nanoparticles formed due to the synergistic effect of enzymes, proteins, and metabolites in the supernatant. Furthermore, these biosynthesized gold nanoparticles are reported to possess antioxidant activity with an antiproliferative property against several human cancer cell lines.30 Similarly, sulfite reductase enzyme with a molecular weight of 116 kDa was purified from Gram-negative Escherichia coli (E. coli) bacteria and utilized to synthesize spherical ∼10 nm sized gold particles with high stability. These nanoparticles exhibited substantial antifungal properties against a wide range of fungal strains without any cytotoxicity towards the kidney epithelial Vero cell line from the African green monkey (Chlorocebus sp.) and human epithelial type-2 (Hep-2) cell lines at a concentration of 0.31 to 10%.44
Fungi and algae are common microbes utilized to prepare a wide variety of gold nanoparticles. Fungal extract mediated biosynthesis of metallic nanoparticles is considered as the most successful approach due to the smaller nanoparticles yielded in a short reaction time. The fungal extracts of Aspergillus japonica,188Basidiomycete lentinus edodes,189 and Hypocrea lixii and intracellular phenol-oxidizing enzymes, such as manganese peroxidases, laccases, and tyrosinases, are widely used for the biosynthesis of gold nanoparticles.190 Recently, Molnár et al. (2018) demonstrated that nanosized gold particles could be synthesized using the autolysates and extracellular as well as intracellular fractions extracted from 29 thermophilic fungi. The study showed that the size of the nanoparticles was in the range of 6–40 nm with 30–70% size distribution, depending on the synthesis parameters and fungal strain. Furthermore, it has been identified that the biological reducing agent responsible for the formation of gold nanoparticles is less than 3 kDa, which may be a monosaccharide, cofactors, antibiotics, amino acids and other molecules like melanin, whereas the stabilizing agent is above 3 kDa, which can be a biopolymer or protein.16 Similarly, Qu et al. (2020) synthesized novel rod-shaped gold nanoparticles with the help of filamentous Aspergillus species WL-Au fungi that were induced by lead (Pb+) ions. The study stated that the rod-shaped gold nanoparticles were in the minimum size range of 24–31 nm (length) and 5.1–7.3 nm (width) and maximum of above 100 nm (length) and 20.5–49.4 nm (width). Apart from lead ion induction, the presence of aliphatic acids, phenols, and primary and secondary amines, especially the amine II group, has been identified as being responsible for the synthesis of rod-shaped gold nanoparticles in this study.37
In recent times, algal extracts were also extensively employed for the biosynthesis of gold nanoparticles. Khan et al. (2019) listed the benefits of algae and blue–green algae in the synthesis of gold nanoparticles for specific biomedical applications. The article emphasized that the presence of fucoidans (a type of sulphated polysaccharide) in marine Cladosiphon okamuranus and Kjellamaniella crassifolia algae, along with optimized synthesis parameters, were responsible for the formation of gold nanoparticles. The presence of exclusive biomolecules in algae has been identified to yield spherical, hexagonal, triangular, octahedral, diamond-shaped, and polycrystalline gold nanoparticles.13 Furthermore, the cyanobacteria Anabaena sphaerica was recently used for the biosynthesis of polydisperse nanoparticles of 1–50 nm in size with shapes, such as hexagonal, spherical, triangular, and irregular. The study confirmed that the chloroplast and thylakoids present in the cyanobacteria were responsible for forming nanosized particles.191 Moreover, Lyngbya majuscule cyanobacteria has been utilized as a factory to prepare ∼42 nm sized gold particles. In this study, the presence of protein shells as the surface functional group around the resulting gold nanoparticles proved to be responsible for nanoparticle formation.28
Silver nanoparticles
Silver nanoparticles are widely synthesized using biosynthesis approaches due to their excellent antimicrobial properties. Several recent studies showed that, with bacterial cell-free supernatant, intracellular and extracellular approaches using both Gram-positive and negative bacterial strains were beneficial for silver nanoparticle preparation. Saravanan et al. (2018) recently prepared 41–68 nm sized, spherical, silver nanoparticles using the cell-free extract of Gram-positive, spore-forming, aerobic Bacillus brevis (NCIM 2533) bacteria. The study showed that the bacterial extract proteins were responsible for nanoparticle formation by acting as reducing, capping, and stabilizing agents.57 Likewise, Javaid et al. (2018) listed several bacterial strains used to synthesize silver nanoparticles. The prepared nanoparticles are in the size range of 2–100 nm with morphologies such as spherical, cuboid, fiber, oval, hexagonal, cubic, triangular, rod, and disc shaped. The article emphasized that the proteins in the bacterial cell wall or soluble enzymes were responsible for the formation of silver nanoparticles via the bacterial extracellular synthesis approach. Also, the silver ions are internalized into the bacterial cell, depending on the medium and growth factors, facilitated by membrane proteins and this leads to the formation of nanosized silver particles, which can later be recovered by bacterial cell lysis and ultra-sonication.79
Like bacteria, fungi and algae are extensively utilized to manufacture biogenic silver nanoparticles to be beneficial for biomedical applications, especially as an effective and non-toxic antimicrobial agent. Mistry et al. (2020) recently synthesized spherical, polydisperse and 6–16 nm sized silver nanoparticles via cell-free filtrate obtained from marine Aspergillus brunneoviolaceus fungi. The specific biomolecules in the fungal extract with functional groups such as nitro or sulfur compounds, alcohols, phenols, alkenes, amines, aliphatic amines, and alkynes serve as capping or stabilizing agents for nanoparticle synthesis.49 Furthermore, Casagrande et al. (2019) listed several distinct silver nanoparticle types prepared via a fungi-mediated biosynthesis approach. In this article, the author emphasized that enzymes, such as nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH) and NADH-dependent nitrate reductase, and biomolecules, namely, quinones and anthraquinones, were significant as reducing, capping, and stabilizing agents in the extracellular fungal extract mediated biosynthesis of silver nanoparticles.192
Algal mediated biogenic silver nanoparticle synthesis is considered to be the most environmentally friendly approach, as it is simple and similar to plant-mediated nanoparticle synthesis. Arya et al. (2019) synthesized 40–90 nm sized silver nanoparticles with mixed morphologies of spheres, cubes, and truncated triangles using aqueous, green, Botryococcus braunnii algal extract. The study demonstrated via FTIR spectra that the formation of silver nanoparticles was due to the presence of long-chain fatty acids, amides, proteins, and polysaccharides.38 Similarly, Fatima et al. (2020) synthesized 70–75 nm sized, spherical silver nanoparticles via extracts from the powdered red alga Portieria hornemanni collected from Rameshwaram (Gulf of Mannar), India.53 The study revealed that proteins, carbohydrates and amino acids present in the extract were responsible for algal-mediated silver nanoparticle biosynthesis. In addition, the extracts of cyanobacteria, such as Desertifilum species (isolated from soil, Egypt) and Microchaete NCCU-342 (cultured in India), were also recently used for the synthesis of 4.5–26 nm and 60–80 nm sized spherical silver nanoparticles, respectively. Both studies demonstrated that the formation of silver nanoparticles was due to the proteins and polysaccharides that existed in the extract and highly dependent on the synthesis parameters.55,56
Other metal nanoparticles
Apart from gold and silver, nanosized metal particles, such as palladium, copper, and iron, were also widely prepared via microbes. However, the specific biomedical applications of these nanoparticles are still under research and are not widely used for commercial applications compared with gold and silver nanoparticles. Recently, dendritic shaped, 20–40 nm sized palladium nanoparticles were synthesized by using the bacterial biomass (intracellular) of Cupriavidus metallidurans strain CH34 after fixing them with formate or glutaraldehyde. The synthesized nanoparticles were identified in the cytoplasm, where the metabolites, such as pyruvate, formate, and lactate, act as electron donors for nanoparticle formation.85 Similarly, Citrobacter bacterial species extracted from wastewater sludge (via intracellular approach) were used to prepare palladium nanoparticles with 11–16 nm crystallite size. The nanoparticles were formed at 30 °C, pH 6, and under anaerobic conditions with sodium formate as an electron donor. This study emphasized that the complex enzymes in the bacterial cells were beneficial for the formation of nanoparticles.93 Likewise, Arya et al. (2020) synthesized platinum nanoparticles using aqueous Botryococcus braunii green alga extract, collected from a lake, with an average particle size of 86.96 nm and monodispersity in nature. The FTIR results showed that the synergistic effect of polysaccharides, proteins, long-chain fatty acids, and amides present in the algal extract was responsible for the formation of monodisperse, nanosized platinum particles.69
Another exclusive type of nanoparticle comprises copper, which has been widely synthesized in recent times via microbial extracts for several biomedical applications. Lv et al. (2018) utilized Gram-negative, marine Shewanella loihica PV-4, which was isolated from the Loihi Seamount hydrothermal vent in the Pacific Ocean, to synthesize 10–16 nm sized, polycrystalline and spherical copper nanoparticles. The study demonstrated that electron transfer via cytochrome c with a metal reductase-containing locus for heavy metal reduction, the existence of organic acids, vitamins, and electron-donating NADH/NADPH via soluble proteins were responsible for copper nanoparticle formation.102 Furthermore, endophytic actinomycetes isolated from seaweeds were used recently to synthesize furry clustered copper nanoparticles below 50 nm in size. This study emphasized that the presence of metal-resistant genes, peptides, proteins, organic materials, and reducing cofactors was responsible for reducing copper ions and nanosized copper formation.89 Moreover, magnetotactic bacteria are widely used for the synthesis of iron nanoparticles known as magnetosomes. These Gram-negative motile bacteria usually grow near iron ores or soils with high iron content and possess the ability to synthesize magnetic iron nanoparticles (iron oxides) via an intracellular approach. Thus, it is considered a natural process of iron nanoparticle formation, where environmental conditions such as iron geocycling, geographic localization, polyphyletic diversity, and magnetotaxis of the bacteria play a crucial role. In addition, recent studies suggested that magnetosome-associated membrane (MAM) proteins encoded by the magnetosome gene island (MAI) were responsible for the formation of iron nanoparticles in magnetosomes.193 In addition, the biomolecular extracts of fungal species, such as Trichoderma species and Rhizopus stolonifera, were used recently to form iron nanoparticles below 100 nm in size. The presence of carboxyl, alkene, phenol, sulfhydryl, and mercaptan (alcohol and phenol) groups in the fungal extract as capping, stabilizing, and reducing agents has been identified as being beneficial for the formation of iron nanoparticles.74,75 Besides, several types of algae, such as macro-algae (Dictyota dicotoma) and microalgae (Chloroccum and Chlorella species), are widely used for the formation of smaller (20–80 nm) sized iron nanoparticles. It has been revealed in several studies that the amine and carbonyl groups of glycoproteins and carbohydrates of algal extracts possess the ability to reduce iron ions into zero valent iron nanoparticles.98
Metal oxide nanoparticles
Like metals, metal oxides, such as zinc, copper, iron, magnesium, and cerium oxides, have been widely synthesized via microbial extracts. It is noteworthy that the synthesis of metal oxide nanoparticles via microbial extracts is easier compared with metal nanoparticles, as the biomolecules in the extract can act as an oxygen donor,194 along with their capping, stabilizing, and metal-reducing properties.195 Hence, metal oxide nanoparticles are more extensively synthesized via a microbial approach than nanosized metals for biomedical applications.
Zinc oxide
Zinc oxide is an exclusive metal oxide nanoparticle that can be prepared by microbial extracts, such as bacteria, fungi, and algae, as shown in Fig. 2 for specific biomedical applications. Yusof et al. (2020) utilized Lactobacillus plantarum strain TA4, which was isolated from local fermented food to form monodisperse zinc oxide (ZnO) nanoparticles. The study showed that biomolecular components with carboxyl and amide groups secreted by the bacterial cell wall were responsible for facilitating nanoparticle formation.107 Likewise, the broth culture of Gram-negative, rod-shaped Pseudomonas putida soil bacteria has been utilized recently to synthesize spherical, 25–45 nm sized (diameter) ZnO nanoparticles. The study showed that nanoparticle formation was facilitated by amino acids and carbohydrates present in the bacterial broth culture as stabilizing agents.112 Similarly, Sumanth et al. (2020) recently synthesized zinc oxide nanoparticles via Xylaria acuta, which is an endophytic fungi isolated from the leaves of Millingtonia hortensis. The resulting nanoparticles were identified to be 40–55 nm in size with a hexagonal shape; enhanced antibacterial activity against Gram-negative bacteria, such as E. coli and Pseudomonas aeruginosa, as well as Gram-positive bacteria, namely, Staphylococcus aureus and Bacillus cereus; antifungal activity against Cladosporium cladosporioides, Aspergillus flavus, Fusarium oxysporum, and Phomopsis species; and anticancer activity against human MDA-MB 134 mammary gland carcinoma cell lines. The study revealed that nanoparticle formation was due to the presence of hydroxyl groups and polyphenols.77 Furthermore, Ganesan et al. (2020) demonstrated a novel sol–gel-based synthesis approach to produce zinc oxide nanoparticles via extracts of an endophytic fungi named Periconium species. The fungal extract led to the formation of 16–78 nm sized, quasi-spherical shaped nanoparticles with a high negative surface charge of −88.6 mV, which indicates their enhanced stability. The FTIR spectra revealed that the synergistic effect of alcohols, aldehydes, carboxylic acids, esters, hydroxyl primary amines and amide I from proteins present in the fungal extract were responsible for the formation of gel and nanoparticles.96
 Fig. 2  Schematics of zinc oxide nanoparticle using microbes via an intracellular approach, this figure has been reproduced from ref. 6 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2019. 
Algal extracts, which include both micro- and macroalgae, have also been used to synthesize zinc oxide nanoparticles. Hasan et al. (2021) revealed that zinc oxide nanoflowers could be synthesized with the help of Withania coagulans algal extract. The resulting nanoflowers were 360–550 nm in size with a hexagonal Wurtzite crystal structure, where the nanosized flowers were identified to be uniformly arranged as nano-petals that radiated out from the spherical pedicel to which they were adhered. FTIR spectral analysis showed that the presence of phenolic molecular groups in the extract promoted the reduction of zinc precursor to form nanoflowers, whereas the amide linkages and amino acids in the algal extract served as a stabilizing agent for nanoflower formation.111 Besides, Hamouda et al. (2020) recently utilized the green alga named Ulva fasciata to synthesize biogenic zinc oxide nanoparticles and compared their efficacy to inhibit infectious bacterial growth with the same nanoparticles synthesized via a wet chemical approach. The results showed that both synthesis approaches yielded flake-shaped particles, the algal extract yielded rod-shaped nanoparticles, and the chemical approach led to the formation of 10–14 nm sized spherically shaped nanoparticles. The FTIR spectra showed that nanoparticles from both synthesis methods possessed N–H, CC, CO, and NO2 functional groups. The study also confirmed that the zinc oxide nanoparticles synthesized via a biological approach were less toxic to albino rats and were proposed as a potential nanomedicine due to the presence of natural surface functional groups compared to chemically synthesized nanoparticles.117
Copper oxide
Similar to zinc, copper oxide nanoparticles were also extensively prepared via microbes, such as bacteria, fungi, and algae. It can be noted that there are only a few recent publications available that report on the synthesis of copper oxide nanoparticles via bacterial extracts. Kouhkan et al. (2020) recently synthesized copper oxide nanoparticles using nutrient broth containing a probiotic bacteria named Lactobacillus casei, subspecies casei. The results showed that synthesized nanoparticles were spherical in shape and 30–75 nm in diameter with high monodispersity. FTIR analysis revealed that the amine and amide linkages present in the membrane of bacteria and carbonyl groups from the peptides and amino acids from bacteria bound to the metal ions to reduce and stabilize them, leading to the formation of nanoparticles.118 Furthermore, Saravanakumar et al. (2019) demonstrated the biosynthesis of copper oxide nanoparticles via an aqueous cell-free extract of an indigenous fungus named Trichoderma asperellum. The existence of amide and aromatic groups in the secondary metabolites as reducing or encapsulating agents has been identified as being responsible for forming cubic face-centered, 10–190 nm sized and spherical nanoparticles.103 Similarly, El-Batal et al. (2020) utilized fungal filtrate solutions, Penicillium chrysogenum, along with gamma rays for the mycogenic synthesis of monodisperse, spherical copper oxide nanoparticles with a mean diameter of 9.70 nm. The study showed that hydrogen, N–H bonds and amide groups in the fungal filtrate helped aid the formation of copper oxide nanoparticles.108 Recently, Bhattacharya et al. (2019) utilized the aqueous algal extract of Anabena cylindrica for the synthesis of copper oxide nanoparticles. The resulting nanoparticles were identified to be of monoclinic crystalline phase, with rod-like morphology and 40–60 nm in size. The study also showed that the algal extract contained vibrational groups corresponding to polyols, such as polysaccharides, flavones, and terpenoids, responsible for nanoparticle formation.123
Similar to other metal oxide nanoparticles, magnetic iron oxide nanoparticles were also synthesized by several microbes. Fatemi et al. (2018) prepared novel superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles via extracellular metabolites (supernatant) of the extracts obtained from Bacillus cereus strain HMH1. The nanoparticles had an average size of 29.3 nm and spherical shape. FTIR analysis emphasized that the existence of carboxylic, primary amine, carbonyl, ester, and ether or ester covalent bonds as functional groups in the bacterial extract were responsible for nanoparticle formation.138 Furthermore, Chatterjee et al. (2020) demonstrated the synthesis of superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles using extracellular metabolite extracts of the manglicolous fungus named Aspergillus niger BSC-1 strain. The resulting nanoparticles were 20–40 nm in size with an elongated needle or flake-like morphology. FTIR spectra revealed the presence of hydrocarbons; carboxyl, amide II, and amide I bonds; and NADH-dependent hydrolase enzyme in the fungal extract as a reducing agent helped aid the formation of magnetic nanoparticles.114 Furthermore, Mahanty et al. (2019) isolated three filamentous fungi from the Sundarban mangrove ecosystem of India, namely, Phialemoniopsis ocularis, Trichoderma asperellum and Fusarium incarnatum, and utilized their cell filtrate with metabolites for the synthesis of magnetic iron oxide nanoparticles. The resulting nanoparticles were 25, 13.13, and 30.56 nm in size, obtained via the cell filtrate of T. asperellum, P. ocularis and F. incarnatum, with spherical morphology. FTIR analysis emphasized that the cell filtrate contained amide I and II bonds corresponding to the extracellular proteins as reducing agents for the formation of magnetic nanoparticles.119 Moreover, Salem et al. (2019) utilized aqueous brown and red seaweed (algae) extracts, such as Colpomenia sinuosa and Pterocladia capillacea, for the preparation of 11.24–33.71 and 16.85–22.47 nm sized magnetic iron oxide (Fe3O4) nanospheres, respectively. The FTIR results showed that the polysaccharides and hydroxy or sulfate groups present in the algal extract participated in the reduction of iron precursor and the formation of iron oxide nanoparticles.136
Other metal oxide nanoparticles
Apart from these more common metal oxide nanoparticles, other metal oxides, such as magnesium, titanium, cerium, and calcium, were recently synthesized using microbial extracts.
Magnesium oxide
Abdel-Aziz et al. (2020) recently utilized the cell filtrate of the endobacterium Burkholderia rinojensis for the biosynthesis of 26.7 nm sized magnesium oxide nanoparticles with spherical granular morphology. FTIR spectra showed that the bacterial cell filtrate contained proteins with methylene groups and aliphatic amino acid that acted as potential reducing and stabilizing agents for the formation of nanoparticles.144 Likewise, El-Sayyad et al. (2018) synthesized magnesium oxide nanoparticles using melanin pigment extracted from Penicillium chrysogenum fungi along with gamma-ray irradiation. The resulting nanoparticles were 5–12.8 nm in size with spherical morphology. FTIR analysis revealed that the fungal melanin contained functional groups corresponding to indolic, carboxylic, pyrrolic, and methane moieties and aromatic hydrogen–carbon bonds responsible for nanoparticle formation.127 In another example, Pugazhendhi et al. (2019) prepared magnesium oxide nanoparticles using aqueous extracts obtained from a marine brown alga named Sargassum wighitii. The resulting nanoparticles had an average size of 68.06 nm, with a zeta potential of 19.8 mV, indicating high stability with agglomerated and flower-shaped morphology. As expected, the FTIR spectra revealed the presence in the algal extracts of typical reducing agents, such as carbohydrates, saturated primary alcohols, aromatic groups, chlorophyll molecules, and polysaccharides, that helped with nanoparticle formation.143
Titanium dioxide
Agceli et al. (2020) prepared titanium dioxide nanoparticles using soil bacteria named Streptomyces species HC1. Titanium hydroxide was added as a precursor to the bacterial growth medium, where the metabolites of the bacteria reduced the titanium precursor to form spherically shaped, 43–67 nm sized titanium dioxide nanoparticles.149 Similarly, Taran et al. (2018) utilized the metabolite extracts of proteobacteria, named the Halomonas elongata IBRC-M 10214 strain, for the biosynthesis of titanium dioxide nanoparticles. The resulting nanoparticles were spherically shaped and 104.63 nm in size, where the FITR spectra showed that the presence of alkyne, alcohol, alkyl halide, and alkene groups in the extract were responsible for nanoparticle formation.156 Furthermore, Rajakumar et al. (2012) synthesized novel 62–74 nm sized, rutile phase, spherical and oval-shaped titanium dioxide nanoparticles via the mycelium of Aspergillus flavus fungi. The fungal metabolites, detected by FTIR, containing peroxo, proteins with peptide linkages, maleic anhydride, carbonyl, amide I, and amide II groups, are responsible for reducing and stabilizing agents for the formation of nanoparticles.133 Surprisingly, algal extracts were not widely used to synthesize titanium dioxide nanoparticles, which will be a potential area of research in the future.
Cerium and other oxide nanoparticles
In addition, spherically shaped cerium oxide nanoparticles were widely synthesized via fungal extracts in recent times.196 Venkatesh et al. (2016) used the aqueous extract of plant pathogenic fungi named Fusarium solani to form spherical, 20–30 nm sized ceria nanoparticles. The FTIR spectra demonstrated that nanoparticle formation was due to the presence of proteins, amines, and heterocyclic compounds in the extract as reducing and stabilizing agents.145 Moreover, Gopinath et al. (2015) utilized the cell culture filtrate of Aspergillus niger for the preparation of 5–20 nm sized, cubic structure and spherically shaped ceria nanoparticles. The FTIR spectra exclusively revealed that the hydroxyl molecules present in the fungal extract served as a potential reducing and stabilizing agent for nanoparticle formation.150 Likewise, extracts from bacterial strains such as Desulfosporosinus species (1.5–2.5 nm sized, spherical)158 and Shewanella oneidensis were used for the synthesis of uranium dioxide (uraninite) nanoparticles,161 whereas manganese oxide nanoparticles (amorphous spherical) were synthesized via Shewanella loihica.164 Similarly, fungal extract from Fusarium oxysporum was used to effectively synthesize bismuth oxide and barium titanate (BaTiO3) nanoparticles, while antimony oxide (Sb2O3) nanoparticles were synthesized using Saccharomyces cerevisae extracts.154
Novel metal and metal oxide nanoparticles
Recently, numerous nanocomposites were synthesized using microbes as novel nanoparticles for various biomedical and environmental applications. Tuo et al. (2015) prepared palladium–iron oxide (Fe3O4), gold–iron oxide, and palladium–gold–iron oxide magnetic nanocomposites using bacterial cells of the Shewanella oneidensis MR-1 strain. The palladium–iron oxide sample was identified to be both spherical and rod shaped with an average particle diameter of 5.5 nm (spherical), 100–200 nm in length, and 7–17 nm in width (rod). Contrarily, gold–iron oxide and palladium–gold–iron oxide magnetic nanocomposites contain spherically shaped nanoparticles of 15.4 nm and 8.3 nm, whereas the nanorods possess lengths of 140–190 nm and 200–300 nm as well as widths of 10–18 nm and 8–18 nm, respectively. The FTIR spectra demonstrated that the bacterial extract contained amides II and III, carboxyl groups, fatty acids, and carbohydrates as functional groups, which acted as reducing, capping, and stabilizing agents for nanocomposite formation.166 Similarly, Araujo et al. (2018) synthesized copper oxide nanocomposite via bacterial cellulose fibrils using a hydrothermal approach. The cellulose fibrils were extracted from Gluconacetobacter hansenii, and the nanocomposites were nanometers in diameter with interwoven fiber networks. The FTIR spectra are a useful tool for analyzing the bond vibrations characteristic of the functional groups present. The FTIR results showed that the alkanes, asymmetrical hydrocarbons, and alcoholic groups present in the bacterial cellulose were responsible for forming the bio-nanocomposite.171 Likewise, Sharma et al. (2018) prepared titanium dioxide nanoparticles using the aqueous green algal extract of Chlorella pyrenoidosa and deposited them on the surface of graphene oxide sheets to form novel nanocomposites. The biosynthesized titanium dioxide nanoparticles were 50 nm in size and spherical in shape with pure tetragonal anatase crystalline phase.148 Moreover, Samuel et al. (2018) demonstrated the synthesis of a novel bio-nanocomposite by integrating graphene oxide and fungal hyphae. The fungal hyphae were developed from the MSR3 strain of Neurospora discreta and TEM analysis showed the irregular, non-homogeneous, and rough surface of the nanocomposite. FTIR analysis emphasized that the polysaccharides, amides of protein and chitin, and carbonyl, epoxy and alkoxy functional groups were responsible for nanocomposite formation.160 All these studies revealed that the specific biomolecules from the microbes were beneficial for the formation of metallic nanoparticles.
Mechanism of microbe mediated nanoparticle synthesis
The most significant aspect of microbe-mediated nanoparticle synthesis is the reduction in their toxicity and increment in their biological activity, such as bioavailability, biocompatibility, and bioreactivity.197 The surface functional groups in the microbial extracts reduce and stabilize the precursor as an encapsulating agent to form nanoparticles, which help them to internalize into cells with high biocompatibility and bioavailability.165 In specific microbes, bacteria possess the ability to precipitate metals to form nanoparticles and can be beneficial for large-scale nanoparticle production with minimal expensive/hazardous chemical usage.184,198 Furthermore, fungal extracts were identified to possess enhanced intracellular metal uptake capacity, with the existence of several specific enzymes and fungal cultivation over the inorganic substrate surface to form nanoparticles with distinct shapes and sizes.198–200 Furthermore, algae are beneficial for reducing toxic by-products and yield colloidal biocompatible nanoparticles.201 However, these microbes possess limitations that deter their use in the commercial or large-scale industrial production of nanoparticles. In general, bacteria-mediated nanoparticle synthesis is time-consuming and is highly tedious to control the resulting nanoparticles’ size, crystallinity, and morphology.202 Likewise, fungal synthesis also requires a long reaction time and a purification step to yield pure nanoparticles. Additionally, there are difficulties in the down-stream process that limit its use as a potential alternative to conventional synthesis approaches.203–205 In addition, algal extracts are used to synthesize only a few metallic nanoparticles as they do not possess specific biomolecules to reduce or stabilize metallic precursors for nanosized particle formation.206 Thus, it is necessary to focus on overcoming these limitations to utilize the microbe mediated biosynthesis approach as a potential alternative to conventional nanoparticle synthesis methods in the future.
The specific mechanism of nanoparticle formation by microbial extracts is the most crucial unanswered question in the biosynthesis approach. It is noteworthy that identifying specific biomolecules present in the microbes that are responsible for nanoparticle formation may help to improve the synthesis method, and thus, extracting and producing them on a large scale will eventually reduce the reaction time207 and price. However, Tables 1–3 show us that almost all the nanoparticles are formed by the synergistic effect of several biomolecules or metabolites present in the microbial extracts.208 It can be noted that proteins, enzymes, and certain electron donors, such as NADH, present in the bacterial extracts are responsible for nanoparticle formation.209 Likewise, complex functional groups as well as proteins, amino acids, and enzymes in the fungal extract enable nanoparticle formation,210 whereas polysaccharides, pigments and certain functional groups in algal extracts can lead to nanoparticle production.211 These biomolecules initially reduce the metallic precursor to form ions of metals to form nanosized particles. Later, the metabolites/biomolecules degrade due to synthesis parameters such as temperature, pH or time, and bind to the nanoparticle surface to control their size as stabilizing or capping agents with regards to metal nanoparticles.173,194 In metal oxide nanoparticles, the degradation of biomolecules donates oxygen to the metal particles, reduces their size to the nano dimension, and stabilizes them to prevent agglomeration.212 However, the exact mechanism of action is still unclear as there is no specific equipment to analyze the in situ biosynthesis of nanoparticles, a topic that deserves more attention in the near future.
Plant extract mediated synthesis
It can be noted that the microbe-based synthesis protocols started to be reported in 1989 or earlier. In contrast, the plant-mediated biological synthesis of nanoparticles began only in the year 2002.213 However, the major drawbacks of microbe-mediated nanoparticle synthesis are the obligatory constraints of aseptic conditions and complex procedures, such as microbial isolation, growth optimization, and maintenance, that require trained staff and longer reaction times, thus raising the scaling-up cost.214 On the other hand, plant-mediated nanoparticle synthesis can be completed within a few minutes or hours, depending on the types of plant used and the concentration of phytochemicals.213 Moreover, plant sources are easily available in nature and they have simple, swift and straightforward reactions. Interestingly, the inherent safety of plant-mediated synthesis makes it a preferable scale-up production method for biocompatible nanoparticles at the industrial level.10,35,214,215
Metal nanoparticles
Plant extract-mediated synthesis of metal nanoparticles is based on the reduction principle, where the plant biomolecules reduce the metal cations and turn them into zero-valent nanoparticles.213 These zero-valent nanoparticles tend to immobilize and agglomerate, which creates an obstacle for practical applications.51 Fortunately, the active biomolecules of the plant can also act as stabilizers to maintain the colloidal stability of the nanoparticles. Plant parts, such as the leaf, fruit, stem, root or tuber, bark powder, latex, fruit peel, and seeds, can be the sources of these active biomolecules.215Table 4 provides a list of current plant extract-mediated syntheses of metallic nanoparticles.
Table 4 Summary of various metal and metal oxide nanoparticles synthesized from plant extracts




Nanoparticles
Size and shape
Plant extracts
Reaction conditions
Applications
Ref.




NP = nanoparticle, NF = nanoflower.




AuNP
51.8 ± 0.8 nm; spherical; monodisperse

Ziziphus zizyphus (Ennab)
1 mM HAuCl4:plant extract = 9:1 (v/v), boiling for 5 min
Useful as drug nanocarrier; no antibacterial or antifungal activity detected

15



AuNP
40–150 nm; spherical, hexagonal and triangular

Minosa tenuiflora

5.3 mM or 2.6 mM HAuCl4:32.5 mg mL−1 plant extract = 2.75:1 (v/v), 25 °C and 3000 rpm
Proposed to be useful as drug nanocarrier and fluorescent probe

27



AgNP
70.7 ± 22

Aloe vera

0.3 mol AgNO3:plant extract = 1:1 (v/v), temperature (100, 150 and 200 °C), vigorous stirring and 30 min
Antibacterial effect towards Staphylococcus epidermidis, Pseudomonas aeruginosa

35





192.0 ± 53 nm; spherical




Minimal toxicity towards human mammalian peripheral blood mononuclear cells




AgNP
19–125 nm spherical

Salvia spinosa

1 mM AgNO3:plant extract = 9:1 (v/v), 27 ± 2 °C, constant rotation and 6 h
Antibacterial effect towards Escherichia coli, Bacillus subtilis and Bacillus vallismortis

46



AgNP
10–20 nm

Ocimum sanctum (Tulsi)
2 mM AgNO3:plant extract = 5:1 (v/v), temperature (5–35 °C) and time (1, 2, 3, 4 h)
Antibacterial effect against E. coli

59



AgNP
∼24 nm

Impatiens balsamina and Lantana camara
(1,2,3,4,5) mM AgNO3:plant extract = 1:1 (v/v), 60 °C in dark and 5 h
Antibacterial effect against S. aureus and E. coli

68



AgNP
26.9 nm

Lycopersicon esculentum

AgNO3:plant extract = 6.8:200 (w/v), 50 °C, 1500 rpm and 2 h
Negative effect in callogenesis and organogenesis

80



AgNP
5–25 nm

Cassia occidentalis linn (Caesalpiniaceae)
1 mM AgNO3:plant extract = 9:1 (v/v), room temperature and 24 h
Antibacterial effect towards S. aureus, S. typhi, E. coli and K. pneumonia

88



PdNP
59–169.24 nm

Chrysophyllum cainito

8.07 mM Pd(II) solution:plant extract, 70–80 °C
Catalyst for Suzuki and Heck coupling reactions

95



PdNP
12.3 nm

Pimpinella tirupatiensis

5 mM PdCl2:plant extract = 1:2 (v/v), 60 °C and 2 h
Photocatalytic degradation of organic Congo red dye

100



CuNP
5–30 nm

Cassia occidentalis linn (Caesalpiniaceae)
1 mM Cu(NO3)2:plant extract = 5:1 (v/v), microwave and 4 h
Antibacterial effect against S. aureus, Salmonella typhi, E. coli and Klebsiella pneumonia

88



CuNP
4.7–17.4 nm hemispherical

Tilia

CuSO4·5H2O:plant extract = 1:4 (v/v), 80 °C and stirring for 25 min
Anticancer and antibacterial effect

110



FeNP
∼70 nm

Eucalyptus robusta

1 mM (NH4)2Fe(SO4):plant extract = 1:1 (v/v), 40 °C and 30 min
Antibacterial effect towards P. aeruginosa, E. coli, S. aureus and B. subtilis

115



ZnONP
51.2 nm, 41.0 nm, 51.6 nm

Matricaria chamomilla L. (chamomile flower), Olea europaea (olive leaves) and Lycopersicon esculentum M. (red tomato fruits)
1 M ZnO:plant extract = 1:1, 100 rpm and 4 h
Antibacterial effect

121



CuONP
80 nm
Walnut leaf
Cu(NO3)2:plant extract = 1:10 (w/v), 300–500 °C, 500 rpm and 2 h
Antioxidant and antimicrobial activity

126



CuONP
30 nm

Enicostemma axillare

5 mM CuSO4:plant extract = 10:1 (v/v)
—

130



Fe2O3NP
∼20 nm spherical

Glycosmis mauritiana

1 M FeCl3·6H2O + 2 M FeCl2·4H2O:plant extract = 5:1 (v/v), 80 °C and 10 min
Antibacterial activity against Bacillus cereus, B. subtilis, Enterococcus faecalis, E. coli, K. pneumonia, Micrococcus luteus, Proteus mirabilis, Proteus vulgaris, Pseudomonas fluorescence, S. aureus and Vibrio fluvialis

137



Fe2O3NP
25–55 nm

Punica granatum (pomegranate)
1 M FeCl3:plant extract = 2:1 (v/v), 70 °C and 15 min
Photocatalyst to degrade dyes in wastewater

142



Fe3O4NP
10 nm

Phyllanthus niruri

0.2 M (NH4)2Fe(SO4)2·6H2O + 0.1 M NH4Fe(SO4)2·12H2O:plant extract = 2:1 (v/v), 30 °C and 30 min
Antibacterial activity against E. coli and P. aeroginosa

146



MgONP
50 nm

Costus pitus D. Don

0.1 M Mg(NO3)2·6H2O:plant extract = 5:1 (v/v), 80 °C and 4 h
Antimicrobial and anticancer effects

153



MgONF
<20 nm

Rosmarinus officinalis L. (rosemary)
1 mM MgO:plant extract = 1:1 (v/v), 70 °C, 6000 rpm and 4 h
Antibacterial effect against Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae (Xoo) strain GZ 0005

157



CeO2
18.7 nm

Lycopersicon esculentum

Ce(NO3)3·6H2O:plant extract = 8.68:200 (w/v), 50 °C, 1500 rpm and 2 h
Callogenesis and organogenesis effect

80



CaONP
58 nm cubic and hexagonal

Cissus quadrangularis

0.2 M CaCl2 + plant extract = 1:1 (v/v), 80 °C and 1 h
Antibacterial effect against S. aureus, E. coli, K. pneumoniae, P. aeruginosa, S. typhi, Shigella dysenteriae and Vibrio cholerae

163





Gold nanoparticles
Recently, gold nanoparticles have been intensively explored in the fields of drug delivery, photothermal therapy, imaging, sensing, catalysis, and antimicrobials.215,216 Chloroauric acid (HAuCl4) is the common precursor used to synthesize AuNPs, where the phytochemicals reduce HAuCl4 to form zero-valent gold atoms, which later undergo nucleation to form nanosized particles.15 In recent times, Mimosa tenuiflora bark extract, which was rich in polyphenolic molecules, was used to synthesize gold nanoparticles. In this study, zerovalent metal atoms (Au0) are formed when the hydroxyl groups present in the polyphenolic molecules are deprotonated and donate electrons to Au3+ ions.27 The synthesized AuNPs were spherical in shape with sizes ranging from 40 to 150 nm. Furthermore, it can be noted that a higher gold precursor concentration can lead to the formation of larger-sized AuNPs. Furthermore, AuNPs with a size of less than 30 nm exhibited a visible ruby-red color due to the localized surface plasmon resonance.15 Moreover, the plant extract-mediated synthesis of AuNPs can be used in food packaging and as a coating material in fabrics due to their active antibacterial and antioxidant activity.215 Interestingly, a study reported that the prepared AuNPs were harmless to bacteria and fungi irrespective of their sizes. It has been suggested that, instead of AuNPs, it could be gold ion residue remaining in the resultant AuNPs that exhibits antimicrobial and antifungal activity in other studies.15 Therefore, purification could be a crucial step to determine the future application of the prepared nanoparticles.
Silver nanoparticles
Silver (Ag) and silver salts have long been recognized as essential agents for hygiene and the healing of wounds due to their prominent antibacterial effect without a cytotoxic effect.10,46,213,215 Also, AgNPs are widely employed in the areas of pharmaceutics, agriculture, water detoxification, air filtration, the textile industries, and oxidation catalysis.213Aloe vera, Salvia spinosa, Ocinum sanctum (Tulsi), Impatiens balsamina and Lantana camara are the plants that are extensively used to synthesize AgNPs.35,46,59,68 It was reported that polyphenolic components, such as flavonoids and terpenoids, could reduce the Ag ions and stabilize the resulting AgNPs.68 Besides, the sizes of the produced AgNPs were in the range of 10 to 190 nm. Furthermore, the morphology of the AgNPs can be in various forms, such as a sphere, trapezoid, prism, and rod, depending on the reaction conditions.213 Furthermore, AgNPs have a yellowish brown color and absorb visible light at a wavelength of 400–500 nm, as shown in Fig. 3.10 Moreover, AgNPs at a low concentration of 10 μg mL−1 had similar antibacterial effects to 10% of DMSO, a well-known antimicrobial agent.88 In addition, Aritonang et al. (2019) demonstrated that the smaller-sized Ag nanoparticles could exhibit antibacterial effects due to their ability to internalize into the bacterial membrane with ease, destroying the respiratory chain and, thus, inhibiting cell respiration to cause bacterial cell death.68
 Fig. 3  Schematics of plant extract mediated biosynthesis of silver nanoparticles and their antibacterial activity. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 14 with permission from Springer, copyright 2019. 
Other metal nanoparticles
Among metallic nanoparticles, the palladium nanoparticle (PdNP) is an efficient catalyst in fuel cells and organic reactions. Phytochemical extracts from Pimpinella tirupatiensis and Chrysophyllum caimito, which are rich in polyphenols, were used to synthesize PdNPs.95,100 The resulting PdNPs were in the range of 12 to 170 nm with an absorbance value of 260 nm. Interestingly, a recent study identified that the size of PdNPs could be reduced by 2.85-fold when the concentration of plant extract was increased by 2-fold.95 It was also reported that the surface of PdNPs was negatively charged, which induced a repulsive interaction to maintain a stable colloidal suspension of NPs.100 Furthermore, PdNPs were identified to possess an efficient nano-catalytic ability by shuttling electrons from donor to acceptor due to its high surface area, providing abundant active sites for interaction.100 The resulting PdNPs were successfully used as a catalyst in Suzuki and Heck coupling reactions and involved in converting 3- and 4-nitrophenols to the safer corresponding aminophenol.95 Similarly, the resulting PdNPs also possess an excellent catalytic property to degrade a highly toxic organic pollutant, namely, Congo red dye, within 11 min.100
Copper nanoparticles (CuNPs) have diverse applications, including catalysis, water treatment, information storage, solar cells, and disinfection. It is noteworthy that copper is 6 times cheaper than silver and 24 times cheaper than gold.215 The relatively low cost of copper has intrigued scientists to investigate significant ways to reduce its toxicity, which would be beneficial for pharmaceutical, health care, and environmental health areas.110 The common precursor salts used for the biosynthesis of CuNPs are copper sulphates and copper nitrate.215 Although copper metal possesses efficient antimicrobial properties, it is susceptible to oxygen, making it difficult to handle in air.110 Thus, the plant mediated synthesis of CuNPs can help to mask them from oxidation and improve their biocompatibility at the same time.215 The phytochemicals extracted from Cassia occidentalis linn, Tilia, Ocinum sanctum and Nerium oleander were recently used to synthesize CuNPs.88,110,217,218 The phytosynthesized CuNPs are proved to absorb visible light at wavelengths of 535 to 563 nm to form 5 to 77 nm sized particles. Moreover, it has been reported that CuNPs can also absorb in the ultraviolet region (range 325–270 nm), depending on their size and functional groups.88,218
In addition, nano-sized iron nanoparticles (FeNPs) have promising advantages that can combat environmental pollution due to their magnetic properties as well as the large surface area to volume ratio to offer abundant reactive sites for interaction. Recently, FeNPs were investigated for their antibacterial effect, which suggested that they exhibited an antimicrobial property via the Fenton reaction. In the presence of FeNPs, hydrogen peroxide, one of microorganism's metabolic products, is converted into highly toxic hydroxyl free radicals and singlet oxygen, which can cause oxidative stress and inhibit bacterial growth. Besides, it was reported that high concentrations of the phytochemical extract and iron precursor would result in larger nanoparticles with low colloidal stability.115
Metal oxide nanoparticles
The most common metal oxide nanoparticles that are synthesized via plant extracts are zinc, copper, iron, cerium, calcium, magnesium, and titanium dioxide. These metal oxide nanoparticles possess significant biomedical properties that plant extracts can enhance with reduced toxicity.
Zinc oxide
Zinc oxide nanoparticles (ZnONPs) have several distinct applications, such as semiconductors, UV absorbers, electroluminescent and antibacterial materials. In recent times, ZnONPs have been extensively synthesized using the leaf extracts of Aloe barbadensis, Abutilon indicum, Melia azedarach, and Indigofera tinctorial. Likewise, ZnONPs were recently biosynthesized via extracts of Matricaria chamomilla L. (chamomile flower), Olea europaea (olive leaves), Lycopersicon esculentum M. (red tomato fruits). It has been reported that the biosynthesis of ZnONPs was effective due to the presence of ascorbic acid in the tomato extract as well as the presence of flavonoids and glycoside in olive leaves and chamomile flower extracts, which acted as reducing and capping agents in the formation of nanosized particles, compared with chemical synthesis approaches. The resulting ZnONPs were about 50 nm in size and absorbed electromagnetic radiation at wavelengths of 380–386 nm. It was found that the resulting ZnONPs exhibited an excellent antibacterial effect by generating reactive oxygen species, such as singlet oxygen (1O2), superoxide (˙O2−), hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), and the hydroxyl radical (˙OH), which could damage bacterial DNA and severely disrupt the bacterial membrane to cause cytoplasm leakage and bacterial death. Moreover, the physicochemical properties of ZnONPs, such as size, shape, surface charge, the surface to volume ratio, and the number of oxygen vacancy sites, can also affect their antibacterial property.121 For instance, ZnONPs with a small size (below 30 nm) and positive surface charge are proved to exhibit higher antibacterial effects.215
Copper oxide
Copper oxide nanoparticles (CuONPs) have been widely used as batteries, heterogeneous catalysts, gas sensors, high-temperature superconductors, and tools for solar energy conversion. Also, they are used as drug delivery and imaging agents in the biomedicine field.126 However, CuONPs have been reported to be more toxic than other metal oxide nanoparticles. Thus, functionalizing their surfaces with biomolecules extracted from plants is proposed to reduce their cytotoxicity. The main precursors for plant-mediated synthesis of CuONPs are copper sulfate and copper nitrate trihydrate.215 Currently, CuONPs are biosynthesized using walnut leaf and Enicostemma axillare.126,130 Walnut leaf was reported to contain numerous bioactive compounds, such as malic acid, 3-O-caffeoylquinic acids, quercetin O-pentoside, sucrose, disaccharide, α-tocopherol and tocopherol isomer, and phenolic compounds, which were proved to possess the ability to reduce and stabilize copper precursors to form nanosized particles. The sizes of the resulting CuONPs were in the range of 30 to 80 nm, with absorbance at 226–234 nm. The synthesized CuONPs are an economical antimicrobial agent and have a longer shelf life than other organic antimicrobial agents.126
Iron oxide
There are three forms of iron oxide, namely, magnetite (Fe3O4), hematite or iron(III) oxide (Fe2O3) and iron(II) oxide (FeO), where each of them has its own beneficial functionality. Fe3O4 NPs are known as superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles and are widely used in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), drug delivery, and hyperthermia therapy due to their biocompatibility and magnetic properties.137,215 Similarly, Fe2O3 NPs are mainly used in wastewater treatment and biomedical applications, as they possess exclusive magnetic properties. Likewise, FeONPs are mainly used as a photocatalyst in environmental remediation as well as biomedical fields.215 It can be noted that ferric chloride and iron sulphate are the essential precursors for plant-mediated iron oxide nanoparticle synthesis. Plant extracts of Glycosmis mauritiana, Punica granatum, and Phyllanthus niruri have been extensively used in recent times for the formation of iron oxide nanoparticles.137,142,146 All these iron oxide nanoparticles are in the size range of 10 to 50 nm with an absorbance value in the range of 330 to 400 nm. Furthermore, Phyllanthus niruri was reported to contain active phytochemicals, such as flavonoids, alkaloids, terpenoids, lignans, polyphenols, tannins, coumarins, and saponins, that could act as both reducing and capping agents in plant extract mediated synthesis.146 Furthermore, Fe3O4 NPs are considered to be a promising magnetic antimicrobial agent to generate reactive oxygen species to inhibit pathogens.215
Other metal oxide nanoparticles
Magnesium oxide (MgO) has various applications, such as an adsorbent for toxic chemicals, a photocatalyst, refractory materials, paints and superconductors.153,215 It is currently used in the medicinal field to treat various diseases, including as an antacid for heartburn and indigestion.153 The most common precursor for the phytosynthesis of MgONPs is magnesium nitrate.215 Recently, plant extracts of Costus pitus D. Don and rosemary were used to synthesize MgONPs between 20 and 50 nm in size with an enhanced antimicrobial property against Gram positive S. aureus bacteria as well as anticancer activities.153,157,215 In our previous studies, we have also prepared spherical and hexagonal shaped, 18–80 nm sized MgO nanoparticles using crude phytochemicals extracted from Amaranthus tricolor, Andrographis paniculata and Amaranthus blitum.219 Furthermore, we have also prepared MgO nanorods using aqueous phytochemicals extracted from the leaves of Eucalyptus globus.220
Likewise, cerium oxide (CeO2) or nanoceria is amongst the most utilized rare earth compound due to its multiple oxidation states. It has oxidation states that can switch between (+3) and (+4) to form Ce2O3 and CeO2, respectively. Besides, CeO2 is widely used in various areas, including fuel cells, optical devices, gas sensors, catalysis, ultraviolet absorbers, hydrogen storage materials, polishing materials, and biomedical applications.215,221 Although CeO2 might be considered a toxic substance, biosynthesized CeO2NPs showed less or nontoxicity towards normal cells in in vitro analysis.215 It can be noted that cerium(III) chloride (CeCl3) and cerium(III) nitrate hexahydrate (Ce(NO3)3·6H2O) are the most common precursors that are used to synthesize CeO2NPs. Recently, CeO2NPs were synthesized using phytochemicals extracted from different plants, such as Gloriosa superba, Acalypha indica, Aloe vera and Lycopersicon esculentum.80,222 The resulting CeO2NPs are 18.71 nm in size and absorb at a wavelength of 298 nm.80 Furthermore, the synthesized CeO2NPs exhibited an antibacterial effect222 with prominent antioxidant properties.80 The antioxidant potential of CeO2NPs is due to their multiple oxidation states that can lead to an excellent reactive oxygen species (ROS) scavenging ability. Furthermore, cerium possesses two different oxidation states, which include Ce3+ (Ce2O3) and Ce4+ (CeO2). Therefore, nanoceria is bestowed with redox potential and, thus, can tolerate free radicals. Hence, CeO2NPs possess the exclusive ability to promote organogenesis of nodal and leaf explants with 91% of callogenesis in tissues compared with the control group (N6 medium without NPs), leading to 39% of callogenesis.80 Additionally, calcium oxide (CaO) nanoparticles are significantly used in the fields of disease diagnosis, therapeutics, catalysis, microelectronics, and antimicrobial applications.163 It can be noted that very few studies are available on the phytosynthesis of CaO nanoparticles that have utilized phytochemical extracts of Cissus quadrangularis and calcium chloride as the precursor.163,215 The resulting CaONPs were about 58 nm in size with cubic and hexagonal morphology, exhibiting surface plasmon resonance peaks between 400 and 450 nm.163 The synthesized CaONPs demonstrated excellent potential in the medical field, such as swift healing of wounds, and were proposed for future incorporation into fabrics as an antibacterial protecting coating.163,215
Novel metal and metal oxide nanoparticles
Several novel metal and metal oxide nanocomposites are synthesized via phytochemicals extracted from plants, as summarized in Table 5. Recently, copper oxide–carbon (CuO–C) nanocomposites were synthesized using the aqueous leaf extract of Adhatoda vasica Nees as the reducing and capping agents and the source of carbon. Alkaloids, such as vasicine and vasicinone, tannins, saponins, proteins, and phenols, exist in the leaf extract. They possess the ability to reduce copper sulphate to copper and, at the same time, act as capping agents to prevent further nanocomposite agglomeration. Moreover, amino acids, namely, glycine; vitamin C; and sugars existing in the leaf extract also served as the carbon source. These CuO–C nanocomposites exhibited significant antimicrobial activities against Gram-negative P. aeruginosa, E. coli and K. pneumoniae bacteria, the Gram-positive S. aureus bacteria, and Aspergillus niger and Candida albicans fungal species. Furthermore, CuO–C nanocomposites and nanosized cellulose papers were used as a substrate to prepare an eco-friendly supercapacitor, which could be a potential alternative to conventional supercapacitors.12 Another study utilized styrene maleic anhydride (SMA) as the polymer matrix to synthesize ZnO–SMA nanocomposite. The polymer matrix offered enhanced mobility of electrons, where the Piper nigrum extracts were used for ZnO nanoparticle synthesis, which were incorporated into the matrix to enhance the supercapacitor behavior of the nanocomposite. The study emphasized that the ZnO–SMA nanocomposite was highly compatible with fibroblast cells and was proposed to be useful as an energy-storage device or a bio-supercapacitor, which could be incorporated into the human body or as medical implants that could be charged by fetching power from within the body's cells.21
Table 5 Plant mediated synthesis of novel metal and metal oxide nanocomposites




Nanocomposites (NC)
Size and shape
Plant extracts
Reaction conditions
Applications
Ref.




C = carbon, NC = nanocomposite, SMA = styrene maleic anhydride copolymer/noncovalent bonding.




CuO–C NC
7–11 nm

Adhatoda vasica

0.01 M of CuSO4·5H2O:plant extract = 5:4 (v/v), room temperature, stirred 0.5 h and incubated for 24 h
Antibacterial effect against E. coli, P. aeruginosa, K. pneumoniae and S. aureus, antifungal effect against A. niger and C. albicans

12



ZnO–SMA NC
20 nm, flake-like

Piper nigrum

1 mM ZnNO3:plant extract = 10 mL:5 drops, 70–80 °C, stir at 400 °C for 3 h and add 0.1 g of ZnO + 10 mL styrene maleic anhydride at 160 °C for 2 h
Supercapacitor

21



Cu–GO–MnO2 NC
50–70 nm spherical

Cuscuta reflexa

1 g of GO/MnO2 + 0.08 M CuCl2:plant extract = 1:2.5 (v/v), reflux for 4 h
Reusable catalyst reducing organic pollutants

34



Fe3O4–TiO2–Au–Pt NC
54 nm
Dahlia flower
1 g of Fe3O4–TiO2 + 1 wt% Au–Pt:plant extract = 10:1 (v/v), room temperature and stirring
Reusable catalyst for reduction of organic dye pollutants and glycerol oxidation reaction

45



RGO/FePd
10–50 nm (FePd)
Green tea
GO:0.5 g L−1 of FeCl3·H2O:plant extract = 1:1:2 (v/v/v), 80 °C for 3 h
Removal of organic contaminants such as antibiotic rifampicin

58





Likewise, copper–graphene oxide–manganese dioxide (Cu–GO–MnO2) nanocomposites were synthesized using the phytochemicals extracted from Cuscuta reflexa. CuNPs are well known for their high catalytic activity, specific surface area and strong electron transfer abilities. Thus, they are often used as catalysts for the degradation of organic dye pollutants.34 However, the agglomeration of metal nanoparticles always results in the deterioration of catalytic activity. Also, metal nanocomposites have not been commercialized due to the difficulties in separation, recycling and reuse at the end of the reaction. Hence, immobilization of the metal NPs on the surface of titanium dioxide (TiO2), silica (SiO2), manganese dioxide (MnO2), and carbon support materials was carried out and reported in recent studies to attain high activity and recovery.45 Another recent study combined the advantages of MnO2 as an active catalyst and the excellent dispersibility of GO as the support for the immobilization of metal NPs. The Cu–GO–MnO2 nanocomposite was identified to be a reusable heterogeneous catalyst with high catalytic activity for the degradation of toxic organic dyes and nitro compounds at room temperature.34
The major advantage of using magnetic nanoparticles is their ease of recovery by merely using a strong external magnetic field, thus allowing their reuse in successive cycles.76 In a recent study, iron oxide (Fe3O4)–TiO2–gold–platinum (Fe3O4–TiO2–Au–Pt) nanocomposites were prepared using extracts from the dahlia flower. The biosynthesized Fe3O4 NPs were immobilized on the surface of the TiO2 support material as a potential catalyst for glycerol biomass conversion and organic dye pollutant degradation.45 Glycerol is the byproduct of fatty acid and biodiesel production, where glycerol can be converted into various value-added chemicals and intermediate compounds, such as glyceric acid, glycolic acid, tartronic acid, glyceraldehyde, dihydroxyacetone, lactic acid and oxalic acid via the glycerol oxidation reaction.45 On the other hand, 4-nitrophenol and organic dyes, such as methylene blue, methyl orange and Congo red, are popular toxic pollutants, which can be reduced using Fe3O4–TiO2–Au–Pt nanocomposite and are also useful for commercial applications, including corrosion inhibition, antipyretic drugs and photographic developers.45 Furthermore, it was reported that the Fe3O4–TiO2–Au–Pt nanocomposite maintained 98% of catalytic activity in the reduction of organic compounds even after six cycles, which confirmed the stability and efficiency of the resulting nanocomposites for toxic organic dye degradation.45
Mechanism of plant extract mediated nanoparticle synthesis
Plant extract mediated nanoparticle synthesis has been explored for more than a decade; however, the exact mechanism of nanoparticle formation is still yet to be understood. Naturally, plants possess the ability to actively take up and reduce metal ions in soils during the detoxification process.213 The same principle has been identified to be applicable in plant extract mediate nanoparticle synthesis. According to previous studies,59,212,215 the mechanism of nanoparticle formation generally involves four stages: reduction of metal ions, clustering or nucleation, growth of the nucleus via an Ostwald ripening process, and the stabilization stage that defines the final shape of the nanoparticles. Various studies have reported that phytochemicals, such as methylglyoxal (NADH)-dependent reductase, terpenoids, terpene, sugars, alkaloids, flavonoids (flavone), phenols, saponins, tannins, ketone, aldehydes, carboxylic acids (e.g. ascorbic acid), amides, carbohydrates, and proteins, play a dual role by acting as both reducing and stabilizing agents.46,121,212,215 Furthermore, several studies have indicated that polyphenols, flavonoids, tannins, ascorbic acids, and sugars in plant extracts serve as reducing agents.10,110,126,213 Hydroxyl (–OH), carbonyl (CO), amino (–NH2), and methoxide (CH3O−) groups in the plant extracts are the stabilizing agents and functional groups responsible for nanoparticle formation in plant extract mediated nanoparticle synthesis.215 For instance, flavonoids with hydroxyl groups can reduce metal ions via the tautomeric transformation from enol-form to keto-form, releasing the reactive hydrogen atom and transferring electrons to the metal ions for metal nanoparticle formation.59,212 It was suggested that the catechol moiety of flavonoids participated in metal ion reduction as lower energy is required to dissociate the O–H bonds in the catechol moiety, compared with other –OH groups present in the flavonoids.59 Furthermore, variations in the reaction conditions, such as types or concentrations of precursor and extract, temperature, and pH, can lead to alterations in the rate and yield of production as well as the characteristics of the end products.215 For example, glucose mediated synthesis was reported to yield metallic nanoparticles with different morphologies, whereas fructose could result in the monodisperse form of gold and silver nanoparticles.212 Moreover, it can be noted that smaller nanosized particles with uniform size distribution are formed at higher temperatures, where the phytochemicals will degrade into simpler forms.59 Besides, numerous studies suggested that the pH could alter the electrical charges of a biomolecule, which could eventually change its reducing and capping ability and later influence the properties of the resulting nanoparticles.59,180Table 6 summarizes the probable mechanisms of metallic nanoparticle formation facilitated by microbes and plants.
Table 6 Mechanism of metallic nanoparticle formation via various biological sources,4 Reproduced with permission from Springer (2011)




Biological sources
Mechanism




Bacteria
Metal ion reduction by exclusive proteins, including nitrate dependent reductase or NADH dependent reductase


Algae
Bio-reduction and nanoparticle stabilization via hydroxyl as a functional group


Fungi
Mineralization via biomimetic approach and exclusive enzymes for metal ion reduction


Yeast
Quinones and cytosolic oxido reductases that are membrane bound


Plants
Secondary metabolites, which include saponins, alkaloid tannins, steroids, and flavonoids as reducing and stabilizing agents




Green synthesis of metal and metal oxide nanoparticles from agricultural waste
One of the significant drawbacks of using plant resources for nanoparticle synthesis is the high volume of agro-waste generated, which unquestionably becomes another source of pollution. The employment of such agro-waste as the significant material for nanoparticle synthesis will eventually minimize pollution and simultaneously benefit waste management. The mechanism of nanoparticle formation based on agriculture or food waste is illustrated in Fig. 4. Recently, the mode of nanoparticle synthesis by agricultural waste has gained attention from researchers, as it is less toxic, environmentally friendly, low cost and most importantly, the sources of bioreducing agents are abundant and easily available.22,24,214,223 The initial steps in this approach are collecting, selecting, categorizing, and washing. The steps for the extraction of biochemicals and biomolecules and nanoparticle formation are similar to that of phytosynthesis.224Table 7 provides a summary of green synthesized metal and metal oxide nanoparticles as well as nanocomposites via agricultural waste.
 Fig. 4  Nanoparticle formation using agriculture/food waste. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 9 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018. 
Table 7 Green synthesis of metal and metal oxide nanoparticles from agricultural waste




Nanoparticles
Size and shape
Plant extract
Reaction conditions
Applications
Ref.




AgNP
20 nm and spherical
Peel waste of Lagenaria siceraria, Luffa cylindrica, Solanum lycopersicum, Solanum melongena and Cucumis sativus
2 mM AgNO3 + plant extract = 1:2.5 (w/v), 80 °C, 10 min
Antibacterial effect against E. coli and K. pneumoniae

10



AgNP
25.8 nm

Rosa damascene waste
0.01 M AgNO3 + plant extract = 3:1 (v/v)
Material as a sensor for H2O2 and vanillin detection

22



AgNP
14.2–22.9 nm and spherical
Coconut (Cocos nucifera) shells
1 mM of AgNO3:10 mg mL−1 plant extract = 100:1 (v/v) in sunlight for 1 h
Antibacterial effect against S. aureus, E. coli, Salmonella typhimurium and Listeria monocytogenes

24 and 25


AuNP
20–25 nm
Grape seeds, skin and stalks
1 mM HAuCl4:plant extract = 2.4:1 (v/v) at room temperature for 5 min
Medical application

41 and 42


FeNP
23 nm at pH 3, 45, 197.5 and 895.8 nm at pH 9
Mango peel
0.05 M of FeCl3·6H2O + plant extract (12 g)
Catalyst for pollutant degradation

51



FeNP
98.8 nm
Tea waste
0.1 M FeSO4 + plant extract = 1:3 (v/v)
Catalyst to remove organic dye as pollutant in water

64



Fe2O3NP
58–78 nm, spherical

Cynometra ramiflora fruit waste
1 M of FeCl3 + 2 M FeCl2:plant extract = 1:1 at room temperature (pH 11)
Photocatalyst for catalytic remediation of polluted water

76



ZnONP
33.1 nm, regular hexagonal

Citrus sinensis peel
12.5 g L−1 of Zn(NO3)2·6H2O:plant extract = 4:1 (v/v) at 600 °C for 2 h
Nanocoating for strawberry preservation

83



Carbon/FeZn NP
126 nm, spherical
Lemon leaves
Carbon + [0.014 M FeSO4·7H2O + 0.2 g ZnCl2·4H2O:plant extract = 1:2 (v/v)] at room temperature for 3 h (250 rpm)
Catalyst to remove organic dye pollutant in water

91





Recently, extracts of various vegetable peel waste, such as Rosa damascene, and coconut shells were used to synthesize 14–25 nm sized AgNPs with antibacterial properties.22,24,214 The phenolic-rich methanolic extract of the coconut shell played a dual role in reducing the silver ions and stabilizing the AgNPs.24 Furthermore, it has been demonstrated that the R. damascene peel waste extract synthesized AgNPs can be helpful as a sensor material for hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) and vanillin detection. Furthermore, it was reported that these AgNPs provided a sensitive and reproducible response for the quantitative determination of H2O2.22 Furthermore, waste extracts from grapes, such as seeds, skin, and stalks, was used to synthesize AuNPs. The extracts of grape waste contain a natural antioxidant named proanthocyanidin, which is used to treat cardiovascular disease, cataracts, and hyperglycemic conditions. The resulting gold nanoparticles were highly biocompatible and could be potentially used in biomedical applications, such as molecular imaging as well as cancer therapy.41
Physically and chemically synthesized iron nanoparticles are intended to aggregate rapidly in the aqueous medium, resulting in reactivity loss.214 Recently, waste extracts from mango peel, tea, fruit, and lemon leaves were employed to synthesize iron and iron oxide nanoparticles. The agro-waste synthesized iron and iron oxide nanoparticles were mainly used as a catalyst in water remediation to degrade organic pollutants.51,64,76,91 In the presence of hydrogen peroxide, the iron nanoparticles are reported to generate hydroxyl radicals for oxidizing recalcitrant dye pollutants via an advanced Fenton process.51 Similarly, ZnONPs were synthesized by using citrus peel extracts, rich in a variety of natural antioxidants. Moreover, these ZnONPs are identified as an efficient antimicrobial agent, and incorporation of these ZnONPs into an edible coating material can inhibit microbial growth on food surfaces by releasing Zn2+ ions from the coating in close contact with ZnONPs.83 Thus, the use of agricultural waste could be considered one of the most promising green synthesis approaches to yield less toxic and large-scale nanoparticles, reduce the cost of raw materials, and decrease agro-waste.
Biomedical application of green synthesized metal-based nanoparticles
Green synthesized metal-based nanoparticles (NPs) combine the unique properties of biocompatibility and nano-scale advantages (e.g. high specific surface area (SSA)) to provide advanced applications in biomedicine, compared with their bulk metals or pristine organic extracts.225,226 Green synthesized nanoparticles are commonly used or under extensive research in diverse applications, including antimicrobial, drug-delivery, bioimaging, biosensing, and hyperthermia therapy, as illustrated in Fig. 5. In this section, microbial and plant-based synthesis of metallic NPs are presented with special highlights towards certain novel biomedical applications.226–228 The environmentally benign approach involved in the biosynthesis of these NPs has been in the focus of researchers to alter the physical and chemical properties of the NPs without toxicity for various biomedical applications. Focusing on the various mechanisms involved in NPs after interacting with biological tissues, the adaptability of biosynthesized nanoparticles towards biomedical systems is investigated to provide further insights into potential future applications with green credentials. Microbial agents, such as bacteria or fungus, and plant extracts facilitate the synthesis of metal nanoparticles (NPs) or metal oxide NPs having medicinal, fluorescent, magnetic or optical properties for use in biomedicine.
 Fig. 5  Green synthesized metal-based nanoparticles in biomedical applications. 
Antimicrobial agents
Antimicrobial activities are obtained from a wide range of green synthesized metallic NPs, such as silver (Ag), gold (Au), zinc (Zn), and iron (Fe), and metal oxide NPs, such as MgO, CaO and CuO. Predominantly, silver nanoparticles (AgNPs) are used to mitigate microbes, as shown in several reports.229–231 For example, different plant- or microbial-based synthesis routes, have been used to synthesize AgNPs having different shapes and sizes for the treatment of microorganisms, such as E. coli, P. aeruginosa, S. aureus and B. sublitis.229 Bindhu et al. (2015) demonstrated the synthesis of ∼15 nm AgNPs using beetroot extracts, to inhibit the growth of both Gram positive (G+) and Gram negative (G−) bacteria, including S. aureus, and E. coli, respectively.8 Also, the fungus Trichoderma viride was used to synthesize AgNPs (5–40 nm), which were synergetically used with different antibiotics to mitigate bacteria.32 Typically, the antimicrobial efficacy of the AgNO depends on its size, pH, ionic strength, and capping agent. For example, smaller particles having a higher SSA penetrate easily into cell membranes, facilitating their disruptive ability.232 Moreover, the amount of Ag ions (Ag+), their affinity to cellular membranes (whether G+ or G−),32,233 and their time of release (e.g. slow release in silver sulfadiazine),234 determine their potency to act as inhibitory agents. For G− microbes, such as E. coli, and P. aeruginosa, strong interactions between Ag+ and the microbial cell wall facilitate the antimicrobial properties.233
Similar to AgNPs, AuNPs have a strong affinity for the cell walls of G− microbes due to the release of positively charged gold ions (Au3+), promoting their antimicrobial ability. For example, AuNPs synthesized from pineapple extracts showed a higher zone of inhibition for G− P. aeruginosa than G+ S. aureus.52 Upon contact with moisture, metal ions from NPs are released, attaching to cell walls via strong electrostatic attractions. The released ions and the NPs themselves accumulate on the outer layers of the cells and subsequently penetrate inside, causing damage to the cellular walls and membranes. Inside the cells, metallic ions bind to enzymes, form complexes with nucleic acids of DNA, and cause the denaturing of proteins, disrupting the overall cellular activity and causing cell death.235,236 The various interactions of NPs on cells to facilitate their degeneration is illustrated in Fig. 6.
 Fig. 6  Schematic illustration depicting the various mechanisms of antimicrobial activities using metal and metal oxide nanoparticles. This figure has been adapted from ref. 3 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2014. 
Due to weak electrostatic interactions between microbes and metallic ions of the same surface charge, alternative mechanisms are needed to facilitate antimicrobial activity in this scenario. Another limiting factor is thicker bacterial cell walls, such as in the G+ bacteria, due to the high buildup of peptidoglycan molecules. This aspect retards the invasion of metallic ions.235 Other mechanisms, such as transmembrane electron-transport of AgNPs or zinc nanoparticles (ZnNPs), oxidative stress with Ag2O, membrane potential modification with AuNPs, the generation of hydrogen peroxides with ZnO, high alkalinity and the production of active oxygen species with CaO and MgO, and the formation of reactive oxygen species (ROS), are alternative means by which metallic NPs can facilitate cell damage irrespective of the cell's surface charge.3,237
Metallic oxides such as CaO and MgO are, in general, efficient antimicrobial agents against both G+ and G− bacteria due to the generation of superoxides on the surface of particles and an increase in pH based on hydration. Such is the case for MgO, which, upon interaction with cells, damages the cell membranes and causes leakage of the intracellular contents, leading to apoptosis.238 Using Coctus pictus D. Don leaf extracts, Suresh et al. (2018) demonstrated the synthesis of ∼50 nm cubic MgO NPs with proven antimicrobial efficacy against both G− and G+ bacteria (e.g. S. aureus and B. subtilis), as well as certain fungal strains (e.g. A. niger and C. albicans).153 It is important to note that unlike metallic NPs where electrostatic interactions are required for antimicrobial activity, metallic oxides such as MgO are versatile antimicrobial agents based on ROS formation. Nanoparticles synthesized via an extracellular approach generate ROS, leading to the destruction of cell walls and membranes, causing leakage of the intracellular contents.3,239 Additionally, strong electrostatic interactions of metal oxides with cell membranes lead to oxidative stresses, which contribute to overall cell death.153 Other metal oxides like CuO NPs cross the bacterial cell membrane and damage the vital enzymes of the bacteria; these oxides are effective against both Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria.3 This is demonstrated by using certain leaf extracts84,240 and algal sources33,90 to mitigate bacterial growth. Table 8 summarizes some of the green synthesized metallic NPs with antimicrobial properties.
Table 8 Antimicrobial activities of green synthesized metal-based nanoparticles




Nanoparticles
Microorganism used
Application
Key features and mechanisms
Ref.




Ag (∼15 nm)
Beetroots
Inhibition of G+ (e.g. S. aureus) and G− (e.g. P. aeruginosa) bacteria
Ion release; makes holes in membranes; disrupts metabolic processes; damages DNA

8




Piper longum fruit

18



Ag (5–40 nm)

Trichoderma viride


32



Ag (77–92 nm)

Bacillus species

In vitro treatment of human pathogens; treated bean yellow mosaic virus

43



Au (16 nm)
Pineapple extract
Inhibited both G+ and G− bacteria, and yeast
NPs attach to membranes and change surface potentials; decreased ATP; inhibition of tRNA; binding to ribosome

52



Banana peels

62



Au (5 nm)

Spirulina platensis

Inhibited G+ bacteria (B. subtilis and S. aureus)

71



CuO

Tabernaemontana divaricate

Inhibited G+ and G− bacteria; antifungal activity; treated urinary tract pathogens
NPs cross bacterial cell membrane and damage important enzymes; high NP stability

84



CuO (5–45 nm)

Bifurcaria bifurcate

Treated G− (e.g. E. aerogenes) and G+ (e.g. S. aureus) bacteria

90



CaO
Papaya leaf extract, green tea
Inhibited a range of G+ and G− bacteria S. aureus, E. coli, P. aeruginosa, B. cereus
Damages cell membrane; causes leakage of intracellular contents and apoptosis

97



Iron oxides

Agrewia optiva and Prunus perisca
Inhibited different G+ (e.g. S. mutans) and G− (e.g. E. coli) bacteria
Magnetic properties; ROS generation

105





Other light-responsive metal-based particles such as TiO2 and ZnO promote antimicrobial activities using photoemission. For instance, Narendhar et al. (2015) highlighted the use of TiO2 NPs for antibacterial activity.241 Metallic oxides such as TiO2 NPs cause oxidative stress via ROS generation, lipid peroxidation, which causes membrane fluidity, and ultimately disruption of the cell's integrity.3 Similarly, biosynthesized ZnO NPs show photocatalytic activity, combining the effects of ROS generation and release of zinc ions to destroy bacteria and pathogens.242–244 Usually, the most common method to test the effectiveness of antimicrobial agents is the disc-diffusion agar method. For other biomedical applications, the cytotoxicity and biocompatibility of the nanoparticles are important aspects to be considered, as presented in subsequent sections.
Drug delivery system
Green-synthesized NPs used in several drug delivery applications, owing to their ecofriendly and nontoxic nature, are presented in this section. For example, biocompatible antimicrobial agents on metal-based NPs are incorporated into textiles for external wound dressing245 or in situ medical systems to deliver drug molecules to target sites.246 The design of efficient drug-delivery systems implies that NP drug carriers must precisely navigate through blood–tissue interfaces, blood–brain barriers, and tight epithelial skin junctions to safely deliver, distribute and accumulate therapeutic agents to target cells. Due to their small sizes, high SSA, and stimuli-responsiveness, NPs are highly desired for such functions. Moreover, NP-hosts improve the stability and solubility of different drug molecules, significantly boosting drug performance compared with the pristine molecules without particles.
Based on their magnetic susceptibility and biocompatibility, magnetic nanoparticles (MNPs) like iron oxides are also widely used for drug delivery. For example, magnetosomes crystallized from microorganisms1,247 are biocompatible and non-toxic with biological tissues. These magnetosomes having functional groups on their surfaces enable the conjugation of anticancer drugs, such as doxorubicin (DOX), for cancer treatment.248 An example is what Sun et al. (2007) demonstrated using magnetic bio-nanoparticles to treat liver cancer.249 They demonstrated a low-cell mortality rate (∼20%), low cardiac toxicity, and increased tumor suppression (∼10.4%), showing significantly improved performance compared with the pristine chemical (DOX) alone. In a similar scenario, anti-tumor activity was increased by 10% by loading DOX onto magnetosomes instead of using the drugs alone.250 Magnetic manipulation of these systems can be potentially used to direct, accumulate, and execute efficient therapeutic responses to targeted diseased cells. Fig. 7 shows the use of microbial-derived magnetosomes for the treatment of cancer tumors.
 Fig. 7  Demonstration of anti-cancerous activity using magnetic particles from a microbial source. This figure has been adapted from ref. 1 with permission from Frontiers, copyright 2014. 
Gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) are easily surface modified and can be readily conjugated with drugs, genes and targeting ligands for drug delivery applications. Demonstrating this, Patra et al. (2015) used Butea monosperma (BM) leaf extracts as a reducing and capping agent to synthesize AuNPs, showing in vitro stability in different biological buffers for up to 14 days.50 Cytotoxicity tests conducted on both cancerous and non-cancerous cells showed particle biocompatibility with endothelial cells and cancer cell lines. Although the BM leaf extract alone was cytotoxic, this was not the case upon conjugation with the particles. Compared with the pristine drug, BM-synthesized NPs conjugated with DOX showed significant inhibition of cancer cell growth. An increase in hydrodynamic radius (by 55%) confirmed the conjugation of the particles with DOX, and a shift in the FTIR spectra from 3380 cm−1 (Au–BM) to 3417 cm−1 (Au–BM–DOX) was attributed to weak dative binding between gold and –OH groups on DOX. Due to the biocompatible nature of both biosynthesized Au–BM and Ag–BM, their DOX conjugates showed significant inhibition against the proliferation of cancer cells, compared with free DOX, which exhibited low inhibition. The biosynthesized NP–DOX conjugates showed more specificity and high retention, contributing to more take up of DOX towards disintegrating the cancerous B16F10 cells. Venkatpurwar et al. (2011) also demonstrated the use of seaweed extracts to synthesize AuNPs for the delivery of the anticancer drug DOX.63 These nano-sized therapeutic agents can distinguish between malignant and non-malignant cells to directly deliver lethal payloads.251
Prabhu et al. (2013) also demonstrated the use of AgNPs biosynthesized from leaf extract, Vitex negundo, which showed significant anticancer properties against human colon cancer.5 The biosynthesized AgNPs arrested HCT 15 cells at the G0/G1 and G2/M phases, which suppressed overall growth, reduced DNA synthesis, and induced apoptosis. Significant anti-pathogenic and anti-angiogenic properties have been demonstrated using AgNPs made from the Bacillus species.20,43 In one scenario, AgNPs terminated the proliferation and migration of bovine retinal endothelial cells by disrupting DNA activity, further affirming their utilization for nanoparticle-mediated targeted drug delivery.20
Furthermore, zinc oxide (ZnO) nanoparticles synthesized from the Sargassum muticum algal extract were used to induce apoptosis in human liver cancer cells.73 Beneficial cytotoxic effects were demonstrated by decreasing angiogenesis and facilitating apoptosis. However, further in vivo studies are needed to confirm their applicability besides in vitro studies. Table 9 summarizes certain metal-based NPs that are used in drug delivery systems. Further demonstrating the potential of ZnO NPs for drug delivery, Cheng et al. (2020) used ZnO synthesized from a Chinese herbal formulation, Rehmanniae Radix (RR), as a target drug delivery vehicle to inhibit the growth of bone cancer (MG-63) cells, where increasing dosage caused apoptosis.252 The ZnONPs initiated ROS generation and decreased mitochondrial membrane potentials, increasing the levels of apoptotic proteins. Using copper oxide nanoparticles synthesized from the brown alga Sargassum polycystum, effective growth inhibition of cells was shown; these nanoparticles have the potential to be tested in clinical studies to establish their use as both anticancer and antimicrobial agents.33 Other metallic oxide particles like nickel oxide (NiO), zinc oxide (ZnO), and titanium oxide (TiO2) have significant cytotoxic activities, making them desirable for drug-delivery applications.253–257 Also, hyperthermia cancer therapies are mostly desired where heat is used to disintegrate cancer cells. Magnetic NPs loaded with drugs are concentrated at the center of cancer tissues, which are destroyed via the application of external magnetic fields, generating heat in the NPs.1,258 Other stimuli-responsive properties such as pH, light, electric fields provide enhanced functionalities where external triggers can be used to modulate therapeutic effects with improved responses.258
Table 9 Green synthesized metal-based nanoparticles for drug delivery




Nanoparticles
Organisms used
Application
Key features and mechanisms
Ref.




Ag

Vitex negundo

Anticancer; antitumor agent against human colon cancer
Surface plasmon resonance; concentration-dependent cell viability

5




Bacillus sp.
Anti-pathogenic and anti-angiogenic properties

20



Cu

Sargassum polycystum

Anti-cancer; cell line (MCF-7) inhibition (>93%)
Inherent antimicrobial and anti-proliferative properties; cytotoxicity in cancer cells

33





Anti-angiogenic and anti-apoptotic


Au–Ag

Butea monosperma

Drug conjugation on nanoparticles inhibits spread of cancer cells; advanced cancer therapy
Easy surface modification to be conjugated with drugs; stability in biological buffers; biocompatibility

50 and 42


Au

Porphyra vietnamensis

Carrier for the drug doxorubicin hydrochloride (DOX), and delivery
Surface plasmon resonance; high stability over a wide pH range; hydrogen bonding interaction between drug and particle

63



ZnO

Sargassum muticum

Induced apoptosis on human liver cancer cells
Minimized particle toxicity; concentration-dependent decrease in cell viability

73





Bioimaging applications
The development of luminescent NPs with multifunctional properties such as optical and magnetic modulations to visualize complex cellular structures (tissues and organs), receptors, and tumors are in high demand.259,260 Unlike their bulk counterparts, NPs such as silicon emit photons in the visible–near infrared range and are adaptable to surface functionalization and bioconjugation, making them ideal for in vivo bioimaging applications.261,262 Ag- and AuNPs have tunable geometries and exhibit significantly higher absorption and scattering cross-sections. These properties make them efficient contrast agents for the optical imaging of tumors.263,264 Magnetic NPs such as iron oxides have superparamagnetic properties and are efficient magnetic labels for nuclear magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).
MNPs conjugated with biological molecules exhibited chemiluminescence in enzymes by antibody immobilization onto bacterial magnetic nanoparticles.265,266 The competitive reaction of different xenoestrogens detectable by the immobilized antibodies facilitated the process of bioimaging. Lu et al. (2020) demonstrated the use of bacteria in inducing aggregation of AuNPs, giving rise to a photoacoustic signal for pathogenic bioimaging.267 Bao et al. also demonstrated the use of the bacteria E. coli, to synthesize biocompatible cadmium telluride (CdTe) quantum dots (QDs), with tenability for fluorescent emission in the range 488–551 nm. The presence of a protein capping layer enhanced cell viability (∼93%), irrespective of high QD concentrations (2 μM). Surface functionalization of the QDs with folic acid facilitated the imaging of cervical cancer cells in vitro, presenting an economical approach to make highly fluorescent biocompatible CdTe QDs for bio-imaging and bio-labeling.7
In another study, Zinjarde et al. synthesized ∼10 nm CdTe QDs using two marine bacteria, Bacillus pumilus and Serratia marcescens. Their fluorescent properties were confirmed via photoluminescence studies, further affirming their utilization for bioimaging and biolabeling applications.19 CdTe QDs with photoluminescence emission within the range 488 to 551 nm were conjugated with folic acid and used in vitro to image cancerous cells with good biocompatibility and cytotoxicity. In another scenario, the fungus fusarium oxysporum was used to synthesize highly fluorescent CdTe QDs under ambient conditions, providing an economical green approach for the synthesis of highly fluorescent NPs for bioimaging.31 By using a fungal filtrate from Trichoderma viride, Fayaz et al. (2010) showed the synthesis of AgNPs, having photoluminescence in the range of 320–520 nm, demonstrating great potential for biolabeling and bioimaging.32Table 10 lists some examples of green-synthesized NPs used for bioimaging applications.
Table 10 Bioimaging applications of green-synthesized nanoparticles




Nanoparticles
Organisms used
Application
Key features and mechanisms
Ref.




CdTe

Escherichia coli


In vitro imaging of cervical cancer cells
Biocompatibility; fluorescent emission within 488–551 nm

7




Bacillus pumilus and Serratia marcescens

19




Fusarium oxysporum

Highly fluorescent CdTe quantum dots

31



Ag

Trichoderma viride

Photoluminescence
Size-dependent functionality

32




Parthenium hysterophorus

Photoluminescence

48



Au

Maduca longifolia

Infrared absorbing efficiency
Shape and size advantages; highly efficient in absorbing IR radiation

61





Metal nanoclusters (NCs), made up of nanoparticle aggregates, are new fluorescent probes for sensors and bioimaging applications. The sizes of NCs are near the Fermi wavelength of electrons, between metal atoms and NPs. This results in molecular properties such as discrete energy levels, size-dependent fluorescence, enhanced photostability and biocompatibility.268 Wang et al. (2013) demonstrated in vivo bio-imaging of tumors through fluorescent gold NCs synthesized inside the same tumor cells. Interestingly, gold nanoparticles form by Au(III) reduction inside the cytoplasm of the cells and these NPs eventually concentrate around the nucleoli. However, this does not happen in normal cells, differentiating tumor cells for specific in vivo bioimaging. The efficacy of this method was tested in certain xenograft tumors, which yielded the effective biosynthesis of Au particle clusters with fluorescence, but without spreading to neighboring normal tissues, and specifically biomarking the tumors.269
Diagnostic applications
Biosynthesized NPs are desirable for biosensor applications due to their biocompatibility, physiological stability, and optical properties. Typically, biosensors have receptor units that respond to specific analytes, which are mostly of biological origin like bacterial or viral DNA, proteins from antibodies or antigens, glucose molecules, or pollutants. NPs also improve transduction (signal capture), showing higher electrochemical, magnetic, and optical signals. Furthermore, efficient immobilization of bioreceptor units on particles in the form of AuNPs, ZnONPs, PtNPs, and AgNPs helps to increase biosensor sensitivities and lowers detection times.270
Particularly, AuNPs have widespread applications in biosensor applications.271 Kumar et al. (2011) demonstrated the biosensor potential of AuNPs (5–15 nm) synthesized with Zingiber officinale extracts.271 The NPs had low protein adsorption, and non-aggregation in red blood cells, making them biologically compatible. By combining properties such as high SSA, anisotropic nature, and structural tenability, the modifications of nano-shell configurations confer desirable biosensor properties to the AuNPs. These properties facilitate the detection of AuNPs through a signal in the near-infrared (NIR) region for improved performance. Kuppusamy et al. (2014) demonstrated the use of AuNPs synthesized from C. nudiflora plant extract to detect the hCG hormone in pregnant women's urine. The particles turned pink for pregnancy-positive urine, confirming pregnancy, whereas gray coloration indicated no pregnancy.272
By reporting the use of yeast cells to biosynthesize polygonal Au–Ag alloy NPs, Zheng et al. (2010) demonstrated their use as an electrochemical vanillin sensor. The Au–Ag alloy NPs were immobilized on a glassy carbon electrode (GCE) surface using a binder (Fig. 8a). This composite electrode exhibited a high sensitivity to electrochemical response for the oxidation of vanillin, as shown in Fig. 8b, with low detection limits (up to 40 nM), compared with 16 μM and 0.4 μM for pristine GCE and graphite electrodes, respectively.11 Deng et al. (2018) also used Plectranthus amboinicus leaf extract to synthesize ZnO NPs and used them to coat a 3.0 mm-diameter GCE electrode. The composite ZnONP/GCE electrode showed high electro-catalytic activity, selectivity, ultra-sensitivity, and stability towards hydrazine determination.273
 Fig. 8  Biosensor application of green synthesized nanoparticles combined with a glassy carbon electrode (GCE) for improved performance. (a) Representation of a vanillin sensor. (b) Improved electrochemical response occurring on a GCE electrode conjugated with biosynthesized Au–Ag NPs for the detection of vanillin. This figure has been adapted from ref. 11 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2010. 
Other novel biomedical applications
Apart from the above-listed biomedical applications of green-synthesized metal-based NPs, other potential uses such as tissue repair, diabetes treatment, DNA modeling, optical coatings, nanoelectronics, separation and detection, and dental applications are being developed. In the case of magnetic NPs, for example, their ability to perform catalytic functions and at the same time, be effectively dispersed in biological systems is a key advantage. Shan et al. made use of microbial cells of Pseudomonas delafieldii with magnetic Fe3O4 NPs (10–15 nm) for the desulfurization of dibenzothiophene. The particles demonstrated strong adsorption on cells, owing to their high surface energies, generating improved performance. These particles could be used several times, showing greater desulfurizing activity and operational ability.274 Furthermore, magnetic particles conjugated with biological molecules are desirable for magnetic separation and detection. Antibodies conjugated to bacterial magnetic particles have demonstrated chemiluminescence to aid in the rapid and sensitive detection of hormones.265
Moreover, the ability to manipulate biosynthesized magnetic nanoparticles and use them as solid-phase adsorbents make them suitable for DNA extraction.195 Besides the typical antimicrobial uses of biosynthesized NPs for parasite, viral or fungal treatment, they can find useful applications against various disease-causing insects. Using Nelumbo nucifera leaf extracts, AgNPs were synthesized and used for mosquito larvicidal activity.275 Similar malaria mitigation strategies have been devised based on AgNPs synthesized from different leaf extracts and are elaborated in a recent review.276 Certain metallic NPs have biosorption properties to remove micro-pollutants such as pharmaceuticals ingredients (e.g. ibuprofen and diclofenac). This was demonstrated by Forrez et al. (2011), who used Pseudomonas putida to synthesize palladium (Pd) NPs.277 Biocompatible modes of these NPs could facilitate the purification of human blood in the case of drug overload. To demonstrate the treatment of diabetes, Basha et al. (2010) used Psidium guajava to synthesize AuNPs, showing inhibition for protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B (PTP 1B).311 Research on using biosynthesized metal-based NPs for biomedical applications continue to grow, showing great promise for widespread clinical implementation.
Innovative opportunities in green nanoscience and nanotechnology
Green synthesis or chemistry produces a material using less energy without causing any hazardous effects or harm to the environment or living organisms.36 The biosynthesis approach helps to reduce environmental toxicity by eliminating toxic byproducts and potential toxicity to living organisms, such as humans, animals, and plants, compared with conventional chemically and physically synthesized nanoparticles.278 The surface functional groups, size, and shape of nanoparticles play key roles in their eco-friendly nature.170,279 It should be noted that the biochemicals and biomolecules present on the surface of biosynthesized nanoparticles are less/nontoxic as they are biogenic compared with physically/chemically synthesized nanoparticles.280 Furthermore, the final product from conventional (chemical and physical) approaches can be modified with functional groups as an additional process step, whereas biosynthesized nanoparticles possess biochemicals and biomolecules as functional groups, eventually reducing their potential toxicity.165Table 11 compares the morphological properties of physical/chemical and biosynthesized metallic nanoparticles. Centrifugation, dialysis, and chromatography are used for the purification of nanoparticles.281–283 Purified nanoparticles synthesized by conventional and biosynthesis approaches can possess similar properties and differ on the basis of their size and shape.284 However, there are certain cases where the nanoparticles, even certain biosynthesized nanoparticles, exhibit toxicity towards humans due to the internalization of nanosized particles into the cells of organisms, which affects the osmotic pressure of the cells and toxic or highly reactive functional groups from the chemical precursor.285,286 Moreover, high energy, such as heat; bioreactors using electric current;287,288 and pH alteration using chemicals180 also call into question the claim of biosynthesis as a green approach. Thus, green technology has been incorporated into the biosynthesis approach in recent times to produce nontoxic and environmentally sustainable nanoparticles.170 Recently, solar energy has been used as a potential alternative for the heating process to yield biosynthesized nanoparticles.289 Likewise, light sources, such as ultraviolet, microwave,290 gamma291 and visible light,292 have been introduced as an effective nanocatalyst to form nanoparticles rapidly, instead of a chemical catalyst. Besides, efforts have been taken to identify the specific biomolecule, enzyme or phytochemical responsible for nanoparticle formation via chromatographic or mass spectroscopic techniques.293,294 These specific biomolecules were recently isolated and utilized as reducing or stabilizing agents to improve nanoparticle formation efficiency295,296 and enhance their stability through additional processes such as pH alteration or biotemplate incorporation.297,298 It can be noted that genetically engineered microbes will be highly beneficial for producing these specific biomolecules and will help in the large-scale industrial and commercial production of nanoparticles, compared with the chemical synthesis approach.299 Similarly, plant tissue culture along with a genetic engineering approach to produce transgenic plants will be useful to yield specific phytochemicals that can be extracted for the large-scale production of nanoparticles.300,301 Besides, these lab-based green biosynthesis techniques will not affect the natural ecosystem and will help to overcome issues related to bioprospecting and biopiracy.302
Table 11 Comparison of physical/chemical and biosynthesized metallic nanoparticles




Nanoparticle
Chemical approach
Biosynthesis approach
Ref.


Method
Size (nm)
Polydispersity index
Shape
Ref.
Method
Size (nm)
Polydispersity index
Shape




Gold nanoparticles
Citrate reduction and flow reactor
15.5
0.07
Spherical

2

Halophytic plant extract (Atriplex halimus and Chenopodium amperosidies)
2–40
Data not available (TEM shows less polydisperse)
Spherical, rod, triangular and rhomboid

23



Silver nanoparticles (cobalt doped)
Laser ablation in liquid
17
Data not available (TEM shows less polydisperse)
Spherical

39

Phytosynthesis via Salvadora persica root extract
37.5
Data not available (TEM shows high polydispersity)
Spherical and rod

47



Copper nanoparticles
Wet electrochemical nucleation
51
Data not available (SEM shows less polydispersity)
Spherical

66


Citrus limon fruit extract
∼30
Data not available (SEM shows highly polydisperse)
Spherical

72



Platinum nanoparticles
Sono-chemical
2.2–2.3
Data not available (TEM shows less polydispersity)
Spherical

81


Atriplex halimus leaf extract
1–3
Data not available (HRTEM shows high polydispersity)
Spherical

92



Zinc oxide nanoparticles
Chemical precipitation
65.3
Data not available (TEM shows highly polydisperse)
Irregular with pores

99


Bergenia ciliata rhizome extract
∼30
Data not available (SEM shows less polydispersity)
Flower

106



Magnesium oxide nanoparticles
Sol–gel approach
40–80
0.5–0.7
Spherical, hexagonal and rod

109


Andrographis paniculata, Amaranthus tricolor and A. blitum
18–80
0.2–0.5
Spherical and hexagonal

113



Cerium oxide nanoparticles
Microwave hydrothermal method
3–5
Data not available (TEM shows high polydispersity)
Linear structure with thin overlapping layers

122

Banana peel
4–13
Data not available (TEM shows polydispersity)
Spherical foam-like snowflakes

128



Titanium dioxide nanoparticles
Magnetic field-assisted laser ablation
25–35
Data not available (FESEM shows high polydispersity)
Spherical, nanowires and nano-platelets

132


Cuminum cyminum seed extract
12–15
Data not available (TEM shows polydispersity)
Clustered bunches

140





Challenges in green synthesis and future perspectives
Controlling the size and shape of the synthesized nanoparticles is always a great challenge for the green synthesis approach, as these physical properties are predetermined mainly by the phytochemical compounds present in the plant extract.215 Uncontrolled size and shape will degrade the market value of the nanoparticles as commercial nanoparticles are usually finely tuned. Also, plant extracts contain various active biomolecules, which will bind to or coat the nanoparticles. This coating might improve the biocompatibility of the nanoparticles for medical applications and assist in preventing aggregation or agglomeration of the nanoparticles. Otherwise, the coating might conceal or mask the intrinsic properties of the nanoparticle. This will pose a myriad of challenges for the isolation and purification of nanoparticles from the plant extract.303 Furthermore, biomass required for the formation of nanoparticles (conversion factor) and the cost factor cannot be standardized in the biosynthesis approach, as it depends on the biomolecules in each organism, which eventually depends on the nutrient level, soil/culture medium quality, seasons, geography, and various other factors.304 Thus, the conversion and cost factor can be calculated for specific cases, considering these parameters and the type of nanoparticle to be synthesized. Also, these parameters affect the reproducibility of the biosynthesized nanoparticles, compared to conventionally synthesized nanoparticles.305 For instance, MgO nanoparticles were synthesized via three different leaf extracts, namely, Amaranthus tricolor, A. blitum and Andrographis paniculata, in our previous work. In that study, 1 g of leaves were used as precursor biomass, which led to a yield of ∼10 mg ml−1 of colloidal nanoparticles; the yield differs depending on the phytochemicals present in each plant.219 Contrarily, MgO nanoparticles synthesized via the sol–gel approach led to a yield of 200 mg for 1 g of magnesium precursor.109 It can be noted that the chemical method seems to be better than the phytosynthesis approach in terms of conversion (yield). Furthermore, 1 M and 0.001 M concentrations are required to form MgO nanoparticles via chemical and phytosynthesis approaches, respectively, which shows that the production cost will be less for the biosynthesis approach. However, this lab-scale analysis does not reflect large-scale production economics, and it depends on the type of nanoparticle and various experimental as well as external factors. Besides, the stability and yield of biosynthesized nanoparticles are not comparable with the nanoparticles prepared via conventional approaches, as they have poor stability due to degradation of the biomolecules.306 More metal precursor can be added to increase the yield. However, it will lead to agglomeration and an increase in the size of nanoparticles.307 It can also be noted that the nanoparticles resulting from most of the biosynthesized approaches are polydisperse, which is a major challenge while utilizing them for biomedical applications.290 In addition, the lack of clear design guidelines for biosynthesis, the requirement for extensive fundamental research and coordination between the industrial and research communities, the lack of toxicity analysis protocols, higher regulatory barriers compared with nanoparticles synthesized via conventional approaches, and unclear end-market demands are the other challenges that must be addressed in the future to utilize biosynthesis as a potential synthesis approach for large-scale nanoparticle production.308–310
Conclusion
The development of biosynthesized nanoparticles with green chemistry approaches has catalyzed the development of environmentally friendly, non-toxic, and biocompatible nanosized particles that are useful in various applications. The increasing popularity of green approaches and the demand for nanoparticles in biomedical applications have triggered novel nanoparticle preparation methods from various sources, such as microbes and plants, in large-scale production. Green biosynthesis methods are recognized as a more sustainable approach for the commercial production of nanoparticles with reduced impact on the environment. However, more research is required to address some of the major challenges relating to the synthesis and application of biosynthesized nanoparticles, including the standardization of procedures to evaluate toxicity, regulatory protocols for green biosynthesis, and identifying relevant mechanisms of nanoparticle formation. These advancements will be useful in supporting commercial scale synthesis and the widespread application of biosynthesized nanoparticles.
Author contributions
Conceptualization: J. J. and J. R.; resources: J. R.; writing—original draft preparation: J. J.; writing—review and editing: all authors; funding acquisition: J. R. All authors have read and agreed to the final version of the manuscript.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
Dr Jaison Jeevanandam and Prof. João Rodrigues acknowledge support from the FCT-Fundação para a Ciência e a Tecnologia (Base Fund UIDB/00674/2020, Portuguese Government Funds) and ARDITI (Agência Regional para o Desenvolvimento da Investigação Tecnologia e Inovação) through the project M1420-01-0145-FEDER-000005-CQM+ (Madeira 14-20 Program). All the other authors acknowledges their respective departments for support for the development of this article.
Notes and references
E. Alphandéry, Applications of magnetosomes synthesized by magnetotactic bacteria in medicine, Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol., 2014, 2, 5 Search PubMed.
J. Dong, J. Lau, S. A. Svoronos and B. M. Moudgil, Continuous Synthesis of Precision Gold Nanoparticles Using a Flow Reactor, KONA Powder Part. J., 2022, 2022011 CrossRef.
S. M. Dizaj, F. Lotfipour, M. Barzegar-Jalali, M. H. Zarrintan and K. Adibkia, Antimicrobial activity of the metals and metal oxide nanoparticles, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2014, 44, 278–284 CrossRef CAS PubMed.

          M. Rai, A. Gade and A. Yadav, in Metal Nanoparticles in Microbiology, ed. M. Rai and N. Duran, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg,  2011, pp. 1–14,  DOI:10.1007/978-3-642-18312-6_1.
D. Prabhu, C. Arulvasu, G. Babu, R. Manikandan and P. Srinivasan, Biologically synthesized green silver nanoparticles from leaf extract of Vitex negundo L. induce growth-inhibitory effect on human colon cancer cell line HCT15, Process Biochem., 2013, 48, 317–324 CrossRef CAS.
H. Mohd Yusof, R. Mohamad, U. H. Zaidan and N. A. Abdul Rahman, Microbial synthesis of zinc oxide nanoparticles and their potential application as an antimicrobial agent and a feed supplement in animal industry: a review, J. Anim. Sci. Biotechnol., 2019, 10, 57 CrossRef PubMed.
H. Bao, Z. Lu, X. Cui, Y. Qiao, J. Guo, J. M. Anderson and C. M. Li, Extracellular microbial synthesis of biocompatible CdTe quantum dots, Acta Biomater., 2010, 6, 3534–3541 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
M. R. Bindhu and M. Umadevi, Antibacterial and catalytic activities of green synthesized silver nanoparticles, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2015, 135, 373–378 CrossRef CAS PubMed.

          A. Rastogi, P. Singh, F. A. Haraz and A. Barhoum, in Fundamentals of Nanoparticles, ed. A. Barhoum and A. S. Hamdy Makhlouf, Elsevier,  2018, pp. 571–604,  DOI:10.1016/B978-0-323-51255-8.00023-9.
K. Sharma, S. Kaushik and A. Jyoti, Green synthesis of silver nanoparticles by using waste vegetable peel and its antibacterial activities, J. Pharm. Sci. Res., 2016, 8, 313 CAS.
D. Zheng, C. Hu, T. Gan, X. Dang and S. Hu, Preparation and application of a novel vanillin sensor based on biosynthesis of Au–Ag alloy nanoparticles, Sens. Actuators, B, 2010, 148, 247–252 CrossRef CAS.
P. G. Bhavyasree and T. S. Xavier, Green synthesis of Copper Oxide/Carbon nanocomposites using the leaf extract of Adhatoda vasica Nees, their characterization and antimicrobial activity, Heliyon, 2020, 6, e03323 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
A. U. Khan, M. Khan, N. Malik, M. H. Cho and M. M. Khan, Recent progress of algae and blue–green algae-assisted synthesis of gold nanoparticles for various applications, Bioprocess Biosyst. Eng., 2019, 42, 1–15 CrossRef CAS PubMed.

          S. Ramanathan, S. C. B. Gopinath, M. K. M. Arshad, P. Poopalan, V. Perumal and M. S. M. Saheed, in Nanomaterials for Healthcare, Energy and Environment, ed. A. H. Bhat, I. Khan, M. Jawaid, F. O. Suliman, H. Al-Lawati and S. M. Al-Kindy, Springer Singapore, Singapore,  2019, pp. 87–101,  DOI:10.1007/978-981-13-9833-9_5.
A. A. A. Aljabali, Y. Akkam, M. S. Al Zoubi, K. M. Al-Batayneh, B. Al-Trad, O. Abo Alrob, A. M. Alkilany, M. Benamara and D. J. Evans, Synthesis of gold nanoparticles using leaf extract of Ziziphus zizyphus and their antimicrobial activity, Nanomaterials, 2018, 8, 174 CrossRef PubMed.
Z. Molnár, V. Bódai, G. Szakacs, B. Erdélyi, Z. Fogarassy, G. Sáfrán, T. Varga, Z. Kónya, E. Tóth-Szeles, R. Szűcs and I. Lagzi, Green synthesis of gold nanoparticles by thermophilic filamentous fungi, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 3943 CrossRef PubMed.
S. M. Mortazavi, M. Khatami, I. Sharifi, H. Heli, K. Kaykavousi, M. H. Sobhani Poor, S. Kharazi and M. A. L. Nobre, Bacterial Biosynthesis of Gold Nanoparticles Using Salmonella enterica subsp. enterica serovar Typhi Isolated from Blood and Stool Specimens of Patients, J. Cluster Sci., 2017, 28, 2997–3007 CrossRef CAS.
N. J. Reddy, D. N. Vali, M. Rani and S. S. Rani, Evaluation of antioxidant, antibacterial and cytotoxic effects of green synthesized silver nanoparticles by Piper longum fruit, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2014, 34, 115–122 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
V. Pawar, A. R. Kumar, S. Zinjarde and S. Gosavi, Bioinspired inimitable cadmium telluride quantum dots for bioimaging purposes, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2013, 13, 3826–3831 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
K. Kalishwaralal, E. Banumathi, S. R. K. Pandian, V. Deepak, J. Muniyandi, S. H. Eom and S. Gurunathan, Silver nanoparticles inhibit VEGF induced cell proliferation and migration in bovine retinal endothelial cells, Colloids Surf., B, 2009, 73, 51–57 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
S. Chakraborty and N. L. Mary, Biocompatible supercapacitor electrodes using green synthesised ZnO/Polymer nanocomposites for efficient energy storage applications, J. Energy Storage, 2020, 28, 101275 CrossRef.
T. Dodevska, I. Vasileva, P. Denev, D. Karashanova, B. Georgieva, D. Kovacheva, N. Yantcheva and A. Slavov, Rosa damascena waste mediated synthesis of silver nanoparticles: Characteristics and application for an electrochemical sensing of hydrogen peroxide and vanillin, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2019, 231, 335–343 CrossRef CAS.
M. Hosny, M. Fawzy, A. M. Abdelfatah, E. E. Fawzy and A. S. Eltaweil, Comparative study on the potentialities of two halophytic species in the green synthesis of gold nanoparticles and their anticancer, antioxidant and catalytic efficiencies, Adv. Powder Technol., 2021, 32, 3220–3233 CrossRef CAS.
S. Sinsinwar, M. K. Sarkar, K. R. Suriya, P. Nithyanand and V. Vadivel, Use of agricultural waste (coconut shell) for the synthesis of silver nanoparticles and evaluation of their antibacterial activity against selected human pathogens, Microb. Pathog., 2018, 124, 30–37 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
A. Naghizadeh, Z. M. Mizwari, S. M. Ghoreishi, S. Lashgari, S. Mortazavi-Derazkola and B. Rezaie, Biogenic and eco-benign synthesis of silver nanoparticles using jujube core extract and its performance in catalytic and pharmaceutical applications: Removal of industrial contaminants and in vitro antibacterial and anticancer activities, Environ. Technol. Innovation, 2021, 23, 101560 CrossRef CAS.
N. González-Ballesteros, S. Prado-López, J. B. Rodríguez-González, M. Lastra and M. C. Rodríguez-Argüelles, Green synthesis of gold nanoparticles using brown algae Cystoseira baccata: Its activity in colon cancer cells, Colloids Surf., B, 2017, 153, 190–198 CrossRef PubMed.
E. Rodríguez-León, B. E. Rodríguez-Vázquez, A. Martínez-Higuera, C. Rodríguez-Beas, E. Larios-Rodríguez, R. E. Navarro, R. López-Esparza and R. A. Iñiguez-Palomares, Synthesis of Gold Nanoparticles Using Mimosa tenuiflora Extract, Assessments of Cytotoxicity, Cellular Uptake, and Catalysis, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2019, 14, 1–16 CrossRef PubMed.
E. M. Bakir, N. S. Younis, M. E. Mohamed and N. A. El Semary, Cyanobacteria as Nanogold Factories: Chemical and Anti-Myocardial Infarction Properties of Gold Nanoparticles Synthesized by Lyngbya majuscula, Mar. Drugs, 2018, 16, 217 CrossRef PubMed.
C. G. Joshi, A. Danagoudar, J. Poyya, A. K. Kudva and B. L. Dhananjaya, Biogenic synthesis of gold nanoparticles by marine endophytic fungus-Cladosporium cladosporioides isolated from seaweed and evaluation of their antioxidant and antimicrobial properties, Process Biochem., 2017, 63, 137–144 CrossRef.
M. P. Patil, M.-j. Kang, I. Niyonizigiye, A. Singh, J.-O. Kim, Y. B. Seo and G.-D. Kim, Extracellular synthesis of gold nanoparticles using the marine bacterium Paracoccus haeundaensis BC74171T and evaluation of their antioxidant activity and antiproliferative effect on normal and cancer cell lines, Colloids Surf., B, 2019, 183, 110455 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
A. Syed and A. Ahmad, Extracellular biosynthesis of CdTe quantum dots by the fungus Fusarium oxysporum and their anti-bacterial activity, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2013, 106, 41–47 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
A. M. Fayaz, K. Balaji, M. Girilal, R. Yadav, P. T. Kalaichelvan and R. Venketesan, Biogenic synthesis of silver nanoparticles and their synergistic effect with antibiotics: a study against Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria, Nanomedicine, 2010, 6, 103–109 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
S. V. P. Ramaswamy, S. Narendhran and R. Sivaraj, Potentiating effect of ecofriendly synthesis of copper oxide nanoparticles using brown alga: antimicrobial and anticancer activities, Bull. Mater. Sci., 2016, 39, 361–364 CrossRef CAS.
S. Naghdi, M. Sajjadi, M. Nasrollahzadeh, K. Y. Rhee, S. M. Sajadi and B. Jaleh, Cuscuta reflexa leaf extract mediated green synthesis of the Cu nanoparticles on graphene oxide/manganese dioxide nanocomposite and its catalytic activity toward reduction of nitroarenes and organic dyes, J. Taiwan Inst. Chem. Eng., 2018, 86, 158–173 CrossRef CAS.
P. Tippayawat, N. Phromviyo, P. Boueroy and A. Chompoosor, Green synthesis of silver nanoparticles in aloe vera plant extract prepared by a hydrothermal method and their synergistic antibacterial activity, PeerJ, 2016, 4, e2589 CrossRef PubMed.
S. I. Asiya, K. Pal, S. Kralj, G. S. El-Sayyad, F. G. de Souza and T. Narayanan, Sustainable preparation of gold nanoparticles via green chemistry approach for biogenic applications, Mater. Today Chem., 2020, 17, 100327 CrossRef.
Y. Qu, S. Lian, W. Shen, Z. Li, J. Yang and H. Zhang, Rod-shaped gold nanoparticles biosynthesized using Pb2+-induced fungus Aspergillus sp. WL-Au, Bioprocess Biosyst. Eng., 2020, 43, 123–131 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
A. Arya, V. Mishra and T. S. Chundawat, Green synthesis of silver nanoparticles from green algae (Botryococcus braunii) and its catalytic behavior for the synthesis of benzimidazoles, Chem. Data Collect., 2019, 20, 100190 CrossRef CAS.
A. Guadagnini, S. Agnoli, D. Badocco, P. Pastore, D. Coral, M. B. Fernàndez van Raap, D. Forrer and V. Amendola, Facile synthesis by laser ablation in liquid of nonequilibrium cobalt-silver nanoparticles with magnetic and plasmonic properties, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2021, 585, 267–275 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
A. Moshfegh, A. Jalali, A. Salehzadeh and A. S. Jozani, Biological synthesis of silver nanoparticles by cell-free extract of Polysiphonia algae and their anticancer activity against breast cancer MCF-7 cell lines, Micro Nano Lett., 2019, 14, 581–584 CrossRef CAS.
K. Krishnaswamy, H. Vali and V. Orsat, Value-adding to grape waste: Green synthesis of gold nanoparticles, J. Food Eng., 2014, 142, 210–220 CrossRef CAS.

          J. Jeevanandam, S. Pan and M. K. Danquah, in Sustainable Production and Applications of Waterborne Polyurethanes, Springer, Cham,  2021, pp. 179–192 Search PubMed.
E. K. F. Elbeshehy, A. M. Elazzazy and G. Aggelis, Silver nanoparticles synthesis mediated by new isolates of Bacillus spp., nanoparticle characterization and their activity against Bean Yellow Mosaic Virus and human pathogens, Front. Microbiol., 2015, 6, 453 Search PubMed.
M. Gholami-Shabani, M. Shams-Ghahfarokhi, Z. Gholami-Shabani, A. Akbarzadeh, G. Riazi, S. Ajdari, A. Amani and M. Razzaghi-Abyaneh, Enzymatic synthesis of gold nanoparticles using sulfite reductase purified from Escherichia coli: A green eco-friendly approach, Process Biochem., 2015, 50, 1076–1085 CrossRef CAS.
S. Sarangapany and K. Mohanty, Facile green synthesis of magnetically separable Au–Pt@ TiO2 nanocomposite for efficient catalytic reduction of organic pollutants and selective oxidation of glycerol, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 830, 154636 CrossRef CAS.
S. Pirtarighat, M. Ghannadnia and S. Baghshahi, Green synthesis of silver nanoparticles using the plant extract of Salvia spinosa grown in vitro and their antibacterial activity assessment, J. Nanostruct. Chem., 2019, 9, 1–9 CrossRef CAS.
H. Arshad, M. A. Sami, S. Sadaf and U. Hassan, Salvadora persica mediated synthesis of silver nanoparticles and their antimicrobial efficacy, Sci. Rep., 2021, 11, 5996 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
D. D. Evanoff Jr. and G. Chumanov, Synthesis and optical properties of silver nanoparticles and arrays, ChemPhysChem, 2005, 6, 1221–1231 CrossRef PubMed.
H. Mistry, R. Thakor, C. Patil, J. Trivedi and H. Bariya, Biogenically proficient synthesis and characterization of silver nanoparticles employing marine procured fungi Aspergillus brunneoviolaceus along with their antibacterial and antioxidative potency, Biotechnol. Lett., 2020, 43, 307–316 CrossRef PubMed.
S. Patra, S. Mukherjee, A. K. Barui, A. Ganguly, B. Sreedhar and C. R. Patra, Green synthesis, characterization of gold and silver nanoparticles and their potential application for cancer therapeutics, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2015, 53, 298–309 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
B. Desalegn, M. Megharaj, Z. Chen and R. Naidu, Green synthesis of zero valent iron nanoparticle using mango peel extract and surface characterization using XPS and GC-MS, Heliyon, 2019, 5, e01750 CrossRef PubMed.
M. R. Bindhu and M. Umadevi, Antibacterial activities of green synthesized gold nanoparticles, Mater. Lett., 2014, 120, 122–125 CrossRef CAS.
R. Fatima, M. Priya, L. Indurthi, V. Radhakrishnan and R. Sudhakaran, Biosynthesis of silver nanoparticles using red algae Portieria hornemannii and its antibacterial activity against fish pathogens, Microb. Pathog., 2020, 138, 103780 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
A. Navrotsky, Nanomaterials in the environment, agriculture, and technology (NEAT), J. Nanopart. Res., 2000, 2, 321–323 CrossRef.
S. Husain, S. Afreen, D. Yasin, B. Afzal and T. Fatma, Cyanobacteria as a bioreactor for synthesis of silver nanoparticles-an effect of different reaction conditions on the size of nanoparticles and their dye decolorization ability, J. Microbiol. Methods, 2019, 162, 77–82 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
R. S. Hamida, N. E. Abdelmeguid, M. A. Ali, M. M. Bin-Meferij and M. I. Khalil, Synthesis of Silver Nanoparticles Using a Novel Cyanobacteria Desertifilum sp. extract: Their Antibacterial and Cytotoxicity Effects, Int. J. Nanomed., 2020, 15, 49–63 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
M. Saravanan, S. K. Barik, D. MubarakAli, P. Prakash and A. Pugazhendhi, Synthesis of silver nanoparticles from Bacillus brevis (NCIM 2533) and their antibacterial activity against pathogenic bacteria, Microb. Pathog., 2018, 116, 221–226 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
Q. Xu, W. Li, X. Weng, G. Owens and Z. Chen, Mechanism and impact of synthesis conditions on the one-step green synthesis of hybrid RGO@ Fe/Pd nanoparticles, Sci. Total Environ., 2020, 710, 136308 CrossRef PubMed.
S. Jain and M. S. Mehata, Medicinal plant leaf extract and pure flavonoid mediated green synthesis of silver nanoparticles and their enhanced antibacterial property, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 1–13 CrossRef PubMed.
K. Gudikandula, P. Vadapally and M. A. S. Charya, Biogenic synthesis of silver nanoparticles from white rot fungi: Their characterization and antibacterial studies, OpenNano, 2017, 2, 64–78 CrossRef.
A. M. Fayaz, M. Girilal, R. Venkatesan and P. T. Kalaichelvan, Biosynthesis of anisotropic gold nanoparticles using Maduca longifolia extract and their potential in infrared absorption, Colloids Surf., B, 2011, 88, 287–291 CrossRef PubMed.
H. M. M. Ibrahim, Green synthesis and characterization of silver nanoparticles using banana peel extract and their antimicrobial activity against representative microorganisms, J. Radiat. Res. Appl. Sci., 2015, 8, 265–275 CrossRef.
V. Venkatpurwar, A. Shiras and V. Pokharkar, Porphyran capped gold nanoparticles as a novel carrier for delivery of anticancer drug: in vitro cytotoxicity study, Int. J. Pharm., 2011, 409, 314–320 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
A. Gautam, S. Rawat, L. Verma, J. Singh, S. Sikarwar, B. C. Yadav and A. S. Kalamdhad, Green synthesis of iron nanoparticle from extract of waste tea: An application for phenol red removal from aqueous solution, Environ. Nanotechnol., Monit. Manage., 2018, 10, 377–387 Search PubMed.
T. Masciangioli and W.-X. Zhang, Peer reviewed: environmental technologies at the nanoscale, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2003, 102A–108A,  DOI:10.1021/es0323998.
G. Yang, X. Zeng, P. Wang, C. Li, G. Xu, Z. Li, J. Luo, Y. Zhang and C. Cui, Size Refinement of Copper Nanoparticles: A Perspective from Electrochemical Nucleation and Growth Mechanism, ChemElectroChem, 2021, 8, 819–828 CrossRef CAS.
B. C. Adebayo-Tayo, A. O. Popoola and O. M. Ajunwa, Bacterial synthesis of silver nanoparticles by culture free supernatant of lactic acid bacteria isolated from fermented food samples, Biotechnol. J. Int., 2017, 19, 1–13 CrossRef.
H. F. Aritonang, H. Koleangan and A. D. Wuntu, Synthesis of silver nanoparticles using aqueous extract of medicinal plants’(Impatiens balsamina and Lantana camara) fresh leaves and analysis of antimicrobial activity, Int. J. Microbiol., 2019, 2019, 8642303 Search PubMed.
A. Arya, K. Gupta and T. S. Chundawat, In Vitro Antimicrobial and Antioxidant Activity of Biogenically Synthesized Palladium and Platinum Nanoparticles Using Botryococcus braunii, Turk. J. Pharm. Sci., 2020, 17, 299–306 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
K. Gupta and T. S. Chundawat, Bio-inspired synthesis of platinum nanoparticles from fungus Fusarium oxysporum: its characteristics, potential antimicrobial, antioxidant and photocatalytic activities, Mater. Res. Express, 2019, 6, 1050d6 CrossRef CAS.
K. S. U. Suganya, K. Govindaraju, V. G. Kumar, T. S. Dhas, V. Karthick, G. Singaravelu and M. Elanchezhiyan, Blue green alga mediated synthesis of gold nanoparticles and its antibacterial efficacy against Gram positive organisms, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2015, 47, 351–356 CrossRef PubMed.
M. W. Amer and A. M. Awwad, Green synthesis of copper nanoparticles by Citrus limon fruits extract, characterization and antibacterial activity, Chem. Int., 2021, 7, 1–8 CAS.
Z. Sanaeimehr, I. Javadi and F. Namvar, Antiangiogenic and antiapoptotic effects of green-synthesized zinc oxide nanoparticles using Sargassum muticum algae extraction, Cancer Nanotechnol., 2018, 9, 1–16 CrossRef.
S. O. Kareem, T. M. Adeleye and R. O. Ojo, Effects of pH, temperature and agitation on the biosynthesis of iron nanoparticles produced by Trichoderma species, IOP Conf. Ser.: Mater. Sci. Eng., 2020, 805, 012036 CAS.
T. M. Adeleye, S. O. Kareem and A. A. Kekere-Ekun, Optimization studies on biosynthesis of iron nanoparticles using Rhizopus stolonifer, IOP Conf. Ser.: Mater. Sci. Eng., 2020, 805, 012037 CAS.
S. Bishnoi, A. Kumar and R. Selvaraj, Facile synthesis of magnetic iron oxide nanoparticles using inedible Cynometra ramiflora fruit extract waste and their photocatalytic degradation of methylene blue dye, Mater. Res. Bull., 2018, 97, 121–127 CrossRef CAS.
B. Sumanth, T. R. Lakshmeesha, M. A. Ansari, M. A. Alzohairy, A. C. Udayashankar, B. Shobha, S. R. Niranjana, C. Srinivas and A. Almatroudi, Mycogenic Synthesis of Extracellular Zinc Oxide Nanoparticles from Xylaria acuta and Its Nanoantibiotic Potential, Int. J. Nanomed., 2020, 15, 8519–8536 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
P. K. Jain, X. Huang, I. H. El-Sayed and M. A. El-Sayed, Noble metals on the nanoscale: optical and photothermal properties and some applications in imaging, sensing, biology, and medicine, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1578–1586 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
A. Javaid, S. F. Oloketuyi, M. M. Khan and F. Khan, Diversity of Bacterial Synthesis of Silver Nanoparticles, BioNanoScience, 2018, 8, 43–59 CrossRef.
Q. Maqbool, Green-synthesised cerium oxide nanostructures (CeO 2-NS) show excellent biocompatibility for phyto-cultures as compared to silver nanostructures (Ag-NS), RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 56575–56585 RSC.
H. E. Hansen, F. Seland, S. Sunde, O. S. Burheim and B. G. Pollet, Two routes for sonochemical synthesis of platinum nanoparticles with narrow size distribution, Mater. Adv., 2021, 2, 1962–1971 RSC.
A. Arya, K. Gupta, T. S. Chundawat and D. Vaya, Biogenic Synthesis of Copper and Silver Nanoparticles Using Green Alga Botryococcus braunii and Its Antimicrobial Activity, Bioinorg. Chem. Appl., 2018, 2018, 7879403 CrossRef PubMed.
Y. Gao, D. Xu, D. Ren, K. Zeng and X. Wu, Green synthesis of zinc oxide nanoparticles using Citrus sinensis peel extract and application to strawberry preservation: A comparison study, LWT, 2020, 109297,  DOI:10.1016/j.lwt.2020.109297.
R. Sivaraj, P. K. S. M. Rahman, P. Rajiv, H. A. Salam and R. Venckatesh, Biogenic copper oxide nanoparticles synthesis using Tabernaemontana divaricate leaf extract and its antibacterial activity against urinary tract pathogen, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2014, 133, 178–181 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
L. Tan, T. Jones, J. Poitras, J. Xie, X. Liu and G. Southam, Biochemical synthesis of palladium nanoparticles: The influence of chemical fixatives used in electron microscopy on nanoparticle formation and catalytic performance, J. Hazard. Mater., 2020, 122945 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
J. F. Li, E. J. Rupa, J. Hurh, Y. Huo, L. Chen, Y. Han, J. c. Ahn, J. K. Park, H. A. Lee, R. Mathiyalagan and D.-C. Yang, Cordyceps militaris fungus mediated Zinc Oxide nanoparticles for the photocatalytic degradation of Methylene blue dye, Optik, 2019, 183, 691–697 CrossRef CAS.
Y. Xia, Y. Xiong, B. Lim and S. E. Skrabalak, Shape–controlled synthesis of metal nanocrystals: simple chemistry meets complex physics?, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 60–103 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
M. Gondwal and G. Joshi nee Pant, Synthesis and catalytic and biological activities of silver and copper nanoparticles using Cassia occidentalis, Int. J. Biomater., 2018, 2018, 6735426 Search PubMed.
U. Rasool and S. Hemalatha, Marine endophytic actinomycetes assisted synthesis of copper nanoparticles (CuNPs): Characterization and antibacterial efficacy against human pathogens, Mater. Lett., 2017, 194, 176–180 CrossRef CAS.
Y. Abboud, T. Saffaj, A. Chagraoui, A. El Bouari, K. Brouzi, O. Tanane and B. Ihssane, Biosynthesis, characterization and antimicrobial activity of copper oxide nanoparticles (CONPs) produced using brown alga extract (Bifurcaria bifurcata), Appl. Nanosci., 2014, 4, 571–576 CrossRef CAS.
Z. Oruç, M. Ergüt, D. Uzunoğlu and A. Özer, Green synthesis of biomass-derived activated carbon/Fe-Zn bimetallic nanoparticles from lemon (Citrus limon (L.) Burm. f.) wastes for heterogeneous Fenton-like decolorization of Reactive Red 2, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 103231 CrossRef.
A. S. Eltaweil, M. Fawzy, M. Hosny, E. M. Abd El-Monaem, T. M. Tamer and A. M. Omer, Green synthesis of platinum nanoparticles using Atriplex halimus leaves for potential antimicrobial, antioxidant, and catalytic applications, Arabian J. Chem., 2022, 15, 103517 CrossRef.
M. T. Matsena, S. M. Tichapondwa and E. M. Chirwa, Synthesis of Biogenic Palladium Nanoparticles Using Citrobacter sp. for Application as Anode Electrocatalyst in a Microbial Fuel Cell, Catalysts, 2020, 10, 838 CrossRef CAS.
Q. A. Pankhurst, J. Connolly, S. K. Jones and J. Dobson, Applications of magnetic nanoparticles in biomedicine, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2003, 36, R167 CrossRef CAS.
R. Majumdar, S. Tantayanon and B. G. Bag, Synthesis of palladium nanoparticles with leaf extract of Chrysophyllum cainito (Star apple) and their applications as efficient catalyst for C–C coupling and reduction reactions, Int. Nano Lett., 2017, 7, 267–274 CrossRef CAS.
V. Ganesan, M. Hariram, S. Vivekanandhan and S. Muthuramkumar, Periconium sp. (endophytic fungi) extract mediated sol-gel synthesis of ZnO nanoparticles for antimicrobial and antioxidant applications, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2020, 105, 104739 CrossRef CAS.
A. Anantharaman, S. Ramalakshmi and M. George, Green synthesis of calcium oxide nanoparticles and its applications, Int. J. Eng. Res. Ind. Appl., 2016, 6, 27–31 Search PubMed.
S.-M. Taghizadeh, A. Taherpoor and A. Ebrahiminezhad, Algae and microalgae mediated synthesis of iron nanoparticles and their applications, J. Adv. Med. Sci. Appl. Technol., 2020, 5, 1–11 Search PubMed.
K. G. Akpomie, S. Ghosh, M. Gryzenhout and J. Conradie, One-pot synthesis of zinc oxide nanoparticles via chemical precipitation for bromophenol blue adsorption and the antifungal activity against filamentous fungi, Sci.
Rep., 2021, 11, 8305 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
P. Narasaiah, B. K. Mandal and N. C. Sarada, Biosynthesis of copper oxide nanoparticles from Drypetes sepiaria leaf extract and their catalytic activity to dye degradation, IOP Conf. Ser.: Mater. Sci. Eng., 2017, 263(2), 022012 Search PubMed.
H. Barabadi, M. Ovais, Z. K. Shinwari and M. Saravanan, Anti-cancer green bionanomaterials: present status and future prospects, Green Chem. Lett. Rev., 2017, 10, 285–314 CrossRef CAS.
Q. Lv, B. Zhang, X. Xing, Y. Zhao, R. Cai, W. Wang and Q. Gu, Biosynthesis of copper nanoparticles using Shewanella loihica PV-4 with antibacterial activity: Novel approach and mechanisms investigation, J. Hazard. Mater., 2018, 347, 141–149 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
K. Saravanakumar, S. Shanmugam, N. B. Varukattu, D. MubarakAli, K. Kathiresan and M.-H. Wang, Biosynthesis and characterization of copper oxide nanoparticles from indigenous fungi and its effect of photothermolysis on human lung carcinoma, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 2019, 190, 103–109 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
T. Khalafi, F. Buazar and K. Ghanemi, Phycosynthesis and Enhanced Photocatalytic Activity of Zinc Oxide Nanoparticles Toward Organosulfur Pollutants, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9, 6866 CrossRef PubMed.
A. U. Mirza, A. Kareem, S. A. A. Nami, M. S. Khan, S. Rehman, S. A. Bhat, A. Mohammad and N. Nishat, Biogenic synthesis of iron oxide nanoparticles using Agrewia optiva and Prunus persica phyto species: characterization, antibacterial and antioxidant activity, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 2018, 185, 262–274 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
K. Dulta, G. Koşarsoy Ağçeli, P. Chauhan, R. Jasrotia and P. K. Chauhan, A Novel Approach of Synthesis Zinc Oxide Nanoparticles by Bergenia ciliata Rhizome Extract: Antibacterial and Anticancer Potential, J. Inorg. Organomet. Polym. Mater., 2021, 31, 180–190 CrossRef CAS.
H. Mohd Yusof, R. Mohamad, U. H. Zaidan and N. A. A. Rahman, Sustainable microbial cell nanofactory for zinc oxide nanoparticles production by zinc-tolerant probiotic Lactobacillus plantarum strain TA4, Microb. Cell Fact., 2020, 19, 10 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
A. I. El-Batal, G. S. El-Sayyad, F. M. Mosallam and R. M. Fathy, Penicillium chrysogenum-Mediated Mycogenic Synthesis of Copper Oxide Nanoparticles Using Gamma Rays for In Vitro Antimicrobial Activity Against Some Plant Pathogens, J. Cluster Sci., 2020, 31, 79–90 CrossRef CAS.
J. Jeevanandam, Y. S. Chan and M. K. Danquah, Calcination-Dependent Morphology Transformation of Sol-Gel- Synthesized MgO Nanoparticles, ChemistrySelect, 2017, 2, 10393–10404 CrossRef CAS.
R. Hassanien, D. Z. Husein and M. F. Al-Hakkani, Biosynthesis of copper nanoparticles using aqueous Tilia extract: antimicrobial and anticancer activities, Heliyon, 2018, 4, e01077 CrossRef PubMed.
M. Hasan, M. Altaf, A. Zafar, S. G. Hassan, Z. Ali, G. Mustafa, T. Munawar, M. S. Saif, T. Tariq, F. Iqbal, M. W. Khan, A. Mahmood, N. Mahmood and X. Shu, Bioinspired synthesis of zinc oxide nano-flowers: A surface enhanced antibacterial and harvesting efficiency, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2021, 119, 111280 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
J. Jayabalan, G. Mani, N. Krishnan, J. Pernabas, J. M. Devadoss and H. T. Jang, Green biogenic synthesis of zinc oxide nanoparticles using Pseudomonas putida culture and its In vitro antibacterial and anti-biofilm activity, Biocatal. Agric. Biotechnol., 2019, 21, 101327 CrossRef.
J. Jeevanandam, Y. S. Chan and M. K. Danquah, Biosynthesis and characterization of MgO nanoparticles from plant extracts via induced molecular nucleation, New J. Chem., 2017, 41, 2800–2814 RSC.
S. Chatterjee, S. Mahanty, P. Das, P. Chaudhuri and S. Das, Biofabrication of iron oxide nanoparticles using manglicolous fungus Aspergillus niger BSC-1 and removal of Cr(VI) from aqueous solution, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 385, 123790 CrossRef CAS.
Y. Vitta, M. Figueroa, M. Calderon and C. Ciangherotti, Synthesis of iron nanoparticles from aqueous extract of Eucalyptus robusta Sm and evaluation of antioxidant and antimicrobial activity, Mater. Sci. Energy Technol., 2020, 3, 97–103 CAS.

          M. Pathak, V. Kumar, P. Pathak, R. Majee and P. w. Ramteke, Green Synthesis of Silver Nanoparticles Using Scindapsus officinalis (Gajpipli): In vitro Cytotoxic Activity Against HepG-2 & MCF-7 Cancer Cell Lines,  2019,  DOI:10.20944/preprints201908.0118.v1.
R. A. Hamouda, W. E. Yousuf, A. B. A. Mohammed, R. S. Mohammed, D. B. Darwish and E. E. Abdeen, Comparative study between zinc oxide nanoparticles synthesis by biogenic and wet chemical methods in vivo and in vitro against Staphylococcus aureus, Microb. Pathog., 2020, 147, 104384 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
M. Kouhkan, P. Ahangar, L. A. Babaganjeh and M. Allahyari-Devin, Biosynthesis of Copper Oxide Nanoparticles Using Lactobacillus casei Subsp. Casei and its Anticancer and Antibacterial Activities, Curr. Nanosci., 2020, 16, 101–111 CrossRef CAS.
S. Mahanty, M. Bakshi, S. Ghosh, S. Chatterjee, S. Bhattacharyya, P. Das, S. Das and P. Chaudhuri, Green Synthesis of Iron Oxide Nanoparticles Mediated by Filamentous Fungi Isolated from Sundarban Mangrove Ecosystem, India, BioNanoScience, 2019, 9, 637–651 CrossRef.
X. Chen and H. J. Schluesener, Nanosilver: a nanoproduct in medical application, Toxicol. Lett., 2008, 176, 1–12 CrossRef CAS.
S. O. Ogunyemi, Y. Abdallah, M. Zhang, H. Fouad, X. Hong, E. Ibrahim, M. M. I. Masum, A. Hossain, J. Mo and B. Li, Green synthesis of zinc oxide nanoparticles using different plant extracts and their antibacterial activity against Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae, Artif. Cells, Nanomed., Biotechnol., 2019, 47, 341–352 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
I. A. P. Farias, C. C. L. Santos, A. L. Xavier, T. M. Batista, Y. M. Nascimento, J. M. F. F. Nunes, P. M. F. Silva, R. A. Menezes-Júnior, J. M. Ferreira, E. O. Lima, J. F. Tavares, M. V. Sobral, D. Keyson and F. C. Sampaio, Synthesis, physicochemical characterization, antifungal activity and toxicological features of cerium oxide nanoparticles, Arabian J. Chem., 2021, 14, 102888 CrossRef CAS.
P. Bhattacharya, S. Swarnakar, S. Ghosh, S. Majumdar and S. Banerjee, Disinfection of drinking water via algae mediated green synthesized copper oxide nanoparticles and its toxicity evaluation, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 102867 CrossRef CAS.
P. Raveendran, J. Fu and S. L. Wallen, Completely “green” synthesis and stabilization of metal nanoparticles, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 13940–13941 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
S. E.-D. Hassan, A. Fouda, A. A. Radwan, S. S. Salem, M. G. Barghoth, M. A. Awad, A. M. Abdo and M. S. El-Gamal, Endophytic actinomycetes Streptomyces spp mediated biosynthesis of copper oxide nanoparticles as a promising tool for biotechnological applications, JBIC, J. Biol. Inorg. Chem., 2019, 24, 377–393 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
M. Asemani and N. Anarjan, Green synthesis of copper oxide nanoparticles using Juglans regia leaf extract and assessment of their physico-chemical and biological properties, Green Process. Synth., 2019, 8, 557–567 CAS.
G. S. El-Sayyad, F. M. Mosallam and A. I. El-Batal, One-pot green synthesis of magnesium oxide nanoparticles using Penicillium chrysogenum melanin pigment and gamma rays with antimicrobial activity against multidrug-resistant microbes, Adv. Powder Technol., 2018, 29, 2616–2625 CrossRef CAS.
A. Miri, H. Beiki, A. Najafidoust, M. Khatami and M. Sarani, Cerium oxide nanoparticles: green synthesis using Banana peel, cytotoxic effect, UV protection and their photocatalytic activity, Bioprocess Biosyst. Eng., 2021, 44, 1891–1899 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
R. F. Sadek, H. A. Farrag, S. M. Abdelsalam, Z. Keiralla, A. I. Raafat and E. Araby, A Powerful Nanocomposite Polymer Prepared From Metal Oxide Nanoparticles
Synthesized via Brown Algae as Anti-corrosion and Anti-biofilm, Front. Mater., 2019, 6, 140 CrossRef.
S. C. Mali, S. Raj and R. Trivedi, Biosynthesis of copper oxide nanoparticles using Enicostemma axillare (Lam.) leaf extract, Biochem. Biophys. Rep., 2019, 20, 100699 Search PubMed.
M. Fani, F. Ghandehari and M. Rezaee, Biosynthesis of iron oxide nanoparticles by cytoplasmic extract of bacteria lactobacillus fermentum, J. Med. Chem. Sci., 2018, 1, 28–30 CAS.
H. H. Bahjat, R. A. Ismail, G. M. Sulaiman and M. S. Jabir, Magnetic Field-Assisted Laser Ablation of Titanium Dioxide Nanoparticles in Water for Anti-Bacterial Applications, J. Inorg. Organomet. Polym. Mater., 2021, 31, 3649–3656 CrossRef CAS.
G. Rajakumar, A. A. Rahuman, S. M. Roopan, V. G. Khanna, G. Elango, C. Kamaraj, A. A. Zahir and K. Velayutham, Fungus-mediated biosynthesis and characterization of TiO2 nanoparticles and their activity against pathogenic bacteria, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2012, 91, 23–29 CrossRef CAS.
P. Rauwel, S. Küünal, S. Ferdov and E. Rauwel, A review on the green synthesis of silver nanoparticles and their morphologies studied via TEM, Adv. Mater. Sci. Eng., 2015, 2015, 682749 Search PubMed.
K. X. Lee, K. Shameli, Y. P. Yew, S.-Y. Teow, H. Jahangirian, R. Rafiee-Moghaddam and T. J. Webster, Recent developments in the facile bio-synthesis of gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) and their biomedical applications, Int. J. Nanomed., 2020, 15, 275 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
D. M. S. A. Salem, M. M. Ismail and M. A. Aly-Eldeen, Biogenic synthesis and antimicrobial potency of iron oxide (Fe3O4) nanoparticles using algae harvested from the Mediterranean Sea, Egypt, Egypt. J. Aquat. Res., 2019, 45, 197–204 CrossRef.
S. Amutha and S. Sridhar, Green synthesis of magnetic iron oxide nanoparticle using leaves of Glycosmis mauritiana and their antibacterial activity against human pathogens, J. Innovations Pharm. Biol. Sci., 2018, 5, 22–26 CAS.
M. Fatemi, N. Mollania, M. Momeni-Moghaddam and F. Sadeghifar, Extracellular biosynthesis of magnetic iron oxide nanoparticles by Bacillus cereus strain HMH1: Characterization and in vitro cytotoxicity analysis on MCF-7 and 3T3 cell lines, J. Biotechnol., 2018, 270, 1–11 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
S. Munusamy, K. Bhakyaraj, L. Vijayalakshmi, A. Stephen and V. Narayanan, Synthesis and characterization of cerium oxide nanoparticles using Curvularia lunata and their antibacterial properties, Int. J. Innovative Res. Sci. Eng., 2014, 2, 318 Search PubMed.
S. S. Mathew, N. E. Sunny and V. Shanmugam, Green synthesis of anatase titanium dioxide nanoparticles using Cuminum cyminum seed extract; effect on Mung bean (Vigna radiata) seed germination, Inorg. Chem. Commun., 2021, 126, 108485 CrossRef CAS.
L. H. Madkour, Biogenic–biosynthesis metallic nanoparticles (MNPs) for pharmacological, biomedical and environmental nanobiotechnological applications, Chron. Pharm. Sci. J., 2018, 2, 384–444 Search PubMed.
I. Bibi, N. Nazar, S. Ata, M. Sultan, A. Ali, A. Abbas, K. Jilani, S. Kamal, F. M. Sarim and M. I. Khan, Green synthesis of iron oxide nanoparticles using pomegranate seeds extract and photocatalytic activity evaluation for the degradation of textile dye, J. Mater. Res. Technol., 2019, 8, 6115–6124 CrossRef CAS.
A. Pugazhendhi, R. Prabhu, K. Muruganantham, R. Shanmuganathan and S. Natarajan, Anticancer, antimicrobial and photocatalytic activities of green synthesized magnesium oxide nanoparticles (MgONPs) using aqueous extract of Sargassum wightii, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 2019, 190, 86–97 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
M. M. Abdel-Aziz, T. M. Emam and E. A. Elsherbiny, Bioactivity of magnesium oxide nanoparticles synthesized from cell filtrate of endobacterium Burkholderia rinojensis against Fusarium oxysporum, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2020, 109, 110617 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
K. S. Venkatesh, K. Gopinath, N. S. Palani, A. Arumugam, S. P. Jose, S. A. Bahadur and R. Ilangovan, Plant pathogenic fungus F. solani mediated biosynthesis of nanoceria: antibacterial and antibiofilm activity, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 42720–42729 RSC.
V. K. Vg and A. A. Prem, Green synthesis and characterization of iron oxide nanoparticles using Phyllanthus niruri extract, Orient. J. Chem., 2018, 34, 2583–2589 Search PubMed.
S. S. Salem and A. Fouda, Green synthesis of metallic nanoparticles and their prospective biotechnological applications: an overview, Biol. Trace Elem. Res., 2021, 199, 344–370 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
M. Sharma, K. Behl, S. Nigam and M. Joshi, TiO2-GO nanocomposite for photocatalysis and environmental applications: A green synthesis approach, Vacuum, 2018, 156, 434–439 CrossRef CAS.
G. K. Ağçeli, H. Hammachi, S. P. Kodal, N. Cihangir and Z. Aksu, A Novel Approach to Synthesize TiO 2 Nanoparticles: Biosynthesis by Using Streptomyces sp. HC1, J. Inorg. Organomet. Polym. Mater., 2020, 30, 3221–3229 CrossRef.
K. Gopinath, V. Karthika, C. Sundaravadivelan, S. Gowri and A. Arumugam, Mycogenesis of cerium oxide nanoparticles using Aspergillus niger culture filtrate and their applications for antibacterial and larvicidal activities, J. Nanostruct. Chem., 2015, 5, 295–303 CrossRef CAS.
R. M. Woodsmall and D. A. Benson, Information resources at the National Center for Biotechnology Information, Bull. Med. Libr. Assoc., 1993, 81(3), 282–4 CAS.
A. M. Sciuto, B. J. Wong, M. E. Martens, H. Hoard-Fruchey and M. W. Perkins, Phosphine toxicity: a story of disrupted mitochondrial metabolism, Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci., 2016, 1374, 41–51 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
J. Suresh, G. Pradheesh, V. Alexramani, M. Sundrarajan and S. I. Hong, Green synthesis and characterization of hexagonal shaped MgO nanoparticles using insulin plant (Costus pictus D. Don) leave extract and its antimicrobial as well as anticancer activity, Adv. Powder Technol., 2018, 29, 1685–1694 CrossRef CAS.
A. K. Jha, K. Prasad and K. Prasad, Biosynthesis of Sb2O3 nanoparticles: A low–cost green approach, Biotechnol. J., 2009, 4, 1582–1585 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
G. Vecchio, A. Galeone, V. Brunetti, G. Maiorano, S. Sabella, R. Cingolani and P. P. Pompa, Concentration-dependent, size-independent toxicity of citrate capped AuNPs in Drosophila melanogaster, PLoS One, 2012, 7, e29980 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
M. Taran, M. Rad and M. Alavi, Biosynthesis of TiO(2) and ZnO nanoparticles by Halomonas elongata IBRC-M 10214 in different conditions of medium, BioImpacts, 2018, 8, 81–89 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
Y. Abdallah, S. O. Ogunyemi, A. Abdelazez, M. Zhang, X. Hong, E. Ibrahim, A. Hossain, H. Fouad, B. Li and J. Chen, The green synthesis of MgO nano-Flowers using Rosmarinus officinalis L.(Rosemary) and the antibacterial activities against Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae, BioMed Res. Int., 2019, 2019, 1–8 Search PubMed.
Y. Suzuki, S. D. Kelly, K. M. Kemner and J. F. Banfield, Nanometre-size products of uranium bioreduction, Nature, 2002, 419, 134–134 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
S. M. Taghavi, M. Momenpour, M. Azarian, M. Ahmadian, F. Souri, S. A. Taghavi, M. Sadeghain and M. Karchani, Effects of nanoparticles on the environment and outdoor workplaces, Electron. Physician, 2013, 5, 706 Search PubMed.
M. S. Samuel, V. Subramaniyan, J. Bhattacharya, R. Chidambaram, T. Qureshi and N. D. Pradeep Singh, Ultrasonic-assisted synthesis of graphene oxide – fungal hyphae: An efficient and reclaimable adsorbent for chromium(VI) removal from aqueous solution, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2018, 48, 412–417 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
M. J. Marshall, A. S. Beliaev, A. C. Dohnalkova, D. W. Kennedy, L. Shi, Z. Wang, M. I. Boyanov, B. Lai, K. M. Kemner and J. S. McLean, c-Type cytochrome-dependent formation of U (IV) nanoparticles by Shewanella oneidensis, PLos Biol., 2006, 4, e268 CrossRef PubMed.
Y.-P. Jia, B.-Y. Ma, X.-W. Wei and Z.-Y. Qian, The in vitro and in vivo toxicity of gold nanoparticles, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2017, 28, 691–702 CrossRef CAS.
G. Marquis, B. Ramasamy, S. Banwarilal and A. P. Munusamy, Evaluation of antibacterial activity of plant mediated CaO nanoparticles using Cissus quadrangularis extract, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 2016, 155, 28–33 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
M. H. Wright, S. M. Farooqui, A. R. White and A. C. Greene, Production of manganese oxide nanoparticles by Shewanella species, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2016, 82, 5402–5409 CrossRef CAS PubMed.

          J. Jeevanandam, A. Sundaramurthy, V. Sharma, C. Murugan, K. Pal, M. H. A. Kodous and M. K. Danquah, in Sustainable nanoscale engineering, Elsevier,  2020, pp. 83–113,  DOI:10.1016/B978-0-12-814681-1.00004-7.
Y. Tuo, G. Liu, B. Dong, J. Zhou, A. Wang, J. Wang, R. Jin, H. Lv, Z. Dou and W. Huang, Microbial synthesis of Pd/Fe3O4, Au/Fe3O4 and PdAu/Fe3O4 nanocomposites for catalytic reduction of nitroaromatic compounds, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 13515 CrossRef CAS PubMed.

          M. K. Panda, Y. D. Singh, R. K. Behera and N. K. Dhal, in Green Nanoparticles, Springer,  2020, pp. 213–225,  DOI:10.1007/978-3-030-39246-8_10.
J. M. Jacob, R. Ravindran, M. Narayanan, S. M. Samuel, A. Pugazhendhi and G. Kumar, Microalgae: A prospective low cost green alternative for nanoparticle synthesis, Curr. Opin. Environ. Sci. Health, 2020, 20, 100163 CrossRef.
E. Zare, S. Pourseyedi, M. Khatami and E. Darezereshki, Simple biosynthesis of zinc oxide nanoparticles using nature's source, and it's in vitro bio-activity, J. Mol. Struct., 2017, 1146, 96–103 CrossRef CAS.
H. R. El-Seedi, R. M. El-Shabasy, S. A. M. Khalifa, A. Saeed, A. Shah, R. Shah, F. J. Iftikhar, M. M. Abdel-Daim, A. Omri and N. H. Hajrahand, Metal nanoparticles fabricated by green chemistry using natural extracts: biosynthesis, mechanisms, and applications, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 24539–24559 RSC.
I. M. S. Araújo, R. R. Silva, G. Pacheco, W. R. Lustri, A. Tercjak, J. Gutierrez, J. R. S. Júnior, F. H. C. Azevedo, G. S. Figuêredo, M. L. Vega, S. J. L. Ribeiro and H. S. Barud, Hydrothermal synthesis of bacterial cellulose–copper oxide nanocomposites and evaluation of their antimicrobial activity, Carbohydr. Polym., 2018, 179, 341–349 CrossRef PubMed.
A. Gour and N. K. Jain, Advances in green synthesis of nanoparticles, Artif. Cells, Nanomed., Biotechnol., 2019, 47, 844–851 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
R. K. Das, V. L. Pachapur, L. Lonappan, M. Naghdi, R. Pulicharla, S. Maiti, M. Cledon, L. M. A. Dalila, S. J. Sarma and S. K. Brar, Biological synthesis of metallic nanoparticles: plants, animals and microbial aspects, Nanotechnol. Environ. Eng., 2017, 2, 18 CrossRef.
Y. Liu, H. Perumalsamy, C. H. Kang, S. H. Kim, J.-S. Hwang, S.-C. Koh, T.-H. Yi and Y.-J. Kim, Intracellular synthesis of gold nanoparticles by Gluconacetobacter liquefaciens for delivery of peptide CopA3 and ginsenoside and anti-inflammatory effect on lipopolysaccharide-activated macrophages, Artif. Cells, Nanomed., Biotechnol., 2020, 48, 777–788 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
R. Deng, D. Lin, L. Zhu, S. Majumdar, J. C. White, J. L. Gardea-Torresdey and B. Xing, Nanoparticle interactions with co-existing contaminants: joint toxicity, bioaccumulation and risk, Nanotoxicology, 2017, 11, 591–612 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
A. M. Elgorban, S. M. Aref, S. M. Seham, K. M. Elhindi, A. H. Bahkali, S. R. Sayed and M. A. Manal, Extracellular synthesis of silver nanoparticles using Aspergillus versicolor and evaluation of their activity on plant pathogenic fungi, Mycosphere, 2016, 7, 844–852 CrossRef.
K. E. Sapsford, W. R. Algar, L. Berti, K. B. Gemmill, B. J. Casey, E. Oh, M. H. Stewart and I. L. Medintz, Functionalizing nanoparticles with biological molecules: developing chemistries that facilitate nanotechnology, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 1904–2074 CrossRef CAS PubMed.

          Y. S. Hii, J. Jeevanandam, Y. S. Chan and M. K. Danquah, in Phytochemistry, Volume 2 Pharmacognosy, Nanomedicine, and Contemporary Issues, Apple Academic Press,  2018, pp. 459–486 Search PubMed.
V. V. Makarov, A. J. Love, O. V. Sinitsyna, S. S. Makarova, I. V. Yaminsky, M. E. Taliansky and N. O. Kalinina, “Green” nanotechnologies: synthesis of metal nanoparticles using plants, Acta Naturae, 2014, 6, 1–20 CrossRef.
J. Jeevanandam, Y. S. Chan and M. K. Danquah, Effect of pH variations on morphological transformation of biosynthesized MgO nanoparticles, Part. Sci. Technol., 2019, 38, 573–586 CrossRef.
P. Khandel, R. K. Yadaw, D. K. Soni, L. Kanwar and S. K. Shahi, Biogenesis of metal nanoparticles and their pharmacological applications: present status and application prospects, J. Nanostruct. Chem., 2018, 8, 217–254 CrossRef CAS.
M. Ovais, A. T. Khalil, N. U. Islam, I. Ahmad, M. Ayaz, M. Saravanan, Z. K. Shinwari and S. Mukherjee, Role of plant phytochemicals and microbial enzymes in biosynthesis of metallic nanoparticles, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2018, 102, 6799–6814 CrossRef CAS PubMed.

          M. Sardar and J. A. Mazumder, in Environmental Nanotechnology: Volume 2, ed. N. Dasgupta, S. Ranjan and E. Lichtfouse, Springer International Publishing, Cham,  2019, pp. 1–23,  DOI:10.1007/978-3-319-98708-8_1.
G. Gahlawat and A. R. Choudhury, A review on the biosynthesis of metal and metal salt nanoparticles by microbes, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 12944–12967 RSC.

          V. K. Yadav, S. H. Khan, P. Malik, A. Thappa, R. Suriyaprabha, R. K. Ravi, N. Choudhary, H. Kalasariya and G. Gnanamoorthy, in Microbial Biotechnology: Basic Research and Applications, ed. J. Singh, A. Vyas, S. Wang and R. Prasad, Springer Singapore, Singapore,  2020, pp. 147–187,  DOI:10.1007/978-981-15-2817-0_7.
S. S. Waghmare, A. M. Deshmukh and Z. Sadowski, Biosynthesis, optimization, purification and characterization of gold nanoparticles, Afr. J. Microbiol. Res., 2014, 8, 138–146 CrossRef.
J. H. Lee, Y. S. Kim, T.-J. Choi, W. J. Lee and Y. T. Kim, Paracoccus haeundaensis sp. nov., a Gram-negative, halophilic, astaxanthin-producing bacterium, Int. J. Syst. Evol. Microbiol., 2004, 54, 1699–1702 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
A. Bhargava, N. Jain, S. Gangopadhyay and J. Panwar, Development of gold nanoparticle-fungal hybrid based heterogeneous interface for catalytic applications, Process Biochem., 2015, 50, 1293–1300 CrossRef CAS.
E. P. Vetchinkina, E. A. Loshchinina, A. M. Burov, L. A. Dykman and V. E. Nikitina, Enzymatic formation of gold nanoparticles by submerged culture of the basidiomycete Lentinus edodes, J. Biotechnol., 2014, 182–183, 37–45 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
J. M. Palomo and M. Filice, Biosynthesis of Metal Nanoparticles: Novel Efficient Heterogeneous Nanocatalysts, Nanomaterials, 2016, 6, 84 CrossRef PubMed.
P. Roychoudhury, A. Bhattacharya, A. Dasgupta and R. Pal, Biogenic synthesis of gold nanoparticle using fractioned cellular components from eukaryotic algae and cyanobacteria, Phycol. Res., 2016, 64, 133–140 CrossRef CAS.
M. Guilger-Casagrande and R. de Lima, Synthesis of Silver Nanoparticles Mediated by Fungi: A Review, Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol., 2019, 7, 287–287 CrossRef PubMed.
A. Dieudonné, D. Pignol and S. Prévéral, Magnetosomes: biogenic iron nanoparticles produced by environmental bacteria, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2019, 103, 3637–3649 CrossRef PubMed.
M. Ovais, A. T. Khalil, M. Ayaz, I. Ahmad, S. K. Nethi and S. Mukherjee, Biosynthesis of metal nanoparticles via microbial enzymes: a mechanistic approach, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2018, 19, 4100 CrossRef PubMed.
X. Li, H. Xu, Z.-S. Chen and G. Chen, Biosynthesis of nanoparticles by microorganisms and their applications, J. Nanomater., 2011, 2011, 1–16 Search PubMed.
M. Nadeem, R. Khan, K. Afridi, A. Nadhman, S. Ullah, S. Faisal, Z. U. Mabood, C. Hano and B. H. Abbasi, Green Synthesis of Cerium Oxide Nanoparticles (CeO(2) NPs) and Their Antimicrobial Applications: A Review, Int. J. Nanomed., 2020, 15, 5951–5961 CrossRef CAS PubMed.

          A. Anandaradje, V. Meyappan, I. Kumar and N. Sakthivel, in Nanoparticles in Medicine, Springer,  2020, pp. 99–133,  DOI:10.1007/978-981-13-8954-2_4.
A. Rana, K. Yadav and S. Jagadevan, A comprehensive review on green synthesis of nature-inspired metal nanoparticles: Mechanism, application and toxicity, J. Cleaner Prod., 2020, 122880,  DOI:10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.122880.
P. Malik, R. Shankar, V. Malik, N. Sharma and T. K. Mukherjee, Green chemistry based benign routes for nanoparticle synthesis, J. Nanopart., 2014, 2014, 1–14 CrossRef.
B. Volesky and Z. R. Holan, Biosorption of heavy metals, Biotechnol. Prog., 1995, 11, 235–250 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
F. LewisOscar, S. Vismaya, M. Arunkumar, N. Thajuddin, D. Dhanasekaran and C. Nithya, Algal nanoparticles: synthesis and biotechnological potentials, Algae: Org. Imminent Biotechnol., 2016, 7, 157–182 Search PubMed.
K. B. Narayanan and N. Sakthivel, Biological synthesis of metal nanoparticles by microbes, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2010, 156, 1–13 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
S. S. Shankar, A. Rai, A. Ahmad and M. Sastry, Rapid synthesis of Au, Ag, and bimetallic Au core–Ag shell nanoparticles using Neem (Azadirachta indica) leaf broth, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2004, 275, 496–502 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
P. Mukherjee, A. Ahmad, D. Mandal, S. Senapati, S. R. Sainkar, M. I. Khan, R. Parishcha, P. V. Ajaykumar, M. Alam and R. Kumar, Fungus-mediated synthesis of silver nanoparticles and their immobilization in the mycelial matrix: a novel biological approach to nanoparticle synthesis, Nano Lett., 2001, 1, 515–519 CrossRef CAS.
J. Jeevanandam, Y. S. Chan and M. K. Danquah, Biosynthesis of metal and metal oxide nanoparticles, ChemBioEng Rev., 2016, 3, 55–67 CrossRef.
O. Velgosová and A. Mražíková, Limitations and possibilities of green synthesis and long-term stability of colloidal Ag nanoparticles, AIP Conf. Proc., 1918, 1918(1), 020004 Search PubMed.
R. Prasad, R. Pandey and I. Barman, Engineering tailored nanoparticles with microbes: quo vadis?, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Nanomed. Nanobiotechnol., 2016, 8, 316–330 Search PubMed.
D. K. Golhani, A. Khare, G. K. Burra, V. K. Jain and J. Rao Mokka, Microbes induced biofabrication of nanoparticles: a review, Inorg. Nano-Met. Chem., 2020, 50, 983–999 CrossRef CAS.
N. Zikalala, K. Matshetshe, S. Parani and O. S. Oluwafemi, Biosynthesis protocols for colloidal metal oxide nanoparticles, Nano-Struct. Nano-Objects, 2018, 16, 288–299 CrossRef CAS.
M. Al-Limoun, H. N. Qaralleh, K. M. Khleifat, M. Al-Anber, A. Al-Tarawneh, K. Al-sharafa, M. H. Kailani, M. A. Zaitoun, S. A. Matar and T. Al-soub, Culture Media Composition and Reduction Potential Optimization of Mycelia-free Filtrate for the Biosynthesis of Silver Nanoparticles Using the Fungus Tritirachium oryzae W5H, Curr. Nanosci., 2020, 16, 757–769 CrossRef CAS.
B. Uzair, A. Liaqat, H. Iqbal, B. Menaa, A. Razzaq, G. Thiripuranathar, N. Fatima Rana and F. Menaa, Green and Cost-Effective Synthesis of Metallic Nanoparticles by Algae: Safe Methods for Translational Medicine, Bioengineering, 2020, 7, 129 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
J. Singh, T. Dutta, K.-H. Kim, M. Rawat, P. Samddar and P. Kumar, ‘Green'synthesis of metals and their oxide nanoparticles: applications for environmental remediation, J. Nanobiotechnol., 2018, 16, 84 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
R. K. Ameta, K. R. Shankar and M. Singh, Plant extract: An effective medium for sythesis of metal nanoparticles, SF J. Nanochem. Nanotechnol., 2018, 1(1), 1008 Search PubMed.
M. Herlekar, S. Barve and R. Kumar, Plant-mediated green synthesis of iron nanoparticles, J. Nanopart., 2014, 2014, 1–9 CrossRef.

          S. Küünal, P. Rauwel and E. Rauwel, in Emerging Applications of Nanoparticles and Architecture Nanostructures, Elsevier,  2018, pp. 411–446,  DOI:10.1016/B978-0-323-51254-1.00014-2.
R. Raliya and P. Biswas, Environmentally benign bio-inspired synthesis of Au nanoparticles, their self-assembly and agglomeration, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 42081–42087 RSC.
V. D. Kulkarni and P. S. Kulkarni, Green synthesis of copper nanoparticles using Ocimum sanctum leaf extract, Int. J. Chem. Stud., 2013, 1, 1–4 Search PubMed.
M. Gopinath, R. Subbaiya, M. M. Selvam and D. Suresh, Synthesis of copper nanoparticles from Nerium oleander leaf aqueous extract and its antibacterial activity, Int. J. Curr. Microbiol. Appl. Sci, 2014, 3, 814–818 Search PubMed.
J. Jeevanandam, Y. S. Chan and M. K. Danquah, Biosynthesis and characterization of MgO nanoparticles from plant extracts via induced molecular nucleation, New J. Chem., 2017, 41, 2800–2814 RSC.
J. Jeevanandam, Y. S. Chan and Y. H. Ku, Aqueous Eucalyptus globulus leaf extract-mediated biosynthesis of MgO nanorods, Appl. Biol. Chem., 2018, 61, 197–208 CrossRef CAS.
N. Thakur, P. Manna and J. Das, Synthesis and biomedical applications of nanoceria, a redox active nanoparticle, J. Nanobiotechnol., 2019, 17, 84 CrossRef PubMed.
F. Charbgoo, M. B. Ahmad and M. Darroudi, Cerium oxide nanoparticles: green synthesis and biological applications, Int. J. Nanomed., 2017, 12, 1401 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
A. Barhoum, J. Jeevanandam, A. Rastogi, Y. Boluk, A. Dufresne, M. K. Danquah and M. Bechelany, Plant Celluloses, Hemicelluloses, Lignins, and Volatile Oils for the Synthesis of Nanoparticles and Nanostructured Materials, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 22845 RSC.
N. Ishak, S. K. Kamarudin, S. N. Timmiati, N. A. Karim and S. Basri, Biogenic platinum from agricultural wastes extract for improved methanol oxidation reaction in direct methanol fuel cell, J. Adv. Res., 2021, 28, 63–75 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
A. Schröfel, G. Kratošová, I. Šafařík, M. Šafaříková, I. Raška and L. M. Shor, Applications of biosynthesized metallic nanoparticles–a review, Acta Biomater., 2014, 10, 4023–4042 CrossRef PubMed.
V. N. Kalpana and V. Devi Rajeswari, A review on green synthesis, biomedical applications, and toxicity studies of ZnO NPs, Bioinorg. Chem. Appl., 2018, 2018 CAS.
N. I. Hulkoti and T. C. Taranath, Biosynthesis of nanoparticles using microbes—a review, Colloids Surf., B, 2014, 121, 474–483 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
D. Sharma, S. Kanchi and K. Bisetty, Biogenic synthesis of nanoparticles: A review, Arabian J. Chem., 2019, 12, 3576–3600 CrossRef CAS.
S. Ahmed, M. Ahmad, B. L. Swami and S. Ikram, A review on plants extract mediated synthesis of silver nanoparticles for antimicrobial applications: a green expertise, J. Adv. Res., 2016, 7, 17–28 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
V. K. Sharma, R. A. Yngard and Y. Lin, Silver nanoparticles: green synthesis and their antimicrobial activities, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2009, 145, 83–96 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
P. Singh, Y. J. Kim, H. Singh, C. Wang, K. H. Hwang, M. E.-A. Farh and D. C. Yang, Biosynthesis, characterization, and antimicrobial applications of silver nanoparticles, Int. J. Nanomed., 2015, 10, 2567 CAS.
M. V. D. Z. Park, A. M. Neigh, J. P. Vermeulen, L. J. J. de la Fonteyne, H. W. Verharen, J. J. Briedé, H. van Loveren and W. H. de Jong, The effect of particle size on the cytotoxicity, inflammation, developmental toxicity and genotoxicity of silver nanoparticles, Biomaterials, 2011, 32, 9810–9817 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
J. R. Morones-Ramirez, J. A. Winkler, C. S. Spina and J. J. Collins, Silver enhances antibiotic activity against Gram-negative bacteria, Sci. Transl. Med., 2013, 5, 190ra181–190ra181 Search PubMed.
Y. Yakabe, T. Sano, H. Ushio and T. Yasunaga, Kinetic studies of the interaction between silver ion and deoxyribonucleic acid, Chem. Lett., 1980, 9, 373–376 CrossRef.
S. Ankanna, T. Prasad, E. K. Elumalai and N. Savithramma, Production of biogenic silver nanoparticles using Boswellia ovalifoliolata stem bark, Dig. J. Nanomater. Biostructures, 2010, 5, 369–372 Search PubMed.
Y. Zhang, T. P. Shareena Dasari, H. Deng and H. Yu, Antimicrobial activity of gold nanoparticles and ionic gold, J. Environ. Sci. Health, Part C: Environ. Carcinog. Ecotoxicol. Rev., 2015, 33, 286–327 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
I. Sondi and B. Salopek-Sondi, Silver nanoparticles as antimicrobial agent: a case study on E. coli as a model for Gram-negative bacteria, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2004, 275, 177–182 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
O. Yamamoto, T. Ohira, K. Alvarez and M. Fukuda, Antibacterial characteristics of CaCO3−MgO composites, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2010, 173, 208–212 CrossRef CAS.
S. Makhluf, R. Dror, Y. Nitzan, Y. Abramovich, R. Jelinek and A. Gedanken, Microwave–assisted synthesis of nanocrystalline MgO and its use as a bacteriocide, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1708–1715 CrossRef CAS.
R. Sivaraj, P. K. S. M. Rahman, P. Rajiv, S. Narendhran and R. Venckatesh, Biosynthesis and characterization of Acalypha indica mediated copper oxide nanoparticles and evaluation of its antimicrobial and anticancer activity, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2014, 129, 255–258 CrossRef CAS PubMed.

          N. Chandrasekar, A. Bala, V. Vijayalakshmi, K. S. Ilangovan, K. S. Vijaya and T. P. Rajesh, Synthesis of TIO2 Nanoparticles by various methodologies and evaluation of their antibacterial activity, Asian J. Microbiol., Biotechnol. Environ. Sci.,  2015, 17, 133–138 Search PubMed.
S. Gunalan, R. Sivaraj and V. Rajendran, Green synthesized ZnO nanoparticles against bacterial and fungal pathogens, Prog. Nat. Sci.: Mater. Int., 2012, 22, 693–700 CrossRef.
J. Suresh, G. Pradheesh, V. Alexramani, M. Sundrarajan and S. I. Hong, Green synthesis and characterization of zinc oxide nanoparticle using insulin plant (Costus pictus D. Don) and investigation of its antimicrobial as well as anticancer activities, Adv. Nat. Sci.: Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2018, 9, 015008 Search PubMed.
K. Elumalai and S. Velmurugan, Green synthesis, characterization and antimicrobial activities of zinc oxide nanoparticles from the leaf extract of Azadirachta indica (L.), Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 345, 329–336 CrossRef CAS.
G. Tao, R. Cai, Y. Wang, L. Liu, H. Zuo, P. Zhao, A. Umar, C. Mao, Q. Xia and H. He, Bioinspired design of AgNPs embedded silk sericin-based sponges for efficiently combating bacteria and promoting wound healing, Mater. Des., 2019, 180, 107940 CrossRef CAS.
A. Z. Wilczewska, K. Niemirowicz, K. H. Markiewicz and H. Car, Nanoparticles as drug delivery systems, Pharmacol. Rep., 2012, 64, 1020–1037 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
L. Xiang, J. Wei, S. Jianbo, W. Guili, G. Feng and L. Ying, Purified and sterilized magnetosomes from Magnetospirillum gryphiswaldense MSR–1 were not toxic to mouse fibroblasts in vitro, Lett. Appl. Microbiol., 2007, 45, 75–81 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
M. Gonçalves, S. Mignani, J. Rodrigues and H. Tomás, A glance over doxorubicin based-nanotherapeutics: From proof-of-concept studies to solutions in the market, J. Controlled Release, 2020, 317, 347–374 CrossRef PubMed.
J.-B. Sun, J.-H. Duan, S.-L. Dai, J. Ren, Y.-D. Zhang, J.-S. Tian and Y. Li, In vitro and in vivo antitumor effects of doxorubicin loaded with bacterial magnetosomes (DBMs) on H22 cells: the magnetic bio-nanoparticles as drug carriers, Cancer Lett., 2007, 258, 109–117 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
J. B. Sun, J. H. Duan, S. L. Dai, J. Ren, L. Guo, W. Jiang and Y. Li, Preparation and anti–tumor efficiency evaluation of doxorubicin–loaded bacterial magnetosomes: Magnetic nanoparticles as drug carriers isolated from Magnetospirillum gryphiswaldense, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 2008, 101, 1313–1320 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
W. H. Gmeiner and S. Ghosh, Nanotechnology for cancer treatment, Nanotechnol. Rev., 2014, 3, 111–122 CAS.
J. Cheng, X. Wang, L. Qiu, Y. Li, N. Marraiki, A. M. Elgorban and L. Xue, Green synthesized zinc oxide nanoparticles regulates the apoptotic expression in bone cancer cells MG-63 cells, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 2020, 202, 111644 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
R. Raliya, P. Biswas and J. C. Tarafdar, TiO2 nanoparticle biosynthesis and its physiological effect on mung bean (Vigna radiata L.), Biotechnol. Rep., 2015, 5, 22–26 CrossRef PubMed.
K. P. Raj, P. Sivakarthik, A. Uthirakumar and V. Thangaraj, Cytotoxicity assessment of synthesized nickel oxide nanoparticles on MCF-7 and A-549 cancer cell lines, J. Chem. Pharm. Sci. ISSN, 2014, 974, 2115 Search PubMed.
M. Ahamed, D. Ali, H. A. Alhadlaq and M. J. Akhtar, Nickel oxide nanoparticles exert cytotoxicity via oxidative stress and induce apoptotic response in human liver cells (HepG2), Chemosphere, 2013, 93, 2514–2522 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
R. Raliya and J. C. Tarafdar, ZnO nanoparticle biosynthesis and its effect on phosphorous-mobilizing enzyme secretion and gum contents in Clusterbean (Cyamopsis tetragonoloba L.), Agric. Res., 2013, 2, 48–57 CrossRef CAS.
R. Raliya and J. C. Tarafdar, Biosynthesis and characterization of zinc, magnesium and titanium nanoparticles: an eco-friendly approach, Int. Nano Lett., 2014, 4, 93 CrossRef.
S. F. Medeiros, A. M. Santos, H. Fessi and A. Elaissari, Stimuli-responsive magnetic particles for biomedical applications, Int. J. Pharm., 2011, 403, 139–161 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
M. A. Hahn, A. K. Singh, P. Sharma, S. C. Brown and B. M. Moudgil, Nanoparticles as contrast agents for in vivo bioimaging: current status and future perspectives, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2011, 399, 3–27 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
K. McNamara and S. A. M. Tofail, Nanoparticles in biomedical applications, Adv. Phys.: X, 2017, 2, 54–88 CAS.
Z. Kang, Y. Liu and S.-T. Lee, Small-sized silicon nanoparticles: new nanolights and nanocatalysts, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 777–791 RSC.
F. Peng, Y. Su, Y. Zhong, C. Fan, S.-T. Lee and Y. He, Silicon nanomaterials platform
for bioimaging, biosensing, and cancer therapy, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 612–623 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
L. Dykman and N. Khlebtsov, Gold nanoparticles in biomedical applications: recent advances and perspectives, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 2256–2282 RSC.
N. Erathodiyil and J. Y. Ying, Functionalization of inorganic nanoparticles for bioimaging applications, Acc. Chem. Res., 2011, 44, 925–935 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
T. Matsunaga, F. Ueki, K. Obata, H. Tajima, T. Tanaka, H. Takeyama, Y. Goda and S. Fujimoto, Fully automated immunoassay system of endocrine disrupting chemicals using monoclonal antibodies chemically conjugated to bacterial magnetic particles, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2003, 475, 75–83 CrossRef CAS.
T. Tanaka, H. Takeda, F. Ueki, K. Obata, H. Tajima, H. Takeyama, Y. Goda, S. Fujimoto and T. Matsunaga, Rapid and sensitive detection of 17β-estradiol in environmental water using automated immunoassay system with bacterial magnetic particles, J. Biotechnol., 2004, 108, 153–159 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
S. Z. Lu, X. Y. Guo, M. S. Zou, Z. Q. Zheng, Y. C. Li, X. D. Li, L. L. Li and H. Wang, Bacteria–Instructed In Situ Aggregation of AuNPs with Enhanced Photoacoustic Signal for Bacterial Infection Bioimaging, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2020, 9, 1901229 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
L. Zhang and E. Wang, Metal nanoclusters: new fluorescent probes for sensors and bioimaging, Nano Today, 2014, 9, 132–157 CrossRef CAS.
J. Wang, G. Zhang, Q. Li, H. Jiang, C. Liu, C. Amatore and X. Wang, In vivo self-bio-imaging of tumors through in situ biosynthesized fluorescent gold nanoclusters, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1157 CrossRef PubMed.
M. Holzinger, A. Le Goff and S. Cosnier, Nanomaterials for biosensing applications: a review, Front. Chem., 2014, 2, 63 Search PubMed.
M. Sharon, A. Mewada, N. Swaminathan and C. Sharon, Synthesis of Biogenic Gold Nanoparticles and its Applications as Theranostic Agent: A Review, Nanomed. Nanotechnol. J., 2017, 1, 113 Search PubMed.
P. Kuppusamy, M. Y. Mashitah, G. P. Maniam and N. Govindan, Biosynthesized gold nanoparticle developed as a tool for detection of HCG hormone in pregnant women urine sample, Asian Pac. J. Trop. Dis., 2014, 4, 237 CrossRef.
J. Deng, S. Deng and Y. Liu, Highly sensitive electrochemical sensing platform for hydrazine detection, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci, 2018, 13, 3566–3574 CrossRef CAS.
G. Shan, J. Xing, H. Zhang and H. Liu, Biodesulfurization of dibenzothiophene by microbial cells coated with magnetite nanoparticles, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2005, 71, 4497–4502 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
T. Santhoshkumar, A. A. Rahuman, G. Rajakumar, S. Marimuthu, A. Bagavan, C. Jayaseelan, A. A. Zahir, G. Elango and C. Kamaraj, Synthesis of silver nanoparticles using Nelumbo nucifera leaf extract and its larvicidal activity against malaria and filariasis vectors, Parasitol. Res., 2011, 108, 693–702 CrossRef PubMed.
A. K. Jha and K. Prasad, Ferroelectric BaTiO3 nanoparticles: biosynthesis and characterization, Colloids Surf., B, 2010, 75, 330–334 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
I. Forrez, M. Carballa, G. Fink, A. Wick, T. Hennebel, L. Vanhaecke, T. Ternes, N. Boon and W. Verstraete, Biogenic metals for the oxidative and reductive removal of pharmaceuticals, biocides and iodinated contrast media in a polishing membrane bioreactor, Water Res., 2011, 45, 1763–1773 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
J. Jeevanandam, Y. San Chan, Y. J. Wong and Y. S. Hii, Biogenic synthesis of magnesium oxide nanoparticles using Aloe barbadensis leaf latex extract, IOP Conf. Ser.: Mater. Sci. Eng., 2020, 943(1), 012030 CAS.
V. Soni, P. Raizada, P. Singh, H. N. Cuong, S. Rangabhashiyam, A. Saini, R. V. Saini, Q. Van Le, A. K. Nadda and T.-T. Le, Sustainable and green trends in using plant extracts for the synthesis of biogenic metal nanoparticles toward environmental and pharmaceutical advances: A review, Environ. Res., 2021, 111622 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
A. Saravanan, P. S. Kumar, S. Karishma, D.-V. N. Vo, S. Jeevanantham, P. R. Yaashikaa and C. S. George, A review on biosynthesis of metal nanoparticles and its environmental applications, Chemosphere, 2021, 264, 128580 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
N. A. Mulla, S. V. Otari, R. A. Bohara, H. M. Yadav and S. H. Pawar, Rapid and size-controlled biosynthesis of cytocompatible selenium nanoparticles by Azadirachta indica leaves extract for antibacterial activity, Mater. Lett., 2020, 264, 127353 CrossRef CAS.
H. Xie, Y. Gu and H. J. Ploehn, Dendrimer-mediated synthesis of platinum nanoparticles: new insights from dialysis and atomic force microscopy measurements, Nanotechnology, 2005, 16, S492 CrossRef PubMed.
J. P. Novak, C. Nickerson, S. Franzen and D. L. Feldheim, Purification of molecularly bridged metal nanoparticle arrays by centrifugation and size exclusion chromatography, Anal. Chem., 2001, 73, 5758–5761 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
J. D. Robertson, L. Rizzello, M. Avila-Olias, J. Gaitzsch, C. Contini, M. S. Magoń, S. A. Renshaw and G. Battaglia, Purification of nanoparticles by size and shape, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 1–9 CrossRef PubMed.
M. Khoshnamvand, S. Ashtiani and J. Liu, Acute toxicity of gold nanoparticles synthesized from macroalga Saccharina japonica towards Daphnia magna, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 2020, 1–7,  DOI:10.1007/s11356-020-08770-9.
M. Jalal, M. A. Ansari, M. A. Alzohairy, S. G. Ali, H. M. Khan, A. Almatroudi and M. I. Siddiqui, Anticandidal activity of biosynthesized silver nanoparticles: effect on growth, cell morphology, and key virulence attributes of Candida species, Int. J. Nanomed., 2019, 14, 4667 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
P. Anbu, S. C. B. Gopinath, H. S. Yun and C.-G. Lee, Temperature-dependent green biosynthesis and characterization of silver nanoparticles using balloon flower plants and their antibacterial potential, J. Mol. Struct., 2019, 1177, 302–309 CrossRef CAS.
C. Colipai, G. Southam, P. Oyarzún, D. González, V. Díaz, B. Contreras and I. Nancucheo, Synthesis of copper sulfide nanoparticles using biogenic H2S produced by a low-pH sulfidogenic bioreactor, Minerals, 2018, 8, 35 CrossRef.
A. A. K. Zarchi, N. Mokhtari, M. Arfan, T. Rehman, M. Ali, M. Amini, R. F. Majidi and A. R. Shahverdi, A sunlight-induced method for rapid biosynthesis of silver nanoparticles using an Andrachnea chordifolia ethanol extract, Appl. Phys. A, 2011, 103, 349–353 CrossRef CAS.
G. Kaur, A. Kalia and H. S. Sodhi, Size controlled, time-efficient biosynthesis of silver nanoparticles from Pleurotus florida using ultra-violet, visible range, and microwave radiations, Inorg. Nano-Met. Chem., 2020, 50, 35–41 CrossRef CAS.
S. M. M. Shanab, A. M. Partila, H. E. A. Ali and M. A. Abdullah, Impact of gamma-irradiated silver nanoparticles biosynthesized from Pseudomonas aeruginosa on growth, lipid, and carbohydrates of Chlorella vulgaris and Dictyochloropsis splendida, J. Radiat. Res. Appl. Sci., 2020, 1–12,  DOI:10.1080/16878507.2020.1856599.
Y. M. Siaw, J. Jeevanandam, Y. S. Hii and Y. San Chan, Photo-irradiation coupled biosynthesis of magnesium oxide nanoparticles for antibacterial application, Naunyn-Schmiedeberg's Arch. Pharmacol., 2020, 393, 2253–2264 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
I. Shaheen and K. S. Ahmad, Chromatographic identification of “green capping agents” extracted from Nasturtium officinale (Brassicaceae) leaves for the synthesis of MoO3 nanoparticles, J. Sep. Sci., 2020, 43, 598–605 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
R. Zarzuela, M. J. Luna, M. L. A. Gil, M. J. Ortega, J. M. Palacios-Santander, I. Naranjo-Rodríguez, J. J. Delgado and L. M. Cubillana-Aguilera, Analytical determination of the reducing and stabilization agents present in different Zostera noltii extracts used for the biosynthesis of gold nanoparticles, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 2018, 179, 32–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed.

          A. Rastogi, P. Singh, F. A. Haraz and A. Barhoum, in Fundamentals of Nanoparticles, Elsevier,  2018, pp. 571–604,  DOI:10.1016/B978-0-323-51255-8.00023-9.
H. Liu, T. Lian, Y. Liu, Y. Hong, D. Sun and Q. Li, Plant-mediated synthesis of Au nanoparticles: separation and identification of active biomolecule in the water extract of Cacumen Platycladi, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2017, 56, 5262–5270 CrossRef CAS.
A. Ramazani, S. Taghavi Fardood, Z. Hosseinzadeh, F. Sadri and S. W. Joo, Green synthesis of magnetic copper ferrite nanoparticles using tragacanth gum as a biotemplate and their catalytic activity for the oxidation of alcohols, Iran. J. Catal., 2017, 7, 181–185 CAS.
M. Hasan, A. Zafar, I. Shahzadi, F. Luo, S. G. Hassan, T. Tariq, S. Zehra, T. Munawar, F. Iqbal and X. Shu, Fractionation of Biomolecules in Withania coagulans Extract for Bioreductive Nanoparticle Synthesis, Antifungal and Biofilm Activity, Molecules, 2020, 25, 3478 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
N. Zhu, B. Zhang and Q. Yu, Genetic Engineering-Facilitated Coassembly of Synthetic Bacterial Cells and Magnetic Nanoparticles for Efficient Heavy Metal Removal, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 22948–22957 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
M. S. Aref and S. S. Salem, Bio-callus synthesis of silver nanoparticles, characterization, and antibacterial activities via Cinnamomum camphora callus culture, Biocatal. Agric. Biotechnol., 2020, 27, 101689 CrossRef.
Y. N. Shkryl, G. N. Veremeichik, D. G. Kamenev, T. Y. Gorpenchenko, Y. A. Yugay, D. V. Mashtalyar, A. V. Nepomnyaschiy, T. V. Avramenko, A. A. Karabtsov and V. V. Ivanov, Green synthesis of silver nanoparticles using transgenic Nicotiana tabacum callus culture expressing silicatein gene from marine sponge Latrunculia oparinae, Artif. Cells, Nanomed., Biotechnol., 2018, 46, 1646–1658 CAS.
A. T. Pandey, I. Pandey, Y. Hachenberger, B.-C. Krause, R. Haidar, P. Laux, A. Luch, M. P. Singh and A. V. Singh, Emerging paradigm against global antimicrobial resistance via bioprospecting of fungi into novel nanotherapeutics development, Trends Food Sci. Technol., 2020, 106, 333–344 CrossRef CAS.
J. Jeevanandam, P. K. Kulabhusan, G. Sabbih, M. Akram and M. K. Danquah, Phytosynthesized nanoparticles as a potential cancer therapeutic agent, 3 Biotech., 2020, 10, 1–26 CrossRef.
R. A. de Jesus, G. C. de Assis, R. J. de Oliveira, J. A. S. Costa, C. M. P. da Silva, M. Bilal, H. M. N. Iqbal, L. F. R. Ferreira and R. T. Figueiredo, Environmental remediation potentialities of metal and metal oxide nanoparticles: mechanistic biosynthesis, influencing factors, and application standpoint, Environ. Technol. Innovation, 2021, 101851 CrossRef CAS.
R. Chaudhary, K. Nawaz, A. K. Khan, C. Hano, B. H. Abbasi and S. Anjum, An overview of the algae-mediated biosynthesis of nanoparticles and their biomedical applications, Biomolecules, 2020, 10, 1498 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
J. Jeevanandam, Y. S. Chan and M. K. Danquah, Cytotoxicity and insulin resistance reversal ability of biofunctional phytosynthesized MgO nanoparticles, 3 Biotech., 2020, 10, 489 CrossRef PubMed.
S. Y. Hii, J. Jeevanandam and Y. S. Chan, Plant mediated green synthesis and nanoencapsulation of MgO nanoparticle from Calotropis gigantea: Characterisation and kinetic release studies, Inorg. Nano-Met. Chem., 2019, 48, 620–631 CrossRef.
X. Zhao, L. Zhou, M. S. Riaz Rajoka, L. Yan, C. Jiang, D. Shao, J. Zhu, J. Shi, Q. Huang and H. Yang, Fungal silver nanoparticles: synthesis, application and challenges, Crit. Rev. Biotechnol., 2018, 38, 817–835 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
A. Syafiuddin, M. R. Salim, A. Beng Hong Kueh, T. Hadibarata and H. Nur, A review of silver nanoparticles: research trends, global consumption, synthesis, properties, and future challenges, J. Chin. Chem. Soc., 2017, 64, 732–756 CrossRef CAS.
P. Khandel and S. K. Shahi, Mycogenic nanoparticles and their bio-prospective applications: current status and future challenges, J. Nanostruct. Chem., 2018, 8, 369–391 CrossRef CAS.
S. K. Basha, K. Govindaraju, R. Manikandan, J. S. Ahn, E. Y. Bae and G. Singaravelu, Phytochemical mediated gold nanoparticles and their PTP 1B inhibitory activity, Colloids Surf., B, 2010, 75(2), 405–409 CrossRef PubMed.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Stages involved in the biosynthesis of metallic nanoparticles. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 9 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018.	 


Bacteria


Salmonella enterica subspecies enterica serovar Typhi	Gold	Irregular shaped 42 nm	STY4669-hypothetical protein	
17


Paracoccus haeundaensis BC74171T	Gold	20.93 ± 3.46 nm sized spherical	Enzymes, proteins and metabolites	
30


Escherichia coli
	Gold	∼10 nm sized spherical	Sulfite reductase enzyme	
44


Bacillus brevis (NCIM 2533)	Silver	41–68 nm, spherical	Proteins	
57


Lactobacillus casei WK2G-3A and Lactobacillus fermentum E10-15	Silver	0.7–10 nm and 1.4–10 nm	Ester, carboxylic acid, aldehyde, ether, hydroxyl groups, amino acids and proteins	
67

Several bacterial strain	Silver	2–100 nm, spherical, cuboid, fiber, oval, hexagonal, cubic, triangular, rod and disc shaped	Bacterial cell wall proteins or soluble enzymes	
79


Cupriavidus metallidurans CH34	Palladium	20–40 nm, dendritic shaped	Pyruvate, formate and lactate	
85


Citrobacter bacterial species	Palladium	11–16 nm	Complex enzymes	
93


Shewanella loihica
	Copper	10–16 nm and spherical	Cytochrome c, organic acids, vitamins, electron donating NADH/NADPH via soluble proteins	
102


Lactobacillus plantarum strain TA4	Zinc oxide	Monodisperse	Carboxyl and amide groups	
107


Pseudomonas putida
	Zinc oxide	25–45 nm, spherical	Amino acids and carbohydrates	
112


Lactobacillus casei subspecies casei	Copper oxide	30–75 nm, spherical	Amine, amide in membrane and carbonyl in peptides	
118


Streptomyces pseudogriseolus Acv-11 and S. zaomyceticus Oc-5	Copper oxide	78 nm, spherical	Peptide bonds, alcohols, N–H bending, aliphatic primary amines and alkene groups	
125


Lactobacillus fermentum
	Iron oxide	10–15 nm, spherical	Histidine, ketones, cysteine and aldehydes	
131


Bacillus cereus strain HMH1	Iron oxide	29.3 nm, spherical	Carboxyl group, primary amines, carbonyl, ester and ether or ester covalent bonds	
138


Burkholderia rinojensis
	Magnesium oxide	26.7 nm, spherical granular shape	Proteins with methylene groups and aliphatic amino acids	
144


Streptomyces species HC1	Titanium dioxide	43–67 nm, spherical	Metabolites	
149


Halomonas elongata IBRC-M10214	Titanium dioxide	104.63 nm, spherical	Alkyne, alcohol, alkyl halide and alkene	
156


Desulfosporosinus species	Uranium dioxide	1.5–2.5 nm, spherical	—	
158


Shewanella oneidensis
	Uranium dioxide	—	—	
161


Shewanella loihica
	Manganese oxide	Amorphous spherical	—	
164


Shewanella oneidensis MR-1	Palladium–iron oxide	5.5 nm (spherical) and 7–17 nm in width (rod)	Amide II and III, carboxyl groups, fatty acids and carbohydrates	
166


Shewanella oneidensis MR-1	Gold–iron oxide	15.4 nm (spherical) and 10–18 nm in width (rod)	Amide II and III, carboxyl groups, fatty acids and carbohydrates	
166


Shewanella oneidensis MR-1	Palladium–gold–iron oxide	8.3 nm (spherical) and 8–18 nm in width (rod)	Amide II and III, carboxyl groups, fatty acids and carbohydrates	
166


Gluconacetobacter hansenii bacterial cellulose fibrils	Copper oxide–cellulose	Interwoven fiber networks	Alkanes, asymmetrical hydrocarbons and alcoholic groups	
171



Fungi

29 thermophilic fungi	Gold	6–40 nm	Monosaccharides, cofactors, antibiotics, amino acids, melanin or biopolymers and proteins	
16


Cladosporium cladosporides
	Gold	∼60 nm sized spherical	NADH-dependent reductase and nitrate reductase	
29


Aspergillus species WL-Au fungi	Gold	Rod shaped, 24–31 nm (length) and 5.1–7.3 nm (width)	Aliphatic acids, phenols, primary and secondary amines, amide II group	
37


Aspergillus brunneoviolaceus
	Silver	6–16 nm, spherical	Nitro, sulfur compounds, alcohols, phenols, alkenes or amines, aliphatic amines and alkynes	
49

55 strains from white rot fungal species	Silver	15–20 nm, spherical to round	Proteins, polysaccharides, vitamins, amino acids and nitrate reductase	
60


Fusarium oxysporum
	Platinum	∼25 nm	Polysaccharides, amides, proteins and long chain fatty acids	
70


Trichoderma species and Rhizopus stolonifera	Iron	100 nm	Carboxyl, alkene, phenol, sulfhydryl and mercaptan	
74 and 75

Xylaria acuta
	Zinc oxide	40–55 nm, hexagonal	Hydroxyl groups and polyphenols	
77


Cordyceps militaris
	Zinc oxide	10.15 nm, flower morphology	Amine and phenol	
86


Periconium species	Zinc oxide	16–78 nm, spherical	Alcohols, aldehydes, carboxylic groups, esters, hydroxyl primary amines and amide I	
96


Trichoderma asperellum
	Copper oxide	10–190 nm, spherical	Amide and aromatic groups	
103


Penicillium chrysogenum
	Copper oxide	9.70 nm, spherical	Hydrogen, N–H bonds and amide groups	
108


Aspergillus niger BSC-1	Iron oxide	20–40 nm, needle or flake-like	Hydrocarbon, carboxyl, amide II and amide I bonds, NADH-dependent hydrolase enzyme	
114


Phialemoniopsis ocularis, Trichoderma asperellum and Fusarium incarnatum	Iron oxide	25, 13.13 and 30.56 nm, spherical	Amide I and II bonds from proteins	
119


Penicillium chrysogenum
	Magnesium oxide	5–12.8 nm, spherical	Indolic, carboxyl groups, pyrrolic patterns, methane moiety and aromatic hydrogen–carbon bonds in fungal melanin	
127


Aspergillus flavus
	Titanium dioxide	62–74 nm, spherical and oval shaped	Metabolites with peroxo, proteins with peptide linkages, maleic anhydride, carbonyl, amide I and amide II	
133


Curvularia lunata
	Cerium oxide	5–20 nm	—	
139


Fusarium solani
	Cerium oxide	20–30 nm, spherical	Proteins, amines and heterocyclic compounds	
145


Aspergillus niger
	Cerium oxide	5–20 nm, cubical and spherical	Hydroxyl molecules	
150


Fusarium oxysporum
	Bismuth oxide and barium titanate	—	—	
154


Saccharomyces cerevisae
	Antimony oxide	—	—	
154

MSR3 strain of Neurospora discreta	Graphene oxide	Irregular and rough surface	Polysaccharides, amides of protein and chitin, carbonyl, epoxy and alkoxy groups in fungal hyphae	
160



Algae or cyanobacteria


Cladosiphon okamuranus and Kjellamaniella crassifolia	Gold	Spherical, hexagonal, triangular, octahedral, diamond-shaped	Fucoidans with sulphated polysaccharides	
13


Cystoseira baccata
	Gold	8.4 nm sized spherical	Polyphenols, proteins and fucoidans with sulfonic acids of polysaccharides	
26


Lyngbya majuscule
	Gold	41.7 nm	Protein shells	
28 and 25

Botryococcus braunnii
	Silver	40–90 nm, spherical, cubic and truncated triangles	Long chain fatty acids, amides, proteins and polysaccharides	
38

Polysiphonia	Silver	5–25 nm, spherical	Proteins, carbohydrates and amino acids	
40


Portieria hornemanni
	Silver	70–75 nm, spherical	Proteins, carbohydrates and amino acids	
53


Desertifilum species and Microchaete NCCU-342	Silver	4.5–26 nm and 60–80 nm, spherical	Proteins and polysaccharides	
55 and 56

Botryococcus braunii
	Platinum	86.96 nm and monodisperse	Polysaccharides, proteins, long chain fatty acids and amides	
69


Botryococcus braunii
	Copper	10–70 nm, elongated spherical and cubic	Polysaccharides, long-chain fatty acids, proteins and amides	
82

Endophytic actinomycetes	Copper	50 nm, clustered	Metal-resistant gene, peptides, proteins, organic materials and reducing cofactors	
89


Dictyota dicotoma, Chloroccum and Chlorella species	Iron	20–80 nm	Glycoproteins and carbohydrates	
98


Chlorella species	Zinc oxide	20 ± 2.2 nm, hexagon	Peptides, proteins, carbohydrates, fat, vitamins and certain fibers	
104


Withania coagulans
	Zinc oxide	Nanoflower, 360–550 nm	Phenolic molecular groups, amide linkages and amino acids	
111


Ulva fasciata
	Zinc oxide	Rod-shaped	N–H, CC, CO and NO2	
117


Anabena cylindrica
	Copper oxide	40–60 nm, rod-like	Polysaccharides, flavones and terpenoids	
123


Sargassum muticum
	Copper oxide	20 nm, spherical	Alpha, beta-unsaturated ketones, olefinic carbons, primary and secondary alcohols, aliphatic hydrocarbon groups	
129


Colpomenia sinuosa and Pterocladia capillacea	Iron oxide	11.24–33.71 and 16.85–22.47 nm	Polysaccharides, hydroxy or sulfate groups	
136


Sargassum wighitii
	Magnesium oxide	68.06 nm, flower shaped	Carbohydrates, saturated primary alcohols, aromatic groups, chlorophyll molecules and polysaccharides	
143


Chlorella pyrenoidosa
	Titanium dioxide–graphene oxide	50 nm, spherical	—	
148


 	Fig. 2  Schematics of zinc oxide nanoparticle using microbes via an intracellular approach, this figure has been reproduced from ref. 6 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2019.	 


AuNP	51.8 ± 0.8 nm; spherical; monodisperse	
Ziziphus zizyphus (Ennab)	1 mM HAuCl4:plant extract = 9:1 (v/v), boiling for 5 min	Useful as drug nanocarrier; no antibacterial or antifungal activity detected	
15

AuNP	40–150 nm; spherical, hexagonal and triangular	
Minosa tenuiflora
	5.3 mM or 2.6 mM HAuCl4:32.5 mg mL−1 plant extract = 2.75:1 (v/v), 25 °C and 3000 rpm	Proposed to be useful as drug nanocarrier and fluorescent probe	
27

AgNP	70.7 ± 22	
Aloe vera
	0.3 mol AgNO3:plant extract = 1:1 (v/v), temperature (100, 150 and 200 °C), vigorous stirring and 30 min	Antibacterial effect towards Staphylococcus epidermidis, Pseudomonas aeruginosa	
35


	192.0 ± 53 nm; spherical	
	
	Minimal toxicity towards human mammalian peripheral blood mononuclear cells	

AgNP	19–125 nm spherical	
Salvia spinosa
	1 mM AgNO3:plant extract = 9:1 (v/v), 27 ± 2 °C, constant rotation and 6 h	Antibacterial effect towards Escherichia coli, Bacillus subtilis and Bacillus vallismortis	
46

AgNP	10–20 nm	
Ocimum sanctum (Tulsi)	2 mM AgNO3:plant extract = 5:1 (v/v), temperature (5–35 °C) and time (1, 2, 3, 4 h)	Antibacterial effect against E. coli	
59

AgNP	∼24 nm	
Impatiens balsamina and Lantana camara	(1,2,3,4,5) mM AgNO3:plant extract = 1:1 (v/v), 60 °C in dark and 5 h	Antibacterial effect against S. aureus and E. coli	
68

AgNP	26.9 nm	
Lycopersicon esculentum
	AgNO3:plant extract = 6.8:200 (w/v), 50 °C, 1500 rpm and 2 h	Negative effect in callogenesis and organogenesis	
80

AgNP	5–25 nm	
Cassia occidentalis linn (Caesalpiniaceae)	1 mM AgNO3:plant extract = 9:1 (v/v), room temperature and 24 h	Antibacterial effect towards S. aureus, S. typhi, E. coli and K. pneumonia	
88

PdNP	59–169.24 nm	
Chrysophyllum cainito
	8.07 mM Pd(II) solution:plant extract, 70–80 °C	Catalyst for Suzuki and Heck coupling reactions	
95

PdNP	12.3 nm	
Pimpinella tirupatiensis
	5 mM PdCl2:plant extract = 1:2 (v/v), 60 °C and 2 h	Photocatalytic degradation of organic Congo red dye	
100

CuNP	5–30 nm	
Cassia occidentalis linn (Caesalpiniaceae)	1 mM Cu(NO3)2:plant extract = 5:1 (v/v), microwave and 4 h	Antibacterial effect against S. aureus, Salmonella typhi, E. coli and Klebsiella pneumonia	
88

CuNP	4.7–17.4 nm hemispherical	
Tilia
	CuSO4·5H2O:plant extract = 1:4 (v/v), 80 °C and stirring for 25 min	Anticancer and antibacterial effect	
110

FeNP	∼70 nm	
Eucalyptus robusta
	1 mM (NH4)2Fe(SO4):plant extract = 1:1 (v/v), 40 °C and 30 min	Antibacterial effect towards P. aeruginosa, E. coli, S. aureus and B. subtilis	
115

ZnONP	51.2 nm, 41.0 nm, 51.6 nm	
Matricaria chamomilla L. (chamomile flower), Olea europaea (olive leaves) and Lycopersicon esculentum M. (red tomato fruits)	1 M ZnO:plant extract = 1:1, 100 rpm and 4 h	Antibacterial effect	
121

CuONP	80 nm	Walnut leaf	Cu(NO3)2:plant extract = 1:10 (w/v), 300–500 °C, 500 rpm and 2 h	Antioxidant and antimicrobial activity	
126

CuONP	30 nm	
Enicostemma axillare
	5 mM CuSO4:plant extract = 10:1 (v/v)	—	
130

Fe2O3NP	∼20 nm spherical	
Glycosmis mauritiana
	1 M FeCl3·6H2O + 2 M FeCl2·4H2O:plant extract = 5:1 (v/v), 80 °C and 10 min	Antibacterial activity against Bacillus cereus, B. subtilis, Enterococcus faecalis, E. coli, K. pneumonia, Micrococcus luteus, Proteus mirabilis, Proteus vulgaris, Pseudomonas fluorescence, S. aureus and Vibrio fluvialis	
137

Fe2O3NP	25–55 nm	
Punica granatum (pomegranate)	1 M FeCl3:plant extract = 2:1 (v/v), 70 °C and 15 min	Photocatalyst to degrade dyes in wastewater	
142

Fe3O4NP	10 nm	
Phyllanthus niruri
	0.2 M (NH4)2Fe(SO4)2·6H2O + 0.1 M NH4Fe(SO4)2·12H2O:plant extract = 2:1 (v/v), 30 °C and 30 min	Antibacterial activity against E. coli and P. aeroginosa	
146

MgONP	50 nm	
Costus pitus D. Don
	0.1 M Mg(NO3)2·6H2O:plant extract = 5:1 (v/v), 80 °C and 4 h	Antimicrobial and anticancer effects	
153

MgONF	<20 nm	
Rosmarinus officinalis L. (rosemary)	1 mM MgO:plant extract = 1:1 (v/v), 70 °C, 6000 rpm and 4 h	Antibacterial effect against Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae (Xoo) strain GZ 0005	
157

CeO2	18.7 nm	
Lycopersicon esculentum
	Ce(NO3)3·6H2O:plant extract = 8.68:200 (w/v), 50 °C, 1500 rpm and 2 h	Callogenesis and organogenesis effect	
80

CaONP	58 nm cubic and hexagonal	
Cissus quadrangularis
	0.2 M CaCl2 + plant extract = 1:1 (v/v), 80 °C and 1 h	Antibacterial effect against S. aureus, E. coli, K. pneumoniae, P. aeruginosa, S. typhi, Shigella dysenteriae and Vibrio cholerae	
163


 	Fig. 3  Schematics of plant extract mediated biosynthesis of silver nanoparticles and their antibacterial activity. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 14 with permission from Springer, copyright 2019.	 


CuO–C NC	7–11 nm	
Adhatoda vasica
	0.01 M of CuSO4·5H2O:plant extract = 5:4 (v/v), room temperature, stirred 0.5 h and incubated for 24 h	Antibacterial effect against E. coli, P. aeruginosa, K. pneumoniae and S. aureus, antifungal effect against A. niger and C. albicans	
12

ZnO–SMA NC	20 nm, flake-like	
Piper nigrum
	1 mM ZnNO3:plant extract = 10 mL:5 drops, 70–80 °C, stir at 400 °C for 3 h and add 0.1 g of ZnO + 10 mL styrene maleic anhydride at 160 °C for 2 h	Supercapacitor	
21

Cu–GO–MnO2 NC	50–70 nm spherical	
Cuscuta reflexa
	1 g of GO/MnO2 + 0.08 M CuCl2:plant extract = 1:2.5 (v/v), reflux for 4 h	Reusable catalyst reducing organic pollutants	
34

Fe3O4–TiO2–Au–Pt NC	54 nm	Dahlia flower	1 g of Fe3O4–TiO2 + 1 wt% Au–Pt:plant extract = 10:1 (v/v), room temperature and stirring	Reusable catalyst for reduction of organic dye pollutants and glycerol oxidation reaction	
45

RGO/FePd	10–50 nm (FePd)	Green tea	GO:0.5 g L−1 of FeCl3·H2O:plant extract = 1:1:2 (v/v/v), 80 °C for 3 h	Removal of organic contaminants such as antibiotic rifampicin	
58


Bacteria	Metal ion reduction by exclusive proteins, including nitrate dependent reductase or NADH dependent reductase
Algae	Bio-reduction and nanoparticle stabilization via hydroxyl as a functional group
Fungi	Mineralization via biomimetic approach and exclusive enzymes for metal ion reduction
Yeast	Quinones and cytosolic oxido reductases that are membrane bound
Plants	Secondary metabolites, which include saponins, alkaloid tannins, steroids, and flavonoids as reducing and stabilizing agents

 	Fig. 4  Nanoparticle formation using agriculture/food waste. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 9 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018.	 

AgNP	20 nm and spherical	Peel waste of Lagenaria siceraria, Luffa cylindrica, Solanum lycopersicum, Solanum melongena and Cucumis sativus	2 mM AgNO3 + plant extract = 1:2.5 (w/v), 80 °C, 10 min	Antibacterial effect against E. coli and K. pneumoniae	
10

AgNP	25.8 nm	
Rosa damascene waste	0.01 M AgNO3 + plant extract = 3:1 (v/v)	Material as a sensor for H2O2 and vanillin detection	
22

AgNP	14.2–22.9 nm and spherical	Coconut (Cocos nucifera) shells	1 mM of AgNO3:10 mg mL−1 plant extract = 100:1 (v/v) in sunlight for 1 h	Antibacterial effect against S. aureus, E. coli, Salmonella typhimurium and Listeria monocytogenes	
24 and 25
AuNP	20–25 nm	Grape seeds, skin and stalks	1 mM HAuCl4:plant extract = 2.4:1 (v/v) at room temperature for 5 min	Medical application	
41 and 42
FeNP	23 nm at pH 3, 45, 197.5 and 895.8 nm at pH 9	Mango peel	0.05 M of FeCl3·6H2O + plant extract (12 g)	Catalyst for pollutant degradation	
51

FeNP	98.8 nm	Tea waste	0.1 M FeSO4 + plant extract = 1:3 (v/v)	Catalyst to remove organic dye as pollutant in water	
64

Fe2O3NP	58–78 nm, spherical	
Cynometra ramiflora fruit waste	1 M of FeCl3 + 2 M FeCl2:plant extract = 1:1 at room temperature (pH 11)	Photocatalyst for catalytic remediation of polluted water	
76

ZnONP	33.1 nm, regular hexagonal	
Citrus sinensis peel	12.5 g L−1 of Zn(NO3)2·6H2O:plant extract = 4:1 (v/v) at 600 °C for 2 h	Nanocoating for strawberry preservation	
83

Carbon/FeZn NP	126 nm, spherical	Lemon leaves	Carbon + [0.014 M FeSO4·7H2O + 0.2 g ZnCl2·4H2O:plant extract = 1:2 (v/v)] at room temperature for 3 h (250 rpm)	Catalyst to remove organic dye pollutant in water	
91


 	Fig. 5  Green synthesized metal-based nanoparticles in biomedical applications.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic illustration depicting the various mechanisms of antimicrobial activities using metal and metal oxide nanoparticles. This figure has been adapted from ref. 3 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2014.	 

Ag (∼15 nm)	Beetroots	Inhibition of G+ (e.g. S. aureus) and G− (e.g. P. aeruginosa) bacteria	Ion release; makes holes in membranes; disrupts metabolic processes; damages DNA	
8


Piper longum fruit	
18

Ag (5–40 nm)	
Trichoderma viride
	
32

Ag (77–92 nm)	
Bacillus species	
In vitro treatment of human pathogens; treated bean yellow mosaic virus	
43

Au (16 nm)	Pineapple extract	Inhibited both G+ and G− bacteria, and yeast	NPs attach to membranes and change surface potentials; decreased ATP; inhibition of tRNA; binding to ribosome	
52

Banana peels	
62

Au (5 nm)	
Spirulina platensis
	Inhibited G+ bacteria (B. subtilis and S. aureus)	
71

CuO	
Tabernaemontana divaricate
	Inhibited G+ and G− bacteria; antifungal activity; treated urinary tract pathogens	NPs cross bacterial cell membrane and damage important enzymes; high NP stability	
84

CuO (5–45 nm)	
Bifurcaria bifurcate
	Treated G− (e.g. E. aerogenes) and G+ (e.g. S. aureus) bacteria	
90

CaO	Papaya leaf extract, green tea	Inhibited a range of G+ and G− bacteria S. aureus, E. coli, P. aeruginosa, B. cereus	Damages cell membrane; causes leakage of intracellular contents and apoptosis	
97

Iron oxides	
Agrewia optiva and Prunus perisca	Inhibited different G+ (e.g. S. mutans) and G− (e.g. E. coli) bacteria	Magnetic properties; ROS generation	
105


 	Fig. 7  Demonstration of anti-cancerous activity using magnetic particles from a microbial source. This figure has been adapted from ref. 1 with permission from Frontiers, copyright 2014.	 

Ag	
Vitex negundo
	Anticancer; antitumor agent against human colon cancer	Surface plasmon resonance; concentration-dependent cell viability	
5


Bacillus sp.	Anti-pathogenic and anti-angiogenic properties	
20

Cu	
Sargassum polycystum
	Anti-cancer; cell line (MCF-7) inhibition (>93%)	Inherent antimicrobial and anti-proliferative properties; cytotoxicity in cancer cells	
33


	Anti-angiogenic and anti-apoptotic
Au–Ag	
Butea monosperma
	Drug conjugation on nanoparticles inhibits spread of cancer cells; advanced cancer therapy	Easy surface modification to be conjugated with drugs; stability in biological buffers; biocompatibility	
50 and 42
Au	
Porphyra vietnamensis
	Carrier for the drug doxorubicin hydrochloride (DOX), and delivery	Surface plasmon resonance; high stability over a wide pH range; hydrogen bonding interaction between drug and particle	
63

ZnO	
Sargassum muticum
	Induced apoptosis on human liver cancer cells	Minimized particle toxicity; concentration-dependent decrease in cell viability	
73


CdTe	
Escherichia coli
	
In vitro imaging of cervical cancer cells	Biocompatibility; fluorescent emission within 488–551 nm	
7


Bacillus pumilus and Serratia marcescens	
19


Fusarium oxysporum
	Highly fluorescent CdTe quantum dots	
31

Ag	
Trichoderma viride
	Photoluminescence	Size-dependent functionality	
32


Parthenium hysterophorus
	Photoluminescence	
48

Au	
Maduca longifolia
	Infrared absorbing efficiency	Shape and size advantages; highly efficient in absorbing IR radiation	
61


 	Fig. 8  Biosensor application of green synthesized nanoparticles combined with a glassy carbon electrode (GCE) for improved performance. (a) Representation of a vanillin sensor. (b) Improved electrochemical response occurring on a GCE electrode conjugated with biosynthesized Au–Ag NPs for the detection of vanillin. This figure has been adapted from ref. 11 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2010.	 


Gold nanoparticles	Citrate reduction and flow reactor	15.5	0.07	Spherical	
2
	Halophytic plant extract (Atriplex halimus and Chenopodium amperosidies)	2–40	Data not available (TEM shows less polydisperse)	Spherical, rod, triangular and rhomboid	
23

Silver nanoparticles (cobalt doped)	Laser ablation in liquid	17	Data not available (TEM shows less polydisperse)	Spherical	
39
	Phytosynthesis via Salvadora persica root extract	37.5	Data not available (TEM shows high polydispersity)	Spherical and rod	
47

Copper nanoparticles	Wet electrochemical nucleation	51	Data not available (SEM shows less polydispersity)	Spherical	
66
	
Citrus limon fruit extract	∼30	Data not available (SEM shows highly polydisperse)	Spherical	
72

Platinum nanoparticles	Sono-chemical	2.2–2.3	Data not available (TEM shows less polydispersity)	Spherical	
81
	
Atriplex halimus leaf extract	1–3	Data not available (HRTEM shows high polydispersity)	Spherical	
92

Zinc oxide nanoparticles	Chemical precipitation	65.3	Data not available (TEM shows highly polydisperse)	Irregular with pores	
99
	
Bergenia ciliata rhizome extract	∼30	Data not available (SEM shows less polydispersity)	Flower	
106

Magnesium oxide nanoparticles	Sol–gel approach	40–80	0.5–0.7	Spherical, hexagonal and rod	
109
	
Andrographis paniculata, Amaranthus tricolor and A. blitum	18–80	0.2–0.5	Spherical and hexagonal	
113

Cerium oxide nanoparticles	Microwave hydrothermal method	3–5	Data not available (TEM shows high polydispersity)	Linear structure with thin overlapping layers	
122
	Banana peel	4–13	Data not available (TEM shows polydispersity)	Spherical foam-like snowflakes	
128

Titanium dioxide nanoparticles	Magnetic field-assisted laser ablation	25–35	Data not available (FESEM shows high polydispersity)	Spherical, nanowires and nano-platelets	
132
	
Cuminum cyminum seed extract	12–15	Data not available (TEM shows polydispersity)	Clustered bunches	
140


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
