Boosting carbon quantum dots/fullerene electron transfer via surface group engineering   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6CP05981C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6CP05981C
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 31286-31295Boosting carbon quantum dots/fullerene electron transfer via surface group engineering†

        
          
            Alberto 
            Privitera
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Marcello 
            Righetto
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Dario 
            Mosconi
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Francesca 
            Lorandi
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Abdirisak A. 
            Isse
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Alessandro 
            Moretto
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Renato 
            Bozio
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Camilla 
            Ferrante
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Lorenzo 
            Franco
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemical Sciences, University of Padova, via Marzolo 1, 35131 Padova, Italy. E-mail: lorenzo.franco@unipd.it
Received 
      30th August 2016
    , Accepted 25th October 2016First published on 26th October 2016AbstractThe design of novel nanostructures with tailored opto-electronic properties is a crucial step for third-generation photovoltaics, and the development of cheap and environmentally compatible materials is still a challenge. Carbon quantum dots (CQDs) emerged as promising candidates but usually a low processability and poor electron-donor properties hampered their photovoltaic applications. We tackle these issues through the synthesis and photophysical characterization of N-doped CQDs functionalized with different thiophene-containing groups. Functionalization was aimed at enhancing the electron donating properties of the carbon dots and improving the solubility in nonpolar solvents. The increased solubility in organic solvents allowed us to investigate the photoinduced interactions of the functionalized carbon dots with the fullerene derivative PCBM in solution and in solid blends. The investigation was carried out by cyclic voltammetry, photoluminescence spectroscopy and electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR). The remarkable oxidation potential shift of the functionalized carbon dots with respect to the pristine materials and the HOMO–LUMO energies strongly suggest them as good electron donors towards PCBM. The electron transfer process between CQDs and PCBM resulted in efficient fluorescence quenching in solution and in total quenching in solid blends. By using EPR spectroscopy in the solid blends, we demonstrated the efficient electron transfer by observing the photoinduced formation of a PCBM radical anion in the presence of functionalized CQDs. Time-resolved EPR allowed us to identify differences in the charge transport efficiency for different CQD:PCBM blends. The enhanced processability of CQDs with PCBM and the promising charge-generation and separation properties pave the way to the development of “all-carbon” photovoltaic devices.
Introduction
Carbon nanomaterials have been studied extensively because of their interesting and unique properties.1 Among the large variety of carbon nanostructures discovered so far, carbon dots (CDs) have received increasing interest in the last few years thanks to their stability, biocompatibility and remarkable photo-physical properties.2–4 CDs are a broad class of materials, including graphene quantum dots (GQDs) and carbon quantum dots (CQDs), mainly composed of carbon atoms forming extended conjugated graphene-like structures joined together by sp3 hybridized carbon domains, with a size below 10 nm. The CD edges usually consist of functional groups containing heteroatoms such as carboxylic, carbonyl and hydroxyl groups that strongly influence the solubility, and the optical and electronic properties.5,6 As a result of the large multitude of synthetic routes (top-down and bottom-up), doping methodologies and surface functionalization procedures, a variety of CDs suitable for a wide range of applications from biomedicine and sensing to optoelectronics and catalysis have been synthesized up to now.7–9 One of their appealing applications regards the organic photovoltaic (OPV) field. Organic photovoltaics is a promising alternative to silicon-based solar cells, being environmentally friendly, mechanically flexible, cost effective and easy to fabricate.10,11 However, because of the poor conversion efficiency and the limited chemical and physical stabilities of the most OPV materials, there is an active quest for new materials that can face and solve these issues.12 CDs are promising materials to overcome these difficulties and a few examples of CDs used in organic solar cells are already reported in the literature. In the case of a polymer/fullerene bulk heterojunction solar cell (BHJSC) Huang et al. demonstrated that the luminescent down-shifting properties of the CQD-doped polysiloxane composite raised the performance of a P3HT:PCBM cell by about 12%.13 Liu et al. inserting a small amount of CQDs in the active layer of BHJSCs demonstrated that, in addition to the luminescent down-shifting properties, CQDs provide an effective interface for charge separation and efficient channels for charge transport, thus increasing solar cell photocurrent.14 The use of CDs as active materials for organic solar cells (OSCs), particularly as electron-acceptors, was demonstrated by Gupta et al. who fabricated a P3HT/GQD device whose performances were significantly enhanced compared to the previously reported polymer/graphene cells.15 Moreover, the electron-accepting properties of GQDs have been studied both optically, coupling GQDs with various aniline derivatives to probe the Photoinduced Electron Transfer (PET),16 and computationally, analyzing the effect of porphyrin functionalization on the energy levels of GQDs with the aim of developing a suitable material for the Dye Sensitized Solar Cell applications.17 Even though the electron-acceptor properties of CDs have been largely studied, there are only a few works in which CDs have been proposed as suitable electron-donor (ED) materials.18,19 This property is appealing for a replacement in OSCs of the semiconducting polymers, which suffer from many of the above mentioned drawbacks. Indeed, the substitution of the semiconducting polymer with CDs would provide an “all-carbon” solar cell with a reduction of the material costs and an increase of the stability of the photovoltaic devices. To obtain this goal it is essential to design a material whose energy levels suitably match the energy levels of the electron acceptor, the most common being the fullerene derivative PCBM. Moreover, it is important to endow the CQDs with a good solubility in organic solvents in order to make a more efficient film deposition step. This can be achieved thanks to the versatile CQD functionalization that allows a fine tuning of the electronic, optical, magnetic and solubility properties.
In this work, we prepared some derivatives of N-doped CQDs, recently synthesized and characterized,20 by adding thiophene groups to the surface of the CQDs. The aim of this work was to obtain a material with improved solubility in organic solvents and endowed with stronger electron-donating properties. Following the successful synthesis, our study has been focused on the analysis of the photo-physical processes that occur on functionalized CQDs in solution and in films, examined by optical and magnetic spectroscopies. The same analysis performed on CQD/PCBM blends allowed us to demonstrate the presence of an efficient Photoinduced Electron Transfer (PET) from CQDs to PCBM. This result was supported also by the measurement of the HOMO and LUMO energies of CQDs, obtained with cyclic voltammetry. The observation of an efficient PET between functionalized CQDs and PCBM suggests the potential application of the newly synthesized nanomaterial as the electron-donor for highly efficient and stable organic solar cells.
Results and discussion
Synthesis
N-doped CQDs were synthesized according to a procedure already reported in our previous work, by using microwave-assisted hydrothermal methods.20 The structure of CQDs shown in Scheme 1 was suggested by the combined results from several techniques, such as Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM), X-Ray Photoemission Spectroscopy (XPS), mass spectrometry and elemental analysis.20,21 These N-doped CQDs are characterized by a mean diameter of 2.4 nm. The presence of amine moieties on the surface ensured an excellent solubility in water and other polar solvents. This affinity for polar environments was a significant issue for our purposes, since the active compound PCBM is soluble only in orthogonal organic solvents.
 Scheme 1  Reaction scheme of the two thiophene-functionalized N-doped CQDs. 
These solubility aspects hampered the fabrication of PCBM/CQD films combining directly N-doped CQDs and PCBM. Therefore, we decided to chemically functionalize the surface of N-doped CQDs in order to increase their solubility in solvents suitable to cast PCBM films. On the other hand, functional groups on the CQD surface tend to affect also other processes occurring between the particle and the surrounding environment, such as energy and charge transfers. Based on these considerations, we decided to functionalize the N-doped CQD surface by covalently linking thiophene moieties, with the aim of improving at the same time the solubility of the non-polar solvents and the electron transfer capabilities. Two different thiophene-derivative carboxylic acids were used to functionalize N-doped CQDs (Scheme 1, CQD-1 and CQD-2), to investigate how different spacers separating the thiophene group from the CQDs may influence electron transfer and charge recombination processes. The synthesized CQD-1 and CQD-2 resulted to be highly soluble in non-polar solvents like o-dichlorobenzene and dichloromethane, while their solubility in water or low molecular weight alcohols was strongly decreased. The change in the solubility after the reaction confirms the effective functionalization. Moreover, the comparison of the IR spectra (Fig. S1 in the ESI†) of the functionalised samples and pristine N-doped CQDs reveals significant differences. In CQD-1 and CQD-2 the presence of a band at 1696 cm−1, corresponding to a carbonyl stretching, confirmed the formation of amide bonds. In addition, bands associated with thiophene ring stretching modes are visible for CQD-1 (1387 cm−1 and 1436 cm−1) and for CQD-2 (1392 cm−1 and 1416 cm−1). As additional structural characterization we compared the results from elemental analysis and 13C-NMR for the three CQDs reported in this work. Elemental analysis (see details in the ESI†) shows the presence of sulfur in CQD-1 and CQD-2 confirming the addition of thiophene moieties in these nanostructures. Furthermore we managed to obtain 13C-NMR of pristine CQDs, CQD-1 and CQD-2 (Fig. S2 in the ESI†). Although these large nanosystems show very broad NMR spectra, it is possible to identify new aromatic carbons and amide carbons in the CQD-1 and CQD-2 samples.
Cyclic voltammetry
Having verified the successful derivatization of CQDs and the improved solubility of the functionalized CQDs in low-polarity solvents, we investigated their redox properties by cyclic voltammetry (CV). Fig. 1 shows the voltammetric behavior of CQD-1, CQD-2 and pristine N-doped CQDs in DMF.
 Fig. 1  Cyclic voltammetry of (a) N-doped CQD, (b) CQD-1 and (c) CQD-2, recorded on a Pt electrode at v = 0.02 V s−1, in DMF with 0.1 M Et4NBF4, T = 25 °C. 
Both oxidation and reduction reactions are irreversible and can be described as multielectron transfer processes followed by chemical reactions.22 It is, however, important to note that functionalization of N-doped CQDs resulted in a strong modification of their redox properties. In particular, the oxidation potentials of CQD-1 and CQD-2 are shifted to less positive potentials with respect to pristine N-doped CQDs.
HOMO and LUMO energy levels (EHOMO and ELUMO) can be estimated by CV on the basis of empirical equations derived from correlations between theoretical ionization potentials and electron affinities, and experimental redox potentials.23 To calculate EHOMO and ELUMO it is necessary to relate the measured oxidation and reduction potentials to the vacuum energy level, which is assumed to be zero.
Redox potentials in non-aqueous solvents are often measured versus the Fc+/Fc couple and converted to EHOMO and ELUMO by using the following equations:24 EHOMO (eV) = −e(Eoxvs.Fc+/Fc + E°(Fc+/Fc)(abs))(1) ELUMO (eV) = −e(Eredvs.Fc+/Fc + E°(Fc+/Fc)(abs))(2)where Eox and Ered are the oxidation and reduction potentials referred to Fc+/Fc, and E°(Fc+/Fc)(abs) is the standard absolute potential (value referred to zero in a vacuum) of the Fc+/Fc couple in DMF. E°(Fc+/Fc)(abs) = 4.8 V is often used,25–27 although this value is a crude estimate based on old literature data and ignores solvent effects.
As shown by Cardona et al.,24 more accurate estimates of E°(Fc+/Fc)(abs) are possible without neglecting solvent effects. We estimated E°(Fc+/Fc)(abs) in DMF using up-to-date values of standard potential of Fc+/Fc in DMF, E°(Fc+/Fc) = 0.476 V vs. saturated calomel electrode (SCE),28 potential of SCE versus the standard hydrogen electrode (SHE), E(SCE) = 0.241 V vs. SHE, and the absolute standard potential of SHE, E°(SHE)(abs) = 4.44 V (IUPAC recommendation).29 Combining these values gives E°(Fc+/Fc)(abs) = 5.16 V.

E
HOMO and ELUMO were calculated from eqn (1) and (2) using onset potentials, Eon,ox and Eon,red, obtained from the intersection of two tangents drawn at the rising oxidation (or reduction) current and the baseline current of the CV curves. The results are reported in Table 1, together with the energy levels of the non-functionalized material, measured under the same conditions. Data for PCBM are also reported, for comparison.30 The HOMO and LUMO energy levels of CQD-1 and CQD-2 are very similar and significantly differ from the energy levels of the non-functionalized material. The presence of thiophene-containing groups on N-doped CQDs moved up the HOMO energy level by 0.43–0.44 eV, while the LUMO level was less affected with an upward shift of 0.09–0.11 eV.
Table 1 HOMO and LUMO energy levels derived from CV for CQDs and the calculated bandgaps




 

E
on,ox (V vs. Fc+|Fc)

E
HOMO (eV)

E
on,red (V vs. Fc+|Fc)

E
LUMO (eV)

E
g (eV)





a From ref. 30.





Pristine
0.47
−5.67
−1.16
−4.04
1.63


CQD-1
0.03
−5.23
−1.25
−3.95
1.28


CQD-2
0.04
−5.24
−1.27
−3.93
1.31


PCBMa


−6


−4.2
1.8




LUMO energies of the CQDs are higher than the LUMO of the fullerene derivative PCBM, the most common electron acceptor in OPV materials. Because of this, it is possible that after photoexcitation of the CQDs, an electron transfer to the PCBM can take place in a blend of the two materials. Alternatively, if the absorbing species is PCBM, a HOMO–HOMO hole transfer can occur, since the HOMO energies of the CQDs are higher than the corresponding orbital energy in PCBM.
In any case, therefore, our functionalized CQDs are expected to act as electron donors towards the PCBM acceptor. The confirmation of this property has been obtained experimentally using optical and EPR spectroscopic methods, described in the following sections.
Optical measurements
We focused our study of the optical properties on both solution and spin-coated film samples. The goal was to comprehend in detail the photo physical properties of the newly synthesized nanomaterial and to examine the solid-state interactions among CQDs or between CQDs and fullerene derivatives. In the latter case the aim was to observe photo-induced electron transfer in CQD/PCBM films, with the perspective to apply these materials in OSCs.
Absorption spectra of the functionalized CQD show broad and poorly structured bands, extending into the visible region (Fig. S3 in the ESI†). However, to improve the spectral selectivity and since we are interested in the photoluminescence properties of CQDs we focused our attention on the excitation and emission spectra of pristine CQDs, CQD-1 and CQD-2 in DMF, reported in Fig. 2. Noteworthily, the optical properties of the pristine CQDs are mainly preserved in functionalized materials: fluorescence bands and associated lifetimes are similar to that of pristine CQDs. Nevertheless, the small differences further confirm the functionalization, which actively influences photo-physics of CQDs.31 Furthermore, the slight red-shift observed in the excitation spectra of CQD-2 with respect to CQD-1 confirms the Eg trend calculated by cyclic voltammetry.22 According to the literature results and previous studies on pristine CQDs,20,32,33 the excitation band peaked at around 350 nm is ascribed to the localized surface states. In detail, absorption peaks in this range are assigned to n → π* transitions of CO bonds.34,35 This optical absorption is related, as confirmed by the excitation spectrum, to the broad and intense PL band centred at 450 nm. The absorption and emission bands exhibit a solvent-dependent shift, as commonly observed in similar samples.6 This behaviour is preserved in functionalized samples, although being modulated by new functional groups, as shown in Fig. S4 in the ESI.† Functionalization is observed to redshift the peak position of both the PL excitation and emission spectra. A similar behaviour was already observed in imidazole functionalized CQDs.36
 Fig. 2  (a) Excitation spectra (dashed lines) recorded at λem = 420 nm and emission spectra (solid lines) excited at λexc = 350 nm of pristine and functionalized CQDs in DMF solution. (b) Fluorescence decay curves recorded at 450 nm under 370 nm excitation. 
More precisely, experiments in DMF show a larger shift of the fluorescence band maximum for CQD-1 with respect to CQD-2. In contrast, in toluene an opposite behaviour is observed. We explain these findings invoking the specific interaction of the solvents with functionalized CQDs. Highly polar DMF interacts more with residual CO groups present on the surface of the functionalized CQDs. Toluene instead, being an aromatic molecule, is expected to promote pi-interactions with thiophene moieties. These facts could suggest that CQD-2 is functionalized to a larger extent with respect to CQD-1. The functionalization leaves almost unvaried the overall electronic properties of CQDs, while conferring them enhanced solubility in organic solvents.36 Furthermore, the FWHM parameter increases in CQD-1 and CQD-2, as reported for DMF in Table S5 of the ESI.† Solvent and solvation are recognized as key factors governing the excited state dynamics and the PL mechanism of CQDs,37 and the surface functionalization of CQDs is expected to affect this dynamics. The effect is evident on both the position and width of the PL peak: a slower solvation dynamics is expected to originate a larger and red-shifted PL band. A slight reduction in the average PL lifetime of functionalized CQDs with respect to pristine one shows that functionalization does not change significantly the energy relaxation pathways.
Fluorescence quenching experiments carried out on solutions of CQDs with increasing amounts of PCBM suggest that indeed a strong interaction between CQDs and PCBM takes place. The PL intensity strongly decreases with increasing PCBM concentration in solution, as shown in Fig. 3 but the peak position and shape are not affected. CQDs were recently found to interact in a similar fashion with multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWNTs) and graphene oxide (GO).18 The interaction is ascribed to charge transfer processes, by ruling out other possible quenching mechanisms. Stern–Volmer analysis provides a quantitative estimation of quenching efficiency and gives some insights into the quenching mechanism. Both CQD-1 and CQD-2 show a linear behaviour of PL quenching from PCBM at low concentrations of fullerene, and a super linear trend at higher concentrations. Typical quenching mechanisms involving the formation of ground state non-fluorescent complexes are referred to as static, while dynamic ones are those involving collisions of excited molecules.38 The interpretation of Stern–Volmer plots in Fig. 3 is based on the “sphere of action” model, which refers to a mechanism involving a quencher close to the excited fluorophore, producing instantaneous fluorescence quenching without the formation of a ground state complex.39,40 This interpretation is also supported by the LEPR results discussed later, which evidence a photo-induced charge transfer interaction and exclude the formation of a ground state charge transfer complex. The fitting function (4), where F0 and F are the fluorescence intensities in the absence and in the presence of the quencher, respectively, is based on two parameters: the K dynamic quenching constant and the V “false” static quenching constant. (3)
 Fig. 3  Stern–Volmer fluorescence quenching experiment using PCBM as a quencher in toluene solution. (a and c) Fluorescence spectra of CQD-1, CQD-2 in toluene solution at different PCBM concentrations (b and d) Stern–Volmer analysis: experimental data (dots) and “sphere of action” fitting of experimental data (line). F is the integrated fluorescence intensity. 
The determined V constant is similar for CQD-1 (V = 25.5 mL mg−1) and CQD-2 (V = 26.1 mL mg−1), indicating a similar volume of interaction with near PCBM molecules. On the other hand, a higher K constant is determined for CQD-2 (K = 251 mL mg−1) with respect to CQD-1 (K = 48 mL mg−1). The chain length of the thiophene capping group seems to be an important factor in determining the charge transfer interaction, perhaps by modulating the accessibility of electronic states and the wavefunction overlap.
Fluorescence spectra of CQD-1 and CQD-2 spin-coated samples are shown in Fig. 4a. The recorded solid-state fluorescence bands are red-shifted and broader than those recorded for solution samples. The solid state fluorescence of carbon dots has been reported in few works.41 Electronic energy transfer or π–π interactions cause PL quenching by introduction of non-radiative relaxation mechanisms. Solid-state excimer formation42 or exciton self-trapping43 is the basic mechanism underlying the red-shifted fluorescence in the aggregate form. As rule of thumb, a strong red-shift in fluorescence originates from a strong interaction between the electronic states involved in PL.
 Fig. 4  (a) Fluorescence spectra of spin coated CQD-1 (red) and CQD-2 (green) films under 350 nm excitation. (b) Fluorescence spectra of PCBM (blue), CQD-1:PCBM blend (red) and CQD-2:PCBM blend (green) in spin coated films, under 350 nm excitation. The intense band peaked at 700 nm is relative to the grating second harmonic of the exciting light. 
Despite a similar PL band-shape in solution, solid state PL bands of CQD-1 and CQD-2 are extremely different. The CQD-1 PL peak shifts toward red by 95 nm, while the CQD-2 PL peak shift is up to 200 nm. The magnitude of the redshift can be related to the extent of aggregation.44 CQD-2 short ligands enhance aggregation resulting in a more red-shifted fluorescence spectrum than that observed for CQD-1, functionalized with bulkier ligands.
Fluorescence spectra of the blends CQD-1:PCBM and CQD-2:PCBM, deposited as thin films by spin-coating, are reported in Fig. 4b. Clearly, no CQD luminescence is observed for both CQD-1:PCBM and CQD-2:PCBM blends. The fluorescence of CQD-1 and CQD-2 is completely quenched and the resulting spectra coincide with the solid state fluorescence of PCBM films, previously reported in the literature.45 This behavior can be considered as the extreme case for high concentrations in Stern–Volmer fluorescence quenching experiments.
A complete fluorescence quenching, indicating the presence of a dominant non-radiative relaxation process, could be a signature of the electron transfer (ET) interaction between CQDs and PCBM, resulting in photo-generation of charges. In order to definitely assign the ET as the main photophysical process in the CQD:PCBM blends, we performed EPR spectroscopic measurements on the materials.
EPR measurements
We used EPR spectroscopy to identify unpaired-electron species (paramagnetic species) photogenerated in the CQD materials, such as the radical anions and cations generated by photoinduced electron transfer. We applied two different EPR techniques, namely light induced-EPR (LEPR) and time-resolved EPR (TREPR), to study CQD-1 and CQD-2 in solution, in neat films and in blends with PCBM.
The LEPR spectra recorded in films of neat CQD-1 or CQD-2 are reported in Fig. 5. Before illumination no relevant EPR signal is detected in the CQDs, whereas under illumination of the samples, a weak EPR line at g = 2.0035 ± 0.0005 is detected that can be attributed to long-living radicals formed by photoinduced electron transfer.46 The linewidths are approximately 10 Gauss and the lineshapes are inhomogeneous due to anisotropic magnetic interactions. The detection of a small photogeneration of radicals in neat CQDs demonstrates a partial double behavior (both the electron donor and acceptor) of the materials, even after the functionalization which increases the p-type activity. The effect is however small and the donor type behavior is certainly prevalent, as demonstrated in the following.
 Fig. 5  EPR spectra of films of CQDs: (a) CQD-1 and (b) CQD-2. Black lines: spectra recorded before illumination of the samples. Red lines: spectra recorded under illumination of the samples. 
A stronger charge photogeneration effect is observed in the LEPR spectra of the CQD:PCBM blends, shown in Fig. 6. In the CQD-1:PCBM blend, the dark EPR spectra do not show any signal whereas a relatively strong EPR spectrum appears during sample illumination. The presence of a strong light-induced EPR signal implies that there is an effective photogeneration of radicals in the material, which can be related to electron transfer processes. The sharp line (about 2 Gauss wide) in the spectrum is characterized by a g-factor g = 1.9998 ± 0.0005 and an anisotropic lineshape typical of PCBM radical anions. The presence of the PCBM anion means that fullerene is the electron acceptor and therefore the CQD acts as an electron donor. The EPR line of the CQD-1 cation (positive polaron) is not clearly visible in the spectrum and is located at lower field with respect to the PCBM anion, at a g factor of 2.0027 ± 0.0005. There are several possible explanations for the low intensity of the CQD cation, observed in other donor:acceptor blends,47 where the low EPR intensity of the positive polaron is attributed to the low stability of the radical cations, to the cation larger linewidth or to a partial microwave saturation of the spin sublevels under the experimental conditions used.
 Fig. 6  LEPR spectra of (a) CQD-1:PCBM and (b) CQD-2:PCBM blends. Red lines: spectra recorded under illumination of the sample. Black lines: spectra recorded before illumination of the sample. 
The light induced-EPR spectrum of the CQD-2:PCBM blend (Fig. 6b) shows a much weaker LEPR signal. The reason for a smaller EPR intensity in this blend can be attributed either to an inefficient photo-induced electron transfer or to a fast recombination of the photogenerated charges. The latter explanation is supported by the fast decay (within fraction of a second) of the EPR line after switching off the illumination of the sample even at low temperature (130 K). In contrast, in the CQD-1:PCBM blend, the decay of the strong LEPR signal is much longer, being in the order of hours at low temperature (130 K). The faster decay in CQD-2 is possibly related to a more efficient charge recombination process, as suggested also by time-resolved experiments discussed in the following. Having demonstrated that the charge transfer process is an effective photophysical pathway in the CQD:PCBM blends and that the CQDS are acting as efficient electron donors, we investigated in deeper detail the dynamics of this process using time-resolved EPR with a sub-microsecond time resolution. The TREPR spectra, recorded in CQD-1:PCBM and CQD-2:PCBM blends after pulsed laser photoexcitation wavelength at 532 nm, are shown in Fig. 7.
 Fig. 7  TREPR spectra recorded at 1 μs after a 532 nm, 5 ns laser pulse of (a) CQD-1:PCBM and (b) CQD-2:PCBM blends spin coated on a PET substrate. Abs = absorption, Em = emission. 
In the CQD-1:PCBM blend (Fig. 7a), the TREPR spectrum is clearly composed of two peaks. The most intense one, at higher field, corresponds to the typical field position (g-value) and the lineshape of PCBM anions, and the less intense one, at lower field, corresponds to a g-value approximately similar to CQD-1 cations observed in Fig. 6. As the EPR spectrum is the sum of the unmodified cation and anion peaks, we conclude that no magnetic interaction between the two opposite charge carriers occurs, which would affect the spectral shape, demonstrating that the detected species are free charge carriers. This evidence is supported also by the polarization pattern of the spectrum, which refers to the line intensities, related to the spin level population distribution. Quite commonly, immediately after a photoinduced generation of radicals, there is a deviation of the spin sublevel populations from the Boltzmann equilibrium, and the EPR lines appear with a modified intensity, either in enhanced absorption or even in emission. Both species in the TREPR spectrum of CQD-1 show an absorptive signal suggesting a fast thermalization of the spin sublevel populations after the photo-induced electron transfer,48 possibly induced by a rapid migration of the charge carriers.
The TREPR spectrum of the CQD-2:PCBM blend at 1 μs after the laser pulse is reported in Fig. 7b. In contrast to the case of CQD-1:PCBM, the spectrum is more complex and shows peaks both in emission (Em, negative signal) and in absorption (Abs, positive signal). The overall spectral pattern is reminiscent of spin correlated radical pair (SCRP) spectra.49 A radical pair consists of two electron spins coupled to each other by exchange and dipolar magnetic interactions because of their proximity. Commonly, the photogeneration of a SCRP produces a non-Boltzmann population in its four spin sublevels, resulting in an alternate emission/absorption (EAEA) pattern of the EPR lines. This is indeed the situation observed in the CQD-2:PCBM blend. The two spins of the SCRP can either recombine or separate to produce distant, non-interacting radicals and the corresponding EPR spectrum is the sum of the two lines belonging to the two radicals. The latter situation is what we observed in the CQD-1:PCBM blend.
The different behavior of the two blends can be rationalized in terms of a fast separation of the initial photogenerated charge transfer state in the CQD-1:PCBM material, much faster than in the CQD-2:PCBM blend. We attribute the faster charge separation in CQD-1:PCBM to a more favorable morphology in the material which lowers the barriers to charge diffusion by hopping motion, thus promoting the charge separation after the initial electron transfer. In CQD-2:PCBM in contrast the initial charge transfer state, giving rise to a SCRP, is more long-living probably because of a too high barrier for charge separation. As a further consequence, in CQD-2:PCBM the prolonged persistence of the two charge at a short distance is inevitably linked to a more effective geminate charge recombination which is also a possible explanation for the low intensity of the LEPR spectra.
Conclusions
In this work, we report the synthesis and photophysical properties of N-doped carbon quantum dots functionalized with thiophene groups by different linkages (CQD-1 and CQD-2). The aim of the functionalization was to improve the solubility of the CQDs in nonpolar solvents and to enhance their electron donating properties. The functionalization indeed produced markedly increased solubility properties of the CQDs in nonpolar aromatic solvents that allowed us to investigate in such solvents the photophysics of CQD-1 and CQD-2 in the presence of the fullerene derivative PCBM and to prepare films of solid blends with PCBM. The changes in the photophysical properties of CQD-1 and CQD-2 after functionalization have been explored by cyclic voltammetry, photoluminescence spectroscopy and electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR).
The CV measurements demonstrated a shift of the oxidation potential with respect to the pristine CQDs. The HOMO and LUMO energies determined by CV predict a better electron donating capability towards the electron acceptor PCBM, with a small difference between CQD-1 and CQD-2.
Fluorescence quenching experiments showed the efficient quenching of the CQD emission induced by PCBM, both in solution and in solid blends. The Stern–Volmer analysis in solution demonstrates the higher quenching efficiency of PCBM towards CQD-2 with respect to CQD-1 and this effect is attributed to the less hindered contact of PCBM to CQD-2 due to the shorter chain linking the thiophene units to the carbon dots.
In thin films of CQD:PCBM blends, the complete quenching of fluorescence of the CQDs is explained by electron transfer processes where the CQDs act as electron donors towards the PCBM acceptor. The proof that the quenching is caused by electron transfer is provided by EPR spectroscopy, which unequivocally shows the photoinduced formation of PCBM radical anions. Furthermore, using Time-Resolved EPR techniques, a different behavior was observed in the dynamics of the photogenerated charges in the two blends CQD-1:PCBM and CQD-2:PCBM. In the latter, relatively long-living charge pairs are detected whereas in the former only free charges are detected. The longer living charge pair states are suggested to be responsible for an increased charge recombination in the CQD-2:PCBM blend with respect to CQD-1:PCBM, causing a reduced yield of photoinduced free charge carriers.
Experimental
Cyclic voltammetry
CV measurements were conducted in a three-electrode cell thermostated at 25 °C, using a Pt disk (2 mm diameter) and a Pt ring as working and counter electrodes, respectively, and Ag|AgI|0.1 M n-Bu4NI as a reference electrode. The samples for CV analysis were prepared by dissolving 10 mg of CQDs in 15 mL of the electrolyte solution. At the end of each experiment, ferrocene was added to the solution in order to refer the potential scale to the ferrocenium/ferrocene (Fc+/Fc) couple. 0.1 M tetraethylammonium tetrafluoroborate (Et4NBF4, Alfa Aesar, 99%) was used as a supporting electrolyte in N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF, VWR HiPerSolv Chromanorm, 99.9%). Et4NBF4 was recrystallized from ethanol and dried in a vacuum oven at 70 °C for 48 h. Measurements were performed using an Autolab PGSTAT 30 potentiostat/galvanostat (EcoChemie, The Netherlands) run by a PC with GPES software.
Optical spectroscopy
UV-vis spectra were recorded by using a Cary 5 spectrometer (Varian), in the range 200–800 nm. The PL spectra were measured using a FluoroMax-P (Jobin-Yvon) fluorimeter. Minimization of the scattered light was achieved collecting the PL spectra in 90° geometry, for solution samples, and choosing the appropriate angle (30°) on the goniometer of the solid sample holder, for film samples. Time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) measurements were carried out using the time-correlated single-photon counting (TCSPC) technique.
The experimental apparatus is based on the Fluoromax-P detection unit (grating monochromator and photomultiplier tube), powered by the FluoroHub Single Photon Counting unit. The excitation source was a blue pulsed Horiba NanoLED, generating 1 ns pulses with a tunable repetition rate (1 MHz–1 kHz). Low fluences used allow neglecting multi-exciton effects in dynamics considerations. The instrument response function (IRF) of about 1.2 ns for the whole apparatus was determined by means of scattered light detection. LED radiation was focused by means of a spherical lens on a sample holder and sample emission was collected with a 90° geometry to minimize scattering interferences. The study of isolate CQD photo-physics was carried out on dilute solutions of CQDs in different organic solvents: N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF), 1,2-dichlorobenzene (oDCB) and toluene. Solutions were prepared keeping optical absorbance at 350 nm below 0.1 in 1 cm path quartz cuvettes.
CQD films and CQD–PCBM blends were realized by the spin-coating deposition technique on treated soda-lime (SL) microscope glass slides. SL slides were treated in basic KOH solution to improve wettability and obtain homogeneous samples. CQD films were realized spinning a 20 mg mL−1oDCB solution at 1500 rpm for 200 s. CQD–PCBM blends were obtained spinning a 20 mg mL−1oDCB solution of CQDs and PCBM.
Electron paramagnetic resonance
Light-induced EPR (LEPR) spectra were recorded on a Bruker ER200D spectrometer. For sample illumination, white light from a 300 W xenon lamp, IR filtered and focused onto a quartz optical fiber was used. The optical system delivered about100 mW cm−2 of light irradiance to the sample. Typical LEPR experimental parameters were: modulation amplitude 1 G and microwave power 0.2 mW. All the reported EPR spectra have been recorded at 130 K using a nitrogen-flow variable temperature system (Bruker BVT2000). TREPR experiments were performed using a Bruker ER200D spectrometer modified to extend the signal bandwidth, allowing a response time of about 150 ns. The second harmonic of a Nd:YAG pulsed laser (Quantel Brilliant, λ = 532 nm, pulse length = 5 ns; E/pulse ≅ 5 mJ, 50 Hz repetition rate) was used to photoexcite the sample. The EPR signal was recorded through a LeCroy LT344 digital oscilloscope, triggered by the laser pulse. The spectra were recorded with 2 mW microwave power and averaging 200 transient signals at each field position. EPR spectral simulation has been obtained using Easyspin routines under Matlab environment.50
All EPR samples were examined in quartz tubes (3 mm inner diameter, 4 mm outer diameter). Three kinds of samples were studied: CQD solutions, CQD films and CQD:PCBM films. The solutions (10 mg mL−1 of CQDs in oDCB) have been degassed in the quartz tubes through several freeze-and-pump cycles. CQD films were deposited inside the EPR tube evaporating from the above solution the solvent under vacuum. The CQD:PCBM blends were prepared either by evaporating a mixed solution of the two materials (both 10 mg mL−1 in oDCB) inside the quartz tube under vacuum or by spin-coating a 20 mg mL−1 solution on a PET substrate that was cut and inserted into the EPR tube successively sealed under a N2 atmosphere.
Acknowledgements
Financial support from the Italian Ministry of Education University and Research (MIUR) (contract PRIN2012T9XHH7) and the University of Padova is gratefully acknowledged.
References

          Y. Gogotsi and V. Presser, Carbon Nanomaterials, CRC Press, Boca Raton, 2nd edn,  2013 Search PubMed .
H. Li, Z. Kang, Y. Liu and S.-T. Lee, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 24230–24253 RSC .
S. Y. Lim, W. Shen and Z. Gao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 362–381 RSC .
Y. Wang and A. Hu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 6921–6939 RSC .
L. Cao, M. J. Meziani, S. Sahu and Y. P. Sun, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 171–180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhu, Y. Song, X. Zhao, J. Shao, J. Zhang and B. Yang, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 355–381 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. Fernando, S. Sahu, Y. Liu, W. K. Lewis, E. A. Guliants, A. Jafariyan, P. Wang, C. E. Bunker and Y. P. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 8363–8376 CAS .
Y. Xu, J. Liu, C. Gao and E. Wang, Electrochem. Commun., 2014, 48, 151–154 CrossRef CAS .
X. T. Zheng, A. Ananthanarayanan, K. Q. Luo and P. Chen, Small, 2015, 11, 1620–1636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. A. Abdulrazzaq, V. Saini, S. Bourdo, E. Dervishi and A. S. Biris, Part. Sci. Technol., 2013, 31, 427–442 CrossRef CAS .
P. Kumar and S. Chand, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2012, 20, 377–415 CAS .
M. Jørgensen, K. Norrman and F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 686–714 CrossRef .
J. J. Huang, Z. F. Zhong, M. Z. Rong, X. Zhou, X. D. Chen and M. Q. Zhang, Carbon, 2014, 70, 190–198 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, K. Chang, W. Guo, H. Li, L. Shen, W. Chen and D. Yan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 73306 CrossRef .
V. Gupta, N. Chaudhary, R. Srivastava, G. D. Sharma, R. Bhardwaj and S. Chand, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 9960–9963 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ghosh, S. Chatterjee and E. Prasad, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2015, 119, 11783–11790 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Mandal, S. Sarkar and P. Sarkar, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 3400–3407 CAS .
P. Yu, X. Wen, Y.-R. Toh, Y.-C. Lee, K.-Y. Huang, S. Huang, S. Shrestha, G. Conibeer and J. Tang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 2894 RSC .
S. Mondal, S. K. Seth, P. Gupta and P. Purkayastha, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 25122–25128 CAS .
D. Mosconi, D. Mazzier, S. Silvestrini, A. Privitera, C. Marega, L. Franco and A. Moretto, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 4156–4164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Mazzier, M. Favaro, S. Agnoli, S. Silvestrini, G. Granozzi, M. Maggini and A. Moretto, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 6592–6595 RSC .
S. K. Haram, B. M. Quinn and A. J. Bard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 8860–8861 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Bredas, R. Silbey, D. S. Boudreaux and R. R. Chance, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1983, 105, 6555–6559 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Cardona, W. Li, A. E. Kaifer, D. Stockdale and G. C. Bazan, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2367–2371 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Pommerehne, H. Vestweber, W. Guss, R. F. Mahrt, H. Bässler, M. Porsch and J. Daub, Adv. Mater., 1995, 7, 551–554 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Ashraf, M. Shahid, E. Klemm, M. Al-Ibrahim and S. Sensfuss, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2006, 27, 1454–1459 CrossRef CAS .
A. Tacca, R. Po, M. Caldararo, S. Chiaberge, L. Gila, L. Longo, P. R. Mussini, A. Pellegrino, N. Perin, M. Salvalaggio, A. Savoini and S. Spera, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 6638–6653 CrossRef CAS .
L. Falciola, A. Gennaro, A. A. Isse, P. R. Mussini and M. Rossi, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2006, 593, 47–56 CrossRef CAS .
S. Trasatti, Pure Appl. Chem., 1986, 58, 955–966 CAS .
B. C. Thompson and J. M. J. Fréchet, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 58–77 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Kwon, S. Do, J.-H. Kim, M. Seok Jeong and S.-W. Rhee, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 12604 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Pan, J. Zhang, Z. Li, C. Wu, X. Yan and M. Wu, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 3681–3683 RSC .
M. O. Dekaliuk, O. Viagin, Y. V Malyukin and A. P. Demchenko, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 16075–16084 RSC .
P. Yu, X. Wen, Y.-R. Toh and J. Tang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 25552–25557 CAS .
Y. Li, Y. Zhao, H. Cheng, Y. Hu, G. Shi, L. Dai and L. Qu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15–18 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, D. Wang, Y. Guo, C. Yang, A. Iqbal, W. Liu, W. Qin, D. Yan and H. Guo, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 5547–5554 RSC .
S. K. Cushing, M. Li, F. Huang and N. Wu, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1002–1013 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. R. Lakowicz, Principles of fluorescence spectroscopy, Springer-Verlag,  2006 Search PubMed .
C. D. Geddes, Meas. Sci. Technol., 2001, 12, R53 CrossRef CAS .
K. Campbell, A. Zappas, U. Bunz, Y. S. Thio and D. G. Bucknall, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2012, 249, 41–46 CrossRef CAS .
M. Xu, G. He, Z. Li, F. He, F. Gao, Y. Su, L. Zhang, Z. Yang and Y. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 10307–10315 RSC .
N. K. Rahman, J. Phys., Colloq., 1985, 46, C1-249–C1-259 CrossRef .

          K. S. Song and R. T. Williams, Self-Trapped Excitons, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg,  1996, vol. 105 Search PubMed .
Y. Chen, M. Zheng, Y. Xiao, H. Dong, H. Zhang, J. Zhuang, H. Hu, B. Lei and Y. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 312–318 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Rathnayake, N. Wright, A. Patel, J. Binion, L. E. McNamara, D. J. Scardino and N. I. Hammer, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 3212–3215 RSC .
O. G. Poluektov, S. Filippone, N. Martín, A. Sperlich, C. Deibel and V. Dyakonov, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2010, 114, 14426–14429 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Franco, A. Toffoletti and M. Maggini, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 14358–14364 RSC .
J. Behrends, A. Sperlich, A. Schnegg, T. Biskup, C. Teutloff, K. Lips, V. Dyakonov and R. Bittl, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 85, 125206 CrossRef .
C. D. Buckley, D. A. Hunter, P. J. Hore and K. A. McLauchlan, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1987, 135, 307–312 CrossRef CAS .
S. Stoll and A. Schweiger, J. Magn. Reson., 2006, 178, 42–55 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Details of the synthesis of functionalized CQDs, IR and NMR spectra of pristine and functionalized CQDs, absorption and fluorescence spectra of CQD-1 and CQD-2, summary of the optical spectroscopic results. See DOI: 10.1039/c6cp05981cThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2016
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  Reaction scheme of the two thiophene-functionalized N-doped CQDs.	 

 	Fig. 1  Cyclic voltammetry of (a) N-doped CQD, (b) CQD-1 and (c) CQD-2, recorded on a Pt electrode at v = 0.02 V s−1, in DMF with 0.1 M Et4NBF4, T = 25 °C.	 
EHOMO (eV) = −e(Eoxvs.Fc+/Fc + E°(Fc+/Fc)(abs))	(1)
ELUMO (eV) = −e(Eredvs.Fc+/Fc + E°(Fc+/Fc)(abs))	(2)


Pristine	0.47	−5.67	−1.16	−4.04	1.63
CQD-1	0.03	−5.23	−1.25	−3.95	1.28
CQD-2	0.04	−5.24	−1.27	−3.93	1.31
PCBMa	
	−6	
	−4.2	1.8

 	Fig. 2  (a) Excitation spectra (dashed lines) recorded at λem = 420 nm and emission spectra (solid lines) excited at λexc = 350 nm of pristine and functionalized CQDs in DMF solution. (b) Fluorescence decay curves recorded at 450 nm under 370 nm excitation.	 
	(3)

 	Fig. 3  Stern–Volmer fluorescence quenching experiment using PCBM as a quencher in toluene solution. (a and c) Fluorescence spectra of CQD-1, CQD-2 in toluene solution at different PCBM concentrations (b and d) Stern–Volmer analysis: experimental data (dots) and “sphere of action” fitting of experimental data (line). F is the integrated fluorescence intensity.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Fluorescence spectra of spin coated CQD-1 (red) and CQD-2 (green) films under 350 nm excitation. (b) Fluorescence spectra of PCBM (blue), CQD-1:PCBM blend (red) and CQD-2:PCBM blend (green) in spin coated films, under 350 nm excitation. The intense band peaked at 700 nm is relative to the grating second harmonic of the exciting light.	 

 	Fig. 5  EPR spectra of films of CQDs: (a) CQD-1 and (b) CQD-2. Black lines: spectra recorded before illumination of the samples. Red lines: spectra recorded under illumination of the samples.	 

 	Fig. 6  LEPR spectra of (a) CQD-1:PCBM and (b) CQD-2:PCBM blends. Red lines: spectra recorded under illumination of the sample. Black lines: spectra recorded before illumination of the sample.	 

 	Fig. 7  TREPR spectra recorded at 1 μs after a 532 nm, 5 ns laser pulse of (a) CQD-1:PCBM and (b) CQD-2:PCBM blends spin coated on a PET substrate. Abs = absorption, Em = emission.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Details of the synthesis of functionalized CQDs, IR and NMR spectra of pristine and functionalized CQDs, absorption and fluorescence spectra of CQD-1 and CQD-2, summary of the optical spectroscopic results. See DOI: 10.1039/c6cp05981c

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2016
