Transition metal carbide-based materials: synthesis and applications in electrochemical energy storage  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6TA03832H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6TA03832H
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 10379-10393Transition metal carbide-based materials: synthesis and applications in electrochemical energy storage

        
          
            Ying 
            Xiao
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jang-Yeon 
            Hwang
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Yang-Kook 
            Sun
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Energy Engineering, Hanyang University, Seoul 133-791, Republic of Korea. E-mail: yksun@hangyang.ac.kr
Received 
      7th May 2016
    , Accepted 31st May 2016First published on 31st May 2016AbstractTransition metal carbides have attracted vast interest over the past years due to their appealing properties such as high conductivity, high chemical stability and thermal stability. With the rapid development of nanotechnology, more and more novel transition metal carbide structures have been prepared and investigated in various areas. In the present review, we summarize the current very recent progress in the synthesis and applications of transition metal carbides in the fields of capacitors and batteries. We also present critical issues, challenges, and perspectives with the hope of providing a fuller understanding of the associated electrochemical processes. Such an understanding is critical for tailoring and designing transition metal carbides with desired activity and stability.Ying XiaoYing Xiao received her Ph.D. degree from the Beijing Institute of Technology in 2015. Since December 2015, she has been a postdoctoral researcher at Hanyang University. Her current research interests focus on the design and synthesis of nanostructured materials and their applications in Na-ion batteries and Li–S batteries.Jang-Yeon HwangJang-Yeon Hwang received his B.S. degree from the Department of Chemical Engineering in Hanyang University in 2012. He is presently a Ph.D. candidate in the Department of Energy Engineering at Hanyang University, Korea, under the supervision of Professor Yang-Kook Sun. His research focuses on materials development in the fields of energy conversion and storage, such as cathode, anode and electrolyte materials for sodium-ion batteries.Yang-Kook SunYang-Kook Sun received his Ph.D degree from the Seoul National University, Korea. In 1996 he was a principal researcher at Samsung SDI and contributed to the commercialization of lithium polymer batteries. He has been working at Hanyang University in Korea as a professor from 2000. His research interests are the synthesis of new electrode materials for lithium-ion batteries, super-capacitors, next-generation Na-ion batteries, Li–S batteries, and Li–air batteries.
1. Introduction
There is an unprecedented drive to develop renewable energy technologies to meet the ever-growing global energy demand and mitigate the rapid depletion of fossil fuels.1,2 Therefore, clean and renewable energy technologies such as solar cells, fuel cells, supercapacitors and metal-based batteries have become hot research areas. Among all the alternative energy devices, electrochemical energy storage devices have attracted a significant amount of attention.3,4 The performance of these devices depends heavily on the properties of the related materials.
For instance, metal-based batteries, especially lithium ion batteries (LIBs), have been the predominant power source for small portable electronics, electric vehicles and hybrid electric vehicles.5,6 Graphite is the most commonly implemented commercial anode in LIBs, and it has benefits such as low cost, high stability and good electronic conductivity. However, the intercalation mechanism of Li+ in graphite limits its specific capacity to 372 mA h g−1. Since the demand for LIBs possessing high power, large capacity, and high rate capability is ever increasing, numerous studies have been carried out worldwide to develop new electrode materials to replace the currently used graphite.
Supercapacitors, which are similar to batteries in design and manufacture, are also important energy storage technologies that exhibit high power density, deliver the stored energy in a very short period of time, and operate for a long time.7,8 However, there is a lack of affordable, highly efficient electrode materials with good conductivity, which limits the practical applications of supercapacitors. The two devices mentioned above play important roles in addressing the current energy and environmental challenges. Thus, with the advantages and disadvantages in mind, considerable efforts must be devoted to exploring high efficiency materials with optimized composition and cost-efficient preparation routes.
Currently, transition metal oxide electrodes are being intensively studied in energy storage devices due to their high theoretical specific capacities, low cost and wide availability.9–11 However, these kinds of materials always suffer from low electrical conductivity and poor durability, which greatly impede their practical applications. Transition metal carbides (TMCs) have special metallic structures in which small carbon atoms are distributed in the interstitial voids of a densely packed host lattice; TMCs exhibit high electronic conductivity, mechanical stability and good corrosion resistance.12–14 The combination of such exceptional properties has attracted considerable attention and has led to numerous technical applications and theoretical investigations, with most efforts focusing on the catalytic activity of TMCs. TMCs have long been investigated as catalysts for various organic reactions.15–19 For instance, Mo2C was reported to have excellent catalytic activity for chemical reactions such as NH3 decomposition,15 HCOOH oxidation,16 and hydrogen evolution reactions.17 Fe5C2 nanoparticles exhibited active catalytic capability for Fischer–Tropsch synthesis.18 CoMo-carbide was used to catalyze the hydrogenation of CO.19 The Pt/Mo2C–C catalyst was successfully applied to convert cellulose to polyols using CO and H2O as the carbon and hydrogen sources.20 As the research in this field has progressed, other applications have emerged, and more and more studies have been conducted to explore the promising applications of TMCs in various areas. Compared with transition metals and carbon, TMCs can not only offer metallic conductivity, but also exhibit excellent catalytic activity, which will be beneficial for achieving higher electrochemical performance. In view of their outstanding properties, TMCs have generated interest in energy conversation and storage applications. The possibility of using TMCs as energy storage materials for clean energy devices was investigated both experimentally and theoretically in recent years.14,21–25 Additionally, a new family of two-dimensional (2D) carbide materials, MXenes, has emerged, and the use of MXenes for applications in electrochemical energy applications was demonstrated by Drexel scientists.26 After that, more and more efforts were devoted to investigating the electrochemical applications of TMCs. However, to the best of our knowledge, there is little attention focusing on the preparation and application of TMC-based materials in energy storage.
Herein, we summarize the preparation of carbide materials and give an account of the previous investigations of carbides in energy storage applications as (i) electrode materials for capacitors and (ii) electrode materials for metal-based batteries. Our goal is to better understand the importance of carbides and to improve the design of high performance TMC-based devices for energy storage.
2. Approaches to preparing carbide materials
Numerous strategies have been developed to synthesize TMCs with various structures. Among them, the most actively studied TMCs are 2D layered carbides (MXenes) and non-layer Mo2C. The former are usually prepared by an exfoliation method, and the latter are commonly obtained by annealing a precursor containing Mo. Apart from the above-mentioned TMCs, there is also some work related to other carbides such as WC, TixCy, Mn3C, Co3C, Co2C, and Co3ZnC prepared using various routes. In this section, we summarize the reported fabrication methods for different carbides that can be used in capacitors as well as batteries.
2.1 Layered MXene-based materials
Two-dimensional materials have garnered significant attention over the past decades. A new family of 2D materials made of layer structured carbides named “MXenes” was reported by Drexel scientists.26–32 Generally, MXenes can be generated by selectively etching a certain element from Mn+1AXn phases. In Mn+1AXn phases, “M” represents an early transition metal, “A” is related to a group A (mostly groups 13 and 14) element, X is C or N, and n = 1, 2, or 3.27b The procedure for synthesizing MXene carbide involves exfoliation coupled with etching. During this process, the relatively strong metallic bonds between M and A that form the corresponding “Mn+1AXn” phases are replaced by weaker hydrogen bonds (“A” layers and replacement by OH, O or F) at room temperature using aqueous HF as the etching agent. This allows for the separation of MXenes via ultrasonication (Fig. 1a).
 Fig. 1  (a) A schematic illustration of the formation of MXenes from the corresponding MAX phase [reprinted with permission from ref. 27b. Copyright 2014 Wiley]. (b) Nb2C layers [reprinted with permission from ref. 28. Copyright 2015 Journal of American Chemical Society]. (c) Ti3C2 layers [reprinted with permission from ref. 33. Copyright 2015 Elsevier]. 
For instance, layered Nb2C-based carbide materials can be generated by the reactions between HF solutions and Nb2AlC2; these reactions can be written in the following form: Nb2AlC + 3HF = AlF3 + 1.5H2 + Nb2C(1) Nb2C + 2H2O = Nb2C(OH)2 + H2(2) Nb2C + 2HF = Nb2CF2 + H2(3)
Reactions (2) and (3) result in OH and F terminations, respectively. Centrifugation was then performed to separate the solids, which were then washed with deionized water. MXenes possess multilayered structures without delamination. To obtain single- or few-layer MXenes, sonication was performed and later replaced by intercalation of dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), which proved to be more efficient. Using a similar method, various carbides with layered structures such as Ti2C-, Ti3C2-, V2C-, and Nb2C-based materials can be obtained (Fig. 1b and c).28,33,34
2.2 Molybdenum carbide (MoxC)-based materials
As one of the early transition metal carbides, MoxC has attracted tremendous interest in many areas owing to its high activity and excellent conductivity (conductance: 1.02 × 102 S cm−1).35,36 Until now, numerous approaches have been proposed to synthesize MoxC-based materials with different structures.
Solid-state reactions are the most direct method to prepare target products. In particular, the temperature-programmed reduction (TPRe) method with the advantages of convenience, efficiency and possibility for achieving high specific surface area15,37 was traditionally applied and was considered as the prominent one for synthesizing carbides. These reactions generally involve the gas–solid reaction between the related oxides and H2 or other carbon containing gases such as CH4, C2H6, C3H8, and C4H10 under a wide range of conditions.15,34,37–40 This strategy was also utilized to fabricate MoxC-based electrodes for use in batteries and capacitors. For instance, Chen et al. reported the synthesis of Mo2C/MoO2 heteronanotubes based on a chemical reaction between the related oxide and carbon.41 In this work, MoO3 was used as a Mo source, and a CMK3 rod was used as a carbon source with self-templates. The reduction reaction between these two samples at high temperature led to the formation of a carbide-based hybrid with a heteronanotube structure.
Ball milling is widely utilized to grind large materials and prepare materials with nanocrystalline or amorphous states because it is simple, low cost, and provides good dispersion. Numerous studies related to ball milling of MoxC precursors have been published in various areas. For instance, Sun et al. prepared a Mo2C/CNT composited cathode for Li–O2 batteries by ball-milling and then post-calcining at high temperature.42 The former operation leads to good dispersion of molybdenum-based nanoparticles onto carbon nanotubes, and the latter results in the carbothermal reduction of the sample (Fig. 2a).
 Fig. 2  (a) Mo2C/CNT composites synthesized by ball milling [reprinted with permission from ref. 42. Copyright 2015 Journal of American Chemical Society]. (b) TEM images of mesoporous Mo2C/C spheres prepared by a solvothermal assisted reaction [reprinted with permission from ref. 43. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry]. (c) SEM image and TEM image of MoC0.654@carbon nanosheets with different magnifications. (d) Schematic illustration of the salt-templating process for the formation of vertically aligned nanosheets [reprinted with permission from ref. 47. Copyright 2015 Journal of American Chemical Society]. 
Besides, Mo-based carbides can also be prepared by hydrothermal/solvothermal reactions. Such reactions are relatively low temperature processes with water or organic solvents as the main mineralizers, respectively. The advantages include fast reaction kinetics, high crystallinity, narrow-size distributions, ease of scalability and so on.43 Recently, mesoporous Mo2C/C spheres were successfully prepared by Cao and co-workers.44 Monodispersed porous spheres with a surface area of 12.62 m2 g−2 were generated by a solvothermal route via a reaction between molybdenyl acetylacetonate and ethanol, followed by low temperature calcining (Fig. 2b). The porous structure was a result of the decomposition of organic-based precursors and should improve the electrochemical performance. In view of the high conductivity of Mo2C and C, Guo et al. designed a composite structure of MoO2/Mo2C/C spheres in the presence of resol, Pluronic F127 and ammonium heptamolybdate tetrahydrate (AHM) with the assistance of a solvothermal reaction.45 Xia et al. combined the solution route with carbothermal reduction under an H2/Ar atmosphere to prepare Mo2C-based materials. The resulting carbide nanoparticles with diameters of about 50 nm were uniformly dispersed among graphene nanosheets.46
Apart from the hydrothermal/solvothermal assisted methods, immersing certain organic materials in solution is considered to be an effective and fast strategy to generate MoxC-based materials. Such a process always refers to the formation of a precursor and the subsequent thermal reduction. For instance, Wang and his co-workers demonstrated a general method to grow Mo2C on graphene supports by heat treatment of an ammonium molybdate–GO mixture followed by carburization at high temperature under an inert atmosphere.47 Mo2C nanoparticles can be covalently anchored to the GR supports using this process. Hybrids with different Mo2C contents can be easily obtained by adjusting the usage of GO. Fellinger et al. synthesized vertically aligned functional graphitic carbon nanosheets using a salt-templating method. They first used a ZnCl2/KCl templating approach, and then the nanosheets were immersed in a metal salt (MoCl6); the resulting MoC0.654@carbon nanosheets were formed after thermal treatment (Fig. 2c and d).48 The proposed method can be expanded to fabricate a series of nanostructured carbides including WC, TaC, and NbC@carbon nanosheets.
Combinations of inorganic and organic materials have frequently been used to fabricate MoxC-based materials. The molecular association between inorganic and organic components plays a key role in achieving a near-homogeneous carbonization process, which subsequently led to the generation of a porous structure. Nazar et al. reported the preparation of elemental carbon-free nanostructured Mo2C fibers with a surface area of 50 m2 g−1 based on a hybrid precursor mediated approach.49 In the first step, the anilinium trimolybdate dihydrate precursor was precipitated using an ammonium tetramolybdate and aniline solution at pH values of 3 to 4. The final heat treatment led to the formation of β-Mo2C composed of loosely interconnected nanoparticles with a porous structure. Cao et al. reported the efficient synthesis of hierarchically porous Mo2C/C hybrids by a facile freeze-drying assisted method.36 The target material had interconnected cubic phase Mo2C and a little bit of free carbon (<5%); it had a high surface area of 200.6 m2 g−1. The pore engineering and hybridization with carbon are believed to be responsible for the significantly improved electrochemical performance (Fig. 3a). The same group successfully prepared Mo2C/N-doped carbon fiber hybrids through a single-nozzle electrospinning approach (Fig. 3b and c).50 The ultrafine Mo2C nanoparticles with diameters of 2 to 4 nm were encapsulated in porous nitrogen-doped carbon fibers to form a highly conductive and interconnected network.
 Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of the formation of (a) the hierarchically porous Mo2C/C hybrid by a freeze-drying assisted method. (b) Mo2C/N-doped carbon fibers synthesized by an electrospinning approach and (c) the corresponding SEM image [reprinted with permission from ref. 36 and 50, respectively. Copyright 2015 Elsevier and 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry, respectively]. 
2.3 Non-layered TiC-based materials
TiC is a tough and excellent electrically conductive material (6.8 × 10−5 Ω cm−2) that has been used as a dual functional material to extend the life of Si anodes, alloy anodes and oxide anodes.51–53 On the one hand, it can offer an effective conductive matrix for the active electrode; on the other hand, it serves as a reinforcing phase to provide mechanical integrity, which results in improved electrochemical performance. For instance, Kumta and his co-workers reported the preparation of a nanostructured TiC/Si composite through a ball-milling process.54 Bulk Si and TiC powders were used as the starting materials in this work. Amorphous silicon nanoparticles distributed homogeneously in the TiC matrix were successfully obtained.
In addition, TiC/Si films can be synthesized using a surface sol–gel strategy combined with a post-annealing treatment under a carbon atmosphere.55 Si active nanoparticles were homogeneously distributed in the TiC matrix. Furthermore, Cui et al. reported a highly efficient anode based on a TiC/C/Si core–shell structure made through a thermochemical process followed by chemical vapor deposition (CVD) treatment (Fig. 4a).51 In the prepared structure, TiC wire arrays were formed on the Ti6Al4V substrate and then a Si coating was realized by a low pressure CVD route. In battery applications, the former served as the inactive part to improve the conductivity and robustness of the electrode. The latter silicon layer served as an active component to store Li+. Manthiram and his co-workers synthesized a FeSb–TiC–C composite anode by heating a metallic precursor followed by high-energy milling.52 In the first step, a mixture of metallic Fe, Sn, and Ti powders was annealed at high temperature under flowing argon. In the second step, the as-formed precursor was subjected to milling with acetylene black carbon. The prepared sample had a roughly spherical morphology in which the individual particles were composed of small FeSn and TiC crystalline grains with diameters of 5 to 10 nm. Tao's group reported the synthesis and electrochemical performance of a TiC/NiO core/shell nanoarchitecture53 in which the TiC nanowire core with double-layer capacitive behaviour improved the Li-storage performance of the active shell of the NiO nanosheet. In this structure, the TiC nanowire core was synthesized using a cost-effective bio-templating approach,56 and the NiO shell was prepared by a solvothermal reaction followed by a post-heat treatment under a N2 atmosphere (Fig. 4c–e).
 Fig. 4  (a) SEM image and schematic illustration of the TiC/C core–shell nanowires formed by a thermochemical approach. (b) SEM image of the TiC/C/Si hybrid structure [reprinted with permission from ref. 51. Copyright 2011 Journal of American Chemical Society]. TiC/NiO prepared by a templating method: digital images of (c) a commercial T-shirt and the textile, (d) the SEM image of TiC nanowires, and (e) the illustration image of the TiC/NiO core–shell structure [reprinted with permission from ref. 53 and 56, respectively. Copyright 2011 Journal of American Chemical Society]. (f) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of 3D TiC interconnected nanoparticle chains [reprinted with permission from ref. 57. Copyright 2016 Wiley]. 
Very recently, Yan's group proposed a novel strategy to synthesize 3D TiC interconnected particle chains by a two-step method (Fig. 4f). In the first step, TiO2/graphene aerogels were prepared using TiCl4 and GO through electrostatic adsorption and hydrolysis during hydrothermal treatment. In the second step, the as-formed aerogels were annealed at 1250 °C under an argon atmosphere, which led to the in situ formation of TiC through the following reaction: TiO2 + 3C → TiC + 2CO.57
2.4 Fe3C-based materials
Fe3C is one of the most popular carbides, and Fe3C with various compositions and structures has been shown to be a highly efficient catalyst over the past few years. Strategies to synthesize nanostructured Fe3C-based materials with various compositions and structures have been developed, and these materials have been applied in energy storage areas such as batteries.
Among all the methods, the MOF or MOF-assisted route is an ingenious and facile one. For instance, Zhang et al. reported a nitrogen doped graphene/Fe–Fe3C nano-composite synthesized by a one-pot pyrolysis process of MIL-100(Fe) (Fig. 5a). During the pyrolysis process, several phases including FeOx–C, g-C3N4, N-doped graphene, Fe, and Fe3C can be formed successively, and the desired composition can be obtained by a one step approach.58
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation of nitrogen doped graphene/Fe–Fe3C nanocomposites [reprinted with permission from ref. 58. Copyright 2013 Elsevier]. (b) TEM images of the Fe2O3/Fe3C–graphene nanoporous layer [reprinted with permission from ref. 60. Copyright 2014 Journal of American Chemical Society]. (c) TEM image and (d) the schematic illustration of the formation process of Fe3O4@Fe3C–C yolk–shell nanospindles [reprinted with permission from ref. 61. Copyright 2016 Journal of American Chemical Society]. 
Zhou et al. reported the synthesis of a core–shell Fe@Fe3C/C composite by adopting FeOOH nanorods as the Fe resource.59 Then, FeOOH nanorods were added to a solution of urea, LiNO3, NH4H2PO4, and glucose. This mixture was reacted at a certain temperature, and the as-formed highly dispersed mixture was ground down and calcined to generate the target product. The Fe3C was embedded in a carbon matrix, and this showed catalytic activity to promote the deinsertion of lithium from carbon–hydrogen and allowed for the partially reversible formation/decomposition of the SEI film. Tour et al. fabricated Fe2O3/Fe3C–graphene thin films with three-dimensional nanopores via a low temperature CVD method.60 In this case, iron foil was used as the substrate, and CVD growth was conducted at 550 °C under a H2/C2H4 atmosphere. Then, the sample was further annealed at 300 °C in air to form heterogeneous Fe2O3/Fe3C–graphene with self-organized nanoporous structures (Fig. 5b). Guo's group synthesized robust Fe3O4@Fe3C yolk–shell nanospindles through pyrolysis of the Fe2O3@RF precursor (Fig. 5c and d).59 The Fe2O3 spindles were used both as the template and reaction reagents, and these were coated with RF resin in an ethanol–ammonia–water system. The target product consisted of an Fe3O4@Fe3C core–shell structure with a diameter of 15 to 20 nm confined in the compartment of a hollow carbon nanospindle. This structure can be obtained by carbonization at high temperature under an inert atmosphere.
By utilizing the polycondensation of resorcinol and formaldehyde, Wang et al. prepared porous carbon spheres doped with Fe3C in the presence of FeCl3 and CH3COONa. During the preparation process, iron precursors were first introduced into the crosslinked resorcinol–formaldehyde spheres by a facile hydrothermal reaction with ethanol as a dispersing agent. The final carbonization was carried out at 700 °C leading to porous Fe3C/C spheres with a high surface area of 305 m2 g−1.62
2.5 Other carbide-based materials
Other non-layered carbides have been also developed in recent years. Compounds such as Co3ZnC, WC, TaC and so on have attracted the interest of many researchers.14,63–65
Cao et al. reported the lithium storage performance of binary metal carbide by an ultrasonic-assisted method (Fig. 6a).14 A porous precursor was first formed under stirring and ultrasonic treatment. The final annealing at 600 °C led to the successful formation of core–shell structured Co3ZnC/N-doped spheres with high surface area (ca. 170 m2 g−1). In order to improve the electrochemical performance of the electrode in lithium–oxygen (Li–O2) batteries, Yoon' group designed a carbide coating (WC) on the O2 cathode side using a physical vapor deposition (PVD) method.63 The related results showed the efficient preparation of the carbide layer using the current strategy. Hu et al. designed a Si/WC@graphene composite using a two-step ball milling route in the presence of commercial Si and WC powders.66 Also, due to the superconducting properties of niobium carbide (NbC), NbC nanoparticles were introduced to modify LiFePO4/C by Hu et al. for the first time using a solid-state route.67 Li et al. prepared graphene/TaC/C wires using electron-assisted hot filament chemical vapor deposition (CVD, Fig. 6b). Ni/Ta wire electrodes were first formed on Ta wires via the following reaction: Ni2+ + 2e− → Ni (−0.257 V). Then, the formation of TaC and the graphene layer coating were completed successively in the CVD chamber in the presence of H2 and CH4 gases.64
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the formation of the Co3ZnC/C–N hybrid via an ultrasonic-assisted method [reprinted with permission from ref. 14. Copyright 2015 Journal of American Chemical Society]. (b) Schematic illustration of the formation of graphene/TaC/C wires by electron-assisted hot filament chemical vapor deposition [reprinted with permission from ref. 64. Copyright 2016 Elsevier]. 
3. Applications of TMC-based materials
3.1 Beyond energy storage
TMS-based materials have been widely investigated as catalysts in some energy conversion devices. Taking H2-fuel cells as an example, this device is considered to be one of the attractive sources of energy owing to its clean byproduct (water) compared to that of fossil fuels.68 However, scarce and expensive noble metal catalysts (e.g., Pt, Ir, and Pd) are generally needed to promote the reactions on the two electrodes [hydrogen oxidation reaction (HOR) and oxygen reduction reaction (ORR)], contributing to the limited commercial availability of fuel cells. Among all of the alternative materials, transition metal carbides have received considerable attention as catalysts or supports owing to their superior physical and chemical properties.19,68,69 In particular, some of the TMSs exhibit a band structure similar to that of the Pt-group.
For instance, Kwon et al. prepared β-WC nanoparticles on top of Pd particles. The corresponding electrochemical characterizations indicate that β-WC can enhance the HOR activity of Pd through the H+-spillover.69 Yang and co-workers investigated the HOR activity of low loading of Pt supported over TMCs in an alkaline electrolyte. The 5 wt% Pt/TMC catalysts displayed comparable activities to those of the Pt/C catalysts. 1 wt% Pt on VC can achieve a high HOR activity close to that of 46 wt% Pt/C.70
Porous Fe/Fe3C@C nanoboxes supported on graphene have been demonstrated to be an efficient catalyst for the ORR. A positive ORR onset potential (1 V), high half-wave potential (0.93 V) and small Tafel slope (72 mV dec−1) can be achieved, which exhibit superior electrocatalytic activity.71 Besides, Co3ZnC/Co encapsulated in nitrogen doped graphene was also applied as an excellent catalyst for the ORR, which was reported by Chen's group.72 The catalyst displays an onset potential and cathodic peak potential at ca. 0.91 V and 0.81 V respectively. A Tafel slope of 81.8 mV dec−1 can be obtained, which is at the same level as that of Pt/C (84.7 mV dec−1).
3.2 Capacitors
Owing to their high power density and long cycle life, electrochemical capacitors have attracted considerable attention. The ever-increasing demand for portable and wearable electronics promotes the recent research primarily focusing on improving the energy density per unit of volume of electrochemical capacitors. However, the volumetric capacitances of carbon-based electrodes are limited to be around 60 F cm−3 for commercial devices, and the best performance is in the range of 300 F cm−3 for low-density porous carbons (<0.5 to 1 g cm−3).73–75 Although extremely high capacitances of 1000 to 1500 F cm−3 can be achieved for hydrated ruthenium oxide (RuO2), its high cost limits its widespread use. MXenes, a novel family of 2D metal carbides, have been proved to be promising electrode materials for supercapacitors with higher volumetric capacitances than carbon materials. Generally, the restacking of thin MXene sheets limits the accessibility to electrolyte ions and then hinders the full utilization of their surfaces. An efficient strategy to improve the performance of 2D materials is to introduce interlayer spacers in order to prevent restacking. The related studies will be discussed in appropriate sections below.

3.2.1 Supercapacitors. 
Gogotsi et al. developed a high performance electrode for supercapacitors by combining MXenes with electrochemically active PPy polymers. The conductive polymer was used to intercalate the MXene layers by expanding the layer space for rapid charge transport in the capacitor electrode.76 The aligned polymer chain structures with ordered morphologies provided fast charge and ion transport for pseudo-capacitive contributions. The Ti3C2Tx/PPy composite exhibited a capacitance of 416 F g−1 at 5 mV s−1, which was much higher than that of the pristine Ti3C2Tx (238 F g−1). A volumetric capacitance of 1000 F cm−3 was achieved with an electrode density of 2.4 g cm−3, which is the highest reported value for MXene-based materials (Fig. 7a and b).
 Fig. 7  (a) TEM image of the PPy/Ti3C2Tx (1:2) film. (b) CVs of the PPy/Ti3C2Tx (1:2) film at various scan rates. (c) Cycle performance of the PPy/Ti3C2Tx (1:2) film after 25000 cycles at 100 mV s−1 [reprinted with permission from ref. 76. Copyright 2016 Wiley]. 


3.2.2 Hybrid capacitors. 
Until now, TMC-based materials have been used in Li-ion capacitors and Na-ion batteries.31,64,65,67,77–79 For instance, Gogotsi and his co-workers designed a sandwich-like MXene/CNT composite free-standing paper electrode by alternating filtration of MXene and CNT dispersions (Fig. 8a–c).31a This novel composition provides the material with high volumetric capacitances, good rate performances and excellent stabilities. At 2 mV s−1, volumetric capacitances of 150 F cm−3 and 390 F cm−3 can be achieved for sandwich-like Ti3C2Tx/MWCNT and Ti3C2Tx/SWCNT electrodes, respectively. Such sandwich-like catalysts also displayed superior cycling performance. In particular, the Ti3C2Tx/SWCNT electrode can produce a volumetric capacitance of ca. 345 F cm−3 at 5 A g−1 with good stability over 10000 cycles. Meanwhile, the Ti3C2Tx/MWCNT electrode exhibited a capacitance value of 300 F cm−3 at 10 A g−1, and a volumetric capacitance of ca. 350 F cm−3 was achieved after 10000 cycles. This work demonstrated the promising application of MXenes in high volumetric capacitance capacitors, and provided a faster and more efficient method to synthesize freestanding sandwich-like materials with impressive performance. The presence of CNTs between the Ti3C2 layers not only effectively prevented the stacking of carbide sheets, but also increased the conductivity of the electrode. In addition, the same group also investigated the electrochemical behaviour of Ti3C2 MXene and MXene/CNT composites in organic electrolytes for the first time.78 Because the homogeneous spreading of CNTs between the Ti3C2 layers prevented their restacking and increased the conductivity of the electrode, capacitance values of 85 F g−1 and 245 F cm−3 were obtained at 2 mV s−1 for Ti3C2 and CNT–Ti3C2 composites, respectively, with a high rate capability (the capacitance retention for the CNT–Ti3C2 was 75% at 100 mV s−1) and good cyclability (90% capacitance retention can be achieved at 1 A g−1 after 1000 cycles). The related investigation indicated that the intercalation and deintercalation processes followed a reversible two-phase mechanism rather than the continuous intercalation process observed in the previous work in aqueous supercapacitors.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of the sandwich-like MXene/CNT papers. (b) SEM image of the MXene/WCNT paper. (c) CV profiles of Ti3C2Tx and Ti3C2Tx/CNT composite electrodes [reprinted with permission from ref. 31a. Copyright 2016 Wiley]. (d) SEM image of Ti3C2Tx particles after hydrazine intercalation. (e) Capacitance retention profile for hydrazine-treated Ti3C2Tx at 5 A g−1 in 1 M H2SO4 [reprinted with permission from ref. 31b. Copyright 2016 Wiley]. (f) Top view of the SEM image of the Nb2CTx/CNT film. (g) Cycle performance of the lithiated graphite/Nb2CTx–CNT capacitor at 50 mA g−1 and (h) the volumetric energy and power densities of the capacitor devices [reprinted with permission from ref. 79. Copyright 2016 Elsevier]. (i) Volumetric (left) and gravimetric (right) rate performances of Nb2CTx/CNT paper electrodes [reprinted with permission from ref. 73. Copyright 2015 Wiley]. (j) SEM images, (k) CV curves and (l) cycling performance at 10 A g−1 of the 3D interconnected TiC nanoparticle chains [reprinted with permission from ref. 57. Copyright 2016 Wiley]. 
Gogotsi's group adopted hydrazine to intercalate into the 2D Ti3C2Tx layer to modify the surface chemistry in order to decrease the amount of surface terminations (including F and OH surface groups and intercalated water) in the exploited 2D Ti3C2-based MXene (Fig. 8d).73 The related characterization indicated that a pillaring effect existed between the carbide layers, which pre-opened the structure and improved the accessibility to active sites. The electrochemical performance of these samples was tested in a sulfuric acid electrolyte. Hydrazine treated Ti3C2Tx exhibited high volumetric and gravimetric capacitance with excellent cyclability and rate performance (Fig. 8e). This performance could be attributed to the increased layer spacing as well as the changes of the surface chemistry, which are beneficial for accessing protons and fast electrochemical kinetics.
The above-mentioned strategy can also be used to improve the electrochemical performance of 2D Nb2CTx in lithium-ion capacitors (Fig. 8f–h).79 Three full-cell Li-ion capacitors assembled with Nb2CTx/CNT films can deliver stable capacities of 43, 24 and 36 mA h g−1 for the lithiated graphite/Nb2CTx–CNT, Nb2CTx–CNT/LiFePO4 and lithiated Nb2CTx–CNT/Nb2CTx–CNT cells, respectively. It is worth noting that the volumetric energy densities of Nb2CTx–CNT/LiFePO4 and lithiated Nb2CTx–CNT/Nb2CTx–CNT cells exceed the energy density of conventional LTO/AC lithium-ion capacitors (Fig. 8h). Gogotsi's group also designed delaminated Nb2CTx by introducing propylamine between Nb2CTx layers. The formed freestanding composite paper electrode with the assistance of CNTs displayed a high volumetric capacitance of 325 F cm−3 at a low scan rate in Li-ion capacitors (Fig. 8i).73
Li et al. adopted graphene/TaC/Ta electrodes and carbon hollow spheres as a solid electrolyte.64 The constructed capacitor showed a specific capacitance of 593 F g−1 at 10 A g−1, displayed a high capacitance retention ratio up to 91.2% (421.25 F g−1) after 8000 cycles, and provided a high specific energy density of 132 W h kg−1 at 3.17 kW kg−1. The combined effect of the solid hollow carbon electrolyte, the double layer capacitance, and the faradaic pseudocapacitance contributed to the excellent capacitance performance of the lithium-ion storage capacitor. Additionally, Yan and his co-workers reported the synthesis of 3D interconnected TiC nanoparticle chain anodes by a reaction between GR and TiO2; they intensively studied the electrochemical performance of these materials as anodes in lithium ion capacitors.57 As shown in Fig. 8j–l, when combined with a porous N-doped carbon cathode, the resulting capacitor displayed a high working voltage window up to 4.5 V and an ultrahigh power density of 67.5 kW kg−1 at 35.6 W h kg−1 along with an energy density up to 112.5 W h kg−1. Such performance suggests that these materials are promising candidates for use in hybrid vehicle systems.
For Na-ion capacitor applications, Yamada et al. reported the pseudocapacitance of MXene Ti2C.77 When used as the negative electrode combined with Na2Fe2(SO4)3 as the positive electrode in a prototype Na-ion hybrid capacitor, the composited device delivered a capacity of 90 and 40 mA h g−1 at 1.0 and 5.0 A g−1, respectively at an operation voltage of 2.4 V. Additionally, 96% of the discharge capacity was retained, and the coulombic efficiency for cycling at 600 mA g−1 reached 99.7% after a few initial cycles (Fig. 9a).
 Fig. 9  (a) Cycle performance and the related coulombic efficiency of the full cell of Ti2CTx–Na2Fe2(SO4)3 [reprinted with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2014 Nature]. (b) Cyclic voltammetry and (c) cycle life of V2CTx at different scan rates. (d) Schematic illustration of the formation of V2CTx and its sodium intercalation [reprinted with permission from ref. 65. Copyright 2015 Journal of American Chemical Society]. 
Moreover, the Na2Fe2(SO4)3–Ti2CTx cell exhibited a high specific energy of 260 W h kg−1 at a high specific power of 1.4 kW kg−1. Such excellent performance was attributed to the pseudo-capacitive charge storage mechanism that was achieved without large structural changes. Gogotsi, Simon and their co-workers investigated the sodiation of V2C for the first time (as shown in Fig. 9b and c).65 This material gives a high capacitance of 100 F g−1 at slow scanning and 50 F g−1 at 50 mV s−1, which represents good power performance for Na intercalation. When used as the positive electrode of the full cell for a sodium ion capacitor, these materials can deliver a capacity of 50 mA h g−1 with a maximum cell voltage of 3.5 V. After 300 cycles at 20C, the as-obtained full cell also displayed good cycle stability, and 70% of the capacity was retained. The investigated mechanism indicates that continuous intercalation of sodium ions between the V2CTx layers occurred in a wide range of potentials (Fig. 9d).

3.3 Batteries
Besides applications as electrodes in capacitors, the possibility of using TMCs as energy storage materials for LIBs was investigated both experimentally and theoretically in recent years. It was found that Li intercalation and deintercalation could occur on 2D layer TMCs, indicating that the materials can be used as potential anodes for LIBs. Currently, various types of TMC-based electrodes, such as Co3ZnC, Mo2C, MoC0.654, Ti2C, Ti3C2, Fe3C and V2C, have also been prepared and have exhibited favorable electrochemical applications including in Li-ion batteries, Li–O2 batteries, and Li–S batteries.14,36,48,51–62,80

3.3.1 MXene-based electrodes. 
3.3.1.1 Li-ion batteries. 
Generally, exfoliated materials will exhibit large specific surface areas, which make them promising as electrodes in LIBs. Most of the studied carbide-based electrodes refer to the 2D MXene layer material including Nb2C, Ti2C and V2C. These kinds of carbides have a large layer spacing, which is favorable for the intercalation of Li-ions. Gogotsi and his co-workers reported a series of 2D layer carbides as electrodes in lithium ion batteries. For instance, Ti2C-based materials were first demonstrated to serve as a host for Li insertion by using different characterization techniques.26 When used as an electrode material in LIBs, the as-prepared electrode can deliver a high capacity of 225 mA h g−1 at C/25, 100 mA g−1 after 80 cycles at 1C, 80 mA h g−1 after 120 cycles at 3C and 70 mA h g−1 after 200 cycles at 10C (Fig. 10a). These results indicate that MXenes are promising anode materials for LIBs. A non-aqueous asymmetric cell using a Ti2C-based material as a negative electrode was also reported.27 The constructed cell was cycled in the range of 1.0 V to 3.5 V at an electrode loading of 2.5 to 3.5 mg cm−2. The irreversible capacity loss for the first cycle in a two-electrode cell is 40%, which may have originated from the SEI formation or the irreversible trapping of Li+ ions in the Ti2C structure. However, in a Ti2C/YP17 asymmetric cell, the capacity can reach a value of 60 mA h g−1 after 1000 cycles at 10C, which is 85% of the initial capacity (70 mA h g−1). Such results indicate that the prepared electrode may be suitable as an electrode in supercapacitor applications. In addition, the intercalation and delamination of different organic molecules including urea, hydrazine, hydrazine in N,N-dimethylformamide, and hydrazine in dimethyl sulfoxide were studied. Among all the studied materials, surface functionalized f-Ti3C2 intercalated with dimethyl sulfoxide was filtered to form MXene paper, which exhibited excellent Li-storage capacity at high charging rates. Specifically, the as-prepared paper displayed a high capacity of 410 mA h g−1 at 1C and 110 mA h g−1 at 36C.
 Fig. 10  (a) Cycling performance of the exfoliated Ti2C at different rates [reprinted with permission from ref. 26. Copyright 2012 Elsevier]. (b) Cycling performance of Nb2CTx and V2CTx-based electrodes at different rates [reprinted with permission from ref. 28. Copyright 2013 Journal of American Chemical Society]. (c) Schematic illustration of the formation process of PVP–Sn(IV)@Ti3C2 and (d) the corresponding cycling performance at 100 mA g−1 [reprinted with permission from ref. 81. 2016 Journal of American Chemical Society]. (e) Cycling stability of the Ti3C2–CNF at 1C and 100C compared with the control samples [reprinted with permission from ref. 82a. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry]. (f) The cycling performance of S–Ti3C2 as a cathode for Li–S batteries [reprinted with permission from ref. 82b. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry]. (g) Cycling performance of 70 wt% S/Ti2C at C/5 and C/2 [reprinted with permission from ref. 83. 2015 Wiley]. 
Meanwhile, Nb2C- and V2C-based materials were also synthesized by the same group for the first time.28 The Li-storage performances of such materials were evaluated. Although there was a large initial irreversibility capacity loss due to the SEI formation or the irreversible reaction between Li and the surface groups or water molecules, reversible capacities of 170 and 260 mA h g−1 at 1C, and 110 and 125 mA h g−1 at 10C were obtained for Nb2C- and V2C-based electrodes (Fig. 10b), respectively. These results demonstrate the potential use of these materials in high power applications.
Several approaches have been explored to improve the volumetric capacity and cycle performance. Recently, Peng et al. synthesized Ti3C2 combined with highly conductive carbon nanotubes by a simple vacuum filtration method.80 The presence of CNTs effectively improved the conductivity and the diffusion rate of the exploited Ti3C2 with terminated groups. The layered structure also provided a path for rapid charge transfer during the electrochemical process. These benefits resulted in an electrode that exhibited improved capacity and stability as a lithium ion battery anode. In particular, a reversible capacity of 428.1 mA h g−1 was obtained at 0.5C after 300 cycles. This value was much higher than that of pure Ti3C2. Zhang et al. synthesized highly efficient Ti3C2-based electrodes by introducing Sn4+@PVP on the surface of the layers using a simple immersion method (Fig. 10c).66 The introduced Sn4+@PVP was anchored by alkalization–dielectrostatic interactions. The designed material exhibited a high volumetric capacity of 1375 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1 and 233 mA h g−1 at 3 A g−1. A specific capacity of 544 mA h g−1 can be achieved at 500 mA g−1 after 200 cycles (Fig. 10d) owing to the small size of the Sn-based amorphous nanoparticles, the high conductivity of Ti3C2, and the “pillar effect” of Sn in the interlayer of the Ti3C2 matrix. In order to prevent the interlayer stacking of MXenes and to ensure the maximum use of the 2D layer structure, Huang et al. introduced carbon nanofibers within (and outside) the layers of Ti3C2Tx to improve the Li-storage performance of layer Ti3C2Tx in lithium ion batteries. The modified composite delivered a highly reversible capacity of 320 mA h g−1 at 1C and a rather stable cycling capability at 100C for 2900 cycles, which provided superior rate capability and long-term stability (Fig. 10e).82a
3.3.1.2 Li–S batteries. 
Apart from applications in lithium ion batteries, 2D transition metal carbides have become promising electrodes for Li–S batteries. Chen et al. prepared layered Ti3C2 with an accordion-like structure by exfoliating Ti3AlC2 in an HF solution; the carbide was then loaded with sulfur (57.6 wt%) by an impregnation process at 155 °C for 24 h.82b When used as a cathode in Li–S batteries, the as-prepared cathode showed a high capacity of 970 mA h g−1 at 200 mA g−1 after 100 cycles with a high coulombic efficiency above 97% during the whole cycling process (Fig. 10f). Thus, the carbide loaded with sulfur showed great promise as a cathode for Li–S batteries. Considering the merits of 2D transition metal carbides, Nazar et al. utilized Ti2C as a host and designed a 70 wt%/Ti2C composite as a cathode in lithium–S batteries.83 The presence of strong interactions between the polysulfide components and the surface Ti atoms contributed to the high capacity and excellent stability. This composite cathode delivered a specific capacity close to 1200 mA h g−1 at C/5 and a capacity retention of 80% was achieved at over 400 cycles at C/2 (Fig. 10g).
Besides, Jin et al. designed a composite separator constructed with a Ti3C2 nanosheet covered glass fibre serving as a superior separator modifier in Li–S batteries.84 The strong metal–sulfur interactions make Ti3C2 chemically bond with LiPSs, which effectively suppresses the dissolution of LiPSs. Consequently, a high capacity of 591 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles can be retained at 1.5 A g−1.


3.3.2 Mo2C-based electrodes. 
MoCx-based materials have attracted a lot of attention due to their excellent conductivity, easy preparation and high activity. Until now, most of the related studies have focused on MoCx applications in catalysis. In recent years, MoCx-based materials have shown promise for use in batteries including Li-ion batteries and Li–O2 batteries.
3.3.2.1 Li-ion batteries. 
In Chen's work, Mo2C was used to modify the electrochemical performance of mesoporous MoO2.37 The Mo2C synthesized in this work served as a highly conductive and electrochemically inactive component to decrease the resistance of the charge transport and ensure the structural stability of MoO2 nanoparticles during cycling. This led to the superior stability and high rate capability of the porous heteronanotube electrode. The electrode can give specific capacities of 623 and 510 mA h g−1 at 500 and 1000 mA g−1, respectively, for 140 cycles.
After that, Cao et al. reported a series of studies related to the Li-storage performance of porous Mo2C. First, the Mo2C/C mesoporous sphere was synthesized by a facile solvothermal method followed by calcination under a H2/Ar atmosphere.44 The hybrid electrode delivered a specific capacity of 670 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1 after 50 cycles, showing better performance compared to that of the commercial Mo2C (Fig. 11a and b). The improved performance was ascribed to the combined effects of the nano-hybridization and the porous structure. The related characterizations verified the Li-storage ability of the current Mo2C. The possible Li-storage mechanism was also proposed in this work, which was based on the conversion reaction between Mo2C and Mo.
 Fig. 11  (a) Cycling performance of mesoporous Mo2C spheres [reprinted with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry]. (b) Cycling performance of the hierarchically porous Mo2C–C hybrid at different current densities compared with that of pure C and bulk Mo2C [reprinted with permission from ref. 36. Copyright 2015 Elsevier]. (c) TEM image and (d) electrochemical performance of the Mo2C/GR composites at 200 mA g−1 [reprinted with permission from ref. 47. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry]. (e) The first discharge/charge profiles and (f) cycling performance of the pristine carbon nanotubes, Mo2C, and Mo2C/CNTs at 100 and 500 mA h g−1 in Li–O2 batteries [reprinted with permission from ref. 42. Copyright 2015 Journal of American Chemical Society]. 
A hierarchically porous Mo2C–C hybrid was prepared by a freeze-drying method and a post-heat treatment under an inert atmosphere.36 The as-obtained hybrid displayed a 3D porous structure with a high surface area of 200.6 m2 g−1. This high surface area is favorable for the diffusion of the electrolyte within the electrode, enhancing the contact area between the electrolyte and electrode and alleviating the volume change during cycling. Therefore, high specific capacities of 1196.8 and 873.6 mA h g−1 can be obtained at 100 and 300 mA g−1, respectively. Even at 1000 mA g−1, a capacity of 777.7 mA h g−1 was obtained after 1000 cycles (Fig. 11c). In addition, Mo2C (with diameters of 2 to 4 nm)/N-doped carbon fibers were also successfully synthesized by an electrospinning method coupled with post-annealing under a N2 atmosphere.50 The resulting hybrid can deliver a capacity of 658 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1 and 411.9 mA h g−1 at 2000 mA g−1 after 50 cycles. This performance resulted from ultrafine Mo2C nanoparticles capped in a 1D porous structure and the strong interactions between Mo2C nanoparticles and the N-doped carbon network, which effectively alleviated the volume change and provided conductive pathways for charge transfer.
Xia et al. also prepared a Mo2C/RGO composite with a sheet-on-sheet structure as an anode in lithium ion batteries. The as-obtained composite delivered a specific capacity of 856.4 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1 and 456.4 mA h g−1 at 1000 mA g−1 after 400 cycles, exhibiting excellent stability.46 Wang et al. reported the synthesis of 10–40 nm Mo2C nanoparticles grown on a graphene support by a facile heat treatment.47 The Mo2C loading was controlled by adjusting the amount of GO. The optimized Mo2C/GR displayed a specific capacity of 813 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1 after 100 cycles, which is much higher than that of pure GR (443 mA h g−1) and bulk Mo2C (110 mA h g−1) (Fig. 11c and d). The reason for this was the synergistic effects between Mo2C nanoparticles and the highly conductive GR support.
A series of metal carbide@carbon nanosheets comprised of vertically aligned carbon nanosheets and small metal carbides were reported by Fellinger and his co-workers using a salt templating method.48 The resulting structure exhibited good electrical conductivity, a porous structure, strong interactions with the substrate and structural robustness, which can provide efficient mass transport, a large electro-active surface and short ion/electron diffusion pathways. Such a superior structure and composition will make the resulting electrode promising for electrochemical applications. When used as an anode in lithium ion batteries, MoC0.654@CNSs exhibited excellent cycling stability, and a high capacity of 815 mA h g−1 was retained after 680 cycles. Similar to the above-mentioned work reported by Chen's group,37 Guo et al. combined MoO2 with Mo2C/C by a hydrothermal reaction with a post-calcining.85 The as-prepared composite delivered a discharge capacity of 800 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1 and 650 mA h g−1 at 500 mA g−1 after 100 cycles.
3.3.2.2 Li–O2 batteries. 
Apart from the applications in Li-ion batteries, Mo2C can also be used as an electrode in Li–O2 batteries. For instance, Sun et al. reported a nanostructured cathode based on Mo2C nanoparticles anchored on carbon nanotubes fabricated using a ball milling process along with a post-annealing step. A series of characterizations were applied to investigate the electrochemical performance of the resulting electrode. The related results indicate that the Mo2C/CNT composite displays lower polarization (0.47 V), lower overpotential (3.25–3.4 V) and higher energy efficiency (88%), compared with the bulk Mo2C power and pristine CNTs (as shown in Fig. 11e–g). Additionally, the constructed cell retained excellent cyclability up to 100 cycles at 500 mA g−1. Such superior performance was mainly related to the high electroconductivity of carbon nanotubes and the good catalytic activity of Mo2C nanoparticles. Nazar et al. investigated the interfacial reactions and cathode stability of metal carbides.49 After surface passivation, the as-synthesized carbon-free porous Mo2C fiber-based cathode with a surface area of 50 m2 g−1 displayed a low potential of 3.2 V for Li2O2 oxidation, making it promising for applications in Li–O2 batteries.


3.3.3 Fe3C-based electrodes. 
In recent years, Fe3C iron carbide (Fe3C)-based materials have become of great interest in renewable energy conversion and storage due to their thermal stability, high resistance against oxidation, excellent mechanical strength, and catalytic activity.62,86 Generally, such materials are considered to be inactive components for Li-storage or may display pseudo-capacitance behavior in batteries. However, these materials have shown obvious advantages as inactive materials to alleviate the volume change of the host electrode materials during cycling; they also possessed excellent catalytic activity and stability for oxygen reduction reactions and hydrogen evolution reactions.
Zhou et al. synthesized a core–shell structured Fe@Fe3C/C composite by using FeOOH rods as templates. The as-obtained spheres were constructed with Fe cores with well-proportioned Fe3C shells in amorphous carbon (Fig. 12a and b).59 When used as an anode in lithium ion batteries, this material can give a specific capacity of 500 mA h g−1 at 50 mA g−1 after 30 cycles. The comparison of XRD patterns before and after cycling verified the inactive properties of Fe and Fe3C in the composited electrode. The presence of Fe3C plays an important role in reducing some SEI components and then improves the performance of the electrode. When used as an anode in lithium ion batteries, this material exhibited a high reversible capacity, stable cyclability, and improved initial efficiency. In particular, a capacity of 750 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1 after 120 cycles was achieved.
 Fig. 12  (a) TEM image and (b) cycle performance of the Fe@Fe3C/C composite by using FeOOH rods as templates [reprinted with permission from ref. 59. Copyright 2015 Elsevier]. (c) Subsequent cycling performance of Fe3O4@Fe3C/C yolk–shell nanospindles along with the control samples at 500 mA g−1. (d) Schematic illustration of the proposed lithium storage mechanism for the Fe3O4@Fe3C/C yolk–shell nanospindle anode [reprinted with permission from ref. 61. Copyright 2015 Journal of American Chemical Society]. 
Tour and his co-workers reported the synthesis of Fe2O3/Fe3C–graphene 3D heterogeneous thin films using chemical vapor deposition.60 Graphene was used as a protective shell, and Fe3C was used as an inactive component; high electroconductivity was introduced to provide structural integrity and subsequently improve the capacity retention. The 3D porous structure provided open channels for ion transport. A possible interfacial lithium storage effect was anticipated to provide additional charge storage in the electrode. The as-prepared electrode delivered greatly enhanced cyclability and rate capacity compared with pristine Fe2O3 when used as an anode in lithium-ion batteries. A specific capacity of 1118 mA h g−1 was obtained at 50 μA cm−2 (0.17C) with 88% retention after 100 cycles and 165 μA h cm−2 μm−1 was obtained at 1000 μA cm−2 for 1000 cycles. Guo et al. designed robust yolk–shell nanospindles for high-rate and long-term lithium ion batteries (Fig. 12c and d).61 In this structure, Fe3O4@Fe3C core@shell nanoparticles were well confined in a hollow carbon nanospindle, which not only provided enough space to accommodate the volume change of Fe3O4 but also afforded a dual protection strategy to improve the capacity retention. Fe3O4@Fe3C/C yolk–shell nanospindles deliver a prolonged cycling life with a high reversible capacity of 1120.2 mA h g−1 at 500 mA g−1 after 100 cycles and an excellent high rate capacity (604.8 mA h g−1 at 2000 mA g−1) in LIBs. These results were much better than those of Fe3O4@C core@shell nanospindles and Fe3O4 nanoparticles.
Chen et al. reported the lithium-storage performance of Fe3C nanoparticles decorated in mesoporous carbon spheres (with 29.1 wt% of carbide and 70.9 wt% of carbon) derived from calcining a mixture of iron precursors and resorcinol–formaldehyde spheres.62 This material displayed a specific capacity of 308.6 mA h g−1 after 31 cycles and 533.6 mA h g−1 after 250 cycles at 100 mA g−1. A specific capacity of 231.7 mA h g−1 was achieved even at a high current density of 2000 mA g−1. Based on the related characterizations and analyses, it was found that such a phenomenon resulted from the decomposition of the electrolyte and the pseudo-capacitance at the interface between the electrode and electrolyte.


3.3.4 Other carbide electrodes. 
Among all the carbides, MXenes, MoCx, and Fe3C-based materials are the most frequently investigated for battery applications. Some new structures or compositions of transition metal carbides have been explored and intensively investigated including Co3ZnC, WC, and TiC films and particles. For instance, Cui et al. deposited Si on TiC/C nanofiber arrays by chemical vapor deposition (CVD) to form a core–shell TiC/C/Si nanocomposite.51 TiC/C did not react with Li and was therefore considered to be an inactive component, which played a key role in enhancing the electroconductivity and mechanical robustness during cycling. The amorphous Si served as an active material to achieve high capacity. Such an inactive/active anode showed a high specific capacity of 2800 mA h g−1, which corresponded to 92% capacity retention after 100 cycles (Fig. 13a). The excellent electrochemical performance may have resulted from the tapering of nanofibers and an open structure that allowed facile Li ion transport and high conductivity and mechanical stability in the TiC/C scaffold. Designing active–inactive composite systems is an effective and commonly used strategy to mitigate the large volume change of an active material. In view of the toughness and high electroconductivity of TiC, as well as the large volume change of alloy materials during electrochemical cycling, Manthiram and his co-workers designed a composite structure of FeSb and TiC–C by high-energy ball milling of the preheated metallic precursors (FeSnTix) with carbon black under an inert atmosphere.52 The as-prepared FeSb–TiC–C composite not only showed a high specific capacity of 450 mA h g−1 and a high tap density of 2.9 g cm−3, but also exhibited a superior volumetric capacity of 1300 mA h cm−3 and 89% capacity retention at 10C rate compared with those at C/5 (Fig. 13b and c). The related study results indicate that the content of TiC and carbon black affected the cycling stability to a large extent, and higher concentrations of these components improved the rate capability, suggesting that they mitigated agglomeration and the volume change in the active material. We demonstrated that the presence of NbC can further improve the conductivity of the electrode, increase the charge transfer reaction, and maintain the stability of the crystal structure. Compared with the pristine LiFePO4/C, the NbC-modified sample displayed higher specific capacity and capacity retention.67
 Fig. 13  (a) Charge/discharge profiles of the Si/TiC/C nanocomposite at C/5 [reprinted with permission from ref. 51. Copyright 2011 Journal of American Chemical Society]. (b) Cycling performance of FeSn–TiC–C composites at C/5. (c) Rate capability of FeSn–TiC–C composites at various rates [reprinted with permission from ref. 52. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry]. (d) SEM image of TiC/NiO and (e) cycling performance of TiC/NiO at 200 mA g−1 [reprinted with permission from ref. 53, 2015 Journal of American Chemical Society]. (f) Cycling performance of Co3ZnC/N–C spheres [reprinted with permission from ref. 14. Copyright 2015 Journal of American Chemical Society]. 
Tao et al. prepared a series of transition metal carbide wires and reported the Li-storage performance of TiC nanowires.53 The investigated TiC-based nanowires consisted of TiC and NiO (32 wt%). The theoretical specific capacity was calculated to be 348.8 mA h g−1 based on the theoretical value of NiO (718 mA h g−1) and the actual capacity of TiC nanowires (175 mA h g−1); however, a high capacity of 507.5 mA h g−1 was obtained at 200 mA g−1 after 60 cycles (Fig. 13d and e). The TiC/NiO also showed excellent cycling stability and rate capability. Electrochemical analysis indicated that the reason for the outstanding performance was the high conductivity and double-layer capacitor behavior of TiC, which improved the reaction kinetics due to the core–shell porous structure.
Cao et al. explored new binary carbide Co3ZnC core–shell nanoparticles embedded in 3D N-doped carbon using ultrasonication and subsequent low-temperature calcination.14 The lithium-storage ability of this novel material was investigated by theoretical calculation and experimental analysis. The results indicate that the resulting composite served as an efficient anode for lithium ion batteries with a mainly absorption mechanism. The specific capacities of 968.1 mA h g−1 and 296.6 mA h g−1 were achieved at 100 mA g−1 after 100 cycles and 1000 mA g−1 after 800 cycles, respectively (Fig. 13f). The superior performance was ascribed to the presence of a 3D porous structure, the small sizes of the carbides, and the high level of N-doping.
Si/WC@graphene composite anodes with a concrete-like core–shell structure were fabricated by ball milling of Si particles, wolfram carbide (WC) and graphite.66 The multiscale WC particles not only improved the internal structure against pulverization and aggregation of Si during the electrochemical process but also connected Si and graphene, thereby providing both highways for electron transport and more interfacial paths for Li+ diffusion. The presence of graphene as a shell provided effective protection for Si. As a consequence, the composite anode exhibited a rather stable SEI film and fast electron and ion transport, which led to good cycling stability and high rate capability. Tu et al. prepared Si/TiC composites by a sol–gel method.55 The related electrochemical characterization indicated that this material displayed a high capacity of 1300 mA h g−1 at 80 mA h g−1 after 80 cycles. The initial coulombic efficiency was 61.3%. The CV test indicated that the primary reversible reaction during the cycling was the alloying–dealloying process of Si and possible reactions between Li and TiC.
Yoon et al. adopted a physical vapor deposition method to coat a tungsten carbide layer onto an oxygen cathode.63 The WC-coated electrode showed voltages of 3.63 and 2.75 V in the first charge and discharge cycles, and the electrode displayed more stable overpotentials compared to the KB electrode, which were mainly ascribed to the catalytic properties and high electrical conductivity of the WC. This work indicates that coating WC onto electrodes is an efficient strategy to improve the electrochemical performance of lithium–oxygen batteries.

4. Conclusions and outlook
The quest for higher energy and higher power electrochemical energy storage devices has led to a major effort in developing advanced electrode materials. Owing to their significant advantages (high melting point, high electro-conductivity, excellent mechanical strength, good thermal and chemical stability), TMCs have been developed as electrode materials and have attracted significant interest in energy applications.86–89 In this review article, we provided an overview of the fabrication approaches and the electrochemical performance of different kinds of carbide electrode materials in capacitors and batteries. Presently, most of the work has focused on 2D layered carbides (MXenes) fabricated by an exfoliation method. Non-layered research has focused mainly on Mo2C-based materials prepared by annealing at high temperature. Moreover, carbides especially Mo-based ones have been mainly used in the energy conversion area including hydrogen evolution reactions, oxygen reduction reactions, fuel oxidation and so on. In order to fully realize the merits of carbides, much more effort is required to develop promising applications of more non-layered carbides to achieve excellent performance.
As is well known, materials with nanoscale particle sizes and porous structures often exhibit high activity and fast kinetics during electrochemical processes. Generally, the small size will lead to a high surface area and subsequently increase the interactions between electrodes and electrolyte. Porous structures have been widely used to design highly efficient electrode materials. Pores in the materials are not only beneficial for the penetration and diffusion of the electrolyte to shorten the transport length, but also may act as reservoirs for energy storage.6,14 However, the above-mentioned superior structures have not been widely used in carbide electrodes. The displayed capacity and cycling life for the reported carbides are limited at present. Therefore, designing an ideal structure that can overcome the drawbacks of carbides to provide desired electrochemical performance is very attractive and important for the future. It is expected that the combination of carbides with small and porous structures will lead to improved electrodes for capacitors and batteries with high energy and power densities in the near future.
In addition, in view of the great importance of TMSs along with the increasing emergence of novel carbides in the energy area, more attention need to be paid to the energy storage mechanism investigation.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Human Resources Development program (No. 20154010200840) of the Korea Institute of Energy Technology Evaluation and Planning (KETEP) grant funded by the Korea government Ministry of Trade, Industry and Energy and also supported by the Global Frontier R&D Program (2013M3A6B1078875) on Center for Hybrid Interface Materials (HIM) funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT & Future Planning.
Notes and references
M. Sevilla and R. Mokaya, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1250–1280 CAS .
C. M. Park, J. H. Kim, H. S. Kimc and H. J. Sohn, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 3115–3141 RSC .
C. G. Hu, G. P. Zheng, F. Zhao, H. B. Shao, Z. P. Zhang, N. Chen, L. Jiang and L. T. Qu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3699–3708 CAS .
A. Manthiram, J. C. Knight, S. T. Myung, S. M. Oh and Y. K. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501010 Search PubMed .
Y. W. Wang, L. Yu and X. W. Lou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016 DOI:10.1002/anie.201601673 .
Y. M. Chen, L. Yu and X. W. Lou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 1–5 CrossRef .
M. Beidaghi and Y. Gogotsi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 867–884 CAS .
X. Huang, X. Y. Qi, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 666–686 RSC .
C. Z. Yuan, H. B. Wu, Y. Xie and X. W. Lou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 1488–1504 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. M. Chen, L. Qie, Y. Shen, Y. M. Sun, L. X. Yuan, X. L. Hu, W. X. Zhang and Y. H. Huang, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 412–418 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xiao and M. H. Cao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 12840–12849 CAS .

          W. Lengauer, in Handbook of Ceramic Hard Materials, ed. R. Riedel, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, Germany, 1st edn,  2000 Search PubMed .
M. Naguib, J. Halim, J. Lu, K. M. Cook, L. Hultman, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 15966–15969 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xiao and M. H. Cao, ACS Nano, 2015, 8, 7846–7857 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Q. Zheng, T. P. Cotter, P. Kaghazchi, T. Jacob, B. Frank, K. Schlichte, W. Zhang, D. S. Su, F. Schüth and R. Schlogl, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 3458–3464 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ganesan and J. S. Lee, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 6557–6560 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Xiao, X. M. Ge, H. B. Wang, Z. L. Liu, A. Fisher and X. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 1520–1526 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yang, H. B. Zhao, Y. L. Hou and D. Ma, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15814–15821 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. M. Ma, H. Meng, M. Cai and P. K. Shen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 1954–1957 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, L. T. Liu, Y. Liu, M. Z. Li, Y. H. Zhu, H. C. Liu, Y. Kou, J. Z. Zhang, Y. Han and D. Ma, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 393–398 CAS .
E. Yang, H. Ji, J. Kim, H. J. Kim and Y. S. Jung, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 5000–5005 RSC .
Q. L. Sun, Y. Dai, Y. D. Ma, T. Jing, W. Wei and B. B. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 937–943 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Mashtalir, M. Naguib, V. N. Mochalin, Y. Dall’Agnese, M. Heon, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Commun., 2014, 4, 1716 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Xie, M. Naguib, V. N. Mochalin, M. W. Barsoum, Y. Gogotsi, X. Q. Yu, K. W. Nam, X. Q. Yang, A. I. Kolesnikov and P. R. C. Kent, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6385–6394 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xie, Y. Dall'Agnese, M. Naguib, Y. Gogotsi, M. W. Barsoum, H. L. Zhuang and P. R. C. Kent, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 9606–9615 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Naguib, J. Come, B. Dyatkin, V. Presser, P. L. Taberna, P. Simon, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 16, 61–64 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) J. Come, M. Naguib, P. Rozier, M. W. Barsoum, Y. Gogotsi, P. L. Taberna, M. Morcrette and P. Simona, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159, A1368–A1373 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. Naguib, V. N. Mochalin, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 992–1005 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Naguib, J. Halim, J. Lu, K. M. Cook, L. Hultman, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 15966–15969 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xie, Y. Dall'Agnese, M. Naguib, Y. Gogotsi, M. W. Barsoum, H. L. Zhuang and P. R. C. Kent, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 9606–9615 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Q. Er, J. W. Li, M. Naguib, Y. Gogotsi and V. B. Shenoy, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 11173–11179 CAS .

  (a) M. Q. Zhao, C. E. Ren, Z. Ling, M. R. Lukatskaya, C. F. Zhang, K. L. Van Aken, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 339–345 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) O. Mashtalir, M. R. Lukatskaya, A. I. Kolesnikov, E. Raymundo-Piñero, M. Naguib, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 9128–9133 RSC .
M. Boota, B. Anasori, C. Voigt, M. Q. Zhao, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 1517–1522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Kim, M. Naguib, M. Q. Zhao, C. F. Zhang, H. T. Jung, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 163, 246–251 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ramanathant and S. T. Oyama, J. Phys. Chem., 1995, 99, 16365–16372 CrossRef .
F. X. Ma, H. B. Wu, B. Y. Xia, C. Y. Xu and X. W. Lou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 15395–15399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xiao, L. R. Zheng and M. H. Cao, Nano Energy, 2015, 12, 152–160 CrossRef CAS .
T. C. Xiao, A. P. E. York, K. S. Coleman, J. B. Claridge, J. Sloan, J. Charnock and M. L. H. Green, J. Mater. Chem., 2001, 11, 3094–3098 RSC .
L. Volpe and M. Boudart, J. Solid State Chem., 1985, 59, 348–356 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Schlatter and S. T. Oyama, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 1988, 27, 1648–1653 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Aoki, H. Tominaga and M. Nagai, Catal. Today, 2013, 215, 169–175 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Zhang, K. X. Wang, X. Y. Wu, Y. M. Jiang, Y. B. Zhai, C. Wang, X. Wei and J. S. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 3399–3404 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Kwak, K. C. Lau, C. D. Shin, K. Amine, L. A Curtiss and Y. K. Sun, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 4129–4137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. K. Devaraju and I. Honma, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 284–297 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Gao, X. Y. Zhao, Y. Xiao, D. Zhao and M. H. Cao, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 6151–6157 RSC .
M. Ihsan, H. Q. Wang, S. R. Majid, J. P. Yang, S. J. Kennedy, Z. P. Guo and H. K. Liu, Carbon, 2016, 96, 1200–1207 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Chen, J. W. Zhang, Q. G. Chen, M. L. Qi and X. H. Xia, Mater. Res. Bull., 2016, 73, 459–464 CrossRef CAS .
B. B. Wang, G. Wang and H. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 17403–17411 CAS .
J. X. Zhu, K. Sakaushi, G. Clavel, M. Shalom, M. Antonietti and T. P. Fellinger, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 5480–5485 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kundu, R. Black, B. Adams, K. Harrison, K. Zavadil and L. F. Nazar, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 2252–2258 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. R. Li, S. G. Wang, W. Wang and M. H. Cao, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 24803–24809 RSC .
Y. Yao, K. F. Huo, L. B. Hu, N. A. Liu, J. J. Cha, M. T. McDowell, P. K. Chu and Y. Cui, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 8346–8351 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Allcorn and A. Manthiram, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 3891–3900 CAS .
H. Huang, T. Feng, Y. P. Gan, M. Y. Fang, Y. Xia, C. Liang, X. Y. Tao and W. K. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 11842–11848 CAS .
P. Patel, I. S. Kim and P. N. Kumta, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2005, 116, 347–352 CrossRef .
Z. Y. Zeng, J. P. Tu, X. H. Huang, X. L. Wang and J. Y. Xiang, Thin Solid Films, 2009, 517, 4767–4771 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Tao, J. Du, Y. C. Yang, Y. P. Li, Y. Xia, Y. P. Gan, H. Huang, W. K. Zhang and X. D. Li, Cryst. Growth Des., 2011, 11, 4422–4426 CAS .
H. W. Wang, Y. Zhang, H. X. Ang, Y. Q. Zhang, H. T. Tan, Y. F. Zhang, Y. Y. Guo, J. B. Franklin, X. L. Wu, M. Srinivasan, H. J. Fan and Q. Y. Yan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 3082–3093 CrossRef CAS .
Y. L. Tan, K. Zhu, D. Li, F. Bai, Y. J. Wei and P. Zhang, Chem. Eng. J., 2014, 258, 93–100 CrossRef CAS .
L. W. Su, Z. Zhou and P. W. Shen, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 87, 180–185 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, X. J. Fan, G. Casillas, Z. W. Peng, G. D. Ruan, G. Wang, M. J. Yacaman and J. M. Tour, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 3939–3946 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. N. Zhang, K. X. Wang, Q. Xu, Y. C. Zhou, F. Y. Cheng and S. J. Guo, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 3369–3376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Chen, J. F. Wu, R. H. Zhou, L. Zuo, P. Li, Y. H. Song and L. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 180, 78–85 CrossRef CAS .
B. S. Koo, J. K. Lee and W. Y. Yoon, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2015, 54, 047101 CrossRef .
L. W. Zhao, H. J. Li, M. J. Li, S. Xu, C. P. Li, C. Q. Qu, L. J. Zhang and B. H. Yang, Appl. Energy, 2016, 162, 197–206 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Dall'Agnese, P. L. Taberna, Y. Gogotsi and P. Simon, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 2305–2309 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Sun, R. Z. Hu, H. Liu, H. Y. Zhang, J. W. Liu, L. C. Yang, H. H. Wang and M. Zhu, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 191, 462–472 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hu and Z. M. Tian, Ceram. Int., 2015, 41, 3927–3931 CrossRef CAS .
Y. N. Regmi, G. R. Waetzig, K. D. Duffee, S. M. Schmuecker, J. M. Thode and B. M. Leonard, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 10085–10091 CAS .
J. H. Jang, J. Y. Kim, Y. H. Lee, C. H. Pak and Y. U. Kwon, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 55, 485–490 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, E. G. Mahoney, S. Zhao, B. L. Yang and J. G. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 3697–3700 RSC .
Y. Hou, T. Z. Huang, Z. H. Wen, S. Mao, S. M. Cui and J. H. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 1400337 Search PubMed .
J. W. Su, G. L. Xia, R. Li, Y. Yang, J. T. Chen, R. H. Shi, P. Jiang and Q. W. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 9204–9212 CAS .
O. Mashtalir, M. R. Lukatskaya, M. Q. Zhao, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3501–3506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yang, C. Cheng, Y. Wang, L. Qiu and D. Li, Science, 2013, 341, 534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Jung, S. Kwon, D. Lee, D.-M. Yoon, Y. M. Park, A. Benayad, J.-Y. Choi and J. S. Park, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6854–6858 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Boota, B. Anasori, C. Voigt, M. Q. Zhao, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 1517–1522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. F. Wang, S. Kajiyama, H. Iinuma, E. Hosono, S. Oro, I. Moriguchi, M. Okubo and A. Yamada, Nat. Commun., 2014, 6, 6544 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Dall’Agnese, P. Rozier, P. L. Taberna, Y. Gogotsi and P. Simon, J. Power Sources, 2016, 306, 510–515 CrossRef .
A. Byeon, A. M. Glushenkov, B. Anasori, P. Urbankowski, J. W. Li, B. W. Byles, B. Blake, K. L. Van Aken, S. Kota, E. Pomerantseva, J. W. Lee, Y. Chen and Y. Gogotsi, J. Power Sources, 2016, 2, 1–9 Search PubMed .
Y. Liu, W. Wang, Y. L. Ying, Y. W. Wang and X. S. Peng, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 7123–7126 RSC .
J. M. Luo, X. Y. Tao, J. Zhang, Y. Xia, H. Huang, L. Y. Zhang, Y. P. Gan, C. Liang and W. K. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 2491–2499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) Z. Y. Lin, D. F. Sun, Q. Huang, J. Yang, M. W. Barsoum and X. B. Yan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 14096–14100 RSC ; 
  (b) X. Q. Zhao, M. Liu, Y. Chen, B. Hou, N. Zhang, B. B. Chen, N. Yang, K. Chen, J. L. Li and L. N. An, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 7870–7876 RSC .
X. Liang, A. Garsuch and L. F. Nazar, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 3907–3911 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lin, W. K. Zhang, L. Wang, Z. G. Wang, W. Zhao, W. H. Duan, Z. G. Zhao, B. Liu and J. Jin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 5993–5998 CAS .
M. Ihsan, H. Q. Wang, S. R. Majid, J. P. Yang, S. J. Kennedy, Z. P. Guo and H. K. Liu, Carbon, 2016, 96, 1200–1207 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Fan, Z. W. Peng, R. Q. Ye, H. Q. Zhou and X. Guo, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 7407–7418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Halim, S. Kota, M. R. Lukatskaya, M. Naguib, M. Q. Zhao, E. J. Moon, J. Pitock, J. Nanda, S. J. May, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 3118–3127 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, T. G. Kelly, J. G. Chen and W. E. Mustain, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 1184–1194 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhong, X. H. Xia, F. Shi, J. Y. Zhan, J. P. Tu and H. J. Fan, Adv. Sci., 2016, 1500286 Search PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:
Ying Xiao	Ying Xiao received her Ph.D. degree from the Beijing Institute of Technology in 2015. Since December 2015, she has been a postdoctoral researcher at Hanyang University. Her current research interests focus on the design and synthesis of nanostructured materials and their applications in Na-ion batteries and Li–S batteries.
Jang-Yeon Hwang	Jang-Yeon Hwang received his B.S. degree from the Department of Chemical Engineering in Hanyang University in 2012. He is presently a Ph.D. candidate in the Department of Energy Engineering at Hanyang University, Korea, under the supervision of Professor Yang-Kook Sun. His research focuses on materials development in the fields of energy conversion and storage, such as cathode, anode and electrolyte materials for sodium-ion batteries.
Yang-Kook Sun	Yang-Kook Sun received his Ph.D degree from the Seoul National University, Korea. In 1996 he was a principal researcher at Samsung SDI and contributed to the commercialization of lithium polymer batteries. He has been working at Hanyang University in Korea as a professor from 2000. His research interests are the synthesis of new electrode materials for lithium-ion batteries, super-capacitors, next-generation Na-ion batteries, Li–S batteries, and Li–air batteries.

 	Fig. 1  (a) A schematic illustration of the formation of MXenes from the corresponding MAX phase [reprinted with permission from ref. 27b. Copyright 2014 Wiley]. (b) Nb2C layers [reprinted with permission from ref. 28. Copyright 2015 Journal of American Chemical Society]. (c) Ti3C2 layers [reprinted with permission from ref. 33. Copyright 2015 Elsevier].	 
Nb2AlC + 3HF = AlF3 + 1.5H2 + Nb2C	(1)
Nb2C + 2H2O = Nb2C(OH)2 + H2	(2)
Nb2C + 2HF = Nb2CF2 + H2	(3)

 	Fig. 2  (a) Mo2C/CNT composites synthesized by ball milling [reprinted with permission from ref. 42. Copyright 2015 Journal of American Chemical Society]. (b) TEM images of mesoporous Mo2C/C spheres prepared by a solvothermal assisted reaction [reprinted with permission from ref. 43. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry]. (c) SEM image and TEM image of MoC0.654@carbon nanosheets with different magnifications. (d) Schematic illustration of the salt-templating process for the formation of vertically aligned nanosheets [reprinted with permission from ref. 47. Copyright 2015 Journal of American Chemical Society].	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of the formation of (a) the hierarchically porous Mo2C/C hybrid by a freeze-drying assisted method. (b) Mo2C/N-doped carbon fibers synthesized by an electrospinning approach and (c) the corresponding SEM image [reprinted with permission from ref. 36 and 50, respectively. Copyright 2015 Elsevier and 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry, respectively].	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) SEM image and schematic illustration of the TiC/C core–shell nanowires formed by a thermochemical approach. (b) SEM image of the TiC/C/Si hybrid structure [reprinted with permission from ref. 51. Copyright 2011 Journal of American Chemical Society]. TiC/NiO prepared by a templating method: digital images of (c) a commercial T-shirt and the textile, (d) the SEM image of TiC nanowires, and (e) the illustration image of the TiC/NiO core–shell structure [reprinted with permission from ref. 53 and 56, respectively. Copyright 2011 Journal of American Chemical Society]. (f) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of 3D TiC interconnected nanoparticle chains [reprinted with permission from ref. 57. Copyright 2016 Wiley].	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation of nitrogen doped graphene/Fe–Fe3C nanocomposites [reprinted with permission from ref. 58. Copyright 2013 Elsevier]. (b) TEM images of the Fe2O3/Fe3C–graphene nanoporous layer [reprinted with permission from ref. 60. Copyright 2014 Journal of American Chemical Society]. (c) TEM image and (d) the schematic illustration of the formation process of Fe3O4@Fe3C–C yolk–shell nanospindles [reprinted with permission from ref. 61. Copyright 2016 Journal of American Chemical Society].	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the formation of the Co3ZnC/C–N hybrid via an ultrasonic-assisted method [reprinted with permission from ref. 14. Copyright 2015 Journal of American Chemical Society]. (b) Schematic illustration of the formation of graphene/TaC/C wires by electron-assisted hot filament chemical vapor deposition [reprinted with permission from ref. 64. Copyright 2016 Elsevier].	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) TEM image of the PPy/Ti3C2Tx (1:2) film. (b) CVs of the PPy/Ti3C2Tx (1:2) film at various scan rates. (c) Cycle performance of the PPy/Ti3C2Tx (1:2) film after 25000 cycles at 100 mV s−1 [reprinted with permission from ref. 76. Copyright 2016 Wiley].	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of the sandwich-like MXene/CNT papers. (b) SEM image of the MXene/WCNT paper. (c) CV profiles of Ti3C2Tx and Ti3C2Tx/CNT composite electrodes [reprinted with permission from ref. 31a. Copyright 2016 Wiley]. (d) SEM image of Ti3C2Tx particles after hydrazine intercalation. (e) Capacitance retention profile for hydrazine-treated Ti3C2Tx at 5 A g−1 in 1 M H2SO4 [reprinted with permission from ref. 31b. Copyright 2016 Wiley]. (f) Top view of the SEM image of the Nb2CTx/CNT film. (g) Cycle performance of the lithiated graphite/Nb2CTx–CNT capacitor at 50 mA g−1 and (h) the volumetric energy and power densities of the capacitor devices [reprinted with permission from ref. 79. Copyright 2016 Elsevier]. (i) Volumetric (left) and gravimetric (right) rate performances of Nb2CTx/CNT paper electrodes [reprinted with permission from ref. 73. Copyright 2015 Wiley]. (j) SEM images, (k) CV curves and (l) cycling performance at 10 A g−1 of the 3D interconnected TiC nanoparticle chains [reprinted with permission from ref. 57. Copyright 2016 Wiley].	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Cycle performance and the related coulombic efficiency of the full cell of Ti2CTx–Na2Fe2(SO4)3 [reprinted with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2014 Nature]. (b) Cyclic voltammetry and (c) cycle life of V2CTx at different scan rates. (d) Schematic illustration of the formation of V2CTx and its sodium intercalation [reprinted with permission from ref. 65. Copyright 2015 Journal of American Chemical Society].	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Cycling performance of the exfoliated Ti2C at different rates [reprinted with permission from ref. 26. Copyright 2012 Elsevier]. (b) Cycling performance of Nb2CTx and V2CTx-based electrodes at different rates [reprinted with permission from ref. 28. Copyright 2013 Journal of American Chemical Society]. (c) Schematic illustration of the formation process of PVP–Sn(IV)@Ti3C2 and (d) the corresponding cycling performance at 100 mA g−1 [reprinted with permission from ref. 81. 2016 Journal of American Chemical Society]. (e) Cycling stability of the Ti3C2–CNF at 1C and 100C compared with the control samples [reprinted with permission from ref. 82a. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry]. (f) The cycling performance of S–Ti3C2 as a cathode for Li–S batteries [reprinted with permission from ref. 82b. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry]. (g) Cycling performance of 70 wt% S/Ti2C at C/5 and C/2 [reprinted with permission from ref. 83. 2015 Wiley].	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Cycling performance of mesoporous Mo2C spheres [reprinted with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry]. (b) Cycling performance of the hierarchically porous Mo2C–C hybrid at different current densities compared with that of pure C and bulk Mo2C [reprinted with permission from ref. 36. Copyright 2015 Elsevier]. (c) TEM image and (d) electrochemical performance of the Mo2C/GR composites at 200 mA g−1 [reprinted with permission from ref. 47. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry]. (e) The first discharge/charge profiles and (f) cycling performance of the pristine carbon nanotubes, Mo2C, and Mo2C/CNTs at 100 and 500 mA h g−1 in Li–O2 batteries [reprinted with permission from ref. 42. Copyright 2015 Journal of American Chemical Society].	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) TEM image and (b) cycle performance of the Fe@Fe3C/C composite by using FeOOH rods as templates [reprinted with permission from ref. 59. Copyright 2015 Elsevier]. (c) Subsequent cycling performance of Fe3O4@Fe3C/C yolk–shell nanospindles along with the control samples at 500 mA g−1. (d) Schematic illustration of the proposed lithium storage mechanism for the Fe3O4@Fe3C/C yolk–shell nanospindle anode [reprinted with permission from ref. 61. Copyright 2015 Journal of American Chemical Society].	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Charge/discharge profiles of the Si/TiC/C nanocomposite at C/5 [reprinted with permission from ref. 51. Copyright 2011 Journal of American Chemical Society]. (b) Cycling performance of FeSn–TiC–C composites at C/5. (c) Rate capability of FeSn–TiC–C composites at various rates [reprinted with permission from ref. 52. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry]. (d) SEM image of TiC/NiO and (e) cycling performance of TiC/NiO at 200 mA g−1 [reprinted with permission from ref. 53, 2015 Journal of American Chemical Society]. (f) Cycling performance of Co3ZnC/N–C spheres [reprinted with permission from ref. 14. Copyright 2015 Journal of American Chemical Society].	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
