Biomass-derived porous carbon materials with different dimensions for supercapacitor electrodes: a review  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9TA04436A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9TA04436A
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 16028-16045Biomass-derived porous carbon materials with different dimensions for supercapacitor electrodes: a review

        
          
            Zhihong 
            Bi
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Qingqiang 
            Kong
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Yufang 
            Cao
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Guohua 
            Sun
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Fangyuan 
            Su
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xianxian 
            Wei
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Xiaoming 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Aziz 
            Ahmad
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Lijing 
            Xie
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Cheng-Meng 
            Chen
          
        
      *a
aCAS Key Laboratory of Carbon Materials, Institute of Coal Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Taiyuan, 030001, China. E-mail: xielijing@sxicc.ac.cn; ccm@sxicc.ac.cn
bUniversity of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, P. R. China
cSchool of Environment and Safety, Taiyuan University of Science and Technology, Taiyuan 030024, China
dSuzhou Institute of Nano-Tech and Nano-Bionics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Nanchang, China
Received 
      28th April 2019
    , Accepted 7th June 2019First published on 10th June 2019AbstractThe exploration of renewable, cost-effective, and environmentally friendly electrode materials with high adsorption, fast ion/electron transport, and tunable surface chemistry is urgently needed for the development of next-generation biocompatible energy-storage devices. In recent years, biomass-derived carbon electrode materials for energy storage have attracted significant attention because of their widespread availability, renewable nature, and low cost. More importantly, their inherent uniform and precise biological structures can be utilized as templates for fabricating electrode materials with controlled and well-defined geometries. Meanwhile, the basic elements of biomass are carbon, sulfur, nitrogen, and phosphorus. The special naturally ordered hierarchical structures as well as abundant surface properties of biomass-derived carbon materials are compatible with electrochemical reaction processes such as ion transfer and diffusion. To date, a series of novel porous carbon materials with different dimensions have been prepared by various methods using biomass as the raw material, which is an important field in the fabrication of supercapacitor electrode materials. Herein, we summarized recently reported biomass-derived carbon materials with one-dimensional, two-dimensional, and three-dimensional structures and their applications as carbon-based electrode materials for supercapacitors. Finally, the current challenges and future perspectives of the carbon-based electrode materials with respect to the supercapacitor's performance were closely highlighted.
1. Introduction
Currently, the excessive consumption of non-renewable fossil fuel resources such as coal and oil has resulted in a serious crisis in the sustainable development of modern society.1–3 Thus, the development and highly efficient utilization of green and renewable resources are the most promising solutions for resolving the abovementioned challenges. Biomass, as one of the most abundant renewable resources on earth, has been examined by researchers worldwide and exploited for various applications such as carbon dioxide (CO2) capture,4–6 hydrogen storage,7,8 dye-sensitized solar cells,9 water treatment,10,11 and energy storage12–15 due to its widespread availability, sustainability, renewable nature, unique structure, and low cost. Particularly, the richness of the carbon element and well-oriented channels for the metabolic process make these biomass-based electrode materials suitable for rapid ion transportation during electrochemical charge–discharge applications. At present, the use of various biomass materials as carbon sources for the preparation of self-doped porous carbon electrodes has become a hot topic in the field of energy storage and conversion (Fig. 1).16–20 Obviously, the research on biomass-derived carbon materials provides not only a new way for high value-added utilization of biomass resources, but also a better understanding of the relationship between the structure and electrochemical properties, ultimately aiding the rational design of more efficient biomass-based carbon materials for practical applications.
 Fig. 1  Different types of biomass materials used in the energy field (ref. 16) (Copyright 2017 Royal Society of Chemistry). 
Supercapacitors, also known as electrochemical capacitors or ultracapacitors, are considered as one of the potential candidates among energy-storage systems due to their various applications in portable devices, electric vehicles, and stationary energy storage systems. Compared with other energy storage systems such as batteries and conventional capacitors, supercapacitors mainly have three major advantages: high specific power of about 10 kW kg−1, a long cycle life >105, and fast charge/discharge processes within seconds. As shown in Fig. 2, a supercapacitor is a new type of energy storage device between conventional capacitors and batteries.21 In principle, the energy storage mechanism of supercapacitors can be divided into two categories22,23 (as shown in Fig. 3): one is the electrical double layer capacitance generated by the pure electrostatic attraction between ions and the charged electrode surface (e.g., carbon materials24,25); the other is the pseudo-capacitance resulting from a rapid reversible oxidation/reduction (redox) or faradaic charge transfer reaction, which is produced by the electroactive substances on the surface of the electrode such as conductive polymers26–28 and transition metal oxides.29–32 The performances of supercapacitors strongly depend on the physicochemical properties of the adopted electrode materials. It is generally considered that the existence of micropores in carbon materials can significantly increase the specific surface area, which plays a key role in enhancing specific capacitance. However, the micropores with intricate pore structures are not quite beneficial for the electrochemical performance of carbon materials. It has been reported that ultra-micropores (<0.70 nm) may contribute to relatively high specific capacitance through the desolvation of ions at low current density, but these pores are not accessible at a high discharge rate, thus resulting in relatively poor rate capability.33,34 In other words, the magnitude of capacitance is determined by the accessible surface area of the carbon-based materials, while the releasing behaviour of capacitors is associated with the pore structures of the materials. Therefore, optimization of the pore structure and pore size is required for the improvement in the capacitive performances of the electrode materials. Besides, the introduction of heteroatoms (such as O, N, P, and B) into carbon frameworks has drastic influence on the capacitive behaviours in both aqueous and organic electrolytes. As previously reported, heteroatoms can alter the electronic and crystalline structures of the carbon materials by enhancing chemical stability, electrical conductivity, and electron-donor properties, which can even give rise to pseudocapacitive reactions.35–38 Among the exploited materials, porous carbons have been widely used as electrode materials for supercapacitors owing to their high specific surface areas, abundant surface functionalities, well-controlled pore systems (pore size and connectivity), and excellent conductivity and stability. With the development of modern technology and the need for better-performing materials, a large number of new carbon materials with well-defined nanostructures and functionalization patterns such as carbon nanotubes (CNTs),39,40 fullerenes,3,41 and graphene42,43 have been synthesized by various physical and chemical processes. However, at present, most of the carbon nanomaterials are heavily dependent on fossil-based precursors (e.g., coal, phenol, and pitch) and sophisticated energy-consuming synthetic conditions (e.g., electric-arc discharge, chemical vapor deposition, and laser ablation), which are expensive and environmentally harmful. Additionally, unsustainable synthetic processes inevitably involve toxic chemicals, which further increase the environmental pollution.16,44,45
 Fig. 2  Ragone plots for various electrochemical energy storage systems (ref. 21) (Copyright 2008, Macmillan). 
 Fig. 3  Schematics of charge storage in supercapacitors. (A) Ion adsorption at the electrode surface (EDLC). (B) Charge transfer near the surface of the electrode (pseudo-capacitance) (ref. 22) (Copyright 2008, Macmillan). 
Driven by the desire for environmentally friendly, low-cost, scalable, and novel sources, the preparation of high value-added carbon electrode materials from biomass has both scientific and practical advantages for a more sustainable future. In addition, the porous carbon derived from biomass with a highly delicate structure created by nature shows a well-developed porous structure, which is essential for power applications, and a highly active surface required for obtaining high specific capacity. Biomass often refers to animal or plant-based materials derived from nature.11,46 According to statistics, the biomass production worldwide is 104.9 pentagrams of carbon per year. Generally, a huge amount of biomass comprising agricultural residues and forest by-products is traditionally discarded or simply combusted to generate heat for thermal applications. This is of low efficiency in terms of energy utilization and also causes climate change by increasing atmospheric CO2, which contradicts the requirements of the sustainable development for the modern society and thus needs to be improved.17,47,48 If the carbon stored in these biomass materials can be transformed into as much carbon-based functional materials as possible, it would not only open a new way to convert waste biomass into high-value-added products, but also provide a significant solution to decrease the emitted amounts of nitrogen oxide (NOx) and CO2. Furthermore, biodiversity offers a nearly limitless source for the fabrication of novel artificial materials with special structures and properties. Biomass originating from the elaborate design of nature possesses well-oriented channels for water, ion, and oxygen transportation during metabolism and can be used as a template for porous carbon materials. The occurrence of defects and hetero-elements is another important factor in functional materials that affects their performance in various applications. Unlike the structural control in traditional materials, biomass naturally consists of a much more ordered structure that reaches down to the nanoscale. The defects and heteroatoms are inherently uniform rather than randomly distributed. Such precise characteristics of the biomass materials can offer special functions much more effectively than the other solutions proposed by researchers.15,17,49 By adjusting these parameters, it is possible to alter the electrochemical performance of the materials and to adapt them to various kinds of electrolytic media and system configurations.
Several studies have shown the successful conversion of biomass into carbon-based functional materials with engineered micro-/nanostructures and tuneable surface chemistries through various methods. Due to the rich microstructures of natural biomass, carbon materials with one-dimensional, two-dimensional, and three-dimensional structures can be controllably produced by inheriting various bio-template structures. Herein, we aimed to classify the recent advances in synthetic strategies and the arising challenges of biomass-based carbon materials having different dimensions for supercapacitor applications towards enhancing electrochemical performances. The unique properties associated with different dimensions were presented, and the benefits of these properties for supercapacitor applications were highlighted. Finally, the current challenges and main developing directions were briefly discussed.
2. One-dimensional biomass carbon materials for supercapacitors
One-dimensional (1D) biomass nanostructures typically including fibrous and tubular structures among other morphologies have been identified as the most viable structures for high-performance supercapacitors as well as for various other applications.11,50–52 The fibrous structure has the following advantages:
● First, a high Young's modulus of 138 GPa and strength of about 2–3 GPa provide excellent mechanical properties for the development of high-strength and self-standing materials as electrodes or separators.52–54
● Second, due to the reactive hydroxyl groups on the surface of the fibre,55 it is possible and convenient to chemically modify other highly active materials on the surface of the fibre. The construction of fibre-based composite electrodes can improve their electrochemical performance by regulating the ratio of active materials.56–58
● Third, fibre geometries with a high aspect ratio such as the tissues of higher plants or bacterial secretions can be assembled into a binder-free and interconnected network to form a strong film or substrate for use in flexible energy storage devices.59,60
● Fourth, due to the nanoscale effect, good flexibility, high specific surface areas, thermal stability, and easy processing of nanofibers, it is very easy to process the fibrous structure into a thermally stable non-porous membrane with controlled pore structures. The structure is capable of simultaneously facilitating electron conduction and ion transport.61,62
● Fifth, this one-dimensional linear channel can provide a direct current path, which can facilitate the transmission of electrons compared to particle electrodes.63
In addition to the above advantages, the hollow tubular structure can serve as a buffer tank for the electrolyte and has a higher specific surface area to provide more active contact sites than nanofibers.64–66 Last but not least, the typical one-dimensional morphology of biomass-based carbon materials possesses diverse structural and surface chemical properties, allowing them to be constructed into diverse materials or devices through various preparation strategies.67
In this section, we will review the advanced progresses where one-dimensional biomass carbon materials have been investigated for use in supercapacitors. The detailed advantages of one-dimensional biomass carbon materials and their electrochemical performances are discussed in the following sections.
2.1 One-dimensional biomass-based carbon electrode
Here, one-dimensional biomass refers to the biomass with a fibrous structure or tubular structure: the examples of the former are flax,68 ramie,69,70 and bacterial cellulose,71–73 while those of the latter include cotton,74 kapok,64 and willow catkins.75 So far, a series of one-dimensional biomass-based carbon materials have been prepared by various strategies and have shown excellent electrochemical performances.
Cellulose, as the most abundant renewable biomass fibre on Earth, presents a high carbon content, abundant surface chemical properties, advantageous mechanical properties, high specific surface areas, thermal stability and ease of processing, which make it a promising and ideal building block for advanced energy storage systems.67 Based on the above advantages, it is currently widely used in four major advanced energy storage systems, as shown in Fig. 4.
 Fig. 4  Schematic diagram showing the main topics from the cellulose resources, nanocellulose fabrication, structural and functional design to the energy storage applications (ref. 55) (Copyright 2018 Royal Society of Chemistry). 
Jie Cai et al. produced nitrogen-functionalized carbon nanofibers by electrospinning a cellulose acetate solution with subsequent deacetylation and pyrolysis (Fig. 5). The as-obtained electrode exhibited specific capacitance of ∼241.4 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 with ∼84.1% capacitance retention even at 10 A g−1, indicating good rate capability and non-kinetic limited performance; thus, this material is suitable for high power supercapacitor applications.76 Due to thermoplastic properties, cellulose acetate tends to melt and deform prior to the formation of carbonaceous materials during annealing; thus, it is essential to regenerate cellulose through deacetylation for the preservation of the nanofiber morphology. However, deacetylation should be executed at extreme pH levels and then, a lot of water is required to wash the product from reagents, which is unacceptable for applications in green processes. Volodymyr Kuzmenko et al. found that a combination of NH4OH and NH4Cl for the simultaneous impregnation and deacetylation of cellulose acetate can significantly shorten the regeneration step and decrease the water consumption for washing the precursor fibres to remove the deacetylation agents. The obtained carbon nanofibers were characterized by fibre diameters between 70 and 400 nm, surface roughness, hydrophilicity (water contact angle, 24–40°), and relatively high electrical conductivity (up to 5.9 S cm−1) due to the doping effect of the nitrogen atoms in their structure. These features of carbon nanofibers make them promising electrode materials for advanced electrochemical applications.77 Lignin is a worldwide by-product of the pulp and paper industries. R. Berenguer et al. demonstrated that interconnected porous lignin–carbon fibres can be easily controlled by a suitable heating rate during stabilization. The heating rate is slow enough to stabilize lignin and prevent its softening during the subsequent carbonization, providing loose CFs. In contrast, the thermo-stabilization of the lignin fibres at a slightly fast heating rate results in their partial softening and interconnection at contact points between the fibres during carbonization. The fibre–fibre interconnections facilitate charge transfer and increase in capacitance.78 Furthermore, the control of the porous structure of the fibres for electrical double layer capacitors (EDLCs) is a key performance parameter. For example, Zhi Jin et al. reported a series of activated carbon fibres (ACFs) fabricated by one-step carbonization and water vapor activation of wood-based fibres. A longer activation time creates more mesopores that are connected reciprocally, which are important for the accessibility of the inner micropores by the electrolyte and therefore ensure the achievement of high capacitance. The sample with an optimal structure exhibits outstanding specific capacitance of 280 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1 and high capacitance retention of 99.3% over 2000 charge–discharge cycles.53
 Fig. 5  CNC-derived hybrid materials for supercapacitors. (a) Schematic illustration of the carbon nanofiber preparation, (b) formation mechanism of the inter-bonded carbon nanofibers, and (c–h) SEM images of the carbon nanofibers: (c) CNFs-E, (d) CNFs-90/10, (e) CNFs-70/30, (f) CNFs-50/50, (g) CNFs-30/70, and (h) CNFs-10/90. (a–h) are reproduced with permission from ref. 76 (Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry). 
Compared with fibrous structures, the hollow structures of 1D biomass-based carbon materials can act as ion-buffering reservoirs to enhance the charge storage in the interior surface and shorten the diffusion path.47,51,53,64 Up to now, much work has been devoted to the preparation of porous carbon materials with natural 1D hollow microstructures. For example, activated carbon fibres with a hierarchical nanostructure were prepared by the pre-treatment of fibres in an NaOH/urea solution and a subsequent carbonization process. The hierarchically porous structure and the well-retained hollow microstructure could simultaneously minimize the diffusion/transfer resistance of the electrolyte and electrons and maximize the surface area utilization for charge accumulation. Consequently, the obtained hierarchical porous carbon fibres exhibited enhanced electrical double layer capacitance of 221.7 F g−1 at 0.3 A g−1 and excellent cycling stability with only 4.6% loss after 6000 cycles at 2 A g−1.79 Recently, H. Wang et al. prepared cheap but high-performance carbon fibre-based electrodes from natural cotton materials and also developed environmentally benign full supercapacitor devices. They first employed molten sodium metal to restructure the cheap natural cotton for obtaining hierarchical porous hollow graphitic carbon fibres (Fig. 6).
 Fig. 6  Schematic illustration of the preparation of highly porous graphitic carbon from natural cotton (ref. 51) (Copyright 2015 Elsevier). 
The as-obtained hierarchical porous hollow graphitic carbon fibres possessed high capacitance retention of 61% when the current density was increased from 1 to 60 A g−1 owing to the shortened diffusion distance from the external electrolyte to the interior surfaces through the ion-buffering reservoirs of the hollow fibres and the minimized transport resistance in the mesoporous region.51 Our previous work reported that hierarchical porous nitrogen self-doped carbon microtubes can be obtained by low-temperature pre-carbonization combined with KOH chemical activation (Fig. 7). The tubular carbon materials several millimetres in length offer an ultra-long electronic and ionic pathway, while numerous nanopores on the fibre walls created by KOH activation enable fast ion transport across the walls and enhance the surface area for charge accommodation. As electrode materials for supercapacitors, hollow carbon microtubes at 650 °C (HCMT-650) exhibit high specific capacitance of 292 F g−1 at current density of 1 A g−1 and good rate capability with retention of 83.5% at 10 A g−1 in 6 M KOH.64 Kapok with the highest hollow ratio of 97% can provide a larger accessible surface and faster transport channels. However, the wall of the tube is so thin (0.74 μm) that the natural fibrous morphology is more easily destroyed via direct carbonization or activation at a high temperature above 500 °C. To inherit the natural hollow structure, kapok-based hollow carbon microtubes were prepared via pre-stabilization, followed by carbonization and simultaneous activation in the presence of (NH4)2HPO4. (NH4)2HPO4 is not only utilized as a porogen and a nitrogen/phosphorus source, but also as an indispensable crosslinking agent to stabilize the kapok structure, which can prevent the destruction of the natural hollow morphology at higher temperatures and increase the carbon yield. The typical shape of carbon microtubes is shown in Fig. 8. The special tube is favourable for a highly accessible surface area and convenient ion diffusion and electron transfer. The as-assembled supercapacitor with HCMT-650 as the electrode in 1 M tetraethylammonium tetrafluoroborate/propylene carbonate (TEABF4/PC) exhibited an excellent rate performance (140 F g−1 at 1.0 A g−1 and capacitance retention of 82% at 10.0 A g−1) and high energy/power density (48.3 W h kg−1 at 450 W kg−1 and 27 kW kg−1 at 25.5 W h kg−1). These results demonstrate that the novel porous tubular structure has outstanding morphology for improving both the rate capability and long-term cycling performance of a supercapacitor. Therefore, the capacitive performance of traditional microporous carbon, which is characterized by poor ion kinetics, can be significantly enhanced by properly engineering the electrode architecture.
 Fig. 7  Schematic of the synthesis procedure for HCMTs using kapok fibre as the precursor (ref. 64) (Copyright 2017 Royal Society of Chemistry). 
 Fig. 8  SEM images of (a) KF, (b) WSKF, and (c) HCMT-650; (d) the high-magnification SEM image of HCMT-650; (e) the low-magnification TEM image of HCMT-650; and (f) the HRTEM image of HCMT-650 (ref. 64) (Copyright 2017 Royal Society of Chemistry). 
2.2 One-dimensional biomass carbon-based composite electrode
One-dimensional biomass-based carbon materials, especially 1D hollow carbon microtubes, can promote ion and electron transport. The porous walls of the carbon microtubes create sufficient contact between the active material and the electrolyte, decreasing the ion diffusion length and enhancing the electrochemical kinetics, thus resulting in extraordinary rate capability and excellent cycle stability. Furthermore, the 1D carbon microtubes with hollow structures have the potential to be used as ideal substrates for the growth and design of various redox-reaction materials.
Our group employed a facile acid treatment and subsequent hydrothermal process to synthesize β-Ni(OH)2@acid-treated carbon microtube (ACMT) composites. The acid treatment greatly increased the percentage of carboxyl (HO–CO) groups on the surface of the carbon microtubes (CMTs), which was favourable for the adsorption of more Ni2+ ions on both the internal and external surfaces of ACMT. Under the above-mentioned experimental conditions, β-Ni(OH)2 nanosheet arrays could be controllably grown on both the internal and external surfaces of the carbon microtubes, the structure of which not only realized effective utilization of the hollow structure, but also enabled efficient redox reactions mostly on the surface of Ni(OH)2. Meanwhile, the super-long carbon microtube served as a long-range conductive network, which provided a convenient channel for electron transportation. As a consequence of this unique hierarchical structure, the electrode based on the β-Ni(OH)2@ACMT composite exhibited high specific capacitance of 1568 F g−1 at current density of 1 A g−1 and remarkable capacitance retention of 51.0% even at 20 A g−1.65 Xiaohua Zhang et al. reported 3D MnO2/carbon microtube bundles that contained carbon microtube bundles (CMB) produced from sawdust and 3D nanostructured MnO2 through anodic electrodeposition. This structure provided multi-channels for electron transport and allowed numerous active sites to contact with the electrolyte. The as-obtained composite exhibited high specific capacitance of 617.6 F g−1 at the current density of 1 A g−1 and outstanding cycle performance.80 X. Zhang et al. used K4Fe(CN)6 to treat willow catkins and obtained porous graphitic carbon by carbonization. The enhanced conductivity of the porous graphitic carbon microtube (PGCMT) provided sufficient space for the deposition of MnO2 and effectively alleviated MnO2 accumulation. At the same time, the microtubes in the hybrid electrode provided highly conductive pathways and facilitated smooth access of the electrolyte ions during rapid charge/discharge. This phenomenon explains why PGCMT/MnO2 achieved good rate capability with capacitance retention of 61.8% even at high current density of 50 A g−1.81 Kapok fibres are one of the potential supports for active materials because of their adjustable diameter (ca. 8–10 μm diameter and ca. 0.8–1.0 μm wall thickness), high degree of hollowness (above 86%), and easy availability with a low cost. W. Xu et al. synthesized a hollow tubular carbonized kapok fibre/NiO composite via a facile hydrothermal and carbonization procedure using kapok fibres as low-cost templates (Fig. 9). The as-prepared composite showed a multi-dimensional and multi-scale structure. A one-dimensional (1D) hollow carbon microtubular structure can provide sufficient active interfacial sites and effectively alleviate the volume variation during the electrochemical reactions, while two-dimensional (2D) NiO nanosheets exposed on the microtubular surface allow more metal oxide nanoparticles to participate in the redox reaction.82 Jiahua Zhu et al. synthesized magnetic tubular carbon nanocomposite fabrics via a microwave heating process using cotton fabrics and inorganic salts as the precursors. The particles were either uniformly distributed on both sides of the tube surface or embedded into the tube wall. This unique open structure facilitated efficient charge transfer between the nanoparticles and the electrolyte. Meanwhile, the carbon matrix served as a cushion to reduce the structural damage from the volume change of the nanoparticles during the charge/discharge process. As expected, the magnetic carbon microtubular nanocomposite with Co–Co3O4 nanoparticles showed excellent electrochemical properties when used as an electrode material for a supercapacitor.83
 Fig. 9  Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of CKF/NiO composites (ref. 82) (Copyright 2016 Elsevier). 
More importantly, the above-mentioned electrode materials have unique characteristics such as low cost and easy fabrication. These findings demonstrate that one-dimensional (1D) hollow carbon microtubular structures are beneficial as electrode materials for supercapacitors with rapid charge/discharge operations.
2.3 One-dimensional biomass carbon-based flexible electrode
The traditional method for the preparation of electrodes requires the addition of insulating binders such as polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) or polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF), which easily block the interior channels for ion diffusion and increase the electrolyte diffusion resistance, thus eventually causing decrease in specific capacitance. To address these issues, one-dimensional biomass porous carbons can be integrated with active materials or converted to carbon materials to assemble them into binder-free and self-supporting films, which are promising in flexible energy storage applications.
Li-Feng Chen et al. produced nitrogen-doped carbon nanofiber films derived from pyrolyzed bacterial cellulose by low-cost, eco-friendly, low-temperature, and scalable hydrothermal synthesis.84 The as-obtained nitrogen-doped carbon nanofiber film showed a three-dimensional (3D) network nanostructure with 10–20 nm co-adjacent nanowires and many interconnected pores, which not only provided a large interfacial area but also ensured effective ion diffusion paths; this resulted in enhanced electrochemical performances in terms of specific capacity, power, and energy density (Fig. 10).
 Fig. 10  (a) Photographs of the bacterial cellulose (BC) pellicle. (b) SEM image of the pyrolyzed BC (p-BC). (c) SEM image of the activated p-BC (A-p-BC). (d) Photograph of the typical free-standing flexible nitrogen-doped A-p-BC (A-p-BC-N-25) being bent (3 cm × 1.3 cm). (e) SEM image of the A-p-BC-N-25. (f) TEM image of the A-p-BC-N-25 (inset: magnified image) (ref. 84) (Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry). 
More strikingly, even after bending at 180°, the all-solid-state supercapacitor showed no structural failure and the capacity of the bent device remained the same as the original capacity, confirming its high flexibility and remarkable reversible electrochemical properties. Camila Zequine et al. fabricated a flexible supercapacitor with carbonized bamboo fibres as the electrodes. The device showed no degradation in the charge storage capacity on bending. The studies further indicated that the bamboo-derived carbon fibres are potential electrode materials for high-performance and flexible supercapacitor devices that can be operated over a wider temperature range.85 Wei Xiong et al. proposed and demonstrated a hemp-derived carbon (HDC) fibre as a scaffold to synthesize HDC@NiCo2O4@polypyrrole (PPy) composite materials (Fig. 11). A fibre-shaped solid-state supercapacitor based on the as-prepared electrode not only showed an excellent electrochemical performance with energy density of 17.5 W h kg−1 at power density of 500 W kg−1, but also exhibited outstanding mechanical flexibility and tensile strength.86 Nanocarbon and conductive polymers can be integrated together with one-dimensional porous carbon to fabricate a composite electrode for supercapacitors. These combinations give the electrodes enhanced flexibility and mechanical robustness and maintain their capacitances. Zhaohui Wang et al. reported the fabrication of PPy@Nanocellulose@Graphene oxide (PNG) paper electrodes by a facile in situ chemical polymerization method. The strong interaction of nanocellulose with both PPy and GO made the entire electrode robust, flexible, and compact (Fig. 12). As a result, the PNG paper electrode exhibited high volumetric capacitance (i.e., 198 F cm−3 based on the whole electrode) and could store energy without dramatic decrease in the performance upon repeated bending, folding, and/or compressing at various angles.87 Another example involves a bacterial cellulose/multiwalled carbon nanotubes/polyaniline (BC/MWCNTs/PANI) composite prepared by vacuum filtration and subsequent electrodeposition. Due to the porous structure and electrolyte absorption properties of the cellulose fibres in the composite paper, the flexible BC/MWCNTs/PANI hybrid electrode exhibited high specific capacitance (656 F g−1 at 1 A g−1) and good cycling stability with capacitance retention of more than 99.5% after 1000 cycles.88 Therefore, 1D biomass-based porous carbon as a support for active materials has great promise for flexible supercapacitor applications. The optimization of the interface interactions between the active materials and the support can maximize the synergistic effects and enhance the activity of supercapacitors; it can also enhance both the electrochemical and mechanical/flexibility performances of the supercapacitors.
 Fig. 11  Preparation scheme of the HDC@NiCo2O4@polypyrrole composites (ref. 86) (Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry). 
 Fig. 12  Schematic illustration depicting the preparation and structure of the PNG paper electrodes (ref. 87) (Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry). 
3. Two-dimensional biomass carbon material for supercapacitors
Two-dimensional (2D) carbonaceous materials with abundant sp2 hybridizations have shown great potential in energy storage and conversion due to the following advantages:
● The strong in-plane covalent bond feature endows the unique two-dimensional structure with high in-plane conductivity, which can accelerate the transmission speed of electrons in the plane.75,89–91
● The unique two-dimensional layered porous structure with atomic ultrathin thickness and large lateral size can shorten the ion transmission distance in the thin dimension.92–95
● The large and open flat surface fully exposes the surface atoms on both sides of the two-dimensional carbon nanosheet, which provides not only a high specific surface area but also rich electrochemically active sites for electrochemical reactions, thus affording high electrode–electrolyte interfaces and reduced ionic resistance.89,90
● Two-dimensional materials have a rich active surface edge and their in-plane defect active sites facilitate charge storage, resulting in higher specific capacitance.96
● For two-dimensional porous carbon nanosheets with hierarchical pore structures, the internal free space can greatly buffer the volume changes that occur during the charge/discharge cycles, thereby achieving long cycle stability.97,98
These integrated properties not only offer a short electric/ionic transfer path for high power delivery, but also provide rich interfacial active sites and high charge carrier density for high energy storage (Fig. 13).94,98–101
 Fig. 13  Summary of the synthesis and energy-related applications of PCN materials (ref. 98) (Copyright 2019 Elsevier). 
Currently, graphene materials with a typical two-dimensional structure have been widely developed as supercapacitor electrodes with excellent capacitive performances. However, these 2D carbonaceous materials usually involve a complex manufacturing process and high cost. In recent years, some 2D graphene-like carbon nanosheets have been successfully prepared from renewable and cheap biomass through efficient processes. These materials provide a great platform as 2D carbon-based electrodes for supercapacitors due to their sustainable and effective fabrication processes. Taniya Purkait et al. prepared few-layered graphene-like nanosheets by KOH activation of peanut shells and a subsequent mechanical exfoliation method. The resulting carbonaceous material with graphene-like nanosheets possessed abundant micropores as well as mesopores, remarkably high specific surface area of 2070 m2 g−1 and sufficiently large pore volume of 1.33 cm3 g−1. The cell assembled with the few-layered graphene-like nanosheet electrode exhibited the highest energy density of 58.13 W h kg−1 and the highest power density of 37.5 kW kg−1 without any binder in 1 M H2SO4 as the electrolyte.102 Dong Zhou et al. achieved interconnected open-channel carbon nanosheets from reeds via a simple hydrothermal process combined with KOH chemical activation (Fig. 14). The as-prepared carbon nanosheets exhibited a high specific surface area of 2183 m2 g−1 and a hierarchical porous structure containing macroporous scaffolds and meso/microporous textures. The assembled supercapacitor yielded maximum energy and power density of 11.4 W h kg−1 and 98 kW kg−1, respectively, based on all the components of the packaged device.103
 Fig. 14  Schematic illustration of the transformation of reeds into the interconnected porous carbon nanosheets (ref. 103) (Copyright 2017 Elsevier). 
In order to further improve the electrochemical performances, heteroatom doping as an effective way has been widely used to control the properties of electron donors or acceptors of carbon materials and to consequently adjust their surface electrochemical performances. Moreover, heteroatom doping can effectively reduce charge transfer resistance and enhance wettability, thus improving the capacitive performances.75,104,105 Apart from carbon, the basic elements of biomass are oxygen, nitrogen, sulfur, and phosphorus. Thus, it is reasonable to expect that the controlled pyrolysis of biomass might yield self-doped carbon materials. For example, Feng Yan et al. prepared self-doped nitrogen porous carbon flakes via carbonization of Chinese human hair fibres. The resulting materials not only inherited the natural lamellar structure of the human hair, but also developed a micro/mesoporous structure with a relatively high self-doped nitrogen content in the resulting carbon. The optimized nitrogen-doped porous carbon flakes exhibited high charge storage capacity with specific capacitance of 340 F g−1 in 6 M KOH at current density of 1 A g−1 and good stability with capacitance retention of 98% over 20000 cycles. The specific capacitance of 126 F g−1 was also verified in a 1 M lithium hexafluorophosphate (LiPF6) ethylene carbonate/diethyl carbonate (EC/DEC) organic electrolyte at current density of 1 A g−1.106 Recently, Cunjing Wang et al. reported highly porous carbon sheets with high specific areas and self-doped nitrogen fabricated by the one-step carbonization of fresh clover stems with potassium chloride as the dual function agent (Fig. 15).
 Fig. 15  Illustration of the formation of carbon sheets with hierarchical pore structures with the molten salt sealing strategy (ref. 107) (Copyright 2017 Elsevier). 
Potassium chloride can not only protect the generated carbon structure from being destroyed by air at high temperatures, but also achieve a high specific surface area by building hierarchical porous structures during one-step carbonization. The resulting self-doped nitrogen porous carbon sheet electrode displayed high specific capacitance of 436 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 and excellent rate capacity with 290 F g−1 capacitance at 50 A g−1.107 Agaric has rich chitin and volumetric swelling property, and it is beneficial for use as a carbon precursor to form self-doped nitrogen carbon materials with high specific surface areas and optimized pore structures. Zhongai Hu et al. reported the preparation of hierarchically porous nitrogen-doped carbon nanosheets (HPN-CS) from agaric through a one-step method. Due to the unique volumetric swelling property of agaric, potassium hydroxide and urea in the solution easily infiltrate into the cell walls of agaric to form an in-built activating agent. This in-built activating agent in agaric plays a key role in forming interconnected hierarchical microporous carbon nanosheets with a simple pore structure. When HPN-CS is used as the supercapacitor electrode, it exhibits remarkable rate capability and high specific capacitance.108 Zheng Ling et al. reported a facile yet sustainable approach for the large-scale production of B/N co-doped carbon nanosheets by assembling long-range-order gelatine molecules in a 2D boric acid template, followed by pyrolysis (as shown in Fig. 16). When used as a supercapacitor electrode material, the as-obtained B/N co-doped carbon electrode delivered extraordinary specific capacitance of 358 F g−1 at 0.1 A g−1, high rate performance, and good stability over 15000 cycles.105 Abundantly available biomass materials such as puffed rice,109 bougainvillea flowers,110 silk,111 biomass wastes,112,113Perilla frutescens,114 and eggplants115 have also been used as carbon sources for 2D biomass-derived carbon sheet synthesis. These biomass precursors themselves have a multiple layer structure or cause new structural rearrangement to form 2D sheets during pyrolysis.
 Fig. 16  (a) Schematic illustration of the sustainable synthesis and assembly of B/N-CSs; (b) optical image of the doped carbon nanosheets (ref. 105) (Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH). 
Furthermore, the atomic-scale thickness of the 2D materials makes them flexible, which is a decisive strength to be used in wearable energy devices. These thin 2D materials advantageously satisfy the requirements of energy-storage devices with thin thickness and good flexibility.96 Xiuxiu Yu et al. reported a freestanding activated wrinkled carbon membrane (AWCM) from flower petals obtained by a simple thermal pyrolysis process; it was further activated by heating the sample in air. The small thickness of the petals (10–20 μm) and their wrinkled surfaces make them flexible electrodes and very attractive for the enhancement in ion storage. As a result, a flexible all-solid supercapacitor with the AWCM electrode was fabricated and showed maximum specific capacitance of 154 F g−1 and great bending stability with negligible capacitance decay after 10 bending cycles.116 Zheng Ling et al. showed boric/nitrogen co-doped carbon nanosheets (B/N-CS) fabricated by assembling gelatine molecules in long-range order on the 2D crystals of boric acid, followed by annealing, as shown in Fig. 16a and b. Furthermore, the doped carbon nanosheets could be assembled into an easy-to-handle and freestanding flexible thin film and could be used as a binder-less electrode without any additives, which reduced the internal resistance of the electrode material and shortened the diffusion pathways of ions. As a result, the supercapacitor made of the B/N-CS film electrodes delivered enhanced high-rate capability with capacitance retention of 70% over a wide range of current densities from 0.2 to 100 A g−1 and excellent cycle life of over 10000–15000 cycles with 105–113% capacitance retention, thus demonstrating their potential applications in compressible energy storage devices.105
4. Three-dimensional biomass carbon-based carbon materials for supercapacitors
As is well-known, microstructures play a key role in the capacitive performances of electrode materials for energy storage devices.17,117,118 On increasing the dimensionality, a large percentage of certain facets are exposed in the electrolyte, which can effectively enlarge the active surface area and therefore improve the capacitive performances of the electrode materials. In view of this point, a 3D microstructure with well-interconnected small and large pores not only provides a continuous electron pathway for good electrical contact, but also contributes to the acceleration of ion transfer by shortening the diffusion pathways; this is essential for designing high-performance electrode materials.1,119,120 Therefore, 3D microstructures show new opportunities in the rational design and synthesis of novel architectures tailor-made for enhancing electrochemical performances (Fig. 17).
 Fig. 17  3D carbon-based nanostructures from different forms of carbon and their combination with pseudo-active materials. 
Currently, many attempts have been made to prepare biomass-based carbon materials with 3D microstructures. This strategy not only reduces the cost but also helps inherit the precise three-dimensional order and multiple structures of the natural species. Different categories of 3D carbon architectures derived from various biomass precursors such as 3D hierarchical porous carbons, 3D carbon aerogels, and 3D flexible carbon films have been widely prepared and have demonstrated excellent performances in supercapacitor applications.
4.1 3D biomass-based hierarchical porous carbons for supercapacitors
The three-dimensional (3D) hierarchical porous carbon is emerging as a promising alternative for advanced supercapacitors. Due to the structural interconnectivities, 3D hierarchical porous carbon not only possesses well-developed porous channels for fast ion transfer, but also provides a large specific surface area, which can enhance the ion accessibility and meanwhile maintain higher electrical conductivity.
Recently, Song et al. also predicted theoretically that the hierarchical pore structure may lead to better electrochemical performances.120,121 Compared to the conventional carbon sources, the special porous structure of the biomass used for effectively absorbing nutritive ions and water from nature is present throughout the biomass material. These pores within biomass can be inherited well during the preparation of carbon materials. Therefore, it is advisable to design and fabricate novel 3D biomass-based hierarchical porous carbons by combining the structural advantages of biomass and the artificial methods. For example, Shijiao Song et al. reported an advanced high-value 3D hierarchical porous carbon obtained by the direct pyrolysis of KOH-pre-treated corn husks (Fig. 18). The interconnected macropores of the 3D hierarchical porous carbon were derived from the inherent cellular structures of cellulose. Moreover, KOH not only promoted the separation of cellulose from hemicellulose and lignin in the pre-treatment process but also acted as the activating agent in the development of the hierarchically interconnected pore network structure. Due to the multiple synergistic effects of the 3D hierarchical porous structure (3D HPCs), narrow pore diameter distribution, and rich oxygen doping, the obtained 3D HPCs exhibited superior capacitive performances including high specific capacitance of 356 F g−1, excellent rate capability (retention of 84.3% from 1 A g−1 to 20 A g−1), high energy density of 21 W h kg−1 (in Na2SO4 aqueous electrolyte), and good cycling stability (95% capacitance retention after 2500 cycles).13 Jong-Sung Yu et al. prepared a highly porous heteroatom-doped carbon through the direct carbonization of urine without any additional activators and templates. Interestingly, the inherent mineral salts within the urine backbone could evaporate during carbonization and the rest could be etched out from the resulting carbon during the acid treatment to create a high amount of micro/mesopores in the carbon framework. The synergetic effect of a suitable heteroatom content and porous structure enhanced the pseudo-capacitance and electric double layer capacitance of the final carbon electrode, resulting in superior capacitance.122 Quan-Hong Yang et al. demonstrated a novel 3D honeycomb-like porous carbon (HLPC) prepared by carbonizing pomelo peels, followed by KOH activation. The as-prepared unique honeycomb-like structure with a specific surface area of 2725 m2 g−1 was made up of interconnected microporous carbon walls, which were helpful in the diffusion of an electrolyte. Above all, the combination of high SSA, novel 3D honeycomb-structured architecture, and favourable N-doping synergistically resulted in an extraordinary electrochemical performance. Thus, the as-prepared HLPC exhibited high specific capacitance of 342 F g−1 and volumetric capacitance of 171 F cm−3 at 0.2 A g−1 and considerable rate capability with retention of 62% at 20 A g−1 as well as good cycling performance with 98% retention over 1000 cycles at 10 A g−1 in 6 M KOH.123 The porous structure with abundant active sites can also be generated by direct carbonization without the assistance of additional activation agents. A representative example is the direct carbonization of insect biomass. Gongyuan Zhao et al. reported the production of HPCs using ant powder as the precursor. The exoskeleton of ant comprises chitin and facilitates the fabrication of tough 3-D scaffolding frameworks, while the high protein and fatty acid composition forms highly porous carbons co-doped with heteroatoms. In addition, the richness of the metal salts within the ant powder provides natural templates for the hierarchical porous structure. Thus, the resultant carbon possesses a large specific surface area (2650 m2 g−1), typical three-dimensional framework comprising interconnected macro-, meso-, and micropores with suitable pore size distribution, and appropriate heteroatom doping with O, N, and S (Fig. 19). These distinct features afforded high specific capacitance of 352 F g−1 at a current density of 0.1 A g−1, high rate retention of 80% from 1.0 A g−1 to 10.0 A g−1, and high cycling stability (5% loss over 10000 cycles).124
 Fig. 18  Schematic diagram for the preparation of corn husk-derived porous carbon (ref. 13) (Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry). 
 Fig. 19  Schematic illustration of the production processes for the 3-D hierarchical porous carbons (ref. 124) (Copyright 2018 Elsevier). 
Up to now, numerous three-dimensional biomass-based hierarchical porous carbons have attracted rapidly increasing interest as electrode materials for supercapacitors and the representative examples are listed in Table 1.
Table 1 Representative biomass-based porous carbons for supercapacitor electrodes




Raw materials
Activation agent
BET surface area [m2 g−1]
Capacitance [F g−1]
Measurement condition
Ref.




Ant
—
2650
352
0.1 A g−1/(6 M KOH)

124



Sodium lignosulfonate
KOH
1867.4
370
0.5 A g−1/(6 M KOH)

125



Sugarcane bagasse
KOH
1939.9
298
1 A g−1/(1 M H2SO4)

126



Corn straw
KOH
1660
327
0.2 A g−1/(6 M KOH)

127



Garlic skin
KOH
2818
427
0.5 A g−1/(6 M KOH)

128



Sunflower seed shells
KOH
2509
311
0.25 A g−1/(30% KOH)

129





In the coming years, three-dimensional biomass-based hierarchical porous carbons are expected to combine with pseudo-active materials as novel nanocomposite electrode candidates to fulfil the high energy-storage demand for supercapacitors. For instance, Xiaosheng Fang et al. prepared well-ordered PANI nanowire arrays aligned on both the inner and outer surfaces of the hierarchical porous carbon (HPC). On the one hand, the PANI nanowire arrays with narrow diameters provide shorter diffusion paths for electrolyte ions, which can realize high utilization of PANI. On the other hand, the interconnected macropores in the HPC/PANI composite can offer highly conductive pathways and allow easy access of the electrolyte ions in the electrode during the rapid charge/discharge process. When used as a supercapacitor electrode, the HPC/PANI composite showed enhanced specific capacitance of 1080 F g−1 in 1 M H2SO4. Furthermore, an asymmetric supercapacitor based on HPC/PANI as the positive electrode and HPC as the negative electrode was successfully assembled within a voltage window of 0–1.8 V in 1 M Na2SO4 aqueous electrolyte, exhibiting high specific capacitance (134 F g−1), high energy density (60.3 W h kg−1) and power density (18 kW kg−1), and excellent cycling stability (91.6% capacitance retention after 5000 cycles).130 Transition metal oxides can also be introduced into three-dimensional biomass-based hierarchical porous carbons to improve the specific capacitance due to their super-high theoretical specific capacity. Min Ho Yang et al. reported the incorporation of MnO2 into the porous structure of a honeycomb-like activated carbon (HC) derived from hemp to form MnO2/HC composites. The resultant MnO2/HC composites showed 3D hierarchical architectures with favorable features such as high surface areas, high electrical conductivity, and efficient ion diffusion characteristics. Benefiting from these unique properties, the 3D MnO2/HC composite electrodes showed high specific capacitance, high rate capability, and excellent cycling characteristic for supercapacitor applications.131 Chaoji Chen and co-workers designed an all-wood-structured asymmetric supercapacitor (ASC) based on an activated wood carbon (AWC) anode and an MnO2/wood carbon (MnO2@WC) cathode, as described in Fig. 20.
 Fig. 20  (a) SEM image of the raw wood carbon. (b–e) SEM images of the wood carbon/MnO2 (MnO2@WC) composite: (b) top view; (c) magnified image of (a); (d) channels, and the inset in (d) shows the nanosheets grown in situ inside the channel; and (e) top and cross-sectional views, and the inset in (e) shows the thickness of the MnO2@WC composite. (f) Elemental mapping images of C, Mn, and O inside the channel. (g) TEM image and (h) HR-TEM image of the MnO2@WC composite, and the inset in (h) shows the SAED pattern of the MnO2@WC composite. (i–k) Electrochemical performance of the MnO2@WC cathode: (i) CV curves at various scan rates, (j) charge–discharge profiles at different current densities and (k) rate performances. The specific capacitances are calculated based on the total mass of the wood carbon/MnO2 composite (∼75 mg cm−2) (ref. 132) (Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry). 
For the cathode, the uniform growth of the MnO2 nanosheets on and even inside the wood carbon channels was realized by a typical electrodeposition method, which could be attributed to the multi-channelled structure along the tree-growth direction of the wood carbon that could facilitate efficient ion penetration throughout its entire surface. As a result, high mass loading, high conductivity, and hierarchical pore structures of the AWC anode and the MnO2@WC cathode demonstrated ultra-high areal capacitances and excellent rate capabilities. The combination of the two electrode materials enabled the all-wood-structured ASC device to demonstrate remarkably high energy/power densities.132 More recently, Kaili Fang and co-workers proposed to combine nanostructured α-Fe2O3 with biomass-derived porous carbon (BPC). Through the direct impregnation of iron ions into a wheat straw-derived porous carbon and calcination, small Fe2O3 nanocrystals were successfully coated onto the hierarchical architecture of the biomass-derived porous carbon. This hierarchical architecture could improve the redox activity, promote the charge transport, and enhance the pseudocapacitive kinetics of Fe2O3. Due to these benefits, the BPC/Fe2O3 nanocomposite exhibited a significantly improved electrochemical performance in comparison to N–Fe2O3.133
4.2 3D biomass-based carbon aerogels for supercapacitors
A carbon aerogel, as a kind of porous carbon, has attracted tremendous attention in the past decades owing to its tuneable 3D hierarchical architecture, high porosity, large specific surface area, and outstanding conductivity. The excellent characteristics of carbon aerogels can provide open channels for continuous unobstructed transportation of electrolyte ions and the corresponding improvement in the effective electrochemical utilization of carbon aerogels, high rate capability, and enhanced charge transportation, which are essential for high power performances. The traditional preparation of carbon aerogel always involves harmful and expensive precursors and complex synthesis processes, which drastically limit their large-scale manufacture.134 Therefore, exploring a facile, environmentally friendly, and low-cost approach to prepare carbon aerogels is highly desired.
Recently, biomass has been demonstrated as a promising precursor to produce carbon aerogels because of its renewability and biodegradability. For example, Guoqing Zu et al. synthesized a high-surface-area activated carbon aerogel via the pyrolysis of cellulose aerogels and subsequent CO2 activation of the obtained carbon aerogel. The cellulose aerogels were first prepared by dissolving cellulose microcrystals in aqueous NaOH solutions, followed by gelation, regeneration, and supercritical CO2 drying. After further CO2 activation, the specific surface area and pore volume of the carbon aerogels were enhanced to 1873 m2 g−1 and 2.65 cm3 g−1, respectively. The highly porous and interconnected nanostructure provided efficient migration of electrolyte ions and electrons, due to which the resultant activated carbon aerogels exhibited excellent electrochemical performances for supercapacitors.135 Xuezhu Xu et al. reported that bacterial cellulose–lignin resorcinol formaldehyde (BC–LRF) hydrogels were first obtained by crosslinking lignin resorcinol formaldehyde and subsequent impregnation with bacterial cellulose (BC). Then, BC–LRF aerogels were produced by CO2 supercritical drying. The traditional resorcinol–formaldehyde (RF) and lignin–resorcinol–formaldehyde (LRF) carbon aerogels are brittle and fragile. By contrast, large reversible deformations in the BC–LRF carbon aerogels are attainable by utilizing the toughening effect of the BC nanofiber network. Furthermore, the obtained BC–LRF also showed a unique blackberry-like structure and a large mesopore concentration, which are favourable for ion transportation and adsorption, thus leading to high areal capacitance.136 Pin Hao et al. prepared hierarchical porous carbon aerogels via the carbonization of freeze-dried bagasse aerogels and successive NaOH activation (Fig. 21). The obtained hierarchical carbon aerogels exhibited improved electrochemical performances due to their high specific surface areas and reasonable pore size distributions, which facilitated fast migration of the electrolyte ions and electrons.137 Subsequently, the authors used chitosan as a raw material to prepare graphene-based nitrogen self-doped hierarchical porous carbon aerogels through careful control of the formation–carbonization–activation process. The as-prepared N-doped graphene-based carbon aerogels contained a graphene framework, amorphous carbon with macropores and mesopores from the aerogel preparation–carbonization process, and micropores from chemical activation. The transformation of amorphous carbon to the graphene skeleton due to the increase in temperature made the structure of the carbon aerogels more stable and reasonable as the electrode material of supercapacitors. Thus, this carbon aerogel exhibited an excellent electrochemical performance with high specific capacitance of about 197 F g−1 at 0.2 A g−1 and capacitance retention of about 92.1% over 10000 cycles in a solid state supercapacitor due to the high conductivity of the nitrogen-doped graphene skeleton and the high storage capacity from the variable pore size and distribution of the amorphous carbon.138 Chitosan, as an important and very good nitrogen self-doping biomass raw material, has attracted the attention of more and more researchers. In 2017, Zhang et al. successfully produced a porous carbon foam with a multi-scale pore network structure using chitosan as the raw material and silica as the template. Due to this carbon material with a specific surface area of up to 2905 m2 g−1 and a hierarchical structure with micropores, mesopores, and macropores, excellent gravimetric capacitance values of up to 374.7 ± 7.7 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 and 235.9 ± 7.5 F g−1 at ultra-high current density of 500 A g−1 can be obtained, showing that 60% of the capacitance can be retained at high current density compared to that at 1 A g−1. These electrochemical results again demonstrate that the advantages of this hierarchical structure with macro-, meso-, and micropores can greatly promote the efficient diffusion of ions and charge transfer and ultimately improve the rate capability of supercapacitors.139 Chitosan, the second rich natural biopolymer, is a very good sustainable biomass precursor for the preparation of carbonaceous materials. Zhang et al. also obtained an ultra-light 3D porous carbon foam with an interconnected network of carbon sheets that also contained uniformly dispersed macropores by the simultaneous carbonization–activation treatment of the glutaraldehyde-crosslinked chitosan aerogel containing potassium carbonate. This ultra-light, hierarchically porous carbon foam also exhibited good electrochemical properties in supercapacitors that benefitted from bio-crosslinked structures and activators.140 F. L. Braghiroli and co-workers reported the fabrication of N-doped carbon aerogels, where the N-doped hydrogel was first prepared by the hydrothermal carbonization of aminated flavonoid tannins. The hydrogel was further dried by supercritical drying and subsequent pyrolysis at 900 °C to obtain an N-doped carbon aerogel with a developed surface area and porosity. The N-doped carbon aerogel electrodes showed outstanding specific capacitance of 387.6 F g−1 at a scan rate of 2 mV s−1 in 4 mol L−1 H2SO4 aqueous solutions.141 Wei-Li Song and co-workers proposed a strategy of utilizing RGO aerogel interfaces towards manipulating biomass derivatives into a binder-free electrode. The unique hierarchical 3D networks based on the integration of N–C networks and reduced graphene oxide (RGO) aerogels were found to offer favourable features, i.e., synergetic improvement in chemical compositions, surface areas, and pore size distribution. These features enabled the N–C–RGO networks to serve as binder-free electrodes for electrochemical storage.142 Inspired by the unique structure of a kiwifruit, a three-dimensional laminated porous carbon aerogel (CA) with short nano-chains bridging the nanospheres was fabricated by simple calcination. In this case, the natural structure of the kiwifruit was successfully preserved in the hierarchical structure of the final product. The 3D network structure with continuous pore channels could provide efficient ionic diffusion, while the continuous carbon structure composed of the nanospheres bridged with the short nano-chains promoted rapid electron transport in the electrode. When used as an electrode in a symmetric two-electrode supercapacitor, it delivered high specific capacitance of 322.9 F g−1 at a current density of 0.5 A g−1. Moreover, the extensible and flexible symmetric supercapacitors obtained using CA-800 displayed stable electrochemical performances even after 10000 cycles of a bending test.17 Wu et al. prepared sponge-like carbon hydrogels and aerogels using watermelon as the carbonaceous precursor by a simple, green, and template-free method. On this basis, they constructed three-dimensional carbonaceous gel-based composite materials by combining Fe3O4 nanoparticles into the porous carbonaceous gel (CG) skeleton composed of carbon nanofibers and nanospheres with high chemical activity and excellent mechanical flexibility. The Fe3O4/CG composites could be converted into magnetic carbon aerogels (MCAs) by further heat treatments and maintained the original porous network structure; this enabled them to continuously and stably transfer electrolyte ions and electrons to the electrode interface so as to provide an excellent electrochemical performance with specific capacitance of 333.1 F g−1 at 1 A g−1.143 Jinfeng Cui and co-workers prepared a hierarchical porous carbonaceous aerogel (HPCA) from renewable seaweed aerogels and then loaded Co3O4 nanowires into the networks of the carbonaceous aerogel to obtain a Co3O4@HPCA composite. The Co3O4@HPCA-700-800 composite exhibited an enhanced pseudocapacitive performance with specific capacitance up to 1167.6 F g−1 at 1 A g−1.144
 Fig. 21  Schematic of the fabrication of highly porous bagasse-derived carbon aerogels with hierarchical pore structures (ref. 137) (Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry). 
Based on the above-mentioned detailed review, it is concluded that the porous structure and distinctive properties of biomass-based carbon aerogels make them promising electrode materials for high-performance supercapacitors.
5. Conclusion and outlook
The development of biomass-based carbon materials for electrochemical energy storage has made significant progress in recent years due to their abundant resources, tuneable physical/chemical properties, and environmental friendliness. More importantly, the structure of natural biomass has been optimized by natural selection for millions of years. It can offer more elaborate and diverse morphologies than the solutions proposed by researchers such as one-dimensional fibres or microtubes, two-dimensional nanosheets, and three-dimensional spatial structures. These materials with unique morphologies can not only act as bio-templates to achieve excellent electrochemical properties, but also as building blocks to fabricate flexible electrodes. In the current review, we summarized the recent advances related to this area, with particular focus on the biomass-derived carbon architectures having different dimensions for applications in supercapacitors. The biomass-derived carbons with various dimensions have different and unique properties that make them promising electrodes. As mentioned above in this review, the 1D carbon architecture possesses much shorter bi-continuous ion and electron transport pathways, which are beneficial for the supercapacitor application with high rate capability. The capacitance of charge storage devices greatly depends on the surface area of the electrode materials. Thus, the diffusion of ions through the whole electrode and the surface accessibility of the electrode by the electrolyte are very important. Using 2D carbon materials as electrodes, these advantages can be easily realized. With the increase in dimensionality, a large percentage of certain facets are exposed in the electrolyte, which can greatly enlarge the available active surface and accordingly enhance the electrochemical performances of the electrode materials. Therefore, 3D carbon materials have been developed as one of the most prospective electrode candidates for high-performance supercapacitors. Although advancements in biomass-based carbon materials having different dimensions for high-performance supercapacitors have been made in recent years, there are still some issues that need to be addressed in the future.
(1) Natural biomass has a precise structure with multi-dimensional and hierarchical pores obtained through millions of years of biological evolution. It acts as not only a brilliant carbon resource but also a bio-template for the synthesis of valuable carbon materials. Therefore, exploring biomass-derived carbon materials with the focus on utilizing and optimizing their natural structure is promising for future carbon materials with an excellent performance and low cost. Nevertheless, most researches at present are dependent on an additional chemical agent to obtain the unique structure, which results in a low carbon yield and the disruption of the biomass structure due to the formation of large amounts of by-products. In order to develop strategies for the efficient utilization of biomass resources, we should pay more attention to the structural evolution from an organic biomass precursor to the inorganic carbon material and how the additional agents can be used to adjust the parameters of the carbon material. The understanding of this fundamental research basis can help us reveal the conversion mechanism of the complicated processes and provide valuable guidance in the fabrication of biomass-derived carbon materials with desired structures and properties for applications in supercapacitors. In addition, further work should also pay more attention to other parameters of biomass-derived carbon materials such as the ash content, oxygen content, and tap density, which are usually ignored but play important roles in the overall electrochemical performances.
(2) The pore diameter and size distribution of the biomass-based carbon electrodes have a significant influence on their electrochemical performances. They are closely related to the processes of ion transport and electron transfer; accordingly, they are crucial factors in determining their specific capacitance and rate capability. As reviewed above, optimized carbons with exohedral carbons or additional mesopores such as hollow carbon microtubes/carbon nanosheets and hierarchical porous carbons are efficient solutions for achieving high electrochemical performances. However, it is still difficult to precisely control the pore structures and sizes of the biomass-derived carbon materials without the collapse of the natural structure of biomass. Therefore, engineering the porous structure of the biomass-derived carbon materials in an optimized controllable manner is highly desirable for further performance improvement.
(3) The gravimetric and volumetric performances of the biomass-based carbon electrodes are limited to some extent due to their intrinsically low specific capacitance and energy density. To improve the performances of the biomass-based carbon electrodes, the incorporation of pseudocapacitive components such as heteroatoms,124,145–148 metal oxides/hydroxides,149–153 or conductive polymers154–159 has become an efficient solution to obtain composite electrodes with high gravimetric and volumetric performances by the contribution of large additional pseudocapacitance and improved packing density. However, the advantages of the individual components cannot be fully inherited due to poor interfacial interactions between the pseudocapacitive components and the carbon materials as well as low loading. Therefore, optimizing the loading and interfacial interactions to take full advantage of the synergistic effects between the individual components is particularly important for developing advanced biomass carbon-based composite materials. Furthermore, the biomass-based carbon materials with diverse structures and adjustable surface/interface chemistry have also provided new opportunities for a wide range of applications such as in Li–S batteries, environmental protection, sensor devices, and electrocatalysis.
(4) Flexibility: with the rapid growth of portable and wearable electronic devices, there has been an increasing demand for flexible energy storage devices with foldable and lightweight properties. Many reports have already demonstrated that biomass-based carbon materials with 1D or 2D architectures are promising building blocks for the construction of flexible electrodes with excellent electrochemical performances at the lab scale. However, it remains a challenge to develop general and effective techniques to weave them at an applicable scale. Furthermore, biomass carbons with different dimensions can be integrated together to construct electrode materials for supercapacitors. These combinations can take full advantage of each building block and accordingly result in a composite electrode with enhanced flexibility and mechanical robustness as well as maintained capacitance.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful to the Scientific and Technological Key Project of Shanxi Province (Grant No. MC2016-08 and No. MC2016-04), the Shanxi Scholarship Council of China (Grant No. 2016141), the Scientific Research Foundation for Young Scientists of Shanxi Province (Grant No. 201601D021061), the Scientific Research Foundation for Young Scientists of Shanxi Province (Grant No. 201601D021134) and Author Cheng-Meng Chen appreciates the support from the Youth Innovation Promotion Association of CAS.
Notes and references
J. Yan, Q. Wang, T. Wei and Z. J. Fan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1300816 CrossRef .
Y. C. Liu, B. B. Huang, X. X. Lin and Z. L. Xie, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 25090 RSC .
L. M. Dai, D. W. Chang, J. B. Baek and W. Lu, Small, 2012, 8, 1130–1166 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Balahmar, A. C. Mitchell and R. Mokaya, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500867 CrossRef .
Y. Boyjoo, Y. Cheng, H. Zhong, H. Tian, J. Pan, V. K. Pareek, S. P. Jiang, J. F. Lamonier, M. Jaroniec and J. Liu, Carbon, 2017, 116, 490–499 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Geng, Q. F. Xiao, H. Lv, B. Li, H. B. Wu, Y. F. Lu and C. M. Zhang, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 30049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. S. Blankenship and R. Mokaya, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 2552–2562 RSC .
W. F. Chen, S. Iyer, S. Iyer, K. Sasaki, C. H. Wang, Y. M. Zhu, J. T. Muckerman and E. Fujita, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1818–1826 RSC .
L. Wang, Y. T. Shi, Y. X. Wang, H. Zhang, H. W. Zhou, Y. Wei, S. Y. Tao and T. L. Ma, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 1701–1703 RSC .
X. B. Liao, C. Chen, Z. Wang, R. Wan, C. H. Chang, X. J. Zhang and S. G. Xie, Process Biochem., 2013, 48, 312–316 CrossRef CAS .
Q. L. Ma, Y. F. Yu, M. Sindoro, A. G. Fane, R. Wang and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605361 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Z. Chen, K. L. Fang, Q. Y. Chen, J. L. Xu and C. P. Wong, Nano Energy, 2018, 53, 337–344 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Song, F. W. Ma, G. Wu, D. Ma, W. D. Geng and J. F. Wan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 18154–18162 RSC .
C. Wang, X. F. Wang, H. Lu, H. L. Li and X. S. Zhao, Carbon, 2018, 140, 139–147 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Q. Zhang, X. Liu, S. L. Wang, L. Li and S. X. Dou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700592 CrossRef .
J. Wang, P. Nie, B. Ding, S. Y. Dong, X. D. Hao, H. Dou and X. G. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 2411–2428 RSC .
C. Wang, Y. Xiong, H. W. Wang, C. D. Jin and Q. F. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 15759–15770 RSC .
Y. C. Liu, B. B. Huang, X. X. Lin and Z. L. Xie, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 13009–13018 RSC .
H. Wang, Y. Yang and L. Guo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700663 CrossRef .
N. Sudhan, K. Subramani, M. Karnan, N. Ilayaraja and M. Sathish, Energy Fuels, 2017, 31, 977–985 CrossRef CAS .
P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 845–854 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Bonaccorso, L. Colombo, G. H. Yu, M. Stoller, V. Tozzini, A. C. Ferrari, R. S. Ruoff and V. Pellegrini, Science, 2015, 347, 1246501 CrossRef PubMed .
P. J. Hall, M. Mirzaeian, S. I. Fletcher, F. B. Sillars, A. J. R. Rennie, G. O. Shitta-Bey, G. Wilson, A. Cruden and R. Carter, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1238–1251 RSC .
E. Frackowiak and F. Béguin, Carbon, 2001, 39, 937–950 CrossRef CAS .
A. González, E. Goikolea, J. A. Barrena and R. Mysyk, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 58, 1189–1206 CrossRef .
K. Jurewicz, S. Delpeux, V. Bertagna, F. Béguin and E. Frackowiak, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2001, 347, 36–40 CrossRef CAS .
A. Laforgue, P. Simon, C. Sarrazin and J.-F. Fauvarque, J. Power Sources, 1999, 80, 142–148 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Meng, K. Cai, Y. Chen and L. Chen, Nano Energy, 2017, 36, 268–285 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Fan, J. Chen, K. Cui, F. Sun, Y. Xu and Y. Kuang, Electrochim. Acta, 2007, 52, 2959–2965 CrossRef CAS .
I. H. Kim and K. B. Kim, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, A383–A389 CrossRef CAS .
Z. J. Lao, K. Konstantinov, Y. Tournaire, S. H. Ng, G. X. Wang and H. K. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2006, 162, 1451–1454 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, J. Wang, C. Xu, H. Jiang, C. Li, L. Zhang, J. Lin and Z. X. Shen, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700322 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Beguin, V. Presser, A. Balducci and E. Frackowiak, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2219–2251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Kang, Q. L. Liu, J. J. Gu, Y. S. Su, W. Zhang and D. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 11225–11233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Liu, K. Tian, L. L. Ling, H. Q. Yu and H. Jiang, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2016, 50, 12421–12428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Paraknowitsch and A. Thomas, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2839–2855 RSC .
N. Zhang, F. Liu, S. D. Xu, F. Y. Wang, Q. Yu and L. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 22631–22640 RSC .
W. P. Ma, L. J. Xie, L. Q. Dai, G. H. Sun, J. Z. Chen, F. Y. Su, Y. F. Cao, H. Lei, Q. Q. Kong and C. M. Chen, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 266, 420–430 CrossRef CAS .
S. Iijima, Nature, 1991, 354, 56–58 CrossRef CAS .
A. Peigney, C. Laurent, E. Flahaut, R. R. Bacsa and A. Rousset, Carbon, 2001, 39, 507–514 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. Kroto, J. R. Heath, S. C. Obrien, R. F. Curl and R.
E. Smalley, Nature, 1985, 318, 162–163 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Tucek, P. Blonski, J. Ugolotti, A. K. Swain, T. Enoki and R. Zboril, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 3899–3990 RSC .
Y. Q. Sun, Q. O. Wu and G. Q. Shi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1113–1132 RSC .
Z. Li, J. T. Zhang, Y. M. Chen, J. Li and X. W. Lou, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lu and X. S. Zhao, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2017, 1, 1265–1281 RSC .
L. J. Xie, G. H. Sun, F. Y. Su, X. Q. Guo, Q. Q. Kong, X. M. Li, X. H. Huang, L. Wan, W. Song, K. X. Li, C. X. Lv and C. M. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 1637–1646 RSC .
H. Y. Yin, B. H. Lu, Y. Xu, D. Y. Tang, X. H. Mao, W. Xiao, D. H. Wang and A. N. Alshawabkeh, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2014, 48, 8101–8108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Gu, W. Zhang, H. L. Su, T. X. Fan, S. M. Zhu, Q. L. Liu and D. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 464–478 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zheng, J. T. Wang, Y. F. Zhu and A. Q. Wang, J. Environ. Sci., 2015, 27, 21–32 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. W. Wang, H. Yi, C. R. Zhu, X. F. Wang and H. J. Fan, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 658–669 CrossRef CAS .
Q. L. Wei, F. Y. Xiong, S. S. Tan, L. Huang, E. H. Lan, B. Dunn and L. Q. Mai, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1602300 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Jin, X. D. Yan, Y. H. Yu and G. J. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 11706–11715 RSC .
I. Sakurada, Y. Nukushina and T. Ito, J. Polym. Sci., 1962, 57, 651–660 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Moon, A. Martini, J. Nairn, J. Simonsen and J. Youngblood, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 3941–3994 RSC .
Y. J. Kang, S.-J. Chun, S.-S. Lee, B.-Y. Kim, J. H. Kim, H. Chung, S.-Y. Lee and W. Kim, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 6400–6406 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, D. O. Carlsson, P. Tammela, K. Hua, P. Zhang, L. Nyholm and M. Strømme, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 7563–7571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Lai, Y.-E. Miao, L. Zuo, H. Lu, Y. Huang and T. Liu, Small, 2016, 12, 3235–3244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Torvinen, S. Lehtimäki, J. T. Keränen, J. Sievänen, J. Vartiainen, E. Hellén, D. Lupo and S. Tuukkanen, Mater. Lett., 2015, 11, 1040–1047 CAS .
S. Li, D. Huang, J. Yang, B. Zhang, X. Zhang, G. Yang, M. Wang and Y. Shen, Nano Energy, 2014, 9, 309–317 CrossRef CAS .
L.-F. Chen, Z.-H. Huang, H.-W. Liang, H.-L. Gao and S.-H. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 5104–5111 CrossRef CAS .
C. Long, D. Qi, T. Wei, J. Yan, L. Jiang and Z. Fan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 3953–3961 CrossRef CAS .
L. Mai, X. Tian, X. Xu, L. Chang and L. Xu, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11828–11862 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. F. Cao, L. J. Xie, G. H. Sun, F. Y. Su, Q. Q. Kong, F. Li, W. P. Ma, J. Shi, D. Jiang, C. X. Lu and C. M. Chen, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2018, 2, 455–465 RSC .
Q. Li, C. X. Lu, D. J. Xiao, H. F. Zhang, C. M. Chen, L. J. Xie, Y. D. Liu, S. X. Yuan, Q. Q. Kong, K. Zheng and J. Q. Yin, ChemElectroChem, 2018, 5, 1279–1287 CrossRef CAS .
Q. L. Wei, F. Y. Xiong, S. S. Tan, L. Huang, E. H. Lan, B. Dunn and L. Q. Mai, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 39,  DOI:10.1002/adma.201602300 .
W. S. Chen, H. P. Yu, S. Y. Lee, T. Wei, J. Li and Z. J. Fan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 2837–2872 RSC .
S. J. He and W. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2015, 294, 150–158 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Jiang, Z. H. Zhang, S. Y. Yin, Z. P. Guo, S. Q. Wang and C. Q. Feng, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2016, 379, 73–82 CrossRef CAS .
K. Z. Hina, H. T. Zou, W. Qian, D. Y. Zuo and C. H. Yi, Cellulose, 2018, 25, 607–617 CrossRef CAS .
C. L. Long, D. P. Qi, T. Wei, J. Yan, L. L. Jiang and Z. J. Fan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 3953–3961 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Wang, D. B. Kong, Y. B. Zhang, B. Wang, X. L. Li, T. F. Qiu, Q. Song, J. Ning, Y. Song and L. J. Zhi, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 9146–9150 RSC .
X. D. Hao, J. Wang, B. Ding, Y. Wang, Z. Chang, H. Dou and X. G. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2017, 352, 34–41 CrossRef CAS .
Z. J. Shi, L. Xing, Y. Liu, Y. F. Gao and J. R. Liu, Carbon, 2018, 129, 819–825 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Li, G. L. Wang, T. Wei, Z. J. Fan and P. Yan, Nano Energy, 2016, 19, 165–175 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cai, H. T. Niu, H. X. Wang, H. Shao, J. Fang, J. R. He, H. G. Xiong, C. J. Ma and T. Lin, J. Power Sources, 2016, 324, 302–308 CrossRef CAS .
V. Kuzmenko, O. Naboka, P. Gatenholm and P. Enoksson, Carbon, 2014, 67, 694–703 CrossRef CAS .
R. Berenguer, F. J. Garcia-Mateos, R. Ruiz-Rosas, D. Cazorla-Amoros, E. Morallon, J. Rodriguez-Mirasol and T. Cordero, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 1506–1515 RSC .
Y. Liu, Z. J. Shi, Y. F. Gao, W. D. An, Z. Z. Cao and J. R. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 28283–28290 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. H. Zhang, X. Y. Meng, S. L. Gong, P. Li, L. E. Jin and Q. Cao, Mater. Lett., 2016, 179, 73–77 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Zhang, K. Zhang, H. X. Li, Q. Cao, L. E. Jin and P. Li, J. Power Sources, 2017, 344, 176–184 CrossRef CAS .
W. B. Xu, B. Mu and A. Q. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 194, 84–94 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Zhu, M. J. Chen, N. Yerra, N. Haldolaarachchige, S. Pallavkar, Z. P. Luo, T. C. Ho, J. Hopper, D. P. Young, S. Y. Wei and Z. H. Guo, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 1825–1830 RSC .
L. F. Chen, Z. H. Huang, H. W. Liang, W. T. Yao, Z. Y. Yu and S. H. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3331–3338 RSC .
C. Zequine, C. K. Ranaweera, Z. Wang, S. Singh, P. Tripathi, O. N. Srivastava, B. K. Gupta, K. Ramasamy, P. K. Kahol, P. R. Dvornic and R. K. Gupta, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 31704 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xiong, X. Hu, X. Wu, Y. Zeng, B. Wang, G. H. He and Z. H. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 17209–17216 RSC .
Z. H. Wang, P. Tammela, M. Stromme and L. Nyholm, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 3418–3423 RSC .
S. H. Li, D. K. Huang, B. Y. Zhang, X. B. Xu, M. K. Wang, G. Yang and Y. Shen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301655 CrossRef .
C. Tan, X. Cao, X.-J. Wu, Q. He, J. Yang, X. Zhang, J. Chen, W. Zhao, S. Han, G.-H. Nam, M. Sindoro and H. Zhang, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 6225–6331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Mendoza-Sanchez and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6104–6135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liu, J. Niu, Z. Zhang, M. Dou and F. Wang, Nano Energy, 2018, 51, 366–372 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hou, M. Qiu, T. Zhang, X. D. Zhuang, C. S. Kim, C. Yuan and X. L. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 8,  DOI:10.1002/adma.201701589 .
Y. Hou, M. R. Lohe, J. Zhang, S. Liu, X. Zhuang and X. Feng, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 478–483 RSC .
H. Wang, Z. W. Xu, A. Kohandehghan, Z. Li, K. Cui, X. H. Tan, T. J. Stephenson, C. K. King'ondu, C. M. B. Holt, B. C. Olsen, J. K. Tak, D. Harfield, A. O. Anyia and D. Mitlin, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 5131–5141 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. J. Fan, Y. Liu, J. Yan, G. Q. Ning, Q. Wang, T. Wei, L. J. Zhi and F. Wei, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 419–424 CrossRef CAS .
F. Yi, H. Y. Ren, J. Y. Shan, X. Sun, D. Wei and Z. F. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 3152–3188 RSC .
Z. Li, H. B. Wu and X. W. Lou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3061–3070 RSC .
Y. F. He, X. D. Zhuang, C. J. Lei, L. C. Lei, Y. Hou, Y. Y. Mai and X. L. Feng, Nano Today, 2019, 24, 103–119 CrossRef CAS .
W. Q. Tian, Q. M. Gao, Y. L. Tan and Z. Y. Li, Carbon, 2017, 119, 287–295 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yao, Q. Wu, P. X. Zhang, J. M. Zhang, D. R. Wang, Y. L. Li, X. Z. Ren, H. W. Mi, L. B. Deng and Z. J. Zheng, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706054 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Sankar, A. T. A. Ahmed, A. I. Inamdar, H. Im, Y. Bin Im, Y. Lee, D. Y. Kim and S. Lee, Mater. Des., 2019, 169, 9 Search PubMed .
T. Purkait, G. Singh, M. Singh, D. Kumar and R. S. Dey, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 15239 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Zhou, H. L. Wang, N. Mao, Y. R. Chen, Y. Zhou, T. P. Yin, H. Xie, W. Liu, S. G. Chen and X. Wang, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2017, 241, 202–209 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Jin, J. Li, Y. F. Yuan, J. C. Wang, J. Lu and S. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801007 CrossRef .
Z. Ling, Z. Y. Wang, M. D. Zhang, C. Yu, G. Wang, Y. F. Dong, S. H. Liu, Y. W. Wang and J. S. Qiu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 111–119 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Qian, F. X. Sun, Y. H. Xu, L. H. Qiu, C. H. Liu, S. D. Wang and F. Yan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 379–386 RSC .
C. J. Wang, D. P. Wu, H. J. Wang, Z. Y. Gao, F. Xu and K. Jiang, J. Power Sources, 2017, 363, 375–383 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. An, Z. M. Li, Y. Y. Yang, B. S. Guo, Z. Y. Zhang, H. Y. Wu and Z. A. Hu, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 4, 1700033 CrossRef .
J. H. Hou, K. Jiang, M. Tahir, X. G. Wu, F. Idrees, M. Shen and C. B. Cao, J. Power Sources, 2017, 371, 148–155 CrossRef CAS .
R. P. Panmand, P. Patil, Y. Sethi, S. R. Kadam, M. V. Kulkarni, S. W. Gosavi, N. R. Munirathnam and B. B. Kale, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 22065 RSC .
J. H. Hou, C. B. Cao, F. Idrees and X. L. Ma, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 2556–2564 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Genovese, J. H. Jiang, K. Lian and N. Holm, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 2903–2913 RSC .
E. C. Hao, W. Liu, S. Liu, Y. Zhang, H. L. Wang, S. G. Chen, F. L. Cheng, S. P. Zhao and H. Z. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 2204–2214 RSC .
B. Liu, Y. J. Liu, H. B. Chen, M. Yang and H. M. Li, J. Power Sources, 2017, 341, 309–317 CrossRef CAS .
Z. J. Li, W. Lv, C. Zhang, B. H. Li, F. Y. Kang and Q. H. Yang, Carbon, 2015, 92, 11–14 CrossRef CAS .
X. X. Yu, Y. Wang, L. Li, H. B. Li and Y. Y. Shang, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 45378 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang, J. Yan and Z. J. Fan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 729–762 RSC .
Y. D. Zhang, Z. A. Hu, Y. F. An, B. S. Guo, N. An, Y. R. Liang and H. Y. Wu, J. Power Sources, 2016, 311, 121–129 CrossRef CAS .
Y. D. Zhang, Z. G. Hu, Y. R. Liang, Y. Y. Yang, N. An, Z. M. Li and H. Y. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 15057–15067 RSC .
H. Jiang, P. S. Lee and C. Z. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 41–53 RSC .
H. K. Song, Y. H. Jung, K. H. Lee and L. H. Dao, Electrochim. Acta, 1999, 44, 3513–3519 CrossRef CAS .
F. Razmjooei, K. Singh, T. H. Kang, N. Chaudhari, J. L. Yuan and J. S. Yu, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 10910 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. H. Liang, L. Ye, Z. H. Huang, Q. Xu, Y. Bai, F. Y. Kang and Q. H. Yang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 13831–13837 RSC .
G. Y. Zhao, C. Chen, D. F. Yu, L. Sun, C. H. Yang, H. Zhang, Y. Sun, F. Besenbacher and M. Yu, Nano Energy, 2018, 47, 547–555 CrossRef CAS .
J. Pang, W. Zhang, J. Zhang, G. Cao, M. Han and Y. Yang, Green Chem., 2017, 19, 3916–3926 RSC .
B. Wang, Y. H. Wang, Y. Y. Peng, X. Wang, J. Wang and J. B. Zhao, J. Power Sources, 2018, 390, 186–196 CrossRef CAS .
Z. P. Qiu, Y. S. Wang, X. Bi, T. Zhou, J. Zhou, J. P. Zhao, Z. C. Miao, W. M. Yi, P. Fu and S. P. Zhuo, J. Power Sources, 2018, 376, 82–90 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, K. H. Han, S. J. Li, M. Li, J. X. Li and K. Ren, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 2427–2437 RSC .
X. A. Li, W. Xing, S. P. Zhuo, J. Zhou, F. Li, S. Z. Qiao and G. Q. Lu, Bioresour. Technol., 2011, 102, 1118–1123 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. P. Yu, Z. M. Zhang, L. X. Zheng, F. Teng, L. F. Hu and X. S. Fang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1601111 CrossRef .
M. H. Yang, D. S. Kim, S. B. Hong, J. W. Sim, J. Kim, S. S. Kim and B. G. Choi, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 5140–5147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Chen, Y. Zhang, Y. J. Li, J. Q. Dai, J. W. Song, Y. G. Yao, Y. H. Gong, I. Kierzewski, J. Xie and L. B. Hu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 538–545 RSC .
K. L. Fang, J. Z. Chen, X. Y. Zhou, C. T. Mei, Q. H. Tian, J. L. Xu and C. P. Wong, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 261, 198–205 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Z. Ma, Y. Guo, C. Zhou and C. Y. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 210, 897–904 CrossRef CAS .
G. Q. Zu, J. Shen, L. P. Zou, F. Wang, X. D. Wang, Y. W. Zhang and X. D. Yao, Carbon, 2016, 99, 203–211 CrossRef CAS .
X. Z. Xu, J. Zhou, D. H. Nagaraju, L. Jiang, V. R. Marinov, G. Lubineau, H. N. Alshareef and M. Oh, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 3193–3202 CrossRef CAS .
P. Hao, Z. H. Zhao, J. Tian, H. D. Li, Y. H. Sang, G. W. Yu, H. Q. Cai, H. Liu, C. P. Wong and A. Umar, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 12120–12129 RSC .
P. Hao, Z. H. Zhao, Y. H. Leng, J. Tian, Y. H. Sang, R. I. Boughton, C. P. Wong, H. Liu and B. Yang, Nano Energy, 2015, 15, 9–23 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, T. Y. Liu, M. Y. Li, M. H. Yu, Y. Luo, Y. X. Tong and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 3097–3104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang, T. Y. Liu, G. H. Hou, T. Y. Kou, L. Yue, R. F. Guan and Y. Li, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 2875–2888 CrossRef CAS .
F. L. Braghiroli, V. Fierro, A. Szczurek, N. Stein, J. Parmentier and A. Celzard, Carbon, 2015, 90, 63–74 CrossRef CAS .
W.-L. Song, X. Li and L.-Z. Fan, Energy Storage Materials, 2016, 3, 113–122 CrossRef .
X. L. Wu, T. Wen, H. L. Guo, S. B. Yang, X. K. Wang and A. W. Xu, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 3589–3597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cui, Y. Xi, S. Chen, D. Li, X. She, J. Sun, W. Han, D. Yang and S. Guo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 8487–8495 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, Z. W. Xu, X. H. Tan, H. L. Wang, C. M. B. Holt, T. Stephenson, B. C. Olsen and D. Mitlin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 871–878 RSC .
F. L. Lai, Y. E. Miao, L. Z. Zuo, H. Y. Lu, Y. P. Huang and T. X. Liu, Small, 2016, 12, 3235–3244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shu, J. Maruyama, S. Iwasaki, S. Maruyama, Y. H. Shen and H. Uyama, J. Power Sources, 2017, 364, 374–382 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Qiu, N. N. Guo, A. Gao, L. Zheng, W. J. Xu, M. Li, F. Wang and R. Yang, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 294, 398–405 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, Z. Zhang, J. D. Luo, X. T. Qi, J. Yu, J. X. Cai and Z. Y. Yang, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 283–290 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. X. Nan, Y. Shi, Z. Q. Xiang, S. Wang, J. W. Yang and B. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 301, 107–116 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Mohammed, C. Chen and Z. Zhu, J. Power Sources, 2019, 417, 1–13 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, Y. J. Liu, H. B. Chen, M. Yang and H. M. Li, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 3101–3110 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Ning, F. Li, Y. Zhou, Y. E. Miao, C. Wei and T. X. Liu, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 328, 599–608 CrossRef CAS .
D. Liu, S. Yu, Y. L. Shen, H. Chen, Z. H. Shen, S. Y. Zhao, S. Y. Fu, Y. M. Yu and B. F. Bao, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2015, 54, 12570–12579 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hu, W. Xiong, W. Wang, S. L. Qin, H. Y. Cheng, Y. Zeng, B. Wang and Z. H. Zhu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2016, 4, 1201–1211 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, X. Yang, Y. Zhang, X. J. Loh, X. D. Hu, G. Chen, F. Du and Q. Y. Yan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 1548–1555 RSC .
Y. Q. Wei, Y. L. Yan, Y. M. Zou, M. M. Shi, Q. J. Deng, N. N. Zhao, S. Y. Chen, J. M. Lin, R. Yang and Y. H. Xua, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2019, 358, 560–566 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhuo, Y. J. Hu, Z. H. Chen and L. X. Zhong, Carbohydr. Polym., 2019, 215, 322–329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yuan, J. Zhou, M. I. Rafiq, S. M. Dai, J. Tang and W. H. Tang, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 295, 82–91 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Different types of biomass materials used in the energy field (ref. 16) (Copyright 2017 Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 2  Ragone plots for various electrochemical energy storage systems (ref. 21) (Copyright 2008, Macmillan).	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematics of charge storage in supercapacitors. (A) Ion adsorption at the electrode surface (EDLC). (B) Charge transfer near the surface of the electrode (pseudo-capacitance) (ref. 22) (Copyright 2008, Macmillan).	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic diagram showing the main topics from the cellulose resources, nanocellulose fabrication, structural and functional design to the energy storage applications (ref. 55) (Copyright 2018 Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 5  CNC-derived hybrid materials for supercapacitors. (a) Schematic illustration of the carbon nanofiber preparation, (b) formation mechanism of the inter-bonded carbon nanofibers, and (c–h) SEM images of the carbon nanofibers: (c) CNFs-E, (d) CNFs-90/10, (e) CNFs-70/30, (f) CNFs-50/50, (g) CNFs-30/70, and (h) CNFs-10/90. (a–h) are reproduced with permission from ref. 76 (Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic illustration of the preparation of highly porous graphitic carbon from natural cotton (ref. 51) (Copyright 2015 Elsevier).	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic of the synthesis procedure for HCMTs using kapok fibre as the precursor (ref. 64) (Copyright 2017 Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 8  SEM images of (a) KF, (b) WSKF, and (c) HCMT-650; (d) the high-magnification SEM image of HCMT-650; (e) the low-magnification TEM image of HCMT-650; and (f) the HRTEM image of HCMT-650 (ref. 64) (Copyright 2017 Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of CKF/NiO composites (ref. 82) (Copyright 2016 Elsevier).	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Photographs of the bacterial cellulose (BC) pellicle. (b) SEM image of the pyrolyzed BC (p-BC). (c) SEM image of the activated p-BC (A-p-BC). (d) Photograph of the typical free-standing flexible nitrogen-doped A-p-BC (A-p-BC-N-25) being bent (3 cm × 1.3 cm). (e) SEM image of the A-p-BC-N-25. (f) TEM image of the A-p-BC-N-25 (inset: magnified image) (ref. 84) (Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 11  Preparation scheme of the HDC@NiCo2O4@polypyrrole composites (ref. 86) (Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic illustration depicting the preparation and structure of the PNG paper electrodes (ref. 87) (Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 13  Summary of the synthesis and energy-related applications of PCN materials (ref. 98) (Copyright 2019 Elsevier).	 

 	Fig. 14  Schematic illustration of the transformation of reeds into the interconnected porous carbon nanosheets (ref. 103) (Copyright 2017 Elsevier).	 

 	Fig. 15  Illustration of the formation of carbon sheets with hierarchical pore structures with the molten salt sealing strategy (ref. 107) (Copyright 2017 Elsevier).	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Schematic illustration of the sustainable synthesis and assembly of B/N-CSs; (b) optical image of the doped carbon nanosheets (ref. 105) (Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH).	 

 	Fig. 17  3D carbon-based nanostructures from different forms of carbon and their combination with pseudo-active materials.	 

 	Fig. 18  Schematic diagram for the preparation of corn husk-derived porous carbon (ref. 13) (Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 19  Schematic illustration of the production processes for the 3-D hierarchical porous carbons (ref. 124) (Copyright 2018 Elsevier).	 

Ant	—	2650	352	0.1 A g−1/(6 M KOH)	
124

Sodium lignosulfonate	KOH	1867.4	370	0.5 A g−1/(6 M KOH)	
125

Sugarcane bagasse	KOH	1939.9	298	1 A g−1/(1 M H2SO4)	
126

Corn straw	KOH	1660	327	0.2 A g−1/(6 M KOH)	
127

Garlic skin	KOH	2818	427	0.5 A g−1/(6 M KOH)	
128

Sunflower seed shells	KOH	2509	311	0.25 A g−1/(30% KOH)	
129


 	Fig. 20  (a) SEM image of the raw wood carbon. (b–e) SEM images of the wood carbon/MnO2 (MnO2@WC) composite: (b) top view; (c) magnified image of (a); (d) channels, and the inset in (d) shows the nanosheets grown in situ inside the channel; and (e) top and cross-sectional views, and the inset in (e) shows the thickness of the MnO2@WC composite. (f) Elemental mapping images of C, Mn, and O inside the channel. (g) TEM image and (h) HR-TEM image of the MnO2@WC composite, and the inset in (h) shows the SAED pattern of the MnO2@WC composite. (i–k) Electrochemical performance of the MnO2@WC cathode: (i) CV curves at various scan rates, (j) charge–discharge profiles at different current densities and (k) rate performances. The specific capacitances are calculated based on the total mass of the wood carbon/MnO2 composite (∼75 mg cm−2) (ref. 132) (Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 21  Schematic of the fabrication of highly porous bagasse-derived carbon aerogels with hierarchical pore structures (ref. 137) (Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
