Towards energy efficient separations with metal organic frameworks  - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8CC00331A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8CC00331A
(Feature Article)
Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 2825-2837Towards energy efficient separations with metal organic frameworks

        
          
            Muhammad Munir 
            Sadiq
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Kiyonori 
            Suzuki
          
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Matthew R. 
            Hill
          
          
        
      *ab
aDepartment of Chemical Engineering, Monash University, Clayton, VIC 3168, Australia
bCSIRO Division of Material Science and Engineering, Private Bag 33, Clayton South MDC, VIC 3169, Australia. E-mail: Matthew.Hill@csiro.au
cDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, Monash University, Clayton, VIC 3168, Australia
Received 
      15th January 2018
    , Accepted 8th February 2018First published on 8th February 2018AbstractThe huge energy requirement for industrial separations of chemical mixtures has necessitated the need for the development of energy efficient and alternative separation techniques in order to mitigate the negative environmental impacts associated with greenhouse gas emissions from fossil fuel combustions for energy generation. A promising approach involves the use of magnetic framework composites (MFCs) for gas capture and release via localised magnetic induction heating in a process known as magnetic induction swing adsorption (MISA). This feature article presents an overview of the mechanism of induction heating of magnetic nanoparticles, incorporation of the nanoparticles into metal organic frameworks to form MFCs and the potential of deploying MFCs for the mitigation of greenhouse gas emissions using the MISA process. We also present an overview of the potential energy savings as a result of the efficiency of magnetic induction heating and we give a perspective on the future directions in material and process development that could lead to widespread deployment of the MISA process for industrial separation operations.
Muhammad Munir Sadiq
Muhammad Munir Sadiq received his BEng. (2006) and MEng. (2011) in Chemical Engineering from Abubakar Tafawa Balewa University Bauchi, Nigeria and Universiti Teknologi Malaysia, respectively. He recently completed his PhD in Materials Science and Engineering at Monash University, Australia under the supervision of Prof. Kiyonori Suzuki and A/Prof. Matthew Hill. His research interests include metal organic frameworks, magnetic nanoparticles, magnetic framework composites, storage and triggered release of gases from porous materials, post combustion carbon capture and process integration.
Kiyonori Suzuki
Kiyonori Suzuki is professor of Materials Science and Engineering at Monash University in Australia. He received his PhD degree in 1997 from the University of New South Wales (UNSW). After a QEII fellowship in the School of Physics, UNSW, he joined the Faculty of Engineering at Monash University. His research areas include soft and hard magnetic properties of nanostructured materials and chemically-induced ferromagnetism in metal nanoparticles and semiconductors.
Matthew R. Hill
Matthew Hill graduated from a PhD in Chemistry from the University of New South Wales (Sydney, Australia) in 2006. He undertook a postdoc at the CSIRO following this, along with secondments to the University of California, Berkeley, and the University of Colorado, Boulder. He then went on to establish a research group at CSIRO focussed on the use of porous materials for storage, separation and release. CSIRO's mission is to deliver impact for industry, and to enable this for porous materials, Matthew established flow chemistry capability for MOFs at CSIRO to allow access to materials at kilogram scale. In 2016, Matthew began a joint position between CSIRO and Monash University. Presently, Matthew leads several applied projects with industry partners, alongside supervising a group of postgraduate students. He is the Chief Technology Officer for the start-up company MOFWORX.
Introduction
Over 30% of the global energy consumption is as a result of operations within the chemical and petrochemical industries,1 with chemical separation processes accounting for up to half of the total consumption.2 The mining and combustion of fossil fuels to satisfy the huge global energy needs coupled with the resultant greenhouse gas emissions (GHG) has been identified as a major reason for the steady increase in atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) concentrations,3 with global warming and climate change identified as direct consequences.4,5 For example, the annual mean CO2 atmospheric concentration recorded in 2015 was 400.9 ppm,6 substantially higher than the level at the start of the industrial age, i.e. 280 ppm in 1750.7,8 Consequently, there are renewed calls for the development of clean and renewable fuel sources and reduction in global GHG emissions. To mitigate the effect of GHG emissions on the environment, capture from large stationary sources such as coal fired power plants, cement factories, petroleum refineries, iron and steel production, petrochemicals, coal mining operations and natural gas processing has been recommended. With these stationary sources having more than 7000 emission point sources each emitting over 0.1 million tonnes of CO2 per year (MtCO2 year−1),9,10 and by 2005 estimates of about 3603 million tonnes CO2 equivalent (MtCO2e)11 methane (CH4) emissions, capture technologies could serve as potential short to medium term solutions before renewable energy technologies mature and gain widespread deployment. Thus significant research effort has been directed towards developing materials and processes to capture and reuse or store these gases from large stationary sources. However, major ongoing challenges are the limitation in deploying new processes/materials for GHG capture, which includes the thermal insulating nature of adsorbents12,13 proposed for gas capture and the ability to harness light at scale for regenerating porous adsorbents as proposed by Lyndon et al.14,15 In addition the huge energy requirement involved in deploying materials or processes for GHG capture at scale has been a bottleneck to mitigating the emissions from large stationary sources like power plants.5,15–17
The huge energy requirement is usually due to the need to separate a range of gases present in the emissions from these stationary sources.
With CO2 having the largest fraction of gases emitted from stacks of large stationary sources, this article will initially highlight the current state of the art technologies proposed for separation, capture and storage of CO2 from large stationary sources. Three main technology approaches proposed for CO2 capture will be discussed, namely: post-combustion capture, pre-combustion capture and oxy-fuel combustion, which differ by the stage at which CO2 is removed. We will also discuss separation techniques that have been developed and established for gas separation in a wide range of industrial applications. An overview of these techniques along with their advantages and barriers mitigating their large scale commercial deployment for carbon capture and storage (CCS) will also be presented.
This feature article highlights our recent work on the use of ultra-porous nano adsorbent materials known as metal organic frameworks (MOFs) embedded with magnetic nano particles (MNPs) for the capture and energy efficient triggered release of CO2via magnetic induction heating in a process called magnetic induction swing adsorption (MISA). The combination of the high gas volumetric uptake of MOFs with the rapid and localised heating capability afforded by the MNPs via hysteresis loss could be a platform to effectively evaluate the potentials of MOF adsorbents towards minimising the energy penalty associated with CCS.17,18 We hope to use this article to elicit interest and chart a new direction on how new systems can be developed from existing established technologies, in this case magnetic induction heating for energy efficient gas separation applications, and to propose new research directions for further development and commercial deployment.
Carbon capture and storage
A strategy that has been proposed for minimising anthropogenic CO2 emissions is carbon capture and storage (CCS) from large industrial point sources.19–21 The process involves separating CO2 from fossil fuel energy generators before transporting it to locations where it can be reused or stored in geological formations that allow isolation from the atmosphere.22 Globally, the implementation of CCS has been rather slow largely due to economic considerations.23 The CO2 capture and separation process is estimated to account for over 70% of the overall cost of CCS,8 with power plants fitted with CCS requiring between 50 and 80% more fuel to cover the energy used to generate the same amount of electricity.18 For widespread deployment of CCS, processes and technologies that significantly reduce the cost of the capture process are to be developed if CCS is to be economically viable for the energy sector.24 Post-combustion capture, pre-combustion capture and oxyfuel combustion are three key technological approaches that have been proposed for CO2 capture from large stationary sources. The processes differ by virtue of the operating principle involved in the capture process. In post combustion capture processes, CO2 is separated from the combustion products of fossil fuels. Pre-combustion capture involves the removal of CO2 from a process stream prior to the combustion of the fuel while the Oxyfuel combustion capture process involves capturing CO2 from flue gas by modifying the combustion process to obtain a high concentration of CO2 in the resulting flue gas. The need to remove trace amounts of impurities,25 prohibitive costs and decreased process efficiency are some of the factors mitigating against the widespread deployment of these technologies.24
Separation techniques
A number of unit operations and techniques have been developed and deployed for gas separation operations involving different gas mixtures. Some of these techniques include absorption, membrane separation, cryogenic separation and adsorption. The current research focussed on improving the economic viability of CCS is based on optimising the process conditions, developing new materials and/or improving the energy efficiency of systems that utilise one or more of these techniques to achieve CO2 separation. The principles, advantages and bottlenecks preventing the widespread deployment of these techniques for CCS are discussed next.
Absorption
The current state of the art in carbon capture via absorption involves the use of aqueous amine solutions with low volatility to absorb CO2 from flue gas at near ambient temperatures. Pure CO2 is then recovered by stripping the amine with water vapour at 100 °C–120 °C.26 There are three primary classes of amines commonly used for CO2 capture, namely: primary amines (e.g. monoethanol amine – MEA); secondary amines (e.g. diethanol amine – DEA); and tertiary amines (e.g. methyl diethanol amine – MDEA). The maximum loading capacity for CO2 in amines depends on the type of amine used. Primary amines react with CO2 in a 2:1 ratio, while secondary and tertiary amines react in a 1:1 ratio with CO2.27 The energy required to remove the CO2 absorbed in amines is said to increase in the order of 3° < 2° < 1° amines, although other factors such as amine concentration play a significant role in determining the overall regeneration energy for an actual capture system.27
Additionally, high amounts of energy28–30 needed to liberate the absorbed CO2 coupled with the corrosive31 and volatile amine vapour produced, which poses serious environmental concerns,32 are major disadvantages mitigating the use of amines in post combustion CCS.
Membrane separation
Membrane based separations are processes designed to effect the separation of particular constituents in a fluid through the use of a selective barrier. The separation is achieved by permeating one or more constituents of a stream through the barrier (membrane) while rejecting the permeation of one or more other components of the stream. Different types of membranes have been deployed for gas separation including polymeric membranes, porous inorganic membranes, ceramic membranes, palladium membranes, micro-porous silica membranes, immobilised liquid membranes, and zeolite membranes.33–37 For membranes to be relevant for CO2 capture, they need to exhibit high permeability and selectivity, and be mechanically strong, resistant to chemicals, and ultimately, cost effective.38
Membrane based separation processes are seen as viable alternatives to the use of solvents in CO2 capture for both pre-combustion and post combustion operations.39,40 Generally, membrane based separation systems do not require regeneration, are waste free and can be developed into simple modular units. However, the additional energy required to create a pressure difference across the membrane, high selectivity requirements, membrane fouling and aging, as well as poor economies of scale are factors currently limiting their widespread application.41–43
Cryogenic separation
Cryogenic separation is used to separate gas mixtures by fractional condensation and distillation at very low temperatures.41 Cryogenic separation has been commercially used to produce high purity liquid CO2 and has also been used for the separation of oxygen from air.44 Cryogenic separation has also been proposed for use in pre-combustion CO2 capture where the concentration of CO2 in the gas stream is very high.45–47 The advantage of this process in carbon capture is its impressive performance with gas mixtures that have a high concentration of CO2.48,49 For low concentration CO2 streams, the high amount of energy needed for refrigeration coupled with the need to remove water present in the stream prior to cooling to avoid blockage is a major disadvantage.38 Additionally, the high capital investment needed for cryogenic separation has made the technology largely unattractive for post combustion CCS limiting its potential application for CCS to only pre-combustion carbon capture systems.
Adsorption
Adsorption is a process widely used in the chemical and process industries for purification and or separation of a substance from a fluid phase (gas or liquid). The process has been shown to be quite effective in the separation of dilute mixtures which makes it attractive for post combustion CO2 capture.50 The mechanism of interaction between the CO2 molecules and the adsorbent is governed either through attraction by weak intermolecular forces (physisorption) or through strong covalent bonding between the molecules and the adsorbent (chemisorption).51
The CO2 capture process is achieved by manipulating the thermodynamic properties of the adsorbent to change the temperature or partial pressure of the adsorbate to induce adsorption or desorption. Thus CO2 can be effectively separated from post combustion flue gas as long as the adsorbent material chosen has a strong affinity for CO2 with the ability to adsorb it from streams with low CO2 concentration. Temperature swing adsorption (TSA) and pressure swing adsorption (PSA) are two common processes deployed for the regeneration of adsorbents.
Adsorbent materials used in adsorption processes are generally classified as either high or low temperature materials. The high temperature adsorbents include alkali or alkaline-earth oxides, hydrotalcites, alkali silicates, double salts and zirconates while low temperature adsorbents include traditional porous materials such as zeolites, carbon nanotubes, activated carbon, graphene, molecular sieves and recent classes of materials such as MOFs, covalent organic frameworks (COFs), and porous polymer networks (PPNs).52–59 Generally, the low temperature adsorbents can be classified as physisorbents, while the high temperature adsorbents are mainly chemisorbents.60 The properties of recently reported adsorbent materials such as MOFs, COFs and PPNs have shown promising performance for their application in CO2 capture, however, there still exists a lack of adequate technical knowledge on the performance of these materials in large scale operations.60,61 The insulating nature of the adsorbents, which impacts on heat transfer during regeneration operations, cycle design, configuration and optimisation of the cyclic processes relative to the properties of these adsorbent materials must also be fully understood for them to be deployed in CCS at a large scale.24,53
Metal organic frameworks (MOFs)
Metal organic frameworks (MOFs) are a class of highly tuneable hybrid materials synthesised by joining metal containing units also known as secondary building units (SBUs) with organic linkers using strong bonds to create open crystalline frameworks with permanent porosity.62–65 MOFs are primarily synthesised by solution-based methods under different conditions. In the simplest approach, MOF crystals grow automatically at elevated temperatures from a solution containing a metal salt and an organic ligand.63–67 The degree to which the SBUs and organic linkers can be varied has led to the preparation and study of thousands of MOFs over the years. The flexibility of design and relatively simple synthesis of MOFs have opened up a wide spectrum of potential applications ranging from gas storage, to separation, drug delivery, chemical sensors and optical devices.68–74 MOFs typically have a low density (0.2–1 g cm−3), a very high surface area (500–4500 m2 g−1), a high porosity, and reasonable thermal and mechanical stability.75 These properties coupled with their tuneable pore surfaces76 make MOFs very promising materials for CO2 capture relative to the more conventional adsorbents such as activated carbons and zeolites.
Release of guest molecules from MOFs
The unprecedented capacity of MOFs to store small molecules does not necessarily lead to a high working capacity (the amount of adsorbed molecules that can be recovered during regeneration). Thus, a number of research efforts have been directed at developing release mechanisms from MOFs that will result in high working capacities.
For post combustion CCS processes, heating and vacuum are two energy intensive triggers that are currently used for releasing guest molecules from adsorbents,5,77 thus, there is a strong motivation to develop new triggers that are smart and energy efficient. An approach that utilises sunlight to trigger the release of CO2 from MOFs was reported by Lyndon et al.15 They demonstrated the approach by incorporating light responsive organic groups within the pore structure of a Zn based MOF, Zn(AzDC)(4,4′-BPE)0.5 (Fig. 1). The results from their work show a remarkable release of up to 64% of CO2 adsorbed on exposure to UV light using broadband radiation similar to concentrated solar sources and up to 42% desorption capacity under static conditions. The same authors also demonstrated the use of visible light responsive methyl red guest molecules coated on the surface of rigid and flexible MOFs which then induce the capture and release of CO2 without the need for UV irradiation.14 Similarly, a recent report by Li et al.78 demonstrated the incorporation of noble metals into MOFs. The ability of the incorporated noble metals to efficiently adsorb incident photons resulting in thermal energy generation was used to achieve up to 90.5% release of adsorbed CO2 in a light induction swing adsorption process (LISA). However, the opaque nature of MOFs which will limit the light penetration depth might pose significant design challenges for large scale systems.
 Fig. 1  Dynamic photo-switching in the light-responsive MOF Zn-(AzDC)(4,4′-BPE)0.5 leads to instantly reversible CO2 uptake. Figure and caption adapted with permission from Lyndon et al.15 Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Heinke et al.79 in their work developed a surface mounted metal organic framework (SURMOF) based hybrid system where a remote control release system that uses light as the trigger is achieved by growing the MOF epitaxially on a solid substrate using liquid phase epitaxy. The bottom passive layer grown on the gold substrate serves as a reservoir containing the molecules to be released and the active layer, a SURMOF, contains a photo switchable azobenzene group that can be switched from the trans to the cis state by UV light and vice versa by visible light thereby acting as a valve that can be opened and closed.
A report by Li Tan et al.80 showed the release of therapeutic agents from a mechanised nano metal organic framework (nanoMOF). They constructed the mechanised nanoMOF by post synthetically modifying the MOF with a pillarene-based supramolecular switch that serves as a gatekeeper which then responds to changes in pH and/or competitive binding to trigger the controlled release of stored molecules. With the large pore sizes of the MOF available for drug encapsulation, low cytotoxicity, biodegradability and biocompatibility, the authors highlighted the potential of the material for cell imaging.
In an effort to develop smart and efficient systems with a wide spectrum of applications, stimuli responsive nanocomposite systems fabricated from MOFs and magnetic nanoparticles have been reported.81,82
The combination of these two unique and interesting materials allows the exploitation of the huge surface areas of the MOFs and the magnetic response of the nanoparticles to be combined and deployed in several applications including catalysis, positioning and sensing, pollution control and sequestration.82
The use of these nanocomposites in drug delivery was demonstrated by Lohe et al.83 They functionalised a copper based MOF, Cu3(btc)2 (HKUST-1) with magnetic particles and then loaded the magnetic MOF with ibuprofen via a wet infiltration technique. The loaded M-HKUST-1 was then exposed to an external magnetic field which resulted in generation of heat by the magnetic particles and subsequent release of the drug from the sample was studied at different temperatures.
Similarly, Ricco et al.84 reported the use of magnetic nanocomposites for the sequestration of heavy metals from different solvent systems. The nanocomposite was synthesised from an aluminium MOF (MIL-53) and iron oxide magnetic nanoparticles. The MOF component of the nanocomposite allowed for the efficient uptake of lead(II) ions from water while the magnetic nanoparticles ensured the composite was collected from the solution with a magnet. Upon the application of an alternating current (AC) magnetic field to the composite in a fresh solution the triggered release of Pb(II) was observed highlighting the potential of these nanocomposites in environmental remediation.84
Zhao and co-workers also reported the use of a Cu3(BTC)2/Fe3O4 nanocomposite system for the removal of methylene blue from aqueous solution.85 The large surface area and mesoporous channels of the MOF component resulted in excellent uptake capacity of methylene blue. However, despite the ease of separating the composite from solution, regeneration and reuse of the composite involved the use of organic solvents to leach out the adsorbed dye.
In an attempt to develop smart and stimuli responsive MOF adsorbent materials, coordination chemistry and the concepts of molecular magnetism have been used to design and develop magnetic MOFs86 where the magnetic moment resides in the constituent atoms within the MOFs. A number of MOFs with long range magnetic ordering synthesised from small organic ligands have been reported.87–91 An example is the Cu(F-pymo)2(H2O)1.25 MOF which exhibits high selectivity for H2 over N2.88 The MOF exhibits antiferromagnetic ordering at 24 K, however the introduction of CO2 molecules into its pores results in a weak ferromagnetic ordering that occurs from 22 K to 29 K. The ability to design and develop these intrinsic magnetic MOFs with stimuli responsive behaviour has attracted a huge amount of interest as a result of their multifunctional properties92 and potential use across a wide range of applications.86 However, the spontaneous magnetization at room temperature in the intrinsic magnetic MOFs is small and thus, their response to an external magnetic field is limited. Unlike the intrinsic magnetic MOFs, both the spontaneous magnetization and Curie temperature can be high in our magnetic framework composites because the bulk properties of the magnetic component are unaltered. Consequently, the response to an external magnetic field in the magnetic framework composites is substantial as compared with that for the intrinsic magnetic MOFs.
One of the significant interactions between magnetic particles and an external field is the heating effect due to a range of loss mechanisms which will be discussed in the next section. This heating effect, i.e. magnetic induction heating, has advantages over other more conventional heating methods. Induction heating is more efficient as compared with resistive heating or microwave heating.93 It can selectively and remotely heat magnetic particles. For post combustion carbon capture and natural gas processing operations, the potential of utilising this heating effect could result in significant energy and cost savings.
Recent developments and progress made in the fabrication and use of stimuli responsive MOFs has been discussed by Nagarkar et al.94 and Kanj et al.95 Nagarkar and co-workers highlighted the advances in stimuli responsive MOFs for a range of applications including gas storage and separation, sensing, catalysis, and biomedical applications.94 Kanj and co-workers discussed the use of organic linkers with azobenzene side groups in MOFs, which induces a remote control functionality in the MOF through a photo switching effect. This added functionality could then be used in switching the adsorption and diffusion behaviour of the MOF and also control of the catalytic activity of the MOF through the azobenzene moiety.95 Similarly, Coudert96 in his work reviewed the mechanisms and advances in a number of materials with stimuli responsive behaviour. He discussed these materials relative to their response to different stimuli including light, temperature, pressure, pH and guest molecules.96
Despite the huge surface areas and pore sizes available for gas uptake in MOFs, existing and proposed technologies aimed at regenerating and reusing these materials are not yet feasible at a meaningful scale. This is largely due to the strong binding of the stored molecules and the thermally insulating nature of the MOFs that could imply a huge requirement to undo the adsorption process (regeneration energy). Consequently, the high gas adsorption capacity of MOFs does not necessarily lead to a high working capacity (the amount of adsorbed molecules that can be recovered during regeneration). To overcome this challenge, over the last few years, our group has focused on combining the heat generation capabilities of magnetic nano- or micro particles with the gas uptake capacities of MOFs to develop composites know as magnetic framework composites (MFCs) and their potential use in energy efficient gas capture and release systems. The next section of this review will look at magnetic nanoparticles and their mechanism of heat generation, which could be applied to develop MOF composites that will potentially allow for an energy efficient regeneration process of MOF adsorbents.
Magnetic framework composites (MFCs)
The high surface area and pore sizes of pure MOFs have led to significant developments in their applications for gas storage, separation or catalysis in a number of chemical processes. A number of studies that focus on the development of frameworks with stimuli responsive properties have been reported.86,96–98 An approach that explores the combination of MOFs and a range of nano and micro particles with different functional properties is also on the rise.82 Quantum dots,99 silica nanospheres,100,101 graphene,102,103 metallic nanoparticles104,105 and nanorods106 are examples of these functional materials. Combinations of magnetic nanoparticles and MOFs are promising composite materials for a range of potential applications in different areas of science and research. MFC applications that have been demonstrated so far include catalysis, sensing, selective sequestration and controlled drug release.107,108 In CCS, the ability to synthesise MFCs with magnetic nanoparticles that heat up in response to an external magnetic field could revolutionise the way MOFs are deployed in separation operations.
Four main approaches (Fig. 2) have been reported for the synthesis of MFCs namely: (1) embedding: the magnetic particles are added into the MOF mother solution which results in an MFC with magnetic particles embedded in the polycrystalline MOF;82 (2) layer by layer: the magnetic particles are decorated with suitable surface functional groups that will allow the growth of the MOF on the particle forming a core shell like structure;109 (3) encapsulation: a carrier medium that serves as a buffer interface between the magnetic particle and porous framework is introduced.82 The new interface then induces the growth of the MOF around the carrier and a MFC can be obtained; (4) mixing: here the magnetic particles and MOF crystals are synthesised separately before being mixed under sonication to form a coarse aggregate.110
 Fig. 2  Different approaches for the design of magnetic framework composites. (a) Embedding; (b) layer-by-layer; (c) encapsulation; and (d) mixing. Figure and caption reproduced from Ricco et al.82 by permission of the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The concept of magnetic induction heating with nanoscale magnetic materials111 has shown promising results in magnetic hyperthermia112,113 and targeted drug delivery.114–116 An attractive feature of this mode of heating is high efficiency of the heating process and the ability to remotely induce the heating process.
For CCS, the remote and localised heating of the MNPs embedded in MFCs could potentially lead to quickly overcoming the strong heat of adsorption associated with MOFs that have demonstrated excellent CO2 uptake capability. The high-energy efficiency of magnetic induction has been demonstrated through induction cooking, much better than microwaves, because the magnetic fields harness a penetrating radiation that can readily be used at scale.117,118 Adapting this technology with MOFs for triggered release not only for CCS processes but also other energy intensive industrial processes could revolutionise the gas separation operations by providing a viable and cost effective alternative to established temperature swing adsorption (TSA) and pressure swing adsorption (PSA) systems.
Magnetic induction heating
Over the last two decades, the use of high frequency magnetic induction heating (MIH) has been attracting significant interest for a number of applications. MIH has been deployed in the selective and fast heating of polymers in the plastic industry,119 stainless steel production processes120–122 and household cooking appliances,123 with reported heating efficiency values higher than 90%, which represents a significant improvement on conventional heating techniques.93 When compared to conventional heating techniques such as resistance heating, flame heating, furnace or oven heating, the remote, rapid and localised heating of conductive materials and the controlled heating that can be achieved with MIH coupled with the efficiency and energy cost savings is currently endearing the technique as the preferred heating technology over a wide range of applications.93
The process involved in MIH is based on the heat generated from a material as a result of its response to an applied AC magnetic field. The material could be in its bulk form or in a reduced size (micro or nano size).124 The heat generation mechanism in bulk, micro or nano magnetic materials is controlled by eddy current losses,124 hysteresis loss125,126 or by the Néel and Brownian relaxation mechanisms.127 The conductive material is usually immersed in an alternating magnetic field which then induces heating through one of the mechanisms at frequencies ranging from line frequency to a few MHz (Fig. 3).93
 Fig. 3  Typical arrangement of an induction heating system in a longitudinal flux configuration: (a) general view and (b) top view. Reprinted with permission from Lucia et al.93 Copyright © 2014, IEEE. 
Magnetic materials in the micro and nano size regime have been deployed in a wide range of applications, including, hyperthermia,128–130 catalysis,131 data storage,132 magnetic resonance imaging,133–135 and super capacitors.136–138 Magnetic micro and nano materials have been reported to generate a significant amount of heat as a result of their response to an applied external magnetic field. Ferro/ferri-magnetic materials and superparamagnetic materials are classes of micro/nano magnetic materials that have been reported with heat generation capabilities upon exposure to an alternating magnetic field.
• Ferromagnetic materials are materials that exhibit a long-range magnetic order and spontaneous magnetisation. Magnetic moments are aligned parallel by the positive exchange interaction and thus, ferromagnetic materials exhibit spontaneous magnetization. Ferromagnetic materials have a magnetic ordering temperature known as the Curie temperature. Above the Curie temperature, the thermal energy overcomes the exchange energy and the spontaneous magnetisation of ferromagnetic materials disappears and the material becomes paramagnetic. The magnetization processes in ferromagnetic materials undergo hysteresis and result in heat generation when placed in an AC magnetic field.139 This will be discussed in detail in the next section.
• Ferrimagnetic materials also show spontaneous magnetisation. Unlike ferromagnetic materials, the exchange interaction in ferrimagnetic materials is negative and thus, the two neighbouring atoms are coupled antiparallel. Hence, the net magnetic moment is given by the difference in the magnetic moment between these two neighbouring atoms. Similar to ferromagnetism, ferrimagnetic materials exhibit hysteresis behaviours and heat generation under a dynamic magnetic field. They also undergo magnetic transition at the Curie temperature. Examples of ferrimagnetic materials include oxides of iron and ferrites.140
• Superparamagnetic materials. In ferro- or ferri-magnetic materials with particle sizes below a certain threshold value, typically in the nanometre regime, the absolute magnetic anisotropy energy becomes small due to the small volume of the particle. In such a particle thermal fluctuations may overcome the magnetic anisotropy energy, causing a rapid flipping of the magnetisation direction away from its magnetic easy direction. Materials that exhibit this thermal activation process are called superparamagnetic materials. Superparamagnetic materials are thus polarized when an external field is applied, however, they become depolarized as soon as the field is removed. The lack of remanent magnetisation upon the removal of the field is an important property that makes superparamagnetic materials suitable for bio applications.141
Mechanism of heat generation in magnetic materials
As was highlighted earlier, eddy current losses,124 hysteresis loss,125,126 and Néel and Brownian relaxation mechanisms127 are the major mechanisms responsible for heat generation in magnetic materials placed in an AC magnetic field. The size and magnetic properties of magnetic particles play a significant role in the magnitude of heat generation by these materials. In multi domain ferri- and ferro-magnetic materials heat generation is largely due to hysteresis loss.125,126 Several magnetic domains are usually found in large particles.127,142 When ferri- or ferro-magnetic materials are exposed to an external magnetic field, the domains whose magnetisation directions are aligned with the direction of the external magnetic field will grow larger while those in the opposite direction will become smaller.143,144 This behaviour is termed “domain wall displacement”. If the external field is high enough, all the domains can be aligned to the magnetic field direction and the material becomes a single domain particle with unidirectional magnetic moment (Fig. 4). This behaviour is irreversible because the domain walls do not return to their initial position when the applied external field is removed. Consequently, the material shows a remanent magnetization. In order to depolarize the remanet magnetization, a magnetic field in the reverse direction needs to be applied.143,144 This irreversible behaviour is referred to as hysteresis and is the major factor that contributes to heat generation in ferro- and ferri-magnetic materials.128 The heat generation in superparamagnetic materials is governed by two mechanisms, i.e. the Néel and Brown relaxations. Fig. 5(a) and (b) diagrammatically describe the Néel and Brown relaxations of a superparamagnetic particle. In the Néel relaxation mechanism, the direction of the spontaneous magnetization, which is originally aligned with the crystal easy axis, rotates away due to the thermal energy. In the Brownian relaxation, the magnetization direction remains in the vicinity of the easy axis but, the entire particle rotates. In both the mechanisms the magnetization direction of each particle fluctuates constantly with characteristic relaxation times (τrelax) which are temperature dependent.145 When the angular frequency of the applied alternating magnetic field becomes comparable to the inverse of τrelax, the heat loss of the superparamagnetic particle is maximized. However, the heat generation due to this mechanism is usually smaller than that for the hysteresis loss in ferro- or ferri-magnetic materials.146
 Fig. 4  Multi-domain material exposed to an external magnetic field. 
 Fig. 5  Relaxation mechanisms: (a) Néel relaxation and (b) Brownian relaxation. 
Hysteresis
As described in the previous section, the responses of magnetic materials to an applied magnetic field are different depending on the class of magnetic material. Fig. 6 shows schematically the relationship between the magnetic polarisation (M) of a ferromagnetic material and the statically applied magnetic field (H). M increases with increasing applied magnetic field and then becomes saturated at H = Hk, the anisotropy field. The reverse magnetic field to depolarise the magnetisation from Ms to zero is defined by the coercivity (Hc), which is highly dependent on the grain size in the nanoscale regime (because the exchange correlation length of ferromagnets is typically 10–50 nm).
 Fig. 6  Magnetization hysteresis curve and energy loss. μ0 = permeability of free space. 
The energy loss associated with the static magnetic polarisation process in a ferro- or ferri-magnetic material (ΔE) is given by the area inside its μoM–H loop. The energy loss per unit time (P) under an alternating magnetic field is given by the area inside the loop (ΔE) multiplied by the frequency (f);147 this corresponds to the volume heating power which is proportional to specific absorption rate (SAR) in W g−1.
There are two processes that contribute to the hysteretic behaviour observed in Fig. 6 and thus, the hysteresis losses; the first is the displacement of domain walls. The wall displacement is pinned by the fluctuations of the wall energy. The magnetic potential energy for magnetization rotation is the second mechanism of the hysteresis. Both the wall energy and the potential energy for magnetization rotation are closely related to the magnetic anisotropy energy and thus, the hysteresis losses tend to be larger when the magnetic anisotropy is large.
Since the domain wall has a higher magnetic free energy as compared with that in the domain, the formation of multi-domain structures costs energy. However, the total free energy can be lowered by multi-domain structures because the surface poles due to a single-domain structure result in a higher magnetostatic energy. Still, there is an increase in the total free energy associated with the multi-domain formation process when the size of a ferromagnetic material is reduced below a critical value. In such a case the multi-domain structure will no longer be energetically favourable and the whole material then becomes a single domain.148
Specific absorption rate (SAR)
SAR is an important parameter that allows the estimation of the heating capability of magnetic materials when exposed to a magnetic field. It is defined as the mass power density transferred to the magnetic material. Its magnitude depends on the power loss mechanism in the magnetic material. In the case of MNPs, it is estimated by dispersing the particles in a liquid medium such as water and recording the temperature rise profile of the medium with time, from which SAR can be calculated using the following equation: (1)where Cs is the specific heat capacity of the suspension, dT/dt at t = 0 is the initial gradient of the heating curve, and ms and mm are the specific masses of the suspension and magnetic particles, respectively. The initial gradient of the heating curve can be calculated from the solution of the relevant heat conduction equation given as:149 (2)where To is the initial temperature of the suspension, ΔTmax(Tmax − To) is the saturation temperature increase, and τ is the time constant of heating, which corresponds to the time when the temperature reaches approximately 63% of Tmax. The initial gradient dT/dt is defined by the latter two parameters and is given by ΔTmax/τ.
Magnetic induction swing adsorption (MISA)
The application of magnetic framework composites, synthesised by incorporating magnetic nanoparticles into metal organic frameworks, is currently an interesting area of research which highlights the benefits of the synergistic properties that can be achieved from such composites.107 One of such areas of research is the use of these composites in the mitigation of GHG emissions to the atmosphere from industrial processes and power plants. The negative effects of GHG emissions in the environment and the huge energy requirement for regenerating the adsorbent component of MFCs make this approach quite interesting. Our group is currently exploring the potential of deploying these composites in post combustion CCS and other industrial gas separation processes.
Li et al.78 proposed a composite developed from the incorporation of noble metals into MOFs for post combustion CCS. The ability of the incorporated noble metals to efficiently adsorb incident photons resulting in thermal energy generation was used to achieve up to 88.2% release of adsorbed CO2 in a light induction swing adsorption process (LISA). However, the opaque nature of MOFs, which will limit the light penetration depth, might pose significant design challenges for large-scale systems.
In contrast, we have recently developed and reported the magnetic induction swing adsorption (MISA) process, which exploits the hysteresis loss in the magnetic component of the MFC to trigger the release of adsorbed guest molecules in the MOF. In comparison with the temperature swing adsorption (TSA) and electric swing adsorption (ESA) processes, where the adsorbent is regenerated by passing a hot stream of gas150 and passing of electric current through embedded conductive materials that heat up the adsorbent,28,151 the MISA process also relies on a thermal driving force to regenerate the MFC after it has been saturated with the target adsorbate. However, unlike the TSA and ESA processes, the heating process is rapid, localised and remote, thus, making the process easily adaptable to different systems. The first reported attempt at gas triggered release using the MISA process from porous adsorbents was from our group,152 where the highly porous Mg-MOF-74 was incorporated with Fe3O4 MNPs for CO2 capture and release.152 The gas uptake capacity of the MFC showed an increase with increase in the MNP content for a number of formulations but beyond a certain point the gas uptake capacity started to reduce. Relative to the bare Mg-MOF-74, the MFC showed an enhanced uptake of 8.2% and 9.8% at 0.15 bar and 1 bar, respectively. Dynamic triggered MISA experiments at 0.35 bar resulted in successful release of up to 67% adsorbed CO2 under magnetic field irradiation. The results from the MISA experiments established the basis for gas capture and triggered release with MFCs through the application of an AC magnetic field. However, in order to evaluate the feasibility of the process for commercial CCS operations, there is a need to establish the actual energy requirement needed to effect gas separation from the composites with the applied magnetic field.
The energy requirement for effective separation of the adsorbate from MFC adsorbents formed the basis of our next publication in this area. To achieve this, we synthesised and incorporated MgFe2O4 MNP with a zirconium based MOF, UiO-66.153
The MNP was chosen for its high SAR with the mechanical and thermal stability considered prior to selecting the MOF. In the publication, we provided a detailed analysis of the energy efficiency of an MFC in a MISA process.
We estimated the heat generation capability of the MFC by establishing the SAR of the MgFe2O4 nanoparticles embedded in the UiO-66 MOF. In order to compare the performance of the MFC with established materials such as zeolites and state of the art amine based systems, we estimated the regeneration energy of the MFC, which is the sum of the energy required to raise the adsorbent to the desorption temperature and the energy required to undo the adsorption process.

Fig. 7 presents the dynamic uptake and triggered release experiment results for UiO-66@MgFe2O4 MFC at different magnetic field strengths (μoH). The results from the MISA induced process resulted in a 93% release of adsorbed CO2 with the lowest MNP concentration, while higher concentrations resulted in 100% release of the adsorbate. The ability to access all of the adsorbed gas via the MISA process was due to the increase in concentration of the MNPs in the MFC with 100% desorption. Regeneration energy calculations (Fig. 8) for the MFC that resulted in 100% desorption were higher in comparison to that of the state of the art MEA absorption process for post combustion CCS. A regeneration energy of 5.16 MJ kgCO2−1 was recorded at a magnetic field strength (μoH) of 32 mT corresponding to a desorption temperature of 95 °C for the UiO-66@MgFe2O4 MFC.
 Fig. 7  Dynamic uptake and release of CO2 from UiO-66@MgFe2O4 MFC; the control showed no desorption effect when exposed to a magnetic field. Reprinted with permission from Sadiq et al.153 Copyright © 2016, American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 8  Regeneration energy as a function of temperature reported for UiO-66@MgFe2O4. Reprinted with permission from Sadiq et al.153 Copyright © 2016, American Chemical Society. 
We attributed this high regeneration energy to the overall low capacity of the parent MOF which had a maximum working capacity of 1.80 wt% at a desorption temperature of 130 °C and 0.82 wt% at 80 °C.153
The efficiency of the MISA process depends on the efficiency of generating a magnetic field from electricity to induce the heating process. Using MgFe2O4 MNPs, it was observed that the conversion efficiency increases linearly with increase in MNP concentration, with an efficiency of about 60% at 1 g concentration of MNPs which was in agreement with reported efficiencies for magnetic induction heating based processes.118
In a bid to improve the efficiency of the regeneration process, we developed a hybrid process that combines the MISA and LISA processes by fabricating a magnetic PCN-250 MOF denoted as mPCN. The mPCN was synthesised by incorporating Fe3O4 magnetic nanoparticles with a PCN-250 MOF.
The PCN MOF consists of a Fe2Co(μ3-O) (CH3COO)6 metal cluster and light-responsive 3,3′,5,5′-azobenzene tetra carboxylic acid (ABTC) organic linkers.154 The hydrophobic properties of the PCN MOF and its chemical resistance make it a suitable MOF for post combustion CCS.155 The combination of the MISA and LISA processes denoted as MaLISA resulted in an improvement in the amount of CO2 released from the composite at 1 bar relative to regeneration through the LISA process.78
The dual stimuli responsive approach enabled us to achieve up to 96.8% of adsorbed CO2 being released on demand when the mPCN MFC was deployed in the MaLISA process.

Fig. 9 shows a comparison of the reusability and CO2 desorption capacity of the mPCN MOF in the LISA, MISA and MaLISA processes.
 Fig. 9  Reusability of mPCN-H assessed by its CO2 desorption capacity at 1 bar through LISA, MISA and MaLISA (a); and (b) the normalised CO2 desorption capacity of mPCN-H at 1 bar shown in (a). Figure and caption reproduced from Li et al.154 by permission of the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
As discussed earlier, MFCs can be synthesised by dispersing the nanoparticles in the metal and ligand precursor solution of the desired MOF. Through a variety of solvothermal techniques,82 the metal and ligand precursors assemble into a crystalline porous structure around the nanoparticle at elevated temperatures.
For MFCs to gain widespread use industrially there is a need to develop a fast and scalable technique with good control of the MFC growth mechanism. In view of this, we developed a new synthetic route for the fabrication of MFCs based on MIH.
The process denoted as magnetic induction framework synthesis (MIFS) relies on the rapid and localised heating obtained from the magnetic nanoparticles to induce the MOF formation. With the surface of the nanoparticles serving as nucleation points for MOF growth, the localised heat ensured better size control, higher yield and faster reaction kinetics for the MFC synthesised with the MIFS process in comparison to conventional solvothermal processes. The versatility of the MIFS process was investigated by synthesising different types of MOFs with excellent results.

Fig. 10 presents an illustration of the MIFS process and the structures of MOFs that have been synthesised through the process. In comparison to the conventional solvothermal synthesis route where indirect heating of the precursor solutions via a hot plate/oven is used, the speed of reaction was much faster in the MIFS process with an 8 hour reaction time resulting in a 91.1% product yield compared to 23 hours used to achieve similar yields for the indirect heating route.156 The formation of free MOFs associated with the indirect solvothermal heating methods was also significantly minimised in the MIFS process. We also ascertained the performance of the MFCs synthesised with the MIFS process when deployed in the MISA process. Using the Mg-MOF-74 MFC synthesised with the MIFS process, a desorption capacity of about 98.4% of adsorbed CO2 was observed at a magnetic field strength of 39 mT and 298 K.156
 Fig. 10  Schematic illustration of MOF growth in a MIFS process, and the crystal structures of MOFs synthesized with MIFS. Reprinted with permission from Li et al.156 Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society. 
The foregoing results and successes obtained from developing and deploying a range of highly porous and magnetic stimuli responsive MFCs for not only post combustion carbon capture but also potentially a wide range of industrial gas separation processes will hopefully stimulate interest and research that will develop a new direction with respect to the use of adsorbents in gas storage and separation operations. Ongoing research within our group involves the use of MOFs with higher CO2 working capacity in the MISA process to achieve a much lower regeneration energy and the deployment of the MISA process in CH4 capture and release from low concentration sources.
Conclusions
In this feature article, we highlighted the potential of adsorbents for energy efficient capture and release of gases. A number of established processes deployed in post combustion CCS were discussed, identifying their advantages and bottlenecks mitigating their widespread deployment in industry. The need to achieve energy efficient separation of not only CO2 from adsorbents but also other gases has led to the development of a wide range of new materials via chemistry. One of these materials with unique properties discovered over two decades ago is metal organic frameworks (MOFs). However, despite the unprecedented capacity of these materials in storing gas molecules, the current techniques aimed at recovering the stored/adsorbed molecules from MOFs are not yet feasible on an industrial scale. This is largely due to the strong binding of stored molecules and the thermally insulating nature of the MOFs.
To overcome this barrier, this article looked at the potential of incorporating the MOF adsorbents with magnetic nanoparticles that enable the regeneration of the adsorbent via the reported MISA process. The process relies on the remote and localized heating that can be achieved as a result of AC magnetic induction of the MNPs embedded in the MOFs. The experimental results showed the ability to completely access adsorbed gas molecules from the MOF based composites through magnetic induction heating. The results are encouraging, however, a lot still needs to be done to establish the process and deploy it at a commercial scale. This article also discussed the potential of a new magnetic induction framework synthesis (MIFS) route for MFC fabrication with faster reaction kinetics and better control of the MFC growth mechanisms. The ability to achieve high yields at shorter reaction times and control over the size of MFCs highlights the benefits of the MIFS process and its potential for quick and easy scale-up.
Future research on magnetic framework composites in stimuli responsive gas capture and release should focus on designing and incorporation of Curie point (TC) tuned MNPs, where the maximum temperature rise is material dependent and not field dependent. This would enable researchers to deploy the MISA process over a wide range of separation processes with different temperature requirements. It is a fact that for MOFs to meet the huge potential that greeted their discovery over two decades ago, the production of these materials should be cost effective and energy efficient in addition to developing technologies that ensure the energy penalty associated with the use of these materials in gas separation operations such as CCS is significantly minimised. Furthermore, studies that investigate the interaction between the adsorbent material and the heat generating magnetic nanoparticles are required. The effect of the localised heat generation by the magnetic heaters on the cycle ability of the MOF should also be investigated. The rapid and localised heating capability achievable with MFCs can potentially stimulate research towards deploying these materials for other types of processes that rely on a thermal gradient to effect separation. For example, regeneration and reuse of adsorbents used for dye capture and heavy metal adsorption from wastewater can be explored with MFCs, thus expanding the industrial potential of MOF-based composites over a wide range of applications.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
M.R.H. acknowledges FT130100345 for funding.
References

          D. i. Kahen and D. S. Ginley, Fundamentals of Materials for Energy and Environmental Sustainability, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,  2012 Search PubMed .
D. S. Sholl and R. P. Lively, Nature, 2016, 532, 435–437 CrossRef PubMed .
T. R. Anderson, E. Hawkins and P. D. Jones, Endeavour, 2016, 40, 178–187 CrossRef PubMed .
G.-P. Hao, W.-C. Li and A.-H. Lu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 6447–6451 RSC .
D. M. D'Alessandro, B. Smit and J. R. Long, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 6058–6082 (
            Angew. Chem.
            , 2010
            , 6122
            , 6194–6219
          ) CrossRef PubMed .
R. A. Betts, C. D. Jones, J. R. Knight, R. F. Keeling and J. J. Kennedy, Nat. Clim. Change, 2016, 6, 806–810 CrossRef CAS .
J.-R. Li, Y. Ma, M. C. McCarthy, J. Sculley, J. Yu, H.-K. Jeong, P. B. Balbuena and H.-C. Zhou, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2011, 255, 1791–1823 CrossRef CAS .
S. I. Plasynski, J. T. Litynski, H. G. McIlvried and R. D. Srivastava, Crit. Rev. Plant Sci., 2009, 28, 123–138 CrossRef CAS .

          B. Metz, O. Davidson, H. de Coninck, M. Loos and A. L. Meyer, IPCC Special Report on Carbon Dioxide Capture and Storage, Prepared by Working Group III of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2005.
M. M. Sadiq, Z. Abdul Manan and S. R. Wan Alwi, J. Cleaner Prod., 2012, 33, 74–85 CrossRef .
US Environmental Protection Agency Summary Report: Global Anthropogenic Non-CO2 Greenhouse Gas Emissions: 1990–2030 (Office of Atmospheric Programs, Climate Change Division, US EPA, 2012), https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2016-05/documents/summary_global_nonco2_projections_dec2012.pdf.
Y. Liu, Z. U. Wang and H.-C. Zhou, Greenhouse Gases: Sci. Technol., 2012, 2, 239–259 CrossRef CAS .
B. L. Huang, Z. Ni, A. Millward, A. J. H. McGaughey, C. Uher, M. Kaviany and O. Yaghi, Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 2007, 50, 405–411 CrossRef CAS .
R. Lyndon, K. Konstas, A. W. Thornton, A. J. Seeber, B. P. Ladewig and M. R. Hill, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 7882–7888 CrossRef CAS .
R. Lyndon, K. Konstas, B. P. Ladewig, P. D. Southon, P. C. J. Kepert and M. R. Hill, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 3695–3698 (
            Angew. Chem.
            , 2013
            , 3125
            , 3783–3786
          ) CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Supekar and S. J. Skerlos, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2015, 49, 12576–12584 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Mason, K. Sumida, Z. R. Herm, R. Krishna and J. R. Long, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3030–3040 CAS .
K. Z. House, C. F. Harvey, M. J. Aziz and D. P. Schrag, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 193–205 CAS .
P. H. M. Feron, Int. J. Greenhouse Gas Control, 2010, 4, 152–160 CrossRef CAS .

          IPCC, in Special Report on Carbon Dioxide Capture and Storage. Contribution of the Working Group III of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, ed. M. Bert, et al.,  2005 Search PubMed .
S. Holloway, Energy, 2005, 30, 2318–2333 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bachu, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2008, 34, 254–273 CrossRef CAS .
E. S. Rubin, C. Chen and A. B. Rao, Energy Policy, 2007, 35, 4444–4454 CrossRef .
J.
D. Figueroa, T. Fout, S. Plasynski, H. McIlvried and R. D. Srivastava, Int. J. Greenhouse Gas Control, 2008, 2, 9–20 CrossRef CAS .
T. C. Drage, C. E. Snape, L. A. Stevens, J. Wood, J. Wang, A. I. Cooper, R. Dawson, X. Guo, C. Satterley and R. Irons, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 2815–2823 RSC .
G. T. Rochelle, Science, 2009, 325, 1652–1654 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Sumida, D. L. Rogow, J. A. Mason, T. M. McDonald, E. D. Bloch, Z. R. Herm, T.-H. Bae and J. R. Long, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 724–781 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. A. Grande and A. E. Rodrigues, Int. J. Greenhouse Gas Control, 2008, 2, 194–202 CAS .
R. Vaidhyanathan, S. S. Iremonger, G. K. H. Shimizu, P. G. Boyd, S. Alavi and T. K. Woo, Science, 2010, 330, 650–653 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. M. Stowe and G. S. Hwang, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2017, 56, 6887–6899 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lastoskie, Science, 2010, 330, 595–596 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Luis, Desalination, 2016, 380, 93–99 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, Z. Xu, M. Fan, R. Gupta, R. B. Slimane, A. E. Bland and I. Wright, J. Environ. Sci., 2008, 20, 14–27 CrossRef CAS .
A. Brunetti, F. Scura, G. Barbieri and E. Drioli, J. Membr. Sci., 2010, 359, 115–125 CrossRef CAS .
N. Du, H. B. Park, G. P. Robertson, M. M. Dal-Cin, T. Visser, L. Scoles and M. D. Guiver, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 372–375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chen, G. Obuskovic, S. Majumdar and K. K. Sirkar, J. Membr. Sci., 2001, 183, 75–88 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lin, Z. He, Z. Sun, J. Vu, A. Ng, M. Mohammed, J. Kniep, T. C. Merkel, T. Wu and R. C. Lambrecht, J. Membr. Sci., 2014, 457, 149–161 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Kenarsari, D. Yang, G. Jiang, S. Zhang, J. Wang, A. G. Russell, Q. Wei and M. Fan, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 22739–22773 RSC .
P. Luis, T. Van Gerven and B. Van der Bruggen, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2012, 38, 419–448 CrossRef CAS .
G. J. Stiegel and M. Ramezan, Int. J. Coal Geol., 2006, 65, 173–190 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Olajire, Energy, 2010, 35, 2610–2628 CrossRef CAS .
E. S. Rubin, H. Mantripragada, A. Marks, P. Versteeg and J. Kitchin, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2012, 38, 630–671 CrossRef CAS .
N. MacDowell, N. Florin, A. Buchard, J. Hallett, A. Galindo, G. Jackson, C. S. Adjiman, C. K. Williams, N. Shah and P. Fennell, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1645–1669 CAS .
T. Burdyny and H. Struchtrup, Energy, 2010, 35, 1884–1897 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Scholes, K. H. Smith, S. E. Kentish and G. W. Stevens, Int. J. Greenhouse Gas Control, 2010, 4, 739–755 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Wilcox, Carbon Capture, Springer New York, New York, NY,  2012, pp. 219–229 DOI:10.1007/978-1-4614-2215-0_6 .
A. Hart and N. Gnanendran, Energy Procedia, 2009, 1, 697–706 CrossRef CAS .
M.-O. Schach, B. Oyarzún, H. Schramm, R. Schneider and J.-U. Repke, Energy Procedia, 2011, 4, 1403–1410 CrossRef CAS .
K. E. Zanganeh, A. Shafeen and C. Salvador, Energy Procedia, 2009, 1, 247–252 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. A. Gibson, E. Mangano, E. Shiko, A. G. Greenaway, A. V. Gromov, M. M. Lozinska, D. Friedrich, E. E. B. Campbell, P. A. Wright and S. Brandani, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2016, 55, 3840–3851 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Wilcox, Carbon Capture, Springer New York, New York, NY,  2012, pp. 115–175 DOI:10.1007/978-1-4614-2215-0_4 .
A. Phan, C. J. Doonan, F. J. Uribe-Romo, C. B. Knobler, M. O’Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, Acc. Chem. Res., 2010, 43, 58–67 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Al-Mamoori, A. Krishnamurthy, A. A. Rownaghi and F. Rezaei, Energy Technol., 2017, 5, 834–849 CrossRef .
H. Liu, P. Guo, T. Regueira, Z. Wang, J. Du and G. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 13287–13294 CAS .
H. An, B. Feng and S. Su, Int. J. Greenhouse Gas Control, 2011, 5, 16–25 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hauchhum and P. Mahanta, Int. J. Renew. Energy Environ. Eng., 2014, 5, 349–356 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ma, L. Li, S. Wang, M. Lu, H. Li, W. Ma and T. C. Keener, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2016, 369, 390–397 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Patel, F. Karadas, A. Canlier, J. Park, E. Deniz, Y. Jung, M. Atilhan and C. T. Yavuz, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 8431–8437 RSC .
T. E. Reich, S. Behera, K. T. Jackson, P. Jena and H. M. El-Kaderi, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 13524–13528 RSC .
S. Choi, J. H. Drese and C. W. Jones, ChemSusChem, 2009, 2, 796–854 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-Y. Lee and S.-J. Park, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2015, 23, 1–11 CrossRef CAS .
O. M. Yaghi, M. O'Keeffe, N. W. Ockwig, H. K. Chae, M. Eddaoudi and J. Kim, Nature, 2003, 423, 705–714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          T. Devic and C. Serre, in Ordered Porous Solids, ed. V. Valtchev, S. Mintova and M. Tsapatsis, Elsevier, Amsterdam,  2009, pp. 77–99 DOI:10.1016/B978-0-444-53189-6.00004-4 .

          J.-P. Zhang and X.-M. Chen, in Metal–Organic Frameworks for Photonics Applications, ed. B. Chen and G. Qian, Springer Berlin Heidelberg,  2014, ch. 100, vol. 157, pp. 1–26 Search PubMed .

          D. Banerjee, H. Wang, B. J. Deibert and J. Li, The Chemistry of Metal–Organic Frameworks, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA,  2016, pp. 73–103 DOI:10.1002/9783527693078.ch4 .
J. L. C. Rowsell and O. M. Yaghi, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2004, 73, 3–14 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Schoedel and O. M. Yaghi, The Chemistry of Metal–Organic Frameworks, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA,  2016, pp. 41–72 DOI:10.1002/9783527693078.ch3 .
S. L. James, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2003, 32, 276–288 RSC .
B. Li, H.-M. Wen, Y. Cui, W. Zhou, G. Qian and B. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8819–8860 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Mao, D. Chen, P. Hu, Y. Guo, Y. Ying, W. Ying and X. Peng, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 15127–15132 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Biemmi, A. Darga, N. Stock and T. Bein, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2008, 114, 380–386 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Takashima, V. M. Martínez, S. Furukawa, M. Kondo, S. Shimomura, H. Uehara, M. Nakahama, K. Sugimoto and S. Kitagawa, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 168 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Bétard and R. A. Fischer, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 1055–1083 CrossRef PubMed .
R. C. Huxford, J. Della Rocca and W. Lin, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol., 2010, 14, 262–268 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Keskin and S. Kizilel, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2011, 50, 1799–1812 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Mason, M. Veenstra and J. R. Long, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 32–51 RSC .
G. T. Rochelle, Science, 2009, 325, 1652–1654 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, M. R. Hill, C. Doblin, S. Lim, A. J. Hill and P. Falcaro, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 4815–4821 CrossRef CAS .
L. Heinke, M. Cakici, M. Dommaschk, S. Grosjean, R. Herges, S. Bräse and C. Wöll, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1463–1467 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L.-L. Tan, H. Li, Y.-C. Qiu, D.-X. Chen, X. Wang, R.-Y. Pan, Y. Wang, S. X.-A. Zhang, B. Wang and Y.-W. Yang, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 1640–1644 RSC .
W. Zhang, F. Liang, C. Li, L.-G. Qiu, Y.-P. Yuan, F.-M. Peng, X. Jiang, A.-J. Xie, Y.-H. Shen and J.-F. Zhu, J. Hazard. Mater., 2011, 186, 984–990 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ricco, L. Malfatti, M. Takahashi, A. J. Hill and P. Falcaro, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 13033–13045 CAS .
M. R. Lohe, K. Gedrich, T. Freudenberg, E. Kockrick, T. Dellmann and S. Kaskel, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 3075–3077 RSC .
R. Ricco, K. Konstas, M. J. Styles, J. J. Richardson, R. Babarao, K. Suzuki, P. Scopece and P. Falcaro, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 19822–19831 CAS .
X. Zhao, S. Liu, Z. Tang, H. Niu, Y. Cai, W. Meng, F. Wu and J. P. Giesy, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 11849 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Coronado and G. Minguez Espallargas, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 1525–1539 RSC .
S. Galli, N. Masciocchi, G. Tagliabue, A. Sironi, J. A. R. Navarro, J. M. Salas, L. Mendez-Liñan, M. Domingo, M. Perez-Mendoza and E. Barea, Chem. – Eur. J., 2008, 14, 9890–9901 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. R. Navarro, E. Barea, A. Rodríguez-Diéguez, J. M. Salas, C. O. Ania, J. B. Parra, N. Masciocchi, S. Galli and A. Sironi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 3978–3984 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q.-X. Yao, L. Pan, X.-H. Jin, J. Li, Z.-F. Ju and J. Zhang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2009, 15, 11890–11897 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-H. Zeng, X.-L. Feng, W.-X. Zhang and X.-M. Chen, Dalton Trans., 2006, 5294–5303,  10.1039/B603337G .
Y.-Q. Tian, C.-X. Cai, X.-M. Ren, C.-Y. Duan, Y. Xu, S. Gao and X.-Z. You, Chem. – Eur. J., 2003, 9, 5673–5685 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-Y. Wang, Z.-M. Wang and S. Gao, Chem. Commun., 2008, 281–294,  10.1039/B708122G .
O. Lucía, P. Maussion, E. J. Dede and J. M. Burdío, IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., 2014, 61, 2509–2520 CrossRef .
S. S. Nagarkar, A. V. Desai and S. K. Ghosh, Chem. – Asian J., 2014, 9, 2358–2376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. B. Kanj, K. Müller and L. Heinke, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2018, 39, 1700239 CrossRef PubMed .
F.-X. Coudert, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 1905–1916 CrossRef .
S. Horike, S. Shimomura and S. Kitagawa, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 695–704 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Kahn, L. Freage, N. Enkin, M. A. A. Garcia and I. Willner, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1602782 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Buso, J. Jasieniak, M. D. H. Lay, P. Schiavuta, P. Scopece, J. Laird, H. Amenitsch, A. J. Hill and P. Falcaro, Small, 2012, 8, 80–88 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ahmed, M. Forster, R. Clowes, D. Bradshaw, P. Myers and H. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 3276–3286 CAS .
V. Agostoni, P. Horcajada, M. Noiray, M. Malanga, A. Aykaç, L. Jicsinszky, A. Vargas-Berenguel, N. Semiramoth, S. Daoud-Mahammed, V. Nicolas, C. Martineau, F. Taulelle, J. Vigneron, A. Etcheberry, C. Serre and R. Gref, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 7925 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Jahan, Z. Liu and K. P. Loh, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 5363–5372 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, Q. Yang, W. Wang, C. Wang and Z. Wang, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2016, 64, 2792–2801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Lu, S. Li, Z. Guo, O. K. Farha, B. G. Hauser, X. Qi, Y. Wang, X. Wang, S. Han, X. Liu, J. S. DuChene, H. Zhang, Q. Zhang, X. Chen, J. Ma, S. C. J. Loo, W. D. Wei, Y. Yang, J. T. Hupp and F. Huo, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 310–316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q.-L. Zhu, J. Li and Q. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 10210–10213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Sugikawa, S. Nagata, Y. Furukawa, K. Kokado and K. Sada, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 2565–2570 CrossRef CAS .
P. Falcaro, F. Lapierre, B. Marmiroli, M. Styles, Y. Zhu, M. Takahashi, A. J. Hill and C. M. Doherty, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 42–45 RSC .
T. Toyao, M. J. Styles, T. Yago, M. M. Sadiq, R. Ricco, K. Suzuki, Y. Horiuchi, M. Takahashi, M. Matsuoka and P. Falcaro, CrystEngComm, 2017, 19, 4201–4210 RSC .
C. Munuera, O. Shekhah, H. Wang, C. Woll and C. Ocal, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2008, 10, 7257–7261 RSC .
S.-H. Huo and X.-P. Yan, Analyst, 2012, 137, 3445–3451 RSC .
M. M. Rashad, H. M. El-Sayed, M. Rasly and M. I. Nasr, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 2012, 324, 4019–4023 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Giustini, A. A. Petryk, S. M. Cassim, J. A. Tate, I. Baker and P. J. Hoopes, Nano Life, 2010, 1 DOI:10.1142/S1793984410000067 .
C. Guibert, V. Dupuis, V. Peyre and J. Fresnais, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 28148–28154 CAS .
R. Tietze, J. Zaloga, H. Unterweger, S. Lyer, R. P. Friedrich, C. Janko, M. Pöttler, S. Dürr and C. Alexiou, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun., 2015, 468, 463–470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Arruebo, R. Fernández-Pacheco, M. R. Ibarra and J. Santamaría, Nano Today, 2007, 2, 22–32 CrossRef .
S. C. McBain, H. H. P. Yiu and J. Dobson, Int. J. Nanomed., 2008, 3, 169–180 CAS .

          F. Kenneth, A. Mats, C. Tord, S. Leif, J. Peter and S. Jan-Eric, presented in part at the 44th CIRP Conference on Manufacturing Systems Madison, 2011.
O. Lucia, J. Acero, C. Carretero and J. M. Burdio, IEEE Ind. Electron. Mag., 2013, 7, 35–47 CrossRef .
T. Bayerl, R. Schledjewski and P. Mitschang, Polym. Polym. Compos., 2012, 20, 333–341 CAS .
D. Paquet, J. Lanteigne, M. Bernard and C. Baillargeon, Int. J. Fatigue, 2014, 59, 90–101 CrossRef CAS .
E. Boudreault, B. Hazel, J. Côté and S. Godin, IOP Conf. Ser.: Earth Environ. Sci., 2014, 22, 012016 CrossRef .
T. Honda, E. C. Santos, K. Kida and T. Shibukawa, Int. J. Mater. Prod. Technol., 2012, 45, 31 CrossRef .
T. Waeckerlé, H. Fraissé, B. Boulogne and S. L. Spire, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 2006, 304, e844–e846 CrossRef .
C. Gómez-Polo, S. Larumbe, J. I. Pérez-Landazábal, J. M. Pastor, J. Olivera and J. Soto-Armañanzas, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 2012, 324, 1897–1901 CrossRef .
E. Pollert, P. Veverka, M. Veverka, O. Kaman, K. Závěta, S. Vasseur, R. Epherre, G. Goglio and E. Duguet, Prog. Solid State Chem., 2009, 37, 1–14 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bahadur and J. Giri, Sadhana, 2003, 28, 639–656 CrossRef CAS .
S. Laurent, S. Dutz, U. O. Häfeli and M. Mahmoudi, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2011, 166, 8–23 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. R. Barati, PhD thesis, Monash University,  2014 .
A. Espinosa, R. Di Corato, J. Kolosnjaj-Tabi, P. Flaud, T. Pellegrino and C. Wilhelm, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 2436–2446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Bañobre-López, A. Teijeiro and J. Rivas, Rep. Pract. Oncol. Radiother., 2013, 18, 397–400 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Iglesias, S. Sabater, A. Azua and J. A. Mata, New J. Chem., 2015, 39, 6437–6444 RSC .
B. D. Terris and T. Thomson, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2005, 38, R199 CrossRef CAS .
J. Estelrich, M. J. Sánchez-Martín and M. A. Busquets, Int. J. Nanomed., 2015, 10, 1727–1741 CAS .
D. E. Sosnovik, M. Nahrendorf and R. Weissleder, Basic Res. Cardiol., 2008, 103, 122–130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Yallapu, S. F. Othman, E. T. Curtis, B. K. Gupta, M. Jaggi and S. C. Chauhan, Biomaterials, 2011, 32, 1890–1905 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sarno, C. Cirillo, C. Scudieri, M. Polichetti and P. Ciambelli, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2016, 55, 3157–3166 CrossRef CAS .
K. Myeongjin and K. Jooheon, Nanotechnology, 2017, 28, 195401 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Abellán, E. Coronado, C. Martí-Gastaldo, A. Ribera and T. F. Otero, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2013, 30, 853–863 Search PubMed .

          B. D. Cullity and C. D. Graham, Introduction to Magnetic Materials, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,  2008, pp. 115–149 DOI:10.1002/9780470386323.ch4 .

          B. D. Cullity and C. D. Graham, Introduction to Magnetic Materials, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,  2008, pp. 175–195 DOI:10.1002/9780470386323.ch6 .
V. Mody Vicky, A. Singh and B. Wesley, Eur. J. Nanomed., 2013, 5, 11–21 Search PubMed .
S. Mornet, S. Vasseur, F. Grasset and E. Duguet, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14, 2161–2175 RSC .

          B. D. Cullity and C. D. Graham, Introduction to Magnetic Materials, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,  2008, pp. 1–21 DOI:10.1002/9780470386323.ch1 .

          S. N. Tabatabaei Shafie, PhD thesis, École Polytechnique de Montreal,  2010 .
R. E. Rosensweig, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 2002, 252, 370–374 CrossRef CAS .
R. Hergt, W. Andra, C. G. d'Ambly, I. Hilger, W. A. Kaiser, U. Richter and H. G. Schmidt, IEEE Trans. Magn., 1998, 34, 3745–3754 CrossRef CAS .
Q. A. Pankhurst, J. Connolly, S. K. Jones and J. Dobson, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2003, 36, R167 CrossRef CAS .

          D. Ortega and Q. A. Pankhurst, Nanoscience: Volume
1: Nanostructures through Chemistry, The Royal Society of Chemistry,  2013, vol. 1, pp. 60–88 Search PubMed .
M. R. Barati, C. Selomulya, K. G. Sandeman and K. Suzuki, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 162412 CrossRef .
A. Ntiamoah, J. Ling, P. Xiao, P. A. Webley and Y. Zhai, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2016, 55, 703–713 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Grande, R. P. L. Ribeiro, E. L. G. Oliveira and A. E. Rodrigues, Energy Procedia, 2009, 1, 1219–1225 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, M. M. Sadiq, K. Suzuki, R. Ricco, C. Doblin, A. J. Hill, S. Lim, P. Falcaro and M. R. Hill, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 1839–1844 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Sadiq, H. Li, A. J. Hill, P. Falcaro, M. R. Hill and K. Suzuki, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 6219–6226 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, M. M. Sadiq, K. Suzuki, C. Doblin, S. Lim, P. Falcaro, A. J. Hill and M. R. Hill, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 18757–18762 CAS .
D. Feng, K. Wang, Z. Wei, Y.-P. Chen, C. M. Simon, R. K. Arvapally, R. L. Martin, M. Bosch, T.-F. Liu, S. Fordham, D. Yuan, M. A. Omary, M. Haranczyk, B. Smit and H.-C. Zhou, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5723 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, M. M. Sadiq, K. Suzuki, P. Falcaro, A. J. Hill and M. R. Hill, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 6186–6190 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

Muhammad Munir Sadiq
	Muhammad Munir Sadiq received his BEng. (2006) and MEng. (2011) in Chemical Engineering from Abubakar Tafawa Balewa University Bauchi, Nigeria and Universiti Teknologi Malaysia, respectively. He recently completed his PhD in Materials Science and Engineering at Monash University, Australia under the supervision of Prof. Kiyonori Suzuki and A/Prof. Matthew Hill. His research interests include metal organic frameworks, magnetic nanoparticles, magnetic framework composites, storage and triggered release of gases from porous materials, post combustion carbon capture and process integration.

Kiyonori Suzuki
	Kiyonori Suzuki is professor of Materials Science and Engineering at Monash University in Australia. He received his PhD degree in 1997 from the University of New South Wales (UNSW). After a QEII fellowship in the School of Physics, UNSW, he joined the Faculty of Engineering at Monash University. His research areas include soft and hard magnetic properties of nanostructured materials and chemically-induced ferromagnetism in metal nanoparticles and semiconductors.

Matthew R. Hill
	Matthew Hill graduated from a PhD in Chemistry from the University of New South Wales (Sydney, Australia) in 2006. He undertook a postdoc at the CSIRO following this, along with secondments to the University of California, Berkeley, and the University of Colorado, Boulder. He then went on to establish a research group at CSIRO focussed on the use of porous materials for storage, separation and release. CSIRO's mission is to deliver impact for industry, and to enable this for porous materials, Matthew established flow chemistry capability for MOFs at CSIRO to allow access to materials at kilogram scale. In 2016, Matthew began a joint position between CSIRO and Monash University. Presently, Matthew leads several applied projects with industry partners, alongside supervising a group of postgraduate students. He is the Chief Technology Officer for the start-up company MOFWORX.

 	Fig. 1  Dynamic photo-switching in the light-responsive MOF Zn-(AzDC)(4,4′-BPE)0.5 leads to instantly reversible CO2 uptake. Figure and caption adapted with permission from Lyndon et al.15 Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 2  Different approaches for the design of magnetic framework composites. (a) Embedding; (b) layer-by-layer; (c) encapsulation; and (d) mixing. Figure and caption reproduced from Ricco et al.82 by permission of the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 3  Typical arrangement of an induction heating system in a longitudinal flux configuration: (a) general view and (b) top view. Reprinted with permission from Lucia et al.93 Copyright © 2014, IEEE.	 

 	Fig. 4  Multi-domain material exposed to an external magnetic field.	 

 	Fig. 5  Relaxation mechanisms: (a) Néel relaxation and (b) Brownian relaxation.	 

 	Fig. 6  Magnetization hysteresis curve and energy loss. μ0 = permeability of free space.	 
	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 7  Dynamic uptake and release of CO2 from UiO-66@MgFe2O4 MFC; the control showed no desorption effect when exposed to a magnetic field. Reprinted with permission from Sadiq et al.153 Copyright © 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  Regeneration energy as a function of temperature reported for UiO-66@MgFe2O4. Reprinted with permission from Sadiq et al.153 Copyright © 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  Reusability of mPCN-H assessed by its CO2 desorption capacity at 1 bar through LISA, MISA and MaLISA (a); and (b) the normalised CO2 desorption capacity of mPCN-H at 1 bar shown in (a). Figure and caption reproduced from Li et al.154 by permission of the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematic illustration of MOF growth in a MIFS process, and the crystal structures of MOFs synthesized with MIFS. Reprinted with permission from Li et al.156 Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
