Recent developments in stimuli-responsive luminescent films  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9TC00348G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9TC00348G
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 3399-3412Recent developments in stimuli-responsive luminescent films

        
          
            Rui 
            Gao
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Xiaoyu 
            Fang
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Dongpeng 
            Yan
          
          
        
      *ab
aBeijing Key Laboratory of Energy Conversion and Storage Materials, College of Chemistry, Beijing Normal University, Beijing 100875, P. R. China. E-mail: yandp@bnu.edu.cn
bState Key Laboratory of Chemical Resource Engineering, Beijing University of Chemical Technology, Beijing 100029, P. R. China
Received 
      18th January 2019
    , Accepted 13th February 2019First published on 14th February 2019AbstractLuminescent films have attracted a great amount of attention due to their unique properties and various potential applications in optical displays, sensors and switches. Due to the fast development of stimuli-responsive luminescent films, we believe it is timely to introduce recent advances and to promote the trends in this field. In this review, firstly, we describe several effective ways to synthesize stimuli-responsive luminescent films. The attention is then focused on the development of several important fluorescence switching systems, which are sensitive to external stimuli (such as typical physical and chemical environments). Finally, the future trends and perspectives are also briefly discussed.
Rui Gao
Rui Gao obtained her BS degree at Beijing University of Chemical Technology (BUCT, China) in 2013. She is currently a PhD student under the supervision of Prof. Acad. Xue Duan and Prof. Dongpeng Yan at the State Key Laboratory of Chemical Resource Engineering Beijing University of Chemical Technology (BUCT, China). Her research interests are the design and synthesis of functional nanomaterials for luminescence and electrochemistry.
Xiaoyu Fang
Xiaoyu Fang obtained his bachelor's degree in applied chemistry from Beijing University of Chemical Technology in 2015, and a master's degree in inorganic chemistry from Beijing Normal University in 2018. He is currently working on his PhD at Beijing Normal University, under the supervision of Prof. Dongpeng Yan. His work involves supramolecular chemistry and photo/electrochemical catalysis.
Dongpeng Yan
Dongpeng Yan obtained his PhD at Beijing University of Chemical Technology (BUCT, P. R. China) in 2012, and then became an associate professor at BUCT. In 2014, he moved to Beijing Normal University (P. R. China) as a full professor. In 2011 and 2013, as a visiting student/scholar, he studied at the Department of Chemistry, University of Cambridge (UK) and School of Pharmacy, University College London (UK). His research topics are functional molecular materials and host–guest chemistry. He has received an Award Nomination of Annual Figure among Chinese University Students (2011), a “Talent Model” Award in the Universities in Beijing (2010), the Tang Aoqing Chemical Scholarship (2011), and an Outstanding Doctoral Dissertation Prize in Beijing (2013), among many others.
1. Introduction
Over the past few decades, stimuli-responsive luminescent materials have attracted worldwide attention, due to their sensitive signaling and facile imaging,1–8 with broad applications in smart switches and sensoring devices.9–12 The chemical synthesis of small molecules, ligand-based metal complexes and polymers has largely enriched the family of stimuli-responsive luminescent materials. From a luminescence sensing view, stimuli-responsive luminescent materials are usually based on the detection of analyte-induced changes in the physicochemical properties of a fluorophore (such as the luminescence intensity, lifetime, quantum yield (QY) and anisotropy). To date, several stimuli-responsive luminescent materials have been shown to undergo obvious changes in their structures and photoemission properties under appropriate external stimuli (such as pH, temperature, ionic strength, light, gas, and biomolecules);13–25 however, some challenges remain. Firstly, the luminescent materials readily aggregate in the solid state, which reduces their photoemission efficiency. For example, the aggregation of a luminescent dye can lead to a fluorescence red-shift, line broadening and even luminescence quenching.26 Additionally, for practical applications of such materials, a fast response time, high visualization contrast ratio, and stable repeatability are all required. If stimuli-responsive luminescent materials are to be employed in practical smart devices and luminescent sensors, it is highly desirable to fabricate them in the form of ordered solid-state thin films, rather than using disordered powder or solutions.27,28 Thus, highly-sensitive stimuli-responsive luminescent films are playing an increasingly important role in the development of smart sensors.
Up to now, studies have demonstrated that luminescent films have several unique advantages compared with their powder counterparts. Firstly, luminescent films with any shape, size, flexibility or rigidity can be easily fabricated for various needs and occasions.29–33 Secondly, it is obviously much easier and simpler to handle films than solution or powdered forms. Moreover, luminescent films enable real-time detection of the analyte and can be regenerated by simply treating them with suitable solvents.34–36 Due to the fast development of stimuli-responsive luminescent films, we believe it is timely to introduce recent advances and promote the trends in this field. In this review, we mainly focus on recent contributions towards stimuli-responsive film-based luminescent sensors. Firstly, we will introduce several effective ways to fabricate luminescent films. And then, the development of several important types of fluorescence switching systems sensitive to external stimuli (including typical physical and chemical environments) is introduced (Scheme 1). Last but not least, the future trends and perspectives (such as multiple-stimuli-responsive systems) will also be discussed.
 Scheme 1  Summary of recent development of stimuli-responsive luminescent films. 
2. Fabrication methods of luminescent films
2.1 Solvent evaporation method
Among the methods used to synthesize luminescent films (Scheme 2), solvent evaporation is one of the most popular techniques, due to its methodological simplicity and low-manufacturing costs.37,38 Typically, a drop of solution can be facilely placed on a flat substrate, followed by drying in air or in a certain atmosphere to evaporate off the solvent. Upon drying, the target substance will be in the form of a film, a process known as drop-casting.39,40 Factors, such as solvent, the concentration of the solution, and the rate of evaporation, control the film morphology.41–43
 Scheme 2  Summary of the fabrication methods for luminescent films. 
Based on the drop-casting process, the solvent evaporation method has evolved. For instance, Barillaro and co-workers have reported a capillary-driven solvent evaporation method.44 During such process, both photoluminescent and non-photoluminescent polymers demonstrate high-density lattices (up to 11 × 106 membranes per cm2) of suspended polymer membranes with a micrometric size (in the order of few μm2) and sub-micrometric thickness (in the order of hundreds of nm). In another example, Lin and co-workers showed a novel spray method that can be used to synthesize highly emissive cubic-shaped quantum dots (QDs), which are composed of organometallic perovskite.45 In this method, micrometer-sized droplets of the precursors react on a heated surface before solvent evaporation. After that, nano-sized products are formed.
2.2 Vacuum deposition method
The vacuum deposition method of luminescent films involves a process used to deposit layers of materials under vacuum or below atmospheric pressure.46 The range of thickness of the layers formed in this way is between one atom and millimeters, which can be further used to make up several layers of different materials. For liquid or solid sources, the process is called physical vapor deposition (PVD). When the source is a chemical vapor precursor, the method is called chemical vapor deposition (CVD). There are several variations of the CVD process, such as low-pressure CVD (LPCVD), plasma-enhanced CVD (PECVD), and plasma-assisted CVD (PACVD).47–50 For example, Nilsen's group has recently reported a series of thin films deposited via atomic layer deposition, consisting of amorphous Eu–Ti–P–O, crystalline YbVO4, and crystalline YVO4:Yb3+. The optical and structural properties were further evaluated for use as spectral converters in solar cells.51–53 Auciello and co-workers have paid much attention to characterizing the relationships between the structure, surface morphology and grain size of polycrystalline diamond films and have investigated the films’ afterglow, thermoluminescence and optically-stimulated luminescence. Based on their work, hot filament CVD can be used to construct three different types of polycrystalline diamond films.54
2.3 The Langmuir–Blodgett technique
Basically, the Langmuir–Blodgett (LB) technique is dependent on van der Waals interactions, and thus the interfacial properties can be tailored at the molecular level.55 Typically, a Langmuir monolayer is formed on water, when amphiphilic molecules orient themselves at the air/water interface. The ordered and oriented monolayer films can be further transferred into a solid substrate to form LB films.56–58 For example, Lu's group has synthesized amphiphilic CdTe QDs@layered double hydroxide (LDH)/arachidate nanocomposite LB ultrathin films. From their work, the CdTe QDs were incorporated into LB monolayers via a layer-by-layer method, which is based on the electrostatic interactions between the LDH and CdTe QDs. Notably, the LB films exhibited two different kinds of fluorescence response to volatile organic compounds (VOCs). One is the irreversible fluorescence quenching for amine VOCs with strong polarity and the other is reversible fluorescence enhancement for non-amine VOCs.59
2.4 The self-assembled monolayer method
Based on chemisorption on a solid surface, luminescent molecules can spontaneously self-assemble into a monolayer, referred to as the self-assembled monolayer (SAM) method. Usually, these molecules consist of three units, a terminal functional group (named the ‘head group’) with a high affinity towards the surface, a tail group arranged towards the outer surface of the film, and a spacer connecting the two aforementioned units.60,61 In luminescent SAM films, the chromophores are usually immobilized on the substrate to form a monolayer as a receptor of analytes for chemical or biological sensing. With the advantage of a single-molecule-thick layer, the response time is relatively short.62 As an example, Gooding's group reported a kind of Si QDs-dye conjugate. The Si QDs serve as the donor and the organic dye as an acceptor. They are covalently attached to each other via self-assembled monolayer linkers.63 This work is a combination of interfacial design and optical imaging, presenting a new strategy for bio-applications using nontoxic silicon QDs.
2.5 Layer-by-layer assembly technique
Layer-by-layer (LBL) assembly is a robust and versatile strategy for preparing luminescent micro/nano-composite thin films. It utilizes the alternate adsorption of oppositely charged molecules, leading to the self-organization of films and other composites. Generally, negatively charged substrates (e.g. glasses, quartz, and silicon wafers) are inserted into a solution of positively charged molecules. Subsequently, a solution of negatively charged molecules covers the surface of the substrate. The deposition cycles of positively/negatively charged molecules are continued until the desired multilayer is achieved (Fig. 1).64,65 Compared with other methods, the LBL technique has remarkable advantages: (a) the method is simple, low cost, and does not require the use of any expensive or complex equipment; (b) it is a suitable alternative to any type of charged component, such as polyelectrolytes, organic dyes, and inorganic nanomaterials; (c) LBL films can be applied onto flexible substrates of different matrixes and shapes; (d) the film thickness can be controlled at the micro/nanometer scale; (e) with the exception of a common assembly procedure driven by electrostatic interactions, LBL assemblies can be also be realized by hydrogen bonding, covalent connection, and/or hydrophobic interactions.66,67 Based on our previous work,68–74 a series of LBL films based on LDHs were synthesized and their luminescence properties were studied. For example, a kind of co-assembly of long-lived energy donors with an energy acceptor in the same host was found to generate an ordered arrangement of phosphorescent donor–acceptor pairs spatially confined within a 2D nanogallery, affording a high energy transfer efficiency of more than 99%.74
 Fig. 1  A typical LBL assembly process. 
2.6 Electrospinning
Different from other methods, electrospun films are usually constructed by nanofibers, which can result in a porous structure.75,76 Electrospun films have a large surface-to-volume ratio and mechanical strength. Due to the influence of surface tension and viscous resistance, the droplet deforms as a spindle and a charged liquid sprays into the grounded collector under a high electric field. The jets are stretched due to electrostatic repulsion and whip up in air. As a result, continuous fibers form on the collector. At last, a porous mesh is collected on the planar target plate.77–79 For example, in our previous work,80–82 highly sensitive stimuli-responsive fluorescent films were synthesized. Upon UV photostimulation, the films exhibited fast and obvious luminescence changes (including color, intensity, QY, fluorescence lifetime, and two-photon emission).80
2.7 Spin-coating method
The spin-coating method is widely used in film manufacturing fields.83,84 A typical process is to place a drop on a substrate and this solution is then spread over the substrate by the centrifugal force from a high-speed rotation. The redundant solution will not be collected by the substrate. After solvent evaporation, a smooth film then forms on the surface of the substrate. Moreover, repeating these process leads to the formation of a multi-layer film.85,86 Notably, the thickness of the films can be controlled by altering the spin speed and/or concentrations of the solutions. Generally, polymer systems are extensively used in spin-coated films, due to their superior film-forming characteristics and ability to incorporate multiple functions.87,88 For example, Jiang and co-workers reported a plasmon-enhanced fluorescent film, based on poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA)-coated, large-area Au@Ag nanorod arrays. An attractive, scalable, and low-cost strategy was developed to produce uniform and reproducible large-area substrates that have many potential applications, in biochips, diagnostics, and photonics.89
Overall, different methods for the assembly of luminescent films are suitable for achieving different microscopic morphologies within the materials. Among the different fabrication methods, the LB method was the first molecular-scale assembly technique. The solvent evaporation and spin-coating methods are traditional, but are the most popular techniques used to synthesize luminescent films because of their simplicity from a methodological view. Nowadays, with the advantage of single-molecule-thick layers, the development of SAMs is a subject of interest. Also, LBL assembly is one of the most robust and versatile technologies used for preparing nano-composite thin films.
3. The development of stimuli-responsive luminescent films
3.1 Luminescent film sensors for pH
Luminescent pH sensors are based on the use of materials that respond to pH with changeable photoemission properties. Optical pH sensors possess certain advantages among the different kinds of pH sensors,90–92 such as safety, the possibility for contactless sensing, the feasibility of miniaturization, and the avoidance of reference elements, which has enabled them to become popular analytical tools in marine research,93,94 blood measurement,95 toxicological assay,96 and biotechnology.97–104
As is known, almost every fundamental life process (such as metabolism and energy conversion) only occurs at a specific pH value. So, the quantification of H+ concentrations in biological systems is important for understanding many biological processes.105–109 In addition, it has potential applications in the development of tumor diagnostics and new drug delivery systems, as solid tumors are present in highly acidic environments.110–114 In this regard, self-supporting luminescent hybrid films composed of both positively charged polyethylenimine-coated NaYF4:Yb/Er nanoparticles and negatively charged graphene oxide have been developed to measure pH values based on the pH-dependent luminescence quenching effect caused by graphene oxide.115 Isothermal titration calorimetry has been used to show that the interaction between the NaYF4:Yb/Er nanoparticles and graphene oxide becomes much stronger with increasing pH, so NaYF4:Yb/Er nanoparticles show more significant fluorescence quenching at higher pH values. Quantitatively, the upconversion luminescence intensity of a self-supporting luminescent film exhibits a linear trend in the pH range of 5.00 to 8.00 (Fig. 2a). As envisioned, the luminescent film sensor is also sensitive to urine measurements when excited with a 980 nm laser because the background absorption is reduced.
 Fig. 2  (a) The standard sensing action of the GO-PEI-NaYF4:Yb,Er hybrid film in the urine of mice. Upconversion luminescence spectra of the sensor film in diluted urine. Inset: The upconversion luminescence intensity of the sensor film with Fx/Fo plotted against the pH values in 30-fold diluted urine. Reprinted with permission.115 Copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Fabrication of hybrid hydrogels via the alternating assembly of electrostatically-bound and hydrogen-bonded (H-B) strata, followed by crosslinking. The inset illustrates crosslinking as a result of the interaction of ethylenediamine with carboxylic groups in the H-B strata. (c) Variation in the pH-induced charge balance in the hybrid systems. Reprinted with permission.117 Copyright 2010, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In another example, a highly oriented luminescent film can be obtained by co-intercalating sodium 1-heptane sulfonate (HES) and fluorescein (FLU) in an LDH matrix using the electrophoretic deposition (EPD) method, and the resulting film can be used as an optical pH sensor. The optical pH sensor with a 300 nm film thickness shows a broad linear dynamic range for solution pH (5.02–8.54), good repeatability (a relative standard deviation (RSD) of less than 1.5% over 20 consecutive cycles) and reversibility (a RSD value of less than 1.5% over 20 cycles), high photostability and storage stability (ca. 95.2% of its initial fluorescence intensity remains after one month), as well as a fast response time (2 s).116 This work provides prospects for the preparation and application of LDH-based chromophores in the field of optical sensors. Tsukruk's group reported on responsive luminescent hybrid materials with QDs immobilized in an organized manner fabricated by spin-assisted LBL assembly.117 Strongly interacting polyelectrolytes such as poly(sodium 4-styrenesulfonate) can be used to confine CdTe nanoparticles stabilized by thioglycolic acid, while a poly(methacrylic acid)hydrogel matrix exhibits an elastomer network with pH-response characteristics (Fig. 2b). The system experiences a reversible change in luminescence intensity in response to a change in pH values. Excessive negative charge at a high pH inhibits the luminescence intensity of the hybrid matrix, but excessive positive charge at low pH results in significant photoluminescence increase (Fig. 2c). This hybrid QD-containing hydrogel system provides a means of designing materials with precisely controlled structures and pH-triggered optical properties that can be applied to pH or chemical sensors. Moreover, Liu et al. reported that reversible addition–fragmentation chain transfer (RAFT) polymerization can be used to construct a responsive double hydrophilic block copolymer as a functional chemical sensor for pH.118 This work is a proof-of-concept example of a fluorescent polymer sensor that combines a responsive block copolymer with a small molecule-based sensing moiety using an optimized RAFT polymerization process.
Although implantable medical devices have many benefits, they are susceptible to bacterial colonization and infection. These infections are difficult to treat because bacteria can form a biofilm on the surface of the implant, which reduces the penetration of antibiotics and produces a localized dormant zone with low pH and low oxygen. In addition, these infections are difficult to detect early because biofilms are usually located on the surface. Anker's group developed an optical sensor film to detect local acidosis on implanted surfaces. They constructed pH sensor films based on the inner filter effect between a bromocresol green-doped silica film and the two closely spaced red emission peaks of the upconverting particles (UCPs).119 The selection of two closely spaced red emission peaks of the UCP minimizes the spectral distortion of the emitted light caused by scattering and tissue absorption, and also minimizes the power dependence of the UCP luminescence ratio. Finally, real-time monitoring by thick porcine tissue resulted in a decrease in pH due to the growth of S. epidermidis at the interface between the tryptic soy agar plate and the pH sensor film.
3.2 Luminescent film sensors for thermal sensitivity
The mechanism of thermo-sensitive luminescent materials can be related to non-radiative deactivation in photophysical processes.120 Typically, the radiation process emits fluorescence with a rate constant independent of temperature. However, if an intermolecular complex is formed, fluctuations in temperature may affect the formation process, which also results in a change in light emission. Normally, the classification of thermo-induced luminescent films is based on several temperature-dependent fluorescence parameters, including fluorescence intensity, peak wavelength, fluorescence lifetime, QY, and fluorescence anisotropy.121,122 Obviously, the turn-on/off and color-tuned luminescence can be easily identified by the naked eye. For example, Duan's group have reported a series of thermo-induced luminescent films based on LDHs.71,123–126 In 2010, LBL-assembled films of anionic bis(2-sulfonatostyryl)biphenyl and positively charged LDHs nanosheets were fabricated on quartz glass, showing fast luminescence response and switching properties, including changes in color, fluorescence lifetime, and anisotropy in the range 20–100 °C.71 In 2013, a temperature sensor based on CdTe QDs embedded LDH ultrathin films was shown to present dual-parameter signals and a high response sensitivity.123 In 2015, Au nanoclusters/LDH ultrathin films were found to exhibit a photoluminescence response towards temperature in the range of 20–90 °C stabilized in water (Fig. 3a).124 In 2016, ultrathin films formed by embedding carbon dots into 2D LDH nanosheets were observed to show turn-on/off fluorescence in the range of 20–80 °C.125 In our recent work,82 in order to develop an easy-to-handle film material, a Zn-based composite Zn(BTZ)2 was incorporated into a poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) matrix to obtain a microfiber film based on an electrospinning process. The Zn(BTZ)2 composite is sensitive to temperature changes in the film state (Fig. 3b). This work demonstrates that zinc-based composites can provide an alternative to developing potentially low-cost luminescence sensors and optical anti-counterfeiting systems, compared to developing precious metal-based composites with stimuli-responsive properties.
 Fig. 3  (a) Fluorescence emission spectra (the inset shows the changes in the intensity at ≈560 nm). Reprinted with permission.124 Copyright 2015, Wiley. (b) Fluorescence images of the Zn(BTZ)2@PVA microfibers under a UV fluorescence microscope. Reprinted with permission.82 Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
3.3 Mechano-induced luminescent films
Films showing mechano-induced luminescence can be classified by the types of forces, such as systems of triboluminescence, fractoluminescence, and piezoluminescence.126,127 By the impact after stimulation, the mechano-induced luminescent films can be mainly divided into two types: turn-on/off and color-tuned systems. Based on the principle of illumination, mechano-induced luminescent films are environmentally friendly, which make them promising candidates for lighting, display, and bioimaging by utilizing natural mechanical energy.128 However, most inorganic mechano-induced luminescent materials exhibit weakly-repeating luminescence and it is therefore difficult to use them in real-world applications. Thus, more recent attention has focused on organic materials.
Classically, a specific organic dye can be incorporated with a polymer to prepare a film, which exhibits mechano-induced luminescence. Weder and co-workers are generally accepted as a pioneering group in the field of organic mechanofluorochromism.129 Moore and co-workers have reported synthetic polymers that display mechanochromic behavior induced by deliberate mechanical activation of chemical reactions.130 Based on their work, Wang's group described a new concept for the design of high-performance supramolecular thermosets by using noncovalent cation–π interactions as cross-links (Fig. 4).131 Schrettl and co-workers described the mechanochromic response of microcapsule-based films upon tensile deformation and compression.132 Compared to the related methods of mechanically discolored polymers, the systems could change their fluorescent color, so the response is always a ratio signal, making quantitative evaluation easy and simple.
 Fig. 4  Synthesis, cross-linking manipulation, and photographs of supramolecular thermosets. (A) Synthetic pathway of SPAIKs. (B) Schematic representation showing installation and removal of cation–π complexes in response to external pH stimuli. Photographs of a SPAIKs film (D) in daylight or (C) irradiated by UV light at 365 nm in the dark. Photographs of an acidified SPAIKs film (E) in daylight or (F) irradiated by UV light at 365 nm in the dark. Reprinted with permission.131 Copyright 2018, Wiley. 
3.4 Light-driven responsive luminescent films
Light is one of the most common naturally-occurring external stimuli, so light-driven molecular reactions (e.g. photochromism) have been extensively studied and several mature photochromic molecular systems (such as diarylethenes, azo dyes, rhodamine, spiropyrans, chromenes, and spirooxazines) have been reported.133–138 As an example, a tungsten oxide thin film with a sheet-like nanostructure was grown on the surface of wood via a simple low-temperature hydrothermal method using ethanol as an inducer.139 The ethanol content of the precursor solution plays an important role in the morphology and phase structure. It was observed that the wood substrate-based WO3 film consisted of 2D nanosheets with an edge length of 580–957 nm, a thickness of about 80 nm, and a high degree crystallinity of the phase purity. UV-vis analysis showed that samples prepared with 20% ethanol content responded to ultraviolet radiation with a wavelength of 270–350 nm. When the sample was irradiated under UV light (365 nm), a significant difference in color was observed. Water contact angle measurements indicated that the WO3 treated wood surface has super-hydrophilic behavior and can be converted to a superhydrophobic material by treatment with octadecyltrichlorosilane. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) analysis showed that a change in the surface roughness of the film is responsible for the photochromic and hydrophobic properties. The wood surface obtained is light responsive and has a self-cleaning function, with potential applications in information storage, smart sensors and anti-counterfeiting materials.
However, light-driven systems are still limited in luminescence compared to photochromic materials, which only change color when stimulated by light. By incorporating a distyryl group into a poly(vinyl alcohol) host, we have developed a novel flexible self-supporting nanofiber film that exhibits rapid and significant photochromic fluorescence (PCF).80 The transfer between the two reversible fluorescent states can be easily recovered (Fig. 5a). Fluorescence microscopy and AFM images (Fig. 5b) provide in situ evidence of fluorescence and surface changes, respectively. Density functional theory calculations further indicate that PCF can be attributed to photoisomerization of stilbene-based molecules. Based on these experimental and theoretical studies, this work details a material that undergoes photoinduced fluorescence changes for use as a potential erasable storage device and anti-counterfeiting material and also details the photoisomerization and PCF processes of nanofiber films.
 Fig. 5  (a) The reversible fluorescence responses of the reversible PCF film. (b) AFM images of the fiber surfaces before/after UV irradiation (left/middle) and after recovery in the dark (right), as well as typical cis–trans molecular conformations. Reprinted with permission.80 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
3.5 Humidity-responsive luminescent films
Efforts have been made to prepare moisture responsive materials that play an important role in the manufacture of sensor systems for detecting water vapor concentrations.140–142 To date, most conventional humidity sensors have been constructed by monitoring changes in the electrical conductivity or electrical constant of semiconductors, ceramics, or polymers when exposed to different moisture levels in a gas.143
Systems involving humidity-responsive fluorescence (HRF) are still very limited compared to those that respond to common environmental stimuli (e.g. pressure, light, pH, or heat), as described above. By incorporating a 4-[4-(dimethylamino)styryl]pyridine chromophore into a polyvinylpyrrolidone host, we have developed a new flexible self-supporting nanofiber membrane with a fast and distinct HRF.81 A reversible transition between the two fluorescent states can be easily observed and this can be recycled at least 200 times (Fig. 6a and b). Therefore, this work provides an alternative to traditional humidity sensors based on changes in color and electrical properties. In addition, these HRF films may also have the potential for use as optical security materials (Fig. 6c). In 2016, Tang's team developed aggregation-induced-emission (AIE) sensors for humidity visualization, in which poly(acrylic acid) (PAA) acts as a moisture capture network, while AIEgens acts as a microenvironment probe (Fig. 6d). Invisible information about the relative humidity (RH) is converted to a different fluorescent color signal, which can be directly observed by the naked eye based on the intramolecular charge transfer effect of AIEgens (Fig. 6e). The AIE humidity sensors are suitable for use in a wide range of applications, with excellent humidity sensing performance, high sensitivity, high space-time resolution and fast response/recovery time without any additional setup. Multi-scale applications, from regional environmental RH detection, internal spatial humidity mapping to sensitive human humidity sensing, have been demonstrated.144
 Fig. 6  (a) Fluorescence spectra of the DSP@PVP(1.5%) fiber film at different RHs (16% and 95%) over one cycle and (b) reversible fluorescence responses (λmax) over 200 consecutive cycles. (c) Fluorescence imaging by selective-zone humidity treatment of the film. Reprinted with permission.81 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic illustration of the fluorescence process in TPP and TVP assemblies. (e) Fluorescent images of (left) TPE-Py and (right) TPE-VPy embedded in PAA at various RH taken under 365 nm UV light irradiation. Reprinted with permission.144 Copyright 2017, Wiley. 
In addition, a switchable and tunable luminescent composite film composed of Na9[EuW10O36]32H2O (EuW10) and agarose has been prepared.145 EuW10 can be converted into a non-luminescent species by photoreduction and the recovery is facilitated by oxidation under moisture air. After a certain exposure time, the luminescence recovery of the UV-reduced film showed a dependence on the relative humidity of 43–78%. Further analysis of EuW10 indicated that photo-generated d1 electron hopping is prohibited in the hybrid film. The absence of recombination of the photogenerated d1 electrons and holes, and the consumption of holes to form OH radicals are responsible for the luminescence quenching rather than luminescence resonance energy transfer. The moisture-responsive behavior of the EuW10-agarose films is attributed to the kinetically controlled back reaction of W5+O6 with O2. This study provides new insights into lanthanide-containing POMs as tunable luminescent components in UV and moisture dual-responsive materials.
The assembly of long-lasting luminescent films is expected to play an important role in the development of a new generation of smart sensors. Recently, we developed a method for the orderly assembly of long afterglow films using a hydrogen bonding LBL process by utilizing the self-organization of phosphors in a two-dimensional (2D) channel between clay nanosheets. In order to investigate the potential application of the self-supporting films as humidity-responsive RTP sensors, the humidity-related afterglow luminescence of the films was investigated. In situ monitoring of the self-supporting films under different relative humidity atmospheres showed that the phosphorescence intensity decreased rapidly as the RH increased from 16% to 94%. At 94% RH, the RTP of the film almost disappeared. Generally, as the RH increases, more water is absorbed by the membrane; therefore, hydrogen bonds between the hydroxyl group and the carboxyl group are more likely to rupture. The cleavage of hydrogen bonds and vibration of water molecules destroy the stability of the triplet excitons, thereby significantly reducing the RTP intensity. When the films are placed in water, the RTP is almost quenched. This directly indicates that humidity affects the phosphorescence intensity. We anticipate that the LBL assembly process can be extended to other inorganic–organic RTP mixtures for intelligent illuminating sensors and anti-counterfeiting applications.146
3.6 Luminescent film sensors for heavy metal ions
The rapid increase in toxic heavy metal ions (e.g. Cr, As, Zn, Pb, Cu, Cd, Ni, and Hg) being released into the environment is now considered to be a major environmental problem worldwide.147–156 Therefore, the monitoring of heavy metal ions in the environment has received considerable attention.157,158 In general, luminescent thin film sensors are beneficial for the rapid and portable detection of heavy metal ions.159–165 The mechanism of the luminescent sensors for detecting heavy metal ions mainly involves fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) between the films and heavy metal ions,163 electron transfer,164,165 and the spin–orbit coupling of electrons.162
Leblanc and Andreopoulos's groups reported that several peptide lipid monolayers (Fig. 7a–c) were used at the air–water and air–solid interface using Langmuir and LB membrane techniques and tested their potential as fluorescent sensors for copper ions in aqueous phase.161 For the LB film, the fluorescence response is selective for copper ions compared to several other transition metal ions. In addition, significant reversibility was observed: the fluorescence was turned off by immersing the solid substrate in a copper ion solution and by washing with an HCl solution (Fig. 7a–c). In one method, both the ionophore and the fluorophore units were in the same molecule (lipid A), so intramolecular interactions were responsible for the fluorescence quenching of monolayers of this lipid. In the other method, the ionophore and fluorophore were located on two different molecules (lipids B and C), so the intramolecular coupling does not exist; instead the fluorescence quenching was realized by a through-space interaction mechanism. Hence, the intermolecular approach appears to be a very flexible and versatile method of designing surface-oriented fluorescent sensor films to meet different analytical purposes.161
 Fig. 7  (a–c) Epifluorescence images of Langmuir monolayers of peptide lipids in the absence and presence of copper ions (10−5 M) in the subphase (image size 895 × 713 μm). Experimental conditions: surface pressure = 15 mN m−1; pH = 7.0 (phosphate buffer); UV light was used for excitation. Reprinted with permission.161 Copyright 2003, American Chemical Society. (d) The Cu(II) concentration vs. fluorescence intensity graph was linear in the Cu(II) concentration range of 1 × 10−5 to 1 × 10−10 M, with a detection limit of 1 × 10−10 M. Particularly, we analyzed the region from 1 to 10 μM, which is the copper pollution region associated with human life (the inset shows a schematic of an all organic label-like flexible and stretchable Cu(II) ion film sensor). Reprinted with permission.162 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
Chen's group has developed a new Cu(II) ion sensor made of all organic materials with bending and tensile properties. The new sensor consists of chlorophyll-a extracted from fresh leaves of common garcinia, plant fibers and uses polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) as a substrate (inset of Fig. 7d). The fluorescence spectra show that chlorophyll-a is more sensitive to Cu(II) ions than any other heavy metal ion, and the device sensitivity is superior to all reported Cu(II) ion sensors (Fig. 7d). The fluorescence quenching can be attributed to two main factors. The paramagnetism and heavy metal effects of the Cu(II) ions may cause electron spin–orbit coupling and convert the excited singlet state into the triplet state, and the internal molecular conversion thus reduces the fluorescence intensity. Besides this, paramagnetic Cu(II) ions can also induce reversible electron transfer to quench the fluorescence. The results fully demonstrate the selectivity of chlorophyll-a for Cu(II) ions. Bending and tensile testing has shown that the sensor has good durability and can be used to develop corresponding applications such as real-time sampling and specified Cu(II) concentration analysis in athlete sweat or brain death and Parkinson's disease patients.162
Additionally, optically-active nanofiber membranes can be obtained by electrospinning techniques and further functionalized with optically-active chromophores to produce fluorescent and colorimetric nanofiber sensors for the specific detection of heavy metals. In this direction, Wang's group marked the first successful attempt by incorporating perovskite QDs into PMMA using the electrospinning method, leading to the formation of a nanoscale fiber film.163 Preserving the surface ligand of the perovskite QDs during electrospinning is beneficial to maintain its high QY (88%), which is critical for highly efficient FRET detection. Due to the efficient FRET process between the film and the cyclam-Cu(II), the unprecedented detection limit of the Cu(II) ions is pushed to 10−15 M. The enhanced sensitivity of electrospun nanofibers is generally attributed to their greater surface area compared to that of films.
Recently, ZnS QDs were mixed with chitosan to design a QD-based membrane for sensing and removing heavy metal ions such as Hg2+, Ag+, and Pb2+ in water based on a cation exchange reaction.164 Cation exchange occurs between Zn2+ of the ZnS QDs in the film and Hg2+, Ag+ and Pb2+ ions to produce corresponding non-luminescent HgS, Ag2S, and PbS QDs. For Hg2+ and Pb2+, the visual detection limit of Ag+ was determined to be 25 ppm or even lower (5 ppm). The system can be suitably used as a simple dipstick to eliminate heavy metal ion contamination in water. Moreover, negatively-charged CdTe QDs were deposited on quartz slides to form multilayer films via electrostatic interactions with polydiallyldimethylammonium chloride (PDDA). Negatively charged CdTe QDs were deposited on a quartz glass slide via electrostatic interactions with PDDA to form a multilayer film.165 Due to the electron transfer process between the QDs and thiosuccinic acid molecules on the surface of the Hg2+, the fluorescence of the PDDA/QD multilayer film can be effectively quenched by Hg2+. The fluorescence intensity of quenching can be perfectly described using the modified Stern–Volmer equation, where the concentration of Hg2+ is in the range of 0.01–1 mM. It is noted that the coexisting Cu2+ ions show strong interference when detecting Hg2+.
3.7 Luminescent film sensors for explosive compounds
Typical organic explosive compounds are nitroorganisms, peroxides and nitramines.166–169 Tracking explosives and explosive-related compounds from explosive production have adverse effects on the environment and human health due to harmful and mutagenic substances.170–173 For example, when explosives remain in the environment for a long time, they break down into various degradation products that contaminate soil and groundwater at toxic levels, compounds such as trinitrotoluene (TNT), dinitrobenzene (DNB), and nitrobenzene (NB).174–177 Therefore, the selective and reliable detection of explosive materials is critical in the chemical and environmental sciences.178–180 In recent years, the research and development of sensors of nitroaromatic compounds have attracted wide attention in the areas of public safety and environmental protection.181,182
For example, we have reported organic–inorganic hybrid films that have a reversible luminescence response to nitroaromatic explosive compounds using an optical brightener anionic stilbene derivative (BBU) and Mg–Al-LDH nanosheets.183 These films have a fast, selective and reversible luminescence response to different nitroaromatic explosives, producing the most pronounced luminescence red shift for picric acid (Fig. 8). In addition, by combining suitable illuminating species, these films can also be extended to other two-color illuminating systems that exhibit changes in luminescence intensity and ratio fluorescence when interacting with explosives. These films can thus act as solid state light sensors for nitroaromatic compounds.
 Fig. 8  The luminescence response profiles of the films to (a) NB, (b) mDNB, (c) DNT, (d) TNT and (e) PA at different concentrations. (f) Comparison of the normalized luminescence intensity of the films responding to different nitroaromatic compounds (100 ppm). Reprinted with permission.183 Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Swager et al. have developed a new sensitivity enhancement mechanism that demonstrates how laser action in organic polymers can be used to increase sensitivity to nitroaromatic explosives.184 They found that the amplified spontaneous emission (ASE) signal is up to 30 times more sensitive to quenching than the emission of a semiconductor organic polymer (SOP) film exposed to saturated DNT vapor for 1 s. By using distributed feedback (DFB) grating structures, they achieved higher sensitivity to saturated TNT vapors. However, the high cost and relatively complex manufacturing process of UV band DBF gratings limits their application. In order to increase the sensitivity to nitroaromatic explosives, laser action in organic polymers has been used in mixed films composed of titanium dioxide (TiO2) nanoparticles and conjugated polymers.185 They first demonstrated that random laser action from a hybrid membrane composed of SOP and TiO2 nanoparticles can be used to detect TNT vapor. The mixed film was produced by spin coating a SOP solution in which nano TiO2 particles were dispersed on quartz glass. The SOP in the hybrid film is used as a gain medium and sensation transducer. The fluorescence quenching behavior of the mixed membranes measured in a TNT vapor atmosphere (10 ppb) indicated that the attenuated laser in the optically pumped hybrid membrane exhibits a sensitivity to explosive vapors that is more than 20 times higher than that observed with spontaneous emission. This phenomenon can be explained by a four-level laser model. Since sensory transducers used in hybrid polymer/nanoparticle systems can be replaced by other functional materials, the concepts developed can be extended to more general chemical or environmental testing fields.
Kim and co-workers made a TNT sensor film by LBL assembly using QD as the transduction unit and engineered M13 virus as the recognition unit.186 The engineered M13 virus captured black hole quencher (BHQ2-COOH) can extinguish the emission through QD and energy transfer between BHQ2-COOH and QDs in the membrane. Interestingly, TNT can release and replace BHQ2-COOH because it has a higher binding affinity for the engineered M13 virus, resulting in recovery of the fluorescence. Therefore, the prepared film was successfully applied for TNT detection at the sub-ppb level, with high sensitivity and specificity. In addition, this nanocomposite film is able to distinguish between TNT and DNT, which still remains a challenge in the field of explosive sensing.
3.8 Luminescent film sensors for oxygen
Oxygen is ubiquitous in nature and is vital to almost all living systems. Luminescent oxygen sensors have attracted much attention due to their wide application in various fields such as biology, meteorology and environmental monitoring.187 For example, with the rapid growth of population, the metabolic activities of plants have become one of the basic research fields of agricultural productivity. Therefore, due to the high respiration rate of plants, oxygen sensors for adequate monitoring of plant tissues need to meet a detectable range of 5% to 80% oxygen concentration and high oxygen sensitivity.188,189 Park's group has presented a method for analyzing the sensitivity enhancements caused by morphological modifications of the sensing membrane, including oxygen accessibility and luminescence intensity.190 The results show that the reason for the sensitivity enhancement in the film is driven more by the increase in the oxygen-accessible site than the increase in the luminous intensity. Furthermore, a sensing film with pores only on its outer surface and not within its volume exhibited an enhanced sensitivity of 72% with respect to the solid sensing film. Thus, the external surface area of the sensing film has a significantly greater effect on the sensitivity than the effect of the pores within the film volume because the outer surface acts as an oxygen diffusion barrier, limiting the amount of oxygen that can enter the film.
Luminescent polymer films containing transition metal complexes can be simply obtained via a conventional spin coating method. A large number of studies have been devoted to the development of novel transition metal complexes for the luminescent detection of O2.191–194 The addition of a mercapto or decyl ethynyl addenda to a Ru polypyridine complex can effectively extend the fluorescence lifetime of the Ru complex. Therefore, the detection sensitivity of O2 can be improved.190 In addition, a cyclometallated Pt(II) complex based on 2-phenylquinoline was also synthesized. The photophysical properties of the complexes demonstrate that the introduction of a diphenylamino group at the 4-position of the phenyl ring significantly affects the HOMO level of the Pt(II) complex, resulting in a marked decrease in the energy gap. Pt(II) complexes with low energy gaps are promising candidates for fabricating luminescent O2 sensors with high sensitivity.193,194
As is known, O2 probes are usually excited by visible or ultraviolet light. To compensate for the gap in NIR-excitable sensors for O2, Wolfbeis et al. proposed the first oxygen sensor that can be excited with NIR light.195 They used up-converted nanoparticles (UCNPs) excited with 980 nm laser light and visible light for the photoexcited quenchable probing of oxygen to overcome the lack of NIR-excitable oxygen probes. The materials and components are readily available, and the advantage of operating at such long excitation wavelengths is primarily due to the complete absence of luminescent background interference, which may be effective in samples such as serum.196
In fact, versatile sensors are highly desirable for practical application needs. A low-cost, simple technique for fabricating plastic fiber optic sensors for dual detection of temperature and oxygen has been described.197 A doped fluorinated xerogel has been used for oxygen and temperature sensors. Both the O2 and temperature indicators can be excited with 405 nm LED light and two different emission wavelengths can be separately detected. A typical Stern–Volmer plot of a fiber optic film for O2 sensing shows linearity, and the attenuation of the relative luminescence intensity for temperature sensing is also linearly related to the temperature within the test range. In addition, the results indicate that the luminescence characteristics of the temperature sensor are independent of the presence of the O2 sensor and have a uniquely good linear response in the range of 25–66 °C. Finally, the O2 sensing scheme proposed is intended for temperature compensation, and the fiber optic dual sensor can be used for non-contact sensing of temperature and O2 in environmental, medical, and biological applications.
Recently, Nakai et al. prepared a lanthanide-based oxygen sensor in a polystyrene film. The film shows a high sensitivity (I0/I100 = 14.9) and fast response (response/recovery time = 1.9 s/2.9 s).198 Wang's group designed electrospun fibrous films doped with a series of luminescent copper complexes for oxygen sensing. It was found that a large electron-pulling conjugation plane in the diamine ligand increased the decay lifetime of the excited electrons and broadened their distribution, which increased the sensing collision probability between the excited electrons and O2 molecules, favoring the oxygen sensing performance.199 Zhang et al. presented the first demonstration of a real-time TET2 kinetics assay in vitro using a metal–organic framework-based optical O2 sensor.200
4. Conclusions
In the light of fast developing smart materials, typical examples of luminescent behavior and the stimuli-responsive performance of thin films have been reviewed and discussed in detail. It is clear that stimuli-responsive luminescent films play an important role in a wide range of applications. Various methods of assembling luminescent films have laid the foundation for basic and practical research. Various new characterization techniques (such as laser, polarization, room temperature phosphorescence, ratiometric emission, and so on) have also enriched the luminescent types and signals in this field. In this review, we have selected two representative external stimuli as examples: physical stimuli (such as light, humidity, pressure and heat) and chemical stimuli (such as pH value, heavy metal ions, explosive compounds, and oxygen), which show that stimuli-responsive luminescent films are good candidates for use as switchable devices and smart sensors. To meet future practical applications, in depth studies need to be focused on how to enhance the responsive time, the repeatability and on/off ratio of luminescent switches and sensors. Moreover, although single-stimulus-responsive luminescent films have been largely developed recently, examples of multi-stimuli-responsive systems are still relatively limited. It is anticipated that fabrication methods and the principles behind the luminescence responses of the as-reported systems can be extended to develop new multi-stimuli-responsive luminescent materials. Research to this end is continuing in our laboratory and many others worldwide.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21473013, 21771021, and 21822501), the Beijing Nova Program (xx2018115), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities, and the Analytical and Measurements Fund of Beijing Normal University.
Notes and references
J. C. H. Chan, W. H. Lam, H.-L. Wong, W. T. Wong and V. W. W. Yam, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 11504 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhu, Q. Su, W. Feng and F. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 1025 Search PubMed .
K. Zhou, H. Liu, S. Zhang, X. Huang, Y. Wang, G. Huang, B. D. Sumer and J. Gao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 7803 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhou and D. Yan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1807599 CrossRef .
X. Chen, S. Kang, M. J. Kim, J. Kim, Y. S. Kim, H. Kim, B. Chi, S. J. Kim, J. Y. Lee and J. Yoon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 1422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Geltmeyer, G. Vancoillie, I. Steyaert, B. Breyne, G. Cousins, K. Lava, R. Hoogenboom, K. Buysser and K. Clerck, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 5987 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sagara and T. Kato, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 605 CAS .
H. Nakanotani, T. Higuchi, T. Furukawa, K. Masui, K. Morimoto, M. Numata, H. Tanaka, Y. Sagara, T. Yasuda and C. Adachi, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4016 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kobatake, H. Muto, T. Ishikawa and M. Irie, Nature, 2007, 446, 778 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhou, D. Yan and M. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 10099 RSC .
W. Yao, Y. Yan, L. Xue, C. Zhang, G. Li, Q. Zheng, Y. Zhao, H. Jiang and J. Yao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 8713 CAS .
X. Zheng, L. Wang, Q. Pei, S. He, S. Liu and Z. Xie, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 2374 CAS .
T. Myochin, K. Kiyose, K. Hanaoka, H. Kojima, T. Terai and T. Nagano, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 3401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Chandrasekharan and L. A. Kelly, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 9898 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Lee, S. Lee and L. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 12724 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Silvi and A. Credi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 4275 RSC .
M. S. Kwon, D. Lee, S. Seo, J. Jung and J. Kim, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 11177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Phillips, M. E. Coltrin, M. H. Crawford, A. J. Fischer, M. R. Krames, R. Mueller-Mach, G. O. Mueller, Y. Ohno, L. E. S. Rohwer, J. A. Simmons and J. Y. Tsao, Laser Photonics Rev., 2007, 1, 307 CrossRef CAS .
X.-D. Wang, O. S. Wolfbeis and R. J. Meier, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 7834 RSC .
J. Kunzelman, B. R. Crenshaw and C. Weder, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 2989 RSC .
M. Morimoto and M. Irie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 14172 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lv, J. Cheng, A. Steiner, L. Gan and D. S. Wright, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 1934 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Lim, L. Feng, J. W. Kemling, C. J. Musto and K. S. Suslick, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 562 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Shim, C. S. Kim, Y. Ahn, Z. Chen and Y. J. Kwon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 8316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. E. Dick, C. Renault, B.-K. Kim and A. J. Bard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 13546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          B. Valeur, Molecular Fluorescence: Principle and Applications, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2002 Search PubMed .
G. S. Papaefstathiou, Z. Zhong, L. Geng and L. R. MacGillivray, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 9158 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B.-K. An, S.-K. Kwon and S. Y. Park, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 1978 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Gao, M. Zhao, Y. Guan, X. Fang, X. Li and D. Yan, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 9579 RSC .
D. Yan, J. Lu, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Chem. Eng. J., 2013, 225, 216 CrossRef CAS .
R. Gao, X. Fang and D. Yan. Yan, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 4444 RSC .
D. P. Yan, J. Lu, M. Wei, J. B. Han, J. Ma, F. Li, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 3073 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Guo, F. Zhang, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Chem. Commun., 2009, 6836 RSC .
S. M. Ji, W. H. Wu, W. T. Wu, P. Song, K. L. Han, Z. G. Wang, S. S. Liu, H. M. Guo and J. Z. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 1953 RSC .
X. D. Yang, B. W. Shen, Y. N. Jiang, Z. X. Zhao, C. X. Wang, C. Ma, B. Yang and Q. Lin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 1201 RSC .
J. S. Kim, S. Y. Lee, J. Yoon and J. Vicens, Chem. Commun., 2009, 4791 RSC .
P. Innocenzi and L. Malfatti, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 4198 CAS .
J. W. Jo, J. W. Jung, J. U. Lee and W. H. Jo, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5382 CAS .
M. Cavallini, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 11867 RSC .
S. M. Ng and R. Narayanaswamy, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2006, 386, 1235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. P. Yan, J. Lu, M. Wei, J. Ma, X. R. Wang, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 7007 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. N. Yang, J. K. J. van Duren, R. A. J. Janssen, M. A. J. Michels and J. Loos, Macromolecules, 2004, 37, 2151 CAS .
D. P. Yan, J. Lu, M. Wei, J. Ma, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 9200 CAS .
G. Polito, V. Robbiano, C. Cozzi, F. Cacialli and G. Barillaro, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 8351 Search PubMed .
S. W. Dai, B. W. Hsu, C. Y. Chen, C. A. Lee, H. Y. Liu, H. F. Wang, Y. C. Huang, T. L. Wu, A. Manikandan, R. M. Ho, C. S. Tsao, C. H. Cheng, Y. L. Chueh and H. W. Lin, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705532 Search PubMed .
X. Wang and O. S. Wolfbeis, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 3666 RSC .
J. Sun, C. Lu, Y. Song, Q. Ji, X. Song, Q. Li, Y. Zhang, L. Zhang, J. Kong and Z. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 4242 CAS .

          A. C. Jones and M. L. Hitchman, Chemical Vapour Deposition: Precursors, Processes and Applications, RSC Publishing,  2009 Search PubMed .
Z. Bo, Y. Yang, J. Chen, K. Yu, J. Yan and K. Cen, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 5180 CAS .
C. Dhand, N. Dwivedi, X. J. Loh, A. N. Jie Ying, N. K. Verma, R. W. Beuerman, R. Lakshminarayanan and S. Ramakrishna, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 105003 CAS .
M. N. Getz, P.-A. Hansen, H. Fjellvåg and O. Nilsen, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 8051 CAS .
M. N. Getz, P.-A. Hansen, M. A. K. Ahmed, H. Fjellvåg and O. Nilsen, Dalton Trans., 2017, 46, 3008 RSC .
M. N. Getz, P.-A. Hansen, Ø. S. Fjellvåg, M. A. K. Ahmed, H. Fjellvåg and O. Nilsen, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 8572 RSC .
J. A. Montes-Gutiérrez, J. J. Alcantar-Peña, E. de Obaldia, N. J. Zúñiga-Rivera, V. Chernov, R. Meléndrez-Amavizca, M. Barboza-Flores, R. Garcia-Gutierrez and O. Auciello, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2018, 85, 117 Search PubMed .
J. A. Zasadzinski, R. Viswanathan, L. Madsen, J. Garnaes and D. K. Schwartz, Science, 1994, 263, 1726 CAS .
Y. J. Zheng, J. Orbulescu, X. J. Ji, F. M. Andreopoulos, S. M. Pham and R. M. Leblanc, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 2680 CAS .
N. A. Azahari, F. L. Supian, T. H. Richardson and S. A. Malik, Adv. Mater. Res., 2014, 895, 8 Search PubMed .
C. P. L. Rubingera, R. L. Moreiraa, L. A. Curya, G. N. Fontesa, B. R. A. Nevesa, A. Meneguzzib and C. A. Ferreira, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2006, 253, 543 CrossRef .
R. Ma, Z. Tian, Y. Hu, Y. Huang and J. Lu, Langmuir, 2018 DOI:10.1021/acs.langmuir.8b02232 .
D. Bonifazi, O. Enger and F. Diederich, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2007, 36, 390 RSC .
C. Vericat, M. E. Vela, G. Benitez, P. Carro and R. C. Salvarezza, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 1805 CAS .
T. H. Liu, L. P. Ding, G. He, Y. Yang, W. L. Wang and Y. Fang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 1245 CAS .
X. Y. Cheng, S. B. Lowe, P. J. Reece and J. J. Gooding, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 2680 RSC .
Z. P. Liu, R. Z. Ma, M. Osada, N. Iyi, Y. Ebina, K. Takada and T. Sasaki, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 4872 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, X. Wang and J. Q. Sun, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 5998 RSC .
S. Srivastava and N. A. Kotov, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1831 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Gao, X. Fang and D. Yan, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 4444 RSC .
D. Yan, J. Lu, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 13128 RSC .
J. Han, D. Yan, W. Shi, J. Ma, H. Yan, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2010, 114, 5678 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. P. Yan, J. Lu, M. Wei, J. Ma, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Chem. Commun., 2009, 6358 RSC .
F. Puntoriero, P. Ceroni, V. Balzani, G. Bergamini and F. Vogtle, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 10714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Gao, X. Lei, M. Chen, D. Yan and M. Wei, New J. Chem., 2013, 37, 4110 RSC .
R. Gao and D. Yan, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 5408 RSC .
D. P. Yan, J. Lu, J. Ma, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 720 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-L. Zhang and S.-H. Yu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 4423 RSC .
D. Li, Y. Wang and Y. Xia, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 361 CrossRef CAS .
D. Grafahrend, K. H. Heffels, M. V. Beer, P. Gasteier, M. Möller, G. Boehm, P. D. Dalton and J. Groll, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 67 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Agarwal, J. H. Wendorff and A. Greiner, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. B. Francesca, C. Andrea, P. Luana, M. L. Anna, P. Emanuela, C. Roberto, T. Leander and P. Dario, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 4234 RSC .
R. Gao, D. Cao, Y. Guan and D. Yan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 9904 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Gao, D. Cao, Y. Guan and D. P. Yan, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2016, 55, 125 CrossRef CAS .
R. Gao, Y. Zhao, X. Yang and D. Yan, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 56470 RSC .
D. B. Mitzi, L. L. Kosbar, C. E. Murray, M. Copel and A. Afzali, Nature, 2004, 428, 299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, Y. C. Kim, W. S. Yang, S. Ryu and S. I. Seok, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 897 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yuan, G. Giri, A. L. Ayzner, A. P. Zoombelt, S. C. B. Mannsfeld, J. Chen, D. Nordlund, M. F. Toney, J. Huang and Z. Bao, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3005 CrossRef PubMed .
W.-Y. Chung, G. Sakai, K. Shimanoe, N. Miura, D.-D. Lee and N. Yamazoe, Sens. Actuators, B, 1998, 46, 139 CrossRef CAS .
P. C. Jukes, S. Y. Heriot, J. S. Sharp and R. A. L. Jones, Macromolecules, 2005, 38, 2030 CrossRef CAS .
R. H. Schmidt, K. Mosbach and K. Haupt, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 719 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sun, Z. Li, Y. Sun, L. Zhong, J. Huang, J. Zhang, Z. Liang, J. Chen and L. Jiang, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 953 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Wong, W. S. Tang, X. X. Lu, N. Zhu and W. W. Yam, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 1492 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Sun, H. Peng, M. Stich, D. Achatz and O. Wolfbeis, Chem. Commun., 2009, 5000 CAS .
Z. Qi and Y. Chen, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2017, 87, 236 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Stahl, A. Glud, C. R. Schröder, I. Klimant, A. Tengberg and R. N. Glud, Limnol. Oceanogr.: Methods, 2006, 4, 336 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. Schroeder, B. M. Weidgans and I. Klimant, Analyst, 2005, 130, 907 RSC .
E. Poehler, S. A. Pfeiffer, M. Herm, M. Gaebler, B. Busse and S. Nagl, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2016, 408, 2927 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Arain, G. T. John, C. Krause, J. Gerlach, O. S. Wolfbeis and I. Klimant, Sens. Actuators, B, 2006, 113, 639 CrossRef CAS .
R. Badugu, Y. Kostov, G. Rao and L. Tolosa, Biotechnol. Prog., 2008, 24, 1393 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Poehler, C. Herzog, M. Suendermann, S. A. Pfeiffer and S. Nagl, Eng. Life Sci., 2015, 15, 276 CrossRef CAS .
A. Zanzotto, N. Szita, P. Boccazzi, P. Lessard, A. J. Sinskey and K. F. Jensen, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 2004, 87, 243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, N. Szita, P. A. Boccazzi, J. Sinskey and K. F. Jensen, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 2006, 93, 286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Korostynska, K. Arshak, E. Gill and A. Arshak, IEEE Sens. J., 2008, 8, 20 Search PubMed .
K. Paek, S. Chung, C.-H. Cho and B. J. Kim, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 10272 RSC .
Z. Bai, R. Chen, P. Si, Y. Huang, H. Sun and D.-H. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 5856 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-C. Mau, G.-R. Lin, M.-Y. Fu and W.-F. Liu, Microw. Opt. Technol. Lett., 2013, 55, 855 CrossRef .
Z. Xu, X. Dai and X. Chai, Biochem. Eng. J., 2018, 131, 24 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yoshihara, T. Noguchi and B. Roy, Chem. – Eur. J., 2017, 23, 17663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yin, C. He, C. Huang, W. Zhu, X. Wang, Y. Xu and X. Qian, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 4486 RSC .
W. Pan, L. Na, T. Bo, W. Honghong, Y. Limin and Y. Zhengze, Anal. Chem., 2016, 88, 6743 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. S. Richardson, C. Gregor, F. R. Winter, N. T. Urban, S. J. Sahl, K. I. Willig and S. W. Hell, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 577 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Na, E. S. Lee and Y. H. Bae, Bioconjugate Chem., 2007, 18, 1568 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Peer, J. M. Karp, S. Hong, O. C. Farokhzad, R. Margalit and R. Langer, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 751 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, H. Yuan, A. M. Fales and T. Vo-Dinh, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2013, 44, 980 CrossRef CAS .
R. Duncan, Nat. Rev. Cancer, 2006, 6, 688 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yan, Y.-N. Chang, L. Zhao, Z. Gu, X. Liu, G. Tian, L. Zhou, W. Ren, S. Jin, W. Yin, H. Chang, G. Xing, X. Gao and Y. Zhao, Carbon, 2013, 57, 120 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yan, Y.-N. Chang, W. Yin, X. Liu, D. Xiao, G. Xing, L. Zhao, Z. Gu and Y. Zhao, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 1576 RSC .
W. Shi, S. He, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 3856 CrossRef CAS .
E. Kharlampieva, V. Kozlovskaya, O. Zavgorodnya, G. D. Lilly, N. A. Kotov and V. V. Tsukruk, Soft Matter, 2010, 6, 800 RSC .
J. Hu, C. Li and S. Liu, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 724 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, Y. Raval, H. Chen, T. R. J. Tzeng, J. D. DesJardins and J. N. Anker, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2014, 3, 197 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. F. Lou, T. M. Finegan, P. Mohsen, T. A. Hatton and P. E. Laibinis, Rev. Anal. Chem., 1999, 18, 235 CAS .
E. M. Graham, K. Iwai, S. Uchiyama, A. P. de Silva, S. W. Magennis and A. C. Jones, Lab Chip, 2010, 10, 1267 RSC .
P. Low, B. Kim, N. Takama and C. Bergaud, Small, 2008, 4, 908 CAS .
R. Liang, R. Tian, W. Shi, Z. Liu, D. Yan, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 969 CAS .
R. Tian, S. Zhang, M. Li, Y. Zhou, B. Lu, D. Yan, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 5006 CAS .
W. Liu, S. Xu, Z. Li, R. Liang, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 5426 CrossRef CAS .

          D. O. Olawale, O. O. I. Okoli, R. S. Fontenot and W. A. Hollerman, Triboluminescence: Theory, Synthesis and Application, Springer, Heidelberg,  2016, ch. 1, pp. 1–16 Search PubMed .
J. I. Zink, Acc. Chem. Res., 1978, 11, 289 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Jeong, S. Song, K.-I. Joo, J. Kim, S.-H. Hwang, J. Jeong and H. Kim, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3338 RSC .
C. Löwe and C. Weder, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 1625 CrossRef .
D. A. Davis, A. Hamilton, J. Yang, L. D. Cremar, D. Van Gough, S. L. Potisek, M. T. Ong, P. V. Braun, T. J. Martínez, S. R. White, J. S. Moore and N. R. Sottos, Nature, 2009, 459, 68 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Chang, L. Yang, J. Yang, M. P. Stoykovich, X. Deng, J. Cui and D. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704234 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Calvino, A. Guha, C. Weder and S. Schrettl, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704603 Search PubMed .
J. P. Beyer, M. Krueger, F. Giesselmann and R. Zentel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 109 Search PubMed .
M. Irie, Chem. Rev., 2000, 100, 1685 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Massimiliano, G. Silvia and M. R. Francisco, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 787 Search PubMed .
R. S. Stoll and S. Hecht, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 5054 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Li, Y. Xiang, X. Wang, J. Li, R. Hu, A. Tong and B. Z. Tang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 1643 CAS .
N. D. Paul, S. Mandal, M. Otte, X. Cui, X. P. Zhang and B. de Bruin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 1090 CAS .
B. Hui, D. Wu, Q. Huang, L. Cai, G. Li, J. Li and G. Zhao, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 73566 RSC .
D.-D. Han, Y.-L. Zhang, H.-B. Jiang, H. Xia, J. Feng, Q.-D. Chen, H.-L. Xu and H.-B. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 332 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Yamamoto, T. Hamada, I. Hisaki, M. Miyata and N. Tohnai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 1709 CAS .
M. Ma, L. Guo, D. G. Anderson and R. Langer, Science, 2013, 339, 186 CAS .
Z. Chen and C. Lu, Sens. Lett., 2005, 3, 274 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cheng, J. Wang, Z. Qiu, X. Zheng, N. L. C. Leung, J. W. Y. Lam and B. Z. Tang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703900 CrossRef PubMed .
Y.-F. Qiu, H. Liu, J.-X. Liu, C. Zhang, Z. Ma, P.-A. Hu and G.-G. Gao, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 6322 RSC .
R. Gao and D. Yan, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 3606 CrossRef CAS .
P. B. Tchounwou, C. G. Yedjou, A. K. Patlolla and D. J. Sutton, EXS, 2012, 101, 133 Search PubMed .
S. Mohapatra, S. Sahu, N. Sinha and S. K. Bhutia, Analyst, 2015, 140, 1221 RSC .
D. S. Yuan, R. Stearman, A. Dancis, T. Dunn, T. Beeler and R. D. Klausner, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1995, 92, 2632 CAS .
M. A. Lovell, J. D. Robertson, W. J. Teesdale, J. L. Campbell and W. R. Markesbery, J. Neurol. Sci., 1998, 158, 47 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jayakanthan, L. T. Braiterman, N. M. Hasan, V. M. Unger and S. Lutsenko, J. Biol. Chem., 2017, 292, 18760 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Y. Zhou, L. Tang, G. M. Zeng, C. Zhang, Y. Zhang and X. Xie, Sens. Actuators, B, 2016, 223, 280 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Pandey, P. Singh, J. Singh, S. Sachan, S. Srivastava and S. K. Singh, Electroanalysis, 2016, 28, 2472 CrossRef CAS .
G. Aragay, J. Pons and A. Merkoçi, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3433 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Mehta, S. K. Bhardwaj, N. Bhardwaj, A. K. Paul, P. Kumar, K. H. Kim and A. Deep, Biotechnol. Adv., 2016, 34, 47 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, H. Gou, I. Al-Ogaidi and N. Wu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2013, 1, 713 CrossRef CAS .
G. Aragay, J. Pons and A. Merkoi, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3433 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. N. Kim, W. X. Ren, J. S. Kim and J. Yoon, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 3210 RSC .
P. Li, C. Ji, H. Ma, M. Zhang and Y. Cheng, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 5741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D.-M. Chen, S. Wang, H.-X. Li, X.-Z. Zhu and C.-H. Zhao, Inorg. Chem., 2014, 53, 12532 CAS .
Y. Zheng, J. Orbulescu, X. Ji, F. M. Andreopoulos, S. M. Pham and R. M. Leblanc, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 2680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-J. Wu, H.-H. Hu, C.-Z. Siao, Y.-M. Liao, J.-H. Chen, M.-Y. Li, T.-Y. Lin and Y.-F. Chen, ACS Sens., 2018, 3, 99 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. W. Wang, Y. H. Zhu, J. F. Huang, J. Cai, J. R. Zhu, X. L. Yang, J. H. Shen and C. Z. Li, Nanoscale Horiz., 2017, 2, 225 RSC .
A. Jaiswal, S. S. Ghsoh and A. Chattopadhyay, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 15687 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, J. W. Zhao, Y. Wang, N. Lou, Q. Ma and X. G. Su, Sens. Actuators, B, 2009, 139, 476 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Thomas III, G. D. Joly and T. M. Swager, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1339 CrossRef PubMed .
A. D. Beveridge, Forensic Sci. Rev., 1992, 4, 17 CAS .
C. M. Carbonaro, A. Anedda, S. Grandi and A. Magistris, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 12932 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Rose, Z. Hu, C. F. Madigan, T. M. Swager and V. Bulovic, Nature, 2005, 434, 876 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. E. Walker and D. L. Kaplan, Biodegradation, 1992, 3, 369 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Rodgers and N. J. Bunce, Water Res., 2001, 35, 2101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. E. Germain and M. J. Knapp, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 2543 RSC .
Y. Salinas, R. Martinez-Manez, M. D. Marcos, F. Sancenon, A. M. Castero, M. Parra and S. Gil, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 1261 RSC .
S. S. Nagarkar, B. Joarder, A. K. Chaudhari, S. Mukherjee and S. K. Ghosh, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 2881 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. C. Rong, L. P. Lin, X. H. Song, T. T. Zhao, Y. X. Zhong, J. W. Yan, Y. R. Wang and X. Chen, Anal. Chem., 2015, 87, 1288 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Haas, G. Stork and Z. Fresenius, Anal. Chem., 1989, 335, 839 CAS .
M. E. Walsh, Talanta, 2001, 54, 427 CAS .
S. Hrapovic, E. Majid, Y. Liu, K. Male and J. H. T. Luong, Anal. Chem., 2006, 78, 5504 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Sanchez, A. G. DiPasquale, A. L. Rheingold and W. C. Trogler, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 6459 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Sanchez, S. A. Urbas, S. J. Toal, A. G. DiPasquale, A. L. Rheingold and W. C. Trogler, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 1237 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, Y. Zhou, D. Yan and M. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 3473 RSC .
Z. Xiang and D. Cao, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2012, 33, 1184 CAS .
H. Ma, R. Gao, D. Yan, J. Zhao and M. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 4128 RSC .
A. Rose, Z. G. Zhu, C. F. Madigan, T. M. Swager and V. Bulovic, Nature, 2005, 434, 876 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Deng, Q. He, C. He, L. Shi, J. Cheng and T. Lin, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2010, 114, 4725 CAS .
H. Jin, N. Won, B. Ahn, J. Kwag, K. Heo, J.-W. Oh, Y. T. Sun, S. G. Cho, S.-W. Lee and S. Kim, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 604 Search PubMed .
X.-D. Wang and O. S. Wolfbeis, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 3666 RSC .
H. Tschiersch, G. Liebsch, L. Borisjuk, A. Stangelmayer and H. Rolletschek, New Phytol., 2012, 196, 926 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Koren, K. E. Brodersen, S. L. Jakobsen and M. Kühl, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2015, 49, 2286 CAS .
S. Lee and J.-W. Park, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 249, 364 CAS .
C.-J. Lin, C.-Y. Chen, S. K. Kundu and J.-S. Yang, Inorg. Chem., 2014, 53, 737 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Ji, W. H. Wu, W. T. Wu, P. Song, K. L. Han, Z. G. Wang, S. S. Liu, H. M. Guo and J. Z. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 1953 RSC .
C. Liu, X. L. Song, Z. G. Wang and J. S. Qiu, ChemPlusChem, 2014, 79, 1472 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, X. L. Song, X. F. Rao, Y. Xing, Z. G. Wang, J. Z. Zhao and J. S. Qiu, Dyes Pigm., 2014, 101, 85 CrossRef CAS .
D. E. Achatz, R. J. Meier, L. H. Fischer and O. S. Wolfbeis, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 260 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. S. Wolfbeis and M. Leiner, Anal. Chim. Acta, 1985, 167, 203 CAS .
C.-S. Chu and C.-A. Lin, Sens. Actuators, B, 2014, 195, 259 CrossRef CAS .
H. Nakai, M. Kuyama, J. Seo, T. Goto, T. Matsumoto and S. Ogo, Dalton Trans., 2017, 46, 9126 RSC .
T. Lan and W. Wang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 254, 81 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, S.-Y. Liu, J. Li, L. Zhang, D. Chen, J.-P. Zhang, Y. Xu, Z. Dai and X. Zou, Anal. Chem., 2018, 90, 9330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

Rui Gao
	Rui Gao obtained her BS degree at Beijing University of Chemical Technology (BUCT, China) in 2013. She is currently a PhD student under the supervision of Prof. Acad. Xue Duan and Prof. Dongpeng Yan at the State Key Laboratory of Chemical Resource Engineering Beijing University of Chemical Technology (BUCT, China). Her research interests are the design and synthesis of functional nanomaterials for luminescence and electrochemistry.

Xiaoyu Fang
	Xiaoyu Fang obtained his bachelor's degree in applied chemistry from Beijing University of Chemical Technology in 2015, and a master's degree in inorganic chemistry from Beijing Normal University in 2018. He is currently working on his PhD at Beijing Normal University, under the supervision of Prof. Dongpeng Yan. His work involves supramolecular chemistry and photo/electrochemical catalysis.

Dongpeng Yan
	Dongpeng Yan obtained his PhD at Beijing University of Chemical Technology (BUCT, P. R. China) in 2012, and then became an associate professor at BUCT. In 2014, he moved to Beijing Normal University (P. R. China) as a full professor. In 2011 and 2013, as a visiting student/scholar, he studied at the Department of Chemistry, University of Cambridge (UK) and School of Pharmacy, University College London (UK). His research topics are functional molecular materials and host–guest chemistry. He has received an Award Nomination of Annual Figure among Chinese University Students (2011), a “Talent Model” Award in the Universities in Beijing (2010), the Tang Aoqing Chemical Scholarship (2011), and an Outstanding Doctoral Dissertation Prize in Beijing (2013), among many others.

 	Scheme 1  Summary of recent development of stimuli-responsive luminescent films.	 

 	Scheme 2  Summary of the fabrication methods for luminescent films.	 

 	Fig. 1  A typical LBL assembly process.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) The standard sensing action of the GO-PEI-NaYF4:Yb,Er hybrid film in the urine of mice. Upconversion luminescence spectra of the sensor film in diluted urine. Inset: The upconversion luminescence intensity of the sensor film with Fx/Fo plotted against the pH values in 30-fold diluted urine. Reprinted with permission.115 Copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Fabrication of hybrid hydrogels via the alternating assembly of electrostatically-bound and hydrogen-bonded (H-B) strata, followed by crosslinking. The inset illustrates crosslinking as a result of the interaction of ethylenediamine with carboxylic groups in the H-B strata. (c) Variation in the pH-induced charge balance in the hybrid systems. Reprinted with permission.117 Copyright 2010, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Fluorescence emission spectra (the inset shows the changes in the intensity at ≈560 nm). Reprinted with permission.124 Copyright 2015, Wiley. (b) Fluorescence images of the Zn(BTZ)2@PVA microfibers under a UV fluorescence microscope. Reprinted with permission.82 Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 4  Synthesis, cross-linking manipulation, and photographs of supramolecular thermosets. (A) Synthetic pathway of SPAIKs. (B) Schematic representation showing installation and removal of cation–π complexes in response to external pH stimuli. Photographs of a SPAIKs film (D) in daylight or (C) irradiated by UV light at 365 nm in the dark. Photographs of an acidified SPAIKs film (E) in daylight or (F) irradiated by UV light at 365 nm in the dark. Reprinted with permission.131 Copyright 2018, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) The reversible fluorescence responses of the reversible PCF film. (b) AFM images of the fiber surfaces before/after UV irradiation (left/middle) and after recovery in the dark (right), as well as typical cis–trans molecular conformations. Reprinted with permission.80 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Fluorescence spectra of the DSP@PVP(1.5%) fiber film at different RHs (16% and 95%) over one cycle and (b) reversible fluorescence responses (λmax) over 200 consecutive cycles. (c) Fluorescence imaging by selective-zone humidity treatment of the film. Reprinted with permission.81 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic illustration of the fluorescence process in TPP and TVP assemblies. (e) Fluorescent images of (left) TPE-Py and (right) TPE-VPy embedded in PAA at various RH taken under 365 nm UV light irradiation. Reprinted with permission.144 Copyright 2017, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a–c) Epifluorescence images of Langmuir monolayers of peptide lipids in the absence and presence of copper ions (10−5 M) in the subphase (image size 895 × 713 μm). Experimental conditions: surface pressure = 15 mN m−1; pH = 7.0 (phosphate buffer); UV light was used for excitation. Reprinted with permission.161 Copyright 2003, American Chemical Society. (d) The Cu(II) concentration vs. fluorescence intensity graph was linear in the Cu(II) concentration range of 1 × 10−5 to 1 × 10−10 M, with a detection limit of 1 × 10−10 M. Particularly, we analyzed the region from 1 to 10 μM, which is the copper pollution region associated with human life (the inset shows a schematic of an all organic label-like flexible and stretchable Cu(II) ion film sensor). Reprinted with permission.162 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  The luminescence response profiles of the films to (a) NB, (b) mDNB, (c) DNT, (d) TNT and (e) PA at different concentrations. (f) Comparison of the normalized luminescence intensity of the films responding to different nitroaromatic compounds (100 ppm). Reprinted with permission.183 Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
