Recent advances in plasmonic metal and rare-earth-element upconversion nanoparticle doped perovskite solar cells  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7TA05428A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7TA05428A
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 21604-21624Recent advances in plasmonic metal and rare-earth-element upconversion nanoparticle doped perovskite solar cells

        
          
            G. 
            Kakavelakis†
ab, 
      
        
          
            K. 
            Petridis†
*ac and 

        
          
            E. 
            Kymakis
          
          
        
      *a
aCenter of Materials Technology and Photonics, Electrical Engineering Department, School of Applied Technology, Technological Educational Institute (TEI) of Crete, Heraklion, 71004 Crete, Greece. E-mail: c.petridischania@gmail.com; kymakis@staff.teicrete.gr
bDepartment of Materials Science and Technology, University of Crete, Heraklion, 710 03 Crete, Greece
cDepartment of Electronic Engineering Technological Educational Institute (TEI) of Crete, Chania 73132, Greece
Received 
      21st June 2017
    , Accepted 13th September 2017First published on 15th September 2017AbstractOrganic–inorganic lead halide based perovskite solar cells are considered as one of the most promising third generation photovoltaic technologies, since within a few years of focused research efforts, they have already presented certified efficiencies surpassing 22%. The high performance, together with the low fabrication cost, makes this technology competitive with state-of-the-art thin film photovoltaics (CdTe and CIGS). However perovskite solar cells present some striking disadvantages hindering their commercialization, including a lower performance compared to commercially available silicon based photovoltaics (26.6%), a low stability tolerance under high levels of moisture and temperature, lead B-cation toxicity and the hysteresis effect which ruins both the performance and long term stability of the devices. Recently, a promising approach to tackle the aforementioned disadvantages was the introduction of plasmonic metal and rare-earth-element upconversion nanoparticles in the building blocks of the devices. In this paper, we review the theoretical and experimental results of the literature regarding the introduction of different constitution, size, shape and coating plasmonic metal and rare-earth-element upconversion nanoparticles into the building blocks of both planar and mesoscopic perovskite solar cells. We analyze their effect on the device performance, stability, hysteresis effect and how they can be very beneficial for making these solar cells environmentally friendly and compatible with tandem applications. In addition, we discuss the critical challenges and the prospects of this newly developed field and propose some prospects for future research directions.G. KakavelakisGeorge Kakavelakis received his B.Sc. and M.Sc. degrees from the Department of Materials Science and Technology of the University of Crete, Greece in 2013 and 2015, respectively. He is currently a PhD candidate in the same department, working in Prof. Emmanuel Kymakis' group at the TEI of Crete. In 2016 he received a PhD fellowship from the State Scholarships Foundation of Greece. His research focuses on the improvement of the performance and stability of organic and perovskite solar cells utilizing metallic nanoparticles and graphene-related nanomaterials. He has 20 publications in peer-reviewed journals (ACS Nano, Advanced Energy Materials, etc.) and 8 oral presentations in international conferences (HOPV16, AP-HOPV17, etc.).K. PetridisDr Konstantinos Petridis received his Bachelor's degree in 1996 from the Department of Physics of the University of Crete, Greece. In 2001 he was awarded his PhD from the Physics Department of the University of St Andrews in the UK. In 2003 he joined, as a post-doctoral researcher, The Institute of Photonic Sciences in Barcelona, Spain. Since 2004 he has been a member of staff in the Department of Electronic Engineering of the University of Applied Sciences Crete (TEI of Crete). In 2012 he joined the Nanomaterials & Advanced Electronics Research group of the TEI of Crete. Dr Petridis has 18 journal publications and 75 conference publications and presentations.E. KymakisEmmanuel Kymakis is Full Professor at the Electrical Engineering Department of the University of Applied Sciences Crete (TEI of Crete), where he heads the Nanomaterials and Advanced Electronics group. He received his B.Eng. in Electrical Engineering & Electronics from Liverpool University in 1999 and his Ph.D. degree in Electrical Engineering from Cambridge University in 2003. His research topics presently include investigation of the opto-electronic properties of graphene, layered crystals and inorganic–organic hybrids for the development of low cost next generation organic and perovskite solar cells. He has over 100 SCI publications with over 5000 citations on these topics.
1. Introduction
Hybrid metal halide perovskite absorbers (PAs), due to some key properties, such as low temperature solution processability,1 high defect tolerance,2 large absorption coefficients,3 long charge carrier diffusion lengths,4 low recombination losses,5 and bandgap tunability,6 have attracted great research interest due to their potential to be established as an efficient and low cost material for light emitting and photovoltaic applications.7 As a result, lead halide perovskite solar cell (PSC) power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) have rapidly grown from 3.9% to the current certified world record of 22.1% within a few years' time8,9 and have potential to be further increased.10 This technology initially adopted the structure of dye sensitized solar cells, the so-called mesoscopic PSCs8 that provide the high photovoltaic performance.11 Other important issues were tackled by the adoption of organic solar cell structures (mainly hysteresis effect and high temperature processability)12,13 which are called planar (inverted and normal) PSCs.11,14
Besides the tremendous progress in PSCs' certified PCEs, state-of-the-art silicon photovoltaic (Si PVs) devices (silicon Heterojunction) have also shown remarkable progress in the last few years, with the world record of certified PCEs standing at 26.6%.9,15 Consequently, further improvements in the certified PCEs of PSC technology are required to close this 4.5% gap in PCEs with state-of-the-art Si PVs. Another very important issue for PSCs is the toxicity of the high performance perovskite semiconductors due to the presence of pure lead (Pb) in the ABX3 crystal structure as the B-cation, which raises concerns for their further commercialization.16 A huge effort in replacing Pb element with the less toxic tin (Sn) compound is in progress. To date however, PSCs using Sn as the B-cation or mixtures of Pb and Sn, demonstrated lower performance compared to pure Pb devices.17 Alternative strategies to reduce the toxicity of PSCs without reducing their performance are highly demanded. Despite the number of benefits that PSCs present compared to other photovoltaic technologies, they also present a striking disadvantage which is related to their long-term operational instability.18,19 The high sensitivity of lead halide perovskites to humid conditions, high temperature, and ultra-violet (UV) light exposure, as well as some intrinsic factors such as ion migration and interfacial reactions, are significant drawbacks to the commercialization of PSCs.20,21 Probably the less important issue for PSCs might be the hysteresis effect (since the use of an inverted planar structure has eliminated this issue),12 even though hysteresis is still observed and is responsible for the non-proper operation (mainly due to stability concerns) of mesoscopic and normal planar structure devices.12
One strategy to improve the PCE of PSCs in order to reach the maximum attainable performance could be to optically engineer the device to maximize light coupling/trapping into the photoactive layer. For this purpose, metal nanoparticles (NPs) can be utilized to confine resonant photons by an induced coherent surface plasmonic oscillation of their conduction band electrons,22 the so-called localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR), at which a significant enhancement of light absorption and scattering takes place.23–25 In addition, the facile tunability of metal NP optical properties, by modifying their constitution, size, shape, and surrounding environment, has shown great potential as an optical engineering tool in thin-film optoelectronic devices.26 Besides the optical contribution of metal NPs in thin film solar cells, plasmonic NP incorporation was shown to improve the electrical characteristics of photovoltaics, such as increased conductivity of buffer layers leading to higher exciton dissociation and charge transportation rates.27 Another interesting approach for PCE enhancement is the utilization of the rare-earth-element inorganic NPs that absorb infrared (IR) or near IR light (with energy below the band gap of the semiconductor) and convert it to higher visible energy photons (with energy higher than the semiconductor band gap) through a non-linear process, widely known as upconversion.28 In this way the photo-response of the device could be extended to the sub-band gap photons.29 Regarding the toxicity, the use of plasmonic metal NPs could potentially allow the thinning down of the perovskite layer thickness and thus reduce the amount of lead employed in the device without weakening its performance. This is achieved by the improvement of the absorption intensity in the ultrathin perovskite layer30 due to the utilization of both the LSPR and scattering effects. The ultra-high absorption coefficient of metal halide perovskite absorbers31 makes the contribution of plasmonic metal NPs more obvious when an ultra-thin absorber is exploited, highlighting the great potential of plasmonic NPs to provide high performance and less toxic semitransparent PSCs. Finally, a possible suppression/reduction of the hysteresis effect (trap filling by utilizing hot electron injection through metal NPs)32,33 or the utilization of NPs to inhibit the degradation of the highly unstable perovskite semiconductors and organic charge transport layers34 could be a promising route for the extension of the PSC lifetime.
In this review, we highlight all the studies (theoretical and experimental) reporting the incorporation of different types of NPs, including plasmonic metal and rare-earth-element nanoparticles, into both the mesoscopic and planar (normal and inverted) structures of PSCs that could potentially improve the device figures of merit: (1) efficiency enhancement as a result of light trapping into the perovskite layer using metal nanostructures (extension of the perovskite absorption spectrum beyond its band edge and lowering of the exciton's binding energy in the vicinity of the plasmonic structures), improved charge extraction due to improved electrical conductivity of buffer layers, and exploitation of rare-earth-element NPs for NIR light utilization, (2) stability enhancement of PSCs by the inhibition of different degradation pathways (including the hysteresis effect) using metal NPs and (3) reduction of device toxicity without lowering its performance through the exploitation of plasmonic effects (LSPR and scattering) generated by metal NPs in ultrathin PAs. In Fig. 1 are depicted the two possible PSC architectures (mesoscopic and planar) and the different positions where the NPs can be placed within the device are highlighted. We proceed to the result presentation dividing it into subsections. In the first part, we present all the theoretical work that provides guidance on the exploitation of metal NPs within the PA. In the second part we present the experimental results of the literature by splitting them according to the PSC building blocks and device structure where the NPs have been placed. At the end of each section we present an overview of the literature results; we have prepared several tables to summarize the findings in terms of structure, type and the layer of NP incorporation and the origin of the measured enhancements. Finally, we provide a perspective of the field by analyzing the status of the current situation and giving an outlook of future research by exploring the promising strategies and experiments that need to be investigated.
 Fig. 1  Schematic diagram showing both (a) the mesoscopic and (b) the planar (normal and inverted) PSC architectures. Yellow and grey particles of different sizes, shapes and coatings indicate plasmonic metal NPs or UCNPs and blue arrows indicate the different layers in which the NPs have been placed in the PSC building block. 
2. Theoretical guidelines for the implementation of metal nanoparticles in PSCs
The already published theoretical work related to the impact of metallic NPs on PSC technology is focused on (a) the solar spectrum absorption induced by each layer in a PSC device, (b) the operational mechanisms that support the extension of the absorption spectrum of a perovskite semiconductor into the IR, (c) the strategy to use less lead (and thus thinner cells) and make the PSC more environmentally friendly, and (d) the effect of the size, shape, concentration, position (within the PA) and composition the metal NPs impose, through the LSPR and scattering phenomena, on the cell's absorption enhancement. The primary results extracted from these theoretical models/simulations show that when metal nanostructures are introduced into the perovskite matrix then (a) the metal NPs act, at an optimum concentration, as highly efficient broadband absorption enhancers, (b) the use of less lead or even a lead free ultrathin (∼50 nm thickness instead of the 300–400 nm in most cases) perovskite layer is an option, (c) the potential of silver NPs as an absorption enhancer is the highest compared to NPs of other commonly considered noble metals such as gold, as well as copper and aluminum, (d) the metal NPs should be covered with dielectric coatings in order to prohibit recombination and/or trapping of photo-generated carriers at the interface with the PA, (e) the absorption is maximized when plasmonic near field and light scattering are adequately balanced and (f) as the size of the NPs is increased, their SPR is red shifted, its peak becomes smaller and its spectral bandwidth becomes broader (the opposite trend is observed as the NP size is decreased).
2.1 Metal NPs in the active layer of PSCs
More specifically, a PA in order to absorb the entire incident solar light should have a thickness of ∼400 nm. Thicker PAs create barriers to efficient exciton dissociation and photo-generated carrier transportation and collection, limiting the photovoltaic performance in terms of short circuit current density (Jsc) and fill factor (FF). To boost the photovoltaic performance above the barrier of 20%, nano-plasmonic structures should be introduced. S. H. Chang et al.35 simulated, using a 3D finite difference time domain (FDTD) method, the effect of Cu nanoplasmonic structures on the excitonic generation of the triiodide perovskite absorber (TPA). The thickness of the PA was reduced, and a periodic Cu nanoplasmonic structure was proposed in order to enhance the absorbance in the spectral region from 350 to 760 nm. The key parameter for the effectiveness of this model was the gap between the different Cu nanostructures introduced into the PA. The introduction of the Cu nanoplasmonic structures, with gaps varying from 30 to 50 nm, allowed the reduction of the PA thickness from 400 nm to 300 nm and at the same time the absorbance of the TPA (in 350–760 nm) was increased by 1.7%. The higher absorption efficiency is attributed to the trapping of the incident light between the nanostructures and the TPA. The redistribution of the trapped radiation in the neighboring area contributed to the effective generation of more excitons and thus the potential enhancement of the cell's PCE.
S. C. Palacios et al.36 presented an FDTD based numerical analysis using experimentally verified parameters, in order to study how bare gold (Au) metal nanoparticles introduced into different locations within the TPA can contribute to the enhancement of a perovskite semiconductor's absorbance for wavelengths (λ) greater than 600 nm. The simulations led to the following conclusions: (a) the absorption of the PA increases with particle size until it reaches an optimum value (see Fig. 2a and b); the latter is governed by the condition of 11.3% filling fraction of the Au NPs across the PA volume, (b) the perovskite absorbance decreases for λ < 500 nm and increases for λ > 500 nm for all NP sizes (a maximum absorbance found for spherical NPs with a 90 nm radius), (c) the effect of the LSPR (near field effect) induced by the Au NPs becomes more obvious as the volume of the PA is reduced, (d) at long wavelengths (e.g. at 750 nm) the PA absorption is enhanced due to the near field & scattering effects generated by the introduced Au NPs, (e) the competition between the near field and scattering effects do not depend only on the concentration of the Au NPs but also on their size, (f) the position of the introduced Au NPs is an important parameter that determines the balanced contribution between the near field and scattering effects; the near field effects dominate when the particles are close to the glass substrate while scattering effects dominate when they are located near the hole transport layer (HTL); the optimum absorption is measured when the NPs are placed in the middle of the PA whereas a balance between the two plasmonic effects (Fig. 2c and d) is noticed, and (g) the formation of dimers (two spheres that are very close to each other) is very crucial for the thin (∼200 nm) film PA (maximum enhancement close to 12% for distances of 20 nm within the dimer); dimer formation in thicker PA films is not desired.
 Fig. 2  (a) The absorption enhancement of the PA as function of the Au NP radius for 200 nm thickness (panel a) and widths of (i) 125 nm, (ii) 200 nm, (iii) 400 nm and (iv) 600 nm. (b) In panel (b) the thickness of the PA is 300 nm while the widths are (i) 150 nm, (ii) 225 nm, (iii) 300 nm and (iv) 600 nm. (c) Perovskite solar absorption enhancement for two different PA thicknesses as a function of the Ag NP position within the PA. Negative z values correspond to positions closer to the glass substrate, z = 0 in the middle of the PA and z > 0 closer to the HTL. The dashed lines correspond to the average value for all the z positions in each case. (d) Absorbance spectra for various Au NP positions: (i) z = −50 nm, (ii) z = −10 nm and (iii) z = 50 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 36© 2015 American Chemical Society. (e) Total absorption demonstrated for 140 nm diameter Ag NPs with multiple spacings between them. In the inset is depicted the corresponding enlargement of the extinction coefficient of the PA in nanoparticle free devices that demonstrate similar absorption to plasmonic doped devices e.g. a 1000 times enlarged k value could contribute 0.8 total absorption which is similar to the effect of doping with 140 nm diameter particles with 2 nm spacing. Reproduced with permission from ref. 37© 2015 Elsevier Ltd. (f) Light absorbance of the PA with/without metal nanoparticles. The broadband absorption enhancement induced by the lumpy Ag NPs is evident. (g) The obtained Jsc in the PSC as a function of the PA thickness and the introduced NP system. The highest Jsc is obtained for the system with lumpy Ag NPs due to their dual operation as absorption enhancers through near field and scattering effects. Reproduced with permission from ref. 38© 2015 OSA. (h) Normalized absorption of a 500 nm MAPI film hosting 90 nm radius gold spheres as a function of the thickness of the silicon oxide protective shell. The drop in the absorption is attributed to the screening of the near field effect as a function of the core shell thickness. The dashed line indicates the normalized absorption value for the NP free reference film. (i) and (j) Figures depicting the spatial distribution of the normalized electric field and absorbed power per unit volume in the vicinity of 90 nm diameter Au spherical NPs at 750 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 40© 2016 American Chemical Society. 
The key to the further advancement of PSC PCEs is the utilization of the incident IR solar photons (where the extinction coefficient of the PA approaches zero). L. Yue et al.37 proposed a full wave simulation approach that demonstrates the incorporation of closely and regularly spaced Ag plasmonic nanoparticles into the active layer of PSCs. This periodic arrangement enhanced the PSC IR absorption by 58.2%. The IR absorption enhancement was attributed to light flow circulation and nonlinear absorption mechanisms within the active layer (c-TiO2/PA/P3HT). The simulation results were based on the absorption induced by each of the five layers of a PSC device (transparent anode, n-type compact layer, perovskite active layer, p-type HTL and cathode). The modeling exhibited that the IR absorption induced by all the reference device active layers was the minimum and approached zero beyond 800 nm. The periodic placement of spherical Ag NPs with various diameters (20, 80 and 140 nm) in the perovskite layer in different regular positions/distances (every 2 nm, 10 nm and 20 nm) provided a hotspot that modified the total IR absorption: the highest IR absorption (780–1280 nm, 58.2% enhancement compared to the reference device absorption) by the PA was caused by the 140 nm diameter Ag NPs placed at a spacing of 2 nm across the perovskite layer (see Fig. 2e). These results are in agreement with the Mie theory that predicts that the absorption ability of bigger NPs increases with the wavelength: thus large NPs spaced closely look bigger and act as most efficient IR absorbers & scatterers. Also the suggested model predicted that the trapped solar field between narrowly spaced NPs was very high. As a result the field magnitude at positions around the Ag NPs was by far higher than that of the reference device active layer absorption and thus boosted the perovskite layer absorption. In order to exploit the nonlinear IR absorption induced by closely spaced NPs, the latter should be placed in the middle of the perovskite layer (enhanced by 7850 times, when 2 nm spaced 80 nm diameter Ag NPs were introduced).
A major concern in PSCs is their toxicity issues that originate from the quantities of the lead used during the construction of the perovskite crystals. The scientific community, in order to address this problem, has aimed at the development of solar cells with an ultra-thin absorber layer that at the same time keeps its photovoltaic performance unaffected. B. Cai et al.38 using FDTD simulation analysis, studied and optimized the absorption demonstrated by ultrathin layer (much less than the conventional 300–400 nm thicknesses) TPA films. The authors proposed the utilization of Ag lumpy nanoparticles in the rear facet of normal architecture PSCs to enhance the active layer's absorption capacity and maximize the measured Jsc (see Fig. 2f and g). The Ag lumpy nanoparticles provided the highest PCEs compared to the PCEs of devices based on Ag and Au NPs and those free of spherical NPs. The lumpy NP configuration consisted of a large Ag core (100 nm in radius) and many smaller diameter Ag NPs (10 nm in radius) evenly attached around the core. Using the lumpy Ag nanoparticle model (the record results were obtained for 40% Ag lumpy NPs within the perovskite absorber with the lumpy Ag NPs placed on the rear facet of the PA), the authors demonstrated an enhancement in Jsc of 431% compared to the corresponding figure of the NP free reference device. This enhancement was attributed to the near field enhancement (from the small radius Ag NPs on the surface of the lumpy setup) and scattering effect (from the large core Ag NPs) that the NPs trigger across a broadband spectrum (300–900 nm). When the thickness of the PA was increased from 10 to 50 nm, the Jsc was also increased from 3.44 to 10.52 mA cm−2; when the lumpy NPs were also introduced, for the same PA thickness change, the Jsc was elevated from 18.29 mA cm−2 to 22.5 mA cm−2. The demonstrated absorption & detected Jsc, across the entire visible spectrum by a 50 nm thick plasmon enriched active layer, were higher to the ones exhibited by a 300 nm thick NP free active layer. The effect of the Ag lumpy NPs was more intense as the active layer became thinner (less than 100 nm). These results pave a new way for ultrathin high efficiency solar cells with either a lead based or a lead free perovskite semiconductor absorption layer.
N. K. Pathak et al.,39 through a modeling based on Mie scattering theory (applicable to arbitrary size and spherical shape metal NPs), presented clearly how the size and constitution (Au, Cu, Al and Ag) of NPs embedded into a perovskite crystal affect the absorption ability of the perovskite semiconductor. The conclusions extracted were the following: (a) smaller size NPs (<15 nm in diameter), independent of the material they were made of, were characterized by an absorption spectrum of a single resonance frequency (characteristic of the material) with a very narrow FWHM, (b) larger NPs (>15 nm in diameter) were linked to multiple SPR frequencies (corresponding to various oscillation modes and are attributed to the multipolar charge distribution) that were shifted to longer wavelengths and characterized by broader absorption spectra (from 300 to 800 nm) and (c) the NPs that demonstrated the highest scattering efficiency were the silver ones (with the copper ones demonstrating a lower scattering efficiency) with a resonance wavelength of 613 nm (for 15 nm diameter spherical NPs).
The weak absorption capacity of the perovskite semiconductors in the spectral region 600 nm < λ < 780 nm can be enhanced following two strategies: (a) increasing the thickness of the semiconductor but this is not acceptable since it increases the cost of the device and at the same time increases the quantity of lead, which is toxic, and (b) employing metal NPs in one of the various layers of the perovskite solar cell and thus enhancing its absorption capacity in the aforementioned spectral region. S. C. Palacios et al.40 used experimentally verified parameters to study theoretically the effect of various metal NPs (silver, gold and aluminum), coated or not coated with metal oxides, of various concentrations and shapes (spheres, rods, stars and cubes) on the enhancement of the perovskite semiconductor's absorbance in the spectral range of 600 nm < λ < 780 nm. The simulations considered that the nanoparticles were dispersed in the PA. They concluded that optimum absorption enhancement can be achieved in the vicinity of metal oxide covered aluminum spherical NPs (near field enhancement) (see Fig. 2h–j). The presence of sharp edges or tips was expected to favor the intense near optical fields and hence trigger higher absorption. The authors very successfully showed that a 300 nm thick perovskite semiconductor that utilizes metal NPs offers an absorption that corresponds to films with triple thicknesses. The origin of this enhancement was attributed to the localization of optical fields with λ > 600 nm, in the vicinity of the NPs.

Table 1 summarizes the published theoretical guidelines related to the impact of metallic NPs on PSC technology when the particles are incorporated into the PA. All the above findings proved theoretically that metal NPs when placed inside the PA could be a very useful tool not only to improve the absorption but also to provide a more environmentally friendly character to the device by allowing the reduction of the lead amount of the absorber without weakening its performance.
Table 1 Summary of the theoretical studies reporting the possible impact of metallic NPs on PSC technology




Theoretical investigations of NPs placed in CH3NH3PbI3 thin-films


Simulated structure
Simulation method
NP type
Enhancement mechanism
Ref.




Glass/ITO/perovskite
FDTD
Oval shaped Cu nanostructure
Exciton generation and dissociation

35



Glass/perovskite/HTM
FDTD
20–90 nm spherical Au NPs
Absorption (LRPR and scattering)

36



Glass/ITO/c-TiO2/perovskite/P3HT/Ag
Finite integral technique (CST microwave studio)
140 nm Ag NPs, 2 nm spacing
IR absorption (non-linear effect)

37



Glass/ITO/c-TiO2/perovskite/spiro/Ag
FDTD
∼100 lumpy Ag NPs
Absorption, Jsc (LSPR and scattering)

38



Perovskite film
Mie scattering theory
15–100 nm spherical Au, Ag (best 100 nm), Al and Cu NPs
Absorption (LSPR and scattering)

39



Glass/perovskite/HTM
FDTD
Al, Au and Ag NPs of various sizes, shapes and coatings
Absorption (LSPR)

40





3. Experimental investigations of plasmonic metal NP-doped PSCs
3.1 Metal NPs in the HTL of PSCs
The introduction of the metal nanostructures (nanospheres, nanoplates and nanorods) of different constitutions (Ag, Au, Al and Au@SiO2) into the most commonly used hole transport layers (HTLs) (spiro-OMeTAD and PEDOT:PSS) employed in PSCs has been investigated by several research groups. The key impacts can be summarized as (a) the improvement of the optical & electrical properties of PSCs mainly attributed to the LSPR and scattering effects demonstrated by the employed nanostructures and (b) the improved transport and collection of charge carriers (enhanced FFs). The reported PCE enhancements varied from 10% to 40% depending on the nanostructure system (shape, size and constitution) employed in the HTL. Apart from the study of the impact of NPs on the PCE, their effect on the device stability under operating conditions has also been reported; the utilization of Al NPs in the HTL provided significantly improved long term stability for several hours.

3.1.1 Planar structure. 
In order to support a uniform absorption enhancement, the utilization of large size metallic nanostructures is suggested. However, one of the key aspects that determine the photovoltaic performance of a PSC is the thicknesses of its building blocks. According to the literature, the optimum HTL thickness in an inverted planar PSC is limited to ∼50 nm. This limit sets a restriction on how large NPs can be introduced into the HTL since the high performance of these devices requires no direct contact between the metal NPs and the perovskite semiconductor (the contact points operate as trap states and/or recombination centers for the photogenerated carriers). To tackle this restriction, H. L. Hsu et al.41 proposed the incorporation of Ag nanoplates (NPLs) (diameters varied between 40 and 100 nm with thicknesses in the order of 12 nm) into the HTL (PEDOT:PSS) of planar inverted PSCs in order to match the limited transverse dimensions of the HTL (∼50 nm). These 2D nanostructures are characterized by their flat deposition, instead of the standing up orientation that metal nanospheres provide, and thus avoid direct contact with the perovskite irrespective of the low HTL thickness. The authors studied the impact of the incorporation of silver NPLs into the HTL of PSCs (with CH3NH3PbI3−xClx as the absorber). The incorporation of these 2D metal structures led to (a) higher PCEs (from 8.5% to 9.6%, an enhancement in the order of 12%) mainly due to the higher measured Jsc (from 13.7 mA cm−2 to 15.4 mA cm−2). The higher Jsc in the case of the plasmonic device was attributed to scattering (enhanced absorption as the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectrum enhancement reveals over a broadband area of 400–800 nm). Additionally the incorporation of the proposed nanostructures into the HTL contributed to the long term device stability (see Fig. 3a and b).
 Fig. 3  (a) J–V curve of the reference and the Ag nanoplate device, (b) superior optical performance of the plasmonic device mainly due to the extension of the perovskite absorber absorption spectrum induced by the Ag nanoplates, and (c) superior stability under illumination and dark conditions of the plasmonic device. Reproduced with permission from ref. 41© 2015 Elsevier B.V. (d) The J–V curves of PSCs employing different types of metal NPs in their HTL. The superiority of the Ag NPs in generating higher PCEs is obvious. (e) External quantum efficiency spectra of the same devices. (f) The higher moisture tolerance (under ∼50% RH) under continuous solar illumination of the Al doped devices is exhibited. Reproduced with permission from ref. 42© 2017 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) The series and (h) recombination resistances the plasmonic and the reference device demonstrated for different bias voltages as EIS measurements revealed. The higher FFs the NR based devices exhibited were attributed to the higher recombination and lower series resistances the plasmonic devices demonstrated. Reproduced with permission from ref. 43© 2016 ACS Publications. (i) J–V curve of the reference and the plasmonic cell (Au NPs at 0.01% concentration of spiro-OMeTAD). (j) Absorption enhancement of the Au@spiro-OMeTAD compared to the nanoparticle free HTL in the spectral region 350–450 nm. This enhancement is attributed to the LSPR absorption induced by the NPs. (k) 10% EQE measurements of the reference and the cells incorporating the plasmonic HTL at an optimum nanoparticle concentration. The enhancement that is observed beyond the LSPR induced absorption (350–750 nm) is attributed to the superior optical and electrical properties of the plasmonic cells. (l) EQE enhancement induced by the plasmonic devices. Reproduced with permission from ref. 45© 2016 ACS Publications. 
The fabrication of low cost, flexible, high performance and high stability PSC devices has motivated a lot of researchers around the globe; the inverted planar PSC structure in synergy with plasmonics promises to satisfy all these requirements. The effect, regarding PSC performance and stability, upon illumination under ambient conditions, of various types of spherical laser generated metal nanoparticles (Au, Ag and Al) on the PEDOT:PSS HTL has been studied by G. Kakavelakis et al.42 The authors extended their work regarding the dispersion of laser fabricated Au (∼10 nm), Ag (∼20 nm) and Al (∼30 nm) NPs in the PEDOT:PSS HTL in organic photovoltaics (OPVs) to planar inverted PSCs (ITO/PEDOT:PSS-metal NPs/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/PCBM/PFN/Ag). A substantial increase in the Jsc (due to the improved hole extraction rate) and FF (due to lower device series resistance) in the devices based on Ag & Au NPs was reported whereas the open circuit voltage (Voc) remained unchanged. On the other hand the impact of the Al NPs on the Jsc enhancement was inferior to that of Au & Ag NPs (due to an ultra-thin oxide layer that is formed during their preparation) (see Fig. 3d–f). The record PCE achieved was ∼13%, which was almost 13% enhanced compared to the corresponding figure of the reference device (PCE ∼11.33%) when 5% v/v Ag NP concentration was employed in the PEDOT:PSS. The Jsc enhancement in all the cases was attributed to a higher carrier extraction rate (hole extraction rate) triggered by the presence of metal NPs at the HTL/perovskite interface. The incorporation of metal NPs resulted in lower series resistance devices, and in the case of Ag NPs it lowered from 7.46 Ω cm−2 (in pristine devices) to 6.18 Ω cm−2. The authors also studied the NP impact on the overall device stability. The addition of Ag and Au NPs into the PEDOT:PSS slowed down its degradation rate slightly under operating conditions. On the other hand, the introduction of Al NPs into the HTL substantially slowed down (the moisture effect) the perovskite layer degradation rate, compared to the one of the reference device, by a factor of ∼2. This result is in agreement with previously published results in OPVs,34 regarding the effect of Al NPs on the long term stability of the device. It is deduced that this tolerance to moisture demonstrated by the PSCs based on Al NPs was attributed to the protection the Al NPs offered to the PA from water molecules (as XRD evolution measurements revealed) reaching it. Finally, the authors, in order to improve simultaneously the stability and the PCE, engineered devices that incorporated into the PEDOT:PSS both Al and Ag NPs. The simultaneous use of Ag and Al NPs in the HTL provided a hysteresis free inverted planar PSC with a PCE of over 12% and high levels of stability (similar to the ones demonstrated by the Al doped devices) under operating conditions.
R. Wu et al.43 proposed the insertion of silica-coated gold (Au@SiO2) nanorods (NRs) at the interface of the HTL (PEDOT:PSS) and the TPA for further improvement of the optical (higher absorption) and electrical characteristics (superior charge transportation & collection) of planar inverted solution processed heterojunction PSCs. The Au@SiO2 NRs (average diameter of 16.8 nm, average length of 34.7 nm and average thickness of the silicon oxide of 9.5 nm), spin coated on top of the HTL, exhibited longitudinal resonance at 720 nm and transverse resonance frequency at 522 nm. This double LSPR resonance was responsible for the improved absorption spectrum the plasmonic cell demonstrated over the NR free reference cells. The dielectric coating of the gold NRs was required in order to avoid direct contact between the metal nanoparticles and the perovskite active layer; the utilization of uncoated NRs led to exciton quenching due to carrier trapping and recombination losses at the metal/perovskite interface. The deposition of the NRs at the interface of the HTL and the active layer resulted in devices (planar inverted device, ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/Al) with average PCEs of ∼15.6% (the reference NR free device exhibited PCEs of ∼10.9%) with the record PCEs approaching a value of 17.6% (Voc = 1.07 V, Jsc = 21.1 mA cm−2, and FF = 77.3%). The PSC efficiency was controlled by adjusting the NR concentration employed in the HTL. The record PCE was attained when 0.047 pM Au NRs were introduced into the HTL; beyond this concentration, the PCEs of the plasmonic cells were degraded. This was attributed to an increase of the interface (PA/HTL) transport resistance that exceeded the positive effect of the local field enhancement on the active layer due to LSPR. The authors managed to report a substantial enhancement in the PCE (∼40%) over the reference device. This enhancement was attributed to the higher Jsc and FF (13.5% increase whereas the FF demonstrated an enhancement in the order of 21% and the Voc values remained unaffected with the utilization of the NRs) due to the superior absorption and the lower series resistance characterizing the plasmonic device compared to the respective values for the reference cells. The higher absorption exhibited by the plasmonic cells can be attributed to the following factors: (a) resistive heating induced by the NRs at 520 nm. This thermal energy can be transferred to the nearby PA region and contribute to the generation of more excitons; (b) the electric field trapped between two adjacent NRs at 760 nm. The lower series (lowered from 164 Ω to 59 Ω) and the higher recombination resistance (elevated from 1.3 × 104 Ω to 2.8 × 104 Ω) were responsible for the higher FFs the plasmonic cells demonstrated (as electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) showed) (see Fig. 3g and h).
P. Liu et al.44 demonstrated very clearly the LSPR impact on the enhancement of light absorption and strong interaction between the plasmonic field and excitons. The authors proposed the dispersion of Au and Ag NPs in the HTL (PEDOT:PSS) of an inverted planar PSC. The motivation of this work was to exploit the dual LSPR spectra towards the improvement of the photovoltaic performance of ultra-thin PA based PSCs. The utilization of two types of metal NPs (both of them with a diameter of 50 nm) improved the optical and electrical properties of the plasmonic cells compared to the respective figures of NP free control devices. As a result, the PCE of the plasmonic devices was elevated from 10.4% to 11.6%. This enhancement was mainly attributed to a corresponding enhancement of the Jsc (increased from 18.59 mA cm−2 to 20.45 mA cm−2) since the other two photovoltaic parameters, Voc and FF, remained unchanged after the NP introduction. The authors through ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) absorption, current density–voltage (J–V), photoluminescence (PL), and EIS measurements showed that the main reasons for this Jsc enhancement were the improved optical (higher absorption within the LSPR area, 200 times enhancement of the electric field in the vicinity of NPs) and electrical (faster transportation and collection of the photo-generated holes) properties the plasmonic device exhibited.


3.1.2 Mesoscopic structure. 
As we have seen until now, metal nanoparticles offer a fascinating strategy to boost PSC performance by acting as scattering centers and sub-wavelength antennas of the incident radiation. D. S. Lee et al.45 demonstrated the dispersion of Au NPs in the HTL (spiro-OMeTAD, 170 nm thick) of TPA based mesoporous PSCs (glass/FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/Au:spiro-OMeTAD/Au electrode) that resulted in superior optical and electrical performance compared to metal nanoparticle free reference devices. In particular, the authors demonstrated that the dispersion of Au NPs (average diameter of 15 nm, LSPR at 547 nm) at an optimum concentration (0.01 wt%) resulted in a higher Jsc (from 19.63 mA cm−2 to 20.04 mA cm−2), almost similar FF (from 67.2% to 66.96%) but inferior Voc (from 0.96 to 0.95) compared to the reference device (see Fig. 3h–k). The authors attributed the higher measured Jsc to the metallic nanoparticle induced synergetic combination of the plasmonic effect (LSPR absorption between 350 and 450 nm, 10% enhancement of the EQE in the spectral region 350–750 nm for the plasmonic cell) and superior electrical properties (the HTL resistance was lowered from 30.47 Ω to 24.35 Ω). The measured PCE of the plasmonic device was 12.74% compared to the 12.66% demonstrated by the reference nanoparticle free device. The lower measured Voc was attributed to the position of the Au NPs (close to the perovskite layer) within the HTL that formed an energy barrier to the transportation of photo-generated holes to the Ag collecting electrode.
Cui et al.46 proposed the incorporation of spectrally tuned silica coated gold (Au@SiO2) nanospheres and NRs into the hybrid compact NiOx/mesoporous Al2O3 (2% wt into the mesoporous Al2O3) hole transport bilayer of inverted perovskite solar cells (CH3NH3PbI2.85Br0.15). As a result a synchronized improvement in the photo-voltage and photocurrent in the plasmonic cells was reported. The LSPR generated by the Au@SiO2 NRs (with an aspect ratio of ∼3.8: a length of 42 nm and a width of 11 nm, and a longitudinal and transverse LSPR of ∼785 nm and ∼541 nm, respectively) was located in the spectral area between 740 and 860 nm where the absorption of the PA is weak. As a result the Au@SiO2 utilization extended the absorption spectrum of the PA. The introduction of a thin layer of Au@SiO2 NRs into the NiOx/mesoporous Al2O3 caused a PCE enhancement of up to 28% compared to the NR free control cells. The higher Jsc (increased by 25% from 13.9 mA cm−2 to 17.4 mA cm−2) was responsible for the higher acquired PCE, accompanied by a slight increase in the FF (from 66% to 68%) of the plasmonic devices. The harvesting of the photons with wavelengths in the range of 740–860 nm was the primary cause of this enhanced Jsc in the NR doped devices. The Voc remained unaffected by the introduction of the NRs into the hybrid HT bilayer. On the other hand, the utilization of Au@SiO2 nanospheres (with LSPR ∼540 nm) in the Al2O3 resulted in a PCE enhancement of ∼7%, which was attributed to a higher measured Jsc (from 13.9 mA cm−2 to 15.3 mA cm−2). In this case both Voc and FF remained almost unchanged.

Table 2 summarizes the published experimental studies related to the impact of metal NP doping into the HTL on the performance and stability of PSCs. It can be concluded that NP incorporation causes an improvement of the optical & electrical properties of PSCs due to LSPR and scattering effects and also results in improved transport and collection of charge carriers. Additionally, it is shown that it significantly improves the device stability upon prolonged illumination under ambient conditions.
Table 2 Summary of the studies reporting the impact of metallic NPs on the performance and stability of PSCs when placed in the HTL




Perovskite
NP type
PCE (%)
Enhancement (%)
Enhancement mechanism
Ref.





Experimental investigations of NPs placed in the HTL of planar PSCs



CH3NH3PbI3−xClx
70 × 12 nm Ag NPLs in PEDOT:PSS
9.6
15
Absorption (plasmonic scattering) and stability

41



CH3NH3PbI3−xClx
20 nm Ag and 30 nm Al spheres in PEDOT:PSS
12.4
10
Charge extraction (enhanced conductivity of the HTL) and stability (moisture tolerance)

42



CH3NH3PbI3
Au@SiO2 NRs at the interface between perovskite and PEDOT:PSS
15.6
40
Absorption (LSPR) and carrier transport (lower series and higher recombination resistance)

43



CH3NH3PbI3
50 nm Au and Ag in PEDOT:PSS
11.6
11.5
Absorption (LSPR) and charge collection (lower series resistance)

44







Experimental investigations of NPs placed in the HTL of mesoscopic PSCs



CH3NH3PbI3
15 nm Au spheres in spiro-OMeTAD
12.77
∼1
Absorption (LSPR) and charge transport (lower HTL resistance)

45







Experimental investigations of NPs placed in the HTL of inverted mesoscopic PSCs



CH3NH3PbI2.85Br0.15
41 nm Au@SiO2 spheres and Au@SiO2 NRs (with a length of 42 nm and a width of 11 nm) between perovskite and NiO (in an Al2O3 scaffold)
13.7
25
IR absorption (LSPR) and efficient charge transport (higher carrier lifetime)

46






3.2 Metal NPs in the ETL of PSCs
The introduction of metal nanostructures (nanospheres, nanocubes, popcorn shaped metal alloys, and nanorods) into the electron transport layer (ETL) (compact TiO2, at the interface of two TiOx layers, PCBM), in the mesoporous scaffold (TiO2 and Al2O3) and between the ETL & the mesoporous scaffold in the different architectures of PSCs (planar and mesoscopic) has been extensively studied by the research community. Bare metal (Ag and Au) nanoparticles of various diameters & various concentrations were introduced into the ETL of the PSCs, while in the case where they were introduced into the mesoporous layer, they should be covered with metal oxide coatings (TiO2 and SiO2) in order to prevent the charge recombination and trapping at the interface between the metals and the PA. In all cases there is an optimum concentration of metal nanostructures anchored in the ETL or the mesoporous scaffolds in order to prevent the charge recombination and the increased interface roughness; this optimum concentration value is experimentally estimated as a function mainly of the interlayer thickness. Additionally, whenever metal oxide coating is required, the coating optimum thickness is determined by the screening induces to the scattering and near field effect intensity. The incorporation of the metal nanostructures contributed to higher PCEs (enhancements up to 30% have been reported) mainly due to higher acquired Jscs. In the majority of the cases, the other two photovoltaic parameters, Voc and FF, remained almost unaffected after the introduction of the metal nanostructures. The higher Jscs were attributed to (a) scattering effects that enhanced the absorption of the plasmonic cells in the broadband spectrum, (b) improved electrical properties due to more efficient charge transfer & collection that the plasmonic devices exhibited compared to the control reference devices and (c) lowering of the exciton binding energy. Some authors have reported the prolonged stability of the devices incorporated with nanostructures.

3.2.1 Planar structure. 
Z. Yuan et al.47 proposed the use of a double layer of titanium sub-oxide (TiOx) crystallized under low temperature (100–150 °C) processing and realized flexible & high performance normal planar PSCs. The authors, in order to cope with the lower conductivity of the amorphous (due to the low crystallization temperature process) TiOx, utilized two layers of TiOx, optimized the double layer thickness (∼100 nm thick TiOx layers favor the fabrication of long grain perovskite crystals whereas films that are too thick degrade the charge transportation through the ETL) and then introduced bare metal Au NPs (of 40 nm diameter) between them. The introduction of Au NPs enhanced the conductivity of the ETL due to hot electron injection under plasmonic illumination at 500–600 nm (Fig. 4a). Under illumination in this spectrum, excited electrons from the Au NPs consequently filled the traps existing in the amorphous TiOx layer which resulted in higher conductivity of the TiOx composite. As a result a fast rising photocurrent to maximum values was observed. The constructed planar architecture PSCs that host as an ETL the sandwiched layers of TiOx–Au–TiOx (the HTL was spiro-OMeTAD) demonstrated PCEs as high as 16% (20–30% enhancement compared to the PCE of the control devices that used a single layer of TiOx) due to the enhanced values of Jsc (from 18.3 mA cm−2 to 19.9 mA cm−2), FF (from 0.72 to 0.76) and Voc (from 1 to 1.08 V) simultaneously. This enhanced photovoltaic performance of the plasmonic cell was attributed to (a) the lower series resistance the overall device exhibited (reduced from 10.8 to 5.20 Ω cm−2), (b) the balanced mobility & faster extraction rates of electrons and holes, and (c) the elevation of the Fermi level (due to hot electron injection) of the TiOx as a result of the plasmonic illumination.
 Fig. 4  (a) Electron injection measurements: (left image) the ETL film doped with NPs exhibits superior conductivity due to the hot electron transfer (under illumination conditions) from the metal NPs to the TiOx network (right image). Reproduced with permission from ref. 47© 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) The higher intensity and broader spectral absorption the Au–Ag alloys provide compared to the other nanostructures shapes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 48© 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Optical absorption of the PA on the mesoporous TiO2 scaffold with (solid line) and without the popcorn NPs. The extension of the absorption spectrum of the PA when NPs were introduced is obvious due to the more efficient light trapping they induced. Reproduced with permission from ref. 54© 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) In the top image the JV curves of devices under AM1.5G illumination as a function of the NP concentration in the c-TiO2 and in the bottom image the electron transportation within the NP doped ETL. Reproduced with permission from ref. 55© 2016 Elsevier Ltd. (e) PCE demonstrating the stability, under UV illumination, of unsealed PSCs based on mesoporous TiO2 with and without Au NPs and MgO modification under ambient conditions (∼55% humidity). Reproduced with permission from ref. 59© 2017 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) (Left) JV curves under 100 mW cm−2 illumination for reference and plasmonic PSCs for forward & reverse scanning, (middle) the ICPE spectra that indicated that the superior performance of the plasmonic device is due to better light trapping and improved electrical characteristics the ETL modified with NPs demonstrated and (right) the obtained PL spectra that showed the faster transportation of the electrons towards the ETL when NPs were utilized in the completed devices. Reproduced with permission from ref. 60© 2016 American Chemical Society. 
Y. Cheng et al.48 provided an in-depth study of metal nanostructures deposited using radio frequency magnetron sputtering, into the ETL in order to enhance the light harvesting in normal planar PSCs. The authors utilized chemically produced Au nanorods, Au nanospheres, Ag nanospheres, Ag nanocubes and Au–Ag nanoalloys of various sizes & concentrations in the compact TiO2 ETL of CH3NH3PbX3 (X = Cl, I or Br) solar cells. The record performances were achieved by devices using Ag–Au alloys embedded into the c-TiO2 layer (thickness of 80 nm), of 40 nm diameter, where their concentrations were up to 20 wt%; PCEs of 14.8% were achieved which corresponded to an enhancement of 17.5% compared to the reference NP free cells. The PCE enhancement was attributed to the superior light trapping performance and thus higher broadband absorption (from 400 to 800 nm) compared to the other tested nanostructure assemblies (using nanospheres and nanorods) (see Fig. 4b). The parameter responsible for the improved light harvesting the plasmonic PSC exhibited was the preferred scattering the nano-alloys induced (LSPR at 663 nm) towards the PA (the higher dielectric permittivity medium). The authors noted that the Voc and the hysteresis effect were not affected by the use of different types of nanostructures. The Au–Ag nanostructure alloys demonstrated higher Jsc (increased from 20.16 to 21.54 mA cm−2) and a superior FF (enhanced from 62.1 to 63.8) due to the higher conductivity of the ETL compared to the ones exhibited in the NP free device.
Environmental reasons have supported the fabrication of thinner layer perovskite films in order to reduce the quantity of lead used. This objective, in combination with the exploitation of tandem architectures (PSCs & Si cells) and semitransparent cells, has attracted interest in thin perovskite films. However due to the decrease of the layer thickness (∼140 nm instead of the usual 300–400 nm), the ultra-thin perovskite solar cells cannot provide PCEs comparable to cells that incorporate PAs of thickness between 300 and 400 nm. Y. Liu et al.,49 in order to address this environmental issue, sprayed CVD deposited Ag nanoparticles, at an optimum concentration, on top of a glass/FTO substrate. Afterwards, the glass/FTO substrate was fully covered with the c-TiO2 ETL and then the rest of the layers were deposited (CH3NH3PbI3, spiro-OMeTAD, and Ag electrodes). The incorporation of the metallic spherical Ag NPs (11 nm in diameter) resulted in enhanced Jsc values: from 14.07 mA cm−2 to 15.93 mA cm−2. The higher measured PCEs (record values) were attributed to the Jsc enhancement: from 8.28% for the reference cell to 9.14% when 11 nm diameter Ag NPs were employed (Voc values dropped slightly in the case of plasmonic devices due to recombination possibly induced by the NPs at the interface between TiO2/perovskite, whereas the FF remained the same (0.58)). The higher Jsc values measured in the plasmonic cells were attributed to improved charge separation at the interface of the perovskite with the ETL and facilitation of charge transfer into the TiO2. PL measurements in a film (perovskite/ETL:Ag NPs/FTO/glass) showed that exciton dissociation and electron transfer to the ETL were improved as the diameter of NPs utilized was increased (from 11 to 36 nm). This was an indication that the improved charge separation happens in the vicinity of NPs which is proof of the LSP effect (which is obvious in the acquired absorption curves).
The deposition of plasmonic nanostructures in either the absorber or carrier transport layers demonstrates a promising strategy to optimize both optical and electrical characteristics of the devices by making better use of incident light and engineering the carrier dynamics. R. Fan et al.50 studied the plasmonic effect induced by (a) Au@TiO2 NPs (10 nm in diameter) and (b) Au@TiO2 NRs (32 nm in length and a width of 8 nm) embedded into the ETL (c-TiO2) of planar perovskite solar cells. The utilization of the NRs provided the most efficient assembly mode. The average PCE increased from 15.76% to 16.35% (∼5% PCE enhancement) with the record efficiency recorded at 20%. This enhancement did not demonstrate any wavelength dependence but showed an Au@TiO2 concentration dependency (best results were obtained for 1% of NRs in the ETL); this was mainly attributed to the higher Jsc (enhanced from 20.68 mA cm−2 to 22.23 mA cm−2 with the Au NRs coated with a 5 nm thick TiO2 layer). EQE, UV-VIS absorption, PL, TRPL, EIS, and TPC measurements, supported by simulation results, revealed that the higher Jsc was attributed to the following parameters: (a) lower exciton binding energy (due to LSPR) and thus easier exciton dissociation in the perovskite or at the interfaces, (b) faster transportation of photo-generated carriers from the perovskite to the ETL, and (c) higher mobilities within the Au@TiO2 modified ETL and thus more efficient charge collection. All these aforementioned parameters are triggered by the plasmonic heating effect. When the LSPR occurs, the accumulated energy in the vicinity of the nanostructures can be dissipated through “hot electrons”. The generated hot electrons in PSCs can be realized through the more efficient utilization of energy (transfer of energy from the hot electrons to the perovskite absorber to further lower the exciton binding energy) and the improved carrier dynamics of the device (enhanced electron mobility of the TiO2 film). It is believed that this mechanism will enrich the fundamental knowledge in the field of thin film perovskite solar cells and help in boosting the performance of these devices.
One key point to boost the performance of PSCs is to extend the absorption spectrum of the PA beyond its absorption edge utilizing metal nanostructures. G. M. Kim et al.51 proposed an innovative strategy to meet this objective, especially in the case of thin PA layer planar PSCs, by electromagnetically coupling the signal (scattering and near field signals) from silver nanocubes (Ag NCs) (from its closest edges and vertices to the PA) and the one reflected back to the PA by the silver back electrode. The size of the Ag NCs and the thickness of the ETL (BCP, ∼10 nm in thickness) placed between the nanostructures and the back electrode were arranged in such a way so that the plasmonic peak could be adjusted in the spectral region between 600 and 800 nm. This electrode coupled plasmon strategy increased the PCE from 11.9% to 13.3% (10% enhancement) mainly due to the higher generated Jsc (increased from 19.5 to 21.4 mA cm−2). This record performance was obtained using a 240 nm thick PA, a 10 nm thick BCP ETL and 70 nm Ag NCs (2% coverage of the PCBM layer where the NCs were dispersed, exhibiting two LSPR peaks at 520 and 790 nm). In addition, the scattering intensity (that increases with the volume of the nanoparticles) was improved by a factor of three at these two LSPR peaks. This was a clear indication of a plasmon resonance effect due to the coupling induced by the silver electrode. The plasmonic resonance effects did not affect the Voc and FF. The extension of the absorption of the PA beyond its absorption edge as a result of the proposed architecture was also revealed by the EQE curves; the EQE values were enhanced in the region 560–790 nm.


3.2.2 Mesoscopic structure. 
W. Zhang et al.52 revealed a new aspect of the incorporation of core–shell type metal nanoparticles into the scaffold layer of mesoporous PSCs that can tune the exciton binding energy and lead to PCE enhancement. The authors measured significant enhancements in photocurrent generation and efficiency in the plasmonic devices. More particularly, this work demonstrated the employment of silica coated (Au@SiO2) (∼85 nm in diameter, LSPR at 550 nm when dispersed in water) NPs at an optimum concentration (0.9 wt%) in the alumina (Al2O3) mesoporous layer of a hybrid metal halide PSC resulting in the enhancement of the measured Jsc (from 14.76 mA cm−2 to 16.91 mA cm−2) and thus higher PCE (from 10.7% to 11.4%). This improved photovoltaic performance was not accompanied by a larger absorption enhancement of the plasmonic device (probably due to the low concentration of the Au@SiO2 NPs introduced into the scaffold). The increase of the EQE spectra when the nanoparticles were introduced allowed the authors to conclude that the Jsc and PCE enhancements were due to the reduction of the exciton binding energy. It was shown that the exciton binding energy in the plasmonic device was lowered from 100 to 35 meV. This effect delivers enhanced free carrier generation and hence enhanced photocurrent at room temperature.
Snaith's group52 in Oxford were the first to demonstrate that the dispersion of Au@SiO2 NPs in the mesoporous layer caused improved photovoltaic performance. The latter was attributed to the lowering of the exciton binding energy. Researchers from the same group provided an alternative explanation for the positive role Ag@TiO2 NPs can play towards higher performance PSCs. Saliba et al.53 demonstrated that the dispersion of core–shell Ag@TiO2 nanoparticles (with a diameter of the order of 42 nm) under a maximum weight ratio (2.2 wt%, Ag@TiO2/Al2O3) in the Al2O3 scaffold led to mesoporous PSCs delivering PCEs up to 16.3% (20% enhancement compared to the control device). The authors attributed this enhancement mainly to the greatly improved Jsc whilst the Voc and FF were changed only slightly. The authors suggested and supported with experimental & theoretical results that highly polarizable metallic NPs in their vicinity (a) enhanced the exciton recombination probability and (b) acted as antennas of the reemitted light of the exciton recombination towards the perovskite active layer resulting in an enhanced absorption due to photon recycling within the active layer.
To further improve the PSC efficiency, one commonly followed strategy is to extend the PA absorption spectrum (mainly beyond 550 nm) where the PA demonstrates a low absorption coefficient. This task should ideally be done without complicating the cell's structure or increasing its active layer thickness. Z. Lu et al.54 very successfully introduced alloys of Ag–Au popcorn shaped nanoparticles into the mesoporous titanium dioxide (m-TiO2) layer of CH3NH3PbI3 based PSCs and demonstrated superior broadband absorption (from 370 to 800 nm) (Fig. 4c), faster charge transfer to the respective collecting electrodes and reduced recombination rates (as the PL measurements showed) compared to the respective parameters of the reference devices. These enhancements were attributed to the shape (popcorn) of the planted nanoparticles (average size 150 ± 50 nm) that provided a broadband LSP resonance in the UV to NIR range. As a result the PCE of the plasmonic device increased from 8.9% to 10.3% (15.7% PCE enhancement).
H. Nourolahi et al.,55 motivated by the ambipolar charge transport characteristics of the CH3NH3PbI3, fabricated HTL-free mesoporous PSCs which are simpler and have a lower cost setup. To keep the architecture simple, without increasing the thickness of the device, and at the same time boost its PCEs, the authors demonstrated the introduction of Ag nanoparticles into the compact TiO2 (c-TiO2) layer (thickness ∼140 nm). The best results were obtained for 30 nm diameter Ag nanoparticles (LSPR at 427 nm in an aqueous solution) with 20% concentration in the compact TiO2 layer. The PCE of the plasmonic PSCs (glass/FTO/c-TiO2:Ag NPs/m-TiO2:CH3NH3PbI3/Au) was enhanced from 4.57% to 6.15% compared to the NP free reference device. This enhancement was attributed to the higher Jsc (from 10.96 mA cm−2 to 13.14 mA cm−2), Voc (from 0.72 to 0.78 volt) and FF (from 58.42% to 60.18%) (see Fig. 4d top) in the plasmonic devices. The performance improvement of the plasmonic device was attributed to (a) the scattering effect caused by the introduced Ag nanoparticles that facilitate further light trapping within the active layer and thus the absorption within the PA (mainly justified by the enhancement of EQE (∼10%) over a broadband spectrum (420–600 nm)), (b) the facilitation of the transportation of the photo-generated electrons (the electron transport time was reduced from 8.25 ms to 4.27 ms) towards the FTO electrode and (c) the lower overall resistance the modified c-TiO2 based cell demonstrated; this charge transfer facilitation can also be attributed to the WF of the Ag NPs (−4.2 eV) which is between those of TiO2 (−4.4 eV) and FTO (−4.7 eV) and thus facilitates their drift towards the FTO electrode (see Fig. 4d bottom).
M. Tang et al.56 exploited the strong plasmon induced scattering effect by Au@SiO2 nanorods introduced into the TiO2 mesoporous scaffold (optimum concentration of 4% wt) of CH3NH3PbI3 based PSCs. The aspect ratio (L/D ∼ 3, where L is the length and D the diameter of the nanorods; the LSPR value was measured at 735 nm) of the Au@SiO2 nanorods and the thickness of the insulating shell (∼15 nm) have been tuned to induce an enhancement of the incoming light harvesting in the 700–780 nm spectral region where PA absorption drops off. A plasmonic device (FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2:Au@SiO2 NRs/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-MeOTAD/Au) with enhanced PCE mainly due to the 13.5% higher Jsc (from 20 to 22.7 mA cm−2) was demonstrated compared to the pristine – free of nanorods – device. More particularly, the PCE has been enhanced by 16.1% (from 12.4% to 14.4%) due to higher absorption (a 20% increase across the VIS-IR region) because of the broadband scattering effects imposed by the nanostructures especially beyond the band edge spectrum area of the PA. The Voc & the FF values remained almost unchanged after the introduction of the metal nanoparticles.
S. S. Mali et al.57 demonstrated TiO2 nanofibers coated with Au NPs as a very promising ETL for mesoporous PSCs. The incorporation of the optimum concentration of Au NPs (0.3 wt%, diameter of ∼58 nm, LSPR at 535 nm) into the TiO2 nanofiber ETL enhanced the generated Jsc (increased from 19.52 mA cm−2 to 20.83 mA cm−2) and FF (increased from 60 to 70%), and as a result maximum PCEs in the order of 15% have been recorded. The authors attributed the Jsc improvement to (a) the near field effect of the LSPR induced by Au NPs, (b) the far field mechanism that strengthens the perovskite absorption due to induced light scattering from the metal NPs and (c) the hot electron injection from metal NPs to the conduction band of TiO2 nanofibers. The higher obtained FF values were attributed to (a) a higher photo-electron lifetime (fewer traps due to their filling from electrons injected by Au NPs) and (b) faster electron transportation. The authors showed that the dispersion of metal NPs in the ETL assisted the enhancement of their air stability (300 h under ambient conditions and illumination) at room temperature (the device that incorporated Au NPs demonstrated much more stable FFs than the one that employed bare TiO2 nanofibers or m-TiO2 as the ETL). The lower degradation of the perovskite active layer might be the reason. Finally, the plasmonic cells exhibited less hysteresis than the NP free reference devices. The study of the correlation between enhancement in absorption, photo-generated free carrier trapping mechanisms caused by metal NPs and induced morphological changes in the ETL by the introduced NPs is an important task regarding the optimum exploitation of the plasmonic nanostructures towards the boosting of the PSC performance. D. Yang et al.58 demonstrated how to manage the Ag neat spherical NP concentration in order to balance the aforementioned competitive phenomena (higher absorption with higher recombination rates as a function of NP concentration) towards the maximization of the plasmonic solar cell performance without increasing the active layer's thickness or complicating the cell's architecture. The authors investigated the impact of neat small diameter Ag NP (∼25 nm in diameter, small enough to suppress the scattering effects) modified m-TiO2 anode on the photovoltaic parameters of a CH3NH3PbI3 solar cell as a function of the Ag NP concentration. In particular, the authors showed that the variation of the Ag NP concentration affected (a) the demonstrated absorption across the VIS-IR spectrum, (b) the measured Jsc, (c) the photo-generated electron trapping rate, (d) the exhibited PCE, (e) the film roughness of the anode and (f) the grain size of the perovskite semiconductor. The authors very clearly showed that the absorbance and the grain size of the fabricated perovskite were increased with increasing Ag NP concentration in the TiO2 photoanode. On the other hand, the increase of the Ag NP concentration enhanced the photo-generated free carrier trapping and as a result caused the reduction of the cell photovoltaic performance (PCE) beyond an optimum concentration. The same trend was followed by the demonstrated roughness of the modified Ag NPs-TiO2 anode; it lowered with the increase of the Ag NPs up to an optimum concentration beyond which it started to increase. Consequently, the PCE with 0.5 wt% Ag NPs was increased to 11.96% compared to a PCE of 10.96% for the NP free reference device (mainly due to the increase of the Jsc, elevated to 18.91 mA cm−2 from 17.85 mA cm−2, while the Voc and FF remained unchanged after the introduction of the metal NPs). This enhancement was attributed to (a) the higher intensity absorption (due to the Ag NP LSPR) over a broadband spectral range (400–800 nm), (b) the lower charge trapping (induced by the lower conduction band of the Ag NPs compared to that of the TiO2 layer) and (c) suppressed roughness (by 13.4% for the optimum Ag NP concentration) of the Ag NP doped TiO2 layer (up to the optimum Ag NP concentration). A further increase in the Ag NP concentration above the optimum value (0.5%) encouraged more free carrier trapping due to the lower conduction band of the Ag compared to that of TiO2, increased the roughness of the ETL and thus resulted in degradation of the cell's overall photovoltaic performance.
Improvement of the Voc and Jsc in PSCs is a challenge for the construction of high-performance cells. C. Zhang et al.59 described a facile fabrication process of plasmonic PSCs, that met this objective, based on the deposition of Au NPs (average diameter of the order of 40 nm) on top of a mp-TiO2 surface that was continuously covered by a MgO passivation film. The latter's role was multiple: (a) it inhibited the recombination between photo-generated carriers at the interface between TiO2 NPs and the active layer and (b) it functioned as a hole blocking layer. The prepared devices exhibited high Voc (∼1.09 V) and Jsc (21.76 mA cm−2) values and an average PCE of 16.1%. This performance was enhanced by 34.2% over the one of the reference device (which did not employ either NPs or MgO in the mp-TiO2 scaffold). This significant PCE improvement (from 12% to 16.1%) was mainly attributed to the higher Jsc (increased from 19.49 mA cm−2 to 21.76 mA cm−2 due to lower recombination rates and faster electron transfer), FF (increased from 0.66 to 0.68) and Voc (increased from 0.94 to 1.09 V). All the photovoltaic parameters were increased because of the ETL Fermi level elevation after the MgO passivation layer was added. The combination of the Au NPs with the insulating MgO significantly contributed to the enhanced photovoltaic performance as well as to the superior UV stability (tested at 365 nm and 90 mW cm−2) the plasmonic cells showed compared to the reference devices. The plasmonic devices retained their PCE at 85–90% of the maximum PCE level even after 15 min of continuous UV irradiation under ambient conditions. The authors attributed the enhanced stability to the (a) retardation of the Au NP corrosion by the halide, (b) prevention of the formation of charge trapping sites and (c) deposition of the passivation layer of MgO which limited the photocatalytic properties of the TiO2 and reduced the electronic defect density at the TiO2/perovskite interface (Fig. 4e). Finally, theoretical simulations showed that the highest EQE enhancements (across the whole UV-VIS spectrum) would be experimentally observed at 760 nm (a wavelength where the perovskite does not absorb strongly). This was attributed to re-emission of re-absorbed light by the Au NPs at wavelengths below and near the perovskite band edge back into the perovskite active layer.
N. Aeineh et al.60 demonstrated the importance of the interfaces (in the transfer and collection of charges and in the stability of the devices and the demonstrated hysteresis) in the performance of PSCs and the crucial role of reduced quantities of highly stable inorganic materials to modify these interfaces instead of the extensively employed organic compounds (e.g. fullerene compounds). The authors reported for the first time the introduction of core/shell type Au@SiO2 NPs (14 nm in diameter) into the interface between the m-TiO2 and c-TiO2 layers of CH3NH3PbI3 PSCs. The enhancement of all the photovoltaic characteristics (the PCE increased from 16.18% to 17.55%, the Jsc from 19.86 to 20.73 mA cm−2, the Voc from 1076 to 1081 mV and the FF from 75.71% to 78.29%) of the nanoparticle based devices, compared to the respective ones of the reference cells, was attributed to the attained modifications of the interfacial layer between the m-TiO2 scaffold and the ETL (c-TiO2 layer). The EQE measurements showed a uniform enhancement across the whole UV-visible spectrum and not just in the region of plasmonic absorption (see Fig. 4f). The authors noticed no impact of the NPs regarding the hysteresis demonstrated by both types of devices (plasmonic and reference devices). PL measurements showed that the proposed introduction of Ag@SiO2 at the interface of the c-TiO2 with the m-TiO2 resulted in a five-fold quenching of the PL intensity compared to the two fold quenching observed upon NP introduction into the mesoporous layer according to previous publications (see Fig. 4f). This was a clear indication of the modifications at the interface the introduction of the Ag@SiO2 NPs induced regarding the electrical properties (faster dissociation and transportation of the charges) of the overall cell. This demonstrated that faster and larger electron injection at the interface between the ETL/perovskite were the main reasons for the higher Jsc and FF the plasmonic cells demonstrated compared to the control reference devices.
Growing attention to mixed cations and mixed halide hybrid perovskite semiconductors has been triggered because of the drawbacks pure perovskite semiconductors have demonstrated: for CH3NH3PbI3 (a) the PCE remains below 20%, (b) thermal instabilities (phase transition at 55 °C), (c) induced degradation upon contact with moisture and (d) formation of light induced traps; for CsPbX3 (e) the band gap is not suitable for single junction solar cells and (f) crystallization at very high temperatures (∼300 °C). T. Ye et al.,61 to overcome the aforementioned obstacles, proposed and exhibited a mixed cation and halide plasmonic PSC with superior structural/thermal stability and overall photovoltaic performance. The authors proposed the use of a Cs0.05(FA0.81MA0.15)0.95Pb(I0.836Br0.15)3 perovskite semiconductor for enhanced structural/thermal stability and the utilization of Au@SiO2 core shell NPs (with a diameter of 40 nm and coated by a 15 nm thick SiO2 shell with a demonstrated LSPR at 531 nm in the dispersion) at the interface of the m-TiO2 and the perovskite active layer in order to boost the photovoltaic performance of the device (PCE enhancement of the order of 29%). More precisely, the placement of the NPs on top of the ETL has enhanced all of its operational parameters compared to the corresponding characteristics of the reference cell: the Voc increased from 1.08 to 1.16 eV, the short circuit current density (Jsc) improved from 22.9 to 23.8 mA cm−2, and the FF was elevated from 0.64 to 0.73. As a result the overall PCE was improved from 15.8% (for the NP free device) to 20.3%. Another positive impact of the incorporation of NPs was the suppression of the hysteresis demonstrated by the plasmonic device (mainly due to the more balanced mobilities that the free electrons and holes demonstrated in the plasmonic cells). The authors attributed the superior performance of the plasmonic device compared to the NP free m-TiO2 device to (a) enhanced induced absorption (from 400 to 800 nm) due to near field enhancement & scattering effects, (b) facilitation of charge carrier transport & enhanced mobilities within the system (the transient photovoltage (TPV) showed twice as long lifetimes of the photo-generated carriers for the plasmonic devices and TOF measurements exhibited higher hole mobility in the plasmonic device) and (c) higher demonstrated long term stability (the PCE dropped only 1% over 60 days of operation). The optimum performance of the devices was theoretically studied using FDTD simulations as a function of the optimum Au@SiO2 positioning and intermediate distances. The simulations revealed that the maximum optical field enhancement occurs within a 100 nm distance around the NPs.

Table 3 summarizes the published experimental studies on the impact of doping metal NPs into the ETL on the performance, stability and hysteresis effect of the PSCs. It can be concluded that NP addition into the ETL causes an improvement in the device performance due to LSPR and scattering effects and also results in improved electrical characteristics. Prolonged stability of the PSCs doped with metal nanostructures has also been reported.
Table 3 Summary of the studies reporting the impact of metallic NPs on the performance and stability of PSCs when placed in the ETL




Perovskite
NP type
PCE (%)
Enhancement (%)
Enhancement mechanism
Ref.





Experimental investigations of NPs placed in the ETL of planar PSCs



CH3NH3PbI3
40 nm Au spheres between two thin films of TiOx ETL
16.2
∼23
Charge extraction (hot electron transfer to the traps of TiOx from the Au NPs)

47



CH3NH3PbI3
Au (nanorods and nanospheres), Ag (nanocubes and nanospheres) and Au–Ag nanoalloys with different sizes in a TiO2 ETL
14.8
15
Absorption (LSPR and scattering) and photoelectron extraction (hot electron injection)

48



CH3NH3PbI3 (ultrathin, 140 nm)
11–16 nm Ag spheres in a c-TiO2 ETL
7.08
22.5
Absorption (LSPR) and carrier extraction

49



CH3NH3PbI3
Au@TiO2 spheres and rods in c-TiO2
16.35
4
Charge extraction (hot electron transfer from Ag NPs to c-TiO2 NPs)

50



CH3NH3PbI3
70 nm Ag nanocubes between a PCBM ETL and a BCP hole blocking layer
13.3
10
Absorption (LSPR and scattering)

51







Experimental investigations of NPs placed in the ETL of mesoscopic PSCs



CH3NH3PbI3
80 nm Au@SiO2 spheres in a m-Al2O3 scaffold
11.4
6.5
Reduced exciton binding energy (NP LSPR)

52



CH3NH3PbI3−xClx
40 nm Ag@TiO2 spheres in a m-Al2O3 scaffold
13.5
18.4
Photon recycling (highly polarizable nanoparticles can enhance the radiative recombination of excitons)

53



CH3NH3PbI3
150 nm Au–Ag alloy popcorn shaped NPs in m-TiO2
10.3
15.7
Absorption and charge extraction

54



CH3NH3PbI3
30 nm Ag spheres in c-TiO2
6.15
30
Absorption (scattering) and charge extraction (decreased electron transport time)

55



CH3NH3PbI3
Au@SiO2 NRs (with an AR of ∼3) in m-TiO2
14.4
16.1
Absorption (scattering)

56



CH3NH3PbI3
58 nm Au spheres in a TiO2 nanofiber ETL
14.37
25
Photoelectron transportation (hot electron injection), absorption (LSPR and scattering), reduced hysteresis (hot electron injection) and stability

57



CH3NH3PbI3
25 nm neat Ag spheres in a m-TiO2 ETL
11.96
9.1
Absorption (LSPR) and carrier extraction (reduced surface roughness and more dense ETL packing)

58



CH3NH3PbI3
40 nm Au spheres in m-TiO2 combined with an MgO passivation layer on top of them
16.1
34
Reduced photo-generated carrier recombination (MgO passivation), UV-stability (Au NPs and MgO), absorption (LSPR) and charge extraction (hot electron injection)

59



CH3NH3PbI3
14 nm Au@SiO2 spheres at the interface between m- and c-TiO2
17.5
7.8
Faster charge extraction (decreased resistance at intermediate frequencies) and slightly reduced hysteresis

60



Triple cation perovskite
40 nm Au@SiO2 with a 15 nm coating placed between m-TiO2 and the perovskite
20.3
29
Absorption (LSPR and scattering) and charge extraction (balanced mobilities), reduced hysteresis and stability

61






4. Experimental investigations of rare-earth-element upconversion NP doped PSCs
One of the main limiting factors in state-of-the-art PSCs that are addressed with the utilization of NPs is the limited harvesting of the NIR-IR solar spectrum due to the low extinction coefficient62 (which starts to lower beyond 500 nm) of the most commonly used perovskite absorbers (see Fig. 5a). Extending the spectral absorption of the metal halide PSCs from the vis region towards the NIR range causes losses due to the non-absorption by the perovskite of this part of the spectrum. One of the most successful strategies reported in the literature is the exploitation of the upconversion effect through the utilization of rare-earth-element upconversion nanoparticles (UCNPs), such as ytterbium/erbium doped lanthanum fluoride (LaF3:Yb/Er), ytterbium and erbium co-doped beta phase sodium yttrium fluoride (β-NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+), β-NaYF4:Yb3+, and Tm3+/NaYF4 core–shell nanostructures, in the ETL of mesoscopic PSCs. The UCNPs operate as IR harvesters. The exploitation of the NIR incident solar photons mainly generated higher Jsc that led to higher PCEs (enhancements of the order of 15–20%) compared to the UCNP free reference devices. The key factor that determines the efficiency of the UCNPs towards higher photovoltaic performances is their concentration in the mesoporous ETL.
 Fig. 5  (a) Optical constants of the CH3NH3PbI3; refractive index (n) and extinction coefficient (k); three different areas of absorption can be noticed: λ > 800 nm which is characterized by minimum absorption, 500 nm < λ < 800 nm with moderate absorption and λ < 500 nm where the absorption is very strong (due to PbI2). Reproduced with permission from ref. 62© 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. (b.1) TEM image of NaYF4:Yb/Er upconversion nanoparticles. The inset shows high resolution TEM images showing the NaYF4:Yb/Er crystal. (b.2) XRD profile of the NaYF4:Yb/Er upconversion nanoparticles. (b.3) The upconversion efficiency of the NaYF4:Yb/Er upconversion nanoparticles under 980 nm NIR laser excitation. The corresponding energy transitions are illustrated. The left insets depict the green fluorescence under 980 nm NIR laser excitation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 63© 2016 Willey-VCH Verlang GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c.1) J–V curves of the PSCs with a TiO2 ETL (black line), with a NaYF4 nanoprisms@TiO2 ETL (blue line) and with a NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ nanoprisms@TiO2 ETL. The superiority of the latter is attributed to the upconversion and scattering effects triggered by the UCNPs. (c.2) Their corresponding IPCE (%) spectra. (c.3) Schematic diagram of the energy transfer process in PSCs employing an upconverting mesoporous layer. Reproduced with permission from ref. 64© 2016 ACS Publications. (d) Photovoltaic parameters of the perovskite solar cell devices employing mp-TiO2 (reference devices) and NYF-TiO2 ETLs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 65© 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
M. He et al.63 proposed a viable strategy for capitalizing judiciously synthesized monodisperse hexagonal phase (β-phase) NaYF4:Yb/Er upconversion nanoparticles (UCNPs, average size of 18.5 nm) as the mesoporous electrode (ETL) (instead of m-TiO2) for TPA PSCs. The utilization of UCNPs led to high efficiencies close to 18% mainly due to the increased acquired photocurrent because of the upconversion effect (absorption of 980 nm radiation by the Yb ions, transfer of this energy to Er ions and de-excitation of the latter with the simultaneous emission of visible photons at 408, 523, 542 and 655 nm that are absorbable by the perovskite active layer, see Fig. 5b.1–b.3). The authors demonstrated that by controlling the NP intermediate distance and the thickness of the mesoporous layer, the photovoltaic performance was optimized. The optimum performance was recorded when the diameter of the pore size in the ETL was 30.5 nm where the PCE was enhanced from 10.5% to 14.2%. A large sized inter-nanoparticle spacing facilitated the penetration of the perovskite and thus (a) the most efficient absorption of the emitted visible photons, due to the upconversion effect, by the perovskite and (b) the easier transportation of charge carriers throughout the mesoporous electrode. The optimum thickness of the UCNP mesoporous layer was found to be about 150 nm leading to a high PCE of 18.1%. A further increase of the mesoporous layer thickness led to a reduction of all photovoltaic parameters of the devices due to increased demonstrated series resistance due to the insulating nature of the NYF UCNPs.
J. Roh et al.64 proposed the use of upconversion materials, such as hexagonal ytterbium and erbium co-doped beta phase sodium yttrium fluoride (β-NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ NYF) hexagonal nanoprisms, introduced into the m-TiO2 ETL, that will convert the incident NIR radiation to visible light which will be continuously absorbed by the perovskite active layer. More precisely, the authors dispersed NYF nano-prisms (550 nm in diameter and 600 nm in height) in the m-TiO2 ETL at an optimum concentration (75%). The NIR incidence radiation excites the Yb3+ and the energy is transferred to Er3+ ions and released as high-energy visible light (408, 523, 543 and 655 nm). NIR light at 1540 nm, through the three photon absorption phenomenon, can also directly excite the Er3+ ions and cause visible light at 650 nm to be emitted. The exploitation of the upconversion effect broadened the absorption spectrum of the PSC and a direct impact of this was the enhancement of all of its photovoltaic characteristics; the Jsc increased from 18.85 to 20.23 mA cm−2 and the conversion efficiency was enhanced by 13.7% and reached a conversion efficiency of 16% at an optimized concentration of NYF nanoplates in m-TiO2 (75 wt%) (see Fig. 5c). This enhanced PSC performance was attributed to the additional carriers generated in the active layer due to the absorption of the upconverted NIR photons, the scattering phenomena induced by the NYF nanoprisms and also by the slightly improved charge transport behavior the NYF ETL demonstrated, attributed to the facilitation the UCNPs provided to the excited electrons to migrate. In conclusion, the incorporation of hexagonal β-NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ upconversion nanoprisms into the m-TiO2 ETL of the PSC is a highly promising strategy to further boost the photovoltaic performance of this solar cell technology.
The β-NaYF4:Yb3+,Tm3+/NaYF4 core–shell nanoparticle (NYF NP) incorporated m-TiO2 ETL was proposed for the first time as a NIR harvesting material by M. Que et al.65 The authors proposed the incorporation of upconversion NYF NPs of 45–50 nm diameter, with high luminous intensity in the visible light spectrum, into the m-TiO2 ETL (width of ∼200 nm) of mesoscopic PSCs. The UCNP doped devices demonstrated superior light absorption, photocurrent density and PCE. The NYF NPs (the Yb3+ ion part) were excited in the NIR region and transferred this energy to the Tm3+ ions that emitted in the visible (at 452, 476 and 648 nm) spectrum where the PA absorbs. The record results were obtained for a specific NYF/m-TiO2 NP ratio which was 0.25 (Jsc = 21.7 mA cm−2, Voc = 1.1 V, and FF = 70.6%). The average PCE of the UCNP doped devices was 15.1%, with a record measured PCE of 16.9%, which is higher by 20% compared to the UCNP free mp-TiO2 reference device (see Fig. 5d). The authors developed a theoretical model based on FDTD simulation that showed that the enhanced characteristics of the UCNP doped device compared to the UCNP-free devices were attributed to the upconversion of the IR photons to visible photons and to scattering induced by the NYF NPs. PL measurements of the perovskite film with the NYF@TiO2 based scaffold demonstrated stronger PL intensity quenching compared to the one of the m-TiO2 reference device. This was attributed to the faster charge transportation in the UCNP based ETL devices compared to the reference cells. The measured PL signal was also studied as a function of the temperature for the UCNP doped and reference films. These measurements indicated that the multi-photon assisted non-radiative decay of the perovskite film with the NYF@TiO2 ETL is faster than that of the TiO2 based cell as the temperature increased.

Table 4 summarizes the published experimental studies investigating the beneficial role of UCNPs in PSCs when used as the mesoporous scaffold or as additives into the m-TiO2 scaffold. Taking into account all of the above, it can be concluded that the utilization of UCNPs in PSCs can effectively extend the photo-response of the devices to IR or NIR in order to utilize photons with energy below the bandgap of the perovskite semiconductor.
Table 4 Summary of the publications reporting the use of UCNPs as the mesoporous scaffold or as additives in the mesoporous scaffold of PSCs for IR light utilization




Experimental investigations of UCNPs placed in mesoscopic PSCs


Perovskite
NP type
PCE (%)
Enhancement (%)
Enhancement mechanism
Ref.




CH3NH3PbI3
18.5 nm NYF:Yb3+,Er3+/PAA-b-PEO spheres as the mesoporous scaffold
18.1
∼8
Superior perovskite layer crystallinity and IR light exploitation (upconversion effect)

63



CH3NH3PbI3
Hexagonal NYF:Yb3+,Er3+ nanoprisms (550 nm in diameter and 600 nm in height) in m-TiO2
15.98
13.7
IR light exploitation (upconversion effect)

64



CH3NH3PbI3
β-NaYF4:Yb3+,Tm3+/NaYF4 core–shell spheres (with diameters of 45–50 nm) in m-TiO2
16.9
20
IR light exploitation (upconversion effect) and faster electron transport

65





5. Conclusions and outlook
The introduction of rare-earth-elements and metal nanoparticles of various sizes, constitutions and shapes into the building blocks of mesoporous and planar PSCs is a very useful strategy and a facile tool to improve the efficiency, electrical characteristics and stability of these solar devices. The synergy of plasmonic metal and rare-earth-element upconversion NPs and PSCs is a new field compared to the work carried out in other solar cell generations but has great potential especially in the case of thin-film PSCs. The crucial parameters that determine the successful exploitation of nanostructures in PSCs are their concentration, the building block into which they have been introduced, the thickness of the host building block (ETL, PA, HTL, and mesoporous scaffold) and the thickness of the coating around the metallic core (if this is necessary). Successful implementation, in the majority of the cases, generated superior harvesting of the incoming solar light due to scattering and near field enhancements. These aforementioned mechanisms are optimized in the LSPR and generate a greater number of photo-generated charges. In the vicinity of the nanostructures the binding energy of the excitons is reduced and at the same time the nanostructures operate as nano-antennas that re-emit the light towards the PA. The introduction of NPs into the interlayers modulates their electrical properties with the PA and facilitates exciton dissociation and charges transportation. A lower series resistance and higher recombination resistance are the results of the introduction of metallic nanostructures into PSCs as the EIS measurements exhibit. Additionally, reduced hysteresis and improved lifetimes were already reported when metal NPs were introduced into the device's architecture, mainly due to hot electron injection and higher moisture tolerance respectively. In the case of the use of rare-earth-element upconversion NPs, the PA's absorption spectrum is artificially extended since the IR solar photons are also utilized. The higher measured PCEs in the NP doped PSCs are mainly attributed, due to the aforementioned mechanisms, to the higher Jscs whereas in the majority of the cases the FF & Voc remained almost unaffected after the employment of nanostructures.
Substantial work and research effort have been devoted to the synergy of metal and rare-earth-element NPs and other solar cell technology generations might contribute to future developments for further understanding and application of such NP systems in PSCs. There are a lot of open issues in the fascinating and highly promising field of PSCs that need to be addressed in order for this technology to become competitive to commercially available Si PVs: efficiency enhancement, long term stability, toxicity issues, hysteresis effects, and light soaking effects among others. All these challenges and how NPs can contribute to address them should be studied further. The synergetic operation of UCNPs and metal core–shell NPs in the PA for extended stability and also exploitation of the NIR solar spectrum should be further studied since it addresses two priority issues in PSCs: further enhancement of the PCE and long term stability issues.66,67 Another open issue is the impact of the NPs on the PA regarding the lowering of the exciton binding energy in their vicinity due to LSPR and thus the increase of the photo-generated carrier generation rate. This is an issue that has not been answered since the Snaith group's first publication52 and we think that it should be further studied since it will be a facile strategy to boost the photovoltaic performance of PSCs. In a number of reports the introduction of metal nanostructures into the PA or into one of the buffer layers has resulted in prolonged stability under illumination and ambient conditions. The mechanism that supports these experimental results should be identified and further studied, as has been done in OPVs,68 in order to achieve the building of ultra-stable PSCs. Another promising area of research is the field of ultrathin semitransparent PSCs where the PA is much thinner (∼50–100 nm) than in conventional PSCs (∼300–500 nm). Semitransparent PSCs are expected to be a key building block for future tandem solar cells in combination with silicon solar cells (world efficiency record of 23.6%).69 Semitransparent PSCs are expected to play an important role in one of the biggest EU priorities, the Building Integrated Photovoltaics (BIPV).70 Plasmonic and upconversion NPs will be called upon to boost the photovoltaic performance and stability of the PSC building block. Furthermore, for PSC technology to be deployed on a large scale, the two main challenges that need to be addressed are the material stability and the toxicity of lead. This does not pose a problem if Pb remains contained within the PV module; however, lead-based perovskites tend to release PbI2 as a degradation product, which is toxic. Human exposure to lead is harmful to the nervous and reproductive systems and to the hematopoietic and renal organs, mainly as a result of increased oxidative stress.71 PAs that are lead free or contain lower lead amounts should retain the unique optoelectronic properties of lead halide perovskites. Thus to tackle the lead toxicity issue there are three alternatives: (a) utilizing thinner PAs and thus a smaller quantity of lead or (b) constructing lead free PSCs72 that suffer from lower PCEs (∼7%, using Sn or germanium (Ge) instead of Pb) and (c) development of an effective encapsulation strategy. For scenario (a) we have already seen that plasmonics are expected to play an important role. For scenario (b), according to our knowledge, there are no reports regarding the application of plasmonic metal and upconversion NPs in this category of PSCs for the enhancement of their PCEs. So the synergy of such NPs with these particular PA systems is required urgently in order to enhance their PCEs and their stability. The synergy of NPs with lead free PSCs is envisioned to contribute to the opening of the road for safe and environmentally friendly solar energy. Finally scenario (c) is expected to have recycling issues in the future.72 The introduction of nanostructures into the ETL or HTL of a PSC enhances the electrical properties of the overall cell mainly due to modifications induced in the interfaces of the device. On the other hand, there is a lack of study on the effect of metal NPs on the crystallization of the perovskite semiconductor (crystal grain size) as a function of NP type and concentration. In a multi-parameter system as one of PSCs this should be studied in the future. It will also be very useful to understand in more detail the charge transport and charge dynamics in the ETL and HTL after the incorporation of the nanostructures. The fantastic features perovskite materials demonstrate as absorbers (bi-polarity, long diffusion lengths, high absorption, etc.) in solar cells, in order to be optimized, should be combined with high performance interlayers. Graphene and other two dimensional (2D) layered crystals have already demonstrated their potential as ETL or HTL building blocks in OPVs73–77 and PSCs.78–81 The incorporation of 2D materials into the different building layers of OPVs has resulted in higher demonstrated stabilities and efficiencies and environmentally friendly devices. The utilization of various 2D crystals decorated with metal NPs77 is something that has not been reported yet and is expected to have a dual role: (a) as an efficient transport & blocking layer and (b) as a light trapping material due to the backscattering or trapping of the incident photons the metal nanostructures will induce into the PA. Finally, but equally important, besides the optical theoretical guidelines already presented for the absorption enhancement when metal NPs are placed in the PA is the development of additional guidelines provided by the theoretical simulations regarding (a) optical and electrical theoretical guidelines for the maximum enhancement of both the absorption and charge extraction when metal NPs are incorporated also into the ETL (mesoporous and planar) and HTL of PSCs and (b) optical theoretical guidelines for the optimum IR light utilization when rare-earth-element UCNPs are placed in the PA, ETL (mesoporous and planar), and HTL and utilized as the mesoporous scaffold of PSCs. These theoretical guidelines will guide experimental researchers to better utilize the above-mentioned approaches in order to further improve the PCEs of PSCs.
This paper is the first attempt to review exclusively27 the impact of metal and rare-earth-element NPs on both the mesoscopic and planar PSCs. It is believed that this paper will be a guide to explain and inspire new work that has to be done in the field of plasmonic and upconversion nanoparticle doped PSCs.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the Research Projects for Excellence IKY/Siemens.
References
W. Nie, H. Tsai, R. Asadpour, J.-C. Blancon, A. J. Neukirch, G. Gupta, J. J. Crochet, M. Chhowalla, S. Tretiak, M. A. Alam, H.-L. Wang and A. D. Mohite, Science, 2015, 347, 522–525 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. X. Steirer, P. Schulz, G. Teeter, V. Stevanovic, M. Yang, K. Zhu and J. J. Berry, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 360–366 CrossRef CAS .
N. K. Kumawat, M. N. Tripathi, U. Waghmare and D. Kabra, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2016, 120, 3917 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini, C. Menelaou, M. J. P. Alcocer, T. Leijtens, L. M. Herz, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2013, 342, 341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Lee, J. Luo, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Gao, M. Grätzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 3925 CrossRef CAS .
T.-B. Song, Q. Chen, H. Zhou, C. Jiang, H.-H. Wang, Y. Yang, Y. Liu, J. You and Y. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9032 CAS .
S. D. Stranks and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 391 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          https://www.nrel.gov/pv/assets/images/efficiency-chart.png
        .
W. E. I. Sha, X. Ren, L. Chen and W. C. H. Choy, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 221104 CrossRef .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, K. Domanski, J.-Y. Seo, A. Ummadisingu, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J.-P. Correa-Baena, W. R. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Science, 2016, 354, 206–209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shao, Z. Xiao, C. Bi, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5784 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. You, Z. Hong, Y. M. Yang, Q. Chen, M. Cai, T.-B. Song, C.-C. Chen, S. Lu, Y. Liu, H. Zhou and Y. Yang, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1674–1680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Docampo, J. M. Ball, M. Darwich, G. E. Eperon and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2761 Search PubMed .
K. Yoshikawa, H. Kawasaki, W. Yoshida, T. Irie, K. Konishi, K. Nakano, T. Uto, D. Adachi, M. Kanematsu, H. Uzu and K. Yamamoto, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17032 CrossRef CAS .
A. H. Slavney, R. W. Smaha, I. C. Smith, A. Jaffe, D. Umeyama and H. I. Karunadasa, Inorg. Chem., 2017, 56, 46–55 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Konstantakou and T. Stergiopoulos, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 11518 CAS .
A. Mei, X. Li, L. Liu, Z. Ku, T. Liu, Y. Rong, M. Xu, M. Hu, J. Chen, Y. Yang, M. Grätzel and H. Han, Science, 2014, 345, 295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. A. Berhe, W.-N. Su, C.-H. Chen, C.-J. Pan, J.-H. Cheng, H.-M. Chen, M.-C. Tsai, L.-Y. Chen, A. A. Dubaleb and B.-J. Hwang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 323 CAS .
T. Leijtens, G. E. Eperon, N. K. Noel, S. N. Habisreutinger, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500963 CrossRef .
C. Zhao, B. Chen, X. Qiao, L. Luan, K. Lu and B. Hu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500279 CrossRef .
X. Huang, S. Neretina and M. A. El-Sayed, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4880 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Stratakis and E. Kymakis, Mater. Today, 2013, 16, 133–146 CrossRef CAS .
C. Petridis, K. Savva, E. Kymakis and E. Stratakis, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2017, 489, 28–37 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chen, L. Shao, Q. Li and J. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2679 RSC .
K. L. Kelly, E. Coronado, L. L. Zhao and G. C. Schatz, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 668 CrossRef CAS .
K. Chan, M. Wright, N. Elumalai, A. Uddin and S. Pillai, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2017, 5, 1600698 CrossRef .
J. C. Goldschmidt and S. Fischer, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2015, 3, 510–535 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhou, Q. Liu, W. Feng, Y. Sun and F. Li, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 395–465 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. D. Gaspera, Y. Peng, Q. Hou, L. Spiccia, U. Bach, J. J. Jasieniak and Y.-B. Cheng, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 249–257 CrossRef .
S. De Wolf, J. Holovsky, S.-J. Moon, P. Löper, B. Niesen, M. Ledinsky, F.-J. Haug, J.-H. Yum and C. Ballif, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1035–1039 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Cushing, J. Li, J. Bright, B. T. Yost, P. Zheng, A. D. Bristow and N. Wu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 16239–16244 CAS .
C. Clavero, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 95–103 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sygletou, G. Kakavelakis, B. Paci, A. Generosi, E. Kymakis and E. Stratakis, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 17756–17764 CAS .
S. H. Chang, K.-F. Lin, C.-H. Chiang, S.-H. Chen and C.-G. Wu, Sci. World J., 2014, 2014, 128414 Search PubMed .
S. C. Palacios, M. E. Calvo and H. Miguez, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2015, 119, 18635–18640 Search PubMed .
L. Yue, B. Yan, M. Attridge and Z. Wang, Sol. Energy, 2015, 124, 143–152 CrossRef .
B. Cai, Y. Peng, Y.-B. Cheng and M. Gu, Opt. Express, 2015, 23, 1700 CrossRef PubMed .
N. K. Pathak and R. P. Sharma, Plasmonics, 2016, 11, 713–719 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Palacios, A. J. Solano and H. Miguez, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 323–331 CrossRef PubMed .
H. L. Hsu, T.-Y. Juang, C.-P. Chen, C.-M. Hsieh, C.-C. Yang, C.-L. Huang and R. J. Jeng, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2015, 140, 224–231 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kakavelakis, K. Alexaki, E. Stratakis and E. Kymakis, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 12998–13002 RSC .
R. Wu, B. Yang, C. Zhang, Y. Huang, Y. Cui, P. Liu, C. Zhou, Y. Hao and J. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 6996–7004 CAS .
P. Liu, B. Yang, G. Liu, R. Wu, J. Yang, Y. Gao and G. Zhou, Chin. Phys. B, 2017, 26, 058401-1–058401-7 Search PubMed .
D. S. Lee, W. Kim, B. G. Cha, J. Kwon, S. J. Kim, M. Kim, J. Kim, D. H. Wang and J. H. Park, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 449–454 CAS .
J. Cui, C. Chen, J. Han, K. Cao, W. Zhang, Y. Shen and M. Wang, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1500312–1500320 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Yuan, Z. Wu, S. Bai, Z. Xia, W. Xu, T. Song, H. Wu, L. Xu, J. Si, Y. Jin and B. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500038 CrossRef .
Y. Cheng, C. Chen, X. Chen, J. Jin, H. Li, H. Song and Q. Dai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 6515–6521 CAS .
Y. Liu, F. Lang, T. Dittrich, A. Steigert, C. H. Fischer, T. Kohler, P. Plate, J. Rappich, M. C. L. Steiner and M. Schmid, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 1206–1214 RSC .
R. Fan, L. Wang, Y. Chen, G. Zheng, L. Liang, Z. Li and H. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 12034–12042 CAS .
G. M. Kim and T. Tatsuma, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 11693–11699 CAS .
W. Zhang, M. Saliba, S. D. Stranks, Y. Sun, X. Shi, U. Wiesner and H. J. Snaith, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4505–4510 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Saliba, W. Zhang, V. M. Burlakov, S. D. Stranks, Y. Sun, J. M. Ball, M. B. Johnston, A. Goriely, U. Wiesner and H. J. Snaith, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 5038–5046 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lu, X. Pan, Y. Ma, Y. Li, L. Zheng, D. Zhang, Q. Xu, Z. Chen, S. Wang, B. Qu, F. Liu, Y. Huang, L. Xiao and Q. Gong, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 11175–11179 RSC .
H. Nourolahi, A. Behjat, S. M. M. H. Zarch and M. A. Bolorizadeh, Sol. Energy, 2016, 19, 475–483 CrossRef .
M. Tang, L. Zhou, S. Gu, W. Zhu, Y. Wang, J. Xu, Z. Deng, T. Yu, Z. Lu and J. Zhu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 109, 183091–183099 Search PubMed .
S. S. Mali, C. S. Shim, H. Kim, P. S. Patil and C. K. Hong, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 2664–2677 RSC .
D. Yang, J. Gyu, J. Lim, J. Lee, S. H. Kim and J. I. Hong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 21522–21530 CAS .
C. Zhang, Q. Luo, J. Shi, L. Yue, Z. Wang, X. Chen and S. Huang, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 2852–2864 RSC .
N. Aeineh, E. M. Barea, A. Behjat, N. Sharifi and I. Mora-Sero, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 13181–13187 CAS .
T. Ye, S. Ma, X. Jiang, L. Wei, C. Vijila and S. Ramakrishna, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1606545 CrossRef .
Q. Lin, A. Armin, R. C. R. Nagiri, P. L. Burn and P. Meredith, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 9, 106–112 CrossRef .
M. He, X. Pang, X. Liu, B. Jiang, Y. He, H. Snaith and Z. Lin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 4280–4284 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Roh, H. Yu and J. Jang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 19847–19852 CAS .
M. Que, W. Que, X. Yin, P. Chen, Y. Yang, J. Hu, B. Yu and Y. Du, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 14432–14437 RSC .
J. Li, Y. Shen, Y. Liu, F. Shi, X. Ren, T. Niu, K. Zhao and S. F. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 19176–19183 CAS .
X. Zhang, Q. Wang, Z. Jin, J. Zhang and S. F. Liu, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 6278–6285 RSC .
B. Baci, A. Generoci, V. R. Albertini, G. D. Spyropoulos, E. Stratakis and E. Kymakis, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 7452 RSC .
K. A. Bush, A. F. Palmstrom, Z. J. Yu, M. Boccard, R. Cheacharoen, J. P. Mailoa, D. P. McMeekin, R. Hoye, C. D. Bailie, T. Leijtens, I. Peters, M. Minichetti, N. Rolston, R. Prasanna, S. Sofia, D. Harwood, W. Ma, F. Moghadam, H. Snaith, T. Buonassisi, Z. Holfaman, S. Bent and M. D. McGehee, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17009 CrossRef CAS .
A. Cannavale, M. Horantner, G. Eperon, H. Snaith, F. Fiorito, U. Ayr and F. Martellotta, Appl. Energy, 2017, 194, 94–107 CrossRef .
G. Flora, D. Gupta and A. Tiwari, Interdiscip. Toxicol., 2012, 5, 47–58 CAS .
F. Giustino and H. J. Snaith, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 1233–1240 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kakavelakis, A. Castillio, V. Pellegrini, A. Ansaldo, P. Tzourmpakis, R. Brescia, M. Prato, E. Stratakis, E. Kymakis and F. Bonaccorso, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 3517–3531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Balis, E. Stratakis and E. Kymakis, Mater. Today, 2016, 19, 580–594 CrossRef CAS .
D. Konios, G. Kakavelakis, C. Petridis, E. Stratakis and E. Kymakis, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 1612–1623 CAS .
A. Agresti, S. Pescetelli, L. Cina, D. Konios, G. Kakavelakis, E. Kymakis and A. Di Carlo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 2686–2694 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sygletou, P. Tzourmpakis, C. Petridis, D. Konios, C. Fotakis, E. Kymakis and E. Stratakis, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 1020–1027 CAS .
A. Agresti, S. Pescetelli, A. Lorenzo, P. A. E. Del Rio Castillo, D. Konios, G. Kakavelakis, S. Razza, L. Cinà, E. Kymakis, F. Bonaccorso and A. Di Carlo, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 279–287 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kakavelakis, T. Maksudov, D. Konios, I. Paradisanos, G. Kioseoglou, E. Stratakis and E. Kymakis, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602120 CrossRef .
K. T. Cho, G. Grancini, Y. Lee, D. Konios, S. Paek, E. Kymakis and M. K. Nazeeruddin, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 3040–3044 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen and G. Shi, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605448 CrossRef PubMed .

Footnote† G. K. and K. P. contributed equally to the preparation of this manuscript.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:
G. Kakavelakis	George Kakavelakis received his B.Sc. and M.Sc. degrees from the Department of Materials Science and Technology of the University of Crete, Greece in 2013 and 2015, respectively. He is currently a PhD candidate in the same department, working in Prof. Emmanuel Kymakis' group at the TEI of Crete. In 2016 he received a PhD fellowship from the State Scholarships Foundation of Greece. His research focuses on the improvement of the performance and stability of organic and perovskite solar cells utilizing metallic nanoparticles and graphene-related nanomaterials. He has 20 publications in peer-reviewed journals (ACS Nano, Advanced Energy Materials, etc.) and 8 oral presentations in international conferences (HOPV16, AP-HOPV17, etc.).
K. Petridis	Dr Konstantinos Petridis received his Bachelor's degree in 1996 from the Department of Physics of the University of Crete, Greece. In 2001 he was awarded his PhD from the Physics Department of the University of St Andrews in the UK. In 2003 he joined, as a post-doctoral researcher, The Institute of Photonic Sciences in Barcelona, Spain. Since 2004 he has been a member of staff in the Department of Electronic Engineering of the University of Applied Sciences Crete (TEI of Crete). In 2012 he joined the Nanomaterials & Advanced Electronics Research group of the TEI of Crete. Dr Petridis has 18 journal publications and 75 conference publications and presentations.
E. Kymakis	Emmanuel Kymakis is Full Professor at the Electrical Engineering Department of the University of Applied Sciences Crete (TEI of Crete), where he heads the Nanomaterials and Advanced Electronics group. He received his B.Eng. in Electrical Engineering & Electronics from Liverpool University in 1999 and his Ph.D. degree in Electrical Engineering from Cambridge University in 2003. His research topics presently include investigation of the opto-electronic properties of graphene, layered crystals and inorganic–organic hybrids for the development of low cost next generation organic and perovskite solar cells. He has over 100 SCI publications with over 5000 citations on these topics.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic diagram showing both (a) the mesoscopic and (b) the planar (normal and inverted) PSC architectures. Yellow and grey particles of different sizes, shapes and coatings indicate plasmonic metal NPs or UCNPs and blue arrows indicate the different layers in which the NPs have been placed in the PSC building block.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) The absorption enhancement of the PA as function of the Au NP radius for 200 nm thickness (panel a) and widths of (i) 125 nm, (ii) 200 nm, (iii) 400 nm and (iv) 600 nm. (b) In panel (b) the thickness of the PA is 300 nm while the widths are (i) 150 nm, (ii) 225 nm, (iii) 300 nm and (iv) 600 nm. (c) Perovskite solar absorption enhancement for two different PA thicknesses as a function of the Ag NP position within the PA. Negative z values correspond to positions closer to the glass substrate, z = 0 in the middle of the PA and z > 0 closer to the HTL. The dashed lines correspond to the average value for all the z positions in each case. (d) Absorbance spectra for various Au NP positions: (i) z = −50 nm, (ii) z = −10 nm and (iii) z = 50 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 36© 2015 American Chemical Society. (e) Total absorption demonstrated for 140 nm diameter Ag NPs with multiple spacings between them. In the inset is depicted the corresponding enlargement of the extinction coefficient of the PA in nanoparticle free devices that demonstrate similar absorption to plasmonic doped devices e.g. a 1000 times enlarged k value could contribute 0.8 total absorption which is similar to the effect of doping with 140 nm diameter particles with 2 nm spacing. Reproduced with permission from ref. 37© 2015 Elsevier Ltd. (f) Light absorbance of the PA with/without metal nanoparticles. The broadband absorption enhancement induced by the lumpy Ag NPs is evident. (g) The obtained Jsc in the PSC as a function of the PA thickness and the introduced NP system. The highest Jsc is obtained for the system with lumpy Ag NPs due to their dual operation as absorption enhancers through near field and scattering effects. Reproduced with permission from ref. 38© 2015 OSA. (h) Normalized absorption of a 500 nm MAPI film hosting 90 nm radius gold spheres as a function of the thickness of the silicon oxide protective shell. The drop in the absorption is attributed to the screening of the near field effect as a function of the core shell thickness. The dashed line indicates the normalized absorption value for the NP free reference film. (i) and (j) Figures depicting the spatial distribution of the normalized electric field and absorbed power per unit volume in the vicinity of 90 nm diameter Au spherical NPs at 750 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 40© 2016 American Chemical Society.	 


Glass/ITO/perovskite	FDTD	Oval shaped Cu nanostructure	Exciton generation and dissociation	
35

Glass/perovskite/HTM	FDTD	20–90 nm spherical Au NPs	Absorption (LRPR and scattering)	
36

Glass/ITO/c-TiO2/perovskite/P3HT/Ag	Finite integral technique (CST microwave studio)	140 nm Ag NPs, 2 nm spacing	IR absorption (non-linear effect)	
37

Glass/ITO/c-TiO2/perovskite/spiro/Ag	FDTD	∼100 lumpy Ag NPs	Absorption, Jsc (LSPR and scattering)	
38

Perovskite film	Mie scattering theory	15–100 nm spherical Au, Ag (best 100 nm), Al and Cu NPs	Absorption (LSPR and scattering)	
39

Glass/perovskite/HTM	FDTD	Al, Au and Ag NPs of various sizes, shapes and coatings	Absorption (LSPR)	
40


 	Fig. 3  (a) J–V curve of the reference and the Ag nanoplate device, (b) superior optical performance of the plasmonic device mainly due to the extension of the perovskite absorber absorption spectrum induced by the Ag nanoplates, and (c) superior stability under illumination and dark conditions of the plasmonic device. Reproduced with permission from ref. 41© 2015 Elsevier B.V. (d) The J–V curves of PSCs employing different types of metal NPs in their HTL. The superiority of the Ag NPs in generating higher PCEs is obvious. (e) External quantum efficiency spectra of the same devices. (f) The higher moisture tolerance (under ∼50% RH) under continuous solar illumination of the Al doped devices is exhibited. Reproduced with permission from ref. 42© 2017 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) The series and (h) recombination resistances the plasmonic and the reference device demonstrated for different bias voltages as EIS measurements revealed. The higher FFs the NR based devices exhibited were attributed to the higher recombination and lower series resistances the plasmonic devices demonstrated. Reproduced with permission from ref. 43© 2016 ACS Publications. (i) J–V curve of the reference and the plasmonic cell (Au NPs at 0.01% concentration of spiro-OMeTAD). (j) Absorption enhancement of the Au@spiro-OMeTAD compared to the nanoparticle free HTL in the spectral region 350–450 nm. This enhancement is attributed to the LSPR absorption induced by the NPs. (k) 10% EQE measurements of the reference and the cells incorporating the plasmonic HTL at an optimum nanoparticle concentration. The enhancement that is observed beyond the LSPR induced absorption (350–750 nm) is attributed to the superior optical and electrical properties of the plasmonic cells. (l) EQE enhancement induced by the plasmonic devices. Reproduced with permission from ref. 45© 2016 ACS Publications.	 


Experimental investigations of NPs placed in the HTL of planar PSCs

CH3NH3PbI3−xClx	70 × 12 nm Ag NPLs in PEDOT:PSS	9.6	15	Absorption (plasmonic scattering) and stability	
41

CH3NH3PbI3−xClx	20 nm Ag and 30 nm Al spheres in PEDOT:PSS	12.4	10	Charge extraction (enhanced conductivity of the HTL) and stability (moisture tolerance)	
42

CH3NH3PbI3	Au@SiO2 NRs at the interface between perovskite and PEDOT:PSS	15.6	40	Absorption (LSPR) and carrier transport (lower series and higher recombination resistance)	
43

CH3NH3PbI3	50 nm Au and Ag in PEDOT:PSS	11.6	11.5	Absorption (LSPR) and charge collection (lower series resistance)	
44



Experimental investigations of NPs placed in the HTL of mesoscopic PSCs

CH3NH3PbI3	15 nm Au spheres in spiro-OMeTAD	12.77	∼1	Absorption (LSPR) and charge transport (lower HTL resistance)	
45



Experimental investigations of NPs placed in the HTL of inverted mesoscopic PSCs

CH3NH3PbI2.85Br0.15	41 nm Au@SiO2 spheres and Au@SiO2 NRs (with a length of 42 nm and a width of 11 nm) between perovskite and NiO (in an Al2O3 scaffold)	13.7	25	IR absorption (LSPR) and efficient charge transport (higher carrier lifetime)	
46


 	Fig. 4  (a) Electron injection measurements: (left image) the ETL film doped with NPs exhibits superior conductivity due to the hot electron transfer (under illumination conditions) from the metal NPs to the TiOx network (right image). Reproduced with permission from ref. 47© 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) The higher intensity and broader spectral absorption the Au–Ag alloys provide compared to the other nanostructures shapes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 48© 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Optical absorption of the PA on the mesoporous TiO2 scaffold with (solid line) and without the popcorn NPs. The extension of the absorption spectrum of the PA when NPs were introduced is obvious due to the more efficient light trapping they induced. Reproduced with permission from ref. 54© 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) In the top image the JV curves of devices under AM1.5G illumination as a function of the NP concentration in the c-TiO2 and in the bottom image the electron transportation within the NP doped ETL. Reproduced with permission from ref. 55© 2016 Elsevier Ltd. (e) PCE demonstrating the stability, under UV illumination, of unsealed PSCs based on mesoporous TiO2 with and without Au NPs and MgO modification under ambient conditions (∼55% humidity). Reproduced with permission from ref. 59© 2017 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) (Left) JV curves under 100 mW cm−2 illumination for reference and plasmonic PSCs for forward & reverse scanning, (middle) the ICPE spectra that indicated that the superior performance of the plasmonic device is due to better light trapping and improved electrical characteristics the ETL modified with NPs demonstrated and (right) the obtained PL spectra that showed the faster transportation of the electrons towards the ETL when NPs were utilized in the completed devices. Reproduced with permission from ref. 60© 2016 American Chemical Society.	 


Experimental investigations of NPs placed in the ETL of planar PSCs

CH3NH3PbI3	40 nm Au spheres between two thin films of TiOx ETL	16.2	∼23	Charge extraction (hot electron transfer to the traps of TiOx from the Au NPs)	
47

CH3NH3PbI3	Au (nanorods and nanospheres), Ag (nanocubes and nanospheres) and Au–Ag nanoalloys with different sizes in a TiO2 ETL	14.8	15	Absorption (LSPR and scattering) and photoelectron extraction (hot electron injection)	
48

CH3NH3PbI3 (ultrathin, 140 nm)	11–16 nm Ag spheres in a c-TiO2 ETL	7.08	22.5	Absorption (LSPR) and carrier extraction	
49

CH3NH3PbI3	Au@TiO2 spheres and rods in c-TiO2	16.35	4	Charge extraction (hot electron transfer from Ag NPs to c-TiO2 NPs)	
50

CH3NH3PbI3	70 nm Ag nanocubes between a PCBM ETL and a BCP hole blocking layer	13.3	10	Absorption (LSPR and scattering)	
51



Experimental investigations of NPs placed in the ETL of mesoscopic PSCs

CH3NH3PbI3	80 nm Au@SiO2 spheres in a m-Al2O3 scaffold	11.4	6.5	Reduced exciton binding energy (NP LSPR)	
52

CH3NH3PbI3−xClx	40 nm Ag@TiO2 spheres in a m-Al2O3 scaffold	13.5	18.4	Photon recycling (highly polarizable nanoparticles can enhance the radiative recombination of excitons)	
53

CH3NH3PbI3	150 nm Au–Ag alloy popcorn shaped NPs in m-TiO2	10.3	15.7	Absorption and charge extraction	
54

CH3NH3PbI3	30 nm Ag spheres in c-TiO2	6.15	30	Absorption (scattering) and charge extraction (decreased electron transport time)	
55

CH3NH3PbI3	Au@SiO2 NRs (with an AR of ∼3) in m-TiO2	14.4	16.1	Absorption (scattering)	
56

CH3NH3PbI3	58 nm Au spheres in a TiO2 nanofiber ETL	14.37	25	Photoelectron transportation (hot electron injection), absorption (LSPR and scattering), reduced hysteresis (hot electron injection) and stability	
57

CH3NH3PbI3	25 nm neat Ag spheres in a m-TiO2 ETL	11.96	9.1	Absorption (LSPR) and carrier extraction (reduced surface roughness and more dense ETL packing)	
58

CH3NH3PbI3	40 nm Au spheres in m-TiO2 combined with an MgO passivation layer on top of them	16.1	34	Reduced photo-generated carrier recombination (MgO passivation), UV-stability (Au NPs and MgO), absorption (LSPR) and charge extraction (hot electron injection)	
59

CH3NH3PbI3	14 nm Au@SiO2 spheres at the interface between m- and c-TiO2	17.5	7.8	Faster charge extraction (decreased resistance at intermediate frequencies) and slightly reduced hysteresis	
60

Triple cation perovskite	40 nm Au@SiO2 with a 15 nm coating placed between m-TiO2 and the perovskite	20.3	29	Absorption (LSPR and scattering) and charge extraction (balanced mobilities), reduced hysteresis and stability	
61


 	Fig. 5  (a) Optical constants of the CH3NH3PbI3; refractive index (n) and extinction coefficient (k); three different areas of absorption can be noticed: λ > 800 nm which is characterized by minimum absorption, 500 nm < λ < 800 nm with moderate absorption and λ < 500 nm where the absorption is very strong (due to PbI2). Reproduced with permission from ref. 62© 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. (b.1) TEM image of NaYF4:Yb/Er upconversion nanoparticles. The inset shows high resolution TEM images showing the NaYF4:Yb/Er crystal. (b.2) XRD profile of the NaYF4:Yb/Er upconversion nanoparticles. (b.3) The upconversion efficiency of the NaYF4:Yb/Er upconversion nanoparticles under 980 nm NIR laser excitation. The corresponding energy transitions are illustrated. The left insets depict the green fluorescence under 980 nm NIR laser excitation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 63© 2016 Willey-VCH Verlang GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c.1) J–V curves of the PSCs with a TiO2 ETL (black line), with a NaYF4 nanoprisms@TiO2 ETL (blue line) and with a NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ nanoprisms@TiO2 ETL. The superiority of the latter is attributed to the upconversion and scattering effects triggered by the UCNPs. (c.2) Their corresponding IPCE (%) spectra. (c.3) Schematic diagram of the energy transfer process in PSCs employing an upconverting mesoporous layer. Reproduced with permission from ref. 64© 2016 ACS Publications. (d) Photovoltaic parameters of the perovskite solar cell devices employing mp-TiO2 (reference devices) and NYF-TiO2 ETLs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 65© 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 


CH3NH3PbI3	18.5 nm NYF:Yb3+,Er3+/PAA-b-PEO spheres as the mesoporous scaffold	18.1	∼8	Superior perovskite layer crystallinity and IR light exploitation (upconversion effect)	
63

CH3NH3PbI3	Hexagonal NYF:Yb3+,Er3+ nanoprisms (550 nm in diameter and 600 nm in height) in m-TiO2	15.98	13.7	IR light exploitation (upconversion effect)	
64

CH3NH3PbI3	β-NaYF4:Yb3+,Tm3+/NaYF4 core–shell spheres (with diameters of 45–50 nm) in m-TiO2	16.9	20	IR light exploitation (upconversion effect) and faster electron transport	
65

Footnote
† G. K. and K. P. contributed equally to the preparation of this manuscript.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
