Tetrametallic molecular catalysts for photochemical water oxidation   - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2CS35287G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2CS35287G
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2262-2280Tetrametallic molecular catalysts for photochemical water oxidation†Andrea Sartorel*a, Marcella Bonchioa, Sebastiano Campagnab and Franco Scandola*caITM-CNR and Dipartimento di Scienze Chimiche, Università di Padova, Via F. Marzolo 1, 35131 Padova, Italy. E-mail: andrea.sartorel@unipd.it; marcella.bonchio@unipd.itbDipartimento di Scienze Chimiche, Università di Messina and Centro Interuniversitario per la Conversione Chimica dell'Energia Solare, sezione di Messina, Via Sperone 31, 98166 Messina, Italy. E-mail: campagna@unime.itcDipartimento di Chimica, Università di Ferrara, and Centro Interuniversitario per la Conversione Chimica dell’Energia Solare, sez. di Ferrara, Via L. Borsari 46, 44121 Ferrara, Italy. E-mail: snf@unife.itReceived 27th July 2012First published on 25th September 2012AbstractAmong molecular water oxidation catalysts (WOCs), those featuring a reactive set of four multi-redox transition metals can leverage an extraordinary interplay of electronic and structural properties. These are of particular interest, owing to their close structural, and possibly functional, relationship to the oxygen evolving complex of natural photosynthesis. In this review, special attention is given to two classes of tetrametallic molecular WOCs: (i) M4O4 cubane-type structures stabilized by simple organic ligands, and (ii) systems in which a tetranuclear metal core is stabilized by coordination of two polyoxometalate (POM) ligands. Recent work in this rapidly evolving field is reviewed, with particular emphasis on photocatalytic aspects. Special attention is given to studies addressing the mechanistic complexity of these systems, sometimes overlooked in the rush for oxygen evolving performance. The complementary role of molecular WOCs and their relationship with bulk oxides and heterogeneous catalysis are discussed.Andrea SartorelAndrea Sartorel (born 1974) graduated in Chemistry cum laude in 1999 at the University of Padova, where he earned his PhD in 2003. After a period of working in the industry (2003–2005) and a research contract with the Italian National Council of Research (2006–2008), since 2009 he has been Assistant Professor at the Department of Chemical Sciences of the University of Padova. His research interests deal with biomimetic oxidations, polyoxometalate chemistry and water oxidation catalysis for applications in artificial photosynthesis.Marcella BonchioMarcella Bonchio started her career at the University of Padova where, in 1993, she received the PhD in Physical Organic Chemistry. Since 2001 she has been First Researcher of the Italian National Research Council (CNR), directing the research activities at the Institute of Membrane Technology section of Padova. Recent achievements deal with new molecular solutions for photosynthetic systems under artificial environment and energy materials.Sebastiano CampagnaSebastiano Campagna (born 1959) received the Laurea in Chemistry (cum laude) from the University of Messina in 1983. Since 1985 he spent a decade as a post-doctoral fellow, funded by a Sicilian cultural foundation and the Messina University, at the Chemistry Department “G. Ciamician” of the University of Bologna, in the group of Prof. Vincenzo Balzani. In 1998 he joined the Science Faculty of the Messina University, where he is now Professor of Physical Chemistry. In 1995 he was awarded the Raffaello Nasini Prize (Società Chimica Italiana). His research fields include light- and redox-active dendrimers, Ru(II) photophysics, and artificial photosynthesis.Franco ScandolaFranco Scandola has been Professor at the Department of Chemistry, University of Ferrara since 1980. Following early research activity on the photochemistry of coordination compounds, he has been a pioneer (together with Vincenzo Balzani) in the emerging field of supramolecular photochemistry. His current interests span from fundamental aspects of energy and electron transfer, to the photophysics of self-assembling multichromophoric systems, to the design and photophysical characterization of functional units for artificial photosynthesis.1. IntroductionBoosted by the rapid economic development of a growing world population, the global energy demand (now about 15 TW) is expected to double by 2050 and to triple by 2100.1 How to satisfy this enormous energy demand is the most pressing challenge facing society today. The main present energy source, fossil fuels, cannot be considered as a viable solution, not only for their limited availability, but because atmospheric CO2 levels (already at more than 50% above the pre-industrial values) cannot increase further without catastrophic consequences on climate change. It is clear that any long-term solution to the energy problem relies on the identification and exploitation of alternative energy sources that must be abundant, inexpensive, environmentally clean, and geographically widespread. In terms of such requirements, solar power (120000 TW average irradiation at earth surface) presents itself as the most promising source of renewable energy available. In Nature, massive utilization of solar energy to sustain biological life is performed by a variety of photosynthetic organisms (plants, algae, cyanobacteria) that have evolved, along ca. 2 billion years, to convert CO2 and water into carbohydrates and oxygen. The development of artificial systems capable of efficiently converting light energy into practical fuels (artificial photosynthesis) can thus be envisioned as a research field of great potential, in principle able to provide a definitive solution to our energy problem.2In natural photosynthesis, absorption of light by photosynthetic pigments initiates a series of energy transfer and charge separation processes that lead to the oxidation of water to molecular oxygen (eqn (1)), while the reducing equivalents are used to drive the reduction of CO2 into carbohydrates (eqn (2)). In artificial photosynthesis, similar lines can be followed as far as water oxidation is concerned, but the reducing equivalents will be eventually used to drive the production of highly energetic fuels such as hydrogen (eqn (3)), or various reduced forms of carbon (eqn (4)–(8), potentials always referred to pH = 7). (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)The energetic requirements of these photosynthetic reactions (algebraic sum of  for water oxidation and substrate reduction) can be easily met by visible photons (energy ≥ 1.55 eV), perhaps using two photons per equivalent of product, as in green plant photosynthesis, to compensate for energy losses in intermediate steps of energy migration and charge separation. The main problems to be faced, however, are of kinetic nature and pertain to the fact that, while the charge separation and recombination steps initiated by light absorption are fast one-electron processes, the oxidation and reduction of the substrates (eqn (1)–(8)) are intrinsically slow, multi-electron processes. In particular, the water oxidation step, common to all these photosynthetic reactions, is a complex process involving four-electron oxidation of two water molecules, the formation of a new O–O bond, and the release of four protons. As such, water oxidation is considered to constitute the real kinetic bottleneck towards artificial photosynthesis,3 and the degree of success in this research field is likely to depend strongly on the development of efficient water oxidation catalysts (WOCs).Although state-of-the-art WOCs are generally based on metal oxide colloids4 or bulk surfaces,5 molecular WOCs have a formidable appeal for at least two important reasons. First, in a molecular WOC the redox and kinetic properties are, in principle, easily tunable by molecular design,6–10 with a wide choice of redox active metal centers and set of ligands. Second, a precious source of inspiration for the design of molecular WOCs is represented by the extremely efficient oxygen evolving complex (OEC) developed by Nature in Photosystem II of plants, algae, and cyanobacteria.11 Perhaps the most evident feature of the OEC of Photosystem II (vide infra) is the presence of four transition metal centers, able to sequentially store four oxidizing equivalents before effecting the water oxidation step. For this reason, although lines of research on molecular catalysts of lower nuclearity are active as well,6–9 attention has been attracted in recent years by the design, development, and testing of tetrametallic molecular WOCs. In this article, after a brief summary of structural and functional aspects of the natural OEC, recent work on tetrametallic molecular WOCs is reviewed.2. Lessons from Nature: the oxygen-evolving complex (OEC) of Photosystem IIInspiration for catalyst design can be obtained from the detailed knowledge accumulated in recent years of natural photosynthetic systems, and in particular of Photosystem II, the transmembrane protein that in oxygenic photosynthetic organisms performs water oxidation.11–13 The structure of Photosystem II, as schematized in Fig. 1a, provides a view of the cofactors involved in transmembrane charge separation: excitation of the primary donor (P680) initiates a cascade of electron-transfer events, proceeding from P680 to pheophytin (Pheo), quinone QA, and onto quinone QB. On the oxidative side, key units are a tyrosine residue, YZ, acting as a relay for electron abstraction from the Mn4Ca cluster that is the actual catalyst for water oxidation (OEC). A recent high-resolution (1.9 Å) X-ray structure11b has revealed the details of the structure of the OEC and of its environment. Fig. 1b shows the chair-like shape of the OEC, with the seat base formed by a distorted cubane structure including three Mn, one Ca, and four bridging oxygen atoms, and the back of the chair formed by the isolated fourth Mn and one bridging oxygen atom. It also shows four water molecules directly coordinated to the metal centers and other water molecules participating to a hydrogen-bond network linking the Mn4CaO5-cluster and YZ, and further from YZ to a nearby histidine. The hydrogen bond to histidine is crucial for the role of Tyrosine YZ as electron relay between the OEC and oxidized P680 (indeed, the removal of this histidine residue by mutagenesis shuts down photosynthesis):14 when YZ is oxidized, a proton moves in this hydrogen bond to the histidine, making the process thermodynamically allowed and leaving the oxidized tyrosine as a neutral radical (proton-coupled electron transfer). Further hydrogen bonding of the histidine to asparagine and several water molecules and residues provides an exit pathway for protons to the lumenal bulk solution. Fig. 1  (a) A view of the main cofactors of PSII (after ref. 12), with a schematic representation of the electron transfer cascade triggered by excitation of P680 and proceeding from P680 to pheophytin (Pheo), QA, and eventually to QB. Also shown is the two-step electron abstraction by oxidized P680 from the Mn4Ca cluster, with the intermediacy of tyrosine YZ. Four of these cycles are needed for the evolution of one molecule of oxygen from the Mn4Ca cluster OEC. (b) Detailed structure of the OEC (after ref. 13) showing the oxo-bridged distorted cubane structure of the Mn3Ca moiety with the additional “dangling” Mn center, the primary electron acceptor tyrosine YZ and the nearby histidine, and the hydrogen-bond network linking the water molecules coordinated to the Mn4Ca cluster, YZ, and histidine. The stepwise oxidation of the OEC by the tyrosine radical is described by the Kok cycle,15 where four oxidation states of the OEC are termed Si (i = 0–4), S0 being the most reduced state and S4 the most oxidized state in the catalytic cycle (Fig. 2). As shown by the flash number dependent oscillating pattern in O2 evolution, the dark-stable state is S1. From there, three photons are needed to effect the S1 → S2, S2 → S3, and S3 → S0 transitions. In the last transition, likely with the intervention of an S4 state as an intermediate, oxygen is evolved. Then, a fourth photon is needed to regenerate the dark-stable state S1. As to the oxidation states of the four Mn centers of the OEC in the various Si states, there is a general agreement that the dark-stable S1 state of the OEC has two Mn(III) and two Mn(IV) centers. The oxidation states of the S0, S2, and S3 states can be inferred by one-electron reduction or oxidation steps. The detailed nature of the elusive S4 state, where oxygen evolution takes place is unknown. Among several hypotheses,11c a plausible one is that of an all-Mn(IV) structure, with one oxyl radical as the apical ligand of the “dangling” Mn atom. In such a case, O–O bond formation could involve the nucleophilic attack of a water molecule, coordinated to the Ca ion, to the oxyl radical. Fig. 2  Classical S-state cycle of photosynthetic water oxidation (Kok cycle).15 Starting in the dark-stable S1 state, absorption of a photon causes electron transfer from the OEC to the YZ tyrosine radical and Si → Si+1 transitions. The electron transfer steps are accompanied by charge-compensating deprotonation steps. A plausible set of oxidation-state combinations of the four Mn ions is shown for the various Si states.11c Typical time constants of the ET step are also indicated.11c In the successive oxidation steps of the Kok cycle, the OEC accumulates four oxidizing equivalents. In each of these steps the oxidant is the YZ radical, with an approximately constant potential (close to +1.1 V). Without a charge-compensating mechanism, the redox-potential of the OEC would increase steadily upon oxidation, making the subsequent oxidation steps thermodynamically forbidden. The required charge compensation is actually provided by four sequential steps by which protons are removed from the OEC and relocated towards the aqueous phase.Many details of the whole system are still to some extent hypothetical, however, such as, e.g. the temporal relationship between electron and proton transfer steps in the various transitions between Si states,16 as well as the detailed picture of the acid–base sites (water molecules, amino acids) involved in the proton relocation processes.17In view of the possibility to apply the building strategies of Nature to the design of artificial WOCs, a final aspect deserves some comment. The harsh oxidizing conditions under which the OEC is working are quite demanding in terms of chemical resistance of the molecular components involved. The strategy devised by Nature to bypass the inevitable long-term oxidative degradation of organic molecules has been that of continuous replacement and repair of the molecular machinery of the OEC. In fact, under ambient sunlight in the chloroplast, the OEC is re-synthesized every half an hour to compensate for the self-produced oxidation damage.18 This strategy can hardly apply to artificial systems, where special attention will have to be paid to the chemical robustness of molecular components used.3. Cubane-type molecular catalysts3.1 ManganeseFollowing bioinspired guidelines, since the discovery that the OEC in Photosystem II is constituted by four manganese atoms,19–22 efforts were directed in developing artificial models mimicking structural or functional properties of the OEC. Therefore, since the early 1980s several mono- and multi-nuclear manganese complexes have been reported, and most of them were reviewed by Mullins et al.23 and by Cady et al.24 Focusing in particular on tetra-manganese clusters, several complexes were structurally characterized, showing different motifs of the Mn4Oy multimetallic core (Fig. 3).23–25 Although such a variety of tetra-manganese species is available, only a few of them have been studied in water oxidation catalysis, showing poor to negligible activity. Fig. 3  Different structural motifs of the Mn4Oy unit in complexes with organic ligands. Reprinted with permission from ref. 25. Copyright (2005) American Chemical Society. 3.1.1 Manganese cubanes. The first example of oxygenic activity by a tetrametallic complex was described by Dismukes and coworkers26,27 who reported that the cubane like [Mn4O4(dpp)6] and [Mn4O4(Me-dpp)6] (dpp = diphenylphosphinate anion, (C6H5)2PO2−; Me-dpp = bis(tolyl)phosphinate, (4-CH3-C6H4)2PO2−) release molecular oxygen in the gas phase upon UV light absorption (Fig. 4). Fig. 4  Structural representation of [Mn4O4(dpp)6] (dpp = diphenylphosphinate anion, (C6H5)2PO2−), and molecular oxygen release in gas phase. dpp ligands at the back of the structure are not shown for clarity. Adapted with permission from ref. 26. Copyright (2000) American Chemical Society. The structure of [Mn4O4(dpp)6] consists of a symmetrical, mixed valent cubane like core, MnIII2MnIV2O4, where the manganese centres are bridged by diphenylphosphinate ligands. Photoinduced O2 release from [Mn4O4(dpp)6] was observed by laser-desorption-ionization time-of-flight mass spectroscopy (LDI-TOF-MS), by vaporizing and ionizing the species by a pulsed N2 laser operating at 337 nm; under these conditions, together with the parent [Mn4O4(dpp)6]+ cation at m/z = 1586.7, a fragment species at m/z = 1337 is also observed, attributed to [Mn4O2(dpp)5]+, with a likely ‘butterfly’ type structure, generated by the contemporary loss of a dpp ligand and two oxygen atoms from the parent cation. Indeed, no peaks due to the separate loss of the dpp or of the two oxygen atoms were observed. At high laser power of ca. 8 μJ a quantum yield (ratio of oxygen molecules produced to absorbed photons) of ca. 0.6 is reported.27The confirmation that the formation of the fragment [Mn4O2(dpp)5]+ was accompanied by molecular oxygen formation was supported by the evidence that no oxygenated products of the dpp ligand were observed, and by the direct detection of O2 with a quadrupole mass spectrometer. Moreover, oxygen labelling experiments revealed that both oxygen atoms came from the cluster and not from the dpp ligands; the authors then argued that the O2 originated from the corner oxygen atoms of the cubane by intramolecular bond formation, and that loss of a dpp ligand is necessary for the process to occur. Two more observations were pivotal in defining the mechanism of O2 release from [Mn4O4(dpp)6]:(i) irradiation at 335 nm is necessary to observe oxygenic activity, since neither fragmentation nor O2 were observed in an analogous experiment with 532 nm laser wavelength, despite high laser powers were used; while the absorption at 355 nm is associated to a Mn–O charge transfer, the one at 532 nm is due to Mn d–d transitions; the metal to ligand charge transfer excitation is then pivotal in the release of dpp and O2;(ii) no O2 release was observed under photoirradiation in solution, probably due to quenching of the photoexcited state or to fast recombination of the first products from the fragmentation, [Mn4O4(dpp)5]+ and dpp.Interestingly, O2 production was observed only in the presence of cubane like structures, and not with other multinuclear manganeseIII,IV mixed valent derivatives, suggesting a favourable geometric effect for oxygen release with an associated structural rearrangement promoted by the cubane framework, possibly associated also with longer (and thus weaker) Mn–O bonds.27The oxygenic activity of [Mn4O4(dpp)6] opened the possibility to design novel species capable of performing water oxidation in catalytic cycles. One major limitation was the poor solubility of these cubane derivatives in aqueous solution; this was overcome by supporting them onto conducting fluorinated membranes that could be used as heterogeneous catalytic materials. [Mn4O4(MeO-dpp)6]+ (MeO-dpp = bis(4-methoxyphenyl)phosphinate, (4-CH3O-C6H4)2PO2−) was ion exchanged with protons in a 3–8 μm thick Nafion membrane, deposited onto conductive electrodes, such as glassy carbon. The doped electrode was shown to generate a photocurrent by application of a potential of 1.0 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) in neutral aqueous solution.28 Illumination was necessary to maintain the current for long time, since application of the bias under dark conditions generated a transient current fading to zero after a few seconds. Also, the energy of the light source had a remarkable influence on the photocurrent, with values decreasing by extending the cutoff wavelength of the filter from 295 up to 570 nm. The photocurrent was accompanied by oxygen evolution, as confirmed with a Clark electrode, with almost quantitative Faradaic efficiency; ca. 1000 turnovers per Mn4O4 cluster were estimated after prolonged electrolysis for 65 h. The key step in the catalytic cycle was postulated to be the photodissociation of a phosphinate anion producing a reduced form of the cluster [Mn4O2(MeO-dpp)5]2+ with the concomitant release of an oxygen molecule, as it was observed in the gas phase. The application of the bias is necessary to perform the following (dark) oxidation:  where two oxygens of water molecules are oxidized to restore the Mn4O4 cluster from its reduced form, with the concomitant release of four protons.The hybrid material nafion-[Mn4O4(MeO-dpp)6]+ was also successfully used to develop a photoanode, where solar power promotes the electron transfer from the catalyst to the electrode, thus avoiding the application of an external bias.29 A representation of such an electrode is reported in Fig. 5; this is constituted by a conductive fluorine tin oxide (FTO) coated glass, where a titania layer sensitized with Ru(bpy)2(bpy(COO)2) (bpy = 2,2′-bipyridine; bpy(COO)2 = 4,4′-dicarboxy-2,2′-bipyridine) is deposited, finally coated with the nafion-[Mn4O4(MeO-dpp)6]+ material.29 The electrode produces photocurrents due to water oxidation in almost neutral water (0.1 M Na2SO4, pH = 6.5) by irradiation at λ > 395 nm (Fig. 5B), without the need for external bias. In this case, contemporary excitation of the Mn4O4 catalyst (to release oxygen) and of the RuII sensitizer (to inject electrons in the conduction band of the semiconductor, followed by electron transfer from the reduced form of the Mn4O4 cluster to the oxidized sensitizer) is needed to activate the catalytic cycle that finally produces oxygen, transferring electrons to a cathode for proton reduction to hydrogen (Fig. 5B).29 The incident photon to current efficiency reached up to 1.7% at λ ca. 440 nm, with current densities of 31 mA cm−2, corresponding to an initial turnover frequency (defined as number of O2 molecules per Mn4O4 cluster per unit of time) of 1.3 × 10−2 s−1. However, the photocurrent was observed to markedly decrease within 2 hours of illumination. Fig. 5  Schematic representation of the photoanode developed by Brimblecombe et al. Reprinted with permission from ref. 29. Copyright (2010) American Chemical Society. Recently, important questions arose on the nature of the water oxidizing species; serious doubts have emerged on the actual role of the Mn4O4 molecular cluster in the catalysis. These are linked to the strong dependence of the observed turnover frequencies (from 5.5 × 10−3 to 7.5 × 10−2 s−1) on the membrane batch,30 to observed changes in the cyclic voltammograms of the cubane cluster in the membrane, and EPR evidence of a six-line signal which could arise from MnII. Indeed, Mn K-edge X-ray absorption spectroscopy and transmission electron microscopy studies applied under catalytic conditions revealed that the Mn4O4 cluster dissociates into MnII compounds, which are then oxidized to MnIII/IV oxides (birnessite), responsible for the water oxidation catalysis.31 In particular, after loading of the Mn4O4 cluster into the nafion membrane a shift of the X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES) peak to lower energy is observed, consistent with formation of MnII derivatives; the extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) indicates also the presence of six oxygen atoms as the coordination sphere of MnII.31 The XANES peak is shifted towards higher energies upon electro-oxidation of the MnII, consistent with an average oxidation state for Mn between 3.75 and 3.85. Analysis of EXAFS and pre-edge points out a clear difference between this electro-oxidized derivative and the original Mn4O4 molecular cluster, indicating that this latter is not responsible for the prolonged water oxidation catalysis. Control experiments showed that the same EXAFS patterns are observed upon electro-oxidation of other Mn species embedded in Nafion, namely Mn2+ ions and [(bpy)2Mn(O)2Mn(bpy)2]3+,32 and this pattern is different from the initial ones registered for these compounds. Indeed, this is consistent with a disordered MnIII/IV phase of the birnessite mineral, or other related manganese oxides (todorokite); indeed, birnessite was found to be the product of electro-oxidation of MnII under acidic conditions.33 1–2 nm nanoparticles of the metal oxides were also observed by high resolution TEM images. Interestingly, upon illumination of the MnIII/IV oxide phase, MnII was observed to be produced concomitantly with oxygen. The reproducible conversion between the oxidized/reduced species was associated to the cycles of natural manganese based minerals via a ‘self-healing’ mechanism in analogy to the cobalt oxide/hydroxide system proposed by Nocera.5aA point of major interest is the origin of the transformation of the Mn4O4 cluster into MnII, which then promoted the formation of the oxide phase. The former process was observed by NMR to originate upon ligand dissociation, induced by the acidic environment of the nafion membrane. Despite the formidable complexity of the catalyst evolution under turnover conditions, the tracing of the key transformation involving the pristine Mn4O4 cores upon light irradiation is certainly instrumental in the comprehension of the reaction mechanism by oxygenic manganese oxides.3.1.2 Other tetranuclear manganese WOCs. One interesting example of a synthetic manganese tetramer capable of water oxidation activity was recently reported by Gao et al.34 This is the ‘dimer of dimers’ type [MnIVO5(terpy)4(H2O)2]6+ (terpy = 2,2′:6′,2′′-terpyridine), Fig. 6, which was initially proposed as a structural model of the natural OEC, being a high-valent oxo-manganese tetramer, with Mn–Mn distances close to those observed in the OEC.35 Moreover, the dimetallic analog [(terpy)2Mn2III/IVO2(H2O)2]3+, Fig. 6, was shown to catalyze water oxidation.32,35–37 While electrochemical oxidation of this dimer induces further dimerization to form the tetramer,38 these two species were also observed to interconvert depending on the pH (the tetramer favored at pH < 2.5).35 This is a key observation since water oxidation catalysis is often studied under acidic conditions, thus suggesting an active role in the catalytic cycle of the tetramer. Fig. 6  Representation of the structure of the tetramer [MnIV4O5(terpy)4(H2O)2]6+ and of the dimer [(terpy)2Mn2III/IVO2(H2O)2]3+ (terpy = 2,2′:6′,2′′-terpyridine). Catalytic activity of [MnIV4O5(terpy)4(H2O)2]6+ in water oxidation was explored by voltammetric techniques in acidic solutions (pH = 1.26 to 2.18), where the appearance of a continuous current at potentials above 1.22 V (vs. SCE) was observed. Formation of manganese oxides particles was excluded by the absence of reduction waves typical of manganese oxides in the cyclic voltammetry. 1 hour electrolysis at 1.6 V vs. SCE at pH = 1.50 (corresponding to an overpotential of 0.70 Volts) yielded dioxygen, as confirmed by GC-MS, but only ca. 3 turnovers per manganese tetramer were observed.The oxygenic activity of the tetramer [MnIV4O5(terpy)4(H2O)2]6+ was explored also in the presence of strong chemical oxidants, such as CeIV salts, both in homogeneous solutions and in heterogeneous systems based on kaolin clays. Under homogeneous conditions, after addition of [MnIV4O5(terpy)4(H2O)2]6+ to a solution of CeIV, a progressive decrease in CeIV concentration was observed over time, accompanied by oxygen evolution. Nevertheless, spectroscopic probes indicate the almost immediate formation of MnII ions (detected by a six-line EPR signal around g = 2) and MnIVO2 (confirmed by the typical absorption at 440 nm in the UV-Vis spectrum, and by the formation of a brown precipitate after prolonged reaction of [MnIV4O5(terpy)4(H2O)2]6+ with CeIV). Differently, when supported onto kaolin, gas evolution in the presence of CeIV is associated to a redox cycle of the molecular tetramer that maintains its absorption at ca. 480 nm after CeIV consumption. However, an EPR signal, registered in the parallel mode, was observed after immediate freezing of a mixture of the kaolin embedded [MnIV4O5(terpy)4(H2O)2]6+ and CeIV, likely ascribable to a mononuclear MnIII derivative. This latter is not observed in homogeneous solution, probably due to its instability to disproportionation to MnII and MnIVO2. Therefore, in the case of [MnIV4O5(terpy)4(H2O)2]6+, it is not clear if the four manganese centers are actually playing with synergic efficiency for oxygen evolution.3.2 Cobalt cubanesThe ability of cobalt(II) ions to catalyze water oxidation catalysis was recognized since the early 1980s, when aqueous solutions of CoII ions or cobalt oxide species were observed to evolve oxygen in the presence of Ru(bpy)33+, chemically produced or light-generated from Ru(bpy)32+ using persulfate anion as the sacrificial electron acceptor.39–41 However, the systems were of scarce practical use, as the oxide catalysts tend to aggregate and form unsoluble (and catalytically inactive) precipitates. The interest in cobalt species for water oxidation purposes has been strongly revitalized in the last few years by Kanan and Nocera, who developed an oxygen evolving anode from electrodeposition of a cobalt oxide/hydroxide layer from Co(II) and phosphate solutions.5a Besides being constituted by earth abundant elements, this material (named Co–Pi) has several interesting properties, since it operates at low overpotentials and self-repairs under catalytic conditions in the presence of protic buffers.42 Subsequent studies revealed that the structure of the active phase is constituted by edge-sharing molecular cobaltate clusters,43 where cobalt–oxygen cubanes are condensed in the extended phase, through edge-sharing. In fact, Co–Pi could be considered at the border of molecular and extended systems.As a consequence of this renewed interest, photo-driven water oxidation was investigated by using a molecular tetracobalt(III)-oxo cubane, namely [Co4(μ-O)4(μ-CH3COO)4(C5H5N)4] (Co4O4–H, Fig. 7), using Ru(bpy)32+ as the photosensitizer and persulfate anion as the sacrificial electron acceptor.44,45 Compound Co4O4–H was already described in the literature,46,47 and it was reported to catalyze oxidation of benzylic alcohols.47 Interestingly, two research teams performed simultaneous, independent and complementary studies on the photo-driven water oxidation of Co4O4–H.44,45 This can be considered a quite lucky circumstance, as independent scrutiny of the molecular nature of the Co4O4–H catalyst was made in different laboratories and a valuable double check of data was possible. Noteworthily, Co4O4–H and the related [Co4(μ-O)4(μ-CH3COO)2(bpy)4]2+ can also be considered good, simplified molecular models for Co–Pi, so some properties of both these compounds have been investigated to shed light on the properties of Co–Pi.48,49 Fig. 7  X-ray structure of cubane Co4O4–H. Reprinted with permission from ref. 47. Copyright (2007) American Chemical Society. Spectrophotometric titration indicated a pKa of about 4 for Co4O4–H, suggesting a non-protonated resting state and an overall neutral charge in the pH range 4.8–8, adopted for the catalysis screening. Cyclic voltammetry of Co4O4–H in phosphate buffer at pH 7 exhibits a one-electron reversible wave, pH-independent in the 5–10 pH range, with E1/2 at +1.05 V vs. Ag/AgCl, which corresponds to an E1/2 of +1.25 V vs. NHE. The oxidation leads to the formation of the formal [3Co(III), Co(IV)]+ species, as confirmed by EPR analysis.49,50 At more positive potentials the catalytic discharge, typical of water oxidation, takes place. The catalytic discharge is pH-dependent, occurring at +1.17 V vs. Ag/AgCl at pH 7 and at +1.12 V vs. Ag/AgCl at pH 8. Therefore, an overpotential of about 550 mV is apparent for water oxidation catalyzed by Co4O4–H under the explored conditions.45Fig. 8 shows the photocatalytic oxygen evolution as a function of time from a 2 mL solution of Co4O4–H (1.87 × 10−5 M) containing Ru(bpy)32+ (1 mM) and persulfate ions (5 mM), at pH 8 in borate buffer ([Na2B4O7] = 80 mM, adjusted at pH 8 with HCl), upon light irradiation (λ > 400 nm).45 A qualitatively very similar result was reported from an irradiated 3.3 × 10−4 M solution of Co4O4–H, in the presence of Ru(bpy)32+ (0.5 mM) and Na2S2O8 (35 mM) in bicarbonate buffer at pH 7.44 Photo-driven water oxidation does not take place at pH 4.8 and occurs only negligibly at pH 5.8.44 The simplified reaction scheme usually accepted for photo-driven water oxidation by photosensitizer–persulfate–catalyst systems is reported in eqn (9)–(14). PS + hν → *PS(9) *PS + S2O82− → PS+ + SO42− + SO4−˙(10) PS + SO4−˙ → PS+ + SO42−(11) PS+ + WOC → PS + WOC+(12) WOC + SO4−˙→ WOC+ + SO42−(13) WOC(4+) + 2H2O → WOC + O2 + 4H+(14)In these equations, PS is the photosensitizer (Ru(bpy)32+ in the present case) and WOC is the oxygen evolving catalyst (Co4O4–H in this case). After light excitation (eqn (9)), oxidative electron transfer quenching of the metal-to-ligand charge-transfer (MLCT) excited state of the Ru(II) photosensitizer by persulfate takes place (eqn (10)), with formation of the oxidized photosensitizer PS+. As the sulfate radical anion formed by eqn (10) is also a very strong oxidant, a further equivalent of PS+ is formed by eqn (11). Then the oxidized sensitizer PS+ reacts with WOC leading to hole transfer and preparation of the oxidized catalyst (eqn (12)). Note that the radical anion SO4−˙ could directly react with WOC (eqn (13)) in competition with eqn (11). The sequence of eqn (9)–(12) has to be repeated twice (so two photons are required) before four holes are accumulated in the WOC, and finally eqn (14) can take place. Fig. 8  Photocatalytic oxygen evolution as a function of time from a 2 mL solution of Co4O4–H (1.87 × 10−5M) containing Ru(bpy)32+ (1 mM) and Na2S2O8 (5 mM), at pH 8 in pH 8 80 mM borate buffer, upon light irradiation (λ > 400 nm). Reproduced from ref. 45 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. Under the experimental conditions used for the experiment in Fig. 8, but using a fixed excitation wavelength (450 nm), the photochemical quantum yield (Φ) for water oxidation was 0.30 (calculated over the first 15 min of irradiation). However, quantum yield drops down to 0.10 at pH 7.45Besides the dependence of photochemical quantum yield on pH, it was found that Φ is also strongly dependent on the catalyst concentration. Fig. 9 visualizes such a dependence at two different pH values. It is clear that Φ is maximized at a specific catalyst concentration, where the optimum catalyst concentration depends on pH.45 Detailed interpretation of the results shown in Fig. 9 is not available, since it would require a knowledge of the effective mechanism for water oxidation. Poisoning processes, such as formation of aggregates and consequent precipitation, are believed to have a primary role in depressing the catalytic activity of Co(II) ions in water solution.39–41 Whether analogous parasite routes might be working with a molecular catalyst such as Co4O4–H is presently difficult to tell. Moreover, it has to be considered that depletion of quantum yield can also be associated to decomposition routes of the photosensitizer (see the following discussion). In the lack of mechanistic details, the behaviour highlighted in Fig. 9 should be regarded as an empirical but practically relevant observation. Fig. 9  Dependence of photochemical quantum yield for oxygen production vs. catalyst concentration. Ru(bpy)32+, 1 mM; Na2S2O8, 5 mM; excitation wavelength is 450 nm. Triangles are data at pH 8 in borate buffer; squares are data at pH 7 in phosphate buffer. Reproduced from ref. 45 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. While the photochemical quantum yield for water oxidation by Co4O4–H in buffer solution was promising, the same cannot be said for the chemical yield (CY) of the process, that is the amount of molecular oxygen produced on the basis of the amount of the persulfate used. In fact, in a catalytic process which contains a sacrificial agent, the product yield is limited by the concentration of the sacrificial agent. In the experiment shown in Fig. 8, CY is 28% of the theoretical amount of oxygen which could be obtained. In different conditions of pH and catalyst concentration, different CY values are found, up to a maximum of 50%.45 The main reason for this behavior is the decomposition of the photosensitizer, which leads to deactivation of the catalytic process.44 It is in fact known that the oxidized forms of Ru(II) polypyridine complexes are prone to nucleophilic attack (usually, on the ligands) by water or other species, including hydroxides, in neutral or basic solutions.40,51,52 Indeed, the absorption spectrum of the catalytic mixture after 30 min of irradiation clearly indicates that the ruthenium sensitizer has been modified.45 This photo-induced decomposition process can be connected with the rate constant and efficiency of the hole scavenging process in eqn (12), as well as of the analogous, successive processes where partially oxidized WOC forms are involved: indeed, slower and less efficient hole scavenging processes tend to favor decomposition of the oxidized photosensitizer. Nanosecond flash photolysis experiments have been performed on Co4O4–H: in these experiments, the recovery of the bleach corresponding to the MLCT band of the photosensitizer upon excitation (i.e., the kinetic of eqn (12), assuming that this is the dominant process leading to recovery of the ground state sensitizer) was followed. An example of the flash photolysis results is shown in Fig. 10. Analysis of the data in Fig. 10 allowed the calculation a pseudo-first order rate constant for the hole scavenging (eqn (12)) involving Ru(bpy)33+ and Co4O4–H of (1.2 ± 0.4) × 107 M−1 s−1 at pH 7.45 The hole scavenging rate constant increases to (1.6 ± 0.4) × 107 M−1 s−1 at pH 8. Such hole scavenging rate constants, essentially invariant between pH 7 and 8, are significantly faster than the slow decomposition of the oxidized photosensitizer (reported to be of the order of 10−3−10−2 s−1,40,51 not detectable in the time scale of the flash photolysis experiments). However, Fig. 10 also indicates that the recovery of the MLCT bleach, while increasing both in rate and in magnitude with increasing catalyst concentration, does never reach completion. This was attributed to the small driving force of eqn (12) in this specific case: in fact, the reduction potential of the couple Ru(bpy)33+/Ru(bpy)32+ is very close to that of the redox couple Co4O4–H+/Co4O4–H (+1.06 V and +1.05 V vs. Ag/AgCl, respectively, in phosphate buffer at pH 7). So, eqn (12) in this case could probably be better seen as an equilibrium process, rather than an irreversible redox reaction.45 Most likely the incomplete hole scavenging process between Ru(bpy)33+ and Co4O4–H could therefore contribute to the decomposition of the photosensitizer during the photocatalytic process. Fig. 10  (a) Kinetics of bleach recovery as a function of catalyst concentration. Experimental conditions: excitation wavelength, 355 nm; Ru(bpy)32+, 5 × 10−5 M; Na2S2O8, 5 × 10−3 M; section, pH 7 (40 mM phosphate buffer). (b) Same experiments shown in a highly expanded time scale, to emphasize bleach formation and development. Adapted from ref. 45 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. A further information inferred by flash photolysis experiments performed on the Ru(bpy)32+–Co4O4–H–persulfate photocatalytic system was that the rate constants of eqn (11) and (13) are comparable, implying a direct reaction between the radical sulfate anion and the catalyst.45 This is testified by Fig. 10b. Here, the formation of Ru(bpy)33+, signalled by the MLCT bleach, is clearly biphasic, with an initial part, formed within 8 ns (the flash pulse time), which is roughly doubled on a longer timescale. The “instantaneous” bleach was assigned to the combined and fast effect of eqn (9) and (10), and the secondary formation of Ru(bpy)33+ was attributed to eqn (11); however the bleach due to such a secondary reaction decreases on increasing the concentration of the catalyst, indicating that eqn (13) occurs at the expense of eqn (11).The photoinduced water oxidation abilities of the Ru(bpy)32+–Co4O4–H–persulfate system were significantly improved on changing solvent, passing to a mixed acetonitrile/aqueous borate (10 mM) buffer solution at pH 8.10 In this mixed solvent, the reduction potentials of the Ru(bpy)33+/Ru(bpy)32+ and Co4O4–H+/Co4O4–H redox couples were 1.20 and 0.93 V vs. Ag/AgCl, respectively, so a more favorable driving force for the hole scavenging process showed in eqn (4) was obtained. Indeed, under these conditions the hole scavenging process was quantitative, with a pseudo-first order rate constant, 1.3 × 108 M−1 s−1, accelerated by an order of magnitude with respect to the same system in buffered aqueous solution.10 The photochemical quantum yield for water oxidation was 0.13, but the chemical yield of the system is significantly improved in comparison to the experiments made in pure aqueous buffered solution: in fact, CY is practically quantitative and photodecomposition of the sensitizer is minimized.The presence in the molecular structure of Co4O4–H of four pyridine ligands offered the possibility of chemically modifying the catalyst, by introducing suitable substituents onto the pyridine structure, tuning the properties of the Co4O4 core. Indeed, six other different tetracobalt(III)-oxo catalysts have been prepared, differing by their pyridine substituents.10Fig. 11 shows the molecular structure of the Co4O4–X compounds, whose properties are summarized in Table 1. The main results obtained can be summarized as follows: (i) the oxidation potential of the one-electron oxidation process, corresponding to formation of the formal [3Co(III), Co(IV)]+ species, follows the expected trend, moving to less positive values with the electron-donating properties of the X substituents (a linear dependence of E1/2 on the Hammett constant for X substituent was reported);10 (ii) the pseudo-first order constant for the hole scavenging process also shows the expected behavior, increasing with the donating properties of substituents; (iii) overpotential does not exhibit significant effect on changing the X substituent; (iv) photochemical quantum yields assume various values, which cannot be related to the donating properties of the X substituent in a simple manner. Altogether, the data suggest a complex influence of the X-substituent on photo-driven water oxidation, indicating that electron-donating substituents, which have a profitable role in the hole scavenging processes, probably have unfavorable effects on successive steps of the global photocatalytic process. A balance over different effects is therefore quite important, and this problem could be explored by using cubane clusters with mixed pyridine substituents. Noteworthily, all the compounds have a quantitative chemical yield of molecular oxygen production with respect to the concentration of persulfate anions, corresponding to 140 turnovers, indicating that the systems are quite stable during the photochemical process. Fig. 11  A series of Co4O4–X cubanes where the redox properties are tuned by substitution of the pyridine ligands in the para-position. Adapted with permission from ref. 10. Copyright (2012) American Chemical Society. 
Table 1 Data for Co4O4–X compounds10

Xaηb/Vkc/108 M−1 s−1E1/2d/mVΦea Substituent in para-position on the pyridine ligand, see Fig. 11.b Overpotential of water discharge in 0.2 M aqueous phosphate buffer (pH = 7), unless otherwise stated.c Pseudo-first order rate constant for hole scavenging (eqn (12)) in 50:50 acetonitrile:10 mM aqueous borate buffer (pH = 8).d E1/2 for the Co4O4–X+/Co4O4–X process in 50:50 CH3CN/10 mM aqueous borate buffer (pH = 8), vs. Ag/AgCl, 3 M NaCl.e Quantum yield of photochemical oxygen evolution (λexc = 450 nm).f Maximum value observed with freshly prepared solutions of Co4O4–OMe. For a sample aged for 24 h, this value decreases to 15%.g E1/2 in 50:50 CH3CN/10 mM aqueous phosphate buffer (pH = 7).OMe0.572.518770.40fMe0.521.928800.15t-Bu0.501.398550.05H0.551.339260.13Br0.530.609900.16COOMe0.510.701040g0.23CN0.510.141081g0.13A general comment is appropriate here, concerning the value of photocatalytic studies using sacrificial oxidants such as persulfate. Whereas these studies are perfectly suited to investigate the systems from a mechanistic viewpoint, one should be cautious in using the results to design regenerative schemes. For example, in many cases not only the oxidized sensitizer but also the strongly oxidizing radical sulphate anion generated in eqn (10) could play an essential role to reach the multiply-oxidized, catalytically-active state of the catalyst.45 Such a contribution would be lost in going to a regenerative system, where the sacrificial oxidant is replaced by a reversible redox couple or perhaps by a semiconductor anode (for a more extensive discussion, see the Conclusion and Outlook section).4. Polyoxometalates: the totally inorganic optionOne of the mandatory requirements that an artificial device for water splitting has to match is the long-term durability of all its components, including the WOC. This opens a serious issue, since many of the molecular catalysts proposed to date fail to resist under the harsh oxidizing conditions needed to perform water oxidation. Self-oxidation of the organic ligand set is indeed one of the major causes of catalyst degradation and consequent loss of catalytic activity. This is the main reason why polyoxometalates ligands (POMs) have recently attracted considerable interest in this field of oxidation catalysis. POMs53 are polyanionic molecular oxo-clusters formed by the condensation of early transition metals (V, Nb, Ta, Mo, W) and oxygen that can act as ligands towards a variety of other transition metals, possibly showing catalytic properties; in Fig. 12 some relevant structures of POM ligands are presented, highlighting the poly-oxygenated binding site. Fig. 12  Relevant structures of polyoxometalate (POM) ligands. Light blue: tungsten; red: oxygen; purple: oxygen atoms of the coordination site. The superior stability of POMs ligands and of their transition metal complexes towards oxidizing conditions is related to their structural motif, since the transition metals that constitute the POM architecture are usually in their highest oxidation states (d0 electronic configuration, i.e. WVI, MoVI or VV), and therefore inert to oxidation.54 While being oxidatively stable, POMs may instead be sensitive to hydrolytic degradation, so that optimization of the pH conditions, ionic strength and counter-ion nature, is usually a key requirement for boosting the catalytic efficiency. The second important property of POMs ligands which is particularly relevant for water oxidation chemistry is their capability of coordinating multimetal cores.55,564.1 Tetraruthenium POMNotably, a tetraruthenium, oxygenic core was embedded within two polyoxometalate ligands, by reaction of suitable ruthenium precursors with the POM γ-SiW10O368−, under mild conditions.57,58 The X-ray characterization of the resulting complex, {Ru4(μ-OH)2(μ-O)4(H2O)4[γ-SiW10O36]}10−, Ru4POM, established the adamantane-like structural motif of the ruthenium-oxo core, that poses analogies with the natural OEC, since both cores are constituted by four redox active transition metals, connected through μ-oxo or μ-hydroxo bridges, while maintaining available coordination sites (Fig. 13). In a different, suggestive perspective, the tetraruthenium core can be considered as a fragment of ruthenium oxide, mounted into a molecular scaffold (ruthenium oxide is still one of the benchmark catalysts in water oxidation).59 Recently, a crystal structure revealed that the adamantane Ru4O6 core has been successfully supported onto another type of POMs ligands, by sharing the surface oxygen of the polyanionic scaffold.60 Fig. 13  Structure of {Ru4(μ-OH)2(μ-O)4(H2O)4[γ-SiW10O36]}10−, Ru4POM. Light blue: tungsten; orange: ruthenium; gray: silicon; red: oxygen. Ru4POM is a versatile water oxidation catalyst, since it drives oxygen evolution in the presence of chemical oxidants (working under dark conditions), upon electrochemical activation, at low overpotentials, and in light activated cycles. In the presence of chemical oxidants such as CeIV or Ru(bpy)33+, at pH 0.6 and 7, respectively, Ru4POM catalyzes water oxidation with multiple turnover numbers (up to 500) and notable turnover frequencies (up to 0.60 s−1). The activity of Ru4POM is evident also from simple cyclic voltammetry experiments, where the catalytic wave due to water oxidation appears at low overpotentials (0.20–0.35 V), over a broad pH range (ca. 1 to 7).61,62 These experiments, together with the spectroscopic characterization of some relevant intermediates, paved the way to unveiling some key features of the catalytic mechanism of Ru4POM. Indeed, although the full electrochemical characterization is limited as well resolved waves are observed only under acidic conditions, and although attribution of the oxidation states is still under study, one observation is that the tetraruthenium core can undergo several consecutive one-electron oxidations, being spaced by ca. 0.2 V;62 since the associated electrochemical waves are pH-dependent, these one electron events are possibly coupled to proton transfer. The possibility to manage several redox events is a key feature in water oxidation catalysis, since Ru4POM can act as a ‘hole accumulator’, until it reaches the active state capable of oxidizing water, contemporarily regenerating the initial state of the catalyst. In the latter step, oxygen–oxygen bond formation is often recognized as the rate limiting step in ruthenium based WOC.63 In Ru4POM, oxygen–oxygen bond formation seems unlikely to occur via an intramolecular route, since the oxygen atoms of the core are too far to couple and create a new bond; bimolecular paths can also be excluded on the basis of the first order in catalyst of oxygen evolution.57 Involvement of the apical ligands, coordinated to the ruthenium centres is more plausible: the O–O bond can result from a water nucleophilic attack to a high valent ruthenium-oxo (or hydroxo) moiety, resulting in a metal hydroperoxo formation.61 This path has been widely considered also for single site ruthenium species with WOC properties.63,64Interestingly, Ru4POM has also been supported onto nanostructured materials, maintaining its oxygenic properties also under heterogeneous conditions.65–67 In particular, efficient functionalization can be driven by exploiting electrostatic interactions between polyanionic Ru4POM and cationic pendant arms anchored onto the material; this strategy allowed the development highly efficient oxygen evolving anodes by supporting Ru4POM onto a conductive bed of multi-walled carbon nanotubes, with the resulting hybrid material being drop-casted onto indium tin oxide plates.65,66 These electrodes electrochemically oxidize water at low overpotentials, achieving turnover frequencies for Ru4POM matching the solution benchmark. Properties of the multi-walled carbon nanotubes such as large surface area, robustness to oxidative stress, high conductivity seem pivotal for the performance of the hybrid material.Ru4POM exhibits outstanding catalytic performance also in light driven water oxidation, in the presence of RuII polypyridine photosensitizers and a sacrificial electron acceptor such as persulfate anion (see eqn (9)–(14) above); the first example of such a system was reported by Hill et al., taking advantage of Ru(bpy)32+ as the photosensitizer.68 At neutral pH (7.2, phosphate buffer) and under visible light illumination (420–550 nm) dioxygen is rapidly formed, accompanied by a stoichiometric persulfate consumption. Ru4POM is able to cycle up to 350 cycles, while oxygen production is limited only by the photosensitizer decomposition. At high concentration of both Ru4POM and Ru(bpy)32+, an insoluble adduct precipitates, and a significant decrease in oxygen production is observed. The photochemical quantum yield of the process (Φ) reaches the value of 0.045, meaning that 9% of the photons are actually exploited to produce oxygen (according to the reaction stoichiometry of eqn (9)–(14), the maximum value of Φ is 0.5). In a subsequent paper, faster initial rates of oxygen production were achieved by replacing the phosphate buffer with Na2SiF6/NaHCO3 (pH 5.8).69Given the high activity of Ru4POM in such photocatalytic cycle, the interaction of the catalyst Ru4POM with the Ru(bpy)32+ sensitizer was investigated in more detail, particularly focusing on: (i) ion pairing, occurring also in aqueous solution, and (ii) kinetics of electron transfer from Ru4POM to the oxidized photosensitizer during the catalytic cycle (hole scavenging), measured by laser flash photolysis techniques.70,71 By virtue of their complementary charge, Ru4POM and Ru(bpy)32+ appear to be strictly paired in aqueous solution; fluorescence and conductimetric titrations evidence an average 1:4 ratio, which is close to the expected stoichiometric ratio of 1:5, due to the polyanionic charge (10−) of Ru4POM. However, as proven by ultrafast spectroscopy, these intimate aggregates Ru4POM·Ru(bpy)32+ lead to fast quenching (ca. 150 ps) of the photosensitizer excited state; the likely mechanism is an oxidative quenching, that is electron transfer from the excited state of Ru(bpy)32+ to Ru4POM (generating the Ru4POM(e−)·Ru(bpy)33+ ion pair, where Ru4POM(e−) stands for the one electron reduced form of Ru4POM), followed by back electron transfer (Fig. 14). The formation of Ru4POM·Ru(bpy)32+ ion pairs can be sensibly disfavored by increasing the ionic strength of the solution; indeed, addition of sodium sulfate to an aqueous solution of Ru(bpy)32+ and Ru4POM results in the progressive recovery of the fluorescence of the photosensitizer, that was initially quenched in the ion pair (Fig. 15). The constant lifetime of the growing emission, around 370 ns is the same as that observed for Ru(bpy)32+ alone in aerated aqueous solution, confirming the static nature of the quenching. Fig. 14  Interactions and photochemical events involving Ru4POM and Ru(bpy)32+. Adapted with permission from ref. 70. Copyright (2012) American Chemical Society.  Fig. 15  Recovery of Ru(bpy)32+ emission upon addition of increasing amounts of Na2SO4 to an aqueous solution of 50 μM of Ru(bpy)32+ and 50 μM of Ru4POM; (a) stationary experiments with excitation at 450 nm; (b) pulsed experiments with excitation at 355 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 70. Copyright (2012) American Chemical Society. Though mitigated under high ionic strength conditions, quenching of the photosensitizer excited state by the catalyst may be a relevant issue in photocatalytic cycles as that reported in eqn (9)–(14), since this may lead to complications in transferring the electrons from the excited photosensitizer to the sacrificial acceptor (or, in the case of photoelectrochemical cells, to the electrode). In the Ru4POM–Ru(bpy)32+–S2O82− system, associated events can be conveniently followed by laser flash photolysis, where the oxidized form of the photosensitizer is generated within 10 ns upon laser absorption (8 ns pulses of 355 nm light) by Ru(bpy)32+ followed by reaction with the sacrificial electron acceptor (eqn (10) and (11)). Electron transfer from Ru4POM to Ru(bpy)33+ (eqn (12)) can then be followed over a μs to ms timescale by the recovery of the metal-to-ligand charge transfer absorption of Ru(bpy)32+. Experimental results evidence that the rate of the Ru(bpy)32+ recovery depends on the concentration of Ru4POM, while fitting of the kinetic traces under pseudo-first-order conditions (at high concentrations of Ru4POM) gives a second-order rate constant of 3.6 × 109 M−1s−1 for the process in eqn (12), where PS = Ru(bpy)32+ and WOC = Ru4POM.70,71 This very high value approaches the diffusion limit rate for the process, and may be again ascribed to the complementary charge of the two reactants, Ru(bpy)32+ and Ru4POM. A corollary information from flash photolysis experiments is that at high concentration of the catalyst, Ru4POM can compete with Ru(bpy)32+ in reacting with the sulfate radical (by a bimolecular process with an estimated k = 5 × 1010 M−1 s−1, see Fig. 14).Usually, flash photolysis experiments are carried out in excess of catalyst, and are therefore aimed at exploring the rate of the first electron transfer occurring from the catalyst to the oxidized sensitizer (eqn (4)). In the case of Ru4POM, an interesting observation is that working at low catalyst concentration, the amount of Ru(bpy)33+ being reduced in the timescale of the experiments exceeds the amount of Ru4POM (Fig. 16); this means that a single molecule of Ru4POM can react several times with Ru(bpy)33+ in a time window of some tens of milliseconds. In particular, when [Ru4POM] = 0.5 × 10−6 M the amount of reduced Ru(bpy)33+ in 40 ms is ca. 2.24 × 10−5 M, meaning that ca. 45 holes per molecule of Ru4POM are accumulated in this timescale (green trace in Fig. 16). Assuming that holes are discharged by oxygen production and that accumulation of 4 holes is necessary to produce 1 oxygen molecule, this translates in ca. 11.2 molecules of O2 released per molecule of Ru4POM in 40 ms, corresponding to a turnover frequency for oxygen production of 280 s−1. Therefore, flash photolysis experiments confirm that: (i) hole scavenging between catalyst Ru4POM and the oxidized photosensitizer Ru(bpy)33+ occurs at a very fast rate, that is important in protecting the sensitizer during the photocatalytic cycle, by limiting side reactions leading to its decomposition, while at the same time being crucial in regenerative systems for oxygen production, where the hole scavenging competes with recombination processes; (ii) catalyst Ru4POM is able to multiply scavenge Ru(bpy)33+ within milliseconds, which translates in astounding turnover frequencies for oxygen production, approaching the enzymatic paradigm. Fig. 16  Flash photolysis experiments with the Ru4POM–Ru(bpy)32+–S2O82− system. Photogenerated [Ru(bpy)33+] = 6.3 × 10−5 M and [Ru4POM] = 0.5–2.5 × 10−6 M. Adapted with permission from ref. 70. Copyright (2012) American Chemical Society. An alternative way to oxidant photogeneration, more closely related to practical application, is electron injection from the Ru(II) photosensitizer into an n-type semiconductor (Fig. 17). A remarkable example of use of this strategy is the demonstration by Mallouk and coworkers4a of photoassisted water splitting, in a photoelectrochemical cell with appropriately grafted Ru(II) polypyridine complex as sensitizer and colloidal iridium oxide as WOC. The ability of Ru4POM to act as hole scavenger in this type configuration has been tested by Orlandi et al.71 with laser flash photolysis measurements. The sensitizer, Ru(bpy)2(dpb)2+ (dpb = 4,4′-diphosphonic-2,2′-bipyridine acid), was chemisorbed on a layer of nanocrystalline TiO2 deposited on a glass slide. The sample, examined by laser flash photolysis (laser excitation at 532 nm), shows the typical behavior of sensitized semiconductor electrodes:72 instantaneous bleach of MLCT absorption (arising from ultrafast electron injection into the semiconductor), followed by recovery with complex kinetics on the ns–ms time scale as a consequence of recombination of the injected electrons with the oxidized sensitizer (Fig. 17 trace a). The sample was then loaded with Ru4POM by contact with aqueous solution of the catalyst, with the efficient uptake likely occurring by electrostatic interaction of the negatively charged catalyst with the positively charged photosensitizer. In laser flash photolysis, the catalyst-loaded samples (Fig. 17 traces b and c) showed an apparent reduction in injection yield, probably related to the previously mentioned fast quenching within the sensitizer-catalyst ion pairs. However, a clear acceleration of the bleach recovery with surface concentration of Ru4POM is also observed, implying that electron injection is followed by fast hole scavenging in the ns timescale. The occurrence of fast hole scavenging following photoinduced injection is a necessary, albeit not sufficient, condition towards the development of efficient water splitting photoelectrochemical cells.4a Fig. 17  (Upper) Ru(II) photosensitizer and Ru4POM on titanium dioxide. (Center) Photoinduced electron injection, electron–hole recombination, and hole scavenging reactions. (Lower) Laser flash photolysis (excitation, 532 nm, FWHM 8 ns) of a nanocrystalline TiO2 layer sensitized with Ru(bpy)2(dpb)2+ (8 × 10−8 mol cm−2), as such (a), and loaded with 6.6 × 10−9 mol cm−2Ru4POM (b) or 3.2 × 10−8 mol cm−2Ru4POM (c). Reproduced from ref. 71 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. In order to efficiently exploit solar light in a photoelectrochemical cell for water splitting, it is highly desirable to take advantage of photosensitizers with extended absorption in the visible region. To this aim, multinuclear ruthenium(II) dendrimers with polypyridine photosensitizers have been extensively investigated in the last few decades.73 These species, based on the use of the 2,3-bis(2′-pyridyl)pyrazine (dpp) bridging ligand, offer several advantages over Ru(bpy)32+, particularly in virtue of their extended absorption towards the visible part of the spectrum. In particular, the chemical structure and the absorption spectra of a tetraruthenium photosensitizer, Ru{(μ-dpp)Ru(bpy)2}38+, are reported in Fig. 18. Besides the extended absorption, the first oxidation event of Ru{(μ-dpp)Ru(bpy)2}38+ involves the one electron oxidation of one peripheral ruthenium(II) centre, and occurs in water at around 1.50 V vs. NHE (the Ru(III)/Ru(II) redox couple of Ru(bpy)32+ is at 1.26 V vs. NHE). Therefore, this tetranuclear photosensitizer appears as a promising candidate to be exploited in photocatalytic cycles for water oxidation.74 Combination of the Ru{(μ-dpp)Ru(bpy)2}38+ sensitizer (100 μM) with catalyst Ru4POM (60 μM) in a photocatalytic cycle exploiting S2O82− (10 mM) as the sacrificial electron acceptor (eqn (9)–(14)) leads to efficient oxygen generation in 20 mM phosphate buffer (pH 7) by using visible light (λ > 550 nm), Fig. 19.75 Oxygen production is herein limited by the amount of the sacrificial electron acceptor, since after three hours of irradiation persulfate conversion is > 90% (corresponding to 80 turnovers of Ru4POM), accompanied by minimal decomposition of the sensitizer, estimated from UV-Vis analysis being less than 5%. Fig. 18  Representation of the Ru{(μ-dpp)Ru(bpy)2}38+ photosensitizer (left), and comparison among solar emission at the sea level (visible region, gray area), absorption spectra of Ru(bpy)32+ (solid line) and of Ru{(μ-dpp)Ru(bpy)2}38+ (dashed-dotted line) (right).  Fig. 19  Circles: oxygen production with the photocatalytic system Ru4POM–Ru{(μ-dpp)Ru(bpy)2}38+–S2O82− (6 × 10−5 M Ru4POM, 20 mM phosphate buffer, pH 7; irradiation at λ > 500 nm. Triangles: comparison with parallel experiments in which Ru4POM is replaced by a well-known heterogeneous catalyst (malonate-stabilized IrO2 nanoparticles, 6 × 10−5 M in iridium oxide content). Reproduced from ref. 75 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. The most appealing property of this system is the photochemical quantum yield, with the experimental value measured using 550 nm light being 0.30, significantly larger than the value of 0.045 reported by using Ru(bpy)32+ as the photosensitizer (with 450–520 nm light);68 according to the above definition of quantum yield for photocatalytic cycles with persulfate as the sacrificial electron acceptor, the value of 0.30 means that 60% of the photons are actually used to produce oxygen. This outstanding performance, together with the possibility of accessing a large fraction of the red portion of visible spectra, makes this system very interesting towards water splitting applications.4.2 Tetracobalt POMIn 1973, Weakley et al. reported the synthesis and the X-ray structure of the potassium salt of the [Co4(H2O)2(α-PW9O34)2]10− anion (Co4POM).76 In Co4POM, a belt of four Co(II) metal ions is sandwiched between two lacunary PW9O349− polyoxometalate fragments (Fig. 20). The unshared octahedral vertices of two Co ions are occupied by coordinated water molecules. Fig. 20  Structure of [Co4(H2O)2(α-PW9O34)2]10−, Co4POM. Light blue: tungsten; green: cobalt; gray: phosphorous; red: oxygen. In 2010, Hill and co-workers77 described the catalytic activity of Co4POM for water oxidation, emphasizing two main virtues of the catalyst: (i) its all-inorganic nature (free of carbon-based organic ligands and thus expected to be resistant to oxidation) and (ii) it being based on earth-abundant elements (non noble metals involved). Cyclic voltammetry of Co4POM shows an intense catalytic current with a low overpotential for water oxidation (E = 1.1 V vs. Ag/AgCl, pH 8). Using Ru(bpy)33+ as the oxidant, O2 evolution from water (pH 8) was observed (60% yield, 75 turnovers). The reaction is limited in part by oxidation of the bipyridine ligand. With a large concentration of the oxidant (2.4 mM) and 0.12 μM catalyst, a turnover number of 1000 was obtained in 3 min (TOF = 5 s−1). The authors provided seven points of evidence that the observed activity is not driven from Co ions or/and Co hydroxide/oxide species released from the polyoxometalate as the result of oxidative degradation. Catalyst Co4POM was also tested by Hill and coworkers, using persulfate as a sacrificial electron acceptor and Ru(bpy)32+ as a photosensitizer, in a photocatalytic reaction scheme analogous to that in eqn (9)–(14)).78 A high (0.15) quantum yield and a large turnover number (TON > 220, limited solely by depletion of the sacrificial electron acceptor) were obtained at pH 8 (Fig. 21). The photocatalytic performance of this catalyst was found to be superior to that of the previously reported precious-metal-based polyoxometalate water oxidation catalyst, Ru4POM. Fig. 21  Kinetics of O2 formation in the photocatalytic system at different concentrations of Co4POM: 0 (brown), 1.5 (pink), 2 (blue), 3 (green), 4 (red), and 5 μM (black). Conditions: Xe lamp, 420–470 nm, 16.8 mW light beam with a diameter of ∼0.75 cm focused on the reaction solution; 1.0 mM Ru(bpy)32+, 5.0 mM Na2S2O8, 80 mM sodium borate buffer (initial pH 8.0); total reaction volume 2 mL. Reprinted with permission from ref. 78. Copyright (2011) American Chemical Society. Two recent studies have addressed water exchange in Co4POM, a process of potential relevance to the catalytic behavior, using 17O-NMR spectroscopy. Casey et al.79 have shown that the rate constants for the water exchange, at pH's 4.6, 5.4, and 6.0, are comparable with the reported values for Co(H2O)62+, with the polyoxometalates remaining intact under these pH conditions. Under these slightly acidic solutions, however, no catalytic activity was observed for Co4POM.77 Lieb et al.,80 on the other hand, have studied the kinetics water exchange in the catalytically relevant pH region (pH 6–10). It is shown that the structural integrity of Co4POM, as well as the coordination of water ligands on the Co centers, is maintained and no deprotonation occurs (pKa values for water molecules bound to Co(II) above 10). The water exchange processes are much faster than the overall catalytic cycle (ca. 5 s−1),77 implying that these steps cannot be rate-limiting and cannot, therefore, be responsible for the maximum catalytic activity at pH 8.In an attempt to obtain a Si-centered analogue of Co4POM, a different, new tetra-cobalt polyoxometalate ion, [{Co4(μ-OH)(H2O)3}(Si2W19O70)]11− (potassium and sodium salt) has been recently isolated by Hill and coworkers.81 Two isomeric forms, differing in the μ-oxo connection motifs of the cobalt sites coexist in a 1:1 ratio in the single-crystal structure. The tetra-cobalt polyoxometalate [{Co4(μ-OH)(H2O)3}(Si2W19O70)]11− was found to be thermodynamically unstable, decomposing slowly in aqueous solution, to give [{Co(H2O)}(μ-H2O)2K{Co(H2O)4}(Si2W18O66)]11−, the mono-Keggin structure [Co(H2O)SiW11O39]6− and free Co(II) as products. Both [{Co4(μ-OH)(H2O)3}(Si2W19O70)]11− and some of its decomposition products were found to exhibit some activity in sacrificial photocatalytic cycles.A strong caveat concerning the nature of the real catalyst in water oxidation using this class of tetracobalt polyoxometalate ions has been recently advanced by Stracke and Finke.82 They made a detailed study of the behavior of Co4POM (sodium salt) as catalyst in electrochemical water oxidation, in pH 8.0 sodium phosphate buffer at a glassy carbon electrode. When a constant potential of 1.1 V vs. Ag/AgCl was applied to the cell, the oxidation current increased rapidly and O2 bubbles formed at the working electrode. Concomitant with the increase in current, however, a film of cobalt oxide (as identified by SEM and EDX) was deposited onto the glassy carbon electrode. When the electrode was then removed from solution, rinsed with water, and placed into a solution containing only 0.1 M sodium phosphate buffer at pH 8.0, in the absence of Co4POM, the catalytic activity was maintained at the previously observed levels. These authors also obtained evidence for slow hydrolysis of Co4POM in pH 8.0 solution, and showed by comparative experiments with Co(NO3)2 that the small amounts of Co(II) released (either as aqueous Co2+ or as cobalt polyoxometalate fragments) can quantitatively account for all of the observed catalytic water oxidation activity. Their conclusion (Fig. 22) was that the active WOC is heterogeneous CoOx formed, under the electrocatalytic conditions used, from Co(II) species released upon partial decomposition of Co4POM. From this viewpoint, Co4POM would not be a real catalyst, but rather a precursor of the active WOC. Fig. 22  Proposed mechanism for formation of cobalt oxide active catalyst species from Co4POM. Adapted with permission from ref. 82. Copyright (2011) American Chemical Society. While the evidence reported by Stracke and Finke82 for the heterogeneous nature of the active catalyst is very strong, the cobalt oxide formation might be limited, in principle, to the experimental conditions used in their work, i.e., electrocatalytic conditions, presence of highly oxidizing anodes. Therefore, the possibility that Co4POM may behave as a bona fide molecular catalyst, e.g., in photocatalytic experiments, such as those described by Hill et al.,78 cannot be excluded. This possibility has been very recently scrutinized by Natali, et al.83 The first step to be performed by the catalyst in any photocatalytic cycle for water oxidation is hole scavenging from the oxidized photosensitizer (eqn (12), Fig. 14). As already mentioned in Section 4.1, this type of process is experimentally accessible using flash photolysis techniques, whereby the oxidized sensitizer is instantaneously generated by fast photoreaction with the sacrificial oxidant, and its subsequent re-reduction by the catalyst can be monitored in time. Experiments of this type have been performed in pH 8 phosphate buffer solutions, using Ru(bpy)32+ as sensitizer, persulfate as sacrificial oxidant, and Co4POM as catalyst. Given the above discussed problems, particular care was taken to check for possible effects of aging of the catalyst solutions on the kinetics of the hole scavenging process. The main result is shown in Fig. 2383 where the kinetics of hole scavenging (as detected by the recovery of the prompt photoinduced bleach of Ru(bpy)32+ MLCT absorption) are monitored as a function of the time elapsed between dissolution of solid Co4POM (sodium salt) and the experiment. It is clearly seen that fraction of bleach recovered increases very rapidly with the aging time, implying that a decomposition product of Co4POM, rather than Co4POM, is the active species in the observed hole scavenging process. From these experiments, it must be concluded that pristine Co4POM is not able to perform the primary hole transfer step that initiates the sacrificial photocatalytic cycle. Fig. 23  (Upper) Hole scavenging kinetics measured using 5.0 × 10−5 M solutions of Co4POM of various aging time. 1 min: solid catalyst dissolved in 80 mM at pH 8 and measured immediately. 8–90 min: prepared from a 10−3 M mother solution of Co4POM in 80 mM pH 8 phosphate buffer at various time intervals. (Lower) Amount of Ru(bpy)33+ being reduced by 5.0 × 10−5 M Co4POM in laser flash photolysis (450 μs time window), as a function of the aging time of the solution used. Reproduced from ref. 83 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. These findings are in line with the cyclic voltammetry (CV) measurements of Fig. 24.83 They show that Ru(bpy)33+ (redox potential 1.05 V green trace) has not the thermodynamic power to oxidize pristine Co4POM (redox potential ca. 1.2 V red trace), neither to promote water oxidation catalyzed by Co4POM. Monitoring of the CV scans over time results in the steady building up, in the time frame 4–60 min, of a catalytic wave due to water oxidation starting at 1.05 V. The building up in solution of a catalyst with a redox potential accessible from Ru(bpy)33+ justifies the bleach recovery trend observed in laser flash photolysis experiments (Fig. 23) upon aging of Co4POM solutions. Fig. 24  Cyclic voltammetry of 2 mM Co4POM in 0.2 M phosphate buffer (pH 8) recorded at 1 (red trace), 4, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50 and 60 minutes after dissolution (black traces), and cyclic voltammetry of Ru(bpy)32+ in the same media (green trace). Reference electrode: Ag/AgCl. Reproduced from ref. 83 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. In conclusion, Co4POM cannot be operative in catalytic cycles where Ru(bpy)33+ is the chemical oxidant (either photogenerated or in dark reactions). Decomposition products, originating from Co4POM in phosphate buffer (pH 8), enable the quenching of Ru(bpy)33+ in a microsecond timescale. The observed fast hole scavenging (same time scale as with the stable ruthenium polyoxometalate species of Section 4.1) speaks in favor of a molecular nature of the active catalytic species observed in these experiments. Indeed, sustained catalytic activity in photochemical water oxidation has been recently observed also for disubstituted POMs.84 Whether or not these may be precursors to the heterogeneous cobalt oxide particles observed in electrocatalytic measurements is still an open question.A final comment is appropriate, concerning possible roles of Co4POM as WOC. Even though Co4POM cannot definitely work with Ru(bpy)33+ as an oxidant, it could possibly be active in water oxidation under chemical/photochemical conditions by using oxidants with a suitable, higher redox potential, such as, e.g., Ru(II) polypyridine dendrimers.73 To check this possibility, however, conditions should be found where the formation of catalytically active decomposition products is avoided.5. Conclusions and outlookIn this review, some recent advances in tetrametallic water oxidation catalysts have been presented, constituting a bioinspired strategy to approach the still open problem of light-driven water oxidation, in the quest for solar fuels production by artificial photosynthesis. Two main questions should however be considered: (i) what are the advantages (if any) of tetrametallic catalysts over the single-site (or bimetallic) ones? (ii) is it worth to design and spend efforts in the synthesis of molecular catalysts, when water oxidation activity can be sustained with ‘cheap’ metal oxide phases?Regarding the first issue, this originates from some recent proofs of outstanding catalytic activity in water oxidation observed with single metal complexes, in terms of turnover numbers and turnover frequencies.6–9,85 In these cases, unless the ligand set plays a non-innocent role or the catalytic mechanism is bimolecular, the metal has to manage the four electron process leading to water oxidation, and therefore needs to have several oxidation states available in a restricted range of redox potentials. A rate determining chemical event, such as water nucleophilic attack to a high valent metal-oxo species, is usually necessary to drive the catalytic cycle. One potential advantage of tetrametallic species is the possibility of distributing the oxidation equivalents over several metal centers, levelling the increase in potentials required for consecutive redox events. This could result in efficient water oxidation catalysis at low overpotentials, with consequent benefits also under photoirradiation conditions. For instance, in the design of a photoanode for photochemical water splitting (Fig. 25), the operating potential of the ideal WOC should approach the thermodynamic value of the O2/H2O couple, with definite advantages such as: (i) larger driving force for hole scavenging from the oxidized sensitizer, with faster kinetics and improved sensitizer stability; (ii) a wider choice of available sensitizers that can use photons of lower energy, with better match to solar spectrum. As discussed in the Introduction, the perfect example of tetrametallic catalysts is provided by natural photosynthesis, where the four manganese centers of the OEC operate in synergy to drive oxygen evolution at the minimal thermodynamic cost, with overpotential in the range 0.2–0.3 V. Fig. 25  Schematic representation of a photoanode for photochemical water splitting (left) and of the associated energy levels (right). P = photosensitizer, WOC = water oxidation catalyst. The synergic interplay of adjacent, multiple transition metals is a key feature also of transition metal oxides, which indeed have been proven to activate catalytic cycles for water oxidation since the 1970s. Recently, the performance of such oxides (iridium, ruthenium, cobalt, manganese) has been boosted by nanosizing the particles, and by incorporation into nano-reactors, which hampers irreversible aggregation under operating conditions.4,86 Many examples deal also with the support onto semiconductors, eventually sensitized, to develop photoanodes. Metal oxides could be nowadays considered the most promising candidates for a widespread production of a water splitting device, due to their cost-efficient preparation, stability under operating conditions, and satisfying performance. Despite this, engineered molecular catalysts do retain a formidable appeal for the scientific community. This is mainly due to the possibilities of fine-tuning their reactivity and mechanism by a proper design, which opens a concrete possibility for planning a rational catalyst optimization. In addition, the molecular control and predictive design will give the opportunity of properly interfacing these catalysts with sensitizers and/or with nanostructured materials, powering efficient electron transfer events. Within this topic, time-resolved flash photolysis provides a unique tool for the dissection of the light-induced catalytic events. Ideally, the knowledge acquired from investigations on molecular catalysts could also be transferred to metal oxides. This is particularly likely when, as in the case of cubane-type and tetrametallic POM systems, the catalytically active core bears structural and functional similarities to oxide phases.Finally, a few aspects, not specifically related to this class of WOC but of some general relevance in the water oxidation photocatalytic systems dealt with in this review, deserve some comments.Often, some ambiguity between quantum yields and overall efficiencies of photocatalytic oxygen evolution makes the interpretation of the reported numbers uncertain. The quantum yield is, by definition,87 the ratio between moles of oxygen produced and einsteins (moles of photons) absorbed by the system. This is the experimental quantity being directly measured. In some cases, however, the ratio between the experimental quantum yield and the maximum theoretical value, sometimes quoted as “quantum efficiency” (e.g., in ref. 10 and 68) or “quantum yield” (e.g., in ref. 78), is used to describe the overall efficiency of the system. It should be pointed out, however, that the maximum value of the quantum yield depends on the assumed reaction mechanism. It is, e.g., 0.5 in the case of the photocatalytic system described by eqn (9)–(14) where, in the absence of any losses, two photons could generate one oxygen molecule. But it would only be 0.25, on the other hand, if a different sacrificial oxidant, unable to generate strongly oxidizing products (e.g., a Co(III) complex), was used. In this review, we have chosen to report as far as possible quantum yield values.The parameters commonly used to specify the performance of a catalyst are (i) turnover numbers (moles of product formed/mole of catalyst, TON) and (ii) turnover frequencies (turnover number/unit time, TOF). When applied to photocatalytic processes, these parameters should be taken with some caution. The maximum TON is a good practical measure of how far the system can go before losing its capability to generate products. The number per se is not always informative, however, especially in cases where the limiting factor of oxygen production is not the decomposition of the catalyst but of some other component, as e.g., the sacrificial oxidant or (quite often) the sensitizer. As to the TOF value, it should be stressed that this parameter is of limited comparative value, unless the photocatalytic experiments to be compared are performed under identical conditions (concentrations of all the components, cell shape and volume, irradiation geometry, light intensity and spectral distribution). Since identical conditions are hardly realized between different laboratories, TOF is not the best parameter to specify the intrinsic rate at which a photocatalytic system works. The only absolute parameter, allowing meaningful comparisons to be made, is the quantum yield. Its use should be strongly encouraged, in lieu of (or in addition to) the TOF performance.We have mentioned above the special role of persulfate, frequently used as a sacrificial oxidant, in generating two oxidized sensitizer equivalents with one photon (eqn (9)–(11)) and the consequences this has on the relationship between quantum yield and efficiency. A further comment on the use of such a sacrificial oxidant is appropriate. Besides reacting with the sensitizer (eqn (11)), the SO4−˙ radical produced in the primary photoinduced electron transfer step (eqn (10)) can also give a secondary oxidation reaction with the catalyst (eqn (12)). In the reaction scheme of eqn (9)–(14), this bifurcation seems to be relatively unimportant, as the final result is the oxidation of a second WOC, either in one (eqn (12)) or two steps (eqn (10) and (11)). Since, however, the SO4−˙ radical (reduction potential 2.43 V versus NHE)88 is a much stronger oxidant than Ru(bpy)33+ (and other oxidized sensitizers), there may be cases in which reaction with the WOC (particularly in the high oxidation states preceding oxygen evolution) is thermodynamically forbidden by the oxidized sensitizer and allowed only by the SO4−˙ radical. One example could be that of the Ru(bpy)32+–Co4O4–H–persulfate system in pH 7 aqueous solution,74 where one-electron oxidation of the catalyst in its resting state by the oxidized sensitizer is almost iso-ergonic, and the subsequent oxidation steps required for oxygen evolution are very likely exclusively effected by the SO4−˙ radical. If checked with other sacrificial acceptors, these sensitizer/catalyst combinations are not expected to give any oxygen. This issue has to be taken into consideration in any extension from sacrificial to regenerative systems, e.g., towards semiconductor photoanodes for oxygen generation.AcknowledgementsFinancial support from the Italian MIUR (PRIN 20085ZXFEE, PRIN 20085M27SS, and FIRB RBAP11C58Y “NanoSolar”), from the University of Padova (PRAT CPDA104105/10), and from Fondazione Cariparo (Nanomode progetti di eccellenza 2010) is gratefully acknowledged.We also thank our coworkers who contributed to some of the work discussed in this review: Mirco Natali and Michele Orlandi (University of Ferrara), Giuseppina La Ganga and Fausto Puntoriero (University of Messina), Irene Bazzan, Serena Berardi and Mauro Carraro (University of Padova).Notes and referencesN. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) R. Eisenberg and H. B. Gray, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 1697 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) C. Herrero, B. Lassalle-Kaisea, W. Leibl, A. W. Rutherford and A. Aukauloo, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2008, 252, 456 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) X. Sala, I. Romero, M. Rodriguez, L. Escriche and A. Llobet, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 2 CrossRef ; 
  (d) W. J. Youngblood, S.-H. A. Lee, K. Maeda and T. E. Mallouk, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1966 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) N. D. McDaniel and S. Bernhard, Dalton Trans., 2010, 39, 10021 RSC ; 
  (f) G. F. Moore and G. W. Brudvig, Annu. Rev. Condens. Matter Phys., 2011, 2, 303 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) J. P. McEvoy and G. W. Brudvig, Chem. Rev., 2006, 106, 4455 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. H. V. Huynh and T. J. Meyer, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 5004 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) D. Gust, T. A. Moore and A. L. Moore, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1890 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) W. J. Youngblood, S.-H. A. Lee, Y. Kobayashi, E. A. Hernandez Pagan, P. G. Hoertz, T. A. Moore, A. L. Moore, D. Gust and T. E. Mallouk, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 926 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) K. Teramura, K. Maeda, T. Saito, T. Takata, N. Saito, Y. Inoue and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 21915 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) M. M. Najafpour, T. Ehrenberg, M. Wiechen and P. Kurz, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 2233 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) F. Jiao and H. Frei, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 1841 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) M. W. Kanan and D. G. Nocera, Science, 2008, 321, 1072 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. B. Gerken, J. G. McAlpin, J. Y. C. Chen, M. L. Rigsby, W. H. Casey, R. D. Britt and S. S. Stahl, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 14431 CrossRef CAS .J. J. Conception, J. W. Jurss, M. K. Brennaman, P. G. Hoertz, A. O. T. Patrocinio, N. Y. Murkami Iha, J. L. Templeton and T. J. Meyer, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1954 CrossRef .L. Fillol, Z. Codolà, I. Garcia-Bosch, L. Gómez, J. J. Pla and M. Costas, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 807 CrossRef .V. Artero, M. Chavarot-Kerlidou and M. Fontecave, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 7238 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) L. Bernet, R. Lalrempuia, W. Ghattas, H. Mueller-Bunz, L. Vigara, A. Llobet and M. Albrecht, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 8058 RSC ; 
  (b) L. Duan, F. Bozoglian, S. Mandal, B. Stewart, T. Privalov, A. Llobet and L. Sun, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 418 CrossRef CAS .S. Berardi, G. La Ganga, M. Natali, I. Bazzan, F. Puntoriero, A. Sartorel, F. Scandola, S. Campagna and M. Bonchio, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 11104 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) J. Barber, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 185 RSC ; 
  (b) Y. Umena, K. Kawakami, J.-R. Shen and N. Kamiya, Nature, 2011, 4, 55 CrossRef ; 
  (c) A. Grundmeier and H. Dau, Biophys. Biochim. Acta, 2012, 1817, 88 CrossRef CAS .B. Loll, J. Kern, W. Saenger, A. Zouni and J. Biesiadka, Nature, 2005, 438, 1040 CrossRef CAS .K. Kawakami, Y. Umena, N. Kamiya and J.-R. Shen, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 2011, 104, 9 CrossRef CAS .B. Svensson, C. Etchebest, P. Tuffery, P. van Kan, J. Smith and S. Styring, Biochemistry, 1996, 35, 14486 CrossRef CAS .B. Kok, B. Forbush and M. McGloin, Photochem. Photobiol., 1970, 11, 457 CrossRef CAS .H. Dau and M. Haumann, Biophys. Biochim. Acta, 2007, 1767, 472 CrossRef CAS .F. M. Ho, Biophys. Biochim. Acta, 2012, 1817, 106 CrossRef CAS .T. J. Meyer, Nature, 2008, 451, 778 CrossRef CAS .G. M. Cheniae and I. F. Martin, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 1970, 197, 219 CrossRef CAS .K. Sauer, Acc. Chem. Res., 1980, 13, 249 CrossRef CAS .C. F. Yocum, C. T. Yerkes, R. E. Blankenship, R. R. Sharp and G. T. Babcock, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1981, 78, 7507 CrossRef CAS .J. Deisenhofer, O. Epp, K. Miki, R. Huber and H. Michel, Nature, 1985, 318, 618 CrossRef CAS .C. S. Mullins and V. L. Pecoraro, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2008, 252, 416 CrossRef CAS .C. W. Cady, R. H. Crabtree and G. W. Brudvig, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2008, 252, 444 CrossRef CAS .H. Chen, M.-N. Collomb, C. Duboc, G. Blondin, E. Rivière, J. W. Faller, R. H. Crabtree and G. W. Brudvig, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 9567 CrossRef CAS .W. Ruettinger, M. Yagi, K. Wolf, S. Bernasek and G. C. Dismukes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 10353 CrossRef CAS .M. Yagi, K. V. Wolf, P. J. Baesjou, S. L. Bernasek and G. C. Dismukes, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2001, 40, 2925 CrossRef CAS .R. Brimblecome, G. F. Swiegers, G. C. Dismukes and L. Spiccia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 7335 CrossRef .R. Brimblecome, A. Koo, G. C. Dismukes, G. Swiegers and L. Spiccia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 2892 CrossRef .R. Brimblecome, D. R. J. Kolling, A. M. Bond, G. C. Dismukes, G. F. Swiegers and L. Spiccia, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 7269 CrossRef .R. K. Hocking, R. Brimblecome, L. Y. Chang, A. Singh, M. H. Cheah, C. Glover, W. H. Casey and L. Spiccia, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 461 CAS .J. Limburg, J. S. Vrettos, L. M. Libale-Sands, A. L. Rheingold, R. H. Crabtree and G. W. Brudvig, Science, 1999, 283, 1524 CrossRef CAS .N. Masaharu, K. Sayaka, H. Tagashira and O. Kotaro, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 354 CrossRef .Y. Gao, R. H. Crabtree and G. W. Brudvig, Inorg. Chem., 2012, 51, 4043 CrossRef CAS .H. Y. Chen, J. W. Faller, R. H. Crabtree and G. W. Brudvig, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 7345 CrossRef CAS .J. Limburg, J. S. Vrettos, H. Y. Chen, J. C. de Paula, R. H. Crabtree and G. W. Brudvig, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 423 CrossRef CAS .K. Narita, T. Kuwabara, K. Sone, K. Shimizu and M. Yagi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 23107 CrossRef CAS .C. Baffert, S. Romain, A. Richardot, J. Leprêtre, B. Lefebvre, A. Deronzier and M. Collomb, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 13694 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) V. Ya. Shafirovich, N. K. Khannanov and V. V. Strelets, Nouv. J. Chim., 1980, 4, 81 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) B. S. Brunschwig, M. H. Chou, C. Creutz, P. K. Ghosh and N. Sutin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1983, 105, 4832 CrossRef CAS .P. K. Ghosh, B. S. Brunschwig, M. H. Chou, C. Creutz and N. Sutin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1984, 106, 4772 CrossRef CAS  , and refs. therein.A. Harriman, M. Richoux, P. A. Christensen, S. Moseri and P. Neta, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 1, 1987, 83, 3001 RSC  , and refs. therein.D. A. Lutterman, Y. Surendranath and D. G. Nocera, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 3838 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) M. W. Kanan, J. Yano, Y. Surendranath, M. Dinca, V. K. Yachandra and D. G. Nocera, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 13692 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) D. G. Nocera, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 767 CrossRef CAS  , and refs therein.N. S. McCool, D. M. Robinson, J. E. Sheats and G. C. Dismukes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 11446 CrossRef CAS .G. La Ganga, F. Puntoriero, S. Campagna, I. Bazzan, S. Berardi, M. Bonchio, A. Sartorel, M. Natali and F. Scandola, Faraday Discuss., 2012, 155, 177 RSC .J. K. Beattie, T. W. Hamblie, J. A. Klepetko, A. F. Masters and P. Turner, Polyhedron, 1998, 17, 1343 CrossRef CAS .R. Chakrabarty, S. J. Bora and B. K. Das, Inorg. Chem., 2007, 46, 9450 CrossRef CAS   and refs. therein.
  (a) M. D. Symes, Y. Surendranath, D. A. Lutterman and D. G. Nocera, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 5174 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) K. Dimitrou, K. Folting, W. E. Streib and G. Christou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1993, 115, 6432 CrossRef CAS .J. G. McAlpin, T. A. Stich, C. A. Ohlin, Y. Surendranath, D. G. Nocera, W. H. Casey and R. D. Britt, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 15444 CrossRef CAS .J. G. McAlpin, Y. Surendranath, M. Dincă, T. A. Stich, S. A. Stoian, W. H. Casey, D. G. Nocera and R. D. Britt, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 6882 CrossRef CAS .M. Hara, C. C. Waraksa, J. T. Lean, B. A. Lewis and T. E. Mallouk, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2000, 104, 5275 CrossRef CAS .N. Serpone and F. Bolletta, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 1983, 75, 189 CrossRef CAS .D. L. Long, E. Burkholder and L. Cronin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2007, 36, 105 RSC .M. Vazylyev, D. Sloboda-Rozner, A. Haimov, G. Maayan and R. Neumann, Top. Catal., 2005, 34, 93 CrossRef CAS .B. S. Bassil, M. Ibrahim, R. Al-Oweini, M. Asano, Z. Wang, J. van Tol, N. S. Dalal, K.-Y. Choi, R. N. Biboum, B. Keita, L. Nadjo and U. Kortz, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 5961 CrossRef CAS .S. S. Mal and U. Kortz, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 3777 CrossRef CAS .A. Sartorel, M. Carraro, G. Scorrano, R. De Zorzi, S. Geremia, N. D. McDaniel, S. Bernhard and M. Bonchio, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5006 CrossRef CAS .Y. V. Geletii, B. Botar, P. Kögerler, D. A. Hillesheim, D. G. Musaev and C. L. Hill, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 3896 CrossRef CAS .A. Sartorel, M. Carraro, G. Scorrano and M. Bonchio, Energy Procedia, 2012, 22, 78 CrossRef CAS .I. V. Kalinina, N. V. Izarova and U. Kortz, Inorg. Chem., 2012, 51, 7442 CrossRef CAS .A. Sartorel, P. Miró, E. Salvadori, S. Romain, M. Carraro, G. Scorrano, M. Di Valentin, A. Llobet, C. Bo and M. Bonchio, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 16051 CrossRef CAS .Y. V. Geletii, C. Besson, Y. Hou, Q. Yin, D. G. Musaev, D. Quiňonero, R. Cao, K. I. Hardcastle, A. Proust, P. Kögerler and C. L. Hill, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 17360 CrossRef CAS .Z. Chen, J. J. Concepcion, X. Hu, W. Yang, P. G. Hoertz and T. J. Meyer, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2010, 107, 7225 CrossRef CAS .M. Muratami, D. Hong, T. Suenobu, S. Yamaguchi, T. Ogura and S. Fukuzumi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 11605 CrossRef .F. M. Toma, A. Sartorel, M. Iurlo, M. Carraro, P. Parisse, C. Maccato, S. Rapino, B. Rodriguez Gonzalez, H. Amenitsch, T. Da Ros, L. Casalis, A. Goldoni, M. Marcaccio, G. Scorrano, G. Scoles, F. Paolucci, M. Prato and M. Bonchio, Nat. Chem., 2010, 2, 826 CrossRef CAS .F. M. Toma, A. Sartorel, M. Iurlo, M. Carraro, S. Rapino, L. Hoober-Burkhardt, T. Da Ros, M. Marcaccio, G. Scorrano, F. Paolucci, M. Bonchio and M. Prato, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 1447 CrossRef CAS .A. Sartorel, M. Truccolo, S. Berardi, M. Gardan, M. Carraro, F. M. Toma, G. Scorrano, M. Prato and M. Bonchio, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 1716 RSC .Y. V. Geletii, Z. Huang, Y. Hou, D. G. Musaev, T. Lan and C. L. Hill, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 7522 CrossRef CAS .C. Besson, Z. Huang, Y. V. Geletii, S. Lense, K. I. Hardcastle, D. G. Musaev, T. Lian, A. Proust and C. L. Hill, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 2784 RSC .M. Natali, M. Orlandi, S. Berardi, S. Campagna, M. Bonchio, A. Sartorel and F. Scandola, Inorg. Chem., 2012, 51, 7324 CrossRef CAS .M. Orlandi, R. Argazzi, A. Sartorel, M. Carraro, G. Scorrano, M. Bonchio and F. Scandola, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 3152 RSC .T. A. Heimer, E. J. Heilweil, C. A. Bignozzi and G. J. Meyer, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2000, 104, 4256 CrossRef CAS .F. Puntoriero, A. Sartorel, M. Orlandi, G. La Ganga, S. Serroni, M. Bonchio, F. Scandola and S. Campagna, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2011, 255, 2594 CrossRef CAS .G. La Ganga, F. Nastasi, S. Campagna and F. Puntoriero, Dalton Trans., 2009, 9997 RSC .F. Puntoriero, G. La Ganga, A. Sartorel, M. Carraro, G. Scorrano, M. Bonchio and S. Campagna, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 4725 RSC .T. J. R. Weakley, H. T. Evans, J. S. Showell, G. F. Tourné and C. M. Tourné, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1973, 139 RSC .Q. Yin, J. M. Tan, C. Besson, Y. V. Geletii, D. G. Musaev, A. E. Kuznetsov, Z. Luo, K. I. Hardcastle and C. L. Hill, Science, 2010, 328, 342 CrossRef CAS .Z. Huang, Z. Luo, Y. V. Geletii, J. W. Vickers, Q. Yin, D. Wu, Y. Hou, Y. Ding, J. Song, D. G. Musaev, C. L. Hill and T. Lian, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 2068 CrossRef CAS .C. A. Ohlin, S. J. Harley, J. G. McAlpin, R. K. Hocking, B. Q. Mercado, R. L. Johnson, E. M. Villa, M. K. Fidler, M. M. Olmstead, L. Spiccia, R. D. Britt and W. H. Casey, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 4408 CrossRef CAS .D. Lieb, A. Zahl, E. F. Wilson, C. Streb, L. C. Nye, K. Meyer and I. Ivanovíc-Burmazovíc, Inorg. Chem., 2011, 50, 9053 CrossRef CAS .G. Zhu, Y. V. Geletii, P. Kögerler, H. Schilder, J. Song, S. Lense, C. Zhao, K. I. Hardcastle, D. G. Musaev and C. L. Hill, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 2084 RSC .J. J. Stracke and R. G. Finke, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 14872 CrossRef CAS .M. Natali, S. Berardi, A. Sartorel, M. Bonchio, S. Campagna and F. Scandola, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 8808 RSC .S. Tanaka, M. Annaka and K. Sakai, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 1653 RSC .
  (a) J. J. Concepcion, J. W. Jurss, J. L. Templeton and T. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 16462 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) W. C. Ellis, N. D. McDaniel, S. Bernhard and T. J. Collins, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 10990 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) G. F. Moore, J. D. Blakemore, R. L. Milot, J. F. Hull, H. Song, L. Cai, C. A. Schmuttenmaer, R. H. Crabtree and G. W. Brudvig, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2389 RSC ; 
  (d) L. Duan, L. Tong, Y. Xu and L. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3296 RSC ; 
  (e) E. A. Karlsson, B. L. Lee, T. Åkemark, E. V. Johnston, M. D. Karkas, J. L. Sun, O. Hansson, J. E. Backvall and B. Åkemark, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 11715 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) D. W. Wasylenko, C. Ganesamoorthy and C. P. Berlinguette, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 4249 RSC ; 
  (g) C.-F. Leung, S.-M. Ng, C.-C. Ko, W.-L. Man, J. Wu, L. Chen and T.-C. Lau, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7903 RSC ; 
  (h) D. K. Dogutan, R. McGuire Jr. and D. G. Nocera, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 9178 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) F. Jiao and H. Frei, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1018 RSC ; 
  (b) J. S. Zhang, M. Grzelczak, Y. D. Hou, K. Maeda, K. Domen, X. Z. Fu and M. Antonietti, Chem. Sci., 2012, 3, 443 RSC .S. E. Braslavsky, IUPAC Commission on Photochemistry, Glossary of terms used in photochemistry, Pure Appl. Chem., 3rd edn,  2007, vol. 79, p. 293 Search PubMed .R. E. Huie, C. L. Clifton and P. Neta, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1991, 38, 477 CrossRef CAS .Footnote† Part of the solar fuels themed issue.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:
Andrea Sartorel	Andrea Sartorel (born 1974) graduated in Chemistry cum laude in 1999 at the University of Padova, where he earned his PhD in 2003. After a period of working in the industry (2003–2005) and a research contract with the Italian National Council of Research (2006–2008), since 2009 he has been Assistant Professor at the Department of Chemical Sciences of the University of Padova. His research interests deal with biomimetic oxidations, polyoxometalate chemistry and water oxidation catalysis for applications in artificial photosynthesis.
Marcella Bonchio	Marcella Bonchio started her career at the University of Padova where, in 1993, she received the PhD in Physical Organic Chemistry. Since 2001 she has been First Researcher of the Italian National Research Council (CNR), directing the research activities at the Institute of Membrane Technology section of Padova. Recent achievements deal with new molecular solutions for photosynthetic systems under artificial environment and energy materials.
Sebastiano Campagna	Sebastiano Campagna (born 1959) received the Laurea in Chemistry (cum laude) from the University of Messina in 1983. Since 1985 he spent a decade as a post-doctoral fellow, funded by a Sicilian cultural foundation and the Messina University, at the Chemistry Department “G. Ciamician” of the University of Bologna, in the group of Prof. Vincenzo Balzani. In 1998 he joined the Science Faculty of the Messina University, where he is now Professor of Physical Chemistry. In 1995 he was awarded the Raffaello Nasini Prize (Società Chimica Italiana). His research fields include light- and redox-active dendrimers, Ru(II) photophysics, and artificial photosynthesis.
Franco Scandola	Franco Scandola has been Professor at the Department of Chemistry, University of Ferrara since 1980. Following early research activity on the photochemistry of coordination compounds, he has been a pioneer (together with Vincenzo Balzani) in the emerging field of supramolecular photochemistry. His current interests span from fundamental aspects of energy and electron transfer, to the photophysics of self-assembling multichromophoric systems, to the design and photophysical characterization of functional units for artificial photosynthesis.
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)
	(7)
	(8)

 	Fig. 1  (a) A view of the main cofactors of PSII (after ref. 12), with a schematic representation of the electron transfer cascade triggered by excitation of P680 and proceeding from P680 to pheophytin (Pheo), QA, and eventually to QB. Also shown is the two-step electron abstraction by oxidized P680 from the Mn4Ca cluster, with the intermediacy of tyrosine YZ. Four of these cycles are needed for the evolution of one molecule of oxygen from the Mn4Ca cluster OEC. (b) Detailed structure of the OEC (after ref. 13) showing the oxo-bridged distorted cubane structure of the Mn3Ca moiety with the additional “dangling” Mn center, the primary electron acceptor tyrosine YZ and the nearby histidine, and the hydrogen-bond network linking the water molecules coordinated to the Mn4Ca cluster, YZ, and histidine.	 

 	Fig. 2  Classical S-state cycle of photosynthetic water oxidation (Kok cycle).15 Starting in the dark-stable S1 state, absorption of a photon causes electron transfer from the OEC to the YZ tyrosine radical and Si → Si+1 transitions. The electron transfer steps are accompanied by charge-compensating deprotonation steps. A plausible set of oxidation-state combinations of the four Mn ions is shown for the various Si states.11c Typical time constants of the ET step are also indicated.11c	 

 	Fig. 3  Different structural motifs of the Mn4Oy unit in complexes with organic ligands. Reprinted with permission from ref. 25. Copyright (2005) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  Structural representation of [Mn4O4(dpp)6] (dpp = diphenylphosphinate anion, (C6H5)2PO2−), and molecular oxygen release in gas phase. dpp ligands at the back of the structure are not shown for clarity. Adapted with permission from ref. 26. Copyright (2000) American Chemical Society.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic representation of the photoanode developed by Brimblecombe et al. Reprinted with permission from ref. 29. Copyright (2010) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  Representation of the structure of the tetramer [MnIV4O5(terpy)4(H2O)2]6+ and of the dimer [(terpy)2Mn2III/IVO2(H2O)2]3+ (terpy = 2,2′:6′,2′′-terpyridine).	 

 	Fig. 7  X-ray structure of cubane Co4O4–H. Reprinted with permission from ref. 47. Copyright (2007) American Chemical Society.	 
PS + hν → *PS	(9)
*PS + S2O82− → PS+ + SO42− + SO4−˙	(10)
PS + SO4−˙ → PS+ + SO42−	(11)
PS+ + WOC → PS + WOC+	(12)
WOC + SO4−˙→ WOC+ + SO42−	(13)
WOC(4+) + 2H2O → WOC + O2 + 4H+	(14)

 	Fig. 8  Photocatalytic oxygen evolution as a function of time from a 2 mL solution of Co4O4–H (1.87 × 10−5M) containing Ru(bpy)32+ (1 mM) and Na2S2O8 (5 mM), at pH 8 in pH 8 80 mM borate buffer, upon light irradiation (λ > 400 nm). Reproduced from ref. 45 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  Dependence of photochemical quantum yield for oxygen production vs. catalyst concentration. Ru(bpy)32+, 1 mM; Na2S2O8, 5 mM; excitation wavelength is 450 nm. Triangles are data at pH 8 in borate buffer; squares are data at pH 7 in phosphate buffer. Reproduced from ref. 45 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Kinetics of bleach recovery as a function of catalyst concentration. Experimental conditions: excitation wavelength, 355 nm; Ru(bpy)32+, 5 × 10−5 M; Na2S2O8, 5 × 10−3 M; section, pH 7 (40 mM phosphate buffer). (b) Same experiments shown in a highly expanded time scale, to emphasize bleach formation and development. Adapted from ref. 45 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 11  A series of Co4O4–X cubanes where the redox properties are tuned by substitution of the pyridine ligands in the para-position. Adapted with permission from ref. 10. Copyright (2012) American Chemical Society.	 


OMe	0.57	2.51	877	0.40f
Me	0.52	1.92	880	0.15
t-Bu	0.50	1.39	855	0.05
H	0.55	1.33	926	0.13
Br	0.53	0.60	990	0.16
COOMe	0.51	0.70	1040g	0.23
CN	0.51	0.14	1081g	0.13

 	Fig. 12  Relevant structures of polyoxometalate (POM) ligands. Light blue: tungsten; red: oxygen; purple: oxygen atoms of the coordination site.	 

 	Fig. 13  Structure of {Ru4(μ-OH)2(μ-O)4(H2O)4[γ-SiW10O36]}10−, Ru4POM. Light blue: tungsten; orange: ruthenium; gray: silicon; red: oxygen.	 

 	Fig. 14  Interactions and photochemical events involving Ru4POM and Ru(bpy)32+. Adapted with permission from ref. 70. Copyright (2012) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  Recovery of Ru(bpy)32+ emission upon addition of increasing amounts of Na2SO4 to an aqueous solution of 50 μM of Ru(bpy)32+ and 50 μM of Ru4POM; (a) stationary experiments with excitation at 450 nm; (b) pulsed experiments with excitation at 355 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 70. Copyright (2012) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  Flash photolysis experiments with the Ru4POM–Ru(bpy)32+–S2O82− system. Photogenerated [Ru(bpy)33+] = 6.3 × 10−5 M and [Ru4POM] = 0.5–2.5 × 10−6 M. Adapted with permission from ref. 70. Copyright (2012) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  (Upper) Ru(II) photosensitizer and Ru4POM on titanium dioxide. (Center) Photoinduced electron injection, electron–hole recombination, and hole scavenging reactions. (Lower) Laser flash photolysis (excitation, 532 nm, FWHM 8 ns) of a nanocrystalline TiO2 layer sensitized with Ru(bpy)2(dpb)2+ (8 × 10−8 mol cm−2), as such (a), and loaded with 6.6 × 10−9 mol cm−2Ru4POM (b) or 3.2 × 10−8 mol cm−2Ru4POM (c). Reproduced from ref. 71 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 18  Representation of the Ru{(μ-dpp)Ru(bpy)2}38+ photosensitizer (left), and comparison among solar emission at the sea level (visible region, gray area), absorption spectra of Ru(bpy)32+ (solid line) and of Ru{(μ-dpp)Ru(bpy)2}38+ (dashed-dotted line) (right).	 

 	Fig. 19  Circles: oxygen production with the photocatalytic system Ru4POM–Ru{(μ-dpp)Ru(bpy)2}38+–S2O82− (6 × 10−5 M Ru4POM, 20 mM phosphate buffer, pH 7; irradiation at λ > 500 nm. Triangles: comparison with parallel experiments in which Ru4POM is replaced by a well-known heterogeneous catalyst (malonate-stabilized IrO2 nanoparticles, 6 × 10−5 M in iridium oxide content). Reproduced from ref. 75 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 20  Structure of [Co4(H2O)2(α-PW9O34)2]10−, Co4POM. Light blue: tungsten; green: cobalt; gray: phosphorous; red: oxygen.	 

 	Fig. 21  Kinetics of O2 formation in the photocatalytic system at different concentrations of Co4POM: 0 (brown), 1.5 (pink), 2 (blue), 3 (green), 4 (red), and 5 μM (black). Conditions: Xe lamp, 420–470 nm, 16.8 mW light beam with a diameter of ∼0.75 cm focused on the reaction solution; 1.0 mM Ru(bpy)32+, 5.0 mM Na2S2O8, 80 mM sodium borate buffer (initial pH 8.0); total reaction volume 2 mL. Reprinted with permission from ref. 78. Copyright (2011) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 22  Proposed mechanism for formation of cobalt oxide active catalyst species from Co4POM. Adapted with permission from ref. 82. Copyright (2011) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 23  (Upper) Hole scavenging kinetics measured using 5.0 × 10−5 M solutions of Co4POM of various aging time. 1 min: solid catalyst dissolved in 80 mM at pH 8 and measured immediately. 8–90 min: prepared from a 10−3 M mother solution of Co4POM in 80 mM pH 8 phosphate buffer at various time intervals. (Lower) Amount of Ru(bpy)33+ being reduced by 5.0 × 10−5 M Co4POM in laser flash photolysis (450 μs time window), as a function of the aging time of the solution used. Reproduced from ref. 83 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 24  Cyclic voltammetry of 2 mM Co4POM in 0.2 M phosphate buffer (pH 8) recorded at 1 (red trace), 4, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50 and 60 minutes after dissolution (black traces), and cyclic voltammetry of Ru(bpy)32+ in the same media (green trace). Reference electrode: Ag/AgCl. Reproduced from ref. 83 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 25  Schematic representation of a photoanode for photochemical water splitting (left) and of the associated energy levels (right). P = photosensitizer, WOC = water oxidation catalyst.	 
Footnote
† Part of the solar fuels themed issue.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
