Pathways for the formation and evolution of peptides in prebiotic environments   - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2CS35064E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2CS35064E
(Tutorial Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 5416-5429Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsPathways for the formation and evolution of peptides in prebiotic environments†

        
          
            Grégoire 
            Danger
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Raphaël 
            Plasson
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Robert 
            Pascal
          
          
        
      *c
aSpectrométries et Dynamique Moléculaire, Physique des Interactions Ioniques et Moléculaires (UMR CNRS 7345, Université de Provence) – Centre de St Jérôme - case 252, Avenue Escadrille Normandie-Niémen, 13397 Marseille Cedex 20, France. E-mail: gregoire.danger@univ-provence.fr;  Fax: +33 4 91 28 91 94
bDepartment of Earth and Planetary Sciences, Harvard University, 100 Edwin H. Lane Bvd, Cambridge MA 02142, USA. E-mail: rplasson@fas.harvard.edu;   Tel: +1 617 496 5069
cInstitut des Biomolécules Max Mousseron (UMR 5247, CNRS – Universités Montpellier 1 & Montpellier 2), Université Montpellier 2, Place E. Bataillon, 34095 Montpellier Cedex 05, France. E-mail: rpascal@univ-montp2.fr;  Fax: +33 467 631046
Received 
      5th March 2012
    First published on 12th June 2012Abstractα-Amino acids are easily accessible through abiotic processes and were likely present before the emergence of life. However, the role they could have played in the process remains uncertain. Chemical pathways that could have brought about features of self-organization in a peptide world are considered in this review and discussed in relation with their possible contribution to the origin of life. An overall scheme is proposed with an emphasis on possibilities that may have led to dynamically stable far from equilibrium states. This analysis defines new lines of investigation towards a better understanding of the contribution of the systems chemistry of amino acids and peptides to the emergence of life.
Grégoire Danger
Grégoire Danger was born in 1978 in France. In 2006, he obtained a PhD in “chemistry of biomolecules: synthesis, structure and reactivity” at Montpellier 2 University. Thereafter, he undertook a post-doctorate position from 2006 to 2007 at the “National Institute of Standards and Technology” at Gaithersburg, MD, USA, followed by a second post-doctorate position from 2007 to 2008 at the “Institut d'Astrophysique Spatiale” at Orsay, France, and from 2008 to 2009, a post-doctorate position in Montpellier, France. Since 2009, he has a lecturer position at the Aix-Marseille University. His main fields of interest comprise chemistry in prebiotic environments, and astrochemistry.
Raphaël Plasson
Raphaël Plasson was born in 1975 in France. He studied the prebiotic formation of oligopeptides under the supervision of Prof. Commeyras, and obtained his PhD in France, at the University of Montpellier 2, in 2003. He then studied the emergence of homochirality, developing both experimental and theoretical aspects, during post-doctoral works at the Free University of Brussels in Belgium with Prof. Bersini, at Keio University in Japan with Prof. Asakura and Prof. Kondepudi, and at Nordita in Stockholm with Prof. Brandenburg. He is now appointed as a research associate in Harvard University, within the Origin of Life Initiative.
Robert Pascal
Robert Pascal was born in 1952 in France. In 1973, he undertook graduate work on improvements of Strecker synthesis by catalytic pathways under the supervision of Prof. Auguste Commeyras and Prof. Jacques Taillades at the University of Montpellier 2 from which he earned a Doctorat d'Etat in 1980. Appointed by the CNRS in 1978, he is presently a Senior Scientist in the Max Mousseron Institute of Biomolecules (IBMM) in Montpellier. His main fields of interest comprise organic reactivity of amino acid derivatives, peptide and peptide materials chemistries, intramolecular reactivity and its connection with enzyme efficiency, and, lastly, prebiotic chemistry with a special interest for early biochemical processes.
Introduction
Extant life is characterized by an entangled network of reactions in which proteins play an important role. They are responsible for an important part of the catalytic and structural functions in the cell. Since the experiment carried out by Miller in 1953,1 we know that amino acids could have been formed on the early Earth through abiotic processes. The origins of life must then have been preceded by a period of the history of the Earth during which biomolecules, including random biopolymers, were synthesized abiotically. The role of genetically encoded polymers is in many cases emphasized. A replication process is indeed mandatory for initiating a natural selection process as described by the Darwinian theory;2 the reproduction of individuals, associated with modification, is required for sustaining an evolutionary process towards complex forms of life. The recognized presence of α-amino acids would however be puzzling if this kind of biomolecules had played no role in the emergence process. This issue is especially relevant during the stage called the “RNA world,”3 if chemical evolution involved only the formation of nucleotides, their condensation into oligonucleotides, and the catalytic role of RNA strands. Significant progress has been made in the synthesis of nucleotides,4 but an environment rich in activated RNA monomers—in which the RNA world processes could develop—remains both a “dream of molecular biologist” and a nightmare for an organic chemist.5 However, the view that the origin of life could have been the result of a kind of lottery, in which a strand of RNA emerged from scratch with an ability to reproduce itself while bearing both a phenotype and a genotype, is questionable. This question is related to the complexity of the prebiotic chemistry that preceded the emergence of life. The composition of abiotically formed organic matter—as found, for example, in meteorites—which contains amino acids and many other simple molecules is a clue of this complexity.6 But the main part of organic matter is composed of “insoluble organic matter” characterized by a complex polymeric structure. Describing the emergence of life on the basis of these compounds may lead to think that such complexity renders the study intractable, and that very few can be learned on the origin of life process. However, it should be realized that the nature of life as a realm of complex structures is not its main feature. In fact, a specific feature of life is to be based on reproduction; the living state can be described as a kinetic state of matter governed by dynamic kinetic stability.7 Chemists shall not remain discouraged by looking at the complexity of abiotic organic matter. They shall consider in priority the abiotic processes that could take place in these systems, and that match the dynamic features of life based on structures capable of being reproduced (Scheme 1).
 Scheme 1  Historical representation of the emergence of life. (a) A discontinuity in a transition governed by chance only, in this view, the event that triggered the origin of life is independent from the driving force for further evolution; (b) replicator dynamics as a conserved driving force for evolution,7 meaning that a role of chemical networks involving dynamic features of self-organization present before the origin of life is possible. 
In this view, life could have emerged as the result of a dynamic reaction network, in the presence of an information system, so that the selection of certain properties resulting from inescapable replication errors led to the increase of the information content. It could be a sequential polymer, whose structure remains presently unknown, though RNA is a likely candidate, or an alternative system. But many other components may have played a role, since the determining factor through this approach is not simply the replication of a single component, but the reproduction of the whole network. This means that the evolution of the genetic components of life may have been associated with metabolic features, as well as with the need of compartmentalization, very early in the history of life. This approach of the origin of life means that autocatalytic processes may have emerged in chemical environments held far from equilibrium by a constant or at least repeated input of activated chemicals. Under such conditions, the unavoidable evolution towards the equilibrium state can be suppressed or lessened by kinetic barriers.8
Considering the emergence of life as a process of evolution in a dynamic chemical network, α-amino acids and random oligopeptides shall have played an important role from the very beginning. The corresponding processes must then be studied from a dynamic point of view. In this review, we will present an overview of the processes that could have yielded peptides, with an emphasis on those that could have contributed to the emergence of organization. Considering that the selection of sequences with specific properties implies the removal from the environment of the other ones, the processes of degradation of peptides—i.e. their depolymerization into amino acids—must additionally be taken into account. This leads to a partial topological closure of the reaction network constituting the protometabolism; such an onset of reaction cycles constitutes a first stage towards complexity by the addition of feedback processes, and eventually of autocatalytic behaviour (Scheme 2).
 Scheme 2  Representation of a peptide protometabolism including possibilities of feedback. Coupling the condensation of α-amino acids into peptides with peptide degradation generates a cyclic network of chemical reactions. Once formed, and depending on their sequences, oligopeptides may influence both the condensation and degradation processes (by catalysis or inhibition resulting for instance from structure formation), which could contribute to self-organization and to the selection of the specific properties or structures that are reproduced faster. 
These peptide cycles fed by the availability of activated monomers or activating agents constitute a prerequisite for more complex systems, in which steady states different from the equilibrium composition could be reached.7
The present review focuses on the ability for such protometabolisms of peptides to have played a role in the selection of sequences, namely in relationship with the emergence of homochirality. This kind of selection and evolution processes in a peptide world are limited by the difficulty in reproducing sequences with fidelity, although they can be considered as protometabolic systems in which some properties might be reproduced. The emergence of natural selection as a driving force for evolution indeed requires an independent system for the storage of genetic information. It is likely that the emergence of a certain degree of organization via amino acid and peptide protometabolisms would have constituted a first step towards replication processes. We will analyse the reactions that are required for building such protometabolisms: monomer formation, amino acid and peptide activation, peptide polymerization, and peptide cleavage. In addition to these processes, we will also consider the epimerization of amino acid residues that is likely to be determinant for the formation of homochiral chains. Based on residues with a single handedness, defined sequences may result in fixed three-dimensional structures that are required for the activity of peptides through binding abilities resulting from the cooperation of several weak interactions.
The formation of amino acids
Since the results of the Miller experiment have been published,1 the accumulation of data has established in an unquestionable way that amino acids can spontaneously be synthesized without any contribution from living organisms. Further analyses9 of the Miller experiment identified the precursors of α-amino acids as aldehydes and hydrogen cyanide, suggesting that the Strecker reaction was involved. Actually, this reaction had been demonstrated as an abiotic pathway to the formation of these biomolecules one century before.10 However, the hypothesis of a highly reducing atmosphere—on which was based the mixture of gases used in this experiment—is now considered as unlikely.11 The production of amino acids would have been less efficient,12 though this conclusion must not be considered as ruling out a contribution of the chemistry in the atmosphere; mixtures based on CO2 and N2 (neutral from a redox point of view) have indeed demonstrated unexpected abilities in the synthesis of amino acids.13 More precisely, the reproduction of previous experiments demonstrated that amino acids were damaged during the analytical process because of the oxidation by nitrite resulting from the formation of nitrogen oxides. Electric discharge in CO2/N2 with copper electrodes also demonstrated the formation of amino acids.14 In addition to α-amino acids produced by Strecker synthesis β-amino acids have also been detected in the produced mixtures,9 indicating that other pathways are likely to be involved. It has also been considered that an increased meteorite flux on the early Earth delivered a significant amount of organic matter, including α-amino acids. Meteorites belonging to the chondrite family, which have suffered less transformation during the formation and the evolution of the solar system, have indeed revealed a significant content of amino acids.15 Similarly, comets have been considered as a possible source of organic matter including amino acids. This was confirmed by experimental simulations on cometary ice analogs yielding a variety of amino acids in the laboratory.16 In addition to these processes, it has been proposed that low concentrations of amino acids can be formed in the reducing environment of hydrothermal systems found in the oceans.17,18
Peptide bond formation
The formation of peptides under prebiotic conditions has focused much interests.19 The corresponding pathways can be classified into two categories involving thermodynamic or kinetic control, respectively.20
Thermodynamics of peptide bond formation
Although corresponding formally to a dehydration process, the formation of peptides is not impossible in water or in dehydrating environments. In fact at pH values close to neutrality, peptides can be formed from free α-amino acids and the equilibrium constant for the formation of a single peptide bond is non-negligible in aqueous solution (Kpep ≈ 2–3 × 10−3 M−1 for Gly-Gly).21,22 However, the yield of peptide that could be formed in this way remains very low (a fraction of percent for 1 M concentrations of free amino acids). In prebiotic environments, mixtures of amino acids may then hardly lead to significant concentrations of peptides23 although prebiotically plausible catalysts have demonstrated efficiency for the formation of peptides.24
The condensation of preformed peptide segments (Scheme 3) is more favourable (Kpep ≈ 0.1 M−1) mainly because the ionization constants of terminal amino and carboxyl groups in peptides increase the reactive forms of precursors compared with free amino acids. From a synthetic point of view, it is possible to build peptide bonds in this way, provided that the reaction is driven by another physicochemical means (precipitation of an insoluble uncharged product for instance). However, peptide bond formation is a slow reaction in the absence of catalyst and this procedure requires the presence of proteases.25
 Scheme 3  Peptide bond formation by condensation of two segments. Non-negligible yields of peptides can be obtained at equilibrium at pH values close to neutrality provided that a catalyst can increase the rates of peptide formation. 
Peptide formation in hydrothermal systems
The equilibrium constant for peptide formation increases at high temperatures23 and experiments have demonstrated that oligopeptides can be formed by heating aqueous solutions of amino acids to temperatures of 200–250 °C.26 However, the concentrations of free amino acids used in these experiments (usually 0.1 M) are not realistic under prebiotic conditions and equilibrium concentrations of peptides formed under more plausible conditions are negligible.23
Dehydrating conditions
Fluctuating environments with alternating dry and wet phases have been considered as favourable to the formation of biopolymers by dehydration, and the adsorption of amino acids on clays or other minerals has been shown to facilitate peptide formation.27–30 By contrast with the above-mentioned thermodynamically driven processes, the dehydration under alternating dry and wet conditions may lead to persistent far from equilibrium states that could sustain a protometabolic activity. However, changes in the environment might turn out to be deleterious for an emergent living organism.
Peptide bond formation promoted by activating agents
The formation of peptide bonds under thermodynamic control shows that peptide bonds require a weak energy input, which is confirmed by the value of the free energy of hydrolysis of an internal peptide bond into two peptide segments ΔGo′ ≈ −2 to −6 kJ mol−1.20 However, the formation of long peptides in solution from realistic concentrations of α-amino acids remains highly unfavourable. This overall free energy cost must be compensated by coupling the formation of every peptide bond to the hydrolysis of an activating agent to make the reaction favourable. Different kinds of dehydrating agents have been used in a prebiotic context.
The direction of peptide elongation
Peptide bond formation usually takes place via the nucleophilic attack of the amino group on an activated carboxyl group. As far as stepwise elongation is concerned, the extra residue can be added at one of the two ends of the preexisting peptide chain, depending on the moiety bearing the activated carboxyl group (Scheme 4). In the ribosomal synthesis, for instance, elongation takes place through the nucleophilic attack of the amino group of a monomer (the aminoacylated tRNA in the A-site of the ribosome) on the esterified C-terminal residue of the growing peptide chain (bound to tRNA in the P-site of the ribosome) meaning that residues are added stepwise at the C-terminus. In addition, protein biosynthesis as well as non-ribosomal peptide synthesis starts from the activation of free amino acids by ATP, which usually leads to transient aminoacyl-adenylate intermediates (AA-AMP) subsequently converted into esters of tRNA (Scheme 5) or thioesters. This strategy is advantageous with regard to the economy of reagents since it does not require any protection and deprotection of the amino group. This is probably the reason why it has been universally selected by evolution.
 Scheme 4  The two strategies for peptide elongation. The reaction is promoted by activation of one of the two carboxyl groups present on the amino acid monomer or on the oligopeptide. 
 Scheme 5  Biochemical peptide elongation through the activation of amino acids by ATP into aminoacyl adenylate (AA-AMP) and aminoacyl tRNA (AA-tRNA) intermediates. 
In peptide chemistry, the synthesis is usually performed from the C-terminus to the N-terminus (i.e. N-terminal elongation), meaning that activated monomers are added stepwise to the peptide chain, which is the opposite direction compared to biochemical synthesis. The explanation of the preference of peptide chemists for the reverse strategy starting from the C-terminal residue lies in the tendency of activated peptides to epimerize and the relatively much lower tendency of amino acids bearing an urethane-type protecting group to undergo epimerization.31 The usual choice of this direction in spite of the need of additional deprotection steps is actually prompted by the need of avoiding the epimerization of the C-terminal residue, associated with the facile activation of α-amino acids bearing an N-acyl group into 5(4H)-oxazolones that are chirally unstable (Scheme 6).32
 Scheme 6  Chiral instability of 5(4H)-oxazolones as intermediates of N-acylamino acid activation. Upon activation, acylated amino acid can be converted into 5(4H)-oxazolones prone to an exchange of proton at the α-carbon responsible for a loss of optical activity from stereochemically pure reactants. 
The choice of a different strategy as a result of natural selection can then be understood as the consequence of a process that avoids the formation of highly activated intermediates at the peptide C-terminus. Mixed anhydrides of amino acids are however formed as adenylates (AA-AMP) but with a free amino group (Scheme 5). Peptidyl-tRNAs formed in the ribosomal synthesis behave as moderately activated peptide esters unable to undergo an easy conversion into 5(4H)-oxazolones. The aminoacylation of tRNA is in principle possible starting from a variety of activated amino acids, but the question why adenylates are universal biochemical intermediates in the formation of activated α-amino acids is open. It could be understood as a remnant of a stage during which ATP was not present and translation had not evolved, providing information on the process that led initially to AA-AMP.33
Prebiotically relevant activating agents
None of the activating agents commonly used in synthetic chemistry was present in the environment of the early Earth. However, among the set of abiotically formed organic molecules, some of the simplest of them, as those found by radioastronomy in molecular clouds, may act as activating agents. A series of these species has been selected in Table 1 displaying the corresponding free energy of hydrolysis at pH 7, which is considered as a measurement of their ability to promote dehydration reactions. This set of reagents includes many species that have been proposed for building peptide bonds in prebiotic environments, and illustrates the high potency of species involving triple bonds and heterocumulenes.33 But a high thermodynamic potential may not be sufficient since a kinetic reactivity consistent with the evolution of the whole system is required for these species to play a role through either spontaneous or catalytic pathways. Their activity rests on the presence of electrophilic centres capable of reacting with carboxylic acid nucleophiles, and then to promote peptide bond formation. Nitriles are usually considered as poorly reactive with respect to hydrolysis, chosen as a model for nucleophilic reactions. It is worth emphasizing the specificity of cyanamide that is poorly reactive by itself but that can be isomerized into carbodiimide,34,35 and that can also be reacted through a dimerization into cyanoguanidine.36
Table 1 Free energy of hydrolysis of potential prebiotic activating agents at pH 7 and 25 °C




Entry
Activating agent
Hydrolysis/hydration product
ΔGo′/kJ mol−1
Reference





a From thermodynamic data.
b Experimental determination.
c Assessment from experimental and thermodynamic data.
d From ab initio calculations.





1
NH2CONH2
CO2 + NH3
−16a

37



2
COS (g)
CO2 + H2S
−17a

37



3
Pyrophosphate
Phosphate
−19b

38



4
CO (g)
HCO2H
−16a
This work


5
HNCO
CO2 + NH3
−54a

37



6
HCN
HCO2H + NH3
−75a

37



7
RCN
RCO2H + NH3
−80c

37



8
NH2CN
Isourea
−83d

35



9
HNCNH
Isourea
−97d

35



10
HCCH (g)
CH3CHO
−112a

37





Activated amino acid monomers
As AA-tRNAs, simple α-amino acid esters could serve as prebiotic activated amino acid monomers. However, in the absence of the 2 × 107-fold rate enhancement brought about by the ribosome,39 and at low concentration, reaction rates are likely to be very slow. Then amino acid derivatives with a much higher degree of activation would be needed. Provided that the amino group remains free, it has been shown that, these derivatives would have been rapidly converted into α-amino acid N-carboxyanhydrides (NCAs) in most prebiotic aqueous environments that are likely to have contained significant concentrations of HCO3−.20,40,41 Even amino acid thioesters, which can be abiotically obtained from carbohydrate chemistry,42 can be converted into NCAs in the presence of HCO3−.40 As independent pathways, compatible with prebiotic environments, have been proposed for the formation of NCAs, these intermediates can be considered as very likely monomers for the abiotic formation of random peptides.20 These pathways (Scheme 7) include the nitrosation of N-carbamoyl amino acids,43 the reaction of amino acids with cyanate,44 or that of carbonyl sulphide (COS) in the presence of oxidizing or alkylating agents and transition metal ions.45‡ NCAs have also been proposed as intermediates in a theoretical study of amino acid activation on the pyrite surface under hydrothermal conditions.46,47 NCAs correspond to a high degree of activation, and can be formed from kinetically less reactive intermediates. They may have played an important role in the emergence of translation,20 as they have very important potentials, such as in the formation of mixed anhydrides with phosphate (AA-P) and nucleotides (AA-NMP)48–50 or in the aminoacylation of nucleotides.49
 Scheme 7  Pathways for the formation of NCAs and further reactions including polymerization and interactions with inorganic phosphate (Pi), nucleotides (NMP), and RNA. 
Activation of the C-terminus in peptides
Peptide chemists generally avoid the activation of the C-terminal residue in peptides since it leads to high degrees of epimerization at this residue. However, in a prebiotic context in which racemic or scalemic mixtures of amino acids are present, we must acknowledge that this line of reasoning is no longer valid. The configuration change is likely to take place as soon as a chemical dehydrating agent is added to a peptide. However, the fate of the reaction is dependent on the presence of neighbouring groups as shown by a study of the activation of N-acylamino acids with cyanate (Scheme 8).51 Thanks to the presence of a second carboxyl group, a cyclic anhydride can be formed from a C-terminal aspartic acid residue. This possibility has been explained by the concept of overactivation by cyclization. The presence of a poorly nucleophilic neighbouring group may trigger the transient formation of a highly reactive cyclic intermediate, whereas a similar intermediate should not be reached from an intermolecular reaction.20
 Scheme 8  Neighbouring group assistance in the activation of C-terminal aspartyl peptides. Trapping the activated adduct by intramolecular cyclization into a 5-membered ring anhydride allows the reaction to proceed further. Otherwise, the adduct can revert to the reactants. 
In fact, the possibility of activating carboxyl groups with chemical agents results from the formation of an instable adduct that is generally in equilibrium with reactants and must be trapped by a nucleophile for the reaction to proceed (as in Scheme 8). Intramolecular reactions of neighbouring groups are very efficient opportunities in peptide formation when side-chain groups can be involved. Other neighbouring groups can play a similar role, as for instance the free amino group of dipeptides leading to diketopiperazines (DKP) by cyanate activation52 (see the next section). But the peptide bond itself may also be involved in a similar way (Scheme 6) leading transiently to 5(4H)-oxazolones. This possibility is generally considered as a drawback to be avoided in peptide synthesis where the chiral integrity of optically pure residues has to be conserved. As mentioned above, this opinion must be reconsidered with respect to the synthesis of peptides from racemic mixtures of amino acids. Although no evidence has been provided that 5(4H)-oxazolones are the sign of neighbouring group assistance in the activation of peptides, carbodiimides have been used for the abiotic formation of peptides in aqueous solution.53,54 Importantly, Cavadore and Previero53 noticed that the process is much more efficient when N-acyl α-amino acids are added as polymerization initiators in an aqueous solution of the activating agent and of free α-amino acids. The unexpected role of N-acyl α-amino acids as initiators can be considered as strong evidence for the intermediacy of 5(4H)-oxazolones, though this was not noticed by the authors. This observation is worthy of consideration since it reveals that a C-terminal activation of peptides may lead to both elongation of the peptide and epimerization at the C-terminal residue. Activation may have consequences on the formation of sequences with defined chirality in peptides.51 Since cyanate turned out to be inefficient through this pathway, it would require activating agents capable of delivering a greater amount of free energy by hydrolysis as those displayed in entries 6 to 10 of Table 1. It is likely that many other processes could lead to the activation of the C-terminal residues in peptides, as for instance a pathway similar to the photochemical activation of peptide thioacids similar to that of thioacetate.55
Diketopiperazines as peptide precursors
DKPs are well known by-products of the activation of dipeptides and can be produced by the cleavage of peptides (see section “Peptide cleavage in prebiotic environments”). They could therefore be formed in various prebiotic systems. They have also been detected in meteorites like Yamato-791198 and Murchison carbonaceous chondrites.56 Therefore, DKPs could have been available as starting materials at the surface of the Primitive Earth. In aqueous solution, they usually undergo hydrolysis into the corresponding dipeptides by nucleophilic attack on the less hindered carbonyl group.57 However, they can also be considered as peptide precursors, since ring opening by aminolysis can lead to oligopeptide elongation. For instance, in the presence of glycine at 90 °C under neutral conditions, glycine DKP leads directly to the tripeptide (Gly)3, in addition to the hydrolysis into dipeptide.52 The same behaviour is observed when glycine DKP reacts with diglycine or triglycine, which leads to tetraglycine or pentaglycine, respectively,52 in agreement with the general equation of Scheme 9.
 Scheme 9  Oligoglycine elongation from glycine diketopiperazine. 
Furthermore, phosphate anions, such as orthophosphate and pyrophosphate, catalyze the ring opening and the subsequent condensation of (AA)n on the opened DKP.58 Therefore, DKPs must not be considered as chemical waste, and these results demonstrate their abilities in peptide elongation.
It is worth mentioning the fact that all the processes presented in this section involve neighbouring group participation and are thus facilitated by the formation of activated 5-membered cyclic intermediates, such as 5(4H)-oxazolones or NCA, from α-amino acids or 6-membered cycles in DKPs. β-Amino acids and residues with longer chains are then likely to be less easily introduced in random prebiotic peptides.
Peptide cleavage in prebiotic environments
Although their thermodynamic stability is limited, oligopeptides are kinetically stable in neutral aqueous solution at moderate temperature. The half life of their uncatalyzed hydrolysis varies from 100 to 1100 years depending on the amino acid residue and its position on the peptide chain (Scheme 10).59 For instance, the uncatalyzed hydrolysis of glycylglycine under neutral conditions at 25 °C proceeds with a rate constant of 6.3 × 10−11 M−1 s−1 (i.e. an half life of 350 y), whereas values of 9.3 × 10−11 s−1 have been reported for glycylvaline at 37 °C under neutral conditions,60 and 1.3 × 10−10 s−1 for benzoylglycylphenylalanine (t1/2 = 128 y).61 Furthermore, kinetics are depending on the position of the residues within the peptide chain (Scheme 10). For instance, from Ac-Gly-Gly as a peptide model, it was shown that the C-terminal residue is hydrolyzed much slower (k = 2 × 10−11 s−1, t1/2 = 1100 y) than an internal residue (k = 3.6 × 10−11 s−1, t1/2 = 650 y), as estimated from the dipeptide model Ac-Gly-Gly-NH-Me. No data were obtained for the hydrolysis of the N-terminal residue from the peptide model Gly-Gly-NH-Me, since it undergoes a rapid intramolecular cyclization into the corresponding diketopiperazine cyclo-(Gly-Gly) (kobs = 2 × 10−8 s−1; t1/2 = 37 y).62
 Scheme 10  Hydrolysis and cleavage of oligoglycines in neutral aqueous solution at 25 °C. The intramolecular attack leading to diketopiperazine at the N-terminus is usually faster than the reaction of water on peptide bonds. 
Metal ions, such as copper(II), or iron(III), and their complexes demonstrated a catalytic efficiency for the hydrolyses of amide or peptide bonds.63 For instance, whereas Gly-Gly is hydrolyzed under uncatalyzed conditions with a rate constant of 3.6 × 10−9 s−1 (at 60 °C and pH 6.8), in the presence of zinc(II) the rate constant increases up to 1.5 × 10−5 s−1.64 The hydrolysis rates can be increased further in the presence of zinc and hydroxylamine.64 The catalytic efficiency depends on peptide sequences, on the nature of the metal ion and on experimental conditions (pH).65 However, the presence of a metal catalyst can exceptionally counter-balance the predominance of the cleavage of N-terminal dipeptides through DKP formation, which remains the preferred pathway of peptide degradation.65
All the previous results have been obtained under usual conditions of pressure and temperature. However, because hydrothermal environments could have contributed to prebiotic chemistry, some experiments have been performed at high temperatures and high pressures in order to estimate the stability of oligopeptides under such conditions. The main degradation pathway of oligopeptides is again the direct formation of diketopiperazines, which inhibits the formation of long oligomers.66 Therefore, starting from a pool of amino acids leads to few short oligopeptides, next to a majority of DKP. Starting from oligomers with degrees of polymerization exceeding 3, the extent of DKP formation decreases allowing peptide elongation from concentrated solutions of monomers.67 From these data, it appears that the predominant pathway of oligopeptide degradation is DKP formation. Kinetic rates depend on residues constituting the oligopeptide chain,68 and are increased at pH values favouring the deprotonation of the N-terminal amine group.68 An interesting feature of the cleavage of oligopeptides through DKP formation is its stereoselectivity, since peptides with N-terminal residues of opposite configuration cyclize faster.69–71 It is worth noting that the prevailing formation of cycles with residues of identical configurations has been reported when DKP is formed by reacting the free dipeptide (Ala)2 in hot water at neutral pH.72 Once formed, DKPs undergo hydrolysis rapidly, which depending on residues can lead to the original dipeptide or to an inversion of sequence. Furthermore, it has been shown that DKPs epimerize faster than the corresponding peptides,73 and have thus been considered as the main pathway of peptide epimerization.57,74 Because extreme thermodynamic conditions increase the rate of peptide degradations, some experiments and theoretical investigations have been performed in order to estimate the effect of the mineral surface on peptide stability. As described above, mineral surfaces can favour peptide bond formation by decreasing the energy barrier from adsorbed amino acid as well as by shifting the equilibrium as a result of a decrease of water activity at the mineral surface.30 However, if a mineral surface can indeed facilitate amino acid condensation, it can also catalyze peptide degradation. For instance, in the presence of pyrite, the tripeptide (Gly)3 is cleaved at 70 °C 1.5 to 4 times faster than without the mineral surface.75 In this case, the main pathway of peptide degradation is again the DKP formation.
One way to stabilize oligopeptides is to obtain chains of lengths sufficient to enable secondary structure formation as β-sheets or α-helices. Oligopeptides are much more stable to degradation when they adopt these specific structures, and especially if they present a β-sheet fold rather than an α-helix one.40,76
Peptide protometabolisms
As already noticed in the introduction, this review, rather than being a comprehensive description of potential prebiotic pathways to peptide formation, is focused on those that can lead to the emergence of properties such as three-dimensional structures or the selection of chiral sequences. Few scenarios have been proposed in the literature and investigated experimentally for the formation, selection and evolution of a peptide pool, in which catalytic or autocatalytic activities could emerge and then result in self-organization. The requirement for these scenarios lies in their continuous feeding in energy and/or in matter, that could enable the development of out-of-equilibrium dynamics, leading possibly to the emergence of improbable states from an initially random peptide pool. Homochirality has indeed been considered as a possible outcome of this kind of process.77 The analysis developed in the two preceding parts revealed that DKPs are essential intermediates in the course of their degradation and can additionally constitute intermediates in the formation of peptides. DKP formation can lead to shuffled peptide sequences or changes in the chirality of residues, which may be of importance when considering the emergence of properties in a peptide pool. A supplementary question is the relevance of a peptide metabolism involving both the formation and the decomposition of peptides to the process of emergence of life. The lifetime of individual peptide bonds corresponds to tens or hundreds of years (Scheme 10) and the formation of peptides would be dependent on the flux of energy or of activated species reaching a determined environment. The latter might be faster by one or two orders of magnitude since the ratio of the formation and decomposition rates is directly connected to the degree of polymerization accessible for peptides. It is then likely that evolution through these processes in a population of peptides would require periods of time largely exceeding the usual lifetime of living beings. Their direct implication as part of a protometabolism of an emerging living organism is thus questionable. However, any feature of self-organization that could emerge through these processes, such as homochirality for instance, might be an essential step in chemical evolution.
Protometabolisms based on NCAs
Although other possibilities may be conceived on the basis of the different pathways for peptide elongation developed previously, the polymerization of peptides through NCA intermediates has been proposed as a component of peptide protometabolisms. A first example was based on a scenario involving NCAs as activated monomers (Scheme 7) and starting either from free α-amino acids and cyanate, or directly from their carbamoylated derivatives (CAAs) obtained from the Bücherer–Bergs synthesis. In a volcanic environment undergoing alternating wet and dry conditions, it has been proposed that nitric oxide (NO), generated by lightning, could yield NCAs in the dry phase through the nitrosation of the urea group of CAAs in the presence of oxygen.43 Then NCA polymerization could take place in the aqueous phase and a selection of sequences with specific properties could emerge after hydrolysis of the peptides on geological time-scales.78,79 Wächtershäuser et al. have demonstrated the formation of short phenylalanine oligopeptides from solutions of the free monomer heated to 100 °C in the presence of (Ni,Fe)S and CO.80 The presence of hydantoin and urea derivatives of oligopeptides was considered as an indication that NCA could be involved in a protometabolic system.80 Urea and hydantoin derivatives were considered as intermediates of the catabolic part leading to the release of free amino acids from the N-terminus of peptide oligomers. Epimerization of the hydantoin moiety was considered as responsible for the loss of chirality in the amino acid pool. It has also been proposed that the formation of peptides from α-amino acids in the presence of (Ni,Fe)S, CO and H2S could be explained in a similar way through the intermediacy of carbonyl sulphide (COS).81 At lower temperatures, COS has indeed been shown to efficiently lead to peptide formation provided that a prebiotically compatible oxidation agent is present.45 The role of urea and hydantoin derivatives of peptides HyPept and UrPept has been clarified by a study of the activation of α-amino acids with cyanate (Scheme 11).44 The urea UrPept turned out to behave as a NCA precursor since the cleavage of the urea functional group takes place through elimination rather than through nucleophilic addition. Therefore, depending on the amine leaving group, it can yield NCA, as mentioned in Scheme 11, or, alternatively, yield a free amino acid and a peptide hydantoin derivative with a length reduced by one residue.
 Scheme 11  The reaction system obtained from α-amino acids and urea or cyanate. The fact that ureas are cleaved in neutral aqueous solution through elimination rather than by the addition of nucleophiles is responsible for the occurrence of pathways involving isocyanate intermediates, which account for the formation of NCAs and peptide derivatives. 
Peptide replication
Nucleic acids constitute the support of genetic information and play an essential role in living beings simply because they present the ability of being replicated. Any possibility of replicating defined peptide sequences would be essential since it could constitute the basis for an exponential growth of these peptide sequences. However, Watson–Crick pairing is not possible for simple peptides rendering stepwise self-replication of the sequence highly improbable. An exception can be made for systems like Peptide Nucleic Acids (PNAs) made of residues involving nucleic base structures in their side-chains.82 Alternatively, the possibility of replication has been demonstrated for peptide segments that adopt α-helix structures and contain hydrophobic homodimerization domains able to bind longer templates. Replication systems have been built through native chemical ligation of a N-terminal segment activated as a thioester and a C-terminal one with a cysteine as a N-terminal residue.83,84 These systems have been developed to build networks of replicating peptides displaying complex autocatalytic properties,85 and starting from scaffolds adopting structures other than α-helices.86 These tools have even been used to conceive complex networks achieving logical operations,87 but they are only working from already built oligopeptide segments constituted of determined sequences rather than from monomers. Therefore, these systems are not strictly equivalent to nucleic acid replication systems, where the Watson–Crick base pairing ensures an accurate reproduction of sequences based on the specific interaction between complementary base pairs in monomers. Whether peptide segments constituted of prebiotically available amino acids could form spontaneously, adopt folds with defined physicochemical properties, and constitute a set in which specific sequences could be elongated through a replication process remains to be demonstrated. A prerequisite for this process is for instance the availability of monomers with a single handedness to ensure defined structure formation. Nevertheless, it is now established that a replication of peptide sequences based on the presence of physicochemical properties like hydrophobicity is possible.83–87
The examples described in this section on peptide protometabolisms show that pathways for peptide elongation and cleavage are available in prebiotic environments. Provided that activating agents are continuously or repeatedly delivered to the system, unidirectional reaction cycles could be established and maintained. These cycles have the structure of metabolic loops. Although no experimental example of the following possibility is presently available in the prebiotic chemistry of amino acids, any further feature in a loop of this kind that could improve the reactant flux through a positive reaction feedback may result in autocatalysis. As a matter of fact, any downstream intermediate or product acting on the system by an additional pathway supplying the loop with one of its component would be reproduced by autocatalysis and the corresponding loop may thus be selected.88 This could be the case for chirality,77 as developed below, but many other structural features may be involved, including possibilities of some selectivity in sequence reproduction from shorter segments containing homodimerization of domains.
Emergence of homochirality
The homochirality of biomolecules is a fundamental property of life.89 The uniqueness of the chiral configuration enables the structuration of macromolecular assemblies; it is namely necessary for the formation of α-helices and β-sheets in proteins, and thus is a basis for their functionality. However, all prebiotic compounds originate ab initio from simple achiral compounds. Following the Curie's principle,90,91 a symmetric system cannot lead to a less symmetrical one; prebiotic chiral compounds should have been formed with exactly the same quantity of both configurations, i.e. in a racemic state. The question of the origin of life asymmetry is thus a crucial one. As amino acids and peptides were likely prebiotic compounds, it is natural to consider their role for the emergence of homochirality during the process of onset of life.92
Environmental asymmetry
A first simple solution is to consider that the symmetry of the system is actually broken from the beginning; an external asymmetry can induce the formation of a non-symmetric system. Such a phenomenon can rely on the actual asymmetry of physical laws that leads to a theoretical energy difference between compounds of opposite configuration.93 This effect is actually very weak, and leads to very small enantiomeric excesses.94,95 Some experiments have actually been reported, claiming that significantly non-racemic amino acids could be obtained from this principle,96 but these results are debated.97
But even if assuming a symmetrical system, simple contingent effects may have played significant roles. The environment itself, due to its complexity, can become asymmetric. For example, circularly polarized light can interact with amino acids or their precursors in space. It could be shown that this can lead to the generation of non-racemic amino acids.98,99 This result is especially meaningful with regard to the detection of non-racemic amino acids in meteorites.100 However, this kind of process only describes the generation of asymmetric material under specific conditions. This asymmetry has then to be preserved and transported to the Earth.101 How this symmetrical imbalance could be maintained in aqueous solution over long periods remains to be explained as these conditions constitute the most probable conditions for life emergence.
Symmetry breaking processes and protometabolisms
It is important to realize that for symmetry reasons, the equilibrium state is always racemic—or biased in at most an infinitesimal proportion in favour of one of the configurations. As a consequence, not only a racemic state shall be obtained following the Curie's Law, but any non-racemic state will also naturally tend to be spontaneously destroyed. As a consequence, in order to obtain a stable asymmetric system, three elements must be established:
- an initial asymmetry,
- an amplification mechanism enhancing the initial imbalance,
- a sustaining mechanism preserving the asymmetry against its natural relaxation.
The amplification mechanism means that the presence of a non-zero enantiomeric excess must be able to increase itself in absolute value. This implies that each chiral compound must be able to enhance its own concentration; a chiral autocatalysis must be present in the system.
The sustaining mechanism can be realized in two ways. If the final state must evolve towards the racemic state for thermodynamic reasons, it may be unable to evolve furthermore for kinetic reasons. It is metastable, “frozen” in its asymmetry. But when the spontaneous racemization process cannot be avoided—as it is typically the case for amino acids and peptides in aqueous solutions—a continuous active mechanism must fight this relaxation. This can be performed by coupling chiral autocatalysis to an energy flux; the same mechanism for the amplification is used in opposition to the spontaneous relaxation. In this case, the symmetry breaking process gets naturally coupled to the protometabolism;102 the energy flux responsible for the matter complexification (e.g. the peptide formation) can lead simultaneously to stable asymmetric states (e.g. the deracemization of amino acids residues).
When these elements are met, a complete mirror symmetry breaking can be obtained. Any imbalance is to be amplified, and lets the system evolve spontaneously to a non-racemic state. Interestingly, it is not even necessary to identify a specific source for the initial asymmetry. The symmetric state becomes unstable, and simply relying on the intrinsic stochastic fluctuations is sufficient as long as such a protometabolic system can be established.
The Frank model103 is a simple system describing this framework. It consists of the autocatalytic formation of the two enantiomers of a chiral compound from an achiral reactant, followed by the mutual destruction of the chiral compounds into a waste product. A matter flux is maintained between products and wastes, directing a constant reaction flux in the autocatalytic loops. Above a critical value of the flux, the racemic state becomes unstable, leading to two stable asymmetric states of opposite values; any fluctuation ineluctably leads the system to one of this non-racemic state, and remains there as long as the matter flux is maintained. A complete symmetry breaking is obtained.
An implementation of this model was experimentally realized based on conglomerate crystallization.104 A racemic mixture of chiral crystals of sodium chlorate can be formed from achiral compounds.105 But when a strong stirring is added to the solution, the fragmentation of the first crystals can act as new seeds generating new crystals; an autocatalytic growth of crystals is obtained leading to a non-racemic mixture of crystals that cannot evolve further. Adding a continuous crushing of the newly formed crystals thanks to glass beads that enable maintenance of the system in an energetically sustained non-equilibrium state.106 This experiment could be adapted to amino acids;107 starting with a racemic mixture of crystals of amino acids coupled to a solution phase racemization and a continuous crushed crystallization, a total deracemization of the system is eventually obtained. This is the simplest experimental realization of a protometabolic cycle capable of bringing about emergent properties,102 which is here sustained by mechanical energy.
Polymerization–depolymerization systems and emergence of autocatalysis
All these experimental systems rely on crystallization processes that are providing the fundamental autocatalytic mechanism. However, the resulting homochiral state only exists within the crystals; the fundamental mechanism relies on either achiral or quickly racemizing compounds in solution. None of these systems enables the maintenance of a non-racemic mixture of compounds in the same phase where this asymmetry is to be destroyed.
In order to obtain such a challenging behaviour, the system can be based on chemical reactions solely. Typically, several theoretical models of polymerization and depolymerization were developed. They are all derivatives of the Frank model, and transposed to a chemistry that can be relevant to the chemistries of either amino acids or nucleic acids.108–110 These models are showing similar bifurcation behaviour as described in the original Frank model, while being only based on monophasic chemical reactions. However, they are directly introducing a direct autocatalytic mechanism in the polymerization process, eluding the critical question of the origin of this autocatalytic behaviour. The only reported chiral autocatalytic processes involving amino acids always involve templating effects in the presence of crystals.111
Direct autocatalysis can indeed be easily imagined with large macromolecular assemblies – as it is typically obtained in the crystallization system – where the structure of either the crystals or initial cluster seeds enables the direct interaction between several molecules of the same configuration. It is however much more difficult to obtain such a template autocatalysis with small molecules. Autocatalysis is a very complex behaviour; but rather than trying to obtain it in one single complex step, it may be easier to obtain it from the combination of several simple steps. Autocatalytic behaviour can be emergent from large networks.112
The possibility of obtaining an indirect autocatalytic process of this kind was developed in the APED (activation–polymerization–epimerization–depolymerization) model.77,113,114 This framework is only based on elementary and chemically relevant reactions of amino acids, and does not include any direct autocatalytic reaction. An activation reaction continuously brings energy into the system. This sustains steady cyclic fluxes of polymerization and depolymerization, leading to the formation of a dynamic pool of peptides, continuously formed and destroyed. The possibility of selective inversion of the N-terminal amino acids completes the system; their insertion in the polymerization–depolymerization cycles—when the stereoselectivities are adequate—implies the formation of autocatalytic loops, in which an amino acid residue indirectly catalyses the inversion of another amino acid residue of the opposite configuration. Chiral autocatalysis is obtained, and its coupling to the energy flux can lead to a mirror symmetry breaking implying the deracemization of the amino acids and peptides in solution (see Scheme 12).
 Scheme 12  Simplified reaction networks able to generate a stable non-racemic steady state by mirror symmetry breaking. (a) The Frank model103 is a continuous production of chiral compounds R/S, with direct chiral autocatalysis. The energy is brought by a matter flux from incoming compounds A towards waste compounds P. (b) The APED model77 is a deracemization system, constituted by cycles of activation, polymerization, epimerization, and depolymerization of amino acids. The energy is brought by the activation reaction. The chiral autocatalysis is generated indirectly within the reaction network. 
The relevance for this model to create spontaneously a non-racemic state relies on the presence of strong stereoselectivities, namely requiring the faster polymerization and depolymerization of homochiral peptides, while keeping a greater thermodynamic stability compared to the heterochiral peptides. No full implementation of this model has been experimentally realized, but experimental oscillating behaviour during amino acid oligomerizations suggesting that an autocatalytic mechanism may indeed be present during the peptide elongation was explained on the basis of this framework.115
The best agreement concerns the well known preferential formation of homochiral peptides during polymerization.116,117 Strong induction and cross-inhibition effects are indeed observed during amino acid polymerization, especially when the formation of β-sheets is involved, leading to peptides with enriched isotacticity.118 If the thermodynamic and kinetic stabilities of homochiral and heterochiral peptides have not been examined in detail, recent studies have indicated that a complex panel of reactivity actually exists. The process of epimerization of peptides is known to be much faster for the N-terminal residues.119 This was experimentally confirmed, showing additionally that heterochiral dipeptides are more stable in neutral pH,71 while the thermodynamic equilibrium shifts back in favour of homochiral dipeptides under acid conditions.72 As for the kinetics of depolymerization, a faster hydrolysis of homochiral dipeptides was indeed observed, except under very acidic conditions. These results tend to indicate that the stereoselectivities under weakly acidic conditions are at least qualitatively consistent with the APED model.
Realistic polymerization–depolymerization systems derived from amino acids would actually be much more complex than that described in the simple APED model. A first extension to take into account is the possible formation of cyclic dipeptides (diketopiperazines).57,120 Their formation can influence greatly the reactivity of peptides within an APED system. Namely, the free form of homochiral dipeptides undergoes a stereoselective cyclization capable of protecting them selectively from epimerization,72 whereas the stereoselective cleavage of heterochiral dipeptides from longer peptide chains69 may facilitate the emergence of homochiral sequences.
The examination of potential pathways for peptide elongation carried out in this review suggests that the C-terminus elongation pathway may play an additional role in the emergence of homochirality. Namely, the epimerization of the C-terminal residue as a 5(4H)-oxazolone is likely to depend on the configuration of other residues in the peptide chain and the subsequent coupling of a monomer is likely to be stereoselective. Depending on the actual stereoselectivities, there is thus a possibility that the C-terminus elongation eventually leads to a reproduction of chirality and the formation of homochiral peptide sequences. An autocatalytic network displaying similarities with the APED model is then conceivable from this process.
Perspectives and developments
The data brought together in this review demonstrate that a diversity of prebiotically plausible pathways involving α-amino acids and peptides are available in abiotic environments held far away from equilibrium by the delivery of energy and chemical precursors. Cyclic protometabolisms, involving amino acids and peptides, are formed when oligomer formation is associated with hydrolytic cleavage. Further developments may give rise to the interesting, but not yet established, possibility that steady states involving features of organization may become dynamically stable upon the evolution of additional feedback pathways. An overall chemical network is presented in Scheme 13 that displays the complexity of the prebiotic chemistry of peptides. Numerous pathways are already supported by experimental data and could be involved in a peptide protometabolism. The anabolic part corresponds to peptide elongation promoted by activating agents. It leads to two major cyclic intermediates, NCAs and probably 5(4H)-oxazolones, depending on the fact that activation takes place either from free amino acids or from the C-terminus of peptides, respectively. The catabolic part involves the predominant pathways by which peptides could be disintegrated, namely the cleavage of the N-terminal dipeptide and the addition of cyanate at the N-terminus. It is worth emphasizing that this overall scheme seems to be ruled by the chemistry of four categories of cyclic intermediates, namely NCAs, 5(4H)-oxazolones, diketopiperazines and the hydantoin derivatives of peptides. Their cyclic structure results from intramolecular reactions made possible by the bifunctional nature of amino acids and their derivatives. The kinetic advantage of intramolecular processes may explain this predominance in the absence of efficient enzyme catalysts. In fact, intramolecular catalysis shares important features with enzyme catalysis that may have consequences on the selection of prebiotic pathways.121 Three of these cyclic intermediates have been reported to be somehow unstable from the point of view of chirality, namely 5(4H)oxazolones, the hydantoin derivatives of peptides, and, to a lesser extent, diketopiperazines. They would have thus been key compounds for the epimerization process, one of the prerequisites for the emergence of homochiral domains in biopolymers, and the overall emergence of homochirality on the Earth. Moreover, their spatial structures, regarding the chiral residues, suggest that they could be involved in stereoselective reactions. Coupling this ability to their propensity to epimerization may similarly lead to indirect chiral autocatalysis as in the APED model. In that context, peptides are likely candidates for having been involved in the process of mirror symmetry breaking towards a dynamically stable homochiral state. Even though several significant chemical intermediates of the pathways displayed in Scheme 13 have been identified, information is missing about the detailed kinetics of the processes and on their diastereoselectivity, so that no conclusion can be reached at this time on the chemical potentialities of these systems. The collection of data on these processes is then a valuable goal for the chemistry of the origin of life and systems chemistry. The questions of the possibility that abiotic chemical systems of this kind may lead to symmetry breaking and to a chiral amino acid and peptide world in determined environments or even at a planetary scale remains open. Alternatively, they may have led to the formation of peptides including at least homochiral sequences of sufficient length, which is a prerequisite for the transition to a translation of genetic sequences into proteins, the activity of which depends on the three-dimensional structure that could not be ensured from residues with random chiral configurations.
 Scheme 13  Overall view of selected pathways identified from experiments or presumed from the analysis of the literature, which could constitute the systems chemistry of α-amino acids and peptides in prebiotic aqueous environments at values of pH close to neutrality. The network is based on the reactivity of four cyclic intermediates, namely NCAs, 5(4H)-oxazolones, hydantoins, and diketopiperazines, which are involved in reaction loops and introduce possibilities of racemization/epimerization. The high reactivity of NCAs and 5(4H)-oxazolones gives rise to possibilities of connection with nucleotide chemistry. 
The formation of highly activated intermediates such as NCAs, and very probably 5(4H)-oxazolones as displayed in Scheme 13, opens the possibility that mixed anhydrides with inorganic48,50 and organic phosphates49,50 could be formed. The availability of these processes is essential since it shows that chemical pathways required for the emergence of ribosomal peptide synthesis and translation are chemically achievable even in the absence of enzyme, which gives an indication that the transition toward a RNA–protein world is chemically feasible.
Conclusions
Although peptides by themselves could hardly constitute an autonomous living organism, the formation of polypeptides with lengths sufficient to give rise to non-random structures seems to be achievable as long as the polymerization is driven by the delivery of free energy brought by activating agents. When these processes are accompanied by degradation of peptides, they constitute protometabolic peptide cycles. The requirement for a closure of the reaction network is related to the power of recycling as demonstrated by the analysis of the APED model.77 It opens to the possibility that far from equilibrium steady states could become kinetically stable provided that free energy and reactants are delivered to the chemical system. Starting from a cyclic reaction network, any additional chemical feedback process would indeed lead to coupled reaction cycles as those presented in Scheme 2—eventually leading to autocatalytic systems in the presence of positive feedback—which are likely to be amplified in a favourable environment. These features in which the corresponding chemical species are amplified, and thus selected by autocatalysis, present striking similarities with the behaviour of living entities.7 The potential that reaction networks having these capabilities could be formed from amino acid chemistry, coupled to the facility in which the corresponding monomers are formed abiotically, leads to the conclusion that it is impossible to exclude their role in the emergence of life. Wide possibilities of scientific investigation remain open in this field, even though further evolution would require these systems to be associated with carriers of genetic information that simple amino acids are unable to provide by themselves.
Note added in proof
Many features discussed in this review can be connected with the issue of evolvability in chemical systems before the emergence of template replication, which has been addressed in a recent report.122
Acknowledgements
The authors are indebted to the interdisciplinary program of the CNRS Planetary Environments and Origins of Life (EPOV) for support, and to the COST Action CM0703 “Systems chemistry” for providing the possibility of fruitful scientific exchanges during the realization of this work.
Notes and references
S. L. Miller, Science, 1953, 117, 528–529 CAS .

          C. Darwin, On the origin of species, John Murray, London,  1859 Search PubMed .

          R. F. Gesteland, T. R. Cech and J. F. Atkins, The RNA World, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, New York, 2nd edn,  1999 Search PubMed .
M. W. Powner, B. Gerland and J. D. Sutherland, Nature, 2009, 459, 239–242 CrossRef CAS .

          G. F. Joyce and L. E. Orgel, in The RNA World, ed. R. F. Gesteland, T. R. Cech and J. F. Atkins, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, New York, 2nd edn,  1999, pp. 49–77 Search PubMed .
P. Schmitt-Kopplin, Z. Gabelicab, R. D. Gougeonc, A. Feketea, B. Kanawatia, M. Harira, I. Gebefuegia, G. Eckeld and N. Hertkorna, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2010, 107, 2763–2768 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pross, J. Syst. Chem., 2011, 2, 1 CrossRef CAS   and references therein.
A. Eschenmoser, Origins Life Evol. Biospheres, 2007, 37, 309–314 CrossRef .
S. L. Miller, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1955, 77, 2351–2361 CrossRef CAS .
A. Strecker, Ann. Chem. Pharm., 1850, 75, 27–45 CrossRef .
J. F. Kasting, Science, 1993, 259, 920–926 CAS .
C. Chyba and C. Sagan, Nature, 1992, 355, 125–132 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Cleaves, J. H. Chalmers, A. Lazcano, S. L. Miller and J. L. Bada, Origins Life Evol. Biospheres, 2008, 38, 105–115 CrossRef CAS .
K. Plankensteiner, H. Reiner and B. M. Rode, Mol. Diversity, 2006, 10, 3–7 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pizzarello and E. Shock, Cold Spring Harbor Perspect. Biol., 2010, 2, a002105 CrossRef .
C. Meinert, J.-J. Filippi, P. de Marcellus, L. Le Sergeant d'Hendecourt and U. J. Meierhenrich, ChemPlusChem, 2012, 77, 186–191 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Amend and E. L. Shock, Science, 1998, 281, 1659–1662 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. Aubrey, H. J. Cleaves and J. L. Bada, Origins Life Evol. Biospheres, 2009, 39, 91–108 CrossRef CAS .
A. Brack, Chem. Biodiversity, 2007, 4, 665–679 CAS .
R. Pascal, L. Boiteau and A. Commeyras, Top. Curr. Chem., 2005, 259, 69–122 CrossRef CAS .
K. Stojanoski and Z. Zdravkovski, J. Chem. Educ., 1993, 70, 134–135 CrossRef CAS .
R. B. Martin, Biopolymers, 1998, 45, 351–353 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Cleaves, A. D. Aubrey and J. L. Bada, Origins Life Evol. Biospheres, 2009, 39, 109–126 CrossRef CAS .
B. M. Rode, Peptides, 1999, 20, 773–786 CrossRef CAS .
H.-D. Jakubke, P. Kuhl and A. Könnecke, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1985, 24, 85–93 CrossRef .
E.-i. Imai, H. Honda, K. Hatori, A. Brack and K. Matsuno, Science, 1999, 283, 831–834 CrossRef CAS .
D. L. Rohlfing, Science, 1976, 193, 68–70 CAS .
N. Lahav, D. White and S. Chang, Science, 1978, 201, 67–69 CAS .
A. Rimola, M. Sodupe and P. Ugliengo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 8333–8344 CrossRef CAS .
J.-F. Lambert, Origins Life Evol. Biospheres, 2008, 38, 211–242 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Bodanszky, Principles of Peptide Synthesis, Springer, Berlin,  1984 Search PubMed .
M. Goodman and W. J. McGahren, Tetrahedron, 1967, 23, 2031–2050 CrossRef CAS .
R. Pascal and L. Boiteau, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., B, 2011, 366, 2949–2958 CrossRef CAS .
F. Duvernay, T. Chiavassa, F. Borget and J.-P. Aycard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 7772–7773 CrossRef CAS .
F. Tordini, A. Bencini, M. Bruschi, L. De Gioia, G. Zampella and P. Fantucci, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2003, 107, 1188–1196 CrossRef CAS .
A. Brack, Pure Appl. Chem., 1993, 65, 1141–1151 CrossRef .
L. Boiteau and R. Pascal, Origins Life Evol. Biospheres, 2011, 41, 23–33 CrossRef CAS .
H. Flodgaard and P. Fleron, J. Biol. Chem., 1974, 249, 3465–3474 CAS .
A. Sievers, M. Beringer, M. V. Rodnina and R. Wolfenden, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2004, 101, 7897–7901 CrossRef CAS .
A. Brack, Origins Life, 1987, 17, 367–379 CrossRef CAS .

          R. Pascal and L. Boiteau, in Origin and Evolution of Life: an astrobiology perspective, ed. M. Gargaud, P. Lopez-Garcia and H. Martin, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,  2011, pp. 247–258 Search PubMed .
A. L. Weber, Origins Life Evol. Biospheres, 1998, 28, 259–270 CrossRef CAS .
A. Commeyras, H. Collet, L. Boiteau, J. Taillades, O. Vandenabeele-Trambouze, H. Cottet, J.-P. Biron, R. Plasson, L. Mion, O. Lagrille, H. Martin, F. Selsis and M. Dobrijevic, Polym. Int., 2002, 51, 661–665 CrossRef CAS .
G. Danger, L. Boiteau, H. Cottet and R. Pascal, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 7412–7413 CrossRef CAS .
L. Leman, L. Orgel and M. R. Ghadiri, Science, 2004, 306, 283–286 CrossRef CAS .
N. N. Nair, E. Schreiner and D. Marx, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 14148–14160 CrossRef CAS .
E. Schreiner, N. N. Nair, C. Wittekindt and D. Marx, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 8216–8226 CrossRef CAS .
J.-P. Biron and R. Pascal, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 9198–9199 CrossRef CAS .
J.-P. Biron, A. L. Parkes, R. Pascal and J. D. Sutherland, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 6731–6734 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. Leman, L. E. Orgel and M. R. Ghadiri, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 20–21 CrossRef CAS .
G. Danger, S. Charlot, L. Boiteau and R. Pascal, Amino Acids, 2012, 42, 2331–2341 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nagayama, O. Takaoka, K. Inomata and Y. Yamagata, Origins Life Evol. Biospheres, 1990, 20, 249–257 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Cavadore and A. Previero, Bull. Soc. Chim. Biol., 1969, 51, 1245–1253 CAS .
K. Kawamura, H. Takeya and T. Kushibe, Adv. Space Res., 2009, 44, 267–275 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Hagan, Jr., ChemBioChem, 2010, 11, 383–387 CrossRef CAS .
A. Shimoyama and R. Ogasawara, Origins Life Evol. Biospheres., 2002, 32, 165–179 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Steinberg and J. L. Bada, J. Org. Chem., 1983, 48, 2295–2298 CrossRef CAS .
O. Takaoka, Y. Yamagata and K. Inomata, Origins Life Evol. Biospheres, 1991, 21, 113–118 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wolfenden, Annu. Rev. Biochem., 2011, 80, 645–667 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Smith and D. E. Hansen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1998, 120, 8910–8913 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. R. Bryant and D. E. Hansen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118, 5498–5499 CrossRef CAS .
A. Radzicka and R. Wolfenden, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118, 6105–6109 CrossRef CAS .
K. B. Grant and M. Kassai, Curr. Org. Chem., 2006, 10, 1035–1049 CrossRef CAS .
B. Gomez-Reyes and A. K. Yatsimirsky, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2003, 1, 866–872 CAS .
T. Takarada, M. Yashiro and M. Komiyama, Chem.–Eur. J., 2000, 6, 3906–3913 CAS .
K. Kawamura, Anal. Sci., 2011, 27, 675–683 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kawamura, T. Nishi and T. Sakiyama, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 522–523 CrossRef CAS .
C. Goolcharran and R. T. Borchardt, J. Pharm. Sci., 1998, 87, 283–288 CrossRef CAS .
S. Capasso, A. Vergara and L. Mazzarella, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1998, 120, 1990–1995 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Bodanszky and J. Martinez, in The peptides, Analysis, Synthesis, Biology, ed. E. Gross and J. Meienhofer, Academic Press, New York,  1983, vol. 5, ch. 3, pp. 111–216 Search PubMed .
G. Danger, R. Plasson and R. Pascal, Astrobiology, 2010, 10, 651–662 CrossRef CAS .
R. Plasson, M. Tsuji, M. Kamata and K. Asakura, Origins Life Evol. Biospheres, 2011, 41, 413–435 CrossRef CAS .
G. Smith and R. Baum, J. Org. Chem., 1987, 52, 2248–2255 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Steinberg and J. L. Bada, Science, 1981, 213, 544–545 CAS .
K. Marshall-Bowman, S. Ohara, D. A. Sverjensky, R. M. Hazen and H. J. Cleaves, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2010, 74, 5852–5861 CrossRef CAS .
A. Brack and G. Spach, J. Mol. Evol., 1980, 15, 231–238 CrossRef CAS   and references therein.
R. Plasson, H. Bersini and A. Commeyras, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2004, 101, 16733–16738 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Commeyras, L. Boiteau, O. Vandenabeele-Trambouze and F. Selsis, in Lectures in Astrobiology, ed. M. Gargaud, B. Barbier, H. Martin and J. Reisse, Springer, Berlin Heidelberg,  2005, part II, ch. 4, pp. 517–545 Search PubMed .

          A. Commeyras, L. Boiteau, O. Vandenabeele-Trambouze and F. Selsis, in Lectures in Astrobiology, ed. M. Gargaud, B. Barbier, H. Martin and J. Reisse, Springer, Berlin Heidelberg,  2006, part II, ch. 5, pp. 547–569 Search PubMed .
C. Huber, W. Eisenreich, S. Hecht and G. Wächtershäuser, Science, 2003, 301, 938–940 CrossRef CAS .
C. Huber and G. Wächtershäuser, Science, 1998, 281, 670–672 CrossRef CAS .
C. Bohler, P. E. Nielsen and L. E. Orgel, Nature, 1995, 376, 578–581 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Lee, J. R. Granja, J. A. Martinez, K. Severin and M. R. Ghadiri, Nature, 1996, 382, 525–528 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yao, I. Ghosh, R. Zutshi and J. Chmielewski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1997, 119, 10559–10560 CrossRef CAS .
K. Severin, D. H. Lee, J. A. Martinez, M. J. Vieth and M. R. Ghadiri, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1998, 37, 126–128 CrossRef CAS .
B. Rubinov, N. Wagner, H. Rapaport and G. Ashkenasy, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 6683–6686 CrossRef CAS .
N. Wagner and G. Ashkenasy, Chem.–Eur. J., 2009, 15, 1765–1775 CrossRef CAS .
M. Eigen and P. Schuster, Naturwissenschaften, 1977, 64, 541–565 CrossRef CAS .
W. A. Bonner, Origins Life Evol. Biospheres, 1995, 25, 175–190 CrossRef CAS .
P. Curie, J. Phys. Theor. Appl., 1894, 3, 393–417 CrossRef .
A. F. Chalmers, Br. J. Philos. Sci., 1970, 21, 133 CrossRef .

          U. Meierhenrich, Amino acids and the asymmetry of life: caught in the act of formation, Springer Verlag,  2008 Search PubMed .
S. F. Mason and G. E. Tranter, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 1985, 397, 45–65 CrossRef CAS .
W. A. Bonner, Chirality, 2000, 12, 114–126 CrossRef CAS .
M. Avalos, R. Babiano, P. Cintas, J. L. Jiménez and J. C. Palacios, Tetrahedron: Asymmetry, 2000, 11, 2845–2874 CrossRef CAS .
M. Shinitzky, F. Nudelman, Y. Barda, R. Haimovitz, E. Chen and D. W. Deamer, Origins Life. Evol. Biospheres, 2002, 32, 285–297 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lahav, I. Weissbuch, E. Shavit, C. Reiner, G. J. Nicholson and V. Schurig, Origins Life Evol. Biospheres, 2006, 36, 151–170 CrossRef CAS .
U. J. Meierhenrich, L. Nahon, C. Alcaraz, J. H. Bredehöft, S. V. Hoffmann, B. Barbier and A. Brack, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 5630–5634 CrossRef CAS .
P. de Marcellus, C. Meinert, M. Nuevo, J.-J. Filippi, G. Danger, D. Deboffle, L. Nahon, L. Le Sergeant d'Hendecourt and U. J. Meierhenrich, Astrophys. J. Lett., 2011, 727, L27 CrossRef .
J. R. Cronin and S. Pizzarello, Science, 1997, 275, 951–955 CrossRef CAS .
S. Iglesias-Groth, F. Cataldo, O. Ursini and A. Manchado, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc., 2011, 410, 1447–1453 CAS .
R. Plasson and A. Brandenburg, Origins Life Evol. Biospheres, 2010, 40, 93–110 CrossRef .
F. C. Frank, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 1953, 11, 459–463 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Kondepudi, R. J. Kaufman and N. Singh, Science, 1990, 250, 975–976 CAS .
F. S. Kipping and W. J. Pope, J. Chem. Soc., Trans., 1898, 73, 606–617 RSC .
C. Viedma, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 94, 065504 CrossRef .
W. L. Noorduin, H. Meekes, W. P. van Enckevort, A. Millemaggi, M. Leeman, B. Kaptein, R. M. Kellogg and E. Vlieg, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 6445–6447 CrossRef CAS .
P. G. H. Sandars, Origins Life Evol. Biospheres, 2003, 33, 575–587 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Saito, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn., 2005, 74, 1629–1635 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. D. Wattis and P. V. Coveney, Origins Life Evol. Biospheres, 2005, 35, 243–273 CrossRef CAS .
I. Weissbuch, L. Leiserowitz and M. Lahav, Top. Curr. Chem., 2005, 259, 123–165 CrossRef CAS .
R. Plasson, A. Brandenburg, L. Jullien and H. Bersini, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2011, 115, 8073–8085 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gleiser and S. I. Walker, Origins Life Evol. Biospheres, 2009, 39, 479–493 CrossRef CAS .
R. Plasson and H. Bersini, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 113, 3477–3490 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sajewicz, M. Gontarska, D. Kronenbach, M. Leda, T. Kowalska and I. Epstein, J. Syst. Chem., 2010, 1, 7 CrossRef CAS .
M. Blocher, T. Hitz and P. L. Luisi, Helv. Chim. Acta, 2001, 84, 842–848 CrossRef CAS .
R. Illos, G. Clodic, G. Bolbach, I. Weissbuch and M. Lahav, Origins Life Evol. Biospheres, 2010, 40, 51–63 CrossRef CAS .
N. Wagner, B. Rubinov and G. Ashkenasy, ChemPhysChem, 2011, 12, 2771–2780 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kriausakul and R. M. Mitterer, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 1980, 44, 753–757 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li and T. B. Brill, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2003, 107, 8575–8577 CrossRef CAS .
R. Pascal, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2003, 1813–1824 CrossRef CAS .
V. Vasas, C. Fernando, S. Kauffman and E. Szathmáry, Biol. Direct, 2012, 7, 1 CrossRef .

Footnotes† Part of the prebiotic chemistry themed issue.‡ A slow formation of NCAs from free amino acids and COS in the absence of oxidizing or alkylating agents has been reported in the original article45 and has been studied through theoretical chemistry investigations.46,47 However, it seems unlikely that COS (ΔGo′ = −16.9 kJ mol−1)37 could be able to generate NCA (ΔGo′ ≈ −60 kJ mol−1)20 in spite of its cyclic structure. A photochemical activation of thiocarbamate that could take place in a way similar to that of thioacetate in aqueous solution55 may provide an explanation to this observation. This potential photochemical reaction may also constitute an efficient pathway for the prebiotic formation of NCAs.  This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

Grégoire Danger
	Grégoire Danger was born in 1978 in France. In 2006, he obtained a PhD in “chemistry of biomolecules: synthesis, structure and reactivity” at Montpellier 2 University. Thereafter, he undertook a post-doctorate position from 2006 to 2007 at the “National Institute of Standards and Technology” at Gaithersburg, MD, USA, followed by a second post-doctorate position from 2007 to 2008 at the “Institut d'Astrophysique Spatiale” at Orsay, France, and from 2008 to 2009, a post-doctorate position in Montpellier, France. Since 2009, he has a lecturer position at the Aix-Marseille University. His main fields of interest comprise chemistry in prebiotic environments, and astrochemistry.

Raphaël Plasson
	Raphaël Plasson was born in 1975 in France. He studied the prebiotic formation of oligopeptides under the supervision of Prof. Commeyras, and obtained his PhD in France, at the University of Montpellier 2, in 2003. He then studied the emergence of homochirality, developing both experimental and theoretical aspects, during post-doctoral works at the Free University of Brussels in Belgium with Prof. Bersini, at Keio University in Japan with Prof. Asakura and Prof. Kondepudi, and at Nordita in Stockholm with Prof. Brandenburg. He is now appointed as a research associate in Harvard University, within the Origin of Life Initiative.

Robert Pascal
	Robert Pascal was born in 1952 in France. In 1973, he undertook graduate work on improvements of Strecker synthesis by catalytic pathways under the supervision of Prof. Auguste Commeyras and Prof. Jacques Taillades at the University of Montpellier 2 from which he earned a Doctorat d'Etat in 1980. Appointed by the CNRS in 1978, he is presently a Senior Scientist in the Max Mousseron Institute of Biomolecules (IBMM) in Montpellier. His main fields of interest comprise organic reactivity of amino acid derivatives, peptide and peptide materials chemistries, intramolecular reactivity and its connection with enzyme efficiency, and, lastly, prebiotic chemistry with a special interest for early biochemical processes.

 	Scheme 1  Historical representation of the emergence of life. (a) A discontinuity in a transition governed by chance only, in this view, the event that triggered the origin of life is independent from the driving force for further evolution; (b) replicator dynamics as a conserved driving force for evolution,7 meaning that a role of chemical networks involving dynamic features of self-organization present before the origin of life is possible.	 

 	Scheme 2  Representation of a peptide protometabolism including possibilities of feedback. Coupling the condensation of α-amino acids into peptides with peptide degradation generates a cyclic network of chemical reactions. Once formed, and depending on their sequences, oligopeptides may influence both the condensation and degradation processes (by catalysis or inhibition resulting for instance from structure formation), which could contribute to self-organization and to the selection of the specific properties or structures that are reproduced faster.	 

 	Scheme 3  Peptide bond formation by condensation of two segments. Non-negligible yields of peptides can be obtained at equilibrium at pH values close to neutrality provided that a catalyst can increase the rates of peptide formation.	 

 	Scheme 4  The two strategies for peptide elongation. The reaction is promoted by activation of one of the two carboxyl groups present on the amino acid monomer or on the oligopeptide.	 

 	Scheme 5  Biochemical peptide elongation through the activation of amino acids by ATP into aminoacyl adenylate (AA-AMP) and aminoacyl tRNA (AA-tRNA) intermediates.	 

 	Scheme 6  Chiral instability of 5(4H)-oxazolones as intermediates of N-acylamino acid activation. Upon activation, acylated amino acid can be converted into 5(4H)-oxazolones prone to an exchange of proton at the α-carbon responsible for a loss of optical activity from stereochemically pure reactants.	 


1	NH2CONH2	CO2 + NH3	−16a	
37

2	COS (g)	CO2 + H2S	−17a	
37

3	Pyrophosphate	Phosphate	−19b	
38

4	CO (g)	HCO2H	−16a	This work
5	HNCO	CO2 + NH3	−54a	
37

6	HCN	HCO2H + NH3	−75a	
37

7	RCN	RCO2H + NH3	−80c	
37

8	NH2CN	Isourea	−83d	
35

9	HNCNH	Isourea	−97d	
35

10	HCCH (g)	CH3CHO	−112a	
37


 	Scheme 7  Pathways for the formation of NCAs and further reactions including polymerization and interactions with inorganic phosphate (Pi), nucleotides (NMP), and RNA.	 

 	Scheme 8  Neighbouring group assistance in the activation of C-terminal aspartyl peptides. Trapping the activated adduct by intramolecular cyclization into a 5-membered ring anhydride allows the reaction to proceed further. Otherwise, the adduct can revert to the reactants.	 

 	Scheme 9  Oligoglycine elongation from glycine diketopiperazine.	 

 	Scheme 10  Hydrolysis and cleavage of oligoglycines in neutral aqueous solution at 25 °C. The intramolecular attack leading to diketopiperazine at the N-terminus is usually faster than the reaction of water on peptide bonds.	 

 	Scheme 11  The reaction system obtained from α-amino acids and urea or cyanate. The fact that ureas are cleaved in neutral aqueous solution through elimination rather than by the addition of nucleophiles is responsible for the occurrence of pathways involving isocyanate intermediates, which account for the formation of NCAs and peptide derivatives.	 

 	Scheme 12  Simplified reaction networks able to generate a stable non-racemic steady state by mirror symmetry breaking. (a) The Frank model103 is a continuous production of chiral compounds R/S, with direct chiral autocatalysis. The energy is brought by a matter flux from incoming compounds A towards waste compounds P. (b) The APED model77 is a deracemization system, constituted by cycles of activation, polymerization, epimerization, and depolymerization of amino acids. The energy is brought by the activation reaction. The chiral autocatalysis is generated indirectly within the reaction network.	 

 	Scheme 13  Overall view of selected pathways identified from experiments or presumed from the analysis of the literature, which could constitute the systems chemistry of α-amino acids and peptides in prebiotic aqueous environments at values of pH close to neutrality. The network is based on the reactivity of four cyclic intermediates, namely NCAs, 5(4H)-oxazolones, hydantoins, and diketopiperazines, which are involved in reaction loops and introduce possibilities of racemization/epimerization. The high reactivity of NCAs and 5(4H)-oxazolones gives rise to possibilities of connection with nucleotide chemistry.	 
Footnotes
† Part of the prebiotic chemistry themed issue.
‡ A slow formation of NCAs from free amino acids and COS in the absence of oxidizing or alkylating agents has been reported in the original article45 and has been studied through theoretical chemistry investigations.46,47 However, it seems unlikely that COS (ΔGo′ = −16.9 kJ mol−1)37 could be able to generate NCA (ΔGo′ ≈ −60 kJ mol−1)20 in spite of its cyclic structure. A photochemical activation of thiocarbamate that could take place in a way similar to that of thioacetate in aqueous solution55 may provide an explanation to this observation. This potential photochemical reaction may also constitute an efficient pathway for the prebiotic formation of NCAs.  		 		 

 		 

 		 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
