On the potential for nanoscale metal–organic frameworks for energy applications  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9TA09896H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9TA09896H
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 21545-21576On the potential for nanoscale metal–organic frameworks for energy applications

        
          
            Seher 
            Kuyuldar
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Douglas T. 
            Genna
          
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Clemens 
            Burda
          
          
        
      *a
aCase Western Reserve University, Department of Chemistry, 10900 Euclid Ave., Cleveland, OH 44106, USA. E-mail: burda@case.edu
bYoungstown State University, Department of Chemistry, 1 University Plaza, Youngstown, OH 44555, USA. E-mail: dtgenna@ysu.edu
Received 
      6th September 2019
    , Accepted 11th September 2019First published on 17th September 2019AbstractThe availability of diverse building blocks leading to highly tunable functionality has enabled metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) to have great success in myriad applications ranging from molecular recognition to catalysis. Moreover, combining the use of their porous nature with tailored reactivity at the metal struts and organic linkers provides valuable tools for energy-related applications. An exciting new research area that is expected to be highly beneficial for energy-related MOF use is the control of MOF morphology to develop nanosheets, nanorods and nanocrystals. Nanoscale MOFs offer larger external surface areas, easier access to functional groups, and close contact with other materials in hybrid structures that result in faster electron and ion transfer, in addition to ease of fabrication into thin films. This review provides an overview of the recent development of nanoscale MOFs as pristine materials or as a component in hybrid structures for solar energy conversion, supercapacitors, batteries and fuel cells.Seher KuyuldarDr Seher Kuyuldar obtained her Bachelor of Science degree in Chemistry from Fatih University, where she conducted undergrad research on cobalt benzimidazole complexes in Prof. Naz M. Agh-Atabay's lab. Later, she studied two-electron transfer chemistry of Platinum and Palladium pincer complexes for her Ph.D. thesis with the guidance of Dr William B. Connick at the University of Cincinnati. She started her postdoctoral research in Dr Clemens Burda's lab in 2018, where she studies nanomaterials for energy related applications.Douglas T. GennaProfessor Douglas T. Genna earned his Ph.D. in the lab of Gary H. Posner at the Johns Hopkins University, where he studied chirality transfer in allylic substitution chemistry and the copper mediated conversion of carboxylic acids into ketones. He conducted postdoctoral studies in the lab of Melanie S. Sanford at the University of Michigan, studying the heterogenization of homogeneous catalysts inside metal–organic frameworks. In 2014 he joined the faculty at Youngstown State University. His research group focuses on the synthesis of new metal–organic frameworks.Clemens BurdaProf. Clemens Burda earned his Ph.D. at the University of Basel (Switzerland) in Laser Chemistry. He was a postdoctoral researcher at Georgia Institute of Technology with Prof. M. A. El-Sayed. Prof. Burda is now the Chair of the Chemical Professorship at Case Western Reserve University, in Cleveland, OH. His research centers on renewable energy conversion materials and theranostic nanomaterials. He has published over 200 peer-reviewed articles in this field. His H-index is 72 and i10-index 159. Dr Burda is also an enthusiastic teacher in all areas of physical chemistry, particularly about photoscience and nanoscience.
1. Introduction
Metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) are three-dimensional crystalline porous coordination polymers derived from an inorganic building unit, often termed a node, and an organic building unit often called a linker.1 As was proposed in the original reports by Robson in 1989 (ref. 2) and 1990,3 the high tunability of the architectural components of MOFs have led to an explosion of applications involving gas storage,4–6 catalysis,7–11 molecular separation,12–14 drug delivery,15–19 sensing,20–25 and energy devices.26–31 While most of these applications will work in the laboratory regardless of MOF crystal size, the implementation of MOFs for select real-world applications require both uniform crystal size distributions, as well as small sizes themselves. Synthetically, achieving nanometer-sized MOF crystals (nanoMOFs) with uniform particle size distributions is an unsolved problem. The state-of-the-art of nanoMOF synthesis was recently reviewed by Mirkin and coworkers, in which efforts in rapid nucleation, burst nucleation, and nano-confinement were discussed.32 While the synthesis of nanoMOFs is not the focus of this review, it will be mentioned herein when appropriate during the discussion of individual examples. The well-defined uniform size and shape of the MOF nanopores has made using MOFs to obtain nanoparticles or nanostructured materials very attractive. As a result, in many articles nanoMOF terminology is used to indicate not the actual MOF size but rather the MOF's pore size. Here, we will include only nanoscale MOF applications, excluding any studies involving sacrificial nanoMOF templates.
NanoMOFs have seen the greatest success in the field of drug delivery, most notably in antitumor applications; however, widespread implementation in the larger nanotechnology fields such as nanoelectronics, nanomechanics, and nanophotonics has remained elusive. Herein we will highlight the use of MOFs in nanodevice-related applications notably for energy generation and storage. Specific examples will focus on the benefits of deploying nanometer-sized MOFs for these applications. Due to the difficulty in synthesizing true nanoscale MOFs and inconsistent reporting in the literature, it is worth noting that not all of examples described in this review will be explicitly nanoMOF materials. Every effort will be made by the authors of this review to accurately report the particle sizes of the MOFs discussed, when that information is available.
We would like to thank to all the numerous researchers who have developed MOFs and contributed to a better understanding. Especially, we would like to thank those whose studies are highlighted here in the nanometer-scale context. At the same time, we have to apologize for the many excellent publications we could not consider herein, simply due to the limitations of space.
2. nanoMOFs in energy devices
The world's continuing need for energy and increased pollution due to fossil fuels necessitates developing strategies for tapping into abundant and cleaner energy sources. There is high demand and an increasing collective effort to improve current methods for the harvest, storage, and conversion of energy. MOFs with their varying compositions, structures, and functions show great potential for use in energy related applications such as photovoltaic devices, supercapacitors, batteries and fuel cells, which we will subsequently review in this text.
As MOF synthesis and modification methods improve, MOF researchers uncover new methods of controlling MOF size, shape and dimensions, leading to exciting new applications involving MOF nanoparticles, nanorods and nanosheets. In many cases, nanoMOF materials offer higher external surface areas, better access to electrolytes, and active surfaces leading to an enhancement in device performance.
3. nanoMOFs for solar energy conversion
Solar energy can be utilized in photovoltaic systems either in solar cells, where the harvested light is used to generate energy, or in photocatalytic systems where it is used to generate chemical energy. In both processes, multiple components need to work synergistically to achieve efficient conversion. MOF's adaptability and ordered porous structure offer a suitable platform to study and design multi-component systems that can work together efficiently.
In the area of photovoltaics, MOFs have been extensively studied as materials for dye sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). Although in comparison to other solar cell materials, power conversion efficiencies of MOF-based solar cells have been comparatively low, the lure of MOF versatility is sufficient to keep researchers aiming for improved designs. One promising development of advances in MOF design and fabrication is the relatively recent research involving their incorporation into perovskite solar cells (PSCs) and organic solar cells (OSCs), mostly to improve morphology or stability. Although photocatalysis is a vast topic, only nanoMOFs used for water splitting to produce H2 from water will be included here.
Researchers utilize nanoscale MOFs in various ways; sometimes to solve a common problem such as solution processability or to fulfil a unique requirement such as shorter distances for better diffusion. Each benefit will be mentioned in the corresponding section.
3.1. nanoMOFs in sensitized solar cells
Dye sensitized solar cells have three main components: photoanode, counter electrode and the electrolyte. Usually, pristine MOFs or MOF composites have been incorporated into dye sensitized solar cells as a part of the photoanode as light harvesting sensitizers. Most MOFs are used as sacrificial templates to obtain carbon or metal oxide-based counter electrodes as an alternative to precious metal electrodes, but a few examples of MOF-based counter electrodes have also been reported. Less frequently, MOFs have also been used in the electrolyte medium in quasi-solid DSSC, as part of the effort to develop more stable electrolytes.
Depending on the function of the component, working with nanoscale materials offers different benefits as described in the following sections.

3.1.1 nanoMOFs at the photoanode. 
In the photoanode, MOFs are used as sensitizers that absorb the incident light. In addition to absorbing a broad range of light from UV to near IR, a good sensitizer should have LUMO levels suitable for injecting the photoexcited electrons into the conduction band of the semiconductor (often metal oxide-based), and HOMO levels suitable for accepting electrons from the electrolyte for regeneration and completing the circuit. With their porous structure and ordered framework, MOFs offer unique opportunities in light harvesting and energy transfer. Incorporation of known light absorbers, electron acceptors or donors into MOFs either as part of the MOF structure or as guest molecules in pores makes MOFs suitable for light harvesting. In addition, the long range ordered MOF framework provides spatial organization of the sensitizing groups and offers a scaffold to support short and long range energy transfer along with better stability and lower losses in comparison to small molecule systems.26,28,31
Since 2011, MOFs have been investigated as possible materials to enhance the metal oxide semiconductor in the photoanode using a variety of fabrication methods that yielded layers, hybrid composites, anchored assemblies, and particles that are embedded or grown on the material surface.33–38 In most of these studies, using another component (graphene, ferrocene, carbon nanotubes) to improve upon the MOF properties such as conductivity, orientation, and charge separation enhanced cell performance.39–44 Since some of these studies are summarized in other reviews,30,31,45 we will focus here on recent developments regarding nanoMOFs and their application in energy-related contexts.
The highly cross-linked network structure of MOFs renders them insoluble and makes it harder to fabricate and target them into devices. At the nanometer scale MOFs can be incorporated into solutions and colloidal mixtures and be easily processed using conventional methods. Although the success of growing MOF nanocrystals on surfaces are highly case dependent, fabricating films is generally more optimized. Several methods have been developed to obtain high quality MOF-films that can be attached to different surfaces.46 As sensitizers, MOFs fabricated as nanoscale thin films are more efficient than microscale films. For efficient sensitization, the harvested light has to be transferred to the MOF/semiconductor interface. Even if there is large degree of coupling between the metal struts, the energy migration distance remains in the low nanometer scale. Thus, only the energy harvested close enough to the MOF interface can be transferred and used while the remaining energy will be thermally lost.47–49
Light harvesting and energy transfer. 
Light harvesting metal polypyridyl complexes have been incorporated in MOFs in an effort to use uniform MOF structure and rigidity to generate and direct long-range energy transfer.49–51 Likewise, MOFs containing metalated-porphyrins have been studied to understand and manipulate MOF structures in a way to increase energy transfer efficiency.52,53 It has been shown that structural anisotropy in MOFs can result in one- or two-dimensional energy transfer.52,54,55 Non-uniform doping or asymmetric units can enhance energy transfer in one direction and limit it in another.56,57 In addition to oriented or surface-attached fabrications, this topic is especially relevant for thin films and 2D-MOF structures where growth in one direction is suppressed. In a comparative study, Cao et al. investigated the efficiency of resonance energy transfer and exciton quenching in a MOF designed to have either 3D-network or 2D-layer structures (∼2 nm thickness), using the same functionalized benzene tris-ethyne ligand (BTE) linker but different hafnium-based struts, as shown in Fig. 1.58 Modeling of both structures revealed that due to lower chromophore connectivity and slow exciton movement (diffusion length is 1.68 times less), the overall energy transfer is less efficient in the 2D-MOF. In contrast, when the MOFs were exposed to an external quencher in solution, independent of the size of the quencher, the energy transfer was more efficient in the 2D-MOF, leading to 5 times faster quenching. Regardless of the porous structure that could accommodate small molecules, the preferred mode of adsorption was on the surface, which limited access to inner excitons in the 3D-MOF. In the 2D-MOF however, the excitons on the layers were more accessible leading to more efficient quenching, despite the slower exciton migration noted earlier. It should be pointed out here that smaller morphology such as nanocrystals would increase the outside surface area in 3D MOFs and help provide more access to outside moieties.
 Fig. 1  Structures of hafnium struts, top view and side view of the crystal structures of 2D layer and 3D network MOFs. (A and B) 2D layer MOF; (C and D) 3D network MOF. (E) TEM image of the 2D MOF (F) TEM image of the 3D MOF. (G and H) The fluorescence quenching of the 3D-MOF and 2D-MOL, by the H3BTE–NO2 that doesn't fit into the pores of the 3D MOF (G) and by coumarin-343 that is small enough to fit into the pores of 3D MOF (H). Reproduced with permission from ref. 58. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
Since spatial arrangement of chromophores is known to be critical for efficient light harvesting and energy transfer in photosystems, developing new methods to control MOF growth has drawn considerable attention. Several different fabrication strategies have been developed to obtain porphyrin based nanoMOF assemblies in an effort to enhance energy transfer. Kitagawa and coworkers developed a layer-by layer deposition method that involved the transfer of Langmuir–Blodgett films onto a solid surface.59,60 The porphyrin-based MOF nanofilms (∼20 nm thickness) were highly crystalline and well-ordered without the use of pillar units in between the layers, as shown in Fig. 2A. The researchers were also able to alter the interlayer spacing (0.9380 nm and 0.7026 nm) by changing the molecular building units. Later, Rubio-Giménez et al. extended this method by functionalizing the solid support with a self-assembled monolayer (SAM), thus layering ultrathin MOF films on nonconventional substrates such as ferromagnetic permalloy.61 As an alternative to layer-by-layer synthesis methods, Goswami et al. recently demonstrated better alignment of porphyrin chromophores through controlled MOF symmetry reduction.62 A porous 3D-pillared paddlewheel porphyrin MOF was collapsed by solvent assisted pillar ligand exchange to form a layered nonporous 2D-MOF, as illustrated in Fig. 2B. Although the effect of the collapse was not drastic due to the accompanying lateral displacement, the decrease in the interlayer spacing (from 1.5 nm to 0.7 nm) improved exciton propagation by approximately 3 layers. In another study, Gordillo et al. solvothermally grew a pillared porphyrin framework on a ZnO functionalized FTO (fluorinated tin oxide) substrate.63 Not depending on an insulating SAM layer for MOF orientation improved charge transfer. Although still very limited (0.86% power conversion efficiency), when used as photoanodes in a liquid junction solar cell, the directed vertical alignment of zinc porphyrin units contributed to better photovoltaic performance with 10–1000 times greater short circuit current and 2–375 times higher power conversion efficiency than the control devices. Oriented growth of other conjugated nanoMOFs, especially conductive MOFs has been investigated as well.64,65 For instance, Mähringer et al. used a vapor-assisted conversion method to deposit highly oriented thin films (180–200 nm thickness) of triphenylene-based 2D-MOFs on quartz, gold or doped ITO surfaces.65
 Fig. 2  (A) 2D porphyrin based MOF layers without pillaring linker groups. (B) Controlled collapse of porous 3D MOF into nonporous 2D MOF using solvent-assisted ligand exchange (SALE). Reproduced with permission from ref. 60 (A) and ref. 62 (B). Copyright© 2011 and 2016 American Chemical Society. 
Photon upconversion. 
Photon upconversion (UC), especially based on triplet–triplet annihilation (TTA), has been investigated in nanoscale MOFs as single-component platforms for structural arrangement of donor and acceptor moieties or as a part of heterojunctions.66,67 Li et al. synthesized asymmetric heterodimers by growing nanoparticles (40–80 nm diameters) of a Zr-MOF with porphyrin linkers onto doped core–shell NaGdF4 based nanoplates (19 nm × 8 nm), Fig. 3A–C.68 The nanoplate component of the heterodimers harvested low-energy near-IR photons to be used by the nanoMOF component. Although light-induced singlet oxygen generation for photodynamic therapy was the main focus of their study, similar designs have the potential to enhance solar cell devices. Kimizuka and coworkers have reported MOF-like assembly of soluble nanofibers (∼3 nm diameter) by coordinating Al3+ ions with a porphyrin donor and an alkyl-chain modified lipophilic anthracene acceptor via carboxylate groups.69 As shown in Fig. 3D and E, this assembly provided co-facial arrangement of the functional components (0.66 nm apart) for the efficient (∼100%) transfer of triplet energy from the sensitizer (Por) to the acceptor (An) and its migration along the acceptor array, leading to a high upconversion efficiency  without concentration quenching. The nanofibers demonstrated UC at 77 K and at low concentration (0.04 mM), showing that the process is independent of molecular migration, and the array is quite stable.
 Fig. 3  (A) The anisotropic growth of nanoMOFs onto up-conversion NPs (UCNPs) to form UCMOF heterodimers. Red dots in up-conversion nanoparticles represent doped lanthanide sensitizer (e.g., Yb3+ and Nd3+) and activator ions (e.g., Er3+, Tm3+ and Ho3+). (B) HRTEM image of the heterodimer. (C) Up-conversion luminescence spectrum of the PVP-coated up-conversion NPs and UV-vis absorption spectrum of the heterodimer. The spectral overlapping is highlighted in orange. (D) The illustration of triplet–triplet annihilation-upconversion (TTA-UC) in the coordination copolymers Al–An–Por. (E) Photoluminescence spectra of Al–An-in deaerated toluene with various excitation intensities (0.5–10 W cm−2, λex = 532 nm, 532 nm notch filter); inset: a photograph under 532 nm green laser excitation without any filter showing up-conversion blue emission. (F) Up-conversion efficiency (ΦUC′) with different Al–An–Por concentrations in deaerated toluene (λex = 515 nm). Reproduced with permission from ref. 68 (A–C). Copyright© 2017 American Chemical Society and ref. 69 (D–F). Copyright© 2018 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Improving charge separation and conductivity. 
Drawing on the advancement of encapsulation of guest molecules or nanoparticles in MOF pores or channels, researchers started investigating nanocomposites that can enhance nanoscale MOF performance. Incorporating known semiconductor quantum dots (QDs) to increase charge separation is one of the areas that is investigated. For instance, Lu et al. incorporated semiconducting CdS nanoparticles on a 2D-Cu porphyrin nanosheet (∼6 nm thickness) in order to improve exciton separation, Fig. 4.70 Compared to pristine nanosheets, the CdS incorporated porphyrin-MOF showed enhanced photocurrent density values (from 36.6 to 62.0 μA cm−2). However, the authors reported CdS aggregation and film degradation with increasing sulfidation times during the synthesis. Similarly, Deep and coworkers embedded CdTe QDs in a Ti based NTU-9 nanosheet (50–100 nm thickness) to combine the broad light absorption profile of the QD with the better charge separation characteristics of the nanoMOF.71 The nanocomposite photoanode showed nearly 50% more photon conversion efficiency (3.2%) and improved short circuit current density (from 19.8 to 23.2 mA cm−2) compared to a CdTe QD-only photoanode. The same group obtained similar results with a Eu-MOF (from 1.67% to 3.02% PCE).72
 Fig. 4  (A) Incorporation of CuS nanoparticles on Cu–TCPP nanosheet. (B) TEM image of CuS/Cu–TCPP composite nanosheet. Inset: the corresponding SAED pattern. (C) Transient photocurrent responses of the pure Cu–TCPP nanosheets and CuS/Cu–TCPP composite nanosheets at different sulfidation times (under illumination of chopped AM 1.5G at a fixed bias potential of −0.6 V, vs. Ag/AgCl). Reproduced with permission from ref. 70. Copyright© 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Most MOFs are classified as insulators. Unfortunately, improving MOF conductivity is not straightforward as it usually requires either changing the MOF structure in a way to improve electronic coupling between linkers and struts, which in-turn limits the variety of building blocks that can be used; or introducing conductive moieties into the pores, which in-turn may cause the MOF to lose its porosity and limits access to the redox mediator in the solar cell.73,74 A solution to coming up with suitable building blocks may be found in the development of advanced computational methods that can not only account for factors involving the choice of metal and linkers but also the effects of having solvent or other guest molecules in the pores, in addition to MOF morphology and chromophore alignment.73
Self-assembly with long alkyl chains. 
Use of long alkyl chains to direct self-assembly and stabilize nanostructures in solution is a growing area of research. Uvdal and coworkers prepared a nanocrystalline Gd-MOF (200–300 diameter discus) with pi-conjugated ligands, Fig. 5A–C.75 Functionalizing the ligands with long alkyl chains allowed them to stabilize the nanoparticles in solution and increase crystallinity. The emission profile was tuned by altering the amounts of the doping ligand and Eu ions, where in one case the Eu ions and the doped organic linker was co-sensitized by the dominant ligand acceptor. In another report, Maji and coworkers demonstrated the use of a linker with long alkyl chains and Zn ions to obtain a 1D-chain that self-assembled into various light-core thick-shell circular nanostructures such as inverted vesicles and toroids, as shown in Fig. 5D–F.76 The dynamic nature of the nanoMOF structures was effective in encapsulating a cationic dye and transferring the excitation energy from the luminescent framework to the acceptor molecules in the pores. Later, the same group synthesized a different nanovesicular MOF (100–300 nm) using an asymmetric linker with polar and nonpolar side chains and Zn2+ ions, as depicted in Fig. 5G–I.77 The TEM study revealed that the initially formed nanoMOF fibers (20–30 nm) get elongated (to 60–80 nm) and folded into vesicles over time (24 h) to reduce surface energy by keeping the hydrophobic chains outside and hydrophilic chains inside thus forming an omniphilic pore surface. The omniphilic pore surface facilitated the encapsulation of the ambipolar dye and the diffusion of water. Although the focus of this study was photocatalysis, this concept can be used to facilitate encapsulation of dopants for different applications including photovoltaic devices.
 Fig. 5  Synthesis and light harvesting study of multicomponent MOF nanoparticles with Gd, Eu and conjugated ligands: (A) the preparation of Gd–L1–L2 multicomponent nanoparticles. (B) Representative SEM and TEM (inset) images (top) and HRTEM side view of a representative particle showing the ordered nanochannels (bottom). (C) Schematic representation of the energy transfer. Ligand and Eu ion doping leads to the multiband emissions (420, 530, and 612 nm). (D) Proposed molecular organization of 1 in multilayered inverse vesicles. (E and F) FESEM images of vesicular and toroid nanostructures. (G) Self-assembly of long chain functionalized ligands with Zn2+ and dye loading. (H) Tunable white light emission by various SRG dye loadings (SRG1: 1.4, SRG2: 3.6, SRG3: 8.2, mol%). (I) Photocatalytic activity of the pristine nanoMOF and 3.6 mol% SRG loaded nanoMOF. Reproduced with permission from ref. 75 (A–C), Copyright© 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc., ref. 76 (D–F), Copyright© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. and ref. 77 (G–I), Copyright© 2018 American Chemical Society. 


3.1.2 nanoMOFs as cathode materials. 
The counter electrode in solar cells contains often a catalyst layered on a conducting oxide surface. The catalyst uses the charge carriers transferred from the external circuit to regenerate the redox mediator (e.g. I−/I3− in the electrolyte). Since the commonly used precious metal Pt based counter electrode is expensive, less expensive polymer-based and carbon-based counter electrodes have been investigated. MOFs have been successfully used as sacrificial templates to obtain porous carbon-based counter electrodes with a variety of dopants such as nitrogen, transition metals, metal oxides and sulfides.30,31,78 The incredible variety of MOFs provides a rich set of tools to adjust the catalytic activity and stability of the counter electrode. Less frequently, MOFs are utilized as counter electrode materials themselves. A big hurdle in more extensive MOF use is the inherent low conductivity of most MOFs. In one study, Chen et al. used a composite of MOF-525 nanocrystals (∼200 nm) and highly conductive sulfonated polythiophene (s-PT) to fabricate a flexible counter electrode on carbon cloth.79 The zirconium oxide struts and functionalized porphyrin linkers of MOF-525 served as redox active sites for I−/I3− regeneration while its pores provided more access to these catalytic sites. As illustrated in Fig. 6, the composite layer enwraps the 1D-fibers of the carbon cloth forming core–shell structure in which the core provides the main transport of the electrons and the shell does the catalysis. Optimizing the amount of MOF-525 particles was necessary to balance the catalytic and conductive needs of the system. The 3 wt% MOF-525 gave the highest performance with 8.91% cell efficiency which improved to 9.75% under dim light. The counter electrode with the MOF nanocrystal composite performed better than the ones with MOF-525 only (4.78% PCE), s-PT only (6.94% PCE), or the conventional pure Pt (8.21% PCE).
 Fig. 6  (A) The depiction of MOF-525/s-PT composite film surrounding a carbon fiber in a core–shell structure. The cross section shows the proposed electron transfer and catalysis involving the I−/I3− redox couple. (B) FE-SEM image of 3 wt% MOF-525/s-PT with the high magnification inset. (C) Photocurrent density–voltage curves of the DSSC with 3 wt% MOF-525 in s-PT conductive binder, illuminated under normal (100 mW cm−2) and dim light intensities (10 mW cm−2). Reproduced with permission from ref. 79. Copyright© 2016 Elsevier Ltd. 
Using a similar strategy, Ahmed et al. prepared a composite with ZIF-8 as the redox site and the polystyrene sulfonate (PSS) doped poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) as the conductive binder.80 The ZIF-8/PEDOT:PSS counter electrode was tested in DSSC based on I−/I3− and Co2+/Co3+ redox mediators. Interestingly, the 3% ZIF-8/PEDOT:PSS composite gave the best performance in iodide-based cells (7.02% PCE) while the 1% ZIF-8/PEDOT:PSS composite performed best in the cobalt-based cells (6.84%), which is higher than the PEDOT:PSS only counter electrode (4% PCE) and close to the Pt electrode performance (7.24% and 7.56% PCE).

3.2. nanoMOFs in perovskite solar cells and organic solar cells
Following the rapid rise in power conversion efficiencies, metal organic perovskite solar cell research has seen an explosion of interest in recent years. Among the most challenging issues of perovskite solar cells is stability and the accompanying concern of toxic lead exposure. Several groups have turned to MOFs in an effort to improve stability.81,82 Confining perovskite QDs in MOF nano-pores not only improved stability but also gave rise to new optoelectronic properties, leading to various new applications.83–85 Vinogradov et al. was the first to use MOFs as a component in a perovskite solar cell.86 Instead of a pristine nanoporous TiO2 layer, a nanocomposite of TiO2 and Ti based MIL-125 was fabricated in between the perovskite and the ITO layers as an additional photoactive scaffold. Later, Zr based MOF-25 and ZIF-8 nanocrystals were used to modify the TiO2 surface as an interlayer in order to provide an additional scaffold for improved coverage and better crystallinity without compromising perovskite access to the electron conducting TiO2 layer underneath, leading to higher power conversion efficiencies in each case.37,87,88 In a more drastic approach, Ryu et al. completely replaced the TiO2 layer with a nanocrystalline (∼6 nm diameter) Ti-MIL-125 layer (∼20 nm thickness) to serve as the electron transport layer in a n–i–p heterojunction solar cell.89 As shown in Fig. 7, PCBM needed to be incorporated into the Ti-MOF layer to increase electron conductivity and to efficiently block the penetration of the perovskite layer into the indium tin oxide (ITO) surface. Although the flexible device fabricated on ITO/polyethylene naphthalate (PEN) substrate performed slightly lower (17.43% PCE) than the rigid device (18.94% PCE), it was stable over 700 bending cycles with a modest performance drop to 15.43%.
 Fig. 7  (A) Synthesis of the nanocrystalline Ti-MOF (nTi-MOF) showing the ligand linked TiO2 clusters. (B) Device structure of a flexible perovskite solar cell incorporating the Ti-MOF nanocrystal/PCBM electron transfer layer. The proposed electron and hole transfer from the perovskite to the other layers are shown on the side. (C) SEM image of the nTi-MOF ETL deposited onto an ITO/glass substrate. (D) Current density plot and picture of the flexible film with the best PCE of 17.43%. Reproduced with permission from ref. 89. Copyright© 2018 American Chemical Society. 
In another article, Lee et al. reported the modification of the hole transport NiOx layer in an inverted p–i–n perovskite solar cell using two Zr-MOFs, UiO-66 and MOF-80.35 Similar to TiO2 modifications, the MOF layer enhanced power conversion efficiencies, from 15.8% to ∼17%. When the study was repeated with a Zr-MOF/perovskite hybrid layer (600 nm thickness) instead, a further improvement to ∼18% PCE and air stability was observed, possibly due to perovskite grain boundary passivation by the MOF nanoparticles. Later, Fan, Yang and coworkers utilized an In–K based MOF to improve the spiro-OMeTAD hole transport layer (HTL).90 This modification effectively oxidized the HTL producing a 20% improvement in PCE to 17.0%.
In a recent report, Xing et al. explored the possibility of using MOF nanosheets as electron extracting interlayers in organic solar cells.91 Tellurophene, a widely used semiconductor in organic solar cells, was chosen as the linker for the Cd-based MOF. The as-synthesized thick MOF layers (∼hundreds of μm) were exfoliated with a conducting polymer surfactant (polyethyleneimine ethoxylate, PEIE) to obtain functionalized thin 2D-nanosheets (1.3 nm thickness). The PEIE functionalized MOF nanosheets improved the power conversion efficiency (10.39% PCE) over the PEIE only device (9.92% PCE) due to better conductivity and ZnO defect healing.
3.3. nanoMOFs for evolution of H2 and O2 from water
Herein, we specifically focus on light-driven water-splitting processes, mentioning electrocatalysis only to provide a more complete discussion.
With their long-range order and diverse structures, MOFs are attractive candidates to assemble multiple synergistic components into a cooperative system that can use solar energy to derive the two half reactions of water splitting: reduction to evolve hydrogen and oxidation to evolve oxygen. Although sometimes studied together, hydrogen evolution reactions (HER) are easier to derive, thus more commonly explored. Photocatalytic hydrogen evolution processes usually utilize a photosensitizer to capture the light and form a photo-excited state, then an electron relay agent to transfer that photo-excited electron to the catalyst, a catalyst to reduce the proton source (acidic water) into H2, and finally a sacrificial reductant to regenerate the initial photosensitizer. Using known light absorbers as linkers, struts or anchoring moieties, and encapsulating nanoparticle catalysts into MOF pores has been reported by several groups to achieve varying degrees of success.92–95 Incorporating molecular catalysts into the MOF backbone as linkers have also been investigated.96–98 In this case, an electron relay agent is not needed since electrons are transferred from one moiety in a MOF to another. An additional self-repairing benefit is reported by Park and coworkers for a UiO-67 derivative nanoMOF with bipyridine linkers.97 As illustrated in Fig. 8, the iridium light-absorbing complex and the platinum catalyst are anchored to the framework through coordination to bipyridine linkers. As seen for other MOF systems, the active components leach out with use, compromising the stability and photocatalytic efficiency of the system. Here, the availability of sufficient amounts of uncoordinated bipyridine linkers provide active sites for recapturing the degraded components leading to an improved stability of 6.5 days as opposed to 7.5 hours for the homogeneous mixture.
 Fig. 8  (A) Self-healing in a functionalized UiO-67 MOF with bipyridine linkers (L). (B) Hydrogen evolution rate and curve over 6.5 days. Inset: HR-TEM image after 6.5 days (right, red square) of photocatalytic hydrogen evolution. Scale bar = 200 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 97. Copyright© 2016 American Chemical Society. 
Incorporation of polyoxymetalate (POM) clusters into MOFs either as part of the framework or as encapsulated moieties have been explored to utilize the multiple redox equivalent generation capability of POMs in photocatalytic99–103 or electrocatalytic104–107 water splitting processes. Combining an earth-abundant element-based catalyst within a well-defined, stable network provides a feasible alternative to more expensive noble metal-based catalysis systems.
Composites of nanoMOFs are also used as electrocatalysts or photocatalysts in hydrogen evolution reactions. The MOF's function in these systems varies from providing a scaffold that can order the distribution of the catalyst and improve substrate and product transfer108–112 to a proton relay agent113 or even to a network that can synergistically work with another component to improve electron transfer or light absorption.114–116
With the advance of nanosheet film synthesis, MOF arrays have been grown on substrates to enhance the catalytic activity of MOFs by providing better access to active sites. Duan et al. fabricated ultrathin 2D-nanosheet (3.5 nm thickness) arrays of NiFe-based MOF on nickel foam, as illustrated in Fig. 9.117 The synergistic effects of the heterometallic MOF, nanosheet structure and the mesoporous nickel foam resulted in smaller over potentials for the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) (134 mV) and oxygen evolving reaction (OER) (240 mV) processes compared to single metal MOF nanosheets (Ni only, HER: 177 mV and OER: 296 mV), bulk NiFe MOF (HER: 196 mV and OER: 318 mV), calcinated MOF (HER: 255 mV and OER: 336 mV) and on less porous substrates (glassy carbon, OER: 406 mV). Several other examples of MOF nanosheets or nanorod arrays used in electrocatalytic or photoelectrocatalytic oxygen evolution reactions have been reported.118–125 In addition to stability, these nanoscale structures are especially useful in increasing the efficiency of the more sluggish OER process by providing easier access to catalytic sites and facilitating mass transport.
 Fig. 9  (A) Growth of 2D NiFe MOF nanosheet arrays on nickel foam. (B) Top: SEM (300 μm scale bar) and bottom: TEM images (100 nm scale bar). (C) Top: Linear sweep voltammogram plots obtained with NiFe-MOF, bulk NiFe-MOF, Ni-MOF and calcined NiFe-MOF for HER at 10 mV−1 in 0.1 M KOH; bottom: LSV plots obtained with NiFe-MOF, nickel-based metal–organic framework (Ni-MOF), bulk NiFe-MOF and IrO2 for OER at 10 mV s−1 in 0.1 M KOH. Reproduced with permission from ref. 117. Open access via Creative Commons BY 4.0. 
4. Supercapacitors
Supercapacitors are produced from the formation of an electrochemical or electrostatical double-layer capacitor at the interface of a conductive electrode and an electrolyte, or in the case of pseudo-capacitors through fast redox reactions at or near the surface. Whether it is carbon-based electrodes for the electrostatical double-layer supercapacitor or transition metal oxide electrodes for the pseudocapacitors, high conductivity, large surface areas and easy electrolyte access to active sites are important parameters for obtaining excellent energy storage capabilities and high power densities. Although extensive research has been devoted to using MOFs as templates to prepare nanostructured materials such as nanoporous carbon or metal oxides, nanoMOFs of various shapes (i.e. particles, rods, sheets) have also been investigated for use as electrodes for supercapacitors. The controllable porous structure of nanoMOFs provides much desired advantages such as low density and exceptionally high external surface area when fabricating electrodes. Additionally, the presence of redox active metal centers has the potential to increase pseudocapacitance as opposed to nearly inert commercial porous carbon electrodes. However, issues like low conductivity and structural stability in conventional electrolytes need to be overcome to extend their use. Combining nanoMOFs with highly conductive materials such as conducting polymers like polyaniline and carbon-based materials like graphene increase the overall conductivity and provide the benefits of nanoMOF porosity while various binders improve electrode stability.126,127 Generally, MOFs are found to be more stable in organic electrolytes than conventional aqueous electrolytes such as NaOH and H2SO4. This means that gel or large organic electrolytes such as tetraethylammonium tetrafluoroborate often are utilized for nanoMOFs with large enough pores or interlayer distances to accommodate them.
4.1. MOF nanocrystals in supercapacitors
Drawing on the known cobalt oxide supercapacitor electrodes, Co containing Zn-MOFs were investigated as supercapacitor electrodes.128 One of the first studies in this area used pristine Co-MOF nanocrystals (50–100 nm) doctor bladed on ITO covered glass as the working electrode in a three electrode set up, obtaining 206.76 F g−1 specific capacitance with only 1.5% loss over 1000 cycles.129 Cd- and Zn-based MOFs with small pore (∼1.4 nm) interpenetrated structures were also reported to show supercapacitive performances.130 Later, Yaghi and coworkers constructed a series of supercapacitors using 23 different nanocrystalline MOFs (<500 nm) with various structures, pore sizes and shapes.131 A colloidal solution of nanocrystalline MOF and graphene (3.3 wt%) was spin coated onto a transparent titanium substrate. The thin films retaining the crystallinity and the porosity of the nanocrystalline MOFs were then placed on both sides of a polypropylene separator membrane and soaked in an organic electrolyte solution. In addition to crystallinity, the pore environment and the presence of redox active mixed metal sites, pore diameter and nanocrystal size were found to affect capacitance performance. Stack and areal capacitance were higher for MOFs with larger pores, and smaller nanocrystal sizes. Among several nanocrystalline MOFs that gave high capacitance, a Zr-MOF (nMOF-867) performed exceptionally better, with 6 times higher areal capacitance (5.09 mF cm−2) than commercial activated carbon (0.788 mF cm−2) over 10000 cycles.
In a related study, Wang et al. fabricated a flexible MOF-based supercapacitor in a two-step fabrication process in which ZIF-67 nanocrystals (∼300 nm) were first coated on a carbon cloth and then polyaniline was electrochemically interweaved onto the cloth.132 The open MOF pores provided easy diffusion of the electrolyte while polyaniline gave electrons access to the MOF surface, thus achieving a very high areal capacitance of 2146 mF cm−2 at 10 mV s−1, as depicted in Fig. 10A and B. Lan and coworkers obtained an unprecedented areal capacitance of 5147 mF cm−1 by coating polyoxymetalate based MOF, NENU-5, nanocrystals (<100 nm) with polypyrrole.133 NENU-5 is isostructural to the well-known copper MOF HKUST-1 with PMo12 immobilized in its pores. As shown in Fig. 10C, the researchers attribute the high performance of the electrode and the symmetric supercapacitor they fabricated to the benefits of combining the large electron transfer capability of the polyoxymetalate and the conductivity of the polypyrrole coating with the nanosize MOFs electrolyte accessibility and active sites. Other combinations of MOF nanocrystals or nanoparticles with conductive materials were also successful to varying degrees.134–139 For example, Qi et al. fabricated a MOF/polymer hybrid material on carbon fibers using UiO-66 nanocrystals (∼500 nm) and polypyrrole (PPY) by electrodeposition in the presence of dopamine.134 Coating the UiO-66/PPY hybrid fibers with polyvinyl alcohol/LiCl/polydopamine gel electrolyte and then twisting the two gel-coated fibers together gave a solid state fabric supercapacitor which showed 93 mF cm−2 areal capacitance (at 0.1 V s−1, inversely proportional to scan rate) and 89% cycling stability over 10000 cycles at 0.2 mA s−1. In addition to the capability of being woven into a cotton cloth, the supercapacitor did not lose much functionality upon 1000 cycles of 360° bending and 100 heating/cooling cycles from −15 °C to 100 °C. Liu et al. synthesized nanoparticles of a Co-MOF with a layered structure to obtain a high performance supercapacitor electrode (2474 F g−1 at a 1 A g−1 current density).139 In addition to the nanoscale particle size, the layered MOF structure provided electrolyte storage and ease of diffusion along with the proton conduction due to the hydrogen bonding in the interlayers.
 Fig. 10  (A) Without PANI: electrolyte diffuses through MOF pores but limited electron access. (B) MOF interwoven by PANI: both electron and electrolyte can access MOF surfaces and an electrochemical double-layer is formed on the surface of PANI-ZIF-67-CC. (C) Synergistic effects of MOF nanocrystals, PPY coating and the polyoxymetalate in pores in NENU-5/PPY-0.15. Reproduced with permission from ref. 132 (A and B). Copyright© 2015 American Chemical Society and ref. 133 (C). Copyright© 2018 American Chemical Society. 
4.2. MOF nanorods and nanowire arrays in supercapacitors
In addition to MOF nanocrystals, MOF nanorods and nanowire arrays have also been investigated for use as supercapacitor electrodes.140–145 For instance, Li et al. fabricated a pristine MOF based electrode for solid state supercapacitors by growing nanowire arrays (200–250 nm in diameter and 3–15 μm in length) of a copper-MOF with triphenylene based ligand on carbon fiber paper (Fig. 11).142 In the presence of polyvinyl alcohol gel as the electrolyte, the electrode's areal capacitance (∼22 μF cm−2) was comparable to high performing graphene based solid state supercapacitors (18.9–25 μF cm−2) and showed good cycling stability (85% over 5000 cycles at 0.5 mV s−1). When the MOF was fabricated as a nanowire, it had more than double the capacity (55%) of the bulk powder (23%). Other researchers have grown nanorods of Fe-MOF and Co-MOF with benzenedicarboxylic acid linkers on graphene based layers, combining the higher surface area and better ion transport access of nanorod MOF structure and conductive property of graphene to obtain better supercapacitor electrodes.143,144
 Fig. 11  (A) Crystal structure of Cu-CAT viewed along the c-axis. (B) SEM image of the Cu-CAT NWAs growing on carbon fiber paper. (C) Comparison of rate performance of Cu-CAT NWAs and Cu-CAT powder. (D) Structure of the solid-state supercapacitor (left) and photograph of a red light-emitting-diode powered by the three supercapacitors connected in series (right). Reproduced with permission from ref. 142. Copyright© 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
4.3. MOF nanosheets in supercapacitors
Highly conductive MOF nanosheets are especially useful electrode materials for supercapacitors because in addition to their large surface areas they provide short electronic and ionic diffusion lengths that increase cyclic lifespan, and power and energy densities. The synthesis of 2D-MOF nanosheets is usually achieved either by physical or chemical exfoliation of bulk MOFs (top-down method) or suppressing vertical growth during synthesis via use of surfactants, ligand modulators, templates or interfacial processing methods (bottom-up method).146 Using surfactants has been shown to decrease the film thickness.147 Mono- or bi-metallic Ni, Co or Cu based MOFs have dominated the research in this area.32,147–153 In 2014, Sheberla et al. synthesized a highly conductive (40 S cm−1) 2D-Ni-MOF film (∼500 nm thickness) that showed 18 μF cm−2 areal capacitance with 90% cycling stability over 10000 cycles as a pristine electrode material.149 Later, Feng et al. reported 2D-Ni- or Cu-MOF with hexaaminobenzene (HAB) linkers that showed hexagonal pore packing with d100 = 1.5 nm. The Cu/Ni-MOF nanosheet electrodes with 5% polytetrafluoroethylene and carbon black additives showed gravimetric capacitances of 215 F g−1 (Cu) and 420 F g−1 (Ni). Wang et al. prepared ultrathin Ni–Co MOF nanosheets (3.1 nm average thickness) using ultrasonication at room temperature rather than hydrothermal synthesis to prevent aggregation (Fig. 12).154 The nanosheet gave a specific capacitance of 1202.1 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 and the asymmetric supercapacitor assembled with Ni–Co MOF and activated carbon delivered an energy density of 49.4 W h kg−1 at a power density of 562.5 W h kg−1 with capacitance retention of 76.3% after 5000 cycles (at 5 A g−1).
 Fig. 12  (A) Synthesis of NiCo MOF nanosheets by ultrasonication. (B) Comparison of supercapacitor performances of mono metallic and bimetallic MOF nanosheets. Reproduced with permission from ref. 154. Copyright© 2019 American Chemical Society. 
Thin nanosheets arrays separated by nanometer size distances that provide sufficient electrolyte and electron access to all surfaces through pores and the interlayer space have shown increased pseudocapacitive performances.139,148,150,153,155–158 In 2013, Lee et al. reported three Co-MOFs with different length linkers giving different pore sizes.159 The Co-MOF with the longest linker and the largest pore (78.96 nm) showed ‘a continuously interconnected leaflet’ structure leading to the highest supercapacitive behavior (179.2 F g−1 at 10 mV s−1). The collapse of the interconnected 3D-structure lead to the loss of supercapacitive storage after 1000 cycles. However, the other two Co-MOFs with shorter linkers and smaller pores (2.58 nm and 13.95 nm) had 2D-structures and stayed stable for longer times (5.7% and 4.2% loss over 1000 cycles).
Wei and coworkers were the first to construct a layered Ni-MOF-24 nanosheet supercapacitor electrode.155 The Ni-MOF-24 nanosheet had approximately 10 nm thickness and 0.93 nm layer to layer distance. The working electrode containing 70 wt% Ni-MOF, 20 wt% acetylene black, and 10 wt% polytetrafluorethylene binder gave a specific capacitance of 1127 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1 with more than 90% cyclic lifespan over 3000 cycles. The diffusion of the electrolyte was found to be the rate controlling step during the pseudocapacitive process. Later, the same group reported a layered Co-MOF nanosheet (5–10 nm thickness with 0.29 nm layer to layer distance) that gave improved supercapacitor performance with a similar electrode composition.150 The specific capacitance was 2564 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 current density and the cycling stability was 95.8% over 3000 cycles. As illustrated in Fig. 13, this high performance was attributed to the MOF conductive network with terephthalate groups located in between the layers acting as pillars that prevent the collapse of the layer while the thin nanosheet structure increases the electron transport.
 Fig. 13  Ion and electron transport processes in Co MOF nanosheet. Reproduced with permission from ref. 150. Copyright© 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Jiao et al. used the interlayer space (0.95 nm) between the 2D-Ni-MOF nanosheets (23 nm thickness on average) to accommodate Fe(CN)64−/Fe(CN)63− ions in the electrolyte.156 As shown in Fig. 14, the synergistic coupling of the Fe(CN)64−/Fe(CN)63− redox reaction in the electrolyte and the Ni(II)/Ni(III) in the Ni-MOF electrode led to the enhancement of energy and power densities, forming a device that is comparable to lithium-ion batteries in energy density (55.8 W h kg−1) and to supercapacitors in power density (7000 W kg−1) with a good cyclic lifespan (90.6% after 3000 cycles at 10 A g−1).
 Fig. 14  The synergistic effect between the layered Ni-MOF and Fe(CN)64−/Fe(CN)63− electrolyte solution significantly improve the electrochemical performance in a hybrid alkaline battery–supercapacitor energy storage device where the Ni-MOF is the cathode and the carboxylic acid functionalized carbon nanotubes (CNTs–COOH) is the anode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 156. Copyright© 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Yan et al. prepared flexible accordion-like Ni-MOF (4.1 nm thickness with 15–35 nm layer-to layer distances) with p-benzenedicarboxylic acid linkers using a combination of hydrothermal and ultrasonic synthesis (Fig. 15).157 In addition to exhibiting high specific capacitance (988 F g−1 at 1.4 A g−1) and good stability (96.5% after 5000 cycles), the flexible solid-state asymmetric supercapacitor assembled from the layered Ni-MOF and activated carbon performed well when bent (230 mF cm−2 specific capacitance at 1.0 mA cm−2 current density). The accordion-like structure was reasoned to offer a stable structure for ion intercalation/extraction that in turn improved the cycling life. The light weight of the device makes it suitable for wearable electronic applications.
 Fig. 15  (A) SEM image of the accordion-like Ni-MOF. (B) Cyclic voltammetry within a 0–1.3 V range at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1 with three bending modes (insets). Reproduced with permission from ref. 157. Copyright© 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Nanosheets assembled on different materials offer increased contact area in the hybrid structure. For example, using various linkers Ni-MOF nanosheet arrays have been grown on carbon nanotubes,127,147 nickel wires,160 and polyaniline153 and graphene oxide layers147 to improve supercapacitor performance Fig. 16A–G. In most cases, the presence of the growth surface is reported to be conducive to the formation or the dispersion of the nanosheets, benefiting the electrode capability.127,147,153 In addition, nanosheets can aggregate into spherical microstructures that are given colorful names like flowers, flakes and balls Fig. 16H–L.148,152,161,162 In all of these structures, the lamellar thin sheets in the aggregates increase surface area and provide facile access to electrolyte ions. Reaction conditions and doping influence the formation and size of the aggregates. For example, as shown in Fig. 16M, Yang et al. showed that as the amount of Zn ions are increased in a p-benzenedicarboxylic acid based Ni-MOF, the size of the microspheres increase along with the interlayer distance, leading to smaller charge transfer resistance thus an improved supercapacitor performance.162
 Fig. 16  (A) In situ growth of Ni MOF on a polyaniline/nickel foam layer (PANI/NF) and (B) the corresponding SEM image with the cross section inset. (C) Charge transfer route in Ni MOF nanosheet (Ni(TA)) aggregated on multiwall carbon nanotube (MWCNT) that are attached to nickel foam (NF). (D–G) SEM images of Ni MOF (D and E) and CoNi MOF (F and G) nanosheets on Ni wires. (H–J) SEM images of Ni/Co-MOF nanoflakes at different magnification (Xia et al.). (K, L) SEM images showing the effect of Zn doping on the formation and (L) the size of Ni MOF nanosheet microspheres. (M) The effect of Zn doping on the inter layer space and ion diffusion in Ni MOF nanosheet microspheres. Reproduced with permission from ref. 153 (A and B). Copyright© 2019 Royal Society of Chemistry, ref. 127 (C), Copyright© 2018 Elsevier Ltd., ref. 160 (D–G), Copyright© 2019 Elsevier B.V., ref. 161 (H–J), Open access via Creative Commons BY 4.0. and ref. 162 (K–M). Copyright© 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
5. Batteries
Effective energy storage devices are necessary components of reliable use of renewable energy sources, especially for powering portable electronics and vehicles. Thus, there is a high demand for storage devices that can provide high power and energy densities with better rate performances and cycle lives than what is currently available. Improving rechargeable batteries, supercapacitors and fuel cells are all parts of this effort.
A typical rechargeable battery has four main components; cathode, anode, separator and electrolyte. Battery types are usually named according to the active components at the anode and the cathode. For instance, in a Li–O2 battery, Li ion is oxidized at the anode and O2 is reduced at the cathode. The most common batteries are Li ion batteries with LiCoO2 and LiFePO4 as cathode materials and graphene as the anode material. Li–S and Li–O2 (or Li–air) batteries are less common but they are attractive contenders with their high theoretical capacities, 1675 mA h g−1 and 3840 mA h g−1. Other battery types are Na-ion batteries, Li–Na dual-ion batteries, redox flow batteries and Zn–air batteries. The separator and the electrolyte play key roles in a battery as well. The porous separator prevents contact between the anode and the cathode while allowing the passage of ions between the two sides. Typical separators are polymer based such as polyethylene and, polypropylene. The electrolyte is the medium that improves the movement of ions between the two terminals. For lithium batteries, electrolytes are commonly liquids containing a lithium salt in an organic solvent such as LiPF6 in ethylene carbonate.
Highly desirable properties in a battery are safety, lightness, fast charge/discharge performance, long cycle life, and high power and energy densities. There is room for a lot of improvement in all of these areas. Every battery type has its set of leading problems that need better solutions. For instance, Li–S batteries produce soluble intermediates that need to be captured to prevent electrode loss limitations, and Li–O2 batteries need efficient methods to keep the air intake clean for best performance. Researchers have utilized MOFs in all four basic components of batteries but especially as anode materials and separators. MOF porosity and adjustable structure allows for their utilization in various functions. Herein, we will focus on recent work with a special attention to nanoscale MOF usage.
5.1. Li and Na ion batteries
Li ion rechargeable batteries are widely used for portable electronics. Na-ion batteries and Li–Na dual ion batteries have similar working principles and are attractive due to lower cost and abundance of sodium. In all three, during charging, an intercalated Li/Na compound at the cathode provides the Li/Na ion to be transferred via the electrolyte, through the separator to the anode to be stored via insertion, alloying and conversion reactions. Then, during discharging the stored ions make the return journey back to the cathode, while the anode captures and transfers the electrons to the external circuit to be used. The efficiency of these processes depends mostly on the reversibility of removing and transporting all the ions from the lattice of the electrode materials. A major safety concern that needs attention is the flammable electrolyte that can explode if the battery is damaged. This is especially important if Li/Na ion batteries are to be used to power electric or hybrid vehicles.

5.1.1 nanoMOFs at anodes. 
Graphite is the anode material of most commercial batteries. Li/Na ions are inserted into graphite layers during the charging process. However, the extraction of the ions during the discharging process is not efficient leading to much lower capacities than the theoretical capacity of 372 mA g−1. In addition, structural issues due to large volumetric changes during cycling leads to poor rate performance. The porous nature and diverse building blocks of MOFs are attractive properties for developing better anode electrode materials. The high MOF surface area decreases local current density and reduces dendrite formation while availability of various deposition sites lowers nucleation overpotential leading to more uniform Li deposition. Nanoscale MOF fabrications are desirable due to the close contact they provide with the electrolyte for faster ion transfer. On the other hand, conductive MOFs or known conducting additives are needed to enhance electron injection to the external circuit.
Flexible morphology to manage volume expansion. 
Wang and coworkers fabricated nanowires (30 nm thickness) of a Co-based MOF, Fig. 17.163 The flexible uniform nanowire structure allowed for fast Li ion storage and diffusion leading to a reversible discharging capacity of 573 mA h g−1 (at 1 A g−1) over 1000 cycles with a capacity retention of 100%. Interestingly, the nanocubes of the same MOF showed fast capacity degradation, presumably due to structure inflexibilities. The nanowire structure supported the structural deformation that accompanied the initial lithiation process and the subsequent reductive conversion of Co2+ to Co0. The lithium ion battery cell with a LiFePO4 cathode delivered a capacity of 138 mA h g−1 at 0.1C with 83% capacity retention over 300 cycles. Later, the same group fabricated polyhedral nanorods of Fe-based MIL-88B as anode materials for Li ion batteries further underlining the benefit of nanowire structure in stabilizing the MOF framework during the lithiation/delithiation process.164
 Fig. 17  (A) Three dimensional atom frameworks of CoCOP nanowires viewed along the z axis and y axis. (B) SEM image of CoCOP nanowires. (C) Charge–discharge curves of CoCOP–LiFePO4 full battery at different rates. Reproduced with permission from ref. 163. Copyright© 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Nanoscale for fast ion diffusion. 
A common morphology for effective ion diffusion and electron transfer is nanosheets or thin films. Ordered aggregation of thin films provide a structured electrode surface. For instance, Gan et al. prepared benzenetricarboxylate based-Ni MOFs as flower-like nanosheet aggregates, or smooth or corrugated solid microspheres (2–3 μm), as shown in Fig. 18.165 Of the three morphologies, the flower-like aggregate showed the highest initial capacity of 1085 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1 compared to 519 mA h g−1 for the smooth and 667 mA h g−1 for the corrugated spheres. The nanosheet aggregate reached a stable coulombic efficiency faster (13 cycles), indicating better lithium storage reversibility. Similar nanosheet aggregates of other MOFs have been noted for their fast and stable Li ion battery performances.166–170
 Fig. 18  (A) Synthesis of Ni-BTC MOFs with various morphologies in different solvents. (B) Corresponding SEM images of different Ni-BTC morphologies. (C) Comparison of cycling performance of Ni-BTCDMF, Ni-BTCDMF/EtOH, and Ni-BTCEtOH electrodes at 1000 mA g−1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 165. Copyright© 2019 Elsevier Inc. 
In an effort to increase the electrode/electrolyte contact surface and improve ion transfer, Xu, Shakir and coworkers developed a confined pulverization technique to convert MOF nanoparticles (∼100 nm) into much smaller nanocrystals (<5 nm), as shown in Fig. 19.171 The Co–MO/–graphene oxide composite was coated with polypyrrole and heated at 350 °C in air to form ultrafine MOF crystals covered by the N-doped carbon/graphene pyrolysis layer. Without the polypyrrole coating, the same process yields the usual metal oxide derivative. In addition to fast ion diffusion, conductivity improvement provided by the coating and the stability against volume expansion provided by the interspace between the nanoparticles and the coating contributed to the high reversible capacity of 1301 mA h g−1 (at 0.1 A g−1) and capacity retention of 98.6% over 2000 cycles (at 10 A g−1).
 Fig. 19  (A) Schematic representation of Co-MOF–graphene oxide composite enwrapped in polypyrrole before and after pulverization at 350 °C, and illustration of improved electron and Li ion access. (B) Right: TEM image before pulverization and left: HRTEM image after pulverization. (C) Comparison of cycling performances of composites pulverized at 350 °C (with the polypyrrole coating: GCP350 and without: GC350) and at 250 °C (GCP250). Reproduced with permission from ref. 171. Copyright© 2018 American Chemical Society. 
MOF coating for other composite anodes. 
Transition metal oxides and Si, Sn, P-based composite anodes can store large amounts of Li/Na ions, thus have higher energy densities than the conventional graphite electrode. Although reversible capacities around 800 mA h g−1 at high current densities are common for these electrodes they are highly susceptible to degradation due to large volume changes that accompanies the lithiation/delithiation process. In addition, the solid electrolyte interface that forms on the surface during the initial activation of the battery often peels off causing continuous consumption of the electrolyte while non-uniform Li deposition forms metallic Li dendrites that can short circuit the battery. MOFs as coatings, protective layers or encapsulating hosts have been utilized to improve stability, safety and efficiency of these anodes.172–177 For instance, Yu et al. enwrapped Si nanorod arrays (∼120 nm thickness) with a multiple layer coating containing first Ti, TiN and then an outer layer of ZIF-8, as shown in Fig. 20.173 The Ti/TiN layer increased conductivity between the Si core and the ZIF-8 coating. In addition to added Li deposition sites, the ZIF-8 layer improved the diffusion of Li ions, controlled volume expansion and provided uniform lithiation, leading to a high capacity of 1650 mA h g−1.
 Fig. 20  (A) Schematic capacities of Si, TiN/Ti/Si, ZIF-8/Si, and ZIF-8/TiN/Ti/Si nanorods as anodes for lithium ion batteries and the corresponding SEM images of top: TiN/Ti/Si nanorods and bottom: ZIF-8/TiN/Ti/Si nanorods. (B) Demonstration of the influence of ZIF-8 layer on rate performance, using the ZIF-8/Si nanoparticle electrode at various current densities. Reproduced with permission from ref. 173. Copyright© 2016 American Chemical Society. 
Redox active linker and metal sites for increased Li storage. 
The first MOF designed as an anode material for Li ion batteries was Zn-based MOF-177 that stored lithium via a conversion reaction at the metal nodes, which unfortunately led to framework breakdown at low cycling numbers.178 Later, linkers that provided insertion type deposition where Li interacts with ligand N-atoms or carboxylate groups lead to improved stability and better performance.167,179–185 The combination of ion intercalation at the linkers and conversion at the metal nodes have been investigated to improve the number of Li ions stored per unit, as well.163,164,167,170 The multi-redox active polyoxometalate (POM) incorporated MOFs are attractive candidates in this regard because of the availability of multiple metals, some of which can function as Li storage sites while others keep the framework stable. For example, Lan and coworkers prepared a nanocomposite of POM based Cu-MOF and reduced graphene oxide (rGO) in which nanoparticles of NENU-9 (∼200 nm) were distributed on rGO films, as shown in Fig. 21.186 The flexible porous MOF structure provided stability against volume change while the POM served as an additional redox active site and rGO improved conductivity leading to a reversible capacity of 1075 mA h g−1 at 50 mA g−1 and a current density of 3000 mA h g−1 over 400 cycles. This exceptional performance over the theoretical capacities of its components (NENU-9: ∼449 mA h g−1 and graphene: 744 mA h g−1) shows a battery–supercapacitor hybrid device in which Li ions stored not only via MOF linker intercalation and POM metal site conversion but also in the pores and interfaces of the nanocomposite and this additional charge are possibly compensated by electrons from rGO. In a similar concept, Sha et al. encapsulated POM in a Ag-MOF then fabricated a nanocomposite with single walled carbon nanotubes as the conductive material leading to a reversible discharge capacity of 859 mA h g−1 at a current density of 100 mA g−1.187
 Fig. 21  (A) Schematic representation of POM-NENU-9 particles on reduced graphene nanosheet. (B) SEM image of the nanocomposite. (C) PMG-3 cycled at various current densities. (D) Comparison of capacity ratio for different PMG nanocomposites (PMG-1: 4% GO, PMG-2: 8% GO and PMG-3: 12% GO, at 0.5 mV s−1 sweep rate). Reproduced with permission from ref. 186. Copyright© 2017 Elsevier Ltd. 
Yuan et al. used a different strategy for improved Li deposition where they inserted Ag nanoparticles in the pores of HKUST-1, a well-known Cu-MOF with benzenetricarboxylate linkers.188 In addition to improving conductivity, the Ag nanoparticles served as additional lithiation sites along with the polar linkers, leading to low nucleation over potential and diminished dendrite formation. Tang and coworkers deposited Ag nanoparticles (∼3 nm) on Co based ZIF-67 nanoparticles (∼500 nm) via post-synthetic modification methods to improve conductivity and Li ion chelation leading to a reversible capacity of 800 mA h g−1 over 100 cycles at 137 mA g−1 with a coulombic efficiency of 99%.189


5.1.2 nanoMOFs at cathodes. 
MOF-based cathode materials for alkali ion batteries are less studied than anode materials, mostly because they have low gravimetric capacities and energy densities than commercially available intercalated Li/Na compounds. Increasing the number of ions inserted per unit through redox active linkers in addition to or in place of metal sites is an effective strategy, specifically if redox activity at metal nodes results in structure stability issues.190,191 N/N+ redox active linkers is especially useful in obtaining voltage windows (∼4 V) that are high enough for practical use.191,192 Finding solutions to increase electronic and ionic conductivity is also an important part of building a high performing MOF cathode.193 For improvement of ion conductivity, one possible method is electrolyte design,194 another is to couple alkali ion insertion with anion chelation in a dual ion insertion/extraction mechanism which is especially effective for slow moving large Na+ diffusion in Na-ion batteries.192,195,196 Permanent MOF pores and layered structures can accommodate large anions without significant volume increase that usually jeopardizes other cathode materials. A specific advantage of nanoscale MOF morphologies for cathode fabrications is their great potential for achieving theoretical capacities in practice by improving charge transfer rate and increasing the contact surface areas.
As the research to develop better performing MOF cathode electrodes continues, preventing degradation of other active cathode materials with MOFs is also underway. For example, Gao and coworkers coated the surface of Li, Mn and Ni doped LiCoO2 nanocrystals by a 2–3 nm thick Mn-MOF layer.197 This surface modification improved thermal stability and discharge capacity leading to a value of 323.8 mA h g−1 at 0.1C rate. In another article, Chae et al. used Co-MOF-74 as an additive to capture the dissolved Ni in Li(NixMnyCozO2) cathode, significantly lowering the amount of Ni in the electrolyte (15 fold) and subsequent electrodeposition on the graphite anode.198


5.1.3 nanoMOFs as electrolytes and separators. 
Replacing the current flammable liquid-based electrolytes with safer solid electrolytes is an important step in developing batteries for high energy-high power density applications such as electrical vehicles and long-term solar fuel storage. Two major concerns in this area are obtaining sufficient ionic conductivity for efficient Li/Na ion transport across the electrodes and achieving good interfacial contact between the solid electrolyte and the electrode surfaces. MOF structure design and nanoscale morphology can provide feasible solutions for these issues. For example, using Lewis acid linkers, or functionalizing the pore surface with Lewis acid groups can increase Li ion dissociation and mobility by interacting with the anion of the added Li salt.199 As shown in Fig. 22A and B Pan and coworkers used ionic liquid embedded MOF-525 nanocrystals as a dense electrolyte.200 The solid electrolyte had an ionic conductivity of 3.0 × 10−4 S cm−1 at room temperature and low interfacial resistance at both the LiFePO4 cathode and the Li metal anode. The open MOF pores and the nanoscale spaces at the electrode interface and between the crystals were effective in forming an efficient Li ion transport network that achieved 25 mg cm−2 loading leading to a charge capacity of ∼132 mA h g−1 at 0.1C at room temperature.
 Fig. 22  (A) Illustration of the solid state battery showing the nano-wetting of the MOF-electrode interface and Li+ ion migration (moving pink balls) in the ionic liquid filled MOF pores. (B) Temperature-dependent cycling performance of the Li|Li-IL@MOF|LiFePO4 full cell with corresponding charge/discharge curves. (C) Synthesis of the covalently linked UiO-66 MOF–PEGDA polymer solid-state electrolyte. (D) The SEM images of the surface (top) and the cross section (bottom) of the hybrid HSPE-1–8 solid electrolyte. (E) Cycle performance of the Li/HSPE-1–8/LiFePO4 cell cycled at different C-rates at RT (HSPE = hybrid solid polymer electrode and HSPE-1–8 is when the MOF:PEGDA ratio during synthesis is 1 to 8 wt%). Reproduced with permission from ref. 200 (A and B). Copyright© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Inc. and ref. 205 (C–E). Copyright© 2018 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Nanoscale MOFs can also be used as additives for other solid electrolytes such as polyethylene oxide to decrease its crystallinity in order to promote charge carrier migration, and to adsorb impurities at the electrode interface in order to enhance electrolyte/electrode contact.201–204 Rather than physically dispersing the MOF into the polymer, as illustrated in Fig. 22C–E, Zhang and coworkers covalently linked NH2-functionalized UiO-66 nanoparticles (<200 nm) by (polyethylene glycol)diacrylate chains using photo-induced polymerization in the presence of LiTFSI as a free standing film.205 The ionic conductivity of the hybrid electrolyte was 4.31 × 10−5 S cm−1 at 30 °C showing a 5-fold increase from the polymer-only electrolyte, and the room temperature specific capacity at 0.2C was 121 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles. Better cycling performance and rate capacity at different temperatures indicates improved electrode interface contact and ion transport in the covalently attached MOF–polymer hybrid compared to the blended MOF–polymer composites probably due to even MOF distribution.
The main function of separators is to physically prevent anode/cathode contact. More than that, if the separator can regulate ion transfer between two half cells of the battery, it can have a major influence on cycling life and rate performance. Normally, Li ions with their large solvation shells move slower than the accompanying anions with smaller solvation shells, causing concentration polarization, especially at high current densities. Various modifications have been investigated to improve separator performance,206–208 however nanoscale MOFs have the potential to selectively functionalize the separator surface for promoting Li/Na ion transport. For example, Wang and coworkers coated commercial polypropylene separator with NH2-functionalized titanium-based MIL-125 to improve Li+ ion transference numbers via amine interactions, leading to 1 mA h cm−2 areal capacity at 1 mA cm−2 current density for more than 1200 h without short circuiting.209 In another study, Shen et al. grew UiO-66-NH2 nanocrystals on glass fibers as illustrated in Fig. 23.210 Upon thermal activation, the Zr6O4(OH)4 nodes become Zr6O4 with open metal sites that can anchor ClO4− anions in the electrolyte and double the Li+ ion transport (Li+ transference number = 0.67 vs. ∼0.33) via ion-pair dissociation. In the glass fiber only separator cell, increasing polarization causes the cell overpotential to climb to 800 mV over 200 hours before short circuiting due to Li dendrite penetration. In contrast, the nanoMOF functionalized separator cell shows a steady 55 mV overpotential over 350 hours. In addition, an average coulombic efficiency of 95% is obtained at 2 mA h cm−2 areal capacity and 1 mA cm−2 current density for the nanoMOF separator while this value is ∼36% for the glass fiber only separator, signaling a more robust solid electrolyte interface formation at the anode. This is also supported by the high areal capacities of the full cells; for example, ∼3 mA h cm−2 over 1000 cycles, at a current density of 4 mA cm−2 (0.5C).
 Fig. 23  (A) Schematic illustration of MOF nanoparticle growth on glass fiber. (B) The SEM image of MOF–glass fiber hybrid with a magnified inset. (C) Right: Li+ stripping and plating tests in Li|Li cells and left: coulombic efficiency of Li+ stripping and plating in Cu|Li cells. (D) Right: Galvanostatic cycling of LiFePO4|Li cells and left: long-term cycling of LiFePO4|Li4Ti5O12 full cells. Blue: glass fiber only, red: MOF–glass fiber. Reproduced with permission from ref. 210. Copyright© 2019 Royal Society of Chemistry. 

5.2. Li–S batteries
Contrary to rechargeable Li ion batteries that intercalate Li+, in a Li–S battery, Li is stored at the anode and S is stored at the cathode. During discharge, Li+ ions move to the cathode via the electrolyte, through the separator and get incorporated into LiS2via a series of lithium polysulfide reductions. Thus, for every sulfur, two Li+ ions can be stored, leading to a higher theoretical capacity of 1675 mA h g−1, compared to most Li ion batteries that store less than one Li per host atom. Despite this high capacity, abundance and low price of sulfur, Li–S batteries have not seen wide-spread use due to three major challenges. One issue has to do with the solubility of the intermediate lithium polysulfides in the electrolyte that continuously deplete the cathode and corrode the anode in a process called ‘the shuttle effect’. Another issue, is the large volume change (∼80%) at the cathode upon LiS2 formation that causes mechanical stress and degradation, limiting cycling life. MOFs have great potential as cathode materials because through pore size and aperture design, and structure functionalization, they can prevent polysulfide leakage. Additionally, rigid MOF structures and suitable morphologies can help contain volume changes. MOFs can be utilized to adjust the electrolyte or the separator, as well. However, the third major challenge of Li–S batteries is also a continuing MOF challenge. Sulfur has such a low conductivity (5 × 10−30 S cm−1 at RT) that it is almost an insulator. Conductive additives are usually used, but they contribute to cathode volume and weight. MOF-derived materials with their higher conductivities and inherited MOF pore structure are attractive contenders as Li–S cathode materials. Here, we will focus on recent nanoscale pristine or composite MOF use in Li–S batteries.

5.2.1 nanoMOFs as sulfur hosts at the cathode. 
Similar to other Li–S cathode hosts, nanoscale MOFs are designed in a way to improve polysulfide retention. Entrapment in MOF pores through aperture and pore size control,211,212 incorporation of sulphilic sites at the linkers213 or uncoordinated metal nodes,214–217 or a combination of these methods218–220 have been investigated. Increasing the number and function of defect sites and hybrid materials has also been utilized to improve sulfur deposition and usage while maintaining control over polysulfide leakage.
Optimizing nanocrystal size. 
Zhou et al. reported that as the particle size decreases, sulfur usage in a series of nanoscale ZIF-8 frameworks increases, with less than 20 nm affording a capacity over 950 mA h g−1 at 0.5C.221 However, an optimized size of ∼200 nm was the best for cycling stability (75% over 250 cycles at 0.5C). Similarly, for a Cu-MOF that utilized both ligand Lewis acid sites and node Cu sites for polysulfide interaction, Cai and coworkers noted the best performance for 100 nm sized nanoparticles over 200 nm, 500 nm and 1 μm size particles.218 In both cases, due to conductivity limitations of the MOFs, electrochemical reactions occur only on the particle surface where there is access to both electrons and Li ions. The sulfur loaded deep inside the pore can only be utilized after the outer sulfur is used up completely due to the sluggish internal diffusion in larger nanocrystals. On the other hand, for very small nanocrystals, the loaded sulfur is reached very quickly leading to rapid generation of polysulfides that escape from the pores to the now increased external surface area. Another interesting example of optimizing nanocrystal size has recently been demonstrated by Baumann et al. in HKUST-1 with exposed Cu sites on its surface.214 Decreasing the particle size increases the number of sulfur binding sites on the external surface, which in turn captures polysulfides that escape from the pores more effectively and prevents their diffusion toward the anode. However, as shown in Fig. 24, despite the presence of capture sites on the surface, higher sulfur loading with bigger nanocrystals is still not beneficial to battery performance in this case.
 Fig. 24  (A) Activation and sulfur loading of HKUST-1 with potential binding sites at the Cu paddlewheel. (B) Electrolyte samples of 0.16 μm and 5.9 μm CuBTC, and S/C electrodes during a galvanostatic discharge of C/20. Yellow discoloration indicates the amount of leached polysulfide. (C) Coin cell performance of 3 cells as a function of particle size, left: the average maximum capacity and right: the average capacity retention over 20 cycles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 214. Copyright© 2018 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
MOF nanoparticle size has an impact on the performance of hybrid structures, as well. Zhang et al. investigated the effect of ZIF-8 nanoparticle size in a carbon nanotube (CNT) (20–40 nm diameter) hybrid structure.222 As shown in Fig. 25, the ∼40 nm ZIF-8 nanoparticles looked grafted on the CNT sponge while the larger 500 nm ZIF-8 nanoparticles showed a mutually embedded hybrid structure. Although the initial discharge capacities for both hybrids were similar (1366 and 1386 mA h g−1), the larger nanoparticles showed much better capacity retention (91.5% vs. 67.6%) and rate performance with reversible discharge capacities at different rates, while a steep irreversible drop in discharge capacity was observed for the smaller particles (from 1400 mA h g−1 at 0.05C to 650 mA h g−1 at 1C). SEM images after 100 cycles reveal detachment and agglomeration of small ZIF-8 nanoparticles leading to sulfur leakage from the pores or cavities while the large ZIF-8 hybrid retains its morphology and no sulfur escape occurs. Additionally, the mutually entrapped CNTs provide better access to electrons throughout the large ZIF-8 particles lowering charge transfer resistance.
 Fig. 25  (A) Hybrid structures with smaller or larger ZIF-8 particles on CNT and their sulfur loading, named S@S-ZIF-8@CNTs and S@L-ZIF-8@CNTs, respectively. (B) SEM images (left) and TEM images (right) of S-ZIF-8@CNTs showing uniform grafting of small ZIF-8 nanoparticles (∼40 nm) on the CNT network. (C) SEM images (left) and TEM images (right) of L-ZIF-8@CNTs showing mutually embedded large ZIF-8 particles (∼500 nm) entrapping the CNT network. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy of (D) S@S-ZIF-8@CNTs and (E) S@L-ZIF-8@CNTs before and after 100 cycles. The insets show the corresponding charge transport paths. Reproduced with permission from ref. 222. Copyright© 2018 American Chemical Society. 
In addition to particle size, the type of MOF and the accompanying hybrid material plays an important role. For example, Tricoli and coworkers prepared a 3D monolith by embedding 200–400 nm ZIF-67 nanoparticles or 20–100 nm HKUST-1 agglomerates in a conductive polymer hydrogel.223 The polymer hydrogel penetrated through both type of nanodomains, so in this work the performance determining parameter was the aperture openings of the MOFs. HKUST-1 with its large pore opening of 0.90 nm was better fitted to encapsulate S8 (0.64 nm) and contain long chain polysulfides (>0.4 nm) then ZIF-67 with its small pore opening of 0.34 nm.
Using nanoMOF hybrids. 
Sulfur host MOFs have been combined with carbon nanotubes, graphene analogs, polymers and metal oxides mostly to alleviate conductivity issues but also for MOF size and distribution control and improved sulfur utilization along with mechanical stability.223–229 Rather than simple mixing, enfolding sulfur or MOF nanoparticles in conductive materials provides a protective containment layer against polysulfide dissolution in addition to enhanced electron transfer.225,230 On the other hand, hybrid morphology and the level of interpenetration of the hybrid materials affect a host of properties such as intervoid size and distribution, flexibility, areal and volumetric capacities in addition to influencing sulfur utilization and charge kinetics. For instance, Peng, Lin and coworkers prepared compact thin films of HKUST-1 nanoparticles (500 nm to 2 μm) interpenetrated with CNTs that formed flexible electrodes with a decay of 0.08% per cycle over 500 cycles and a volumetric energy density of 1195 mA h cm−3.224 Using a 3D-porous CNT sponge instead, Cao and coworkers obtained compressible (10-fold) electrodes with 0.02% rate fading per cycle over 500 cycles for a ZIF-8 nanoparticle–CNT hybrid and a larger volumetric capacity of 575 A h L−1.222 To strike a balance between having a sufficient specific capacity and improving areal and volumetric capacities, the same group fabricated hierarchically porous but dense monolithic ZIF-8–CNT hybrids using a room temperature drying method.231 Small ZIF-8 nanoparticles (40 nm) merged to form MOF blocks with penetrating CNTs. Optimizing ZIF-8 loading (70 wt%) afforded maximum sulfur loading with improved areal (10.7 mA h cm−2) and volumetric (676 mA h mL−1) capacities.


5.2.2 nanoMOFs as polysulfide sieves at the separator. 
Similar to their function in Li ion batteries, separators keep the anode and the cathode half-cells physically apart, but allow electrolyte movement and ion diffusion. With their uniform pores, MOF-separators also support uniform Li+ transport to the anode, which is important for suppressing Li dendrite formation, especially at high current densities. A function specific to Li–S batteries however, is the possibility of preventing the migration of dissolved polysulfides to the anode to improve cycling life and rate performance. Thus, separators can be utilized as ionic sieves specifically at high sulfur loadings when the polysulfide capture measures at the cathode are not enough. MOFs are structurally very suitable for functionalization of separators since their pores can be adjusted to be small enough to retain polysulfides, yet big enough to let Li ions through. They are thermally stable and electrically insulating which is fine for the anode side of the separator. However, good conductivity is important for the cathode side, therefore most researchers use a conductive material along with the MOF when the modification side is going to face the cathode half of the battery. In addition, binders or flexible materials are needed to mediate MOF brittleness.
Most nanoMOF based polysulfide capture is based on size exclusion achieved by pore size selection.232–234 However, the importance of MOF morphology is also noted.235–237 Expectedly, a compact MOF coating of the separator surface can more efficiently control polysulfide passage as opposed to loose particle layering with many voids. An interesting dilemma is the role of having exposed metal sites. Although metal–sulfur interactions help retain polysulfides,238–240 irreversible reactions may result in material loss, and depending on the number of exposed sites, MOF structure stability vary. For example, Zhou and coworkers stated no degradation after cycling for a HKUST-1 modified separator, reasoning that the number of Cu–S formations would be limited as almost all Cu sites were occupied by oxygen groups.240 In contrast, Li, Ming and coworkers showed great capacity loss in another HKUST-1 modified separator due to irreversible Cu–S interactions.236 Wang, Cai and coworkers explored the possibility of open-metal-site catalysis of long chain polysulfide conversion using cerium(IV) UiO-66 (Ce-MOF-1) nanoparticles (∼350 nm) and MOF-808 (Ce-MOF-2) nanoparticles (∼180 nm) grown on carbon nanotubes (CNT).241 As shown in Fig. 26, the MOF-808-based hybrid with more unsaturated coordination sites at the Ce(IV) nodes consumed Li2S6 much better than CNT or UiO-66-based hybrid with no uncoordinated sites, leading to an initial specific capacity of 993.5 mA h g−1 at 0.1C at a high sulfur loading of 6.0 mg cm2.
 Fig. 26  (A) Ce-MOF/CNT composite as a separator coating materials for Li–S battery. (B) SEM image of Ce-MOF-2/CNT. (C) Comparison of catalytic consumption of Li2S6/DME solution in the presence of CNT, Ce-MOF-1/CNT, and Ce-MOF-2/CNT. (D) CV curves of symmetrical cells using different coating materials of CNT, Ce-MOF-1/CNT, and Ce-MOF-2/CNT with and without Li2S6 at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 241. Copyright© 2019 American Chemical Society. 

5.3. Li–O2 batteries
Li–O2 rechargeable batteries oxidize Li metal in the anode and reduce oxygen at the cathode to generate current. In contrast to Li ion and Li–S batteries, only anode active material is stored in the battery while the porous cathode uses ambient oxygen, leading to a high energy density. When the anode is Li, high theoretical specific capacity of 3842 mA h g−1 and a specific energy (40.1 MJ kg−1) close to that of gasoline (46.8 MJ kg−1) are obtained. Even not at full capacity, a stable Li–O2 battery can provide enough power for use in vehicles or solar energy storage-based grid backup systems. The two major drawbacks that are holding the commercialization of Li–O2 batteries are related to improvements needed at the cathode and the electrolyte. The most obvious source of oxygen at the cathode is air, that is why these batteries are also called Li–air batteries. However, water vapor, air contaminants and other air gasses can cause side reactions, causing electrolyte degradation and cathode pore blockage. Thus, using an atmosphere of purified oxygen for battery testing is common in a laboratory setting. The search for electrolyte compositions that will be stable in the presence of reactive intermediates and the discharge product over multiple cycles is continuing. Aqueous, non-aqueous, a mix of both and solid electrolytes are main electrolyte types that are being improved by researchers. nanoMOFs with their ordered pores and metal active sites can provide uniform and concentrated O2 adsorption as well as efficient electrolyte access and O2 diffusion in addition to catalyzing oxygen reduction and oxygen evolution reactions. Although very limited, MOFs have also been utilized in separators in less explored battery designs.

5.3.1 nanoMOFs as catalysts at the Li–O2 cathode. 
Catalysts at the Li–O2 cathode promote oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) during discharge where the adsorbed oxygen is converted mostly to O22− or O2−. Then, Li+ ions that are generated at the anode and transported through the electrolyte to the cathode react with the reduced oxygen species to form mostly Li2O2 and LiO2 in aprotic electrolytes. During charging, oxygen evolution reaction (OER) takes place via which these compounds are decomposed to obtain O2. Cathode porosity, and the distribution and efficiency of the catalytic sites are important factors for battery performance.
Utilization of MOFs as Li–O2 cathode materials are very recent and limited. Mostly, MOFs are used as precursors to obtain doped porous carbon materials. However, a handful of articles on actual MOF cathodes are useful in demonstrating the advantages of nanoscale morphologies in promoting better battery performance. MOF nanosheets have been prepared to have more accessible catalytic sites and improve electron and mass transport.120,242,243 For example, Yuan et al. investigated the ORR and OER performance of 2D nanosheets, as depicted in Fig. 27.242 The 2D Mn-MOF nanosheets (5.30 nm thickness) showed higher electrochemical activity (1.66 V vs. 1.57 V at 200 mA h g−1), lower overpotential (1.34 V vs. 1.57 V at 200 mA h g−1) and better round trip efficiency (66.7% vs. 63.2%) than the corresponding 3D Mn-MOF. Higher percentage of unsaturated metal sites on the surface and the edges and better diffusion due to the nanoscale 2D structure contributed to the enhanced catalytic performance of the Mn–O sites, leading to an initial discharge capacity of 9464 mA h g−1 and 1000 mA h g−1 after 200 cycles at 100 mA g−1.
 Fig. 27  (A) Schematic illustration for Li–O2 battery with 2D MOF-based electrode. (B) Schematic representation of the proposed electrochemical process for the reversible formation of the discharge products on 2D Mn-MOFs. (C) TEM image of 2D Mn-MOF nanosheets. (D) Left: Discharge–charge profiles of 2D MOFs and KB-based electrodes at 100 mA g−1 and right: 1st full charge discharge profile of the 3D Mn-MOF. Reproduced with permission from ref. 242. Copyright© 2019 American Chemical Society. 
Yan et al. investigated the effect of crystal size reduction in Co-MOF-74 rods (1400 and 800 nm thickness) and nanofibers (20 nm thickness).244 The easier accessibility of the active Co sites and shorter ion transfer diffusion lengths contributed to the enhanced performance of the Co-MOF-74 nanofiber. An additional factor however was the presence of more defect sites in the nanofiber MOF due to the use of a size modulator during synthesis which can help explain the nearly 2.5-fold increase in the first specific capacity.


5.3.2 MOF-based redox mediator sieve at the separator. 
Use of redox mediators allow researchers to catalyze the formation and decomposition of Li2O2 in solution rather than on the cathode surface to remedy pore blockage, high charge overpotentials and low cycling numbers. However, functionalized separators are needed in such a process to keep the mediators within the cathode half-cell and limit their shuttling via diffusion in order to prevent Li anode degradation. Qiao et al. used a layer of HKUST-1 grown on a commercial Celgard separator as a molecular sieve.245 As illustrated in Fig. 28, small pores and the narrow pore size distribution of HKUST-1 was instrumental in taking full advantage of redox mediator use and protection of the Li anode, leading to a capacity of 5000 mA h g−1 over 100 cycles at a high current density of 1000 mA g−1.
 Fig. 28  (A) Schematic comparison of glass fiber (top) and HKUST-1-based (bottom) separators, showing the advantage of the use of the HKUST-1 sieve for the inhibition of redox mediator shuttling to the anode. DBBQ and TTF are the discharging and charging redox mediators. (B) The corresponding SEM images of Li anodes from cycled cells with 5000 mA h g−1, top: with the GF separator after 22 cycles, and bottom: with the MOF-based separator after 100 cycles. (C) Comparison of battery performance with glass carbon and MOF-based separators with fixed capacities of 2500 and 5000 mA h g−1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 245. Copyright© 2018 American Chemical Society. 

6. nanoMOF fuel cells
In contrast to most batteries that store chemical energy within the cell, fuel cells use a constant flow of chemical energy in the form of a fuel from outside the cell to generate electricity. The most common fuel is hydrogen, but fuel cells with methanol and ethanol, and at high temperatures CO and dilute methane are also used.246 The three main parts of a fuel cell include an anode, an electrolyte and a cathode. At the anode, the fuel is oxidized using a catalyst to form ions and electrons both of which are then transferred to the cathode; electrons via an external circuit and the ions via the electrolyte. At the cathode, another catalyst is used to combine the ions and electrons to reduce oxygen which is usually supplied from air. Fuel cells are mainly classified by the type of electrolyte used. Befitting the most common fuel, proton exchange membrane fuel cells are the most common type. Fuel cells are fabricated as stacks of cells to increase either the voltage or the current output. MOFs and especially their derivatives have been explored as cheaper replacements for precious metal based catalysts, and as electrolyte holding membranes. Since there are reviews focusing on MOF-derived catalysts and membranes for fuel cells,247–250 herein, we will only focus on recent publications on the use of nanoscale MOFs in these areas.
6.1. nanoMOF proton exchange membranes
Proton exchange membranes can be designed to hold an aqueous or a non-aqueous electrolyte. Non-aqueous electrolytes are designed mainly for fuel cells operating at temperatures higher than 100 °C. Functionalization of MOF linkers with acidic groups such as –SO3H, –COOH and –PO3H2 or loading the pores with protonic guest molecules such as imidazole and histamine are well-established strategies for enhancing MOF proton conductivity.251,252 In addition, the crystalline MOF network is very useful in studying proton transfer mechanisms.253 Many membrane fabrications are composites of nanoscale MOFs with other materials to improve flexibility, processability and uniform distribution. nanoMOFs are also used as additives for common membranes such as Nafion® and SPEEK to improve their performance, especially at higher temperatures.250

6.1.1 Applications for low temperature and aqueous conditions. 
Proton conductivity increases and transfer kinetics improve as the temperature is raised, but a delicate balance of water and heat control is necessary to prevent excessive electrolyte loss due to water shortage, or catalyst poisoning due to water overload. MOFs are usually used as part of a composite or as an additive for polymer-based membranes in an effort to improve proton conductivity. Filling MOF pores with proton conductive molecules not only enhances proton transfer and provides opportunities for ternary hybrids but also limits fuel and gas diffusion by blocking the pores. An important issue for fabricating hybrid membranes is obtaining uniform distribution of the components. Nanoscale MOFs are easier to distribute across polymer matrixes. Researchers have merited the use of nanoscale MOFS with having pin hole and crack-free fabrication,254 tight embedding of MOF crystals into polymer matrix,255 an improved hybrid mechanical strength256 and better proton conductivity.257 For instance, Wu and coworkers investigated the effect of MOF morphology on proton conductivity and methanol fuel permeability using 0D ZIF-8 nanoparticles and 2D ZIF-8–carbon nanotube hybrids.258 As shown in Fig. 29, although the same acid–base pair interaction exist between the SPEEK backbone and ZIF-8, the carbon nanotube directed growth of ZIF-8 provides better incorporation with the polymer matrix, leading to a 2.1-fold increase proton conductivity (50.24 mS cm−1) at 120 °C and 30% relative humidity. Gathering of SPEEK backbone around the ZIF-8/CNT nanowires due to acid–base interactions results in tighter ionic clusters which ultimately limits methanol cross over, affording a methanol permeability of 2.45 × 10−7 cm2 s−1 compared to 14.59 × 10−7 cm2 s−1 for the ZIF-8 nanoparticle hybrid, at 2.5 wt% loading.
 Fig. 29  (A) Left: Acid–base interaction between the commercial polymer membrane SPEEK and ZIF-8, right: the schematic illustration of the 0D-ZIF/SPEEK composite membrane (top) and 2D ZIF-8–carbon nanotube–SPEEK composite membrane (bottom). (B) The corresponding TEM images of ZIF-8 nanoparticles (top) and 2D ZIF-8 CNT hybrids (bottom). (C) Comparison of temperature dependent proton conductivities of different membranes at 30% relative humidity. Reproduced with permission from ref. 258. Copyright© 2017 American Chemical Society. 


6.1.2 Applications for intermediate temperature (80–200 °C) and non-aqueous conditions. 
For hydrous membranes, the hydrogen bonding network that help transfer the proton becomes less efficient at temperatures close to the boiling point of water, and the hopping mechanism can only hardly be utilized above 100 °C. Designing stable membranes for high boiling point electrolytes is also challenging. Most commercial membranes like Nafion, SPEEK or chitosan (CS) are polymer-based and deteriorate at high temperatures. As most MOFs are quite thermally stable in comparison, MOF hybrids have the potential to provide a high temperature-stable proton conduction network. Such high temperature systems are expected to provide faster water and heat management as well as to improve the sluggish oxygen reduction reaction kinetics at the cathode.249 In addition, since alignment and close-enough contact at boundaries is important for proton mobility, nanoscale MOF morphologies can offer unique advantages in obtaining better proton conductance. For instance, Xu and coworkers fabricated sulfonated poly(phthalazinone ether sulfone ketone) (SPPESK) nanofibers (200 nm thickness) embedded with a Zn-MOF.259 The interactions between the triazole rings of the Zn-MOF and the sulfamide groups of SPPESK lead to wrapping of the polymer around the MOF nanocrystals (∼100 nm) forming ionic clusters that are crucial for enhanced proton conductivity (8.2 × 10−2 S cm−1, anhydrous, at 160 °C) and low methanol permeability (0.707 × 10−7 cm2 s−1). As illustrated in Fig. 30, protons migrate from the polymer to the MOF, then are carried from MOF to MOF via structural diffusion along the oriented fibers. In comparison, the bulk phase Zn-MOF was reported to have limited proton conductivity due to disconnections at the grain boundaries.
 Fig. 30  (A) Left: The hopping mechanism in the oriented nanofibers provided by the embedded MOF nanocrystals, and right: HRTEM image of the oriented nanofiber tainted by Pb2+ ions to show hydrophilic (dark areas) and hydrophobic (light areas) domains. (B) The comparison of temperature-dependent proton conductivity under anhydrous conditions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 259. Open access via Creative Commons BY 4.0. 
Introduction of acid–base pairs via linker modification or guest encapsulation has been shown to be effective for obtaining proton migration networks that do not rely on the presence of water. Dong et al. embedded –NH2 and –SO3H attached isomorphous UiO-66 nanocrystals (40–100 nm) in the sugar based chitosan polymer network260 (Fig. 31A) while Guo et al. fabricated a hybrid where a zwitterionic polymer with sulfonate and quaternary ammonium groups were threaded through ZIF-8 (Fig. 31B),261 leading to enhanced proton transfer. As an addition to previous quest encapsulation strategies, Wan and coworkers introduced various ionic liquids into MIL-101 nanoparticle (∼500 nm) pores to generate improved proton conductivity through acid–base interactions (Fig. 31C).262,263 And in another study, Gui et al. prepared a Zr-MOF with anionic zirconium phosphate chains stabilized by NH4+ cations, forming a continuous N–H⋯O–P chain for better anhydrous proton conductance.264
 Fig. 31  (A) Incorporation of acid–base functionalized dual UiO-66 nanoparticles into chitosan polymer. (B) Process of threading the acid–base functionalized polymer through ZIF-8 to form hybrid membranes. (C) Left: The structures of binary ionic liquids EIMS and HTFSA and right: proton hopping within the EIMS–HTFSA matrix. Reproduced with permission from ref. 260 (A). Copyright© 2018 American Chemical Society, ref. 261 (B), Copyright© 2018 Royal Society of Chemistry and ref. 262 (C). Copyright© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Inc. 

6.2. nanoMOFs for oxygen reduction reactions at the fuel cell cathode
Two types of targeted oxygen reduction happen at the cathode. In acidic media with a proton exchange membrane, oxygen is reduced by four electrons to form water, using the protons that were transferred from the anode. In basic media with an anion exchange membrane, oxygen is reduced by two electrons to form hydroxide which is then transferred to the anode for hydrogen oxidation, generating water and electrons. Both systems use expensive Pt-based catalysts at the cathode that the industry is looking to replace or reduce. The four-electron reduction reaction in the acidic system is more sluggish, and it is hard to find materials that are stable in acidic media. Although the two-electron reduction reaction in the basic system is faster, hydrogen peroxide forming side reactions limit efficiency. Proton exchange materials are more studied then hydroxide exchange materials, as well. Regardless of the cell type, MOFs can provide uniformly distributed reduction sites and effective O2 access and product removal due to their ordered pore structure. However, their insulating nature greatly diminishes their use as pristine materials. A limited number of conductive-enough MOFs have been synthesized.265,266 A more general approach is the use of MOFs as precursors to derive carbon-based catalysts that inherit some of their nanostructure and active site distribution.78,247,249,267,268 Another strategy to alleviate insulation issues is combining MOFs with conductive components such as graphene-based materials and carbon nanotubes.269–274 Such hybrid materials have the potential to utilize MOF functionality for designing efficient catalysts. Within this context, nanoscale MOFs offer better incorporation into hybrid structures. In addition, MOF dimension reduction and oriented growth strategies that provide better coupling with conductive materials can improve catalytic performance.275 Unfortunately, limited practical studies into the use of newly developed ORR catalysts as cathode materials in fuel cell devices restricts our understanding of their stability, susceptibility to side reactions and general performance.
Apart from use as a catalyst, MOF pores can be utilized to improve access to O2. For instance, Azzaroni and coworkers demonstrated the use of a ZIF-8 top layer as an O2 adsorbent to increase oxygen concentration on the conducting polymer catalytic surface. The ZIF-8 layer facilitated O2 uptake from solution, leading to enhancement of ORR in neutral media.276,277
6.3. Alcohol oxidation at the anode
Hydrogen gas storage issues raises the need for energy dense liquid fuels, especially for portable devices and vehicles. On top of cost concerns, methanol and ethanol oxidation intermediates such as carbon monoxide are adsorbed on the porous Pt anode, leading to incomplete fuel consumption and catalyst deactivation. Cu-MOFs were first studied for ethanol oxidation.278,279 An indirect proton transfer pathway facilitated by an OH group at the linker was reported. Later, HKUST-1, was grown on a surface modified gold electrode for methanol oxidation. The role of linkers was minimal in this case. Although alcohol adsorption and proton conduction are important, the real challenges are reliable catalytic oxidation without compromise of structure stability and efficient electron transfer to the external circuit. Apart from MOF-derived catalysts, MOF hybrids with a conductive component are promising candidates. Recently, Iqbal and coworkers investigated the use of a Co-MOF/graphene oxide hybrid as a catalyst for methanol oxidation where graphene oxide was instrumental in catalyst stability and electrical activity.280
In another report, Samadi-Maybodi and coworkers fabricated a modified carbon paste electrode using Ni-doped ZIF-8 nanoparticles (60–90 nm) and graphite powder for direct methanol fuel cells.281 Here, ZIF-8 provided an encapsulation platform that is stable in alkaline solution for the Ni nanoparticle catalyst.
7. Conclusions and outlook
It is a fairly recent scientific revelation that optimized functional structures, whether in biology or in technology, are nanoscale materials. Upon the establishment of MOF as a novel type of material, the emergence of nanoMOFs will be a logical next step. This review intends to summarize the many benefits (high order, molecular and elemental variability, chemical tunability, etc.) why MOFs at the nanoscale are particularly functional and thus interesting to explore for future applications. This review highlights nanoscale MOF use in solar energy conversion including studies of light harvesting and energy transfer in dye sensitized solar cells and performance enhancement in perovskite, organic solar cells, and photocatalytic fuel production from water in addition to their diverse utilization in energy storage systems such as supercapacitors, batteries and fuel cells. It focuses on the benefits gained by using nanosheets, nanorods or nanocrystals such as better compatibility with other materials, easier processability and improved performance due to larger external surface areas, more exposure to the active sites and faster electron and ion transfer. This work intended to show the challenges that MOFs at the nanoscale face, among them limited conductivity, stability and homogeneity.
Clearly, we are currently witnessing a nascent stage of nanoMOF materials science and will see a rapid rise of this type of nanomaterials in energy and other fields. It is the authors' hope that this review may contribute to an increasing enthusiasm for the next stage of materials science and technology, and that possibly readers may become inspired to spearhead efforts to develop these materials of the future.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
References
S. Seth and A. J. Matzger, Cryst. Growth Des., 2017, 17, 4043–4048 CrossRef CAS .
B. F. Hoskins and R. Robson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1989, 111, 5962–5964 CrossRef CAS .
B. F. Hoskins and R. Robson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1990, 112, 1546–1554 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sumida, D. L. Rogow, J. A. Mason, T. M. McDonald, E. D. Bloch, Z. R. Herm, T.-H. Bae and J. R. Long, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 724–781 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. P. Suh, H. J. Park, T. K. Prasad and D.-W. Lim, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 782–835 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wu, Q. Gong, D. H. Olson and J. Li, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 836–868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yoon, R. Srirambalaji and K. Kim, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 1196–1231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Corma, H. García and F. X. Llabrés i Xamena, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 4606–4655 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Lin, Top. Catal., 2010, 53, 869–875 CrossRef CAS .
K. P. Lillerud, U. Olsbye and M. Tilset, Top. Catal., 2010, 53, 859–868 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, O. K. Farha, J. Roberts, K. A. Scheidt, S. T. Nguyen and J. T. Hupp, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1450 RSC .
L. Heinke, M. Tu, S. Wannapaiboon, R. A. Fischer and C. Wöll, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2015, 216, 200–215 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 10094 RSC .
J.-R. Li, J. Sculley and H.-C. Zhou, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 869–932 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. He, D. Liu and W. Lin, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 11079–11108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. C. McKinlay, R. E. Morris, P. Horcajada, G. Férey, R. Gref, P. Couvreur and C. Serre, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 6260–6266 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Della Rocca, D. Liu and W. Lin, Acc. Chem. Res., 2011, 44, 957–968 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Cai, C.-C. Chu, G. Liu and Y.-X. J. Wáng, Small, 2015, 11, 4806–4822 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, M. Zheng and Z. Xie, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2018, 6, 707–717 RSC .
Z. Hu, B. J. Deibert and J. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5815–5840 RSC .
L. E. Kreno, K. Leong, O. K. Farha, M. Allendorf, R. P. Van Duyne and J. T. Hupp, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 1105–1125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Kumar, A. Deep and K.-H. Kim, TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem., 2015, 73, 39–53 CrossRef CAS .
D. Liu, K. Lu, C. Poon and W. Lin, Inorg. Chem., 2014, 53, 1916–1924 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Lu, T. Aung, N. Guo, R. Weichselbaum and W. Lin, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1707634–1707654 CrossRef PubMed .
X.-Y. Ren and L.-H. Lu, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2015, 26, 1439–1445 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. So, G. P. Wiederrecht, J. E. Mondloch, J. T. Hupp and O. K. Farha, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 3501–3510 RSC .
A. M. Ullman, J. W. Brown, M. E. Foster, F. Léonard, K. Leong, V. Stavila and M. D. Allendorf, Inorg. Chem., 2016, 55, 7233–7249 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-L. Wang, C. Wang and W. Lin, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 2630–2640 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, Y. Han, X. Feng, J. Zhou, P. Qi and B. Wang, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2016, 307, 361–381 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xie, W. Xu, X. Cui and Y. Wang, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 1645–1663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, A. Chen, M. Zhong, Z. Zhang, X. Zhang, Z. Zhou and X.-H. Bu, Electrochemical Energy Reviews, 2019, 2, 29–104 CrossRef .
S. Wang, C. M. McGuirk, A. d'Aquino, J. A. Mason and C. A. Mirkin, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800202 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Li, A. Pang, C. Wang and M. Wei, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 17259–17264 RSC .
W. Zhang, W. Li, X. He, L. Zhao, H. Chen, L. Zhang, P. Tian, Z. Xin, W. Fang and F. Zhang, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2018, 29, 1623–1629 CrossRef CAS .
C.-C. Lee, C.-I. Chen, Y.-T. Liao, K. C.-W. Wu and C.-C. Chueh, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1801715 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Khajavian and K. Ghani, J. Cryst. Growth, 2016, 455, 60–65 CrossRef CAS .
T.-H. Chang, C.-W. Kung, H.-W. Chen, T.-Y. Huang, S.-Y. Kao, H.-C. Lu, M.-H. Lee, K. M. Boopathi, C.-W. Chu and K.-C. Ho, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7229–7235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Joyce, F. R. Laffir and C. Silien, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 12502–12509 CrossRef .
D. Y. Lee, C. Y. Shin, S. J. Yoon, H. Y. Lee, W. Lee, N. K. Shrestha, J. K. Lee and S.-H. Han, Sci. Rep., 2015, 4, 3930 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Kaur, K.-H. Kim and A. Deep, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 396, 1303–1309 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, T. Wächter, A. Irmler, P. G. Weidler, H. Gliemann, F. Pauly, V. Mugnaini, M. Zharnikov and C. Wöll, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 9824–9830 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Han, S. C. Warren, S. M. Yoon, C. D. Malliakas, X. Hou, Y. Wei, M. G. Kanatzidis and B. A. Grzybowski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 8169–8175 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Y. Lee, E.-K. Kim, N. K. Shrestha, D. W. Boukhvalov, J. K. Lee and S.-H. Han, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 18501–18507 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Talin, A. Centrone, A. C. Ford, M. E. Foster, V. Stavila, P. Haney, R. A. Kinney, V. Szalai, F. E. Gabaly, H. P. Yoon, F. Léonard and M. D. Allendorf, Science, 2014, 343, 66–69 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          I. R. Perera, C. V. Hettiarachchi and R. J. K. U. Ranatunga, in Advances in Solar Energy Research, ed. H. Tyagi, A. K. Agarwal, P. R. Chakraborty and S. Powar, Springer Singapore, Singapore,  2019, pp. 175–219 Search PubMed .
Y. Li, Z. Fu and G. Xu, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2019, 388, 79–106 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Clifford, E. Palomares, Md. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel, J. Nelson, X. Li, N. J. Long and J. R. Durrant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 5225–5233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. M. Hasselman, D. F. Watson, J. R. Stromberg, D. F. Bocian, D. Holten, J. S. Lindsey and G. J. Meyer, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 25430–25440 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. A. Maza, A. J. Haring, S. R. Ahrenholtz, C. C. Epley, S. Y. Lin and A. J. Morris, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 719–727 RSC .
C. A. Kent, B. P. Mehl, L. Ma, J. M. Papanikolas, T. J. Meyer and W. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 12767–12769 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. W. Larsen and L. Wojtas, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2012, 116, 7830–7835 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-J. Son, S. Jin, S. Patwardhan, S. J. Wezenberg, N. C. Jeong, M. So, C. E. Wilmer, A. A. Sarjeant, G. C. Schatz, R. Q. Snurr, O. K. Farha, G. P. Wiederrecht and J. T. Hupp, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 862–869 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L.-L. Li and E. Wei-Guang Diau, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 291–304 RSC .
T. Zhang and W. Lin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5982–5993 RSC .
M. C. So, S. Jin, H.-J. Son, G. P. Wiederrecht, O. K. Farha and J. T. Hupp, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 15698–15701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. A. Maza, R. Padilla and A. J. Morris, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 8161–8168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Park, M. C. So, D. Gosztola, G. P. Wiederrecht, J. D. Emery, A. B. F. Martinson, S. Er, C. E. Wilmer, N. A. Vermeulen, A. Aspuru-Guzik, J. F. Stoddart, O. K. Farha and J. T. Hupp, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 24983–24988 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Cao, Z. Lin, W. Shi, Z. Wang, C. Zhang, X. Hu, C. Wang and W. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 7020–7029 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Makiura, S. Motoyama, Y. Umemura, H. Yamanaka, O. Sakata and H. Kitagawa, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 565–571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Motoyama, R. Makiura, O. Sakata and H. Kitagawa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 5640–5643 CrossRef CAS .
V. Rubio-Giménez, S. Tatay, F. Volatron, F. J. Martínez-Casado, C. Martí-Gastaldo and E. Coronado, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 2576–2584 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Goswami, L. Ma, A. B. F. Martinson, M. R. Wasielewski, O. K. Farha and J. T. Hupp, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 30863–30870 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Gordillo, D. K. Panda and S. Saha, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 3196–3206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kambe, R. Sakamoto, K. Hoshiko, K. Takada, M. Miyachi, J.-H. Ryu, S. Sasaki, J. Kim, K. Nakazato, M. Takata and H. Nishihara, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 2462–2465 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mähringer, A. C. Jakowetz, J. M. Rotter, B. J. Bohn, J. K. Stolarczyk, J. Feldmann, T. Bein and D. D. Medina, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 6711–6719 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Medishetty, J. K. Zaręba, D. Mayer, M. Samoć and R. A. Fischer, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 4976–5004 RSC .
M. Oldenburg, A. Turshatov, D. Busko, S. Wollgarten, M. Adams, N. Baroni, A. Welle, E. Redel, C. Wöll, B. S. Richards and I. A. Howard, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8477–8482 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, Z. Di, J. Gao, P. Cheng, C. Di, G. Zhang, B. Liu, X. Shi, L.-D. Sun, L. Li and C.-H. Yan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 13804–13810 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Hosoyamada, N. Yanai, K. Okumura, T. Uchihashi and N. Kimizuka, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 6828–6831 RSC .
Q. Lu, M. Zhao, J. Chen, B. Chen, C. Tan, X. Zhang, Y. Huang, J. Yang, F. Cao, Y. Yu, J. Ping, Z. Zhang, X.-J. Wu and H. Zhang, Small, 2016, 12, 4669–4674 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Kaur, A. Rana, R. K. Singh, V. A. Chhabra, K.-H. Kim and A. Deep, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 29015–29024 RSC .
R. Kaur, A. L. Sharma, K.-H. Kim and A. Deep, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2017, 53, 77–81 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Allendorf, A. Schwartzberg, V. Stavila and A. A. Talin, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 11372–11388 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Hendon, A. J. Rieth, M. D. Korzyński and M. Dincă, ACS Cent. Sci., 2017, 3, 554–563 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, M. A. Ballem, Z.-J. Hu, P. Bergman and K. Uvdal, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 5729–5733 CrossRef CAS .
V. M. Suresh, S. J. George and T. K. Maji, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 5585–5590 CrossRef CAS .
D. Samanta, P. Verma, S. Roy and T. K. Maji, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 23140–23146 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, J. Nai, L. Yu and X. W. Lou, Joule, 2017, 1, 77–107 CrossRef CAS .
T.-Y. Chen, Y.-J. Huang, C.-T. Li, C.-W. Kung, R. Vittal and K.-C. Ho, Nano Energy, 2017, 32, 19–27 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. A. Ahmed, W. Xiang, I. S. Amiinu and X. Zhao, New J. Chem., 2018, 42, 17303–17310 RSC .
J. Ren, T. Li, X. Zhou, X. Dong, A. V. Shorokhov, M. B. Semenov, V. D. Krevchik and Y. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 358, 30–39 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, Z.-G. Gu, W.-Q. Fu, F. Wang and J. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 28737–28742 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhang, Y. Xu, Q. Liu and Z. Xia, Inorg. Chem., 2018, 57, 4613–4619 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhihai, W. Jiao, S. Yanni, W. Jun, H. Yafei, W. Pan, W. Nengping and Z. Zhenfu, J. Mater. Sci., 2019, 54, 6917–6929 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, H. Wu, W. Lin, J. Wang and Y. Chi, J. Solid State Chem., 2019, 272, 221–226 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Vinogradov, H. Zaake-Hertling, E. Hey-Hawkins, A. V. Agafonov, G. A. Seisenbaeva, V. G. Kessler and V. V. Vinogradov, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 10210–10213 RSC .
H.-Y. Chung, C.-H. Lin, S. Prabu and H.-W. Wang, J. Chin. Chem. Soc., 2018, 65, 1476–1481 CrossRef CAS .
D. Shen, A. Pang, Y. Li, J. Dou and M. Wei, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 1253–1256 RSC .
U. Ryu, S. Jee, J.-S. Park, I. K. Han, J. H. Lee, M. Park and K. M. Choi, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 4968–4975 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, J. Wang, A. Jiang, D. Xia, X. Du, Y. Dong, P. Wang, R. Fan and Y. Yang, Sol. Energy, 2019, 188, 380–385 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xing, P. Ye, J. Lu, X. Wu, Y. Chen, T. Zhu, A. Peng and H. Huang, J. Power Sources, 2018, 401, 13–19 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kataoka, K. Sato, Y. Miyazaki, K. Masuda, H. Tanaka, S. Naito and W. Mori, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 397–400 RSC .
C. Gomes Silva, I. Luz, F. X. Llabrés i Xamena, A. Corma and H. García, Chem.–Eur. J., 2010, 16, 11133–11138 CrossRef .
C. Wang, K. E. deKrafft and W. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 7211–7214 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fateeva, P. A. Chater, C. P. Ireland, A. A. Tahir, Y. Z. Khimyak, P. V. Wiper, J. R. Darwent and M. J. Rosseinsky, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 7440–7444 CrossRef CAS .
C.-C. Hou, T.-T. Li, S. Cao, Y. Chen and W.-F. Fu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 10386–10394 RSC .
D. Kim, D. R. Whang and S. Y. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 8698–8701 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang, D. Fan, W. Hu, B. Pattengale, C. Liu, X. Zhang and J. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 3305–3311 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-M. Zhang, T. Zhang, C. Wang, Z. Lin, L.-S. Long and W. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 3197–3200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-J. Kong, Z. Lin, Z.-M. Zhang, T. Zhang and W. Lin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 6411–6416 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Paille, M. Gomez-Mingot, C. Roch-Marchal, B. Lassalle-Kaiser, P. Mialane, M. Fontecave, C. Mellot-Draznieks and A. Dolbecq, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 3613–3618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhao, S. Zhang, J. Yan, L. Li, G. Wu, W. Shi, G. Yang, N. Guan and P. Cheng, Inorg. Chem., 2018, 57, 5030–5037 CrossRef CAS .
D. Shi, R. Zheng, C.-S. Liu, D.-M. Chen, J. Zhao and M. Du, Inorg. Chem., 2019, 58, 7229–7235 CrossRef CAS .
B. Nohra, H. El Moll, L. M. Rodriguez Albelo, P. Mialane, J. Marrot, C. Mellot-Draznieks, M. O'Keeffe, R. Ngo Biboum, J. Lemaire, B. Keita, L. Nadjo and A. Dolbecq, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 13363–13374 CrossRef CAS .
J.-S. Qin, D.-Y. Du, W. Guan, X.-J. Bo, Y.-F. Li, L.-P. Guo, Z.-M. Su, Y.-Y. Wang, Y.-Q. Lan and H.-C. Zhou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 7169–7177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Rousseau, L. M. Rodriguez-Albelo, W. Salomon, P. Mialane, J. Marrot, F. Doungmene, I.-M. Mbomekallé, P. de Oliveira and A. Dolbecq, Cryst. Growth Des., 2015, 15, 449–456 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, S. Li, C. J. Gómez-García, H. Ma, C. Zhang, H. Pang and B. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 31498–31504 CrossRef CAS .
R. Lin, L. Shen, Z. Ren, W. Wu, Y. Tan, H. Fu, J. Zhang and L. Wu, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 8533–8535 RSC .
Z. Wang, Z. Jin, G. Wang and B. Ma, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 13039–13050 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhu, K. Wang, T. Lei, T. Xiao and L. Liu, Mater. Lett., 2018, 216, 243–247 CrossRef CAS .
K. E. Ramohlola, G. R. Monana, M. J. Hato, K. D. Modibane, K. M. Molapo, M. Masikini, S. B. Mduli and E. I. Iwuoha, Composites, Part B, 2018, 137, 129–139 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zheng, C. Zhang, X. Gao, C. Du, Z. Zhuang and W. Chen, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 306, 627–634 CrossRef CAS .
I. Hod, P. Deria, W. Bury, J. E. Mondloch, C.-W. Kung, M. So, M. D. Sampson, A. W. Peters, C. P. Kubiak, O. K. Farha and J. T. Hupp, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8304 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li, S.-H. Yu and H.-L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1707377 CrossRef .
D. Senthil Raja, X.-F. Chuah and S.-Y. Lu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801065 CrossRef .
T. Liu, P. Li, N. Yao, G. Cheng, S. Chen, W. Luo and Y. Yin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 4679–4684 CrossRef CAS .
J. Duan, S. Chen and C. Zhao, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. M. Miner and M. Dincă, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16186 CrossRef .
Q. Zhang, H. Wang, Y. Dong, J. Yan, X. Ke, Q. Wu and S. Xue, Sol. Energy, 2018, 171, 388–396 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhao, Y. Wang, J. Dong, C.-T. He, H. Yin, P. An, K. Zhao, X. Zhang, C. Gao, L. Zhang, J. Lv, J. Wang, J. Zhang, A. M. Khattak, N. A. Khan, Z. Wei, J. Zhang, S. Liu, H. Zhao and Z. Tang, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16184 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, R. Li, X. Zhao, Z. Chen, A. W.-K. Law and K. Zhou, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 2710–2716 CrossRef CAS .
M. Guo, Y. Li, L. Zhou, Q. Zheng, W. Jie, F. Xie, C. Xu and D. Lin, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 298, 525–532 CrossRef CAS .
K. Natarajan, A. K. Gupta, S. N. Ansari, M. Saraf and S. M. Mobin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 13295–13303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Yoon, D. H. Kim, J.-H. Kim, H. W. Jang and J.-H. Lee, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 244, 511–518 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, J. Bright, S. Kasani, P. Zheng, T. Musho, B. Chen, L. Huang and N. Wu, Nano Res., 2019, 12, 643–650 CrossRef CAS .
H. Bagheri, H. Javanmardi, A. Abbasi and S. Banihashemi, J. Chromatogr. A, 2016, 1431, 27–35 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang, Q. Wang, B. Xu, F. Gao, F. Gao and C. Zhao, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 281, 69–77 CrossRef CAS .
R. Díaz, M. G. Orcajo, J. A. Botas, G. Calleja and J. Palma, Mater. Lett., 2012, 68, 126–128 CrossRef .
D. Y. Lee, S. J. Yoon, N. K. Shrestha, S.-H. Lee, H. Ahn and S.-H. Han, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2012, 153, 163–165 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gong, J. Li, P.-G. Jiang, Q.-F. Li and J.-H. Lin, Dalton Trans., 2013, 42, 1603–1611 RSC .
K. M. Choi, H. M. Jeong, J. H. Park, Y.-B. Zhang, J. K. Kang and O. M. Yaghi, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 7451–7457 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, X. Feng, L. Ren, Q. Piao, J. Zhong, Y. Wang, H. Li, Y. Chen and B. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 4920–4923 CrossRef CAS .
H.-N. Wang, M. Zhang, A.-M. Zhang, F.-C. Shen, X.-K. Wang, S.-N. Sun, Y.-J. Chen and Y.-Q. Lan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 32265–32270 CrossRef CAS .
K. Qi, R. Hou, S. Zaman, Y. Qiu, B. Y. Xia and H. Duan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 18021–18028 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Fu, H. Zhou, X.-M. Zhang, G. Han, Y. Chang and H. Li, ChemistrySelect, 2016, 1, 285–289 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hosseinian, A. Amjad, R. Hosseinzadeh-Khanmiri, E. Ghorbani-Kalhor, M. Babazadeh and E. Vessally, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2017, 28, 18040–18048 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Rahmanifar, H. Hesari, A. Noori, M. Y. Masoomi, A. Morsali and M. F. Mousavi, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 275, 76–86 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ehsani, J. Khodayari, M. Hadi, H. M. Shiri and H. Mostaanzadeh, Ionics, 2017, 23, 131–138 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, C. Shi, C. Zhai, M. Cheng, Q. Liu and G. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 4585–4591 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liu, X. Liu, C. Shi, Y. Zhang, X. Feng, M.-L. Cheng, S. Su and J. Gu, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 19175–19184 RSC .
J. Xu, C. Yang, Y. Xue, C. Wang, J. Cao and Z. Chen, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 211, 595–602 CrossRef CAS .
W.-H. Li, K. Ding, H.-R. Tian, M.-S. Yao, B. Nath, W.-H. Deng, Y. Wang and G. Xu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1702067 CrossRef .
L. Liu, Y. Yan, Z. Cai, S. Lin and X. Hu, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1701548 CrossRef .
N. S. Punde, C. R. Rawool, A. S. Rajpurohit, S. P. Karna and A. K. Srivastava, ChemistrySelect, 2018, 3, 11368–11380 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gao, Y. Sui, F. Wei, J. Qi, Q. Meng, Y. Ren and Y. He, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 531, 83–90 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhao, J. Peng, W. Wang, S. Liu, Q. Zhao and W. Huang, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2018, 377, 44–63 CrossRef CAS .
W. Bai, S. Li, J. Ma, W. Cao and J. Zheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 9086–9098 RSC .
L. Chen, Q. Zhang, H. Xu, X. Hou, L. Xuan, Y. Jiang and Y. Yuan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 1847–1852 RSC .
D. Sheberla, L. Sun, M. A. Blood-Forsythe, S. Er, C. R. Wade, C. K. Brozek, A. Aspuru-Guzik and M. Dincă, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8859–8862 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, Z. Ma, W. Gao and M. Wei, Chem.–Eur. J., 2017, 23, 631–636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Feng, T. Lei, M. R. Lukatskaya, J. Park, Z. Huang, M. Lee, L. Shaw, S. Chen, A. A. Yakovenko, A. Kulkarni, J. Xiao, K. Fredrickson, J. B. Tok, X. Zou, Y. Cui and Z. Bao, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 30 CrossRef CAS .
P. Du, Y. Dong, C. Liu, W. Wei, D. Liu and P. Liu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 518, 57–68 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Cheng, K. Tao, X. Han, Y. Yang, Z. Yang, Q. Ma and L. Han, Dalton Trans., 2019, 48, 4119–4123 RSC .
Y. Wang, Y. Liu, H. Wang, W. Liu, Y. Li, J. Zhang, H. Hou and J. Yang, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 2063–2071 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, P. Xiong, C. Zheng, H. Qiu and M. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 16640–16644 RSC .
Y. Jiao, J. Pei, C. Yan, D. Chen, Y. Hu and G. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 13344–13351 RSC .
Y. Yan, P. Gu, S. Zheng, M. Zheng, H. Pang and H. Xue, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 19078–19085 RSC .
Y. Wang, Y. Liu, H. Wang, W. Liu, Y. Li, J. Zhang, H. Hou and J. Yang, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 2063–2071 CrossRef CAS .
D. Y. Lee, D. V. Shinde, E.-K. Kim, W. Lee, I.-W. Oh, N. K. Shrestha, J. K. Lee and S.-H. Han, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2013, 171, 53–57 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hong, C. Zhou, S. Xu, X. Ye, Z. Yang, L. Zhang, Z. Zhou, N. Hu and Y. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2019, 423, 80–89 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xia, J. Zhang, Z. Yang, S. Guo, S. Guo and Q. Xu, Nano-Micro Lett., 2017, 9, 43 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Yang, C. Zheng, P. Xiong, Y. Li and M. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 19005–19010 RSC .
H. Song, L. Shen, J. Wang and C. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 15411–15419 RSC .
L. Shen, H. Song and C. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 235, 595–603 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Gan, H. He, K. Zhao, Z. He and S. Liu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 530, 127–136 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Q. Qu, G. Liu, V. S. Battaglia and H. Zheng, Nano Energy, 2017, 39, 200–210 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ning, X. Lou, C. Li, X. Hu and B. Hu, Chem.–Eur. J., 2017, 23, 15984–15990 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Chen, W. Yang, J. Wang, C. Chen and M. Wei, Chem.–Eur. J., 2018, 24, 13362–13367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Shi, Y. Gao, L. Liu, Y. Song, X. Wang, H.-J. Liu and Q. Liu, J. Nanopart. Res., 2016, 18, 371 CrossRef .
C. Li, X. Hu, W. Tong, W. Yan, X. Lou, M. Shen and B. Hu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 29829–29838 CrossRef CAS .
P. Xiao, F. Bu, R. Zhao, M. F. Aly Aboud, I. Shakir and Y. Xu, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 3947–3953 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Han, P. Qi, J. Zhou, X. Feng, S. Li, X. Fu, J. Zhao, D. Yu and B. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 26608–26613 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yu, C. Yue, X. Lin, S. Sun, J. Gu, X. He, C. Zhang, W. Lin, D. Lin, X. Liao, B. Xu, S. Wu, M. Zheng, J. Li, J. Kang and L. Lin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 3992–3999 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, Z. Wang, Y. Cui, Y. Yang, Z. Wang and G. Qian, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 84662–84665 RSC .
F. Yang, W. Li, Y. Zhang and B. Tang, Dalton Trans., 2018, 47, 13657–13667 RSC .
J. Jin, Y. Zheng, S. Huang, P. Sun, N. Srikanth, L. B. Kong, Q. Yan and K. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 783–790 RSC .
Y. Han, D. Yu, J. Zhou, P. Xu, P. Qi, Q. Wang, S. Li, X. Fu, X. Gao, C. Jiang, X. Feng and B. Wang, Chem.–Eur. J., 2017, 23, 11513–11518 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, F. Cheng, S. Zhang and J. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2006, 160, 542–547 CrossRef CAS .
K. Saravanan, M. Nagarathinam, P. Balaya and J. J. Vittal, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 8329–8335 RSC .
P.-C. Cheng, W.-C. Lin, F.-S. Tseng, C.-C. Kao, T.-G. Chang, D. S. Raja, W.-R. Liu and C.-H. Lin, Dalton Trans., 2013, 42, 2765–2772 RSC .
L. Gou, L.-M. Hao, Y.-X. Shi, S.-L. Ma, X.-Y. Fan, L. Xu, D.-L. Li and K. Wang, J. Solid State Chem., 2014, 210, 121–124 CrossRef CAS .
R. Senthil Kumar, C. Nithya, S. Gopukumar and M. Anbu Kulandainathan, Energy Technol., 2014, 2, 921–927 CrossRef CAS .
S. Maiti, A. Pramanik, U. Manju and S. Mahanty, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 16357–16363 CrossRef CAS .
S. Maiti, A. Pramanik, U. Manju and S. Mahanty, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2016, 226, 353–359 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ge, J. Peng, G. Qu, H. Geng, Y. Deng, J. Wu, X. Cao, J. Zheng and H. Gu, New J. Chem., 2016, 40, 9238–9244 RSC .
T. Wei, M. Zhang, P. Wu, Y.-J. Tang, S.-L. Li, F.-C. Shen, X.-L. Wang, X.-P. Zhou and Y.-Q. Lan, Nano Energy, 2017, 34, 205–214 CrossRef CAS .
J.-Q. Sha, X.-Y. Yang, Y. Chen, P.-P. Zhu, Y.-F. Song and J. Jiang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 16660–16665 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yuan, J. L. Bao, C. Li, Y. Xia, D. G. Truhlar and Y. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 10616–10623 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, F. Yang, X. Fang, Y. Rui and B. Tang, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 282, 276–285 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, H. Yoshikawa and K. Awaga, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 16112–16115 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Peng, X. Yi, Z. Liu, J. Shang and D. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 14578–14585 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lou, F. Geng, B. Hu, C. Li, M. Shen and B. Hu, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 413–419 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gu, Z. Bai, S. Majumder, B. Huang and G. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2019, 429, 22–29 CrossRef CAS .
B. M. Wiers, M.-L. Foo, N. P. Balsara and J. R. Long, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 14522–14525 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Aubrey and J. R. Long, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 13, 13594–13602 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Zhang, H. Yoshikawa and K. Awaga, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 1298–1303 CrossRef CAS .
Q.-Q. Qiao, G.-R. Li, Y.-L. Wang and X.-P. Gao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 4440–4447 RSC .
B.-J. Chae, Y. E. Jung, C. Y. Lee and T. Yim, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 8547–8553 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wieczorek, J. R. Stevens and Z. Florjańczyk, Solid State Ionics, 1996, 85, 67–72 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, R. Tan, H. Wang, L. Yang, J. Hu, H. Chen and F. Pan, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704436 CrossRef .
C. Gerbaldi, J. R. Nair, M. Anbu Kulandainathan, R. Senthil Kumar, C. Ferrara, P. Mustarelli and A. Manuel Stephan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 9948–9954 RSC .
C. Yuan, J. Li, P. Han, Y. Lai, Z. Zhang and J. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2013, 240, 653–658 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhu, Y. Liu and J. Liu, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 42278–42284 RSC .

          R. Dutta and A. Kumar, Structural and Dielectric Properties of Ionic Liquid Doped Metal Organic Framework based Polymer Electrolyte Nanocomposites – IOPscience, https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1742-6596/765/1/012020, accessed July 18, 2019 Search PubMed .
Z. Wang, S. Wang, A. Wang, X. Liu, J. Chen, Q. Zeng, L. Zhang, W. Liu and L. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 17227–17234 RSC .
Z. Wang, F. Guo, C. Chen, L. Shi, S. Yuan, L. Sun and J. Zhu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 3314–3322 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chi, L. Shi, Z. Wang, J. Zhu, X. Mao, Y. Zhao, M. Zhang, L. Sun and S. Yuan, Nano Energy, 2016, 28, 1–11 CrossRef CAS .
X. Mao, L. Shi, H. Zhang, Z. Wang, J. Zhu, Z. Qiu, Y. Zhao, M. Zhang and S. Yuan, J. Power Sources, 2017, 342, 816–824 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liu, Y. Mi, Z. Weng, Y. Zhong, Z. Wu and H. Wang, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 4285–4291 RSC .
L. Shen, H. B. Wu, F. Liu, C. Zhang, S. Ma, Z. Le and Y. Lu, Nanoscale Horiz., 2019, 4, 705–711 RSC .
M.-T. Li, Y. Sun, K.-S. Zhao, Z. Wang, X.-L. Wang, Z.-M. Su and H.-M. Xie, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 33183–33188 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhou, R. Li, X. Fan, Y. Chen, R. Han, W. Li, J. Zheng, B. Wang and X. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2715–2724 RSC .
J. H. Park, K. M. Choi, D. K. Lee, B. C. Moon, S. R. Shin, M.-K. Song and J. K. Kang, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 25555 CrossRef CAS .
A. E. Baumann, G. E. Aversa, A. Roy, M. L. Falk, N. M. Bedford and V. S. Thoi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 4811–4821 RSC .
Z. Wang, B. Wang, Y. Yang, Y. Cui, Z. Wang, B. Chen and G. Qian, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 20999–21004 CrossRef CAS .
F. Li, X. Zhang, X. Liu and M. Zhao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 15012–15020 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. E. Baumann, D. A. Burns, J. C. Díaz and V. S. Thoi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 2159–2167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-J. Hong, T.-X. Tan, Y.-K. Guo, X.-Y. Tang, J.-Y. Wang, W. Qin and Y.-P. Cai, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 2774–2780 RSC .
H. Park and D. J. Siegel, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 4932–4939 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zheng, J. Tian, D. Wu, M. Gu, W. Xu, C. Wang, F. Gao, M. H. Engelhard, J.-G. Zhang, J. Liu and J. Xiao, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2345–2352 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhou, X. Yu, X. Fan, X. Wang, H. Li, Y. Zhang, W. Li, J. Zheng, B. Wang and X. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8272–8275 RSC .
H. Zhang, W. Zhao, M. Zou, Y. Wang, Y. Chen, L. Xu, H. Wu and A. Cao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800013 CrossRef .
B. Liu, R. Bo, M. Taheri, I. Di Bernardo, N. Motta, H. Chen, T. Tsuzuki, G. Yu and A. Tricoli, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 4391–4399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Mao, G. Li, Y. Guo, Z. Li, C. Liang, X. Peng and Z. Lin, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14628 CrossRef .
Z. Zhao, S. Wang, R. Liang, Z. Li, Z. Shi and G. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 13509–13512 RSC .
Y. Hou, H. Mao and L. Xu, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 344–353 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, W. Li, W. Ye, W. Yin, W. Chai, Y. Qu, Y. Rui and B. Tang, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 793, 16–23 CrossRef CAS .
G. Xu, Y. Zuo and B. Huang, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2018, 830–831, 43–49 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Pu, W. Wu, J. Liu, T. Liu, F. Ding, J. Zhang and Z. Tang, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 18604–18612 RSC .
L. Bai, D. Chao, P. Xing, L. J. Tou, Z. Chen, A. Jana, Z. X. Shen and Y. Zhao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 14328–14333 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, W. Zhao, Y. Wu, Y. Wang, M. Zou and A. Cao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 9195–9201 RSC .
S. Bai, X. Liu, K. Zhu, S. Wu and H. Zhou, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16094 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, L. Fan, Y. Qiu, M. Wang, J. Cheng, B. Guan, Z. Guo, N. Zhang and K. Sun, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 3345–3351 CrossRef CAS .
S. Suriyakumar, M. Kanagaraj, M. Kathiresan, N. Angulakshmi, S. Thomas and A. M. Stephan, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 265, 151–159 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, M. Sun, H. Liang, W. Ying, X. Zeng, Y. Ying, S. Zhou, C. Liang, Z. Lin and X. Peng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 30451–30459 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, Y. Wan, J.-K. Huang, A. H. Assen, C.-E. Hsiung, H. Jiang, Y. Han, M. Eddaoudi, Z. Lai, J. Ming and L.-J. Li, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2362–2367 CrossRef CAS .
S. Suriyakumar, A. M. Stephan, N. Angulakshmi, M. H. Hassan and M. H. Alkordi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 14623–14632 RSC .
D. H. Lee, J. H. Ahn, M.-S. Park, A. Eftekhari and D.-W. Kim, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 283, 1291–1299 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bai, K. Zhu, S. Wu, Y. Wang, J. Yi, M. Ishida and H. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 16812–16817 RSC .
Y. He, Z. Chang, S. Wu, Y. Qiao, S. Bai, K. Jiang, P. He and H. Zhou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1802130 CrossRef .
X.-J. Hong, C.-L. Song, Y. Yang, H.-C. Tan, G.-H. Li, Y.-P. Cai and H. Wang, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 1923–1931 CAS .
M. Yuan, R. Wang, W. Fu, L. Lin, Z. Sun, X. Long, S. Zhang, C. Nan, G. Sun, H. Li and S. Ma, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 11403–11413 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xiao, Q. Li, X. Yuan, Y. Xu, M. Zheng and H. Pang, Small Methods, 2018, 2, 1800240 CrossRef .
W. Yan, Z. Guo, H. Xu, Y. Lou, J. Chen and Q. Li, Mater. Chem. Front., 2017, 1, 1324–1330 RSC .
Y. Qiao, Y. He, S. Wu, K. Jiang, X. Li, S. Guo, P. He and H. Zhou, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 463–468 CrossRef CAS .

          D. B. Stauffer, J. H. Hirschenhofer, M. G. Klett and R. R. Engleman, Fuel Cell Handbook, 4th edn,  1998 Search PubMed .
L. Yang, X. Zeng, W. Wang and D. Cao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1704537 CrossRef .
Z. Song, N. Cheng, A. Lushington and X. Sun, Catalysts, 2016, 6, 116 CrossRef .
M. E. Scofield, H. Liu and S. S. Wong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 5836–5860 RSC .
J. Escorihuela, R. Narducci, V. Compañ and F. Costantino, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 6, 1801146 Search PubMed .
M. Sadakiyo, T. Yamada and H. Kitagawa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 9906–9907 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Umeyama, S. Horike, M. Inukai, Y. Hijikata and S. Kitagawa, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 11706–11709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Pili, S. P. Argent, C. G. Morris, P. Rought, V. García-Sakai, I. P. Silverwood, T. L. Easun, M. Li, M. R. Warren, C. A. Murray, C. C. Tang, S. Yang and M. Schröder, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 6352–6355 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. A. Patel, N. Mansor, S. Gadipelli, D. J. L. Brett and Z. Guo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 30687–30691 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sun, B. Tang and P. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 26077–26087 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ahmadian-Alam and H. Mahdavi, Renewable Energy, 2018, 126, 630–639 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liang, F. Zhang, W. Feng, X. Zou, C. Zhao, H. Na, C. Liu, F. Sun and G. Zhu, Chem. Sci., 2013, 4, 983–992 RSC .
H. Sun, B. Tang and P. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 35075–35085 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wu, J. Pan, L. Ge, L. Wu, H. Wang and T. Xu, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 4334 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-Y. Dong, J.-H. Wang, S.-S. Liu, Z. Han, Q.-J. Tang, F.-F. Li and S.-Q. Zang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 38209–38216 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, Z. Jiang, X. Wang, W. Ying, D. Chen, S. Liu, S. Chen, Z. Jiang and X. Peng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 19547–19554 RSC .
X.-L. Sun, W.-H. Deng, H. Chen, H.-L. Han, J. M. Taylor, C.-Q. Wan and G. Xu, Chem.–Eur. J., 2017, 23, 1248–1252 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chen, S.-Y. Han, R.-H. Liu, T.-F. Chen, K.-L. Bi, J.-B. Liang, Y.-H. Deng and C.-Q. Wan, J. Power Sources, 2018, 376, 168–176 CrossRef CAS .
D. Gui, X. Dai, Z. Tao, T. Zheng, X. Wang, M. A. Silver, J. Shu, L. Chen, Y. Wang, T. Zhang, J. Xie, L. Zou, Y. Xia, J. Zhang, J. Zhang, L. Zhao, J. Diwu, R. Zhou, Z. Chai and S. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 6146–6155 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. Miner, S. Gul, N. D. Ricke, E. Pastor, J. Yano, V. K. Yachandra, T. Van Voorhis and M. Dincă, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 7726–7731 CrossRef CAS .
P. Mani, A. Sheelam, S. Das, G. Wang, V. K. Ramani, K. Ramanujam, S. K. Pati and S. Mandal, ACS Omega, 2018, 3, 3830–3834 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang and D. Astruc, Chem. Rev., 2019 DOI:10.1021/acs.chemrev.9b00223 .
S. Gonen and L. Elbaz, Curr. Opin. Electrochem., 2018, 9, 179–188 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jahan, Q. Bao and K. P. Loh, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6707–6713 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Jiang, L. Li, D. Zhu, H. Zhang and X. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 5323–5329 RSC .
Y. Fang, X. Li, F. Li, X. Lin, M. Tian, X. Long, X. An, Y. Fu, J. Jin and J. Ma, J. Power Sources, 2016, 326, 50–59 CrossRef CAS .
K. Cho, S.-H. Han and M. P. Suh, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 15301–15305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Jahan, Z. Liu and K. P. Loh, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 5363–5372 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhao, B. Dong, S. Li, L. Zhou, L. Lai, Z. Wang, S. Zhao, M. Han, K. Gao, M. Lu, X. Xie, B. Chen, Z. Liu, X. Wang, H. Zhang, H. Li, J. Liu, H. Zhang, X. Huang and W. Huang, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 5800–5807 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hu, Q. Pang, C. Tang, J. Bao, H. Liu, K. Ba, S. Xie, J. Chen, J. Chen, Y. Yue, Y. Tang, Q. Li and Z. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 11322–11327 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rafti, W. A. Marmisollé and O. Azzaroni, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 3, 1600047 CrossRef .
G. E. Fenoy, J. Scotto, J. Azcárate, M. Rafti, W. A. Marmisollé and O. Azzaroni, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 5428–5436 CAS .
L. Yang, S. Kinoshita, T. Yamada, S. Kanda, H. Kitagawa, M. Tokunaga, T. Ishimoto, T. Ogura, R. Nagumo, A. Miyamoto and M. Koyama, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 5348–5351 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ishimoto, T. Ogura, M. Koyama, L. Yang, S. Kinoshita, T. Yamada, M. Tokunaga and H. Kitagawa, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 10607–10614 CrossRef CAS .
R. Mehek, N. Iqbal, T. Noor, H. Nasir, Y. Mehmood and S. Ahmed, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 255, 195–204 CrossRef CAS .
A. Samadi-Maybodi, S. Ghasemi and H. Ghaffari-Rad, J. Power Sources, 2016, 303, 379–387 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:
Seher Kuyuldar	Dr Seher Kuyuldar obtained her Bachelor of Science degree in Chemistry from Fatih University, where she conducted undergrad research on cobalt benzimidazole complexes in Prof. Naz M. Agh-Atabay's lab. Later, she studied two-electron transfer chemistry of Platinum and Palladium pincer complexes for her Ph.D. thesis with the guidance of Dr William B. Connick at the University of Cincinnati. She started her postdoctoral research in Dr Clemens Burda's lab in 2018, where she studies nanomaterials for energy related applications.
Douglas T. Genna	Professor Douglas T. Genna earned his Ph.D. in the lab of Gary H. Posner at the Johns Hopkins University, where he studied chirality transfer in allylic substitution chemistry and the copper mediated conversion of carboxylic acids into ketones. He conducted postdoctoral studies in the lab of Melanie S. Sanford at the University of Michigan, studying the heterogenization of homogeneous catalysts inside metal–organic frameworks. In 2014 he joined the faculty at Youngstown State University. His research group focuses on the synthesis of new metal–organic frameworks.
Clemens Burda	Prof. Clemens Burda earned his Ph.D. at the University of Basel (Switzerland) in Laser Chemistry. He was a postdoctoral researcher at Georgia Institute of Technology with Prof. M. A. El-Sayed. Prof. Burda is now the Chair of the Chemical Professorship at Case Western Reserve University, in Cleveland, OH. His research centers on renewable energy conversion materials and theranostic nanomaterials. He has published over 200 peer-reviewed articles in this field. His H-index is 72 and i10-index 159. Dr Burda is also an enthusiastic teacher in all areas of physical chemistry, particularly about photoscience and nanoscience.

 	Fig. 1  Structures of hafnium struts, top view and side view of the crystal structures of 2D layer and 3D network MOFs. (A and B) 2D layer MOF; (C and D) 3D network MOF. (E) TEM image of the 2D MOF (F) TEM image of the 3D MOF. (G and H) The fluorescence quenching of the 3D-MOF and 2D-MOL, by the H3BTE–NO2 that doesn't fit into the pores of the 3D MOF (G) and by coumarin-343 that is small enough to fit into the pores of 3D MOF (H). Reproduced with permission from ref. 58. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 2  (A) 2D porphyrin based MOF layers without pillaring linker groups. (B) Controlled collapse of porous 3D MOF into nonporous 2D MOF using solvent-assisted ligand exchange (SALE). Reproduced with permission from ref. 60 (A) and ref. 62 (B). Copyright© 2011 and 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  (A) The anisotropic growth of nanoMOFs onto up-conversion NPs (UCNPs) to form UCMOF heterodimers. Red dots in up-conversion nanoparticles represent doped lanthanide sensitizer (e.g., Yb3+ and Nd3+) and activator ions (e.g., Er3+, Tm3+ and Ho3+). (B) HRTEM image of the heterodimer. (C) Up-conversion luminescence spectrum of the PVP-coated up-conversion NPs and UV-vis absorption spectrum of the heterodimer. The spectral overlapping is highlighted in orange. (D) The illustration of triplet–triplet annihilation-upconversion (TTA-UC) in the coordination copolymers Al–An–Por. (E) Photoluminescence spectra of Al–An-in deaerated toluene with various excitation intensities (0.5–10 W cm−2, λex = 532 nm, 532 nm notch filter); inset: a photograph under 532 nm green laser excitation without any filter showing up-conversion blue emission. (F) Up-conversion efficiency (ΦUC′) with different Al–An–Por concentrations in deaerated toluene (λex = 515 nm). Reproduced with permission from ref. 68 (A–C). Copyright© 2017 American Chemical Society and ref. 69 (D–F). Copyright© 2018 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 4  (A) Incorporation of CuS nanoparticles on Cu–TCPP nanosheet. (B) TEM image of CuS/Cu–TCPP composite nanosheet. Inset: the corresponding SAED pattern. (C) Transient photocurrent responses of the pure Cu–TCPP nanosheets and CuS/Cu–TCPP composite nanosheets at different sulfidation times (under illumination of chopped AM 1.5G at a fixed bias potential of −0.6 V, vs. Ag/AgCl). Reproduced with permission from ref. 70. Copyright© 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.	 

 	Fig. 5  Synthesis and light harvesting study of multicomponent MOF nanoparticles with Gd, Eu and conjugated ligands: (A) the preparation of Gd–L1–L2 multicomponent nanoparticles. (B) Representative SEM and TEM (inset) images (top) and HRTEM side view of a representative particle showing the ordered nanochannels (bottom). (C) Schematic representation of the energy transfer. Ligand and Eu ion doping leads to the multiband emissions (420, 530, and 612 nm). (D) Proposed molecular organization of 1 in multilayered inverse vesicles. (E and F) FESEM images of vesicular and toroid nanostructures. (G) Self-assembly of long chain functionalized ligands with Zn2+ and dye loading. (H) Tunable white light emission by various SRG dye loadings (SRG1: 1.4, SRG2: 3.6, SRG3: 8.2, mol%). (I) Photocatalytic activity of the pristine nanoMOF and 3.6 mol% SRG loaded nanoMOF. Reproduced with permission from ref. 75 (A–C), Copyright© 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc., ref. 76 (D–F), Copyright© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. and ref. 77 (G–I), Copyright© 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (A) The depiction of MOF-525/s-PT composite film surrounding a carbon fiber in a core–shell structure. The cross section shows the proposed electron transfer and catalysis involving the I−/I3− redox couple. (B) FE-SEM image of 3 wt% MOF-525/s-PT with the high magnification inset. (C) Photocurrent density–voltage curves of the DSSC with 3 wt% MOF-525 in s-PT conductive binder, illuminated under normal (100 mW cm−2) and dim light intensities (10 mW cm−2). Reproduced with permission from ref. 79. Copyright© 2016 Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 7  (A) Synthesis of the nanocrystalline Ti-MOF (nTi-MOF) showing the ligand linked TiO2 clusters. (B) Device structure of a flexible perovskite solar cell incorporating the Ti-MOF nanocrystal/PCBM electron transfer layer. The proposed electron and hole transfer from the perovskite to the other layers are shown on the side. (C) SEM image of the nTi-MOF ETL deposited onto an ITO/glass substrate. (D) Current density plot and picture of the flexible film with the best PCE of 17.43%. Reproduced with permission from ref. 89. Copyright© 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (A) Self-healing in a functionalized UiO-67 MOF with bipyridine linkers (L). (B) Hydrogen evolution rate and curve over 6.5 days. Inset: HR-TEM image after 6.5 days (right, red square) of photocatalytic hydrogen evolution. Scale bar = 200 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 97. Copyright© 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (A) Growth of 2D NiFe MOF nanosheet arrays on nickel foam. (B) Top: SEM (300 μm scale bar) and bottom: TEM images (100 nm scale bar). (C) Top: Linear sweep voltammogram plots obtained with NiFe-MOF, bulk NiFe-MOF, Ni-MOF and calcined NiFe-MOF for HER at 10 mV−1 in 0.1 M KOH; bottom: LSV plots obtained with NiFe-MOF, nickel-based metal–organic framework (Ni-MOF), bulk NiFe-MOF and IrO2 for OER at 10 mV s−1 in 0.1 M KOH. Reproduced with permission from ref. 117. Open access via Creative Commons BY 4.0.	 

 	Fig. 10  (A) Without PANI: electrolyte diffuses through MOF pores but limited electron access. (B) MOF interwoven by PANI: both electron and electrolyte can access MOF surfaces and an electrochemical double-layer is formed on the surface of PANI-ZIF-67-CC. (C) Synergistic effects of MOF nanocrystals, PPY coating and the polyoxymetalate in pores in NENU-5/PPY-0.15. Reproduced with permission from ref. 132 (A and B). Copyright© 2015 American Chemical Society and ref. 133 (C). Copyright© 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (A) Crystal structure of Cu-CAT viewed along the c-axis. (B) SEM image of the Cu-CAT NWAs growing on carbon fiber paper. (C) Comparison of rate performance of Cu-CAT NWAs and Cu-CAT powder. (D) Structure of the solid-state supercapacitor (left) and photograph of a red light-emitting-diode powered by the three supercapacitors connected in series (right). Reproduced with permission from ref. 142. Copyright© 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.	 

 	Fig. 12  (A) Synthesis of NiCo MOF nanosheets by ultrasonication. (B) Comparison of supercapacitor performances of mono metallic and bimetallic MOF nanosheets. Reproduced with permission from ref. 154. Copyright© 2019 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  Ion and electron transport processes in Co MOF nanosheet. Reproduced with permission from ref. 150. Copyright© 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.	 

 	Fig. 14  The synergistic effect between the layered Ni-MOF and Fe(CN)64−/Fe(CN)63− electrolyte solution significantly improve the electrochemical performance in a hybrid alkaline battery–supercapacitor energy storage device where the Ni-MOF is the cathode and the carboxylic acid functionalized carbon nanotubes (CNTs–COOH) is the anode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 156. Copyright© 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 15  (A) SEM image of the accordion-like Ni-MOF. (B) Cyclic voltammetry within a 0–1.3 V range at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1 with three bending modes (insets). Reproduced with permission from ref. 157. Copyright© 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 16  (A) In situ growth of Ni MOF on a polyaniline/nickel foam layer (PANI/NF) and (B) the corresponding SEM image with the cross section inset. (C) Charge transfer route in Ni MOF nanosheet (Ni(TA)) aggregated on multiwall carbon nanotube (MWCNT) that are attached to nickel foam (NF). (D–G) SEM images of Ni MOF (D and E) and CoNi MOF (F and G) nanosheets on Ni wires. (H–J) SEM images of Ni/Co-MOF nanoflakes at different magnification (Xia et al.). (K, L) SEM images showing the effect of Zn doping on the formation and (L) the size of Ni MOF nanosheet microspheres. (M) The effect of Zn doping on the inter layer space and ion diffusion in Ni MOF nanosheet microspheres. Reproduced with permission from ref. 153 (A and B). Copyright© 2019 Royal Society of Chemistry, ref. 127 (C), Copyright© 2018 Elsevier Ltd., ref. 160 (D–G), Copyright© 2019 Elsevier B.V., ref. 161 (H–J), Open access via Creative Commons BY 4.0. and ref. 162 (K–M). Copyright© 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 17  (A) Three dimensional atom frameworks of CoCOP nanowires viewed along the z axis and y axis. (B) SEM image of CoCOP nanowires. (C) Charge–discharge curves of CoCOP–LiFePO4 full battery at different rates. Reproduced with permission from ref. 163. Copyright© 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 18  (A) Synthesis of Ni-BTC MOFs with various morphologies in different solvents. (B) Corresponding SEM images of different Ni-BTC morphologies. (C) Comparison of cycling performance of Ni-BTCDMF, Ni-BTCDMF/EtOH, and Ni-BTCEtOH electrodes at 1000 mA g−1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 165. Copyright© 2019 Elsevier Inc.	 

 	Fig. 19  (A) Schematic representation of Co-MOF–graphene oxide composite enwrapped in polypyrrole before and after pulverization at 350 °C, and illustration of improved electron and Li ion access. (B) Right: TEM image before pulverization and left: HRTEM image after pulverization. (C) Comparison of cycling performances of composites pulverized at 350 °C (with the polypyrrole coating: GCP350 and without: GC350) and at 250 °C (GCP250). Reproduced with permission from ref. 171. Copyright© 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 20  (A) Schematic capacities of Si, TiN/Ti/Si, ZIF-8/Si, and ZIF-8/TiN/Ti/Si nanorods as anodes for lithium ion batteries and the corresponding SEM images of top: TiN/Ti/Si nanorods and bottom: ZIF-8/TiN/Ti/Si nanorods. (B) Demonstration of the influence of ZIF-8 layer on rate performance, using the ZIF-8/Si nanoparticle electrode at various current densities. Reproduced with permission from ref. 173. Copyright© 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 21  (A) Schematic representation of POM-NENU-9 particles on reduced graphene nanosheet. (B) SEM image of the nanocomposite. (C) PMG-3 cycled at various current densities. (D) Comparison of capacity ratio for different PMG nanocomposites (PMG-1: 4% GO, PMG-2: 8% GO and PMG-3: 12% GO, at 0.5 mV s−1 sweep rate). Reproduced with permission from ref. 186. Copyright© 2017 Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 22  (A) Illustration of the solid state battery showing the nano-wetting of the MOF-electrode interface and Li+ ion migration (moving pink balls) in the ionic liquid filled MOF pores. (B) Temperature-dependent cycling performance of the Li|Li-IL@MOF|LiFePO4 full cell with corresponding charge/discharge curves. (C) Synthesis of the covalently linked UiO-66 MOF–PEGDA polymer solid-state electrolyte. (D) The SEM images of the surface (top) and the cross section (bottom) of the hybrid HSPE-1–8 solid electrolyte. (E) Cycle performance of the Li/HSPE-1–8/LiFePO4 cell cycled at different C-rates at RT (HSPE = hybrid solid polymer electrode and HSPE-1–8 is when the MOF:PEGDA ratio during synthesis is 1 to 8 wt%). Reproduced with permission from ref. 200 (A and B). Copyright© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Inc. and ref. 205 (C–E). Copyright© 2018 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 23  (A) Schematic illustration of MOF nanoparticle growth on glass fiber. (B) The SEM image of MOF–glass fiber hybrid with a magnified inset. (C) Right: Li+ stripping and plating tests in Li|Li cells and left: coulombic efficiency of Li+ stripping and plating in Cu|Li cells. (D) Right: Galvanostatic cycling of LiFePO4|Li cells and left: long-term cycling of LiFePO4|Li4Ti5O12 full cells. Blue: glass fiber only, red: MOF–glass fiber. Reproduced with permission from ref. 210. Copyright© 2019 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 24  (A) Activation and sulfur loading of HKUST-1 with potential binding sites at the Cu paddlewheel. (B) Electrolyte samples of 0.16 μm and 5.9 μm CuBTC, and S/C electrodes during a galvanostatic discharge of C/20. Yellow discoloration indicates the amount of leached polysulfide. (C) Coin cell performance of 3 cells as a function of particle size, left: the average maximum capacity and right: the average capacity retention over 20 cycles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 214. Copyright© 2018 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 25  (A) Hybrid structures with smaller or larger ZIF-8 particles on CNT and their sulfur loading, named S@S-ZIF-8@CNTs and S@L-ZIF-8@CNTs, respectively. (B) SEM images (left) and TEM images (right) of S-ZIF-8@CNTs showing uniform grafting of small ZIF-8 nanoparticles (∼40 nm) on the CNT network. (C) SEM images (left) and TEM images (right) of L-ZIF-8@CNTs showing mutually embedded large ZIF-8 particles (∼500 nm) entrapping the CNT network. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy of (D) S@S-ZIF-8@CNTs and (E) S@L-ZIF-8@CNTs before and after 100 cycles. The insets show the corresponding charge transport paths. Reproduced with permission from ref. 222. Copyright© 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 26  (A) Ce-MOF/CNT composite as a separator coating materials for Li–S battery. (B) SEM image of Ce-MOF-2/CNT. (C) Comparison of catalytic consumption of Li2S6/DME solution in the presence of CNT, Ce-MOF-1/CNT, and Ce-MOF-2/CNT. (D) CV curves of symmetrical cells using different coating materials of CNT, Ce-MOF-1/CNT, and Ce-MOF-2/CNT with and without Li2S6 at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 241. Copyright© 2019 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 27  (A) Schematic illustration for Li–O2 battery with 2D MOF-based electrode. (B) Schematic representation of the proposed electrochemical process for the reversible formation of the discharge products on 2D Mn-MOFs. (C) TEM image of 2D Mn-MOF nanosheets. (D) Left: Discharge–charge profiles of 2D MOFs and KB-based electrodes at 100 mA g−1 and right: 1st full charge discharge profile of the 3D Mn-MOF. Reproduced with permission from ref. 242. Copyright© 2019 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 28  (A) Schematic comparison of glass fiber (top) and HKUST-1-based (bottom) separators, showing the advantage of the use of the HKUST-1 sieve for the inhibition of redox mediator shuttling to the anode. DBBQ and TTF are the discharging and charging redox mediators. (B) The corresponding SEM images of Li anodes from cycled cells with 5000 mA h g−1, top: with the GF separator after 22 cycles, and bottom: with the MOF-based separator after 100 cycles. (C) Comparison of battery performance with glass carbon and MOF-based separators with fixed capacities of 2500 and 5000 mA h g−1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 245. Copyright© 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 29  (A) Left: Acid–base interaction between the commercial polymer membrane SPEEK and ZIF-8, right: the schematic illustration of the 0D-ZIF/SPEEK composite membrane (top) and 2D ZIF-8–carbon nanotube–SPEEK composite membrane (bottom). (B) The corresponding TEM images of ZIF-8 nanoparticles (top) and 2D ZIF-8 CNT hybrids (bottom). (C) Comparison of temperature dependent proton conductivities of different membranes at 30% relative humidity. Reproduced with permission from ref. 258. Copyright© 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 30  (A) Left: The hopping mechanism in the oriented nanofibers provided by the embedded MOF nanocrystals, and right: HRTEM image of the oriented nanofiber tainted by Pb2+ ions to show hydrophilic (dark areas) and hydrophobic (light areas) domains. (B) The comparison of temperature-dependent proton conductivity under anhydrous conditions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 259. Open access via Creative Commons BY 4.0.	 

 	Fig. 31  (A) Incorporation of acid–base functionalized dual UiO-66 nanoparticles into chitosan polymer. (B) Process of threading the acid–base functionalized polymer through ZIF-8 to form hybrid membranes. (C) Left: The structures of binary ionic liquids EIMS and HTFSA and right: proton hopping within the EIMS–HTFSA matrix. Reproduced with permission from ref. 260 (A). Copyright© 2018 American Chemical Society, ref. 261 (B), Copyright© 2018 Royal Society of Chemistry and ref. 262 (C). Copyright© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Inc.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
