UV-protectant metabolites from lichens and their symbiotic partners  - Natural Product Reports (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3NP70064J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3NP70064J
(Review Article)
Nat. Prod. Rep., 2013, 30, 1490-1508UV-protectant metabolites from lichens and their symbiotic partners

        
          
            Khanh-Hung 
            Nguyen
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Marylène 
            Chollet-Krugler
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Nicolas 
            Gouault
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Sophie 
            Tomasi
          
          
        
      *
      Equipe PNSCM «Produits Naturels – Synthèses – Chimie Médicinale» UMR CNRS 6226 Institut des Sciences chimiques de Rennes, UFR Sciences Pharmaceutiques et Biologiques, Univ. Rennes 1, Université Européenne de Bretagne, 2 Avenue du Pr. Léon Bernard, F-35043 Rennes, France. E-mail: sophie.tomasi@univ-rennes1.fr;  Fax: +33 (0)2 23 23 47 04;   Tel: +33 (0)2 23 23 48 17
Received 
      15th July 2013
    First published on 30th October 2013Contents1 Introduction2 Chemical features of natural UV-protectants3 Orsellinic acid derivatives3.1 Depsides3.2 Depsidones3.3 Dibenzofurans and derivatives3.4 Diphenyl ethers4 Chromones, xanthones and anthraquinones derivatives4.1 Chromones and xanthones4.2 Anthraquinones5 Shikimic acid derivatives5.1 Pulvinic acid derivatives5.2 Mycosporines and MAAs5.3 Scytonemin5.4 Melanin pigments6 Carotenoid pigments7 ConclusionsAcknowledgementsReferencesAbstractCovering: up to May 2013Lichens are structurally complex symbiotic organisms that are exposed to a wide variety of external conditions (extreme temperatures, desiccation, UV radiation, etc.). These poikilohydric organisms have developed various mechanisms of photoprotection, such as light scattering, radiation screening, thermal dissipation, activation of antioxidant defense and macromolecules and membrane repair. These unique organisms produce a vast array of compounds, with more than 1000 secondary metabolites known. An important protective mechanism of lichens is the production of UV screening compounds, such as phenolic compounds (depsidones, depsides, diphenyl ethers), anthraquinones, xanthones or shikimic acid derivatives (calycin, mycosporines, scytonemin). Due to the harmful effects of the UVA wavelengths of sunlight, the search for new sunscreens remains important. We herein propose a review that focuses on the UV protectants from lichens and their symbiotic partners (lichenized fungi, green alga, cyanobacteria). In fact, lichens produce unique and/or efficient UV filters such as depsidones (lobaric acid, pannarin, etc.), depsides (atranorin, gyrophoric acid, etc.), diphenyl ethers (epiphorellic acids, buellin), bisxanthones (secalonic acids, etc.), mycosporines and MAAs, scytonemin along with classical pigments (melanin, carotenoids). We propose to classify these compounds with regard to their chemical structures and review the physicochemical properties that act as UV filters. While the most abundant lichen polyfunctionalized aromatic compounds, belonging to orsellinic derivatives, are UVB screens, these organisms produce strong UVA filters, e.g., calycin (pulvinic acid derivatives), bisxanthones (secalonic acids), scytonemin or mycosporines and MAAs with the latter ones exhibiting attractive properties as photoprotectants.Khanh-Hung NguyenKhanh-Hung Nguyen received his bachelor’s degree in organic chemistry at the University of Natural Sciences (Vietnam) in 2009 and received his master’s degree in 2010 at the University of Le Mans, France. Afterwards, he started his PhD research under the guidance of Prof. Sophie Tomasi and Dr Nicolas Gouault in the PNSCM team, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Rennes 1. He is currently working on the synthesis of the derivatives of mycosporines and mycosporine-like amino acids and their photoprotective activity, while his research interests focus on the chemical synthesis of biologically active products and medicinal chemistry.Marylène Chollet-KruglerMarylène Chollet-Krugler received her PhD in chemistry from the University of Rennes 1, France in 1997, studying dithiolethiones synthesis and their physico-chemical properties. She was then appointed as Research Assistant Professor in 1997 and promoted to lecturer in analytical chemistry in 2000. She joined the group of Prof. Boustie in 2006, working in the field of natural products chemistry (lichen). Her current research is focused on the isolation and characterization of novel lichen compounds, particularly mycosporine-like compounds.Nicolas GouaultNicolas Gouault studied chemistry at the University of Rennes 1, France. He obtained his PhD from the University of Rennes 1 in 2002 under the supervision of Dr M. David. He was then appointed as Research Assistant Professor in the same group in 2002 and promoted to lecturer in 2004. His research interests include heterocyclic chemistry, organic chemistry at the interface with biology, and gold catalysis.Sophie TomasiSophie Tomasi studied Pharmacy at the University of Rennes 1 where she received her PhD in chemistry in 1999 under the guidance of Prof. P. Uriac. After a postdoctoral position under the supervision of Dr R. Barrow at the ANU University of Canberra, she became a lecturer in 2000 then a full professor of Pharmacognosy in 2011 at the University of Rennes 1. She possesses skills in the field of phytochemical and synthetic studies and her research interests focus on natural products chemistry (lichens) and more recently on lichen-associated bacteria as a source of bioactive compounds.
1 Introduction
Lichens are symbiotic organisms resulting from an association between a mycobiont (fungus), a photobiont (green alga or cyanobacteria) and dedicated bacterial communities.1 The fungal partner provides shelter, water and mineral nutrients for the photobiont which performs photosynthesis. Fixation of atmospheric nitrogen can occur for cyanolichens, which represent 10% of lichens, through specific cyanobacterial structures. They mostly contain cyanobacteria corresponding to species of Calothrix, Fischerella, Gloeocapsa, Nostoc or Scytonema.2 These miniature ecosystems, which are dominant life forms in some parts of the Earth, are able to survive in harsh conditions (extreme temperatures, desiccation, UV radiation, high salt concentrations, etc.) as they are sustained by various processes and the production of protective compounds.3,4
These poikilohydric organisms may develop photodamage from UVB (280–315 nm) and UVA radiation (315–400 nm). The mechanical aspects of lichen adaptation to UV stress can be summarized into five ways: light scattering, radiation screening, thermal dissipation, activation of antioxidant defense and macromolecules, and membrane repair (Fig. 1). Protective strategies are dependent on the anatomy of the vegetative structures (thallus shape, cortex thickness, presence of refractive structure or compounds, etc.) and the state of hydration of the lichens. The morphology of these organisms is divided into homoiomerous thallus or heteromerous thallus (most lichens),5 the latter one being optimized for the protection of the photobiont against excessive light (Fig. 1). The cortex of the thallus could absorb light radiation 2- to 10-fold more than the epidermis of a leaf.6 Anatomical adaptation of the upper cortex can appear to significantly decrease the transmission of incident light at the algal layer.7 Physical light reflection may also be involved in the calcium oxalate8 accumulation in the external surface, known as pruina.7 An important protective mechanism is the production of UV screening compounds such as phenolic compounds (depsidones, depsides, diphenyl ether), anthraquinones, xanthones or shikimate derivatives. These metabolites often crystallize on the surface of the hyphae, either in the upper cortex or in the internal medulla,9–11 and their accumulation seems to be higher in the upper thallus parts than in the lower.12 These compounds absorb and re-emit the UV radiation as fluorescence or heat.13 The other protection strategy of photobionts is the thermal dissipation of light energy.14 Besides the classical xanthophyll cycle, which requires a zeaxanthin and protonation reaction located in the photosystem II (PSII), alternative zeaxanthin independent mechanisms of energy dissipation have been described in lichens after desiccation. A conformational change of the PSII reaction center, caused by water removal, led to the switch of this energy-conservation center to an energy-dissipating center.15–17 While both mechanisms coexist in green-algal lichens, only desiccation-activated mechanisms protect cyanolichens.17,18
 Fig. 1  Main mechanisms of photoprotection in lichens depending on the thallus anatomy (from Ozenda and Clauzade5): A) Lobaria pulmonaria as heteromerous. B) Collema tenax as homoiomerous. cs: upper cortex; g: algal cells; m: medullary layer; ci: lower cortex; h: fungal hyphae. 
Regarding the protection against photooxidative damage, antioxidant defense systems using glutathione and ascorbic acid are required and are much more effective for the entire organism than the individual isolated organisms.19 Finally, the last protective strategy consists of macromolecule repair after the induction of pyrimidine dimers by UVB radiation. The reversible DNA damage that was brought about by blue-light/UVA inductible photolyase under photoreactivation conditions has been described for Cladonia arbuscula spp. mitis and can be controlled by the the water and temperature levels.20
These stress tolerators thus possess the ability to develop adaptive mechanisms to respond to high light exposure. We herein propose a focus on UV protectants from lichens and their symbiotic partners (lichenized fungi, green algae, cyanobacteria). Lichens synthesize secondary metabolites, which are often of fungal origin, and are the major class of aromatic compounds derived from the polyketide biosynthetic pathway. They include orcinol derivatives (depsides, depsidones, diphenyl ether, dibenzofuranes), which are unique to lichens or non-lichenized fungi and anthraquinones, chromones and xanthones, which are also produced from other fungi or plants.10 The other aromatic metabolic pathway is the shikimic acid route, which leads the formation of pulvinic acid derivatives unique to lichens, mycosporines and mycosporine-like amino acids (MAAs), and scytonemin which also occurs in fungi or cyanobacteria. Some of these compounds have been described as UV filters, such as depsidones (lobaric acid, pannarin etc.), depsides (atranorin, gyrophoric acid, etc.), diphenyl ethers (epiphorellic acids), dibenzofurane derivative (usnic acid), bisxanthones (secalonic acids, etc.), mycosporines and MAAs, scytonemin along with classical pigments (melanin, carotenoids, etc.). We propose to classify these compounds regarding their chemical structures and review their physicochemical properties to act as UV filters. To determine which compounds are photoprotectant it is important to define certain criteria.21 These compounds should 1) efficiently absorb UV radiation overlapping the absorption band of the photosynthetic pigments and/or photosensitive macromolecules of the cell; 2) have increased synthesis after irradiation in the corresponding spectral range; 3) lead to a better resistance of the lichens to this irradiation.22 Along with these properties, these compounds must present good photochemical stability and should not act as photosensitizers.23
2 Chemical features of natural UV-protectants
For a long time sunlight has been considered of vital importance for life on Earth, but it is also well known that ultraviolet radiation, as a result of its high energy content, can lead to a wide variety of harmful effects in living cells, especially DNA lesions and gene mutations. The UV radiation from the sun can be divided into UVC (170–280 nm), UVB (280–315 nm), and UVA (315–400 nm). UVC, as well as most of UVB radiation, that is emitted by the sun does not reach the earth's surface, since it is filtered by ozone in the stratosphere. With a reduction in the ozone layer due to anthropogenic emissions, organisms on Earth are being exposed to an increased levels of UV radiation, especially UVB since UVA is not impacted by the ozone layer.21 Therefore, various organisms such as lichens, as discussed above, have developed mechanisms to protect against the damage caused by UVA and UVB radiation, and one way to defend against these radiations is to produce and accumulate absorbing molecules.
A molecule’s ability to absorb light is due to electronic transitions within the molecule, from the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) to the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO). The highest energy electrons in the ground state (S0) may occupy σ, π or n (non-bonding) orbitals and the corresponding excited state of the lowest electronic energy (S1) correspond to π* or σ* levels. The wavelength of light absorbed is that having the energy required to move an electron from the HOMO to the LUMO level.
This absorbed energy can be eliminated by several pathways (Fig. 2). Ideally it returns unchanged to the ground state by release of the excess energy in non-radiative vibrational relaxation (heat), or by radiative processes (fluorescence or phosphorescence), thereby achieving photostability. The energy may also be dissipated by transfer to other molecules (sensitization) or via photoreactions. In this case, structural modifications occur that may be reversible (cis/trans isomerization or keto–enol equilibrium) or irreversible (decomposition). Such deactivation pathways lead to the generation of free radicals (reactive oxygen species), thereby rending these UV absorbers ineffective due to their photoinstability.24
 Fig. 2  Jablonski diagram showing the different deactivation pathways. Abbreviations: IC, internal conversion; ISC, intersystem conversion; VR, vibrational relaxation. S0: ground state; S1: first excitation state; S2: second excitation state. 
A chromophore is a functional group which exhibits a characteristic absorption spectrum in the UV or visible region. UV absorption implies transitions between π and π* or n and π* levels, so most absorption by organic compounds results from the presence of unsaturated bonds (π). Furthermore, compounds containing heteroatoms such as halogens, nitrogen, oxygen or sulfur with unpaired electrons will give rise to n → σ* transitions or n → π* transitions in the case of the presence of a heteroatom associated with a double bond. The non-bonding electrons thus causes a bathochromic effect on the absorption maximum and the degree of this effect depends on the mesomeric effect of these electrons.21 The characteristics of some chromophores are presented in Fig. 3.
 Fig. 3  UV absorption characteristics of common functional groups. 
Molecules that strongly absorb in the UVB and UVA range are conjugated systems. Indeed, conjugating a chromophore with additional chromophores increases both the intensity (ε) and the wavelength (λ) of the absorption. For example, a polyunsaturated hydrocarbon such as β-carotene absorbs UV-visible light with a maximum absorption at 452 nm and a strong intensity (ε = 15.2 104 L mol−1 cm−1). Aromatic, polyaromatic, heteroaromatic structures are also UVB/UVA absorbers (Fig. 4) even if they possess lower extinction coefficients than unsaturated aliphatic compounds (e.g., benzene with λmax = 255 nm, ε = 230 L mol−1 cm−1 and 1,3,5-hexatriene with λmax = 258 nm, ε = 80000 L mol−1 cm−1).21
 Fig. 4  Molecular structures of common aromatic and heteroaromatic UV absorbing compounds. 
The presence of substituents with electronic effects (donor or acceptor) and their position on the aromatic or heteroaromatic ring have an impact on the UV absorption characteristics. Generally, the absorption increases with the number of substituents.21 It is also important to note that the absorbance maximum (λmax) depends partially on the molecular environment of the chromophore. Actually, the solvent, pH or temperature may modify both the intensity and the wavelength of the absorbance maxima. Therefore, compound families that are commercially used as UVA and UVB filters contain conjugated aromatic systems substituted by various electron-withdrawing or electron-donating groups (Fig. 5).25 The position and nature of the substituents have an effect on the UV absorption pattern, as shown for p-aminobenzoate and salicylate derivatives, which act as UVB screens in comparison to UVA anthranilate derivatives filters. The latter ones possess lower extinction coefficients than those of p-aminobenzoates. Other interesting UVA filters are dibenzoylmethane derivatives (e.g., avobenzone) for which the enol–keto tautomerization is in favor of the enol form and is responsible for their UV absorption profile and their photo-antioxidant role.26
 Fig. 5  Molecular structures of common classes of UV absorbing compounds: I, UVB and II, UVA filters. 
Such structural features are found in some lichen metabolites classes27 (Fig. 6) and we will discuss them in this review. Most of these compounds are highly polyfunctionalized, allowing them to efficiently absorb UV radiation, as discussed above. Lichens and cyanobacteria also produce non-aromatic compounds such as mycosporines and MAAs, which present interesting UV patterns connected to the cyclohexenone or cyclohexenimine core structures. Finally a cyanobacterial pigment, scytonemin, possesses an interesting UV profile due to an increase in the complexity of the π-conjugated system.
 Fig. 6  Chemical structures of lichen UV-protectant metabolites. 
3 Orsellinic acid derivatives
The major aromatic compounds produced by lichens are provided by the polyketide route (Scheme 1) and correspond to orsellinic acid derivatives, which are characterized by the ortho-hydroxycarbonyl chromophore unit. These compounds are produced by the bond formation between two or three orcinol or β-orcinol phenolic moieties through ester (depsides, tridepsides), ether (diphenyl ethers, depsidones, dibenzofuranes) or C–C linkages (depsones).10 These orcinol units could be subjected to increasing levels of oxidation. Some studies have reported the increased accumulation of phenolic compounds under solar or UVB radiation in lichens, mainly in the upper parts, suggesting their roles as UV absorbers.28,29 Huneck and Yoshimura have described, in an important review focusing on structural identification of lichen substances, the UV properties of various classes of products (Table 1).27 Most of the UV spectra have been recorded in polar solvents (methanol or ethanol), which could significantly influence the UV profiles. While depsides, depsidones, dibenzofuranes, chromones and diphenyl ethers possess features of UVB screens, the xanthones and pulvinic acid derivatives appear as UVA absorbers, with all of them possessing high extinction coefficients above 10000 L mol−1 cm−1 for the lower energy absorption bands.
 Scheme 1  Overview of the biosynthesis of lichen metabolites via the polyketide pathway.10,30 
Table 1 UV properties of various lichen compounds (solvents used: MeOH and EtOH)27




Classes of compounds

λ
max (nm) (range)

ε (L mol−1 cm−1) (range)




Monoaromatic compounds
245–278
4898–20417


299–305
2691–10233


Depsides
247–276
5012–32360


281–318
3467–29512


Depsidones
250–270
8710–39810


295–333
1995–18620


Dibenzofurans
235–249
13490–60256


256–275
16982–35481


295–338
3715–19055


Usnic acid and derivatives
282–290
21380–32359


Diphenyl ethers
238–259
14125–57544


269–295
3715–28840


314–338
4169–12589


Chromones
242–253
12589–29512


251–264
19953–30903


278–296
5012–25704


313–335
3236–5888


Xanthones
240–256
21878–70795


260–284
5888–23988


308–323
10000–34674


340–372
3981–32359


Quinones
205–235
7079–70795


250–295
13183–57544


308–387
10233–22387


417–500
7943–23988


520–578
3981–26303


Pulvinic acid derivatives
236–291
11749–54954


316–389
13183–31623




3.1 Depsides
Most of the lichen aromatic compounds correspond to depsides and depsidones.10 Depsides are formed by esterification of two (depsides) or three orcinol (tridepsides) or β-orcinol units and absorb in the UVB region. Depsides and monoaromatic compounds possess similar spectral properties regarding the absorption maxima, the intensity of the shorter wavelength being higher than that of the longer wavelength.31 The bonding of two orcinol chromophore units leads, therefore, to an increase of the absorption intensity in comparison to monoaromatic compounds (Table 1). While methylation or increasing of the alkyl chain have little effect on the UV spectra, functionalization of the orcinol unit with a formoyl or an hydroxyl group (at position 3) afford drastic changes in the UV absorption.31 Among depsides already known, atranorin, diffractaic, divaricatic and evernic acids and the tridepside gyrophoric acid (Fig. 7) have been reported to act as UV filters. An increasing accumulation of lichen substances, such as atranorin in Cladonia rangiferina, has been observed under high light intensities supplemented by UVA and UVB.32 One other study highlighted the differential occurrence of atranorin in two specimens of Ochrolechia parella growing under different light intensities. This metabolite was only present in the sunlit specimens, in comparison with the shaded specimen,33 suggesting its biological role as UV screen. In fact, atranorin absorbs UVB with a moderate absorption coefficient (λmax = 252 (ε = 14454 L mol−1 cm−1), 312 nm (ε = 3715 L mol−1 cm−1))27 and dissipates it as fluorescence (λmax emission = 425 nm) within the region in which chlorophyll absorbs.6 Despite the presence of a benzaldehyde-ortho-hydroxyl unit, the absorption of the n → π* transition is blue-shifted around 50 nm in shorter wavelengths due to the hydrogen bonding.34 The Stokes shifted fluorescence of this chromophore unit35 indicates the enol formation, and could explain the very low fluorescence yield (<10−3) of atranorin, which leads to its protection from photodecomposition.35 More recently the photolability of some depsides, such as atranorin and barbatic acid, have been reported after exposure to high level of UVA and B.36 Regarding their photoprotection ability, these depsides showed low37 or moderate38 SPF (Sun Protection Factor) in vitro and in vivo (using an irradiated guinea-pig skin method) and a good ability to inhibit UVA induced 8-(methyl-3H)-methoxypsoralen-human serum albumin photobinding.23 These results, and the moderate allergenic potentiality already reported for atranorin,39 introduces drawbacks to the use of this compound as a sunscreen.
 Fig. 7  Chemical structures of depsides from lichens reported as UVB filters. 
Similar UVB screening and photostability characteristics have been observed for evernic,37 divaricatic12,13,38 and diffractaic acids.13,38 Medullary despides with long alkyl chain, isosphaeric and sphaephorin (Fig. 7) structurally related to evernic acid, were produced by the 6-month cultured mycobiont of Haematomma personii under UV exposure (365 nm) and exhibited similar UVB absorbing profiles than other depsides.40 Recently, Bjerke and colleagues reported that the presence of divaricatic acid in the medullar part of Ophioparma ventosa was correlated to its UV absorption (mostly in UVC zone) affording no essential protection for this lichen against light radiation.12 The highest SPF value has been observed for the tridepside gyrophoric acid,37,38 an UVB filter possessing a good absorption coefficient due to the chromophore association of the three orcinol units. This compound exhibited good photostability,36,37 no toxicity towards human keratinocytes HaCaT cells after 24 h of treatment and no phototoxicity towards these cells after UVA treatment.37 However, its cytotoxicity against this same cell line was reported after 48 h of treatment along with that of diffractaic acid.41 This drawback limits the cosmetic potential of gyrophoric acid as sunscreen.
Quilhot et al. highlighted that despite the low fluorescence quantum yield of the evaluated depsides, this inefficiency could be thwarted by their high amount in some lichen thallus (>5% dry weight).13
3.2 Depsidones
Depsidones show similar spectral characteristics to depsides, with little difference. These orsellinic acid derivatives are formed via ester and ether joins between two orsellinic or β-orsellinic acid units, endowing them with a capacity to absorb UVB radiation and some UVA radiation (Table 1). As described above, the UV spectral characteristics can be modified by the presence of an ortho-hydroxy benzaldehyde unit, e.g., for pannarin, 1′-chloropannarin, fumarprotocetraric and salazinic acids (Fig. 8), leading to absorption in the shorter wavelengths (308–321 nm) due to hydrogen bonding. As underlined above, solvents used for UV spectral measurements can therefore produce changes in the absorption band. While the absorption maxima of vicanicin (Fig. 8) was reported in MeOH27 to be 270 nm (ε = 8710 L mol−1 cm−1) and 324 nm (ε = 302 L mol−1 cm−1), Boehm and colleagues42 described them in CHCl3 as 258 nm (9250 L mol−1 cm−1) and 342 nm (570 L mol−1 cm−1). Vicanicin is not suitable for use, as it could produce thymine triplets causing DNA damage. On the other hand, its formoyl derivative, 1′-chloropannarin, was not able to transfer triplet energy to thymine.42
 Fig. 8  Chemical structures of depsidones from lichens acting as UV filters. 
The substitution pattern on the aromatic units also has a drastic effect on the UV properties and could be predicted by TD-DFT calculations , as shown on chlorinated compounds from Diploicia canescens.43 Thus, methoxylation causes a bathochromic effect of the absorption maxima,44 as observed between diploicin (λmax = 320 nm) and 4-O-methyldiploicin (λmax = 324 nm), and between dechlorodiploicin (λmax = 315 nm) and 4-O-methyldechlorodiploicin (λmax = 326 nm), due to a better HOMO → LUMO transition.43 Chlorination affects the low-energy bands (above 250 nm), causing a hypsochromic shift with increasing of the number of Cl atoms for scensidin < 4-O-methyldechlorodiploicin < 4-O-methyldiploicin.43 Some cytotoxic effects on human keratinocyte HaCaT cell lines have been demonstrated for dechlorodiploicin45 and the photolability under UV radiation has been reported for diploicin.43 Alkylation with a long aliphatic chain, e.g., in lobaric acid,46 and an additional lactonic cycle in variolaric acid,37 produced moderate UVB absorption with low intensity. This result is in agreement with the presence of a higher amount of variolaric acid in shaded samples of O. parella than in those exposed to sunlight.33
In addition, pannarin and 1′-chloropannarin have been reported as being photostable34,47 and inhibitors of the photosensitizer effect, like 8-MOP-human serum albumin photobinding via participation of singlet oxygen.23 These results suggest their ability, through the trapping of free radicals and singlet oxygen, to increase their photoprotection properties for photobionts, with this effect being higher for depsidones than depsides.48 Thus, the superoxide radical scavenging ability was reported for salazinic acid, which also appeared to be non-phototoxic.37
Nevertheless, a recent review49 introduced that most of these depsidones (pannarin, 1′-chloropannarine, lobaric and salazinic acids, etc.) have already been reported as potential cytotoxic compounds (e.g., on hepatocytes lymphocytes from rats) limiting their cosmetic use.
3.3 Dibenzofurans and derivatives
Dibenzofurans are the third most abundant class of orsellinic acid derivatives in lichens after depsides and depsidones.10 This group is divided into compounds provided by the condensation of orsellinic acid and resorcylic acids and those corresponding to usnic acid and derivatives formed by the coupling of two methyl-phloroacetophenones, all of them obtained via the polyketide pathway (Scheme 1).50
The loss of aromaticity in the second ring observed for usnic acid and derivatives (Fig. 9) explains the decrease in the absorption intensity for the longer wavelength bands (Table 1), in comparison to dibenzofurans. Placodiolic acid (Fig. 9), with a similar UVB spectral profile to that of usnic acid, was provided for a number of Haemmatoma species and was also detected in 5 month spore-derived cultures of a mycobiont of H. africanum after exposure to UV radiation (365 nm).40
 Fig. 9  Chemical structures of dibenzofurans and derivatives, chromones, xanthones from lichens reported as UV screens. 
Usnic acid, the most common and widespread compound of this class, is described as a good UVB absorbant (λmax = 287 nm and ε = 18600 L mol−1 cm−1),37 which does not dissipate its radiation as fluorescence,13 but presented a moderate in vitro SPF value.37,38 Rancan and colleagues have nevertheless evaluated the in vivo protection factor and in vitro membrane protection factor of this compound, which was similar to Nivea Sun Spray LSF5 or higher than the reference octylmethoxycinnamate, suggesting that usnic acid is a good UVB filter. The authors highlighted that usnic acid still has a good UVB absorption ability after UVB radiation, which was higher than that observed for OMC and suggested its relative photostability.47 Thus, the fluorescent photoproducts formed after irradiation of usnic acid36,47,51 possess similar UVB absorption capacities to usnic acid, with an additional band at the lower energy bands (λmax= 241, 294 and 344 nm).51 The photodegradation of usnic acid thus occurred at a certain radiation threshold and in nucleophilic solvents, and led to the formation of decarboxylated photoproducts which possess a similar photoprotection ability (similar in vitro SPF values).51
As discussed above, one criteria to be a photoprotectant is its increased synthesis under UV radiation. Correlation between the increase of usnic acid rates and light radiation supplemented with UVA and/or UVB radiation12,32,51 has been reported and depends on the acclimatization of the species to solar radiation before UV radiation, the environmental conditions52 and the structure of lichens. Thus, the species which possess a well-developed internal screening capacity did not increase their cortical accumulation of usnic acid under UV radiation.12 In fact, the localization of usnic acid in the upper parts seems to be an ecological response to permit UV protection.53 Moreover, photosynthetically active radiation (PAR) without UV radiation induces the production of usnic acid in lichens lacking a cortex, the latter one provided direct lichen protection from PAR.12 Therefore, while the antioxidant effect of usnic acid was reported at low concentrations, the prooxidant effect occurred at higher concentrations12,32,51 or under higher UVB doses, which could be explained by the generation of the protein damaging radical cations of usnic acid.54 These radical cations could be efficiently quenched by vitamins C and E.42
Even if some studies highlighted usnic acid as a good UVB filter, with the production enhanced by UV radiation and an incapacity to produce the thymine singlet responsible for DNA damage,42 the relevant toxicity already demonstrated on normal human cell lines41,55 and with 100 μM on a human lymphocyte cell line (Jurkat-cells) under UV-B-irradiation54 and its photosensitizer potential56 limit its suitable use in cosmetics.
3.4 Diphenyl ethers
These less common compounds, obtained by the joining of two units via an ether bond, possess similar UVB absorptions to the other orsellinic acid derivatives (Table 1). Epiphorelic acids I and II (Fig. 9) isolated from Coelopogon epiphorellus47, and the chlorinated buellin (Fig. 9) that is structurally close to the depsidone 4-O-methyldechlorodiploicin from Diploicia canescens,45 showed UVB screening behavior. A TD-DFT study introduced the idea that the opened C-ring, present in buellin compared to 4-O-methyldechlorodiploicin, induces a hypsochromic effect that is caused by a destabilization of the LUMO and the favored contribution of the HOMO → LUMO + 1 transition.43 This chlorinated diphenyl ether showed, however, cytotoxic effects against HaCaT cell lines.45 Epiphorelic acids I and II were found to be photodegradable47 and are able to induce the thymine triplet that causes DNA damage.42 These studies demonstrated the low interest of this class of compounds as potential sunscreens.
4 Chromones, xanthones and anthraquinones derivatives
Lichens are able to produce, via the polyketide pathway (Scheme 1), other polyfunctionalized aromatic compounds such as chromones, xanthones and anthraquinones ,which could also occur in fungi or plants, and which possess the ability to absorb UV.
4.1 Chromones and xanthones
Chromones and xanthones are non-specific lichen metabolites which possess interesting UV spectral behaviors. While chromones present four absorption bands, leading them to absorb in the UVB range, xanthones, with three absorption maxima with high absorption coefficients in the lower energy absorption band, act as UVA absorbers (Table 1).
Only few chromones have been isolated from lichens.10 Lepraric acid (Fig. 9), a chromone that occurs in the cortex and medulla of Roccella fuciformis,57 showed absorption maxima (in THF) at 240 (ε = 17420 L mol−1 cm−1), 250 (15970), 257 (15854) and 292 nm (4065) (personal data). These results indicate its low ability to absorb UVB radiation in comparison to UVC.
In the case of xanthones, lichexanthone (Fig. 9) was found in the thallus and thalline exciple of Brazilian tropical H. flourescens and in juvenile mycelia after UV exposition of its cultured mycobiont. The presence of this compound may indicate its protective role as a light filter.40 A recent TD-DFT study43 highlighted the UV spectra of secalonic acids (Fig. 9), and two bis-xanthones isolated from D. canescens. These compounds showed two main absorption maxima (at 340 and 375 nm), the highest located at 340 nm being mainly assigned to the HOMO − 1 → LUMO + 1 electronic transition with a relatively weak absorption intensity (indicated by the oscillator strength). The second band, with weaker intensity, is attributed to the HOMO → LUMO + 2, this latter one being located in the central moiety and the carboxylic moiety of these bis-xanthones. Secalonic acid B showed a non-optimal photostability with a 15% decrease of the UV profile after irradiation.43
Secalonic acids present chemical similarities to avobenzone, which is related to the phenyl-β-diketo moiety. The enol form leads to a strong absorption at 340–350 nm, while the keto form absorbs at 260–280 nm.43 While the photoprotection action of avobenzone depends on the conditions (e.g., formulation, etc.) favoring the intramolecular hydrogen bonded enol “chelated” form,26 secalonic acid B exists in an enol form that is less sensitive to the conditions. The low cytotoxicity against HaCaT cells shown by secalonic acid B45 is in favor for its cosmetic use, but it is counter-balanced by its difficult separation, as it was isolated along with higher toxicity isomers (e.g., secalonic acid D).
4.2 Anthraquinones
The yellow parietin pigment (Fig. 10) is the most studied cortical lichen anthraquinone, acting as an UV-absorber with a strong UVB and blue light absorption. By extracting compounds using acetone and exposing rinsed thalli to light filtered radiation, Solhaug et al. showed that parietin synthesis in the lichen Xanthoria parietina is directly induced by the presence of UVB radiation and to a lesser extent UVA radiation, while PAR does not induce parietin synthesis. However, the photoprotection of the photosynthetic apparatus by parietin is not observed.58 The photoprotective role of parietin in X. parietina is confirmed by a significant correlation between parietin concentration and site light factors.59,60 Moreover both lichen symbionts are involved in the synthesis of parietin and the blue light screening of parietin may functionally be more important than the UVB screening.61,62 More recently, the screening of visible light function of parietin and atranorin, respectively in X. parietina and Physcia aipola, has been compared. Results show that screening mechanisms are compound-specific, as parietin absorbs whereas atranorin reflects excess light.63 Finally, concerning its photoprotective activity, parietin exhibits a low in vitro SPF value compared to homosalate, a commercial sunscreen compound, respectively 1.9 and 3.9.37
 Fig. 10  Molecular structures of anthraquinone and perylenequinone compounds. 
Like the previous lichexanthone study, two anthraquinones haematommone and russulone (Fig. 10) were found in the reddish orange apothecia of Haematomma stevensiae and were surprisingly discovered in the mycelia of its cultured mycobiont as a response to a UV light of 365 nm exposure. This experiment shows that the Haematomma mycobiont is able to produce anthraquinone pigments in the absence of symbiotic algae and may indicate their protective role as light filters.40
Other anthraquinones exhibit characteristic UV-visible absorption spectra such as perylenequinone pigments.64 Two of them have been identified in lichens: isohypocrellin in Graphis hematites and elsinochrome A in Cryptothelium rhodotitton (Fig. 10). Their conjugated polycyclic aromatic quinone moieties allowed them to exhibit an intense red fluorescence emission under UV and blue excitation. Their spectroscopic properties have been used to obtain their spatial distribution in lichens using confocal fluorescence microscopy. They exhibit a major peak fluorescence near 660 nm with a broad range of 250 nm, which may explain their role in the energy dissipation mechanism for light absorbed by the lichens.65
They can also act as photosensitizers. In this context, some new elsinochrome A derivatives have been synthesized for an application in photodynamic therapy.66
5 Shikimic acid derivatives
Other important biosynthetic route in lichens is the shikimic acid pathway (Scheme 2), providing an alternative way to produce either aromatic compounds derived from aromatic amino acids or compounds named mycosporines and MAAs and scytonemin, which have chemical features for UV absorption. These latter ones are well-distributed in algae or in cyanobacteria. Shikimate aromatic compounds possessing good potentials for UV sun-screening correspond to pulvinic acid derivatives which are unique to lichens, while scytonemin, which is a lipid-soluble phenolic and indolic derivative, is produced in the sheaths of cyanobacteria, often along with MAAs21 and complex polymeric melanin pigments which are also spread in various organisms such as lichens.
 Scheme 2  Overview of biosynthesis of lichen metabolites via the shikimate pathway30 and via the pentose phosphate pathway (indicated in the square as a recent biosynthetic origin for MAAs and mycosporines67) 
5.1 Pulvinic acid derivatives
These compounds such as calycin, rhizocarpic acid and vulpinic acid (Fig. 11), possessing an oxolane-carbonyl chromophore unit, present UV profiles characterized by two absorption bands with a high absorption coefficient (Table 1).27 The study of their photochemical properties revealed that these compounds absorb UVA and UVB radiations37,68,69 and emit fluorescence at around 430 nm.69 These metabolites are frequently found in lichens from environments having high UV radiation levels (e.g., calycin coexisting with usnic acid in alpine Lecanora somervellei70) and their biosynthesis rates increase with the increasing levels of UV radiation (calycin in Pseudocyphellaria crocata69 or rhizocarpic acid in Acarospora schleicheri68). Despite moderate protection factors (in vitro SPF37 and in vivo MPF47 values), the photoprotective capacity of these compounds appears worthy, such that these compounds were relatively photostable with good filtering power of their photoproducts47,69 and were unable to transfer energy to thymine singlets, thus avoiding DNA damage.42 The photodegradation observed with these compounds occurs mainly in the oxolane carbonylic group.69 The radical cations of calycin formed using various oxidizing radicals could, however, be efficiently scavenged by vitamins C or E, suggesting their possible association, despite their yellow color, with antioxidants in commercial sunscreens.42
 Fig. 11  Molecular structures of pulvinic acid derivatives from lichens acting as UV-protectants. 
5.2 Mycosporines and MAAs
Mycosporines and MAAs are polar, water soluble and low molecular weight compounds,71–74 which have been found in many taxonomically marine lichens and their symbiotic partners75 (Table 2). These compounds have a common chromophore unit corresponding, respectively, to a cyclohexenone or cyclohexenimine ring, and the presence of substituents at different positions, such as alcohol, carboxylic acid, glycone has an effect on their absorption. These compounds have been described as shikimate derivatives but Balskus and Walsh have recently demonstrated their biosynthetic origin from sedoheptulose-7-phosphate via the pentose phosphate pathway67 (Scheme 2).
Table 2 Mycosporines and MAAs from lichens and cyanobacteria and related physical properties




Mycosporines and MAAs
Source

λ
max (nm) and ε (L mol−1 cm−1)







Cyanobacteria (Anabaena doliolum71 and Chlorogloeopsis PCC 691277), cyanolichens Collema, Gonohymenia and Peltula78
310 (28800)





Cyanobacteria Synechocystis sp. PCC 680379
309





Cyanolichens Lichina pygmaea,80,81L. confinis,81Peltigera praetextata,81P. horizontalis,81P. polydactylum81
310 (27270)





Cyanolichen Nephroma laevigatum Ach81
310





Cyanobacteria Nodularia (N. baltica, N. harveyana, N. spumigena),82Anabaena variabilis PCC 7937,83A. doliolum,71A. sp.84–86Nostoc commune,87Scytonema sp.,86Chlorogloeopsis PCC 691277
334 (44668)





Unicellular cyanobacteria (Euhalothece sp.)88,89
331





Cyanobacterial strain Nodularia (N. baltica, N. harveyana, N. spumigena),82 Cyanobacteria Anabaena doliolum71
334 (42300)





Halophilic cyanobacterium (Euhalothece sp.)89
362





Cyanolichen Collema cristatum76
311 (34400)





Cyanobacteria (Nostoc commune)90
335 (33173)


M-343
Cyanobacteria Synechosistis sp. PCC 680379
343




These secondary metabolites can reduce the damage effect of UVA radiation with efficient absorption between 310 and 360 nm related to the π → π* and n → π* electronic transitions of the heteroatom conjugated system. These results are in concordance with theoretical calculations.72 For example, mycosporine glycine has a strong absorption at 310 nm in comparison to mycosporine 2-glycine, which possesses a strong absorption at 331 nm (Table 2). The presence of an imine function instead of a keto group increases the bathochromic shift toward the UVA zone, due to an extension of the conjugated system, simultaneously affording an increase of the absorption wavelength and of its intensity. The conjugated system has been also largely extended for euhalothece-362 leading to an important shift to 362 nm. Collemin A (λmax = 311 nm) (Table 2), an original UVB absorbing mycosporine isolated from Collema cristatum, showed the capacity to efficiently prevent UVB-induced damage, such as cell destruction, pyrimidine dimer formation and erythema.76
The production of mycosporines and MAAs in lichens and their symbiotic partners was analysed by HPLC under different sources of light radiation such as PAR (700–400 nm), a combination of PAR with UVA (700–315 nm), and PAR + UVA + UVB (700–295 nm).71,74,84–86,91 The combination of PAR + UV usually gave better results than the use of PAR alone and the percentage of mycosporines and MAAs predominantly increases under UV radiation when used alone. These data underlined the importance of UV radiation in the synthesis of mycosporines and MAAs from lichens and their symbiotic partners.71,77,82–85,87 Their presence depends on the wavelength used. In fact, while mycosporine-glycine,71 mycosporine-taurine79 tolerate both UVA and UVB, porphyra-33471,82 and shinorine,71,86 were predominantly induced under UVB irradiation, and M-343 and dehydroxylusujirene only under UVA.79 Other environmental factors (temperature, salinity, ammonium concentration) influenced the generation of mycosporines and their related compounds. The synergy effects of the UV radiation and temperature increased the shinorine rates,83 despite the most important effect being correlated to the radiation. The presence of salt without UVB had a positive effect on the mycosporines concentration.77,83 However, in some cases, if the salt concentration exceeded a threshold, it induced a negative effect with or without UV radiation.77 Therefore, the increase of pH influenced the induction of MAAs,92 and the antibiotic compounds decreased the accumulation of MAAs,77e.g., chloramphenicol and rifampicin, in the synthesis of shinorine and of mycosporine glycine from the cyanobacterium Chlorogloeopsis PCC 6912.
The high photostability of some MAAs (porphyra-334 and shinorine) was recently studied to clarify this character. The experimental results showed a low fluorescence quantum yield, even in the presence of oxygen (1 atmosphere), and very low photoreactivity because of a very fast conversion from the excited state to the ground one.93 Conde et al.93,94 applied the photoacoustic calorimetry (PAC) experiment to understand the relaxation pathway of the excited MAAs in solution. The experimental results highlighted that the energy absorbed by MAAs was delivered as heat to the external environment in a short time, without the production of a reactive oxidating species.93 Most of mycosporines and MAAs choose this way to dissipate the excited energy, while palythene and usujirene (isolated from other organisms) showed photoexcited isomerisation under irradiation.94–96 However, recent works proposed the indirect photodegradation route after UV radiation of MAAs in solution, depending on the presence of oxygen and strong photosensitizing agents in high excess. In fact, under irradiation and in the presence of these organic compounds (riboflavin or rose bengal), the MAAs were oxidized into 2-hydroxy glutaric acid.73,95 Indeed, with rose bengal as the source of singlet oxygen, palythine was degraded by 50% after 2 h of exposure, while its complete degradation was obtained within 1 h in the presence of riboflavin in a ratio of 10:1.95 Other studies mentioned the stability of the aqueous solution of MAAs under different conditions: damage irradiation, heat treatment,93,96,94 variation of pH,93,94 presence of distilled water or seawater.95
All these results demonstrate that mycosporines and the related MAAs have a good absorption in both the regions of UVA and UVB, with high photostability. These compounds have the potential to be UV filters. However, major drawbacks concern the low amount of these compounds found in marine organisms and also their difficult isolation. Moreover, to date, only two publications about the total synthesis of mycosporines have been reported in the literature, due to their complexity.97,98 Two mycosporines have been synthetized in around 20 steps with low yields, and no synthesis of iminomycosporines was successful. We propose to develop new organic filters structurally close to mycosporines and MAAs, possessing similar physicochemical properties (absorption pattern) that are associated with harmlessness, good photostability and the exhibition of no phototoxicity.
5.3 Scytonemin
Scytonemin (Table 3), a shikimic acid derivative, has been predominantly found in the extracellular polysaccharide sheath of cyanobacteria living in extreme conditions, such as under intense radiation or dessication.99–103 It is also produced in the outer thallus of cyanobacterial lichens of some genera Collema, Gonohymenia and Peltula species from high UV radiation environments. Its presence was determined by HPLC in concentrations ranging from very low (0.06% dry weight of P. impressula) to high (8.21% dry weight of P. clavata).78 This dimeric compound, containing an indole ring and phenolic units, exists in a green and reduced form depending on the external conditions (redox, acido-basic conditions) (Table 3).104 Three scytonemin derivatives have been recently provided by Scytonema sp.,105 a cyanobacteria species usually found in lichens, which also presented the ability to absorb UV radiation (Table 3).
Table 3 The physical properties of scytonemin and its related compounds




Compounds

λ
max(nm) and ε (L mol−1 cm−1)







386 (61254)


300


278


252





378 (22000)


314


276


246





422 (23015)


316 (18143)


215 (60354)





562 (5944)


212 (35928)





270 (22484)


207 (38948)


224 (37054)




Scytonemin showed efficient activity as an UV absorber.99–103 Firstly, this UV screening compound presents an absorption maximum in the UVA zone, at 386 nm, with a high extinction coefficient, but it also absorbs significantly in the UVC zone (252, 278 nm) and UVB zone (300 nm).101,104,106 Secondly, scytonemin can reduce, by 90%, the damage incident of UVA radiation entering the cells.100,101,107–109
The UV absorption profiles (absorption wavelengths, related strengths) of scytonemin, reduced scytonemin, dimethoxyscytonemin and tetramethoxyscytonemin have been studied by quantum chemistry and are similar to the experimental results.110 Scytonemin and its related compounds possess different absorption properties correlated to their own unsaturated system. The larger carbon and heteroatom unsaturated system of scytonemin, in comparison to that of shorter carbon conjugated tetramethoxyscytonemin, led to scytonemin being able to absorb in the UVC, UVB and UVA zones, the latter one corresponding to the electronic transitions (π → π*) and (n → π*).
The plausible biosynthesis of scytonemin was reported by Walsh and Balskus via the shikimic acid pathway, affording the monomer part.112 Subsequent reactions using various enzymes (NpR1275, NpR1269, NpR1276) led to the product (2) which was transformed into the monomer part after some chemical transformations, e.g., decarboxylation, cyclization and oxidation (Scheme 3). The last step is the oxidative dimerization that may be catalyzed by the NpR1263 enzyme or may be afforded spontaneously. Walsh and Balskus111 recently isolated the enzyme ScyC, which is involved in the indole ring formation of (2), from N. punctiforme ATCC 29133. These co-workers proposed a highly efficient route for the biosynthesis of scytonemin and also characterized three enzymes operating in the first steps.
 Scheme 3  Plausible biosynthesis of scytonemin111,112 
Under natural conditions, cyanobacteria or lichens are often exposed to extreme conditions, therefore scytonemin may achieve high stability.99,108,113,114 Scytonemin was found in cyanobacteria Lyngbya sp.,114 which can survive and grow during long periods in the summer season under temperatures above 45 °C108 and dry conditions.104,113 In the cells of desiccated cyanobacteria of N. punctiforme, a large amount of scytonemin was found intact after UVA radiation for 2 months, and only 16% was degraded under intense UVA radiation after 50 days.113
The scytonemin accumulation was influenced by the complex cooperative effect of various environmental factors (light, temperature, salinity, nitrogen source, etc.). UVA radiation stimulates the production of scytonemin in cyanobacteria, which is also positively affected by temperature.99 In the same manner, the presence of a moderate concentration of oxidative stress compounds (for example: methylene blue99) and osmotic stress conditions (e.g., salanity,99,114 nitrogen source115) increases the formation rate of scytonemin, indicating its potential role as photoprotectant.
Among scytonemin and its related compounds, only one total synthesis of scytonemin has recently been proposed by Martensson and co-worker116 and inspired from its biosynthesis.
Scytonemin was found to efficiently limit the harmful effect of UVA radiation, but until now, no publication has reported the attractive properties regarding its phototoxicity, harmlessness, and solubility in some organic solvents. Indeed, scytonemin could act as a natural sunscreen, however, its low presence in cyanobacteria or lichens, and difficult purification and total synthesis prevents its exploitation. In conclusion, further studies investigating the properties of this natural sunscreen and the development of new strategies of synthesis need to be undertaken.
5.4 Melanin pigments
Melanic pigments are a group of complex pigments of biological origin that are widely spread in all species, ranging from fungi to humans. They are cortical lichen compounds that are solar radiation screens along with parietin, usnic acid, and atranorin.117 These pigments possess phenolic and indolic rings acting as basic building blocks for the melanin polymeric structure. Despite the fact that their spectroscopic UV-visible properties are not well characterized, the screening activities of melanin compounds have been directly demonstrated in vivo in Lobaria pulmonaria by cortical transmittance measurements. They seem to be synthesized by the mycobiont in order to protect its photobiont partner.118 Moreover in Cetraria islandica thalli, melanin strongly absorbs both UVB and PAR.60 Using an acetone-rinsing method, Solhaug et al. showed that melanin synthesis in the lichen L. pulmonaria requires the presence of UVB radiation, and to a lesser extent UVA radiation, while PAR does not induce melanin synthesis.58 The production of these pigments indicates that stress-tolerating lichens develop similar protective strategies to the human skin for protection against the harmful effects of UV radiation.
6 Carotenoid pigments
Other candidates for UV screening compounds are carotenoid pigments, despite the fact that their role is somewhat controversial with an indirect photoprotective function.21 Carotenoids are the accessory pigments of the photosynthetic apparatus, which participate in both light-harvesting and photoprotective functions.119
They are formed via the condensation of eight isoprenoid monomers, constituting a regular conjugated 40-carbon skeleton. One or both ends of the carbon skeleton can be cyclized to form a β-ionone ring. According to their substituent composition, carotenoids are divided into two groups: carotenes being non-oxygenated molecules (e.g., β-carotene) and xanthophylls containing oxygen atoms within hydroxy-, epoxy- or keto-groups (e.g., lutein Fig. 12). The maximum absorptions of carotenoids are between 440 and 520 nm, with a strong molar absorption coefficient which could be as high as 180 ×103 moL−1 L cm−1.120 Their visible absorption is due to the number of carbon double bonds, where these linear conjugated molecules generally have higher absorption coefficients than aromatics. About 750 different carotenoids are known, and they are synthesized in cyanobacteria, bacteria, fungi, phytoplankton and algae de novo, and are acquired in the diet by animals.121 In photosynthetic organisms, carotenoids are localized within the thylakoid membranes of chloroplasts near the photosynthetic apparatus, they can also be synthesized and accumulated in the cytoplasmic lipid globules under unfavourable high light conditions.22 Carotenoids thus form droplets in the filamentous green photobiont Trentepohlia, which is usually found in lichens.7 Their photoprotective role occurs in a process globally known as non-photochemical quenching or NPQ and consists of protecting cells from photo-oxidative damage by 1) preventing the formation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) through thermal dissipation of excess energy; 2) quenching of the excited (triplet) states of chlorophyll and singlet oxygen 1O2 given by the conjugate bonds of the polyene chain.3 Excess energy is dissipated as heat in the cyclic transformations of carotenoids known as xanthophyll cycles (XC). Two major XC are involved, such as the violaxanthin cycle in higher and certain lower plants and the diadinoxanthin cycle in algae (Fig. 13).22 Gasulla et al. have completed a review on the mechanism of light energy dissipation in lichens.14
 Fig. 12  Molecular structures of carotenoid pigments. 
 Fig. 13  Two major xanthophyll cycles involved in the dissipation of excess light energy as heat. A: Violaxanthin cycle; two de-epoxidation steps catalyzed by violaxanthin de-epoxidase (VDE); recycling violaxanthin by zeaxanthin epoxidase (ZE) in an NADPH dependent reaction. B: Diadinoxanthin cycle; single de-epoxidation step catalyzed by diadinoxanthin de-epoxidase (DDDE); recycling diadinoxanthin by diatoxanthin epoxidase (DE). 
Green lichen like Lobaria pulmonaria and cyanolichens like Umbilicaria antartica, Lasallia pustulata use the violaxanthin cycle to synthesize zeaxanthin under excessive light conditions. It is activated by the acidification of thylacoid lumen and the activation of the enzyme violaxanthin de-epoxidase VDE.122Lobaria pulmonaria has also been especially studied for a better understanding of the mechanism of thermal energy dissipation when the thallus is desiccated, which further involved a conformational change of the PSII reaction center. This study was followed by direct measurement of the fluorescence emission variation in the photosynthetic apparatus.17,123–125
FT laser Raman spectroscopy was also used to study the parietin:β-carotene ratio of two epilethic lichens, Xanthoria elegans and Caloplaca sublobulata, under UVB radiation. Inside UVB-protective cloches lichens, there is a lower parietin:β-carotene ratio than in non-protected lichens, suggesting that the response of lichens towards parietin production is more rapid than for β-carotene production. Moreover the produced β-carotene is retained more than the produced parietin in these lichens under UVB radiation.126 The same observation was highlighted by Bachereau and Asta for Cetraria islandica, where the screening of the UVB–UVA bands induces a decrease of the content of phenolic compounds (−52% on average) without any significant effects on the concentrations of the photosynthetic pigments chlorophyll and carotenoid.127
In dinoflagellates and diatoms, the XC with diadinoxanthin to diatoxanthin conversion is the result of the dissipation of the excess energy as heat.128 In this context, Johnsen et al. have invented a composition of carotenoids comprising diadino-diatoxanthin and/or fucoxanthin and related compounds for their use as sunscreens.129
From the green microalga Haematococcus pluvialis, astaxanthin (Fig. 12) is a rich source of natural pigment.130 This compound is a lipophilic xanthophyll carotenoid with unique chemical features based on the presence of hydroxyl and ketone groups on each β-ionone ring. It provides powerful antioxidant activity and the possibility to be esterified with one or two fatty acids (monoester or diester form) which stabilize the molecule. Astaxanthin is reported to have a promising application in skin health. When the skin is exposed to prooxidant agents, it leads to ROS generation and oxidative stress produced damage of cellular constituents. This study displays that when human skin fibroblast cultures are pre-incubated with either natural algal or synthetic astaxanthin, the pre-incubation prevents UVA-induced alterations in cellular SOD activity and cellular glutathione content and points out protection against UVA-induced DNA alterations.131
An example of photoadaptative behaviour under unfavourable conditions is the study of the green unicellular alga Parietochloris incisa (Trebouxiophyceae, Chlorophyta). It was found that the carotenoid content, localization and composition (especially β-carotene and lutein) as well as the carotenoid-to-chlorophyll ratio represents a characteristic response of P. incisa to light and nitrogen availability.132
In various cyanobacteria, the orange carotenoid protein OCP has been recently found to have a role in performing NPQ as a photoprotective mechanism, which is responsible for the quenching of phycobilisome fluorescence. It contains a single pigment, the carotenoid 3′-hydroxy echinenone, which is bound to the protein.133,134
Ten species of the ascomycete fungus Neurospora have been studied for their carotenoid accumulation in Spain. The accumulation of the carotenoid neurosporaxanthin shows a correlation with UV radiation: the species with a high UV exposure accumulates more carotenoids than the species exposed to little UV radiation. The increasing carotenoid accumulation may protect the Neurospora species from high UV exposure.135
Thus, these pigments play an essential role in photoprotection by acting as thermal dissipation antennae.
7 Conclusions
Lichens are stress tolerant organisms which have developed complex mechanisms to protect themselves against UV radiation. Along with physiological processes, e.g., light scattering, thermal dissipation, ROS scavenging and DNA repair, these organisms produce protective compounds that act as UV screens. They often crystallize on the surface of hyphae and thus give the first line of defense against UV radiation. The variations in the production of these natural UV-protectants depends on the environmental conditions under which the lichens grow. These observations point out that the produced metabolites correspond to an evolutionary response of these organisms to external stress factors such as light radiation.
The most abundant UV screening compounds provided by lichens are polyfunctionalized aromatic compounds, e.g., depsides, depsidones, dibenzofuranes, anthraquinones, which absorb in the UVB range, or xanthones, and pulvinic acid derivatives which possess UVA screening behaviors. Atranorin (depside), pannarin and its chlorinated compound (depsidones), usnic acid (dibenzofurane derivative), parietin (anthraquinone) and calycin (pulvinic acid derivative) were the most studied UV filters from lichens. Among them calycin has the potential to be a photoprotectant due to its relative photostability and its lack of direct photodamage generation. All these aromatic lichen products are in general moderate UV filters, in comparison to physical blocks. Due to their chemical and screening characteristics and their photostability, they do not stop visible light which essential for photosynthesis, but could play an important role in absorbing UV light, followed by energy dissipation and thus reflects the ecological response of these organisms to the environment. Their high accumulation on lichen thallus (>5% dry weight for most of them), that is mainly localized in the upper parts, counter-balances their lower efficiency. These compounds, that are provided by lichens, can not be used alone in sunscreens, but instead need to be associated with other UV filters or antioxidants which may prevent the DNA damage caused by the putative singlet oxygen species produced after photodegradation.
Cyanolichens, characterized by their cyanobacterial photobionts, produce interesting UVA sunscreens, e.g., mycosporines and MAAs or scytonemin, a lipid soluble pigment. Even though mycosporines and MAAs are present in low amounts from lichens, they seem essential for UVA protection. The strong radiation screening is associated with their known antioxidant activity, which underlines their essential role to protect species exposed to direct sunlight. Their interesting photoprotective properties (absorption pattern, photostability, etc.) have attracted research interest towards the development of mycosporine derivatives for future applications in cosmetics.
8 Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Delphine Parrot and Solenn Ferron for providing the UV measurement of lepraric acid and Prof. Joel Boustie for his intellectual support.
9 References
M. Cardinale, A. M. Puglia and M. Grube, FEMS Microbiol. Ecol., 2006, 57, 484–495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          T. H. Nash III, in Lichen Biology, ed. T. H. Nash, Cambridge, 2nd edn,  2008, pp. 216–233 Search PubMed .

          R. P. Beckett, I. Kranner, and F. V. Minibayeva, in Lichen Biology, ed. T. H. Nash, Cambridge, 2nd edn,  2008, pp. 134–151 Search PubMed .

          D. Delmail, M. Grube, D. Parrot, J. Cook-Moreau, J. Boustie, P. Labrousse, and S. Tomasi, in Ecophysiology and responses of plants under salt stress, ed. P. Ahmad, M. M. Azooz, and M. N. V. Prasad, Springer, New York, NY,  2013, pp. 115–149 Search PubMed .

          P. Ozenda and G. Clauzade, Les lichens: étude biologique et flore illustrée, Paris, Masson,  1970 Search PubMed .
D. N. Rao and F. LeBlanc, Bryologist, 1965, 68, 285–289 Search PubMed .

          B. Büdel and C. Scheidegger, in Lichen Biology, ed. T. H. Nash, Cambridge, 2nd edn,  2008, pp. 40–68 Search PubMed .
V. R. Franceschi and H. T. Horner Jr, Bot. Rev., 1980, 46, 361–427 CrossRef CAS .
D. Fahselt, Symbiosis, 1994, 16, 117–165 CAS .

          J. A. Elix and E. Stocker-Wörgötter, in Lichen Biology, ed. T. H. Nash, Cambridge, 2nd edn,  2008, pp. 104–133 Search PubMed .
J. Boustie, S. Tomasi and M. Grube, Phytochem. Rev., 2011, 10, 287–307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Bjerke, K. Lerfall and A. Elvebakk, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2002, 1, 678–685 CAS .
W. Quilhot, E. Fernandez and M. E. Hidalgo, Brit. Lich. Soc. Bull., 1994, 75, 1–5 Search PubMed .

          F. Gasulla, J. Herrero, A. Esteban-Carrasco, A. Ros-Barceló, E. Barreno, J. M. Zapata, and A. Guéra, in Advances in photosynthesis - fundamental aspects, ed. M. M. Najafpour, InTech, Rijeka,  2012, pp. 149–174 Search PubMed .
J. Kopecky, M. Azarkovich, E. E. Pfündel, V. A. Shuvalov and U. Heber, Plant Biol., 2005, 7, 156–167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Heber and V. A. Shuvalov, Photosynth. Res., 2005, 84, 85–91 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Heber, O. L. Lange and V. A. Shuvalov, J. Exp. Bot., 2006, 57, 1211–1223 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Heber, W. Bilger and V. A. Shuvalov, J. Exp. Bot., 2006, 57, 2993–3006 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Kranner, W. J. Cram, M. Zorn, S. Wornik, I. Yoshimura, E. Stabentheiner and H. W. Pfeifhofer, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2005, 102, 3141–3146 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. S. Buffoni Hall, M. Paulsson, K. Duncan, A. K. Tobin, S. Widell and J. F. Bornman, Physiol. Plant., 2003, 118, 371–379 CrossRef .
C. S. Cockell and J. Knowland, Biol. Rev. Cambridge Philos. Soc., 1999, 74, 311–345 CrossRef CAS .
A. E. Solovchenko and M. N. Merzlyak, Russ. J. Plant Physiol., 2008, 55, 719–737 CrossRef CAS .
E. Fernandez, A. Reyes, M. E. Hidalgo and W. Quilhot, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 1998, 42, 195–201 CrossRef CAS .
J.-E. A. Otterstedt, J. Chem. Phys., 1973, 58, 5716–5726 CrossRef CAS .
P. Kullavanijaya and H. W. Lim, J. Am. Acad.
Dermatol., 2005, 52, 937–958 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Aspée, C. Aliaga and J. C. Scaiano, Photochem. Photobiol., 2007, 83, 481–485 CrossRef PubMed .

          S. Huneck and I. Yoshimura, Identification of lichen substances, Springer, Berlin and New York,  1996 Search PubMed .
A. Swanson and D. Fahselt, Can. J. Bot., 1997, 75, 284–289 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Buffoni Hall, J. F. Bornman and L. O. Björn, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 2002, 66, 13–20 CrossRef CAS .
E. Stocker-Wörgötter, Nat. Prod. Rep., 2008, 25, 188–200 RSC .
P. S. Rao, G. Sarma and T. R. Seshadri, P. Indian Acad. Sci. A, 1967, 66, 1–14 CAS .
M. D. Begora and D. Fahselt, Bryologist, 2001, 104, 134–140 CrossRef CAS .
M. Millot, S. Tomasi, K. Articus, I. Rouaud, A. Bernard and J. Boustie, J. Nat. Prod., 2007, 70, 316–318 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. E. Hidalgo, E. Fernandez, W. Quilhot and E. A. Lissi, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 1992, 67, 245–254 CrossRef CAS .
S.-I. Nagaoka, N. Hirota, M. Sumitani and K. Yoshihara, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1983, 105, 4220–4226 CrossRef CAS .
M. Begora and D. Fahselt, Symbiosis, 2001, 3–22 CAS .
F. Lohézic - Le Dévéhat, B. Legouin, C. Couteau, J. Boustie and L. Coiffard, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 2013, 120, 17–28 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Fernandez, W. Quilhot, M. E. Hidalgo, X. Molina and I. Meneses, Cosmet. Toiletries, 1996, 111, 69–74 CAS .
M. Sandberg and P. Thune, Contact Dermatitis, 1984, 11, 168–173 CrossRef CAS .
E. Stocker-Wörgötter, A. Hager and J. A. Elix, Phytochem. Rev., 2009, 8, 561–569 CrossRef .
K. C. Kumar and K. Müller, J. Nat. Prod., 1999, 62, 821–823 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Boehm, K. Clarke, R. Edge, E. Fernandez, S. Navaratnam, W. Quilhot, F. Rancan and T. G. Truscott, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 2009, 95, 40–45 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Millot, F. Di Meo, S. Tomasi, J. Boustie and P. Trouillas, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 2012, 111, 17–26 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Cilento, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1953, 75, 3748–3750 CrossRef CAS .
M. Millot, S. Tomasi, E. Studzinska, I. Rouaud and J. Boustie, J. Nat. Prod., 2009, 72, 2177–2180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. E. Hidalgo, L. Bascunan, W. Quilhot, E. Fernandez and C. Rubio, Photochem. Photobiol., 2005, 81, 1447–1449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Rancan, S. Rosan, K. Boehm, E. Fernández, M. E. Hidalgo, W. Quihot, C. Rubio, F. Boehm, H. Piazena and U. Oltmanns, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 2002, 68, 133–139 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Hidalgo, E. Fernandez, W. Quilhot and E. Lissu, Phytochemistry, 1994, 37, 1585–1587 CrossRef CAS .
G. Shrestha, S. Clair and L. Larry, Phytochem. Rev., 2013, 12, 229–244 CrossRef CAS .

          Y. H. Chooi, School of Applied Sciences Science, Engineering and Technology Portfolio, RMIT University,  2008 Search PubMed .
E. Fernández, W. Quilhot, C. Rubio, M. E. Hidalgo, R. Diaz and J. Ojeda, Photochem. Photobiol., 2006, 82, 1065–1068 CrossRef PubMed .
J. W. Bjerke, A. Elvebakk, E. Domínguez and A. Dahlback, Phytochemistry, 2005, 66, 337–344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liao, M. D. Piercey-Normore, J. L. Sorensen and K. Gough, Analyst, 2010, 135, 3242–3248 RSC .
C. Kohlhardt-Floehr, F. Boehm, S. Troppens, J. Lademann and T. G. Truscott, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 2010, 101, 97–102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-A. Bazin, A.-C. Le Lamer, J.-G. Delcros, I. Rouaud, P. Uriac, J. Boustie, J.-C. Corbel and S. Tomasi, Bioorg. Med. Chem., 2008, 16, 6860–6866 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. O. Thune and Y. J. Solberg, Contact Dermatitis, 1980, 6, 81–87 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Aberhart, K. H. Overton and S. Huneck, J. Chem. Soc., 1969, 704–707 CAS .
K. A. Solhaug, Y. Gauslaa, L. Nybakken and W. Bilger, New Phytol., 2003, 158, 91–100 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gauslaa and E. M. Ustvedt, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2003, 2, 424–432 CAS .
L. Nybakken, K. A. Solhaug, W. Bilger and Y. Gauslaa, Oecologia, 2004, 140, 211–216 CrossRef PubMed .
K. A. Solhaug and Y. Gauslaa, Plant, Cell Environ., 2004, 27, 167–176 CrossRef CAS .
H. Vráblíková, M. McEvoy, K. A. Solhaug, M. Barták and Y. Gauslaa, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 2006, 83, 151–162 CrossRef PubMed .
K. A. Solhaug, P. Larsson and Y. Gauslaa, Planta, 2010, 231, 1003–1011 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. A. Mulrooney, E. M. O'Brien, B. J. Morgan and M. C. Kozlowski, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2012, 21, 3887–3904 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Mathey and P. B. Lukins, Micron, 2001, 32, 107–113 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, J. Xie, L. Zhang, C. Li, H. Chen, Y. Gu and J. Zhao, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2009, 8, 1676–1682 CAS .
E. P. Balskus and C. T. Walsh, Science, 2010, 329, 1653–1656 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Rubio, E. Fernandez, M. A. Hidalgo and W. Quilhot, Bol. Soc. Chim. Quim., 2002, 47, 213–217 Search PubMed .
M. E. Hidalgo, E. Fernández, M. Ponce, C. Rubio and W. Quilhot, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 2002, 66, 213–217 CrossRef CAS .
W. Obermayer and J. Poelt, Lichenologist, 1992, 14, 111–117 Search PubMed .
S. P. Singh, R. P. Sinha, M. Klisch and D.-P. Häder, Planta, 2008, 229, 225–233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Sampedro, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 5584–5586 RSC .
J. Bernillon, E. Parussini, R. Letoublon, J. Favre-Bonvin and N. Arpin, Phytochemistry, 1990, 29, 81–84 CrossRef CAS .
B. Pattanaik, M. Y. Roleda, R. Schumann and U. Karsten, Planta, 2008, 227, 907–916 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Řezanka, M. Temina, A. G. Tolstikovc and V. M. Dembitsky, Folia Microbiol., 2004, 49, 339–352 Search PubMed .
A. Torres, M. Hochberg, I. Pergament, R. Smoum, V. Niddam, V. M. Dembitsky, M. Temina, I. Dor, O. Lev, M. Srebnik and C. D. Enk, Eur. J. Biochem., 2004, 271, 780–784 CrossRef CAS .
A. Portwich and F. Garcia-Pichel, Arch. Microbiol., 1999, 172, 187–192 CrossRef CAS .
B. Büdel, U. Karsten and F. Garcia-Pichel, Oecologia, 1997, 112, 165–172 CrossRef .
L. Zhang, L. Li and Q. Wu, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 2007, 86, 240–245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Roullier, M. Chollet-Krugler, A. Bernard and J. Boustie, J. Chromatogr., B, 2009, 877, 2067–2073 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Roullier, M. Chollet-Krugler, E.-M. Pferschy-Wenzig, A. Maillard, G. N. Rechberger, B. Legouin-Gargadennec, R. Bauer and J. Boustie, Phytochemistry, 2011, 72, 1348–1357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. P. Sinha, N. K. Ambasht, J. P. Sinha, M. Klisch and D.-P. Häder, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 2003, 71, 51–58 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. P. Singh, M. Klisch, R. P. Sinha and D.-P. Häder, Photochem. Photobiol., 2008, 84, 1500–1505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. P. Sinha, M. Klisch and D. Hader, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 1999, 52, 59–64 CrossRef CAS .
R. P. Sinha, J. P. Sinha, A. Gröniger and D.-P. Häder, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 2002, 66, 47–53 CrossRef CAS .
R. P. Sinha, M. Klisch, E. W. Helbling and D. Häder, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 2001, 60, 129–135 CrossRef CAS .
R. P. Sinha, N. K. Ambasht, J. P. Sinha and D.-P. Häder, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2003, 2, 171–175 CAS .
L. Kedar, Y. Kashman and A. Oren, FEMS Microbiol. Lett., 2002, 208, 233–237 CrossRef CAS .
M. Volkmann, A. A. Gorbushina, L. Kedar and A. Oren, FEMS Microbiol. Lett., 2006, 258, 50–54 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Matsui, E. Nazifi, S. Kunita, N. Wada, S. Matsugo and T. Sakamoto, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 2011, 105, 81–89 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. P. Singh, S. Kumari, R. P. Rastogi, K. L. Singh and R. P. Sinha, Indian J. Exp. Biol., 2008, 46, 7–17 CAS .
S. Mushir and T. Fatma, Curr. Res. J. Biol. Sci., 2011, 3, 165–171 CAS .
F. R. Conde, M. S. Churio and C. M. Previtali, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 2000, 56, 139–144 CrossRef CAS .
F. R. Conde, M. S. Churio and C. M. Previtali, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2004, 3, 960–967 CAS .
K. Whitehead and J. I. Hedges, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 2005, 80, 115–121 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Rub and C. Mario, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2007, 6, 669–674 Search PubMed .
J. D. White, J. H. Cammack and K. Sakuma, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1989, 111, 8970–8972 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. White, J. H. Cammack, K. Sakuma, G. W. Rewcastle and R. K. Widener, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1995, 60, 3600–3611 CAS .
J. G. Dillon, C. M. Tatsumi, P. G. Tandingan and R. W. Castenholz, Arch. Microbiol., 2002, 177, 322–331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. P. Singh, D.-P. Häder and R. P. Sinha, Ageing Res. Rev., 2010, 9, 79–90 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Garcia-Pichel, N. D. Sherry and W. Castenholz, Photochem. Photobiol., 1992, 56, 17–23 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. Proteau, W. H. Gerwick, F. Garcia-Pichel and R. Castenholz, Experientia, 1993, 49, 825–829 CrossRef CAS .
R. P. Sinha and D.-P. Häder, Plant Sci., 2008, 174, 278–289 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. P. Rastogi and R. P. Sinha, Biotechnol. Adv., 2009, 27, 521–539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Bultel-Poncé, F. Felix-Theodose, C. Sarthou, J.-F. Ponge and B. Bodo, J. Nat. Prod., 2004, 67, 678–681 CrossRef PubMed .
J. G. Dillon and R. W. Castenholz, J. Phycol., 1999, 35, 673–681 CAS .
F. Garcia-Pichel and R. W. Castenholz, J. Phycol., 1991, 27, 395–409 CAS .
R. P. Sinha, M. Klisch, A. Vaishampayan and D.-P. Hader, Acta Protozool., 1999, 38, 291–298 CAS .
S. Brenowitz and R. W. Castenholz, FEMS Microbiol. Ecol., 1997, 24, 343–352 CrossRef CAS .
T. Varnali and H. G. M. Edwards, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 2010, 368, 3193–3203 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. P. Balskus and C. T. Walsh, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 14648–14649 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. P. Balskus and C. T. Walsh, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 15260–15261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. D. Fleming and R. W. Castenholz, Environ. Microbiol., 2007, 9, 1448–1455 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Rath, S. Mandal and S. P. Adhikary, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 2012, 115, 5–8 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. D. Fleming and R. W. Castenholz, FEMS Microbiol. Ecol., 2008, 63, 301–308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ekebergh, I. Karlsson, R. Mete, Y. Pan, A. Börje and J. Martensson, Org. Lett., 2011, 13, 4458–4461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          K. A. Solhaug and Y. Gauslaa, in Prog. Bot., ed. U. Lüttge, W . Beyschlag, B. Büdel, and D. Francis, Berlin, Springer-Verlag,  2012, vol. 73, pp. 283–304 Search PubMed .
Y. Gauslaa and K. A. Solhaug, Oecologia, 2001, 126, 462–471 CrossRef .

          C. Stange and C. Flores, in Advances in photosynthesis – Fundamental Aspects, ed. M. Najafpour, InTech Eur.,  2012, pp. 77–96 Search PubMed .

          G. Britton, in UV/Visible spectroscopy, ed. G. Britton, S. Liaaen-Jensen, and H. Pfander, Basel, Birkhauser,  1995, pp. 13–62 Search PubMed .
R. P. Rastogi, Richa, R. P. Sinha, S. P. Singh and D.-P. Häder, J. Ind. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2010, 37, 537–558 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Vráblíková, M. Barták and A. Wonisch, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 2005, 79, 35–41 CrossRef PubMed .
U. Heber, Photosynth. Res., 2012, 113, 5–13 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Heber, W. Bilger, R. Türk and O. L. Lange, New Phytol., 2010, 185, 459–470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. A. Shuvalov and U. Heber, Chem. Phys., 2003, 294, 227–237 CrossRef CAS .
H. G. M. Edwards, C. S. Cockell, E. M. Newton and D. D. Wynn-Williams, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2004, 35, 463–469 CrossRef CAS .
F. Bachereau and J. Asta, Symbiosis, 1997, 23, 197–217 CAS .
I. Laurion and S. Roy, J. Phycol., 2009, 45, 16–33 CrossRef CAS .
G. Johnsen, P. A. Lysaa and K. Aamodt, PCT Int. Appl., 2006 Search PubMed .
G. Hussein, U. Sankawa, H. Goto, K. Matsumoto and H. Watanabe, J. Nat. Prod., 2006, 69, 443–449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. M. Lyons and N. M. O'Brien, J. Dermatol. Sci., 2002, 30, 73–84 CrossRef CAS .
A. E. Solovchenko, I. Khozin-Goldberg, S. Didi-Cohen, Z. Cohen and M. N. Merzlyak, Russ. J. Plant Physiol., 2008, 55, 455–462 CrossRef CAS .
T. Polívka, P. Chábera and C. A. Kerfeld, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Bioenerg., 2013, 1827, 248–254 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Bailey and A. Grossman, Photochem. Photobiol., 2008, 84, 1410–1420 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. M. Luque, G. Gutiérrez, L. Navarro-Sampedro, M. Olmedo, J. Rodríguez-Romero, C. Ruger-Herreros, V. G. Tagua and L. M. Corrochano, PLoS One, 2012, 7, e33658 CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:
Khanh-Hung Nguyen	Khanh-Hung Nguyen received his bachelor’s degree in organic chemistry at the University of Natural Sciences (Vietnam) in 2009 and received his master’s degree in 2010 at the University of Le Mans, France. Afterwards, he started his PhD research under the guidance of Prof. Sophie Tomasi and Dr Nicolas Gouault in the PNSCM team, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Rennes 1. He is currently working on the synthesis of the derivatives of mycosporines and mycosporine-like amino acids and their photoprotective activity, while his research interests focus on the chemical synthesis of biologically active products and medicinal chemistry.
Marylène Chollet-Krugler	Marylène Chollet-Krugler received her PhD in chemistry from the University of Rennes 1, France in 1997, studying dithiolethiones synthesis and their physico-chemical properties. She was then appointed as Research Assistant Professor in 1997 and promoted to lecturer in analytical chemistry in 2000. She joined the group of Prof. Boustie in 2006, working in the field of natural products chemistry (lichen). Her current research is focused on the isolation and characterization of novel lichen compounds, particularly mycosporine-like compounds.
Nicolas Gouault	Nicolas Gouault studied chemistry at the University of Rennes 1, France. He obtained his PhD from the University of Rennes 1 in 2002 under the supervision of Dr M. David. He was then appointed as Research Assistant Professor in the same group in 2002 and promoted to lecturer in 2004. His research interests include heterocyclic chemistry, organic chemistry at the interface with biology, and gold catalysis.
Sophie Tomasi	Sophie Tomasi studied Pharmacy at the University of Rennes 1 where she received her PhD in chemistry in 1999 under the guidance of Prof. P. Uriac. After a postdoctoral position under the supervision of Dr R. Barrow at the ANU University of Canberra, she became a lecturer in 2000 then a full professor of Pharmacognosy in 2011 at the University of Rennes 1. She possesses skills in the field of phytochemical and synthetic studies and her research interests focus on natural products chemistry (lichens) and more recently on lichen-associated bacteria as a source of bioactive compounds.

 	Fig. 1  Main mechanisms of photoprotection in lichens depending on the thallus anatomy (from Ozenda and Clauzade5): A) Lobaria pulmonaria as heteromerous. B) Collema tenax as homoiomerous. cs: upper cortex; g: algal cells; m: medullary layer; ci: lower cortex; h: fungal hyphae.	 

 	Fig. 2  Jablonski diagram showing the different deactivation pathways. Abbreviations: IC, internal conversion; ISC, intersystem conversion; VR, vibrational relaxation. S0: ground state; S1: first excitation state; S2: second excitation state.	 

 	Fig. 3  UV absorption characteristics of common functional groups.	 

 	Fig. 4  Molecular structures of common aromatic and heteroaromatic UV absorbing compounds.	 

 	Fig. 5  Molecular structures of common classes of UV absorbing compounds: I, UVB and II, UVA filters.	 

 	Fig. 6  Chemical structures of lichen UV-protectant metabolites.	 

 	Scheme 1  Overview of the biosynthesis of lichen metabolites via the polyketide pathway.10,30	 

Monoaromatic compounds	245–278	4898–20417
299–305	2691–10233
Depsides	247–276	5012–32360
281–318	3467–29512
Depsidones	250–270	8710–39810
295–333	1995–18620
Dibenzofurans	235–249	13490–60256
256–275	16982–35481
295–338	3715–19055
Usnic acid and derivatives	282–290	21380–32359
Diphenyl ethers	238–259	14125–57544
269–295	3715–28840
314–338	4169–12589
Chromones	242–253	12589–29512
251–264	19953–30903
278–296	5012–25704
313–335	3236–5888
Xanthones	240–256	21878–70795
260–284	5888–23988
308–323	10000–34674
340–372	3981–32359
Quinones	205–235	7079–70795
250–295	13183–57544
308–387	10233–22387
417–500	7943–23988
520–578	3981–26303
Pulvinic acid derivatives	236–291	11749–54954
316–389	13183–31623

 	Fig. 7  Chemical structures of depsides from lichens reported as UVB filters.	 

 	Fig. 8  Chemical structures of depsidones from lichens acting as UV filters.	 

 	Fig. 9  Chemical structures of dibenzofurans and derivatives, chromones, xanthones from lichens reported as UV screens.	 

 	Fig. 10  Molecular structures of anthraquinone and perylenequinone compounds.	 

 	Scheme 2  Overview of biosynthesis of lichen metabolites via the shikimate pathway30 and via the pentose phosphate pathway (indicated in the square as a recent biosynthetic origin for MAAs and mycosporines67)	 

 	Fig. 11  Molecular structures of pulvinic acid derivatives from lichens acting as UV-protectants.	 



	Cyanobacteria (Anabaena doliolum71 and Chlorogloeopsis PCC 691277), cyanolichens Collema, Gonohymenia and Peltula78	310 (28800)


	Cyanobacteria Synechocystis sp. PCC 680379	309


	Cyanolichens Lichina pygmaea,80,81L. confinis,81Peltigera praetextata,81P. horizontalis,81P. polydactylum81	310 (27270)


	Cyanolichen Nephroma laevigatum Ach81	310


	Cyanobacteria Nodularia (N. baltica, N. harveyana, N. spumigena),82Anabaena variabilis PCC 7937,83A. doliolum,71A. sp.84–86Nostoc commune,87Scytonema sp.,86Chlorogloeopsis PCC 691277	334 (44668)


	Unicellular cyanobacteria (Euhalothece sp.)88,89	331


	Cyanobacterial strain Nodularia (N. baltica, N. harveyana, N. spumigena),82 Cyanobacteria Anabaena doliolum71	334 (42300)


	Halophilic cyanobacterium (Euhalothece sp.)89	362


	Cyanolichen Collema cristatum76	311 (34400)


	Cyanobacteria (Nostoc commune)90	335 (33173)
M-343	Cyanobacteria Synechosistis sp. PCC 680379	343



	386 (61254)
300
278
252


	378 (22000)
314
276
246


	422 (23015)
316 (18143)
215 (60354)


	562 (5944)
212 (35928)


	270 (22484)
207 (38948)
224 (37054)

 	Scheme 3  Plausible biosynthesis of scytonemin111,112	 

 	Fig. 12  Molecular structures of carotenoid pigments.	 

 	Fig. 13  Two major xanthophyll cycles involved in the dissipation of excess light energy as heat. A: Violaxanthin cycle; two de-epoxidation steps catalyzed by violaxanthin de-epoxidase (VDE); recycling violaxanthin by zeaxanthin epoxidase (ZE) in an NADPH dependent reaction. B: Diadinoxanthin cycle; single de-epoxidation step catalyzed by diadinoxanthin de-epoxidase (DDDE); recycling diadinoxanthin by diatoxanthin epoxidase (DE).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
