Flame synthesis of few-layered graphene /graphite films   - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C0CC05139J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C0CC05139J
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 3520-3522Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsFlame synthesis of few-layered graphene/graphite films†

        
          
            Zhen 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hongwei 
            Zhu
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Dan 
            Xie
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Kunlin 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Anyuan 
            Cao
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Jinquan 
            Wei
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xiao 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Lili 
            Fan
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Dehai 
            Wu
          
        
      a
aKey Laboratory for Advanced Manufacturing by Material Processing Technology, Ministry of Education and Department of Mechanical Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, P. R. China. E-mail: hongweizhu@tsinghua.edu.cn;  Fax: +86 1062770190;   Tel: +86 1062781065
bCenter for Nano and Micro Mechanics, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, P. R. China
cTsinghua National Laboratory for Information Science and Technology (TNList), Institute of Microelectronics, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, P. R. China
dDepartment of Advanced Materials and Nanotechnology, College of Engineering, Peking University, Beijing 100871, P. R. China
Received 
      24th November 2010
    , Accepted 24th January 2011First published on 10th February 2011AbstractWe report a fast (in 10–40 s) flame synthesis of high quality few-layered graphene/graphite films, offering the advantages of simplicity, high efficiency, energy saving, low cost and the ability to extend to continuous and mass production of graphene.

Graphene is now widely known to be outstanding with respect to its unusual mechanical and electronic properties.1,2 Recent progress in the synthesis of graphene has stimulated a wide range of research for next generation device applications.2,3 However, except for the handy mechanical exfoliation that produces graphene of highest quality from highly orientated pyrolytic graphite (popular for lab use but not suitable for large-scale application), other methods have their own drawbacks, such as the indispensable need for well-sealed chambers and complex gas handling equipment in the chemical vapor deposition (CVD) method,4 high temperature and high-level vacuum in thermal decomposition of SiC to produce epitaxial graphene,5 and complicated wet-chemistry operation which is comprised of a multi-step process including oxidation, reduction, sonication, centrifugation in liquid phase exfoliation of natural graphite6 or carbon nanotubes (CNTs).7
In this Communication, we introduce a facile yet time- and energy-saving flame method to produce high quality graphene and large-area few-layered graphene/graphite (FLG) films. High quality graphene/graphite films can be obtained in a short time (only 10–40 s). Flame synthesis is a self-propagating high-temperature synthesis technique,8 which involves only a single-step process, resulting in a large-scale, rapid and low-cost approach for preparing diverse materials including low-dimension carbon structures such as fullerenes,9 CNTs10 and amorphous carbon thin films.11 Here, a dual flame synthesis method was applied to effectively generate graphene/graphite films directly on the surface of nickel foils in ambient conditions. The quality evaluation of the graphene was performed to measure the power conversion efficiencies of graphene/silicon Schottky junction solar cells. The results confirmed that the flame-synthesized graphene may rival its CVD-derived counterparts.
The dual flame method employed here is an adaptation of the flame technique used previously for the preparation of amorphous carbon thin films and essentially a one-step process.11 The growth is based on a non-equilibrium surface segregation process and a carburization/decarburization mechanism similar to that in CVD. As illustrated in Fig. 1, a metal (Ni) foil was first heated for carburizing in high temperature (>800 °C) dual flames from burner 1 and burner 2. Carbon seeds pyrolyzed from the organic fuels were then allowed to diffuse into nickel from both sides of the foil. This process could be realized thanks to the presence of the reduction species (CO and H2) within the overlapped inner flames.11 After carburization, burner 2 was switched off and burner 1 was then capped off immediately. The Ni foil was allowed to cool down quickly to room temperature. During the cool-down, carbon solubility in nickel decreased and carbon segregated at the nickel surface to form FLG layers.
 Fig. 1  Schematic of the flame synthesis of FLG film on a nickel foil. 
The dual flame from the two burners served different functions in the graphene growth process. The flame from the burner 1 surrounded the Ni substrate for the whole time of synthesis, protecting the Ni substrates from air oxidation and serving as a carbon source for graphene segregation. It is a so called “protection flame”. The flame from burner 2 mainly served as a heating source for carbonization of Ni substrates, and also provided carbon for graphene growth. So it is called a “carburization flame”. Besides the advantages of flame synthesis for nanomaterials, the dual flame method offers the same flexibility with many parameters to be controlled similar to the CVD method. By changing the temperature of the carburization flame, one can control the maximal carbon solubility in the substrate, and further control the carbon segregation thickness from single layer graphene to thick graphite film. By changing the fuel of the protection flame, one can readily dope the graphene with various dopants.
We adapted two different dual-flame setups by varying burner 1 for either high quality or large-area graphene/graphene film deposition, respectively (see ESI†: Experimental method and Fig. S1a, 1b, Movies S1, S2). As shown in the schematic phase diagram (Fig. S1c), the Ni–C system presents a broad domain of two-phase solid solution.12 In the single α phase, only a small concentration of carbon is soluble; the maximum solubility is about 3% (atomic) at 1325 °C. In our flame synthesis, the carbon concentration (by weight) was obtained as below 0.2% by weighing the Ni foil before and after flame synthesis. Therefore, the atomic concentration of carbon was estimated as less than 1%. At 850 °C, the flame Ni–C system existed in the α phase. Graphene formed when the solubility limit of carbon in α was exceeded during cooling.
An etchant solution of 0.5 M FeCl3 and 0.5 M HCl was used to etch away the nickel substrate. Detailed information on the transferring technique was reported in our previous work.13 The raw graphene/graphite films were then immersed into a hydrogen peroxide solution (H2O2, 30%) for over 24 h to remove the amorphous carbon impurities and obtain a hydrophilic surface. After washing, the graphene films were transferred onto other substrates for characterizations and device fabrication. To transfer the film to a polyethylene terephthalate (PET) substrate, the nickel foil with graphene film was first hot pressed to PET by a laminator at a rolling rate of 30 cm min−1 and a rolling temperature of 130 °C. The nickel foil was then etched away by the etchant mentioned above. Fig. S1e shows a graphene film transferred on PET substrate by this simple thermoplastic process.

Fig. 2a and b show the SEM images of H2O2 purified samples. Formation of graphene was confirmed by the presence of the surface wrinkles, and the electron diffraction pattern (inset of Fig. 2c) which shows the typical hexagonally arranged lattice of carbon. Few-layer (2–5 layers) graphene can be identified by high-resolution TEM images (Fig. 2d).
 Fig. 2  (a,b) SEM, (c,d) TEM characterizations of the flame synthesized FLG films. 
The quality of graphene showed dependence on the position of the Ni foil with respect to the flame (See ESI†). Various organic solvents, including xylene, hexane, acetone, ethanol, and methanol, have been tried as fuels of the protection flame. Ethanol and methanol yielded high quality graphene deposition (Fig. S3b), while fuels with higher carbon content resulted in higher amorphous carbon content in the as-grown FLG film due to insufficient combustion of the fuels (Fig. S3b inset). Compared to the well-developed CVD method, one major drawback of our flame synthesis is that the graphene/graphite films so obtained are less uniform and continuous, with higher surface defects concentration and amorphous carbon impurities content. For samples grown on 50 μm thick Ni foils, the intensity ratio of the D band to the G band (ID/IG) of the flame sample is higher than that for the CVD sample (Fig. 3a). Thinner graphene films with stronger 2D peaks could be obtained on thinner Ni foils (20 μm). The pre-annealing process before carburization is an important key step in the CVD deposition of high quality graphene, which was not involved in our flame synthesis. The high temperature pre-annealing in hydrogen could effectively remove the native oxide layer and surface impurities on Ni and yield high-quality graphene deposition. To verify this, we used a Ni foil (20 μm) annealed at high temperature (1000 °C for 2 h) for flame synthesis. The graphene films so obtained show an enhanced I2D/IG intensity ratio (up to 2.0) and a decreased ID/IG intensity ratio (similar to CVD sample). Fig. 3b shows the Raman spectra of the flame synthesized graphene films using the first setup (Fig. S1a) upon H2O2 purification. The G-band is located at a normal position (1581.6 cm−1). As shown in the inset of Fig. 3b, monolayer graphene is identified from the high I2D/IG intensity ratio (∼3) and single peak 2D band (2703.6 cm−1) with a full width at half-maximum of ∼45 cm−1. Acetonitrile and pyridine were also tried as carbon sources to realize in situnitrogen doping in FLG films. Raman spectra of as-grown films show relatively lower crystallinity which was caused by nitrogen atoms embedded in the graphitic lattice (Fig. S3c). The tiny peak at 401.9 eV (shown in the inset: XPS spectrum) corresponds to sp2-hybridized nitrogen of hexagonal phase (also named substitutional type).14
 Fig. 3  
Raman spectra of (a) the CVD and flame-synthesized samples on Ni foils (20 μm and 50 μm thick) and (b) few-layered graphene films. 
To examine the quality of flame films and explore their application potential as transparent conducting coatings, the films were transferred onto silica substrates to measure their visible/near-infrared transmittances using a spectrophotometer (Lambda-950). The transmission spectra of three samples after 20 s flame synthesis are shown in Fig. S4a. Fig. S4b shows transmittance measured at 550 nm for films with different sheet resistances. The performance characteristics of flame graphene films are comparable to those of graphene films fabricated from liquid exfoliated graphene.15
To evaluate the quality of the flame-synthesized graphene films, Schottky solar cells consisting of graphene and n-type silicon (n-Si) wafers were fabricated (as illustrated in the inset of Fig. 4a, see ESI† for details). The current density versus the applied voltage (J–V) results from the solar devices in the dark and at AM1.5 condition are shown in Fig. 4a. We previously demonstrated that the CVD graphene/n-Si solar cells showed efficiencies of up to 1.6% under AM 1.5 illumination.16 Recently, this value has been optimized to 2.46% upon optimization in CVD synthesis and device fabrication. Schottky solar cells made from the flame graphene and n-Si show comparable photovoltaic performance. In all of our devices fabricated with the flame graphene, the efficiencies fell in the range of 1–3%, which is comparable to the values for the CVD-derived counterparts (Table S1†). Fig. 4a shows a typical cell with a conversion efficiency of ∼2.88% (cell flame 2 in Table S1†). HNO3 modification was carried out by exposing the graphene films to HNO3 fumes. The assembled graphene/n-Si solar cell was placed above a vial containing fuming HNO3 (65 wt%). The treatment time was carefully controlled to avoid corrosion of silver and underlying Si. Upon HNO3 fume treatment, the efficiency could be further increased to 4.35% (see Fig. 4a and Table S1). Previous study demonstrated that modification of graphene films with HNO3 led to p-type doping and enhanced sheet conductance.17 Besides the enhanced photovoltaic performance, the HNO3 treated cell demonstrated fairly good short-term stability (Fig. S5), still showing a high efficiency of 4.18% after ten days keeping in ambient conditions. The results suggest that the flame graphene could be used as the hole collecting electrode and transparent window electrode. Average reverse current at −1.0 V is ∼200 nA and the rectification ratio is ∼2 × 104 at ±1.0 V (Fig. 4b). The achievement of such values strongly indicates the high quality of the flame graphene film as well as the excellent characteristics of the graphene/silicon interface. Though the cells are still far from providing the ideal diode characteristics, the comparable or even better performance suggests that the flame graphene may rival its CVD counterparts.
 Fig. 4  (a) Light J–V curves of graphene/n-Si Schottky solar cells. (b) Dark J–V curves of graphene/n-Si Schottky solar cells. 
To utilize the surface defects of the flame-synthesized FLG films, Ag nanoparticles (NPs) have been directly deposited on the films from AgNO3 solution (see ESI†). The results showed that Ag NPs were uniformly anchored to the surface of the flame FLG film (Fig. S6). In contrast, many fewer Ag NPs were observed on the surface of the CVD graphene film owing to its higher crystallinity and the chemical stability of the perfect 2D honeycomb lattice. The facile decoration of metal NPs on flame synthesized FLG films opens a broad range of potential applications; from energy transfer related catalysts, chemical sensors to surface-enhanced-Raman spectroscopy and so on.
To conclude, we have developed a dual-flame system for controlled growth of high-quality FLG films, a concept which combines the CVD growth mechanism with the advantages of the flame method. Schottky solar cells made from the graphene films and n-Si show conversion efficiencies of 2.88% for pristine cells and 4.35% upon HNO3 treatment. The flame method offers the advantages of simplicity, high efficiency, energy saving, low cost and the ability to easily extend to continuous and mass production of graphene, and will significantly contribute to the fundamental research and practical applications of graphene.
Notes and references
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Geim, Science, 2009, 324, 1530 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wei and Y. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3225 CrossRef CAS .
A. Reina, X. Jia, J. Ho, D. Nezich, H. Son, V. Bulovic, M. S. Dresselhaus and J. Kong, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 30 CrossRef CAS ; K. S. Kim, Y. Zhao, H. Jang, S. Y. Lee, J. M. Kim, K. S. Kim, J. Ahn, P. Kim, J. Choi and B. H. Hong, Nature, 2009, 457, 706 CrossRef CAS ; X. Li, W. Cai, J. An, S. Kim, J. Nah, D. Yang, R. Piner, A. Velamakanni, I. Jung, E. Tutuc, S. K. Banerjee, L. Colombo and R. S. Ruoff, Science, 2009, 324, 1312 CrossRef CAS .
C. Berger, Z. Song, X. Li, X. Wu, N. Brown, C. Naud, D. Mayou, T. Li, J. Hass, A. N. Marchenkov, E. H. Conrad, P. N. First and W. A. de Heer, Science, 2006, 312, 1191 CrossRef CAS .
M. Choucair, P. Thordarson and J. A. Stride, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 30 CrossRef CAS ; X. L. Li, G. Y. Zhang, X. D. Bai, X. M. Sun, X. R. Wang, E. Wang and H. J. Dai, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 538 CrossRef CAS ; Y. Hernandez, V. Nicolosi, M. Lotya, F. M. Blighe, Z. Y. Sun, S. De, I. T. McGovern, B. Holland, M. Byrne, Y. K. Gun'ko, J. J. Boland, P. Niraj, G. Duesberg, S. Krishnamurthy, R. Goodhue, J. Hutchison, V. Scardaci, A. C. Ferrari and J. N. Coleman, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 563 CrossRef CAS .
D. V. Kosynkin, A. L. Higginbotham, A. Sinitskii, J. R. Lomeda, A. Dimiev, B. K. Price and J. M. Tour, Nature, 2009, 458, 872 CrossRef CAS ; L. Y. Jiao, L. Zhang, X. R. Wang, G. Diankov and H. J. Dai, Nature, 2009, 458, 877 CrossRef CAS .
S. T. Aruna and A. S. Mukasyan, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2008, 12, 44 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Howard, J. T. McKinnon, Y. Makarovsky, A. L. Lafleur and M. E. Johnson, Nature, 1991, 352, 139 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Howard, K. D. Chowdhury and J. B. Vander Sande, Nature, 1994, 370, 603 CrossRef .
Z. Li, H. Zhu, K. Wang, J. Wei, X. Gui, X. Li, C. Li, L. Fan, P. Sun and D. Wu, Carbon, 2011, 49, 237 CrossRef CAS .
M. Singleton and P. Nash, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams, 1989, 10, 121 Search PubMed .
X. Li, C. Li, H. Zhu, K. Wang, J. Wei, X. Li, E. Xu, Z. Li, S. Luo, Y. Lei and D. Wu, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 3502 RSC .
W. J. Gammon, O. Kraft, A. C. Reilly and B. C. Holloway, Carbon, 2003, 41, 1917 CrossRef CAS .
F. Bonaccorso, Z. Sun, T. Hasan and A. C. Ferrari, Nat. Photonics, 2010, 4, 611 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, H. Zhu, K. Wang, A. Cao, J. Wei, C. Li, Y. Jia, Z. Li, X. Li and D. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2743 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bae, H. Kim, Y. Lee, X. Xu, J. Park, Y. Zheng, J. Balakrishnan, T. Lei, H. R. Kim, Y. I. Song, Y. Kim, K. S. Kim, B. Ozyilmaz, J. Ahn, B. H. Hong and S. Iijima, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 574 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental data: Fig. S1–S6 and Movies S1, S2. See DOI: 10.1039/c0cc05139jThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic of the flame synthesis of FLG film on a nickel foil.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a,b) SEM, (c,d) TEM characterizations of the flame synthesized FLG films.	 

 	Fig. 3  
Raman spectra of (a) the CVD and flame-synthesized samples on Ni foils (20 μm and 50 μm thick) and (b) few-layered graphene films.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Light J–V curves of graphene/n-Si Schottky solar cells. (b) Dark J–V curves of graphene/n-Si Schottky solar cells.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental data: Fig. S1–S6 and Movies S1, S2. See DOI: 10.1039/c0cc05139j

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
