2013 Atomic spectrometry update—A review of advances in X-ray fluorescence spectrometry  - Journal of Analytical Atomic Spectrometry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3JA90046K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3JA90046K
(Atomic Spectrometry Update)
J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2013, 28, 1544-1590Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms2013 Atomic spectrometry update—A review of advances in X-ray fluorescence spectrometry
Margaret West†
a, 
Andrew T. Ellisb, 
Philip J. Pottsd, 
Christina Strelic, 
Christine Vanhoofe, 
Dariusz Wegrzynekf and 
Peter Wobrauschekc
aWest X-ray Solutions, 405 Whirlowdale Road, Sheffield S11 9NF, UK. E-mail: margaretwest@blueyonder.co.uk
bOxford Instruments X-ray Technology, 360 El Pueblo Road, Scotts Valley, CA 95066, USA
cVienna University of Technology, Atominstitut, Stadionallee 2, 1020, Vienna, Austria
dFaculty of Science, The Open University, Walton Hall, Milton Keynes, MK7 6AA, UK
eFlemish Institute for Technological Research (VITO), Boeretang 200, 2400 Mol, Belgium
fOffice of Safeguards Analytical Services, IAEA Laboratories, A-2444 Seibersdorf, Austria
Received 
19th July 2013
, Accepted 19th July 2013First published on 16th August 2013Contents1 Introduction and reviews2 Instrumentation2.1 Hand-held, mobile, on-line XRF techniques and planetary exploration2.2 Laboratory instruments and excitation sources2.3 Synchrotron and large scale facilities2.4 TXRF and related techniques2.5 X-ray detectors2.6 Quantification and data processing3 Applications3.1 Geological and climate change3.2 Industrial minerals and consequences from mining activity3.3 Industrial and consequences of industrial activity3.4 Environmental3.5 Archaeological and cultural heritage3.6 Forensic3.7 Clinical3.8 Drugs3.9 Biological3.10 Thin films, coatings and nano-materials3.11 Chemical state and speciationAbbreviationsReferencesAbstractThis review comments on the ever expanding range of work using the XRF group of techniques published approximately between April 2012 and March 2013. It presents innovative work as opposed to the wealth of contributions that combine XRF spectrometry in conjunction with other analytical techniques and those descriptions of the valuable routine applications published during the review period. New specialised laboratory instruments, X-ray sources and data processing procedures have been introduced as well as further detector development. Portable and hand-held systems have been increasingly used and the literature represents the widening application of μ-SR techniques for XRF mapping and insights of the sub-cellular metabolisms of animals and plants. Applications using TXRF were published dealing with samples from the pharmaceutical industry, biological tissues, extraterrestrial samples and the analysis of nuclear fuels. Nano-particles feature in many applications and this review is enlivened by reports on more space missions. Climate change, environmental studies and green chemistry feature along with work on archaeological and cultural heritage samples including the authentication of an eighteenth century harpsichord varnish.
1 Introduction and reviews
This update reviews papers published approximately between April 2012 and March 2013 and continues the series of Atomic Spectrometry Updates in X-ray Fluorescence Spectrometry1 that should be read in conjunction with other related reviews in the series.2–6 The team of reviewers are keen to ensure that readers find this review to be authoritative and critical of publications concerning the ever expanding range of work using the XRF group of techniques. We have therefore concentrated on innovative work as opposed to the wealth of contributions that combine XRF in conjunction with other analytical techniques and those descriptions of the valuable routine applications published during the review period. Thus, the review team have revised the format this year to reflect the maturity of the XRF techniques with two main sections offering instrumentation and applications. Papers describing sample preparation and pre-concentration methodology are now to be found in their appropriate applications sections.
A review by Bendicho et al.7 addressed the greening of atomic spectrometry by describing how green chemistry principles could be applied to every step in the analytical process from sampling and sample preparation to data processing. Topics included downsizing of instrumentation, use of portable systems, solid sampling, the application of clean energies (ultrasound and microwave) in sample preparation, the development of on-site, on-line and at-line approaches rather than conventional off-line methods of analysis. Chemometric tools for method optimization and signal processing were also offered as ways by which the analytical process could become greener.
2 Instrumentation
2.1 Hand-held, mobile, on-line XRF techniques and planetary exploration
In surveying the literature, it rapidly becomes apparent that there is little standardisation in the terminology used to describe XRF instrumentation that has not been permanently installed in a laboratory. The terms: ‘hand-held’, ‘portable’, ‘mobile’ and sometimes ‘transportable’ XRF are used, sometimes indiscriminately. Occasionally, it is clear that the instrumentation was used for in situ measurements, rather than the use of conventional instrumentation in a mobile laboratory transported to a field site, where a conventional sampling and analysis approach would normally be followed. In reviewing this year's contributions, the authors' terminology, as expressed in the abstract, has normally been followed. However, readers are advised to evaluate carefully the exact analytical approach that has been followed, given this lack of agreement in the precise use of terminology.
A number of publications during the current review period investigated novel or innovative applications of in situ XRF analysis. Desert varnish is a thin coating found on the surface of rocks exposed to arid environments and Nowinski et al.8 used field portable XRF spectrometry to analyse samples collected near power plants in Nevada. A range of trace elements were determined to show that desert varnish could be used as a passive environmental monitor to investigate recent air pollution deposited over the last 20 to 30 years in the area of coal-fired power plants with the XRF technique providing multi-element data for a large number of samples. Agostino and Falcone9 showed that hand-held XRF spectrometry was capable of performing the rapid quantitative analysis of Pb and other trace elements in glass containers used for food and beverage with a high level of precision and accuracy. Comparisons were made with conventional WDXRF and hand-held XRF detection limits of 30 mg kg−1 (PbO) were reported, well below the requirements for legal and quality control monitoring. One of the advantages of portable XRF for in situ analysis is the acquisition of data in real time, an application explored by Marsala et al.10 for the mineralogical and chemo-stratigraphical analysis of drill cores in the challenging environment of a drilling rig. The authors claimed that this approach was superior to the visual determination of mineralogy by optical microscopy and showed that modern, robust, portable XRF spectrometry was capable of providing accurate geochemical data that could be converted into mineralogical compositions of the rock sample that were comparable to laboratory XRD determinations. A further advantage of field-portable XRF is the capability of providing low-cost geochemical data for environmental surveys, an application of interest to Higueras et al.11 in the context of the disposal of mine concentrates to river systems in Irian Jaya and Papua New Guinea. In these territories, access to a fully equipped geochemical laboratory is not usually a viable option owing to a chronic shortage of funds. To simulate the application of this approach in remote areas, the authors determined As, Cd, Cu, Pb and Zn in geochemical samples from a highly polluted Pb–Zn mining district in the Alcudian Valley of Central Spain and asserted that field-portable XRF should become the instrument of choice for environmental monitoring in developing countries. An unusual combination of portable instrumentation—Raman and XRF—was used by Colomban et al.12 for the analysis of Asian bronzes and brasses to distinguish copies of ancient pieces that were made a long time ago in different countries. The XRF data allowed the identification of two brass artefacts and different types of bronzes from non-invasive measurements. In the characterisation of soils by in situ XRF analysis, corrections must be made for the moisture content, an aspect that was investigated by Bastos et al.13 using a ‘low-energy background’ approach. Zemlicka et al.14 described a new mobile instrumentation for the in situ X-ray transmission radiography and XRF imaging of phantoms and real samples of cultural artefacts. This prototype instrumentation comprised an X-ray tube radiation source and a special sensitive X-ray camera mounted on independently motorised positioning systems. The detector was positioned in a shielded box with an exchangeable entrance window comprising beam filters and a pin-hole collimator to allow both transmission and XRF emission radiography to be undertaken.
Reports of space applications always enliven this section so it is a pleasure to feature a multi-author paper headed by Weider15 presenting XRF observations of the lunar surface made by the Chandrayaan-1 X-ray spectrometer. These measurements took advantage of two solar flare events (December 2008 and January 2009) to provide an enhanced X-ray excitation source and quantitative estimates of MgO/SiO2 and Al2O3/SiO2 ratios were made for two mainly basaltic regions of the near-side of the Moon. As one area encompassed the Apollo 14 landing site, comparisons with Apollo 14 soil compositions were made and agreed within 1 sigma errors, although some differences were reported with compositions obtained by the Lunar Prospector gamma-ray spectrometer. The measurement of elemental abundances on the surface of Mercury by detecting X-ray fluorescence induced by the incident solar X-ray flux was also an aim of the Messenger mission. As a contribution to this mission, Starr et al.16 found good agreement between Al, Mg and Si data determined from the solar flare-induced X-ray fluorescence spectra and spectra from the unlit surface of Mercury where fluorescence was induced by the interaction of 1–10 keV electrons with the surface. This comparison provided independent validation of the analysis methodologies. Mars has been the focus of much interest recently, especially because of NASA's successful Martian rovers. More specifically, the Curiosity Rover (which landed on the surface of Mars during August 2012) carried a comprehensive instrument package designed to identify and characterise past habitable environments. The package included, an XRD instrument with XRF spectrometric capabilities, the design and capabilities of which were described by Blake et al.17 A more advanced version of the alpha particle X-ray spectrometer was also carried on the Curiosity Rover for the elemental analysis of the Martian surface by a combination of XRF and PIXE spectrometries. Campbell18 described two schemes for the correction of artefacts that contribute to elemental peak areas of this instrument. Earth analogues make an important contribution to the interpretation of measurements made on the surface of Mars and Richardson et al.19 proposed that secondary deposits in caves at the ‘Craters of Moon’ National Monument, southern Idaho, USA offer a reasonable representation of the minerals likely to be associated with Martian basalts. The authors used XRF spectrometry, XRD, FTIR and FTIR-ion cyclotron mass spectrometry to characterise sulfate and carbonate deposits formed by the leaching of basalt minerals by meteoritic water, a process that they expected should have taken place in basaltic caves on Mars.
For another year, on-line XRF systems only get a brief mention with the welcomed contribution by Ostermann et al.,20 who described four applications of XRF spectrometry in production processes in which the benefits in both financial and speed terms were emphasised, for example in the analysis of raw materials in the recycling industry. In addition, Li et al.21 described an on-line EDXRF spectrometry system at a Chinese iron and steel plant for the monitoring of the grade of iron ore, considering factors such as moisture content, matrix effects and spectral drift that could influence the quality of results.
2.2 Laboratory instruments and excitation sources
In the current review period, a number of reports were published describing new specialised laboratory instruments, also combining different analytical techniques, and presenting an evaluation of various X-ray sources and X-ray emission phenomena. Dehlinger et al.22 combined a micro-beam X-ray laboratory source employing a cylindrical capillary-based collimator attached to an XRF detector, with a shear-force microscope made in-house. Simultaneous XRF spectrometry and near-field microscopy measurements led to an improvement in the spatial resolution of the XRF data approaching the sub-micrometre range. Based on the experimental results and theoretical modelling, the authors concluded that 100 nm XRF spatial resolution could be achieved by combining the near-field microscopy apparatus with micro-beam XRF spectrometry based on a synchrotron radiation source. Construction of another combined instrument was reported by Erko et al.23 Their system comprised UV and soft X-ray spectrometers both of which could be operated simultaneously. The soft X-rays, covering the range 100–550 eV, were selected in a WD mode by utilising Fresnel diffraction structures built onto the surface of a total-reflection mirror. The results from test measurements from the reflection zone plates were presented in their report. Ohmori et al.24 constructed a projection-based XRF microscope by attaching polycapillary optics to an X-ray CCD camera and utilised a WDXRF spectrometer. The authors presented details of the spectrometer design and reviewed the analytical performance of the newly developed system. Wrobel et al.25 described a newly established, compact, confocal, micro-beam XRF microscope using commercially available components and controlled by LabVIEW-based modular software. The spectrometer was highly configurable and could be used for 3D and 2D elemental mapping. The authors presented a few applications of the spectrometer. A similar confocal XRF spectrometric system was characterised in a report by Shabel'nikova and Chukalina.26 The authors determined the spatial response profile of this set up using both a polycapillary and a fabricated multichannel collimator. They observed that in the case of the multichannel collimator, the fraction of X-ray photons transmitted due to total external reflection from channel walls was negligible compared with the fraction of the directly transmitted photons. Smolek et al.27 constructed an X-ray tube-based confocal micro-beam XRF spectrometer dedicated to the determination of low-Z elements (6 < Z < 14). The instrument depth resolution was equal to 100 μm at 1 keV and 30 μm at 17.5 keV. The analytical parameters of the newly constructed spectrometer were compared with the parameters of a similar system utilising a synchrotron X-ray source. Scruggs28 reported the installation of a new detector that offered an improvement in sensitivity for their micro-beam XRF spectrometer, which up to that point, could only be equipped with a standard Si(Li) or small area SDD devices. The newly installed SDD offered a larger active area without degrading detector resolution and an improved count throughput that increased sensitivity by 20 to 30%. Dabrowski and Korecki29 set up a highly specialised laboratory spectrometer utilising a polycapillary collimator and HOPG monochromator for recording 2D maps of X-ray absorption anisotropy (XAA) for atomic-resolved structural analysis. The adoption of polycapillary optics resulted in a gain of two-orders of magnitude in the radiant intensity, as compared with a system without the optics, enabling the XAA experiments to be performed using a laboratory-based system. Previously, such experiments were only possible using synchrotron radiation.
A few contributions were devoted to an evaluation of various X-ray sources and X-ray emission phenomena. Kawai et al.30 experimentally tested and confirmed the applicability of a miniature, battery driven, pyroelectric X-ray source for both X-ray absorption and XRF analysis of transition metal thin films and aqueous solutions, achieving 0.1 μg g−1 detection limits after element preconcentration. Klopfer et al.31 also studied pyroelectric X-ray sources. They simulated X-ray emission of such sources using Monte Carlo spectral models of electron targets comprising gold, silver, copper, molybdenum, and tungsten. Silver was identified as the least efficient target at an energy of 85 keV and copper at the energy of 20 keV. The group observed that the measured X-ray spectrum of lithium tantalite crystal cycled over a temperature range of 140 K were approximated by an 85 keV mono-energetic electron beam. In a note by Cornaby,32 results were presented demonstrating sufficient stability and repeatability of a compact X-ray source developed by a commercial manufacturer for utilisation in handheld XRF instruments. This miniature source comprised an X-ray tube and high voltage power supply. Romano et al.33 presented the development of an updated version of a 210Po isotope source designed for a portable PIXE spectrometer for the analysis of cultural heritage objects. The new compact geometry of the source yielded a 10-fold gain in sensitivity, as compared with the original design, enabling in situ detection of minor and trace elements. Zhang et al.34 experimented with X-ray emission using repetitive discharge in atmospheric air. They observed maximum emission in the energy range 20–90 keV during a nanosecond discharge in a diffuse mode. Also investigating discharge phenomena, Ponomarenko and Tolmachev35 studied X-ray emission spectra accompanying the discharge in low-pressure xenon and oxygen. The X-ray emission was generated by runaway electrons stopped in a vanadium target. The authors provided a theoretical description of the observed X-ray intensity profiles. An evaluation of a specialised larger scale apparatus was presented by Hampel et al.,36 who described the results of a feasibility study from an electron-beam tomography facility. This facility utilised a 1 MeV accelerator electron-beam with a transmission target in inverse fan beam geometry with a single X-ray detector and a linearly moving X-ray source. The facility produced X-rays with an energy of several hundreds of keV and of sufficient material penetration depth to allow the scanning of large technical objects. Opposing the trend for the construction of highly specialised apparatus, Espinosa et al.37 reported the development of a flexible and easily reconfigurable XRF spectrometer. This instrument could utilise different excitation sources, encompassing X-ray tubes and radioisotope sources, various types of X-ray detector, such as Si(Li), Si(PIN), HPGe and CdTe, with the optional use of vacuum and secondary target geometry. The spectrometer was intended for environmental science applications; see Section 3.4 of this review. Last but not least in this section, Giulherne et al.38 published a review of the developments in X-ray microprobe instruments operated with SR and conventional X-ray tube sources. The reviewed systems were divided into three categories to distinguish between diffractive, reflective and refractive principles of operation. Selected case studies were used to compare the instruments performance.
2.3 Synchrotron and large scale facilities
This section focuses on contributions that apply SR to a large variety of scientific questions unveiling often surprising insights into the dynamics of processes involving organic and inorganic substances. Thus, upgrading of existing beam lines or modifying them for special purposes are reported here. Rothe et al.39 gave an overview of the research capabilities of the ANgstroem KArlsruhe synchrotron source (ANKA) in Germany, which has a special beam line for actinide research in the Institute for Nuclear Waste Management. Their work focused on various aspects of nuclear waste disposal providing a scientific basis for assessing the long-term safety for the final disposal of nuclear waste. Experiments with hot material were possible at activities up to 106 times the European exemption limits. Experiments with monochromatic radiation from energies 2.1 up to 25.0 keV, which included the lanthanide L-edges and the actinide M- and L3-edges up to Californium were easily performed. In addition there were well established bulk techniques available for XAFS in transmission and fluorescence mode offering advanced methods using a micro focus beam including confocal XAFS/XRF detection and also a combination of μ-XAFS spectrometry and XRD. Finally, additional instrumentation could be provided for high energy resolution X-ray emission spectrometry, which was of greatest advantage in the analysis of mixtures of elements that have strongly overlapping emission lines often observed in the actinide L-, and M-series. Tancharakorn et al.40 described the first μ-SRXRF beamline at the Siam Photon Laboratory, commissioned by August 2011. After installation of a polycapillary half lens, this optic focused the beam to 100 μm with a working distance of 22 mm (lens focal point). This allowed μ-XRF inside the end station using a Peltier-cooled Si(PIN) detector and the sample mounted on a x–y–z motorized sample stage. To test the performance of the beamline, an elemental surface profile was taken from a sample of ancient pottery from Ban Chiang, Thailand, a UNESCO cultural heritage site. Further modification to that beamline, for example, the installation of a Si(111) crystal, provided an 8 keV beam for powder diffraction. As the beamline originally was designed for deep X-ray lithography (DXL), this beamline combined successfully three modes for X-ray research. Kosior et al.41 described the nano-imaging beamline ID22NI at ESRF in Grenoble, France. This beamline allowed the combination of hard XRF microscopy and magnified phase contrast imaging with the goal of obtaining quantitative maps of the projected metal concentration in whole cells, a very challenging application. The X-ray data acquired were validated using biological reference samples of known composition. Quantitative phase contrast imaging was validated using calibration samples and by comparing AFM and scanning transmission ion microscopy data. This was a great breakthrough because absolute quantification by XRF microscopy at the sub-cellular level had been impossible up to now. Yuan et al.42 constructed a full-field transmission X-ray microscope with XRF mapping capability, operating in the range 5 keV to 12 keV. The instrument was installed at the Beijing Synchrotron Radiation Facility. The spatial resolution, better than 30 nm, was reported in both absorption and phase-contrast operation modes. In the scanning XRF mapping mode, a detection limit of 50 ppm was achieved at a spatial resolution equal to 20 μm.
Concerning new applications, Bucci et al.43 studied the heterogeneity of the phosphorus content of the freshwater diatom Cyclotella meneghiana in the Charles River in Boston, USA, using μ-SRXRF spectrometry. The authors claimed that micro-scale patchiness led to large and important heterogeneity in the internal distribution of nutrients in single cells in phytoplankton. The result of these experiments showed that the nutrient status varied from P-starved to P-replete. To find an explanation, a series of simulations of individual cells was performed using an agent-based model taking many parameters into account. This modelling led to the conclusion that 85% of the heterogeneity was due to micro-scale patchiness.
Very little is known about the sub-cellular distribution of metal ions in cells. Typically Cu, Fe and Zn play an important role in cell metabolism and dysfunctions in this delicate balance may be the origin of major diseases. Nanoparticles are frequently used in the field of nanomedicine and are suspected of causing adverse effects in cells and organs. SRXRF and FTIR microscopies are more than suitable sub-micrometer analytical tools for the study of cells and organs at the nano-scale. Bohic et al.44 described the recently developed and extended possibilities of achieving sub-100 nm lateral resolutions available at beamlines ID21 and ID22 at the ESRF, Grenoble, France. Unique features of these beamlines are ultra-low detection limits, large penetration depth and sub-cellular chemical imaging of all features that are extremely important in the biomedical field. Winarski et al.45 described a hard X-ray nanoprobe beamline for nanoscale microscopy incorporating diffraction, fluorescence and full-field imaging capabilities designed and operated at the Advanced Photon Source at the Argonne National Laboratory. This facility was constructed to probe the nanoscale structure of biological, environmental and material sciences samples. The beamline incorporated Fresnel zone plate optics and a precision laser sensing and control system that operated over X-ray energies of 3 to 30 keV, so enabling studies of most elements in the periodic table, with a particular emphasis on imaging transition metals. Unfortunately no specification of the beamsize was given.
Interesting results using μ-SRXRF spectrometry in the analysis of impurities in raw quartz-bearing and carbon-bearing feedstock materials for photovoltaic applications were found by Bernardis et al.46 These investigations of the silicon-bearing compounds, pegmatitic quartz, hydrothermal quartz and quartzite, showed micro-scale clusters containing oxidised states of Fe, Ti and/or Ca at structural defects. The authors also found that in three carbon-bearing samples, pine wood, pine charcoal and eucalyptus charcoal, clustered metals were only observed in the charcoal samples. The authors concluded that impurity clustering implied that industrial processing could be adapted to take advantage of this natural gettering phenomenon, expanding the usable range of raw feedstock material to dirtier, cheaper and more abundant materials that are currently underexploited in the production of solar-grade silicon. Photovoltaic materials should be characterised to give a greater insight into the mechanism in order to obtain a potential improvement in the efficiency of the cells.
Micro-SRXRF was applied to characterise photovoltaic related semiconductors by Villanova et al.,47 who mapped the elemental distribution and the X-ray beam induced current in multi-crystalline silicon. These photovoltaic cells showed accumulations of metallic impurities at the interface of crystallographic defects and variations in the current generated over the cell were attributed to these bulk defects and structural variations in the silicon. These authors also undertook similar studies on a single GaAs crystal using XRF and X-ray excited optical luminescence and showed that the inhomogeneous distribution of arsenic correlated with a higher photoluminescence signal in higher arsenic concentration regions. Micro-SRXRF thus contributed to a greater understanding of the optical properties of these photovoltaic materials. Buzanich et al.48 detected impurities by SRXRF in multi-crystalline silicon wafers designed for solar cells. They reported that the efficiency of these solar cells was strongly influenced by minor contamination with metals such as copper and iron. Application of compound refractive lenses (CRLs) in μ-XRF allowed versatile two-dimensional mapping of relevant contaminations and localisation of their sites of deposition. In this context, the measured bulk average limit of detection was one picogram of Fe and Cu gram−1 of silicon. The authors concluded that μ-SRXRF was a valuable tool for the non-destructive spatial quantification of metal impurities. This technique could be extended to provide 3D information on the distribution of impurities that critically affect the performance of a wide range of materials and devices by taking into account absorption in the bulk silicon and variations in penetration and information depth. The same group49 also examined the applicability of CRL for XAS. They tested the influence of varying beam energy on the position and the dimensions of the CRL focal spot and the attenuation of the incident beam photon flux due to absorption in the lens by performing XANES measurements with the presence of the CRL and without the lens.
Macdonald et al.50 reported the study of heavily contaminated multi-crystalline silicon wafers using a scanning SRXRF spectrometer which revealed the presence of iron-rich particles located along grain boundaries. These particles were partially dissolved and thus removed from their location during phosphorus gettering treatment. Annealing without the phosphorus gettering layer being present at the wafer surfaces resulted in no discernible reduction in particle coverage, showing that the gettering layer was essential in such heavily contaminated wafers, in order to reduce the dissolved Fe concentration below the solubility limit and therefore allowing dissolution to proceed.
Grazing emission XRF is an extremely surface-sensitive technique that allows depth profiling at the nm scale. The combination of GEXRF with a wavelength dispersive spectrometer with its inherently high energy resolution creates a perfect spectrometer for the determination of depth profiles of Al implanted in bulk Si wafers. Kayser et al.51 showed, by using the benefits of synchrotron radiation and the WD detection setup, that the depth distribution of implanted ions in silicon can be deconvoluted from the dependence of the X-ray fluorescence intensity on the grazing emission angle with nano-meter precision. For completeness, it should be mentioned that an analytical function describing the shape of the depth distribution was assumed beforehand. If not available, a bell-shaped function for the dopant distribution was found to be satisfactory in reproducing the depth distribution of the implanted ions. In another study, Honicke et al.52 compared the results of two surface sensitive techniques GIXRF and GEXRF by analysing five aluminium-implanted silicon wafers, all having a dose of 1016 atoms cm−1 but with different implantation energies from 1 to 50 keV. In both these publications, the driving force was the continuing development of miniaturisation in the microelectronic industry and the resulting need for more sensitive methods for the determination of impurities and depth-profile control in the nm range. For each technique it was shown how the dopant depth profile could be derived from the angular intensity dependence of the Al Kα fluorescence line. Results were in good agreement using both techniques and were cross-checked by SIMS.
Physics under extreme conditions could be studied within laser heated diamond anvil cells (DAC). Temperatures up to 4200 K and pressures up to 50 GPa could be reached inside the cell. This environment was used by Petitgirard et al.53 to study the partitioning behaviour of elements between different phases under in situ conditions to understand the element mobility especially for geochemical processes. The authors described their experiments performed at beamline ID27 (ESRF France) to detect sample melting based on the appearance of diffuse scattering in the XRD pattern which is characteristic of the structure factor of liquids. At the same time, elemental partitioning in the sample was observed using XRF before, during and after laser-heating in the DAC. The analytical power was good enough to detect trace elements at the mg L−1 level found in standard solutions. The results indicated a strong partitioning of Pd and Ru into a metallic phase, whereas Zr remains clearly incompatible with Fe. This novel approach brought new insights in the early history of the Earth. High spatial resolution and quantitative chemical imaging is of importance to various scientific communities, and is difficult to achieve. Wang et al.54 linked the complementary advantages of two micro-analytical techniques, μ-SRXRF and LA-ICP-MS. A cross-calibration approach was established between these two techniques and validated by one experimental demonstration. Trace levels of cesium migrating into a heterogeneous geological medium was imaged quantitatively by one dimensional line scans and two dimensional chemical images revealing two distinct types of geochemical domains: calcium carbonate-rich domains and clay-rich domains. During the diffusion, cesium showed a high interfacial reactivity within the clay-rich domain and was nearly inactive in the calcium-rich domain. In addition, the study contributed to a refined safety assessment of potential host rock material for the deep geological nuclear waste storage repositories.
Synchrotron-based XRF microscopy using hard X-rays focused into sub-micrometre spots is a powerful technique for elemental quantification and mapping, as well as performing μ-XANES. Jensen et al.55 reported results of studies to quantify the transuranic element Pu at the L-3 or L-2 edge and also Th and lighter biologically essential elements in individual rat pheochromocytoma (PC12) cells after exposure to the long lived isotope 242Pu. Elemental maps demonstrated that Pu localised principally in the cytoplasm of the cell avoiding the cell nucleus, which was marked by the highest concentrations of P and Zn in these experiments. It was noteworthy that detection limits of 1.4 fg Pu were achieved within the 202 μm2 cell size. The Cu accumulation in rat aortic elastin and copper topography in human THP-1 cell monolayers are described in a paper by Qin et al.56 In this study, SRXRF coupled with TEM was used to image Cu in sections of human THP-1 and mouse aorta. The SRXRF and TEM experiments could clearly identify the location of Cu in the nucleus and nucleolus in non-dividing THP-1 cells and was able to differentiate the Cu location at elastic laminae from collagen in mouse aortic sections. These results revealed the Cu topography in vascular cells and tissues and highlighted the potential of the combined measurements to investigate the role of Cu in macrophage and aortic homeostasis.
Angular-resolved X-ray reflectivity measurements and energy dispersive X-ray reflectivity experiments were performed at the XRF beamline in Campinas at the Brazilian SR light source to study the temperature evolution of self-assembled phosphonic acid multilayers. Results of these experiments published by de Pauli et al.57 showed that the precise monitoring of phase transitions observed in organic thin film and multilayer systems was possible. Multilayers with a different bilayer periodicity of 5 nm straight and 3.4 nm tilted, were studied. The results showed evidence of reorganization of the lamellar ordering of octadecylphosphonic acid multilayers as a function of the temperature, where the ED technique was advantageous over conventional methods because the short acquisition time and high flux allowed an investigation of various external parameters.
The SRXRF microprobe station at Spring-8 in Japan was used for the specification of chemical properties of various atmospheric samples. Ma et al.58 reported the composition of individual particles by the combination of visual elemental mapping and XRF spectral analysis. Individually collected droplets were analysed. As the chemical content of the solute in these individual droplets could be determined, the mechanism of droplet formation and pollutant scavenging could be described. Similar results were achieved by analysing sand dust collected from the local desert in China, confirming that the fine fragments of sand, which may be lifted and transported over a long distance, were considerably inhomogeneous in elemental composition. A group of Japanese scientists (Bong et al.59) studied soil sediments in Japan and established a database of heavy mineral and heavy elements by high energy SRXRF. Data from 3024 points all over Japan were analysed with SRXRD and SRXRF. The construction of a data base was claimed to be useful to provenance soil evidence in a crime scene situation. Results for the analysis of sediments from two regions were compared—the Kofu and the Chiba region in the province of Kanto. In the Chiba region, it was found that there was a domination of heavy minerals and elements of volcanic origin—orthopyroxene, amphibole and the REEs, of geochemical origin. However from the Kofu region, four distinct mineral groups were distinguished in accordance with the great variety of underlying bedrock. The REE data in the sediment constrained, in particular, the likely geographical origin of the sediment. In another study, Khramova et al.60 reported that plants in an area of geological heterogeneity showed a different uptake of micro-elements, particularly in the leaves of Pentaphylloides fruticosa and Loonicera caerulea. The relationship between Fe/Mn, Ca/Sr, Cu/Zn and K/Rb ratios and the geochemical and geophysical features of the environment and element accumulation by different plants was established. Measurements were performed using SRXRF and the measured data show that the two types of bushes under study react differently to changes in the geochemical and geophysical characteristics of the environment.
SRXRF was used to study the distribution of elements between a cyanobacterial community and a carbonate body from the Garga hot spring in the Barguzin Valley, Baikal Rift Zone, Russia. These interesting results were published by Lazareva et al.61 and showed that the content of all elements except Sr was higher in the microbial community than in the carbonate body. The Ge and Zn values were even higher by a factor of 200. Germanium was found to be 270 μg g−1 in the microbial community, whereas in the carbonate body it was around 2 μg g−1. This result could serve as a diagnostic indicator of the microbial community's behaviour in the sulfide-less, alkaline hot springs in the presence of increased levels of radium isotopes.
2.4 TXRF and related techniques
This review period showed a smaller number of publications using TXRF than last year. Nevertheless the fields of application and fundamental research in TXRF are certainly growing. The results of systematic studies in sample preparation and sample shape created by pico or nano-litre droplets gave new insight into the optimised morphology of the dried sample in various patterns. Unwanted absorption effects resulting in deviations from the ideal linear calibration curve were studied. Several applications were published dealing with samples from the pharmaceutical industry, biological tissue, even extraterrestrial samples and nuclear fuel were analysed. Some interesting ways to remove the argon line from the air in measured spectra were demonstrated not by flushing with helium or evacuating the spectrometer but instead flushing with nitrogen.
A new application for TXRF during this review period was the analysis of residual metals in active pharmaceutical ingredients (API), previously the domain of AAS, ICP-AES, and ICP-MS techniques. Two independent studies by Antosz et al.62 and Shaw et al.63 addressed the problem of line overlaps between Pd Lα and Ar Kα and Cl Kβ encountered when using a conventional TXRF system with Mo excitation. Both publications overcame this concern by using a second TXRF spectrometer fitted with a W anode tube that offered interference free analysis using Pd K spectra. In addition, Antosz and colleagues mentioned that both instruments could be used for the quantitative determination of these residual metals when the spectrometer fitted with a Mo anode used nitrogen purging.
New methods of sample preparation for biological tissues have been tested that are specifically suited for TXRF, broadening the potential applications of the technique. An interesting comparison of two ultrasonic-based procedures for sample preparation prior to determination of As, Ca, Cr, Cu, Fe, K, Mn, Ni, P, Se, Sr and Zn in biological tissues was presented by De La Calle et al.64 Ultrasound-assisted extraction by means of a “cup-horn sonoreactor” and ultrasonic-probe slurry sampling were compared with the well established procedure of magnetic agitation slurry sampling. Best values for detection limits were achieved with ultrasonic assisted extraction. The main advantages were reported as reduced sample handling, decreased sample contamination risks, simpler spectral background, as no solid particles were on the sample carrier, and improved recovery for elements such as P.
Turning now to the analysis of exotic samples, Schmeling et al.65 described the suitability of cleaning methods for residual surface contamination on Genesis solar wind samples prior to TXRF measurements. Two samples were analysed and it was found that for each sample a special cleaning technique was required to reduce the persistent contaminants. In one case, cleaning with concentrated hydrochloric acid and a combination of hydrochloric acid and hydrofluoric acid decreased persistent inorganic contaminations substantially. Whereas in the second case, the application of “CO2 snow” appeared to be effective in removing one persistent Genesis contaminant, namely germanium. Problems still appeared from high background contamination on one of the samples, so further studies are planned. In an effort to identify the location of very persistent contaminants, some selected samples were subjected to scanning electron microscopy and showed excellent agreement with TXRF data. The analysis of Cl at trace levels in nuclear fuel samples such as U3O8 or PuO2 was described by Dhara et al.66 from the Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai, India. Chlorine was first separated from the solid matrix by pyrohydrolysis as HCl and collected in 5 mmol L−1 NaOH solution. This solution was analysed for Cl using the W Lα excitation with Co as an internal standard. The precision achieved was 27% and was shown to improve by purging the spectrometer with helium thus giving a higher count-rate for the chlorine under these conditions. A rather exciting idea for the determination of the anion-specificity at the water–air interface by TXRF was suggested by Wojciechowski et al.67 This group probed the accumulation of bromide ions in the Stern part of the electrical double layer (EDL) near a Gibbs monolayer of cationic surfactant cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTABr) by TXRF spectrometry. For the first time, a combination of TXRF spectrometry coupled with surface tension data enabled the determination of adsorbed amounts of bromide ions in the Stern and diffuse parts of the EDL. Both TXRF and X-ray reflectivity (XRR) were employed to probe the competitive adsorption of other anions present in the aqueous solution.
As mentioned earlier in this section of the review, line overlaps, in particular the problem encountered when determining Ag and Pd in TXRF measurements performed in air, are a concern. The TXRF spectrometers, normally equipped with a Mo anode source, excite almost all elements but with varying efficiency. Nevertheless, the abundance of argon in the atmosphere is only 0.93% but sufficient to generate significant peaks around 3 keV, matching the L-spectra of Ag and Pd. Removal of argon by evacuating the measuring chamber or flushing with helium is the classical ways to solve this problem. However, Holtkamp et al.68 suggested the use of a commercially available TXRF spectrometer in a water-cooled airtight box and to purge it with nitrogen. The authors claimed that the operation of the spectrometer was not affected by temperature drift effects, even during long term measurements. This new configuration offered limits of detection of 6.6 μg L−1 for Ag and 16.6 μg L−1 for Pd. Another easier approach to solve the same problem was suggested by Imashuku et al.69 The solution was to purge just the gap between sample and detector with nitrogen at a flow rate of 400 mL min−1. A reduction of the Ar Ka line by a factor of 17 was the excellent result leading to detection limits for Cd of 2.2 ng in the gas stream from a sample mass of 10 ng on the reflector.
Some efforts were taken to improve quantification in wafer surface analysis. Horntrich et al.70 demonstrated that for small sample amounts, between pg and ng, TXRF provided a linear calibration curve as absorption effects were negligible. However, for higher total amounts of sample, the experimental results diverged from linearity. The study described the effects from varying sample morphology by creating different shapes using a nano-litre dispensing system combined with a PC-controlled positioning device. Patterns of various shapes were tested and showed that a ring-shaped sample was the best option, proved both theoretically and experimentally. Sparks et al.71 showed that a standard calibration wafer for quantifiable-contamination control by TXRF could be made, using deposition of pico-litre quantities of equivalent metal-contamination solution on a silicon wafer surface in uniform arrays of residues. A linear calibration curve could be generated within these arrays from increasing concentrations using NIST traceable metal standards and the exact volume of all arrays deposited on a single wafer. A characterisation of the residues indicated that they were in thin films with a thickness less than 2 nm.
TXRF was applied for the direct surface analysis of epitaxial silicon solar cells which are based on an epitaxial active layer grown on top of a low cost inactive p+ silicon substrate. The key challenge was to mitigate transition metal out-diffusion from low purity substrate into the active layer. Radhakrishnan et al.72 used an embedded porous silicon (PSi) layer to getter metals within the substrate. Theoretical calculations for metal segregation to PSi were performed for iron and copper, yielding large gettering coefficients of 104 even at 1000 °C. To prove the results, a test structure of 2 μm epilayer grown on top of a 200 mm p+ wafer with an area size of 8.5 × 8.5 cm2 of re-organised etched PSi was described. The surfaces of the wafers were contaminated with Cu, Fe and Ni to about 1014 to 1015 atoms cm−1 and annealed for 15 min at 1000 °C. TXRF was used to determine the amount of Cu reaching the surface of these prepared wafers. The authors claimed that the embedded PSi reduced the amount of Cu reaching the surface by a factor of 1000, compared with areas without PSi. Moreover SIMS depth profiles revealed a large metal concentration of 1018 to 1019 at. cm−3 in the depth associated with the PSi.
This year, only two fundamental papers dealt with GIXRF for the characterisation of the sample layer to thickness, density and roughness. Abuillan et al.73 described the quantitative determination of the lateral density and intermolecular correlation between proteins anchored on the membrane surfaces using GIXRF and SAXS (small angle X-ray scattering). The physical model was functionalised by using the surface of phospholipid membranes coupled with neutravidin to biotinylated lipid anchors forming the layer. Both X-ray reflectivity and grazing incidence small angle scattering were used to characterise the fine structure of proteins on the membrane surface perpendicular to the plane of the membrane. The mean intermolecular distance between proteins was calculated from the sulfur intensities by applying Abele's matrix formalism. Data achieved from GISAXS and GIXRF agreed well and thus offered the potential to combine both the probing of the lateral density and correlation of non-crystalline proteins displayed on membrane surfaces. It is well known that the geometrical factor in GIXRF is an important angle dependent term, strongly influencing the results. Li et al.74 demonstrated the effects of this geometry factor on the fluorescence yield with a formula that showed good agreement between calculated and experimental fluorescence yields.
2.5 X-ray detectors
With the increasing commercial availability of silicon drift detectors (SDD) and digital pulse processors, an EDXRF end-user or system integrator is faced with the need for more extensive detector system evaluations and comparisons. In an attempt to provide a quantitative basis for such comparisons, Redus and Huber75 proposed a single figure of merit as the basis for selecting the optimum detection system for EDXRF systems. The authors proposed using the time required to achieve a specific statistical uncertainty for the intended application. Scaling rules were derived for the figure of merit, based upon typical specifications such as energy resolution, pulse processor peaking time, maximum output count rate, detector active area and X-ray stopping power. In addition to these basic/universal specification parameters, the scaling factors also included the peak to background ratios for the analyte photopeak and the number of overlapping peaks. Several samples were provided to demonstrate the practical value of the approach for specific EDXRF applications. It would perhaps have been useful for a team of scientists who were evaluating an SDD X-ray spectrometry system for future planetary space missions,76 to adopt a similar approach. Despite the inherent challenges of providing high quality XRF spectrometry for planetary exploration, the authors reported results for an SDD that provided poor energy resolution for this class of detector of only 150 eV at 5.9 keV and a disappointingly low incident count rate limit of only 20 kcps. It is to be hoped that space-qualified X-ray detection systems with performance characteristics closer to the commercially available state of the art (<130 eV resolution and >100 kcps output count rate) become available to the team in time for the proposed future space mission. Kaneko and Kohmura77 constructed and optimised a gas electron multiplier (GEM) detector utilising Au-coating. The response of the detector to X-rays with energies up to 25 keV was evaluated. The Au-coated GEM performance was compared with a standard GEM (without Au-coating). The observed energy resolution was the same at 5.9 keV and better for the not Au-coated GEM at 22 keV.
The state of the art for space-qualified imaging X-ray detectors was comprehensively presented by Majewski et al.78 who described the SDD/DEPFET X-ray detector module to be flown on the BepiColombo mission to survey the surface of Mercury when it arrives in orbit around the planet in 2022 after a seven year journey from Earth. The SDD/DEPFET macro pixel detector to be used in the Mercury Imaging X-ray Spectrometer (MIXS) comprises 3 drift rings and a DEPFET detector with 64 × 64 pixels each 300 × 300 μm2 providing a detector active area of an impressive 1.92 × 1.92 cm2. Not only is the novel silicon structure of the device highly impressive, but the readout and thermal engineering of the detector module is truly remarkable as was described in detail by the authors. The extensive electrical characterisation of the module was also described in detail, as was the X-ray performance using an X-ray beamline at the BESSY-2 SR source in Berlin. When operated at a detector temperature of −40 °C an impressive energy resolution of 129.1 eV at 5.9 keV was obtained for single events and of 134.2 eV at 5.9 keV for all events. The detector's direct X-ray imaging capability was demonstrated by being able to clearly show a feature of 350 μm across. These impressive high energy resolution X-ray imaging detectors are now proven and flight ready and their capabilities are already of interest for terrestrial XRF applications. A simpler, lower performance imaging soft X-ray detector for use in future Indian and Chinese space missions was described by Gow and co-workers.79 The authors described their second generation swept charge device that is effectively a pixellated X-ray CCD with a novel continuous readout system. The second generation devices were designed for improved radiation hardness, higher speed and for operation over a wider temperature range. Two devices, one of 110 mm2 and the other of 440 mm2 active area, were carefully characterised before and after irradiation with a dose equivalent to 10 MeV proton fluence over two years. The baseline energy resolution of the detectors was around 150 eV at 8.04 keV, which increased to around 300 eV after proton irradiation. The second generation devices showed less degradation than the first generation provided they were operated at a somewhat lower temperature and the authors claimed a useful factor of two improvement in radiation hardness. Given the shallow depletion depth of these devices compared with SDDs, they are likely to remain less popular and restricted to soft X-ray detection applications although the relatively less complex readout systems may increase their attractiveness in some cases.
Recognising the much better X-ray stopping power of cadmium telluride detectors compared with SDDs and building upon the figure of merit work reported above that showed the benefits of higher Z. detectors above 20 keV, Redus and colleagues80 proposed the use of both SDD and cadmium telluride detectors in the same system for complete coverage of the Z range in EDXRF measurements. The authors showed that for most EDXRF applications a modern SDD provides the best performance up to 20 or 25 keV due to its high energy resolution and count rate and despite its lower stopping power than cadmium telluride detectors. At energies ≥25 keV, the much greater X-ray stopping power of a 750 μm thick cadmium telluride detector is dramatically better than a typically 350 or 500 μm thick SDD. For Cd K lines in the quoted RoHS polymer sample, the peak intensity provided by the cadmium telluride detector was four times that of the SDD, thereby providing two times greater precision or a halving of the measurement time for the equivalent precision. The authors recommended the use of a cadmium telluride detector for K lines >25 keV, where peak overlaps are only between K series lines and recommended a combination of cadmium telluride plus SDD for the best overall EDXRF measurements. The authors reported the use of a novel dual cadmium telluride + SDD in the same detector head with the cadmium telluride sensor behind the SDD sensor, although this compact hybrid approach led to compromising performance of both detectors and separate preamplifier's and pulse processing channels were still required. Notwithstanding the compromises, the dual detector yielded improved precision for Sn in a lead–tin solder, Cd in a RoHS polymer sample and Rh in automotive catalysts. In work also dedicated to higher X-ray stopping power and two-layer composite detectors, Portnoy and co-workers81,82 proposed a two-layer composite silicon–germanium detector with a 0.5 mm silicon sensor on top of a 5 mm thick germanium sensor. The authors presented in detail their mathematical models for the detector response functions and also proposed a method by which the troublesome Ge K escape peaks could be compensated in a digital pulse processor. A Ge K escape peak leaving from the front surface of the Ge sensor was detected in the thin (0.5 mm) silicon detector with almost 100% efficiency and the Ge K escape peaks could be eliminated from the final spectrum using anti-coincidence from the silicon detector signal or could be added back into the germanium detector spectrum to preserve the loss-free photopeak. Elimination of the Ge K escape peaks from the typical Compton and Rayleigh scatter peaks of the EDXRF spectrum is particularly valuable as the complex escape peak background is high and mathematical correction inevitably introduces a statistical error to peaks overlapped by the Ge K escape peak spectrum. Interesting though this is as a theoretical model, a successful embodiment of such a dual layer silicon–germanium detector remains elusive and efforts to make a thicker SDD are likely to bear greater and earlier success for practical EDXRF spectrometry of higher Z elements with K lines in the 20–30 keV energy range. Despite the use of an impressive 13-sensor high purity germanium detector array, Karanfil et al.83 still had to reduce the overall incident count rate in their XAFS experiment at an SR beamline by means of a bent crystal Laue pre-analyser. This bent crystal analyser was used to eliminate characteristic and background X-rays in energy regions outside the specific energy range of interest. Given the availability of state of the art SDDs that can each readily process a count rate of hundreds of thousands while retaining attractive energy resolution, it is difficult to see why the authors chose the complex, unwieldy and expensive 13-channel high purity germanium detection system, other than it was already deployed on the beamline they used.
By far the most active area of research in pixellated X-ray detectors during the review period was that of cadmium telluride sensor arrays. A 16-pixel linear X-ray detector comprising 3 mm thick cadmium telluride pixels with a 0.8 mm pixel pitch was described by Brambilla and co-workers.84 Each pixel of the array was attached to a novel in-house readout channel providing an energy resolution of 6.5 percent at 122 keV with a frame rate of 3 ms and an impressive overall array count rate of 7 × 106 cps at a peaking time of only 50 ns. Each digital signal processing channel was also able to be used to correct charge sharing and the authors reported a reduction from 46 to 36% charge sharing using the algorithm. It was not possible to perform this correction for pixels losing charge to the guard ring, used for noise reduction, as the guard ring had no energy discrimination capability. Although low energy (up to 20 keV) performance was improved by the novel signal processing, the array was not specifically intended for use in the energy range typically used for X-ray tube-excited EDXRF spectrometers. A novel edgeless design for a pixellated cadmium telluride sensor array was developed by an international multi-agency team85 in order to eliminate guard ring losses and, in particular, to allow very close positioning of many single detector arrays to produce a very large area pixellated detector array. The single edgeless array itself comprised an array of 80 × 80250 μm2 1 mm thick pixels, each of which was attached via flip-chip bonding to an ASIC readout chip capable of providing energy dispersive readout and a total count rate of 10 million cps. The energy resolution of the 4 cm2 detector array was 700 eV at 60 keV and impressive EDXRF multi element images were shown for several elements in a PCB assembly. The authors were next using the edgeless pixel array detector to produce a very large area (16 cm2) detector array destined for security and medical imaging applications for which cadmium telluride, with its high X-ray stopping power, is highly attractive. The relatively poor energy resolution of these cadmium telluride sensors favours the use of silicon-based detector arrays for EDXRF imaging in the 2 to 20 keV energy range but the readout devices developed for cadmium telluride could usefully be applied to silicon sensors. One such example was reported by Uher et al.86 who used a 256 × 256 pixel array and Medipix2 readout chip for real-time EDXRF imaging and a second paper by Ruat and Ponchut87 described the use of a TIMEPIX readout chip with 1 mm thick cadmium telluride sensors for use in X-ray imaging over the energy range 30–100 keV at SR beamlines. In a study88 using 77 keV X-rays in a beamline at the Diamond Light source, a 1 mm thick cadmium telluride sensor array was used in conjunction with a TIMEPIX readout chip. Although at higher energy than used for typical EDXRF, the authors noted how the bias voltage could be used to influence the ratio of intensities of the incident photopeak and its associated escape peak. Finally, Norlin et al.89 evaluated radiation hardness in silicon strip detectors and Hattori et al.90 improved by 60% the position resolution of a micro-pixel gas chamber detector from 230 to 93 μm by means of improved signal processing algorithms in the readout chip.
Considering the needs of detector makers, Raulo and co-workers91 provided details of the improved crystal growth and annealing processors supported by detailed RBS and XRF analysis of the resulting detector-grade cadmium telluride material. A variety of spectroscopic methods was also applied92 to confirm the high quality of bismuth-doped cadmium telluride crystals grown in a furnace in which a Pt cold finger was used to modify the thermal environment of the solid–liquid interface.
Once again the review year has been a quiet one for developments in cryogenic high-resolution energy dispersive detectors. Although being developed for solar physics experiments, the small pitch transition edge sensor (TES) microcalorimeter using 35 × 35 μm2 molybdenum/gold TESs with 4.5 μm thick gold absorbers provided an excellent energy resolution of just 1.58 eV at 5.9 keV and 1.96 eV at 8 keV.93 A NASA-developed single pixel TES microcalorimeter was reported94 to yield an energy resolution of 3.7 eV at 5.9 keV when operated in an AC bias mode, which was a factor of two worse than an identical sensor operated in DC biased mode. The authors discovered a strong dependency of detector noise on the bias voltage.
2.6 Quantification and data processing
Data processing, development of quantitative analysis procedures, and improved accuracy and expansion of fundamental parameter tabulations were pursued by authors of a number of reports published in the reviewed period. Roach et al.95 approximated measured XRF spectra using EPDL97 and NIST tabulated X-ray emission energies and observed that EPDL97 tabulated values did not fit well the experimental data, whereas the NIST tabulation produced satisfactory results. The authors concluded that the EPDL97 data should not be used to evaluate the results from XRF experiments. A large number of reports were devoted to establishing improved values of various atomic data related to X-ray emission spectroscopy. Aksoy et al.96 determined L-shell X-ray production cross-sections, the emission rates and fluorescence yields for Ta, W and their selected compounds using 241Am radioisotope source irradiation. The authors examined the influence of chemical effects on the determined values of the fundamental parameters. In a similar pursuit, and following their research carried out in a low energy range, Bonzi et al.97 experimentally determined the values of L-subshell XRF cross-sections for elements with atomic numbers in the range 45–50 at the energy of 9 keV. By utilising synchrotron radiation, the authors took advantage of the low background due to the linear polarisation and good monochromatisation of the synchrotron beam to reduce uncertainties in the determined cross-sections. The obtained values of the coefficients were compared with those available in the literature. In a similar research area, Hopman et al.98 experimentally determined the K-shell X-ray emission yield of silicon with a high degree of accuracy. The experimental result was only slightly lower than that calculated with the Hartree–Fock–Slater approximation. The authors concluded that there is a need for new theoretical calculations of K-shell fluorescence yields of low-Z elements. Apaydin and Tirasoglu99 determined K- to L-shell transfer probabilities for 11 high-Z elements applying 57Co radioisotope source excitation with the 123.6 keV gamma photons. In a pure literature study, Kahoul et al.100 compiled the published data on K-shell fluorescence yields, generated between 1994 and 2011. These data were presented in tabulated form and were fitted by analytical functions to deduce new K-shell fluorescence yields for a broad range of elements. In a practical study, Sharanabasappa et al.101 experimentally determined the mass absorption coefficients of a group of elements including lead, near the K-shell absorption edges, in the energy range from 17 keV to 88 keV. They observed significant differences between the experimentally determined coefficients and their theoretical approximations suggesting that Bragg's additivity law (mixture rule) is invalid near the absorption edge. In another practical study, Damla et al.102 carried out measurements of selected construction materials, such as sand, cement, concrete, tile, and bricks to determine effective mass absorption coefficients, effective atomic numbers, electron densities, and photoelectric cross-sections for these materials in the energy range 81–1332 keV. Satisfactory agreement was found between the experimentally determined and the literature-based values. The M-shells data also attracted the interest of researches. Yadav et al.103 determined experimentally the M-shell X-ray emission yields of Pt by using electron impact. The experimentally determined values were in good agreement with the theoretical values predicted using Monte Carlo simulations. Various phenomena connected with the X-ray emission were studied by several research groups. Demir and Sahin104 investigated the effects of an external magnetic field on the angular distribution of L-shell XRF emission for Pt and Au using a 241Am radioisotope excitation source. The authors observed anisotropy in the angular intensity distribution in the Ll and Lα groups and isotropic distribution for the Lβ and Lγ groups, with the absence of an external magnetic field. The integral cross-sections, determined with the absence of the external magnetic field, agreed well with their theoretical values. In a fundamental research contribution by Fregeau et al.,105 XRF emission phenomenon were used to provide timing information about the fission time and the vacancy lifetime of the element with the atomic number Z = 120. K-shell X-ray spectra of this element were determined leading to an estimate of the minimum fission time of 2.5 × 10−18 s. Soldatov et al.106 confirmed the presence of dips in the L-edge total fluorescence yield spectra of transition-metal ions in aqueous solution. The authors demonstrated that the dips originated from orbital mixing of the solute with the solvent orbitals leading to electron delocalisation between the valence d-orbitals of the transition metal and the valence bands of the solvent molecules, quenching their X-ray fluorescence. Seidel et al.107 studied similar phenomena, namely the decay mechanism of 2p core-excited Co2+ ions in water using photoelectron spectroscopy from a liquid micro-jet. The conclusions were in line with the observations made by the authors of the previous report, namely metal-to-water charge transfer quenches fluorescence and leads to dips in the total-fluorescence-yield X-ray absorption spectrum.
New and expanded data processing methods were developed by many research groups as well as individual authors. Hayashi et al.108 presented a theoretical description of atomic-resolution X-ray fluorescence holography, providing the solution to the twin-image problem. The authors described the measuring system, the data processing and image reconstruction algorithm and presented the application to the analysis of local lattice distortions in mixed- and nanometre-sized crystals. In the same research field, but related to data processing from CT measurements, Gonzales and Lalush109 applied a single-photon counting pixelated detector in energy-discriminated X-ray CT. The authors adapted the eigenvalue deconvolution method to X-ray spectra detected from different materials into the basic functions, thereby significantly suppressing noise in images obtained by filtered back-projection reconstruction. In research focused on the spectral background, Zhang et al.110 applied fast Fourier transform deconvolution for estimating the shape of the background function in energy dispersive XRF spectra. The method was validated by use of experimental and synthetized X-ray spectra. The proposed method could be applied automatically to a batch of very different X-ray spectra, without the need for operator intervention. Rackwitz et al.111 presented a semi-empirical approach for estimating X-ray spectral distributions from side-window X-ray tubes. They employed experimental methodology involving the use of a modern, state-of-the-art SEM-EDS instrument to expand the spectral distribution data towards the low-energy range, encompassing the characteristic L-shell emission of Cu, Cr, and V targets, as well as the M-shell emission of high-Z targets such as tungsten. The estimated uncertainties in the modelled X-ray tube emission spectra were within 15%. Pavlinsky et al.112 investigated the contribution to the spectral background from free electrons produced in the samples during excitation, using the Na-Kα line in WDXRF spectrometry. The calculated total background contribution was in good agreement with the experimentally observed signal-to-background ratio. The same trio of authors,113 presented a related report in which they estimated the contributions to the long-wavelength background observed in measurements by WDXRF spectrometry due to bremsstrahlung radiation from free electrons, diffuse scattering and fluorescence of the analysing crystal, and high-order reflections of the scattered radiation. Similarly to their previous report, the analysis was carried out in the region around the Na Kα line and the contributions from the individual processes were assessed. The spectral background and its influence on analytical results was of interest to Thomsen,114 who conducted a general study on the spectral background and the methodology for converting this background into equivalent elemental concentrations, and its influence on detection limits in analytical atomic emission spectrometry. The results of the study were applicable to various analytical techniques, including XRF spectrometry. Kadachi and Al-Eshaikh115 also took a closer look at the existing methodologies for determining the detection limit in XRF analysis with a focus on the detection of toxic heavy elements in imported polyethylene and other plastic goods to comply with the EU RoHS. The authors concluded that the approach based on the slope of the calibration curve was the most practical and correct for their application.
Interest in the development of the quantitative analysis methodology for the micro-beam X-ray techniques was demonstrated by several reports devoted to advance the quantification algorithms. Patterson et al.116 verified the possibility of applying the confocal XRF analysis for 3D density profiling of targets used in high energy density physics experiments, such as those carried out at the National Ignition Facility, USA. The authors observed a linear correlation between the X-ray scatter intensity and bulk density in low-Z materials. For higher-Z materials, such as aerogels, absorption effects reduced the ability of the technique to quantify the density of the material in 3D. The technique was used to render a 3D image of a machined aerogel tube. Mantouvalou et al.117 presented a review of published quantitative analysis approaches in confocal micro-beam XRF spectrometry. In their review, they discussed various synchrotron and X-ray tube-based set-ups and their applications. The report could be helpful in selecting the most appropriate quantification methodology, which, to a large extent, depends on the confocal configuration. Schoonjans et al.118 developed a quantitative analysis algorithm for the confocal nano-beam XRF technique. The fundamental parameter method was adapted to the confocal measuring geometry, comprising nano-beam excitation combined with a confocal detection channel. The method was validated using a rigorously designed Monte Carlo simulation. The newly developed method was applied for characterisation of the dust particles collected during NASA's Stardust mission. The measurement of samples was conducted at the beamline ID13 of the European Synchrotron Radiation Facility. Trojek119 used Monte Carlo simulations to examine interference effects in micro-beam XRF measurements due to variable surface topography of the analysed samples. The author elaborated a method capable of correcting these effects resulting in increased accuracy and in the provision of additional quantitative information about the sample surface topography. Hatam et al.120 proposed quite a different approach for determining the topography of the sample surface during micro-beam measurements. In their approach, a pair of X-ray detectors was positioned on opposite sides of the collimated primary beam to detect, independently, X-rays emitted from the analysed sample. When combined with the sample scanning mode, a topographic map of the scanned region was obtained by combining the spectra (each affected to a different extent by attenuation) collected by the two detectors. This approach could be applied to both μ-PIXE and μ-XRF analysis and the authors presented results obtained in a μ-PIXE experiment.
Monte Carlo approaches were also applied to investigate more general problems related to EDXRF spectrometry. A general Monte Carlo code for simulating EDXRF spectrometers was further developed and presented in the report by Schoonjans et al.121 The new code was capable of modelling polarised excitation, M-shell emission, cascade effects, detector response including XRF and Compton escape peaks and pile-up effects. The code could also deal with stratified samples and a full description of the code and the results of its validation based on measurements performed on the HASYLAB Beamline L were presented in the report. Li and Gardner122 developed an optimised Monte Carlo simulation code for the determination of element concentrations based on modelling and least-squares regression of experimental X-ray spectra by employing computer-generated library spectra. The code utilised a stratified sampling variance-reduction technique to speed up computations and increase the accuracy of modelling, especially for trace elements. Reference material production and their utilisation in XRF spectrometry were tackled by Czyzycki et al.123 The authors designed and characterised a candidate reference material intended for confocal micro-beam XRF spectrometry. The material consisted of stacked polymer layers of known composition, alternately and homogenously doped with Cu2O and ZnO oxides. The material was characterised by optical microscopy and μ-XRF analysis. The results of the XRF analysis were validated using Monte Carlo simulations. The material was found to be suitable for validating quantification methodologies in depth-sensitive analysis when using X-ray emission techniques. Ohata et al.124 tested the stability of Hg in a certified reference material comprising an acrylonitrile–butadiene–styrene disk (ABS disk CRM, NMIJ CRM 8116-a) for bulk analysis in WDXRF and EDXRF spectrometers under varying measuring conditions. The XRF intensities and XRF intensity ratios stayed constant for up to 32 h of measurement time under an 80 mA X-ray tube load. The CRM was found to be sufficiently stable for bulk XRF analysis. In a more applied research project, Walker and Smith125 performed subsequent tests of a previously developed algorithm used for making geological interpretations of X-ray spectrometric data collected with swept-charge device (SCD) X-ray detectors launched on-board the Indian Space Research Organisation Chandrayaan-1 lunar mission in October 2008. They used samples made from mixtures of MgO, Al2O3, and SiO2 powders, and described the operation of the SCD, the test facility, the sample preparation methods, and presented the collected XRF spectra. Indresand and Dillner126 performed a detailed investigation to identify the possible sources of errors frequently observed in the determination of Si and Al in powdered soil samples by XRF analysis. They found that three main sources significantly increased the uncertainty of results: spectral interferences due to presence of sulfur peaks, attenuation of Al and Si fluorescence by sulfur, and the low sensitivity of XRF spectrometry for Si and Al X-ray peaks.
In a few reports, the authors employed multivariate techniques to process the experimental data. Li et al.127 applied a neural network approach for determining lead and zinc concentrations in ores by feeding the network with XRF data. The estimated accuracy of the method was better than 5%. Rodriguez et al.128 applied a multivariate analysis technique for separating XRF spectral components and for producing interference-free elemental maps by the micro-beam XRF technique. By coupling the obtained maps to the results of quantitative powder XRD analysis, the authors improved the detection of trace phases in geological specimens. Another multivariate analysis approach to XRF data was presented by Angeyo et al.129 The authors used principal component analysis (PCA) and the radioisotope-excited EDXRF technique to determine B, Ca, Mg, Zn, Fe, and Na in lubricating oil samples. The PCA technique discriminated between lubricating oils from various brands and indicated the aging of the oil samples. It was demonstrated that important information was available in the scatter region of the X-ray spectra. The method was found to be capable of routine discrimination between complex matrix materials. In line with their previous report,129 Angeyo et al.130 utilized a partial least squares approach to analyse rapidly EDXRF spectrometry data of the same material, that is lubricating oil samples, concluding that the performance of the technique was promising for the determination of low- and high-Z elements. Windig et al.131 applied an alternating least squares method with contrast enhancement to support the interpretation of data from mapping measurements by various analytical techniques, including XRF elemental mapping. An example of elemental mapping of a granite sample was presented in the report. The method produced optimal contrast in the elemental images and improved separation of the elemental maps. In a report related to the development of advanced instrumentation but addressed from the data processing side, Wang et al.132 studied baseline estimation techniques in the digital processing of X-ray detector signals. They improved and optimised existing baseline filtering algorithms and established a new model of the adaptive Kalman filter algorithm. Very good filtering efficiency of the newly developed filter was demonstrated, leading to improved energy resolution of the acquired X-ray spectra.
3 Applications
3.1 Geological and climate change
A number of contributions were published over the current review period describing developments in XRF techniques for the analysis of geological samples. Rowe et al.133 investigated the application of hand-held XRF spectrometry to quantify the chemo-stratigraphy and geochemistry of mudrock. Owing to a lack of sufficient matrix-matched reference materials with adequate concentration ranges, the authors prepared their own calibrators. Following a comparison with samples analysed by conventional WDXRF spectrometry, they considered that hand-held XRF was effective in defining chemo-stratigraphy in real time, with all the attendant advantages for immediate data interpretation. Weindorf et al.134 investigated the use of portable XRF in the analysis of soil pedons (the smallest unit or volume of soil that contains all the soil horizons of a particular soil type) from Lousiana, USA and reported that variations in elemental concentrations by XRF spectrometry matched the described horizons better than those by other measures (laboratory analyses and clay content analysis). Han et al.135 reported the use of portable XRF spectrometry in the determination of heavy metal pollutants (As, Cr, Cu, Pb and Zn) in soils, assessing the performance by comparison with laboratory analysis and considering that the portable XRF technique was effective in this application. To accommodate the determination of the major element oxides in very small precious silicic samples, Nakayama and Nakamura136 developed a WDXRF glass bead technique based on the preparation of small 12.5 mm diameter glass discs. These discs were prepared from 11 mg of sample and 396 mg of flux (Li2B4O7) (instead of 400 mg and 4000 mg respectively for the normal technique) and the authors reported potential applications in the analysis of archaeological ceramics and stone tools, geochemical minerals in rocks and sediment and sand. Krishna et al.137 investigated a WDXRF powder pellet method for the determination of the halides in environmental and geochemical exploration samples—elements that are not always routinely reported by XRF. Analytical data was obtained over the concentration ranges Br (0.71–252 mg kg−1), Cl (26–1200 mg kg−1) and F (44–6960 mg kg−1). A rapid method for the determination of heavy metals (Cu, Fe, Mn, Ni, Pb, Zn) in coastal seawater was reported by Peng et al.138 based on membrane pre-concentration, coupled with hydroxide and sulfide precipitation/co-precipitation. After precipitation as hydroxides or sulfides, the filtered residue was measured directly with a portable XRF detector, achieving detection limits of 1.32–7.84 μg L−1 (hydroxide method) and 1.94–11 μg L−1 (sulfide method). Without matrix-matched calibrators, carbonate rocks cannot always be reliably measured on powder pellets by XRF, a problem addressed by Sliwinski et al.,139 who described the preparation of calibration samples containing 0–100 mg kg−1 of Cu, Mo, Ni, U and V by spiking 99.999% pure CaCO3 with single element ICP-MS standard solutions. Wilhelms-Dick et al.140 undertook a comparison of techniques capable of offering millimetre scale resolution of the elemental composition of sediment cores, the techniques in question being core scanning XRF (offering 0.8 mm resolution) and ICP-MS on discrete samples selected for analysis (offering 1 mm resolution). Significant correlation was reported in data for Ca, Fe, Rb, S, Sr, Zr as well as K/Ca, Fe/Ti and Ti/Al ratios and overall, XRF was considered to offer major advantages of high speed, low cost and few sample preparation steps. Core scanning XRF was also evaluated by Kylander et al.,141 this time in a more demanding application in the analysis of tephra (volcanic ash) cores from the Faroe Islands to investigate eruption chronology. The XRF technique was capable of identifying basaltic tephra layers of >1000 shards cm3, but not concentrations lower than 850 shards cm3 of rhyolitic tephra layers. In addition, there were differences in the elemental composition of tephra layers detected by XRF core scanning when compared with the analysis of individual shards by EPMA, leading the authors to recommend the use of XRF core scanning for tephra screening to localise layers for high resolution sub-sampling and to avoid layers where sediment mixing had caused tailing or mixing of the tephra signal. An unusual application of the XRF technique was described by Casey et al.142,143 who analysed the geochemical and mineralogical composition of supraglacial debris from selected glaciers in the Nepal Himalaya, New Zealand and Switzerland by XRF and XRD techniques to obtain ‘ground truth’ for the interpretation of satellite remote sensing data. In a technically challenging geochemical application, Tanis et al.144 interfaced a hydrothermal diamond anvil cell onto a SR beamline to measure the solubility of xenotime in 2 mol L−1 HCl at pressures of 1.19 to 2.6 GPa and temperatures of 300 to 500 °C to contribute to an understanding of the mass transfer of REE and high field strength elements from the subducted oceanic crust and metasediments to the mantle wedge.
One of the ‘classic’ geological applications of XRF spectrometry is in contributing major and trace element data to geochemical research, an area that is well represented in publications available for this year's review. In this section, publications are restricted to a selection that described more demanding or unusual applications of the technique. Thus, Barnes et al.145 studied nickel-rich iron-nickel sulfide assemblages in a komatitic dunite from Betheno, Western Australia, employing SRXRF mapping to reveal subtle zonation of Ni in host olivine. These data allowed the authors to propose the mineralogical and magmatic origin of this rock sequence. The techniques, XRF, XANES and XRD, were used to characterise sulfur, sulfides, oxides and organic matter aggregated in submarine hydrothermal plumes at the East Pacific rise. The XANES technique was used to detect speciation of C, Fe and S and the overall conclusions were that the aggregation of particles with organic material is prevalent in dispersing hydrothermal plume fluxes as well as in sinking particle matter at this site. Katsuta et al.146 used μ-XRF imaging to reveal differentiation caused by metamorphic activity in Archean banded iron formation samples from the Yellowknife greenstone belt, Canada. Using a similar approach, Matthews et al.147 used μ-SRXRF to investigate processes that occur in magma chambers based on samples collected from the Taupo Volcanic Zone, New Zealand. They interpreted elemental variations from the core to the rim of quartz crystals in terms of conditions in the magma chamber during quartz crystallisation. Pillow lavas in a DSDP drilling cores from the North Atlantic and representative of the Cretaceous oceanic crust were analysed by Fliegel et al.148 using conventional petrographic optical microscopy, μ-XRF mapping and XAS on the one hand and the more specialised techniques of TEM (after focused ion beam milling), EELS and scanning transmission electron microscopy on the other. A detailed description of textures and alteration features was presented and the authors described a sequence of processes that led to the formation of these pillow lavas and concluded that none of the features could be linked solely to a biogenic origin. Synchrotron radiation XRF was used by Twining et al.149 to analyse individual phytoplankton cells collected from stations in the Pacific Ocean in an investigation of the role of diatoms in the biogeochemistry of Ni in the ocean; Ni, P and Si being the elements of interest. Ramakrishnan et al.150 reported trace element data by WDXRF spectrometry in the first-ever reported sample of spinifex-textured komatiite from the Karnataka region of India, drawing comparisons with other komatiitic lavas and suggesting that the source regions had a chondritic composition. Among a spectrum of techniques, Josh et al.151 used X-ray μ-CT at low and high resolution to characterise the properties of shale, related to oil/gas recovery and production strategies. X-ray fluorescence contributed to the analysis of dolomite marble in the Bayan Obo REE–Nb–Fe deposit in Inner Mongolia. Data from this and ICP-AES and EPMA techniques were used to distinguish the formation of coarse- and fine-grained marbles in this area. Chert was of interest to Khoury et al.152 with XRF, XRD and ED-SEM data used to evaluate its microstructure and origin in relation to the deformation effects expected at a confirmed impact site of a meteorite. As has been found in other areas of application, White and Goodwin153 reported that portable XRF facilitated a timely and cost-effective approach in the analysis of rocks that have the potential to cause an acid drainage problem in the Halifax Regional Municipality, Nova Scotia, Canada, although the authors warned that the technique does not replace the legally mandated acid–base accounting procedure.
There has been a substantial growth in recent years in the application of XRF to studies of climate change over geological time scales, (and sometimes more recently!) and this year is no different. The selection of appropriate sedimentary cores and their analysis using a range of techniques, but especially core scanning XRF is the basis for many contributions in this area, and some innovative applications have been mentioned at the beginning of this section. This year's review is mainly restricted to those contributions that comment on the technique or data analysis. Hennekam and de Lange154 suggested that significant analytical deviations can occur in XRF core scanning data owing to physical sedimentary properties and undertook a comparison between conventional XRF (glass beads) and ICP-AES, both on discrete samples and core scanning XRF. Agreement between the data sets was reasonably good, but several deviations were observed that could be caused by major paleoceanographic events. However, the authors found that these variations appeared to be mainly related to the presence and distribution of water underneath the plastic wrapping film. As these discrepancies do not affect significantly the concentration ratios of adjacent elements in the periodic table, the authors recommended the use of Ca/K and Ca/Ti ratios for a preliminary overview of sedimentary variability in the analysis of marine cores. Hanslik et al.155 examined Arctic Ocean cores using XRF scanning and reported a strong correlation between the XRF-detected carbonate content and foraminiferal abundance, leading the authors to suggest that the XRF scanner's capability of mapping efficiently Ca concentrations in sediment cores makes it possible to examine systematically large numbers of cores from different regions to investigate the palaeoceanographic reasons for the spatial and temporal variability of calcareous microfossils. Loess was the medium of interest for Hang et al.156 because it provides a unique continental archive of Quaternary climate change in China. The authors reported that although core scanning XRF was capable of determining ten elements, only five (Ca, Fe, Si, Sr and Zr) could be used with confidence to infer chemical weathering and grain-size effects. A comparison of these with other data indicated that high resolution records have great potential for evaluating rapid fluctuations of the East Asia monsoon. Jones et al.157 reported the geochemical record of flooding on the upper River Severn, UK over the last 3750 years. Sediment profiles were obtained using XRF core scanning with a high resolution of 500 μm with ages attributed by C-14 dating and Pb contamination profiles. Yao et al.158 used μ-XRF core scanning to characterise paleoceanographic changes in the East/Japan Sea during the late Quaternary.
Deposits in caves also record a signature of environmental and climate change and Deves et al.159 used digital autoradiography and μ-XRF spectrometry to study the geochemistry of a speleotherm from eastern Siberia, in particular to study the distribution of U as well as Ca, Si and Sr. Exceptionally high concentrations of U (>1300 mg kg−1) were found in different areas of the sample with concentrations varying in proportion to Si and inversely with Ca. Micro-SRXRF mapping was used by Frisia et al.160 to re-evaluate the palaeoclimatic significance of the variation in P in speleotherms from one modern and two Early Pliocene coastal caves on Christmas Island (Indian Ocean). Results indicated that there might not be a direct relationship between an increase in P concentration and seasonal infiltration (as had been found in previous studies), especially if the source of P is not labile phosphorus released through leaching during the seasonal dieback of vegetation. Micro-SRXRF was also used by Frierdich and Catalano161 to measure the spatial distribution and banding of Fe and Mn and associated trace elements (As, Co, Cu, Ni, Se and Zn) in the coatings on pebbles in streams in the Pautler cave system in Southwest Illinois, USA. Supplementary speciation data for As was obtained by EXAFS and results indicated that these coatings were sensitive to aqueous redox conditions, scavenged trace elements and limited the transport of micronutrients and contaminants in the karst aquifer system so potentially recording anthropomorphic and land use activity on the surface. The presence of potentially toxic metals in soils and cave sediments was reported by Munteanu et al.162 in the karst geosystem of Ponoarele, Cyprus, using both AAS and XRF to detect elements of interest. Higher values were observed for Cd, Ni, Pb, Rb, S, V, Zn and Zr, all elements associated with the regional mining of copper-pyrite ores and no significant evidence of road or residentially induced toxic metal contamination was detected.
Weathering is the process that results in the breakdown of rocks, minerals and soils and although normally associated with solid residues, the products of weathering can affect ground waters. Thus, Masuda et al.163 studied the cause of arsenic pollution in the Holocene aquifers of Bangladesh. Of the possible source minerals—biotite, chlorite and amphibole—μ-XRF showed that only chlorite contained As and the authors proposed that chemical weathering of chlorite accelerated by the infiltration of aerobic water was the first stage in the formation of As-contaminated ground water, which represents a significant health risk in Bangladesh. The release of As to ground water is also a potential side effect of carbon dioxide sequestration due to the leakage of carbon dioxide causing mineral precipitation–dissolution reactions, as investigated by Viswanathan et al.164 at a natural analogue site in Chimayo, New Mexico, USA. They examined the association of As with iron-rich phases such as clays and oxides by XRD, μ-SRXRF and SEM and proposed a model that involved a drop in pH as CO2 was introduced into the ground water, buffered by calcite and causing an increase in the As concentration. This decreased with time owing to the scavenging of As by illite, kaolinite and smectite—all factors that are important in the environment impact assessment of a sequestration site. Regmi et al.165 were interested in a different aspect of weathering which resulted in a major landslide that caused the Mugling–Narayanghat Highway in Central Nepal to fail. Although triggered by the monsoon rain of 2003, XRF, XRD and thin section analysis showed that the presence of clay minerals, mainly derived by the weathering of rock, significantly reduced the rock strength and facilitated the failure. Weathering can also affect soils and the phenomenon of de-alumination in soils (an increase in the concentration of acid-extractable Al caused by the accelerated weathering or chemical attack of crystalline aluminosilicates) was investigated by Taylor et al.166 using samples from the Waikato region, New Zealand. X-ray fluorescence data for total Al contributed to this study and an increase in extractable Al over time was postulated to be caused by either the high localised acidity around fertiliser grains applied to agricultural land or the annual loadings of fluorine. Schepers and Milsch167 used a range of techniques, including XRF to investigate dissolution–precipitation reactions that occur when hydrothermal fluids (150 °C, 5 MPa) interact with quartz–feldspar aggregates. The results provided evidence of the early stages of diagenisis of quartz–feldspar sands and indicated that amorphous phases may be precursor to the formation of crystalline phases, e.g., clays. Rajakaruna et al.168 used XRF to analyse ultramafic and non-ultramafic rocks from San Benito County, California, USA to establish an inventory of lichens that grew on their surface, presumably sustained by minerals released by weathering.
The analysis of soils can give valuable information on a wide range of activities as summarised by the contributions featured here. Portable XRF will probably make an increasing contribution as the technique of choice, as illustrated by the work of Weindorf et al.,169 whose interest was in differentiating horizons formed by volcanic ash in soil from northern Idaho and southern Alaska, USA. The PXRF data was used to distinguish seemingly nondescript horizons, with Fe/Zr ratios being particularly useful. The analysis of soils was the subject of regional geochemical mapping with the interest of Tarvainen et al.170 being in the distribution of As in agricultural and grazing land soils of Europe at a sampling density of one site per 2500 km2. Total As was determined by XRF and acid extractable As by AAS and the dominant feature of resultant maps was the distinction between glacial deposits covering northern Europe (with a median of 3 mg kg−1 total As) and southern Europe (with a median of 10 mg kg−1 total As). Scheib et al.171 interpreted results for total Nb (by XRF) and acid extractable Nb as part of the same Geochemical Mapping of Agricultural and Grazing Land Soil project with this element being considered to be immobile in >95% of samples with concentration levels mainly dominated by associated bedrock geology. Anda172 also concluded that parent rock geochemistry had a significant influence on cation imbalance and potential heavy metal contamination of soils from Indonesia with XRF data from a range of fresh rocks samples being compared with the exchangeable cation and extractable heavy metal content of associated soils. Indeed, the author considered that the risk of Cr and Ni toxicity should be taken into account by avoiding growing food crops on soils derived from serpentinite and gabbro. Matschullat et al.173 reported that few regional soil geochemical projects had been undertaken in the southern hemisphere, but undertook such a survey in northeastern Brazil, using WDXRF to provide the relevant major, minor and trace element data. The author made comparisons with other surveys and considered that such data comprised a robust and valuable tool to support future land-use management. The origin of heavy metal contamination in urban soil from an industrial district in Weinan, Northwest China was reported by Li and Feng174 using WDXRF, supplemented by sequential extraction data. The elements Ba, Cr, Cu, Pb, Zn were considered to be mainly derived from coal combustion and traffic sources, whereas As, Co, Mn, Ni and V were mainly natural in origin. X-ray fluorescence contributed to a study by Jayawardana et al.175 of soils in the dry zone of Sri Lanka associated with areas having a high content of fluorine in groundwater, reporting that the weathering of heavy minerals (such as zircon, apatite, fluorite, monazite and garnet) were the main sources of F with the loss of CaO providing favourable conditions for the leaching of this element into the ground water. On a more pleasant note, Ortiz-Villajos et al.176 used XRF to analyse soils and dried vegetation from vineyards in La Mancha, Spain to provide an elemental fingerprint of the vines, calculating biological absorption coefficients to assess the uptake of minerals by vines as a function of soil content. The elements Ce, Cs, K, Nb, Sr and Zn were considered to be possible markers of soil fingerprinting in the resulting wines.
The analysis of sediments often sampled as cores, is widely used in studies of climate change, examples of which have been given earlier in this section. However, sediments can also reveal details of other processes, as illustrated by von Eynatten et al.,177 who used XRF to analyse grain-size fractions and XRD to identify minerals present in the moraines from six retreating glaciers in the Alps. The interest of these authors was in the mechanisms of comminution (the process by which solid rock is reduced in size, by the crushing and grinding effect of moving glacial ice). The ratio Zr/Zn was found to be a good proxy for grain size and Cr/Rb for source rock discrimination and the authors proposed a model for the entire network of sediment production processes from source to sink. By contrast, Ijmker et al.178 used XRF to analyse terrestrial sediments on an alluvial fan and adjacent areas in the eastern part of the Donggi Cona catchment, Northeast Tibetan Plateau to provide an insight into the transport of sediment between the catchment area and lake. The elements Ca, Fe, K, Mn, Rb, Sr, Ti, V and Zn were found to give the best discrimination and factor analysis was used to identify the following sediment inputs: a carbonate input, weathering and two redox input factors, with the first two being identified with dune, loess, lake and fluvial gravel sediments. Kleeberg et al.179 asked the question ‘how effectively does a single or continuous supply of iron affect the phosphorus budget of aerated lakes’, and used high resolution μ-XRF to provide core stratigraphy for Fe in Lake Tegel and Lake Gro-Glienicke in Berlin, Germany. The issue of concern was the restoration of lakes by the use of Fe to fix P in sediments and avoid release back to the water owing to a change in redox conditions. The authors concluded that this was possible providing the Fe dosage exceeded 200 g m−2 to compensate for complexation of Fe with sediment organic matter. The trace metal concentrations in tidal flat coastal sediments in Yamaguchi Prefecture, southwestern Japan were measured by XRF by Rahman and Ishiga180 to assess contamination levels. Based on Sediment Quality Guidelines, the sediments were found to be heavily polluted by As and moderately heavily polluted by Cr, Cu, Ni and Zn, and the correlation between trace metal contents and Fe2O3 and TiO2 suggested that iron oxyhydroxides and detrital clastic deposits played a role in controlling pollutants in the study area. A similar range of pollutants was detected using WDXRF by Han et al.181 in the surface sediment of the Wei River, China, attributed to agricultural runoff and industrial wastewater discharge, although levels were lower than the Yangzi and Pearl Rivers, probably because of the dilution of contaminants by large in-flows of sand into the Wei as well as lower levels of industrialisation. Energy dispersive XRF with polarised excitation was used by Hellar-Kihampa et al.182 to distinguish lithogenic and anthropomorphic sources of elements found in the bottom sediments of the Pangani River basin, Tanzania. The elements associated with anthropomorphic activities were Cr, Cu, La, Ni, V and were again associated with agricultural and industrial activities.
As a contribution to the characterisation of clays, Kibria and Hossain183 used ‘high energy’ X-ray fluorescence as one of the techniques to investigate various parameters that affect the resistivity of compacted clays. The parameters investigated included moisture content, unit weight, degree of saturation, specific surface area, percent of pores and ion composition, and these data were of value in understanding the geotechnical properties of the clay. Goethite was synthesised and characterised using XRF and XRD by Liu et al.184 with a particular interest in measuring the kinetics of dehydration using TG and DTG. Experiments to distinguish the morphology of goethite and aluminium goethite were undertaken by the same laboratory.185 X-ray fluorescence, XRD and TGA were used by Picanco et al.186 to investigate the pozzolanic activity of zeolite-bearing sandstone from Northeast Brazil as preliminary studies showed that this sandstone could be used in Portland cement-based systems after sieving to remove quartz and thermal activation. An investigation to discover the reason for the unexpectedly high cation exchange capacity of illite from Muloorina, South Australia was undertaken by Eggleton and Gerald187 using XRF, XRD and TGA. The authors concluded that Muloorina illite is not an interstratified illite–smectite, but a mica mineral with low-charge regions associated with terminating 2:1 defects, wedge in shape and stabilised by bonding of the illite remainder of that interlayer.
As a contribution to the analysis of other geological artefacts, the origin of Libyan desert glass found in the Great Sand Sea of the Libyan Desert (Egypt) is controversial, and justified a study by Aramendia et al.188 using Raman microspectroscopy and μ-XRF to characterise the mineralogy. Inclusions were found to contain uncommon minerals for a high temperature glass (including sodium carbonate, calcite, gypsum, anhydrite and cinnabar) interpreted as originating from a trapping process that occurred just before the glass cooled to the point of solidification. The histology and geochemistry of a functional maxillary tooth from an ancient aquatic preditor, Mosasaurus hoffmanni, from Devrekani, Turkey, was reported by Chinsamy et al.189 using XRF, XRD and Sr-isotope techniques. Results indicated heterogeneous diagenetic alteration but also provided paleobiological and paleoenvironmental information. A nano- to micro-structural and geochemical analysis of the calcitic skeletons of extant deep-sea stalked crinoids was undertaken by Gorzelak et al.190 using SEM, AFM, nano-SIMS, μ-SRXRF and XANES techniques. Particular interest was shown in the high Mg content found in parts of the skeleton, an observation that this often correlated with the presence of sulfate associated with sulfated polysaccharides in biocarbonate, but the authors expressed caution in the use of Mg data to reconstruct palaeotemperatures and Mg/Ca palaeo-variations of the ocean.
3.2 Industrial minerals and consequences from mining activity
X-ray fluorescence continues to make an important contribution to the characterisation of coal and the products of combustion as shown by the work of Bortoluzzi et al.,191 who used XRF to contribute to a project designed to vitrify coal ashes contaminated with heavy metals to render inert these potential pollutants. The technique was used to characterise the coal ash as well as waste from the mining of fluorite, feldspar and from the plating industry. Formulations were fused with Na2CO3 to form a glass and the physical properties were measured using other techniques. Flues et al.192 used WDXRF to analyse bottom and fly ash waste from a power plant in Figueira, Brazil, to assess the environmental impact. The highest mobility was observed for As > Mo > Cd, Mn, Pb, Zn with As considered to be the most critical element. X-ray fluorescence, accompanied by a number of other techniques was used by Zhao193 to monitor “dumps” of colliery waste that had accumulated since 1895 at the Durban Navigational Colliery in South Africa. This study showed that the “dumps” had the potential to turn acidic (containing more than 0.25% sulfide–sulfur) with leachates predicted to contain Al, Fe, Mn and Zn. Bankar et al.194 used SEM, XRD and XRF techniques to evaluate the role of a metal-tolerant tropical yeast on the bioleaching of different metals from fly ash collected from an Indian thermal power plant.
As a contribution to the characterisation of oil reserves and the products of combustion, Fadipe et al.195 used XRF spectrometry and a range of other techniques to evaluate the oil reservoir potential of sandstones in the Orange Basin, offshore South Africa, providing a detailed description of their diagenetic and geochemical development. Huq et al.196 undertook laboratory experiments into dissolution–precipitation phenomena induced by the injection of carbon dioxide into sandstone designed to be representative of the Altmark (North East German basin) gas field. Inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectrometry and TXRF spectrometry were used to analyse liquid samples from a closed batch reactor and the authors commented that TXRF spectrometry was a feasible alternative technique, especially when only small (10 μL) sample volumes were available. Mello et al.197 reviewed developments over the last ten years for the determination of metals and non-metals in crude oil. This compilation was concerned with sample preparation provided by official methods as well as certified reference materials available for the accurate evaluation of crude oils. Sulfur emissions from fossil fuels is a major environmental problem, which was investigated by Sarda et al.,198 who used XRF spectrometry to assess the desulfurisation of diesel fuel by selective adsorption over a commercial aluminosilicate zeolite and activated alumina loaded with different ratios of nickel and copper. Best performance was reported for Ni/Al2O3 in the presence of hydrogen peroxide oxidant. X-ray fluorescence was used by Nair et al.199 to analyse the calcium oxide catalyst, prepared from a powdered calcined clamshell, that was found to be effective in the synthesis of biodiesel from waste frying oil.
Mineral processing applications of XRF were illustrated by the report of Chu et al.200 who used XRF and XRD techniques to investigate the recovery of Ni by roasting and acid leaching a molybdenum residue from a metalliferous black shale; the optimum extraction conditions being presented. Sitando and Crouse201 described the production of high-purity Li2CO3 from the Bikita petalite deposits, Zimbabwe, using XRF and ICP-AES to show that the concentrate consisted of the oxides of Al, Li and Si. X-ray diffraction and TGA were used to characterise the product. Although mainly about the role of quantitative XRD for quality control of granitic pegmatite in mineral production, Hestnes and Sorensen202 reported that a combination of methods including both mineralogy (XRD) and chemistry (XRF) gave the best outcome in terms of accuracy for daily control management. The use of EDXRF was described by Gbadago et al.203 to measure the concentration of major and trace elements in oxide and sulfide feed ores at various stages in the milling and processing of gold from a goldmine at Bogoso in the western region of Ghana. In particular, the concentration of the toxic elements: Co, Cr, Cu, Ni, Pb and Zn in slurries discharged into the tailings dam were monitored and these were considered not to contribute significant pollution to the surrounding area. A more unusual application was described by Cheah and Ramli204 who used XRF and XRD to investigate the potential use of high calcium bearing wood ash as a partial replacement for cement in the production of mortar, with the proportion of ash used as a replacement for cement in the range 5 to 15% showing beneficial properties. Also using XRF in a multi-technique approach, Phonphuak and Thiansem205 demonstrated the beneficial effect of adding charcoal (2.5%) to clay on the mechanical and physical properties of lightweight fired bricks. Goncalves et al.206 were interested in the quantification of hematite and goethite in kaolin using diffuse reflectance spectroscopy, but reported that the XRF measured Fe content of kaolin showed a poor correlation with its brightness because the technique could not distinguish between Fe contained in oxyhydroxides and Fe present in the crystalline structure of kaolinite.
On the subject of the treatment of waste for industrial processes involving geological materials, Ma et al.207 focused on the hydrothermal stabilisation of heavy metals in fly ash from a fluidised bed incinerator co-firing refuse and coal. Alkali concentration, liquid–solid ratio and temperature were the main reaction parameters and XRF together with other techniques indicated that the stabilisation of Cr, Cu, Pb and Zn was less effective than that of Cd, Mn and Ni. Stabilisation was attributed to absorption, ion exchange and physical encapsulation of these metals in the zeolite-like minerals synthesised by this process. The preparation of alinite cement from fly ash produced by the incineration of municipal solid waste was described by Wu et al.,208 who used XRF, XRD and SEM to investigate production and properties. The authors reported that the leaching of heavy metals was far lower than that of regulatory limits. Yan et al.209 reported on the feasibility of using a fly ash-based composite coagulant for the treatment of waste water from a coal washing plant, using XRF and a range of techniques to show a high removal efficiency of suspended solids and chemical oxygen demand with the leaching of Al3+ and Fe3+ and the addition of Ca2+ having an improved effect on the coagulation process. Frias et al.210 used XRF in a multi-technique approach to show that mine wastes from three Spanish coal mines exhibited high pozzolanic activity after activation, and so were suitable for use as a cement additive. The preparation of a new cementitious material by the alkali-activation of steel slag was described by Zhang et al.211 for the photocatalytic degradation of organic pollutants in waste water. The XRF technique was used to characterise this nickel-activated metahalloysite and calcium silicate hydrate material and a mechanism for the photocatalytic oxidative degradation of organic pollutants was proposed. The use of precipitated CaCO3 compounds recovered from pulped waste gypsum using some carbonate- and hydroxide-based reagents for the neutralisation of acid mine drainage was evaluated by Zvimba et al.212 EDXRF contributed to this study, which showed that this treatment was more effective than ammonium-based CaCO3 and commercial CaCO3.
In the characterisation of mining wastes and their environmental impact, Boecher et al.213 used the techniques of XRF, XRD and TGA to quantify the chemistry and mineralogy of the solid remains that resulted from the processing of chromite ore. The mineralogy of weathered and unweathered material and the use of analytical measurements to predict the presence of amorphous phases and likely sinks for CrVI was of particular interest. Obhodas et al.214 found high levels of Al, Ca, Fe, Si and Ti in red mud, a toxic waste from the Bayer aluminium production process, that had been stored for 30 to 40 years in open concrete basins in Croatia. X-ray fluorescence, ICP-MS and XRD were used by Gu et al.215 to study red mud from the same process in Guizhou, China, and provided an inventory of the principal mineralogical content. One of the microprobe techniques used by Mantha et al.216 to analyse the black silica- and sulfur-bearing rock coatings in the Greater Sudbury area, Canada, was μ-XRF. These coatings provide a record of atmospheric processes associated with the emission of particulate matter from historic smelting operations. Results showed that on a micrometre scale, As, Cu, Pb, S and Se were closely associated with metal-sulfate-rich layers composed of iron and copper sulfates, although element proportions did not correspond to the smelter plume owing to dissolution–precipitation processes, element substitutions and the stability of various phases involved in the coating formation. Kumpiene et al.217 reported the effective revegetation of mining spoils at a gold mine in Portugal using a combination of compost, zero-valent iron grit and coal fly ash, using XANES and μ-XRF mapping to assess the associations of As, ten years after the treatment with coal fly ash. Results showed that As in the spoils treated with coal fly ash was primarily contained in surface coatings as precipitates and sorbates and that arsenic binding with poorly crystalline Fe-oxyhydroxides did not inhibit the uptake of As by plants. Essilfie-Dughan et al.218 also used XANES and μ-XRF together with WDXRF and EPMA to undertake a micro-scale characterisation of As, Fe and Ni mineralogy in tailings from a uranium mine in northern Saskatchewan, Canada. The tailings had been treated to remove uranium by sulfuric acid dissolution and then neutralised with Ca(OH)2 to reduce soluble elements of concern leaching into the pore water. The authors concluded that As and Ni were absorbed onto ferrihydrite, formed as rims around gypsum grains and considered that these should remain stable for many years. The speciation and bioaccumulation of Se from treated metal mine and mill effluent in a lake in northern Saskatchewan, Canada was studied by Tse et al.219 using SRXRF imaging and XAS to analyse chironomids (a non-biting midge), one component of the food chain of benthic invertebrates. Field and laboratory experiments suggested that selenomethionine-like species were most readily accumulated by these creatures either from the diet or water. A multi-technique approach (XRF, XRD, TEM, ICP) was followed by Marescotti et al.220 to determine the mineralogy and chemical evolution of ochreous precipitates in acid mine drainage from an Fe–Cu–sulfide mine in eastern Liguria, Italy. They investigated changes to mineralogy caused by changes in pH, Eh and sulfate concentration, which resulted mainly from the mixing of unpolluted stream and rill waters with the mine drainage water. The authors considered that changes in pH-Eh facilitated rapid changes in mineralogy by dissolution–reprecipitation reactions and solid state transformations involving jarostie, schwertmannite, goethite, ferrihydrite and amorphous phases and that this represented the main control on the mobility of the trace elements of interest (As, Co, Cu, Ni, Sr, V and Zn). The study of Hayes et al.221 centred on the increased bioavailability of Pb as a result of geochemical weathering at the semi-arid Arizona State Superfund mine tailings site. X-ray absorption spectrometry, XRF and sequential extractions were used to characterise samples and the authors concluded that a mobile and bioaccessible Pb did accumulate in the surface tailings, largely owing to the presence of anglesite (PbSO4), thereby increasing the risk of human exposure from atmospheric particles.
3.3 Industrial and consequences of industrial activity
The number of publications in this year's review once again proves that the XRF technique is well-established and routinely applied in a broad range of industrial applications. Heavy metal determination in polluted soils from an industrial area was performed by several researchers. Luo et al.222 used polarised EDXRF to determine As, Cd, Cr, Cu, Ni, Pb, Zn and other trace elements in soil samples from an area polluted by lead mine exploitation. Potassium bromide was used as secondary target instead of Zr to reduce the impact from overlap of Pb Lα over As Kα. The highest concentrations for As, Cd, Pb and Zn, found in the vicinity of the Pb–Zn mine, were 2726, 65, 14960 and 9439 mg kg−1, respectively, all exceeding the concentrations defined in Class III of the Chinese environmental quality standard for soils. Kodom et al.223 performed a similar study at an industrial cluster in Kumasi, Ghana, using XRF to determine As, Cd, Co, Cr, Cu, Hg, Ni, Pb and Zn in 100 soil samples taken from six sampling sites, four of which were industrial and two residential. Apart from As and Ni, the concentration of all the heavy metals from the industrial sites ranged from 10 to 900% higher than their respective threshold limit value (TLV). Heavy metal concentrations from the residential sites were comparatively far lower, but nevertheless, and of more concern, were Cd, Cr and Hg that revealed concentrations between 62 and 250% above their TLVs. An environmental risk assessment was conducted by Slavik et al.,224 who screened 280 topsoil samples from an industrial estate in Zlin, Czech Republic, using EDXRF spectrometry for the presence of toxic elements. Further contaminant analysis was performed by AAS to determine Pb, Sn and Zn concentrations. Combining the results of both techniques with the data from a geographical information system, resulted in a powerful tool for mapping topsoil contamination.
Immobilisation and stabilisation of contaminants in soil and waste was studied several times in this review period. Baker et al.225 examined the influence of P on Zn speciation in soils as phosphorous was used as an immobiliser for Pb in contaminated soils. A combination of different synchrotron-based techniques, namely μ-XRF, μ-EXAFS and μ-XRD, were used to measure the speciation of Zn for two incubation times, in the proximity of applications points (0 to 4 mm) for fluid and granular P amendments in a Pb–Zn smelter-contaminated soil. Phosphate rock, triple super phosphate, monoammonium phosphate and fluid ammonium polyphosphate caused the formation of Zn phosphate. Phosphoric acid increased the presence of soluble Zn species because of increased acidity, which has implications with respect to Zn bioavailability. Serrano et al.226 investigated the uptake and molecular speciation of dissolved Hg during the formation of Al- or Fe-ettringite-type and high-pH phases in coprecipitation and sorption experiments of sulfate–cement treatments used for soil and sediment remediation. To identify the different phases, the XRD technique was applied, whilst the characterisation of the Hg–Al solids was conducted by bulk Hg EXAFS. Electron microprobe and μ-XRF mapping indicated the coordination of Hg by Cl ligands, multiple Hg and Cl backscattering atoms and spots of Hg as small particles. The results suggested physical encapsulation of Hg as a polynuclear chloromercury(II) salt in ettringite as the primary immobilisation mechanism. In a number of contributions, XRF spectrometry in combination with other analytical techniques was implemented as a characterisation tool: to study the immobilisation of some metals in contaminated sludge by zeolite,227 to evaluate the solidification of municipal solid waste incinerator (MSWI) fly ash using alkaline activated coal ash,228 to explore the stabilisation of heavy metals in MSWI fly ash through sintering with montmorillonitic clay229 and to characterise Belgian MSWI fly ashes and Air Pollution Control residues.230
Contributions this year on the challenge of analysing liquid samples by XRF were focused on the improvement of the instrumental sensitivity and detection limits. Marqui et al.231 pre-concentrated metals from aqueous solutions using commercially available organic-based solid-phase extraction (SPE) disks functionalised with iminodiacetate groups for direct analysis by XRF spectrometry. The analytical possibilities and drawbacks of using this pre-concentration procedure in combination with a handheld unit, a benchtop EDXRF system and a high-energy polarised-beam EDXRF instrument were evaluated. Using the HE-P-EDXRF system, the detection limits for all metals were more than one order of magnitude lower than those attained using handheld and benchtop EDXRF instrumentation. For the detection of metal concentrations higher than about 20 μg L−1, however, handheld or benchtop systems remained a very good option due to their extreme simplicity of operation and their low-cost, compact design. The pre-concentration of Cu, Fe, Ni and Zn in ethanol fuel samples on a cation exchange chromatography paper and subsequent direct EDXRF analysis, was evaluated by Teixeira et al.232 The repeatability (n = 15) of a 250 μg L−1 Cu, Fe, Ni and Zn solution, was less than 3.0% for all elements and limits of detection of less than 15 μg L−1 were found. An EDXRF method to determine U in process stream water from a uranium extraction plant, was developed and validated by Rao et al.,233 who set up a calibration in the range from 0.1 to 10 g L−1 using synthetic standard solutions prepared from U3O8 powder and using the U Lα line at 13.61 keV. Comparison with other methods resulted in a good agreement and over a concentration range of 0.1 to 350 g L−1, a relative standard deviation of 1 to 5% was obtained.
The wide range of interesting industrial applications using XRF as the analytical technique was illustrated by the following contributions. Energy dispersive X-ray fluorescence spectrometry was used by Schwab et al.,234 who determined, in 22 distinct toothpaste samples, calcined at 800 °C, the concentration of TiO2, a pigment that is classified as potentially carcinogenic. A multivariate calibration model was constructed. As a major advantage, the method allowed analysis of samples without pre-treatment with a throughput of 24 determinations per hour. An investigation of the Cd content in several phosphate rocks (PR) used for the production of fertilisers was conducted by Mar and Okazaki235 using XRF, ICP-MS and XRD. Elemental analysis of phosphate rock samples from USA (Wyoming, Florida and Idaho), Morocco (Qued Zem), Russia (Slyudanka) and Japan showed that they were mainly composed of Al, Ca, Fe, P, S and Si. The total phosphate concentration in all phosphate rocks varied between 6 and 38% on the average, whilst the Cd concentration levels ranged from 0.15 to 507 mg kg−1. This study also confirmed that the Idaho and Marocco samples exhibited higher Cd contents and that the prominent mineral component was carbonate fluorapatite, suggesting that Cd might exchange with Ca and/or be occluded in carbonate fluorapatite during its formation by sedimentation. Ozer et al.236 developed a convenient organic solvent treatment method for the determination of Cd, Cr, Hg and Pb in polyethylene and polypropylene matrices by EDXRF. Calibration curves were prepared using organometallic compounds in xylene in the concentration range of 1 to 80 mg kg−1. The elemental recoveries obtained from a polyethylene certified reference material, were in the range of 81% (Hg) to 114% (Pb). The precision was normally better than 8% relative standard deviation, with the exception of Hg (10%). The method detection limits were found to be 24 mg kg−1 for Cr and 12 mg kg−1 for Cd, Hg and Pb. Application of analysis of variance (ANOVA) showed no differences between the mean results of polyethylene and polypropylene samples analysed by both the XRF method and the reference technique. In a contribution by Lorber et al.,237 the processing and the quality of solid recovered fuel (SRF), which is increasingly used in a wide range of co-incineration plants, was described. Reference was made to new, innovative laboratory equipment like cutting mills with attached cyclones and a mobile, hand-sized XRF instrument for the fast identification of extraneous materials removed from the laboratory samples prior to chemical analysis. Kretzschmar et al.238 provided the first quantitative Zn speciation data in 12 blast furnace sludge (BFS) samples from former sedimentation ponds using synchrotron XRD, μ-XRF and XAS at the Zn K-edge to measure solid-phase Zn speciation. Five major types of Zn species in the BFS were identified. These species occurred in variable amounts: (1) Zn in the octahedral sheets of phyllosilicates, (2) Zn sulfide minerals (ZnS, sphalerite, or wurtzite), (3) Zn in a KZn-ferrocyanide phase, (4) hydrozincite (Zn5(OH)6(CO3)2), and (5) tetrahedrally coordinated adsorbed Zn. The contents of ZnS and the KZn-ferrocyanide phase were closely correlated with the total S and total CN contents, respectively, of the BFS. These data are of great relevance for environmental risk assessment, the development of new methods for recovering Zn and Fe from BFS, and potential applications of BFS as an sorbent material in wastewater treatment. Finally, Robert et al.239 performed a scanning XRF imaging study of lithium insertion into copper based oxysulfides (Sr2MnO2Cu3.5S3) used for Li-ion batteries. Microfocused XRF was used to image the elemental components within the battery electrode while μ-XANES and μ-XRD provided information about the Cu oxidation state and phase distribution, respectively. In situ electrochemical synchrotron XRF imaging had the advantage over the ex situ mode in allowing the reaction mechanism of a single particle to be followed versus time. In situ μ-XRF imaging data suggested that the microstructure of the electrode was not affected by the Cu extrusion process.
The use of XRF spectrometry in the analysis of road construction and construction materials remains of interest as shown by the following contributions. Snyder and co-workers240 examined three viscosity modifiers to reduce the effective diffusivity of chloride ions through mortars over a 1 year exposure. Micro-XRF analysis was used to profile the radial chloride concentration under ambient air pressure. Compared with a control mortar, the results proved that the addition of a viscosity modifier would double the service life of any concrete that might be subjected to a degradation process that depended on diffusion, such as corrosion of the steel reinforcement and sulfate attack. Vanadium is well known to promote the ageing of bitumen through oxidation of the carbon matrix. Therefore, El Beze et al.241 investigated whether V could be used as a tracer of the aged and fresh parts of reclaimed bitumen by studying the speciation of V in a bitumen matrix and the way it evolved with ageing. Using V K edge XANES and μ-XANES at the V K edge combined with μ-XRF, it was shown that the presence of aggregates (CaCO3 particles) enhanced the oxidation of bitumen, without effecting the oxidation state of V. As a consequence, the researchers concluded that V could not be used as a tracer.
To conclude, an extended number of contributions were published in this years' review dealing with the chemical characterisation of materials in industrial applications using XRF in combination with complementary analytical techniques. As the emphasis in these papers is related to the industrial process rather than the analytical measurement itself, they are not highlighted in this review. Nevertheless, readers interested in these topics should consult our companion review on ‘Industrial analysis: metals, chemical and advanced materials’.5
3.4 Environmental
In recent years this review has followed the development of advanced X-ray techniques such as μ-SRXRF, μ-XANES and μ-PIXE to assist researchers interested in spatial distribution and speciation of elements within plants. With sufficient published material, this year sees two reviews on these subjects. The first by Donner et al.,242 reported micro techniques used to study metal(loids) in vivo in hydrated plant tissues at sub-micron resolution and speciation of elements to support molecular biology that offered information on the location of gene expression and protein production. Examples were given of how synchrotron-based methods combined with molecular techniques have facilitated the characterisation of genes in plants. There is, however, more to come, as technical challenges still remain at the sub-cellular level. The second review by Wu and Becker243 offered principles and techniques (SRXRF, XAS, SIMS and LA-ICP-MS), sample preparation, advantages and limitations for the improvement of sensitivity and spatial resolution in plants. Examples of work during the last decade revealed the uptake, transport, localisation and speciation of both essential and toxic elements in plants to support the understanding of plant homeostasis and metabolism leading to greater knowledge for food and nutrient researchers as well as those interested in agricultural and environmental studies.
Turning now to element specific work within plants; McNear et al.244 investigated mercury–selenium antagonism in plants with a report on green onion supplemented with sodium selenite and mercuric chloride. Micro-focused SRXRF mapping of freshly excised roots showed mercury sequestered on the root surface and outlining individual root cells, while selenium was more evenly distributed throughout the root. Analysis of the XANES spectra showed a “background” of methylselenocysteine within the root with discrete spots of SeO3, Se–O and HgSe on the root surface. The formation of HgS and Hg–O in the rhizosphere was also reported. These results demonstrated the chemical and biological processes that occur within the rhizosphere that influence Hg and Se bioavailability and lead to the remediation of these metals in the environment. This paper also gave information on fruit and vegetable food selection from plants grown in mercury contaminated soils and their suitability for consumption. Carey et al.245 were interested in selenium accumulation and distribution of selenium species within rice grains. Selenium species were supplied via cut flag leaves of intact plants and excised panicle stems. The organic species selenomethionine and selenomethylcysteine were found to be transported to the grain more efficiently than selenite and selenate. Castillo-Michel et al.246 investigated arsenic speciation in the rhizosphere of mesquite (Prosopis juliflora-velutina) plants grown in a sandy loam treated with AsIII and AsV at 40 mg kg−1. Rhizosphere soil and freeze-dried root tissues of one-month-old plants were analysed by bulk XAS and showed that AsV was the predominant species in the soil whereas AsIII was dominant in the root tissues from both AsIII and AsV treated plants. Studies of thin sections from resin embedded soil cores by μ-XAS and μ-XRF revealed the AsIII S interactions in root tissues and a predominant As Fe interaction in the soil. This research demonstrated that the combination of bulk XAS and μ-XAS techniques is a valuable way to study arsenic in both soil and plant samples. Wovkulich et al.247 developed and applied a new method for measuring arsenic mobilisation in situ within soil columns using μ-SRXRF. By performing these measurements in situ during column transport experiments, the authors simultaneously monitored grain-scale solid phase reactions and column-scale transport. The column (approximately 4 cm long and 0.635 cm internal diameter) experiments were performed on the laboratory bench as well as in the synchrotron beamline. Micro-focused SRXRF maps for As and Fe were collected at the same location in the columns (<1 mm2) before and during treatment with 10 mM oxalic acid. The fraction of As and Fe removed by this treatment was calculated from the change in flux-normalised counts for each pixel in the map images, giving calculated kinetic parameters over the studied area. The authors calculated 79% to 83% of the arsenic was removed from the sediments by the oxalic acid treatment. Using μ-XANES on a subset of the points, most of the iron was oxidised and present as a mixture of goethite, hematite and ferrihydrite on sand grain coatings. This work could be developed to study a wide variety of reaction processes, including contaminant removal due to chemical treatment, mineral precipitation due to changing redox characteristics and solid phase transformation. Nuester et al.248 reported the localisation of iron storage cells of Thalassiosira plants grown at low and high iron concentrations using SRXRF elemental mapping. Localised intracellular iron storage features, defined as anomalously high iron concentrations in regions of relatively low P, S, Si and Zn, were reported to be twice as common in T. weissflogii cells grown in high iron compared to low iron cells. The element stoichiometry of the iron features was found to be consistent with phosphate-bound iron as a potential vacuolar iron storage pool. Iron quotas increased 2.5 fold in T. pseudonana grown in high iron, but storage features contained only twice the iron content and did not increase in size compared to low iron cells. Schreck et al.249 reported metal and metalloid foliar uptake by various plant species (lettuce, parsley and rye-grass) exposed to atmospheric industrial fallout using lead as a model element. Several complementary techniques including μ-XRF were used to investigate the localisation and speciation of the leaves of the plants. The results showed lead-enriched particulate matter on the surface of the plant leaves. Biogeochemical transformations were reported to have occurred on the leaf surfaces with secondary lead species such as PbCO3 and organic Pb. Compounds such as PbSO4 were in their primary form and were found underneath an organic layer. Internalisation through the cuticle or penetration through stomata openings were proposed as two major mechanisms involved in foliar uptake of particulate matter. Lyubenova et al.250 used μ-PIXE and conventional XRF to study accumulation, localisation and distribution of lead and mineral nutrients in roots, rhizomes and leaves of Typha latifolia grown at 0, 50, 100 and 250 μM Pb concentrations in a pot experiment. From the bulk XRF data, lead concentrations gradually increased in roots and rhizomes treated with increasing lead concentrations; however the rhizomes' lead concentrations were found to be an order of magnitude lower than in the roots. In the leaves lead concentrations were around the limit of detection for XRF (∼20 μg g−1). Element localisation using μ-PIXE analysis showed lead in epidermal and cortical tissues of treated roots and rhizomes, while in endodermis and vascular tissues lead was not detected. The results indicated that lead may form complexes with P and S compounds in roots and rhizomes, which may also represent attraction sites for binding with Zn. The authors considered that Typha latifolia may represent a potentially efficient plant species for phytoremediation of lead contaminated soils and waters.
Two papers during this review period featured the use of portable XRF for plant nutrient analysis. McLaren et al.251 assessed the application of portable XRF for total element analysis of four plant species (maize, cotton, soybean and wheat) collected across northern New South Wales, Australia. The effects of counting time and particle size on data quality were also evaluated. Three of the plant species (corn, cotton and soybean) showed significant relationships between the acid digest values and data for Ca, Co, Cr, Fe, K, Mn, Ni, P, S, Si and Zn thereby showing the value of this approach. Similarly, Reidinger et al.252 used a portable system to analyse P and Si in as little as 0.1 g dried and ground plant material. The authors used CRMs from different plant species to show that the data suffered very little bias and that precision of their measurements was as good as or better than that of other techniques. With 200 ground samples analysed daily, the portable XRF proved a valuable tool for plant biologists.
The suitability of WDXRF for the analysis of fluorine in soil was investigated by An et al.253 who realised there was a need to correct for Fe Lα overlap on the F Kα signal. The authors demonstrated that WDXRF offered easy, precise and rapid determinations of fluorine in iron-bound soil when compared to conventional alkali fusion-ISE analysis. Jassogne et al.254 characterised micropores in a sodic soil with strong texture-contrast using a range of synchrotron X-ray techniques. When dry, these soils impede root growth of annual cereal crops. The study used μ-XRF to locate the distribution of Ca, Cu, Fe, Mn and Zn plus μ-XANES and μ-XAFS to investigate speciation of Cu, Fe, Mn and Zn around a pore. Both natural aggregates and thin sections were employed with the thin sections proving more useful due to the smaller thickness of the sample. Manganese was reported to be well correlated with iron, the reduced MnII form was associated with phosphates, whereas iron was oxidised. Zinc was mainly found to be associated with carbonates, sulfates and silicates. The authors also used LA-ICP-MS but found that μ-XRF offered superior detection limits. An American study by Landrot et al.255 reported As and Cr speciation in contaminated urban soil using μ-XRF, μ-XAS and bulk EXAFS. Samples were collected from a park in Wilmington, Delaware which had been a centre for the leather tanning industry in the early 20th century. Soil concentrations for As, Cr and Pb were reported to exceed background levels quoted in State legislation. The μ-XRF maps showed that Cr and Fe were distributed together with Al and As as a precipitate phase similar to mansfieldite (AlAsO4·2H2O) thereby confirming that arsenic was immobilised in the soil. Brown et al.256 were interested in urban soils with a laboratory incubation, a field trial and a second laboratory incubation to test the ability of high iron based composts to reduce the bio accessibility of As and Pb in situ. Micro techniques (μ-XRF and μ-XANES) were used after the second incubation to show that high iron based biosolids added to the compost was an effective means to reduce lead accessibility only for certain types of iron-rich materials. Cataldo257 compared a complete analysis of a landfill leachate from a several year old site using TXRF and ICP-AES. The TXRF technique was reported to be reliable, rapid and the simpler of the two methods.
Control of phosphate in surface waters is essential to monitor industrial and agricultural activities as well as contamination from domestic sewage that offer a combined potential for seasonal development of toxic algal bloom. Pytlakowska and Sitko258 offered a method for the determination of nano-levels of phosphate in surface water using EDXRF analysis by directly suspended droplet micro-extraction. Determination of trace levels of analytes such as phosphate had suffered from low fluorescent yield and relatively low energy of the characteristic radiation that is strongly absorbed by a sample matrix. A number of workers have offered co-precipitation routes to improve sensitivity but this new method took advantage of selective directly suspended droplet micro-extraction of molybdenum blue complex into 1-hexanol. The enriched extractant phase separated from the water sample was then deposited onto a substrate for measurement of the Mo Kα radiation. With a good ratio of 1 part phosphorus to 37 parts molybdenum, this indirect approach offered improved sensitivity and good linearity up to 20 μg P with a detection limit of 2.8 ng mL−1. Staying with sewage, Padovan et al.259 described a method for the determination of trace metals (As, Co, Cu, Fe, Mn, Ni, P, Pb and Zn) in sewage outfall and background sites. The metals were concentrated in the sponge Spheciospongia vagabunda for subsequent assessment by μ-SRXRF imaging. High Fe, Ni and Zn concentrations were either localised in circular patches, 100–200 μm in size, or scattered in 10 μm spots throughout the sponge tissue. In contrast, Co and Mn were reported to be highly dispersed and probably associated with aluminium- and iron-oxide rich sediment inclusions.
The application of μ-SRXRF for the study of the distribution of biologically important elements in different environmental matrices was reviewed by Majumdar et al.260 The matrices included soils, sediments and living organisms that become unwitting depositories of analytes that reflect their surroundings. Mapping of biologically important elements at nano to sub-micrometer scale by μ-SRXRF has increased in importance as synchrotron facilities now offer beamlines with new focusing optics, detector technologies and incident energies that are combined with complimentary techniques such as μ-XRD and μ-XAS to offer a more complete characterisation of environmentally complex matrices. The review discusses the advantages of the synchrotron techniques and compares them with conventional methodologies. Transuranic elements have been released into the environment since the beginning of the nuclear age. Jimenez-Ramos et al.261 reported studies on so called hot particles using μ-PIXE and μ-XRF to measure not L lines but K lines of U and Pu. The K spectra offered the advantage of no overlapping between the main peaks and the X-ray absorption in the sample is much lower than for the L-spectra. Thyssen et al.262 offered a risk assessment of chromium in leather footwear that may release >3 mg g−1 CrVI thereby sensitising and eliciting allergic dermatitis. Sixty pairs of leather shoes, sandals and boots were purchased in Copenhagen and examined by XRF spectrometry using chromium extracted in accordance with ISO 17075. Chromium was identified in 95% of the footwear and no association with store category was found although there was a tendency for higher chromium content in higher priced wear. The authors reported that CrVI was extracted from 44% of footwear and in three items was above the 10 μg g−1 level. Sandals were found to be over-represented with detectable CrVI posing a risk of sensitisation. Savoly et al.263 were interested in chemical characterisation of individual free-living nematodes where their small size (1–3 μg) offered a challenge that was met by TXRF. A two step sample preparation procedure enabled detection of analytes down to 0.01 ng μg−1 to be achieved. The lack of CRMs was overcome by ICP-MS analysis of solutions of 100 digested nematodes. In Mexico a team lead by Espinosa37 developed an X-ray spectrometer for environmental applications that offered considerable flexibility. The device was designed to allow the use of different types of radiation sources, such as 241Am or tubes with different anodes (Rh or W). Other advantages included the possibility to exchange detectors to improve efficiency at different X-ray energies with options of Si(Li), Si(PIN), hyperpure Ge or CdTe available. The device could also be attached to a WDXRF system and used in vacuum or air path. It was also reported that the system could be modified to offer secondary targets for polarised X-rays as exciting radiation. Versatile indeed!
The literature published during this review period again demonstrated the number and versatility of measurements of indoor and outdoor particulate matter taken in an increasing number of countries. Einstein et al.264 described a new, passive particle deposition air sampler, called the Einstein–Lioy Deposition Sampler, designed for near-field particle emissions. The sampler may be configured in several ways; with a protective hood for outdoor use, without the hood and as a dust plate. There is also an XRF-ready option that allows direct sampling onto a filter-mounted XRF cartridge which can be used in conjunction with all configurations. The sampler was tested in a wind tunnel using a dust of known particle size distribution to contrast and compare each configuration option. A field study was then conducted to test the sampler under actual environmental conditions to evaluate its ability to collect samples for chemical analysis. The authors recommend their device for both indoor and outdoor use to satisfy user's needs. Two papers published by Oakes and colleagues were concerned with iron solubility in source emissions and ambient fine (2.5 μm) particles. In their first offering265 the chemical factors influencing iron solubility (soluble iron/total iron) were investigated in source emissions such as biomass burning, coal fly ash, mineral dust, and mobile exhaust as well as ambient PM2.5 particles collected in Atlanta, USA. The collected iron-containing particles were characterised using XANES and μ-SRXRF measurements to report speciation and mixing state. Leaching tests were performed to report the bulk iron solubility with results ranging from low (<1%) for mineral dust and coal fly ash to 75% for mobile exhaust and biomass burning emissions. Source emissions and ambient samples with high iron solubility were found to correspond to the sulfur content observed in single particles. This trend was also seen in the 358 Atlanta PM2.5 samples. Results of linear combination fitting experiments showed that iron sulfates in several samples may be an important proxy for iron solubility. In their second paper266 XANES measurements indicated that iron in single particles was present as a mixture of FeII and FeIII, with FeII content generally between 5 and 35% with a mean value of 25%. Elemental analysis using μ-SRXRF indicated that 74% of iron-containing particles were characterised as Al-substituted iron oxides, with Fe/Al molar ratios of 1.4. No correlation was found between fractional iron solubility and the abundance of Al-substituted iron oxides and Fe-aluminosilicates present in single particles at any of the sites sampled during different seasons of the year suggesting solubility largely depended on factors other than differences in major iron phases. Borgese et al.267 presented an improvement in a recently introduced method for airborne PM filter analysis using XSW and TXRF in a new dedicated laboratory instrument. The main advantage of combining XSW and TXRF was to distinguish the nature of the sample, be it in the form of a small droplet dry residue, a thin film or bulk sample. This new instrument offered the ability to switch X-ray anodes from Mo to Cu for improved accuracy of both lighter and heavier elements. By using an external standard, the study showed the benefits of considering the sample as thin layers. A set of reference samples was prepared to establish a calibration curve demonstrating this approach that eliminated the need to digest the PM filters.
3.5 Archaeological and cultural heritage
Reviews of the developing use of XRF with SR excitation sources to archaeological applications were published during the current review period. Thus, Young268 considered the characteristics, capabilities, advantages and disadvantages of SR techniques in the analysis of metal artifacts, particularly to provide a better understanding of the ancient cultures that made them. Bergmann et al.269 considered the application of recently developed SR rapid scanning techniques designed to map large objects, highlighting advantages over traditional systems and of obtaining data using other SR techniques during the same analytical session. Case studies show-cased by these authors included the SRXRF imaging of manuscripts of archaeological and cultural interest and, in a palaeontological application, soft tissue and pigments from fossils of Archaeopteryx and Confuciusornis sanctus (the oldest documented bird with a fully developed avian beak). In contrast, Chadwick et al.270 reviewed the application of SR microfocus beams in heritage conservation exemplified by case studies in the degradation of marble, glass and ship timbers with the aim of developing conservation strategies. Sandu et al.271 reviewed the analysis of gilded European art objects from the 9th to 19th centuries using a wide spectrum of methodologies including XRF spectrometry to identify composition and application technique. The authors considered (perhaps not surprisingly) that the most reliable and complete information could be obtained from a complementary and interdisciplinary approach, but noting the particularly effectiveness of microscopy.
As a contribution to the development of techniques, Smilgies et al.272 showed that two symmetrically arranged XRF detectors, arranged in back-reflection geometry could be used to distinguish intensity variations caused by surface topography and demonstrated the application of this approach in the analysis of Roman inscriptions on marble. This development may also be of interest to developers of hand-held XRF instruments where analyses of artifacts are often influenced by surface relief effects. Guerra et al.273 reviewed the performance of three different Si(Li) detectors in portable XRF spectrometers used in cultural heritage applications. Of concern in the development of methods for data interpretation, Frahm274 considered how the concepts of precision, accuracy, reliability and validity (proposed by earlier workers) were best applied in the evaluation of analytical data used for sourcing archaeological artifacts, especially with the introduction of new analytical techniques. Goodale et al.275 undertook a comprehensive review of the performance of two portable XRF instruments, WDXRF and benchtop EDXRF in the analysis of fine grain volcanic and obsidian sources from the Great Basin, North America and concluded that the same strict protocols needed to be applied to portable XRF analysis as was the case for laboratory XRF, including calibration, evaluation of inter-instrument performance, and traceability to geological reference materials.
One of the popular applications of XRF is in the analysis of metallic artifacts, sometimes in combination with other techniques. Luo and Li276 used XRF in combination with μ-Raman and XRD to characterise the 1 mm black-brown film on the surface of a bronze Pan (a water vessel) dated to the 4th to 3rd century BC and excavated in the Hubei Province, central southern China. X-ray fluorescence results showed that the film contained high concentrations of Cr as well as Fe. Based on additional observations from the accompanying techniques, the authors proposed that in the 3rd century in this part of China, techniques had been discovered to use and intentionally applied chromium minerals to create a surface treatment to decorate bronze objects. The chromium may have come from chromium spinel minerals in meteorites although the authors recognised the possibility of forming the chromium-rich layer during burial. A brass artifact excavated from a site in Shaanxi Province, China dating from 4700–4000 BC, and therefore pre-dating the Bronze Age, was characterised by Fan et al.277 with a particular interest in evaluating the production methodology. Simulation experiments and μ-SRXRF analysis indicated that the brass alloy was produced in China by a solid-state reduction (rather than a melting) process. Gouda et al.278 were surprised to discover that the majority of bronze statues they selected for analysis from the Egyptian Museum, Cairo, Egypt were made of lead bronze with a Pb content of 3.43 to 18.04% m/m. Use of XRD showed that in addition to cuprite (Cu2O) and cassiterite (SnO2) being detected in a surface patina on most objects, the presence of chloride and carbonate minerals was attributed to interactions with the burial environment. Use of lead bronze reduced corrosion caused by galvanic reactions because lead corrosion products acted as insulators and the lead provided stability to the artifact due to its extra weight. Estimating the bulk composition of archaeological bronze artifacts covered with a surface patina was the subject of a paper by Niculescu et al.279 The authors favoured the use of XRF spectrometric data accompanied by neural network analysis. Gigante et al.280 produced a large amount of data, using a transportable XRF system, in the analysis of the bronze burial monument of Pope Sixtus IV (1471-84), now in the Treasure Museum in the Vatican. These data were designed to map the composition of the alloy and evaluate surface deterioration, in order to contribute to its restoration programme. Statistical analysis confirmed the use of different alloys for elements of the panels of the monument. Leroy et al.,281 based at the Soleil SR facility were interested in the use of trace elements and multivariate statistical methods to characterize a medieval iron market at Ariege (French Pyrenees) in order to provenance iron artifacts on the basis of ores and smelting sites. Bani-Hani et al.282 used XRF as one of a range of techniques to determine elemental compositions of slag, iron and related artifacts from Barsinia, northern Jordan, concluding that the direct or ‘bloomer’ process was the main method used for smelting iron from the Bronze Age through to the Byzantine Period. To finger-print gold artifacts found in Romanian museums, Constantinescu et al.283 found by use of μ-PIXE and μ-SRXRF that Hg, Sb, Sn, Te and the platinum-group elements were of most value in provenancing applications. The impact of Phoenician settlers on metallurgical practices in the Iberian Peninsula during the first half of the first century BC was emphasized by Valerio et al.284 using a μ-EDXRF analysis of copper-based artifacts originating from the Phoenician settlement of Quinta do Almaraz, Portugal. Complementary microstructural analysis demonstrated the highly skillful use of forging and annealing methods compared with indigenous production.
A portable XRF spectrometer was used by Liu et al.285 to determine the major, minor and some trace elements in glass beads from 18 oasis sites both north and south of the Taklamakan Desert at the centre of the ancient Silk Trade Routes. Taking account of surface weathering and sample preparation, results were interpreted as showing that earlier glass beads (1st century BC to 4th century AD) originated from Kushan-controlled areas mainly in northern India, Pakistan and Afghanistan, whereas 4th to 10th century beads came from sites in the Sasanian Empire such as central Iraq. Portable XRF was also used by Tantrakarn et al.,286 who analysed ancient (7th to 9th centuries AD) glass fragments from several sites in southern Thailand. These artifacts were identified as soda-lime silicate glasses and compared with previous reported materials from Thailand and Egypt. The interest of De Ferri et al.287 was to develop protective coatings for antique glass windows. To this end, these authors prepared three glasses of composition used in medieval times which were analysed by XRF, DTA and XRD, FTIR and Raman and found a direct dependence on glass depolymerisation on the K content.
As is frequently the case, the XRF analysis of pottery and other ceramic materials featured strongly in the current review period. Ichikawa et al.288 described a loose powder technique for the XRF analysis of ancient pottery using 100 mg test portions hand pressed into a holder. Calibration samples were prepared in the same way by homogenising chemical reagents for the 22 elements determined by this technique. Portable XRF spectrometry featured in a number of publications, including that of Mitchell et al.289 who used a multivariate statistical approach to compare its performance with ICP-AES and NAA, in the analysis of glazed stoneware from North-East Asia. The authors concluded that although PXRF was limited to a small number of major, minor and trace elements, these data were sufficient to allow the identification of compositional groups as the high dimensional ICP-AES and NAA results. Portable XRF was also used by Frankel and Webb290 to analyse 400 samples of Early and Middle Bronze Age pottery from Cyprus from four widely separated sites. An assessment of results together with stylistic observations allowed the authors to distinguish locally produced items from imported vessels. In a further portable XRF study, Forouzan et al.291 concluded that local production could not account for the diversity in elemental composition found in zoomorphic clay figurines, ‘tokens’ and sling bullets recovered from the site of Chogha Gavaneh, Iran. Issi292 was interested in ancient firing techniques used in the manufacture of semi-fused Hellenistic potsherds from Harabebezikan, Turkey and used XRF, XRD and SEM to characterise sample mineralogy, suggesting that kiln firing was the most probable technique used for the production of these potsherds. Porcelain from Jindezhen, China was analysed by Zhang et al.293 using EDXRF spectrometry, who reported that white porcelain bodies from the Xianhu Kiln were made from porcelain stone over a period of five dynasties, whereas celadon bodies were made from porcelain stone and Zijin clay. Indigenous Archaic pottery from Monte Polizzo, Western Sicily was analysed by Montana et al.294 to characterise its mineralogical and elemental compositions, the latter by XRF. The authors also prepared and analysed experimental ceramic briquettes to identify the local clayey raw material deposit with which 92% of the samples correlated.
X-ray fluorescence spectrometry can also make an important contribution in the identification and characterisation of pigments and glazes used to decorate pottery as shown by the work of Abe et al.295 Here, they used in situ portable XRFspectrometry to analyse cobalt blue deposits at two archaeological sites in the Memphite region, Egypt for correlation with on-site analyses of Ramesside cobalt blue-coloured glasses and faiences. Results were interpreted as showing that a new cobalt source was used during the Ramesside Period to replace the cobaltiferous alum from the Western Oases of Egypt that was used during the 18th Dynasty of the New Kingdom of Egypt. Staying with blue pigments in Egypt, Mahmoud296 used a range of techniques, including μ-XRF to identify cuprorivaite (CaCuSi4O10) as the blue pigment found in the Ptolemaic temple of Hathor, Luxor. The particular contribution from XRF spectrometry was in the detection of significant quantities of Pb in the pigment, which was interpreted as indicating that a leaded bronze scraper was used in its manufacture. The paint and adhesive materials used to decorate terracotta figures excavated from a royal tomb (206 BC to 8 AD) in Qingzhou County, Shandong Province, PR China were analysed using XRF, FTIR and GC-MS techniques by Wei et al.297 Results indicated that Chinese purple, cinnabar, red lead and ochre were used as pigments and animal glue as the binding medium and adhesive, providing new evidence for the materials and technologies used during the Han Dynasty. Cinnabar was a pigment also identified both by Gajie-Kvascev et al.298 as the red pigment used on ceramics from the Neolithic period using XRF, PIXE and XRD techniques on samples excavated from sites in Serbia and by Domingo et al.299 on early Neolithic samples from Valencia, Spain. The latter authors also reported on the storage, production and use of hematite paint at three Early Neolithic sites on the Mediterranean Coast of Spain. X-ray fluorescence and XANES were used by Figueiredo et al.300 to characterise cobalt blue minerals in ancient blue-and-white Chinese glazes on porcelain (14th to 17th centuries) excavated in the Old City area of Lisbon, Portugal. Particular interest was shown in the near-tetrahedral coordination environment of cobalt(II) ions and the dual role of cobalt as a network former and a modifier in these glazes. X-ray absorption spectra allowed Bardelli et al.301 to identify the iron pigments associated with ancient (5th to 4th centuries BC) Attic pottery found at the Gioiosa Guardia archaeological site, Sicily, Italy. Different relative abundances of an admixture of Fe2O3 (hematite and maghemite) and magnetite (Fe3O4) were found to contribute to dark- to light-coloured areas of samples.
The characterisation of archaeological building materials, often to provenance the sources, has become increasingly popular. Thus, Donais et al.302 undertook in situ measurements of Roman hypocaust and floor tiles at an archaeological excavation site near Orvieto, Italy, using portable XRF instrumentation. Despite the use of three different portable XRF instruments, differentiation between tiles remained the same over the three year period of this study. Some improvement in discrimination could be achieved using an XRF fusion technique but only at the cost of increasing analysis times. Portable XRF was also used by Azevedo et al.303 to characterise tiles, placed on the walls of the Franciscan Convent (Santo Antonio) in Recefe, Brazil compared with the thermo-luminescence technique used to date bricks. The XRF data indicated that the white pigment in the tiles was 2PbCO3·Pb(OH)2 (a pigment used from ancient times until the 12th century), whereas the blue pigment was CoO·Al2O3 (a pigment used from 1807 to the present day). These observations contributed to an understanding of the dates of construction and extension of the building. Architectural plaster from elite masonry structures at the classic Maya kingdom of Piedras Negras, Guatemala, was analysed using XRF spectrometry by Abrams et al.304 Results showed that single buildings were coated with plaster from a single source of limestone and limestone-based aggregate but that differences were observed between different buildings, attributed to a model of rotational labour obligations to the State. It is anticipated that acid rain will have a deleterious effect in the weathering of building stone, a subject of interest to Dewanckele et al.305 who brought an almost unprecedented degree of sophistication to this topic by the use of 4D imaging with high resolution X-ray tomography. The sample of natural calcareous sandstone (Leda stone) was exposed to gaseous SO2 under wet surface conditions following a standard EU procedure and CT was then used to measure changes in porosity, and the growth of weathering crusts as a function of time. Results offered a better understanding of gypsum weathering mechanisms, porosity changes and patterns in natural building stone.
In addition to the analysis of tangible building materials, the elemental characterisation of archaeological sites can reveal evidence of human habitation. Thus, Courty et al.306 advocated a micro-stratigraphical and multi-analytical approach to unravel the complexities of social behaviour in Neanderthal communities, emphasising that the burning of fossil fuels made a range of contributions to the domestic environment. X-ray fluorescence spectrometry contributed to this study, together with Raman and XRD techniques. Taraskevicius et al.307 investigated a 4th to 10th century hill fort site in Lithuania and used EDXRF spectrometry to analyse sandy sediments, identifying a correlation between total and inorganic carbon and two groups of elements that might serve as anthropogenic indicators: Ba, Ca, Cu, Mn, P and Zn, and Br, Cl, Pb and S. The Cooper's Ferry excavation site in western Idaho, USA, was investigated using PXRF by Davis et al.,308 who subjected 151 PXRF readings from six lithostratographic units to multiple discriminant function analysis. The fact that PXRF readings from an in-filled rodent burrow did not correlate with any of the stratographic units and could therefore be identified as ‘disturbed’ showed that an independent evaluation could be made of whether an artefact was associated with ‘anomalous’ or ‘regular’ sediments, based on the chemostratographic classification.
The analysis of archaeological lithic artefacts and implements is a long standing application of XRF spectrometry with significant interest this year in the analysis of obsidian, as illustrated by the work of Forster and Grave309 who used portable XRF to analyse museum-curated obsidian from archaeological sites in Syria, Iraq and Turkey and geological obsidian from Turkey. Analysis of results showed that instrumental bias between the XRF data and other techniques (ICP-MS and PIXE) was less than source-to-source variations so allowing comparisons with legacy datasets. In addition, geological sources of obsidian and trade networks that existed during the Chalcolithic period were identified. Vazquez et al.310 also compared in situ portable XRF in the analysis of archaeological obsidian samples from Northwest Patagonia, Argentina, in this case with laboratory XRF. No significant differences were observed between the laboratory and portable XRF results and PCA was used to provenance samples and to identify the mobility of hunter-gatherer groups. Duff et al.311 undertook XRF analyses of obsidian artefacts from Chaco Canyon and three Chacoera communities in New Mexico, USA, to identify patterns in procurement. In the course of this work, disagreement with earlier analyses indicated that some obsidian artefact sources had previously been misidentified. Flint was widely used to manufacture artefacts in Denmark and Sweden in the Stone Age and Hughes et al.312 employed EDXRF to provenance samples to seven flint sources in these two countries as well as providing new data on a number of other sources of archaeological significance. Grave et al.313 applied portable XRF to the analysis of Aboriginal hatchets from Sydney, Australia and adjacent coastal areas. The samples were made of basalt (i.e. the non-vitreous analogue of obsidian) and the authors concluded that non-destructive portable XRF was effective for the reliable characterisation of non-vitreous stone artefacts that have a sufficiently complex and enriched compositional signature. Lamentably, XRF spectrometry cannot resolve all archaeological problems, but it did contribute to a report by Carciumaru et al.314 that included evidence of the use of bitumen as a hafting material during the Palaeolithic period, based on artefacts found in Romania.
The analysis of ink, paper and manuscripts is, perhaps, not the most obvious application for XRF spectrometry, but it is one that regularly features in this review. To set this topic into context, Goltz315 reviewed instrumental approaches available for the study of historical inks, and as well as XRF and XANES, included the techniques GF-AAS, ICP-MS and PIXE. In the characterisation of illuminated manuscripts, Pessanha et al.316 featured the techniques of XRF, TXRF, ED-SEM and LIBS and regarded XRD, FTIR and Raman as complementary techniques capable of revealing information on the compounds present in samples. In a complementary review, Nesmerak and Nemcova317 provided details of spectrometric methods used for dating and authenticating historical manuscripts. Although XRF spectrometry was included in this review, the strategy recommended by the authors was first pigment analysis by Raman, followed by PIXE to characterise the ink and finally radiocarbon dating of the manuscript material potentially augmented by Auger microscopy to date the ink. A different protocol was implemented by Aceto et al.318 to characterise the palette of pigments used in illuminated manuscripts and miniature paintings, recognising that no single technique can provide all the information needed. The first stage of the authors' protocol was the use of UV-visible spectroscopy in reflectance mode to highlight areas possibly containing the same materials, followed by an in-depth optical microscopy examination to aid the interpretation of the reflectance spectra. X-ray fluorescence was then used to characterise pigments and metal layers (especially to provide information that would aid provenance and contribute to the chemometric classification of pigments) followed finally by Raman to resolve any remaining uncertainties in pigment identification. In a further contribution, Aceto et al.319 reported the first analytical evidence of the use of precious colourants in two Byzantine Mediterranean manuscripts from the sixth century, using Raman, UV-visible and XRF spectrometry to characterise the palette. The authors considered that these manuscripts were the oldest ever analysed and they detected the presence of gold, ultramarine, cinnabar, azurite, indigo, red lead, orpiment, red and yellow ochre, vergaut, madder and Tyrian blue (the latter two being organic pigments). The presence of the precious pigment, ultramarine, was particularly noteworthy as its presence in the studied samples preceded its use in Western manuscripts by three centuries. Photography might just be considered a modern form of an illuminated manuscript. But Rogge and Bezur320 described a student experiment using XRF to identify the fixer used to stabilise the photograph comprised halide, thiosulfate, or toned with sulfur, selenium or gold. The results had implications for the conservation of early historic photographs.
There has been a lull in the present review period from contributions involving the XRF analysis of paintings, relieved by the contribution by Howard et al.321 They presented a high definition elemental map of a historic self-portrait by Sir Arthur Streeton (1867–1943) produced by fast scanning SRXRF microscopy. Advantages claimed using this approach were the ability to detect the distribution of pigments in underlying brush strokes, an important approach for this portrait where some of the painting is obscured by heavy brushstrokes of white lead paint (2PbCO3·Pb(OH)2). To overcome the detrimental effect of the presence of this pigment on elemental maps, the authors developed a correction procedure based on elastic X-ray scatter, which was used as a proxy for the white lead over-paint. Contributing to the numerous studies of the palette of pigments used by artists; Akyuz et al.322 used EDXRF, FTIR and Raman techniques to characterise that used by Feyhaman Duran, a famous Turkish artist who lived from 1886 to 1970. Aquilia et al.323 described the analysis of pigments used in Hellenistic painted plasters from the second century BC in Licata, Sicily, Italy, using hand-held XRF, ED-SEM and FTIR methods in which the XRF instrument was used in the first step for the elemental identification of the plaster and pigments. In an application to a rather more ancient topic, Olivares et al.324 described the use of two non-invasive techniques, Raman and EDXRF spectroscopies, to study Palaeolithic rock paintings at La Pena Cave in San Roman de Candamo, Asturias, Spain. In addition to identifying the main pigments, this study highlighted the biodegradation and decalcification processes that had damaged the paintings over the centuries.
A number of other artefacts of archaeological and cultural heritage interest were analysed by XRF techniques during the current review period, including a multi-analytical approach by Le Gac et al.325 to authenticate an eighteenth century harpsichord made by the famous maker Pascal Taskin. Results identified a number of ‘interventions’ including one performed during Pascal Taskin's time. The varnish on early musical instruments was also the subject of a study by Caruso et al.326 who used in situ μ-XRF to detect Fe and Mn-based earths in the varnish of nine instruments from the Musical Instruments Museum in Brussels and a Cr-based pigment in one of them. This information was considered important for the conservation of these instruments and to art historians. Marine archeological wood in shipwrecks in the Baltic Sea and Scandinavian waters was the subject of study by Fors et al.327 with a particular interest in the way hydrogen sulfide, produced by sulfate-reducing bacteria, reacts and accumulates at low Fe concentrations mainly as organically bound sulfur in lignin-rich parts of the wood cell walls. Sulfur K-edge XANES and XRF with XPS were the techniques contributing to this study.
Restoration and conservation are hugely important topics in this area of study and Necemer et al.328 used EDXRF with monochromatic excitation to monitor the degradation of plastic artefacts in museums by comparing the intensity of the coherent and incoherent scatter radiation from artefacts with scatter from typical plastic materials such as polyethylene, PVC, and polypropylene. The results were designed to be of value to conservators in maintaining such objects in good condition. Dumitriu et al.329 reviewed recent advances in a range of techniques (including EDXRF spectrometry) to contribute to the restoration and conservation of organic compounds used as a binding material in the protective coating on art objects.
3.6 Forensic
As a contribution to the forensic analysis of artefacts, it is well known that nickel alloys are widely used in coins, but that allergic reactions can occur if nickel is released during the handling of such coins; a topic of interest to Hamann et al.,330 who used XRF spectrometry and surface spot tests to measure the release of Cu and Ni from 850 coins currently in circulation in 52 countries. Results showed that cupronickel was the most commonly used alloy (observed in 28% of the denominations), followed by aluminium bronze (17% of the denominations) and that significant nickel release was detected in a large proportion of the coins that were investigated, with some variation country by country. Elemental mapping by ‘milli-XRF’ was used by Latzel et al.331 to detect gunshot residues from modern lead-free ammunition. The multi element approach improved the reliability with which the shooting distance could be estimated, although problems could be encountered when residues were deposited on a highly scattered background. The role of WDXRF in the analysis of very small forensic samples was considered by Gazulla et al.332 The authors developed three methods, two of which were based on the preparation of glass beads (one for geological materials, the other for particulate matter on filters, glasses, frits and for ceramic glazes and pigments) and the third method used a powder pellet for the determination of volatile elements in geological materials. These methods permitted the analysis of test portions that were between 30 and 40 times smaller than those normally used for the preparation of glass discs and 100 times smaller than typical powder pellet samples, without loss in analytical performance in terms of detection limits and measurement uncertainties.
3.7 Clinical
Metal imaging using XRF techniques has become indispensable in understanding the role of metals in various metal-related diseases; as reflected by the number of review papers published in this year's review period. Bourassa and Miller333 highlighted the advances in neurodegenerative disease research facilitated by metal imaging techniques, including XFM, PIXE, EDS, LA-ICP-MS and SIMS. Moreover, Vogt and Ralle334 described how recent advances in XRF microscopy and the use of fluorescent copper probes have started to reveal the association of Cu with neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer’s. In another review,335 the main parameters of X-ray spectrometric methods (XRF, PIXE, XFM) together with AAS, ICP-AES and ICP-MS, used for the examination of the cardiovascular system, were compared, and new trends in the analysis of these samples and the main sample preparation approaches were considered. Dillon336 presented recent advances in and applications of three prominent synchrotron radiation techniques, μ-XRF spectroscopy/imaging, XAS, and μ-IR spectroscopy, and highlighted how these tools were useful to the medicinal chemist. The author focused on several recent applications of these techniques to solve inorganic medicinal chemistry problems, and on studies of cellular uptake, distribution and biotransformation of established and potential therapeutic agents. Finally, a general overview of all clinical and biological applications was given in our companion review on ‘Clinical and biological materials, foods and beverages’.2
The mechanisms of Mn-induced neurotoxicity remain unclear, but nevertheless a correlation between Mn exposure and an elevated risk of Parkinson's disease has been suggested in several studies. Robison et al.337 introduced XRF imaging as a quantitative tool with high spatial resolution for analysis of the Mn distribution in the brain. The animal model employed mimics deficits observed in affected human subjects. Maps of Mn distribution in the brain demonstrated the highest Mn content in the globus pallidus, the thalamus, and the substantia nigra pars compacta. The Mn accumulation in the substantia nigra pars compacta might represent a link between Mn exposure and its potential effect on the development of Parkinson's disease. Daoust et al.338 correlated manganese enhanced MRI with μ-SRXRF data for the rat hippocampus, to investigate the spatial distribution of Mn and how Mn interacted with Ca, Fe and Zn at a cellular level. The study showed that SRXRF was well suited to investigate Mn distribution at a mesoscale and that MRI was sensitive to low Mn concentrations. Rentschler et al.339 investigated how polymorphism in the Parkinson-related gene ATPase type 13A2 could modify neurophysiological effects of Mn exposure. Elderly residents (n = 255) and adolescents (n = 311) from an area in Northern Italy, located in the neighbourhood of ferro-alloy smelters that released manganese, were examined for neuromotor and olfactory functions. Exposure to Mn was assessed in blood and urine by AAS and in soil by portable XRF spectrometry. For both adolescents and the elderly, negative correlations between Mn in soil and motor coordination were demonstrated. Also among adolescents, negative correlations were seen between Mn in soil with odour identification and no associations were seen for Mn in blood or urine. The findings suggested that ATP13A2 variation might be a risk marker for neurotoxic effects of Mn in humans.
Elemental micro-imaging and quantification using SRXRF spectrometry is an emerging field with regard to studying the role of chemical elements in the pathophysiology of Parkinson's disease. In one contribution by Szczerbowska-Boruchowska et al.,340 this analysis was carried out for dopaminergic nerve cells and extraneuronal spaces in tissue sections of human substancia nigra pars compacta (SNc). The mass fractions of Br, Ca, Cl, Cu, Fe, K, P, Rb, S and Zn were determined. Two-dimensional maps of elemental distribution showed that the location of nerve cells in SNc sections was precisely visualised by the high levels of most elements. The direct contribution of chemical elements to the pathophysiology of Parkinson's disease could be shown. In a second study on a similar subject,341 the influence of electrical stimulation of the vagus nerve on the elemental composition of dopamine-related brain structures in rats could be elucidated using SRXRF spectrometry. Elements under investigation were Br, Ca, Cl, Cu, Fe, K, P, Rb, S, Se and Zn. The same researcher342 also considered the influence of sample thickness in the quantitative XRF analysis of soft and skeletal tissues of the human body. For an incident beam energy of 17 keV, a 15 μm sample was found to be of intermediate thickness for all elements between P and Ca and became thin from Fe upwards for most human body tissues in a natural form. Dried samples of soft tissues excluding those of low water content could be regarded as thin for all elements from P to Sr. The use of a thin sample approach in the quantification of intermediate thickness specimens, resulted in a discrepancy of about 5 to 10% in areal mass (weight fraction) of Ca, 15 to 25% of Cl, 8 to 15% of K, 30 to 45% of P, and 20 to 35% of S. The analysis of human brain samples (white and gray matter) and bovine liver (NIST 1577b) confirmed the high accuracy of the XRF quantification on the basis of the described procedures. When assessing trace elements such as Cu, Se and Zn in patients with neurodegenerative disease, McIntosh et al.343 assembled and validated a prototype point-of-care instrument, based on monochromatic XRF for the determination of these elements in whole blood, plasma, and urine. Analysis of certified reference materials for Cu and Zn in serum/plasma resulted in a bias and a relative imprecision of less than 10%. The prototype performance was further assessed using human specimens collected from Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s disease subjects, and was found to be satisfactory (<20% bias) for monitoring Cu and Zn levels in plasma and whole blood. However, the prototype sensitivity was not sufficient for quantifying Cu, Se, or Zn in urine. A limited biomonitoring study provided robust data for up to 16 elements including As, Ba, Cd, Co, Cr, Cu, Cs, Hg, Mo, Pb, Sb, Se, Sn, Tl, U and Zn in plasma, whole blood, and urine. Gu et al.344 examined whether in vivo Pb exposure, possibly associated with the etiology of Alzheimer’s disease, increased brain concentrations of beta-amyloid (A beta), resulting in amyloid plaque deposition in brain tissues. Using SRXRF spectrometry, a high level of Pb was detected in amyloid plaques in mice exposed to Pb in vivo. These data indicated that Pb exposure with an ensuing elevated A beta level in mouse brains appeared to be associated with the amyloid plaque formation. More research on the role of metal ion homeostasis in human Alzheimer’s disease (AD) was performed by Wang et al.,345 who collected quantitative images of Ca, Cu, Fe and Zn in amyloid precursor protein (APP) transgenic mouse brain tissues by μ-SRXRF. Their findings demonstrated that the enrichment of transition metals with age and the dyshomeostasis of those metals in specific regions might contribute together to the etiology and development of AD in elderly people. The measurements of Cu and Fe by XANES showed evidence that Cu might have redox properties in the AD brain. In a second contribution by the same researchers346 immunogold labelling and μ-SRXRF spectrometry was used to reveal enrichment ratios of Cu and Zn, and the association of these metals with amyloid-beta 42, during plaque formation, in a mouse model of AD.
The implementation of the XRF technique to gather elemental profiles in relation to several diseases becomes more and more established. Chwiej et al.347,348 performed μ-SRXRF measurements on animal models to elucidate the mechanisms involved in the pathogenesis and progress of epilepsy. Khuder et al.349 applied EDXRF to determine Br, Ca, Cl, Cu, Fe, K, Rb, S and Zn levels in the whole blood of leukemia patients and healthy volunteers. The study indicated different patterns of element distribution and mutual relationships in the whole blood of leukemia patients in comparison with controls. Serum samples from patients with sickle cell anemia (SCA) were analysed by Canellas et al.350 using SR-TXRF spectrometry performed at the Brazilian National Synchrotron Light Laboratory (LNLS). It was possible to determine the concentrations of the elements Br, Ca, Cl, Cu, Fe, K, P, Rb, S and Zn and obtain data that showed evidence of an association between Cu, Fe, Zn and Cu/Zn in the SCA pathogenesis process. For the assessment of Fe levels in patients with thalassemia and hemochromatosis, Estevam and Appoloni351 evaluated the viability of a portable XRF system consisting of a 238Pu X-ray source and a Si(PIN) diode detector for in vivo measurements on the hand of each patient. The measuring system was calibrated with phantoms of aqueous solution doped with 15 to 150 μg L−1 of Fe. Using a measurement time of 50 s, a detection limit of 13 μg L−1 of Fe was obtained. The radiation dose on the skin was 10 mSv. The thalassemia patient presented 74 ± 6 μg L−1 of Fe, whereas the healthy people presented an average of 53 ± 5 μg L−1 of Fe, which was in accordance with values described in the literature. Ricketts et al.352 employed XRF spectrometry to locate heavy nanoparticles, such as Au, which were embedded into tissues and could act as markers for tumour characteristics to map the state of disease. This novel system, consisting of an energy-resolving SDD with high spectral resolution, showed potential to be sensitive enough to quantify nanoparticle concentrations typically found in tumours. Performing synchrotron measurements, a limit of detection down to 0.005 mg Au mL−1 could be achieved. The successful use of a bench-top source, suitable for possible future clinical use, was also demonstrated, and found not to degrade the detection limit or accuracy of the gold nanoparticle concentration measurement. Spectroscopic imaging and mapping techniques, including scanning XFM, was used by Zhang et al.353 to gain complementary information on the composition of untreated DLD-1 colon cancer cell spheroids. This is crucial for understanding the interactions between drug molecules and the tumour micro-environment. In a second contribution,354 the same researchers performed 3D XRF μ-CT for accurately probing the bio-distribution of Pt compounds, originating from Pt-based chemotherapeutics, within the model tumour of DLD-1 colon cancer cell spheroids. Finally, Kuang et al.355 proved that XRF CT is a promising system for multiple element imaging of high atomic number biomarkers. A 5 mm diameter pencil beam produced by a polychromatic X-ray source (150 kV, 20 mA) was used to stimulate the emission of XRF photons from 2% (weight/volume) Au, Ba and Gd embedded within a water phantom. The phantom was translated and rotated relative to the stationary pencil beam in a first-generation CT geometry. The X-ray energy spectrum was collected for 18 s at each position using a cadmium telluride detector. The measured XRF spectra showed sharp peaks of Au, Ba and Gd. Moreover, the distribution of Au, Ba and Gd in the water phantom was clearly identifiable in the reconstructed XRF images. The results showed linear relationships between the XRF intensity of each tested element and their concentrations, suggesting that XRF CT is capable of quantitative imaging.
Trace element analysis related to archaeological bone was viewed as one way to determine levels of element exposure in past populations. Swanston et al.356 examined samples from a non-segregated Royal British Naval cemetery (1793–1822) in Antigua, West Indies. Images from conventional light microscopy (histological) analysis of the bone samples were matched with elemental maps of Ca, Pb and Sr using SRXRF spectrometry. Biogenic uptake of both Pb and Sr was indicated, based on the localisation of these trace elements within discreet microstructural elements. The successful integration of histological information with XRF data provide a powerful technique for the interpretation of past biological events through trace element measurements. Figueroa et al.357 presented an application of a new XRF technique, ‘energy dispersive by scanning’, capable of analysing samples of different composition and shape, unlike most of the existing techniques, which are only applicable to flat samples. The technique was applied to a set of human bone samples and the tarsus and fingers of a dead Gallus gallus (chicken), obtaining a 2D spatial distribution with different levels of fluorescence intensity, depending on the detected element and its concentration. The acquired images covered areas of up to 104 mm2, with a spatial resolution of 400 mm2 and an acquisition time of about 20 min. Calculations of the radiation dose associated with this type of XRF analysis showed that the levels applied to obtain an XRF image were acceptable and provided opportunities for in vivo applications.
Several research groups performed studies on the incorporation of strontium into bones, teeth and human kidney stones. Oliveira et al.358 focused their research on Sr-incorporated levels in bones and teeth of rats treated with strontium ranelate, an approved pharmacotherapy for osteoporosis in Europe and Australia, but not in Canada or the United States. Using μ-SRXRF spectrometry in combination with other analytical techniques to determine the relative Sr levels,359 it was shown that the Sr content markedly increased in animals treated with strontium ranelate, with different incorporated levels found in specific bones, regions within the same bone and in teeth. Wohl et al.,360 on the other hand, evaluated the accumulation of bone-strontium by in vivo XRF spectrometry in rats supplemented with strontium citrate, an alternative salt, and compared the results with those of rats treated with the commonly applied strontium ranelate. The XRF measurements were validated against ex vivo measurements of bone strontium using ICP-MS values. Using the Sr dose as a covariate to account for differences in Sr dosing, an analysis of covariance revealed that the difference in bone strontium levels between the strontium groups was not significant, but that bone strontium levels were still very significantly greater than the control group. The same research group361 monitored bone strontium levels of an osteoporotic female volunteer, who had taken strontium supplements, using the in vivo XRF 125I based system and the Sr Kα peak at 14.16 keV. Thirty minute measurements were taken at the finger and ankle bone sites, representing primarily cortical and trabecular bone, respectively. The results provided insight into the strontium bone kinetics over time and showed the ability of this in vivo XRF technique to be implemented as a useful diagnostic tool. Heirwegh et al.362 assessed the feasibility of applying a normalisation procedure including soft-tissue correction of X-ray absorption as a means to quantify an ex vivo bone strontium XRF measurement. However, the results indicated that shortcomings existed with the bone strontium coherent normalisation and tissue correction procedure. The coherent scatter contribution of soft-tissue that overlay bone, tissue correction model limitations, and spectra processing issues were all mentioned as sources of observed discrepancies. The presence of Sr in different types of human kidney stones as a substitute for calcium was examined by Blaschko et al.363 using SRXRF and XAS techniques. X-ray fluorescence imaging identified Sr in all calcium based stones, present as strontium apatite. This finding might be critical since apatite is thought to be the initial nidus for calcium stone formation. Strontium was not identified by standard laboratory stone analyses. Its substitution for calcium could be reliably identified in stones from multiple calcium-based stone formers, which might offer opportunities to gain an insight into early events in lithogenesis. In a second contribution by the same researchers,364 a similar study was performed to determine the micro-composition and spatial distribution of all elements in human urinary calculi.
Polyvinyl alcohol hydrogels (PVA), both pure and reinforced with two types of carbon nanoparticles (nanotubes and nanofibres), were studied by Rodrigues et al.365 as a candidate material for osteochondral defect repair. The hydrogels were surgically implanted in osteochondral defects in the articular cartilage of rats and, after a delay of 3 and 12 weeks, examined by XRF spectrometry in combination with other analytical techniques. The XRF results revealed an increasing concentration of Ca and P in the implants over time; a phenomenon more pronounced for the hydrogels with carbon nanofibres. The results suggested that PVA hydrogel with carbon nanoparticles elicited a stronger biological response than pure hydrogel. Marchini et al.366 assessed the influence of chronic alcoholism and oestrogen deficiency on the alterations in the stoichiometric composition of bone hydroxyapatite within the alveolar bone crest of rats, by measuring the relationship between the concentration of Ca and P, using μ-XRF tecniques. The results indicated that ovariectomy, associated with alcohol consumption at 20%, led to a significant reduction in Ca/P ratios.
Non-invasive, in vivo measurements of Pb in bone using 109Cd-based K-shell XRF spectrometry is widely implemented in epidemiological studies. Bellis et al.367 conducted the first and very interesting interlaboratory study of the use of K-shell XRF for the analysis of nine goat tibiae in which the mean Pb value ranged from 4.0 μg g−1 to 55.3 μg g−1 bone mineral and validated these concentrations by ICP-MS after nitric acid digestion. Eight of the XRF systems did not yield a significant bias for any of the nine tibiae, while seven systems reported biased results for between one and six of the nine tibiae. Average bias for the systems that were biased for the majority of samples ranged from −2.6 μg g−1 (−15.7%) to 5.1 μg g−1 (30.7%) dry weight bone. The ICP-MS data, however, indicated that the Pb mass fraction varied considerably with the sampling location within the tibiae, to the extent of exceeding XRF variability for the higher Pb values and underlined the fact that material heterogeneity is an unavoidable reality of measuring Pb in bone. The K-shell X-ray fluorescence technique was also implemented to study the influence of lead exposure on a range of health effects. Peters et al.368 provided evidence for the relationship between Pb concentrations and multiple biomarkers of cardiovascular disease. Zhang et al.369 examined the association between prenatal Pb exposure and blood pressure in children. Eum et al.370 provided support for an association of low-level cumulative Pb exposure with increased depressive and phobic anxiety symptoms among older women who were premenopausal or who consistently took postmenopausal hormone replacement therapy. Whilst Behinaein et al.371 observed a non-linearity in the relationship between bone Pb concentrations and the cumulative blood Pb index for lead smelter employees.
Studies related to health effects as a consequence of lead and other heavy metal exposure remains a recurrent research topic in this review. A study of the accumulation of Pb in the liver and kidney of exposed rats with age was conducted by Guimaraes et al.,372 who used EDXRF spectrometry for the analysis of contaminated soft tissues. The mean values of Pb in liver varied from 6 to 22 μg g−1 and in kidneys from 44 to 79 μg g−1. A strong positive correlation with age for Pb was observed in the liver but not in the kidney. The Pb accumulation in liver was made at different levels that strongly decreased with age. The findings might indicate a maximum accumulation level for Pb in kidney. Reames and Charlton373 evaluated a portable XRF instrument, used to identify Pb hazards in housing, to determine its effectiveness to screen food, medicinal, and ceremonial items during Pb poisoning investigations. Fifty-eight suspect exposure items were tested for Pb by XRF spectrometry and subsequently sent to the laboratory for confirmation. The portable XRF instrument consistently identified the presence of Pb and gave quantitative readings above 10 mg kg−1 for the nine samples with a Pb content that exceeded 10 mg kg−1 in laboratory testing. van Geen et al.374 estimated the population of Peru living in the vicinity of active or former mining operations that could be exposed to Pb from contaminated soil. The Pb content of soil in the historic mining town of Cerro de Pasco and around a recent mine and ore processing plant near the city of Huaral, was mapped in 2009 using a hand-held XRF instrument. Soil Pb levels exceeded 1200 mg kg−1, a reference standard for residential soil, in 35 of 74 sites tested in Cerro de Pasco, but in only 4 of 47 sites tested around the newer operations near Huaral. The authors underlined the importance of these soil mapping studies as childhood exposure to Pb by soil ingestion could be substantially reduced by making this information public and encouraging local communities to segregate contaminated areas from children. Finally, Khudzari et al.375 screened heavy metal levels in hair samples of sanitation workers using a mobile EDXRF spectrometry. A total of 34 hair samples were analysed consisting of 29 samples from sanitation workers and 5 samples from students. While the heavy metals Cu, Fe, Mn, Ni, Sb, Se, and Zn were detected in both groups, three additional elements, i.e. As, Hg and Pb, were detected only in the sanitation workers group. Nevertheless, for this sanitation workers group, the mean concentration of Cu, Fe, Mn, Ni, Sb, Se and Zn showed elevated concentrations as compared with the concentration in control samples.
Elemental analysis of intra-oral dental restorations provided considerable information related to dental metal allergy. Hosoki et al.376 described an EDXRF method to perform elemental analysis of metal dust on a polyethylene film. Micro metal dust was obtained by polishing the surface of restorative metal material with an unused silicone point. The metal dust on the silicone point was then rubbed onto adhesive tape, and this tape was covered with polyethylene film. The amount of metal dust material was less than 20 μg. Using this analytical procedure, the results of elemental analyses of five alloy materials, collected from alloys of known composition and from dental metal restoration of an adult female volunteer in vivo, exactly matched the product specification. Furuhashi et al.377 also developed a non-destructive extraction method for dental alloys, along with a subsequent, rapid and accurate elemental determination. Samples were obtained by polishing the surfaces of metal restorations using a dental rotating tool with disposable buffs and polishing pastes. Subsequently, the buff was analysed using X-ray scanning analytical microscopy. The whole process of sampling and analysis required less than 10 minutes. The method was effective for three representative alloys used in dentistry, namely, Au–Ag–Pd, Ni–Cr and dental Ag alloys. A μ-EDXRF mapping of enamel and dental materials was conducted by Soares et al.378 to verify whether beverage consumption or the use of mouthwash would change the chemical properties of dental materials and enamel mineral content. Their findings suggested that the dental materials under investigation were not able to protect adjacent enamel from acid erosion by the soft drink tested, but the use of mouthwash promoted protection of enamel after erosion by the soft drink.
3.8 Drugs
Small molecule ruthenium complexes, KP1019 and NAMI-A, show great promise as anticancer pharmaceuticals, but further development of these as drugs is held back by an incomplete understanding of the mechanisms that give rise to markedly different biological behaviour for structurally similar species. Aitken et al.379 used XRF imaging at two incident energies to reveal the intracellular distribution of Ru in single human cells treated with KP1019, showing Ru localised in both cytosol and in the nuclear region. In addition the imaging showed that treatment with KP1019 modulated Fe distribution to resemble the Ru distribution, without affecting cellular Fe content. In stark contrast, Ru could not be visualised in cells treated with NAMI-A, indicating that it was not internalised and supporting the proposition that its activity is exerted through a membrane-binding mechanism. For the first time the elemental composition and the phenolic compounds of short-spurred violet herb Viola brachyceras Turcz were investigated by Martynov et al.380 Thirteen compounds of flavonoid structure were identified by HPLC, whilst the concentrations of 20 elements (Al, Ba, Br, Ca, Cl, Cr, Cu, Fe, K, Mg, Mn, Na, Ni, P, Rb, S, Si, Sr, Ti and Zn) were measured by XRF spectrometry. These results were of interest for the further investigation of the pharmacological properties of Viola brachyceras as a valuable raw material for producing new drugs. The bioactive component of Zhuxi, a mineral medicine widely used in traditional Tibetan medicine, still remains unclear. To enunciate the material basis of its pharmacological activity, Chinese researchers381 determined the chemical components and structure of two Zhuxi samples using XRF, XRD and ICP-AES techniques. The analysis indicated that the main elements were Fe, O and S, with some minor elements such as Al, Ca, K, Mg, Na, Ni, Si and Ti. These findings might be a good starting point for exploring the basis of its pharmacological activity. Meyer et al.382 applied TXRF spectrometry as a tool for the quantification of gold and platinum metallodrugs in trace concentrations (μg L−1 range) in a matrix of biological origin (cell suspensions). General aspects of sample preparation as well as method performance parameters (precision, recovery rates) were investigated.
Cosmetic foundation powders are one of the most commonly used cosmetic products in modern society. In recent years, so-called mineral-based foundation products have become increasing popular in the cosmetic consumer market and can demand a premium price from the consumer. In this contribution,383 WDXRF spectrometry was implemented for the multi-elemental analysis of 39 mineral and traditional ingredient cosmetic powders. Quantitative measurements were obtained for Al, Bi, Ca, Fe, K, Mg, Si, Ti and Zn. Using cluster analysis and principal components analysis, the authors could clearly identify the samples as being of either traditional or mineral formulation, and in the case of the mineral samples, specific manufacturers could be distinguished.
3.9 Biological
Following the development of third generation synchrotrons, XRF microscopy has emerged as an ideal technique for the study of metal content, speciation, and localisation in cells, tissues, and organs from animal samples. Paunesku et al.384 reviewed some of the recent XFM literature pertinent to tissue sample studies and presented examples of XFM data obtained from tissue sections of beagle dog samples. These showed that archival tissues were of adequate quality to allow an XFM investigation. Synchrotron scanning XFM in combination with XANES was also applied by Koudouna et al.,385 who studied the chemical composition and sulfur speciation of developing chick corneas at embryonic days 12, 14 and 16. The derived data were subjected to principal component analysis and linear discriminant analysis, which highlighted differences in the elemental and S species composition at different stages of embryonic growth. Notably, Ca, Cl, K, P and S compositions altered with development during the transition of the immature opaque cornea to a mature transparent tissue. Sulfur structure spectroscopy revealed developmentally regulated alterations in thiols, organic monosulfides, ester sulfate, and inorganic sulfate species. Rao et al.386 continued their research regarding the role of essential trace elements in the biological processes of invertebrates using SRXRF. Fluorescence spectra were collected by exciting individual invertebrate structures, such as external shell, embedded soft-tissue and the operculum of a small animal shell, with 8, 10 and 12 keV synchrotron X-rays. This was achieved using the new hard X-ray micro-spectroscopy beamline facility, X27A, (NSLS, BNL, USA), with a 10 μm primary beam spot and a liguid nitrogen-cooled 13-element energy-dispersive high-purity germanium detector. The percentage of Ca, predominantly present in an aquatic organism, was lower in the soft tissue, as distinguished from other samples, and the contributions of Cu and Zn were considerable. The presence of other bioactive trace elements such as As, Cr, Cu, Fe, Mn, Ni, Ti, Rb, Sr and Zn was observed in lower proportions. Raimunda et al.387 applied a combined 2D-gel electrophoresis (GE) separation technique, XRF, and tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) to study the role of metals and their binding to ligands in a biochemical study. The analysis, using the multiple techniques, was performed on the same spot of the sample. They verified their approach on a well-known system and then applied the developed methodology to successfully identify a novel periplasmic zinc protein in Pseudomonas aeruginosa.
It is common knowledge that exposure to toxic metals such as mercury and lead, can have a negative impact on the health and the development of humans and other vertebrates. Some forms of methylated mercury, one of which exists in fish and other seafood products, pose a potential threat, especially during embryonic and early postnatal development. To investigate the impact of different chemical forms of mercury on vertebrate development, Korbas et al.388 performed synchrotron-based XRF imaging of zebrafish larvae revealing substantial differences in tissue-specific accumulation patterns of Hg in larvae exposed to four different mercury formulations in water. Methylmercury species not only resulted in overall higher Hg burdens but also targeted different cells and tissues from their inorganic counterparts, thus revealing a significant role of speciation in cellular and molecular targeting and mercury sequestration. The effect of Hg on invertebrates, on the other hand, was examined by Mantuano et al.,389 who performed SR-TXRF measurements to investigate changes in the concentrations of Ca, Cl, Fe, K and Zn in Rhodnius prolixus as insect model. The elements were quantified in urine and hemolymph samples collected on different days after feeding the insects with blood containing HgCl2. The results revealed that the Ca level was higher in the hemolymph than in urine. On the other hand, the urine collected from insects treated with HgCl2 showed higher level of Cl than hemolymph samples. Calcium, Fe and Zn concentrations decreased drastically in urine samples collected after 2 days of HgCl2 treatment. Guimaraes et al.390 investigated Pb intoxication in rats by analysing their faeces by EDXRF spectrometry and their urine by TXRF and ETAAS methods. The results showed high concentrations of Pb being eliminated from the organism in the urine and faeces of contaminated rats. Values varied from 600 ± 140 μg L−1 to 5460 ± 115 μg L−1 in urine and from 4500 ± 300 μg g−1 to 11400 ± 3300 μg g−1 in dry faeces. The control rats showed, in general, low Pb concentrations or below detection limits. It was verified in faeces and urine that excretion decreased with the animals age.
Until the 1980s, most herbarium specimens were protected from bacterial, fungal and insect degradation using mercuric chloride. The 19th century “general herbarium” of the botanist pharmacist Ernest Henry Tourlet is currently being restored in the Faculty of Pharmacy, Tours, France. During this operation, the Hg concentrations in plant specimens and herbarium sheets were first screened using XRF spectrometry and subsequently analysed by ICP-AES analysis. The results indicated an important variability of Hg concentrations across the samples and even, occasionally, high concentrations of Hg were detected; one specimen presented an abnormal concentration of more than 70 mg g−1 of dry matter. Subsequently the Hg concentrations in the urine samples of the two employees restoring the herbarium (employed for respectively 6 years and 2 years) were quantified. These results showed low values of the mercure–creatinine ratio: 1.9 μg g−1 of creatinine for the employee with the longest exposure, less than 1 μg g−1 for the other.
Readers who are interested in additional biological applications can always consult our companion review on ‘Clinical and biological materials, foods and beverages’.2
3.10 Thin films, coatings and nano-materials
A significant number of papers dealing with thin films for solar cells were published within the review period where the aim of the study was focussed on increasing the efficiency of these devices and with a significant number of contributions from Asian countries. Lee et al.391 reported the two-step selenisation of copper-indium-gallium precursors, Cu(In1−xGax)Se2 (CIGS), for thin-film solar cells by using a selenium cracker. The composition of the Cu–In–Ga precursors was controlled by changing the thickness ratio of the copper–indium and the copper–gallium films. After selenisation, the thickness of the CIGS film was approximately three times that of the precursor layer. Composition analysis using XRF spectrometry revealed that the CuIII and the GaIII ratios of CIGS changed from 0.66 to about 0.80 and 0.11 to about 0.20, respectively, with variations in the precursor thickness. The authors obtained a power conversion efficiency of 3.91% from the fabricated CIGS solar cell. Lee et al.392 investigated coating dye-sensitised solar cells (DSSC) with a light scattering TiO2 layer. To enhance the efficiency of this light scattering layer, surfaces of the TiO2 particles were coated with a thin oxide layer such as Al2O3 nanoparticles using methods similar to the modified sol–gel method. The Al2O3-coated TiO2 powder was characterised by SEM and XRF methods, and the overall conversion efficiency of DSSCs as a result of applying the Al2O3-coated TiO2 light scattering layer increased from 5.07% to 6.46%. Lim et al.393 also used XRF to characterise CIGS thin films in solar cell devices, which are expected to be the next generation of solar cells because of their economical manufacturing cost and high conversion efficiency. To develop an efficient thin-film CIGS structure, however, quantitative compositional analysis of major elements was claimed to be necessary by these authors. Quantitative analysis of CIGS was carried out using ICP-AES, XRF, WD-EPMA techniques, and dynamic SIMS. The ratio of each element comprising CIGS was determined by ICP-AES, which was performed by dissolving the entire CIGS sample. A reproducible and rapid semi-quantified analysis of CIGS could be obtained using XRF spectrometry and EPMA, giving comparable results to ICP-AES. Han et al.394 reported triangular islands and cavities on the surface of the evaporated CIGS absorber layer. These CIGS thin films were co-evaporated at a constant substrate temperature of 500 °C on the molybdenum/soda lime glass substrates. The structural properties and chemical composition of the CIGS films were studied by XRD and XRF spectrometry while an SEM was used to study the surface morphology. The authors investigated the formation mechanism of the triangular islands which were found on (1 1 2) planes, terminated by selenium atoms and provided an explanation for the formation of these structures. A comparison of the performance of solar cells with triangular islands and layered CIGS grains showed an improvement in conversion efficiency. Li et al.395 reported a film growth mechanism for electrodeposited copper indium selenide compounds. The Cu2Se–In2Se3 system comprised several copper indium selenide (CIS) compounds with conduction–valence band gaps matched to the solar spectrum. The authors investigated electrochemical growth of CIS films under various conditions. The film growth, monitored by XRF spectrometry, showed excellent composition and thickness uniformity and these results agreed with SIMS profiles and XRD data, indicating the conversion of initially formed binary phases to a homogenous ternary compound. Another thin film material that has been the subject of recent interest is kesterite (Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4) and its related alloys, due to their high absorption of solar radiation. Vora et al.396 reported phase identification and control of thin films deposited by co-evaporation of elemental Cu, Se, Sn, and Zn using techniques including XRD and XRF spectrometry to characterise the deposition process. They found that the process window for growing single-phase kesterite films was narrow and they documented a 9.15% conversion efficiency for this material.
The applicability of XRF spectrometry for determining the thickness and composition of stacks of metal thin films was reported by Vrielink et al.397 and this was compared with imaging techniques and profilometry. The fast, accurate and non-destructive determination of the thickness of a variety of single-layer and multi-layer metal thin films deposited on glass and silicon was investigated. The authors identified a limitation when determining thickness with profilometry and cross-sectional SEM-imaging, which was not observed using XRF spectrometry. They found that the XRF technique could discriminate between sub-layers in a multi-layer film, and could also be utilized for compositional analysis and density estimations. As a consequence, it was concluded that XRF spectrometry was a versatile technique for analysis, verification, control or evaluation of the thickness, density or (elemental) composition of thin metal film line-patterns, during their fabrication.
Franquelo et al.398 applied analytical techniques to the study of paint layers on sculptures that had been restored/repainted several times across the centuries. Analyses were performed using portable XRF, μ-XRD and μ-Raman instruments, optical microscopy, SEM-EDS and μ-FTIR techniques. Pigments and other materials including vermilion, minium, red lac, ivory black, lead white, barium white, zinc white (zincite), titanium white (rutile and anatase), lithopone, gold and brass were detected. Pigments from both ancient and modern times were found due to the different restorations/repaintings carried out. The authors point out that in some cases, pigment identification was only possible by combining the results from the different analytical techniques.
In reservoirs used for geological CO2 sequestration, brine films remaining on mineral surfaces can influence flow, diffusion, and reactions. Kim et al.399 measured the thickness of nanoscale KCsI2 brine films on silica surfaces under geological CO2 sequestration conditions using SRXRF spectrometry. The authors investigated how capillary action influenced the thickness of a KCsI2 brine film on both smooth and rough SiO2 surfaces, under confinement with supercritical CO2. The thicknesses of brine films coating the interior surfaces of the silica windows of a high-pressure cell were measured by the SRXRF determination of two tracer ions (I− and Cs+) with supercritical CO2 as the immiscible confining fluid. The measured area-averaged film thicknesses on the rough 330 nm relative root mean square (Rrms) silica surface ranged from 265 to 249 nm for capillary potentials measured within a narrow range of 0.18 to 3.7 kPa. Over this same range of potentials, film thicknesses measured on the smooth (1.6 nm Rrms) silica surface were about 2 nm.
Several other applications have been reported within the review period: transparent conducting oxides (TCO) are oxides that couple low sheet resistance with high transparency and find applications in many fields such as solar cells, light emitting diodes and transparent thin film transistors. Baratto et al.400 described sputtering deposition of amorphous cadmium stannate to form TCO. They measured the functional properties of these thin films by means of sheet resistance and transmittance measurements in the visible region, while the film composition and structure were investigated by TXRF spectrometry and glancing incidence XRD. Dakhel401 reported structural and optoelectronic properties of zinc-incorporated CdO films prepared using a sol–gel spin coating technique. These films were characterised by XRF, XRD, optical absorption spectroscopy, and DC-electrical measurements. Shigley et al.402 characterised diamond simulants consisting of colourless cubic zirconia crystals and found that they were coated with a thin layer (30–50 nm) of nanocrystalline diamond particles embedded in the matrix. The authors found that the only standard gemological technique that could establish the presence of this coating was EDXRF spectrometry, detecting Ti from the adhesion layer deposited on the cubic zirconia during the initial part of the coating process.
Thin film reference materials are very important for the validation of quantitative results. Molloy et al.403 reported the certification of NIST SRM 2569 lead paint films for children's products developed for use primarily with XRF instrumentation. This CRM consisted of three paint coatings, with nominally 0, 90, and 300 mg kg−1 of Pb deposited on polyester substrates. The levels of Pb were appropriate for use when validating test methods intended for testing product compliance with the US Consumer Product Safety Improvement Act. The mass of Pb per unit area, paint density, and paint thickness were all characterised to make this material useful to users of different XRF instrumentation. The paints were highly homogeneous among units, although within units, some localised areas enriched in Pb could be observed using micro-beam XRF instrumentation. The authors also commented on the limitation of use, where SRM 2569 was not recommended for measured areas smaller than 1 mm diameter.
Several methods have been used to characterise thin films, Mainz and Klenk404 continued their work on the in situ analysis of elemental depth distributions in thin films by a combined evaluation of SRXRF spectrometry and XRD. The authors recorded diffraction and fluorescence signals simultaneously during active annealing of thin films. By observing the diffraction signal, the timed evolution of phases in the thin films during the annealing processes could be determined. This phase information was used to determine the parameters influencing the depth distribution of the elements in the films. The authors applied the method to analyse the evolution of elemental depth distributions and to quantify the kinetic parameters during the synthesis of CuInS thin films via the reactive annealing of Cu–In precursors in a sulfur atmosphere. Hoffmann et al.405 reported the synthesis and chemical characterisation of silicon carbonitride nanolayers (SiCxNy). These thin films were produced by plasma-enhanced CVD and characterised by ellipsometry, FTIR and Raman spectroscopy, XRD, XPS, as well as TXRF-XANES.
Diffusive gradients in thin films deposited by ion exchange on cellulose phosphate ion exchange membrane (Whatman P 81 paper) using EDXRF for the determination of labile Co, Cu, Mn, Ni, Pb and Zn in river water was reported by de Almeida et al.406 The diffusive gradients in thin films (DGT) technique showed enormous potential for monitoring labile metals in fresh water by combining preconcentration, time-integrated, matrix interference removal and speciation analytical features. The proposed approach was applied to determine the analytes at five sampling sites on the Piracicaba river basin, Brazil, and the results (labile fraction) were compared with 0.45 μM dissolved fractions determined by SR-TXRF. The limits of detection of DGT-EDXRF coupling for the analytes (from 7.5 to 26 μg L−1) were similar to those obtained by the sensitive SR-TXRF technique (3.8 to 9.1 μg L−1).
A very important topic in nano-technology is the development and characterisation of low k materials. Yang et al.407 analysed cobalt capping layers for copper/low-k interconnects. Cobalt films were selectively deposited as copper capping layers by the CVD technique, whereas XRF was used to determine the Co deposition selectivity as a function of the deposition temperature and substrate material. Dakhel408 investigated the tungsten doping effect on the dielectric properties of amorphous Ga2O3 films grown on a silicon substrate for low-k applications and determined the W content by EDXRF spectrometry. It was observed that tungsten doping at a certain level reduced the effective dielectric constant of Ga2O3.
Arac et al.409 studied focused-ion-beam (FIB)-induced structural and compositional modifications in nanoscale bilayer systems by combined grazing incidence techniques, XRR and GIXRF using a SR source. Nickel iron/gold (NiFe/Au) bilayers with different thicknesses were irradiated with a focused 30 keV Ga+ ion beam, and the evaluation of the individual layers and interfaces were investigated systematically as a function of a broad range of irradiation fluence. Experimental data were collected from 1.3 × 4.5 mm2 structures with a 100 nm-wide focused ion beam. Two irradiation regimes were identified, for Ga+ fluences of <15.6 × 1014 ion cm−2 (low dose regime), the main influence of the focused ion beam was on the interface between the bilayer and, for the high dose regime, sputtering effects and ion implantation became significant, eventually causing amorphisation of the bilayer system. A relationship was found between the intermixing length and irradiation fluence, indicating that FIB-induced mixing was diffusion controlled. Despite the complexity of these bilayer structures, good agreement between the experiment and theory highlighted the functionality of the combined XRR and GIXRF techniques for studying intermixing at high resolution.
Cadieu et al.410 reported the X-ray measurement of thickness and composition for nanometer-thick films of tantalum oxide and hafnium oxide on silicon substrates. These films were made by magnetron sputtering of Ta and Hf in oxygen onto heated silicon (100) substrates. Three different techniques were used for measurements. The first used X-ray reflectivity, which provided a thickness value independent of the film composition. The second method used the simultaneous measurement of Ta and Hf fluorescence counts, which for <200 nm thick films increased linearly with the film thickness. The third method used the attenuation of the Si Kα X-ray line from the underlying Si substrate excited by a glancing incident X-ray beam. The authors commented on the growth of these films with sputtering conditions. Zheng et al.411 reported the deposition of double nanometric layers of Ru/Au, Ru/Pd, and Pd/Au onto CdZnTe by the electrodeless method. The deposited layers were analysed by TXRF and RBS to determine the thickness, the depth profiles and the composition of the layers.
The effect of alginate as a polymer matrix on the characteristics of hydroxyapatite nanoparticles was studied by Son et al.412 Hydroxyapatite (HA) nanoparticles were prepared in the presence of alginate, which exhibited spherical shapes. A mixture of spherical and rod-like nanoparticles was observed after thermal treatment at 600 °C. FTIR, XRD and XRF analyses confirmed that the stoichiometric HA nanoparticles could be synthesized when using alginate, in which the Ca/P molar ratio ranged from 1.74 to 1.68. These HA nanoparticles showed the same crystalline phase as that of the stoichiometric HA after thermal treatment. Galstyan et al.413 reported that polymer-capped magnetite nanoparticles change the 2D structure of (dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine) DPPC model membranes. The interaction of bio-compatible and stimuli-responsive Fe3O4 nanoparticles with DPPC model membranes was studied at the air–water interface. The authors found that the interactions between NPs and DPPC stabilised the NPs at the interface. Only at very high pressures were all NPs squeezed out. The number of NPs in the monolayer was quantified by TXRF spectrometry. Judy et al.414 studied the bioavailability of gold nano-materials to plants and the importance of particle size and surface coating. The authors used the model organisms Nicotiana tabacum L. cv Xanthi (tobacco) and Triticum aestivum (wheat) to investigate plant uptake of 10, 30 and 50 nm diameter Au manufactured nanomaterials (MNMs) coated with either tannate (T-MNMs) or citrate (C-MNMs). Spatial distribution of Au in tissue samples was determined using LA-ICP-MS and μ-XRF techniques. Both C-MNMs and T-MNMs of each size treatment accumulated in tobacco, but no accumulation of MNMs was observed for either treatment in wheat. These results indicated that MNMs of a wide range of size and with different surface chemistries were bioavailable to plants, providing information on the mechanism regarding the role of cell wall pores in plant uptake of MNMs, and raising questions about the importance of plant species to MNM bioaccumulation. Larue et al.415 investigated the accumulation, translocation and impact of TiO2 nanoparticles in wheat (Triticum aestivum spp.) and studied the influence of diameter and crystal phase. The intensive production of TiO2 nanoparticles (TiO2-NPs) would lead to their release in the environment. Their eco-toxicological impact is still poorly documented, while their use in commercial goods is constantly increasing. The authors compared root accumulation and root-to-shoot translocation in wheat of anatase and rutile TiO2-NPs with diameters ranging from 14 nm to 655 nm, prepared in water. Nanoparticle distribution in plant tissues was mapped by μ-SRXRF spectrometry, observed by TEM and quantified in the different compartments of plant roots by μ-PIXE. The authors conclude that only the smallest TiO2-NPs were accumulated in wheat plants, although in limited amounts and with moderate impact. Advances in nanotechnology have raised concerns about possible effects of engineered nano-materials (ENMs) in the environment, especially in terrestrial plants. Servin et al.416 combined μ-SRXRF and μ-XANES techniques to study the uptake and translocation of TiO2 nanoparticles in cucumber (Cucumis sativus) plants. Seven day old seedlings were treated with TiO2 NPs at concentrations varying from 0 to 4000 mg L−1. At harvest, the size of roots and shoots were measured. In addition, μ-XRF and μ-XAS methods were used to track the presence and chemical speciation of Ti within plant tissues. Results showed that at all concentrations, TiO2 significantly increased root length (average >300%). Using μ-XRF spectrometry the authors found that Ti was transported from the roots to the leaf trichomes, suggesting that trichomes are possibly the sink or excretory system for the Ti. The μ-XANES spectra showed that the absorbed Ti was present as TiO2 within the cucumber tissues, demonstrating that the TiO2 NPs were not bio-transformed. Castell et al.417 reported the analysis of liquid-phase laser-ablated (LP-LA) nanoparticles from cryolite–alumina solutions. A new procedure with minimum sample preparation was developed for the fast and serial analysis of cryolite with varying concentrations of dissolved alumina by liquid-phase laser ablation followed by TXRF spectrometry and ICP-AES. The Na/Al ratio of bath samples taken from industrial Hall–Herault reduction cells, as well as the relative concentration of trace elements. Two different types of molten samples taken directly from the aluminium production plant were placed under distilled deionized water in a quartz cell and subjected to pulsed laser ablation using the beam from the third harmonic Nd:YAG laser. Scanning electron microscopy examination showed the nature of the nanoparticles in the ablated material. The water-suspension was deposited on quartz reflectors for TXRF analysis or directly aspirated to the ICP yielding the aluminium and sodium signals. The authors claimed that the procedure could provide the Na/Al ratio with adequate precision for the control of aluminium production and revealed trace elements that could be considered as contaminants. Jones et al.418 reported a benchtop X-ray fluorescence computed tomography (XRFCT) of gold nanoparticle-loaded objects using lead- and tin-filtered polychromatic beams. The authors presented the first experimental demonstration of bench-top polychromatic cone-beam XRFCT for the simultaneous determination of the spatial distribution and amount of gold nanoparticles (GNPs) within small sized objects. The current bench-top experimental setup successfully produced XRFCT images, accurately showing the regions containing small amount of GNPs in the order of 0.1 mg within a 3 cm diameter plastic phantom. The authors claimed a remarkable improvement in performance using a tin-filtered polychromatic beam in comparison with a lead-filtered beam. Bentonite is rich in montmorillonite, which is a nanostructured and nanoporous member of the smectite group. Mineralogical and physicochemical properties of bentonites play a key role in their selection for different applications. Hayati-Ashtiani419 characterised mineralogical and physicochemical properties of nanoporous and nanostructured bentonites (Montmorillonites). The morphological form and size of their mineral phase were revealed by SEM and XRD showed that the bentonites predominantly consisted of montmorillonites accompanied by other impurities such as quartz, calcite, and plagioclase. XRF analysis showed that there was a large amount of Al2O3 in one sample indicating a greater amount of montmorillonite in this sample compared with others.
Wang et al.420 investigated the interfacial properties and iron binding to bacterial proteins that promote the growth of magnetite nanocrystals using XRR and surface spectroscopy. Surface sensitive X-ray scattering and spectroscopic studies were undertaken to determine the structural properties of Mms6, the protein in Magnetospirillum magneticum AMB-1 that is implicated as promoter of the growth of magnetite nanocrystals. Grazing incidence-XRF spectrometry from the same monolayers allowed quantitative determination of ions bound to the surface of the protein showing that ferric iron was bound to Mms6 at higher densities compared with other ions such as Fe2+ or La3+ under similar buffer conditions. Lupascu et al.421 reported a structural study of Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8 + δ exfoliated nanocrystals. The authors demonstrated that structural and spectroscopic information could be obtained non-invasively on exfoliated nanocrystals as thin as 6 nm using a combination of μ-XRF, μ-XANES and μ-XRD techniques at a SR source.
Kanygin et al.422 investigated features of the inelastic interaction of X-ray radiation with aligned carbon nanotube films (CNT). The aligned CNT films on a silicon substrate were synthesized by the thermal decomposition of selected organic compounds with ferrocene as a catalyst. The angular dependence of the XRF yield for the films was measured and consisted mainly of C Kα radiation. The model curves were calculated to reveal the effect of the film density and thickness as well as the inclusion of iron nanoparticles on the X-ray radiation yield. A comparison of experimental data for the oriented and the disoriented nanotube films showed an extra intensity in the X-ray radiation yield in the direction of nanotube growth. The influence of CNT film structure parameters on the intensity increase was discussed, based on the experimental results and the model calculations. Zawisza et al.423 report on carbon nanotubes as a solid sorbent for the pre-concentration of Co, Cr, Cu, Fe, Mn, Ni, Pb and Zn prior to their measurement by WDXRF spectometry. The proposed pre-concentration procedure was based on the sorption of trace elements on MWCNTs dispersed in the solution to be analysed. After sorption, the MWCNTs with the metal ions were collected on a filter, and measured directly by WDXRF sprctrometry. The optimised pre-concentration procedure allowed detection limits of <1 ng mL−1 for these elements to be achieved, with recoveries of about 100%. Because the analytes were not eluted from the sorbent before WDXRF measurement, the risk of contamination and loss of analytes was reduced and the method was applied to the analysis of natural water. Martinez-Criado et al.424 probed quantum confinement within single core–multi-shell nanowires. Using a hard X-ray nano-beam, the authors showed experimental evidence for carrier localisation phenomena at the hexagon corners by combining synchrotron-excited optical luminescence with simultaneous XRF spectrometry. Applied to single coaxial n-GaN/InGaN multiquantum-well/p7GaN nanowires, these experiments narrowed the gap between optical microscopy and high-resolution X-ray imaging.
Turning now to imaging of structure and composition at the nano-scale where strong demands for the development of high resolution systems have assisted researchers in their understanding of the behaviour of biological systems and engineered materials. Xu et al.425 reported the development of correlative nanoscale 3D imaging of structure and composition in extended objects. The authors presented a non-destructive and multiple-contrast imaging technique, using the principles of X-ray laminography, thus extending tomography towards laterally extended objects. They retained the advantages that are usually restricted to 2D microscopic imaging, such as the scanning of large areas and the facility to zoom-in on a region of interest at the highest possible resolution. The correlation of the 3D structure and the elemental distribution yielded a high sensitivity to variations of the electron density via coherent imaging and to local trace element quantification through XRF spectrometry. Analysing a biological system, the authors visualised in lung tissue the subcellular response to toxic stress after exposure to nanotubes. They showed that most of the nanotubes were trapped inside alveolar macrophages, while a small portion of the nanotubes had crossed the barrier to the cellular space of the alveolar wall. The developed method was non-destructive and could be adapted to different sample environmental or loading conditions. The authors claimed that correlative X-ray nano-laminography would facilitate a variety of in situ and in operando 3D studies.
3.11 Chemical state and speciation
Luhl et al.426 described a new approach for chemical speciation in stratified systems using 3D μ-XAFS spectroscopy by combining 3D μ-XRF with conventional XAFS. Measurements were collected in fluorescence mode, which could lead to distorted spectra due to absorption effects. A reliable reconstruction algorithm for obtaining undistorted spectra for superficial and in-depth layers was developed and validated.
Hoffmann et al.427 reported chemical bonds and elemental compositions of BCxNy layers produced by CVD with trimethylamine borane, triethylamine borane, or trimethylborazine. BCxNy films were also produced from single-source precursors. The films deposited on Si(100) substrates were chemically characterised by XPS and SR-TXRF-XAS and quantified by EDXRS. Stoichiometric formulas derived from EDXRF were proposed; B3.54C4N22.5 for the carbidic region and B3.5C1.5N5 for the nitridic region. The same group428 investigated chemical interactions in the layered system BCxNy/Ni(Cu)/Si, produced by CVD at high temperature. The chemical compositions of the layers and of the interfaces were characterised by TXRF spectrometry combined with XANES, XPS and SIMS. At the relatively high synthesis temperature of 700 °C, broad regions of Cu or Ni and Si were observed between the metal layer and the Si substrate. Wilke et al.429 reported zircon solubility and zirconium complexation in H2O + Na2O + SiO2 ± Al2O3 fluids at high pressure and temperature. Using hydrothermal diamond-anvil cells, H2O–Na2Si2O5, H2O–NaAlSi3O8 fluids and baddeleyite solubility in H2O–NaOH fluids were measured by in situ SRXRF spectrometry. In situ XANES spectra collected on zircon in H2O–Na2Si3O7, H2O–Na2Si3O7 + Al2O3, H2O–NaOH and H2O–HCl fluids in equilibrium with zircon provided evidence for strong differences in the Zr complexation between these fluids. Comparison of XANES spectra to those of model compounds and ab initio simulation of XANES spectra, revealed ZrVIII for the HCI solution, ZrVII for the NaOH solution, and ZrVI for the Na–Al–silicate-bearing solutions. Alkali zircono–silicate complexes were responsible for the enhancement of Zr concentrations in Na–Al–silicate-bearing solutions and very likely played an important role for mobilisation of HFSE during fluid–rock interaction. Because high alkali aluminium could be expected in aqueous fluids at high pressure and temperature due to incongruent dissolution of feldspar and mica, the increase of zircon solubility along the NaAlSi3O8–Na2Si3O7 join pointed to potentially considerable Zr or HFSE transport by silicate-bearing aqueous fluids in the lower crust and upper mantle. Heald et al.430 reported the incorporation of pertechnetate and perrhenate into corroded steel surfaces studied by XAS. Batch reaction experiments and solid-phase characterisation analyses were completed to examine the uptake of dissolved perrhenate (ReVII) or pertechnetate (TcVII) by A-516 steel coupons that corroded in simulated groundwater solutions. The goal was to identify the mechanisms that controlled the uptake of Tc-99 by corrosion products on carbon steel in the presence of dilute solutions. An XAFS study of the oxidation states of Re and Tc incorporated into the corroded steel coupon surfaces. X-ray fluorescence maps showed that the corroded coupons contained localised regions enriched in Re or Tc. The Re L-3 XANES results for the coupons reacted with Re-spiked waters, were consistent with nearly all of the sorbed Re being present as perrhenate and not significantly reduced to ReIV. Linear combination fits of the extended XAFS signals for the perrhenate and ReO2–OIV standards indicated that Re sorbed to the steel coupons corroded in simulated J-13 (a relatively dilute Na–HCO3–CO3 groundwater) and even more dilute waters that consisted of a maximum of 5 and 10% ReIV, respectively. The fluorescence results also showed that the Re concentrations increased with increasing time of exposure to the X-ray beam, which suggested that the perrhenate ions were only weakly bonded to the matrix of the corrosion product. The Tc K edge XAFS results for the coupons reacted in Tc-99-spiked waters, indicated that most of the sorbed Tc had been reduced to TcIV. The shape of the near edge and extended fine structure was similar to the TcIV-hydrous ferric oxide (HFO).
Kocot et al.431 reported a dispersive liquid–liquid micro-extraction (DLLME) using diethyldithiocarbamate as a chelating agent and the dried-spot technique for the determination of Co, Cu, Fe, Ni, Pb, Se and Zn by EDXRF spectrometry in water samples. The experiments showed that Co, Cu, Fe, Ni, Pb and Zn could be simultaneously extracted at a pH of 5 and Se at a pH of 2–3. For all analytes, a linear range was observed up to 0.4 μg mL−1. If Fe and Zn were present in concentrations ten times higher than those of the other analytes, then the linearity was observed up to 0.2 μg mL−1. The organic phase that contained the pre-concentrated elements was deposited onto a Millipore filter and the elements were measured by EDXRF spectrometry. The detection limits obtained were between 1 and 4 μg mL−1. This combination of DLLME and the dried-spot technique was claimed to be promising for multi-element analyses using other spectroscopic techniques, such as LA-ICP-MS, laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy or TXRF spectrometry.
Sahinkaya et al.432 investigated the bio-reduction of CrVI from acidic waste waters in a sulfidogenic anaerobic baffled reactor. The bio-treatment of synthetic acidic waste water containing CrVI, FeIII and sulfate was studied in an ethanol supplemented anaerobic baffled reactor (ABR) at a constant hydraulic retention time of one day. The produced precipitates were retained in the ABR as a result of its compartmentalised structure and the presence of a sludge blanket acting as filter. Studies using XRD, XRF and SEM techniques were carried out to identify the type and morphology of the precipitates formed and further elucidate CrVI removal mechanisms. The CrVI precipitates as CrIIIO(OH) as well as chromium sulfide. Part of the chromium might be also adsorbed in amorphous precipitated phases. The experimental results proved the high efficiency of the process and its potential application to tackle environmental issues related to acidic waste waters/leachates generated in the mining and metallurgical industry, as well as in chromium-containing waste disposal sites. Aranda et al.433 reported a novel and selective method for the pre-concentration and determination of CrVI in aqueous samples. The CrVI was adsorbed in a “batch mode” on multi-walled carbon nano-tubes covered with Aliquat 336 and then determined directly, i.e., on the solid, by XRF spectrometry. This reduced the number of reagents and minimised sample handling. The authors claimed that their method combined the advantages of solid-phase extraction with the benefits of the XRF method in that the large areas aquired by the carbon nano-tubes make them a promising solid sorbent for pre-concentration. Skorek et al.434 determined Se by XRF spectrometry using dispersive solid-phase micro-extraction with multi-walled carbon nanotubes as solid sorbent. A dispersive solid-phase micro-extraction (DSPME) with multi-walled carbon nano-tubes as solid sorbent and ammonium pyrrolidinedithiocarbamate (APDC) as chelating agent was developed for the determination of selenium. The loaded filters were directly measured by XRF spectrometry. The authors claimed that under optimised conditions Se ions could be determined with a recovery of 97% and detection limits from 0.06 to 0.2 ng mL−1, depending on the counting time and XRF instrument. SeIV could be determined in the presence of heavy metal ions and alkali metals. The authors showed that the chemical interferences observed for high concentrations of CuII, FeIII, and ZnII could be completely eliminated using precipitation with NaOH. The proposed method was applied to the determination of Se in mineral water and biological samples. The authors reported that their method could also be applied for selenium speciation.
Abbreviations

2D/3D/4D2 Dimensional/3 dimensional/4 dimensional
AASAtomic absorption spectrometry
ABRAnaerobic baffled reactor
ABSAcrylonitrile–butadiene–styrene
ACAlternating current
ADAnno domini
AFMAtomic force microscopy
ANKAANgstroem KArlsruhe synchrotron source
ANOVAAnalysis of variance
APDCAmmonium pyrrolidinedithiocarbamate
APIActive pharmaceutical ingredients
APPAmyloid precursor protein
ASICApplication-specific integrated circuit
BCBefore Christ
BFSBlast furnace slags
BNLBrookhaven national laboratory
CCDCharge coupled detector
CdTeCadmium telluride
CIGSCopper indium gallium selenide
CISCopper indium selenide
CNTCarbon nanotube
CRLCompound refractive lens
CRMCertified reference material
CTComputer tomography
CTABrCetyltrimethylammonium bromide
CVDChemical vapour deposition
DACDiamond anvil cell
DCDirect current
DDTCDiethyldithiocarbamate
DEPFETDepleted P-channel field effect transistor
DGTDiffuse gradient thin film
DGT-EDXRFDiffuse gradient thin film-energy dispersive X-ray fluorescence
DLLMEDispersive liquid–liquid microextraction
DPPCDipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine
DSDPDeep sea drilling project
DSPMEDispersive solid-phase microextraction
DSSCDye-sensitized solar cell
DTADifferential thermal analysis
DTGDifferential thermogravimetry
EDLElectrical double layer
ED-SEMEnergy dispersive scanning electron microscopy
EDTAEthylenediaminetetraacetic acid
EDXRFEnergy dispersive X-ray fluorescence
EELSElectron energy loss spectrometry
ENMEngineered nanomaterial
EPDLEvaluated photon data library
EPMAElectron probe microanalysis
ESRFEuropean Synchrotron Radiation Facility
ETAASElectrothermal atomic absorption spectrometry
EUEuropean Union
EXAFSExtended X-ray absorption fine structure
FTIRFourier transform infrared
GC-MSGas chromatography-mass spectrometry
GEGel electrophoresis
GEMGas electron multiplier
GEXRFGrazing exit X-ray fluorescence
GF-AASGraphite furnace-atomic absorption spectrometry
GISAXSGrazing incidence small angle X-ray scattering
GIXRDGrazing incidence X-ray diffraction
GIXRFGrazing incidence X-ray fluorescence
GNPGold nanoparticle
HAHydroxyapatite
HE-P-EDXRFHigh-energy polarised-beam energy dispersive X-ray fluorescence
HOPGHighly orientated pyrolytic graphite
HPGeHigh purity germanium
HPLCHigh performance liquid chromatography
HFSEHigh field strength elements
ICP-AESInductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectrometry
ICP-MSInductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry
IRInfrared
ISEIon selective electrode
LA-ICP-MSLaser ablation-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry
LIBSLaser induced breakdown spectrometry
LNLSLaboratorio Nacional de Luz Sincroton
LP-LALiquid-phase laser-ablated
MIXSMercury Imaging X-ray Spectrometer
MNMManufactured nanomaterial
MRIMagnetic resonance imaging
MSMass spectrometry
MSWIMunicipal solid waste incinerator
MWCNTMultiwalled carbon nanotube
NAANeutron activation analysis
NASANational Aeronautics and Space Administration
NISTNational Institute of Standards and Technology
NPNanoparticle
NSLSNational Synchrotron Light Source
PCPersonal computer
PCAPrincipal component analysis
PCBPrinted circuit board
PIXEParticle-induced X-ray emission
PMParticulate matter
PRPhosphate rocks
PSiPorous silicon
PVAPolyvinyl alcohol
PVCPoly(vinyl chloride)
PXRFPortable X-ray fluorescence
RoHSRestriction of hazardous substances
RBSRutherford backscattering spectrometry
REERare earth elements
RrmsRelative root mean square
SDDSilicon drift detector
SAXSSmall angle X-ray scattering
SCASickle cell anemia
SCDSwept charge device
SEMScanning electron microscopy
SEM-EDSScanning electron microscopy-energy dispersive X-ray spectrometry
SIMSSecondary ion mass spectrometry
Si(PIN)Silicon PIN detector device
SNcSubstancia nigra pars compacta
SPESolid phase extraction
SRMStandard reference material
SRSynchrotron radiation
SRFSolid recovered fuel
SR-TXRFSynchrotron radiation-total reflection X-ray fluorescence
SR-TXRF-XASSynchrotron radiation-total reflection X-ray fluorescence-X-ray absorption spectroscopy
SRXRDSynchrotron radiation X-ray diffraction
SRXRFSynchrotron radiation X-ray fluorescence
TCOTransparent conducting oxide
TEMTransmission electron microscopy
TESTransition edge sensor
TGThermogravimetry
TGAThermogravimetric analysis
TLVThreshold limit value
TXRFTotal reflection X-ray fluorescence
TXRF-XANESTotal reflection X-ray fluorescence-X-ray absorption near edge structure
UKUnited Kingdom
UNESCOUnited Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
USUnited States
USAUnited States of America
UVUltraviolet
WDWavelength dispersive
WD-EPMAWavelength dispersive-electron probe microanalysis
WDXRFWavelength dispersive X-ray fluorescence
XAAX-ray absorption anisotropy
XAFSX-ray absorption fine structure
XANESX-ray absorption near edge structure
XASX-ray absorption spectroscopy
XFMX-ray fluorescence microscopy
XPSX-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
XRDX-ray diffraction
XRFX-ray fluorescence
XRFCTX-ray fluorescence computed tomography
XRRX-ray reflectometry
XRSX-ray spectrometry
XSWX-ray standing waves
YAGYttrium aluminium garnet
ZAtomic number

ReferencesM. West, A. T. Ellis, P. J. Potts, C. Streli, C. Vanhoof, D. Wegrzynek and P. Wobrauschek, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2012, 27(10), 1603–1644 RSC .A. Taylor, M. P. Day, J. Marshall, M. Patriarca and M. White, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2012, 27(4), 537–576 RSC .E. H. Evans, C. D. Palmer and C. M. M. Smith, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2012, 27(6), 909–927 RSC .R. Clough, L. R. Drennan-Harris, C. F. Harrington, S. J. Hill and J. F. Tyson, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2012, 27(8), 1185–1224 RSC .S. Carter, A. S. Fisher, M. W. Hinds and S. Lancaster, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2012, 27(12), 2003–2053 RSC .O. T. Butler, W. R. L. Cairns, J. M. Cook and C. M. Davidson, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2013, 28(2), 177–216 RSC .C. Bendicho, I. Lavilla, F. Pena-Pereira and V. Romero, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2012, 27(11), 1831–1857 RSC .P. Nowinski, V. F. Hodge and S. Gerstenberger, Environ. Chem., 2012, 9(4), 379–388 CrossRef CAS .A. Agostino and R. Falcone, Glass Technol.: Eur. J. Glass Sci. Technol., Part A, 2012, 53(2), 60–64 CAS .A. F. Marsala, T. Loermans, S. Shen, C. Scheibe and R. Zereik, Petrophysics, 2012, 53(2), 102–109 Search PubMed .P. Higueras, R. Oyarzun, J. M. Iraizoz, S. Lorenzo, J. M. Esbri and A. Martinez-Coronado, J. Geochem. Explor., 2012, 113, 3–12 CrossRef CAS .P. Colomban, A. Tournie, M. Maucuer and P. Meynard, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2012, 43(6), 799–808 CrossRef CAS .R. O. Bastos, F. L. Melquiades and G. E. V. Biasi, X-Ray Spectrom., 2012, 41(5), 304–307 CrossRef CAS .J. Zemlicka, J. Jakubek, F. Krejci, D. Hradil, J. Hradilova and H. Mislerova, J. Instrum., 2012, 7, 8 CrossRef .S. Z. Weider, B. J. Kellett, B. M. Swinyard, I. A. Crawford, K. H. Joy, M. Grande, C. J. Howe, J. Huovelin, S. Narendranath, L. Alha, M. Anand, P. S. Athiray, N. Bhandari, J. A. Carter, A. C. Cook, L. C. d'Uston, V. A. Fernandes, O. Gasnault, J. N. Goswami, J. P. D. Gow, A. D. Holland, D. Koschny, D. J. Lawrence, B. J. Maddison, S. Maurice, D. J. McKay, T. Okada, C. Pieters, D. A. Rothery, S. S. Russell, A. Shrivastava, D. R. Smith and M. Wieczorek, Planet Space Sci., 2012, 60(1), 217–228 CrossRef CAS .R. D. Starr, D. Schriver, L. R. Nittler, S. Z. Weider, P. K. Byrne, G. C. Ho, E. A. Rhodes, C. E. Schlemm, S. C. Solomon and P. M. Travnicek, J. Geophys. Res.: Planets, 2012, 117, 19 CrossRef .D. Blake, D. Vaniman, C. Achilles, R. Anderson, D. Bish, T. Bristow, C. Chen, S. Chipera, J. Crisp, D. Des Marais, R. T. Downs, J. Farmer, S. Feldman, M. Fonda, M. Gailhanou, H. W. Ma, D. W. Ming, R. V. Morris, P. Sarrazin, E. Stolper, A. Treiman and A. Yen, Space Sci. Rev., 2012, 170(1–4), 341–399 CrossRef .J. L. Campbell, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2012, 288, 102–110 CrossRef CAS .C. D. Richardson, N. W. Hinman, L. J. McHenry, J. M. Kotler, D. L. Knipe and J. R. Scott, Planet Space Sci., 2012, 65(1), 93–103 CrossRef CAS .M. Ostermann, A. Kuhn, A. Bjeoumikhov and R. Wedell, TM, Tech. Mess., 2011, 78(12), 559–568 CrossRef CAS .Z. Li, X. G. Tuo, M. Z. Liu, J. B. Yang and J. Ren, Nucl. Sci. Tech., 2012, 23(5), 289–294 CAS .M. Dehlinger, C. Dorczynski, C. Fauquet, F. Jandard, D. Tonneau, A. Bjeoumikhov, S. Bjeoumikhova, R. Gubzhokov, A. Erko, I. Zizak, D. Pailharey, S. Ferrero and B. Dahmani, Int. J. Nanotechnol., 2012, 9(3–7), 460–470 CrossRef CAS .A. Erko, A. Firsov and F. Senf, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2012, 67, 57–63 CrossRef CAS .T. Ohmori, M. Hatayama, T. Ohchi, H. Ito, H. Takenaka and K. Tsuji, Powder Diffr., 2012, 27(2), 71–74 CrossRef CAS .P. Wrobel, M. Czyzycki, L. Furman, K. Kolasinski, M. Lankosz, A. Mrenca, L. Samek and D. Wegrzynek, Talanta, 2012, 93, 186–192 CrossRef CAS .Y. L. Shabel'nikova and M. V. Chukalina, Tech. Phys. Lett., 2012, 38(5), 452–455 CrossRef CAS .S. Smolek, B. Pemmer, M. Folser, C. Streli and P. Wobrauschek, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2012, 83(8), 6 CrossRef .B. Scruggs, Spectroscopy, 2012, 27(12), 86–87 Search PubMed .K. M. Dabrowski and P. Korecki, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2012, 285, 94–101 CrossRef CAS .J. Kawai, H. Ishii and H. Ida, X-Ray Spectrom., 2012, 41(4), 216–218 CrossRef CAS .M. Klopfer, T. Wolowiec, V. Satchouk, Y. Alivov and S. Molloi, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2012, 689, 47–51 CrossRef CAS .S. Cornaby, Spectroscopy, 2012, 9 Search PubMed .F. P. Romano, L. Pappalardo, G. Calvi, E. Costa, C. Marchetta, G. Pappalardo, F. Rizzo and S. Russo, Microchem. J., 2012, 101, 95–98 CrossRef CAS .C. Zhang, T. Shao, Z. Niu, D. D. Zhang, J. Wang and P. Yan, Acta Phys. Sin., 2012, 61(3), 9 Search PubMed .V. O. Ponomarenko and G. N. Tolmachev, Tech. Phys. Lett., 2012, 38(8), 747–749 CrossRef CAS .U. Hampel, Y. Bartling, D. Hoppe, N. Kuksanov, S. Fadeev and R. Salimov, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2012, 83(9), 7 CrossRef .A. A. Espinosa, J. Reyes-Herrera, J. Miranda, F. Mercado, M. A. Veytia, M. Cuautle and J. I. Cruz, Instrum. Sci. Technol., 2012, 40(6), 603–617 CrossRef CAS .A. Guilherme, G. Buzanich and M. L. Carvalho, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2012, 77, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .J. Rothe, S. Butorin, K. Dardenne, M. A. Denecke, B. Kienzler, M. Loble, V. Metz, A. Seibert, M. Steppert, T. Vitova, C. Walther and H. Geckeis, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2012, 83(4), 13 CrossRef .S. Tancharakorn, W. Tanthanuch, N. Kamonsutthipaijit, N. Wongprachanukul, M. Sophon, S. Chaichuay, C. Uthaisar and R. Yimnirun, J. Synchrotron Radiat., 2012, 19, 536–540 CrossRef .E. Kosior, S. Bohic, H. Suhonen, R. Ortega, G. Deves, A. Carmona, F. Marchi, J. F. Guillet and P. Cloetens, J. Struct. Biol., 2012, 177(2), 239–247 CrossRef CAS .Q. X. Yuan, K. Zhang, Y. L. Hong, W. X. Huang, K. Gao, Z. L. Wang, P. P. Zhu, J. Gelb, A. Tkachuk, B. Hornberger, M. Feser, W. B. Yun and Z. Y. Wu, J. Synchrotron Radiat., 2012, 19, 1021–1028 CrossRef CAS .V. Bucci, D. Nunez-Milland, B. S. Twining and F. L. Hellweger, Aquat. Ecol., 2012, 46(1), 101–118 CrossRef .S. Bohic, M. Cotte, M. Salome, B. Fayard, M. Kuehbacher, P. Cloetens, G. Martinez-Criado, R. Tucoulou and J. Susini, J. Struct. Biol., 2012, 177(2), 248–258 CrossRef CAS .R. P. Winarski, M. V. Holt, V. Rose, P. Fuesz, D. Carbaugh, C. Benson, D. M. Shu, D. Kline, G. B. Stephenson, I. McNulty and J. Maser, J. Synchrotron Radiat., 2012, 19, 1056–1060 CrossRef CAS .S. Bernardis, B. K. Newman, M. Di Sabatino, S. C. Fakra, M. I. Bertoni, D. P. Fenning, R. B. Larsen and T. Buonassisi, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2012, 20(2), 217–225 CAS .J. Villanova, J. Segura-Ruiz, T. Lafford and G. Martinez-Criado, J. Synchrotron Radiat., 2012, 19, 521–524 CrossRef CAS .G. Buzanich, M. Radtke, U. Reinholz, H. Riesemeier, A. F. Thunemann and C. Streli, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2012, 27(11), 1875–1881 RSC .G. Buzanich, M. Radtke, U. Reinholz, H. Riesemeier and C. Streli, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2012, 27(10), 1803–1808 RSC .D. Macdonald, S. P. Phang, F. E. Rougieux, S. Y. Lim, D. Paterson, D. L. Howard, M. D. de Jonge and C. G. Ryan, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2012, 27(12), 5 CrossRef .Y. Kayser, D. Banas, W. Cao, J. C. Dousse, J. Hoszowska, P. Jagodzinski, M. Kavcic, A. Kubala-Kukus, S. Nowak, M. Pajek and J. Szlachetko, X-Ray Spectrom., 2012, 41(2), 98–104 CrossRef CAS .P. Honicke, Y. Kayser, B. Beckhoff, M. Muller, J. C. Dousse, J. Hoszowska and S. H. Nowak, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2012, 27(9), 1432–1438 RSC .S. Petitgirard, M. Borchert, D. Andrault, K. Appel, M. Mezouar and H. P. Liermann, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2012, 83(1), 5 CrossRef .H. A. O. Wang, D. Grolimund, L. R. Van Loon, K. Barmettler, C. N. Borca, B. Aeschlimann and D. Gunther, Chimia, 2012, 66(4), 223–228 CrossRef CAS .M. P. Jensen, B. P. Aryal, D. Gorman-Lewis, T. Paunesku, B. Lai, S. Vogt and G. E. Woloschak, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2012, 722, 21–28 CrossRef CAS .Z. Y. Qin, B. Lai, J. Landero and J. A. Caruso, J. Synchrotron Radiat., 2012, 19, 1043–1049 CrossRef CAS .M. de Pauli, C. A. Perez, M. C. Prado, D. H. C. Araujo, B. R. A. Neves and A. Malachias, Synth. Met., 2012, 161(23–24), 2521–2525 CrossRef .C. J. Ma, K. C. Hwang and K. H. Kim, Int. J. Environ. Anal. Chem., 2012, 92(6), 755–765 CrossRef CAS .W. S. K. Bong, I. Nakai, S. Furuya, H. Suzuki, Y. Abe, K. Osaka, T. Matsumoto, M. Itou, N. Imai and T. Ninomiya, Forensic Sci. Int., 2012, 220(1–3), 33–49 CrossRef CAS .E. P. Khramova, I. G. Boyarskikh, O. V. Chankina and K. P. Kutsenogii, J. Surf. Invest.: X-Ray, Synchrotron Neutron Tech., 2012, 6(3), 454–457 CrossRef CAS .E. V. Lazareva, S. M. Zhmodik, I. V. Petrova, Y. P. Kolmogorov, M. A. Fedorin, A. V. Bryanskaya and O. P. Taran, J. Surf. Invest.: X-Ray, Synchrotron Neutron Tech., 2012, 6(3), 446–453 CrossRef CAS .F. J. Antosz, Y. Q. Xiang, A. R. Diaz and A. J. Jensen, J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal., 2012, 62, 17–22 CrossRef CAS .B. J. Shaw, D. J. Semin, M. E. Rider and M. R. Beebe, J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal., 2012, 63, 151–159 CrossRef CAS .I. De La Calle, M. Costas, N. Cabaleiro, I. Lavilla and C. Bendicho, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2012, 67, 43–49 CrossRef CAS .M. Schmeling, D. S. Burnett, A. J. G. Jurewicz and I. V. Veryovkin, Powder Diffr., 2012, 27(2), 75–78 CrossRef CAS .S. Dhara, N. L. Misra, U. K. Thakur, D. Shah, R. M. Sawant, K. L. Ramakumar and S. K. Aggarwal, X-Ray Spectrom., 2012, 41(5), 316–320 CrossRef CAS .K. Wojciechowski, T. Gutberlet and O. Konovalov, Colloids Surf., A, 2012, 413, 184–190 CrossRef CAS .M. Holtkamp, C. A. Wehe, F. Blaske, C. Holtschulte, M. Sperling and U. Karst, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2012, 27(10), 1799–1802 RSC .S. Imashuku, D. P. Tee and J. Kawai, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2012, 73, 75–78 CrossRef CAS .C. Horntrich, P. Kregsamer, J. Prost, F. Stadlbauer, P. Wobrauschek and C. Streli, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2012, 77, 31–34 CrossRef CAS .C. M. Sparks, U. E. A. Fittschen and G. J. Havrilla, Microelectron. Eng., 2013, 102, 98–102 CrossRef CAS .H. S. Radhakrishnan, C. Ahn, J. Van Hoeymissen, F. Dross, N. Cowern, K. Van Nieuwenhuysen, I. Gordon, R. Mertens and J. Poortmans, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2012, 209(10), 1866–1871 CrossRef CAS .W. Abuillan, A. Vorobiev, A. Hartel, N. G. Jones, M. Engstler and M. Tanaka, J. Chem. Phys., 2012, 137(20), 8 CrossRef .W. B. Li, J. T. Zhu, X. Y. Ma, H. C. Li, H. C. Wang, K. J. S. Sawhney and Z. S. Wang, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2012, 83(5), 5 Search PubMed .R. Redus and A. Huber, X-Ray Spectrom., 2012, 41(6), 401–409 CrossRef CAS .M. Shanmugam, S. Vadawale, Y. B. Acharya, V. Mishra, P. N. Patel and S. K. Goyal, Radiat. Meas., 2012, 47(5), 375–382 CrossRef CAS .K. Kaneko and T. Kohmura, J. Instrum., 2012, 7, 7 CrossRef .P. Majewski, L. Andricek, A. Bahr, G. De Vita, B. Gunther, K. Hermenau, M. Hilchenbach, T. Lauf, P. Lechner, G. Lutz, D. Miessner, M. Porro, J. Reiffers, R. Richter, G. Schaller, M. Schnecke, F. Schopper, H. Soltau, A. Stefanescu, R. Strecker, L. Struder and J. Treis, IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., 2012, 59(5), 2479–2486 CrossRef .J. P. D. Gow, A. D. Holland, P. J. Pool and D. R. Smith, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2012, 680, 86–89 CrossRef CAS .R. Redus, A. Huber, T. Pantazis, J. Pantazis and B. Cross, X-Ray Spectrom., 2012, 41(6), 393–400 CrossRef CAS .A. Y. Portnoy, G. V. Pavlinsky, M. S. Gorbunov and Y. I. Sidorova, X-Ray Spectrom., 2012, 41(5), 298–303 CrossRef CAS .A. Y. Portnoi, G. V. Pavlinskii, M. S. Gorbunov and Y. I. Sidorova, J. Anal. Chem., 2012, 67(3), 235–242 CrossRef CAS .C. Karanfil, G. Bunker, M. Newville, C. U. Segre and D. Chapman, J. Synchrotron Radiat., 2012, 19, 375–380 CrossRef CAS .A. Brambilla, P. Ouvrier-Buffet, J. Rinkel, G. Gonon, C. Boudou and L. Verger, IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., 2012, 59(4), 1552–1558 CrossRef CAS .M. C. Veale, S. J. Bell, L. L. Jones, P. Seller, M. D. Wilson, R. C. Cernik, J. Kalliopuska, H. Pohjonen, H. Andersson, S. Nenonen and V. Kachkanov, IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., 2012, 59(4), 1536–1543 CrossRef CAS .J. Uher, G. Harvey and J. Jakubek, IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., 2012, 59(1), 54–61 CrossRef CAS .M. Ruat and C. Ponchut, IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., 2012, 59(5), 2392–2401 CrossRef CAS .E. Frojdh, C. Frojdh, E. N. Gimenez, D. Maneuski, J. Marchal, B. Norlin, V. O'Shea, G. Stewart, H. Wilhelm, R. M. Zain and G. Thungstrom, J. Instrum., 2012, 7, 8 CrossRef .P. Norlin, C. Xu, D. Perttu, M. Lundqvist, M. Aslund and M. Bakowski, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2011, 648, S68–S71 CrossRef CAS .K. Hattori, J. D. Parker, C. Ida, K. Ito, H. Kubo, K. Miuchi, T. Tanimori and M. Takata, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2012, 674, 1–7 CrossRef CAS .A. Raulo, M. Sowinska, G. Hennard, L. Campajola, D. Marano, G. Paternoster and E. Perillo, IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., 2012, 59(4), 1491–1496 CrossRef CAS .V. Carcelen, K. H. Kim, G. S. Camarda, A. E. Bolotnikov, A. Hossain, G. Yang, J. Crocco, H. Bensalah, F. Dierre, E. Dieguez and R. B. James, J. Cryst. Growth, 2012, 338(1), 1–5 CrossRef CAS .S. J. Smith, J. S. Adams, C. N. Bailey, S. R. Bandler, J. A. Chervenak, M. E. Eckart, F. M. Finkbeiner, R. L. Kelley, C. A. Kilbourne, F. S. Porter and J. E. Sadleir, J. Low Temp. Phys., 2012, 167(3–4), 168–175 CrossRef CAS .L. Gottardi, J. Adams, C. Bailey, S. Bandler, M. Bruijn, J. Chervenak, M. Eckart, F. Finkbeiner, R. den Hartog, H. Hoevers, R. Kelley, C. Kilbourne, P. de Korte, J. van der Kuur, M. Lindeman, F. Porter, J. Sadlier and S. Smith, J. Low Temp. Phys., 2012, 167(3–4), 214–219 CrossRef CAS .G. Roach, J. Tickner and Y. Van Haarlem, X-Ray Spectrom., 2012, 41(5), 279–283 CrossRef CAS .C. Aksoy, E. Tirasoglu, E. Cengiz, G. Apaydin, M. Saydam, V. Aylikci and N. K. Aylikci, J. Electron Spectrosc. Relat. Phenom., 2012, 184(11–12), 556–560 CrossRef CAS .E. V. Bonzi, N. M. Badiger, G. B. Grad, R. A. Barrea and R. G. Figueroa, Appl. Radiat. Isot., 2012, 70(4), 632–636 CrossRef CAS .T. L. Hopman, C. M. Heirwegh, J. L. Campbell, M. Krumrey and F. Scholze, X-Ray Spectrom., 2012, 41(3), 164–171 CrossRef CAS .G. Apaydin and E. Tirasoglu, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 2012, 81(10), 1593–1594 CrossRef CAS .A. Kahoul, V. Aylikci, N. K. Aylikci, E. Cengiz and G. Apaydin, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 2012, 81(7), 713–727 CrossRef CAS .Sharanabasappa, A. Chitralekha, B. R. Kerur and S. Anilkumar, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2012, 291(3), 895–900 CrossRef CAS .N. Damla, H. Baltas, A. Celik, E. Kiris and U. Cevik, Radiat. Prot. Dosim., 2012, 150(4), 541–549 CrossRef CAS .N. Yadav, P. Bhatt, R. Singh, X. Llovet and R. Shanker, J. Electron Spectrosc. Relat. Phenom., 2012, 185(1–2), 23–26 CrossRef CAS .D. Demir and Y. Sahin, J. X-Ray Sci. Technol., 2012, 20(1), 79–89 CAS .M. O. Fregeau, D. Jacquet, M. Morjean, E. Bonnet, A. Chbihi, J. D. Frankland, M. F. Rivet, L. Tassan-Got, F. Dechery, A. Drouart, L. Nalpas, X. Ledoux, M. Parlog, C. Ciortea, D. Dumitriu, D. Fluerasu, M. Gugiu, F. Gramegna, V. L. Kravchuk, T. Marchi, D. Fabris, A. Corsi and S. Barlini, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 108(12), 5 CrossRef .M. A. Soldatov, K. M. Lange, M. D. Gotz, N. Engel, R. Golnak, A. Kothe and E. F. Aziz, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2012, 546, 164–167 CrossRef CAS .R. Seidel, S. Ghadimi, K. M. Lange, S. Bonhommeau, M. A. Soldatov, R. Golnak, A. Kothe, R. Konnecke, A. Soldatov, S. Thurmer, B. Winter and E. F. Aziz, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134(3), 1600–1605 CrossRef CAS .K. Hayashi, N. Happo, S. Hosokawa, W. Hu and T. Matsushita, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2012, 24(9), 15 CrossRef .B. J. Gonzales and D. S. Lalush, Phys. Med. Biol., 2012, 57(5), 1309–1323 CrossRef .Q. X. Zhang, L. Q. Ge, Y. Gu, Y. C. Lin, G. Q. Zeng and J. Yang, X-Ray Spectrom., 2012, 41(2), 75–79 CrossRef CAS .V. Rackwitz, U. Panne and V. D. Hodoroaba, X-Ray Spectrom., 2012, 41(4), 264–272 CrossRef CAS .G. V. Pavlinsky, M. S. Gorbunov and L. I. Vladimirova, X-Ray Spectrom., 2012, 41(4), 247–252 CrossRef CAS .G. V. Pavlinskii, M. S. Gorbunov and L. I. Vladimirova, J. Anal. Chem., 2012, 67(3), 226–234 CrossRef CAS .V. Thomsen, Spectroscopy, 2012, 27(3), 28 Search PubMed .A. N. Kadachi and M. A. Al-Eshaikh, X-Ray Spectrom., 2012, 41(5), 350–354 CrossRef CAS .B. M. Patterson, K. A. D. Obrey, C. E. Hamilton and G. J. Havrilla, X-Ray Spectrom., 2012, 41(4), 253–258 CrossRef CAS .I. Mantouvalou, W. Malzer and B. Kanngiesser, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2012, 77, 9–18 CrossRef CAS .T. Schoonjans, G. Silversmit, B. Vekemans, S. Schmitz, M. Burghammer, C. Riekel, F. E. Brenker and L. Vincze, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2012, 67, 32–42 CrossRef CAS .T. Trojek, Appl. Radiat. Isot., 2012, 70(7), 1206–1209 CrossRef CAS .E. G. Hatam, P. Pelicon, M. Lamehi-Rachti, P. Vavpetic, O. Kakuee, N. Grlj, M. Cekada and V. Fathollahi, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2012, 27(5), 834–840 RSC .T. Schoonjans, L. Vincze, V. A. Sole, M. S. del Rio, P. Brondeel, G. Silversmit, K. Appel and C. Ferrero, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2012, 70, 10–23 CrossRef CAS .F. S. Li and R. P. Gardner, Appl. Radiat. Isot., 2012, 70(7), 1243–1249 CrossRef CAS .M. Czyzycki, P. Wrobel, M. Szczerbowska-Boruchowska, B. Ostachowicz, D. Wegrzynek and M. Lankosz, X-Ray Spectrom., 2012, 41(4), 273–278 CrossRef CAS .M. Ohata, T. Kidokoro and A. Hioki, Anal. Sci., 2012, 28(11), 1105–1108 CrossRef CAS .T. E. Walker and D. R. Smith, J. Instrum., 2012, 7, 10 CrossRef .H. Indresand and A. M. Dillner, Atmos. Environ., 2012, 61, 140–147 CrossRef CAS .F. Li, L. Q. Ge, Q. X. Zhang, Y. Gu, Z. X. Wan and W. Y. Li, Spectrosc. Spectral Anal., 2012, 32(5), 1410–1412 CAS .M. A. Rodriguez, P. G. Kotula, J. J. M. Griego, J. E. Heath, S. J. Bauer and D. E. Wesolowski, Powder Diffr., 2012, 27(2), 108–113 CrossRef CAS .K. H. Angeyo, S. Gari, J. M. Mangala and A. O. Mustapha, X-Ray Spectrom., 2012, 41(5), 321–327 CrossRef CAS .K. H. Angeyo, S. Gari, A. O. Mustapha and J. M. Mangala, Appl. Radiat. Isot., 2012, 70(11), 2596–2601 CrossRef CAS .W. Windig, J. M. Shaver, M. R. Keenan and B. M. Wise, Chemom. Intell. Lab. Syst., 2012, 117, 159–168 CrossRef CAS .M. Wang, J. B. Zhou, F. Fang, Z. M. Shi, W. Zhou, Y. Liu, J. Y. Cao and X. Zhu, Spectrosc. Spectral Anal., 2013, 33(1), 233–236 CAS .H. Rowe, N. Hughes and K. Robinson, Chem. Geol., 2012, 324, 122–131 CrossRef .D. C. Weindorf, Y. D. Zhu, B. Haggard, J. Lofton, S. Chakraborty, N. Bakr, W. T. Zhang, W. C. Weindorf and M. Legoria, Soil Sci. Soc. Am. J., 2012, 76(2), 522–531 CrossRef CAS .P. Han, J. H. Wang, A. X. Lu, Z. H. Ma and L. G. Pan, Spectrosc. Spectral Anal., 2012, 32(3), 826–829 CAS .K. Nakayama and T. Nakamura, X-Ray Spectrom., 2012, 41(4), 225–234 CrossRef CAS .A. K. Krishna, K. R. Mohan and M. Satyanarayanan, At. Spectrosc., 2012, 33(3), 100–108 CAS .Y. Z. Peng, Y. M. Huang, D. X. Yuan, Y. Li and Z. B. Gong, Chin. J. Anal. Chem., 2012, 40(6), 877–882 CrossRef .M. G. Sliwinski, K. J. Spaleta, F. J. Meyer, E. M. Hutton, R. J. Newberry, T. P. Trainor, K. P. Severin and M. T. Whalen, Chem. Geol., 2012, 298, 97–115 CrossRef .D. Wilhelms-Dick, T. Westerhold, U. Rohl, F. Wilhelms, C. Vogt, T. J. J. Hanebuth, H. Rommermann, M. Kriews and S. Kasten, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2012, 27(9), 1574–1584 RSC .M. E. Kylander, E. M. Lind, S. Wastegard and L. Lowemark, Holocene, 2012, 22(3), 371–375 CrossRef .K. A. Casey, A. Kaab and D. I. Benn, Cryosphere, 2012, 6(1), 85–100 CrossRef .K. Casey and A. Kaab, Remote Sens., 2012, 4(9), 2554–2575 CrossRef .E. A. Tanis, A. Simon, O. Tschauner, P. Chow, Y. M. Xiao, G. Y. Shen, J. M. Hanchar and M. Frank, Am. Mineral., 2012, 97(10), 1708–1713 CrossRef CAS .S. J. Barnes, B. M. Godel, M. Locmelis, M. L. Fiorentini and C. G. Ryan, Aust. J. Earth Sci., 2011, 58(7), 691–709 CrossRef CAS .N. Katsuta, I. Shimizu, H. Helmstaedt, M. Takano, S. Kawakami and M. Kumazawa, J. Metamorph. Geol., 2012, 30(5), 457–472 CrossRef CAS .N. E. Matthews, C. Huber, D. M. Pyle and V. C. Smith, J. Petrol., 2012, 53(7), 1385–1416 CrossRef CAS .D. Fliegel, E. Knowles, R. Wirth, A. Templeton, H. Staudigel, K. Muehlenbachs and H. Furnes, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2012, 96, 80–93 CrossRef CAS .B. S. Twining, S. B. Baines, S. Vogt and D. M. Nelson, Global Biogeochem. Cycles, 2012, 26, 9 CrossRef .M. Ramakrishnan, B. Mahabaleswar and S. Viswanathan, J. Geol. Soc. India, 2012, 79(4), 361–366 CrossRef CAS .M. Josh, L. Esteban, C. Delle Piane, J. Sarout, D. N. Dewhurst and M. B. Clennell, J. Pet. Sci. Eng., 2012, 88–89, 107–124 CrossRef CAS .H. Khoury, E. Salameh and M. Khirfan, Neues Jahrb. Geol. Palaeontol., Abh., 2012, 265(3), 281–293 CrossRef .C. E. White and T. A. Goodwin, Atl. Geol., 2011, 47, 158–184 Search PubMed .R. Hennekam and G. de Lange, Limnol. Oceanogr.: Methods, 2012, 10, 991–1003 CrossRef .D. Hanslik, L. Lowemark and M. Jakobsson, Polar Res., 2013, 32, 10 Search PubMed .L. J. Hang, Y. B. Sun, Z. Q. Yao, Y. G. Liu and F. Wu, Catena, 2012, 92, 75–82 CrossRef .A. F. Jones, M. G. Macklin and P. A. Brewer, Geomorphology, 2012, 179, 89–105 CrossRef .Z. Q. Yao, Y. G. Liu, X. F. Shi and B. C. Suk, J. Quaternary Sci., 2012, 27(9), 932–940 CrossRef .G. Deves, A. S. Perroux, T. Bacquart, C. Plaisir, J. Rose, S. Jaillet, B. Ghaleb, R. Ortega and R. Maire, Chem. Geol., 2012, 294, 190–202 CrossRef .S. Frisia, A. Borsato, R. N. Drysdale, B. Paul, A. Greig and M. Cotte, Clim Past, 2012, 8(6), 2039–2051 CrossRef .A. J. Frierdich and J. G. Catalano, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2012, 91, 240–253 CrossRef CAS .C. M. Munteanu, A. Giurginca, M. Giurginca, C. G. Panaiotu and G. Niculescu, Carpathian Journal of Earth and Environmental Sciences, 2012, 7(1), 193–204 Search PubMed .H. Masuda, K. Shinoda, T. Okudaira, Y. Takahashi and N. Noguchi, Geochem. J., 2012, 46(5), 381–391 CAS .H. Viswanathan, Z. X. Dai, C. Lopano, E. Keating, J. A. Hakala, K. G. Scheckel, L. G. Zheng, G. D. Guthrie and R. Pawar, Int. J. Greenhouse Gas Control, 2012, 10, 199–214 CrossRef CAS .A. D. Regmi, K. Yoshida, M. R. Dhital and K. Devkota, Landslides, 2013, 10(1), 1–13 CrossRef .M. D. Taylor, N. D. Kim, R. M. Briggs, A. Taylor and D. F. Guinto, Appl. Clay Sci., 2012, 64, 18–24 CrossRef CAS .A. Schepers and H. Milsch, Contrib. Mineral. Petrol., 2013, 165(1), 83–101 CAS .N. Rajakaruna, K. Knudsen, A. M. Fryday, R. E. O'Dell, N. Pope, F. C. Olday and S. Woolhouse, Lichenologist, 2012, 44(5), 695–714 CrossRef .D. C. Weindorf, Y. D. Zhu, P. McDaniel, M. Valerio, L. Lynn, G. Michaelson, M. Clark and C. L. Ping, Geoderma, 2012, 189, 268–277 CrossRef .T. Tarvainen, S. Albanese, M. Birke, M. Ponavic, C. Reimann and G. P. Team, Appl. Geochem., 2013, 28, 2–10 CrossRef CAS .A. J. Scheib, D. M. A. Flight, M. Birke, T. Tarvainen, J. Locutura and G. P. Team, Geochem.: Explor., Environ., Anal., 2012, 12(4), 293–302 CrossRef CAS .M. Anda, Geoderma, 2012, 189, 388–396 CrossRef .J. Matschullat, S. Hofle, J. da Silva, J. Mello, G. Melo, A. Plessow and C. Reimann, Geochem.: Explor., Environ., Anal., 2012, 12(3), 197–209 CrossRef CAS .X. P. Li and L. N. Feng, Environ. Earth Sci., 2012, 67(7), 2129–2140 CrossRef CAS .D. T. Jayawardana, H. Pitawala and H. Ishiga, J. Geochem. Explor., 2012, 114, 118–125 CrossRef CAS .J. A. A. Ortiz-Villajos, F. J. G. Navarro, C. P. de los Reyes, J. A. C. Gallego, S. B. Martin-Consuegra, R. J. Ballesta and R. G. Moreno, Vitis, 2012, 51(3), 111–118 CAS .H. von Eynatten, R. Tolosana-Delgado and V. Karius, Sediment. Geol., 2012, 280, 80–92 CrossRef CAS .J. Ijmker, G. Stauch, K. Hartmann, B. Diekmann, E. Dietze, S. Opitz, B. Wunnemann and F. Lehmkuhl, J. Asian Earth Sci., 2012, 44, 176–188 CrossRef .A. Kleeberg, A. Kohler and M. Hupfer, J. Soils Sediments, 2012, 12(10), 1593–1603 CrossRef CAS .M. A. Rahman and H. Ishiga, Environ. Monit. Assess., 2012, 184(9), 5755–5771 CrossRef CAS .Y. M. Han, J. J. Cao, F. Wu, B. C. Zhang, C. L. Zhan, C. Wei and Z. Z. Zhao, J. Environ. Monit., 2012, 14(10), 2762–2771 RSC .H. Hellar-Kihampa, S. Potgieter-Vermaak, K. Van Meel, G. G. Rotondo, M. Kishimba and R. Van Grieken, Toxicol. Environ. Chem., 2012, 94(3), 525–544 CrossRef CAS .G. Kibria and M. S. Hossain, J. Geotech. Geoenviron. Eng., 2012, 138(12), 1520–1529 CrossRef CAS .H. B. Liu, T. H. Chen, Q. Q. Xie, X. H. Zou, C. S. Qing and R. L. Frost, Thermochim. Acta, 2012, 545, 20–25 CrossRef CAS .H. B. Liu, T. H. Chen, R. L. Frost, D. Y. Chang, C. S. Qing and Q. Q. Xie, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2012, 385, 81–86 CrossRef CAS .M. D. Picanco, R. S. Angelica and M. S. Barata, REM, Rev. Esc. Minas, 2012, 65(2), 161–167 CrossRef .R. A. Eggleton and J. F. Gerald, Clays Clay Miner., 2011, 59(6), 608–616 CrossRef CAS .J. Aramendia, L. Gomez-Nubla, S. F. O. de Vallejuelo, K. Castro, X. Murelaga and J. M. Madariaga, Spectrosc. Lett., 2011, 44(7–8), 521–525 CrossRef CAS .A. Chinsamy, C. Tunoglu and D. B. Thomas, Bull. Soc. Geol. Fr., 2012, 183(2), 85–92 Search PubMed .P. Gorzelak, J. Stolarski, M. Mazur and A. Meibom, Geobiology, 2013, 11(1), 29–43 CrossRef CAS .D. Bortoluzzi, L. Rodrigues and A. M. Bernardin, Miner. Process. Extr. Metall. Rev., 2013, 34(4), 202–209 CrossRef CAS .M. Flues, I. M. Sato, M. A. Scapin, M. E. B. Cotrim and I. M. C. Camargo, Fuel, 2013, 103, 430–436 CrossRef CAS .B. Zhao, Environ. Earth Sci., 2012, 67(3), 743–757 CrossRef CAS .A. Bankar, M. Winey, D. Prakash, A. R. Kumar, S. Gosavi, B. Kapadnis and S. Zinjarde, Appl. Biochem. Biotechnol., 2012, 168(8), 2205–2217 CrossRef CAS .O. A. Fadipe, P. F. Carey, A. Akinlua and S. A. Adekola, S. Afr. J. Geol., 2011, 114(3–4), 433–448 CrossRef CAS .F. Huq, P. Blum, M. A. W. Marks, M. Nowak, S. B. Haderlein and P. Grathwohl, Environ. Earth Sci., 2012, 67(2), 385–394 CrossRef CAS .P. A. Mello, J. S. F. Pereira, M. F. Mesko, J. S. Barin and E. M. M. Flores, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2012, 746, 15–36 CrossRef CAS .K. K. Sarda, A. Bhandari, K. K. Pant and S. Jain, Fuel, 2012, 93(1), 86–91 CrossRef CAS .P. Nair, B. Singh, S. N. Upadhyay and Y. C. Sharma, J. Cleaner Prod., 2012, 29–30, 82–90 CrossRef CAS .G. Chu, S. J. Zhao and T. Z. Yang, J. Cent. South Univ. Technol., 2012, 19(2), 340–346 CrossRef CAS .O. Sitando and P. L. Crouse, Int. J. Miner. Process., 2012, 102, 45–50 CrossRef .K. H. Hestnes and B. E. Sorensen, Miner. Eng., 2012, 39, 239–247 CrossRef CAS .J. K. Gbadago, E. O. Darko and C. Schandorf, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2012, 291(3), 587–599 CrossRef CAS .C. B. Cheah and M. Ramli, Constr. Build. Mater., 2012, 30, 320–329 CrossRef .N. Phonphuak and S. Thiansem, Constr. Build. Mater., 2012, 29, 612–618 CrossRef .I. G. Goncalves, C. O. Petter and J. L. Machado, Clays Clay Miner., 2012, 60(5), 473–483 CrossRef CAS .X. J. Ma, X. G. Jiang, Y. Q. Jin, H. M. Liu, X. D. Li and J. H. Yan, Fresenius Environ. Bull., 2012, 21(3), 586–592 CAS .K. Wu, H. S. Shi, G. De Schutter, X. L. Guo and G. Ye, Cem. Concr. Compos., 2012, 34(3), 322–327 CrossRef CAS .L. Yan, Y. F. Wang, H. Z. Ma, Z. P. Han, Q. Zhang and Y. S. Chen, J. Hazard. Mater., 2012, 203, 221–228 CrossRef .M. Frias, R. V. de la Villa, M. I. S. de Rojas, C. Medina and A. J. Valdes, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2012, 95(1), 386–391 CrossRef CAS .Y. J. Zhang, L. C. Liu, Y. Xu, Y. C. Wang and D. L. Xu, J. Hazard. Mater., 2012, 209, 146–150 CrossRef .J. N. Zvimba, J. Mulopo, L. T. Bologo and M. Mathye, Water Sci. Technol., 2012, 65(9), 1577–1582 CrossRef CAS .T. A. Boecher, J. M. Tinjum and H. F. Xu, J. Residuals Sci. Technol., 2012, 9(4), 131–141 CAS .J. Obhodas, D. Sudac, L. Matjacic and V. Valkovic, IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., 2012, 59(4), 1453–1457 CrossRef CAS .H. N. Gu, N. Wang and S. R. Liu, Miner. Metall. Process., 2012, 29(3), 169–171 CAS .N. M. Mantha, M. Schindler and T. K. Kyser, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2012, 90, 221–241 CrossRef CAS .J. Kumpiene, J. P. Fitts and M. Mench, Environ. Pollut., 2012, 166, 82–88 CrossRef CAS .J. Essilfie-Dughan, M. J. Hendry, J. Warner and T. Kotzer, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2012, 96, 336–352 CrossRef CAS .J. J. Tse, M. Gallego-Gallegos, E. D. Franz, K. Liber and I. J. Pickering, Chemosphere, 2012, 89(3), 274–279 CrossRef CAS .P. Marescotti, C. Carbone, P. Comodi, F. Frondini and G. Lucchetti, Appl. Geochem., 2012, 27(3), 577–589 CrossRef CAS .S. M. Hayes, S. M. Webb, J. R. Bargar, P. A. O'Day, R. M. Maier and J. Chorover, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2012, 46(11), 5834–5841 CrossRef CAS .L. Q. Luo, B. B. Chu, Y. C. Li, T. Xu, X. F. Wang, J. Yuan, J. L. Sun, Y. Liu, Y. Bo, X. C. Zhan, S. X. Wang and L. J. Tang, X-Ray Spectrom., 2012, 41(3), 133–143 CrossRef CAS .K. Kodom, K. Preko and D. Boamah, Soil Sediment Contam., 2012, 21(8), 1006–1021 CrossRef CAS .R. Slavik, M. Julinova and M. Labudikova, Ecol. Chem. Eng. S, 2012, 19(2), 259–272 CAS .L. R. Baker, G. M. Pierzynski, G. M. Hettiarachchi, K. G. Scheckel and M. Newville, J. Environ. Qual., 2012, 41(6), 1865–1873 CrossRef CAS .S. Serrano, D. Vlassopoulos, B. Bessinger and P. A. O'Day, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2012, 46(12), 6767–6775 CrossRef CAS .A. M. Ashmawy, H. S. Ibrahim, S. M. A. Moniem and T. S. Saleh, Toxicol. Environ. Chem., 2012, 94(9), 1657–1669 CrossRef CAS .E. I. Diaz-Loya, E. N. Allouche, S. Eklund, A. R. Joshi and K. Kupwade-Patil, Waste Manag., 2012, 32(8), 1521–1527 CrossRef .Y. Y. Liu, J. He, L. Q. Chen, S. Yuan, W. Y. Wang and J. J. Wang, Res. J. Chem. Environ., 2012, 16, 46–55 Search PubMed .A. De Boom and M. Degrez, Waste Manag., 2012, 32(6), 1163–1170 CrossRef CAS .E. Margui, M. Hidalgo, I. Queralt, K. Van Meel and C. Fontas, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2012, 67, 17–23 CrossRef CAS .L. S. G. Teixeira, E. S. Santos and L. S. Nunes, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2012, 722, 29–33 CrossRef CAS .Y. B. Rao, B. V. V. Ramana, P. G. Raghavan and R. B. Yadav, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2012, 294(3), 371–376 CrossRef .N. V. Schwab, J. A. Da-Col, J. Terra and M. Bueno, J. Braz. Chem. Soc., 2012, 23(3), 546–554 CrossRef CAS .S. S. Mar and M. Okazaki, Microchem. J., 2012, 104, 17–21 CrossRef CAS .E. T. Ozer, M. A. Cimenoglu and S. Gucer, Instrum. Sci. Technol., 2011, 39(4), 357–367 CrossRef CAS .K. E. Lorber, R. Sarc and A. Aldrian, Waste Manage. Res., 2012, 30(4), 370–380 CrossRef CAS .R. Kretzschmar, T. Mansfeldt, P. N. Mandaliev, K. Barmettler, M. A. Marcus and A. Voegelin, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2012, 46(22), 12381–12390 CrossRef CAS .R. Robert, D. L. Zeng, A. Lanzirotti, P. Adamson, S. J. Clarke and C. P. Grey, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24(14), 2684–2691 CrossRef CAS .K. A. Snyder, D. P. Bentz and J. M. Davis, J. Mater. Civ. Eng., 2012, 24(8), 1017–1024 CrossRef CAS .L. El Beze, J. Rose, V. Mouillet, F. Farcas, A. Masion, P. Chaurand and J. Y. Bottero, Fuel, 2012, 102, 423–430 CrossRef CAS .E. Donner, T. Punshon, M. L. Guerinot and E. Lombi, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2012, 402(10), 3287–3298 CrossRef CAS .B. Wu and J. S. Becker, Metallomics, 2012, 4(5), 403–416 RSC .D. H. McNear, S. E. Afton and J. A. Caruso, Metallomics, 2012, 4(3), 267–276 RSC .A. M. Carey, K. G. Scheckel, E. Lombi, M. Newville, Y. Choi, G. J. Norton, A. H. Price and A. A. Meharg, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2012, 46(10), 5557–5564 CrossRef CAS .H. Castillo-Michel, J. A. Hernandez-Viezcas, A. Servin, J. R. Peralta-Videa and J. L. Gardea-Torresdey, Appl. Spectrosc., 2012, 66(6), 719–727 CrossRef CAS .K. Wovkulich, B. J. Mailloux, B. C. Bostick, H. L. Dong, M. E. Bishop and S. N. Chillrud, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2012, 91, 254–270 CrossRef CAS .J. Nuester, S. Vogt and B. S. Twining, J. Phycol., 2012, 48(3), 626–634 CrossRef CAS .E. Schreck, Y. Foucault, G. Sarret, S. Sobanska, L. Cecillon, M. Castrec-Rouelle, G. Uzu and C. Dumat, Sci. Total Environ., 2012, 427, 253–262 CrossRef .L. Lyubenova, P. Pongrac, K. Vogel-Mikus, G. K. Mezek, P. Vavpetic, N. Grlj, P. Kump, M. Necemer, M. Regvar, P. Pelicon and P. Schroder, Metallomics, 2012, 4(4), 333–341 RSC .T. I. McLaren, C. N. Guppy and M. K. Tighe, Soil Sci. Soc. Am. J., 2012, 76(4), 1446–1453 CrossRef CAS .S. Reidinger, M. H. Ramsey and S. E. Hartley, New Phytol., 2012, 195(3), 699–706 CrossRef CAS .J. S. An, K. H. Kim, H. O. Yoon and J. J. Seo, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2012, 69, 38–43 CrossRef CAS .L. Jassogne, G. Hettiarachchi, A. McNeill and D. Chittleborough, Soil Res., 2012, 50(5), 424–435 CrossRef CAS .G. Landrot, R. Tappero, S. M. Webb and D. L. Sparks, Chemosphere, 2012, 88(10), 1196–1201 CrossRef CAS .S. L. Brown, I. Clausen, M. A. Chappell, K. G. Scheckel, M. Newville and G. M. Hettiarachchi, J. Environ. Qual., 2012, 41(5), 1612–1622 CrossRef CAS .F. Cataldo, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2012, 293(1), 119–126 CrossRef CAS .K. Pytlakowska and R. Sitko, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2012, 27(3), 460–465 RSC .A. Padovan, N. Munksgaard, B. Alvarez, K. McGuinness, D. Parry and K. Gibb, Hydrobiologia, 2012, 687(1), 275–288 CrossRef CAS .S. Majumdar, J. R. Peralta-Videa, H. Castillo-Michel, J. Hong, C. M. Rico and J. L. Gardea-Torresdey, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2012, 755, 1–16 CrossRef CAS .M. C. Jimenez-Ramos, J. G. Lopez, M. Eriksson, J. Jernstrom and R. Garcia-Tenorio, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2012, 273, 118–121 CrossRef CAS .J. P. Thyssen, M. Strandesen, P. B. Poulsen, T. Menne and J. D. Johansen, Contact Dermatitis, 2012, 66(5), 279–285 CrossRef CAS .Z. Savoly, P. Nagy, K. Havancsak and G. Zaray, Microchem. J., 2012, 105, 83–87 CrossRef CAS .S. A. Einstein, C. H. Yu, G. Mainelis, L. C. Chen, C. P. Weisel and P. J. Lioy, J. Environ. Monit., 2012, 14(9), 2411–2420 RSC .M. Oakes, E. D. Ingall, B. Lai, M. M. Shafer, M. D. Hays, Z. G. Liu, A. G. Russell and R. J. Weber, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2012, 46(12), 6637–6644 CrossRef CAS .M. Oakes, R. J. Weber, B. Lai, A. Russell and E. D. Ingall, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 2012, 12(2), 745–756 CrossRef CAS .L. Borgese, M. Salmistraro, A. Gianoncelli, A. Zacco, R. Lucchini, N. Zimmerman, L. Pisani, G. Siviero, L. E. Depero and E. Bontempi, Talanta, 2012, 89, 99–104 CrossRef CAS .M. L. Young, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2012, 75(3), 15 CrossRef .U. Bergmann, P. L. Manning and R. A. Wogelius, in Annual Review of Analytical Chemistry, Vol 5, ed. R. G. Cooks and E. S. Yeung, Annual Reviews, Palo Alto,  2012, vol. 5, pp. 361–389 Search PubMed .A. V. Chadwick, A. Berko, E. J. Schofield, A. M. Jones, J. F. W. Mosselmans and A. D. Smith, Int. J. Architect. Herit., 2012, 6(2), 228–258 CrossRef .I. C. A. Sandu, M. H. de Sa and M. C. Pereira, Surf. Interface Anal., 2011, 43(8), 1134–1151 CrossRef CAS .D. M. Smilgies, J. A. Powers, D. H. Bilderback and R. E. Thorne, J. Synchrotron Radiat., 2012, 19, 547–550 CrossRef .M. Guerra, M. Manso, S. Longelin, S. Pessanha and M. L. Carvalho, J. Instrum., 2012, 7, 10 CrossRef .E. Frahm, Geoarchaeology: An International Journal, 2012, 27(2), 166–174 CrossRef .N. Goodale, D. G. Bailey, G. T. Jones, C. Prescott, E. Scholz, N. Stagliano and C. Lewis, J. Archaeol. Sci., 2012, 39(4), 875–883 CrossRef .W. G. Luo and T. Li, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2012, 43(2), 303–306 CrossRef CAS .X. P. Fan, G. Harbottle, Q. Gao, W. R. Zhou, Q. M. Gong, H. Wang, X. H. Yu and C. S. Wang, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2012, 27(5), 821–826 RSC .V. K. Gouda, G. I. Youssef and N. A. A. Ghany, Surf. Interface Anal., 2012, 44(10), 1338–1345 CrossRef CAS .G. Niculescu, M. Georgescua and I. Sarghie, X-Ray Spectrom., 2012, 41(3), 150–155 CrossRef CAS .G. E. Gigante, S. Ridolfi and D. Ferro, J. Cult. Herit., 2012, 13(3), 345–351 CrossRef .S. Leroy, S. X. Cohen, C. Verna, B. Gratuze, F. Tereygeol, P. Fluzin, L. Bertrand and P. Dillmann, J. Archaeol. Sci., 2012, 39(4), 1080–1093 CrossRef .M. Bani-Hani, R. Abd-Allah and L. El-Khouri, J. Cult. Herit., 2012, 13(3), 314–325 CrossRef .B. Constantinescu, D. Cristea-Stan, A. Vasilescu, R. Simon and D. Ceccato, Proc. Rom. Acad. Math. Phys. Tech. Sci. Inform. Sci., 2012, 13(1), 19–26 Search PubMed .P. Valerio, R. J. C. Silva, M. F. Araujo, A. M. M. Soares and L. Barros, Mater. Charact., 2012, 67, 74–82 CrossRef CAS .S. Liu, Q. H. Li, F. Gan, P. Zhang and J. W. Lankton, J. Archaeol. Sci., 2012, 39(7), 2128–2142 CrossRef .K. Tantrakarn, N. Kato, I. Nakai, Y. Shindo and B. Chaisuwan, Archaeometry, 2012, 54, 508–527 CrossRef CAS .L. De Ferri, D. Bersani, A. Lorenzi, P. P. Lottici, G. Vezzalini and G. Simon, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2012, 358(4), 814–819 CrossRef CAS .S. Ichikawa, K. Nakayama and T. Nakamura, X-Ray Spectrom., 2012, 41(5), 288–297 CrossRef CAS .D. Mitchell, P. Grave, M. Maccheroni and E. Gelman, J. Archaeol. Sci., 2012, 39(9), 2921–2933 CrossRef .D. Frankel and J. M. Webb, J. Archaeol. Sci., 2012, 29(5), 1380–1387 CrossRef .F. Forouzan, J. B. Glover, F. Williams and D. Deocampo, J. Archaeol. Sci., 2012, 39(12), 3534–3541 CrossRef .A. Issi, Ceram. Int., 2012, 38(3), 2375–2380 CrossRef CAS .M. L. Zhang, J. Zhou, Q. J. Li, J. M. Wu and K. Gan, Spectrosc. Spectral Anal., 2012, 32(5), 1413–1417 CAS .G. Montana, C. E. Heinze, A. M. Polito and L. Randazzo, Period. Mineral., 2012, 81(1), 107–130 Search PubMed .Y. Abe, R. Harimoto, T. Kikugawa, K. Yazawa, A. Nishisaka, N. Kawai, S. Yoshimura and I. Nakai, J. Archaeol. Sci., 2012, 39(6), 1793–1808 CrossRef .H. H. M. Mahmoud, Surf. Interface Anal., 2012, 44(9), 1271–1278 CrossRef .S. Y. Wei, Q. L. Ma and M. Schreiner, J. Archaeol. Sci., 2012, 29(5), 1628–1633 CrossRef .M. Gajie-Kvascev, M. M. Stojanovic, Z. Smit, V. Kantarelou, A. G. Karydas, D. Sljivar, D. Milovanovic and V. Andric, J. Archaeol. Sci., 2012, 39(4), 1025–1033 CrossRef .I. Domingo, P. Garcia-Borja and C. Roldan, Archaeometry, 2012, 54, 868–892 CrossRef CAS .M. O. Figueiredo, T. P. Silva and J. P. Veiga, J. Electron Spectrosc. Relat. Phenom., 2012, 185(3–4), 97–102 CrossRef CAS .F. Bardelli, G. Barone, V. Crupi, F. Longo, G. Maisano, D. Majolino, P. Mazzoleni and V. Venuti, J. Synchrotron Radiat., 2012, 19, 782–788 CrossRef CAS .M. K. Donais, S. Wojtas, A. Desmond, B. Duncan and D. B. George, Appl. Spectrosc., 2012, 66(9), 1005–1012 CrossRef CAS .R. L. Azevedo, V. K. Asfora, G. B. Ribeiro, J. V. C. Ferreira, H. J. Khoury, H. S. L. Sullasi, N. J. S. Rego and J. A. C. de Mello, Appl. Radiat. Isot., 2012, 70(10), 2460–2465 CrossRef CAS .E. M. Abrams, J. Parhamovich, J. A. Butcher and B. McCord, J. Archaeol. Sci., 2012, 29(5), 1648–1654 CrossRef .J. Dewanckele, T. De Kock, M. A. Boone, V. Cnudde, L. Brabant, M. N. Boone, G. Fronteau, L. Van Hoorebeke and P. Jacobs, Sci. Total Environ., 2012, 416, 436–448 CrossRef CAS .M. A. Courty, E. Carbonell, J. V. Poch and R. Banerjee, Quaternary
International, 2012, 247, 294–312 Search PubMed .R. Taraskevicius, M. Stancikaite, A. Bliujiene, R. Stakeniene, R. Zinkute and J. Kusiak, Geochem.: Explor., Environ., Anal., 2012, 12(4), 265–275 CrossRef CAS .L. G. Davis, S. J. Macfarlan and C. N. Henrickson, J. Archaeol. Sci., 2012, 39(3), 663–671 CrossRef .N. Forster and P. Grave, J. Archaeol. Sci., 2012, 39(3), 728–736 CrossRef .C. Vazquez, O. Palacios, M. P. Lue-Meru, G. Custo, M. Ortiz and M. Murillo, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2012, 292(1), 367–373 CrossRef CAS .A. I. Duff, J. M. Moss, T. C. Windes, J. Kantner and M. S. Shackley, J. Archaeol. Sci., 2012, 39(9), 2995–3007 CrossRef .R. E. Hughes, A. Hogberg and D. Olausson, Archaeometry, 2012, 54, 779–795 CrossRef CAS .P. Grave, V. Attenbrow, L. Sutherland, R. Pogson and N. Forster, J. Archaeol. Sci., 2012, 39(6), 1674–1686 CrossRef .M. Carciumaru, R. M. Ion, E. C. Nitu and R. Stefanescu, J. Archaeol. Sci., 2012, 39(7), 1942–1950 CrossRef .D. M. Goltz, Anal. Lett., 2012, 45(4), 314–329 CrossRef CAS .S. Pessanha, M. Manso and M. L. Carvalho, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2012, 71–72, 54–61 CrossRef CAS .K. Nesmerak and I. Nemcova, Anal. Lett., 2012, 45(4), 330–344 CrossRef CAS .M. Aceto, A. Agostino, G. Fenoglio, M. Gulmini, V. Bianco and E. Pellizzi, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2012, 91, 352–359 CrossRef CAS .M. Aceto, A. Agostino, G. Fenoglio, P. Baraldi, P. Zannini, C. Hofmann and E. Gamillscheg, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2012, 95, 235–245 CrossRef CAS .C. E. Rogge and A. Bezur, J. Chem. Educ., 2012, 89(3), 397–400 CrossRef CAS .D. L. Howard, M. D. de Jonge, D. Lau, D. Hay, M. Varcoe-Cocks, C. G. Ryan, R. Kirkham, G. Moorhead, D. Paterson and D. Thurrowgood, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84(7), 3278–3286 CrossRef CAS .S. Akyuz, T. Akyuz, G. Emre, A. Gulec and S. Basaran, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2012, 89, 74–81 CrossRef CAS .E. Aquilia, G. Barone, V. Crupi, F. Longo, D. Majolino, P. Mazzoleni and V. Venuti, J. Cult. Herit., 2012, 13(2), 229–233 CrossRef .M. Olivares, K. Castro, M. S. Corchon, D. Garate, X. Murelaga, A. Sarmiento and N. Etxebarria, J. Archaeol. Sci., 2013, 40(2), 1354–1360 CrossRef .A. Le Gac, R. Estrompa, J. C. Frade, S. Pessanha, T. I. Madeira, A. Cardoso, L. Piorro, L. Dias, J. Mirao, A. Candeias and M. L. Carvalho, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2012, 27(4), 626–643 RSC .F. Caruso, S. Saverwyns, M. Van Bos, D. F. C. Martino, A. E. Ceulemans, J. de Valck and E. Caponetti, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2012, 107(1), 197–202 CrossRef CAS .Y. Fors, F. Jalilehvand, E. D. Risberg, C. Bjordal, E. Phillips and M. Sandstrom, J. Archaeol. Sci., 2012, 39(7), 2521–2532 CrossRef .M. Necemer, P. Kump and M. Zvanut, X-Ray Spectrom., 2012, 41(2), 87–92 CrossRef CAS .I. Dumitriu, R. C. Fierascu, R. I. Bunghez, S. F. Pop, S. M. Doncea, M. L. Ion and R. M. Ion, Rev. Roum. Chim., 2011, 56(10–11), 931–940 CAS .C. R. Hamann, D. Hamann, C. Hamann, J. P. Thyssen and C. Liden, Contact Dermatitis, 2013, 68(1), 15–22 CrossRef CAS .S. Latzel, D. Neimke, R. Schumacher, M. Barth and L. Niewohner, Forensic Sci. Int., 2012, 223(1–3), 273–278 CrossRef CAS .M. F. Gazulla, S. Vicente, M. Orduna and J. Ventura, X-Ray Spectrom., 2012, 41(3), 176–185 CrossRef CAS .M. W. Bourassa and L. M. Miller, Metallomics, 2012, 4(8), 721–738 RSC .S. Vogt and M. Ralle, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2013, 405(6), 1809–1820 CrossRef CAS .V. V. Zvereva and V. A. Trunova, J. Anal. Chem., 2012, 67(7), 613–631 CrossRef CAS .C. T. Dillon, Aust. J. Chem., 2012, 65(3), 204–217 CrossRef CAS .G. Robison, T. Zakharova, S. Fu, W. Jiang, R. Fulper, R. Barrea, M. A. Marcus, W. Zheng and Y. Pushkar, PLoS One, 2012, 7(11), 9 Search PubMed .A. Daoust, E. L. Barbier and S. Bohic, NeuroImage, 2013, 64, 10–18 CrossRef CAS .G. Rentschler, L. Covolo, A. A. Haddad, R. G. Lucchini, S. Zoni and K. Broberg, Neurotoxicology, 2012, 33(4), 697–702 CrossRef CAS .M. Szczerbowska-Boruchowska, A. Krygowska-Wajs and D. Adamek, JJ. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2012, 24(24), 11 Search PubMed .M. Szczerbowska-Boruchowska, A. Krygowska-Wajs, A. Ziomber, P. Thor, P. Wrobel, M. Bukowczan and I. Zizak, Neurochem. Int., 2012, 61(2), 156–165 CrossRef CAS .M. Szczerbowska-Boruchowska, X-Ray Spectrom., 2012, 41(5), 328–337 CrossRef CAS .K. G. McIntosh, M. J. Cusack, A. Vershinin, Z. W. Chen, E. A. Zimmerman, E. S. Molho, D. Celmins and P. J. Parsons, J. Toxicol. Environ. Health, Part A, 2012, 75(21), 1253–1268 CrossRef CAS .H. Y. Gu, G. Robison, L. Hong, R. Barrea, X. Wei, M. R. Farlow, Y. N. Pushkar, Y. S. Du and W. Zheng, Toxicol. Lett., 2012, 213(2), 211–219 CrossRef CAS .H. J. Wang, M. Wang, B. Wang, M. Li, H. Q. Chen, X. H. Yu, Y. L. Zhao, W. Y. Feng and Z. F. Chai, Metallomics, 2012, 4(3), 289–296 RSC .H. J. Wang, M. Wang, B. Wang, M. Li, H. Q. Chen, X. H. Yu, K. Yang, Z. F. Chai, Y. L. Zhao and W. Y. Feng, Metallomics, 2012, 4(10), 1113–1118 RSC .J. Chwiej, J. Dulinska, K. Janeczko, K. Appel and Z. Setkowicz, JBIC, J. Biol. Inorg. Chem., 2012, 17(5), 731–739 CrossRef CAS .J. Chwiej, J. Kutorasinska, K. Janeczko, K. Gzielo-Jurek, L. Uram, K. Appel, R. Simon and Z. Setkowicz, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2012, 404(10), 3071–3080 CrossRef CAS .A. Khuder, M. A. Bakir, A. Solaiman, H. Issa, K. Habil and A. Mohammad, Nukleonika, 2012, 57(3), 389–399 CAS .C. G. L. Canellas, S. M. F. Carvalho, M. J. Anjos and R. T. Lopes, Appl. Radiat. Isot., 2012, 70(7), 1277–1280 CrossRef CAS .M. Estevam and C. R. Appoloni, Health Phys., 2013, 104(2), 132–138 CrossRef CAS .K. Ricketts, A. Castoldi, C. Guazzoni, C. Ozkan, C. Christodoulou, A. P. Gibson and G. J. Royle, Phys. Med. Biol., 2012, 57(17), 5543–5555 CrossRef CAS .J. Z. Zhang, N. S. Bryce, R. Siegele, E. A. Carter, D. Paterson, M. D. de Jonge, D. L. Howard, C. G. Ryan and T. W. Hambley, Integr. Biol., 2012, 4(9), 1072–1080 RSC .J. Z. Zhang, N. S. Bryce, A. Lanzirotti, C. K. J. Chen, D. Paterson, M. D. de Jonge, D. L. Howard and T. W. Hambley, Metallomics, 2012, 4(11), 1209–1217 RSC .Y. Kuang, G. Pratx, M. Bazalova, B. W. Meng, J. G. Qian and L. Xing, IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., 2013, 32(2), 262–267 CrossRef .T. Swanston, T. Varney, I. Coulthard, R. F. Feng, B. Bewer, R. Murphy, C. Hennig and D. Cooper, J. Archaeol. Sci., 2012, 39(7), 2409–2413 CrossRef .R. G. Figueroa, E. Lozano and M. A. Flores, Int. J. Morphol., 2011, 29(3), 1000–1006 CrossRef .J. P. Oliveira, W. Querido, R. J. Caldas, A. P. C. Campos, L. G. Abracado and M. Farina, Calcif. Tissue Int., 2012, 91(3), 186–195 CrossRef CAS .G. L. Yang, L. N. Song, Q. H. Jiang, X. X. Wang, S. F. Zhao and F. M. He, Int J Oral Maxillofac Implants, 2012, 27(6), 1332–1339 Search PubMed .G. R. Wohl, D. R. Chettle, A. Pejovic-Milic, C. Druchok, C. E. Webber, J. D. Adachi and K. A. Beattie, Bone, 2013, 52(1), 63–69 CrossRef CAS .H. Moise, J. D. Adachi, D. R. Chettle and A. Pejovic-Milic, Bone, 2012, 51(1), 93–97 CrossRef CAS .C. M. Heirwegh, D. R. Chettle and A. Pejovic-Milic, Med. Phys., 2012, 39(2), 832–841 CrossRef CAS .S. D. Blaschko, T. Chi, J. Miller, L. Flechner, S. Fakra, P. Kapahi, A. Kahn and M. L. Stoller, J. Urol., 2013, 189(2), 735–739 CrossRef CAS .S. D. Blaschko, J. Miller, T. Chi, L. Flechner, S. Fakra, A. Kahn, P. Kapahi and M. L. Stoller, J. Urol., 2013, 189(2), 726–734 CrossRef CAS .A. A. Rodrigues, N. A. Batista, V. P. Bauaresco, V. Baranauskas, H. J. Ceragioli, A. C. Peterlevitz, J. R. L. Mariolani, M. H. A. Santana and W. D. Belangero, Carbon, 2012, 50(6), 2091–2099 CrossRef CAS .A. Marchini, C. P. Deco, K. B. Lodi, L. Marchini, A. M. E. Santo and R. F. Rocha, Arch. Oral Biol., 2012, 57(10), 1385–1394 CrossRef CAS .D. J. Bellis, A. C. Todd and P. J. Parsons, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2012, 27(4), 595–603 RSC .J. L. Peters, L. D. Kubzansky, A. Ikeda, S. C. Fang, D. Sparrow, M. G. Weisskopf, R. O. Wright, P. Vokonas, H. Hu and J. Schwartz, Environ. Health Perspect., 2012, 120(3), 361–366 CrossRef CAS .A. M. Zhang, H. Hu, B. N. Sanchez, A. S. Ettinger, S. K. Park, D. Cantonwine, L. Schnaas, R. O. Wright, H. Lamadrid-Figueroa and M. Tellez-Rojo, Environ. Health Perspect., 2012, 120(3), 445–450 CrossRef CAS .K. D. Eum, S. A. Korrick, J. Weuve, O. Okereke, L. D. Kubzansky, H. Hu and M. G. Weisskopf, Environ. Health Perspect., 2012, 120(6), 817–823 CrossRef .S. Behinaein, D. R. Chettle, L. M. Egden, F. E. McNeill, G. Norman, N. Richard and S. Stever, J. Environ. Monit., 2012, 14(12), 3267–3275 RSC .D. Guimaraes, M. L. Carvalho, V. Geraldes, I. Rocha, L. C. Alves and J. P. Santos, J. Trace Elem. Med. Biol., 2012, 26(4), 285–290 CAS .G. Reames and V. Charlton, J. Environ. Health, 2013, 75(6), 16–20 Search PubMed .A. van Geen, C. Bravo, V. Gil, S. Sherpa and D. Jack, Bull. W. H. O., 2012, 90(12), 878–886 Search PubMed .J. M. Khudzari, H. Wagiran, I. Hossain and N. Ibrahim, J. Environ. Radioact., 2013, 115, 1–5 CrossRef .M. Hosoki, T. Satsuma, K. Nishigawa, H. Takeuchi and K. Asaoka, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2012, 262, 258–262 CrossRef CAS .K. Furuhashi, M. Uo, Y. Kitagawa and F. Watari, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2012, 262, 13–18 CrossRef CAS .L. E. S. Soares, R. de Oliveira, S. Nahorny, A. M. D. Santo and A. A. Martin, Microsc. Microanal., 2012, 18(5), 1112–1117 CrossRef CAS .J. B. Aitken, S. Antony, C. M. Weekley, B. Lai, L. Spiccia and H. H. Harris, Metallomics, 2012, 4(10), 1051–1056 RSC .A. M. Martynov, T. D. Dargaeva and E. V. Chuparina, Pharm. Chem. J., 2012, 46(7), 435–437 CrossRef CAS .C. Li, L. Sang, B. Leng, Z. J. Xia, Y. Z. Du and L. X. Wei, Spectrosc. Spectral Anal., 2012, 32(6), 1671–1673 CAS .A. Meyer, S. Grotefend, A. Gross, H. Watzig and I. Ott, J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal., 2012, 70, 713–717 CrossRef CAS .E. Kulikov, K. Latham and M. J. Adams, X-Ray Spectrom., 2012, 41(6), 410–415 CrossRef CAS .T. Paunesku, M. B. Wanzer, E. N. Kirillova, K. N. Muksinova, V. S. Revina, E. R. Lyubchansky, B. Grosche, M. Birschwilks, S. Vogt, L. Finney and G. E. Woloschak, Health Phys., 2012, 103(2), 181–186 CAS .E. Koudouna, G. Veronesi, I. I. Patel, M. Cotte, C. Knupp, F. L. Martin and A. J. Quantock, Biophys. J., 2012, 103(2), 357–364 CrossRef CAS .D. V. Rao, M. Swapna, R. Cesareo, A. Brunetti, T. Akatsuka, T. Yuasa, T. Takeda and G. E. Gigante, Phys. Scr., 2012, 85(3), 8 CrossRef .D. Raimunda, T. Khare, C. Giometti, S. Vogt, J. M. Arguello and L. Finney, Metallomics, 2012, 4(9), 921–927 RSC .M. Korbas, T. C. MacDonald, I. J. Pickering, G. N. George and P. H. Krone, ACS Chem. Biol., 2012, 7(2), 410–419 CrossRef .A. Mantuano, A. Pickier, R. C. Barroso, A. P. de Almeida, D. Braz, S. C. Cardoso, M. S. Gonzalez, M. B. Figueiredo, E. S. Garcia and P. Azambuja, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2012, 71–72, 127–130 CrossRef CAS .D. Guimaraes, M. L. Carvalho, M. Becker, A. von Bohlen, V. Geraldes, I. Rocha and J. P. Santos, X-Ray Spectrom., 2012, 41(2), 80–86 CrossRef CAS .H. S. Lee, N. M. Park, K. S. Lee, J. Kim and H. J. Chang, J. Korean Phys. Soc., 2012, 60(10), 1753–1756 CrossRef CAS .H. S. Lee, S. C. Choi and S. H. Sohn, Mol. Cryst. Liq. Cryst., 2012, 565, 43–51 CrossRef CAS .W. C. Lim, J. Lee, S. Won and Y. Lee, Surf. Interface Anal., 2012, 44(6), 724–728 CrossRef CAS .A. J. Han, Y. Zhang, W. Liu, B. Y. Li and Y. Sun, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2012, 258(24), 9747–9750 CrossRef CAS .Y. Li, S. S. Shaikh and S. Menezes, Thin Solid Films, 2012, 524, 20–25 CrossRef CAS .N. Vora, J. Blackburn, I. Repins, C. Beall, B. To, J. Pankow, G. Teeter, M. Young and R. Noufi, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2012, 30(5), 7 Search PubMed .J. A. M. Vrielink, R. M. Tiggelaar, J. G. E. Gardeniers and L. Lefferts, Thin Solid Films, 2012, 520(6), 1740–1744 CrossRef CAS .M. L. Franquelo, A. Duran, J. Castaing, D. Arquillo and J. L. Perez-Rodriguez, Talanta, 2012, 89, 462–469 CrossRef CAS .T. W. Kim, T. K. Tokunaga, D. B. Shuman, S. R. Sutton, M. Newville and A. Lanzirotti, Water Resour. Res., 2012, 48, 13 Search PubMed .C. Baratto, A. Ponzoni, M. Ferroni, L. Borgese, E. Bontempi and G. Sberveglieri, Thin Solid Films, 2012, 520(7), 2739–2744 CrossRef CAS .A. A. Dakhel, J. Alloys Compd., 2012, 539, 26–31 CrossRef CAS .J. E. Shigley, A. Gilbertson and S. Eaton-Magana, Gems Gemol., 2012, 48(1), 18–30 CrossRef CAS .J. L. Molloy, J. R. Sieber, K. E. Murphy, S. E. Long and S. D. Leigh, X-Ray Spectrom., 2012, 41(6), 374–383 CrossRef CAS .R. Mainz and R. Klenk, J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 111(8), 1 CrossRef .P. S. Hoffmann, N. I. Fainer, O. Baake, M. L. Kosinova, Y. M. Rumyantsev, V. A. Trunova, A. Klein, B. Pollakowski, B. Beckhoff and W. Ensinger, Thin Solid Films, 2012, 520(18), 5906–5913 CrossRef CAS .E. de Almeida, V. F. do Nascimento and A. A. Menegario, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2012, 71–72, 70–74 CrossRef CAS .C. C. Yang, P. Flaitz, B. Li, F. Chen, C. Christiansen, S. Y. Lee, P. Ma and D. Edelstein, Microelectron. Eng., 2012, 92, 79–82 CrossRef CAS .A. A. Dakhel, Microelectron. Reliab., 2012, 52(6), 1050–1054 CrossRef CAS .E. Arac, D. M. Burn, D. S. Eastwood, T. P. A. Hase and D. Atkinson, J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 111(4), 9 CrossRef .F. J. Cadieu, I. Vander, Y. Rong and R. W. Zuneska, Powder Diffr., 2012, 27(2), 87–91 CrossRef CAS .Q. Zheng, F. Dierre, V. Corregidor, R. Fernandez-Ruiz, J. Crocco, H. Bensalah, E. Alves and E. Dieguez, J. Cryst. Growth, 2012, 358, 89–93 CrossRef CAS .K. D. Son, D. J. Yang, M. S. Kim, I. K. Kang, S. Y. Kim and Y. J. Kim, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2012, 132(2–3), 1041–1047 CrossRef CAS .V. Galstyan, E. Comini, G. Faglia, A. Vomiero, L. Borgese, E. Bontempi and G. Sberveglieri, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23(23), 6 CrossRef .J. D. Judy, J. M. Unrine, W. Rao, S. Wirick and P. M. Bertsch, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2012, 46(15), 8467–8474 CrossRef CAS .C. Larue, J. Laurette, N. Herlin-Boime, H. Khodja, B. Fayard, A. M. Flank, F. Brisset and M. Carriere, Sci. Total Environ., 2012, 431, 197–208 CrossRef CAS .A. D. Servin, H. Castillo-Michel, J. A. Hernandez-Viezcas, B. C. Diaz, J. R. Peralta-Videa and J. L. Gardea-Torresdey, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2012, 46(14), 7637–7643 CrossRef CAS .R. Castell, E. D. Greaves, L. Abdala and H. Barros, Appl. Phys. B: Lasers Opt., 2012, 109(1), 47–53 CrossRef CAS .B. L. Jones, N. Manohar, F. Reynoso, A. Karellas and S. H. Cho, Phys. Med. Biol., 2012, 57(23), N457–N467 CrossRef CAS .M. Hayati-Ashtiani, Part. Sci. Technol., 2012, 30(5), 474–481 CrossRef CAS .W. J. Wang, W. Bu, L. J. Wang, P. E. Palo, S. Mallapragada, M. Nilsen-Hamilton and D. Vaknin, Langmuir, 2012, 28(9), 4274–4282 CrossRef CAS .A. Lupascu, R. F. Feng, L. J. Sandilands, Z. X. Nie, V. Baydina, G. Gu, S. Ono, Y. Ando, D. C. Kwok, N. Lee, S. W. Cheong, K. S. Burch and Y. J. Kim, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101(22), 4 CrossRef .M. A. Kanygin, A. V. Okotrub, A. V. Gusel'nikov and A. G. Kurenya, J. Nanoelectron. Optoelectron., 2012, 7(1), 60–64 CrossRef CAS .B. Zawisza, R. Skorek, G. Stankiewicz and R. Sitko, Talanta, 2012, 99, 918–923 CrossRef CAS .G. Martinez-Criado, A. Homs, B. Alen, J. A. Sans, J. Segura-Ruiz, A. Molina-Sanchez, J. Susini, J. Yoo and G. C. Yi, Nano Lett., 2012, 12(11), 5829–5834 CrossRef CAS .F. Xu, L. Helfen, H. Suhonen, D. Elgrabli, S. Bayat, P. Reischig, T. Baumbach and P. Cloetens, PLoS One, 2012, 7(11), 6 CrossRef .L. Luhl, I. Mantouvalou, W. Malzer, I. Schaumann, C. Vogt, O. Hahn and B. Kanngiesser, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84(4), 1907–1914 CrossRef .P. S. Hoffmann, O. Baake, M. L. Kosinova, B. Beckhoff, A. Klein, B. Pollakowski, V. A. Trunova, V. S. Sulyaeva, F. A. Kuznetsov and W. Ensinger, X-Ray Spectrom., 2012, 41(4), 240–246 CrossRef CAS .P. S. Hoffmann, M. I. Kosinova, S. Flege, O. Baake, B. Pollakowski, V. A. Trunova, A. Klein, B. Beckhoff, F. A. Kuznetsov and W. Ensinger, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2012, 404(2), 479–487 CrossRef CAS .M. Wilke, C. Schmidt, J. Dubrail, K. Appel, M. Borchert, K. Kvashnina and C. E. Manning, Earth Planet. Sci. Lett., 2012, 349, 15–25 CrossRef .S. M. Heald, K. M. Krupka and C. F. Brown, Radiochim. Acta, 2012, 100(4), 243–253 CrossRef CAS .K. Kocot, B. Zawisza and R. Sitko, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2012, 73, 79–83 CrossRef CAS .E. Sahinkaya, M. Altun, S. Bektas and K. Komnitsas, Miner. Eng., 2012, 32, 38–44 CrossRef CAS .P. R. Aranda, E. Perino, F. A. Bertolino, J. Raba and I. E. De Vito, Microchim. Acta, 2012, 179(3–4), 235–239 CrossRef CAS .R. Skorek, E. Turek, B. Zawisza, E. Margui, I. Queralt, M. Stempin, P. Kucharski and R. Sitko, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2012, 27(10), 1688–1693 RSC .
Footnote† Review coordinator.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:
2D/3D/4D	2 Dimensional/3 dimensional/4 dimensional
AAS	Atomic absorption spectrometry
ABR	Anaerobic baffled reactor
ABS	Acrylonitrile–butadiene–styrene
AC	Alternating current
AD	Anno domini
AFM	Atomic force microscopy
ANKA	ANgstroem KArlsruhe synchrotron source
ANOVA	Analysis of variance
APDC	Ammonium pyrrolidinedithiocarbamate
API	Active pharmaceutical ingredients
APP	Amyloid precursor protein
ASIC	Application-specific integrated circuit
BC	Before Christ
BFS	Blast furnace slags
BNL	Brookhaven national laboratory
CCD	Charge coupled detector
CdTe	Cadmium telluride
CIGS	Copper indium gallium selenide
CIS	Copper indium selenide
CNT	Carbon nanotube
CRL	Compound refractive lens
CRM	Certified reference material
CT	Computer tomography
CTABr	Cetyltrimethylammonium bromide
CVD	Chemical vapour deposition
DAC	Diamond anvil cell
DC	Direct current
DDTC	Diethyldithiocarbamate
DEPFET	Depleted P-channel field effect transistor
DGT	Diffuse gradient thin film
DGT-EDXRF	Diffuse gradient thin film-energy dispersive X-ray fluorescence
DLLME	Dispersive liquid–liquid microextraction
DPPC	Dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine
DSDP	Deep sea drilling project
DSPME	Dispersive solid-phase microextraction
DSSC	Dye-sensitized solar cell
DTA	Differential thermal analysis
DTG	Differential thermogravimetry
EDL	Electrical double layer
ED-SEM	Energy dispersive scanning electron microscopy
EDTA	Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid
EDXRF	Energy dispersive X-ray fluorescence
EELS	Electron energy loss spectrometry
ENM	Engineered nanomaterial
EPDL	Evaluated photon data library
EPMA	Electron probe microanalysis
ESRF	European Synchrotron Radiation Facility
ETAAS	Electrothermal atomic absorption spectrometry
EU	European Union
EXAFS	Extended X-ray absorption fine structure
FTIR	Fourier transform infrared
GC-MS	Gas chromatography-mass spectrometry
GE	Gel electrophoresis
GEM	Gas electron multiplier
GEXRF	Grazing exit X-ray fluorescence
GF-AAS	Graphite furnace-atomic absorption spectrometry
GISAXS	Grazing incidence small angle X-ray scattering
GIXRD	Grazing incidence X-ray diffraction
GIXRF	Grazing incidence X-ray fluorescence
GNP	Gold nanoparticle
HA	Hydroxyapatite
HE-P-EDXRF	High-energy polarised-beam energy dispersive X-ray fluorescence
HOPG	Highly orientated pyrolytic graphite
HPGe	High purity germanium
HPLC	High performance liquid chromatography
HFSE	High field strength elements
ICP-AES	Inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectrometry
ICP-MS	Inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry
IR	Infrared
ISE	Ion selective electrode
LA-ICP-MS	Laser ablation-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry
LIBS	Laser induced breakdown spectrometry
LNLS	Laboratorio Nacional de Luz Sincroton
LP-LA	Liquid-phase laser-ablated
MIXS	Mercury Imaging X-ray Spectrometer
MNM	Manufactured nanomaterial
MRI	Magnetic resonance imaging
MS	Mass spectrometry
MSWI	Municipal solid waste incinerator
MWCNT	Multiwalled carbon nanotube
NAA	Neutron activation analysis
NASA	National Aeronautics and Space Administration
NIST	National Institute of Standards and Technology
NP	Nanoparticle
NSLS	National Synchrotron Light Source
PC	Personal computer
PCA	Principal component analysis
PCB	Printed circuit board
PIXE	Particle-induced X-ray emission
PM	Particulate matter
PR	Phosphate rocks
PSi	Porous silicon
PVA	Polyvinyl alcohol
PVC	Poly(vinyl chloride)
PXRF	Portable X-ray fluorescence
RoHS	Restriction of hazardous substances
RBS	Rutherford backscattering spectrometry
REE	Rare earth elements
Rrms	Relative root mean square
SDD	Silicon drift detector
SAXS	Small angle X-ray scattering
SCA	Sickle cell anemia
SCD	Swept charge device
SEM	Scanning electron microscopy
SEM-EDS	Scanning electron microscopy-energy dispersive X-ray spectrometry
SIMS	Secondary ion mass spectrometry
Si(PIN)	Silicon PIN detector device
SNc	Substancia nigra pars compacta
SPE	Solid phase extraction
SRM	Standard reference material
SR	Synchrotron radiation
SRF	Solid recovered fuel
SR-TXRF	Synchrotron radiation-total reflection X-ray fluorescence
SR-TXRF-XAS	Synchrotron radiation-total reflection X-ray fluorescence-X-ray absorption spectroscopy
SRXRD	Synchrotron radiation X-ray diffraction
SRXRF	Synchrotron radiation X-ray fluorescence
TCO	Transparent conducting oxide
TEM	Transmission electron microscopy
TES	Transition edge sensor
TG	Thermogravimetry
TGA	Thermogravimetric analysis
TLV	Threshold limit value
TXRF	Total reflection X-ray fluorescence
TXRF-XANES	Total reflection X-ray fluorescence-X-ray absorption near edge structure
UK	United Kingdom
UNESCO	United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
US	United States
USA	United States of America
UV	Ultraviolet
WD	Wavelength dispersive
WD-EPMA	Wavelength dispersive-electron probe microanalysis
WDXRF	Wavelength dispersive X-ray fluorescence
XAA	X-ray absorption anisotropy
XAFS	X-ray absorption fine structure
XANES	X-ray absorption near edge structure
XAS	X-ray absorption spectroscopy
XFM	X-ray fluorescence microscopy
XPS	X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
XRD	X-ray diffraction
XRF	X-ray fluorescence
XRFCT	X-ray fluorescence computed tomography
XRR	X-ray reflectometry
XRS	X-ray spectrometry
XSW	X-ray standing waves
YAG	Yttrium aluminium garnet
Z	Atomic number
Footnote
† Review coordinator.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
