Environmental impact, life cycle analysis and battery performance of upcycled carbon anodes  - Environmental Science: Nano (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8EN00196K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8EN00196K
(Paper)
Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2018, 5, 1237-1250Environmental impact, life cycle analysis and battery performance of upcycled carbon anodes

        
          
            Andrea L. 
            Hicks†
*a, 
      
        
          
            Arthur D. 
            Dysart†
b and 

        
          
            Vilas G. 
            Pol
          
        
      b
aDepartment of Civil and Environmental Engineering, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 1415 Engineering Drive, Madison, WI 53706, USA. E-mail: hicks5@wisc.edu
bDavidson School of Chemical Engineering, Purdue University, 480 Stadium Mall Drive, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA
Received 
      14th February 2018
    , Accepted 17th April 2018First published on 26th April 2018AbstractFor rechargeable lithium ion batteries, natural and synthetic graphite anodes come with great economic and environmental costs. Carbon microsheets, developed from used starch packing peanuts, are a carbonaceous alternative with great electrochemical performance and quantifiable environmental footprint. This work investigates how synthesis route (e.g., ambient inert gas or vacuum) influences microsheet electrochemistry and environmental impact. Carbon microsheets show gravimetric capacity greater than conventional graphite, with argon-derived microsheets demonstrating gravimetric capacity up to ca. 30% greater than vacuum-derived ones. Life cycle assessment (LCA) is used to examine the environmental impact of synthesis routes across standard midpoint TRACI categories (viz., ozone depletion, global warming, smog, acidification, eutrophication, carcinogenics, non-carcinogenics, respiratory effects, eco-toxicity, and fossil fuel depletion). Midpoint LCA illustrates that the impact of the vacuum process is sensitive to the origin of utilized energy. For instance, with respect to ozone depletion, vacuum pyrolysis produces less emission equivalents than its argon analog – assuming conventional domestic energy profile. In this sense, the context of energy should be considered alongside environmental impact in evaluation of process sustainability.

Environmental significance
Battery storage is critical to advancing alternative energy technologies. Conventional rechargeable lithium ion batteries use battery grade graphite. This work presents an alternative graphitic anode produced from starch packing peanuts using two synthesis methods (viz., inert gas and vacuum) with superior performance to conventional graphite. Life cycle assessment analyzes the environmental impact of the synthesis routes and identifies significant contributors. Electrochemical testing shows battery components generated from waste materials may perform better than conventional graphite. Ultimately, this work demonstrates new environmental avenues for waste materials as raw materials: an increasingly critical area of research.

1.0 Introduction
Innovations in alternative energy technologies (e.g., wind and solar1–4) require more cost-effective energy storage. Rechargeable lithium-ion (Li-ion) batteries demonstrate sufficient energy and power density, yet modern Li-ion systems struggle to meet ever-increasing demands from energy grids and electric vehicles.5–7 While many works present excellent materials with better battery performance or smaller form factors, few have explored the practicality and sustainability of their materials. In parallel, existing battery sustainability and life cycle assessment (LCA) literature has focused on outlets of electric and hybrid vehicle technology7–11 and lithium or production constraints.9,11
There is a deficiency of environmental impact studies investigating synthesis pathways for graphitic anodes. LCA studies on batteries12,13 typically employ graphite inventory data from the 1980 study of Hittman Associates Inc.14 Hittman and associates' work quantifies the energy required for each life cycle stage, demonstrating an overall energy demand 11090 British thermal units per pound of battery produced (BTU lb−1) assuming inventory with 13.8%-wt graphite. Though pioneering at the time, the study does not consider the influence of synthesis route to overall impact. Similarly, other studies utilizing different battery-grade graphite inventories11 disregard synthesis pathway, such as choice of inert gas (i.e., argon, nitrogen).13,15–20 In representative cases, Rydh et al.21 and Notter et al.11 both neglect the choice of inert gas during the graphite synthesis process, potentially leading to a significant underestimation in the environmental impact of graphite and subsequent battery production. Interestingly, Rydh et al. estimated battery energy requirements to be greater than those of Notter et al. This overlooked yet critical parameter makes it challenging to compare conventional techniques with innovations in graphite synthesis – particularly methods utilizing waste precursors.
This work explores the transformation of waste packing peanuts into semi-graphitic anode materials. Packing peanuts are common packaging filler used in transportation of goods. In 1996, 50 million pounds (22.68 million kilograms) of packing peanuts were used, valuing the entire packing peanut industry at over 500 million U.S. dollars.22 Though reusable, packing peanuts are typically disposed after only a single use as landfill waste. Alternatively, oxygen-deficient heat treatment transforms packing peanuts into carbon microsheets, a disordered carbon morphology with bimodal porosity. This carbon morphology performs with gravimetric capacity greater than that of conventional graphite at comparable cycling rates.
The relationship between synthesis and product capability is an objective measure for evaluations of sustainability and commercial viability. Thus, this work investigates effects of inert gas or vacuum synthesis routes of carbon microsheet anodes for rechargeable Li-ion batteries. Both processes produce carbon microsheets with similar material properties and electrochemical performance (e.g., gravimetric capacity difference of 15%). The environmental impact of both processes is studied using LCA according to functional unit and life cycle stage, demonstrating that the impact of the vacuum process is dependent on energy source. Two functional units (viz., mass yield and gravimetric capacity) are employed to account for functionality of the semi-graphitic anode material through synthesis and application. Finally, the broader impact of carbon microsheets as rechargeable Li-ion battery anodes is assessed. This work suggests LCA is a significant tool in evaluation of battery materials, emerging today at an ever-increasing rate.
2.0 Materials and methods
This work is a comprehensive assessment of the carbon microsheet as a viable alternative to graphite for rechargeable Li-ion batteries. From the materials perspective, material properties and electrochemical performance are studied as a function of synthesis route. From the sustainability perspective, cradle-to-gate life cycle assessment compares the environmental impact of carbon microsheets as a function of synthesis route. The scope encompasses raw material acquisition, in which packing peanuts are designated as waste materials; and manufacturing, in which packing peanuts are transformed into carbon microsheets. In the manufacturing stage, particulate emissions are modeled according to the downstream aerosol characterization performed by Tsai et al.23 Environmental impact reduction is explicitly considered as avoided impact: impacts avoided by eliminating packing peanuts instead of disposing as landfill waste. Impacts avoided are represented as the percent decrease of overall environmental impact (Fig. 5 and 6). Due to deficiency of life cycle inventory literature on graphite synthesis, quantitative comparison with conventional synthesis techniques is not included in this work.
2.1 Carbon microsheet synthesis
In 2015, Etacheri et al.24 first reported synthesis and Li-ion battery anode application of carbon microsheets. The modified procedure used in this work introduces inert gas or vacuum evacuation for pyrolysis atmosphere (Fig. 1). An aluminum oxide crucible was loaded with waste starch packing peanuts and placed within a high temperature tube furnace. The continuous oxygen-free atmosphere required for pyrolytic decomposition was enabled by (1) inert gas purge at rate ca. 2 mL min−1 or (2) rotary vacuum pump evacuation to gauge pressure below 0.1 mPa. An organic trap was implemented downstream of the furnace exhaust to collect aerosol contaminants.23 After atmosphere facilitation, packing peanuts were heated from 27 °C to the specified dwell temperature at rate 10 °C min−1. The furnace was maintained at dwell temperature for 2 hours, and then cooled to room temperature at rate ca. −10 °C min−1. The dwell temperatures studied in this work are 600 and 900 °C. Resultant carbon microsheets were utilized without further treatment (e.g., acid or base), separation, and purification.
 Fig. 1  Synthesis of carbon microsheets. Carbon microsheets are synthesized by pyrolytic heating of packing peanuts in an oxygen-free atmosphere. Non-oxidizing atmosphere is enabled by continuous argon gas purge or vacuum evacuation. After pyrolysis, micron-sized carbon microsheets are used in rechargeable battery anodes without further chemical separation or purification. 
The original and modified procedure differ along three principle features. The primary difference is ambient atmosphere during heating. In the original procedure, oxygen-free atmosphere is enabled by continuous purging with high purity argon gas before and during heating. In the modified procedure, oxygen-free atmosphere is enabled by continuous pump evacuation. The second difference is the dwell temperature. Dwell temperatures 600 and 900 °C are studied in this work. The third difference is the implemented organic trap. The original procedure collects organics using a water bath, while the modified procedure collects organics using a liquid nitrogen-cooled condenser. Among these differences, the most significant influence is expected from the ambient atmosphere (viz., inert gas or vacuum) and synthesis dwell temperature.
The inputs and outputs of this process are presented in Tables 1 and 2, respectively. The total energy consumed in this process was calculated using a precursor mass of 273.81 mg and a specific heat 0.71 kJ kg−1 K−1. The specific heat was modeled as graphitic carbon due to unavailability of packing peanut specific heat measurements.25 Calculation of consumed energy assumes required energy for the constant temperature step is 10% of that for the constant heating rate step. Energy consumption of the vacuum pump at 1/3 horsepower was calculated according to manufacturer specification.26
Table 1 Inventory for inert gas-synthesis of carbon microsheets




Parameter
Quantity
Allocation




Inputs


Mass of starch packing peanuts
273.81
mg




Energy of heating
0.192
kJ
Electricity of US grid


Mass of argon gas
36.87
g
Liquid argon


Outputs


Mass of carbon product
82.14
mg




Mass of landfill waste avoided
273.81
mg
Biodegradable waste to municipal landfill


Mass of particulates to air
164.27
mg
Particulate diameter <2.5 μm




Table 2 Inventory for vacuum-synthesis of carbon microsheets




Parameter
Quantity
Allocation




Inputs






Mass of starch packing peanuts
273.81
mg




Energy of heating
0.0642
kJ
Electricity of US grid


Energy of vacuum
298.0
kJ
Electricity of US grid


Outputs






Mass of carbon product
35.04
mg




Mass of landfill waste avoided
273.81
mg
Biodegradable waste to municipal landfill


Mass of particulates to air
164.27
mg
Particulate diameter <2.5 μm




Mass lost as particulate matter is determined according to by-product characterization performed by Tsai et al.23 Inert gas pyrolysis is modeled as two-step decomposition with overall mass loss ca. 70%-wt of initial packing peanut mass. The first mass loss of ca. 40%-wt occurs near 100 °C due to vaporization of hygroscopic moisture. The second mass loss of ca. 60%-wt occurs near 300 °C due to chemical and morphological changes. The modal particulate diameter is less than 2.5 μm as characterized from the downstream water bath.
2.2 Software and impact metrics
The Sima Pro (version 8.1) LCA software tool was used to produce data inventories for each studied synthesis method. TRACI (Tool for Reduction and Assessment of Chemicals and Other Environmental Impacts, version 2.1) environmental impact methods were used to assess impact data. TRACI, developed by the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) for particular application to North American models, includes ten impact categories: ozone depletion, global warming, smog, acidification, eutrophication, carcinogenics, non-carcinogenics, respiratory effects, eco-toxicity, and fossil fuel depletion. TRACI was selected as the midpoint analysis method for multiple reasons: 1) the method was developed to be relevant to North America, the location of the study, 2) this method utilizes multiple midpoint impact categories, which allows for the evaluation of tradeoffs, and 3) and finally it produces and unweighted suite of midpoint values instead of fewer weighted endpoint values. The LCA utilizes various databases including US Life Cycle Inventory (US LCI),27 Ecoinvent 3,28 and European Life Cycle Database 3 (ELCD), as there was no single database that housed all of the necessary data for the work.29 Where applicable, the following conventional energy mix for the United States was assumed: 53% coal, 20% nuclear, 16% natural gas, 7% hydropower, 3% fuel oil, 1% biomass, 1% other fossil fuel, and less than 1% each of wind, photovoltaic, and geothermal. The influence of energy source is analyzed independently of overall LCA analysis.
2.3 Functional units
Modern rechargeable batteries contain four primary components: the anode, cathode, electrolyte, and separator. The anode and cathode, collectively known as electrodes, create the impetus for energy storage known as voltage or potential difference. During charge and discharge, net potential difference drives lithium cation and electron transfer between electrodes. Lithium cations pass between electrodes through the electrolyte, a solid or liquid medium which is ionically-conductive typically through dissolution of alkali metal salts. The two electrodes remain separated by the separator, an insulating porous membrane that reinforces external electron transfer as electric current. From the life cycle perspective, environmental impact of rechargeable batteries is a function of the individual impact of these constituents.
This work quantifies the environmental impact of carbon microsheets as an alternative to graphite in rechargeable battery anodes. Two different functional units are utilized to normalize impact: mass and functionality (i.e., specific or gravimetric capacity). The mass functional unit is defined as environmental impact per kilogram of graphitic anode material. The mass unit accounts for synthesis process yield. The capacity functional unit accounts for practical or useful ability of graphitic anode material. The gravimetric capacity unit is defined as environmental impact per amp-hour per kilogram of graphitic anode material, accounting for electron storage ability of battery grade graphitic material. Impacts per specific capacity unit are normalized to gravimetric capacity 372 Ah kg−1 of graphitic anode material.
2.4 Academic database query
The number of granted patent applications between 1970–2016 were determined using the United States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) Patent Full-text and Image Database with the following search query: SPEC/“lithium ion battery” AND ISD/1/1/2016->12/31/2016 AND SPEC/“anode” ANDNOT SPEC/“graphite”. The number of accepted academic publications and documents between 1970–2016 were determined using the Clarivate Analytics Web of Science Database with the following search query: TS(“lithium ion battery”) OR TS(“Lithium ion battery” AND “anode” NOT “graphite”).
2.5 Material characterization
Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was performed using a Nova 200 DualBeam scanning electron microscope (FEI Co.). Double-sided carbon tape (3 M Corp.) was used to adhere carbon microsheet samples to an aluminum sample stage. Approximately 1 mg of sample was evenly dispersed onto the exposed surface of carbon tape. The microscope chamber was loaded with the sample stage and evacuated to high vacuum (i.e., <2.6 nbar). Micrographs were recorded at various magnifications after thorough optimization of electron beam alignment, stigmation, focus, brightness, and contrast.
Organic elemental analysis (OEA) was performed using an autosampling combustion-pyrolysis furnace with a tungsten conductivity sensor (CE440, Exeter Analytical Inc.). Approximately 2 mg carbon microsheets were placed within a nickel combustion capsule (Exeter Analytical) and loaded into the combustion chamber. Dynamic flash combustion was enabled by controlled oxygen (99.997%, Praxair Inc.) injection within a continuous helium atmosphere (99.997%, Indiana Oxygen), permitting direct measurement of carbon, hydrogen, and nitrogen content. Oxygen content was determined by difference from unity. Reported values for elemental composition are the average of at least 3 separate trials.
X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) was performed using a Smartlab I X-ray diffractometer (Rigaku Corp.) with a cross-beam optic system. Approximately 20 mg carbon microsheets were loaded into the cavity of borosilicate sample holders mounted into the theta–theta goniometer. Monochromatic Cu-Kα radiation was produced with a 9 kW rotating anode X-ray source, and collected with a sodium iodide scintillation detector. Spectral patterns were produced in X-ray scattering domain (i.e., 2θ) 2–150° at scanning rate 0.5° min−1. Reported spectral patterns are smoothed for clarity of interpretation, but not reduced for background.
Raman spectroscopy was performed using a DXR Raman microscope (Thermo-Fisher Scientific). The apparatus was calibrated using a polystyrene calibration standard (Thermo-Fisher). Carbon microsheet samples were evenly dispersed across a borosilicate microscope slide (Fisher), and then loaded into the microscope chamber. Spectral patterns were produced using an aperatured green laser with wavelength 532 nm, beam diameter 25 μm, and power 8 mW. A single spectral pattern is the average of at least 3 exposures, with collection time 20 seconds per exposure. Reported spectral patterns are reduced for background and smoothed for clarity of interpretation.
2.6 Electrochemical measurements
The battery fabrication and galvanostatic cycling procedure was performed as follows. Electrodes were fabricated using an automatic constant-speed doctor blade technique. The electrode components of 80%-wt vacuum-synthesized carbon microsheet material, 10%-wt Super P Li conductive additive (TIMCAL Ltd.), and 10%-wt polyvinylidene fluoride (Arkema Inc.), were homogeneously mixed to a viscous mixture with N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (MTI Corp.). Mixing was performed using a polypropylene mixing cup and alumina mixing balls (MTI, 4 × 6 mm. dia., 2 × 10 mm dia.) within a planetary mixer (THINKY Inc.) at constant speed 8000 rpm for ca. 15 minutes. After mixing, the mixture was coated onto a substrate of aluminum foil (MTI, 15 μm thick.) at gap thickness 8 mil using an automatic film applicator (MTI). The resulting thin-film lamination was subsequently dried in a vacuum oven (MTI) at temperature 80 °C and gauge pressure −0.1 mPa for at least 12 hours. Electrodes were cut using a 0.5 in.-diameter arch punch (General tools) and assembled into CR2032 battery cells using stainless steel parts (MTI). Batteries were constructed within a high-purity inert atmosphere glovebox (Vacuum Atmospheres Co.). The electrolyte (MTI) is composed of co-solvents ethylene carbonate (EC; 40%-vol.), dimethyl carbonate (DMC; 20%-vol.), and diethyl carbonate (DEC; 40%-vol.); lithium salt lithium hexafluorophosphate (LiPF6, 1.0 M conc.); and additive vinylene carbonate (VC; <5%-vol.). All batteries contain porous polypropylene membrane separator (CELGARD; 25 μm thick.) and lithium metal counter electrode (MTI). Batteries were electrochemically tested by galvanostatic cycling at gravimetric currents (i.e., 25, 50, 125, 250, and 500 A kg−1) corresponding to conventional cycling rates (C/10, C/5, C/2, C, and C/10) in the voltage range 0.005–3.0 V. Formation cycling was performed at cycling rate 25 A kg−1. Applied gravimetric currents were estimated according to theoretical gravimetric capacity 372 Ah kg−1. Mean areal carbon microsheets per electrode was 1.17 mg cm−2.
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was performed using a potentiostat with direct digital synthesis circuitry (Reference 600, Gamry Instruments). Following fabrication, a LIB cell was loaded into the potentiostat and cycled in voltage domain 0.01–2.0 V for 100 cycles. At conditioned voltage 0.01 V, potentiostatic impedance spectroscopy was performed in the frequency range of 0.01–20000 Hz.
3.0 Results
Electrochemical cycling illustrates that gravimetric capacity of packing peanut-derived carbon microsheets is weakly dependent on synthesis method. Instead, the two synthesis methods differ by their respective environmental impact, with each method offering unique sustainability advantages. Each synthesis method is characterized by the features of their products, including material properties, electrochemical performance, and LCA along TRACI impact categories (presented on bases of mass and gravimetric capacity) at overall and midpoint life cycle stages.
3.1 Material properties
Carbon microsheets synthesized by vacuum and inert gas pyrolysis share morphological and material properties. The following observations made for inert gas-derived carbon microsheets are comparable to those for the previously reported process.24 This suggests that the heating profile (i.e., intensity and duration) has the strongest influence upon material character of pyrolytic materials. However, minute differences in the degree of crystallinity strongly influence the electrochemical ability of the synthesized carbon microsheet materials, as demonstrated in section 3.2.
Scanning electron micrographs (Fig. 2) show the thin, sheet-like morphology of carbon microsheets is generally independent of synthesis method. Sampled across 20 different particles, carbon microsheets demonstrate mean thickness 1.09 ± 0.62 μm independent of synthesis method. Carbon microsheets also show irregular particle shape and texture: vacuum-derived carbon microsheets exhibit asymmetrical and bulging surface protrusions. In comparison, inert gas-derived carbon microsheets exhibit similar size and thickness, with coarser particle geometries.
 Fig. 2  Scanning electron micrograph of carbon microsheets derived from packing peanuts in vacuum. Carbon microsheets synthesized under inert gas and vacuum demonstrate irregular and planar shapes, with mean particle length less than 50 μm. The morphology of carbon microsheets is also independent of synthesis temperature. 
Organic elemental analysis shows that the chemical composition of carbon microsheets is weakly dependent on synthesis method (Fig. 3). However, compositional changes are subtle; composition is more strongly a function of synthesis atmosphere than temperature. At 600 °C synthesis temperature, inert gas-derived carbon microsheets exhibit 4.97%-wt greater carbon and 4.60%-wt less oxygen content than vacuum-derived microsheets. Similarly, at 900 °C, inert gas-derived carbon microsheets show 2.41%-wt greater carbon and 1.77%-wt less oxygen content than vacuum-derived microsheets. Synthesis temperature better influences hydrogen composition: in vacuum and inert gas synthesis, hydrogen content is 0.58 and 1.32%-wt greater at lower temperature, respectively.
 Fig. 3  Organic elemental composition of carbon microsheets. Though generally similar among the studied synthesis procedures, final carbon content is more strongly influenced by synthesis atmosphere than temperature. At either 600 or 900 °C, carbon microsheets synthesized under vacuum demonstrate less carbon and greater oxygen content than those synthesized under inert gas. Note oxygen content is calculated as the residual from unity. 
Nanoscale organization of carbon microsheets is characteristically amorphous irrespective of synthesis method. At 600 and 900 °C, X-ray powder diffractograms (XRD, Fig. 4a) of vacuum-derived carbon microsheets demonstrate two principle intensity features in scattering domain (viz., 2-theta) 0–80°. These features indicate nanoscale crystalline regions, called crystallites, within carbon microsheet particles. Specifically, the two diffraction peaks occurring near 26 and 42° and represent the (002) and (100) crystal planes, respectively.30 The (002) plane represents the mean width of nano-crystallites, while the (100) plane represents the mean layer separation of microsheet crystallites. The wide breadth of observed diffraction peaks is characteristic of disordered or non-crystalline phases within carbon microsheets. Similarly, inert gas-derived microsheets demonstrate spectral features of a principle amorphous carbon phase.24 At constant synthesis temperature, vacuum-derived carbon microsheets demonstrate sharper or more defined diffraction peaks compared to their inert gas-derived counterparts. Furthermore, definition increases with increasing pyrolysis temperature: diffractograms exhibit a less refined (100) peak, suggesting less overall crystalline organization. Similarly, with increasing temperature, decreasing definition of the low-intensity diffraction peak near 6° suggests this peak depends on heteroatom content.
 Fig. 4  Material characterization of carbon microsheets. Carbon microsheets synthesized under inert gas and vacuum demonstrate great disorder typical of low temperature pyrolytic carbons. (a) X-ray powder diffractograms demonstrate diffuse (002) and (100) peaks that characterize nano-crystallites within a dominant disordered phase. (b) Raman spectrograms show diffuse peaks including the D and G fundamental vibration modes, and the I, D′, and D′′ overtone modes that echo the great degree of material disorder. 
Raman spectrograms of carbon microsheets further evidence non-crystalline order (Fig. 4b). Two principle Raman features are observed in the frequency range 1000–2000 cm−1: the intensity peaks at frequencies 1350 and 1580 cm−1 are known as the D and G vibration modes, respectively.31 The D mode corresponds to the vibrational mode of sp3 hybridized carbon atoms, while the G mode corresponds to sp2 hybridized carbon. Carbon with sp2 hybridization is typical of planar arrangement or aromatic bonding, and thus measures graphitic crystallinity. Carbon with sp3 hybridization is typical of three-dimensional bonding structures, and thus measures disordered or aliphatic carbon content. Three additional peaks (i.e., I, D′, and D′′) are overtone vibrations of the D and G modes. The I peak is characteristic of amorphous carbon.32 As observed for the diffraction peaks of the X-ray diffractograms, the breadths of these Raman features are characteristic of significant disorder within the microsheet particles. Again, inert gas-derived microsheets also demonstrate these same spectral features.24 At a given synthesis temperature, the areal intensity of the D mode is greater than that of the G mode. With increasing temperature, the areal intensity ratio of these vibrational modes also increases.
The crystalline parameters of the synthesized carbon microsheets suggest that vacuum-derived microsheets are more disordered with smaller crystallite sizes compared to inert gas-derived microsheets (Fig. 5). These relationships are also conserved with higher synthesis temperature. This is explained by the effective size of crystallites in carbon microsheets, where asymmetrical Raman vibrations from crystallite edge sites impart greater intensity than symmetric vibrations from the bulk crystallite phase.31
 Fig. 5  Crystallite parameters of carbon microsheets. As synthesis temperature increases, the crystallite height decreases while the areal intensity ratio of the D and G vibration modes increases. At a given synthesis temperature, vacuum-derived carbon microsheets demonstrate larger intensity ratios and smaller crystallite size compared to inert gas-derived microsheets. 
3.2 Electrochemical performance
Electrochemical performance of vacuum-derived carbon microsheets is similar to that of inert gas-derived microsheets,24 particularly under comparable currents and synthesis temperature (Fig. 6b). But, at either synthesis temperature, extended cycling gravimetric capacity is greater for inert gas synthesis. With synthesis temperature 900 °C, inert gas and vacuum – derived carbon microsheets demonstrate mean gravimetric capacity 200 Ah kg−1 in cycle 10 (gravimetric current 25 A kg−1) – a similar capacity rating to that of synthetic graphite.24 In cycle 60 (25 A kg−1), gravimetric capacity increases to 250 Ah kg−1 with inert gas synthesis, but remains ca. 200 Ah kg−1 with vacuum synthesis. Similarly, with synthesis temperature 600 °C, inert gas and vacuum-derived carbon microsheets demonstrate mean gravimetric capacity 325 Ah kg−1 in cycle 10 (25 Ah kg−1). In cycle 60 (25 Ah kg−1), gravimetric capacity increases to ca. 400 Ah kg−1 with inert gas synthesis, while gravimetric capacity decreases to ca. 280 Ah kg−1 with vacuum synthesis.
 Fig. 6  Rate-dependent electrochemistry of carbon microsheets. As a Li-ion battery anode, each carbon microsheet sample demonstrates large reversible specific capacities and short-term stability. (a) Across all materials, the coulombic efficiency approaches unity under increasing applied specific current. (b) The specific capacity of carbon microsheets is equivalent or better than that of commercial graphite, especially at fast rates. The cycle 60 chronopotentiogram, corresponding to current 25 A kg−1, shows greater capacities with larger energy inefficiencies at (c) 600 C compared to (d) 900 C. Solid (●) and open (○) symbols represent discharge capacity and coulombic efficiency, respectively. Symbols and chronopotentiographs of the same color correspond to the same data set. 
Chronopotentiograms of inert gas and vacuum-derived carbon microsheets suggest greater capacity occurs with higher energy inefficiency (Fig. 6c and d). Energy inefficiency is measured as hysteresis, disparity between charge and discharge chronopotentiograms. Carbon microsheets synthesized at 600 °C demonstrate less energy inefficiency than those synthesized at 900 °C. Greater hysteresis in microsheets synthesized at lower temperature suggests higher capacity consequentially occurs with lower energy efficiency. Overall, vacuum-derived carbon microsheets demonstrate gravimetric capacities ca. 15% less than that of inert gas-derived microsheets, but with better energy efficiency.
Over extended galvanostatic cycling at high applied current 250 Ah kg−1, vacuum-derived carbon microsheets demonstrate more stable gravimetric capacity (Fig. 7). With synthesis temperature 900 °C at cycle 100, inert gas-derived microsheets demonstrate greater gravimetric capacity than vacuum-derived microsheets. However, inert gas-derived microsheets demonstrate unstable charge accumulation between cycles ca. 2–50 before reaching the steady capacity value of 175 Ah kg−1. This trend also occurs with synthesis temperature 900 °C, but with instability between cycles ca. 2–50. As concluded from rate-dependent cycling, the minimally decreased capacity occurring with vacuum synthesis is accompanied by greater energy efficiency (i.e., lower voltage hysteresis) compared to its counterpart with argon synthesis (Fig. 7c and d).
 Fig. 7  Extended cycling of carbon microsheets. Under specific current 500 Ah kg−1 at similar synthesis temperature, vacuum-derived carbon microsheets demonstrate better cycling stability compared to inert gas-derived ones. (a) Across all materials, the coulombic efficiency approaches unity with increased cycling. (b) The specific capacity of inert gas-derived microsheets is higher than that of vacuum-derived microsheets. The cycle 100 chronopotentiogram shows greater energy inefficiency accompanies higher capacity at (c) 600 C compared to (d) 900 C. Solid (●) and open (○) symbols represent discharge capacity and coulombic efficiency, respectively. Symbols and chronopotentiographs of the same color correspond to the same data set. 
After high current cycling, greater gravimetric capacity and unstable coulombic efficiency (e.g., greater than unity) are attributed to accelerated aging mechanisms. Great applied currents induce high overpotentials which accelerate material changes – though the specific nature of these changes are not well understood.33,34 One explanation is morphology change within the active material, where solid-state diffusion of lithium ions creates small channels within microsheets morphology.35–39 This phenomenon reveals new sites for lithium storage (e.g., surface charge storage) within increasing cycle number. Another possible explanation is instability at the electrode–electrolyte interface, where morphological and compositional changes occur with increasing cycle number or increasing applied current.40,41
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy shows vacuum-derived carbon microsheets have less high frequency impedance and greater low frequency impedance compared to inert gas-derived microsheets (Fig. 8). From high to low frequency, the complex impedance spectra for each carbon microsheet sample demonstrates four principle features42 (Fig. 8c): (1) high frequency arc, corresponding to solid electrolyte interphase (viz., electrode passivation) impedance; (2) moderate frequency arc, corresponding to heterogeneous or intrinsic material impedance; (3) low frequency arc, corresponding to charge transfer impedance; and (4) low frequency line, corresponding to solid diffusion impedance. All materials demonstrate appreciable solid state impedance. The combined resistance (i.e., SEI, microsheet material, and charge transfer sources), represented in each spectrum as the projection of the cumulative arc onto the abscissa, is less for the inert gas-derived materials compared to the vacuum-derived materials. Lower capacity in the vacuum-derived material can be attributed to their higher impedance.
 Fig. 8  Impedance spectroscopy of carbon microsheets. Vacuum-derived carbon microsheets demonstrate lower impedance at high frequency, but higher impedance at low frequency, compared to inert gas-derived ones. (a) The impedance spectrum for carbon microsheets can be modeled with four separate impedance sources: electrolyte, solid electrolyte interphase, bulk microsheet phase, and electrode interface. (b) The Bode impedance diagram shows several capacitance and resistance features occurring between 1–106 Hz for all carbon microsheet samples. (c) The Nyquist complex impedance diagram shows overlapping Randles features at low to high frequency and a distinct Warburg feature at low frequency for all carbon microsheet samples. 
3.3 Mass-based life cycle assessment
Midpoint life cycle assessment (LCA) is performed to understand the broader impact of large scale carbon microsheet manufacture. Results of LCA are compared for the processes of ambient vacuum at synthesis temperature 900 °C or inert gas at 600 °C. The environmental impact of carbon microsheets is analyzed using the TRACI impact categories (Fig. 5). Overall environmental impacts are reported on a constant mass basis (functional unit) of 1 kg of graphitic material.
Along dimensions of TRACI categories, both synthesis methods have different advantages. The inert gas process demonstrates less impact in the categories of acidification, smog, respiratory effects, global warming, and fossil fuel depletion; except in respiratory effects, environmental impact improves by at most 1 order of magnitude. In comparison, the vacuum process demonstrates less impact in carcinogenics, eco-toxicity, eutrophication, non-carcinogenics, and ozone depletion. In these categories, impact increases by 1–4 orders of magnitude.
In all categories, inert gas contributions dominate environmental impact of inert gas synthesis while continuous vacuum contributions dominate that of vacuum synthesis. Continuous inert gas atmospheres utilize great quantities of manufactured gas: increased gas production implies increased energy costs. In consequence, more energy for gas production increases pollutant equivalents: particularly, equivalents of CO2 and CFC-11. With respect to global warming and ozone depletion, increasing gas production underlies overall greater impact in the inert gas process. Finally, energy requirements comprise ca. 4% impact due to fossil fuel depletion. Overall impact of the vacuum process is proportional to energy consumption which, in turn, is a function of the applied energy mix. This critical dependence is explored in section 4.0.
In both processes, air emissions dominate respiratory effects (Fig. 8). Pyrolysis reactions are thermal decompositions: high-temperature heating breaks organic precursors into phases of solid carbon and aerosol hydrocarbons.43 Hydrocarbon by-products are respiratory risks because of their small average particle diameter.23 As suggested by Tsai et al.,23 possible by-product mitigation techniques include advanced HVAC filtration and stream recycling.
Both processes demonstrate avoided landfill impact, the effective reduction in environmental impact by preventing packing peanuts from becoming landfill waste. In the inert gas process, fossil fuel depletion decreases by ca. 40% of the maximum predicted impact. In the vacuum process, ozone depletion and eutrophication decrease by ca. 40% and 5%, respectively.
3.4 Capacity-based life cycle assessment
To understand environmental impact through the lens of sustainability, a midpoint LCA was performed with functional unit of specific capacity and four representative TRACI categories are presented (Fig. 6). The environmental impact of the inert gas process is less than that of the vacuum process in the categories of fossil fuel depletion, global warming, and respiratory effects. This suggests consumed argon is less impactful than low pressure maintenance. However, the inert gas pyrolysis method has greater environmental impact in potential eutrophication, ozone depletion, carcinogenics, non-carcinogenics, and eco-toxicity (not pictured). The impacts of both the vacuum and argon processes indicate that respiratory effects are significantly reduced by landfill avoidance. Although both synthesis methods produce graphitic anode material of similar quality, the yield on the vacuum process is much lower than that of the gas pyrolysis method (Fig. 9).
 Fig. 9  Midpoint environmental impact of carbon microsheets. (a) At mid-life cycle, environment impact of the vacuum process (c) is generally greater than that of the inert gas process (b), though by at most one order of magnitude. In the inert gas process, a significant landfill impact is avoided in preventing fossil fuel depletion. Midpoint impacts are normalized to specific capacity 372 Ah kg−1. 
4.0 Discussion
Carbon microsheets are inherently amorphous: phase disorder enables unique electrochemical performance, including specific capacities greater than conventional graphite. This behavior results from large mean interlayer spacing – greater than that of crystalline graphite.44 As observed through XRD, broad diffraction peaks are characteristic of carbonaceous pyrolysis products with low crystallinity. In pyrolytic carbons, low crystalline order is inversely related to intensity of heat treatment. For example, disordered carbon microsheets are subject to low intensity heating at less than 1000 °C for moderate synthesis time. In comparison, crystalline synthetic graphite is subject to excessive temperatures (e.g., 2800 °C) for sufficient synthesis time, encouraging development of ordered phases.
Li-Ion anode performance of inert gas-derived carbon microsheets has been previously reported by Etacheri et al.24 Vacuum-derived carbon microsheets are reported for the first time in this work. Gravimetric capacity, measuring electrochemical charge storage ability, is weakly dependent on synthesis atmosphere. At cycling rate C/10, carbon microsheets demonstrate mean gravimetric capacity 420 Ah kg−1; in contrast, conventional graphite exhibits less gravimetric capacity at comparable rate (with maximum theoretical limit 372 Ah kg−1).24 Greater gravimetric capacity suggests carbon microsheet anodes can enable batteries with greater energy storage. Several electrochemical challenges, particularly voltage hysteresis and energy efficiency, should be addressed to improve microsheet applicability as alternative anodes in rechargeable Li-ion batteries.
Across all of the environmental impact categories considered, the vacuum process is consistently dependent upon energy and its context. In particular, the vacuum process was determined with mixed energy sources assumed representative of the United States (viz., US conventional energy mixture; an itemized breakdown is shown in Table 3). This mixture is comprised of energy from various sources proportioned by prominence (outlined in section 2.2). The LCA suggests energy context is as significant to environmental impact as energy itself: the origin of utilized energy significantly effects environmental impact of the vacuum-synthesis method (Table 3). Replacement of the mixed energy source with renewable technologies of wind, nuclear, and hydropower decrease impact across several categories. In contrast, energy from only natural gas increases environmental impact in carcinogenics, eco-toxicity, fossil fuel depletion, and non-carcinogenics; and weakly reduces impact in eutrophication potential, ozone depletion, and smog. Energy derived from combustion materials (i.e., biomass, anthracite, bituminous, lignite, oil fuel) generally increases impact, but least environmental impact is observed from biomass sources. Specifically, biomass energy sources reduce acidification, eutrophication potential, and ozone depletion; however, smog increases by over 300%.
Table 3 Percent change in environmental impact due to energy source. The origin of energy utilized in the vacuum process has a significant influence upon environmental impact. If the energy consumed by the vacuum process is generated solely by renewable energy technologies, particularly nuclear and wind, the overall environmental impact decreases radically. If biomass is used as the energy source to provide energy for the vacuum process, in place of traditional organic fuels or coals, the overall environmental impact decreases in all categories except smog production and carcinogenics. Negative values indicate decreased environmental impact




Category
Reference
Conversion processes
Combustion materials


US standard
Hydropower
Natural gas
Nuclear
Photovoltaic
Wind
Biomass
Anthracite
Bituminous
Lignite
Oil fuel




Acidification
1.59 × 101
−99.9%
−8.8
−95.9
−93.8
−99.6
−87.5%
467.9
39.0
98.9
−44.7


kg SO2 eq.


Carcinogenics
3.41 × 10−6
−95.9
108.5
−97.8
515.7
−71.1
2.2
827.8
−45.1
−3.4
844.4


CTU (h)


Eco-toxicity
7.17 × 102
−99.4
216.5
−83.7
833.9
−98.4
−97.9
−33.2
−72.8
−51.9
727.1


CTU (e)


Eutrophication
2.16 × 10−1
−102.5
−38.6
−99.6
333.5
−101.7
−59.7
6.6
46.0
77.8
29.0


kg N eq.


Fossil fuel depletion
1.16 × 103
−99.8
283.5
−98.0
−88.0
−98.9
−99.1
−62.2
−63.5
−42.7
281.9


MJ surplus


Global warming
1.84 × 103
−97.1
−7.5
−98.7
−92.5
−99.4
−94.3
62.4
38.7
52.8
20.1


kg CO2 eq.


Non-carcinogenics
5.89 × 10−5
−99.3
57.0
−93.8
76.9
−98.2
−98.7
241.8
−7.8
65.1
436.3


CTU(h)


Ozone depletion
8.13 × 10−9
2223.0
−395.6
−214.3
365223.5
−410.5
−407.8
−385.6
153.9
443.1
672.5


kg CFC-11 eq.


Respiratory effects
5.46 × 10
−14.1
1.6
−13.5
−11.4
−14.0
−13.8
28.2
5.5
2.6
−11.5


kg PM2.5 eq.


Smog
1.24 × 102
−99.8
−70.9
−96.7
−92.9
−99.6
361.6
7.5
45.5
75.6
−14.2


kg O3 eq.




Overall, energy context is significantly influential to environmental impact of the vacuum process. Between different energy sources and combustion sources, greatest decreased impact is observed in ozone depletion by using renewable technologies (i.e., wind, hydropower, nuclear) or biomass and anthracite combustion; and in non-carcinogenics by biomass combustion. The greatest increased impact is more divisive: excessive environmental impact occurs in fossil fuel depletion by using natural gas; in ozone depletion, eutrophication, and ecotoxicity by using photovoltaic technologies; in global warming, acidification, and respiratory effects by anthracite combustion; in smog by biomass combustion; and carcinogenics and non-carcinogenics by fuel oil combustion.
4.1 Comparison with other studies
The environmental impact of Li-ion batteries has been studied in exhaustive detail, but a complete battery-grade synthetic graphite inventory has yet to be produced, which includes a comprehensive analysis of different synthesis processes. Hittman et al.14 reported overall energy consumption 177169 BTU kg−1 of carbon produced in the synthetic graphite process. Natural graphite performs with theoretical capacity 372 Ah kg−1 and practical capacity ca. 250 Ah kg−1 at moderate cycling rates.45 In comparison, inert gas-synthesized carbon microsheets perform with similar practical capacity but with quantifiable environmental impact, accounting for non-negligible influence of synthesis pathway. This work calculated cumulative energy demand for inert gas and vacuum pyrolysis pathways as 10700000 and 24500000 BTU kg−1 of carbon produced, respectively. The calculated energy demands for carbon microsheets are 2 orders of magnitude greater than that of Hittman et al. However, it is difficult to directly compare these cumulative energy demands because pyrolysis conditions of Hittman et al. are unreported. Similarly, energy demands of Notter et al.11 and Rydh et al.21 do not isolate synthesis impacts from cell fabrication impacts, further challenging objective comparisons. It is suggested that cumulative energy demands of these previous studies would be significantly greater and directly comparable if the significant influence of atmosphere maintenance was considered.
4.2 Perspective on current battery trends
In analyzing sustainability of emerging energy materials, it is important to consider broader implications – particularly to battery and graphite markets. Utilizing Li-ion battery patent data, Wagner et al.46 discussed several perspectives on movement and interest in the battery sector. In the past 2 decades, patent applications related to rechargeable Li-ion batteries increased by over 32%. Patent application trends in 1990–2010 can be classified according to the following categories, ordered by decreasing rate: battery cell housings (38%), current collectors (30%), electrolyte (29%), fillers or binders (27%), electrodes (25%), and separators (22%). With respect to anode materials, Wagner et al.46 highlight increasing patents relevant to graphite markets and suggest significant potential for titanium materials.
The 2013 perspective of Wagner et al.46 maintains relevance and accuracy at the time of publication of this work. But this perspective does not discuss synthetic graphitic materials, particularly novel substitutes derived from sustainable precursors. It is the opinion of the authors that sustainable alternatives to commercial graphite should not be overlooked: research activity in biomass-derived carbons, particularly for electrochemical applications, have rapidly increased in the past 2 decades. Due to rising popularity and market activity in renewable energy, many advances in rechargeable energy technology are quickly finding application in consumer markets. For example, in discussing the most significant cost factors for today's rechargeable batteries, Tesla Motors founder Elon Musk emphasized the dominant costs of commercial rechargeable batteries on graphite.47 A query of the US Patent Office (Fig. 7a) illustrates that accepted non-graphite battery anode patents have increased by 200% over the last six years.48 Non-graphite anode research has also increased by 400% over the same time period, based on a query of the Web of Knowledge database (Fig. 7b).49 This suggests an exceptional market need for graphite alternatives with better cost and sustainability. The authors recommend that future work in battery-focused LCA expand upon viability and environmental impact of graphite alternatives, with careful consideration of influences from synthesis mechanisms and energy context.
Ultimately, this work presents methodologies for LCA analysis of biomass-derived electrode materials, with focus on energy dominant synthesis processes. The demonstrated methodologies are not inherently dependent on carbon microsheets; rather, carbon microsheets and their synthesis process represent a product-process model through which the analysis methodology is described. In this sense, any biomass-derived carbon can be thoroughly analyzed using the demonstrated LCA-electrochemical evaluation – provided relevant electrochemical performance values and synthesis parameters are available (Fig. 10).
 Fig. 10  Increasing research activity related to derived-anodes for lithium-ion rechargeable batteries. Since 1994, the number of published (a) patent applications and (b) academic publications related to lithium-ion batteries has grown rapidly. The enlarged endpoints denote the patent application or academic publication quantities quoted for 2016. 
5.0 Conclusions
Carbon microsheets produced from used starch packing peanuts are superior to current battery-grade graphite at fast charging rates. The inert gas synthesis process relies heavily on energy-intensive practices, principally argon gas production. Synthesis of carbon microsheets under vacuum atmosphere can potentially reduce environmental strain with minimal loss in gravimetric capacity. This work demonstrates the influence of synthesis method to overall environmental impact, with little influence on gravimetric capacity. In the vacuum process, environmental impact is highly sensitive to the context of energy: for example, replacing the conventional mixed energy source by wind technology decreases impact in all TRACI categories. Utilization of waste packing peanuts in this process prevents their introduction into the solid waste stream. The potential to transform waste “zero” value materials into high value products for energy storage is only beginning to be investigated from a life cycle perspective: further research is encouraged to understand possible influence upon introduction to consumer battery and other markets.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest in this work.
Acknowledgements
AH would like to acknowledge the role of startup funding from the University of Wisconsin-Madison in the completion of this work. VP and AD gratefully acknowledge the Assistant Secretary for Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy, Office of Vehicle Technologies of the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract No. DE-EE0006832 under the Advanced Battery Materials Research (BMR) Program.
References
B. Dunn, H. Kamath and J.-M. Tarascon, Electrical Energy Storage for the Grid: A Battery of Choices, Science, 2011, 334, 928 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ibrahim, A. Ilinca and J. Perron, Energy storage systems – characteristics and comparisons, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2008, 12, 1221–1250 CrossRef CAS .
M. Beaudin, H. Zareipour, A. Schellenberglabe and W. Rosehart, Energy storage for mitigating the variability of renewable electricity sources: an updated review, Energy Sustainable Dev., 2010, 14, 302–314 CrossRef .
P. J. Hall and E. J. Bain, Energy-storage technologies and electricity generation, Energy Policy, 2008, 36, 4352–4355 CrossRef .
M. Yilmaz and P. T. Krein, Review of Battery Charger Topologies, Charging Power Levels, and Infrastructure for Plug-In Electric Hybrid Vehicles, IEEE Trans. Power Electron., 2013, 28(5), 2151 CrossRef .
C. Capasso and O. Veneri, Experimental analysis on the performance of lithium based batteries for road full electric hybrid vehicles, Appl. Energy, 2014, 136, 921–930 CrossRef CAS .
A. Nordelof, M. Messagi, A.-M. Tillman, M. L. Soderman and J. V. Mierlo, Environmental impacts of hybrid, plug-in hybrid, and battery electric vehicles – what can we learn from life cycle assessment?, Int. J. Life Cycle Assess., 2014, 19, 1866–1890 CrossRef .
K. Richa, C. W. Babbitt, N. G. Nenadic and G. Gaustad, Environmental trade-offs across cascading lithium-ion battery life cycles, Int. J. Life Cycle Assess., 2017, 22(1), 66–81 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pehklen, S. Albach and T. Vogt, Is there a resource constraint related to lithium ion batteries in cars?, Int. J. Life Cycle Assess., 2017, 22(3), 40–53 Search PubMed .
L. A.-W. Ellingsen, G. Majeau-Bettez, B. Singh, A. K. Srivastava, L. O. Valoen and A. H. Stromman, Life cycle assessment of a lithium-ion battery vehicle pack, J. Ind. Ecol., 2013, 18(1), 113 CrossRef .
D. A. Notter, M. Guach, R. Widmer, P. Wager, A. Stamp, R. Zah and H.-J. Althaus, Contribution of Li-Ion batteries to the environmental impact of electric vehicles, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2010, 44, 6550–6556 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          K. Richa, C. W. Babbit, N. G. Nenadic and G. Gaustad, Environmental trade-offs across cascading lithium-ion battery life cycles, International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment,  DOI:10.1007/s11367-015-0942-3,  2015 .

          L. Gaines and R. Cuenca, Life-cycle costs of lithium-ion vehicle batteries, Report, ANL/ESD-42,  2000.

          Hittman Associates, Life-cycle energy analyses of electric vehicle storage batteries, US Department of Energy,  1980 Search PubMed .
N. Arena, Jacquetta and R. Cliff, Life cycle assessment of activated carbon production from coconut shells, J. Clean. Prod., 2016, 125, 68–77 CrossRef CAS .

          M. M. Labes, Process for production of graphite flakes and films via low temperature pyrolysis, Patent Publication #WO1990015776A1,  1990 Search PubMed .
W. von Lensa, D. Vulpius, H. Steinmetz, N. Girke, D. Bosbach, B. Thomauske, J. A. W. Banford, D. Bradbury, B. Grambow, M. Grave, A. Jones, L. Petit and G. Pina, Treatment and disposal of irridated graphite and other carbonaceous waste, ATW, Int. Z. Kernenerg., 2011, 57(4–5), 263–269 Search PubMed .
M. Tang and R. Bacon, Carbonization of cellulose fibers – 1 low temperature pyrolysis, Carbon, 1964, 2, 211–220 CrossRef CAS .
S. Clyburn, T. Kantor and C. Veillon, Pyrolysis treatment for graphite atomization systems, Anal. Chem., 1974, 46(14), 2213 CrossRef CAS .
G. Majeau-Bettez, T. R. Hawkins and A. H. Stromman, Life cycle environmental assessment of lithium-ion and nickel metal hydride batteries for plug-in hybrid and battery electrici vehicles, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2011, 45, 4548–4554 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Rydh and B. A. Sanden, Energy analysis of batteries in photovoltaic systems. Part I: Performance and energy requirements, Energy Convers. Manage., 2005, 46, 1957–1979 CrossRef CAS .

          D. Whitford, The Snack Food that's Packing America, 1 October 1996, [Online], Available: http://www.inc.com/magazine/19961001/1828.html, [Accessed 14 October 2016] Search PubMed .
C. S. Tsai, A. Dysart, J. H. Beltz and V. G. Pol, Identifcation and mitigation of generated solid by-products during advanced electrode materials processing, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2016, 50, 2627–2634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Etacheri, C. N. Hong and V. G. Pol, Upcycling of packing-peanuts into carbon microsheet anodes for lithium-ion batteries, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2015, 49, 11191–11198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
The Engineering Tool Box, Specific Heats, 2016, [Online], Available: http://www.engineeringtoolbox.com/specific-heat-solids-d_154.html, [Accessed 22 April 2016] .
Robinair, Vacuum pump operating manual, Model 15500 .
National Renewable Energy Laboratory, U.S. Life cycle inventory database, 2012, [Online], Available: https://www.lcacommons.gov/nrel/search, [Accessed 10 January 2017] .
Ecoinvent, The Ecoinvent database, [Online], Available: http://www.ecoinvent.org/database/database.html, [Accessed 9 January 2017] .
European Commission, European Life Cycle Database, [Online], Available: http://eplca.jrc.ec.europa.eu/ELCD3/, [Accessed 9 January 2017] .
Z. Li, C. Lu, Z. Xia, Y. Zhou and Z. Luo, X-ray diffraction patterns of graphite and turbostratic carbon, Carbon, 2007, 45, 1686–1695 CrossRef CAS .
I. Childres, L. Jauregui, W. Park, H. Cao and Y. Chen, Spectroscopy of Graphene and Related Materials, New Dev. Photon Mater. Res., 2013, 1–20 Search PubMed .
A. Umair, T. Raza and H. Raza, Ultrathin pyrolytic carbon films on magnetic substrate, Mater. Res. Express, 2016, 3, 1–9 Search PubMed .
K. Persson, V. A. H. L. J. Sethurama, Y. Hinuma, Y. S. Meng, A. an der Ven, V. Srinivasan, R. Kostecki and G. Ceder, Lithium diffusion in graphitic carbon, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 1176–1180 CrossRef CAS .
C. Jiang, E. Hosono and H. Zhou, Nanomaterials for Lithium Ion Batteries, Nano Today, 2006, 1(4), 28 CrossRef .
K. Kim, R. A. Adams, P. J. Kim, A. Arora, E. Martinez, J. P. Youngblood and V. G. Pol, Li-ion storage in an amorphous, solid, spheroidal carbon anode produced by dry-autoclaving of coffee oil, Carbon, 2018, 133, 62–68 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhao, Y. Fan, K. Zhu, D. Zhang, W. Zhang and S. E. A. Chen, The effect of hydrogenation on the growth of carbon nanospheres and their performance as anode materials for rechargeable lithium-ion batteries, Nanoscale, 2015, 7(5), 1984–1993 RSC .
S. Wang, R. Wang, Y. Zhang and L. Zhang, Highly porous carbon with large electrochemical ion absorption capability for high-performance supercapacitors and ion capacitors, Nanotechnology, 2017, 28(44), 445406 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Huang, S. Wang, Y. Zhang, B. Yu, L. Hou and G. Su, 
            et al., Hollow Carbon Nanospheres with Extremely Small Size as Anode Material in Lithium-Ion Batteries with Outstanding Cycling Stability, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120(6), 3139–3144 CAS .
J. Dong, T. Zhang, D. Zhang, W. Zhang, H. Zhang and R. Liu, 
            et al., Remarkable cycle-activated capacity increasing in onion-like carbon nanospheres as lithium battery anode material, Nanotechnology, 2017, 28(3), 35704 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Collins, G. Gourdin, M. Foster and D. Qu, Carbon surface functionalities and SEI formation during Li intercalation, Carbon, 2015, 92, 193–244 CrossRef CAS .
F. Kong, R. Kostecki, G. Nadeau, X. Song, K. Zaghib, K. Kinoshita and F. McLarnon, In situ studies of SEI formation, J. Power Sources, 2001, 97–98, 58–66 CrossRef CAS .

          Q. Zhuang, X. Qiu, S. Xu, Y. Qiang and S. Su, Diagnosis of Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy in Lithium-Ion Batteries,  2012 Search PubMed .
D. Neves, H. Thunman, A. Matos, L. Tarelho and A. Gomez-Barea, A characterization and prediction of biomass pyrolysis products, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2011, 37, 611–630 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, J. Xue, T. Zheng and J. Dahn, Mechanism of lithium insertion in hard carbons prepared by pyrolysis of epoxy resins, Carbon, 1996, 34, 193–200 CrossRef CAS .
S. Komaba, T. Itabashi, B. Kaplan, H. Groult and N. Kumagai, Enhancement of Li-ion battery performance of graphite anode by sodium ion as an electrolyte additive, Electrochem. Commun., 2003, 5(11), 962–966 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wagner, N. Preschitschek, S. Passerini, J. Leker and M. Winter, Current research trends and prospects among the various materials and designs used in lithium-based batteries, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2013, 43, 481–496 CrossRef CAS .
Mineral Intelligence, 5 June 2016, [Online], Available: http://benchmarkminerals.com/elon-musk-our-lithium-ion-batteries-should-be-called-nickel-graphite/, [Accessed 12 January 2017] .
U.S. Patent Office, U.S. Patent Office Search, 10 January 2017, [Online], Available: http://patft.uspto.gov, [Accessed 12 January 2017] .

          T. Reuters, Web of Knowledge,  2017, [Online], Available: https://apps.webofknowledge.com/WOS_GeneralSearch_input.do?product=WOS&search_mode=GeneralSearch&SID=3A1nlZlnmqgP3S9dYXC&preferencesSaved=, [Accessed 11 January 2017] Search PubMed .

Footnote† Denotes equal contribution to the work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

Environmental significance
Battery storage is critical to advancing alternative energy technologies. Conventional rechargeable lithium ion batteries use battery grade graphite. This work presents an alternative graphitic anode produced from starch packing peanuts using two synthesis methods (viz., inert gas and vacuum) with superior performance to conventional graphite. Life cycle assessment analyzes the environmental impact of the synthesis routes and identifies significant contributors. Electrochemical testing shows battery components generated from waste materials may perform better than conventional graphite. Ultimately, this work demonstrates new environmental avenues for waste materials as raw materials: an increasingly critical area of research.


 	Fig. 1  Synthesis of carbon microsheets. Carbon microsheets are synthesized by pyrolytic heating of packing peanuts in an oxygen-free atmosphere. Non-oxidizing atmosphere is enabled by continuous argon gas purge or vacuum evacuation. After pyrolysis, micron-sized carbon microsheets are used in rechargeable battery anodes without further chemical separation or purification.	 

Inputs
Mass of starch packing peanuts	273.81	mg	

Energy of heating	0.192	kJ	Electricity of US grid
Mass of argon gas	36.87	g	Liquid argon
Outputs
Mass of carbon product	82.14	mg	

Mass of landfill waste avoided	273.81	mg	Biodegradable waste to municipal landfill
Mass of particulates to air	164.27	mg	Particulate diameter <2.5 μm

Inputs	
	

Mass of starch packing peanuts	273.81	mg	

Energy of heating	0.0642	kJ	Electricity of US grid
Energy of vacuum	298.0	kJ	Electricity of US grid
Outputs	
	

Mass of carbon product	35.04	mg	

Mass of landfill waste avoided	273.81	mg	Biodegradable waste to municipal landfill
Mass of particulates to air	164.27	mg	Particulate diameter <2.5 μm

 	Fig. 2  Scanning electron micrograph of carbon microsheets derived from packing peanuts in vacuum. Carbon microsheets synthesized under inert gas and vacuum demonstrate irregular and planar shapes, with mean particle length less than 50 μm. The morphology of carbon microsheets is also independent of synthesis temperature.	 

 	Fig. 3  Organic elemental composition of carbon microsheets. Though generally similar among the studied synthesis procedures, final carbon content is more strongly influenced by synthesis atmosphere than temperature. At either 600 or 900 °C, carbon microsheets synthesized under vacuum demonstrate less carbon and greater oxygen content than those synthesized under inert gas. Note oxygen content is calculated as the residual from unity.	 

 	Fig. 4  Material characterization of carbon microsheets. Carbon microsheets synthesized under inert gas and vacuum demonstrate great disorder typical of low temperature pyrolytic carbons. (a) X-ray powder diffractograms demonstrate diffuse (002) and (100) peaks that characterize nano-crystallites within a dominant disordered phase. (b) Raman spectrograms show diffuse peaks including the D and G fundamental vibration modes, and the I, D′, and D′′ overtone modes that echo the great degree of material disorder.	 

 	Fig. 5  Crystallite parameters of carbon microsheets. As synthesis temperature increases, the crystallite height decreases while the areal intensity ratio of the D and G vibration modes increases. At a given synthesis temperature, vacuum-derived carbon microsheets demonstrate larger intensity ratios and smaller crystallite size compared to inert gas-derived microsheets.	 

 	Fig. 6  Rate-dependent electrochemistry of carbon microsheets. As a Li-ion battery anode, each carbon microsheet sample demonstrates large reversible specific capacities and short-term stability. (a) Across all materials, the coulombic efficiency approaches unity under increasing applied specific current. (b) The specific capacity of carbon microsheets is equivalent or better than that of commercial graphite, especially at fast rates. The cycle 60 chronopotentiogram, corresponding to current 25 A kg−1, shows greater capacities with larger energy inefficiencies at (c) 600 C compared to (d) 900 C. Solid (●) and open (○) symbols represent discharge capacity and coulombic efficiency, respectively. Symbols and chronopotentiographs of the same color correspond to the same data set.	 

 	Fig. 7  Extended cycling of carbon microsheets. Under specific current 500 Ah kg−1 at similar synthesis temperature, vacuum-derived carbon microsheets demonstrate better cycling stability compared to inert gas-derived ones. (a) Across all materials, the coulombic efficiency approaches unity with increased cycling. (b) The specific capacity of inert gas-derived microsheets is higher than that of vacuum-derived microsheets. The cycle 100 chronopotentiogram shows greater energy inefficiency accompanies higher capacity at (c) 600 C compared to (d) 900 C. Solid (●) and open (○) symbols represent discharge capacity and coulombic efficiency, respectively. Symbols and chronopotentiographs of the same color correspond to the same data set.	 

 	Fig. 8  Impedance spectroscopy of carbon microsheets. Vacuum-derived carbon microsheets demonstrate lower impedance at high frequency, but higher impedance at low frequency, compared to inert gas-derived ones. (a) The impedance spectrum for carbon microsheets can be modeled with four separate impedance sources: electrolyte, solid electrolyte interphase, bulk microsheet phase, and electrode interface. (b) The Bode impedance diagram shows several capacitance and resistance features occurring between 1–106 Hz for all carbon microsheet samples. (c) The Nyquist complex impedance diagram shows overlapping Randles features at low to high frequency and a distinct Warburg feature at low frequency for all carbon microsheet samples.	 

 	Fig. 9  Midpoint environmental impact of carbon microsheets. (a) At mid-life cycle, environment impact of the vacuum process (c) is generally greater than that of the inert gas process (b), though by at most one order of magnitude. In the inert gas process, a significant landfill impact is avoided in preventing fossil fuel depletion. Midpoint impacts are normalized to specific capacity 372 Ah kg−1.	 


Acidification	1.59 × 101	−99.9%	−8.8	−95.9	−93.8	−99.6	−87.5%	467.9	39.0	98.9	−44.7
kg SO2 eq.
Carcinogenics	3.41 × 10−6	−95.9	108.5	−97.8	515.7	−71.1	2.2	827.8	−45.1	−3.4	844.4
CTU (h)
Eco-toxicity	7.17 × 102	−99.4	216.5	−83.7	833.9	−98.4	−97.9	−33.2	−72.8	−51.9	727.1
CTU (e)
Eutrophication	2.16 × 10−1	−102.5	−38.6	−99.6	333.5	−101.7	−59.7	6.6	46.0	77.8	29.0
kg N eq.
Fossil fuel depletion	1.16 × 103	−99.8	283.5	−98.0	−88.0	−98.9	−99.1	−62.2	−63.5	−42.7	281.9
MJ surplus
Global warming	1.84 × 103	−97.1	−7.5	−98.7	−92.5	−99.4	−94.3	62.4	38.7	52.8	20.1
kg CO2 eq.
Non-carcinogenics	5.89 × 10−5	−99.3	57.0	−93.8	76.9	−98.2	−98.7	241.8	−7.8	65.1	436.3
CTU(h)
Ozone depletion	8.13 × 10−9	2223.0	−395.6	−214.3	365223.5	−410.5	−407.8	−385.6	153.9	443.1	672.5
kg CFC-11 eq.
Respiratory effects	5.46 × 10	−14.1	1.6	−13.5	−11.4	−14.0	−13.8	28.2	5.5	2.6	−11.5
kg PM2.5 eq.
Smog	1.24 × 102	−99.8	−70.9	−96.7	−92.9	−99.6	361.6	7.5	45.5	75.6	−14.2
kg O3 eq.

 	Fig. 10  Increasing research activity related to derived-anodes for lithium-ion rechargeable batteries. Since 1994, the number of published (a) patent applications and (b) academic publications related to lithium-ion batteries has grown rapidly. The enlarged endpoints denote the patent application or academic publication quantities quoted for 2016.	 
Footnote
† Denotes equal contribution to the work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
