Organic thermoelectric generators: working principles, materials, and fabrication techniques  - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2CC04205C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2CC04205C
(Highlight)
Chem. Commun., 2023, 59, 3160-3174Organic thermoelectric generators: working principles, materials, and fabrication techniques

        
          
            Ilknur Hatice 
            Eryilmaz
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yan-Fang 
            Chen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Giorgio 
            Mattana
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Emanuele 
            Orgiu
          
        
      *a
aInstitut national de la recherche scientifique, Centre Énergie Matériaux Télécommunications, 1650 Blvd. Lionel-Boulet, J3X 1P7, Varennes, QC, Canada. E-mail: emanuele.orgiu@inrs.ca
bUniversité Paris Cité, ITODYS, CNRS, UMR 7086, 15 rue J.-A. de Baïf, F-75013 Paris, France. E-mail: giorgio.mattana@u-paris.fr
Received 
      27th July 2022
    , Accepted 13th February 2023First published on 14th February 2023AbstractOrganic thermoelectricity is a blooming field of research that employs organic (semi)conductors to recycle waste heat through its partial conversion to electrical power. Such a conversion occurs by means of organic thermoelectric generator (OTEG) devices. The recent process on the synthesis of novel materials and on the understanding of doping mechanisms to increase conductivity has tremendously narrowed the gap between laboratory research and their application in actual applications. This Feature Article intends to highlight the impressive progress in materials and fabrication techniques for OTEGs made in recent years.
A thermoelectric device typically consists of a thermoelectric active material sandwiched between a hot (T = Th) and a cold (T = Tc) electrode as illustrated in Fig. 1(a). Greater thermal motion of charge carriers at the hot side compared to the cold one leads to the build-up of a charge density gradient which opposes the temperature gradient. This phenomenon leads to the appearance of a thermal voltage, ΔV, across the two sides of the material whose magnitude is governed by the so-called Seebeck coefficient, S = ΔV/ΔT, which is material dependent. Such a thermovoltage allows useful electrical power to be extracted. The maximum efficiency, ηTE, of any thermoelectric device can be written as a function of the Carnot efficiency, ηc = (Th − Tc)/Th. (1)where T = (Th − Tc)/2. Here the dimensionless factor, zT, known as the thermoelectric figure of merit, is the material parameter that needs to be maximised and can be expanded as a function of the material's conductivity, σ, Seebeck coefficient, S, and thermal conductivity, κ. zT = σS2T/κ(2)
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematics representation of a thermoelectric process occurring in a TEG sandwiched between hot and cold thermal contacts. (b) Thermal equivalent circuit of a TEG device. 
A good thermoelectric material is therefore one that possesses high electrical conductivity combined with a large Seebeck coefficient and low thermal conductivity. Since the 1950s, significant efforts have been devoted to improving the so-called figure-of-merit (zT) of TEGs by integrating high-performance thermoelectric materials based mainly on inorganic semiconductors as the active material. In fact, inorganic thermoelectric materials (e.g., Te, Bi, Pb) are rare, toxic, and manufactured using high-temperature processes, which are incompatible with mass production and as such, do hamper the widespread use of thermoelectrics. State-of-the art values of zT for inorganic TEGs currently exceed 1 in the average temperature range.1–3 In sharp contrast, organic (semi)conductors (OSC) materials are carbon-based, low-cost and solution-processable. Moreover, the mechanical flexibility of OSC makes it possible to utilise such devices in applications such as wearable electronics, single-use sensors or domotics, to mention only a few. zT ≥ 1 is generally considered necessary for most applications and the current state of the art is represented by the inorganic Bi2Te3 featuring a zT close to 1 (at ca. 300 K), while there is already reported experimental evidence of zT ∼ 0.4 for organic active layers.4 A major difference between inorganic and organic TEGs is their operating range temperature; while inorganic TEGs can function at relatively high temperatures (typically up to 600 K), organic TEGs have operating temperatures that generally lie below 450 K which, however, corresponds to the majority of global waste heat.5–7 Hence, organic TEGs mostly recycle heat waste at temperature closer to Tamb while providing effective power output which could be employed in wearable, biomedical and domotic applications.8 The grand challenges of organic thermoelectrics currently are represented by the synthesis and processing of novel materials and by the implementation of novel doping strategies. As the thermoelectric voltage that is generated by a single TEG is usually of the order of only a few mVs, thermoelectric couples of n-type and p-type elements (called legs) must be connected in series to generate enough power for practical applications.
TEGs can be used in cooling and power generation applications without moving parts or in hazardous working fluids, and they represent an attractive solution to energy and environmental problems. Whilst there is already reported experimental evidence of zT of ∼0.4 for OSC, the latter generally suffer from low electrical conductivity, therefore novel materials, doping strategies or processing techniques must be found to boost OSC's conductivity to improve TEGs’ figure of merit. Although molecules do appear to have attracted a great deal of attention for molecular-scale thermoelectrics,9–13 the present Highlight will only focus on large-area, bulk devices. Another major hurdle in organic thermoelectrics is the development of appropriate processing and fabrication techniques to produce thick layers which are required for TEGs.
This feature article starts off by covering the main working principles of TEGs. The second section describes the state-of-the-art p-type and n-type materials employed in current organic thermoelectrics, while providing a brief overview of the doping strategies currently utilized to increase the electrical conductivity. The final section is dedicated to the description of the main fabrication techniques currently employed to fabricate organic TEGs.
1. Working principles of thermoelectric generator devices
1.1. Thermal equivalent circuit of thermoelectric devices
As discussed in the previous section, OSC hold great potential as active layers for thermoelectric generator devices (TEGs). A basic TEG device normally includes a p-type and n-type leg, connected in series through metallic connections, sandwiched between a hot and a cold thermal reservoir. Let us consider a material with a given Seebeck coefficient S, thermal conductivity κ, and resistivity ρ that is sandwiched between a high and a low temperature reservoirs with temperature Th and Tc, respectively. Assuming S is independent of temperature so as to ignore the Thomson effect, the relationship between the current I going through the legs and the heat Qh transferred through the high-temperature thermal contact can be expressed as: (3)where A is the cross-sectional area, and l is the length of the leg (Fig. 1(a)). The first and second terms correspond to the (as expected) Joule heating and thermal conduction, respectively, while the third term is unique to thermoelectric materials, and arises from Seebeck and Peltier effect.
Similarly, the heat Qc transferred through the low-temperature thermal contact can be expressed as: (4)

Eqn (3) and (4) hold under the assumption that thermal transport is one-dimensional, i.e., the cross-sectional area remains the same throughout the active layer, and the heat flow escaping through lateral directions is neglected. Generally, this would lead to an overestimation of efficiency and power output in the device. However, in the case of organic thin film devices, the lateral dimensions are small compared to that of the device area, so the assumption should be considered as a good approximation. Another assumption is that the material properties are not dependent from temperature (as explicitly made above in the case of Seebeck coefficient).
Another point of interest concerning the use of these equations is that they are not limited to a single active layer type of device. In the typical p-type/n-type serial configuration of TEG, the equations can be easily adapted and maintain their full accuracy by replacing the Seebeck coefficient with the difference between the 2 materials (Sp − Sn), while the resistivity and thermal conductivity replaced with their added values (ρp + ρn, κp + κn), since the 2 legs are electrically connected in series but thermally connected in parallel, or more generally: (5) (6)where Ap, An are the cross-sectional area of the p-type and n-type legs, respectively.
With the equations justified for our use, it is possible to further analyse the TEG device using the concept of thermal equivalent circuits, which obey the same laws of electric circuits when the current is replaced by the heat flow, the electric potential by the temperature, and there is an equivalent “thermal resistance” (in the unit of K W−1) in the thermal system. Using the above equations, the TEG device can be seen as composed of 2 thermal sources and 1 thermal resistor (Fig. 1(b)): at the hot end there is a thermal source with heat generating rate of −I2ρL/2A + SITc, while at the cold end generating rate of I2ρL/2A + SITc, and a resistance value of κA(Th – Tc)/L.
From here a more general thermal equivalent circuit of the TEG device can be constructed, taking into account the thermal resistance of the substrates and thermal contact resistances. In Fig. 1(b), y indicates thermal resistances: yk is the thermal resistance of the TEG, yhs and ycs are the thermal resistances of the hot and cold end substrates, respectively, and yh and yc correspond to the contact thermal resistances between the substrate and the hot and cold reservoirs.
As an example of the analysis of this thermal circuit, we consider the heat flow going through the hot end of the TEG device. At the steady state, the net heat flow is zero. Therefore: (7)where Ts is the temperature of the heat source.
Similarly, with Ta being the temperature of the low temperature heat sink, at the cold end of the TEG device, one obtains: (8)
1.2. Device architecture and its optimisation
With the equivalent circuit in Fig. 1(b), it is possible to estimate the complete temperature distribution and heat flow, either analytically in simplified cases or numerically in general, given the current I is known. However, power generating devices such as TEG are generally connected with an external load, represented by Rload, to collect the energy output. With the internal electrical resistance of the TEG device RTEG, the (electrical) equivalent circuit of the TEG device can be drawn simply, as shown in Fig. 2(a), and an expression of the output power of the TEG based on the relevant parameters can be derived.
 Fig. 2  (a) Electrical equivalent circuit of a TEG device. (b) Schematics of a TEG array. 
However, further considerations are necessary in order for the expression to correspond to a more realistic device. In particular, the issue of device area would be of concern, as, practically, TEG devices consist not just of a single pair of p-type/n-type legs but an array of pairs in order to achieve higher open-circuit voltage and generate larger output power (Fig. 2(b)). Due to fabrication limitation and thermal resistance consideration, the total device area A may be larger than the active area Ap + An in the array design, leaving gaps between thermal couples, and a fill factor FF should be introduced as FF = (Ap + An)/A (FF ≤ 1).
Therefore, with the open-circuit voltage per unit area vTEG = nS (Th− Tc), where n is the number of thermal couples per unit area, and the output power per unit area pout = vloadi, the following expression can be obtained for the output power: (9)where l is the length of the active layer, m = Rload/RTEG.
The variable load resistance can be used to optimise the output power of the TEG. Using the above expression, it is found that the optimised output power to be: (10)when m = 1.
However, such optimisation does not take into account the thermal processes that are going to affect the temperatures at the hot and cold side of TEG (Th and Tc). The full optimisation would need to entwine the thermal component as discussed in section 1 with the electrical circuit, which presents as a full-fledged research topic due to its highly nonlinear nature. For example, a linearised model has been proposed in order to obtain insight into the overall processes.8 Aiming at providing the introductory ideas of the TEG operation, this section suggests that there is still plenty of room when it comes to TEGs’ optimisation, as presented in the literature.14–18
2. Materials for organic thermoelectric generators
In order to develop organic TEGs (OTEGs) approaching figure of merit of commercial inorganic materials, it is of utter importance to focus on improving the design and synthesis of novel organic materials and, at the same time, considerable effort should be put on adapting pre-existing deposition processes. Thanks to their facile synthesis, flexibility and being lightweight, OTEGs can be potentially applied in everyday/smart electronics i.e., wearable, medical devices, IoT, etc. As OTEGs typically employ a p- and an n-type (semi)conductive material, the field is in search of novel compounds of both types. As discussed in the previous section, a high zT value requires high electrical and low thermal conductivity basically and organic materials usually possess low thermal conductivities (usually between 0.1 and 0.5 W m−1 K−1) and, as such, it is mostly their electrical properties which should be improved. In this regard, conjugated organic materials transporting carriers are studied widely for thermoelectric purposes for various applications.19–22 Drude–Sommerfeld model, σ = neμ, (where n is carrier concentration, e is the elemental charge and μ is the charge carriers’ mobility) is used to increase electrical conductivity. As organic semiconductors are generally endowed with low thermal conductivity, in order to achieve a high figure of merit (zT), one could think of maximising the power factor by following the classical expression, PF = σS2, where S is the Seebeck coefficient and σ is the electrical conductivity. On the one hand, direct measurement of the carrier concentration (contained in the expression of σ) in organics with conventional Hall measurements is difficult owing to their inherently low mobility and energetic disorder. On the other hand, due to the current lack of a predictive model, thermopower could be better predicted as a function of electrical conductivity. Based on numerous literature reports for a broad range of doped organic materials, an empirical relationship was found between electrical conductivity and thermopower where PF ∝ σ1/2.23,24 Another challenge for organic thermoelectric is still the general lack of n-type materials (in comparison with p-type materials) which certainly deserves further synthetic efforts.
Conjugated backbones of polymers with continuous sp2 hybridised electrons and tailored packing of molecules (decreased π–π stacking distances) allow intramolecular and intermolecular charge transportation respectively. Carefully chosen molecular guest dopants can lead to increased host polymer electrical conductivity. There are number of strategies used to enhance the electrical properties of organic materials by manipulating polymer design, molecular dopant design, and processing methods.23,25–28 p-(e− acceptor) and n-(e− donor) type small molecules are commonly used to dope polymers either through integer charge-transfer (ICT) or formation of charge-transfer complexes (CPXs).29 Controlled doping is critical in thermoelectric materials, and although the presence of molecular doping inside the polymer matrix might boost its electrical conductivity, excessive doping concentrations could disturb the solid-state packing and generate traps, so might influence the Seebeck value.30
2.1. p-type organic thermoelectric materials
p-Type organic materials (hole carriers) are studied widely in literature, and they exhibit attractive thermoelectric properties as discussed below. Fig. 3 depicts some of popular p-type organic thermoelectric molecules’ chemical structures.
 Fig. 3  Molecular structures of the p-type polymers encompassed in this Feature Article. 
One of the well-known thermoelectric polymer, PEDOT, based on an ethylenedioxythiophene (EDOT) monomer, is an extensively studied p-type conducting polymer thanks to its facile oxidative polymerisation processing in water, its air-stable and water processibility properties makes it useful in industrial applications.22,31–34 Its doped version with polystyrenesulfonic acid (PSS), PEDOT:PSS, was employed in an OTEG to reach the highest zT of 0.42 (at RT) in organic thermoelectrics.4 Wen et al. successfully demonstrated ultra-flexible OTEG devices of PEDOT:PSS (1D) fibres with high PF of 147.8 μW m−1 K−2 for μm-scaled conducting polymers with electrical conductivity of 4029.5 S cm−1 with H2SO4 post-treatment which enhanced its electrical properties.35 PEDOT is used in different applications such as the wearable36 where extremely high electrical conductivity (13826 S m−1) and PF (1.41 μW m−1 K−2) are reached with a composite of PEDOT:PSS and multi-walled carbon nanotube (MW-CNT) fibres and polyurethane.36 Besides acid treatment,35,37,38 using polar organic solvents such as ethylene glycol (EG) and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO)4,37,39,40 and ionic liquids41,42 were reported to improve PEDOT:PSS thermoelectric properties. Liu et al. presented PEDOT:PSS hydrogel fibres with enhanced π–π stacking interaction and treated with organic solvents and sulphuric acid reaching PF of 4.77 μW m−1 K−2.43
CNTs are cylindrical carbon-based nanoarchitectures that can be either single-walled (SW-CNT) or multi-walled (MW-CNT) in different nm-scale diameters and are widely studied for thermoelectric applications.44–46 CNTs have high electrical conductivities and also high thermal conductivities which requires the careful preparation of composites with various polymers to get higher zT and S as well as improve mechanical, physical properties, and process scalability.47–49 Sun et al. studied the CNTs paired with PEDOT-Tosylate, in which electrical conductivity exceeds 1000 S cm−1 and the power factor is 35 μW m−1 K−2.50 Polypyrrole (PPy) is another attractive thermoelectric polymer due to its high electrical conductivity and intrinsically low thermal conductivity and thus researchers use this material either in its pristine form or in composites.51,52 Baghdadi et al. grew 1-dimensional PPy on the sidewalls of MWCNT in an acidic medium and reached 0.77 μW m−1 K−2 as PF.53 Liang et al. reached 21.7 ± 0.8 μW m−1 K−2 through sandwiching SWCNT by PPy nanowires as free-standing devices.54 All-carbon OTEG device was demonstrated recently via p- and n-type air-stable SWCNT films and they reached values of PFs such as 145 (p) and 127 (n) μW m−1 K−2 at RT.55
Polyaniline (PANI) is a conductive polymer used in the industry thanks to its facile synthesis, chemical and thermal stability as well as high conductivity in spite of its hygroscopic behaviour that limits its applications.20,56–58 Acid doping of PANI (HCl,59,60 camphor sulfonic acid (CSA)) led to conductivity as high as 5700 S m−161 thus improving electrical conductivity and PF. Moreover, composite of PANI with SWCNT through partial dedoping presented a high PF of 345 μW m−1 K−2.62 Improvement of thermoelectric characteristics was also achieved through utilising A-CNT/PANI (A-CNT: amine-functionalized SW/DWCNT) composites, resulting in high conductivities up to 2012 S cm−1 and power factor ∼400 μW m−1 K−2 which is increased from 273 μW m−1 K−2 upon adjusting the CSA ratio.63
Tetracyanoquinodimethane (TCNQ) and its increasingly fluorinated derivatives used frequently as p-dopant for various conjugated polythiophene polymers such as poly(2,5-bis(3-tetradecylthiophen-2-yl)thieno(3,2-b)thiophene) (pBTTT) and poly(3-hexyl)thiophene (P3HT) besides PEDOT. Patel et al. presented different doping methods (solution vs. vapour deposition) of FnTCNQ (n = 2, 4) on PBTTT.26 According to their results, vapour-doped films exhibited higher electrical conductivity thanks to minimal molecular structural perturbation of the pristine polymer crystallinity; a PF of 120 ± 30 μW m−1 K−2 was reported within the same study. When molecular packing needs to be preserved and dopants are difficult to dissolve, sequential doping is the preferred method.64–66 In this process, the dopants are deposited from an orthogonal solvent or by vapor on a pre-assembled film and are then let diffuse into the film typically upon gentle heating. The doping mechanism, dopant/polymer interactions has been studied thoroughly about the role of dopant contribution at a fundamental level as giving rise either ion pair (IPA) or ground-state charge transfer complex (CPX) formation.67–70 Kang et al. demonstrated that conductivity of pBTTT can reach 200 S cm−1 through a controlled solid state diffusion of 2,3,5,6-tetrafluoro-7,7,8,8-tetracyanoquinodimethane (F4-TCNQ).71 Electrochemical doping of pBTTT was studied to connect crystalline domains efficiently to an increased PF and they explained the role of the crystal domains and the boundaries under continuous ion-gel gating doping.72,73
Poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl) (P3HT) is a model material which has been extensively studied in organic electronics but that is also employed to study fundamental processes such as structure-dopant interactions for thermoelectrics.74–79 Double doping of P3HT with AuCl3− and Au nanoparticles in ambient air was presented by Kang et al. leading to the electrical conductivity of 207 S cm−1 and PF of 110 μW m−1 K−2.80 Beyond P3HT, Gregory et al. studied the thermoelectric properties of poly(3-alkylchalcogenophene) thin films together with heteroatoms and doping processes.81 In the study, three different heteroatoms such as S (thiophene), Se (selenophene), and Te (tellurophene) with an alkyl solvating group were compared. As a result, electrical conductivity values were found to increase with heavier heteroatom from S, Se to Te while thermopower increases in the opposite order. In the case of high dopant concentration poly(3-alkylthiophene) (P3HT) showed a PF of 13 μW m−1 K−2.
Suh et al. studied the thermoelectric properties of two donor–acceptor polymers with low-lying HOMO such as regioregular poly[(5-fluoro-2,1,3-benzothiadiazole-4,7-diyl)(4,4-dihexadecyl-4H-cyclopenta[2,1-b:3,4-b′]dithiophene-2,6-diyl)(6-fluoro-2,1,3-benzothiadiazole-4,7-diyl)(4,4-dihexadecyl-4H-cyclopenta[2,1-b:3,4-b′]dithiophene-2,6-diyl)] (PCDTFBT) and poly[1,2,5 thiadiazolo][3,4-c]pyridine-4,7-diyl(4,4-dihexadecyl-4H-cyclopenta[2,1-b:3,4-b′]dithiophene-2,6-diyl)1,2,5-thiadiazolo[3,4-c]pyridine-7,4-diyl(4,4-dihexadecyl-4H-cyclopenta[2,1-b:3,4-b′]dithiophene-2,6-diyl) (PCDTPT) in comparison with a donor-only benchmark polymer such as P3HT.82 The three polymers were molecularly doped with F4TCNQ through blending and their thermoelectric properties were compared. After doping, they achieved PF of 31.5μW m−1 K−2 (PCDTFBT, with zT value of 0.043) and 21.8 μW m−1 K−2 (PCDTPT) which was found to be remarkably higher than P3HT's PF of 0.76 μW m−1 K−2.
In terms of device performance, Yvenou et al. investigated ultrasonic spray-coating of PEDOT:OTf using the oxidant iron(III) trifluoromethane sulfonate with 156 thermocouples producing power output of 1 μW with a 48 °C thermal gradient.83 Elmoughni et al. studied very applicative textile integrated organic TEGs presenting 32-leg device made from PEDOT:PSS (p-type) and poly[Na(NiETT)] (n-type) inks generating Vopencircuit of ≈3 mV at ΔT = 3 K. They estimate 1072-leg prototype would be powerful enough to generate 13 μW from 3 K difference around body temperatures.21 On the other hand, on all-carbon printable, free of any metallic junction, OTEG prototype prepared by carbon nanotube (CNT) inks featured an outstanding power output as 342 μW at ΔT = 150 K.55
2.2. n-Type organic thermoelectric materials
As a complement to p-type materials, high-performance n-type organic materials (electron carriers) are required to obtain high thermoelectric power output. However, n-type thermoelectric polymers are lagging behind their p-type counterparts in terms of thermoelectric performance and air stability, therefore there is a growing research interest on this materials.84–87 Low electrical conductivity, and zT values are mainly due to their challenging doping mechanism owing to their high electron affinities (−3 to −4 eV). Additionally, their tendency to ambient degradation (oxygen and water) and, in some cases, insolubility challenges require certain attention.88,89
Several exciting strategies have been employed to improve the thermoelectric performances of n-type materials. These include utilising an electron-deficient acceptor–acceptor backbone repeated unit motif, introducing electron-withdrawing groups or heteroatoms, rigidification and planarisation of the polymer backbone, or increasing the conjugation length. Several among the most notable n-type organic thermoelectric chemical structures are shown in the Fig. 4.
 Fig. 4  Molecular structures of n-type semiconductors discussed in this Feature article. 
(4-(1,3-Dimethyl-2,3-dihydro-1H-benzoimidazol-2-yl)phenyl) dimethylamine (N-DMBI) doped (solution doping) benzodifurandione-based poly(p-phenylene vinylene) (BD-PPV) derivate polymers, that are characterized by low crystallinity, exhibited high electrical conductivities reaching 14 S cm−1 and PF of 28 μW m−1 K−2 (Fluoro-BDPPV (FBDPPV), at RT), and their low-lying LUMO level (sitting at energies <−4.0 eV) allowed for efficient doping.90,91 Shi et al. also demonstrated that halogen-containing polymer backbones are not only increasing the carrier mobility but also the doping levels. A Cl-substituted BDPPV derivative (Cl-BDPPV) was doped efficiently with small quantities of tetrabutylammonium fluoride (TBAF) with improved air stability.92 Another recent work, wherein the design of an n-type triaminomethane derivative (TAM) dopant was computer-assisted, revealed an efficient FBDPPV doping exhibiting record electrical conductivity of 21S cm−1 and a power factor as high as 51μW m−1 K−2.86 By virtue of thermal activation of the TAM dopant and “dopant-at-side-chain” approach the molecule featured a good solubility and high air stability.
Recently, Huang et al. presented a novel small molecule, (aromatic-dicyanovinyl-dipyrrolo[3,4-c]pyrrole-1,4-diylidene)bis (thieno[3,2-b]thiophene (A-DCV-DPPTT)), through doping with N-DMBI, resulted in electrical conductivity of 5.3 S cm−1 and zT value of 0.11 ± 0.01 (at RT) increased to 0.23 ± 0.03 (at 100 °C) indicating no π–π stacking distance increase after doping.93 Fullerenes are also great candidates for n-type thermoelectric materials thanks to their high electrical and low thermal conductivity.91,94,95 Doping of fullerenes with Caesium carbonate (Cs2CO3) (C60/Cs2CO3) exhibits PF of 28.8 μW m−1 K−2.96 Phonon-glass electron-crystal term proposed earlier as “a material in which the phonon mean free paths are as short as possible and in which the electron mean free paths are as long as possible”97,98 and achieved electrical conductivity of >10S cm−1 and zT = 0.34 (at 120 °C) when PTEG-2 was doped by N-DMBI.99 Fullerene derivative with lateral double-triethylene-glycol-type side chains featured thermal stability and improved doping efficiency. The role of the polarity of the side chain (alkyl vs. polar ethylene glycol) in fullerene derivatives was also explored. As a result of an improved molecular packing and doping efficiency, a PF of 23.1 μW m−1 K−2 was achieved on a particular derivative (PTeEG-1).100 Zuo et al. studied the inverse-sequential doping method on [6,6]-phenyl C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) with N-DPBI and it led to the very high electrical conductivity of ∼40 S m−1 and PF of ∼35 μW m−1 K−2 compared to the bulk doped version with ∼6 S m−1 PF ∼3 μW m−1 K−2 respectively.101
More recently, a novel n-type ink has emerged that displays high conductivity (reaching 8S cm−1)102 and it is therefore promising for further development of organic thermoelectric generators. The novel n-type conductive ink, made of poly(benzimidazobenzophenanthroline):poly(ethyleneimine) (BBL:PEI) is a mixed ion-electron conductor that is ethanol-based and endowed with excellent thermal, ambient, and solvent stability. BBP-PEI ink is printable and featured the highest power output per thermocouple reported for in-plane all-polymer TEGs (BBL:PEI (33wt% PEIlin) coupled with PEDOT:PSS, Fig. 5). Noteworthy, the power output was found to be much higher than organic TEGs with only a p-leg and metal connection.
 Fig. 5  (a) Seebeck coefficient of BBL:PEI as a function of PEI content. (b) Power output as a function of resistance (measured as a function of temperature gradients). The device included a planar TEG whose p-type and n-type legs were made of PEDOT:PSS and a BBL:PEI, respectively. (c) Power output defined for a p–n pair as a function of temperature gradient (ΔT). A comparison with the literature data on other planar thermoelectric modules is presented. Readapted with permission from ref. 102 that licensed under http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. 
Another category of n-type polymers that are promising for thermoelectric applications are the naphthalene diimide (NDI) based polymers in view of their high electron affinity and self-dopable structures through tethering of a specific group to the conjugated backbone.91,103–106 Russ et al. studied different alkyl spacer lengths between the backbone and charged side groups. They combined a charged doping group tethered to the conjugated backbone and proper side chain length led to PF of 1.4 μW m−1 K−2.91 Well-known NDI-based polymer, poly([N,N0-bis(2-octyldodecyl)naphthalene-1,4,5,8-bis(dicarboximide)-2,6-diyl]-alt-5,50-(2,20-bithiophene)) (P(NDI2OD-T2)), which also known as N2200, is generally doped with dihydro-1H-benzoimidazol-2-yl (N-DBI) derivatives (i.e. N-DMBI, N-DPBI) and exhibits electrical conductivities around 10−3 S cm−1.103,107 In order to improve miscibility, Liu et al. replaced the alkyl chains with polar triethyleneglycol-based ones and reached electrical conductivity of 0.17 S cm−1 upon N-DMBI doping.108 Wang et al. published in their study that replacing bithiophene (T2) unit with a more electron-deficient bithiazole (Tz2) unit, P(NDI2OD-Tz2), showed a more rigid and planar backbone with increased electron affinity that resulted in efficient doping and higher thermoelectric properties (PF of 1.5 μW m−1 K−2).109
3. Fabrication techniques of organic thermoelectric generators
3.1. Deposition of organic semiconductors

3.1.1. P-type semiconductors for OTEG. 
Organic semiconductors (OSC) (especially conjugated polymers) present good solubility in a large variety of solvents.110 Moreover, it is possible to chemically modify their structure to considerably enhance solubility in a given solvent or groups of related solvents.111 For these reasons, OSC are almost always deposited by using liquid-phase deposition processes.
The deposition of organic, semiconducting, thin layers is, in most cases, performed by spin-coating,112 especially if relatively uniform thickness is crucial for the final device performances.113
Within the context of OTEG fabrication, PEDOT is by far the most widely employed p-type polymer.8,114 To improve its electrical conductivity, PEDOT is often degenerately doped by using poly(styrenesulfonate); the resulting mixture, known as PEDOT:PSS, is typically available in the form of highly conductive aqueous suspensions. It has been demonstrated that a further increase in conductivity may be obtained by mixing such suspensions with small quantities of organic solvents exhibiting a strong dipole moment (such as ethylene glycol – EG – or dimethyl sulfoxide – DMSO).115,116
For the fabrication of OTGE, PEDOT:PSS may be used either alone117,118 or, more frequently, in combination with the aforementioned organic solvents119 or other types of materials. Li et al.120 reported on mixtures of PEDOT:PSS, ionic liquids (1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium chloride – EMImCl – or sodium tricyanomethanide – Na[C(CN)3]) and a reducing agent (L-ascorbic acid). Compared to the pristine PEDOT:PSS, this mixture showed improved electrical conductivity and mechanical flexibility, which the authors attributed to a decoupling between PEDOT and PSS ions and a morphological rearrangement of PEDOT polymeric chains. Other strategies to improve the thermoelectric performances of PEDOT:PSS include the formation of composites with inorganic semiconductors121 or the chemical reduction immediately after deposition by dipping the samples into aqueous solutions containing reducing agents.122
The usual deposition technique for PEDOT:PSS is spin-coating. Spin-coating of a single layer typically results in thickness of roughly 100 nm.119,120 If thicker layers are needed, the spin-coating procedure may be repeated several times to obtain layers whose thickness is around 1 μm. Drop-casting is also reported as a method capable of producing layers that are roughly 10 μm thick.121,122 Another PEDOT-based material often used for the fabrication of OTEG is PEDOT degenerately doped by tosylate salts, usually known as PEDOT:tosylate. Again, spin-coating is generally used for the deposition of a solution containing both the EDOT monomer and its oxidiser, namely iron(III) tris-p-toluenesulphonate. EDOT polymerisation is then thermally promoted by heating up the substrate. To improve thermoelectric performances, different strategies have been reported: PEDOT:tosylate films can be exposed to inert atmosphere saturated with tetrakis(dimethylamino)ethylene (TDAE) vapours to allow a finely controlled reduction of the conducting polymer (Seebeck coefficient optimisation)123 or they can be electrochemically oxidised.124
Another conjugated polymer frequently used for the fabrication of OTEG is polypyrrole (PPy). The typical fabrication method for PPy thin films is electrochemical synthesis at room temperature in a classical three-electrode system.125 Within the framework of OTEG fabrication, however, other deposition techniques can be employed. An in situ chemical oxidative polymerisation method was used by Wang et al. for the fabrication of PPy/graphene composite nanosheets that were subsequently turned into pellets by cold-pressing.126
Another protocol for the fabrication of PPy nanotubes was described in the same year by Wu et al.127 In this paper, it was shown that such nanotubes can be easily dispersed in ethanol and poured onto glass Petri dishes. After ethanol evaporation, the nanotubes form self-standing films that can be easily manipulated. Another interesting approach consisting in growing PPy nanotubes around inorganic templates was presented by Wang et al.128 In this case, multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNT) were used as templates for the growth of PPy nanotubes. Polyaniline (PANI) is another example of p-type polymer often used for the fabrication of OTEG. Its main advantages include good stability in air and the possibility of simply synthesising it from relatively cheap precursors. Moreover, its electrical conductivity may be finely tuned by doping.129 For the fabrication of OTEG, PANI is usually synthesised from its precursor (aniline) by a step of chemical oxidation.130,131 Characterisation is typically performed on solid pellets obtained after polymer precipitation and cold pressing. Electrical conductivity of PANI may be easily varied by doping, especially acid doping; hydrochloric acid (HCl) is often used for this purpose. In recent years, different forms of PANI have been fabricated and employed for the fabrication of OETG. Using the soft template method, Wu et al. were able to obtain PANI nanowires.132 Toshima et al. described the incorporation of Bi2Te3 inorganic nanoparticles into a PANI solution doped with camphorsulfonic acid.133 Characterisation of the composite material was performed on films cast on glass substrates and dried in nitrogen atmosphere. Single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNT) were also used as templates for the growth of tin layers of PANI, as reported by Yao et al.134 The synthesis was performed by preparing a suspension containing the SWCNT, aniline and on oxidant agent. The precipitate was then filtered, rinsed and pressed into pellets. A similar approach, using MWCNT instead of SWCNT, was described by Zhang et al.135 Another example of PANI-based composite material was presented by Zhao and co-workers,136 who dispersed graphite oxide (GO) flakes into an aqueous solution containing the aniline precursor and an oxidant agent.
Finally, another family of p-type conjugated polymers frequently used for the fabrication of OTEGs is represented by polythiophenes. The most commonly cited polythiophene is poly-(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT), probably because it is readily commercially available and can be easily dissolved in a large variety of solvents.137 When used in the framework of thermoelectric systems, P3HT is almost invariably chemically doped, as its pristine electrical conductivity (as low as 10−8 S cm−1 at room temperature)138 does not allow efficient thermic conversion. Different molecules have been described for efficient chemical doping of P3HT. Zhang et al.139 used a ferric salt of a trifluromethanesulfonimide anion (CF3SO2)2N− as a doping agent while Xuan and co-workers140 employed nitrosonium hexafluorophosphate/acetonitrile. In both cases, film preparation was performed into two steps: a first step in which the polymer was dissolved in a suitable solvent and then drop-cast on the substrate and a second one in which the dry polymer films were dipped into a solution containing the doping agent. Another dopant often reported is 2,3,5,6-tetrafluoro-7,7,8,8-tetracyanoquinodimethane (F4TCNQ), which can be used either in vapour-phase infiltration141 or directly added into the solution containing the polymer before spin-coating.142 Recently, a novel class of composites obtained by mixing P3HT with carbon-based materials has been successfully used for the fabrication of OETG. A dispersion (50% wt) of few-walled CNT in a solution of chloroform and P3HT was presented by Hong et colleagues.143 Two deposition methods were used to obtain a solid film: drop casting on a bare substrate and spray-coating through a shadow mask. Spray-coated films exhibited better thermoelectric properties (both in terms of electrical conductivity and Seebeck coefficient), which the authors attribute to the morphology of the printed layers (greater number of inter-CNT bundle connections).
A similar composite material was proposed by Lee et al.144 In this case, the dispersion was made adding SWCNT (different concentrations, from 30 to 60% wt were tested) to a solution of P3HT dissolved in o-dichlorobenzene. Once again, two different deposition methods were used: drop-casting and wire-bar-coating. Bar-coated films exhibited better thermoelectric performances, probably because of the higher density of SWCNT bundles. The same authors145 showed that the thermoelectric behaviour of their composite may be further improved by chemical doping, obtained by spin-coating a solution of FeCl3 in nitromethane on the top of the dry layers.
Besides P3HT, another notable example of polythiophene polymer that is worth mentioning is represented by poly(2,5-bis(3-alkylthiophen-2-yl)thieno[3,2-b]thiophene) (pBTTT). A particularly interesting study was the one published by Venkateshvaran et al.146 in which pBTTT was used as active layer in a transistor configuration. This work, performed on spin-coated thin films, allowed to elucidate the dependence of the Seebeck coefficient on the applied gate voltage.


3.1.2. n-Type semiconductors for OTEG. 
n-Type semiconductors are much rarely reported in the fabrication of OTEG than their p-type counterparts, even if one of the most efficient architecture requires the simultaneous presence of both types of semiconductors. This observation may be attributed, at least partially, to the poor ambient stability that characterised n-type organic semiconductors until recent times.137,147
Recent progress in the synthesis of more air-stable n-type polymers148 has effectively contributed to the increase of the number of publications concerning this specific type of materials. An important family of n-type semiconductors employed in the fabrication of OTEG is represented by soluble fullerene derivatives. Usually, these materials need to be prepared in combination with chemical dopants, as they exhibit a very low room-temperature electrical conductivity (∼10−8 S cm−1).149 Zuo and co-workers150 proposed two different strategies for the doping of thin films of [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methylester (PCBM). The first method simply consisted in adding the dopant (4-(1,3-dimethyl-2,3-dihydro-1H-benzoimidazol-2-yl)phenyl) dimethylamine (n-DMBI) directly into the PCBM solution prior to spin-coating. The second strategy (called inverse-sequential doping) consisted in spin-coating a solution containing only the semiconductor on the top of substrates on which the dopant alone had been previously deposited. Thanks to this second method, better performances (both in terms of Seebeck coefficient and power factor) were achieved. Another fullerene derivative was presented by Liu et al.108 The authors synthesised a set of fulleropyrrolidines with different alkyl side chains (either an n-dodecyl side chain or oligoethylene glycol side chains of different lengths). These semiconductors were dissolved in chloroform and n-DMBI was added as a dopant; deposition was done by spin-coating. One of the most interesting aspects of this work is that the influence of the polarity and length of the side chains on the thermoelectric performances was systematically studied. The main conclusion is that the two aforementioned parameters need careful optimisation to obtain high molecular order, a crucial aspect to improve OTEGs performances. Very recently, the same research group proposed a new fullerene-derivative material99 that they used for the fabrication of a “phonon-glass electron-crystal” (PGEC)-like organic thermoelectric material, again doped with n-DMBI and deposited by spin-coating.
Another example of n-type semiconductor often employed for the fabrication of the n-legs of OTEGs is tetrathiafulvalene–tetracyanoquinodimethane (TTF-TCNQ), a small molecule. The interesting thermoelectric properties of TTF-TCNQ have been known since the late seventies151,152 but they were observed on single crystals, which strongly limited its utilisation in real systems. This issue was solved by Wüsten et al.153 by embedding the crystals into a polyvinylchloride (PVC) paste that was subsequently deposited by screen-printing.
As for the n-type conjugated polymers, one of the examples most often cited in the literature is poly((N,N′-bis(2-octyldodecyl)- naphthalene-1,4,5,8-bis(dicarboximide)-2,6-diyl)-alt-5,5′-(2,20-bithiophene)) P(NDI2OD-T2) (also known by its commercial name N2200), which is typically deposited by spin-coating after dissolution in suitable organic solvents (chloroform, xylene, chlorobenzene are often reported). Since the electrical conductivity of pristine crystalline films of P(NDI2OD-T2) is quite low (∼3 × 10−3 S cm−1),154 this polymer is almost always chemically doped. Doping may be achieved by adding the dopants directly into the solution containing the semiconductor (n-DMBI155,156) or, more rarely, after deposition by exposing the dry films to dopant vapours (tetrakis(dimethylamino)ethylene (TDAE) vapours).157 A more innovative approach is the one proposed by Kim et al.,158 consisting in synthesising a p–n block copolymer (BCP) whose monomer contained a 3HT unit coupled with an NDI2OD-T2 unit. One of the most interesting results of this approach is that the careful choice of the dopant may selectively trigger p- or n-type behaviour; for instance, using tetrafluoro-tetracyano-quinodimethane (F4TCNQ) the p-type behaviour was exalted while the utilisation of the usual n-DMBI permitted highlighting the n-type transport. Wang and co-workers159 reported on a polymer similar to P(NDI2OD-T2) but in which the they replaced the thiophene ring by a thiazole ring. With respect to P(NDI2OD-T2), this new molecule (called P(NDI2OD-Tz2)) exhibits much weaker steric repulsion in Tz2 and a more rigid and planar backbone, which considerably improves the π–π stacking and intermolecular interactions. Thin films for thermoelectric applications were prepared by spin-coating solutions in which chloroform was used as the solvent; electrical conductivity was increased by exposure to TDAE vapours. Another noteworthy example is represented by the work published by Zhao et al.92 This paper describes a chlorine-substituted benzodifurandione-phenylenevinylene (ClBDPPV), which may be doped by adding small quantities of tetrabutylammonium fluoride (TBAF). Doping is typically performed by preparing a solution of both the polymer and its dopant in a suitable mixture of organic solvents; deposition is carried out by drop-casting.

3.2. Deposition by means of printing techniques
Thanks to the possibility of easy processing in liquid phase, OSC represent ideal candidates for device fabrication by means of printing techniques. In the case of OTEG, however, the number of printed devices and systems reported so far has been surprisingly low.160 Among the different printing techniques, inkjet-printing seems to be the one used most often for the fabrication of thermoelectric systems (Fig. 6).
 Fig. 6  Fabrication of inkjet-printed OTEGs. (a) creation of SU8 cavities over the bottom contacts (b) inkjet-printing of active materials (c) thermal evaporation of top contacts. 
Bubnova and co-workers123 reported on the fabrication of OTEGs based on a PEDOT derivative, namely PEDOT:tosylate. Fabrication was performed by inkjet-printing a solution containing both the EDOT monomer and the oxidant molecule Fe(Tos)3. Spontaneous polymerisation of EDOT inside the cartridge was prevented by adding a small quantity of pyridine to the ink. Polymerisation was promoted at the substrate surface by slightly heating up the printer's platen (35 °C). Inkjet-printing was also used by Jiao et al.161 for the deposition of both p- and n-type legs of a thermoelectric generator. Very interestingly, they used insoluble metal coordination polymers (general formula: poly[Ax(M-ett)], A being an alkaline metal and M a transition metal) dispersed in insulating, polymeric solutions via the ball-milling technique. Connections between the different legs were fabricated by thermally evaporated gold. A PEDOT:PSS/ZnO composite was used by Besganz et al.162 Deposition of the active material, as well as of the Ag serpentine electrodes, was entirely performed by inkjet. A similar approach was also followed by Andersson et al.117
Spray-printing was also used by Hong and co-workers (Fig. 7).143 They reported on the deposition of a CNT-P3HT nanocomposite dispersed in chloroform on flexible polyimide substrates. The same group also described a slightly modified version of the same nanocomposite,144 more suitable for bar-coating deposition on rigid glass substrates. Yang and co-workers102 reported on the synthesis and characterisation of a new ethanol-based n-type semiconductor, based on dispersions of conjugated polymer poly(benzimidazobenzophenanthroline) (BBL) nanoparticles into poly(ethyleneimine) (PEI). This inkjet-printable composite material was used for the fabrication of the n-type legs of an OTEG, while PEDOT:PSS (doped with DMSO) was used as active material for the fabrication of the p-legs. Both polymers were deposited by spray-coating on a flexible plastic substrate through a shadow mask. Ferhat et al.163 reported on a new, n-type, PEDOT-derivative composite material. Thanks to a redox intercalative polymerisation process, they were able to insert EDOT monomers in a (V2O5⋯nH2O) xerogel, thus producing a (PEDOT)xV2O5 hybrid material exhibiting n-type transport. Moreover, this polymer was formulated into an inkjet-printable suspension, used for the fabrication of the n-type legs of an OTEG (inkjet-printed PEDOT:PSS was used for the p-type legs).
 Fig. 7  Spray-coated OTEG fabricated by Hong et al.143 (a) Schematic representation of the spray-coating process. (b) Optical picture of the device. Adapted from ref. 143 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2023. 
Besides inkjet-printing, screen-printing has been also successfully used for the fabrication of OTEGs. An all-screen-printed thermoelectric generator fabricated on cellulosic substrates was described by Wei and co-workers.164 PEDOT:PSS was used as thermoelectric material, a conductive silver paste was utilised to make the electrical connections (see Fig. 8). Particularly interesting is the approach proposed by Søndergaard et al.,165 in which screen-printing was combined with flexography. Once again, PEDOT:PSS was chosen as active materials while electrical connections were fabricated using a conductive silver paste. A hybrid organic/inorganic system was presented by We et al.166 This system was obtained from a screen-printed layer of inorganic semiconductors (Bi2Te3 (n-type) and Sb2Te3 (p-type)) subsequently coated by a drop-cast layer of PEDOT:PSS. Excess PEDOT:PSS was removed by spinning the substrates at high rotational speed so that the organic layer could form a matrix embedding the inorganic semiconductors. Screen-printing of a conductive silver paste was used for the electrical connections fabrication.
 Fig. 8  Screen-printed OTEG fabricated by Wei et al.164 Schematic representation of the (a) series and (b) parallel PEDOT:PSS array. (c) Optical image of the PEDOT:PSS lines. (d) Photograph of the final OTEG modules, the copper plates used to sandwich the devices are clearly visible. Adapted from ref. 164 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2023. 
Zhang and co-workers167 reported on the employment of offset-printing for the fabrication of OTEG. P-type legs were realised using DMSO-doped PEDOT:PSS while for the n-type legs a homemade nitrogen-doped graphene suspension was used. Deposition of both types of materials on flexible, plastic sheets was carried out using a roll-to-roll system.
An original approach was recently presented by Shakeel et al.168 In this paper, OTEG were fabricated by using direct ink writing (DIW), a technique combining an engraving machine, a syringe barrel and an automatic pressure regulator. PEDOT:PSS was used as thermoelectric material and a silver-nanoparticles based ink was employed for the contacts fabrication.
Finally, an example of 3D-printed thermoelectric devices was described by Kee and co-workers.169 The authors reported on a stretchable, self-healing ternary composite of PEDOT:PSS blended with a polymeric surfactant, Triton X-100 as a healing agent, and DMSO (added to boost thermoelectric performances). The composite was used to fabricate, by 3D-printing fabrication technique, devices consisting of ten legs of electrically connected in series and thermally in parallel.
4. Conclusions and outlooks
With a new conductive n-type ink being recently developed along with a very recent and better understanding of the doping fundamentals, organic materials are approaching a new phase of maturity that is rapidly approaching their employment in thermoelectric devices. The recent progress in materials and their processing techniques, is beneficial for thermoelectric generators and represents a factor that needs consideration. However, a deeper understanding on the doping mechanisms united to the synthesis of novel dopants and organic semi(conductors) for thermoelectric will certainly continue to be the research focus of the next decade in the field. In spite of the recent and substantial progress in the synthesis of n-type conductors, developing novel n-type conductors matching the carrier mobilities of their p-type counterpart is much needed. The field of organic (semi)conductors that focused for several decades on developing better materials for applications such as organic field-effect transistors and solar cells, now urges to give more attention to the design and synthesis of more organic conductors specifically for thermoelectric applications. The design of such novel materials will have to consider parameters such as conductivity which include not only the intrinsic charge carrier (field-effect) mobility but also the intrinsic doping level. The development of novel solution-processable conductors will not only contribute to maximising the power factor in organic thermoelectrics but may contribute to the field of organic electronics and organic photovoltaics by offering alternative doping platforms to reduce metal/semiconductor injection barrier or Ohmic losses in organic-based photovoltaic cells, light-emitting diodes and field-effect devices. More recently, stable radical polymers and molecules were developed that are being looked at as promising materials with high conductivities thanks to the different electronic structure with respect to “conventional” polymer conductors.170 This approach was applied to insulating polymer backbones with pendant radical groups through which hopping conduction would occur upon partial oxidation or reduction. Similarly, blending radical TEMPO-OH molecules with PEDOT:PSS boosted the Seebeck coefficient without perturbing the electrical conductivity.171 Similarly, when TEMPO unit are tethered to a conjugated backbone, they induce a self-doping effect which boosts the number of free electron carriers in the solid-state. This approach is proved for different classes of compounds such as perylene diimide, naphthalene diimide, diketopyrrolopyrrole, and fullerene derivatives172 and it is therefore very promising for organic thermoelectrics.
Another grand challenge for the technological development of OTEG is that in order to maintain sufficient temperature gradients for effective thermoelectric operation, the heat transfer direction in the legs must be millimetres to centimetres in thickness.173,174 However, current low-cost deposition techniques such as inkjet-printing, gravure, or roll-to-roll, gravure are able to deposit films whose thickness is typically in the nm-to-μm range on a given substrate, hence novel and creative strategies, such as rolled, origami, or corrugated designs22,174 should be employed to convert arrays of organic-based legs printed in two dimensions into 3D architectures wherein the thermal gradient runs parallel to the substrate. These three-dimensional geometries make OTEG compatible with large-area heat sources. Furthermore, if OTEG are to be integrated in smart clothes or in biomedical applications, robust conformal contacts with the skin should be implemented to ensure an efficient heat transfer.
Novel material design and characterisation strategies for more efficient large-area OTEG will also trigger the excitement of many chemists, materials scientists and physicists but also the engineers working on the development of thermoelectric module technology based on printing methods, which seem more promising to be considered for waste management products. A further development of patterning techniques will definitely support the current hurdle of printing p- and n-type legs. The future of OTEG in the marketplace can only be imaginable if high throughout techniques for large area applications will be employed and combined in such a way to keep competitive thermoelectric performances also in real-life applications. As they operate well at temperatures close to Tamb, OTEG hold great promise for applications in the wearable and domotics sector.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
E. O. is supported by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) through an individual Discovery Grant and by Fonds de recherche du Québec – Nature et Technologies (FRQNT). E. O. wishes to thank the support of the Centre québécois sur les matériaux fonctionnels/Quebec Centre for Advanced Materials (CQMF/QCAM). I. H. E. is grateful to MITACS for funding her Globalink scholarship. G. M. and E. O. (as an international collaborator) gratefully acknowledge support by a public grant overseen by the French National Research Agency (ANR) as part of the programme “Investissement d’Avenir” (reference: ANR-18-IDEX-001, project “OrtheFlex”).
References
W. Xie, X. Tang, Y. Yan, Q. Zhang and T. M. Tritt, Unique nanostructures and enhanced thermoelectric performance of melt-spun BiSbTe alloys, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94(10), 102111 CrossRef .
Y. Tang, Z. M. Gibbs, L. A. Agapito, G. Li, H.-S. Kim, M. B. Nardelli, S. Curtarolo and G. J. Snyder, Convergence of multi-valley bands as the electronic origin of high thermoelectric performance in CoSb3 skutterudites, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14(12), 1223–1228 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. T. Witting, T. C. Chasapis, F. Ricci, M. Peters, N. A. Heinz, G. Hautier and G. J. Snyder, The Thermoelectric Properties of Bismuth Telluride, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2019, 5(6), 1800904 CrossRef .
G. H. Kim, L. Shao, K. Zhang and K. P. Pipe, Engineered doping of organic semiconductors for enhanced thermoelectric efficiency, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12(8), 719–723 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Haddad, C. Périlhon, A. Danlos, M.-X. François and G. Descombes, Some Efficient Solutions to Recover Low and Medium Waste Heat: Competitiveness of the Thermoacoustic Technology, Energy Procedia, 2014, 50, 1056–1069 CrossRef .
Z. Soleimani, S. Zoras, B. Ceranic, S. Shahzad and Y. Cui, A review on recent developments of thermoelectric materials for room-temperature applications, Sustain. Energy Technol. Assess., 2020, 37, 100604 Search PubMed .
J. Li, A. B. Huckleby and M. Zhang, Polymer-based thermoelectric materials: A review of power factor improving strategies, J. Materiomics, 2022, 8(1), 204–220 CrossRef .
D. Beretta, A. Perego, G. Lanzani and M. Caironi, Organic flexible thermoelectric generators: from modeling, a roadmap towards applications, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2017, 1(1), 174–190 RSC .
A. Ismael, A. Al-Jobory, X. Wang, A. Alshehab, A. Almutlg, M. Alshammari, I. Grace, T. L. R. Benett, L. A. Wilkinson, B. J. Robinson, N. J. Long and C. Lambert, Molecular-scale thermoelectricity: as simple as ‘ABC’, Nanoscale Adv., 2020, 2(11), 5329–5334 RSC .
A. Gemma and B. Gotsmann, A roadmap for molecular thermoelectricity, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2021, 16(12), 1299–1301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Park, S. Kang and H. J. Yoon, Power Factor of One Molecule Thick Films and Length Dependence, ACS Cent. Sci., 2019, 5(12), 1975–1982 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Park, S. Kang and H. J. Yoon, Thermopower of Molecular Junction in Harsh Thermal Environments, Nano Lett., 2022, 22(10), 3953–3960 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Tan, J. Balachandran, S. Sadat, V. Gavini, B. D. Dunietz, S.-Y. Jang and P. Reddy, Effect of Length and Contact Chemistry on the Electronic Structure and Thermoelectric Properties of Molecular Junctions, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133(23), 8838–8841 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yazawa and A. Shakouri, Cost-Efficiency Trade-off and the Design of Thermoelectric Power Generators, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2011, 45(17), 7548–7553 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Tian, S. Lee and G. Chen, Heat Transfer in Thermoelectric Materials and Devices, J. Heat Transfer, 2013, 135(6), 061605 CrossRef .
P. M. Mayer and R. J. Ram, Optimization of Heat Sink–Limited Thermoelectric Generators, Nanoscale Microscale Thermophys. Eng., 2006, 10(2), 143–155 CrossRef .
J. W. Stevens, Optimal design of small ΔT thermoelectric generation systems, Energy Convers. Manage., 2001, 42(6), 709–720 CrossRef .
B. Vermeersch and G. De Mey, A Fixed-Angle Dynamic Heat Spreading Model for (An)Isotropic Rear-Cooled Substrates, J. Heat Transfer, 2008, 130(12), 121301 CrossRef .
N. A. Khoso, X. Jiao, X. GuangYu, S. Tian and J. Wang, Enhanced thermoelectric performance of graphene based nanocomposite coated self-powered wearable e-textiles for energy harvesting from human body heat, RSC Adv., 2021, 11(27), 16675–16687 RSC .
V. Jangra, S. Maity and P. Vishnoi, A review on the development of conjugated polymer-based textile thermoelectric generator, J. Ind. Text., 2021, 1528083721996732 Search PubMed .
H. M. Elmoughni, A. K. Menon, R. M. W. Wolfe, S. K. Yee and A. Textile-Integrated, Polymer Thermoelectric Generator for Body Heat Harvesting, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2019, 4(7), 1800708 CrossRef CAS .
B. Russ, A. Glaudell, J. J. Urban, M. L. Chabinyc and R. A. Segalman, Organic thermoelectric materials for energy harvesting and temperature control, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1(10), 16050 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Glaudell, J. E. Cochran, S. N. Patel and M. L. Chabinyc, Impact of the Doping Method on Conductivity and Thermopower in Semiconducting Polythiophenes, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5(4), 1401072 CrossRef .
A. B. Kaiser, Thermoelectric power and conductivity of heterogeneous conducting polymers, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1989, 40(5), 2806–2813 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Hartmann, K. Tremel, S. Uttiya, E. Crossland, S. Ludwigs, N. Kayunkid, C. Vergnat and M. Brinkmann, 2D Versus 3D Crystalline Order in Thin Films of Regioregular Poly(3-hexylthiophene) Oriented by Mechanical Rubbing and Epitaxy, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21(21), 4047–4057 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Patel, A. M. Glaudell, K. A. Peterson, E. M. Thomas, K. A. O’Hara, E. Lim and M. L. Chabinyc, Morphology controls the thermoelectric power factor of a doped semiconducting polymer, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3(6), e1700434 CrossRef PubMed .
A. D. Scaccabarozzi, A. Basu, F. Aniés, J. Liu, O. Zapata-Arteaga, R. Warren, Y. Firdaus, M. I. Nugraha, Y. Lin, M. Campoy-Quiles, N. Koch, C. Müller, L. Tsetseris, M. Heeney and T. D. Anthopoulos, Doping Approaches for Organic Semiconductors, Chem. Rev., 2022, 122(4), 4420–4492 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhou, H. Zhang, H. Zheng, Z. Xu, H. Xu, H. Guo, P. Li, Y. Tong, B. Hu and L. Chen, Recent Advances and Prospects of Small Molecular Organic Thermoelectric Materials, Small, 2022, 18(23), 2200679 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Salzmann and G. Heimel, Toward a comprehensive understanding of molecular doping organic semiconductors (review), J. Electron Spectrosc. Relat. Phenom., 2015, 204, 208–222 CrossRef CAS .
A. Jha, H.-G. Duan, V. Tiwari, M. Thorwart and R. J. D. Miller, Origin of poor doping efficiency in solution processed organic semiconductors, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9(19), 4468–4476 RSC .
J. Liu, X. Wang, D. Li, N. E. Coates, R. A. Segalman and D. G. Cahill, Thermal Conductivity and Elastic Constants of PEDOT:PSS with High Electrical Conductivity, Macromolecules, 2015, 48(3), 585–591 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Smith, L. Su, W. Gong, N. Nakamura, B. Reeja-Jayan and S. Shen, Thermal conductivity of poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) films engineered by oxidative chemical vapor deposition (oCVD), RSC Adv., 2018, 8(35), 19348–19352 RSC .
X. Fan, B. Xu, N. Wang, J. Wang, S. Liu, H. Wang and F. Yan, Highly Conductive Stretchable All-Plastic Electrodes
Using a Novel Dipping-Embedded Transfer Method for High-Performance Wearable Sensors and Semitransparent Organic Solar Cells, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2017, 3(5), 1600471 CrossRef .
A. F. Al Naim and A. G. El-Shamy, Review on recent development on thermoelectric functions of PEDOT:PSS based systems, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2022, 152, 107041 CrossRef CAS .
N. Wen, Z. Fan, S. Yang, Y. Zhao, T. Cong, S. Xu, H. Zhang, J. Wang, H. Huang, C. Li and L. Pan, Highly conductive, ultra-flexible and continuously processable PEDOT:PSS fibers with high thermoelectric properties for wearable energy harvesting, Nano Energy, 2020, 78, 105361 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wu and J. Hu, Waterborne polyurethane based thermoelectric composites and their application potential in wearable thermoelectric textiles, Composites, Part B, 2016, 107, 59–66 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liu, Y. Liu, M. Zhang, Z. Yang and P. Gane, Comparing build architecture and electrolyte of ITO-free flexible patterned organic screen-printed ECDs based on a novel PEDOT:PSS compound film post-treated with strong and weak organic acids, Org. Electron., 2020, 81, 105674 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kim, S. Kee, S. H. Lee, B. H. Lee, Y. H. Kahng, Y.-R. Jo, B.-J. Kim and K. Lee, Highly Conductive PEDOT:PSS Nanofibrils Induced by Solution-Processed Crystallization, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26(14), 2268–2272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kirihara, Q. Wei, M. Mukaida and T. Ishida, Reduction of specific contact resistance between the conducting polymer PEDOT:PSS and a metal electrode by addition of a second solvent during film formation and a post-surface treatment, Synth. Met., 2018, 246, 289–296 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, B. Lu, J. Yan, J. Xu, R. Yue, Z. Zhu, S. Zhou, X. Hu, Z. Zhang and P. Chen, Highly conducting free-standing poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)/poly(styrenesulfonate) films with improved thermoelectric performances, Synth. Met., 2010, 160(23), 2481–2485 CrossRef CAS .
N. Saxena, B. Pretzl, X. Lamprecht, L. Bießmann, D. Yang, N. Li, C. Bilko, S. Bernstorff and P. Müller-Buschbaum, Ionic Liquids as Post-Treatment Agents for Simultaneous Improvement of Seebeck Coefficient and Electrical Conductivity in PEDOT:PSS Films, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11(8), 8060–8071 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. A. Yemata, Y. Zheng, A. K. K. Kyaw, X. Wang, J. Song, W. S. Chin and J. Xu, Improved Thermoelectric Properties and Environmental Stability of Conducting PEDOT:PSS Films Post-treated With Imidazolium Ionic Liquids, Front. Chem., 2020, 7, 870 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Liu, Y. Jia, Q. Jiang, F. Jiang, C. Li, X. Wang, P. Liu, P. Liu, F. Hu, Y. Du and J. Xu, Highly Conductive Hydrogel Polymer Fibers toward Promising Wearable Thermoelectric Energy Harvesting, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10(50), 44033–44040 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. L. De Volder Michael, H. Tawfick Sameh, H. Baughman Ray and A. J. Hart, Carbon Nanotubes: Present and Future Commercial Applications, Science, 2013, 339(6119), 535–539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, F. Liu, C. Gao, T. Wan, L. Wang, L. Wang and L. Wang, Enhancement of the thermoelectric property of nanostructured polyaniline/carbon nanotube composites by introducing pyrrole unit onto polyaniline backbone via a sustainable method, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 370, 322–329 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liang, J. Fan, M. Wang, G. Chen and G. Sun, Ternary thermoelectric composites of polypyrrole/PEDOT:PSS/carbon nanotube with unique layered structure prepared by one-dimensional polymer nanostructure as template, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2020, 187, 107948 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hone, M. C. Llaguno, N. M. Nemes, A. T. Johnson, J. E. Fischer, D. A. Walters, M. J. Casavant, J. Schmidt and R. E. Smalley, Electrical and thermal transport properties of magnetically aligned single wall carbon nanotube films, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 77(5), 666–668 CrossRef CAS .
K. Suemori, S. Hoshino and T. Kamata, Flexible and lightweight thermoelectric generators composed of carbon nanotube–polystyrene composites printed on film substrate, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103(15), 153902 CrossRef .
D. Kim, Y. Kim, K. Choi, J. C. Grunlan and C. Yu, Improved Thermoelectric Behavior of Nanotube-Filled Polymer Composites with Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) Poly(styrenesulfonate), ACS Nano, 2010, 4(1), 513–523 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Sun, B. Zhou, Q. Zheng, L. Wang, W. Jiang and G. J. Snyder, Stretchable fabric generates electric power from woven thermoelectric fibers, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11(1), 572 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liang, G. Chen and C.-Y. Guo, Polypyrrole nanostructures and their thermoelectric performance, Mater. Chem. Front., 2017, 1(2), 380–386 RSC .
T. y V. Vernitskaya and O. N. Efimov, Polypyrrole: a conducting polymer; its synthesis, properties and applications, Russ. Chem. Rev., 1997, 66(5), 443–457 CrossRef .
N. Baghdadi, M. S. Zoromba, M. H. Abdel-Aziz, A. F. Al-Hossainy, M. Bassyouni and N. Salah, One-Dimensional Nanocomposites Based on Polypyrrole-Carbon Nanotubes and Their Thermoelectric Performance, Polymers, 2021, 13(2), 278 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liang, G. Chen and C.-Y. Guo, Enhanced thermoelectric performance by self-assembled layered morphology of polypyrrole nanowire/single-walled carbon nanotube composites, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2016, 129, 130–136 CrossRef CAS .
C. K. Mytafides, L. Tzounis, G. Karalis, P. Formanek and A. S. Paipetis, High-Power All-Carbon Fully Printed and Wearable SWCNT-Based Organic Thermoelectric Generator, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13(9), 11151–11165 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-C. Chiang and A. G. MacDiarmid, ‘Polyaniline’: Protonic acid doping of the emeraldine form to the metallic regime, Synth. Met., 1986, 13(1), 193–205 CrossRef CAS .
C. O. Yoon, M. Reghu, D. Moses, A. J. Heeger, Y. Cao, T. A. Chen, X. Wu and R. D. Rieke, Hopping transport in doped conducting polymers in the insulating regime near the metal-insulator boundary: polypyrrole, polyaniline and polyalkylthiophenes, Synth. Met., 1995, 75(3), 229–239 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Yao, Q. Wang, L. Wang, Y. Wang, J. Sun, H. Zeng, Z. Jin, X. Huang and L. Chen, The synergic regulation of conductivity and Seebeck coefficient in pure polyaniline by chemically changing the ordered degree of molecular chains, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2(8), 2634–2640 RSC .
J. Li, X. Tang, H. Li, Y. Yan and Q. Zhang, Synthesis and thermoelectric properties of hydrochloric acid-doped polyaniline, Synth. Met., 2010, 160(11–12), 1153–1158 CrossRef CAS .
C. Nath and A. Kumar, Fractal like charge transport in polyaniline nanostructures, Phys. B, 2013, 426, 94–102 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, L. Yin, X. Pu and C. Yu, Facile charge carrier adjustment for improving thermopower of doped polyaniline, Polymer, 2013, 54(3), 1136–1140 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, Y. Liang, S. Liu, F. Qiao, P. Li and C. He, Modulating carrier transport for the enhanced thermoelectric performance of carbon nanotubes/polyaniline composites, Org. Electron., 2019, 69, 62–68 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, S. Liu, P. Li, D. Yuan, X. Zhou, J. Sun, X. Lu and C. He, Interfacial control and carrier tuning of carbon nanotube/polyaniline composites for high thermoelectric performance, Carbon, 2018, 136, 292–298 CrossRef CAS .
I. E. Jacobs, E. W. Aasen, J. L. Oliveira, T. N. Fonseca, J. D. Roehling, J. Li, G. Zhang, M. P. Augustine, M. Mascal and A. J. Moulé, Comparison of solution-mixed and sequentially processed P3HT:F4TCNQ films: effect of doping-induced aggregation on film morphology, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4(16), 3454–3466 RSC .
D. T. Scholes, S. A. Hawks, P. Y. Yee, H. Wu, J. R. Lindemuth, S. H. Tolbert and B. J. Schwartz, Overcoming Film Quality Issues for Conjugated Polymers Doped with F4TCNQ by Solution Sequential Processing: Hall Effect, Structural, and Optical Measurements. The, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6(23), 4786–4793 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, T.-P. Ruoko, G. Wang, S. Riera-Galindo, S. Hultmark, Y. Puttisong, F. Moro, H. Yan, W. M. Chen, M. Berggren, C. Müller and S. Fabiano, Sequential Doping of Ladder-Type Conjugated Polymers for Thermally Stable n-Type Organic Conductors, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12(47), 53003–53011 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Salzmann, G. Heimel, S. Duhm, M. Oehzelt, P. Pingel, B. M. George, A. Schnegg, K. Lips, R.-P. Blum, A. Vollmer and N. Koch, Intermolecular Hybridization Governs Molecular Electrical Doping, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 108(3), 035502 CrossRef PubMed .
O. Zapata-Arteaga, B. Dörling, A. Perevedentsev, J. Martín, J. S. Reparaz and M. Campoy-Quiles, Closing the Stability–Performance Gap in Organic Thermoelectrics by Adjusting the Partial to Integer Charge Transfer Ratio, Macromolecules, 2020, 53(2), 609–620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Y. Kao, B. Lee, L. S. Wielunski, M. Heeney, I. McCulloch, E. Garfunkel, L. C. Feldman and V. Podzorov, Doping of Conjugated Polythiophenes with Alkyl Silanes, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19(12), 1906–1911 CrossRef CAS .
I. Salzmann, G. Heimel, M. Oehzelt, S. Winkler and N. Koch, Molecular Electrical Doping of Organic Semiconductors: Fundamental Mechanisms and Emerging Dopant Design Rules, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49(3), 370–378 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kang, S. Schott, D. Venkateshvaran, K. Broch, G. Schweicher, D. Harkin, C. Jellett, C. B. Nielsen, I. McCulloch and H. Sirringhaus, Investigation of the thermoelectric response in conducting polymers doped by solid-state diffusion, Mater. Today Phys., 2019, 8, 112–122 CrossRef .
H. Ito, H. Mada, K. Watanabe, H. Tanaka and T. Takenobu, Charge transport and thermoelectric conversion in solution-processed semicrystalline polymer films under electrochemical doping, Commun. Phys., 2021, 4(1), 8 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tanaka, K. Kanahashi, N. Takekoshi, H. Mada, H. Ito, Y. Shimoi, H. Ohta and T. Takenobu, Thermoelectric properties of a semicrystalline polymer doped beyond the insulator-to-metal transition by electrolyte gating, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6(7), eaay8065 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Kline, M. D. McGehee, E. N. Kadnikova, J. Liu, J. M. J. Fréchet and M. F. Toney, Dependence of Regioregular Poly(3-hexylthiophene) Film Morphology and Field-Effect Mobility on Molecular Weight, Macromolecules, 2005, 38(8), 3312–3319 CrossRef CAS .
M. Heydari Gharahcheshmeh and K. K. Gleason, Texture and nanostructural engineering of conjugated conducting and semiconducting polymers, Mater. Today Adv., 2020, 8, 100086 CrossRef .
Q. Yao, W. Shi, S. Y. Qu and L. D. Chen, CHAPTER 7: Conducting Polymer-based Organic-Inorganic Thermoelectric Nanocomposites, RSC Energy Environ. Ser., 2020, 2020, 213–245 Search PubMed .
M. McBride, C. Morales, E. Reichmanis and M. A. Grover, Process-Structure-Property Relationships for Design of Polymer Organic Electronics Manufacturing, Comput.-Aided Chem. Eng., 2018, 44, 2467–2472 CAS .
J. Sun, M. L. Yeh, B. J. Jung, B. Zhang, J. Feser, A. Majumdar and H. E. Katz, Simultaneous Increase in Seebeck Coefficient and Conductivity in a Doped Poly(alkylthiophene) Blend with Defined Density of States, Macromolecules, 2010, 43(6), 2897–2903 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chang, J. Lee, N. Kleinhenz, B. Fu and E. Reichmanis, Photoinduced Anisotropic Supramolecular Assembly and Enhanced Charge Transport of Poly(3-hexylthiophene) Thin Films, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24(28), 4457–4465 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Kang, S.-J. Ko, M.-H. Lee, Y. K. Lee, B. J. Kim and S. Y. Cho, Highly efficient and air stable thermoelectric devices of poly(3-hexylthiophene) by dual doping of Au metal precursors, Nano Energy, 2021, 82, 105681 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Gregory, A. K. Menon, S. Ye, D. S. Seferos, J. R. Reynolds and S. K. Yee, Effect of Heteroatom and Doping on the Thermoelectric Properties of Poly(3-alkylchalcogenophenes), Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8(34), 1802419 CrossRef .
E. H. Suh, Y. J. Jeong, J. G. Oh, K. Lee, J. Jung, Y. S. Kang and J. Jang, Doping of donor–acceptor polymers with long side chains via solution mixing for advancing thermoelectric properties, Nano Energy, 2019, 58, 585–595 CrossRef CAS .
E. Yvenou, M. Sandroni, A. Carella, M. N. Gueye, J. Faure-Vincent, S. Pouget, R. Demadrille and J.-P. Simonato, Spray-coated PEDOT:OTf films: thermoelectric properties and integration into a printed thermoelectric generator, Mater. Chem. Front., 2020, 4(7), 2054–2063 RSC .
T. Menke, D. Ray, J. Meiss, K. Leo and M. Riede, 
            In-situ conductivity and Seebeck measurements of highly efficient n-dopants in fullerene C60, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100(9), 093304 CrossRef .
M. Sumino, K. Harada, M. Ikeda, S. Tanaka, K. Miyazaki and C. Adachi, Thermoelectric properties of n-type C60 thin films and their application in organic thermovoltaic devices, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99(9), 093308 CrossRef .
C.-Y. Yang, Y.-F. Ding, D. Huang, J. Wang, Z.-F. Yao, C.-X. Huang, Y. Lu, H.-I. Un, F.-D. Zhuang, J.-H. Dou, C.-A. Di, D. Zhu, J.-Y. Wang, T. Lei and J. Pei, A thermally activated and highly miscible dopant for n-type organic thermoelectrics, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11(1), 3292 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, L. Liu, F. Wu, Z. Liu, Z. Fan, L. Chen and Y. Chen, Recent Developments of n-Type Organic Thermoelectric Materials: Influence of Structure Modification on Molecule Arrangement and Solution Processing, ChemSusChem, 2022, 15(4), e202102420 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Griggs, A. Marks, H. Bristow and I. McCulloch, n-Type organic semiconducting polymers: stability limitations, design considerations and applications, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9(26), 8099–8128 RSC .
X. Zhan, A. Facchetti, S. Barlow, T. J. Marks, M. A. Ratner, M. R. Wasielewski and S. R. Marder, Rylene and Related Diimides for Organic Electronics, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23(2), 268–284 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Shi, F. Zhang, C.-A. Di, T.-W. Yan, Y. Zou, X. Zhou, D. Zhu, J.-Y. Wang and J. Pei, Toward High Performance n-Type Thermoelectric Materials by Rational Modification of BDPPV Backbones, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137(22), 6979–6982 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Russ, M. J. Robb, F. G. Brunetti, P. L. Miller, E. E. Perry, S. N. Patel, V. Ho, W. B. Chang, J. J. Urban, M. L. Chabinyc, C. J. Hawker and R. A. Segalman, Power Factor Enhancement in Solution-Processed Organic n-Type Thermoelectrics Through Molecular Design, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26(21), 3473–3477 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhao, D. Madan, Y. Cheng, J. Zhou, H. Li, S. M. Thon, A. E. Bragg, M. E. Decoster, P. E. Hopkins and H. E. Katz, High Conductivity and Electron-Transfer Validation in an n-Type Fluoride-Anion-Doped Polymer for Thermoelectrics in Air, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29(34), 1606928 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Huang, H. Yao, Y. Cui, Y. Zou, F. Zhang, C. Wang, H. Shen, W. Jin, J. Zhu, Y. Diao, W. Xu, C.-A. Di and D. Zhu, Conjugated-Backbone Effect of Organic Small Molecules for n-Type Thermoelectric Materials with ZT over 0.2, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139(37), 13013–13023 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Xu, W. Shen, W. Huang and X. Lu, Fullerene micro/nanostructures: controlled synthesis and energy applications. Materials Today, NANO, 2020, 11, 100081 Search PubMed .
A. Nadtochiy, V. Kozachenko, O. Korotchenkov and V. Schlosser, Nickel-Fullerene Nanocomposites as Thermoelectric Materials, Nanomaterials, 2022, 12(7), 1163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Barbot, C. Di Bin, B. Lucas, B. Ratier and M. Aldissi, N-type doping and thermoelectric properties of co-sublimed cesium-carbonate-doped fullerene, J. Mater. Sci., 2013, 48(7), 2785–2789 CrossRef CAS .
M. Beekman, D. T. Morelli and G. S. Nolas, Better thermoelectrics through glass-like crystals, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14(12), 1182–1185 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Slack, New materials and performance limits for thermoelectric cooling, CRC Handb. Thermoelectr., 1995 Search PubMed .
J. Liu, B. van der Zee, R. Alessandri, S. Sami, J. Dong, M. I. Nugraha, A. J. Barker, S. Rousseva, L. Qiu, X. Qiu, N. Klasen, R. C. Chiechi, D. Baran, M. Caironi, T. D. Anthopoulos, G. Portale, R. W. A. Havenith, S. J. Marrink, J. C. Hummelen and L. J. A. Koster, N-type organic thermoelectrics: demonstration of ZT > 0.3, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11(1), 5694 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, L. Qiu, G. Portale, S. Torabi, M. C. A. Stuart, X. Qiu, M. Koopmans, R. C. Chiechi, J. C. Hummelen and L. J. Anton Koster, Side-chain effects on N-type organic thermoelectrics: A case study of fullerene derivatives, Nano Energy, 2018, 52, 183–191 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zuo, Z. Li, E. Wang and M. Kemerink, High Seebeck Coefficient and Power Factor in n-Type Organic Thermoelectrics, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2018, 4(1), 1700501 CrossRef .
C.-Y. Yang, M.-A. Stoeckel, T.-P. Ruoko, H.-Y. Wu, X. Liu, N. B. Kolhe, Z. Wu, Y. Puttisong, C. Musumeci, M. Massetti, H. Sun, K. Xu, D. Tu, W. M. Chen, H. Y. Woo, M. Fahlman, S. A. Jenekhe, M. Berggren and S. Fabiano, A high-conductivity n-type polymeric ink for printed electronics, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12(1), 2354 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. Schlitz, F. G. Brunetti, A. M. Glaudell, P. L. Miller, M. A. Brady, C. J. Takacs, C. J. Hawker and M. L. Chabinyc, Solubility-Limited Extrinsic n-Type Doping of a High Electron Mobility Polymer for Thermoelectric Applications, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26(18), 2825–2830 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Piliego, D. Jarzab, G. Gigli, Z. Chen, A. Facchetti and M. A. Loi, High Electron Mobility and Ambient Stability in Solution-Processed Perylene-Based Organic Field-Effect Transistors, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21(16), 1573–1576 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kiefer, A. Giovannitti, H. Sun, T. Biskup, A. Hofmann, M. Koopmans, C. Cendra, S. Weber, L. J. Anton Koster, E. Olsson, J. Rivnay, S. Fabiano, I. McCulloch and C. Müller, Enhanced n-Doping Efficiency of a Naphthalenediimide-Based Copolymer through Polar Side Chains for Organic Thermoelectrics, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3(2), 278–285 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Nava, Y. Shin, M. Massetti, X. Jiao, T. Biskup, M. S. Jagadeesh, A. Calloni, L. Duò, G. Lanzani, C. R. McNeill, M. Sommer and M. Caironi, Drastic Improvement of Air Stability in an n-Type Doped Naphthalene-Diimide Polymer by Thionation, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1(9), 4626–4634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yan, Z. Chen, Y. Zheng, C. Newman, J. R. Quinn, F. Dötz, M. Kastler and A. Facchetti, A high-mobility electron-transporting polymer for printed transistors, Nature, 2009, 457(7230), 679–686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, L. Qiu, R. Alessandri, X. Qiu, G. Portale, J. Dong, W. Talsma, G. Ye, A. A. Sengrian, P. C. T. Souza, M. A. Loi, R. C. Chiechi, S. J. Marrink, J. C. Hummelen and L. J. A. Koster, Enhancing Molecular n-Type Doping of Donor–Acceptor Copolymers by Tailoring Side Chains, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30(7), 1704630 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Wang, H. Sun, T. Erdmann, G. Wang, D. Fazzi, U. Lappan, Y. Puttisong, Z. Chen, M. Berggren, X. Crispin, A. Kiriy, B. Voit, T. J. Marks, S. Fabiano and A. Facchetti, A Chemically Doped Naphthalenediimide-Bithiazole Polymer for n-Type Organic Thermoelectrics, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30(31), 1801898 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Allard, M. Forster, B. Souharce, H. Thiem and U. Scherf, Organic Semiconductors for Solution-Processable Field-Effect Transistors (OFETs), Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47(22), 4070–4098 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ahmad, Organic semiconductors for device applications: current trends and future prospects, J. Polym. Eng., 2014, 34(4), 279–338 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, Y.-J. Heo, M. Park and S.-J. Park, Recent Advances in Organic Thermoelectric Materials: Principle Mechanisms and Emerging Carbon-Based Green Energy Materials, Polymers, 2019, 11(1), 167 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Diao, L. Shaw, Z. Bao and S. Mannsfeld, Morphology Control Strategies for Solution-Processed Organic Field Effect Transistors, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2145–2159 RSC .
Q. Wei, M. Mukaida, K. Kirihara, Y. Naitoh and T. Ishida, Recent progress on PEDOT-based thermoelectric materials, Materials, 2015, 8(2), 732–750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-J. Lin, W.-S. Ni and J.-Y. Lee, Effect of incorporation of ethylene glycol into PEDOT: PSS on electron phonon coupling and conductivity, J. Appl. Phys., 2015, 117(21), 215501 CrossRef .
T.-R. Chou, S.-H. Chen, Y.-T. Chiang, Y.-T. Lin and C.-Y. Chao, Highly conductive PEDOT: PSS films by post-treatment with dimethyl sulfoxide for ITO-free liquid crystal display, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3(15), 3760–3766 RSC .
H. Andersson, P. Šuly, G. Thungström, M. Engholm, R. Zhang, J. Mašlík and H. Olin, PEDOT: PSS thermoelectric generators printed on paper substrates, J. Low Power Electron. Appl., 2019, 9(2), 14 CrossRef .
M. Massetti, S. Bonfadini, D. Nava, M. Butti, L. Criante, G. Lanzani, L. Qiu, J. Hummelen, J. Liu and L. Koster, Fully direct written organic micro-thermoelectric generators embedded in a plastic foil, Nano Energy, 2020, 75, 104983 CrossRef CAS .
G.-H. Kim, L. Shao, K. Zhang and K. P. Pipe, Engineered doping of organic semiconductors for enhanced thermoelectric efficiency, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12(8), 719–723 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Li, Q. Zhou, L. Wen and W. Liu, Enhanced thermoelectric performances of flexible PEDOT: PSS film by synergistically tuning the ordering structure and oxidation state, J. Materiomics, 2020, 6(1), 119–127 CrossRef .
B. Zhang, J. Sun, H. Katz, F. Fang and R. Opila, Promising thermoelectric properties of commercial PEDOT: PSS materials and their Bi2Te3 powder composites, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2(11), 3170–3178 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Massonnet, A. Carella, O. Jaudouin, P. Rannou, G. Laval, C. Celle and J.-P. Simonato, Improvement of the Seebeck coefficient of PEDOT: PSS by chemical reduction combined with a novel method for its transfer using free-standing thin films, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2(7), 1278–1283 RSC .
O. Bubnova, Z. U. Khan, A. Malti, S. Braun, M. Fahlman, M. Berggren and X. Crispin, Optimization of the thermoelectric figure of merit in the conducting polymer poly(3, 4-ethylenedioxythiophene), Nat. Mater., 2011, 10(6), 429–433 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Park, C. Park, B. Kim, H. Shin and E. Kim, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 788–792 RSC .
M. Culebras, B. Uriol, C. M. Gómez and A. Cantarero, Controlling the thermoelectric properties of polymers: application to PEDOT and polypyrrole, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17(23), 15140–15145 RSC .
L. Wang, F. Liu, C. Jin, T. Zhang and Q. Yin, Preparation of polypyrrole/graphene nanosheets composites with enhanced thermoelectric properties, RSC Adv., 2014, 4(86), 46187–46193 RSC .
J. Wu, Y. Sun, W.-B. Pei, L. Huang, W. Xu and Q. Zhang, Polypyrrole nanotube film for flexible thermoelectric application, Synth. Met., 2014, 196, 173–177 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, K. Cai, S. Shen and J. Yin, Preparation and thermoelectric properties of multi-walled carbon nanotubes/polypyrrole composites, Synth. Met., 2014, 195, 132–136 CrossRef CAS .
F. Yakuphanoglu and B. Şenkal, Electronic and thermoelectric properties of polyaniline organic semiconductor and electrical characterization of Al/PANI MIS diode. The, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111(4), 1840–1846 CrossRef CAS .
P. Adams, P. Laughlin, A. Monkman and A. Kenwright, Low temperature synthesis of high molecular weight polyaniline, Polymer, 1996, 37(15), 3411–3417 CrossRef CAS .
F. Yakuphanoglu, B. F. Şenkal and A. Saraç, Electrical conductivity, thermoelectric power, and optical properties of organo-soluble polyaniline organic semiconductor, J. Electron. Mater., 2008, 37(6), 930–934 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, Y. Sun, W. Xu and Q. Zhang, Investigating thermoelectric properties of doped polyaniline nanowires, Synth. Met., 2014, 189, 177–182 CrossRef CAS .
N. Toshima, M. Imai and S. Ichikawa, Organic–inorganic nanohybrids as novel thermoelectric materials: hybrids of polyaniline and bismuth(III) telluride nanoparticles, J. Electron. Mater., 2011, 40(5), 898–902 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Yao, L. Chen, W. Zhang, S. Liufu and X. Chen, Enhanced thermoelectric performance of single-walled carbon nanotubes/polyaniline hybrid nanocomposites, ACS Nano, 2010, 4(4), 2445–2451 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Zhang, M. Davis, J. Qiu, L. Hope-Weeks and S. Wang, Thermoelectric properties of porous multi-walled carbon nanotube/polyaniline core/shell nanocomposites, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23(38), 385701 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhao, G.-S. Tang, Z.-Z. Yu and J.-S. Qi, The effect of graphite oxide on the thermoelectric properties of polyaniline, Carbon, 2012, 50(8), 3064–3073 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Cowen, J. Atoyo, M. J. Carnie, D. Baran and B. C. Schroeder, Review—Organic Materials for Thermoelectric Energy Generation, ECS J. Solid State Sci. Technol., 2017, 6(3), N3080–N3088 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Singh, J. Kumar, R. Singh, R. Kant, S. Chand and V. Kumar, Micromorphology, photophysical and electrical properties of pristine and ferric chloride doped poly(3-hexylthiophene) films, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2007, 104(2–3), 390–396 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, Y. Sun, W. Xu and D. Zhu, Thermoelectric energy from flexible P3HT films doped with a ferric salt of triflimide anions, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5(11), 9639–9644 RSC .
Y. Xuan, X. Liu, S. Desbief, P. Leclère, M. Fahlman, R. Lazzaroni, M. Berggren, J. Cornil, D. Emin and X. Crispin, Thermoelectric properties of conducting polymers: The case of poly(3-hexylthiophene), Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 82(11), 115454 CrossRef .
E. Lim, K. A. Peterson, G. M. Su and M. L. Chabinyc, Thermoelectric properties of poly(3-hexylthiophene)(P3HT) doped with 2,3,5, 6-Tetrafluoro-7,7,8,8-tetracyanoquinodimethane (F4TCNQ) by vapor-phase infiltration, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30(3), 998–1010 CrossRef CAS .
E. Jang, A. Poosapati and D. Madan, Enhanced thermoelectric properties of F4TCNQ doped P3HT and its use as a binder for Sb2Te3 based printed thermoelectric films. ACS Applied Energy, Materials, 2018, 1(4), 1455–1462 CAS .
C. T. Hong, Y. H. Kang, J. Ryu, S. Y. Cho and K.-S. Jang, Spray-printed CNT/P3HT organic thermoelectric films and power generators, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3(43), 21428–21433 RSC .
W. Lee, C. T. Hong, O. H. Kwon, Y. Yoo, Y. H. Kang, J. Y. Lee, S. Y. Cho and K.-S. Jang, Enhanced thermoelectric performance of bar-coated SWCNT/P3HT thin films, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7(12), 6550–6556 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. T. Hong, W. Lee, Y. H. Kang, Y. Yoo, J. Ryu, S. Y. Cho and K.-S. Jang, Effective doping by spin-coating and enhanced thermoelectric power factors in SWCNT/P3HT hybrid films, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3(23), 12314–12319 RSC .
D. Venkateshvaran, A. Kronemeijer, J. Moriarty, D. Emin and H. Sirringhaus, Field-effect modulated Seebeck coefficient measurements in an organic polymer using a microfabricated on-chip architecture, APL Mater., 2014, 2(3), 032102 CrossRef .
B. A. Jones, M. J. Ahrens, M. H. Yoon, A. Facchetti, T. J. Marks and M. R. Wasielewski, High-mobility air-stable n-type semiconductors with processing versatility: dicyanoperylene-3,4:9,10-bis(dicarboximides), Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43(46), 6363–6366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. A. Jones, A. Facchetti, M. R. Wasielewski and T. J. Marks, Tuning orbital energetics in arylene diimide semiconductors. Materials design for ambient stability of n-type charge transport, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129(49), 15259–15278 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, C. A. Di, W. Xu and D. Zhu, Advances in n-type organic thermoelectric materials and devices. Advanced Electronic, Materials, 2019, 5(11), 1800825 CAS .
G. Zuo, Z. Li, E. Wang and M. Kemerink, High Seebeck coefficient and power factor in n-type organic thermoelectrics, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2018, 4(1), 1700501 CrossRef .
J. Kwak, P. Chaikin, A. Russel, A. Garito and A. Heeger, Anisotropic thermoelectric power of TTF-TCNQ, Solid State Commun., 1975, 16(6), 729–732 CrossRef CAS .
P. Chaikin, R. Greene, S. Etemad and E. Engler, Thermopower of an isostructural series of organic conductors, Phys. Rev. B: Solid State, 1976, 13(4), 1627 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wüsten and K. Potje-Kamloth, Organic thermogenerators for energy autarkic systems on flexible substrates, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2008, 41(13), 135113 CrossRef .
C.-J. Yao, H.-L. Zhang and Q. Zhang, Recent progress in thermoelectric materials based on conjugated polymers, Polymers, 2019, 11(1), 107 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Schlitz, F. Brunetti, A. Glaudell, P. Miller, M. A. Brady, C. J. Takacs, C. J. Hawker and M. L. Chabinyc, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2825–2830 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, Y. Liu, H. Li, S. Yan, X. Sun, D. Tu, X. Guo and Z. Ren, Enhanced charge transport and thermoelectric performance of P (NDI2OD-T2) by epitaxial crystallization on highly oriented polyethylene substrates, Mater. Chem. Front., 2020, 4(2), 661–668 RSC .
S. Wang, H. Sun, U. Ail, M. Vagin, P. Persson, Å. Andreasen, J. W. Thiel, W. Berggren, M. Crispin, X. Fazzi and D. Fabiano, S. Thermoelectric Properties of Solution-Processed n-Doped Ladder-Type Conducting Polymers, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 10764–10771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-S. Kim, S.-Y. Ku, N. J. Economou, W. Jang and D. H. Wang, Selective Doping of Conjugated Block Copolymer for Organic Thermoelectric Applications, Nanoscale Microscale Thermophys. Eng., 2019, 23(3), 222–234 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, H. Sun, T. Erdmann, G. Wang, D. Fazzi, U. Lappan, Y. Puttisong, Z. Chen, M. Berggren and X. Crispin, A chemically doped naphthalenediimide-bithiazole polymer for n-type organic thermoelectrics, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30(31), 1801898 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Orrill and S. LeBlanc, Printed thermoelectric materials and devices: Fabrication techniques, advantages, and challenges, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2017, 134(3), 44256 CrossRef .
F. Jiao, C.-a Di, Y. Sun, P. Sheng, W. Xu and D. Zhu, Inkjet-printed flexible organic thin-film thermoelectric devices based on p- and n-type poly(metal 1,1,2,2-ethenetetrathiolate)s/polymer composites through ball-milling, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A, 2013, 2014(372), 20130008 Search PubMed .
A. Besganz, V. Zöllmer, R. Kun, E. Pál, L. Walder and M. Busse, Inkjet printing as a flexible technology for the deposition of thermoelectric composite structures, Procedia Technol., 2014, 15, 99–106 CrossRef .
S. Ferhat, C. Domain, J. Vidal, D. Noël, B. Ratier and B. Lucas, Organic thermoelectric devices based on a stable n-type nanocomposite printed on paper, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2018, 2(1), 199–208 RSC .
Q. Wei, M. Mukaida, K. Kirihara, Y. Naitoh and T. Ishida, Polymer thermoelectric modules screen-printed on paper, RSC Adv., 2014, 4(54), 28802–28806 RSC .
R. R. Søndergaard, M. Hösel, N. Espinosa, M. Jørgensen and F. C. Krebs, Practical evaluation of organic polymer thermoelectrics by large-area R2R processing on flexible substrates, Energy Sci. Eng., 2013, 1(2), 81–88 CrossRef .
J. H. We, S. J. Kim and B. J. Cho, Hybrid composite of screen-printed inorganic thermoelectric film and organic conducting polymer for flexible thermoelectric power generator, Energy, 2014, 73, 506–512 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, J. Qiu and S. Wang, Roll-to-roll printing of flexible thin-film organic thermoelectric devices, Manuf. Lett., 2016, 8, 6–10 CrossRef .
M. Shakeel, K. Rehman, S. Ahmad, M. Amin, N. Iqbal and A. Khan, A low-cost printed organic thermoelectric generator for low-temperature energy harvesting, Renewable Energy, 2021, 167, 853–860 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kee, M. A. Haque, D. Corzo, H. N. Alshareef and D. Baran, Self-healing and stretchable 3D-printed organic thermoelectrics, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29(51), 1905426 CrossRef CAS .
E. P. Tomlinson, M. E. Hay and B. W. Boudouris, Radical Polymers and Their Application to Organic Electronic Devices, Macromolecules, 2014, 47(18), 6145–6158 CrossRef CAS .
E. P. Tomlinson, M. J. Willmore, X. Zhu, S. W. A. Hilsmier and B. W. Boudouris, Tuning the Thermoelectric Properties of a Conducting Polymer through Blending with Open–Shell Molecular Dopants, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7(33), 18195–18200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Russ, M. J. Robb, B. C. Popere, E. E. Perry, C.-K. Mai, S. L. Fronk, S. N. Patel, T. E. Mates, G. C. Bazan, J. J. Urban, M. L. Chabinyc, C. J. Hawker and R. A. Segalman, Tethered tertiary amines as solid-state n-type dopants for solution-processable organic semiconductors, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7(3), 1914–1919 RSC .
J.-H. Bahk, H. Fang, K. Yazawa and A. Shakouri, Flexible thermoelectric materials and device optimization for wearable energy harvesting, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3(40), 10362–10374 RSC .
T. Sun, J. L. Peavey, M. David Shelby, S. Ferguson and B. T. O’Connor, Heat shrink formation of a corrugated thin film thermoelectric generator, Energy Convers. Manage., 2015, 103, 674–680 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:
	(1)
zT = σS2T/κ	(2)

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematics representation of a thermoelectric process occurring in a TEG sandwiched between hot and cold thermal contacts. (b) Thermal equivalent circuit of a TEG device.	 
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)
	(7)
	(8)

 	Fig. 2  (a) Electrical equivalent circuit of a TEG device. (b) Schematics of a TEG array.	 
	(9)
	(10)

 	Fig. 3  Molecular structures of the p-type polymers encompassed in this Feature Article.	 

 	Fig. 4  Molecular structures of n-type semiconductors discussed in this Feature article.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Seebeck coefficient of BBL:PEI as a function of PEI content. (b) Power output as a function of resistance (measured as a function of temperature gradients). The device included a planar TEG whose p-type and n-type legs were made of PEDOT:PSS and a BBL:PEI, respectively. (c) Power output defined for a p–n pair as a function of temperature gradient (ΔT). A comparison with the literature data on other planar thermoelectric modules is presented. Readapted with permission from ref. 102 that licensed under http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.	 

 	Fig. 6  Fabrication of inkjet-printed OTEGs. (a) creation of SU8 cavities over the bottom contacts (b) inkjet-printing of active materials (c) thermal evaporation of top contacts.	 

 	Fig. 7  Spray-coated OTEG fabricated by Hong et al.143 (a) Schematic representation of the spray-coating process. (b) Optical picture of the device. Adapted from ref. 143 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2023.	 

 	Fig. 8  Screen-printed OTEG fabricated by Wei et al.164 Schematic representation of the (a) series and (b) parallel PEDOT:PSS array. (c) Optical image of the PEDOT:PSS lines. (d) Photograph of the final OTEG modules, the copper plates used to sandwich the devices are clearly visible. Adapted from ref. 164 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2023.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
