Faceted metal and metal oxide nanoparticles: design, fabrication and catalysis  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5NR03395K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5NR03395K
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 14159-14190Faceted metal and metal oxide nanoparticles: design, fabrication and catalysis

        
          
            Jaya 
            Pal
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Tarasankar 
            Pal
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur 721302, India. E-mail: tpal@chem.iitkgp.ernet.in
Received 
      22nd May 2015
    , Accepted 10th July 2015First published on 16th July 2015AbstractThe review addresses new advances in metal, bimetallic, metal oxide, and composite particles in their nanoregime for facet-selective catalytic applications. The synthesis and growth mechanisms of the particles have been summarized in brief in this review with a view to develop critical examination of the faceted morphology of the particles for catalysis. The size, shape and composition of the particles have been found to be largely irrelevant in comparison to the nature of facets in catalysis. Thus selective high- and low-index facets have been found to selectively promote adsorption, which eventually leads to an effective catalytic reaction. As a consequence, a high density of atoms rest at the corners, steps, stages, kinks etc on the catalyst surface in order to host the adsorbate efficiently and catalyze the reaction. Again, surface atomic arrangement and bond length have been found to play a dominant role in adsorption, leading to effective catalysis.Jaya PalJaya Pal obtained her B.Sc. and M.Sc. degrees from The University of Burdwan, India. She is currently pursuing her PhD degree in the Department of Chemistry at the Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, India under the guidance of Prof. Tarasankar Pal. Her research interests include size, shape and facet controlled synthesis of nanoparticles for catalysis, plasmonic photocatalysis and spectroscopy.Tarasankar PalProfessor Tarasankar Pal, MSc, PhD, DSc has been working in the Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur since 1984. He is a fellow of the Indian National Academy of Sciences, Allahabad. He has published about 300 papers. Recently the ACS highlighted him among 20 Indian authors for high-quality research. Prof. Pal has received numerous national and international awards including the ISCAS gold medal, and the R & D 100 Award from the U.S.A. His research interests include the synthesis and applications of metal and semiconductor nanoparticles for catalytic and spectroscopic applications, including surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) studies. His ‘arsenic detection kit’ and ‘bench marked model reaction’ to test any metal nanoparticle catalyst deserve special mention.
1. Introduction
The past decade has witnessed a great deal of research into the size-,1–6 shape-,7–15 and composition-dependent16–22 catalytic reactivity of nanoparticles. By tuning the size, shape and composition, the catalytic activity of a nanomaterial can be improved. It is well established that a catalyst becomes more effective as its size goes down. More precisely this fact can be envisaged from the increased number of surface atoms, especially from the general idea of surface-to-volume ratio. Thus size-dependent catalysis has become an important aspect in surface-catalysed reactions. It has already been proven that the reduction potential of metal particles becomes progressively negative as the size goes down (Fig. 1).23,24
 Fig. 1  The electrochemical standard potential of metal particles depends on agglomeration number. 
Again, the catalytic reactivity of nanoparticles is also related to the shapes of the particles. The shapes of nanocatalysts are determined by their crystal structures, including crystallinity, terminating facets and anisotropy. These parameters strongly affect the properties of nanocatalysts. For example, shape-dependent catalysis by Au nanoparticles was reported by Liang and coworkers, who have used Au nanoparticles in the form of nanospheres, nanorods, and nanoprisms to catalyze the hydrogenation of aromatic nitro compounds to amines.25 Furthermore, multi-component nanocomposites with controlled compositions can greatly alter catalytic reactivity as well. This issue is interesting because on the one hand it can advance the fundamental understanding of solid-state reactivity. On the other hand, it might provide a facile method to tune composition for an enhanced catalytic effect. Recently the exposed facets of a nanocrystal have been found to offer greater versatility than size, shape and other parameters in tuning the catalytic efficiency of the nanocrystal.26–28 Facets are the flat faces on particular geometric shapes. Generally the shape of a nanoparticle has a strong correlation with the exposed facet(s), and thus the surface structures as well as the fraction of atoms at corners and edges also become important.29,30 Faceted nanomaterials are of two types: (i) low-index-faceted nanomaterials and (ii) high-index-faceted nanomaterials. Since a facet, a surface of a crystal, is a plane, it can also be denoted with Miller indices. A low-index facet is one where the sum of the three components is small. High-index facets are those that contain a set of Miller indices {hkl} with at least one index greater than unity.
During the synthesis of faceted metal or metal oxide nanoparticles, if the growth is under thermodynamic control, the product will be bounded by low-index facets, i.e., lower surface energy. In this case, the stabilizing or capping agent plays an imperative role for determining the product shape, because the different facets have selective adsorption properties that are also reflected in their growth rates.31 In contrast, when the growth is governed under kinetically controlled conditions, then the product can drastically diverge from the thermodynamically favoured structure; noteworthy examples include nanocrystals with high-index facets or concave surfaces.32 The difficulty in generating concave structures with controlled high-index facets can be attributed to their higher surface energy.33,34 In this case, the use of a capping agent, a template, and/or kinetic control has been considered for the formation of nanocrystals with concave surfaces. Metal and metal oxide nanostructures with high-index facets possess more active catalytic sites than usual due to the presence of a high density of low-coordinated atoms, steps, edges and kinks, and this has become an important factor in catalysis.35 For enhanced catalytic activity, the design and fabrication of high-index-faceted metal or metal oxide nanoparticles is now a challenging task. Recent studies have revealed that high-index-faceted nanocrystals are synthesized either by selective overgrowth or through site-specific dissolution of nanoparticles.
The most widely studied facet-dependent property is the catalytic reactivity of nanomaterials towards a particular reaction, because the catalytic activity of nanomaterials is highly related to their exposed facets. This is understandable because the atoms at different facets have different reactivity/surface energy. Another interesting facet-dependent property is revealed from the facet-selective etching and reshaping of polyhedral nanocrystals, showing that surface conditions such as charges and preferential molecular adsorption on selected faces can be exploited to form unique hollow or concave structures.36–39 There are also reports addressing facet-dependent electrical conductivity40 and magnetic behaviour41 of different nanoparticles. Currently, the facet-dependent synthesis of different nanoparticles is making the headlines in the research area due to their promising properties and enhanced catalytic reactivity.
A wide variety of methods have been developed for the synthesis of noble metals, including Au,42–45 Ag,46–49 Pd,50–53 Pt,54–57 and Rh58–61 as well as their bimetallic62–65 combinations with different exposed facets. For noble metals, the most commonly observed shapes are octahedra, truncated octahedra, cuboctahedra, and cubes, with different degrees of truncation at corners and edges, and enclosed by different low-index facets, such as {111}, {110}, {100} in different proportions (Fig. 2). Such types of materials with faceted structures have received a lot of attention due to their outstanding performance in catalytic reactions such as Suzuki coupling,66–68 CO oxidation,69–72 styrene oxidation,48 hydrogenation,73–78 and electrocatalytic reactions.79–85
 Fig. 2  3D Geometry of different polyhedra with different volume ratios of {100} to {111} facets. 
It is well known that the Pt groups of metals are very costly due to their extremely low abundance in the Earth's crust. However, due to their enhanced catalytic activity, the higher stability of the particles and the minimum poisoning effect from external sources, there is a continuous and ever-increasing demand and hence a surge in the synthesis of this type of faceted noble nanomaterials. In order to reduce the use of these expensive metals, we need to focus on the performance of more familiar, low-cost and stable oxide materials such as Cu2O,86,87 TiO2,88–90 ZnO,91,92 Fe2O3,93 Co3O494,95etc. Thus the recent trend in this research area has been shifted towards the design and fabrication of such types of low-cost oxide nanomaterials, controlling their shapes by exposing different reactive facets. To this end, a variety of different shaped oxide nanomaterials have been reported for their enhanced catalytic reactivity in fields such as photocatalysis,96,97 gas sensors,98 lithium-ion batteries,99 solar energy conversion,100,101 and water splitting.102
In this review, we focus on the facet-dependent catalytic activity of metal, metal oxide, and composite nanomaterials with low- and high-index facets. For each material, we briefly summarise the progress towards the experimental implementation of these synthetic approaches. We also investigate the essential role of stabilizing or capping agents in determining the product shape with exposed facets by tuning the surface reactivity of different facets via selective adsorption. Finally, the dramatic differences in catalytic reactivity with distinctly different facets are addressed in terms of surface energy, surface atomic arrangement and configuration, associated with terraces, steps, kinks, and vacancies. As with many reviews on the Pt group metals,103,104 Cu2O38 and the celebrated TiO2105,106 have already been reported, hence in this brief report we mostly centre our discussion on the other faceted common and useful oxide nanomaterials.
2. Low-index-faceted nanomaterials
Metal and metal oxide nanoparticles expose different low-index facets depending on the particle shapes. Octahedral, cubic and rhombic dodecahedral nanocrystals are bound by {111}, {100} and {110} low-index facets, respectively. Facet-dependent catalytic activity can be appraised more accurately if only a single set of surface facets are available in the nanocrystals. The catalytic reactivity of the particles exposing two or more surface facets such as truncated octahedra and cuboctahedra can also be examined when their efficiencies are compared to monofaceted nanocrystals.
2.1. Metal nanoparticles
During the last few decades, the synthesis of metal nanoparticles with variable shapes by exposing specific crystal facets has received a great deal of attention due to their potential and promising applications in facet-selective catalysis. A careful review of the literature reveals that the platinum metals, by virtue of their nobility and partially filled d-orbitals, have become the most celebrated catalysts. It is also observed that Pd in particular remains the best catalyst for hydrogenation reactions. In this context, if we consider morphology-driven or facet-selective catalysis, even then Pt and Pd make up the lion's share. Even today electrocatalysis is best carried out by faceted Pt and Pd nanoparticles.

2.1.1. Platinum nanoparticles. 
El-Sayed and coworkers investigated the facet-dependent catalytic reactivity of Pt nanoparticles with varied shapes for the electron transfer reaction between hexacyanoferrate and thiosulfate.107–111 For example, tetrahedral Pt nanoparticles containing {111} facets exhibited higher catalytic activity than {100}-faceted Pt nanocubes.107 Furthermore, a comparative study of the hydrogenation reaction with facet-controlled Pt nanoparticles was conducted in great detail by Somorjai et al.77,78,112–116 They examined that {100}-faceted Pt nanocubes produced cyclohexane as the major product during hydrogenation of benzene, whereas cuboctahedra bound by {111} and {100} facets produced a mixture of cyclohexane and cyclohexene.112 Faceted Pt nanoparticles are also widely used in the electrocatalytic oxygen reduction reaction (ORR). In 1994, Yeager et al. proved that catalytic reactivity towards ORR decreased in the sequence of {110} > {111} > {100}.117 The ORR was found to be sensitive to the exposed crystal facets of the Pt electrode surface. Xia et al. investigated that Pt multioctahedra served as a better catalyst for ORR than the commercial Pt/C due to the high ratio of {111} to {100} as exposed facets and the existence of surface steps on their surfaces.118 In another study Sun et al. proved {100}-faceted Pt nanocubes exhibited a four times higher specific activity for ORR than other faceted polyhedra or truncated cubes.119,120
As the shape-controlled synthesis of nanoparticles is believed to be a kinetic process, a high-energy facet vanishes faster in the crystal growth stage and is difficult to preserve on the surface of the nanoparticles. Therefore capping agents (surfactants, biomolecules or peptides) are used to overcome this problem in the shape-controlled synthesis of nanoparticles. Capping agents can bind specifically to particular facets, lowering the surface energy. In this study, shape-controlled Pt nanocrystals have been obtained by using appropriate peptide sequences.121 {100}-Faceted Pt cubes have been synthesized using binding peptide Ac–Thr–Leu–Thr–Thr–Leu–Thr–Asn–CONH2, and {111}-faceted Pt tetrahedra have been synthesized using binding peptide Ac–Ser–Ser–Phe–Pro–Gln–Pro–Asn–CONH2. Again the shape transformation from cube to tetrahedron is done at room temperature by switching the binding peptide sequence.
Huang et al. reported the preparation of Pt nanocrystals in the presence of different aromatic molecules.122 Here, facet-selective capping with differently substituted organic molecules evolves differently faceted Pt nanocrystals. This was confirmed from Raman studies. Again the study has been generalized for the facet-selective synthesis of Pd nanocrystals as well. In one case aromatic organic molecules were used that bear negative ring currents, i.e., negative electrostatic potentials, because of the substitution in the phenyl ring. In this case the phenyl ring is able to interact with the {111} facets of the Pt nanocrystals. However, electron-withdrawing substituents in the phenyl ring make the ring current positive. As a result of this, molecules like p-nitro phenol do not interact with the {111} facet. Instead the {100} facet interacts with positive-charge-bearing p-nitro phenol-like molecules.
Keeping this idea in mind, it might be possible to think of a junction between two differently faceted nanomaterials for catalysis. There two selective capping agents may be brought into contact because of their facet-selective capping by the two faceted nanomaterials in contact. Thus a facile reaction between two capping agents might take place across the heterojunction.


2.1.2. Palladium nanoparticles. 
Pd nanoparticles enclosed by different facets are also widely used in hydrogenation,123–127 Suzuki coupling,128–132 oxygen reduction133 and formic acid oxidation reactions.134 For the selective hydrogenation of 1,3-butadiene, it was found that {110}-faceted Pd single crystals exhibited five times higher catalytic reactivity than {111} facet-exposed Pd,135,136 indicating a more open surface and higher adhesion probability of the {110} facets, which favours adsorption and activation.137 The product selectivity also varies with different exposed facets. For example, {111}-faceted Pd nanoparticles produced the fully hydrogenated product n-butane, whereas both 2-butene and n-butane were obtained on the {110} surface.138–140
Although Pt is the most efficient catalyst for ORR, researchers have been devoted to finding alternative catalysts due to its high cost, and Pd (less expensive than Pt) is probably the best substitute among all other metals similar to Pt. Xia et al. recently studied the facet-dependent ORR activity of {100}-faceted Pd cubes and {111}-faceted Pd octahedra.133 Facet-dependent formic acid oxidation was also examined by looking at five differently shaped Pd based catalysts. It was found that the maximum current density increased in the order of octahedra < truncated octahedra < cuboctahedra < truncated cubes < cubes (Fig. 3), signifying that the {100} facet was more reactive for the oxidation of formic acid than the {111} facet.134
 Fig. 3  Maximum current densities of formic acid oxidation obtained using different Pd polyhedra enclosed by {111} and {100} planes in different proportions. The inset displays their corresponding peak potentials. Reprinted with permission from ref. 134. Copyright 2012 from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In another approach, Xia et al. prepared size-dependent Pd octahedra from Pd cubes of a single size.141 Here, selective capping agent Br− hindered the oxidative etching of Pd on the {100} facet, as a result of which {111} facets were found to have been selectively etched. The presence of the suitable reducing agent triethylene glycol in the solution phase reverts the oxidized Pd(II) back to Pd(0). The freshly produced Pd(0) gets deposited back on the edges of the cubes and diffuses to the adjacent side faces because of the ongoing oxidation and Br− ion-blocked {100} facets (Fig. 4). Thus, octahedral Pd nanocrystals are produced. Size-dependent octahedra have been produced just by controlling the etching and regrowth rate of Pd by varying the proportions of oxidant and reductant.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic representation of the five important steps involved in the oxidative etching and regrowth process. (b) Schematic representation of the formation of Pd octahedra with different but controllable edge lengths (l) by controlling the rates of oxidative etching and regrowth for Pd cubes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 141. Copyright 2013 from the American Chemical Society. 
The presence of bromide ions in the reaction mixture plays a vital role in the formation of {100}-faceted Pd and Ag nanocrystals.142–145 Here the bromide ions act as a capping agent and preferentially adsorb on the {100} facets, thus stabilizing these facets. In this work, Xia et al. measured the number of Br− ions adsorbed on the surface of {100}-faceted Pd nanocubes using inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy.146 Again from XPS analysis it is also confirmed that there is a chemisorption-type of interaction between Br− ions and Pd nanocubes that can be removed only by deposition at higher temperature under reductive conditions. The removal of adsorbed Br− ions on the surface of {100}-faceted Pd nanocubes is also possible through overgrowth of Pd cubes, which causes the formation of cuboctahedral or octahedral structures. A critical number of Br− ions is required for full coverage of all the {100} facets, and if the number is less than the optimum value it causes the formation of truncated cubes with some {111} facets. Thus I− and Br− deserve special mention in relation to oxidative etching as well as capping of Pd crystal facets.


2.1.3. Gold nanoparticles. 
Coinage metal Au as nanoparticle has attracted extensive interest in heterogeneous catalysis. However, the facet-dependent phenomenon is far less explored in Au nanoparticles, even though it appears as a hot topic in catalysis research. Zubarev et al. demonstrated the wet chemical process for the purification of high-aspect-ratio 1D Au nanorods from an initial mixture of Au nanoparticles (rods and platelets).147,148 Here Au nanoparticles have been synthesized using a seed-mediated technique, first proposed from our laboratory in 2001,6 where a mixture of spheres, rods and platelets are obtained. It is observed that the treatment of the mixture of rods and platelets with Au(III)/CTAB complex causes conversion of the platelets into more soluble, smaller nanodisks, which remain in the supernatant while the pure nanorods slowly precipitate (Fig. 5). The blue supernatant solution containing nanodisks can easily be converted back to less soluble, multifaceted platelets by the addition of Au(I) ions and ascorbic acid. It has been seen that in general Au fcc planes follow the energy sequence {111} < {100} < {110}. However, experimentally a different order has often been observed in the solution phase, {111} < {110} < {100}. This implies that adsorption of capping agent significantly alters the surface energy of the faceted particles.
 Fig. 5  TEM images of gold nanoparticles: (A) as-synthesized mixture, (B) mixture of faceted platelets and rods, (C) mixture of nanodisks and rods and (D) nanorods. Reprinted with permission from ref. 147. Copyright 2008 from the American Chemical Society. 
In a recent study, nitroaromatic reduction has been studied using different faceted Au nanoparticles (cubic, octahedral, and rhombic dodecahedral) at different temperatures.149 The highest catalytic rate of reduction has been observed for rhombic dodecahedra irrespective of the temperature change. From DFT calculations, it has been found that the binding energy between p-nitroaniline and the {110} facets of rhombic dodecahedral Au nanoparticles is higher than that for the other two, and the catalytic efficiency follows the sequence of {110} > {100} > {111}. It was also observed that at 25 °C, {100}-faceted cubic Au nanoparticles exhibited a higher reduction rate than {111}-faceted Au nanoparticles, and the situation is reversed at 40 °C.
Recently, regioselective catalysis using morphologically different Au nanocrystals for the synthesis of 1,4-disubstituted triazole through click reaction has been reported by Huang et al.150 It is observed that rhombic dodecahedral Au nanocrystals with {110} facets serve as the best-suited catalyst for the regioselective synthesis of 1,4-disubstituted triazole, compared to {111}-faceted octahedral and {100}-faceted cubic Cu2O nanocrystals. The improved catalytic efficiency of rhombic dodecahedral Au nanocrystals can be attributed to the less-congested surface Au atom arrangement on the {110} surface and the largest unsaturated coordination number of the surface Au atoms.
Therefore, there is a need for further experimentation to explore facet-selective catalysis, especially for Au nanocrystals.


2.1.4. Rhodium nanoparticles. 
The facet-dependent catalytic reactivity of differently shaped Rh nanoparticles is less explored with respect to Pt and Pd. A rhodium 1D nanostructure has been prepared from aqueous RhCl3 solution by uniform heating in the presence of CTAB. Here CTAB acts as a face-selective adsorption additive and aids the formation of 1D nanostructures of Rh.151 It has been observed that the pH has a remarkable influence on the alteration of the aspect ratio and sharpening of the edges of Rh nanorods. An interesting shape transformation has also been shown in a selective redox environment for nanorods and nanowires to octahedral and spherical particles, respectively.
Attention has been directed to the evolution of concave nanocrystals of Rh containing a mixture of {111} and {110} facets, as Rh is an important catalyst.152 Selective capping of the {111} facets of Rh seed particles with citrate and then temperature-dependent diffusion of Rh from corner to edge leads to concave tetrahedra (Fig. 6). This synthetic strategy offers a radically different approach for the formation of noble metal nanocrystals with concave surfaces.
 Fig. 6  (a–d) TEM images of Rh nanoparticles obtained at different reaction times after the injection of Rh(III) precursor: (a) 6, (b) 15, (c) 30, and (d) 60 min. All the scale bars are 5 nm. (e) Schematic representation of the formation of an Rh concave tetrahedron. Reprinted with permission from ref. 152. Copyright 2013 from the American Chemical Society. 

2.2. Bimetallic nanoparticles
Catalytic reactions involving monometallic particles have served many industrial processes. More recently it has been seen that bimetallic or even multimetallic particles are more advantageous in terms of catalytic performance and optical properties than single component systems.153–158 In this respect noble metal bimetallic particles are very important. Recently Pt–Pd, Pd–Rh, Pd–Ag, Pd–Ir, Pt–Au and Co–Pt3etc. have been used for catalytic purposes.
Bimetallic alloy nanoparticles of Pt–Pd bearing nanotetrahedra (Td) and nanocubes (Cb) have been meticulously synthesized via a one-pot hydrothermal route.159 Reducing agent HCHO together with capping agent Na2C2O4 generate nanotetrahedra from the solution phase synthetic route. The capping agent as well as the oxidized product HCHO jointly aid the selective evolution of Td. However, nanocubes are obtained while PVP is used as a reducing agent and iodide–bromide as small capping agents. Interchange of reducing agent resulted in a mixture of morphologically different products. It has been shown that {100}-facet-bound cubes have higher electrocatalytic activity than {111}-faceted Td towards methanol oxidation. Interestingly, {111}-facet-enclosed Pt–Pd Td exhibit better durability.
For fuel cell applications, i.e., from the electrooxidation point of view, Co/Pt3 has recently been exploited for methanol oxidation.160 Zhang and coworkers have synthesized morphologically different shapes of Co/Pt3 using varied proportions of stabilizing agent. The {111}-faceted nanoflowers exhibited a higher catalytic efficiency towards methanol oxidation than any other facets even though there is size variation of the nanocrystals of Co/Pt3.
In another piece of work, single capping agent PAH (poly(allylamine hydrochloride)) has been found to be a complex forming and tuning agent for co-reduction of Pt and Au precursor salts to form high-energy {100}-faceted Pt/Au alloy nanocubes for 4-nitrophenol reduction.161
Xia and coworkers reported the preparation of three distinctive shapes of Pd–Ag bimetallic nanocrystals through controlled nucleation and growth of Ag atoms on one, three, and six of the equivalent {100} facets of a Pd seed.162 Only by controlling the flow rate of AgNO3, they obtained hybrid dimers, eccentric nanobars, and core–shell-type Pd–Ag nanocrystals. These Pd–Ag bimetallic nanoparticles exhibited significantly different localized surface plasmon resonance properties in comparison to pure metals and their alloys.
Considering the importance of bimetallic catalyst particles, recently Xia et al. have considered Rh deposition on selected facets of Pd nanocrystals.163 Three important parameters have been introduced for the fabrication of bimetallic Pd–Rh particles using a seed-mediated technique. The monometallic basic framework of cuboctahedral Pd nanocrystals has become the selected platform for deposition of Rh metal. Two important ideas have enriched the {111} facets of Pd cuboctahedra with Rh: (i) selected capping of the {100} facets of Pd by Br− ions, and (ii) thermodynamically controlled reduction of Rh(III) ions onto the selected part of the {111} facets of Pd. In the latter case, slow but controlled reduction covers the entire {111} facet of Pd, producing Pd–Rh cubic structures (Fig. 7). Whereas a faster rate of reduction produces multiple Rh islands on each Pd{111} facet due to the high surface energy and interatomic Rh–Rh binding energy (Fig. 7). Finally, etching of Pd–Rh bimetallic nanocrystals by Fe(III)/Br− pairs produces Rh nanoframes.
 Fig. 7  Schematic illustrations of the formation of Pd–Rh multipod cuboctahedra and Pd–Rh binary nanocubes from Pd cuboctahedra. Reprinted with permission from ref. 163. Copyright 2013 from the American Chemical Society. 
Recently the synthesis of hollow structures or concave faces has received attention due to the presence of high-index facets as well as their unique optical and catalytic properties.164–172 Xia et al. have reported the synthesis of Pd–Rh core–frame concave nanocubes through site-specific overgrowth of Rh adatoms at the corners and edges of Pd cubic seeds.173 The as-synthesized Pd cubic seeds are slightly truncated at the corners and edges. It is observed that the Br− ions cover the Pd{100} surface except the truncated sides of the Pd cube. Therefore, Rh atoms are deposited at all the corners and edges and ultimately form Pd–Rh concave core–frame structures with Pd{100} and Rh{110} facets (Fig. 8). Rh is highly resistant to oxidative corrosion compared to Pd.174,175 Therefore etching of Pd–Rh core–frame concave nanocubes by Fe(III)/Br− pairs produces Rh nanoframes with a unique open structure through selective etching of the Pd cores (Fig. 8).
 Fig. 8  Schematic representation of the synthesis of Pd–Rh core–frame concave nanocubes and Rh cubic nanoframes using three important steps: (1) selective nucleation of Rh at the corners and edges of the Pd nanocubes due to the capping of {100} facets by Br− ions; (2) formation of concave nanocubic Pd–Rh bimetallic core–frames since the growth of Rh on the corners and edges of the Pd nanocubes is continued; and (3) preparation of Rh cubic nanoframes by selectively etching away the Pd cores. Reprinted with permission from ref. 173. Copyright 2012 from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. 
As Pt-group metals are very expensive, researchers have focused on the shape- and size-dependent synthesis of nanocrystals to maximise their catalytic performance.176 Iridium nanoparticles generally exist with spherical morphology, and investigation of facet-dependent catalytic activity is impossible.177–180 So the synthesis of iridium nanocrystals with well-defined facets is now a challenging task. Keeping this in mind, Xia et al. for the first time reported the facile synthesis of Ir nanocrystals with well-defined facets through a simple seed-mediated growth approach, where cubic and octahedral Pd nanoparticles are used as seeds.181 The main success of the reaction is layer-by-layer smooth deposition of an Ir shell on a Pd core due to fast diffusion of Ir adatoms on the Pd surface, which is greatly accelerated at high temperature (200 °C). It is found that cubic and octahedral Pd@Ir core–shell nanostructures are also enclosed by {100} and {111} facets as like the initial Pd seeds, which ensures the replication of facets. These two well-faceted core–shell nanocrystal structures exhibit facet-dependent catalytic efficiency for the selective generation of H2 from the decomposition of hydrazine. The experimental results suggest that {100}-faceted cubic Pd@Ir serves as a better catalyst than {111}-faceted octahedral Pd@Ir with roughly the same size.
2.3. Metal oxide nanoparticles
The recent developments in materials science have now shifted to tailor-made metal oxides with specific crystal facets, to overcome the cost effect of precious noble metals. It has been seen that the exposed facets of oxide nanomaterials tremendously affect their catalytic reaction performance. This provides a new opportunity to understand the nature of active sites and the atomic configuration of different crystal facets, and the structure reactivity by correlating the reaction properties with the exposed crystal facets of oxide nanomaterials.

2.3.1. Cuprous oxides. 
Cu2O, being a natural product obtained from the Earth's crust as cuprites, has attracted engineers and chemists for its p-type semiconducting and catalytic properties, especially when Cu2O is taken to the nanoregime. Cu2O has a typical cuprite crystal structure in which the body-centered cubic unit cell lattice is built by copper atoms and oxygen atoms occupying half of the tetrahedral sites.182 As shown in Fig. 9, all the surface Cu atoms are fully exposed in the case of {110} facets, while the {111} facet contains some exposed and some sub-surface Cu atoms. Only partially exposed Cu atoms are available in the case of the {100} facet of Cu2O,183 which is also reflected in the experimental results, showing the low reactivity of {100}-facet-bounded nanocubes.
 Fig. 9  Crystal structure models of cuprite Cu2O showing the (a and b) {100}, (c and d) {111}, and (e and f) {110} facets. Oxygen and copper atoms are shown in red and white, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 182. Copyright 2013 from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. 
Facet-dependent catalytic properties have recently inspired scientists to study coupling reactions. It has been shown that {111} faceted octahedral Cu2O shows higher reactivity towards the C–N coupling reaction than {100} faceted cubic Cu2O.184 Low reactivity of the {100} faceted cubic Cu2O has been found to be improved after O2 assisted etching that provides more active sites on the produced facet-etched nanocubes.
Recently regioselective catalysis using morphologically different Cu2O nanocrystals has been reported by Huang et al. It was observed that rhombic dodecahedral Cu2O with {110} facets serves as the best-suited catalyst for the regioselective synthesis of 3,5-disubstituted isoxazoles compared to {111}-faceted octahedral and {100}-faceted cubic Cu2O nanocrystals.185 From this catalyst, 3,5-disubstituted isoxazoles from a wide variety of aromatic imidoyl chlorides and terminal alkynes in ethanol at 50 °C have been obtained with excellent yields.
Adsorption being the first step in catalysis, many adsorbents have been examined in relation to dye adsorption. Here also, {111}-faceted octahedral Cu2O nanoparticles perform the best, superseding other morphologically different faceted Cu2O nanoparticles.186
Similarly faceted Cu2O nanocrystals have been shown to be a good photocatalyst for the degradation of negatively charged methyl orange.187–194
Huang et al. demonstrated facet-dependent etching of cubic, octahedral, and rhombic dodecahedral Cu2O nanoparticles in the presence of acetic acid and ammonia solution.195,196 During the etching process, it was observed that {100} facets are more stable, whereas less stable {111} and {110} facets are transformed to form new {100} facets.
Hollow 3D nanostructures of Cu2O (Fig. 10) are evolved from different faceted solid parental nanostructures capable of scattering visible to near-infrared light. The preparation procedure takes advantage of sonication, etching by HCl and kinetic control through selective expulsion of surfactant molecules.197
 Fig. 10  Facet-selective etching of morphologically different Cu2O nanocrystals. Reprinted with permission from ref. 197. Copyright 2013 from the American Chemical Society. 
Different surface atomic arrangements of the exposed crystal facets exhibit distinctive antibacterial activities. This was realized by Wang and coworkers introducing E. Coli strain into the reaction medium.198 From zeta potential measurements, they reported that the electrostatic interaction between E. Coli and {111}-faceted octahedral Cu2O is stronger in inactivating bacteria than that with {100}-faceted cubic Cu2O.
The compositional and morphological evolution of differently shaped Cu2O (octahedral, truncated octahedral, hollow octahedral, cubic and spherical) nanoparticles has been studied very recently by introducing different etching agents such as aqueous NaOH, triethylamine (TEA) and oxalic acid solution, and their oxidative dissolution depends on the exposed crystal planes (Fig. 11).199 During oxidative dissolution in aqueous oxalic acid solution, it is found that the relative stability of the {100} crystal plane is higher than that of the {111} crystal plane. Etching only with oxalic acid generates shape transformation from octahedral, truncated octahedral and hollow octahedral Cu2O nanoparticles to cubic and hollow cubic as etching products, with 50% reduction of edge length. All morphologically different Cu2O nanoparticles and chemically etched products show facet-dependent photocatalytic activity under visible light irradiation. The photocatalytic efficiency of different particles for Congo red degradation has shown a close relationship with exposed crystal planes, surface area and particle size. NaOH-etched products with hollow octahedral morphology exposing {111} facets exhibited the highest photocatalytic activity.
 Fig. 11  Chemical etching of morphologically different Cu2O nanoparticles. Etched products shown in the same colour are produced from Cu2O nanoparticles of the same shape. Reprinted with permission from ref. 199. Copyright 2013 from the American Chemical Society. 
In another study Huang et al. reported the facet-dependent electrical conductivity of differently shaped Cu2O and Au–Cu2O nanoparticles.40 The experimental results suggest that {111}-faceted Cu2O octahedra are highly electrically conductive, whereas {100}-faceted Cu2O shows very poor conductivity. Again the octahedral Au–Cu2O core–shell structure shows significant enhancement of conductivity, but the cubic Au–Cu2O core–shell structure shows little enhancement.
Cu2O nanocages have been judiciously obtained to encapsulate Au nanorods for possible applications. The authors have studied time-dependent seed particle growth of two types of Cu2O nanoframes with variable wall thickness. Slow and faster etching by ethanol and an ethanol–HCl mixture in NaOH/SDS solution produced a truncated rhombic dodecahedral structure of Cu2O.200 The authors have discussed the importance of Au incorporation in Cu2O cages. Furthermore, the anion sensitivity of the {111} facets with that of the {100} facets of Cu2O has been compared.


2.3.2. Titanium dioxides. 
Titania has four polymorphs: rutile, anatase, brookite, and TiO2(B), based on the 3D arrangements of TiO6 octahedral units. Of these phases, rutile is the thermodynamically most stable form in bulk titania, whereas anatase is the most stable form when the size goes below 14 nm.201 The other two polymorphs [brookite, and TiO2(B)] are not generally obtained in minerals because they exit in metastable forms. The structural variation in the different polymorphs arises mainly due to the different sharing of edges and corners of one TiO6 octahedral unit with the adjacent one (Fig. 12). For the anatase phase, the TiO6 octahedral units are connected by sharing edges. The rutile phase is built by sharing the corners of TiO6 octahedral units along the a and b direction, but the edges along the c direction. In the case of brookite, the connectivity of TiO6 octahedral units along the c direction is similar to that of rutile, but along the a and b directions TiO6 octahedral units are connected by sharing both the corners and edges.202 For TiO2(B), the connectivity of TiO6 octahedral units by sharing of edges is similar to that of the anatase form, but the with a different 3D arrangement that generates a layered structure.203
 Fig. 12  3D arrangements of the TiO2 anatase, rutile, and brookite forms. Reprinted with permission from ref. 202. Copyright 2010 from the American Chemical Society. 
Both the {110} and {101} surfaces of the rutile and anatase phase are terminated by sixfold- and fivefold-coordinated Ti atoms and threefold- and twofold-coordinated O atoms (Fig. 13).204 Due to slight orthorhombic distortion, the anatase phase is less symmetrical than the rutile phase, and it was also found that the Ti–Ti bond distance is shorter in the anatase form than the rutile form. As a result, anatase TiO2 becomes less dense and stable than the rutile form due to the degree of distortion in the basic building block. The different exposed crystal facets of TiO2 are the promoters of heterogeneous catalysis.
 Fig. 13  Atomic configurations of the {110} and {101} crystal facets for anatase and rutile TiO2, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 204. Copyright 2014 from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
TiO2 nanocrystals are considered to be by far the best catalyst for UV-assisted chemical reactions. Recently, TiO2 nanocrystals with different crystal forms and crystal facets have been obtained from hydrothermal reactions involving Ti(OH)4 in the presence of anion additives.205 Restructuring and recrystallization may occur for TiO2 NCs due to the strong interaction between added anions and the TiO2 surface, leading to phase transformation from anatase to rutile or brookite. Hard donor atoms bind differently with the crystal facets of TiO2 and cause surface restructuring and recrystallization. It has been observed that truncated octahedral anatase TiO2 NC was obtained when F− was used as the capping anion. F− is selectively adsorbed on the {001} facets of TiO2 and lowers the surface energy, leading to a larger percentage of {001} facets. However, SO42− or Ac− (acetate ion) in place of F− upon hydrothermolysis produces anatase TiO2 nanorods. Longer nanorods are obtained with SO42− and shorter nanorods with Ac−. Selective photocatalytic reduction of nitrobenzene and selective oxidation of benzyl alcohol have been elucidated with the different faceted TiO2 NCs. Comparative accounts of facet-selective reactions have been documented for benzyl alcohol oxidation without any facet discrimination, but nitroaromatics show a definitive order of reduction rates of nitrobenzene as follows: {101} > {001} > {100} (Fig. 14).
 Fig. 14  Photocatalytic performances of TiO2 nanocrystals with different crystal facets in (A) reduction of nitrobenzene to aniline after reaction for 30 min and (B) oxidation of benzyl alcohol to benzaldehyde after reaction for 4 h. Reprinted with permission from ref. 205. Copyright 2013 from the American Chemical Society. 
It has recently been discovered that naturally occurring TiO2 nanocrystals bear energetically favourable {101} facets.206–209 Furthermore, the morphology of the anatase phase consists of octahedral bipyramidal structures. It is very difficult to produce TiO2 nanocrystals with reactive and energetically unfavourable {001} facets. Recently Li et al. have discovered a hydrothermal process to stabilize {001}-faceted anatase TiO2 nanosheets in aqueous medium.210 Here, F− ion capping capability has been discussed, which promotes oriented attachment along the {001} facets via a hydrolytic pathway. They have also shown that solvents such as HCl, ethanol, propanol, and butanol suppress the hydrolysis of surface Ti–F, which helps the retention of the original nanosheet morphology.
Recently, Pradhan et al. reported the photocatalytic efficacy of anatase TiO2 nanocrystals.211 The size-dependent TiO2 nanocrystals have been found to evolve by varying the reaction time. The paper has documented the use of effective diethanolamine capping for {101} facets instead of {100} facets. Thus with increasing reaction time nanocrystals with {101} facets predominates and as a result cuboid nanocrystals are produced with selected facets (Fig. 15). The author has identified high energy oxidative {001} facets and low energy {101} reductive facets. The popular belief of hole–electron pair generation and subsequent decrease of charge recombination have been envisaged in the paper. Finally, TiO2 nanocrystal with {001} or {100/010} and {101} facets exhibited facet-selective photocatalytic activity.
 Fig. 15  FESEM, TEM images, and 3D geometrical models of respective TiO2 nanoparticles are shown with different facets hydrothermally synthesized in (a, b) 12 h, (c, d) 24 h, (e, f) 36 h, and (g, h) 48 h. The scale bar in all the images is 25 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 211. Copyright 2013 from American Chemical Society. 
Chen et al. reported the photocatalytic efficiency of {001}-faceted TiO2 nanocrystals through both experiment and theory. It has been found that postannealing TiO2 nanoparticles at 350, 450, and 550 °C led to outstanding performance in photocatalytic H2 production as compared to that of commercial P25. In this report, the enhanced photocatalytic activity of the 450 °C calcined sample has been explained by the synergistic effect.212 They have brought up the co-existence of low-index-faceted structures with dominant {010} and {001} facets, which they have termed as quasi heterojunctions. Photocatalytic H2 evolution by the TiO2 semiconductor nanoparticles has also been supported by density functional theory.
TiO2 nanocrystals with uncommonly high-energy {111} facets have been synthesized by wet chemical synthesis at room temperature. Ye et al. have not only synthesized TiO2 nanocrystals using F− and ammonia as capping agents, but have also substantiated the energetics of the high-energy faceted {111} structure through density functional theory.213 The electronic band structure of the {111}-faceted TiO2 nanocrystals is supportive for the generation of more reductive electrons. The authors have proposed higher solar energy conversion efficiency from the as-synthesized product with {111} facets than from the common faceted anatase TiO2 nanocrystals with {001}, {010}, and {101} facets.
Again faceted TiO2 nanocrystals have been produced from titanium isopropoxide in acid medium (HF and HCl) under prolonged hydrothermal heating using an autoclave.214 To promote the photocatalytic activity of TiO2 nanocrystals, different metallic cocatalysts have been deposited onto the TiO2 facets to examine the facet-selective oxidation of glycerol. It has been concluded that the {110} facet shows maximum photocatalytic activity while the {001} facet performs badly. Intermediate activity has been documented for the {101} facet in the production of hydroxyl acetaldehyde.
To make TiO2 an efficient catalyst many attempts have been made. Among them, tuning of the band gap value of TiO2 by changing its morphology is a fruitful way to improve its catalytic activity. Furthermore, doping of elements is also responsible for tuning the band gap value.215 Sometimes deposited metals change the catalytic properties of the composites drastically. In this regard Haruta's work is a ground-breaking one.216 Here we present one elegant application of Au–TiO2 composite materials for photocatalytic hydrogen generation.217 Faceted Au nanoparticles have been deposited onto the highly exposed {001} facet of TiO2. It has been shown that anchored Au{111} shows higher reactivity than other Au nanoparticles [Au{100/111} and Au{100}].
Oxidation of CO has been reported with faceted TiO2–Au as the catalyst.218 In this work, faceted TiO2 has been prepared to host Au nanoparticles. It is clearly shown that the reactivity of differently faceted TiO2 varies with temperature for CO oxidation. Interestingly, 100% oxidation has been reported on the {100} TiO2 facet at 253 K, but with increasing temperature the {001} facet became increasingly important for CO oxidation. At intermediate temperatures, i.e. at 273 K, the {101} facet converts CO into CO2 quantitatively.
TiO2 nanocrystals become activated under UV irradiation and can be best physically modified by a suitable dye. This provides improved visible light photocatalytic activity. Further improvement is governed by noble metal loading on dye-sensitized TiO2 nanocrystals. This is because of the suppression of charge recombination processes. Lu et al. loaded Pt onto commercially available P25 Degussa TiO2 nanocrystals for water reduction.219 In their report they have explained the improved photocatalytic activity of the composite nanomaterials taking the Fermi level of Pt{111} facets into consideration. In fact neat Pt{111} facets are active due to the larger number of unsaturated Pt atoms at the corners and edges. Again the position of the Fermi level traps the electron easily out of the conduction band of TiO2. Thus the composite Pt{111}/TiO2 provides more reaction sites for water reduction than the other nanocomposites, Pt{100/111}/TiO2 and Pt{100}/TiO2.


2.3.3. Ferric oxides. 
Generally, it is known that four types of Fe2O3 polymorphs exist depending upon the atomic arrangements of Fe3+ and O2− ions, and they are α, β, γ, and ε phases. Among them highly crystalline α-, and γ-Fe2O3 have been studied for a long time due to their nontoxicity, environmental friendliness and abundance in nature. α-Fe2O3 has a corundum-type structure (Rc space group, a = 0.50352 and c = 1.37508 nm) with a hexagonal close-packed array of O2− ions, and Fe3+ ions occupy 2/3 of the octahedral sites.220 Whereas γ-Fe2O3 has a cubic structure (Fdm space group, lattice constant value 0.83474 nm) in which the Fe3+ ions are distributed in the tetrahedral (eight Fe ions per unit cell) and octahedral sites (the remaining Fe ions and vacancies) confined by the cubic close-packed array of oxygen anions.221Fig. 16 shows the surface atomic configurations of the crystal facets for α- and γ-Fe2O3. It is observed that the {001} facet is the most frequently exposed facet for α-Fe2O3, which is only terminated by Fe or O atoms, whereas another low-index facet, {100}, simultaneously contains both Fe and O atoms.222 γ-Fe2O3 is generally bound by polar and unstable low-index {001}, {011}, and {111} facets and the surface energies of the {001}, {011}, {112}, and {012} facets after surface reconstruction are almost equivalent.223 The catalytic reactivity of Fe2O3 depends not only on its crystal phase but also on the exposed crystal facets.
 Fig. 16  Atomic configurations of the {0001} and {110} facets for α-Fe2O3 and {001} and {110} facets for γ-Fe2O3. Reprinted with permission from ref. 204. Copyright 2014 from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Recently Fe2O3 has been actively considered as an anode material for lithium storage owing to its high theoretical capacity (∼1000 mA h g−1). Yu et al. reported an interesting flame pyrolysis method for the synthesis of 26-faceted truncated cuboctahedral γ-Fe2O3 by direct burning of ferrocene in different solvents using an alcohol lamp.224 The choice of solvents is therefore very important for fabrication of maghemite nanocrystals and their carbon composites. Polyhedral γ-Fe2O3 was obtained when methanol, ethanol and dimethylformamide were used as solvents, whereas isopropanol, butanol and tetrahydrofuran produced smaller iron oxide nanocrystals encapsulated in carbon. A detailed mechanism for shape evolution from 14-faceted truncated octahedra to 26-faceted truncated cuboctahedra has also been discussed. Fig. 17 indicates that {111} hexagons (indicated as A, B, C, and D) grew faster in truncated octahedra,225 which resulted in the formation of new {110} squares (indicated as O′), and at the same time the original {100} square (marked as O) was transformed into an octagonal {100} plane (indicated as P) as the surface energies of different facets are different. It is observed that the surface energies follow the order of σ{101} > σ{001} > σ{111}. From the electrochemical performance of the as-synthesized catalysts as an anode material for Li-ion batteries, it can be concluded that γ-Fe2O3@C displayed a high discharge specific capacity (1050 mA h g−1) and stability compared to bare maghemite, mainly due to the high electronic conductivity of carbon.
 Fig. 17  Cartoon illustration of the formation of truncated cuboctahedra by further growth of truncated octahedral nanocrystals in the flame. Reprinted with permission from ref. 224. Copyright 2012 from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Shen et al. fabricated hexagonal α-Fe2O3 nanoplates enclosed by two larger {0001} basal surfaces, which gave a higher discharge capacity (1630 mA h g−1) and more cycling stability for Li-ion batteries than the thicker α-Fe2O3 nanograins (1510 mA h g−1) enclosed by a variety of crystal facets, although both nanocrystals have identical surface areas (22.02 and 24.32 m2 g−1).226 The better electrochemical performance of hexagonal α-Fe2O3 nanoplates is attributed to the presence of significantly larger {0001} planes, and a shorter thickness along the <0001> direction.
By using the solvothermal method, Li and coworkers synthesized 27 nm-thick Fe2O3 nanodisks bound by {001} facets.227 By comparing the packing density of Fe3+ and O2− for {001}, {100} and {010} facets (Table 1), it should be clearly concluded that the packing of O2− in the {001} facet is exactly hexagonal close packing (hcp), but in other two cases packing is not in the manner of hcp (Fig. 18). That is why in the oriented growth of hematite nanodisks, this {001} facet is the most stable and most exposed. In this work the most stable {001} facet of Fe2O3 was preserved mainly due to the preferential capping effect of acetate ions. The as-synthesized materials showed excellent rate and cyclic capability as an anode material for Li-ion batteries due to the reduced diffusion length of the Li+ ions.
 Fig. 18  {001} Plane (a), {100} plane (b) and general view of O2− packing (c) in hematite. The pink balls in (c) correspond to the O2− ions between the top and bottom layers of O2−. Reprinted with permission from ref. 227. Copyright 2013 from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Table 1 The atomic densities for the {100}, {010} and {001} facets of Fe2O3. Reprinted with permission from ref. 227. Copyright 2013 from the Royal Society of Chemistry




Ions
{100}/nm−2
{010}/nm−2
{001}/nm−2




Fe3+
2.89
2.89
9.11


O2−
5.78
5.78
13.8




Yan et al. investigated the effect of largely exposed {110} facets of hollow sphere-like α-Fe2O3 for high lithium storage properties and improved photocatalytic activity towards water oxidation.228 The growth process for the formation of three-dimensional hierarchical hollow α-Fe2O3 involves three steps. The formation of FeOOH nanosheets on the surface of CuO spheres uniformly occurred in the first stage. In the second stage, core CuO was gradually dissolved in the aqueous solution as [CuClx]1−x through etching with in situ-produced H+ ions under hydrothermal conditions. As a result, hollow spherical FeOOH was produced. Finally in the last step the products were annealed at 500 °C in air and hollow sphere-like α-Fe2O3 was obtained without any structural changes. Due to the higher density of Fe atoms on the {110} facets of α-Fe2O3, the product showed superior Li ion storage performance and enhanced photocatalytic activity towards CO oxidation.
Morphologically different Fe2O3 nanoparticles with different dominant facets have also been used in photocatalysis. Layered α-Fe2O3 nanodisks have been judiciously obtained through a low-cost silicate-anion-assisted hydrothermal method.229 It is found that silicate ions adsorbed very strongly onto the {0001} facets of α-Fe2O3 nanoplates, resulting in a novel layer-by-layer oriented attachment of the nanoplates. So, here silicate ions played a crucial role in the formation of this rare layered structure of α-Fe2O3. In this study, the layered α-Fe2O3 showed better photocatalytic degradation activity for methylene blue than nanoplates, which is mainly due to the higher adsorption capacity of the layered structure.
Rhodamine B degradation on Fe2O3 nanoparticles has been studied spectrophotometrically by Chen et al.230 A comparative account of facet selectivity has been underlined in their report in light of the higher density of surface Fe ions on the {102} facet. The nanocrystals bearing {0001} and {100} facets with a lower density of Fe ions photodegrade the dye less effectively.
Cao and coworkers compared the photocatalytic activity of α-Fe2O3 polyhedra, rods, ellipses, and cylinders bound by different facets for the degradation of organic contaminants in the presence of H2O2.231 The photocatalytic performance of differently shaped α-Fe2O3 towards methylene blue degradation follows the order: polyhedra bound by {101} and {001} facets > rods bound by {001} facets > ellipses > cylinders, and the order was not in good agreement with the BET surface area values. The improved photocatalytic activity of polyhedral α-Fe2O3 can be ascribed to its higher density of {101} facets.
The study of the facet-dependent catalytic activity of differently shaped α-Fe2O3 nanostructures for heavy metal determination by stripping voltammetry was conducted by Huang and coworkers.232 They compared the selectivity and sensitivity for Pb2+ ion detection of three types of α-Fe2O3 nanostructures including nanocubes, nanoplates, and nanorods with dominant facets of {012}, {001}, and {110}, respectively. {110}-facet-bound α-Fe2O3 nanorods were found to be a more active catalyst for Pb2+ ion detection, and the electrochemical sensitivity is about 6-fold and 32-fold that of nanoplates and nanocubes, respectively. This experimental result is closely related to the DFT calculations.
26-faceted γ-Fe2O3 enclosed by six {100}, eight {111}, and twelve {110} facets has been successfully prepared by Gao et al. via a flame synthesis method by directly combusting a methanolic solution of the iron precursor.233 They investigated the catalytic activity of polyhedral γ-Fe2O3 for styrene to benzaldehyde conversion compared to two other commercial γ-Fe2O3 samples. The catalysis experiment indicates that the 26-faceted polyhedral γ-Fe2O3 holds great promise for styrene to benzaldehyde conversion, with very high catalytic selectivity because of the large number of different facets, especially the {110} facets, which have a greater number of Fe atoms than the {100} and {111} facets in γ-Fe2O3.
Faceted α-Fe2O3 has also played a major role in enhancing gas sensing properties. Zheng et al. investigated that the exposed {110} facets of plate-like α-Fe2O3 have a significant role in acetone sensing and CO oxidation.234 They reported a controlled solvent evaporation process for the fabrication of porous plate-like α-Fe2O3 in the presence of an ionic liquid [Bmim]Cl, which acted as both a solvent and templating agent. This nanoplate-like α-Fe2O3-400 (annealing at 400 °C) had higher sensitivity towards acetone than commercial α-Fe2O3, which can be attributed to its unique plate-like morphology and its higher crystallinity. Then they deposited different percentages of Au onto the porous plate-like α-Fe2O3 and tested their catalytic improvement towards CO oxidation. For the same loading of Au on the α-Fe2O3 support, {110}-faceted α-Fe2O3 exhibited superior catalytic activity towards CO oxidation than α-Fe2O3 (Fluka).


2.3.4. Cobalt oxides. 
The structure of Co3O4 is usually considered to be a spinel (Fdm space group and unit cell length 0.8084 nm) and is built by a cubic close-packed array of O2− ions and Co2+ ions occupying one eighth of the tetrahedral sites, while Co3+ occupies half of the octahedral sites (Fig. 19). Under equilibrium conditions, Co3O4 naturally exists with a morphology of a truncated octahedron enclosed by the energetically favourable {001} and {111} faces rather than the more reactive {110} facets.235 In addition the reactive {110} facets of Co3O4 have two types of surface termination: in type A two Co2+ cations are distributed in the tetrahedral sites, two Co3+ cations in the octahedral sites, and four O2− anions; and in type B two Co3+ cations are distributed in the octahedral sites and four O2− anions.236
 Fig. 19  Atomic configurations of the {001}, {111} and {110} facets for spinel Co3O4. Reprinted with permission from ref. 204. Copyright 2014 from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Several strategies have been proposed for the synthesis of differently shaped Co3O4 nanoparticles bound by different facets for different applications. Facet-dependent electroanalytical sensing of heavy metal ions from solution has been described by Huang et al. Nanocrystals of Co3O4 with two different predominant facets, {111} and {001}, have been shown to carry different degrees of heavy metal ion loading, and that is the basis of sensing applications.237 The hydrolysis of Co(CH3COO)2·4H2O under hydrothermal conditions with and without ethylene glycol evolves Co3O4 with {111}-faceted nanoplates and {001}-faceted nanocubes respectively. Theoretical (DFT) calculations suggest that Co3O4 {111} facets exhibit a relatively larger adsorption energy, more adsorption sites, and a relatively lower transition state barrier than Co3O4 {001} facets. This result becomes supportive to the experimental observation accounting for facet-dependent electrochemical sensing behaviour toward heavy metal ions.
Kodambaka et al. proposed a simple wet chemical approach for the fabrication of single crystalline {111}-faceted Co3O4 holey nanosheets.238 Co3O4 holey nanosheets exhibited efficient catalytic activity for methanol decomposition at low temperature due to the presence of higher energy {111} surfaces.
Li et al. found that the exposed facets of Co3O4 nanostructures, including a cube with {001} facets, a truncated octahedron with {001} and {111} facets, and an octahedron with {111} facets, have a noteworthy influence on their electrochemical performance.239 By simply changing the amount of NaOH and Co(NO3)2·6H2O, they have successfully prepared Co3O4 nanoparticles with different facets under hydrothermal conditions. When these three materials were evaluated for lithium storage properties, octahedral Co3O4 with dominant {111} facets exhibited a much better lithium storage capability (946 mA h g−1 at a rate of 100 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles) than the other two kinds of Co3O4. From the surface atomic configuration (Fig. 20) it is observed that the {001} plane contains 2 Co2+ ions, whereas the {111} plane contains 3.75 Co2+ ions. This means that the {111} plane has more Co2+ ions. This data is also in good agreement with the prediction that the lithium storage capacity is greatly facilitated through the exposed {111} facets of Co3O4 nanoparticles.
 Fig. 20  The surface atomic configurations of the {001} facets (a), {111} facets (b), and {110} facets (c) of Co3O4. Reprinted with permission from ref. 239. Copyright 2012 from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. 
Golberg et al. have proposed a facile one-step solution approach to obtain unusual single-crystal Co3O4 nanocages with highly exposed {110} facets.240 Clearly the sample showed an enhanced lithium storage capacity of 864 mA h g−1 at 0.2 C over 50 cycles, and excellent rate capability. These improved electrochemical energy storage properties can be attributed to their highly exposed {110} facets, the high density of atomic steps on the nanocage surfaces and the large void interiors.
Nie et al. synthesized thermodynamically stable {111} Co3O4 nanofilms by a microwave-assisted method and subsequent liquid nitrogen cooling using sodium hydroxide and cobalt sulfate solution.241 During the growth process, liquid nitrogen cooling treatment played a vital role for further aggregation of nanosheets to form nanofilms with high surface area. These {111}-faceted Co3O4 nanofilms were used as an active catalyst for the decomposition of ammonium perchlorate.


2.3.5. Nickel oxides. 
NiO has a cubic rock-salt crystal structure (Fmm) with octahedral Ni(II) and O2− sites. Being a p-type semiconductor, NiO is one of the most promising metal oxides (band gap energy 3.6–4.0 eV) exploited in photocatalysis, electrochemistry, and electrochromics.242–245
By using a simple wet chemical approach, Richards et al. demonstrated the fabrication of {111}-faceted NiO nanosheets with hexagonal holes without adding any template or halide ions, for the first time. NiO nanosheets with controllable sizes from 300 nm to 3 μm were synthesized by adjusting the amount of urea, while the size of the holes was determined by the calcination conditions.246 Experimental results suggested that {111}-faceted NiO nanosheets with unusual surfaces were very much active for low-temperature methanol decomposition compared to conventionally prepared CP-NiO, which could be attributed to the high surface energy of the {111} facets. In another study, Richards et al. proposed that {111}-faceted NiO nanosheets with hexagonal holes were also a very efficient adsorbent for the removal of different dyes (brilliant red X-3B, Congo red and fuchsin acid) from aqueous solution compared to nickel oxide powder (CP-NiO) obtained from conventional thermal decomposition of nickel nitrate.247
Mesoporous NiO nanomaterials have been prepared for use in lithium-ion storage from wet chemical techniques. It has been demonstrated that the {110} facet is the most reactive, which leads to efficient ultrafast lithium storage,248 mimicking the high power delivery of supercapacitors, just like anatase {001}-exposed TiO2 nanosheets.


2.3.6. Magnesium oxides. 
As illustrated in Fig. 21, the {100} facet of MgO is unambiguously the most stable due to its low surface energy. Whereas, in {111}-faceted MgO nanocrystals, polar monolayers of oxygen anions and magnesium cations are present alternately, and thus a strong electrostatic field is produced perpendicular to the {111} facet. So the fabrication of MgO nanocrystals with highly reactive {111} facets is highly desirable for different applications. Numerous studies have focused on elucidating the relationship between surface structure and surface reaction.
 Fig. 21  Surface atomic configurations of the {001}, {110}, and {111} crystal facets for MgO. Reprinted with permission from ref. 204. Copyright 2014 from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
When Mg(OCH3)2 was utilized as a precursor in the presence of 4-nitro- or 4-methoxybenzyl alcohol, MgO nanosheets bound by {111} facets were produced preferentially under hydrothermal conditions. During the formation of MgO nanosheets, 4-nitro- or 4-methoxybenzyl alcohol played an important role due to their strong interaction with the hydroxyl group of the inorganic intermediate Mg(OH)(OCH3), which facilitates spontaneous substitution on the interface during mixing and supercritical treatment. The catalytic activity towards Claisen–Schmidt condensation of benzaldehyde and acetophenone was found to be superior for {111}-faceted MgO nanosheets than other MgO samples exposing {100} facets.249 In 2007, Richards et al. further used the {111}-faceted MgO nanosheets as an active catalyst for decomposition of methanol at low temperature due to the higher concentration of oxygen anions on the surface of MgO{111} nanosheets.250
Again MgO particles bound by {111}, and {100} facets were much more selective during the oxidative coupling of methane to hydrocarbons than cubic MgO.251,252


2.3.7. Zinc oxides. 
ZnO has a stable hexagonal wurzite structure253–255 in which each O2− ion is tetrahedrally coordinated with four Zn2+ ions along the crystallographic c axis and vice versa.256 Recently Diebold et al.257 reported that the surface morphology of wurzite ZnO is bound by five low-miller-index planes, the nonpolar prism {100} and {110} facets as well as the polar {000}, {0001}, and {111} facets, by using high resolution scanning tunnelling microscopy (STM). During the formation of ZnO nanobelts, nanowires, and nanorods, {100} and {20} facets appear to be the major facets as the nanostructures grow along the <0001> direction.258,259 The {100} facet of ZnO becomes the most stable because of its low surface energy value (2.3 J m−2), and this value is smaller than that of ZnO{20} (2.5 J m−2) and those of polar ZnO{0001}–Zn and ZnO{100}–O (4.0 J m−2).260–263
The facet-dependent gas sensing properties of ZnO nanoparticles have been discussed by different groups. Using a simple dip-coating method, Xie et al. synthesized {100}-faceted ZnO nanorods aligned along the ceramic tube.264 Then the tube with the ZnO thin film was dipped into a growth solution containing zinc acetate and ethylenediamine for the formation of further nanorod arrays with {0001} and {100} facets (Fig. 22). On the basis of the gas sensing performance, it is observed that the {0001}-faceted ZnO nanorod arrays demonstrated excellent catalytic activity towards benzene and ethanol sensing compared to the unprocessed dip-coated ZnO. This can be explained in the light of the exposed facets rather than a size effect. So the experimental results suggest that the {0001} facet of ZnO is more reactive for gas sensing than the {100} facet.
 Fig. 22  (a) Schematic representation of the fabrication of a solution-processed gas sensor. (b) SEM and (c) TEM images of the thin film on the Al2O3 tube before the solution processing. (d and e) High- and low-magnification SEM images of the ZnO nanorod array on the Al2O3 tube after solution processing, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 264. Copyright 2012 from the American Chemical Society. 
In the same token, pronounced gas sensing ability towards NH3, N(C2H5)3, and ethanol vapour has also been shown for the {0001} facet of ZnO.265
Yu et al. proved that the {100} facet of ZnO had excellent sensitivity, selectivity, and stability towards n-butanol compared to the {110}, and {0001} facets.266 In this work, {100}-faceted ZnO nanoflakes were synthesized via a one-step hydrothermal method. For comparative study, ZnO nanoparticles with {110}, and {0001} facets were also employed for sensing capability. The sensing efficiency of different facets towards n-butanol was demonstrated to follow the order of {100} > {110} > {0001} because the {100} facet of ZnO had a higher adsorption capability and lower diffusion coefficient value. The diffusivity, adsorption, and reaction ability of different gas molecules on different surfaces were elucidated from molecular dynamics simulations, and these findings were closely related to the experimental results. Again this material also showed improved sensitivity towards ethanol, methanol, acetone, and formaldehyde under the same experimental conditions.
Facet-selective CO adsorption has been shown on Pd/ZnO surfaces from methanol decomposition studies. Highly active Pd/ZnO{0001} sites have been identified from a temperature-programmed experiment, superseding Pd/ZnO{100}.267
Facet-selective epitaxial growth of heterogeneous nanostructures of semiconductor ZnO has been achieved successfully using faceted noble metal (Ag) nanoparticles.268 Incoming ZnO nanoparticles were overgrown on the {111} facets rather than the {100} facets of Ag and produced rod-like ZnO nanostructures (Fig. 23). To achieve success, lattice and symmetry matching is considered to be the most important factor. Again, allowance of direct interfacing between the metal and semiconductor is a corollary factor for overgrowth, which ultimately evolves metal semiconductor heterojunctions.
 Fig. 23  3D Geometric models and SEM images show the selective growth of different numbers of ZnO nanorods on the {111} facets of Ag-truncated nanocubes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 268. Copyright 2009 from the American Chemical Society. 


2.3.8. Tungsten trioxides. 
In the temperature range of −180 to 900 °C, WO3 exhibits five different phases: tetragonal (α-WO3, >740 °C), orthorhombic (β-WO3, 330–740 °C), monoclinic I (γ-WO3, 17–330 °C), triclinic (δ-WO3, −43–17 °C), and monoclinic II (ε-WO3, <−43 °C).269,270 The generally mentioned WO3 refers to γ-WO3 because it is the most stable phase at room temperature. Being a p-type semiconductor, γ-WO3 has attracted interest due to its photosensitivity, good electron transport properties, and stability against photocorrosion.271
By adjusting the amount of tartaric acid under hydrothermal conditions, Wang et al. prepared three types of WO3 nanoparticles with different percentages of {001}, {100}, and {010} facets.272 A very low amount of tartaric acid was preferentially adsorbed on the top and bottom facets, which causes inhibition of the growth rate along these facets. As a result, well-defined sheet-like structures with thicknesses of about 30–35 nm were obtained. When the amount of tartaric acid is increased, it is adsorbed onto the side facets of the WO3 nanocrystals, resulting in the inhibition of growth along the side facets. So the formation WO3 nanocrystals with higher thickness values (155–175 nm) was favoured with a high amount of tartaric acid. From the SAED pattern it is observed that the WO3 nanocrystal has three different facets: top and bottom surfaces were bound by {001} facets, and the side surfaces were bound by {010} and {100} facets. Interestingly, the percentages of the different exposed facets in three types of WO3 nanocrystals were different. It should be noted that the percentages of {010} and {100} facets increased and the percentage of the {001} facet was decreased from a lower thickness sample (1) to a higher thickness sample (3). Fig. 24 shows that a greater number of W atoms are present on the {010} facets than on the {100} and {001} facets, indicating the presence of a greater number of dangling bonds in the {010} facets. So it should be concluded that the gas sensing ability becomes more pronounced with an increase in {010} facets. Experimental results also proved that WO3 nanoparticles with a greater percentage of exposed {010} facets exhibited better gas sensing ability towards 1-butylamine.
 Fig. 24  Surface atomic configuration of different facets for triclinic WO3: (a) {001} facet, (b) {100} facet, (c) {010} facet. Reprinted with permission from ref. 272. Copyright 2012 from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In 2014, Jin et al. also investigated the gas sensing ability of WO3 nanoparticles with different exposed facets.273 On the basis of the gas sensing results, it was found that the {002} facets of WO3 nanoparticles showed better acetone sensitivity and selectivity than the {100} facets due to the asymmetric distribution of unsaturated coordinated O atoms in the O-terminated {002} facets. These findings were also supported by the PL spectra, which depicted that {002}-faceted WO3 nanoparticles had numerous oxygen vacancies and defects.
Miyauchi invented a new karstification method for the preparation of octahedral WO3 nanoparticles with {111} facets from irregular-shaped commercial WO3 nanoparticles.274 During the growth process, commercial WO3 nanoparticles were etched by ammonia from gradual urea decomposition to produce (NH4)2WO4, and this etching process is similar to the karst process. In the second step, as-prepared (NH4)2WO4 was further reacted with HCl and ultimately produced octahedral WO3 particles in the nanoregime. For the formation of {111}-faceted octahedral WO3 nanoparticles, the effect of ethanol in the reaction mixture was undoubtedly significant. Here the presence of ethanol in the reaction mixture reduced the polarity of the solvent, which inhibited the homogeneous nucleation and growth and formed octahedral-shaped particles. The as-synthesized octahedral WO3 nanoparticles bound by {111} facets showed enhanced catalytic activity for the removal of dissolved Ag+ ions in photoprocessing wastewater, as well as visible-light-driven photocatalytic reducibility of methylene blue dye.
Li et al. adopted a hydrothermal method for the fabrication of hexagonal single-crystal WO3 nanorods with dominant {001} and {10} facets, using (NH4)2WO4 as the tungsten precursor in acidic medium.275 During the formation of hexagonal WO3 nanorods, it was observed that the crystal growth orientation was heavily dependent on the tungsten source. NH4+ ions of the precursor salt strongly adsorbed on to the {001} facets, resulting in the inhibition of crystal growth along the [001] axis. So the NH4+ ions play a crucial role in initiating crystal growth along either [110] axis (Fig. 25). A theoretical model of single-crystal WO3 suggested that more coordinatively unsaturated W atoms were exposed on the surface of the {001} facets than on the {100} facets. As a result of the high surface area and the presence of more reactive {001} facets, hexagonal WO3 nanorods showed high adsorption capacities for organic dyes including rhodamine B and methylene blue.
 Fig. 25  Schematic representation of the growth orientation of the hexagonal single-crystal WO3 nanorods. Reprinted with permission from ref. 275. Copyright 2011 from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In a combined hydrothermal and finger rubbing method, Kang et al. described the synthesis of {020}-faceted WO3·H2O nanoplates using L-ascorbic acid as the capping agent on the surface of a fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO)-coated glass substrate.276 After calcination, orthorhombic WO3·H2O nanoplates were transformed to monoclinic γ-WO3 with exposed {002} facets without destroying the plate-like structure. Then this {002} facet-dominant film was applied for a water splitting reaction. According to a previous report, the surface energy order of the different facets of monoclinic WO3 follows the sequence {002}(1.56 J m−2) > {020}(1.54 J m−2) > {200}(1.43 J m−2), which means the most reactive surface of γ-WO3 is the {002} facet. Because of this feature, {002}-faceted γ-WO3 served as a better catalyst for water splitting than the WO3 thin film prepared by spin-coating with the same thickness.
Quasi-cubic WO3 nanocrystals with an equal percentage of {002}, {020}, and {200} facets, prepared by controlling the acid hydrolysis of tungsten boride, served as a superior catalyst for solar energy conversion compared with rectangular sheet-like WO3 nanocrystals with predominant {002} facets.277


2.3.9. Silver oxides. 
Ag2O has the same cuprite crystal structure as Cu2O. The etching properties of Ag2O nanoparticles are also facet-dependent. Silver nitrate easily reacts with NaOH and produces Ag2O. On the other hand, AgNO3 and even freshly precipitated AgCl dissolves in ammonia, forming Ag(NH3)21+ complex. Considering the above precipitation and complexation reaction, Huang et al. controlled the etching of differently shaped Ag2O nanocrystals (Ag2O nanocubes, rhombicuboctahedra, octahedra, and extended hexapods).36 It has been verified that {100}-faceted cubic and rhombicuboctahedral Ag2O are very much susceptible to etching due to less effective adsorption of hydroxide ions on the {100} facets with terminal oxygen atoms. On the other hand, the {111} facet of Ag2O, because of the significant terminal Ag atoms at the corners, makes the nanocrystal stable because of strong interactions with NaOH.
Morphologically different Ag@Ag2O have been synthesised by a kinetically controlled reaction to show the facet-selective photocatalytic degradation of methyl orange (MO).278 Experiments as well as DFT calculations conclude that the highest-surface-energy-bearing {100} facet is the most potent for the photocatalysis of MO. A suitable redox potential-driven observation has been explained by the weighted average effective mass of holes and electrons for the reaction.


2.3.10. Indium oxides. 
Only very recently, researchers have introduced highly conducting and electrochemically stable faceted In2O3 nanoparticles for different catalytic applications. For its highly prevalent body-centered cubic (bcc) structure with compatible band gap energy, In2O3 has proved to be a stable photocatalyst. For the bcc In2O3, it is observed that the order of surface energy (γ) for low-index facets is as follows: γ {111} < γ {001} < γ {110}. Wu and coworkers investigated the morphological evolution of {001}-faceted cubic In2O3 nanoparticles by employing a modified chemical vapour deposition method based on the carbothermal reduction reaction.279 Faceted cubic In2O3 is anticipated to show pronounced photoeletrocatalytic activity and excellent chemical and structural stability in oxygen evolution reactions compared to In2O3 nanoparticles with a smaller percentage of exposed {001} facets. The enhanced catalytic activity of cubic In2O3 is mainly due to the unique structure and electronic band structure of the {001} facets.
The facet-dependent enhanced gas sensing properties of octadecahedral In2O3 have also been described by Chen et al.280 Octadecahedral In2O3 nanoparticles with two different predominant facets, {110} and {100}, have been successfully synthesized by annealing the 18-facet In(OH)3 precursor. XPS results suggest that In2O3 nanoparticles with {110} and {100} facets provide more oxygen vacancies, responsible for pronounced gas sensing properties, than {100}-faceted cubic In2O3 or nanoparticles with irregular structures.

2.4. Composite nanomaterials
Octahedral, cubic, and spherical CuO–MnO2 nanocomposites have been synthesized by a redox transformation reaction between Cu2O (octahedral, cubic, and spherical) and KMnO4 under modified hydrothermal conditions (Fig. 26). Interestingly faceted CuO–MnO2 nanocomposites are obtained with retention of the size and shape of the Cu2O precursor compound. However, morphologically different CuO–MnO2 nanocomposites are found to be ruptured into tiny spherical nanocomposites with the increase of reaction time. All these composite nanomaterials were employed as catalysts for the examination of facet-dependent catalytic activity toward nitroarene reduction in the presence of NaBH4. {111}-Faceted octahedral CuO–MnO2 nanocomposites showed higher catalytic efficiency than cubic and spherical nanocomposites.281 So the catalytic efficiency for the reduction reaction follows the order of {111} > {100}.
 Fig. 26  Schematic illustration of the formation of morphologically different CuO–MnO2 nanocomposites. Reprinted with permission from ref. 281. Copyright 2014 from the American Chemical Society. 
Facet-selective growth of SnO2 nanorods on the surface of α-Fe2O3 has been reported by Yan et al. Using {110} and {100}-faceted α-Fe2O3 with different morphologies (nanorings, nanocolumns, nanotubes and nanoplatelets) as a template, they have synthesized α-Fe2O3-SnO2 composite nanomaterials under hydrothermal conditions using Sn(OH)62− as the precursor.282 The preferential growth of SnO2 nanorods on the {110} and {100} surface of α-Fe2O3 nanotubes and nanocolumns along the [101] and [101]/[001] directions, respectively, have been studied thoroughly using TEM and HRTEM analysis (Fig. 27). The growth of SnO2 nanorods on the surface of α-Fe2O3 nanorings is similar to that of α-Fe2O3 nanocolumns (Fig. 27A). The HRTEM image in Fig. 27B indicates that SnO2 nanorods grow along the [001] direction of α-Fe2O3 nanoplatelets. The experimental findings of oxygen atomic position on both sides of the {110}α-Fe2O3/{101}SnO2 and {100}α-Fe2O3/{001}SnO2 interfaces suggests slight deviation of oxygen atoms from their original position.
 Fig. 27  (A) TEM images of (a) α-Fe2O3(nanotube)–SnO2, (b) α-Fe2O3(nanoring)–SnO2, (c) α-Fe2O3(nanocolumn)–SnO2 composites and (d) SEM images of α-Fe2O3(platelet)–SnO2 composites. (B) HRTEM images of (a) α-Fe2O3(nanotube)–SnO2, (b) α-Fe2O3(nanoring)–SnO2, (c) α-Fe2O3(nanocolumn)–SnO2 and (d) α-Fe2O3(platelet)–SnO2 composites. Reprinted with permission from ref. 282. Copyright 2012 from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
3. High-index-faceted nanomaterials
Recently high-index facets (HIFs) have brought about new insight for the improvement of facet-selective catalytic reactions. High-index facets are generally represented by {hkl} Miller indices, in which at least one index is greater than unity. Due to presence of a high density of low-coordinated atoms, steps, edges and kinks within the structures, metal and metal oxide nanocrystals with high-index facets possess more active catalytic sites. According to thermodynamic considerations, such types of facets are absent from the crystals in most of the cases due to their higher chemical reactivity. So for enhanced catalytic activity, the design and fabrication of high-index-faceted metal or metal oxide nanoparticles is now a challenging task. Recent studies have shown that high-index-faceted nanocrystals have been synthesized either by the selective overgrowth technique or by site-specific dissolution of nanoparticles. Over the past several years, different synthetic protocols have been developed for the synthesis of metallic (Au, Ag, Pt, Pd) and bimetallic nanoparticles with high-index facets in order to improve their catalytic or electrocatalytic reactivity. In comparison, the preparation of high-index-faceted oxide nanoparticles and their enhanced catalytic activities is not well explored.
3.1. Metal and bimetallic nanoparticles
Pt concave nanocubes enclosed by high-index facets including {510}, {720}, and {830} were prepared using a simple route based on reduction in aqueous solution using two syringe pumps.283 The formation of the Pt pyrophosphate complex in the reaction mixture and a controlled reaction rate using a syringe pump play crucial roles for selective overgrowth of seeds from corners and edges. At the same time, by introducing an additional capping agent KBr into the reaction system, Pt concave nanocubes have been obtained by selective capping of the {100} facets of seeds. So by using the controlled overgrowth technique onto the selected corners or edges and capping of particular facets, it is possible to obtain high-index-faceted metal nanoparticles. However, these Pt concave nanocubes show superior electrocatalytic activity towards the ORR reaction when compared with Pt cubes, cuboctahedra, and commercial Pt/C catalysts that are bounded by low-index planes such as {100} and {111}.
Keeping this idea in mind, in 2011 Xia et al. demonstrated the pronounced catalytic efficiency of high-index {730}-faceted Pd concave nanocubes towards the electrooxidation of formic acid and in the Suzuki coupling reaction, superseding regular cubes enclosed by low-index {100} facets.67
In a simple synthetic strategy, Pt concave nanocubes (CNCs) have been synthesized by reduction of H2PtCl6 in the presence of PVP and glycine.284 Experimental findings suggest that here glycine behaves as a size and shape controller by manipulating the reduction kinetics. It is observed that the selective binding of glycine on the high-index {hk0} facets of Pt nanocrystals during growth plays a vital role for the formation of such type of Pt CNCs. On the other hand, PVP has no promising role in the formation of Pt CNCs, but the absence of PVP causes aggregated products. So by introducing the stabilizing agent PVP into the reaction mixture, dispersed Pt CNCs with {hk0} can be obtained. When these Pt CNCs were used as a catalyst for electrooxidation of methanol and formic acid, it was found that the Pt CNCs are a better-suited catalyst than commercial Pt black and Pt/C.
Anticipating the pronounced plasmonic properties of high-index-faceted Au nanocrystals, Han et al. reported for the first time the synthesis of high-index {321}-faceted hexoctahedral Au nanocrystals.285 By judicious control of reductant concentration, capping agents and the temperature of the reaction they obtained high-index-faceted hexoctahedral Au nanocrystals with higher SERS activities, superseding low-index-faceted Au nanocrystals.
Using SERS as an experimental tool, Wang et al. reported the intrinsic facet-dependent catalytic efficiency of morphologically different Au nanoparticles enclosed by different types of high-index facets towards the hydrogenation of 4-nitrothiophenol at room temperature.286 They also compared the performance of high-index-faceted Au nanocrystals with that of low-index-faceted Au in the catalysis. Here, the order of the catalytic activity is explained by the distribution of coordinatively unsaturated surface atoms on various crystal facets.
In 2015, Wang et al. also used surface-enhanced Raman scattering as a time-resolved in situ spectroscopic tool to study facet-dependent interfacial molecular transformations on Au nanocatalysts. Using a cationic surfactant and suitable reductant in the presence of Cu2+ ions, they produced high- and low-index-faceted morphologically different Au nanocrystals.287 In this work the importance of faceted Au nanocrystals over conventional cylindrical Au nanorods has been described for pronounced optical extinction spectral features, plasmonic tenability and superior catalytic activity towards the reduction of 4-nitrophenol.
Considering high surface energy of Rh in comparison to other noble metals, Sun et al. could synthesize high-index {830}-faceted tetrahexahedral (THH) Rh nanocrystals by employing electrochemical means. They eventually proved the superior electrocatalytic activity of THH Rh nanocrystals over commercial Rh catalysts towards ethanol and CO oxidation.288
Huang et al. described the relationship between the coordination number of surface Rh atoms and the thermal and shape stability of high-index-faceted Rh nanocrystals by employing molecular dynamics simulations.289 Here, from bonding states analysis, it was concluded that the thermal and shape stability of {210}-faceted Rh NCs is higher than that of the {310} and {830}-faceted NCs. This is further explained considering the {830}-faceted structure, which is really composed of {210} and dominant {310} subfacets.
The influence of GO on the synthesis of PtPd alloy concave nanocubes with high-index facets has been explored by Chen et al. for the first time.290 In the absence of GO, the reaction only resulted in the cubic PtPd alloy. In this study GO acted not only as a catalyst support but also a structure-directing agent for the formation of such type of high-index-faceted alloy. Fig. 28 shows the growth mechanism for the formation of C–PtPd–RGO. Here small Pd nanoclusters should form first on the RGO sheets due to their strong interaction. Then the Pt component grows gradually on the Pd nanoclusters via galvanic replacement reaction, followed by co-reduction of Pt and Pd precursors. Finally the as-synthesized C–PtPd–RGO shows enhanced electrocatalytic activity and high durability toward methanol oxidation due to the presence of high-index {730} facets and the strong interaction between catalysts and graphene support.
 Fig. 28  Schematic representation of the formation of RGO-supported PtPd alloy concave nanocubes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 290. Copyright 2014 from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Yan et al. synthesized Pt–Cu and Pt–Pd–Cu concave nanocubes enclosed by {hk0} HIFs through a progressive galvanic replacement reaction in a one pot hydrothermal process,291 whereas by the solvothermal method Li et al. prepared high-index-faceted Pt–Cu concave hexapods.292 Despite these two synthetic approaches, Yang et al. further reported a new but simple oil-phase method for the synthesis of a concave nanocube-like Pt–Cu alloy bound by HIFs.293 In all three cases the catalysts exhibited enhanced electrocatalytic activity for methanol oxidation due to the presence of HIFs.
Another drastic enhancement in catalytic activity towards the hydrogenation of styrene arises due to the existence of {hk0} HIFs in concave Pt3Co nanocubes.294 Such type of unstable structure can be prepared by maintaining an appropriate ratio of oleylamine and oleic acid (Fig. 29). The superiority of the catalytic activity of Pt3Co concave nanocubes with HIFs can be ascribed to the presence of a more open structure and more active atomic sites.
 Fig. 29  (a) TEM image, (b) 3D geometrical model, (c) HRTEM image and (d) Fourier transform pattern of Pt3Co concave nanocubes. (e) Stepped surface highlighted from the HRTEM image. (g) Schematic representation of Pt3Co nanocatalyst-involving styrene hydrogenation reaction. Reprinted with permission from ref. 294. Copyright 2014 from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. 
Leung et al. reported the fabrication of FeNi concave nanocubes with HIFs through a one-pot, surfactant-free electrochemical method by manipulating the growth kinetics of Fe and Ni.295 In the second step they developed a new avenue for the synthesis of monodispersed concave nanocage-like Fe–Ni with HIFs via a material-independent electroleaching process. During the electroleaching process it is observed that material dissolution starts at the center of the concave face and continues to the edges until complete cage formation takes place. Due to the higher strain and chemical potential, the concave faces are more pronounced for the etching process than the edges of the cube. Remarkably, the high-index-facet-exposed concave nanocage- and concave nanocube-like Fe–Ni showed 100-fold and 10-fold enhancement in its catalytic activity towards the electrodetection of 4-aminophenol relative to cuboctahedra with convex surfaces. The superiority of the former as a catalyst has been explained in terms of high-index planes in the cavities of the nanocage and the higher active surface area.
3.2. Metal oxide nanoparticles

3.2.1. Cuprous oxides. 
The applications of Cu2O nanocrystals enclosed by HIFs have mainly been focused in the field of photocatalysis and CO oxidation. It was found that high-index-faceted Cu2O nanocrystals had improved catalytic efficiency towards these reactions compared with other low-index-faceted Cu2O nanocrystals.
Wang and coworkers reported the catalytic activity of polyhedral 50-facet Cu2O nanoparticles enclosed by high-index {311} facets by maintaining the concentration of OH− and the volume ratios of polar solvents to water in the mixed solvent for CO oxidation.296 In another study, concave octahedral Cu2O microcrystals mainly enclosed by {332} high-index facets have been synthesized in the presence of an anionic surfactant SDS (sodium dodecyl sulfate) for superior performance in CO oxidation.297
Guo et al. recently reported a facile one-step synthetic method for the fabrication of multifaceted Cu2O that can be considered as an active photocatalyst for reforming glucose under visible light.86 It was observed that the preferential accumulation of photogenerated electrons on high-index {104} facets and holes on the {100} facets of a Cu2O polyhedron were responsible for efficient charge separation and as a result Cu2O with more HIFs showed enhanced photocatalytic activity for the reforming of glucose.
Yang et al. demonstrated that polyhedral 50-facet Cu2O nanoparticles enclosed by 24 high-index {211} facets, synthesised via a facile seed-mediated solution phase route, showed a much higher photocatalytic activity toward methyl orange degradation than the products with low-index facets.298
Similar photocatalytic improvement towards methyl orange degradation was also achieved in other high-index-faceted Cu2O nanocrystals such as {522}-facet-enclosed polyhedral Cu2O and {211}-, {522}- or {311}-faceted perfect polyhedral Cu2O.193,194,299


3.2.2. Ferric oxides. 
Lu et al. demonstrated the synthesis of two kinds of brand new high-index-faceted polyhedral iron oxide, tetrakaidecahedra and oblique parallelepipeds, with the assistance of the viscous macromolecule sodium carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC) and the addition of different amounts of N2H4 solution.300 In this work CMC played a key role as a stabilizing agent by dividing the solution into numerous channels in the reaction system because it has many carboxymethyl side groups, which prohibits the individual molecules from getting close to each other. However, in basic medium (by addition of N2H4) Fe2O3 grew faster, so by varying the amount of N2H4 one can control the growth of Fe2O3 nanoparticles with different exposed surfaces.301 From magnetic measurements it is observed that two types of Fe2O3 nanoparticles with different HIFs showed different magnetic behaviours. The tetrakaidecahedral α-Fe2O3, bound by {012}, {102}, and {001} facets, was spin-canted ferromagnetically controlled at room temperature, and it disappeared at temperatures lower than Tm (Morin transition temperature), while the other, i.e., the oblique parallelepiped α-Fe2O3 form bound by {012}, {01}, and {10} facets, showed spin-canted and defect ferromagnetism at room temperature.
A similar type of magnetic behaviour was also achieved in other two high-index-faceted α-Fe2O3 materials. Here quasi-cubic α-Fe2O3 bound by {012}, {10}, and {12} facets and hexagonal bipyramid α-Fe2O3 polyhedra with {012} facets have been successfully synthesized simply by applying metal ions Zn2+ and Cu2+, respectively, as structure-directing agents.302
Additionally, in 2013 Gao et al. reported the Ni2+ ion-induced synthesis of high-index-faceted α-Fe2O3 nanoparticles and their facet-controlled magnetic properties.303
Hou et al. reported the fabrication of different phases of iron oxides with varied shapes and ultimately the effect of HIFs for the photocatalytic degradation of RhB dye.304 The appropriate ratio of oleylamine and acetylacetone played a key role in the formation of different phases of iron oxide (α-Fe2O3 and Fe3O4) with varied shapes. Here oleyammine provides a strong reductive environment for the reduction of Fe3+ to Fe2+, and on the other hand acetylacetone affects Fe3+ by giving an oxidative atmosphere. However, truncated nanocube- and oblique nanocube-like α-Fe2O3 nanoparticles were formed in the presence and in the absence of oleic acid. This experimental finding suggests that oleic acid plays an important role in tuning the crystal shape, as the carboxylic groups of oleic acid have a strong chelating ability and the nonpolar tail group has a stabilizing effect on this ligand. Truncated nanocube-like α-Fe2O3 with {102} and {104} facets showed higher photocatalytic activity for the degradation of RhB than oblique nanocube-like α-Fe2O3 with {102} facets due to presence of more active high-index facets.
Presently, Yu and coworkers compared the photocatalytic activity of {012}-faceted α-Fe2O3 nanocubes and {001}-faceted α-Fe2O3 nanoplates for degradation of methyl orange (MO) and rhodamine B (RhB) under visible light in presence of H2O2.305 From DFT calculation it should be noted that the adsorption energy of MO on {012} and {001} facets of α-Fe2O3 is higher than that of RhB and the adsorption energy for MO and RhB on {012} facet is higher than {001} facet. Experimental results also suggested that {012}-faceted α-Fe2O3 served as a better photocatalyst than {001}-faceted α-Fe2O3. That means a particular facet on nanoscale has definite selectivity in heterogeneous photocatalysis.
Again the improved photocatalytic activity of truncated nanooctahedral α-Fe2O3 with high-index {102} facets has been discussed by Gao et al.306
Zheng and coworkers have followed the routine but systematic change in the concentration of the precursor compound, solvent parameters and reaction time for the synthesis of different faceted Fe2O3 nanoparticles.307 Supersaturation conditions have been proven to evolve high energy {113}-faceted Fe2O3 nanocrystals whereas {012}- or {001}-faceted Fe2O3 nanocrystals were produced from lower saturation conditions from hydrothermal synthesis. However, the comparatively low-energy facet {012} supports better catalytic performance for CO oxidation. For gas sensing, the {113} facet becomes the best suited one. However, the least efficiency for both CO oxidation and gas sensing ability was observed for the {001} facet.
Tailoring the high-index facets of α-Fe2O3 could also play a crucial role for gas sensing. One impressive related result is that for a given acetone concentration, high-index {104}-faceted α-Fe2O3 shows a higher sensor response than the commercial α-Fe2O3 powder.308 Such type of {104}-faceted α-Fe2O3 was synthesized by a simple hydrothermal method through an aggregation, phase transformation and recrystallization mechanism. Zhao et al. demonstrated that formamide in the reaction mixture plays a pivotal role for the synthesis of this type of unstable structure with highly reactive facets. Here formamide molecules selectively adsorb onto highly reactive {104} planes, resulting in the preservation of the {104} planes. So formamide serves as a facet directing agent.
Wang et al. demonstrated polyhedral α-Fe2O3 based on an oriented attachment growth process in the presence of CMC (carboxy methyl cellulose) and PVP, which gave excellent gas sensing selectivity to ethanol vapour due to the exposure of high-index facets.309
Wu et al. studied the influence of double ligand PO43− and formamide for the formation of HIF-{112}-exposed hexagonal α-Fe2O3 nanorods.310 It is found that PO43− adsorbs very strongly on the facets parallel to the c axis restraining the growth along radial direction, while formamide selectively adsorbs on the {112} facets and leads to restrained the growth of α-Fe2O3 along the {112} direction. Due to the presence of high-surface-energy facets, hexagonal α-Fe2O3 nanorods show enhanced electrochemical sensing capability toward H2O2 ranging from 40 μM to 4.66 mM.
A similar improvement was also achieved in other high-index octadecahedral α-Fe2O3 nanoparticles bound by twelve dominant {112} facets and six {104} facets toward H2O2 sensing.311
In a recent study, Li et al. investigated the catalytic properties of concave nanocube-like α-Fe2O3 with high-index {134} and {128} facets for low temperature CO oxidation.312 100% CO conversion was achieved at 160 °C when HIF-exposed α-Fe2O3 was used as a catalyst. However, for α-Fe2O3 nanorods, CO conversion was only 10.8% even though it has a higher surface area (39.3 m2 g−1) than the α-Fe2O3 nanocubes (13.7 m2 g−1). So here the exposed crystal planes play a more important role than the surface area for determining the catalytic efficiency of the catalyst. Again this enhanced efficiency can be attributed to the higher reactivity of the HIFs.
Enhanced electrochemical performance in terms of cyclability, specific capacity, and high rate were also achieved using high-index {104}-faceted rhombohedral α-Fe2O3 as a catalyst.313 Deng et al. successfully prepared rhombohedral α-Fe2O3 using FeCl3 as the precursor in the presence of 1-propanol under hydrothermal conditions without any additives. During the growth process, hydrolysis of FeCl3 under hydrothermal conditions produced H+ and Cl− ions, which are responsible for further etching of the rhombohedral structures. It is noted that the etching process preferentially occurred on the edges of the rhombohedral structure rather than on the smooth surface with low surface energy, and ultimately produced high-index {104}-faceted α-Fe2O3. The materials exhibited a high specific capacity of 550 mA h g−1 after 120 cycles at a rate of 200 mA g−1 because of the high surface energy of the HIFs.


3.2.3. Cobalt oxides. 
Li et al. have demonstrated the synthesis of differently shaped Co3O4 nanocrystals exposing different crystal planes via a hydrothermal process with a cobalt hydroxide precursor, and subsequent direct thermal decomposition.314 The catalytic properties of {112}-facet-dominant Co3O4 nanosheets for methane combustion are superior to those of Co3O4 nanobelts and cubes. This experimental result suggests that the high-index {112} facet is much more reactive than the low-index {011} and {001} facets. Fig. 30 depicts the surface atom arrangement of fcc Co3O4 nanocrystals with different facets. It is observed that the area of four adjacent brown spheres is highest in the case of {112} planes compared to {001} and {011} facets, which suggests that the {112} facet is more open. So {112}-faceted Co3O4 nanosheets shows superior catalytic activity for methane combustion compared to the other two types of faceted Co3O4 nanoparticles.
 Fig. 30  Representation of the surface atom arrangement of fcc Co3O4 nanocrystals with different crystal facets. Reprinted with permission from ref. 314. Copyright 2008 from the American Chemical Society. 


3.2.4. Titanium dioxides. 
Anatase bipyramidal TiO2 nanocrystals bound by HIFs were prepared by a simple solvothermal method using titanium butoxide as the Ti source in a solvent mixture containing acetic acid and N,N-dimethylformamide.315 Interestingly, these rare bipyramidal TiO2 nanocrystals with two asymmetric pyramids have two types of HIFs: the short edge is bound by {201} facets whereas the long edge is bound by {401} facets (Fig. 31). During the anisotropic crystal growth process, the long end of the bipyramidal TiO2 has a tendency to self assemble on the higher energy {401} facets to minimize the free energy and ultimately form a dandelion-like hierarchical structure. In addition, the {201} surfaces were exposed to the outside of the sphere as they can probably be stabilized by acetate ions present in the system. The experimental results further demonstrated that anatase bipyramidal TiO2 nanocrystals could be used as an anode material for lithium-ion batteries, and showed very low initial irreversible capacity loss and superior cyclic capacity retention upon extended cycling, probably due to presence of the HIFs.
 Fig. 31  (A and B) TEM images of bipyramidal TiO2 nanocrystals (inset in B: corresponding SEAD pattern). (C and D) HRTEM images of bipyramidal TiO2 nanocrystals taken from the dotted circles I and II in (B), respectively. (E) 3D Geometrical model of TiO2 needles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 315. Copyright 2011 from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The use of titanium disilicide (TiSi2) as a Ti source and hydrofluoric acid as a crystallographic controlling agent are favourable for the synthesis of Si-doped TiO2 single crystals (Ti0.89Si0.11O2) bound by {201} HIFs under hydrothermal conditions.316 This catalyst exhibited superior visible-light-induced photocatalytic activity for hydrogen evolution due to the in situ incorporation of Si element to extend the light adsorption into the visible region, and the presence of highly reactive {201} HIFs.


3.2.5. Tin dioxides. 
The use of SnCl4·5H2O as the precursor in an appropriate acidic environment adjusted with HCl in the presence of PVP was favourable for the synthesis of octahedral SnO2 nanoparticles with high-index {221} facets under hydrothermal conditions.317 The as-synthesized octahedral SnO2 nanoparticles served as a better catalyst for ethanol sensing due to the presence of high-energy {221} facets. In this study, additional HCl prevented the hydrolysis of Sn4+ ions to a certain extent and slowed down the growth of SnO2. In addition, PVP played a crucial role in dispersing the SnO2 particles and prevented their aggregation with each other. From literature it is observed that the relative surface energy of the {221} facets of SnO2 (2.28 J m−2) is higher than that of the common low-index facets such as {110} (1.401 J m−2), {101} (1.554 J m−2), and {100} (1.648 J m−2).318 From BET surface area measurements, it is observed that {221}-faceted octahedral SnO2 has a lower surface area value (11.02 m2 g−1) than elongated octahedral (18.70 m2 g−1) and lance-shaped (41.49 m2 g−1) SnO2 nanoparticles. These experimental findings suggest that the gas sensing properties of faceted SnO2 nanoparticles are closely related to their exposed facets and are not due to their surface area.


3.2.6. Indium oxides. 
In a roundabout way, high-index {211}-faceted trapezohedron-shaped In2O3 has been synthesized by Han et al. in ionic liquid.319 This has again exhibited a high gas sensing activity and thermal stability due to the presence of high-density atom steps, ledges, and dangling bonds.

3.3. Polyoxometalates (POMs)
We recently reported the precursor-salt-assisted synthesis of high-index {hkl}-faceted concave hexagonal plate-like polyoxometalates.320 This led to totally new information about the surface etching of a well-defined crystal plane for obtaining high-index-faceted nanocrystals. Selective etchants remove specific facets, producing high-index-faceted crystal structures. It was found that upon addition of ammonium heptamolybdate [etching agent] the reactivity of the {001} crystal plane of hexagonal plate-like ammonium copper molybdate (ACM) is much higher than that of the {010} plane, as a result of which hexagonal plate-like ACM becomes corrugated to a concave hexagon with high-index facets (Fig. 32). It has been shown that high-index-facet-{422}-exposed concave hexagonal ACM exhibited substantially enhanced photocatalytic activity towards Congo red degradation compared to the other microstructures enclosed by low-index facets.
 Fig. 32  Schematic illustration of the preparation of high-index-faceted concave hexagonal plate-like ACM from hexagonal plate-like ACM. Reprinted with permission from ref. 320. Copyright 2015 from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
4. Conclusions
Herein, we have discussed the recent progress of synthetic strategies based on oxidative etching, surface capping, and kinetic/thermodynamic control for the fabrication of faceted metal, bimetallic, metal oxide, and composite nanomaterials. We have strived to explain the key factors that control the growth rate of different facets and ultimately determine the final shape of a nanocrystal. Such types of faceted nanocrystals provide a great opportunity to design new catalysts with substantially higher catalytic reactivity. Here, we have mainly emphasized the enhanced catalytic activity of faceted oxide nanomaterials to overcome the cost effect of precious Pt-group metals. Finally, this article explored the importance of thermodynamically unfavourable high-index facets over low-index facets in improving the catalytic reactivity of metals and metal oxides. This is mainly due to the presence of low-coordinated atoms, steps, and kinks in the high-index-faceted nanocrystals. Only recently a paradigm shift in photocatalysis has been explored taking heterojunctions into consideration. In future faceted heterojunctions might enlighten the world of photocatalysis to a great extent.
Acknowledgements
The authors are thankful to the UGC, DST, BRNS and CSIR New Delhi for financial assistance and IIT Kharagpur for research facilities.
References
L. M. Baldyga, S. O. Blavo, C.-H. Kuo, C.-K. Tsung and J. N. Kuhn, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 2626–2629 CrossRef CAS .
K.-L. Wu, R. Yu and X.-W. Wei, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 7626–7632 RSC .
S. Panigrahi, S. Basu, S. Praharaj, S. Pande, S. Jana, A. Pal, S. K. Ghosh and T. Pal, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 4596–4605 CAS .
C. Zhang, S. Y. Hwang and Z. Peng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 19778–19787 CAS .
S. Praharaj, S. Jana, S. Kundu, S. Pande and T. Pal, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2009, 333, 699–706 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. K. Sau, A. Pal and T. Pal, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 9266–9272 CrossRef CAS .
M. Leng, C. Yu and C. Wang, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 8454–8461 RSC .
H. Zhang, M. Jin, Y. Xiong, B. Lim and Y. Xia, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1783–1794 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jana, S. Basu, S. Pande, S. K. Ghosh and T. Pal, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 16272–16277 CAS .
X. Zhang, H. Yin, J. Wang, L. Chang, Y. Gao, W. Liu and Z. Tang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 8392–8397 RSC .
H. Mistry, F. Behafarid, E. Zhou, L. K. Ono, L. Zhang and C. B. Roldan, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 109–115 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gu, Y.-W. Zhang and F. Tao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 8050–8065 RSC .
M. Pradhan, S. Sarkar, A. K. Sinha, M. Basu and T. Pal, CrystEngComm, 2011, 13, 2878–2889 RSC .
A. K. Sinha, S. Jana, S. Pande, S. Sarkar, M. Pradhan, M. Basu, S. Saha, A. Pal and T. Pal, CrystEngComm, 2009, 11, 1210–1212 RSC .
S. Sarkar, A. K. Sinha, M. Pradhan, M. Basu, Y. Negishi and T. Pal, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 1659–1673 CAS .
H. Rong, S. Cai, Z. Niu and Y. Li, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 1560–1563 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Yuan, D.-B. Huang, H.-H. Wang and Z.-Y. Zhou, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 5711–5715 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Wu, H. Zhang, Y. Qian, Y. Hu, H. Zhang and C. Cai, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 19091–19100 CAS .
F. Can, S. Berland, S. Royer, X. Courtois and D. Duprez, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 1120–1132 CrossRef CAS .
C. Koenigsmann, M. E. Scofield, H. Liu and S. S. Wong, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 3385–3398 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kim, H. J. Kim, Y. S. Kim, S. M. Choi, M. H. Seo and W. B. Kim, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 18093–18100 CAS .
H. Bao, Z. Zhang, Q. Hua and W. Huang, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 6427–6436 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Pal, T. K. Sau and N. R. Jana, Langmuir, 1997, 13, 1481–1485 CrossRef CAS .
A. Henglein, J. Phys. Chem., 1993, 97, 5457–5471 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kundu, S. Lau and H. Liang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 5150–5156 CAS .
M. H. Huang, S. Rej and S.-C. Hsu, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 1634–1644 RSC .
M. H. Huang and P.-H. Lin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 14–24 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Lee, M. Kim and H. Kim, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 3791–3798 RSC .
Y. Xia, Y. Xiong, B. Lim and S. E. Skrabalak, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 60–113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Lim, M. J. Jiang, J. Tao, P. H. C. Camargo, Y. Zhu and Y. Xia, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 189–200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun and Y. Xia, Science, 2002, 298, 2176–2179 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, M. Jin and Y. Xia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 7656–7673 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Quan, Y. Wang and J. Fang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 191–202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, M. Jin and Y. Xia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 7656–7673 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. Van Santen, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 57–66 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L.-M. Lyu and M. H. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 17768–17773 CAS .
C. G. Read, E. M. P. Steinmiller and K.-S. Choi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 12040–12041 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-H. Kuo and M. H. Huang, Nano Today, 2010, 5, 106–116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhu, M. L. Du, D. L. Yu, Y. Wang, M. L. Zou, C. S. Xu and Y. Q. Fu, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 13795–13799 RSC .
C.-H. Kuo, Y.-C. Yang, S.-J. Gwo and M. H. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 1052–1057 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Luo, Q.-Q. Meng, C. Gao, X.-Y. Yu, Y. Jia, B. Sun, Z. Jin, Q.-X. Li, J.-H. Liu and X.-J. Huang, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 15952–15955 RSC .
Q. Zhang and H. Wang, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 4027–4033 CrossRef CAS .
T. Liu, P. Jiang, Q. You and S. Ye, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 2350–2353 RSC .
T. P. Tyler, P. A. Lin, Y. Tian, H.-J. Gao, X. P. A. Gao, R. M. Sankaran and M. C. Hersam, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 1484–1487 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Rahman, T. Okajima and T. Ohsaka, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 5172–5174 RSC .
P. Christopher and S. Linic, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 11264–11265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Christopher and S. Linic, ChemCatChem, 2010, 2, 78–83 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Xu, D. Wang, J. Zhang and Y. Li, Chem. – Asian J., 2006, 1, 888–893 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Chimentão, I. Kirm, F. Medina, X. Rodríguez, Y. Cesteros, P. Salagre and J. E. Sueiras, Chem. Commun., 2004, 846–847 RSC .
K. Qi, Q. Wang, W. Zheng, W. Zhang and X. Cui, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 15090–15097 RSC .
M. Kim, Y. Kim, J. W. Hong, S. Ahn, W. Y. Kim and S. W. Han, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 9454–9457 RSC .
G. Li, H. Kobayashi, S. Dekura, R. Ikeda, Y. Kubota, K. Kato, M. Takata, T. Yamamoto, S. Matsumura and H. Kitagawa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 10222–10225 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, C. Feng, Y. Deng, L. Liu, Y. Wu, B. Shen, C. Zhong and W. Hu, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 1213–1218 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xiao, S. Liu, N. Tian, Z.-Y. Zhou, H.-X. Liu, B.-B. Xu and S.-G. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 18754–18757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhang, D. Wang, Y. Hou, S. Yang, X. H. Yang, J. H. Zhong, J. Liu, H. F. Wang, P. Hu and H. J. Zhao, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1836 Search PubMed .
L. Yang, X. Song, M. Qi, L. Xia and M. Jin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 7316–7320 CAS .
L. Ruan, H. Ramezani-Dakhel, C.-Y. Chiu, E. Zhu, Y. Li, H. Heinz and Y. Huang, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 840–846 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. H. Park, K. Jang, H. J. Kim and S. U. Son, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 1152–1155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Renzas, Y. W. Zhang, W. Y. Huang and G. A. Somorjai, Catal. Lett., 2009, 132, 317–322 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. P. Hopstaken, W. J. H. van Gennip and J. W. Niemantsverdriet, Surf. Sci., 1999, 433/435, 69–73 CrossRef .
M. J. P. Hopstaken and J. W. Niemantsverdriet, J. Chem. Phys., 2000, 113, 5457–5465 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Shao, A. Peles and J. Odell, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 18505–18509 CAS .
Y. Park, Y. W. Lee, S. W. Kang and S. W. Han, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 9798–9805 RSC .
S.-B. Wang, W. Zhu, J. Ke, M. Lin and Y.-W. Zhang, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 2298–2306 CrossRef CAS .
S.-I. Choi, M. Shao, N. Lu, A. Ruditskiy, H.-C. Peng, J. Park, S. Guerrero, J. Wang, M. J. Kim and Y. Xia, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 10363–10371 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-W. Yang, K. Chanda, P.-H. Lin, Y.-N. Wang, C.-W. Liao and M. H. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 19993–20000 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Jin, H. Zhang, Z. Xie and Y. Xia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 7850–7854 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, J. Xu, D. Yan, S. Li, J. Lu, X. Cao and B. Wang, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2013, 3, 2016–2024 CAS .
Y. Zheng, J. Tao, H. Liu, J. Zeng, T. Yu, Y. Ma, C. Moran, L. Wu, Y. Zhu, J. Liu and Y. Xia, Small, 2011, 7, 2307–2312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Wang, H. He, L.-C. Liu, H.-X. Dai and Z. Zhao, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2012, 2, 575–580 CAS .
R. Wang, H. He, J. Wang, L. Liu and H. Dai, Catal. Today, 2013, 201, 68–78 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-N. Xu, J. Sun, C.-S. Lin, X.-M. Jiang, Q.-S. Chen, S.-Y. Peng, M.-S. Wang and G.-C. Guo, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 118–122 CrossRef CAS .
M. Crespo-Quesada, A. Yarulin, M. Jing, Y. Xia and L. Kiwi-Minsker, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 12787–12794 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Kiwi-Minsker and M. Crespo-Quesada, Top. Catal., 2012, 55, 486–491 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chung, C. Kim, H. Jeong, T. Yu, D. H. Binh, J. Jang, J. Lee, B. M. Kim and B. Lim, Chem. – Asian J., 2013, 8, 919–925 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Schmidt, A. Vargas, T. Mallat and A. Baiker, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 12358–12367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. M. Bratlie, H. Lee, K. Komvopoulos, P. Yang and G. A. Somorjai, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3097–3101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-K. Tsung, J. N. Kuhn, W. Huang, C. Aliaga, L.-I. Hung, G. A. Somorjai and P. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 5816–5822 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tang and W. Cheng, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 3125–3132 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-L. Lu, K. S. Prasad, H.-L. Wu, J.-a. A. Ho and M. H. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 14546–14553 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, J. Gong, Y. Xiong, J. Yang, Y. Gao, Y. Liu, X. Lu and Z. Tang, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 6894–6896 RSC .
V. Bansal, V. Li, A. P. O'Mullane and S. K. Bhargava, CrystEngComm, 2010, 12, 4280–4286 RSC .
X. Zhang, H. Yin, J. Wang, L. Chang, Y. Gao, W. Liu and Z. Tang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 8392–8397 RSC .
M. Shao, J. Odell, M. Humbert, T. Yu and Y. Xia, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 4172–4180 CAS .
H. Erikson, A. Sarapuu, K. Tammeveski, J. Solla-Gullón and J. M. Feliu, Electrochem.
Commun., 2011, 13, 734–737 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, J. Shi, M. Liu, D. Jing and L. Guo, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 192–194 RSC .
S. Yoon, M. Kim, I.-S. Kim, J.-H. Lim and B. Yoo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 11621–11627 CAS .
J. Yu, J. Fan and K. Lv, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 2144–2149 RSC .
Y.-e. Du, Q. Feng, C. Chen, Y. Tanaka and X. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 16007–16019 CAS .
B. Liu and E. S. Aydil, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 9507–9509 RSC .
H. Tang, Y. Ding, P. Jiang, H. Zhou, C. F. Guo, L. Sun, A. Yu and Z. L. Wang, CrystEngComm, 2011, 13, 5052–5054 RSC .
F. Li, F. Gong, Y. Xiao, A. Zhang, J. Zhao, S. Fang and D. Jia, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 10482–10491 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T.-K. Van, H. G. Cha, C. K. Nguyen, S.-W. Kim, M.-H. Jung and Y. S. Kang, Cryst. Growth Des., 2012, 12, 862–868 CAS .
G. Zhou, L. Li, Q. Zhang, N. Li and F. Li, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 5582–5587 RSC .
G.-L. Xu, J.-T. Li, L. Huang, W. Lin and S.-G. Sun, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 394–402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Huang, S. Weng, B. Wang, J. Hu, X. Fu and P. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 25434–25440 CAS .
F. Pan, K. Wu, H. Li, G. Xu and W. Chen, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 15095–15101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Qin, Q. Xiang, H. Zhao, J. Zhang and J. Xu, CrystEngComm, 2014, 16, 7062–7073 RSC .
J. S. Chen, D. Luan, C. M. Li, F. Y. C. Boey, S. Qiao and X. W. Lou, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 8252–8254 RSC .
F. Hao, X. Wang, C. Zhou, X. Jiao, X. Li, J. Li and H. Lin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 19164–19172 CAS .
W. Peng, X. Yang, Z. Chen, J. Zhang, H. Chen, K. Zhang and L. Han, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 172–178 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kwon, A. Soon, H. Han and H. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 156–162 CAS .
J. Chen, B. Lim, E. P. Lee and Y. Xia, Nano Today, 2009, 4, 81–95 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, Q. Liu and W. Shen, Dalton Trans., 2011, 40, 5811–5826 RSC .
G. Liu, H. G. Yang, J. Pan, Y. Q. Yang, G. Q. Lu and H.-M. Cheng, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 9559–9612 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Cargnello, T. R. Gordon and C. B. Murray, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 9319–9345 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Narayanan and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 7194–7195 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Narayanan and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 5726–5733 CrossRef CAS .
R. Narayanan and M. A. El-Sayed, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1343–1348 CrossRef CAS .
R. Narayanan and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 12663–12676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Mahmoud, C. E. Tabor, M. A. El-Sayed, Y. Ding and Z. L. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 4590–4591 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. M. Bratlie, C. J. Kliewer and G. A. Somorjai, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 10051–10057 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. M. Bratlie, M. O. Montano, L. D. Flores, M. Paajanen and G. A. Somorjai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 12810–12816 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. M. Bratlie, C. J. Kliewer and G. A. Somorjai, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 17925–17930 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. N. Kuhn, W. Y. Huang, C. K. Tsung, Y. W. Zhang and G. A. Somorjai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 14026–14027 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Kliewer, M. Bieri and G. A. Somorjai, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 11373–11378 CAS .
N. M. Markovic, R. R. Adzic, B. D. Cahan and E. B. Yeager, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1994, 377, 249 CrossRef CAS .
B. Lim, X. Lu, M. Jiang, P. H. C. Camargo, E. C. Cho, E. P. Lee and Y. Xia, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 4043–4047 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, H. Daimon, Y. Lee, J. Kim and S. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 6974–6975 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, H. Daimon, T. Onodera, T. Koda and S. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 3588–3591 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-Y. Chiu, Y. Li, L. Ruan, X. Ye, C. B. Murray and Y. Huang, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 393–399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-Y. Chiu, H. Wu, Z. Yao, F. Zhou, H. Zhang, V. Ozolins and Y. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 15489–15500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Berhault, L. Bisson, C. Thomazeau, C. Verdon and D. Uzio, Appl. Catal., A, 2007, 327, 32–43 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Piccolo, A. Valcarcel, M. Bausach, C. Thomazeau, D. Uzio and G. Berhault, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2008, 10, 5504–5506 RSC .
M. M. Telkar, C. V. Rode, R. V. Chaudhari, S. S. Joshi and A. M. Nalawade, Appl. Catal., A, 2004, 273, 11–19 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ma and N. Semagina, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 15417–15423 CAS .
J. Watt, S. Cheong, M. F. Toney, B. Ingham, J. Cookson, P. T. Bishop and R. D. Tilley, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 396–402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Astruc, Inorg. Chem., 2007, 46, 1884–1894 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. T. S. Phan, M. V. D. Sluys and C. W. Jones, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2006, 348, 609–679 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Narayanan and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 8340–8347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Chen, H. H. Hung and M. H. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 9114–9121 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Kim, M. Kim, W. Y. Lee and T. Hyeon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 7642–7643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Shao, T. Yu, J. Odell, M. Jin and Y. Xia, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 6566–6568 RSC .
M. Jin, H. Zhang, Z. Xie and Y. Xia, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6352–6357 CAS .
B. Tardy, C. Noupa, C. Leclercq, J. C. Bertolini, A. Hoareau, M. Treilleux, J. P. Faure and G. Nihoul, J. Catal., 1991, 129, 1–11 CrossRef CAS .
G. Tourillon, A. Cassuto, Y. Jugnet, J. Massardier and J. C. Bertolini, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1996, 92, 4835–4841 RSC .
H. Conrad, G. Ertl, J. Koch and E. E. Latta, Surf. Sci., 1974, 41, 435–446 CrossRef .
J. Silvestre-Albero, G. Rupprechter and H. J. Freund, J. Catal., 2006, 240, 58–65 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Silvestre-Albero, G. Rupprechter and H. J. Freund, J. Catal., 2005, 235, 52–59 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Silvestre-Albero, G. Rupprechter and H. J. Freund, Chem. Commun., 2006, 80–82 RSC .
M. Liu, Y. Zheng, L. Zhang, L. Guo and Y. Xia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 11752–11755 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, M. E. Grass, J. N. Kuhn, F. Tao, S. E. Habas, W. Huang, P. Yang and G. A. Somorjai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5868–5869 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xiong, H. Cai, B. J. Wiley, J. Wang, M. J. Kim and Y. Xia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 3665–3675 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, L. Zhang, H. Zhou, Y. Zhu, E. Sutter, Y. Ji, M. H. Rafailovich and J. C. Sokolov, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 2065–2070 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, C. H. Moran, X. Xia, M. Rycenga, N. Li and Y. Xia, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 9047–9054 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-C. Peng, S. Xie, J. Park, X. Xia and Y. Xia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 3780–3783 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. P. Khanal and E. R. Zubarev, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 12634–12635 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Pradhan and T. Pal, Chemtracts, 2008, 21, 346–349 CAS .
C.-Y. Chiu, P.-J. Chung, K.-U. Lao, C.-W. Liao and M. H. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 23757–23763 CAS .
S. Rej, K. Chanda, C.-Y. Chiu and M. H. Huang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 15991–15997 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Pradhan, S. Sarkar, A. K. Sinha, M. Basu and T. Pal, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 16129–16142 CAS .
S. Xie, H. Zhang, N. Lu, M. Jin, J. Wang, M. J. Kim, Z. Xie and Y. Xia, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 6262–6268 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. D. Cozzoli, T. Pellegrino and L. Manna, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2006, 35, 1195–1208 RSC .
F. Tao, M. E. Grass, Y. Zhang, D. R. Butcher, J. R. Renzas, Z. Liu, J. Y. Chung, B. S. Mun, M. Salmeron and G. A. Somorjai, Science, 2008, 322, 932–934 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. R. Stamenkovic, B. S. Mun, M. Arenz, K. J. J. Mayrhofer, C. A. Lucas, G. Wang, P. N. Ross and N. M. Markovic, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 241–247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Mazumder, M. Chi, K. L. More and S. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 9368–9372 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Gu, Y.-W. Zhang and F. Tao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 8050–8065 RSC .
J. Wu, P. Li, Y.-T. Pan, S. Warren, X. Yin and H. Yang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 8066–8074 RSC .
A.-X. Yin, X.-Q. Min, Y.-W. Zhang and C.-H. Yan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 3816–3819 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Luo, Y. Liu, H. Zhang and B. Yang, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 3359–3362 RSC .
G. Fu, L. Ding, Y. Chen, J. Lin, Y. Tang and T. Lu, CrystEngComm, 2014, 16, 1606–1610 RSC .
J. Zeng, C. Zhu, J. Tao, M. Jin, H. Zhang, Z.-Y. Li, Y. Zhu and Y. Xia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 2354–2358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Xie, H.-C. Peng, N. Lu, J. Wang, M. J. Kim, Z. Xie and Y. Xia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 16658–16667 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, M. Jin and Y. Xia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 7656–7673 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Hu, J. Chen, Z. Y. Li, L. Au, G. V. Hartland, X. Li, M. Marquez and Y. Xia, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2006, 35, 1084–1094 RSC .
M. S. Yavuz, Y. Cheng, J. Chen, C. M. Cobley, Q. Zhang, M. Rycenga, J. Xie, C. Kim, K. H. Song, A. G. Schwartz, L. V. Wang and Y. Xia, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 935–939 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Peng, H. You, J. Wu and H. Yang, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1492–1496 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. S. Mtraux, Y. C. Cao, R. Jin and C. A. Mirkin, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 519–522 CrossRef .
X. Lu, L. Au, J. McLellan, Z. Y. Li, M. Marquez and Y. Xia, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1764–1769 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Au, Y. Chen, F. Zhou, P. H. C. Camargo, B. Lim, Z. Y. Li, D. S. Ginger and Y. Xia, Nano Res., 2008, 1, 441–449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. McEachran, D. Keogh, B. Pietrobon, N. Cathcart, I. Gourevich, N. Coombs and V. Kitaev, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 8066–8069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Fan, Y. Yang, W. Wang, L. Zhang, W. Chen, C. Zou and S. Huang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 4072–4082 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Xie, N. Lu, Z. Xie, J. Wang, M. J. Kim and Y. Xia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 10266–10270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Llopis and M. Vazquez, Electrochim. Acta, 1964, 9, 1655–1663 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Rice and J. C. Suits, J. Appl. Phys., 1979, 50, 5899–5901 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Jin, Nanotechnol. Rev., 2012, 1, 31–56 CAS .
C. A. Stowell and B. A. Korgel, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1203–1207 CrossRef CAS .
G. S. Fonseca, A. P. Umpierre, P. F. P. Fichtner, S. R. Teixeira and J. Dupont, Chem. – Eur. J., 2003, 9, 3263–3269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, H. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Y. Ma, H. Zhong and H. Ma, Chem. Commun., 2009, 6589–6591 RSC .
M. Rueping, R. M. Koenigs, R. Borrmann, J. Zoller, T. E. Weirich and J. Mayer, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 2008–2010 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xia, L. Figueroa-Cosme, J. Tao, H.-C. Peng, G. Niu, Y. Zhu and Y. Xia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 10878–10881 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Chanda, S. Rej and M. H. Huang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 16036–16043 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. X. Yao, X. M. Yin, T. H. Wang and H. C. Zeng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 6131–6144 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, H. Wang, Y.-F. Yu, L. Tian, W.-W. Zhao and B. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 15288–15296 CAS .
K. Chanda, S. Rej and M. H. Huang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 12494–12501 RSC .
D.-F. Zhang, H. Zhang, L. Guo, K. Zheng, X.-D. Han and Z. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 5220–5225 RSC .
C.-H. Kuo and M. H. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 18355–18360 CAS .
J.-Y. Ho and M. H. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 14159–14164 CAS .
W.-C. Huang, L.-M. Lyu, Y.-C. Yang and M. H. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 1261–1267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-H. Kuo, Y.-C. Yang, S. Gwo and M. H. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 1052–1057 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-C. Wang, L.-M. Lyu and M. H. Huang, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 2677–2684 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xu, W. Wang and W. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 13829–13834 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liang, L. Shang, T. Bian, C. Zhou, D. Zhang, H. Yu, H. Xu, Z. Shi, T. Zhang, L.-Z. Wu and C.-H. Tung, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 4431–4436 RSC .
S. Sun, X. Song, Y. Sun, D. Deng and Z. Yang, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2012, 2, 925–930 CAS .
Q. Hua, D. Shang, W. Zhang, K. Chen, S. Chang, Y. Ma, Z. Jiang, J. Yang and W. Huang, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 665–671 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Hua, K. Chen, S. Chang, Y. Ma and W. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 20618–20627 CAS .
Y.-H. Tsai, C.-Y. Chiu and M. H. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 24611–24617 CAS .
J. Ren, W. Wang, S. Sun, L. Zhang, L. Wang and J. Chang, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2011, 50, 10366–10369 CrossRef CAS .
J. Pal, M. Ganguly, C. Mondal, A. Roy, Y. Negishi and T. Pal, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 24640–24653 CAS .
C.-H. Kuo and M. H. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 12815–12820 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang and J. F. Banfield, J. Mater. Chem., 1998, 8, 2073–2076 RSC .
D. Dambournet, I. Belharouak and K. Amine, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 1173–1179 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Banfield and D. R. Veblen, Am. Mineral., 1992, 77, 545–557 CAS .
Y. Li and W. Shen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 1543–1574 RSC .
L. Liu, X. Gu, Z. Ji, W. Zou, C. Tang, F. Gao and L. Dong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 18578–18587 CAS .
X.-Q. Gong and A. Selloni, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 19560–19562 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Vittadini, A. Selloni, F. P. Rotzinger and M. Gratzel, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1998, 81, 2954–2957 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Barnard and L. A. Curtiss, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1261–1266 CrossRef CAS .
H. G. Yang and H. C. Zeng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 270–278 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. H. Yang, Z. Li, C. Sun, H. G. Yang and C. Li, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 3486–3494 CrossRef CAS .
N. Roy, Y. Sohn and D. Pradhan, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2532–2540 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wang, P. Kanhere, M. Li, Q. Tay, Y. Tang, Y. Huang, T. C. Sum, N. Mathews, T. Sritharan and Z. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 22894–22902 CAS .
H. Xu, P. Reunchan, S. Ouyang, H. Tong, N. Umezawa, T. Kako and J. Ye, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 405–411 CrossRef CAS .
R. Chong, J. Li, X. Zhou, Y. Ma, J. Yang, L. Huang, H. Han, F. Zhang and C. Li, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 165–167 RSC .
G. Yang, Z. Jiang, H. Shi, T. Xiao and Z. Yan, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 5301–5309 RSC .
M. Haruta, N. Yamada, T. Kobayashi and S. Iijima, J. Catal., 1989, 115, 301 CrossRef CAS .
E. Cui and G. Lu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 7672–7685 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liu, X. Gu, Y. Cao, X. Yao, L. Zhang, C. Tang, F. Gao and L. Dong, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 2768–2775 CrossRef CAS .
E. Cui and G. Lu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 26415–26425 CAS .
C.-J. Jia, L.-D. Sun, F. Luo, X.-D. Han, L. J. Heyderman, Z.-G. Yan, C.-H. Yan, K. Zheng, Z. Zhang and M. Takano, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 16968–16977 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-E. Jorgensen, L. Mosegaard, L. E. Thomsen, T. R. Jensen and J. C. Hanson, J. Solid State Chem., 2007, 180, 180–185 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Goniakowki, F. Finocchi and C. Noguera, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2008, 71, 016501 CrossRef .
R. C. Baetzold and H. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 14357–14364 CrossRef CAS .
S. Inamdar, H.-S. Choi, M.-S. Kim, K. Chaudhari and J.-S. Yu, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 7009–7014 RSC .
R. Zheng, H. Gu, B. Xu, K. Fung, X. Zhang and S. Ringer, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2418–2421 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Lu, Q. Wu, X. Yang, L. Chen, J. Cai, C. Liang, M. Wu and P. Shen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 9768–9774 RSC .
J. Lu, Q. Peng, Z. Wang, C. Nan, L. Li and Y. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5232–5237 CAS .
J. Zhu, Z. Yin, D. Yang, T. Sun, H. Yu, H. E. Hoster, H. H. Hng, H. Zhang and Q. Yan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 987–993 CAS .
J. Qu, Y. Yu, C.-Y. Cao and W.-G. Song, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 11172–11177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, F. Pan, H. Li, T. Niu, G. Xu and W. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 7242–7246 CAS .
X. Wang, J. Wang, Z. Cui, S. Wang and M. Cao, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 34387–34394 RSC .
W.-H. Xu, Q.-Q. Meng, C. Gao, J. Wang, Q.-X. Li, J.-H. Liu and X.-J. Huang, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 5011–5013 RSC .
N. Zhao, W. Ma, Z. Cui, W. Song, C. Xu and M. Gao, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 1775–1780 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ma, J. Teo, L. Mei, Z. Zhong, Q. Li, T. Wang, X. Duan, J. Lian and W. Zheng, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 11694–11700 RSC .
P. Broqvist, I. Panas and H. Persson, J. Catal., 2002, 210, 198–206 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Petitto, E. M. Marsh, G. A. Carson and M. A. Langell, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2008, 281, 49–58 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-Y. Yu, Q.-Q. Meng, T. Luo, Y. Jia, B. Sun, Q.-X. Li, J.-H. Liu and X.-J. Huang, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2886 Search PubMed .
L. Chen, J. Hu, R. Richards, S. Prikhodko and S. Kodambaka, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 1657–1660 RSC .
X. Xiao, X. Liu, H. Zhao, D. Chen, F. Liu, J. Xiang, Z. Hu and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5762–5766 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Liu, X. Wang, X. Wang, W. Tian, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2543 Search PubMed .
J. Wang, Z. Qiao, L. Zhang, J. Shen, R. Li, G. Yang and F. Nie, CrystEngComm, 2014, 16, 8673–8677 RSC .
Z. Huang, G. Natu, Z. Ji, P. Hasin and Y. Wu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 25109–25114 CAS .
L. Trotochaud, J. K. Ranney, K. N. Williams and S. W. Boettcher, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 17253–17261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. A. Niklasson and C. G. Granqvist, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 127–156 RSC .
G. Wang, X. Lu, T. Zhai, Y. Ling, H. Wang, Y. Tong and Y. Li, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 3123–3127 RSC .
J. Hu, K. Zhu, L. Chen, H. Yang, Z. Li, A. Suchopar and R. Richards, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 267–271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Song, L. Chen, J. Hu and R. Richards, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 275707 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Su, M. Ford and G. Wang, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 924 Search PubMed .
K. Zhu, J. Hu, C. Kubel and R. Richards, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 7277–7281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hu, K. Zhu, L. Chen, C. Kuebel and R. Richards, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 12038–12044 CAS .
J. S. J. Hargreaves, G. J. Hutchings and R. W. Joyner, Catal. Today, 1990, 6, 481–488 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. J. Hargreaves, G. J. Hutchings, R. W. Joyner and C. J. Kiely, J. Catal., 1992, 135, 576–595 CrossRef CAS .
Y. N. Xu and W. Y. Ching, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1993, 48, 4335–4351 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wrobel and J. Piechota, Solid State Commun., 2008, 146, 324–329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Azzaz, S. Kacimi, A. Zaoui and B. Bouhafs, Physica B, 2008, 403, 3154–3158 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Kresse, O. Dulub and U. Diebold, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2003, 68, 245409 CrossRef .
U. Diebold, L. V. Koplitz and O. Dulub, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 237, 336–342 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lucas, W. Mai, R. Yang, Z. L. Wang and E. Riedo, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1314–1317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, J. Zhou, J. Song, J. Liu, N. Xu and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2768–2772 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. L. Marana, V. M. Longo, E. Longo, J. B. L. Martins and J. R. Sambrano, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2008, 112, 8958–8963 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Meyer and D. Marx, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2003, 67, 035403 CrossRef .
A. Wander, F. Schedin, P. Steadman, A. Norris, R. McGrath, T. S. Turner, G. Thornton and N. M. Harrison, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2001, 86, 3811–3814 CrossRef CAS .
A. Wander and N. M. Harrison, Surf. Sci., 2000, 457, L342–L346 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tian, F. Yang, D. Zeng and C. Xie, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 10586–10591 CAS .
Q. Zhao, Q. Shen, F. Yang, H. Zhao, B. Liu, Q. Liang, A. Wei, H. Yang and S. Liu, Sens. Actuators, B, 2014, 195, 71–79 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. V. Kaneti, J. Yue, X. Jiang and A. Yu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 13153–13162 CAS .
M. P. Hyman, V. M. Lebarbier, Y. Wang, A. K. Datye and J. M. Vohs, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 7251–7259 CAS .
F.-R. Fan, Y. Ding, D.-Y. Liu, Z.-Q. Tian and Z. L. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 12036–12037 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Salje, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B: Struct. Crystallogr. Cryst. Chem., 1977, 33, 574–577 CrossRef .
H. Zheng, J. Z. Ou, M. S. Strano, R. B. Kaner, A. Mitchell and K. Kalantar-zadeh, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 2175–2196 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, V. C. Di and G. Pacchioni, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 8901–8909 CAS .
X. Han, X. Han, L. Li and C. Wang, New J. Chem., 2012, 36, 2205–2208 RSC .
Q.-Q. Jia, H.-M. Ji, D.-H. Wang, X. Bai, X.-H. Sun and Z.-G. Jin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 13602–13611 CAS .
Z.-G. Zhao, Z.-F. Liu and M. Miyauchi, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 3321–3323 RSC .
J. Zhu, S. Wang, S. Xie and H. Li, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 4403–4405 RSC .
J. Y. Zheng, G. Song, J. Hong, T. K. Van, A. U. Pawar, D. Y. Kim, C. W. Kim, Z. Haider and Y. S. Kang, Cryst. Growth Des., 2014, 14, 6057–6066 CAS .
Y. P. Xie, G. Liu, L. Yin and H.-M. Cheng, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 6746–6751 RSC .
G. Wang, X. Ma, B. Huang, H. Cheng, Z. Wang, J. Zhan, X. Qin, X. Zhang and Y. Dai, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 21189–21194 RSC .
M. Meng, X. Wu, X. Zhu, L. Yang, Z. Gan, X. Zhu, L. Liu and P. K. Chu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 4298–4304 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, G. Chen, Y. Yu, Y. Wu, M. Zhou, H. Zhang, C. Lv, Y. Zheng and F. He, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 44306–44312 RSC .
J. Pal, C. Mondal, A. K. Sasmal, M. Ganguly, Y. Negishi and T. Pal, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 9173–9184 CAS .
Y.-Q. Zhang, L.-D. Sun, W. Feng, H.-S. Wu and C.-H. Yan, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 5092–5097 RSC .
T. Yu, D. Y. Kim, H. Zhang and Y. Xia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 2773–2777 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-C. Zhang, J.-F. Hui, Z.-C. Liu, X. Zhang, J. Zhuang and X. Wang, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 14845–14848 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Hong, S.-U. Lee, Y. W. Lee and S. W. Han, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 4565–4568 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang and H. Wang, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 4027–4033 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, Y. Zhou, E. Villarreal, Y. Lin, S. Zou and H. Wang, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 4161–4169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N.-F. Yu, N. Tian, Z.-Y. Zhou, L. Huang, J. Xiao, Y.-H. Wen and S.-G. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 5097–5101 CAS .
X.-M. Zeng, R. Huang, Y.-H. Wen and S.-G. Sun, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 5751–5757 RSC .
Y. Lu, Y. Jiang and W. Chen, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 3309–3315 RSC .
A.-X. Yin, X.-Q. Min, W. Zhu, W.-C. Liu, Y.-W. Zhang and C.-H. Yan, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 777–782 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, W. Wang, H. Li, L. Li, G. Zhou, R. Yu, D. Wang and Y. Li, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1404 Search PubMed .
Y. Qi, T. Bian, S.-I. Choi, Y. Jiang, C. Jin, M. Fu, H. Zhang and D. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 560–562 RSC .
C. Wang, C. Lin, L. Zhang, Z. Quan, K. Sun, B. Zhao, F. Wang, N. Porter, Y. Wang and J. Fang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 1753–1759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Moghimi, M. Abdellah, J. P. Thomas, M. Mohapatra and K. T. Leung, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 10958–10961 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Leng, M. Liu, Y. Zhang, Z. Wang, C. Yu, X. Yang, H. Zhang and C. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 17084–17087 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, C. Liu, B. Zheng, Y. Jiang, L. Zhang, Z. Xie and L. Zheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 282–287 CAS .
S. Sun, D. Deng, C. Kong, Y. Gao, S. Yang, X. Song, B. Ding and Z. Yang, CrystEngComm, 2011, 13, 5993–5997 RSC .
S. Sun, H. Zhang, X. Song, S. Liang, C. Kong and Z. Yang, CrystEngComm, 2011, 13, 6040–6044 RSC .
J. Yin, Z. Yu, F. Gao, J. Wang, H. Pang and Q. Lu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 6328–6332 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Murphy, Science, 2002, 298, 2139–2141 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Liu, Y. Jiang, H. Fan, Q. Lu, W. Du and F. Gao, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 8957–8963 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Liu, Y. Jiang, Q. Chen, Q. Lu, W. Du and F. Gao, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 8261–8268 RSC .
W. Wu, R. Hao, F. Liu, X. Su and Y. Hou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 6888–6894 CAS .
X. Zhou, Q. Xu, W. Lei, T. Zhang, X. Qi, G. Liu, K. Deng and J. Yu, Small, 2014, 10, 674–679 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yang, Y. Xu, Y. Sun, G. Zhang and D. Gao, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 7915–7921 RSC .
J. Ouyang, J. Pei, Q. Kuang, Z. Xie and L. Zheng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 12505–12514 CAS .
X. Liu, J. Zhang, S. Wu, D. Yang, P. Liu, H. Zhang, S. Wang, X. Yao, G. Zhu and H. Zhao, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 6178–6184 RSC .
Y. Yang, H. Ma, J. Zhuang and X. Wang, Inorg. Chem., 2011, 50, 10143–10151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, B. Lv, Y. Xu and D. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 3040–3046 CAS .
Z. Liu, B. Lv, D. Wu, Y. Sun and Y. E. Xu, J. Inorg. Chem., 2012, 2012, 4076–4081 CAS .
H. Liang, X. Jiang, Z. Qi, W. Chen, Z. Wu, B. Xu, Z. Wang, J. Mi and Q. Li, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 7199–7203 RSC .
J. Zhu, K. Y. S. Ng and D. Deng, Cryst. Growth Des., 2014, 14, 2811–2817 CAS .
L. Hu, Q. Peng and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 16136–16137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. B. Wu, J. S. Chen, X. W. Lou and H. H. Hng, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 4082–4084 RSC .
L. Wu, H. B. Jiang, F. Tian, Z. Chen, C. Sun and H. G. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 2016–2018 RSC .
X. Han, M. Jin, S. Xie, Q. Kuang, Z. Jiang, Y. Jiang, Z. Xie and L. Zheng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 9180–9183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Slater, C. R. A. Catlow, D. H. Gay, D. E. Williams and V. Dusastre, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 10644–10650 CrossRef CAS .
X. Han, X. Han, L. Sun, S. Gao, L. Li, Q. Kuang, Z. Xie and C. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 9612–9615 RSC .
J. Pal, M. Ganguly, C. Mondal, Y. Negishi and T. Pal, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 708–719 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:
Jaya Pal	Jaya Pal obtained her B.Sc. and M.Sc. degrees from The University of Burdwan, India. She is currently pursuing her PhD degree in the Department of Chemistry at the Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, India under the guidance of Prof. Tarasankar Pal. Her research interests include size, shape and facet controlled synthesis of nanoparticles for catalysis, plasmonic photocatalysis and spectroscopy.
Tarasankar Pal	Professor Tarasankar Pal, MSc, PhD, DSc has been working in the Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur since 1984. He is a fellow of the Indian National Academy of Sciences, Allahabad. He has published about 300 papers. Recently the ACS highlighted him among 20 Indian authors for high-quality research. Prof. Pal has received numerous national and international awards including the ISCAS gold medal, and the R & D 100 Award from the U.S.A. His research interests include the synthesis and applications of metal and semiconductor nanoparticles for catalytic and spectroscopic applications, including surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) studies. His ‘arsenic detection kit’ and ‘bench marked model reaction’ to test any metal nanoparticle catalyst deserve special mention.

 	Fig. 1  The electrochemical standard potential of metal particles depends on agglomeration number.	 

 	Fig. 2  3D Geometry of different polyhedra with different volume ratios of {100} to {111} facets.	 

 	Fig. 3  Maximum current densities of formic acid oxidation obtained using different Pd polyhedra enclosed by {111} and {100} planes in different proportions. The inset displays their corresponding peak potentials. Reprinted with permission from ref. 134. Copyright 2012 from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic representation of the five important steps involved in the oxidative etching and regrowth process. (b) Schematic representation of the formation of Pd octahedra with different but controllable edge lengths (l) by controlling the rates of oxidative etching and regrowth for Pd cubes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 141. Copyright 2013 from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  TEM images of gold nanoparticles: (A) as-synthesized mixture, (B) mixture of faceted platelets and rods, (C) mixture of nanodisks and rods and (D) nanorods. Reprinted with permission from ref. 147. Copyright 2008 from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a–d) TEM images of Rh nanoparticles obtained at different reaction times after the injection of Rh(III) precursor: (a) 6, (b) 15, (c) 30, and (d) 60 min. All the scale bars are 5 nm. (e) Schematic representation of the formation of an Rh concave tetrahedron. Reprinted with permission from ref. 152. Copyright 2013 from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic illustrations of the formation of Pd–Rh multipod cuboctahedra and Pd–Rh binary nanocubes from Pd cuboctahedra. Reprinted with permission from ref. 163. Copyright 2013 from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic representation of the synthesis of Pd–Rh core–frame concave nanocubes and Rh cubic nanoframes using three important steps: (1) selective nucleation of Rh at the corners and edges of the Pd nanocubes due to the capping of {100} facets by Br− ions; (2) formation of concave nanocubic Pd–Rh bimetallic core–frames since the growth of Rh on the corners and edges of the Pd nanocubes is continued; and (3) preparation of Rh cubic nanoframes by selectively etching away the Pd cores. Reprinted with permission from ref. 173. Copyright 2012 from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.	 

 	Fig. 9  Crystal structure models of cuprite Cu2O showing the (a and b) {100}, (c and d) {111}, and (e and f) {110} facets. Oxygen and copper atoms are shown in red and white, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 182. Copyright 2013 from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.	 

 	Fig. 10  Facet-selective etching of morphologically different Cu2O nanocrystals. Reprinted with permission from ref. 197. Copyright 2013 from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  Chemical etching of morphologically different Cu2O nanoparticles. Etched products shown in the same colour are produced from Cu2O nanoparticles of the same shape. Reprinted with permission from ref. 199. Copyright 2013 from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  3D arrangements of the TiO2 anatase, rutile, and brookite forms. Reprinted with permission from ref. 202. Copyright 2010 from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  Atomic configurations of the {110} and {101} crystal facets for anatase and rutile TiO2, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 204. Copyright 2014 from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 14  Photocatalytic performances of TiO2 nanocrystals with different crystal facets in (A) reduction of nitrobenzene to aniline after reaction for 30 min and (B) oxidation of benzyl alcohol to benzaldehyde after reaction for 4 h. Reprinted with permission from ref. 205. Copyright 2013 from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  FESEM, TEM images, and 3D geometrical models of respective TiO2 nanoparticles are shown with different facets hydrothermally synthesized in (a, b) 12 h, (c, d) 24 h, (e, f) 36 h, and (g, h) 48 h. The scale bar in all the images is 25 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 211. Copyright 2013 from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  Atomic configurations of the {0001} and {110} facets for α-Fe2O3 and {001} and {110} facets for γ-Fe2O3. Reprinted with permission from ref. 204. Copyright 2014 from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 17  Cartoon illustration of the formation of truncated cuboctahedra by further growth of truncated octahedral nanocrystals in the flame. Reprinted with permission from ref. 224. Copyright 2012 from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 18  {001} Plane (a), {100} plane (b) and general view of O2− packing (c) in hematite. The pink balls in (c) correspond to the O2− ions between the top and bottom layers of O2−. Reprinted with permission from ref. 227. Copyright 2013 from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

Fe3+	2.89	2.89	9.11
O2−	5.78	5.78	13.8

 	Fig. 19  Atomic configurations of the {001}, {111} and {110} facets for spinel Co3O4. Reprinted with permission from ref. 204. Copyright 2014 from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 20  The surface atomic configurations of the {001} facets (a), {111} facets (b), and {110} facets (c) of Co3O4. Reprinted with permission from ref. 239. Copyright 2012 from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.	 

 	Fig. 21  Surface atomic configurations of the {001}, {110}, and {111} crystal facets for MgO. Reprinted with permission from ref. 204. Copyright 2014 from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Schematic representation of the fabrication of a solution-processed gas sensor. (b) SEM and (c) TEM images of the thin film on the Al2O3 tube before the solution processing. (d and e) High- and low-magnification SEM images of the ZnO nanorod array on the Al2O3 tube after solution processing, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 264. Copyright 2012 from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 23  3D Geometric models and SEM images show the selective growth of different numbers of ZnO nanorods on the {111} facets of Ag-truncated nanocubes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 268. Copyright 2009 from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 24  Surface atomic configuration of different facets for triclinic WO3: (a) {001} facet, (b) {100} facet, (c) {010} facet. Reprinted with permission from ref. 272. Copyright 2012 from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 25  Schematic representation of the growth orientation of the hexagonal single-crystal WO3 nanorods. Reprinted with permission from ref. 275. Copyright 2011 from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 26  Schematic illustration of the formation of morphologically different CuO–MnO2 nanocomposites. Reprinted with permission from ref. 281. Copyright 2014 from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 27  (A) TEM images of (a) α-Fe2O3(nanotube)–SnO2, (b) α-Fe2O3(nanoring)–SnO2, (c) α-Fe2O3(nanocolumn)–SnO2 composites and (d) SEM images of α-Fe2O3(platelet)–SnO2 composites. (B) HRTEM images of (a) α-Fe2O3(nanotube)–SnO2, (b) α-Fe2O3(nanoring)–SnO2, (c) α-Fe2O3(nanocolumn)–SnO2 and (d) α-Fe2O3(platelet)–SnO2 composites. Reprinted with permission from ref. 282. Copyright 2012 from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 28  Schematic representation of the formation of RGO-supported PtPd alloy concave nanocubes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 290. Copyright 2014 from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 29  (a) TEM image, (b) 3D geometrical model, (c) HRTEM image and (d) Fourier transform pattern of Pt3Co concave nanocubes. (e) Stepped surface highlighted from the HRTEM image. (g) Schematic representation of Pt3Co nanocatalyst-involving styrene hydrogenation reaction. Reprinted with permission from ref. 294. Copyright 2014 from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.	 

 	Fig. 30  Representation of the surface atom arrangement of fcc Co3O4 nanocrystals with different crystal facets. Reprinted with permission from ref. 314. Copyright 2008 from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 31  (A and B) TEM images of bipyramidal TiO2 nanocrystals (inset in B: corresponding SEAD pattern). (C and D) HRTEM images of bipyramidal TiO2 nanocrystals taken from the dotted circles I and II in (B), respectively. (E) 3D Geometrical model of TiO2 needles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 315. Copyright 2011 from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 32  Schematic illustration of the preparation of high-index-faceted concave hexagonal plate-like ACM from hexagonal plate-like ACM. Reprinted with permission from ref. 320. Copyright 2015 from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
