Self-template synthesis of CdS/NiS x heterostructured nanohybrids for efficient photocatalytic hydrogen evolution   - Dalton Transactions (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7DT00842B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7DT00842B
(Paper)
Dalton Trans., 2017, 46, 10650-10656Self-template synthesis of CdS/NiSx heterostructured nanohybrids for efficient photocatalytic hydrogen evolution†

        
          
            You 
            Xu
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Wenguang 
            Tu
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Shengming 
            Yin
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Markus 
            Kraft
          
        
      cd, 
      
        
          
            Qichun 
            Zhang
          
        
      e and 

        
          
            Rong 
            Xu
          
        
      *bc
aCollege of Chemical Engineering, Zhejiang University of Technology, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310014, P.R. China
bSchool of Chemical & Biomedical Engineering, Nanyang Technological University 62 Nanyang Drive, 637459, Singapore. E-mail: rxu@ntu.edu.cn
cC4T CREATE, National Research Foundation, CREATE Tower 1 Create Way, 138602, Singapore
dDepartment of Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology, University of Cambridge, CB2 3RA, UK
eSchool of Materials Science & Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 639798
Received 
      8th March 2017
    , Accepted 5th April 2017First published on 5th April 2017AbstractPhotocatalytic hydrogen (H2) evolution from water splitting is attracting enormous interest due to the possibility of converting solar energy into green chemical energy. The construction of highly efficient and stable photocatalysts is of importance and necessary for the development of photocatalytic water splitting technology. In this study, we have developed a self-template synthetic strategy for the preparation of heterostructured nanohybrids composed of ultrasmall CdS and NiSx nanoparticles by using Cd(II)–Ni(II)-(4,4′-bipyridine) coordination polymers as the precursor and template. The CdS/NiSx nanohybrids are comprised of integrated CdS and NiSx nanoclusters in a heterostructure which function as highly efficient visible-light-driven H2 evolution photocatalysts. The enhanced photocatalytic performance could be attributed to the formation of hetero-junctions between CdS and NiSx nanoparticles inside the nanohybrids which could effectively improve the separation efficiency of photogenerated electrons and holes, and thus enhance the photocatalytic activity. This work can provide a new insight into the design and fabrication of other heterostructured photocatalysts for solar-driven water splitting or other photocatalytic applications.
1. Introduction
Solar-driven water splitting for hydrogen (H2) generation is considered as one of the promising means to produce sustainable and clean fuels. Inspired by natural photosynthetic organelles, various artificial photocatalytic systems based on semiconductor materials have been developed for photocatalytic H2 generation.1,2 Among them, CdS is extensively explored because of its visible-light responsive characteristics and a suitable flat-band potential to reduce aqueous proton to H2.3 However, its photocatalytic performance is often plagued by low photogenerated electron–hole separation efficiency and poor photostability. Efforts to improve the activity of semiconductor photocatalysts over the past decade have been concentrated on the construction of heterogeneous photocatalysts which could take full advantage of the synergistic effects of different components to overcome the drawbacks of single component systems.4–6 In this regard, the investigation of biomimetic nickel sulfides (e.g., NiS, NiS2), inorganic analogues of natural hydrogenase, as a heterogeneous electrocatalyst and/or cocatalyst for catalyzing H2 evolution, has attracted renewed interest with a series of semiconductor composite photocatalysts (e.g., CdS-NiS, TiO2-NiS, g-C3N4-NiS, g-C3N4-NiS2) been fabricated using a variety of techniques.7–18 However, most of the reported heterogeneous photocatalysts are composed of building blocks or assembly units with sizes ranging from tens of nanometers to several micrometers. Alternatively, the construction of heterostructured photocatalysts composed of ultrafine or ultrasmall nanoparticles leads to both large interface and short distance between different components for efficient charge carrier separation and transfer. Therefore, it is highly desirable but challenging to construct heterogeneous photocatalysts based on ultrasmall nanoparticles for photocatalytic H2 generation.
In recent years, coordination polymers have emerged as a new class of porous materials with potential applications in catalysis, storage, exchange, separation, etc.19 Moreover, the synthesis of functional materials from coordination polymers has drawn ever-growing interest as the periodically porous and inorganic–organic structure of coordination polymers can offer unique benefits for the fabrication of inorganic or hybrid nanostructured materials. Simultaneously, a self-template directed strategy based on coordination polymers or other starting materials is of importance owing to their potential ability to control the morphology, composition and architecture.20,21 Different types of coordination polymer-derived materials, including porous carbon materials, inorganic compounds, as well as many nanocomposites have been reported by many research groups.22–26 Despite such developments, one finds limited examples of direct conversion of a coordination polymer into a heterogeneous hybrid material that integrates efficient light-harvesting, charge-separation and catalytic function for photocatalytic H2 generation.
Herein, we report a facial strategy to synthesize CdS/NiSx heterostructured photocatalysts that integrate both the visible-light responding light-absorber (CdS) and the H2-evolution cocatalyst (NiSx) into nanohybrid materials for highly efficient visible-light-driven H2 evolution. By using a bimetallic coordination polymer, Cd(II)–Ni(II)-(4,4′-bpy)(4,4′-bpy = 4,4′-bipyridine), which serves as both the template and precursor, plate-shaped nanostructures composed of ultrasmall CdS and NiSx nanoparticles can be easily fabricated through the reaction with sulfide anions in the aqueous solution at room temperature (Fig. 1). The presence of 4,4′-bpy in the coordination polymer precursor uniquely leads to the in situ formation of ultrasmall yet integrated CdS and NiSx nanoparticles (<10 nm in size) without any extra capping agents. The formation of hetero-junctions between CdS and NiSx nanoparticles within the plate-shaped nanostructures could effectively improve the separation efficiency of photogenerated electrons and holes, and thus enhance the photocatalytic activity. As expected, the as-obtained CdS/NiSx heterostructured photocatalyst, which can be well dispersed in water, exhibits high photocatalytic activity and good stability for visible-light driven H2 evolution from water in the presence of ethanol as a sacrificial agent.
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the preparation process of CdS/NiSx nanohybrids. 
2. Experimental section
2.1 Materials synthesis

2.1.1 Synthesis of Cd(II)-(4,4′-bpy) coordination polymers. 
In a typical procedure, 0.2 g 4,4′-bipyridine was dissolved in 20 mL ethanol (EtOH) under magnetic stirring to form a clear solution. Then CdCl2 aqueous solution (by dissolving 0.292 g of CdCl2·2.5H2O in 2 mL of deionized water) was added into the above solution. The mixture was kept stirring for 2 h. The white precipitate was collected by certification and washed with deionized water and ethanol three times, respectively.


2.1.2 Synthesis of Cd(II)–Ni(II)-(4,4′-bpy) coordination polymers. 
The synthesis procedure was similar to that of Cd(II)-(4,4′-bpy) coordination polymers except that the aqueous solutions containing CdCl2·2.5H2O and NiCl2·6H2O with various molar ratios (e.g., 99:1; 97:3; 95:5; 93:7; 90:10) but constant total metal ion concentration was introduced. The as-synthesized coordination polymers are named as Cd(II)–Ni(II)-(4,4′-bpy)-x% (x stands for the mol% of Ni(II) in the total metal ions).


2.1.3 Synthesis of Cd(II)–Co(II)-(4,4′-bpy) coordination polymers. 
The synthesis procedure was similar to that of Cd(II)–Ni(II)-(4,4′-bpy) coordination polymers except for the replacement of NiCl2·6H2O with CoCl2·6H2O.


2.1.4 Conversion of Cd(II)-(4,4′-bpy) coordination polymers to CdS. 
In a typical procedure, a 5 mg Cd(II)-(4,4′-bpy) coordination polymer sample was added into 50 mL of deionized H2O and sonicated for 10 min to obtain a milky suspension. Then, 2 mL of 20 mM Na2S aqueous solution was quickly added to the above suspension under magnetic stirring. The mixture was kept stirring for 60 min.


2.1.5 Conversion of Cd(II)–Ni(II)-(4,4′-bpy) coordination polymers into CdS/NiSx nanohybrids. 
The procedure was similar to that of CdS except for the replacement of various Cd(II)–Ni(II)-(4,4′-bpy) coordination polymers. The as-obtained CdS/NiSx nanohybrids are named according to the precursor used. For example, the as-obtained product from the Cd(II)–Ni(II)-(4,4′-bpy)-5% coordination polymer is referred to as CdS/NiSx-5% accordingly.


2.1.6 Conversion of Cd(II)–Co(II)-(4,4′-bpy) coordination polymers into CdS/CoSx nanohybrids. 
The procedure was similar to that of CdS/NiSx nanohybrids except for the use of Cd(II)–Co(II)-(4,4′-bpy) coordination polymers as the precursors.

2.2 Characterization
The powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern was recorded in a Bruker AXS D8 X-ray diffractometer with Cu Kα (λ = 1.5406 Å) radiation at 40 kV and 20 mA. The UV-visible diffuse reflectance spectra (DRS) were obtained from a UV-visible spectrophotometer (UV-2450, Shimadzu). Photoluminescence spectra were recorded on a LS55 Fluorescence Spectrometer. The morphologies and structures of the samples were characterized by field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM, JEOL JSM 6701F, 5 kV) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM, JEOL 3010, 300 kV). X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analysis was conducted on an Axis Ultra spectrometer (Kratos Analytical) using a monochromated Al Kα X-ray source (1486.7 eV) operating at 15 kV. Inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectrometry (ICP-AES) was carried out on a PerkinElmer ICP Optima 2000DV instrument. The zeta potentials of the suspensions were measured at room temperature by using a Zeta Potential Analyzer (BIC PALS Zeta Sizer).
2.3 Photoelectrochemical measurement
For the photoelectrochemical measurement, 1 mg of the photocatalyst sample was dispersed in 0.75 mL of solution (EtOH:water = 1:2) and then ultrasonically dispersed to prepare a homogeneous catalyst ink. Then, 40 μL of the catalyst ink was deposited onto an area of 0.196 cm2 on ITO conductive glass and then was dried in air and further heated at 300 °C for 1 h under an argon atmosphere to form the working electrode. Photoelectrochemical measurements were carried out in an electrochemical workstation (CHI 660E) using a three-electrode configuration system: an ITO working electrode, Ag/AgCl as the reference electrode, and Pt foil as the counter electrode. Na2SO4 (0.5 M) aqueous solution was used as the electrolyte. The photocurrent was observed for each switch-on/off event by using a 300 W xenon lamp. An applied potential of the working electrode against the counter electrode was set to 0.6 V (vs. Ag/AgCl). Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was recorded at an applied potential of 0.6 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) over the frequency range of 1 MHz to 0.1 Hz.
2.4 Photocatalytic measurements
The freshly prepared CdS/NiSx nanohybrid suspension by the method described in section 2.1.5 (containing ∼1.8 mg CdS/NiSx nanohybrid detected by ICP-AES) was diluted with deionized water (28 mL) and ethanol (20 mL) to make the total volume of 100 mL with 20 vol% of ethanol. The H2 evolution reactions were conducted in a top-window Pyrex reaction cell connected to the closed gas circulation and evacuation system. A 300 W Xe lamp equipped with a 420 nm cut off filter was applied as the incident visible light. Before irradiation, the reaction system was evacuated and refilled with argon gas several times to remove air inside and finally filled with argon gas to reach a pressure of about 30 Torr. The reaction cell was kept at around 20 °C by a cooling water jacket.
The apparent quantum efficiency (QE) was measured under the same photocatalytic reaction conditions with irradiation light at 420 nm by using the combined band-pass and cut-off filters. The intensity and number of photons of the light source at 420 nm were measured by an irradiate-meter. The QE was calculated according to eqn (1): (1)
3. Results and discussion

Fig. 2a displays the typical field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) image of the as-obtained product with the CdCl2/NiCl2 molar ratio of 95:5. It can be seen that the plate-shaped nanostructure was formed with the lateral size ranging from 100 to 800 nm, a thickness of about 80–100 nm and a smooth surface. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image further confirms their plate-shaped morphology (Fig. 2b). Power X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns displayed in Fig. S1a (ESI†) indicate that the as-obtained nanostructures are well crystallized and possess an obviously periodic layered structure which is different from the 4,4′-bpy precursor. The chemical composition is examined by energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX). As observed from the EDX spectrum (Fig. S1b, ESI†), the as-prepared nanostructures are mainly composed of C, N, Cl, Cd and Ni elements. Previous reports have demonstrated the formation of Cd(II)-(4,4′-bpy) coordination polymers with a two-dimensional square network.27,28 Although the determination of the exact crystal structure of the as-prepared products is difficult, we conclude that the coordination polymer composed of Cd2+, Ni2+ and 4,4′-bpy was successfully synthesized (named as Cd(II)–Ni(II)-(4,4′-bpy)-5% here according to the molar ratio of CdCl2/NiCl2) based on these materials characterization results. Interestingly, the as-prepared Cd(II)–Ni(II)-(4,4′-bpy)-5% coordination polymer particles can be readily dispersed in water with a good stability (see Fig. S1b, ESI†) due to a positively charged surface with a zeta potential of about +48.8 mV.
 Fig. 2  (a) SEM image and (b) TEM image of the Cd(II)–Ni(II)-(4,4′-bpy)-5% coordination polymer. (c,d) SEM images of the as-converted CdS/NiSx-5% nanohybrid. 
The as-synthesized Cd(II)–Ni(II)-(4,4′-bpy)-5% coordination polymer was used as both the template and precursor to produce a CdS/NiSx heterostructured nanohybrid through the reaction with S2− anions in aqueous solution under mild conditions. As seen from the SEM images (Fig. 2c and d), after reacting with Na2S, the plate-shaped macroscopic morphology of the precursor is retained, while the surface of the as-converted product (named as CdS/NiSx-5% according to the Cd:Ni ratio in the precursor solution) becomes very rough. Its morphology and structure were further examined by TEM. As shown in Fig. 3a and b, the CdS/NiSx-5% sample with the shape of nanoplates is composed of many ultrasmall nanoparticles (<10 nm in size). Fig. 3c shows the XRD pattern of these plate-shaped nanostructures composed of ultrasmall nanoparticles. The diffraction peaks at two theta values around 27°, 44°, and 52° correspond to (111), (220), and (311) planes of cubic zinc blend structured CdS (JCPDS no. 80-0019). The diffraction peaks are broad, reflecting the small size of the CdS nanoparticles in the as-obtained sample. However, no diffraction peaks of nickel sulfide (e.g., NiS, NiS2 or others) can be observed probably due to the low content of NiSx in the resultant sample and the low intensity of its characteristic XRD peaks. The conversion was also supported by a visual change in the colour of the dispersion from milky white to light yellow (Fig. S1b and S2b, ESI†). HRTEM images (Fig. 3d and e) display the obvious distribution of many nanoparticles with particle size in the range of 5–8 nm embedded in these plate-shaped nanostructures. The lattice fringes can be clearly observed in the HRTEM image (Fig. 3e), suggesting the well defined crystal structure of both CdS and NiS. The lattice spacing of ca. 0.333 and 0.201 nm can be assigned to the (111) plane of cubic CdS and (102) plane of NiS, respectively. Note that the nickel sulphide component in the nanohybrid was recorded as NiSx because other phases except for NiS may exist. EDX spectrum suggests the existence of Cd, Ni, and S elements in CdS/NiSx-5% (Fig. S2a, ESI†). X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was carried out to further analyze the chemical composition of the sample. As presented in Fig. 3f–h and S3 (ESI†), both the survey spectrum and core level spectra clearly indicate the presence of Cd, Ni, and S in CdS/NiSx-5%. These results suggest that the Cd(II)–Ni(II)-(4,4′-bpy) coordination polymer is successfully converted to a CdS/NiSx heterostructured nanohybrid material. The obtained dispersion has a good stability over 24 h with a zeta potential of about −32.5 mV (Fig. S2b, ESI†).
 Fig. 3  (a,b) TEM images, (c) XRD pattern, (d,e) HRTEM images, and XPS spectrum of (f) Cd 3d, (g) Ni 2p, and (h) S 2p of CdS/NiSx-5% nanohybrid. 
In order to reveal the conversion mechanism from the coordination polymer precursor to a heterostructured nanohybrid, time-dependent experiments were carried out through characterizing the intermediates collected at different time intervals. After the addition of excess Na2S to the dispersion of Cd(II)–Ni(II)-(4,4′-bpy), the colour of the dispersion changed rapidly from white to light yellow, suggesting the fast reaction between S2− anions and the coordination polymer precursor. Fig. 4a–c and d–f show the typical SEM and TEM images of the intermediates obtained at different reaction durations. At a shorter reaction time, such as 3 min, the metal centers (Cd2+ and Ni2+) in the outer region of the coordination polymer are partially reacted with the S2− anions, in situ generating CdS and NiSx nanoparticles, while the interior remains intact. Compared with the precursor with a smooth surface, the surface of the intermediate sample obtained at 3 min becomes slightly rough owing to the formation of inorganic nanocrystals on the surface (Fig. 4a and d). The XRD pattern indicates that the composition of this intermediate is mainly the coordination polymer, with no obvious diffraction peaks from CdS or NiSx observable (Fig. 3g). With an increased reaction time to 10 min, the surface of the intermediate sample becomes much rougher due to a larger extent of the reaction of Cd2+ and Ni2+ with the S2− anions (Fig. 4b and e). With a further increase of the reaction time to 50 min, the coordination polymer can be completely converted (Fig. 4c and f). The XRD pattern also indicates the absence of the polymer precursor. The dynamic process can be further confirmed by the EDX analysis results and UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectra (Fig. S4, ESI† and Fig. 4h). Recent reports on nucleotide passivated nanocrystals have shown that the pyridinic nitrogen ademine binds to the metal ions of inorganic nanocrystals to restrict their growth to large nanoparticles.29,30 Since 4,4′-bpy molecules cannot dissolve in water at room temperature, the complete removal of 4,4′-bpy ligands from the coordination polymers is a slow process. The presence of 4,4′-bpy molecules in the precursor, which act as the capping ligand, can effectively restrict the growth of the as-formed inorganic nanocrystals (CdS and NiSx) to large nanoparticles. In contrast, when the transformation reaction was carried out at an elevated hydrothermal temperature (e.g., 160 °C), the coordination polymers are transformed into CdS/NiSx nanocomposites with particle sizes around 20–30 nm due to the rapid removal of 4,4′-bpy molecules and the Ostwald ripening of the nanoparticles at higher temperatures (Fig. S5, ESI†). The original plate-like morphology is also not retained. These results suggest that the mechanism for the transformation of the coordination polymer into a heterostructured material involves a self-template-directed reaction with S2− anions (Fig. 4i). At the beginning, when S2− anions are introduced into the dispersion of Cd(II)–Ni(II)-(4,4′-bpy) coordination polymers, the outer part of the precursor partially reacts with S2− anions to form CdS and NiSx nanoparticles owing to their low solubility product constants. These in situ generated nanoparticles are stabilized by the 4,4′-bpy molecules that remained in the solid structure. The as-formed CdS/NiSx layers at the outer part of the coordination polymer play a key role in the preservation of the macroscopic shape of the precursor. Moreover, the porous structure enables the inward diffusion of S2− anions and the subsequent reaction with Cd2+ and Ni2+ species in the interior of the coordination polymer. Finally, the remaining Cd2+ and Ni2+ cations in the precursor are completely converted to ultra-small CdS and NiSx nanoparticles, which are strongly interconnected with each other, forming a CdS/NiSx heterostructured nanohybrid material.
 Fig. 4  (a–c) SEM images and (d–f) TEM images of the intermediates collected at different reaction times: (a,d) 3 min, (b,e) 10 min, (Fi,f) 50 min. (g) XRD patterns and (h) UV-visible absorption spectra of the intermediates. (i) Schematic illustration of the conversion process from the coordination polymer to CdS/NiSx nanohybrid. 
Impressively, it was found that the NiSx content in the resultant CdS/NiSx heterostructured nanohybrids can be easily adjusted by tuning the Cd/Ni molar ratio in the polymer precursors. Based on various Cd(II)–Ni(II)-(4,4′-bpy) coordination polymers with different Cd/Ni molar ratios, a series of CdS/NiSx nanohybrids with different NiSx contents (e.g., 1, 3, 5, 7, 10 mol%) can be obtained (Fig. S6, 7 and Table S1, ESI†). Furthermore, our method can also be extended to synthesize other heterostructured materials with different metal types. For example, two-dimensional plate-like Cd(II)–Co(II)-(4,4′-bpy) coordination polymers can be successfully converted to a porous CdS/CoSx hybrid nanostructure via a similar sulfidation reaction, which has been confirmed by SEM, TEM, EDX, as well as XRD analysis (Fig. S8, ESI†).
The photocatalytic H2 evolution activity of the as-obtained CdS/NiSx heterostructured nanohybrid photocatalysts was evaluated under visible light irradiation (λ > 420 nm) using ethanol as the hole scavenger. For comparison, CdS alone was also synthesized using the Cd(II)-(4,4′-bpy) coordination polymer precursor. UV-Vis diffusion reflectance spectra (Fig. 5a) show that the as-obtained CdS/NiSx-5% nanohybrid material exhibits an enhanced absorption in the visible-light region compared to the CdS alone. Fig. 5b summarizes the H2 evolution activities of CdS and various CdS/NiSx nanohybrid photocatalysts with different NiSx contents. Obviously, the CdS sample shows the lowest photocatalytic activity which should be due to the rapid recombination of photogenerated electrons and holes, while all the CdS/NiSx photocatalysts show enhanced activities with the amount of H2 evolution steadily increasing with the irradiation time. Among them, the CdS/NiSx-5% sample exhibits the highest activity. Control experiments indicated that light, the photocatalyst (CdS/NiSx-5% sample), and the sacrificial agent (ethanol) in this system are all essential for efficient H2 evolution (Fig. S9, ESI†). The H2 evolution activity over CdS/NiSx-5% photocatalyst is more than 2 times of that of the mechanically mixed sample containing CdS and NiSx with a similar molar ratio (Fig. S9, ESI†). The amount of H2 generated over CdS/NiSx-5% photocatalyst reaches around 295 μmol after 5 h of the photocatalytic reaction (Fig. 5b), which is also higher than that of the CdS/CoSx-5% photocatalyst (Fig. S10, ESI†). The apparent quantum efficiency (QE) at 420 nm for photocatalytic H2 generation over the CdS/NiSx-5% sample was measured to be 16.8%. Fig. 5c illustrates the reusability of the CdS/NiSx-5% photocatalyst and shows that about 75% of the catalytic activity still remains after three successive runs. The long-term robustness of the CdS/NiSx-5% photocatalyst was evaluated and is displayed in Fig. 5d. After 55 h irradiation, over 2 mmol H2 was generated with a turnover number (TON) of over 5800 (based on NiSx cocatalyst) was achieved. After the long-term stability test, the CdS/NiSx-5% photocatalyst was collected and characterized using SEM, EDX and XRD analyses, demonstrating that the composition and the structure of the photocatalysts are well retained (Fig. S11, ESI†).
 Fig. 5  (a) UV-visible absorption spectra of CdS and CdS/NiSx-5% nanohybrids. (b) Time-dependent photocatalytic H2 evolution over CdS and various CdS/NiSx nanohybrid photocatalysts. (c) Reusability test of photocatalytic H2 evolution over CdS/NiSx-5% nanohybrid photocatalyst. (d) Long-term stability test of photocatalytic H2 evolution over CdS/NiSx-5% nanohybrid photocatalyst. 
The proposed mechanism of the CdS/NiSx nanohybrids for photocatalytic H2 evolution is illustrated in Fig. 6a. In these CdS/NiSx nanohybrid photocatalysts, the CdS component functions as the light-absorber. When the CdS/NiSx nanohybrids are illuminated by visible light, the electrons at the valence band (VB) of CdS can be excited to the conduction band (CB), leaving holes in the VB. The photoexcited electrons in the CB of the CdS nanoparticles can further transfer to NiSx nanoparticles due to the formation of heterojunction between CdS and NiSx nanoparticles, which function as the cocatalyst for the reduction of H2O (or H+) to produce H2, while the holes in the VB of CdS are mainly consumed by the ethanol sacrificial regent. It is believed that the formation of heterojunctions between CdS and NiSx nanoparticles within the nanohybrids could effectively improve the separation efficiency of photogenerated electrons and holes. Furthermore, the ultrasmall size of the CdS and NiSx nanoparticles could effectively shorten the distance of the charge transport. As mentioned above, the content of NiSx in the CdS/NiSx hybrids also influences the photocatalytic activity with the optimal NiSx content determined to be 5 mol%. When the NiSx content is lower than 5%, the increase of NiSx would lead to more heterojunctions, which results in the improvement of charge separation efficiency. However, further increasing the content of NiSx to a higher percentage (e.g., 7%, 10%) will affect the light absorption by the CdS component and thus reduce the photocatalytic activity.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of visible-light driven H2 evolution process over the CdS/NiSx heterostructured nanohybrid photocatalysts. (b) The transient photocurrent response of CdS alone and CdS/NiSx-5% in 0.5 M Na2SO4 aqueous solution under visible-light irradiation at 0.6 V (vs. Ag/AgCl). (c) Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) Nyquist plots of CdS and CdS/NiSx-5% nanohybrid photocatalysts under dark and light conditions. 
To provide additional evidence for the above proposed mechanism, photoelectrochemical measurement was carried out to study the excitation and transfer of photogenerated charge carriers in the CdS/NiSx nanohybrids system. Fig. 6b displays the transient photocurrent responses of CdS and CdS/NiSx-5% recorded for several on–off cycles under visible-light irradiation. The CdS/NiSx-5% nanohybrid-decorated electrode shows a higher photocurrent intensity than that of the CdS-decorated electrode, suggesting a lower electron–hole recombination. We further carried out the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurement. As shown in Fig. 6c, the arc radius of the EIS Nyquist plot of CdS/NiSx-5% is smaller than that of the CdS sample, indicating a faster interfacial electron transfer.31 The better separation efficiency of photogenerated electrons and holes in the CdS/NiSx-5% photocatalyst can be further confirmed by its lower intensity in photoluminescence (PL) emission spectrum in comparison to that of CdS (Fig. S12, ESI†).
4. Conclusions
In summary, we have developed a facile self-template-directed strategy for synthesizing CdS/NiSx heterostructured nanohybrids by using Cd(II)–Ni(II)-(4,4′-bpy) coordination polymers as both the template and precursor. The synthetic strategy can realize the assembly of ultrasmall CdS and NiSx nanoparticles into a hybrid material which integrates light harvesting, charge separation and catalytic functions for visible light-driven H2 generation. The formation of hetero-junctions between NiSx and CdS nanoparticles in the CdS/NiSx nanohybrids is believed to facilitate the separation of photogenerated electrons and holes and thus enhance the photocatalytic efficiency. The composition of the final CdS/NiSx nanohybrids could be controlled by adjusting the molar ratio of Cd2+:Ni2+ in the coordination polymer precursors. Benefiting from their desirable composition and structure, these CdS/NiSx nanohybrids exhibit high activity and good stability for visible light-driven H2 evolution from water by using ethanol as the hole scavenger. Moreover, this self-template-directed strategy can be easily extended to the preparation of other nanohybrids (e.g., CdS/CoSx), thus opening new opportunities for the development of highly efficient heterostructured photocatalysts for future clean energy applications.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the financial support of the Singapore National Research Foundation (NRF) through the Singapore-Berkeley Research Initiative for Sustainable Energy (SinBeRISE) and the Cambridge Centre for Carbon Reduction in Chemical Technology (C4T) CREATE Programmes.
Notes and references

  (a) J. Liu, Y. Liu, N. Liu, Y. Han, X. Zhang, H. Huang, Y. Lifshitz, S.-T. Lee, J. Zhong and Z. Kang, Science, 2015, 347, 970 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) J. H. Montoya, L. C. Seitz, P. Chakthranont, A. Vojvodic, T. F. Jaramillo and J. K. Norskov, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 70 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (c) X. Li, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 2603 RSC ; 
  (d) T. Hisatomi, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7520 RSC .

  (a) Y. Xu, M. Kraft and R. Xu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 3039 RSC ; 
  (b) X. Li, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 2603 RSC ; 
  (c) L. Yuan, C. Han, M.-Q. Yang and Y.-J. Xu, Int. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2016, 35, 1 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) Y. Xu, Y. Huang and B. Zhang, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2016, 3, 591 RSC ; 
  (b) Q. Li, X. Li, S. Wageh, A. A. Al-Ghamdi and J. Yu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500010 CrossRef ; 
  (c) K. Zhang and L. Guo, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2013, 3, 1672 RSC .

  (a) Y. Qu and X. Duan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2568 RSC ; 
  (b) S. Liu, C. Han, Z.-R. Tang and Y.-J. Xu, Mater. Horiz., 2016, 3, 270 RSC .

  (a) A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253 RSC ; 
  (b) N. Zhang, M.-Q. Yang, S. Liu, Y. Sun and Y.-J. Xu, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 10307 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) S. Liu, Z.-R. Tang, Y. Sun, J. C. Colmenares and Y.-J. Xu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 5053 RSC .

  (a) X. Li, J. Yu, J. Low, Y. Fang, J. Xiao and X. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 2485 RSC ; 
  (b) M.-Q. Yang, C. Han and Y.-J. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 27234 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, Y. Wang, Z. Wang, Z. Zhong and R. Xu, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 7631 RSC .
J. Zhang, S. Z. Qiao, L. Qi and J. Yu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 12088 RSC .
Z. Chen, P. Sun, B. Fan, Z. Zhang and X. Fang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 7801 CAS .
C. Kong, S. Min and G. Lu, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 2763 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yin, Y.-P. Yuan, S.-W. Cao, Z. Zhang and C. Xue, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 6127 RSC .
J. Zhang, L. Qi, J. Ran, J. Yu and S. Z. Qiao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301925 CrossRef .
N. Li, B. Zhou, P. Guo, J. Zhou and D. Jing, Int. J. Hydrogen
Energy, 2013, 38, 11268 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-P. Yuan, S.-W. Cao, L.-S. Yin, L. Xu and C. Xue, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 7218 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, B. Tian, F. Chen and J. Zhang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 17060 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhong, J. Yuan, J. Wen, X. Li, Y. Xu, W. Liu, S. Zhang and Y. Fang, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 18260 RSC .
X. Liu, X. Liang, P. Wang, B. Huang, X. Qin, X. Zhang and Y. Dai, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 203, 282 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu and R. Xu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 351, 779 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) S. Kitagawa, R. Kitaura and S. Noro, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 2334 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) H. Zhang, G. Liu, L. Shi, H. Liu, T. Wang and J. Ye, Nano Energy, 2016, 22, 149 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, S. Zhuo, Y. Liang, X. Han and B. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 9055 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. P. Zhu, T. Y. Ma, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 1324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hanifehpour, B. Mirtamizdoust, M. Hatami, B. Khomami and S. W. Joo, J. Mol. Struct., 2015, 1091, 43 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. S. Fard, P. Hayati, A. Firoozadeh and J. Janczak, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2017, 35, 502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-J. Huang, Y.-Q. Zheng, H.-L. Zhu and J.-J. Wang, J. Solid State Chem., 2016, 239, 274 CrossRef CAS .
H. Fan, D. Fu, T. Shu, M. Luo, F. Zhu, Y. Liu, S. Yue and M. Zheng, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 224, 80 CrossRef CAS .
P. D. Tran, T. V. Tran, M. Orio, S. Torelli, Q. D. Truong, K. Nayuki, Y. Sasaki, S. Y. Chiam, R. Yi and I. Honma, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 640 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Fujita, Y. J. Kwon, S. Washizu and K. Ogura, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1994, 116, 1151 CrossRef CAS .
O. Ohmori and M. Fujita, Chem. Commun., 2004, 1586 RSC .
S. Saha, G. Das, J. Thote and R. Banerjee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 14845 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Berti and G. A. Burley, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 81 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-Q. Yang, C. Han, N. Zhang and Y.-J. Xu, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 18062 RSC .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Additional characterization and spectra. See DOI: 10.1039/c7dt00842bThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the preparation process of CdS/NiSx nanohybrids.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 2  (a) SEM image and (b) TEM image of the Cd(II)–Ni(II)-(4,4′-bpy)-5% coordination polymer. (c,d) SEM images of the as-converted CdS/NiSx-5% nanohybrid.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a,b) TEM images, (c) XRD pattern, (d,e) HRTEM images, and XPS spectrum of (f) Cd 3d, (g) Ni 2p, and (h) S 2p of CdS/NiSx-5% nanohybrid.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a–c) SEM images and (d–f) TEM images of the intermediates collected at different reaction times: (a,d) 3 min, (b,e) 10 min, (Fi,f) 50 min. (g) XRD patterns and (h) UV-visible absorption spectra of the intermediates. (i) Schematic illustration of the conversion process from the coordination polymer to CdS/NiSx nanohybrid.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) UV-visible absorption spectra of CdS and CdS/NiSx-5% nanohybrids. (b) Time-dependent photocatalytic H2 evolution over CdS and various CdS/NiSx nanohybrid photocatalysts. (c) Reusability test of photocatalytic H2 evolution over CdS/NiSx-5% nanohybrid photocatalyst. (d) Long-term stability test of photocatalytic H2 evolution over CdS/NiSx-5% nanohybrid photocatalyst.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of visible-light driven H2 evolution process over the CdS/NiSx heterostructured nanohybrid photocatalysts. (b) The transient photocurrent response of CdS alone and CdS/NiSx-5% in 0.5 M Na2SO4 aqueous solution under visible-light irradiation at 0.6 V (vs. Ag/AgCl). (c) Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) Nyquist plots of CdS and CdS/NiSx-5% nanohybrid photocatalysts under dark and light conditions.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Additional characterization and spectra. See DOI: 10.1039/c7dt00842b

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
