Assessing the effects of increasing conjugation length on exciton diffusion: from small molecules to the polymeric limit   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1CP01263K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1CP01263K
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2021, 23, 15635-15644Assessing the effects of increasing conjugation length on exciton diffusion: from small molecules to the polymeric limit†

        
          
            Leonardo Evaristo 
            de Sousa
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Laura Simonassi Raso 
            de Paiva
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Demétrio Antônio 
            da Silva Filho
          
        
      *bcd, 
      
        
          
            Gjergji 
            Sini
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Pedro Henrique 
            de Oliveira Neto
          
        
      b
aDepartment of Energy Conversion and Storage, Technical University of Denmark, Anker Engelunds Vej 301, 2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
bInstitute of Physics, University of Brasilia, 70919-970, Brasilia, Brazil. E-mail: dasf@unb.br
cLaboratoire de Physicochimie des Polymères et des Interfaces, EA 2528, CY Cergy Paris Université, 5 mail Gay-Lussac, 95031, Cergy-Pontoise Cedex, France
dInstitute for Advanced Studies, CY Cergy Paris Université, 1 rue Descartes, 95000, Neuville-sur-Oise, France
Received 
      22nd March 2021
    , Accepted 6th July 2021First published on 9th July 2021AbstractOrganic solar cells (OSC) generally contain long-chain π-conjugated polymers as donor materials, but, more recently, small-molecule donors have also attracted considerable attention. The nature of these compounds is of crucial importance concerning the various processes that determine device performance, among which singlet exciton diffusion is one of the most relevant. The efficiency of the diffusion mechanism depends on several aspects, from system morphology to electronic structure properties, which vary importantly with molecular size. In this work, we investigated the effects of conjugation length on the exciton diffusion length through electronic structure calculations and an exciton diffusion model. By applying extrapolation procedures to thiophene and phenylene vinylene oligomer series, we investigate their electronic and optical properties from the small-molecule point of view to the polymeric limit. Several properties are calculated as a function of oligomer size, including transition energies, absorption and emission spectra, reorganization energies, exciton coupling and Förster radii. Finally, an exciton diffusion model is used to estimate diffusion lengths as a function of oligomer size and for the polymeric limit showing agreement with experimental data. Results also show that longer conjugation lengths correlate with longer exciton diffusion lengths in spite of also being associated with shorter exciton lifetimes.
1 Introduction
The field of organic photovoltaics is the subject of extensive research, with efforts to increase device efficiency and stability being undergone to bring commercial viability to this technology.1–7 The working of organic photovoltaic devices relies on several physical processes, starting with light absorption. Such absorption generates singlet excitons, bound electron–hole pairs that must diffuse through the material until they reach donor–acceptor interfaces, where a difference between energy levels from the two materials promotes the dissociation of excitons into charge transfer states that eventually separate into free charges.8
Ever since the beginning of research in organic photovoltaics, polymer solar cells (PSC) have been at the forefront of efforts as they present several advantages, including mechanical flexibility, transparency, and the utilization of solution processes in their fabrication. Besides, the long conjugation lengths of these polymers resulted in high absorption coefficients, which has enabled the implementation of thin-film architectures.1,9 Recently, however, all-small molecule (SM) solar cells have gained attention due to several advantages when compared to polymers, such as ease of purification, well-defined chemical structure, less batch-to-batch variations in photovoltaic performances and with increasing power conversion efficiencies being reported.10–12
However, despite the aforementioned advantages of SM donors as compared to polymer ones, there is little discussion in the literature concerning the question of how the mechanisms involved in the working of organic solar cells (OSCs) evolve when going from a polymeric regime to a small-molecule one. This is particularly the case when considering exciton diffusion, as the efficiency of this process constitutes one of the main factors behind device performance, putting constraints on the maximum amount of generated charges.13 Behind the mechanism of exciton diffusion, there are several features ranging from morphology to electronic structure properties14 that determine its efficiency. Exciton lifetimes, for instance, are often deemed a limiting factor to OSCs performance.15 They are, in turn, dependent on molecular size through the magnitude of transition dipole moments and also on the presence of non-radiative deexcitation pathways. It can be seen, thus, that exciton behavior is expected to change considerably between polymers and small molecules.
From an electronic structure perspective, the study of polymer properties employing Density Functional Theory (DFT) is not straightforward, as the vast number of atoms in polymeric chains makes direct calculations impossible. This issue can be circumvented by studying the corresponding oligomer series and applying some extrapolation procedures that allow the estimation of specific polymer properties from the oligomer values.16–19 Studies in this sense, however, are most often restricted to the behavior of optical properties in the polymeric limit leaving several other vital properties undetermined.
In this work, we study the oligomer series and the corresponding polymeric limit for polythiophene and p-phenylene vinylene (PPV), two very commonly employed polymers in organic electronics.20,21 Apart from the typical evaluation of transition energies, we determine the evolution of several physical features relevant to the process of exciton diffusion, such as molecular reorganization energies and radiative lifetimes. Absorption and photoluminescence spectra simulations are performed taking into consideration the effects of molecular vibrations, allowing for the prediction of the corresponding spectra in the polymeric limit. Results are used in conjunction with an exciton diffusion model to provide estimates of exciton diffusion length for the oligomer series and at the polymeric limit.
2 Methods
Geometry optimizations and normal mode analyses of each oligomer were performed for the S0 and S1 states using DFT and time-dependent DFT (TD-DFT), respectively. All calculations were performed at both the B3LYP/6-31G(d,p) and CAM-B3LYP/6-31G(d,p) levels of theory using the Gaussian 09 software.22 Even though it is known that, in general, TD-DFT has a tendency to underestimate transition energies,16 the B3LYP functional has been shown to correctly reproduce the optical properties of conjugated polymer films and has been used for this purpose on several works.17,19,23,24 Similarly, range-separated functionals such as CAM-B3LYP have also been used to provide better description for the electronic properties of large molecular systems with delocalized π-conjugation.25,26
Absorption cross-sections (σ(E)) and differential emission rates (I(E)) were obtained as a function of excitation energy by means of spectra simulations. In order for vibronic effects to be taken into account explicitly in spectrum simulations, it is necessary to invoke the Franck–Condon approximation or higher order expansions of the transition dipole moment such as the Herzberg–Teler approximation. However, these approximations break down when a molecule's geometry undergoes significant modification upon excitation.27–29 This is precisely what happens with most of the oligomers studied here, which mostly change from a torsioned to a planar geometry when transitioning from S0 to S1. To circumvent this issue, we make use of the nuclear ensemble method.30 In this method, the distribution for a set of harmonic oscillators at 300 K is used for each of the molecule's normal modes, each one contributing to some deformation of the molecule's equilibrium geometry. A sample of M = 500 geometries is thus obtained for each oligomer for both S0 and S1 states. These geometries serve as input to single point TD-DFT calculations that provide transition energies (ΔE) and oscillator strengths (f). Results are broadened by Gaussian curves G with a standard deviation δ = 0.025 eV, which amounts to the thermal energy at 300 K. Once all calculations are performed, results are averaged over to produce the spectra according to the following expressions (1)and (2)in which e is the electron's charge, m is its mass, c is the speed of light and ε0 the vacuum permittivity. Importantly, the oscillator strengths relate to transition dipole moments μ as (3)
A comparison between different methods for spectrum simulation is shown in the ESI,† file for bithiophene (Fig. SI-1). The different methods (nuclear ensemble, Franck–Condon and vertical gradient approximations) are shown to produce similar results and agree well with experimental data.31 However, when applied to the 8 unit thiophene oligomer, the Franck–Condon approximation breaks down and the resulting spectrum manages only to reproduce peak energies but not vibrational contributions. The same happens with the spectrum calculated with the vertical gradient approximation. These results, shown in Fig. SI-2 (ESI†), justify the use of the nuclear ensemble method for spectrum simulations.
3 Results and discussion
To assess the impact of increasing the conjugation length in π-conjugated molecules on the mechanism of exciton diffusion, we start by looking at the evolution of the absorption and photoluminescence energies as a function of the oligomer size. Fig. 1 shows the decrease of the S0 → S1 and S1 → S0 transition energies calculated with both functionals for the oligothiophenes (Fig. 1a and c) and oligo(p-phenylene vinylenes) (OPVs) (Fig. 1b and d) as a function of 1/N, N being the number of double bonds in each oligomer. The observed red shift of the excitation energies is a well known feature of increasing conjugation lengths. This phenomenon has been modelled by Kuhn by treating the conjugated polymer as a system of classical coupled harmonic oscillators with force constants k′ and k0 corresponding to single and double bonds, respectively. In Kuhn's model, the transition energies as a function of N are given by32 (4)
 Fig. 1  S0 → S1 and S1 → S0 transition energies as a function of the inverse number of double bonds N for the thiophene (a and c) and phenylene vinylene (b and d) oligomer series using the B3LYP (upper panel) and CAM-B3LYP (lower panel) functionals. The curves correspond to the Kuhn fits from which transition energies at the polymeric limit are obtained. 
This expression may then be used to obtain transition energies in the polymeric limit (N → ∞) by using the terms E0 and k′/k0 as fitting parameters. This extrapolation procedure is known to produce very accurate results16,17 and its application to polythiophene and PPV can also be seen in Fig. 1, as the curves that go through the data points. The fitting is performed for both S0 → S1 and S1 → S0 transition energies and results can be seen to change significantly with functional choice. The B3LYP calculations predict an absorption energy of 1.96 eV for polythiophene and 2.17 eV for PPV, whereas for CAM-B3LYP these values change to 2.83 eV and 3.00 eV. The corresponding emission energies at the polymeric limit are evaluated at 1.68 eV and 1.89 eV with B3LYP and 2.11 eV and 2.51 eV with CAM-B3LYP. These results indicate that the CAM-B3LYP functional provides better excitation energies, as its results for PPV compare well with results obtained from high-level ab initio calculations.33
The computation of the progression of both S0 → S1 and S1 → S0 transition energies allows us to investigate further the behavior of another feature relevant to exciton behavior: the Stokes' shift. This feature is calculated as the energy difference between absorption and emission peaks. This shift is due to molecular relaxation that takes place after photoexcitation and, as such, is associated with the excited state reorganization energy (λ). To make this connection explicit, an approximation often made considers the Stokes' shift as twice the reorganization energy.34 Using this approximation, Fig. SI-10 and SI-11 in the ESI,† file show that the reorganization energies for both oligomer series decrease continuously as the number of repeating units grows larger. Focusing on B3LYP results, we notice that whereas the oligothiophene series presents a seemingly exponential decay in reorganization energies, dropping from 0.32 eV to a nearly constant value of 0.18 eV, the OPV series does not change as much throughout the entire range investigated here. It follows a less steep decay, with λ changing from 0.22 eV to 0.16 eV. The CAM-B3LYP functional, however, predicts higher reorganization energies that range from 0.45 eV to 0.36 eV for the oligothiphenes and 0.35 eV to 0.24 eV for the OPVs. Using the transition energies provided by the Kuhn fit with B3LYP leads to a prediction of λ = 0.14 eV in the polymeric limit for both polymers, which would also set a limiting value of 0.28 eV for their Stokes' shift, in agreement with results obtained for MEH-PPV.35 However, with the CAM-B3LYP results we obtain λ = 0.36 eV and λ = 0.25 eV for oligothiophenes and OPVs, respectively, which appears to overestimate the reorganization energy of both polymers.
The observed evolution of transition energies affects the absorption and emission spectra, which show a progressive red shift. This can be seen in Fig. 2a, which presents the simulated absorption spectra of the oligothiophene series calculated with the B3LYP functional. These spectra are computed by averaging contributions from hundreds of molecular geometries produced by molecular vibrations. This procedure results in the broadening of the spectra according to the manner in which the molecular normal modes affect transition energies. The corresponding spectra for OPVs, along with all photoluminescence spectra as well as the spectra calculated with CAM-B3LYP, can be found in the ESI file† (Fig. SI-3 through 9). The inset in Fig. 2a shows the same absorption spectra shifted to the S0 → S1 transition energy in the polymeric limit. It is seen that even though the number of normal modes increases with more repeating units, the overall broadness of the spectra seems to remain the same, with an almost constant standard deviation of 0.19 eV. A similar behavior is found for all spectra, though CAM-B3LYP derived spectra present larger average standard deviations. For detailed results for all cases, see Table SI-1 (ESI†).
 Fig. 2  (a) Absorption cross-section for the thiophene oligomer series obtained with B3LYP. Inset shows the same spectra shifted to the polymeric absorption peak. (b) Radiative lifetimes as a function of repeating units for both oligomer series. Curves correspond to exponential fits to the B3LYP data. 
Total emission rates (kr) and radiative lifetimes (τ) can be obtained from the differential emission rates as (5)
As the differential emission rates grow larger in intensity for a higher number of repeating units, the total emission rates, integrated over all frequencies, rise accordingly, pushing radiative lifetimes to continuously lower values, as shown in Fig. 2b for B3LYP calculations. For the oligothiophene series, lifetimes drop from 2.3 ns to 1.1 ns from 2 to 8 repeating units, whereas in the OPV series lifetimes range from 0.8 ns to 0.6 ns. Similar results are obtained with CAM-B3LYP calculations (Fig. SI-12, ESI†). The observed progression in radiative lifetimes as a function of repeating units is suggestive of an exponential decay behavior, particularly so for the oligothiophenes. The data can be fitted with a function τ = τpexp(N0/N), where N is the number of repeating units, N0 is a characteristic number, and τp is the radiative lifetime in the polymeric limit. This latter parameter is found to be 0.9 ns for polythiophene and 0.5 ns for PPV. These results are in agreement with experimental data.36–38
Apart from the red shift, another feature of the spectra progression is the correlation between the number of repeating units and both the absorption cross-section and the differential emission rate. The main dependence the intensity of these two features possesses is with respect to the transition dipole moments (μ), with both spectra being proportional to the square of μ (see eqn (1)–(3)). The evolution of the transition dipole moments from the B3LYP calculations on both S0 and S1 geometries is shown in Fig. 3 for the two oligomer series. Results for S0 and S1 states are very similar, with the differences being due to changes in equilibrium geometries in the two electronic states. The excited state produces planar equilibrium geometries, whereas the ground state is characterized by bent chains. Regardless of the oligomer series, the progression suggests a concave functional relationship between the transition dipole moment and the number of repeating units. It has been observed that oscillator strengths scale linearly with oligomer size at least for small oligomers16 which, by virtue of eqn (3), implies that transition dipole moments would follow a square root relationship with respect to chain length. Since the transition dipole moments have an inverse relationship with respect to radiative lifetimes (as it can be seen from eqn (2) and (5)), a square root scaling for dipole moments would result, in the polymer limit, in a zero radiative lifetime, which is at odds with the results shown in Fig. 2b. To preserve the relationship between dipole moments and radiative lifetimes, the data in Fig. 3 was fit with the reciprocal of the function used to fit the lifetimes. The curves in Fig. 3 correspond to these fits to the data, which predict transition dipole moments in the polymeric limit of 10.8 a.u. (12.5 a.u.) and 12.9 a.u. (14.4 a.u.) for polythiophene and PPV in the S0 (S1) geometries, respectively. The CAM-B3LYP calculations produce similar results, which can be seen in Fig. SI-13 (ESI†). For this functional, the fitting procedure predicts transition dipole moments of 9.39 a.u. (10.79 a.u.) and 12.79 a.u. (13.17 a.u.) for polythiophene and PPV in the S0 (S1) state.
 Fig. 3  Transition dipole moments obtained with B3LYP from the S0 and S1 states as a function of the number of repeating units for the thiophene (a) and phenylene vinylene (b) oligomer series. Curves correspond to fits to the data. 
The progressive reduction in the Stokes' shift along with the rise in transition dipole moments indicate that there should be an increase in the overlap integral between the absorption and photoluminescence spectra as the number of repeating units becomes larger. The existence of such overlap is a necessary condition for the Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET) process to take place.39,40 The FRET mechanism is responsible for the diffusion of singlet excitons and is characterized by an inverse sixth power dependence on intermolecular distances (r). The rate of exciton transfers due to FRET is given by (6)where τ is the exciton's radiative lifetime, RF is the Förster radius, and the αμ term constitutes a correction term for small distances. This correction is necessary, as the above expression is derived from the point dipole approximation. As such, when molecular sizes become as large or larger than intermolecular distances, the approximation breaks.41–45 Fortunately, it has been shown that this issue may be overcome by adding to the intermolecular distance r a term corresponding to a measure of molecular conjugation length.46 Following previous works, we take this measure as being proportional to the transition dipole moment, with α = 1.15e−1 being the proportionality constant.15 The appropriateness of this measure is attested by the correlation between μ and molecular sizes that has been established in Fig. 3.
The Förster radius is a characteristic distance at which the probability of exciton transfer equals that of exciton recombination. This feature is, thus, a measure of the efficiency of exciton diffusion for a given molecule and depends on its electronic structure. It may be evaluated as47 (7)where c is the speed of light, and κ2 is an orientation factor (averaged to 2/3 for randomly oriented molecules). The integral gives the overlap between the absorption (σ(ω)) and emission (I(ω)) spectra and is weighed by the ω−4 term. This feature, associated with both the reduction in Stokes' shift and progressive red shift of the spectra results in Förster radii that grow larger as the number of repeating units increases.
As the exciton transfer rates correlate with the Förster radius, these results suggest that exciton diffusion length should increase monotonically with the number of repeating units until the polymeric limit is reached. This observation goes against results from previous works whose calculations for the interchain exciton coupling between increasingly larger oligomers eventually reaches a maximum value before dropping to zero in the polymer limit.48,49 This behavior would imply that for polymers, exciton transport becomes predominantly intrachain, but this is not the observed behavior experimentally. Such mismatch is explained in terms of strong electron–phonon coupling and energetic disorder effects that may lead to the localization of excitation energy in shorter segments of the polymer chain.49
Within our corrected point dipole approximation, the exciton coupling (V) is given by (8)in which μd and μa are the donor and acceptor transition dipole moments. The behavior of the coupling in the polymeric limit depends then on how the transition dipole moments evolve with chain length. If we consider, as mentioned above, that dipole moments scale as a square root with chain lengths and if we further assume that this behavior remains true for all chain lengths, then in the polymeric limit the coupling will vanish after having reached a maximum value (see Fig. 4a and b). We attribute this failure in description to the unphysical asymptotic behavior of the transition dipole moments as given by this square root dependence. Indeed, when the exponential dependence used in Fig. 3 is applied to eqn (8), it results in coupling values that increase with chain length, reach a maximum and finally are reduced to a constant value consistent with the finite asymptotic behavior of the dipole moments, as also shown in Fig. 4a and b for both oligomer series (and in Fig. SI-14 for CAM-B3LYP, ESI†).
 Fig. 4  Exciton coupling for (a) oligothiophenes and (b) OPVs as a function of the inverse number of repeating units using the B3LYP results along with the corrected point dipole approximation coupled to both a square root and exponential dependence for transition dipole moments. 
With these considerations in mind, we may turn to the actual Förster radii calculations. These are shown in Fig. 5a and c for B3LYP and CAM-B3LYP functionals, respectively. Both results show the correlation between radius and chain length, with the CAM-B3LYP calculations predicting lower Förster radii than its B3LYP counterparts, as well as displaying a more concave relationship. This can be explained by the larger Stokes shift observed in the CAM-B3LYP results, which indicate that spectral overlap should be reduced. Employing the transition dipole moments in the polymeric limit in association with the observed constant standard deviation of the spectra, we may produce the spectra in the polymeric limit, which are shown in the ESI,† file for both functionals (Fig. SI-15–18). Using them to calculate the Förster radii results in 92.0 Å for polythiophene and 97.7 Å for PPV when considering B3LYP calculations. For CAM-B3LYP these values are reduced to 65.7 Å and 78.4 Å for polythiophene and PPV, respectively.
 Fig. 5  Förster radii as a function of repeating units for both oligomer series using (a) B3LYP and (c) CAM-B3lYP functionals. Estimates of exciton diffusion length for the two oligomer series using (b) B3LYP and (d) CAM-B3LYP functionals. The colored region marks the possible diffusion lengths considering quantum yield values ranging from 0.02 to 0.08. 
In addition to Förster radii, estimating exciton diffusion lengths also require one to take into account the existence of non-radiative decay pathways for excitons, which include internal conversion and intersystem crossing. When these processes display rates knr comparable to the radiative emission rate they affect importantly the fluorescence quantum yield, defined as Φ = kr/(knr + kr) = τeff/τ, in which τ and τeff correspond to the average radiative and overall exciton lifetimes. In this sense, reductions in quantum yield are associated with decreased exciton lifetimes, which, in turn, reduce diffusion lengths.
The behavior of the quantum yield as a function of chain length has been already elucidated for both OPVs and oligothiophenes in solution.36,50 Whereas the former oligomer series displays yields that decrease with size, the latter shows the opposite behavior. These results reflect mostly the different ways by which the rates of intersystem crossing evolve with chain length in these two oligomer series and provide a clear example that there is no automatic relationship between non-radiative decay rates and conjugation length. Despite of these differences, both oligomer series present reasonably high quantum yields. In the case of oligothiophenes with 2 to 7 monomers, Φ ranges from 0.026 to 0.36 whereas, for OPVs with 3 to 7 monomers, Φ decreases from 0.62 to 0.25.
However, when it comes to exciton diffusion length, the more relevant quantum yields are those obtained in thin films, which are often found to be quite low. For P3HT, for instance, it is reported to be 0.02, and it may go as low as 0.08 for PPV.51–53 Similarly, low values have been reported for different sized oligothiophenes and OPVs in films with no clear correlation with chain length.54,55 The large difference between these yields and the corresponding values in solution can be attributed to intermolecular interactions whose quenching effect greatly outweighs those stemming from intramolecular non-radiative decay mechanism. These intermolecular phenomena include, for instance, electron transfer reactions56 and hydrogen-bond dynamical quenching.57–60
In light of all these features, we analyze the behavior of exciton diffusion length in organic thin films as a function of conjugation length. It has been shown that the one-dimensional diffusion length relates to the Förster radius (RF), average hopping distance () and quantum yield as61,62 (9)
To produce the diffusion length estimates, we consider an average intermolecular distance of 5 Å and quantum yields that range from 0.02 and 0.08. This is done in order to take into account the fact that measurements of quantum yields in films also present some variability depending on film thickness, molecular orientation with respect to the substrate, and their effective conjugation length, for example.54 As such, we cover the relevant interval that is typical for films made of these materials.
Results can be seen in Fig. 5b and d, which shows the intervals for estimated one-dimensional exciton diffusion lengths calculated for both oligomer series as a function of chain length for both functionals. As expected from the behavior of the Förster radii, diffusion lengths increase with oligomer size. Regardless of functional, this variation is particularly important in the case of oligothiophenes, which experience an order of magnitude increase in the studied range. The OPV series, on the other hand, shows a less steep rise in diffusion length due to its larger transition dipole moments, which enter the denominator of eqn (9). Importantly, the calculated diffusion lengths are seen not to be sensitive to functional choice, as results for both functionals display predicted intervals ranging from around 3–6 nm to 12–24 nm for oligothiophenes and 6–12 nm to 10–19 nm for OPVs.
It is worth noting that more generally, this upward trend in diffusion lengths may be disrupted if quantum yields in thin films are observed to decrease with oligomer size, as is the case for OPVs in solution. If this were the case, a competition would ensue between the improvements in electronic properties observed for larger oligomers and the corresponding increase in non-radiative deexcitation that could result in optimal diffusion lengths being found at intermediate oligomer sizes.
Finally, employing the values we obtained for properties in the polymeric limit, we obtain, for B#LYP calculations, estimates of exciton diffusion length in the 15–30 nm range for polythiophene and 13–27 nm for PPV. For CAM-B3LYP calculations, these estimates become 7–14 nm for both polymers. Whereas B3LYP results overestimate diffusion lengths somewhat, the values obtained from CAM-B3LYP calculations for both oligomer series are in excellent agreement with experimental data, which puts diffusion lengths in the range of 3 nm to 13 nm for P3HT films and 5 nm to 12 nm for PPV films (see ref. 45 and 63 and references therein).
4 Conclusion
In summary, we have investigated the progression of several physical features in the thiophene and phenylene vinylene oligomer series by means of DFT calculations. With the aid of extrapolation procedures, we were able to determine the values of the corresponding features at the polymeric limit. Results demonstrate a continuous redshift in both the absorption and emission transition energies, along with similar decreases in reorganization energy.
Whereas the broadness of absorption and emission spectra remains practically constant for all oligomers, the intensity of the absorption cross-sections and differential emission rates correlates with oligomer sizes. One consequence of this behavior is the decay in radiative lifetimes observed in both oligomer series. At the root of these effects, it is shown to be the progressive increase in transition dipole moments.
The dependence of transition dipole moments with respect to chain length is shown to be determinant to how the exciton coupling behaves in the polymer limit. In order for interchain exciton couplings not to vanish in the polymer limit, we show that it is necessary that dipole moments reach a finite asymptotic value, which we obtain by drawing a parallel with respect to the behavior of radiative lifetimes with chain length. In this framework, we show that from an electronic structure point of view, the efficiency of exciton diffusion, as measured by the Förster radius, increases continuously with oligomer size, peaking at the polymeric limit. This is shown to result from the combined effects of spectral redshifts, spectral overlap enlargement due to reductions in the Stokes' shift and the aforementioned increases in transition dipole moments.
Finally, we provide estimates of exciton diffusion length as a function of oligomer size and also in the polymeric limit. We show that oligothiophenes display a substantial increase in diffusion length, in contrast to a less steep variation observed in the case of OPVs. We conclude that, in general, unless a strong negative correlation between chain length and quantum yields in thin films is observed, exciton diffusion lengths should be expected to increase with conjugation length. Our results are seen to agree with experimental results, indicating that the extrapolation procedure shown here may be useful for the estimation of exciton diffusion lengths in polymers.
Data availability
The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This study was financed in part by the Coordenacao de Aperfeicoamento de Pessoal de Nivel Superior – Brasil (CAPES) – Codigo de Financiamento 001. The authors also acknowledge the support from CNPq and FAP-DF. This work received funding by the CY Initiative of Excellence (grant “Investissements dAvenir” ANR-16-IDEX-0008) and developed during a three-month stay at the CY Advanced Studies whose support is gratefully acknowledged. D. A. S. F. acknowledges the financial support from the Edital DPI-UnB No. 04/2019, from CNPq (grants 305975/2019-6, 305975/2019-6, and 420836/2018-7) and FAP-DF (grants 193.001.596/2017 and 193.001.284/2016). L. E. S. acknowledges support from a research grant (00028053) from VILLUM FONDEN.
Notes and references
G. Li, R. Zhu and Y. Yang, Polymer solar cells, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 153 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kippelen and J.-L. Brédas, Organic photovoltaics, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 251–261 RSC .
F. H. Alharbi and S. Kais, Theoretical limits of photovoltaics efficiency and possible improvements by intuitive approaches learned from photosynthesis and quantum coherence, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2015, 43, 1073–1089 CrossRef .

          M. A. Green, K. Emery, Y. Hishikawa, W. Warta and E. D. Dunlop, Solar cell efficiency tables (version 40),  2012 Search PubMed .
T. Ameri, P. Khoram, J. Min and C. J. Brabec, Organic ternary solar cells: a review, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4245–4266 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. B. Darling and F. You, The case for organic photovoltaics, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 17633–17648 RSC .
P. H. de Oliveira Neto, 
            et al., Limit of exciton diffusion in highly ordered π-conjugated systems, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 19654–19659 CrossRef CAS .
J.-L. Brédas, J. E. Norton, J. Cornil and V. Coropceanu, Molecular understanding of organic solar cells: the challenges, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1691–1699 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Lu, T. Zheng, Q. Wu, A. M. Schneider, D. Zhao and L. Yu, Recent advances in bulk heterojunction polymer solar cells, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 12666–12731 CrossRef CAS .
R.-Z. Liang, M. Babics, V. Savikhin, W. Zhang, V. M. Le Corre, S. Lopatin, Z. Kan, Y. Firdaus, S. Liu and I. McCulloch, 
            et al., Carrier transport and recombination in efficient “all-small-molecule” solar cells with the nonfullerene acceptor idtbr, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800264 CrossRef .
M. Privado, P. de la Cruz, S. Biswas, R. Singhal, G. D. Sharma and F. Langa, A non-fullerene all small molecule solar cell constructed with a diketopyrrolopyrrole-based acceptor having a power conversion efficiency higher than 9% and an energy loss of 0.54 eV, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 11714–11724 RSC .
H. Bin, J. Yao, Y. Yang, I. Angunawela, C. Sun, L. Gao, L. Ye, B. Qiu, L. Xue and C. Zhu, 
            et al., High-efficiency all-small-molecule organic solar cells based on an organic molecule donor with alkylsilyl-thienyl conjugated side chains, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706361 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Tamai, H. Ohkita, H. Benten and S. Ito, Exciton diffusion in conjugated polymers: from fundamental understanding to improvement in photovoltaic conversion efficiency, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 3417–3428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kjelstrup-Hansen, J. E. Norton, D. A. da Silva Filho, J.-L. Brédas and H.-G. Rubahn, Charge transport in oligo phenylene and phenylene–thiophene nanofibers, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 1228–1234 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Yost, E. Hontz, S. Yeganeh and T. Van, Voorhis, Triplet vs singlet energy transfer in organic semiconductors: the tortoise and the hare, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 17369–17377 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gierschner, J. Cornil and H.-J. Egelhaaf, Optical bandgaps of π-conjugated organic materials at the polymer limit: experiment and theory, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 173–191 CrossRef CAS .
J. Torras, J. Casanovas and C. Alemán, Reviewing extrapolation procedures of the electronic properties on the π-conjugated polymer limit, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2012, 116, 7571–7583 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Benatto and M. Koehler, Effects of fluorination on exciton binding energy and charge transport of π-conjugated donor polymers and the itic molecular acceptor: a theoretical study, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 6395–6406 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhu, Y. Yi, L. Chen and Z. Shuai, Exciton binding energy of electronic polymers: a first principles study, J. Theor. Comput. Chem., 2008, 7, 517–530 CrossRef CAS .

          C. Zhi and L. Dai, Flexible Energy Conversion and Storage Devices, John Wiley & Sons,  2018 Search PubMed .
U. Mehmood, A. Al-Ahmed and I. A. Hussein, Review on recent advances in polythiophene based photovoltaic devices, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 57, 550–561 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Frisch, G. Trucks, H. Schlegel, G. Scuseria, M. Robb, J. Cheeseman, G. Scalmani, V. Barone, B. Mennucci and G. Petersson, et al., Gaussian 09, revision E. 01,  2009, Gaussian, Inc., Wallingford, CT Search PubMed .
S. S. Zade and M. Bendikov, From oligomers to polymer: convergence in the HOMO-LUMO gaps of conjugated oligomers, Org. Lett., 2006, 8, 5243–5246 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Zade, N. Zamoshchik and M. Bendikov, From short conjugated oligomers to conjugated polymers. lessons from studies on long conjugated oligomers, Acc. Chem. Res., 2011, 44, 14–24 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, R. Nieman, A. J. Aquino, H. Lischka and S. Tretiak, Comparison of LC-TDDFT and adc (2) methods in computations of bright and charge transfer states in stacked oligothiophenes, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2014, 10, 3280–3289 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Fazzi, M. Barbatti and W. Thiel, Modeling ultrafast exciton deactivation in oligothiophenes via nonadiabatic dynamics, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 7787–7799 RSC .
D. Jacquemin, I. Duchemin and X. Blase, 0-0 energies using hybrid schemes: Benchmarks of Td-DFT, cis (d), adc (2), cc2, and bse/gw formalisms for 80 real-life compounds, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2015, 11, 5340–5359 CrossRef CAS .
L. E. de Sousa, L. A. Ribeiro, A. L. D. A. Fonseca and D. A. da Silva Filho, Modeling the emission spectra of organic molecules: a competition between Franck–Condon and nuclear ensemble methods, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2016, 120, 5380–5388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Bloino, M. Biczysko, F. Santoro and V. Barone, General approach to compute vibrationally resolved one-photon electronic spectra, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2010, 6, 1256–1274 CrossRef CAS .
R. Crespo-Otero and M. Barbatti, Spectrum simulation and decomposition with nuclear ensemble: formal derivation and application to benzene, furan and 2-phenylfuran, Theor. Chem. Acc., 2012, 131, 1237 Search PubMed .
D. Birnbaum and B. E. Kohler, Electronic structure of thiophene and pyrrole dimers: 2,2-bithiophene, 2,2-thienylpyrrole, and 2,2-bipyrrole, J. Chem. Phys., 1991, 95, 4783–4789 CrossRef CAS .
W. Kuhn, Über das absorptionsspektrum der polyene, Helv. Chim. Acta, 1948, 31, 1780–1799 CrossRef CAS .
A. N. Panda, F. Plasser, A. J. Aquino, I. Burghardt and H. Lischka, Electronically excited states in poly(p-phenylenevinylene): vertical excitations and torsional potentials from high-level ab initio calculations, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2013, 117, 2181–2189 CrossRef CAS .
E. L. Mertz, V. A. Tikhomirov and L. I. Krishtalik, Stokes shift as a tool for probing the solvent reorganization energy, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1997, 101, 3433–3442 CrossRef CAS .
J.-L. Brédas, J. Cornil and A. J. Heeger, The exciton binding energy in luminescent conjugated polymers, Adv. Mater., 1996, 8, 447–452 CrossRef .
R. S. Becker, J. Seixas de Melo, A. L. Macanita and F. Elisei, Comprehensive evaluation of the absorption, photophysical, energy transfer, structural, and theoretical properties of α-oligothiophenes with one to seven rings, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 18683–18695 CrossRef CAS .
L. Rothberg, Photophysics of conjugated polymers, Semicond. Polym., 2007, 1, 179–204 CAS .
I. Samuel, B. Crystall, G. Rumbles, P. Burn, A. Holmes and R. Friend, The efficiency and time-dependence of luminescence from poly(p-phenylene vinylene) and derivatives, Chem. Phys.
Lett., 1993, 213, 472–478 CrossRef CAS .
T. Förster, Zwischenmolekulare energiewanderung und fluoreszenz, Ann. Phys., 1948, 437, 55–75 CrossRef .
T. Förster, 10th spiers memorial lecture. transfer mechanisms of electronic excitation, Discuss. Faraday Soc., 1959, 27, 7–17 RSC .
G. D. Scholes, Long-range resonance energy transfer in molecular systems, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2003, 54, 57–87 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Beenken and T. Pullerits, Excitonic coupling in polythiophenes: comparison of different calculation methods, J. Chem. Phys., 2004, 120, 2490–2495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. E. Kose, Evaluation of excitonic coupling and charge transport integrals in P3HT nanocrystal, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 13076–13082 CrossRef CAS .
V. Stehr, R. F. Fink, B. Engels, J. Pflaum and C. Deibel, Singlet exciton diffusion in organic crystals based on marcus transfer rates, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2014, 10, 1242–1255 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Bjorgaard and M. E. Köse, Simulations of singlet exciton diffusion in organic semiconductors: a review, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 8432–8445 RSC .
K. F. Wong, B. Bagchi and P. J. Rossky, Distance and orientation dependence of excitation transfer rates in conjugated systems: beyond the förster theory, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2004, 108, 5752–5763 CrossRef CAS .

          V. May and K. Oliver, Charge and energy transfer dynamics in molecular systems, John Wiley & Sons,  2008 Search PubMed .
D. Beljonne, J. Cornil, R. Silbey, P. Millié and J. Brédas, Interchain interactions in conjugated materials: the exciton model versus the supermolecular approach, J. Chem. Phys., 2000, 112, 4749–4758 CrossRef CAS .
E. Hennebicq, G. Pourtois, G. D. Scholes, L. M. Herz, D. M. Russell, C. Silva, S. Setayesh, A. C. Grimsdale, K. Müllen and J.-L. Brédas, 
            et al., Exciton migration in rigid-rod conjugated polymers: an improved förster model, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 4744–4762 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Peeters, A. M. Ramos, S. C. Meskers and R. A. Janssen, Singlet and triplet excitations of chiral dialkoxy-p-phenylene vinylene oligomers, J. Chem. Phys., 2000, 112, 9445–9454 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cook, A. Furube and R. Katoh, Analysis of the excited states of regioregular polythiophene P3HT, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 1, 294–299 RSC .
N. Greenham, I. Samuel, G. Hayes, R. Phillips, Y. Kessener, S. Moratti, A. Holmes and R. Friend, Measurement of absolute photoluminescence quantum efficiencies in conjugated polymers, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1995, 241, 89–96 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Ho, J.-S. Kim, N. Tessler and R. H. Friend, Photoluminescence of poly(p-phenylenevinylene)-silica nanocomposites: evidence for dual emission by Franck–Condon analysis, J. Chem. Phys., 2001, 115, 2709–2720 CrossRef CAS .
D. Oelkrug, H.-J. Egelhaaf, D. Worrall and F. Wilkinson, Fluorescence yields and molecular orientation of thin organic films: vapor-deposited oligothiophenes α3t-α8t, J. Fluoresc., 1995, 5, 165–170 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-J. Egelhaaf, J. Gierschner and D. Oelkrug, Characterization of oriented oligo(phenylenevinylene) films and nano-aggregates by UV/vis-absorption and fluorescence spectroscopy, Synth. Met., 1996, 83, 221–226 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, H. Jia, L. Wang, Y. Wu, C. Zhan, H. Fu and J. Yao, Intermolecular electron transfer promoted by directional donor-acceptor attractions in self-assembled diketopyrrolopyrrole-thiophene films, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 14262–14269 RSC .
H. Inoue, M. Hida, N. Nakashima and K. Yoshihara, Picosecond fluorescence lifetimes of anthraquinone derivatives. radiationless deactivation via intra-and intermolecular hydrogen bonds, J. Phys. Chem., 1982, 86, 3184–3188 CrossRef CAS .
V. Samant, A. K. Singh, G. Ramakrishna, H. N. Ghosh, T. K. Ghanty and D. K. Palit, Ultrafast intermolecular hydrogen bond dynamics in the excited state of fluorenone, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2005, 109, 8693–8704 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. A. Kukhta, D. A. da Silva Filho, D. Volyniuk, J. V. Grazulevicius and G. Sini, Can fluorenone-based compounds emit in the blue region? impact of the conjugation length and the ground-state aggregation, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 1695–1707 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kukhta, D. Volyniuk, J. V. Grazulevicius and G. Sini, Blue versus yellow emission in bipolar fluorenone derivatives: the impact of aggregation and hydrogen bonding, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 1679–1692 RSC .
L. E. de Sousa, 
            et al., Fast predictions of exciton diffusion length in organic materials, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 4066–4071 RSC .
L. E. d. Sousa, I. G. Ribeiro, F. M. Carvalho and P. H. d. Oliveira Neto, Choice of solubilizing group is determinant for exciton diffusion length in organic crystals, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 5522–5527 CrossRef .
O. V. Mikhnenko, P. W. Blom and T.-Q. Nguyen, Exciton diffusion in organic semiconductors, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1867–1888 RSC .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Simulated absorption and emission spectra for all OPVs and oligothiopehenes along with average standard deviation of each kind of spectrum are available. Also available are reorganization energies, emission lifetimes, transition dipole moments and excitonic couplings obtained with the CAM-B3LYP functional. See DOI: 10.1039/d1cp01263kThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2021
Table Content:
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)

 	Fig. 1  S0 → S1 and S1 → S0 transition energies as a function of the inverse number of double bonds N for the thiophene (a and c) and phenylene vinylene (b and d) oligomer series using the B3LYP (upper panel) and CAM-B3LYP (lower panel) functionals. The curves correspond to the Kuhn fits from which transition energies at the polymeric limit are obtained.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Absorption cross-section for the thiophene oligomer series obtained with B3LYP. Inset shows the same spectra shifted to the polymeric absorption peak. (b) Radiative lifetimes as a function of repeating units for both oligomer series. Curves correspond to exponential fits to the B3LYP data.	 
	(5)

 	Fig. 3  Transition dipole moments obtained with B3LYP from the S0 and S1 states as a function of the number of repeating units for the thiophene (a) and phenylene vinylene (b) oligomer series. Curves correspond to fits to the data.	 
	(6)
	(7)
	(8)

 	Fig. 4  Exciton coupling for (a) oligothiophenes and (b) OPVs as a function of the inverse number of repeating units using the B3LYP results along with the corrected point dipole approximation coupled to both a square root and exponential dependence for transition dipole moments.	 

 	Fig. 5  Förster radii as a function of repeating units for both oligomer series using (a) B3LYP and (c) CAM-B3lYP functionals. Estimates of exciton diffusion length for the two oligomer series using (b) B3LYP and (d) CAM-B3LYP functionals. The colored region marks the possible diffusion lengths considering quantum yield values ranging from 0.02 to 0.08.	 
	(9)
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Simulated absorption and emission spectra for all OPVs and oligothiopehenes along with average standard deviation of each kind of spectrum are available. Also available are reorganization energies, emission lifetimes, transition dipole moments and excitonic couplings obtained with the CAM-B3LYP functional. See DOI: 10.1039/d1cp01263k

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2021
