Lithographic in-mold patterning for CsPbBr 3 nanocrystals distributed Bragg reflector single-mode laser   - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1NR04543A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1NR04543A
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 15830-15836Lithographic in-mold patterning for CsPbBr3 nanocrystals distributed Bragg reflector single-mode laser†

        
          
            Ahmad Syazwan 
            Ahmad Kamal
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Cheng-Chieh 
            Lin
          
        
      bcd, 
      
        
          
            Di 
            Xing
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yang-Chun 
            Lee
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zhiyu 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Mu-Hsin 
            Chen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ya-Lun 
            Ho
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Chun-Wei 
            Chen
          
        
      bce and 

        
          
            Jean-Jacques 
            Delaunay
          
        
      *a
aSchool of Engineering, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo 113-8656, Japan. E-mail: ho.ya-lun@scale.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp; jean@mech.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp
bInternational Graduate Program of Molecular Science and Technology (NTU-MST), Taiwan International Graduate Program, National Taiwan University and Academia Sinica, Taipei 10617, Taiwan
cDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei 10617, Taiwan
dMolecular Science and Technology Program, Taiwan International Graduate Program (TIGP), Academia Sinica, Taipei 11529, Taiwan
eCenter of Atomic Initiative for New Materials (AI-MAT), National Taiwan University, Taipei 10617, Taiwan
Received 
      13th July 2021
    , Accepted 5th September 2021First published on 6th September 2021AbstractExtensive studies on lead halide perovskites have shown that these materials are excellent candidates as gain mediums. Recently, many efforts have been made to incorporate perovskite lasers in integrated optical circuits. Possible solutions would be to utilize standard lithography with an etching/lift-off process or a direct laser etching technique. However, due to the fragile nature of the lead halide perovskites which gives rise to significant material deterioration during the lithography and etching processes, realizing a small-size, low-roughness, and single-mode laser remains a challenge. Here, a lithographic in-mold patterning method realized by nanocrystal concentration control and a multi-step filling-drying process is proposed to demonstrate CsPbBr3 nanocrystals distributed-Bragg-reflector (DBR) waveguide lasers. This method realizes the patterning of the CsPbBr3 nanocrystal laser cavity and DBR grating without lift-off and etching processes, and the smallest fabricated structures are obtained in a few hundred nanometers. The single-mode lasing is demonstrated at room temperature with a threshold of 23.5 μJ cm−2. The smallest full width at half maximum FWHM of the laser output is 0.4 nm. Due to the fabrication process and the DBR laser geometry, the lasers can be fabricated in a compact array, which is important for incorporating perovskite-based lasers in complex optoelectronic circuits.
Introduction
Lasers are well known for their ability to emit high intensity, monochromatic and coherent electromagnetic radiation. Their applications cover all branches of physical sciences and engineering. With the high demand for high-speed and energy-efficient communication devices, nanometer-scale photonic integrated circuit devices have become highly desirable. This in turn calls for the development of coherent light sources at the nanometer scale.1–3 Recently, the usage of lead halide perovskites (LHPs) as the gain medium for these small lasers is attracting more attention. This class of materials started to become popular due to its impact on photovoltaic research and applications. By having properties such as high optical absorption coefficient, long diffusion length, and long carrier lifetime, LHPs based solar cells achieve efficiencies of more than 25%.4–7 Recent studies on LHPs show that they are also capable of producing coherent light with a low lasing threshold due to the high quantum yields (>90%) property of the materials.8–11 Furthermore, the output wavelength of the material can be tuned by modifying the chemical composition of the materials.12–14 Due to these properties, the LHPs have become a strong gain material candidate in the development of small and efficient light-emitting devices.
In recent times, LHPs based lasers in the forms of nano/microwires,9,15–20 microplates,21,22 microcubes,23 microspheres,24 and thin films25–27 have been demonstrated. These LHP lasers are synthesized by chemical vapor deposition (CVD) or solution-growth methods. A critical issue for these synthesized lasers is the difficulty to control the position of the nano/microstructures on a chip and so alignment with other components is still a challenge. This strongly hampers the on-chip integration of LHP lasers with other devices for practical applications. The top-down fabrication processes such as photolithography and electron-beam lithography are well-established solutions to address this issue (see Table S1†). Several research groups successfully fabricated LHP based lasers by using the lithography method with a lift-off process.28,29 From their studies, the major challenge in using the lithography and the lift-off process with LHPs is that the LHPs’ chemical reactivity with the solvent used during the development and lift-off always leads to material chemical instability issues. This problem prevents the realization of perovskite devices by a well-established lithography fabrication process for semiconductors. To circumvent this problem, other groups introduced the lithography method with the plasma etching process30,31 or the direct laser etching32–35 for the LHP based lasers. However, the etching process usually produces high surface roughness, which can significantly affect the geometry of the small laser cavity. Therefore, a non-etching patterning method for LHP laser devices with a well-controlled position and alignment is desired and remains challenging.
In this work, a lithographic in-mold patterning method realized by controlling perovskite nanocrystals concentration and utilizing the multi-step filling-drying process is proposed to demonstrate CsPbBr3 nanocrystals distributed-Bragg-reflector (DBR) waveguide lasers. The laser structure is composed of a rectangular waveguide that is sandwiched by DBR gratings at both ends to form a Fabry–Perot cavity with high reflectance. The proposed method realizes the patterning of the perovskite laser cavity without lift-off and etching processes. The resist pattern fabricated by electron beam lithography (EBL) was used as a mold for the laser cavity, including the waveguide and the DBR gratings. The CsPbBr3 nanocrystals are then introduced after the lithography process by drop-casting, thus preventing the perovskite materials from being in contact with the solvents used in the lithography process. The key issue of this method is to fill the CsPbBr3 nanocrystals into the waveguide and small DBR gratings uniformly without having an excess of nanocrystals on the top of the resist.36 By controlling the concentration of the CsPbBr3 nanocrystals and the multi-step filling and drying processes, the resist patterns were filled in with the CsPbBr3 nanocrystals and formed the DBR waveguide laser cavity, while removing excess nanocrystals away from the top surface of the resist. The DBR grating with a few hundred-nm period and width is obtained. The laser is capable of operating at room temperature with a lasing threshold intensity of 23.5 μJ cm−2, and the smallest FWHM of the lasing peak is observed as 0.4 nm, a performance similar to that obtained with whispering-gallery-mode lasing observed from top-down fabricated perovskite laser.22,28–33,35,37 Single-mode lasing is obtained by shortening the waveguide section to 16 μm in length.
Results and discussion
Laser schematic and fabrication process
As shown in Fig. 1a, a femtosecond laser (Orpheus-HP, Light Conversion, Vilnius, Lithuania), which has an output light at 400 nm in wavelength and 250 fs pulse with 75 kHz repetition rate is used to pump the gain medium. The CsPbBr3 perovskite nanocrystals were utilized as the gain medium because of their high photoluminescence quantum yield and high stability in the ambient atmosphere.38,39 (see Table S1 in the ESI†) The laser is composed of a rectangular waveguide with a grating at both ends, thus forming the DBR waveguide laser cavity. The laser cavity was formed by patterning the resist (ZEP520A, Zeon, Tokyo, Japan) on top of a SiO2/Si substrate (1 μm thick SiO2 on Si substrate) by the EBL process. The pattern was then filled up by CsPbBr3 nanocrystals. For the waveguide section of the cavity, the light produced by the perovskite can be confined inside the gain medium itself to form waveguide modes. This is because the perovskite has a higher refractive index (nCsPbBr3 = 1.9) than the resist (nresist = 1.55).40,41 The gratings at both ends of the cavity serve two purposes. The first is to reflect the light that is reaching the waveguide ends. This results in optical feedback needed for the laser cavity to function. The second purpose is to scatter the transmitted light out of the resist layer to enable lasing light collection using the same microscope setup for pumping and analyzing the lasing structure. The grating is formed by patterning an array of 20 rectangular holes periodically and filling up the holes with the CsPbBr3 nanocrystals. Since the refractive indices of the resist and the CsPbBr3 are different, this periodic structure forms a DBR.42,43 The ideal DBR design should be the first-order DBR, where the simulated reflection percentage can be higher than 98%. However, as the first-order DBR requires very small holes that are very difficult to fill with a high density of perovskite nanocrystals, a high-order DBR was used instead. A reflection of 95% is predicted for the fifth-order DBR. Further discussion regarding the design of the DBR can be found in Fig. S2 of the ESI.† It is noted that the proposed fabrication technique enables the fabrication of laser arrays that can be integrated into an optical circuit on the same substrate or chip by non-etching lithography.
 Fig. 1  (a) The schematic of the CsPbBr3 nanocrystal embedded distributed Bragg reflector (DBR) waveguide lasers by lithographic in-mold patterning method. A 400 nm femtosecond pulse laser is used to excite the laser from the top. (b) The illustration of the lithographic in-mold patterning process of the CsPbBr3 nanocrystal DBR waveguide laser. (c) The μ-photoluminescence (μ-PL) images of the lasers made out of different CsPbBr3 nanocrystal concentrations. The laser cavities were fabricated with the CsPbBr3 nanocrystal concentration of 36.3 mg mL−1 (left), 57.8 mg mL−1 (middle), and 18.1 mg mL−1 (right). The PL intensity variations at the dash lines in the μ-PL images are provided. (d) An SEM image of the fabricated laser cavity. The cavity was fabricated with the CsPbBr3 nanocrystal concentration of 36.3 mg mL−1. 

Fig. 1b illustrates the fabrication process of the laser. First, a 450 nm layer of the resist was coated on the SiO2/Si substrate. Then, an electron-beam lithography system (F7000S-VD02, Advantest, Tokyo, Japan) was used to produce the pattern for housing the perovskite. After that, the solution of CsPbBr3 nanocrystals, which is composed of CsPbBr3 nanocrystals and n-hexane, was drop-casted on the sample. The next step is to perform the PDMS sheet mechanical clamping process. A PDMS sheet was put on top of the drop-casted perovskite nanocrystals. A screw clamp was used to clamp both the PDMS sheet and the substrate, assisting the nanocrystal solution to fill up the fabricated pattern and removing any excess perovskite solution. After that, the sample was dried in an optimized 3-steps process: First, the sample was left to dry at room temperature for 15 minutes. Then, the sample was baked at 60 °C for 15 minutes. Finally, the sample was placed in a vacuum chamber for 12 hours. The final step of the fabrication process is to peel the PDMS sheet from the sample. The perovskite on the sample needs to be properly dried so that the perovskite will not stick to the PDMS sheet when the peeling process was performed.
An important note that needs to be mentioned is that the concentration of the CsPbBr3 nanocrystal solution affects significantly the end product of this fabrication process. During the fabrication process, different nanocrystal concentrations were used to study the effect of this parameter on the quality of the fabricated lasers. The result was shown in Fig. 1c, where the μ-photoluminescence (μ-PL) images show the distribution of the CsPbBr3 nanocrystals inside and outside of three different laser cavities that were made out of three different nanocrystal concentrations (From left to right: 36.3, 57.8, and 18.1 mg mL−1). The photoluminescence (PL) intensity along the dashed line in the image was plotted for each of the μ-PL images. Laser cavities with better quality have been fabricated by using a CsPbBr3 nanocrystals solution with a concentration of 36.3 mg mL−1, which is shown in Fig. 1c (left). From this μ-PL image, it can be seen that the pattern was filled up by the CsPbBr3 nanocrystals in a compact manner, while at the same time, the amount of the nanocrystals outside of the pattern was very low. These factors are important in preventing the amplified light from escaping the cavity. The result is supported by the PL intensity plot, where there is a large contrast between the intensity inside and outside of the pattern. Furthermore, the SEM image of this laser, which is shown in Fig. 1d, also reinforces this result. For Fig. 1c (middle), a high concentration CsPbBr3 nanocrystals solution (57.8 mg mL−1) was used in the fabrication process, which caused the perovskite layer to be very thick. This result can also be seen from the intensity plot, where there is a small contrast between the intensity inside and outside of the pattern. It can also be seen from the image that the nanocrystals formed large crystals inside the pattern, which shows that the material inside the pattern is inhomogeneous. When a lower concentration of the CsPbBr3 nanocrystals solution was used, the laser pattern was not being filled up by the nanocrystals. This result is shown in Fig. 1c (right), where the concentration of the perovskite nanocrystals mixture used in the fabrication was 18.1 mg mL−1. The defects in both lasers reduce the capability of the structures in confining light, thus both failed to lase at room temperature. Regarding the stability of the perovskite nanocrystals, please refer to the Fig. S3 section in the ESI.†
Numerical simulation results
The laser cavity was designed and optimized by the numerical simulation software (COMSOL Multiphysics, COMSOL, Inc., Burlington, USA). The result of the optical mode analysis performed on the cross-section of the waveguide section in Fig. 2a shows the fundamental photonic waveguide mode for the light propagation in the cavity. This corresponds to the waveguide design with its dimensions larger than the diffraction limit of the propagation light and the refractive index of the CsPbBr3 larger than those of the surrounding air and resist. The magenta arrows representing the normalized electric field vector of the mode indicate that the polarization of the mode is in the y-direction.
 Fig. 2  (a) The simulated electric field norm distribution of the fundamental mode on the cross-section of the waveguide section of the CsPbBr3 nanocrystal DBR-waveguide lasers. The arrows represent the electric field vectors. (b) The simulated electric field norm distribution of the propagating light on the vertical cross-section along the cavity axis. The top and middle images show light propagation in the waveguide without and with the DBR at the end, respectively. The bottom image shows light propagation in the waveguide with the DBR and a thick CsPbBr3 nanocrystal layer on the top of the whole structure. (c) Experimental data of the drop-casted CsPbBr3 amplified spontaneous emission (ASE) spectrum (blue) and simulation data of the fabricated grating reflectance spectrum (orange). 

Fig. 2b shows the effect of the gratings in the cavity with the frequency domain analysis performed on the cross-section that was parallel to the cavity axis. The grating was designed and optimized with a period of 770 nm and a resist ridge width of 250 nm. The simulation was performed on three models. The first model (top) is a cavity without grating and the second model (middle) is a cavity with the gratings. The third model (bottom) is a cavity with the same gratings as the second model, but the perovskite layer is thick (perovskite layer thickness = 720 nm) and remains on the top of the resist. The light with the normalized optical power in the form of propagating fundamental waveguide mode is injected at the left boundary of all models, and the reflected optical power was also calculated at the same boundary. For the cavity without gratings, the reflected power is 1% of the input power, whereas the cavity with optimized gratings can reflect 95% of the input power. In the case of the thick perovskite layer, the reflectance is only 7%. It can be seen in Fig. 2b (bottom) that a part of the propagating mode is traveling above the grating and cannot be reflected by the grating. The simulation results clearly show that the gratings, with the period and the width of a few hundred nm, are essential for the laser cavity. Furthermore, the laser cavity should be made of the gain materials without excess on the top of the resist to reduce the pump power needed to reach the lasing threshold and realize lasing at room temperature. Fig. 2c shows the amplified spontaneous emission (ASE) spectrum of the CsPbBr3 nanocrystals (blue) that was obtained experimentally and the simulated reflectance result of the grating against different input wavelengths (orange). From the plot, it is shown that the grating is effective in providing optical feedback for the wavelength range where ASE of the CsPbBr3 nanocrystals can occur. The wavelength range of the reflectance curve (orange) is from 529 to 535 nm, which explains the reason why the lasing peaks exist around that range.
Laser characterization
In this section, the characterization of the fabricated lasers will be discussed. The length and the width of the fabricated waveguides are 16 μm to 26 μm, and 1.2 μm, respectively. The thickness of the resist is 450 nm. The grating period is 780 nm, and the resist ridge width is 240 nm. Fig. 3a shows the optical microscope image of the device lasing at room temperature. The grating regions exhibit bright spots of very high intensity when the pump energy density is higher than the lasing threshold. Also, interference fringes can be seen around these spots, which cannot be produced by the PL process. The interference fringes can only occur if the output of the device is a coherent light source. The spectrum of the output light was recorded with a spectrometer (IsoPlane 160, Princeton Instruments, Trenton, USA) (see ESI†). The spectrum is shown in Fig. 3b. From the figure, there are two emission peaks with peak wavelengths of 528.3 and 529.7 nm. The FWHMs of the two peaks are 0.7 nm and 0.6 nm, respectively. The behavior of the lasing threshold is reported in the following. Fig. 3c shows the emission spectra with three different pump energy densities. At a low pump energy density, the output spectrum only consists of the PL spectrum of the CsPbBr3 nanocrystals. When the pump energy density became near the lasing threshold, narrow peaks were observed on top of the PL spectrum. When the pump energy density was above the lasing threshold, then the lasing peaks were observed in the output spectrum. The strongest lasing peak shows an FWHM of 0.4 nm. The inset of Fig. 3c shows the fabricated laser that was used in this lasing threshold study.
 Fig. 3  (a) The microscope image of the device with the pump energy density above the lasing threshold. The white spots indicate camera saturation by the lasing emission. (b) The emission spectrum when the pump energy density was above the lasing threshold. The lasing peaks are 528.3 nm and 529.7 nm with FWHM of 0.7 nm and 0.6 nm, respectively. (c) The emission spectra of the laser with different pump energy densities near the lasing threshold. The inset image is the optical microscope image of the laser with the pump energy density of 27.0 μJ cm−2. (d) Emission intensities (blue circles) and the FWHMs of the PL and lasing peaks (black dots) with respect to the pump energy density. The left y-axis is a log scale. All the experiments were performed at room temperature. 
To estimate the lasing threshold, Fig. 3d shows the plot of the maximum emission intensity and the FWHM of the lasing peak for different pump energy densities. The emission intensity axis is in log scale, and the FWHM and pumping energy density axis are in linear scale. It can be observed that when the pump energy density is above 23.5 μJ cm−2, the emission intensity increases significantly and the FWHM of the spectrum becomes smaller than 1 nm. Also, the device experienced gain saturation when the pump energy density is above 25 μJ cm−2.
To further analyze the output light, a polarizer was used to determine the polarization of the emitted light. The result is shown in Fig. 4a. It is shown that the signal is significantly stronger when the polarizer is set to be perpendicular to the cavity axis. This result confirms the mode analysis simulation result, where the fundamental mode is polarized in the y-direction. Another important thing to investigate is the existence of the Fabry–Pérot (F–P) cavity effect in the operation of the fabricated laser. The F–P cavity effect can be represented by the equation Δλ = (1/L)(λ2/2ng), where Δλ is the mode spacing, λ is the wavelength in vacuum, and ng is the group index of the perovskite.15 For this study, lasers with different values of L (L = 20–26 μm) were fabricated, and the output spectra of the lasers were recorded when the pump energy density was above the lasing threshold. After that, the spacing between two adjacent lasing modes is measured from the output spectrum data for each value of L. From these measurements, it was found that the lasing mode spacing decreases when L increases. To compare these measurements with the F–P cavity mode spacing equation, the lasing mode spacing, Δλ, was plotted against the inverse of L, which is shown in Fig. 4b. The figure shows a linear relationship, which confirms that the gratings can provide optical feedback to the laser cavity from both ends to form an F-P waveguide cavity.
 Fig. 4  (a) The polarization study of the laser emission. The polarization angle is defined as the angle between the cavity axis and the electric field of the emitted light as shown in the inset. The output light has a polarization perpendicular to the cavity axis. (b) The plot of lasing mode spacing (Δλ) against the inverse of different lengths of the waveguide section of the lasers (1/L), which shows a linear relationship. (c) The emission spectrum of a single-mode lasing with the waveguide section length of 16 μm. The lasing peak is 531.8 nm and its FWHM is 0.7 nm. The inset image is an optical microscope image of the single-mode laser with the pump energy density above the lasing threshold. 
Besides multimode lasing, the device is also capable of single-mode lasing. This is further demonstrated in Fig. 4c, where only one single peak can be seen at a wavelength of 531.8 nm with an FWHM of 0.7 nm. To achieve this, the length of the waveguide section is reduced to 16 μm, which then increases the free spectral range of the device. When the length is reduced, the free spectral range of the cavity will become larger than the emission band of the CsPbBr3 nanocrystal. With this condition, the device can only support single-mode lasing. The image of the single-mode laser while it is lasing is shown in the inset of Fig. 4b.
Conclusions
The lithographic non-etching in-mold patterning method has been proposed and the CsPbBr3 nanocrystals embedded DBR waveguide lasers have been successfully demonstrated. The lasers were fabricated by taking advantage of the precision of the lithography process, which makes it possible for integration into an optical circuit. By controlling the perovskite nanocrystal concentration and utilizing the multi-step filling-drying process, the compact CsPbBr3 nanocrystal waveguide and gratings with structure size as small as a few hundred nanometers were realized with a reduced amount of the perovskite outside of the laser cavity. Because the concentration of the perovskite nanocrystals affects the quality of the fabricated lasers, it was found that the optimum concentration should be around 36.3 mg mL−1. Under these optimum fabrication conditions, the fabricated DBR waveguide lasers exhibited a lasing FWHM of 0.4 nm and had a lasing threshold of 23.5 μJ cm−2. Furthermore, the laser structure was also capable of supporting single-mode lasing when the length of the waveguide section of the cavity was shorter than 16 μm. The proposed technique to fabricate laser structure on a chip is thought to have a high potential to make it possible for the integration of perovskite coherent light sources in large-area integrated optoelectronic circuits.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported through the JSPS KAKENHI (JP20H02197, JP21H01383), JSPS Bilateral Joint Research Project (JPJSBP120209909), Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST), Taiwan (107-2112-M-002-024-MY3, 108-2923-M-002-002-MY2), and Taiwan Consortium of Emergent Crystalline Materials (TCECM). Financial support by the Center of Atomic Initiative for New Materials (AI-MAT), National Taiwan University, from the Featured Areas Research Center Program within the framework of the Higher Education Sprout Project by the Ministry of Education in Taiwan (108L9008) is acknowledged. A part of this work was conducted at Takeda Sentanchi Supercleanroom, The University of Tokyo, supported by “Nanotechnology Platform Program” of the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science, and Technology (MEXT), Japan, Grant Number JPMXP09F-20-UT-0027. The authors would like to extend grateful appreciation to Professor Kuniaki Konishi, Professor Junji Yumoto, and Professor Makoto Kuwata-Gonokami from the School of Science, The University of Tokyo for technical support. A.S.A.K. thanks the support from Majlis Amanah Rakyat (MARA No. 330408033556).
Notes and references
R. F. Service, Science, 2010, 328, 810 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. M. Ma and R. F. Oulton, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2019, 14, 12–22 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Y. Jeong, M. S. Hwang, J. Kim, J. S. Park, J. M. Lee and H. G. Park, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32(51), 2001996 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Miyata, A. Mitioglu, P. Plochocka, O. Portugall, J. T. W. Wang, S. D. Stranks, H. J. Snaith and R. J. Nicholas, Nat. Phys., 2015, 11, 582–587 Search PubMed .
Q. Dong, Y. Fang, Y. Shao, P. Mulligan, J. Qiu, L. Cao and J. Huang, Science, 2015, 347(6225), 967–970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Galkowski, A. Mitioglu, A. Miyata, P. Plochocka, O. Portugall, G. E. Eperon, J. T. W. Wang, T. Stergiopoulos, S. D. Stranks, H. J. Snaith and R. J. Nicholas, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 962–970 RSC .
K. A. Bush, K. Frohna, R. Prasanna, R. E. Beal, T. Leijtens, S. A. Swifter and M. D. McGehee, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 428–435 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhu, Y. Fu, F. Meng, X. Wu, Z. Gong, Q. Ding, M. V. Gustafsson, M. T. Trinh, S. Jin and X. Y. Zhu, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 636–642 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xing, N. Mathews, S. S. Lim, N. Yantara, X. Liu, D. Sabba, M. Grätzel, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 476–480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. R. Sutherland and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 295–302 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fu, H. Zhu, J. Chen, M. P. Hautzinger, X. Y. Zhu and S. Jin, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2019, 4, 169–188 CrossRef CAS .
J. Song, J. Li, X. Li, L. Xu, Y. Dong and H. Zeng, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7162 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Filip, G. E. Eperon, H. J. Snaith and F. Giustino, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liao, X. Jin and H. Fu, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7, 1900099 CrossRef .
P. Liu, X. He, J. Ren, Q. Liao, J. Yao and H. Fu, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 5766–5773 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xing, X. F. Liu, Q. Zhang, S. T. Ha, Y. W. Yuan, C. Shen, T. C. Sum and Q. Xiong, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 4571–4577 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fu, H. Zhu, A. W. Schrader, D. Liang, Q. Ding, P. Joshi, L. Hwang, X. Y. Zhu and S. Jin, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1000–1008 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, Q. Shang, W. Du, J. Shi, Z. Wu, Y. Mi, J. Chen, F. Liu, Y. Li, M. Liu, Q. Zhang and X. Liu, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6, 1701032 CrossRef .
K. Park, J. W. Lee, J. D. Kim, N. S. Han, D. M. Jang, S. Jeong, J. Park and J. K. Song, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 3703–3710 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fu, H. Zhu, C. C. Stoumpos, Q. Ding, J. Wang, M. G. Kanatzidis, X. Zhu and S. Jin, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 7963–7972 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, S. T. Ha, X. Liu, T. C. Sum and Q. Xiong, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 5995–6001 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, Y. Liu, G. Li, J. Zhang, N. Zhang, S. Xiao and Q. Song, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6, 1701266 CrossRef .
B. Zhou, H. Dong, M. Jiang, W. Zheng, L. Sun, B. Zhao, B. Tang, A. Pan and L. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 11740–11748 RSC .
B. Tang, H. Dong, L. Sun, W. Zheng, Q. Wang, F. Sun, X. Jiang, A. Pan and L. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 10681–10688 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Pourdavoud, T. Haeger, A. Mayer, P. J. Cegielski, A. L. Giesecke, R. Heiderhoff, S. Olthof, S. Zaefferer, I. Shutsko, A. Henkel, D. Becker-Koch, M. Stein, M. Cehovski, O. Charfi, H. Johannes, D. Rogalla, M. C. Lemme, M. Koch, Y. Vaynzof, K. Meerholz, W. Kowalsky, H. Scheer, P. Görrn and T. Riedl, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1903717 CrossRef PubMed .
B. R. Sutherland, S. Hoogland, M. M. Adachi, C. T. O. Wong and E. H. Sargent, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 10947–10952 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Safdar, Y. Wang and T. F. Krauss, Opt. Express, 2018, 26, A75–A84 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Lin, Q. Zeng, E. Lafalce, S. Yu, M. J. Smith, Y. J. Yoon, Y. Chang, Y. Jiang, Z. Lin, Z. V. Vardeny and V. V. Tsukruk, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6, 1800474 CrossRef .
D. Xing, C. C. Lin, Y. L. Ho, A. S. A. Kamal, I. T. Wang, C. C. Chen, C. Y. Wen, C. W. Chen and J. J. Delaunay, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 31, 2006283 CrossRef .
P. J. Cegielski, A. L. Giesecke, S. Neutzner, C. Porschatis, M. Gandini, D. Schall, C. A. R. Perini, J. Bolten, S. Suckow, S. Kataria, B. Chmielak, T. Wahlbrink, A. Petrozza and M. C. Lemme, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 6915–6923 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Zhang, W. Sun, S. P. Rodrigues, K. Wang, Z. Gu, S. Wang, W. Cai, S. Xiao and Q. Song, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606205 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Zhizhchenko, S. Syubaev, A. Berestennikov, A. V. Yulin, A. Porfirev, A. Pushkarev, I. Shishkin, K. Golokhvast, A. A. Bogdanov, A. A. Zakhidov, A. A. Kuchmizhak, Y. S. Kivshar and S. V. Makarov, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 4140–4147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Tian, Y. Xu, H. Zhao, X. Qin, Y. Nie, W. Li, S. Liu, Q. Lin and Q. Cao, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 7314–7321 RSC .
A. Y. Zhizhchenko, P. Tonkaev, D. Gets, A. Larin, D. Zuev, S. Starikov, E. V. Pustovalov, A. M. Zakharenko, S. A. Kulinich, S. Juodkazis, A. A. Kuchmizhak and S. V. Makarov, Small, 2020, 16, 2000410 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Tian, L. Wang, W. Li, Q. Lin and Q. Cao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 16952–16958 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. J. Cegielski, S. Neutzner, C. Porschatis, H. Lerch, J. Bolten, S. Suckow, A. R. S. Kandada, B. Chmielak, A. Petrozza, T. Wahlbrink and A. L. Giesecke, Opt. Express, 2017, 25, 13199–13206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, Q. Liao, Y. Wu, Z. Zhang, Q. Gao, P. Liu, M. Li, J. Yao and H. Fu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706186 CrossRef PubMed .
N. S. Makarov, S. Guo, O. Isaienko, W. Liu, I. Robel and V. I. Klimov, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 2349–2362 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yakunin, L. Protesescu, F. Krieg, M. I. Bodnarchuk, G. Nedelcu, M. Humer, G. De Luca, M. Fiebig, W. Heiss and M. V. Kovalenko, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8056 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yan, L. Mao, P. Zhao, A. Mertens, S. Dottermusch, H. Hu, Z. Jin and B. S. Richards, Opt. Express, 2020, 28, 15706–15717 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
ZEON Corporation, ZEP520 High Resolution Positive Electron Beam Resist, 2001, Ver.1.02.
H. Wenzel and R. Güther, IEEE J. Quantum Electron., 2006, 42, 64–70 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fricke, W. John, A. Klehr, P. Ressel, L. Weixelbaum, H. Wenzel and G. Erbert, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2012, 27, 055009 CrossRef .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1nr04543aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) The schematic of the CsPbBr3 nanocrystal embedded distributed Bragg reflector (DBR) waveguide lasers by lithographic in-mold patterning method. A 400 nm femtosecond pulse laser is used to excite the laser from the top. (b) The illustration of the lithographic in-mold patterning process of the CsPbBr3 nanocrystal DBR waveguide laser. (c) The μ-photoluminescence (μ-PL) images of the lasers made out of different CsPbBr3 nanocrystal concentrations. The laser cavities were fabricated with the CsPbBr3 nanocrystal concentration of 36.3 mg mL−1 (left), 57.8 mg mL−1 (middle), and 18.1 mg mL−1 (right). The PL intensity variations at the dash lines in the μ-PL images are provided. (d) An SEM image of the fabricated laser cavity. The cavity was fabricated with the CsPbBr3 nanocrystal concentration of 36.3 mg mL−1.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) The simulated electric field norm distribution of the fundamental mode on the cross-section of the waveguide section of the CsPbBr3 nanocrystal DBR-waveguide lasers. The arrows represent the electric field vectors. (b) The simulated electric field norm distribution of the propagating light on the vertical cross-section along the cavity axis. The top and middle images show light propagation in the waveguide without and with the DBR at the end, respectively. The bottom image shows light propagation in the waveguide with the DBR and a thick CsPbBr3 nanocrystal layer on the top of the whole structure. (c) Experimental data of the drop-casted CsPbBr3 amplified spontaneous emission (ASE) spectrum (blue) and simulation data of the fabricated grating reflectance spectrum (orange).	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) The microscope image of the device with the pump energy density above the lasing threshold. The white spots indicate camera saturation by the lasing emission. (b) The emission spectrum when the pump energy density was above the lasing threshold. The lasing peaks are 528.3 nm and 529.7 nm with FWHM of 0.7 nm and 0.6 nm, respectively. (c) The emission spectra of the laser with different pump energy densities near the lasing threshold. The inset image is the optical microscope image of the laser with the pump energy density of 27.0 μJ cm−2. (d) Emission intensities (blue circles) and the FWHMs of the PL and lasing peaks (black dots) with respect to the pump energy density. The left y-axis is a log scale. All the experiments were performed at room temperature.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) The polarization study of the laser emission. The polarization angle is defined as the angle between the cavity axis and the electric field of the emitted light as shown in the inset. The output light has a polarization perpendicular to the cavity axis. (b) The plot of lasing mode spacing (Δλ) against the inverse of different lengths of the waveguide section of the lasers (1/L), which shows a linear relationship. (c) The emission spectrum of a single-mode lasing with the waveguide section length of 16 μm. The lasing peak is 531.8 nm and its FWHM is 0.7 nm. The inset image is an optical microscope image of the single-mode laser with the pump energy density above the lasing threshold.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1nr04543a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
