Impact of t -butyl substitution in a rubrene emitter for solid state NIR-to-visible photon upconversion  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0CP00144A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0CP00144A
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2020, 22, 7392-7403Impact of t-butyl substitution in a rubrene emitter for solid state NIR-to-visible photon upconversion

        
          
            Edvinas 
            Radiunas
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Manvydas 
            Dapkevičius
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Steponas 
            Raišys
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Saulius 
            Juršėnas
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Augustina 
            Jozeliūnaitė
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Tomas 
            Javorskis
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Ugnė 
            Šinkevičiūtė
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Edvinas 
            Orentas
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Karolis 
            Kazlauskas
          
        
      *a
aInstitute of Photonics and Nanotechnology, Vilnius University, Saulėtekio av. 3, LT-10257 Vilnius, Lithuania. E-mail: karolis.kazlauskas@ff.vu.lt
bInstitute of Chemistry, Faculty of Chemistry and Geosciences, Vilnius University, Naugarduko 24, LT-03225 Vilnius, Lithuania
Received 
      9th January 2020
    , Accepted 5th March 2020First published on 5th March 2020AbstractSolid state NIR-to-visible photon upconversion (UC) mediated by triplet–triplet annihilation (TTA) is necessitated by numerous practical applications. Yet, efficient TTA-UC remains a highly challenging task. In this work palladium phthalocyanine-sensitized NIR-to-vis solid UC films based on a popular rubrene emitter are thoroughly studied with the primary focus on revealing the impact of t-butyl substitution in rubrene on the TTA-UC performance. The solution-processed UC films were additionally doped with a small amount of emissive singlet sink tetraphenyldibenzoperiflanthene (DBP) for collecting upconverted singlets from rubrene and in this way diminishing detrimental singlet fission. Irrespective of the excitation conditions used, t-butyl-substituted rubrene (TBR) was found to exhibit enhanced TTA-UC performance as compared to that of rubrene at an optimal emitter doping of 80 wt% in polystyrene films. Explicitly, in the TTA dominated regime attained at high excitation densities, 4-fold higher UC quantum yield (ΦUC) achieved in TBR-based films was caused by the reduced fluorescence concentration quenching mainly due to suppressed singlet fission. Under low light conditions, i.e. in the regime governed by spontaneous triplet decay, even though triplet exciton diffusion was obstructed in TBR films by t-butyl moieties, the subsequently reduced TTA rate was counterbalanced by both suppressed singlet fission and non-radiative triplet quenching, still ensuring higher ΦUC of these films as compared to those of unsubstituted rubrene films.
Introduction
Photon energy conversion from lower to higher energies proceeding through triplet–triplet annihilation (TTA), commonly referred to as TTA-mediated upconversion (UC) is appealing for various applications such as photocatalysis,1 bioimaging,2 stress sensing,3 night vision,4 memory devices,5 targeted drug delivery6 and others.7 Low excitation power density (such as that available from the sun) sufficient to drive the incoherent UC process makes TTA-UC especially attractive in photovoltaics, where the weakly absorbed near-infrared (NIR) portion of solar energy (>700 nm), particularly in organic solar cells, could be converted into visible light hence enabling more efficient photon harvesting.8,9
Briefly, in a typical step like TTA-UC process, low energy photons absorbed by the singlet states of sensitizer species are converted into triplet excitons via intersystem crossing (ISC), which then undergo energy transfer (TET) to triplet manifold of emitter species. Long-lived triplet-states of emitters are utilized to generate singlets from triplets through incoherent TTA events, which subsequently result in emission of higher energy photons as compared to the absorbed ones. Since during the TTA at most one UC photon can be produced per two absorbed ones, the quantum yield of the net process cannot exceed 50%.
Although the studies on red/green-to-blue (vis-to-vis) photon UC in solution dominates the TTA-UC field,8,10 there is a high demand for efficient NIR-to-vis UC systems operative in the solid state as best suited for practical applications.11–13 Regrettably, UC quantum yields (ΦUC) of such solid systems capable of utilizing NIR photons (>700 nm) are still very low (typically <1%)13–18 and improving ΦUC was found to be a challenging task.
Presently, the majority of the NIR-to-vis UC systems utilize rubrene as an emitter8,19–29 due to its low lying triplet energy (T1 ≈ 1.14 eV) and close to unity fluorescence (FL) quantum yield (ΦFL) in the isolated form.30,31 However, since singlet energy (S1) of rubrene is roughly twice that of the triplet manifold, i.e. S1 = 2 × T1, this also causes a reverse process – singlets splitting into two triplets, the so-called singlet fission (SF), given the two rubrene molecules are in close proximity to each other.32,33 Taking into account that in the rigid environment molecule positions are fixed, TTA must rely on efficient energy transfer and exciton diffusion, which in the case of triplet excitons are governed by a Dexter-type mechanism.12,27,34–37 Since Dexter transfer requires electron wavefunction overlap between the neighboring molecules and thus is a short-range process, high emitter concentrations in the solid state are required for TTA-UC to occur. High rubrene content in the solid films is known to cause detrimental concentration quenching mainly due to efficient SF, which lowers ΦFL of rubrene neat films down to a few percent.13,38 Strongly reduced ΦFL of the neat films was reported to be one of the key-limiting factors in achieving efficient UC in the systems based on rubrene emitter.21 Therefore, the suppression of concentration quenching and maintenance of high ΦFL at high emitter concentration in the solid films are of crucial importance.
Nagata et al. have recently demonstrated that decorating rubrene with t-butyl moieties can significantly lower SF in the solid films resulting in the enhancement of ΦFL by a factor of 9 (from 5% to 46%).38 Diminished SF is obtained as a result of enlarged intermolecular separation and thus effectively reduced interaction between the neighboring rubrene molecules. Note that this is expected to also cause a side effect, namely, a slowdown of triplet diffusion. The observed reduction of charge carrier mobility in t-butyl-substituted rubrene as compared to that of unsubstituted rubrene serves as indirect evidence for this.39 Since the same Dexter mechanism is involved in the transfer of charges and transfer/diffusion of triplet excitons in the films, lowered triplet exciton diffusion in t-butyl-substituted rubrene films is indeed highly probable.
The TTA-UC process is known to heavily depend on triplet transfer/diffusion, which can be impeded by the t-butyl spacers. Hence, even though the utilization of t-butyl moieties can sustain high ΦFL in high-rubrene-content films due to suppressed SF, it may also adversely affect ΦUC because of the reduced triplet migration. Considering that t-butyl-substituted rubrene was not investigated as an emitter for TTA-UC before, the net effect of t-butyl groups on the UC performance of rubrene solid films needs to be clarified.
To this end, TTA-assisted photon upconversion in solid rubrene and t-butyl-rubrene (TBR) films was studied and compared. The studied solution-processed UC films contained a small amount of triplet sensitizer palladium phthalocyanine and singlet sink DBP for reducing undesirable energy back-transfer from emitter to sensitizer and for diminishing SF in rubrene, respectively. TTA-UC performance, and in particular, the importance of t-butyl substituents on the performance was revealed by assessing SF, diffusion-facilitated non-radiative triplet quenching and TTA as a function of emitter concentration in UC films. Having virtually no impact on electronic properties of rubrene, t-butyl groups were found to significantly affect TTA-UC performance of the films resulting in 4-fold enhanced NIR-to-vis ΦUC. Better UC efficiency in optimized TBR films as compared to optimized rubrene films was attributed to reduced SF of upconverted singlets and diminished non-radiative triplet quenching.
Experimental
Materials
Sublimation grade rubrene was purchased from TCI; meanwhile DBP was purchased from Merck. The synthesis of TBR and palladium phthalocyanine (PdPc) was published elsewhere.40 TBR was purified by vacuum sublimation prior to use in the experiments.
Preparation of the upconverting films
Materials were dissolved in toluene at concentrations of rubrene (10 mg mL−1), TBR (10 mg mL−1), PdPc (1 mg mL−1), DBP (1 mg mL−1), and PS (50 mg mL−1) and mixed at appropriate ratios to result in the following final concentrations of emitter in PS (in wt%): 0.01, 0.05, 0.2, 1, 5, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 90 and 100; DBP in rubrene (in wt%): 0.01, 0.05, 0.1, 0.5, and 1; emitter in PS/PdPc[0.1 wt%]/DBP[0.5 wt%] (in wt%): 30, 60, 70, 80, 90, 95, and 100. Here wt% is defined as a weight percentage relative to the total weight content of the mixture. Films were prepared by spincoating at 4000 rpm for 1 min on 1 mm-thick 25 × 25 mm microscope glass slides. Low concentration PS films (<1 wt%) were drop-cast to produce thicker films. The film preparation of all the films and solutions were performed in a nitrogen-filled glovebox with O2 and H2O concentrations below 0.1 ppm.
The prepared films were covered with additional microscope slides and encapsulated inside the glovebox by using a 2-component epoxy resin prior to conducting different types of photophysical measurements at ambient conditions. The sealing was essential to protect films from triplet quenching by oxygen and to avoid photoinduced degradation of rubrene emitters.23
Optical techniques
Absorption spectra of the dilute solutions of compounds were recorded using a UV-vis-NIR spectrophotometer, Lambda 950 (PerkinElmer). Fluorescence (FL) of the samples was excited at 450 nm by using a xenon arc lamp coupled to a monochromator, whereas photon upconversion (UC) was induced by exciting at 730 nm using a 12 mW power continuous-wave semiconductor laser diode (Picoquant). Steady state FL and UC emission spectra were measured using a back-thinned CCD spectrometer, PMA-12 (Hamamatsu). Fluorescence transients of the samples were measured by using a time-correlated single photon counting system, PicoHarp 300 (Picoquant), which utilized a pulsed semiconductor laser diode (repetition rate – 1 MHz, pulse duration – 70 ps, and emission wavelength – 450 nm) as an excitation source. High excitation FL and UC transients were measured using a time-gated iCCD camera, New iStar DH340T (Andor), after exciting samples with emission of a tunable-wavelength optical amplifier (Ekspla) pumped by a nanosecond Nd3+:YAG laser (wavelength – 450 nm or 730 nm, pulse duration – 5 ns, and repetition rate – 1 kHz). FL and UC emission quantum yields (ΦFL and ΦUC) were estimated by utilizing an integrating sphere (Sphere Optics) coupled to a CCD PMA-12 spectrometer via an optical fiber. All the experiments were performed at room temperature.
Results and discussions
Chemical structures of compounds used in the current work, namely, the structures of emitters rubrene and TBR, sensitizer palladium phthalocyanine (PdPc) and singlet exciton sink tetraphenyldibenzoperiflanthene (DBP) are illustrated in Chart 1.
 Chart 1  Chemical structures of emitters rubrene and TBR (together with molecular models), sensitizer PdPc and singlet exciton sink DBP. 
In contrast to a report of Nagata et al.38 where t-butyl groups were appended to a rubrene scaffold at the para-position, we devised a new bulky rubrene derivative (TBR) with meta-t-butyl-disubstituted phenyl rings on the periphery of the tetracene core. Such bifurcated molecular architecture featuring t-butyl groups on both sides of the tetracene unit is expected to have a more pronounced steric effect on the packing of TBR in the solid phase as opposed to t-butyl groups in the para-positions where the effect of the bulkiness of these groups is somewhat offset by the size of the phenyl ring itself.
Absorption and FL spectra of rubrene and t-butyl-functionalized rubrene (TBR) emitters were found to be very similar indicating negligible impact of t-butyl moieties on the electronic structure of rubrene (Fig. 1). This finding suggested that the TTA process for the TBR emitter is similarly feasible as that for rubrene. Molar extinction of TBR at the lowest energy vibronic peak was somewhat smaller as compared to that of rubrene, 3390 M−1 cm−1 and 4120 M−1 cm−1, respectively; nevertheless, the estimated ΦFL of both emitters in the diluted form (either in toluene or PS film) were the same and close to 100%. To reduce SF of the upconverted photons and thereby improve ΦUC of the rubrene-based solid films, DBP as the third component was introduced in small amounts. The emission spectrum of DBP dispersed in PS film at 0.01 wt% concentration is displayed in Fig. 1b. Featuring a large overlap integral with rubrene emission spectrum and high ΦFL (ΦFL = 84% in toluene) DBP served as a singlet exciton sink (emissive trap) for the upconverted singlets in rubrene.13 Although emission of DBP is redshifted by about 60 nm as compared to FL of rubrene (or TBR) it is still within the transparency region of the sensitizer absorption (Fig. 1a). Taking into account that the lowest triplet state of DBP is ∼0.2 eV higher than that of rubrene,41 DBP is expected to not affect the TTA process in the emitter. Palladium phthalocyanine (PdPc) was used as a sensitizer in this study. Weak absorption of the sensitizer in the UC emission spectral range is essential to ensure reduced energy back-transfer from the emitter to the sensitizer, which was demonstrated to cause significant energy losses in UC systems.42,43
 Fig. 1  (a) Absorption spectra of rubrene, and TBR emitters and singlet exciton sink DBP in toluene (1 × 10−5 M). Absorption spectrum of the PdPc sensitizer is displayed for reference. (b) FL spectra of rubrene, TBR and DBP in polystyrene (PS) films at 0.01 wt% concentration. (c) TTA-UC energy scheme for PdPc-sensitized rubrene (or TBR) systems with DBP as a singlet sink. Here, ISC – intersystem crossing, TET – triplet energy transfer, TTA – triplet–triplet annihilation, SF – singlet fission, FRET – Förster resonant energy transfer. 
The role of t-butyl groups in the suppression of FL quenching at high emitter concentrations was elucidated by evaluating ΦFL of the PS films with increasing rubrene and TBR concentrations. ΦFL of the rubrene- and TBR-doped PS films estimated using an integrating sphere are compared in Fig. 2. At low emitter concentrations (up to 1 wt%) in PS, both emitters expressed ΦFL close to 100% indicating negligible intermolecular interaction and FL quenching; however, further increasing the concentration resulted in rather different ΦFL behaviors. In the case of rubrene, ΦFL experienced a rapid drop with increasing emitter concentration already above 1 wt%, whereas TBR showed persistently high ΦFL up to 30 wt% and only above this concentration a slight decrease of ΦFL was observed. In the neat rubrene film (at 100 wt% of emitter) ΦFL decreased down to tiny 1.5%, which is ascribed to the formation of crystalline aggregates facilitating SF.31,44–46ΦFL of the neat TBR films was found to be a factor of ∼20 higher (ΦFL = 35%) as compared to that of rubrene films, thus in turn confirming the preventive role of t-butyl moieties in reducing SF-promoted FL quenching.
 Fig. 2  Fluorescence quantum yield of emitter-doped PS films as a function of emitter concentration. Lines serve as guidelines to the eye. Excitation wavelength – 450 nm. 
The discussed ΦFL behaviors with increasing emitter concentration are well supported by the corresponding dynamics observed in the FL spectra (Fig. 3). With up to 1 wt% of rubrene in the PS films, no changes in FL spectral shape are observed. Above this concentration the relative intensity of vibronic peaks begin to change finally resulting in a domination of the second vibronic replica at 610 nm for an emitter concentration of 70 wt% and above. These changes are also accompanied by the pronounced FL redshift and band broadening, which all together signifies onset of rubrene aggregation with the emission band (at ∼610 nm) corresponding to rubrene in the crystalline enviroment.47 In contrast, TBR exhibits considerably smaller FL spectral changes with increasing emitter concentration indicating that emission from the amorphous TBR phase prevails almost up to 100 wt% (Fig. 3).
 Fig. 3  Fluorescence spectra of emitter-doped PS films as a function of emitter concentration, where the emitter is (a) rubrene and (b) TBR. Excitation wavelength – 450 nm. 
More detailed understanding on the role of t-butyl groups in suppressing FL concentration quenching can be obtained from the FL transients. FL transients of rubrene- and TBR-doped PS films at different doping concentrations are compared in Fig. 4.
 Fig. 4  FL transients of emitter-doped PS films as a function of emitter concentration, where the emitter is (a) rubrene and (b) TBR. Measurements carried out at FL maximum. Excitation energy density per pulse – 2.3 nJ cm−2; excitation wavelength – 450 nm; repetition rate – 1 MHz. FL lifetimes of 1 wt% doped PS films are indicated. 
At a low doping concentration (∼1 wt%), both rubrene and TBR transients followed a single exponential decay law with similar FL lifetimes of ∼19 ns indicating the absence of concentration quenching. The increasing rubrene concentration in PS films rapidly accelerated FL decay eventually transforming it to bi-exponential. The average FL lifetime at the 100 wt% doping level (neat film) was shortened dramatically, down to 0.58 ns. Such an abrupt shortening of the FL lifetime nicely correlates with ΦFL quenching dynamics observed with increasing rubrene concentration (Fig. 2).
Compared to rubrene, the TBR emitter also demonstrated shortening of FL lifetime, yet at a much smaller degree (Fig. 4b). This again hints at a decrease of concentration quenching likely due to diminished SF in TBR films. Nevertheless, increase of TBR concentration causes an emergence of a delayed FL component (>100 ns), which was absent in rubrene films. We attribute the delayed component to annihilation of triplet excitons generated via the SF process. Surprisingly, the delayed FL is not visible in the rubrene-doped PS film, even though SF is much stronger. The reason for this intricate behavior is discussed below.
The role of SF was further disclosed in FL transients measured at a significantly higher excitation density (300 μJ cm−2 per pulse) (Fig. 5). PS films with low emitter concentration (1 wt%) expressed the same mono-exponential FL decay profile independently of the pump level used, whereas an increased doping level (up to 70 wt%) resulted in the appearance of well-pronounced delayed FL components for both emitters, rubrene and TBR. Since no significant FL spectral changes have been observed at several nanosecond and hundreds of nanosecond delays, prompt and delayed FL components were associated with the same emitting species, thereby signifying that the delayed FL originates from TTA. From this, it became obvious that there must be a mechanism responsible for triplet generation, which apparently is SF in agreement with other reports on rubrene.31,44 Undoubtedly, a large excitation density plays a crucial role here, because TTA is a bimolecular process and large triplet concentration is required for the TTA-caused delayed FL component to be substantial. In contrast, low excitation density conditions imply much lower triplet concentration generated via SF, which efficiently spread in the bulk of rubrene films because of the greater triplet diffusion. This concomitantly facilitates triplet quenching and thus justifies the absence of a delayed FL component in rubrene transients at a given registration dynamic range (Fig. 4a).
 Fig. 5  FL transients of emitter-doped PS films at different emitter concentrations, where the emitter is (a) rubrene and (b) TBR. Excitation energy density per pulse – 300 μJ cm−2, excitation wavelength – 450 nm; repetition rate – 1 kHz. 
Having realized from our previous experiments that TTA indeed occurs in TBR-doped PS films, we attempted to use TBR as an emitter in sensitized NIR-to-vis photon upconversion. To reveal the net effect of t-butyl groups on the UC performance of rubrene films, a triplet sensitizer, palladium phthalocyanine (see Chart 1), was additionally introduced. The choice of the current sensitizer was based on the rapid intersystem crossing delivered, which enabled virtually perfect conversion of singlet excitations to triplets (ΦISC = 1), and moreover, featured well-matched triplet and singlet energy levels with those of rubrene.22,23 Sensitizer concentrations in the UC films was kept low (0.1 wt%) to avoid undesirable aggregation and to lessen detrimental singlet energy back-transfer from emitter to sensitizer.11,42,48 Yet this concentration was not set too low to have sufficient absorption of excitation light, and consequently, the detectable UC signal for conducting reliable measurements.
To diminish SF of the upconverted singlets in the studied solution-processed rubrene films, singlet exciton sink DBP13,14,28,42 with high ΦFL was also introduced. By collecting upconverted singlets from rubrene via a Förster resonant energy transfer (FRET) mechanism DBP was anticipated to prevent undesirable SF. Indeed, as previously demonstrated it served well for this purpose enabling ΦFL to be improved, and consequently, external quantum efficiency of rubrene-based OLEDs by a few tens of times.49 To ensure efficient energy transfer from rubrene to DBP, the optimal concentration of DBP has to be found. Although, intuitively, larger amount of DBP should yield larger FRET efficiency, a planar structure possessing DBP will likely aggregate at larger concentrations unavoidably causing emission quenching. Therefore, optimization of DBP concentration in the rubrene film with respect to ΦFL was performed. Fig. 6 shows the FL spectra as well as the ΦFL of the DBP-doped rubrene films as a function of doping concentration in the range of 0–1 wt%. FL spectrum evolution with increasing DBP concentration clearly demonstrates that even a small amount of sink noticeably changes the emission properties. Explicitly, already at 0.5 wt% of DBP, the emission spectrum resembled that of the pure DBP spectrum (see Fig. 1b) indicating efficient FRET from rubrene to DBP. Maximum ΦFL of 15% attained at this doping concentration signifies a factor of 10 enhancement of ΦFL in respect to that obtained in the sink-free rubrene film (ΦFL = 1.5%). Still the achieved maximum ΦFL in the DBP-doped films is found to be roughly 7 times less than that (∼100%) attained by pure rubrene in the isolated form. This indicates that FL quenching due to SF is not completely suppressed by addition of 0.5 wt% DBP, and unfortunately cannot be further suppressed because of DBP aggregation at higher concentrations. Nevertheless, the determined optimal DBP concentration (0.5 wt%) in solution-processed rubrene films is found to be very similar to those reported by others for thermally evaporated films.13,17 This DBP concentration was further utilized in the fabrication of PdPc-sensitized UC films with rubrene and TBR emitters.
 Fig. 6  FL spectra of DBP-doped rubrene films at various doping concentrations. ΦFL of the films as a function of sink concentration is shown in the inset. Excitation wavelength – 450 nm. 
Aiming to find the optimal emitter concentration for the most efficient TTA-UC, we fabricated PdPc-sensitized UC films with different rubrene and TBR concentrations. During the fabrication, concentrations of the sensitizer PdPc and singlet sink DBP were kept constant at their optimal values of 0.1 wt% and 0.5 wt%, respectively, as determined previously. Bright yellow UC emission was observed from the upconverting films even by the naked eye under excitation of a NIR laser diode at 730 nm (Fig. 7e). ΦUC evaluated using an integrating sphere and expressed as a ratio of the emitted UC photons to the absorbed ones for the fabricated UC films are shown in Fig. 7b. Note that such a definition of ΦUC implies a maximum theoretical UC yield of 50%. ΦFL of the same films obtained by directly exciting emitter species are displayed in Fig. 7a.
 Fig. 7  (a) FL and (b) UC quantum yields of PdPc-sensitized UC films doped with singlet sink DBP as a function emitter rubrene or TBR concentration. UC emission spectra of the same films containing different emitters (c) rubrene and (d) TBR. Emission spectra of pure rubrene, TBR and DBP in PS at low concentrations are presented for reference. PdPc and DBP concentrations in the UC films were fixed at 0.1 wt% and 0.5 wt%, respectively. FL and UC excitation wavelengths are 450 nm and 730 nm, respectively. Excitation density at 730 nm–100 W cm−2. (e) Picture of the NIR-to-visible upconversion in the polymer film with the TBR emitter excited at the edge of the film with 730 nm light. 
First of all, it is worth noting that even though the rubrene UC films contain singlet sink DBP, their ΦFL is several times lower, particularly at higher emitter concentrations, as compared to a ΦFL of 15% obtained in Fig. 6 at the same optimal DBP doping. This is explained by the presence of a sensitizer in the UC films, which causes detrimental back-FRET from DBP to PdPc. The FRET is feasible due to a small yet existing spectral overlap between DBP emission and PdPc absorption (Fig. 1). In close analogy, the detrimental energy back-transfer induced by the introduction of 0.1 wt% of the sensitizer (platinum octaethylporphyrin) was previously demonstrated to be responsible for ∼20-fold reduction in ΦFL of 9,10-diphenylanthracene solid films.42 Thus, the decrease of ΦFL observed for rubrene UC films with increasing emitter content from 30 to 100 wt% (Fig. 7a) results from the adverse back-FRET to PdPc and persisting SF in the emitter as discussed above. For instance, at the highest rubrene emitter concentration (close to 100 wt%) UC films containing PdPc exhibited ΦFL = 2.5%, whereas the same films without sensitizer expressed ΦFL = 15% (see Fig. 6) implying a factor of 6 lower ΦFL due to back-FRET to sensitizer. On the other hand, similar (a factor of 7) reduction in ΦFL was also experienced by the rubrene films due to SF effects resulting in the net decrease of ΦFL from 100% to 2.5%. The decrease of ΦFL with increasing emitter concentration was also obtained for TBR although at a considerably smaller extent due to suppressed SF.
Contrary to the ΦFL dynamics, ΦUC of the UC films showed non-monotonous behavior with increasing emitter contents (Fig. 7b). Initially, ΦUC increased with increasing rubrene and TBR concentrations up to 80 wt%, where maximum ΦUC values were reached, and then began slightly declining above this concentration. The maximum ΦUC values attained in these films were 0.07% and 0.3% for rubrene and TBR emitters, respectively. Note that for all emitter concentration ranges the studied UC was dominated by the emission from DBP (Fig. 7c and d) signifying the essential role of the singlet sink in alleviating SF. The excitation density chosen for ΦUC measurements was sufficiently high (∼100 W cm−2) for TTA to dominate over spontaneous triplet decay. This is confirmed by the data presented in Fig. 9, where UC intensity dependence on excitation power density is displayed (see discussion below). The chosen excitation regime allowed us to disregard non-radiative triplet quenching (kT) as being negligibly small as compared to the TTA rate (kTTA ≫ kT), hence rendering ΦTTA = kTTA/(kTTA + kT) = 1. Taking into consideration that ΦUC is determined by the yields of intermediate energy transfer steps (shown in Fig. 1c), explicitly, by ISC yield of a sensitizer, TET yield from a sensitizer to an emitter and TTA and FL yields of an emitter, i.e. ΦUC = 0.5fΦISCΦTETΦTTAΦFL,(1)the observed initial increase of ΦUC could only be justified by the enhanced ΦTET. Note that ΦFL here also includes efficiency of FRET from emitter to DBP as depicted in Fig. 7a and f is a constant representing statistical probability to obtain a singlet from two emitter triplets via TTA. Since TET is a short-range Dexter-type process necessitating molecular orbital overlap, ΦTET should exhibit exponential growth with decreasing distance between emitter and sensitizer. Eventually, the growth of TET will saturate at some ΦTET value (not necessarily at 100%), which in the studied UC films occurs at the emitter concentration of about 80 wt%. Further behavior of ΦUC with increasing emitter concentration should follow that of ΦFL as all the other intermediate energy transfer steps have already reached maximum efficiency. Indeed, 4-fold higher maximum ΦUC obtained for the TBR film as compared to that of rubrene at 80 wt% concentration well corresponds to 4-fold higher ΦFL in the TBR film vs rubrene film at the same concentration. This infers similar ΦTET in both emitter-type UC films at this particular emitter concentration and also clarifies the improvement of ΦUC in TBR films under the TTA domination conditions to be caused by the suppressed SF.
We point out that UC films containing an emitter in excess of 80 wt% are rather inhomogeneous. This can contribute to more substantial reduction of ΦUC with increasing emitter concentration (Fig. 7b) above 80 wt% as that expected from ΦFL dependence. The spatial inhomogeneity in the films infers local fluctuations in composition, which likely cause FL and UC to emerge from different spatial regions. The most intense FL (unlike UC) is expected from the less aggregated regions with smaller emitter concentrations and thus diminished SF; meanwhile stronger UC is anticipated from the regions with larger emitter concentration as this facilitates triplet diffusion and TTA. Yet, the latter regions are more prone to detrimental SF, which adversely affects ΦUC. Additionally, the emitter aggregation may also induce spatial fluctuations, e.g. in sensitizer concentration. Obviously, sensitizer-poor regions will contribute most to the overall FL signal due to lowered back-FRET. Conversely, UC will be predominantly observed from sensitizer-rich regions; however these will suffer from enhanced back-FRET and thus reduced ΦUC. The reproducibility of the measurements in the case of spatially inhomogeneous films was ensured by probing large excitation volumes. The sample edge excitation configuration used (Fig. 7e) resulted in a long excitation stripe allowing an ensemble-averaged signal to be collected, which was independent of the excitation spot position.
In practice there might be frequent situations when operational conditions for TTA-assisted photon upconversion in solid UC films are not optimal, e.g. due to low sunlight. To find out how TTA-UC performance is affected by the change in the regime, i.e. from that governed by TTA (discussed above) to that dominated by spontaneous triplet decay (kT ≫ kTTA), UC properties of the rubrene and TBR films were investigated at low excitation conditions. UC transients of the films in these conditions at different emitter concentrations (60–100 wt%) are depicted in Fig. 8a. Emitter concentrations lower than 60 wt% precluded us from obtaining reliable UC transients because of too weak UC signals in the microsecond-time-domain.
 Fig. 8  (a) UC transients of rubrene and TBR films for different emitter concentrations (indicated) excited at 730 nm and measured at UC maxima. PdPc and DBP concentrations in the UC films were fixed at 0.1 wt% and 0.5 wt%, respectively. Excitation energy density per pulse – 7 mJ cm−2. (b) FL transients of the emitter-doped PS films at 70 wt% doping excited at 450 nm and measured at FL maxima. Excitation energy density per pulse – 300 μJ cm−2. Dashed lines indicate exponential fits. 
The transients of rubrene and TBR films expressed mainly single-exponential decay confirming the dominance of spontaneous triplet decay against non-linear TTA, and thus enabling easy deduction of triplet exciton lifetime (τT) from UC lifetime (τUC) by using the following expression τT = 2 × τUC.50 Compositional inhomogeneities of UC films at high emitter concentrations (≥80 wt%), particularly in rubrene films, conditioned dispersive triplet diffusion and appearance of multi-exponential UC decay profiles,51 which nonetheless did not obscure the clear tendencies observed. τUC and τT values estimated at different emitter concentrations are summarized in Table 1. The lifetime data evidence that increasing emitter contents from 60 wt% to 100 wt% accelerates UC decay resulting in τT shortening from 51 μs to ∼28 μs and from 91 μs to 63 μs for rubrene and TBR films, respectively. The monotonous shortening of triplet lifetime in the UC films with increasing emitter concentration is a signature of triplet exciton diffusion facilitated triplet quenching at non-radiative decay sites. We emphasize that 2-fold longer τT obtained in TBR films highlights the essential role of t-butyl moieties in effectively reducing triplet exciton diffusion and quenching as compared to those in rubrene films. Note, however, that diffusion in TBR films is still sufficient for TTA-UC to occur. The reduced triplet diffusion and thus prolonged τT (91 μs) obtained in TBR films at the lowest measured emitter concentration (60 wt%) is close to the intrinsic triplet lifetime of rubrene or TBR emitters measured in dilute solution (τT = 100 μs).40
Table 1 UC and triplet exciton lifetimes of PdPc-sensitized UC films doped with singlet sink DBP at various emitter (rubrene or TBR) concentrations




Conc. in PS
60 wt%
70 wt%
80 wt%
100 wt%





a 
τ
T = 2 × τUC considering that UC decay follows an exponential model.
b Fractional contribution of each decay component to the overall UC decay is indicated in brackets.
c Average lifetime estimated by taking into account fractional contributions of each decay component.





Rubrene



τ
UC (μs)
25.6
22.2
16.1 [74%]b 25.9 [36%]
10.9 [52%]b 17.7 [48%]



τ
T

 (μs)
51.2
44.4
〈37.2〉c
〈28.4〉c






TBR



τ
UC (μs)
45.5
44.1
38.2
31.5



τ
T

 (μs)
91.0
88.2
76.4
63.0





Fig. 8b illustrates FL transients of the emitter-doped PS films at 70 wt% doping. They are similar to those shown in Fig. 5 just depicted on a longer (microsecond) time-frame. Delayed FL occurring as a result of subsequent SF and TTA events follows a single-exponential decay profile for the delay of >50 μs as indicated by the linear fits in the semi-log plot. Single-exponential decay designates spontaneous triplet relaxation as a major deactivation pathway with decay lifetimes of ∼38 μs and ∼26 μs for TBR and rubrene emitter, respectively. These delayed FL lifetimes are found to be similar to τUC obtained in UC films containing identical emitter species at 70 wt% doping (see Table 1), and therefore serve as an additional proof that the delayed FL in sensitizer-free rubrene and TBR films originates from subsequently occurring SF and TTA processes.

Fig. 9 displays excitation density dependences of UC intensity for rubrene and TBR UC films measured at emitter doping concentrations of 80 wt% (at which maximum ΦUC was obtained) and 30 wt%. At low excitation the UC intensities exhibit quadratic behavior (indicated by slope 2 in Fig. 9), which switches to linear (slope 1) at a certain threshold density (Ith) with increasing excitation. The observed quadratic and linear behaviors in the TTA-UC systems are well-known to correspond to two different regimes, i.e. the one dominated by spontaneous triplet decay and the second one governed by TTA, respectively.50 It is worth noting that irrespective of the emitter type used, the UC films featured similar Ith (3.7 W cm−2) for an emitter doping concentration of 30 wt%. At higher 80 wt% doping Ith was found to be slightly larger for TBR (2.4 W cm−2) as compared to that for rubrene (2.1 W cm−2). The obtained Ith values are consistent with those reported by other groups for solid NIR-to-vis UC systems.13–16,21 Generally, the higher Ith observed for lower emitter doping concentrations with respect to that of higher doping can be mainly explained by reduced triplet diffusion because of the larger emitter interspacing, and thus reduced γTTA and diminished sensitizer-to-emitter TET efficiency. Note that the reduced ΦTET was found to be also responsible for significantly lowered ΦUC at 30 wt% doping as discussed previously (see Fig. 7b). Meanwhile similar Ith obtained for rubrene and TBR UC films at 30 wt% doping can be understood by considering threshold expression for TTA52 (2)where γTTA (=kTTA/nT) is the second-order TTA rate constant independent of the triplet concentration in the emitter (nT), and α(E) is the absorption coefficient of the sensitizer. Eqn (2) is valid if ΦISC = 1, which is exactly the case for the PdPc sensitizer. Since the same sensitizer (PdPc) and its concentration (0.1 wt%) was used in all the studied UC films, α(E) is considered to be the same. Previously we showed that t-butyl moieties in TBR reduce triplet diffusion, and consequently, diffusion facilitated triplet quenching resulting in a smaller kT (=1/τT) as compared to that in rubrene (see Table 1). Taking into account that TTA and TET are also governed by triplet diffusion described by the same Dexter transfer mechanism, the reduced diffusion is expected to similarly reduce γTTA and ΦTET in TBR films. Conversely, enhanced triplet diffusion in rubrene UC films will correspondingly enlarge all three quantities kT, γTTA and ΦTET. In accordance with eqn (2), the obtained similar Ith for rubrene and TBR UC films suggest that the enlargement of (kT)2 quantity in rubrene is compensated by the same increase of the product of [γTTA⋅ΦTET]. In other words, reduction of UC threshold, which could be attained through diffusion-enhanced TET and TTA processes in sensitized rubrene films is countervailed by diffusion-facilitated non-radiative triplet quenching, and vice versa, reduced triplet quenching and thus remaining larger triplet population in TBR films are counterbalanced by the diminished TET and TTA.
 Fig. 9  UC intensity vs. excitation power density of (a) rubrene- and (b) TBR-based UC films containing 30 wt% and 80 wt% of emitters. PdPc and DBP concentrations in the UC films were fixed at 0.1 wt% and 0.5 wt%, respectively. Excitation wavelength – 730 nm. 
The smaller γTTA in TBR films can be confirmed by using the following expression (3)at Ith excitation when spontaneous triplet decay rate is equal to that of TTA.52 Here G is the triplet generation rate in the emitter. Given the identical α(E) and ΦISC for the same sensitizer used and considering equal ΦTET for TBR and rubrene films at the emitter concentration of 80 wt% as discussed previously, G values evaluated at the threshold density could also be considered to be the same. Owing to 2-fold smaller kT obtained in TBR films, 4 times smaller γTTA in these films is expected with respect to rubrene films at 80 wt% emitter concentration.
UC quantum yield evaluated at optimal 80 wt% emitter doping as a function of excitation density is shown in Fig. 10. Obviously, at high excitations in TTA dominated regime ΦUC is saturated at 0.07% and 0.3% for rubrene and TBR films, respectively, in agreement with the maximum ΦUC values obtained in Fig. 7b. Decreasing excitation density apparently causes reduction of ΦUC below 10 W cm−2 indicating change of the regime from that governed by TTA to that dominated by spontaneous triplet decay. Similar Ith values found for rubrene and TBR UC films imply similar excitation density at which ΦUC starts decreasing. This in fact determines that ΦUC of TBR films will remain higher as compared to that of rubrene films even at low light conditions (kT ≫ kTTA) as it is shown in Fig. 10. Taking into account that in such conditions expression for ΦTTA simplifies into the following (4)the larger ΦUC in TBR films will also be afforded by lowered kT (in addition to larger ΦFL due to reduced SF). The latter result demonstrates that even though triplet exciton diffusion is impeded in TBR films due to the presence of t-butyl substituents, the subsequently reduced γTTA is counterbalanced by suppressed non-radiative triplet quenching kT and SF resulting in better overall TTA-UC performance of these films as compared to the performance of unsubstituted rubrene films. Despite the fact that the unsubstituted rubrene as an emitter performs better in UC solutions,40 the obtained results indicate that the TBR emitter is more efficient in the optimized solid UC films.
 Fig. 10  UC quantum yield of PdPc-sensitized UC films containing 80 wt% of emitter as a function of excitation power density. PdPc and DBP concentrations in the UC films were fixed at 0.1 wt% and 0.5 wt%, respectively. Excitation wavelength – 730 nm. Dashed lines indicate ΦUC saturation values. 
Conclusions
To summarize, we evaluated and compared TTA-UC performance of solution-processed films based on the popular rubrene emitter with those based on a t-butyl-substituted rubrene (TBR) emitter. Although t-butyl moieties were anticipated to act as spacing groups suppressing undesirable concentration quenching of emission, they could also induce adverse effects, i.e. reduced triplet diffusion and diffusion-assisted TTA, hence hampering UC efficiency. A small amount (0.1 wt%) of triplet sensitizer PdPc was used in the studied UC films to diminish detrimental energy transfer of upconverted singlets back to the sensitizer. All the UC films were additionally doped with 0.5 wt% of DBP, which served as an emissive singlet sink collecting upconverted singlet excitons and in this way reducing SF, particularly at high emitter contents. UC performance optimization carried out against emitter concentration revealed 4 times higher maximum ΦUC (0.3%) in TBR films as compared to that in rubrene films (ΦUC = 0.07%) at the optimal emitter doping of 80 wt%. Note that ΦUC defined in this work cannot exceed 50%, since during the TTA at most one UC photon can be produced per two absorbed ones. Importantly, TBR films outperformed rubrene films in terms of ΦUC irrespective of excitation conditions applied. Enhanced UC performance in the case of TBR in the TTA dominated regime was determined by the reduced fluorescence concentration quenching mainly due to suppressed SF. In the regime dominated by spontaneous triplet decay typically attained at low excitation densities, the impeded triplet diffusion and thus TTA in TBR films were counterbalanced by reduced non-radiative triplet quenching and SF rendering higher ΦUC of these films as compared to unsubstituted rubrene films. The obtained results imply peripheral spacing groups (e.g. t-butyl) in the emitters are beneficial for UC performance of the solid films, which are desired in practical TTA-UC applications.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The research was funded by the European Social Fund (project No. 09.3.3-LMT-K-712-01-0084) under grant agreement with the Research Council of Lithuania (LMTLT).
Notes and references
B. D. Ravetz, A. B. Pun, E. M. Churchill, D. N. Congreve, T. Rovis and L. M. Campos, Photoredox catalysis using infrared light via triplet fusion upconversion, Nature, 2019, 565, 343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. I. Park, K. T. Lee, Y. D. Suh and T. Hyeon, Upconverting nanoparticles: a versatile platform for wide-field two-photon microscopy and multi-modal in vivo imaging, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 1302–1317 RSC .
D. Yildiz, C. Baumann, A. Mikosch, A. J. C. Kuehne, A. Herrmann and R. Göstl, Anti-Stokes Stress Sensing: Mechanochemical Activation of Triplet–Triplet Annihilation Photon Upconversion, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 12919–12923 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-W. Liu, C.-C. Lee, C.-H. Yuan, W.-C. Su, S.-Y. Lin, W.-C. Chang, B.-Y. Huang, C.-F. Lin, Y.-Z. Lee, T.-H. Su and K.-T. Chen, Transparent Organic Upconversion Devices for Near-Infrared Sensing, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1217–1222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhou, S.-T. Han, X. Chen, F. Wang, Y.-B. Tang and V. A. L. Roy, An upconverted photonic nonvolatile memory, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4720 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. C. Askes, M. S. Meijer, T. Bouwens, I. Landman and S. Bonnet, Red Light Activation of Ru(II) Polypyridyl Prodrugs via Triplet-Triplet Annihilation Upconversion: Feasibility in Air and through Meat, Molecules, 2016, 21, 1460 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhou, Q. Liu, W. Feng, Y. Sun and F. Li, Upconversion Luminescent Materials: Advances and Applications, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 395–465 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Pedrini and A. Monguzzi, Recent advances in the application triplet–triplet annihilation-based photon upconversion systems to solar technologies, J. Photonics Energy, 2017, 8, 022005 Search PubMed .
T. F. Schulze and T. W. Schmidt, Photochemical upconversion: present status and prospects for its application to solar energy conversion, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 103–125 RSC .
T. N. Singh-Rachford and F. N. Castellano, Photon upconversion based on sensitized triplet–triplet annihilation, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2010, 254, 2560–2573 CrossRef CAS .
V. Gray, K. Moth-Poulsen, B. Albinsson and M. Abrahamsson, Towards efficient solid-state triplet–triplet annihilation based photon upconversion: supramolecular, macromolecular and self-assembled systems, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2018, 362, 54–71 CrossRef CAS .
B. Joarder, N. Yanai and N. Kimizuka, Solid-State Photon Upconversion Materials: Structural Integrity and Triplet–Singlet Dual Energy Migration, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 4613–4624 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wu, D. N. Congreve, M. W. B. Wilson, J. Jean, N. Geva, M. Welborn, T. Van Voorhis, V. Bulović, M. G. Bawendi and M. A. Baldo, Solid-state infrared-to-visible upconversion sensitized by colloidal nanocrystals, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 31–34 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wu, J. Jean, V. Bulović and M. A. Baldo, Interference-enhanced infrared-to-visible upconversion in solid-state thin films sensitized by colloidal nanocrystals, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2017, 110, 211101 CrossRef .
S. Amemori, Y. Sasaki, N. Yanai and N. Kimizuka, Near-Infrared-to-Visible Photon Upconversion Sensitized by a Metal Complex with Spin-Forbidden yet Strong S0–T1 Absorption, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 8702–8705 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Nienhaus, J.-P. Correa-Baena, S. Wieghold, M. Einzinger, T.-A. Lin, K. E. Shulenberger, N. D. Klein, M. Wu, V. Bulović, T. Buonassisi, M. A. Baldo and M. G. Bawendi, Triplet-Sensitization by Lead Halide Perovskite Thin Films for Near-Infrared-to-Visible Upconversion, ACS
Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 888–895 CrossRef CAS .
L. Nienhaus, M. Wu, N. Geva, J. J. Shepherd, M. W. B. Wilson, V. Bulović, T. Van Voorhis, M. A. Baldo and M. G. Bawendi, Speed Limit for Triplet-Exciton Transfer in Solid-State PbS Nanocrystal-Sensitized Photon Upconversion, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 7848–7857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. M. Felter, M. C. Fravventura, E. Koster, R. D. Abellon, T. J. Savenije and F. C. Grozema, Solid-State Infrared Upconversion in Perylene Diimides Followed by Direct Electron Injection, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 124–129 Search PubMed .
Z. Huang, Z. Xu, M. Mahboub, Z. Liang, P. Jaimes, P. Xia, K. R. Graham, M. L. Tang and T. Lian, Enhanced Near-Infrared-to-Visible Upconversion by Synthetic Control of PbS Nanocrystal Triplet Photosensitizers, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 9769–9772 CrossRef CAS .
F. Deng, W. Sun and F. N. Castellano, Texaphyrin sensitized near-IR-to-visible photon upconversion, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2014, 13, 813–819 RSC .
A. Abulikemu, Y. Sakagami, C. Heck, K. Kamada, H. Sotome, H. Miyasaka, D. Kuzuhara and H. Yamada, Solid-State, Near-Infrared to Visible Photon Upconversion via Triplet–Triplet Annihilation of a Binary System Fabricated by Solution Casting, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 20812–20819 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Han, J. You, H. Yonemura, S. Yamada, S. R. Wang and X. G. Li, Metallophthalocyanines as triplet sensitizers for highly efficient photon upconversion based on sensitized triplet–triplet annihilation, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2016, 15, 1039–1045 RSC .
T. N. Singh-Rachford and F. N. Castellano, Pd(II) Phthalocyanine-Sensitized Triplet–Triplet Annihilation from Rubrene, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2008, 112, 3550–3556 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Che, W. Yang, G. Tang, F. Dumoulin, J. Zhao, L. Liu and Ü. İşci, Photophysical properties of palladium/platinum tetrasulfonyl phthalocyanines and their application in triplet–triplet annihilation upconversion, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 5785–5793 RSC .
V. Yakutkin, S. Aleshchenkov, S. Chernov, T. Miteva, G. Nelles, A. Cheprakov and S. Baluschev, Towards the IR Limit of the Triplet–Triplet Annihilation-Supported Up-Conversion: Tetraanthraporphyrin, Chem. – Eur. J., 2008, 14, 9846–9850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Nienhaus, M. Wu, V. Bulović, M. A. Baldo and M. G. Bawendi, Using lead chalcogenide nanocrystals as spin mixers: a perspective on near-infrared-to-visible upconversion, Dalton Trans., 2018, 47, 8509–8516 RSC .
S. Wieghold, A. S. Bieber, Z. A. VanOrman and L. Nienhaus, Influence of Triplet Diffusion on Lead Halide Perovskite-Sensitized Solid-State Upconversion, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 3806–3811 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Geva, L. Nienhaus, M. Wu, V. Bulović, M. A. Baldo, T. Van Voorhis and M. G. Bawendi, A Heterogeneous Kinetics Model for Triplet Exciton Transfer in Solid-State Upconversion, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 3147–3152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. N. Sanders, M. K. Gangishetty, M. Y. Sfeir and D. N. Congreve, Photon Upconversion in Aqueous Nanodroplets, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 9180–9184 CrossRef PubMed .
D. K. K. Liu and L. R. Faulkner, P-Type delayed fluorescence from rubrene, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1977, 99, 4594–4599 CrossRef CAS .
V. Jankus, E. W. Snedden, D. W. Bright, E. Arac, D. Dai and A. P. Monkman, Competition between polaron pair formation and singlet fission observed in amorphous rubrene films, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 87, 224202 CrossRef .
W. G. Herkstroeter and P. B. Merkel, The triplet state energies of rubrene and diphenylisobenzofuran, J. Photochem., 1981, 16, 331–341 CrossRef CAS .
X. Qiao and D. Ma, Nonlinear optoelectronic processes in organic optoelectronic devices: triplet–triplet annihilation and singlet fission, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2019, 100519 Search PubMed .
Y. C. Simon and C. Weder, Low-power photon upconversion through triplet–triplet annihilation in polymers, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 20817–20830 RSC .
S. Raišys, K. Kazlauskas, S. Juršėnas and Y. C. Simon, The Role of Triplet Exciton Diffusion in Light-Upconverting Polymer Glasses, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 15732–15740 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Gray, D. Dzebo, M. Abrahamsson, B. Albinsson and K. Moth-Poulsen, Triplet–triplet annihilation photon-upconversion: towards solar energy applications, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 10345–10352 RSC .
D. L. Dexter, A Theory of Sensitized Luminescence in Solids, J. Chem. Phys., 1953, 21, 836–850 CrossRef CAS .
R. Nagata, H. Nakanotani, W. J. Potscavage and C. Adachi, Exploiting Singlet Fission in Organic Light-Emitting Diodes, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801484 CrossRef PubMed .
H. H. Fong, S. K. So, W. Y. Sham, C. F. Lo, Y. S. Wu and C. H. Chen, Effects of tertiary butyl substitution on the charge transporting properties of rubrene-based films, Chem. Phys., 2004, 298, 119–123 CrossRef CAS .
E. Radiunas, S. Raišys, S. Juršėnas, A. Juzeliūnaitė, T. Javorskis, U. Šinkevičiūtė, E. Orentas and K. Kazlauskas, Understanding the limitations of NIR-to-visible photon upconversion in phthalocyanine-sensitized rubrene systems, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020 10.1039/c9tc06031f .
D. Y. Kondakov, T. D. Pawlik, T. K. Hatwar and J. P. Spindler, Triplet annihilation exceeding spin statistical limit in highly efficient fluorescent organic light-emitting diodes, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 106, 124510 CrossRef .
S. Raišys, S. Juršėnas, Y. C. Simon, C. Weder and K. Kazlauskas, Enhancement of triplet-sensitized upconversion in rigid polymers via singlet exciton sink approach, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 6796–6802 RSC .
T. Ogawa, M. Hosoyamada, B. Yurash, T.-Q. Nguyen, N. Yanai and N. Kimizuka, Donor–Acceptor–Collector Ternary Crystalline Films for Efficient Solid-State Photon Upconversion, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 8788–8796 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Finton, E. A. Wolf, V. S. Zoutenbier, K. A. Ward and I. Biaggio, Routes to singlet exciton fission in rubrene crystals and amorphous films, AIP Adv., 2019, 9, 095027 CrossRef .
X. Wang, T. Garcia, S. Monaco, B. Schatschneider and N. Marom, Effect of crystal packing on the excitonic properties of rubrene polymorphs, CrystEngComm, 2016, 18, 7353–7362 RSC .
S. T. Roberts, R. E. McAnally, J. N. Mastron, D. H. Webber, M. T. Whited, R. L. Brutchey, M. E. Thompson and S. E. Bradforth, Efficient Singlet Fission Discovered in a Disordered Acene Film, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6388–6400 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, B. Lee, D. Fu and V. Podzorov, The Origin of a 650 nm Photoluminescence Band in Rubrene, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5370–5375 CrossRef CAS .
Z. A. VanOrman, A. S. Bieber, S. Wieghold and L. Nienhaus, A perspective on triplet fusion upconversion: triplet sensitizers beyond quantum dots, MRS Commun., 2019, 1–12 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhang and S. R. Forrest, Triplets Contribute to Both an Increase and Loss in Fluorescent Yield in Organic Light Emitting Diodes, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 108, 267404 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Köhler and H. Bässler, Triplet states in organic semiconductors, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2009, 66, 71–109 CrossRef .
M. Scheidler, B. Cleve, H. Bässler and P. Thomas, Monte Carlo simulation of bimolecular exciton annihilation in an energetically random hopping system, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1994, 225, 431–436 CrossRef CAS .
A. Monguzzi, R. Tubino, S. Hoseinkhani, M. Campione and F. Meinardi, Low power, non-coherent sensitized photon up-conversion: modelling and perspectives, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 4322–4332 RSC .

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2020
Table Content:

 	Chart 1  Chemical structures of emitters rubrene and TBR (together with molecular models), sensitizer PdPc and singlet exciton sink DBP.	 

 	Fig. 1  (a) Absorption spectra of rubrene, and TBR emitters and singlet exciton sink DBP in toluene (1 × 10−5 M). Absorption spectrum of the PdPc sensitizer is displayed for reference. (b) FL spectra of rubrene, TBR and DBP in polystyrene (PS) films at 0.01 wt% concentration. (c) TTA-UC energy scheme for PdPc-sensitized rubrene (or TBR) systems with DBP as a singlet sink. Here, ISC – intersystem crossing, TET – triplet energy transfer, TTA – triplet–triplet annihilation, SF – singlet fission, FRET – Förster resonant energy transfer.	 

 	Fig. 2  Fluorescence quantum yield of emitter-doped PS films as a function of emitter concentration. Lines serve as guidelines to the eye. Excitation wavelength – 450 nm.	 

 	Fig. 3  Fluorescence spectra of emitter-doped PS films as a function of emitter concentration, where the emitter is (a) rubrene and (b) TBR. Excitation wavelength – 450 nm.	 

 	Fig. 4  FL transients of emitter-doped PS films as a function of emitter concentration, where the emitter is (a) rubrene and (b) TBR. Measurements carried out at FL maximum. Excitation energy density per pulse – 2.3 nJ cm−2; excitation wavelength – 450 nm; repetition rate – 1 MHz. FL lifetimes of 1 wt% doped PS films are indicated.	 

 	Fig. 5  FL transients of emitter-doped PS films at different emitter concentrations, where the emitter is (a) rubrene and (b) TBR. Excitation energy density per pulse – 300 μJ cm−2, excitation wavelength – 450 nm; repetition rate – 1 kHz.	 

 	Fig. 6  FL spectra of DBP-doped rubrene films at various doping concentrations. ΦFL of the films as a function of sink concentration is shown in the inset. Excitation wavelength – 450 nm.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) FL and (b) UC quantum yields of PdPc-sensitized UC films doped with singlet sink DBP as a function emitter rubrene or TBR concentration. UC emission spectra of the same films containing different emitters (c) rubrene and (d) TBR. Emission spectra of pure rubrene, TBR and DBP in PS at low concentrations are presented for reference. PdPc and DBP concentrations in the UC films were fixed at 0.1 wt% and 0.5 wt%, respectively. FL and UC excitation wavelengths are 450 nm and 730 nm, respectively. Excitation density at 730 nm–100 W cm−2. (e) Picture of the NIR-to-visible upconversion in the polymer film with the TBR emitter excited at the edge of the film with 730 nm light.	 
ΦUC = 0.5fΦISCΦTETΦTTAΦFL,	(1)

 	Fig. 8  (a) UC transients of rubrene and TBR films for different emitter concentrations (indicated) excited at 730 nm and measured at UC maxima. PdPc and DBP concentrations in the UC films were fixed at 0.1 wt% and 0.5 wt%, respectively. Excitation energy density per pulse – 7 mJ cm−2. (b) FL transients of the emitter-doped PS films at 70 wt% doping excited at 450 nm and measured at FL maxima. Excitation energy density per pulse – 300 μJ cm−2. Dashed lines indicate exponential fits.	 


Rubrene

τ
UC (μs)	25.6	22.2	16.1 [74%]b 25.9 [36%]	10.9 [52%]b 17.7 [48%]

τ
T

 (μs)	51.2	44.4	〈37.2〉c	〈28.4〉c


TBR

τ
UC (μs)	45.5	44.1	38.2	31.5

τ
T

 (μs)	91.0	88.2	76.4	63.0
	(2)

 	Fig. 9  UC intensity vs. excitation power density of (a) rubrene- and (b) TBR-based UC films containing 30 wt% and 80 wt% of emitters. PdPc and DBP concentrations in the UC films were fixed at 0.1 wt% and 0.5 wt%, respectively. Excitation wavelength – 730 nm.	 
	(3)
	(4)

 	Fig. 10  UC quantum yield of PdPc-sensitized UC films containing 80 wt% of emitter as a function of excitation power density. PdPc and DBP concentrations in the UC films were fixed at 0.1 wt% and 0.5 wt%, respectively. Excitation wavelength – 730 nm. Dashed lines indicate ΦUC saturation values.	 

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2020
