Effect of surface chemistry on bio-conjugation and bio-recognition abilities of 2D germanene materials   - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0NR07579E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0NR07579E
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 1893-1903Effect of surface chemistry on bio-conjugation and bio-recognition abilities of 2D germanene materials†

        
          
            Wei Li 
            Ang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jiri 
            Sturala
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Nikolas 
            Antonatos
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Zdeněk 
            Sofer
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Alessandra 
            Bonanni
          
        
      *a
aDivision of Chemistry & Biological Chemistry, School of Physical and Mathematical Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 637371. E-mail: a.bonanni@ntu.edu.sg
bDepartment of Inorganic Chemistry, University of Chemistry and Technology Prague, Technická 5, 166 28 Prague 6, Czech Republic
Received 
      22nd October 2020
    , Accepted 18th December 2020First published on 13th January 2021AbstractThe interest of the scientific community for 2D graphene analogues has been recently focused on 2D-Xene materials from Group 14. Among them, germanene and its derivatives have shown great potential because of their large bandgap and easily tuneable electronic and optical properties. With the latter having been already explored, the use of chemically modified germanenes for optical bio-recognition is yet to be investigated. Herein, we have synthesized two germanene materials with different surface ligands namely hydrogenated germanene (Ge–H) and methylated germanene (Ge–Me) and used them as an optical platform for the label-free biorecognition of Ochratoxin A (OTA), a highly carcinogenic food contaminant. It was discovered that firstly the surface ligands on chemically modified germanenes have strong influence on the intrinsic fluorescence of the material; secondly they also highly affect both the bio-conjugation ability and the bio-recognition efficiency of the material towards the detection of the analyte. An improved calibration sensitivity, together with superior reproducibility and linearity of response, was obtained with a methylated germanene (Ge–Me) material, indicating also the better suitability of the latter for real sample analysis. Such research is highly beneficial for the development and optimization of 2D material based optical platforms for fast and cost-effective bioassays.
Introduction
For years, graphene has been extensively employed for a myriad of applications including the design and realization of sensors with enhanced analytical performance for the detection of biomolecules.1,2 This is due to its unique properties such as a large surface area, low-frequency electrical noise, high electron mobility and high sensitivity towards changes in chemical environments.3–5 Based on numerous successes, more recent efforts have been directed to research and apply other 2D layered materials with the structure analogous to graphene which are known collectively as 2D-Xenes. The main analogues are germanenes and silicenes from the 14th Group, and phopshorenes, arsenenes and antimonenes from the 15th Group. Germanene, a 2D layered monoelemental material, holds great potential since it has shown high carrier mobility, quantum hall effect and half metallicity.6,7 More importantly, depending on the surface ligands (mostlyhydrogen or alkyl groups), its electronic structure, stability and physical properties can be highly tuneable.8–11 This allows the potential application of functionalised germanenes in various fields,10,12 several of which still remain largely unexplored. To date, theoretical calculations performed with germanenes have displayed potential applications in the fabrication of miniaturised sensors for the detection of NO2, H2S and SO2 gases,13,14 a wide range of energy conversions and storage applications, particularly batteries,15,16 and photocatalysis to convert solar energy into chemical and electrical energy,17 as well as optoelectronics and luminescence applications.11,18
Unlike graphene, single atoms within a germanene crystal structure are not confined to a single plane displaying intrinsic buckling distortions in each of the six-membered rings of the lattice structure. This results in enhanced surface reactivity which facilitates functionalisation via chemical reactions, enabling the creation of germanene derivatives with ease. Graphene, in contrast, requires harsh conditions for functionalization due to its stable flat structure.13,17,19 However, germanene is unable to exist in a free standing form and unlike graphene, 2D germanene cannot be exfoliated from the bulk germanium.20
The top-down synthesis of germanene is based on the chemical exfoliation of its Zintl phase with the general formula AB2, being A = divalent metal ion (e.g. Ca2+ or Eu2+), and B = germanium atom. This structure consists of germanium layers arranged in a hexagonal fashion which are coupled with interlayers comprising an alkali earth metal such as calcium. Commonly known Zintl phase compounds include CaSi2 and CaGe2,21,22 which are often utilised as the starting material for the synthesis of layered silicon or germanium structures via the chemical etching of calcium atoms. As a result, the produced materials are often not classified as germanenes (with GeGe double bonds) but as germananes as the germanium atoms are terminated with hydrogen (germanane) or alkyl chains (alkyl germanane, e.g. methyl germanane). As 2D graphene analogues have been the material of choice for the fabrication of biosensors in recent years,23 we wanted to examine if germanene, belonging to the abovementioned group with germanium being in the same group as carbon, would be able to exhibit biosensing capabilities. Since highly fluorescent germanenes can be synthesised by tuning the surface ligands, we wanted to investigate and compare the ability of these materials for biosensing by examining the variations in their intrinsic fluorescence during the biosensing process. Herein, synthesised methylated germanene (Ge–Me) and hydrogenated germanene (Ge–H) were employed for the study, with the aim of comparing the potential influence of the coordinated surface ligands on the properties and performance of the material. The use of 2D materials as optical labels has been widely explored, where the intrinsic fluorescence of the material was employed as the signal of interest. Previously reported data of 2D materials which have functioned as fluorescent labels included graphene oxides for the selective labelling of tumour cells,24,25 monolayered WS2 QDs for the detection of lipoic acid26,27 and Ti3C2 MXene QDs for Cu2+ ion sensing.28 While there has been evidence portraying the benefits of fluorescent labelling with 2D materials, the possibility of using germanene as an optical label remains largely unexplored. To date, there has only been one previous study utilising germanenes as a fluorescent label to identify and track nanographene-platinum microbots.29
In this study, we report the novel use of germanene derivatives towards the development of an optical aptasensor with the bio-recognition element being a DNA aptamer, a short and single stranded oligonucleotide which upon high affinity binding to a target molecule via non-covalent interactions, induces a conformation change into a 3-dimensional structure.30 While germanenes have only been previously used for first-principles DFT theoretical calculations to showcase the potential of using germanenes as a monolayer for the detection of toxic gases,14 there has only been one study involving the application of germanenes for the electrochemical detection of dopamine.31 To the best of our knowledge, there has been no work in the literature reporting the use of germanene derivatives as optical labels for biosensing purpose.
A previous study conducted by T. Hussain et al. revealed strong interactions between DNA nucleobases and the germanene surface upon adsorption of the former onto the latter.6 In view of that, investigation of the effects of the immobilisation of a DNA aptamer onto germanene derivatives could provide interesting insights into their potential use in sensing applications.
Herein, germanene derivatives functioning as the biosensing platform and optical labels towards the immobilisation of the biorecognition element, OTA Aptamer, were used to detect Ochratoxin A (OTA), a highly carcinogenic mycotoxin involved in food contamination.32,33 First, we compared the effect of germanenes with different surface ligands (Ge–Me and Ge–H) on the conjugation of the platform to the biorecognition element. After which, a comprehensive study was performed to investigate the influence of the surface ligands present on germanene in terms of bioanalytical parameters such as calibration sensitivity and selectivity, as well as linearity and reproducibility of the response.
Results and discussion
Two different germanene materials containing different surface functional groups were employed for this study, namely methylated germanene (Ge–Me) and hydrogenated germanene (Ge–H). Herein, the aim was to examine the effect of different surface chemistry on germanene materials, when functioning as the biosensing platform and optical label at the same time. The detection principle is based on a homogeneous optical apta-assay towards the determination of Ochratoxin A, a major food contaminant belonging to the class of mycotoxins.
Typically, the bio-conjugation mechanism is highly dependent on the interactions between the bio-recognition element and the biosensing platform.34 To gain a better understanding of the functional groups present on the surface of the materials, characterisation of germanene materials was first performed by X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS). Fig. 1 showcases the high-resolution Ge 2p and C 1s spectra for both the synthesized materials. For Ge–Me, it can be observed that the Ge 2p signal can be deconvoluted with two distinguishable peaks at 1218.7 eV and 1220.9 eV corresponding to Ge–H/C functionalities and Ge oxide species, respectively.35,36 The XPS spectrum of the Ge–H material presents similar functionalities to the XPS Ge 2p spectrum revealing a signal at 1218.5 eV assigned to Ge–C/H functionalities and a less intense peak occurring at 1221.2 eV corresponding to the presence of Ge oxide species. It is important to highlight that XPS spectra deconvolution is carried out to achieve the optimal fitting of the spectra but more importantly it takes into consideration the actual chemical features present, as confirmed by other characterization methodologies. In particular, it can be observed that the absence of Ge(0) from XPS analysis was supported and confirmed by XRD analysis (see Fig. 4). Furthermore, the significant presence of Ge oxide species for both Ge–H and Ge–Me materials as evidenced in the XPS signals at about 1220 eV was also confirmed by Energy Dispersive Spectroscopy (EDS) elemental analysis mapping performed during the TEM characterization (Fig. 1E and F). Comparing the high-resolution C 1s spectra (Fig. 1B and D) it can be easily appreciated that only the Ge–Me material presents a peak at 283.2 eV corresponding to the Ge–C functionality. Such a peak was not observed for the Ge–H material (Fig. 1D). In both materials the signal at about 285 eV can be attributed to adventitious carbon. Survey scans for both materials and further details for the XPS deconvolution can be found in Table S1 and Fig. S1 of the ESI.†
 Fig. 1  Top: high-resolution Ge 2p and C 1s X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) spectra for Ge–Me (A, B) and Ge–H (C, D). Bottom: transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images with corresponding EDS maps and selected area electron diffraction (SAED) patterns of (E) Ge–Me and (F) Ge–H. 
 Fig. 2  AFM images and size profiles of Ge–Me (top) and Ge–H (bottom). 
 Fig. 3  (A) General scheme illustrating the role of germanene functioning as the biosensing platform toward the optical detection of OTA, with the OTA Aptamer being the bio-recognition element; fluorescence emission spectra of the preliminary experiment involving (B) Ge–Me and (C) Ge–H before and after conjugation with the OTA Aptamer. Conditions: 1 mg mL−1 Ge–R; 150 μM OTA Aptamer; 10 μM OTA. 
 Fig. 4  Characterisation of Ge–Me. (A) FTIR spectra recorded with KBr pellets; (B) Raman spectra; (C) TG-MS spectra displaying the mass difference (black) and curves corresponding to the release of water (blue) and methane (red) as a function of temperature and (D) powder XRD patterns. 
TEM images displaying the structural features of Ge–Me and Ge–H are also shown in Fig. 1. Noticeably, both materials displayed a sheet-like morphology with a lateral size of the flakes in the micron range. Elemental maps obtained from EDS showcased a homogeneous distribution of Ge, C and O for Ge–Me and Ge and O for Ge–H. The corresponding selected area electron diffraction (SAED) patterns suggested a hexagonal symmetry for both Ge–Me and Ge–H, confirming a honeycomb structure for both materials. Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) was performed in an attempt to investigate the thickness and size of the materials (Fig. 2). It was uncovered that Ge–Me had a lateral size between 0.3 and 1.6 μm with a thickness ranging from 10 to 55 nm, while Ge–H possesses a lateral size between 0.1 and 1.2 μm with a thickness ranging from 25 to 60 nm. Overall, the AFM images displayed sheets of thickness between 10 and 60 nm indicating the existence of few-layer and multilayer germanene. According to AFM images, the observed sheets were unfolded.
The general principle behind the proposed sensing mechanism, as illustrated in Fig. 3A, is based on the physical adsorption of the bio-recognition element (OTA Aptamer) onto a fluorescent Ge–Me platform via non-covalent interactions such as van der Waals forces and hydrogen bonds, which can be formed between the surface of the material and the nitrogenous bases of the DNA aptamer.1,37 As a consequence of the increased proximity between the platform and the bio-recognition element, a switching-off phenomenon of the initial fluorescence emission of germanene was observed. Following the subsequent incubation of the Ge–Me/Apt conjugate with OTA, a further quenching of the fluorescence intensity was observed. In the presence of the target molecule (OTA), a conformational change in the structure of the OTA Aptamer took place, resulting in the formation of an antiparallel G-quadruplex.38,39 This OTA-induced structural change of the bio-recognition element could lead to an increased proximity between the two, thus intensifying the switching-off phenomenon and therefore, lowering the fluorescence emission upon incubation with the target molecule. In addition, it can be observed that the FWHM of the initial signal (see the blue line) is at about 98 nm which was approximately similar (100 nm) after the addition of the OTA Aptamer (see the pink line) and thereafter increased to 115 nm upon addition of the OTA target (see the green line). According to the literature, it was uncovered that the FWHM is temperature dependent, where an increase in temperature would result in an increase in the FWHM value.40,41 The measurements of the first and second signals were performed at room temperature and therefore, the FWHM value of both signals was very similar. However, the third measurement was performed after a one hour incubation at 37 °C, therefore, resulting in the slight increase of the FWHM value.
Thereafter, with the aim of validating the biosensing mechanism illustrated in Fig. 3A, a preliminary experiment where both Ge–Me and Ge–H functioned as the biosensing platform towards the optical detection of OTA was performed, and the corresponding results are illustrated in Fig. 3B and C. From Fig. 3B, it was revealed that in the absence of the OTA Aptamer (the bio-recognition element in this biosensing process), Ge–Me exhibited a strong fluorescence emission (see the blue continuous line). With the subsequent addition of the OTA Aptamer, a decrease in the fluorescence intensity (about 33%) of the fluorophore within the material was recorded (see the pink dotted line). To further ascertain if the fluorescence emissions from the individual reagents contributed to the recorded signal of interest, the fluorescence spectra for the Tris-HCl buffer, OTA Aptamer and OTA were also measured (see orange, red and purple continuous lines), with the obtained emissions indicating no interferences at the emission wavelength of interest (see the inset in Fig. 3B). The corresponding histogram plots are displayed in Fig. S2A of the ESI,† where the obtained results exhibited good reproducibility with an RSD value of less than 5% for all the measurements. On the other hand, in the case of the Ge–H material, not only the initial fluorescence is of much lower intensity, but also no change in the measured signal was observed with the addition of both the bio-recognition element and the target analyte (see Fig. 3C). From the histogram plots illustrated in Fig. S2B of the ESI,† it can be observed that the measurements displayed good reproducibility with an RSD value below 5% as well for all measurements. Moreover, photoluminescence (PL) measurements of the Ge crystal were performed and the results were subsequently compared to those of Ge–Me and Ge–H. From the obtained result shown in Fig. S3 of the ESI,† there was no observable PL for the Ge crystal as compared to Ge–Me, thereby confirming its inability to exhibit any inherent fluorescence. Therefore, it was not possible to use this material for biosensing. As a result, Ge–Me was selected as the platform for further quantitative studies.
Before proceeding, in order to gain more insights and further understand the chemical composition and properties of the Ge–Me material chosen for the biosensing, additional characterization was carried out by FTIR, Raman spectroscopy, X-ray Powder Diffraction (XRD) and Thermogravimetric Analysis (TGA). From FTIR spectra in Fig. 4A, the peak appearing at 570 cm−1 was assigned to Ge–C vibration, thus confirming the presence of methyl groups on the Ge–Me surface. In addition, C–H vibrational modes were recorded at 850 cm−1, 1180 cm−1, 1420 cm−1 and 2920 cm−1, also indicating the presence of methyl groups. Furthermore, the Ge–H vibrational modes were observed at about 2000 cm−1. Subsequent Raman analysis was performed (see the spectrum in Fig. 4B) to ascertain the presence of –CH3 surface termination groups on the material. From the obtained spectra, the E2g mode showcased a large peak at about 305 cm−1, corresponding to the Ge–Ge framework vibration, in accordance with the reported values in the literature.10,35 Thereafter, thermogravimetric analysis was performed to analyse the thermal stability of Ge–Me, which showed minimal mass loss from 60–200 °C while significant mass loss was recorded between 200 and 550 °C with an estimated mass loss of 33%, which is attributed to the expected mass loss of a methane from the structure. A small signal for water was also detected, which is probably the result of surface oxidation and presence of small quantity of Ge–OH groups (see the black line in Fig. 4C). Finally, the X-ray power diffraction was performed in the small angle (2θ) regions, in order to elucidate the structure of the germanene framework and explore the interlayer spacing. The interlayer distances (d) were calculated using Bragg's equation (λ = 2dsinθ), where λ corresponds to the wavelength of the Cu-Kα source (1.540598 Å) while 2θ corresponds to the (002) peak position related to the c lattice parameter of a hexagonal closely-packed crystal structure.42,43 The X-ray peaks were identified according to or in analogy to previous publications.11,35 From the obtained spectra in Fig. 4D, the first major diffraction reflection at 10.5° of 2θ corresponds to the interlayer spacing. The diffraction reflection occurring at 26.2° of 2θ is assumed to be the (100) reflection. It was uncovered that the obtained XRD peaks of Ge–Me were in good agreement with the previously reported data in the literature.11
Moving on, optimisation of the Ge–Me concentration was carried out. To this aim, increasing concentrations of Ge–Me (ranging from 0.016 mg mL−1 to 6 mg mL−1) were employed for OTA detection, with the obtained results displayed in Fig. 5 showing good reproducibility, with the RSD value always below 4% for all concentrations. The initial fluorescence emission from the Ge–Me increased linearly with increasing concentrations of the material. Specifically, the increase in the fluorescence intensity continued until an emission maximum was attained at 1 mg mL−1. After which, the fluorescence intensity decreased with increasing concentrations of the material. As such, an optimal concentration of 1 mg mL−1 of Ge–Me was chosen for subsequent studies.
 Fig. 5  Study of Ge–Me fluorescent emission dependence vs. concentration. (A) Calibration curve showing a linear trend of fluorescence intensity towards Ge–Me concentration; (B) histogram plots for triplicate experiments; (C) fluorescence intensity spectra illustrating the concentration study (with concentrations ranging from 0.016 mg mL−1 to 6 mg mL−1). 
Following which, a more comprehensive study was performed in order to probe the effect of the bio-recognition element concentration utilised on the fluorescence emission of the Ge–Me/Apt conjugate. Fig. 6A illustrates the corresponding fluorescence intensity ratio represented as an average FIratio of [(FIGe–Me − FIGe–Me/Apt–OTA)/(FIGe–Me − FIGe–Me/Apt)] and plotted in the form of a histogram. With this notation, a value of FIratio > 1 would indicate a further decrease in the initial fluorescence in the presence of the analyte, while a value equal to 1 indicates no further change upon OTA incubation. From Fig. 6A, an initial increase in FIratio when increasing OTA Aptamer concentration up to 150 nM can be observed. After which, most likely due to the crowding effect of the bio-recognition element on the Ge–Me surface, which hinders the bio-recognition event, a decrease in the detection signal was observed upon further increasing OTA Aptamer concentration. Since the use of 150 nM of the bio-recognition element resulted in the greatest change in fluorescence emission (largest FIratio) for OTA detection, this value was then chosen for further optimization studies.
 Fig. 6  (A) Histogram plot representing the variation in fluorescence intensity (FIratio) measured from the Ge–Me/Apt conjugate obtained with a series of concentrations of the OTA Aptamer (ranging from 47 nM to 9000 nM). FIratio = [(FIGe–Me − FIGe–Me/Apt–OTA)/(FIGe–Me − FIGe–Me/Apt)]; error bars correspond to triplicate measurements; (B) calibration curve displaying the variation in the fluorescence intensity measured from the Ge–Me/Apt conjugate incubated with a series of concentrations of OTA (ranging from 0.01 μM to 100 μM). The signal is represented as an average FIratio of [(FIOTA Apt − FIOTA)/(FIGe–Me − FIOTA Apt)]; error bars correspond to triplicate measurements; (C) fluorescence emission spectra for Ge–Me, Ge–Me/Apt, and Ge–Me/Apt–OTA upon incubation with varying concentrations of OTA from 0.01 μM to 100 μM. All measurements were performed in 0.025 M Tris-HCl buffer (pH = 7.4) at room temperature; 1 mg mL−1 Ge–Me. 
Next, a calibration study was performed with increasing concentrations of OTA using Ge–Me/Apt as a bio-recognition platform. As depicted in Fig. 6B, a linear trend was obtained for the variation of fluorescence intensity (see FIratio) towards increasing OTA concentrations. As previously mentioned, formation of the Apt–OTA complex led to an antiparallel G quadruplex structure, where an increment in the OTA concentration could induce structural changes in the OTA Aptamer, resulting in a partial detachment of the entire formed complex or the aptamer itself. This phenomenon could contribute to the restoration of the fluorescence emission with increasing concentrations of OTA.
Since contamination of foodstuff has always been a key concern for food safety, ensuring the selectivity of a biosensor towards the detection of the specific food contaminant becomes a critical process. To this aim, a selectivity study was carried out using 1 mg mL−1 of Ge–Me to further evaluate the analytical performance of the system towards the detection of OTA. Fumonisin B1, a well-known mycotoxin co-contaminant in food commodities44,45 selected due to the similarity in size with OTA, and thrombin, a protein capable of being successfully captured by a DNA aptamer as the biorecognition element, were incubated in the presence of the Ge–Me/Apt conjugate.46 Additionally, a signal in the absence of the target was also recorded as reference (refer to “No target” signal). As illustrated in Fig. 7A, it can be observed from the histograms that a signal change similar to that obtained in the absence of any target was observed upon incubation of the Ge–Me/Apt conjugate with the abovementioned negative controls (see FB1 and THR histograms), with a significant change being observed after the incubation with OTA. The corresponding fluorescence emission spectra are displayed in Fig. 7B. Overall, this confirmed good selectivity of the developed apta-assay based on Ge–Me as the platform towards the optical detection of OTA. In addition, to further ascertain that the decrease in the fluorescence signal after incubation with the target analyte was not due to its interaction with the platform, a negative control was carried by comparing the initial fluorescence emission of Ge–Me with the fluorescence emission after its incubation with OTA, in the absence of the OTA Aptamer. Fig. 7C confirms a negligible signal change of Ge–Me before and after incubation with OTA, implying that changes in fluorescence intensity were only attainable in the presence of the bio-recognition element.
 Fig. 7  (A) Histogram plots illustrating the selectivity of the detection assay carried out using Fumonisin B1 (FB1), Thrombin (THR) and ‘No Target’ using 1 mg mL−1 of Ge–Me and 150 nM OTA Aptamer. (B) Corresponding fluorescence emission spectra obtained from the selectivity study. (C) Control experiment performed with 1 mg mL−1 of Ge–Me with and without OTA, in the absence of the OTA Aptamer. 
Before proceeding with real sample analysis, the stability of the Ge–Me material was also investigated. To this aim, the fluorescence emission of 1 mg mL−1 of the Ge–Me suspension was measured at different time intervals from 0 min to 336 hours (see Fig. S4 in the ESI†). The obtained spectra portrayed the greatest decrease in the emission of Ge–Me dispersion to occur beyond 120 hours, suggesting the optimal lifetime of the Ge–Me suspension to be 120 hours.
Next, the optimised protocol was employed for real sample analysis. Spiking the red wine sample with an optimised OTA concentration of 10 μM resulted in an average recovery of 92.4%, with an RSD below 2%, displaying excellent reproducibility (see Fig. S5 in the ESI† for the corresponding fluorescence emission spectra and Table S2† for the obtained data). This further affirms the suitability of the developed assay towards complex matrix applications. Finally, the limit of detection was determined to be 5 μg L−1 by considering both the standard deviation of the population of the blank, and the slope of the regression line.
Conclusions
To conclude, we have demonstrated the proof-of-concept of a novel platform for biosensing using germanene, a graphene analogue. We have exploited the intrinsic fluorescence of chemically modified germanenes for the optical detection of Ochratoxin A (OTA), a highly carcinogenic mycotoxin. The objective of the study was to investigate the ability of the surface ligands present on germanenes to influence the performance of the developed apta-assay. Specifically, two different types of germanenes with different surface ligands were employed for the study, namely methylated germanene (Ge–Me) and hydrogenated germanene (Ge–H). While utilising Ge–Me offered excellent biosensing capability upon incubation with the biorecognition element and target analyte, Ge–H on the other hand resulted in a poor biosensing ability. In fact, Ge–Me displayed superiority in terms of calibration sensitivity and selectivity, indicative of the strong influence surface ligands have on the behaviour of the biosensing mechanism. Overall, conclusions from this study show the great potential of a chemically modified germanene for optical sensing, and act as the basis for the identification of the optimal platform for the detection of biological analytes.
Experimental
Materials

Germanene materials. 
Hydrogenated germanene (Ge–H)8 and methylated germanene (Ge–Me) were prepared according to previously published data.47


Synthesis of Ge–H. 
Briefly, CaGe2 (300 mg, 1.62 mmol) was stirred at −40 °C for 14 days in aqueous 37% HCl (50 mL) under an argon atmosphere. The resulting solid was collected via filtration with a nylon filter, and washed with cold (0 °C) aqueous 37% HCl (2 × 20 mL), water (4 × 100 mL) and acetone (1 × 50 mL) before drying under vacuum. The resulting product was stored under an argon atmosphere.


Synthesis of Ge–Me. 
CaGe2 was fully immersed in an excess of iodomethane for 7 days at room temperature in a sintered glass funnel immersed in water to remove precipitated calcium iodide. The resulting flakes were collected via filtration and washed with 1 M HCl (2 × 20 mL), water (4 × 50 mL) and acetone (1 × 50 mL). The final product was dried under vacuum and stored under an argon atmosphere.
Tris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane, calcium chloride, sodium chloride, sodium hydroxide, hydrochloric acid and Ochratoxin A (OTA) were obtained from Sigma Aldrich, Singapore. The oligonucleotide sequence, functioning as the OTA Aptamer, was purchased from Integrated DNA Technologies (IDT, Singapore). The sequence of the OTA Aptamer was as follows: GAT CGG GTG TGG GTG GCG TAA AGG GAG CAT CGG ACA.48 A Tris-HCl buffer solution (0.025 M, pH 7.4, 0.3 M NaCl, 20 mM CaCl2) was employed in this study. Ultrapure water was obtained via a Milli-Q ion exchange column (Millipore) containing a resistivity value of 18.2 MΩ cm.

Equipment
High resolution X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS) was performed using a Phoibos 100 spectrometer equipped with a monochromatic Al X-ray radiation source (SPECS, Germany). High resolution C 1s core-level scans, Ge 2p scans and survey scans were carried out.
Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was conducted on a JEOL 7600 Field-emission scanning electron microscope (JEOL, Japan) with an accelerating voltage of 5.0 kV and a working distance of 6.0 mm under the Gentle Beam mode.
FTIR measurements were performed using an iS50R FTIR spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, USA) with a KBr beam splitter in the range of 4000–400 cm−1 at a resolution of 4 cm−1. The samples were measured using KBr pellets prepared by grounding 300 mg of KBr powder finely mixed with 1 mg of the sample.
Raman spectroscopic measurements were performed with an inVia Raman microscope (Renishaw, England) with a CCD detector in backscattering geometry and a 50× magnification objective lens. A DPSS Nd-YAG laser (532 nm, 50 mW) with an applied power of 0.05% was used for the measurements. Obtained peaks in the spectrum were referenced to a laser peak at 0 cm−1, while calibration of the spectrometer prior to the measurements was performed by acquiring a spectrum of Silicon and referencing it to 521 cm−1. Sample preparation was performed by depositing the powdered sample onto a metal plate before measurements were carried out immediately after the deposition.
Thermogravimetric analysis was performed using a Themys TGA (SETARAM instrumentation) coupled to mass spectrometry (OMNI star) at a heating rate of 10 °C min−1 and in a temperature range 40–600 °C. The measurements were carried out under a helium atmosphere with a flow rate of 100 mL min−1.
X-Ray Diffraction (XRD) was carried out using a Bruker D8 Discoverer (Bruker, Germany) powder diffractometer with a parafocusing Bragg–Brentano geometry and a Cu Kα radiation source (λ = 1.540598 Å, U = 40 kV, and I = 40 mA). Data were scanned over the angular range of 5–80° (2θ) with a step size of 0.0167° (2θ), and a counting time of 0.2 s per step. Data processing was performed using the HighScore Plus software.
Fluorescence measurements were performed on a Varian Cary Eclipse Fluorescence Spectrophotometer (Agilent, CA, USA) at room temperature, using a quartz glass cuvette. The excitation wavelength was fixed at 430 nm with the corresponding emission spectra recorded over the range of 450–800 nm, obtaining an emission maximum at 645 nm.

Preparation of the germanene/OTA Aptamer (Ge–R/Apt, R = H, Me) conjugate. 
To a solution of Tris-HCl buffer, an optimised amount of germanene material was added to make up a total volume of 200 μL before a fixed amount of OTA Aptamer was added to the solution. The resulting mixture was subjected to an incubation process with a thermoshaker for 20 min at 25 °C, following fluorescence measurements at room temperature immediately after the incubation.


Preparation of the germanene/OTA Aptamer-OTA (Ge–R/Apt–OTA, R = H, Me) conjugate. 
Varying amounts of OTA (ranging from 0.01 μM to 100 μM) were added to the Ge–R/Apt conjugate solution before subsequent incubation in a thermoshaker for 60 min at 37 °C. The incubated conjugate solution was cooled to room temperature before subsequent fluorescence measurements were carried out.

Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
A.B. gratefully acknowledges Ministry of Education (MOE), AcRF Tier 1 grant (Reference No: RG9/19) for the financial support. J. S. acknowledges the financial support of Grant Agency of the Czech Republic (GACR: 19-17593Y). Z. S. was supported by ERC CZ project LL2003 from the Ministry of Education Youth and Sports (MEYS).
References
W. L. Ang and A. Bonanni, ChemPlusChem, 2019, 84, 420–426 CrossRef CAS .
C. E. Chng, A. Ambrosi, C. K. Chua, M. Pumera and A. Bonanni, Chem. – Eur. J., 2017, 23, 1930–1936 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pumera, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 4146–4157 RSC .
A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183–191 CrossRef CAS .
A. H. Castro Neto, F. Guinea, N. M. R. Peres, K. S. Novoselov and A. K. Geim, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2009, 81, 109–162 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hussain, H. Vovusha, T. Kaewmaraya, V. Amornkitbamrung and R. Ahuja, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 255, 2713–2720 CrossRef CAS .
F. Bechstedt, L. Matthes, P. Gori and O. Pulci, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 261906 CrossRef .
E. Bianco, S. Butler, S. Jiang, O. D. Restrepo, W. Windl and J. E. Goldberger, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 4414–4421 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Padilha, L. B. Abdalla, A. J. R. da Silva and A. Fazzio, Phys. Rev. B, 2016, 93, 045135 CrossRef .
S. Jiang, K. Krymowski, T. Asel, M. Q. Arguilla, N. D. Cultrara, E. Yanchenko, X. Yang, L. J. Brillson, W. Windl and J. E. Goldberger, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 8071–8077 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jiang, S. Butler, E. Bianco, O. D. Restrepo, W. Windl and J. E. Goldberger, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3389 CrossRef .
J. R. Young, B. Chitara, N. D. Cultrara, M. Q. Arguilla, S. Jiang, F. Fan, E. Johnston-Halperin and J. E. Goldberger, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2015, 28, 034001 CrossRef .
T. Hussain, T. Kaewmaraya, S. Chakraborty, H. Vovusha, V. Amornkitbamrung and R. Ahuja, ACS Sens., 2018, 3, 867–874 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Gupta, D. Singh, K. Rajput and Y. Sonvane, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 102264–102271 RSC .
A. C. Serino, J. S. Ko, M. T. Yeung, J. J. Schwartz, C. B. Kang, S. H. Tolbert, R. B. Kaner, B. S. Dunn and P. S. Weiss, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 7995–8001 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhu, A. Chroneos and U. Schwingenschlögl, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 7272–7277 RSC .
Z. Liu, Z. Lou, Z. Li, G. Wang, Z. Wang, Y. Liu, B. Huang, S. Xia, X. Qin, X. Zhang and Y. Dai, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 11046–11048 RSC .
W. Amamou, P. M. Odenthal, E. J. Bushong, D. J. O’Hara, Y. K. Luo, J. van Baren, I. Pinchuk, Y. Wu, A. S. Ahmed, J. Katoch, M. W. Bockrath, H. W. K. Tom, J. E. Goldberger and R. K. Kawakami, 2D Mater., 2015, 2, 035012 CrossRef .
A. Nijamudheen, R. Bhattacharjee, S. Choudhury and A. Datta, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 3802–3809 CrossRef CAS .
A. Dimoulas, Microelectron. Eng., 2015, 131, 68–78 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Castillo, Z. Tang, A. P. Litvinchuk and A. M. Guloy, Inorg. Chem., 2016, 55, 10203–10207 CrossRef CAS .
N. D. Cultrara, Y. Wang, M. Q. Arguilla, M. R. Scudder, S. Jiang, W. Windl, S. Bobev and J. E. Goldberger, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 1335–1343 CrossRef CAS .
N. Rohaizad, C. C. Mayorga-Martinez, M. Fojtů, N. M. Latiff and M. Pumera, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021 10.1039/D1030CS00150C .
S. Senapati, D. K. Patel, B. Ray and P. Maiti, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part A, 2019, 107, 1917–1924 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Kushwaha, R. Sao and R. Vaish, J. Appl. Physiol., 2014, 116, 034701 CrossRef .
Y. Yan, C. Zhang, W. Gu, C. Ding, X. Li and Y. Xian, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 12170–12177 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lin, Y. Xu, S. Zhang, I. M. Ross, A. C. Ong and D. A. Allwood, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 8214–8223 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Guan, J. Ma, W. Yang, R. Zhang, X. Zhang, X. Dong, Y. Fan, L. Cai, Y. Cao, Y. Zhang, N. Li and Q. Xu, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 14123–14133 RSC .
T. Maric, S. M. Beladi-Mousavi, B. Khezri, J. Sturala, M. Z. M. Nasir, R. D. Webster, Z. k. Sofer and M. Pumera, Small, 2020, 16, 1902365 CrossRef CAS .
T. Adachi and Y. Nakamura, Molecules, 2019, 24, 4229 CrossRef CAS .
N. F. Rosli, N. Rohaizad, J. Sturala, A. C. Fisher, R. D. Webster and M. Pumera, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1910186 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Bendele, W. W. Carlton, P. Krogh and E. B. Lillehoj, J. Natl. Cancer Inst., 1985, 75, 733–742 CAS .
T. R. Bui-Klimke and F. Wu, Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr., 2015, 55, 1860–1869 CrossRef CAS .
V. Koh, W. L. Ang and A. Bonanni, ChemElectroChem, 2018, 5, 3654–3659 CrossRef CAS .
E. Bianco, S. Butler, S. Jiang, O. D. Restrepo, W. Windl and J. E. Goldberger, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 4414–4421 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hartman, J. Sturala, J. Plutnar and Z. Sofer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 16517–16522 CrossRef CAS .
F. Yang, M. Zhao, B. Zheng, D. Xiao, L. Wu and Y. Guo, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 25471–25479 RSC .
C. Yang, Y. Wang, J. L. Marty and X. Yang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2011, 26, 2724–2727 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Cruz-Aguado and G. Penner, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2008, 56, 10456–10461 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Ding, X. Zhang, L. Li, X. Lou, J. Xu, P. Zhou and M. Yan, Opt. Express, 2017, 25, 19065–19076 CrossRef .
B. Liang, Q. Yuan, L. Su, Y. Wang, Y. Guo, S. Wang, G. Fu, E. Marega, Y. I. Mazur, M. E. Ware and G. Salamo, Opt. Express, 2018, 26, 23107–23118 CrossRef CAS .
B. Anasori, M. R. Lukatskaya and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 16098 CrossRef CAS .
O. Mashtalir, M. Naguib, V. N. Mochalin, Y. Dall'Agnese, M. Heon, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Commun, 2013, 4, 1716 CrossRef .
M. Kamle, D. K. Mahato, S. Devi, K. E. Lee, S. G. Kang and P. Kumar, Toxins, 2019, 11, 328 CrossRef CAS .

          K. A. Voss, R. T. Riley and J. G.-v. Waes, in Reproductive and Developmental Toxicology, ed. R. C. Gupta, Academic Press, San Diego,  2011, pp. 725–737,  DOI:10.1016/B978-0-12-382032-7.10053-0 .
A. Sosic, A. Meneghello, E. Cretaio and B. Gatto, Sensors, 2011, 11, 9426–9441 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jiang, M. Q. Arguilla, N. D. Cultrara and J. E. Goldberger, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 4735–4740 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lv, Y. Zhang, G. Liu, L. Du and S. Wang, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 16290–16294 RSC .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0nr07579eThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Top: high-resolution Ge 2p and C 1s X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) spectra for Ge–Me (A, B) and Ge–H (C, D). Bottom: transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images with corresponding EDS maps and selected area electron diffraction (SAED) patterns of (E) Ge–Me and (F) Ge–H.	 

 	Fig. 2  AFM images and size profiles of Ge–Me (top) and Ge–H (bottom).	 

 	Fig. 3  (A) General scheme illustrating the role of germanene functioning as the biosensing platform toward the optical detection of OTA, with the OTA Aptamer being the bio-recognition element; fluorescence emission spectra of the preliminary experiment involving (B) Ge–Me and (C) Ge–H before and after conjugation with the OTA Aptamer. Conditions: 1 mg mL−1 Ge–R; 150 μM OTA Aptamer; 10 μM OTA.	 

 	Fig. 4  Characterisation of Ge–Me. (A) FTIR spectra recorded with KBr pellets; (B) Raman spectra; (C) TG-MS spectra displaying the mass difference (black) and curves corresponding to the release of water (blue) and methane (red) as a function of temperature and (D) powder XRD patterns.	 

 	Fig. 5  Study of Ge–Me fluorescent emission dependence vs. concentration. (A) Calibration curve showing a linear trend of fluorescence intensity towards Ge–Me concentration; (B) histogram plots for triplicate experiments; (C) fluorescence intensity spectra illustrating the concentration study (with concentrations ranging from 0.016 mg mL−1 to 6 mg mL−1).	 

 	Fig. 6  (A) Histogram plot representing the variation in fluorescence intensity (FIratio) measured from the Ge–Me/Apt conjugate obtained with a series of concentrations of the OTA Aptamer (ranging from 47 nM to 9000 nM). FIratio = [(FIGe–Me − FIGe–Me/Apt–OTA)/(FIGe–Me − FIGe–Me/Apt)]; error bars correspond to triplicate measurements; (B) calibration curve displaying the variation in the fluorescence intensity measured from the Ge–Me/Apt conjugate incubated with a series of concentrations of OTA (ranging from 0.01 μM to 100 μM). The signal is represented as an average FIratio of [(FIOTA Apt − FIOTA)/(FIGe–Me − FIOTA Apt)]; error bars correspond to triplicate measurements; (C) fluorescence emission spectra for Ge–Me, Ge–Me/Apt, and Ge–Me/Apt–OTA upon incubation with varying concentrations of OTA from 0.01 μM to 100 μM. All measurements were performed in 0.025 M Tris-HCl buffer (pH = 7.4) at room temperature; 1 mg mL−1 Ge–Me.	 

 	Fig. 7  (A) Histogram plots illustrating the selectivity of the detection assay carried out using Fumonisin B1 (FB1), Thrombin (THR) and ‘No Target’ using 1 mg mL−1 of Ge–Me and 150 nM OTA Aptamer. (B) Corresponding fluorescence emission spectra obtained from the selectivity study. (C) Control experiment performed with 1 mg mL−1 of Ge–Me with and without OTA, in the absence of the OTA Aptamer.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0nr07579e

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
