Graphene-supported 2D transition metal oxide heterostructures  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8TA03404D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8TA03404D
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 13509-13537Graphene-supported 2D transition metal oxide heterostructures

        
          
            Jalal 
            Azadmanjiri
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Vijay K. 
            Srivastava
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Parshant 
            Kumar
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            James 
            Wang
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Aimin 
            Yu
          
          
        
      *a
aFaculty of Science, Engineering and Technology, Swinburne University of Technology, Hawthorn, Victoria, 3122, Australia. E-mail: jalal_azad2000@yahoo.com; aiminyu@swin.edu.au;  Fax: +61 3 9214 8264;   Tel: +61 3 9214 8161
bDepartment of Mechanical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology (BHU), Varanasi, 221005, India
Received 
      13th April 2018
    , Accepted 19th June 2018First published on 20th June 2018AbstractHeterostructures of two-dimensional (2D) nanomaterials such as graphene/transition metal oxide (TMO) have recently attracted great interest due to their unique structures and superior properties that none of the individual conventional 2D nanomaterials could have. These unusual properties are due to alteration of the Fermi energy position, density of states, and work function of those heterostructures rather than their chemical components. The physical and quantum properties, the interfacial layer and the synergistic effect of each component in 2D heterostructures lead to the generation of new behavior and properties. In this review article, we are focusing on the recent progress in studying the characteristics and properties of 2D graphene/TMO heterostructures, and their significant applications in advanced energy storage and conversion devices. In this context, we firstly introduce bottom-up wet chemical approaches for the synthesis of 2D graphene/TMO heterostructures. The electron transfer, bonding chemistry and defects at the interface of these heterostructures are then discussed. Thirdly, the tunable properties of 2D graphene/TMO heterostructures and their applications in advanced energy storage and conversion devices are presented. The final section discusses the challenges and future prospects of 2D graphene/TMO heterostructures.Jalal AzadmanjiriJalal Azadmanjiri received his PhD (full scholarships) in Materials Science and Engineering from Monash University, Australia (2012) followed by a postdoctoral research fellowship at the Swinburne University of Technology. His current research interests include nanomaterials and nanotechnology, especially focusing on the design, synthesis, functionalization and characterization of nanomaterials with zero-, one- and two-dimensional structures. He is also interested in the development and improvement of hybrid materials with thin film and layered nanostructures for energy storage, energy conversion and biomedical applications, and the study of their surfaces and interfaces.Aimin YuDr Aimin Yu received her PhD in Chemistry at Nanjing University (China) in 1997. After being a Lecturer at the same university for three years, Dr Yu took a postdoctoral position at the Max Planck Institute of Colloids and Interfaces (Germany). Dr Yu moved to Australia in 2003 and currently is an Associate Professor at the Swinburne University of Technology, based in Melbourne Australia. Her research fields include: synthesis and functionalization of nanomaterials; preparation of nanostructured thin films; and development of biosensors and assay methods for biomedical applications. Dr Yu has co-authored more than 120 publications in these areas.
1 Introduction
1.1. Overview of graphene and other 2D nanomaterials
Graphene is a 2D monolayer of hybridized sp2 carbon (C) atoms in a honeycomb lattice with a 1.42 Å carbon–carbon distance and a typical thickness of 3.4 Å.1,2 Initially, single-layer graphene was exfoliated from graphite by a micromechanical cleavage method.3 Later on, other techniques such as chemical exfoliation,4 pyrolysis,5 epitaxial growth,6 the arc discharge method,7 and chemical vapor deposition (CVD)8 were developed to synthesize graphene. Due to its unique structure, graphene has remarkable characteristics such as high surface area, high mechanical strength, high thermal and electrical conductivity, high electron mobility and high optical transmittance (Table 1).9–11 Graphene is an excellent material that can be used in high-performance electronic devices such as sensors and energy storage and conversion devices that require high conductivity materials with fast charge movement.12,13 However, graphene effectiveness can be limited and it may not be able to provide all functions that are required in advanced electronic devices due to its chemical inertness, re-stacking problem and lack of a bandgap in its electronic structure.13,14 One effort has been made to improve graphene properties by forming graphene heterostructured architectures via stacking with other 2D nanomaterials. Dimensionality plays an important role in depicting the fundamental properties of a material despite the composition and arrangement of atoms in materials. This is due to the exotic condensed matter phenomenon which is generally absent in bulk materials.15 Moreover, the van der Waals interaction among neighbouring atomic layers of 2D nanomaterials leads to flexible integration of distinct materials to combine and control the diverse properties at the atomic scale.16 This has opened up opportunities to construct new 2D nanostructures with combined properties that none of the individual 2D nanomaterials could have.17
Table 1 Graphene structures and their properties




Graphene structure
Properties




Single layer graphene
Elastic stiffness ∼ 340 N m−1.10 Young's modulus ∼ 1.02 TPa and ultimate strength ∼ 130 GPa.27 Thermal conductivity ∼ 5300 W m−1 K−1.28 Electron mobility 2 × 105 cm2 V−1 s−1.29 Surface area ∼ 2600 m2 g−1 (ref. 30) and resistivity ∼ 6.5 kΩ.31 Optical transparency ∼ 97.7%.32 Specific capacitance ∼ 1.0 × 105 μF cm−2 for the graphene edge and 4 μF cm−2 for the basal plane.33 Bending stiffness of 0.192 nN nm (1.2 eV).34







Few-layer/multilayer graphene
Young's modulus ∼ 0.98 TPa (3 layers) and ultimate strength ∼ 101 GPa.27 Thermal conductivity ∼ 3000 W m−1 K−1.35 Electron mobility of 27000 cm2 V−1 s−1.36 Surface area ∼ 940 m2 g−1.37 Resistivity ∼ 2 kΩ.38 Optical transparency ∼ 80% (10 layers).39 Specific capacitance ∼ 135 F g−1.40 Bending stiffness of almost 10000 eV (10 layers).41







Graphene oxide/reduced-graphene oxide (rGO)
Young's modulus ∼ 42 GPa and ultimate strength ∼ 190 MPa.42 Thermal conductivity ∼ 1950 W m−1 K−1.43 Electron mobility 123 cm2 V−1 s−1.44 Surface area ∼ 705 m2 g−1 and specific capacitance ∼ 135 F g−1.45 Resistivity ∼ 10kΩ cm.46 Optical transparency ∼ 73%.47









2D nanomaterials such as hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN), metal–organic frameworks (MOFs), covalent organic frameworks (COFs), layered double hydroxides (LDHs), black phosphorus (BP), MXenes, transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs) and transition metal oxides (TMOs) which typically have a graphene-like crystallite structure and properties are the most recently researched nanostructures (Fig. 1a).18–20 These 2D nanomaterials have their own advantages and limitations when they are employed in diverse applications. For example, (i) TMDCs provide high initial capacities in batteries as electrodes; however, their capacity retention is low.18 The conducting state of TMDCs can be tuned to be semiconducting or metallic, depending upon the coordination and oxidation state of metals in their crystallographic structures. (ii) h-BN has an atomically flat surface that is relatively free of dangling bonds and charge hooks. Therefore, h-BN is a typical insulator as no charge is trapped on the surface.21
 Fig. 1  (a) A schematic illustration of diverse kinds of typical 2D nanomaterials. (b) Representative structures of selected TMO nanosheets: (i) monolayer MoO2, (ii) monolayer Ti0.91O2, (iii) TiNbO5, (iv) Ca2Nb3O10 and (v) Cs4W11O36. (c) Layered α-MoO3 and V2O5. (d) A set of SEM and TEM images of the as-synthesized TMO nanosheets: (i and i′) TiO2, (ii and ii′) Fe2O3, (iii and iii′) Co3O4 and (iv and iv′) WO3. Panel (a) reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 20, Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. Panel (b) reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 63 Copyright 2009, The Royal Society of Chemistry. Panel (c) reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 64, Copyright 2015, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Panel (d) reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 65, Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Graphene had been heterostructured with TMDCs like MoS2 and WS2,22,23h-BN24 and non-transition metal chalcogenides.25 These heterostructures overcome the limitations of individual 2D nanomaterials. Novel properties which are not related to any of the 2D nanomaterials can also be realized.26
1.2. Characteristics of TMOs
Among various 2D nanomaterials, TMOs possess some exceptional physical and chemical properties.48 The presence of polarizable oxygen ions (O2−) provides a contribution to their remarkable properties such as the capability to retain charged ions on their surfaces without intermixing. Furthermore, the stoichiometry of 2D TMOs in heterostructures can be altered by removing oxygen (O) through exposing to reducing environments.48 This treatment will cause non-uniform and nonlinear charge distribution within the lattices of a 2D TMO.49 This phenomenon leads to the generation of an electrostatic screening (damping of an electric field) on a length scale of 1–100 nm (i.e., it blocks the effect of an electric field while allowing the free passage through a magnetic field). Thus, 2D TMOs have exceptional local and interfacial properties which are desirable for coulombic interactions.50 It has been investigated that if a couple of 2D TMOs would come up in the electrostatic field of each other, an electrostatic potential at the interface will build up which influences the electronic properties of the structures due to the shifting of the Fermi levels of surface planes. It has also been demonstrated that an unconventional semiconductor can be fabricated from 2D TMOs if their d orbitals are aligned normally to their planes.49 This causes the re-ordering of orbitals and spins and thus leads to semiconducting properties.49 Besides, the vacancies in a 2D TMO can be altered to tune its properties.51
TMOs include different transition metals such as titanium (Ti), cobalt (Co), copper (Cu), manganese (Mn), etc. The representative structures, scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) of some TMOs and their layered structures have been presented in Fig. 1b to d, respectively. Cations of transition metals can adopt different charge states and binding configurations in 2D TMOs.51–53 Thus, various structures of 2D TMOs with different metal oxidation states can be created. It is possible that the same 2D TMOs may show different electronic properties at different stoichiometries.54
TMOs normally have high working potentials which make them attractive to be used as cathodes in energy storage applications.17 Additionally, they have found potential applications in optics,55 sensors,56 electronics,57 supercapacitors (SCs),58 batteries,59 solar hydrogen production,60 photon detectors,61 and biosystems,48,62 due to their exceptional properties. The redox activity of TMOs in intercalation reactions is also high. The properties of some TMOs are listed in Table 2.
Table 2 Some TMOs and their properties




2D TMOs
Properties
Application
Reference




TiO2
Self-cleaning and photoinduced hydrophilicity
Photocatalysis

66



Holey Zn(Mn2O4)
A specific capacity of 500 mA h g−1 at a current density of 800 mA g−1 for 50 cycles
Anode for sodium ion batteries

67



MnO2
A specific capacity of 617 mA h g−1
Cathode for Li and Na ion batteries

68



WO3
Prolonged irradiation time
Photoelectrode

69



MoO3
A high response to H2 gas with response and recovery times in the order of seconds
H2 gas sensing

70



TiO2
A spleen index of almost 3 after 30 days
Bio-applications

71



ZnO
A specific capacitance of 554 F g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1
SCs

72



V2O5
A specific capacity of 600 mA h g−1 at a current density of 100 m A g−1
Anode for LIBs

73



MnO2
A therapeutic efficiency of 49.5% (24 h) at a doxorubicin concentration of 30 μg mL−1 (doxorubicin is a typical broad-spectrum anticancer drug)
Ultrasensitive stimuli-responsive theranostics of cancer

74





1.3. Combination of TMOs with graphene
It has been demonstrated that, if a 2D TMO combines with graphene to form a 2D graphene/TMO heterostructure, it is possible to have synergistic effects and endow some new and unique functionalities to that heterostructure.21 Graphene in a graphene/TMO heterostructure can contribute excellent properties like those presented in Table 1. In fact, the synergistic effect of each component in a graphene/TMO heterostructure makes it exhibit a better performance. For instance, an excellent electrocatalytic oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) activity was reported for a graphene/TMO (i.e., graphene/Mn3O4-decorated Co3O4 (ref. 75)) heterostructure architecture whilst graphene and TMOs individually have little OOR activity.76 Graphene could facilitate the uniform nucleation, growth and assembly of TMOs to form heterostructures while TMOs on the surface of graphene could minimize the restacking of graphene nanosheets and maximize its electrochemically accessible surface area. Due to oxygen-containing functional groups on graphene nanosheets, there are good interfacial interactions and electrical contacts between graphene and TMOs.13,77,78 The electrical conductivity of 2D graphene/TMO heterostructures may be higher as compared to that of pristine graphene due to the extra holes created in graphene because of electron injection from graphene to TMOs.79 Effective adjustment or interaction of graphene with the incorporated TMO in a graphene/TMO leads to a significant enhancement in physicochemical properties such as electrical conductivity, electrochemically accessible surface area, structural stability, chemical activity and widening of the electronic bandgap.80 Thus, graphene/TMO heterostructures are attractive candidates for Li-ion batteries (LIBs),81 SCs,82 photocatalysts,83 bio-applications,84 and energy conversion devices.67,85Table 3 shows the fabrication methods, properties, and applications of some graphene/TMO heterostructures.
Table 3 Some graphene/TMO heterostructures with their fabrication methods and applications




Heterostructure
Fabrication method
Properties/Performance
Application
Reference




Graphene oxide (GO)/TiO2
Laser ablation in a liquid
A solar conversion efficiency of 14.3%
Water-splitting photocatalyst

86



Graphene/TiO2
Atomic layer deposition
63% more capacity to bear the load as compared to TiO2 over 50 ALD cycles
Electrode for LIBs

87



Graphene/TiO2
Rational control of hydrolysis, condensation, and annealing
A reversible capacity of 237 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at a current density of 20 mA g−1
Anode for LIBs

88



Graphene/SnO2
Layer by layer technique
A maximum specific capacitance of 472 F g−1
SCs

89



Graphene/SnO2
Redox reactions
A rate constant of 9.8 × 10−4 under ultraviolet (UV) light
Photocatalytic degradation

90



Graphene/SnO2
Chemical reduction
A specific capacitance of 43.4 F g−1
SCs

91



Graphene/SnO2
Reduction of graphene oxide (GO) with Sn2+ ions
A maximum reversible capacity of 541.3 mA h g−1
Anode for LIBs

92



Graphene/SnO2
First principles prediction
A global bandgap of 100 meV at the Fermi level
Field effect transistors (FETs)

93



Graphene/indium doped SnO2
Ultrasonication
A maximum charge capacity of 1058 mA h g−1
Anode for LIBs

94



Graphene/SnO2
Nanocrystal-seed-directed-hydrothermal route
An emitting current density as high as 1.1 A cm−2 at an applied field of 7.5 V μm−1
Printable electronics, energy-saving and harvesting

95



rGO/SnO2
Microwave-assisted sol–gel technique
Detection of sub-ppm concentrations of NO2 at low temperature (150 °C) in just a few seconds
Gas sensing

96



Graphene/Fe3O4
Microwave-assisted sol–gel technique
A maximum rate capacity of 400 mA h g−1
Anode for LIBs

97



Graphene/FeOOH quantum dots
Ultrasonication
A maximum specific capacitance of about 365 F g−1
SCs

94



Graphene/Fe3O4
Hydrothermal
Tunable microwave absorption over the range of 4–18 GHz
Microwave absorption

98



Graphene/Fe3O4
Ultrasonication
A maximum rate capacity of 1235 mA h g−1
Anode for LIBs

99



Graphene/NiO
Electrochemical reduction
A high electrocatalytic activity toward the oxidation of glucose and methanol under alkaline conditions
Electrolyte for glucose and methanol

100



Graphene/TiO2
Aerosol assisted self-assembly
A sensitivity of about 6.2 mA mM−1 cm2
Glucose biosensor

101



Graphene/TiO2
Simple mixing and sonication
1.26 wt% hydrogen storage
Hydrogen storage

102



Graphene/V2O5
Simple mixing and sonication
1.36 wt% hydrogen storage
Hydrogen storage

102



Graphene/ZnO
Electrodeposition
Sensitivities of 54 and 295.82 mA mM−1 cm2 for acetaminophen and 21 and 344.66 mA mM−1 cm2 for phenacetin
Sensing of acetaminophen and phenacetin drugs

69



Graphene/MnO2
Electrodeposition
A maximum specific capacitance of 245 F g−1
SCs

103



rGO/Co3O4
Hydrothermal route
A maximum specific capacitance of 402 F g−1
SCs

104



GO/TiO2
Self-assembly method
Excited by visible light with wavelengths longer than 510 nm
Photoelectronic and photocatalytic applications

105



GO/V2O5
Hydrothermal route
A maximum specific capacitance of 635 F g−1
SCs

82



Graphene/MnO2
Electrochemical reduction
A maximum specific capacitance of 1486.9 μF cm−2
SCs

106



Graphene/TiO2
Nanocrystal-seed-directed hydrothermal route
Photocatalytic activity four times faster than that of TiO2 nanorods
Photocatalytic decontamination

107



rGO/Cu2O
Template-assisted sol–gel method
High sensitivity (185 μA mM−1 cm2) and fast response (within 3 s)
Non-enzymatic amperometric glucose sensing

108



rGO/CuO
Vacuum filtration and hydrothermal reduction
A specific capacity of 736.8 mA h g−1
Anode for LIBs

109



Graphene/CoOx
Electrodeposition
A sensitivity of 79.3 μA mM−1 cm2
Sensor for monitoring urine glucose

100



rGO/Co3O4
Thermal pyrolysis
A specific capacity of 673 mA h g−1
Electrode for LIBs

110





1.4. The scope of this review
The design and fabrication of 2D heterostructures is still in its infancy to date but it is developing rapidly because of their many unique properties and a wide range of potential applications. The properties shown by 2D heterostructures are generally entirely different from their parent materials due to interface induced phenomena. For example, the effect induced by a plasmon on energy, light and carriers at the contact interface of a metal/semiconductor heterostructure decides the performance of the heterostructure.111 The dangling bond free atomic sheets in heterostructures exhibit extraordinary optical electronic properties as compared to other nanostructures in which dangling bonds are generally present.112 Research is being carried out to design unique devices with 2D heterostructures which increase alluring possibilities for manipulation and controlling the transport, confinement and generation of charge carriers, photons, phonons and excitons within these atomic interfaces. Some 2D heterostructures such as graphene/TMO could be used in various advanced technologies such as energy storage and conversion, sensors and biosystems. Although there are still limited studies on emerging new graphene/TMO heterostructures whose physical properties and geometry can be finely tailored by varying TMOs and the fabrication method, several articles on the synthesis, properties and applications of graphene based h-BN, sulfide and TMDC heterostructures have been published recently.113–116 In this context, the aim of this paper is to provide a comprehensive review that covers the fabrication methods, interaction bonding, tunable properties, advanced applications, and current conditions and challenges of graphene/TMO heterostructures. The application of 2D graphene/TMO heterostructures will be focused on the areas of advanced energy storage and conversion devices.
2 Overview of the synthesis of 2D graphene/TMO heterostructures using bottom-up wet chemical approaches
2D graphene/TMO heterostructures are generally synthesized by bottom-up approaches where desired nanostructures are constructed by stacking atoms or molecules one at a time. The chances of getting a homogeneous chemical composition, better short and long-range ordering, and final product with fewer defects are much higher for bottom-up techniques in comparison with that of top-down approaches.117 Various TMO nanostructures including zero-dimensional (0D), one-dimensional (1D), 2D and three-dimensional (3D) structures have been grown on graphene via ex situ or in situ bottom-up approaches.118–125Ex situ methods are also known as post-immobilization techniques. These methods generally involve the separate synthesis of TMO nanostructures followed by mixing with graphene solution.126 In order to enhance the interaction between TMOs and graphene, both surfaces are generally functionalized. The main drawback of ex situ methods is the non-uniform distribution of different constituents in the final product. Thus, in situ methods are generally used to achieve a more uniform structure. The surface of GO possesses oxygen-containing groups which could act as anchoring sites for metal cations.127 The subsequent oxidation of metal cations leads to the in situ generation of metal oxides on the surface of GO. Some most common bottom-up techniques for the fabrication of 2D graphene/TMO heterostructures are described in the following section.
2.1. Electrochemical/electrophoretic deposition
Electrochemical deposition (ECD)/electrophoretic deposition (EPD) has been used to fabricate graphene-supported TMO nanostructures. ECD and EPD are attractive approaches for thin film synthesis in which the composition of the deposited material can be controlled fairly.128,129 These methods can also control the coating thickness and morphology of TMOs by adjusting the bath chemistry, temperature and applied current/voltage.130 They are chemical deposition techniques for the deposition of elements or compounds via redox reactions. For both methods, the ions of elements or compounds (to be deposited) are dissolved in the electrolyte.131 These ions are transported to the electrodes under the applied electric field, and then reduced at the electrode surface. The ECD process can be either cathodic or anodic depending upon the material to be deposited on the electrode. The difference between EPD and ECD is in the solutions/suspensions. ECD is highly conductive whilst EPD uses low conductivity aqueous solutions/suspensions.132Fig. 2a displays a schematic of ECD/EPD processes. The Fermi energy level position of conducting surfaces can be tuned by adjusting the external power. Thus, the electronic states of the resulting graphene/TMO nanostructures can be modified accordingly.133–135 If appropriate parameters are selected, the reaction kinetics would be simple, green and fast without leaving any toxic contaminants.
 Fig. 2  (a) A schematic of producing a 2D GO/Cu2O heterostructure using the EPD method. (b) A low and higher magnification TEM images from the cross section and the given areas of GO/Cu2O, respectively (the crystal plane directions and inter-planar spaces have been indicated on the images. The insets also show the corresponding fast Fourier transform patterns). (c) A coincident periodic match style of Cu2O on the GO plane. Reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 137, Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Some 2D graphene/TMO heterostructures have been synthesized by ECD/EPD. Lee et al.136 created a hybrid film of graphene/MnO2 using the EPD method. A diluted colloidal suspension of rGO and layered manganate was deposited on an indium tin oxide (ITO) substrate with an applied voltage of 25 V. It was observed that the structure of different constituents in the fabricated hybrid film was almost similar to that of individual MnO2 nanosheets and rGO. In another study, Ruan et al.137 synthesized nacre-like GO/Cu2O thin films by the ECD method (Fig. 2b). The GO nanosheets functioned as a soft organic part in the nacre structure. The obtained composite nanostructure showed enhanced mechanical properties (the hardness and Young's modulus were 6 and 3 times higher than those of pure GO nanosheets, respectively). The ED method was proved to be a simple and novel route for the synthesis of nacre-like GO/Cu2O thin films. However, growing uniform crystals rapidly onto GO nanosheets is still a major challenge for this process.
2.2. Self-assembly
Self-assembly (SA) is a very efficient approach to assemble nano- and micro-structures into macrostructures (Fig. 3a).128 This method utilizes specific and local interactions to arrange disordered components into organized patterns or structures without any human intervention or external stimulus.138 The driving forces of SA generally involve weak interactions such as van der Waals, hydrophobic, magnetic, electrostatic and non-covalent interactions.139 Nanoscale entities tend to self-assemble into ordered structures to attain minimum Gibbs free energy. Thus, the product of SA exists in thermal equilibrium.140 SA is able to fabricate closely packed, well-ordered and organized thin films and authorize for the immobilization of multiple functional molecules onto surfaces.20
 Fig. 3  (a) A schematic illustration of different self-assembly methods. (b) XRD patterns, Raman spectra, DTA-TGA curves and TEM images of the MoO3 and synthesized graphene/MoO3 nanosheets. Panel (b) reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 145, Copyright 2013, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Several graphene/TMO nanostructures have been synthesized using the SA technique.141–144 Manga et al.144 developed a multilayer graphene/Ti0.91O2 nanostructure by electrostatic assembly of graphene and titania (Ti0.91O2) nanosheets with a repeating distance of 1.075 nm. It was observed that the growth of the multilayer film via layer-by-layer self-assembly was rather uniform. Additionally, the layer distance could be altered by a post-treatment process. In the SA technique, rGO plays an important role in directing and stabilizing the morphology of 2D graphene/TMO heterostructures.141 Chang et al.145 fabricated hybrid graphene/MoO3 nanosheets by an electrostatic SA method. Fig. 3b shows X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns, Raman spectra, differential thermogravimetric (DTA) and thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) curves and TEM images of MoO3 and synthesized graphene/MoO3 nanosheets. For the synthesis, positively charged MoO3 and negatively charged GO solutions were prepared and then mixed to obtain a 2D nanostructure of GO/MoO3 with alternating GO and MoO3 nanosheets. 2D rGO/V2O5,146 graphene/Co3O4 (ref. 147) and graphene/MnO2 (ref. 148) heterostructures were also synthesized by the SA method. The specific surface area of the obtained structure for rGO/V2O5 was 40.1 m2 g−1 which is higher than that of pure V2O5 spheres with only 8.5 m2 g−1.146 The thickness of each bilayer sheet in the synthesized graphene/Co3O4 and graphene/MnO2 by the SA method was in range from 0.5 to 50 nm.
2.3. Hydrothermal/solvothermal
The hydrothermal process is a high temperature–high pressure process in which reactions are performed in the presence of aqueous solvents.149Fig. 4a shows the step-by-step procedure of a hydrothermal/solvothermal method. A confined volume of solution in an autoclave is heated in a furnace to generate high temperature and pressure.150 Sometimes the hydrothermal process is performed at a supercritical temperature of water, i.e., 374 °C. If the process is carried out in the presence of a non-aqueous solvent at a temperature above the boiling point of the solvent, the method is called solvothermal. The variation of reaction time, temperature and concentration of precursor salts in the hydrothermal/solvothermal process could result in different morphologies of nanostructures.151 When GO was used as the source of graphene to prepare graphene/TMO structures via a hydrothermal process, the reduction of GO could take place simultaneously.152 The restacking of graphene sheets due to reduction could be effectively prevented by coupling with TMOs. However, the conventional hydrothermal/solvothermal process is very time consuming and requires high electric power for heating. Thus, a microwave assisted hydrothermal/solvothermal process was developed which is a green process and requires less time and power with uniform heating of the all constituents.153
 Fig. 4  (a) Procedure of hydrothermal/solvothermal synthesis. (b) A schematic illustration of the growth process of a 2D graphene/NiO heterostructure. (c) (i) TEM image of a graphene nanosheet (inset shows HRTEM of the cross section of the graphene nanosheet), (ii) TEM image of NiO nanosheets and the graphene/NiO heterostructure, (iii) TEM image of polycrystalline NiO, (iv) the SAED pattern of polycrystalline NiO (left) and HRTEM image of the NiO nanosheet in the graphene/NiO heterostructure (right). Panels (b) and (c) reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 150, Copyright 2011, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The hydrothermal/solvothermal process has been successfully used to synthesize 2D graphene/TMO heterostructures. Zou et al.150 fabricated a graphene/NiO sheet-on-sheet composite nanostructure by the hydrothermal method. Fig. 4b and c show the step-by-step procedure for the preparation of a 2D graphene/NiO heterostructure, and TEM, HRTEM, and the SAED pattern of Ni nanosheets and the fabricated graphene/NiO heterostructure. Zhang et al.154 also employed a low-temperature hydrothermal process to disperse manganese dioxide (MnO2) nanosheets on the surface of graphene sheets. In another study, Liu et al.155,156 demonstrated that the hydrothermal synthesis of a graphene/MnO2 heterostructure led to good adhesion of MnO2 nanosheets on graphene and the mass loading of MnO2 nanosheets was high. The hydrothermal synthesis of a 2D graphene/SnO2 heterostructure by Ding et al.157 demonstrated that SnO2 nanoparticles could be linked to form SnO2 nanosheets in the presence of mercaptoacetic acid (C2H4O2S or HSCH2COOH) during the process. Their results also showed that the morphology of the precursor had influence on the morphology of the final structure.
Some other graphene/TMO heterostructures that were synthesized by the hydrothermal/solvothermal method include graphene/SnO2,152 rGO/α-Fe2O3,158 graphene/TiO2,159 rGO/Co3O4,160 rGO/CuO,109 and graphene/WO3.161 Results from the characterization of graphene/TMO heterostructures indicated that the bonding at the interface of graphene and TMO layers was strong chemical bonding. However, the hydrothermal/solvothermal technique requires a specific setup to carry out the synthesis which is a major drawback of this process.162
2.4. Sol–gel
The stable dispersion of colloidal particles in a liquid forms a sol. The size of solid particles can range from 1 to 100 nm.163 Sol is generally obtained by hydrolysis and partial condensation of precursors. In order to synthesize a 2D graphene/TMO heterostructure, generally, metal alkoxides or chlorides are taken as precursors.128 The polymerization of particles in the sol forms a 3D network called gel which is carried out by partial evaporation of the solvent or addition of an initiator. Basically, a diphasic material in the solvent is encapsulated by a solid. The gel contains several substances that are broadly classified into four categories such as (i) a well ordered lamellar structure, (ii) a polymer network formed through physical aggregation, (iii) covalent polymeric networks and (iv) particular disordered structures.164 In order to remove the liquid from the gel to obtain the final product, either evaporation or supercritical drying is applied. If it is through evaporative drying, the final product is called xerogel. Otherwise, the final product is called aerogel. Generally, an unhindered shrinkage occurs in xerogels which makes xerogels denser in comparison with aerogels.165Fig. 5a depicts a schematic of a sol–gel process and its diverse products.
 Fig. 5  (a) A schematic of the sol–gel method and its various products. (b) Atomic force microscopy (AFM) image of the as-deposited GO/TiO2. (c) TEM images of rGO/V2O5. Panel (b) reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 166, Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society. Panel (c) reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 82, Copyright 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
It is possible to employ the sol–gel process for the synthesis of 2D graphene/TMO heterostructures. For instance, Akhavan et al.166 synthesized a 2D graphene/TiO2 heterostructure by the sol–gel approach (Fig. 5b). Their results showed that the root mean square roughness of the prepared graphene/TiO2 heterostructure was 0.54 nm. In other research work, Nagaraju et al.82 employed a sol–gel method to synthesize a 2D nanostructure of V2O5 nanosheets and graphene. The lateral dimension of the synthesized heterostructures was in the range of 80 to 200 nm (Fig. 5c).
2.5. Hydrolysis
Hydrolysis is a kind of decomposition reaction in which one reactant is water and it breaks chemical bonds of another molecule. The pH of a solution usually changes after the reaction. For the fabrication of 2D graphene/TMO heterostructures by employing the hydrolysis method, two solutions containing graphene and TMO precursors were mixed with water and heated to a high temperature.167 The rate of hydrolysis needs to be controlled to prevent any free growth of TMOs on graphene sheets which could be achieved by adjusting the reaction temperature, the proportion of water in the solvent and/or adding any external agent.168 The hydrolysis process is generally assisted by the hydrothermal/solvothermal process for the crystallization of TMOs and reduction of GO.123,167,168Fig. 6a shows a schematic of the hydrolysis process which was employed for the synthesis of graphene/TMO composites. Chen et al.169 also employed the hydrolysis process to synthesize a graphene/Co3O4 heterostructure with an alternatively stacked sheet-on-sheet morphology. In this work, Co(NO3)2·6H2O was selected as a precursor. In another study, Li et al.88 reported the synthesis of uniform mesoporous graphene/TiO2 heterostructures for highly reversible lithium storage. Fig. 6b and c exhibit a schematic formation process of a mesoporous graphene/TiO2 nanostructure and TEM, HRTEM, AFM, scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) and energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDX) images of the fabricated mesoporous graphene/TiO2.
 Fig. 6  (a) A schematic illustration of the hydrolysis process employed for the synthesis of graphene/TMO heterostructures. (b) A schematic of the formation process of the mesoporous graphene/TiO2 sandwich-like nanosheets by hydrolysis taking tetrabutyl titanate (TBOT) as the Ti precursor. (c) TEM and HRTEM images of the surface (i and ii) and cross section (iii and iv), and AFM topography and its corresponding height-profile analysis along the line as well as STEM and EDX elemental maps (v) of the hybrid graphene/TiO2 nanosheet. Panels (b) and (c) reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 88, Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
The hydrothermal assisted hydrolysis process was employed to synthesize 2D nanostructures of graphene/SnO2 and graphene/TiO2 heterostructures with SnCl2 and TiCl3 as precursors, respectively.127 Almost the same conditions (i.e., stirring time, temperature, sonication time and quantity of distilled water) were employed in the fabrication of graphene/SnO2 and graphene/TiO2 heterostructures. However, the morphology of both heterostructures was different. The results indicated that different precursors such as Sn2+ and Ti3+ have different reduction abilities and hydrolysis rates which are important parameters for the hydrolysis method.170
The advantages and disadvantages of the above bottom-up wet chemical techniques are summarized in Table 4.
Table 4 A summary of the bottom-up wet chemical techniques




Wet chemical technique
Advantages
Disadvantages




Electrochemical/electrophoretic deposition
✓ Economic and versatile
○ Difficult to achieve uniform layer systems171





✓ High deposition rate of different layers
○ External stimulus is required


✓ Simplicity of scaling up
○ Substrate is required for deposition


✓ Doesn't require any high temperature step




Self-assembly
✓ No external stimulus is required
○ Surfactants are generally required to prevent the re-aggregation of graphene and TMO nanosheets





✓ Uniform layer system may be achieved with the help of surfactants
○ Generally poor dispersion of graphene142


✓ Strong interaction and coupling can be achieved between graphene and TMO layers141,143
○ High temperature is required


Hydrothermal/Solvothermal
✓ TMOs with high energy facets can be grown on the surface of graphene159,172
○ Re-aggregation of graphene and TMO nanosheets is difficult to prevent





✓ Intimate contacts with high conformity can be achieved150,173
○ High temperature is required




○ Very time-consuming process


Sol–gel
✓ Smooth planar structure of graphene and TMOs can be achieved166
○ High temperature is required





✓ Better adhesion after post-annealing
○ Post-annealing at high temperature may lead to the formation of extra compounds of carbon (graphene degradation) and transition metals (TMO degradation)


Hydrolysis
✓ Intimate contacts can be achieved169
○ Iterations are required to adjust the process parameters to prevent any free growth of TMOs on the surface of graphene





✓ Porous structure can be obtained
○ High temperature is required


✓ Re-aggregation of sheets can be prevented with the help of surfactants174






3 The electron transfer, bonding chemistry and charged defects at the interface of 2D graphene/TMO heterostructures
The (i) electron transfer, (ii) bonding chemistry and (iii) charged defects (the defects that can be electrically charged on the surface, due to large mismatch and possible atomic vacancies)175 between components of a 2D graphene/TMO heterostructure are critical parameters that can significantly affect the physical, chemical and mechanical performance of a 2D heterostructure system. Therefore, these three parameters are discussed in this section.
The performance of 2D graphene/TMO heterostructures is strongly related to the quality of the crystals and their interfaces at the atomic scale. When a 2D TMO nanosheet is placed on a graphene nanosheet, it is expected that there will be electron transfer between the two nanosheets. Hence, this will alter (i) the position of the Fermi energy (valence band and conduction band), (ii) the density of states at the Fermi energy and (iii) the work function of the 2D graphene/TMO heterostructure.176 These changes create mechanisms for enhancing the performance of such heterostructures. The electron transfer at the interface of a 2D heterostructure depends on the electronegativity of the element on each nanosheet.176 A nanosheet can act as an electron donor or acceptor depending on its electronegativity compared with the other nanosheet in a 2D heterostructure. Generally, the O atom on the surface of a TMO possesses higher electronegativity than the C in graphene (electronegativity of O = 3.44 eV and C = 2.55 eV), leading to electron transfer from graphene to the TMO in a 2D graphene/TMO heterostructure.
Undoubtedly, in addition to electron transfer, further study and investigation are required to understand the structure and mechanisms in the interfacial insertion of 2D heterostructures and enhance their physical, chemical and mechanical efficiencies. In this context, Cao et al.87 studied interfacial adhesion at a 2D graphene/TiO2 heterostructure by density functional theory (DFT). The interaction and adsorption of a TMO on graphene were simulated in two distinct scenarios: (i) physisorption and (ii) chemisorption. These two conditions give physical and/or chemical interaction occurring at the interface.87 The interfacial formation energies and charge density difference traces and data for both physisorption and chemisorption interactions of 2D TiO2 with graphene in 2D graphene/TiO2 heterostructures have been provided in Fig. 7a. The charge density difference traces (Fig. 7a(i) and (ii)) indicated that there was an enhanced interaction between TiO2 and graphene by means of C–O charge sharing, in the case of chemisorption, whereas a limited charge transfer was observed for the physisorption of TiO2 over graphene, because the charge density difference in the physisorption trace is lower than that in chemisorption (Fig. 7a(iii)). Therefore, it was concluded that the chemically close contact and linkage of TiO2 were directly integrated onto the graphene surface and led to the formation of covalent Ti–O–C bonds at the interface. This hypothesis was confirmed by Chen et al., where they synthesized 2D defect-rich MoS2/graphene/TiO2.177 Their XPS results of graphene coated ultra-thin TiO2 confirmed the formation of Ti–O–C between interfacial layers (Fig. 7b). Hence, electrons could be transferred from C carriers to TiO2 nanosheets through the formed Ti–O–C bonds where the coordinated O atom acts as a bridge (Fig. 7b). The conductivity of graphene decreased due to the electron transfer from C to TiO2 nanosheets and also the covalent functionalization which changed the electron configuration of C, from sp2 to sp3 (Fig. 7b).13 This covalent linkage results in the elimination of π electrons from the C atom in graphene and diminution of the carrier density. It is noted that the non-covalent functionalization does not alter much the graphene π–π bonding system.13 Thus, the conductivity of graphene could be retained after non-covalent functionalization.
 Fig. 7  (a) Side views of charge density difference traces for (i) physisorption and (ii) chemisorption with charge accumulation (light red) and charge depletion (light green) regions, and (iii) the binding energies and inter-planar distance of a 2D graphene/TiO2 heterostructure. (b) (i) interaction between graphene and ultrathin TiO2 and (ii) formation of the heterostructure, (iii) formation of sp3, Ti–O–C covalent bonding and transfer of an electron from graphene to TiO2 through that covalent bonding, and (iv) XPS result and SEM images of the 2D graphene/TiO2 heterostructure. (c) Defects on TiO2 (due to vacancies of Ti) and graphene. Panel (a) reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 87, Copyright 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry. Panel (b) reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 177, Copyright 2016, Elsevier. 
The (i) chemical bonding formed at the interface and large mismatch between the in-plane lattice parameters of the constituent of 2D graphene/TMO heterostructures and (ii) the possible vacancies of atoms on each graphene and TMO lattice are two reasons that facilitate the formation of interfacial defects and this can propagate through the crystal.20,87 In the case of a 2D graphene/TiO2 heterostructure, the formed chemical bonds at the interface and high lattice mismatch between the two surfaces (graphene and 2D TiO2) commonly lead to compression on graphene and stretching on TiO2 in the zigzag direction, and negligible changes in the armchair direction.87 The formation of lattice defects on TMO (i.e., TiO2) and/or graphene nanosheets could be due to the vacancies of transition metals (i.e., Ti) or C atoms (Fig. 7c), respectively. In the case of TMOs, O2− lattice arrangement generally is close-packed in TMOs and requires higher formation energies. Therefore, it is more likely that the lattice defect is generated by transition metal vacancies.75,175 Hence, negative charges are associated with interfacial defects due to transition metal vacancies and/or C atoms.175 The created negative charges due to the synergistic effect of the defects and transferred electrons from graphene to TMOs can further contribute to improving the efficiency of 2D graphene/TMO platforms.177 For example, these defects and electron accumulation can further associate to increase the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) kinetics of catalysts.75 Furthermore, the synergistic effect between rich defects that can be electrically charged in graphene and TMOs at the interface and also the high structural stability of TMOs (i.e., TiO2) during charge and discharge processes result in excellent performance (cycling performance and rate capability) of the composites as anode materials of lithium ion batteries (LIBs).177 The interfacial bonding strength of the coupled nanosheets could also be enhanced, resulting in a stable 2D heterostructure.175,178 These synergistic tactics can further open a new avenue for the design of other high-performance materials for advanced energy storage and conversion devices.75,177
4 Tunable properties and applications of 2D graphene/TMO heterostructures
2D nanomaterials such as graphene generally exhibit strong light–matter interactions, unique bandgap structures and a large surface area which result in their significant properties and broad applications (Fig. 8a).179 The properties of 2D materials could be further enhanced by forming heterostructures with other functional materials. In addition, the properties of their heterostructures can be tuned and even show outstanding new physical phenomena if they are fabricated in a controlled fashion.180 Some of their properties cannot be observed in either 3D heterostructures, bulk materials or a single layer of 2D nanostructures.181 Some properties are enhanced in 2D nanostructures as compared to their 3D bulk counterparts. For example, a bandgap of 1.3 eV is observed in bulk MoS2 whereas it increases to 1.8 eV in single layer MoS2.23 The atomically modulated interface of 2D heterostructures plays an important role in tuning the properties of 2D heterostructures.182,183 The presence of some dangling bonds and incomplete atomic coordination on the surface of a 2D nanomaterial results in polar discontinuities at the interface of 2D heterostructures. This polar discontinuity at interfaces can lead to the source of a nontrivial local atomic structure (different atomic configurations and defects at the interface of 2D heterostructures, Fig. 8b and c) and nontrivial electronic structure (different electronic bond interactions, bandgaps and electron filling, at the interface of 2D heterostructures, Fig. 8d).184 Controlling and tuning the polar discontinuities at the atomic scale at the interfaces of 2D heterostructures by selective functionalization of monolayers (i.e., synthesizing graphane, (CH)n, by fully hydrogenated the graphene structure, Fig. 8e) lead to achieving an unusual charge state. This effect enables the possibility to tune and engineer the properties of 2D heterostructures.
 Fig. 8  (a) Electromagnetic spectrum from UV rays to THz/microwaves and the corresponding light–matter interactions in graphene (which can be distributed into four various regions) and the bandgap values of diverse 2D and conventional semiconductors. The bandgap can be tuned over that range by changing the structure of the material. (b) Structure model of a defect line in a 2D h-BN/Ni (111) heterostructure and scanning tunneling microscope (STM) image of h-BN triangular islands grown on Ni (arrows indicate the defect lines). (c) STM images showing the bright stripe defects of an EuO/Ir (111) bilayer film due to antiphase domain boundaries. The green and black lines (on the right STM panel) represent densely packed superstructure rows on the right and left sides of the bright stripe. (d) The planar averaged local density of states along with the zigzag chains of a BN/BNH2 superlattice at the interface (modeled by DFT) and a plot that shows the bandgaps in each subdomain of the superlattice structure. (e) A schematic illustration of graphane (top) that can be incorporated into a graphene matrix (down). Panel (a) reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 1, Copyright 2017, Published by AIP Publishing. Panel (b–e) reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 188, Copyright 2015, Elsevier. 
Among various 2D heterostructures, TMOs containing heterostructures possess unique characteristics and flexibility in tailoring their properties. Hence, these materials can be used for diverse applications in nanotechnology including SCs and LIBs. The performance of SCs and LIBs is attributed to the ion diffusivity at the electrode surfaces which can be expressed by the following equation:185 τ = λ2/Di(1)where τ, λ and Di represent the diffusion time, ion/electron diffusion length and ion diffusion coefficient, respectively. Since Di is an intrinsic property of a material, the performance of SCs and LIBs could be enhanced by tuning λ and/or τ.186 This can be achieved by using 2D TMO heterostructures because cation movement is enhanced at specific facets of 2D TMOs with low energy barriers.187 In fact, the basic idea to use 2D TMO heterostructures in high mobility electronics is to confine the movement of carriers in one direction (i.e., z direction) while allowing their free movement in the other two directions (i.e., x and y directions). Thus, 2D planar nanostructures are created with minimum scattering sites and free charges (O2−) at the surface. In addition to SCs and LIBs, 2D TMO nanostructures can be used in other high-performance applications such as gas sensing, biosensors, fuel cells and thermoelectric power generation, where their properties could be tuned to suit different applications.48
Graphene is one of the best 2D nanomaterials that can be conjugated with 2D TMOs to form heterojunction structures with highly tunable properties and fascinating characteristics. When graphene is placed on polar substrates, phonons in polar substrates and plasmons in graphene may couple depending upon the difference in their energies and momenta. This leads to new mixed states known as plasmons–phonons–polaritons.26 TMOs have low charge carrier mobility and most of them exhibit poor electrical conductivity and hence low capacity retention in some applications.13,58 However, their electrical conductivity can be improved if they are conjugated with graphene to form graphene/TMO heterostructures. Among various 2D transition metal crystals that have been intercalated with graphene, TMOs have the highest redox activity in intercalation reactions.189 The properties of 2D graphene/TMO heterostructures depend on the type of intercalated TMO and the adapted fabrication route.156 The fabrication route could influence the growth process leading to the formation of TMOs with different morphologies.141,158,174 The properties of 2D graphene/TMO heterostructures also need to be tuned for different applications. Their tuning properties that are determined by their heterostructures and composition are discussed in the present section by taking examples of some advanced applications.
4.1. Supercapacitors (SCs)
SCs (or ultracapacitors) are gaining research interests because of their high power density, wide operating temperature range, excellent charge and discharge capabilities and long cycle life performance.21 Due to these attractive properties, SCs are found to be prospective candidates for portable electronic devices, electric transportation systems and electrochemical energy storage devices.13,21 Generally, SCs could be divided into two groups, based on the mechanism of electrical energy storage.82 (i) Electric double-layer capacitors (EDLCs): charge storage is electrostatic in these kinds of SCs and mechanism of charge storage is via a physical phenomenon. Charges are accumulated over the surface of the active materials across the interface of electrode/electrolyte which results in capacitance generation. (ii) Electrochemical capacitors (or pseudo-capacitors): charge storage mechanism is electrochemical in these SCs. Charges are transferred and accumulated between the electrolyte and electrode due to surface electrode/electrolyte electrochemical reactions (surface redox reactions).190 In this mechanism of charge storage, electrolyte ions are adsorbed or intercalated with the electrode and rapid redox processes occur. Therefore, in order to store large charges at the interface of electrode/electrolyte and obtain a high specific capacitance, the electrical conductivity, pseudocapacitive behavior and specific surface area of electrode materials should be high. Based on these characteristics of electrode materials, pseudo-capacitors exhibit higher specific capacitance and energy density in comparison with EDLCs.191,192 However, the electrode materials of pseudo-capacitors have poor electrical conductivity which restrict the faradaic reactions and show unsatisfactory electrochemical performance.
A single layer of graphene exhibits a specific capacitance of 550 F g−1.193 Therefore, it can be a good candidate as an electrode for SCs because of its significant physical, chemical and mechanical properties. However, graphene is not able to be used effectively due to π–π stacking of its nanosheets.13 This restacking problem decreases the effective surface area which causes the ion transport difficulty between the electrode and electrolyte. One solution to enhance the efficiency of graphene electrodes is to combine graphene with other electrochemically active materials with large pseudocapacitive behaviors.13,126 TMOs are one type of electrochemically active material to be used as electrodes for pseudo-capacitors.120 2D TMOs can be intercalated with graphene to form 2D graphene/TMO heterostructures to boost the SC performance over its individual components. The enhancement would be due to the synergistic effects of high electrical conductivity, large surface area and electrochemical activity of graphene and the pseudocapacitance of 2D TMOs.21
In this context, Wang et al.194 synthesized a 2D rGO/TiO2 hybrid nanoarchitecture that could be used as a high-performance electrode nanomaterial for SCs. They employed a water-based green route for the synthesis. TiO2 was firstly derived from the Ti3C2 MXene phase (a typical 2D materials). It was then coupled with graphene in a dilute solution (Fig. 9a). The results indicated that the synthesized 2D rGO/TiO2 possessed a well-defined porous nanostructure with an enhanced electrical conductivity and pseudocapacitive behavior. The synthesized 2D rGO/TiO2 was employed in a sodium-ion capacitor as an anode. It was demonstrated that the constructed nanoarchitecture was capable of operating at a high voltage of 4.0 V and delivered a maximum energy density of 95.9 W h kg−1. It also demonstrated high reversibility, fast kinetics, long cyclability and negligible degradation when used for Na+ charge storage (Fig. 9d). Wang's method also provides a facile synthetic technique that could be used for developing diverse TMOs, from more than 70 groups of MAX phases.
 Fig. 9  (a) A schematic demonstration of oxidizing MXene-Ti3C2 into a Ti-peroxo complex and the derived 2D rGO/TiO2 heterostructure, along with SEM and TEM images of 2D rGO/TiO2. (b) Optical images of MXene-Ti3C2 and Ti-peroxo complex gels (taken using H2O2 addition with a different range of H2O2 concentrations) along with SEM and TEM images of MXene-Ti3C2 and MXene-derived TiO2, and UV-vis spectra of the Ti-peroxo complex (inset in UV-vis presents the Ti-peroxo complex that can be dissolved in water easily). (c) A schematic and Ragone plot (power density vs. energy density) of a sodium-ion capacitor based on the MXene-derived 2D rGO/TiO2 anode and polyaniline derived porous carbon cathode. (d) Electrochemical performance of the 2D rGO/TiO2-polyaniline derived porous carbon sodium-ion capacitor: current density–potential (scan rate of 5 mV s−1), galvanostatic charge–discharge plots (with a current density of 0.5 A g−1) measured in various potential windows (the inset shows the relationship between the specific energy density and potential window. The current density was calculated at a current density of 0.5 A g−1), cycling stability for ∼ 2000 cycles, coulombic efficiency at a current density of 2 A g−1 within different working potential ranges, and galvanostatic charge–discharge curves at diverse current densities, respectively. Reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 194, Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In another study by Liu et al.,156 a specific capacitance of 315 F g−1 was measured in a 2D graphene/MnO2 heterostructure, at a current density of 0.2 A g−1. This value of specific capacitance was higher than those of individual graphene and MnO2 sheets. In addition, 87% of that specific capacitance was retained after 2000 cycles.156 This superior capacitance was attributed to the high utilization of MnO2 and fast electron and ion transport because of shortened diffusion paths throughout the 2D nanostructure. Similarly, the synthesized 2D rGO/Co3O4 heterostructure by Song et al.160 exhibited good cycle performance with a specific capacitance of 402 F g−1 at a current density of 2.0 A g−1. The obtained characterization of the rGO/Co3O4 heterostructure indicated that faradaic redox reactions dominate the capacitance characteristics.160Table 5 shows a summary of some 2D graphene/TMO heterostructures that have been used in SCs. Studies on 2D graphene/TMO heterostructures show that these heterostructures are very useful candidates as electrodes for ultrathin and flexible SCs which is a general requirement of advanced wearable electronic devices.
Table 5 2D graphene/TMO heterostructures for SCs




2D Heterostructure
Fabrication method
Electrochemical/electrical performance
Electrolyte
Reference




GO/MnO2
Hydrothermal route
A specific capacitance of 213 F g−1 at a current density of 0.1 A g−1 and 98.1% capacity retention after 1000 cycles
1 M Na2SO4

155



Graphene/MoO3
Self-assembly
A specific capacitance of 291 F g−1 at a scan rate of 2 mV s−1
1 M Na2SO4

145



Graphene/MnO2
Self-assembly
A specific capacitance of 175 F g−1 at a current density of 0.5 A g−1 and a capacitance retention of 88.8% after 5000 charge–discharge cycles
1 mol L−1 Na2SO4

143



GO/Fe2O3
Electrochemical deposition
A specific capacitance of 349 F g−1 at a current density of 0.5 A g−1 and 95% capacity retention after 1000 cycles
1 mol L−1 LiOH aqueous solution

77



NiO/Graphene
Electrochemical deposition
A pseudocapacitance of 400 Fg−1 at a current density of 2 Ag−1
1 M KOH

171



Graphene/MnO2
Self-assembly
A specific capacitance of 267 F g−1 at a current density of 0.2 A g−1 and a capacitance retention of 92% after 7000 charge/discharge cycles
Gel electrolyte of PVA/H3PO4

122



Graphene/V2O5
Sol–gel
A specific capacitance of 635 F g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1 and a capacitance retention of 94% after 3000 charge/discharge cycles
1 M KCl

82





4.2. Lithium-ion batteries (LIBs)
LIBs have attracted significant interest due to their long cycle life, high energy density, high rate capability and low maintenance.13 They are promising energy storage devices (EESDs) for portable electronics, hybrid electric vehicles and renewable energy applications from intermittent wind and solar sources.124 However, many potential LIB electrodes exhibit unsatisfactory performance (i.e., poor electron transport, slow rate of Li-ion diffusion and poor cycling stability) that limits their use in many applications.13 Therefore, researchers have endeavored to enhance the diffusion rate of Li-ions, electron transport and cycling stabilities of electrodes.195–198 Downsizing the electrode to the nanoscale may improve these characteristics, for example, by shortening the pathway for Li-ion insertion/extraction.195 Hence, nanostructured conductive materials have been investigated for LIBs.199
Several nanostructured materials such as LiCoO2,200 LiMn2O4,201 LiFePO4,202 graphite,203 some active nanomaterials204 and graphene based hybrid composites13,205 have been used in LIBs. However, the electrochemical/electrical performance of these materials is generally lower than that of 2D nanostructures which exhibit more active sites (the sites of Li-ion intercalation for Li storage) and larger surface area. Hence, 2D nanomaterials appear to provide more efficiency in LIBs than any other nanostructures. Graphene with outstanding conductivity is the most promising 2D electrode candidate for LIBs. However, (i) the cycling stability of graphene is poor13 and (ii) the restacking issue of graphene decreases ion transport and energy storage capacity because of reduced active surface area.67 2D heterostructures (i.e., 2D graphene/TMOs) could overcome these weaknesses. 2D heterostructures of graphene with TMDCs have been widely studied for their usage in LIBs due to their high initial capacities. However, their capacity retention is very low and drops significantly after a few cycles.17 Furthermore, the 2D heterostructures of graphene with MXenes show high irreversible capacity. The 2D heterostructures of graphene and TMOs do not possess these limitations as in the case of TMDCs and MXenes. The stacks of graphene and 2D TMOs could lead to conductivity increase with reference to both materials and the utilization of high redox capacity of oxides without losing fast reaction kinetics.48,189 In this regard, Chen and Wang fabricated a 2D graphene/Co3O4 heterostructure and examined its performance in LIBs (Fig. 10).169 The characterization results displayed a capacity of 931 mA h g−1 which was achieved at a large current rate of 4450 mA g−1 (Fig. 10d). The initial charge capacity of the heterostructure was also higher than those of both constituents. Huang et al.206 fabricated a binder free 2D CoO/graphene heterostructure electrode for LIBs. The initial discharge and charge capacities were found to be 947 and 678 mA h g−1, respectively, due to the formation of a solid electrolyte interface film on the surface of the electrolyte resulting from electrolyte decomposition. Yang et al.174 also synthesized a 2D graphene/TiO2 heterostructure with a high discharge capacity of 269 mA h g−1 at a current rate of 178 mA g−1 when it was used as an anode for LIBs. This value of capacity was higher than that of TiO2 nanosheets, with 167.5 mA h g−1.207 The evaluation of a 2D rGO/Fe2O3 heterostructure as an anode material for LIBs by Qu et al.158 displayed good cyclability and rate performance at high charge/discharge cycles, in the heterostructure in comparison to its components. Table 6 presents some 2D graphene/TMO heterostructures that have been used in LIBs.
 Fig. 10  (a) A schematic of the growth process of a 2D graphene/Co3O4 heterostructure. (b) The first cycle discharge and charge curves, (c) cycling efficiency at 0.1C, (d) rate capabilities, and (e) cycling performance at stepwise current rates of GO, graphene and the 2D graphene/Co3O4 heterostructure. (f) TEM image of the graphene/Co3O4 anode after 30 cycles. Reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 169, Copyright 2010, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Table 6 2D graphene/TMO heterostructures for LIBs




2D heterostructure
Fabrication route
Electrochemical/electrical performance
Reference




Graphene/Mesoporous TiO2
Hydrolysis
A specific capacity of 238 mA h g−1 at a current rate of 178 mA g−1 and a coulombic efficiency of 70.7% in the initial cycle

88



rGO/CuO
Hydrothermal
A specific capacity of 736.8 mA h g−1 at a current rate of 67 mA g−1 after 50 cycles

109



Graphene/anatase TiO2
Solvothermal
A specific capacity of 213 mA h g−1 at a current rate of 890 mA g−1 in the second discharge cycle and a coulombic efficiency of 90.6% in the second initial cycle

159



Graphene/NiO
Hydrothermal
An initial charge capacity of 1056 mA h g−1 at a current rate of 89 mA g−1 and a capacity retention of 97.6% after 40 cycles

150



Graphene/SnO2
Hydrothermal
An initial discharge capacity of 1666 mA h g−1 at a current rate of 160 mA g−1

157



Graphene/V2O5
Solvothermal
An initial discharge capacity of 138 mA h g−1 at a current rate of 3000 mA g−1

146



Graphene/Co3O4
Electrochemical deposition
A discharge capacity of 880 mA h g−1 during the 40th cycle at a current rate of 267 mA g−1

81





4.3. Photocatalysis
Photocatalysts are one of the green and sustainable technologies which are able to convert the energy of photons (E = hν) into usable clean energy such as hydrogen.208,209 Generally, the bandgap of a photocatalyst should be short enough to absorb a large fraction of the solar spectrum (different energies/wavelengths of light) and make it further visible light active.210 For instance, an ideal photocatalyst for the generation of hydrogen fuel from water splitting requires an optimum bandgap of 2.0–2.2 eV which is short enough to absorb more visible light and large enough to provide energy for the splitting of water.211,212 Therefore, the design and selection of suitable materials are essential to achieve the best performance of photocatalysts.
Semiconductor TMOs exhibit chemical and optical stabilities. Furthermore, TMOs do not suffer from anion loss/replacement like carbides, phosphides, nitrides, and chalcogenides.48 However, TMOs possess broad bandgaps which result in mainly absorbing UV light and thus less photocatalytic activity for visible light.213 This impediment could be improved by modifying the dimension size of TMOs to 2D nanostructures. The implementation of 2D TMOs can significantly enhance the photocatalytic activity through (i) electronic modification of photocatalysts, (ii) close existence of photogenerated electron/hole pairs, (iii) increasing the effective surface area, (iv) improving large charge separation and electron transport and (v) shortening the diffusion distance of photoinduced charge carriers.48,173,214,215
In order to further enhance the photocatalytic activity, 2D TMOs could be intercalated with some other 2D nanomaterials such as graphene.216 Because graphene has outstanding conductivity and excellent electron mobility due to the π-conjugated framework, graphene can provide an ultrafast electron transfer platform to facilitate the splitting up of photogenerated electrons and holes within the photocatalyst.216
Sun et al.173 fabricated three categories of 2D/0D, 2D/1D and 2D/2D graphene/TiO2 heterostructures by the solvothermal process. Their results indicated that the 2D/2D graphene/TiO2 heterostructure had the highest photocatalytic efficiency in comparison to the 0D/2D and 1D/2D graphene/TiO2 heterostructures and pure TiO2 nanosheets (Fig. 11a–c). This behavior was attributed to stronger electronic and physical coupling in the 2D/2D structure which made electron transport more efficient. Wang et al.172 further demonstrated that the exposed facet of a 2D/2D heterostructure (i.e., exposed (001) facet of TiO2 on graphene) had also an effect on the photocatalytic efficiency. It was found that the separation of electron and hole pairs is accelerated by high reactive facets which in turn increases the photocatalytic efficiency. Therefore, the photocatalytic efficiency of the hybrid can be further enhanced by controlling the growth of high reactive facets of 2D TMOs on graphene nanosheets.217 Han et al.218 also fabricated a 2D graphene/α-Fe2O3 heterostructure using nanoplates of α-Fe2O3 (Fig. 11d–f). The obtained results indicated that the photocatalytic performance of the fabricated heterostructure is almost four times higher than that of pure α-Fe2O3 nanoplates. The investigation of the 2D graphene/α-Fe2O3 heterostructure shows that adequately matching between 2D components is beneficial for efficient charge transfer and increasing the photocatalytic performance.218Table 7 shows some 2D graphene/TMO heterostructures and their photocatalytic activity.
 Fig. 11  (a) A schematic illustration of the crystal structure of TiO2 and graphene nanosheets. (b) TEM and elemental mapping images of the 2D graphene/TiO2 heterostructure. (c) Photocatalytic degradation of Rhodamine B (RhB) over various photocatalysts under the irradiation of UV light (note: the time of light on is specified as 0 min. C and C0 represent the concentration of RhB at time t and the initial solution, respectively). (d) A schematic illustration of the crystal of α-Fe2O3 and graphene nanosheets. (e) SEM, TEM and HRTEM images of pure α-Fe2O3 nanoplates and the graphene/α-Fe2O3 heterostructure. (f) Photodegradation of RhB by α-Fe2O3 and the graphene/α-Fe2O3 heterostructure under Xe light irradiation for 60 min. Panel (b and c) reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 173, Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. Panel (e and f) reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 218, Copyright 2014, John Wiley & Sons. 
Table 7 2D graphene/TMO heterostructures for photocatalysts




2D heterostructure
Fabrication route
Photocatalytic activity
Reference




Graphene/Ti0.91O2
Electrostatic self-assembly
Ultrafast electron transfer and photo-conversion properties. Efficient dissociation of photogenerated excitons was observed. With the increase in the thickness of layers, photocurrents increased linearly

144



GO/TiO2
Sol–gel
Photocatalytic activity (i.e. degradation of E. coli bacteria) increased by a factor of 7.5 as compared to TiO2

166



Graphene/ZnO
Electrochemical deposition
Photocatalytic activity (i.e. degradation of methyl orange) increased by a factor of almost 7 as compared to Zn

219



rGO/WO3
Hydrothermal
Decomposition of methyl blue was enhanced as compared to WO3

220



TiO2/GO
Hydrolysis
Enhanced visible-light photodegradation of methylene blue and electrochemical ORR from polluted water

221



GO/TiO2
Combined sol–gel and solvothermal
The strong interaction between TiO2 and GO reduced the rate of recombination of charge carriers and enhanced the decolorating of methylene blue

222





4.4. Photovoltaics
Photovoltaic technology has driven certain interest and is gaining attention due to the increasing demand for clean energy. This technology is one of the best ways to use solar power as it involves the direct conversion of sunlight into electricity. The generated photocurrent in a photovoltaic device is based on the separation of photoinduced electron and hole pairs. The separated electrons are transported towards the anode electrode and this generates current.85,179 The major concern in photovoltaic devices is achieving satisfactory power conversion efficiency.179 Generally, materials with small bandgaps and a low recombination rate of electrons and holes are ideal materials for photovoltaic devices to absorb maximum solar light. Thus, new materials such as 2D graphene/TMO heterostructures are one type of superior platform that can be used in photovoltaic applications to obtain high-performance products. Within this context, Zhao et al.223 employed a wet chemical hydrothermal route to synthesize a dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC) photoanode using a 2D graphene/TiO2 heterostructure. It was found that the charge transfer characteristics of the graphene/TiO2 were improved in comparison with pristine TiO2. A power conversion efficiency of 7.52% was obtained using 2D graphene/TiO2 which was 17.7% higher than that of pristine TiO2. The incident photon to current conversion efficiency of graphene/TiO2 increased to 60% at a wavelength of 510 nm whilst this value was only 47% in pristine TiO2. This difference is due to the quick transport of electrons from the conduction band of TiO2 to graphene in graphene/TiO2.
A p-type semiconductor such as nickel oxide (NiO) with a large optical bandgap (3.4 eV) and high ionization potential (5.4 eV vs. vacuum) could act as a good electron donor and hence is suitable to be used as a photocathode material in DSSCs.224 However, the intrinsic electric conductivity and diffusion coefficient of holes in p-type semiconductors are lower than those in n-type semiconductors. This results in the decrease of the hole transport rate due to increasing chance of recombination with (i) the excited state of the electrolyte and (ii) excited electrons in the dye molecule.225 Hence, Yang et al.224 fabricated a p-type photoelectrode using 2D graphene/NiO to enhance the charge transport characteristics (Fig. 12). It was observed that the power conversion efficiency of 2D graphene/NiO was two times higher than that of plain NiO. This increase in the value of efficiency is attributed to the increase in the effective surface area and hole transport characteristics.
 Fig. 12  (a) A schematic illustration of the synthesis process of a graphene/NiO heterostructure and the crystal structure of NiO and graphene nanosheets. (b and c) Current density–voltage characteristics of p-type DSSCs based on NiO and graphene/NiO heterostructures in the dark and under 1 sun intensity, respectively (note: the current density–voltage was measured by using a Keithley 2420 in the dark and under illumination of a sun 2000 solar simulator, with the 100 mW cm−2 AM1.5G spectrum). Reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 224, Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. 
4.5. Thermoelectric devices
Thermoelectric devices are systems that convert heat to electrical energy.216 These devices are made of a kind of semiconducting thermoelectric material. The thermoelectric energy conversion efficiency can be increased by developing a thermoelectric figure of merit (ZT).226 The ZT value of a thermoelectric device could be calculated by using the following equation:227 ZT = (S2σT)/κ(2)where S, σ, T and κ, respectively, are the Seebeck coefficient, electrical conductivity, absolute temperature and thermal conductivity. The S2σ also represents the power factor.13 Generally, the κ value of a material depends on phonon (κp) and electronic (κe) contributions and mostly is evaluated via κ = κp + κe. It can be observed from the ZT that the adequate selection of n and p type semiconducting materials with suitable electrical and thermal properties may enhance the performance of thermoelectric devices. Bi2Te3, Bi2Se3, and Sb2Te3 are some conventional thermoelectric materials with a ZT value of ∼1.0.226 However, the ZT value of a thermoelectric device should be at least 2.0 to compete with other cooling and energy harvesting techniques.48 Additionally, the above conventional thermoelectric materials are generally toxic and/or unstable at high temperature.228 Furthermore, they have low ductility and flexibility which limited their use in portable electronic devices. Thus, new thermoelectric materials with a high ZT value, low toxicity, more stability, ductility and flexibility are required and being explored.
Generally, two strategies are used to increase the ZT value: (i) decreasing the κ value and/or (ii) increasing the value of the power factor. However, according to Motts and Wiedemann–Franz laws, increasing the value of σ leads to a decrease in the value of S and an increase in the value of κe, respectively.229,230 Thus, to decrease the value of κ, its κp component should be decreased. The κp value can be reduced by enhancing the phonon scattering at the interfaces which doesn't affect σ.231 This tactic can be obtained by nanostructuring of materials and arranging them to form 2D heterostructures. This nanoarchitecture results in a high density of states at the interfaces.232 The theoretical aspect of decrease in phonon transport across the interfaces is not well understood. However, the first predictions indicate that the thermal boundary resistance233 and anisotropic phonon scattering234 at the interface of 2D heterostructures contribute to reducing the lattice thermal conductivity. Atomic-scale roughness at the interface of 2D heterostructures also can reduce the lattice thermal conductivity due to interface scattering mechanisms.235 The different layers in a 2D heterostructure provide different phonon and electron transport characteristics.236 Thus, 2D heterostructures with suitable materials may lead to an increase in the efficiency of the thermoelectric device.
Graphene with high electrical conductivity, high flexibility and outstanding mechanical properties could be a good potential candidate for thermoelectric devices.237 However, the high thermal conductivity of graphene results in a low value of ZT. Therefore, some strategies were applied to increase the value of ZT by the fabrication of 2D heterostructures using graphene and other suitable materials.238 TMOs are also good candidates for thermoelectric applications because of their excellent characteristics especially their low thermal conductivities.236 Some other TMO characteristics such as (i) strong electronic correlations and narrow d bands which result in strong orbital and spin fluctuations and (ii) high degeneracy that can occur in the d electron systems make them suitable for high-performance thermoelectrics.239 However, they have a low ZT value because of low electrical conductivity.240 Therefore, the combination of graphene and TMOs can provide an ideal material for high-performance thermoelectric devices. In this context, Chen et al.241 fabricated rGO/aluminum (Al)-doped ZnO (Fig. 13a) and found that the obtained ZT (0.28) was 8 times higher than that of bulk ZnO and 60% larger than that of bulk Al-doped ZnO at 900 °C. They also determined the electrical conductivity value of the hybrid system which was 10 times larger than that of ZnO. The lowest κp was obtained at 900 °C for the sample with 1.5 wt% rGO content due to a significant increase in phonon scattering. Lin et al.242 also synthesized graphene/lanthanum strontium titanium oxide (LSTO) (Fig. 13b) and discovered that the κ value reduced upon the addition of graphene. Both the σ value and the power factor of the graphene/LSTO nanocomposite (with 0.6 wt% graphene loading) were significantly enhanced and reached 2.0 × 105 Sm−1 and ∼2500 μ Wm−1 K−2 at room temperature, respectively. The highest ZT of 0.42 at room temperature and 0.36 at 750 °C was achieved for the synthesized nanocomposite with 0.6 wt% of graphene loading. It has been reported that this value of ZT for the graphene/LSTO nanocomposite was >280% higher than that of pure LSTO.242 The research area of 2D graphene/TMO heterostructures for thermoelectrics is in the development stage and it is expected to be progressed in the near future.
 Fig. 13  (a) A schematic demonstration of feasible mechanisms for the formation of rGO/Al-doped ZnO composites and the electrical conductivity and lattice thermal conductivity of ZnO, Zn0.98Al0.02O and rGO (1.5 wt%)/Zn0.98Al0.02O. (b) A high magnification SEM image of the graphene/LSTO heterostructure, the ZT value of pure LSTO and graphene/LSTO heterostructures as a function of temperature and the open-circuit voltage and couple S as a function of hot side temperature (the inset is a photograph of the module). Panel (a) reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 241, Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. Panel (b) reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 242, Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
5 Challenges of 2D graphene/TMO heterostructures
The quantum confinement of TMOs can provide unique features for specific applications by fabricating them into 2D nanostructures and making 2D graphene/TMO heterostructures. 2D heterostructures generally possess combined properties of constituent materials. However, they may also lead to unique tunable properties which are not generally displayed by their components. For instance, the high capacitive performance of graphene/TMO heterostructures can be achieved by utilizing the high specific capacitance of TMOs, the high electronic conductivity of graphene and electrostatic interactions between them.154,156 Furthermore, the photocatalytic activities of TMOs can be enhanced by the addition of graphene which acts as a conductive support and slows down the recombination rate of electron and hole pairs.172 Similarly, 2D graphene/TMO heterostructures can be used for efficient electron transfer and photoconversion applications (by allowing the periodic modulation of the refractive index and interchanging the phenomenon of electron and phonon transport between different layers)144 and LIBs (efficient ion transfer by providing open channels in the electrode material and abundant sites for electrochemical reactions).158 However, these materials are still in the design stage and some challenges have to be addressed before their commercial utilization and some of them are discussed in this section.
A problem like irreversible restacking of 2D nanosheets during fabrication reduces the effective surface area for ion transport and storage which results in a reduction of electrochemical performance.243,244 For instance, wet chemical approaches are common techniques that are generally employed for the synthesis of 2D graphene/TMO heterostructures in which precursors of graphene and TMOs are mixed. Hence, due to strong covalent interactions between the nanosheets of graphene and TMOs, they have a tendency to restack and form agglomerates in the solution.136,245 To troubleshoot this problem, surfactant assisted approaches are generally used.147,246 A surfactant functionalizes the surface of graphene/rGO and creates an additional repulsive force due to which the re-aggregation of nanosheets is prevented.143,247 Although a surfactant provides benefits for reducing the restacking, it is very difficult to remove which may lead to property deterioration in comparison to heterostructures made from pristine nanosheets.248 Thus, the subject of choosing a suitable surfactant or synthesizing 2D graphene/TMO heterostructures without a surfactant and restacked geometry is a challenge for future investigation.
The second challenge is the lack of chemical interaction and large lattice mismatch between graphene and TMOs due to substantial interfacial energy.249 Thus, the growth of TMOs on the surface of graphene generally occurs only at the defect sites. This leads to discontinuous island-like domains of TMOs on the surface of graphene. In order to form a continuous and conformal 2D graphene/TMO heterostructure, uniform growth is required. This issue might be improved by slowing down the growth rate of TMOs.88 However, in turn, the synthesis process is very time-consuming.
2D heterostructures possess a large surface area due to which more electrolyte is consumed for the formation of a solid electrolyte interface and unwanted side reactions may also occur which deteriorate the performance of electrochemical systems.67 2D heterostructures also suffer from morphological transformation and structural degradation during charge/discharge cycles. Thus, the third challenge is preparing heterostructures with efficient use of surface area and accessibility to increase the electrochemical performance.156 In this context, one approach is to intercalate hierarchical nanosheets of 2D TMOs into graphene sheets,109,156,250 because hierarchical nanoarchitecture sheets prevent the decomposition of active materials by volume expansion/contraction during the process of charge and discharge.109 The penetration of the electrolyte in electrochemical systems is also enhanced in hierarchical nanostructures.88 The main challenge lies in the preparation of porous structures with a controlled pore size and morphology.88,109,156
The fourth challenge is to get an intimate contact and strong bonding forces between graphene and 2D TMO layers. A poor interfacial contact results in low conformity surfaces and weaker bonding forces and thereby affects the interfacial charge transfer.173 For instance, poor interfacial contacts act as recombination sites and reduce the photocatalytic performance in photocatalysis.162 In the case of LIBs, a poor interfacial contact may lead to reduction in electrochemical performance.158 Two strategies are generally followed to modify the interface, i.e., (i) the introduction of a carbonaceous layer in between TMO and graphene layers162 and (ii) growing TMOs with high reactive facets on the surface of graphene.172 However, the carbonaceous layer may lead to the reduction in electrochemical performance, and synthetic methods to effectively grow specific facets of TMOs are also needed to be explored further.
The fifth challenge is the development of fabrication techniques to precisely control the morphology, size, quantity and number of layers of graphene and TMOs in a particular heterostructure and for a specific application.78 The wet chemical methods discussed in the synthesis section are effective in controlling the size and morphology of 2D nanosheets.161,173,251 However, controlling the number of layers and their uniformity is a difficult task due to many variable parameters such as reaction time, temperature, concentration, type of precursor and solvent.144,150,251 Thus the optimization of these parameters to precisely control the number of layers and maintain the uniformity of layers is still a main challenging task.
6 Conclusions and future prospects
Explosive progress in the field of 2D TMOs, graphene and their heterostructures has been achieved in recent years. The combination of graphene with 2D TMOs and also other 2D nanomaterials is an effective way to achieve higher performance. The formation of 2D heterostructures of graphene/TMO by stacking 2D layers could maximize the synergistic effects of graphene and TMOs and extend their usability in applications which individual graphene and TMOs cannot achieve. This review article presents the overview of recent progress in the field of 2D heterostructures of graphene/TMOs. Details of the synthesis, chemistry behind their functionality, tunable properties, proposed applications and challenges for their commercial utilization have been discussed in this article. 2D heterostructures are currently a hot topic of research in nanotechnology. Much attention has been focused on the design and synthesis of 2D heterostructures of graphene/TMO in a controllable way so that the potential of both components can be utilized to their maximum capacities. 2D heterostructures of TMOs are already used commercially in various technological fields such as LIBs, SCs and photocatalysts. However, some of their characteristics such as low conductivity limited their efficiency and applications. Graphene acts as a conductive and flexible support for TMOs in heterostructures and enhances their properties like conductivity, flexibility, photocatalytic activity, bandgap modification, refractive index and phonon transport. Fabrication methods of 2D graphene/TMO heterostructures need to be explored further to obtain required structures in regard of tunable properties, aforesaid challenges and synthesis of heterostructures in a simple and inexpensive manner. The underpinning mechanisms for the enhanced properties of 2D graphene/TMO heterostructures are still not very clear. These mechanisms should be properly examined at the atomic scale to understand the relationship between the surface chemistry/structure and properties so that a variety of heterostructures can be engineered properly. Although the basic theory suggests that graphene and 2D TMOs can be good candidates to attain high ZT values for thermoelectric applications, their potential in thermoelectric applications has not been much explored. In addition, extreme efforts are still required to fully understand the synergistic interaction between graphene and TMOs, so that the potential applications of graphene/TMO heterostructures can be broadened.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
References
X. M. Li, L. Tao, Z. F. Chen, H. Fang, X. S. Li, X. R. Wang, J. B. Xu and H. W. Zhu, Appl. Phys. Rev., 2017, 4, 021306 Search PubMed .
B. Aïssa, N. K. Memon, A. Ali and M. K. Khraisheh, Front. Mater., 2015, 2, 58 Search PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Parvez, S. Yang, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Synth. Met., 2015, 210, 123–132 CrossRef .
M. S. A. Bhuyan, M. N. Uddin, M. M. Islam, F. A. Bipasha and S. S. Hossain, Int. Nano Lett., 2016, 6, 65–83 CrossRef .
W. Yang, G. Chen, Z. Shi, C.-C. Liu, L. Zhang, G. Xie, M. Cheng, D. Wang, R. Yang and D. Shi, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 792–797 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Subrahmanyam, L. Panchakarla, A. Govindaraj and C. Rao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 4257–4259 CrossRef .
A. N. Obraztsov, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 212–213 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Pei and H.-M. Cheng, Carbon, 2012, 50, 3210–3228 CrossRef .
C. Lee, X. Wei, J. W. Kysar and J. Hone, Science, 2008, 321, 385–388 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Orlita, C. Faugeras, P. Plochocka, P. Neugebauer, G. Martinez, D. K. Maude, A.-L. Barra, M. Sprinkle, C. Berger and W. A. De Heer, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 101, 267601 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhu, S. Murali, W. Cai, X. Li, J. W. Suk, J. R. Potts and R. S. Ruoff, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3906–3924 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Azadmanjiri, V. K. Srivastava, P. Kumar, M. Nikzad, J. Wang and A. M. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 702–734 RSC .
W. Choi, I. Lahiri, R. Seelaboyina and Y. S. Kang, Crit. Rev. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2010, 35, 52–71 CrossRef .
M. Chhowalla, H. S. Shin, G. Eda, L. J. Li, K. P. Loh and H. Zhang, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 263–275 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Duan, C. Wang, A. Pan, R. Yu and X. Duan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 8859–8876 RSC .
E. Pomerantseva and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17089 CrossRef .
M. Xu, T. Liang, M. Shi and H. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 3766–3798 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Z. Butler, S. M. Hollen, L. Cao, Y. Cui, J. A. Gupta, H. R. Gutiérrez, T. F. Heinz, S. S. Hong, J. Huang and A. F. Ismach, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2898–2926 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Azadmanjiri, C. C. Berndt, J. Wang, A. Kapoor and V. K. Srivastava, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 109361–109385 RSC .
P. Solís-Fernández, M. Bissett and H. Ago, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 4572–4613 RSC .
L. Britnell, R. M. Ribeiro, A. Eckmann, R. Jalil, B. D. Belle, A. Mishchenko, Y. J. Kim, R. V. Gorbachev, T. Georgiou, S. V. Morozov, A. N. Grigorenko, A. K. Geim, C. Casiraghi, A. H. Castro Neto and K. S. Novoselov, Science, 2013, 340, 1311–1314 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. H. Wang, K. Kalantar-Zadeh, A. Kis, J. N. Coleman and M. S. Strano, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 699–712 CrossRef PubMed .
C. R. Dean, A. F. Young, I. Meric, C. Lee, L. Wang, S. Sorgenfrei, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, P. Kim, K. L. Shepard and J. Hone, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 722–726 CrossRef PubMed .
W. H. Dang, H. L. Peng, H. Li, P. Wang and Z. F. Liu, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2870–2876 CrossRef PubMed .
F. N. Xia, H. Wang, D. Xiao, M. Dubey and A. Ramasubramaniam, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 899–907 CrossRef .
C. Lee, X. Wei, Q. Li, R. Carpick, J. W. Kysar and J. Hone, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2009, 246, 2562–2567 CrossRef .
A. A. Balandin, S. Ghosh, W. Bao, I. Calizo, D. Teweldebrhan, F. Miao and C. N. Lau, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 902–907 CrossRef PubMed .
K. I. Bolotin, K. Sikes, Z. Jiang, M. Klima, G. Fudenberg, J. Hone, P. Kim and H. Stormer, Solid State Commun., 2008, 146, 351–355 CrossRef .
S. Stankovich, D. A. Dikin, G. H. B. Dommett, K. M. Kohlhaas, E. J. Zimney, E. A. Stach, R. D. Piner, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Nature, 2006, 442, 282 CrossRef PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, M. I. Katsnelson, I. V. Grigorieva, S. V. Dubonos and A. A. Firsov, Nature, 2005, 438, 197 CrossRef PubMed .
R. R. Nair, P. Blake, A. N. Grigorenko, K. S. Novoselov, T. J. Booth, T. Stauber, N. M. R. Peres and A. K. Geim, Science, 2008, 320, 1308 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Yuan, Y. Zhou, Y. Li, C. Li, H. Peng, J. Zhang, Z. Liu, L. Dai and G. Shi, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2248 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Kim, J. Lee, M. S. Yeom, J. W. Shin, H. Kim, Y. Cui, J. W. Kysar, J. Hone, Y. Jung, S. Jeon and S. M. Han, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2114 CrossRef PubMed .
K. M. F. Shahil and A. A. Balandin, Solid State Commun., 2012, 152, 1331–1340 CrossRef .
C. Berger, Z. Song, X. Li, X. Wu, N. Brown, C. Naud, D. Mayou, T. Li, J. Hass, A. N. Marchenkov, E. H. Conrad, P. N. First and W. A. de Heer, Science, 2006, 312, 1191–1196 CrossRef PubMed .
J.-F. Dai, G.-J. Wang, L. Ma and C.-K. Wu, Rev. Adv. Mater. Sci., 2015, 40, 60–71 Search PubMed .

          M. Politou, X. Wu, A. Contino, B. Soree, C. Huyghebaert, D. Lin, I. Radu, Z. Tokei and I. Asselberghs, IEEE Interactional Interconnect Technology Conference/Advanced Metallization Conference (IITC/AMC), USA,  2016 Search PubMed .
S.-E. Zhu, S. Yuan and G. Janssen, EPL, 2014, 108, 17007 CrossRef .
C. Liu, Z. Yu, D. Neff, A. Zhamu and B. Z. Jang, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4863–4868 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Cranford, D. Sen and M. J. Buehler, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 123121 CrossRef .
O. C. Compton and S. T. Nguyen, Small, 2010, 6, 711–723 CrossRef PubMed .

          N. K. Mahanta and A. R. Abramson, 13th IEEE Intersociety Thermal and Thermomechanical Phenomena in Electronic Systems (ITherm), USA,  2012 Search PubMed .
H. Feng, R. Cheng, X. Zhao, X. Duan and J. Li, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1539 CrossRef PubMed .
M. D. Stoller, S. Park, Y. Zhu, J. An and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3498–3502 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Wei, D. Wang, S. Kim, S.-Y. Kim, Y. Hu, M. K. Yakes, A. R. Laracuente, Z. Dai, S. R. Marder, C. Berger, W. P. King, W. A. de Heer, P. E. Sheehan and E. Riedo, Science, 2010, 328, 1373–1376 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Eda, G. Fanchini and M. Chhowalla, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 270 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Kalantar-zadeh, J. Z. Ou, T. Daeneke, A. Mitchell, T. Sasaki and M. S. Fuhrer, Appl. Mater. Today, 2016, 5, 73–89 CrossRef .
J. Mannhart and D. Schlom, Science, 2010, 327, 1607–1611 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Chimene, D. L. Alge and A. K. Gaharwar, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7261–7284 CrossRef PubMed .
M. V. Ganduglia-Pirovano, A. Hofmann and J. Sauer, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2007, 62, 219–270 CrossRef .
M. C. Biesinger, B. P. Payne, A. P. Grosvenor, L. W. Lau, A. R. Gerson and R. S. C. Smart, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2011, 257, 2717–2730 CrossRef .

          P. A. Cox, Transition Metal Oxides: an Introduction to Their Electronic Structure and Properties, Oxford university press, Oxford, UK,  2010 Search PubMed .
S. Surnev, M. G. Ramsey and F. P. Netzer, Prog. Surf. Sci., 2003, 73, 117–165 CrossRef .

          C. Jagadish and S. J. Pearton, Zinc Oxide Bulk, Thin Films and Nanostructures: Processing, Properties, and Applications, Elsevier, Amsterdam, Netherlands,  2011 Search PubMed .
C. Wang, L. Yin, L. Zhang, D. Xiang and R. Gao, Sensors, 2010, 10, 2088–2106 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Meyer, S. Hamwi, M. Kröger, W. Kowalsky, T. Riedl and A. Kahn, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5408–5427 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Azadmanjiri, C. C. Berndt, J. Wang, A. Kapoor, V. K. Srivastava and C. E. Wen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 3695–3708 RSC .
H. B. Wu, J. S. Chen, H. H. Hng and X. W. D. Lou, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 2526–2542 RSC .
R. van de Krol, Y. Liang and J. Schoonman, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 2311–2320 RSC .
Z. L. Wang, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2008, 8, 27–55 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Azadmanjiri, P.-Y. Wang, H. Pingle, P. Kingshott, J. Wang, V. K. Srivastava and A. Kapoor, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 55825–55833 RSC .
M. Osada and T. Sasaki, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 2503–2511 RSC .
Q. Tang, Z. Zhou and Z. Chen, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Comput. Mol. Sci., 2015, 5, 360–379 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhou, G. Chen, Y. Yu, C. Yan, J. Sun and F. He, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 781–784 RSC .
A. Fujishima, T. N. Rao and D. A. Tryk, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2000, 1, 1–21 CrossRef .
L. Peng, P. Xiong, L. Ma, Y. Yuan, Y. Zhu, D. Chen, X. Luo, J. Lu, K. Amine and G. Yu, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15139 CrossRef PubMed .
C. C. Leong, H. Pan and S. K. Ho, PCCP, 2016, 18, 7527–7534 RSC .
Z. Sun, T. Liao, Y. Dou, S. M. Hwang, M.-S. Park, L. Jiang, J. H. Kim and S. X. Dou, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3813 CrossRef PubMed .
M. M. Y. A. Alsaif, S. Balendhran, M. R. Field, K. Latham, W. Wlodarski, J. Z. Ou and K. Kalantar-zadeh, Sens. Actuators, B, 2014, 192, 196–204 CrossRef .
S.-S. Song, B.-Y. Xia, J. Chen, J. Yang, X. Shen, S.-J. Fan, M.-l. Guo, Y.-M. Sun and X.-D. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 42598–42603 RSC .
W. Wei, Y. Wang, H. Wu, A. M. Al-Enizi, L. Zhang and G. Zheng, Nanotechnology, 2015, 27, 02LT01 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Xu, M. Dunwell, L. Fei, E. Fu, Q. Lin, B. Patterson, B. Yuan, S. Deng, P. Andersen and H. Luo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 20408–20413 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Chen, D. Ye, M. Wu, H. Chen, L. Zhang, J. Shi and L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 7019–7026 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Dai, M. Liu, Y. Song, J. Liu and F. Wang, Nano Energy, 2016, 27, 185–195 CrossRef .
M. Sun, H. Liu, Y. Liu, J. Qu and J. Li, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 1250–1269 RSC .
Q. Qu, S. Yang and X. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5574–5580 CrossRef PubMed .
Z.-S. Wu, G. Zhou, L.-C. Yin, W. Ren, F. Li and H.-M. Cheng, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 107–131 CrossRef .
B. Anasori, M. Beidaghi and Y. Gogotsi, Mater. Today, 2014, 17, 253–254 CrossRef .
J. Song, L. Xu, C. Zhou, R. Xing, Q. Dai, D. Liu and H. Song, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 12928–12934 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Zhang, Y. Zeng, N. Xiao, H. H. Hng and Q. Yan, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 8455–8461 RSC .
D. H. Nagaraju, Q. Wang, P. Beaujuge and H. N. Alshareef, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 17146–17152 RSC .
N. Zhang, Y. Zhang and Y.-J. Xu, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 5792–5813 RSC .
A. Jana, E. Scheer and S. Polarz, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol., 2017, 8, 688–714 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Bonaccorso, L. Colombo, G. Yu, M. Stoller, V. Tozzini, A. C. Ferrari, R. S. Ruoff and V. Pellegrini, Science, 2015, 347, 1246501 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Li, L. Yu, Z. Lin and G. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 8536–8545 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Cao, S. Mukherjee, J. Liu, B. Wang, M. Amirmaleki, Z. Lu, J. Y. Howe, D. Perovic, X. Sun and C. V. Singh, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 11678–11684 RSC .
W. Li, F. Wang, Y. Liu, J. Wang, J. Yang, L. Zhang, A. A. Elzatahry, D. Al-Dahyan, Y. Xia and D. Zhao, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 2186–2193 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Patil, V. Patil, S. Sathaye and K. Patil, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 4094–4104 RSC .
S. Humaira, K. C. Kemp, C. Vimlesh and S. K. Kwang, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 355705 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Fenghua, S. Jiangfeng, Y. Huafeng, G. Shiyu, Z. Qixian, H. Dongxue, I. Ari and N. Li, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 455602 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Li, X. Lv, J. Lu and J. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 21770–21774 CrossRef .
R.-w. Zhang, C.-w. Zhang, H.-x. Luan, W.-x. Ji and P.-j. Wang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 35377–35383 RSC .
Y. Liu, A. Palmieri, J. He, Y. Meng, N. Beauregard, S. L. Suib and W. E. Mustain, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 25860 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Rujia, Z. Zhang, L. Jiang, K. Xu, Q. Tian, S. Xue, J. Hu, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 19196–19201 RSC .
C. Marichy, P. A. Russo, M. Latino, J.-P. Tessonnier, M.-G. Willinger, N. Donato, G. Neri and N. Pinna, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 19729–19739 Search PubMed .
S. Baek, S.-H. Yu, S.-K. Park, A. Pucci, C. Marichy, D.-C. Lee, Y.-E. Sung, Y. Piao and N. Pinna, RSC Adv., 2011, 1, 1687–1690 RSC .
W.-L. Song, X.-T. Guan, L.-Z. Fan, W.-Q. Cao, Q.-L. Zhao, C.-Y. Wang and M.-S. Cao, Mater. Res. Bull., 2015, 72, 316–323 CrossRef .
J. Zai, C. Yu, Q. Zou, L. Tao, K. Wang, Q. Han, B. Li, Y. Xiao, X. Qian and R. Qi, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 4397–4403 RSC .
S.-J. Li, J.-M. Du, J. Chen, N.-N. Mao, M.-J. Zhang and H. Pang, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2014, 18, 1049–1056 CrossRef .
H. D. Jang, S. K. Kim, H. Chang, K.-M. Roh, J.-W. Choi and J. Huang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2012, 38, 184–188 CrossRef PubMed .
W. G. Hong, B. H. Kim, S. M. Lee, H. Y. Yu, Y. J. Yun, Y. Jun, J. B. Lee and H. J. Kim, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 7594–7599 CrossRef .
Q. Cheng, J. Tang, J. Ma, H. Zhang, N. Shinya and L.-C. Qin, Carbon, 2011, 49, 2917–2925 CrossRef .
Z. Song, Y. Zhang, W. Liu, S. Zhang, G. Liu, H. Chen and J. Qiu, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 112, 120–126 CrossRef .
C. Chen, W. Cai, M. Long, B. Zhou, Y. Wu, D. Wu and Y. Feng, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 6425–6432 CrossRef PubMed .

          S. Jana, V. Rao and S. Banerjee, AIP Conference Proceedings, Greece,  2013 Search PubMed .
R. Zou, Z. Zhang, L. Yu, Q. Tian, Z. Chen and J. Hu, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 13912–13917 CrossRef PubMed .
D.-L. Zhou, J.-J. Feng, L.-Y. Cai, Q.-X. Fang, J.-R. Chen and A.-J. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 115, 103–108 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, W. Wang, L. Gu, Y. Wang, Y. Ying, Y. Mao, L. Sun and X. Peng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 9850–9855 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhu, Y. K. Sharma, Z. Zeng, X. Zhang, M. Srinivasan, S. Mhaisalkar, H. Zhang, H. H. Hng and Q. Yan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 8400–8406 CrossRef .
C. C. Jia, X. X. Li, N. Xin, Y. Gong, J. X. Guan, L. A. Meng, S. Meng and X. F. Guo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600431 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, N. O. Weiss, X. D. Duan, H. C. Cheng, Y. Huang and X. F. Duan, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16042 CrossRef .
J. Wang, F. Ma and M. Sun, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 16801–16822 RSC .
H. M. Hill, A. F. Rigosi, A. Raja, A. Chernikov, C. Roquelet and T. F. Heinz, Phys. Rev. B, 2017, 96, 205401 CrossRef .
N. A. Kumar, M. A. Dar, R. Gul and J.-B. Baek, Mater. Today, 2015, 18, 286–298 CrossRef .
K. Novoselov, A. Mishchenko, A. Carvalho and A. C. Neto, Science, 2016, 353, aac9439 CrossRef PubMed .
A. H. Abdelmohsen, W. M. El Rouby, N. Ismail and A. A. Farghali, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 5946 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Xiao, Y. Li, X. Zan, K. Liao, R. Xu and H. Duan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 2487–2494 CrossRef .
H. Yin, S. Zhao, J. Wan, H. Tang, L. Chang, L. He, H. Zhao, Y. Gao and Z. Tang, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6270–6276 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Jiang, Y. Li, J. Liu, X. Huang, C. Yuan and X. W. D. Lou, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5166–5180 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Liu, H. Bai, Y. Wang, Z. Liu, X. Zhang and D. D. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 4175–4181 CrossRef .
L. Peng, X. Peng, B. Liu, C. Wu, Y. Xie and G. Yu, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2151–2157 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhu, Y. Zhu, S. Murali, M. D. Stoller and R. S. Ruoff, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 3333–3338 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Wang, D. Choi, J. Li, Z. Yang, Z. Nie, R. Kou, D. Hu, C. Wang, L. V. Saraf and J. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 907–914 CrossRef PubMed .
C. X. Guo, M. Wang, T. Chen, X. W. Lou and C. M. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 736–741 CrossRef .
M. Khan, M. N. Tahir, S. F. Adil, H. U. Khan, M. R. H. Siddiqui, A. A. Al-warthan and W. Tremel, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 18753–18808 RSC .
J. Zhang, Z. Xiong and X. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3634–3640 RSC .
C. Hu, T. Lu, F. Chen and R. Zhang, J. Chin. Adv. Mater. Soc., 2013, 1, 21–39 CrossRef .
S. Wu, Z. Yin, Q. He, X. Huang, X. Zhou and H. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 11816–11821 CrossRef .
Q. Cheng, J. Tang, J. Ma, H. Zhang, N. Shinya and L.-C. Qin, Carbon, 2011, 49, 2917–2925 CrossRef .

          W. Dissanayaka Wijesooriyage, Master of Science, Chalmers University of Technology,  2011 Search PubMed .
M. Ammam, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2014, 58, 121–131 CrossRef PubMed .
S.-J. Li, N. Xia, X.-L. Lv, M.-M. Zhao, B.-Q. Yuan and H. Pang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2014, 190, 809–817 CrossRef .
C. Zhu, S. Guo, Y. Fang, L. Han, E. Wang and S. Dong, Nano Res., 2011, 4, 648–657 CrossRef .
D. Du, J. Liu, X. Zhang, X. Cui and Y. Lin, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 8032–8037 RSC .
Y. R. Lee, I. Y. Kim, T. W. Kim, J. M. Lee and S. J. Hwang, Chem.–Eur. J., 2012, 18, 2263–2271 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Ruan, Y. Ying, Y. Guo, Z. Zhou and X. Peng, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 94845–94850 RSC .
G. M. Whitesides and B. Grzybowski, Science, 2002, 295, 2418–2421 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Kajbafvala, H. Bahmanpour, M. H. Maneshian and M. Li, J. Nanomater., 2013, 2013, 158517 Search PubMed .

          C. T. O'Mahony, R. A. Farrell, T. Goshal, J. D. Holmes and M. A. Morris, in Thermodynamics-systems in Equilibrium and Non-equilibrium, InTech, London, UK,  2011 Search PubMed .
I. Y. Kim, J. M. Lee, T. W. Kim, H. N. Kim, H. i. Kim, W. Choi and S. J. Hwang, Small, 2012, 8, 1038–1048 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Du, X. Lai, N. Yang, J. Zhai, D. Kisailus, F. Su, D. Wang and L. Jiang, ACS Nano, 2010, 5, 590–596 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Li, J. Jian, L. Xiao, F. Liu, G. Cheng, M. Sun and J. Zhou, Ceram. Int., 2018, 44, 2269–2273 CrossRef .
K. K. Manga, Y. Zhou, Y. Yan and K. P. Loh, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 3638–3643 CrossRef .
J. Chang, M. Jin, F. Yao, T. H. Kim, V. T. Le, H. Yue, F. Gunes, B. Li, A. Ghosh and S. Xie, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 5074–5083 CrossRef .
J. Cheng, B. Wang, H. L. Xin, G. Yang, H. Cai, F. Nie and H. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 10814–10820 RSC .
S. Yang, X. Feng, L. Wang, K. Tang, J. Maier and K. Müllen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 4795–4799 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Li, J. Wang, X. Liu, S. Liu, J. Ou and S. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3397–3403 RSC .

          K. Byrappa and M. Yoshimura, Handbook of Hydrothermal Technology, William Andrew,  2012 Search PubMed .
Y. Zou and Y. Wang, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 2615–2620 RSC .
C. Gumeci, A. Marathe, R. L. Behrens, J. Chaudhuri and C. Korzeniewski, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 14433–14440 CrossRef .
C. Zhong, J. Wang, Z. Chen and H. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 25115–25120 CrossRef .

          B. I. Kharisov, O. V. Kharissova and U. O. Méndez, in The Development and
Application of Microwave Heating, InTech, London, UK,  2012 Search PubMed .
J. Zhang, J. Jiang and X. Zhao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 6448–6454 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, D. Yan, Y. Li, Z. Wu, R. Zhuo, S. Li, J. Feng, J. Wang, P. Yan and Z. Geng, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 117, 528–533 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, D. Yan, R. Zhuo, S. Li, Z. Wu, J. Wang, P. Ren, P. Yan and Z. Geng, J. Power Sources, 2013, 242, 78–85 CrossRef .
S. Ding, D. Luan, F. Y. C. Boey, J. S. Chen and X. W. D. Lou, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 7155–7157 RSC .
J. Qu, Y.-X. Yin, Y.-Q. Wang, Y. Yan, Y.-G. Guo and W.-G. Song, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 3932–3936 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Ding, J. S. Chen, D. Luan, F. Y. C. Boey, S. Madhavi and X. W. D. Lou, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 5780–5782 RSC .
Z. Song, Y. Zhang, W. Liu, S. Zhang, G. Liu, H. Chen and J. Qiu, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 112, 120–126 CrossRef .
D.-M. Kim, S.-J. Kim, Y.-W. Lee, D.-H. Kwak, H.-C. Park, M.-C. Kim, B.-M. Hwang, S. Lee, J.-H. Choi and S. Hong, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 163, 132–139 CrossRef .
J. Xu, J. Tian, Y. Zhang, A. Riaz, Y. Liu, M. Zhi, Z. Hong and C. Zhou, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 40304–40311 RSC .
L. L. Hench and J. K. West, Chem. Rev., 1990, 90, 33–72 CrossRef .

          P. J. Flory, Principles of Polymer Chemistry, Cornell University Press, NY, USA,  1953 Search PubMed .

          C. J. Brinker and G. W. Scherer, Sol-gel Science: the Physics and Chemistry of Sol-gel Processing, Academic press,  2013 Search PubMed .
O. Akhavan and E. Ghaderi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 20214–20220 CrossRef .
Y. Liang, H. Wang, H. S. Casalongue, Z. Chen and H. Dai, Nano Res., 2010, 3, 701–705 CrossRef .
Y. Liang, Y. Li, H. Wang, J. Zhou, J. Wang, T. Regier and H. Dai, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 780 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Q. Chen and Y. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 9735–9739 RSC .
J. F. Ye, H. J. Zhang, R. Yang, X. G. Li and L. M. Qi, Small, 2010, 6, 296–306 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Xia, J. Tu, Y. Mai, R. Chen, X. Wang, C. Gu and X. Zhao, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 10898–10905 CrossRef PubMed .
W.-S. Wang, D.-H. Wang, W.-G. Qu, L.-Q. Lu and A.-W. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 19893–19901 CrossRef .
J. Sun, H. Zhang, L.-H. Guo and L. Zhao, ACS Appl. Mater.
Interfaces, 2013, 5, 13035–13041 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Yang, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3575–3579 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Azadmanjiri, J. Wang, C. C. Berndt, A. Kapoor, D. M. Zhu, A. S. M. Ang and V. K. Srivastava, PCCP, 2017, 19, 11881–11891 RSC .
D. H. Deng, K. S. Novoselov, Q. Fu, N. F. Zheng, Z. Q. Tian and X. H. Bao, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 218–230 CrossRef PubMed .
B. A. Chen, E. Z. Liu, F. He, C. S. Shi, C. N. He, J. J. Li and N. Q. Zhao, Nano Energy, 2016, 26, 541–549 CrossRef .
J. Azadmanjiri, J. Wang, C. C. Berndt, A. Kapoor, D. M. Zhu, A. S. M. Ang and V. K. Srivastava, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2017, 56, 434–439 CrossRef .
M.-Y. Li, C.-H. Chen, Y. Shi and L.-J. Li, Mater. Today, 2016, 19, 322–335 CrossRef .
J. Park, T. Back, W. C. Mitchel, S. S. Kim, S. Elhamri, J. Boeckl, S. B. Fairchild, R. Naik and A. A. Voevodin, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 14374 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Niu and A. Li, Prog. Surf. Sci., 2015, 90, 21–45 CrossRef .
D. Xiao, W. Zhu, Y. Ran, N. Nagaosa and S. Okamoto, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 596 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Y. Hwang, Y. Iwasa, M. Kawasaki, B. Keimer, N. Nagaosa and Y. Tokura, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 103 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Ohtomo and H. Hwang, Nature, 2004, 427, 423 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Tang, Y. Zhang, W. Li, B. Ma and X. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 5926–5940 RSC .
P. Roy and S. K. Srivastava, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 2454–2484 RSC .
H. T. Tan, W. Sun, L. Wang and Q. Yan, ChemNanoMat, 2016, 2, 562–577 CrossRef .
R. Martinez-Gordillo and M. Pruneda, Prog. Surf. Sci., 2015, 90, 444–463 CrossRef .
E. Pomerantseva and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17089 CrossRef .
Q. Ke and J. Wang, J. Materiomics, 2016, 2, 37–54 CrossRef .
C.-C. Hu, K.-H. Chang, M.-C. Lin and Y.-T. Wu, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2690–2695 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Xiao, H. Xia, J. Y. Fuh and L. Lu, J. Power Sources, 2009, 193, 935–938 CrossRef .
J. Xia, F. Chen, J. Li and N. Tao, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 505 CrossRef PubMed .
R. T. Wang, S. J. Wang, Y. B. Zhang, D. D. Jin, X. Y. Tao and L. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 1017–1027 RSC .
A. S. Arico, P. Bruce, B. Scrosati, J.-M. Tarascon and W. Van Schalkwijk, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 366 CrossRef PubMed .
C.-T. Hsieh, C.-Y. Lin and J.-Y. Lin, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 8861–8867 CrossRef .
X. Wang, Y. Huang, D. Jia, W. K. Pang, Z. Guo, Y. Du, X. Tang and Y. Cao, Inorg. Chem., 2015, 54, 11799–11806 CrossRef PubMed .
S.-K. Park, A. Jin, S.-H. Yu, J. Ha, B. Jang, S. Bong, S. Woo, Y.-E. Sung and Y. Piao, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 120, 452–459 CrossRef .
P. S. Herle, B. Ellis, N. Coombs and L. F. Nazar, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 147–152 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Tang, L. L. Liu, S. Tian, L. Li, Y. B. Yue, Y. P. Wu, S. Y. Guan and K. Zhu, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 1524–1526 CrossRef .
W. Tang, X. J. Wang, Y. Y. Hou, L. L. Li, H. Sun, Y. S. Zhu, Y. Bai, Y. P. Wu, K. Zhu and T. van Ree, J. Power Sources, 2012, 198, 308–311 CrossRef .
X. L. Wu, Y. G. Guo, J. Su, J. W. Xiong, Y. L. Zhang and L. J. Wan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 1155–1160 CrossRef .
S. S. Zhang, K. Xu and T. R. Jow, Electrochim. Acta, 2002, 48, 241–246 CrossRef .
Y. G. Wang, H. Q. Li, P. He, E. Hosono and H. S. Zhou, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 1294–1305 RSC .
S. K. Behera, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 10371–10373 RSC .
X. L. Huang, R. Z. Wang, D. Xu, Z. L. Wang, H. G. Wang, J. J. Xu, Z. Wu, Q. C. Liu, Y. Zhang and X. B. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 4345–4353 CrossRef .
H. Ren, R. Yu, J. Wang, Q. Jin, M. Yang, D. Mao, D. Kisailus, H. Zhao and D. Wang, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6679–6684 CrossRef PubMed .
M. R. Hoffmann, S. T. Martin, W. Choi and D. W. Bahnemann, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 69–96 CrossRef .
T. Xu, L. Zhang, H. Cheng and Y. Zhu, Appl. Catal., B, 2011, 101, 382–387 CrossRef .
Y. F. Zhukovskii, S. Piskunov, O. Lisovski, D. Bocharov and R. Evarestov, Isr. J. Chem., 2017, 57, 461–476 CrossRef .
J. Nowotny, C. C. Sorrell, L. R. Sheppard and T. Bak, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2005, 30, 521–544 CrossRef .
B. D. Alexander, P. J. Kulesza, I. Rutkowska, R. Solarska and J. Augustynski, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 2298–2303 RSC .
H. Chen and L. Wang, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol., 2014, 5, 696 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Anpo and M. Takeuchi, J. Catal., 2003, 216, 505–516 CrossRef .
X. Han, Q. Kuang, M. Jin, Z. Xie and L. Zheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 3152–3153 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Azadmanjiri, J. Wang, C. C. Berndt and A. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 3824–3849 RSC .
H. G. Yang, C. H. Sun, S. Z. Qiao, J. Zou, G. Liu, S. C. Smith, H. M. Cheng and G. Q. Lu, Nature, 2008, 453, 638 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Han, L. Hu, Z. Liang, S. Wageh, A. A. Al-Ghamdi, Y. Chen and X. Fang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 5719–5727 CrossRef .
S. Y. Sawant and M. H. Cho, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 97788–97797 RSC .
B. Chai, J. Li, Q. Xu and K. Dai, Mater. Lett., 2014, 120, 177–181 CrossRef .
Q. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Z. Meng, W. Tong, X. Yu and Q. An, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 12296 CrossRef PubMed .
I. H. Tseng, Y.-M. Sung, P.-Y. Chang and S.-W. Lin, J. Photochem. Photobiol A, 2017, 339, 1–11 CrossRef .
J. C. Zhao, J. H. Wu, M. Zheng, J. H. Huo and Y. G. Tu, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 156, 261–266 CrossRef .
H. B. Yang, G. H. Guai, C. X. Guo, Q. L. Song, S. P. Jiang, Y. L. Wang, W. Zhang and C. M. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 12209–12215 CrossRef .
S. Uehara, S. Sumikura, E. Suzuki and S. Mori, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 641–644 RSC .
T. Harman, P. Taylor, M. Walsh and B. LaForge, science, 2002, 297, 2229–2232 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Kim, S. Datta and M. S. Lundstrom, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 105, 034506 CrossRef .
Y. Yin, B. Tudu and A. Tiwari, Vacuum, 2017, 146, 356–374 CrossRef .
M. Kaveh and N. Mott, J. Phys. C: Solid State Phys., 1981, 14, L177 CrossRef .
M. J. Graf, S. Yip, J. Sauls and D. Rainer, Phys. Rev. B, 1996, 53, 15147 CrossRef .
P. Dollfus, V. H. Nguyen and J. Saint-Martin, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2015, 27, 133204 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Minnich, M. Dresselhaus, Z. Ren and G. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 466–479 RSC .
G. Chen, Phys. Rev. B, 1998, 57, 14958 CrossRef .
G. Chen, Semicond. Semimetals, 2001, 71, 203–259 Search PubMed .
G. Chen, J. Heat Transfer, 1997, 119, 220–229 CrossRef .
S. Walia, S. Balendhran, H. Nili, S. Zhuiykov, G. Rosengarten, Q. H. Wang, M. Bhaskaran, S. Sriram, M. S. Strano and K. Kalantar-zadeh, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2013, 58, 1443–1489 CrossRef .
S.-M. Lee, J.-H. Kim and J.-H. Ahn, Mater. Today, 2015, 18, 336–344 CrossRef .
C.-C. Chen, Z. Li, L. Shi and S. B. Cronin, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 666–672 CrossRef .
M. Imada, A. Fujimori and Y. Tokura, Rev. Mod. Phys., 1998, 70, 1039 CrossRef .
J. He, Y. Liu and R. Funahashi, J. Mater. Res., 2011, 26, 1762–1772 CrossRef .
D. Chen, Y. Zhao, Y. Chen, B. Wang, H. Chen, J. Zhou and Z. Liang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 3224–3230 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Lin, C. Norman, D. Srivastava, F. Azough, L. Wang, M. Robbins, K. Simpson, R. Freer and I. A. Kinloch, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 15898–15908 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Maeda and T. E. Mallouk, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 4813–4818 RSC .
X. Yang, J. Zhu, L. Qiu and D. Li, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2833–2838 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Hassan, M. Suzuki and A. A. El-Moneim, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2014, 9, 8340–8354 Search PubMed .
W. Zhou, J. Liu, T. Chen, K. S. Tan, X. Jia, Z. Luo, C. Cong, H. Yang, C. M. Li and T. Yu, PCCP, 2011, 13, 14462–14465 RSC .
Y. Lu, J. Wu, J. Liu, M. Lei, S. Tang, P. Lu, L. Yang, H. Yang and Q. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 17433–17440 CrossRef PubMed .
J. R. Brent, N. Savjani and P. O'Brien, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2017, 89, 411–478 CrossRef .
X. Li, W. Qi, D. Mei, M. L. Sushko, I. Aksay and J. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5136–5141 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Huang, X.-l. Huang, J.-s. Lian, D. Xu, L.-m. Wang and X.-b. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 2844–2847 RSC .
H. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 9451–9469 CrossRef PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:
Jalal Azadmanjiri	Jalal Azadmanjiri received his PhD (full scholarships) in Materials Science and Engineering from Monash University, Australia (2012) followed by a postdoctoral research fellowship at the Swinburne University of Technology. His current research interests include nanomaterials and nanotechnology, especially focusing on the design, synthesis, functionalization and characterization of nanomaterials with zero-, one- and two-dimensional structures. He is also interested in the development and improvement of hybrid materials with thin film and layered nanostructures for energy storage, energy conversion and biomedical applications, and the study of their surfaces and interfaces.
Aimin Yu	Dr Aimin Yu received her PhD in Chemistry at Nanjing University (China) in 1997. After being a Lecturer at the same university for three years, Dr Yu took a postdoctoral position at the Max Planck Institute of Colloids and Interfaces (Germany). Dr Yu moved to Australia in 2003 and currently is an Associate Professor at the Swinburne University of Technology, based in Melbourne Australia. Her research fields include: synthesis and functionalization of nanomaterials; preparation of nanostructured thin films; and development of biosensors and assay methods for biomedical applications. Dr Yu has co-authored more than 120 publications in these areas.

Single layer graphene	Elastic stiffness ∼ 340 N m−1.10 Young's modulus ∼ 1.02 TPa and ultimate strength ∼ 130 GPa.27 Thermal conductivity ∼ 5300 W m−1 K−1.28 Electron mobility 2 × 105 cm2 V−1 s−1.29 Surface area ∼ 2600 m2 g−1 (ref. 30) and resistivity ∼ 6.5 kΩ.31 Optical transparency ∼ 97.7%.32 Specific capacitance ∼ 1.0 × 105 μF cm−2 for the graphene edge and 4 μF cm−2 for the basal plane.33 Bending stiffness of 0.192 nN nm (1.2 eV).34



Few-layer/multilayer graphene	Young's modulus ∼ 0.98 TPa (3 layers) and ultimate strength ∼ 101 GPa.27 Thermal conductivity ∼ 3000 W m−1 K−1.35 Electron mobility of 27000 cm2 V−1 s−1.36 Surface area ∼ 940 m2 g−1.37 Resistivity ∼ 2 kΩ.38 Optical transparency ∼ 80% (10 layers).39 Specific capacitance ∼ 135 F g−1.40 Bending stiffness of almost 10000 eV (10 layers).41



Graphene oxide/reduced-graphene oxide (rGO)	Young's modulus ∼ 42 GPa and ultimate strength ∼ 190 MPa.42 Thermal conductivity ∼ 1950 W m−1 K−1.43 Electron mobility 123 cm2 V−1 s−1.44 Surface area ∼ 705 m2 g−1 and specific capacitance ∼ 135 F g−1.45 Resistivity ∼ 10kΩ cm.46 Optical transparency ∼ 73%.47




 	Fig. 1  (a) A schematic illustration of diverse kinds of typical 2D nanomaterials. (b) Representative structures of selected TMO nanosheets: (i) monolayer MoO2, (ii) monolayer Ti0.91O2, (iii) TiNbO5, (iv) Ca2Nb3O10 and (v) Cs4W11O36. (c) Layered α-MoO3 and V2O5. (d) A set of SEM and TEM images of the as-synthesized TMO nanosheets: (i and i′) TiO2, (ii and ii′) Fe2O3, (iii and iii′) Co3O4 and (iv and iv′) WO3. Panel (a) reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 20, Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. Panel (b) reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 63 Copyright 2009, The Royal Society of Chemistry. Panel (c) reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 64, Copyright 2015, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Panel (d) reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 65, Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

TiO2	Self-cleaning and photoinduced hydrophilicity	Photocatalysis	
66

Holey Zn(Mn2O4)	A specific capacity of 500 mA h g−1 at a current density of 800 mA g−1 for 50 cycles	Anode for sodium ion batteries	
67

MnO2	A specific capacity of 617 mA h g−1	Cathode for Li and Na ion batteries	
68

WO3	Prolonged irradiation time	Photoelectrode	
69

MoO3	A high response to H2 gas with response and recovery times in the order of seconds	H2 gas sensing	
70

TiO2	A spleen index of almost 3 after 30 days	Bio-applications	
71

ZnO	A specific capacitance of 554 F g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1	SCs	
72

V2O5	A specific capacity of 600 mA h g−1 at a current density of 100 m A g−1	Anode for LIBs	
73

MnO2	A therapeutic efficiency of 49.5% (24 h) at a doxorubicin concentration of 30 μg mL−1 (doxorubicin is a typical broad-spectrum anticancer drug)	Ultrasensitive stimuli-responsive theranostics of cancer	
74


Graphene oxide (GO)/TiO2	Laser ablation in a liquid	A solar conversion efficiency of 14.3%	Water-splitting photocatalyst	
86

Graphene/TiO2	Atomic layer deposition	63% more capacity to bear the load as compared to TiO2 over 50 ALD cycles	Electrode for LIBs	
87

Graphene/TiO2	Rational control of hydrolysis, condensation, and annealing	A reversible capacity of 237 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at a current density of 20 mA g−1	Anode for LIBs	
88

Graphene/SnO2	Layer by layer technique	A maximum specific capacitance of 472 F g−1	SCs	
89

Graphene/SnO2	Redox reactions	A rate constant of 9.8 × 10−4 under ultraviolet (UV) light	Photocatalytic degradation	
90

Graphene/SnO2	Chemical reduction	A specific capacitance of 43.4 F g−1	SCs	
91

Graphene/SnO2	Reduction of graphene oxide (GO) with Sn2+ ions	A maximum reversible capacity of 541.3 mA h g−1	Anode for LIBs	
92

Graphene/SnO2	First principles prediction	A global bandgap of 100 meV at the Fermi level	Field effect transistors (FETs)	
93

Graphene/indium doped SnO2	Ultrasonication	A maximum charge capacity of 1058 mA h g−1	Anode for LIBs	
94

Graphene/SnO2	Nanocrystal-seed-directed-hydrothermal route	An emitting current density as high as 1.1 A cm−2 at an applied field of 7.5 V μm−1	Printable electronics, energy-saving and harvesting	
95

rGO/SnO2	Microwave-assisted sol–gel technique	Detection of sub-ppm concentrations of NO2 at low temperature (150 °C) in just a few seconds	Gas sensing	
96

Graphene/Fe3O4	Microwave-assisted sol–gel technique	A maximum rate capacity of 400 mA h g−1	Anode for LIBs	
97

Graphene/FeOOH quantum dots	Ultrasonication	A maximum specific capacitance of about 365 F g−1	SCs	
94

Graphene/Fe3O4	Hydrothermal	Tunable microwave absorption over the range of 4–18 GHz	Microwave absorption	
98

Graphene/Fe3O4	Ultrasonication	A maximum rate capacity of 1235 mA h g−1	Anode for LIBs	
99

Graphene/NiO	Electrochemical reduction	A high electrocatalytic activity toward the oxidation of glucose and methanol under alkaline conditions	Electrolyte for glucose and methanol	
100

Graphene/TiO2	Aerosol assisted self-assembly	A sensitivity of about 6.2 mA mM−1 cm2	Glucose biosensor	
101

Graphene/TiO2	Simple mixing and sonication	1.26 wt% hydrogen storage	Hydrogen storage	
102

Graphene/V2O5	Simple mixing and sonication	1.36 wt% hydrogen storage	Hydrogen storage	
102

Graphene/ZnO	Electrodeposition	Sensitivities of 54 and 295.82 mA mM−1 cm2 for acetaminophen and 21 and 344.66 mA mM−1 cm2 for phenacetin	Sensing of acetaminophen and phenacetin drugs	
69

Graphene/MnO2	Electrodeposition	A maximum specific capacitance of 245 F g−1	SCs	
103

rGO/Co3O4	Hydrothermal route	A maximum specific capacitance of 402 F g−1	SCs	
104

GO/TiO2	Self-assembly method	Excited by visible light with wavelengths longer than 510 nm	Photoelectronic and photocatalytic applications	
105

GO/V2O5	Hydrothermal route	A maximum specific capacitance of 635 F g−1	SCs	
82

Graphene/MnO2	Electrochemical reduction	A maximum specific capacitance of 1486.9 μF cm−2	SCs	
106

Graphene/TiO2	Nanocrystal-seed-directed hydrothermal route	Photocatalytic activity four times faster than that of TiO2 nanorods	Photocatalytic decontamination	
107

rGO/Cu2O	Template-assisted sol–gel method	High sensitivity (185 μA mM−1 cm2) and fast response (within 3 s)	Non-enzymatic amperometric glucose sensing	
108

rGO/CuO	Vacuum filtration and hydrothermal reduction	A specific capacity of 736.8 mA h g−1	Anode for LIBs	
109

Graphene/CoOx	Electrodeposition	A sensitivity of 79.3 μA mM−1 cm2	Sensor for monitoring urine glucose	
100

rGO/Co3O4	Thermal pyrolysis	A specific capacity of 673 mA h g−1	Electrode for LIBs	
110


 	Fig. 2  (a) A schematic of producing a 2D GO/Cu2O heterostructure using the EPD method. (b) A low and higher magnification TEM images from the cross section and the given areas of GO/Cu2O, respectively (the crystal plane directions and inter-planar spaces have been indicated on the images. The insets also show the corresponding fast Fourier transform patterns). (c) A coincident periodic match style of Cu2O on the GO plane. Reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 137, Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) A schematic illustration of different self-assembly methods. (b) XRD patterns, Raman spectra, DTA-TGA curves and TEM images of the MoO3 and synthesized graphene/MoO3 nanosheets. Panel (b) reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 145, Copyright 2013, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Procedure of hydrothermal/solvothermal synthesis. (b) A schematic illustration of the growth process of a 2D graphene/NiO heterostructure. (c) (i) TEM image of a graphene nanosheet (inset shows HRTEM of the cross section of the graphene nanosheet), (ii) TEM image of NiO nanosheets and the graphene/NiO heterostructure, (iii) TEM image of polycrystalline NiO, (iv) the SAED pattern of polycrystalline NiO (left) and HRTEM image of the NiO nanosheet in the graphene/NiO heterostructure (right). Panels (b) and (c) reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 150, Copyright 2011, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) A schematic of the sol–gel method and its various products. (b) Atomic force microscopy (AFM) image of the as-deposited GO/TiO2. (c) TEM images of rGO/V2O5. Panel (b) reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 166, Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society. Panel (c) reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 82, Copyright 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) A schematic illustration of the hydrolysis process employed for the synthesis of graphene/TMO heterostructures. (b) A schematic of the formation process of the mesoporous graphene/TiO2 sandwich-like nanosheets by hydrolysis taking tetrabutyl titanate (TBOT) as the Ti precursor. (c) TEM and HRTEM images of the surface (i and ii) and cross section (iii and iv), and AFM topography and its corresponding height-profile analysis along the line as well as STEM and EDX elemental maps (v) of the hybrid graphene/TiO2 nanosheet. Panels (b) and (c) reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 88, Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

Electrochemical/electrophoretic deposition	✓ Economic and versatile	○ Difficult to achieve uniform layer systems171


	✓ High deposition rate of different layers	○ External stimulus is required
✓ Simplicity of scaling up	○ Substrate is required for deposition
✓ Doesn't require any high temperature step	

Self-assembly	✓ No external stimulus is required	○ Surfactants are generally required to prevent the re-aggregation of graphene and TMO nanosheets


	✓ Uniform layer system may be achieved with the help of surfactants	○ Generally poor dispersion of graphene142
✓ Strong interaction and coupling can be achieved between graphene and TMO layers141,143	○ High temperature is required
Hydrothermal/Solvothermal	✓ TMOs with high energy facets can be grown on the surface of graphene159,172	○ Re-aggregation of graphene and TMO nanosheets is difficult to prevent


	✓ Intimate contacts with high conformity can be achieved150,173	○ High temperature is required

	○ Very time-consuming process
Sol–gel	✓ Smooth planar structure of graphene and TMOs can be achieved166	○ High temperature is required


	✓ Better adhesion after post-annealing	○ Post-annealing at high temperature may lead to the formation of extra compounds of carbon (graphene degradation) and transition metals (TMO degradation)
Hydrolysis	✓ Intimate contacts can be achieved169	○ Iterations are required to adjust the process parameters to prevent any free growth of TMOs on the surface of graphene


	✓ Porous structure can be obtained	○ High temperature is required
✓ Re-aggregation of sheets can be prevented with the help of surfactants174	


 	Fig. 7  (a) Side views of charge density difference traces for (i) physisorption and (ii) chemisorption with charge accumulation (light red) and charge depletion (light green) regions, and (iii) the binding energies and inter-planar distance of a 2D graphene/TiO2 heterostructure. (b) (i) interaction between graphene and ultrathin TiO2 and (ii) formation of the heterostructure, (iii) formation of sp3, Ti–O–C covalent bonding and transfer of an electron from graphene to TiO2 through that covalent bonding, and (iv) XPS result and SEM images of the 2D graphene/TiO2 heterostructure. (c) Defects on TiO2 (due to vacancies of Ti) and graphene. Panel (a) reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 87, Copyright 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry. Panel (b) reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 177, Copyright 2016, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Electromagnetic spectrum from UV rays to THz/microwaves and the corresponding light–matter interactions in graphene (which can be distributed into four various regions) and the bandgap values of diverse 2D and conventional semiconductors. The bandgap can be tuned over that range by changing the structure of the material. (b) Structure model of a defect line in a 2D h-BN/Ni (111) heterostructure and scanning tunneling microscope (STM) image of h-BN triangular islands grown on Ni (arrows indicate the defect lines). (c) STM images showing the bright stripe defects of an EuO/Ir (111) bilayer film due to antiphase domain boundaries. The green and black lines (on the right STM panel) represent densely packed superstructure rows on the right and left sides of the bright stripe. (d) The planar averaged local density of states along with the zigzag chains of a BN/BNH2 superlattice at the interface (modeled by DFT) and a plot that shows the bandgaps in each subdomain of the superlattice structure. (e) A schematic illustration of graphane (top) that can be incorporated into a graphene matrix (down). Panel (a) reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 1, Copyright 2017, Published by AIP Publishing. Panel (b–e) reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 188, Copyright 2015, Elsevier.	 
τ = λ2/Di	(1)

 	Fig. 9  (a) A schematic demonstration of oxidizing MXene-Ti3C2 into a Ti-peroxo complex and the derived 2D rGO/TiO2 heterostructure, along with SEM and TEM images of 2D rGO/TiO2. (b) Optical images of MXene-Ti3C2 and Ti-peroxo complex gels (taken using H2O2 addition with a different range of H2O2 concentrations) along with SEM and TEM images of MXene-Ti3C2 and MXene-derived TiO2, and UV-vis spectra of the Ti-peroxo complex (inset in UV-vis presents the Ti-peroxo complex that can be dissolved in water easily). (c) A schematic and Ragone plot (power density vs. energy density) of a sodium-ion capacitor based on the MXene-derived 2D rGO/TiO2 anode and polyaniline derived porous carbon cathode. (d) Electrochemical performance of the 2D rGO/TiO2-polyaniline derived porous carbon sodium-ion capacitor: current density–potential (scan rate of 5 mV s−1), galvanostatic charge–discharge plots (with a current density of 0.5 A g−1) measured in various potential windows (the inset shows the relationship between the specific energy density and potential window. The current density was calculated at a current density of 0.5 A g−1), cycling stability for ∼ 2000 cycles, coulombic efficiency at a current density of 2 A g−1 within different working potential ranges, and galvanostatic charge–discharge curves at diverse current densities, respectively. Reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 194, Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

GO/MnO2	Hydrothermal route	A specific capacitance of 213 F g−1 at a current density of 0.1 A g−1 and 98.1% capacity retention after 1000 cycles	1 M Na2SO4	
155

Graphene/MoO3	Self-assembly	A specific capacitance of 291 F g−1 at a scan rate of 2 mV s−1	1 M Na2SO4	
145

Graphene/MnO2	Self-assembly	A specific capacitance of 175 F g−1 at a current density of 0.5 A g−1 and a capacitance retention of 88.8% after 5000 charge–discharge cycles	1 mol L−1 Na2SO4	
143

GO/Fe2O3	Electrochemical deposition	A specific capacitance of 349 F g−1 at a current density of 0.5 A g−1 and 95% capacity retention after 1000 cycles	1 mol L−1 LiOH aqueous solution	
77

NiO/Graphene	Electrochemical deposition	A pseudocapacitance of 400 Fg−1 at a current density of 2 Ag−1	1 M KOH	
171

Graphene/MnO2	Self-assembly	A specific capacitance of 267 F g−1 at a current density of 0.2 A g−1 and a capacitance retention of 92% after 7000 charge/discharge cycles	Gel electrolyte of PVA/H3PO4	
122

Graphene/V2O5	Sol–gel	A specific capacitance of 635 F g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1 and a capacitance retention of 94% after 3000 charge/discharge cycles	1 M KCl	
82


 	Fig. 10  (a) A schematic of the growth process of a 2D graphene/Co3O4 heterostructure. (b) The first cycle discharge and charge curves, (c) cycling efficiency at 0.1C, (d) rate capabilities, and (e) cycling performance at stepwise current rates of GO, graphene and the 2D graphene/Co3O4 heterostructure. (f) TEM image of the graphene/Co3O4 anode after 30 cycles. Reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 169, Copyright 2010, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

Graphene/Mesoporous TiO2	Hydrolysis	A specific capacity of 238 mA h g−1 at a current rate of 178 mA g−1 and a coulombic efficiency of 70.7% in the initial cycle	
88

rGO/CuO	Hydrothermal	A specific capacity of 736.8 mA h g−1 at a current rate of 67 mA g−1 after 50 cycles	
109

Graphene/anatase TiO2	Solvothermal	A specific capacity of 213 mA h g−1 at a current rate of 890 mA g−1 in the second discharge cycle and a coulombic efficiency of 90.6% in the second initial cycle	
159

Graphene/NiO	Hydrothermal	An initial charge capacity of 1056 mA h g−1 at a current rate of 89 mA g−1 and a capacity retention of 97.6% after 40 cycles	
150

Graphene/SnO2	Hydrothermal	An initial discharge capacity of 1666 mA h g−1 at a current rate of 160 mA g−1	
157

Graphene/V2O5	Solvothermal	An initial discharge capacity of 138 mA h g−1 at a current rate of 3000 mA g−1	
146

Graphene/Co3O4	Electrochemical deposition	A discharge capacity of 880 mA h g−1 during the 40th cycle at a current rate of 267 mA g−1	
81


 	Fig. 11  (a) A schematic illustration of the crystal structure of TiO2 and graphene nanosheets. (b) TEM and elemental mapping images of the 2D graphene/TiO2 heterostructure. (c) Photocatalytic degradation of Rhodamine B (RhB) over various photocatalysts under the irradiation of UV light (note: the time of light on is specified as 0 min. C and C0 represent the concentration of RhB at time t and the initial solution, respectively). (d) A schematic illustration of the crystal of α-Fe2O3 and graphene nanosheets. (e) SEM, TEM and HRTEM images of pure α-Fe2O3 nanoplates and the graphene/α-Fe2O3 heterostructure. (f) Photodegradation of RhB by α-Fe2O3 and the graphene/α-Fe2O3 heterostructure under Xe light irradiation for 60 min. Panel (b and c) reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 173, Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. Panel (e and f) reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 218, Copyright 2014, John Wiley & Sons.	 

Graphene/Ti0.91O2	Electrostatic self-assembly	Ultrafast electron transfer and photo-conversion properties. Efficient dissociation of photogenerated excitons was observed. With the increase in the thickness of layers, photocurrents increased linearly	
144

GO/TiO2	Sol–gel	Photocatalytic activity (i.e. degradation of E. coli bacteria) increased by a factor of 7.5 as compared to TiO2	
166

Graphene/ZnO	Electrochemical deposition	Photocatalytic activity (i.e. degradation of methyl orange) increased by a factor of almost 7 as compared to Zn	
219

rGO/WO3	Hydrothermal	Decomposition of methyl blue was enhanced as compared to WO3	
220

TiO2/GO	Hydrolysis	Enhanced visible-light photodegradation of methylene blue and electrochemical ORR from polluted water	
221

GO/TiO2	Combined sol–gel and solvothermal	The strong interaction between TiO2 and GO reduced the rate of recombination of charge carriers and enhanced the decolorating of methylene blue	
222


 	Fig. 12  (a) A schematic illustration of the synthesis process of a graphene/NiO heterostructure and the crystal structure of NiO and graphene nanosheets. (b and c) Current density–voltage characteristics of p-type DSSCs based on NiO and graphene/NiO heterostructures in the dark and under 1 sun intensity, respectively (note: the current density–voltage was measured by using a Keithley 2420 in the dark and under illumination of a sun 2000 solar simulator, with the 100 mW cm−2 AM1.5G spectrum). Reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 224, Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society.	 
ZT = (S2σT)/κ	(2)

 	Fig. 13  (a) A schematic demonstration of feasible mechanisms for the formation of rGO/Al-doped ZnO composites and the electrical conductivity and lattice thermal conductivity of ZnO, Zn0.98Al0.02O and rGO (1.5 wt%)/Zn0.98Al0.02O. (b) A high magnification SEM image of the graphene/LSTO heterostructure, the ZT value of pure LSTO and graphene/LSTO heterostructures as a function of temperature and the open-circuit voltage and couple S as a function of hot side temperature (the inset is a photograph of the module). Panel (a) reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 241, Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. Panel (b) reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 242, Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
