A feasibility study of unconventional planar ligand spacers in chalcogenide nanocrystals   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5CP07521A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5CP07521A
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 13781-13793A feasibility study of unconventional planar ligand spacers in chalcogenide nanocrystals†

        
          
            Binit 
            Lukose
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Paulette 
            Clancy
          
        
      *
      School of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Cornell University, 14853 Ithaca, NY, USA. E-mail: Paulette.Clancy@cornell.edu
Received 
      7th December 2015
    , Accepted 19th February 2016First published on 19th February 2016AbstractThe solar cell efficiency of chalcogenide nanocrystals (quantum dots) has been limited in the past by the insulation between neighboring quantum dots caused by intervening, often long-chain, aliphatic ligands. We have conducted a computationally based feasibility study to investigate the use of ultra-thin, planar, charge-conducting ligands as an alternative to traditional long passive ligands. Not only might these radically unconventional ligands decrease the mean distance between adjacent quantum dots, but, since they are charge-conducting, they have the potential to actively enhance charge migration. Our ab initio studies compare the binding energies, electronic energy gaps, and absorption characteristics for both conventional and unconventional ligands, such as phthalocyanines, porphyrins and coronene. This comparison identified these unconventional ligands with the exception of titanyl phthalocyanine, that bind to themselves more strongly than to the surface of the quantum dot, which is likely to be less desirable for enhancing charge transport. The distribution of finite energy levels of the bound system is sensitive to the ligand’s binding site and the levels correspond to delocalized states. We also observed a trap state localized on a single Pb atom when a sulfur-containing phenyldithiocarbamate (PTC) ligand is attached to a slightly off-stoichiometric dot in a manner that the sulfur of the ligand completes stoichiometry of the bound system. Hence, this is indicative of the source of trap state when thio-based ligands are bound to chalcogenide nanocrystals. We also predict that titanyl phthalocyanine in a mix with chalcogenide dots of diameter ∼1.5 Å can form a donor–acceptor system.
Introduction
The study of nanocrystals is an active area of research for their ability to absorb infrared light.1,2 Their discrete energy levels and the spatial confinement of excitons are characteristic of their finite size. Multiple exciton generation is an added facility in some cases, which considerably increases their energy conversion efficiency.3,4 These confinement properties are accompanied by strong exciton–exciton and carrier–carrier Coulomb interactions, leading to shifts in the spectral features and enhancement of the Auger recombination efficiency, respectively. Also, since the discrete energy levels are distributed according to angular momentum quantum numbers, the conservation of translational momentum is relaxed in NCs. All these conditions favor size-tunable band gap and carrier multiplication in nanocrystals.
Various synthetic methods have been utilized for colloidal quantum dot formation, such as hot injection,5 non-precursor injection, phosphine-free synthesis, electrodeposition, chemical vapor deposition, hydro and solvothermal synthesis, etc. A number of factors can modify the charge dynamics in NCs. Changes in morphology, for instance, lead to changes in optical6,7 and charge transport8 properties. A desired shape and size of the quantum dots can be achieved by controlling surfactants,9–15 reaction time,16 and seed growth,6,17 and by using different templates.18,19 Stoichiometry is also known to make discrete differences in electronic structure and optical properties.20–22 Above all, surface chemistry and ligand specifics sensitively impact the overall efficiency.
The properties of the self-assembled quantum dot superlattice arise from the inherent properties of the dots, the nature of interaction between the dots and their crystallographic arrangement, such as the lattice and the inter-particle distance.23 The charge coupling between dots can be tuned over a wide range (orders of magnitude) by variations in the inter-dot spacing as well as by compression. The inter-dot spacing is affected by the choice of ligand used in the quantum dot (QD) self-assembly process. These ligands not only direct the assembly process, but they play an important role in the charge transfer processes and in the relaxation of excited states. Rate of Auger recombination and interband relaxation are said to be controlled by the ligands.24 It is common for long-chain ligands (typically, C12–C15), often alkyl-based like oleic acid, to be used for the self-assembly process. But these long chains also passivate the surface of the quantum dot and there has been a recent tendency to assemble the superlattice and then perform a “ligand swop” to a short ligand to decrease the inter-dot distance and improve charge transport given encouraging results by Yu et al.25 and Talapin et al.26
A few groups27–29 have studied photo-luminescence in nanocrystal–organic dye systems and reported efficient fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) from nanocrystals (donors) to organic dyes (acceptors). Xiao et al.29 additionally found carrier multiplication in nanocrystals and enhanced fluorescence in dyes preceded by the energy transfer. Moreover, Gocalińska et al. demonstrated that electrons can transfer from PbS dots to fullerene molecules fast enough to produce carrier multiplication.30 In all these reported systems, nanocrystals have capping agents and have organic dye neighbors. Since the efficiency of FRET has a sixth-power dependence on donor–acceptor separation,31 a prominent way forward has been to use dye molecules as capping agents/surfactants.
In this paper, we take a radically different approach; instead of mixing nanocrystals with capping agents, we consider a feasibility study in which we replace traditional, insulating capping agents (like oleic acid) by ultra-thin charge-conducting ligands, like the phthalocyanine, porphryin, and coronene families that can actively contribute to the charge-carrying capability of the system. Moreover, all these molecules have energy gaps comparable to that of our computationally feasible-sized QDs. A recent article has discussed research on dots chemically bound to conjugated organic molecules.32 However, the ligands we suggest above have never been used as spacers between chalcogenide nanocrystals. One exception that we are aware of is work by Frasco et al. in which the authors capped a porphyrin derivative on CdSe dots using pyridyl moieties.33 Nonetheless, since the tethered ligands stuck out from the surface into the interstitial (inter-dot) spaces, the distance between the dots did not decrease significantly. In our different approach, we analyze the tangential binding of thin planar molecules as spacers using density functional theory.
Selection process for choice of conventional and unconventional ligands
Organic molecules that act as both spacers and as directors of self-assembly in chalcogenide nanocrystals are typically acid, amine or thiol compounds; they are coordinated to the nanocrystal surface via O, N or S atoms, respectively. These organic ligands are known to be poor conductors whose carrier mobilities decrease exponentially with ligand length. The long-chain ligands are chosen more for their ability to direct the self-assembly process. Thus, it has become quite common to initiate a “ligand exchange” at some point in the processing, either in solution26,34 and or in the solid phase.35,36 The replacement of long, insulating ligands by short, charge-conducting ones such as S2−, Se2−, hydrazine, dithiols, halide anion, etc.25,26,37–41 is intended to allow smaller inter-dot separation. These strategies have led to impressive results, with electron and hole mobilities approaching nearly 1 cm2 V−1 s−1 for electrons and around 0.2 cm2 V−1 s−1 for holes.26 Partial fusion of dots by controlling the exchanged ligand is a further improvement.42–45 Another approach is to use metallated ligands that bind the dots strongly and facilitate band-like charge transport.46 But issues remain: in particular, mid-gap states in devices act as potential recombination centers that can reduce the number of carriers. Thus, passivation of mid-gap states is an important design criterion. To mitigate this, the choice of functional group at the end of the ligand has also been shown to be important. But striking the right balance between passivation and carrier transport through the choice of ligand (and processing conditions) remains something of an art.
Subtleties of geometry, chemistry and subsequent electronic properties are important in this study, requiring that we perform accurate first-principles study of NCs with both conventional and unconventional ligands for this work. Given the broad range of candidate ligands that this implies, our focus took a rather different approach. We conducted a feasibility study on a hypothetical class of QD-passivating ligand molecules that are planar, charge-conducting and, especially, are ultra-thin. These band-gap matching molecules could be of potential interest for organic solar cell applications, but are as yet untested. In this study, we choose to focus on lead chalcogenide nanocrystals for the colloidal quantum dot, which we have considerable experience in simulating.8 As a backdrop for this feasibility study, we also considered a number of more traditional ligands for comparison. Table 1 lists the nine ligands used in this study; they were chosen to cover a broad range of coordination, size and constituent atoms. We chose butanedioic acid (BuDA) and oxalic acid (OA) as examples of ligands coordinated to the NC via oxygen atoms. 4,4-Butanediamine (BDA), 1,4-benzenediamine (BeDA), 1,6-hexanediamine (HDA) and 1,3-propanediamine (PDA) are among the amine ligands typically used for nanocrystals; they are coordinated to the NC via nitrogen atoms. Hydrazine (HZ) is also coordinated via nitrogen atoms and leads to particularly impressive mobilities. Finally, 1,2-ethanedithiol (EDT), tert-butyl N-(2-mercaptoethyl carbomate) (t-BDC) and phenyldithiocarbamate (PTC) were chosen as examples of ligands coordinated via sulfur atoms. We were particularly interested in undertaking a feasibility study of ligands composed of phthalocyanine (Pc), porphyrin (Prp), or coronene molecules, which could be targeted as alternatives to conventional ligands, but have not yet been introduced. In this paper, we have particularly focused on phthalocyanine molecules, either with, or without, a central metal atom such as Cu, Zn, Ni, Pb, Se and TiO as examples of thin, planar, charge-conducting ligands for this study.
Table 1 (top) Binding energy of conventional ligands (in eV) on a [100] facet of a 1.5 nm octahedral PbS nanocrystal. (bottom) Partial atomic charges (in e) of the bound atoms calculated using CHELPG method. The first four ligands are amines, the next two ligands (OA and EDT) are acids and the last three ligands are S-coordinated. In the last two cases, except for PTC, the binding energy relates to binding to two Pb atoms. PTC is linked to a single Pb atom. Each of the amine ligand is bound to single S atom. The atom type for each partial charge is given in parenthesis




Ligand
PDA
BDA
HDA
BeDA
BuDA
OA
EDT
PTC

t-BDC





Binding energy (eV)



NC–ligand
−1.2
−1.3
−1.1
−0.9
−2.2
−2.5
−1.2
0.76
−1







Partial atomic charges (e)



Bound atom of ligand
−0.65 (N)
−0.53 (N)
−0.55 (N)
−0.68 (N)
−0.46 (O)
−0.46 (O)
−0.50 (S)
−0.40 (S)
−0.52 (S)


Bound atom/atoms of NC
0.23 (S)
0.18 (S)
0.22 (S)
0.15 (S)
0.55, 0.43 (Pb, Pb)
0.60, 0.57 (Pb, Pb)
0.42, 0.39 (Pb, Pb)
0.83 (Pb)
0.42, 0.25 (Pb, Pb)


Atom/atoms next to the bound atom of ligand
0.58 (C)
0.30 (C)
0.04 (C)
0.68 (C)
0.79, −0.59 (C, O)
0.71, −0.63 (C, O)
0.59 (C)
0.25 (C)
0.59 (C)


Atom/atoms next to the bound atom of the NC
0.26, 0.24, −0.42 (Pb, Pb, S)
0.29, 0.27, −0.43 (Pb, Pb, S)
0.30, 0.27, −0.44 (Pb, Pb, S)
0.25, 0.28, −0.42 (Pb, Pb, S)
−0.49, −0.46 (S, S)
−0.46, −0.59 (S, S)
−0.35, −0.40 (S, S)
−0.50, −0.46, 0.39 (S, S, Pb)
−0.37, −0.41 (S, S)


Atom/atoms on the other side of the ligand
−1.10 (N)
−1.10 (N)
−1.09 (N)
−0.80 (N)
−0.65, −0.59 (O, O)
−0.65, −0.76 (O, O)
−0.48 (S)
−0.49 (S)
−0.5, −0.65, −0.67, 1.3 (O, O, N, C)




Our computational study includes calculations of the binding energy of each ligand with both PbSe and PbS nanocrystals, as well as a determination of the ligand–QD pair's electronic properties, and absorption spectrum. All calculations were done on freestanding finite geometries; we have not considered band-like transport.
To reduce computational cost, we selected a relatively small 1.53 nm diameter octahedral PbSe nanocrystal (1.5 nm dia. for PbS) that contains 80 atoms and exhibits reconstructed facets to minimize the surface energy. We followed the techniques introduced by Bealing et al.47 for this reconstruction, details of which are also described in our earlier publication.8 It is important to remember that the size selection has consequences on the absolute energy levels, the energy gap and the energy alignment with the organic molecules. Some experimental reports show better air stability for dots of size smaller than 3 nm.48 Geometry optimization was performed without symmetry constraints for ligand molecules bound to the nanocrystal. Frequency analysis was performed at the same level as the geometries corresponding to the lowest energies to confirm that the system is located at an energy minimum. We have studied the nature of the attachment of ligands on both [100] and [111] facets of the nanocrystal. Geometry optimization suggested that all ligands prefer to coordinate via Pb to S atoms. In some cases, the ligands prefer to coordinate to two adjacent Pb atoms. For example, BDA, BuDA and OA ligands show energy differences of 1.0, 0.4 and 0.8 eV, respectively, between S and Pb coordinations.
Results and discussion
Binding of ligands on nanocrystals
Binding energies of conventional ligands on PbS nanocrystals at [100] facets are given in the top part of Table 1. We calculated the binding energy as the difference between the total energy of the bound system and the combined total energies of the NC and the ligand; the total energies of the NC, the ligand and the bound ligand–NC system are all calculated in vacuum. With the exception of BeDA, all of the ligands given in Table 1 are coordinated to a pair of neighboring Pb atoms. Amine and thiol ligands have comparable binding energies, while acids are much more strongly bound (>1 eV more) to nanocrystals. Such differences in binding energies for amine and acid ligands confirm similar results found experimentally for CdSe nanocrystals.49 We found that the binding energy of ligands can be different on different facets of the NCs and can lead to different growth rates of the dot; a stronger binding causes slower growth.50 For example, an OA ligand coordinated to two Pb atoms on a [111] facet has about 0.1 eV higher binding compared to similar coordination on a [100] facet. The NC facet may have a larger impact on the binding of planar molecules since they are likely to lie parallel to the NC surface and are bound mainly by van der Waals interactions. Overall, the binding of the ligands is strong, ranging from −0.9 to −2.5 eV. Acids and other ligands are bound to double and single Pb atoms, respectively. Not surprisingly, binding to two Pb atoms leads to stronger coordination.
Planar charge-conducting molecules, on the other hand, show significantly weaker binding with nanocrystals, except for titanyl phthalocyanine (TiOPc), as evident from Table 2. Binding energies range from −0.2 to −0.6 eV; although that for TiOPc is almost twice as strong. Coronene molecule shows the lowest binding of all. Metal-centered Pc or Prp derivatives do not show a significant advantage over Pc or Prp. All planar ligands generally prefer to bind to Pb rather than to Se atoms. However, the stacking energy of Pc molecules (i.e., the Pc-to-Pc self-binding) is significantly higher than the Pc–NC binding energy; our calculations show values of −1.8 and −2.2 eV for Pc-to-Pc and (Pc–Zn)-to-(Pc–Zn) stacking energies, respectively. All Pc (or Prp) derivatives stack with an offset of about 1.4 Å from the fully eclipsed configuration, as shown in Fig. S1 (ESI†). The bulk crystal arrangement of Pc molecules follows a herringbone structure,51,52 and this offset is consistent with those for other small-molecular organic electronic molecules. The relatively small binding of each Pc derivative to NC in comparison to its binding to itself suggest the Pc class of ligands will tend to agglomerate in the spaces between the QDs and make it less likely that they will form a well distributed system consisting of quantum dots and ligand spacers. Whether this is an issue, given that the planar spacers conduct charge, is unknown. The answer to this question will have to wait for large-scale Molecular Dynamics simulation studies or for exploratory experiments.
Table 2 Binding energy of planar ligands – phthalocyanine (Pc), porphyrin (Prp) and coronene – on [100] (or [110]) and Pb/Se-terminated [111] facets of 1.53 nm octahedral PbSe nanocrystal. Blank spaces denote unstable configurations in the corresponding facets




Planar ligands
[100] (or [110]a) surface
Pb-terminated [111] surface
Se-terminated [111] surface





a Bound to a [110] surface.





Pc
−0.37a
−0.43
−0.22


Pc–Cu
−0.42
−0.41
−0.39


Pc–Zn
−0.60
−0.39
−0.60


Pc–Ni
−0.26
−0.42
−0.25


Pc–Pb
−0.40 (to Se)
—
−0.21


Pc–Se
−0.41 (to Pb)
−0.49
—


TiOPc
−0.89
−0.95
−0.75






Prp
−0.39a
−0.50
−0.41


Prp–Cu
−0.46
−0.48
−0.35


Prp–Zn
−0.39
−0.47
−0.46


Prp–Ni
−0.50
−0.51
−0.54


Prp–Pb
−0.33a (to Se)
—
−0.21


Prp–Se
−0.63a (to Pb)
−0.57
—






Coronene
−0.16
−0.17
−0.28




TiOPc distinguishes itself as a promising candidate among all the thin planar molecules considered in this study. The binding energy of TiOPc with a 1.53 nm-dia. octahedral PbSe nanocrystals is −0.9 and −0.95 eV on [100] and [111] Pb-rich facets, and 0.75 eV on [111] Se-rich facets. It has twice the binding energy to the QD than the rest of the thin planar molecules we considered. However, TiOPc has the symmetry to stack in a number of different arrangements around the NC. We have studied the three most likely stacking modes of TiOPc, as shown in Fig. 1(a–c), and found their stacking energies to be −0.45, −0.4 and −0.25 eV, respectively. The last two stacking configurations correspond to a π-stacked global arrangement of TiOPc.53 These results for TiOPc are noteworthy since here, unlike other Pc and Prp molecules, the ligand–NC interaction is more than twice the ligand–ligand interactions, which suggests a stronger tendency to form a system in which chalcogenide dots are separated by TiOPc ligands, as in our hypothetical design, with less of a spacer aggregation problem (due to weaker TiOPc–TiOPc binding). Detailed studies to determine the large-scale stability of such a system, namely a superlattice of NCs surrounded by spacers, will not be feasible using first-principles methods. However, we found that the binding energy of TiOPc with a quantum dot is comparable or lower than that of many conventional ligands (see Table 1 for comparison).49 This may challenge ligand replacement schemes since the relative strength of the metal–ligand bond can affect the thermodynamics of the ligand exchange reaction.
 Fig. 1  (a–c) Three possible stacking configurations of TiOPc (in their geometry-optimized configurations) and their corresponding stacking energies (S.E.). (a) Configuration in which the Ti atoms are adjacent to one another; (b) Ti atoms separated by the organic framework and (c) a stacked (shuttlecock) arrangement exhibiting the largest (self-) stacking energy. (d and e) Binding energies (B.E.) of TiOPc on the [100] and [111] facets of a PbSe NC, respectively. 
We also studied partial atomic charges of NC–ligand bound system using CHELPG method54 (see Methods section for details) to shed light on the electronic distribution around the ligand. The partial charges of the principal atoms, lead and sulfur, vary significantly across the systems, ranging from 0.15 to 0.5 and from −0.15 to −0.5, respectively, in PbS nanocrystals. This is also true in PbSe nanocrystals, where the charges of lead and selenium range from ±0.2 to ±0.8. The partial charges of the bound atoms, their immediate neighboring atoms, and some important atoms on the other side of the ligand are given at the bottom of Table 1. Bound atoms of ligands carry negative charges, while the NC carries positive charges. The carbon atom next to the bound atom of each ligand carries positive charge. For amine and acid ligands, the partial charge of the bound atom (N, and C, respectively) is much lower than its counterpart on the other side of the ligand. This illustrates the change in atomic charges when these ligands bind to NC. Thiol ligands have comparable charges for the S atoms on both sides.
In Pc, carbon atoms that are bonded to nitrogen have positive charges between 0.4 and 0.6 and all other C atoms have charges between −0.05 and −0.2. In Pc, N atoms that are bonded to H have charges between −0.2 and −0.3. In metallophthalocyanine (Pc–M), N atoms that are bonded to the metal atom have charges between −0.3 and −0.4. All other N atoms in both Pc and Pc–M have charges between −0.5 and −0.6. Inner H atoms of Pc have higher charge (0.28) compared to the outer H atoms of Pc or its derivatives (<0.15). Partial charges for Cu, Zn, Ni, Pb, and Se in Pc–M, where M = Cu, Zn, Ni, Pb, and Se, are 0.78, 0.9, 0.31, 0.37, and −0.34, respectively. Changes of up to 0.1 are observed for those metal atoms when bound to different facets of the NC. In TiOPc, the partial charge of Ti and O undergoes larger deviations depends on its stacking or binding site. For O atoms, the variation is from 0.5 to 0.9, whereas for Ti, the variation is much larger (from 1 to 2.2). No particular difference in the charges of surface atoms of NC is observed. For example, the closest Pb atoms of TiO and their neighboring Se atoms on different facets have charges in the range from ±0.4 to ±0.5. For explicit partial charges, we have provided the charges of atoms in several studied configurations along with their Cartesian co-ordinates in the ESI.†
Electronic properties
We have calculated the HOMO–LUMO energy gap of a single NC in combination with various ligand molecules (see Table 3). A 1.5 nm-dia. octahedral PbS NC has a band gap of 1.8 eV given our choice of functional and basis set (see Methods section). While conventional ligands show wide gaps (4.1–7.2 eV), all the thin, planar, unconventional ligands we studied showed gaps similar to that of the NC (1.5–1.9 eV). This matching of energy levels is desirable, as it enables resonance energy transfer between the NC and the spacer. Considering the close separation between the two (NC and ligands), a significant energy transfer may be expected. Some differences may be expected for dots of different size since the energy gap varies with size.55–57 Energy transfer from a PbS NC to a fullerene molecule with an alkyl side-chain (namely, [6,6]-phenyl-61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM)) has been reported to be dependent on the NC size for diameters under 4 nm.30
Table 3 HOMO–LUMO gap of nanocrystals, conventional ligand molecules, and phthalocyanine derivatives in the gas phase




 
Nanocrystals
Conventional ligands


PbS
PbSe
BDA
HDA
BeDA
BuDA
OA
EDT
PTC




Gap
1.8
1.7
6.3
6.4
4.3
7.2
5.5
5.9
4.1






 
Planar unconventional ligands


Pc
Pc–Cu
Pc–Zn
Pc–Ni
Pc–Pb
Pc–Se
TiOPC




Gap
1.7
1.8
1.8
1.9
1.8
1.5
1.8




The valence and conduction orbitals of a PbSe NCs are primarily the p states of Se and Pb atoms, respectively, which provide enhancement or suppression of hole/electron migration depending on whether aligned facets are rich or poor in Se/Pb atoms.8 In short, the overlap of orbitals of similar energies favors transport of the corresponding charge carrier. In the absence of linkers, when Se-dominated surfaces are facing each other, hole transfer is enhanced and when Pb-dominated surfaces are facing each other, electron transfer is enhanced due to the strong overlap of orbitals of similar energies.
Not surprisingly, we found a similar dominance of atom types for the valence and conduction orbitals of a PbS NC. Fig. 2 shows the total density of states (DOS) and the DOS projected to Pb and S atoms along with the HOMO and LUMO orbital diagrams. Electrons from the p states of S atoms are excited to the p states of Pb atoms. Hence electron transfer can occur from the p states of Pb atoms to conduction states of neighboring systems, and hole transfer from the p states of S atoms to valence states of neighboring systems.
 Fig. 2  HOMO (left), LUMO (right) orbitals and projected density of states (middle) of bare PbS nanocrystals. An isovalue of 0.01 is used to plot the orbitals. The stoichiometric NC shows no mid-gap states. 
With the behavior of the bare NC established, we turned our attention to an analysis of the electronic properties of dots bound to conventional ligands. We have previously reported that –SCH3 ligands make little modification to the HOMO and LUMO levels of a PbSe NC.8 However, we found that other ligands such as EDT, BuDA and OA can significantly alter states near the gap. For example, Fig. 3 shows the total and projected DOS of an NC with a bound EDT ligand. An orbital formed at an energy, E = −4.45 eV acts as the LUMO for beta spin electrons. This mid-gap peak is, however, not a trap state since the projected DOS shows contributions from both S and Pb orbitals. S atoms dominate the contributions, unlike that for unoccupied orbitals. The LUMO orbitals also spread over to the sulfur atom from the ligand, which is bound to the Pb atoms of the NC. The LUMO diagram in Fig. 3 shows that the orbital is spread across many S and P atoms, including the S atom of the ligand. This is further reason to argue that the LUMO is not a trap state. However, its position in the gap may cause non-radiative recombination.58 Presence of a mid-gap peak for PbS dots with EDT ligands has been reported by Klimov et al.;59 our peak position in the DOS plot with respect to the HOMO and LUMO bears a close resemblance to their finding.
 Fig. 3  Projected density of states, HOMO, LUMO and LUMO+1 orbital diagrams of a PbS NC with a bound EDT ligand. Alpha and beta denote the two types of spin. 
It has been also previously shown that conventional thiol ligands lower the ratio between electron and hole couplings.8 Comparison of the density of states plots in Fig. 2 and 3 implies that conventional ligands, with their large HOMO–LUMO gap have some ability to affect the energy levels in NC–ligand systems. Aside from the mid-gap peak, the HOMO–LUMO gap of the bound system is not significantly different from that of the bare NC.

Phenyldithiocarbamate (PTC) ligands. 
The phenyldithiocarbamate (PTC) ligand is notable for its bathochromic shifts and increased excitonic radius, which are assumed to be due to the delocalization of the hole wave function of the NC into the atoms of the ligand.60 The PTC ligand is also reported to give rise to an enhanced photoluminescence quantum yield.61 We have investigated the electronic orbitals of a PTC ligand bound to a PbS NC (Fig. 4). A PTC ligand on a slightly non-stoichiometric PbS NC (here, 40 Pb:39 Se) shows that the highest occupied orbital of the bound system is 55% localized on a single Pb atom at the surface near the root of the linker. Non-stoichiometry-induced trap states have been studied computationally before;20 however, our case is interesting because of the reduced optical band gap reported for the PTC ligand. Moreover, the PTC ligand has one S atom and hence the bound system can be considered stoichiometric. In our calculations, the inclusion of the PTC ligand as a replacement for one surface S atom shows the redistribution of occupied molecular energy levels and contraction of the energy gap by 0.7 eV. Experimental studies have shown similar outcomes for CdS, CdSe and PbS nanocrystals. Weiss et al.'s experimental studies have reported the formation of interfacial states between the NC and a bound PTC ligand that decreases the optical band gap of QDs.60 Corresponding redshifts of 1.0 and 0.22 eV are measured for PTC-bound CdS and CdSe dots, respectively. Moreover, the distribution of hole states into the ligand has been described as being due to matching of the HOMO levels of dot and PTC molecule. The energy gap of the PTC molecule (4.1 eV) is the lowest among all conventional ligands studied in this work; however, it is still much higher than that of the bare dot. Our calculated density of states shows no particular contribution by the PTC ligand on the highest occupied energy levels, not unlike that of conventional ligands. However, the binding of PTC ligand on the dot creates a redistribution of electrons within the dot. This leads to the formation of a trap state for holes in the system. The binding of ligands to under-coordinated surface atoms of a NC with the introduction of off-stoichiometry is not a possibility that can be neglected in colloidal synthesis. It is however not clear if the sulfur atom of the ligand effectively passivates the S-deficient defect of the dot. For ligands that contain sulfur atoms, stoichiometry can be misleading. Our example case suggests that trap states are possible if stoichiometry is achieved only with the introduction of sulfur-containing ligands (Fig. 4b).
 Fig. 4  PTC ligand on a slightly non-stoichiometric (40 Pb:39 S) NC shows a localized HOMO. (a) Projected density of states of the bound NC–PTC ligand system. Key as in the inset for the component pieces of the DOS. (b) Ball-and-stick diagram of the system showing the hole trap Pb atom at the vertex of the NC. (c–e) Representation of the HOMO−1, HOMO, and LUMO, respectively. Atom colors: grey – Pb, yellow – S. 


Planar ligands. 
Due to the matching band gaps of NC and Pc, the distribution of occupied and unoccupied orbitals of the compound system can be very sensitive to a number of factors such as the number of molecules, surface coverage, and the nature of the facets. We also studied the occupation of electronic energy levels of Pc bound to a NC. As a charge-conducting conjugated medium, Pc can share the electronic orbitals of the NC. The matching of energy gaps of neighboring molecules facilitates the spread (delocalization) of both occupied and unoccupied orbitals rather than the equalization of one of the upper or lower bounds of the energy gap. When the occupied orbitals are spread over Se atoms and virtual orbitals are spread over Pb atoms in a bare NC, the Pc-bound NC shares the states of the bound atoms with Pc. More than the delocalization of the same energy level between the two molecules, we have observed a HOMO/LUMO transition from NC to Pc, depending on the specific facet of the NC. The HOMO transits to the Pc when it is bound to a Se-terminated [111] facet, and the LUMO transits to the Pc when it is bound to a Pb-terminated [111] facet, as shown in Fig. 5. This leads to the assumption that there is a redistribution of both the energy levels and the occupation of electrons when the two molecules are neighbors. A schematic diagram given in Fig. S3 (ESI†) depicts the different shifts in HOMO and LUMO levels when Pc is bound to Se- and Pb-terminated facets. Both the shifts lead to a smaller energy gap of the compound system. Furthermore, the occupation of HOMO and LUMO of the compound system given in the projected DOS matches the corresponding orbitals shown in Fig. 5.
 Fig. 5  HOMO (left), LUMO orbitals (right) and total and projected density of states (middle) for systems containing a Pc molecule on Se-terminated (top) and Pb-terminated (bottom) [111] surfaces of a 1.53 nm-dia. PbSe NC. An isovalue of 0.02 is used to plot the orbitals. The DOS is projected on Pb and Se atoms and on the Pc molecule. Atom colors: grey – Pb, yellow – Se for NC, grey – C, blue – N, white – H for Pc. 
From the above results, it is clearly interesting to investigate changes in energy levels when multiple Pc molecules are bound to both Pb- and Se-terminated facets. Hence, we have examined the case of a NC with two Pc molecules, each bound to Pb- and Se-terminated facets. The two Pc molecules shared the HOMO and LUMO of the compound system, diminishing the role of NC as donor or acceptor, as shown in Fig. S4 (ESI†). The Pc close to a Se-rich facet acted as the HOMO and the Pc close to a Pb-rich facet acted as the LUMO, similar to the individual cases shown in Fig. 5. Deeper energy levels such as HOMO−1 and LUMO+2 were spread over the NCs. It is clear that the identity of the atoms on the facets plays a crucial role in determining the role of NC and Pc as donor or acceptor. With multiple types of facets present (both Se- and Pb-rich), the organic ligand molecules dominate at the band edges. However, when either Se-rich or Pb-rich facets are present, the NC and the Pc molecules adopt distinctive roles: NC and Pc act as electron-acceptor and donor, respectively for the former, and vice versa for the latter. Optimization of the reconstructed surfaces for each ligand is computationally expensive. However, the binding energies of ligands with the surface (Table 2) may be taken as an indictor of the mechanism. Some of the planar ligands bind more strongly to Pb-rich facets, while others bind more strongly to Se-rich facets. This suggests that the electronic properties can be controlled by proper selection of planar ligand molecules, if they can be incorporated experimentally.
Moreover, the possibility of having two kinds of facets (Pb- and Se-rich) in a real mixture is rare. It can be argued that the atom type with the stronger binding is very likely to constitute the majority of the outer atoms of the dot. Thus, in the case of a homogenous mixture of Pc and a dot, one of them will be the donor and the other will be the acceptor. In the other case of aggregation of Pc molecules, some other surfactants would be required to space the dots. The charge dynamics of such a spatially separated system would be more similar to that of the hybrid resonant organic–inorganic nanostructures, the prospects of which are covered in the review of Agranovich et al.62
When we used metal-centered phthalocyanines, porphyrin-derivatives, or coronene, the valence and conduction orbitals of the NC–ligand dimer are spread out in a way that is similar to that of Pc. TiOPc, on the other hand, is promising for its relatively unchanging behavior independent of the surface atom types (see Fig. 6). The HOMO and other valence energy levels are spread over the NC, mainly on the Se atoms. The LUMO and other conduction edge levels are spread over TiOPc. The electron donor nature of the NC and acceptor nature of TiOPc are independent of the surface atom types. This suggests that the compound system can act as a donor–acceptor system, such as a bulk heterojunction or bilayer, depending on the self-assembly process.
 Fig. 6  HOMO (left), LUMO orbitals (right) and total and projected density of states (middle) for systems containing a TiOPc molecule on Se-terminated (top) and Pb-terminated (bottom) [111] surfaces of a 1.53 nm-dia. PbSe NC. An isovalue of 0.02 is used to plot the orbitals. The DOS is projected on Pb and Se atoms and on the Pc molecule. Atom colors: grey – Pb, yellow – Se for NC, grey – C, blue – N, white – H for Pc. 
One limitation for TiOPc, and indeed for all the suggested unconventional ligands, is that the dot surface would suffer from low ligand density, leading to more dangling bonds on the surface. Using functionalized planar ligands may solve this issue. Introducing metallocene derivatives as surfactants could be an alternate solution to this.

Absorption spectra
We have used time-dependent density functional theory (TDDFT) to calculate excited energy levels and probabilities of absorption from ground to excited states. Since our choices of dot size and one category of ligands (phthalocyanine etc.) do not have any counterpart in reported experiments, we introduce this analysis to qualitatively determine the difference between bare dots and those with conventional and unconventional ligands.
Calculated absorption spectra of selected cases are given in Fig. S6 (in the ESI†), which include the first 50 transitions from the ground energy levels to the excited levels, in the decreasing order of the absorbed wavelength. Electrons in the bare 1.5 nm PbS NC can be excited using visible light leading to the formation of excitons, in which the excited electron delocalizes on Pb atoms and the hole delocalizes predominantly on Se atoms. The HOMO to LUMO transition has an oscillator strength of 0.0016. Higher oscillator strengths (e.g., 0.018) are obtained for transitions from deep valence states to conduction edge states (ΔE ≈ 2.4 eV). The small extinction coefficients (ε as shown in the figure) and oscillator strengths in our data are probably the result of our small dot size.63 Some of the low energy excitations, including transition from HOMO−1 to LUMO+1, carried zero oscillator strength, implying “dark” excitations.64–66 Previously reported calculations of absorption spectra of CdSe dots by Fischer et al. have also revealed forbidden transitions.67 Similar trends, such as higher oscillator strengths for transitions from deep valence to conduction edges and zero strength for some transitions including valence and conduction edges, were observed for bare PbSe NC. As an example, the HOMO to LUMO transition has zero oscillator strength.
In the case of PbS NC bound with EDT ligands, absorption in the near-IR wavelengths involved valence states and the LUMO only, since the LUMO+1 state is more than 1 eV higher than the LUMO.
Next, we studied the absorption spectra of one Pc molecule bound to a PbSe NC. When Pc is stacked on the Se-rich [111] facet, the HOMO is completely spread on Pc. Therefore, in all transitions from the HOMO level, excitons have larger radius due to the fact that the excited electron lies on the NC and hole lies on the ligand. While the edge-to-edge transitions exhibited smaller oscillator strength, some of the deep levels to edge transitions exhibited much larger oscillator strength (e.g., 0.16). Moreover, the absorption spectra of the bound system does not differ much from the bare NC, since the only modification is near the valence edge. In the case of a Pc bound to a Pb-rich facet, which has a stronger binding energy, stronger modification happened to the conduction edge. The LUMO and LUMO+1 levels on the bound system lie only on the ligand. Higher oscillator strengths exhibited only for transitions from deep valence levels to LUMO+1. Due to the decrease of the energy gap, this system can absorb near IR wavelengths.
Due to the smaller energy gap, when TiOPc binds to the Pb-rich [111] facet of the dot, wavelengths up to 2740 nm are absorbed from electron transitions involving band edges. The transitions from both HOMO−1 and HOMO−2 to LUMO are forbidden, as revealed by zero oscillator strengths. The HOMO−1 to LUMO+1 transition has almost double the oscillator strength of HOMO to LUMO transition. Much higher frequency is required to excite electrons to orbitals above LUMO+2, which are spread over the dot. Considering the spread of the orbitals, the transitions suggest that the excitons generated from the absorption of near IR light are spread on both NC and TiOPc; the excited electrons on the ligand and the holes on the dot. A different situation arises when TiOPc is bound to Se-rich [111] surface of the dot, which is also evident from its different density of states (Fig. 6). Only wavelengths below 890 nm can be absorbed in that case.
Conclusions
The nature of the ligands caused dramatic changes in the electronic levels and excitations: The stronger the binding of the ligand to the nanocrystal, the stronger the band edge modifications. This is applicable to both conventional and unconventional ligands. The redistribution of energy levels above and below the Fermi level has an effect on the absorption frequencies. In the presence of unconventional ligands, the band edge orbitals (either HOMO or LUMO) were not only modified, but also transferred to the ligand. This increases the exciton radius for transitions involving band edges, since the excited electrons and holes are distributed separately on dots and ligands. However, recall that we have used a finite model for this study. In periodic representations, this would correspond to a donor–acceptor system.32 The charge dynamics could change further depending on the morphology of the system. In the case of formation of large, irregular domains of planar molecules, the system could behave like a bulk heterojunction. In the other case, stronger or weaker coupling could give different transport.62
The fact that stronger binding leads to changes in electronic structure at least for smaller dots has its implications. The nanocrystal not only benefits from the absorption of longer wavelengths, but also encounters different excitation dynamics for different linkers. In addition, trap states may be introduced by dangling bonds and off-stoichiometry. Hence, ligands are necessary ‘evils’ in nanocrystals. Weakly bound phthalocyanine, porphyrin or coronene molecules may, perhaps, not prevent dot–dot aggregation. Otherwise, their major advantage lies in their charge conductance abilities. However, attempts could be made to mix them with ligand–clad nanocrystals to form hybrid organic–inorganic systems.62
The main contribution of this paper is the completion of a computational feasibility study to discriminate among a number of classes of completely unconventional nanocrystal spacers, ones that are molecularly thin and charge-conducting. Such planar, untethered ligands offer the dual advantages of decreasing the inter-dot separation (with the significant improvement this implies in terms of improved charge transport) but also an added enhancement to the charge mobility due to the fact that the spacers are themselves charge-conducting. Among the classes of phthalocyanines, porphryns, and coronenes, we were able to identify TiOPc as a promising candidate material. We showed that it was the only one to exhibit a preference for binding to the NCs rather than to itself. More than being simply a charge-conducting medium, it can also distinctively act as an acceptor with ultra-small dots.
This strongly coupled system will have different relative energies for different dot sizes, which may lead it to exhibit substantially different charge-propagating mechanisms at larger scales. Apart from the size of the NCs, it is possible that consideration of full coverage of ligands and surrounding solvents will play contributory roles, which also have not been considered in the study.67 In this paper, our focus has been to elucidate the inherent differences in electronic properties of conventional versus unconventional ligands. An obvious next step, now that the ab initio calculations have identified some more promising ligand candidates, is to perform larger-scale thermodynamic assessments of these new ultra-thin ligands, using semi-empirical models of the NCs, ligands, and solvent to unravel the superlattice arrangement of quantum dots and these planar spacer molecules. However, this computationally expensive study is outside the scope of this work. Our results have provided a quick and accurate discrimination between ultra-thin ligand candidates that seem to be the most likely candidates for such a time-intensive MD study. This down-selection of possible candidates for unconventional planar spacers also saves innumerable hours of lab synthesis and characterization, showing the value of such a computational study.
Methods
All calculations were performed using the quantum chemistry code, Gaussian09,68 using the HSEh1PBE functional69 and the LanL2DZ70 basis set for the Pb, Se and Ti atoms and the 6-31+G(d,p) basis set for the S, C, N, O and H atoms. Use of the full Heyd–Scuseria–Ernzerhof (HSEh1PBE) functional used in the density functional theory description of the atoms in the system includes the weak dispersive forces by empirical dispersion terms that are important to include in systems such as the ones considered here. Unrestricted calculations were performed for conventional ligands bound to the NC.
We used CHELPG (charges from electrostatic potentials using a grid based method) scheme introduced by Breneman and Wiberg54 as implemented in Gaussian09 to calculate atomic charges. In this scheme, the atomic charges are fitted to reproduce the molecular electrostatic potential on a grid of points.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank the Department of Energy, Bridging Research Interactions through collaborative Development Grants in Energy (BRIDGE) program under contract DE-FOA-0000654-1588 for financial support.
References
G. H. Carey, A. L. Abdelhady, Z. Ning, S. M. Thon, O. M. Bakr and E. H. Sargent, Colloidal Quantum Dot Solar Cells, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 12732–12763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Hanrath, Colloidal Nanocrystal Quantum Dot Assemblies as Artificial Solids, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2012, 30, 030802 Search PubMed .
R. D. Schaller and V. I. Klimov, High Efficiency Carrier Multiplication in PbSe Nanocrystals: Implications for Solar Energy Conversion, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 92, 186601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Ellingson, M. C. Beard, J. C. Johnson, P. Yu, O. I. Micic, A. J. Nozik, A. Shabaev and A. L. Efros, Highly Efficient Multiple Exciton Generation in Colloidal PbSe and PbS Quantum Dots, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 865–871 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Abe, R. K. Capek, B. De Geyter and Z. Hens, Reaction Chemistry/nanocrystal Property Relations in the Hot Injection Synthesis, the Role of the Solute Solubility, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 943–949 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, J. Ge, T. Pham, J. Goebl, Y. Hu, Z. Lu and Y. Yin, Reconstruction of Silver Nanoplates by UV Irradiation: Tailored Optical Properties and Enhanced Stability, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 3516–3519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Moreels, K. Lambert, D. Smeets, D. De Muynck, T. Nollet, J. C. Martins, F. Vanhaecke, A. Vantomme, C. Delerue and G. Allan, 
            et al., Size-Dependent Optical Properties of Colloidal PbS Quantum Dots, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3023–3030 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. P. Kaushik, B. Lukose and P. Clancy, The Role of Shape on Electronic Structure and Charge Transport in Faceted PbSe Nanocrystals, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 2302–2317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Mokari, M. Zhang and P. Yang, Shape, Size, and Assembly Control of PbTe Nanocrystals, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 9864–9865 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Bao, X. Qiu, Y.-H. A. Wang, Z. Zhou, X. Lu, C. A. Grimes and A. Gupta, Facile Thermolysis Synthesis of CuInS(2) Nanocrystals with Tunable Anisotropic Shape and Structure, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 9441–9443 RSC .
C. Wang, D. Zhang, L. Xu, Y. Jiang, F. Dong, B. Yang, K. Yu and Q. Lin, A Simple Reducing Approach Using Amine To Give Dual Functional EuSe Nanocrystals and Morphological Tuning, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 7587–7591 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Li, T. Bai, F. Li, L. Wang, X. Wu, L. Yuan, Z. Shi and S. Feng, Growth Orientation, Shape Evolution of Monodisperse PbSe Nanocrystals and Their Use in Optoelectronic Devices, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 597 RSC .
H. Li, D. Chen, L. Li, F. Tang, L. Zhang and J. Ren, Size- and Shape-Controlled Synthesis of PbSe and PbS Nanocrystals via a Facile Method, CrystEngComm, 2010, 12, 1127 RSC .
B. Koo, R. N. Patel and B. A. Korgel, Synthesis of CuInSe2 Nanocrystals with Trigonal Pyramidal Shape, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 3134–3135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Niu, H. Shen, X. Li, W. Xu, H. Wang and L. S. Li, Controlled Synthesis of High Quality PbSe and PbTe Nanocrystals with One-Pot Method and Their Self-Assemblies, Colloids Surf., A, 2012, 406, 38–43 CrossRef CAS .
H. Fu, W. Luan and S.-T. Tu, A Simple Route for Synthesis of PbSe Nanocrystals: Shape Control by Ligand and Reaction Time, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 12254 RSC .
D. V. Talapin, R. Koeppe, S. Götzinger, A. Kornowski, J. M. Lupton, A. L. Rogach, O. Benson, J. Feldmann and H. Weller, Highly Emissive Colloidal CdSe/CdS Heterostructures of Mixed Dimensionality, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 1677–1681 CrossRef CAS .
H.-W. Liang, S. Liu, J.-Y. Gong, S.-B. Wang, L. Wang and S.-H. Yu, Ultrathin Te Nanowires: An Excellent Platform for Controlled Synthesis of Ultrathin Platinum and Palladium Nanowires/Nanotubes with Very High Aspect Ratio, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1850–1854 CrossRef CAS .
N. I. Kovtyukhova, B. K. Kelley and T. E. Mallouk, Coaxially Gated in-Wire Thin-Film Transistors Made by Template Assembly, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 12738–12739 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kim, D.-H. Kim, J.-H. Lee and J. C. Grossman, Impact of Stoichiometry on the Electronic Structure of PbS Quantum Dots, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2013, 110, 196802 CrossRef PubMed .
N. C. Anderson, M. P. Hendricks, J. J. Choi and J. S. Owen, Ligand Exchange and the Stoichiometry of Metal Chalcogenide Nanocrystals: Spectroscopic Observation of Facile Metal-Carboxylate Displacement and Binding, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 18536–18548 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Oh, N. E. Berry, J. H. Choi, E. A. Gaulding, T. Paik, S. H. Hong, C. B. Murray and C. R. Kagan, Stoichiometric Control of Lead Chalcogenide Nanocrystal Solids to Enhance Their Electronic and Optoelectronic Device Performance, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2413–2421 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. P. Collier, T. Vossmeyer and J. R. Heath, Nanocrystal Superlattices, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 1998, 49, 371–404 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Peterson, L. C. Cass, R. D. Harris, K. Edme, K. Sung and E. A. Weiss, The Role of Ligands in Determining the Exciton Relaxation Dynamics in Semiconductor Quantum Dots, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2014, 65, 317–339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Yu, C. Wang and P. Guyot-Sionnest, N-Type Conducting CdSe Nanocrystal Solids, Science, 2003, 300, 1277–1280 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. V. Talapin and C. B. Murray, PbSe Nanocrystal Solids for N- and P-Channel Thin Film Field-Effect Transistors, Science, 2005, 310, 86–89 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Clapp, I. L. Medintz, J. M. Mauro, B. R. Fisher, M. G. Bawendi and H. Mattoussi, Fluorescence Resonance Energy Transfer between Quantum Dot Donors and Dye-Labeled Protein Acceptors, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 301–310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sarkar, R. Bose, S. Jana, N. R. Jana and N. Pradhan, Doped Semiconductor Nanocrystals and Organic Dyes: An Efficient and Greener FRET System, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 636–640 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xiao, Y. Wang, Z. Hua, X. Wang, C. Zhang and M. Xiao, Carrier Multiplication in Semiconductor Nanocrystals Detected by Energy Transfer to Organic Dye Molecules, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 1170 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Gocalińska, M. Saba, F. Quochi, M. Marceddu, K. Szendrei, J. Gao, M. A. Loi, M. Yarema, R. Seyrkammer and W. Heiss, 
            et al., Size-Dependent Electron Transfer from Colloidal PbS Nanocrystals to Fullerene, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 1149–1154 CrossRef .

          D. C. Harris, Applications of Spectrophotometry, in Quant. Chem. Anal.,  2010, 8th edn, pp. 419–444 Search PubMed .
M. Scheele, W. Brütting and F. Schreiber, Coupled Organic–Inorganic Nanostructures (COIN), Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 97–111 RSC .
M. F. Frasco, V. Vamvakaki and N. Chaniotakis, Porphyrin Decorated CdSe Quantum Dots for Direct Fluorescent Sensing of Metal Ions, J. Nanopart. Res., 2010, 12, 1449–1458 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Tang, N. A. Kotov and M. Giersig, Spontaneous Organization of Single CdTe Nanoparticles into Luminescent Nanowires, Science, 2002, 297, 237–240 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. J. Williams, W. A. Tisdale, K. S. Leschkies, G. Haugstad, D. J. Norris, E. S. Aydil and X. Y. Zhu, Strong Electronic Coupling in Two-Dimensional Assemblies of Colloidal PbSe Quantum Dots, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 1532–1538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Law, J. M. Luther, Q. Song, B. K. Hughes, C. L. Perkins and A. J. Nozik, Structural, Optical, and Electrical Properties of PbSe Nanocrystal Solids Treated Thermally or with Simple Amines, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5974–5985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. J. Schnitzenbaumer, T. Labrador and G. Dukovic, Impact of Chalcogenide Ligands on Excited State Dynamics in CdSe Quantum Dots, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 150512085421000 Search PubMed .
I. S. Moody, A. R. Stonas and M. C. Lonergan, PbS Nanocrystals Functionalized with a Short-Chain, Ionic, Dithiol Ligand, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 19383–19389 CAS .
J. Tang, K. W. Kemp, S. Hoogland, K. S. Jeong, H. Liu, L. Levina, M. Furukawa, X. Wang, R. Debnath and D. Cha, 
            et al., Colloidal-Quantum-Dot Photovoltaics Using Atomic-Ligand Passivation, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 765–771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Giansante, I. Infante, E. Fabiano, R. Grisorio, G. P. Suranna and G. Gigli, “Darker-than-Black” PbS Quantum Dots: Enhancing Optical Absorption of Colloidal Semiconductor Nanocrystals via Short Conjugated Ligands, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 150109162303002 CrossRef PubMed .
H. J. Yun, T. Paik, M. E. Edley, J. B. Baxter and C. B. Murray, Enhanced Charge Transfer Kinetics of CdSe Quantum Dot-Sensitized Solar Cell by Inorganic Ligand Exchange Treatments, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 3721–3728 CAS .
W. J. Baumgardner, K. Whitham and T. Hanrath, Confined-but-Connected Quantum Solids via Controlled Ligand Displacement, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3225–3231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. S. S. Sandeep, J. M. Azpiroz, W. H. Evers, S. C. Boehme, I. Moreels, S. Kinge, L. D. Siebbeles, I. Infante and A. J. Houtepen, Epitaxially Connected PbSe Quantum-Dot Films: Controlled Neck Formation and Optoelectronic Properties, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 11499–11511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. H. Carey, L. Levina, R. Comin, O. Voznyy and E. H. Sargent, Record Charge Carrier Diffusion Length in Colloidal Quantum Dot Solids via Mutual Dot-To-Dot Surface Passivation, Adv. Mater., 2015, 1–6 Search PubMed .
B. E. Treml, B. Lukose, P. Clancy, D.-M. Smilgies and T. Hanrath, Connecting the Particles in the Box – Controlled Fusion of Hexamer Nanocrystal Clusters within an AB6 Binary Nanocrystal Superlattice, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 6731 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Talgorn, Y. Gao, M. Aerts, L. T. Kunneman, J. M. Schins, T. J. Savenije, M. A. van Huis, H. S. J. van der Zant, A. J. Houtepen and L. D. A. Siebbeles, Unity Quantum Yield of Photogenerated Charges and Band-like Transport in Quantum-Dot Solids, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 733–739 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. Bealing, W. J. Baumgardner, J. J. Choi, T. Hanrath and R. G. Hennig, Predicting Nanocrystal Shape through Consideration of Surface–Ligand Interactions, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 2118–2127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Tang, L. Brzozowski, D. A. R. Barkhouse, X. Wang, R. Debnath, R. Wolowiec, E. Palmiano, L. Levina, A. G. Pattantyus-Abraham and D. Jamakosmanovic, 
            et al., Quantum Dot Photovoltaics in the Extreme Quantum Confinement Regime: The Surface-Chemical Origins of Exceptional Air- and Light-Stability, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 869–878 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Schapotschnikow, B. Hommersom and T. J. H. Vlugt, Adsorption
and Binding of Ligands to CdSe Nanocrystals, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 12690–12698 CAS .
A. Puzder, A. J. Williamson, N. Zaitseva, G. Galli, L. Manna and A. P. Alivisatos, The Effect of Organic Ligand Binding on the Growth of CdSe Nanoparticles Probed by Ab Initio Calculations, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 2361–2365 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Robertson, 255. An X-Ray Study of the Phthalocyanines. Part II. Quantitative Structure Determination of the Metal-Free Compound, J. Chem. Soc., 1936, 1195–1209 RSC .
R. B. Hammond, K. J. Roberts, R. Docherty, M. Edmondson and R. Gairns, X-Form Metal-Free Phthalocyanine: Crystal Structure Determination Using a Combination of High-Resolution X-Ray Powder Diffraction and Molecular Modelling Techniques, J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 2, 1996, 1527–1528 RSC .
L. Li, Q. Tang, H. Li, W. Hu, X. Yang, Z. Shuai, Y. Liu and D. Zhu, Organic Thin-Film Transistors of Phthalocyanines, Pure Appl. Chem., 2008, 80, 2231–2240 CAS .
C. M. Breneman and K. B. Wiberg, Determining Atom-Centered Monopoles from Molecular Electrostatic Potentials. The Need for High Sampling Density in Formamide Conformational Analysis, J. Comput. Chem., 1990, 11, 361–373 CrossRef CAS .
L. E. Brus, Electron–electron and Electron–Hole Interactions in Small Semiconductor Crystallites: The Size Dependence of the Lowest Excited Electronic State, J. Chem. Phys., 1984, 80, 4403 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Alivisatos, Perspectives on the Physical Chemistry of Semiconductor Nanocrystals, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 13226–13239 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Kane, R. E. Cohen and R. Silbey, Theoretical Study of the Electronic Structure of PbS Nanoclusters, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 7928–7932 CrossRef CAS .
P. Nagpal and V. I. Klimov, Role of Mid-Gap States in Charge Transport and Photoconductivity in Semiconductor Nanocrystal Films, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 486 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Diaconescu, L. A. Padilha, P. Nagpal, B. S. Swartzentruber and V. I. Klimov, Measurement of Electronic States of PbS Nanocrystal Quantum Dots Using Scanning Tunneling Spectroscopy: The Role of Parity Selection Rules in Optical Absorption, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2013, 110, 127406 CrossRef PubMed .
M. T. Frederick, V. A. Amin, L. C. Cass and E. A. Weiss, A Molecule to Detect and Perturb the Confinement of Charge Carriers in Quantum Dots, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5455–5460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jin, R. D. Harris, B. Lau, K. O. Aruda, V. A. Amin and E. A. Weiss, Enhanced Rate of Radiative Decay in CdSe Quantum Dots upon Adsorption of an Exciton-Delocalizing Ligand, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 5323–5328 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. M. Agranovich, Y. N. Gartstein and M. Litinskaya, Hybrid Resonant Organic–Inorganic Nanostructures for Optoelectronic Applications, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 5179–5214 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jasieniak, L. Smith, J. Van Embden, P. Mulvaney and M. Califano, Re-Examination of the Size-Dependent Absorption Properties of CdSe Quantum Dots, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 19468–19474 CAS .
A. Efros, M. Rosen, M. Kuno, M. Nirmal, D. Norris and M. Bawendi, Band-Edge Exciton in Quantum Dots of Semiconductors with a Degenerate Valence Band: Dark and Bright Exciton States, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1996, 54, 4843–4856 CrossRef CAS .
R. Schaller, S. Crooker, D. Bussian, J. Pietryga, J. Joo and V. Klimov, Revealing the Exciton Fine Structure of PbSe Nanocrystal Quantum Dots Using Optical Spectroscopy in High Magnetic Fields, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 105, 067403 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Gong, Y. Zeng and D. F. Kelley, Extinction Coefficients, Oscillator Strengths, and Radiative Lifetimes of CdSe, CdTe, and CdTe/CdSe Nanocrystals, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 20268–20279 CAS .
S. A. Fischer, A. M. Crotty, S. V. Kilina, S. A. Ivanov and S. Tretiak, Passivating Ligand and Solvent Contributions to the Electronic Properties of Semiconductor
Nanocrystals, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 904–914 RSC .

          M. J. Frisch, G. W. Trucks, H. B. Schlegel, G. E. Scuseria, M. A. Robb, J. R. Cheeseman, G. Scalmani, V. Barone, B. Mennucci and G. A. Petersson, et al., Gaussian 09 Revision E.01,  2009 Search PubMed .
J. Heyd, G. E. Scuseria and M. Ernzerhof, Hybrid Functionals Based on a Screened Coulomb Potential, J. Chem. Phys., 2003, 118, 8207–8215 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. Hay and W. R. Wadt, 
            Ab Initio Effective Core Potentials for Molecular Calculations. Potentials for the Transition Metal Atoms Sc to Hg, J. Chem. Phys., 1985, 82, 270 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5cp07521aThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2016
Table Content:


Binding energy (eV)

NC–ligand	−1.2	−1.3	−1.1	−0.9	−2.2	−2.5	−1.2	0.76	−1



Partial atomic charges (e)

Bound atom of ligand	−0.65 (N)	−0.53 (N)	−0.55 (N)	−0.68 (N)	−0.46 (O)	−0.46 (O)	−0.50 (S)	−0.40 (S)	−0.52 (S)
Bound atom/atoms of NC	0.23 (S)	0.18 (S)	0.22 (S)	0.15 (S)	0.55, 0.43 (Pb, Pb)	0.60, 0.57 (Pb, Pb)	0.42, 0.39 (Pb, Pb)	0.83 (Pb)	0.42, 0.25 (Pb, Pb)
Atom/atoms next to the bound atom of ligand	0.58 (C)	0.30 (C)	0.04 (C)	0.68 (C)	0.79, −0.59 (C, O)	0.71, −0.63 (C, O)	0.59 (C)	0.25 (C)	0.59 (C)
Atom/atoms next to the bound atom of the NC	0.26, 0.24, −0.42 (Pb, Pb, S)	0.29, 0.27, −0.43 (Pb, Pb, S)	0.30, 0.27, −0.44 (Pb, Pb, S)	0.25, 0.28, −0.42 (Pb, Pb, S)	−0.49, −0.46 (S, S)	−0.46, −0.59 (S, S)	−0.35, −0.40 (S, S)	−0.50, −0.46, 0.39 (S, S, Pb)	−0.37, −0.41 (S, S)
Atom/atoms on the other side of the ligand	−1.10 (N)	−1.10 (N)	−1.09 (N)	−0.80 (N)	−0.65, −0.59 (O, O)	−0.65, −0.76 (O, O)	−0.48 (S)	−0.49 (S)	−0.5, −0.65, −0.67, 1.3 (O, O, N, C)


Pc	−0.37a	−0.43	−0.22
Pc–Cu	−0.42	−0.41	−0.39
Pc–Zn	−0.60	−0.39	−0.60
Pc–Ni	−0.26	−0.42	−0.25
Pc–Pb	−0.40 (to Se)	—	−0.21
Pc–Se	−0.41 (to Pb)	−0.49	—
TiOPc	−0.89	−0.95	−0.75


Prp	−0.39a	−0.50	−0.41
Prp–Cu	−0.46	−0.48	−0.35
Prp–Zn	−0.39	−0.47	−0.46
Prp–Ni	−0.50	−0.51	−0.54
Prp–Pb	−0.33a (to Se)	—	−0.21
Prp–Se	−0.63a (to Pb)	−0.57	—


Coronene	−0.16	−0.17	−0.28

 	Fig. 1  (a–c) Three possible stacking configurations of TiOPc (in their geometry-optimized configurations) and their corresponding stacking energies (S.E.). (a) Configuration in which the Ti atoms are adjacent to one another; (b) Ti atoms separated by the organic framework and (c) a stacked (shuttlecock) arrangement exhibiting the largest (self-) stacking energy. (d and e) Binding energies (B.E.) of TiOPc on the [100] and [111] facets of a PbSe NC, respectively.	 


Gap	1.8	1.7	6.3	6.4	4.3	7.2	5.5	5.9	4.1


Gap	1.7	1.8	1.8	1.9	1.8	1.5	1.8

 	Fig. 2  HOMO (left), LUMO (right) orbitals and projected density of states (middle) of bare PbS nanocrystals. An isovalue of 0.01 is used to plot the orbitals. The stoichiometric NC shows no mid-gap states.	 

 	Fig. 3  Projected density of states, HOMO, LUMO and LUMO+1 orbital diagrams of a PbS NC with a bound EDT ligand. Alpha and beta denote the two types of spin.	 

 	Fig. 4  PTC ligand on a slightly non-stoichiometric (40 Pb:39 S) NC shows a localized HOMO. (a) Projected density of states of the bound NC–PTC ligand system. Key as in the inset for the component pieces of the DOS. (b) Ball-and-stick diagram of the system showing the hole trap Pb atom at the vertex of the NC. (c–e) Representation of the HOMO−1, HOMO, and LUMO, respectively. Atom colors: grey – Pb, yellow – S.	 

 	Fig. 5  HOMO (left), LUMO orbitals (right) and total and projected density of states (middle) for systems containing a Pc molecule on Se-terminated (top) and Pb-terminated (bottom) [111] surfaces of a 1.53 nm-dia. PbSe NC. An isovalue of 0.02 is used to plot the orbitals. The DOS is projected on Pb and Se atoms and on the Pc molecule. Atom colors: grey – Pb, yellow – Se for NC, grey – C, blue – N, white – H for Pc.	 

 	Fig. 6  HOMO (left), LUMO orbitals (right) and total and projected density of states (middle) for systems containing a TiOPc molecule on Se-terminated (top) and Pb-terminated (bottom) [111] surfaces of a 1.53 nm-dia. PbSe NC. An isovalue of 0.02 is used to plot the orbitals. The DOS is projected on Pb and Se atoms and on the Pc molecule. Atom colors: grey – Pb, yellow – Se for NC, grey – C, blue – N, white – H for Pc.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5cp07521a

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2016
