A hybrid description and evaluation of oxymethylene dimethyl ethers synthesis based on the endothermic dehydrogenation of methanol   - Reaction Chemistry & Engineering (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8RE00100F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8RE00100F
(Paper)
React. Chem. Eng., 2018, 3, 676-695A hybrid description and evaluation of oxymethylene dimethyl ethers synthesis based on the endothermic dehydrogenation of methanol†

        
          
            Mohamed 
            Ouda
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Franz 
            Mantei
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Kai 
            Hesterwerth
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Eleonora 
            Bargiacchi
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Harald 
            Klein
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Robin J. 
            White
          
        
      *a
aSustainable Catalytic Materials Group, Division Hydrogen Technologies, Fraunhofer Institute for Solar Energy Systems, Heidenhofstr. 2, 79110 Freiburg, Germany. E-mail: mohamed.ouda@ise.fraunhofer.de; robin.white@ise.fraunhofer.de
bInstitute of Process and Plant Technology, Technical University Munich, Boltzmannstr. 15, 85748 Garching, Germany
Received 
      12th June 2018
    , Accepted 17th July 2018First published on 17th July 2018AbstractConcerning oxymethylene dimethyl ethers (e.g. a class of potential oxygenated diesel substitutes; denoted as OME), this work utilises a hybrid process model based on methanol (MeOH) and its partially selective conversion to anhydrous formaldehyde (FA, target MeOH conversion ≥67% and target FA selectivity ≥93%), which in turn is used as the feed for OME synthesis. The model couples the merits of algorithms available in the commercial software CHEMCAD® together with self-developed reactor models as implemented through Matlab® and the coupling node implemented in Visual Basic for Applications (VBA) software. This is followed by process heat integration using PinCH 2.0 software. This modelling is complemented by experimental investigations and results concerning the synthesis of the anhydrous FA/MeOH feed through a designed and developed annular counter current reactor, with the use of Na2CO3 as an inexpensive and sustainable dehydrogenation catalyst. The process material and energy balance of the proposed process have also been used to evaluate the key performance indicators (KPIs). An overall process yield of 80.3% at 71.7% process energy efficiency and production cost of 951 US$ per ton of OME3–5 at small production capacity (35 kt per annum) demonstrates the technical and the economic potential of the described process.
Introduction
Global CO2 emissions contributing to Green House Gases (GHG) and local emissions (NOx, PM) regarding urban mobility are an increasingly part of the political and indeed public debate.1–3 The European Commission has set out in a white paper for the transport sector, a reduction in CO2 emissions of 60% by 2050, relative to 1990.4 Euro 6 regulations set sharp NOx and PM emissions limits (i.e. for diesel private vehicles 80 mg km−1 for the former and 5 mg km−1 for the latter with almost a hundred fold reduction relative to Euro 1 limits).5,6 Taking Germany as an example, road passengers and road freight transport represents >82% of the net transport sector primary energy consumption and ca. 90% of corresponding CO2 emissions.5,7 To meet these targets, several solutions are being considered. One option is the large scale production of synthetic (also called electro or designer) fuels,8 which could potentially be “dropped in” to existing fuel delivery infrastructure and be used with minimal modifications to existing fleet engines. Systematically evaluating this and other proposed solutions (e.g. battery vehicles, biodiesel etc.) reveals the magnitude of the challenge. For example, in Germany 295 TWh electricity would be needed to cover (private) electro mobility,2 whilst enormous amounts of biomass (and land) would be needed to establish suitable bio-diesel capacities to cover the same sector,1 or indeed >300 Mt of MeOH would be the annual demand to provide a suitable sized synthetic (diesel) fuel production (e.g. at a very optimistic yield of 1.1 tMeOH tsyntheticfuel−1; current global annual MeOH production is ca. 80 Mt (ref. 9)) – therefore a combination of all these fuel provision options should provide a contribution to a sustainable mobility sector. In this context, polyoxymethylene dimethyl ethers (molecular formula: H3CO–(CH2O)n–CH3, OME for short chains with n = 3–5) are a class of synthetic oxygenates that can make a potential contribution to the mobility sector and in particular as a diesel substitute. OME are known to have very attractive combustion properties.6,10,11 They are known to have good miscibility with diesel and a high cetane number,10,12 and can be used in existing infrastructure.3,13 Several contributions regarding the direct use of OME or blends in diesel engines, in particular the work of Wachtmeister et al.,10 Richter et al.14 and Liu et al.,15,16 – have demonstrated the potential for drastic reduction in the PM emissions and an override of the NOx-soot trade-off allowing measures to reduce the NOx emissions (i.e. exhaust gas recycle EGR).17–28 With regards to other applications, OME are also sparking interest as potential CO2 sorption media, as fuel for direct oxidation fuel cells, and in the production of perfume, resins, and protective coatings.12,29–31
Although currently produced based on “grey” MeOH (e.g. fossil based), the synthesis of OME can be logically also performed based on MeOH as sourced from the hydrogenation of (e.g. captured) CO2 using renewable H2 (e.g. as sourced from H2O electrolysis or photolysis). These drop-in liquid synthetic oxygenates can thus be produced with potentially net CO2 emission reductions. An overview of different OME synthesis routes has been reported recently by Barnowski et al. and Niethammer et al.6,30 As a general basis, OME synthesis requires an FA source – which can be formalin, para-formaldehyde, or trioxane – and also a methyl capping group supplier, as provided by MeOH, methylal (OME1) or DME. Subsequent oligomer extension reactions (e.g. acetalisation, condensation, addition, etc.) then take place according to the feed components as explained in detail previously by Burger et al.32 and Zhao et al.33 Known (e.g. industrial) processes for OME synthesis are relatively complex, composed of a variety of process synthesis steps, for example involving reactive distillation, extraction, etc., often leading to relatively low synthesis efficiency, whilst being based on expensive feedstocks (e.g. trioxane).3,34,35
A so-called “Direct OME synthesis” based on MeOH and aqueous formaldehyde (FAaq.) has been investigated previously due to the theoretical potential to increase process energy efficiency and reduce capital investment (CAPEX).34–40 This two-step synthesis represents in principle a simpler route in comparison with other known processes featuring several intermediate synthesis steps.30,34,35 In the first synthesis step MeOH undergoes selective oxidative dehydrogenation to yield FAaq. (formalin, FA = 37–50 wt%). FAaq. reacts in a second step with MeOH to produce OME and H2O followed by working up of the product to produce the target OME3–5 fraction. It is important to note that using FAaq. feed is not thermodynamically favoured for the OME synthesis step since it limits the OME3–5 yield (maximum of 8 wt% per path yield [gOME3−5 gproduct−1] and enhances side product formation.38,41 Therefore H2O management in this direct synthesis path is essential (as discussed in previous report by Schmitz et al.,35 and Arnold et al.42). Other reports have also focused on defining system kinetics for example over different catalysts or describing the OME synthesis equilibrium.36
In this report a process for a direct synthesis of OME based on MeOH and an anhydrous FA is evaluated. This approach has the potential to double the OME3–5 per path yield, in turn improving the whole process energy and economic efficiency as discussed in our recently reported work.34 Instead of oxidative dehydrogenation, anhydrous FA is generated in the evaluated process through the catalytic endothermic dehydrogenation of MeOH to yield anhydrous FA and H2 as the main side product. The reaction takes place at temperatures ≥700 °C to generate appropriate MeOH conversions. Different catalyst systems have been investigated for the this step as reported previously by Su et al.43 As discussed below, thermodynamically favoured side reactions compete during this endothermic dehydrogenation and therefore a selective catalyst is required, alongside consideration of appropriate reactor design, to achieve selective FA production.44 However FA yields of ≥70% have been reported with high synthesis efficiency, but the anhydrous FA needs to be handled carefully due to its reactivity and converted directly to the desired end product in a continuous manner, e.g. if a financially attractive process vs. conventional FAaq. production is to be established.44,45 In the context of OME synthesis where MeOH is a co-reactant with FA, the endothermic MeOH dehydrogenation synthesis path becomes very attractive, as selective anhydrous FA synthesis at partial MeOH conversion is a significant process advantage, e.g. at 50% MeOH conversion and with 95% FA selectivity, the overall process yield is 47.5% which is negative when FA is the end product. Operation of conversion and selectivity to generate a FA/MeOH ratio of ca. 1.9 [mol mol−1] can be considered an optimal feed for the subsequent OME synthesis, and thus control of MeOH dehydrogenation opens the possibility alongside reactor optimisation, of producing an optimal OME synthesis with enhanced overall process efficiency.
In this context, the described process in this report has been simulated using a hybrid model, where all process components are described along with process material and energy demands can be observed and extracted for process evaluation. To the best of our knowledge, synthesis models as reported in the literature have thus predominantly focused on the OME synthesis step from a kinetic or reaction equilibrium perspective.36,37,40 In this context, the work from Burger et al.46 and Schmitz et al.35 regarding process modelling are duly acknowledged regarding steps forward concerning OME synthesis reactors and separation equipment.
Previously we reported on the basic material balance evaluation of the direct OME synthesis based on MeOH and anhydrous FA. Based on these preliminary results and assumptions regarding process energy consumption and ideal product separation, we have been able to define so-called “Key Performance Indicators” (KPIs) for the process (e.g. regarding MeOH demand, cost per tonne OME3–5etc.). On this basis, an approach to OME synthesis is defined, with the main process reaction and separation steps are implemented through a hybrid simulation platform. The hybrid model couples the merits of algorithms available in the commercial software CHEMCAD® together with our own “in-house” developed reactor models as implemented in Matlab®. The model components are described and the methodology of model implementation by developing the interface between the two software programs using “Visual Basic for Applications” (VBA) is also reported. Furthermore, the convergence criteria and methodology of implementation of each simulation component is described. After the process simulation is converged, the process energy integration task is performed using the software PinCH 2.0, where a heat exchange network (HEN) is designed to allow maximum process heat recovery.
As it has been highlighted as a key synthesis step in the described process, the anhydrous FA synthesis is also experimentally investigated using an “in-house” designed and applied annular counter current reactor (ACCR), to validate the endothermic MeOH dehydrogenation reaction. With the model converged for a base case scenario, the process technical and economic metrics are defined. These metrics are presented as KPIs allowing the process evaluation and comparison with other literature processes, highlighting the potential of the presented process. Furthermore, the introduction here and use of our integrated tool which is capable of a robust evaluation of both FA and indeed OME production, represents an innovative approach (as complimented by experimental investigations) and lays the basis for further OME (or indeed anhydrous FA) synthesis progress.
Hybrid process model
Model basis
The process is simulated using the simulation software CHEMCAD® (version 5.2.0) which contains a variety of models for various process units, the possibility to implement user generated models and cost functions for most of the units. For the simulation, the chemical components are selected from the built-in library containing the physio-chemical and thermodynamic properties of >1900 components. Additionally, the user can implement self-defined components and property models. As yet, reflecting the novelty of the topic, OMEn>1, poly(oxymethylene) hemiformals (HFn) and poly(oxymethylene) glycols (MGn) are not included in the built-in component library and have thus been added manually based on available literature.47 Furthermore, a UNIFAC model has been adopted as reported in the literature and implemented to take into account the non-ideal behaviour of the liquid phase of this reaction system.48–50 For HFn and MGn, there are very few properties available in the literature. Therefore, to still use the CHEMCAD® to solve the separation task after the reaction unit, some assumptions had to be made. First, as described by Schmitz et al.,37 the OME reactions reach equilibrium for MeOH, FA, H2O, OME1–8, HF1–10 and MG1–10. Second as stated by Hahnenstein et al.,51 the degradation reactions of HF and MG are slow in comparison to typical residence times in separation equipment. Third, HFn>1 and MGn>1 stay in the liquid phase. According to Albert et al.52 there is no experimental evidence for the presence of substantial amounts of MGn or HFn in the gas phase. Therefore, the process considers the equilibrium composition to be achieved in the reactor and further changes so slowly in comparison to the separation residence time that this change can be neglected. Furthermore, HFn>1 and MGn>1 completely split to the bottom stream. The minimum required properties for the distillation calculation comprise the dependency of vapor pressure on temperature, the dependency of the heat capacity on temperature and for HF1 and MG1 the enthalpy of vaporization. Liu et al.53 published a physicochemical model for VLE in mixtures of FA with MeOH and FA with H2O. From this model heat capacities for HF1–10 and MG1–10 could be extracted. However, since the considered temperature range of 323 to 363 K for FA aqueous solution and 312 to 347 K for FA methanolic solution is comparatively small to the temperatures reached in the distillation unit, the extrapolation of these relations led partially to negative heat capacities. Therefore, the heat capacities of HFn>1 and MGn>1 have been assumed to be equal to the heat capacity of the corresponding OME, whereby the heat capacity of HF9–10 and MG9–10 has been assumed to be equal to OME8. The extracted relations for HF1 and MG1 were used, since they will mainly stay in the vapor phase and therefore exposed much smaller temperatures in the distillation separation units. Albert et al.52 furthermore published relations for the vapor pressure depending on temperature for HF1 and MG1 for the temperature range of 293 to 413 K. Nonetheless, for HFn>1 and MGn>1 no vapor pressure relations could be found. But since they are assumed to stay in the liquid phase their vapor pressure has been assumed to be equal to the vapor pressure of OME8.
Together with the component properties, global thermodynamic packages should be specified to define and unify the model basis for the simulation. For the definition of the K-value estimation the UNIFAC package was selected, since it was specifically implemented in the component properties, while the enthalpy is defined using the latent heat package, which was recommended by CHEMCAD® in combination with UNIFAC. Additionally, single unit operations thermodynamic packages could be assigned when it is more convenient.
Several assumptions and basis were selected on the global model level for a successful model convergence. The following points summarise the most prominent of these considerations:
1. Model basis of a production capacity of ca. 35 kt per annum OME3–5.
2. N2 is used as a carrier gas for the MeOH feed stream. After the MeOH endothermic dehydrogenation reaction, the product stream (Fig. 1 – Stream 207) containing FA, MeOH, CO, H2 and N2 is absorbed in the recycle stream (Fig. 1 – Stream 321) where FA and MeOH are separated. The gaseous components N2, H2 and traces of CO (<0.3 vol% of stream 209) are separated conceptually as follows: H2 and N2 are separated using membrane technology54 and N2 and CO are recycled. A portion of this recycle stream (Fig. 1 – Stream 211) is purged and new make-up N2 is introduced (0.5 vol% volume is assumed and considered in the production cost assessment). These steps are considered using the mixer unit (Fig. 1 – Unit 212) and the ideal separation equipment (Fig. 1 – Units 205 and 206). The energy required for performing these tasks is not considered in the evaluated KPIs.
 Fig. 1  Hybrid process model flow diagram as implemented in CHEMCAD®. 
3. The endothermic dehydrogenation of MeOH is performed through a kinetic reactor (Fig. 1 – Unit 204) operating at a certain residence time to yield the desired FA/MeOH molar ratio.
4. The OME synthesis reaction proceeds to equilibrium and occurs only in the liquid phase (Fig. 1 – Unit 306).
5. Concerning distillation equipment, the gas phase is considered as ideal gas while non-ideal behaviour in the liquid phase is considered using a UNIFAC model to calculate activity coefficients.
6. Distillation units are assumed to reach phase equilibrium on every stage.
7. Since no satisfying vapour pressures for MGn>1 and HFn>1 are available in the literature, low vapour pressure values (from OME8) are assigned for these components. The heat capacities of HFn>1 and MGn>1 have been assumed to be equal to the heat capacity of the corresponding OME, whereby the heat capacity of HF9–10 and MG9–10 has been assumed to be equal to OME8. Generally physical property model for these unstable intermediates is lacking.
8. A pressure drop of 340 mbar (ref. 55) is considered for a heat exchanger, 6.9 mbar (ref. 55) per distillation stage, 345 mbar (ref. 56) for the condenser and 100 mbar for reactor units.57 Pumps and compressors are included in the process design to account for this pressure drop.
Process description
The OME synthesis described here based on MeOH as a single educt has been divided for clarity into two main sub-process steps (Fig. 1), namely: FA synthesis (Fig. 1 – No. 200) and OME synthesis (Fig. 1 – No. 300). The FA synthesis sub-process starts with the saturation of MeOH in N2 as carrier gas (Fig. 1 – Mixer, Unit 201) where the feed concentration is defined. This feed (Fig. 1 – Stream 203) is preheated via a heat exchanger (Fig. 1 – Unit 202) which recovers the heat from the product (Fig. 1 – Stream 206) to the feed (T = 670 °C) of the FA reactor (Fig. 1 – Unit 204). The feed is then heated up to the reaction temperature of 690 °C in a high temperature trim heater (supplied by natural gas; Fig. 1 – Unit 203) before being introduced to the FA reactor. In the reactor the endothermic catalytic dehydrogenation of MeOH takes place (reactions (1)–(3)).44 CH3OH ⇌ CH2O + H2 ΔH298R = +85kJmol−1(1)
In addition secondary competing reactions occur:43 CH3OH ⇌ CO + 2H2  ΔH298R = +105kJmol−1(2) CH3OH ⇌ C + H2O + H2  ΔH298R = −31kJmol−1(3)
Next to the competing reactions, FA is thermodynamically unstable and can react further to more thermodynamically favoured products including HCOOH, CH4, CO and CO2.43 Therefore, the reaction temperature should be sufficiently high, an effective, selective and active catalyst should be used, the residence time in the reactor should be as short as possible to minimize further conversion of FA and the product (Fig. 1 – Stream 206) needs to be quenched as fast as possible to limit FA decomposition.43 This reaction step is simulated using a kinetic reactor model which is implemented in Matlab® and coupled via an Excel® unit using VBA (as elaborated in more detail later in this article). After the first reaction step, the product stream (Fig. 1 – Stream 207) is mixed with the recycle stream (Fig. 1 – Stream 321) and separated using a component separator (Fig. 1 – Unit 205) from CHEMCAD®, where FA, MeOH and recycled components in stream 321 are directed towards the OME synthesis sub-process (Fig. 1 – Stream 301), the side products H2 is exiting the process (Fig. 1 – Stream 217) and the carrier gas N2 with the side product CO (Fig. 1 – Stream 211) are separated as explained in the model basis and recycled using an isotropic compressor with an efficiency of 75% to close the loop and be saturated again with MeOH (Fig. 1).
OME synthesis starts with mixing the MeOH dehydrogenation production stream with the recycle stream (Fig. 1 – Stream 326) – constituting of OMEn>5, HFn and MGn – before being cooled to the reaction temperature of 50 °C (Fig. 1 – Unit 305) and entering the OME reactor (Fig. 1 – Unit 306). In this reactor FA and MeOH are converted to OME through simultaneous oligomerisation, addition and condensation reactions as reported previously.38 The major contributing reactions are summarised here:36,38 CH3OH + CH2O ⇌ HO(CH2O)CH3 (HF1)(4) HO(CH2O)n−1CH3 + CH2O ⇌ HO(CH2O)nCH3 (HFn)(5) CH3OH + HO(CH2O)CH3 ⇌ CH3O(CH2O)CH3 + H2O (OME1)(6) CH3O(CH2O)n−1CH3 + CH2O ⇌ CH3O(CH2O)nCH3 (OMEn)(7)
These are equilibrium reactions strongly depending on the concentration of FA, with higher concentrations promoting longer chain oligomer formation.32 The OME formation reactions are slightly exothermic reactions (ΔH298R = −25.2 kJ mol−1) and take place at mild conditions (T = 50–90 °C), the temperature is not significantly influencing the reaction system.38 The presence of FA and H2O leads to further competing reactions:34 H2O + CH2O ⇌ HO(CH2O)H (MG1)(8) HO(CH2O)n−1H + CH2O ⇌ HO(CH2O)nH (MGn)(9)
For the reaction model of the OME synthesis, MGn and HFn (reactions (5) and (9)) have been considered for chain lengths up to n = 10, while OMEn are considered until n = 8 as assumed previously by Schmitz et al.38 The reaction steps have been simulated using an isothermal equilibrium reactor model, as implemented through Matlab® and interfaced to CHEMCAD® via an Excel® unit using VBA. Due to the presence of an acidic catalyst further side reactions are possible where CH3OCH3, HCOOCH3 or (CH2O)3 can be formed. Therefore, the choice of the catalyst system and reaction conditions can significantly suppress secondary reactions and avoid side product formation in this equilibrium system, thus side products have not been considered in the OME reactor.
Following OME synthesis, the product stream (Fig. 1 – Stream 307) is separated as follows: the desired product OME3–5 (Fig. 1 – Stream 325), a second by-product stream mainly containing H2O (Fig. 1 – Stream 318) and the recycled streams (Fig. 1 – Streams 321 and 326) containing the rest of the components are brought back to the OME synthesis reactor. This separation is mainly performed through four distillation columns. The first column (Fig. 1 – Unit 307) splits the stream between OME2 as light component and OME3 as heavy component on 22 stages and a reflux ratio of 1. Therefore, OME1–2, unreacted MeOH and FA, H2O, HF1 and MG1 are leaving the column in the distillate (Fig. 1 – Stream 308) at ca. 79 °C while OMEn>2, HFn>1 and MGn>1 are withdrawn from the bottom (Fig. 1 – Stream 322) at ca. 264 °C. As a result about 99.99% of OME2 of the feed and 0.02% of OME3 of the feed are leaving the column in the distillate which is purified from H2O in two additional columns. For this purification other process units like adsorption or membrane could lead to significant production cost reductions, however, this is still under investigation.35 The second column (Fig. 1 – Unit 309) splits the stream between H2O as the light component and OME2 as the heavy component on 80 stages and a reflux ratio of 4. Due to the small difference in vapour pressure between H2O, HF1 and OME2 a thermal separation is CAPEX and energy intensive. H2O, MeOH, FA, OME1, and HF1 are leaving as distillate at ca. 53 °C while OME2 and HF1 are leaving the column in the bottom at ca. 126 °C. As a result ca. 99.99% of H2O, 50.89% HF1 and 1.02% of OME2 of the feed are leaving the column in the distillate. Before the MeOH and H2O separation column (Fig. 1 – Unit 314), the rest of the unstable HF1 in stream 314 is heated (Fig. 1 – Unit 312) and thermally dissociated in equilibrium reactor (Fig. 1 – Unit 313) to its forming components MeOH and FA (reaction (4)). This takes place at long residence time without a catalyst according to equilibrium relations as described by Hahnsteinet al.51,58 This decomposition at this stage is essential to allow the separation of water. Stream 315 composed mainly of OME1, MeOH, FA and H2O is directed to the third column (Fig. 1 – Unit 314) splitting the stream between MeOH as the light component and H2O as the heavy component on 21 stages and a reflux ratio of 1. MeOH, FA and OME1 are leaving as distillate at ca. 12.9 °C and are mixed with the separated OME2 (Fig. 1 – Unit 317) while H2O is leaving the column in the bottom at ca. 107 °C. As a result ca. 98.93% of MeOH of the feed is leaving the column in the distillate.
The fourth column (Fig. 1 – Unit 319) splits the stream between OME5 as the light component and OME6 as the heavy component on 40 stages and a reflux ratio of 7. OME3–5 are leaving as distillate at ca. 173 °C while OMEn>6, HFn>1 and MGn>1 are leaving the column in the bottom at ca. 352.5 °C. As a result ca. 95% of OME5 of the feed is leaving the column in the distillate. After the separation all components (Fig. 1 – Streams 321 and 326) other than OME3–5 and H2O are recycled back to the OME reactor to be converted to the desired OME3–5.
Description of the process model components
The description of each model component and convergence methodology is specified in the following:

Endothermic FA synthesis reactor. 
From our previous reported works, which have focused on modelling of the OME reaction equilibria, the composition ratio of FA/MeOH was optimised to obtain the highest OME3–5 product yield possible. This was narrowed and established to lie between 1.8–2 [mol mol−1].34 This was defined as the target performance for the anhydrous FA synthesis reactor. As discussed earlier, the mechanism of endothermic MeOH dehydrogenation, secondary side reactions are thermodynamically favoured, thus making overall reaction modelling a kinetic challenge. Kinetic reactor models in CHEMCAD® require the definition of the reaction rate constant kj of each reaction j as a function of temperature. In this work, a Na2CO3 catalyst was used, whilst the kinetic data for this reaction was not available in literature. To establish kinetic data, three main reactions are considered. kj values for the main contributing reactions (reaction (1) and (2)) were evaluated experimentally at T = 690 °C using an annular counter current reactor as explained in Catalyst choice and reactor design. kj for the MeOH pyrolysis to carbon (reaction (3)) was evaluated from previously published experimental results over a similar catalyst system.59 In this report and based on experimental and available literature data, a global kinetic model was implemented to describe this synthesis step. An ideal plug flow reactor model was adopted with the following assumptions:
1. Irreversibility of the considered reactions.
2. Constant gas density.
3. Quasi-isothermal operation.
The generic equation for the reaction rate rj for the consumption of a reactant A (here MeOH) in a reaction j is:60 (10)
Thereby CA is the concentration in [mol m−3], t the time in [s], ni the order of the reaction and i the component counter. For parallel simultaneous reactions based on the same feed A, the concentration of a component i at certain time can thus be evaluated as follows: (11)
Assuming constant gas density, the following equation applies for plug flow reactors:60 (12)
Thereby τ is the residence time in [s], V the volume of the reactor in [m3],  the volume flow in [m3 s−1], X the mol fraction in and the index 0 represents the initial time. MeOH dehydrogenation tests were carried out at same test parameters with varying the residence time. By plotting the concentration of MeOH corresponding to each product in the considered reactions (FA and CO) against the residence time, the reaction orders could be defined and kj values are evaluated (Fig. S1 and S2†).

Table 1 summarises the reaction order and kj values for reaction (1)–(3) at T = 690 °C.
Table 1 Reaction orders and kj values for the considered reactions in the kinetic FA reactor model




Reaction
Reaction order

k

j


Rate equation




1
1
6.94

C

A
 = CA0e−kτCA


2
0
0.291

C

A
 = Kτ + CA0


3
1
0.000066

C

A
 = CA0e−kτ




With defined reaction orders, the total rate equation results in: −∑ rj = k1CA + k2 + k3CA(13)
Substituting in eqn (12) followed by integration, the kinetic equation results as: (14)
The equation system is implemented through Matlab® whereby at a certain feed concentration CA0 and given residence time, the concentration of each component Ci in the product stream can be evaluated. An exemplary result at a given initial [MeOH] feed has been provided (Fig. S3†). The conversion of MeOH and the corresponding selectivity to FA have also been evaluated at each τ (Fig. S4†). For the convergence of the whole process model, τ was selected to achieve the desired FA/MeOH mole ratio. The results were in turn added to CHEMCAD® using an Excel® unit interface.


Equilibrium OME synthesis reactor. 
The routine for chemical reaction equilibrium calculations using the available reactor modules in CHEMCAD® requires currently unavailable information i.e. for the OME components and side products. In addition, to the standard Gf (Gibbs reactor) or equilibrium constant Keq. as a function of T for pre-defined reactions (equilibrium reactor module), UNIFAC parameters to consider the non-ideal nature of the liquid phase, reaction conditions (P,T), the reactor operating mode isothermal or adiabatic and the saturation pressure of each component, the routine also requires the standard enthalpy and entropy of formation for each component in order to solve simultaneously the energy balance and the phase equilibria of each stream. The equilibrium reactor model of CHEMCAD® only considers up to 20 simultaneous reactions which is not sufficient for the previously mentioned reaction system, while the Gibbs reactor model requires the heat capacity of the components in addition to standard enthalpies and entropies of formation to evaluate the standard Gibbs energy of the components at given P and T. These are unfortunately currently not available. Estimations of the missing properties using UNIFAC, Joback or CHETAH 9.0 ASTM thermodynamic calculator software did not yield satisfactory results relative to experimental values (Fig. S5†). This comparison shows the chemical equilibrium compositions of experimental results from Schmitz et al.38 against the simulation results obtained from our previous report regarding the convergence of an OME reaction equilibrium, based on a Gibbs energy minimisation approach with the aid of an stochastic global optimizer (SGO) reactor model and the CHEMCAD® Gibbs and equilibrium reactors modules at T = 348 K, P = 2 bar and a feed molar composition of FA/MeOH = 0.89 and H2O/MeOH = 0.54.34
The SGO shows good agreement with the equilibrium compositions from the experimental results with a mean error of 0.01, while the results from the CHEMCAD® Gibbs and equilibrium reactors reach mean errors of 0.07 and 0.08 in mass fraction, respectively and with quite different components equilibrium composition distribution. However, the known reaction equilibrium constants as a function of T are defined experimentally and accordingly the Gibbs energy can be evaluated. The calculation method described in our previous report can therefore shortcut the equilibrium evaluation importantly whilst providing good accuracy, based on experimental values and consideration of activity-based relations.34 Accordingly, integrating our reactor equilibrium calculation module in the CHEMCAD® platform was imperative.
In our previous work we discussed the OME synthesis reaction equilibrium system in single and multiphase.34,41 The equilibrium model applied a non-stoichiometric Gibbs minimisation (NSGM) approach with a SGO solver to converge the complex OME multicomponent reaction equilibrium. The merits of this algorithm for the complex reaction system was further validated against literature and own experimental results for different feed systems:34 (15)
Where Gt = total Gibbs free energy, N = number of species present in the reacting mixture, ni = number of moles of component i, R = gas constant, T = temperature, Xi = molar fraction in the liquid phase, γi = activity coefficient of component i in the liquid phase and the index 0 refers to the standard state. The non-ideality in the liquid phase is accounted by considering activity based chemical equilibrium constants and using the UNIFAC method for evaluating the activity coefficients.34
A Microsoft Excel®-based unit was developed to include the reaction code developed in Matlab® using the NSGM reaction model.34 In this context, Microsoft Excel® offers the possibility to open and run a Matlab® code via the use of a VBA add-on, as well as exchanging matrices and single values, as long as both programs are installed within the same operating system. The extracted results from Matlab® using VBA can be translated and introduced in the CHEMCAD® platform. The development of the VBA unit is significant as it enables a “hybrid” combination of CHEMCAD® functionality and the flexibility and calculation speed of Matlab®. Running the Matlab® code through the VBA node does not alter the results as long as the input/output variables (as defined in each platform) are translated correctly via VBA. Calculations using the VBA node as interfaced between the two software platforms require additional computational time (i.e. vs. those performed with Matlab® directly).


Rigorous distillation units. 
For the simulation of the distillation columns the SCDS distillation column unit – following the MESH equations – was selected with the assumption of reaching equilibrium on every tray. The simultaneous (SC) method, (i.e. the Naphtali–Sandholm method),61 was applied for the final simulation. This method is used by a range of simulation software and is better suited for non-ideal mixtures than other global Newton methods.55 To define the initial parameters for the SCDS algorithm, the shortcut column (SHOR) unit using Fenske–Underwood–Gilliland method was applied. The algorithm generally simplifies the separation problem to a binary system of the light and heavy key component. The light key component was specified as the more volatile component of the two components between whom the column splits the stream with the assumption that ca. 99.9% of the amount in the feed stream are leaving the column in the distillate. The heavy key component was specified as the less volatile component with the assumption that ca. 0.1% is leaving the column in distillate. The distribution of the non-key components is determined according to this specification.62 Furthermore, to determine the number of stages and the reflux ratio a minimum reflux R/Rmin = 1.3 was selected.56 For the SHOR algorithm no pressure drop was assumed. The estimated column properties have been used as an initial definition of the SCDS parameters. Additionally the specification of the condenser and reboiler mode is required. To find a point of convergence those modes have been specified with the definition of the condenser and reboiler duty, respectively. The parameters to reach the separation target of the columns were narrowed and defined by varying the reflux ratio at the condenser mode and the bottom temperature for the reboiler mode. In every convergence step, the energy and mass balances were checked to monitor the state of convergence.
The SCDS columns have been defined and specified in order of their position in the flow sheet (Fig. 1). Therefore, the exit stream of the OME reactor, defined by the Matlab® simulation considering a perfectly sharp separation and recycle, was used as the first feed stream for the first column (Fig. 1 – Unit 307). The required parameters of this column to fulfil the separation task have been pre-estimated using the SHOR unit and adjusted in the SCDS unit until convergence and separation task were achieved. Distillate (Fig. 1 – Stream 308) and bottom (Fig. 1 – Stream 322) were used as feed streams for the following columns and the same procedure was applied to reach convergence and achieve the separation task until the two product streams (Fig. 1 – Stream 318 and 325) containing mainly H2O and OME3–5, respectively were separated. The other components were recycled to the OME reactor and the loop of adjusting the parameters of the SCDS columns continued until the process converged and steady state was reached.


Auxillaries. 
Auxillary units where implemented to simulate heat exchange between streams and to compensate the pressure drop of reactors and separation units. Counter current heat exchangers were used with the U-value defined according to Towler et al. as computed by CHEMCAD®.63 Pressure regulating units (pumps, compressors and throttles) are specified according the desired outlet stream pressure and for the centrifugal compressor an efficiency of 75% was assumed, while the centrifugal pumps have an efficiency of 60%. These efficiency figures were defined according to practical data and CHEMCAD® recommendations.57,64

Methodology for process model convergence
Through CHEMCAD® the physico-chemical and thermodynamic properties of the considered components were implemented based on the component library. The reactor models (FA synthesis and OME synthesis) were implemented through the Matlab®/CHEMCAD®/Excel®-VBA hybrid platform. The product purification is conducted using a series of distillation columns which are simulated using a rigorous SC distillation algorithm which is implemented in the SCDS unit in CHEMCAD®. Due to the consideration of pressure drop, the implementation of pumps, compressors and throttles was necessary and the according CHEMCAD® library units were used.
The process model considers recycle of non-product components, therefore the Matlab® reactor models and distillation units were solved interactively during the first loops to reach convergence for the whole process simulation. Since the FA synthesis sub-process does not contain recycles with changing composition or enthalpies, this process was specified according to the FA/MeOH ratio of 1.9 [mol mol−1] as a first step of the model convergence. This stream was then introduced to the OME reactor model were equilibrium composition was calculated. The product stream of this model was implemented in Matlab® considering perfectly sharp separations of OME3–5 and H2O and the recycle of non-product components. After this simulation had reached convergence and therefore a steady state, the OME reactor exit stream was used as the tear stream and implemented in the CHEMCAD® model. This stream was defined as the feed stream for the first column to split the stream between OME2 as the light component and OME3 as the heavy component. For the first estimation of necessary column parameters the SHOR unit from CHEMCAD® was used and the results implemented in the rigorous SCDS column. For the first point of convergence using the SCDS model the condenser and reboiler duties, specified by the SHOR model, were set. Afterwards, the associated reflux ratio and bottom temperature were set and adjusted to fulfil the separation task and reach convergence. The same procedure was applied to the other three columns. At this stage, the product streams were separated and the recycle streams were brought back to the OME reactor model interfaced with the Excel® unit in CHEMCAD®. This model was set to a single reaction pass and the exit stream was again implemented in the first distillation column and its parameters adjusted to fulfil the separation task and obtain convergence. This loop was conducted manually until the parameters of the columns got stable. Afterwards the loop was set to run automatically until the convergence criteria of 10−3 for flow rates, T, P, vapour fraction and enthalpy of the tear stream was reached.
After completion of the process simulation/convergence, integration of the process heat was conducted using the software PinCH 2.0. The process flowsheet was updated accordingly and the convergence loop repeated.
Methodology for process heat integration
The PinCH 2.0 software platform was used to generate a HEN according to specified streams (e.g. based on specified initial and final temperatures which define the stream as a hot or a cold stream), duties, a constant heat capacity Cp or specific enthalpy of vaporisation, a heat transfer coefficient and the pressure level. If a phase change occurs during the heat exchange, the user can split the stream in various segments and define both – e.g. parts with temperature differences and parts for the phase change. In this study, these phase changes were computed using CHEMCAD® and an associated VBA code. A constant heat capacity can be extracted using the temperature difference, the corresponding enthalpy difference and the mass flow. However, if a phase change occurs during the heat exchange its consideration is beneficial regarding the pinch point temperature. Therefore, after defining the initial and final enthalpy of the stream according to the respective temperatures, the considered stream is checked regarding the occurrence of a phase change. Since most of the considered streams are mixtures of various components a phase change occurs over a temperature range. If the phase does not change, the heat capacity is calculated for various points over the considered temperature range, the average Cp of these points is estimated and the deviation of each point is checked.
If the phase changes, the vaporisation enthalpy is extracted based on a CHEMCAD® function, where an isothermal change is assumed. If the stream is cooled or heated beyond the phase change another segment is defined which contains the average heat capacity up till the final temperature. Therefore, a stream which changes its phase and is additionally heated or cooled beyond the phase change, is split into several segments whereby representing the latent and sensible heat intervals. Heat transfer coefficients were computed according to Towler et al.63 as calculated in CHEMCAD®. Mass flow and pressure level were extracted from CHEMCAD®.
After the definition of the process streams, the utility streams were also defined. Cooling water at 25 °C with an increase of an additional 10 °C was defined as the cold utility and steam at 80 bar was assumed as the hot utility. Since CHEMCAD® does not include the option to integrate the heat of a stream in the reboiler or condenser of a column, the integration of the condenser and reboiler duties with the process streams was done manually by considering the required heat duties and temperature levels at minimum pinch temperature difference of ca. 20 °C (e.g.Fig. 2 – units 324 and 327). Streams 205, 208, 211, 212, 307, 309, 310, 317, 322, 325 and 326 (Fig. 1) were considered for the heat integration, resulting in the issuing of a composite and grand composite curve (Fig. S6†). The Pinch temperature was defined as 88.6 °C and the recommended minimum temperature difference for the heat exchangers was 20.17 °C (please see the designed HEN in Fig. S7†). The HEN was implemented in the hybrid platform using nine heat exchangers (Fig. 2).
 Fig. 2  Hybrid simulation platform for the production of OME3–5 from MeOH via FA in CHEMCAD®, heat integrated using PinCH 2.0. 
Experimental – anhydrous FA synthesis
Experimental fundamentals
Methanol (ROTISLOV®, purity >99.9 wt%) was purchased from Carl Roth GmBH. Anhydrous sodium sulphite (Na2SO3; Bioultra grade, purity ≥98 wt%) and 1.0M HClaq. (Fluka standard grade solution) were purchased from Sigma Aldrich. All chemicals were used without further purification. CO, CO2, H2 and N2 calibration mixtures, CH4 in N2 calibration mixtures and DME 3.0 (purity >99.9 vol%) gas cylinders were purchased from Linde AG. N2 6.0 and Ar 5.0 were supplied from in-house supply lines. Sodium carbonate (Na2CO3, purity >99.9 wt%) from VWR Chemicals was used to produce the anhydrous formaldehyde synthesis catalyst. Na2CO3 (3 g) was pressed into a tablet (diameter 2.5 cm) with 15 tons of pressure. The tablet was then carefully crushed in a mortar and sieved into the desired fraction (630–800 μm). The particles obtained were placed in the formaldehyde synthesis reactor without further treatment.
Two Gas Chromatography (GC) devices equipped with thermal conductivity detectors (GC-TCD) were employed for the product analysis. An Agilent 6890A GC with a CP-SIL5CB (30 m × 8 μm) capillary column was employed for the quantitative analysis of FA and MeOH. Samples were analysed using He as the carrier gas, an oven temperature 100 °C, and a column pressure of 35 psi. Another Agilent 7890 A GC with a poraplot Q (30 m × 530 μm × 20 μm) capillary column was used for the analysis of the rest of the product mixture other than H2. He was used as the carrier gas for the front detector. Carrier gas flow (flow: 4 mL min−1 at ca. 36 psi). A packed porapack Q column (0.91 m × 3 mm and Mesh 80/100) followed by a molsieve (30 × 530 μm × 25 μm) capillary column were used for the H2 separation before being introduced to the back detector. N2 was used as the carrier gas (flow: 26.6 mL min−1 at ca. 35 psi). The GC inlet temperature was set at 200 °C and operated in split mode (split ratio = 2). Chromatograms were obtained using a programmed oven temperature ramp (i.e. 70 to 150 then back to 70 °C, over 11 min). An ABB gas analyser (GA) with a Caldos 17 and Uras 14 modules was used for the online detection of H2, CO, CO2 and CH4.
All mass flow controllers were calibrated using mass flow meter range check device setup (Bronkhorst). MeOH and H2O were calibrated via saturation in carrier gas at nominal operating volumetric flow rate and exact saturation T and P. CO, CO2, CH4 and H2 were calibrated using standard calibration gas mixtures. DME was calibrated by mixing several concentrations with N2 using MFCs. FA was calibrated based on a Na2SO3 volumetric titration method, using 1 M HClaq. as titre and thymolphtalein as indicator.65
All T, P, flow rates and GA readings are monitored and controlled using a LabVIEW program. Extracted results and data from GCs, GA and Labview program are evaluated using a developed Excel® program with data extraction via VBA tool. The selectivity of FA and the conversion of MeOH are evaluated as follows: (16) (17)where nMeOHi is the number of moles of MeOH in the feed gas, nMeOH0 is the number of moles of MeOH in the product gas, nFA is the number of FA moles in the product.
The gas hourly space velocity (GHSV) is calculated as follows: (18)where V is the bulk volume of the catalyst in [L],  is the volume flow in [L STP h−1].
Reaction conditions were based on the results from Su et al. over similar catalyst system.43 Reaction temperature of 690 °C, MeOH feed concentration of 5–6 vol%, pressure of 1.05–1.15 bar and Na2CO3 with particle size of 830–600 μm were fixed as basis testing parameters. Parameters were selected after several pre-tests. GHSV could be varied by changing the carrier gas flow or varying the catalyst bed length.
Catalyst choice and reactor design
The endothermic MeOH dehydrogenation has been discussed in previous literature reports, for example over different catalysts and/or reactor types.46,47,63 As discussed in these reports, the typical aim was to produce pure anhydrous FA or derivatives such as para formaldehyde (pFA) or trioxane in high yield (e.g. as precursors for polyacetal production).44 Typically this dehydrogenation reaction occurs at elevated temperatures ≥700 °C to achieve reasonable conversion of MeOH.45 However, such temperatures promote MeOH pyrolysis and thermodynamically favoured production of CO and H2 (reaction (2)). Therefore this reaction is kinetically controlled whereby a selective catalyst and reactor design are required for a satisfactory anhydrous FA yield.44 In this context, the following are identified as key prerequisites to achieve this, namely (a) a fast heating of educts to avoid pyrolysis of MeOH, (b) a fast reaction over the catalytic species (e.g. residence times ≤0.01 s),45 (c) a fast quenching of products to avoid further conversion of the thermodynamically unstable FA to CO and H2 and (d) the maintenance of a stream containing the FA product in a stable temperature range (e.g. between 100–150 °C) to avoid FA from polymerisation.44,45
Regarding catalyst choice, Su et al. have investigated endothermic MeOH dehydrogenation over Na2CO3 through a packed bed reactor at T = 690 °C, resulting in an FA selectivity (SFA) of 84% and MeOH conversion (UMeOH) of 54%.43 Zaza et al. have investigated the same catalyst but using a circulating fluidised bed reactor, leading to SFA = 80% at less than 20% UMeOH.46,64 Sauer et al. investigated this reaction in a tube wall reactor using a NaAlO2 catalyst and at T ≤900 °C. Almost 100% UMeOH was achieved over this system with SFA of ca. 70%.44 Schweers et al. introduced a homogeneous reaction concept where the catalyst active species Na (from NaOH, or Na2C2) was evaporated in super-heated circulating gas (consists mainly of H2 and CO or N2) and introduced with MeOH vapour to a reaction zone where dehydrogenation reaction took place over the range T = 600–800 °C. FA yield was reported as ≥60%.66 Based on this information, and indeed regarding cost, sustainability and ease of synthesis, Na2CO3 was selected as an exemplary catalyst in this investigation.
Regarding reactor design, from the reported literature and our first experimental investigations, selective anhydrous FA synthesis through tubular packed bed reactors has been identified as a challenge.67 For example carbon formation in pre-catalytic zone due to pyrolysis of MeOH is typically observed, resulting in turn in low FA selectivity. Furthermore, with increasing reaction T, selectivity towards CO formation also increases. Therefore, to overcome these challenges, and in an attempt to fulfil the aforementioned key prerequisites, a new reactor design concept was developed (Fig. 3). This initial lab-scale design is defined as an “Annular Counter Current Reactor”(ACCR), constructed from quartz glass (e.g. to observe any decomposition/deposition processes) and was conceptualised with the aim of achieving a selective and stable anhydrous FA synthesis. The ACCR was designed to allow testing of different catalyst systems over a wide range of Gas Hourly Space Velocities GHSV (5000–35000 h−1) and T. The reactor was integrated in a continuous flow test stand (Fig. S8†). MeOH was fed to the reactor in a saturated inert carrier gas at the identified pre-catalytic zones (1, 2 and 3; Fig. 3b). These zones were designed to minimise the residence time of the feed gas before it reached the catalyst surface (e.g. to reduce/avoid undesired MeOH pyrolysis). A residence time of ≤0.05 s was identified as desirable in this zone i.e. based on preliminary testing in tubular reactor. The dehydrogenation reaction initiates and proceeds through the catalyst bed (zone 4), where short residence times over Na2CO3 have been reported as positive (0.001–0.03 s).68 Catalyst particles are supported in the catalytic zone on a porous quartz glass frit (Porosity 2; 40–100 μm). In the post-catalytic zone (zone 5), a fast quenching of the reaction mixture is desired to suppress the secondary competing reactions of MeOH or the dissociation of FA to CO and H2. The ACCR applied in this study is designed with a high volumetric ratio between zone 1 and zone 5 where “feed-to-product” heat exchange occurs. The diameter of the catalyst capillary tube was selected to achieve (a) a minimal temperature gradient in the catalyst bed and (b) to avoid a pressure rise >250 mbar (evaluated using Ergun's eqn (S1†)) considering the highest flow rate possible from the feed gas mass flow controller MFC. The quartz glass jacket and inner tube are assembled together with the gas inlet/outlet tube using a metallic screw made from a brass nut and a threaded piece made of aluminium allowing easy access and fast catalyst loading/removal (Fig. S9†).
 Fig. 3  The annular counter current reactor (ACCR) designed as applied in this investigation – (a) temperature profile of ACCR during test with Na2CO3 catalyst (along the whole reactor capillary length 88 mm as shown in Fig. S9†); T = 690 °C, YMeOH = 5–6 vol%, QN2 = 1.3 nL min−1, GHSV = 15000 h−1 (b) schematic of ACCR with illustration of different zones. Zone 1, 2 and 3: pre-catalytic zones, Zone 4: catalyst bed, Zone 5: post-catalytic zone. (c) Section of the ACCR with the main dimensions in [mm] and flow directions. 
Regarding the ACCR temperature profile, the calculated temperature drop in the post catalytic zone is ca. 7.75 K mm−1 (Fig. 3a). Reported results using packed bed reactor, the same catalyst system and similar operating conditions indicate that a maximum post-catalytic temperature drop of ca. 1.7 K mm−1 is reached. Fast cooling after the catalyst bed is required to avoid post-catalytic dissociation of FA. This was successfully achieved using the ACCR.59
Concerning the tests procedure, N2 can be introduced to the saturator filled with MeOH using MFC. The desired MeOH concentration in the feed is controlled by setting the saturation temperature and by monitoring the total saturation pressure. The feed gas is introduced to the ACCR as heated by a programmable electrically heated oven (Fig. S9a†). The reaction product stream exits the reactor and is analysed online (i.e. through two GC and GA as previously discussed). Through a set of manual and magnetic valves feed and products can be analysed at different positions in the test stand.
Experimental results and discussion
As a control reaction, the endothermic dehydrogenation of MeOH was attempted through the ACCR without the use of the Na2CO3 catalyst. This was performed at GHSV = 15000 h−1 and was used as a basis for further tests. This “blank” reaction showed a UMeOH of 6–9% with no FA formation detected. Reference test was carried out over activated charcoal and showed activity towards MeOH conversion but rather selectivity towards CO than FA (UMeOH of 74% with 24% SFA). Under the same test conditions in the presence of the Na2CO3 catalyst showed selective MeOH conversion to FA (Fig. 4). An SFA of over 90% at UMeOH of 40% was achieved. During a single test the tendency of increasing selectivity with slight conversion reduction was observed (Fig. 4). This was also observed previously by Su et al., who explained that this trend is due to carbon formation (e.g. on the catalyst surface), which poisons the CO selective sites and enhances the rate limiting H2 spill-over reaction.59 Due to the very narrow feed and product concentration ranges, the standard deviations of the measured UMeOH, SFA and MeOH concentration (in vol%, calculated using GC analysis) were found to be in the range of 4.2, 4.4 and 20.6% respectively.
 Fig. 4  Initial exemplary test results of endothermic MeOH dehydrogenation over Na2CO3 at T = 690 °C (Dp = 800–630 μm; YMeOH = 5–6 vol%; QN2 = 1.65 nL min−1; GHSV = 15000 h−1). 
To investigate the longer term behaviour of the system, the experiment was repeated for a test run length of 60 h (Fig. 5). It was observed that with increasing time online, SFA continuously reduced while catalyst activity to MeOH conversion increased. Initial characterisation of the catalyst after a defined time “online” (e.g. 8 h), using scanning electron microscope (SEM) demonstrated that a significant catalyst structural change is observed (e.g. used vs. the original catalyst; Fig. S10†). The relationship between the changes in the catalyst physicochemical properties and its performance online are currently being evaluated and will be discussed further in a forthcoming article on this topic. What is clear at this point is that extended time online leads to the deposition of a “carbon” layer (e.g. as observed by a physical colour change), which may result in the blocking of catalytic sites favouring undesired side-reactions and/or the generation of additional sites that promote the dehydrogenation mechanism.
 Fig. 5  Duration test with consecutive start-up and shutdowns over Na2CO3 catalyst at basis test parameter; Dp = 800–630 μm; T = 690 °C; YMeOH = 5–6 vol%; QN2 = 1.65 nL min−1; GHSV = 15000 h−1. Test setup shutdown after single tests with duration of 6 to 8 h and start-up the next test day. 
Regarding the current work, the use of a Na2CO3 has shown selectivity for the endothermic dehydrogenation of MeOH to FA. The presented experimental results over this catalyst in a lab scale ACCR specially designed to meet this reaction system requirements, has demonstrated the potential to increase towards FA selectivity, e.g. with respect to other reactor types discussed in literature.43,44,59 However, the behaviour of the catalyst and the potential scaling up of this innovative reactor concept remain open questions which are under investigation. These initial results are however very promising regarding achieving the desired FA/MeOH mole ratio for the subsequent OME synthesis.
Hybrid model results and discussion
The presented process hybrid model allows the extraction, analysis and evaluation of all process streams and units. With the model results, different KPIs can be generated and evaluated extending understanding with regard to where further process improvements can be made. For the integrated process, the energy consumption in different process units was evaluated and the major process energy consumers were identified. Distillation equipment technical data were also generated. The overall process energy efficiency is evaluated and a summary of the major KPIs is given. Finally, with detailed energy consumption and utility requirements data provided by the hybrid process model, a simple production cost evaluation based on our previously reported simple cost evaluation method is provided.34
Material and energy balance
With the model implemented in CHEMCAD®, convergence of the whole flow sheet and performing the heat integration task, the material and energy balance for the described process are evaluated for the direct OME synthesis process based on endothermic MeOH dehydrogenation as illustrated in Table 2.
Table 2 Material stream table of the described direct OME process with the main representative streams as depicted in Fig. 2








Process feed
FA reactor feed
FA reactor product
OME reactor feed
Final product
SCDS 310
SCDS 315
SCDS 320
SCDS 325


Distil.
Bot.
Distil.
Bot.
Distil.
Bot.
Distil.
Bot.




Stream
Unit
201
205
206
306
336
311
330
319
316
326
324
331
340



ṁ

[t h−1]
5.4
95.7
95.7
22.4
4.3
6.3
16.1
3.4
2.9
1.8
0.5
4.3
2.1



T

[°C]
25
690
690
50
32
79
264
53
126
13
109
167
353



P

[bar]
2.2
1.6
1.6
3.1
1.0
1.5
2.0
1.0
1.9
1.0
1.6
1.0
1.0



w

i


[wt%]




























N2


0
25
25
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0


H2


0
0
0.26
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0


CO


0
69.1
69.6
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0


MeOH


100
5.8
1.8
8.5
0
2.7
0
4.9
0
24.6
1.5
0
0


FA


0
0
3.2
13.9
0
0.3
0
0.6
0
18.7
0
0
0


H2O


0
0
0
0
0
7.3
0
13.5
0
0
91.8
0
0


OME1


0
0
0
7.3
0
26.0
0
47.9
0
56.0
0
0
0


OME2


0
0
0
7.8
0
28.1
0
0.9
60.2
0.5
3.2
0
0


OME3–5


0
0
0
0.0
98.3
0
26.5
0
0
0
0
98.2
0.5


OMEn>5


0
0
0
9.6
0.1
0
13.3
0
0
0
0
0.1
18.1


HF1


0
0
0
9.7
0
34.4
0
32.3
36.9
0
3.3
0
0


MG1


0
0
0
0.4
1.6
1.3
0.4
0
2.8
0
0
1.7
0


HFn>1


0
0
0
23.6
0
0
32.7
0
0
0
0
0
44.7


MGn>1


0
0
0
19.3
0
0
26.9
0
0
0
0
0
36.6




The total heating load is supplied either from other process hot streams or externally using high pressure steam (80 bar, up to 295 °C, with 1437 kJ kg−1) or using natural gas (NG) for high temperature energy supply of the FA synthesis. The cooling load is supplied externally using cooling water at 25 °C (Cp = 4.2 kJ kg−1 K−1 and allowable T rise of 10 °C). Chilled water was used for cooling the condenser of distillation column (Unit – 314) and the electrical load required for this refrigeration task was evaluated using coefficient of performance with refrigeration cycle efficiency of 80%.69 The electricity supply resulting from pumping of process streams to account for process unit pressure drops or from the compression of the recycled N2/CO carrier gas stream is supplied externally. The energy and utility consumption of the heat integrated process are shown in Table 3 with the corresponding shares.
Table 3 Energy and utility consumption of the heat integrated OME3−5 production process




Unit
Duty [MWh a−1]
Utility
Share [%]
Relative share [MWh tOME3−5−1]


HP steam [kt a−1]
Cooling water [104 m3 a−1]
NG [MWh a−1]




HTXR


Heating
5477




5477
2.36
0.15


Cooling
16598


135


7.16
0.47


Distillation


Heating
80004
200




34.51
2.30


Cooling
76158


619


32.85
2.196


Reactors


Heating
25552




25552
11.02
0.73


Cooling
10085


82


4.35
0.29


Electricity


Pumps
16






0.01
0.00


Compressors
17924






7.73
0.51












100%






The heating of the feed gas to such high temperature (690 °C) represents one of the major energy consumption in the process (Fig. 6). The highest energy share is allocated by the reboiler of the first distillation column (Fig. 2 – Unit 310) where the OME reactor product is initially separated; this is due to the high flow rate of the stream entering this column. Also the reboiler duty of the column for the separation of H2O and OME2 separation (Fig. 2 – Unit 315) is consuming much energy due to the complexity of the separation task. Regarding the electricity consumption, the compression of the N2 carrier gas to recycle it is representing a significant process energy consumer. When the reaction can be operated at higher MeOH concentration in the feed, major energy savings can be achieved at the compressor side.
 Fig. 6  Breakdown of the energy consumption for the process units. 
A comparison of the external utilities supply before and after heat integration showed a reduction of the steam consumption by 16.1%, cooling water consumption by 30.4% and increase in the electricity consumption by 5.07% due to the increased pressure drop by installing more heat exchangers.
The separation of the final product from H2O and non-reactants or other OME fractions is cumbersome. The fact that H2O is a main by-product of the condensation reactions, which take place in the OME synthesis, sophisticates the separation task due to the very small boiling point difference between H2O, HF1 and OME2. Table 4 illustrates the operational conditions and summary of the distillation columns technical data.
Table 4 Distillation columns operational conditions and technical data




Unit
*LKC/HKC
LKC in distillate [wt%]
HKC in distillate [wt%]

n-stages
Feed stage

T
feed [°C]

T
distillate [°C]

T
bottom [°C]
Condenser specification
Reboiler specification


Reflux ratio
Bottom temp [°C]





*LKC: light key component; HKC: heavy key component.





SCDS 310
OME2/OME3
99.99
0.02
22
11
133
79
264
1
264.4


SCDS 315
H2O/OME2
100.00
1.77
80
23
115
53
126
4
126.4


SCDS 320
MeOH/H2O
98.93
<1
21
10
80
13
108
1
107.7


SCDS 325
OME5/OME6
94.29
0.00
41
20
264
174
354
7
353.5




Process energy efficiency
The energy efficiency relates the energy content of the final products to that of the feed and also accounts for the process energy Eprocess required performing the conversion of certain feed to a final product. For the considered process, three different energy efficiencies are evaluated. First, the thermal energy efficiency ηeff,th where only the heating load is considered as the Eprocess and accounting for OME3–5 as the only product. For the overall process energy efficiency ηeff,overall, the Eprocess accounts for the heating load and the electricity consumption. The last category is the overall energy efficiency  considering the side products H2 and CO and the Eprocess constituting of the heat and electricity. A generic equation for calculating the energy efficiency can be written as follows: (19)where ηeff is process efficiency, ṁi is the mass flow rate of component i, LHVi is the lower heating value of component i and Eprocess is the energy consumption in the process as previously defined. Thermochemical properties required for process energy evaluation are given elsewhere.10,70
The evaluated process energy efficiency  based on the hybrid model results is 71.7%. With MeOH as the starting material, the described process efficiency is ca. 25% higher than the state of the art process in China with overall process efficiency of 45%.71 Also the process presented by Schmitz et al. based on TRI/OME1 synthesis route was evaluated at 52.6% overall efficiency which is significantly less than the direct synthesis process efficiency described in this work.67
Key performance indicators
From the results of the hybrid process model, several process material and energy streams are determined. From these figures process characteristic KPIs are defined (Table 5). A very important process characteristic is the overall process yield where the raw material cost is a major component of the OME production cost (Fig. 7). This indicator illustrates the potential of process enhancement regarding selective synthesis steps and minimizing target product losses in the separation steps. With 80.3% MeOH to OME3–5 product yield, the process represents a selective route in comparison with the process described by Schmitz et al. (considering OME3–6 while here only OME3–5 are considered).67,68 Figures as recycle ratio reflects on the CAPEX of the reaction equipment and the OPEX due to the electrical power consumed for recycling. Specific energy and utility consumption figures reflect on the process energy efficiency. The evaluated energy efficiency is significantly higher than literature investigated processes as aforementioned.
Table 5 Technological indicators for the production of OME3−5 from MeOH




Technological indicators


Material balance
[t a−1]
[t tOME3−5−1]




Inlet MeOH
43211.5
1.246


Outlet CO
2563.2
0.07


Outlet H2
2029.2
0.06


Outlet H2O
3948.4
0.11






[g g−1product]


Outlet OME3–5
34687.9
OME3: 0.38


OME4: 0.33


OME5: 0.27


Overall yield [g g−1]
[OME3–5/MeOH]
80.3%


R1 yield [g g−1]
[FA/MeOH]
57.2%


R1 feed ratio [mol mol−1]
[FA/MeOH]
1.9


R2 yield [g g−1]
[MeOH/OME3–5]
0.45


Recycle ratio R2
[gOME3−5,product grecycled−1]
0.25


Energy balance
[kt a−1]
[MWh tOME3–5−1]


Steam consumption
200.4
2.31


Natural gas


0.89


Electricity


0.53



η
eff,th



53.9%



η
eff,overall



51.2%







71.7%


Economic indicators


CAPEX
33424298.22 US$




OPEX
[US$ per a]
[US$ per tOME3−5]


VCP
23532361.04
678.4 (69.8%)


FCP
9474968.00
273.1 (30.2%)


Total
33007329.04
951.5




 Fig. 7  OPEX break down for the OME direct synthesis. VCP composed of (1) raw materials: MeOH and N2; (2) energy cost: steam HP, natural gas, cooling water, electricity. FCP composed of: personnel, overhead costs, investment capital with 10 years depreciation period and 3% interest on capital investment, maintenance and reparation, taxes and insurance and miscellaneous costs. 
A simple cost evaluation was done based on the method discussed in our previous work.34 In this basic evaluation, the capital costs (CAPEX) and the operational costs (OPEX) (constitutes mainly of variable cost of production (VCP) and fixed cost of production (FCP)) are evaluated as follows. Regarding CAPEX, a capital investment of 1000 kt annual capacity plant which was used by Schmitz et al. was adopted in this work.67 To adjust the CAPEX to the considered capacity in this work, a power law with a capacity factor, also called six-tenths rule due to the regression coefficient of 0.6 was used. For the OPEX, VCP are basically MeOH raw material cost (354 US$ per t, Methanex.org, 01/10/2017 until 31/12/2017) and the process energy cost. The former is provided by the material balance while the latter is calculated from the process energy demand as evaluated in this work. The process energy is supplied by high pressure steam (24 US$ per t),72 natural gas (0.03 US$ per kWh),73 cooling water (0.04 US$ per m3)74 and electricity (0.08 US$ per kWh).75 The FCP are evaluated using a factorial method as discussed previously by Baerens.57
A breakdown of the OPEX is depicted in Fig. 7. Increasing the production capacity significantly enhance the production cost of OME due to the non-linear relation of CAPEX and production capacity. For OME3–5 annual production capacity of 1000 kt, the production cost of the described process is 598.7 US$ per t (at MeOH feed cost of 300 US$ per t, which was considered by Schmitz et al.67 for evaluating same production capacity). Also the MeOH feed cost has a major impact on the OME product cost (i.e. a 47% share as shown in Fig. 7). With MeOH costs at 300 US$ per t the OME production cost is 882.79 US$ per t (at 35 kt per annum) with a breakeven point with diesel production cost (at a price of crude oil of ca. 83 US$ per barrel67) at MeOH feed cost of 126 US$ per t. Important to be noted that the CAPEX in this investigation is derived from rather a complicated synthesis technology, with more detailed CAPEX evaluation for the described process, OME production cost can be considerably reduced.
Another significant production cost enhancement potential is the synergy potential of coupling the OME synthesis plant with the MeOH synthesis plant; a case under investigation using the hybrid model which preliminary shows energy saving potential. The MeOH plant distillation unit and the OME reactor are operating at close T levels with integration potential. Same integration effect is possible considering the MeOH synthesis reactor and OME product work up units. The by-products H2 and CO of the OME synthesis are also a suitable feed for the MeOH synthesis.
One of the main process energy consuming steps is the feed heating for MeOH dehydrogenation reactor unit operated at ca. 700 °C. This feed stream consists mainly of carrier gas N2 and CO (>90 vol%) where the major heating energy shares is consumed for the enthalpy rise of the inert carrier gas. Additionally to the change in thermal energy demand the electricity demand of the compressor is influenced significantly, which is directly reflected on the costs for electricity. Therefore, research and development for new catalyst system for selective FA synthesis with higher MeOH concentrations in the feed can enhance the process energy efficiency and the production cost (Fig. 8). Increasing MeOH concentration up to 20 vol%, a production cost reduction of ca. 4.6% and synthesis efficiency of ca. 2.8% increase are potential.
 Fig. 8  Effect of MeOH feed concentration on the process energy efficiency and the production cost of OME3–5. 
For the MeOH dehydrogenation step the high temperature energy required is supplied by natural gas. One of the synergies that can significantly enhance the presented OME synthesis process is coupling the synthesis plant with industries where high temperature waste heat might be available. A concept being considered in the steel industry from steel mill exhaust gas valorisation perspective and also from the energy integration perspective.76 Considering this integration can supply the high T energy needed for the feed preparation for the endothermic MeOH dehydrogenation, the process energy efficiency significantly increases by 6.6% to reach 78.3%.
The water management and separation from the desired OME product is challenging and indeed energy consuming in this synthesis concept. The distillation apparatus for water separation from the product mixture represent a major energy consumption share (19.6% of the total heat energy consumption). As previously mentioned, other R&D contributions are investigating several water separation alternatives than the energy consuming distillation. With the developed tool and considering an adsorption based water separation alternative as described by Schmitz et al.,35 the potential of this solution is identified. Assuming two scenarios were the adsorption unit requires 50% and 20% of the distillation unit reboiler heat duty, the energy efficiency and the production cost calculated are 74% and 932.7 US$ per t for the former case and 75.3% and 921.5 US$ per t for the latter.
Conclusions
A “direct” OME synthesis based on the endothermic dehydrogenation of MeOH as the only feed is presented. In the described process presented in this paper, MeOH undergoes selective catalytic dehydrogenation at high temperatures to yield FA and H2. The non-converted MeOH and produced anhydrous FA are converted directly with high yield to the desired OME3–5. The described process was implemented in a hybrid simulation model where own developed reactor models using Matlab® are coupled with process units in the commercial software CHEMCAD®. A global kinetic reactor model based on experimental and literature data was developed in Matlab® for describing the anhydrous FA synthesis reactor. The OME synthesis reactor was described also in Matlab® using a Gibbs minimisation approach for multicomponent reaction equilibrium. The interface between the two platforms was implemented using an Excel® unit in CHEMCAD® software in which a VBA node can open, run and call the results from the Matlab® platform. With all process units implemented and after the hybrid model convergence in CHEMCAD®, a heat integration was conducted using the software PinCH 2.0 with maximum process heat recovery as the objective function. The process flow diagram was subsequently updated in CHEMCAD® and the convergence was repeated accordingly.
Due to its importance in the overall process scheme, endothermic dehydrogenation of MeOH over a Na2CO3 catalyst was also experimentally investigated in a specially developed reactor (ACCR) to meet the described reaction system prerequisites. At low MeOH concentrations in the feed (<10 vol%), FA selectivity of 90% with MeOH conversion of 40% were reached at 690 °C. However, the behaviour of this catalyst under the applied conditions is still under investigation and will be discussed further in a forthcoming publication. Nonetheless, given its abundance and indeed low relative price, the use of the Na2CO3 catalyst systems represents a promising basis for further development, although further investigations are still required.
The process energy integration in the hybrid model was also evaluated. The material streams and energy duties were extracted and used to define the process KPIs. An overall process OME3–5 yield of 80.3 wt% was calculated which is almost 10% higher than the current state of the art process (e.g. in China). From the computed heating duties and electricity consumption the process overall energy efficiency was calculated as 71.7% with 200.4 kt per annum steam consumption and 18.4 GWh annual electricity consumption. The energy integration task led to reduction of the steam consumption by 16.1% less than the non-heat integrated process. The working up of the product stream was done in four distillation units implemented as rigorous columns in CHEMCAD®. The technical characteristics of the columns were given which showed the complexity of the water separation column representing 19.6% share of the total process thermal energy consumption. This emphasizes that new innovative water management solutions are essential for enhancing the OME synthesis chain technical and economic performance.
A basic production cost model was applied where the following are the main results of this evaluation:
• OME3–5 production cost of the 35 kt per annum facility was calculated as 951.5 US$ per t.
• The main cost influencing components are the MeOH feed cost with 47% of the production cost share, the energy cost with 22.13% share and the production capacity.
• At high annual production capacity of 1000 kt, the production cost per tonne OME3–5 was evaluated at 598.7 US$.
Several scenarios where also considered with the aim to enhance the described process economics from which:
• Catalyst developments for the endothermic MeOH dehydrogenation reaction to operate at higher concentrations showed significant energy efficiency and production cost improvement. A production cost reduction of 5.9% was calculated with increasing the MeOH feed concentration from 5 to 50 vol%.
• Coupling the existing technology with high temperature industries (e.g. steel production facilities) could lead to significant production cost reductions with 6.6% process overall energy efficiency enhancement potential.
• Further process improvements could relate to separation of H2O from the OME product mixture, for example using adsorption technology rather than distillation, whilst increasing the MeOH concentration in the feed to 20 vol% based on a MeOH feed price of 300 US$ per t, would result in a production cost of 820.3 US$ per t OME3–5 (with process energy efficiency of 76.9%).
The production cost evaluated in this investigation might not show direct competitiveness for OME in the fuel market. However, it is based on small production capacity and relatively conservative evaluation conditions. On the other hand the considered production capacity and cost could be attractive for OME as a solvent or for other applications in the chemical industry.
In conclusion, the developed hybrid process model is capable of robust process technical and preliminary economic metrics evaluation once the process is correctly defined. For more detailed process evaluation the following improvements are to be considered. Regarding the anhydrous FA synthesis, saturating the MeOH feed in circulating gas (consisting of CO and H2 as described by Schweers et al.66), including the absorption model of this product in the recycle stream and more detailed kinetic description of the catalytic reaction are important improvements. Also, the so far ideally considered separation of N2, CO and H2 is to be further investigated in more detail. On the OME synthesis block side, improving the physical and thermodynamic property models for the HFn and MGn can allow more detailed reactive distillation modelling. Furthermore, improving the developed OME reaction equilibrium model towards kinetic modelling is a foreseen enhancement for detailed reactor sizing and costing. An exact process unit operations sizing and CAPEX evaluation for the specific described process and implementing the costing model in the hybrid model are under development for improved process description.
Funding sources
The “Sustainable Catalytic Materials” group at Fraunhofer ISE would like to acknowledge funding through the “Leistungszentrum Nachhaltigkeit Freiburg” and the pilot project “HyCO2”. RJW would also like to acknowledge funding provided by the Fraunhofer Society and the Fraunhofer ISE via the granting of an “Attract Award”.
Nomenclature
Abbreviations

AbbreviationsFull Name
ACCRAnnular counter current reactor
EGRExhaust gas recycle
FAFormaldehyde
GAGas analyser
GCGas chromatograph
GHGEGreen house gas emissions
HFPolyoxymethylene hemiformals
LHVLower heating value
CH3OH/MeOHMethanol
MFCMass flow controller
MGPolyoxymethylene glycols
NOxNitrous oxides
OME/POMDEPolyoxymethylene dimethyl ethers
OMEnOME of chain length n
pFAPara formaldehyde
PMParticulate matter
SGOStochastic global optimizer
TCDThermal conductivity detectors
VBAVisual Basics for Applications
SEMScanning electron microscope

Symbols and indices

Symbol or IndiceName

C

A

Concentration of component A

C
p
Heat capacity

γ

i

Activity coefficient of component i

E
Energy

G
f
Gibbs free energy of formation

G
t
Gibbs free energy

η
Efficiency
ΔHREnthalpy of reaction

K
eq.
Equilibrium constant

K

j

Reaction rate constant of reaction j

m

i

Mass of component i

n
Order of the reaction

N
Number of species present in the reacting mixture

n

i

Molar amount of component i

P
Pressure

r

j

Reaction rate of reaction j

R
Gas constant

T
Temperature

t
Time

τ
Residence time

V
Volume


Volume flow

w

i

Mass fraction of component i

X

i

Molar fraction of component i in the liquid phase

U
MeOH
Methanol conversion

S
FA
Formaldehyde selectivity

Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
A special acknowledgement is made to Max Hadrich and Charlotte Wentzler for their contributions to this work. Also thanks are made to Samuel Fehr (Working group: Prof. Dr. Ingo Krossing) from Freiburg Material Research center FMF, University of Freiburg for supplying the Na2CO3 catalyst used in this investigation.
References

CO2 to Fuels – Chemical Perspectives: 193–264, 37, ed. R. Schlögl, Internationales Wiener Motorensymposium, Vienna,  2016 Search PubMed .
R. Schlögl, Angew. Chem., 2017, 129(37), 11164 CrossRef .
E. Jacob and W. Maus, MTZ Worldw., 2017, 78(3), 52 CrossRef .

          European Commission, White paper: Roadmap to a Single European Transport Area - Towards a competitive and resource efficient, Brussels, Belgium,  2011 Search PubMed .
O. Deutschmann and J.-D. Grunwaldt, Chem. Ing. Tech., 2013, 85(5), 595 CrossRef .
B. Niethammer, S. Wodarz, M. Betz, P. Haltenort, D. Oestreich, K. Hackbarth, U. Arnold, T. Otto and J. Sauer, Chem. Ing. Tech., 2018, 90(1–2), 99 CrossRef .

          Bundesministerium für Verkehr and Bau und Stadtentwicklung, The Mobility and Fuels Strategy of the german government (MFS): New pathways for energy,  2013 Search PubMed .
S. Schemme, R. C. Samsun, R. Peters and D. Stolten, Fuel, 2017, 205, 198 CrossRef .

          M. Bertau and F. Asinger, Methanol: The basic chemical and energy feedstock of the future Asinger's vision today, Springer, Heidelberg,  2014 Search PubMed .
M. Härtl, K. Gaukel, D. Pélerin and G. Wachtmeister, MTZ Worldwide, 2017, 78(2), 52 CrossRef .
P. Haltenort, K. Hackbarth, D. Oestreich, L. Lautenschütz, U. Arnold and J. Sauer, Catal. Commun., 2018, 109, 80 CrossRef .
L. Lautenschütz, D. Oestreich, P. Seidenspinner, U. Arnold, E. Dinjus and J. Sauer, Fuel, 2016, 173, 129 CrossRef .

Synthetic Fuels–OME1: A Potentially Sustainable Diesel Fuel: 325–347, 35, ed. E. Jacob and W. Maus, Wiener Motorensymposium, Vienna,  2014 Search PubMed .
G. Richter and H. Zellbeck, Motortech. Z., 2017, 78(12), 66 CrossRef .
H. Liu, Z. Wang, J. Wang, X. He, Y. Zheng, Q. Tang and J. Wang, Energy, 2015, 88, 793 CrossRef .
J. Liu, H. Wang, Y. Li, Z. Zheng, Z. Xue, H. Shang and M. Yao, Fuel, 2016, 177, 206 CrossRef .

          M. Bohner, R. Fischer and R. Gscheidle, Fachkunde Kraftfahrzeugtechnik, Verl. Europa-Lehrmittel Nourney, Vollmer, Haan-Gruiten,  2001 Search PubMed .
A. Feiling, M. Münz and C. Beidl, Springer Fachmedien Wiesbaden ATZextra Worldwide, 2016, 21(11), 16 CrossRef .

The Fuel OME2: An Example to Pave the Way to Emission-NeutralVehicles with Internal Combustion Engine: 224–252, 37, ed. M. Härtl and E. Jacob, Internationales Wiener Motorensymposium, Vienna,  2016 Search PubMed .
M. Härtl, P. Seidenspinner, E. Jacob and G. Wachtmeister, Fuel, 2015, 153, 328 CrossRef .
S. E. Iannuzzi, C. Barro, K. Boulouchos and J. Burger, Fuel, 2016, 167, 49 CrossRef .
W. Sun, G. Wang, S. Li, R. Zhang, B. Yang, J. Yang, Y. Li, C. K. Westbrook and C. K. Law, Proc. Combust. Inst., 2016, 1269–1278 Search PubMed .
L. Tong, H. Wang, Z. Zheng, R. Reitz and M. Yao, Fuel, 2016, 181, 878 CrossRef .

          K. D. Vertin, J. M. Ohi, D. W. Naegeli, K. H. Childress, G. P. Hagen, C. I. McCarthy, A. S. Cheng and R. W. Dibble in International Fuels & Lubricants Meeting & Exposition, SAE International, 400 Commonwealth Drive, Warrendale, PA, United States,  1999 Search PubMed .
H. Yang, X. Li, Y. Wang, M. Mu, X. Li and G. Kou, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 37611 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Yang, X. Li, Y. Wang, M. Mu, X. Li and G. Kou, Aerosol Air Qual. Res., 2016, 16(10), 2560 CrossRef .
W. Sun, G. Wang, S. Li, R. Zhang, B. Yang, J. Yang, Y. Li, C. K. Westbrook and C. K. Law, Proc. Combust. Inst., 2017, 36(1), 1269 CrossRef .
J. Liu, H. Shang, H. Wang, Z. Zheng, Q. Wang, Z. Xue and M. Yao, Fuel, 2017, 193, 101 CrossRef .

          L. P. Lautenschütz, Neue Erkenntnisse in der Syntheseoptimierung oligomerer Oxymethylendimethylether aus Dimethoxymethan und Trioxan, PhD, Inaugural-Dissertation, Ruprecht-Karls-Universität Heidelberg,  2015 Search PubMed .
C. J. Baranowski, A. M. Bahmanpour and O. Kröcher, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 217, 407 CrossRef .
M. Schappals, T. Breug-Nissen, K. Langenbach, J. Burger and H. Hasse, J. Chem. Eng. Data, 2017, 4027–4031 CrossRef .
J. Burger, E. Ströfer and H. Hasse, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2012, 51(39), 12751 CrossRef .
Y. Zhao, Z. Xu, H. Chen, Y. Fu and J. Shen, J. Energy Chem., 2013, 22(6), 833 CrossRef .
M. Ouda, F. K. Mantei, M. Elmehlawy, R. J. White, H. Klein and S.-E. K. Fateen, React. Chem. Eng., 2018, 534(7609), 631 Search PubMed .
N. Schmitz, E. Ströfer, J. Burger and H. Hasse, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2017, 56(40), 11519 CrossRef .
D. Oestreich, L. Lautenschütz, U. Arnold and J. Sauer, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2017, 163, 92 CrossRef .
N. Schmitz, J. Burger and H. Hasse, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2015, 54(50), 12553 CrossRef .
N. Schmitz, F. Homberg, J. Berje, J. Burger and H. Hasse, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2015, 54(25), 6409 CrossRef .
J. Zhang, D. Fang and D. Liu, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2014, 53(35), 13589 CrossRef .
J. Zhang, M. Shi, D. Fang and D. Liu, React. Kinet., Mech. Catal., 2014, 113(2), 459 CrossRef .
M. Ouda, G. Yarce, R. J. White, M. Hadrich, D. Himmel, A. Schaadt, H. Klein, E. Jacob and I. Krossing, React. Chem. Eng., 2017, 2(1), 50 RSC .

          U. Arnold, L. Lautenschutz, D. Oestreich and J. Sauer, Verfahren zur Herstellung von Oxymethylenethern und deren Verwendung, EP2987781,  2015 Search PubMed .
S. Su, P. Zaza and A. Renken, Chem. Eng. Technol., 1994, 17(1), 34 CrossRef .
J. Sauer and G. Eming, Chem. Eng. Technol., 1995, 18, 284 CrossRef .

          G. Reuss, W. Disteldorf, A. O. Gamer and A. Hilt in Ullmann's Encyclopedia of Industrial Chemistry, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, Germany,  2000 Search PubMed .

          J. Burger, A novel process for the production of diesel fuel additives by hierarchical design, Techn. Univ, Kaiserslautern,  2012 Search PubMed .
J. Burger, E. Ströfer and H. Hasse, Chem. Eng. Res. Des., 2013, 91(12), 2648 CrossRef .
M. Albert, B. Coto García, C. Kuhnert, R. Peschla and G. Maurer, AIChE J., 2000, 46(8), 1676 CrossRef .
C. Kuhnert, M. Albert, S. Breyer, I. Hahnenstein, H. Hasse and G. Maurer, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2006, 45(14), 5155 CrossRef .
N. Schmitz, A. Friebel, E. von Harbou, J. Burger and H. Hasse, Fluid Phase Equilib., 2016, 425, 127 CrossRef .
I. Hahnenstein, M. Albert, H. Hasse, C. G. Kreiter and G. Maurer, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 1995, 34(2), 440 CrossRef .
M. Albert, I. Hahnenstein, H. Hasse and G. Maurer, AIChE J., 1996, 42(6), 1741 CrossRef .
Y.-Q. Liu, H. Hasse and G. Maurer, AIChE J., 1992, 38(11), 1693 CrossRef .
H. Du, J. Li, J. Zhang, G. Su, X. Li and Y. Zhao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115(47), 23261 CrossRef .

          H. Kister, Distillation Design, McGraw-Hill Education,  1992 Search PubMed .

          E. Henley and J. Seader, Equilibrium-stage separation operations in chemical, John Wiley and Sons Ltd,  1981 Search PubMed .

Rules of thumb for chemical engineers, ed. C. Branan, Elsevier,  2002 Search PubMed .
M. Albert, I. Hahnenstein, H. Hasse and G. Maurer, AIChE J., 1996, 42(6), 1741 CrossRef .

          S. Su, Catalytic dehydrogenation of methanol to formaldehyde on sodium carbonate, PhD, Dissertation,  1991 Search PubMed .

          Fogler, Elements of chemical reaction engineering, Prentice-Hall of India,  2004 Search PubMed .
L. M. Naphtali and D. P. Sandholm, AIChE J., 1971, 17(1), 148 CrossRef .

          L. Weise and D. Seidl, Shortcut simulation Search PubMed.

          G. Towler and R. Sinnott in Chemical Engineering Design, Elsevier,  2013, p. 1047 Search PubMed .

CHEMCAD Version 6: SpringerReference, User Guide, Springer-Verlag, Berlin/Heidelberg,  2011 Search PubMed .

          J. F. Walker, Formaldehyde, Reinhold Publ. Corp, New York,  1964 Search PubMed .

          E. Schweers, T. Kaiser, M. Haubs and M. Rosenberg, Apparatus for the preparation of Formaldehyde from Methanol, US006472566B2,  2002 Search PubMed .
N. Schmitz, J. Burger, E. Ströfer and H. Hasse, Fuel, 2016, 185, 67 CrossRef .
S. Su, M. R. Prairie and A. Renken, Appl. Catal., A, 1992, 91, 131 CrossRef .

          G. Towler and R. Sinnott in Chemical Engineering Design, Butterworth-Heinemann, Boston, 2nd edn,  2013, p. 103 Search PubMed .
L. Lautenschütz, D. Oestreich, P. Seidenspinner, U. Arnold, E. Dinjus and J. Sauer, Fuel, 2016, 173, 129 CrossRef .

          H. Shang, Z. Hong, Z. YE, J. Xiang and Z. Xue, Method for producing polyoxymethylene dimethyl ethers from feedstock of concentrated formaldehyde, US20160168307A1,  2016 Search PubMed .

          M. Baerns, A. Behr, A. Brehm, J. Gmehling, H. Hofmann, U. Onken, A. Renken, K.-O. Hinrichsen and R. Palkovits, Technische Chemie, Wiley-VCH-Verl., Weinheim,  2013 Search PubMed .

          http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php/File:Natural_gas_prices_for_industrial_consumers,_second_half_2016_%28EUR_per_kWh%29_YB17.png (last accessed March  2018) .

          https://www.thuenen.de/media/ti-themenfelder/Nachwachsende_Rohstoffe/Bioraffinerie/Pilotprojekt_Lignocellulose_Bioraffinerie_Schlussbericht.pdf (last accessed March  2018) .

          http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/tgm/refreshTableAction.do;jsessionid=PFQ0ll_JhIhX0p9NIV3oixTQdNVmcuO6MsiUY79AVpd47XuQ45vh!-800505858?tab=table&plugin=1&pcode=ten00117&language=en (last accessed March  2018) .
M. Oles, W. Lüke, R. Kleinschmidt, K. Büker, H.-J. Weddige, P. Schmöle and R. Achatz, Chem. Ing. Tech., 2018, 90(1–2), 169 CrossRef .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental results for equilibrium constant evaluation for Na2CO3 catalyst; kinetic model results for endothermic selective MeOH dehydrogenation to FA reaction over Na2CO3 catalyst; chemical equilibrium composition using different reaction models; results and HEN from PinCH 2.0; process flow diagram of the test stand for endothermic MeOH catalytic dehydrogenation to FA; Ergun's equation for pressure drop evaluation in ACCR; photographs of the ACCR with relative dimensions; Na2CO3 catalyst characterization. See DOI: 10.1039/c8re00100fThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Hybrid process model flow diagram as implemented in CHEMCAD®.	 
CH3OH ⇌ CH2O + H2 ΔH298R = +85kJmol−1	(1)
CH3OH ⇌ CO + 2H2  ΔH298R = +105kJmol−1	(2)
CH3OH ⇌ C + H2O + H2  ΔH298R = −31kJmol−1	(3)
CH3OH + CH2O ⇌ HO(CH2O)CH3 (HF1)	(4)
HO(CH2O)n−1CH3 + CH2O ⇌ HO(CH2O)nCH3 (HFn)	(5)
CH3OH + HO(CH2O)CH3 ⇌ CH3O(CH2O)CH3 + H2O (OME1)	(6)
CH3O(CH2O)n−1CH3 + CH2O ⇌ CH3O(CH2O)nCH3 (OMEn)	(7)
H2O + CH2O ⇌ HO(CH2O)H (MG1)	(8)
HO(CH2O)n−1H + CH2O ⇌ HO(CH2O)nH (MGn)	(9)
	(10)
	(11)
	(12)

1	1	6.94	
C

A
 = CA0e−kτCA
2	0	0.291	
C

A
 = Kτ + CA0
3	1	0.000066	
C

A
 = CA0e−kτ
−∑ rj = k1CA + k2 + k3CA	(13)
	(14)
	(15)

 	Fig. 2  Hybrid simulation platform for the production of OME3–5 from MeOH via FA in CHEMCAD®, heat integrated using PinCH 2.0.	 
	(16)
	(17)
	(18)

 	Fig. 3  The annular counter current reactor (ACCR) designed as applied in this investigation – (a) temperature profile of ACCR during test with Na2CO3 catalyst (along the whole reactor capillary length 88 mm as shown in Fig. S9†); T = 690 °C, YMeOH = 5–6 vol%, QN2 = 1.3 nL min−1, GHSV = 15000 h−1 (b) schematic of ACCR with illustration of different zones. Zone 1, 2 and 3: pre-catalytic zones, Zone 4: catalyst bed, Zone 5: post-catalytic zone. (c) Section of the ACCR with the main dimensions in [mm] and flow directions.	 

 	Fig. 4  Initial exemplary test results of endothermic MeOH dehydrogenation over Na2CO3 at T = 690 °C (Dp = 800–630 μm; YMeOH = 5–6 vol%; QN2 = 1.65 nL min−1; GHSV = 15000 h−1).	 

 	Fig. 5  Duration test with consecutive start-up and shutdowns over Na2CO3 catalyst at basis test parameter; Dp = 800–630 μm; T = 690 °C; YMeOH = 5–6 vol%; QN2 = 1.65 nL min−1; GHSV = 15000 h−1. Test setup shutdown after single tests with duration of 6 to 8 h and start-up the next test day.	 


Stream	Unit	201	205	206	306	336	311	330	319	316	326	324	331	340

ṁ
	[t h−1]	5.4	95.7	95.7	22.4	4.3	6.3	16.1	3.4	2.9	1.8	0.5	4.3	2.1

T
	[°C]	25	690	690	50	32	79	264	53	126	13	109	167	353

P
	[bar]	2.2	1.6	1.6	3.1	1.0	1.5	2.0	1.0	1.9	1.0	1.6	1.0	1.0

w

i

	[wt%]	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	

N2	
	0	25	25	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
H2	
	0	0	0.26	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
CO	
	0	69.1	69.6	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
MeOH	
	100	5.8	1.8	8.5	0	2.7	0	4.9	0	24.6	1.5	0	0
FA	
	0	0	3.2	13.9	0	0.3	0	0.6	0	18.7	0	0	0
H2O	
	0	0	0	0	0	7.3	0	13.5	0	0	91.8	0	0
OME1	
	0	0	0	7.3	0	26.0	0	47.9	0	56.0	0	0	0
OME2	
	0	0	0	7.8	0	28.1	0	0.9	60.2	0.5	3.2	0	0
OME3–5	
	0	0	0	0.0	98.3	0	26.5	0	0	0	0	98.2	0.5
OMEn>5	
	0	0	0	9.6	0.1	0	13.3	0	0	0	0	0.1	18.1
HF1	
	0	0	0	9.7	0	34.4	0	32.3	36.9	0	3.3	0	0
MG1	
	0	0	0	0.4	1.6	1.3	0.4	0	2.8	0	0	1.7	0
HFn>1	
	0	0	0	23.6	0	0	32.7	0	0	0	0	0	44.7
MGn>1	
	0	0	0	19.3	0	0	26.9	0	0	0	0	0	36.6


HTXR
Heating	5477	
	
	5477	2.36	0.15
Cooling	16598	
	135	
	7.16	0.47
Distillation
Heating	80004	200	
	
	34.51	2.30
Cooling	76158	
	619	
	32.85	2.196
Reactors
Heating	25552	
	
	25552	11.02	0.73
Cooling	10085	
	82	
	4.35	0.29
Electricity
Pumps	16	
	
	
	0.01	0.00
Compressors	17924	
	
	
	7.73	0.51

	
	
	
	
	100%	


 	Fig. 6  Breakdown of the energy consumption for the process units.	 



SCDS 310	OME2/OME3	99.99	0.02	22	11	133	79	264	1	264.4
SCDS 315	H2O/OME2	100.00	1.77	80	23	115	53	126	4	126.4
SCDS 320	MeOH/H2O	98.93	<1	21	10	80	13	108	1	107.7
SCDS 325	OME5/OME6	94.29	0.00	41	20	264	174	354	7	353.5
	(19)


Inlet MeOH	43211.5	1.246
Outlet CO	2563.2	0.07
Outlet H2	2029.2	0.06
Outlet H2O	3948.4	0.11

	
	[g g−1product]
Outlet OME3–5	34687.9	OME3: 0.38
OME4: 0.33
OME5: 0.27
Overall yield [g g−1]	[OME3–5/MeOH]	80.3%
R1 yield [g g−1]	[FA/MeOH]	57.2%
R1 feed ratio [mol mol−1]	[FA/MeOH]	1.9
R2 yield [g g−1]	[MeOH/OME3–5]	0.45
Recycle ratio R2	[gOME3−5,product grecycled−1]	0.25
Energy balance	[kt a−1]	[MWh tOME3–5−1]
Steam consumption	200.4	2.31
Natural gas	
	0.89
Electricity	
	0.53

η
eff,th
	
	53.9%

η
eff,overall
	
	51.2%


	
	71.7%
Economic indicators
CAPEX	33424298.22 US$	

OPEX	[US$ per a]	[US$ per tOME3−5]
VCP	23532361.04	678.4 (69.8%)
FCP	9474968.00	273.1 (30.2%)
Total	33007329.04	951.5

 	Fig. 7  OPEX break down for the OME direct synthesis. VCP composed of (1) raw materials: MeOH and N2; (2) energy cost: steam HP, natural gas, cooling water, electricity. FCP composed of: personnel, overhead costs, investment capital with 10 years depreciation period and 3% interest on capital investment, maintenance and reparation, taxes and insurance and miscellaneous costs.	 

 	Fig. 8  Effect of MeOH feed concentration on the process energy efficiency and the production cost of OME3–5.	 
Abbreviations	Full Name
ACCR	Annular counter current reactor
EGR	Exhaust gas recycle
FA	Formaldehyde
GA	Gas analyser
GC	Gas chromatograph
GHGE	Green house gas emissions
HF	Polyoxymethylene hemiformals
LHV	Lower heating value
CH3OH/MeOH	Methanol
MFC	Mass flow controller
MG	Polyoxymethylene glycols
NOx	Nitrous oxides
OME/POMDE	Polyoxymethylene dimethyl ethers
OMEn	OME of chain length n
pFA	Para formaldehyde
PM	Particulate matter
SGO	Stochastic global optimizer
TCD	Thermal conductivity detectors
VBA	Visual Basics for Applications
SEM	Scanning electron microscope
Symbol or Indice	Name

C

A

	Concentration of component A

C
p
	Heat capacity

γ

i

	Activity coefficient of component i

E
	Energy

G
f
	Gibbs free energy of formation

G
t
	Gibbs free energy

η
	Efficiency
ΔHR	Enthalpy of reaction

K
eq.
	Equilibrium constant

K

j

	Reaction rate constant of reaction j

m

i

	Mass of component i

n
	Order of the reaction

N
	Number of species present in the reacting mixture

n

i

	Molar amount of component i

P
	Pressure

r

j

	Reaction rate of reaction j

R
	Gas constant

T
	Temperature

t
	Time

τ
	Residence time

V
	Volume


	Volume flow

w

i

	Mass fraction of component i

X

i

	Molar fraction of component i in the liquid phase

U
MeOH
	Methanol conversion

S
FA
	Formaldehyde selectivity
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental results for equilibrium constant evaluation for Na2CO3 catalyst; kinetic model results for endothermic selective MeOH dehydrogenation to FA reaction over Na2CO3 catalyst; chemical equilibrium composition using different reaction models; results and HEN from PinCH 2.0; process flow diagram of the test stand for endothermic MeOH catalytic dehydrogenation to FA; Ergun's equation for pressure drop evaluation in ACCR; photographs of the ACCR with relative dimensions; Na2CO3 catalyst characterization. See DOI: 10.1039/c8re00100f

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
