Nanomaterials as multimodal photothermal agents (PTAs) against ‘Superbugs’  - Journal of Materials Chemistry B (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2TB02396B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2TB02396B
(Perspective)
J. Mater. Chem. B, 2023, 11, 2287-2306Nanomaterials as multimodal photothermal agents (PTAs) against ‘Superbugs’

        
          
            Shubham 
            Roy
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jhilik 
            Roy
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Bing 
            Guo
          
          
        
      *a
aShenzhen Key Laboratory of Flexible Printed Electronics Technology and School of Science, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen 518055, China. E-mail: guobing2020@hit.edu.cn
bDepartment of Physics, Jadavpur University, Kolkata 700032, India
Received 
      2nd November 2022
    , Accepted 9th February 2023First published on 10th February 2023AbstractSuperbugs, also known as multidrug-resistant bacteria, have become a lethal and persistent threat due to their unresponsiveness toward conventional antibiotics. The main reason for this is that superbugs can rapidly mutate and restrict any foreign drug/molecule in their vicinity. Herein, nanomaterial-mediated therapies have set their path and shown burgeoning efficiency toward the ablation of superbugs. Notably, treatment modalities like photothermal therapy (PTT) have shown prominence in killing multidrug-resistant bacteria with their ability to generate local heat shock-mediated hyperthermia in such species. However, photothermal treatment has some serious limitations, such as high cost, complexity, and even toxicity to some extent. Hence, it is important to resolve such shortcomings of PTTs as they provide substantial tissue penetration. This is why multimodal PTTs have emerged and taken over this domain of research for the past few years. In this work, we have summarized and critically reviewed such exceptional works of recent times and provided a perspective to enhance their efficiencies. Profoundly, we discuss the design rationales of some novel photothermal agents (PTAs) and shed light on their mechanisms. Finally, challenges for PTT-derived multimodal therapy are presented, and capable synergistic bactericidal prospects are anticipated.
Shubham Roy
Dr Shubham Roy obtained his Bachelor's degree in Physics from the University of Calcutta in 2013 and his Master's degree in the same discipline from Madurai Kamaraj University in 2015. He was awarded his Doctoral degree in science from Jadavpur University in 2022. Dr Roy works on the interface of materials science and biomedical engineering for fabricating fluorometric imaging and theranostic modules to address different environmental and biological issues.
Jhilik Roy
Jhilik Roy is presently doing her PhD in Materials science at the Department of Physics, Jadavpur University, Kolkata, India. She has obtained both BSc (2019) and MSc (2021) degrees in Physics from the University of Calcutta and Techno India University respectively. Ms Roy has an excellent command of theoretical molecular docking analysis and other in-silico studies. She has published several research papers recently on fluorometric sensors and their interaction with living systems. She is presently working in the field of piezoelectric and piezocatalysis applications.
Bing Guo
Dr Bing Guo is currently acting as an Associate Professor in the School of Science, Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen), China. He earned his Bachelor's and Master of Philosophy degrees from Zhengzhou University and Hong Kong Polytechnic University, respectively. Dr Guo completed his PhD study and postdoctoral training at the National University of Singapore. His current research focuses on the development of organic materials for molecular imaging probes and nanomedicines.
1. Introduction
Superbugs or in other words multidrug-resistant bacteria (MDR) are becoming a severe threat to humankind.1,2 It is estimated that within the year 2050, billions of people will die every year due to superbug-mediated diseases.3 Superbugs are the fruits of uncontrolled misuse of antibiotics and other drugs. Owing to their strong defense against conventional therapies, superbugs are very difficult to eradicate.4 In reality, such resistant strains could organize themselves by chemical signaling and create bacterial biofilms, which show excellent resistance against antibiotics.5
Scientists are nowadays trying to implement new antibacterial therapies against superbugs to effectively decay their resistance.6 Primarily, dynamic therapies have achieved tremendous success due to their simplicity and efficacy.2 These dynamic therapies are stimulus-based (both intrinsic and extrinsic) and can be classified by the nature of the stimulus.7 These stimulus-based dynamic therapies produce reactive radicals (especially reactive oxygen and nitrogen species) inside the infected cells and inhibit them. The stimulus can be optical (photodynamic therapy), electrical (photodynamic therapy), thermal (photothermal therapy), or even chemical (chemodynamic therapy). Apart from dynamic therapies, immunotherapy, and gene therapy have received enormous attention due to their noninvasiveness. Herein, nanoparticles and small organic molecules have performed well enough to improve the immune response of the system. Very recently after the COVID-19 outbreak, various nosocomial infections have been reported due to prolonged hospital stays and weak immuno-response. Herein, gene- and immunotherapy did well and made a sustainable solution to such infections.8
However, these therapeutic modalities are not entirely free from challenges. It is observed that sometimes dynamic therapies produce excessive amounts of ROS and RNS during their operation, which may cause death to the surrounding healthy cells and tissues. Moreover, they are stimulus-dependent, which may restrict the depth of operation inside the infected tissue/organ. In reality, the visible photon-based stimulus can penetrate up to 1 mm of the skin tissue, whereas the near-infrared band (NIR) can penetrate even 1 cm deep inside the skin.9 Additionally, other therapies also have their own restrictions; for example, immunotherapy and gene therapy are on the costlier side, whereas chemotherapy and electrodynamic therapy have their own side effects.10 In fact, photothermal therapy (PTT) has limitations when uncontrolled heat is produced by the photothermal agent (mostly nanoparticles) and causes harm to the surrounding healthy cells.
Thus, scientists are moving towards lower energy domains such as NIR-II (1000–1700 nm), NIR-III (1800–2100 nm), and even piezocatalytic antibacterial therapy for better penetration and lower scattering.11–14 Additionally, they have started dealing with multimodal/combinatory therapeutic models to minimize such side effects and to maintain a low cost (Scheme 1). Besides, a multimodal strategy could sustainably treat infected cells using their engineered and rational design. Owing to its deep penetration capabilities, PTT has become a favorable option among scientists to design multimodal therapeutics.15 PTT can be activated under the influence of a NIR stimulus and efficiently convert optical energy into thermal energy. This photothermal conversion efficacy should be high to fabricate a PTT system. In some PTT systems, the temperature of the photothermal agent even reaches up to 70 °C, which renders a thermal shock to the infected cells and eradicates them. Such a phenomenon is known as photothermal hyperthermia. But due to the lack of controllability, such hyperthermia can inhibit surrounding healthy cells without any reason. Thus, multimodal therapy nowadays significantly improves the PTT effect in bacteria.16 Sometimes PTT is used with chemodynamic and photodynamic therapies to generate a rapid thermal shock by PTT and further sustained ROS-mediated damage to the bacteria.17 Not only with other dynamic therapies, PTT has also been successfully administrated along with immunotherapy and gas therapy to enhance bacterial mortality.18
 Scheme 1  A schematic diagram of PTT with different multimodal strategies. 
Nanomaterials and polymers show excellent photothermal conversion efficacies and thus have become favorable candidates in this domain.19–21 Apart from nanoparticles, some other nanostructures such as nanofibers, nanosheets, and nanoflowers have emerged as functional photothermal agents in recent times.22 Herein, we aim to discuss their design rationale and introduce some non-conventional PTT systems, which showed remarkable efficiencies in the recent past. This review will explore all such avenues related to multimodal PTT systems and not only summarize their contributions, but also discuss their limitations and future prospects.
2. Multidrug resistance mechanisms
The emergence of superbugs can be discussed under a broad spectrum. There are different factors in the rise of multidrug-resistant bacteria, but among them, overuse of antibiotics is the primary cause (Scheme 2).23 Such overuse/misuse genetically causes a mutation in the bacterial species which is hard to eradicate. Previous studies show that the base pairs of DNA greatly re-sequenced themselves at a speed of ∼10−9 to 10−10 per gene and during this process overuse of antibiotics introduces random errors. This can be ascribed to target-gene mutations. The DNA becomes manipulated in such a way that the antibiotic no longer binds to its target.24 For example, Mycobacterium tuberculosis resistance to rifamycins could be validated by the point mutations that take place in the rifampin-binding region of the gene.
 Scheme 2  Multiple resistance mechanisms of bacteria that turn to MDR bacteria. Reprinted from ref. 23, image reused under the creative commons attribution license. 
Moreover, superbugs can originate by forming bacterial biofilms, which are difficult to inhibit.25 Precisely, biofilms are well-organized colonies of bacteria under the protective envelope of polysaccharide layers and extracellular DNA. Inside such biofilms, bacteria can communicate with each other by a chemical signaling method, quorum sensing. Bacterial biofilms are fatal and they can cause severe infections like chronic rhinosinusitis and ocular infection. According to the National Institutes of Health (NIH), biofilms are responsible for more than 80% of chronic infections in humans.26 Antibiotics cannot penetrate the extracellular layer of the biofilm and thus they reasonably fail against biofilm-mediated infections. On a serious note, biofilms can infect any surface and prove to be the primary factor in various nosocomial infections.27
Intracellular bacterial infections have also become fatal and are regarded as superbugs. These types of bacteria generally insert into a healthy host cell by forming a phagosome/phagolysosome. Sometimes some extracellular bacteria can act as intracellular ones, such as M. tuberculosis, Salmonella, C. burnetii, and H. capsulatum.28 Such intracellular infections cannot be cured by using conventional antibiotics as they are protected by the host cells. Thus, new therapeutic models are needed to eradicate intracellular infections.
Apart from these, other prime factors of superbug formation are enzymatic degradation of antibiotics, restriction of entering into the infected cells through efflux channels, and cellular membrane permeability. These factors play crucial roles to bypass antibiotics and form superbugs instead, which can be fatal and need rigorous research in the near future.29
3. Multimodal photothermal therapies against superbugs
3.1 Mechanistic overview of PTT
Unlike conventional antibiotics, PTT is successful in eradicating superbugs as it does not mutate bacterial genes or is even dependent upon bacterial permeability.30 Moreover, a photothermal system uses infrared radiation having longer wavelengths (typically ranging between 800–1700 nm), which makes them capable of penetrating more into the tissues (preferably 1 mm–1 cm). In a typical photothermal system, near-infrared light has been used to excite the photothermal agent (PTA) and thus the photonic absorption at the NIR band is extremely required in PTAs. Selecting and designing a PTA is thus a very delicate issue.31 The photothermal conversion efficiency should be high in PTAs. The working principle of PTAs may vary according to their structure and composition. Herein, we classified PTAs into three distinct categories, in which they convert light into heat for a functional photothermal system.32

3.1.1 Local surface plasmon resonance mediated (LSPR) PTAs. 
After absorbing NIR radiation, PTA can initiate the localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR), which produces heat and increases the local temperature of the system. Scientists have managed to channel this heat to inhibit bacterial infections.33 In reality, the conduction electrons within metal nanostructures induce localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) by the virtue of electron-phonon and phonon–phonon coupling and generate localized hyperthermia. Notably, noble metal and transition metal compounds and complexes can undergo LSPR. For instance, Wang et al. reported peptide-modified gold NPs (Pep-DA/Au), which can effectively ablate bacteria under NIR stimulus (Fig. 1).34 According to their study, the synthesized Pep-DA/Au system creates aggregation on the bacterial surface, which leads to an increment of the band edge of the NP system and hence resulted in a red-shifted absorbance due to the LSPR effect. The photonic absorbance lies in the NIR-I window, which makes it capable of photothermal application.34
 Fig. 1  (I) UV-vis spectrum of MRSA incubated with AuNP solutions at different pH values (7.4 and 6.0). The embedded graphs are the digital images of MRSA treated with AuNP solutions at different pH values. (II) Aggregation mechanism of AuNPs for bacterial-selective therapy: (i) The charge conversion of Pep-DA/Au. (ii) The aggregation mechanism of AuNPs and the aggregated AuNP-triggered interparticle plasmonic coupling effects and hyperthermia with light irradiation. (III) TEM images of MRSA (107 CFU mL−1, 1 mL) treated with Pep-DA/Au (120 μg mL−1) at pH values of 7.4 and 6.0. (IV) Photographs of the agar plates of MRSA treated with different concentrations (μg mL−1) of Pep-DA/Au at different pH values (7.4 and 6.0) under 808 nm light irradiation. Reprinted from ref. 34, copyright (2021) with permission from Elsevier. 
In another study, Wei et al. demonstrated how Ag NPs situated over the surface of the Fe3O4/MoS2 nanocomposite enrich the LSPR effect at around 800 nm wavelength. They found a significant photon absorption band at 800 nm due to the presence of Fe3O4, which was increased radically when Ag nanoparticles were decorated over the system. This novel compound was utilized in the photothermal eradication of E. coli.35


3.1.2 Aggregation-based PTAs. 
It is found that, unlike metal NPs, inorganic NPs primarily shift their characteristic absorption maxima towards longer wavelengths by using an aggregation-induced absorption mechanism. Precisely, in certain conditions, NPs tend to form aggregates owing to their surface functional groups and various surface moieties, which broaden their band edges.36 Such a band edge broadening results in a red shift of the characteristic absorption maximum. Wang and his coworkers presented a 2-D black phosphorous-based photosensitizer, which under a low pH environment aggregated significantly. This agglomeration has been validated by using the dynamic light scattering method and depicted a 50 nm increment in hydrodynamic size at pH 3.5 compared to the neutral pH. Such aggregation shifted its absorbance maximum to 808 nm wavelength and made it capable of PTT. Interestingly, the low pH mediated aggregation of this system enables it to work in tumor theranostics as the tumor microenvironment has a relatively lower pH value.37
Additionally, scientists have managed to design aggregation induced PTAs by using metal NPs. For example, Chen et al. demonstrated a gold nanosystem (dAuNPs), which tends to aggregate under visible (405 nm) + NIR radiation (808 nm). Typically, the diazirine gets crosslinked under such light stimuli and made aggregates of Au NPs, which are wrapped in the envelope of diazirine (Fig. 2). It is found that this nanosystem can efficiently shift its absorption maximum toward longer wavelengths with the irradiation duration and thereby produced heat that can ablate tumors in a facile manner.38
 Fig. 2  (I) TEM images of dAuNPs before and after being illuminated with a 405 nm laser at different periods of time, (II) photographs of representative mice chosen from each group and captured on the 20th-day post-treatment for showing the therapeutic effects of different therapeutic combinations, (III) photothermal images of tumor-bearing mice for showing the in vivo cross-linking effect of dAuNPs on tumor local temperature against irradiation time of 808 nm laser. Reprinted from ref. 38, Copyright (2017) with permission from WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 


3.1.3 PTAs based on the intra- and inter-molecular quenching of radiative transition. 
Another efficient way to increase the NIR response in NPs is to minimize the radiative transitions and thereby increase the non-radiative transfer of energy in the molecules.40 Du et al. in their study highlighted this excellent and useful phenomenon by using a fluorescent biotin-based complex (Fig. 3).39 The synthesized complex in its nanodomain posed remarkable fluorescence at around 840 nm wavelength. It is worth noting that, when conjugated with TCEP, this fluorescent complex drastically lost its fluorescence. Not only the fluorescence intensity but also the fluorescence quantum yield decreased radically after this conjugation. While the fluorescence of the complex lost its value, the lifetime remains unaffected. However, a closer look suggests that the non-radiative rate constant compared to the radiative rate constant in this case enhanced radically (65.7), which further validates the intra- and intermolecular energy transfer between the system and the solvent. Moreover, the DFT study suggests a FRET-based quenching phenomenon, which is quite analogous to the data. Such non-radiative exposure is worthy in designing photothermal systems. In this particular example, the authors found the sample to have more than 65 °C temperature when it was irradiated by an 808 nm laser.39 This work enlightened many researchers to think out of the box and opened a new avenue to explore.
 Fig. 3  (I) Schematic illustration of reduction-controlled condensation of 1 to yield 1-Dimer (intramolecular quenching) which self-assembles into 1-NPs (both intra-and intermolecular quenching) to additionally enhance the photothermal efficacy of the fluorophore Cypate. (II) (a) UV-vis absorption spectra of 20 × 10−6 m 1 after incubation with (red) or without (black) 4 × 10−3 m TCEP at 37 °C for 4 h. Inset: UV-vis absorption spectra of 20 × 10−6 m 1 and 10 × 10−6 m 1-Dimer in DMSO. (b) Fluorescence spectra of 20 × 10−6 m 1 after incubation with (gray) or without (red) 4 × 10−3 m TCEP at 37 °C for 4 h. (III) Theoretical calculations of photophysical properties for 1-Dimer (intramolecular quenching) and Cypate-Dimer (intermolecular quenching). (a) Optimized ground-state structure of 1-Dimer in DMSO. (b) and (c) Electron transitions of the excitation to the first excited state of 1-Dimer in DMSO (b) and Cypate-Dimer in water (c). H (L) means HOMO (LUMO). Transitions were characterized by molecular orbitals (bubbles), photo wavelength (λx), and oscillator strength (f). Reprinted from ref. 39, Copyright (2019) with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 

3.2 Implications of multimodal PTT
Multimodal PTTs are designed in such a way that they show synergistic effects in bacterial killing by employing multiple treatment modalities along with PTT.41 Chemotherapy is considered the earliest and most commonly used therapeutic modality against bacterial infections. Due to its inefficiency against superbugs, scientists have introduced multimodal chemo-photothermal therapy (CPTT).42 In this treatment modality, the PTA moiety of the sample introduces a thermal shock to the bacterial cells and thereby initiates the catalytic reaction, which continues for a prolonged duration and inhibits the superbugs.42 For instance, Liu et al. used a mesoporous ruthenium complex (AA@Ru@HA-MoS2) to eradicate superbugs.43 Herein, the complex has been exposed to an 808 nm laser to attain more than 50 °C temperature. After gathering at the infection site, the synthesized nanosystem triggers ascorbic acid (AA) release, which further produces hydroxyl radicals (˙OH) and initiates the degradation process.43
Besides, photodynamic therapy (PDT) coupled with PTT has also been explored by various research groups.45 It is observed that PDT-PTT multimodal systems can destroy methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) colonies under 655 nm, 0.5 W cm−2 lasers for only 2 minutes (Fig. 4).44 In this particular experiment, scientists have used a supramolecular self-assembly (NanoPcN) made of zinc(II) phthalocyanine with a 3-(dimethylamino) phenoxy group. This complex can couple and combine type-I photodynamic activity and photothermal effects under a photonic stimulus.44
 Fig. 4  (I) Photodynamic and photothermal properties of NanoPcN. (a) 1O2 detection using ABDA as the probe and the degradation of absorbance at 380 nm. (b) Fluorescence intensity changes of DHE in the control and NanoPcN groups under 655 nm laser irradiation at different times. λex = 510 nm and λem = 578 nm. (c) Temperature change (ΔT) of various concentrations of NanoPcN under 655 nm laser (2.0 W cm−2) irradiation for 10 min. (d) IR images were recorded using an IR camera with various concentrations of NanoPcN after laser irradiation (10 min, 2.0 W cm−2). (e) The photothermal effect of NanoPcN upon irradiation for 10 min (655 nm, 1.0 W cm−2) and then shutting off the laser. (f) Linear time vs. −lnθ during the cooling period. (g) Photothermal capability for three cycles under irradiation using a 655 nm laser (2.0 W cm−2) for 10 min. (h) Photographs of ICG and NanoPcN after laser irradiation (2.0 W cm−2). Inset: before laser irradiation. (i) Schematic diagram of the possible photophysically activated process of NanoPcN, (II) Schematic diagram of the multimodal PTT application. (III) S. aureus (a) and E. coli (b) in the absence and presence of NanoPcN treated with and without 655 nm laser irradiation. The concentration of NanoPcN was 50 nM for S. aureus and 5 μM for E. coli. (c) Statistical analysis of the bacterial survival rate after 655 nm laser irradiation by calculating log10 (CFU mL−1) of MRSA and ESBL E. coli. For MRSA: 50 nM NanoPcN; laser: 0.5 W cm−2, 2 min. For ESBL E. coli, 10 μM NanoPcN; laser: 1.0 W cm−2, 10 min. (d) Photographs of MRSA treated with MB, TPPS, and NanoPcN, in the absence and presence of 655 nm laser irradiation. Concentration: 50 nM. (e) Bacterial survival rate after incubating different concentrations of MB, TPPS, and NanoPcN by calculating log10 (CFU mL−1) of MRSA after 2 min 655 nm laser irradiation (0.5 W cm−2). Reprinted from ref. 44, Copyright (2022) with permission from American Chemical Society. 
Besides, sono-photothermal therapy (SPTT) has received enormous attention owing to its noninvasiveness and deeper penetration ability.46 When ultrasound (US) and an 808 nm laser are concurrently irradiated on multimodal PTAs, effective bacterial eradication has been observed. Zhang and coworkers have synthesized hematoporphyrin–melanin nanoconjugates (HMNCs) for the sono-photothermal treatment of superbugs. Herein, the hematoporphyrin moiety under ultrasound produces cytotoxic singlet oxygen for sonodynamic therapy, while the melanin part having strong NIR absorbance possessed efficient photothermal conversion for PTT.47
Apart from these therapies, other different therapeutic modalities can be achieved such as immunotherapy, gas therapy, and electrodynamic therapy coupled with PTT. Scientists are nowadays exploring such newer avenues to combat superbugs.48
3.3 Nanomaterials as multimodal PTAs
Nanomaterials (NMs) are known as excellent receptors of different physical, chemical, and biological stimuli. They offer tremendous structure-property correlation and band gap tunability. Such tunability is an asset for an efficient photoconversion rate.49 Precisely, a higher surface area will contribute to a higher amount of LSPR and thereby the conversion efficacy.50 Hence, nanostructures having high surface area are considered promising PTAs. Moreover, nanomaterials with surface defects can also contemplate PTT. Different polymeric nanomaterials, metal oxides, and porous nanomaterials show such effects.51 Owing to their structure, morphology, and surface features, NMs can be classified into various types such as 1D-nanofibers, nanoribbons, nanorods, 2D-nanosheets and nano-petals, and 0D-quantum dots and nanoclusters.52 Furthermore, some 3D nanomaterials like nanoflowers, nanoparticles, and nano-assemblies have gained attention due to their excellent structure-property correlation and superior functionality.53 Moreover, polymeric nanocomposites and other inorganic nanocomposites have tremendous efficacy as PTAs. Recently, biopolymeric nanocomposites and other nano-heterostructures have been exploited as photothermal agents in both antibacterial and anticancer therapies.54
Nanomaterials like ZnO, TiO2, and CuO are famous for such multifunctional aspects and became favorable choices in the domain of multimodal applications.55 In this section, nanomaterials and nanocomposites have been categorized as per their structure and composition and their bactericidal efficacies have also been depicted in the light of multimodal photothermal therapy.56

3.3.1 Metal and metal oxide NMs. 
Metal oxide NMs might be the mostly used nanosystems to date. They have been rigorously used in different physical, biological, and chemical applications.57 The synthesis of metal oxide nanomaterials is very facile. In most cases, solvothermal/hydrothermal and sol–gel synthesis routes have been exploited rigorously to boost the yield of the nanomaterials.58 However, a few reported top-bottom synthesis approaches, such as the mechanical grinding method and high-energy ball-milling to produce metal oxide NMs.59,60 Apart from that, electrochemical synthesis routes, microwave synthesis, spray-pyrolysis and template-based fabrication routes are well adopted.61
In reality, when metal oxide NMs are incubated with bacterial suspensions, in most cases they offer peroxidase or Fenton-like reactions to inhibit bacterial cells.62,63 Thus, there is an unambiguous effect of metal oxides as antimicrobial agents. However, recent studies have promoted such metal oxide NMs to incur stimulus-driven activities and paved paths to obtain specialized photothermal agents.64
On this note, Yang and his team fabricated Fe3+-doped polydopamine (Fe/PDA)-capped ZnO nanoparticles with a successive assembly of methylene blue (MB) and poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) nanoassembly. This nanohybrid can inhibit bacterial biofilms efficiently.65 In a typical process, the Fe-moiety of the nanohybrid initiates the Fenton reaction inside the biofilm to convert endogenous H2O2 to hydroxyl radicals (*OH) for chemodynamic sterilization. Moreover, the MB dye under a 635 nm laser beam generates a photodynamic effect. Interestingly, the same material, due to the presence of the Fe/PDA layer, introduces PTT activity under 808 nm laser light. This efficient nano compound depicts three distinct therapeutic modalities in a single material and has thus achieved enormous attention.65 Besides, several metal nanoalloys have also shown promise in PTT applications. Due to the presence of more than one metal, these nanoalloys can produce Fenton and peroxidase-like reactions for inhibiting infection.66,67 Similarly, bi-metallic nanostructures have also been exploited by several groups to inhibit bacterial infection by using PTT. For instance, Sun et al. devised a bimetallic nanosheet composed of FeS@Cu2O to minimize the hyperthermia-mediated damage during PTT. They performed a facile hydrothermal synthesis to obtain bimetallic nanosheets. Among different alloying concentrations, when the FeS:Cu2O concentration reached 1:1, the highest PTT efficacy was found to occur. These nanosheets depicted promising antibacterial activity against both E. coli and S. aureus.68 In their very recent paper (2022), Wang et al. used the synergy of both chemotherapy and PTT to eradicate planktonic bacteria. Herein, they have synthesized a Pd–Cu nanoalloy-based metal–organic framework (MOF) consisting of antibiotic amoxicillin (AMO) (Fig. 5). Initially, the chemotherapeutic part takes charge and destroys the bacterial cell wall by releasing AMO in an acidic microenvironment. Later on, PTT takes place under the NIR laser and significantly modulates the drug release profile and finishes the antibacterial effect.69
 Fig. 5  (I) Synthesis process of the nanosystem and its working principle. (II) FTIR spectra of the synthesized sample. (III) (A) TEM photos of the nanoparticles, PC (upper left), ZIF-8 (upper right), PCZ (lower left), and PCAZ (lower right). (B) TEM element mapping of PCAZ. (IV) (D) The temperature change curve of PC (250 μg mL−1, 1 W cm−2) after irradiation with an 808 nm laser and after turning off the laser. (E) The relationship between the cooling time and the negative natural logarithm of the temperature driving force. (F) The photothermal cycle curve of PC (250 μg mL−1, 1 W cm−2) in five switching cycles. (V) SEM images of P. aeruginosa (Scale bars: 1 μm). (VI) Statistical analysis of the relative biomass of the P. aeruginosa biofilm. Reprinted from ref. 69, Copyright (2022) with permission from Elsevier. 
Nanoparticles of silver and gold have become famous for their intrinsic antibacterial properties. Their peroxidase-like reaction with the extracellular matrix of the bacteria makes them usable in various antibacterial applications.70–73 Additionally, the ROS/RNS generation in these cases is difficult to control and thus needs strict regulation. Nowadays, researchers are focusing on regulating such issues and offering better therapeutic models. For instance, Bi et al. reported a silver peroxide nanoparticle system that can kill around 99.9999% of bacteria in just 10 minutes under a synergistic sono-photothermal effect. Here, the external ultrasound and laser stimuli efficiently control ROS production and restrict any unwanted cell death. This work not only reports the first paradigm for fabricating silver peroxide nanoparticles but also invades the entire bacterial infection with ease.74


3.3.2 Nano-chalcogenides. 
Chalcogenides belong to group-16 (VI (a)) in the periodic table and they have efficient thermal and photodynamic properties.75,76 Typically, nano-chalcogens have been synthesized by using solvothermal techniques like metal oxides. But, several other methods such as reflux, ‘panoramic syntheses’, and dimensional reduction methods have also been employed for their synthesis.77 However, Gogova and the team have successfully fabricated AsTe and As2Te3 chalcogens by employing a Plasma Enhanced Chemical Vapor Deposition method.78 Gao et al. in their topical review showed various novel techniques to produce chalcogenides. They highlighted the template-based method, hot-injection method, electrospinning, sonochemical, and microwave-assisted methods besides several liquid phase synthesis techniques.79 Furthermore, Jacob et al. reported some microbial synthesis routes to obtain chalcogenides. They depicted intra- and extracellular biosynthesis routes for chalcogenide synthesis. Unlike oxides, chalcogenides have the ability to produce stable complex anions making it essential to serve as the reagents of various solid-state materials.77
Nano-chalcogenides may produce physical rupture of the bacterial cells to inhibit them. It is found that needle-shaped and sharp 1-D nanomaterials showed prominence in mechanical rupture. Besides, Fenton-like catalytic activity may also be induced in bacterial suspensions by using these chalcogens. Some literature depicts that metallic chalcogens can produce excessive ROS in the infection microenvironment to eradicate pathogens. In addition, several groups have performed photocatalytic activity owing to the superior photocatalytic efficacies of these nano-chalcogens.80
Recently, nanomaterials of metallic chalcogens such as sulfides, tellurides, and selenides have shown promising photothermal applications under the NIR stimulus. Precisely, these materials produce heat under NIR guidance and promote a high bactericidal efficiency owing to local hyperthermia. Their excellent spatiotemporal resolution in this domain made them exploited in cancer theranostics. For example, photo-responsive CuS NPs have been incorporated into the MOF to exhibit a dual chemo-photothermal effect against cutaneous melanoma.81 Similarly, these metal chalcogenides have been exploited in antibacterial applications in the past few years. For instance, Cu2WS4 ternary chalcogenide synthesized by using a facile hydrothermal process has been utilized in eradicating different Gram-positive (B. subtilis, M. luteus) and Gram-negative (E. coli, P. aeruginosa, and K. pneumoniae) bacteria due to the excessive ROS production.82 Nowadays, these chalcogenides are being used under a varied spectrum due to their extensive physicochemical properties. Multimodal PTT is one of the primary applications among them. According to Agnihotri and his group, FeS NPs under a NIR stimulus can kill pathogenic bacteria by using a dual-mode therapy. Herein, Fe2+ ions in an aqueous dispersion initiate Fenton-based ROS generation, and the 635 nm laser additionally leads to PTT-mediated hyperthermia in the bacterial cells.83
In another work, Qi et al. synthesized a Bi2S3:Gd@Cu-BIF core–shell nanoassembly for multimodal antibacterial theranostics. Precisely, the group adopted a solvothermal synthesis route and thereby a precise polymeric conjugation to obtain the core–shell nanoassembly. Interestingly, the synthesized nanosystem in the presence of hydrogen peroxide in the inflammatory microenvironment got activated and depicted excellent PTT efficiency under NIR light. Herein, the photothermal conversion efficacy was found to be around 52.6% with a high MRSA eradication efficacy (99.8%). Moreover, a superior chemodynamic efficiency has also been found, which enhanced the overall antibacterial effect of this nanoassembly. This core–shell chalcogenide system is effective in diagnosing the infection margin by employing the MRI-CT dual-modal technique making it a futuristic alternative in the domain of antibacterial theranostics.84
Notably, chalcogenides have significant absorption cross-sections in the visible and NIR regions and could be excited by simple diode lasers.83 In another work, CuS nanodots have been utilized to inhibit multidrug-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) and expedite wound healing simultaneously by administrating dual PTT-chemodynamic therapy (Fig. 6). The PTT herein acted as a remote control of Cu2+ release, which further resulted in ROS generation.85 Apart from in vitro bacterial inhibition, Yuan et al. presented a MoS2-PDA-RGD-coated titanium implant for orthopedic applications. It is worth noting that MoS2 can act as a significant PTA, which under NIR stimulus inhibited around 94.6% of bacteria. The coating material not only improved the osteogenesis of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) but also endowed Ti substrates with effective antibacterial ability when exposed to NIR irradiation. Surprisingly, this implant helped bone regeneration and is considered a potential therapeutic model, which can be translated into the clinic.86
 Fig. 6  (I) Schematic diagram of the working principle of the sample. (II) Temperature rise (hyperthermia) pattern of aqueous dispersed FeS nanoparticles as a function of time of irradiation with CW laser light (wavelength 635 nm). (III) (a) VSM data (inset: magnified near zero-field) and (b) UV-visible spectrum of FeS nanoparticles (0.75 mg mL−1). (IV) ROS detection assay using DCFH-DA dye from bacterial cells, treated with various concentrations of FeS NPs (0, 0.5, and 1 mg mL−1), without (dark) and with (light) laser irradiation. Reprinted from ref. 83. Image reused under the Creative Commons Attribution License. 


3.3.3 Conjugated polymeric nanocomposites. 
Conjugated polymers are a class of materials having delocalized electronic structures and large π-conjugated backbones resulting in high optical amplification and light-harvesting properties.87–90 There are several conjugated polymers such as polyaniline (PANI), chitosan (CS), lignin (LIG), polypyrrole (PPy), polydopamine (PDA), and poly(3,4-ethylene dioxythiophene) (PEDOT) that are capable of being pursued for multimodal imaging-guided photothermal therapy for antibacterial applications.91 Conjugated polymers can be classified into several segments among which conductive polymers (PANI, PEDOT, etc.), biopolymers (chitosan, polydopamine, etc.), and synthetic polymers (PLGA, PEG, etc.) are the primary branches.
Conjugated polymeric nanocomposites can be synthesized in two distinct ways, one of which involves chemical routes such as a one-pot approach in which the monomer or polymer acts as a reductant or the synthesis of the nanomaterials either prior to chemical polymerization or dispersion of the nanomaterials into the polymeric milieu. On the other hand, some groups have initiated electrochemical synthesis of the polymeric nanocomposites, which depicts oxidative coupling of monomers and offers better controllability to tune functional side chains for precise applications.92
Based on their mechanism, these conjugated polymers carrying NPs inside them have a higher affinity towards the bacterial cell wall. Such affinity leads to a good attachment between them and under NIR irradiation local heat is generated, which results in cell lysis and further bacterial eradication. For instance, poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA)-stabilized polypyrrole nanoparticles (PVA-PPy) can reduce the adhesion of Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus) and Escherichia coli (E. coli) in biofilms under NIR light.93 Recently, He et al. demonstrated that N-carboxyethyl chitosan (CEC) and benzaldehyde-terminated Pluronic F127/carbon nanotubes mediated a self-healing combinatory photothermal agent for wound healing activity. In this work, the authors reported moxifloxacin hydrochloride antibiotic incorporation into the hydrogel system to achieve a synergistic effect, and NIR-guided sustained delivery of the drug.94 In another study, Liu and his group showed an effective antimicrobial depot for infectious site-targeted chemo-photothermal therapy by using polydopamine (PDA)-coated gold nanorods (GNRs). This hybrid system became positively charged in the bacterial microenvironment (pH ∼ 6.3) and released Ag+ ions (Fig. 7).95 Furthermore, the PTT under laser light induced photo-triggered cellular hyperthermia causing a sustained release of Ag+ ions for a prolonged duration. Such chemo-photothermal modality eradicated almost 100% of bacteria and was found to have excellent biocompatibility against healthy cells and tissues.95
 Fig. 7  (I) Schematic of (a) synthesis of Ag+-GCS-PDA@GNRs, (b) acidity-triggered charge reversal and Ag+ ion release, and (c) bacteria-specific targeting and chemo-photothermal combinational therapy based on the Ag+-GCS-PDA@GNRs. (II) Characterization of Ag+-GCS-PDA@GNRs. a Representative TEM images of (a1) GNRs, (a2) PDA@GNRs, (a3) GCS-PDA@GNRs, and (a4) Ag+-GCS-PDA@GNRs. (b) UV-vis-NIR spectra of GNRs, PDA@GNRs, GCS-PDA@GNRs and Ag+-GCS-PDA@GNRs, respectively. (c) The zeta potential of Ag+-GCS-PDA@GNRs in PB with different pH values (7.4 & 6.3). (d) Quantitative analysis of Ag+ ion loading capacity of PDA@GNRs. (e) The release curve of Ag+ ions from Ag+-GCS-PDA@GNRs in the medium at pH 7.4 and 6.3 with or without laser irradiation for a certain time, respectively. (f) Temperature evolution profile of PB buffer and Ag+-GCS-PDA@GNR suspensions with different concentrations in PB (pH 6.3) upon NIR laser (808 nm, 0.5 W cm−2) irradiation. (g) The corresponding thermographic images of different concentrations of Ag+-GCS-PDA@GNR suspension in PB (pH 6.3) under NIR irradiation. (h) The change in absorbance intensity of Ag+-GCS-PDA@GNRs after repeated laser irradiation (n = 5; 808 nm, 0.5 W cm−2). (i) Change in the thermal curves of Ag+-GCS-PDA@GNRs after repeated laser irradiation (n = 5; 808 nm, 0.5 W cm−2), (III) (a) Photographs of the subcutaneous abscess on the dorsal surface of mice after 9 days treatment. (b) Photographs of bacterial CFUs. Reprinted from ref. 95. Image reused under the Creative Commons Attribution License. 
It is worth noting that cationic polymers have also gained tremendous interest in the past few years in this domain.96 Xiao et al. modified the side chains of polythiophenes and modified them with reduced graphene oxide flakes (RGO) and finally formed an RGO-g-P3TOPS composite for bacterial ablation. This novel polymeric compound exhibited unprecedentedly excellent PTT-based bactericidal activity due to the electrostatic interaction between RGO-g-P3TOPA and Escherichia coli, which bound them together and facilitated direct heat conduction through their interfaces.96 A similar mechanism has been proposed by other groups where cationic chitosan@ruthenium dioxide hybrid nanozymes exhibited a dual ROS-PTT mediated bactericidal effect. Moreover, this polymeric nanozyme could carry an antibacterial drug ([Ru(bpy)2(tip)]2+), the release of which could be controlled by the external NIR stimulus.97 Such hybrid polymeric systems are effective against superbugs like biofilms and other planktonic bacteria and could be translated into clinics if properly improvised.


3.3.4 Small molecules. 
Small molecules such as AIEgens, peptides, nanozymes, and liposomes have augmented tunability and biocompatibility besides their exceptional physicochemical properties.98–101 These small molecules can be effective against superbugs owing to their photoconversion efficiencies. AIEgens are conventionally low/non-luminescent in nature but when they form aggregates, they provide excellent photoluminescence.102,103 Such an interesting property of AIEgens makes them usable in fluorescent sensing and other theranostic applications. These small molecules can even perform in the NIR-II biowindow, which is required in photothermal applications. Huang et al. showed how poly(dithieno[3,2-b:2,3-d]pyrrole-benzo[1,2-c:4,5-c′]bis([1,2,5]thiadiazole)) (PDTPTBT), an AIEgen, can photothermally eradicate Gram-positive methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus and Enterococcus faecalis, the Gram-negative Escherichia coli and Pseudomonas aeruginosa by using NIR-II exposure.104 Not only standalone PTT, but also AIEgens can regulate multimodal photothermal applications. Xue and his coworkers designed an AIEgen-based nanobiocide, which can inactivate drug-resistant Staphylococcus aureus and Escherichia coli bacteria. This work introduced a physically blended lauric acid (LA) and cupric acetate, which depicts a synergy by combining the LA-mediated membrane damage, Cu-mediated chemodynamic effect, and copper–LA complex-based photothermal effect.105 The synthesized complex showed a 12-fold enhancement of the molar extinction coefficient in the NIR domain, resulting in 99.99% killing of the bacterial cells.
In another work, Li and his group developed an AIEgen-modified nanofibrous membrane (TTVB@NM) by electrospinning, which can inhibit not only bacteria but also viruses and fungi. It is observed that this novel material can be excited under both photodynamic and photothermal stimuli and eradicate bacteria (Fig. 8). Their work would open new avenues in sterilizing personal protective equipment (PPE) under NIR stimulus only under 10 minutes of light exposure.106 Besides, another small molecule, namely peptide-based dendrimer nano-gel (G3KBPY) has also been used as a multimodal PDT/PTT system for biofilm inhibition. This peptide-based system effectively produced CO under the co-driven effects of PTT and PDT. This combinatory therapy accompanied by CO, PTT, and PDT offered an augmented biofilm ablation effect and was proposed to be used in treating urinary catheter infections and subcutaneous abscesses.107 Apart from AIEgens, peptides, and nanozymes, various other small molecules like exosomes and liposomes have been utilized in this domain and are currently under the rigorous attention of scientists and researchers.
 Fig. 8  (I) Schematic illustration of the preparation of TTVB-loaded nanofibrous membrane (TTVB@NM) through electrospinning for microbe interception and microbial inactivation under sunlight. (II) (A)–(D) ROS generation ability of TTVB in aqueous solution upon light irradiation (34 mW cm−2) verified with different ROS indicators: (A) DCFH as the indicator for total ROS; (B) ABDA as the indicator for 1O2; (C) DHR 123 as the indicator for O2˙−; (D) HPF as the indicator for ˙OH. (E) CLSM images of different bacteria and fungi stained with TTVB (10 μM for E. coli and MDR E. coli; 2 μM for S. aureus, MDR S. aureus, S. cerevisiae, and C. albicans). (F) Antimicrobial activity of TTVB (5 μM for Gram-negative bacteria; 1 μM for Gram-positive bacteria and fungi; 500 nM for M13 phage) upon irradiation with simulated sunlight (34 mW cm−2). (III) (a) TTVB@NM covered on a medical mask suffering from E. coli aerosol treatment and (b) later analysis of live bacteria on and underneath the membrane using a plate-counting method. Reprinted from ref. 106, Copyright (2021) with permission from Elsevier. 


3.3.5 Carbon nanomaterial-based PTAs. 
Carbonaceous nanomaterials are favorable candidates in biomedical applications due to their extensive physicochemical properties and negligible cytotoxicity.108–112 Precisely, sp2 hybridized carbon nanostructures such as graphene, and carbon nanotubes (CNTs) have efficient photo-absorption in the NIR regime and thus they became useful for PTT. Moreover, the bactericidal effect of carbon nanoparticles owing to their membrane stress, oxidative stress, and electron transfer is extremely useful to ablate bacteria.113–115 If we focus on the synthetic perspective, with time, the synthesis of carbonaceous nanomaterials has become easier and more cost-effective. For instance, a decade earlier, graphene synthesis was a laborious task. Scientists used Hummers’ method for synthesizing graphene. Nowadays, the modified Hummers’ method and other facile synthetic routes such as chemical vapor deposition (CVD), thermal decomposition, electrochemical exfoliation, arc discharge, and even unzipping of CNTs can produce high-quality graphene.116 On the other hand, the synthesis of CNTs reached such a milestone, and they can be yielded industrially in large quantities. Methods like CVD, arc discharge, and laser ablation are quite common synthetic protocols for CNT production nowadays.117 Meanwhile, scientists are exploring new synthetic routes. Herein, the study of Gogotsi et al. shows a facile hydrothermal synthesis of multiwalled CNTs, which not only reduces the production cost but also ensures its scalability.
Carbon nanomaterials do not have a promising antibacterial effect if left alone. But when exposed to NIR these efficient nanostructures release vibrational energy and cause local temperature enhancements. Additionally, they depict high thermal conductivity due to the large phonon mean free path in the strong carbon sp2 bonding network, which increases their absorption at the NIR.118–120 For instance, He et al. developed a CNT-based self-healing hydrogel for antibacterial and wound healing therapies. This nanocomposite is found to have an increment in temperature up to 22 °C under a NIR pulse (808 nm) and proved to have great potential for PTT. The bacterial eradication reached 100% when the sample was placed under NIR for only 10 minutes.94 This study revealed the efficacy of CNTs in this domain. In another study, Soni and his team fabricated a face mask containing single-walled CNTs over a superhydrophobic surface. They used CNTs as the PTA herein and generated extreme temperatures (60.9 °C) under natural sunlight for only 1 minute (Fig. 9). They also tested the biocompatibility of the mask and employed human dummies to validate their data. The bacterial photothermal ablation has been performed against E. coli and S. aureus showing more than 99% bacterial eradication. According to their proposal, this mask could be useful to treat Covid-19 like infections and self-sterilize its surface under sunlight.121 This interesting work might open new directions in self-sterilizing materials in the near future.
 Fig. 9  (I) Fabrication of the self-sterilizing face mask by a spray deposition method. (II) Photothermal performance of the masks. (A) Schematic of the setup used for photothermal studies. (B) Time-lapse thermal images of the CNT-coated mask. (C) Human dummy wearing a CNT-coated mask showing the temperature increase at 1 sun intensity. (D) Surface temperature was measured by an IR camera against time for the pristine (black curve) and the CNT-coated (red curve) masks. (E) Reflectance spectra of the pristine (black curve) and the CNT-coated (red curve) masks. (F) The temperature of the CNT-coated mask under multiple on/off cycles of 1 sun illumination, (III) Antimicrobial and antiviral properties. (A) Detection of the antibacterial effect (CFU mL–1) of the E. coli ATCC 25922 bacteria on the pristine and the CNT-coated masks under dark and light conditions. (B) High-resolution confocal fluorescence microscopy images of the live/dead assay of E. coli ATCC 25922 stained with SYTO 9 and propidium iodide. (C) The number of viable E. coli bacteria was calculated from CFUs after solar illumination of the surfaces of the control (glass surface), pristine, and CNT-coated masks. Data are expressed as mean ± standard deviation values; n = 3 independent experiments. (D) Changes in the concentration of the VPs on the control, pristine, and CNT-coated masks under dark and light conditions. (E) Representative SDS-PAGE electrophoresis data for the control, pristine, and CNT-coated masks after the treatment of VPs under light mode. Reprinted from ref. 121, Copyright (2021) with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
On the other hand, graphene and graphene-based materials have shown enormous promise in the field of photothermal therapy.122–124 Graphene and its derivatives such as reduced graphene oxide (rGO), and graphene oxide (GO) have unique optical properties, which gives them the ability to convert light into heat. Therefore, graphene-based nanomaterials are getting attention in PTT. Typically, graphene cannot readily dissolve in water, and thus rGO and GO with some surface modifications have become useful as PTAs. For example, Ocsoy et al. reported a magnetic GO assembly conjugated with the DNA aptamer (APT@MGO) for PTT. In this work, the authors have synthesized Fe3O4 NPs on the top of GO sheets and further conjugated them with the aptamer.125 They claimed that the MGO tends to agglomerate in PBS buffer by using aptamer crosslinking and resulted in an aggregation-induced red-shift of the absorption maximum, which is found to be located in the NIR regime. Such a red shift enabled it to produce heat under NIR stimulus. It is found that almost 97% of MRSA bacteria got killed in this method, which makes it a promising material for clinical translation.125

4. Challenges and plausible remedies
In recent years, NMs and nanocomposites have shown tremendous efficacy in different fields of medicine, biology, chemistry, and materials science.126,127 Their unique physicochemical properties make them usable in antibacterial therapies. As mentioned earlier, stimulus-based nanosystems especially photo-responsive nanomaterials have been exploited widely in antibacterial therapies. Their rapid action against bacteria, noninvasiveness, and biocompatibility makes them favorable candidates in photothermal therapy. However, these functional NMs are not entirely free from errors.128,129 Herein, we depict a comparative study of the synthetic routes and their efficacy as PTAs in Table 1 in order to substantiate their functionalities.
Table 1 Comparative study of the synthetic processes and efficacies of different PTAs




Material types
Synthesis routes
Photo-thermal conversion efficacy (%)
Bacterial mortality (%)
Advantages
Challenges
Ref.




Metal and metal oxide NPs
Hydrothermal, sol–gel, template-based, electrochemical, microwave-assisted
42–56
99.99
Excellent stability, easy engineering to the required size, shape, and porosity, no swelling changes, straightforward insertion into hydrophobic and hydrophilic systems
Cytotoxicity issue from chemical contaminants during synthesis

57–74



Nano-chalcogenides
Reflux, hydrothermal, panoramic, template-based method, hot-injection method, electrospinning, sonochemical, microwave-assisted, CVD, microbial
36–45
94–99
Act as photocatalysts, low cost and high efficiency for efficient utilization
Low stability, limited synthesis strategies, limited activity

75–86



Conjugated polymeric nanocomposites
Electrochemical synthesis, intrinsic/extrinsic polymerization, oxidative coupling of monomers
Up to 88
90–99
Mechanical and electrical conductivity, low density and permeability, structural and thermal stability
High viscosity, non-uniform distribution, agglomeration

87–97



Small molecules
Rathore's procedures, McMurry reactions, and Suzuki–Miyaura cross-coupling reactions, catalyzed reactions
35–40
99.99
Work rapidly, potential for therapeutic development
Variable specificity, limited availability

98–107



Carbon nanomaterials-based PTAs
CVD, thermal decomposition, electrochemical exfoliation, arc discharge, hydrothermal, laser ablation
30–35
99.99
Excellent heat conductors, extremely low gravitational influence, good conductivity, low toxicity
Costly, extremely small size, difficult to work with

108–125





It is evident that some of these nanosystems can produce extreme local heat, which may cause inhibition of surrounding healthy cells and tissues.130,131 Such uncontrollable heat is detrimental to living systems and restricts them from being translated into clinics. Thus, scientists are nowadays working on ‘cold photothermal systems’ that can produce less temperature (less than 50 °C). This temperature is quite enough to eradicate some planktonic bacteria and hence these systems have been undergoing clinical trials.132,133 Furthermore, some groups are working on image-guided therapeutic approaches for this purpose.134
Moreover, some PTT systems cannot target the infection sites properly, and thus the efficacy of the treatment gets lowered.135 Herein, multimodal PTT strategies have become famous. In reality, nanoparticles loaded with antibiotics/drugs have been guided and deployed by using external optical stimuli such as PDT/PTT.136 This methodology attained great interest not only due to the targeted and controlled release of the drug molecules, but also due to the sustained and prolonged release duration. Notably, PTT uses NIR radiation to convert it into thermal energy, which helps the penetration capacity of the system and enables them to work in interior regions like the brain, gut, etc.137,138
Besides, PTT application requires high laser power density, and a high concentration of PTAs is needed.139 These factors not only enhance the secondary toxicity but also elevate the treatment cost radically. On the one hand, we anticipate that more green materials (such as carbon-based nanotherapeutics) and materials with a facile synthesis process could lower the cost.140,141 On the other hand, multimodal therapeutics could restrain the need for high PTA concentration.142
In summary, more therapeutic strategies are expected to work in conjunction with PTT to combat bacterial infection in clinical applications.
5. Summary and outlook
In this review, we initially pointed out the burgeoning rise of superbugs and their impact on human health. Later, the reasons and mechanisms of superbug formation have been critically reviewed. Herein, a special emphasis is given to gene modification, horizontal gene transfer, biofilm formation, and intracellular bacterial diseases. It is evident that the misuse and overuse of conventional antibiotics play a crucial role in the rise of superbugs. Different therapeutic modalities have been conferred, which shows that photothermal ablation of bacteria could be one of the strongest weapons we have ever had. We further reviewed different multimodal photothermal strategies, which evidently approve the need for these combinatory therapies in order to minimize the cost, complexity, and toxicity of PTT systems.
In addition, a mechanistic overview of the possible causes behind opto-thermal conversion in a PTA has been depicted. Interestingly, three major mechanisms including the LSPR effect, aggregation limited shifting of the absorption maximum, and FRET-based intra- or intermolecular energy transfer have been found besides several other mechanisms. We hope that this finding will help future researchers design novel and efficient PTAs.
Besides, we discussed different photothermal agents, especially nanomaterials in this domain, and reviewed some important works published in the last few years. We shed light on different metal and metal oxide NPs, small molecules, conjugated polymers, and chalcogenides. This probably encompasses most of the materials that can initiate multimodal photothermal systems. Moreover, their performance and mechanisms have also been critically analyzed in this review.
It is found that most of the PTAs may have some drawbacks such as unrestricted heat generation, and high cost besides having toxicity and methodological complexities. Such challenges have been addressed in the following section and their plausible remedies have also been depicted.
We hope that this review will provide insights for researchers and clinicians to develop novel antibacterial materials and technologies against superbugs. Meanwhile, these nanosystems and nanocomposites having augmented light-to-heat conversion efficacies could also be of great significance in solving environmental and energy issues, including energy generation and wastewater treatment.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Science and Technology Innovation Commission of Shenzhen (RCBS20200714114910141, JCYJ20210324132816039), the Start-up Grant at Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen) (HA45001108, HA11409049), the General Project of Guangdong Natural Science Foundation (2022A1515011781), and the Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation (2021A1515110086).
References
G. D. Wright and A. D. Sutherland, Trends Mol. Med., 2007, 13, 260–267 CrossRef CAS .
N. Bag, S. Bardhan, S. Roy, J. Roy, D. Mondal, S. Das and B. Guo, Biomater. Sci., 2023 10.1039/D2BM01941H .
M. S. Razzaque, Front. Public Health, 2021, 8, 1017 Search PubMed .
W. Li, F. Separovic, N. M. O’Brien-Simpson and J. D. Wade, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 4932–4973 RSC .
S. N. Khan and A. U. Khan, Front. Microbiol., 2016, 7, 174 Search PubMed .
H. Wang, D. Chen and H. Lu, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2022, 106, 3957–3972 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Li, T. Chen, Y. Zhang, Y. Xu and H. Niu, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2021, 10, 2100716 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Krieg and H. Wagner, Immunol. Today, 2000, 21, 521–526 CrossRef CAS .
T. A. Henderson and L. D. Morries, Neuropsychiatr. Dis. Treat., 2015, 11, 2191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Chen, T. Gu, L. Cheng, X. Li, G. Han and Z. Liu, Biomaterials, 2020, 255, 120202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Thangudu, C.-S. Chiang and K. Chu Hwang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2023, 631, 1–16 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, J. Wu, W. Liu, W. Zhang, C.-S. Lee and P. Wang, Acta Biomater., 2023 DOI:10.1016/J.ACTBIO.2023.01.031 .
D. Mondal, S. Roy, S. Bardhan, J. Roy, I. Kanungo, R. Basu and S. Das, Dalton Trans., 2022, 51, 451–462 RSC .
L. Zhang, H. Forgham, X. Huang, A. Shen, T. P. Davis, R. Qiao and B. Guo, Mater. Today Adv., 2022, 14, 100226 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Jung, P. Verwilst, A. Sharma, J. Shin, J. L. Sessler and J. S. Kim, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 2280 RSC .
Y. Qi, S. Ren, J. Ye, Y. Tian, G. Wang, S. Zhang, L. Du, Y. Li, Y. Che and G. Ning, Acta Biomater., 2022, 143, 445–458 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sun, C. Liu, Q. Wang, H. Yang, X. Gao, Y. Deng, W. Yang and M. He, Mater. Lett., 2023, 336, 133884 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, X. Liu, Z. Cui, Y. Zheng, H. Jiang, Y. Zhang, Y. Liang, Z. Li, S. Zhu and S. Wu, ACS Nano, 2022, 16, 14860–14873 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gao, W. Wang, M. Mohammadniaei, M. Zhang, J. Shen and N. Zhou, Appl. Catal., B, 2023, 325, 122314 CrossRef CAS .
X. Bai, Y. Yang, W. Zheng, Y. Huang, F. Xu and Z. Bao, Mater. Chem. Front., 2023, 7, 355–380 RSC .
T. Xu, W. Liu, Z. Li, B. Wang, B. Chitrakar, W. Xiong, Y. Liu and Z. Zeng, Colloids Surf., B, 2023, 222, 113126 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yan, X. Lyu, Y. Jiang, K. R. Ng, R. Yang, F. Zhang and W. Zhao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2023, 15(5), 6514–6525 CrossRef CAS .
L. K. Ruddaraju, S. V. N. Pammi, G. Sankar Guntuku, V. S. Padavala and V. R. M. Kolapalli, Asian J. Pharm. Sci., 2020, 15, 42–59 CrossRef .
A. Maxwell and D. Lawson, Curr. Top. Med. Chem., 2005, 3, 283–303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Rabin, Y. Zheng, C. Opoku-Temeng, Y. Du, E. Bonsu and H. O. Sintim, Future Med. Chem., 2015, 7, 647–671 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jamal, W. Ahmad, S. Andleeb, F. Jalil, M. Imran, M. A. Nawaz, T. Hussain, M. Ali, M. Rafiq and M. A. Kamil, J. Chin. Med. Assoc., 2018, 81, 7–11 CrossRef PubMed .
K. A. Brossard and A. A. Campagnari, Infect. Immun., 2012, 80, 228–233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Nanjundaswamy, J. Jayashankar, M. H. Chethana, R. R. A. Renganathan, C. S. Karthik, A. P. Ananda, S. Nagashree, P. Mallu and V. R. Rai, J. Mol. Struct., 2022, 1255, 132400 CrossRef .
D. T. King, S. Sobhanifar and N. C. J. Strynadka, Protein Sci., 2016, 25, 787–803 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. D. Thorat, E. Dworniczek, G. Brennan, G. Chodaczek, R. Mouras, V. Gascón Pérez, C. Silien, S. A. M. Tofail and J. Bauer, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2021, 9, 846–856 RSC .
D. Xi, M. Xiao, J. Cao, L. Zhao, N. Xu, S. Long, J. Fan, K. Shao, W. Sun, X. Yan, X. Peng, D. Xi, M. Xiao, J. Cao, N. Xu, S. Long, J. Fan, K. Shao, W. Sun, X. Peng, L. Zhao and X. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1907855 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shi, M. Liu, F. Deng, G. Zeng, Q. Wan, X. Zhang and Y. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 194–206 RSC .
Z. Zhang, J. Wang, C. Chen, Z. Zhang, J. Wang and C. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3869–3880 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, J. Zhang, Z. Song, Y. Mu, M. F. Foda, Y. Wu and H. Han, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 407, 127076 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wei, X. Cui, Z. Wang, C. Dong, J. Li and X. Han, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 408, 127240 CrossRef CAS .
J. Son, G. Yi, J. Yoo, C. Park, H. Koo and H. S. Choi, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2019, 138, 133–147 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Y. Zhang, G. Wang, X. Shi, Y. Qiao, J. Liu, H. Liu, A. Ganesh, L. Li, Y. Wang, Y. Zhang, G. Wang, X. Shi, Y. Qiao, A. Ganesh, L. Li, J. Liu and H. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1907284 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cheng, R. Sun, L. Yin, Z. Chai, H. Shi, M. Gao, X. Cheng, R. Sun, L. Yin, Z. Chai, H. Shi and M. Y. Gao, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604894 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Du, Y. Chong, X. Hu, Y. Wang, Y. Zhu, J. Chen, X. Li, Q. Zhang, G. Wang, J. Jiang and G. Liang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1908073 CrossRef CAS .
F. Xiao, H. Gao, Y. Lei, W. Dai, M. Liu, X. Zheng, Z. Cai, X. Huang, H. Wu and D. Ding, Nat. Commun., 2022, 13, 1–10 Search PubMed .
Y. W. Chen, Y. L. Su, S. H. Hu and S. Y. Chen, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2016, 105, 190–204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, W. Zhang, P. Sun, Y. Cai, W. Xu, Q. Fan, Q. Hu and W. Han, Theranostics, 2019, 9, 391 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liu, A. Lin, J. Liu, X. Chen, X. Zhu, Y. Gong, G. Yuan, L. Chen and J. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 26590–26606 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Wang, D. Kim, M. Yang, X. Li and J. Yoon, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 7609–7616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, J. F. Lovell, J. Yoon and X. Chen, Nat. Rev. Clin. Oncol., 2020, 17, 657–674 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Canaparo, F. Foglietta, N. Barbero and L. Serpe, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2022, 189, 114495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, C. Shi, F. Shan, N. Shi, W. Ye, Y. Zhuo, Y. Zhang, Z. Zhang, Y. Shi and C. Peng, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 408, 127282 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yi, Q.-Y. Duan and F.-G. Wu, Research DOI:10.34133/2021/9816594 .
N. Briggs, S. Subramanian, Z. Lin, X. Li, X. Zhang, K. Zhang, K. Xiao, D. Geohegan, R. Wallace, L. Q. Chen, M. Terrones, A. Ebrahimi, S. Das, J. Redwing, C. Hinkle, K. Momeni, A. van Duin, V. Crespi, S. Kar and J. A. Robinson, 2D Mater., 2019, 6, 022001 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, M. Ye, J. Iocozzia, C. Lin, Z. Lin, M. Wang, J. Iocozzia, Z. Lin, C. Lin and M. Ye, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1600024 CrossRef PubMed .
R. A. Ponzio, L. E. Ibarra, E. E. Achilli, E. Odella, C. A. Chesta, S. R. Martínez and R. E. Palacios, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 2022, 234, 112510 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xu, S. Wang, H. Wu, Y. Liu, F. Xu and J. Zhao, Colloids Surf., B, 2021, 207, 111979 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Roy, A. Maity, P. Mandal, D. K. Chanda, K. Pal, S. Bardhan and S. Das, CrystEngComm, 2018, 20, 6338–6350 RSC .
Z. Chen, H. Wu, H. Wang, D. Zaldivar-Silva, L. Agüero, Y. Liu, Z. Zhang, Y. Yin, B. Qiu, J. Zhao, X. Lu and S. Wang, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2021, 129, 112422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ha, J. H. Kim, M. You, Q. Li, C. Fan and J. M. Nam, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 12208–12278 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Singh, A. Sharma, A. Ahmed, A. K. Sundramoorthy, H. Furukawa, S. Arya and A. Khosla, Biosensors, 2021, 11, 336 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Liu, S. Laurent, H. Fattahi, L. vander Elst and R. N. Muller, Nanomedicine, 2011, 6, 519–528 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Roy, S. Bardhan, K. Pal, S. Ghosh, P. Mandal, S. Das and S. Das, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 763, 749–758 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ghosh, S. Roy, S. Bardhan, N. Khatua, B. Bhowal, D. K. Chanda, S. Das, D. Mondal, R. Basu and S. Das, J. Electron. Mater., 2021, 50, 3836–3845 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bardhan, S. Roy, D. K. Chanda, S. Das, K. Pal, A. Chakraborty, R. Basu and S. Das, Cryst. Growth Des., 2019, 19, 4588–4601 CrossRef CAS .
T. Guo, M. S. Yao, Y. H. Lin and C. W. Nan, CrystEngComm, 2015, 17, 3551–3585 RSC .
S. Bardhan, K. Pal, S. Roy, S. Das, A. Chakraborty, P. Karmakar, R. Basu and S. Das, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2019, 19, 7112–7122 CrossRef CAS .
L. Fernández, J. González-Rodríguez, M. Gamallo, Z. Vargas-Osorio, C. Vázquez-Vázquez, Y. Piñeiro, J. Rivas, G. Feijoo and M. T. Moreira, Environ. Pollut., 2020, 266, 115181 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Liu, X. Zhao, B. Yu, N. Zhao, C. Zhang and F. J. Xu, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 7482–7490 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yang, L. Hai, Z. Wang, H. Li, W. Yi, Y. Luo, J. Li, L. Deng and D. He, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2022, 10, 7744–7759 RSC .
Y. Xu, L. Xiao, J. Chen, Q. Wu, W. Yu, W. Zeng, Y. Shi, Y. Lu and Y. Liu, Acta Biomater., 2022, 150, 367–379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Mao, F. Jia, T. Jing, T. Li, H. Jia and W. He, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 569–579 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sun, C. Liu, Q. Wang, H. Yang, X. Gao, Y. Deng, W. Yang and M. He, Mater. Lett., 2023, 336, 133884 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, Y. Peng, Y. Zhou, S. Zhang, J. Tan, H. Li, D. He and L. Deng, Acta Biomater., 2022, 137, 276–289 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Saxena, K. Punjabi, N. Ahamad, S. Singh, P. Bendale and R. Banerjee, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng., 2022, 8, 2232–2257 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. C. Maan, A. H. Hofman, W. M. de Vos and M. Kamperman, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2000936 CrossRef CAS .
T. T. V. Phan, T. C. Huynh, P. Manivasagan, S. Mondal and J. Oh, Nanomaterials, 2020, 10, 66 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Lukowiak, A. Kedziora and W. Strek, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2016, 236, 101–112 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Bi, Q. Bai, M. Liang, D. Yang, S. Li, L. Wang, J. Liu, W. W. Yu, N. Sui, Z. Zhu, X. Bi, Q. Bai, M. Liang, J. Liu, N. Sui, Z. Zhu, L. Wang, D. Yang, S. Li and W. W. Yu, Small, 2022, 18, 2104160 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Samy, S. Zeng, M. D. Birowosuto and A. el Moutaouakil, Crystals, 2021, 11, 355 CrossRef CAS .
M. Derakhshi, S. Daemi, P. Shahini, A. Habibzadeh, E. Mostafavi and A. A. Ashkarran, J. Funct. Biomater., 2022, 13, 27 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Kanatzidis, Inorg. Chem., 2017, 56, 3158–3173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Mochalov, A. Nezhdanov, D. Usanov, A. Markelov, V. Trushin, G. Chidichimo, G. de Filpo, D. Gogova and A. Mashin, Superlattices Microstruct., 2017, 111, 173–180 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Gao, Y. F. Xu, J. Jiang and S. H. Yu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2986–3017 RSC .
Y. Tang, Z. Qin, S. Yin and H. Sun, Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 6373–6388 RSC .
Y. Zhao, Y. Zhou, D. Yang, X. Gao, T. Wen, J. Fu, X. Wen, G. Quan, X. Pan and C. Wu, Acta Biomater., 2021, 135, 164–178 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kannan, P. Vinitha, K. Mohanraj and G. Sivakumar, J. Solid State Chem., 2018, 258, 376–382 CrossRef CAS .
S. Agnihotri, T. Mohan, D. Jha, H. K. Gautam and I. Roy, ACS Omega, 2020, 5, 597–602 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Qi, S. Ren, J. Ye, Y. Tian, G. Wang, S. Zhang, L. Du, Y. Li, Y. Che and G. Ning, Acta Biomater., 2022, 143, 445–458 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Qiao, Y. Ping, H. Zhang, B. Zhou, F. Liu, Y. Yu, T. Xie, W. Li, D. Zhong, Y. Zhang, K. Yao, H. A. Santos and M. Zhou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 3809–3822 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yuan, B. Tao, Y. He, J. Liu, C. Lin, X. Shen, Y. Ding, Y. Yu, C. Mu, P. Liu and K. Cai, Biomaterials, 2019, 217 DOI:10.1016/J.BIOMATERIALS.2019.119290 .
Y. Jiang and J. McNeill, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 838–859 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Guo, M. Li, Y. Zhou, J. Song, Z. Bo and H. Wang, Macromolecules, 2017, 50, 7984–7992 CrossRef CAS .
R. Tautz, E. da Como, T. Limmer, J. Feldmann, H. J. Egelhaaf, E. von Hauff, V. Lemaur, D. Beljonne, S. Yilmaz, I. Dumsch, S. Allard and U. Scherf, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 1–8 Search PubMed .
S. Li, T. Chen, Y. Wang, L. Liu, F. Lv, Z. Li, Y. Huang, K. S. Schanze and S. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 13455–13458 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Manivasagan, J. Kim and E. S. Jang, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2022, 470, 214701 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. Sih and M. O. Wolf, Chem. Commun., 2005, 3375–3384 RSC .
Y. Wang, X. He, Y. Cheng, L. Li, K. Zhang, E. T. Kang and L. Xu, Colloids Surf., B, 2022, 212, 112381 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. He, M. Shi, Y. Liang and B. Guo, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 394, 124888 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liu, D. He, T. Yang, W. Liu, L. Mao, Y. Zhu, J. Wu, G. Luo and J. Deng, J. Nanobiotechnol., 2018, 16, 1–20 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Xiao, J. Sun, L. Liu, R. Hu, H. Lu, C. Cheng, Y. Huang, S. Wang and J. Geng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 5382–5391 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhu, X. Chen, Z. Jia, D. Huo, Y. Liu and J. Liu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2021, 603, 615–632 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhu, X. J. Loh, E. Ye and Z. Li, ACS Mater. Lett., 2022, 4, 21–48 CrossRef CAS .
X. Jiang, L. Wang, H. Tang, D. Cao and W. Chen, Dyes Pigm., 2020, 181, 108599 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lin, X. Song, X. Dong and B. Li, Photodiagn. Photodyn. Ther., 2021, 36, 102597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Shan, Z. Zhao, C. Wang, J. Sun, Z. He, C. Luo and S. Zhang, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 442, 136383 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xu, D. Wang and B. Z. Tang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 133, 7552–7563 CrossRef .
X. Lou, Z. Zhao and B. Z. Tang, Small, 2016, 12, 6430–6450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Huang, D. Li, D. Wang, X. Chen, L. Ferreira, M. C. L. Martins, Y. Wang, Q. Jin, D. Wang, B. Z. Tang and J. Ji, Biomaterials, 2022, 286 DOI:10.1016/J.BIOMATERIALS.2022.121579 .
K. Xue, C. Yang, C. Wang, Y. Liu, J. Liu, L. Shi and C. Zhu, CCS Chem., 2022, 4, 272–285 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, H. Wen, H. Li, Z. C. Yan, Y. Li, L. Wang, D. Wang and B. Z. Tang, Biomaterials, 2021, 276, 121007 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cai, J. Tian, J. Zhu, J. Chen, L. Li, C. Yang, J. Chen and D. Chen, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 426, 131919 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liao, Y. Li and S. C. Tjong, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2018, 19, 3564 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Czarnecka, M. Kwiatkowski, M. Wiśniewski and K. Roszek, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2021, 22, 8136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Avcu, F. E. Baştan, H. Z. Abdullah, M. A. U. Rehman, Y. Y. Avcu and A. R. Boccaccini, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2019, 103, 69–108 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ahlawat, S. Masoudi Asil, G. Guillama Barroso, M. Nurunnabi and M. Narayan, Biomater. Sci., 2021, 9, 626–644 RSC .
H. Liu, Y. Yang, Y. Liu, J. Pan, J. Wang, F. Man, W. Zhang, G. Liu, H. Liu, J. Pan, F. Man, Y. Yang, W. Zhang, Y. Liu, J. Wang and G. Liu, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1903129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Azizi-Lalabadi, H. Hashemi, J. Feng and S. M. Jafari, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 284, 102250 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ji, H. Sun and X. Qu, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2016, 105, 176–189 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Khashan, M. S. Jabir and F. A. Abdulameer, Mater. Res. Express, 2018, 5, 035003 CrossRef .
R. S. Edwards and K. S. Coleman, Nanoscale, 2012, 5, 38–51 RSC .
C. E. Baddour and C. Briens, Int. J. Chem. React. Eng., 2005, 3 DOI:10.2202/1542-6580.1279 .
E. Miyako, H. Nagata, K. Hirano, Y. Makita, K. I. Nakayama and T. Hirotsu, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 475103 CrossRef .
Z. Cheng, R. Chai, P. Ma, Y. Dai, X. Kang, H. Lian, Z. Hou, C. Li and J. Lin, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 9573–9580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Burghard, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2005, 58, 1–109 CAS .
R. Soni, S. R. Joshi, M. Karmacharya, H. Min, S. K. Kim, S. Kumar, G. H. Kim, Y. K. Cho and C. Y. Lee, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2021, 4, 8491–8499 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yang, L. Hu, X. Ma, S. Ye, L. Cheng, X. Shi, C. Li, Y. Li, Z. Liu, K. Yang, L. L. Hu, L. Cheng, X. Z. Shi, Z. Liu, X. X. Ma, Y. G. Li, S. Q. Ye and C. H. Li, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1868–1872 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ma, H. Tao, K. Yang, L. Feng, L. Cheng, X. Shi, Y. Li, L. Guo and Z. Liu, Nano Res., 2012, 5, 199–212 CrossRef CAS .
X. Shi, H. Gong, Y. Li, C. Wang, L. Cheng and Z. Liu, Biomaterials, 2013, 34, 4786–4793 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Ocsoy, S. Yusufbeyoglu, N. Ildiz, A. Ulgen and I. Ocsoy, ACS Omega, 2021, 6, 20637–20643 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Raizada, A. Sudhaik and P. Singh, Mater. Sci. Energy Technol., 2019, 2, 509–525 Search PubMed .
M. Yousefi, M. Dadashpour, M. Hejazi, M. Hasanzadeh, B. Behnam, M. de la Guardia, N. Shadjou and A. Mokhtarzadeh, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2017, 74, 568–581 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. K. Kefeni, T. A. M. Msagati, T. T. Nkambule and B. B. Mamba, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2020, 107, 110314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Moritz and M. Geszke-Moritz, Chem. Eng. J., 2013, 228, 596–613 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xie, T. Fan, J. An, W. Choi, Y. Duo, Y. Ge, B. Zhang, G. Nie, N. Xie, T. Zheng, Y. Chen, H. Zhang and J. S. Kim, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 8065–8087 RSC .
J. J. Hu, Y. J. Cheng and X. Z. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 22657–22672 RSC .
X. Deng, Z. Shao and Y. Zhao, Adv. Sci., 2021, 8, 2002504 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Riehemann, S. W. Schneider, T. A. Luger, B. Godin, M. Ferrari and H. Fuchs, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 872–897 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Huang, A. Ali, Y. Liu, H. Xie, S. Ullah, S. Roy, Z. Song, B. Guo and J. Xu, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2023, 192, 114634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Kim, W. il Choi, M. Kim and G. Tae, J. Controlled Release, 2013, 171, 113–121 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Zhu, S. Qian, H. Guo, Q. Wang, X. Chu, X. Wang, S. Lu, Y. Peng, Y. Guo, Z. Zhu, T. Qin, B. Liu, Y. W. Yang and B. Wang, ACS Nano, 2022, 16, 11136–11151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L.-X. Yan, L.-J. Chen, X. Zhao, X.-P. Yan, L. Yan, L. Chen, X. Zhao and X. Yan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1909042 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Augustin, S. S. Lin, W. S. Berberian and J. E. Johnson, Foot Ankle Clin., 2003, 8, 491–502 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Huo, Q. Jia, H. Huang, J. Zhang, P. Li, X. Dong and W. Huang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 8762–8789 RSC .
Y. Liu, P. Bhattarai, Z. Dai and X. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 2053–2108 RSC .
J. J. Hu, Y. J. Cheng and X. Z. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 22657–22672 RSC .
Z. Bao, X. Liu, Y. Liu, H. Liu and K. Zhao, Asian J. Pharm. Sci., 2016, 11, 349–364 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:

Shubham Roy
	Dr Shubham Roy obtained his Bachelor's degree in Physics from the University of Calcutta in 2013 and his Master's degree in the same discipline from Madurai Kamaraj University in 2015. He was awarded his Doctoral degree in science from Jadavpur University in 2022. Dr Roy works on the interface of materials science and biomedical engineering for fabricating fluorometric imaging and theranostic modules to address different environmental and biological issues.

Jhilik Roy
	Jhilik Roy is presently doing her PhD in Materials science at the Department of Physics, Jadavpur University, Kolkata, India. She has obtained both BSc (2019) and MSc (2021) degrees in Physics from the University of Calcutta and Techno India University respectively. Ms Roy has an excellent command of theoretical molecular docking analysis and other in-silico studies. She has published several research papers recently on fluorometric sensors and their interaction with living systems. She is presently working in the field of piezoelectric and piezocatalysis applications.

Bing Guo
	Dr Bing Guo is currently acting as an Associate Professor in the School of Science, Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen), China. He earned his Bachelor's and Master of Philosophy degrees from Zhengzhou University and Hong Kong Polytechnic University, respectively. Dr Guo completed his PhD study and postdoctoral training at the National University of Singapore. His current research focuses on the development of organic materials for molecular imaging probes and nanomedicines.

 	Scheme 1  A schematic diagram of PTT with different multimodal strategies.	 

 	Scheme 2  Multiple resistance mechanisms of bacteria that turn to MDR bacteria. Reprinted from ref. 23, image reused under the creative commons attribution license.	 

 	Fig. 1  (I) UV-vis spectrum of MRSA incubated with AuNP solutions at different pH values (7.4 and 6.0). The embedded graphs are the digital images of MRSA treated with AuNP solutions at different pH values. (II) Aggregation mechanism of AuNPs for bacterial-selective therapy: (i) The charge conversion of Pep-DA/Au. (ii) The aggregation mechanism of AuNPs and the aggregated AuNP-triggered interparticle plasmonic coupling effects and hyperthermia with light irradiation. (III) TEM images of MRSA (107 CFU mL−1, 1 mL) treated with Pep-DA/Au (120 μg mL−1) at pH values of 7.4 and 6.0. (IV) Photographs of the agar plates of MRSA treated with different concentrations (μg mL−1) of Pep-DA/Au at different pH values (7.4 and 6.0) under 808 nm light irradiation. Reprinted from ref. 34, copyright (2021) with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 2  (I) TEM images of dAuNPs before and after being illuminated with a 405 nm laser at different periods of time, (II) photographs of representative mice chosen from each group and captured on the 20th-day post-treatment for showing the therapeutic effects of different therapeutic combinations, (III) photothermal images of tumor-bearing mice for showing the in vivo cross-linking effect of dAuNPs on tumor local temperature against irradiation time of 808 nm laser. Reprinted from ref. 38, Copyright (2017) with permission from WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 3  (I) Schematic illustration of reduction-controlled condensation of 1 to yield 1-Dimer (intramolecular quenching) which self-assembles into 1-NPs (both intra-and intermolecular quenching) to additionally enhance the photothermal efficacy of the fluorophore Cypate. (II) (a) UV-vis absorption spectra of 20 × 10−6 m 1 after incubation with (red) or without (black) 4 × 10−3 m TCEP at 37 °C for 4 h. Inset: UV-vis absorption spectra of 20 × 10−6 m 1 and 10 × 10−6 m 1-Dimer in DMSO. (b) Fluorescence spectra of 20 × 10−6 m 1 after incubation with (gray) or without (red) 4 × 10−3 m TCEP at 37 °C for 4 h. (III) Theoretical calculations of photophysical properties for 1-Dimer (intramolecular quenching) and Cypate-Dimer (intermolecular quenching). (a) Optimized ground-state structure of 1-Dimer in DMSO. (b) and (c) Electron transitions of the excitation to the first excited state of 1-Dimer in DMSO (b) and Cypate-Dimer in water (c). H (L) means HOMO (LUMO). Transitions were characterized by molecular orbitals (bubbles), photo wavelength (λx), and oscillator strength (f). Reprinted from ref. 39, Copyright (2019) with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 4  (I) Photodynamic and photothermal properties of NanoPcN. (a) 1O2 detection using ABDA as the probe and the degradation of absorbance at 380 nm. (b) Fluorescence intensity changes of DHE in the control and NanoPcN groups under 655 nm laser irradiation at different times. λex = 510 nm and λem = 578 nm. (c) Temperature change (ΔT) of various concentrations of NanoPcN under 655 nm laser (2.0 W cm−2) irradiation for 10 min. (d) IR images were recorded using an IR camera with various concentrations of NanoPcN after laser irradiation (10 min, 2.0 W cm−2). (e) The photothermal effect of NanoPcN upon irradiation for 10 min (655 nm, 1.0 W cm−2) and then shutting off the laser. (f) Linear time vs. −lnθ during the cooling period. (g) Photothermal capability for three cycles under irradiation using a 655 nm laser (2.0 W cm−2) for 10 min. (h) Photographs of ICG and NanoPcN after laser irradiation (2.0 W cm−2). Inset: before laser irradiation. (i) Schematic diagram of the possible photophysically activated process of NanoPcN, (II) Schematic diagram of the multimodal PTT application. (III) S. aureus (a) and E. coli (b) in the absence and presence of NanoPcN treated with and without 655 nm laser irradiation. The concentration of NanoPcN was 50 nM for S. aureus and 5 μM for E. coli. (c) Statistical analysis of the bacterial survival rate after 655 nm laser irradiation by calculating log10 (CFU mL−1) of MRSA and ESBL E. coli. For MRSA: 50 nM NanoPcN; laser: 0.5 W cm−2, 2 min. For ESBL E. coli, 10 μM NanoPcN; laser: 1.0 W cm−2, 10 min. (d) Photographs of MRSA treated with MB, TPPS, and NanoPcN, in the absence and presence of 655 nm laser irradiation. Concentration: 50 nM. (e) Bacterial survival rate after incubating different concentrations of MB, TPPS, and NanoPcN by calculating log10 (CFU mL−1) of MRSA after 2 min 655 nm laser irradiation (0.5 W cm−2). Reprinted from ref. 44, Copyright (2022) with permission from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (I) Synthesis process of the nanosystem and its working principle. (II) FTIR spectra of the synthesized sample. (III) (A) TEM photos of the nanoparticles, PC (upper left), ZIF-8 (upper right), PCZ (lower left), and PCAZ (lower right). (B) TEM element mapping of PCAZ. (IV) (D) The temperature change curve of PC (250 μg mL−1, 1 W cm−2) after irradiation with an 808 nm laser and after turning off the laser. (E) The relationship between the cooling time and the negative natural logarithm of the temperature driving force. (F) The photothermal cycle curve of PC (250 μg mL−1, 1 W cm−2) in five switching cycles. (V) SEM images of P. aeruginosa (Scale bars: 1 μm). (VI) Statistical analysis of the relative biomass of the P. aeruginosa biofilm. Reprinted from ref. 69, Copyright (2022) with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 6  (I) Schematic diagram of the working principle of the sample. (II) Temperature rise (hyperthermia) pattern of aqueous dispersed FeS nanoparticles as a function of time of irradiation with CW laser light (wavelength 635 nm). (III) (a) VSM data (inset: magnified near zero-field) and (b) UV-visible spectrum of FeS nanoparticles (0.75 mg mL−1). (IV) ROS detection assay using DCFH-DA dye from bacterial cells, treated with various concentrations of FeS NPs (0, 0.5, and 1 mg mL−1), without (dark) and with (light) laser irradiation. Reprinted from ref. 83. Image reused under the Creative Commons Attribution License.	 

 	Fig. 7  (I) Schematic of (a) synthesis of Ag+-GCS-PDA@GNRs, (b) acidity-triggered charge reversal and Ag+ ion release, and (c) bacteria-specific targeting and chemo-photothermal combinational therapy based on the Ag+-GCS-PDA@GNRs. (II) Characterization of Ag+-GCS-PDA@GNRs. a Representative TEM images of (a1) GNRs, (a2) PDA@GNRs, (a3) GCS-PDA@GNRs, and (a4) Ag+-GCS-PDA@GNRs. (b) UV-vis-NIR spectra of GNRs, PDA@GNRs, GCS-PDA@GNRs and Ag+-GCS-PDA@GNRs, respectively. (c) The zeta potential of Ag+-GCS-PDA@GNRs in PB with different pH values (7.4 & 6.3). (d) Quantitative analysis of Ag+ ion loading capacity of PDA@GNRs. (e) The release curve of Ag+ ions from Ag+-GCS-PDA@GNRs in the medium at pH 7.4 and 6.3 with or without laser irradiation for a certain time, respectively. (f) Temperature evolution profile of PB buffer and Ag+-GCS-PDA@GNR suspensions with different concentrations in PB (pH 6.3) upon NIR laser (808 nm, 0.5 W cm−2) irradiation. (g) The corresponding thermographic images of different concentrations of Ag+-GCS-PDA@GNR suspension in PB (pH 6.3) under NIR irradiation. (h) The change in absorbance intensity of Ag+-GCS-PDA@GNRs after repeated laser irradiation (n = 5; 808 nm, 0.5 W cm−2). (i) Change in the thermal curves of Ag+-GCS-PDA@GNRs after repeated laser irradiation (n = 5; 808 nm, 0.5 W cm−2), (III) (a) Photographs of the subcutaneous abscess on the dorsal surface of mice after 9 days treatment. (b) Photographs of bacterial CFUs. Reprinted from ref. 95. Image reused under the Creative Commons Attribution License.	 

 	Fig. 8  (I) Schematic illustration of the preparation of TTVB-loaded nanofibrous membrane (TTVB@NM) through electrospinning for microbe interception and microbial inactivation under sunlight. (II) (A)–(D) ROS generation ability of TTVB in aqueous solution upon light irradiation (34 mW cm−2) verified with different ROS indicators: (A) DCFH as the indicator for total ROS; (B) ABDA as the indicator for 1O2; (C) DHR 123 as the indicator for O2˙−; (D) HPF as the indicator for ˙OH. (E) CLSM images of different bacteria and fungi stained with TTVB (10 μM for E. coli and MDR E. coli; 2 μM for S. aureus, MDR S. aureus, S. cerevisiae, and C. albicans). (F) Antimicrobial activity of TTVB (5 μM for Gram-negative bacteria; 1 μM for Gram-positive bacteria and fungi; 500 nM for M13 phage) upon irradiation with simulated sunlight (34 mW cm−2). (III) (a) TTVB@NM covered on a medical mask suffering from E. coli aerosol treatment and (b) later analysis of live bacteria on and underneath the membrane using a plate-counting method. Reprinted from ref. 106, Copyright (2021) with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 9  (I) Fabrication of the self-sterilizing face mask by a spray deposition method. (II) Photothermal performance of the masks. (A) Schematic of the setup used for photothermal studies. (B) Time-lapse thermal images of the CNT-coated mask. (C) Human dummy wearing a CNT-coated mask showing the temperature increase at 1 sun intensity. (D) Surface temperature was measured by an IR camera against time for the pristine (black curve) and the CNT-coated (red curve) masks. (E) Reflectance spectra of the pristine (black curve) and the CNT-coated (red curve) masks. (F) The temperature of the CNT-coated mask under multiple on/off cycles of 1 sun illumination, (III) Antimicrobial and antiviral properties. (A) Detection of the antibacterial effect (CFU mL–1) of the E. coli ATCC 25922 bacteria on the pristine and the CNT-coated masks under dark and light conditions. (B) High-resolution confocal fluorescence microscopy images of the live/dead assay of E. coli ATCC 25922 stained with SYTO 9 and propidium iodide. (C) The number of viable E. coli bacteria was calculated from CFUs after solar illumination of the surfaces of the control (glass surface), pristine, and CNT-coated masks. Data are expressed as mean ± standard deviation values; n = 3 independent experiments. (D) Changes in the concentration of the VPs on the control, pristine, and CNT-coated masks under dark and light conditions. (E) Representative SDS-PAGE electrophoresis data for the control, pristine, and CNT-coated masks after the treatment of VPs under light mode. Reprinted from ref. 121, Copyright (2021) with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

Metal and metal oxide NPs	Hydrothermal, sol–gel, template-based, electrochemical, microwave-assisted	42–56	99.99	Excellent stability, easy engineering to the required size, shape, and porosity, no swelling changes, straightforward insertion into hydrophobic and hydrophilic systems	Cytotoxicity issue from chemical contaminants during synthesis	
57–74

Nano-chalcogenides	Reflux, hydrothermal, panoramic, template-based method, hot-injection method, electrospinning, sonochemical, microwave-assisted, CVD, microbial	36–45	94–99	Act as photocatalysts, low cost and high efficiency for efficient utilization	Low stability, limited synthesis strategies, limited activity	
75–86

Conjugated polymeric nanocomposites	Electrochemical synthesis, intrinsic/extrinsic polymerization, oxidative coupling of monomers	Up to 88	90–99	Mechanical and electrical conductivity, low density and permeability, structural and thermal stability	High viscosity, non-uniform distribution, agglomeration	
87–97

Small molecules	Rathore's procedures, McMurry reactions, and Suzuki–Miyaura cross-coupling reactions, catalyzed reactions	35–40	99.99	Work rapidly, potential for therapeutic development	Variable specificity, limited availability	
98–107

Carbon nanomaterials-based PTAs	CVD, thermal decomposition, electrochemical exfoliation, arc discharge, hydrothermal, laser ablation	30–35	99.99	Excellent heat conductors, extremely low gravitational influence, good conductivity, low toxicity	Costly, extremely small size, difficult to work with	
108–125


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
