Facile synthesis of hierarchical SnSe nanosheets–hydrogel evaporators for sustainable solar-powered desalination   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2TA01264B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2TA01264B
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 10672-10681Facile synthesis of hierarchical SnSe nanosheets–hydrogel evaporators for sustainable solar-powered desalination†

        
          
            Feng 
            Li‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Xiaoqing 
            Cai‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Gaoxing 
            Jing
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ruijia 
            Huang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Guangjie 
            Song
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Dong 
            Wang
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Wenwen 
            Chen
          
        
      *a
aGuangdong Key Laboratory for Biomedical Measurements and Ultrasound Imaging, School of Biomedical Engineering, Health Science Center, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518060, China. E-mail: chenww@szu.edu.cn
bCenter for AIE Research, Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Polymer Science and Technology, Guangdong Research Center for Interfacial Engineering of Functional Materials, College of Materials Science and Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518060, China
Received 
      16th February 2022
    , Accepted 8th April 2022First published on 8th April 2022AbstractIn contrast to the demand for freshwater that is increasing continuously due to population growth and economic growth, the availability of freshwater resources is decreasing rapidly due to environmental pollution and climate change. Solar-powered desalination is an eco-friendly and efficient way to produce freshwater. Herein, a facile method based on the Rayleigh–Bénard convection was developed to synthesize hierarchical nanomaterials–hydrogel evaporators. The SnSe nanosheets were encapsulated in poly(hydroxyethyl 2-methacrylate) hydrogel, and the resultant thin, porous SnSe–hydrogel composite layer was seamlessly integrated into the hydrogel matrix. Under one-sun irradiation, the SnSe–hydrogel evaporator demonstrated a high water-evaporation rate (2.20 kg m−2 h−1) and high energy conversion efficiency (91.70%). Moreover, the evaporator not only had excellent long-term mechanical properties, but also demonstrated excellent ion-rejection rates during a long-term seawater evaporation test, which indicated the potential application of the evaporator to sustainable solar-powered desalination in the offing or on ocean-going vessels. Our results provide a route for the synthesis of functional nanocomposite hydrogels for solar-powered water purification, sensing, biomedical, and other fields.
Introduction
Due to population growth, industrial development, and economic growth, the demand for freshwater is continuously increasing. In recent years, extremely dry weather has frequently occurred in coastal areas due to global warming, resulting in a shortage of freshwater resources. Fresh water is an extremely limited natural resource: 96.5% of the water on Earth is seawater,1 and part of the freshwater is polluted by industrial activities. Desalination and sewage purification are effective ways to alleviate the freshwater shortage. However, traditional water-purification technology suffers from several limitations, including large equipment, complex structure, high cost, and horrendous energy consumption,2 which is not conducive to peaking carbon dioxide emissions and achieving carbon neutrality. In comparison, using solar energy for seawater desalination and sewage purification is a low-carbon and environmentally friendly method to reduce the consumption of fossil fuels and electrical energy.3,4 Therefore, in the face of climate change, advanced solar-powered water purification technologies are of great significance to economic development and water security.
The core unit of solar-powered water-purification instruments is the evaporator. An efficient evaporator can achieve a high water-evaporation rate by effectively promoting water transportation and converting solar energy into thermal energy. However, because very few materials have both excellent water-transportation-promoting and photothermal-conversion properties, high-performance evaporators are generally composed of two materials. Hydrogel is a material that has a porous structure, highly tunable flexibility, elasticity, and self-healing ability. Hydrogel not only has no barrier effect on water vapor and water molecules, but also has unique swelling properties. Therefore, the use of hydrogel as a material for the evaporator of the solar-powered water-purification instrument has attracted attention.5,6 Poly(hydroxyethyl 2-methacrylate) (pHEMA) is a network hydrogel with mechanical stability, biocompatibility and low toxicity which has been widely used in medical polymer materials, modifiers and adhesives.7 Recently, the hydrophilic pHEMA also showed high ion adsorption and excellent antifouling properties,8–10 making it a potential choice for the evaporator. Obviously, pHEMA hydrogel is an ideal medium for water transportation, which usually needs a light-absorbing additive to make the evaporator.
Superior light-absorbing materials typically have high absorbance and photothermal conversion efficiency in the spectral regions of ultraviolet light, visible light, and near-infrared light. Metallic plasmonic nanoparticles, carbon nanomaterials, and low-dimensional narrow-bandgap semiconductors are commonly used light absorbing materials.11–17 The photothermal effects of layered semiconductors, such as black phosphorus,18 graphene,19 MXenes,20,21 and MoS2,22 have been studied. However, black phosphorus is unstable in water, MXenes have many defects, and graphene and MoS2 have low absorbance. Recently, the photothermal effect of low-dimensional SnSe has evoked attention.23,24 SnSe is a layered material whose structure is similar to that of black phosphorus. Its band gap is approximately 0.9 eV, and it has high absorbances in the spectral regions of ultraviolet light, visible light, and near-infrared light.25 Moreover, SnSe has a very low thermal conductivity.26 Therefore, SnSe is a suitable light-absorbing additive in evaporators. However, the application of SnSe as a light-absorbing additive in evaporators has not been reported.
The use of hydrogel and nanomaterials as materials for evaporators has been reported.20,27 A large amount of light-absorbing additive cannot interact with sunlight since it is usually uniformly distributed inside the hydrogel, which wastes endothermic materials and increases cost. In this work, on the basis of Rayleigh–Bénard convection, we developed a one-step method to fabricate hierarchical nanomaterials–hydrogel evaporators. SnSe NSs, used as the nanomaterials, were encapsulated in porous hydrogel, which was used as the backbone. Interestingly, the NSs were enriched within a 55 μm depth from the hydrogel surface. In comparison with previously reported hierarchical hydrogel evaporators fabricated by simple bonding,28,29 the SnSe nanosheets–hydrogel evaporator reported here exhibited not only improved mechanical properties, but also improved resistance to the scouring effect of sea waves. Moreover, the solar-powered water-evaporation performance and long-term solar-powered desalination performance of the SnSe–hydrogel evaporator were studied. The results of this work are of great significance to obtain freshwater in coastal areas or ocean-going vessels by using solar-driven desalination technology.
Results
An interesting phenomenon is that the pepper and undissolved salt will enrich at the bottom of an egg custard in a mold caused by Rayleigh–Bénard convection. The Rayleigh–Bénard convection phenomenon exists widely in nature and has been used to study the principles of the formation of composite materials.30,31 The Rayleigh number (Ra), which is the governing parameter of Rayleigh–Bénard convection, can be calculated according to the following equation: (1)where g is gravitational acceleration, β is the thermal expansion coefficient, ν is kinematic viscosity, α is thermal diffusivity, H is the height of the liquid column, and Tbottom and Ttop are the temperatures at the bottom and top of the liquid column, respectively. Tbottom is greater than Ttop. The Ra describes the ratio of the gravitational force that drives the fluid flow to kinematic viscosity that opposes the fluid flow. In a closed system, when Ra exceeds the critical threshold (1708), the liquid in the system begins to become unstable and forms convection cells.32 The higher the Ra, the more significant the thermal convection.
On the basis of Rayleigh–Bénard convection, we designed a novel method of synthesizing hierarchical nanomaterials–hydrogel structures. As illustrated in Fig. 1a, SnSe NSs and hydrogel are mixed uniformly before being thermally polymerized in a closed mold. Large Rayleigh–Bénard convection is required to quickly transport the low-dimensional nanomaterials to the bottom of the mold. According to eqn (1), a large Tbottom, which can be achieved by heating the bottom of the mold, is required to obtain a large Ra. The transportation of the NSs is promoted by not only Rayleigh–Bénard convection, but also the high density of the NSs that prevents them from floating. As shown in Fig. 1b, after the polymerized mixture solidifies, the SnSe NSs are enriched at the bottom of the molded hydrogel, and the hierarchical SnSe NSs–hydrogel is obtained.
 Fig. 1  Schematic of synthesizing the hierarchical SnSe NSs–hydrogel evaporator. (a) Schematic of Rayleigh–Bénard convection in a mixture of hydrogel and SnSe NSs during thermal polymerization. (b) The hierarchical SnSe–hydrogel evaporator with the SnSe NSs at the bottom. 
SnSe is an emerging high-performance light-absorbing additive,24,33,34 thus, we focus on the hierarchical SnSe NSs–hydrogel evaporator. SnSe NSs were synthesized by a facile sonication-assisted liquid exfoliation method. Two sizes of SnSe NSs were obtained by centrifuging the NSs at 1k rpm and 5k rpm; for details see the Experimental section. The SEM images in Fig. S1† show that the lamellar SnSe NSs have a variety of shapes and sizes, and the average size of the NSs obtained after the 1k rpm centrifugation is larger than that of the NSs obtained after the 5k rpm centrifugation. The SnSe NSs have a smooth surface, indicating that they delaminate along the (100) plane, which has the lowest strength among different lattice planes. The detailed characterization of SnSe NSs has been reported in our previous work.35–37
A series of hydrogels that differed in their moisture content were fabricated. The higher the moisture content of the hydrogels, the higher the water absorption but the lower the mechanical properties of the hydrogels. The hydrogel that had an 80% moisture content was selected as the matrix of the SnSe NSs-based evaporator due to its good water absorption capacity and sufficient flexibility. The hydrogel not only promoted water transportation, but also provided a mechanical support.
Fig. S2† shows a typical hierarchical SnSe NSs–hydrogel evaporator synthesized using the one-step thermal polymerization method based on Rayleigh–Bénard convection; the details of the synthesis process can be seen in the Experimental section. A thin black layer is prominent on the top area of the evaporator, and the hydrogel matrix is white in color. The evaporator was freeze-dried and its microstructure was studied. The Raman spectra (Fig. S3†) of the SnSe NSs and the black layer show four peaks at 67 cm−1, 110 cm−1, 128 cm−1, and 151 cm−1, which correspond to the A1g, Bg3, A2g, and A3g phonon vibration modes of SnSe,38 while no peaks are observed for the white pHEMA hydrogel. The Raman results show that the SnSe–hydrogel composite layer is obtained. In addition, the Raman peaks obtained for SnSe–hydrogel are lower in intensity than the peaks measured for SnSe NSs, suggesting that the SnSe NSs in the hydrogel are not directly exposed to air, but are covered by the hydrogel.39
To study the mechanism underlying the formation of the hierarchical structure and optimize the performance of the SnSe–hydrogel evaporator, we investigated the morphology, microstructure and photothermal conversion performance of the evaporators fabricated using different sizes and concentrations of SnSe NSs (Table S1†). Fig. S4† shows the top view of the six evaporators. The surface color of the evaporator fabricated using ground SnSe powder and 0.5 mg mL−1 SnSe NSs obtained after 1k rpm centrifugation is gray, which indicates that the SnSe covers the surface of the evaporator incompletely. Therefore, we focused on the other four evaporators whose surface colors were black.
The thickness of the SnSe–hydrogel composite layer was characterized using an optical microscope. When the concentration of the SnSe nanosheets obtained after 1k rpm centrifugation increased from 1 mg mL−1 to 3 mg mL−1, the thickness of the SnSe–hydrogel composite layer remained similar (55 μm; Fig. 2a and b and S5†). However, when the centrifugation speed increased to 5k rpm, the thickness of the composite layer increased to 117 μm (Fig. 2c). Interestingly, the results indicate that the size rather than the concentration of SnSe NSs affects the thickness of the SnSe–hydrogel composite layer. The SnSe–hydrogel mixture is a nanofluid. Therefore, its Ra can be modulated by changing the size and concentration of nanomaterials of SnSe NSs to modify the thermal diffusivity α. As the size of the NSs decreases, α increases due to Brownian motion that accelerates the movement of the NSs and enhances the heat exchange in the SnSe–hydrogel nanofluid.40,41 According to eqn (1), the higher the α, the lower the Ra, which increases the thickness of the SnSe–hydrogel composite layer. When the concentration of high-thermal-conductivity nanomaterials increases, α generally increases. Both the thermal conductivity and the volume fraction (0.008–0.05%) of SnSe NSs are very low. Therefore, at the volume fraction range, SnSe NSs have no significant effect on the thermal diffusivity of the SnSe–hydrogel nanofluid, and the concentration of the NSs has little effect on the thickness of the composite layer.
 Fig. 2  Characterization of the SnSe–hydrogel evaporator. Optical image of the cross-section of the evaporator with (a and b) 1 and 3 mg mL−1, 1k rpm SnSe NSs and (c) 2 mg mL−1, 5k rpm SnSe NSs. SEM image of the top surface of the evaporator (d) without SnSe, and with (e) 1k rpm SnSe NSs and (f) 5k rpm SnSe NSs. (g) High magnification SEM image of the evaporator with 1k rpm SnSe NSs and the corresponding EDS elemental mapping of (h) Sn and (i) Se. Scale bars of (a–c), (d–f), and (h–j) are 200 μm, 20 μm, and 10 μm, respectively. 
A pure-hydrogel evaporator that contains no SnSe NSs, an SnSe–hydrogel evaporator fabricated using the SnSe NSs obtained after 1k rpm centrifugation, and an SnSe–hydrogel evaporator fabricated using the SnSe NSs obtained after 5k rpm centrifugation were further investigated using scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Fig. 2d–f show that the evaporators, especially the SnSe–hydrogel evaporators, are porous. Importantly, the SnSe NSs promote the formation of pores in the hydrogel, which is due to the motion of SnSe during the polymerization process. In addition, the smaller the SnSe NSs, the larger the pores in the SnSe–hydrogel evaporators. It can be inferred from Fig. 2a and c that the volume of the composite layer fabricated using 5k rpm SnSe NSs is larger than that of the composite layer fabricated using 1k rpm SnSe NSs, which leads to an increase in the pore size. Under high magnification, only a small number of exposed SnSe NSs were observed (Fig. S6†), indicating that most of the SnSe NSs are encapsulated in the hydrogel matrix. Energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) mapping analysis revealed that the SnSe NSs were distributed on the surfaces of the SnSe–hydrogel evaporators evenly (Fig. 2g–i). The EDS spectra shown in Fig. S7† suggest that the atomic percentages of Se and Sn in the SnSe NSs are 47.48% and 52.52%, respectively. It is worth noting that the SnSe–hydrogel composite layer was denser than the hydrogel matrix (Fig. S8†). The small size of the pores on the SnSe–hydrogel composite layer may be due to the enrichment of the SnSe NSs. TEM images (Fig. S9†) showed a layer of hydrogel wrapped around the SnSe NSs. The SEM images and TEM images indicate that the SnSe NSs were non-covalently immobilized in the hydrogel matrix.42
Collectively, the characterization of the SnSe–hydrogel evaporator demonstrated that the SnSe NSs are encapsulated in the hydrogel matrix, and the resultant SnSe–hydrogel composite layer is seamlessly integrated into the hydrogel matrix. Furthermore, we successfully fabricated nanomaterial–hydrogel evaporators using MoS2 NSs, graphene and Au nanoparticles (NPs) as the light-absorbing additives, which indicates that the fabrication method reported in this work is applicable in synthesizing hierarchical structures based on low-dimensional materials and hydrogels.
The ultraviolet-visible-near-infrared (UV-vis-NIR) spectra in the wavelength range of 280–2500 nm were employed to examine the absorption spectra of SnSe NSs. As shown in Fig. S10,† SnSe NSs present good solar absorption features over a wide wavelength range, especially in visible light, which covered the most energetic part of the solar spectrum. The solar-powered water-evaporation performance of the SnSe–hydrogel evaporator was measured under one-sun irradiation. Fig. 3a illustrates the experimental setup for measuring the water evaporation performance of the evaporator and the details can be seen in the Experimental section. During the measurement, the maximum surface temperature of the evaporator was reached in 30 minutes (Fig. 3b and c). It is worth mentioning that the temperature of the evaporator surface differs from the temperature of water by 10–11 °C, which is greater than that reported in some recently published work.15,20,43
 Fig. 3  Solar-powered water-evaporation performance of SnSe–hydrogel evaporators. (a) Measurement setup. (b and c) Infrared images of the SnSe–hydrogel evaporator before irradiation and after 30 min one-sun irradiation. (d) Time-dependent surface temperature of the SnSe NSs of different size. (e and f) Effect of size and concentration on the temperature variation curve of the evaporators. (g) Time-dependent water mass loss curves and (h) corresponding evaporation rate histogram. 
Under one-sun irradiation, as the size of SnSe NSs decreased, the equilibrium temperature of the SnSe–hydrogel evaporator decreased (Fig. 3d). A similar observation was reported in ref. 24. The maximum equilibrium temperature of the SnSe NSs is close to 80 °C (Fig. 3d), which is consistent with the maximum equilibrium temperature of the SnSe nanomaterials reported in ref. 33. As the size of SnSe NSs decreases, the heating rate of SnSe increases, which may be due to the rapid heat conduction through small NSs. As shown in Fig. 3e, the equilibrium temperature of the SnSe–hydrogel evaporator in the water is larger than that of the pure SnSe powders in air (Fig. 3d). The ground SnSe–hydrogel evaporator has a low equilibrium temperature because the SnSe powder does not completely cover the surface of the evaporator. We further investigated the effect of the concentration of the SnSe obtained after 1k rpm centrifugation on the equilibrium temperature of the evaporators since it had the highest photothermal conversion performance among the NSs of different sizes. As shown in Fig. 3f, the SnSe–hydrogel evaporator fabricated using 0.5 mg mL−1 of the SnSe NSs has a low equilibrium temperature because the NSs do not completely cover the surface of the evaporator. However, when the concentration of the NSs increases above 1 mg mL−1, the equilibrium temperature of the evaporator remains unchanged despite the increase in the concentration, which indicates that 1 mg mL−1 is the concentration at which the SnSe NSs can completely cover the surface of the SnSe–hydrogel evaporator. Here, the surface area of the evaporator surface covered by 5 mg SnSe NSs was approximately 4.52 cm2. Therefore, to fabricate 1 m2 × 1 cm of SnSe–hydrogel evaporator, engineers will require SnSe NSs or low-density carbon materials as little as 10 g or 4 g, respectively, which indicates that the fabrication method of the evaporators reported in this work can greatly reduce the requirement for light-absorbing additives. On the basis of the quotation of HEMA and SnSe in China, the industrialization cost of the SnSe–hydrogel evaporator is as low as $ 2.72 per m2.
As demonstrated in Fig. 3g and h, under one-sun irradiation, the SnSe–hydrogel evaporator fabricated using 1 mg mL−1 of SnSe NSs obtained after 1k rpm centrifugation exhibits the highest water-evaporation rate (2.20 kg m−2 h−1). The water evaporation rate is significantly higher than the evaporation rate of pure water and other reported SnSe based evaporators.24,33,34 As shown in Fig. S11,† the pore size decreased with increasing SnSe NS concentration. The dense surface hinders water transport as well as reduces the surface area of the evaporator, resulting in a low evaporation rate. The energy conversion efficiency (η) can be calculated according to the following equation: (2)where m is the water evaporation rate, Pin is the power of one-sun irradiation, and ELV is the energy consumed for water evaporation. The evaporation enthalpy of the water that passes through the hydrogel is usually lower than that of pure water due to the hydrating effect, porous structure, and large surface area of the hydrogel.5,20,44 Under one-sun irradiation, the water evaporation rate exhibited by the SnSe–hydrogel evaporator was 1.6 times as high as the evaporation rate of the 40 °C pure water in a dark room. Assuming that the energy input (Uin) of pure water and the SnSe–hydrogel evaporator is equal at the same temperature, the relationship between evaporation rate and evaporation enthalpy can be described by the following equation:45 Uin = ΔHwatermwater = ΔHevaporatormevaporator(3)
The evaporation enthalpy of 40 °C pure water is about 2400 kJ kg−1,46 and mevaporator/mwater is 1.6; therefore, the evaporation enthalpy of the water evaporated by the SnSe–hydrogel evaporator is about 1500 kJ kg−1. Therefore, the maximum energy conversion efficiency of the evaporator is approximately 91.7%.
As a comparison, the water evaporation rates exhibited by the hierarchical evaporators based on MoS2–hydrogel, Au NPs–hydrogel and graphene–hydrogel are shown in Fig. S12.† As shown in Fig. S12b and c and Table S1,† at the same concentration, the SnSe–hydrogel evaporator exhibits the highest water-evaporation rate among the nanomaterial–hydrogel evaporators fabricated in this work. However, to determine the most suitable nanomaterials for light-absorbing additives, engineers should consider the density, size, and concentration of the nanomaterials.
To evaluate the desalination performance of the SnSe–hydrogel evaporator, we investigated the natural seawater evaporation rate of the evaporator fabricated using 1 mg mL−1 of SnSe NSs obtained after 1k rpm centrifugation under one-sun irradiation over a 30 hour period. Fig. 4a shows that salt crystallizes on the edge of the evaporator surface before gradually crystallizing over the entire evaporator surface. It is worth noting that the amount of salt that crystallizes over the evaporator surface is low after 10 hours, indicating that the evaporator can continue to work throughout the daytime. In addition, as shown in the right-hand picture of Fig. 4a, the salt that crystallizes over the evaporator surface dissolves completely in the seawater after the irradiation light is turned off. Thus, the evaporator demonstrates good self-cleaning properties, which may allow the evaporator to recover overnight.
 Fig. 4  Sustainable solar-powered desalination performance of the SnSe–hydrogel evaporator. (a) Salt crystallization of the evaporator under continuous 30 h one-sun illumination. And the salt was redissolved completely after turning off the light. (b and c) Time-dependent water mass loss and evaporation rate curves. (d) Concentrations of four primary ions in an actual seawater sample before and after desalination. (e and f) The water-evaporation performance in brine with the salinity from 0 to 2 M. (g) Long-term solar evaporation performance evaluation simulating actual working conditions. 
As shown in Fig. 4b and c, over time, the evaporation rate of natural seawater decreases due to the crystallization of salt over the evaporator surface, which hinders water transportation. We found that as the volume of the seawater decreased due to water evaporation, the surface area of the evaporator decreased. However, when the seawater was reconstituted to its initial volume by adding seawater, the surface area of the evaporator recovered, because the added seawater redissolved the salt that crystallized over the evaporator surface. Therefore, there are some fluctuation peaks in Fig. 4c. And in practical solar-powered desalination applications, to maintain the high water-evaporation efficiency of the evaporator, engineers should keep the water content high. It is worth mentioning that the average of the evaporation rates of the natural seawater throughout the first 10 hours of the test was 1.99 kg m−2 h−1. Moreover, the results of plasma mass spectroscopy (ICP-MS) analysis, which are shown in Fig. 4d, indicate that the concentrations of Na+, Mg2+, K+, and Ca2+ in the natural seawater were reduced by 3–4 orders of magnitude (Table S2†). In addition, the Na+ concentration in the desalinated seawater obtained through the SnSe–hydrogel evaporator is significantly lower than that of natural desalinated seawater (Fig. S13†), which indicates that the pHEMA hydrogel plays an important role in absorbing Na+. The concentrations of the metal ions in the desalinated seawater are significantly lower than the threshold concentrations of the metal ions established in the WHO's guidelines for drinking-water quality. Therefore, the desalinated seawater can be used as an alternative to fresh water in ocean-going vessels. In addition, the evaporation performance of the evaporator in 0–2 M (mol L−1) brine was examined. As shown in Fig. 4e and f, the evaporation rate of the brine decreased as salinity increases, with values of 2.20, 2.12, 1.99, and 1.80 kg m−2 h−1 in 0, 0.5, 1, and 2 M brine, respectively. The result is consistent with an earlier report,21 which further provides an explanation for the fluctuations in Fig. 4c.
To evaluate the practical application of the SnSe–hydrogel evaporator to the sustainable solar-powered desalination in the marine environment, we designed a 7 day experiment, in which each day, the evaporator was used to evaporate seawater under one-sun irradiation for 10 hours and then immersed in fresh seawater for 14 hours. Fig. 4g indicates the good stability and durability of the evaporator. The average evaporation rate ranged from 1.94 to 2.16 kg m−2 h−1 (Fig. S14†). The results suggest the practical potential of the evaporator for sustainable solar-powered desalination: the evaporator can be operated during the daytime and recovered by being immersed in seawater at night-time.
During its actual service life, the SnSe–hydrogel evaporator may deform due to the scouring effect of sea waves. Therefore, we investigated the mechanical properties of the evaporator and solar-powered water-evaporation performance of the evaporator after the evaporator had been subjected to multiple loading–unloading compression cycles and a simulated sea-wave scouring test. The compression tests were performed using a tensile testing machine (Fig. S15a and b†). The cyclic loading–unloading compression curve of the evaporator, which is shown in Fig. 5a, reveals that the evaporator withstands compressive strain as high as 40%. The appearance of a hysteresis loop in the curve, which is a common characteristic of the cyclic loading–unloading compression curves of hydrogels, is due to the network structure of the evaporator and deformation of the hydrogen bonds in the evaporator.47,48 After 1000 loading–unloading cycles under 20% compressive strain, the evaporator showed almost no sign of irreversible deformation (Fig. 5b). In addition, after the 1000 loading–unloading cycles, the peak stress recovery rate of the evaporator remained stable (97%; Fig. 5c), which indicates the excellent resilience and fatigue resistance of the evaporator. Moreover, the surface micromorphology (Fig. S15c and d†) and solar-powered water-evaporation performance (Fig. 5d and e) of the evaporator were almost unchanged after the 1000 loading–unloading cycles. The simulated sea-wave scouring test was carried out for 24 hours on a shaker (Fig. S16a and b†). After 24 hours, as no light-absorbing additives leached from the evaporator (Fig. S16c and d†), the evaporator maintained its high solar-powered water-evaporation performance (Fig. 5f and g). A 1 hour test under the impact of the water further confirms the excellent mechanical properties of the SnSe–hydrogel evaporator, as shown in the video in the ESI.†
 Fig. 5  Mechanical behavior and outdoor solar-powered desalination performance of the SnSe–hydrogel evaporator. (a) The loading–unloading cycle curves of the evaporator under 10–40% compressive strain. (b) 1000 loading–unloading cycles under 20% compressive strain and (c) the change rate of the corresponding compressive peak force. (d) Time-dependent water mass loss curves and (e) corresponding evaporation rate histogram before and after 1000 compression cycles. (f) Water mass loss curves and (g) evaporation rate before and after 24 h wave wash. (h) Photographs of the solar-powered desalination measurement under natural sunlight conditions and corresponding (i) water mass loss curve and (j) evaporation rate curve. 
For practical applications, an outdoor experiment was performed to test the performance of the SnSe–hydrogel in practical solar-powered desalination. As shown in Fig. 5h, the evaporator was placed in a transparent box on the grass at Shenzhen University between 9:00 and 17:00 (March 31, 2022). The highest outdoor temperature is 29 °C at 14:00. The evaporator exhibits the highest evaporation rate of 3.11 kg m−2 h−1 and an average evaporation rate of 2.41 kg m−2 h−1 (Fig. 5i and j), which is higher than that from the laboratory measurements because of the high outdoor temperature and greenhouse effect. The SnSe–hydrogel evaporators used in the experiments in this paragraph were kept in water for more than three months, which indicates the longevity of the evaporator. The above-mentioned results suggest that due to its excellent mechanical properties and outdoor solar-powered desalination performance, the SnSe NSs–hydrogel evaporator can be used for sustainable solar-powered desalination in the offing or on ocean-going vessels.
Conclusions
In summary, a hierarchical SnSe NSs–hydrogel evaporator was successfully fabricated using a novel facile method based on Rayleigh–Bénard convection. The evaporator was porous and composed of a thin, uniform SnSe NSs–hydrogel composite layer and a pure-hydrogel matrix. Controlling the size, density, and concentration of the SnSe NSs modulated the properties of the composite layer. The SnSe–hydrogel evaporator fabricated using 1 mg mL−1 of the SnSe NSs obtained after 1k rpm centrifugation exhibited the highest water-evaporation performance. The evaporator demonstrated excellent long-term desalination performance and excellent long-term mechanical fatigue resistance. The evaporator reduced the concentrations of metal ions in natural seawater by 3–4 orders of magnitude. The SnSe–hydrogel evaporator can also be used for sewage purification, and the fabrication method of the SnSe–hydrogel evaporator can be extended to the fabrication of composite layers based on low-dimensional materials and hydrogels, and their broad applications need to be explored.
Experimental details
Materials
2-Hydroxyethyl methacrylate (HEMA, 97 vol%) and poly(ethylene glycol) diacrylate (PEGDA, average Mn 575) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich Co., Ltd. Ammonium persulfate (APS, AR, 98.5%) was purchased from Macklin Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd. Tin selenide (SnSe, 99.99%) was purchased from Shanghai Yuanye Bio-Technology Co., Ltd. Molybdenum(IV) sulfide (MoS2, 98%) was purchased from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd. Graphene oxide dispersion (GO, 1 mg mL−1) was obtained from XFNANO Material Technology Co., Ltd. 1-Methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP, 99%) was obtained from Tianjin HEOWNS Biochem Technology Co., Ltd. Water used was purified using a Barnstead NanoPure system (Direct-Q 3UV, Millipore, Germany) to 18.2 MΩ cm resistivity and total ion content <1 μg mL−1 (henceforth ‘DI water’). The seawater was obtained at the seaside in Shenzhen.
Materials synthesis
The SnSe NSs were fabricated by the sonication liquid exfoliation method. Bulk SnSe was pre-ground into fine powder by a mortar. The ground SnSe powder (0.5 g) and NMP (25 mL) were mixed evenly, followed by 2 h of probe sonication in an ice bath. The supernatant was obtained after 500 rpm centrifugation for 30 min, and this procedure was repeated eight times. Then, the supernatant collected in the previous procedure was centrifuged at 1k rpm (or 2k, 5k rpm) for 30 minutes to obtain a precipitate, which was freeze-dried for 48 h, then the SnSe NSs were collected. MoS2 NSs were also prepared by a similar process. Gold nanoparticles (Au NPs) were synthesized by a general hydrothermal method. Graphene dispersion was freeze-dried for 48 h to obtain graphene powder.
Fabrication of nanomaterials–hydrogel evaporators
Taking the synthesis of SnSe–hydrogel evaporator as an example. The pHEMA–SnSe hydrogel was synthesized via a simple one-pot method at 70 °C. In a typical procedure, HEMA (1 mL = 8.245 mmol), PEGDA (0.022 mL = 0.0419 mmol), APS aqueous solution (0.06 mL containing 0.0413 mmol APS), ultrasonically dispersed SnSe NS solution (1 mL containing 5 mg SnSe NSs) and DI water (3 mL) were added together and stirred for 5 min, then the mixture was poured into a 24 mm diameter glass bottle and sealed. In order to obtain a temperature difference, the mixture was allowed to gel on the top of a water bath at 70 °C for 6 hours. The obtained pHEMA–SnSe with water content of 80% was washed with DI water to remove the unreacted material. The molar ratio of HEMA, PEGDA and APS is fixed, and the water content of the hydrogel could be tuned by the volume ratio between HEMA and DI water. The Au NPs–pHEMA, MoS2–pHEMA and graphene–pHEMA composites were prepared similarly.
Characterization
The SnSe NSs were dispersed on a silicon wafer for SEM and Raman measurement. The SnSe–hydrogel was freeze-dried for 24 h for the optical microscope and SEM image test. The freeze-dried evaporator was ground to powder for TEM characterization. The SEM images were taken using a high resolution scanning electron microscope (APREO S, Thermo Scientific, Netherlands) to observe the morphology, microstructure, EDS mapping and spectra of the samples. TEM images were obtained by using an HT7700 (HITACH). The Raman spectra measurement was performed on a Raman spectrometer (inVia, Renishaw, UK) from 20 to 300 nm. The excitation radiation for the Raman emission was produced using a laser with a laser wavelength of 532 nm. All of the compression tests were performed on a tensile machine (EUT6203, SAAS, China) at a deformation rate of 5 mm min−1 at 25 °C. During the test, the hydrogel was placed in Petri dishes containing a small amount of water to avoid hydrogel dehydration. The wave washing simulation test was performed on a shaker (SLK-R3000-S, SCILOGEX, USA) with seesaw type movement at 20 rpm for 24 hours.
Solar water evaporation test
The water evaporation performance experiments were conducted using a solar simulator (Solar-500L, NBET, China) outputting simulated solar flux at 1000 W m−2 (one sun). An optical power meter (1918-R, Newport, USA) was used to measure the optical density. Temperatures were tracked using a K-type thermocouple with a data acquisition (DAQ) board (Agilent 34970A, USA). The pHEMA–SnSe with a thickness of 10 mm was placed in a glass dish filled with pure water (or filtered seawater for desalination tests), and the black evaporation surface is exposed above the water surface. The mass of the water loss during the evaporation was monitored using an electronic balance (PR423ZH/E, OHAUS, USA). All evaporation experiments were performed under one-sun irradiation for 90 min or more.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2020M682862) and the Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation (2019A1515110209).
References
J. N. Hausmann, R. Schlögl, P. W. Menezes and M. Driess, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 3679–3685 RSC .
S. Peng, G. Jin, L. Li, K. Li, M. Srinivasan, S. Ramakrishna and J. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 1225–1241 RSC .
M. Elimelech and W. A. Phillip, Science, 2011, 333, 712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhao, Y. Guo, X. Zhou, W. Shi and G. Yu, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2020, 5, 388–401 CrossRef .
Y. Guo and G. Yu, Acc. Mater. Res., 2021, 2, 374–384 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhou, Y. Guo, F. Zhao and G. Yu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2019, 52, 3244–3253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Přádný, P. Lesný, K. Smetana, J. Vacík, M. šlouf, J. Michálek and E. Syková, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Med., 2005, 16, 767–773 CrossRef PubMed .
A. R. Hernandez-Martínez, J. A. Lujan-Montelongo, C. Silva-Cuevas, J. D. Mota-Morales, M. Cortez-Valadez, Á. d. J. Ruíz-Baltazar, M. Cruz and J. Herrera-Ordonez, React. Funct. Polym., 2018, 122, 75–84 CrossRef .
D. Dong, Y. Zhu, W. Fang, M. Ji, A. Wang, S. Gao, H. Lin, R. Huang and J. Jin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 2113247 CrossRef .
V. K. Gupta, I. Tyagi, S. Agarwal, H. Sadegh, R. Shahryari-ghoshekandi, M. Yari and O. Yousefi-nejat, J. Mol. Liq., 2015, 206, 129–136 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ghasemi, G. Ni, A. M. Marconnet, J. Loomis, S. Yerci, N. Miljkovic and G. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, S. Yu, R. Feng, A. Bernard, Y. Liu, Y. Zhang, H. Duan, W. Shang, P. Tao, C. Song and T. Deng, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2768–2774 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Fang, Q. Liu, W. Zhang, J. Gu, Y. Su, H. Su, C. Guo and D. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 17817–17821 RSC .
P. He, L. Hao, N. Liu, H. Bai, R. Niu and J. Gong, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 423, 130268 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, H. Lu, F. Zhao, X. Zhou, W. Shi and G. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1907061 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Guo, C. M. Dundas, X. Zhou, K. P. Johnston and G. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2102994 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Yu, X. Ming, Y. Xu, Z. Chen, D. Meng, H. Cheng, Z. Shi, P. Shen and X. Wang, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 6, 1901168 CrossRef CAS .
M. Qiu, D. Wang, W. Liang, L. Liu, Y. Zhang, X. Chen, D. K. Sang, C. Xing, Z. Li, B. Dong, F. Xing, D. Fan, S. Bao, H. Zhang and Y. Cao, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2018, 115, 501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhou, F. Zhao, Y. Guo, Y. Zhang and G. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1985–1992 RSC .
Y. Lu, D. Fan, Y. Wang, H. Xu, C. Lu and X. Yang, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 10366–10376 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Li, N. He, B. Jiang, K. Yu, Q. Zhang, H. Zhang, D. Tang and Y. Song, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2104380 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, Y. Yang, L. Fu, M. Zou, Z. Li, A. Cao and Q. Yuan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1704505 CrossRef .
Z. Tang, P. Zhao, D. Ni, Y. Liu, M. Zhang, H. Wang, H. Zhang, H. Gao, Z. Yao and W. Bu, Mater. Horiz., 2018, 5, 946–952 RSC .
J. Yao, Z. Zheng and G. Yang, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 2876–2886 RSC .
W. Shi, M. Gao, J. Wei, J. Gao, C. Fan, E. Ashalley, H. Li and Z. Wang, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700602 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Xiao, C. Chang, Y. Pei, D. Wu, K. Peng, X. Zhou, S. Gong, J. He, Y. Zhang, Z. Zeng and L.-D. Zhao, Phys. Rev. B, 2016, 94, 125203 CrossRef .
Y. Zhou, T. Ding, M. Gao, K. H. Chan, Y. Cheng, J. He and G. W. Ho, Nano Energy, 2020, 77, 105102 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lei, S. Khan, L. Chen, N. Suzuki, C. Terashima, K. Liu, A. Fujishima and M. Liu, Nano Res., 2021, 14, 1135 CrossRef CAS .
Q.-F. Guan, Z.-M. Han, Z.-C. Ling, H.-B. Yang and S.-H. Yu, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 5699–5704 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Lohaus, N. Herkenhoff, R. Shankar and M. Wessling, J. Membr. Sci., 2018, 549, 60–66 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Haddad, E. Abu-Nada, H. F. Oztop and A. Mataoui, Int. J. Therm. Sci., 2012, 57, 152–162 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jeffreys, London, Edinburgh Dublin Philos. Mag. J. Sci., 1926, 2, 833–844 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, L. Sun, Y. Liu, L. Zhu, D. Yu, Y. Wang, Y. Sun and M. Yu, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2019, 6, 1507–1515 RSC .
Z. Tahir, S. Kim, F. Ullah, S. Lee, J.-h. Lee, N.-W. Park, M.-J. Seong, S.-K. Lee, T.-S. Ju, S. Park, J.-S. Bae, J. I. Jang and Y. S. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 2490–2496 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Li, H. Chen, L. Xu, F. Zhang, P. Yin, T. Yang, T. Shen, J. Qi, Y. Zhang, D. Li, Y. Ge and H. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 33226–33236 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, F. Li, J. Guo, C. Ma, Y. Song, Z. He, J. Liu, Y. Zhang, D. Li and H. Zhang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2020, 8, 1902183 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, F. Li, Y. Xu, M. Duan, Y. Song, Y. Yang and H. Zhang, Mater. Today Phys., 2021, 21, 100500 CrossRef CAS .
H. R. Chandrasekhar, R. G. Humphreys, U. Zwick and M. Cardona, Phys. Rev. B: Solid State, 1977, 15, 2177–2183 CrossRef CAS .
F. Li, T.-D. Huang, Y. Lan, T.-H. Lu, B. S. Kristan, T. Shen and J. Qi, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 13725–13730 RSC .
Y.-L. Guo, H.-H. Xu, S.-Q. Shen and L. Wei, Acta Phys. Sin., 2013, 62, 144704 CrossRef .
C. J. Ho, D.-S. Chen, W.-M. Yan and O. Mahian, Int. Commun. Heat Mass Transfer, 2014, 57, 22–26 CrossRef CAS .
P. Thoniyot, M. J. Tan, A. A. Karim, D. J. Young and X. J. Loh, Adv. Sci., 2015, 2, 1400010 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Guo, X. Zhao, F. Zhao, Z. Jiao, X. Zhou and G. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 2087–2095 RSC .
X. Zhou, Y. Guo, F. Zhao, W. Shi and G. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2007012 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Liu, Z. Zhou, N. Wu, R. Zhang, B. Zhu, H. Jin, Y. Zhang, M. Zhu and Z. Chen, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 13007–13018 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. O. Popiel and J. Wojtkowiak, Heat Transfer Eng., 1998, 19, 87–101 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lin, X. Liu, J. Liu, H. Yuk, H.-C. Loh, A. Parada German, C. Settens, J. Song, A. Masic, H. McKinley Gareth and X. Zhao, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaau8528 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Zhou, C. Qian and W. Yuan, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2021, 203, 108608 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See https://doi.org/10.1039/d2ta01264b‡ These authors contributed equally to the work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:
	(1)

 	Fig. 1  Schematic of synthesizing the hierarchical SnSe NSs–hydrogel evaporator. (a) Schematic of Rayleigh–Bénard convection in a mixture of hydrogel and SnSe NSs during thermal polymerization. (b) The hierarchical SnSe–hydrogel evaporator with the SnSe NSs at the bottom.	 

 	Fig. 2  Characterization of the SnSe–hydrogel evaporator. Optical image of the cross-section of the evaporator with (a and b) 1 and 3 mg mL−1, 1k rpm SnSe NSs and (c) 2 mg mL−1, 5k rpm SnSe NSs. SEM image of the top surface of the evaporator (d) without SnSe, and with (e) 1k rpm SnSe NSs and (f) 5k rpm SnSe NSs. (g) High magnification SEM image of the evaporator with 1k rpm SnSe NSs and the corresponding EDS elemental mapping of (h) Sn and (i) Se. Scale bars of (a–c), (d–f), and (h–j) are 200 μm, 20 μm, and 10 μm, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 3  Solar-powered water-evaporation performance of SnSe–hydrogel evaporators. (a) Measurement setup. (b and c) Infrared images of the SnSe–hydrogel evaporator before irradiation and after 30 min one-sun irradiation. (d) Time-dependent surface temperature of the SnSe NSs of different size. (e and f) Effect of size and concentration on the temperature variation curve of the evaporators. (g) Time-dependent water mass loss curves and (h) corresponding evaporation rate histogram.	 
	(2)
Uin = ΔHwatermwater = ΔHevaporatormevaporator	(3)

 	Fig. 4  Sustainable solar-powered desalination performance of the SnSe–hydrogel evaporator. (a) Salt crystallization of the evaporator under continuous 30 h one-sun illumination. And the salt was redissolved completely after turning off the light. (b and c) Time-dependent water mass loss and evaporation rate curves. (d) Concentrations of four primary ions in an actual seawater sample before and after desalination. (e and f) The water-evaporation performance in brine with the salinity from 0 to 2 M. (g) Long-term solar evaporation performance evaluation simulating actual working conditions.	 

 	Fig. 5  Mechanical behavior and outdoor solar-powered desalination performance of the SnSe–hydrogel evaporator. (a) The loading–unloading cycle curves of the evaporator under 10–40% compressive strain. (b) 1000 loading–unloading cycles under 20% compressive strain and (c) the change rate of the corresponding compressive peak force. (d) Time-dependent water mass loss curves and (e) corresponding evaporation rate histogram before and after 1000 compression cycles. (f) Water mass loss curves and (g) evaporation rate before and after 24 h wave wash. (h) Photographs of the solar-powered desalination measurement under natural sunlight conditions and corresponding (i) water mass loss curve and (j) evaporation rate curve.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See https://doi.org/10.1039/d2ta01264b
‡ These authors contributed equally to the work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
