Free-floating ultrathin tin monoxide sheets for solar-driven photoelectrochemical water splitting  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4TA01659A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4TA01659A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 10647-10653Free-floating ultrathin tin monoxide sheets for solar-driven photoelectrochemical water splitting

        
          
            Liang 
            Liang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yongfu 
            Sun
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Fengcai 
            Lei
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Shan 
            Gao
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Yi 
            Xie
          
        
      *
      Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at Microscale, Collaborative Innovation Center of Chemistry for Energy Materials, University of Science & Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui 230026, P.R. China. E-mail: yxie@ustc.edu.cn; yfsun@ustc.edu.cn;  Fax: +86-551-63606266
Received 
      5th April 2014
    , Accepted 2nd May 2014First published on 2nd May 2014AbstractSolar-driven photoelectrochemical water splitting represents one of the most challenging tasks for solar-energy utilization. In this study, free-floating ultrathin SnO sheets with different thicknesses were successfully synthesized via a convenient liquid exfoliation strategy, with efforts to disclose the thickness-dependent solar water splitting efficiency in p-type semiconductors. The thinner thickness and larger surface area afford a higher fraction of surface atoms to serve as active sites, while the calculated increased density of states near the Fermi level ensures rapid carrier transport/separation efficiency along the two-dimensional conducting paths of the thinner SnO sheets. As expected, the 3 nm thick SnO sheet-based photocathode shows an incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency of up to 20.1% at 300 nm, remarkably higher than 10.7% and 4.2% for the 5.4 nm thick SnO sheet- and bulk SnO-based electrodes. This work discusses the thickness-dependent solar water splitting efficiency in ultrathin p-type semiconductor sheets, thus opening new opportunities in the field of solar cells and photocatalysts.
Introduction
Nowadays, world energy resources mostly depend on traditional fossil fuels such as natural gas, oil and coal. Unfortunately, the depletion of these limited fossil fuels and the serious environmental problems accompanying their combustion have become serious bottlenecks constraining economic and social development. In this case, it is necessary to construct a clean energy system to solve the above serious issues. Hydrogen is a promising alternative that could not only provide more heat energy than the conventional fuels but also involve the environmentally benign combustion without generating polluted byproducts such as carbon dioxide.1 In this regard, hydrogen production from photocatalytic water splitting has attracted a large amount of attention since Fujishima and Honda's report on water splitting on the TiO2 surface in 1972.2–4 Note that the photoelectrochemical water splitting not only provides a free and unlimited supply of solar energy and water, but also exhibits a green reaction without any undesirable impacts on the environment.5–7 However, the photoconversion efficiency of the conventional photoelectrodes is substantially limited by their kinetically sluggish electron–hole separation efficiency, which is mainly ascribed to their extremely low number of active sites and their inherently poor electrical conductivity in the previously prepared photoelectrodes. Thus, it is highly desirable to fabricate a novel structure with abundant active sites and increased conductivity, with efforts to achieve highly efficient photoelectrochemical water splitting.
Notably, our previous studies demonstrate that the ultrathin two-dimensional sheets of n-type semiconductors can fully optimize the crucial processes in solar water splitting and hence help to improve the photoelectrochemical performances, thanks to their atomic thickness, large surface area and increased two-dimensional conductivity. For instance, the peculiar structure such as the 2-atomic-layer thick n-type SnS sheets could provide 100% atoms to serve as active sites for triggering water splitting, while their nearly ultimate upper limit of specific surface area contributes to improved solar light harvesting.7,8 Moreover, our systematic studies also verify that the atomically thin sheets of n-type semiconductors usually possess surface structural disorder,8–10 which always brings about obviously increased density of states (DOS) at the edge of the valence band or conduction band. This is beneficial for quick carriers separation and transport along the two-dimensional conducting channels, thus further reducing the carriers' recombination rates. Furthermore, the atomic thickness allows for fast transport of photo-excited electron–hole pairs from the interior to the surface of n-type semiconductors, according to the diffusion formula t = d2/k2D (where d is the particle size, k is a constant, and D is the diffusion coefficient of electron–hole pairs).11,12 As is well-known, compared with the n-type semiconductor-based photoelectrodes, the p-type semiconductor-based photoelectrodes are more suitable as cathodes for solar hydrogen generation since their band bending is favourable for electron transfer to the interface between the electrode and the electrolyte.13 However, the discovered p-type semiconductors are still quite limited, let alone the investigation on their solar water splitting properties.14–16 Thus, an important question arises: can the above thickness-dependent photoelectrochemical properties of n-type semiconductors be suitable for p-type semiconductors? To verify this, pursuing the synthesis of ultrathin p-type semiconductor sheets with different thicknesses is of paramount importance.
Theoretical analysis, indicates that tin monoxide would be a suitable candidate, thanks to its p-type conductivity along with hole concentrations up to 1019 cm−3.17,18 In addition, for tetragonal SnO with a layered crystal structure (Scheme 1),19 it consisted of pyramids on both sides of each layer alternately, in which the pyramid structure is comprised of four O atoms and one Sn atom. Whereas, the adjacent pyramid Sn–O layers are coupled to each other by weak van der Waals interactions, which provides the practical feasibility for exfoliating the bulk SnO into ultrathin SnO sheets with different thicknesses, thus offering opportunities for studying their thickness-dependent photoelectrochemical properties. In addition, to directly visualize the influence of the electronic structure induced by reducing the macroscopic three-dimensional bulk SnO into a microscopic two-dimensional structure, first-principles density-functional (DFT) calculations were carried out to study the electronic structure of the bulk and single-layered ultrathin sheets of SnO, respectively. As shown in Fig. 1A and D, the calculated DOS of single-layered SnO sheets shows obviously increased density of states at both the valence band and conduction band edge with respect to the bulk counterpart, which can be further demonstrated by the corresponding charge density distributions in Fig. 1B, C, E and F, indicating that the ultrathin SnO sheets possess more charge carriers. This result theoretically demonstrates that the thickness-dependent density of states in n-type semiconductors can also be applied to p-type semiconductors. Benefiting from the enhanced DOS, one can anticipate that the ultrathin SnO sheets would possess much faster carrier transport and separation efficiency, and hence exhibit higher solar conversion efficiency. Accordingly, it is essential to pursue a facile and convenient strategy for fabricating ultrathin p-type SnO sheets with different thicknesses.
 Scheme 1  Schematic unit cell structure of tetragonal SnO, in which four O atoms and one Sn atom form a pyramid structure on both sides of each layer alternately. The layers are also stacked alternately. 
 Fig. 1  (A and D) Calculated density of states (DOS) for the SnO single-layer and bulk counterpart; insets clearly depict the increased DOS at the valence band and the conduction band edge of the SnO single-layer. Charge density contour plots projected along the (001) plane for the valence band maximum and the conduction band minimum of (B and C) the SnO single-layer and (E and F) the bulk counterpart. 
Experimental
Synthesis of bulk SnO
In a typical procedure, 200 mg SnCl2·2H2O and 200 mg L-histdine were added into 35 mL distilled water in order. After vigorous stirring for 15 min, the mixture was transferred into a 40 mL Teflon-lined autoclave, sealed and heated at 150 °C for 24 h. The system was then allowed to cool down to room temperature naturally, the final product was collected by centrifuging the mixture, washed with distilled water and absolute ethanol many times, and then dried in a vacuum overnight for further characterization.
Synthesis of Li-intercalated bulk SnO
In a typical procedure, 75 mg bulk SnS2 powder and 8 mL 2.2 M n-BuLi/cyclohexane were added into a 25 mL three-necked flask and refluxed at 60 °C for 12 h. The resultant dispersions were centrifuged, washed with cyclohexane and absolute ethanol many times, and then dried in a vacuum overnight for further characterization.
Synthesis of ultrathin SnO sheets with an average thickness of 3 nm
5 mg Li-intercalated bulk SnO was added into 15 mL distilled water and then ultrasonicated for ca. 2 h; the resultant dispersions were centrifuged, washed with distilled water and absolute ethanol many times, and then dried in a vacuum overnight for further characterization.
Synthesis of ultrathin SnO sheets with an average thickness of 5.4 nm
5 mg Li-intercalated bulk SnO was added into 15 mL distilled water and then ultrasonicated for ca. 1 h; the resultant dispersions were centrifuged, washed with distilled water and absolute ethanol many times, and then dried in a vacuum overnight for further characterization.
Characterization
The field emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM) images were captured by using a FEI Sirion-200 SEM. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images and high-resolution TEM image were obtained by using a JEOL-2010 TEM with an acceleration voltage of 200 kV. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) in the present work was performed by means of a Veeco DI Nano-scope MultiMode V system. XRD patterns were recorded by using a Philips X'Pert Pro Super diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.54178 Å). X-ray photoelectron spectra (XPS) were acquired on an ESCALAB MKII with Mg Kα (hν = 1253.6 eV) as the excitation source. The binding energies obtained in the XPS spectral analysis were corrected for specimen charging by referencing C 1s to 284.5 eV. Room temperature UV/vis diffuse reflectance spectroscopy (DRS) spectra were recorded on a Perkin Elmer Lambda 950 UV/vis-NIR spectrophotometer.
Photoelectrochemical measurement
To conduct the photoelectrochemical water splitting measurements, the SnO products were fabricated into thin films as follows: the as-synthesized SnO products were initially dispersed in ethanol to obtain a concentration of ca. 0.5 mg mL−1; then 8 mL SnO–ethanol dispersion was uniformly spin-dropped on the 1 cm × 1 cm indium tin oxide (ITO)-coated glass at 500 rpm for 30 s by a desktop spin coater; afterwards, the ITO-coated glass was heated at 65 °C for 30 min to volatilize the solvent and then the SnO thin films were obtained for further measurements.
Photoelectrochemical tests were carried out in a conventional three-electrode, single-compartment quartz cell filled with 0.5 M Na2SO4 electrolyte (pH = 6.6). The Na2SO4 electrolyte was purged with N2 for 30 min prior to the measurement. The SnO thin films served as the working electrode. The counter and reference electrodes were the platinum gauze and the Ag/AgCl reference electrode, respectively. The photoelectrochemical properties were investigated on an electrochemical station under ambient conditions and irradiation of a 300 W Xe lamp (PLS-SXE300/300UV, Trusttech Co., Ltd. Beijing). The measured power density of the light source is 100 mW cm−2. The potential was swept from −0.2 to −1.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl at a sweep rate of 10 mV s−1. Incident photon to current efficiency (IPCE) spectra were recorded on a QE/IPCE Measurement Kit (Newport, USA), while all the kit components were in control of Oriel Tracq Basic V5.0 software automatically. The light from a 300 W Xe lamp was focused through a monochromator (74125 Oriel Cornerstone 260 1/4 m) onto the cell, and the monochromator was incremented to generate a photocurrent action spectrum with a current sampling time of 2 s, where the light intensity and the photocurrent generated were measured with a 2931-C dual channel power/current meter and a 71675 calibrated UV silicon photodetector. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was performed on an electrochemical station (CHI 660d Shanghai, China) in 0.5 M Na2SO4 electrolyte. The Nyquist plots were measured at a bias potential of −1.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl with a frequency of 100 kHz to 100 mHz under irradiation of a 300 W Xe lamp.
Calculation details
The first-principles density functional theory (DFT) calculations were performed using Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP).20 The gradient-corrected (GGA) exchange–correlation functional of Perdew, Burke, and Ernzerhof (PBE) was used.21 The energy cutoff was set to 550 eV, and the atomic positions were allowed to relax until the energy and force were less than 10−4 eV and 10−2 eV Å−1, respectively. Each SnO single-layer model was separated by a vacuum region of 10 nm. For calculating the density of states of the SnO single-layer, a 5 × 5 × 1 Monkhorst grid was used to sample the Brillouin zone. The calculations of the bulk counterpart were compared within a supercell constructed from a standard unit cell of the SnO lattice.
Results and discussion
Characterization of ultrathin SnO sheets with thickness of 3 and 5.4 nm
In this work, we put forward a facile and convenient chemical exfoliation strategy to accomplish this challenge through ultrasonicating the Li-intercalated bulk SnO precursor in water (Scheme 2), giving the first synthetic case for ultrathin SnO freestanding sheets with different thicknesses. In this regard, the incorporated lithium ions in LixSnO could react with water during the sonication in distilled water, in which the evolved H2 could greatly expand the interlayer distance of SnO and hence weaken the van der Waals interactions between the layers,6,7,9,10 thus finally facilitating the successful exfoliation into ultrathin SnO sheets. Taking the synthetic 3 nm thick SnO sheets as an example, their morphology, thickness, phase and chemical composition can be revealed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), atomic force microscopy (AFM), X-ray diffraction (XRD), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and Raman spectroscopy. Since it is currently infeasible to perform XRD characterization on an individual ultrathin sheet, a layer-by-layer assembly strategy is adopted to fabricate an ultrathin sheet-based film. As shown in Fig. 2B, the XRD pattern for the ultrathin SnO sheet-based film shows only two strong diffraction peaks that could be readily assigned to the (001) and (002) facets of tetragonal SnO (P4/nmm, JCPDS Card no. 06-0395) with lattice parameters a = b = 3.802 Å and c = 4.836 Å. This suggests their highly [001] preferred orientation, which could be further confirmed by the corresponding high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image and electron diffraction image in Fig. 3B and C. No X-ray diffraction peaks corresponding to metal Sn or other phases such as SnO2, Sn2O3 and Sn3O4 are observed, indicating the formation of pure SnO, which is further demonstrated by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). As depicted in Fig. 2C and D, the XPS spectra show that the exfoliated products consist of elements Sn and O, while no evident impurities are detected. The resolved peaks at binding energies of 486.1 and 494.6 eV correspond to Sn 3d5/2 and Sn 3d3/2 of SnO,22 confirming the formation of pure hexagonal SnO. Meanwhile, Raman spectra in Fig. 3D give additional insight into the chemical composition of the products. As for the exfoliated SnO products, the Raman bands at 208 cm−1 and 110 cm−1 correspond to the A1g and E1g modes of tetragonal SnO, respectively.23 Obviously, compared to the bulk counterpart, their Raman bands shift towards lower wavenumbers, which could be ascribed to the phonon confinement effect, and reasonably infer their ultrathin thickness.5,6,10,24 Moreover, Fig. 2A and 3A display the XRD pattern and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of bulk SnO, possessing an irregular morphology with a lateral size of ca. 10 μm and a thickness of about 2 μm. By contrast, the TEM image of the exfoliated products in Fig. 3B clearly reveals their two-dimensional sheet-like morphology with a size of ca. 300–500 nm. Furthermore, as revealed by the AFM image and the corresponding height profile in Fig. 3E and F, the obtained products exhibit the sheet-like morphology with an average height of about 3 nm, which corresponds to the thickness of seven-layer SnO along the [001] direction, giving direct and solid evidence for the formation of ultrathin SnO sheets. Of note, this developed method is very simple and can be easily scaled up because the yield is only limited by the size of the flask. Furthermore, to elucidate the thickness-dependent photoelectrochemical properties, the ultrathin SnO sheets with a thickness of ca. 5.4 nm are also successfully synthesized through the same strategy except ultrasonicating the Li-intercalated bulk SnO using distilled water for ca. 1 h. The AFM image and the corresponding height profile in Fig. 4E and F show that the synthetic ultrathin SnO sheets possess an average thickness of 5.4 nm, corresponding to the thickness of twelve-layer SnO along the [001] direction. Therefore, all the above results unambiguously demonstrate the large-scale exfoliation of bulk SnO into ultrathin SnO free-floating sheets with different thicknesses, thus offering the prerequisites for studying their thickness-dependent photoelectrochemical water splitting properties.
 Scheme 2  Schematic illustration for exfoliating bulk layered SnO into [001]-oriented freestanding ultrathin SnO sheets. 
 Fig. 2  XRD patterns for (A) bulk SnO and (B) 3 nm thick SnO sheet-based film fabricated by a layer-by-layer assembly strategy; (C and D) XPS spectra for the as-obtained 3 nm thick SnO sheets. 
 Fig. 3  (A) SEM image for bulk SnO; characterization of [001]-oriented 3 nm thick SnO freestanding sheets; (B) TEM image and the corresponding electron diffraction image; (C) HRTEM image; (E) AFM image and (F) the height profile corresponding to the number 1 in (E); (D) Raman spectra for the 3 nm thick SnO sheets and the bulk counterpart. 
 Fig. 4  (A) AFM image and (B) the height profile corresponding to the number 1 in (A) of ultrathin SnO sheets with a thickness of ca. 5.4 nm. 
Photoelectrochemical properties for ultrathin SnO sheets with thickness of 3 and 5.4 nm
Benefiting from the ultrathin atomic thickness, large surface area and remarkably increased DOS near the Fermi level, the ultrathin SnO sheets possess efficient solar light harvesting and fast carrier transport/separation efficiency, and thus exhibit improved solar conversion efficiency; in addition, the different thicknesses of 3 and 5.4 nm provide the necessary prerequisites for studying their thickness-dependent solar water splitting properties. For investigating the photoelectrochemical properties of the ultrathin SnO sheets, the photoelectrode is prepared by spin-coating their ethanol dispersions on the indium tin oxide (ITO)-coated glass and hence their solar hydrogen generation by water splitting is studied by the measurements in a 0.5 M Na2SO4 electrolyte using a three electrode setup. In fact, all the three photocathodes of the ultrathin SnO sheets and bulk counterpart exhibit very low dark currents at the applied potentials between −0.2 and −1.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl (Fig. 5A). Under the irradiation of a 300 W Xe lamp, the 3 nm thick SnO sheet-based photocathode possesses a photocurrent density of −0.89 mA cm−2 at −1.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl, roughly 2 and 7 times higher than that of the 5.4 nm thick SnO sheet-based and bulk SnO-based electrodes, suggesting the thickness-dependent photoactivity. Moreover, it should be stressed that incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) is an important tool for identifying the photoconversion efficiency because it does not depend on the light sources and filters utilized in the measurements.25 The IPCE can be calculated from the following equation:  where h is the Planck constant, c is the speed of light, λ is the incident light wavelength, I is the measured photocurrent density at a specific wavelength, and Jlight is the light irradiance intensity at a specific wavelength. Fig. 5B clearly reveals that the 3 nm thick SnO sheet-based photocathode displays much higher IPCE over all the measured wavelength range from 300 nm to 700 nm. For example, the 3 nm thick SnO sheet-based photocathode shows an IPCE of up to 20.1% at 300 nm, remarkably higher than 10.7% and 4.2% for the 5.4 nm thick SnO sheet-based and bulk SnO-based electrodes, indicating that the photo-excited hole–electron pairs can be efficiently separated and transported in the 3 nm thick SnO sheets. Intriguingly, the IPCE of the 3 nm thick SnO sheet-based photocathode also possesses an onset at around 420 nm, corresponding to a band gap of about 2.95 eV, which agrees well with their absorption edge of ca. 3.0 eV in Fig. 5E and F. Note that the band gap of the 3 nm thick SnO sheets is obviously smaller than 3.2 and 3.8 eV for the 5.4 nm thick SnO sheets and bulk counterpart, and hence favors solar light harvesting. Note that the narrowed band gap of ultrathin SnO sheets could be ascribed to the surface distortion or the surface defects arising from the chemical exfoliation process.3,5,26 Furthermore, it is well-known that the photostability is also a crucial factor for evaluating the solar water splitting performance of the photoelectrodes. To evaluate the photostability, long-term cycling measurements for both the photocathodes are carried out at −1.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl under 300 W Xe lamp irradiation. As shown in Fig. 4C, even after 7200 s, the 3 and 5.4 nm thick SnO sheet-based photocathodes still retain almost the same photocurrent density as the initial value, while the bulk counterpart shows serious I–t fluctuations, clearly revealing the superior structural stability of the ultrathin two-dimensional sheets. Accordingly, the above results not only demonstrate that the ultrathin SnO sheets are indeed a good photoelectrode material with high solar conversion efficiency and excellent structural stability, but also show their thickness-dependent photoelectrochemical water splitting properties.
 Fig. 5  Photoelectrochemical properties of the 3 nm, 5.4 nm thick SnO sheets and bulk SnO: (A) photocurrent density vs. applied potential curves under 300 W Xe lamp irradiation; (B) IPCE at −1.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl; (C) I–t curve at −1.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl under 300 W Xe lamp irradiation; (D) electrochemical impedance spectra at −1.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl under 300 W Xe lamp irradiation; (E and F) UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectra. 
Of note, the greatly improved solar conversion efficiency of the 3 nm thick SnO sheets could be attributed to their ultrathin thickness, large surface area, narrow band gap and increased density of states (Scheme 3). Note that the 3 nm thick SnO sheets possess a surface area of 38.1 m2 g−1, larger than the 17.5 and 1.3 m2 g−1 for the 5.4 nm thick SnO sheets and bulk counterpart. As revealed by the UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectra in Fig. 5E and F, the large surface area endows the 3 nm thick SnO sheets with increased solar light harvesting,5–7 while the narrowed band gap helps to greatly extend the range of light that can be absorbed and used for water splitting, compared with the 5.4 nm thick SnO sheets and bulk counterpart. Moreover, for the 3 nm thick SnO sheets, their larger surface area and thinner thickness could provide a higher fraction of surface atoms to serve as active sites for efficiently photo-catalyzing the water splitting reactions, which could be verified by their larger photocurrent density and higher visible-light photoconversion efficiency compared with the 5.4 nm thick SnO sheets (Fig. 5A and B). In addition, the thinner thickness of 3 nm enables the photo-generated carriers to take a shorter time to reach the surface, which contributes to reduce their bulk recombination rates.5,6 Furthermore, the two-dimensional configuration of the 3 nm thick SnO sheets allows for much better grain boundary connectivity and intimate contact with the ITO substrate, confirmed by their much lower interfacial charge-transfer resistance in Fig. 5D, which could help to achieve efficient carrier transport and separation efficiency as well as low photocorrosion rates.5 More importantly, as revealed by the calculated DOS in Fig. 1, the 3 nm thick SnO sheets reasonably possess an obviously increased density of states near the Fermi level compared with the 5.4 nm thick SnO sheets and bulk counterpart. The greatly increased DOS facilitates the transport and separation of photo-excited carriers,5–8 thus definitely determining their remarkably improved water splitting properties.
 Scheme 3  Advantages of using the ultrathin SnO sheets deposited on ITO-coated glass as the photoelectrode for photoelectrochemical water splitting. 
Conclusions
In conclusion, ultrathin two-dimensional sheets with different thicknesses are proposed as ideal material models for studying the thickness-dependent solar water splitting efficiency in p-type semiconductors. As an example, free-floating ultrathin SnO sheets with thickness of 3 and 5.4 nm are successfully synthesized via a convenient liquid exfoliation strategy. The thinner thickness affords a higher fraction of surface atoms to serve as active sites, while the larger surface area allows for more efficient solar light harvesting. In addition, the thinner thickness ensures obviously increased DOS near the Fermi level, which allows for rapid carrier transport/separation efficiency along the two-dimensional conducting paths as well as improved structural stability. As a result, the 3 nm thick SnO sheet-based photocathode possesses a photocurrent density of −0.89 mA cm−2 at −1.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl, roughly 2 and 7 times higher than that of the 5.4 nm thick SnO sheet- and bulk SnO-based photocathodes. Also, the 3 nm thick SnO sheet-based photocathode shows an IPCE of up to 20.1% at 300 nm, remarkably higher than 10.7% and 4.2% for the 5.4 nm thick SnO sheet- and bulk SnO-based electrodes, indicating that the photo-excited hole–electron pairs can be efficiently separated and transported in the thinner SnO sheets. This work demonstrates the thickness-dependent light harvesting, density of states, photoconversion efficiency and structural stability in p-type semiconductors and holds great promise for applications in the field of solar cells and photocatalysts.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the National Nature Science Foundation (21331005, 11079004, 90922016, 21201157, 11321503), the Chinese Academy of Science (XDB01020300), the Program for New Century Excellent Talents in University (NCET-13-0546) and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (WK2310000022).
Notes and references
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253 RSC .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37 CrossRef CAS .
X. B. Chen, L. Liu, P. Y. Yu and S. S. Mao, Science, 2011, 331, 746 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Youngblood, S. H. A. Lee, K. Maeda and T. E. Mallouk, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1966 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. F. Sun, Z. H. Sun, S. Gao, H. Cheng, Q. H. Liu, J. Y. Piao, T. Yao, C. Z. Wu, S. L. Hu, S. Q. Wei and Y. Xie, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 1057 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. F. Sun, H. Cheng, S. Gao, Z. H. Sun, Q. H. Liu, Q. Liu, F. C. Lei, T. Yao, J. F. He, S. Q. Wei and Y. Xie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 8727 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. F. Sun, Z. H. Sun, S. Gao, H. Cheng, Q. H. Liu, F. C. Lei, S. Q. Wei and Y. Xie, Adv. Energy. Mater., 2014, 4, 1300611 Search PubMed .
Y. F. Sun, F. C. Lei, S. Gao, B. C. Pan, J. F. Zhou and Y. Xie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 10569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. F. Sun, S. Gao and Y. Xie, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 530 RSC .
Y. F. Sun, H. Cheng, S. Gao, Q. H. Liu, Z. H. Sun, C. Xiao, C. Z. Wu, S. Q. Wei and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 20294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. L. Bickley and G. C. Williams, Mater. Chem. Phys., 1997, 51, 47 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Sun, J. B. Zhu, L. F. Bai, Q. Y. Li, X. Zhang, W. Tong and Y. Xie, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2014, 1, 58 RSC .
J. Y. Cao, T. Kako, P. Li, S. X. Ouyang and J. H. Ye, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13, 275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kawazoe, M. Yasukawa, H. Hyodo, M. Kurita, H. Yanagi and H. Hosono, Nature, 1997, 389, 939 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kudo, H. Yanagi, H. Hosono and H. Kawazoe, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1998, 73, 220 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Tsukazaki, A. Ohtomo, T. Onuma, M. Ohtani, T. Makino, M. Sumiya, K. Ohtani, S. F. Chichibu, S. Fuke, Y. Segawa, H. Ohno, H. Koinuma and M. Kawasaki, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 42 CrossRef CAS .
R. Sivarammasubramaniam, M. R. Muhamad and S. Radhakrishna, Phys. Status Solidi A, 1993, 136, 215 CrossRef .
W. Guo, L. Fu, Y. Zhang, K. Zhang, L. Y. Liang, Z. M. Liu, H. T. Cao and X. Q. Pan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 042113 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Togo, F. Oba and I. Tanaka, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2006, 74, 195128 CrossRef .
G. Kresse and J. Furthmüller, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1996, 54, 11169 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Perdew, K. Burke and M. Ernzerhof, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1996, 77, 3865 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Stranick and A. Moskwa, Surf. Sci. Spectra, 1993, 2, 45 CrossRef CAS .
J. Geurts, S. Rau, W. Richter and F. J. Schmitte, Thin Solid Films, 1984, 121, 217 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Sun, Q. H. Liu, S. Gao, H. Cheng, F. C. Lei, Z. H. Sun, Y. Jiang, H. B. Su, S. Q. Wei and Y. Xie, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2899 Search PubMed .
G. M. Wang, H. Y. Wang, Y. C. Ling, Y. C. Tang, X. Y. Yang, R. C. Fitzmorris, C. C. Wang, J. Z. Zhang and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3026 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Gan, X. H. Lu, J. H. Wu, S. L. Xie, T. Zhai, M. H. Yu, Z. S. Zhang, Y. C. Mao, S. C. L. Wang, Y. Shen and Y. X. Tong, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1021 Search PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  Schematic unit cell structure of tetragonal SnO, in which four O atoms and one Sn atom form a pyramid structure on both sides of each layer alternately. The layers are also stacked alternately.	 

 	Fig. 1  (A and D) Calculated density of states (DOS) for the SnO single-layer and bulk counterpart; insets clearly depict the increased DOS at the valence band and the conduction band edge of the SnO single-layer. Charge density contour plots projected along the (001) plane for the valence band maximum and the conduction band minimum of (B and C) the SnO single-layer and (E and F) the bulk counterpart.	 

 	Scheme 2  Schematic illustration for exfoliating bulk layered SnO into [001]-oriented freestanding ultrathin SnO sheets.	 

 	Fig. 2  XRD patterns for (A) bulk SnO and (B) 3 nm thick SnO sheet-based film fabricated by a layer-by-layer assembly strategy; (C and D) XPS spectra for the as-obtained 3 nm thick SnO sheets.	 

 	Fig. 3  (A) SEM image for bulk SnO; characterization of [001]-oriented 3 nm thick SnO freestanding sheets; (B) TEM image and the corresponding electron diffraction image; (C) HRTEM image; (E) AFM image and (F) the height profile corresponding to the number 1 in (E); (D) Raman spectra for the 3 nm thick SnO sheets and the bulk counterpart.	 

 	Fig. 4  (A) AFM image and (B) the height profile corresponding to the number 1 in (A) of ultrathin SnO sheets with a thickness of ca. 5.4 nm.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 5  Photoelectrochemical properties of the 3 nm, 5.4 nm thick SnO sheets and bulk SnO: (A) photocurrent density vs. applied potential curves under 300 W Xe lamp irradiation; (B) IPCE at −1.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl; (C) I–t curve at −1.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl under 300 W Xe lamp irradiation; (D) electrochemical impedance spectra at −1.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl under 300 W Xe lamp irradiation; (E and F) UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectra.	 

 	Scheme 3  Advantages of using the ultrathin SnO sheets deposited on ITO-coated glass as the photoelectrode for photoelectrochemical water splitting.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
