Investigations on structural, optical and second harmonic generation in solvothermally synthesized pure and Cr-doped ZnO nanoparticles  - CrystEngComm (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1CE06127E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1CE06127E
(Paper)
CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 1653-1658Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsInvestigations on structural, optical and second harmonic generation in solvothermally synthesized pure and Cr-doped ZnO nanoparticles

        
          
            Pushpendra 
            Kumar
          
        
      *abc, 
      
        
          
            Jai 
            Singh
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Vyom 
            Parashar
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Kedar 
            Singh
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            R. S. 
            Tiwari
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            O. N. 
            Srivastava
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Koduri 
            Ramam
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Avinash C. 
            Pandey
          
        
      a
aNanotechnology Application centre, University of Allahabad, Allahabad, 211002, India. E-mail: push.nac@gmail.com
bDepartment of Physics, Faculty of Science, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, 221005, India
cDepartamento de Ingenieria de Materiales (DIMAT), Facultad de Ingenieria, Universidad de Concepcion, Concepcion, Chile
Received 
      1st September 2011
    , Accepted 17th November 2011First published on 20th December 2011AbstractAt the forefront of the current scientific revolution of nanoscience nanocrystals (NCs), crystalline particles grown in liquid media, stand out over other classes of inorganic nanomaterials due to the high degree of control with which their crystal structure, size, shape, and surface functionalities can be engineered in the synthesis stage and to the versatility with which they can be processed and implemented into a large spectrum of devices and processes. Doped semiconductor nanostructures can yield both high luminescence efficiencies and lifetime shortening at the same time. In the present manuscript pure and Cr-doped ZnO nanoparticles were successfully synthesized from the solution phase chemistry and investigated with respect to their structural and optical properties. The resulting powder consisting of nanocrystalline particles were characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD), UV-Visible spectroscopy, photoluminescence spectroscopy, transmission electron microscopy (TEM), high resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) and energy dispersive X-ray analysis (EDX) techniques. A UV emission peak was observed from the exciton transition at 380 nm in the room temperature photo luminescent (PL) spectra. The blue emission band was assigned to the Zn interstitial and vacancy level transition. Even though Cr ions are known to act as an efficient non-radiative loss centre for near band gap emission (NBE), a pronounced NBE is obtained at room temperature even for a nominal Cr concentration of 8 at. %. XRD data analysis shows that the chromium dopant atoms are incorporated into the wurtzite host lattice. The grain size decreases with increasing dopant concentration. The lattice constants extracted by the Rietveld method from XRD data vary slightly with doping concentration.
1. Introduction

Nanostructures are of requisite claim owing to their incomparable dimension dependent properties and promising applications as building blocks in electronics, optoelectronics, sensors & actuators and in bioimaging.1–5 Nanoparticulates exhibit a size quantization effect that has a potential use as a building block in nanoelectronics, nano-optronics, nanosensors & actuators, optical signal processing, switches and in biology. The understanding of size dependent properties of nanomaterials has yielded to the incompatibility of theoretical descriptions and experimental measurements. This allows one to predict size dependent properties and exchange interactions for a wide range of semiconductors regardless of shape, composition and synthetic protocol. The level of understanding of the nanoscale properties is perceptive and makes it possible to develop a correlation between experimental and physical models in order to explain the properties of these materials. As part of continuous development in the field, the nature of pure and doped (host and guest) lattice, surface and unintentional vacancies among other defects, plagues our understanding of the general properties of these materials. Among them all, II–VI direct band gap semiconductors have engrossed substantial consideration due to their applications in light-emitting diodes, photo-detectors, field emitters and full colour displays.6–10 The wide band gap and notably large binding energy make them an ideal choice for inorganic passivation shells in a variety of semiconductor core/shell nanocrystals and also an attractive host for the development of doped nanocrystals.11,12
In recent years, metal oxides and their nanostructures have emerged as an important class of materials with a rich spectrum of properties and great potential for device applications, e.g., transparent electrodes, high-electron mobility transistors, gas sensors, photovoltaic and photonic devices and hydrogen storage applications.13 Of their class, wide-band gap oxide semiconductors have occupied the forefront in the past decade because of an increasing need for short wavelength photonic devices, high-power, high-frequency electronic devices.13 Although research on the wide bandgap oxides has been focused on a plethora of oxidese.g.TiO2, CuO2, SnO2 and ZnOetc. among them, zinc oxide an II–VI semiconductor with a wide gap of 3.37 eV and sufficiently large exciton binding energy of 60 meV at room temperature making it suitable as a material for blue and ultraviolet light-emitting devices, has been of growing interest due to their scientific and technological importance. ZnO has a key of nanotechnology and well-recognized functional material suitable for various applications such as optoelectronic, the solar cell and so on.14–17 Nano-structured ZnO have been synthesized by various methods, such as chemical vapor deposition,18laser ablation,19molecular beam epitaxy20 or a simply just by heating Zn powders with or without catalyst.21 Because of the ability to produce high yield, easy scalability and low cost, the combination of thermal evaporation and vapor transport method has emerged as a promising route to grow ZnO nanostructures.21,22 Considerable efforts have been devoted to develop an understanding of the correlation between structure and electronic properties of the nano-variants and the growth parameters of ZnO nanostructures. However, precise control for the yield of desired ZnO nanostructures still remains a big challenge. The structure of ZnO can be described as a number of alternating planes composed of tetrahedrally coordinated O2− and Zn2+ ions stacked along the c-axis. The oppositely charged ions produce positively charged (001) Zn-polar and negatively charged (00) O-polar surfaces, resulting in a normal dipole moment and spontaneous polarization along the c-axis.23 In addition to the conventional nanowire and nanobelt structures, a diverse group of novel ZnO nanostructures has been discovered recently, such as nanocages,24 nanorings,25 nanohelixes/nanosprings,26 nanobows,27 nanodiscs,28 nanotetrapods29 and nanocombs30etc. These novel nanostructures indicate that ZnO contains probably the richest family of nanostructures among all materials, in both structure and properties, and also provides valuable models for understanding the nanoscale crystal growth. This is in addition to the high potential ZnO has for fabricating novel nanoelectronics and optical devices with enhanced performance.
It is now well known that the doping of nanocrystals can be achieved.31–33 This manuscript was an attempt to continue our quest for understanding the dopant induced optical exchange in chemically synthesized quantum confined semiconductors. Intentional defects, generated by doping of a guest ion, may have a profound effect on the electronic and optical properties of the materials. To generate a deeper level of understanding of the nature of electronic exchange under different conditions we have employed a set of optical techniques to extract evidence of exchange coupling and carrier densities in pure and doped nanoparticles. By systematically tuning the host lattice composition, the dopant concentration and the nanocrystal size; one can efficiently tune the band parameters and interactions within these systems to probe the existence of carriers. This exercise is exciting for physicists and material scientists working in this area due to the limitations of surface energy and ion incorporation, the possibility of annealing, the requirement of a pure nucleus formation in crystallization theory and the differences in solubility and kinetic rate of formation between different materials. In the present paper the authors have focused on the preparation and correlation of optical properties of pure and Cr doped ZnO nanoparticles with variable concentrations. The incorporation of donor atoms into nanocrystalline host atom sites is expected to result in emergent optical properties that can be experimentally probed by experiments. In the present investigation it is observed that the Cr doping leads to the optical band gap narrowing. The second harmonic generation (SHG) efficiency of the ZnO:Cr NPs was found to be higher than that of pure ZnO. The potential of these materials are for application in laser diodes, for observation of quantum confinement and purely for fundamental scientific understanding of the interplay of the lattice and electronic degrees of freedom.
2. Experimental details
2.1 Synthesis of pure and Cr doped ZnO NPs
Bottom-up approach of nanostructures with tailoring high-performance functionalities is the key for realistic applications in optoelectronics, field emitters, sensors and light emission diodes (LEDs). Extensive efforts have been devoted to achieving the desired crystallinity and to self-assemble architectural morphologies of various inorganic crystals from micro to nanosized. Such structural parameters represent key elements that determine their electrical, optical, and mechanical properties. To date, various morphologies or shapes of nanostructural materials and their hetero-structures or architectures, have been well investigated and were shown to suitable candidates for achieving high performance devices because of their superior physiochemical properties. Herein the authors have focused on the synthesis of pure and Cr doped ZnO nanoparticles with variable Cr concentration. In the representative synthesis of pure and doped ZnO, zinc nitrate hexahydrate Zn(NO3)2·6H2O (98%), sodium hydroxide NaOH and chromium chloride were purchased from Merck Limited, Mumbai, India. These chemicals were directly used without further treatment. In a representative synthesis process: 2.5 g of zinc nitrate hexahydrate was added to 80 mL of triple distilled water under vigorous stirring. After 30 min stirring, 20 mL of 2 M NaOH aqueous solution was introduced into the above solution, resulting in a white solution for which the pH value was maintained at 12. For the synthesis of 2, 4, 6 and 8 at. wt.% Cr doped ZnO, appropriate amount of chromium chloride was introduced into the above solution. Then the prepared solution was transferred into a stainless steel autoclave, sealed and maintained at 70 °C for 6 h. The resulting white solid products were washed with distilled water and ethanol to remove any ions possibly remaining in the final products, and finally dried at 100 °C in air.
2.2. Characterization techniques
The obtained products were examined using scanning electron microscopy (SEM Philips XL-20, ESEM FEI-Tecnai Quanta 200 attached with EDAX), transmission electron microscopy (HR-TEM FEI-Tecnai-20G2) and X-ray diffractometry (X'Pert PRO PAN analytical). The photoluminescence (PL) measurements were carried out at room temperature with a Xe lamp, excited to 325 nm. Crystal structure and phase composition of the samples were determined by X-ray diffraction using a PANalytical X-ray diffractometry (X' Pert PRO) with Cu-Kα (1.54184A°) radiation and an X'Celerator detector. The XRD data were collected over a 2θ range of 5°–80° with a step size of 0.02°. The diffraction data were analyzed using the Rietveld refinement program FULLPROF. [22] The XRD diffractograms were analyzed using the wurtzite structure (space groupP63mc, 186) with initial structural parameters taken from the ICSD data base (collection code 65119). Information on the isotropic micro strain and grain size broadening are obtained using a Thompson-Cox-Hastings-pseudo-Voigt line shape function.
3. Result and discussion
3.1 Structural analysis
At the forefront of the current scientific revolution of nanoscience nanocrystals (NCs), crystalline particles grown in liquid media, stand out over other classes of inorganic nanomaterials due to the high degree of control with which their crystal structure, size, shape, and surface functionalities can be engineered in the synthesis stage and to the versatility with which they can be processed and implemented into a large spectrum of devices and processes. The as synthesized products were subjected to XRD characterization for the identification of the gross structure. X-ray diffraction (XRD) confirmed that all nanostructures have hexagonal (wurtzite) ZnO structure (JCPDS file no. 36-1451) and the corresponding pattern shown in Fig. 1.
 Fig. 1  
X-ray diffraction (XRD) of as synthesized pure and doped ZnO–Cr samples confirming that all nanostructures have hexagonal (wurtzite) ZnO structure (JCPDS file no. 36-1451). 
No diffraction peak from Zn or other impurity phases is found in any of the samples, confirming that the products are single phased pure ZnO (JCPDS file no. 36-1451). The results indicated that products with a hexagonal wurtzite structure were prepared. The (0 0 2) peak values of the four samples were 34.321, 34.241, 34.361, and 34.081, respectively, which were smaller than that of the strain-free ZnO powder samples (34.431). With the increase in Cr, the full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the (0 0 2) peak became wider and the orientation poorer. Fig. 2 shows the XRD pattern of pure, 2 and 8 at.% Cr doped ZnO sample analyzed with Rietveld refinement. The refined pattern is in very good agreement with the measured data. No second phase is observed which revealed the first indication that the dopant atoms are incorporated in the wurtzite structure. The lattice parameter of the a-axis decreases and the c-axis increases with increasing dopant concentrations.28 This observation is another indication that the dopant atoms have been incorporated into the host's wurtzite from the literature bulk value25 probably because the point defect concentration (oxygen vacancies and zinc interstitials)26 are larger than the samples prepared solvothermally. In crystal structures, the lattice parameters of the pure oxide differ from the doped ZnO. The crystallite size decreases with increasing dopant concentration (19 nm for pure ZnO and 8 nm at 6 at. %). The kinetics of this process are influenced by the dopant atoms as the mobility of the grain boundaries in the agglomerate is limited by impurity drag.26
 Fig. 2  The XRD pattern of pure, 2 and 8 at.% Cr doped ZnO sample analyzed with Rietveld refinement. 
Other possible grain growth inhibition mechanisms such as segregation, second phase precipitation or processes influencing the nucleation cannot be ruled out. However, nucleation phenomena seem unlikely as the other process, which are based on irreversible decomposition reactions of the precursor second phases have not been observed with the detection limits of XRD and showed a homogeneous distribution of chromium across the particles investigated.28 The crystallographic data show a good agreement with data obtained for bulk crystals. The major differences are in the lattice parameters in the unit cell volume which is slightly larger for the nanomaterials due to a crystallite size effect and the temperature factors which are larger compared to values for the bulk reference materials probably due to additional static disorder or interface contributions. The results of the Rietveld refinement for the as-synthesized pure as well as the Cr doped sample are given in comparison to the literature data.25
3.2. Morphology of as prepared pure and doped ZnO NPs

Scanning electron microscopy was carried out by SEM Philips XL-20, ESEM FEI-Tecnai Quanta 200 and transmission electron microscopy of as prepared pure and doped samples was carried out by HR-TEM FEI-Tecnai-20G2. Fig. 3(a–b) shows the SEM image of pure ZnO while Fig. 3 (c–f) represent the SEM image of 2, 4, 6 and 8 at.% Cr doped ZnO respectively. Fig. 4(a–d) shows TEM images that respectively designate that the particles typically have equiaxial morphology and are agglomerated.
 Fig. 3  
            SEM images of pure (a–b) and (c–f) 2, 4, 6 and 8 at. % Cr doped ZnO NPs at the scale of 5 μm (a & c) and 2 μm (b, d–f). 
 Fig. 4  
            TEM images of as synthesized pure (a) and (b–d) 4, 6 and 8 at. % Cr doped ZnO NPs at the scale of 50 nm. 
Particle size distributions were resolute from TEM images. Fig. 4(a) displays pure ZnO nanoparticles with a mean diameter of 30 nm and Fig. 4(b–d) shows a Cr doped ZnO sample containing 4, 6 and 8 at.% Cr with a mean diameter ranging from ∼10–20 nm which is in very good agreement with the value obtained from XRD.
3.3. Optical properties of pure and Cr doped ZnO NPs

3.3.1. Band gap analysis. 
UV–visible reflectance spectra of as synthesized pure and doped ZnO are illustrated in Fig. 5. The reflectance spectrum was studied without taking into account the transmission losses. For pure and doped ZnO NPs sharp peaks close to 390, 382, 378, 375 and 370 nm were observed, which was believe to arise from the near band edge free excitons.
 Fig. 5  
Reflectance spectra of Cr-doped ZnO NPs. 
The diameters of the particles are in quantum-confinement regime, and thus are expected to show a large blue-shift in comparison to bulk ZnO. The band gap energies, Eg, of pure and doped ZnO samples were found to be 3.59 eV and 3.65 eV, respectively, and showed the large ‘blue shifts’ of 0.79 and 0.85 eV from standard bulk band gap at room temperature (Eg = 3.3 eV). This blue shift toward higher energy can be explained as a quantum size effect, due to the electron hole confinement in a small volume.


3.3.2 Photoluminescence analysis of pure and doped ZnO. 
Semiconductor NPs exhibit distinct photoluminescence (PL) properties rising to the quantum confinement effects on their electronic structures. One of the characteristic PL properties of NPs is the observation of an optically passive state, so-called dark-exciton states. The origin of the dark-excitonic state is basically a spin triplet state that is forbidden for optical transitions by the spin-selection rule. In a bulk crystal, thermal effects inhibit the observation of the triplet-exciton state since the spin-exchange-splitting energy is naturally smaller than 1 meV. On the contrary, in a NP system, the well defined quantum confinement effect enhances the spin-exchange interaction, which results in a large splitting energy between the spin singlet and triplet states. In particular, the splitting energy in a smaller NP becomes considerably larger, becoming comparable to or exceeding the thermal energy at room temperature in some cases, owing to the quantum confinement effect. When the electron-hole pair is tightly bound with distance between electron and hole comparable to the lattice constant, then they are called Frenkel excitons. On the other extreme, one may have an exciton with an electron-hole separation much larger in comparison to the lattice constant. This type of weakly bound electron-hole pair is called a Mott-Wannier exciton. The energy of such an exciton is slightly less than the energy gap (Eg). In the case of nanoparticles with dimensions comparable to the Bohr-diameter of the electron, electron and hole wave functions can overlap. Therefore the probability of efficient recombination increases. Due to altered electronic structures in nanomaterials, the transition rules also relax in certain cases and some transitions which are forbidden in bulk material become possible.
Dopants can introduce some energy levels in the band gap of the host material. Such levels can be responsible for altering the luminescence properties of the host material. After successful incorporation of Cr in the crystal lattice of ZnO, depending on whether efficient PL emission like in the pure ZnO nanocrystals can be observed or if the TM Cr acts as an efficient non-radiative centre via deep levels. In order to investigate the impact of Cr doping and annealing on the optical properties of the ZnO nanoparticles we performed PL measurements. Photoluminescence (PL) data on Cr-doped ZnO are rare, probably due to the well known reduction of the quantum efficiency in semiconductors after doping with transition metal atoms.34–36 Satoh et al. performed magneto-photoluminescence (magneto-PL) measurements on Cr-doped ZnO thin films and observed an increase in the PL intensity of the donor bound exciton transition which they claimed to be indicative of a bound magnetic polaron.37 In many cases, however, detailed and comprehensive information about the local structure and the electronic state of the Cr atoms within the crystal lattice is missing in the literature although it is important to understand the optical properties to get a more comprehensive insight into the properties and application potential of Cr-doped ZnO nanostructures. The light emission characteristics of the pure and Cr-doped ZnO NPs have been investigated by photoluminescence measurements and represented in Fig. 6. The PL spectrum exhibits a peak located at ∼390 nm. The ∼390 nm, peak is well understood and due to the exciton emission. Although, there seems to be no general agreement on the type and nature of such defects the possible variety of defects could be zinc and oxygen interstitials, oxygen vacancies, donor–acceptor complexes, surface states, etc. As the Cr concentration increases, the NBE emission decreases and for 8 at. % Cr, the defect related emission band dominates the spectrum. However, a rather inhomogeneous distribution of the nanoparticles on the substrate led to a position dependent variation of the PL intensity.
 Fig. 6  Room temperature PL spectra of as synthesized pure and doped ZnO NPs. 

4. Second harmonic response
There are not many reports on the study of nonlinear optical (NLO) properties of ZnO. Moreover, the Cr doped ZnO NPs would be very interesting objects for the investigation of the photo induced nonlinear optics phenomena, in particular, photo induced second harmonic generation (SHG). Inducing a media by a polarized external field (polarized laser field) can create a local photo induced electric field inside giving an additional increase to SHG even in metallic nanoparticles.38 Coherent NLO phenomena such as SHG and third harmonic generation (THG) depend explicitly on the crystal lattice structure of the medium, which could yield to a very high polarization selectivity. Moreover, non-resonant SHG is essentially independent of wavelength below the energy band gap of semiconductor materials, most often including wavelength regions typically used in optical fiber communications. Hence, characterizing the NLO response is crucial for evaluating potential applications.39
4.1. SHG measurements
The SHG measurements were performed by a rotational Maker fringe technique for s- and p-polarized fundamental beams with an excitation wavelength of 1064 nm. Taking into account that the structure of ZnO belongs to a hexagonal, non-centrosymmetric space group, this material should manifest a non zero second-order NLO efficiency. Fig. 7 presents the dependences of the second harmonic intensity generated in the ZnO NPs, Cr-doped, as the function of incident doped Cr content. The polarization of the second harmonic signal was found to always be p-polarized regardless of the incident polarization.
 Fig. 7  Second harmonic response in as synthesized Cr-doped ZnO NPs. 
The specific SHG conversion efficiency of Cr-doped ZnO NPs is one–two orders of magnitude lower than those in undoped ZnO. Furthermore, the conversion efficiency in second harmonic for p–p geometry of experiment is one order higher than for s–p configuration. The main reason, therefore, lies in the differences of the crystalline structure of ZnO after the incorporation of the dopant. The Cr ions incorporated into the ZnO matrix distort the lattice due to their smaller radius, and the system progressed to form a centrosymmetric structure. Moreover, one can see that by increasing Cr dopant from 2 to 8 at. % a small decreased of the second-order NLO response is observed. Such behaviour can be explained by the modified polycrystalline structure of ZnO NPs caused by increased concentration of Cr dopant.
5. Possible reaction mechanism
The overall reaction for the growth of ZnO crystals may be simplified as following during the process, the following reaction takes place:3Zn(NO3)2·6H2O + 2NaOH → 6Zn (OH)2− + 6NaNO3 + 6H2O6Zn(OH)2− → 6ZnO + 3H2O
Although the chemical reaction is rather simple, the growth process of ZnO NPs would be very complicated. The usage of a basic condition and an alcoholic environment are two crucial keys in ensuring the formation of the growth unit of Zn(OH)2− and a controlled release of the units from solution. Under the optimised solution conditions, zinc nitrate may be dissolved in the alkaline environment forming the zinc hydroxide species Zn(OH)2− in the solution. Consequently, the dissolved Zn(OH)2− species could be easily stabilized and serve as growth units for the formation of ZnO nuclei and growth of ZnO nuclei into NPs.
6. Conclusions
A facile, general and simple solution process has been developed to synthesize blue luminescent ZnO and Cr doped ZnO in alcoholic media in the presence of NaOH at 70 °C within 4 h, free from any surfactant or template. Large ‘blue-shifts’ were observed in UV-visible and in PL spectroscopy analysis of the products. The emission intensity of Cr ion doped ZnO was found to decrease considerably with respect to pure sample. The crystallinity and size of the NPs decreases with increasing Cr content. NaOH played multiple roles in the formation of ZnO and Cr doped ZnO NPs as it served not only as the reduction agent but also as a complexing agent, reaction and shape controller, molecular template and as the stabilizing agent.
Acknowledgements
We are thankful to Dr Kaushal Kumar for his help in the analysis of second harmonic data. P. Kumar is thankful to the University Grant Commission (UGC), New Delhi, India for providing financial assistance under the Dr D. S. Kothari Post Doctoral Fellowship Scheme. J. Singh is thankful to the MNRE; New Delhi, India for providing financial assistance under the hydrogen mission scheme. We gratefully acknowledge the University Grant Commission (UGC), Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) and Department of Science and Technology (DST), New Delhi for their financial support regarding this study. P. Kumar and K. Ramam also acknowledge funding support from the Fondecyt Postdoctorate Project number 3120225 and Fondecyt Regular Project number 1110583 of CONICYT-Chile, respectively.
References
J. F. Wang, M. S. Gudiksen, X. F. Duan, Y. Cui and C. M. Lieber, Science, 2001, 293, 1455 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hu, L. Li, W. Yang, L. Manna, L. Wang and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2001, 292, 2060 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Friedman, M. C. McAlpine, D. S. Ricketts, D. Ham and C. M. Lieber, Nature, 2005, 434, 1085 CrossRef CAS .
W. C. W. Chan and S. Nie, Science, 1998, 281, 2016 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bruchez, M. Moronne, P. Gin, S. Weiss and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 1998, 281, 2013 CrossRef CAS .
T. Matasuoka, Adv. Mater., 1996, 8, 469 CAS .
J. Wang, D. C. Hutchings, A. Miller, E. W. Van Stryland, K. R. Welford, I. T. Muirhead and K. L. Lewis, J. Appl. Phys., 1993, 73, 4746 CrossRef .
J. Singh, S. S. Patil, M. A. More, D. S. Joag, R. S. Tiwari and O. N. Srivastava, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2010, 256, 6157 Search PubMed .
H. Jeon, J. Ding, W. Patterson, A. V. Nurmikko, W. Xie, D. C. Grillo, M. Kobayashi and R. L. Gunshor, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1991, 59, 3619 Search PubMed .
D. J. Norris, N. Yao, F. T. Charnock and T. A. Kennedy, Nano Lett., 2001, 1, 3 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Malik, P. O'Brien and N. Revaprasadu, J. Mater. Chem., 2001, 11, 2382 RSC .
T. J. Jr. Norman, D. Magana, T. Wilson, C. Burns, J. Z. Zhang, D. Cao and F. Bridges, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 6309 CrossRef .

          Z. L. Wang (ed.) Nanowires and Nanobelts - materials, properties and devices;Vol. II: Nanowires and Nanobelts of Functional Materials, Kluwer Academic Publisher,  2003 Search PubMed .
S. Singh, P. Thiyagarajan, K. M. Kant, D. Anita, S. Thirupathiah, N. Rama, B. Tiwari, M. Kottaisamy and M. S. R. Rao, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2007, 40, 6312 Search PubMed .
Y. B. Li, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 84, 3603 CrossRef CAS .
U. Ozgur, Y. I. Alivov, C. Liu, A. Teke, M. A. Reshchikov, S. Dogan, V. Aurutin, S. J. Cho and H. Morkoc, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 98, 043101 Search PubMed .

          C. Jagdish and S. Pearton, Zinc Oxide Bulk, Thin Films and Nano Structures Processing, Properties and Applications, Elsevier, Oxford IX51GB UK,  2006 Search PubMed .
D. C. Kim, B. H. Kong and H. K. Cho, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2008, 19, 760 Search PubMed .
Z. W. Liu and C. K. Ong, Mater. Lett., 2007, 61, 3329 Search PubMed .
W. I. Park, D. H. Kim, S. W. Jung and G. C. Yi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80, 4232 CrossRef CAS .
J. Singh, R. S. Tiwari and O. N. Srivastava, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2007, 7, 1783 Search PubMed .
U. Manzoor and D. K. Kim, Scr. Mater., 2006, 54, 807 Search PubMed .
Z. L. Wang, X. Y. Kong and J. M. Zuo, Phys. Rev.
Lett., 2003, 91, 185502 CrossRef CAS .
P. X. Gao and Z. L. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 11299 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Kong, Y. Ding, R. Yang and Z. L. Wang, Science, 2004, 303, 1348 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Kong and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 1625 CrossRef CAS .
W. L. Hughes and Z. L. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 6703 CrossRef .
P. X. Gao, C. S. Lao, Y. Ding and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 53 CrossRef CAS .
J. Singh, A. Srivastava, R. S. Tiwari and O. N. Srivastava, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2005, 5, 2093 Search PubMed .
C. S. Lao, P. X. Gao, R. S. Yang, Y. Zhang, Y. Dai and Z. L. Wang, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2005, 417, 359 Search PubMed .
P. Kumar and K. Singh, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011 DOI:10.1021/ja2088426 .
P. Kumar and K. Singh, Nanopart. Res., 2011, 13, 1613 Search PubMed .
P. Srivastava, P. Kumar and K. Singh, Nanopart. Res., 2011, 13, 5077 Search PubMed .
S. Bhaskar, P. S. Dobal, B. K. Rai, R. S. Katiyar, H. D. Bist, J. O. Ndap and A. Burger, J. Appl. Phys., 1999, 85, 439 Search PubMed .
Z. W. Jin, Y. Z. Yoo, T. Sekiguchi, T. Chikyow, H. Ofuchi, H. Fujioka, M. Oshima and H. Koinuma, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 83, 39 Search PubMed .
I. Satoh and T. Kobayashi, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2006, 216, 603 Search PubMed .
I. Satoh, T. Kobayashi, K. Katayama, T. Okada and T. Itoh, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2004, 79, 1445 Search PubMed .
I. V. Kityk, J. Ebothe, I. Fuks-Janczarek, A. Ali Umar, K. Kobayashi, M. Oyama and B. Sahraoui, Nanotechnology, 2005, 16, 1687 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Johnson, H. Yan, R. D. Schaller, P. B. Petersen, P. Yang and R. J. Saykally, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 279 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  
X-ray diffraction (XRD) of as synthesized pure and doped ZnO–Cr samples confirming that all nanostructures have hexagonal (wurtzite) ZnO structure (JCPDS file no. 36-1451).	 

 	Fig. 2  The XRD pattern of pure, 2 and 8 at.% Cr doped ZnO sample analyzed with Rietveld refinement.	 

 	Fig. 3  
            SEM images of pure (a–b) and (c–f) 2, 4, 6 and 8 at. % Cr doped ZnO NPs at the scale of 5 μm (a & c) and 2 μm (b, d–f).	 

 	Fig. 4  
            TEM images of as synthesized pure (a) and (b–d) 4, 6 and 8 at. % Cr doped ZnO NPs at the scale of 50 nm.	 

 	Fig. 5  
Reflectance spectra of Cr-doped ZnO NPs.	 

 	Fig. 6  Room temperature PL spectra of as synthesized pure and doped ZnO NPs.	 

 	Fig. 7  Second harmonic response in as synthesized Cr-doped ZnO NPs.	 
3Zn(NO3)2·6H2O + 2NaOH → 6Zn (OH)2− + 6NaNO3 + 6H2O
6Zn(OH)2− → 6ZnO + 3H2O

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
