Graphene, inorganic graphene analogs and their composites for lithium ion batteries  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4TA01033G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4TA01033G
(Feature Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 12104-12122Graphene, inorganic graphene analogs and their composites for lithium ion batteries

        
          
            Yu 
            Jing
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Zhen 
            Zhou
          
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Carlos R. 
            Cabrera
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Zhongfang 
            Chen
          
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Chemistry, Institute for Functional Nanomaterials, University of Puerto Rico, Rio Piedras Campus, San Juan, Puerto Rico 00931. E-mail: zhongfangchen@gmail.com
bTianjin Key Laboratory of Metal and Molecule Based Material Chemistry, Key Laboratory of Advanced Energy Materials Chemistry (Ministry of Education), Institute of New Energy Material Chemistry, Collaborative Innovation Center of Chemical Science and Engineering (Tianjin), Nankai University, Tianjin 300071, P. R. China. E-mail: zhouzhen@nankai.edu.cn
Received 
      28th February 2014
    , Accepted 3rd April 2014First published on 4th April 2014AbstractIn recent years, two-dimensional (2D) materials, including graphene and inorganic graphene analogs (IGAs), have been the subject of intensive studies due to their novel chemical and physical properties. With apparent high surface-to-volume ratio, 2D materials are promising electrode candidates for lithium ion batteries (LIBs). Compared with three-dimensional bulk crystals, 2D materials have superior structural characteristics, and thus can exhibit higher specific capacity and better high-rate stability. In particular, composites consisting of graphene and IGAs could have enhanced electrochemical performances due to the specific synergic effects, which open up new frontiers in fundamental science and technology. Although the explorations of using IGAs for lithium storage have begun very recently, a timely overview in this field is necessary for developing improved electrode candidates. In this feature article, we summarize the ongoing efforts and studies from both experimental and theoretical communities on developing graphene and IGAs as LIB electrodes. Compared with graphene, we put more emphasis on IGAs, such as transition metal oxides, dichalcogenides, and MXenes, and illustrate the significant advantages of IGAs as electrodes. We also show that due to the effective synergic interactions between graphene and IGAs, their composites step further to achieve reversible high-capacity LIBs. Finally, we discuss the problems and limitations for the practical application of 2D materials to LIBs.Yu JingYu Jing was born in Jiamusi, Heilongjiang Province, P.R. China in 1988. She received her bachelor's degree in Materials Chemistry at Nankai University in 2011. She has been studying for her Ph D degree at Nankai University with Professor Zhen Zhou. Her main research interest is 2D materials for energy storage and conversion.Zhen ZhouZhen Zhou was born in Shandong, P. R. China in 1971. After he received his BSc in 1994 and Ph D in 1999 at Nankai University, P. R. China, he joined the faculty in 1999. Two years later, he began to work at Nagoya University, Japan, as a JSPS post-doctoral fellow. In 2005, he returned to Nankai University as an associate professor. In 2011, he was promoted to full professorship. His main research interest is the design, preparation and application of nanomaterials for energy storage and conversion.Carlos R. CabreraDr Carlos R. Cabrera was born in San Juan, Puerto Rico. He obtained his B.S. in Chemistry at the University of Puerto Rico at Río Piedras. In 1987, Dr Cabrera obtained his Ph.D. in Analytical Chemistry at Cornell University, followed by a post-doctoral appointment at the University of Texas at Austin. Currently, Dr Cabrera is a Full Professor of Chemistry at the University of Puerto Rico at Rio Piedras. During his career at the University of Puerto Rico, Dr Cabrera was the advisor for 23 Ph.Ds and 6 M.Ss in Chemistry and Chemical Physics. His main research is in regenerative fuel-cell catalysts, Li-battery anode nanomaterials, urine purification, and biosensors.Zhongfang ChenZhongfang Chen obtained his B.S. (1994), M.S. (1997), and Ph.D. (2000) at Nankai University, China, and has been an associate professor at the Department of Chemistry, University of Puerto Rico, Rio Piedras Campus since 2008. His main research is to apply modern computational tools for investigating and designing new materials for energy, environment and human health.
1. Introduction
As one of the most important energy storage devices, lithium ion batteries (LIBs) are indispensable in modern society, from portable electronics like cellular phones and laptops to electric vehicles and even smart grids. Moreover, the rapid development of modern society imposes increasing demands for highly efficient LIBs. For this reason, researchers have been devoting numerous efforts to improving both cathodes and anodes to achieve LIBs with high capacity, short charge–discharge time and long cycle life.1–4
Generally, traditional materials with stable layered structures are highly favorable for LIB cathodes, which include layered lithium transition metal oxides (LiCoO2, LiNiO2, and LiNi1/3Co1/3Mn1/3O2), and layered metal oxides (such as V2O5) and chalcogenides (such as TiS2).5–12 For anodes, graphite is a well-commercialized material due to its low cost, high safety and cyclic efficiency.13,14 However, with a low capacity of 372 mA h g−1,15 graphite cannot satisfy the increasing demands for high-capacity mobile power sources. In past years, metal alloys,16 silicon,17–19 transition metal oxides (TMOs) and chalcogenides (TMDs) have been widely explored as anodes to replace graphite in LIBs.20–22 Despite extensive investigations, outstanding electrode materials with high specific capacity and excellent cyclic stability are still underexploited.
The properties of a material depend critically on its size and dimensionality. Due to the quantum confinement and boundary effects, low-dimensional materials can present novel properties absent in bulk crystals.23–25 During the past decade, it has been rather popular to improve the electrochemical performances of electrode materials by reducing the size to nanoscale.26 Compared with the bulk crystals, nanoscale materials can exhibit significantly improved electrochemical performances because of their high surface area and short lithium-diffusion paths.
Furthermore, in order to improve the electrical conductivity and structural stability of nanoscale electrode materials, conductive materials including carbon nanotubes, mesoporous carbon and conductive polymers are widely introduced to build hybrid electrodes.27 Particularly, graphene, a new star in materials science, has recently provided a tempting alternative as a conductive cover or substrate for electrode materials,28–30 while graphene itself also exhibits good potential as LIB anodes. Excitingly, the exceptional properties of graphene other than graphite, such as high ion mobility,31 large surface area and excellent electrical and thermal conductivity,32–35 not only make graphene attractive for use in composite electrodes but also lead to intensifying research interest in other graphene-like, two-dimensional (2D) inorganic materials for LIBs.
Similar to graphene, inorganic graphene analogs (IGAs) also have unusual properties compared with their bulk crystals. For example, the MoS2 monolayer shows specific properties different from its bulk crystal, such as dynamic negative compressibility effects and intrinsic piezoelectricity, which make it attractive for use in electromechanical devices.36–38 Some single-layered transition metal oxides or dichalcogenides were even predicted to have some superior properties to graphene. Utilized as electrodes for LIBs, IGAs with favorable open structures can possess higher surface area, more abundant lithium adsorption sites, and larger Li diffusion space than their bulk forms. Therefore, IGAs are promising for high-performance LIBs.
Among IGAs, 2D MoS2 is probably the most attractive, and its successful preparation contributes to the current active investigations of IGAs. Based on density functional theory (DFT) computations, Ataca et al. revealed that almost 52 compounds exhibit high stability with single-layered structures among all 88 different combinations of MX2 (M = Sc, Ti, V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Nb, Mo, and W; X = O, S, Se, and Te).39 Different from the uniform MX2 stoichiometry of 2D TMDs, 2D TMOs can range in various stoichiometric ratios of M and X.
In general, it is more feasible to achieve single-layered TMDs than TMOs because of the different thermal stabilities. As revealed, the suspended layers of 2D TMOs (such as TiO2, CoO2, and NbO2) are sensitive to temperature changes and are only stable on specific substrates. Currently, only ZnO,40 MoO3 (mechanical exfoliation with Scotch tape),41 and CoO (intercalation of tetramethylammonium) in free-standing monolayers have been realized.42 Most obtained 2D TMOs are multilayers, such as WO3 and MnO2 (bottom-up approach).43–45
2D TMDs manifest the biggest potential as high-capacity anodes among the emerging IGAs. Although some 2D TMOs have been experimentally achieved, due to the high collecting difficulty and low quantity, few of them have been applied to LIB anodes. In comparison, 2D TMDs anodes, including MoS2, MoSe2, WS2, WSe2, and SnS2, have been extensively explored in LIBs due to their high thermal and chemical stability. Besides TMDs and TMOs, MXene has become a novel research topic in the family of IGAs, and is highly promising as a LIB anode. Additionally, IGAs can serve as LIB cathodes; for example, few-layered V2O5 was well applied to cathodes in LIBs with excellent performances.46 Therefore, IGAs have been well spread over anodes and cathodes with high capacity for LIBs. However, the poor conductivity and risk of restacking continue to limit the electrochemical performances of IGAs, especially the high-rate performance and cyclic stability.
To conquer these problems, graphene-based IGA (G–IGA) composites were proposed. With similar 2D structures, IGAs can be favorably loaded on the surface of graphene. Since the addition of graphene can weaken the interaction of IGA layers, the restacking problem can be effectively alleviated. Meanwhile, metalloid graphene can improve the electrical conductivity of the composites with high efficiency, and the synergistic effects between graphene and IGAs can contribute to higher specific capacity of the G–IGA composites, compared with that of bare graphene or IGAs. Thus, G–IGA composites are attracting much research enthusiasm and exhibit excellent electrochemical performances for LIBs.
In this feature article, we will present an overview on the recent and ongoing efforts in developing graphene, IGAs and their composites for LIB electrodes. We will first introduce the structural characteristics of graphene and IGAs and their concomitant advantages for LIB electrodes, briefly summarize general preparation strategies, and then discuss the performances of graphene, IGAs and their composites as LIB electrodes. In addition to the well-investigated 2D TMDs and TMOs, some novel IGAs like silicene and MXenes will also be introduced. These 2D materials open a new gate for effective lithium storage, and their electrochemical performances, including high capacity, excellent cyclic stability and great high-rate capability, endow them as outstanding electrode candidates for LIBs.
2. Structural characteristics and advantages of graphene and IGAs for Li-ion batteries
In general, graphene can be regarded as a single sheet of sp2-bonded carbon atoms placed in a honeycomb lattice. Due to its unique structural properties, graphene exhibits novel phenomena that are absent in graphite, such as massless Dirac fermions and the room-temperature quantum Hall effect.47–49 Meanwhile, graphene also presents many fantastic physical and chemical properties, including high hardness (217 kg fmm−2), high intrinsic carrier mobility (200000 cm2 V−1 s−1),50 super mechanical strength (breaking strength of 42 N m−1 and Young's modulus of 1.0 TPa),51 high optical transmittance (97.7%),52 high theoretical specific surface area of 2630 m2 g−1,32 excellent thermal conductivity of ∼5000 W m−1 K−1, and great electrical conductivity (106 S cm−1).53,54 These brilliant properties of graphene make it not only attractive for use in electronic devices but also popular in energy storage systems, such as solar cells,55,56 fuel cells,57 supercapacitors,58,59 and particularly, LIBs.60–62
The explosive growth of research interest in graphene draws forth the rapid development of graphene-like inorganic materials. Similar to graphene, single-layered IGAs are mostly disengaged from the layered structures of their bulk crystals by overcoming the van der Waals (vdW) interactions. Among various IGAs, a hexagonal boron nitride (BN) monolayer is the structural analog of graphene with B and N atoms substituting C atoms, and it is generally termed as “white graphene.”63
Different from the one-atom thickness of graphene or BN, TMD monolayers generally consist of three atomic layers, forming the MX2 stoichiometry with a sandwich structure. Normally, one layer of metal atoms is located in the middle, sandwiched by two layers of chalcogen atoms. The thickness of an MX2 layer ranges from 6 to 7 Å. With respect to its three polymorphs in bulk crystals (one X-M-X unit trigonal morph, 1T; two-unit X-M-X hexagonal morphs, 2H; and three-unit rhombohedral morphs, 3R), MX2 monolayers only exhibit two coordination categories:64 the trigonal prismatic H phase and the octahedral T phase (Fig. 1a and b). H-phase MX2 belongs to the D3d point group with a honeycomb top view, while T-phase MX2 belongs to the C3v point group with a centered honeycomb top view.39,65
 Fig. 1  Top and side views of the atomic structure of 2D single-layered MoS2 presented as a prototype for MX2 in H structure (a) and T structure (b); monolayer schematics of MnO2 (c) and MoO3 (d) and a two-layer schematic of V2O5 (e). 
Due to the complicated stoichiometry, the structures of TMO monolayers are multifarious and in lack of rules. For example, the MnO2 monolayer possesses a typical sandwich structure (Fig. 1c), which is rather similar to the T-MoS2 monolayer,66,67 while the single-layered structure of MoO3 is more complicated (Fig. 1d). In addition, the MoO3 monolayer, which consists of double layers of linked, distorted MoO6 octahedra, can only be stabilized in an orthorhombic α-phase.41,68,69 For a more complicated example, one V2O5 monolayer consists of six layers of atoms and is built of distorted V2O5 trigonal bipyramidals. In its monolayer structure, V atoms spread alternatively up and down in pairs instead of locating in one layer (Fig. 1e), and three kinds of oxygen atoms are arranged in different configurations in each layer.70
Irrespective of different structural configurations, IGAs all exhibit high surface area with abundant active sites, open space for effective Li diffusion and good electrical conductivity, which make them highly attractive for use in LIB electrodes. In the following sections, we will discuss how these factors facilitate the lithium storage in graphene and IGAs.
2.1. 2D structures: abundant sites for Li adsorption and high mobility for Li diffusion
Graphene has a notably high surface area, which is an extremely advantageous characteristic for rapid and effective lithium adsorption, making graphene irresistible for LIBs. Superior to graphite, graphene can accommodate lithium atoms on both sides, which consequently leads to a higher theoretical capacity than graphite.71–73 Many first-principle computations have been performed to study the electrochemical properties of graphene for lithium storage. In pristine graphene, the most favorable site for Li adsorption is the hollow center of the carbon hexagon, as shown in Fig. 2a. However, recent computational studies have revealed that pristine graphene is energetically unfavorable for lithium storage. Lee et al. systematically calculated Li adsorption and intercalation on graphene monolayers and few layers.74 They demonstrated that defects in graphene are indispensable for Li adsorption and stabilization since Li atoms can barely adsorb on the defect-free graphene monolayer. Meanwhile, graphene nanoribbons (GNRs) with zigzag or armchair edges can significantly facilitate the lithium adsorption and diffusion processes.31,75 As demonstrated by Uthaisar et al.,31 Li on graphene and zigzag GNRs both appeared to migrate from the middle of the hexagon (H) to the edge through the middle of the bond (M), as shown in Fig. 2b and c, respectively. GNRs can exhibit lower energy barriers for Li-ion diffusion and shorter diffusion paths than those in graphene (Fig. 2d), which correspondingly increases the Li-diffusion coefficient by 2 orders of magnitude. In addition, due to the existence of edge states,76–78 GNRs with zigzag edges can provide higher lithium-binding energy than that of armchair GNRs or 2D graphene.87 Thus, graphene with zigzag edges can be highly favorable for lithium storage.
 Fig. 2  According to DFT computations, (a) the most favorable adsorption site of Li on graphene; (b) Li migration path A on graphene; (c) Li migration path A′ on GNRs; (d) energy barriers for Li migration in (b) and (c);31 geometries of Li atoms adsorbed at the T (e) and H sites (f) of the MoS2 monolayer; (g) energy profiles for Li diffusion on the MoS2 monolayer from a T site to another, passing through an H site.79 Reproduced from ref. 31 (Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society) and ref. 79 (Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society). 
Owing to the high thermal and chemical stability, single- or few-layered MoS2 is the most accessible 2D MX2 material. The MoS2 monolayer displays a typical sandwiched structure in the H phase (Fig. 1a). The broad applications of bulk MoS2 in lubricants, catalysts, optoelectronic devices, solar cells and LIBs have prompted substantial research of 2D MoS2, inspired by the fantastic properties of graphene. Since the MoS2 monolayer has two sulfur atomic layers exposed to the open space, it can provide more lithium adsorption sites than the MoS2 bulk. As revealed by Li et al., Li atoms tend to be stabilized right above the Mo atom (T site, Fig. 2e) rather than above the center of the honeycomb (H site, Fig. 2e) on the surface of the MoS2 monolayer. Their computational studies demonstrated that the Li mobility can be significantly facilitated on the MoS2 monolayer, compared with the MoS2 bulk.79 In addition, due to the presence of edge states, zigzag MoS2 nanoribbons, which are ferromagnetic and metallic,80 have remarkably enhanced binding interaction with Li, without sacrificing Li mobility (Fig. 2g), and thus are promising for use as cathode materials in LIBs.79 Moreover, zigzag MoS2 nanoribbons were also predicted for use in rechargeable Mg batteries by computations.81 Similar to lithium adsorption, Mg atoms tend to be stabilized on the edge sites of the MoS2 nanoribbons rather than on the smooth surface.
Studies of Li storage on the MoS2 monolayer have led to a good understanding of how the 2D TMDs work as high-capacity electrodes. Based on an ab initio study, Tibbetts et al. revealed that the lithium diffusion barrier on the TiS2 surface can be decreased by 0.2 eV, compared with that in the TiS2 bulk, implying an improved charge/discharge rate.82 Very recently, we have investigated the Li storage capability of the VS2 monolayer, compared with the MoS2 monolayer and graphite, on the basis of DFT computations.83 As a result, the VS2 monolayer exhibited a lower Li diffusion barrier (0.22 eV) than MoS2 (0.25 eV) and can deliver higher theoretical capacity (466 mA h g−1) than either MoS2 or graphite. Particularly, the metallic property of the VS2 monolayer endows it with superior electrical conductivity for improved electrochemical performances in LIBs. With a low open circuit voltage, the VS2 monolayer is a promising anode candidate for LIBs.
In addition to 2D TMDs, lithium storage in the V2O5 monolayer was explored on the basis of DFT by Wang et al.,84 and their simulations showed that single-layered V2O5 can exhibit higher Li binding energy and lower Li diffusion barriers than the bulk V2O5. In fact, the advantageous electrochemical performances of ultrathin V2O5 film over those of thicker V2O5 film have been demonstrated experimentally before the computational predictions. As revealed by Li et al.,85 the ultrathin V2O5 film with a thickness of 17 nm, corresponding to four monolayers (the interlayer distance is 4.36 Å), exhibited fast charge/discharge capability and excellent cyclic stability. These excellent performances of few-layered V2O5 can be attributed to free Li accessibility to the intercalation active sites.
In general, 2D layered materials have been computationally or experimentally demonstrated to be more favorable for lithium adsorption and diffusion than their bulk counterparts. The superior Li storage performances can be mostly attributed to their high surface area, abundant Li adsorption sites on both sides of the monolayer, low Li diffusion barriers, and unique edge effects, which can improve their performances to a higher level. However, besides their favorable structural properties, the electrical conductivity of 2D materials has to be considered for their potentials for use in LIBs.
2.2. Super electrical conductivity of graphene and various IGAs
Good conductivity can guarantee fast and effective electron/ion transmission and diffusion, which decides the highly rated electrochemical performance and cyclic stability of electrode materials to a large extent. A perfect graphene monolayer has been computationally and experimentally confirmed to be a good conductor;50 however, its excellent conductivity recedes with the increase of defects and functional groups in the graphene matrix,86 which means that the electrical conductivity of graphene is sacrificed with increasing active sites in the graphene surface. Nonetheless, reduced graphene oxides can reach a balance of these two characters. With tremendous oxygen-containing groups and surface defects, graphene oxides exhibit much lower electronic conductivity, compared with pristine graphene. However, the reduced graphene oxides (rGO) can recover the good electronic conductivity and effective field effect mobility.87 In addition, graphene samples with the short-range disorder were reported to possess higher mobility than those with the long-range disorder.86 The amount of defects and functional groups of rGO depends directly on the synthesis conditions, which will be discussed later.
Aside from graphene, most 2D inorganic materials present band gaps under 2.0 eV and behave as metals or semiconductors (Table 1). For example, the 2H MoS2 monolayer is semiconducting with a band gap of 1.89 eV,94 while the 2D VS2 monolayer is metallic with no band gap.83,88 Besides TMDs, Tang et al. investigated the band structure of the V2O5 monolayer and revealed its semiconductor property with a band gap of 1.94 eV.89 As a result, many 2D inorganic materials show feasibility for effective electron and Li-ion transportation because of their small band gaps. In contrast, due to the large band gap (∼5.9 eV),90 the BN monolayer has good applications in insulators and gate dielectrics but are rarely used in energy storage devices.
Table 1 Electronic properties of different 2D materials




2D materials
Band gap (eV)
Conductivity
Ref.




Graphene
0
Semi-metal

50



BN
5.9
Insulator

90 and 91



2H-MoS2
1.89
Semiconductor

92 and 93



2H-WS2
1.98
Semiconductor

138 and 139



2H-MoSe2
1.44
Semiconductor

140



1T-TiS2
—
Metal

39



VS2
—
Metal

83



V2O5
1.94
Semiconductor

89



Silicene
0
Semiconductor

94



Ti3C2
—
Metal

198





Note that the different polymorphs of a material may exhibit disparate electrical conductivities. Taking the MoS2 monolayer as an example, the electrical conductivities of its two polymorphs can be totally different. The stable 2H structure of the MoS2 monolayer composed of edge-sharing MoS6 trigonal prisms is semiconducting, while metastable 1T structures built of edge-sharing MoS6 octahedra acts as a metal. Generally, the MoS2 monolayer synthesized by chemical vapor deposition (CVD) crystallizes in the 2H phase. However, in the MoS2 monolayer obtained through chemical exfoliation, the 1T polymorph was detected to co-exist with the 2H polymorph.95,96 Therefore, the exfoliated MoS2 monolayer can maintain good electrical conductivity for effective lithium storage.
In general, high surface areas with rich lithium adsorption sites and good electrical conductivity of graphene and IGAs are essential for their electrochemical performances in the LIBs. However, the properties of graphene and IGAs are highly related to their 2D structures, which can be mainly determined by the synthesis conditions. Therefore, we will next introduce the general strategies for preparing graphene and IGAs.
3. General preparation strategies of graphene and IGAs
Since graphite and most bulk crystals of IGAs are dominated by vdW interactions, their monolayers can be peeled off from the bulk by overcoming the vdW interactions in different ways. Graphene has been successfully prepared by various approaches, including mechanical cleavage from graphite,50 epitaxial growth on SiC,97 CVD synthesis on metal substrates,98 chemical coupling reactions,99 exfoliation via solution oxidation,100 sonication/intercalation,101 or ball milling.102 Based on those investigations, approaches for preparing single- or few-layered 2D inorganic materials are rapidly developed.103–105 In a comprehensive review, Zhang et al. summarized the most recent advances in the design, assembly and transfer strategies for free-standing 2D crystals.106 Generally, methods such as mechanical exfoliation, liquid-based exfoliation, CVD, hydrothermal, and sol–gel can be used to prepare IGAs.
3.1. Mechanical exfoliation
Graphene was first obtained by mechanical exfoliation method with Scotch tape, in which graphite was peeled into fewer layers by taping and peeling until only one layer was finally obtained. Mechanical exfoliation is an effective way to prepare the isolated 2D monolayers with high quality. By stirring, shaking or sonicating, mechanical forces can overcome the vdW attractions in stacked layers. Since no chemical groups or elements are involved in the 2D matrix during this physical process, 2D materials obtained via this method are good for fundamental studies, especially for patterned structures and physical properties. However, the mechanical method cannot provide large-scale 2D materials, which limits its application to some extent.
With the same concept of mechanical exfoliation, ball milling has recently been determined to be facile, effective, low cost and eco-friendly for the preparation of graphene and graphene-like materials. By taking advantage of the high mechanical energy, ball milling is widely used for synthesizing low-dimensional nanomaterials. Recently, Jeon et al. have reported an effective ball-milling process to prepare graphene nanosheets with the presence of dry ice.102 By using this efficient CO2-capturing approach, the edges of the primary graphite can be selectively carboxylated, which would improve its dispersion in various solvents and facilitate its self-exfoliation into single- or few-layered graphene. Hence, the ball-milling method stands out from other complicated exfoliation processes for low cost and flexible operations. Besides graphene, ball milling can also be applied to synthesize BN, MoS2 and WS2 2D nanosheets with high dispersion.107,108 However, it is difficult to control the size of these materials by ball milling, and impurities are usually introduced during this process.
3.2. Liquid exfoliation
Liquid exfoliation can be regarded as mechanical exfoliation of layered materials in proper liquids under ultrasonication.109,110 Organic solvents are generally used in liquid exfoliation based on the solubility theory, which predicts that nanomaterials can be effectively dispersed in solvents with matched surface energy.111,112 Solvents such as dimethylformamide, N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) and cyclohexylpyrrolidone (CHP) can efficiently disperse both graphene and IGAs, including MoS2, WS2, MoSe2, MoTe2, etc.
To further improve the exfoliating efficiency, chemical intercalation was combined with the liquid exfoliation process. The general strategy is to exfoliate graphene and IGA monolayers from their bulk crystals with the help of chemical molecules or groups. The most typical example is the oxidation–reduction synthesis of graphene. Generally, graphite was first oxidized with oxygen-containing groups by strong oxidants and then reduced either chemically or electrochemically.113–115 In the reduction process, the diffusion force of reduced oxygen overcomes the vdW interaction and separates rGO into single layers. For other IGAs, the chemical liquid exfoliation methods are highly similar. Lithium intercalation and exfoliation methods are widely used for the liquid exfoliation of BN, MoS2, TiS2, TaS2, ZrS2, WS2, NbSe, WSe2, Sb2Se3, Bi2Te3, etc.116–160 Exfoliation conducted after n-butyl–Li intercalation or electrochemical Li intercalation could produce large amounts of hydrogen and push the stacked MoS2 or other IGAs into separated layers. More recently, swelling with formamide has been found effective to exfoliate V2O5 bulk into few layers,46 which contributed to the realization of the 2D materials in liquid exfoliation.
There are two major shortcomings for the chemical liquid exfoliation: first, additional groups or matrix defects are always induced to the 2D materials, which would lower the material quality; second, most organic solvents used thus far are toxic, and less toxic solvents are needed. Encouragingly, it was found that ethanol–water mixtures of appropriate composition can efficiently exfoliate IGAs.118 Nevertheless, liquid exfoliation is an effective method for synthesizing large-scale 2D materials with relatively large yields, and thus is highly preferable when large quantities are demanded.
3.3. Chemical vapor deposition
CVD can effectively deposit graphene monolayers or IGAs onto proper substrates. By using copper as the depositing substrate, high-quality graphene monolayers with ultra large surface areas can be obtained and the percentage of graphene monolayers can be as high as 90%.112,119 Other transition metals like Ir, Ru and Ni can also be utilized as substrates for graphene deposition.120–122 After graphene, CVD was successfully applied to synthesize IGAs. The most representative is the synthesis of MoS2. Generally, in the CVD process, MoS2 sheets are deposited on Si/SiO2 substrates by heat treating molybdenum precursors in sulfur-reductant vapor. Ammonium thiomolybdates [(NH4)2MoS4], MoO3 or Mo can be selected as the Mo source, and sulfur or hydrogen sulfide is generally applied for sulfurization.123,124 Recently, by using MoO2 as a template, a new CVD approach was reported to synthesize MoS2 nanoflakes with a controllable layer number and high crystallization.125,126 Generally speaking, CVD is advantageous in achieving high-quality 2D flakes with large smooth surfaces. However, CVD requires harsh operation conditions, and it still remains a considerable challenge to extract 2D flakes from the substrates, which significantly limits its application.
3.4. Hydrothermal/solvothermal method
In comparison with the above discussed methods, hydrothermal/solvothermal methods have significant advantages, such as low toxicity, simple operation and low cost. For example, gram-scale production of graphene can be realized from non-graphitic precursors through a solvothermal process.127 In particular, hydrothermal/solvothermal methods are favorable for preparing nanomaterials with various morphologies. The few-layered IGA, such as 3–5 layer MoS2 and WS2 nanosheets, can be synthesized though this method by controlling the synthesis conditions. In addition, the inclusion of graphene or surfactants like polyethylene glycol (PEG) can facilitate the formation of thin MoS2 layers during the hydrothermal process.128 Particularly, there have been extensive studies on the hydrothermal synthesis of graphene-based composites with few-layered structures.129,130
To conclude, all the exfoliation methods can be related to each other at different extents, and sometimes they are combined together for improved control over the dispersion of the IGAs. Currently, chemical/liquid exfoliation and hydrothermal methods are the most feasible methods for preparing IGAs. However, none of the methods mentioned above can effectively help achieve high-quality IGAs with large quantities for LIBs. Therefore, more efficient processes are in high demand.
4. Performances of graphene, IGAs and their composites in LIBs
Owing to good thermal stability, excellent electronic conductivity, high lithium ion mobility and ultra-high surface area, graphene has been successfully and extensively applied to anodes for LIBs. After graphene, IGA electrodes are now acting as vibrant components for high-capacity LIBs because of their advantageous structural properties and similar surface activities. In this section, we will discuss the electrochemical performances of graphene and IGAs as electrodes in LIBs, and in particular, highlight the superior performances of graphene-based IGA composites.
4.1. Performances of graphene
Graphite is a traditional anode material in LIBs; however, its low specific capacity (372 mA h g−1) cannot satisfy the increasing demand. In contrast, graphene monolayers, the building blocks of graphite, exhibit higher specific capacity than graphite because of more effective Li adsorption sites and larger diffusion space.
Since defect-free or highly crystalline graphene shows chemically inert properties for energy storage as predicted theoretically and confirmed experimentally, surface or edge defects and functional groups are necessary.
Pan et al. well illustrated both the irreversible and reversible lithium storage mechanisms on the interface, surface defects and edges of graphene.131 The defects at the interface between the graphene nanosheets (GNSs) and the electrolyte can accommodate irreversible Li present in the solid electrolyte interface (SEI) films (Fig. 3a); in contrast, the defects at the edge sites and internal defects of the GNSs involve reversible lithium storage (Fig. 3b) since the electrolyte is out of contact with these defects. In addition, some Li ions can be stored reversibly between the (002) planes (Fig. 3c). In brief, the edge site and internal defects of the GNSs dominate the reversible capacity of the GNS anodes.
 Fig. 3  (a) Irreversible Li storage at the interface between the graphene nanosheets and the electrolyte; (b) reversible Li storage at edge sites and internal defects, including vacancies, of nanodomains embedded in graphene nanosheets; (c) reversible Li storage between the (002) planes;131 (d and e) HRTEM images and SAED pattern (inset of e) of GNSs; (f) cyclic performances of the GNS anodes at the current density of 0.2 mA cm−2, compared with those of artificial graphite.132 Reproduced from ref. 131 (Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society) and ref. 132 (Copyright 2009, Elsevier). 
Compared with graphite, graphene possesses a higher theoretical capacity of 740 mA h g−1 since Li can be adsorbed on both sides of the graphene. Experimentally, a cyclically stable capacity of 672 mA h g−1 of the graphene anode has been achieved, as shown in Fig. 3f.132 Note that the graphene used here had functional groups and micropores. Due to the abundance of active sites and facile synthesis, rGOs have been extensively studied for the LIB anodes.
Since graphene has shown superior advantages to graphite, IGAs were also expected to have improved electrochemical performance than their bulk crystals for practical lithium storage.
4.2. Performances of IGAs
Currently, some IGAs, primarily 2D TMDs, have been well applied to LIBs. Even before the emergence of IGAs, their bulk forms have been widely studied, providing a firm foundation for the further development of 2D materials.
Since low dimensions are effective for improving the electrochemical performances of electrode materials, rapid developments of TMD and TMO electrodes with various kinds of morphologies have been seen in recent years. A representative TMD, MoS2 has been considered as an anode in a variety of morphologies, from bulk powder to nanoparticles, nanorods, nanowires, nanowalls, nanotubes, nanospheres, nanoflowers and nanoflakes.133–139
To further improve the electrochemical performances of TMDs, conductive materials have been extensively adopted as efficient electron- and ion-diffusion media, which include amorphous carbon,140–142 carbon nanotubes,143,144 porous carbon CMK-3,145 polyaniline matrices,146 and graphene.128,129 In brief, bulk and nanoscale inorganic materials, as well as their composites, have been well developed for LIBs, which facilitate a fertile soil for the rapid growth of IGA electrodes.

4.2.1. Electrochemical performances of 2D anodes. 
With respect to the excellent electrochemical performances of the 1D or 3D TMD anodes for LIBs, the 2D TMD anodes with monolayers or few-layered structures present more attractive electrochemical potentials. In particular, due to the outstanding thermal and chemical stability and high theoretical capacity, the 2D MoS2 attracts the most attention. Some incipient studies revealed that restacked MoS2 layers can behave as MoS2 monolayers after exfoliation,147,148 due to the enlarged interlayer spaces, and exhibit superior stability and high capacity for Li storage.149
By using Mo(CO)6 and S as precursors, Hwang et al. prepared disordered graphene-like MoS2 nanoplates through a hydrothermal process.150 The as-prepared MoS2 nanoplates consist of few-layered MoS2 with enlarged interlayer distance (0.69 nm vs. 0.62 nm in bulk MoS2). The enlarged interlayer spaces can accommodate large amounts of Li ions and facilitate the fast charge–discharge process. As a result, the MoS2 nanoplates delivered an excellent reversible capacity of 554 mA h g−1 at 50 C (53.1A g−1) over 20 cycles (Fig. 4a). Furthermore, Liu et al. synthesized highly ordered mesoporous MoS2 with expanded spacing of the (002) crystal plane by using SBA-15 as the template in a vacuum-assisted impregnation process.151 Specifically, the prepared mesoporous MoS2 exhibited morphologies of numerous nanowire-like arrays, which consist of few-layered, graphene-like MoS2. The mesoporous MoS2 layers were orientated in the (002) direction with an enlarged interlayer distance of 0.66 nm. Since the enlarged interlayer space and mesoporous property are quite beneficial for large amounts of Li intercalation and diffusion, the graphene-like MoS2 anode delivered a high capacity of 903 mA h g−1 at 0.1 C.
 Fig. 4  Morphologies of 2D TMDs and their electrochemical performances as anodes in LIBs, including (a) MoS2 nanoflakes with disordered, graphene-like layers;150 (b) few-layered WS2 nanosheets;155 and (c) vertically aligned, graphene-like SnS2 ultrathin nanosheets.157 Reproduced from ref. 150 (Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society), ref. 155 (Copyright 2007, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim) and ref. 157 (Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society). 
In addition, by adding polystyrene microspheres, Ding et al. fabricated hierarchical MoS2 microspheres and applied them to LIB anodes.152 In particular, the microspheres were assembled by numerous MoS2 nanosheets in few-layered thickness, which exhibited high surface area for effective contact with the electrolyte, and a large buffer zone for the volume variation. Their experimental measurements showed that the MoS2 nanosheet microspheres have higher capacities and better cyclicity than stacked MoS2 flakes.
Besides MoS2, 2D WS2 and SnS2 were also investigated as anodes for LIBs. As revealed by Feng et al., WS2 nanoflakes can accommodate higher Li insertion than WS2 nanotubes or WS2 powders, due to the favorable thin structure.153 By using a strong acid treatment followed by quenching in deionized water, Bhandavat et al. synthesized surface-functioned WS2 nanosheets and applied them as LIB anodes.154 Owing to the tungsten oxidization at the edges and partial sulfur oxidation, cleaved superacid-treated WS2 layers exhibited higher Li intercalation capacity. Furthermore, Seo et al. investigated few-layered WS2 as LIB anodes, and the TEM images and cyclic performances of 2D WS2 are shown in Fig. 4b.155 2D WS2 can provide rapid intercalation processes for Li storage and exhibit a capacity of 377 mA h g−1 at the current density of 100 mA g−1. More recently, Wang et al. have fabricated graphene-like 2D WS2 by a solid-state reaction and reported a high reversible capacity of 590 mA h g−1 at a rate of 0.05 C.156 These investigations demonstrated that 2D WS2 is more favorable for high Li insertion capacity than other WS2 morphologies.
Similarly, when the thickness of the SnS2 nanosheets was further reduced, enhanced electrochemical performances could be achieved. Ultrathin SnS2 nanosheets consisting of 1–5 atomic layers were prepared and investigated as LIB anodes by Zhong et al., and they showed an average capacity as high as 1050 mA h g−1 at 1 C.157 The general morphology and cycling performances of ultrathin SnS2 nanosheets at different rates are shown in Fig. 4c. Bare SnS2 nanoflakes can exhibit capacities of 510–520 mA h g−1 at low rates, while carbon-coated SnS2 nanoparticles can maintain the capacity of 700 mA h g−1 at the rate of 0.08 C (corresponding to a current density of 46.9 mA g−1), and SnS2 nanosheets anchored on multiwalled carbon nanotubes can deliver a capacity of about 600 mA h g−1 at the current density of 100 mA g−1.158–161 From the comparison, ultrathin SnS2 anodes can evidently exhibit much higher specific capacity than any other layer-stacked SnS2 structures.


4.2.2. Electrochemical performances of IGA cathodes. 
Due to the demand of high open-circuit voltage, most TMDs and TMOs are unfeasible for application to cathodes in LIBs, except for V2O5. With a typical layered structure, V2O5 is a good cathode candidate because of its high redox potential of 3.5 V (V5+/V4+vs. Li/Li+) and high theoretical capacity of 294 mA h g−1. Very recently, with the rapid development of IGAs, 2D V2O5 cathodes have been realized experimentally. Li et al. developed a facile green method to prepare leaf-like V2O5 nanosheets and applied them to LIB cathodes.162 As revealed, the leaf-like V2O5 nanosheets have a thickness of 60–80 nm and can maintain a capacity of 225 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles and 206 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at the current density of 500 mA g−1. The electrochemical performance of V2O5 can be further improved by reducing the thickness. Rui et al. successfully synthesized ultrathin V2O5 nanosheets through direct exfoliation of bulk V2O5 crystals in formamide solvent and applied them to LIB cathodes (Fig. 5a).46 The free-standing V2O5 nanosheets (Fig. 5b) were demonstrated for 6–10 O–V–O atomic layers with thicknesses of 2.1–3.8 nm. As expected, the ultrathin V2O5 nanosheet cathodes exhibited high capacities of 290 mA h g−1 at a rate of 0.2 C, excellent cycling stability (maintaining 93.8% of the initial capacity after 50 cycles) and outstanding rate performance (Fig. 5c). Subsequently, ultrathin V2O5 nanosheets with thickness of 6 nm, which correspond to 1–2 layers, were synthesized by An et al. via a supercritical solvothermal reaction.163 When applied to the cathodes, these V2O5 nanosheets maintained a capacity of 139 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles, at the current rate of 1 C. In fact, all these brilliant electrochemical performances can be ascribed to the distinct structural properties of the 2D V2O5 nanosheets, including high surface areas and open spaces of free-standing sheets, which are beneficial to the lithiation processes.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematics of the exfoliation of bulk V2O5 into {001}-oriented, few-layered V2O5 nanosheet; (b) TEM image of ultrathin V2O5 nanosheets; (c) rate capability of ultrathin V2O5 nanosheet and bulk V2O5 cathodes at various charge and discharge rates.46 Reproduced from ref. 46 (Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry). 
In brief, IGA electrodes can provide a larger space for Li diffusion and a higher surface specific area with more abundantly active sites for lithium adsorption, which result in better rate capability and higher specific capacities, compared with their bulk crystals. However, a few issues exist that inhibit the practical applications of IGA electrodes. First, a large quantity of IGAs can rarely be achieved by mechanical or CVD methods, and the reported IGAs were generally prepared by hydrothermal or solvothermal and liquid exfoliation methods. Inevitably, IGAs synthesized via these processes generally are of stacked layers. Second, the poor stability of IGAs, compared with their bulk crystals, can degrade their electrochemical performances to some extent. Third, some semiconducting IGAs failed to deliver effective ion/electron transportation. To conquer these limitations and improve the lithium storage capacities of IGAs, scientists devoted tremendous efforts in developing G–IGA composites as LIB electrodes.

4.3. Performances of graphene–IGA composites for Li ion batteries
Due to high mechanical and chemical inertness, high surface area and excellent electronic conductivity, graphene can act as excellent loading substrates for other electrode materials. Extensive investigations of graphene-based composites have vigorously confirmed the significant contributions of graphene to the improved electrochemical performances of graphene-based anodes, in which graphene works as both a volume variation buffer zone and an electric transport medium.29 By introducing graphene, the electrochemical performances of the hybrid anodes, including graphene/nanosized silicon,164 MnO/graphene,165 Co3O4–graphene,166–168 SnO2–graphene,169–171 and Fe3O4–graphene,172,173 have been significantly improved.
As discussed above, IGAs possess graphene-like structures and can exhibit high capacity but poor stability; thus, it is highly attractive to combine graphene with IGAs for LIBs. Taking MoS2 as an example, it can be a good reinforcing component in composites, and the sulfur elements on both sides can allow an efficient load transfer from MoS2 to the substrate matrix.38 Due to the favorable reciprocity between graphene and the MoS2 monolayer, the graphene/2D MoS2 hybrids can be fabricated flexibly. Chang et al. developed an L-cysteine-assisted method to synthesize MoS2/graphene anodes.174 In their study, few-layered MoS2 was dispersed randomly on the surface of graphene, and the obtained MoS2/graphene hybrid anode exhibited a high capacity of 1100 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1 with no fading after 100 cycles. When the current density was increased to 1000 mA g−1, an excellent and stable capacity of 900 mA h g−1 remained.
On the basis of this result, abundant efforts have been made to study G–IGA composites. By means of an in situ-reduced method, Chang et al. synthesized the MoS2/graphene composites with 4–5 layers of thickness on MoS2.175 With the presence of large-scaled carbon matrix, MoS2 residing on the surface of graphene can effectively avoid the problem of restacking. The combination of graphene and few-layered MoS2 contributed to an extraordinarily high reversible capacity of the hybrid anode, up to 1300 mA h g−1 over 50 cycles. Very recently, Wang et al. have reported the synthesis of MoS2 monolayer/graphene composites by a cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB)-assisted, solution-based method followed by annealing in N2.176 In the composite, graphene can not only help reduce the contact resistance and facilitate electron transfer in lithiation/delithiation reactions, but also contribute to synergistic interaction between graphene and MoS2 monolayers. As a consequence, the obtained MoS2/graphene anode delivered large reversible capacity and high cyclic stability. Moreover, by introducing cationic surfactant CTAB in different concentrations, Huang et al. synthesized MoS2/graphene composites with well-dispersed MoS2 monolayers,177 and the high dispersion of MoS2 in the composite can contribute to a highly effective synergistic interaction between graphene and the MoS2 monolayers. As a result, the prepared MoS2/graphene composite exhibited a high reversible capacity of 940–1020 mA h g−1 with no obvious decrease after 100 cycles.
Following the success of the MoS2/graphene composites, researchers began to mix the 2D MoS2 with modified graphene. Chang et al. successfully prepared the composite consisting of ultrathin MoS2 nanosheets and nitrogen-doped graphene by using a simple hydrothermal method.178 With abundant surface defects and vacancies, the MoS2 nanosheets were uniformly and effectively dispersed and stabilized on the surface of N-doped graphene (see Fig. 6a and b). As a result, the MoS2/N-graphene composite exhibited a higher capacity than MoS2/graphene or bare MoS2 and maintained the high capacity up to 1285.3 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles at a rate of 100 mA g−1 (Fig. 6c). Moreover, the MoS2/N-graphene also exhibited excellent high rate performances (Fig. 6d). Stephenson et al. have recently summarized the studies about the LIB applications of MoS2 nanocomposites.179
 Fig. 6  SEM (a) and TEM (b) images as well as cyclic (c) and rate (d) performances at different rates of MoS2/N-graphene composite synthesized by CTAB-assisted, solution-based method.178 Reproduced from ref. 178 (Copyright 2013, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). 
In addition to the MoS2/graphene composites, synergistic effects were also found in other graphene-2D TMD anodes, including WS2/graphene,180,181 and SnS2/graphene.182,183 Through a facile hydrothermal route, Shiva et al. synthesized uniform, graphene-like WS2 supported on rGO (WS2/rGO) and investigated their performance as LIB anodes (Fig. 7a).180 Due to the close contact between graphene and WS2 layers, the electrons from S atoms and π-electrons from graphene can form an electron-rich cloud, which can contribute to efficient and rapid electron transport. As a result, the specific capacity of the WS2/rGO anode can be as high as 400–500 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles at a current density of 100 mA g−1. In addition, the WS2/rGO anode exhibited good high rate performances and cyclic stability (Fig. 7a). By employing L-cysteine as a sulfide source and reducing agent, Chang et al. prepared a few-layered SnS2/graphene hybrid (FL-SnS2/G) and applied it to LIB anodes.182 Due to the robust composite structure and synergistic interaction between SnS2 layers and graphene, the FL-SnS2/G anode exhibited a high capacity of 920 mA h g−1 with excellent cyclic stability and outstanding high rate performance (Fig. 7b).
 Fig. 7  (a) Synthesis schematic, TEM image and rate performance of the WS2/rGO composite;180 (b) rate performance and lithiation/delithiation schematic of FL-SnS2/G;182 (c) synthesis process of the V2O5/rGO nanocomposites.184 Reproduced from ref. 180 (Copyright 2013, Elsevier), ref. 182 (Copyright 2012, Elsevier) and ref. 184 (Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry). 
Graphene–IGA composites have also been explored as LIB cathodes. Cheng et al. prepared the self-assembled V2O5 nanosheet/rGO (V2O5/rGO) composites through a simple solvothermal process (Fig. 7c).184 With the addition of GO during the synthesis process, V2O5·xH2O, the precursor of V2O5, can be well nucleated in sheet-like morphology by taking the functional groups of GO as the nucleation centers. Accordingly, the V2O5 nanosheets were prevented from restacking and stabilized by rGO. As a result, the V2O5/rGO cathode exhibited a higher specific capacity and improved rate performances than the bare V2O5 due to the advantageous synergetic effects in the composite.
To better illustrate the advantages of the IGA and graphene–IGA composite electrodes over their bulk electrodes, we summarize their electrochemical performances in Table 2. Obviously, the graphene–IGA composites exhibit significantly improved cyclic stability and high-rate capability.
Table 2 Electrochemical performance comparisons of bulk inorganic crystal, IGA and G–IGA composite anodes




Anodes
Theoretical capacity (mA h g−1)
Stable specific capacity (mA h g−1)
Current density
Cycles
Ref.




Graphite
372
372
0.4 mA cm−2
∼

25



Graphene (G)
740
672
0.2 mA cm−2
30

163



Bulk MoS2
670
902
100 mA g−1
80

165



2D MoS2


554
50 C ≈ 53.1 A g−1
20

181



2D MoS2/G


1300
100 mA g−1
50

206



2D MoS2/G


940–1020
100 mA g−1
100

208



2D MoS2/N-graphene


1285.3
100 mA g−1
50

209



Bulk SnS2
586
513
100 mA g−1
50

190



2D SnS2


1050
1 C ≈ 645 mA g−1
10

188



2D SnS2/G


920
100 mA g−1
50

213



Bulk WS2
432
680
47.5 mA g−1
20

184



2D WS2


590
0.05 C ≈ 24.0 mA g−1
100

187



2D WS2/G


451
100 mA g−1
50

211



Bulk V2O5
294
132
0.2 C ≈ 60 mA g−1
110

185



2D V2O5


139
1 C ≈ 300 mA g−1
50

194



V2O5/rGO


102 mA h g−1
2 C ≈ 600 mA g−1
160

184





Generally, in G–IGA electrodes, both graphene and IGA nanosheets have large-scale surface areas and present effective surface contacts. In particular, the delocalized π-conjugation system over the matrix of graphene interacts effectively with the electrons of the IGA layers, which gives rise to rapid electron transfer in the composites and hence contributes to a specific synergetic interaction in the sheet-on-sheet hybrids. In addition, the synergetic effect also helps to avoid the restacking of the IGA layers. As a consequence, the graphene–IGA electrodes can exhibit larger reversible capacity, higher cyclic stability and better high rate capability than the bare IGA competitors. Thus, the shortcomings of the pristine IGAs as LIB electrodes, as previously discussed, have been solved effectively by introducing graphene.
Thus far, IGAs have demonstrated great potential for lithium storage, and G–IGA composites can be potential electrode candidates for high-capacity LIBs. Encouraged by the great electrochemical performances of the well-researched IGA electrodes, novel IGAs are under wide exploration for use in LIBs.
4.4. Novel IGAs for lithium storage
Experimental and theoretical communities did not stop at the well-researched IGA electrodes. Novel IGA materials, such as silicene/germanene and MXenes, began to attract significant attention and gradually expanded the family of IGA electrodes.

4.4.1. Silicene/germanene. 
Besides carbon, it is natural for us to pay attention to silicon and germanium since they are both from the IV main group and have the same four valence electrons. As structural analogues and isoelectronic species of graphene, 2D silicene (Fig. 8a) and germanene have been extensively researched, experimentally and theoretically. Theoretical studies demonstrated that the electronic properties of silicene and germanene are quite close to graphene: π and π* bands at the Fermi level are linear and hence the charge carriers are also massless.186,187 Recently, several groups have successfully synthesized silicene by depositing the Si atoms on the Ag or metal oxide substrates (Fig. 8b shows the scanning tunnelling microscope (STM) images of silicene deposited on Ag(111)),188–191 and the hydrogenated germanene (germanane) has also been realized experimentally.192 Interestingly, both silicene and germanene favor a low-buckled structure rather than a planar structure (Fig. 8a). This is because, different from carbon, Si and Ge prefer sp3 hybridization rather than sp2 hybridization, which makes the planar structure unfavorable. Due to the same reason, it currently remains a significant challenge to extract synthesized silicene from the substrates.
 Fig. 8  (a) Structural models of silicene (top and side views of single-layered silicene);193 (b) STM images of silicon and silicene on Ag(111) substrate;190 (c) schematic of lithium adsorbed on the surface of silicene.193 Reproduced from ref. 193 (Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society) and ref. 190 (Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society). 
Since the bulk crystal silicon is a well-known anode with a high theoretical capacity of 4200 mA h g−1, researchers are highly interested in the electrochemical performances of silicene/germanene as anode materials for the LIBs. However, it is rather difficult, if not impossible, to get free-standing silicene and germanene, so far the investigations in this field are mainly performed theoretically.193,194 For example, by DFT computations, Tritsaris et al. demonstrated that lithium can be well accommodated at the two surface sites of silicene with rather small diffusion barriers (Fig. 8c), which are superior to silicon bulk and nanowires. Moreover, they determined that the binding energy of Li on monolayers or two-layer silicene varies as a function of the Li concentration, and the maximum Li content can be up to Li0.5Si0.5, which leads to a capacity of 957 mA h g−1.193 Therefore, silicene can be a promising lithium storage candidate for LIBs.


4.4.2. MXene. 
Recently, a new family of 2D materials, namely MXene made from MAX phases (including carbides, nitrides and carbonitrides), has replenished the category of IGA anodes. Consisting of three kinds of elements (M represents transition metals; A, main-group sp elements; and X, carbon or nitride), MAX phases exhibit more complicated structures than graphite or layered inorganic materials as mentioned above. In the general formula of Mn+1AXn (n = 1–3), MAX phases are built up with alternative stacks of hexagonal MX layers and planes of A atom layers in the c-axis direction by a mixture of strong covalent, metallic and ionic bonding. Hence, it is difficult to exfoliate MAX phases into single 2D layers from its complicated structures. Encouragingly, a selective erosion-exfoliation strategy has been developed to synthesize these new 2D materials. As reported, an atomic layer can be effectively removed by immersing MAX powders into hydrofluoric acid. With this method, Naguib et al. successfully fabricated Ti3C2 nanosheets by etching Al layers from 3D Ti3AlC2 before sonication.195 Afterwards, some other MAX phases were exfoliated into 2D layers, such as TiC2, Ta4C3, and TiNbC.196 Very recently, Mashtalir et al. have systematically studied the kinetics of aluminum extraction from Ti3AlC2 in hydrofluoric acid.197 With the understanding of the atom extraction mechanism, MXene can be designed and synthesized more favorably for Li storage.
Since these new kind of IGAs present similar structures with graphene, they were termed “MXene”. After the experimental realizations, some MXene structures were theoretically and experimentally investigated for lithium storage. Tang et al. investigated the electrochemical properties and Li capacities of Ti3C2 by using DFT computations.198 These computations demonstrated that Ti3C2-based hosts are able to adsorb lithium ions with strong Coulomb interactions with no significant changes to their structural integrity and also predicted great electrochemical properties such as good electronic conductivity, rapid Li diffusion, low operating voltage, and high theoretical Li storage capacity (Fig. 9a). They also indicated that the functional groups on the surface of Ti3C2 should be avoided during synthesis to facilitate lithium adsorption and diffusion.
 Fig. 9  (a) Top and side views of the optimized Li-adsorbed Ti3C2 monolayers and the lithium diffusion path and barrier;198 (b) TEM image of Nb2CTx flakes and SAED of the hexagonal basal plane in the insert image; (c) cross section TEM image of Nb2CTx; (d) cyclic performances of V2C and Nb2C anodes, compared with Ti2C at different rates;200 (e) schematic of Ti3C2Tx electrode fabrication; (f) cyclic performance of Ti3C2Tx in KOH as the capacitor electrode. Inset: galvanostatic cycling data collected at 1A g−1.201 Reproduced from ref. 198 (Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society), ref. 200 (Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society) and ref. 201 (Copyright 2013, The American Association for the Advancement of Science). 
The computations of Tang et al.198 were supported by experimental studies from Naguib et al.,199 in which 2D layered Ti2C-based anode material with an oxidized surface were prepared by etching Al from Ti2AlC in HF at room temperature. Compared with pristine Ti2AlC, the exfoliated Ti2C showed more open structure, weaker interlaminar forces and higher specific surface area. When applying Ti2C as an anode for lithiation and delithiation in LIBs, the exfoliated Ti2C exhibited a stable capacity of 225 mA h g−1 at a C/25 rate and maintained the excellent cyclic stability at higher current rates. Therefore, this encouraging result highly demonstrated the great potentials of MXene for use as anodes in LIBs.
After TiC2, Naguib et al. synthesized 2D V2C and Nb2C with surface terminated with O(OH) and F (Fig. 9b and c show the TEM images of few-layered Nb2C), and explored the feasibility of using them as anode materials in LIBs.200 In comparison with TiC2, 2D V2C and Nb2C can exhibit higher capacities and improved high rate performances. V2C can deliver a reversible capacity of 260 mA h g−1 after 150 cycles at the rate of 1 C (Fig. 9d). When increasing the current density to 10 C, a capacity of 125 mA h g−1 for V2C can still be obtained after 150 cycles. Nb2C also showed high capacity and good high rate performances. Therefore, these two MXene materials exhibited more enhanced electrochemical performances than Ti2C and even better than those of commercial anode materials, including graphite and TiO2-based anodes.
Furthermore, Lukatskaya et al. explored the cation intercalation in 2D titanium carbides (Ti3C2) and developed them as electrodes for capacitors with high volumetric capacitance.201 By placing Ti3C2Tx (T represents surface termination atoms, O, F and OH) in various salt solutions, the intercalations of Li+, Na+, Mg2+, K+, NH4+, and Al3+ ions between the 2D Ti3C2Tx layers can take place spontaneously (Fig. 9e). The intercalation of cations can further expand the interlayer distance along the c-axis direction. With large interlayer space, Ti3C2Tx is highly favorable for intercalation capacitance, and due to a larger surface area, its capacitance can far exceed the double-layer capacitance. Therefore, Ti3C2Tx is rather promising for capacitors, and experimental results show that Ti3C2Tx can achieve a high volumetric capacitance of 340 F cm−3 in the KOH solution and show almost no degradation after 10000 cycles (Fig. 9f).
The intercalation of MXenes is not limited to cations. Hydrazine, N,N-dimethylformamide and urea could also be intercalated into the interlayer of Ti3C2, Ti3CN and TiNbC,202 and this resulted in their delamination into separate sheets after sonication. By filtering the colloidal MXene solution, binder-free MXene papers were obtained and applied to anodes for LIBs. In comparison with the non-delaminated counterpart, the Ti3C2 paper showed higher capacity and improved rate performance.
Although investigations on MXenes have just begun, MXene materials have shown great potential to work as electrode candidates for effective energy storage. For future applications, more efficient preparations are necessary. The recent experimental achievements on MXene anodes are impressive, and we believe that more MXene materials can be realized in the near future. Importantly, through ongoing investigations of novel IGAs, the family of 2D materials will be further enlarged and better revealed.

5. Conclusion and prospective
In this article, we summarized the most recent efforts in developing graphene, IGAs, and their composites as LIB electrodes. The versatile properties and feasible synthesis methods of graphene and IGAs were itemized. Due to abundantly active sites on their large surfaces and excellent electrical conductivities, graphene and IGAs with single or few layers show great potential for lithium storage. Both IGA anodes and cathodes have been realized and practically applied to LIBs. Meanwhile, because of the specific properties of the graphene matrix, uploading IGAs on graphene is highly successful for achieving G–IGA electrodes. Owing to the synergistic effects between graphene and loaded IGA layers, the general weakness of IGAs as LIB electrodes, including low electron transport and high restacking risk, can be successfully avoided. With enhanced cyclic stability and high rate performances, the G–IGA composites become excellent electrode candidates for high-capacity LIBs.
Despite extensive investigations on the IGA and G–IGA electrodes and their highly identified potentials for LIBs, many questions still remain for IGA-based LIB electrodes. First, due to the large specific surface area, the high risk of side reactions and SEI film formation on IGAs, which cause large irreversible initial capacity, is inevitable. This problem may be solved by the addition of graphene/rGO to form layer-by-layer assemblies, but there is no definite solution. Second, due to the high volume–mass ratio, the IGA and G–IGA electrodes suffer from low volumetric energy density, which is the common limitation of applying nanomaterials to LIBs. Third, it remains vague as to how 2D TMD anodes work to deliver excessively high capacity in sustained reversible cycles. In fact, the reaction mechanism is highly complicated in TMDs such as MoS2. Although some recent reports have shown that the charge–discharge processes of MoS2 after the first several cycles involve the same reactions as Li–S batteries, the underlying mechanism of the Li–MoS2 system remains poorly understood, and the role of graphene in the G–MoS2 anodes remains controversial.128,129,145,179,203,204 As the Li storage mechanism of the 2D MoS2 anodes remains undetermined, the reversible charging–discharging processes of other IGA anodes are far from clear.
The problems of IGAs are not limited to those previously presented. The current available methods for synthesizing IGAs are complicated, either limited substrates or uncontrolled layers. Effective and facile methods to prepare large-scale IGAs with a high percentage of single layers are urgently needed. The investigations of silicene/germanene and MXenes are largely expanding the scope of the IGAs, especially the rapid development of MXenes that has motivated increasing enthusiasm for exploring novel 2D materials for energy storage. However, we have to keep in mind that thus far, with the exception of MXenes, these novel IGAs are far from practical applications for LIBs.
Opportunities and challenges exist simultaneously. The investigations of IGAs and their applications to LIBs are still in their infancy, and more efforts should be devoted to the exploitation of IGAs. It is worth mentioning that, with high-energy densities, Li–S and Li–air batteries may be more promising for energy storage by applying sulfur or oxygen as cathode-active substances.205–208 As expected, 2D materials with large surface areas and chemical stability are also preferred for Li–S and Li–air batteries. Briefly, graphene can minimize the shuttle effects and buffer the volume expansion by trapping soluble polysulfides in graphene/sulfur cathodes.209–211 Meanwhile, graphene can work as an effective catalyst or substrate for other catalysts in air cathodes for Li–air batteries.212,213 Therefore, we believe that graphene and the IGA family is a huge gold mine awaiting excavations, and we hope that this article can help promote additional investigations on IGAs and their related materials for LIBs and other energy storage devices.
Acknowledgements
Support in the USA by the Department of Defense (Grant W911NF-12-1-0083) and in China by the NSFC (21273118), 111 Project (B12015) and MOE Innovation Team (IRT13022) is gratefully acknowledged.
References
J.-M. Tarascon and M. Armand, Nature, 2001, 414, 359–367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Winter, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4245–4269 CrossRef CAS .
V. Etacheri, R. Marom, R. Elazari, G. Salitra and D. Aurbach, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3243–3262 CAS .
M. Hu, X. Pang and Z. Zhou, J. Power Sources, 2013, 237, 229–242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Whittingham, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4271–4301 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kang and G. Ceder, Nature, 2009, 458, 190–193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang and G. Cao, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2251–2269 CrossRef CAS .
B. L. Ellis, K. T. Lee and L. F. Nazar, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 691–714 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Fergus, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 939–954 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Masquelier and L. Croguennec, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 6552–6591 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, S. Li, Y. Sun, X. Feng and C. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2854–2857 CAS .
G. L. Holleck and J. R. Driscoll, Electrochim. Acta, 1977, 22, 647–655 CrossRef CAS .
M. Endo, C. Kim, K. Nishimura, T. Fujino and K. Miyashita, Carbon, 2000, 38, 183–197 CrossRef CAS .
S. Komaba, T. Itabashi, B. Kaplan, H. Groult and N. Kumagai, Electrochem. Commun., 2003, 5, 962–966 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Fukuda, K. Kikuya, K. Isono and M. Yoshio, J. Power Sources, 1997, 69, 165–168 CrossRef CAS .
W.-J. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 13–24 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Esmanski and G. A. Ozin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1999–2010 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ge, X. Fang, J. Rong and C. Zhou, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 422001 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Terranova, S. Orlanducci, E. Tamburri, V. Guglielmotti and M. Rossi, J. Power Sources, 2014, 246, 167–177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Poizot, S. Laruelle, S. Grugeon, L. Dupont and J.-M. Tarascon, Nature, 2000, 407, 496–499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. V. Reddy, G. V. S. Rao and B. V. R. Chowdari, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 5364–5457 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Du, H. Zhang, J. Chen, J. Sun, B. Chen and D. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2008, 112, 14836–14842 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. P. Sheu, C. Y. Yao, J. M. Chen and Y. C. Chiou, J. Power Sources, 1997, 68, 533–535 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Lu and S.-W. Lin, J. Power Sources, 2001, 97–98, 458–460 CrossRef CAS .
C. Jiang, M. Wei, Z. Qi, T. Kudo, I. Honma and H. Zhou, J. Power Sources, 2007, 166, 239–243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Aricò, P. Bruce, B. Scrosati, J.-M. Tarascon and W. Schalkwijk, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 366–377 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Su, Y. Jing and Z. Zhou, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 3967–3983 RSC .
S. Stankovich, D. A. Dikin, G. H. B. Dommett, K. M. Kohlhaas, E. J. Zimney, E. A. Stach, R. D. Piner, S. B. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Nature, 2006, 442, 282–286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xu, B. Xu, Y. Gu, Z. Xiong, J. Sun and X. S. Zhao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1388–1414 CAS .
G. Kucinskis, G. Bajars and J. Kleperis, J. Power Sources, 2013, 240, 66–79 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Uthaisar and V. Barone, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2838–2842 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Peigney, C. Laurent, E. Flahaut, R. R. Bacsa and A. Rousset, Carbon, 2001, 39, 507–514 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Stoller, S. Park, Y. Zhu, J. An and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3498–3502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Jung, D. A. Dikin, R. D. Piner and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 4283–4287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. I. Bolotin, K. J. Sikes, Z. Jiang, M. Klima, G. Fudenberg, J. Hone, P. Kim and H. L. Stormer, Solid State Commun., 2008, 146, 351–355 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-A. N. Duerloo, M. T. Ong and E. J. Reed, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 2871–2876 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. M. Barboza, H. Chacham, C. K. Oliveira, T. F. D. Fernandes, E. H. M. Ferreira, B. S. Archanjo, R. J. C. Batista, A. B. de Oliveira and B. R. A. Neves, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2313–2317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bertolazzi, J. Brivio and A. Kis, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 9703 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ataca, H. Sahin and S. Ciraci, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 8983–8999 CAS .
C. Tusche, H. L. Meyerheim and J. Kirschner, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 99, 026102 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kalantar-zadeh, J. Tang, M. Wang, K. L. Wang, A. Shailos, K. Galatsis, R. Kojima, V. Strong, A. Lech, W. Wlodarski and R. B. Kaner, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 429–433 RSC .
T. W. Kim, E.-J. Oh, A.-Y. Jee, S. T. Lim, D. H. Park, M. Lee, S.-H. Hyun, J.-H. Choy and S.-J. Hwang, Chem.–Eur. J., 2009, 15, 10752–10761 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kalantar-zadeh, A. Vijayaraghavan, M.-H. Ham, H. Zheng, M. Breedon and M. S. Strano, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 5660–5666 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Oaki and H. Imai, Angew. Chem., 2007, 119, 5039–5043 CrossRef .
X. Yang, Y. Makita, Z. Liu, K. Sakane and K. Ooi, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 5581–5588 CrossRef CAS .
X. Rui, Z. Lu, H. Yu, D. Yang, H. H. Hng, T. M. Lim and Q. Yan, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 556–560 RSC .
S. Cho and M. S. Fuhrer, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 77, 081402 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, Y.-W. Tan, H. L. Stormer and P. Kim, Nature, 2005, 438, 201–204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, J. P. Small, M. E. S. Amori and P. Kim, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 94, 176803 CrossRef .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, D. Jiang, S. V. Morozov, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lee, X. Wei, J. W. Kysar and J. Hone, Science, 2008, 321, 385–388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. R. Nair, P. Blake, A. N. Grigorenko, K. S. Novoselov, T. J. Booth, T. Stauber, N. M. R. Peres and A. K. Geim, Science, 2008, 320, 1308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Trushin and J. Schliemann, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 99, 216602 CrossRef .
M. J. Allen, V. C. Tung and R. B. Kaner, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 132–145 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, L. Zhi and K. Müllen, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 323–327 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Yang, J. Zhai, D. Wang, Y. Chen and L. Jiang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 887–894 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Qu, Y. Liu, J.-B. Baek and L. Dai, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1321–1326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Huang, J. Liang and Y. Chen, Small, 2012, 8, 1805–1834 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kuila, A. K. Mishra, P. Khanra, N. H. Kim and J. H. Lee, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 52–71 RSC .
D. A. C. Brownson, D. K. Kampouris and C. E. Banks, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 4873–4885 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Han, D. Wu, S. Li, F. Zhang and X. Feng, Small, 2013, 9, 1173–1187 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liang and L. Zhi, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 5871–5878 RSC .
H. Zeng, C. Zhi, Z. Zhang, X. Wei, X. Wang, W. Guo, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 5049–5055 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Xu, T. Liang, M. Shi and H. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 3766–3798 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Podberezskaya, S. Magarill, N. Pervukhina and S. J. Borisov, Struct. Chem., 2001, 42, 654–681 CrossRef CAS .
C. Sun, Y. Wang, J. Zou and S. C. Smith, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 11325–11328 RSC .
M. Kan, J. Zhou, Q. Sun, Y. Kawazoe and P. Jena, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 3382–3386 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hu and X. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 8126–8127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Li and Z. Chen, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 5321–5333 RSC .
Q. Tang and Z. Zhou, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2013, 58, 1244–1315 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. V. C. Medeiros, F. de Brito Mota, A. J. S. Mascarenhas and C. M. C. de Castilho, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 115701 CrossRef PubMed .
C.-K. Yang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 163115 CrossRef PubMed .
R. E. Mapasha and N. Chetty, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2010, 49, 787–791 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Lee and K. A. Persson, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4624–4628 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Uthaisar, V. Barone and J. E. Peralta, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 106, 113715 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Nakada and M. Fujita, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1996, 54, 17954–17961 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, M. L. Cohen and S. G. Louie, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 101, 186401 CrossRef .
D. A. Abanin, P. A. Lee and L. S. Levitov, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 96, 176803 CrossRef .
Y. Li, D. Wu, Z. Zhou, C. R. Cabrera and Z. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 2221–2227 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Z. Zhou, S. Zhang and Z. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 16739–16744 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yang, D. Li, T. Zhang, Z. Tao and J. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 1307–1312 CAS .
K. Tibbetts, C. R. Miranda, Y. S. Meng and G. Ceder, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 5302–5308 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jing, Z. Zhou, C. R. Cabrera and Z. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 25409–25413 CAS .
Z. Wang, Q. Su and H. Deng, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 8705 RSC .
Y. Li, T. Kunitake and Y. Aoki, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 575–580 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-W. Tan, Y. Zhao, S. Adam, E. H. Hwang, S. Das Sarma, H. L. Stormer and P. Kim, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 99, 246803 CrossRef .
C. Gómez-Navarro, R. T. Weitz, A. M. Bittner, M. Scolari, A. Mews, M. Burghard and K. Kern, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3499–3503 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Feng, X. Sun, C. Wu, L. Peng, C. Lin, S. Hu, J. Yang and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 17832–17838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Tang, F. Li, Z. Zhou and Z. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 11983–11990 CAS .
X. Blase, A. Rubio, S. G. Louie and M. L. Cohen, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1995, 51, 6868–6875 CrossRef CAS .
L. Song, L. Ci, H. Lu, P. B. Sorokin, C. Jin, J. Ni, A. G. Kvashnin, D. G. Kvashnin, J. Lou, B. I. Yakobson and P. M. Ajayan, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3209–3215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. F. Mak, C. Lee, J. Hone, J. Shan and T. F. Heinz, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 105, 136805 CrossRef .
W. Chen, E. J. G. Santos, W. Zhu, E. Kaxiras and Z. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 509–514 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Cahangirov, M. Topsakal, E. Aktürk, H. Şahin and S. Ciraci, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 102, 236804 CrossRef CAS .
G. Eda, T. Fujita, H. Yamaguchi, D. Voiry, M. Chen and M. Chhowalla, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 7311–7317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Lukowski, A. S. Daniel, F. Meng, A. Forticaux, L. Li and S. Jin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 10274–10277 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Berger, Z. Song, T. Li, X. Li, A. Y. Ogbazghi, R. Feng, Z. Dai, A. N. Marchenkov, E. H. Conrad, P. N. First and W. A. de Heer, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 19912–19916 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, W. Cai, J. An, S. Kim, J. Nah, D. Yang, R. Piner, A. Velamakanni, I. Jung, E. Tutuc, S. K. Banerjee, L. Colombo and R. S. Ruoff, Science, 2009, 324, 1312–1314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, L. J. Zhi, N. Tsao, Z. Tomovic, J. L. Li and K. Müllen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 2990–2992 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Park and R. S. Ruoff, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 217–224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Lotya, Y. Hernandez, P. J. King, R. J. Smith, V. Nicolosi, L. S. Karlsson, F. M. Blighe, S. De, Z. M. Wang, I. T. McGovern, G. S. Duesberg and J. N. Coleman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 3611–3620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I.-Y. Jeon, Y.-R. Shin, G.-J. Sohn, H.-J. Choi, S.-Y. Bae, J. Mahmood, S.-M. Jung, J.-M. Seo, M.-J. Kim, D. W. Chang, L. Dai and J.-B. Baek, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 5588–5593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Balendhran, S. Walia, H. Nili, J. Z. Ou, S. Zhuiykov, R. B. Kaner, S. Sriram, M. Bhaskaran and K. Kalantar-zadeh, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 3952–3970 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, Z. Zeng and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 1934–1946 RSC .
V. Nicolosi, M. Chhowalla, M. G. Kanatzidis, M. S. Strano and J. N. Coleman, Science, 2013, 340, 1420 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang and Y. Xie, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 8187–8199 RSC .
Y. Yao, Z. Lin, Z. Li, X. Song, K.-S. Moon and C. Wong, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 13494–13499 RSC .
Z. Wu, B. Fang, A. Bonakdarpour, A. Sun, D. P. Wilkinson and D. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 125, 59–66 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. N. Coleman, M. Lotya, A. ƠNeill, S. D. Bergin, P. J. King, U. Khan, K. Young, A. Gaucher, S. De, R. J. Smith, I. V. Shvets, S. K. Arora, G. Stanton, H.-Y. Kim, K. Lee, G. T. Kim, G. S. Duesberg, T. Hallam, J. J. Boland, J. J. Wang, J. F. Donegan, J. C. Grunlan, G. Moriarty, A. Shmeliov, R. J. Nicholls, J. M. Perkins, E. M. Grieveson, K. Theuwissen, D. W. McComb, P. D. Nellist and V. Nicolosi, Science, 2011, 331, 568 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Nicolosi, M. Chhowalla, M. G. Kanatzidis, M. S. Strano and J. N. Coleman, Science, 2013, 340, 1226419 CrossRef .
G. Cunningham, M. Lotya, C. S. Cucinotta, S. Sanvito, S. D. Bergin, R. Menzel, M. S. P. Shaffer and J. N. Coleman, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3468–3480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Chhowalla, H. S. Shin, G. Eda, L.-J. Li, K. P. Loh and H. Zhang, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 263–275 CrossRef PubMed .
H.-L. Guo, X.-F. Wang, Q.-Y. Qian, F.-B. Wang and X.-H. Xia, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 2653–2659 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shao, J. Wang, M. Engelhard, C. Wang and Y. Lin, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 743–748 RSC .
D. R. Dreyer, S. Park, C. W. Bielawski and R. S. Ruoff, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 228–240 RSC .
Z. Zeng, Z. Yin, X. Huang, H. Li, Q. He, G. Lu, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 11093–11097 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zeng, T. Sun, J. Zhu, X. Huang, Z. Yin, G. Lu, Z. Fan, Q. Yan, H. H. Hng and H. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 9052–9056 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-G. Zhou, N.-N. Mao, H.-X. Wang, Y. Peng and H.-L. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 10839–10842 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bae, H. Kim, Y. Lee, X. Xu, J.-S. Park, Y. Zheng, J. Balakrishnan, T. Lei, H. R. Kim, Y. I. Song, Y.-J. Kim, K. S. Kim, B. Özyilmaz, J.-H. Ahn, B. H. Hong and S. Iijima, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 574–578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. W. Sutter, J.-I. Flege and E. A. Sutter, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 406–411 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Reina, X. Jia, J. Ho, D. Nezich, H. Son, V. Bulovic, M. S. Dresselhaus and J. Kong, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 30–35 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-Y. Juang, C.-Y. Wu, C.-W. Lo, W.-Y. Chen, C.-F. Huang, F.-R. Chen, K.-C. Leou, C.-H. Tsai and J.-C. Hwang, Carbon, 2009, 47, 2026–2031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-K. Liu, W. Zhang, Y.-H. Lee, Y.-C. Lin, M.-T. Chang, C.-Y. Su, C.-S. Chang, H. Li, Y. Shi, H. Zhang, C.-S. Lai and L.-J. Li, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1538–1544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kim, D. Sun, W. Lu, Z. Cheng, Y. Zhu, D. Le, T. S. Rahman and L. Bartels, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 11650–11653 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, H. Neng, Y. Wu and L. Jiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 5304–5307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yu, C. Li, Y. Liu, L. Su, Y. Zhang and L. Cao, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1866 Search PubMed .
M. Choucair, P. Thordarson and J. A. Stride, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 30–33 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xiao, D. Choi, L. Cosimbescu, P. Koech, J. Liu and J. P. Lemmon, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 4522–4524 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xiao, X. Wang, X.-Q. Yang, S. Xun, G. Liu, P. K. Koech, J. Liu and J. P. Lemmon, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 2840–2846 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yu, C. Ma, B. Ge, Y. Chen, Z. Xu, C. Zhu, C. Li, Q. Ouyang, P. Gao, J. Li, C. Sun, L. Qi, Y. Wang and F. Li, Chem.–Eur. J., 2013, 19, 5818–5823 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Pan, S. Wang, B. Zhao, M. Wu, H. Zhang, Y. Wang and Z. Jiao, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 3136–3142 CrossRef CAS .
P. Guo, H. Song and X. Chen, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 1320–1324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Guo, J. Hong, C. Cong, X. Zhou and K. Zhang, J. Mater. Sci., 2005, 40, 2557–2559 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wang, G. Li, H. Xu, Y. Qian and J. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 1003–1008 CAS .
U. K. Sen and S. Mitra, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 1240–1247 CAS .
R. Dominko, D. Arcon, A. Mrzel, A. Zorko, P. Cevc, P. Venturini, M. Gberseck, M. Remskar and D. Mihailovic, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 1531–1534 CrossRef CAS .
S.-K. Park, S.-H. Yu, S. Woo, J. Ha, J. Shin, Y.-E. Sung and Y. Piao, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 8323–8325 RSC .
H. Li, W. Li, L. Ma, W. Chen and J. Wang, J. Alloys Compd., 2009, 471, 442–447 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Feng, J. Ma, H. Li, R. Zeng, Z. Guo and H. Liu, Mater. Res. Bull., 2009, 44, 1811–1815 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, H. B. Wu, Z. Guo and X. W. Lou, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 20, 7–10 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, Z. Wang, Z. Guo and X. W. Lou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 3765–3768 CAS .
S. K. Das, R. Mallavajula, N. Jayaprakash and L. A. Archer, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 12988–12992 RSC .
S. Ding, J. S. Chen and X. W. Lou, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 13142–13145 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shi, Y. Wang, J. I. Wong, A. Y. S. Tan, C.-L. Hsu, L.-J. Li, Y.-C. Lu and H. Y. Yang, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2169 Search PubMed .
X. Zhou, L. J. Wan and Y. G. Guo, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 5868–5871 RSC .
L. Yang, S. Wang, J. Mao, J. Deng, Q. Gao, Y. Tang and O. G. Schmidt, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1180–1184 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. H. Hu and X. G. Hu, Mater. Sci. Technol., 2009, 25, 407–414 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Petkov, S. J. L. Billinge, J. Heising and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 11571–11576 CrossRef CAS .
G. Du, Z. Guo, S. Wang, R. Zeng, Z. Chen and H. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 1106–1108 RSC .
H. Hwang, H. Kim and J. Cho, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4826–4830 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, D. Su, R. Zhou, B. Sun, G. Wang and S. Z. Qiao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 970–975 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ding, D. Zhang, J. S. Chen and X. W. Lou, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 95 RSC .
C. Feng, L. Huang, Z. Guo and H. Liu, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 119–122 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Bhandavat, L. David and G. Singh, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 1523–1530 CrossRef CAS .
J.-W. Seo, Y.-W. Jun, S.-W. Park, H. Nah, T. Moon, B. Park, J.-G. Kim, Y. J. Kim and J. Cheon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 8828–8831 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Fang, C. Hua, C. Wu, X. Wang, L. Shen, Q. Kong, J. Wang, Y. Hu, Z. Wang and L. Chen, Chem.–Eur. J., 2013, 19, 5694–5700 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhong, G. Yang, H. Song, Q. Liao, H. Cui, P. Shen and C.-X. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 9319–9326 CAS .
T.-J. Kim, C. Kim, D. Son, M. Choi and B. Park, J. Power Sources, 2007, 167, 529–535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhai, N. Du, H. Zhang and D. R. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 1270–1272 RSC .
H. S. Kim, Y. H. Chung, S. H. Kang and Y.-E. Sung, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 54, 3606–3610 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhai, N. Du, H. Zhang, J. Yu and D. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 4067–4074 CAS .
Y. Li, J. Yao, E. Uchaker, J. Yang, Y. Huang, M. Zhang and G. Cao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 1171–1175 CrossRef CAS .
Q. An, Q. Wei, L. Mai, J. Fei, X. Xu, Y. Zhao, M. Yan, P. Zhang and S. Huang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 16828–16833 RSC .
H. Xiang, K. Zhang, G. Ji, J. Y. Lee, C. Zou, X. Chen and J. Wu, Carbon, 2011, 49, 1787–1796 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, X. Hu, W. Luo, F. Xia and Y. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 2436–2444 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang, X. Feng, S. Ivanovici and K. Müllen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 8408–8411 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-S. Wu, W. Ren, L. Wen, L. Gao, J. Zhao, Z. Chen, G. Zhou, F. Li and H.-M. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3187–3194 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Q. Chen and Y. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 9735–9739 RSC .
Y. Li, X. Lv, J. Lu and J. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 21770–21774 CAS .
X. Zhu, Y. Zhu, S. Murali, M. D. Stoller and R. S. Ruoff, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 6473–6477 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wang, X. Li, J. Wang, J. Yang, D. Geng, R. Li, M. Cai, T.-K. Sham and X. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 22149–22156 CAS .
D. Chen, G. Ji, Y. Ma, J. Y. Lee and J. Lu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 3078–3083 CAS .
Y. Su, S. Li, D. Wu, H. Liang, P. Gao, C. Cheng, F. Zhang and X. Feng, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 8349–8356 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Chang and W. Chen, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4720–4728 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Chang and W. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 4252–4254 RSC .
Z. Wang, T. Chen, W. Chen, K. Chang, L. Ma, G. Huang, D. Chen and J. Y. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 2202–2210 CAS .
G. Huang, T. Chen, W. Chen, Z. Wang, K. Chang, L. Ma, F. Huang, D. Chen and J. Y. Lee, Small, 2013, 9, 3693–3703 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Chang, D. Geng, X. Li, J. Yang, Y. Tang, M. Cai, R. Li and X. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 839–844 CrossRef CAS .
T. Stephenson, Z. Li, B. Olsen and D. Mitlin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 209–231 CAS .
K. Shiva, H. S. S. Ramakrishna Matte, H. B. Rajendra, A. J. Bhattacharyya and C. N. R. Rao, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 787–793 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chen, G. Ji, B. Ding, Y. Ma, B. Qu, W. Chen and J. Y. Lee, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 7890–7896 RSC .
K. Chang, Z. Wang, G. Huang, H. Li, W. Chen and J. Y. Lee, J. Power Sources, 2012, 201, 259–266 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liu, X. Lu, J. Xie, G. Cao, T. Zhu and X. Zhao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 1588–1595 CAS .
J. Cheng, B. Wang, H. L. Xin, G. Yang, H. Cai, F. Nie and H. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 10814–10820 CAS .
S. Wang, Z. Lu, D. Wang, C. Li, C. Chen and Y. Yin, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 6365–6369 RSC .
S. Cahangirov, M. Topsakal, E. Akturk, H. Sahin and S. Ciraci, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 102, 236804 CrossRef CAS .
A. ƠHare, F. V. Kusmartsev and K. I. Kugel, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1045–1052 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Lalmi, H. Oughaddou, H. Enriquez, A. Kara, S. Vizzini, B. Ealet and B. Aufray, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 223109 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Vogt, P. D. Padova, C. Quaresima, J. Avila, E. Frantzeskakis, M. C. Asensio, A. Resta, B. Ealet and G. L. Lay, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 108, 155501 CrossRef .
B. J. Feng, Z. Ding, S. Meng, Y. Yao, X. He, P. Cheng, L. Chen and K. Wu, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3507–3511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Fleurence, R. Friedlein, T. Ozaki, H. Kawai, Y. Wang and Y. Yamada-Takamura, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 108, 245501 CrossRef .
E. Bianco, S. Butler, S. Jiang, O. D. Restrepo, W. Windl and J. E. Goldberger, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 4414–4421 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. A. Tritsaris, E. Kaxiras, S. Meng and E. Wang, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2258–2263 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. H. Osborn and A. A. Farajian, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 22916–22920 CAS .
M. Naguib, M. Kurtoglu, V. Presser, J. Lu, J. Niu, M. Heon, L. Hultman, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4248–4253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Naguib, O. Mashtalir, J. Carle, V. Presser, J. Lu, L. Hultman, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1322–1331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Mashtalir, M. Naguib, B. Dyatkin, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2013, 39, 147–152 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Tang, Z. Zhou and P. Shen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 16909–16916 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Naguib, J. Come, B. Dyatkin, V. Presser, P.-L. Taberna, P. Simon, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 16, 61–64 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Naguib, J. Halim, J. Lu, K. M. Cook, L. Hultman, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 15966–15969 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Lukatskaya, O. Mashtalir, C. E. Ren, Y. Dall'Agnese, P. Rozier, P. L. Taberna, M. Naguib, P. Simon, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Science, 2013, 341, 1502–1505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Mashtalir, M. Naguib, V. N. Mochalin, Y. Dall'Agnese, M. Heon, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1716 CrossRef PubMed .
X.-P. Gao and H.-X. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 174–189 CAS .
X. Li, Y. Cao, W. Qi, L. V. Saraf, J. Xiao, Z. Nie, J. Mietek, J.-G. Zhang, B. Schwenzer and J. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 16603–16610 RSC .
X. Ji and L. F. Nazar, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 9821–9826 RSC .
P. G. Bruce, S. A. Freunberger, L. J. Hardwick and J.-M. Tarascon, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 19–29 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Manthiram, Y. Fu and Y.-S. Su, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1125–1134 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shao, F. Ding, J. Xiao, J. Zhang, W. Xu, S. Park, J.-G. Zhang, Y. Wang and J. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 987–1004 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kim, H.-D. Lim, J. Kim and K. Kang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 33–47 CAS .
H. Wang, Y. Yang, Y. Liang, J. T. Robinson, Y. Li, A. Jackson, Y. Cui and H. Dai, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2644–2647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Chen, T. Zhao, J. Lu, F. Wu, L. Li, J. Chen, G. Tan, Y. Ye and K. Amine, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4642–4649 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Yoo and H. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 3020–3026 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cao, Z. Wei, J. He, J. Zang, Q. Zhang, M. Zheng and Q. Dong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9765–9768 CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:
Yu Jing	Yu Jing was born in Jiamusi, Heilongjiang Province, P.R. China in 1988. She received her bachelor's degree in Materials Chemistry at Nankai University in 2011. She has been studying for her Ph D degree at Nankai University with Professor Zhen Zhou. Her main research interest is 2D materials for energy storage and conversion.
Zhen Zhou	Zhen Zhou was born in Shandong, P. R. China in 1971. After he received his BSc in 1994 and Ph D in 1999 at Nankai University, P. R. China, he joined the faculty in 1999. Two years later, he began to work at Nagoya University, Japan, as a JSPS post-doctoral fellow. In 2005, he returned to Nankai University as an associate professor. In 2011, he was promoted to full professorship. His main research interest is the design, preparation and application of nanomaterials for energy storage and conversion.
Carlos R. Cabrera	Dr Carlos R. Cabrera was born in San Juan, Puerto Rico. He obtained his B.S. in Chemistry at the University of Puerto Rico at Río Piedras. In 1987, Dr Cabrera obtained his Ph.D. in Analytical Chemistry at Cornell University, followed by a post-doctoral appointment at the University of Texas at Austin. Currently, Dr Cabrera is a Full Professor of Chemistry at the University of Puerto Rico at Rio Piedras. During his career at the University of Puerto Rico, Dr Cabrera was the advisor for 23 Ph.Ds and 6 M.Ss in Chemistry and Chemical Physics. His main research is in regenerative fuel-cell catalysts, Li-battery anode nanomaterials, urine purification, and biosensors.
Zhongfang Chen	Zhongfang Chen obtained his B.S. (1994), M.S. (1997), and Ph.D. (2000) at Nankai University, China, and has been an associate professor at the Department of Chemistry, University of Puerto Rico, Rio Piedras Campus since 2008. His main research is to apply modern computational tools for investigating and designing new materials for energy, environment and human health.

 	Fig. 1  Top and side views of the atomic structure of 2D single-layered MoS2 presented as a prototype for MX2 in H structure (a) and T structure (b); monolayer schematics of MnO2 (c) and MoO3 (d) and a two-layer schematic of V2O5 (e).	 

 	Fig. 2  According to DFT computations, (a) the most favorable adsorption site of Li on graphene; (b) Li migration path A on graphene; (c) Li migration path A′ on GNRs; (d) energy barriers for Li migration in (b) and (c);31 geometries of Li atoms adsorbed at the T (e) and H sites (f) of the MoS2 monolayer; (g) energy profiles for Li diffusion on the MoS2 monolayer from a T site to another, passing through an H site.79 Reproduced from ref. 31 (Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society) and ref. 79 (Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society).	 

Graphene	0	Semi-metal	
50

BN	5.9	Insulator	
90 and 91

2H-MoS2	1.89	Semiconductor	
92 and 93

2H-WS2	1.98	Semiconductor	
138 and 139

2H-MoSe2	1.44	Semiconductor	
140

1T-TiS2	—	Metal	
39

VS2	—	Metal	
83

V2O5	1.94	Semiconductor	
89

Silicene	0	Semiconductor	
94

Ti3C2	—	Metal	
198


 	Fig. 3  (a) Irreversible Li storage at the interface between the graphene nanosheets and the electrolyte; (b) reversible Li storage at edge sites and internal defects, including vacancies, of nanodomains embedded in graphene nanosheets; (c) reversible Li storage between the (002) planes;131 (d and e) HRTEM images and SAED pattern (inset of e) of GNSs; (f) cyclic performances of the GNS anodes at the current density of 0.2 mA cm−2, compared with those of artificial graphite.132 Reproduced from ref. 131 (Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society) and ref. 132 (Copyright 2009, Elsevier).	 

 	Fig. 4  Morphologies of 2D TMDs and their electrochemical performances as anodes in LIBs, including (a) MoS2 nanoflakes with disordered, graphene-like layers;150 (b) few-layered WS2 nanosheets;155 and (c) vertically aligned, graphene-like SnS2 ultrathin nanosheets.157 Reproduced from ref. 150 (Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society), ref. 155 (Copyright 2007, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim) and ref. 157 (Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematics of the exfoliation of bulk V2O5 into {001}-oriented, few-layered V2O5 nanosheet; (b) TEM image of ultrathin V2O5 nanosheets; (c) rate capability of ultrathin V2O5 nanosheet and bulk V2O5 cathodes at various charge and discharge rates.46 Reproduced from ref. 46 (Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 6  SEM (a) and TEM (b) images as well as cyclic (c) and rate (d) performances at different rates of MoS2/N-graphene composite synthesized by CTAB-assisted, solution-based method.178 Reproduced from ref. 178 (Copyright 2013, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim).	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Synthesis schematic, TEM image and rate performance of the WS2/rGO composite;180 (b) rate performance and lithiation/delithiation schematic of FL-SnS2/G;182 (c) synthesis process of the V2O5/rGO nanocomposites.184 Reproduced from ref. 180 (Copyright 2013, Elsevier), ref. 182 (Copyright 2012, Elsevier) and ref. 184 (Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

Graphite	372	372	0.4 mA cm−2	∼	
25

Graphene (G)	740	672	0.2 mA cm−2	30	
163

Bulk MoS2	670	902	100 mA g−1	80	
165

2D MoS2	
	554	50 C ≈ 53.1 A g−1	20	
181

2D MoS2/G	
	1300	100 mA g−1	50	
206

2D MoS2/G	
	940–1020	100 mA g−1	100	
208

2D MoS2/N-graphene	
	1285.3	100 mA g−1	50	
209

Bulk SnS2	586	513	100 mA g−1	50	
190

2D SnS2	
	1050	1 C ≈ 645 mA g−1	10	
188

2D SnS2/G	
	920	100 mA g−1	50	
213

Bulk WS2	432	680	47.5 mA g−1	20	
184

2D WS2	
	590	0.05 C ≈ 24.0 mA g−1	100	
187

2D WS2/G	
	451	100 mA g−1	50	
211

Bulk V2O5	294	132	0.2 C ≈ 60 mA g−1	110	
185

2D V2O5	
	139	1 C ≈ 300 mA g−1	50	
194

V2O5/rGO	
	102 mA h g−1	2 C ≈ 600 mA g−1	160	
184


 	Fig. 8  (a) Structural models of silicene (top and side views of single-layered silicene);193 (b) STM images of silicon and silicene on Ag(111) substrate;190 (c) schematic of lithium adsorbed on the surface of silicene.193 Reproduced from ref. 193 (Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society) and ref. 190 (Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Top and side views of the optimized Li-adsorbed Ti3C2 monolayers and the lithium diffusion path and barrier;198 (b) TEM image of Nb2CTx flakes and SAED of the hexagonal basal plane in the insert image; (c) cross section TEM image of Nb2CTx; (d) cyclic performances of V2C and Nb2C anodes, compared with Ti2C at different rates;200 (e) schematic of Ti3C2Tx electrode fabrication; (f) cyclic performance of Ti3C2Tx in KOH as the capacitor electrode. Inset: galvanostatic cycling data collected at 1A g−1.201 Reproduced from ref. 198 (Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society), ref. 200 (Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society) and ref. 201 (Copyright 2013, The American Association for the Advancement of Science).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
