Shaping the beating heart of artificial photosynthesis: oxygenic metal oxide nano-clusters  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2EE02838G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2EE02838G
(Perspective)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5592-5603Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShaping the beating heart of artificial photosynthesis: oxygenic metal oxide nano-clusters

        
          
            Andrea 
            Sartorel
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Mauro 
            Carraro
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Francesca Maria 
            Toma
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Maurizio 
            Prato
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Marcella 
            Bonchio
          
        
      *a
aITM-CNR and Dipartimento di Scienze Chimiche, Università di Padova, Via Marzolo 1, 35131, Padova, Italy. E-mail: andrea.sartorel@unipd.it; marcella.bonchio@unipd.it;  Fax: +39 049 8275829
bDipartimento di Scienze Chimiche e Farmaceutiche, Università di Trieste, Piazzale Europa 1, 34127, Trieste, Italy. E-mail: prato@units.it
Received 
      5th October 2011
    , Accepted 2nd December 2011First published on 12th January 2012Abstract
Water
oxidation is the crucial stage in the chemical and molecular sequence of photosynthesis, designed by Nature to convert solar light into chemical energy. The artificial “off-leaf” transposition is a major goal of energy research, aiming at the continuous production of hydrogen as a solar fuel, through the photo-catalytic splitting of water. Success in this task primarily depends on the interplay of light-activated multi-electron oxidation and reduction cycles and on the invention of stable and robust water oxidation catalysts, liberating oxygen with fast rates, high quantum yield, and long-term activity. A promising perspective is herein envisaged in the molecular design of functional metal-oxide cores and composite nano-materials.

Broader context

Water is a green carrier of electrons stored in very stable chemical bonds, readily available in many forms and distributed in vast geographic areas. Therefore, water oxidation, meaning the stepwise abstraction of four electrons from its O–H bonds, releases oxygen as a direct product, but in doing this, provides the necessary reduction equivalents to address the dream goals of energy research i.e. H2 generation and CO2 abatement. In this scenario, the oxidation of water performed with low activation energy, under multi-turnover catalytic conditions, is pivotal for regenerative atmosphere, green-house gas remediation, and carbon-neutral renewable fuelsvia sustainable hydrogen economy and/or bio-inspired CO2 transformation. A major research effort is therefore dedicated to address the artificial transposition of what is conceived as the bottleneck of Natural Photosynthesis. Success in this task primarily depends on the interplay of light-activated multi-electron oxidation and reduction cycles and on the invention of stable and robust water oxidation catalysts, liberating oxygen with fast rate, high quantum yield, and long-term activity. A promising perspective is herein envisaged in the molecular design of functional metal-oxide cores and hybrid nano-materials.

Introduction
Green plants harvest solar light by converting absorbed photons into chemical energy via the orchestrated mechanism of photosynthesis. Life on our planet has been powered by the perpetual cycling of this natural machinery, where small molecules like H2O and CO2, enter two solar-activated catalytic gears and undergo a concerted translocation of electrons/protons and bond breaking/forming reactions. Dioxygen and carbohydrates are the ultimate products where solar energy is stored into chemical bonds. In this process, H2O is the renewable multi-electron source, providing a total of four electron mol−1 by the oxidative half reaction leading to O2 formation (2H2O → O2 + 4H+ + 4e−; E0 = 1.23 V vs.NHE). This multi-electron pathway generates O2 at the lowest thermodynamic barrier compared to the stepwise one-electron routes. Nevertheless it dictates a massive molecular rearrangement as four O–H bonds are cleaved to release a new O–O bond. Therefore, water oxidation poses a severe chemical hurdle, coupling both kinetic and thermodynamic challenges. Over billions of years, Nature has refined a multi-electron photocatalytic strategy to perform water oxidation at a low energy cost, to feed the reductive end and to collect energy in the form of carbohydrates. Our mission is now to devise an artificial analog, where, after water oxidation, protons and electrons are recombined into hydrogen providing a “solar fuel”.
Bio-inspired guidelines: the natural oxygen evolving center (OEC), CaMn4Ox

Water
oxidation occurs with unmatched efficiency on the luminal side of the membrane bound Photosystem II (PSII) enzyme, where O2 evolution is catalysed by a polynuclear metal-oxo cluster with four manganese and one calcium atom (CaMn4O5). The structure of the PSII-OEC has been recently addressed by combining crystallographic and spectroscopic techniques.1–4 The more credited topology, determined with resolution up to 1.9 Å,4 shows a chair-like structural arrangement, where a distorted-cubane Mn3CaO4-core is linked viaoxo bridges to a fourth “dangling” Mn center (Fig. 1a).
 Fig. 1  (a) Structure of the PSII-OEC cluster from T. vulcanus at a resolution of 1.9 Å (from crystallographic data of ref. 4). (b) S0–S4catalytic cycle originating upon sequential photo-oxidation of the PSII-OEC and proposed valence state of the Mn centers.6 
In addition, a total of four water molecules are coordinated to the pendant Mn center and to the calcium atom. As no other water molecules were located within the binding distance, this is likely a key feature for water activation whereby electrons and protons are extracted upon photo-induced oxidation, with the final destination of feeding the reduction half-reaction.4
The adoption of catalytic cores, featuring adjacent multi-transition metal centers and multiple-μ-hydroxo/oxo bridging units, is a winning strategy devised by Nature, to effect multiple/cascade transformations with high efficiency and minimal energy cost. The PSII-OEC can master a four-electron/four-proton mechanism through sequential redox steps, thus featuring a unique flexibility of the metal-core structure. Assistance of the nanostructured proteic environment plays a key role, by providing an oxygen-rich, ligand set of mono and bi-dentate carboxylates, and a second sphere hydrogen bonding network for further stabilization while promoting fast electron transfer and a coupled proton exit. The mechanism of water oxidation by the PSII-OEC has been extensively investigated.5–8 Although several details still need to be clarified, a general consensus has emerged, indicating that a light induced four electron-oscillation pattern, along five oxidation states Sn (n = 0–4), is responsible for the catalytic cycling of the oxygenic PSII-OEC core (Kok cycle, Fig. 1b). In this scheme, S0 is the most reduced and S4 the four-electron oxidized state; when S4 is generated it reacts rapidly (1 ms) releasing O2 and returning to the initial S0 form of the enzyme.9 The photo-oxidation cycle is driven by a chlorophyll pigment radical cation, called P680+˙, generated upon illumination (the subscript 680 indicates the wavelength of the maximum absorption) and which is by far the strongest oxidizing agent known in living systems (reduction potential for P680+˙/P680 ≈ 1.25 V vs.NHE).6 In the natural system P680+˙ is generated in close proximity to a redox active tyrosine (TyrZ), in turn located at ca. 7 Å distance from the metal cluster. Such a donor–acceptor sequence entails a photo-induced electron flow within the nano- to microsecond time domain. Upon four light flashes, electron transfer in the sequence P680+˙ ← TyrZ ← CaMn4O5 powers the PSII-OEC through its S0–S4 evolution. On the other hand, the coupled four proton release, compensating for charge increase, is fostered by water coordination at the manganese core, and by an orchestrated hydrogen-bonding channel within the organic domains of the surrounding proteins.4,6 In this scenario, the composition, supramolecular organization and morphology of the PSII-OEC environment play a fundamental role by setting: (i) the ligand system to stabilize the S0–S4 states of the manganese-oxo cluster; (ii) the functional communication between the photoreaction center and such catalytic core, (iii) the water/catalyst interfacial contact, (iv) the confinement of the oxygenic cluster, and (v) the coupled proton exit, aided by the ionizable groups of the polypeptide surroundings.
Within such a perfectly merged hybrid nano-environment, oxygenic photosynthesis turns out to effect a solar-activated 4e−/4H+ catalytic cycle, with multi-turnover (TON) efficiency yielding up to ca. 400 s−1 turnover frequency (TOF), with overall quantum yield close to 10% and operating at a moderate overpotential (ca. 0.3–0.4 V at physiological pH). Herein the Achilles' heel stems from the intrinsic weakness of the functional components chosen by Nature to master such peak performance. Despite some elaborate control/protection strategies, the PSII enzyme undergoes fatal damage during catalytic conditions, thus requiring a perpetual self-healing reconstruction every 30–60 min.
The artificial perspective should find its roots in more solid materials, as any remediation plan will cost extra energy at the expense of efficiency and sustainability. The vision here is to transcend the natural wonder, while being inspired by its key guidelines along the design of a functional system/device, with superior operation stability and long-term endurance. In the next paragraphs we will highlight a recently discovered pathway carved within the class of inorganic metal-oxide clusters displaying a unique mimicry of the PSII-OEC. Furthermore, the shaping of their functions at the interface of specifically tailored carbon nano-structures and/or polymeric scaffolds opens a vast scenario for tuning electron/proton transfer in terms of rates, distance, geometries and communication between donor/acceptor centers. Innovation is envisaged based on the molecular modification of the hybrid photo-catalytic center and of its environment.
Oxygenic metal-oxo phases: colloidal catalysts and beyond
Colloidal metal oxides have been considered since the early 70s as water oxidation catalysts (WOCs). Recent progress is briefly outlined by dissecting some major fields of activity, as a function of key transition metal redox cores, while highlighting some promising strategies towards integration of photo-induced electron transfer for light-activated water oxidation. Although not exhaustive in many aspects, a cutting-edge perspective of functional nano-building blocks that hold promise for artificial photosynthesis is herein presented, which is expected to provide useful guidelines for a most sought molecular breakthrough.
Ruthenium oxide
Colloidal ruthenium oxide, RuO2, stabilized by polyvinyl alcohol as an additive, was found to behave as a water oxidation catalyst in the late 70s.10,11 The RuO2 nanoparticles displayed an average hydrodynamic radius of 28 nm, and oxygen evolution was observed in the presence of cerium(IV) as the bulk oxidant. The resulting oxidation rate exceeded by two orders of magnitude the one achieved with RuO2 powder, despite an excess of about 40 fold, which was used in this latter case. RuO2 colloids were then integrated in a coupled redox system permitting catalytic light driven water splitting in the presence of Ru(bpy)32+ (bpy = 2,2′-bipyridine) as the photosensitizer and dimethylviologen as the electron acceptor, responsible for H2 production.12 A further evolution of the system was then envisaged by co-deposition of colloidal RuO2 and Pt(0) domains on photo-active nano-TiO2 particles to yield an integrated system performing at the same time water oxidation and reduction with λ > 450 nm.13 A major impact on the catalytic performance is ascribed to the RuO2 hydration grade, with the optimal value found in the range ∼12 to 14%. This is generally controlled upon heating at 150 °C for 2–5 hours.14–17 Indeed, highly hydrated samples easily undergo anodic corrosion (i.e.oxidation to inactive RuO4), while poorly hydrated RuO2 has a sluggish activity due to the reduced surface area. In this respect, a straightforward method for nano-RuO2 photodeposition on titania surface has been recently described,17 yielding an evenly distributed coverage with 2–3 nm catalyst particles as revealed by TEM images. The resulting material was screened for water oxidation under dark conditions with Ce(IV) excess, however exhibiting a fairly low TON of ca. 16 for oxygen evolution.
Interaction with visible light Ru(II) polypyridine sensitizer18 and in particular the prototype Ru(bpy)32+ has been achieved both in homogeneous solution and by devising a photoactive heterogeneous material/surface.19,20 Interestingly, a photo-driven oxygenic-gel is generated upon assembling nano-RuO2 particles, dispersed by anionic sodium dodecyl sulfate, with a cross-linked polycationic matrix incorporating the ruthenium sensitizer, namely poly(N-isopropylacrylamide-co-Ru(bpy)3) (Fig. 2). Water oxidation by the resulting gel was observed upon irradiation at λ > 350 nm in the presence of [Co(NH3)5Cl]2+ as a sacrificial electron acceptor. The gel structure allows the organization of the catalytic and sensitizer domains while fostering the entrapment of water pools exposed to the catalytic material with high surface area (Fig. 2).
 Fig. 2  Photo-activated oxygenic-gel entrapping nano-RuO2 particles and a covalently grafted ruthenium sensitizer (adapted from ref. 19 with authorization from John Wiley and Sons). 
A different strategy involves the use of a Nafion (0.1–1%) film embedding a RuO2/Ru(bpy)32+ composite, which was then screened for electrocatalytic water oxidation.20 Preparation of the electrode was achieved by deposition of a dilute Nafion solution containing colloidal RuO2, and subsequent dipping of the electrode surface in a Ru(bpy)32+ solution. Water oxidation was observed in acetate buffer (pH = 4.6) at 0.9 V vs.SCE, by effect of the Ru(bpy)32+/Ru(bpy)33+ redox mediator, thus implying an effective overpotential η = 0.2 V, with a remarkable increase in oxygen production as compared to the Ru(bpy)32+-free Nafion-RuO2 electrode.

Iridium oxide

Reported more than 30 years ago,21iridium oxide, IrO2, is still one of the most efficient catalysts for water oxidation, working at low overpotentials and displaying a remarkable robustness against anodic corrosion in the presence of strong oxidants.14,15 Since the very beginning, it was recognized that IrO2 colloids provide an implemented surface area of the nano-material. The self-assembly of citrate-stabilized IrO2 nanoparticles (50–100 nm) on Indium Tin Oxide (ITO) electrodes was reported by simple dipping of the electrode surface in the colloidal solution.22 Formation of ester bonds between the reactive hydroxyl moieties on the ITO surface and the stabilizer carboxylate group is likely responsible for the deposition of an IrO2 monolayer. With such nano-structured electrodes, water oxidation was electrochemically induced in aqueous solution (pH = 5.3) at 1.0 V vs.SCE, corresponding to an overpotential η = 0.325 V. Although it is difficult to evaluate performance of the material per catalytic center, a very high TOF = 6.4–6.9 s−1 per iridium atom was estimated at η = 0.625 V. Interestingly a recent publication reports the use of solution stable nano-IrOx with diameter as low as 1.6 ± 0.6 nm.23,24 Controlled potential electro-flocculation of the nanoparticle solutions at pH = 13 on glassy carbon electrodes yielded an IrOx film, with 2 nm thickness, that catalyzes O2 evolution at overpotentials η = 0.15–0.25 V, with η being pH independent in the range 1.5–13, and achieving 100% current efficiency at η = 0.25 V. These results highlight the critical parameter of colloid dimension and stability and at the same time forecast the unique role that nanodimensional molecular metal oxides, i.e. polyoxometalates (POMs) can play in this chemistry, as it will be addressed in the next paragraphs.
The interfacial communication of IrO2 colloids with photo-generated oxidants is feasible, as it has been recently demonstrated. The combination of citrate stabilized IrO2 colloids with Ru(bpy)32+ leads to water photo-oxidation in aqueous Na2SiF6–NaHCO3 buffer (pH = 5.4) with a remarkable activity and an extended life of the photosensitizer with up to 290 cycles.25 The upgrade to heterogeneous conditions is readily achieved upon polymerization of ruthenium sensitizer units.26,27 Photo-induced electron transfer (ET) from the Ir(IV) centres to oxidized Ru(bpy)33+ was found to be the rate determining step occurring concomitantly with oxygen production. The ET kinetics, determined by time-resolved UV-Vis spectroscopy, yielded a second order rate constant, k = 1.3 × 106 M−1 s−1. At high concentration of the photosensitizer and low loading of the IrO2 catalyst, a turnover frequency TOF = 160 s−1 per surface iridium atom was estimated. So further improvement of the system was achieved by employing nano-IrO2 with diameter in the range 1–5 nm, obtained by replacing the generally used citric acid stabilizer (10–30 nm colloids), with bidentate carboxylates.28 A definite step forward was the design of tailored sensitizers containing pendant succinate or malonate groups, for directly tethering to the IrO2 nanoparticles, and thus promoting ET in a covalently assembled system to overcome the limit of the low ET rate. As expected, ET from Ir(IV) to Ru(bpy)33+ proceeds with a first-order rate constant k = 8 × 102 s−1.28
These results have set the basis for an advanced proof-of-principle concerning the artificial leaf functional assembly.29 This is a dye-sensitized photoelectrochemical cell to achieve full water splitting. The photoanode is designed at the molecular level and integrates nanoparticulate TiO2 (anatase) with IrO2 nanoparticles (2 nm average diameter). The pivotal role is herein played by a multi-functional ruthenium polypyridyl sensitizer decorated with peripheral phosphonate and carboxylate substituents. Such a tailored structure allows the photo-active center to be covalently anchored to the nano-TiO2 hydroxylic surface by phosphonate ester bonds, while providing the required linkage with the IrO2 colloids at the carboxylic ends (Fig. 3).29
 Fig. 3  
Dye-sensitized photoelectrochemical cell finalized to water splitting proposed by Mallouk et al. (reproduced from ref. 29 with authorization from ACS). 
Nevertheless, the covalent-bond-driven architecture linking the donor/acceptor units with a suitable geometry and spacing does not lead to a major improvement of the photoinduced ET rate, which remains in the milli-seconds timescale, thus being the limiting factor for the production of intense photocurrents. The quantum efficiency of the experimental setup turns out to level off at 1–2%, indicating that further progress has to be sought in the molecular components and materials. In particular, the sensitizer nature can be addressed with the twofold aim of providing: (i) increased/extended absorption features to optimize the overlap with the solar radiation and (ii) a higher photo-induced oxidation potential to drive faster photoinduced ET from the WOC domains. In particular, the antenna-type tetranuclear derivative Ru{(μ-dpp)Ru(bpy)2}38+, (dpp = 2,3-bis(2′-pyridyl)pyrazine) shows higher molar absorptivity and a significant shift towards the red portion of the visible spectrum with respect to the parent Ru(bpy)32+.18,30 Indeed, substitution of Ru(bpy)32+ with the dendrimeric Ru{(μ-dpp)Ru(bpy)2}38+ was initially attempted in combination with citrate-stabilized nano-IrO2 (20 nm) and sacrificial Na2S2O8 upon irradiation (λ > 550 nm) in water yielding a 6-fold increase in oxygen evolution and an overall quantum yield efficiency of 3%. It is worth noting that the system activity is also maintained at λ > 700 nm, low energy radiations at which Ru(bpy)32+ is completely ineffective. Moreover, the tetranuclear Ru{(μ-dpp)Ru(bpy)2}38+ sets forward a, ca. 440 mV, favorable potential gap with respect to Ru(bpy)32+ (1.70 V and 1.26 V vs.NHE in water, respectively). These advantages play a major role for achieving an unprecedented quantum yield, in combination with a molecular polyoxometalate catalyst (vide infra). Indeed, lower energy irradiation and faster ET rates contribute synergetically to preserve the sensitizer from irreversible degradation thus maintaining long-term activity, and efficiency. Of particular interest is also the documented use of a totally inorganic and highly robust photocatalytic unit based on mesoporous silica AlMCM-41, where the sensitizer is a binuclear TiOCr charge-transfer chromophore.31 When exciting with visible light (λ = 460 nm), a metal-to-metal charge-transfer occurs, Ti(IV)OCr(III) → Ti(III)OCr(IV), generating a Cr(IV) oxidant, capable of ET from IrO2, as recently demonstrated in water solution, in the presence of sacrificial persulfate. The estimated quantum efficiency was 13%, while in situ FT Raman and EPR spectroscopy revealed the presence of Ti(VI)-bound superoxide species.
A major area of progress is also foreseen in the electrode material with respect to the semiconductor nature. A recent achievement deals with the most desirable use of nanostructured hematite, α-Fe2O3, where IrO2 nanoparticles (2 nm) have been deposited by electrophoresis.32 The resulting photoanode displays a high surface area due to a cauliflower-type morphology, 1% iridium concentration determined by XPS, and exhibits unprecedented photocurrent of 3 mA cm−2 value at 1.23 V versus the reversible hydrogen electrode, under simulated sunlight conditions. However, under repetitive scans, and a few minutes of activity, a steady increase of the operative potential together with a slight decrease in photocurrent is registered, likely ascribable to the degradation of the electrode surface and loss of the catalytic components.

          Cobalt oxide
        
The search for earth abundant substitutes of Ru and Ir is a fundamental target towards WOC sustainability and hydrogen economy. For this reason, there has been an increasing interest in cobalt-based electrode coatings and molecular cobalt complexes to promote water oxidation.33Cobalt oxide and related aquo or hydroxo complexes have been known as water oxidation catalysts since the early 80s.34,35 In the previous work, the oxidation states II, III and IV were thought to be involved in the overall catalytic cycle, whereby formation of hydrogen peroxide as a reaction intermediate was also hypothesized. The limited stability of the molecular precursors evolving to insoluble oxides was considered as one major drawback of such systems, as slow rates of oxygen evolution were obtained under heterogeneous catalysis conditions.
An important breakthrough in cobalt-based water oxidation was achieved by electrodeposition of a catalytic phase from neutral aqueous solutions containing Co(II) and phosphate ions, on ITO or fluorine tin oxide (FTO) electrodes, upon application of positive potentials (1.05–1.3 V vs.NHE).36,37 The deposited layer is a mixture of Co(III) phosphates, hydroxides and oxides, whose composition was confirmed by microanalytical elemental analysis, which indicated a rough Co:P ratio of 2:1. A SEM image of the deposited layer is represented in Fig. 4a. Water oxidation with such an electrode occurs at pH = 7, room temperature under air atmosphere, at 280 mV overpotential, while prolonged electrolysis at 1.29 Volt (corresponding to 470 mV overpotential) leads to a 8 hour long oxygen generation. Optimization of the material morphology/composition was screened by using other protic buffers such as methyl phosphonate and borate electrolytes, with similar results.38 The electrocatalytic surface can be regenerated from the solution bulk after turnover by tuning the electrode potential, thus a complete uptake of the re-dissolved cobalt is obtained after ca. 14 h electrolysis. Albeit at an extra energy cost, and with the mandatory presence of a proton acceptor electrolyte (otherwise cobalt dissolution is rapid and not reversible), this remains a straightforward tool to induce the “self-healing” of the artificial WOC system analogous to the native PSII-OEC.39 It is noteworthy that oxygen evolution is not limited by the presence of chloride anions (no Cl−oxidation to chlorine is observed), thus allowing efficient oxygen evolution also from seawater. X-Ray Absorption Near-Edge Structure (XANES) experiments performed on the electrodeposited film (1.4 V vs.NHE) indicated an octahedral coordination environment for the cobalt centres, with six oxygen ligands, and Co(III) the major oxidation state.40 From Extended X-Ray Absorption Fine Structure (EXAFS) measurements a structural motif has been proposed for the catalytic layer based on edge sharing CoO6 octahedra, similar to the one found in cobaltates (Fig. 4b).41 Important insights into the reaction mechanism come from Electron Paramagnetic Resonance (EPR) evidence of low-spin Co(IV) formation (geff = 2.27) upon preparation of the film at potentials of 1.14 and 1.34 V.42 The proposed cycle thus involves proton coupled oxidation to form adjacent Co(IV)-oxo units, responsible for oxygen generation, with phosphate residues acting as proton acceptors (Fig. 4c).43
 Fig. 4  (a) Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of a cobalt phosphate (Co–Pi) film for electrocatalytic water oxidation (reproduced from ref. 37 by permission of the Royal Society of Chemistry); (b) edge-sharing molecular cobaltate cluster as the proposed model for the surface catalyst (reproduced from ref. 41 with authorization from ACS); and (c) catalytic scheme involving a CoII/III/IV manifold (reproduced from ref. 43 with authorization from ACS). 
The cobalt phase was recently electrodeposited on mesostructured hematite (α-Fe2O3 (ref. 44)).45 The resulting photoanode shows a >350 mV reduction of the bias voltage required for promoting water oxidation, with respect to bare hematite in 1 M aqueous NaOH (pH = 13.6) by irradiation with visible light (λ = 590 nm); cobalt leaching in solution was excluded by several converging tests, including continuous photocatalysis for 10 hours. Subsequent improvements of this system include reduction of non-productive photon absorption by lowering the catalyst deposition time from 1 h to 15 minutes, usage of the photoanode under milder basic conditions (pH = 8), and sustained O2 evolution with 5 times enhancement over the parent hematite photoanode at 1.0 V vs.NHE.46
Photochemical deposition of the cobalt phosphate system has been achieved by using a ZnO photoanode.47 In this case, 10–30 nm catalyst particles turned out to form locally where the photogenerated holes are most readily available, thus reducing the total amount of catalyst and its interference with photon absorption from the semiconductor. The photocurrent onset potential was reduced by 0.23 V in the presence of the cobalt based catalyst.
Recently, molecular models of Nocera's catalyst based on a Co4O4 unit have also been proposed.48–51 In particular, the cubane Co4O4(py)4(CH3COO)4 (py = pyridine) was shown to be active in homogeneous, light-driven water oxidation employing the Ru(bpy)32+/S2O82− system, reaching up to 40 turnovers and 0.02 s−1 turnover frequencies,49,50 and an impressive initial quantum efficiency of 60% with visible light (λ = 450 nm).49 Further studies on these molecular models could provide useful insights also into the reaction mechanism of the extended catalytic layers.
Another outstanding example of cobalt-oxide phases as WOC deals with Co3O4 nano-clusters confined in mesoporous silica (SBA-15) (4.2–8.6 w/w% loading) prepared by wet impregnation methods, in the presence of Co(NO3)2 methanol solutions and subsequent calcinations of the samples.52Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) confirmed the embedding of the catalytic clusters within the silica porous framework displaying 8 nm channels. Indeed, spheroid-shaped bundles of parallel Co3O4 nanorods with spinel structure were characterized inside the porous SBA-15 scaffold, their crystalline nature was evidenced by Selected Area Electron Diffraction (SAED). Light driven oxygen evolution was achieved in aqueous suspension (pH = 5.8, T = 22 °C, laser at 476 nm), by using such catalysts in combination with the well known Ru(bpy)32+/S2O82− system described above. The nanostructured material with 4.2% loading showed an increased catalytic activity with respect to commercially available micrometre sized Co3O4 particles, with estimated turnover frequencies per Co centre TOF = 0.01 s−1 compared to TOF = 0.0006 s−1 for the commercial catalysts. The much larger surface area provided by the internal structure of the silica channels is probably a major factor for the high turnover frequency observed for the nanoclusters. Under the condition explored the quantum efficiency was ϕ = 18%. No O2 evolution was observed using NiO nanoclusters instead of Co3O4, thus confirming the catalytic relevance of the cobalt oxide core.
Manganese oxide
Nature's ultimate choice, manganese-oxo structures have been widely investigated as catalysts for water oxidation. Preliminary studies refer to MnO2 colloids used in water solution (pH = 3.6–5.0) with sensitized sacrificial electron acceptors, either Ru(bpy)32+/Co(NH3)5Cl2+ or Ru(bpy)32+/S2O82−.14,15,53 Under the conditions explored, however, the O2 yield was disappointingly low since 53 μmol of O2 were produced with 172 μmol of MnO2.53 The poor performance of colloidal MnO2 also in the presence of dark oxidants as Ce(IV) is likely ascribed to a detrimental aggregation of the initially small particles (6 nm) with extensive flocculation and separation of the colloidal catalyst from the reaction mixture.
Therefore a convincing strategy is the encapsulation of nanostructured Mn oxide clusters in mesoporous KIT-6 silica (8% loading),54 following the cobalt protocol described above.52 The manganese clusters are thus formed inside the silica channels, with mean diameter in the 70–90 nm range. Depending on the calcination temperature, the average oxidation state of the manganese centers was different, with a prevalence of Mn(IV) for samples calcinated at 500 °C, Mn(III) samples prepared at 600 °C, corresponding to Mn2O3, and even lower oxidation states, corresponding to Mn3O4, above 600 °C. Oxygen evolution was performed by irradiation with visible light of an aqueous solution (Na2SiF6/NaHCO3 buffer, pH = 5.8) containing the Ru(bpy)32+/S2O82− system together with the suspended Mn oxide/KIT-6 catalysts. It is worth noting that the material treated at 600 °C (corresponding to Mn2O3) showed the highest performance, with double the rate with respect to the sample treated at 400 °C (MnO2). Oxygen yield was 26 times lower when micrometre sized Mn2O3 was used as the catalyst. A very small fraction of Mn ions is leached in solution, but this is not responsible for catalysis, as demonstrated by control experiments. Oxygen evolution was observed until total consumption of the sacrificial oxidant, but catalysis was completely restored upon recharging the experiment, suggesting that the Mn centers retain the pristine activity. Also in this case, the upgrade to nano-scale systems is rewarding as is demonstrated by oxygenic α-MnO2 nanotubes or nanowires and β-MnO2 nanowires. These nanostructures provide an increased surface area so that in the light driven Ru(bpy)32+/S2O82− cycle they give turnover frequencies of 3.5, 5.9 and 2.0 × 10−5 s−1, respectively per Mn centre.55 However, both the resulting morphology and the crystal structure arrangement of these oxides do not seem to have a substantial impact on their catalytic properties.
A major effect was found for a bio-inspired, all inorganic, oxygen evolving catalyst based on calcium manganese(III) oxide hydrates that was recently reported as PSII-OEC mimicry.56α-Mn2O3 and CaMn2O4·xH2O materials were obtained by controlled oxidation of Mn(II) ions in basic aqueous solution, followed by calcination at 600 and 400 °C. Scanning Electron Microscopy confirmed the formation of particles with 5–50 nm size and high surface area (16.6 and 205–303 m2 g−1). Both materials were screened for water oxidation, in the presence of sacrificial oxidants and also in the light driven system with Ru(bpy)32+/[Co(NH3)5Cl]2+ (acetate buffer at pH = 4). Interestingly, in this latter case, the oxygen evolution rate is one order of magnitude higher in the presence of CaMn2O4·xH2O (x = 1 or 4) with respect to Ca-free manganese oxides. Indeed, observed turnover frequencies per manganese centre were 2.2–2.3 × 10−5 s−1 for α-Mn2O3 (commercial and prepared samples) and 3.25 × 10−4 and 3.50 × 10−4 s−1 for CaMn2O4·4H2O and CaMn2O4·H2O. Major drawbacks are the poor stability of the calcium manganese oxide catalysts in acetate buffer, and the strong influence of the hydration grade on the turnover performance, as the anhydrous CaMn2O4 obtained after extensive calcination (marokite) is inactive.

          Manganese-oxo particles have been shown to be the competent water oxidation catalysts, forming from photoinduced decomposition of the molecular, tetranuclear manganese complex [Mn4O4L6]+ (L = diarylphosphinate) embedded within a polymeric Nafion membrane.57,58 A careful spectroscopic investigation showed that the observed catalytic regime was originating from a disordered Mn(III/IV)-oxide phase with a dominant connectivity similar to the layers of the birnessite structure. In such system the molecular complex was just a precursor of the catalytically active manganese nano-clusters.58

Water photooxidation at metal cores: orchestrating rates at the speed of light
Efficient photo-induced water splitting is a matter of balance, according to a separation of tasks and modular assembly architecture (Fig. 5). Photon absorption, charge separation and electron transfer events should be coupled and concerted against several concurrent facts: (i) the lifetime of photo-excited states; (ii) the inactive recombination/decay; (iii) the sensitizer/environment stability; (iv) the multi-redox evolution and reorganization of the catalytic cores; and (v) the time domain of catalytic turnover.
 Fig. 5  Modular assembly of key components and processes for artificial photosynthesis. 
A favorable interplay of rates governing each of these competing processes becomes a stringent requirement for performance. In particular, fast electron transfer, after consecutive light-absorption/charge separation events, should occur from the oxygen evolving catalytic core to the photo-generated “hole” (i.e.oxidation equivalent), in order to override any backward electron-flux while scavenging the nascent oxidant site and preserving the sensitizer structure. This is one main conditions required to foster high quantum yield under a catalytic regime. Time-resolved spectroscopic experiments are instrumental to address electron transfer kinetics and interfacial communication between the light-activated oxidant and the metal cluster donor. More so, the screening of the catalyst performance under light activation by the sacrificial oxidant “shortcut” is a revealing tool in this search. This is best performed by combination of a water soluble photoactive center (P) with a terminal electron acceptor, or sacrificial acceptor (SA), offering a suitable thermodynamic sink. This latter is usually provided in large excess and poses the turnover limit of the catalytic process (Scheme 1).
 Scheme 1  Light driven water oxidation by a water oxidation catalyst (WOC), in the presence of a photosensitizer (P) and a sacrificial electron acceptor (SA). 
In many examples reviewed thus far, the ruthenium(II) polypyridyl sensitizer Ru(bpy)32+ is generally coupled with either persulfate, S2O82−, or Co(NH3)5Cl2+ as sacrificial acceptors. Under such conditions, the problem of electron back-donation or “recombination” is generally ruled out as the ideal terminal acceptor undergoes to irreversible decomposition after electron injection (bond cleavage, dissociation, precipitation, etc.). Therefore, the screening of selected antennas/photoreaction centers/catalysts under sacrificial acceptor conditions offers a valid hint on the one-way electron communication/flow within the assembly, enabling the optimization of the single tasks. The performance of selected metal-oxide clusters as catalysts for water photo-oxidation with the Ru(bpy)32+/S2O82− asset is compared in Table 1.
Table 1 Quantum efficiency of water photooxidation by selected WOC in the presence of Ru(bpy)32+/S2O82− as photosensitizer and sacrificial acceptor, respectively.





                  WOC
                  a
pH

λ
b


                  Q.E.c (%)
Ref.





a Nano-colloids or molecular catalysts.
b Photoirradiation wavelength.
c 
Photons (%) converted into oxygen.
d 
                    Citrate or malonate stabilized nano-particles (20 nm).
e Maximum efficiency achieved with Ru{(μ-dpp)Ru(bpy)2}3]8+ as the photosensitizer.
f Estimated from the ratio of initial rates between nano MnxOy and Co3O4oxides (ref. 52 and 54).
g Abbreviation for {RuIV4(μ-OH)2(μ-O)4(H2O)4[γ-XW10O36]2}n− (X = Si, P) see text.
h Abbreviation for [Co4(H2O)2(α-PW9O34)2]10−.





Nano-IrO2d
7.2
550
3–11e

30 and 65



Nano-Co3O4
5.8
476
18

52



Nano-MnxOy
5.8
476
11f

54




                  Ru4SiW10g
7.2
420–520
9–14

62 and 63




                  Ru4PW10g
7.2
420–520
14.6

63




                  Ru4SiW10g
7.2
550
60e

65




                  Co4PW9h
8
420–470
30

75




                  Co4O4(py)4(CH3COO)4
8
450
60

49





The quantum efficiencies reported therein highlight a prominent role of discrete and nano-sized molecular metal oxides, the so-called polyoxometalate (POM) catalysts, by far exceeding the performance of colloidal catalysts. Their disruptive advent in this chemistry provides a unique tool to address the behavior of bulk oxide catalytic surfaces. In fact, as it will be discussed in the next paragraphs, such multi-metal molecular complexes offer well-defined model systems to gain valuable insights into the fundamental mechanisms and intermediates involved in artificial photosynthetic schemes while offering a molecular base to shape interfacial connections with suitable photoreaction centers/sensitizers and nanostructured materials.
Oxygenic polyoxometalates: the totally inorganic molecular perspective
The first paper on water oxidation catalysis by transition metal substituted polyoxometalates was reported in 2004,59 when Shannon et al. observed electrochemical oxygen generation from a 2 μM aqueous solution of Na14[RuIII2Zn2(H2O)2(ZnW9O34)2], using pulsed voltammetry. The experiments performed in phosphate buffer at pH = 8.0, showed a catalytic current due to oxygen generation at low potentials, approaching the thermodynamic value for water oxidation (E = 0.756 V vs.NHE). Since the mono-substituted [RuIIIPW11O39]4− was not active under the same conditions, the proximity of the two ruthenium centres appeared to be a key factor to access oxygenic catalysis. Despite the interesting activity observed, some doubts still remain concerning the precise structure of [RuIII2Zn2(H2O)2(ZnW9O34)2]14−, and of the molecular active site, as the Ru occupancy in the belt of the polyanion is ill defined, indicating some compositional variation of the clusters, hampering both mechanistic studies and optimization. This pioneering study has opened up a new avenue for the design of molecular water oxidation catalysts in close connection with the natural structure, while bridging the gap with bulk metal-oxide surfaces, and real-world applications.
A tetra-ruthenate core stabilized by POM ligands: {RuIV4(μ-OH)2(μ-O)4(H2O)4[γ-SiW10O36]}10−
In 2008, the tetraruthenium polyoxometalate {RuIV4(μ-OH)2(μ-O)4(H2O)4[γ-SiW10O36]}10− (Ru44SiW1010) was isolated and recognized as a highly efficient water oxidation catalyst.60,61 This species is easily obtained in aqueous solution, with gram scale 80% yield, by metalation of the lacunary polyoxometalate K8[γ-SiW10O36] with K4[Ru2OCl10].60 The X-ray structure of Ru44SiW1010, isolated as the Cs+ salt, shows an adamantane like tetraruthenium-oxo core, coordinated by two staggered [γ-SiW10O36]8− ligands (Fig. 6).
 Fig. 6  Structure of {Ru4(μ-OH)2(μ-O)4(H2O)4[γ-SiW10O36]}10−, where the adamantane-like Ru4O6 tetraruthenium-oxo core is highlighted in ball and stick form (Ru = blue atoms, O = red atoms). 
The encapsulated ruthenium-oxo moiety displays a striking analogy with the tetramanganese active site of Photosystem II. In both cases four redox-active transition metals are connected through μ-oxo or μ-hydroxo bridges; moreover, each of these metal centres coordinate one water molecule as the terminal ligand, with this latter feature being fundamental to drive the reactivity. Interestingly, the metal–oxygen connectivity displays similar bond lengths in the natural CaMn4O5 OEC (1.8–2.5 Å) as well as in the artificial Ru44SiW1010 analog (1.85–2.00 Å), with the apical water molecules found respectively at 2.1–2.2 Å and at 2.09 Å.
The performance of Ru44SiW1010 as a water oxidation catalyst was initially studied in the presence of bulk oxidants and under dark conditions with excess of Ce(IV) or isolated Ru(bpy)33+. In the presence of excess of Ce(IV) and acidic pH conditions, oxygen evolution occurs with up to 500 catalytic cycles and an initial turnover frequency of 0.125 s−1. Recharging the system with a second and a third Ce(IV) aliquot induces an equivalent oxygen production, due to the remarkable stability of the inorganic scaffold.60 Vis-à-vis the wide range of pH stability and solubility in water media, oxygenic catalysis can be also obtained at more favorable pH windows, around pH = 7, by employing Ru(bpy)33+ as the sacrificial oxidant. Under such conditions, up to 18 turnovers are obtained in 30–40 seconds, corresponding to a turnover frequency of 0.45–0.60 s−1.61 The extreme versatility of the molecular catalyst is also apparent from its upgrade to light-driven catalysis, readily achieved by using the Ru(bpy)32+/S2O82− combined protocol (see Table 1). In this system (λmax = 454 nm, ε = 14000 M−1 cm−1, pH = 7) oxygen evolution by Ru44SiW1010 reaches up to 350 turnovers and an initial turnover frequency of 8 × 10−2 s−1.62 This result was found to correspond to an overall quantum efficiency of 9%. Under analogous conditions the isostructural catalyst {RuIV4(μ-OH)(μ-O)5(H2O)4[γ-PW10O36]}9−, where phosphorus replaces silicon as the central atom of the POM ligands, displays a similar initial efficiency, but an overall halved catalytic performance in terms of the resulting turnover number.63 A breakthrough observation concerns the very fast photo-induced ET occurring from the catalyst resting state to photo-generated Ru(III) species, occurring both under homogeneous conditions by quenching with persulfate as a terminal acceptor, or by charge injection into a sensitized nano-crystalline TiO2 photoanode.64 The kinetics determined by nanosecond laser flash photolysis reveal a bimolecular rate constant k = 2.1 × 109 M−1 s−1 for the homogeneous process, i.e. within one order of magnitude of diffusion-controlled rate, and most interestingly, a sub-nanoseconds hole scavenging on the electrode surface. These results hold great promise for the artificial photosynthesis assembly. As a matter of fact, the state of the art colloidal WOC, i.e.malonate-stabilized IrO2 nanoparticles, effects hole scavenging on the millisecond timescale, which thus means this system is orders of magnitude slower than the POM-based molecular catalyst Ru44SiW1010.29 Slow ET from the catalytic manifold turns out to leverage unproductive recombination, thus proving to be the main limiting factor towards the function of an efficient cell for the photocatalytic splitting of water. The ET rate fostered by the oxygenic POM sets a true record and approaches the natural standard, and this is likely related to a favorable interplay of properties/effects: (i) the high negative charge of the POM surface facilitates the intimate contact with sensitizers bearing opposite charges, as in the case of Ru(bpy)32/3+ and (ii) the low reorganizational energy brought about by the rigid POM scaffold embedding the redox active Ru4 core. Based on these arguments, a remarkable improvement of the photocatalytic performance has been achieved in combination with the tetranuclear sensitizer [Ru{(μ-dpp)Ru(bpy)2}3]8+. With respect to the parent Ru(bpy)32+, the multi-centered antenna-type derivative displays: (i) enhanced absorption properties (λmax = 550 nm) and large overlap with solar irradiation; (ii) enhanced thermodynamic driving force, as the P+/P couple potential is +1.70 V vs.NHE; and (iii) higher positive charge to direct the electrostatic assembly with the polyanionic catalyst. Indeed, the interplay of 4 × 4 ruthenium centers both in the catalysts and sensitizer fosters photocatalytic water oxidation at λ = 550 nm with >90% persulfate conversion, 80 turnovers, an initial turnover frequency of 8 × 10−3 s−1, and the outstanding quantum efficiency of 60% (see Table 1).65 Fast electron transfer promoted by the electrostatic intermolecular attraction is herein pivotal to shield the photosensitizer against decomposition pathways, which translates into high performance and well-behaved kinetics within the explored time-interval. Under the same experimental conditions, IrO2 colloids fall far behind and cannot match the behaviour of the POM-based molecular WOC.65
The precise mapping of competent intermediates and relevant steps composing the mechanism of water oxidation by Ru44SiW1010 is still under discussion.66–68 A common view springing from diverse studies is the occurrence of multiple and consecutive one-electron oxidation steps, ultimately generating a high valent ruthenium species enabling water oxidation and oxygen evolution, while cycling back with an overall four electron process. Oxygenic catalase pathways, involving free peroxo intermediates, were found to occur at a slower rate.69
A further point of interest is related to proton exchange equilibria which are known to play an important role in the aqueous chemistry of Ru44SiW1010. This aspect again merges with the natural OEC mechanism. The dependence of Ru44SiW1010redox potentials on the solution pH (pH = 0.6–2.0), together with resonance Raman studies and DFT computations, provides converging evidence of the contemporary exchange of one proton per redox event.67 In particular the spectral analysis of the Ru44SiW1010 manifold, upon stoichiometric addition of Ce(IV), shows the formation of new Raman bands, found in the 450–550 cm−1 spectral region and attributed to RuV–OH stretchings, generated upon oxidation of the pristine RuIV–OH2 functions of the catalytic core.66Cyclic voltammetry registered at neutral pH is less informative as the anodic waves are not resolved and overlap in a broad feature. This indicates a major impact of proton exchange on the catalyst resting state and redox properties at neutral pH, and hampers the monitoring of the catalytic cycle under photoirradiation, generally performed at pH = 7. On the other hand, the possible participation of the POM scaffold in proton equilibria and translocation is yet another similarity to the PSII-OEC, and with its nanostructured environment, where properly arranged H-bonding networks ease the requested proton transfer events.
A final remark is that, just recently, water oxidation catalysis has also been reported for mono-substituted ruthenium polyoxometalates [RuIII(H2O)α-XW11O39]5− (X = Si, Ge) under dark conditions with Ce(IV) as the sacrificial oxidant.70 The turnover efficiency is almost negligible when compared to the tetra-nuclear catalyst, as only up to 5 turnovers are obtained over 50 minutes, when X = Ge. This observation sheds further light on the synergistic effect of a tetranuclear metallic core for multi-redox catalysis. Moreover, it links this inorganic class of molecular catalysts to classical coordination compounds, as the mono-substituted POMs may follow similar avenues previously ascertained for mononuclear ruthenium complexes bearing organic ligands.71,72
It should be also mentioned that a single site Ir(III) polyoxotungstate [(IrCl4)KP2W20O72]14− has been reported to catalyze water oxidation, with dark Ru(bpy)33+ as the oxidant, however undergoing major decomposition, and the resulting catalysis does not differentiate from the control reaction with the IrIIICl3 precursor.73
Earth abundant oxygenic POMs: the cobalt alternative
Availability and sustainable cost of the starting materials are priority issues for the follow-up to operative device and large-scale applications. Ruthenium is a quite rare element on the earth (1.0 × 10−3 ppm), and its replacement with earth abundant first row transition metals is highly desirable. In this perspective, the catalytic activity of cobalt (abundance on earth 25–30 ppm) is known since the early 80s (see above).34 One step forward in this quest has been recently claimed, based on the WOC performance of the tetracobalt substituted polyoxometalate [Co4(H2O)2(α-PW9O34)2]10− hereafter Co44PW99 (Fig. 7).74 A Co4O6 core is the active fragment of this molecule, again involving four redox centres connected through μ-oxo bridges as in the OEC of Photosystem II. Water oxidation catalysis by Co44PW99 was initially studied in phosphate buffer (pH = 7.5–8.0), Ru(bpy)33+ as the oxidant, both under dark and illumination conditions.74,75 Indeed, Co44PW99 shows a reactivity that is slightly inferior to Co(NO3)2 (19.5 and 23.4 turnovers per cobalt atom, respectively) but the critical point in this chemistry is dilution, so that at catalyst concentrations of 0.12 μM up to 1000 turnovers were detected in under 3 minutes, corresponding to the outstanding turnover frequency of ca. 5 s−1,74 whereas an initial quantum yield of 30%, up to 220 turnovers, results when using the light based Ru(bpy)32+/S2O82− asset in borate buffer at pH = 8 (Table 1).75
 Fig. 7  Structure of [Co4(H2O)2(α-PW9O34)2]10−, with the Co4O6 core highlighted in the ball and stick form (Co = green atoms, O = red atoms). 
However, electrochemical conditions have been found unsafe for the preservation of the expected molecular structure while leading to deposition on the glassy carbon working electrode of an amorphous film, made by a complex mixture of cobalt oxides/hydroxides, resembling Nocera's catalytic system described in the previous section.76
The design of photosynthetic electrodes, replicating the molecular efficiency by on-surface well defined and positioned light-activated multi-redox sites, is one major frontier of solar fuel research. This objective is instrumental for the follow-up of the homogeneous screening, finalized at optimization of the photosynthetic molecular setup, while ultimately enabling the fabrication of molecular-based photoelectrochemical devices. One fundamental aspect is the design of the electrodic interface for water splitting, to promote electron transfer, while providing high surface area, wettability, proton translocation and robustness. The next section will highlight the boosting effect of modified carbon nanotubes (CNTs) used as nanostructured scaffolds to anchor the oxygenic tetraruthenate POM complex and to shape its chemical environment on the surface of ITO anodes for electrocatalytic water oxidation.
Nano-structured oxygen evolving anodes integrating CNTs and oxygenic POMs
Functional electrodes built from molecular components as a single unit or assembled architectures must address the one key challenge of the metal–molecule junction. Important parameters like distribution/geometry, distance, morphology, and contact come into play to dictate and direct electron transfer energy and kinetics. This is also the key to performance, especially when dealing with multi-redox events and electrocatalyzed bond-cleavage/forming processes.
The unique properties of Ru44SiW1010 as a water oxidation catalyst displaying a high negative charge make it extremely attractive vis-à-vis straightforward heterogenization procedures, based on electrostatic interaction with complementary charged materials. Our approach has thus been focused on the tailored modification of carbon nanostructures including single and multi-walled nanotubes (SWNTs and MWNTs) with covalent and non-covalent strategies, finalized to the nano-surface decoration with alkyl ammonium residues (Fig. 8a–c).77,78 The resulting materials can be conveniently dispersed in water, and provide suitable nano-scaffolds to: (i) support Ru44SiW1010 as a function of the ammonium group distribution on the carbon surface, (ii) control the morphology and surface area of the resulting nano-hybrid material, and (iii) funnel the direction of sequential electron-transfer to the electrode. In particular modified multi-walled carbon nanotubes, exhibiting a surface array of cationic polyamidoamine dendrimeric pendants,79 foster an even distribution of POM clusters with loading up to 60%, as shown by converging spectroscopic and microscopy evidence (Fig. 8d).77
 Fig. 8  
Carbon nanotubes functionalized with: (a) cationic polyamidoamine dendrimeric pendants, (b) 2-aminoethyltrimethylammonium, and (c) trimethylammonium acetyl pyrene groups, through π–π interactions. (d) Scanning Transmission Electron Microscopy of an MWNT decorated with polyamidoamine dendrimeric pendants supported with Ru44SiW1010; bright spots are indicative of the presence of the heavy metals (Ru, W) from the polyoxometalate framework. 
Alternative strategies have been considered to access a cost-effective CNT modification. These include the covalent anchoring of 2-aminoethyltrimethylammonium branches on the tubes (Fig. 8b), and non-covalent association of trimethylammonium acetyl pyrene groups through π–π interactions (Fig. 8c). Specifically, microwave irradiation protocols have been found to enhance the functionalization degree thus resulting in up to 20% loading of Ru44SiW1010.78
In all cases the stability of the catalyst structure was ascertained by r-Raman, XPS, small angle X-ray scattering and High Resolution Transmission Electron Microscopy. This feature is pivotal to access single site catalysis, and for the molecular design of functional electrodes.
Indeed, the resulting electrocatalytic activity on ITO substrates is exceptional, yielding oxygen evolution with remarkable TOF of up to 306 h−1 at relatively low overpotentials of η = 0.35–0.60 V, reaching the solution performance. This sets a record value compared to previously reported figures for Co- or Mn-based systems, with TOFs found in the range 0.7–20 h−1 at η = 0.40 V.36,57
Further studies are now directed to explore a plethora of nanostructured scaffolds to consolidate and acquire new knowledge, on the morphology/structure impact of the hybrid material on the electrocatalysis performance.
Finally, as an alternative to ITO surfaces, carbon based electrodes featuring an increased surface area, brought up to a comparable efficiency with a lower catalyst loading, represent a favorable opportunity for cost-efficiency optimization.
Conclusions
Research in the field of artificial photosynthesis for the conversion of water to fuel has come to the awakening point that a major effort has to be dedicated to the design of efficient catalytic cycles operating with energy and rates commensurate with the solar flux at ground level. Multi-redox events are exceptionally mastered by small metal-oxo clusters stabilized in a molecular environment. This will be guaranteed by the engineering of novel ligand scaffolds with superior resistance under oxidative turnover, and carved within the class of totally inorganic polyoxometalate complexes.
Furthermore the novel frontier of catalysis springs from a molecular core but looks at the nanoscopic scale. Indeed, the mastering of the electron transfer distance, junctions and potential gradients at the molecular level, with the aid of a nanostructured environment is a rewarding strategy. Dimensionality plays a critical role in determining the properties of functional materials, which turns out to be considerably altered when exhibited in a nanosized environment, and strongly depend on the different ways that atom/electrons interact in three- (3D), two- (2D), or one-dimensional (1D) structures. This confirms the opportunity to design a catalytic system taking advantage of the introduction of particle size and morphology as pivotal parameters. Further efforts will thus be dedicated to the next frontier of photo-induced electron transfer within self-assembled nano-architectures activating inorganic catalysts for photosynthetic reactions.
Acknowledgements
We thank the teams of Prof. F. Scandola (University of Ferrara), Prof. S. Campagna (University of Messina) and Prof. F. Paolucci (University of Bologna) for their invaluable and constructive collaboration. Financial support from the University of Padova (Progetto di Ateneo CPDA104105/10 and Progetto Strategico 2008 HELIOS prot. STPD08RCX), MIUR (PRIN no. 20085M27SS, FIRB “Nanosolar” RBAP11C58Y) and Fondazione Cariparo (Nano-Mode, Progetti di Eccellenza 2010) is gratefully acknowledged.
References

  (a) K. N. Ferreira, T. M. Iverson, K. Maghlaoui, J. Barber and S. Iwata, Science, 2004, 303, 1831–1838 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) B. Loll, J. Kern, W. Saenger, A. Zouni and J. Biesiadka, Nature, 2005, 438, 1040–1044 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yano, J. Kern, K. Sauer, M. J. Latimer, Y. Pushkar, J. Biesiadka, B. Loll, W. Saenger, J. Messinger, A. Zouni and V. K. Yachandra, Science, 2006, 314, 821–825 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) H.-A. Chu, W. Hillier, N. A. Law and G. T. Babcock, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 2001, 1503, 69–82 CrossRef CAS T. G. Carrell, A. M. Tyryshkin and G. C. Dismukes, J. Biol. Inorg. Chem., 2002, 7, 2–22 CrossRef CAS ; J. M. Peloquin and R. D. Britt, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 2001, 1503, 96–111 Search PubMed ; L. V. Kulik, B. Epel, W. Lubitz and J. Messinger, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 2392–2393 CrossRef .
Y. Umena, K. Kawakami, J.-R. Shen and N. Kamiya, Nature, 2011, 473, 55–60 CrossRef CAS .
M. Haumann, P. Liebisch, C. Müller, M. Barra, M. Grabolle and H. Dau, Science, 2005, 310, 1019–1021 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. McEvoy and G. W. Brudvig, Chem. Rev., 2006, 106, 4455–4483 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) 
The Role of Manganese in Photosystem II, ed. G. Brudvig, Coord. Chem. Rev.,  2008, vol. 252, pp. 231–468 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) 
Artificial Photosynthesis and Solar Fuels, ed. L. Hammarstrom and S. Hammes-Schiffer, Acc. Chem. Res.,  2009, vol. 42, pp. 1859–2029 Search PubMed ; 
  (c) S. Yamanaka, H. Isobe, K. Kanda, T. Saito, Y. Umena, K. Kawakami, J.-R. Shen, N. Kamiya, M. Okumura, H. Nakamura and K. Yamaguchi, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2011, 511, 138–145 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) G. Renger and T. Renger, Photosynth. Res., 2008, 98, 53–80 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) 
Recent Progress in the Studies of Structure and Function of Photosystem II, ed. S. I. Allakhverdiev, J. Photochem. Photobiol. B: Biology,  2011, vol. 104, pp. 1–385 Search PubMed .
B. Kok, B. Forbush and M. McGloin, Photochem. Photobiol., 1970, 11, 457–475 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kiwi and M. Grätzel, Chimia, 1979, 33, 289–291 CAS .
J. Kiwi and M. Grätzel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1979, 18, 624–626 CrossRef .
K. Kalayanasundaram and M. Grätzel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1979, 18, 701–702 CrossRef .
J. Kiwi, E. Borgarello, E. Pellizzetti, M. Visca and M. Grätzel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1980, 19, 646–648 CrossRef .
A. Harriman, M.-C. Richoux, P. A. Christensen, S. Mosseri and P. Neta, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 1, 1987, 83, 3001–3014 RSC .
A. Harriman, I. J. Pickering, J. M. Thomas and P. A. Christensen, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 1, 1988, 84, 2795–2806 RSC .
A. Mills, Chem. Soc. Rev., 1989, 18, 285–316 RSC .
A. Mills, P. A. Duckmanton and J. Reglinski, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 2397–2398 RSC .
F. Puntoriero, A. Sartorel, M. Orlandi, G. La Ganga, S. Serroni, M. Bonchio, F. Scandola and S. Campagna, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2011, 255, 2594–2601 CrossRef CAS .
K. Okeyoshi and R. Yoshida, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 708–714 CrossRef CAS .
K. C. Pillai, A. S. Kumar and J.-M. Zen, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2000, 160, 277–285 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kiwi and M. Grätzel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1978, 17, 860–861 CrossRef .
M. Yagi, E. Tomita, S. Salita, T. Kuwabara and K. Nagai, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 21489–21491 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nakagawa, N. S. Bjorge and R. W. Murray, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 15578–15579 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nakagawa, C. A. Beasley and R. W. Murray, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 12958–12961 CAS .
M. Hara, C. C. Waraksa, J. T. Lean, B. A. Lewis and T. E. Mallouk, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2000, 104, 5275–5280 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hara, J. T. Lean and T. E. Mallouk, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 4668–4675 CrossRef CAS .
N. D. Morris, M. Suzuki and T. E. Mallouk, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2004, 108, 9115–9119 CrossRef CAS .
P. G. Hoertz, Y. I. Kim, W. J. Youngblood and T. E. Mallouk, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2007, 111, 6845–6856 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Youngblood, S.-H. A. Lee, Y. Kobayashi, E. A. Hernandez-Pagan, P. G. Hoertz, T. A. Moore, A. L. Moore, D. Gust and T. E. Mallouk, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 926–927 CrossRef CAS .
G. La Ganga, F. Nastasi, S. Campagna and F. Puntoriero, Dalton Trans., 2009, 9997–9999 RSC .
H. Han and H. Frei, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 16156–16159 CAS .
S. D. Tilley, M. Cornuz, K. Sivula and M. Grätzel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 6405–6408 CrossRef CAS .
V. Artero, M. Chavarot-Kerlidou and M. Fontecave, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 7238–7266 CrossRef CAS .
V. Y. Shafirovich, N. K. Khannanov and V. V. Strelets, Nouv. J. Chim., 1980, 4, 81–84 CAS .
B. S. Brunschwig, M. H. Chou, C. Creutz, P. Ghosh and N. Sutin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1983, 105, 4832–4833 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. Kanan and D. G. Nocera, Science, 2008, 321, 1072–1075 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. Kanan, Y. Surendranath and D. G. Nocera, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 109–114 RSC .
Y. Surendranath, M. Dincă and D. G. Nocera, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 2615–2620 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Lutterman, Y. Surendranath and D. G. Nocera, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 3838–3839 CrossRef CAS .
M. Risch, V. Khare, I. Zaharieva, L. Gerencser, P. Chernev and H. Dau, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6936–6937 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. Kanan, J. Yano, Y. Surendranath, M. Dincă, V. K. Yachandra and D. G. Nocera, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 13692–13701 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. McAlpin, Y. Surendranath, M. Dincă, T. A. Stich, S. A. Stoian, W. H. Casey, D. G. Nocera and R. D. Britt, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 6882–6883 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Surendranath, M. W. Kanan and D. G. Nocera, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 16501–16509 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kay, I. Cesar and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 15714–15721 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Zhong, J. Sun, H. Inumaru and D. R. Gamelin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6086–6087 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Zong and D. R. Gamelin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 4202–4207 CrossRef .
E. M. P. Steinmiller and K.-S. Choi, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106, 20633–20636 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Symes, Y. Surendranath, D. A. Lutterman and D. G. Nocera, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 5174–5177 CrossRef CAS .
G. La Ganga, F. Puntoriero, S. Campagna, I. Bazzan, S. Berardi, M. Bonchio, A. Sartorel, M. Natali and F. Scandola, Faraday Discuss., 2012 Search PubMed  , Advance Article.
N. S. McCool, D. M. Robinson, J. E. Sheats and G. C. Dismukes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 11446–11449 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. McAlpin, T. A. Stich, C. A. Ohlin, Y. Surendranath, D. G. Nocera, W. H. Casey and R. D. Britt, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 15444–15452 CrossRef CAS .
F. Jiao and H. Frei, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 1841–1844 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Okuno, O. Yonemitsu and Y. Chiba, Chem. Lett., 1983, 815–818 CrossRef CAS .
F. Jiao and H. Frei, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 2920–2922 RSC .
V. B. R. Boppanam and F. Jiao, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 8973–8975 RSC .
M. M. Najafpour, T. Ehrenberg, M. Wiechen and P. Kurz, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 2233–2237 CrossRef CAS .
R. Brimblecome, G. F. Swiegers, G. C. Dismukes and L. Spiccia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 7335–7338 CrossRef .
R. K. Hocking, R. Brimblecombe, L.-Y. Chang, A. Singh, M. H. Cheah, C. Glover, W. H. Casey and L. Spiccia, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 461–466 CAS .
A. R. Howells, A. Sankarraj and C. Shannon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 12258–12259 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sartorel, M. Carraro, G. Scorrano, R. De Zorzi, S. Geremia, N. D. McDaniel, S. Bernhard and M. Bonchio, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5006–5007 CrossRef CAS .
Y. V. Geletii, B. Botar, P. Kögerler, D. A. Hillesheim, D. G. Musaev and C. L. Hill, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 3896–3899 CrossRef CAS .
Y. V. Geletii, Z. Huang, Y. Hou, D. G. Musaev, T. Lian and C. L. Hill, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 7522–7523 CrossRef CAS .
C. Besson, Z. Huang, Y. V. Geletii, S. Lense, K. I. Hardcastle, D. G. Musaev, T. Lian, A. Proust and C. L. Hill, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 2784–2786 RSC .
M. Orlandi, R. Argazzi, A. Sartorel, M. Carraro, G. Scorrano, M. Bonchio and F. Scandola, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 3152–3154 RSC .
F. Puntoriero, G. La Ganga, A. Sartorel, M. Carraro, G. Scorrano, M. Bonchio and S. Campagna, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 4725–4727 RSC .
A. Sartorel, P. Mirò, E. Salvadori, S. Romain, M. Carraro, G. Scorrano, M. Di Valentin, A. Llobet, C. Bo and M. Bonchio, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 16051–16053 CrossRef CAS .
Y. V. Geletii, C. Besson, Y. Hou, Q. Yin, D. G. Musaev, D. Quiñonero, R. Cao, K. I. Hardcastle, A. Proust, P. Kögerler and C. L. Hill, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 17360–17370 CrossRef CAS .
D. Quiñonero, A. L. Kaledin, A. E. Kuznetsov, Y. V. Geletii, C. Besson, C. L. Hill and D. G. Musaev, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2010, 114, 535–542 CrossRef .
A. Sartorel, M. Truccolo, S. Berardi, M. Gardan, M. Carraro, F. M. Toma, G. Scorrano, M. Prato and M. Bonchio, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 1716–1718 RSC .
M. Muratami, D. Hong, T. Suenobu, S. Yamaguchi, T. Ogura and S. Fukuzumi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 11605–11613 CrossRef .
J. J. Concepcion, J. W. Jurss, J. L. Templeton and T. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 16462–16463 CrossRef CAS .
S. Romain, L. Vigara and A. Llobet, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1944–1953 CrossRef CAS .
R. Cao, H. Ma, Y. V. Geletii, K. I. Hardcastle and C. L. Hill, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 5596–5598 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Yin, J. M. Tan, C. Besson, Y. V. Geletii, D. G. Musaev, A. E. Kuznetsov, Z. Luo, K. I. Hardcastle and C. L. Hill, Science, 2010, 328, 342–345 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Huang, Z. Luo, Y. V. Geletii, J. W. Vickers, Q. Yin, D. Wu, Y. Hou, Y. Ding, J. Song, D. G. Musaev, C. L. Hill and T. Lian, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 2068–2071 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Stracke and R. G. Finke, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 14872–14875 CAS .
F. M. Toma, A. Sartorel, M. Iurlo, M. Carraro, P. Parisse, C. Maccato, S. Rapino, B. R. Gonzalez, H. Amenitsch, T. Da Ros, L. Casalis, A. Goldoni, M. Marcaccio, G. Scorrano, G. Scoles, F. Paolucci, M. Prato and M. Bonchio, Nat. Chem., 2010, 2, 826–831 CrossRef CAS .
F. M. Toma, A. Sartorel, M. Iurlo, M. Carraro, S. Rapino, L. Hoober-Burkhardt, T. Da Ros, M. Marcaccio, G. Scorrano, F. Paolucci, M. Bonchio and M. Prato, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 1447–1451 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Herrero, F. M. Toma, K. T. Al-Jamal, K. Kostarelos, A. Bianco, T. Da Ros, F. Bano, L. Casalis, G. Scoles and M. Prato, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 9843–9848 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

Broader context

Water is a green carrier of electrons stored in very stable chemical bonds, readily available in many forms and distributed in vast geographic areas. Therefore, water oxidation, meaning the stepwise abstraction of four electrons from its O–H bonds, releases oxygen as a direct product, but in doing this, provides the necessary reduction equivalents to address the dream goals of energy research i.e. H2 generation and CO2 abatement. In this scenario, the oxidation of water performed with low activation energy, under multi-turnover catalytic conditions, is pivotal for regenerative atmosphere, green-house gas remediation, and carbon-neutral renewable fuelsvia sustainable hydrogen economy and/or bio-inspired CO2 transformation. A major research effort is therefore dedicated to address the artificial transposition of what is conceived as the bottleneck of Natural Photosynthesis. Success in this task primarily depends on the interplay of light-activated multi-electron oxidation and reduction cycles and on the invention of stable and robust water oxidation catalysts, liberating oxygen with fast rate, high quantum yield, and long-term activity. A promising perspective is herein envisaged in the molecular design of functional metal-oxide cores and hybrid nano-materials.


 	Fig. 1  (a) Structure of the PSII-OEC cluster from T. vulcanus at a resolution of 1.9 Å (from crystallographic data of ref. 4). (b) S0–S4catalytic cycle originating upon sequential photo-oxidation of the PSII-OEC and proposed valence state of the Mn centers.6	 

 	Fig. 2  Photo-activated oxygenic-gel entrapping nano-RuO2 particles and a covalently grafted ruthenium sensitizer (adapted from ref. 19 with authorization from John Wiley and Sons).	 

 	Fig. 3  
Dye-sensitized photoelectrochemical cell finalized to water splitting proposed by Mallouk et al. (reproduced from ref. 29 with authorization from ACS).	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of a cobalt phosphate (Co–Pi) film for electrocatalytic water oxidation (reproduced from ref. 37 by permission of the Royal Society of Chemistry); (b) edge-sharing molecular cobaltate cluster as the proposed model for the surface catalyst (reproduced from ref. 41 with authorization from ACS); and (c) catalytic scheme involving a CoII/III/IV manifold (reproduced from ref. 43 with authorization from ACS).	 

 	Fig. 5  Modular assembly of key components and processes for artificial photosynthesis.	 

 	Scheme 1  Light driven water oxidation by a water oxidation catalyst (WOC), in the presence of a photosensitizer (P) and a sacrificial electron acceptor (SA).	 


Nano-IrO2d	7.2	550	3–11e	
30 and 65

Nano-Co3O4	5.8	476	18	
52

Nano-MnxOy	5.8	476	11f	
54


                  Ru4SiW10g	7.2	420–520	9–14	
62 and 63


                  Ru4PW10g	7.2	420–520	14.6	
63


                  Ru4SiW10g	7.2	550	60e	
65


                  Co4PW9h	8	420–470	30	
75


                  Co4O4(py)4(CH3COO)4	8	450	60	
49


 	Fig. 6  Structure of {Ru4(μ-OH)2(μ-O)4(H2O)4[γ-SiW10O36]}10−, where the adamantane-like Ru4O6 tetraruthenium-oxo core is highlighted in ball and stick form (Ru = blue atoms, O = red atoms).	 

 	Fig. 7  Structure of [Co4(H2O)2(α-PW9O34)2]10−, with the Co4O6 core highlighted in the ball and stick form (Co = green atoms, O = red atoms).	 

 	Fig. 8  
Carbon nanotubes functionalized with: (a) cationic polyamidoamine dendrimeric pendants, (b) 2-aminoethyltrimethylammonium, and (c) trimethylammonium acetyl pyrene groups, through π–π interactions. (d) Scanning Transmission Electron Microscopy of an MWNT decorated with polyamidoamine dendrimeric pendants supported with Ru44SiW1010; bright spots are indicative of the presence of the heavy metals (Ru, W) from the polyoxometalate framework.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
