Graphene -based composites  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1CS15078B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1CS15078B
(Critical Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 666-686Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsGraphene-based composites

        
          
            Xiao 
            Huang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xiaoying 
            Qi
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Freddy 
            Boey
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Hua 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      *ab
aSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, 50 Nanyang Avenue, Singapore 639798, Singapore. E-mail: hzhang@ntu.edu.sg; hzhang166@yahoo.com;  Web: http://www.ntu.edu.sg/home/hzhang/
bCentre for Biomimetic Sensor Science, Nanyang Technological University, 50 Nanyang Drive, Singapore 637553
Received 
      28th March 2011
    First published on 28th July 2011AbstractGraphene has attracted tremendous research interest in recent years, owing to its exceptional properties. The scaled-up and reliable production of graphene derivatives, such as graphene oxide (GO) and reduced graphene oxide (rGO), offers a wide range of possibilities to synthesize graphene-based functional materials for various applications. This critical review presents and discusses the current development of graphene-based composites. After introduction of the synthesis methods for graphene and its derivatives as well as their properties, we focus on the description of various methods to synthesize graphene-based composites, especially those with functional polymers and inorganic nanostructures. Particular emphasis is placed on strategies for the optimization of composite properties. Lastly, the advantages of graphene-based composites in applications such as the Li-ion batteries, supercapacitors, fuel cells, photovoltaic devices, photocatalysis, as well as Raman enhancement are described (279 references).
Hua Zhang
Hua Zhang studied at Nanjing University (BS, MS), and completed his PhD at Peking University (with Zhongfan Liu) in 1998. After postdoctoral work at Katholieke Universiteit Leuven (with Frans De Schryver) and Northwestern University (with Chad Mirkin), and working at NanoInk Inc. (US) and the Institute of Bioengineering and Nanotechnology (Singapore), he joined Nanyang Technological University in July 2006. He was promoted to a tenured associate professor in March 2011. He is an Associate Editor of the International Journal of Nanoscience, on the Editorial Board of NANO, and on the Advisory Committee of IOP Asia-Pacific. His research interests focus on carbon materials (graphene and CNTs) and their applications; controlled synthesis, characterization and application of novel nanomaterials; and surface fabrication from the micro- to nanometre scale, etc. He has published 25 patent applications, 3 book chapters, more than 130 papers with over 2400 citations and an H-index of 26. He has been invited to give more than 70 Keynote Lectures and Invited Talks in international conferences and universities, and serve as Session Chair. He has organized several international conferences and served as Symposium Chair.
1. Introduction
The direct observation and characterization of a mechanically exfoliated graphene monolayer by Novoselov et al. in 20041 has sparked the exponential growth of graphene research in both the scientific and engineering communities. Graphene, a single-layer carbon sheet with a hexagonal packed lattice structure, has shown many unique properties, such as the quantum hall effect (QHE), high carrier mobility at room temperature (∼10000 cm2 V−1 s−1),1 large theoretical specific surface area (2630 m2 g−1),2 good optical transparency (∼97.7%),3 high Young's modulus (∼1 TPa)4 and excellent thermal conductivity (3000–5000 W m−1 K−1).5 To further exploit these properties in various kinds of applications, versatile and reliable synthetic routes have been developed to prepare graphene and its derivatives, ranging from the bottom-up epitaxial growth6–9 to the top-down exfoliation of graphite by means of oxidation, intercalation, and/or sonication.10–13 In particular, the low-cost and mass production of chemically exfoliated graphene oxide (GO)14–29 and reduced graphene oxide (rGO) sheets has been realized,14–23,30–34 which possess many reactive oxygen-containing groups for further functionalization and tuning properties of GO or rGO sheets. With these added advantages, it is desirable to harness the useful properties of graphene and its derivatives in composites, through the incorporation with various kinds of functional materials. To date, graphene-based composites have been successfully made with inorganic nanostructures,18–20,35–38 organic crystals,39–40 polymers,14,17,41,42 metal–organic frameworks (MOFs),43–45 biomaterials,46–48 and carbon nanotubes (CNTs),49–53 and are intensively explored in applications such as batteries,37,54–56 supercapacitors,36,57–59 fuel cells,60–63 photovoltaic devices,19,33,64,65 photocatalysis,66–69 sensing platforms,46,47 Raman enhancement70–72 and so on. In this critical review, after introducing the properties and synthetic methods of graphene and its derivatives, graphene-based composites are discussed, with particular emphasis placed on their fabrication/synthesis methods, properties and applications.
2. Properties of graphene
2.1 Electronic properties
One of the most important properties of graphene is that its charge carriers behave as massless relativistic particles, or the Dirac fermions.1 It has been demonstrated that graphene is a zero-gap 2D semimetal with a tiny overlap between valence and conductance bands, and charge carriers move with little scattering under ambient conditions.1 It also exhibits a strong ambipolar electric field effect with the concentration of charge carriers up to 1013 cm−2 and room-temperature mobilities of ∼10000 cm2 V−1 s−1, when the gate voltage is applied.1 Besides, the suspended graphene shows low-temperature mobility approaching 200000 cm2 V−1 s−1 for carrier densities below 5 × 109 cm−2, which is not observable in semiconductors or non-suspended graphene sheets.73 Additionally, an unusual half-integer quantum Hall effect (QHE) for both electron and hole carriers in graphene has been observed by adjusting the chemical potential with the use of the electric field effect.74,75 Such QHE can be observed at room temperature as well,76 and the fractional QHE was obtained when suspended graphene devices were probed, which allows for the isolation of the sample from substrate-induced perturbations.77
2.2 Optical properties
The measured white light absorbance of suspended single-layer graphene is 2.3% with a negligible reflectance (< 0.1%), and this absorbance increases linearly with the layer numbers from 1 to 5.3 The measured values and the observed linearity are in consistence with the theoretical calculation results obtained with a model of non-interacting massless Dirac fermions. It shows that the dynamic conductivity of graphene in the visible range, G, only depends on the universal constants, i.e. G ≈ πe2/2h, where c is the speed of light, h is Planck's constant.78 The transparency of graphene only depends on the fine-structure constant α = 2πe2/hc, which describes the coupling between the light and relativistic electrons. The absorbance of n-layer graphene can thus be simply expressed as nπα. However, deviation from this behavior is found with the incident photons with energy less than 0.5 eV (or wavelength larger than ∼2480 nm), which is attributed to the effects of finite-temperature, doping, and intra-band transitions.79
The ultrafast optical pump–probe spectroscopy has been applied to study the carrier dynamics and relative relaxation timescales of graphene layers grown on SiC.80 An initial fast relaxation transient (70–120 fs) followed by a slower relaxation process (0.4–1.7 ps) has been identified, which is associated to the carrier–carrier intra-band and carrier–phonon inter-band scattering process, respectively. With the help of infrared spectroscopy, it is found that the inter-band transitions and optical transitions of monolayer and double layer graphene are layer-dependent and can be modulated through the electrical gating, which holds promise for the infrared optics and optoelectronics.81
2.3 Thermal properties
The thermal conductivity of single-layer suspended graphene at room temperature has been measured as 3000–5000 W m−1 K−1 depending on the size of the measured graphene sheet.5 It is supported on amorphous silica, a case similar to the practical application, the measured thermal conductivity of graphene is ∼600 W m−1 K−1, about one order lower than that of the suspended graphene sheet.82 This reduction in thermal conductivity is attributed to the leaking of phonons across the graphene–silica interface and strong interface-scattering. Nevertheless, this value is still about 2 times and 50 times higher than copper and silicon, respectively, which are used in the electronics today.
2.4 Mechanical properties
The intrinsic mechanical properties of free-standing monolayer graphene membranes were measured based on the nanoindentation using atomic force microscopy (AFM).4 The breaking strength is 42 N m−1 and the Young's modulus is 1.0 TPa, suggesting the strongest material ever measured. Theoretical work has been carried out to investigate the mechanical properties of zigzag graphene and armchair graphene nanoribbons, suggesting that the critical mechanical loads for failure and buckling of armchair ribbons are smaller than those for zigzag ribbons.83 In addition, external mechanical loads can change the electronic properties of graphene, such as field emission performance.83,84 By employing a cantilever beam, single-layered graphene can be subjected to various degrees of axial compression.85 The uptake of stress and the compression buckling strains of different geometries have thus been measured. It is found that the mechanical response is related to the Raman shift of the G or 2D phonons of graphene.
The elastic deformation of functionalized graphene sheets (FGSs), or chemically reduced graphene oxide (rGO), has also been studied by AFM.86 After repeatedly folding and unfolding of the FGSs multiple times, the folding lines were found to appear at the same locations, which can be attributed to the pre-existing kinks or defect lines in the FGSs.
3. Synthetic methods
Till now, tremendous efforts have been made to develop synthetic methods for graphene and its derivatives, not only to achieve high yield of production, but also to realize the solution or thin film based process. These methods can be generally classified as the bottom-up and top-down approaches. Table 1 summarizes and compares the typical synthetic methods for graphene and its derivatives. The bottom-up approach involves the direct synthesis of graphene materials from the carbon sources, such as the chemical vapor deposition (CVD), which is a typical method used to grow large-area, single and few-layer graphene sheets on metal substrates, e.g. Ni, Ru, and Cu.6–9,49 Plasma enhanced CVD (PECVD) is able to grow single-layer graphene with high throughput at shorter reaction time and lower deposition temperature compared to the CVD process.87 Besides, graphitization of carbon-containing substrates, such as SiC, can give rise to single-layer and few-layer graphene films as well through the high temperature annealing.88,89 In addition to these methods based on the solid-phase deposition, graphene is also obtainable via the wet chemical reaction of ethanol and sodium followed by pyrolysis,90 or through the organic synthesis to give graphene-like polyaromatic hydrocarbons.91,92
Table 1 Comparison of various methods for preparation of graphene and its derivatives




Methods
Conditions
Yield and properties
Ref.





Bottom-up approaches



CVD
Carbon sources: CH4, H2
Sheet size of up to a few tens of micrometres.

6–8



Substrate: Ni, Ru, Cu


Temperature: 1000 °C


PECVD
Carbon source: CH4, H2
Large area of more than 1 cm of monolayer graphene

87



Substrate: Cu


Temperature: 650 °C


Graphitization
Substrate: 6H-SiC(0001)
Grain size: up to 50 μm long, 1 μm wide

89



Temperature: 1280 °C


Solvothermal
Reagents: Na and ethanol
Folded graphene structures

90



Temperature: 220 °C
Bulk conductivity: ∼0.05 S m−1


Organic synthesis
Thermal fusion of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons at 1100 °C
For a 30 nm thick film on quartz, conductivity: 20600 S m−1, sheet resistance: 1.6 kΩ m−2

91




Top-down approaches



Liquid exfoliation of graphite
Intercalate: NMP
Single-layer yield: 7–12 wt% after purification

11



Film conductivity: ∼6500 S m−1


Intercalate: SDBS
Film conductivity: ∼35 S m−1

13



Single-layer yield: ∼3% with a size of ∼1 μm


Intercalate: ternary potassium salt
Graphene ribbons with lengths of ∼40 μm.

12



Thermal exfoliation and liquid intercalation
Thermal exfoliation at 1000 °C
Single-layer yield: ∼90% after purification

98



Intercalates: oleum and TBA
Size: ∼250 nm


Resistance of single sheet with 100 nm in width: 10–20 kΩ


Electrochemical exfoliation
1-Octyl-3-methyl-imidazolium hexafluorophosphate as electrolyte; graphite rods as electrodes
Sheet size: 500 × 700 nm

99



Chemical reduction of GO
Reduction agent: hydrazine
Sheet resistance of graphene paper: 7200 S m−1

31



Deoxygenation agent: KOH or NaOH
Incomplete removal of oxygen-containing groups

109



Temperature: 50–90 °C


Reduction agent: bovine serum albumin
To be used as template for nanoparticle synthesis

111



Reduction agent: vitamin C
Film conductivity: up to 7700 S m−1

133



Temperature: 95 °C


Reduction via bacteria respiration
Film resistance decreased up to 104 after reduction

134



Reduction agent: hydriodic acid and acetic acid
Sheet resistance: pellets dried after solution reduction: 30400 S m−1

32



In solution at room temperature or in vapor at 40 °C
Thin film after vapor reduction: 7850 S m−1


Sonolytic reduction: ultrasonication at 211 kHz for 30 min
Formation of 1–4 layers of rGO

127



Microwave-assisted reduction in the presence of hydrazine
Formation of 1–8 layers of rGO with size up to a few micrometres

128



Thermal reduction of GO
220 °C in air for 24 h
Film sheet resistance: 8 kΩ sq−1

124



150 °C in DMF for 1 h
Film resistance: 6 kΩ

119



Photothermal reduction of GO
High pressure Hg lamp with H2 or N2 flow
Sheet size: ∼1 um

115



Single-sheet conductivity: 2000–20000 S m−1


Pulsed xenon flash
Able to prepare a GO/rGO patterned film with a photomask

126



Sheet resistance of rGO area: ∼9.5 kΩ sq−1




Different from the bottom-up approaches, the top-down approaches are advantageous in terms of high yield, solution-based processability, and ease of implementation, which have been demonstrated by means of intercalation, chemical functionalization, and/or sonication of bulk graphite. The first observation of exfoliated graphite dates back to 1840 by Schafhaeutl, when H2SO4 was used for the intercalation.93 Since then, a number of chemical species have been found to form intercalated compounds with graphite.94–97 Further attempts, combining the intercalation and sonication, have realized isolation and dispersion of graphene sheets by using intercalates such as N-methyl-pyrrolidone (NMP)11 and sodium dodecylbenzene sulfonate (SDBS)13 in non-aqueous and aqueous solutions, respectively. Re-intercalation of thermally exfoliated expandable graphite (EG) with oleum (fuming sulfuric acid with 20% free SO3) and tetrabutylammonium hydroxide (TBA) has also produced single-layer graphene sheets with a yield of ∼90% after purification.98 Even without sonication, ternary potassium salt-intercalated graphite readily gives isolated graphene sheets in NMP.12 Additionally, electrochemical exfoliation of graphite has also achieved graphene nanosheets in ionic liquids.99 Unfortunately, the aforementioned methods face drawbacks such as the low yield of single-layer production,13 expensive intercalates,11 and residual surfactant induced low conductivity. Therefore, an alternative approach, the reduction of highly oxidized graphene oxide (GO) sheets from the exfoliated graphite oxide has been developed,10 and mostly employed to prepare reduced GO (rGO), chemically converted graphene (CCG), or functionalized graphene sheets (FGS). The graphite oxide is obtained by the Hummers method via the reaction of graphite with a mixture of potassium permanganate (KMnO4) and concentrated sulfuric acid (H2SO4).14–23 The exfoliated GO sheets are thus highly oxidized and featured with the residual epoxides, hydroxides and carboxylic acid groups on their surfaces.100,101 So far, various types of reduction methods have been reported to obtain rGO sheets, such as the chemical reagent reduction,14–22,31,33,102–112 photochemical reduction,113–116 thermal reduction,117–124 photothermal reduction,125,126 sonolysis,127 microwave-assisted reduction128 and electrochemical reduction.129–132 Among these methods, the chemical reduction is the most versatile one with many reduction agents being used, such as hydrazine,14–22,31,33,102–108 strong alkaline media,109 vitamin C or ascorbic acid,110,133 bovine serum albumin (BSA),111 bacterial respiration,134 and hydriodic acid.32,135 To date, the rGO sheets reduced by hydriodic acid and acetic acid have shown the best electronic conductivity (up to 30000 S m−1).32 Due to the less toxicity of hydriodic acid, this method is expected to replace the hydrazine reduction for the mass production of rGO dispersions and fabrication of rGO thin films. Despite the fact that the conductivity of rGO is orders lower compared to the pristine graphene due to the presence of residual oxygenated groups and defects, the reactive surfaces of GO and rGO provide the tunability in electronic and optoelectronic properties via chemical reactions,118,136,137 and the feasibility for composite incorporation.138
4. Graphene–inorganic nanostructure composites
In the last few decades, huge efforts have been made to synthesize inorganic nanostructures with controlled shape, size, crystallinity and functionality. These materials are widely employed in applications like electronics, optics, electrochemical energy conversion and storage, solar energy harvesting, and so on. In order to further enhance their properties, a great number of inorganic nanostructures have been composited with graphene and its derivatives, which include metals like Au,20,35,111,114,127,139–146 Ag,20,146–150 Pd,128,141,146,151,152 Pt,111,141,146,153 Ni,154 Cu,128 Ru155 and Rh;155 oxides like TiO2,67,68,113,156–162 ZnO,19,163–165 SnO2,166,167 MnO2,168,169 Co3O4,54,55,170,171 Fe3O4,172–175 NiO,176 Cu2O,18,102,177 RuO2,59 and SiO2;178 chalcogenides like CdS179–182 and CdSe.183,184 The fabrication methods are generally classified as the ex situ hybridization, and in situ crystallization. Table 2 has summarized the typical synthetic methods for graphene–inorganic nanostructure composites and their related applications.
Table 2 Comparison of typical synthetic methods for graphene–inorganic nanostructure composites and their related applications




Materials
Synthetic routes
Applications
Ref.




Au/GO or rGO

Ex situ: π–π stacking via 2-mercaptopyridine
Catalysis, SERS

145




Ex situ: π–π stacking via bovine serum albumin



146




In situ: photochemical reduction



114




In situ: reduction by hydroxyl-amine
Raman enhancement

142




In situ: sonolytic reduction in poly(ethylene glycol) at 211 kHz



127



Au/rGO

In situ: reduction by NaBH4
Plasmonics

35




In situ: reduction by amino terminated ionic liquid; perylene-modified rGO
Electrocatalysis

139




In situ: reduction by sodium citrate
SERS

144




In situ: reduction by ascorbic acid in the presence of CTAB
Raman enhancement

185




In situ: microwave assisted reduction



128,190



Au/pristine graphene

In situ: thermal evaporation
Identification of layer number of pristine graphene

189



Ag/GO or rGO

Ex situ: π–π stacking via bovine serum albumin



146




In situ: reduction by NaBH4



150




In situ: electroless deposition
SERS

20



Ag/TiO2/rGO

In situ: Ag is reduced by the photo-generated electrons from TiO2/rGO



187



Ag/rGO

In situ: microwave assisted reduction



128



Pt or Pd/GO or rGO

Ex situ: π–π stacking via bovine serum albumin



146



Pd/rGO

In situ: microwave assisted reduction



128



Pt-on-Pd/rGO

In situ: sequential reduction of H2PdCl4 with HCOOH, and K2PtCl4 with ascorbic acid
Eletrocatalysis

186



Cu/rGO

In situ: microwave assisted reduction



128



Ru/rGO

In situ: microwave assisted reduction
Catalysis

155



Rh/rGO

In situ: microwave assisted reduction
Catalysis

155



CdS/rGO

Ex situ: π–π stacking via benzyl mercaptan
Optoelectronics

179



TiO2/GO

Ex situ: non-covalent adhesion via solution mixing of P-25 TiO2 and GO
DSSC

156




Ex situ: non-covalent adhesion via solution mixing with the GO film
Photocatalysis

158



TiO2/rGO

Ex situ: noncovalent adhesion via Nafion
DSSC

161




Ex situ: self-assembly of TiO2 nanorods and rGO at two-phase interface
Photocatalysis

67




In situ: templated hydrolysis starting with TiCl3 and titanium isopropoxide
Photocatalysis

68




In situ: hydrolysis starting with TiCl3
Li ion battery

157




In situ: hydrolysis starting with titanium butoxide
DSSC

160




In situ: hydrothermal starting with P25 and GO
Photocatalysis

162



ZnO/rGO

In situ: electrochemical deposition
Photovoltaics

19



Cu2O/rGO

In situ: electrochemical deposition
Photovoltaics

18



Cl-doped Cu2O/rGO

In situ: electrochemical deposition
Optoelectronics

102



Co3O4/GO or rGO

Ex situ: electrostatic via aminopropyltrimethoxysilane
Li ion battery

55




In situ: reduction of Co(OH)2/GO at 450 °C
Li ion battery

54



Co3O4/rGO

In situ: microwave assisted reaction between urea and Co(NO3)2
Supercapacitor

170



MnO2/GO

In situ: redox reaction between MnCl2 and KMnO4
Supercapacitor

168




In situ: microwave assisted reaction between C and KMnO4
Supercapacitor

169



MnO2/FGS

In situ: redox reaction between Na2SO4 and KMnO4
Li ion battery

166



SiO2/GO or rGO

Ex situ: electrostatic via aminopropyltrimethoxysilane



55



SiO2/FGS

In situ: hydrolysis starting with TEOS



166



SnO2/FGS

In situ: redox reaction starting with SnCl2 and H2O2
Li ion battery

166



Fe3O4/rGO

In situ: hydrolysis starting with FeCl3
Li ion battery

173



Fe3O4/GO

In situ: redox reaction starting with FeCl2, FeCl3 and NaOH
Magnetic drug carrier

175




In situ: reaction of ferric triacetylacetonate with GO in 1-methyl-2-pyrrolidone
Magnetic composite

172



NiO/graphene

In situ: sputtering
Nanocapacitor

176



RuO2/rGO

In situ: redox reaction starting with RuCl3 and GO
Supercapacitor

59



CdS/rGO

In situ: chemical bath deposition
Solar cell

180



CdS/rGO

In situ: hydrothermal starting with dimethylsulfoxide, GO and Cd(CH3COO)2
Optoelectronics

181



CdSe/CVD-graphene

In situ: electrochemical deposition templated by a porous silica film
Optoelectronics

183





4.1 
          Ex situ hybridization
The ex situ hybridization involves the mixture of graphene-based nanosheets and pre-synthesized or commercially available nanocrystals in solutions. Before mixing, surface modification of the nanocrystals and/or graphene sheets is often carried out, so that they can bind through either the non-covalent interactions or the chemical bonding. For example, 2-mercaptopyridine modified Au nanoparticles (NPs)145 or benzyl mercaptan-capped CdS NPs179 have been successfully attached to GO or rGO surfaces via the π–π stacking. Alternatively, rGO sheets can be modified with adhesive polymers for anchoring the NPs, which has been demonstrated in the Nafion-coated rGO/TiO2 composites.161 Amphiphilic biopolymers, such as bovine serum albumin (BSA) protein, have also been used to modify the rGO surface via the π–π interaction, which then serve as a “universal” adhesive layer to absorb Au, Ag, Pt and Pd NPs.146
Instead of decorating NPs on GO/rGO surfaces, GO/rGO sheets can wrap around the oxide NPs for specific applications such as the Li-ion battery.55 As reported, after the positively charged SiO2 or Co3O4 NPs (modified by aminopropyltrimethoxysilane, APS) are encapsulated by negatively charged GO sheets through the electrostatic interaction, the GO can be in situ reduced to rGO subsequently without destroying the sheet-encapsulated-particle structures.
4.2 
          In situ crystallization
Although the ex situ hybridization is able to pre-select nanostructures with desired functionalities, it sometimes suffers from the low density and non-uniform coverage of the nanostructures on the GO/rGO surfaces.145 In contrast, the in situ crystallization can give rise to uniform surface coverage of nanocrystals by controlling the nucleation sites on GO/rGO via surface functionalization. As a result, the continuous film of NPs on graphene surfaces can be realized.

4.2.1 Chemical reduction method. 
Chemical reduction is the most popular strategy for synthesis of metal nanostructures. Precursors of noble metals, such as HAuCl4, AgNO3, K2PtCl4 and H2PdCl6, can be simply in situ reduced by reduction agents like amines, NaBH4, and ascorbic acid. For example, graphene–Au NP composites can be obtained by the reduction of HAuCl4 with NaBH4 in a rGO-octadecylamine (ODA) solution.35 However, since rGO contains much less residual oxygen-containing functional groups than GO, it is restricted to aqueous solution based processes. To address this problem, 3,4,9,10-perylene tetracarboxylic acid (PTCA)-modified rGO sheets have been used as templates for the in situ reduction of HAuCl4 with amino-terminated ionic liquid (IL-NH2). Because of the additional carboxylic groups from PTCA, the resulting rGO–Au NP composites are water soluble and give a dense coverage of NPs.139
Anisotropic metal nanostructures, such as nanorods143,185 and snowflakes,142 have also been synthesized on rGO or GO surfaces via chemical reduction. For example, Au nanorods can be prepared on rGO films or seed-modified rGO films, by using a shape-directing surfactant, cetyl trimethylammonium bromide (CTAB), to facilitate the one dimensional growth of the nanorods. Very recently, by using GO as a synthetic template, we have synthesized square-like Au nanosheets with an edge length of 200–500 nm and a thickness of ∼2.4 nm (Fig. 1A).38 These Au nanosheets display the unique hexagonal close packed (hcp) structure. This is the first time to directly synthesize hcp Au nanostructures by the wet chemical method.
 Fig. 1  (A) TEM image of Au square sheets synthesized on GO. Reproduced from ref. 38. (B) TEM image of solution-synthesized Pt-on-Pd nanodendrites on rGO. Reproduced with permission from ref. 186. Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society. (C) TEM image of ordered Au NDs photochemically synthesized on rGO. Reproduced with permission from ref. 114. Copyright 2010, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (D) TEM image of ordered CdSe NPs electrochemically deposited on a graphene sheet. Reproduced with permission from ref. 183. Copyright 2010, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Besides the single-phased metal structures, Pt-on-Pd bimetallic nanodendrites on polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP)-modified rGO sheets have been synthesized in a seed-mediated sequential process, where the Pd seeds were synthesized on rGO by the reduction of H2PdCl4 with HCOOH, and then Pt nanodendrites on the Pd seeds were formed by reducing K2PtCl4 with ascorbic acid (Fig. 1B).186 In this work, the pre-synthetic functionalization of rGO with PVP has provided good solubility of the rGO sheets in aqueous solution, and high nucleation density of the Pd seeds.
As an alternative, the photochemical reduction has also been applied for synthesis of graphene–metal nanostructure composites.114,187 For example, our group has synthesized the fluorescent Au nanodots (NDs, with size <2 nm) on thiol-modified GO/rGO surfaces by simply in situ reducing HAuCl4 under light irradiation.114 Especially, if octadecylthiol (ODT) is used to modify the rGO surfaces, the in situ synthesized Au NDs self-assemble into short ND-chains on the ODT-rGO surfaces (Fig. 1C), along the 〈100〉 direction of the graphitic lattice. This is due to the specific pattern formation of the long chain thiol molecules on the rGO surface, which in turn serves as a secondary template for the synthesis and self-assembly of Au NDs. In another approach, semiconductor nanoparticles loaded on GO/rGO sheets are employed to catalyze the reduction of metal ions. The excited state interaction between semiconductor and GO/rGO has been studied in the GO/ZnO system, based on the photoluminescence decay measurements.165 It is shown that the lifetime of ZnO emission is decreased in the presence of GO sheets, indicating the fast electron transfer from ZnO to GO with a transfer-rate constant of 1.2 × 109 s−1. Such rapid electron transfer between semiconductor nanoparticles and GO/rGO makes their composites attractive photocatalysts. As an example, after GO sheets are photocatalytically reduced in the presence of light-excited TiO2 nanoparticles, the resulting rGO/TiO2 hybrid catalyst is subsequently used for photo-reduction of Ag+. During this process, the photo-generated electrons from TiO2 are rapidly captured by rGO and then transferred to reduce the absorbed Ag+ ions on the rGO surface.187
In addition to metals, metal oxides, such as RuO2,54 SnO2166 and MnO2,168 can also form on GO/rGO surfaces via in situ reduction/oxidation. For example, GO/RuCl3 was heated with a hot soldering iron in a N2 atmosphere and in situ reduced to rGO/RuO2 nanocomposites,54 and KMnO4 reacting with MnCl2·4H2O in the presence of GO sheets has led to MnO2–GO composites.168
Microwave irradiation is a rapid and facile method to provide energy for chemical reactions. It can be used for the simultaneous formation of metal NPs (e.g. Cu, Pd, Au and Ag)128 and reduction of GO. Additionally, the in situ microwave irradiation has been used to prepare metal oxide–rGO hybrids, such as rGO–MnO2 NPs169 and rGO–Co3O4 NPs.170 In the former work, rGO serves as the carbon source to react with KMnO4 under microwave irradiation to form CO2−3, HCO−3, and MnO2.169 In spite of the ease of process and scalable production, the aforementioned microwave-assisted syntheses did not show the fine control over the size uniformity and surface distribution of NPs on rGO surfaces. More recently, the microwave irradiation was combined with ironic liquid (IL)-assisted dispersion of rGO to make Ru/rGO and Rh/rGO composites, which exhibit densely loaded Ru or Rh NPs with narrow size distributions of 2.2±0.4 nm and 2.8±0.5 nm, respectively.155


4.2.2 Electroless deposition. 
The electroless deposition of metals has been previously observed on single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs), where Au and Pt NPs formed on the side-walls of SWCNTs immediately after immersing the SWCNTs in solution of HAuCl4 or Na2PtCl2.188 Because the Femi level of SWCNT is higher (less negative) than the redox potential of Au or Pt, the SWCNT serves as the “cathode” to donate electrons for the nucleation of metal NPs. Based on the similar mechanism, we have shown that GO can be used to template the growth of Ag nanostructures via the electroless deposition, by simply heating GO films deposited on APTES-modified Si/SiOx substrates in AgNO3 solutions.20 In addition to GO, rGO sheets can also lead to the formation of Ag NPs due to the presence of many aromatic conjugated domains for electron donation. Importantly, the abundant residual oxygen-containing groups on GO provide more nucleation sites for metal nucleation, thus resulting in formation of smaller Ag NPs with higher density compared to using rGO as the template in the electroless deposition.


4.2.3 Sol–gel methods. 
The sol–gel process is a popular approach for preparation of metal oxide structures and film coatings, with the metal alkoxides or chlorides as precursors that undergo a series of hydrolysis and polycondensation reactions. It has been used to in situ prepare TiO2,68,157,160 Fe3O4173 and SiO2166 nanostructures on FGS (or rGO) sheets. Taking TiO2 as an example, the typical precursors used are TiCl3,157 titanium isopropoxide,68 and titanium butoxide,160 which have resulted in nanorods, NPs, or macro–mesoporous framework of TiO2 depending on the different experimental conditions applied. The key advantage of the in situ sol–gel process lies in the fact that the surface OH− groups of the GO/rGO sheets act as the nucleation sites for the hydrolysis, so that the resulting metal oxide nanostructures are chemically bonded to the GO/rGO surfaces.


4.2.4 Hydrothermal methods. 
Hydrothermal is a powerful tool for synthesis of inorganic nanocrystals, which operates at elevated temperatures in a confined volume to generate high pressure. The one-pot hydrothermal process can give rise to nanostructures with high crystallinity without post-synthetic annealing or calcination, and at the same time reduce GO to rGO. Typically, TiO2–rGO composites162 and CdS–rGO composites have been prepared by the hydrothermal process. For example, after the mixture of GO and Cd(CH3COO)2 in dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) was heated in an autoclave at 180 °C for 12 hours,181 the simultaneous reduction of GO to rGO and the formation of CdS NPs were realized, with the DMSO acting as both the solvent and the sulfur source.


4.2.5 Electrochemical deposition. 
Direct electrochemical deposition of inorganic crystals on graphene-based substrates, without the requirement for post-synthetic transfer of the composite materials, is an attractive approach for thin film-based applications. Nanostructures of ZnO, Cu2O and CdSe18,19,183 have been successfully deposited on rGO or CVD-graphene films. As an example, ZnO nanorods have been deposited on spin-coated rGO thin films on quartz, by using oxygen saturated aqueous solution of ZnCl2 and KCl as the electrolyte.19 This method has also been extended to deposit Cu2O nanostructures18 as well as Cl-doped n-type Cu2O102 on rGO films, spin-coated on flexible polyethylene terephthalate (PET) substrates. In addition to the random deposition of nanostructures on rGO films, ordered nanostructure patterns can also be prepared by electrochemical deposition using porous template.183 As reported, a layer of mesoporous silica film was first formed on the CVD-grown graphene sheets via a sol–gel process, and then CdSe NPs were electrochemically deposited on the graphene surface through the pores of the pre-coated silica film. After removing the silica film by HF etching, ordered CdSe NPs on graphene are revealed (Fig. 1D).


4.2.6 Thermal evaporation. 
The thermal evaporation has been utilized to deposit Au NPs on the pristine graphene and how the layer number of graphene affects the particle size and density of deposited Au NPs has been studied.189 It is found that the particle density increases and size decreases with increasing the layer number of graphene. This interesting phenomenon has been attributed to two factors. First, the diffusion coefficient of deposited Au atoms varies on different surfaces, which governs the nucleation and growth of the Au islands. Second, the surface free energy of graphene depends on the layer number, which controls the interaction between graphene and the evaporated Au atoms, and in turn affects the surface absorption, desorption and diffusion of the Au atoms on graphene surface.189


4.2.7 Ordered metal oxide–graphene composites via in situ self-assembly. 
In contrast to the random stacking of graphene-based hybrid nanosheets, a novel method has been developed to prepare the ordered metal oxide–graphene hybrids by the surfactant assisted self-assembly.166 In this work, the anionic surfactants were first mixed with rGO sheets, which attached to the hydrophobic domains of the surfactant micelles (Fig. 2A). After that, metal cations were introduced and bonded to the surfactants assembled on rGO, to give an ordered overall structure (Fig. 2B). In situ crystallization then took place, via redox or hydrolysis reactions, to result in the alternating layers of rGO/metal oxides, e.g. NiO, SnO2, and MnO2 (Fig. 2C and D). This assembly process is important in constructing layered composite materials for lithium ion batteries, which will be discussed in section 7.1.
 Fig. 2  (A–C) Schematic illustrations of the self-assembly approach to prepare ordered metal oxide/rGO composites. (A) Adsorption of surfactant hemimicelles on the surfaces of the rGO or rGO stacks causes its dispersion in surfactant micelles in an aqueous solution. (B) The self-assembly of anionic sulfonate surfactant on the graphene surface with oppositely charged metal cation (e.g. Sn2+) species and the transition into the lamella mesophase toward the formation of SnO2 graphene nanocomposites, where hydrophobic rGO sheets are sandwiched in the hydrophobic domains of the anionic surfactant. (C) Layered metal oxide–rGO composites composed of alternating layers of metal oxide nanocrystals and rGO stacks after crystallization of metal oxide and removal of the surfactant. (D) High-magnification TEM of SnO2/rGO composites. The layered structure of SnO2 is composed of connected nanocrystalline SnO2 with 4–5 nm diameter interspaced by rGO stacks. Reproduced with permission from ref. 166. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. 

5. Graphene–polymer composites
The graphene–polymer composites, based on the 3D arrangement and the kind of interaction between graphene sheets and polymers, can be classified into three types, i.e. graphene-filled polymer composites, layered graphene–polymer films, and polymer-functionalized graphene nanosheets.
5.1 Graphene-filled polymer composites
Carbon-based materials, such as amorphous carbon and carbon nanotubes (CNTs), are conventional fillers for enhancing the electronic, mechanical and thermal properties of polymer matrices. CNT has been regarded as one of the most effective filler materials, but with relatively high cost. Graphene-based fillers are thus expected as a promising replacement or supplement to CNTs. In order to lower the content of the graphene filler, the dispersity and its bonding with the polymer matrix are important factors to achieve optimal properties of the composites. With this consideration in mind, graphene-filled polymer composites are commonly prepared by solution mixing,42,191–195 melt blending,196–198 and in situ polymerization.199–210

5.1.1 Fabrication methods. 
Solution mixing is the most straightforward method for preparation of polymer composites. The solvent compatibility of the polymer and the filler is critical in achieving good dispersity. Due to the residual oxygen-containing functional groups, GO can be directly mixed with water soluble polymers, such as poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA), at various concentrations.191,211 However, GO does not dissolve in non-polar solvents, and other forms of graphene such as expanded graphite (EG) and rGO show limited solubility in both organic and inorganic solvents. In order to overcome this problem, sonication has been used to produce metastable dispersions of graphene derivatives, which are then mixed with polymer solutions, such as those of poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA),192 polyaniline (PANi),195 polycaprolactone (PCL),193 and polyurethane (PU).194,212 High-speed shearing combined with ice-cooling has also been applied to mix graphene-based fillers and the polymer matrices.42 However, in the two approaches mentioned above, re-stacking, aggregation and folding of the graphene based nanosheets are unavoidable during the process, which significantly reduce the specific surface area of the 2D fillers. Thus, surface functionalization of graphene-based fillers before solution mixing must be carried out to provide them with good solubility in various kinds of solvents. As an example, phenyl isocyanate-modified GO sheets have shown improved dispersity in polystyrene (PS) solution in DMF. During the subsequent in situ reduction of GO, the polymer matrix prevents the re-aggregation of rGO sheets to retain a homogeneous suspension.138
Melt compounding utilizes both high-shear forces and high-temperature melting to blend the filler and matrix materials. Hence, it does not require a common solvent for the graphene filler and the polymer matrix. Polylactide (PLA)-exfoliated graphite (EG) composite 196 and PET–rGO graphene composite197 were successfully prepared by using melt compounding. However, the high shear forces employed in melt compounding can sometimes result in the breakage of the filler materials, such as CNTs and graphene nanosheets.198

In situ polymerization is another often used method to prepare graphene-filled polymer composites, such as those with epoxy199–201,213 and polyaniline (PANi).202–206 In a typical process for preparation of graphene–epoxy composite, after the graphene based filler is mixed with epoxy resins under high-shear forces, a curing agent is added to initiate the polymerization.199 The polymerization for PANi, on the other hand, is an oxidative process, thus an oxidative agent, such as ammonium persulfate, is used to facilitate the polymerization.204 Alternatively, graphene–PNAi composite can be prepared by the in situ anodic electropolymerization.207 For example, PANi has been directly deposited on the working electrode made from graphene paper in a three-electrode cell, with a solution containing aniline monomers as the electrolyte. In addition to the epoxy and PANi, graphene has been successfully incorporated in other polymer matrices, such as silicone,208 PS209 and poly(vinyl chloride/vinyl acetate) copolymer,210via the in situ polymerization.


5.1.2 Property enhancement. 
Electrical conductivity has shown significant improvement in graphene-filled polymers. Very low percolation thresholds have been achieved in various types of insulating matrices, for example, 0.15 vol% loading of rGO in poly(vinyl chloride/vinyl acetate) copolymer–graphene composites,210 0.47 vol% filler loading in PET–graphene composites (with a conductivity of 2.11 S m−1 obtained at a loading of 3.0 vol%),197 and 0.1 vol% filler loading in PS-functionalized graphene sheets (FGS) composites.138 The effective property enhancement in these reports has been attributed to the large specific surface area and the π-conjugated 2D conducting surface of graphene-based sheets, their homogeneous dispersion in the polymer matrix, and the filler–matrix interaction induced by the surface functional groups.
Besides the electrical conductivity, graphene-based fillers can improve the mechanical strength of the polymer as well, since the monolayer graphene is one of the strongest materials with a Young's modulus of 1.0 TPa and a breaking strength of 42 N m−1.4 By using solution mixing and vacuum filtration, the strong and ductile poly(vinyl alcohol)(PVA)–GO composite paper has been prepared, which shows a Young's modulus of 4.8 GPa and a tensile yield strength of ∼110 MPa with 3 wt% of the GO loading. Unfortunately, in the physically mixed composite, the relative movement between the filler and matrix cannot be avoided under external stresses, which limits the achievable maximum strength. To alleviate or solve this problem, it is necessary to chemically tailor the structure at the filler/matrix interface to facilitate the efficient load transfer. For example, GO filler was covalently bonded to isocyanated-PU matrix via the reaction between the oxygenated groups of GO and the isocyanate groups at the end of PU chains. This chemical bonding has led to the increase in the Young's modulus and hardness by ∼900% and ∼327%, respectively.194
The thermal stability is another important property for functional polymers, which can be improved by embedding materials with superior thermal properties like the graphene-based fillers. For example, FGS–PMMA composite gives an increase of 30 °C in Tg (glass transition temperature, above which chains of thermoplastic polymer begin to flow) with a loading of 0.05 wt% FGS, whereas the Tg of poly(acrylonitrile) (PAN)–FGS composite increases more than 40 °C with a loading of 1 wt% FGS,42 which surpasses all other carbon-based nanofillers, such as the expanded graphite (EG) and the graphitic nanoplatelets (GNPs).192 The superior performance of FGSs fillers, arises from the presence of larger amount of monolayer graphene sheets with wrinkled morphology and functionalized surfaces, which benefits the strong filler–matrix interaction (Fig. 3A and B).42 Besides the thermoplastics, graphene-filled elastomers also exhibit enhanced thermal stability in terms of increased degradation temperature. Examples include the silicone–FGS composites with a 55 °C increase in the degradation temperature with 0.25 wt% loading of the filler,208 and the PLA–EG composite with the degradation temperature improved by 10 °C with a loading of only 0.5 wt% of EG.196
 Fig. 3  SEM images of (A) EG–PMMA and (B) FGS–PMMA showing fracture surface topography. Reproduced with permission from ref. 42. Copyright 2008, Nature Publishing Group. 
Furthermore, the graphene-based filler materials have also enhanced the thermal conductivity of polymer matrices, provided that the single layer graphene has a thermal conductivity of up to ∼5000 W mK−1 at room temperature.214 When only 0.25 wt% of FGSs were incorporated in the silicon foam matrix, the increase of 6% in the thermal conductivity was obtained.208 In addition, epoxy with embedded few-layer graphene sheets (∼25 vol%, layer number of ∼4) has displayed an increase in the thermal conductivity of more than 30 times at k = 6.44 W mK−1.199 This result outperforms many conventional fillers, such as Al, Ag and SiO2, which require more than 50% loading to achieve the similar result.

5.2 Layered graphene–polymer films
In contrast to the graphene-filled polymer composites, where the graphene fillers are randomly distributed in the polymer matrices, graphene derivatives have also been composited with polymers in layered structures, which are fabricated for specific applications, such as the directional load-bearing membranes, and thin films for photovoltaic applications. For example, layer-by-layer (LbL) assembling via the Langmuir–Blodgett (LB) technique has been used to deposit GO sheets onto films of polyelectrolyte poly(allylamine hydrochloride) (PAH) and poly(sodium 4-styrene sulfonate) (PSS) multi-layers (Fig. 4A).215 The resulting composited membrane shows enhanced directional elastic modulus by an order of magnitude, i.e. from 1.5 to 20 GPa with 8 vol% loading of the graphene (Fig. 4B). The similar strategy has been used to prepare multi-layer PVA–GO films, which also display improved elastic modulus and hardness.216 Another application that requires layered graphene–polymer composites is in polymer-based photovoltaic devices.217–219 These composite films are fabricated by the sequential spin-coating of functional components in the device configurations. For example, GO film and poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT)/phenyl-C61-butyric acid (PCBM) blends are deposited layer after layer on ITO substrate, where the GO layer acts as the hole transport segment in the photovoltaic device.218
 Fig. 4  (A) Schematic illustration of fabrication and assembly of the free-standing GO-LbL film. (B) Plot showing the variation of elastic modulus calculated theoretically (under parallel and random orientation) and that obtained experimentally (using buckling and bulging measurements) with the volume fraction of GO. Reproduced with permission from ref. 215. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. 
5.3 Polymer functionalized graphene nanosheets
Instead of being used as fillers to enhance the properties of polymers, graphene derivatives can be applied as 2D templates for polymer decoration via covalent and non-covalent functionalizations. The polymer coating, on the other hand, assists to improve the solubility of the graphene derivatives, and offers additional functionality to the resulting hybrid nanosheets.
The covalent functionalization of graphene derivatives is mainly based on the reaction between the functional groups of the polymers and the oxygenated groups on the GO or rGO surfaces. Esterification of the carboxylic groups in GO with the hydroxyl groups in PVA has been demonstrated in the synthesis of GO–PVA composite sheets.220 The carboxylic groups on GO were also involved in the carbodiimide-catalyzed amide formation process to bind with the six-armed polyethylene glycol (PEG)-amine stars.221 However, the carboxylic groups are mainly confined at the periphery of the GO sheets. In addition, the grafting of certain polymers requires the presence of non-oxygenated functional groups on GO, such as amine and chloride groups. Therefore, alternative strategies with additional chemical reactions have to be developed to modify GO/rGO surfaces with desired functional groups before the grafting of polymers. For example, after 4-bromophenyl groups were coupled on the rGO surface through the diazonium reaction, a fluorene–thiophene–benzothiadazole polymer was covalently grafted to the rGO surface through the Suzuki reaction via the 4-bromophenyl groups.222 The pre-bonded diazonium group on rGO can also act as the initiator for atomic transfer radical polymerization (ATRP), based on which, PS has been successfully grafted onto the rGO sheet with controlled density.223 Additionally, acyl-chlorinated GO sheets can further react and connect to triphenylamine-based polyazomethine (TPAPAM)224 and MeOH-terminated P3HT,225 and the APTES-modified GO surface can be further bonded with maleic anhydride-grafted polyethylene (MA-g-PE).226
As shown in the aforementioned examples, the covalent functionalization of polymers on graphene-based sheets holds versatile possibility due to the rich surface chemistry of GO/rGO. Nevertheless, the non-covalent functionalization, which relies on the van der Waals force, electrostatic interaction or π–π stacking,227 is easier to carry out without altering the chemical structure of the capped rGO sheets, and provides effective means to tailor the electronic/optical property and solubility of the nanosheets. The first example of non-covalent functionalization of rGO sheets was demonstrated by the in situ reduction of GO with hydrazine in the presence of poly(sodium 4-styrenesulfonate) (PSS),228 in which the hydrophobic backbone of PSS stabilizes the rGO, and the hydrophilic sulfonate side groups maintains a good dispersion of the hybrid nanosheets in water. Later on, conjugated polyelectrolytes with various functionalities have been used to modify rGO nanosheets,14,17,41 in the hope to achieve good solubility in different kinds of solvents, and at the same time acquire added optoelectronic properties. Our group has specially designed an amphiphilic coil–rod–coil conjugated triblock copolymer (PEG–OPE, chemical structure shown in Fig. 5A) to improve the solubility of graphene–polymer nanocomposites in both high and low polar solvents.14 In the proposed configuration, the conjugated rigid-rod backbone of PEG–OPE can bind to the basal plane of the in situ reduced GO via the π–π interaction (Fig. 5B), whereas the lipophilic side chains and two hydrophilic coils of the backbone form an amphiphilic outer-layer surrounding the rGO sheet. As a result, the obtained rGO sheets with a uniformly coated polymer layer (Fig. 5C) are soluble in both organic low polar (such as toluene and chloroform) and water-miscible high polar solvents (such as water and ethanol).
 Fig. 5  (A) Chemical structure of PEG–OPE. (B) Schematic illustration of fabrication of PEG–OPE stabilized rGO sheets. (C) Tapping-mode AFM image and cross-sectional analysis of PEG–OPE–rGO on mica. Reproduced with permission from ref. 14. Copyright 2010, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
6. Other graphene-based composites
Other than inorganic nanostructures and polymers, materials such as organic crystals,39,40 metal–organic frameworks (MOF),43–45 biomaterials,46–48 and carbon nanotubes (CNTs)50–53 have also been composited with graphene derivatives for various applications.
For example, N,N′-dioctyl-3,4,9,10-perylenedicarboximide (PDI)–graphene core/shell nanowires have been prepared through the π–π interaction, and used in organic solar cells.39 Besides, peptide–graphene core/shell nanowires were prepared by mixing graphene aqueous solution and the organic peptide solution (diphenylalanine in 1,1,1,3,3,3-hexafluoro-2-propanol). After removal of peptide cores by calcination, the hollow graphene tubes were applied as supercapacitor electrodes.40
MOF, a recently emerging material, is promising in a number of gas purification and storage based applications, and has also been composited with GO/rGO sheets.43–45 As an interesting example, benzoic acid-functionalized graphene has been found to act as a structure-directing template for the growth of MOF-5, which exhibits the wire-like structure along its [220] direction. Along the long axis of the wire, the functionalized graphene sheets are periodically distributed, which are expected to impart photoelectric transport property to the insulating structure of MOF-5.43
Moreover, biomaterials like DNA hybridized with GO or rGO are used in fluorescent sensing platforms based on the fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET),46,47 and biocompatible aptamer–GO composites can be applied in probing living cells.48 Graphene–CNT composites have also been prepared via solution blending50,51 or in situ CVD growth53 to be applied in Li ion batteries,51 transparent conductors,50 and supercapacitors.52,53
7. Applications of graphene-based composites
7.1 Lithium ion batteries
The increasing demand from the current information-rich society to provide high efficient, low cost and green solutions for energy conversion and storage devices, has been constantly driving the development of battery systems, in particular, the rechargeable batteries. Li ion battery (LIB) is considered as one of the most promising storage systems, because of its high absolute potential against the standard hydrogen cell (−3.04 V) and its low atomic weight (M = 6.94 g mol−1), which leads to the large energy density with a theoretical value of up to ∼400 Wh kg−1.229,230 In addition to the traditional insertion-type (e.g. TiS2 and LiCoO2)231,232 and alloying-type (e.g. Sn)233 of electrode systems for insertion/extraction of Li, the conversion-type LIB has been intensively studied recently, which employs transition metal compounds (MaXb, M = Co, Ni, Fe, Cu etc.; X = O, S, P, N etc.) to facilitate the Li insertion/extraction through redox reactions (reaction (1)) between the ionic and metallic states of the metal, thus providing high capacities.234 MaXb + cLi+ + ce− ↔ LicXb + aM(1)

7.1.1 Graphene–metal oxide nanostructures for LIBs. 
The nanostructured MaXb has been proven to be advantageous compared to micrometre-sized structures for LIBs, owing to the shortened diffusion length for both Li ions and electrons, and larger specific surface area for the electrode/electrolyte interaction.235 However, drawbacks like poor conductivity, low packing density thus reduced volumetric energy density, as well as the expansion induced lose of contact points, remain problematic and require continuous development. Although graphene and its derivatives cannot effectively host Li via intercalation like in bulk graphite, they are able to store Li through the surface absorption and functional groups induced bonding,236 and they possess high conductivity and large surface area. Therefore, many metal oxide nanostructures, like SnO2,166,167,237 Co3O4,54,55 MnO2,56 TiO2,157,238 Fe3O4173 and Cu2O,177 have been composited with graphene for LIBs.
Rapid capacity decay is usually observed in the pure metal oxide based anodes, due to problems like poor conductivity, structure degradation and expansion, and inter-particle agglomeration. Using graphene based materials as matrices for in situ synthesis and anchoring of the metal oxide nanostructures is anticipated to solve these problems. First of all, the incorporation of graphene maintains a good conducting network in the hybrid electrode. This effect has been elucidated in a recent report on the Mn3O4/graphene based anode.56 Although Mn3O4 is an attractive anode material for LIBs considering its low cost, abundance, and high theoretically value in capacity (∼936 mAh g−1), its low conductivity (∼ 10−7–10−8 S cm−1) has limited its practical application with a measured capacity of 400 mAh g−1.56 Direct growth of Mn3O4 NPs on graphene sheets provides a good contact between the NPs and the 3D network of graphene, thus realizes efficient conduction of charge carriers. Consequently, the graphene/Mn3O4 hybrid anode affords a specific capacity of ∼900 mAh g−1, about two times higher than that by using the pure Mn3O4. The same effect, arising from the conducting network of graphene sheets, has also been demonstrated in SnO2/graphene,237 TiO2/graphene157 and Fe3O4/graphene173 electrodes.
By using graphene as templates, another attractive aspect is that the synthesized NPs can be evenly distributed on the graphene surfaces. In this way, the agglomeration of NPs can be considerably reduced and the large active surfaces of the NPs are able to participate in Li/electron diffusion more efficiently during the discharge/charge cycles. As a result, enhanced specific capacity and cycling performance have been achieved in systems like Co3O4/graphene54 and Cu2O/graphene177 composites. In addition, the elastic and flexible graphene sheets can accommodate the volume expansion of the NPs upon Li insertion/extraction; whereas the NPs in turn prevent the re-stacking of the graphene layers.173 More importantly, it has been shown that the structure integrity of the crystalline NPs on graphene can be maintained after many cycles of discharge/charge. As an example, the Li insertion/extraction in SnO2 based anode usually involves a two phase process, i.e. in the first cycle, the SnO2 reacts with Li+ to give Sn and Li2O; after that, Sn will not reverse back to SnO2 but form SnLix alloy for the rest cycles,237,239 which leads to large volume change and rapid capacity decay. This problem can be overcome by using SnO2/graphene hybrid anode, which shows a well maintained SnO2 crystalline structure after 50 cycles.167
Although the graphene-based 2D templates have provided the good NP distribution on individual sheets, the graphene–NP hybrid sheets are randomly stacked to make electrodes, inevitably leading to the particle–particle aggregation. Thus, the ordered graphene–metal oxide composites166 and graphene encapsulated metal oxide nanostructures55 have been developed to further reduce the particle aggregation. In the former case, layers of graphene stacks and metal oxide NPs (e.g. SnO2) are assembled alternatively through a surfactant assisted self-assembly process (Fig. 2 in section 4.2.7). Such highly ordered and stable structure of graphene/SnO2 exhibits a specific energy density of ∼760 mAh g−1, which is comparable to the theoretical value for SnO2 without significant charge/discharge degradation.166 However, most graphene stacks consist of multi-layer graphenes, which reduce the useful surface area of graphene and increase the carbon content in the composite. In an alternative approach, graphene sheets are made to wrap around NPs of SiO2 or Co3O4via the electrostatic interaction in the graphene encapsulated-metal oxide hybrids (Fig. 6A).55 The graphene encapsulation is able to separate individual NPs from one another, which prevents the particle agglomeration, and maintains a conducting network to effectively connect all NPs. The resulting graphene/Co3O4 based anode, with a low carbon content of <8.5 wt%, displays a very high capacity of 1100 mAh g−1 in the first 10 cycles, and maintains at above 1000 mAh g−1 even after 130 cycles (Fig. 6B).
 Fig. 6  (A) Schematic illustration of fabrication of graphene-encapsulated metal oxide NPs. (B) Cycle performance of graphene-encapsulated Co3O4. Reproduced with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2010, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 


7.1.2 Graphene–carbon nanotube or graphene–fullerene hybrid for LIB. 
To date, besides the graphene–metal oxide based anode materials for LIBs, graphene–carbon nanotube (CNT) or graphene–fullerene (C60) hybrid electrodes are also reported.51 The graphene nanosheets (GNSs), prepared from reduction and re-assembly of oxidized GO sheets, consist of 6–15 re-stacked individual graphene monolayers. The GNSs show a specific capacity of ∼540 mAh g−1, which is much larger than that of graphite due to the enlarged specific surface area after exfoliation. The energy storage property of this electrode can be further improved by mixing GNSs with nanocarbons, such as CNTs and C60, to increase the spacings among the re-stacked GNSs. In this way, the additional voids for Li insertion/extraction are created in the mixtures, resulting in ∼40% increase in the specific capacity.

7.2 Supercapacitors
Supercapacitor, or ultracapacitor, is another type of electrochemical energy storage device, which provides high power density (10 kW kg−1), short charge/discharge time (in seconds), and long cycling life, as compared to the battery device.240 Thus, supercapacitor is widely applied for powering the heavy vehicles, portable media players, personal computer (PC) cards, and so on. Generally, there are two types of supercapacitors, in terms of their operation mechanisms.241 One is the electrical double layer capacitor (EDLC), which stores energy via an electrostatic process, i.e. the charges are accumulated at the electrode/electrolyte interface through polarization. Hence, it is essentially important to use electrode materials with good conductivity and large specific surface areas in EDLCs, such as the activated carbon, CNTs, carbon nanofibers, and the emerging graphene-based 2D sheets. The graphene-based materials, in particular rGO, are advantageous in terms of the chemically active surface with large specific area, good conductivity, low cost, and mass production with solution-based processability as mentioned before. In addition, it is suggested that the aggregated graphene sheets exhibit an open-pore structure, which allows for the easy access of electrolyte ions to form electric double layers.242 The first EDLC based on the chemically modified graphene, or rGO, was demonstrated by Ruoff and coworkers.2 A specific capacitance of 135 F g−1 in the aqueous electrolyte is obtained, which is comparable with the traditional carbon-based electrode materials.
The other type of supercapacitor is so called the pseudo-capacitor, which is based on the rapid redox reactions of the chemical species present in the electrode.241 Commonly used electrode materials are metal oxides (e.g. RuO2, NiO and MnO2) and conducting polymers (e.g. Polyaniline, PANi and Polypryrrole, PPy). This type of electrode affords higher specific capacitance per unit surface area (1 to 5 F m−2) compared to the porous carbon based EDL electrode (0.1 to 0.2 F m−2).242 However, the relatively high cost and low conductivity of metal oxides or conducting polymers have limited their applications. As a result, graphene derivatives and metal oxides or conducting polymers are combined and used as the hybrid type of supercapacitor (i.e. the combination of the EDLC and pseudo-capacitor).

7.2.1 Graphene–metal oxide supercapacitors. 
A number of metal oxides, such as ZnO,57 SnO2,58 Co3O4,170 MnO2168,169 and RuO2,59 have been composited with graphene derivatives to prepare electrodes for supercapacitors. Taking the graphene/MnO2 hybrid electrode for example,169 the MnO2 NPs contribute to the energy storage via the redox reaction in between the III and IV oxidation states of Mn (reaction (2)), which involves the intercalation of alkali metal ions present in the electrolyte, e.g. Na+. The rGO sheets, on the other hand, provide the capacitance through the electron double layer at the carbon surface, and meanwhile afford a conducting network for the anchored MnO2 NPs and large surface area for the NP/electrolyte interaction, which leads to high pseudo-capacity with rapid charge–discharge rate. The resulting composite electrode shows a high specific capacitance of 310 F g−1 at 2 mV s−1 (228 F g−1 at even 500 mV s−1), about 3 times higher than that given by the pure rGO or MnO2. Similarly, a graphene nanosheet (GNS)/Co3O4 supercapacitor displays a maximum specific capacity of 243.2 F g−2 at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 in KOH aqueous solution, and ∼95.6% of the specific capacitance is retained after 2000 cycles.170 MnO2 + C+ + e− ↔ MnOOC(2)where C+ = Na+, K+ or Li+
Compared to batteries, supercapacitors exhibit higher power density but lower energy density. In order to improve the energy density of a supercapacitor, while maintaining the high power density from the graphene/metal oxide hybrid electrode, an asymmetric capacitor system was employed by Cheng and coworkers.243 In such a capacitor, graphene is incorporated as the negative electrode (a battery type) and MnO2 nanowire/graphene composite (MGC) as the positive electrode (Fig. 7A). A high operating voltage (∼2.0 V) is thus made possible in this asymmetric set-up to give the high energy density (note that the energy is directly proportional to the square of the operating voltage across the cell). As a result, a maximum energy density of 30.4 Wh kg−1 for this asymmetric capacitor is achieved, which is much higher than the results obtained from the symmetric one, i.e. with graphene (or graphene/MnO2) as both the positive and negative electrodes (Fig. 7B).
 Fig. 7  (A) Schematic of the assembled structure of asymmetric ECs based on MGC as the positive electrode and graphene as the negative electrode. (B) Ragone plot related to energy and power densities of graphene//MGC asymmetric ECs with various voltage windows, graphene//graphene and MGC//MGC symmetric ECs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 243. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. 


7.2.2 Graphene-conducting polymer supercapacitors. 
Conducting polymers are attractive materials for supercapacitor electrodes, because they have moderate conductivity, e.g. 0.1–5 S cm−1 for doped polyaniline (PANi),244 fast charge–discharge kinetics and doping–undoping processes,245 and flexibility for thin film based fabrications.246 The power conversion and storage process in polymer-based capacitors involves the doping–undoping redox reactions, as shown in reactions (3) and (4):  Cp + nA− ↔ Cpn+(A−)n + ne− (p-doping)(3) Cp + ne− + nC+ ↔ Cpn−(C+)n (n-doping)(4)where Cp = conducting polymer; C+ = cation; A− = anion.
Till now, PANi is one of the most employed polymers to be incorporated with GO or rGO sheets for supercapacitors.195,202–207,247,248 In the GO–PANi composite, the doping process is realized by linking the carboxyl group of GO to the nitrogen of the PANi backbone.205,206 Since PANi is synthesized on GO via the in situ polymerization, the oxygen-containing functional groups of GO can facilitate the nucleation of the polymer and give rise to good surface coverage of PANi and the strong π–π interaction between the PANi backbone and the GO surface. As reported, with 1% mass loading of GO, the conductivity of the PANi based electrode is improved from 2 S cm−1 (for pure PANi) to 10 S cm−1, and a high specific capacitance of 531 F g−1 (216 F g−1 for the pure PANi) is obtained in the potential range of 0 to 0.45 V at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1.206 Besides the enhanced conductivity and capacitance, GO is also able to improve the cycling-stability of the composite electrode, because the flexible GO sheets can undertake mechanical deformation during the charge–discharge cycles to protect the PANi polymer from shrinkage and swelling.205,248 For example, a hierarchical composite electrode of GO–PANi can retain 92% of the initial capacitance after 2000 cycles, whereas the initial capacitance of pure PANi electrode drops to 74%.248
Although the chemically modified graphene, or rGO, exhibits much better intrinsic conductivity as compared to GO, the rGO–PANi electrode has not shown any improved electrochemical performance compared to GO–PANi at a low GO/rGO content (< 20 wt%).195,203 This is possibly because, the less amount of oxygenated functional groups on the surface of rGO compared to GO has caused the poor polymerization and distribution of PANi nanostructures, and less effective doping of PANi via the carboxyl groups.


7.2.3 Graphene–carbon nanotube (CNT) supercapacitors. 
In graphene-based supercapacitors, re-stacking of graphene sheets can lead to the decrease of active surface area. To solve this problem, CNTs can be used as spacers to create nanopores among graphene layers, and at the same time provide good conductivity. For example, poly(ethyleneimine) (PEI)-modified rGO sheets mixed with acid-oxidized multi-walled CNTs to make hybrid carbon films gave an average specific capacitance of 120 F g−1 at a high scan rate of 1 V s−1.52 The concept of using CNT spacers is further employed in a three dimensional (3D) CNT/graphene sandwich structure (CGS), in which CNTs are grown amongst the graphene layers via the CVD process (Fig. 8A and B).53 The resulting Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) surface area of the CGS is 612 m2 g−1, which is much higher than that of graphene (202 m2 g−1). A specific capacitance of 386 F g−1 is thus obtained at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. The capacitance increases for ca. 20% compared to the initial value after 2000 cycles (Fig. 8C), suggesting the excellent electrochemical stability of the hybrid carbon electrode.
 Fig. 8  (A) Schematic illustration of the formation of hybrid materials with CNTs grown in between graphene nanosheets, showing stacked layers of GO (left), catalyst particles adhered onto layer surface after deposition (middle), and CNTs in between graphene layers after growth (right). (B) SEM image of the CGS sheet. (C) Variations of specific capacitance versus the cycle number measured at a scan rate of 200 mV s−1 in 6 M KOH within the potential range from −0.2 to 0.45 V (versus saturated calomel electrode (SCE)). Reproduced with permission from ref. 53. Copyright 2010, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 

7.3 Fuel cells
Unlike batteries or supercapacitors, which store energy chemically in the electrochemical cells, the fuel cell generates electricity via reactions between a fuel (anode) and an oxidant (cathode), which are continuously supplied from external sources. There are several different combinations of the fuel and oxidant, with typical examples including the hydrogen/oxygen cell and the methanol/oxygen cell. Pt-based catalysts are the most popular materials used for low-temperature fuel cells, e.g. the oxidation of hydrogen, methanol, or reformate.249 Since Pt is very expensive, Pt loading must be minimized, but the fuel cell performance cannot be compromised. Therefore, carbon-based catalyst supports, such as carbon black, CNTs and graphene, are used to provide good dispersity and thus large effective surface area of the supported catalyst particles. Graphene–Pt composites have been attempted in the fuel cells, such as the methanol oxidation cells60–62,250–252 and the oxygen reduction cells.63,253,254
Enhanced electrocatalytic activity in methanol oxidation has been obtained in graphene-supported Pt catalysts as compared to the commercial carbon black (Vulcan XC-72) supported Pt NPs.60,61 The superior performance arises from the large specific surface area of graphene and its high conductivity for electron and ion transport. Graphene has also shown advantages compared to the CNT-based catalyst support. First, the 2D configuration of graphene sheets with both sides exposed to the solution, leading to larger active surface area compared to the 1D tube structures. Second, due to the large curvature of the CNT walls, the deposited Pt particles are sometimes aggregated, and not as uniformly distributed as on graphene-based supports.250 Moreover, it is demonstrated that the chemically converted graphene, or rGO, displays better tolerance towards CO poisoning during the methanol oxidation compared to CNTs, because the residual oxygenated functional groups of rGO can react and remove the carbonaceous species.250 In a recent report, Yoo et al. found that graphene nanosheets (GNS) are able to assist the formation of Pt clusters with a size of ∼0.5 nm,251 and because these clusters are well distributed on the GNS surface, their aggregation into larger Pt particles is avoided. In addition, based on a theoretical study, surface defects and voids on the graphene surface can enhance the interaction between the graphene and anchored Pt or Au clusters.255 Consequently, these sub-nanometre Pt clusters can remain stable on GNS even after the heat treatment at 400 °C in an Ar/H2 environment. The resulting Pt–GNS hybrid catalyst shows unusually high activity for methanol oxidation, e.g. the Pt–GNS exhibits a current density of 0.12 mA cm−2 at 0.6 V (versus reference hydrogen electrode), about 3 times higher than that obtained with the Pt–carbon black catalyst.
Nitrogen-doped graphene sheets, with better conductivity compared to un-doped ones,256 have also been used as catalyst supports in fuel cells.62,63 The N-doped rGO can be prepared by nitrogen plasma treatment of rGO,63 or thermal reduction of GO in the presence of ammonia (NH3),62 which gives rise to nitrogen species on the carbon basal plane, such as amino, pyridine and graphitic type groups. The presence of the nitrogen species results in a good coverage and dispersion of the in situ synthesized Pt NPs compared to the un-doped rGO surface. This advantage along with the N-doping induced increase of the electronic conductivity256 has led to much enhanced electrocatalytic activities of N-rGO–Pt catalysts.62,63 For example, in a methanol fuel cell, the N-doped rGO–Pt catalyst exhibited an oxidation current of 135 mA mg−1, which is 2 times higher than that of the rGO–Pt catalyst.62
7.4 Photovoltaic devices
A photovoltaic device converts the solar energy into electricity. Besides the widely commercialized Si based solar cells, cheap and efficient alternatives, such as the polymer based solar cells, dye (or quantum dots, QD) sensitized solar cells, have also been intensively investigated. The following context will discuss the incorporation of graphene into these devices.

7.4.1 Silicon based solar cells. 
In order to partially replace silicon, thus reducing cost in solar cell devices, carbon based materials have been attempted in the p-type amorphous carbon/n-type silicon (p-AC/n-Si) heterojunctions,257 and CNT/Si heterojunctions.258 However, amorphous carbon usually encounters difficulties in tuning its electronic properties, while the CNT-based thin film suffers from bundling and thus reduces the film connectivity and conductivity. In contrast, graphene-based films can be prepared with controlled thickness, good surface continuity, and tunable properties via doping, covalent or non-covalent functionalizations. CVD-grown graphene sheets with sizes of tens to hundreds micrometres have been deposited on n-Si with 100% coverage to make the Schottky junction solar cell,64 which shows an efficiency (PCE, η) of up to ∼1.5% with a fill factor of ∼56% (FF, actual obtainable maximum power vs. the theoretical power). In addition to its low cost, the graphene film serves as a semitransparent electrode and an antireflection coating for the graphene/n-Si solar cells, and helps to generate a built-in voltage of 0.55–0.57 V for the effective electron-hole separation.64,259 Although the obtained efficiency is still lower than that of pure Si-based solar cells, it is suggested that the efficiency can be increased in future by improving the conductivity and transparency of the graphene film.64 Additionally, the tunable work function of the graphene layer affords the additional advantage to the graphene/silicon solar cells, since a desirable work function allows for the efficient carrier injection at the interface. One way to adjust the work function of the graphene film is through controlling the layer number of the graphene sheets via the LbL deposition,260 which has shown a sequential increase in work function with increasing layer numbers. Another effective way to control the work function is via chemical doping, e.g. Au-doping through the electrochemical deposition.261 The resulting Au-doped graphene films exhibit a change in work function of up to ∼0.5 eV (i.e. from −4.66 eV to −3.96 eV), which leads to more than 40 times increase in PCE as compared to the un-doped graphene films.


7.4.2 Polymer based solar cells. 
In polymer-based heterojunction solar cells, graphene-based materials have been composited and incorporated to function as the electrodes,19,33,217,262–264 electron transporters/acceptors,225,265–267 and hole transporters.218
a. Transparent electrodes. 
Graphene thin films with easy accessibility, good flexibility and transparency have shown promises to replace indium tin oxide (ITO) as the transparent electrode for solar cells and other electronic devices. In a typical fabrication process, GO solutions are spin-coated on quartz substrate and reduced chemically followed by high temperature annealing. Additional layers in the device configuration are deposited on top of the rGO film in sequence to give the organic (e.g. quartz/rGO/P3HT/PCBM/PEDOT:PSS/LiF/Al)217 or organic/inorganic hybrid (e.g. quartz/rGO/ZnO/P3HT/PEDOT:PSS/Au)19 photovoltaic devices (Fig. 9A). High temperature annealing not only improves the conductivity of the rGO film,217,264 but also increases the work function of rGO, resulting in a better match between the Fermi-level of the rGO layer and the conduction band of the adjacent semiconducting layer for efficient charge injection.19 Besides the work function, another key concern for the rGO electrode is the transmittance. It is found that there exists a critical value for the transmittance of the rGO electrode (e.g. 65% in a device with a configuration of rGO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/TiO2/Al),33 above which the performance of the device mainly depends on the charge transport efficiency through the rGO electrodes, and below which the performance is dominated by the light transmission efficiency. In addition to rGO films, CVD-grown graphene films with better electrical conductivity have also been used as the transparent electrode. The performance of the CVD-grown graphene anode can be improved by modulating its work function through chemical means such as ozone treatment or non-covalent functionalization.262 In the former approach, although ozone treatment can generate the OH and CO groups on the graphene surface, thus improving the open circuit voltage (Voc) and PCE, the electronic conductivity is compromised due to the disrupted sp2 network, which results in the decreased FF. In contrast, the non-covalent functionalization not only retains the good conductivity of CVD-grown graphene, but also increases the Voc and FF. For example, the functionalization of CVD-grown graphene with pyrene buanoic acid succidymidyl ester (PBASE) can adjust the work function of the graphene film from −4.2 to −4.7 eV, resulting in the increased Voc, FF, and PCE with values of 0.55 V, 51.3%, and 1.71%, respectively (with a device configuration of glass/PBASE-graphene/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/LiF/Al).262 Moreover, graphene films can be deposited/transferred onto flexible substrates, which presents as another advantage compared to the conventional ITO electrode.33,263 For example, the organic solar cell with graphene film deposited on polyethylene terephthalate (PET) as the electrode can be operated under bending condition with a bending angle of up to 138°, whereas the ITO-based solar cell, with a comparable value of PCE, shows cracks under bending of only 60°.263
 Fig. 9  (A) Schematic illustration of the rGO thin film used as the transparent electrode in a ZnO/P3HT hybrid solar cell. Reproduced with permission from ref. 19. Copyright 2010, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (B) Schematic illustration of the P3HT/graphene hybrid film used as the electron transport/acceptor layer in a polymer solar cell. Reproduced with permission from ref. 267. Copyright 2009, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (C) Left: schematic illustration of GO used as the hole transport layer in a polymer solar cell. Right: Current–voltage characteristics of photovoltaic devices with no hole transport layer (curve labeled as ITO), with a 30 nm PEDOT:PSS layer, and a 2 nm thick GO film. Reproduced with permission from ref. 218. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. 
b. Electron transport/acceptors. 
One of the most important components in a polymer-based photovoltaic cell is the electron donor/acceptor layer (or the heterojunction), which contains a conjugated polymer (e.g. poly(3-hexylthiophene, P3HT) to generate electron–hole pairs upon photon absorption, and an acceptor with a relatively high electron affinity to dissociate the electron–hole pairs into separate charges. Fullerene and its derivatives (e.g. phenyl-C61-butyric acid, PCBM) are among the mostly employed acceptor materials due to their high electron affinity and charge mobility. The combination of P3HT and PCBM have been studied intensively in various configurations and the cell efficiencies of up to ∼6% have been achieved.265 However, the electron transport in the heterojunction is hindered due to problems associated with the phase separation process used to make the polymeric heterojunction, such as the isolated domains and structural traps. These problems have limited the obtained maximum efficiency in the polymer-based solar cells.266 Graphene-based materials are anticipated to be used for the effective electron–hole separation and charge transport when blended with conjugated polymers, owing to its large surface area for donor/acceptor interfaces and continuous pathway for the electron transfer.225,267–269 For example, P3HT can be covalently functionalized on GO, and then mixed with C60 to form the donor/acceptor heterojunction. The resulting GO-P3HT/C60 based solar cell outperforms the P3HT/C60 based cell with two times increase in PCE.225 Alternatively, C60-grafted graphene can be mixed with P3HT and applied as the acceptor layer.269 Also, the isocyanate-modified GO sheets have been directly mixed with P3HT and function as the electron acceptor (Fig. 9B). In this work, the thermal annealing has played an important role in tuning the work function of the functionalized rGO for efficient charge carrier injection. When annealed at 160 °C for 20 min, the resulting P3HT/isocyanate-rGO based solar cell shows a maximum PCE of ∼ 1.1%.
c. Hole transport layers. 
Direct connection of the electron donor/acceptor layer between the cathode and anode will result in the fast recombination of charge carriers and current leakage. Therefore, a hole transport layer is usually incorporated in between the anode and the electron donor/acceptor layer, such as the commonly used poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)∶poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS). GO film has been shown as a simple and effective alternative to PEDOT:PSS in polymer-based solar cells.218 In the configuration of glass/PBASE-ITO/GO/P3HT:PCBM/Al, the GO film with a band gap of ∼3.6 eV is able to hinder the electron transport from the PCBM LUMO to the ITO anode, while bridging the holes to the anode. GO thin film with a thickness of ∼2 nm has shown the best performance, since thicker films lead to larger resistance and reduced transmittance. The best PCE value obtained with the 2 nm GO film is ∼3.5%, which is comparable to ∼3.6% obtained in the PEDOT:PSS based solar cells (Fig. 9C).


7.4.3 Dye sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). 
Dye sensitized solar cells (DSSCs), in contrast to the solid state solar cells, usually consist of a layer of semiconducting materials deposited on the anode, e.g. TiO2, covered with photo-sensitive dyes, and connected to a platinum cathode via an electrolyte. Upon light irradiation, the dye molecules are excited to inject electrons into the conduction band of the semiconductor layer. In DSSCs, it is important to increase the loading of dye molecules, enlarge the interface area of dye/electrolyte, and improve the conductivity of electrons at the semiconductor layer to compete with charge recombination. Therefore, besides being used as the transparent electrode in DSSCs,270,271 the graphene derivatives have also been composited with TiO2 nanostructures to enhance the above-mentioned factors. One of the benefits of rGO incorporation is that the work function of rGO (about −4.4 eV) is between the conduction band of TiO2 and the work function of ITO, which allows for the fast collection of electrons at the anode to suppress charge recombination.160 Importantly, on the basis of a theoretical study,272 valence electrons might be directly excited under the visible light irradiation from graphene into the TiO2 conduction band at the graphene/TiO2 interface, giving rise to separated electron–hole pairs. In addition, the conductive percolation threshold of the rGO/TiO2 layer is only at ∼1 vol% of the rGO loading.161 However, increasing the rGO content compromises the transmittance of the composite film, hence an optimal value is to be determined to maximize the device efficiency.156,161 Besides the enhanced conductivity, the large surface area of rGO improves the loading and dispersion of the dye molecules. It is reported that dye molecules, e.g. porphyrin, can directly bind to rGO surfaces, and upon photo-irradiation undergo energy and electron transfer to generate the photo-current.273 Moreover, the rGO/TiO2 composite forms a porous network, resulting in enhancement of light scattering at the photoanode.161 Consequently, by using rGO/TiO2 as the photoanode, a PCE of about 4–7% is obtained, which is at least 39% higher as compared to the commercial P25 TiO2.156,161


7.4.4 Quantum dots-based solar cells. 
In addition to the silicon solar cells, polymer based solar cells and DSSCs, graphene has also been hybridized with quantum dots (QDs) to make photovoltaic devices. A novel layered graphene/CdS QD structure on ITO has been developed via electrophoretic and chemical bath deposition (Fig. 10A).180 When the device contains eight repeating graphene/CdS QD bilayers, a surprisingly high PCE value of 16% is achieved (Fig. 10B), which outperforms all other carbon/QD based photovoltaic devices with the reported PCE value of ∼5%. The layered structure is believed to be critical in achieving the fast electron transfer from the QDs to the graphene acceptor and suppressing charge recombination. For comparison, a layered SWCNT/CdS-QD hybrid device was constructed in the same way, which shows a PCE of ∼9% (Fig. 10B). The reason why the graphene based device shows better performance compared to the one based on SWCNTs is because the graphene provides a better template for loading QDs, and the work function of graphene (∼ −4.2 eV) compared to that of SWCNTs (∼ −4.8 eV) energetically favors the direct electron transfer to the ITO electrode (with a work function of ∼ −4.8 eV).
 Fig. 10  (A) Cross-sectional SEM image of a layered graphene/QDs sample. (B) Dependence of the incident photon conversion efficiency (IPCE, external quantum yield) on the incident wavelength of different photoelectrodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 180. Copyright 2010, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 

7.5 Photocatalysis
In a photocatalysis reaction, the light induced electron–hole pairs formed on the catalyst surfaces (e.g. TiO2), instead of being collected by an electrode, are directly scavenged by chemical reactions. Graphene/TiO2 composites have shown an enhanced catalytic efficiency compared to TiO2 alone in reactions such as water-splitting,274 degradation of methylene blue (MB),67–69 and decomposition of 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4-D).275 These enhanced performances are attributed to the large surface area of graphene derivatives for loading of catalysts, and the excellent conductivity for electron capture and transport. However, compared to CNT-based composites, graphene-based composites in photocatalysis have not shown the evident advantages, except for the low cost.113 This is in contrast to the case of photovoltaic applications mentioned above. One of the possible reasons is that in photovoltaic devices, the composite films are connected to an external circuit for the electron transport and collection. The reliable process for making continuously graphene-based thin films, compared to CNT-based films, affords the continuous electron pathway and fast electron collection at the electrode.64,180 However, in photocatalysis, the electron transfer to external circuit is not required.
7.6 Raman enhancement
Resonant Raman scattering (RRS) and surface enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) are important techniques to characterize material structures based on the Raman spectroscopy. The RRS requires the excitation wavelength in resonance with the electronic transition of the molecule, while the SERS mainly relies on the rough surface or nanoparticle films of noble metals such as Au and Ag. Recently, graphene-enhanced Raman scattering has attracted much research interest.70–72 It is found that the enhancement of the absorbed molecules on graphene mainly comes from the fluorescent quenching effect due to the resonance energy transfer, which considerably reduces the background noise.70 Meanwhile, the charge transfer between the molecules and graphene results in a chemical enhancement (or the chemical mechanism, CM).71 This chemical enhancement, rather than the electromagnetic mechanism (EM), is confirmed by a systematic study of graphene-enhanced scattering of surface absorbed protoporphyrin IX (PPP). This work shows that the first layer of PPP on graphene contributes to most of the enhancement, and the enhancement increases when the functional group of PPP becomes closer to the graphene surface.72 However, the CM-based enhancement is orders weaker compared to the EM-based one. As a result, the combination of fluorescence quenching of graphene and the EM enhancement from noble metals is expected to lead to even superior enhancement of Raman signals. This concept has been demonstrated in Raman substrates made from graphene/Au NPs144,145,276,277 and graphene/Au film,278 where the composite substrates have shown better Raman enhancement compared to the graphene film (GO or rGO) or NPs alone. In the case of graphene/NP based Raman substrates, the particle loading, or the density of NPs on graphene-based templates, is important for the enhancement of signals. Two ways have been demonstrated to increase the particle loading. One is to use GO sheets with abundant functional groups as the nucleation sites for the in situ synthesis of NPs. The other is to use the microwave-synthesized 3D graphitic petal arrays with large specific surface area as the template for synthesis of NPs (Fig. 11).276
 Fig. 11  SEM images of (A) graphitic petals and (B) Au NP-decorated petals. (C) Raman spectra of 10−5 (black curve), 10−6 (red curve) and 10−7 M (green curve) R6G on Au-decorated graphitic petals. Reproduced with permission from ref. 276. Copyright 2010, American Institute of Physics. 
Moreover, it has been demonstrated that the Raman signals of graphene or functionalized graphene (GO or rGO) can be greatly enhanced by the anchored metal nanostructures.142,185,279 For example, in situ synthesized Ag NPs can enhance the Raman signals of the D and G bands of GO with one order of enhancement (up to 16 folds).279 Similarly, snowflake-shaped Au structures deposited on rGO have shown the Raman enhancement of rGO;142 and Au nanorod can give rise to enhanced Raman signals of rGO by 34 folds at the rod tip.185
8. Conclusions and outlook
The collection of many useful properties of graphene and its derivatives, along with the low cost and availability for mass production, has made them promising building blocks in functional composites, incorporated with polymers, metals, metal oxides, organic crystals, and so on.
Various fabrication methods have been developed for preparation of graphene-based composites. Driven by the constant demand for optimization of composite properties, the particular efforts are directed towards the design and formation of specially constructed hybrid architectures rather than the random mixtures. Some examples are highlighted in this review, such as the graphene-encapsulated metal oxides for Li ion batteries, sandwiched graphene/CNT structures for supercapacitors, and layered graphene/quantum dots for solar cells. More versatile fabrication/synthesis strategies are expected to be developed in future for the continuous advancement of functional composites.
To date, graphene-based fillers have brought about enhanced electrical, thermal and mechanical properties to graphene–polymer composites, which outperform many types of traditional filler materials. These advantages of graphene-based fillers arise from their large surface area for effective electrical/heat conduction and load transfer, and the 2D functionable surfaces for the strong filler/matrix interaction.
Other types of graphene-based composites, involving conductive polymers, transition metal oxides, and noble metals, are attractive candidates in the electrochemical energy conversion and storage based applications, such as the Li ion batteries, supercapacitors and fuel cells, with recent achievement in enhanced performances and anticipated commercialization in the near future.
Another promising area for graphene-based composites lies in various strategies for harvesting of solar energy, like organic–inorganic hybrid solar cells and photocatalysis. Flexible and transparent electrodes based on graphene thin films have been used to grow semiconductor nanostructures, which are directly incorporated in photovoltaic devices, in order to place the conventional but expensive ITO electrodes to realize high efficiency for photo-conversion at relatively low cost. In other investigations, graphene-based composite films have also functioned as the electron transport/acceptor layer, hole transport layer and so on. Despite the huge efforts, the significant breakthrough in harvesting solar energy has not been achieved in laboratory trials and remains the key challenge for future exploitation.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by AcRF Tier 2 (ARC 10/10, No. MOE2010-T2-1-060) from MOE, CRP (NRF-CRP2-2007-01) from NRF, CREATE program (Nanomaterials for Energy and Water Management) from NRF, and New Initiative Fund FY 2010 (M58120031) from NTU in Singapore.
References
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Stoller, S. Park, Y. Zhu, J. An and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3498–3502 CrossRef CAS .
R. R. Nair, P. Blake, A. N. Grigorenko, K. S. Novoselov, T. J. Booth, T. Stauber, N. M. R. Peres and A. K. Geim, Science, 2008, 320, 1308–1308 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lee, X. D. Wei, J. W. Kysar and J. Hone, Science, 2008, 321, 385–388 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Balandin, S. Ghosh, W. Bao, I. Calizo, D. Teweldebrhan, F. Miao and C. N. Lau, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 902–907 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Kim, Y. Zhao, H. Jang, S. Y. Lee, J. M. Kim, K. S. Kim, J.-H. Ahn, P. Kim, J.-Y. Choi and B. H. Hong, Nature, 2009, 457, 706–710 CrossRef CAS .
X. S. Li, W. W. Cai, J. H. An, S. Kim, J. Nah, D. X. Yang, R. Piner, A. Velamakanni, I. Jung, E. Tutuc, S. K. Banerjee, L. Colombo and R. S. Ruoff, Science, 2009, 324, 1312–1314 CrossRef CAS .
P. W. Sutter, J. I. Flege and E. A. Sutter, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 406–411 CrossRef CAS .
N. Xiao, X. Dong, L. Song, D. Liu, Y. Tay, S. Wu, L.-J. Li, Y. Zhao, T. Yu, H. Zhang, W. Huang, H. H. Hng, P. M. Ajayan and Q. Yan, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 2749–2755 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li, M. B. Muller, S. Gilje, R. B. Kaner and G. G. Wallace, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 101–105 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hernandez, V. Nicolosi, M. Lotya, F. M. Blighe, Z. Y. Sun, S. De, I. T. McGovern, B. Holland, M. Byrne, Y. K. Gun'ko, J. J. Boland, P. Niraj, G. Duesberg, S. Krishnamurthy, R. Goodhue, J. Hutchison, V. Scardaci, A. C. Ferrari and J. N. Coleman, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 563–568 CrossRef CAS .
C. Vallés, C. Drummond, H. Saadaoui, C. A. Furtado, M. He, O. Roubeau, L. Ortolani, M. Monthioux and A. Pénicaud, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 15802–15804 CrossRef .
M. Lotya, Y. Hernandez, P. J. King, R. J. Smith, V. Nicolosi, L. S. Karlsson, F. M. Blighe, S. De, Z. Wang, I. T. McGovern, G. S. Duesberg and J. N. Coleman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 3611–3620 CrossRef CAS .
X. Qi, K.-Y. Pu, H. Li, X. Zhou, S. Wu, Q.-L. Fan, B. Liu, F. Boey, W. Huang and H. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 9426–9429 CrossRef CAS .
Q. He, H. G. Sudibya, Z. Yin, S. Wu, H. Li, F. Boey, W. Huang, P. Chen and H. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3201–3208 CrossRef CAS .
B. Li, X. Cao, H. G. Ong, J. W. Cheah, X. Zhou, Z. Yin, H. Li, J. Wang, F. Boey, W. Huang and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3058–3061 CrossRef CAS .
X. Qi, K. Y. Pu, X. Zhou, H. Li, B. Liu, F. Boey, W. Huang and H. Zhang, Small, 2010, 6, 663–669 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wu, Z. Yin, Q. He, X. Huang, X. Zhou and H. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 11816–11821 CAS .
Z. Yin, S. Wu, X. Zhou, X. Huang, Q. Zhang, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Small, 2010, 6, 307–312 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhou, X. Huang, X. Qi, S. Wu, C. Xue, F. Y. C. Boey, Q. Yan, P. Chen and H. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 10842–10846 CAS .
X. Zhou, Y. Wei, Q. He, F. Boey, Q. Zhang and H. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 6974–6976 RSC .
J. Liu, Z. Yin, X. Cao, F. Zhao, A. Lin, L. Xie, Q. Fan, F. Boey, H. Zhang and W. Huang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3987–3992 CrossRef CAS .
W. S. Hummers and R. E. Offeman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1958, 80, 1339–1339 CrossRef CAS .
G. Lu, X. Zhou, H. Li, Z. Yin, B. Li, L. Huang, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 6164–6166 CrossRef CAS .
B. Li, G. Lu, X. Zhou, X. Cao, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 10455–10458 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cao, Q. He, W. H. Shi, B. Li, Z. Y. Zeng, Y. Shi, Q. Yan and H. Zhang, Small, 2011, 9, 1199–1202 CrossRef .
X. Huang, Z. Y. Yin, S. X. Wu, X. Y. Qi, Q. Y. He, Q. C. Zhang, Q. Y. Yan, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Small, 2011, 7, 1876–1902 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, J. Zhang, X. Zhou, G. Lu, Z. Yin, G. Li, T. Wu, F. Boey, S. S. Venkatraman and H. Zhang, Langmuir, 2009, 26, 5603–5609 CrossRef .
X. Zhou, G. Lu, X. Qi, S. Wu, H. Li, F. Boey and H. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 19119–19122 CAS .
Z. Wang, J. Zhang, P. Chen, X. Zhou, Y. Yang, S. Wu, L. Niu, Y. Han, L. H. Wang, P. Chen, F. Boey, Q. C. Zhang, B. Liedberg and H. Zhang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2011, 26, 3881–3886 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li, M. B. Muller, S. Gilje, R. B. Kaner and G. G. Wallace, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 101–105 CrossRef CAS .
I. K. Moon, J. Lee, R. S. Ruoff and H. Lee, Nat. Commun., 2010, 1, 73 CrossRef .
Z. Yin, S. Y. Sun, T. Salim, S. Wu, X. Huang, Q. He, Y. M. Lam and H. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5263–5268 CrossRef CAS .
H. G. Sudibya, Q. He, H. Zhang and P. Chen, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 1990–1994 CrossRef CAS .
R. Muszynski, B. Seger and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 5263–5266 CAS .
W. Shi, J. Zhu, D. H. Sim, Y. Y. Tay, Z. Y. Lu, X. J. Zhang, H. Zhang, H. H. Hng and Q. Yan, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3422–3427 RSC .
J. Zhu, T. Zhu, X. Zhou, Y. Zhang, X. W. Lou, X. Chen, H. Chen, H. Zhang, H. H. Hng, J. Ma and Q. Yan, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 1084–1089 RSC .
X. Huang, S. Li, Y. Huang, S. Wu, X. Zhou, S. Li, C. L. Gan, F. Boey, C. A. Mirkin and H. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 292 CrossRef .
S. Wang, B. M. Goh, K. K. Manga, Q. Bao, P. Yang and K. P. Loh, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 6180–6186 CrossRef CAS .
T. H. Han, W. J. Lee, D. H. Lee, J. E. Kim, E. Y. Choi and S. O. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2060–2064 CrossRef CAS .
H. F. Yang, Q. X. Zhang, C. S. Shan, F. H. Li, D. X. Han and L. Niu, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 6708–6712 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ramanathan, A. A. Abdala, S. Stankovich, D. A. Dikin, M. Herrera-Alonso, R. D. Piner, D. H. Adamson, H. C. Schniepp, X. Chen, R. S. Ruoff, S. T. Nguyen, I. A. Aksay, R. K. Prud'homme and L. C. Brinson, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 327–331 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jahan, Q. Bao, J.-X. Yang and K. P. Loh, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 14487–14495 CrossRef CAS .
C. Petit and T. J. Bandosz, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 111–118 CrossRef CAS .
C. Petit, J. Burress and T. J. Bandosz, Carbon, 2011, 49, 563–572 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Lu, H. H. Yang, C. L. Zhu, X. Chen and G. N. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 121, 4879–4881 CrossRef .
H. Chang, L. Tang, Y. Wang, J. Jiang and J. Li, Anal. Chem., 2010, 82, 2341–2346 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Z. Li, D. Hu, C.-T. Lin, J. Li and Y. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 9274–9276 CrossRef CAS .
X. Dong, B. Li, A. Wei, X. Cao, M. B. Chan-Park, H. Zhang, L.-J. Li, W. Huang and P. Chen, Carbon, 2011, 49, 2944–2949 CrossRef CAS .
V. C. Tung, L.-M. Chen, M. J. Allen, J. K. Wassei, K. Nelson, R. B. Kaner and Y. Yang, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1949–1955 CrossRef CAS .
E. Yoo, J. Kim, E. Hosono, H.-s. Zhou, T. Kudo and I. Honma, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2277–2282 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yu and L. Dai, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2009, 1, 467–470 CrossRef .
Z. Fan, J. Yan, L. Zhi, Q. Zhang, T. Wei, J. Feng, M. Zhang, W. Qian and F. Wei, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3723–3728 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-S. Wu, W. Ren, L. Wen, L. Gao, J. Zhao, Z. Chen, G. Zhou, F. Li and H.-M. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3187–3194 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang, X. Feng, S. Ivanovici and K. Müllen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 8408–8411 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, L.-F. Cui, Y. Yang, H. Sanchez Casalongue, J. T. Robinson, Y. Liang, Y. Cui and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 13978–13980 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, H. Li, L. Pan, T. Lu and Z. Sun, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2009, 634, 68–71 CrossRef CAS .
F. Li, J. Song, H. Yang, S. Gan, Q. Zhang, D. Han, A. Ivaska and L. Niu, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 455602 CrossRef .
F. Kim, J. Luo, R. Cruz-Silva, L. J. Cote, K. Sohn and J. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 2867–2873 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, L. Tang and J. Li, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 846–849 CrossRef CAS .
L. Dong, R. R. S. Gari, Z. Li, M. M. Craig and S. Hou, Carbon, 2010, 48, 781–787 CrossRef CAS .
L.-S. Zhang, X.-Q. Liang, W.-G. Song and Z.-Y. Wu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 12055–12059 RSC .
R. I. Jafri, N. Rajalakshmi and S. Ramaprabhu, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 7114–7117 RSC .
X. Li, H. Zhu, K. Wang, A. Cao, J. Wei, C. Li, Y. Jia, Z. Li, X. Li and D. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2743–2748 CrossRef CAS .
J. Song, Z. Yin, Z. Yang, P. Amaladass, S. Wu, J. Ye, Y. Zhao, W. Deng, H. Zhang and X. Liu, Chem. Eur. J., 2011 DOI:10.1002/chem.201101263 .
H. Liu, S. Ryu, Z. Chen, M. L. Steigerwald, C. Nuckolls and L. E. Brus, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 17099–17101 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, H. Bai, Y. Wang, Z. Liu, X. Zhang and D. D. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 4175–4181 CrossRef CAS .
J. Du, X. Lai, N. Yang, J. Zhai, D. Kisailus, F. Su, D. Wang and L. Jiang, ACS Nano, 2010, 5, 590–596 CrossRef .
H. Zhang, X. J. Lv, Y. M. Li, Y. Wang and J. H. Li, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 380–386 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xie, X. Ling, Y. Fang, J. Zhang and Z. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 9890–9891 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ling, L. Xie, Y. Fang, H. Xu, H. Zhang, J. Kong, M. S. Dresselhaus, J. Zhang and Z. Liu, Nano Lett., 2009, 10, 553–561 CrossRef .
X. Ling and J. Zhang, Small, 2010, 6, 2020–2025 CrossRef CAS .
X. Du, I. Skachko, A. Barker and E. Y. Andrei, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 491–495 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, M. I. Katsnelson, I. V. Grigorieva, S. V. Dubonos and A. A. Firsov, Nature, 2005, 438, 197–200 CrossRef CAS .
Y. B. Zhang, Y. W. Tan, H. L. Stormer and P. Kim, Nature, 2005, 438, 201–204 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Novoselov, Z. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Morozov, H. L. Stormer, U. Zeitler, J. C. Maan, G. S. Boebinger, P. Kim and A. K. Geim, Science, 2007, 315, 1379–1379 CrossRef CAS .
X. Du, I. Skachko, F. Duerr, A. Luican and E. Y. Andrei, Nature, 2009, 462, 192–195 CrossRef CAS .
V. P. Gusynin, S. G. Sharapov and J. P. Carbotte, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 96, 256802 CrossRef CAS .
K. F. Mak, M. Y. Sfeir, Y. Wu, C. H. Lui, J. A. Misewich and T. F. Heinz, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 101, 196405 CrossRef .
J. M. Dawlaty, S. Shivaraman, M. Chandrashekhar, F. Rana and M. G. Spencer, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 042116 CrossRef .
F. Wang, Y. Zhang, C. Tian, C. Girit, A. Zettl, M. Crommie and Y. R. Shen, Science, 2008, 320, 206–209 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Seol, I. Jo, A. L. Moore, L. Lindsay, Z. H. Aitken, M. T. Pettes, X. Li, Z. Yao, R. Huang, D. Broido, N. Mingo, R. S. Ruoff and L. Shi, Science, 2010, 328, 213–216 CrossRef CAS .
Y. W. Gao and P. Hao, Physica E, 2009, 41, 1561–1566 CrossRef CAS .
O. Hod and G. E. Scuseria, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2619–2622 CrossRef CAS .
O. Frank, G. Tsoukleri, J. Parthenios, K. Papagelis, I. Riaz, R. Jalil, K. S. Novoselov and C. Galiotis, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3131–3138 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Schniepp, K. N. Kudin, J. L. Li, R. K. Prud'homme, R. Car, D. A. Saville and I. A. Aksay, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 2577–2584 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, X. Xu, J. Lu, M. Lin, Q. Bao, B. Özyilmaz and K. P. Loh, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 6146–6152 CrossRef CAS .
C. Berger, Z. Song, T. Li, X. Li, A. Y. Ogbazghi, R. Feng, Z. Dai, A. N. Marchenkov, E. H. Conrad, P. N. First and W. A. de Heer, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 19912–19916 CrossRef CAS .
K. V. Emtsev, A. Bostwick, K. Horn, J. Jobst, G. L. Kellogg, L. Ley, J. L. McChesney, T. Ohta, S. A. Reshanov, J. Rohrl, E. Rotenberg, A. K. Schmid, D. Waldmann, H. B. Weber and T. Seyller, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 203–207 CrossRef CAS .
M. Choucair, P. Thordarson and J. A. Stride, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 30–33 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, L. Zhi, N. Tsao, Ž. Tomović, J. Li and K. Müllen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 2990–2992 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yan, X. Cui and L.-s. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 5944–5945 CrossRef CAS .
H.-P. Boehm and E. Stumpp, Carbon, 2007, 45, 1381–1383 CrossRef CAS .
S. Malik, A. Vijayaraghavan, R. Erni, K. Ariga, I. Khalakhan and J. P. Hill, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 2139–2143 RSC .
T. E. Weller, M. Ellerby, S. S. Saxena, R. P. Smith and N. T. Skipper, Nat. Phys., 2005, 1, 39–41 CrossRef CAS .
N. Emery, C. Hérold, M. d'Astuto, V. Garcia, C. Bellin, J. F. Marêché, P. Lagrange and G. Loupias, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 95, 087003 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Dresselhaus and G. Dresselhaus, Adv. Phys., 2002, 51, 1–186 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Li, G. Y. Zhang, X. D. Bai, X. M. Sun, X. R. Wang, E. Wang and H. J. Dai, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 538–542 CrossRef CAS .
N. Liu, F. Luo, H. Wu, Y. Liu, C. Zhang and J. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 1518–1525 CrossRef CAS .
A. Lerf, H. He, M. Forster and J. Klinowski, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 4477–4482 CrossRef CAS .
W. Gao, L. B. Alemany, L. Ci and P. M. Ajayan, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 403–408 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wu, Z. Yin, Q. He, G. Lu, X. Zhou and H. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 21, 3467–3470 RSC .
S. Agarwal, X. Zhou, F. Ye, Q. He, G. C. K. Chen, J. Soo, F. Boey, H. Zhang and P. Chen, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 2244–2247 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, Z. Lin, T. Liu, Z. Yin, X. Zhou, S. Chen, L. Xie, F. Boey, H. Zhang and W. Huang, Small, 2010, 6, 1536–1542 CrossRef CAS .
W. Hu, C. Peng, W. Luo, M. Lv, X. Li, D. Li, Q. Huang and C. Fan, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4317–4323 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, X. Li, Y. Huang, Y. Ma, X. Wan and Y. Chen, Carbon, 2010, 48, 2367–2371 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Z. Shi, Y. Huang, Y. Ma, C. Wang, M. Chen and Y. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 13103–13107 CAS .
X. Lv, Y. Huang, Z. Liu, J. Tian, Y. Wang, Y. Ma, J. Liang, S. Fu, X. Wan and Y. Chen, Small, 2009, 5, 1682–1687 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fan, W. Peng, Y. Li, X. Li, S. Wang, G. Zhang and F. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4490–4493 CrossRef CAS .
V. Dua, S. Surwade, S. Ammu, S. Agnihotra, S. Jain, K. Roberts, S. Park, R. Ruoff and S. Manohar, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 2154–2157 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Liu, S. H. Fu, B. Yuan, Y. L. Li and Z. X. Deng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 7279–7281 CrossRef CAS .
Q. He, S. Wu, S. Gao, X. Cao, Z. Yin, H. Li, P. Chen and H. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 5038–5044 CrossRef CAS .
G. Williams, B. Seger and P. V. Kamat, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 1487–1491 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, X. Z. Zhou, S. X. Wu, Y. Y. Wei, X. Y. Qi, J. Zhang, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Small, 2010, 6, 513–516 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Matsumoto, M. Koinuma, S. Y. Kim, Y. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, K. Hatakeyama, H. Tateishi and S. Ida, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 3461–3466 CAS .
Y. H. Ng, A. Iwase, A. Kudo and R. Amal, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2607–2612 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. McAllister, J. L. Li, D. H. Adamson, H. C. Schniepp, A. A. Abdala, J. Liu, M. Herrera-Alonso, D. L. Milius, R. Car, R. K. Prud'homme and I. A. Aksay, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 4396–4404 CrossRef CAS .
C. Mattevi, G. Eda, S. Agnoli, S. Miller, K. A. Mkhoyan, O. Celik, D. Mastrogiovanni, G. Granozzi, E. Garfunkel and M. Chhowalla, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 2577–2583 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lin, Y. Yao, Z. Li, Y. Liu, Z. Li and C.-P. Wong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 14819–14825 CAS .
S. Mao, G. Lu, K. Yu, Z. Bo and J. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3521–3526 CrossRef CAS .
Y. W. Zhu, M. D. Stoller, W. W. Cai, A. Velamakanni, R. D. Piner, D. Chen and R. S. Ruoff, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1227–1233 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, M. Agrawal, H. c. A. Becerril, Z. Bao, Z. Liu, Y. Chen and P. Peumans, ACS Nano, 2009, 4, 43–48 CrossRef .
H. A. Becerril, J. Mao, Z. Liu, R. M. Stoltenberg, Z. Bao and Y. Chen, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 463–470 CrossRef CAS .
C. D. Zangmeister, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 5625–5629 CrossRef CAS .
V. Abdelsayed, S. Moussa, H. M. Hassan, H. S. Aluri, M. M. Collinson and M. S. El-Shall, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2804–2809 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. Cote, R. Cruz-Silva and J. X. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 11027–11032 CrossRef CAS .
K. Vinodgopal, B. Neppolian, I. V. Lightcap, F. Grieser, M. Ashokkumar and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 1987–1993 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. A. Hassan, V. Abdelsayed, A. Khder, K. M. AbouZeid, J. Terner, M. S. El-Shall, S. I. Al-Resayes and A. A. El-Azhary, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 3832–3837 RSC .
Z. Wang, X. Zhou, J. Zhang, F. Boey and H. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 14071–14075 CAS .
M. Zhou, Y. Wang, Y. Zhai, J. Zhai, W. Ren, F. Wang and S. Dong, Chem.–Eur. J., 2009, 15, 6116–6120 CrossRef CAS .
H.-L. Guo, X.-F. Wang, Q.-Y. Qian, F.-B. Wang and X.-H. Xia, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 2653–2659 CrossRef CAS .
G. K. Ramesha and S. Sampath, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 7985–7989 CAS .
M. J. Fernández-Merino, L. Guardia, J. I. Paredes, S. Villar-Rodil, P. Solís-Fernández, A. Martínez-Alonso and J. M. D. Tascón, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 6426–6432 Search PubMed .
E. C. Salas, Z. Sun, A. Lüttge and J. M. Tour, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4852–4856 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pei, J. Zhao, J. Du, W. Ren and H.-M. Cheng, Carbon, 2010, 48, 4466–4474 CrossRef CAS .
G. Eda, Y. Y. Lin, C. Mattevi, H. Yamaguchi, H. A. Chen, I. S. Chen, C. W. Chen and M. Chhowalla, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 505–509 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yan, B. Li, X. Cui, Q. Wei, K. Tajima and L.-S. Li, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 1119–1124 CrossRef CAS .
S. Stankovich, D. A. Dikin, G. H. B. Dommett, K. M. Kohlhaas, E. J. Zimney, E. A. Stach, R. D. Piner, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Nature, 2006, 442, 282–286 CrossRef CAS .
F. H. Li, H. F. Yang, C. S. Shan, Q. X. Zhang, D. X. Han, A. Ivaska and L. Niu, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 4022–4025 RSC .
H. M. A. Hassan, V. Abdelsayed, A. Khder, K. M. AbouZeid, J. Terner, M. S. El-Shall, S. I. Al-Resayes and A. A. El-Azhary, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 3832–3837 RSC .
C. Xu, X. Wang and J. W. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 19841–19845 CAS .
K. Jasuja and V. Berry, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 2358–2366 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-K. Kim, H.-K. Na and D.-H. Min, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 13065–13070 CrossRef CAS .
G. Goncalves, P. Marques, C. M. Granadeiro, H. I. S. Nogueira, M. K. Singh and J. Gracio, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 4796–4802 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang, L. Zhang, B. Chen, N. Ji, F. Chen, Y. Zhang and Z. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 2733–2738 RSC .
J. Liu, S. Fu, B. Yuan, Y. Li and Z. Deng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 7279–7281 CrossRef CAS .
G. H. Lu, S. Mao, S. Park, R. S. Ruoff and J. H. Chen, Nano Res., 2009, 2, 192–200 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Shen, M. Shi, N. Li, B. Yan, H. W. Ma, Y. Z. Hu and M. X. Ye, Nano Res., 2010, 3, 339–349 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 520–527 CrossRef CAS .
T. Cassagneau and J. H. Fendler, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 1789–1793 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Scheuermann, L. Rumi, P. Steurer, W. Bannwarth and R. Mulhaupt, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 8262–8270 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Johnson, A. Behnam, S. J. Pearton and A. Ural, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4877–4880 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Si and E. T. Samulski, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 6792–6797 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, J. T. Robinson, G. Diankov and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 3270–3271 CrossRef CAS .
D. Marquardt, C. Vollmer, R. Thomann, P. Steurer, R. Mülhaupt, E. Redel and C. Janiak, Carbon, 2011, 49, 1326–1332 CrossRef CAS .
N. L. Yang, J. Zhai, D. Wang, Y. S. Chen and L. Jiang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 887–894 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, D. Choi, J. Li, Z. Yang, Z. Nie, R. Kou, D. Hu, C. Wang, L. V. Saraf, J. Zhang, I. A. Aksay and J. Liu, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 907–914 CrossRef CAS .
O. Akhavan, M. Abdolahad, A. Esfandiar and M. Mohatashamifar, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 12955–12959 CAS .
B. Li, X. T. Zhang, X. H. Li, L. Wang, R. Y. Han, B. B. Liu, W. T. Zheng, X. L. Li and Y. C. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 3499–3501 RSC .
Y. B. Tang, C. S. Lee, J. Xu, Z. T. Liu, Z. H. Chen, Z. B. He, Y. L. Cao, G. D. Yuan, H. S. Song, L. M. Chen, L. B. Luo, H. M. Cheng, W. J. Zhang, I. Bello and S. T. Lee, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3482–3488 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Sun, L. Gao and Y. Q. Liu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 083113 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, Z.-R. Tang, X. Fu and Y.-J. Xu, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 7303–7314 CrossRef CAS .
J. O. Hwang, D. H. Lee, J. Y. Kim, T. H. Han, B. H. Kim, M. Park, K. No and S. O. Kim, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 21, 3432–3437 RSC .
J. M. Lee, Y. B. Pyun, J. Yi, J. W. Choung and W. I. Park, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 19134–19138 CAS .
G. Williams and P. V. Kamat, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 13869–13873 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, R. Kou, D. Choi, Z. Yang, Z. Nie, J. Li, L. V. Saraf, D. Hu, J. Zhang, G. L. Graff, J. Liu, M. A. Pope and I. A. Aksay, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1587–1595 CrossRef CAS .
L. S. Zhang, L. Y. Jiang, H. J. Yan, W. D. Wang, W. Wang, W. G. Song, Y. G. Guo and L. J. Wan, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 5462–5467 RSC .
S. Chen, J. Zhu, X. Wu, Q. Han and X. Wang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2822–2830 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yan, Z. Fan, T. Wei, W. Qian, M. Zhang and F. Wei, Carbon, 2010, 48, 3825–3833 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yan, T. Wei, W. Qiao, B. Shao, Q. Zhao, L. Zhang and Z. Fan, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 6973–6978 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhu, Y. K. Sharma, Z. Zeng, X. Zhang, M. Srinivasan, S. Mhaisalkar, H. Zhang, H. H. Hng and Q. Yan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 8400–8406 CAS .
J. F. Shen, Y. Z. Hu, M. Shi, N. Li, H. W. Ma and M. X. Ye, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 1498–1503 CAS .
G. Zhou, D.-W. Wang, F. Li, L. Zhang, N. Li, Z.-S. Wu, L. Wen, G. Q. Lu and H.-M. Cheng, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 5306–5313 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liang, Y. Xu, D. Sui, L. Zhang, Y. Huang, Y. Ma, F. Li and Y. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 17465–17471 CAS .
X. Yang, X. Zhang, Y. Ma, Y. Huang, Y. Wang and Y. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 2710–2714 RSC .
J. Y. Son, Y.-H. Shin, H. Kim and H. M. Jang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2655–2658 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xu, X. Wang, L. C. Yang and Y. P. Wu, J. Solid State Chem., 2009, 182, 2486–2490 CrossRef CAS .
S. Watcharotone, D. A. Dikin, S. Stankovich, R. Piner, I. Jung, G. H. B. Dommett, G. Evmenenko, S. E. Wu, S. F. Chen, C. P. Liu, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1888–1892 CrossRef CAS .
M. Feng, R. Q. Sun, H. B. Zhan and Y. Chen, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 075601 CrossRef .
C. X. Guo, H. B. Yang, Z. M. Sheng, Z. S. Lu, Q. L. Song and C. M. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 3014–3017 CrossRef CAS .
A. Cao, Z. Liu, S. Chu, M. Wu, Z. Ye, Z. Cai, Y. Chang, S. Wang, Q. Gong and Y. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 103–106 CrossRef CAS .
C. Nethravathi, T. Nisha, N. Ravishankar, C. Shivakumara and M. Rajamathi, Carbon, 2009, 47, 2054–2059 CrossRef CAS .
Y. T. Kim, J. H. Han, B. H. Hong and Y. U. Kwon, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 515–518 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, K. Zhang, W. Chen, Y. Liu, Z. Geng, J. Zeng, N. Pan, L. Yan, X. Wang and J. G. Hou, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3033–3038 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-K. Kim, H.-K. Na, Y. W. Lee, H. Jang, S. W. Han and D.-H. Min, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 3185–3187 RSC .
S. Guo, S. Dong and E. Wang, ACS Nano, 2009, 4, 547–555 CrossRef .
I. V. Lightcap, T. H. Kosel and P. V. Kamat, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 577–583 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Choi, M. Shim, S. Bangsaruntip and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 9058–9059 CrossRef CAS .
H. Q. Zhou, C. Y. Qiu, Z. Liu, H. C. Yang, L. J. Hu, J. Liu, H. F. Yang, C. Z. Gu and L. F. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 944–946 CrossRef CAS .
K. Jasuja, J. Linn, S. Melton and V. Berry, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 1853–1860 CrossRef CAS .
Y. X. Xu, W. J. Hong, H. Bai, C. Li and G. Q. Shi, Carbon, 2009, 47, 3538–3543 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ramanathan, S. Stankovich, D. A. Dikin, H. Liu, H. Shen, S. T. Nguyen and L. C. Brinson, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2007, 45, 2097–2112 CrossRef CAS .
D. Y. Cai and M. Song, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 315708 CrossRef .
D. Y. Cai, K. Yusoh and M. Song, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 085712 CrossRef .
Q. Wu, Y. X. Xu, Z. Y. Yao, A. R. Liu and G. Q. Shi, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1963–1970 CrossRef CAS .
I. H. Kim and Y. G. Jeong, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2010, 48, 850–858 CrossRef CAS .
H. B. Zhang, W. G. Zheng, Q. Yan, Y. Yang, J. W. Wang, Z. H. Lu, G. Y. Ji and Z. Z. Yu, Polymer, 2010, 51, 1191–1196 CrossRef CAS .
A. Dasari, Z.-Z. Yu and Y.-W. Mai, Polymer, 2009, 50, 4112–4121 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Yu, P. Ramesh, M. E. Itkis, E. Bekyarova and R. C. Haddon, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 7565–7569 CAS .
X. C. Xiao, T. Xie and Y. T. Cheng, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 3508–3514 RSC .
M. A. Rafiee, J. Rafiee, I. Srivastava, Z. Wang, H. H. Song, Z. Z. Yu and N. Koratkar, Small, 2010, 6, 179–183 CrossRef CAS .
X. S. Zhou, T. B. Wu, B. J. Hu, G. Y. Yang and B. X. Han, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 3663–3665 RSC .
K. Zhang, L. L. Zhang, X. S. Zhao and J. S. Wu, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 1392–1401 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yan, T. Wei, B. Shao, Z. J. Fan, W. Z. Qian, M. L. Zhang and F. Wei, Carbon, 2010, 48, 487–493 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Wang, Q. L. Hao, X. J. Yang, L. D. Lu and X. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 821–828 CAS .
H. L. Wang, Q. L. Hao, X. J. Yang, L. D. Lu and X. Wang, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 1158–1161 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Wang, F. Li, J. P. Zhao, W. C. Ren, Z. G. Chen, J. Tan, Z. S. Wu, I. Gentle, G. Q. Lu and H. M. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 1745–1752 CrossRef CAS .
R. Verdejo, F. Barroso-Bujans, M. A. Rodriguez-Perez, J. A. de Saja and M. A. Lopez-Manchado, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 2221–2226 RSC .
H. Hu, X. Wang, J. Wang, L. Wan, F. Liu, H. Zheng, R. Chen and C. Xu, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2010, 484, 247–253 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wei, G. L. Luo, Z. J. Fan, C. Zheng, J. Yan, C. Z. Yao, W. F. Li and C. Zhang, Carbon, 2009, 47, 2296–2299 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liang, Y. Huang, L. Zhang, Y. Wang, Y. Ma, T. Guo and Y. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 2297–2302 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liang, Y. Xu, Y. Huang, L. Zhang, Y. Wang, Y. Ma, F. Li, T. Guo and Y. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 9921–9927 CAS .
J. Liang, Y. Wang, Y. Huang, Y. Ma, Z. Liu, J. Cai, C. Zhang, H. Gao and Y. Chen, Carbon, 2009, 47, 922–925 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Balandin, S. Ghosh, W. Bao, I. Calizo, D. Teweldebrhan, F. Miao and C. N. Lau, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 902–907 CrossRef CAS .
D. D. Kulkarni, I. Choi, S. S. Singamaneni and V. V. Tsukruk, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4667–4676 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao, Q. Zhang, Y. Hao, Y. Li, Y. Fang and D. Chen, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 9411–9416 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, G. Long, L. Huang, Y. Huang, X. Wan, Y. Ma and Y. Chen, Carbon, 2010, 48, 3308–3311 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Li, K. H. Tu, C. C. Lin, C. W. Chen and M. Chhowalla, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3169–3174 CrossRef CAS .
L. Valentini, M. Cardinali, S. B. Bon, D. Bagnis, R. Verdejo, M. A. Lopez-Manchado and J. M. Kenny, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 995–1000 RSC .
H. J. Salavagione, M. n. A. Gómez and G. Martínez, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 6331–6334 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, J. T. Robinson, X. Sun and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 10876–10877 CrossRef CAS .
A. Midya, V. Mamidala, J. X. Yang, P. K. L. Ang, Z. K. Chen, W. Ji and K. P. Loh, Small, 2010, 6, 2292–2300 CrossRef CAS .
M. Fang, K. G. Wang, H. B. Lu, Y. L. Yang and S. Nutt, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 1982–1992 RSC .
X. D. Zhuang, Y. Chen, G. Liu, P. P. Li, C. X. Zhu, E. T. Kang, K. G. Noeh, B. Zhang, J. H. Zhu and Y. X. Li, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1731–1735 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yu, Y. Yang, M. Durstock, J.-B. Baek and L. Dai, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5633–5640 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, J. Jin and M. Song, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3455–3461 RSC .
J. Björk, F. Hanke, C.-A. Palma, P. Samori, M. Cecchini and M. Persson, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 3407–3412 CrossRef .
S. Stankovich, R. D. Piner, X. Chen, N. Wu, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 155–158 RSC .
M. R. Palacin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 2565–2575 RSC .
J. M. Tarascon and M. Armand, Nature, 2001, 414, 359–367 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Whittingham, Science, 1976, 192, 1126–1127 CAS .
J. N. Reimers and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1992, 139, 2091–2097 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Thackeray, J. T. Vaughey, C. S. Johnson, A. J. Kropf, R. Benedek, L. M. L. Fransson and K. Edstrom, J. Power Sources, 2003, 113, 124–130 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-G. Guo, J.-S. Hu and L.-J. Wan, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2878–2887 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Arico, P. Bruce, B. Scrosati, J.-M. Tarascon and W. van Schalkwijk, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 366–377 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. Kaskhedikar and J. Maier, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2664–2680 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kim, S.-W. Kim, Y.-U. Park, H. Gwon, D.-H. Seo, Y. Kim and K. Kang, Nano Res., 2010, 3, 813–821 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qiu, K. Yan, S. Yang, L. Jin, H. Deng and W. Li, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 6515–6526 CrossRef CAS .
I. A. Courtney and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, 2045–2052 CrossRef CAS .
C. o. S. P. E. Systems and N. R. C. (U.S.), Meeting the Energy Needs of Future Warriors, National Academies Press, 2004.

          B. E. Conway, Electrochemical Supercapacitors: Scientific Fundamentals and Technological Applications, Kulwer Academic/Plenum Press, New York,  1999 Search PubMed .
C. Liu, F. Li, L.-P. Ma and H.-M. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E28–E62 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-S. Wu, W. Ren, D.-W. Wang, F. Li, B. Liu and H.-M. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5835–5842 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Snook, P. Kao and A. S. Best, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 1–12 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Ryu, Y.-G. Lee, Y.-S. Hong, Y. J. Park, X. Wu, K. M. Kim, M. G. Kang, N.-G. Park and S. H. Chang, Electrochim. Acta, 2004, 50, 843–847 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mastragostino, C. Arbizzani and F. Soavi, J. Power Sources, 2001, 97–98, 812–815 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yan, T. Wei, Z. J. Fan, W. Z. Qian, M. L. Zhang, X. D. Shen and F. Wei, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 3041–3045 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, K. Wang, S.-Z. Zu, B.-H. Han and Z. Wei, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5019–5026 CrossRef CAS .
S. Srinivasan, R. Mosdale, P. Stevens and C. Yang, Annu. Rev. Energy Environ., 1999, 24, 281–328 CrossRef .
Y. Li, W. Gao, L. Ci, C. Wang and P. M. Ajayan, Carbon, 2010, 48, 1124–1130 CrossRef CAS .
E. Yoo, T. Okata, T. Akita, M. Kohyama, J. Nakamura and I. Honma, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2255–2259 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, J. Wang, J. Zeng, J. Ou, Z. Li, X. Liu and S. Yang, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 4628–4633 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Shao, S. Zhang, C. M. Wang, Z. M. Nie, J. Liu, Y. Wang and Y. H. Lin, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 4600–4605 CrossRef CAS .
B. Seger and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 7990–7995 CAS .
Y. Okamoto, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2006, 420, 382–386 CrossRef CAS .
L. S. Panchakarla, K. S. Subrahmanyam, S. K. Saha, A. Govindaraj, H. R. Krishnamurthy, U. V. Waghmare and C. N. R. Rao, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4726–4730 CAS .
Z. Q. Ma and B. X. Liu, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2001, 69, 339–344 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jia, J. Wei, K. Wang, A. Cao, Q. Shu, X. Gui, Y. Zhu, D. Zhuang, G. Zhang, B. Ma, L. Wang, W. Liu, Z. Wang, J. Luo and D. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4594–4598 CrossRef CAS .
R. Won, Nat. Photonics, 2010, 4, 411 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ihm, J. T. Lim, K. J. Lee, J. W. Kwon, T. H. Kang, S. Chung, S. Bae, J. H. Kim, B. H. Hong and G. Y. Yeom, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 032113 CrossRef .
Y. M. Shi, K. K. Kim, A. Reina, M. Hofmann, L. J. Li and J. Kong, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2689–2694 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, X. Chen, Y. Zhong, F. Zhu and K. P. Loh, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 063302 CrossRef .
L. Gomez De Arco, Y. Zhang, C. W. Schlenker, K. Ryu, M. E. Thompson and C. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2865–2873 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Su, S. Pang, V. Alijani, C. Li, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3191–3195 CrossRef CAS .
J. Peet, J. Y. Kim, N. E. Coates, W. L. Ma, D. Moses, A. J. Heeger and G. C. Bazan, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 497–500 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Dittmer, E. A. Marseglia and R. H. Friend, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 1270–1274 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liu, Z. Liu, X. Zhang, L. Yang, N. Zhang, G. Pan, S. Yin, Y. Chen and J. Wei, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 894–904 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, Q. Liu, Y. Huang, Y. Ma, S. Yin, X. Zhang, W. Sun and Y. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3924–3930 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yu, K. Park, M. Durstock and L. Dai, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 1113–1118 CrossRef CAS .
L. Kavan, J. H. Yum and M. Grätzel, ACS Nano, 2010, 5, 165–172 CrossRef .
J. D. Roy-Mayhew, D. J. Bozym, C. Punckt and I. A. Aksay, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 6203–6211 CrossRef CAS .
A. Du, Y. H. Ng, N. J. Bell, Z. Zhu, R. Amal and S. C. Smith, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 894–899 CrossRef CAS .
A. Wojcik and P. V. Kamat, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 6697–6706 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Zhang, H. P. Li, X. L. Cui and Y. H. Lin, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 2801–2806 RSC .
Y. H. Ng, I. V. Lightcap, K. Goodwin, M. Matsumura and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2222–2227 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Rout, A. Kumar, G. Xiong, J. Irudayaraj and T. S. Fisher, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 133108 CrossRef .
G. Lu, H. Li, C. Liusman, Z. Yin, S. Wu and H. Zhang, Chem. Sci., 2011 10.1039/C1SC00254F .
Y. Wang, Z. Ni, H. Hu, Y. Hao, C. P. Wong, T. Yu, J. T. L. Thong and Z. X. Shen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 163111 CrossRef .
C. Xu and X. Wang, Small, 2009, 5, 2212–2217 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

Hua Zhang
	Hua Zhang studied at Nanjing University (BS, MS), and completed his PhD at Peking University (with Zhongfan Liu) in 1998. After postdoctoral work at Katholieke Universiteit Leuven (with Frans De Schryver) and Northwestern University (with Chad Mirkin), and working at NanoInk Inc. (US) and the Institute of Bioengineering and Nanotechnology (Singapore), he joined Nanyang Technological University in July 2006. He was promoted to a tenured associate professor in March 2011. He is an Associate Editor of the International Journal of Nanoscience, on the Editorial Board of NANO, and on the Advisory Committee of IOP Asia-Pacific. His research interests focus on carbon materials (graphene and CNTs) and their applications; controlled synthesis, characterization and application of novel nanomaterials; and surface fabrication from the micro- to nanometre scale, etc. He has published 25 patent applications, 3 book chapters, more than 130 papers with over 2400 citations and an H-index of 26. He has been invited to give more than 70 Keynote Lectures and Invited Talks in international conferences and universities, and serve as Session Chair. He has organized several international conferences and served as Symposium Chair.


Bottom-up approaches

CVD	Carbon sources: CH4, H2	Sheet size of up to a few tens of micrometres.	
6–8

Substrate: Ni, Ru, Cu
Temperature: 1000 °C
PECVD	Carbon source: CH4, H2	Large area of more than 1 cm of monolayer graphene	
87

Substrate: Cu
Temperature: 650 °C
Graphitization	Substrate: 6H-SiC(0001)	Grain size: up to 50 μm long, 1 μm wide	
89

Temperature: 1280 °C
Solvothermal	Reagents: Na and ethanol	Folded graphene structures	
90

Temperature: 220 °C	Bulk conductivity: ∼0.05 S m−1
Organic synthesis	Thermal fusion of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons at 1100 °C	For a 30 nm thick film on quartz, conductivity: 20600 S m−1, sheet resistance: 1.6 kΩ m−2	
91


Top-down approaches

Liquid exfoliation of graphite	Intercalate: NMP	Single-layer yield: 7–12 wt% after purification	
11

Film conductivity: ∼6500 S m−1
Intercalate: SDBS	Film conductivity: ∼35 S m−1	
13

Single-layer yield: ∼3% with a size of ∼1 μm
Intercalate: ternary potassium salt	Graphene ribbons with lengths of ∼40 μm.	
12

Thermal exfoliation and liquid intercalation	Thermal exfoliation at 1000 °C	Single-layer yield: ∼90% after purification	
98

Intercalates: oleum and TBA	Size: ∼250 nm
Resistance of single sheet with 100 nm in width: 10–20 kΩ
Electrochemical exfoliation	1-Octyl-3-methyl-imidazolium hexafluorophosphate as electrolyte; graphite rods as electrodes	Sheet size: 500 × 700 nm	
99

Chemical reduction of GO	Reduction agent: hydrazine	Sheet resistance of graphene paper: 7200 S m−1	
31

Deoxygenation agent: KOH or NaOH	Incomplete removal of oxygen-containing groups	
109

Temperature: 50–90 °C
Reduction agent: bovine serum albumin	To be used as template for nanoparticle synthesis	
111

Reduction agent: vitamin C	Film conductivity: up to 7700 S m−1	
133

Temperature: 95 °C
Reduction via bacteria respiration	Film resistance decreased up to 104 after reduction	
134

Reduction agent: hydriodic acid and acetic acid	Sheet resistance: pellets dried after solution reduction: 30400 S m−1	
32

In solution at room temperature or in vapor at 40 °C	Thin film after vapor reduction: 7850 S m−1
Sonolytic reduction: ultrasonication at 211 kHz for 30 min	Formation of 1–4 layers of rGO	
127

Microwave-assisted reduction in the presence of hydrazine	Formation of 1–8 layers of rGO with size up to a few micrometres	
128

Thermal reduction of GO	220 °C in air for 24 h	Film sheet resistance: 8 kΩ sq−1	
124

150 °C in DMF for 1 h	Film resistance: 6 kΩ	
119

Photothermal reduction of GO	High pressure Hg lamp with H2 or N2 flow	Sheet size: ∼1 um	
115

Single-sheet conductivity: 2000–20000 S m−1
Pulsed xenon flash	Able to prepare a GO/rGO patterned film with a photomask	
126

Sheet resistance of rGO area: ∼9.5 kΩ sq−1

Au/GO or rGO	
Ex situ: π–π stacking via 2-mercaptopyridine	Catalysis, SERS	
145


Ex situ: π–π stacking via bovine serum albumin	
	
146


In situ: photochemical reduction	
	
114


In situ: reduction by hydroxyl-amine	Raman enhancement	
142


In situ: sonolytic reduction in poly(ethylene glycol) at 211 kHz	
	
127

Au/rGO	
In situ: reduction by NaBH4	Plasmonics	
35


In situ: reduction by amino terminated ionic liquid; perylene-modified rGO	Electrocatalysis	
139


In situ: reduction by sodium citrate	SERS	
144


In situ: reduction by ascorbic acid in the presence of CTAB	Raman enhancement	
185


In situ: microwave assisted reduction	
	
128,190

Au/pristine graphene	
In situ: thermal evaporation	Identification of layer number of pristine graphene	
189

Ag/GO or rGO	
Ex situ: π–π stacking via bovine serum albumin	
	
146


In situ: reduction by NaBH4	
	
150


In situ: electroless deposition	SERS	
20

Ag/TiO2/rGO	
In situ: Ag is reduced by the photo-generated electrons from TiO2/rGO	
	
187

Ag/rGO	
In situ: microwave assisted reduction	
	
128

Pt or Pd/GO or rGO	
Ex situ: π–π stacking via bovine serum albumin	
	
146

Pd/rGO	
In situ: microwave assisted reduction	
	
128

Pt-on-Pd/rGO	
In situ: sequential reduction of H2PdCl4 with HCOOH, and K2PtCl4 with ascorbic acid	Eletrocatalysis	
186

Cu/rGO	
In situ: microwave assisted reduction	
	
128

Ru/rGO	
In situ: microwave assisted reduction	Catalysis	
155

Rh/rGO	
In situ: microwave assisted reduction	Catalysis	
155

CdS/rGO	
Ex situ: π–π stacking via benzyl mercaptan	Optoelectronics	
179

TiO2/GO	
Ex situ: non-covalent adhesion via solution mixing of P-25 TiO2 and GO	DSSC	
156


Ex situ: non-covalent adhesion via solution mixing with the GO film	Photocatalysis	
158

TiO2/rGO	
Ex situ: noncovalent adhesion via Nafion	DSSC	
161


Ex situ: self-assembly of TiO2 nanorods and rGO at two-phase interface	Photocatalysis	
67


In situ: templated hydrolysis starting with TiCl3 and titanium isopropoxide	Photocatalysis	
68


In situ: hydrolysis starting with TiCl3	Li ion battery	
157


In situ: hydrolysis starting with titanium butoxide	DSSC	
160


In situ: hydrothermal starting with P25 and GO	Photocatalysis	
162

ZnO/rGO	
In situ: electrochemical deposition	Photovoltaics	
19

Cu2O/rGO	
In situ: electrochemical deposition	Photovoltaics	
18

Cl-doped Cu2O/rGO	
In situ: electrochemical deposition	Optoelectronics	
102

Co3O4/GO or rGO	
Ex situ: electrostatic via aminopropyltrimethoxysilane	Li ion battery	
55


In situ: reduction of Co(OH)2/GO at 450 °C	Li ion battery	
54

Co3O4/rGO	
In situ: microwave assisted reaction between urea and Co(NO3)2	Supercapacitor	
170

MnO2/GO	
In situ: redox reaction between MnCl2 and KMnO4	Supercapacitor	
168


In situ: microwave assisted reaction between C and KMnO4	Supercapacitor	
169

MnO2/FGS	
In situ: redox reaction between Na2SO4 and KMnO4	Li ion battery	
166

SiO2/GO or rGO	
Ex situ: electrostatic via aminopropyltrimethoxysilane	
	
55

SiO2/FGS	
In situ: hydrolysis starting with TEOS	
	
166

SnO2/FGS	
In situ: redox reaction starting with SnCl2 and H2O2	Li ion battery	
166

Fe3O4/rGO	
In situ: hydrolysis starting with FeCl3	Li ion battery	
173

Fe3O4/GO	
In situ: redox reaction starting with FeCl2, FeCl3 and NaOH	Magnetic drug carrier	
175


In situ: reaction of ferric triacetylacetonate with GO in 1-methyl-2-pyrrolidone	Magnetic composite	
172

NiO/graphene	
In situ: sputtering	Nanocapacitor	
176

RuO2/rGO	
In situ: redox reaction starting with RuCl3 and GO	Supercapacitor	
59

CdS/rGO	
In situ: chemical bath deposition	Solar cell	
180

CdS/rGO	
In situ: hydrothermal starting with dimethylsulfoxide, GO and Cd(CH3COO)2	Optoelectronics	
181

CdSe/CVD-graphene	
In situ: electrochemical deposition templated by a porous silica film	Optoelectronics	
183


 	Fig. 1  (A) TEM image of Au square sheets synthesized on GO. Reproduced from ref. 38. (B) TEM image of solution-synthesized Pt-on-Pd nanodendrites on rGO. Reproduced with permission from ref. 186. Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society. (C) TEM image of ordered Au NDs photochemically synthesized on rGO. Reproduced with permission from ref. 114. Copyright 2010, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (D) TEM image of ordered CdSe NPs electrochemically deposited on a graphene sheet. Reproduced with permission from ref. 183. Copyright 2010, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.	 

 	Fig. 2  (A–C) Schematic illustrations of the self-assembly approach to prepare ordered metal oxide/rGO composites. (A) Adsorption of surfactant hemimicelles on the surfaces of the rGO or rGO stacks causes its dispersion in surfactant micelles in an aqueous solution. (B) The self-assembly of anionic sulfonate surfactant on the graphene surface with oppositely charged metal cation (e.g. Sn2+) species and the transition into the lamella mesophase toward the formation of SnO2 graphene nanocomposites, where hydrophobic rGO sheets are sandwiched in the hydrophobic domains of the anionic surfactant. (C) Layered metal oxide–rGO composites composed of alternating layers of metal oxide nanocrystals and rGO stacks after crystallization of metal oxide and removal of the surfactant. (D) High-magnification TEM of SnO2/rGO composites. The layered structure of SnO2 is composed of connected nanocrystalline SnO2 with 4–5 nm diameter interspaced by rGO stacks. Reproduced with permission from ref. 166. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  SEM images of (A) EG–PMMA and (B) FGS–PMMA showing fracture surface topography. Reproduced with permission from ref. 42. Copyright 2008, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 4  (A) Schematic illustration of fabrication and assembly of the free-standing GO-LbL film. (B) Plot showing the variation of elastic modulus calculated theoretically (under parallel and random orientation) and that obtained experimentally (using buckling and bulging measurements) with the volume fraction of GO. Reproduced with permission from ref. 215. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (A) Chemical structure of PEG–OPE. (B) Schematic illustration of fabrication of PEG–OPE stabilized rGO sheets. (C) Tapping-mode AFM image and cross-sectional analysis of PEG–OPE–rGO on mica. Reproduced with permission from ref. 14. Copyright 2010, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.	 
MaXb + cLi+ + ce− ↔ LicXb + aM	(1)

 	Fig. 6  (A) Schematic illustration of fabrication of graphene-encapsulated metal oxide NPs. (B) Cycle performance of graphene-encapsulated Co3O4. Reproduced with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2010, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.	 
MnO2 + C+ + e− ↔ MnOOC	(2)

 	Fig. 7  (A) Schematic of the assembled structure of asymmetric ECs based on MGC as the positive electrode and graphene as the negative electrode. (B) Ragone plot related to energy and power densities of graphene//MGC asymmetric ECs with various voltage windows, graphene//graphene and MGC//MGC symmetric ECs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 243. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society.	 
Cp + nA− ↔ Cpn+(A−)n + ne− (p-doping)	(3)
Cp + ne− + nC+ ↔ Cpn−(C+)n (n-doping)	(4)

 	Fig. 8  (A) Schematic illustration of the formation of hybrid materials with CNTs grown in between graphene nanosheets, showing stacked layers of GO (left), catalyst particles adhered onto layer surface after deposition (middle), and CNTs in between graphene layers after growth (right). (B) SEM image of the CGS sheet. (C) Variations of specific capacitance versus the cycle number measured at a scan rate of 200 mV s−1 in 6 M KOH within the potential range from −0.2 to 0.45 V (versus saturated calomel electrode (SCE)). Reproduced with permission from ref. 53. Copyright 2010, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.	 

 	Fig. 9  (A) Schematic illustration of the rGO thin film used as the transparent electrode in a ZnO/P3HT hybrid solar cell. Reproduced with permission from ref. 19. Copyright 2010, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (B) Schematic illustration of the P3HT/graphene hybrid film used as the electron transport/acceptor layer in a polymer solar cell. Reproduced with permission from ref. 267. Copyright 2009, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (C) Left: schematic illustration of GO used as the hole transport layer in a polymer solar cell. Right: Current–voltage characteristics of photovoltaic devices with no hole transport layer (curve labeled as ITO), with a 30 nm PEDOT:PSS layer, and a 2 nm thick GO film. Reproduced with permission from ref. 218. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (A) Cross-sectional SEM image of a layered graphene/QDs sample. (B) Dependence of the incident photon conversion efficiency (IPCE, external quantum yield) on the incident wavelength of different photoelectrodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 180. Copyright 2010, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.	 

 	Fig. 11  SEM images of (A) graphitic petals and (B) Au NP-decorated petals. (C) Raman spectra of 10−5 (black curve), 10−6 (red curve) and 10−7 M (green curve) R6G on Au-decorated graphitic petals. Reproduced with permission from ref. 276. Copyright 2010, American Institute of Physics.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
