Counter electrodes for perovskite solar cells: materials, interfaces and device stability  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2TC02182J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2TC02182J
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2022, 10, 10775-10798Counter electrodes for perovskite solar cells: materials, interfaces and device stability

        
          
            Bolin 
            Lyu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Li 
            Yang
          
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Yiyun 
            Luo
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xiaoli 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      *c and 

        
          
            Jinbao 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      *abd
aCollege of Materials, Fujian Key Laboratory of Advanced Materials, Xiamen Key Laboratory of Electronic Ceramic Materials and Devices, Xiamen University, Xiamen, 361005, China. E-mail: jinbao.zhang@xmu.edu.cn
bShenzhen Research Institute of Xiamen University, Shenzhen, 518000, China
cSchool of Physics & Optoelectronic Engineering, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou, 510006, China
dInnovation Laboratory for Sciences and Technologies of Energy Materials of Fujian Province (IKKEM), Xiamen 361005, China
Received 
      26th May 2022
    , Accepted 17th June 2022First published on 23rd June 2022AbstractPerovskite solar cells (PSCs) show great promise for scalable application owing to the advantages of high conversion efficiency and solution processable fabrication. However, the material cost and device stability greatly hinder the development of PSC technology. Counter electrodes, as one of the indispensable components in PSCs, play critical roles in charge collection and device protection. However, the commonly used noble metals (Ag or Au) are unaffordable for the scalable application of PSCs, and the interfacial instability caused by metal corrosion has significantly threatened the reliability of PSCs. Here we provide a comprehensive review of the development of counter electrodes in the aspects of materials, interfaces and device stability. Firstly, the fundamental understanding of the roles and limitations of counter electrodes are summarized, including the basic requirements and influencing factors for counter electrodes. Moreover, different degradation mechanisms and various interfacial characterization methods have been discussed. Furthermore, recent development of alternative counter electrodes and their photovoltaic performance are reviewed. This review provides a comprehensive understanding of the fundamental material limitations and guides the design of robust and efficient counter electrodes for PSCs.
Li Yang
Dr Li Yang is an assistant professor of material electrochemistry at Xiamen University. She obtained her PhD degree from Uppsala University in 2016 under the supervision of Prof. Martin Sojdin and Prof. Maria Stromme. Her research interest includes the synthesis and characterization of functional conducting polymers for energy storage and conversion devices, such as capacitors, batteries and solar cells.
Xiaoli Zhang
Dr Xiaoli Zhang received her PhD degree from the School of Science, Tianjin University (China) in 2014. She pursued her postdoctoral research at Nanyang Technological University in Singapore during 2015–2017. Currently, she is an associate professor at Guangdong University of Technology (China). Her research focuses on the synthesis of low-dimensional semiconductors and their applications in optoelectronic devices such as light-emitting diodes, solar cells and photodetectors.
Jinbao Zhang
Dr Jinbao Zhang is a Professor of material chemistry at Xiamen University. He obtained his BS degree from Central South University in 2010 and PhD degree from Uppsala University in 2016 under the direction of Prof. Anders Hagfeldt. He then did his postdoctoral research in Prof. Udo Bach and Prof. Yi-Bing Cheng's group at Monash University. Later he worked at Stanford University as a Wallenberg Research Fellow in Prof. Dauskardt's group. His current research focuses on developing functional nanomaterials for energy conversion devices and fundamentally understanding the interfacial phenomenon in optoelectronic devices.
1. Introduction
With the fast economic and technological development, world energy needs are growing rapidly. As suggested by the US Energy Information Administration (EIA) projects, world energy consumption will increase by nearly 50% between 2018 and 2050. Although a large quantity of energy is provided by burning fossil fuels, it causes high greenhouse gas emissions in the earth's atmosphere. Therefore, the world is facing great challenges in the balance between rising energy demand and energy access and environmental sustainability and affordability. Therefore, in order to achieve carbon neutral commitment targets, most of the countries are seeking to accelerate an energy transition, which transforms the global energy sector from fossil-based to zero-carbon by means of renewable energy resources.
Photovoltaic (PV) technologies, which can effectively convert solar energy into electricity, represent one of the most clean, sustainable and environmentally friendly ways to meet the global energy demand and solve environmental problems. Crystalline silicon solar cells, as the first generation of PVs, dominate about 90% of the solar market, owing to the advantages of high conversion efficiencies and long lifetimes.1 However, the current silicon PV installation capacity and its energy output are far below the global energy demand because of the limitations of high material cost and complex fabrication processes. Moreover, traditional rigid and heavy silicon panels are undesirable for applications in light-weight, portable and flexible electronics. In contrast, new-generation thin film PVs, such as dye sensitized solar cells,2 organic solar cells,3 quantum dot solar cells,4 and perovskite solar cells (PSCs),5 are developed rapidly and show great potential in diverse applications, thanks to their superiority in low material cost, simple fabrication and high flexibility. Particularly, PSCs have attracted great research attention in the past decade by showing a dramatic increase of power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) from 3.8% to over 25%.6 Hybrid perovskite (e.g. CH3NH3PbI3) semiconductors show remarkable optoelectronic characteristics, including tunable bandgap,7 long carrier diffusion length,8 low exciton binding energy, and high ambipolar carrier mobility.9 In addition to their performance merits, the features of simple solution-processed fabrication add additional manufacturing benefits for scalable application of PSCs. The significant improvement in the performance of PSCs is attributed to great research efforts made in optimizing perovskite composition, modulating charge dynamics, engineering interfacial contacts and passivating defects. Although the fundamental understanding and controllable material processing of PSCs has been well realized, the major challenge still remains in the long-term stability of PSCs, which represents key obstacles for PSC commercialization.
PSCs feature a layered device structure with a perovskite absorber in the middle sandwiched between two charge transport layers, namely electron transport materials (ETMs) and hole transport materials (HTMs). Two contact electrodes, including transparent conducting glass (e.g. fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO)) and a counter electrode (e.g. Ag or Au), are located on the two sides of the devices for charge collection. All the above-mentioned functional layers play essential roles in both the PCEs and stability of PSCs, whose specific roles and functions in devices will be discussed later. Previous work has well demonstrated that such materials and their interfaces are decisive in influencing the device stability. In particular, hybrid perovskite materials show high sensitivity to environmental moisture, temperature and light illumination.10 It is suggested that water as a catalyst induced irreversible degradation of the perovskite into PbI2 as the main byproduct.11 Besides, the hygroscopic nature of organic cations, such as methylammonium (MA) or formamidinium (FA) halides, also accelerates the degradation process. Illumination with UV light can induce electrons trapped in deep lying unoccupied sites which cause perovskite degradation in a device architecture with TiO2 as the ETM.12 Exposure to elevated temperatures induces perovskite decomposition to PbI2 and volatile species like CH3NH2 and HI.13 Many attempts have been made to improve the intrinsic stability of the perovskite in recent years. By incorporating Br (low fraction of about 20%) into an I-based perovskite, the stability of PSCs was significantly improved, which was mainly attributed to a reduced lattice constant and phase transition.14 Similarly, replacing some of the organic cations MA with FA or cesium (Cs) has been proved to be an efficient way to improve the water and thermal stability of a perovskite.15,16 Preparation of two-dimensional (2D) layered perovskites by incorporating large organic cations in the structure has become an effective strategy to improve the stability of the perovskites; however, the reduction of the dimensionality from 3D to 2D leads to an increased exciton binding energy and band gap, both of which are undesirable for solar cell performance.17 Moreover, the other layers (charge transport layers and contact electrodes) play equally important roles in device stability. The HTMs based on doped spiro-OMeTAD with LiTFSI and tert-butyl pyridine (TBP) underwent a morphological deformation during the test at a constant temperature of 55 °C and a relative humidity of 50%, which caused a gradual increase in the series resistance of PSCs. Different dopant-free polymers and molecules have been developed in order to improve the stability of HTMs.18 All these factors contributed to the efficiency losses of PSCs, and addressing the intrinsic instability of perovskite materials is the key research target for paving the way to reliable application. Various strategies have been proposed and developed, including compositional modulation,19 interfacial optimization,20 defect passivation by additives,21 and structural engineering of charge transport materials.22,23
Compared to the above-mentioned functional materials and interfaces, the roles of counter electrodes in the PSC performance and stability are often overlooked, and they have received much less attention and investigation. Recent work has revealed that counter electrodes have significantly impacted the PCEs and reliability of devices. For example, Au as one of the most favorable counter electrodes demonstrates good performance and stability in PSCs. However, the utilization of Au in PSCs greatly increases the cost of fabrication, which accounts for 7% of the total device cost.24 Alternatively, the Ag metal electrode has a suitable work function and low cost, which is about 75 times lower in cost than Au. Recent research shows that the work functions of metal counter electrodes have significant effects on interfacial charge collection efficiency and device performance.25 It is also proved that heat can vaporize halides and induce ion migration towards metal counter electrodes, leading to halide reaction with the metal layer.26 These metal corrosion issues resulted in severe perovskite deformation and device degradation. A faster metal corrosion kinetics has been observed for Ag compared to Au.27 To this end, a huge number of strategies have been reported, including designing alternative metal or nonmetal counter electrodes, and developing a robust barrier layer between the metal electrode and perovskite layer.
In this review, we aim to provide a comprehensive overview in advances made with counter electrodes for perovskite solar cells. Detailed operational principles and interfacial degradation of counter electrodes will be highlighted. Firstly, the roles and stability issue of metal electrodes will be reviewed. The influencing factors and corrosion mechanisms will then be discussed. Later, the most successful tuning strategies, including materials, interfaces and barrier layers, are summarized. Hopefully this review provides useful insights for developing robust counter electrodes for PSCs.
2. Fundamental roles of counter electrodes
PSCs have typical sandwich structures, which present a similar structure to traditional solid-state dye sensitized solar cells. The most common configuration of PSCs is composed of five essential components: (1) transparent conductive glass as substrates, e.g. FTO or tin-doped indium oxides (ITO); (2) n-type semiconductors as electron transport materials (ETMs); (3) perovskite materials as light harvesting materials; (4) p-type semiconductors as hole transport materials (HTMs); and (5) metal layers or other conductive materials as back contact. According to the position of the functional layers, there are two main types of architectures which are n–i–p and p–i–n PSCs, as illustrated in Fig. 1. The difference between planar and mesoscopic PSCs lies in the microstructures of the charge transport materials. Due to suitable energy band alignment in the heterogeneous interfaces, charge separation and collection in PSCs can be efficiently accomplished, as shown in Fig. 1c and f. Specifically, after light excitation, the electron–hole pairs are created and migrate towards the interfaces. Charge separation occurs at perovskite interfaces by injecting electrons into ETMs and holes into HTMs, respectively. In n–i–p PSCs, the injected holes are transported through HTMs towards the metal contact. Meanwhile the electrons are transported in ETMs and go through the external circuit to the back contact. Finally, the free electrons and holes recombine at the interface of the HTM/metal so as to generate electricity. Theoretically, the Fermi levels of the n and p contact materials create a built-in electric field and determine the open-circuit voltage (Voc) of the devices. The conductivities of ETMs and HTMs as well as the energetic driving force at interfaces influence the short-circuit current (Jsc) and series resistance of the devices. However, some undesired nonradiative recombination processes also occur at different interfaces, such as the electron–hole recombination within the polycrystalline perovskite layer, and the charge carrier recombination at interfaces of the ETM/perovskite and HTM/perovskite. These recombination reactions cause charge losses and limit the performance of PSCs.28
 Fig. 1  Device architecture of conventional PSCs of (a) n–i–p planar and (b) n–i–p mesoscopic PSCs. (c) Energy levels of n–i–p architecture with a device structure of FTO/TiO2/MAPbI3/Au. Device architecture of inverted PSCs of (d) p–i–n planar and (e) p–i–n mesoscopic PSCs. (f) Energy levels of the p–i–n architecture with a device structure of FTO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3/PCBM. Permission from ref. 29, copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
As illustrated in Fig. 1, in both n–i–p and p–i–n architectures, counter electrodes play critical roles in photovoltaic parameters as well as the device stability.30,31 The main role of the counter electrode is to extract, transfer and collect the charge carriers to enable the current generation. The transparency and flexibility of counter electrodes influence the light-absorption and the device mechanical stability, which also determines the device application areas, such as flexible or bifacial solar modules. Moreover, the counter electrode as a barrier between the PSC device and the surrounding environment can efficiently prevent the water ingress and also block the egress of volatile perovskite decomposition species. Therefore, the film density of the counter electrode is a crucial factor for water blocking effects. High reflectivity is preferred for the counter electrode in order to reduce the light transmission losses. Besides, the counter electrodes should be chemically stable without reaction with the bottom contact materials or perovskite. Last but not least, the material and the corresponding deposition method will greatly influence the total cost of PSCs, especially for large-scale PSC modules. Thus, efficient counter electrodes should meet several general requirements. Firstly, aiming for scalable application in PSCs, counter electrodes should have an affordable cost. Due to their outstanding conducting properties and appropriate work functions, precious metals (such as Au and Ag) are most commonly used as counter electrodes in PSCs. However, the high production cost of these precious metals significantly limits their practical application in PSCs. Fortunately, some low-cost alternative electrodes, such as PEDOT:PSS,32 carbon,33 Cu,34 and Al,35 demonstrate remarkable performance and high potential in PSC applications. More details about the performance of these counter electrodes will be discussed in a later section.
Secondly, counter electrodes should have good electrical conductivities. Generally, metal electrodes have a much lower resistivity (Rs) and thus show higher conductivities compared to nonmetal ones. For example, the carbon electrode exhibits a Rs of about 100 Ω sq−1, which is about over 100 times higher than that for metals, such as Ag and Au. The relatively low conductivity for carbon electrodes is likely one of the main reasons for the low PCEs of carbon-based PSCs. Although Au has a slightly lower conductivity (4.1 × 10−7 S m−1) compared to Ag (6.3 × 10−7 S m−1) and Cu (5.96 × 10−7 S m−1) at room temperature, most of the highest performing PSCs employed Au as counter electrodes.30 Some metals (Ti and Sn) have suitable work functions, but have never been efficiently used in PSCs due to poor electrical conductivity (for example, the conductivity of Ti is about 10 times and 30 times lower than that of Al and Cu, respectively).36 In contrast, Cu has been widely used in optoelectronic devices because of low cost and good conductivity.37 In addition, W, Ni, and Mo are abundant materials, and they have been utilized as counter electrodes in PSCs.38 Previous reports have displayed that the metal deposition methods play important roles in determining the Rs of the counter electrodes and the photovoltaic parameters of PSCs. For example, when a Ni-based counter electrode is sputtered on the devices, a low Rs of about 5 Ω sq−1 was achieved,39 whereas the Ni electrode deposited from printing showed a much higher Rs of 38 Ω sq−1.40 In addition, nanostructured metal materials are also used as counter electrodes in PSCs. Bryant and coworkers developed flexible PET/Ni mesh (low lateral resistivity of 1.2 Ω sq−1) as the top electrode in PSCs, where a high PCE of 13.3% was obtained.41 Hwang and coworkers delivered a core–shell Cu nanowire with a low resistivity of 19.8 Ω sq−1, leading to a high PCE of 9.88%.42
Thirdly, the work function of the counter electrode is another essential parameter for the devices to obtain an appropriate built-in voltage (Vbi).43 Many studies have shown the crucial effects of work function on the photovoltaic performance of PSCs.44–46 It is concluded that the work function of the counter electrode should be higher than that of HTMs in n–i–p PSCs, in order to facilitate efficient charge collection at the interface of the HTM/counter electrode. In the case of PSCs without HTMs, the work function of the counter electrode needs to match with the perovskite absorber, indicating a higher work function than the Fermi level of the perovskite. However, the PSCs without HTMs usually show low PCEs due to insufficient charge collection. In the case of the HTM/counter electrode interface, the work function of the counter electrode should be higher than 3.9 eV, if spiro-OMeTAD (the work function is about 3.91 eV under illumination) is used as the HTM.47 In contrast, a significant efficiency loss occurs if the work function of the counter electrode lies above the conduction band of the perovskite, owing to the formation of the interfacial back diode as an energy barrier which greatly limits the hole extraction. For example, when the Al counter electrode is directly deposited on the perovskite in PSCs, a low PCE of 0.027% was obtained.48 Interestingly, when an interlayer of MoO3 was inserted between the perovskite and Al counter electrode, the PCEs increased to 11.42% which are comparable with the PSCs with Ag contact (PCE = 12.36%). Zhao et al. simulated the impact of the work function of metal electrodes on PSC performance. In their work, an ohmic contact between the ETM and the front electrode (FTO glass) was settled in order to accurately investigate the work function effects. The results showed that the Vbi increased when the work function of the counter electrode decreased from −4.3 eV to −4.7 eV and reached a plateau when the work function ranges from −4.8 eV to −5.2 eV, as illustrated in Fig. 2a. As a result, the Voc decreased with increasing work function from −4.7 eV to −4.3 eV, showing a similar relationship with Vbi. This further proved that the increase of the counter electrode work function results in a reduction of electric field across the interface, which leads to insufficient charge collection and low Voc.25 The photovoltaic parameters of the PSCs were simulated with varying work function of the counter electrode (Fig. 2b and c), indicating the substantial role of work function in device performance. Wang and coworkers applied organometallic complexes to tune the counter electrode work function in inverted PSCs, as shown in Fig. 2d. They found that the induced dipole on the metal surface can modulate the metal work function and interfacial charge dynamics.49 From the numerical simulation of the current–voltage (J–V) curves of the inverted PSCs, as shown in Fig. 2e, an S-shaped J–V curve was obtained for the high work function (4.3 eV) cathode due to high interfacial contact resistance. As the work function decreased to 4.0 eV, a normal J–V curve with a high fill factor (FF) was recorded. However, no further increase of PCE was achieved when subsequently decreasing the work function to 3.8 eV. Fig. 2f and g demonstrate the mechanism of interfacial energy band bending. After the cathode came into conact with the ETM, the Fermi level of the ETM would align with the highest occupied energy level of the metal, causing a band bending and thus a Schottky barrier which inhibits the charge transport. The introduction of the interlayer enables a reduction of the cathode work function, leading to a favorable energy alignment for enhancing the electron collection efficiency. This demonstrates that an appropriate work function for matching the interfacial energy levels is critical for counter electrodes, and careful adjustment of the work function of the counter electrode is an effective way to enhance the photovoltaic parameters of PSCs.
 Fig. 2  (a) Energy band diagram of perovskite solar cells with P–Si as HTMs with varying work function of the counter electrode. Reproduced with permission.25 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (b) and (c) J–V curves and photovoltaic parameters of the PSCs simulated with varying work function of the counter electrode. Reproduced with permission.25 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (d) Device structure of inverted PSCs. Reproduced with permission.49 Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. (e) Simulated J–V curves of the PSCs with the counter electrode with different work functions which are 3.8, 4.0 and 4.3 eV. Reproduced with permission.49 Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. (f) and (g) Illustration of the interfacial energy diagram in the case of high work function and low work function counter electrodes. Reproduced with permission.49 Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. 
3. Limitations of conventional counter electrodes
Noble metals have been widely used as counter electrodes in solid-state dye sensitized and perovskite solar cells owing to their advantages of outstanding conductivity, high reflectivity and suitable work functions. However, for practical application, some key issues must be considered. For example, it is recently reported that the electrodes (including ITO and the metal cathode) are one of the most expensive components in PSCs, which contribute about 70% of the total material cost in solar modules.50 Therefore, the use of noble metals in PSCs is one of the main limitations for the commercialization of PSCs. Moreover, recent studies revealed that metal electrodes could cause severe degradation of PSCs. For example, Ag could react with the perovskite to form AgI if the cathode was directly coated on the perovskite.51,52 The exposure to moisture and illumination could accelerate the metal diffusion towards the perovskite, leading to decomposition of the perovskite and thus a fast decrease of the PCEs of PSCs.53 In this section, the stability issues of conventional metal counter electrodes will be summarized, and the detailed degradation mechanism and characterization methods will be discussed.
Au is one of the most common cathode materials in PSCs due to its remarkable conductivity, chemical inertness and high intrinsic stability. However, it is recently found that heat and moisture could induce Au ion migration towards the perovskite through HTMs, which might be related to device stability issues. For example, Domanski et al. investigated the stability of Au under thermal treatment.26 An irreversible metal diffusion into the perovskite was observed when the devices are exposed to high temperatures of over 70 °C. According to the evolution of the light absorption spectra of the aged devices, they concluded that there were no obvious optical and structural changes in the perovskite after heat treatment. They employed time of flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (ToF-SIMS) to analyze the elemental depth profiling, as shown in Fig. 3a. High Au peaks were found at the perovskite/TiO2 interface, meaning that Au diffusion occurred in this device under 70 °C aging. This was the first direct observation of metal diffusion in PSCs. The reconstructed 3D element maps further proved that a considerable amount of Au migrated and accumulated at the perovskite/TiO2 interfaces, as displayed in Fig. 3b. Cacovich et al. further explored the combined effect of light and heat on the Au migration kinetics.54 They observed that light soaking induced morphological and chemical degradation of the perovskite layer due to the iodine migration. Simultaneous diffusion of Au and iodine toward the opposite direction under light and heat exposure applied additional pressure on device stability. From the cross-sectional SEM image (Fig. 3c), the perovskite film degraded after light soaking by showing the formation of clusters containing heavy elements.
 Fig. 3  (a) ToF-SIMS depth profiles of the aged PSC devices at 30 and 70 °C. Reproduced with permission.26 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (b) Reconstructed elemental 3D maps for ions in the depth profiles. Reproduced with permission.26 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (c) HAADF STEM images for a large area fresh cell and the cell after 200 h of light soaking. Reproduced with permission.54 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. ToF-SIMS depth profiles of Au ion fragments. (d) FTO/MAPbI3/Au and (e) FTO/MAPbI3/spiro-MeOTAD (undoped)/Au devices biased for 4 and 40 h, respectively. Reproduced with permission.56 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (f) Ag 3d5 counts measured in the XPS depth profile. Reproduced with permission.57 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
Divitini and coworkers studied the correlation of perovskite fabrication routes with the thermal response of the perovskite by in situ TEM.55 It is revealed that the fabrication route has strong effects on the perovskite degradation mechanism. Partial iodine diffusion was observed before the heating, and diffusion speed was increased at a higher temperature. In contrast, Pb migration was triggered at much higher temperatures (from 175 °C). Analysis of the energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) mapping further confirmed that the formed clusters belonged to Au. The perovskite fabricated in air with moisture showed a slower degradation, suggesting that the incorporation of oxygen or moisture in the perovskite can probably prevent the Pb diffusion towards FTO electrodes, although some local degradation would occur. This work provides new insights into the effects of perovskite formation conditions and microstructures on their thermal stability. Kerner et al.56 applied electrochemical bias potentials to the PSC devices to study the electrochemical oxidation between metallic Au and I−/I3−. As shown in Fig. 3d and e, a great amount of Au was accumulated in the perovskite and its interfaces with FTO, when a voltage of 0.8 V was imposed on the device of FTO/perovskite/Au for 4 hours. In contrast, a higher voltage of 1.2 V is required to trigger the Au diffusion into the perovskite in the device of FTO/perovskite/undoped spiro-OMeTAD/Au, indicating that the HTMs played important roles in blocking the Au diffusion.
Similar metal diffusion kinetics were observed for perovskite materials which were coated on ITO substrates and processed with various solvents. This method provides new insights into the metal and halide diffusion under different bias voltages. Boyd et al. investigated the metal (Ag, Au and Cu) diffusion in inverted PSCs.57 They found that the perovskite film near metal gridlines quickly turned yellow. The same phenomenon was observed for perovskites with three different compositions. From X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), they confirmed that the degradation resulted from the reaction between the metal and perovskite, as shown in Fig. 3f. It was noted that metal peaks appeared in the perovskite when aging at 85 °C, where no obvious Ag was detected in the perovskite after 1000 hours of storage at room temperature. After insertion of the ITO layer as a barrier between the perovskite and metal electrodes, significantly reduced metal diffusion and perovskite degradation were observed. Two types of PCBM, prepared from thermal evaporation and spin coating, were compared. The results show that the channel free ITO layer and homogeneous coverage of the ETM layer are essential to block the metal diffusion. In addition, edge sealing is critical for preventing the volatile species (such as the organic species MA) from escaping away through the edges.
Aside from the Au counter electrode, Ag has been widely used as a cathode in PSCs due to its suitable work function, high reflectivity and conductivity. Ag also suffered from a metal diffusion problem in both regular and inverted PSCs by showing the formation of AgI caused by iodine migration from the perovskite towards the top Ag electrode.52,53,58 The iodide was suggested to originate from MAI or HI after perovskite degradation. In addition, silver diffusion through charge transport materials into the perovskite layer can be another reaction mechanism.57 In order to understand the physical properties of metal impurities, Du and coworkers used first-principles calculations to study the formation energetics and diffusion dynamics of different metal counter electrodes in MAPbI3.59 Generally, fast diffusion of metal impurities in the perovskite requires a low formation energy and a low diffusion barrier. Furthermore, metal diffusion likely occurs through interstitial sites rather than MA or Pb vacancies due to their high diffusion barriers. As illustrated in Fig. 4a, the Fermi level of the perovskite determines the formation energy of the metal impurity in the perovskite. For most metals, low formation energies are observed when the Fermi level is in the midgap region. Exceptionally, owing to the weak binding with iodide, the formation energies of W and Mo are above 1 eV. Equally important as formation energy, diffusion barrier is another key factor influencing the metal diffusion kinetics in the perovskite. Fig. 4b exhibits the diffusion barriers for metal impurities at different charge states. Surprisingly, the monovalent Au+, Ag+ and Cu+ show relatively low diffusion barriers ranging from 0.27 eV to 0.42 eV in MAPbI3, which are comparable to the diffusion barrier of iodide.60–62 For Au+, Ag+ and Cu+, their low formation energies together with low diffusion barriers made them highly mobile and easily diffuse towards the perovskite, which well explained the diffusion mechanism for such metal cathode materials. Based on this calculation, Mo and W electrodes with high formation energies and high diffusion can be selected as potential stable metal counter electrodes in PSCs. It is worth mentioning that their electrical resistivity and work function must be considered before being applied in solar cells.
 Fig. 4  (a) The relationship between the formation energies of interstitial metal impurities in MAPbI3 and the Fermi levels. Reproduced with permission.59 Copyright 2017, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, UT-Battelle, LLC. Published by Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) The diffusion barriers for different metal impurities in the perovskite. Reproduced with permission.59 Copyright 2017, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, UT-Battelle, LLC. Published by Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) Core-level XPS analysis of the pure perovskite and the perovskite/Ag samples for different perovskite materials on day 1 and day 7. Relative atomic percentages of each sample. Reproduced with permission.63 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (d) Core-level spectra (O 1s and Pb 5d) of the same samples which are normalized to the Pb 5d peak area. Reproduced with permission.63 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (e) XPS spectra of Pb 4f with different thicknesses of Al films on the MAPbI3 perovskite. Reproduced with permission.64 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (f) Pb 4f XPS spectra of samples with Al, Yb, Cr, Ag, and Au metals directly on CsPbBr3, CsPbI3, and MAPbI3 perovskite films. Reproduced with permission.64 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
In order to reveal the interaction between the metal electrode and perovskite, the Cappel group has employed X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) together with other characterization techniques to systematically study the interfacial stability of Ag/perovskite interfaces without charge selective layers.63 The perovskite compositional effects on the metal diffusion and degradation mechanism were studied. Fig. 4c shows the relative atomic percentages of each perovskite sample for day 1 and day 7. A blue-shift absorption edge and decreased absorbance in UV-visible absorption spectroscopy were obtained for the Ag coated perovskite compared to the samples without Ag. They proposed that a higher band-gap halide-rich perovskite was formed near the Ag electrode, which was due to the reaction between Ag and the halide perovskite. However, Ag diffusion into the bulk of the perovskite did not lead to significant changes in the perovskite structure, which probably resulted from Ag+ incorporation into the perovskite. After 7 days, a great decrease of Ag amount (about 60%) was observed for all perovskite compositions, indicating that the Ag diffusion occurs for all perovskite materials. However, a roughly twice amount of Ag was observed for the Br-based perovskite compared to a mixed halide perovskite with Br and I, indicating that a much higher amount of Ag has diffused into the mixed halide perovskite. In addition, a shift of perovskite core levels toward lower binding energies was observed for perovskites with different compositions, which suggested that the Fermi level of the perovskite has moved toward the valence band, as shown in Fig. 4d.
Al is an alternative low-cost counter electrode and shows promising potential to be applied in PSCs. Al with a low work function is suitable for most perovskite applications. However, the stability and interfacial diffusion of Al have not been clearly studied, which left a research gap. Recently, Zhao et al.64 studied the redox chemistry between the perovskite and Al electrodes using several in situ techniques. A very fast decrease of PSC performance and the perovskite degradation was observed when the devices were stored in humid conditions. As evidenced by the XPS results (Fig. 4e), the redox reaction between Al and MAPbI3 occurred spontaneously, even without other environmental factors, such as light, moisture or oxygen. It is suggested that the moisture in the environment can facilitate the ion diffusion in the solid film, but has no function as a reagent in the interfacial redox reaction. The redox chemistry between the perovskite and other kinds of metals was evaluated by XPS (Fig. 4f). Metallic peaks for Pb0 were observed for all metals, except Au, which indicates that the reaction between lead perovskites and the metals (Ag, Yb and Cr) can occur voluntarily. In contrast, Au samples did not show metallic Pb0 peaks, indicating the much better stability of the Au electrode on perovskites. Ding et al. applied in situ synchrotron radiation photoemission spectroscopy (SRPES) and XPS to explore the interaction at the interface of the Al/perovskite.65 They found that a strong reaction occurs once Al is deposited on top of the perovskite. The reaction leads to perovskite decomposition (Pb2+ to Pb0) and the formation of AlI3. The energy alignment suggests that the Al electrode is not sufficient for hole extraction, but is a suitable electrode for electron transport in PSCs.
4. Alternative electrodes
As discussed above, Ag and Au are the most popular counter electrodes for PSCs; however, their high cost and instability issues significantly limit their scalable application in PSCs. Developing alternative electrodes with superior efficiency and stability is greatly desired. To date, different base-metal and nonmetal counter electrodes have been developed, such as copper, carbon, PEDOT and metal oxides. A summary of the materials and their performance can be found in previous reports. Here, we mainly focus on the material stability and interfacial charge dynamics in PSCs, aiming to review the advances and challenges for each type of counter electrode.
4.1 Metals and alloys
Similar to noble metals, Al metal has high electrical conductivity and light reflectivity but a lower molecular weight. But Al has a much lower cost than Au and Ag, exhibiting much higher potentials as conductive electrodes in optoelectronic applications. Besides, Al has a low work function (∼4.3 eV) to form good energy alignment with fullerene-based materials, and therefore Al is widely used in inverted PSCs. Since early attempts to use Al electrodes in inverted PSCs (ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/PCBM/Al),66,67 Al-based electrodes have been studied in both conventional and inverted PSCs. Previous work demonstrated that the direct contact of Al metal and PCBM could generate a dipole moment across the interface. Accordingly, Seok et al. introduced a thin LiF layer (0.5 nm) between PCBM and the Al electrode which successfully reduced the interfacial energy barrier and enhanced the electron extraction.68 Based on this interlayer strategy, the best reported PCE of 14.1% was achieved. Yue et al. optimized the work function of the cathode in a typical perovskite photovoltaic device (ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3/PC61BM/buffer metal/Al) by inserting different metal layers (Ca, Mg, Ag, and Au) between PCBM and the Al electrode.69 As illustrated in Fig. 5a, a downward band bending from the active layer to the cathode was generated due to the fact that the Fermi levels of Ca and Mg are above that of CH3NH3PbI3. The Fermi level of Au is lower than that of CH3NH3PbI3, leading to an upward band bending. The band configuration has great impacts on the interfacial charge transfer yield and charge collection efficiency. When the Au/Al structure is used in solar cells, a low PCE of 3.0% was obtained. In contrast, a significantly enhanced PCE of 17.1% was achieved for the devices with the Ca/Al cathode. The PCE and Voc of different cathodes versus work function are shown in Fig. 5b. Detailed characterization suggested that a low work function of a metal induced a lower series resistance. This work further demonstrated that optimization of the work function of the metal cathode is critical for improving device performance. Huang and coworkers applied the Ag/Al alloy cathode in n–i–p PSCs, and this bilayer cathode enabled a 37.3% enhancement of PCEs compared to the devices with the Ag electrode. The PCE enhancement was attributed to distinguished film quality and optical reflectivity of the Ag/Al layer.70 Nouri et al. introduced lithium doped graphene oxide (GO–Li) and Ti-sol as a bilayer ETL film. Due to the fact that GO has a work function of 5.2 eV which did not match well with the Al electrode,71 the introduction of lithium ions greatly reduced its work function to 4.3 eV, providing an optimized matching energy level with the Al electrode. The modulation of work function likely originated from the replacement of H+ by Li+ ions in the functional groups of GO. Unsatisfactory PCEs of 7.1% and 4.4% were achieved using single layers of GO–Li and Ti-sol, respectively. Surprisingly, the devices based on GO–Li and Ti-sol bilayers enabled an enhanced PCE of 10.2%. This work illustrated that the work function alignment at interfaces plays crucial roles in the high photovoltaic performance of solar cells. Sun and coworkers successfully engineered the interfaces by introducing ZnO nanocrystals between PC61BM and the Al electrode, which enabled a long charge carrier diffusion length as well as a high PCE of 15.9%.72 The Yang group introduced a thin layer of PFN between PCBM and Al in order to form an ohmic contact, which favors efficient charge extraction.67 An Al electrode was also employed on top of HTMs in n–i–p devices. Zhu et al. observed that the direct contact of the HTM and Al electrodes induced a high energy barrier at this interface and the device exhibited a low PCE of <0.1%. They found that the introduction of a 10 nm MoOx can greatly enhance the device performance to 11.42%, which is comparable to that with Ag as the top contact electrode.48 It has to be noted that Al metal can react with the perovskite or O2 in the air to form Al2O3, limiting the interfacial stability of devices.73 Therefore, it is critical to form a bilayer structure by inserting other barrier layers between Al and charge transport layers.
 Fig. 5  (a) Energy diagram at the interfaces of PCBM and metal counter electrodes. Reproduced with permission.69 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) The work function, Voc and PCEs of different metal counter electrodes. Reproduced with permission.69 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) The reuse process of the mpNi-cathode PSC device. Reproduced with permission.40 Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) J–V curves of the mpNi-cathode PSC device in this study under AM1.5 simulated sunlight. Reproduced with permission.40 Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) XRD spectra of different metal (Cu/Ag/Al)/perovskite devices after being stored in air for 20 h. Reproduced with permission.75 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (f) SEM images with different metal layers. Reproduced with permission.75 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Other metals, such as Ni, Mo, and W, have also been used as counter electrodes in n–i–p devices. Ni as an earth-abundant element and a non-precious metal has a comparable work function (φ = 5.04 eV) to Au (φ = 5.1 eV), showing high promise for use as an alternative counter electrode. Xu et al. used a Ni counter electrode in nanowire TiO2 based perovskite solar cells, and a high PCE of over 10% was obtained. They suggested a high thickness of Ni was required in order to reduce the series resistance of Ni and increase the FF of devices.39 In order to eliminate the vacuum facility which is desired for metal deposition, Fan and coworkers developed printable mesoporous nickel (mpNi) films for PSCs.40 The device structure is illustrated in Fig. 5c, which is a typical sandwich structure with Al2O3 inserted between TiO2 and the mpNi counter electrode. This premade electrode allowed the washing and reloading of the perovskite film, enabling the reuse of such devices. The four-probe test showed that the square resistance values of the Ni film were about one order of magnitude lower than those of the carbon films at different thicknesses. The purpose of the Al2O3 spacer layer is to avoid the direct contact between Ni and TiO2. This device architecture (device A) enabled a high PCE of 13.6% to be achieved, the device (device A +) by reloading the fresh perovskite recovered almost 90% of the initial performance (PCE = 12.1%), and the J–V curve is shown in Fig. 5d. The scalable fabrication method of Ni possesses a great potential for fully-printable solar cells with low cost and high performance. Ko and coworkers used low-cost Mo as the cathode material, and they found that the Mo-based electrode exhibited good mechanical properties against external deformation compared to Au. The devices with the Mo electrode showed a high PCE of 15.06%.74 This work demonstrates the high potential of Mo as the counter electrode for solar cells, but further work is needed to investigate the stability of the Mo electrode under different operational conditions. Gao and coworkers fabricated a W-based counter electrode by magnetron sputtering deposition, and over 12% has been realized.38 However, the stability of W-based devices was not discussed in this work, and further investigation of the W-based thin film as a rear electrode is needed.
A previous study has demonstrated that the chemical reaction between the counter electrode (Ag, Al) dominates the degradation mechanism of PSCs under ambient conditions, especially under conditions with high humidity. Finding alternative metal electrodes with less reactivity with the perovskite is critical for enhancing the device reliability. Cu is known for good corrosion resistance in different environmental conditions. The Huang group used Cu metal to replace Al as the counter electrode in PSCs based on FA0.4MA0.6PbI3 and MAPbI3. The devices with the Cu cathode exhibited remarkable air stability in ambient conditions with 20–60% relative humidity (RH). They noted that the Al film became gray and lusterless after several minutes from the vacuum chamber of thermal evaporation. As illustrated in Fig. 5e, impurity peaks were observed in the XRD measurement for Ag- and Al-based devices, indicating that the interfacial reaction between the metal and perovskite induced fast decomposition of the perovskite. In contrast, the Cu/perovskite interface showed a much higher stability by showing little impurity peaks from XRD, and the Cu layer retained the shiny color. The stability of the Cu electrode can also be reflected from the intact morphology, in comparation to the damaged perovskite film, as shown in Fig. 5f. As a result, the Al-based device demonstrated a fast degradation to PCE = 0 after storage in air for 2 days, whereas the devices with Cu showed little loss of PCE for more than 20 days.75 The same group systematically investigated the long-term stability of Cu electrodes in PSCs.34 In the presence of O2 and moisture, Cu can be oxidized to CuOx or Cu(OH)2, which causes perovskite decomposition. They compared the stability of the devices with Cu in both air and N2, and found that the perovskite underwent fast degradation to a yellow film after annealing in air for 1 hour. However, no detectable change in crystal structures was observed for the samples in N2 after 16 hours, indicating the high intrinsic stability of the Cu/perovskite interface in the absence of moisture and O2. The diffusivity of Cu through the perovskite was explored by SEM and EDX, and the results suggested minimal diffusion of Cu into the perovskite. The device with Cu retained 98% of the initial performance after 800 hours in ambient conditions with 55% RH. Based on the results, the authors predicted that the chemical reaction between Cu and the perovskite could take over 160 years at room temperature. The Huang group further applied a vacuum-free low temperature lamination technique and commercial Cu tape to prepare the counter electrode. The conductive tape showed satisfactory mechanical and electric contact with the active layer. Besides, the thick and compact Cu tape ensured an effective blocking of moisture penetration to the perovskite.76 In addition, Cu electrodes have also been used in other studies.77,78 Although Cu is a potential candidate in inverted perovskite solar cells, its inappropriate work function (4.65 eV) limits its performance in regular devices with organic spiro-OMeTAD or PTAA as the hole conductor. Besides, the ease of oxidation and diffusion of Cu electrodes is another challenge for scalable application.
Alloy metals were also used as counter electrodes in PSCs. Jiang et al. suggested that AgAl alloy is a promising electrode for improving the stability of PSCs.79 In AgAl alloy, Al tended to migrate away from the AgAl alloy, leading to the formation of AlOx, which acted as a protective layer to reduce Ag diffusion into the active layer. Meanwhile, AlOx as an intermediate medium between the electrode and active layer was thin enough to guarantee the ohmic contact at the interface. As a result, the device with the AgAl electrode has a higher PCE due to enhanced Jsc and FF compared to Ag and Al. A previous study has reported that the Al2O3 layer could improve IPCE values at a long wavelength.80 They suggested that the AlOx in AgAl likely contributed to the high performance of the AgAl cathode in PSCs. Compared with Al and Ag, AgAl showed remarkable stability in the environment with 10% RH, indicating that the AgAl alloy could efficiently prevent water penetration into the device. Wang et al. introduced the semiconductor material bismuth telluride (Bi2Te3) as the counter electrode in PSCs.81 In a device structure of ITO/NiOx/MAPbI3/PCBM/BCP/Bi2Te3, the performance of Bi2Te3 and the Ag electrode was compared. Bi2Te3 has a similar work function to Ag, which matches well with the work function of PCBM. Due to the special topological properties of Bi2Te3, the electrical conductivity increased for higher thicknesses. However, a too thick electrode would reduce the charge collection efficiency. Based on an optimal thickness of 200 nm, Bi2Te3 based devices reached a high PCE of 18.2%, compared to 15.9% for Ag-based devices. It is noted that the Bi2Te3-based device showed a higher IPCE value than the Ag-based one within the visible light range, which led to a better charge extraction and transfer ability of the Bi2Te3 electrode. The mechanical stability of Bi2Te3 was examined by applying different bending radii (R) on the devices. The Bi2Te3-based electrode retained 95% of the initial PCE after the 1000-cycle bending test when R was 4 mm, whereas Ag retained only 22% of the initial PCE. This indicates that Bi2Te3 is a promising flexible counter electrode for solar cell applications. The environmental stability of unencapsulated devices was tested at 30–50% RH and room temperature. The device with Bi2Te3 lost 10% of the initial PCE after 1000 h, but over 36% loss of the initial PCE was observed for Ag-based devices. When depositing a Bi2Te3 or Ag electrode on the MAPbI3 layer directly, they found that the Ag electrode quickly lost its metallic luster, but Bi2Te3 retained its original appearance for 20 h. Very recently, the Han group developed a composite rear electrode based on Cu–Ni alloy with graphene on both sides for solar cells. They found that the alloy electrodes showed both high stability and electrical conductivity. The work function of Cu can be well tuned by varying the Ni content. More importantly, the graphene capping layer can act as a barrier layer to suppress the metal diffusion and block the moisture penetration. As a result, a promising PCE of over 24% was realized in devices based on this composite electrode, and the encapsulated devices kept 95% of the initial performance after working under maximum power point conditions and continuous illumination for 5000 hours.82
4.2 Carbon
Carbon has shown promise in optoelectronic applications owing to its superior properties, including great abundance, low cost, structural diversity, conductivity and excellent stability.83 Various types of carbon materials (graphene, carbon nanotubes, and graphite) have been developed and their physicochemical properties have been explored. Carbon materials usually show a comparable work function of −5.0 eV to metal Au (−5.1 eV). Besides, carbon materials show remarkable protection effects, enabling a significant improvement of device stability.84 Extensive efforts on carbon counter electrodes have been made to study their impacts on device efficiency and stability, and details of the development of carbon electrodes can be found in previous reviews.85,86 Here we only summarize some representative work on carbon electrodes in terms of device architecture, material composition, stability and scalable fabrication. Generally, carbon electrodes are mainly applied in two types of device architectures, including monolithic and conventional layered structures. The monolithic structure is made by depositing a mesoporous insulating layer (e.g. ZrO2 or Al2O3) sandwiched between mesoporous TiO2 and porous carbon electrodes, followed by infiltration of the perovskite into the underlying mesoporous structures. The role of the insulating layer is to avoid the direct contact between carbon materials and the electron conductor TiO2. The monolithic structure has the advantages of simple fabrication by printing or other low-cost manufacturing techniques. However, an elevated annealing temperature (>400 °C) is often required to anneal the metal oxide layer, which increases the energy consumption and is unfit for plastic substrates. Besides, poor infiltration of the perovskite in the porous structure of electrodes may limit the interfacial charge collection. Difficulties remain in finely controlling the perovskite crystallization in the porous architecture. All these could lead to relatively low PCEs for carbon electrodes compared to conventional metal counter electrodes. The other device structure for carbon electrodes is the conventional layer structure, where carbon is lastly coated on top of the HTM or perovskite layers. In such an architecture, the perovskite or HTM layer acts as a barrier layer between two conducting electrodes (e.g. Au and FTO); therefore, the insulating layer (ZrO2) is not required. Since carbon materials can act as both the HTM and counter electrode, the doped molecular HTM layer, such as spiro-OMeTAD, with high cost and poor stability can be eliminated. Due to the low tolerance of the perovskite to high temperature and organic solvents, the fabrication conditions and carbon paste/ink composition need careful optimization. In the conventional layer structure, the contact between the carbon electrode and perovskite or the HTM layer is critical for preferred charge collection efficiency.
The Han group firstly reported the monolithic structure in PSCs in 2013. As illustrated in Fig. 6a, the carbon electrode acts simultaneously as the HTM and the charge collector in a HTM-free configuration. A promising PCE of 6.6% and good device stability were achieved.87 Typically, the monolithic carbon device contains a 400 nm thick layer of TiO2, a 500 nm thick layer of ZrO2 and a 9 μm thick layer of carbon. Two-step fabrication was used to prepare the perovskite film by simply dropping PbI2 solution into the mesoporous film, followed by dipping the device into MA solution. Compared to conventional PSCs, the mesoporous electrode and carbon layer are far thicker in this architecture, which could induce high charge conducting resistance and long carrier diffusion paths. Moreover, incomplete pore filling is often observed in such thick films. According to the thickness optimization, a high thickness of carbon induced low pore infiltration and a low thickness induced large square resistance. It was found that the increase of graphite size led to a lower square resistance, which is favorable for high performance.88 Due to the composite nature of graphite/carbon black, the carbon film tends to form crack defects and low film robustness. The conductivity of the carbon film was further enhanced by incorporating some additives (titanium isopropoxide and acetic acid) in the carbon precursor. Without any polymer binders, the additives enabled a strong adhesion to glass or PET substrates. A high PCE of 14% was achieved by using this new composition of carbon film.89 The unsatisfied work function alignment between the carbon electrode and perovskite causes undesired carrier extraction barrier and influences the device efficiency. The Han group developed heteroatom boron doping to carbon materials for tuning the electronic properties. Boron doping enhanced the film conductivity and facilitated interfacial hole collection.90 Yang et al. proposed a novel method to modify carbon counter electrodes by chlorine management. After careful optimization of chlorinated graphite composition (C–Clx, x = 0.2, 0.4, and 0.6), a 1.46 times PCE enhancement was achieved.91 In order to further improve the performance of monolithic structured devices, the Han group systematically optimized the perovskite composition and interfaces. By introducing 5-ammonium valeric acid (5-AVA) into a methylammonium (MA) based perovskite, fewer perovskite defects and better perovskite pore filling in mesoporous TiO2 electrodes were obtained. These enabled more effective charge collection efficiency and a prolonged electron lifetime. A certified 12.8% PCE was achieved by combining the perovskite (5-AVA)x(MA)1−xPbI3 and monolithic carbon electrodes. Furthermore, this device showed outstanding stability for 1000 hours in ambient air and under one sun conditions. Optimization of the perovskite composition is another way to enhance perovskite properties in a more excellent manner. The Han group introduced BF4− into an I− based perovskite, and the corresponding parameters including light harvesting efficiency, conductivity and PCE were improved. A high PCE of over 13% was obtained for hole conductor free and fully printable PSCs.92 Later, the same group further enhanced the PCE (over 15%) of the devices with a monolithic carbon electrode by solvent engineering, additive-assisted crystallization and solvent vapor treatment. In contrast to the HTM-free configuration in monolithic carbon-based devices, TiO2/Al2O3/NiO/carbon was also explored. NiO as the hole selective layer accelerated the charge collection, and a high PCE of 15% was obtained.93 The Yang group reported a simplified device structure by using a pre-deposited PbI2 film as the insulating layer to replace ZrO2. This configuration enhanced the electric contact between the perovskite and counter electrode, and a high PCE of over 11% was reached.94 To modulate the permeability of the carbon counter electrode for printable PSCs, Tao and coworkers used polystyrene spheres as a pore forming agent to obtain a porous structure, which induced a 22% enhancement of PCEs.95
 Fig. 6  (a) A schematic structure of a carbon-based monolithic device. Reproduced with permission.87 Copyright 2013, the authors. Published by Springer Nature. (b) A schematic structure of a carbon based conventional layered device with a CuPc interlayer. Reproduced with permission.97 Copyright 2015, Elsevier. (c) Cross-sectional SEM images of TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/C solar cells prepared by the inkjet printing technique using the C + CH3NH3I ink. Reproduced with permission.99 Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) Time evolution of the normalized PCEs of the glass-encapsulated CNT + P3HT-based device. The PCEs were evaluated from the J–V scan (black) and maximum power point (red). Reproduced with permission.106 Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Long-term PCE stability of PSCs with the reference Ag electrode and CNT-8, hybrid graphene-1/CNT-8 film, and hybrid graphene-4/CNT-8 film as counter electrodes under a controlled RH of 50 ± 2% at 25 °C. Reproduced with permission.114 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (f) Variation of normalized PCEs as a function of bending cycles under a tensile strain of 1.5% for the PATCVD-Gr and Trans-Gr devices. Reproduced with permission.116 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (g) The fabrication of the NbS2 film from the LixNbS2 powder. Reproduced with permission.119 Copyright 2018, the authors. Published by Springer Nature. (h) Experimental (an incident angle of 8°) and simulated reflectance of part of Spiro-OMeTAD HTL-based devices. Reproduced with permission.32 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
In the conventional layered structure, different types of carbon electrodes (such as carbon paste, graphite, carbon nanotubes, and graphene) were used in PSCs.96 The key in this configuration is to deposit a carbon film at a low temperature at which the underlying perovskite and functional layers are stable. Another challenge is that the contact between the perovskite and carbon film is poor which produces a physical and energy barrier at interfaces. Zhang et al. prepared low-temperature processed nanorod-liked copper phthalocyanine (CuPc) as an interlayer between the perovskite and carbon film, as illustrated in Fig. 6b.97 CuPc was deposited under high vacuum conditions, then commercial carbon paste was deposited on top of CuPc by doctor-blading. Comparable PCEs have been obtained for carbon-based and Au-based PSCs. The environmental stability of two encapsulated devices was examined in ambient air at room temperature under one sun illumination. Double-layer CuPc/carbon devices showed excellent device stability, which kept more than 90% of the initial PCE after 500 h. It is found that the solvents in the carbon paste or ink should be carefully optimized in order to avoid the damage to the perovskite or other organic functional layers. Hagfeldt and coworkers developed a hot pressure transfer method to deposit a carbon cloth on carbon paste. This method was approved to be promising for large-scale fabrication.98 To allow scalable and low-cost fabrication of PSCs, Yang and coworkers developed an inkjet printing technique for deposition of a conformable perovskite/carbon bilayer.99 Large grain and defect-free boundaries have been obtained for this configuration. The key point in this inkjet printing is to simultaneously deposit both carbon and perovskite films in situ. The cross-sectional SEM images showed large pinholes and voids formed in the film made by applying a carbon film and a subsequent MAPbI3 bath. In contrast, a compact perovskite/carbon film and high interface quality were observed for inkjet printing of carbon and MAI ink, as illustrated in Fig. 6c. The improvement of crystal crystallinity and superior performance were attributed to in situ chemical transformation of the perovskite at the time of carbon film formation. To enhance the interfacial contact, a carbon black interlayer was introduced in HTM-free PSCs. It was found that, under heat treatment, carbon black nanoparticles can diffuse into the perovskite and improve the interfacial charge extraction.100 The Zhang group employed carbonized bacterial cellulose (CBC) and carbonized macadamia nutshell (CMNS) in traditional carbon paste in order to reduce the material cost and improve the environmental sustainability. They found that the addition of 0.1% CBC or CMNS induced a notable increase of PCEs, which was mainly attributed to the improved interface contact with the perovskite.101 Wu et al. introduced a continuous electrospray (ES) technique to achieve low-cost printing of different layers in devices including ETO, perovskite and carbon layers. All steps were performed by continuous printing under room temperature conditions. A high PCE of 14.41% was achieved for printed devices, which is about 29% higher than that of the devices using doctor-blading. This method shows high ability to fabricate films in a scalable processing line.102
Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) with high conductivity have been widely used as additives in charge transport materials for enhancement of charge collection. Besides, it is transparent and suitable for application in semi-transparent solar cells. One limitation for the CNT counter electrode is the poor interfacial contact between the perovskite and CNTs, leading to undesirable charge extraction efficiency. In this respect, great efforts have been devoted to optimize the microstructure and interface contact between these two materials, in order to improve the device performance. Mhaisalkar and coworkers applied CNTs in PSCs by directly transferring CNT films on the perovskite as a charge collector, enabling the replacement of both hole transport materials and metal contact.103 The fabricated CNT films have diameters in the range of 1–2 nm which are composed of both single- and double-walled CNTs. The as-prepared free-standing CNT film can be easily peeled off and transferred to different substrates. A high PCE of 6.8% was obtained due to a high driving force for hole injection. However, the high sheet resistance of the CNT film of 2–5 kΩ caused a low FF in devices. The authors concluded that further doping of CNTs could be an effective way to increase film conductivity. Jang et al. used a modified antisolvent method by dispersing CNTs into chlorobenzene. This method allowed CNTs to form a high contact area with the perovskite, facilitating interfacial charge collection.104 Besides, the device with the CNT dripping method showed a high PCE of 13.5%. The Yang group introduced a CNT interlayer to improve the perovskite/carbon contact and reduced the interfacial recombination.105 They fabricated a polyethyleneimine-functionalized CNT (PEI/CNT) hybrid film in order to passivate the perovskite surface and enhance the interface quality. The PCE was improved from 7.41% (without interlayer) to 10.55% (PEI/CNT). Choi and coworkers infiltrated the polymer HTMs into CNT films in order to bring down the material cost and enhance the stability of the devices. As illustrated in Fig. 6d, stability for over 2000 hours for the CNT-based devices was obtained under one-sun light illumination in ambient conditions.106 To expand the contact area between the perovskite and carbon layer, the Huang group developed CNT/carbon fiber as the counter electrode. The hybrid film enabled the decrease of charge exchange resistance and simultaneously the enhancement of hole extraction, which contributed a PCE increase from 8.93% (CNTs) to 11.8% (CNT/carbon fiber).107 More advances in the utilization of CNTs in other PSC components can be found in recent reviews.108
Graphene is a commonly used 2D carbon material in various optoelectronic applications. Graphene is definitely a candidate for electrode applications, with its transparency, mechanical flexibility and appropriate work functions. The Yang group optimized the layer thickness of graphene for enhancing the device performance. Both multilayered and single-layered graphene reached Schottky junction and ohmic contact at the interface between the perovskite and graphene electrode. Their results showed that multilayered graphene had better hole extraction than single-layered graphene, enabling fast hole extraction kinetics (5.1 ns−1) and a high PCE of 11.5%. They concluded that the superior performance of multilayered graphene was mainly attributed to the large transport coefficient, long carrier lifetime and long diffusion length.109 Wang et al. developed one-step fast pyrolysis to prepare graphene with a high specific surface area of 1149 m2 g−1. During the synthesis, real-time nitrogen doping was applied to form N-doped graphene. The devices based on N-doped graphene exhibited reduced charge recombination and a PCE of 10.32%, higher than the ones with graphene.110 Chemical doping by heteroatoms becomes an efficient way to enhance the electrical conductivity of carbon electrodes. Guo et al. developed Ni-N-doped graphene (Ni–NG) for hybrid carbon electrodes. They suggest that N atoms are bonded with carbon atoms and Ni atoms form coordination bonds by bonding with N atoms,111 which could improve hole extraction in devices and enabled a PCE of 12.39%. They used UPS measurements to explore the effect of Ni doping on the work function of graphene, revealing that Ni atoms can significantly reduce the work function of graphene. Zheng and coworkers developed a strategy for B-doping,112 which manipulated the hole extraction and transport ability of CNTs. According to the UPS measurement, they suggest that the decreased EF after B-doping induced an improvement in hole extraction at the perovskite–MWCNT interface. Moreover, B-doping led to the enhancement of film conductivity and carrier concentration. Wei et al. synthesized three-dimensional honeycomb like graphene by introducing the reaction between potassium and CO2. The prepared graphene exhibited high conductivity and large surface area, showing high promises as a counter electrode in perovskite solar cells, leading to PCEs over 10%.113 In order to further enhance the transport properties of the carbon electrode, the Lee group combined graphene and CNTs to fabricate a hybrid film as the top electrode. This free-standing film can be easily transferred onto other substrates. As illustrated in Fig. 6e, the hybrid counter electrode in perovskite solar cells demonstrated a high PCE of 15.36% and promising stability by retaining 86% of the initial performance after 500 hours in humid conditions.114 The Yan group applied graphene electrodes in inverted PSCs for the first time and obtained ultrathin and flexible solar cells with high power output per weight of 5 W g−1.115 Tran and coworkers developed transfer-free, large-scale monolayer graphene as the counter electrode. They applied plasma assisted thermal chemical vapor deposition to prepare the graphene film directly on the polymer substrate, which was performed at a relatively low temperature of 150 °C. The highest efficiency of 14.2% was reported for the illumination from the graphene side. The obtained graphene film exhibited promising mechanical flexibility, which retained 90% of the initial PCE after 1000 bending cycles under a tensile strain of 1.5%, as illustrated in Fig. 6f.116
Recent work demonstrated that the major limiting factor for carbon-based counter electrodes in perovskite solar cells is the severe performance losses at the counter electrode interfaces.117 Kim and coworkers developed a two dimensional perovskite electron blocking layer in hole-conductor free devices in order to reduce the charge losses at interfaces, which enables a promising PCE of 18.5%.118
4.3 Others
Huang and coworkers developed layered transition metal dichalcogenides NbS2 as counter electrodes in PSCs. Such layered materials show excellent electronic properties (8.7 × 103Scm−1), great mechanical flexibility, and partial optical transparency.119 NbS2 powder was prepared through a simple two-step solid-state reaction from Nb and S precursors, as illustrated in Fig. 6g. A homogeneous dispersion of NbS2 nanosheet (thickness of about 1 nm) colloidal solution was obtained, and the NbS2 film exhibited many wrinkle-like features before and after cold isostatic pressing treatment. This NbS2 film exhibited a remarkable conductivity of 8.7 × 103Scm−1, about 15 times higher than that of the assembled graphene (550Scm−1). In PSCs, a low PCE of 8.31% was obtained compared to 16.37% for Au-based PSCs. The low photovoltaic parameters are mainly attributed to high series resistance for the NbS2 counter electrode (302.8 Ω) compared to Au (29.4 Ω). In addition, the fabrication of NbS2 electrodes was completed by carefully transferring to the HTM surface, which was sophisticated and unsuitable for large-area production. The conducting polymer poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) is known for its high transparency and high conductivity (>1000 S cm−1), which shows high promise for use as a counter electrode in optoelectronic devices. However, the commercial PEDOT:PSS is mostly in the form of aqueous dispersion, which cannot be directly coated on perovskite films. To overcome this issue, the Zhou group developed a transfer-lamination technique to deposit the PEDOT:PSS top electrode on the perovskite. The PEDOT:PSS film was firstly deposited from aqueous dispersion onto a PDMS substrate and then transferred onto a perovskite thin film.120 They demonstrated that this transfer-lamination method caused undetectable deformation of the underlying perovskite and enabled over 11% efficiency. The same group further optimized the thickness of the transferred PEDOT:PSS films to engineer the color and antireflection, which allowed selective reflection of specific wavelengths, as shown in Fig. 6h.32 The colorful PSCs (e.g. red, orange, green, blue, purple) exhibited PCE values from 11% to 15%.
Bryant and coworkers developed a new semi-transparent electrode structure which combined Ni mesh electrodes with a transparent conductive adhesive (TCA). This electrode could be fabricated separately and simply laminated at room temperature to work.41 The mesh electrode had a large-area lateral conductivity of about 1.2 Ω per square. To ensure the electrical conductivity of the electrode, PEDOT:PSS was incorporated into TCA, which not only retained the transparency but also enhanced the conductivity. This device achieved a PCE of 13.3% when illumination was incident from the FTO glass side (9.8% for the reverse side). This work provided a strategy to replace flexible metal foils for low-cost roll-to-roll manufacturing. Troughton et al. also reported flexible perovskite solar cells using titanium foil as the counter electrode substrate.121 They optimized the thickness of titanium metal foil and the highest PCE of 10.3% was obtained. Moreover, the devices exhibited remarkable stability during the bending test by retaining over 90% of the initial performance after 200 bending cycles.
Transparent conductive oxide (TCO) refers to a collection of conductive, transparent materials that allowed light to pass through. It was usually fabricated in thin layers and could be widely used on different substrates. Transparent substrates were commonly used in optoelectronics. Due to their excellent properties, they have been explored as transparent counter electrodes in semi-transparent PSCs. Indium tin oxide (ITO) is one of the typical TCOs widely used in industrial production for its low resistivity (10−4 Ω cm) and high transmittance (>80%).122 Since ITO was first reported for application as counter electrodes in tandem perovskite solar cells in 2014,123 more research has been conducted to optimize the ITO based transparent counter electrode. Thin films of ITO are typically deposited by magnetron sputtering. This high-speed fabrication method provides the possibility for its scalability. However, the high energy sputtered particles and high temperature during deposition have posed risks in damaging the perovskite layer.124 Bush et al. developed ZnO nanoparticles as the sputtering buffer layer.125 Aluminum doped (2 mol%) zinc oxide (AZO) nanoparticles were introduced to eliminate the extraction barrier, and the highest PCE of 12.3% was obtained. The devices with ITO and AZO as interlayers also showed better thermal stability compared to the reference device. Specifically, the device with sputtered ITO retained 80% of the original efficiency for 124 h at 100 °C. Since the perovskite layer is sensitive to high temperatures, device fabrication at a low temperature is desirable in order to reduce this damage. Fu and coworkers deposited a hydrogenated indium oxide (In2O3:H) film using room temperature sputtering.126 In2O3:H represents a promising electrode material which has high visible and NIR transmittance and chemical stability.127 The electrode of In2O3:H was prepared with a low-temperature process (50 °C). As a result, the film showed a high mobility of 51.3 cm2 V−1 s−1, a high transmittance in the near-infrared region (72%), and a low sheet resistance of 25.7 Ω per square for 149 nm layers. High-energy ions in the radio-frequency sputtering method tend to damage the organic layers in the device. Compared with ZnO:Al, the device with In2O3:H suffered less damage due to a shorter target-to-substrate distance and a better coating efficiency. Werner et al. applied the indium zinc oxide (IZO) layer as a transparent electrode by radiofrequency sputtering.128 This layer showed low absorption (less than 3% absorption in the range of 400–1200 nm) and a low sheet resistance of 35 Ω per square. Unlike ITO, which requires relatively high deposition temperatures to achieve its satisfactory properties, IZO shows superior advantages in this regard, as it could retain excellent optical and electrical properties when processed at a low temperature. Wahl et al. developed semitransparent inverted PSCs with the IZO counter electrode.129 They adopted a device structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3/PCBM/BCP/IZO without a buffer layer between transport layers and the counter electrode. In order to reduce the damage caused by sputtering the IZO layer on the BCP/PCBM layer, a short annealing step was introduced. A high PCE of 13% was achieved for the 170 nm IZO electrode, which was attributed to the low sheet resistance of 22 Ω per square and the high transmittance of over 70% in the range of 300–800 nm.
4.4 Multilayer electrodes
Multilayer electrodes are demonstrated to be a promising way to reduce the metal diffusion in perovskite solar cells. In earlier studies, researchers reported interlayers such as LiF,68 Ca,130 and bathocuproine (BCP).131 Lin et al. suggested that the devices (Fig. 7a) based on the Cu (10 nm)/Ag (100 nm) bilayer electrode could retain 85% of the initial PCE after 80 h in the air.132 In comparison, single Cu and Ag electrodes retained only about 60% and 10% of the initial PCEs, respectively. No obvious differences in the initial PCEs were observed when using different electrodes, including Al, Ag, Cu and the Cu–Ag bilayer. In contrast, significant differences in stability were recorded for these counter electrodes (Fig. 7b). Specifically, the devices with the Al electrode completely degraded in 20 h due to the severe reaction at interfaces. In contrast, single layer Ag and Cu electrodes exhibited better performance than Al. For the Cu–Ag bilayer electrode, it demonstrated the best stability by retaining a high PCE of 15% after 80 h. From ToF-SIMS and other measurements, they found that a large amount of I− accumulated at the surface of the aged Cu electrode. Moreover, the single layer Cu electrode could be oxidized to CuO after aging, which was observed from the observed diffraction peak at 39.2° in XRD. For the aged Ag electrode, great increases in the amounts of I−, AgI2− and PbI3− were recorded, indicating iodide migration into the Ag layer. Surprisingly, the signals of CuO and AgI2− were not found in the aged devices based on bilayer Cu/Ag. It was suggested that in the bilayer electrode Ag had the ability to prevent Cu oxidation, while Cu reduced the formation of AgI, which together enhanced the stability of PSCs.
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration of the device with a Cu (10 nm)/Ag (100 nm) bilayer electrode. Reproduced with permission.132 Copyright 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) J–V characteristics of devices with different electrodes. Reproduced with permission.132 Copyright 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) XPS spectra of Pb 4f for fresh and aged electrodes (aged environment in the dark) in a N2 atmosphere at 85 °C for 100 h. Reproduced with permission.134 Copyright 2020, the authors. Published by Springer Nature. (d) The N 1s XPS spectra of the TiN, MAPbI3, and MAPbI3/Ti films after aging in air for 5 h. Reproduced with permission.135 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (e) The architecture of the MoOx/Au-seed/Cu/MoOx electrode. Reproduced with permission.139 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (f) Transmittance of MoO3/Ag/WO3 multilayers. Reproduced with permission.140 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (g) Schematic diagram and J–V characteristics with fast degradation by ionic defects in perovskite solar cells. The p–i–n PHJ devices with and without a CIL and the cathode protection process with J–V characteristics and absorption spectra. Reproduced with permission.149 Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (h) Field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) images of ZnO-NRs at various magnifications. Reproduced with permission.151 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. 
Domanski et al. reported that the Cr/Au bilayer was a successful way to enhance the stability of a device.26 Specifically, a thin Cr layer (10 nm) was deposited between the Au electrode and HTM layer. Severe morphological deformation was observed for Au coated HTM layers. As a result, the devices with bilayer Cr/Au kept over 80% of the initial PCE after 12 h aging under the conditions of 75 °C, one sun illumination and maximum power point (MPP) tracking, although the initial PCE of the Cr/Au based device was 13.0%, slightly lower than that of the Au-based device. This work proved that Cr represents a promising buffer layer to reduce metal diffusion. Similarly, Mei et al. demonstrated that a Au/Ag bilayer was an effective strategy to enhance device stability.133 Under MPP conditions, a pure Ag metal electrode retained only 40% of its original PCE for 200 hours. In comparison, 80% of the initial performance for devices with the Au/Ag bilayer electrode has been kept for the same period. It was shown that the Au electrode could slow down the reaction between the halogen and the metal electrode to a certain extent. Wu et al. introduced the low-cost Bi metal as a metal barrier layer to prevent the corrosion of the halide perovskite, which was commonly observed for Ag, Au and Al metals.134 Bi shows a high formation energy of the reaction with gaseous iodine, requiring at least 150° to trigger such a reaction. In addition, the temperature (when the pressure is about 10 torr) for evaporating the Bi film is about 517 °C, which was lower than that for Ag (832 °C), tungsten (W, 2757 °C) and Mo (2717 °C). The metal halide reaction kinetics was investigated for different metals by analyzing the Pb–I bonds (138.40 and 143.25eV) and metallic Pb (136.90 and 141.75eV) as shown in the XPS spectra (Fig. 7c). The Bi-coated devices showed remarkable chemical stability by showing no addition of the above-mentioned peaks, which instead occurred for all other metals (Au, Cu, and Ag). The enhanced chemical stability of the Bi electrode is mainly attributed to its higher energy barrier (18.3kJmol−1) for this corrosion reaction compared to other metals (−49.8, −88, and −71.1 kJmol−1 for Au, Cu, and Ag, respectively).59 Thermal aging indicated that the kinetics and mechanism of the corrosion reactions proceeding during aging are different from other metals, and Bi showed very limited penetration into the perovskite. They found that the thickness of the Bi layer played an important role in affecting the film morphology and conducting properties. A high PCE of over 18% was achieved with a thickness of 20 nm. For unencapsulated Bi-based devices, nearly 88% of the initial PCE was retained after 6000 h in ambient air environment.
Chen et al.135 developed an ultra-thin titanium layer to work as an interlayer between the perovskite layer and metal electrode. It is worth noting that Ti metal as a dense barrier layer had many advantages, such as low diffusivity. What is more, Ti metal with suitable work function (−4.3 eV) with respect to the conduction band of CH3NH3PbI3 was beneficial to charge collection. When the Ti interlayer was applied to a device of ITO/PTAA/MAPbI3/Ti (10 nm)/Au, a champion solar cell PCE of 18.1% was achieved. From the XPS results, a weak peak at 397.2 eV corresponding to Ti–N bonds was observed (Fig. 7d). According to the weakened peak at 401.4 eV corresponding to (CH3–NH2) from the decomposition product of MAPbI3, they suggested that the Ti barrier layer can prevent ion migration rather than accelerating corrosion in the device. In the cross-sectional SEM images, it could be clearly found that the Ti interlayer could improve the uniformity of the top metal film, such as Au or Ag.
Han et al. reported the combination of Sn–Bi alloy and silver as double-layer counter electrodes. The Sn–Bi alloy was fabricated by a high-temperature melting method.136 Ag and Sn–Bi were sequentially deposited on the device surface by vacuum thermal evaporation. The Sn–Bi alloy exhibited a similar work function to Au, but a low PCE of 4.08% was obtained. They speculated that the Sn–Bi alloy exhibited a low melting point and tended to collapse downwards during the evaporation process, and the addition of the silver layer would make the connection between the layers tighter. Compared with the Ag electrode (PCE = 10.85%), this double-layer electrode showed a PCE of 13.19% in the devices, indicating that the Sn–Bi alloy and silver electrode improved the PCE and reduced hysteresis. In the stability test, the double-layer electrodes retained 88% of the initial PCE in ambient air for 7 days.
Sanehira et al. investigated the role of MoOx as the interlayer between the metal electrode and HTMs.137 They showed that the MoOx coated spiro-OMeTAD layer exhibited excellent stability after 115 h light soaking. They noted that the thickness of MoOx is critical for both PCEs and stabilities of the devices. Specifically, the devices with a thin Al electrode (8 and 15 nm) tended to degrade, indicating that the Al electrode is unstable in PSCs.48 By using a thick Al–MoOx bilayer, the devices showed much enhanced stability in ambient conditions. Further study has shown that some chemical reaction occurred between Al and MoOx, probably forming Al2O3 or nonstoichiometric aluminum oxides, which could serve as an additional physical barrier to moisture. Similarly, Liu et al. developed an ultra-thin MoOx layer in CsPbIBr2.138 CsPbIBr2 had been reported to degenerate to a yellow phase when moisture was infiltrated. They deposited a 4 nm MoOx layer on CsPbIBr2 by thermal evaporation and improved the PCE from 1.3% to 5.5%. It should be noted that the work function of CsPbIBr2 was 4.70 eV, which was similar to 4.30 eV for the MoOx layer. This lower work function of the MoOx layer acted as an electron transfer pathway, which was beneficial to accelerate charge extraction and improved the photovoltaic performance of the device. Moreover, different from the introduction of small organic molecules with poor thermal stability, they adopted the FTO/NiOx/CsPbIBr2/MoOx/Au architecture and the devices showed excellent thermal stability. When the device was stored in a N2 atmosphere at 30–40% RH, 12% and 25% of degradation was observed when the devices were heated at 85 °C and 160 °C for 90 min compared to their initial efficiency, respectively.
Giuliano et al. reported a new dielectric/metal/dielectric (DMD) multilayer structure in a semitransparent counter electrode (see Fig. 7e),139 which is composed of MoOx/Au/Cu/MoOx. Compared with the Au or Ag based structure, Cu-based DMD electrodes showed much reduced interfacial reactions with the perovskite. Meanwhile, the Cu-based electrode could not only reduce the cost, but also exhibited a high PCE of 12.5%, which was much higher than that of the Au-based electrode. They found that the insertion of the ultra-thin Au seed layer was necessary for decreasing the sheet resistance of the DMD electrode from 1 MΩ sq−1 to 10 Ω sq−1. Moreover, the ultrathin Au seed layer (1.5 nm) is sufficient to solve the problem of Cu self-aggregation and diffusion into MoOx. Similarly, Xie et al. developed a DMD electrode based on MoO3/Ag/WO3.140 A very low sheet resistance (7 Ω sq−1) and a high average visible transmittance of over 70% in the range of 400–800nm were realized after carefully adjusting the thickness by optimizing the deposition rate of each layer (Fig. 7f). Moreover, other electrodes based on metals/dielectrics have been reported, such as V2Ox/Ag/V2Ox,141 ZTO/Ag/ZTO,142 ZnS/Ag/WO3,143 AZO/Ag/AZO,144 MoO3/Au/MoO3,145 and SnOx/Ag/SnOx.146
Jagt et al. developed a CuOx buffer layer which had a high hole mobility (4.3 ± 2 cm2 V−1 s−1) and a high transmittance (> 95%).147 In contrast to MoOx which reacted with lead halide perovskites leading to severe degradation, direct contact of CuOx with perovskites did not accelerate interface degradation. They used atmospheric-pressure chemical vapor deposition (AP-CVD) to form the CuOx layer. It is worth mentioning that, unlike traditional sputtering which requires more than an hour of growth time, this method took only a few minutes to complete. Using Kelvin probe measurements and XPS measurements, a suitable work function of 5.3 ± 0.2 eV for CuOx was recorded, which matched well with the HOMO of PTAA. When inserting a 3 nm CuOx interlayer, the PCE has improved to 16.7%. Besides, it could be used in the four-terminal tandem perovskite–silicon devices due to its high transmittance, which enabled an excellent PCE of 24.4%. Similarly, Eom et al. introduced pulsed-chemical vapor deposition (pulsed-CVD) for preparing CuOx layers.148 They found that high CuOx thickness increased the RMS roughness, and an excessively thin layer may result in a decrease in the FF. By optimizing the film thickness, the best PCE of 15.6% has been achieved.
Back and coworkers introduced amine-mediated titanium suboxide (AM–TiOx) as a chemical inhibition layer (CIL), which successfully reduced the migration between the Ag electrode and perovskite layer (Fig. 7g).149 The amine group acted as a buffer to block the migration of halide ions, thereby reducing the corrosion of silver electrodes. AM–TiOx was prepared by mixing titanium(IV) isopropoxide (TTIP) with diethanolamine (DEA) in isopropyl alcohol (IPA). The introduction of the AM–TiOx layer led to a reduction of Rs from 25 to 2.5 Ω cm2, enabling improved PCEs ranging from 15.02% to 16.09%. Furthermore, the stability of Ag or Al coated devices was tested in a N2 environment under dark conditions. The devices based on Ag electrodes with the AM–TiOx layer retained more than 90% of the initial PCE after 1000 hours of storage. This showed that AM–TiOx was an excellent barrier to block the migration of iodide ions and the metal electrode.
Hailegnaw et al. reported that inserting TiOx as an interlayer between PCBM and the Al electrode was an effective strategy to enhance interfacial stability.150 This interlayer strategy enabled a great increase of the PCE from 13.5% to 14.6%, which was mainly attributed to the reduced interface resistance with the TiOx interlayer (Rs ∼ 16 Ω) compared to that without the interlayer (Rs ∼ 380 Ω). In the stability test, the device with TiOx retained approximately 90% of the initial PCE under continuous illumination for about 22 h in the ambient environment.
Selim et al. prepared a mixture of ZnO nanorods (ZnO-NRs) and bathocuproine (BCP) to form (ZnO-NRs/BCP) composited interlayers.151 The shape of ZnO-NRs could be well controlled by optimizing the hydrothermal conditions and the surfactant, as observed from the field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) images (Fig. 7h). After fine adjustment of the BCP solution, they found that the PCE of the device reached the highest (PCE = 18.13%) when the ZnO-NR concentration was 70% in the device architecture of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/PC61BM/ZnO-NRs/BCP/Ag. This performance was better than those of PSCs based on ZnO-NRs and BCP with 16.55% and 15.17% PCEs, respectively.
Wang et al. introduced a nano-ZnMgO interlayer between the ETL and counter electrode,152 which significantly improved the device performance. The magnesium doping in Zn0.85Mg0.15O could tune the band gap of materials, and the optimal ZnMgO exhibited the best PCE of 15.61%, which was 26% higher than the device without the interlayer. They suggested that the improvement was mostly attributed to the better energy alignment for increasing charge collection.
Kaltenbrunner et al. reported Au/Cr2O3/Cr as the counter electrode in an ultrathin and lightweight device, enabling a PCE value of 12%.153 They found that Cr2O3/Cr played an important role in improving its air stability and promoted the practicability. The device with the Au or Al electrode contacting with PCBM or PTCDI directly showed a higher tendency to be corroded. Cr2O3 had excellent ability to resist oxidizing conditions. Compared to the Au electrode, the introduction of Cr2O3/Cr between Au and PCBM significantly improved the device stability, by retaining its initial PCE for 1 h, and was still working efficiently after 4 days. It was suggested that the Cr2O3/Cr interlayer functions as a buffer layer to reduce the iodine from perovskite layer diffusion into the Au electrode, so that the device stability was greatly enhanced.
Moreover, organic based barrier layers have been recently showing great promise for improvement of PSC stability. Bi et al. deposited nanostructured carbon quantum dots (CQDs) as ion/molecule blocking layers between the ETL and Ag.154 The introduced nanocarbon layer exhibited high charge conductivity and ohmic contact with the Ag electrode. The results showed this new type of electrode hindered the ion diffusion effectively by almost 3 times than the standard PCBM based devices. In addition, a certified efficiency of 15.6% was recorded for centimeter-squared devices. The PSCs with a CQD cathode revealed good thermal and light stability by retaining a stable PCE of 15% after thermal treatment at 85 °C for 500h or 1000 h light soaking with one sun illumination.
Bi et al. adopted polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) as a barrier of metal electrode to reduce unwanted iodide diffusion.155 As illustrated in Fig. 8a, the barriers were based on zero-dimensional (0D), one-dimensional (1D), and two-dimensional (2D) layers consisting of metal oxide nanoparticles, silicon-based polymers, and nanostructured inorganic materials, which are chemically and thermally stable. From ToF-SIMS results, they found that a 2D barrier layer based on tri-s-triazine-based graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) enabled negligible iodide and Ag diffusion. Moreover, lateral diffusion of iodide can be almost hindered by a 2D g-C3N4 layer, as evidenced by little absorption losses of the perovskite under heat treatment. This indicates that the dimension and structures of barrier materials largely determine the diffusion coefficients of iodide. 2D g-C3N4 exhibited high compactness with very few pinholes, and its channels (∼0.3 nm) are smaller than the iodide diameter, which largely increased the iodide diffusion paths and reduced the ion diffusion accordingly. Meanwhile, 2D g-C3N4 is able to reduce the charge carrier recombination at interfaces, contributing to high PCEs. When applying such a 2D barrier layer to 36 cm2 solar modules, over 95% of the initial PCE was retained after 1000 h heating at 85 °C, and 91% after 1000 h light soaking. This work provides a sufficient interlayer strategy for counter electrodes to suppress ion diffusion and enhance PSC stability.
 Fig. 8  (a) The depth profile of diffused iodide and Ag in a Ag/0D-DBL(Al2O3 nanoparticles)/perovskite film with an aluminum signal, a Ag/1D-DBL(PDMS)/perovskite film with a silicon signal and a Ag/2D-DBL(g-C3N4)/perovskite film with a carbon signal, respectively. Reproduced with permission.155 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (b) Device structure and schematic of the BCP layer with TTTS. Reproduced with permission.158 Copyright 2022, The Royal Society of Chemistry. Cross-sectional STEM analysis and the corresponding EDX mapping of the Au element for the aged devices (c) without and (d) with TTTS. Reproduced with permission.158 Copyright 2022, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Recently, Li et al. reported a promising and effective chemical anti-corrosion method to improve the interfacial stability in PSCs.156 Inspired by metal anticorrosion strategies, they introduced a typical corrosion inhibitor of benzotriazole (BTA) between charge transport materials and the Cu electrode. A shift toward low binding energies of Cu peaks was observed in BTA/Cu, indicating the coordination between BTA and Cu. In Auger electron spectroscopy (AES) spectra, there was almost no signal from metallic Cu, indicating that the Cu surface was completely covered by [BTA–Cu] in the BTA/Cu film. It is found that BTA molecules can promote chemical coordination to the Cu electrode and form an insoluble BTA–Cu film, which can sufficiently block the electrochemical corrosion at the interfaces of perovskite/Cu. The devices based on the Cu/BTA counter electrode exhibited remarkable stability under different conditions of ambient air, thermal, or operating conditions. Over 88% of the initial efficiency was retaining after 1000 hour MPP tracking under continuous illumination. Over 92% and 90% of initial PCEs were kept after 2500 hours of aging in humid air and after 1100 hours of aging at 85 °C, respectively. This work proposed a new direction for optimization of the counter electrode by using interlayers with chemical interactions. Kim and coworkers changed the number of amine groups at the end of the BTA alkyl functional group, and its effect on the device stability was explored.157 The device with three alkyls (BTA-3) exhibited the best moisture stability, retaining 80% of the initial PCE after an exposure time of 500 h. In the XPS measurement, the iodide ion signal of the device without BTA could be observed at the copper electrode, indicating the iodine migration towards the counter electrode. However, this process has been effectively suppressed in the device with BTA-3. They speculated that the increase in the number of amine functional groups in BTA is conducive to better binding with copper, which could help block the invasion of moisture and the migration of iodide ions.
Similarly, Yang and coworkers introduced the modification of 1,3,5-triazine-2,4,6-trithiol trisodium salt (TTTS) to BCP.158 As shown in Fig. 8b, they reported that there were three sulfide ions with strong lone pairs of electrons in TTTS, which could form strong chemical coordination with metal electrodes to prevent metal diffusion. This strategy led to a champion PCE of 22.59% in inverted devices. When the devices were stored at 85 °C in a N2 glovebox for 300 h, the device with TTTS exhibited excellent ability to block Au ions, as shown in Fig. 8c and d. In the stability test, the device with TTTS showed good performance. It almost retained its initial power output after continuous one-sun illumination at 45 °C and the MPP tracking for 1000 h. The unencapsulated device retained more than 90% of the initial PCE in ambient environment for 1500 h. What is more, this chemical anticorrosion strategy has also proved effective in other metal electrodes, such as Ag electrodes and Cu electrodes.
Arora et al. studied the interfacial stability of CuSCN and Au in PSCs.159 Although more than 20% of the PCE and good thermal stability for 1000 h were obtained, this device surprisingly lost over half of the initial PCEs under full-sun illumination at MPP for 24 h. To improve the stability, a thin 2D graphene oxide (rGO) barrier layer was inserted into the interface between CuSCN and the Au electrode, and this interlayer was beneficial for enhancing the stability by retaining 95% of the initial PCE under MPP and at 60 °C for 1000 h.
5. Conclusion and perspective
Perovskite solar cells (PSCs) represent one of the most promising PV technologies in the aspects of high conversion efficiency and simple solution-processed fabrication. However, unsatisfactory device stability under environmental conditions greatly limits the scalable application of this technology. The counter electrode as one important component in devices exhibited decisive roles in both device efficiency and stability. Metal based counter electrodes (Au or Ag) are widely used in PSCs; however, they have the drawbacks of high material cost as well as metal diffusion issues. Clearly, it is of necessity to understand the fundamental requirements of counter electrodes and to further develop reliable and stable alternatives for PSCs.
Here we summarized the recent developments of counter electrodes for PSCs, including materials engineering, device architecture, charge dynamics, and stability. Specifically, we systematically discuss the working mechanisms and basic roles of counter electrodes, and summarize the important properties for an ideal efficient counter electrode. We also review the stability issues of common metal electrodes (Au, Ag, and Al) under different working conditions. Besides, different strategies in engineering of counter electrodes are reviewed. Firstly, great efforts have been made in developing alternative base metals as counter electrodes. Most of them show either unsatisfied work function or poor device stability. Overall, Cu is one promising counter electrode due to its superior stability. But further optimization of the deposition conditions and film properties is required in order to promote the wide application of Cu counter electrodes. Moreover, carbon-based electrodes demonstrate outstanding advantages over metal electrodes, and they attracted great research attention in PSCs. Different types of carbon materials (graphite, carbon nanotubes, and graphene) have been used as counter electrodes, and the advantages and limitations of different carbon materials have been compared and discussed. Various methods to tune the work function of carbon materials including surface functionalization and chemical doping are summarized. Carbon based counter electrodes show relatively low efficiency compared to metal ones, and further research will be needed to explore the limitations of carbon based counter electrodes and enhance the device performance. In addition, the interlayer strategy becomes another effective way to reduce metal diffusion, and we review different bilayer and multilayer structures in counter electrodes, and their impacts on device stability are discussed.
Overall, carbon-based counter electrodes show high promise due to both low material cost and high stability; however, their relatively poor efficiency in solar cells limits their application. More efforts should be devoted to optimize the perovskite microstructures (e.g. grain size) in monolithic carbon-based devices and manage the interfacial defects to reduce recombination losses. For metal-based counter electrodes, the interlayer strategy by introducing a dense physical barrier between the metal and charge conductor would be one of the most efficient ways to enhance the device stability. Copper and its alloys represent the most promising rear electrodes in the aspects of low cost and high stability; however, more research attention needs to be paid to their stability under heat, moisture and light. This work provides a fundamental understanding of the roles and limitations of counter electrodes and reviews recent development in the materials, composition, structures and stability of counter electrodes. This review can serve as a guide manual for future research on counter electrodes to further enhance their photovoltaic performance and stability.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was funded by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 52102309), Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation (2020A1515110068 and 2022A1515011869), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (No. 20720212001), the Central guide local science and technology development funds (No. 2021Szvup064), Shenzhen Science and Technology Program (JCYJ20210324121803009), the Natural Science Foundation of Fujian Province of China (No. 2021J01040) and Nanqiang Youth Talented Program of Xiamen University.
References
K. Branker, M. J. M. Pathak and J. M. Pearce, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2011, 15, 4470–4482 CrossRef .
A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo, L. C. Sun, L. Kloo and H. Pettersson, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6595–6663 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jorgensen, K. Norrman and F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 686–714 CrossRef .
A. J. Nozik, Phys. E, 2002, 14, 115–120 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liu, M. B. Johnston and H. J. Snaith, Nature, 2013, 501, 395–398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. I. Hossain, A. M. Saleque, S. Ahmed, I. Saidjafarzoda, M. Shahiduzzaman, W. Qarony, D. Knipp, N. Biyikli and Y. H. Tsang, Nano Energy, 2021, 79, 105400 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini, C. Menelaou, M. J. Alcocer, T. Leijtens, L. M. Herz, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2013, 342, 341–344 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Herz, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1539–1548 CrossRef CAS .
U. Krishnan, M. Kaur, M. Kumar and A. Kumar, J. Photonics Energy, 2019, 9, 021001 CAS .
J. M. Frost, K. T. Butler, F. Brivio, C. H. Hendon, M. van Schilfgaarde and A. Walsh, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2584–2590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Leijtens, G. E. Eperon, S. Pathak, A. Abate, M. M. Lee and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2885 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Philippe, B. W. Park, R. Lindblad, J. Oscarsson, S. Ahmadi, E. M. J. Johansson and H. Rensmo, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 1720–1731 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Noh, S. H. Im, J. H. Heo, T. N. Mandal and S. I. Seok, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1764–1769 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. E. Eperon, S. D. Stranks, C. Menelaou, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 982–988 RSC .
T. M. Koh, K. W. Fu, Y. N. Fang, S. Chen, T. C. Sum, N. Mathews, S. G. Mhaisalkar, P. P. Boix and T. Baikie, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16458–16462 CrossRef CAS .
I. C. Smith, E. T. Hoke, D. Solis-Ibarra, M. D. McGehee and H. I. Karunadasa, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 11232–11235 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Sun, X. Y. Yu and Z. A. Li, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 10282–10302 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, S. Bai, W. Tress, A. Hagfeldt and F. Gao, npj Flexible Electron., 2018, 2, 22 CrossRef .
K. Choi, H. Choi, J. Min, T. Kim, D. Kim, S. Y. Son, G. W. Kim, J. Choi and T. Park, Sol. RRL, 2020, 4, 1900251 CrossRef .
Y. H. Wu, D. Wang, J. Y. Liu and H. Z. Cai, Nanomaterials, 2021, 11, 775 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. X. Yin, Z. N. Song, Z. F. Li and W. H. Tang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 4057–4086 RSC .
A. A. Said, J. Xie and Q. C. Zhang, Small, 2019, 15, 1900854 CrossRef .
J. Kalowekamo and E. Baker, Sol. Energy, 2009, 83, 1224–1231 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Rong, H. M. Tian, W. G. Bi, H. J. Jin, T. Zhang, D. Guo and K. Y. Zhao, Sol. Energy, 2017, 158, 424–431 CrossRef CAS .
K. Domanski, J. P. Correa-Baena, N. Mine, M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. Abate, M. Saliba, W. Tress, A. Hagfeldt and M. Gratzel, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 6306–6314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kato, L. K. Ono, M. V. Lee, S. H. Wang, S. R. Raga and Y. K. Qi, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 2, 1500195 CrossRef .
I. Mesquita, L. Andrade and A. Mendes, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 82, 2471–2489 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, J. Iocozzia, M. Zhang, M. D. Ye, S. C. Yan, H. L. Jin, S. Wang, Z. G. Zou and Z. Q. Lin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 4854–4891 RSC .
J. W. Xiao, C. B. Shi, C. X. Zhou, D. L. Zhang, Y. J. Li and Q. Chen, Sol. RRL, 2017, 1, 1700082 CrossRef .
R. Chen, W. J. Zhang, X. Y. Guan, H. Raza, S. S. Zhang, Y. Q. Zhang, P. A. Troshin, S. A. Kuklin, Z. H. Liu and W. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 2200651 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Jiang, B. W. Luo, F. Y. Jiang, F. B. Jiang, C. Fuentes-Hernandez, T. F. Liu, L. Mao, S. X. Xiong, Z. F. Li, T. Wang, B. Kippelen and Y. H. Zhou, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 7829–7835 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Liu, W. C. Huang, P. Z. Liao, N. Pootrakulchote, H. Li, J. F. Lu, J. P. Li, F. H. Huang, X. X. Shai, X. J. Zhao, Y. Shen, Y. B. Cheng and M. K. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 4220 RSC .
J. J. Zhao, X. P. Zheng, Y. H. Deng, T. Li, Y. C. Shao, A. Gruverman, J. Shield and J. S. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3650–3656 RSC .
J. A. Christians, P. Schulz, J. S. Tinkham, T. H. Schloemer, S. P. Harvey, B. J. T. de Villers, A. Sellinger, J. J. Berry and J. M. Luther, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 68–74 CrossRef CAS .
O. Umezawa and K. Ishikawa, Cryogenics, 1992, 32, 873–880 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Xie, B. Y. Xia, Y. W. Li, Y. Yan, Y. H. Yang, Q. Sun, S. H. Chan, A. Fisher and X. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1687–1695 RSC .
L. Wang, G. R. Li, Q. Zhao and X. P. Gao, Energy Storage Mater., 2017, 7, 40–47 CrossRef .
Q. L. Jiang, X. Sheng, B. Shi, X. J. Feng and T. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 25878–25883 CrossRef CAS .
Z. L. Ku, X. H. Xia, H. Shen, N. H. Tiep and H. J. Fan, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 13363–13368 RSC .
D. Bryant, P. Greenwood, J. Troughton, M. Wijdekop, M. Carnie, M. Davies, K. Wojciechowski, H. J. Snaith, T. Watson and D. Worsley, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 7499–7504 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hwang, A. Kim, Z. Zhong, H. C. Kwon, S. Jeong and J. Moon, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 6545–6554 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bhushan and A. Catalano, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1981, 38, 39–41 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chen, R. H. Zha, Z. Y. Yuan, Q. S. Jing, Z. Y. Huang, X. K. Yang, S. M. Yang, X. H. Zhao, D. L. Xu and G. D. Zou, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 313, 791–800 CrossRef CAS .
T. Minemoto and M. Murata, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2014, 14, 1428–1433 CrossRef .
F. Chen, Q. Chen, L. Mao, Y. X. Wang, X. Huang, W. Lu, B. Wang and L. W. Chen, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 484011 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Aharon, S. Gamliel, B. El Cohen and L. Etgar, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 10512–10518 RSC .
Y. X. Zhao, A. M. Nardes and K. Zhu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 213906 CrossRef .
J. T. Wang, J. H. Li, Y. C. Zhou, C. Z. Yu, Y. H. Hua, Y. Y. Yu, R. X. Li, X. S. Lin, R. Chen, H. K. Wu, H. P. Xia and H. L. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 7759–7768 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Couderc, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17080 CrossRef .
A. Guerrero, J. B. You, C. Aranda, Y. S. Kang, G. Garcia-Belrnonte, H. P. Zhou, J. Bisquert and Y. Yang, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 218–224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Lee, S. G. Kim, J. M. Yang, Y. Yang and N. G. Park, APL Mater., 2019, 7, 041111 CrossRef .
C. Besleaga, L. E. Abramiuc, V. Stancu, A. G. Tomulescu, M. Sima, L. Trinca, N. Plugaru, L. Pintilie, G. A. Nemnes, M. Iliescu, H. G. Svavarsson, A. Manolescu and I. Pintilie, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 5168–5175 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Cacovich, L. Cina, F. Matteocci, G. Divitini, P. A. Midgley, A. Di Carlo and C. Ducati, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 4700–4706 RSC .
G. Divitini, S. Cacovich, F. Matteocci, L. Cina, A. Di Carlo and C. Ducati, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 15012 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Kerner, L. Zhao, S. P. Harvey, J. J. Berry, J. Schwartz and B. P. Rand, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 3352–3356 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Boyd, R. Cheacharoen, K. A. Bush, R. Prasanna, T. Leijtens and M. D. McGehee, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1772–1778 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang, X. Y. Meng, Y. Bai, S. Xiao, C. Hu, Y. L. Yang, H. N. Chen and S. H. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 1103–1111 RSC .
W. M. Ming, D. W. Yang, T. S. Li, L. J. Zhang and M. H. Du, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700662 CrossRef PubMed .
D. W. Yang, W. M. Ming, H. L. Shi, L. J. Zhang and M. H. Du, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 4349–4357 CrossRef CAS .
T. Y. Yang, G. Gregori, N. Pellet, M. Gratzel and J. Maier, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 7905–7910 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Haruyama, K. Sodeyama, L. Y. Han and Y. Tateyama, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 10048–10051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Svanstrom, T. J. Jacobsson, G. Boschloo, E. M. J. Johansson, H. Rensmo and U. B. Cappel, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 7212–7221 CrossRef PubMed .
L. F. Zhao, R. A. Kerner, Z. G. Xiao, Y. H. L. Lin, K. M. Lee, J. Schwartz and B. P. Rand, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 595–602 CrossRef CAS .
H. H. Ding, B. R. Li, S. Zareen, G. H. Li, Y. Tu, D. L. Zhang, X. Cao, Q. Xu, S. F. Yang, S. L. Tait and J. F. Zhu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 28861–28868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. You, Z. R. Hong, Y. Yang, Q. Chen, M. Cai, T. B. Song, C. C. Chen, S. R. Lu, Y. S. Liu, H. P. Zhou and Y. Yang, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1674–1680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. You, Y. B. Yang, Z. R. Hong, T. B. Song, L. Meng, Y. S. Liu, C. Y. Jiang, H. P. Zhou, W. H. Chang, G. Li and Y. Yang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 183902 CrossRef .
J. Seo, S. Park, Y. C. Kim, N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, S. C. Yoon and S. I. Seok, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2642–2646 RSC .
S. Z. Yue, S. D. Lu, K. K. Ren, K. Liu, M. Azam, D. W. Cao, Z. J. Wang, Y. Lei, S. C. Qu and Z. G. Wang, Small, 2017, 13, 1700007 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. D. Luo, X. H. Chen, C. X. Zhang, J. J. Li, J. H. Shi, Z. Sun, Z. C. Wang and S. M. Huang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 56037–56044 RSC .
E. Nouri, M. R. Mohammadi and P. Lianos, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 1630–1633 RSC .
S. Bai, Z. W. Wu, X. J. Wu, Y. Z. Jin, N. Zhao, Z. H. Chen, Q. Q. Mei, X. Z. Wang, Z. Ye, T. Y. Song, R. Y. Liu, S. T. Lee and B. Q. Sun, Nano Res., 2014, 7, 1749–1758 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. You, L. Meng, T. B. Song, T. F. Guo, Y. Yang, W. H. Chang, Z. R. Hong, H. J. Chen, H. P. Zhou, Q. Chen, Y. S. Liu, N. De Marco and Y. Yang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 75 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Jeong, H. J. Kim, B. S. Lee, H. J. Son, J. Y. Kim, D. K. Lee, D. E. Kim, J. Lee and M. J. Ko, Nano Energy, 2015, 17, 131–139 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Deng, Q. F. Dong, C. Bi, Y. B. Yuan and J. S. Huang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600372 CrossRef .
Y. C. Shao, Q. Wang, Q. F. Dong, Y. B. Yuan and J. S. Huang, Nano Energy, 2015, 16, 47–53 CrossRef CAS .
X. P. Zheng, B. Chen, J. Dai, Y. J. Fang, Y. Bai, Y. Z. Lin, H. T. Wei, X. C. Zeng and J. S. Huang, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17102 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Z. Lin, B. Chen, F. W. Zhao, X. P. Zheng, Y. H. Deng, Y. C. Shao, Y. J. Fang, Y. Bai, C. R. Wang and J. S. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700607 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Y. Jiang, X. H. Chen, X. H. Lin, X. K. Jia, J. F. Wang, L. K. Pan, S. M. Huang, F. R. Zhu and Z. Sun, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 146, 35–43 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Shi, W. Dong, Y. Z. Xu, C. H. Li, S. T. Lv, L. F. Zhu, J. Dong, Y. H. Luo, D. M. Li, Q. B. Meng and Q. Chen, Chin. Phys. Lett., 2013, 30, 128402 CrossRef .
M. Wang, Q. Y. Fu, L. Yan, W. B. Pi, G. Wang, Z. P. Zheng and W. Luo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 47868–47877 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. S. Lin, H. Z. Su, S. F. He, Y. A. Song, Y. B. Wang, Z. Z. Qin, Y. Z. Wu, X. D. Yang, Q. F. Han, J. F. Fang, Y. Q. Zhang, H. Segawa, M. Gratzel and L. Y. Han, Nat. Energy, 2022, 7, 520–527 CrossRef .
X. T. Meng, C. Yu, X. D. Song, J. Iocozzia, J. F. Hong, M. Rager, H. L. Jin, S. Wang, L. L. Huang, J. S. Qiu and Z. Q. Lin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 4682–4686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. T. Meng, C. Yu, X. P. Zhang, L. L. Huang, M. Rager, J. F. Hong, J. Qiu and Z. Q. Lin, Nano Energy, 2018, 54, 138–147 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xu, X. Zhao, J. Y. Ma, J. J. Guo, T. L. Ma and M. X. Wu, ChemElectroChem, 2021, 8, 4396–4411 CrossRef CAS .
L. S. Liang, Y. Cai, X. Li, M. K. Nazeeruddin and P. Gao, Nano Energy, 2018, 52, 211–238 CrossRef CAS .
Z. L. Ku, Y. G. Rong, M. Xu, T. F. Liu and H. W. Han, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 3132 CrossRef PubMed .
L. J. Zhang, T. F. Liu, L. F. Liu, M. Hu, Y. Yang, A. Y. Mei and H. W. Han, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9165–9170 RSC .
P. Jiang, T. W. Jones, N. W. Duffy, K. F. Anderson, R. Bennett, M. Grigore, P. Marvig, Y. L. Xiong, T. F. Liu, Y. S. Sheng, L. Hong, X. M. Hou, M. Duan, Y. Hu, Y. G. Rong, G. J. Wilson and H. W. Han, Carbon, 2018, 129, 830–836 CrossRef CAS .
M. Duan, C. B. Tian, Y. Hu, A. Y. Mei, Y. G. Rong, Y. L. Xiong, M. Xu, Y. S. Sheng, P. Jiang, X. M. Hou, X. T. Zhu, F. Qin and H. W. Han, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 31721–31727 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. M. Chen, L. Lu, D. W. Gu, X. Y. Zhang, H. Yu, F. Chen, Y. J. Rui, J. W. Hou and Y. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 8615–8622 RSC .
J. Z. Chen, Y. G. Rong, A. Y. Mei, Y. L. Xiong, T. F. Liu, Y. S. Sheng, P. Jiang, L. Hong, Y. J. Guan, X. T. Zhu, X. M. Hou, M. Duan, J. Q. Zhao, X. Li and H. W. Han, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502009 CrossRef .
K. Cao, Z. X. Zuo, J. Cui, Y. Shen, T. Moehl, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Grazel and M. K. Wang, Nano Energy, 2015, 17, 171–179 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. Wei, K. Y. Yan, H. N. Chen, Y. Yi, T. Zhang, X. Long, J. K. Li, L. X. Zhang, J. N. Wang and S. H. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3326–3333 RSC .
H. J. Tao, Y. T. Li, C. X. Zhang, K. Wang, J. Y. Wang, B. Tan, L. X. Han and J. Tao, Solid State Commun., 2018, 271, 71–75 CrossRef CAS .
X. T. Meng, C. Yu, X. D. Song, Y. Liu, S. X. Liang, Z. Q. Liu, C. Hao and J. S. Qiu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500180 CrossRef .
F. G. Zhang, X. C. Yang, M. Cheng, W. H. Wang and L. C. Sun, Nano Energy, 2016, 20, 108–116 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gholipour, J. P. Correa-Baena, K. Domanski, T. Matsui, L. Steier, F. Giordano, F. Tajabadi, W. Tress, M. Saliba, A. Abate, A. M. Ali, N. Taghavinia, M. Gratzel and A. Hagfeldt, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1601116 CrossRef .
Z. H. Wei, H. N. Chen, K. Y. Yan and S. H. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 13239–13243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. P. Gong, H. Y. Li, Z. Q. Chen, C. H. Shou, M. J. Huang and S. W. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 34882–34889 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. L. Jiang, Y. Peng, T. X. Xiang, Y. Y. Liu, M. Y. Xu, J. T. Wang, P. L. Tremblay and T. Zhang, J. Alloys Compd., 2022, 902, 163725 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Wu, K. Wang, Y. Y. Jiang, D. Yang, Y. C. Hou, T. Ye, C. S. Han, B. Chi, L. Zhao, S. M. Wang, W. W. Deng and S. Priya, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 31, 2006803 CrossRef .
Z. Li, S. A. Kulkarni, P. P. Boix, E. Z. Shi, A. Y. Cao, K. W. Fu, S. K. Batabyal, J. Zhang, Q. H. Xiong, L. H. Wong, N. Mathews and S. G. Mhaisalkar, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 6797–6804 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ryu, K. Lee, J. Yun, H. Yu, J. Lee and J. Jang, Small, 2017, 13, 1701225 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. L. Yang, H. N. Chen, C. Hu and S. H. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 22005–22011 RSC .
N. Ahn, I. Jeon, J. Yoon, E. I. Kauppinen, Y. Matsuo, S. Maruyama and M. Choi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 1382–1389 RSC .
M. X. Guo, J. Q. Liu, Y. Q. Yuan, Z. Zhang, S. H. Yin, J. Leng and N. B. Huang, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2020, 403, 112843 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Luo, R. G. Wu, L. T. Ma, C. J. Wang, H. Liu, H. Lin, N. Wang, Y. A. Chen and Z. H. Guo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2004765 CrossRef CAS .
K. Y. Yan, Z. H. Wei, J. K. Li, H. N. Chen, Y. Yi, X. L. Zheng, X. Long, Z. L. Wang, J. N. Wang, J. B. Xu and S. H. Yang, Small, 2015, 11, 2269–2274 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Y. Zhu, S. P. Jia, J. F. Zheng, Y. L. Lin, Y. R. Wu and J. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 3097–3103 RSC .
M. Guo, C. Y. Wei, C. C. Liu, K. Zhang, H. J. Su, K. Y. Xie, P. Zhai, J. Zhang and L. Liu, Mater. Des., 2021, 209, 109972 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Zheng, H. N. Chen, Q. Li, Y. L. Yang, Z. H. Wei, Y. Bai, Y. C. Qiu, D. Zhou, K. S. Wong and S. H. Yang, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 2496–2505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wei, B. Y. Hu, F. M. Jin, Z. Z. Jing, Y. X. Li, A. A. G. Blanco, D. J. Stacchiola and Y. H. Hu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 7749–7752 RSC .
M. Tian, C. Y. Woo, J. W. Choi, J. Y. Seo, J. M. Kim, S. H. Kim, M. Song and H. W. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 54806–54814 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. K. Liu, P. You, C. Xie, G. Q. Tang and F. Yan, Nano Energy, 2016, 28, 151–157 CrossRef CAS .
V. D. Tran, S. V. N. Pammi, B. J. Park, Y. Han, C. Jeon and S. G. Yoon, Nano Energy, 2019, 65, 104018 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bogachuk, B. W. Yang, J. J. Suo, D. Martineau, A. Verma, S. Narbey, M. Anaya, K. Frohna, T. Doherty, D. Muller, J. P. Herterich, S. Zouhair, A. Hagfeldt, S. D. Stranks, U. Wurfel, A. Hinsch and L. Wagner, Adv. Energy Mater., 2022, 12, 2103128 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zouhair, S. M. Yoo, D. Bogachuk, J. P. Herterich, J. Lim, H. Kanda, B. Son, H. J. Yun, U. Wurfel, A. Chahboun, M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. Hinsch, L. Wagner and H. Kim, Adv. Energy Mater., 2022, 12, 2200837 CrossRef CAS .
F. Shao, Z. L. Tian, P. Qin, K. J. Bu, W. Zhao, L. Xu, D. L. Wang and F. Q. Huang, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 7033 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Y. Jiang, T. F. Liu, S. Zeng, Q. Zhao, X. Min, Z. F. Li, J. H. Tong, W. Meng, S. X. Xiong and Y. H. Zhou, Opt. Express, 2015, 23, A83–A91 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Troughton, D. Bryant, K. Wojciechowski, M. J. Carnie, H. Snaith, D. A. Worsley and T. M. Watson, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9141–9145 RSC .
Z. X. Chen, W. C. Li, R. Li, Y. F. Zhang, G. Q. Xu and H. S. Cheng, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 13836–13842 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Loper, S. J. Moon, S. M. de Nicolas, B. Niesen, M. Ledinsky, S. Nicolay, J. Bailat, J. H. Yum, S. De Wolf and C. Ballif, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 1619–1629 RSC .
J. Meyer, S. Hamwi, M. Kroger, W. Kowalsky, T. Riedl and A. Kahn, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5408–5427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. A. Bush, C. D. Bailie, Y. Chen, A. R. Bowring, W. Wang, W. Ma, T. Leijtens, F. Moghadam and M. D. McGehee, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3937–3943 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Fu, T. Feurer, T. Jager, E. Avancini, B. Bissig, S. Yoon, S. Buecheler and A. N. Tiwari, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8932 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Jager, Y. E. Romanyuk, S. Nishiwaki, B. Bissig, F. Pianezzi, P. Fuchs, C. Gretener, M. Dobeli and A. N. Tiwari, J. Appl. Phys., 2015, 117, 205301 CrossRef .
J. Werner, G. Dubuis, A. Walter, P. Loper, S. J. Moon, S. Nicolay, M. Morales-Masis, S. De Wolf, B. Niesen and C. Ballif, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2015, 141, 407–413 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wahl, J. Hanisch, S. Meier, M. Schultes and E. Ahlswede, Org. Electron., 2018, 54, 48–53 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Chiang, Z. L. Tseng and C. G. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 15897–15903 RSC .
Y. H. Shao, Z. G. Xiao, C. Bi, Y. B. Yuan and J. S. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5784 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. T. Lin, J. Ngiam, B. Xu, Y. H. Chang, T. Du, T. J. Macdonald, J. R. Durrant and M. A. McLachlan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 8684–8691 RSC .
S. K. Mei, Z. P. Yin, P. C. Gu, H. Q. Wang, J. H. Wang and W. J. Song, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2021, 4, 11062–11068 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Wu, R. Chen, S. S. Zhang, B. H. Babu, Y. F. Yue, H. M. Zhu, Z. C. Yang, C. L. Chen, W. T. Chen, Y. Q. Huang, S. Y. Fang, T. L. Liu, L. Y. Han and W. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1161 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Chen, T. F. Shi, X. H. Li, J. Q. Zheng, W. S. Fan, B. Ni, Y. Q. Wang, J. M. Dai and Z. G. Xiao, Sol. RRL, 2018, 2, 1800167 CrossRef .
S. Han, F. X. Wu, W. J. Qin, H. Q. Cao, L. Y. Yang and S. G. Yin, J. Alloys Compd., 2021, 888, 161455 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. Sanehira, B. J. T. de Villers, P. Schulz, M. O. Reese, S. Ferrere, K. Zhu, L. Y. Lin, J. J. Berry and J. M. Luther, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 38–45 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Misra, S. Aharon, B. Li, D. Mogilyansky, I. Visoly-Fisher, L. Etgar and E. A. Katz, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 326–330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Giuliano, S. Cataldo, M. Scopelliti, F. Principato, D. C. Martino, T. Fiore and B. Pignataro, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2019, 4, 1800688 CrossRef .
X. X. Xie, C. C. Wu, S. R. Sun, X. L. Xu, W. J. Xu, G. G. Qin and L. X. Xiao, Energy Technol., 2020, 8, 1900868 CrossRef CAS .
W. L. Wu, W. J. Lin, J. Bao, Z. T. Liu, B. H. Liu, K. F. Qiu, Y. F. Chen and H. Shen, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 23851–23858 RSC .
T. Winkler, H. Schmidt, H. Flugge, F. Nikolayzik, I. Baumann, S. Schmale, T. Weimann, P. Hinze, H. H. Johannes, T. Rabe, S. Hamwi, T. Riedl and W. Kowalsky, Org. Electron., 2011, 12, 1612–1618 CrossRef CAS .
D. Han, H. Kim, S. Lee, M. Seo and S. Yoo, Opt. Express, 2010, 18, A513–A521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Lee, J. Ahn, H. C. Kwon, S. Ma, K. Kim, S. Yun and J. Moon, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702182 CrossRef .
E. Della Gaspera, Y. Peng, Q. C. Hou, L. Spiccia, U. Bach, J. J. Jasieniak and Y. B. Cheng, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 249–257 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, K. O. Brinkmann, T. Hu, N. Pourdavoud, T. Becker, T. Gahlmann, R. Heiderhoff, A. Polywka, P. Gorrn, Y. Chen, B. Cheng and T. Riedl, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602599 CrossRef .
R. A. Jagt, T. N. Huq, S. A. Hill, M. Thway, T. Y. Liu, M. Napari, B. Roose, K. Gałkowski, W. W. Li, S. F. Lin, S. D. Stranks, J. L. MacManus-Driscoll and R. L. Z. Hoye, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 2456–2465 CrossRef CAS .
T. Eom, S. Kim, R. E. Agbenyeke, H. Jung, S. M. Shin, Y. K. Lee, C. G. Kim, T. M. Chung, N. J. Jeon, H. H. Park and J. Seo, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 8, 2001482 CrossRef .
H. Back, G. Kim, J. Kim, J. Kong, T. K. Kim, H. Kang, H. Kim, J. Lee, S. Lee and K. Lee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1258–1263 RSC .
B. Hailegnaw, G. Adam, H. Heilbrunner, D. H. Apaydin, C. Ulbricht, N. S. Sariciftci and M. C. Scharber, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 24836–24846 RSC .
M. S. Selim, A. M. Elseman and Z. Hao, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 11781–11791 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, Y. Xia, L. Chao, Y. Pan, M. Li, R. Li, B. Du, Y. Chen and W. Huang, J. Energy Chem., 2019, 28, 107–110 CrossRef .
M. Kaltenbrunner, G. Adam, E. D. Glowacki, M. Drack, R. Schwodiauer, L. Leonat, D. H. Apaydin, H. Groiss, M. C. Scharber, M. S. White, N. S. Sariciftci and S. Bauer, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 1032–1039 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. B. Bi, H. Chen, F. X. Xie, Y. Z. Wu, W. Chen, Y. J. Su, A. Islam, M. Gratzel, X. D. Yang and L. Y. Han, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. B. Bi, W. T. Tang, H. Chen, Y. B. Wang, J. Barbaud, T. H. Wu, W. Y. Kong, P. Tu, H. Zhu, X. Q. Zeng, J. J. He, S. Kan, X. D. Yang, M. Gratzel and L. Han, Joule, 2019, 3, 2748–2760 CrossRef CAS .
X. D. Li, S. Fu, W. X. Zhang, S. Z. Ke, W. J. Song and J. F. Fang, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, 219–235 Search PubMed .
Y. R. Kim, J. Kim, H. Kim, C. J. Yoon, J. T. Yun, J. H. Kim, A. Gu, H. Suh and K. Lee, Sol. RRL, 2021, 5, 2100351 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Yang, Q. Cao, T. Wang, B. W. Yang, X. Y. Pu, Y. X. Zhang, H. Chen, I. Tojiboyev, Y. K. Li, L. Etgar, X. H. Li and A. Hagfeldt, Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 2154–2163 RSC .
N. Arora, M. I. Dar, A. Hinderhofer, N. Pellet, F. Schreiber, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Gratzel, Science, 2017, 358, 768–771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Li Yang
	Dr Li Yang is an assistant professor of material electrochemistry at Xiamen University. She obtained her PhD degree from Uppsala University in 2016 under the supervision of Prof. Martin Sojdin and Prof. Maria Stromme. Her research interest includes the synthesis and characterization of functional conducting polymers for energy storage and conversion devices, such as capacitors, batteries and solar cells.

Xiaoli Zhang
	Dr Xiaoli Zhang received her PhD degree from the School of Science, Tianjin University (China) in 2014. She pursued her postdoctoral research at Nanyang Technological University in Singapore during 2015–2017. Currently, she is an associate professor at Guangdong University of Technology (China). Her research focuses on the synthesis of low-dimensional semiconductors and their applications in optoelectronic devices such as light-emitting diodes, solar cells and photodetectors.

Jinbao Zhang
	Dr Jinbao Zhang is a Professor of material chemistry at Xiamen University. He obtained his BS degree from Central South University in 2010 and PhD degree from Uppsala University in 2016 under the direction of Prof. Anders Hagfeldt. He then did his postdoctoral research in Prof. Udo Bach and Prof. Yi-Bing Cheng's group at Monash University. Later he worked at Stanford University as a Wallenberg Research Fellow in Prof. Dauskardt's group. His current research focuses on developing functional nanomaterials for energy conversion devices and fundamentally understanding the interfacial phenomenon in optoelectronic devices.

 	Fig. 1  Device architecture of conventional PSCs of (a) n–i–p planar and (b) n–i–p mesoscopic PSCs. (c) Energy levels of n–i–p architecture with a device structure of FTO/TiO2/MAPbI3/Au. Device architecture of inverted PSCs of (d) p–i–n planar and (e) p–i–n mesoscopic PSCs. (f) Energy levels of the p–i–n architecture with a device structure of FTO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3/PCBM. Permission from ref. 29, copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Energy band diagram of perovskite solar cells with P–Si as HTMs with varying work function of the counter electrode. Reproduced with permission.25 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (b) and (c) J–V curves and photovoltaic parameters of the PSCs simulated with varying work function of the counter electrode. Reproduced with permission.25 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (d) Device structure of inverted PSCs. Reproduced with permission.49 Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. (e) Simulated J–V curves of the PSCs with the counter electrode with different work functions which are 3.8, 4.0 and 4.3 eV. Reproduced with permission.49 Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. (f) and (g) Illustration of the interfacial energy diagram in the case of high work function and low work function counter electrodes. Reproduced with permission.49 Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) ToF-SIMS depth profiles of the aged PSC devices at 30 and 70 °C. Reproduced with permission.26 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (b) Reconstructed elemental 3D maps for ions in the depth profiles. Reproduced with permission.26 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (c) HAADF STEM images for a large area fresh cell and the cell after 200 h of light soaking. Reproduced with permission.54 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. ToF-SIMS depth profiles of Au ion fragments. (d) FTO/MAPbI3/Au and (e) FTO/MAPbI3/spiro-MeOTAD (undoped)/Au devices biased for 4 and 40 h, respectively. Reproduced with permission.56 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (f) Ag 3d5 counts measured in the XPS depth profile. Reproduced with permission.57 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) The relationship between the formation energies of interstitial metal impurities in MAPbI3 and the Fermi levels. Reproduced with permission.59 Copyright 2017, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, UT-Battelle, LLC. Published by Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) The diffusion barriers for different metal impurities in the perovskite. Reproduced with permission.59 Copyright 2017, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, UT-Battelle, LLC. Published by Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) Core-level XPS analysis of the pure perovskite and the perovskite/Ag samples for different perovskite materials on day 1 and day 7. Relative atomic percentages of each sample. Reproduced with permission.63 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (d) Core-level spectra (O 1s and Pb 5d) of the same samples which are normalized to the Pb 5d peak area. Reproduced with permission.63 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (e) XPS spectra of Pb 4f with different thicknesses of Al films on the MAPbI3 perovskite. Reproduced with permission.64 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (f) Pb 4f XPS spectra of samples with Al, Yb, Cr, Ag, and Au metals directly on CsPbBr3, CsPbI3, and MAPbI3 perovskite films. Reproduced with permission.64 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Energy diagram at the interfaces of PCBM and metal counter electrodes. Reproduced with permission.69 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) The work function, Voc and PCEs of different metal counter electrodes. Reproduced with permission.69 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) The reuse process of the mpNi-cathode PSC device. Reproduced with permission.40 Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) J–V curves of the mpNi-cathode PSC device in this study under AM1.5 simulated sunlight. Reproduced with permission.40 Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) XRD spectra of different metal (Cu/Ag/Al)/perovskite devices after being stored in air for 20 h. Reproduced with permission.75 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (f) SEM images with different metal layers. Reproduced with permission.75 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) A schematic structure of a carbon-based monolithic device. Reproduced with permission.87 Copyright 2013, the authors. Published by Springer Nature. (b) A schematic structure of a carbon based conventional layered device with a CuPc interlayer. Reproduced with permission.97 Copyright 2015, Elsevier. (c) Cross-sectional SEM images of TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/C solar cells prepared by the inkjet printing technique using the C + CH3NH3I ink. Reproduced with permission.99 Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) Time evolution of the normalized PCEs of the glass-encapsulated CNT + P3HT-based device. The PCEs were evaluated from the J–V scan (black) and maximum power point (red). Reproduced with permission.106 Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Long-term PCE stability of PSCs with the reference Ag electrode and CNT-8, hybrid graphene-1/CNT-8 film, and hybrid graphene-4/CNT-8 film as counter electrodes under a controlled RH of 50 ± 2% at 25 °C. Reproduced with permission.114 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (f) Variation of normalized PCEs as a function of bending cycles under a tensile strain of 1.5% for the PATCVD-Gr and Trans-Gr devices. Reproduced with permission.116 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (g) The fabrication of the NbS2 film from the LixNbS2 powder. Reproduced with permission.119 Copyright 2018, the authors. Published by Springer Nature. (h) Experimental (an incident angle of 8°) and simulated reflectance of part of Spiro-OMeTAD HTL-based devices. Reproduced with permission.32 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration of the device with a Cu (10 nm)/Ag (100 nm) bilayer electrode. Reproduced with permission.132 Copyright 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) J–V characteristics of devices with different electrodes. Reproduced with permission.132 Copyright 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) XPS spectra of Pb 4f for fresh and aged electrodes (aged environment in the dark) in a N2 atmosphere at 85 °C for 100 h. Reproduced with permission.134 Copyright 2020, the authors. Published by Springer Nature. (d) The N 1s XPS spectra of the TiN, MAPbI3, and MAPbI3/Ti films after aging in air for 5 h. Reproduced with permission.135 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (e) The architecture of the MoOx/Au-seed/Cu/MoOx electrode. Reproduced with permission.139 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (f) Transmittance of MoO3/Ag/WO3 multilayers. Reproduced with permission.140 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (g) Schematic diagram and J–V characteristics with fast degradation by ionic defects in perovskite solar cells. The p–i–n PHJ devices with and without a CIL and the cathode protection process with J–V characteristics and absorption spectra. Reproduced with permission.149 Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (h) Field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) images of ZnO-NRs at various magnifications. Reproduced with permission.151 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) The depth profile of diffused iodide and Ag in a Ag/0D-DBL(Al2O3 nanoparticles)/perovskite film with an aluminum signal, a Ag/1D-DBL(PDMS)/perovskite film with a silicon signal and a Ag/2D-DBL(g-C3N4)/perovskite film with a carbon signal, respectively. Reproduced with permission.155 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (b) Device structure and schematic of the BCP layer with TTTS. Reproduced with permission.158 Copyright 2022, The Royal Society of Chemistry. Cross-sectional STEM analysis and the corresponding EDX mapping of the Au element for the aged devices (c) without and (d) with TTTS. Reproduced with permission.158 Copyright 2022, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
