Progress of alternative sintering approaches of inkjet-printed metal inks and their application for manufacturing of flexible electronic devices   - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4TC01820F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4TC01820F
(Feature Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 10232-10261Progress of alternative sintering approaches of inkjet-printed metal inks and their application for manufacturing of flexible electronic devices†

        
          
            Sebastian 
            Wünscher
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Robert 
            Abbel
          
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Jolke 
            Perelaer
          
          
        
      abd and 

        
          
            Ulrich S. 
            Schubert
          
          
        
      *abd
aLaboratory of Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry (IOMC), Friedrich Schiller University Jena, Humboldtstr. 10, 07743 Jena, Germany. E-mail: ulrich.schubert@uni-jena.de
bJena Center for Soft Matter (JCSM), Friedrich Schiller University Jena, Philosophenweg 7, 07743 Jena, Germany
cHolst Centre-TNO, High-Tech Campus 31, 5656 AE Eindhoven, The Netherlands
dDutch Polymer Institute (DPI), P.O. Box 513, 5600 MB Eindhoven, The Netherlands
Received 
      15th August 2014
    , Accepted 12th September 2014First published on 25th September 2014AbstractWell-defined high resolution structures with excellent electrical conductivities are key components of almost every electronic device. Producing these by printing metal based conductive inks on polymer foils represents an important step forward towards the manufacturing of plastic electronic products on an industrial scale. The development of fast, efficient and inexpensive post-deposition sintering technologies for these materials is an important processing step to make this approach commercially viable. This review discusses the advances in alternative sintering approaches for conductive, metal containing inks, which can be processed by inkjet-printing processes. Each sintering approach is examined regarding its mechanism, its compatibility with commonly used materials in the field of flexible electronics, its compatibility with high-throughput manufacturing processes and its applicability to the production of flexible electronic devices.Sebastian WünscherSebastian Wünscher was born in Jena (Germany), in 1983. In 2011, he obtained his masters degree in applied chemistry from the Georg-Simon-Ohm University of Applied Sciences in Nuremberg (Germany). His studies included external industrial research at the Carl Zeiss Vision GmbH in Adelaide (Australia). His PhD studies under the supervision of Prof. Ulrich S. Schubert at the Friedrich Schiller University of Jena (Germany) and the University of Manchester (United Kingdom) include the fabrication of flexible electronics like sensors and electromagnetically active structures by means of inkjet-printing of metal containing inks and the development of alternative and low temperature sintering approaches.Robert AbbelRobert Abbel studied chemistry at the universities of Mainz (Germany) and Toronto (Canada). In 2004, he joined Bert Meijer's group at the Eindhoven University of Technology (The Netherlands) for his graduation research on the supramolecular chemistry of π-conjugated oligomers. Since 2009, he has been working in Holst Centre's technology program “Printed Functional Structures on Flexible Substrates”, where he is responsible for materials and process development for the Printed Electronics industry. His core research activities within that program involve conductive inkjet inks and photonic flash sintering.Jolke PerelaerJolke Perelaer obtained his masters in chemistry from the University of Utrecht, the Netherlands. After finishing his PhD in 2009 in the group of Prof. Ulrich Schubert (Eindhoven University of Technology, the Netherlands) with the focus on the inkjet printing of (conductive) microstructures, he continued his work with Prof. Schubert as project manager of the inkjet-group at the Friedrich Schiller University in Jena, Germany. In 2013, he moved to the publisher Wiley-VCH in Weinheim, Germany, where he is a commissioning editor, focusing on materials science related projects. Within a year he acquired a number of new book projects that focus on inkjet-printing.Ulrich S. SchubertUlrich S. Schubert was born in Tübingen (Germany) in 1969. He studied chemistry in Frankfurt and Bayreuth (both Germany) and the Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond (USA). His PhD studies were performed at the Universities of Bayreuth and South Florida/Tampa. After postdoctoral training with J.-M. Lehn at the University in Strasbourg (France), he moved to the TU München (Germany) and obtained his Habilitation in 1999. In 1999–2000 he was a professor at the Center for NanoScience, University of Munich (Germany), and in 2000–2007 Full-Professor at TU Eindhoven. Currently he holds a chair at the Friedrich-Schiller-University Jena (Germany).
1. Introduction
The development of novel electronic devices, which are light weight, flexible and cheap, has been one major research topic in recent years. Besides the research on novel materials, the development of suitable fabrication methods for cost-efficient and high-throughput production was investigated. In order to replace lithography based fabrication methods used for silicon based electronics, which require many processing steps including additives as well as subtractive sub-steps, printing techniques were under intensive investigation.1–3 In general, solution processing techniques like coating (spin, spray, dip, blade and slot-die)4,5 as well as printing technologies (screen, inkjet, gravure, flexographic, μcontact and offset)3–6 have the advantage of being operated under ambient conditions. Furthermore, most of the mentioned printing techniques are solely additive processes allowing a very efficient use of the expensive materials applied for flexible electronic devices. Among others, inkjet-printing has evolved from a tool for graphics printing only to a scalable production tool for the deposition of functional materials. As a digital and additive manufacturing method, drop-on-demand (DOD) inkjet-printing offers several advantages compared to vapor deposition and other solution based manufacturing methods. In particular, it enables design flexibility without the requirement of masks, multilayer deposition of a wide variety of materials with different printing resolution in the same printing process, contactless material deposition and efficient handling of expensive materials due to its minimal waste production. An additional advantage of inkjet-printing is that it can be easily scaled up towards industrial roll-to-roll (R2R) production processes.5 To review the evolution of inkjet-printing in particular and solution processing techniques in general, we refer to a large number of recent publications in the respective field.1–5,7–10
As a deposition method, inkjet-printing is frequently used for the fabrication of conductive elements for flexible electronic devices.2,7,9–11 It represents a suitable method to print well-defined contacts, interconnects, antennas, current collecting grids and electrodes for several applications in the field of flexible electronics. For this purpose, conductive materials are printed onto flexible substrates such as polymer foils and paper.2,9 Recently, Kamyshny and Magdassi reviewed conductive nanomaterials used in the field of printed electronics where carbon based as well as metal based materials are discussed.12 Currently, metal precursor inks are predominantly used for printing conductive elements of electronic devices, which is due to their superior electric conductivity and to the commercial availability of several metal ink formulations. Commonly used metals include gold (Au), silver (Ag) and copper (Cu).13–16 Due to its beneficial properties in terms of stability against oxidation, electrical conductivity (highest of all metals) and price (much cheaper than Au), Ag is frequently the material of choice for printed electronic applications. The main advantage of Cu based inks compared to Ag is the much lower cost of the raw materials. Because of its lower stability, however, post processing often needs to be carried out in a vacuum or under a protective or reducing atmosphere in order to avoid oxidation. Metal precursor inks can contain metal organic compounds (MOD), metal salts or metal nanoparticles (NP).15,17–19 MOD (e.g. silver neodecanoate) and salt (e.g. silver nitrate (AgNO3)) inks contain the respective precursor dissolved in a desired solvent.20,21 Since they do not contain particles, they behave as solutions having the advantage of being easy to prepare in larger quantities and easy to print. Typical metal loadings reach up to 30%. Also, in contrast to most particle based inks, MOD and salt inks contain the metals in a chemically very stable oxidized state, which eliminates the requirement of stabilization of sensitive materials against oxidation in the ink formulation. On the other hand, metal NP inks contain particles of a size preferably below 100 nm of the respective metal dispersed in aqueous or organic solution with metal loadings ranging between 20 and 70%. In order to avoid agglomeration, which would result in nozzle clogging and unreliable printing, the NPs are stabilized by amphiphilic molecules like polymers (e.g. polyacrylic acid (PAA) or polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP)) or low molar mass compounds that bind to the metal surface via anchoring groups, like carboxyl, carbonyl, amine or thiol functionalities.14,22–27 Their bulky polymer backbone or long alkyl chain causes steric, or if charged, electrostatic and/or electrosteric repulsion of the dispersed metal particles.28 After deposition and drying of the solvent, all the above described inks require a post-printing procedure in order to become electrically conductive. In MOD and salt inks, the metals exist in their oxidized form and need to be reduced to their elemental form. Although the NP inks contain the respective metal in its elemental form, the dry ink is not conductive since the stabilizing agents act as insulating shells and separate the particles from each other. The common way of introducing electrical conductivity is the application of heat to decompose the stabilizer and sinter the metal NPs.11,28
In the case of MOD inks, the complex decomposes at a certain temperature. Upon displacement, the ligand itself can oxidize whilst reducing the metal cation to the elemental metal. Depending on its boiling point and/or decomposition temperature, the displaced ligand is either evaporated, leaving the conductive metal behind or remains as a coating of separated metal NPs in an overall non-conductive printed layer.28 The sintering mechanism of the latter system is the same as for NP based inks, which is discussed hereinafter. Typical processing temperatures reported in the literature range between 125 °C and well above 200 °C, which were applied for up to 60 min.17,29,30 In contrast to metal MOD inks, metal salt inks, containing for instance AgNO3 as a precursor, decompose to metallic Ag, nitrogen dioxide (NO2), and oxygen at much higher temperatures of 300 to 500 °C.18,31
In the case of NP inks, temperatures well above 200 °C are applied in order to decompose the organic stabilizers in the ink leaving unprotected NPs behind.32–34 Although complete removal of all organic stabilizers by decomposition is favorable to achieve very high conductivities, it was found that it is not mandatory to introduce metal particle contact in the dried ink.33,35–37 Ingham et al. and Volkman et al. discovered a disordering of the stabilizers surrounding Au (oleylamine stabilized) and Ag (thiol stabilized) NPs at temperatures below the respective decomposition temperatures. It was proven that the stabilizers detach from the metal surface. The stabilizer acts as a quasi liquid in which the metal particles are able to move, approach each other, get in direct contact and coalesce.35,36 After stabilizer detachment or decomposition, the unprotected metal particles are able to coalesce at the particle interface and form necks. Furthermore smaller particles with a relatively high surface energy deposit on larger particles.38 These diffusion and Ostwald ripening phenomena occur in order to reach a more thermodynamically stable state wherein the surface area to volume ratio is minimized.33,38,39 After the coalescence of the NPs in the printed ink, a percolation path is formed throughout the entire printed structure, causing electrical conductivity. The high surface energy of NPs was investigated by Gladkich et al., Buffat et al. and Allen et al.40–42 It was observed that Au NPs of a diameter below 10 nm show a significant melting point depression compared to the respective bulk metal. However, it has to be stated that the described merging of the NPs during sintering is not due to complete melting of the NPs. The mechanism is rather based on surface melting and the diffusion of metal atoms from one NP to another. In the described two stage sintering mechanism (1. removal of stabilizers, 2. coalescence of metal NPs) the sintering temperature (percolation temperature) of an ink is mainly defined by the removal of the stabilizing molecules from the metal surface rather than the melting point depression due to a smaller particle diameter.33,43–45 For that reason, also larger particles, for which no melting point depression is expected, show the aforementioned sintering effects.
The high temperatures that are required to remove the stabilizers from NP inks, the residual ligands from MOD inks as well as to reduce the metal ions limit the application of these conductive inks to inorganic substrate materials like silicon and glass as well as to high performance polymer foils such as polyimide (PI) or polyarylate foils, which are able to withstand the required high processing temperatures.2,30,32 For the manufacturing of flexible electronics, however, these materials are less suitable since they are either not flexible or they are simply too expensive.
Most commonly used polymer substrates have rather low thermal stabilities, with glass transition points in the order of 150 °C or even significantly lower (Table 1). When the processing temperatures transcend this threshold for an extended time and into a significant fraction of the total foil thickness, irreversible deformation will occur, giving rise to deteriorated device performance. As a consequence, the traditional approach of thermal sintering in a hot air oven is limited to rather low temperatures. On the other hand, the sintering kinetics of most conductive inks are rather sluggish under these conditions, resulting in the need for long sintering times (typically in the order of at least a few minutes to several hours), which renders the entire process slow, inefficient and expensive.33,37,46 This problem is in particular relevant for high-throughput industrial R2R manufacturing techniques, where enormously long arrays of ovens would be required.47 PI foil currently serves as a laboratory standard substrate for ink and application development in the research of flexible electronics. For an actual large quantity production, cheap substrate materials such as PP, PEN, PC or PET and paper are suitable candidates (Table 1).9,11,30,48 Alternative faster sintering technologies at low temperatures are therefore of high commercial interest.
Table 1 Glass transition temperatures of polymers commonly used as substrates for printed electronics applications49




Polymer
Abbreviation

T
g (°C)




Polycarbonate
PC
147


Poly(ethylene naphthalate)
PEN
125


Poly(ethylene terephthalate)
PET
62


Polyimide
PI
222


Poly(ether ether ketone)
PEEK
147


Poly(ether sulfone)
PES
210


Poly(vinyl chloride)
PVC
80


Polypropylene
PP
0 (100 °C softening temperature)




Many research groups have attempted to reduce the sintering temperatures of conductive inks by tailoring the NP size, kind of organic stabilizer and stabilizer content.50–52 As explained above, smaller particles possess a higher surface energy and sinter more readily once the stabilizer is removed.39 On the other hand, the smaller the particle size is, the larger is the surface area that has to be protected in the ink formulation and a larger amount of stabilizer is required. Researchers have attempted to use as little organic stabilizer as possible to reduce the sintering temperatures after drying.50,53 Less stabilization is, however, also reflected in the ink properties and especially influences the long term stability and shelf life of an ink, which is crucial for a commercial product and the utilization in industrial production environments. With this approach, low temperature processing is traded against stability before and during printing. For tuning the degree of stabilization of an ink, a balance between dispersion stability, printability and the ability to be sintered at low temperatures has to be found, which limits the extent of destabilization.
As another approach, alternative and low temperature sintering technologies were investigated to either selectively heat the printed patterns without influencing the substrate material or to exploit the effects of destabilization of certain chemicals to the NP dispersions or MOD/salt solutions. This review provides an insight into these alternative sintering approaches for inkjet-printed metal precursor or conductive inks. Alternative sintering approaches attempt to reduce the processing time to a few minutes, seconds or even a fraction of a second, while achieving similar or even better conductivity values compared to conventional thermal sintering with as low energy consumption and applied temperatures as possible. Such processing conditions are required in order to enable large area and high-throughput manufacturing of large area flexible electronics on thermo-sensitive substrates like polymer foils and paper.54
Currently, much work is being performed in order to incorporate printed conductive components such as electrodes, antennas, interconnects and contacts into flexible or even stretchable electronic devices. Electric wiring and contacting is a basic requirement for electricity transport from energy sources to energy consumers and the necessary conductive connections have to be incorporated into the design of flexible devices such as solar cells and lighting devices (Fig. 1a).4,5,9,55,56 Also manufacturing the source/drain and gate electrodes of transistors, which are essential components for many electronic applications such as logic circuits and active matrix displays, represents a highly active research area.57 Furthermore, organic field effect transistors (OFET) are usable as sensor devices for gases, liquids and pressure as well as memory applications.57 For these devices, printing technologies can serve as viable techniques to manufacture electrode structures from Ag and Au inks.58–60 Radio frequency identification (RFID) tags require highly conductive antennas, in order to harvest and transfer the energy sent from a reading device to power an integrated circuit (IC) chip.58,61 RFID tags can be used for contactless payment, inventory management, tracking of goods or access control to security areas (Fig. 1b).62,63
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of OPV device architectures including inkjet-printed current collecting grids (CCG) (a), inkjet-printed UHF-RFID antenna on PET foil (b) and inkjet printed UHF RFID tag upon transfer onto the body (c). Reprinted with permission from Elsevier,56 Materials Research Society64 and The Royal Society of Chemistry.63 
Printed RFID tags are most commonly applied to packaging materials of goods but can also be used directly mounted on the human skin for temporary access control management or for electronic skin applications by the use of stretchable electronics (Fig. 1c).63,65 RFID tags are also usable as readout or active components in printed sensor platforms in order to monitor temperature, humidity, the pH value and the presence of solvents (e.g. water, alcohols).66,67 Also the sensors itself require conductive electrodes that are used in capacitive sensors in combination with active polymers like nafion (sulfonated tetrafluoroethylene polymer), cellulose acetate butyrate (CAB) or poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS), which are sensitive towards humidity or strain (Fig. 2a).68–70 Monitoring of environmental conditions and mechanical stress in addition to wireless communication cumulates in the vision of the internet of things (IOT), where every single object in the world is connected to form one huge network demonstrating the vast potential demand of cheap and flexible electronic devices on every kind of substrate material.71 Along with the IOT, also cheap and efficient energy storage devices such as battery applications are of interest. In this context, printed primary and secondary batteries based on conventional alkaline based concepts as well as novel fully organic systems are under intensive investigation.72–74 Also inkjet-printing of Ag current collecting grids as well as scaffolding was used in a 3D zinc–silver microbattery (Fig. 2b).75 Among the sensing applications, also biochemical approaches such as the detection of animal and human pathogen DNA or the manufacturing of immunoarrays for cancer biomarker proteins are of great interest.48,76–78 Further reported applications employing printed metal patterns include photodetectors (Fig. 2c),79 transparent electrodes80 and UHF electromagnetic patterns as wearable antennas or as frequency selective surfaces (FSS), which can be used for selective electromagnetic shielding in building communication.81–83
 Fig. 2  Sketch of the inkjet-printed capacitor and the resistor for different sensing applications (a) and assembly of a super inkjet printed 3D zinc–silver microbattery (b). © IOP Publishing. Reproduced by permission of IOP Publishing. All rights reserved.69,75 Sketch and micrograph of an inkjet printed photodetector (c). Reproduced with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.79 
In contrast to previously published reviews that cover only a selection of alternative sintering approaches,10,11,28,84,85 this review will critically assess all important sintering technologies, provide insights into the capability of each technique with respect to its compatibility with industrial manufacturing and point out successfully manufactured applications, which were realized in laboratory conditions or pilot manufacturing lines.
2. Chemical sintering
The approach of chemical sintering describes the addition of substances to a printed ink in order to transform the non-conductive features into their conductive counterpart. Since different ink systems, namely nanoparticles (NP), metal organic decomposition (MOD) and salt inks follow different sintering mechanisms, several approaches have been followed.
2.1 Chemical sintering of nanoparticle inks
As described above, sintering of NP based inks requires the removal of stabilizers in order to allow direct contact of the metal NPs. Actually, the majority of chemical sintering approaches on NP based inks technically do not involve a chemical reaction after addition of sintering agents but cause destabilization of the metal particle/stabilizer system by dissolving or detachment of the organic molecules. In several studies, Wakuda et al. described the dissolving of the dodecylamine stabilizing molecules from Ag NPs by dipping into several alcohols (methanol, ethanol and iso-propanol) or water for up to 2 hours.86,87 It was found that dodecylamine readily dissolves in alcohols breaking its bond to the Ag NPs. The unprotected particles subsequently follow the sintering mechanism described above. Achieved conductivity values for 60 s and 2 h of methanol treatment are in the range of 0.07 to 2.2% compared to bulk Ag. Ethanol and iso-propanol revealed similar effects of a lower efficiency compared to methanol. In comparison to immersing the printed patterns into an alcoholic solution, a similar treatment with water proved to be ineffective due to the very low solubility of dodecylamine in water. In addition to the alcohol treatment, heating to 40 °C and 60 °C was performed, which resulted in slightly improved conductivity values due to enhanced diffusion processes between adjacent Ag NPs and, therefore, the formation of larger particles and larger necks between the particles.87 During their investigations on thermal sintering of 1-butane-thiol stabilized Au NPs, Coutts et al. noticed a significant influence of oxygen present in the ambient atmosphere on the sintering performance.88 The authors observed that the printed ink sinters at lower temperatures in the presence of oxygen (about 150 °C compared to 225 °C in vacuo), which is believed to be due to oxidation of the thiol groups and the resulting decreased ability of the oxidized thiols to stabilize the Au NPs. Hence, the ink was exposed to the strongly oxidizing NO2 vapor, which showed to be effective in decreasing the resistance of the Au pattern after a treatment time of 50 min at room temperature. This method, however, is only suitable for Au NP inks, since Ag and Cu NPs would also oxidize under NO2 exposure and form less or non-conductive oxide species after the described treatment. An approach described by Magdassi et al. involves the deposition of a cationic polymer as an additional layer on top of a polyacrylic acid (PAA) stabilized Ag NP ink.89 The proposed mechanism involves the neutralization of charges of the stabilized particles or desorption of the stabilizer by poly(diallyldimethylammonium chloride) (PDAC) at room temperature. After the destabilization process, coalescence of the Ag NPs occurs and conductivities of 20% of bulk Ag could be reached after tuning the concentration of the PDAC solution.
In continuative work, Grouchko et al. presented a PAA stabilized Ag NP ink with a built-in sintering mechanism, which becomes effective upon drying of the deposited ink.90 As a trigger for room temperature sintering, sodium chloride (NaCl) was added to the ink formulation in a low concentration (<50 mM), which is not supposed to have any negative effects on the stability of the ink. During drying of the ink, the chloride concentration slowly increases until the chloride ions are able to replace the bulky PAA stabilizer causing a loss of steric repulsion between the single Ag NPs and subsequently their coalescence (Fig. 3). In the study of Grouchko et al., about 10% of bulk Ag conductivity could be reached, which is explained to be limited by a rather low packing density, due to an immediate formation of Ag clusters in solution.
 Fig. 3  Potential mechanism of the replacement of the stabilizer PAA by chloride ions inducing the loss of steric repulsion between Ag NPs and coalescence. Reproduced with permission from M. Grouchko et al., ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 3354–3359. Copyright (2011) American Chemical Society.90 
In order to allow dense packing of the particles, a two stage process was utilized. After printing and drying of an ink without NaCl, the sample was exposed to hydrochloric acid (HCl) vapor, where the incorporated chloride ions induce the same sintering effects while achieving comparatively high conductivities of 41% of bulk Ag. These sintering approaches were applied to manufacture laboratory demonstrators like electroluminescent devices (Fig. 4), transparent coatings and embedded microwires in a PET foil.89–92 The use of electrolytes for room temperature sintering was subsequently followed up by Layani et al., where Ag NP ink and the NaCl and MgCl2 solutions were deposited in a sequential inkjet-printing fashion, which represents a significant step towards integration of this sintering approach into production (Fig. 4).93 It was found that directly after deposition of the electrolyte solution, a conductivity of 5% compared to bulk Ag was achieved. After 12 hours, conductivities of up to 30% were observed for an optimized amount of printed layers of Ag ink and NaCl solution.
 Fig. 4  Schematic representation of the sequential inkjet printing process of a Ag NP ink followed by printing a NaCl solution as a sintering agent (left). Reproduced with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.93 Fabrication of electroluminescent device by utilizing PDAC as a chemical sintering agent (right). Reproduced with permission from S. Magdassi et al., ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1943–1948. Copyright (2010) American Chemical Society.89 
Furthermore it was found that MgCl2 did result in inferior conductivities compared to sintering with NaCl. This shows that also the counter ions have an influence on the sintering result and have to be considered as well. The approach of electrolyte sintering by using NaCl was furthermore applied to PVP stabilized Ag NP inks by an immersion process in the respective electrolyte solution and extended to immersing pre-treated samples (UV treatment to enhance adhesion) into boiling salt water.94,95 Treatment times of 20 to 30 min resulted in conductivities of 0.2 to 50% of bulk Ag at room temperature and 110 °C, respectively.
In contrast to the previously discussed work on sintering via electrolytes, Long et al. attributed the interaction of the metal cation of the electrolyte with the stabilizer molecule to the observed destabilization and sintering phenomenon of benzoquinone stabilized Ag NPs.96
During the investigation of different electrolytes it was found that the smaller the cation (with the same anion), the more efficient the sintering, which coincides with the findings of the differences in sintering performance of NaCl and MgCl2 made by Layani et al.93 This effect is accounted for by the faster diffusion of smaller ions into the deposited material and its higher mobility and ability to reach the metal/stabilizer interface. The same effect was found for the size of the corresponding anion.96 However, clear proof if the interaction of the anion and metal NP or the salt formation of the electrolyte cation and stabilizer are the main driving forces for the observed sintering effects was not found and might vary for different metal/stabilizer systems.
Layani et al. furthermore demonstrated that the diffusion of electrolyte ions is effective in a cross-linked polymer matrix.97 The deposited ink contains acrylate monomers, which form a solid host scaffold for the PAA stabilized Ag NPs after polymerization via UV irradiation. Immersing these samples into NaCl solution sinters the metal to approximately 3% of bulk Ag. This is indeed much lower compared to previous work on electrolyte sintering, but shows one possible way to conductive 3D objects, fabricated by inkjet-printing in combination with a chemical sintering technique. As another chemical sintering approach, Chen et al. proposed the addition of hydrazine (N2H4) and other reducing substances to dodecanoate protected Ag NPs.98 After deposition, the patterns were soaked in the corresponding reducing solution for at least 60 min obtaining patterns with conductivities of 0.4 to 0.8% of bulk Ag at room temperature and with additional heating at 100 °C, respectively. A mechanistic explanation of the sintering process was, however, not provided by the authors. A sintering approach on the basis of silanol groups in combination with high humidity was reported by Allen et al.99 This approach is particularly interesting, since silica and alumina coatings are often used as an ink receiving layer for paper substrates in the printing industry to accelerate the drying process. It is believed that, if silanol moieties are present in the coating of the paper, the hydrophobicity of the substrate is increased, water uptake of the substrate under high humidity is enhanced and, therefore, dissolving the water soluble stabilizer (PVP) is enabled. The second proposed effect is that the binding affinity of the stabilizer to the silanol groups is superior to its binding affinity to the Ag NPs. Either way causes destabilization of the respective Ag NPs and hence, coalescence. The maximum conductivity reached after an exposure to high humidity for one day is about 22% of bulk Ag. However, this so-called substrate facilitated sintering requires further investigation in order to elucidate the exact sintering mechanism. Similar work on room temperature sintering on paper substrates having silica and alumina based coatings was conducted by Andersson et al.100 Additionally, the substrates were coated with different halides. The results of this study can be seen as proof of previously reported studies on sintering on paper (silanol groups) and sintering in the presence of electrolytes but does not provide any insights into the mechanism of alumina or silica triggered sintering. The findings on humidity induced sintering on certain paper based substrates were used for moisture sensor applications. Once a certain humidity threshold has been reached, the printed high resistive pattern starts to sinter, which can be monitored by an increasing conductivity.101,102 However, the moisture sensor only works for one ink/substrate combination and is irreversible (one-time use) and, therefore, an exact mechanistic clarification of this sintering effect is required in order to expand the approach to other materials as well.
2.2 Chemical sintering of MOD and salt inks
Approaches on chemical sintering of MOD and salt inks require a reduction of the metal cation to the zerovalent metal, which is most often achieved by an approach called reactive inkjet-printing (RIJ).103 This process involves the deposition of the metal precursor in the first printing step followed by the deposition of a reducing chemical (or vice versa) in order to synthesize the elemental metal directly on the surface of the substrate material (Fig. 5). Bidoki et al. presented a study of sequential inkjet-printing of ascorbic acid as a reducing agent and copper sulfate (CuSO4) and AgNO3 as metal precursors.104 The reduction of AgNO3 on different substrate materials (paper, polyester foil and cotton fabric) proved to be successful by achieving conductivities of up to 0.4% of bulk Ag. By carefully adapting the printing sequence of the metal precursor and reducing agent and the reaction temperature on the substrate (up to 150 °C), the final conductivity could be increased to 0.9% of bulk Ag.105 After the formation of metallic Ag, purification steps like washing with water and hot-pressing at 150 °C were performed in order to remove side products and remaining reactants from the printed pattern. The reduction of CuSO4 and of Cu precursors in general did, however, not lead to conductive patterns after deposition. Although, particle formation was also observed for Cu precursor reduction, the rapid reaction of the formed particles with atmospheric oxygen resulted in the formation of non-conductive Cu oxide species, which might be overcome by working under an inert atmosphere.104 On the other hand, Li et al. describe a RIJ approach to pattern electrically conductive Cu and nickel (Ni) structures on paper.106 Cu citrate and nickel sulfate (NiSO4) were used as metal precursors in aqueous solution. In a second printing step, sodium borohydride (NaBH4) was deposited in order to reduce the respective precursor to its elemental, hence conductive, state. The partial oxidation of the formed Cu could be suppressed by printing a very large amount of materials in multiple printing cycles (up to 400 times). However, rather low conductivities of 3.3% and 0.2% bulk Cu and Ni were achieved, respectively.
 Fig. 5  Schematic representation of a reactive inkjet-printing process using a Au precursor ink and an ink incorporating a reducing agent to form the zerovalent metal directly on the substrate. Reproduced with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.111 
In subsequent experiments, many researchers have attempted to perform RIJ procedures using AgNO3, silver ammonia ([AgNH3]+ + OH−) and silver neodecanoate as Ag precursors as well as ascorbic acid, formaldehyde, hydroquinone or diethanolamine.20,107–110 Kao et al. reported on the reduction of AgNO3 with formaldehyde via the silver mirror reaction.107,108 After performing the reaction on glass substrates and washing the patterns with nitric acid, a conductivity of 6% compared to bulk Ag has been obtained at room temperature. A subsequent thermal treatment at 150 °C enhanced these values to about 14% of bulk Ag. This approach was later on improved by the addition of PVP to the formaldehyde solution in order to gain more control over the reaction and, hence, to obtain equally sized and shaped NPs.108 The resulting material is equal to an NP based ink after drying. Removal of the PVP was achieved by washing with ammonia, reaching 10% of bulk Ag conductivity at room temperature. Again, thermal sintering at 150 °C improved the conductivity to 32% of bulk Ag.
A comparison of the reactive sintering approach and the RIJ approach to convert AgNO3 into metallic Ag on the surface of a PET and PI foil was reported by Kheawhom et al.110 The reactive sintering approach included the deposition of AgNO3 onto the substrate and subsequent reduction with ethylene glycol vapor at 250 °C (previously reported by Wu et al.)112 and formic acid at 150 °C. RIJ was performed by firstly depositing one layer of ascorbic acid and subsequently depositing the AgNO3 solution after which the printed pattern was thermally sintered at 150 °C. The obtained conductivities are in the range of 3.5%, 8.5% and 13.2% of the bulk Ag conductivity for the processes of RIJ, reduction with formic acid and reduction with ethylene glycol, respectively. The temperatures used for the applied sintering approaches are, however, in disagreement with the temperatures required for thermo-sensitive foils. Recently, the formation of Au NPs via a RIJ process has been reported.111 In a two cartridge inkjet system, firstly a reduction agent (oleylamine) and a dispersion solvent (1,2-dichlorobenzene) were printed. Subsequently, the metal precursor (HAuCl4·3H2O) in dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) was dispersed on top of the reducing solution. Oleylamine is able to slowly reduce the Au(III) species to zerovalent Au while acting as a stabilization molecule at the same time. After thermal annealing at 120 °C, defined Au NPs were formed directly on the surface, which could be sintered in further post-processing in order to render the printed structures conductive.
For the chemical sintering of the MOD precursor Ag neodecanoate, Valeton et al. used a combination of UV treatment and reduction by hydroquinone, ascorbic acid or formic acid solutions.20 After printing of the metal precursor, UV irradiation creates a so-called latent image (known from photography), which describes the formation of metallic Ag seed particles. Immersion in a reductive medium like an aqueous hydroquinone solution triggers the redox reaction to form metallic Ag and electrically conductive patterns (10% of bulk Ag conductivity) at room temperature.
In addition to chemical sintering approaches which require the deposition of two reactants to the surface, inks with an intrinsic sintering trigger are under development. Walker et al. reported on the formulation of a RIJ ink which is based on a modified Tollens reaction.113 This reactive ink contains diamminesilver(I) cations and acetate as well as formate anions in aqueous solution. Since the diamminesilver complex is only stable in solution, the complex collapses upon drying and the volatile ammonia ligands evaporate. At the same time, silver is reduced by the formate anions and the generated acetic acid. This process occurs at room temperature as well as at elevated temperature (up to 90 °C) reaching a conductivity of above 2% of bulk Ag. Another silver ammonia based reactive ink is described by Chen et al., who incorporated diethanolamine (DEA) as a built-in sintering trigger.109 At temperatures above 50 °C, DEA self-oxidizes under the formation of formaldehyde, which is able to reduce the silver cations to metallic Ag via a silver mirror like reaction. The rather slow DEA decomposition can be accelerated by heating to above 70 °C, which shortens the sintering time from multiple hours to 1 hour. After washing the sintered pattern with water in order to remove the oily film of residues (reaction products and residual reactants), a conductivity of up to 26% of bulk Ag could be achieved. As a last example of reactive inks, the work of Shin et al. describing a self-heatable ink based on Ag2O and silver 2,2-dimethyloctanoate as a precursor material shall be discussed here.114 Upon heating to 180 °C, the reduction of Ag2O is triggered by the dissociated carboxyl moiety of silver 2,2-dimethyloctanoate forming a large amount of Ag atoms. The aggregation of the Ag atoms to larger clusters and particles was found to be very exothermic resulting in heat generation inside the deposited material. During this self-heating, sintering of the Ag occurs, which can be furthermore enhanced by the previously described immersion of the pattern into a solution of NaCl. Conductivity values of about 3.5% and 6.5% of bulk Ag could be achieved after less than one minute of heating and after NaCl treatment, respectively.
Many of the above described chemical sintering approaches show very interesting and rather easily realizable possibilities to achieve highly conductive patterns even at room temperature. In particular the adaption of sequential inkjet-printing in order to apply metal precursors and sintering agents has very high potential to also be used in manufacturing processes for flexible electronic devices. In terms of achievable conductivities and simplicity of the process, chemical sintering of NP based inks seems to be superior to the sintering of MOD and salt based inks. Major drawbacks in reactive systems occurring directly on the surface of the substrate are the comparatively low metal precursor concentrations, which are mostly limited by the solubility in the desired solvent and the formation of side products, which have to be removed with a washing procedure in most cases in order to achieve highly conductive patterns. Furthermore, some of the described approaches require the application of elevated temperatures, which are not compatible with thermo-sensitive substrates and therefore show promising routes to low temperature sintering but require further optimization in order to be applicable to polymer and paper substrates. A summary of all here described chemical sintering approaches can be found in ESI Table 1.†
For large area manufacturing, chemical sintering approaches involving the exposure to vapors as well as approaches involving long treatment times are hardly compatible with fast R2R production. However, due to their simplicity, chemical sintering approaches serve as suitable alternatives for thermal sintering in the development of novel applications on thermo-sensitive substrates, such as electroluminescent devices, moisture sensors, 3D conductors, radio frequency identification (RFID) tags and others. Furthermore, they have the potential to be developed into a fast and cheap sintering technique, which is compatible with R2R production in the near future. In particular reactive inks with an intrinsic sintering mediator can serve as a suitable system, if the printability and stability of these inks serve sufficiently the standards of the printing industry.
3. Electrical sintering
The approach of electrical sintering describes the application of a current to printed metal NP based inks causing local heating within the ink, which is due to its highly resistive nature before sintering. As a consequence, electrical sintering is basically a local heating of the printed material while keeping the thermal stress to the substrate material to a minimum. The local heating causes the NPs to lose their insulating shell and enables coalescence of adjacent particles, resulting in the formation of a percolation path across the printed patterns.115 This process occurs on a timescale of a few milliseconds to seconds and is called rapid electrical sintering (RES). First studies on RES of printed Au and Ag NP inks describe the application of a DC current to slightly pre-sintered patterns.44,116,117 The introduction of a low initial conductivity is required in order to change the printed pattern from an insulator to a poor resistor, allowing current to flow across the pattern and, hence, to cause local ohmic heating as well as sintering during the application of a current. Direct contacting of the printed pattern during DC RES enables access to a direct feedback regarding the progress of sintering, which allows tailoring the obtained conductivity of the pattern by limiting the maximum current used for sintering.116,118 However, the requirement of directly contacting the printed pattern during sintering demonstrates an obstacle in large quantity fabrication. Therefore, contactless electrical sintering using AC current was developed.119 An AC field was applied by mobile electrodes, which were situated slightly above the sample (Fig. 6). The electrical field is able to overcome the electrode gap, couple into the printed Ag NP ink and cause local sintering. Contactless RES was carried out with two setups, both using a top electrode which is separated by a small electrode gap from the sample. The counter electrode can either be situated below the substrate or be operated as a second electrode above the substrate.116,119 By applying contactless AC RES, larger areas can be sintered homogeneously compared to DC RES. Since in contact mode the printed pattern has to be contacted from one end to the other end, one narrow percolation path is formed inside of the deposited ink. After reaching a certain conductivity, the ohmic heating effects are not sufficient enough in order to sinter the surroundings of the initial percolation path. Contactless RES, however, allows the application of a current over a smaller area of the sample and additionally enables movement of at least one of the electrodes over a larger area, which eventually causes a more homogeneous sintering result over the entire printed pattern. Using this approach, Allen et al. obtained a sheet resistance of 100 mΩ sq−1 after two sintering sweeps at a movement velocity of 25 mm s−1.119 It is proposed that, depending on the design of the sintering head, homogeneous as well as local sintering can be achieved, which allows the setup to be integrated into a R2R production line. During RES, parameters like initial pattern conductivity, input voltage, sintering time and input voltage profile have to be considered in order to achieve the optimum sintering result. The creation of an initial conductivity of the pattern, which is currently still achieved by thermal annealing at rather low temperatures, is required to enable an initial current flow and, therefore, ohmic heating over the printed pattern. A high initial conductivity can be counteracted with a higher input voltage, which however has to be chosen carefully, since too much energy input can cause macroscopic defects in the sintered pattern. Jang et al. studied the effects of these input parameters during RES and defined three working areas: no effect, sintering and blow out, which demonstrate the importance of finding the correct settings for each sintering application.120 The requirement of a pre-sintering step is naturally disadvantageous for R2R processing, but can potentially be replaced by faster drying systems (i.e. photonic curing) or substrate facilitated sintering, when printing on specifically coated substrate materials (see Section 2.1).99,121
 Fig. 6  Sketch of contactless alternating current (AC) rapid electrical sintering (RES) of a printed Ag NP ink (a), demonstration of selective sintering via RES (b and c). © IOP Publishing. Reproduced by permission of IOP Publishing. All rights reserved.116 Image of the printed memory device (d) and close-up of the bit (fuse-like) used for local electrical sintering (e). Reprinted with permission from Elsevier.122 
Since electrical sintering can be carried out in a very selective manner, the fabrication of so-called Write Once Read Many (WORM) memory devices was performed (Fig. 6d).122–125 Andersson et al. described the fabrication of these devices on photopaper based on the printing of a Ag NP ink, which has an initially high resistance.122 The printed pattern consists of several contacts which are connected to a main electrode by narrow interconnects (fuse-like). After introduction of a base (low) conductivity, DC RES is used to sinter selected interconnects of the printed contact board in order to increase their conductivity, hence, changing their status from “0” (poor conductor) to “1” (good conductor). Due to the selectivity of RES, it is possible to change the status of contacts to “1” by sintering of the NP ink whereas adjacent contacts remain in the highly resistive status “0”. Therefore a binary code on printed contacts and interconnects can be generated, which is applicable in electrically readable memory cards or access control passes. Leppäniemi et al. demonstrated the printing of such devices in a R2R fashion using gravure and flexographic printing of Ag NP inks followed by RES.125
Electrical sintering demonstrates a fast and selective sintering approach that has been used to sinter Ag NP inks on various substrates such as glass, PI, PET and paper obtaining conductance values of up to 50% of bulk Ag without damaging the substrate material.116,118 Due to its speed and the possibility of contactless application, it has the potential to be integrated into a R2R production line. However, up to now only NP based inks have been successfully processed by electrical sintering and require the introduction of an initial conductance in order to allow current flow and therefore ohmic heating throughout the entire pattern. Due to its mechanism, it is unlikely that RES can be applied to MOD or salt based inks without any pre-treatment. Elimination or replacement of the thermal pre-sintering step by fast alternative sintering approaches (IPL sintering) is one requirement to make this technique compatible with high-throughput manufacturing. A summary of all described electrical sintering approaches can be found in ESI Table 2.†
4. Plasma sintering
In general, plasma is an ionized gas which can be generated by applying a large energy (i.e. thermal, electric current or electromagnetic (EM) irradiation) on the desired gaseous species. Due to this activation, excited species like ions, electrons and neutrals are generated.126 One basic requirement for plasma used as sintering technology in printed electronics is keeping the temperature as low as possible. The generation of high as well as low temperature plasmas is possible by choosing the right architecture of the electrodes as well as choosing the appropriate activation settings in terms of the applied voltage. Paschen's law describes the required breakdown voltage for ignition of a plasma in dependence of electrode distance and pressure, given that the ignition is performed between two electrodes.127,128 It shows the possibility of creating plasmas at reduced as well as atmospheric pressure with similar breakdown voltages (and similar properties) by changing the electrode design.128 A non-thermal, low-pressure plasma can be generated over a large electrode gap, in which a potential sample can be inserted. Of course, vacuum processes are technically demanding and represent an obstacle for being implemented in high-throughput applications. A reduction of the electrode distance allows several atmospheric pressure setups including a top and bottom electrode setup, which is similar to the low-pressure plasma generation and so-called plasma beams (also torch or pencil). In this case, the ignition is carried out in a small reaction chamber and the excited species are pushed forward by the following feed gas flow forming a beam like plasma, which can eventually be directed towards a sample. To review the basic concepts of plasma generation and the versatile applications of plasma processes, we refer to the sufficient amount of recent literature in the respective field.126,128,129
The chemical nature of a plasma is dependent on the feed gas that is used for the generation. A plasma can have reducing (hydrogen), inert (noble gases, nitrogen) or oxidizing (oxygen, air) properties. The excited species of different plasmas can be used to convert metal salt inks into their zerovalent counterparts. Crowther et al. described the use of a hydrogen plasma (non-equilibrium glow discharge) treatment for 15 minutes in order to reduce gold(III) chloride (AuCl3) to elemental Au on a Nylon 66 substrate.130 In this contribution, a conductivity of up to 7.5% compared to bulk Au has been achieved. The same group applied this hydrogen plasma exposure to AgNO3 and palladium acetate (Pd(C2H3O2)2) reaching conductivities of up to 21% of bulk Ag and 4% of bulk palladium after 30 minutes of plasma treatment.131 The authors propose that in the case of exposure to a reductive hydrogen plasma, the elements C, O and N form hydrates, which desorb from the deposited pattern leaving a layer of elemental metal behind. Besides reductive plasmas, also inert plasmas are able to convert metals from their oxidized form in the metal precursor to their zerovalent, conductive form. Bromberg et al. used a low-pressure argon plasma in order to sinter inkjet-printed AgNO3 on glass slides.132 Since the temperatures during plasma exposure (<150 °C) are far too low for a thermal decomposition of the AgNO3 (>400 °C), the proposed mechanism involves the decomposition of NO3− species by high energy argon ion bombardment during plasma exposure, leaving the metal species behind. Cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images reveal a top to bottom sintering approach, which rapidly forms a sintered top crust layer with a high conductivity ranging between 50 and 95% of bulk Ag. Sintering of the bottom layers, however, requires significantly more time since the excited species of the plasma are hindered from penetrating the material. Therefore, the overall conductivity of the printed tracks is assumed to be much lower than the conductivity of the crust layer. Plasma sintering of metal NP inks follows a slightly different mechanism compared to the reduction of metal precursor inks. During plasma exposure of a metal NP ink, the plasma inherent active species decompose the organic stabilizers due to chain scission, which results in the formation of low molar mass compounds. These decomposed compounds can be easily evaporated in a low-pressure plasma application, leaving destabilized metal NPs behind, which follow the sintering mechanism described in Section 1. Reinhold et al. used a low-pressure argon plasma in order to sinter Ag NP inks on glass, PC and PET to a conductivity of up to 30% of bulk Ag.133
Also for NP ink sintering, the occurrence of a skin effect was observed, which hinders fast and sufficient curing of the bottom layers of the printed patterns. In order to achieve sufficient sintering, processing times of at least 30 minutes are required. Since the plasma is able to decompose organic molecules, also the foil is affected, which results in surface activation by the creation of functional groups on the surface for short irradiation times.
For longer processing times, however, etching of the surface of different polymer foils was observed, which is disadvantageous for the deposition of subsequent materials for multilayer devices as well as the optical properties of the substrate material.134 Decreasing the technical complexity of a low-pressure process by using a plasma tool operating at atmospheric pressure also decreased the processing times to a few seconds to minutes. Wünscher et al. investigated the employment of a cold (<60 °C) atmospheric pressure plasma sintering (APPS) tool for different Ag NP inks on PEN foil.134 It was found that the sintering results of plasma sintering depend on the ink formulation (particle size and kind of stabilizer) but also on the dimensions (especially height) of the printed pattern, which is due to the skin effect occurring during plasma sintering.133,134,136 In subsequent work, an increasing temperature for both, plasma temperature (≤200 °C) and substrate temperature (≤110 °C) proved to be more effective in terms of sintering time and achievable conductivity for both processes, low-pressure and atmospheric-pressure plasma sintering.135 A conductivity of up to 20% of bulk Ag was reached after a single pass with a nitrogen plasma torch at a speed of 20 mm s−1 on PEN foil. The application of an elevated substrate temperature, which can be adjusted to the thermal stability of the respective substrate material, is able to counteract the top to bottom plasma sintering process, resulting in faster sintering of the bottom layers of a printed pattern (see Fig. 7). These results of the temperature dependency coincide with the work of Reinhold et al. and Ma et al., who also investigated the influence of elevated substrate temperatures on the sintering process during low-pressure argon plasma sintering.133,136 Another approach of two stage plasma sintering of screen printed Cu NPs with PVP stabilization was followed by Kim et al.137 In the first step, an atmospheric-pressure oxygen plasma was employed in order to decompose the stabilizing PVP polymer (see Fig. 8). Since oxygen containing plasmas are strongly oxidizing, Cu oxide (CuO, CuO2) species are formed, which are intrinsically not conductive. Therefore, a reductive hydrogen plasma was applied in the second sintering stage in order to reduce the Cu oxides to metallic Cu. Plasma sintering with the aid of a heated substrate (150 °C/PI foil) resulted in patterns with a conductivity of up to 8% of bulk Cu (Fig. 8).
 Fig. 7  Photographs of the process of single pass plasma sintering using an atmospheric pressure plasma tool (top), cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of a Ag NP ink after printing and after single pass plasma sintering (bottom). Reproduced with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.134,135 
 Fig. 8  Schematic illustration of the APPS equipment used for plasma sintering of a Cu NP ink, performed in two stages (oxygen and hydrogen plasma treatment). Reprinted with permission from Elsevier.137 
Up to now, only low-pressure argon plasma sintering was used for the manufacturing of demonstration devices in the field of flexible electronics. Pabst et al. reported on the fabrication of an actuator device including inkjet-printed Ag electrodes in addition to a piezoelectric polymer, which can be used as a micropump in microfluidic devices (Fig. 9).138 A piezoelectric polymer is sandwiched between two electrodes, which were printed from a Ag NP ink (on PET foil) and subsequently sintered by exposure to low-pressure argon plasma. The fabricated micropump shows a deflection upon the application of an electrical current, has a potential pumping rate of 100 to 750 μL min−1 and can be applied to lab-on-a-chip systems. Secondly, functional RFID tags were manufactured by means of inkjet-printing of Ag NP inks onto PET foil.64
 Fig. 9  Inkjet printed actuator (left) with piezoelectric polymer sandwiched between two plasma sintered Ag electrodes (right). Reprinted with permission from Elsevier.138 
The customized ink was sintered to conductivity values of above 11% in only one minute of low-pressure argon plasma exposure, which was used for the manufacturing of conductive ultra-high frequency (UHF) RFID antennas. Functionality tests after placing an IC chip on the antenna revealed that the inkjet-printed tags perform as well as screen-printed devices. The major advantage of inkjet-printing is, however, the significantly lower amount of metal used for each antenna. The same antennas with similar conductivity have been manufactured by the application of APPS but were not investigated in an actual RFID testing.135
Thirdly, a bio-sensing platform was manufactured using plasma sintered electrodes printed from Ag NP inks on PP foil (Fig. 10).48 The electrodes are interrupted by a gap of 100 μm, which can be used as a reaction area to perform a DNA hybridization reaction including an immobilized capture DNA and an amplified and labeled target DNA. If the base sequences of capture and target DNA match, a labeled double stranded DNA is formed, which can be used for an enzymatic Ag deposition by addition of horseradish peroxidase and Ag ions. Enzymatic Ag deposition is able to bridge the gap of the electrodes, allowing an electrical read-out of the chip.
 Fig. 10  DNA detection platform based on plasma sintered Ag electrodes (top left), results of DNA analysis via electrical and optical read-out (top right) and mechanism of DNA hybridization (bottom). Reprinted with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.48 
The manufactured platform is able to analyze tens of pathogens in parallel by using only one chip. In this application, plasma exposure is used to sinter the printed electrodes and to functionalize the foil in the electrode gap, allowing immobilization of the capture DNA strand on the surface without any wet chemical pre-treatment steps.
Plasma sintering demonstrates a low-temperature sintering technology, which has been applied to NP as well as salt based Ag and Cu inks. Low-pressure plasma sintering is a suitable method to homogeneously sinter large areas of printed metal patterns on many substrates including thermo-sensitive foils like PP. However, its application in R2R processing is not achievable because of the application of a reduced pressure and the rather long processing times ranging between several minutes and hours. On the other hand, the approaches of atmospheric-pressure plasma sintering can become a R2R compatible technique in terms of technical complexity, processing times and achievable conductivities. Since sintering was mostly performed on small test patterns, much scientific and engineering work is required to develop and scale up this technology from its current status towards a tool for large area and high-throughput production. A summary of the described plasma sintering approaches can be found in ESI Table 3.†
5. Photonic sintering
The sintering of printed metal containing inks via electromagnetic (EM) irradiation ranging between the ultra-violet (UV) and infra-red (IR) range is called photonic sintering. The absorption characteristics of many metals and metal precursors used in the field of printed electronics allow selective heating of the ink by using irradiation which does not affect the most commonly used substrate materials. Rather than heating the entire system indiscriminately, it enables to target specific components selectively, leaving all others unaffected, if the illumination conditions are properly chosen. An obvious prerequisite for this selectivity is a significant difference in the optical properties of the various materials, such that the components to be sintered are highly absorptive in the wavelength range employed, and all other materials are as transparent (or reflective) as possible. In the case of conductive inks based on metal precursors, such as NPs or complexes, on common substrates like polymer foils or glass, this is usually the case (Fig. 11). Most metal NPs show very intense surface plasmon resonance bands in the visible part of the electromagnetic spectrum,139–141 which has been used for localized heating.142,143 It should be noted, however, that in highly concentrated dispersions, such as conductive inks, there are indications for the absorption spectra of such thin films being more closely related by the properties of bulk metals.144 In either case, strong absorption of visible light is observed. Also many transition metal complexes absorb strongly, e.g. due to charge transfer transitions in the optical range.145 In contrast, glass substrates and most polymer foils tend to absorb only in the UV range, unless colorants are deliberately added. A notable exception is polyimide, which is usually orange or brown, but even in this case, the absorption in the visible range is rather limited, as long as the foils are not too thick. If a light source with an appropriate emission spectrum and sufficient optical power density is chosen, energy can be coupled efficiently into the ink layer. Ag, Au and Cu NPs, as used in many conductive inks, have an absorption maximum in the range of 420 nm, 520 nm and 600 nm, respectively (Fig. 11).
 Fig. 11  Normalised UV-vis absorption spectra of commonly used building blocks of conductive inks (a). UV-vis absorption spectra of Ag NP inks at various film thicknesses (b).144 UV-vis absorption spectra of commonly used substrates for printed electronic applications (c). Normalised emission spectrum of a typical Xe stroboscope lamp (d). © 2012 Jeff West, Michael Carter, Steve Smith and James Sears. Originally published in Sintering – Methods and Products by InTech under CC BY 3.0 license. 
Since the plasmon resonance is dependent on material, size and shape of the nanomaterial, different metal inks possess different absorption characteristics and, therefore, require an excitation with irradiation of a different wavelength.146 Photonic sintering exploits the possibility of selectively heating the printed ink by the photothermal effect whereas the transparent substrate material remains unaffected. The generation of EM irradiation used for photonic sintering can be classified according to the excitation wavelength. Frequently reported bands are in the infra-red (IR), ultra-violet (UV) and visible region, which is called intense pulsed light – (IPL) or photonic flash sintering. A special form of irradiation is laser sintering, where the emission of the laser can be tuned in a narrow wavelength window or even single wavelength to match the absorption spectrum of the respective ink formulation.147
5.1 Infra-red (IR) sintering
IR sintering of metal containing inks uses irradiation in the range of the NIR to MIR region (700 to 15000 nm) in order to generate heat selectively to the printed ink.148–150 Denneulin et al. used an IR lamp operating at wavelengths of 8 to 15 μm in order to sinter a Ag NP ink after inkjet-printing. The use of such a high wavelength, however, resulted in fast heating of the used glass and especially the paper substrate to 180 to 210 °C, respectively. Higher substrate temperatures resulted in higher conductivity, which leads to the conclusion that the applied setup does not serve as selective heating method for the ink but is able to shorten the sintering times compared to conventional thermal sintering. A more selective approach of IR sintering was performed by Cherrington et al., who used irradiation in the NIR region to cure a Ag NP ink after deposition via slot-die coating.149 Irradiation in the NIR is shown to be less absorbed by the used PET foil, enabling a selective sintering of the metal ink without substrate deformation. In comparison to thermal annealing at 140 °C and irradiation in the MIR range, NIR sintering resulted in highly conductive patterns after a sintering time of only two seconds. The fast sintering by NIR irradiation was used by Tobjörk et al. to sinter inkjet-printed Ag and Au NP inks on paper and glass substrates.150 An optimal sintering result can be achieved by carefully adjusting settings like power output, distance between lamp and sample and treatment time. Conductivity values of approximately 10% of the respective bulk metal could be achieved after a few seconds of treatment with no or minimal damage to the substrate. After an initial sintering of the NPs, the sintering process slows down since the absorption behavior of the ink changed due to particle size and shape alterations, which can be seen as a negative feedback from the sample itself. Further conductivity increase would require higher power as well as longer sintering times. Since heat dissipation from the metal ink into the substrate occurs quite fast, this technique is suitable for rather temperature stable paper substrates but not for thermo-sensitive foils like PET.
In subsequent work, several studies have been conducted in order to incorporate IR sintered metal electrodes to manufacture field effect transistors (FETs),151,152 paper based sensing devices for pH value,153 glucose153 and hydrogen sulfide (H2S)154,155 as well as DNA hybridization and bio-affinity platforms.77,156 Ihalainen et al. have successfully manufactured a paper based hygroscopic insulator field effect transistor (HIFET), consisting of Ag source and drain electrodes, polythiophene (PQT) as a semiconductor layer, poly(4-vinylphenol) as an insulating layer and PEDOT:PSS as a gate electrode.152 The printed metal electrodes received IR sintering for 25 s resulting in a substrate temperature of 180 °C, which sufficiently sintered the metal electrodes. Similarly treated Au electrodes were used as electrode structures by Määttänen et al. to manufacture pH value and glucose sensors. A self-assembled monolayer (SAM) of alkanethiols was created on top of the sintered Au electrodes on which polymers like polyaniline (PANI) and PEDOT doped with glucose oxidase (PEDOT-GOx) can be electropolymerized.153,157 These polymers change their electrical potential upon changing the pH value (PANI) or glucose concentration (PEDOT:GOx) and can be used as the respective sensor device.153 This setup was also employed as a gas sensor for H2S by using PANI and Cu salts as active components.154,155
IR sintering demonstrates a very fast (in the order of seconds) method to sinter Ag and Au NP inks to obtain conductivity values in the range of 10% of the respective bulk metal. From a technical point of view, IR sintering is one of the technologies that is compatible with R2R processing. However, due to the rather high thermal stress occurring during the process, only materials with high temperature resistance can be processed. Thermo-sensitive foils are hardly compatible with the processing conditions although, power and lamp distance settings could be varied in order to reduce the substrate temperatures. On the other hand, this would be disadvantageous for both, processing time and final conductivity. The only successful reported study on foil investigated a slot-die paste, where the particles do not require as much stabilization as in inkjet inks and, therefore, less energy input to trigger sintering. As demonstrated, IR sintering is a very suitable tool for the manufacturing of electronic devices on many paper substrates. From a material point of view, IR sintering has only been applied to NP based inks and was not yet reported for metal salt or MOD inks. Also the successful sintering of Cu inks on foils is so far not reported in the literature. A summary of the described IR sintering approaches is given in ESI Table 4.†
5.2 Ultra-violet (UV) assisted sintering
Sintering by irradiation of printed inks in the UV region (100 to 400 nm) was mainly applied to metal MOD inks. Since the absorption of NP inks (plasmon resonance) is in the visible region, UV irradiation is not suitable for the selective heating of these materials. MOD inks like Ag neodecanoate, silver(I)-2-[2-(2-methoxyethoxy)ethoxy]acetate (Ag2O(CH2OCH2)3H) and [Ag(DioxoNic)2]NO3, (DioxoNic = (2,2-dimethyl-1,3-dioxolan-4-yl)methyl nicotinate), show strong absorption bands below 400 nm.20,158–160 The combination of a UV-treatment (365 nm) and a chemical reduction with hydroquinone ascorbic acid and formic acid to perform room temperature sintering of a Ag neodecanoate ink is described is Section 2.2.20 For other ink systems, a significant reduction of the sintering temperature was observed when the thermal treatment was performed in combination with UV light (350 nm). Jahn et al. observed an accelerated sintering at low temperatures of 100 to 130 °C when combining thermal and UV treatment, which enabled the sintering of this compound to 18% of bulk Ag conductivity on PET foil.158,159 Fritsch et al. reported on the sintering of a [Ag(DioxoNic)2]NO3 ink with UV treatment for 20 to 40 minutes to reduce the Ag. However, a thermal treatment at 250 °C is required for this ink in order to decompose organic residues from the deposited ink and to achieve highly conductive patterns in the range of 90% of bulk Ag conductivity.160 If processing at polymer foil compatible temperatures also results in conductive patterns was unfortunately not investigated.
Up to now, irradiation of metal precursor inks with UV light is not sufficient to convert the inks into their conductive counterpart as a stand-alone technique. However, UV irradiation can be used in combination with thermal treatments or chemical approaches in order to reduce sintering times, achieve higher conductivity or enable sintering at mild temperatures. It can therefore be seen as an assisting method for other sintering approaches which can be applied if the respective ink possesses an absorption band in the UV region. Since the processing times are still in the range of tens of minutes to several hours, UV sintering is not compatible with high-throughput manufacturing of flexible electronics either. Low temperature sintering by the use of UV irradiation is most likely only achievable with compounds that have a very strong absorption in the respective wavelength range. Since most of the conductive inks available today do not fulfil these requirements, UV sintering remains in an early stage of development. A summary of the discussed UV assisted sintering approaches is given in ESI Table 5.†
5.3 Laser sintering
The sintering of metal NP inks with lasers exploits the properties of using a focused beam of light at a tuned wavelength, which can be adapted to the respective absorption of the inks. Within the last years, a large variety of different lasers has been investigated for metal NP sintering. Among these lasers are gas lasers using an ionized gas such as argon as well as solid state lasers like ytterbium (Yb) doped fiber lasers, neodymium-doped yttrium aluminium garnet (Nd:YAG) lasers, titanium–sapphire (Ti:sapphire) lasers and diode pumped solid state lasers (DPSS).161–165 Sintering is performed by following the printed track with a laser beam operating at the desired wavelength. NP based inks absorb the laser irradiation in the affected area, heat up due to the photothermal effect and sinter due to the reached elevated temperatures.166 The generated temperature inside of the ink has to be controlled and kept as low as possible to avoid heat dissipation into the substrate material. Many studies on laser sintering use temperature stable materials such as glass, silicon or PI foil as substrate because laser sintering can generate temperatures of up to 500 °C.167 A careful adaption of sintering parameters like power output, writing velocity, wavelength and operation mode (continuous wave or pulsed) allows a reduction of the processing temperatures on the substrate to 150 °C and can be tailored to the sintering temperature of the ink that is used for the respective application.168 In order to match the absorption maximum of Ag, Au and Cu NP inks and to induce heating as fast as possible, many researchers have attempted to use argon ion lasers operating at wavelengths of 488 to 515 nm.147,161,169–174 Generally, fast heating allows for reaching highly conductive patterns in a very short timeframe. However, disadvantageous effects like the formation of a rough or uneven surface, which is due to the fast volume reduction of the material and the fast volatilization of organic matter as well as the introduction of coffee-staining like effects during the creation of the high local temperatures, were observed.161,167,175–177 Also a high power output of the laser is able to perform ablation processes instead of sintering.178 These observations show that the performance of the used lasers is on the edge of the temperature range that can be applied to both, high performance substrate materials and metal inks.169 The reduction of thermal stress to the substrate can be achieved by replacing a continuous wave laser by a pulsed laser (nano- and femtosecond).147,168,179,180 Applying short laser pulses enables the transmittance of a high energy density to the ink while keeping the heat dissipation to the surroundings at a minimum.168 The drawback of this method is the requirement of an optimized pulse repetition rate and writing velocity, which determine the distance between two single pulses. In order to avoid unsintered areas, the single spots have to overlap to a certain extent, which is described as a compromise between processing time and good conductivity by Kumpulainen et al.168
In order to gain more control over the laser sintering process, the use of a wavelength which does not match to the absorption maximum was investigated. Such a process shows slower heating of the deposited ink, resulting in prevention of excessive surface damaging during sintering. This approach was followed with solid state lasers with tunable wavelengths in the visible and IR region of the EM spectrum (780 to 1064 nm).147,164,168,179 Maekawa et al. studied the influence of the laser wavelength to the sintering of a Ag NP ink of PI foil.147 It was found that by using lasers operating at a high absorbing wavelength (green lasers), fast metallization of the ink occurs on the surface leading to many defects due to fast evaporation of volatile compounds (solvent, stabilizers) as well as a dense skin layer. This rapid surface sintering (also seen for plasma sintering, Section 4) prevents complete sintering to the bottom (ink/substrate interface) and results in poor adhesion after sintering. Lasers operating in the NIR region have a larger transmittance through the printed metal and therefore heat the substrate/ink interface, leading to a bottom to top sintering progress and hence smoother and more homogeneous sintering. The introduced temperatures, however, have to be below the glass transition temperature or decomposition temperature of the substrate, which limits the choice of substrates.
Among other parameters, the spot size of the laser mainly determines the sintering resolution, e.g. the obtained width of the sintered track after on passage. Spot sizes in the low μm range allow a significant reduction of resolution compared to inkjet-printing, which makes laser sintering a suitable tool for high resolution and lithography free manufacturing. The workflow of high resolution patterning via laser irradiation is depicted in Fig. 12. The deposited metal ink is sintered in the small area, which is affected by the incoming laser spot while the surroundings remain unaffected. Due to its poor adhesion, the unsintered ink can be removed by washing with a desired solvent (e.g. methanol, toluene) leaving a high resolution pattern of conductive metal behind. The smallest reported line width is about 400 nm manufactured from a Ag NP ink on glass sintered with an ultra-short pulsed Ti:sapphire laser.179 The high resolution of the laser, however, is an issue when it comes to large area processing because the entire printed structure has to be scanned with a writing width of 3.5 to 200 μm.147,166,168,170,176 The acceleration of large area laser sintering processes was introduced by Yeo et al. who used a Nd:YAG laser in combination with a galvano mirror scanner in order to rapidly scan the printed structure.172,181 This technique allowed the sintering of patterns of a size of 1 × 3 cm in 30 seconds to a sheet resistance below 10 Ω sq−1 on PET foil (Fig. 13). Rather than for the purpose of fast processing of large areas, micro mirror systems were used in order to generate differently shaped 2D objects from coatings of Ag NP based inks.182 In general, the achievable conductivity with laser sintering is dependent on all aforementioned parameters like power, wavelength, writing velocity, number of treatment cycles and the ink material itself since it determines the required temperatures to trigger sintering.147,183 By controlling the parameter settings used, conductivity values of up to 40% of the respective bulk metal can be obtained. However, the used sintering parameters to achieve these high conductivity values are not compatible with thermo-sensitive substrates. Sintering of Ag NP inks to a conductivity of up to 20% of bulk Ag was performed successfully on PEN and PET foil.181,184 For the sintering of Cu NP inks under ambient conditions, oxidation due to the high surface area and the present oxygen can occur quickly. However, it was found that if sintering occurs fast enough, the formation of significant oxide amounts can be avoided. Zenou et al. described this process as “a race against oxidation” because if the conversion is too slow, non-conductive Cu oxide species will form.171,185 The comparison of different sintering velocities from 0.3 to 20 mm s−1 at a constant power density in an argon and ambient atmosphere only reveals significant deviations for low velocities. At 20 mm s−1, the sintering is fast enough to avoid oxide formation leading to a maximum conductivity of 20% of bulk Cu on glass. Also the laser sintering of MOD inks has been investigated. Cai et al. irradiated a Ag MOD ink on PI foil at a wavelength of 1017 nm in order to locally introduce temperatures above the decomposition temperature (170 °C).162 The resulting highly porous structure, which is due to the volatilization of the organic compounds, is the major explanation for the rather low conductivity of 0.25% of bulk Ag. Kang et al. attempted to process a transparent Ag MOD ink, which cannot be directly processed via lasing.186 The transparent ink required a thermal pre-treatment in order to form small NPs with a plasmon resonance that was exploited for laser heating at a wavelength of 532 and 1070 nm to introduce a conductivity of 27% compared to bulk Ag on glass.
 Fig. 12  Illustration of high resolution patterning by means of selective laser sintering of a Ag NP on a polymer substrate ink followed by a solvent based removal of unaffected ink. Reproduced with permission from Public Library of Science (PLOS).172 
 Fig. 13  Schematic diagram for the process of Ag NP ink deposition on PET foil and annealing by rapid scanning of the focused laser beam using galvano-mirror and telecentric lens (top). Illustration of optical experimental setup. Inset image shows the digital image of as-deposited Ag NP ink pattern on PET by R2R process (bottom). Reprinted with permission from Elsevier.181 
Since the resolution of laser sintering is higher than that of inkjet-printing, it can be used in order to manufacture source, drain and gate electrodes in OFETs. For instance, Ko et al. fabricated both active (OFET) and passive (capacitor) electrical components on PI foil with a combination of laser sintering and laser ablation of an inkjet-printed Au NP ink in combination with the deposition of poly-4-vinylphenol as dielectric layer.169 In further investigations, the approach of selective laser sintering and removal of unsintered material by washing (Fig. 12) in order to manufacture small channel length OFET's on glass and foil was used.164,170,172,187,188 Ag and Au NP inks in combination with laser sintering were applied in order to manufacture high resolution electrodes with channel lengths in the low μm range (>6 μm), which were incorporated in a multilayer pattern using a poly-4-vinylphenol dielectric layer and modified polythiophenes or pentacene as semiconducting polymer to build functional OFET devices on glass, foil and Si wafers. A laser based approach to fabricate conductive patterns with high aspect ratio (up to 50) was investigated by Kullmann et al.189 It was found that printing of multiple droplets of a Au NP ink onto the same location on a heated substrate (<100 °C) results in the formation of pillars (micro-wires) rather than a widening spot, which is due to the fast evaporation of the solvent from the deposited ink. An increasing local temperature inside the ink was achieved by in situ laser annealing using a green diode laser, which enables the manufacturing of significantly narrower pillars of sintered Au NPs. This approach demonstrates one possibility to engineer 3D structures via inkjet-printing. Further devices manufactured via laser sintering include antennas for passive RFID tags and grid structures as transparent electrodes for touch panel applications.165,184
The utilization of a focused laser beam represents a very powerful way of fast heat generation inside of NP (Au, Ag, Cu) based inks. It is possible to adjust the wavelength of the laser to the absorption bands of the respective ink in order to achieve the optimal sintering result in terms of conductivity, sintering speed and structure morphology. The sintering of MOD inks is generally possible, if they possess a suitable absorption behavior. Transparent inks, however, demonstrate a natural obstacle for every photonic sintering approach. Since laser sintering is a selective heating process, the majority of the investigations have been performed on heat resistive substrates like silicon, glass or PI foil. Actually, the high temperatures generated in many studies were able to cause damage to the substrate and to the ink (ablation of metal), likewise. Only few investigations have accomplished successful sintering of metal NP inks on thermo-sensitive materials, such as PET foil. In order to be compatible with such sensitive materials, laser sintering parameters require careful tuning and further investigation in order to suppress heat dissipation into the substrate. Laser writing velocities of up to 100 mm s−1 have been reported, which are compatible with R2R manufacturing at first glance. However, it has to be considered that many setups operate with spot sizes of only a few μm, which leads to prolonged processing times for large area sintering.168 Garnett et al. described laser sintering as a local rather than a global heating such as IPL sintering (Section 5.4).146 Improvements in large area processing were made by using mirror systems in order to widen the treated area which, on the other hand, requires rather complex equipment. The strength of laser sintering today certainly is the high resolution patterning in the low μm range, which represents a powerful tool for electrode patterning in many transistor applications. An additional advantage of laser sintering is the possibility to process Cu NP inks under ambient conditions. If local heating and sintering is performed fast enough, oxidation of the highly porous Cu material can be avoided, which suspends the requirement of operating under inert conditions. The described laser sintering approaches are summarized in ESI Table 6.†
5.4 Intense pulsed light (IPL) sintering
Intense pulsed light (IPL) or photonic flash sintering is essentially a thermal technique which, in contrast to conventional oven sintering, employs the heat generated by the absorption of visible light in the target materials to achieve the necessary temperature increase. The most commonly used light source for IPL sintering is a xenon stroboscope lamp, which emits radiation in the range between roughly 200 and 1200 nm, encompassing the entire visible spectrum (Fig. 11). In order to prevent the (small) UV contribution to the emission spectrum from being absorbed by the substrate and damaging it, it can be removed from the spectrum by a UV filter.190 Since about 30% of the electrical power is converted into radiation, which is an order of magnitude higher than that of a typical laser, IPL sintering is a much more energy efficient technology.191 In particular in combination with specifically shaped reflectors, this allows high energy densities and thus locally high temperatures to be achieved without the need for enormously strong power supplies.192
Localized heat dissipation only in the ink deposits is a necessary prerequisite for selective heating and sintering, but an equally important aspect is the time scale at which the irradiation is applied. For a detailed discussion of this topic, the reader is referred to a literature reference,191 only the most important conclusions of which are summarized here. Typical thicknesses of freshly inkjet printed ink layers are at most few microns and tend to shrink to a maximum of only a few hundreds of nanometers after drying. By contrast, the substrate thicknesses are usually in the order of 100 μm or above. Due to the localized heating in the thin ink deposits, strong temperature gradients are created in the material stack, which will inevitably result in heat conduction from the ink deposits into the substrate. Because they are not directly heated by the radiation, the foils act as heat sinks, quickly cooling down the ink layers after the illumination has ceased. In order to restrict high temperatures to the ink and its immediate surroundings, rather than heating significant parts of the foil bulk, the duration of the irradiation (tpulse) needs to be much shorter than the time required to establish a thermal equilibrium between ink and foil (τfoil), hence the need for pulsed exposure instead of continuous irradiation. In two examples, where continuously emitting halogen lamps instead of xenon flash lamps were used, long exposure times (in the order of 10 seconds to a few minutes) were necessary.146,193 Thus, the thermal equilibrium within the system was reached and the choice of substrate materials was restricted to those stable at high temperatures.
For homogenous sintering throughout the entire thickness of the ink deposit to be guaranteed, it is necessary to achieve high peak temperatures in the complete ink volume. This is most conveniently achieved when the pulse length is longer than the thermal equilibration time of the ink deposit (τink): τink ≪ tpulse ≪ τfoil(1)
The time scales to be considered can be estimated by taking typical sample dimensions and values for the thermal material properties of the inks and substrate materials into account. The thermal equilibration times of ink and foil can be estimated respectively as τink = cinkρinkxink2/4κink(2)and τfoil = cfoilρfoilxfoil2/4κfoil(3)with c, ρ, χ and κ being the specific heat capacities, mass densities, layer thicknesses and thermal conductivities of each material. Assuming typical values for metal loaded inks and polymer foils, it becomes apparent that τink is in the order of a microsecond (or even much shorter when the properties of dried inks are used for calculation), whereas τfoil is at least several tens of milliseconds. Suitable pulse lengths are therefore typically chosen between a few microseconds and several milliseconds.
The exact values of pulse lengths, but also of other flashing parameters like pulse intensity and flashing frequency, need to be carefully chosen to achieve a fast sintering process and high final conductivities, while at the same time limiting the thermal load of the foil to an acceptable minimum. Material properties to be taken into consideration include the evaporation enthalpies of the ink solvents, the thermal stabilities of the polymeric foils and organic ink components as well as the sintering kinetics of the conductive building blocks involved (decomposition and reduction of oxidized metal ions in complex inks, sintering of NPs, etc.). Unless the processing is performed under a protective atmosphere, the kinetics of oxidation need to be considered as well when working with oxidation-sensitive metals such as Cu. Generally, each ink/substrate combination tends to have its own specific optimal sintering conditions, which, on the one hand, provides the operator a lot of flexibility when choosing the various parameters, but, on the other hand, also means that optimization work needs to be carried out for each individual material combination. Theoretical models which help predicting reasonable ranges for experimental conditions are therefore in high demand. In order to achieve more insight into the heat transport processes as well as the temperature distributions and peak temperatures during flash illumination, a limited number of theoretical studies have been published.144,190,194,195 Although not all these studies deal with the specific system of a conductive ink on a polymer foil, the underlying physics are generally comparable: radiation in the form of visible light (frequently also accompanied by some fractions in the UV and NIR) is emitted from the flash lamp and hits the surface of the sample, where a part of it is reflected, whereas the remainder enters the sample material and is either transmitted or absorbed (Fig. 14). These processes are described based on the emission spectrum of the lamp and the known wavelength dependencies of the optical properties of the materials, using e.g. Lambert–Beer's law. The absorbed part of the radiation is subsequently dissipated as heat at the location of absorption. Alternatively, the heat generation by radiation can also be described as occurring only at the surface, which obviously is a good approximation especially for highly absorptive materials. From the surface, some heat is re-emitted again following Stefan–Boltzmann’s law, and another part is conducted into the bulk of the material.
 Fig. 14  Physical principles involved in IPL sintering of an absorbing conductive ink on a transparent substrate (a). Calculated surface temperature of a Cu layer as a function of time during flash illumination (b). Calculated temperature distributions into the depth of a Cu layer during flash illumination (c). Reproduced with permission from ASME Digital Collection.194 
To calculate the temperature distribution in the materials stack and its changes in time, standard equations for heat conduction are used, taking the various thermal properties of the involved materials as well as exposure parameters such as pulse duration, pulse shape, flashing intensity and flashing frequency into account. The actual simulations are most conveniently carried out after discretization into domains, using finite volume methods. With a one-dimensional model, Guillot et al. have applied these principles to a number of test cases, the most relevant for practical processing is a sequence of three consecutive identical rectangular pulses interrupted by cooling breaks three times the pulse duration.194 The material used in this case was a 5 mm thick slab of dense Cu metal. The surface temperature showed three peaks, quickly reaching 2000 °C, followed by rapid cool down due to heat flux into the bulk of the material. Following the temperature profiles into the depth of the Cu slab, the expected behavior of continuously decreasing temperatures with increasing distance from the surface could be theoretically reproduced, as well as the effect of much stronger gradients during flashing than in the cooling breaks. Other authors, who also included the energy required to melt the metal in their models, have achieved similar initial heating profiles, but rather constant values upon reaching the metal melting point.144
In order to achieve a better understanding of and control over the IPL sintering process and its underlying physical mechanisms, equipment for in-line process monitoring has been developed. The most obvious physical property to be followed during flash sintering of metallic inks is the electrical resistance (Fig. 15). Several researchers have described in detail the design, construction and application of setups which allow the constant measurement of the electrical resistance of an ink line under flash illumination.192,196,197 A variation of the construction principle also allowed indirect monitoring of the temperature development inside an ink line under flash illumination in real time (Fig. 15).192 The experimental measurements reported by these authors qualitatively revealed a very similar behavior as theoretically predicted, although peak temperatures only up to 250 °C were observed. A possible explanation for this discrepancy might be that a different system was used in this case (Ag NP ink on PEN foil, less intense flashing condition, temperature measurement at the ink–foil interface).
 Fig. 15  Construction principle of an in-line resistance measurement during flash sintering (a). Experimental result obtained with this setup (b). © IOP Publishing. Reproduced by permission of IOP Publishing. All rights reserved.196 Construction principle of a probe for in-line temperature measurement during flash sintering (c). Experimental result obtained with this setup (d). Reprinted with permission from Materials Research Society.192 
Processing by exposure to high intensity pulsed light has been applied to a variety of nanomaterials such as CIGS,198,199 CdS,200,201 Si202 and organic photovoltaic (OPV) blends.203 Within the scope of this review, however, the focus will be on materials which, after flash illumination, result in highly conductive, metallic structures. For these functionalities, research so far has been almost exclusively focused on Ag and Cu, with only very few exceptions of Au and Ni.204,205 The conductive building blocks in use are either elemental metallic particles, which need to be sintered by the (partial) removal of stabilizing organic coatings and the subsequent formation of necks and grain growth (Section 1). Alternatively, metals in their oxidized form (as complexes or oxide particles) are used, which need to be reduced to the zerovalent state by the rapid heating caused by flash illumination, or by photochemical reactions. This latter approach is mainly applied to Cu, as Ag is usually more stable in its elemental metallic state anyway, even in the form of NPs. In the following, some general remarks on IPL sintering for the production of metallic conductive structures will be made and some key publications will be highlighted. A complete overview of the published work, including the reported flashing conditions, is given in ESI Table 7.†
For Ag NP inks, in most cases, thermal sintering is used, but also a number of publications have appeared reporting on the influence of the various photonic flashing parameters on sintering speed, final conductivity, microstructure and sample damage. By contrast, publications on this treatment for Ag complex based inks or flake pastes are scarce. In the case of complexes, this might be due to the absence of absorption in the visible range, which renders it difficult to couple any light into the deposits.
West et al. reported on the densification of Ag ink deposits under flash illumination with different pulse durations and flash intensities, as controlled by the applied voltage.144 A maximum volume fraction above 80% of Ag was found under optimized conditions, with higher intensities giving rise to unfavorable cracking of the lines and partial lift-off. As very thick layers were used (multiple printing to achieve >20 μm thickness), the sintering process using single pulse exposure did not proceed completely through the entire structure, leaving roughly the lower half unaffected. Reinhold et al. and Abbel et al. studied the influence of flash energy and frequency during pulsed illumination, finding, as expected, that to some degree, increasing one of the two can compensate for a decrease in the other.192,206 A combination of high energy density and high flashing frequency will, however, at a given point result in significant overheating and sample damage. By contrast, increasing the number of pulses under optimized conditions (corresponding to a longer total exposure time) generally was found to be beneficial to the final conductivity until the values approach an upper limit, without damaging the sample.206–208 It is noteworthy, however, that some authors have encountered damage like delamination of the Ag ink from the substrate,196,209 signs of starting oxidation210 and foil deformation208 upon repeated flashing. Although these observations may seem contradictory at first sight, they merely demonstrate the strong influence of experimental factors such as ink type, substrate materials and flashing conditions on the sintering process.
Single pulse experiments reported by Chung et al. revealed that applying the same amount of energy in a shorter pulse time gives rise to higher conductivity.196 A similar effect was found when the energy density of a single pulse was increased at constant pulse length.190 In both cases, this is presumably due to the higher peak temperatures. By contrast, splitting up one rather long single pulse into a burst of four short pulses with different cooling times in between (i.e. different flashing frequencies) did not result in a significant change in the final sample properties.196 Interestingly, dividing the energy of one single high energy pulse into three with lower energy gave an impressive conductivity improvement by a factor of four and a totally different microstructure.190
As a result from the studies summarized above, it becomes clear that variation of parameters such as flashing frequency, intensity and pulse duration in various combinations offers a wide range of conditions for process optimization. Recently, however, this approach has even been further refined by variation of the flashing conditions during the process.121,211 Why this might result in a further improvement of the sintering process can be rationalized by realizing that significant changes in the dimensions and material properties of the ink layer are expected during each single flash. Due to solvent evaporation, stabilizer degradation and densification of the metal, the height of the lines can shrink by more than one order of magnitude, strongly accelerating heat conduction. At the same time, with the constantly changing composition (increase in metal content, decrease in organic components), the thermal conductivities and heat capacities are also expected to change significantly. Consequently, the ideal flash conditions to achieve fast and efficient sintering will also vary from flash to flash. This principle has been applied by Park et al., using a two-step approach consisting of a number of rather gentle pulses to remove most of the organic ink components (in particular the solvent), followed by one single flash with high intensity, which was responsible for the actual sintering.121 Although sintering by a single high energy pulse without the pre-treatment gave a rather low resistance of the sample, the authors were not able to extract a specific conductivity from the data because a highly porous and disrupted structure was formed. Applying only the gentle drying conditions without the final pulse gave rise to extremely low conductivities, if any at all. By contrast, the combination of both steps under optimized conditions yielded a better conductivity than with thermal sintering and also a rather dense Ag film.
The influence of various parts of the visible spectrum on the sintering result was studied by Reinhold et al., showing that light enriched in the blue region was best suited to obtain a favorable sintering process in terms of speed and reliability.206 No statement was made on the final conductivities, but from the graphs shown in the original publication, it seems that, also in this respect, blue was the color of choice. The authors explained this spectral selectivity by the strong absorption of small (<50 nm) Ag NPs in the blue and purple regions, which even further increases upon particle growth. Red light, which is not strongly absorbed by Ag NPs, especially when they are below 50 nm, indeed exhibited a delay in the sintering process, together with a high percentage of non-conductive samples. White light, which also contains significant blue contributions, was found to sinter the particles as quickly, but less reliably, most probably due to the negative influence of the also present red light. The line geometry was also found to influence the sintering behavior, most probably because of the different heating profiles induced by the differences in relative contact area with the heat sink (substrate). Abbel et al. found that wider lines gave rise to both, faster sintering and higher final conductivities under identical illumination conditions, both observations being consistent with the assumption of higher peak temperatures in wider lines as a consequence of reduced relative heat flux.212 On the other hand, it was reported that at high flashing intensities, wider lines suffered more from the formation of an outer metallic shell on top of the ink deposit, which was distorted during later pulses by organic vapors emanating from the interior, giving rise to a very irregular surface topology.209
The fact that the ink composition itself also has a decisive influence on the sintering result was demonstrated by Abbel et al., where three different Ag NP inks were subjected to identical flashing conditions on the same substrate.213 Only one reacted advantageously to that treatment, whereas in the other two cases either no conductivity was obtained or extreme foil deformation was observed. This finding again stresses the need to optimize the sintering conditions for each ink/substrate combination individually.
Very recently, Ag nanowire coatings have been introduced as promising alternatives to thin films of transparent conductive oxides for the production of transparent electrodes. A number of publications have employed IPL sintering to weld the contact point together and attain highly conductive percolation networks.146,214,215
Because of the lower chemical stability of Cu NPs, thermal sintering needs to be carried out in a vacuum or under a protective or reducing atmosphere in order to avoid oxidation. By contrast, due to its much faster sintering kinetics, IPL sintering can be applied to Cu inks in air, nevertheless yielding highly conductive metallic structures.197,216–220 In most cases, even a reduction of the oxide content with respect to the unsintered ink has been reported.197,216,217,219,220 Ryu et al. proposed a mechanism on how the stabilizing polymer PVP may contribute by providing the necessary reducing agents.217 This assumption is also consistent with observations reported by Hwang et al., where the concentration of PVP was found to be crucial for the final conductivity. Too much polymer inhibited the formation of a conductive network, whereas low amounts of polymer were not able to prevent oxidation.197
As in the case of Ag NP based inks, also for Cu NPs, a number of parametric studies have been carried out in order to obtain optimized flash sintering conditions. Pulse energy, pulse length, flashing frequency, and the number of pulses were varied, yielding general trends very similar to what has been found earlier for Ag NP inks. Increasing the pulse energy resulted in faster sintering, larger grain sizes and higher final electric conductivities above a certain threshold, which was necessary to start the sintering process at all.197,216 Findings consistent with these observations have been reported by Dharmadasa et al.220 Foil damage is frequently observed if the applied energy resulted in too high substrate temperatures. At constant total energy exposure and frequency, shortening the pulse time (and thus increasing the energy density) gives rise to larger pores in the sintered structure, but nevertheless also significantly higher conductivities, because the amount of stabilizer is more strongly reduced.216 For single pulse sintering, an optimum was found at 10 ms pulse lengths, when the pulse length and intensity were varied in such a way as to keep the total energy input identical.197 Splitting up one single pulse into a number of shorter pulses, while retaining the total energy and exposure time, revealed that generally several short pulses give smoother morphologies, because the latter process prevents the organic ink components from excessive vaporization and disruption of the coherent conductive network.216 However, the conductivities obtained following this approach were unsatisfactory because the short low energy pulses were insufficient to induce significant grain growth and densification. Also splitting up a single pulse into a number of lower intensity pulses while retaining the pulse length was reported to have negative effects on the conductivity.197
IPL sintering has been demonstrated to be a suitable technology to efficiently convert printed structures of Cu MOD and CuO inks into zerovalent conductive Cu metal. Because the heating occurs for such short times, this reaction is even possible without the need for a protective atmosphere. IPL sintering of inkjet-printed CuO has been evaluated with respect to its dependence on the number of pulses and the applied energy.222,223 Upon IPL sintering, the oxide content was significantly reduced and metallic Cu was formed, presumably throughout the entire layer thickness. A higher energy exposure gave rise to a better electrical performance but also to an increased surface roughness, and partial delamination of the ink from the substrate was found after overexposure. A two-stage sintering approach consisting of a number of rather gentle pulses for drying, followed by a single intense pulse to achieve the chemical conversion, has proven beneficial.224
Recently, two contributions have appeared describing the reduction of concentrated Cu(II) complex solutions into Cu metal by IPL sintering. Wang et al. reported on a Cu complex with amino ligands and a mixture of formate and citrate as counterions.221 As the pulse energy was varied, it turned out that a certain energy density was required to combust the organic ink components completely and to reduce the Cu fully to its metallic form. At too high intensities, highly porous structures were formed due to explosive formation of decomposition gases (Fig. 16). The influence of various carboxylate counterions was investigated, again in combination with an amino ligand.225 It was argued that the broader absorption spectrum of the oleate complex compared to formate and acetate was beneficial for the efficiency of the IPL sintering process, but this effect was counteracted by the strongly enhanced carbon content in the oleate chains, which prevented the occurrence of any conductivity.
 Fig. 16  Microstructures and electric resistivities of Cu complex inks after flash sintering at different energy densities. Reproduced with permission from B. Y. Wang et al., ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 4113–4119. Copyright (2013) American Chemical Society.221 
From a substrate material point of view, PI foil is frequently chosen for IPL sintering experiments (Table 1), as it is able to withstand also rather harsh flashing conditions, which might negatively affect less robust substrates. The decisive influence of the chosen substrate on the sintering performance of Ag NP inks was demonstrated, where lines on more temperature sensitive foils like polyesters and polypropylene completely disintegrated under the more intense flashing conditions.206 Nevertheless, also various less stable and less expensive foils have proven their merits under IPL treatment (ESI Table 7†). It was shown that the type of substrate can have strong influences on the final conductivity (Ag NP ink on plastics was two times better than on paper).210 This observation was explained as resulting from the different surface roughness, which gave rise to much more cracks and discontinuities in the Ag deposit on paper. Significant differences were also found in the microstructure, the sample on paper showing much clearer signs of local melting, as a consequence of the higher temperatures in the ink on the paper. The reason was the lower thermal conductivity of paper compared to the polymer foils, which slowed down the heat flux into the substrate material.
In terms of high-throughput processing, IPL sintering offers some decisive advantages compared to several alternatives, as it is very fast (milliseconds to seconds), selective and can be easily applied to large areas. Furthermore, no protective atmosphere is required, even if the used metals are sensitive to oxidation. On the other hand, IPL sintering requires a lot of process optimization to fully exploit its advantages, which can be a tedious and time-consuming process. For that end, a strategy has been developed which uses IPL sintering machinery of continuously increasing size to achieve a stepwise approach for process parameter optimization.213 Starting from a very small research tool, many different inks can be screened and benchmarked, and the various flashing parameters can be varied on a small scale, with limited effort. The results from this step were subsequently used as input for the following stage, which uses a sheet-to-sheet (S2S) tool with a moving substrate underneath a flash lamp and already closely resembles the final R2R application, but still on a moderate scale. A typical problem occurring at this stage with moving substrates, but not with immobile ones, is to choose the flashing frequencies sufficiently high to ensure a uniform exposure across the entire sample, without under- or overexposed spots.206
After another optimization iteration, these results can then be transferred to the R2R equipment (Fig. 17), where they serve as the starting point for a last optimization iteration. In this way, process speeds up to 10 m min−1 for Ag NP inks on polymer foils have been demonstrated, with reasonable electrical conductivities of up to 12% of bulk Ag.213 A similar process has also been applied to inkjet-printed CuO, though no specific conductivity was reported in this case.224 Other examples for the R2R processing of conductive Ag inks by IPL sintering can be found in several literature examples (Fig. 17).47,226,227 R2R processing by IPL sintering was compared to a number of alternatives (convection oven, IR, electrical), revealing that IPL sintering scored highest on all four evaluation criteria (conductivity, substrate damage, ease of R2R integration and length of the sintering oven).47
 Fig. 17  R2R IPL sintering equipment described by Abbel et al. (a). © IOP Publishing. Reproduced by permission of IOP Publishing. All rights reserved.213 Schematic representation of the R2R manufacturing line described by Hösel et al. (b). Reproduced with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.226 Flash sintering of printed Ag inks on foil in a R2R line (c). Reproduced with permission Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.227 
The compatibility of IPL sintered metal structures with functional devices has been demonstrated for a number of different printed electronics applications such as flexible RF antennas on paper and electrical connections for electronic packaging and power supply for LED arrays from Ag NP inks.206,228 Schottky diodes in which one layer consisted of IPL sintered Cu prepared from inkjet-printed CuO showed rather poor device properties, due to the porosity and surface roughness of the Cu track.200
The working electrode in a Cu sensor has been prepared by IPL sintering of a Au NP ink on paper, showing a distinct difference in the sensitivity with photonic energy density.204
The application for IPL sintered Ag for the preparation of transparent electrodes for ITO-free organic solar cells has been studied most intensively until now. For this purpose current collecting grids have been manufactured in order to support a transparent conductive polymer coating.56,227 An improvement of solar cell performance was observed for current collecting grids, which were treated via IPL sintering rather than thermal sintering for an extended time. The improved performance was explained by the higher conductivity of the Ag lines in combination with their reduced widths, reducing the non-active shadowing area of the device (Fig. 18).56
 Fig. 18  
JV curves of organic solar cells containing current collecting grids of printed Ag ink subjected to thermal or IPL sintering (a and b).56,227 Calculated electric potential fields for current collecting grids prepared by thermal (top) and IPL (bottom) sintering.56 Reprinted with permission from Elsevier56 and Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.227 
6. Microwave sintering
Microwave heating is widely used for sintering of dielectric materials,229 conductive materials,230,231 and in synthetic chemistry.232 It offers the advantage of uniform, fast and volumetric heating.233 For electrically insulating materials the heating is attributed to dielectric losses. Derived from the Maxwell equations, the dielectric response of a material to a field is given by the complex permittivity (4)where ε′ accounts for energy storage, ε′′ for energy loss of the incident EM wave or so-called dissipation, σ the conductivity and ω the angular frequency. The ratio of the imaginary to the real part of the permittivity defines the capability of the material to dissipate power compared to energy storage and is generally known as the loss tangent. (5)
There are three basic types of energy dissipation. Firstly, conduction loss occurs due to the movement of free charges in a conductive medium. As can be seen in eqn (4), this directly translates to the increasing loss with higher conductivity.234 Secondly, dielectric resonance is the dissipation through atoms and molecules, e.g. bond vibrations, but is only effective at frequencies much higher than the ones contemplated here. Thirdly, a loss due to dielectric relaxation relies on the property of materials to polarize under the influence of an externally applied field, characterized by a finite displacement of charge or a rotation of the dipoles. Upon removal of the field force, dipoles relax under interaction with their surrounding and thereby dissipate power.229,235 For a spherical molecule, for instance, the relaxation time τ may be calculated using (6)emphasizing the importance of the volume of the molecule and the viscosity η of the surrounding medium.234
Depending on their loss characteristic and thus their conductivity, materials can be opaque, transparent or a microwave absorber, as shown in Fig. 19. For bulk metals, being good electric conductors, no internal electrical field is generated and the induced electrical charge remains at the surface of the sample.236 Consequently, metals reflect microwaves. While bulk metals do not absorb until they are heated to about 500 °C, powders with particle sizes within the micrometer-region are rather good absorbers.237 The penetration depth d is defined as the distance into the material at which the incident power is reduced to 1/e (36.8%) of the surface value and is given by (7)with c being the speed of light, f the frequency of the microwave radiation and μ the real part of the permeability, which is 4π × 10−7 T m A−1 for non-magnetic materials. Due to their high conductivity metals have a very small penetration depth. For example, the penetration depth of microwaves with a frequency of 2.45 GHz for bulk metals like Ag and Cu is 1.3 and 1.6 μm, respectively.238
 Fig. 19  Microwave energy absorption as a function of electrical conductivity. Derived from Agrawal et al.237 
Ma et al. presented a systematic study of microwave absorption of porous copper powder metal compacts.239 The spherical particles used in their experiments had a size of 3 μm, but also larger particles up to 22 μm were used. Their main observations were that the differences between electric (E) and magnetic (H) microwave heating are significant. Compacts made from the same powder and same relative density heat more rapidly and to higher equilibrium temperature in the H-field compared to the E-field. Furthermore, in the H-field the heating is more comprehensive throughout the sample, resulting in more evolved interparticle necking and agglomeration.
In their study, the authors also observed that the initial heating behavior of the copper powder is marked by a sharp rise in temperature that peaks and then relaxes to equilibrium. It is likely that this phenomenon of rapid heating is due to rapid interparticle necking and agglomeration throughout the sample that occurs in the first 5 to 40 seconds. Fig. 20 explains this in more detail: despite of a dense packing, the particles initially do not reveal good electrical or thermal contact due to the native surface oxide layer and the absence of interparticle necking. Upon exposure to a microwave H-field eddy currents and concomitant thermal dissipation are induced in each particle, hence greatly changing the microstructure of the compacts. As a result of the particle necking and agglomeration the penetration of the fields into the sample reduces. Overall energy absorption by the sample is thus reduced since eddy currents flow through a smaller fractional volume of the entire compact (compare the number of arrows in Fig. 20 on the left and on the right). As the effective particle size increases upon neck formation and agglomeration, also the complex permittivity (ε′′) and complex permeability (μ′′) are reduced greatly due to a drop in the dielectric and diamagnetic polarization. Whereas bulk Cu has a skin depth of 1.3 μm at 2.45 GHz, the skin depth for porous copper powder is in the order of 0.002 to 0.05 m, which is better matching the vertical dimensions of the used samples (here 5 mm).239 Similar to Ma's used Cu particles, metallic NPs are also surrounded by an insulating shell. As a result, the effective skin depth is much larger than the sample itself and each particle can be regarded as a separate absorber. Generally, it is believed that the conductive particle interaction with microwave radiation, i.e. inductive coupling, is mainly based on Maxwell–Wagner polarization, which results from the accumulation of charge at the material interfaces, electric conduction, and eddy currents. However, the main reasons for successful heating of metallic nanoparticles through microwave radiation are not yet fully understood.
 Fig. 20  A previously unheated sample (left) is heated rapidly by induced eddy currents (represented by the arrows in the particles), while exposed to a microwave H-field. As the particles are heated, contacts are formed (necking), the sample densifies, and becomes presintered within seconds (right). At this stage, the fractional volume of the compact subject to eddy currents is reduced. Reprinted with permission from J. Ma, J. F. Diehl, E. J. Johnson, K. R. Martin, N. M. Miskovsky, C. T. Smith, G. J. Weisel, B. L. Weiss and D. T. Zimmerman, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 101, 074906. Copyright [2007], AIP Publishing LLC.239 
In contrast to the relatively strong microwave absorption by the conductive particles, the polarization of dipoles in thermoplastic polymers below the Tg is limited, which makes the polymer foil's skin depth almost infinite, hence transparent, to microwave radiation.
As a result of the different modes in a multimode cavity of a microwave, a serious issue with microwave heating is the appearance of multiple hotspots. Either by up-scaling the cavity, i.e. increase of the frequency at the expense of a loss in penetration depth, by motion of the sample or by utilization of mode stirrers the uniformity of heating can be improved. In organic or polymer synthesis the vial usually contains a liquid and the small difference in the electric field is homogenized by a magnetic stirrer in the vial.232 However, when the vial is loaded with a solid sample, small differences in the electric field cannot be compensated for by stirring, which makes placement of the vial more critical. Furthermore, microwave sintering can only be successful if the dimension of the object perpendicular to the plane of incidence is of the order of the penetration depth.
Microwave heating has been reported in the literature as a successful sintering technique for metals.240 Unsintered non-conductive silver lines were treated in a microwave reactor operating in constant power mode (300 W). Sintering times are significantly shortened in the microwave, from 60 minutes or more down to 240 seconds, as shown in Fig. 21a, while obtaining the same conductivity as when using thermal energy. Within the reactor vessel the temperature reaches 200 °C, which is near the sintering temperature of 220 °C for conventional thermal sintering. Longer sintering times did not increase the conductivity, but sometimes resulted in deformation or decomposition of the substrate at the edges of the silver lines and the substrate.
 Fig. 21  Conductance as a function of time for the microwave sintering of silver tracks on PI foil (a), schematic representation of the printed template including four conductive Ag antennas and a single silver line inkjet printed on top (b). Reproduced with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.240,242 
Furthermore, it was discovered that conductive antenna structures are more susceptible for absorption of microwaves than the printed feature by itself.241 Therefore, conductive antenna structures have been applied onto the polymer foil and were found to improve the sintering process, and thereby the obtained conductivity, significantly. Also the introduction of antenna structures around the samples shortened the sintering time. After the application of conductive antenna structures (Fig. 21b), a single silver ink line was printed over the metallic probes and shortly cured in an oven for 1 to 5 minutes at a temperature of 110 °C. The pre-sintered sample was subsequently exposed to microwave radiation for at least 1 second, while applying the lowest possible set-power of 1 W. This resulted in a pronounced decrease of the resistance of which the exact outcome depends on the initial resistance. Final conductivities up to 34% of bulk Ag were revealed by using such antenna structures.
Subsequently, Perelaer et al. reported on the substitution of the thermal pre-treatment with plasma and IPL sintering in order to reduce the thermal stress to the substrate as well as to reduce the total sintering time to only a few seconds.242,243 Cauchois et al. discussed the impact of using a variable frequency microwave and rapid thermal sintering of printed nanoparticles on an n-type (100) silicon substrate.244 Microwave sintering was performed using a variable frequency mode centered around 6.425 GHz with a bandwidth of 0.75 GHz and a sweep rate of 0.1 s. The fact that all experiments were conducted on silicon substrates, which are susceptible to electromagnetic waves, was not discussed in the manuscript.245 Furthermore, for rapid thermal annealing (RTA) a partial sintering of the nanoparticle film with a large number of small pores was observed, while hybrid variable frequency microwave (HVFM) sintering at 300 °C revealed a bimodal distribution of grains (300 nm and 1 μm). An enhanced coarsening and densification took place upon microwave exposure due to coupling with nanosized crystals. For RTA it was found that an optimized thermal ramp between 0.1 and 25 °C s−1 revealed a conductivity of up to 25% of bulk Ag. In the case of HVFM sintering at 300 °C, a conductivity of up to 75% of bulk Ag was observed, while the resulting density was close to full dense polycrystalline Ag, despite the presence of residual porosities.
Microwave sintering demonstrates a rapid sintering technology (order of seconds to minutes) that can be applied to NP inks on cost-effective polymer substrates. In particular the combination of photonic and microwave sintering, both flash sintering techniques, decreases the sintering time significantly and processing times that are compatible with R2R applications are obtained, as was proven for functional honeycomb structures that can be used for OLED and OPV applications.242 However, the main drawback for successful microwave sintering is the up-scaling, where a homogeneous and effective absorption of the radiation into the material is essential. Frequently observed hot-spots during sintering result in inhomogeneous heating as well as local overheating, thus hampering the control of sintering larger samples. Despite the success in some work, microwave sintering of metal nanoparticles is currently limited to lab- to small-scale only. A summary of the described microwave sintering approaches is provided in ESI Table 8.†
7. Conclusions
In order to generate electrically conductive patterns on flexible substrates, different post-processing technologies have been developed to replace thermal (oven) sintering, which is characterized by high processing temperatures and rather long processing times for many inkjet inks. In order to be compatible with thermo-sensitive substrate materials, alternative methods operating with locally induced high temperatures (electric sintering, photonic sintering), operating at comparatively low temperatures (plasma sintering, chemical sintering) or operating even at room temperature (chemical sintering) have been investigated. Since every sintering approach follows a different mechanism, it is difficult to appoint one technology which is suitable for every ink, every substrate and every application. However, there are significant differences in the maturity and technical development/possibilities between the methods reviewed here.
The term “chemical sintering” summarizes several sintering approaches involving the addition of chemicals to the deposited ink or directly into the ink formulation (built-in sintering trigger). Many of these methods can be carried out at room temperature. However, since most of the approaches of NP based inks are diffusion dependent, increased temperatures accelerate the procedure in order to achieve high conductivities. Besides the possibility of room temperature processing, these sintering methods utilize rather easy concepts as well as cheap and common chemicals (electrolytes), which makes them perfect candidates for the development of new devices on very sensitive substrates. The approach of reactive inkjet-printing involves performing a chemical reaction (mostly reduction) in order to synthesize the metal species directly on the substrate material. These approaches have been employed to metal MOD and salt inks achieving rather low conductivities, which is primarily due to the lack of control over the reaction resulting in the formation of side products. Due to the possibility of sequential printing (R2R compatible) and built-in sintering agents, some chemical approaches like the addition of electrolytes or controlled reactions on the surface are compatible with high-throughput production. On the other hand, it has to be considered that the added chemicals often remain in the sintered pattern, which might be disadvantageous for the aimed application, if not removed. Currently, the major advantage of chemical sintering approaches is that it serves as a replacement for thermal sintering in laboratory research rather than high-throughput fabrication of devices.
Electrical sintering proved to be successful for the sintering of NP based inks in contact and contactless modes. The development of different sintering heads, which are used in S2S and R2R manners, demonstrates a significant step towards integration into large area processing. However, many studies still describe the requirement of a thermal pre-sintering step in order to introduce an initial high resistance, which is naturally in disagreement with fast production lines.
Plasma sintering exploits the interactions of the excited species with the organic stabilizers leading to their decomposition. One step plasma procedures using inert plasmas (argon, nitrogen) as well as two step procedures operating with oxidizing (O2) and reducing (H2) plasmas are reported. Low-pressure plasma approaches are hardly compatible with R2R production, which is due to the rather long processing times as well as the difficulties in implementing vacuum technologies into fast production lines. The approaches of atmospheric pressure plasma sintering, however, show promising characteristics in terms of processing time as well as achievable conductivity. Furthermore, similar R2R compatible equipment is frequently used for surface activation in many high-throughput manufacturing lines. However, much additional scientific and engineering work is required in order to scale up and develop plasma sintering into a R2R compatible technology.
Until now, microwave sintering of Ag NP inks has been performed on a small laboratory scale. In a rather small processing window, microwave sintering is able to quickly (seconds) increase the conductivity of a printed metal ink. In most cases, support by conductive antenna structures, which can funnel the EM irradiation to the printed pattern, or by silicon based substrates, which act as susceptors, is required. The major issue of microwave sintering in its current status is the homogeneity of sintering, which is extremely difficult to control. Local overheating can be counteracted by adjusting the microwave frequency according to the conductivity increase during sintering. Successful sintering on foils requires a pre-sintering step in order to introduce an initial conductivity, which can be performed by heating or other alternative approaches, e.g. photonic or plasma exposure, and the presence of conductive antennas around the printed pattern. The generation of highly conductive patterns on foil for large area production in a R2R manner is technically difficult to accomplish through microwave sintering.
Photonic sintering summarizes sintering techniques exploiting the absorption behavior of metal inks in the UV, visible and IR region. Irradiation in these regions of the spectrum causes selective heating of the deposited ink while the substrate materials are transparent to the used wavelength, and hence remains unaffected. UV sintering is used exclusively for MOD inks, since they show a strong absorption in the UV region. Despite this absorption behavior, UV irradiation is not able to convert the metal complexes into their zerovalent counterparts and only acts as an assisting method to thermal sintering (reduction of processing temperatures and time) or chemical sintering approaches. Using UV irradiation also bears the risk of directly heating the substrate material, since many foils used for flexible electronics absorb in this region of the spectrum. IR sintering in the near-infrared (NIR) region on the other hand is able to selectively heat Ag and Au NP based inks. In fact, up to now, IR sintering is still hardly compatible with thermo-sensitive foils, because intensive optimization of the sintering settings (power, velocity, time, distance between the lamp and sample) is required. Mostly glass and paper substrates have been used in order to manufacture electrodes for several sensing devices. IR irradiation can be applied in a R2R fashion with varying intensities, which enables its utilization as a pre-drying technique for homogeneous sintering results of other sintering approaches. Laser sintering enables tailoring of the wavelength of irradiation to the absorption behavior of the ink in order to achieve fast local heating. Optimization of parameters like power, wavelength, operation mode (continuous or pulsed) and writing velocity allows sintering on thermo-sensitive substrate materials. Due to its high resolution, it can be utilized for the manufacturing of electrodes in transistors, which require higher resolution processing than printing processes generally offer. Large area processing is possible, but requires rather complex scanning mirror systems since the spot size of typically used lasers is in the μm range and the sample has to be scanned by this small spot entirely. Among all described alternative sintering methods, IPL sintering certainly is the most advanced one. It uses flashes of white light from stroboscopic lamps, which are able to selectively heat the inks without harming the substrate. IPL sintering was studied intensively regarding many processing parameters such as power, pulse frequency, number of pulses, pre-drying steps, sample dimensions and many more. The technology is well understood and enables fast processing that is compatible with R2R processing and the processing velocities of inkjet printers. It has, in fact, already been employed in production of pilot lines, which can be used for the fabrication of different electrode and antenna structures. However, as mature as the technology is, every ink/substrate combination requires an adjustment of the sintering parameters in order to achieve homogeneous sintering without overheating, which would damage the printed patterns. Since this adjustment can be extremely time consuming, developed simulation tools attempt to simplify the finding of the correct parameters. Nevertheless, there is still demand for accurate resistivity models that are able to consider the large amount of processing parameters in order to optimize the sintering procedure for new materials.
Besides good electrical properties, sintered patterns require mechanical stability in terms of adhesion to the substrate and bending stability in order to be integrated into flexible electronic devices. Since only a few studies investigated such mechanical properties, they do not provide a basis for the comparison of different sintering technologies yet and still have to be investigated in future.20,147,172,181,184,207,221,244 One particularly interesting investigation on the adhesion of a Ag NP ink sintered with laser, plasma and IPL sintering was performed by Niittynen et al.207 This study showed the differences in electrical and mechanical properties which resulted from the different sintering mechanisms (i.e. top-to-bottom sintering) and processing conditions of the alternative sintering approaches. In order to investigate the mechanical properties in detail, further investigations with standardized test methods for different parameters, materials and processes are required.
In summary, it has to be stated that IPL sintering is by far the most advanced sintering technology amongst the here described approaches. However, it was observed that not every ink can be successfully processed via this technique (which is also true for all other techniques). Therefore, also other sintering techniques might be considered for certain ink/substrate combinations as well as for particular applications. Due to its technical progress, IPL sintering is the most promising candidate for high-throughput fabrication, however, other approaches are potentially more suitable for basic research on devices, which is due to their easy accessibility (chemical sintering) and availability of similar equipment in many research labs (IR lamps, plasma chambers, lasers).
The fast development of applications in the field of flexible electronics (RFIDs, transistors, transparent electrodes for OLEDs and OPVs, battery systems, sensors, stretchable electronics and others) calls for fast and reliable sintering technologies, which are able to perform in high-throughput manufacturing. The research on suitable processing techniques has created several possibilities of different maturity, which have to be further developed in order to overcome the remaining obstacles for R2R integration.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank the Dutch Polymer Institute (DPI, technology area HTE) as well as the European Community's Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007–2013) LOTUS under grant agreement no. 248816 for financial support.
References
B. J. de Gans, P. C. Duineveld and U. S. Schubert, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 203–213 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Szczech, C. M. Megaridis, D. R. Gamota and J. Zhang, IEEE Trans. Electron. Packag. Manuf., 2002, 25, 26–33 CrossRef CAS .
P. F. Moonen, I. Yakimets and J. Huskens, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5526–5541 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Teichler, J. Perelaer and U. S. Schubert, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 1910–1925 RSC .
R. R. Søndergaard, M. Hösel and F. C. Krebs, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2013, 51, 16–34 CrossRef .
K. J. Baeg, M. Caironi and Y. Y. Noh, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4210–4244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Tekin, P. J. Smith and U. S. Schubert, Soft Matter, 2008, 4, 703–713 RSC .
M. Singh, H. M. Haverinen, P. Dhagat and G. E. Jabbour, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 673–685 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Tobjörk and R. Österbacka, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1935–1961 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Cummins and M. P. Y. Desmulliez, Circuit World, 2012, 38, 193–213 CrossRef CAS .
J. Perelaer, P. J. Smith, D. Mager, D. Soltman, S. K. Volkman, V. Subramanian, J. G. Korvink and U. S. Schubert, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 8446–8453 RSC .
A. Kamyshny and S. Magdassi, Small, 2014, 10, 3515–3535 CrossRef CAS .
D. V. Leff, P. C. Ohara, J. R. Heath and W. M. Gelbart, J. Phys. Chem., 1995, 99, 7036–7041 CrossRef CAS .
D. Huang, F. Liao, S. Molesa, D. Redinger and V. Subramanian, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2003, 150, G412–G417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Magdassi, A. Bassa, Y. Vinetsky and A. Kamyshny, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 2208–2217 CrossRef CAS .
S. Magdassi, M. Grouchko and A. Kamyshny, Materials, 2010, 3, 4626–4638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. L. Dearden, P. J. Smith, D. Y. Shin, N. Reis, B. Derby and P. O'Brien, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2005, 26, 315–318 CrossRef CAS .
Z. C. Liu, Y. Su and K. Varahramyan, Thin Solid Films, 2005, 478, 275–279 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Lee, A. C. Park, M. H. Kim, T. S. Chang, S. T. Kim, S. M. Koo, Y. C. You and S. J. Lee, J. Ceram. Process. Res., 2007, 8, 219–223 Search PubMed .
J. J. P. Valeton, K. Hermans, C. W. M. Bastiaansen, D. J. Broer, J. Perelaer, U. S. Schubert, G. P. Crawford and P. J. Smith, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 543–546 RSC .
H. J. Chang, M. H. Tsai, W. S. Hwang, J. T. Wu, S. L. C. Hsu and H. H. Chou, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 4612–4620 CAS .
T. S. Ahmadi, Z. L. Wang, T. C. Green, A. Henglein and M. A. El-Sayed, Science, 1996, 272, 1924–1926 CAS .
T. Teranishi and M. Miyake, Chem. Mater., 1998, 10, 594–600 CrossRef CAS .
L. H. Liang, C. M. Shen, S. X. Du, W. M. Liu, X. C. Xie and H. J. Gao, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2004, 70, 205419 CrossRef .
M. Chen, Y. G. Feng, X. Wang, T. C. Li, J. Y. Zhang and D. J. Qian, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 5296–5304 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. M. Tolaymat, A. M. El Badawy, A. Genaidy, K. G. Scheckel, T. P. Luxton and M. Suidan, Sci. Total Environ., 2010, 408, 999–1006 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. Li, S. J. Chang, F. J. Su, S. W. Lin and Y. C. Chou, Colloids Surf., A, 2013, 419, 209–215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kamyshny, J. Steinke and S. Magdassi, Open Appl. Phys. J., 2011, 4, 19–36 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. Smith, D. Y. Shin, J. E. Stringer, B. Derby and N. Reis, J. Mater. Sci., 2006, 41, 4153–4158 CrossRef CAS .
J. Perelaer, C. E. Hendriks, A. W. M. de Laat and U. S. Schubert, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 165303 CrossRef PubMed .
J. F. Mei, M. R. Lovell and M. H. Mickle, IEEE Trans. Electron. Packag. Manuf., 2005, 28, 265–273 CrossRef CAS .
H. H. Lee, K. S. Chou and K. C. Huang, Nanotechnology, 2005, 16, 2436–2441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Greer and R. A. Street, Acta Mater., 2007, 55, 6345–6349 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Y. Deng, Y. X. Jin, Y. R. Cheng, T. K. Qi and F. Xiao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 3839–3846 CAS .
B. Ingham, T. H. Lim, C. J. Dotzler, A. Henning, M. F. Toney and R. D. Tilley, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 3312–3317 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Volkman, S. Yin, T. Bakhishev, K. Puntambekar, V. Subramanian and M. F. Toney, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 4634–4640 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wünscher, T. Rasp, M. Grouchko, A. Kamyshny, R. M. Paulus, J. Perelaer, T. Kraft, S. Magdassi and U. S. Schubert, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 6342–6352 RSC .
J. H. Yao, K. R. Elder, H. Guo and M. Grant, Phys. A, 1994, 204, 770–788 CrossRef .
K. K. Nanda, A. Maisels, F. E. Kruis, H. Fissan and S. Stappert, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2003, 91, 106102 CrossRef CAS .
N. T. Gladkich, R. Niedermayer and K. Spiegel, Phys. Status Solidi, 1966, 15, 181–192 CrossRef CAS .
P. Buffat and J. P. Borel, Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys., 1976, 13, 2287–2298 CrossRef CAS .
G. L. Allen, R. A. Bayles, W. W. Gile and W. A. Jesser, Thin Solid Films, 1986, 144, 297–308 CrossRef CAS .
B. T. Anto, S. Sivaramakrishnan, L. L. Chua and P. K. H. Ho, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 296–303 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sivaramakrishnan, P.-J. Chia, Y.-C. Yeo, L.-L. Chua and P. K. H. Ho, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 149–155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Jung, Y. H. Jo, I. Kim and H. M. Lee, J. Electron. Mater., 2012, 41, 115–121 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Pan, S. H. Ko and C. P. Grigoropoulos, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 234104 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Reinhold, W. Voit, M. Thielen, M. Müller, M. Müller, S. Farnsworth, I. Rawson, R. Bollström and W. Zapka, Proc. NIP27 Dig. Fabr., 2011, 445–451 Search PubMed .
S. Wünscher, B. Seise, D. Pretzel, S. Pollok, J. Perelaer, K. Weber, J. Popp and U. S. Schubert, Lab Chip, 2014, 14, 392–401 RSC .

          J. Brandrup, E. H. Immergut and E. A. Grulke, Polymer Handbook, Wiley Interscience,  1999 Search PubMed .
J. Perelaer, A. W. M. de Laat, C. E. Hendriks and U. S. Schubert, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 3209–3215 RSC .
I. Jung, K. Shin, N. R. Kim and H. M. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 1855–1862 RSC .
K. Ankireddy, S. Vunnam, J. Kellar and W. Cross, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 572–579 RSC .
D. Wakuda, K.-S. Kim and K. Suganuma, Scr. Mater., 2008, 59, 649–652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. C. Arias, J. D. MacKenzie, I. McCulloch, J. Rivnay and A. Salleo, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 3–24 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. E. Habas, H. A. S. Platt, M. van Hest and D. S. Ginley, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6571–6594 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Galagan, E. W. C. Coenen, R. Abbel, T. J. van Lammeren, S. Sabik, M. Barink, E. R. Meinders, R. Andriessen and P. W. M. Blom, Org. Electron., 2013, 14, 38–46 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-a. Di, F. Zhang and D. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 313–330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Subramanian, J. M. J. Fréchet, P. C. Chang, D. C. Huang, J. B. Lee, S. E. Molesa, A. R. Murphy and D. R. Redinger, Proc. IEEE, 2005, 93, 1330–1338 CrossRef CAS .
Y. L. Wu, Y. N. Li and B. S. Ong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 4202–4203 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Caironi, E. Gili, T. Sakanoue, X. Y. Cheng and H. Sirringhaus, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1451–1456 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yang, A. Rida, R. Vyas and M. M. Tentzeris, IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., 2007, 55, 2894–2901 CrossRef .
K. Koski, E. Koski, J. Virtanen, T. Björninen, L. Sydänheimo, L. Ukkonen and A. Z. Elsherbeni, Int. J. Adv. Des. Manuf. Technol., 2012, 62, 167–182 CrossRef .
V. Sanchez-Romaguera, M. A. Ziai, D. Oyeka, S. Barbosa, J. S. R. Wheeler, J. C. Batchelor, E. A. Parker and S. G. Yeates, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 6395–6402 RSC .
F. M. Wolf, J. Perelaer, S. Stumpf, D. Bollen, F. Kriebel and U. S. Schubert, J. Mater. Res., 2013, 28, 1254–1261 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Benight, C. Wang, J. B. H. Tok and Z. A. Bao, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2013, 38, 1961–1977 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. F. Salmerón, F. Molina-Lopez, D. Briand, J. J. Ruan, A. Rivadeneyra, M. A. Carvajal, L. F. Capitan-Vallvey, N. F. Derooij and A. J. Palma, J. Electron. Mater., 2014, 43, 604–617 CrossRef PubMed .
B. S. Cook, J. R. Cooper and M. M. Tentzeris, IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., 2013, 61, 4714–4723 CrossRef .
J. Weremczuk, G. Tarapata and R. S. Jachowicz, Meas. Sci. Technol., 2012, 23, 014003–014012 CrossRef .
F. Molina-Lopez, A. V. Quintero, G. Mattana, D. Briand and N. F. de Rooij, J. Micromech. Microeng., 2013, 23, 025012 CrossRef .
V. Correia, C. Caparros, C. Casellas, L. Francesch, J. G. Rocha and S. Lanceros-Mendez, Smart Mater. Struct., 2013, 22, 105028 CrossRef .
Y. Q. Zhan, Y. F. Mei and L. R. Zheng, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 1220–1232 RSC .
A. M. Gaikwad, D. A. Steingart, T. N. Ng, D. E. Schwartz and G. L. Whiting, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 233302 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Madej, M. Espig, R. R. Baumann, W. Schuhmann and F. La Mantia, J. Power Sources, 2014, 356–362 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Janoschka, M. D. Hager and U. S. Schubert, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 6397–6409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. Ho, K. Murata, D. A. Steingart, J. W. Evans and P. K. Wright, J. Micromech. Microeng., 2009, 19, 094013 CrossRef .
N. Komuro, S. Takaki, K. Suzuki and D. Citterio, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2013, 405, 5785–5805 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Ihalainen, F. Pettersson, M. Pesonen, T. Viitala, A. Määttänen, R. Österbacka and J. Peltonen, Nanotechnology, 2014, 25, 094009 CrossRef PubMed .
G. C. Jensen, C. E. Krause, G. A. Sotzing and J. F. Rusling, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 4888–4894 RSC .
G. Azzellino, A. Grimoldi, M. Binda, M. Caironi, D. Natali and M. Sampietro, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6829–6833 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Layani, A. Kamyshny and S. Magdassi, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 5581–5591 RSC .
J. C. Batchelor, E. A. Parker, J. A. Miller, V. Sanchez-Romaguera and S. G. Yeates, Electron. Lett., 2009, 45, 7–8 CrossRef .
B. M. Turki, E. A. Parker, J. C. Batchelor, M. A. Ziai, V. Sanchez-Romaguera and S. G. Yeates, Electron. Lett., 2013, 49, 1054–1055 CrossRef .
S. Kim, B. Cook, T. R. Le, J. Cooper, H. Lee, V. Lakafosis, R. Vyas, R. Moro, M. Bozzi, A. Georgiadis, A. Collado and M. M. Tentzeris, IET Microwaves Antennas & Propagation, 2013, 7, 858–868 Search PubMed .
J. Perelaer and U. S. Schubert, J. Mater. Res., 2013, 28, 564–573 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yang, C. P. Wong and M. M. F. Yuen, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 4052–4069 RSC .
D. Wakuda, M. Hatamura and K. Suganuma, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2007, 441, 305–308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wakuda, K.-S. Kim and K. Suganuma, IEEE Trans. Compon. Packag. Technol., 2009, 32, 627–632 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Coutts, M. B. Cortie, M. J. Ford and A. M. McDonagh, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 1325–1328 CAS .
S. Magdassi, M. Grouchko, O. Berezin and A. Kamyshny, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1943–1948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Grouchko, A. Kamyshny, C. F. Mihailescu, D. F. Anghel and S. Magdassi, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 3354–3359 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Layani and S. Magdassi, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 15378–15382 RSC .
P. F. Moonen, E. Bat, W. P. Voorthuijzen and J. Huskens, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 18498–18505 RSC .
M. Layani, M. Grouchko, S. Shemesh and S. Magdassi, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 14349–14352 RSC .
Y. Tang, W. He, G. Zhou, S. Wang, X. Yang, Z. Tao and J. Zhou, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 355304 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Olkkonen, J. Leppäniemi, T. Mattila and K. Eiroma, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 3577–3582 RSC .
Y. H. Long, J. J. Wu, H. Wang, X. L. Zhang, N. Zhao and J. A. Xu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 4875–4881 RSC .
M. Layani, I. Cooperstein and S. Magdassi, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 3244–3249 RSC .
C. N. Chen, C. P. Chen, T. Y. Dong, T. C. Chang, M. C. Chen, H. T. Chen and I. G. Chen, Acta Mater., 2012, 60, 5914–5924 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Allen, J. Leppäniemi, M. Vilkman, A. Alastalo and T. Mattila, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 475204 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Andersson, A. Manuilskiy, C. Lidenmark, J. Gao, T. Öhlund, S. Forsberg, J. Örtegren, W. Schmidt and H. E. Nilsson, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 455203 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Unander and H. E. Nilsson, IEEE Sens. J., 2009, 9, 922–928 CrossRef .
H. Andersson, A. Manuilskiy, T. Unander, C. Lidenmark, S. Forsberg and H.-E. Nilsson, IEEE Sens. J., 2012, 12, 1901–1905 CrossRef .
P. J. Smith and A. Morrin, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 10965–10970 RSC .
S. M. Bidoki, D. M. Lewis, M. Clark, A. Vakorov, P. A. Millner and D. McGorman, J. Micromech. Microeng., 2007, 17, 967–974 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Bidoki, J. Nouri and A. A. Heidari, J. Micromech. Microeng., 2010, 20, 055023 CrossRef .
D. P. Li, D. Sutton, A. Burgess, D. Graham and P. D. Calvert, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 3719–3724 RSC .
Z. K. Kao, Y. H. Hung and Y. C. Liao, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 18799–18803 RSC .
Z. K. Kao, S. P. Chen, J. L. Lin and Y. C. Liao, J. Taiwan Inst. Chem. Eng., 2012, 43, 965–970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. P. Chen, Z. K. Kao, J. L. Lin and Y. C. Liao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 7063–7067 Search PubMed .
S. Kheawhom and K. Foithong, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2013, 52, 05DB14-01–05DB14-05 CrossRef .
M. Abulikemu, E. H. Da'as, H. Haverinen, D. Cha, M. A. Malik and G. E. Jabbour, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 420–423 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Wu, S. L. C. Hsu, M. H. Tsai and W. S. Hwang, Thin Solid Films, 2009, 517, 5913–5917 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. B. Walker and J. A. Lewis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 1419–1421 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D.-Y. Shin, J. W. Han and S. Chun, Nanoscale, 2013, 6, 630–637 RSC .
M. Hummelgård, R. Zhang, H.-E. Nilsson and H. Olin, PLoS One, 2011, 6, e17209 Search PubMed .
M. L. Allen, M. Aronniemi, T. Mattila, A. Alastalo, K. Ojanperä, M. Suhonen and H. Seppä, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 175201 CrossRef PubMed .
D. A. Roberson, R. B. Wicker and E. MacDonald, J. Electron. Mater., 2012, 41, 2553–2566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Werner, D. Godlinski, V. Zollmer and M. Busse, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2013, 24, 4367–4377 CrossRef CAS .
M. Allen, A. Alastalo, M. Suhonen, T. Mattila, J. Leppäniemi and H. Seppä, IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., 2011, 59, 1419–1429 CrossRef .
S. Jang, D. J. Lee, D. Lee and J. H. Oh, Thin Solid Films, 2013, 546, 157–161 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Park, S. Jang, D. J. Lee, J. Oh and H. S. Kim, J. Micromech. Microeng., 2013, 23, 015013 CrossRef .
H. Andersson, A. Rusu, A. Manuilskiy, S. Haller, S. Ayoz and H. E. Nilsson, Microelectron. J., 2011, 42, 21–27 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Leppäniemi, M. Aronniemi, T. Mattila, A. Alastalo, M. Allen and H. Seppä, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 2011, 58, 151–159 CrossRef .
M. Allen, M. Aronniemi, T. Mattila, P. Helistö, H. Sipola, A. Rautiainen, J. Leppäniemi, A. Alastalo, R. Korhonen and H. Seppä, Microelectron. Eng., 2011, 88, 2941–2945 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Leppäniemi, T. Mattila, T. Kololuoma, M. Suhonen and A. Alastalo, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 305204 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Tendero, C. Tixier, P. Tristant, J. Desmaison and P. Leprince, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2006, 61, 2–30 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Paschen, Ann. Phys., 1889, 273, 69–96 CrossRef .
D. Pappas, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2011, 29, 020801 Search PubMed .
D. Merche, N. Vandencasteele and F. Reniers, Thin Solid Films, 2012, 520, 4219–4236 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Crowther and J. P. S. Badyal, Adv. Mater., 1998, 10, 407–411 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Crowther and J. P. S. Badyal, Aust. J. Chem., 2012, 65, 1139–1144 CrossRef CAS .
V. Bromberg, S. Ma, F. D. Egitto and T. J. Singler, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 6842–6849 RSC .
I. Reinhold, C. E. Hendriks, R. Eckardt, J. M. Kranenburg, J. Perelaer, R. R. Baumann and U. S. Schubert, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 3384–3388 RSC .
S. Wünscher, S. Stumpf, A. Teichler, O. Pabst, J. Perelaer, E. Beckert and U. S. Schubert, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 24569–24576 RSC .
S. Wünscher, S. Stumpf, J. Perelaer and U. S. Schubert, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 1642–1649 RSC .
S. Ma, V. Bromberg, L. Liu, F. D. Egitto, P. R. Chiarot and T. J. Singler, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2014, 293, 207–215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Kim, J. O. Bang, Y. H. Choa and S. B. Jung, Microelectron. Eng., 2013, 107, 121–124 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Pabst, J. Perelaer, E. Beckert, U. S. Schubert, R. Eberhardt and A. Tünnermann, Org. Electron., 2013, 14, 3423–3429 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Moores and F. Goettmann, New J. Chem., 2006, 30, 1121–1132 RSC .
K. L. Kelly, E. Coronado, L. L. Zhao and G. C. Schatz, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 668–677 CrossRef CAS .
J. Z. Zhang and C. Noguez, Plasmonics, 2008, 3, 127–150 CrossRef CAS .
Y. B. Li, T. Verbiest, R. Strobbe and I. F. J. Vankelecom, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 3182–3189 CAS .
A. O. Govorov and H. H. Richardson, Nano Today, 2007, 2, 30–38 CrossRef .

          J. West, M. Carter, S. Smith and J. Sears, in Sintering – Methods and Products, ISBN 978-953-51-0371-4, InTech,  2012 Search PubMed .
A. Vogler and H. Kunkely, Comments Inorg. Chem., 1997, 19, 283–306 CrossRef CAS .
E. C. Garnett, W. S. Cai, J. J. Cha, F. Mahmood, S. T. Connor, M. G. Christoforo, Y. Cui, M. D. McGehee and M. L. Brongersma, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 241–249 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Maekawa, K. Yamasaki, T. Niizeki, M. Mita, Y. Matsuba, N. Terada and H. Saito, IEEE Trans. Compon., Packag., Manuf. Technol., 2012, 2, 868–877 CrossRef CAS .
A. Denneulin, A. Blayo, C. Neuman and J. Bras, J. Nanopart. Res., 2011, 13, 3815–3823 CrossRef CAS .
M. Cherrington, T. C. Claypole, D. Deganello, I. Mabbett, T. Watson and D. Worsley, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 7562–7564 RSC .
D. Tobjörk, H. Aarnio, P. Pulkkinen, R. Bollström, A. Määttänen, P. Ihalainen, T. Mäkelä, J. Peltonen, M. Toivakka, H. Tenhu and R. Österbacka, Thin Solid Films, 2012, 520, 2949–2955 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Bollström, A. Määttänen, D. Tobjörk, P. Ihalainen, N. Kaihovirta, R. Österbacka, J. Peltonen and M. Toivakka, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 1020–1023 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Ihalainen, A. Määttänen, J. Järnström, D. Tobjörk, R. Österbacka and J. Peltonen, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2012, 51, 6025–6036 CrossRef CAS .
A. Määttänen, U. Vanamo, P. Ihalainen, P. Pulkkinen, H. Tenhu, J. Bobacka and J. Peltonen, Sens. Actuators, B, 2013, 177, 153–162 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Sarfraz, A. Määttänen, P. Ihalainen, M. Keppeler, M. Lindén and J. Peltonen, Sens. Actuators, B, 2012, 173, 868–873 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Sarfraz, D. Tobjörk, R. Österbacka and M. Lindén, IEEE Sens. J., 2012, 12, 1973–1978 CrossRef CAS .
P. Ihalainen, H. Majumdar, A. Määttänen, S. X. Wang, R. Österbacka and J. Peltonen, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 2013, 1830, 4391–4397 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Määttänen, P. Ihalainen, P. Pulkkinen, S. Wang, H. Tenhu and J. Peltonen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 955–964 Search PubMed .
S. F. Jahn, T. Blaudeck, R. R. Baumann, A. Jakob, P. Ecorchard, T. Ruffer, H. Lang and P. Schmidt, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 3067–3071 CrossRef CAS .
S. F. Jahn, A. Jakob, T. Blaudeck, P. Schmidt, H. Lang and R. R. Baumann, Thin Solid Films, 2010, 518, 3218–3222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Fritsch, F. M. Wisser, K. Eckhardt, V. Bon, G. Mondin, B. Schumm, J. Grothe and S. Kaskel, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2013, 74, 1546–1552 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. R. Bieri, J. Chung, S. E. Haferl, D. Poulikakos and C. P. Grigoropoulos, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 82, 3529–3531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. X. Cai, X. Y. Zeng and J. G. Liu, J. Electron. Mater., 2011, 40, 301–305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Yoon, S.-M. Yi, J.-R. Yim, J.-H. Lee, G. Rozgonyi and Y.-C. Joo, Microelectron. Eng., 2010, 87, 2230–2233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Son, J. Yeo, H. Moon, T. W. Lim, S. Hong, K. H. Nam, S. Yoo, C. P. Grigoropoulos, D. Y. Yang and S. H. Ko, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Chiolerio, G. Maccioni, P. Martino, M. Cotto, P. Pandolfi, P. Rivolo, S. Ferrero and L. Scaltrito, Microelectron. Eng., 2011, 88, 2481–2483 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Lesyuk, W. Jillek, Y. Bobitski and B. Kotlyarchuk, Microelectron. Eng., 2011, 88, 318–321 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chung, N. R. Bieri, S. Ko, C. P. Grigoropoulos and D. Poulikakos, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2004, 79, 1259–1261 CAS .
T. Kumpulainen, J. Pekkanen, J. Valkama, J. Laakso, R. Tuokko and M. Mäntysalo, Opt. Laser Technol., 2011, 43, 570–576 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Ko, J. Chung, H. Pan, C. P. Grigoropoulos and D. Poulikakos, Sens. Actuators, A, 2007, 134, 161–168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Ko, H. Pan, C. P. Grigoropoulos, C. K. Luscombe, J. M. J. Fréchet and D. Poulikakos, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 141103 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Watanabe and T. Miyashita, J. Photopolym. Sci. Technol., 2007, 20, 115–116 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yeo, S. Hong, D. Lee, N. Hotz, M.-T. Lee, C. P. Grigoropoulos and S. H. Ko, PLoS One, 2012, 7, e42315 CAS .
J. W. Yun, K. G. Cho, B. J. Park, H. C. Kang, B. K. Ju and S. Kim, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 47, 5070–5075 CrossRef CAS .
Y. T. Cheng, R. H. Uang, Y. M. Wang, K. C. Chiou and T. M. Lee, Microelectron. Eng., 2009, 86, 865–867 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Chung, S. W. Ko, N. R. Bieri, C. P. Grigoropoulos and D. Poulikakos, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 84, 801–803 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. R. Bieri, J. Chung, D. Poulikakos and C. P. Grigoropoulos, Superlattices Microstruct., 2004, 35, 437–444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. R. Bieri, J. Chung, D. Poulikakos and C. P. Grigoropoulos, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2005, 80, 1485–1495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Y. Choi, D. Poulikakos and C. P. Grigoropoulos, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 13–15 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Son, J. Yeo, C. W. Ha, J. Lee, S. Hong, K. H. Nam, D. Y. Yang and S. H. Ko, Thermochim. Acta, 2012, 542, 52–56 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Peng, A. Hu and Y. Zhou, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2012, 108, 685–691 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yeo, G. Kim, S. Hong, M. S. Kim, D. Kim, J. Lee, H. B. Lee, J. Kwon, Y. D. Suh, H. W. Kang, H. J. Sung, J. H. Choi, W. H. Hong, J. M. Ko, S. H. Lee, S. H. Choa and S. H. Ko, J. Power Sources, 2014, 246, 562–568 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. An, S. Hong, S. Han, H. Lee, J. Yeo and S. H. Ko, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 2785–2789 Search PubMed .
D. G. Lee, D. K. Kim, Y. J. Moon and S. J. Moon, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 265702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hong, J. Yeo, G. Kim, D. Kim, H. Lee, J. Kwon, P. Lee and S. H. Ko, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 5024–5031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zenou, O. Ermak, A. Saar and Z. Kotler, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2014, 47, 025501 CrossRef .
B. Kang, S. Ko, J. Kim and M. Yang, Opt. Express, 2011, 19, 2573–2579 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Ko, H. Pan, C. P. Grigoropoulos, C. K. Luscombe, J. M. J. Fréchet and D. Poulikakos, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 345202 CrossRef .
S. H. Ko, H. Pan, D. Lee, C. P. Grigoropoulos and H. K. Park, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 49, 05ec03 Search PubMed .
C. Kullmann, N. C. Schirmer, M. T. Lee, S. H. Ko, N. Hotz, C. P. Grigoropoulos and D. Poulikakos, J. Micromech. Microeng., 2012, 22, 055022 CrossRef .
J. S. Kang, J. Ryu, H. S. Kim and H. T. Hahn, J. Electron. Mater., 2011, 40, 2268–2277 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          K. A. Schroder, Proc. NSIT Int. Nanotech. Conf.,  2011, p. 220 Search PubMed .
R. Abbel, T. van Lammeren, R. Hendriks, J. Ploegmakers, E. J. Rubingh, E. R. Meinders and W. A. Groen, MRS Commun., 2012, 2, 145–150 CrossRef CAS .
N. R. Kim, J. H. Lee, S. M. Yi and Y. C. Joo, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, K165–K169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. J. Guillot, S. C. McCool and K. A. Schroder, Proc. 12th Int. Conf. Nucl. Engin. IMECE12-87674,  2012, vol. 7, pp. 19–27 Search PubMed .
H. Habuka, A. Hara, T. Karasawa and M. Yoshioka, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., Part 1, 2007, 46, 937–942 CrossRef CAS .
W. H. Chung, H. J. Hwang, S. H. Lee and H. S. Kim, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 035202 CrossRef PubMed .
H. J. Hwang, W. H. Chung and H. S. Kim, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 485205 CrossRef PubMed .
S. R. Dhage and H. T. Hahn, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2010, 71, 1480–1483 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. Dhage, H. S. Kim and H. T. Hahn, J. Electron. Mater., 2011, 40, 122–126 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Marjanovic, J. Hammerschmidt, J. Perelaer, S. Farnsworth, I. Rawson, M. Kus, E. Yenel, S. Tilki, U. S. Schubert and R. R. Baumann, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 13634–13639 RSC .
H. A. Colorado, S. R. Dhage and H. T. Hahn, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2011, 176, 1161–1168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Hiller, S. Gutsch, A. M. Hartel, P. Löper, T. Gebel and M. Zacharias, J. Appl. Phys., 2014, 115, 134311 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Y. Yang, J. M. Hong, T. W. Kim, Y. W. Song, W. K. Choi and J. A. Lim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 1495–1501 CAS .
D. D. Liana, B. Raguse, L. Wieczorek, G. R. Baxter, K. Chuah, J. J. Gooding and E. Chow, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 8683–8691 RSC .
S. H. Park and H. S. Kim, Thin Solid Films, 2014, 550, 575–581 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          I. Reinhold, M. Müller, M. Müller, W. Voit and W. Zapka, Proc. NIP 28 Dig. Fabr.,  2012, pp. 424–430 Search PubMed .
J. Niittynen, R. Abbel, M. Mäntysalo, J. Perelaer, U. S. Schubert and D. Lupo, Thin Solid Films, 2014, 556, 452–459 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          T. Falat, B. Platek, J. Felba, A. Moscicki, A. Smolarek and K. Stojek, in Proceedings of the 4th Electronic System-Integration Technology Conference (ESTC),  2012, pp. 1–5 Search PubMed .
D. J. Lee, S. H. Park, S. Jang, H. S. Kim, J. H. Oh and Y. W. Song, J. Micromech. Microeng., 2011, 21, 125023 CrossRef .
K. C. Yung, X. Gu, C. P. Lee and H. S. Choy, J. Mater. Process. Technol., 2010, 210, 2268–2272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          K. A. Schroder and S. Farnsworth, Spec. Print. Worldwide,  2012, pp. 34–35 Search PubMed .

          R. Abbel, J. van den Boomen, T. Van Lammeren, T. de Koning, J. J. P. Valeton and E. R. Meinders, in Proceedings of the 2011 MRS Spring Meeting, San Francisco,  2012, 1323, 87–92 Search PubMed .
R. Abbel, P. Teunissen, E. Rubingh, T. Van Lammeren, R. Cauchois, M. Everaars, J. Valeton, S. van de Geijn and P. Groen, Trans. Mater. Res., 2014, 1, 015002 CrossRef .
J. Jiu, M. Nogi, T. Sugahara, T. Tokuno, T. Araki, N. Komoda, K. Suganuma, H. Uchida and K. Shinozaki, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 23561–23567 RSC .
J. T. Jiu, T. Sugahara, M. Nogi, T. Araki, K. Suganuma, H. Uchida and K. Shinozaki, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 11820–11828 RSC .
W.-S. Han, J.-M. Hong, H.-S. Kim and Y.-W. Song, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 395705 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Ryu, H.-S. Kim and H. T. Hahn, J. Electron. Mater., 2011, 40, 42–50 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-S. Kim, S. R. Dhage, D.-E. Shim and H. T. Hahn, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2009, 97, 791–798 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Mäkinen, H. Sillanpää, K. Östman, V. Palukuru, V. Pynttäri, T. Kanerva, J. Hagberg, T. Lepistö, H. Jantunen, M. Yang, P. B. Laxton, H. Arimura and R. Rönkka, Proc. IEEE, 2009, 2455 Search PubMed .
R. Dharmadasa, M. Jha, D. A. Amos and T. Druffel, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 13227–13234 CAS .
B. Y. Wang, T. H. Yoo, Y. W. Song, D. S. Lim and Y. J. Oh, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 4113–4119 CAS .

          H. Kang, E. Sowade and R. R. Baumann, in Proc. NIP 29 Dig. Fab.,  2013, pp. 494–497 Search PubMed .
H. Kang, E. Sowade and R. R. Baumann, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 1682–1687 CAS .

          I. Reinhold, W. Voit, I. Rawson, K. Martin, D. Pope, S. Farnsworth, W. Zapka and C. Munson, in Proc. NIP 29 Dig. Fab.,  2013, pp. 476–478 Search PubMed .
T. Araki, T. Sugahara, J. T. Jiu, S. Nagao, M. Nogi, H. Koga, H. Uchida, K. Shinozaki and K. Suganuma, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 11192–11197 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Hösel and F. C. Krebs, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 15683–15688 RSC .
D. Angmo, T. T. Larsen-Olsen, M. Jørgensen, R. R. Søndergaard and F. C. Krebs, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 172–175 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Amin, Q. Chen, L. R. Zheng and H. Tenhunen, Prog. Electromagn. Res., 2012, 130, 241–256 CrossRef .
K. J. Rao, B. Vaidhyanathan, M. Ganguli and P. A. Ramakrishnan, Chem. Mater., 1999, 11, 882–895 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fang, M. T. Lanagan, D. K. Agrawal, G. Y. Yang, C. A. Randall, T. R. Shrout, A. Henderson, M. Randall and A. Tajuddin, J. Electroceram., 2005, 15, 13–19 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. M. Anklekar, K. Bauer, D. K. Agrawal and R. Roy, Powder Metall., 2005, 48, 39–46 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kempe, C. R. Becer and U. S. Schubert, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 5825–5842 CrossRef CAS .

          I. Reinhold, Diploma Thesis, Eindhoven University of Technology and Technical University Chemnitz, Eindhoven/Chemnitz,  2008 .
C. Gabriel, S. Gabriel, E. H. Grant, B. S. J. Halstead and D. M. P. Mingos, Chem. Soc. Rev., 1998, 27, 213–223 RSC .
E. T. Thostenson and T. W. Chou, Composites, Part A, 1999, 30, 1055–1071 CrossRef .
P. Mishra, G. Sethi and A. Upadhyaya, Metall. Mater. Trans. B, 2006, 37, 839–845 CrossRef .
D. Agrawal, Trans. Indian Ceram. Soc., 2006, 65, 129–144 CrossRef CAS .

          D. K. Cheng, Theory and Applications of Transmission Lines, Field and Wave Electromagnetics, Addison-Wesley Co. Inc., Reading, MA,  1989, pp. 369–371 Search PubMed.
J. Ma, J. F. Diehl, E. J. Johnson, K. R. Martin, N. M. Miskovsky, C. T. Smith, G. J. Weisel, B. L. Weiss and D. T. Zimmerman, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 101, 074906 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Perelaer, B.-J. de Gans and U. S. Schubert, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2101–2104 CrossRef CAS .
J. Perelaer, M. Klokkenburg, C. E. Hendriks and U. S. Schubert, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4830–4834 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Perelaer, R. Abbel, S. Wünscher, R. Jani, T. van Lammeren and U. S. Schubert, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2620–2625 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Perelaer, R. Jani, M. Grouchko, A. Kamyshny, S. Magdassi and U. S. Schubert, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 3993–3998 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Cauchois, M. Saadaoui, A. Yakoub, K. Inal, B. Dubois-Bonvalot and J. C. Fidalgo, J. Mater. Sci., 2012, 47, 7110–7116 CrossRef CAS .
R. Roy, D. Agrawal, J. P. Chen and S. Gedevanishvili, Nature, 1999, 399, 668–670 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c4tc01820fThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:
Sebastian Wünscher	Sebastian Wünscher was born in Jena (Germany), in 1983. In 2011, he obtained his masters degree in applied chemistry from the Georg-Simon-Ohm University of Applied Sciences in Nuremberg (Germany). His studies included external industrial research at the Carl Zeiss Vision GmbH in Adelaide (Australia). His PhD studies under the supervision of Prof. Ulrich S. Schubert at the Friedrich Schiller University of Jena (Germany) and the University of Manchester (United Kingdom) include the fabrication of flexible electronics like sensors and electromagnetically active structures by means of inkjet-printing of metal containing inks and the development of alternative and low temperature sintering approaches.
Robert Abbel	Robert Abbel studied chemistry at the universities of Mainz (Germany) and Toronto (Canada). In 2004, he joined Bert Meijer's group at the Eindhoven University of Technology (The Netherlands) for his graduation research on the supramolecular chemistry of π-conjugated oligomers. Since 2009, he has been working in Holst Centre's technology program “Printed Functional Structures on Flexible Substrates”, where he is responsible for materials and process development for the Printed Electronics industry. His core research activities within that program involve conductive inkjet inks and photonic flash sintering.
Jolke Perelaer	Jolke Perelaer obtained his masters in chemistry from the University of Utrecht, the Netherlands. After finishing his PhD in 2009 in the group of Prof. Ulrich Schubert (Eindhoven University of Technology, the Netherlands) with the focus on the inkjet printing of (conductive) microstructures, he continued his work with Prof. Schubert as project manager of the inkjet-group at the Friedrich Schiller University in Jena, Germany. In 2013, he moved to the publisher Wiley-VCH in Weinheim, Germany, where he is a commissioning editor, focusing on materials science related projects. Within a year he acquired a number of new book projects that focus on inkjet-printing.
Ulrich S. Schubert	Ulrich S. Schubert was born in Tübingen (Germany) in 1969. He studied chemistry in Frankfurt and Bayreuth (both Germany) and the Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond (USA). His PhD studies were performed at the Universities of Bayreuth and South Florida/Tampa. After postdoctoral training with J.-M. Lehn at the University in Strasbourg (France), he moved to the TU München (Germany) and obtained his Habilitation in 1999. In 1999–2000 he was a professor at the Center for NanoScience, University of Munich (Germany), and in 2000–2007 Full-Professor at TU Eindhoven. Currently he holds a chair at the Friedrich-Schiller-University Jena (Germany).

Polycarbonate	PC	147
Poly(ethylene naphthalate)	PEN	125
Poly(ethylene terephthalate)	PET	62
Polyimide	PI	222
Poly(ether ether ketone)	PEEK	147
Poly(ether sulfone)	PES	210
Poly(vinyl chloride)	PVC	80
Polypropylene	PP	0 (100 °C softening temperature)

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of OPV device architectures including inkjet-printed current collecting grids (CCG) (a), inkjet-printed UHF-RFID antenna on PET foil (b) and inkjet printed UHF RFID tag upon transfer onto the body (c). Reprinted with permission from Elsevier,56 Materials Research Society64 and The Royal Society of Chemistry.63	 

 	Fig. 2  Sketch of the inkjet-printed capacitor and the resistor for different sensing applications (a) and assembly of a super inkjet printed 3D zinc–silver microbattery (b). © IOP Publishing. Reproduced by permission of IOP Publishing. All rights reserved.69,75 Sketch and micrograph of an inkjet printed photodetector (c). Reproduced with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.79	 

 	Fig. 3  Potential mechanism of the replacement of the stabilizer PAA by chloride ions inducing the loss of steric repulsion between Ag NPs and coalescence. Reproduced with permission from M. Grouchko et al., ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 3354–3359. Copyright (2011) American Chemical Society.90	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic representation of the sequential inkjet printing process of a Ag NP ink followed by printing a NaCl solution as a sintering agent (left). Reproduced with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.93 Fabrication of electroluminescent device by utilizing PDAC as a chemical sintering agent (right). Reproduced with permission from S. Magdassi et al., ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1943–1948. Copyright (2010) American Chemical Society.89	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic representation of a reactive inkjet-printing process using a Au precursor ink and an ink incorporating a reducing agent to form the zerovalent metal directly on the substrate. Reproduced with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.111	 

 	Fig. 6  Sketch of contactless alternating current (AC) rapid electrical sintering (RES) of a printed Ag NP ink (a), demonstration of selective sintering via RES (b and c). © IOP Publishing. Reproduced by permission of IOP Publishing. All rights reserved.116 Image of the printed memory device (d) and close-up of the bit (fuse-like) used for local electrical sintering (e). Reprinted with permission from Elsevier.122	 

 	Fig. 7  Photographs of the process of single pass plasma sintering using an atmospheric pressure plasma tool (top), cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of a Ag NP ink after printing and after single pass plasma sintering (bottom). Reproduced with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.134,135	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic illustration of the APPS equipment used for plasma sintering of a Cu NP ink, performed in two stages (oxygen and hydrogen plasma treatment). Reprinted with permission from Elsevier.137	 

 	Fig. 9  Inkjet printed actuator (left) with piezoelectric polymer sandwiched between two plasma sintered Ag electrodes (right). Reprinted with permission from Elsevier.138	 

 	Fig. 10  DNA detection platform based on plasma sintered Ag electrodes (top left), results of DNA analysis via electrical and optical read-out (top right) and mechanism of DNA hybridization (bottom). Reprinted with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.48	 

 	Fig. 11  Normalised UV-vis absorption spectra of commonly used building blocks of conductive inks (a). UV-vis absorption spectra of Ag NP inks at various film thicknesses (b).144 UV-vis absorption spectra of commonly used substrates for printed electronic applications (c). Normalised emission spectrum of a typical Xe stroboscope lamp (d). © 2012 Jeff West, Michael Carter, Steve Smith and James Sears. Originally published in Sintering – Methods and Products by InTech under CC BY 3.0 license.	 

 	Fig. 12  Illustration of high resolution patterning by means of selective laser sintering of a Ag NP on a polymer substrate ink followed by a solvent based removal of unaffected ink. Reproduced with permission from Public Library of Science (PLOS).172	 

 	Fig. 13  Schematic diagram for the process of Ag NP ink deposition on PET foil and annealing by rapid scanning of the focused laser beam using galvano-mirror and telecentric lens (top). Illustration of optical experimental setup. Inset image shows the digital image of as-deposited Ag NP ink pattern on PET by R2R process (bottom). Reprinted with permission from Elsevier.181	 
τink ≪ tpulse ≪ τfoil	(1)
τink = cinkρinkxink2/4κink	(2)
τfoil = cfoilρfoilxfoil2/4κfoil	(3)

 	Fig. 14  Physical principles involved in IPL sintering of an absorbing conductive ink on a transparent substrate (a). Calculated surface temperature of a Cu layer as a function of time during flash illumination (b). Calculated temperature distributions into the depth of a Cu layer during flash illumination (c). Reproduced with permission from ASME Digital Collection.194	 

 	Fig. 15  Construction principle of an in-line resistance measurement during flash sintering (a). Experimental result obtained with this setup (b). © IOP Publishing. Reproduced by permission of IOP Publishing. All rights reserved.196 Construction principle of a probe for in-line temperature measurement during flash sintering (c). Experimental result obtained with this setup (d). Reprinted with permission from Materials Research Society.192	 

 	Fig. 16  Microstructures and electric resistivities of Cu complex inks after flash sintering at different energy densities. Reproduced with permission from B. Y. Wang et al., ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 4113–4119. Copyright (2013) American Chemical Society.221	 

 	Fig. 17  R2R IPL sintering equipment described by Abbel et al. (a). © IOP Publishing. Reproduced by permission of IOP Publishing. All rights reserved.213 Schematic representation of the R2R manufacturing line described by Hösel et al. (b). Reproduced with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.226 Flash sintering of printed Ag inks on foil in a R2R line (c). Reproduced with permission Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.227	 

 	Fig. 18  
JV curves of organic solar cells containing current collecting grids of printed Ag ink subjected to thermal or IPL sintering (a and b).56,227 Calculated electric potential fields for current collecting grids prepared by thermal (top) and IPL (bottom) sintering.56 Reprinted with permission from Elsevier56 and Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.227	 
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)
	(7)

 	Fig. 19  Microwave energy absorption as a function of electrical conductivity. Derived from Agrawal et al.237	 

 	Fig. 20  A previously unheated sample (left) is heated rapidly by induced eddy currents (represented by the arrows in the particles), while exposed to a microwave H-field. As the particles are heated, contacts are formed (necking), the sample densifies, and becomes presintered within seconds (right). At this stage, the fractional volume of the compact subject to eddy currents is reduced. Reprinted with permission from J. Ma, J. F. Diehl, E. J. Johnson, K. R. Martin, N. M. Miskovsky, C. T. Smith, G. J. Weisel, B. L. Weiss and D. T. Zimmerman, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 101, 074906. Copyright [2007], AIP Publishing LLC.239	 

 	Fig. 21  Conductance as a function of time for the microwave sintering of silver tracks on PI foil (a), schematic representation of the printed template including four conductive Ag antennas and a single silver line inkjet printed on top (b). Reproduced with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.240,242	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c4tc01820f

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
