Metal oxide photoanodes for solar hydrogen production   - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B718644D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B718644D
(Highlight)
J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 2298-2303Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsMetal oxide photoanodes for solar hydrogen production†

        
          
            Bruce D. 
            Alexander
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Pawel J. 
            Kulesza
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Iwona 
            Rutkowska
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Renata 
            Solarska
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Jan 
            Augustynski
          
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Chemistry, University of Warsaw, PL-02-093, Warsaw, Poland
bSchool of Science, University of Greenwich, Central Avenue, Chatham Maritime, Kent, UK ME4 4TB
cLaboratory for High Performance Ceramics, Empa - Swiss Federal Laboratories for Materials Testing & Research, CH - 8600, Dübendorf, Switzerland
Received 
      3rd December 2007
    , Accepted 1st February 2008First published on 14th March 2008AbstractThe development of sustainable hydrogen production is a key target in the further facilitation of a hydrogen economy. Solar hydrogen generation through the photolytic splitting of water sensitised by semiconductor materials is attractive as it is both renewable and does not lead to problematic by-products, unlike current hydrogen sources such as natural gas. Consequently, the development of these semiconductor materials has undergone considerable research since their discovery over 30 years ago and it would seem prescient to review the more practical results of this research. Among the critical factors influencing the choice of semiconductor material for photoelectrolysis of water are the band-gap energies, flat band potentials and stability towards photocorrosion; the latter of these points directs us to focus on metal oxides. Careful design of thin films of photocatalyst material can eliminate potential routes of losses in performance, i.e., recombination at grain boundaries. Methods to overcome these problems are discussed such as coupling a photoanode for photolysis of water to a photovoltaic cell in a “tandem cell” device.Bruce D. AlexanderFollowing his PhD at the University of Dundee, Bruce Alexander moved to the University of Geneva to begin work with Jan Augustynski. He is now a lecturer in physical chemistry at the University of Greenwich where he is continuing his interest in photoelectrochemistry, surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy and computational chemistry, specifically applied to the structure of peptides.Jan AugustynskiJan Augustynski acted over several years as professor of chemistry at the University of Geneva in Switzerland. His research interests comprise passivity of metals, electrocatalysis and photoelectrochemistry with special focus on nanostructured materials. Since 2006 he has been with the Department of Chemistry, Warsaw University in Poland.
Semiconductor requirements
For more than 30 years the photo-electrolysis of water1 has caused continuous interest as a potential route to sustainable hydrogen production. Irradiation of semiconductor/solution interfaces with sunlight leads to water splitting. In most cases, a photo-electrolysis cell consists of an n-type semiconductor photoanode associated with a conventional metal cathode, as will be further discussed later. However, the choice of a suitable system is severely restricted by the fact that the only semiconductors that are photochemically stable in water are metal oxides. This is unfortunate as most semiconducting oxides have band-gap energies that are too large to allow efficient visible-light absorption and furthermore fail to exhibit suitable band energetics. As shown in Fig. 1, the potential of the conduction band, CB, edge of an ideal semiconductor should be more negative than the H+/H2redox potential. Similarly, the potential of the valence band, VB, edge should be more positive than that corresponding to the O2 evolution potential. These requirements are fulfilled by, for example, strontium titanate, SrTiO3 (Eg = 3.2 eV) and to a lesser extent by anatase TiO2 (Eg = 3.1 eV), the band gaps of which preclude, however, any significant solar light absorption. Titanium dioxide served to demonstrate the feasibility of photoelectrochemical water splitting for the first time1 and has subsequently prompted a large number of studies into the reduction of its band-gap energy to sensitise the oxide to visible portions of the solar spectrum.2 Although early investigations involving transition metal dopants demonstrated some extension of the photoresponse towards visible wavelengths,3,4,2 they also showed significant degradation of the conversion efficiencies within the fundamental absorption range of TiO2 due to increased electron–hole (e−–h+) recombination.5 More recently, a series of works describing the effects of doping TiO2 with non-metallic elements, namely carbon,6nitrogen7 and sulfur,8 have been published. In particular, reports of 8.35 % efficiency for photolytic water splitting (measured under illumination by a xenon lamp with a spectrum similar to AM 1.5) for C-doped rutile TiO2 films formed by oxidation of titanium metal in a natural gas flame6 provoked a lively discussion.9–14
 Fig. 1  Energetic band positions of an ideal water-splitting photocatalyst where the hydrogen and oxygen evolution potentials lie within the conduction and valence band levels. The redox potentials correspond to a solution of pH 7 and are given vs.SHE. 
Although the actual gain in solar water-splitting efficiency for either C- or N-doped TiO2 photoanodes seems to be in fact quite modest,12–15 similar doped oxides employed as powder suspensions exhibit promising visible-light activity for the photodegradation of organic contaminants.16,17 An interesting approach to enhance further the photoresponse of doped TiO2 involves a more efficient capture of visible light, which can be achieved through structuring of the film surface as illustrated by the results obtained with C-doped nanotubes.18,19
Shortening the band gap: problems and progress
There appears to be a broad agreement that an optimal semiconductor to be used for the cleavage of water in a photo-electrolysis cell should have a band-gap energy close to 2 eV. This would account, in addition to the thermodynamic water decomposition potential of 1.23 V, for overpotential and Ohmic drop losses.2 Therefore, considering the band-gap energy alone, hematite, α-Fe2O3, is an ideal candidate material as it has a band gap of 2–2.2 eV, thereby allowing visible light absorption up to 550–600 nm. This leads to a respectable maximum theoretical efficiency for water splitting of 12.9%.20 However, n-type α-Fe2O3 falls short of another important requirement (and does so by some way)—the CB edge should be more negative than the potential of H2 evolution. In fact, because of the combined effects of a flat-band potential that is too positive, and large recombination losses occurring in this material, the photocurrent onset potentials for O2 evolution are in the best cases (i.e., for doped films) ca. 0.8 V more positive than the potential of the reversible hydrogen electrode, RHE, in the same solution. This severely affects the amount of photocurrent attained at 1.23 V vs.RHE (which we set here as an upper potential limit) and also raises questions regarding the prospects for a radical improvement in practical water-splitting efficiency using α-Fe2O3 photoanodes. Photoelectrochemical characteristics for α-Fe2O3 photoanodes are typically found to have a marked dependence upon anode preparation conditions and the nature of dopant incorporated into the host lattice.20–24 This situation is illustrated by the recently reported dramatic improvement of the photoresponse of thin film α-Fe2O3 photoanodes through silicon doping.23,24 These α-Fe2O3(Si) films, prepared by atmospheric-pressure chemical vapour deposition exhibited pronounced dendritic nanostructures. On the other hand, for α-Fe2O3 films obtained either by spray pyrolysis22,25 or by reactive magnetron sputtering,20 doping with Ti was more effective at increasing the photocurrents than doping with Si. It is also worth mentioning that, in contrast to the aforementioned case of TiO2 photoanodes where the main motivation for doping was to extend the fundamental photoresponse of the semiconductor towards visible wavelengths, the mechanism by which the dopants enhance the photocurrents generated by the α-Fe2O3 photoanodes is still not completely understood.20 However, it is plausible, as suggested in ref. 20, that dopants such as Ti or Si act by decreasing the extent of recombination in α-Fe2O3 through passivation of grain boundaries.
Another semiconducting oxide capable of absorbing a sizeable portion of the visible spectrum is tungsten trioxide, WO3. Although the band-gap energy of WO3 (in the monoclinic form) is larger than that of α-Fe2O3, 2.5 eV compared to 2.2 eV, the photocurrent onset potential of WO3 is less positive, ca. 0.4 V vs.RHE. This reflects the almost generally applicable rule for semiconducting oxides whereby the decrease in band-gap is accompanied by a down-shift in the CB edge. This is related to the fact that the conduction band of these oxides has mainly d-band character, whereas the valence band is mainly O 2p in character. However, this “rule of thumb” is not valid for some mixed semiconducting oxides such as BiVO4 (Eg = 2.4 eV), in which the observed shift to a more negative potential of the valence band is assigned to the hybridization between the O 2p and Bi 6s orbitals.26 Nanostructured BiVO4 photoanodes were shown to exhibit significant (over 40%) incident-photon-to-current efficiencies, IPCEs, for oxygen evolution in the visible spectral range.26
Material improvements from organic additives
Despite their limited absorption of visible light which is restricted to the blue region of the solar spectrum, optimised WO3 film photoanodes deliver considerable water-splitting photocurrents that are close to 3 mA cm−2 under simulated 1.5 AM solar irradiation.‡ These mesoporous WO3 film photoanodes developed earlier in the author's laboratory27 have recently been improved through modification of the published sol–gel procedure.28 The precursor used for the deposition of mesoporous WO3 films consists of (poly)tungstic acid, freshly prepared by elution of a solution of Na2WO4 through the cation exchange column, and an organic structure-directing agent. After testing a wide range of additives, low molecular weight polyethylene glycol (PEG) 300 or 400 and mannitol gave the best photoelectrochemical performance of the WO3 films. Such compounds are known to form complexes with tungsten oxoanions. Consequently, during annealing the conversion of the initially formed xerogel into the monoclinic phase of WO3 takes place at higher temperatures (around 450 °C) with the simultaneous oxidation of organic residues. The WO3 films are usually formed by spreading a few drops of colloidal solution onto a conducting glass support and annealing at a minimum of 500 °C to form well-crystallised WO3. The 2–3 μm thick films are obtained by consecutive applications of the solution, each followed by an annealing step.
It is the presence of the organic additive, such as PEG 300 or mannitol, and the judicious choice of the precursor–additive ratio that allow tailoring of the size of the resulting WO3nanoparticles and film porosity. The strong influence of the structure-directing agents on the formation of WO3 films is illustrated by the SEM images in Fig. 2. The film produced from a polytungstic acid is uniformly porous with spherical features of varying diameters, in the range 30–100 nm. Larger particles have been visibly formed by the fusion of smaller particles at the annealing temperature of 550 °C. The morphology of the film prepared from a polytungstic acid without an additive consists of much larger irregular particles and pores.
 Fig. 2  
          Scanning electron micrographs of porous WO3 films formed by a sol–gel method from: (A) polytungstic acid and; (B) a polytungstic acid/PEG 300 precursor. Both samples were annealed at 550 °C. 
The XRD patterns of the films shown in Fig. 3 are consistent with a preferential orientation of the 200, 020 and 002 faces of WO3 crystallites parallel to the conducting glass substrate. Comparison of the XRD spectra of the WO3 films annealed at 500 °C and 550 °C revealed a large increase in the intensity of the main peaks for the films treated at higher temperatures. There is also a concurrent increase in the signal-to-noise ratio in the Raman spectra of the films.27,29 In turn, this improved crystallinity of the WO3 films markedly affects the amount of the observed photocurrent. Typical photoaction spectra for a ca. 2.5 μm thick WO3 film photoanode are depicted in Fig. 4. The IPCEs maximise at 400–410 nm reaching ca. 80% for the photo-oxidation of water from a 1 M H2SO4 solution and more than double in the presence of small organic molecules in the solution, the latter IPCE value greatly exceeds 100%. This is primarily due to the occurrence of photocurrent doubling and also to particularly favourable photo-oxidation kinetics of the organic species at WO3.30 These high IPCE values explain why, despite their narrower visible-light absorption range, mesoporous WO3 photoanodes afford larger steady-state photocurrents than similar α-Fe2O3 photoanodes. Photocurrent–voltage curves for ca. 2.5 μm-thick WO3 photoanodes irradiated with simulated AM 1.5 solar light, in 3 M H2SO4 and 0.5 M NaCl, are shown in Fig. 5. Photocurrents measured for WO3 photoanodes saturate at 1–1.2 V vs.RHE. In contrast, no such photocurrent saturation is observed for α-Fe2O3 photoanodes at potentials more negative of that where the dark-current becomes significant.21–24 This is consistent with the persistence of significant e−–h+ recombination over the whole potential range for α-Fe2O3 photoanodes before the occurrence of the conventional (i.e. in the dark) electrolysis of water.
 Fig. 3  
X-Ray diffraction pattern for a WO3 film prepared from a polytungstic acid/PEG 300 precursor and annealed at 550 °C. The patterns are consistent with a preferential orientation of the 200, 020, 002 faces. 
 Fig. 4  Incident photon-to-current efficiencies for a ca. 2.5 μm thick WO3 photoanode plotted against wavelength. The electrode was annealed at 550 °C. Curve a was recorded in a 3 M H2SO4 solution and curve b in 0.1 M CH3OH–3 M H2SO4. 
 Fig. 5  Photocurrent–voltage curves for a ca. 2.5 μm thick mesoporous WO3 film polarised anodically in a 3 M H2SO4 solution (curve a) or 0.5 M NaCl (curve b). The film was annealed at 550 °C. The photoanodes were irradiated with simulated AM 1.5 solar light. 
The outstanding photoelectrochemical performance of WO3 photoanodes under visible light illumination (which may seem counter-intuitive given the relatively large band gap of WO3) is primarily due to the mesoporous morphology of the films shown in Fig. 2. In fact, given the relatively small values of absorption coefficients31 that are typical of indirect-band-gap transition semiconductors, such as WO3, films with thicknesses of a few μm are required to maximise absorption of visible light with wavelengths close to the band edge. This renders the efficient separation of photogenerated electron–hole pairs complicated due to the relatively small hole-diffusion length in WO3, ca. 0.15 μm.31 This complication is obviated by the porous nanostructure of the films, consisting of particles smaller than 100 nm, which is entirely permeated by electrolyte. A second essential requirement is the avoidance of the occurrence of multiple inter-particle contacts in such films, thereby eliminating recombination at particle boundaries. This is accomplished by selection of film preparation conditions that allow formation of well-crystallised oxide nanoparticles and inter-particle grain boundaries.27
Enhancing performance by design: the tandem cell
All of the above considerations are exclusively concerned with photoanodes able to photo-oxidise water. This reflects the fact that most of the studies on solar hydrogen generation focus on the development of photoelectrochemical cells consisting of a semiconductor photoanode and a metal cathode. The association of an n-type semiconductor electrode with a p-type semiconductor electrode that act as a photoanode and photocathode, respectively, and have complementary absorption ranges remains an attractive prospect. However, this is hindered by the absence of polycrystalline photocathode materials that are both easy to prepare and stable under conditions of hydrogen evolution.32
One alternative is offered by the association of a photoelectrolysis cell (PEC), consisting of a semiconductor photoanode and a metal cathode, with a photovoltaic (PV) cell. The PV cell is intended to provide the bias voltage required to photolytically split water in the photoelectrolysis cell. From the very outset, the development of semi-transparent WO3 film photoanodes in the author's laboratory was oriented towards their application in such a tandem PEC/PV cell.33,34 As detailed above, none of the oxide semiconductor photoanodes have a sufficiently negative photocurrent onset potential to allow direct water splitting in the presence of a metal cathode. Furthermore, one can empirically say that the smaller the band-gap energy of the semiconductor, the larger an external bias is required to overcome the problem of an onset potential that is too positive. Inspection of the photocurrent–voltage curves in Fig. 5 shows an external bias (between the WO3 photoanode and Pt cathode) of the order of 1 V to be sufficient to allow such a PEC/PV “tandem cell” to deliver photocurrents close to the saturation value. Under such conditions an oxygen evolution photocurrent of ca. 3 mA cm−2 translates into a chemical (H2)-to-solar conversion efficiency of 3.6%. Such a tandem cell device involving two (optical) photosystems in series is represented schematically in Fig. 6.
 Fig. 6  Schematic representation of a twin PEC/PV device (tandem cell) used in water splitting under solar light irradiation. 
For optimal performance, the two superimposed photosystems should have different band-gap energies, and absorb complementary parts of the visible and near-infrared range of the solar emission spectrum. The cell on the left in Fig. 6 consists of a mesoporous metal oxide semiconductor film such as WO3 that is deposited on transparent fluorine-doped conducting SnO2 (F-SnO2) electrode and Pt metal cathode (in another version of the cell the cathode may consist of a transparent Pt-coated F-SnO2electrode). The first cell contains an aqueous electrolyte that is subjected to water photolysis. In the cell shown in Fig. 6, the light enters through the cell wall and then through the aqueous electrolyte and impinges on the mesoporous WO3electrode where the blue and green parts of the solar spectrum are absorbed. As the energy of absorbed photons in this region is higher than the band-gap energy of the WO3 semiconductor, electrons are excited into the conduction band leaving holes in the valence band. The conduction band electrons move to the transparent F-SnO2 current collector, i.e. the back contact. The remaining photogenerated holes oxidise water to form oxygen and protons. The yellow and red parts of the solar spectrum are transmitted through the first photocell and enter the second photocell, which is mounted behind the back wall of the first one. In this regard, good transparency of the mesoporous WO3electrode to the wavelengths larger than 550 nm27 will allow the PV cell to capture the maximum amount of irradiation in this region and is therefore of primary importance to ensure the efficient operation of the device. The selection criteria for the PV cell will depend upon the actual current and voltage demands of the PEC. While maximum oxygen evolution photocurrents for WO3 photoanodes do not exceed 3 mA cm−2 for 1 sun AM 1.5 irradiation, they may be twice as large in the case of photo-oxidation of moderately concentrated solutions of organic effluents. Both the dye-sensitised solar cell35 and (hydrogenated) amorphous silicon germanium (e.g., a-Si:H/a-SiGe:H) solar cells36 may be appropriate for use in a tandem device.
Conclusions and future developments
In summary, we have briefly reviewed the principal n-type semiconductor materials which appear to be the most serious candidates for use as photoanodes for water cleavage. The above discussion was restricted to metal oxide semiconductors with proven stability, i.e., chemical inertness and absence of photocorrosion under conditions of photo-oxidation of water. It has been shown that none of the presently available materials§ can afford direct splitting of water when associated with a metal cathode. Although some semiconducting oxides have band-gap energies that allow them to capture a non-negligible portion of the solar spectrum and which, in theory, are sufficiently large to photolytically split water, they are impeded by the energetically unsuitable positions of their band edges. The additional bias required to split water may be provided by a photovoltaic cell electrically connected with, and placed behind, a photo-electrolyser. Such a twin-cell configuration—the “tandem cell”—offers great flexibility with regard to the choice of PV cell. On the other hand, the choice of PEC seems to be restricted to WO3, α-Fe2O3 and possibly BiVO4 photoanodes. The hematite phase of iron oxide has the smallest band gap, but tungsten oxide offers a significantly less positive photocurrent onset potential and better photoconversion efficiency as shown by the large IPCE values. Moreover, WO3 photoanodes operate particularly efficiently in the presence of organic species in the solution that is to be photo-oxidised, accompanied by hydrogen generation at the metal cathode.
Future developments may involve expansion of the range of materials to include mixed oxide materials, such as BiVO4, as it has been suggested that modification of charge mobility may arise.26 Indeed, a number of perovskite semiconductors have demonstrated activity towards H2 production, such as K2La2Ti3O1041 or Sr2Ta2O7,42 and the performance of photoanodes made of these, or similar, materials may be of interest.
The tandem cell is not the sole way to overcome unfavourable band energetics associated with many photoanodic materials: photoelectrochemical cells may also be constructed from a photoanode in conjunction with a photocathode. Despite early reports of the increased theoretical maximum efficiency of such cells,43 their development has been substantially retarded by a lack of p-type semiconductor materials with low band-gap and chemical stability. Again, it is the latter of these problems which continues to present one of the greatest challenges to PEC development.
Acknowledgements
J.A. thanks the Swiss Federal Office of Energy for the continuing financial support over the period of his work at the University of Geneva. I. R. acknowledges support through the grant BW-175612.
References
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37 CAS .
K. Rajeshwar, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2007, 37, 765 CrossRef CAS .

Semiconductor Electrodes, ed. H. O. Finklea, Elsevier, Amsterdam,  1988 Search PubMed .
A. L. Linsebigler, G. Lu and J. T. Yates, Jr., Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 735 CrossRef CAS .
A. Monnier and J. Augustynski, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1980, 127, 1576 CAS .
S. U. M. Khan, M. Al-Shahry and W. B. Ingler, Jr., Science, 2002, 297, 2243 CrossRef CAS .
R. Asahi, T. Morikawa, T. Ohwaki, K. Aoki and Y. Taga, Science, 2001, 293, 269 CrossRef CAS .
T. Umebayashi, T. Yamaki, H. Itoh and K. Asai, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 81, 454 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fujishima, Science, 2003, 301, 1673a CrossRef .
C. Hägglund, M. Grätzel and B. Kasemo, Science, 2003, 301, 1673b CrossRef .
K. S. Lackner, Science, 2003, 301, 1673c CrossRef .
K. Noworyta and J. Augustynski, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2004, 7, E31 CrossRef CAS .
B. Neumann, P. Bogdanoff, H. Tributsch, S. Sakthivel and H. Kisch, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 16579 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Murphy, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 1326 CrossRef CAS .
G. R. Torres, T. Lindgren, J. Lu, C.-G. Granqvist and S.-E. Lindquist, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 5995 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sakthivel and H. Kisch, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 4908 CrossRef CAS .
T. Umebayashi, T. Yamaki, S. Tanaka and K. Arai, Chem. Lett., 2003, 32, 330 CrossRef CAS .
K. Shankar, M. Paulose, G. K. Mor, O. K. Varghese and C. A. Grimes, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2005, 38, 3543 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Park, S. Kim and A. J. Bard, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 24 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Glasscock, P. R. F. Barnes, I. C. Plumb and N. Savvides, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 16477 CrossRef CAS .
C. Jorand Sartoretti, M. Ulmann, B. D. Alexander, J. Augustynski and A. Weidenkaff, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2003, 376, 194 CrossRef .
C. Jorand Sartoretti, B. D. Alexander, R. Solarska, I. A. Rutkowska, J. Augustynski and R. Cerny, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 13685 CrossRef CAS .
I. Cesar, A. Kay, J. A. Gonzalez Martinez and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 4582 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kay, I. Cesar and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 15714 CrossRef CAS .

          C. Jorand Sartoretti, unpublished results.
K. Sayama, A. Nomura, T. Arai, T. Sugita, R. Abe, M. Yanagida, T. Oi, Y. Iwasaki, Y. Abe and H. Sugihara, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 11352 CrossRef CAS .
C. Santato, M. Odziemkowski, M. Ulmann and J. Augustynski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 10639 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Augustynski, M. Ulmann and R. Solarska, Patent WO 103 329 A2,  2005 Search PubMed .
R. Solarska, B. D. Alexander and J. Augustynski, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2004, 8, 748 CAS .
R. Solarska, C. Santato, C. Jorand Sartoretti, M. Ulmann and J. Augustynski, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2005, 35, 715 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Butler, J. Appl. Phys., 1977, 48, 1914 CrossRef .
O. Khaselev and J. A. Turner, Science, 1998, 280, 425 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Augustynski, G. Calzaferri, J. Courvoisier and M. Grätzel, Proceedings of the 11th World Hydrogen Energy Conference, ed. T. N. Veziroglu, C.-J. Winter, J. P. Baselt and G. Kreysa, DECHEMA, Frankfurt, Germany,  1996, p. 2378 Search PubMed .

          M. Grätzel and J. Augustynski, Patent WO 002 624,  2001 Search PubMed .
J. M. Kroon, N. J. Bakker, H. J. P. Smit, P. Liska, K. R. Thampi, P. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Grätzel, A. Hinsch, S. Hore, U. Wuerfel, R. Sastrawan, J. R. Durrant, E. Palomares, H. Pettersson, T. Gruszecki, J. Walter, K. Skupien and G. E. Tulloch, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2007, 15, 1 CAS .
A. Gordijn, R. J. Zambrano, J. K. Rath and R. E. I. Schropp, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 2002, 49, 949 CrossRef CAS .
P. Ritterskamp, A. Kuklya, M.-A. Wüstkamp, K. Kerpen, C. Weidenthaler and M. Demuth, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 7770 CrossRef CAS .
J. Augustynski, Struct. Bonding, 1988, 69, 1 CAS .
K. Maeda, T. Takata, M. Hara, N. Saito, Y. Inoue, H. Kobayashi and K. Domen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 8286 CrossRef CAS .
D. Lu, T. Takata, N. Saito, Y. Inoue and K. Domen, Nature, 2006, 440, 295 CrossRef CAS .
T. Takata, Y. Furumi, K. Shinohara, A. Tanaka, M. Hara, J. N. Kondo and K. Domen, Chem. Mater., 1998, 9, 1063 .
A. Kudo, H. Kato and S. Nakagawa, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 571 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Nozik, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1976, 29, 150 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† This paper is part of a Journal of Materials Chemistry theme issue on hydrogen storage and generation. Guest editor: John Irvine.‡ While oxygen is evolved at the photoanode, a stoichiometric amount of hydrogen is produced at the metal cathode. A 1 cm2 WO3 photoanode irradiated with simulated 1.5 AM solar light operates at a maximum photocurrent of 3 mA. This corresponds to the formation of ca. 50 μmol of H2 per hour. When comparing this figure with the performance of the best powder photocatalysts, the comparison should normally be made to powers with the same illuminated surface area as that of the photoanode.§ It is worth mentioning in this connection a recently discovered semiconductor photocatalyst: titanium disilicide. In an interesting and intriguing paper, the use of a TiSi2 powder suspension is described for the visible-light driven photolysis of water.37 While hydrogen is evolved under the irradiation of the photocatalyst, oxygen is initially stored at the oxidised TiSi2 surface and can be subsequently released by heating the reaction slurries above 100 °C. This observation is reminiscent of the peroxo-titanate species formed under analogous conditions at the surface of anatase TiO2.38 The intriguing aspect of this report lies in the broad range of band-gap energies observed for TiSi2, extending from 1.5–3.4 eV. Even for the smallest Eg = 1.5 eV, the band positions apparently still allow photosplitting of water. Another recently reported powder photocatalyst (recalled by one of the referees of this paper) permits direct visible-light water splitting: gallium–zinc oxo-nitride (Ga1−xZnx)(N1−xOx). Although the naked photocatalyst exhibits relatively low quantum efficiencies39 its effectiveness is dramatically improved by loading (Ga1−xZnx)(N1−xOx) with rhodium–chromium mixed oxide nanoparticles.40 Apparently, the crystalline Rh–Cr oxide acts principally as an oxygen evolution catalyst leading to overall quantum efficiencies exceeding 2% in the blue part of the spectrum (below 450 nm).This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2008
Table Content:
Bruce D. Alexander	Following his PhD at the University of Dundee, Bruce Alexander moved to the University of Geneva to begin work with Jan Augustynski. He is now a lecturer in physical chemistry at the University of Greenwich where he is continuing his interest in photoelectrochemistry, surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy and computational chemistry, specifically applied to the structure of peptides.
Jan Augustynski	Jan Augustynski acted over several years as professor of chemistry at the University of Geneva in Switzerland. His research interests comprise passivity of metals, electrocatalysis and photoelectrochemistry with special focus on nanostructured materials. Since 2006 he has been with the Department of Chemistry, Warsaw University in Poland.

 	Fig. 1  Energetic band positions of an ideal water-splitting photocatalyst where the hydrogen and oxygen evolution potentials lie within the conduction and valence band levels. The redox potentials correspond to a solution of pH 7 and are given vs.SHE.	 

 	Fig. 2  
          Scanning electron micrographs of porous WO3 films formed by a sol–gel method from: (A) polytungstic acid and; (B) a polytungstic acid/PEG 300 precursor. Both samples were annealed at 550 °C.	 

 	Fig. 3  
X-Ray diffraction pattern for a WO3 film prepared from a polytungstic acid/PEG 300 precursor and annealed at 550 °C. The patterns are consistent with a preferential orientation of the 200, 020, 002 faces.	 

 	Fig. 4  Incident photon-to-current efficiencies for a ca. 2.5 μm thick WO3 photoanode plotted against wavelength. The electrode was annealed at 550 °C. Curve a was recorded in a 3 M H2SO4 solution and curve b in 0.1 M CH3OH–3 M H2SO4.	 

 	Fig. 5  Photocurrent–voltage curves for a ca. 2.5 μm thick mesoporous WO3 film polarised anodically in a 3 M H2SO4 solution (curve a) or 0.5 M NaCl (curve b). The film was annealed at 550 °C. The photoanodes were irradiated with simulated AM 1.5 solar light.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic representation of a twin PEC/PV device (tandem cell) used in water splitting under solar light irradiation.	 
Footnotes
† This paper is part of a Journal of Materials Chemistry theme issue on hydrogen storage and generation. Guest editor: John Irvine.
‡ While oxygen is evolved at the photoanode, a stoichiometric amount of hydrogen is produced at the metal cathode. A 1 cm2 WO3 photoanode irradiated with simulated 1.5 AM solar light operates at a maximum photocurrent of 3 mA. This corresponds to the formation of ca. 50 μmol of H2 per hour. When comparing this figure with the performance of the best powder photocatalysts, the comparison should normally be made to powers with the same illuminated surface area as that of the photoanode.
§ It is worth mentioning in this connection a recently discovered semiconductor photocatalyst: titanium disilicide. In an interesting and intriguing paper, the use of a TiSi2 powder suspension is described for the visible-light driven photolysis of water.37 While hydrogen is evolved under the irradiation of the photocatalyst, oxygen is initially stored at the oxidised TiSi2 surface and can be subsequently released by heating the reaction slurries above 100 °C. This observation is reminiscent of the peroxo-titanate species formed under analogous conditions at the surface of anatase TiO2.38 The intriguing aspect of this report lies in the broad range of band-gap energies observed for TiSi2, extending from 1.5–3.4 eV. Even for the smallest Eg = 1.5 eV, the band positions apparently still allow photosplitting of water. Another recently reported powder photocatalyst (recalled by one of the referees of this paper) permits direct visible-light water splitting: gallium–zinc oxo-nitride (Ga1−xZnx)(N1−xOx). Although the naked photocatalyst exhibits relatively low quantum efficiencies39 its effectiveness is dramatically improved by loading (Ga1−xZnx)(N1−xOx) with rhodium–chromium mixed oxide nanoparticles.40 Apparently, the crystalline Rh–Cr oxide acts principally as an oxygen evolution catalyst leading to overall quantum efficiencies exceeding 2% in the blue part of the spectrum (below 450 nm).

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2008
