A review of current developments in non-aqueous redox flow batteries: characterization of their membranes for design perspective  - RSC Advances (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3RA00115F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3RA00115F
(Review Article)
RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 9095-9116A review of current developments in non-aqueous redox flow batteries: characterization of their membranes for design perspectiveSung-Hee Shin, Sung-Hyun Yun and Seung-Hyeon Moon*School of Environmental Science and Engineering, Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology (GIST), 123 Cheomdan-gwagiro, Buk-gu, Gwangju 500-712, Republic of Korea. E-mail: shmoon@gist.ac.kr;  Fax: +82-62-715-2434;   Tel: +82-62-715-2435Received 9th January 2013, Accepted 14th February 2013First published on 15th February 2013AbstractThe non-aqueous redox flow battery (RFB) is one of the emerging large-scale energy storage systems that may overcome the low energy density limited by breakdown of water at a high voltage in aqueous RFBs. Yet development of the non-aqueous RFB is at an early stage, so its components are not thoroughly understood. As a key component of non-aqueous RFBs, the role of the membrane is to suppress cross-contamination between the anolyte and catholyte confined in two separate compartments, and to transport the charge carrier ions selectively for the completion of the circuit during cell operation. In this review, recent studies on non-aqueous redox flow systems are summarized including redox couples, electrolytes, and systems including membranes. A focus is placed on comparison of battery performance in terms of the current and power density through membranes. In addition, we introduce syntheses and characterization of membranes used for non-aqueous RFBs.Sung-Hee ShinSung-Hee Shin completed her bachelor degree in Environmental Engineering from Chosun University of Korea in 2006. She received her master of science degree in Environmental Science and Engineering at Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology (GIST, Korea) in 2011. She is currently PhD candidate at GIST. She has studied fundamental electrochemical-methods for electrochemistry oriented sensors and energy conversion/storage systems. Her current research interests are multifunctional polymer electrolyte membranes for non-aqueous/aqueous redox flow batteries and highly stable lithium ion battery separators including ion transport phenomena through the membranes.Sung-Hyun YunSung-Hyun Yun received his bachelor degree in Environmental Engineering from University of Seoul in 2007. He completed his master of science degree in Environmental Science and Engineering from Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology (GIST, Korea) in 2009. He is PhD candidate at GIST and currently visiting student at Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, North Carolina State University (NCSU, USA). His current research focuses are on understanding and development of ion transfer nanochannels of polymer electrolyte membranes for electrochemical energy conversion and storage devices such as fuel cells, redox flow batteries, supercapacitors, and secondary lithium ion batteries.Seung-Hyeon MoonProfessor Seung-Hyeon Moon started his career in Energy Systems Division, Argonne National Laboratory in USA to develop bioseparation processes using electromembranes in 1990 after receiving PhD in Chemical Engineering, Illinois Institute of Technology. Since then, he has been working on synthesis, characterization, and process application of electromembranes. In GIST, he is performing membrane studies for a sustainable environment. He has published over 200 journal articles and holds 30 patents in this area. His recent interests are ionic transport through the electromembranes and nanoscale ion transport pathway particularly for energy conversion-storage systems.1. IntroductionRenewable energy resources as an energy policy have been of interest globally due to concerns over the energy crisis brought about through the increasing international oil price and the exhaustion of the limited supply of fossil fuels.1–4 Several renewable energy resources such as solar radiation and wind are dependent on intermittent natural energy sources; consequently, they lead to the limited provision of a stable electricity supply owing to the low quality of the electricity produced, and the mismatch that occurs between generation and consumption.5,6 In this regard, the development of large-scale energy storage systems in combination with renewable resources has attracted much attention as a route to solving the energy crisis. Among the various energy storage systems, the redox flow battery (RFB) is the most promising technology due to several advantages such as its large capacity, convenient operating temperature, long cycle life, and so on.7 On the other hand, the use of an aqueous electrolyte severely restricts the energy density as is determined by the cell potential that is constrained by the electrochemical stability window of water, while non-aqueous RFBs which can offer a higher density have drawn considerable interest from energy storage researchers in contrast to aqueous RFBs.8,9 Furthermore, non-aqueous organic electrolytes provide a wider potential window of operation due to the high solubility of various metal–ligand complexes in an organic solvent.10 Researchers have mainly focused on metal–ligand complexes as a redox couple.9,11–14 Yet it is hard to find intensive research into membrane development for non-aqueous RFBs over the past decade. As a key component, membranes must possess two main properties: prevention of undesirable cross-mixing of the negative and positive electrolytes to minimize self-discharge, while selectively conducting the charge carrier ions through the membrane to complete the redox circuit during the passage of current.15–17Since there are reliability issues associated with the lack of appropriate membranes to prevent the cross-over of electrolytes while allowing for the charge carrier ions to transport, employing better membranes is essential for non-aqueous RFBs systems. Non-aqueous RFBs are classified into three types of target systems according to the charge of reactive species present in each compartment. Therefore, understanding the target RFB system is of primary importance in order to explore development of corresponding membranes. In this regard, this review briefly covers the general principles of non-aqueous RFB systems in comparison to aqueous RFBs, and various types of non-aqueous RFBs are explained according to the redox couples including their membranes used in the literature. Finally, we discuss the various membrane preparation procedures for target non-aqueous RFB systems with characterization methods to evaluate the membranes. The main objective of this article is to suggest the criteria for the selection of suitable membranes and potential approaches to membrane preparation for a target non-aqueous RFB system.2. Principle and configuration of non-aqueous RFBs: comparison with aqueous RFBsNon-aqueous RFBs can be classified through their reactive species as redox couples and through the non-aqueous solvent as an electrolyte. The schematic diagram of a non-aqueous RFB is shown in Fig. 1. In the charge mode, the electrical energy produced by redox reactions is stored as chemical energy in separate electrolyte reservoirs. During discharge, the anolyte solution is pumped into the non-aqueous RFB system, and it flows through the porous electrode, and the reactive species dissolved in the anolyte reacts on the electrode to generate electrons, which are transported to the external circuit.5 The charge carrier species pass through an ion exchange membrane (or separator), which allows for the separation of the anolyte and catholyte compartments. The general redox reactions in the discharge mode can be represented as:  Cathode compartment: [MLn](z+x)+ → [MLn]z+ + xe−(1) Anode compartment: [MLn](z−y)+ + ye− → [MLn]z+(2)where M is a transition metal, L is a ligand, and n is the number of ligands. Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of a non-aqueous RFB. The schematic redox reactions of the reactive species and the ionic transport phenomena of the charge carrier ions are shown in Fig. 2 for aqueous and non-aqueous RFBs. The major differences between aqueous and non-aqueous RFBs are summarized in Table 1. The main difference is seen in terms of the electrolyte including the solvent and supporting ions. In general aqueous RFBs, strong acid solutions such as sulfuric acid18–20 and hydrochloric acid21,22 have frequently been used as the aqueous electrolyte, which serves to dissolve the reactive species; the electrical balance is achieved by the migration of protons across the membrane during cell operation. Thus, the conductivity of the proton is an important issue for aqueous redox flow systems. To improve proton conductivity, cation exchange membranes have been widely applied in aqueous RFBs.20,23,24 On the other hand, organic solvents (e.g. acetonitrile,25 propylene carbonate26) are used to dissolve various metal–ligand complexes as the reactive species in non-aqueous RFBs. Furthermore, the addition of ionic liquid as the supporting electrolyte is required to improve the conductivity of the electrolyte.27 In many systems, tetraethyl ammonium tetrafluoroborate (TEABF4) is used as a supporting electrolyte due to its compatibility with organic solvents.9,11,28 Since the anion of the supporting electrolyte (e.g. BF4− or PF4−) plays an important role as a membrane charge carrier in non-aqueous RFBs, an anion-exchange membrane is considered as a suitable separator for non-aqueous RFBs. In practical applications, the non-aqueous RFB stack is constructed by assembling several unit cells in series to meet a desired output voltage level. Fig. 2  Schematic redox reaction and ionic transport phenomena in (a) aqueous RFB and (b) non-aqueous RFB systems. 
Table 1 Comparison of aqueous and non-aqueous RFBs

 Aqueous RFB systemNon-aqueous RFB systemRedox coupleMetal ionTransition-metal complex(All-vanadium, Fe/Cr, Mn/V, etc.)MLn (M: transition metal, L: ligands)SolventH2OCH3CNSupporting electrolyteH2SO4, HClTEABF4, EMIPF6Membrane charge carrierH+BF4−, PF6−3. Types of non-aqueous redox flow cells3.1. Ruthenium complexes redox systemMatsuda et al. first proposed a non-aqueous redox system based on tris(2,2′-bipyridine) ruthenium(II) tetrafluoroborate (Ru(bpy)3(BF4)2) complexes in an organic solvent, acetonitrile (CH3CN), with tetraethylammonium tetrafluoroborate (TEABF4) as the supporting electrolyte.25,29 The redox reactions of Ru(V)/Ru(VI) and Ru(IV)/R(V) at the positive and negative electrodes take place, respectively, as shown in Fig. 3 (a). Positive electrode: [Ru(bpy)3]2+ ⇌ [Ru(bpy)3]3+ + e−, E0 = 1.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl(3) Negative electrode: [Ru(bpy)3]+ ⇌ [Ru(bpy)3]2+ + e−, E0 = −1.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl(4) Fig. 3  Non-aqueous redox flow systems: (a) ruthenium bipyridine, (b) ruthenium acetylacetonate, (c) vanadium acetylacetonate, (d) chromium acetylacetonate, (e) manganese acetylacetonate, (f) iron bipyridine/nickel bipyridine, (g) uranium acetylacetonate, (h) cobalt acetylacetone ethylenediamine, (i) TEMPO/N-methylphthalimide. The expected open circuit potential (OCP) between the two reactions is approximately 2.6 V. In this report, the influences of membrane (or diaphragm) materials such as sintered glass (a glass filter #4), an anion exchange membrane (AEM) (Neocepta ACH-45T, Tokuyama Soda), a porous polymer-hybrid membrane (MF-2508 or YS-UE02-4B, Yuasa Battery), and a porous fluorocarbon resin filter (polyfon PF-1 or PF-3, Toyo Roshi) in a non-aqueous RFB system were examined. A unit cell assembled with each membrane discharges at a constant current of 1 mA in the H-type cell after a 50% state of charge at a constant potential (1.1 V). The coulombic efficiency depends on the membrane types in the discharge mode. When a membrane—which has a small pore size or high selectivity—such as the polyflon filter (PF-3) was applied to the non-aqueous RFB, relatively higher efficiency was observed during cell operation. Moreover, the flow-type cell is prepared with carbon fiber cloth and an AEM under the optimum circulation rate of the electrolyte (0.18 cm3 s−1). This cell is also charged to reach the preset value of the cell potential (50% state of charge) under a constant voltage (3.0 V) and discharged at a constant current. The efficiency of the flow-type cell assembled with an AEM is 40%.25Another Ru complexes redox flow system—ruthenium acetylacetonate (Ru(acac)3) dissolved in acetonitrile containing TEABF4—was evaluated by Chakrabarti et al.30 in an H-type cell using graphite felt electrodes and an AEM (Neosepta® AHA, Eurodia Industrie SA). The Ru(acac)3 redox-flow cell shown in Fig. 3 (b) employs the Ru(III)/Ru(IV) redox couple at the negative electrode and the Ru(IV)/Ru(V) redox couple at the positive electrode. Positive electrode: [Ru(acac)3] ⇌ [Ru(acac)3]+ + e−, E0 = 1.27 V vs. AgQRE(5) Negative electrode: [Ru(acac)3]− ⇌ [Ru(acac)3] + e−, E0 = −0.50 V vs. AgQRE(6)The cell potential for this system is expected to be 1.77 V. The high efficiency of the ruthenium acetylacetonate system is achieved due to its high solubility and stability caused by the acetonitrile electrolyte. During the charging of the system, opposite charge species is generated, and there might have been some loss of efficiency due to cross-over through the AEM. However, the loss of efficiency due to the cross-over of redox couples affecting the coulombic efficiency is not so high because oppositely charged species generated during charging reverted to the same reactive species (Ru(acac)3). While ruthenium bipyridine and ruthenium acetylacetonate redox systems are different in terms of their charge species after charging, the charge species of both systems tend to revert to the same initial state of the electrolyte, resulting in improved efficiency of redox flow systems during discharge.3.2. Vanadium complexes redox systemVanadium acetylacetonate (V(acac)3) as a single metal for non-aqueous RFBs has been predominantly studied.8,31–33 The V(acac)3 redox flow system employing acetonitrile and TEABF4 shown in Fig. 3 (c) was developed to be an H-type cell assembled with graphite electrodes and an AEM (AMI-7001, Membrane International Inc., USA).31 There are three oxidation states for the redox reaction in this system, and the electrolyte containing V(acac)3 initially exists in both compartments (the anolyte and catholyte compartments). During discharge, V(acac)3 is oxidized to [V(acac)3]+ at the positive electrode (anode) and is reduced to [V(acac)3]− at the negative electrode (cathode); thus, the decline of coulombic efficiency caused by the cross-contamination of electrolytes is improved by using the same electrolyte in both compartments. The redox reactions at the negative and positive electrodes are as follows:  Positive electrode: [V(acac)3] ⇌ [V(acac)3]+ + e−, E0 = 0.46 V vs. Ag/Ag+(7) Negative electrode: [V(acac)3]− ⇌ [V(acac)3] + e−, E0 = −1.72 V vs. Ag/Ag+(8)The evaluated cell potential is approximately 2.18 V, and coulombic efficiencies of around 50% are observed at a 50% state of oxidation for the electrolyte. Since two redox couples revert to the same state of oxidation in the discharge mode, a higher cell potential and lower cross-over are obtained in the non-aqueous V(acac)3 redox system. In the same redox system, Shinkle et al. also used an AEM (Neosepta AHA, ASTOM, Japan) to separate the anolyte and catholyte.33 They investigated the water and oxygen effects on the performance of the system. The reduction of V(acac)3 is repressed on carbon, and the solvent and support electrolyte might have been degraded by oxygen. In addition, the kinetics of the negative V(acac)3 redox couple is impeded via the formation of vanadyl acetylacetonate by water. Thus, prior to cell assembly, the membrane is immersed in the electrolyte for a long time to remove any environmental water or oxygen in most experiments. Furthermore, the effect of the supporting electrolyte for the V(acac)3 redox system was recently investigated in an H-type cell assembled with an AEM (UltrexTM AMI-7001, Membranes international Ltd., USA) by Zhang et al.32 They synthesized and offered tetrabutylammonium hexafluorophosphate (TEAPF6) and 1-ethyl-3-methyl imidazolium hexafluorophosphate (EMIPF6) as the supporting electrolytes for improving the performance of the V(acac)3 redox system. The cell potentials for the TEAPF6 and EMIPF6 systems are 2.3 V and 2.4 V, respectively. These cell potential results in this report is higher than that of V(acac)3 system when using TEABF4 as the supporting electrolyte (2.18 V). In the other study, three electrode materials—i.e. glassy carbon, platinum, and gold—were explored for their application in non-aqueous V(acac)3 RFBs in the same electrolyte configuration as used in previous cases.8 The exchange-current densities measured on glassy carbon, platinum, and gold electrodes for the V(acac)3 reduction reaction were 1.3, 3.8, and 8.4 A m−2, respectively. The literature review highlighted how AEMs have been widely used for non-aqueous V(acac)3 redox flow cells due to the transport of the supporting electrolyte anion (BF4−) for ionic conductivity and the electroneutrality of non-aqueous systems.3.3. Chromium complexes redox systemAnother single-metal flow cell based on chromium(III) acetylacetonate (Cr(acac)3), shown in Fig. 3 (d), was initially developed by Liu et al.28 using acetonitrile supported by TEABF4. For the charge-discharge experiments, an H-type cell was prepared with a graphite electrode and an AEM (Neospeta AHA, Astom, Japan). The redox reaction of the Cr(III)/Cr(IV) redox couple at the positive electrode and the Cr(II)/Cr(III) redox couple at the negative electrode takes place as follows:  Positive electrode: [Cr(acac)3] ⇌ [Cr(acac)3]+ + e−, E0 = 1.2 V vs. Ag/Ag+(9) Negative electrode: [Cr(acac)3]− ⇌ [Cr(acac)3] + e−, E0 = −2.2 V vs. Ag/Ag+(10)The cell potential of the Cr(acac)3 redox-flow system is 3.4 V for an one-electron disproportionation. The coulombic and energy efficiencies are obtained in the range of 53–58% and 21–22%, respectively, at a 50% state of oxidation for the electrolyte. In this system, although it has a higher cell potential than an aqueous system, the solubility of Cr(acac)3 in acetonitrile might be a further challenge in improving the energy density.3.4. Manganese complexes redox systemThe all-manganese(III) acetylacetonate (Mn(acac)3) redox flow system in acetonitrile and TEABF4 was also investigated by Sleightholme et al.9 An H-type cell was assembled with the same electrode and membrane as the C(acac)3 redox system, developing novel redox couples using metal–ligand complexes. As shown in Fig. 3 (e), the redox reaction of the Mn(III)/Mn(IV) couple at the positive electrode and the Mn(II)/Mn(III) couple at the negative electrode are as follows:  Positive electrode: [Mn(acac)3] ⇌ [Mn(acac)3]+ + e−, E0 = 0.7 V vs. Ag/Ag+(11) Negative electrode: [Mn(acac)3]− ⇌ [Mn(acac)3] + e−, E0 = −0.4 V vs. Ag/Ag+(12)For a one-electron disproportionation of Mn(acac)3, a cell potential of 1.1 V and an efficiency of up to 21% were obtained. Since this cell potential is lower than other non-aqueous RFB systems that have previously been reported, further studies are needed to overcome the problems by modifying the ligands and solvents employed.3.5. Nickel and iron complexes redox systemA non-aqueous RFB employing tri(2,2′-bipyridine) nickel(II) tetrafluoroborate (Ni(bpy)3(BF4)2) and tri(2,2′-bipyridine) iron(II) tetrafluoroborate (Fe(bpy)3(BF4)2) was developed in a propylene carbonate (PC) solution and TEABF4.10 Its reactivity and kinetics for the electrochemical reaction according to electrode type (e.g. Pt, Ir, Ni, Cu, Mo, Nb, Co, and Ti) were evaluated by cyclic voltammetry (CV) which is the standard characterization method. The best reversible reactions of Ni(0)/Ni(II) and Fe(II)/Fe(III) take place at the Mo and Ni electrodes, respectively, as shown in Fig. 3 (f).  Positive electrode: [Fe(bpy)3]2+ ⇌ [Fe(bpy)3]3+ + e−, E0 = 0.4 V vs. Ag/Ag+(13) Negative electrode: [Ni(bpy)3] ⇌ [Ni(bpy)3]2+ + 2e−, E0 = −1.5 V vs. Ag/Ag+(14)The cell voltage difference between the two redox couples is 1.9 V. Therefore, when compared to Pt, some non-precious metals such as Ni and Mo have potential as electrodes for metal–ligand complex redox couples in non-aqueous RFBs. Samsung Electronics in South Korea also recently developed the same redox flow system using Ni(bpy)3(BF4)2 and Fe(bpy)3(BF4)2.26 The formal potential of Fe(II)/Fe(III) and Ni(II)/Ni(0) were discovered to be 0.65 V and −1.66 V on a glassy carbon electrode by CV, respectively. The cell potential of Ni and Fe complexes combined with tri(2,2′-bipyridine) is over 2.25 V. The charge-discharge characterization was performed in a flow-type cell consisting of carbon felt electrodes (Nippon Graphite, GF20-3, 25 cm2), an AEM (FAP4, FuMa-Tech Co.), and a dual electrolyte (e.g. 0.2 M Ni(bpy)3(BF4)2 and 0.4 M Fe(bpy)3(BF4)2) in PC with TEABF4 (0.5 M). It showed a higher initial coulombic value of 90.4% and EE of 81.8% when compared to the aqueous system.3.6. Uranium complexes redox systemA non-aqueous RFB using uranium complexes as the negative and the positive reactive material in polar aprotic solvents was proposed by Yamamura et al.14 In particular, uranium complexes were prepared by combining β-diketonates, which consists of ligands including hetafluoro-acetylacetone, heptafluorobutanoly-pivaloylmethane, pivaloyl-trifuoroacetone, acetylaetone, and dipivaloylmethane, and dissolving the complexes in polar aprotic solvents such as acetonitrile, PC, and so on. In this study, the solubility of U(VI) complexes higher than 0.8 M and that of U(IV) higher than 0.4 M are obtained due to high solubilities of the uranium β-diketonates in the polar aprotic solvents. The OCP is assumed to be approximately 1.0 V for the acac ligand by using the U(VI)/U(V) β-diketonates solution as the catholyte and the U(IV)/U(III) β-diketonates solution as the anolyte. The redox reaction is as follows in eqn (15) and (16) and is depicted in Fig. 3 (g).  Positive electrode: [UO2(acac)2]− ⇌ [UO2(acac)2] + e−, E0 = −1.45 V vs. Fc/Fc+(15) Negative electrode: [U(acac)4]− ⇌ [U(acac)4] + e−, E0 = −2.45 V vs. Fc/Fc+(16)It is reported that a larger OCP might be obtained if ligands with higher basicity are used. The charge-discharge test, however, is not demonstrated for a practical application in this report. Thus, it should be evaluated in a flow cell assembled with a membrane. The effects of ligands and solvents on the membranes should be investigated further.3.7. Cobalt complexes redox systemAs mentioned previously, metal–ligand complexes can be divided into two kinds of ligand complexes: acetylacetonate complexes and 2,2-bipyridine complexes. Recently, a third group of complexes, bis(acetylacetone)ethylenediamine complexes, has been developed, and a new single-metal redox flow battery utilizing a cobalt(II) bis(acetylacetone)ethylenediamine (Co(acacen)) electrolyte supported by TEAPF6 in acetonitrile has been pioneered by Zhang et al.34 The Co(acacen) redox system was evaluated configured with a graphite electrode and an AEM (AMI-7001). The redox reaction at the positive and negative electrodes was examined on a glassy carbon electrode as follows:  Positive electrode: [Co(acacen)] ⇌ [Co(acacen)]+ + e−, E0 = −0.2 V vs. Ag/Ag+(17) Negative electrode: [Co(acacen)]− ⇌ [Co(acacen)] + e−, E0 = −2.2 V vs. Ag/Ag+(18)The determined cell potential is approximately 2.0 V for one-electron disproportionation and coulombic efficiency of 90.24% was observed in cycle 5. Particularly, the effect of environmental factors such as temperature, oxygen, and water are evaluated in this report. From the experimental results obtained, it was discovered that oxygen and water cause degradation in the efficiency of non-aqueous RFB systems. Accordingly, the elimination of oxygen and water is essential for the operation of high-performance non-aqueous RFBs.3.8. All-organic redox systemAn all-organic RFB, which satisfies both the advantages of non-aqueous electrolytes and of electroactive organic compounds, was recently proposed to overcome the limitations of non-aqueous RFBs using metal–ligand complexes such as intricate complex preparation and the low solubility of redox couples.35 In this battery, 2,2,6,6,-teramethyl-1-piperidinylxy (TEMPO), and N-methylphthalimide dissolved in acetonitrile supported by NaClO4 are used as the catholyte and anolyte, respectively. As a battery model, the redox flow cell was assembled with graphite felts and a cation exchange membrane (CEM) (Nepem-117, BEST, China). The uniqueness of this approach is that the CEM is used for all-organic RFB to be compatible with the NaClO4-supporting electrolyte. The expected redox reaction mechanism of TEMPO and N-methylphthalimide is described in Fig. 4 (and Fig. 3 (h)). Fig. 4  Redox reaction mechanism of (a) TEMPO and (b) N-Methylphthalimide. The equilibrium cell potential was estimated to be approximately 1.60 V from CV tests, and stable charge-discharge characteristics and high coulombic efficiency of 90% (for the first 20 cycles) were observed through charge-discharge experiments. The all-organic RFB showed a strong potential for its application in the non-aqueous RFB field.3.9. Summary of non-aqueous RFB systemsSo far, we have looked at the various types of non-aqueous RFB systems through a literature survey. The general properties and features of the developed, non-aqueous RFBs are briefly described in Table 2. Most of the studies are concerned with the investigation and evaluation of redox couples that exhibit wider potential windows of operation than aqueous-based redox systems. Even though Mg and U complexes as redox couples were investigated for their application in non-aqueous systems, the obtained cell potentials were lower than those for aqueous systems. A larger OCP might be realized by a better combination of metallic ions and ligands. In the light of redox reactions in organic solvents shown in Fig. 3, it is found that the single-metal–ligand complex has been predominantly studied. In the case of a single-metal redox system, the same electrolyte is supplied to both the anode and cathode compartments of the redox-flow cell before cell operation; consequently, the oppositely charged species generated in charging can revert to the same oxidation state as the electrolyte in discharging (Fig. 3 (a), (b), (c), (d), (e) and (h)). The oxidized state of the reduced charge species tend to revert to the same oxidation state during discharging in order to improve the efficiency of the redox flow system. In practical applications, the charge-discharge operation is conducted under constant current conditions that are predetermined empirically. For the organic electrolyte, very low charging currents are chosen in an attempt to minimize ohmic losses and to appraise whether efficient charging could be achieved.30 The lower discharging currents lead to high significant cell potentials. In a generic non-aqueous RFB system, acetonitrile and TEABF4 have been mostly used as the solvent and supporting electrolyte, respectively. Acetonitrile is regarded as a better solvent because it can dissolve many organic reactive species; many organic redox couples are observed to have excellent electrochemical characteristics in acetonitrile compared to other organic solvents.27 In addition, lower ohmic loss is attained by the use of a high conductivity supporting electrolyte, TEABF4. To separate dual electrolytes, several commercial AEMs have been used for many non-aqueous systems as they are compatible with the supporting electrolytes used and they retard the undesired cross-mixing. Development of a specialized membrane for redox couples might lead to an improvement in the performance for non-aqueous systems in future.
Table 2 General features of the non-aqueous RFBs

No.RedoxElectrolyte conditionMembrane typeMembrane product nameElectrodeCell typeOCV (V)Charge Current density (mA cm−2)Discharge current density (mA cm−2)Charge/discharge Efficiency (%)References1[Ru(bpy)3](BF4)20.02 M [Ru(bpy)3](RF4)2/0.1 M TEABF4 in CH3CN1) Sintered glassa glass filter #4Carbon fibre cloth 2.6 5 252) Anion exchange membraneNeosepta ACH-45T, Tokuyama SodaFlow type cell50% charge at constant potential (3 V)40 (EE)(low electrical resistance)3) Porous polymer-hybrid membraneMF-2508 or YS-UE02-4B, Yuasa Battery   4) porous fluorocarbon resin filterPolyflon PF-1 or PF-3, Toyo Roshi   2Ru(acac)30.1 M Ru(acac)3/1 M TEABF4 in CH3CNAnion exchange membraneNeosepta AHA,Graphite felt electrodeH-type glass cell1.3—0.08457 (EE)30Eurodia Industrie SA3Ru(acac)30.02 M Ru(acac)3/0.1 M TEABF4 in CH3CNundivided RFB,—Graphite felt electrodeSingle cell stack1.7572—29polyprolene mesh4V(acac)30.01 M V(acac)3/0.5 M TEABF4 in CH3CNAnion exchange membraneAMI-7001,GC electrodeH-type glass cell2.22.20.247 (CE)11(Strongly basic anion permeable)Membrane International Inc., US5V(acac)30.01 M V(acac)3/0.2 M TEAPF6 in CH3CNAnion exchange membraneAMI-7001,Graphite electrodeH-type glass cell2.30.0830.00857 (CE) for cycle 4320.01 M V(acac)3/0.2 M EMIPF6 in CH3CNMembrane International Inc., US2.40.0830.00843 (CE) for cycle 46V(acac)30.05 M V(acac)3/0.5 M TEABF4 in CH3CNAnion exchange membraneNeosepta AHA,Graphite felt electrodeH-type glass cell1.70.140.014∼70 (CE)33(Strongly basic anion permeable)Astom, Japan∼35 (EE)7V(acac)30.01 M V(acac)3/0.05 M TEABF4 in CH3CN——Glassy carbon—2.00.130.13—8platinum0.380.38—Glod0.840.84—8Cr(acac)30.05 M Cr(acac)3/0.5 M TEABF4 in CH3CNAnion exchange membraneNeosepta AHA,Graphite electrodeH-type glass cell3.40.140.01455 (CE)12(Strongly basic anion permeable)Astom, Japan20 (EE)9Mn(acac)30.05 M Mn(acac)3/0.5 M TEABF4 in CH3CNAnion exchange membraneNeosepta AHA,GC electrodeH-type glass cell1.10.140.05797 (CE) for cycle 109(Strongly basic anion permeable)Astom, Japan∼21 (EE)10Ni(bpy)3/Fe(bpy)3Anolyte: 0.1 M Ni(bpy)3/0.5 M TEABF4 in propylene carbonate——Mo electrode—1.9———10Catholyte: 0.2 M Fe(bpy)3/0.5 M TEABF4 in propylene carbonateNi electrode11Ni(bpy)3/Fe(bpy)3Anolyte: 0.2 M Ni(bpy)3/0.5 M TEABF4 in propylene carbonateAnion exchange membraneFAP4, FuMa-Tech Co.Graphite felt electrodeHomemade flowing-type cell2.250.80.890.4 (CE)26Catholyte: 0.4 M Fe(bpy)3/0.5 M TEABF4 in propylene carbonate81.8 (EE)12U β-diketonatesAnolyte: U(IV)/U(III) β-diketonates solution——platinum electrode—1.0———14Catholyte: U(VI)/U(V) β-diketonates solution13TEMPO/N-MethylphthalimideCatholyte: 0.1 M TEMPO/1 M NaClO4 in CH3CNCation exchange membraneNepem-117, BEST, ChinaGraphite felt electrodeSingle cell stack1.60.350.3590 (EE) for 20 cycles35Anolyte: 0.1 M N-Methylphthalimide/1 M NaClO4 in CH3CN4. Membranes for non-aqueous RFBs4.1. The role of membranes for non-aqueous RFBsMembrane is a key component of a non-aqueous RFB system. Alternatively, a membrane is also known as a separator in this field. The membrane must prevent the migration of reactive species between the anolyte and catholyte at an optimum rate, and allow migration of non-reactive species (e.g. organic solvent, supporting electrolyte) to maintain the electroneutrality of both electrolytes in the non-aqueous RFB. The ideal membrane should meet the following requirements:(1) High ionic conductivity of the electrolyte (e.g. transport of charge carriers): The membranes in a non-aqueous RFB system are responsible for transferring ions of the charge carriers to keep the electroneutrality in balance and to complete a current circuit. A high ionic conductivity is important to improve cell performance by minimizing loss of VE.(2) High ion selectivity (ions selective permeability or low reactive species permeability): During the operation of non-aqueous RFB systems, the undesirable transport of reactive species can take place. The cross-mixing due to the migration of reactive species leads to an increase in self-discharge. Thus, the ideal membrane should reduce the permeation rate of reactive species for high coulombic efficiency in the charge-discharge mode.(3) Chemical stability: The membranes are employed in organic solvents (e.g. acetonitrile or PC) as a non-aqueous solvent of the electrolyte under oxidation and reduction reactions of reactive species. For this reason, good chemical stability is required for long-term battery cycling operation.(4) Mechanical stability (high dimensional stability): During the operation of the battery, the charge and discharge cycles are repeated from a few times to a hundred times. The membrane is usually exposed to harsh conditions in non-aqueous RFB systems. After a large number of cycles, the membrane has to endure the harsh environment under operational conditions and needs to be able to keep its shape.(5) Long life time: The lifetime of the membrane is determined by its chemical and mechanical properties. A membrane with a long lifetime is essential in RFB-application fields.4.2. Membranes for possible application in non-aqueous RFBsThe general requirements of the membrane for non-aqueous RFBs are described in the previous section. To achieve excellent performance with non-aqueous RFBs, the membrane must be suitably designed for the target redox system. Generally, the ion exchange membrane (IEM) is classed as an AEM or a CEM according to the type of functional groups attached to the membrane supports. Currently, AEMs are receiving considerable attention and are applied in non-aqueous RFBs due to their compatibility with a general supporting electrolyte, TEABF4. Several commercial AEMs for non-aqueous RFBs such as Neosepta AHA (Astom, Japan), FAP4 (FuMa-Tech Co.), AMI-7001 (Membrane international Inc., USA) have been investigated.11,26,30 These commercial AEMs were selected as suitable membranes for separating both electrolytes while transporting the anion of the supporting electrolyte (BF4−). In the unusual case of all-organic redox flow systems, NaClO4 has played a role as the supporting electrolyte; consequently, a commercial CEM (Nepem-117, BEST, China) was used to transport Na+ ions due to its electroneutrality. However, these commercial IEMs have originally been prepared in applications for desalination of sea and brackish water, and for treating industrial effluents,36 and show poor chemical and mechanical stability in organic electrolyte solutions. Crystals of metallic ions employed as redox couples have sharp edges which can damage membrane surface; therefore, a high mechanical strength of a membrane is needed for applications in non-aqueous RFBs. In this regard, the membrane candidates for non-aqueous RFBs will be introduced.4.2.1. Membranes for positively charged reactive species in both compartments. In the first type of redox system, the positively charged reactive species exist in both compartments during charging and discharging. As discussed earlier, the functions of the membrane are to separate the two half-cell electrolytes and to prevent the cross-mixing of the electrolytes. In this system, the charge of reactive species is positive and the charge carrier ions have a negative charge, as described in Fig. 3 (a), (f); thus, AEMs may be used reasonably. Yet there are issues for non-aqueous RFBs such as chemical and mechanical strength. Unfortunately, most of the commercial AEMs do not have sufficient chemical stability. Thus, three types of membrane preparation methods are suggested to overcome these issues that were raised in the previous studies.4.2.1.1. Solution-casting membrane. The first approach for membrane preparation is the solution-casting method. This method is inspired by aqueous RFBs and fuel cells. The polymer solution is prepared with an optimized ratio of polymer to solvent or solvent mixture, and then cast on the plate (generally glass). Subsequently, the membrane is extracted from the solution by phase-inversion methods, which can be carried out in two ways: (1) solution evaporation by drying and heating, (2) exchange between the solvent and non-solvent by immersing the membrane into the non-solvent. After forming a bare membrane, the polymer such as poly(phthalazinone ether ketone) (PPEK), poly(phthalazinone ether sulfone) (PPES), or poly(phthalazinon ether sulfone ketone) (PPESK) was chloromethlyated with a catalytic agent to produce the sites for the quaternary ammonium groups.37–40 Finally, AEMs were functionalized by the quaternization reaction in trimethylamine (TMA) aqueous solution; the reaction is progressed after casting the polymer solution onto the plate. Fig. 5 shows the preparation procedure via chloromethylataion and the quaternization reaction for the functionalization of AEMs. In particular, PPESK was used, having a high glass-transition temperature of 284 °C, which leads to high thermal stability, excellent solvent resistance, and a better performance with 88% overall EE in vanadium redox-flow battery (VRFB).39,40 These properties show a strong potentiality possibility for improving the cell performance of non-aqueous RFBs. Fig. 5  Chloromethylation and quaternization reaction of PPESK. 4.2.1.2. Pore-filled ion exchange membrane. The pore-filled ion exchange membrane is one of the alternative membrane types. This type of membrane is prepared by filling porous supports with an ion exchange resin or polyelectrolyte and a cross-linker, and then the cross-linking reaction follows, as shown in Fig. 6.41,42 The ionic conductivity of the membranes can be controlled by filling the membrane pores with ion exchange resin or polyelectrolyte. In these membranes, the porous supports contribute to the mechanical stability and the cross-linking reaction brings with it the chemical stability of the membrane; therefore, the introduction of higher strength materials such as polyethylene (PE) or polypropylene (PP) for the thin porous supports requires special attention for them to be able to endure the harsh conditions of non-aqueous RFBs. Finally, thin pore-filled membranes prepared by using high strength materials are in its high mechanical strength and low electrical resistance. Fig. 6  Schematic procedure for the preparation of pore filling membranes. 4.2.1.3. γ-radiation grafting membrane. The last approach is γ-radiation-induced copolymerization of a polymer film. Radiation-graft polymerization is one of the useful methods for polymer modification. Radiation-graft polymerization can be carried out without chemical initiators and catalysts, and the overall degree of grafting can be controllable depending on the application. As for its procedure, active sites on the polymer backbone are formed by using a radiation source such as 60Co, γ-rays, and electro-beams.43 The active sites are employed as ionic chemical groups and free radicals. Especially, fluoropolymers have gained recent attention owing to their thermal, chemical, and mechanical stabilities. Kwak et al. reported on the preparation of AEMs by graft copolymerization of vinyl benzyl trimethyl ammonium chloride (VBTAC) onto a poly(ethylene-co-tetrafluoroethylene) (ETFE)43 and Qiu et al. reported on the preparation of an ETFE-based AEM by grafting dimethylaminoethyl methacrylate (DMAEMA) onto ETFE to reduce the permeability of vanadium ions.44 This AEM showed a higher ion-exchange capacity (IEC), and lower area resistance at 40% grafting yield (GY), and the lower permeability of the vanadium ions was successfully achieved. Moreover, the synthesis of an AEM using anion exchange monomers such as VBTAC and DMAEMA does not need an additional amination reaction due to their anion functional group, –NH4+, which can be transformed to quaternary ammonium. Accordingly, a simple and easy preparation method for the AEM can be applied for non-aqueous RFBs that have positively charged reactive species in both compartments.4.2.2. Membranes for negatively charged reactive species in both compartments. In this redox system, the negatively charged reactive species exist in both compartments during cell operation. For example, the negative reactive species are generated in the catholyte or anolyte by charge and discharge, respectively, as described in Fig. 3 (g); consequently, the ions which should be transported and the ions which should be prevented from passing through the membrane have the same charge, and the membrane requirements for this redox system are similar to that of a VRFB. A critical issue for this redox system, the cross-over of reactive species may occur through the AEMs used, and the cross-over is the main reason for the low EE and high self-discharge rate of non-aqueous RFBs. Many researchers have carried out development and modification of the membrane to reduce the permeability of reactive vanadium ions for the performance of VRFBs.45–53 The following possible membrane systems can be considered.4.2.2.1. Hybrid ion exchange membrane. The hybrid IEMs can be classed into inorganic/organic hybrid membranes and organic blending hybrid membranes. The inorganic/organic hybrid membranes are commonly prepared by the dispersion of inorganic nanoparticles (SiO2) into a polymer matrix. The chemical and mechanical properties of the membrane can be improved due to the interaction induced between organic and inorganic materials in the presence of inorganic nanoparticles. The degree of the dispersed inorganic nanoparticles in the organic matrix (polymer) decides the ion selectivity of the membrane. For example, Nafion/SiO2 hybrid IEMs have been typically synthesized according to the in situ sol–gel process illustrated in Fig. 7.45–47 The VRFB assembled with the Nafion/SiO2 hybrid membrane showed a higher CE and EE than that of the Nafion-only membrane by reducing the cross-contamination ability.46 In a similar manner, the incorporation of aminated silica nanoparticles48 into commercial or as-made AEMs can be envisaged for preventing negatively charged species migrating through the membrane in the further non-aqueous RFBs, because the coulombic repulsion between reactive species and aminated silica nanoparticles takes place. Fig. 7  Schematic process for the preparation of Nafion/silica nanoparticles hybrids membranes. 4.2.2.2. Amphoteric ion exchange membrane. Amphoteric ion exchange membranes (AIEMs) have been inspired by the effort to minimize the cross-contamination of reactive electrolytes in VRFBs.50–52 This kind of membrane is widely fabricated via radiation-induced graft copolymerization for the introduction of ionic groups into fluorocarbon polymers with excellent chemical stability such as PVDF and ETFE. Recently, Qiu and co-workers have synthesized a novel amphoteric IEM by radiation-induced grafting of α-methyl styrene (AMS) and DMAEMA into PVDF films, followed by sulfonation and protonation processes as illustrated in Fig. 8 (a). These fabricated AIEMs at the optimized GY have been employed as both anion and cation membranes in VRFB, and have shown much lower permeability of the vanadium ions compared with the Nafion membrane due to the Donnan exclusion effect. Moreover, it has been found that the OCP of the VRFB assembled with an AIEM was maintained for a longer time than the Nafion membrane.50 Also, the researchers reported an AIEM based on ETFE via a two-step grafting method (Fig. 8 (b)).52 This membrane-preparation method was proposed to increase the stability, and also showed the same advantages with AIEM based on PVDF. Finally, the developed AIEMs can be suitably applied in non-aqueous RFBs with negatively reactive species. Fig. 8  Preparation route of the AIEM using (a) PVDF film and (b) ETFE film. 4.2.2.3. Layer-by-layer membrane. A layer-by-layer (LBL) membrane was attempted by Xi et al.53 to suppress the vanadium ion cross-over in VRFBs. The formation of barrier layers onto the surface of the membrane was achieved via a LBL self-assembly technique of polyelectrolyte which is one of the versatile membrane modification methods. The barrier layers on the membrane surface were composed of polycation poly(diallyldimethylammonium chloride) (PDDA) and polyanion poly(sodium styrene sulfonate) (PSS), alternatively. The fabricated LBL membrane shows much lower vanadium ion permeability, which leads to a lower self-discharge rate compared to the Nafion membrane. These results can be considered as being due to two reasons: the ion-channel on the surface of the membrane is covered by polyanion–polycation layers, and there is electrostatic repulsion between the vanadium ions and the polycation layer. Accordingly, the VRFB assembled with an LBL membrane exhibits a higher CE and EE.As a possible approach for this kind of non-aqueous RFB, a LBL self-assembly technique of polyelectrolyte can be used to modify the surface of a commercial AEM as described in Fig. 9. The formation of barrier layers such as the polyanion and polycation layers on the membrane surface will contribute to suppressing the negatively charged reactive species during the cell-operation process, while maintaining the transport of the supporting electrolyte anion. Further research on LBL membranes for non-aqueous RFBs would effectively improve their EE. Fig. 9  Schematic representation of the preparation of layer-by-layer membrane through self-assembly technique. 4.2.3. Membranes for oppositely charged reactive species in each compartment. The oppositely charged reactive species existing in each compartment can be seen in the most non-aqueous RFB systems (Fig. 3 (b), (c), (d), (e), (h), and (i)). In this non-aqueous RFB with AEMs, positively charged species are naturally rejected from the surface AEM due to electrostatic repulsion; however, negatively charged species can be easily transported through AEMs. Thereby, special modification of one side of the membrane can be envisaged for this kind of non-aqueous RFBs from previous studies. Here, we would like to introduce attractive membrane fabrication methods as possible candidates for this kind of non-aqueous RFB.4.2.3.1. Surface-modified ion exchange membrane. The various modification methods of the Nafion membrane have been widely studied to reduce the permeation of vanadium ions for VRFBs.15,54–57 Among them, modification of one side of the membrane can be considered as a potential method by which to prepare a suitable membrane for a third type of non-aqueous RFB. Luo et al. demonstrated the formation of a cationic charged layer on the surface of the Nafion membrane via interfacial polymerization.54 In a detailed procedure, the chlorosulfonyl (–SO2Cl) groups were firstly introduced on the surface of the Nafion membrane by the chlorosulfonation reaction, and a thin polyethylenimine (PEI) layer was then formed by acid–amide bonding. Finally, a cationic charged layer was formed on the surface of the Nafion membrane in isophthaloyl dichloride hexane solution via the interfacial reaction. The Nafion membrane having a thin cationic layer showed a dramatic reduction in the cross-over of vanadium ions. Thereby, a VRFB single cell assembled with a surface-modified ion exchange membrane led to a significant increase in the CE. By using a similar approach, interfacial polymerization can be carried out to form an anionic-charged thin layer on commercial AEMs for non-aqueous RFBs with negatively charged reactive species in one compartment as illustrated in Fig. 10. This promising method will bring an improvement in the EE of non-aqueous RFBs. Fig. 10  Schematic representation of hybrid membranes having thin top layer. 4.2.3.2. Mosaic ion exchange membrane. The charged mosaic membrane has attracted considerable attention for the desalination and purification of various organic substances, due to its unique molecular structure and selectivity.58 The charged mosaic membrane consists of a parallel array of anion exchange and cation exchange elements; each element provides a pathway through the membrane. It is clearly differentiated from amphoteric charged membranes with negatively fixed ions and those with positively fixed ions randomly distributed in a neutral polymer matrix.36,58,59 The five different types of asymmetric mosaic membranes with unique selectivity can be categorized as shown in Fig. 11:60 (1) anion exchange particles distributed in a cation exchange matrix; (2) cation exchange particles distributed in an anion exchange matrix; (3) cation and anion particles in a neutral matrix. (4) anion exchange particles in the top layer of a cation exchange matrix; and (5) cation particles in the top layer of an anion-exchange matrix. Membranes of types (4) and (5) have additional selectivity for monovalent inorganic ions. The casting solution of anionic and cationic polymers is difficult to process without precipitation because of electrostatic interaction between the components. Accordingly, at least one of the polymers must be non-ionic, containing the groups that can be converted to ionic moieties. The preparation of the fourth type of asymmetric mosaic membrane was demonstrated using sulfonated polysulfone (SPSu) as an anionic polymer to form the asymmetric membrane and bromomethylated poly(2,6-dimethyl phenylene oxide) (PPOBr) as an incompatible hydrophobic polymer (Fig. 11 (d)). A homogenous casting solution of SPSu and PPOBr in a solvent mixture (THF/NMP/H2O) with surfactant and additives to control particle size and density was cast on a non-woven support at a wet film thickness of 0.4 mm. The cast solution was slightly evaporated and then immersed in deionized water to form an asymmetric membrane by the phase inversion method. Lastly, the formed membrane was soaked in an aqueous trimethylamine (TMA) solution (5%) to convert the bromomethylated groups into cationic quaternary ammonium groups. A top selective layer of anion exchange particles was successfully formed onto a cation exchange matrix. The asymmetric mosaic membrane having the top selective layer has never been considered for non-aqueous RFB applications. However, the formation of a top selective layer focused on preventing negatively charged reactive species in one compartment can be a very powerful technique to prepare a possible candidate for this kind of non-aqueous RFB (Fig. 11 (e)). Fig. 11  Mosaic configurations: (a) anion exchange particles in a cation exchange matrix; (b) cation exchange particles in an anion exchange matrix; (c) cation and anion exchange particles in a neutral matrix; (d) anion exchange particles in the top layer of a cation exchange matrix; (e) cation exchange particles in the top of an anion exchange matrix. 4.2.4. Nano-porous membranes for the filtration of reactive species. As referred to earlier, the IEMs can be designed according to the target redox flow systems by tuning ion conductivity. The introduction of ion exchange groups, however, leads to low chemical stability. To solve this problem, Zhang et al. proposed nano-porous membranes (NPMs) instead of IEMs for VRFBs to improve the vanadium ion/proton (V/H) selectivity by filtration of the polyvalent ions.61,62 In reports, NPMs based on polyacrylonitrile (PAN) were readily prepared by the phase inversion method as follows. The PAN dissolved in a dimethyl sulfoxide–tetrahydrofuran solution was cast on a polypropylene support and the NPMs were extracted from solidification of as-cast film in water after a certain time for evaporation. The pore-size distribution of the membrane was controlled by adjusting the polymer concentration and by the addition of a volatile co-solvent. The results showed that NPMs could separate the active vanadium ions and transfer the protons by pore-size exclusion, which can overcome the traditional constraint caused by ion-exchange groups. With decreasing pore-size distribution, the V/H selectivity was enhanced; the VRFB assembled with an NPM showed a higher CE of 95% and EE of 76% than that of the Nafion membrane. On the other hand, decreased ion conductivity was considered as an important issue because the performance of RFBs can be restricted by lower ion conductivity.Thus, they first modified the surface of the NPMs using silica to maintain high ion conductivity. In addition, the pore size of NPMs decreased due to silica in the pores, causing an increase the membrane selectivity; the VRFB with a silica-modified NPM showed a high CE of 98% and EE of 79% compared to the original NPMs. Similarly, a non-aqueous RFB utilizing NMPs can be envisaged. Representative metal–ligand complexes ions (V(acac)3− and Ru(bpy)32+) and the charge carrier ion (BF4−) are depicted as three-dimensional structures in Fig. 12; their physical properties such as their molecular weight and expected maximum ionic radius are summarized in Table 3. Accordingly, NPMs with a pore size of more than 5.5 Å and less than 9 Å could make non-aqueous RFBs suitable as high-performance energy storage systems in the near future. Fig. 12  Chemical structure of (a) V(acac)3−, (b) Ru(bpy)32+ and (c) BF4−. 
Table 3 Physical properties of metal–ligand complexes ions and charge carrier ion

  Type of ionMolecular weightExpected ionic radiusMetal complexes ionM(acac)3V(acac)3−348.279.10 ÅRu(acac)3−398.39Cr(acac)3−349.32Mn(acac)3−352.26M(bpy)3Ru(bpy)32+569.6211.78 ÅFe(bpy)32+524.4Ni(bpy)32+527.25Charge carrier ionBF4−86.85.50 Å4.3. Characterization of the ion exchange membraneThe basic properties of the designed membranes for non-aqueous RFBs can be characterized by similar methods reported in previous studies on membranes for aqueous RFBs or non-aqueous energy storage systems. As the basic properties of membranes, uptake (absorption), leakage (retention) and wettability of the electrolyte, ionic conductivity, and permeability of the reactive species can be characterized to define a suitable membrane for non-aqueous RFB applications. When a suitable membrane is applied to a redox-flow cell, its performance in a single cell can be evaluated by a charge-discharge test. Characterization methods for non-aqueous RFB systems are explained by the following.4.3.1. Ion exchange capacity and ionic conductivity. The ion exchange capacity of an AEM and CEM can be estimated by titration methods.37,43,44,54 To measure the AEM capacity, there are two types of titration methods: (1) The silver titration method: A certain amount of dried AEM should be equilibrated in a 1.0 N Na2CO3 solution overnight. The equilibrated solution is then titrated with a 0.1 N AgNO3 solution. The end point is observed using a K2CrO4 standard solution as an indicator.37,43 (2) The acid–base titration method: A certain amount of dried AEM is equilibrated in 0.05 M NaOH overnight. Then, the equilibrated solution is titrated with 0.05 M HCl solution and vice versa.44,54 The ion-exchange capacity can be calculated by the following eqn (19): (19)where N and V are the concentration (meq/mL) and the volume (mL) of the titrated solution, respectively, and W is the weight of the membrane sample.The ionic conductivity of the ion exchange membranes can be observed by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) from high frequency (105∼106 Hz) to low frequency (0.1∼1 Hz) with an AC amplitude using the conductivity test cell. Several conductivity test cells have been employed including four-probe63 and two-probe64 systems. Among the possible test cells to measure ionic conductivity of the IEMs for a non-aqueous RFB, a typical two-probe cell is shown in Fig. 13 (a).39,41,47,62,65–68 Prior to the area resistance measurement, the membrane must be soaked in the electrolyte at a 50% state of oxidation for over 24 h. The resistance of the conductivity cell with and without the membrane can be obtained at the frequency where the phase angle is minimal. The typical impedance results of some commercial IEMs measured in 0.01 M V(acac)3/0.05 M TEABF4 in CH3CN are represented in Fig. 13 (b). The area resistance of the membrane (R) is calculated by:  R (Ω cm2) = (r1 − r2) × A(20)where r1 and r2 are the resistance of the cell with the membrane (Ω) and without the membrane (Ω), respectively, and A is the membrane area (cm2). Finally, the ionic conductivity (σ) of the membrane is calculated as follows:  (21)where d is the thickness of the membrane. Fig. 13  (a) Equipment for the measurement of ion conductivity, (b) AC impedance spectrum of commercial IEMs in a solution of 0.01 M V(acac)3/0.05 M TEABF4 in CH3CN. 4.3.2. Electrolyte uptake, leakage, and swelling ratio. The electrolyte uptake, leakage, and swelling ratio are determined to evaluate compatibility between the electrolyte and the membrane.66,69 The membranes should initially be immersed in organic electrolyte for a long enough time. The excess electrolyte on the membrane surface is removed by absorbent paper. Before and after absorption of the electrolyte, the membrane sample is weighed, and the electrolyte uptake is calculated by eqn (22).  (22)where Wwet and Wdry are the weight of the samples under wet and dry conditions, respectively. The electrolyte leakage test is needed to confirm the membrane's retention ability for the electrolyte. The membrane sample infiltrated with electrolyte is pressed by a specific weight for a certain time. The electrolyte leakage can be defined by weighing the sample before and after leakage of the electrolyte.  (23)where Wwet is the weight of the wet samples and Wretention is the weight of the sample after electrolyte leakage. To measure the swelling ratio of the membrane, a dried membrane sample of a specific size is soaked in the electrolyte for a certain time. After removing the excess electrolyte on the surface, the swelling ratio can be calculated by using eqn (24). (24)where lwet and ldry are the length of the samples in wet and dry conditions, respectively. Noting that the swelling behaviours of the membranes are not always isotropic, it is also meaningful to analyze by the changes of the thickness70,71 and area72 of the membrane.4.3.3. Ion permeability (selectivity). The permeability of reactive species ions through the IEM should be measured to evaluate the exclusive degree of undesired ion transport.38,52,61,66,67,69 Generally, a handmade two-compartment static cell has been used for aqueous systems and a similar cell can be applied to non-aqueous systems to evaluate the permeability (Fig. 14 (a)). An electrolyte containing metal–ligand complexes and the supporting electrolyte is prepared for one compartment, and the electrolyte of the same concentration excluding metal–ligand complexes is introduced into another compartment in order to balance the ionic strength and minimize the osmotic-pressure effects. The area of the membrane is exposed to both solutions of the same volume, which are constantly stirred or circulated by external reservoirs at a constant flow rate. The sample of the electrolyte excluding the metal–ligand complexes is taken to measure the permeated ions by inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectrometry (ICP-AES) at regular time intervals and the concentration of reactant that have permeated into the solution can be estimated. Fig. 14  (a) Equipment for the measurement of reactive species ion permeability, (b) the variation of the concentration of vanadium acetylacetonate ions in right reservoir with time for the commercial AEMs. As an alternative method, the concentration of reactant can be analysed by a UV-vis spectrometer when the reactant has a specific absorption band. A wavelength for measurement is identified by observing the peak absorbance of the target reactant. The linear plot of peak absorbance at the defined wavelength versus the concentration of reactant can be shown. The permeability of reactant through the membranes is estimated by the variation of concentration calculated from the linear plot of peak absorbance in terms of time. For example, the change in concentration of vanadium acetylacetonate ions with time was observed in the same manner (Fig. 14 (b)). The diffusion rate of reactant can also be determined through the derivation of the absorbance change as follows:38 (25)where absBo is the initial absorbance of solution (B) including reactive species, absA is the absorbance of solution (A) excluding reactive species, A and t are the membrane area and time, and VA is the volume of solution A. The mass-transfer coefficient (ks) of the reactant across the membrane can be obtained by the slope (2ksA/VA) of the linear plot (ln(absBo − 2absA) versus t). The diffusion coefficient (D) is then calculated:  D = ksdy(26)where y is the thickness of the membrane.In addition, the ion permeability of the reactant is calculated by using the following equation:  (27)where P is the permeability of the membrane, VR is the volume of solution in the right reservoir, A and L are the area and thickness of the membrane, and cL and cR are the concentrations of reactive species' ions in the left and right reservoir as a function of time, respectively.52,66,69,734.3.4. Oxidation stability. A major limiting factor in the lifetime of a non-aqueous RFB concerns the oxidation stability of the membrane. It is necessary for the membranes to maintain good performance during the operation of non-aqueous RFBs. Two methods inspired by VRFB studies can be mainly used to evaluate the oxidation stability of the membranes in non-aqueous systems:(1) The oxidative solution immersion testThe oxidation stability of the membrane is determined by immersing the membrane samples in fully charged electrolyte for a long time (over 10 days) similar to the previously reported method in VRFB.15,74–76 The weight change of the membrane before and after immersion is measured according to electrolyte environment.  (28)where Wbefore and Wafter are the weights of the dry membrane before and after immersion in the oxidative solution.(2) The Fenton test.As the accelerated degradation method, oxidation stability of the membrane for non-aqueous RFBs can be tested in Fenton's reagent; aqueous solutions containing hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) and ferrous iron (Fe2+) under optimized concentrations.77,78 The membrane samples are then soaked into prepared aqueous solutions at ambient temperature in the range of 60∼80 °C. The large number of free radicals (OH· and OOH·) generated by H2O2 in the presence of Fe2+ give the opportunity for the attack by radicals on the polymer backbone of the membrane. The weight of the membrane is recorded according to time, and the survival time of the membranes indicates their oxidation stability, relatively.4.3.5. Performance of non-aqueous RFBs. 4.3.5.1. Efficiency. The performance of membranes used in a non-aqueous RFB is investigated via a single cell test. A cyclic operation of a single cell that has been assembled with a membrane may result in determination of its efficiencies:1) Coulombic (or charge) efficiency (CE): the ratio of discharge capacity (Qdis) to charge capacity (Qch) in a cell operation is described eqn (29).  (29)In a constant current (Iconst) charge-discharge mode, CE can be expressed as the ratio of the discharge time (tdis) to the charge time (tch). (30)A high CE can be obtained by suppressing the cross-contamination of reactant ions. Thus, the membrane must be exclusive to reactant to reduce the capacity loss of the system, as shown in eqn (30).2) Voltage efficiency (VE): the ratio of the average discharge cell voltage (Vdis) to the average charge cell voltage (Vch) during the cell operation is presented as:  (31)In each half cell with the over potential of the cell, the discharge and charge voltage are determined by the reduction potential of the redox couples.(3) Energy efficiency (EE): the ratio of energy between the discharge and charge process is given by:  (32)EE is also calculated by multiplying CE and VE, as described in eqn (33).  EE = CE × VE(33)EE, indicating the energy loss in the charge-discharge cycle, can evaluate the performance of energy storage systems.79(4) Power efficiency (PE) is the ratio of power between the discharge and charge processes:  (34)These efficiency values can offer information such as the electrolyte volume, redox reaction of the reactant, and the state of charge to account in practical design and operation. In addition, the contribution of the membrane can be effectively evaluated in the non-aqueous RFB system operation.4.3.5.2. Rated power. The power of the non-aqueous RFB is considered as rated output energy by discharging under certain conditions that are similar to that of an aqueous RFB.17 The instantaneous power of a non-aqueous RFB is calculated by multiplying the current and voltage between the cathode and anode at a specific time.  P = I × V(35) where P is the output power, and I and V are the current and voltage, respectively. The mean output power of the non-aqueous RFB is calculated as:  (36)where ; is the mean power, I and V are the instantaneous current and voltage, respectively, and t is time. The power of the non-aqueous RFB system is determined by the size of the electrodes expressed as effective area, and the number of single cells that are assembled in a stack.4.3.5.3. Energy storage capacity. The energy storage capacity of the non-aqueous RFB is the maximum electric charge that can be supplied from the battery during discharge, and it is designed independently of the power (kW) of the applicable system. The energy storage capacity (kWh) is determined by the concentration and volume of the electrolyte used in the system, which is simply adjusted from just a few hours to days of storage, depending on the application.4.3.5.4. Charge-discharge efficiency. The non-aqueous redox flow single cell can be constructed by sandwiching the membrane between two graphite felt electrodes as current collectors.11,26,28,32,33 To test the charge-discharge efficiency, the constructed single cell is employed in a general concentration of metal–ligand complexes and the supporting electrolyte in the solvent. The single cell is then charged and discharged at a constant current density to observe the efficiency of the single cell. Suitable charge-discharge current densities according to the types and concentrations of the redox couple can be experimentally determined for the operation of redox-flow systems. As reported in the literature, a much lower current density (0.01 to 2.2 mA cm−2) than that of aqueous RFBs (10∼70 mA cm−2)20,23,24,80–84 has been used for non-aqueous RFB operation, as presented in Table 4. For the organic electrolytes, an approximately 10-times lower charging current is often used in order to minimize ohmic losses. The discharging current is experimentally determined to obtain a reasonable cell voltage, while lower discharging currents are necessary due to the lower conductivity of organic electrolytes.30 The power density and current density values of non-aqueous RFBs and aqueous RFBs are compared in Fig. 15. Even though non-aqueous RFBs have attracted attention as promising energy storage systems due to the expansion of their operating potential window using organic solvents, the estimated power density values of non-aqueous RFBs are lower than those of aqueous RFBs due to their much lower operating current density. The improvement of the operating current density in non-aqueous RFBs might be the greatest challenge for IEMs in the future work. Fig. 15  Comparison of power density and current densites for non-aqueous RFBs (green) and aqueous RFBs (blue). 
Table 4 Current and power density of non-aqueous RFBs and aqueous RFBs

 Redox coupleElectrolyte conditionMembrane typeOCV (V)Charge/discharge Current density (mA cm−2)Charge/discharge Power density (mW cm−2)Efficiency (%)Ref.Non-aqueous RFBsV(acac)30.01 M V(acac)3/0.5 M TEABF4 in CH3CNAnion exchange membrane (AMI-7001)2.22.2/0.24.84/0.4447 (CE)11V(acac)30.05 M V(acac)3/0.5 M TEABF4 in CH3CNAnion exchange membrane (Neosepta AHA)1.70.14/0.010.24/0.02∼70 (CE)33∼35 (EE)Ru(acac)30.02 M Ru(acac)3/0.1 M TEABF4 in CH3CNAnion exchange membrane (Neosepta AHA)1.3_/0.08_/0.1157 (EE)30Cr(acac)30.05 M Cr(acac)3/0.5 M TEABF4 in CH3CNAnion exchange membrane (Neosepta AHA)3.40.14/0.010.48/0.0555 (CE)1220 (EE)Mn(acac)30.05 M Mn(acac)3/0.5 M TEABF4 in CH3CNAnion exchange membrane (Neosepta AHA)1.10.14/0.060.15/0.06∼97 (CE)9∼21 (EE)Ni(bpy)3/Fe(bpy)3Catholyte: 0.2 M Ni(bpy)3/0.5 M TEABF4 in propylene carbonateAnion exchange membrane (FAP4, FuMa-Tech)2.250.81.890.4 (CE)26Anolyte: 0.4 M Fe(bpy)3/0.5 M TEABF4 in propylene carbonate81.8 (EE)TEMPO/N-MethylphthalimideCatholyte: 0.1 M TEMPO/1 M NaClO4 in CH3CNAnion exchange membrane (Nepem-117, BEST)1.60.350.5690 (CE)35Anolyte: 0.1 M N-Methylphthalimide/1 M NaClO4 in CH3CNAqueous RFBsAll-vanadium1.5 M VOSO4 in 2 M H2SO4sulfonated poly(ether ether ketone) (SPEEK)/polypropylene (PP)/perfluorosulfonic acid (PFSA) layered composite membrane1.4507095 (CE)8080 (EE)Fe/CdCatholyte: FeSO4–Fe2(SO4)3 in H2SO4proton exchange membrane (CEM)0.99109.970.8 (EE)81Anolyte: CdSO4 in H2SO4Fe/V1.5 M Fe/V in 3.8 M HCl or 2 M Fe/V in 3 M HClCation exchange membrane (NR-212)1.355067.589 (CE)82,841.89079 (EE)All-neptunium0.05 M Np in 1 M HNO3Anion exchange membrane (A-511, Asahi Kasei Corp., Japan)1.3709199.1 (EE)83Ce/ZnCatholyte: 0.5 M Ce(CH3SO3)3 in 2 M methane sulfonic acidCation exchange membrane (Nafion® 115)2.1611.12485.7 (CE)23Anolyte: 0.5 M ZnSO4 in 2 M methane sulfonic acid74.8 (EE)Fe-EDTA/Br2Catholyte: 0.1 M Fe(III)-EDTA/1 M sodium acetateCation exchange membrane (Nafion® 117)1.041010.492.1 (CE)2479.4 (EE)Anolyte: 1 M NaBrV/MnCatholyte: 0.3 M V(III) in 5 M H2SO4Cation exchange membrane (Nafion® 117)1.662033.296.4 (CE)20Anolyte: 0.3 M V(III) in 5 M H2SO462.7 (EE)Table 5 presents preliminary experimental results of coulombic efficiency and voltage efficiency of a non-aqueous RFB with various membranes. It is clearly observed than nonporous anion exchange membrane exhibits a high efficiency due to a lower self-discharge. Also, the choice of a membrane for a non-aqueous RFB caused to yield significant difference in the efficiency even though the membranes are not optimized yet.
Table 5 Performance of non-aqueous RFBsa with various membranes

Type of membraneThicknessPore sizeCell potentialCharging time (0.1 mA cm−2)Discharging time (0.01 mA cm−2)Coulombic efficiencyVoltage efficiencyEnergy efficiencya The non-aqueous RFB system is consisted of graphite felt for both electrodes (50 × 50 × 5 mm3) with 0.01 M V(acac)3/0.05 M TEABF4 in CH3CN for anolyte and catholyte of 50 mL volumes; charge-discharge test was performed at a constant flow rate of 2 mL min−1 in an argon-atmosphere glove box.b PP: polypropylene, PE: polyethylene.c Poly(vinylidene fluoride) (PVDF) solution in the mixture of dimethylformamide and butanol (v/v = 4:1) is casted on the surface of Sefar fabric, and then porous membrane is formed in distilled water by phase inversion method.d Poly(vinyl chloride) (PVC) and 4-vinyl pyridine (4VP) in cyclohexanone as thin film formed by a solution casting method are polymerized by cross-linking agent, divinylbenzene (DVB) at 70 °C.PPb (Celgard® 2500)25 μm64 nm (avg.)1.83 V0.8 h0.9 h11.4%42.5%4.9%PEb (Tonen Setela)25 μm100∼200 nm1.78 V4.4 h0.8 h1.7%18.3%0.3%PVDF (AMFOR Inc.)170 μm80∼100 nm3.0 V11.9 h12.6 h10.6%61.6%6.5%PVDF reinforced with Sefar fabricc108 μmNA1.9 V0.9 h1.5 h17.2%33.2%5.7%PS/DVB (Neosepta AHA)185 μmNA3.23 V18.1 h54.4 h30.2%50.3%15.2%PS/DVB (Neosepta AM-1)22 μmNA3.2 V8.9 h8.1 h (0.05 A cm−2)45.6%78.9%36.0%PVC/4VP/DVBd140 μmNA2.2 V21.2 h (0.01 A cm−2)12.2 h57.8%54.7%31.6%5. Perspective and concluding remarksIn this review, the possible approaches for fabrication of membranes in non-aqueous redox flow batteries are introduced as a solution to cope with their specific requirements for the target system. Most studies on non-aqueous RFBs have focused on the redox couples having a high potential difference for their high energy density. In particular, single-metal redox systems are strongly recommended, to reduce the cross-over effect by using the same metallic ion in both compartments. The anolyte and catholyte revert to the same oxidation state of the reactive species during discharging. In typical non-aqueous RFBs, commercial AEMs have commonly been used to transport the anions of the supporting electrolyte as the charge carriers to complete the current circuit. However, in the light of the membrane functions for the target systems, it should be emphasized that a suitable membrane must be designed according to the reactive species where and how the oxidation state of reactive species exists in redox flow systems. Thus, the target systems are categorized as one of three types of redox system based on the charge type of the reactive species within each compartment, and the membrane technologies are required to attain their capability and versatility by solving specific problems in each target system. (i) For the first target system in the presence of positively charged reactive species in both electrolytes during cell operation, the solution-casting, pore-filling and γ-radiation methods are recommended to prepare AEMs with high chemical and mechanical stabilities. (ii) For the negatively charged reactive species in electrolytes, hybrid IEMs, amphoteric IEMs, and LBL membranes are possible preparation and modification methods to reduce the permeability of reactive species, thus improving the performance of this type of system. (iii) For non-aqueous RFBs in the presence of oppositely charged reactive species in each compartment, the membrane should be modified appropriately: surface modification using oppositely charged polymers by interfacial copolymerization; or formation of asymmetric-mosaic membranes with cation-exchange particles distributed in an anion-exchange matrix by phase inversion of two mixed polymers. (iv) Alternatively, the NPMs are proposed to avoid mixing reactive species. Controlling the pore-size distribution to be smaller than the ionic radius of the reactive species and larger than the ionic radius of the charge carrier ions is necessary to achieve a suitable membrane for non-aqueous RFBs. Through further development of the modification methods, the negatively charged reactive species will be effectively rejected by one side of the modified membranes. Besides, the characterization of the fabricated membrane is very important to determine if it is suitable or not for the target system; consequently, the required characterization methods are to be considered based upon those of aqueous RFBs. Accordingly, the membranes can be improved by evaluation through the characterizations. It is expected that this article may provide useful information for researchers working on non-aqueous RFBs to expedite their research progress.AcknowledgementsThis work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea Grant funded by the Korean Government(MEST) (NRF-2011-C1AAA001-0030538).ReferencesK. L. Huang, X. g. Li, S. q. Liu, N. Tan and L. q. Chen, Renewable Energy, 2008, 33, 186–192 Search PubMed .L. Y. Li, S. Kim, W. Wang, M. Vijayakumar, Z. M. Nie, B. W. Chen, J. L. Zhang, G. G. Xia, J. Z. Hu, G. Graff, J. Liu and Z. G. Yang, Advanced Energy Materials, 2011, 1, 394–400 Search PubMed .M. R. Mohamed, S. M. Sharkh and F. C. Walsh,  2009.F. Cheng, J. Liang, Z. Tao and J. Chen, Advanced Materials, 2011, 23, 1695–1715 CrossRef CAS .A. Z. Weber, M. M. Mench, J. P. Meyers, P. N. Ross, J. T. Gostick and Q. Liu, Journal of Applied Electrochemistry, 2011, 41, 1137–1164 Search PubMed .L. Ren, Y. Tang, J. Shi, J. Dou, S. Zhou and T. Jin, Physica C: Superconductivity and its Applications, 2012 Search PubMed .T. Shigematsu, SEI Technical Review, 2011, 4–13 Search PubMed .A. A. Shinkle, A. E. S. Sleightholme, L. T. Thompson and C. W. Monroe, Journal of Applied Electrochemistry, 2011, 41, 1191–1199 Search PubMed .A. E. S. Sleightholme, A. A. Shinkle, Q. Liu, Y. Li, C. W. Monroe and L. T. Thompson, Journal of Power Sources, 2011, 196, 5742–5745 Search PubMed .J. H. Kim, K. J. Kim, M. S. Park, N. J. Lee, U. Hwang, H. Kim and Y. J. Kim, Electrochemistry Communications, 2011, 13, 997–1000 Search PubMed .Q. Liu, A. E. S. Sleightholme, A. A. Shinkle, Y. Li and L. T. Thompson, Electrochemistry Communications, 2009, 11, 2312–2315 Search PubMed .Q. H. Liu, A. A. Shinkle, Y. D. Li, C. W. Monroe, L. T. Thompson and A. E. S. Sleightholme, Electrochemistry Communications, 2010, 12, 1634–1637 Search PubMed .C. W. Monroe, A. A. Shinkle, A. E. S. Sleightholme and L. T. Thompson,  2010.T. Yamamura, Y. Shiokawa, H. Yamana and H. Moriyama, Electrochimica Acta, 2002, 48, 43–50 CrossRef CAS .B. Tian, C. W. Yan and F. H. Wang, Journal of Applied Electrochemistry, 2004, 34, 1205–1210 Search PubMed .C. Ponce de León, A. Frías-Ferrer, J. González-García, D. A. Szánto and F. C. Walsh, Journal of Power Sources, 2006, 160, 716–732 Search PubMed .Z. Yang, J. Zhang, M. C. W. Kintner-Meyer, X. Lu, D. Choi, J. P. Lemmon and J. Liu, Chemical Reviews, 2011, 111, 3577–3613 CrossRef CAS .B. Fang, Y. Wei, T. Arai, S. Iwasa and M. Kumagai, Journal of Applied Electrochemistry, 2003, 33, 197–203 Search PubMed .M. Skyllas-Kazacos, Journal of Power Sources, 2003, 124, 299–302 Search PubMed .F. Q. Xue, Y. L. Wang, W. H. Wang and X. D. Wang, Electrochimica Acta, 2008, 53, 6636–6642 CrossRef CAS .C. Jia, J. Liu and C. Yan, Journal of Power Sources, 2010, 195, 4380–4383 Search PubMed .C. H. Bae, E. P. L. Roberts and R. A. W. Dryfe, Electrochimica Acta, 2002, 48, 279–287 CrossRef CAS .Z. P. Xie, D. B. Zhou, F. J. Xiong, S. M. Zhang and K. L. Huang, Journal of Rare Earths, 2011, 29, 567–573 Search PubMed .Y. H. Wen, H. M. Zhang, P. Qian, H. T. Zhou, P. Zhao, B. L. Yi and Y. S. Yang, J Electrochem Soc, 2006, 153, A929–A934 CrossRef CAS .Y. Matsuda, K. Tanaka, M. Okada, Y. Takasu, M. Morita and T. Matsumura-Inoue, Journal of Applied Electrochemistry, 1988, 18, 909–914 Search PubMed .J. Mun, M. J. Lee, J. W. Park, D. J. Oh, D. Y. Lee and S. G. Doo, Electrochemical and Solid-State Letters, 2012, 15, A80–A82 Search PubMed .M. H. Chakrabarti, R. A. W. Dryfe and E. P. L. Roberts, Journal of the Chemical Society of Pakistan, 2007, 29, 294–300 Search PubMed .Q. Liu, A. A. Shinkle, Y. Li, C. W. Monroe, L. T. Thompson and A. E. S. Sleightholme, Electrochemistry Communications, 2010, 12, 1634–1637 Search PubMed .M. H. Chakrabarti, E. P. L. Roberts, C. Bae and M. Saleem, Energ Convers Manage, 2011, 52, 2501–2508 CrossRef CAS .M. H. Chakrabarti, R. A. W. Dryfe and E. P. L. Roberts, Electrochimica Acta, 2007, 52, 2189–2195 CrossRef CAS .Q. H. Liu, A. E. S. Sleightholme, A. A. Shinkle, Y. D. Li and L. T. Thompson, Electrochemistry Communications, 2009, 11, 2312–2315 Search PubMed .D. Zhang, Q. Liu, X. Shi and Y. Li, Journal of Power Sources, 2012, 203, 201–205 Search PubMed .A. A. Shinkle, A. E. S. Sleightholme, L. D. Griffith, L. T. Thompson and C. W. Monroe, Journal of Power Sources, 2012, 206, 490–496 Search PubMed .D. Zhang, H. Lan and Y. Li, Journal of Power Sources, 2012, 217, 199–203 Search PubMed .Z. Li, S. Li, S. Liu, K. Huang, D. Fang, F. Wang and S. Peng, Electrochemical and Solid-State Letters, 2011, 14, A171–A173 Search PubMed .T. Xu, J Membrane Sci, 2005, 263, 1–29 CrossRef CAS .S. Zhang, C. Yin, D. Xing, D. Yang and X. Jian, J Membrane Sci, 2010, 363, 243–249 CrossRef CAS .D. Xing, S. Zhang, C. Yin, B. Zhang and X. Jian, J Membrane Sci, 2010, 354, 68–73 CrossRef CAS .J. Fang and P. K. Shen, J Membrane Sci, 2006, 285, 317–322 CrossRef CAS .X. G. Jian, C. Yan, H. M. Zhang, S. H. Zhang, C. Liu and P. Zhao, Chinese Chemical Letters, 2007, 18, 1269–1272 Search PubMed .T. Mohammadi and M. Skyllas-Kazacos, J Membrane Sci, 1995, 98, 77–87 CrossRef CAS .T. Mohammadi and V. Haddadi-Asl, Iranian Polymer Journal (English Edition), 1997, 6, 43–51 Search PubMed .N. S. Kwak, J. S. Koo and T. S. Hwang, Macromolecular Research, 2012, 20, 205–211 Search PubMed .J. Qiu, M. Li, J. Ni, M. Zhai, J. Peng, L. Xu, H. Zhou, J. Li and G. Wei, J Membrane Sci, 2007, 297, 174–180 CrossRef CAS .X. Teng, Y. Zhao, J. Xi, Z. Wu, X. Qiu and L. Chen, Journal of Power Sources, 2009, 189, 1240–1246 Search PubMed .D. Schulte, J. Drillkensb Bschulteb and D. U. Sauer,  2010.G. J. Hwang and H. Ohya, J Membrane Sci, 1997, 132, 55–61 CrossRef CAS .M. I. Goller, C. Barthet, G. P. McCarthy, R. Corradi, B. P. Newby, S. A. Wilson, S. P. Armes and S. Y. Luk, Colloid and Polymer Science, 1998, 276, 1010–1018 CrossRef CAS .Z. Mai, H. Zhang, X. Li and S. Xiao, Journal of Power Sources, 2011, 196, 5737–5741 Search PubMed .G. Hu, Y. Wang, J. Ma, J. Qiu, J. Peng, J. Li and M. Zhai, Journal of Membrane Science, 2012, 407-408, 184–192 Search PubMed .J. Qiu, J. Zhang, J. Chen, J. Peng, L. Xu, M. Zhai, J. Li and G. Wei, J Membrane Sci, 2009, 334, 9–15 Search PubMed .J. Qiu, M. Zhai, J. Chen, Y. Wang, J. Peng, L. Xu, J. Li and G. Wei, J Membrane Sci, 2009, 342, 215–220 CrossRef CAS .J. Xi, Z. Wu, X. Teng, Y. Zhao, L. Chen and X. Qiu, Journal of Materials Chemistry, 2008, 18, 1232–1238 RSC .Q. Luo, H. Zhang, J. Chen, P. Qian and Y. Zhai, J Membrane Sci, 2008, 311, 98–103 CrossRef CAS .M. A. Smit, A. L. Ocampo, M. A. Espinosa-Medina and P. J. Sebastián, Journal of Power Sources, 2003, 124, 59–64 Search PubMed .C. K. Jia, J. G. Liu and C. W. Yan, Journal of Power Sources, 2010, 195, 4380–4383 Search PubMed .J. Zeng, C. P. Jiang, Y. H. Wang, J. W. Chen, S. F. Zhu, B. J. Zhao and R. Wang, Electrochemistry Communications, 2008, 10, 372–375 Search PubMed .J. Liu, T. Xu, X. Zhu and Y. Fu, Chinese Journal of Chemical Engineering, 2006, 14, 330–336 Search PubMed .Y. Isono, H. Ito, K. Hirahara, T. Fujimoto and Y. Miyaki, J Membrane Sci, 1989, 43, 205–216 CrossRef CAS .C. Linder and O. Kedem, J Membrane Sci, 2001, 181, 39–56 CrossRef CAS .H. Z. Zhang, H. M. Zhang, X. F. Li, Z. S. Mai and J. L. Zhang, Energ Environ Sci, 2011, 4, 1676–1679 Search PubMed .H. Zhang, X. Li, Z. Mai and W. Wei, Energy and Environmental Science, 2012, 5, 6299–6303 Search PubMed .Y. Sone, P. Ekdunge and D. Simonsson, J Electrochem Soc, 1996, 143, 1254–1259 CAS .S. H. Yun, S. H. Shin, J. Y. Lee, S. J. Seo, S. H. Oh, Y. W. Choi and S. H. Moon, J Membrane Sci, 2012, 417, 210–216 Search PubMed .W. Wei, H. Zhang, X. Li and Z. Mai, Journal of Power Sources, 2012, 208, 421–425 Search PubMed .N. Wang, S. Peng, Y. Li, H. Wang, S. Liu and Y. Liu, Journal of Solid State Electrochemistry, 2012, 1–9 Search PubMed .T. Mohammadi and M. Skyllas-Kazacos, J Membrane Sci, 1995, 107, 35–45 CrossRef CAS .G. J. Hwang and H. Ohya, J Membrane Sci, 1996, 120, 55–67 CrossRef CAS .Z. Mai, H. Zhang, X. Li, C. Bi and H. Dai, Journal of Power Sources, 2011, 196, 482–487 Search PubMed .S. S. Mohtar, A. F. Ismail and T. Matsuura, J Membrane Sci, 2011, 371, 10–19 Search PubMed .D. Y. Chen, S. J. Wang, M. Xiao and Y. Z. Meng, Energ Convers Manage, 2010, 51, 2816–2824 CrossRef CAS .S. H. Yun, J. J. Woo, S. J. Seo, L. A. Wu, D. Wu, T. W. Xu and S. H. Moon, J Membrane Sci, 2011, 367, 296–305 CrossRef CAS .X. L. Luo, Z. Z. Lu, J. Y. Xi, Z. H. Wu, W. T. Zhu, L. Q. Chen and X. P. Qiu, J Phys Chem B, 2005, 109, 20310–20314 CrossRef CAS .S. Kim, T. B. Tighe, B. Schwenzer, J. Yan, J. Zhang, J. Liu, Z. Yang and M. A. Hickner, Journal of Applied Electrochemistry, 2011, 41, 1201–1213 Search PubMed .M. Yue, Y. Zhang and L. Wang, Solid State Ionics, 2012, 217, 6–12 Search PubMed .W. SkyllasKazacos, C. Menictas and M. Kazacos, J Electrochem Soc, 1996, 143, L86–L88 CrossRef CAS .D. Aili, M. K. Hansen, C. Pan, Q. Li, E. Christensen, J. O. Jensen and N. J. Bjerrum, International Journal of Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 6985–6993 Search PubMed .D. Y. Chen, S. J. Wang, M. Xiao and Y. Z. Meng, Energ Environ Sci, 2010, 3, 622–628 Search PubMed .X. F. Li, H. M. Zhang, Z. S. Mai, H. Z. Zhang and I. Vankelecom, Energ Environ Sci, 2011, 4, 1147–1160 Search PubMed .C. Jia, J. Liu and C. Yan, Journal of Power Sources, 2012, 203, 190–194 Search PubMed .J. Cheng, H. M. Zhang, Y. H. Wen, G. P. Cao and Y. S. Yang,  2012, 399–401, 1519–1523.W. Wang, Z. M. Nie, B. W. Chen, F. Chen, Q. T. Luo, X. L. Wei, G. G. Xia, M. Skyllas-Kazacos, L. Y. Li and Z. G. Yang, Advanced Energy Materials, 2012, 2, 487–493 Search PubMed .T. Yamamura, N. Watanabe and Y. Shiokawa, Journal of Alloys and Compounds, 2006, 408–412, 1260–1266 CrossRef CAS .W. Wang, S. Kim, B. Chen, Z. Nie, J. Zhang, G. G. Xia, L. Li and Z. Yang, Energy and Environmental Science, 2011, 4, 4068–4073 Search PubMed .This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:
Sung-Hee Shin	Sung-Hee Shin completed her bachelor degree in Environmental Engineering from Chosun University of Korea in 2006. She received her master of science degree in Environmental Science and Engineering at Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology (GIST, Korea) in 2011. She is currently PhD candidate at GIST. She has studied fundamental electrochemical-methods for electrochemistry oriented sensors and energy conversion/storage systems. Her current research interests are multifunctional polymer electrolyte membranes for non-aqueous/aqueous redox flow batteries and highly stable lithium ion battery separators including ion transport phenomena through the membranes.
Sung-Hyun Yun	Sung-Hyun Yun received his bachelor degree in Environmental Engineering from University of Seoul in 2007. He completed his master of science degree in Environmental Science and Engineering from Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology (GIST, Korea) in 2009. He is PhD candidate at GIST and currently visiting student at Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, North Carolina State University (NCSU, USA). His current research focuses are on understanding and development of ion transfer nanochannels of polymer electrolyte membranes for electrochemical energy conversion and storage devices such as fuel cells, redox flow batteries, supercapacitors, and secondary lithium ion batteries.
Seung-Hyeon Moon	Professor Seung-Hyeon Moon started his career in Energy Systems Division, Argonne National Laboratory in USA to develop bioseparation processes using electromembranes in 1990 after receiving PhD in Chemical Engineering, Illinois Institute of Technology. Since then, he has been working on synthesis, characterization, and process application of electromembranes. In GIST, he is performing membrane studies for a sustainable environment. He has published over 200 journal articles and holds 30 patents in this area. His recent interests are ionic transport through the electromembranes and nanoscale ion transport pathway particularly for energy conversion-storage systems.
Cathode compartment: [MLn](z+x)+ → [MLn]z+ + xe−	(1)
Anode compartment: [MLn](z−y)+ + ye− → [MLn]z+	(2)

 	Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of a non-aqueous RFB.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic redox reaction and ionic transport phenomena in (a) aqueous RFB and (b) non-aqueous RFB systems.	 

Redox couple	Metal ion	Transition-metal complex
(All-vanadium, Fe/Cr, Mn/V, etc.)	MLn (M: transition metal, L: ligands)
Solvent	H2O	CH3CN
Supporting electrolyte	H2SO4, HCl	TEABF4, EMIPF6
Membrane charge carrier	H+	BF4−, PF6−
Positive electrode: [Ru(bpy)3]2+ ⇌ [Ru(bpy)3]3+ + e−, E0 = 1.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl	(3)
Negative electrode: [Ru(bpy)3]+ ⇌ [Ru(bpy)3]2+ + e−, E0 = −1.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl	(4)

 	Fig. 3  Non-aqueous redox flow systems: (a) ruthenium bipyridine, (b) ruthenium acetylacetonate, (c) vanadium acetylacetonate, (d) chromium acetylacetonate, (e) manganese acetylacetonate, (f) iron bipyridine/nickel bipyridine, (g) uranium acetylacetonate, (h) cobalt acetylacetone ethylenediamine, (i) TEMPO/N-methylphthalimide.	 
Positive electrode: [Ru(acac)3] ⇌ [Ru(acac)3]+ + e−, E0 = 1.27 V vs. AgQRE	(5)
Negative electrode: [Ru(acac)3]− ⇌ [Ru(acac)3] + e−, E0 = −0.50 V vs. AgQRE	(6)
Positive electrode: [V(acac)3] ⇌ [V(acac)3]+ + e−, E0 = 0.46 V vs. Ag/Ag+	(7)
Negative electrode: [V(acac)3]− ⇌ [V(acac)3] + e−, E0 = −1.72 V vs. Ag/Ag+	(8)
Positive electrode: [Cr(acac)3] ⇌ [Cr(acac)3]+ + e−, E0 = 1.2 V vs. Ag/Ag+	(9)
Negative electrode: [Cr(acac)3]− ⇌ [Cr(acac)3] + e−, E0 = −2.2 V vs. Ag/Ag+	(10)
Positive electrode: [Mn(acac)3] ⇌ [Mn(acac)3]+ + e−, E0 = 0.7 V vs. Ag/Ag+	(11)
Negative electrode: [Mn(acac)3]− ⇌ [Mn(acac)3] + e−, E0 = −0.4 V vs. Ag/Ag+	(12)
Positive electrode: [Fe(bpy)3]2+ ⇌ [Fe(bpy)3]3+ + e−, E0 = 0.4 V vs. Ag/Ag+	(13)
Negative electrode: [Ni(bpy)3] ⇌ [Ni(bpy)3]2+ + 2e−, E0 = −1.5 V vs. Ag/Ag+	(14)
Positive electrode: [UO2(acac)2]− ⇌ [UO2(acac)2] + e−, E0 = −1.45 V vs. Fc/Fc+	(15)
Negative electrode: [U(acac)4]− ⇌ [U(acac)4] + e−, E0 = −2.45 V vs. Fc/Fc+	(16)
Positive electrode: [Co(acacen)] ⇌ [Co(acacen)]+ + e−, E0 = −0.2 V vs. Ag/Ag+	(17)
Negative electrode: [Co(acacen)]− ⇌ [Co(acacen)] + e−, E0 = −2.2 V vs. Ag/Ag+	(18)

 	Fig. 4  Redox reaction mechanism of (a) TEMPO and (b) N-Methylphthalimide.	 

1	[Ru(bpy)3](BF4)2	0.02 M [Ru(bpy)3](RF4)2/0.1 M TEABF4 in CH3CN	1) Sintered glass	a glass filter #4	Carbon fibre cloth	 	2.6	 	5	 	25
2) Anion exchange membrane	Neosepta ACH-45T, Tokuyama Soda	Flow type cell	50% charge at constant potential (3 V)	40 (EE)
(low electrical resistance)
3) Porous polymer-hybrid membrane	MF-2508 or YS-UE02-4B, Yuasa Battery	 	 	 
4) porous fluorocarbon resin filter	Polyflon PF-1 or PF-3, Toyo Roshi	 	 	 
2	Ru(acac)3	0.1 M Ru(acac)3/1 M TEABF4 in CH3CN	Anion exchange membrane	Neosepta AHA,	Graphite felt electrode	H-type glass cell	1.3	—	0.084	57 (EE)	30
Eurodia Industrie SA
3	Ru(acac)3	0.02 M Ru(acac)3/0.1 M TEABF4 in CH3CN	undivided RFB,	—	Graphite felt electrode	Single cell stack	1.75	7	2	—	29
polyprolene mesh
4	V(acac)3	0.01 M V(acac)3/0.5 M TEABF4 in CH3CN	Anion exchange membrane	AMI-7001,	GC electrode	H-type glass cell	2.2	2.2	0.2	47 (CE)	11
(Strongly basic anion permeable)	Membrane International Inc., US
5	V(acac)3	0.01 M V(acac)3/0.2 M TEAPF6 in CH3CN	Anion exchange membrane	AMI-7001,	Graphite electrode	H-type glass cell	2.3	0.083	0.008	57 (CE) for cycle 4	32
0.01 M V(acac)3/0.2 M EMIPF6 in CH3CN	Membrane International Inc., US	2.4	0.083	0.008	43 (CE) for cycle 4
6	V(acac)3	0.05 M V(acac)3/0.5 M TEABF4 in CH3CN	Anion exchange membrane	Neosepta AHA,	Graphite felt electrode	H-type glass cell	1.7	0.14	0.014	∼70 (CE)	33
(Strongly basic anion permeable)	Astom, Japan	∼35 (EE)
7	V(acac)3	0.01 M V(acac)3/0.05 M TEABF4 in CH3CN	—	—	Glassy carbon	—	2.0	0.13	0.13	—	8
platinum	0.38	0.38	—
Glod	0.84	0.84	—
8	Cr(acac)3	0.05 M Cr(acac)3/0.5 M TEABF4 in CH3CN	Anion exchange membrane	Neosepta AHA,	Graphite electrode	H-type glass cell	3.4	0.14	0.014	55 (CE)	12
(Strongly basic anion permeable)	Astom, Japan	20 (EE)
9	Mn(acac)3	0.05 M Mn(acac)3/0.5 M TEABF4 in CH3CN	Anion exchange membrane	Neosepta AHA,	GC electrode	H-type glass cell	1.1	0.14	0.057	97 (CE) for cycle 10	9
(Strongly basic anion permeable)	Astom, Japan	∼21 (EE)
10	Ni(bpy)3/Fe(bpy)3	Anolyte: 0.1 M Ni(bpy)3/0.5 M TEABF4 in propylene carbonate	—	—	Mo electrode	—	1.9	—	—	—	10
Catholyte: 0.2 M Fe(bpy)3/0.5 M TEABF4 in propylene carbonate	Ni electrode
11	Ni(bpy)3/Fe(bpy)3	Anolyte: 0.2 M Ni(bpy)3/0.5 M TEABF4 in propylene carbonate	Anion exchange membrane	FAP4, FuMa-Tech Co.	Graphite felt electrode	Homemade flowing-type cell	2.25	0.8	0.8	90.4 (CE)	26
Catholyte: 0.4 M Fe(bpy)3/0.5 M TEABF4 in propylene carbonate	81.8 (EE)
12	U β-diketonates	Anolyte: U(IV)/U(III) β-diketonates solution	—	—	platinum electrode	—	1.0	—	—	—	14
Catholyte: U(VI)/U(V) β-diketonates solution
13	TEMPO/N-Methylphthalimide	Catholyte: 0.1 M TEMPO/1 M NaClO4 in CH3CN	Cation exchange membrane	Nepem-117, BEST, China	Graphite felt electrode	Single cell stack	1.6	0.35	0.35	90 (EE) for 20 cycles	35
Anolyte: 0.1 M N-Methylphthalimide/1 M NaClO4 in CH3CN

 	Fig. 5  Chloromethylation and quaternization reaction of PPESK.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic procedure for the preparation of pore filling membranes.	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic process for the preparation of Nafion/silica nanoparticles hybrids membranes.	 

 	Fig. 8  Preparation route of the AIEM using (a) PVDF film and (b) ETFE film.	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic representation of the preparation of layer-by-layer membrane through self-assembly technique.	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematic representation of hybrid membranes having thin top layer.	 

 	Fig. 11  Mosaic configurations: (a) anion exchange particles in a cation exchange matrix; (b) cation exchange particles in an anion exchange matrix; (c) cation and anion exchange particles in a neutral matrix; (d) anion exchange particles in the top layer of a cation exchange matrix; (e) cation exchange particles in the top of an anion exchange matrix.	 

 	Fig. 12  Chemical structure of (a) V(acac)3−, (b) Ru(bpy)32+ and (c) BF4−.	 

Metal complexes ion	M(acac)3	V(acac)3−	348.27	9.10 Å
Ru(acac)3−	398.39
Cr(acac)3−	349.32
Mn(acac)3−	352.26
M(bpy)3	Ru(bpy)32+	569.62	11.78 Å
Fe(bpy)32+	524.4
Ni(bpy)32+	527.25
Charge carrier ion	BF4−	86.8	5.50 Å
	(19)
R (Ω cm2) = (r1 − r2) × A	(20)
	(21)

 	Fig. 13  (a) Equipment for the measurement of ion conductivity, (b) AC impedance spectrum of commercial IEMs in a solution of 0.01 M V(acac)3/0.05 M TEABF4 in CH3CN.	 
	(22)
	(23)
	(24)

 	Fig. 14  (a) Equipment for the measurement of reactive species ion permeability, (b) the variation of the concentration of vanadium acetylacetonate ions in right reservoir with time for the commercial AEMs.	 
	(25)
D = ksdy	(26)
	(27)
	(28)
	(29)
	(30)
	(31)
	(32)
EE = CE × VE	(33)
	(34)
P = I × V	(35)
	(36)

 	Fig. 15  Comparison of power density and current densites for non-aqueous RFBs (green) and aqueous RFBs (blue).	 

Non-aqueous RFBs	V(acac)3	0.01 M V(acac)3/0.5 M TEABF4 in CH3CN	Anion exchange membrane (AMI-7001)	2.2	2.2/0.2	4.84/0.44	47 (CE)	11
V(acac)3	0.05 M V(acac)3/0.5 M TEABF4 in CH3CN	Anion exchange membrane (Neosepta AHA)	1.7	0.14/0.01	0.24/0.02	∼70 (CE)	33
∼35 (EE)
Ru(acac)3	0.02 M Ru(acac)3/0.1 M TEABF4 in CH3CN	Anion exchange membrane (Neosepta AHA)	1.3	_/0.08	_/0.11	57 (EE)	30
Cr(acac)3	0.05 M Cr(acac)3/0.5 M TEABF4 in CH3CN	Anion exchange membrane (Neosepta AHA)	3.4	0.14/0.01	0.48/0.05	55 (CE)	12
20 (EE)
Mn(acac)3	0.05 M Mn(acac)3/0.5 M TEABF4 in CH3CN	Anion exchange membrane (Neosepta AHA)	1.1	0.14/0.06	0.15/0.06	∼97 (CE)	9
∼21 (EE)
Ni(bpy)3/Fe(bpy)3	Catholyte: 0.2 M Ni(bpy)3/0.5 M TEABF4 in propylene carbonate	Anion exchange membrane (FAP4, FuMa-Tech)	2.25	0.8	1.8	90.4 (CE)	26
Anolyte: 0.4 M Fe(bpy)3/0.5 M TEABF4 in propylene carbonate	81.8 (EE)
TEMPO/N-Methylphthalimide	Catholyte: 0.1 M TEMPO/1 M NaClO4 in CH3CN	Anion exchange membrane (Nepem-117, BEST)	1.6	0.35	0.56	90 (CE)	35
Anolyte: 0.1 M N-Methylphthalimide/1 M NaClO4 in CH3CN
Aqueous RFBs	All-vanadium	1.5 M VOSO4 in 2 M H2SO4	sulfonated poly(ether ether ketone) (SPEEK)/polypropylene (PP)/perfluorosulfonic acid (PFSA) layered composite membrane	1.4	50	70	95 (CE)	80
80 (EE)
Fe/Cd	Catholyte: FeSO4–Fe2(SO4)3 in H2SO4	proton exchange membrane (CEM)	0.99	10	9.9	70.8 (EE)	81
Anolyte: CdSO4 in H2SO4
Fe/V	1.5 M Fe/V in 3.8 M HCl or 2 M Fe/V in 3 M HCl	Cation exchange membrane (NR-212)	1.35	50	67.5	89 (CE)	82,84
1.8	90	79 (EE)
All-neptunium	0.05 M Np in 1 M HNO3	Anion exchange membrane (A-511, Asahi Kasei Corp., Japan)	1.3	70	91	99.1 (EE)	83
Ce/Zn	Catholyte: 0.5 M Ce(CH3SO3)3 in 2 M methane sulfonic acid	Cation exchange membrane (Nafion® 115)	2.16	11.1	24	85.7 (CE)	23
Anolyte: 0.5 M ZnSO4 in 2 M methane sulfonic acid	74.8 (EE)
Fe-EDTA/Br2	Catholyte: 0.1 M Fe(III)-EDTA/1 M sodium acetate	Cation exchange membrane (Nafion® 117)	1.04	10	10.4	92.1 (CE)	24
79.4 (EE)
Anolyte: 1 M NaBr
V/Mn	Catholyte: 0.3 M V(III) in 5 M H2SO4	Cation exchange membrane (Nafion® 117)	1.66	20	33.2	96.4 (CE)	20
Anolyte: 0.3 M V(III) in 5 M H2SO4	62.7 (EE)


PPb (Celgard® 2500)	25 μm	64 nm (avg.)	1.83 V	0.8 h	0.9 h	11.4%	42.5%	4.9%
PEb (Tonen Setela)	25 μm	100∼200 nm	1.78 V	4.4 h	0.8 h	1.7%	18.3%	0.3%
PVDF (AMFOR Inc.)	170 μm	80∼100 nm	3.0 V	11.9 h	12.6 h	10.6%	61.6%	6.5%
PVDF reinforced with Sefar fabricc	108 μm	NA	1.9 V	0.9 h	1.5 h	17.2%	33.2%	5.7%
PS/DVB (Neosepta AHA)	185 μm	NA	3.23 V	18.1 h	54.4 h	30.2%	50.3%	15.2%
PS/DVB (Neosepta AM-1)	22 μm	NA	3.2 V	8.9 h	8.1 h (0.05 A cm−2)	45.6%	78.9%	36.0%
PVC/4VP/DVBd	140 μm	NA	2.2 V	21.2 h (0.01 A cm−2)	12.2 h	57.8%	54.7%	31.6%

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
