Status and perspectives of CO 2 conversion into fuels and chemicals by catalytic, photocatalytic and electrocatalytic processes   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3EE41272E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3EE41272E
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3112-3135Status and perspectives of CO2 conversion into fuels and chemicals by catalytic, photocatalytic and electrocatalytic processes†Evgenii V. Kondratenko*a, Guido Mulb, Jonas Baltrusaitisb, Gastón O. Larrazábalc and Javier Pérez-Ramírez*caLeibniz-Institut für Katalyse e.V and der Universität Rostock, Albert-Einstein-Str., 29A, 18059 Rostock, Germany. E-mail: evgenii.kondratenko@catalysis.de;  Fax: +49-381-128151290;   Tel: +49-381-1281290bPhotocatalytic Synthesis Group, MESA+ Institute for Nanotechnology, Faculty of Science and Technology, University of Twente, P.O. Box 217, Enschede, NL 7500 AE, The NetherlandscInstitute for Chemical and Bioengineering, Department of Chemistry and Applied Biosciences, ETH Zurich, HCI E 125, Wolfgang-Pauli-Strasse 10, Zurich, CH-8093, Switzerland. E-mail: jpr@chem.ethz.ch;  Fax: +41 44 633 1405;   Tel: +41 44 633 7120Received 15th April 2013, Accepted 13th August 2013First published on 14th August 2013AbstractThis review highlights recent developments and future perspectives in carbon dioxide usage for the sustainable production of energy and chemicals and to reduce global warming. We discuss the heterogeneously catalysed hydrogenation, as well as the photocatalytic and electrocatalytic conversion of CO2 to hydrocarbons or oxygenates. Various sources of hydrogen are also reviewed in terms of their CO2 neutrality. Technologies have been developed for large-scale CO2 hydrogenation to methanol or methane. Their industrial application is, however, limited by the high price of renewable hydrogen and the availability of large-volume sources of pure CO2. With regard to the direct electrocatalytic reduction of CO2 to value-added chemicals, substantial advances in electrodes, electrolyte, and reactor design are still required to permit the development of commercial processes. Therefore, in this review particular attention is paid to (i) the design of metal electrodes to improve their performance and (ii) recent developments of alternative approaches such as the application of ionic liquids as electrolytes and of microorganisms as co-catalysts. The most significant improvements both in catalyst and reactor design are needed for the photocatalytic functionalisation of CO2 to become a viable technology that can help in the usage of CO2 as a feedstock for the production of energy and chemicals. Apart from technological aspects and catalytic performance, we also discuss fundamental strategies for the rational design of materials for effective transformations of CO2 to value-added chemicals with the help of H2, electricity and/or light.Evgenii V. KondratenkoEvgenii V. Kondratenko (Rubtsovsk, Russia, 1967) graduated from the Novosibirsk State University in 1991 (diploma degree in chemistry with specialisation in chemical kinetics). He earned his PhD (Candidate of Chemical Sciences) in 1995 at the Institute of Chemistry of Natural Materials in Krasnoyarsk. In 1997, he was awarded a fellowship from the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation at the Institute for Applied Chemistry Berlin-Adlershof. After a Post-Doc stay at the same institute, he obtained a habilitation degree (the Venia Legendi degree) from the Technical University Berlin in 2007. He is currently working as a group leader (“Reaction Mechanisms”) at the Leibniz-Institut für Katalyse e.V. an der Universität Rostock. His research field is functionalisation of C1–C4 alkanes, environmental catalysis, and high-temperature reactions with the focus on mechanistic understanding of catalyst operation and on developing reactor concepts for improved catalyst and/or process design.Guido MulGuido Mul (1969) obtained his master's degree in chemistry with specialization in heterogeneous catalysis (Prof. Geus) from Utrecht University in 1992. He received his PhD in 1997 from the Delft University of Technology on the in situ DRIFT analysis of catalytic oxidation of (diesel) soot, research conducted under supervision of Prof. Jacob Moulijn. After a Post-Doc position at SRI-International (Stanford Research Institute) in California, USA (1997–1999), he was awarded a fellowship of the KNAW (Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences) in 2000. This allowed him to return to Delft University of Technology (TUD) and to determine the detailed mechanism of catalytic oxidation reactions, using an integrated approach based on Infrared and Raman spectroscopies and transient kinetics. In 2005 he was awarded the VIDI grant of the Dutch National Science Foundation (NWO), to initiate fundamental research in the field of photocatalysis. He was appointed associate professor at TU Delft in 2007, with the focus on developing/evaluating spectroscopies (ATR, Raman) for analyses of liquid phase (photo)catalytic processes. He was appointed full professor at the University of Twente in 2009 to conduct research in the field of ‘Photocatalytic Synthesis’, with research activities in photocatalysis for hydrogen production and CO2 to fuel conversion, water and air purification, and selective oxidation. Furthermore, development and evaluation of novel reactor concepts based on monoliths and microreactors for (photo)catalysis are part of his current research activities.Jonas BaltrusaitisJonas Baltrusaitis was born in June 24, 1976 in Marijampole, Lithuania. He graduated from Kaunas University of Technology, Lithuania with BSc and MSc degrees in Chemical Engineering in 1998 and 2000, and then worked in the chemical industry as a process engineer. In 2003 he was accepted to the University of Iowa, Department of Chemistry where he graduated in 2007 with a PhD in Physical Chemistry. During his graduate career, he worked in Prof. Vicki Grassian's group on the atmospheric and environmental chemistry topics, surface chemistry, microscopy and spectroscopy. After his PhD and post-doc, JB worked in Central Microscopy Research Facility at the University of Iowa as a research scientist. In 2012, JB has become an assistant professor in the Photocatalytic Synthesis Group, University of Twente, the Netherlands. His research is now at the nexus between energy and environment in designing low key, sustainable methods and materials for energy conversion. JB has been happily married to his wife Marija for 10 years and is a proud owner of 2 adopted dogs.Gastón O. LarrazábalGastón O. Larrazábal (Caracas, Venezuela, 1987) earned his BS degree in Chemical Engineering from Universidad Simón Bolívar (2010) and his MSc degree in Process Engineering (2013) from ETH Zurich. He has recently started his PhD studies at ETH Zurich under the supervision of Prof. Javier Pérez-Ramírez. Gastón is interested in the development of electrocatalytical processes for the conversion of carbon dioxide into fuels and chemicals.Javier Pérez-RamírezJavier Pérez-Ramírez (Benidorm, Spain, 1974) studied Chemical Engineering at the University of Alicante, Spain and earned his PhD degree at TU Delft, Netherlands in 2002. After a period in industry he was appointed ICREA research professor at ICIQ in Tarragona, Spain. In 2010, he took the chair of Catalysis Engineering at the Institute for Chemical and Bioengineering of the ETH Zurich. He is engaged in the development and understanding of new heterogeneous catalysts, multifunctional materials, and reactor engineering concepts devoted to sustainable technologies.Broader contextPreserving the environment for future generations, particularly in light of concerns about climate change linked to anthropogenic CO2 emissions, is one of the greatest challenges facing today's society. The complexity of this issue is compounded by a myriad of factors, such as the constant push for economic growth, the increase of the world's population and our reliance on fossil fuels. In this context, novel technologies for the sustainable production of energy and chemicals in an economically and environmentally viable manner are urgently needed. One vision for such a technology is using CO2 as a feedstock for the production of energy carriers and commodity chemicals. This could lessen the amount of CO2 released into the atmosphere, lead to more sustainable production processes in the chemical industry and unlock valuable synergies with intermittent renewable energy sources. Catalysis plays a fundamental role in all the routes that have been proposed for CO2 utilisation. This review provides a comprehensive view of the field of CO2 conversion into fuels and chemicals through heterogeneous catalysis, photocatalysis and electrocatalysis and highlights the technical features, recent advances, current limitations and future perspectives of these routes.Setting the CO2 sceneFor the past two centuries, fossil fuels such as natural gas, oil, and coal have been essential for the production of energy and commodity chemicals. For example, around 90% of the energy produced worldwide in 2011 was derived from fossil fuels. Furthermore, BP's Energy Outlook 2030 predicts that oil will remain the dominant resource of energy for years to come.1 It is also forecasted that the global energy demand will grow by 36% between 2011 and 2030. Despite the fact that the amount of fossil fuels is finite and resources decrease rapidly due to (i) the development of new processes, (ii) the increased world population, and (iii) a longer life expectancy, they will continue to play a major role in energy generation. This is due to the development of cost effective new technologies, which enable the recovery of oil and gas from non-standard sources. For example, 170.4 billion barrels of proven oil reserves are present in the oil sand deposits of Northern Alberta,2 the world's third largest oil reserve. Certainly, from the point of view of CO2 emissions, the use of these fossil resources is not sustainable and will further contribute to global warming. Therefore, the environmental and economic incentives to develop processes for the conversion of CO2 into fuels and chemicals are enormous. For such conversions to become economically feasible, considerable research is urgently required. Another important aspect is the development of CO2 capture and storage technologies.According to the report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change in 2005 (IPCC),3 around 7900 stationary sources with individual annual CO2 emissions above 0.1 Mt exist worldwide. Fig. 1 shows a breakdown of the overall annual CO2 production by selected industry sectors. Fossil-fuel combustion in power stations clearly dominates global CO2 emissions. Other processes which also contribute to the formation of CO2 include the production of cement, metals, and bioethanol as well as the refinery and petrochemical industries. Fig. 1  Total annual CO2 emissions and partial CO2 pressures in various industry sectors. Adapted from ref. 3. However, the ability to utilise CO2 strongly depends on the quality of its source, i.e. the purity and the partial pressure. In general, the higher the partial pressure, the easier the separation. Fig. 1 shows that the partial pressure of CO2 in the flue gases of power stations is significantly lower than that in those originating from petrochemical plants (e.g., from the production of ethylene oxide, methanol, hydrogen, and ammonia). As a consequence, capturing CO2 from its largest stationary source, i.e. power generation plants, is economically less attractive. When oxy-fuel technology (i.e. the combustion of fossil fuels with pure oxygen) is applied, water and pure carbon dioxide are formed. However, this technology is costly as it requires separating oxygen from air. More detailed analysis and description of options for CO2 recovery from various sources and for its storage are provided in the latest IPCC report.3Once CO2 is separated, we face the conversion challenge. CO2 is an awfully stable chemical, which imposes significant energy demands and requires the application of extremely ‘talented’ catalysts capable of driving its selective conversion into targeted chemicals. CO2 can be simply incorporated into organic molecules to yield various carbonates, carboxylates, and carbamates. Such reactions are usually homogeneously catalysed at room temperature. Recent developments in this domain are thoroughly described elsewhere4,5 and will not be covered herein. It should also be noted that the above approaches are not implemented in large scale and do not provide bulk chemicals and/or fuels. In order to obtain the latter, CO2 must be chemically reduced, which requires a substantial input of energy. From a sustainable viewpoint, solar light is the ideal energy source. In combination with photocatalytic H2O splitting, the solar-driven reduction of CO2 to fuels is a very attractive approach to reduce CO2 emissions. Compared to heterogeneous photocatalysts for CO2 reduction in aqueous solutions, homogeneous ones can be uniformly dispersed thus enabling easier accessibility of dissolved CO2 to the active sites. However, they are based on expensive metals and need sacrificial reductants. Challenges and developments in this area, specifically related to novel catalytic materials, are discussed in recent authoritative reviews.6–10 CO2 dissolved in liquids can also be electrocatalytically converted into hydrocarbons, oxygenates, or carbon monoxide using both heterogeneous and homogeneous systems.7,11–14 This approach gathers strength when photovoltaic- or wind-derived electricity is used. Another option to directly functionalize CO2 is its hydrogenation to oxygenates or hydrocarbons via modified methanol and Fischer–Tropsch (FT) syntheses.15–17 Such processes have a greater potential to be applied on a large scale compared to the photo- or electrocatalytic conversion. However, the problem associated with CO2 hydrogenation is the need for cheap and clean H2. Alternatively, CO2 can react with CH4 to yield synthesis gas (a mixture of CO and H2). The Gas and Metals National Corporation in Japan has successfully performed pilot plant tests for the production of liquid fuels from synthesis gas obtained via a combined CO2 and H2O reforming of natural gas followed by FT synthesis.18Compared with available accounts on specific CO2 transformations, this review discusses recent developments in CO2 technologies via the catalytic hydrogenation as well as electro- and photocatalytic approaches for the production of higher-value chemicals with the aim of identifying unifying guidelines for the improvement of these processes. Since our expertise lies in heterogeneous catalysis, the emphasis will be on heterogeneous transformations. We will also elaborate on the possibilities for integrating different technological approaches.Catalytic hydrogenation of CO2Key issue: H2 sourcesSince molecular hydrogen does not naturally exist in its pure form, it is typically derived from natural gas, oil, coal, biomass, and water by means of various chemical, physico-chemical, photolytic, electrolytic or biological transformations. From an environmental viewpoint, it is crucial that its production is also CO2 emission free. Since hydrogen can actually substitute fossil fuels, it opens the possibility to even have a positive CO2 balance, i.e. reducing overall CO2 production, when generating heat and energy upon hydrogen combustion yielding H2O as the only product. Fig. 2 shows possible H2 production routes with the corresponding energy sources. As this contribution is not aimed at reviewing developments in this research area, we will only briefly describe commercially available and prospective approaches. The emphasis will be on their environmental impact and economy in CO2 hydrogenation to value-added chemicals. Detailed information on various aspects of hydrogen production can be found elsewhere.19–24 Fig. 2  Primary materials and energy sources for H2 generation. Steam reforming of methane (eqn (1)) is the main source of hydrogen today.25 Since this reaction also results in CO, the latter is oxidised to non-toxic CO2 through the water-gas shift reaction in a separate reactor with simultaneous generation of molecular hydrogen (eqn (2)). Moreover, the steam reforming of methane is energy intensive due to its high endothermicity. This energy is presently generated by the combustion of fossil fuels which also simultaneously produces carbon dioxide. The latter emissions are minimised when steam reforming is performed in the presence of gaseous oxygen (autothermal reforming). Even though these reactions are well optimised, there are economic needs for their further improvements with respect to the catalyst activity, ratio of H2:CO, resistance to deactivation via coking and poisoning by sulphur compounds.26 Furthermore, cost-effective and eco-efficient technologies for air separation are required for autothermal reforming. CH4 + H2O → 3H2 + CO(1) H2O + CO → H2 + CO2(2)Biomass can also be directly converted to hydrogen through liquefaction, pyrolysis, and gasification.22,27 The latter seems to be the most attractive, because it can profit from existing commercially applied coal gasification technologies. Gasification occurs above 1000 K in the presence of oxygen and/or water (eqn (3)). This conversion process results in a mixture of H2, CO, CO2, CH4 and other gas-phase, liquid or solid carbon-containing by-products. Taking into account the renewable nature of biomass, such hydrogen production can be considered to be CO2-neutral. When combining the biomass gasification with coal gasification, which seriously suffers from significant amounts of co-produced CO2, the environmental impact of the latter process can be minimised. Hydrogen can also be produced through reforming reactions of bio-liquids such as ethanol, glycerol, sugars, or bio-oils.22 According to the Hydrogen Production Roadmap,23 the development of commercial technologies for biomass gasification can be completed by 2017, since a common drawback with such conversions is catalyst deactivation due to coking and sulphur poisoning. Another important need is for cheap technologies for the capture and storage of high amounts of CO2 and solid carbon deposits formed as by-products. In addition, any biomass-based routes to produce hydrogen suffer from unpredictable feedstock quality, regional and seasonal dependency, and finally high operation and maintenance costs. Therefore, further improvements in hydrogen production via biomass gasification are expected to be achieved through the development of sulphur- and carbon-tolerant catalysts and separation technologies. CxHyOz + O2 + H2O → H2 + CO + CO2 +CnHm + tar(3)Water electrolysis is industrially applied to produce oxygen and high-purity hydrogen (eqn (4)), eliminating expensive separation costs. Available commercial low-temperature electrolysers operate with efficiencies between 50 and 70%.27 Electricity production is the dominant cost, and also contributes to air pollution due to the formation of CO2, when generated from fossil fuels. When electricity produced with the help of wind or sunlight is applied, the formation of molecular hydrogen through water electrolysis is free from carbon dioxide emissions. However, the suitability of both wind and solar energy is climate and therefore geographically dependent. Consequently, major challenges are to ensure resourceful operation over a wide range of weather conditions, as well as quick and safe response to their changes. 2H2O → 2H2 + O2(4)Water can also be split into hydrogen and oxygen using sunlight and a photocatalyst. Typically, oxides, nitrides or sulphides of metals with d0, d10, and f0 electronic configurations show catalytic activity for the target reaction.28–31 The role of such catalysts can also be fulfilled by some biological microorganisms, like green algae or cyanobacteria.32 Both ways of hydrogen production are very attractive, but are still far from a possible industrial application due to the low productivity. Several developments are needed to produce hydrogen from water on an industrial level by photocatalysis. According to ref. 21 and 23, catalytic materials are required, which (i) provide a solar-to-hydrogen efficiency higher than 16% and (ii) are stable against oxidation and (iii) can produce hydrogen for longer than 15000 hours.In summary, water is concluded to be the only suitable source of hydrogen for reducing CO2 emissions from various sources via its hydrogenation to valued-added chemicals. This is due to the fact that H2 and O2 are the only reaction products of water splitting, meaning that CO2 emissions can be avoided when using a CO2 free energy source. In contrast, hydrogen generation from fossil fuels and biomass leads to the co-production of CO2 and CO (eqn (1) and (3)). Therefore, CO2 neutrality can only be realized if the cogenerated CO2 is hydrogenated in subsequent process steps, rather than consuming/treating CO2 originating from other sources.CO2 hydrogenation by heterogeneous catalystsHydrogen and methane are two high-energy materials, which can be used for the large-scale transformation of carbon dioxide to valuable products. Fig. 3 illustrates the most attractive heterogeneously catalysed routes. It is important to highlight that the H2-based routes directly yield fuels or chemical building blocks, while the CO2 conversion with CH4 results in syngas, which can be converted to the above products in an additional process step. From an economic point of view, the direct transformation of CO2 is preferable. Fig. 3  CO2 conversions to fuels or useful commodity chemicals. Conversion of CO2 to hydrocarbonsThe hydrogenation of CO2 to CH4 is highly important from an industrial viewpoint. There are several uses of methane within the existing commercial infrastructure: (i) for the steam reforming of methane to syngas, (ii) for heat and electricity generation, and (iii) as a substitute for gasoline, diesel or liquid petroleum gas in vehicles. The importance of the latter application is illustrated by the “e-gas project” initiated by Audi AG in 2011 in Hamburg.33 Together with regional energy suppliers in Northern Germany, Audi AG participates in building wind mills at an offshore park in the North Sea. The wind-generated energy will be applied for water electrolysis to obtain hydrogen and oxygen (eqn (4)). Hydrogen produced in this way is applied for the conversion of CO2 from bio-gas to CH4. The planned annual production of 1 kt of CH4 would translate to the conversion of 2.8 kt of CO2. The resulting CH4 can be used for vehicles and also transported to other regions in Europe through the existing natural gas transportation system. Thus, the methanation of CO2 opens the possibility of producing CH4 in places where H2 is generated using renewable energy sources and thereafter to use it everywhere.Supported noble metals or nickel catalyse the methanation of CO2. Catalysts, reaction conditions, and mechanistic concepts are thoroughly reviewed by Wang et al.,34 covering the literature up to 2010. Among the metals tested, Ru exhibits superior activity and selectivity (Table 1). Since the conversion of CO2 to CH4 is exothermic, it is highly desired to develop catalysts for low temperature operation favouring high degrees of CO2 conversion. Low temperatures are also favourable for suppressing the undesired reverse water-gas shift (RWGS) reaction, which is endothermic. Abe et al.35 reported 100% yield of CH4 at 453 K on a Ru/TiO2-anatase catalyst. This catalyst did not lose its activity over at least 170 h on-stream. It was also active even at room temperature with a reaction rate of 40 nmol CH4 min−1 g−1. It was concluded that the size of Ru nanoparticles on the catalyst surface determines the hydrogenation activity; the lowest temperature for 100% CO2 conversion to CH4 was achieved over the catalyst possessing Ru nanoparticles of 2.5 nm diameter (Table 1). Since smaller nanoparticles were not tested in this study, new experiments are required in order to check if the methanation activity can be further increased with a decreased size or whether the size-activity dependence will follow a typical volcano dependence.
Table 1 Catalysts, their activity and selectivity for CO2 hydrogenation to CH4

Catalystsd/nmτ/ml g−1 s−1T/KX(CO2)/%S(CH4)/%Ref.a This value is gas space hourly velocity (h−1). B, W, and G mean different methods of catalyst preparation, i.e. barrel-sputtering,40 Conventional impregnation, and impregnation with partial reduction of RuOx to Ru,41 respectively.Ru/TiO2(B)2.50.2445310010035Ru/TiO2(W)9.50.2469310010035Ru/TiO2(G)5.20.2451310010035Ru/TiO2(B)3.40.2447310010035Ru/TiO2(B)5.00.2469310010035Ru/TiO2(B)6.40.2451310010035Ce0.97Ru0.03O2 12.5753519936Ce0.96Ru0.04O2 12.5723559936Pd–Mg/SiO2 2.0723599537Pd–Ni/SiO2 2.072350.5893710Ni–CZ 43000a6238599.538Ni-MCM-41 1.6673569639Carbon dioxide can also be directly hydrogenated to hydrocarbons analogously to a classical CO–FT synthesis over Co- and Fe-based catalysts.34,42,43 However, cobalt catalysts do not follow a typical Anderson–Schulz–Flory distribution in a CO2–H2 feed; methane is the main product.44,45 This is probably related to the low activity of Co-based catalysts for the generation of CO via the RWGS reaction. As summarised elsewhere,43 CO is an important reaction intermediate in the conversion of CO2 to higher hydrocarbons over Fe-based catalysts. Such materials have been intensively applied for the CO2–FT reaction. The most relevant results up to 2011 have been thoroughly reviewed.34,43 It should be stressed that unpromoted Fe-based catalysts are not selective for the desired FT products.34 Mn, Cu, K, and Ce are the most intensively investigated dopants which positively influence the selectivity to higher hydrocarbons. From a mechanistic point of view, both Mn46,47 and Cu46 improve the reducibility of FeOx species, the distribution of iron species, and the surface basicity. The positive effect of Mn is only valid in a limited concentration range due to blockage of active iron sites at high Mn loadings.47,48 In contrast, high amounts of K are beneficial for CO2–FT in terms of decreasing CH4 formation and of improving CO2 conversion.43 A possible reason for this effect may be that K enhances the chemisorption of CO2 and simultaneously decreases the adsorption of H2.The positive role of Ce is related to its good low-temperature RWGS activity. The size of CeO2 domains and the order of catalyst impregnation with ceria influence the activity and selectivity towards C2–C5 olefins.49 For example, the catalysts prepared via deposition of Fe, Mn, and K on alumina impregnated with ceria showed higher activity and selectivity in comparison to their ceria-free counterparts. In order to benefit from the effects of ceria, it is essential to avoid or minimise blockage of the active catalyst components by ceria. This can be achieved by calcination of the unloaded Ce-containing support at a high temperature.In summary, although Fe-based catalysts show promising results for CO2–FT, their performance, in terms of their activity and of the formation of undesired methane, should be further improved. Another possibility to improve the economic feasibility of converting CO2 to higher hydrocarbons is to initially convert CO2 to CO and then performing CO–FT. Graves et al.50 analysed the energy balance and economy of fuel production for CO2via three main steps: (i) CO2 capture, (ii) conversion of H2O and CO2 to syngas, and (iii) classical FT synthesis. Their process scheme is shown in Fig. 4. Fig. 4  Process diagram for CO2 conversion to liquid fuels. Adapted from ref. 50. The activation of CO2 and H2O is the most energy demanding part and dominates the process costs. In order to decrease the costs, these authors suggested using the heat of the FT synthesis to preheat the CO2 and H2O for reducing the thermo neutral voltage and thus increasing the overall system efficiency. According to their estimations, the so-produced synthetic fuel could be competitive with gasoline at around 0.53 $ L−1 if the electricity price was less than 0.03 $ kW h−1 from a constant power supply. For comparison, recent average electricity prices in the USA are approximately 3 times higher. The cost of CO2 capture also contributes to the price of fuel, which increases by 0.02 $ L−1 with a cost of 0.1 $ per ton of CO2 captured. Therefore, it is highly important to reduce electricity costs significantly in order to improve the economics of such CO2-based fuel production technology and to make it competitive for the current fossil fuel based technologies.Formation of oxygenates from CO2Methanol is an important intermediate for the large-scale production of a variety of chemicals.51 It is currently produced via the hydrogenation of CO over catalysts based on metals and oxides of copper and zinc. These materials can also catalyse the conversion of CO2 to methanol. Approximately 30 years ago, Lurgi GmbH had already developed and tested a process for the hydrogenation of carbon dioxide to methanol.52In late 2011, the company Carbon Recycling International (CRI) in Iceland commissioned the first plant for methanol production from CO2.53 The production capacity of the plant is around 4 kt of methanol per year, although no information about the type of catalyst or reactor has been disclosed. This year, CRI has already shipped methanol to the Dutch oil company Argos in Rotterdam. CRI also plans to build a new plant with an annual production of methanol of around 40 kt. All CO2 used in the production process is captured from flue gases from the nearby HS Orka geothermal power plant. This power plant also produces hydrogen through electrolytic water splitting (eqn (4)). From an environmental point of view, the whole production process is clean, with oxygen being the only by-product.A recent joint contribution from Air Liquide Forschung und Entwicklung GmbH and Lurgi GmbH54 deals with the technical aspects of the hydrogenation of CO2 to methanol over a commercial methanol synthesis catalyst from Süd-Chemie. For comparative purposes, methanol production from CO was also investigated on the same catalyst. Catalytic tests were performed in a loop reactor under conditions close to those of large-scale methanol production; Treactor = 523 K, the gas hourly space velocity was 10500 h−1, total pressure was 80 and 70 bar for CO2 and CO hydrogenation, respectively. The feed components were separated from the reaction products at the reactor outlet and then recycled. The per-pass conversion of CO2 ranges from 35 to 45%. The catalyst slightly deactivated within the first 100 h on-stream and showed stable operation over the following 600 h. The space-time-yield (STY) of methanol was around 0.6 kgCH3OH Lcat−1 h−1. This value is approximately 45% lower than for the CO-based process. This is probably related to the negative effect of H2O on the rate of methanol formation when using a CO2–H2 feed. Actually, several previous studies have claimed that the kinetics of CO2 hydrogenation are faster than the kinetics of CO hydrogenation.55–58 CO was suggested to remove oxygen species coming from H2O. Another important difference between the CO- and CO2-based production of methanol relates to the product selectivity. Compared to the former process, the latter shows significantly higher water content but notably lower selectivity towards carbon-containing products, like higher alcohols, hydrocarbons, esters, and ketones.Dimethyl ether (DME) is another important chemical, with potential as a substitute for conventional diesel. It can be formed from CO2 in a single-step process using a bifunctional catalyst, i.e. when a methanol synthesis catalyst is combined with an acid catalyst like γ-Al2O3 or zeolites. Alternatively, methanol is formed in one reactor followed by its further dehydration to DME in another reactor. Since DME formation is thermodynamically limited due to the negative effect of water formed upon methanol dehydration, pure (distilled) methanol is typically used. The distillation step is an important cost factor. Recently, Lurgi developed the MegaDME® process,54 which can tolerate methanol streams with a high water content. Fig. 5 gives an overview of the main process operations. This process features energy integration through the coupling of the methanol vaporizer and the DME-column, an arrangement which saves the investment costs for these two individual operation units because the methanol vaporizer and the DME-column can become the reboiler or overhead condenser of each other.54 Fig. 5  MegaDME® basic process instrumentation diagram taken from ref. 54. Catalysts. Apart from the availability of large amounts of cheap and pure CO2 and H2, the relatively low productivity of methanol is also an important issue. Therefore, many research groups try to elucidate factors determining catalyst activity, selectivity, and time-on-stream stability. In general, the most active and selective catalysts contain Cu as the main active component together with different modifiers.34,59,60 ZnO is an important supporting material used for preparation of Cu-containing catalysts. The value of ZnO is its ability to control the morphology and stabilise the copper species.61,62 It is well established that the activity and selectivity can be improved when ZnO is promoted by ZrO2,63–65 Al2O3,66–68 La2O3,59 or SiO2.69 The promoting effect is often related to a better dispersion of copper species. In addition, structural characteristics of supports play an important role. For example, Guo et al.64 applied a glycine–nitrate combustion method to prepare Cu–ZnO–ZrO2 catalysts and tested them for the conversion of CO2 to methanol at 493 K and 30 bar. These authors found a linear correlation between turnover-frequency (TOF) and the relative amount of monoclinic zirconia in the catalysts. Based on these results and previous studies by Bell and coworkers,70 Cu species on monoclinic zirconia were suggested to possess a higher concentration of carbon-containing intermediates yielding methanol. However, this is probably not the only activity-determining factor. Later, the same authors were unable to establish a direct relationship between the TOF values of methanol formation and the content of monoclinic zirconia in Cu–ZnO–ZrO2 catalysts prepared via the solid–state reaction route.65 The monoclinic zirconia was suggested to be relevant for methanol selectivity. In order to avoid such contradictive discussions, additional systematic studies are required to further elucidate the role of zirconia morphology in the hydrogenation of CO2 to methanol.The effect of support morphology was also established in the conversion of CO2 to methanol over a physical mixture of Cu with rod-like or plate-like ZnO and Al2O3.71 When the plate-like ZnO crystals were used, significantly higher methanol selectivity at a slightly lower CO2 conversion was achieved compared to the catalysts based on the rod-like ZnO. The authors of ref. 71 concluded that additional oxygen vacancies are formed at the Cu–ZnO interface when copper interacts with ZnO crystals of plate-like morphology. These vacancies were suggested to be active sites for CO2 activation.Pd-72–76 and Au-containing77 materials were also tested for the hydrogenation of CO2 to methanol. Liang et al.72 showed that active catalysts for the above reaction were obtained by supporting Pd/ZnO on carbon nanotubes. The nanotubes play a dual role: they (i) help to increase the dispersion of metallic Pd and (ii) are additionally able to adsorb hydrogen. A similar effect of carbon nanotube supports on the catalytic properties of a Pd/Ga2O3 system was also established.73 Very recently, Zhou et al.76 have demonstrated that both the CO2 conversion and methanol selectivity exhibited by supported Pd species are strongly influenced by the exposed face of the β-Ga2O3 support. The best performance was obtained over Pd supported on the (002) facet. This is due to the fact that this surface helps to increase the dispersion of Pd owing to the strong metal–support interaction. Another example of the importance of support morphology for methanol synthesis is the hydrogenation of CO2 on Au/TiC(001) and Cu/TiC(001).77 The metal-normalized activity of these materials was significantly higher than that of Cu(111) under ultrahigh vacuum conditions. This was explained by a charge polarization of Au and Cu particles, which activates them for the reaction.Mechanistic aspects of CO and CO2 hydrogenation to methanol. From a mechanistic point of view, the catalytic hydrogenation of CO2 to methanol can occur directly or indirectly with participation of CO formed through the RWGS reaction. In the former, two alternative mechanistic schemes are suggested. They differ in the key reaction intermediates, which are formate (HCOO) or hydrocarboxyl (COOH) species. To identify possible elementary reaction pathways of direct hydrogenation of CO2 to methanol, periodic DFT calculations were performed on Cu(111),78,79 Cu(211)66 and CuZn(211).66 The hydrogenation of CO to methanol was also calculated to clarify if the mechanistic concepts of CO- and CO2-based methanol synthesis differ. Considered reaction networks of methanol formation are shown in Fig. 6. Fig. 6  Pathways for methanol formation from CO2 and H2 or CO and H2 on metallic Cu. * represents a surface Cu site. Adapted from ref. 66, 78 and 79. The hydrogenation of CO2 starts with the non-dissociative and dissociative adsorption of CO2 and H2. Subsequently, the adsorbed CO2 species are hydrogenated step-wise to adsorbed HCO, H2CO, H3CO, and finally to H3COH. Owing to the very weak adsorption of CO2, it was suggested to react directly from the gas phase with adsorbed H species to yield mono-HCOO or trans-COOH adsorbed species.78 The latter species were not considered by Behrens et al.66 and Grabow et al.79 Irrespective of the exposed face of the Cu surface and of the co-existence of Zn, formate species can be preferably hydrogenated to HCOOH. A common adsorbed CH2O intermediate was found to be involved in the hydrogenation both of CO and CO2 to methanol. In general, the stability of the CO2 hydrogenation intermediate species is energetically favoured, albeit with a larger activation barrier than in the case of CO. Another important conclusion is that CO is not only used as a promoter for CO2 hydrogenation to methanol, but is also hydrogenated in significant amounts via the common CH2O intermediate.In contrast to the above studies, Zhao et al.78 excluded methanol formation from CO2via the formate route because the surface HCOOH species either easily desorb or dissociate back into HCOO and H. In addition to formate intermediates,66,79 these authors also considered hydrocarboxyl (COOH) species. Although the formation of such species is less energetically favourable compared with formate species, Zhao et al.78 predicted that co-adsorbed water helps to stabilise them. They can be further hydrogenated to COHOH species, which decomposes to COH and OH. The former species is transformed to methanol through the addition of three hydrogen atoms. Thus, in order to discriminate between reaction pathways leading to methanol directly from CO2, experimental studies on surface intermediates or independent DFT calculations are highly desired. They must include the effects of the secondary reactions, such as RWGS, and their adsorbed intermediates, especially those involved in H2O formation.The key intermediates may also depend on the structure of the catalytically active Cu surface. A recent combined experimental and theoretical study established that the sites active in methanol synthesis comprise Cu steps decorated with Zn atoms.66 The authors used industrial Cu/ZnO-based catalysts for methanol synthesis at 60 bar and 483 and 523 K. The main conclusion of their thorough catalyst characterization was related to the role of bulk defects in inducing line defects at the exposed surfaces of Cu. In their DFT calculations, stepped Cu(211) and flat Cu(111) surfaces were used to elucidate the role of surface defects in the hydrogenation of both CO and CO2 to methanol. For the hydrogenation of CO2 only the formate route was considered. In agreement with ref. 78, formate species are weakly bound on the flat Cu(111) surface. Adsorption energies of surface intermediates in CO- and CO2-based methanol synthesis are strengthened upon elevating the pressure of feed components. Independently, both the intermediate and the transition state energies were stabilised on the stepped Cu(211) surface, explaining its higher intrinsic activity compared to that of the flat Cu(111) surface. In addition, allowing for the introduction of Zn into the Cu step further increased the adsorption strength of HCO, H2CO, and H3CO intermediates and decreased the activation barriers. From these DFT data, an active catalyst for the synthesis of methanol from CO2 should possess Cu nanoparticles with a high step density and Zn atom nearby.Electrocatalytic CO2 hydrogenationElectrodes and reaction cellsThe electrocatalytic reduction of CO2 has a long history dating from the 19th century. Since the last three decades, this topic has attracted interest from both academia and industry. CO2 can be electrocatalytically converted into various products directly at the surface of solid electrodes. Alternatively, a homogeneous catalyst, which also participates in an electron transfer reaction from solid electrodes, can be additionally incorporated to convert the CO2. A number of reviews have been published covering various aspects of CO2 reduction.11–14,80–84 Herein, we cover recent advances in this fast developing research area of direct CO2 conversion over metal electrodes. A brief general description of electrocatalytic cells, reaction conditions, and electrodes will be concisely described. Fig. 7 shows schemes of cells often used for CO2 conversions. As highlighted by Hori,83 the cells must also enable appropriate chemical analysis of the products formed at the electrodes. A significant number of experiments were performed in standard cells with undivided electrodes (Fig. 7). Fig. 7  Laboratory cells used for electrochemical CO2 conversion: (a) two-compartment cell, (b) cell with electrodes separated by an H+-conducting membrane, and (c) cell with a gas diffusion electrode. Common methods used for testing CO2 reduction are summarised elsewhere.14 This paper also contains information about the effect of temperature, pressure and pH on the rates of CO2 reduction and product distribution. In general, an increase in the pressure and a decrease in the temperature result in higher reaction rates owing to an increased CO2 concentration in the electrolyte. The application of nonaqueous solutions also improves CO2 solubility and suppresses the hydrogen evolution reaction.83 Various metals as well as carbon and boron were applied as cathodes. Lvov et al.14 summarised studies dealing with the individual electrodes. According to Hori and coworkers,83,85,86 simple metal electrodes can be classified in four groups depending on the type of reaction products (Fig. 8). Metallic Cu is the only member of the first group and shows exceptional selectivity and activity for CO2 conversion to hydrocarbons. The second group consists of Au, Ag and Zn, which yield CO as the main product. The third group, including In, Pb, Sn and Cd, is characterized by the formation of formate as the main product, while hydrogen evolution was almost exclusively observed over Ni, Fe, Pt and Ti electrodes. It is interesting to note that CO is adsorbed very strongly on metals of the fourth group; it has been postulated that the adsorbed CO prevents further reduction of CO2, hence resulting in hydrogen evolution.86 Another study,87 performed at −2.2 V vs. SCE (standard calomel electrode) in a 0.05 M KHCO3 solution at 273 K, found the following electrodes to be mostly inactive in CO2 reduction: C, Al, Si, V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Zr, Nb, Mo, Ru, Rh, Hf, Ta, W, Re and Ir. Fig. 8  Electrode materials and reaction products of CO2 reduction. Adapted from ref. 83. In the works cited above, structurally simple electrodes were used. For instance, a typical Cu electrode was prepared by cutting a strip out of an ultrapure copper sheet, which was then mechanically polished with fine emery paper and electropolished in 85% phosphoric acid.85 Electropolishing is commonly used to brighten the surface and remove irregularities after the mechanical polishing. However, later studies have highlighted the influence of the surface morphology of the electrode and the preparation method. Cook et al.88 reported a current efficiency of 73% for CH4 and 25% for C2H4 at 8.3 mA cm−2 on an electrode prepared by the in situ electrodeposition of copper on a glassy carbon substrate in 0.5 M KHCO3 at 273 K. Even at 25 mA cm−2 the overall Faradaic efficiency for these two products was 79%. Likewise, studies with single crystal electrodes have demonstrated that different surface faces display different activity and selectivity in electrocatalytic CO2 reduction. Single crystal Cu electrodes dominated by Cu(100) faces favour C2H4 formation, while those dominated by Cu(111) faces show enhanced selectivity towards CH4.89 Cu(110) faces demonstrate increased yields of alcohols and non-gaseous C2 and C3 products in comparison with others.Despite the many advances in aqueous CO2 reduction, the process remains challenging due to (i) the high overpotential (the difference between the thermodynamic and actual electrode voltages to drive a reaction) required, (ii) the low solubility of CO2 in water at ambient temperature and pressure, (iii) the formation of a mixture of products implying a costly separation step, and (iv) the fouling and deactivation of the electrodes by impurities. These issues can be partly addressed by employing gas diffusion electrodes (GDEs). A GDE usually consists of a Teflon-bonded carbon black matrix on which metal catalyst particles are dispersed. Their application for CO2 reduction was first demonstrated by Mahmood et al.,90 who employed a lead-impregnated GDE to reduce CO2 to formic acid with a current efficiency of nearly 100% at a current density of 150 mA cm−2 and a potential of approximately −1.8 V vs. SCE. Hara et al.91 reported that a platinum GDE produced methane from CO2 at 30 bar with a Faradaic efficiency of 34.8% at a current density of 900 mA cm−2.While traditional electrochemical cells are appropriate for fundamental research on the electrocatalytic reduction of CO2, it is clear that practical applications would require more complex systems. Similarly, for practical purposes it is important to regard the reduction of CO2 not just as an individual reaction, but as part of the overall cell in which valuable products are also obtained from the oxidation reaction. Kobayashi and Takahashi92 demonstrated a low-density energy cell, which produced methanol from CO2 and H2 at ambient pressure with up to 97% current efficiency at a potential of −0.1 V vs. the standard hydrogen electrode. The anodic and cathodic half cells were separated using a cation exchange membrane (Nafion 117). H2 was supplied to the anodic part consisting of a Pt/C catalyst, while the cathode, which was bubbled with CO2 in a 0.1 M KHCO3 electrolyte, consisted of a Cu/Zn/Al catalyst applied to the other side of the membrane. Electron transfer between the electrodes occurred via an external circuit while the membrane allowed the transport of protons from the anode to the cathode. Yamamoto et al.93 first reported the production of synthesis gas from CO2 reduction and oxygen from water oxidation in a cell employing Ni/active carbon fibre and Cu/metal oxide GDEs. Several cells for the electrochemical production of synthesis gas from CO2 have been reported in the past few years. Newman et al.94 developed and tested several cell designs based on proton exchange membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs) for the simultaneous reduction of CO2 and H2O to syngas. The best results were obtained in a “modified” PEMFC by inserting a glass fibre-supported layer of aqueous KHCO3 between the proton-exchange membrane (Nafion) and the silver-based catalyst cathode layer. This cell produced syngas with a CO:H2 ratio of 1:2 at a potential of −2 vs. SCE and a total current density of 80 mA cm−2 at 298 K, while O2 was obtained at the anode. Dufek et al.95 demonstrated a bench-scale flow cell-based device fitted with an Ag GDE as the cathode and a commercial Ru-based anode separated by a Nafion 424 cation-exchange membrane. Interestingly, the cell was operated at 344 K, which the authors felt would more closely resemble the conditions of an actual commercial cell, and they found that the CO:H2 ratio of the syngas produced could be controlled between 4:1 and 1:9 by adjusting the flow of CO2 and the current density. The same group recently reported a similar system to continuously produce CO from CO2.96 Operating at 18.5 bar, this system was able to produce CO with a current efficiency of up to 92% at 350 mA cm−2. The cell voltage decreased with increasing temperature, dropping below 3 V at 363 K. At this temperature an electrical efficiency of 50% at 225 mA cm−2 was observed. Narayanan et al.97 reported a cell for converting CO2 to formate with high current efficiency (ca. 80%) using sodium ion- or hydrogen-ion-conducting membranes.Improving performance of metal electrodesNone of the investigated electrodes perform better than Cu for CO2 reduction in aqueous solutions in terms of activity and time-on-stream stability. However, even the latter electrodes suffer from high overpotentials and low current densities. In addition, when CO2 reduction is coupled with H2O oxidation, the overpotential for CO2 conversion to hydrocarbons increases. Water electrolysis is a benchmark for electrocatalytic CO2 reduction. As demonstrated by Whipple and Kenis,14 until 2010 the efficiency (eqn (5)) of electrodes used for the latter approach was still very low compared to the water electrolysis (Fig. 9). (5)where E0, η and EFaradaic are standard potential, overpotential, and Faradaic efficiency, respectively. Fig. 9  Comparison of the energy efficiencies and current densities for CO2 reduction to formic acid (), syngas (), and hydrocarbons (). This figure is from ref. 13.  and  represent the data for CO2 reduction to methanol98 and CO,99 respectively. To circumvent these problems, several strategies were suggested and are briefly discussed below. They include: (i) modifying metal electrodes with corresponding oxides, (ii) operating at high temperature with molten or solid-oxide electrolytes, (iii) applying photo irradiation, (iv) using ionic liquid electrolytes (water-free conditions), or (v) biological microorganisms. The three latter aspects are discussed in the “Alternative approaches to electrocatalytic CO2 conversions” section.Modification of metal electrodesGoncalves et al.100 demonstrated the importance of electrodepositional modification of copper electrodes for the reduction of CO2 to hydrocarbons. A copper mesh cathode produced methane and ethylene with a similar selectivity. Two modified copper electrodes from Omnidea Lda possessed approximately 7 and 19 times higher specific surface area than the unmodified one. They also showed significantly lower selectivity towards methane in favour of ethylene and ethane. Unfortunately, these authors did not explain how they modified their electrodes. Electrodeposition of a thin layer of Cu2O on Cu electrodes was reported to change the product selectivity from hydrocarbons to methanol.101 It was suggested that Cu+ plays an important role in the production of methanol. However, Li and Kanan102 recently showed that Cu was the active component of copper electrodes initially precovered with a thick layer of Cu2O. These authors investigated the effect of the layer thickness on the CO2 reduction activity to CO and HCO2H. It is important to stress that copper oxide was reduced to metallic copper after the electrode had been used for CO2 reduction. High activity and time-on-stream stability were achieved when the layer was thicker than approximately 3 μm. This was explained by the fact that certain Cu particles are formed upon reduction of the thick Cu2O layer during electrolysis. Such in situ formed electrodes converted CO2 to CO and HCO2H with the Faradaic efficiencies of 45 and 33%, respectively, at potentials between −0.3 and −0.65 V vs. the reversible hydrogen electrode. Polycrystalline Cu electrodes were inert under the same reaction conditions.The group of Kanan103 also reported an increased activity using a Sn/SnO2 electrode for CO2 reduction compared with a Sn electrode. CO and HCO2H were the only reaction products formed over both electrodes. However, the Faradaic efficiency of the Sn/SnO2 electrode for CO and HCO2H formation was 4 and 3 times higher than that of the Sn electrode, respectively. The role of SnOx layer was suggested to be related to the stabilisation of CO2˙−, which was further converted to HCOOH and CO. From a mechanistic point of view, it is still not clear if the conversion takes place on Sn0 or SnOx.An interesting approach for CO2 reduction was reported by Chen et al.104 These authors combined water oxidation by simple inorganic Cu2+ salts with the electrocatalytic reduction of CO2 on a Cu(0) nanoparticulate film. Their electrochemical cell consisted of two chambers filled with a 0.1 M NaHCO3 solution saturated with CO2 at 1 bar. They were separated by a Nafion membrane. One chamber contained a boron-doped diamond (BDD) disk anode in the presence of 1.2 mM CuSO4. The cathode chamber was equipped with a high-surface area metallic Cu electrode deposited on a BDD disk. The reaction products were CO, HCOO−, H2 and O2. When the electrolysis was performed in the same cell but in the absence of the Cu2+ salt, the amount of reaction products was significantly lowered at ca. 3 times lower current density.In summary, CO2 reduction catalysed by metal electrodes still suffers from low Faradaic efficiencies and current densities. Further improvements in this field are expected as the mechanistic role of metal and metal oxides in the reduction process is better understood. This will open the possibility to design electrodes with certain compositions.Solid-oxide electrolytesCompared with electrochemical cells operating in the liquid phase and at ambient temperature, performing electrolysis at high-temperatures (>673 K) is thermodynamically and kinetically more attractive. Such electrolysers operate with molten carbonate or solid-oxide electrolytes. The latter cells typically use zirconia stabilised by yttrium oxide as the electrolyte. Relevant references for electrolysis of CO2 or H2O can be found in a recent review.50 Since 2009, several papers have appeared dealing with the co-electrolysis of H2O and CO2 to produce syngas.105–111 However, all these studies used a feed containing H2 in addition to H2O and CO2. As a consequence, a source of hydrogen is required. Moreover, a part of CO is produced via the RWGS reaction and not by co-electrolysis of CO2 and H2O.107 As reported by Hu et al.,108 H2 co-feeding is not required to directly produce paraformaldehyde from CO2 and H2O. The activation of the feed components was possible only when the Pt/CaO–ZrO2 interface was polarised by a DC current or voltage. The maximum CO2 conversion of up to 8%, with 100% paraformaldehyde selectivity, was obtained at 1173 K with 1.5 V DC voltages.Proton-conducting electrolysers which effectively split H2O to H2 and O2 at high temperatures also have potential for the electrocatalytic reduction of CO2 as demonstrated by Xie et al.110 These authors used a BaCeO0.5Zr0.3Y0.16Zn0.04O3−δ electrolyte to convert CO2 into CO and CH4 in the presence of H2 and H2O. The reaction feeds containing CO2 and H2/H2O were separately supplied to the cathode and anode compartments, respectively. A CO2 conversion of 65% was obtained at 887 K and at a current density of 1.5 A cm−2, which is attractive from an application viewpoint. Unfortunately, the Faradaic efficiency of CH4 was only 2.4% in contrast to 29.5% for CO formation. This is probably due to the fact that CO2 reduction to CO is faster than hydrogen transport through the electrolyte leading to an unfavourable CO2/CO ratio on the cathode side to yield CH4.Alternative approaches to electrocatalytic CO2 conversionsBarton et al.112 demonstrated the highly selective reduction of CO2 to methanol in water when using a p-GaP semiconductor electrode with pyridine as a co-catalyst. Methanol was observed only in the presence of pyridine when the electrode was irradiated with a 200 W Hg–Xe arc light source. It is important to highlight that pyridine was not consumed over the experimental time, supporting its catalytic action. In this cell, the electrode utilises light energy for CO2 reduction to methanol without any other external energy input. The reduction of methanol at pH 5.2 was performed at −0.4 V vs. SCE with Faradaic efficiencies reaching 100% at a current density of 0.5 mA cm−2. According to ref. 113, the rate of methanol formation is affected by (i) the Lewis acidity of the pyridyl nitrogen and (ii) the ability of the electrode surface to stabilise carbon-based free radicals. Further mechanistic aspects of methanol formation from CO2 in the presence of pyridine are thoroughly discussed in the “Co-catalysts” section.The application of an ionic liquid (1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium) electrolyte was found to be favourable for the electrocatalytic reduction of CO2 to CO.99 The tests were performed in a continuous flow cell equipped with a Pt anode and an Ag cathode separated by this ionic liquid. The ionic liquid behaves as a co-catalyst lowering the potential for formation of the CO2˙− intermediate. H2 and CO were the only reaction products formed at the cathode, while O2 was formed at the anode. The amount of hydrogen produced was very low proving the minor occurrence of water electrolysis. The Faradaic efficiency was around 100% at overpotentials below 0.2 V, i.e. 87% energy efficiency. This is actually the highest reported value for CO formation. The turnover frequency for CO formation rose from 0.8 s−1 to 1.4 s−1 upon increasing the potential of the cell from 1.5 and 2.5 V. Unfortunately, this resulted in a simultaneous decrease in the energy efficiency from 87 to 50%.Microbial electrolysis cells (MECs) appear to be attractive devices for the reduction of CO2 to useful products.114–118 An MEC device consists of an anode and a biocathode separated by a proton-exchange membrane. The oxidation of water takes place at the anode resulting in gaseous O2. Alternatively, the anode can also contain bacteria oxidizing biological substrates to CO2 with simultaneous generation of electrons and protons. In both cases, the protons and electrons generated flow to the cathode through the membrane and an external electrical circuit, respectively. Reaction products are formed at cathodic sites via CO2 hydrogenation with the help of electrochemically active microorganisms.In their pioneering work, Cheng et al.114 used Methanobacterium palustre to selectively produce CH4 from CO2 in a MEC with an electron capture efficiency of 96%. Mechanistically,115 CH4 is formed via two reaction pathways: (i) direct extracellular electron transfer processes (eqn (6)) or (ii) biological CO2 reduction with H2 formed from water (eqn (7) and (8)). The relative contribution of these processes depends on the cathode potential. The extracellular electron transfer route showed the highest contribution to the overall methane production at −0.75 V. CO2 + 8H+ + 8e− → CH4 + 2H2O(6) 2H+ + 2e− → H2(7) CO2 + 4H2 → CH4 + 2H2O(8)To estimate the potential of the MEC approach for CO2 hydrogenation to CH4, Van Eerten-Jansen et al.117 performed a long-term test for ca. 200 days. Two different anolytes were tested, i.e. hexacyanoferrate(II) and water. The latter showed approximately 8 times lower activity for electron donation. Using water the cell produced methane stably during the operation time at an average rate of 6 ± 8 L (CH4) L−1 day−1. The overall energy efficiency was 3.1%. In order to be competitive with anaerobic digestion processes generating methane, the MEC approach should have the efficiency not worse than 5.5%. Based on previous literature and their own results, these authors117 defined four possibilities for increasing the energy efficiency: (i) developing active high-surface area electrode materials, (ii) using porous electrodes to increase mass and charge transport, (iii) decreasing the distance between the electrodes and the membrane, and (iv) using membranes with low permeability for gas-phase products. Very recently, an integrated concept for low-voltage CO2 functionalisation has been suggested.118 It uses Fe-oxidizing bacteria (Mariprofundus ferrooxydans) at the cathode site, which fulfills a double function, i.e. catalysing the reduction of CO2 and acting as a voltage multiplier. Polysaccharides were identified as reaction products of CO2 fixation by the bacteria. Electrochemically generated Fe2+ was the sole electron source.An electromicrobial approach was also suggested for converting CO2 to higher alcohols.119 The idea behind this concept was to combine the electrocatalytic reduction of CO2 to formate in a cell consisting of an In foil cathode and a Pt anode, with the consecutive fermentative conversion of formate to isobutanol and 3-methyl-1-butanol. The latter transformation was catalysed by Ralstonia strain LH74D. To avoid degradation of the microbes, the anode was shielded by a porous ceramic cup. This shield quenched reactive intermediates like O2− and NO but did not influence the diffusion of chemicals.Photocatalytic CO2 conversionLaboratory photoreactorsSince the advent of photocatalysis in the 1970s a tremendous amount of studies have been reported in the literature focused on photocatalyst synthesis and evaluation in various applications, including environmental remediation, water splitting, CO2 reduction and synthetic chemistry. Still, very few examples exist of chemical processes operating on the basis of photocatalysis technology. Not only the photon efficiency of materials and the resulting achievable rates remain insufficient to warrant commercial application, also sub-optimal photocatalytic reactors often induce inefficiency and limit the practical application.120,121 In the construction of a photocatalytic reactor, in addition to mass transfer considerations, the reactor should also be designed to allow optimised exposure of catalytically active sites to light.122 In particular in slurry reactors scattering properties largely depend on (time dependent) agglomeration phenomena, which will affect rates.122 Changes in scattering behaviour obviously are less dominant in reactor configurations equipped with coated catalyst systems.123,124 Still, scattering properties might vary for different coating strategies leading to different agglomerate sizes and porosities, also making comparison of photocatalytic rates achieved for coated systems difficult. Very little information can be found in the literature on comparing the optical properties of coatings of similar chemical composition, but with different physical appearance.Solar-to-fuel synthesis, i.e. the light-induced reaction of CO2 and H2O to form hydrocarbons, is currently considered a promising technology for the storage of solar energy in the form of chemical bonds.123 At the same time the technology might contribute to reducing the emission of CO2. In laboratory studies describing the photocatalytic CO2 reduction, batch reactors have usually been applied. In liquid-phase operation, slurry reactors predominate. The aforementioned light scattering issues are often neglected, making the comparison of rates difficult. In gas-phase applications, batch reactors are also usually applied (with the catalyst introduced as a loose powder on the bottom of a vessel),125 since the catalytic rates usually do not warrant continuous operation. Some examples of reactors with coated catalyst exist, e.g. using optical fibre technology,126,127 but these are still scarce. In the following, we evaluate the progress of improving rates in the photocatalytic reduction of CO2 to produce fuels.Overview of photocatalysts for CO2 reductionTable S1 (see the ESI† and the references cited therein) compiles a selection of the studies reported in the literature since the 1980s until 2013,128–170 including the applied process conditions (with as much details as possible). We have also constructed a figure based on these data, highlighting the limited progress that has been made over the years (Fig. 10). In contrast to what has been observed for the development of solar cell performance (see the well-known graph published by NREL123), there is not an apparent continuous improvement in the performance of photocatalysts in the reduction of CO2 and H2O to fuels. Another observation is that most of the catalysts reported are based on TiO2, either supported or unsupported, and with and without catalytic promoters (noble metal particles). Commercial P25 is often used due to its availability and reproducibility. The disadvantage of these TiO2-based systems is that they are not photo-responsive to visible light. Hence, various efforts can be identified in Table S1† to synthesise and evaluate catalysts with visible light activity. This table also indicates the process conditions. Fig. 10  Representative data points reflecting the rates of photocatalytic CO2 conversion to methane as a function of the year of study. Both liquid and gas phase operations are shown. Progress in enhancing rates is limited and a game changing material still needs to be developed. Selected rates are based on literature data compiled in Table S1.†128–170 As aforementioned, both liquid and gas-phase studies have been conducted. In a recent review,171 Garcia and coworkers already commented on an important issue of CO2 reduction in the liquid phase. One of the problems associated with this methodology is that the standard reduction potential of H2O to form H2 is considerably lower (Eored = 0 V) than the standard reduction potential of CO2 to form CO2˙− (1.9 V). Evaluation of the hydrogen quantities produced in CO2 reduction conducted in the liquid phase is thus extremely important to validate the photon-, and overall catalyst efficiency. Making a valid quantitative comparison of catalytic performance in CO2 reduction is furthermore difficult because of the following issues:1. As Table S1† shows, a large variety of illumination sources was used. This usually also impacts the reaction temperature, and thus the reported rates.136 The effect of the diversity of the applied light sources and the reactor configurations is best illustrated by analysing the performance of the reference catalyst P25. Rates varying by one order of magnitude from 0.3 (ref. 141 and 149) to 4.7 μmol gcat−1 h−1 (ref. 136) have been reported. A very peculiar activity has been recently reported for P25 by Wang et al.,170 approaching 500 μmol gcat−1 h−1. We suspect that the last authors may have mislabelled the Y axis in their plots, i.e. μmol gcat−1 h−1 should be used instead of mmol gcat−1 h−1.2. Another relevant parameter to evaluate photocatalytic performance is the effectivity of the catalyst to convert light into chemical energy. Few papers report the quantum yield or efficiency, which requires measurement of the quantity of photons absorbed by the catalysts. Inaccuracy arises from how precisely the light intensity is probed. Similar issues arise when comparing materials in the photocatalytic production of hydrogen from water, as discussed by Maschmeyer et al.172,173Still, the data in Table S1† provide trends and perspectives of photocatalytic CO2 conversion in practice. Over the years, a few data points stand out (marked in the table), which require a more elaborated discussion.Isolated centres in zeolite matricesFirst of all, the group of Anpo has reported extraordinary activities of zeolite and mesoporous supported TiO2 based catalysts. As listed in Table S1,† the product yield was mostly determined based on the amount of titanium (μmol gTi−1 h−1). Ikeue et al.140,141,174 reported activities in the range of 200 μmol gTi−1 h−1 for zeolite supported Ti-centres. Hwang et al.149 reported an activity of 100 μmol gTi−1 h−1 for SBA-15 supported TiO2. For silica-supported samples, like Ti-ZSM-5, Ti-MCM-41, Ti-MCM-48, Ti-SBA-15, and Ti-PS, low titania loadings ranging from 0.5 wt% to at most 10 wt% were applied, and quantification of rates per Ti quantity (based on ICP or XRF analyses) with small error margins is difficult. Furthermore, since the product yields are very small, the role of impurities in the catalyst formulations should not be underestimated. Some of us have observed that pre-treatment in the presence of only steam is extremely important, since significant quantities of hydrocarbons can be formed in the absence of CO2.125,175 Still, even considering some contribution of impurities, the reported activity of (usually) SiO2 supported catalysts is up to 3 orders of magnitude higher per gTi than that of P25 under similar conditions. Isolated centres consisting of tetrahedral sites are believed to be the active sites. The work of Frei and coworkers provides significant details on the mechanism of CO2 reduction over these isolated centres, and variants of these to induce visible light sensitivity.176–179 By using advanced IR spectroscopy it became clear that CO is an important intermediate in the conversion of CO2. Strikingly, these authors have not observed consecutive reactions under the conditions applied for the IR study, and the formation of hydrocarbons was not discussed.178,179 Recently Yang et al.125 have shown that formaldehyde is a very unstable potential intermediate to form hydrocarbons, and can be converted in the presence of the catalyst to products similar to those observed in the conversion of CO2 and CO. It should be noted that formaldehyde strongly absorbs UV light, resulting in a rich photochemistry under the process conditions (UV illumination). As a final note, various IR studies have shown that carbonates in various forms can be formed and decomposed to CO and hydrocarbons upon light activation on semiconductor surfaces,160,175 which will be discussed later. Carbonates have not been observed to play a role for the micro- and mesoporous silica supported catalysts.Semiconductors showing high apparent ratesOther rates with quantities significantly higher than usual were reported by Sasirekha et al.150 for supported TiO2 catalysts, with some possible effect of promotion by ruthenium. However, the light intensity in this study was considerably higher than reported by others, so temperature effects should not be ignored. Contributions of impurities cannot be excluded either. Very peculiar activities for CeOx containing TiO2 formulations have been reported by Wang et al.170 We believe these numbers are not to be taken seriously, since the activity reported for P25 was also way beyond the ordinary, approaching 500 μmol gcat−1 h−1. Still, the reported beneficial effect of CeOx addition shifting the absorption spectrum of composites more to the visible merits further investigation.Co-catalystsWithout discussing the rates provided in Table S1† in too much detail, another trend is obvious: adding co-catalysts in the form of small quantities of noble metals enhances the values observed. Ishitani et al.132 have reported an order of magnitude increase in rates by adding noble metals and Cu. The order in observed rates was Pd > Rh > Pt > Au > Cu, with Ru showing the least effect. The low response to rate by adding Ru is remarkable, since other researchers have observed significant improvement by adding Ru(O2) to catalyst formulations. RuO2 needs to be formed in the preparation procedure, and rather than a promoting function by physical improvement of the lifetime of photo-excited states, the promotion of RuO2 is ascribed to introducing a high water oxidation activity. RuO2 was also found to significantly enhance the rate of mesoporous ZnGa2O4.164 The beneficial effect of adding nanosized metal particles as co-catalysts is usually ascribed to the improved separation of electron–hole pairs generated upon photo-excitation. Pt was also found to promote the activity of composites like CuGaAlO4169 and TiO2 nanotubes.159 Other oxides such as IrOx, MnOx and Co3O4 have been reported to enhance water oxidation rates, when supported on semiconductor surfaces, and applied in the overall splitting of water to hydrogen and oxygen.180–182Copper promoted systemsOne very interesting system that has also been extensively discussed in the literature is copper promoted TiO2. The findings reported for this material have recently been reviewed by Garcia et al.171 To summarise, the preparation of the Cu-promoted TiO2 catalysts largely affects the performance. Impregnation leads to less active materials as compared to compositions prepared by sol–gel methods. Methanol forms a major product.171 Significant amounts of methanol have also been observed in an optical fibre reactor.127,183 Yang et al.175 recently reported the formation of large quantities of CO adsorbed on Cu+ sites, and evaluated this to be a true product of CO2 reduction by using 13C-labeled CO2, whereas significant quantities of the CO product were observed to result from water induced contaminant oxidation. Recently, others have also observed the formation of large quantities of CO with a SiO2 supported Cu/TiO2 system.162 The catalyst was found to deactivate over time. While changes in the oxidation state of copper have been argued to be detrimental to the performance (it is proposed that Cu0 is formed from more active CuI sites), an issue of carbon contamination might also explain the data: contaminants will be depleted after a certain period of time, lowering the apparent formation of CO and hydrocarbon products. In conclusion, certainly Cu-containing TiO2 catalysts are worth studying, including the role of the oxidation state and stability. However, as always, care should be taken when assigning hydrocarbon products to CO2 reduction, that is, to exclude contributions of carbon contaminants.The relevance of adsorption of CO2Dissolution of CO2 in water initially results in the formation of carbonates and bicarbonates, and the question arises if it is feasible to directly reduce these species upon illumination. Chandrasekaran et al.184 first demonstrated the photochemical reduction of carbonates into formaldehyde over TiO2 powder. The yield of formaldehyde was found to be independent of the concentration of Na2CO3(aq.) (from 0.01 to 1 M). Raphael et al.185 reported the activity of platinised titania suspended in a Na2CO3 solution under UV/visible light irradiation. Their results showed the formation of CH3OH, ‘C’, HCHO and HCOO− ions in the absence of CO2, which was quantified by spectro-photometrical methods. While aqueous phase carbonate reduction has been reported, understanding the role of surface adsorbed carbonates in the gas-phase conversion of CO2 is also extremely relevant for a configuration in which CO2 is accumulated in the dark on the surface of an inorganic semiconductor, and converted during exposure to sunlight. Carbonates have been demonstrated to be easily formed on the surface of TiO2 by IR spectroscopy, and have been proposed as intermediates in the photocatalytic decomposition of CO2. Some aspects of the mechanism of carbonate decomposition on TiO2 surfaces have been addressed.148,185,186 There is no agreement on this mechanism, however. In particular, Chandrasekaran et al.184 suggested that the carbonate ion can be considered as a hole acceptor, and is oxidised, as demonstrated by laser flash pyrolysis experiments. The neutral carbonate radical is then proposed to decompose into CO and O2. The electron is either scavenged by oxygen or involved in the reduction of protons to hydrogen, eventually leading to the catalytic reduction of CO to form the product formaldehyde. In contrast to this mechanism, Raphael and Malati,185,186 and later Ku et al.148 argued that carbonate is the electron acceptor, and proposed a route in which carbonate is first reduced to formate, and subsequently to formaldehyde and methanol. Water is oxidised by holes leading to the evolution of O2. An argument against the oxidation of carbonate used by Raphael et al.179 and Malati et al.185,186 is the incompatibility of this mechanism with the formation of formaldehyde. Recently, Dimitrijevic et al.187 used EPR spectroscopy to study the reduction of CO2 to CH4 on TiO2 surfaces in the presence of light. Important steps in the mechanism were also discussed. A mechanism involving a two-electron, one-proton reaction was confirmed by first-principles calculations. It should be mentioned that the nature of the site on which the carbonate is adsorbed possibly affects the pathway: experiments applying metal deposition have demonstrated that holes and electrons might preferentially accumulate on specific crystal facets.188In situ IR studies are needed to shed more light on the mechanistic routes.C3N4 based catalystsMany alternative doped oxides, sulfides, and materials known from the solar cell industry have been tested for the photocatalytic decomposition of CO2. One of the materials we envision as promising is γ-C3N4, since it is composed of elements which are widely available in nature, and it can be easily formed by thermal treatment of (cheap) precursor molecules. γ-C3N4 based catalysts are reportedly effective in the overall water splitting reaction, and their photocatalytic properties have been recently reviewed by Zheng et al.189 The band gap positions of these materials are quite favourable for the absorption of light in the near UV and visible range, whereas the potential of the generated electrons in the conduction band is sufficient to drive CO2 reduction reactions. In water splitting experiments using sacrificial agents (triethanol amine for hydrogen evolution and silver nitrate for oxygen evolution), considerable rates have been observed. Surprisingly, to the best of our knowledge these materials have not yet been evaluated in the reduction of CO2, while another property of these materials appears to be beneficial: nitrogen containing hydrocarbons have very good CO2 adsorption properties, and we expect that γ-C3N4 will have a reasonable CO2 adsorption capacity. Future studies will reveal the significance of γ-C3N4 in photocatalytic CO2 conversion.Conclusions on heterogeneous photocatalysisBased on the above discussion regarding the highest reported activities, one can conclude that game-changing rates have not yet been achieved in the direct photocatalytic production of hydrocarbons from CO2 and H2O. Yang et al. attempted to convert the reported rates into a turnover frequency of the materials.125 Even for Ti-SBA-15, the turnover frequency is only 8.6 × 10−4 h−1. Such small turnover frequencies are far from those required for an efficient catalytic process, and an efficiency improvement of at least 3 orders of magnitude is needed to bring artificial photosynthesis closer to reality. Moreover, the apparent quantum yield (AQY) is 0.01%. This means at best only a minute fraction of the photons is used effectively for the reaction. The recent attempts of the group of Frei190 using visible light sensitive sites connected to a nanoparticle oxide water oxidation catalyst appear to be an interesting way forward to improve the quantum yield and use solar radiance more effectively.Fundamental basis for rational design of CO2 conversion catalystsQuantum chemical methods and their use in elucidating fundamental aspects of catalytic performance in various CO2 transformations have rapidly evolved in recent decades. In particular, owing to its relatively low computational cost combined with its appreciable accuracy, Density Functional Theory (DFT) has been routinely applied across all science and engineering disciplines for predicting the molecular and crystalline structures as well as the bulk and surface properties of inorganic, organic, and organometallic compounds.191–196 Here, we will focus on elucidating methods and predictions of active catalysts for CO2 activation using: (i) thermal energy to overcome the activation barrier, (ii) electrochemistry as a source of readily available electrons, and (iii) photocatalytic activation.Heterogeneous CO2 hydrogenation to methanolAs mentioned in the “Formation of oxygenates from CO2” section, supported Cu-containing materials are industrially attractive catalysts for the conversion of CO2 to methanol. The unique catalytic property of Cu is probably related to its ability to stabilise surface formate (HCOO) or hydrocarboxyl (COOH) species.66,78,79 This property is increased over step sites and in the presence of ZnO.66 This knowledge opens the possibility to design more active and selective catalysts.Computational DFT-based techniques promise an unprecedented capability to explore alternative elemental compositions to the conventional catalysts without performing tedious experimental synthesis and evaluation. For example, the selectivity of CO2 hydrogenation on Pd/γ-Al2O3 was predicted to depend on competing reaction pathways leading to CO and HCOO species, which can be regarded as intermediates in the formation of methane and methanol, respectively.197,198 These DFT data thus imply that CO2 methanation will be favoured if support materials have a low water affinity. In contrast, methanol would be formed if controllable hydroxylation of the support surface was achieved. The latter conclusion was substantiated by DFT calculations of the hydrogenation of CO2 on Co/Cu clusters supported on a hydroxylated γ-Al2O3.199,200 Furthermore, incorporation of Cu atoms into Co clusters resulted in a 0.24 eV decrease in activation energy towards HCOO formation. A negative effect of surface hydroxylation is the weaker interaction between the γ-Al2O3 support and the Pd clusters, which may decrease the palladium dispersion and hence total activity, and catalyst stability and lifetime .197Other unconventional catalysts computationally explored for the hydrogenation of CO2 to methanol were Au/TiC,77 Cu/TiC,77 and Co/WC.201 Cu and Au nanoparticles were shown to undergo a charge polarization on a TiC support to become active catalytic centres for the conversion of CO2 to CH3OH. This can be regarded as a new approach in the design of methanol synthesis catalysts; conventional catalysts are based on achieving strong interactions between Cu and ZnO on an Al2O3 support of high surface area. Metal carbide supports, on the other hand, are known as very stable compounds that also induce the polarisation of -ad-metals (metal atoms that sit on top of the surface), thus facilitating methanol synthesis.In addition to copper and palladium catalysts, Mo6S8 clusters were shown via DFT studies to selectively convert CO2 and H2 into CH3OH.198 Due to the lower S/Mo ratio than in bulk MoS2, Mo6S8 was shown to facilitate the dissociation of adsorbed H2 by forming S–H bonds, thus increasing the selectivity towards methanol.202 Mo atoms were involved in the binding of CO2 as well as in the formation of carbon intermediates. The proposed reaction pathway involved the RWGS reaction with the formation of CO followed by its hydrogenation via HCO into CH3OH. HCO formation was found to be rate limiting with an activation barrier of 1 eV, even smaller than the comparable energy on the surface steps of Cu nanoparticles. These substoichiometric metal sulphide nanoclusters suppress hydrocarbon formation, albeit at the expense of activity. The use of nanoparticulate MoS2 for the synthesis of alcohols from syngas has been demonstrated by PowerEnerCat, Inc.203 A small amount of sulphur in the feed was essential to ensure substiochiometric conditions, similar to the CO2 activation process on the Mo6S8 catalyst discussed here. Another transition metal sulphide, Fe2S2, clusters have also been reported to form methanol via a barrier-free, thermodynamically favourable pathway showing the potential of metal sulphide nanoparticles and clusters in selective CO2 hydrogenation.204 A possible interplay between particle size and stoichiometry needs to be explored computationally in more detail.Electrocatalytic CO2 activation on metal surfaces has a well-established computational basis, recently developed by Nørskov et al.205–207 Briefly, this method is based on calculating the binding energies (EB) of adsorbate molecules, which are a basis for estimating the corresponding chemical potentials. The latter are used to calculate a limiting potential UL (eqn (9)), i.e. the potential at which each elementary step of a reaction becomes exergonic. (9)where * signifies adsorbed species, μ[A, B] is the chemical potential of any generic surface species found from a standard statistical mechanics treatment of the calculated binding energies (EB) of these adsorbed species, ΔGelem is the free energy change of the elementary reaction and e is the (positive) charge of an electron and the chemical potential of the proton.The calculated potentials then provide the overpotential necessary for the electrocatalytic transformation of CO2, thus quantitatively establishing the reactivity of a series of electrocatalysts. Systematic activity trends have recently been calculated and compared using this method for the facets of late transition metals of face centred cubic (fcc) structure, which are routinely used as electrocatalysts.207 A measure of activity was suggested to be the difference between UL and the equilibrium potential, representing the overpotential for the elementary reactions shown in Fig. 11. Fig. 11  Calculated limiting potentials for elementary steps upon CO2 hydrogenation to CH4 on fcc transition metal electrocatalysts (from ref. 207). Based on these values for the metals analysed, it was concluded that the protonation of adsorbed CO species to CHO was an important rate-limiting step in the mechanism of carbon intermediate transformations. Cu showed the lowest calculated overpotential (top of the “volcano plot” in Fig. 11) for this step, indicating its superior performance in electrocatalytic CO2 conversion to form hydrocarbons. This predicted rate-limiting step agrees well with the common phenomena of catalyst CO poisoning due to its strong binding on other metals, and can explain the high values of the calculated overpotentials. Using the same computational approach to compare different copper facets, the lowest limiting potential for CO2 electrocatalytic reduction into CH4 was found for the fcc Cu (211) surface, that is the formation of hydrocarbons proceeds more easily on the stepped surfaces of Cu than on other facets.206 It is worth noting that a similar order of activity was predicted for the hydrogenation of CO2 to methanol over Cu(211) and Cu(111). Therefore, it can be suggested that irrespective of the mode of CO2 activation, defect-rich Cu surfaces will show high catalytic activity.An important conclusion drawn for the electrochemical reduction of CO2 to CH4 is that a prospective material must be found that binds to CHO species more strongly than CO, e.g. with greater affinity towards the oxygen atom.207 This is due to the fact that gaseous CO is more stable than adsorbed, resulting in the liberation rather than the protonation of CO molecules. The primary approaches here would be through the application of a controlled surface doping or co-binding with other adsorbed species that donate electron density to carbon or withdraw electron density from the oxygen in CHO, thus increasing the degree of sp2 character of the adsorbed CHO, as well as its binding energy. The general difficulty here is in discerning coupled electronic and structural effects of surface dopants with the goal of changing the reduction potential of CO2.Co-catalystsThe use of pyridine as a co-catalyst in the photoelectrochemical reduction of CO2 to CH3OH112 over a p-GaP semiconductor electrode has spurred a series of theoretical studies.208–212 A pyridinyl radical has been proposed to be involved in a one electron step as a strong reductant to form a carbamate intermediate, which can then yield formic acid, formaldehyde, and finally methanol.208Modifications to the thermodynamic cycle have also been made to uncover the systematic trends in the pKa of substituted pyridines with electron withdrawing (Cl− or CHO−) or electron donating (Me, NH2−) groups, which decrease or increase the pKa, respectively.212 Such a procedure permits the intelligent design of pyridine-based CO2 activation catalysts. However, calculated Ka values of such substituted pyridinyl species were 10 to 20 times higher than their pyridinium counterparts, making them poor proton donors to CO2. Instead, the recombination of two pyridinyl-containing units into pyridines and formic acid was shown to be thermochemically favourable, depending on the reaction (reaction steps 12, 17 and 22 in Fig. 12).209 Such thermodynamic efficiency implies that electron-storage molecules having the inherent ability to coordinate hydrogen atoms can act as efficient intermediates in CO2 activation. Fig. 12  Reaction pathways and their calculated free energies in the reduction of CO2 to methanol. Adapted from ref. 209. To design the most effective organic system for CO2 activation, computational studies need to be performed with a series of π-bonded cyclic hydrocarbons to establish the electron donating capacities between the nitrogen containing ring and the CO2 molecule via an inner sphere coordination mechanism. Another challenge is to design a selective electrocatalytic process, as many-electron reactions are usually non-selective. Formic acid, formaldehyde and methanol were all observed as intermediates or final products at some point of the reaction, while the production of H2 considerably reduced the Faradaic efficiency.Photocatalysis and photolysisMetal oxide semiconductors. Most of the theoretical studies in the development of photocatalysts focused on modelling the solid state band structure and the changes caused by the formation of vacancies due to substitutional doping.213–215 Further, accurate prediction of the band edge positions for wide bandgap semiconductors to be able to drive the photocatalytic reduction of CO2 has been achieved.216,217 The predicting capability of DFT can also serve to describe subtle electronic effects that notably change the activity of photocatalytic CO2 reduction. Band flatness arguments can be used to describe the kinetic energy, hence the mobility of the charge carrier, as well as (de)localization of the electronic bands.215,217 Since the potential for the photocatalytic reduction of CO2 into hydrocarbons is close to that of H2 evolution,9 the vast knowledge acquired by evaluating materials for their band positions is of value to predict active CO2 reduction photocatalysts. For example, modifications of valence band of semiconductors to absorb in a wider range of the solar spectrum can be applied as a tool for predicting which dopants would decrease it, but not necessarily for forecasting enhanced photoreactivity towards CO2. Only the energetically (un)favourable photocatalyst band alignment with CO2 reduction potential can be predicted using this method whereas kinetics and thermodynamics require standard surface–adsorbate interaction calculations. To this point, the inherent affinity of Cu, most likely in the form of Cu2O, towards CO2 can be explored to devise efficient photocatalysts by performing DFT band position screening of alternative semiconductor materials, including those not commonly applied. Nitrides, carbides, phosphides or silicides have bandgap magnitudes capable of absorbing UV/visible light, and might thus be of use.218 This recently has been attempted when combining Cu2O and SiC nanoparticles to photocatalytically produce CH3OH from CO2.219 The low methanol yields reported (191 μmol per g catalyst) are typical for the photocatalytic processes involved; efficiency needs to be improved by several orders of magnitude to bring the photocatalytic activation of CO2 within practical usability.Organic molecules as renewable or sacrificial hydrogen donors. Stable metal oxide semiconductors, such as TiO2, have been core materials of interest in photocatalysis for many decades. They usually are doped with cations or anions to modify either their electron or hole conductive properties, or the magnitude of the bandgap to absorb visible light. A recent, conceptually very different approach is using purely organic solar light absorbing materials.220,221 That comes with an added benefit that, somewhat auspiciously, organic molecules mostly cannot operate under UV light conditions due to their stability; thus, visible light organic molecules need to be used which is favourable for any practical purpose. A very elegant approach was reported by Carpenter and Rose221 where the B3LYP hybrid functional combined with 6-31+G(d, p) basis sets and IEFPCM simulated acetonitrile solvent were used to design an organic compound for the conversion of CO2 to formic acid circumventing the generation of CO2˙−. Instead, hydride generating organic molecules based on substituted naphthalene were devised, which after the initial photon absorption undergo series of elementary intramolecular reaction steps, involving intersystem crossing from S1 to T3, enabling hydride transfer to CO2 to form formic acid. A hydrogenation step has to be involved to regenerate the organic molecule, thus being one step short of fully renewable.Intricate methods to describe the electronic structure of the organic molecules in the excited state have been devised (TDDFT, CIS, SAC-CI, CC2, CC3, EOM-CCSD, MRCI, CASSCF),222 which simply are either not accurate or cannot be sustained computationally for large transition metals. However, homogeneous processes can be described efficiently. With this in mind, other light absorbing organic molecules, such as H2S or CH3SH, prevalent as byproducts in natural gas, have been modelled to act as a source of hydrogen atoms in the excited state. The calculated values of the absorbed wavelengths were 205 and 231 nm, respectively.223 This effort is substantiated by the fact that the bond dissociation energy of S–H in H2S is ∼120 kJ mol−1 smaller than that of O–H in H2O, making it easier to break electro- or photochemically. Electrochemical hydrogen transfer from a thiol group to CO2˙− to form formic acid was modelled at ground state using the B3LYP and M06X density functionals applying an explicitly solvated cluster model.224 Furthermore, excited state DFT simulations were performed to investigate whether organic sulphur species can be facile hydrogen atom donors.223 Geometry optimization using long range corrected CAM-B3LYP density functional showed that the SH bond, 1.34 Å in the ground state in both H2S and CH3SH, was elongated to 1.94 and 1.85 Å in the 1st excited state for H2S and CH3SH, respectively, indicating formation of a neutral diradical. This very reactive hydrogen atom can react via a low energy transition state with the carbon atoms in CO2 forming formate species as shown in Fig. 13, a reaction which is unavailable via ground state chemistry. Fig. 13  CR-EOMCC(2,3)/6-311+G(2df, 2p)//CAM-B3LYP/6-311+G(2df, 2p) reaction energy diagram of CO2 and H2S reactions optimized on the S1 surface. All enthalpies are referenced to those of separated CO2 and H2S optimized in the S0 state. Reaction path A (C–S bond formation mechanism) is shown in red, whereas path B (H–S bond formation mechanism) is shown in green. Adapted from ref. 223. This mechanism utilises the photolytic n-σ* excitation of the donor molecule. This shows that once excited, mixtures of possible hydrogen atom donors react with CO2 to activate the latter exergonically. Besides the above mentioned H2S and CH3SH, compounds of practical importance to activate CO2 photolytically would be alcohols, such as CH3OH or isopropyl alcohol, but not organic acids due to the n-π* transition of the carboxylic group.Comparison of different approaches for CO2 functionalisationIrrespective of the way CO2 is converted to value-added products, the profitability of the overall process depends not only on the value of the final products, but also on the energy and consumables required for process operation. Therefore, we start with an analysis of the overall energy balance of catalytic CO2 hydrogenation, as well as electron- and photon-assisted approaches. Fig. 14 shows a simplified energy diagram. Initially, and very importantly, CO2 must be separated from flue gases or air. Various methods can be used.50 The best available technique at present is to absorb the CO2 present in the flue gas in an amine solution. The amine from the scrubber is then heated by steam to release high-purity CO2, and the CO2-free amine is reused. According to ref. 225, ca. 53 and 158 kJ mol−1 (CO2) are required for the separation of CO2 from feeds containing 11 vol% and 300 ppmv CO2, respectively. For the electro- or photocatalytic conversion of CO2, additional energy input is required, which is obviously the solar energy that one likes to directly (photocatalysis), or indirectly (electrocatalysis) store in the process. We consider the formation of methane, methanol and formic acid, i.e. typical products reported in the literature. The respective chemical equations and enthalpies are given in Table 2. It is obvious that methane formation requires the highest amount of energy. However, even for this case, the energy for CO2 separation amounts to 6–17% of the overall energy required. This value increases up to 60% when CO2 is converted to formic acid, the formation of which requires the lowest amount of energy. Thus, further developments in CO2 capturing technologies are necessary to improve the overall energy balance of CO2 conversion to useful chemicals. Fig. 14  Simplified energy diagram of conversion of CO2 to value-added products. Red and blue arrows indicate energy consumption and release, respectively. 
Table 2 CO2 conversion to various chemicals and the corresponding enthalpies

Nr.ReactionΔH0298K kJ mol−1 (CO2)1CO2(g) + 2H2O(l) → CH4(g) + 2O2(g)890.92CO2(g) + 2H2O(l) → CH3OH(l) + 1.5O2(g)726.73CO2(g) + H2O(l) → CHOOH(l) + 0.5O2(g)255.04CO2(g) + 4H2(g) → CH4(g) + 2H2O(g)−165.15CO2(g) + 3H2(g) → CH3OH(g) + H2O(g)−49.76CO2(g) + H2(g) → CHOOH(g)14.97CO2(g) + 3H2(g) → –CH2–(g) + 2H2O(g)−110.88CO2(g) → CO(g) + 0.5O2(g)283.2Compared to photo- or electrocatalytic CO2 transformations, CO2 hydrogenation is generally an exothermic process. The most representative reactions and their enthalpies are summarised in Table 2; reaction 7 represents CO2 conversion to higher hydrocarbons (FT-products). The CO2 conversion to CH4 leads to the highest energy release. However, one also has to take into account the energy required for H2 production from renewable sources. For example, high-temperature (1073 K) water (steam) electrolysis requires 248.5 kJ mol−1 (H2O). It is worth mentioning that modern water electrolysers operate with significantly higher energy efficiencies than those reported for various technologies using direct electro- or photocatalytic CO2 conversions. As a consequence, the latter must be significantly improved in order to compete with catalytic CO2 hydrogenation in terms of energy consumption. To this end, novel electrodes and catalysts are required. Another drawback of electro- or photocatalytic CO2 conversion processes is the low solubility of CO2 in water, which leads to mass transport limitation. This problem can be overcome by: (i) using gas diffusion electrodes, (ii) organic solvents or (iii) operating at elevated pressures or (iv) application of supercritical fluid. Some process options used in practice are discussed below.From an energetic viewpoint, formic acid requires the lowest amount of energy (Table 2), which is highly attractive for possible commercial application. Actually, the University of British Columbia's Clean Energy Research Center headed by Professor Colin Oloman developed a technology for the electrocatalytic conversion of CO2 to formic acid. This technology was acquired by Mantra Energy226 and is now called ERC (Electro Reduction of Carbon dioxide). This company is going to start demonstration projects in North America and in Asia in order to derive data for process economics. Since the global market of formic acid is relatively small it must also be demonstrated that the ERC process will strongly contribute to reducing total CO2 emissions. If formic acid will be used as an energy carrier (large-volume consumption), the CO2 emissions cannot be reduced unless CO2 is also recycled since CO2 will be formed upon the decomposition of formic acid. Moreover, the energy density of formic acid is significantly lower than that of conventionally used fuels and methanol.Given the above arguments and the increasing demand for methanol, a CO2-based methanol technology is highly relevant. The energy requirements are significantly higher than for the production of formic acid. As mentioned in the “Formation of oxygenates from CO2” section, methanol formation via catalytic CO2 hydrogenation has already been industrially implemented by Carbon Recycling International (CRI) in Iceland.53 However, compared to commercial CO-based methanol synthesis, the alternative process requires a higher amount of H2 and suffers from a lower productivity. This drawback can be overcome by using CO2–CO mixtures. In fact, modern methanol plants co-feed CO2 as a promoter to the CO–H2 feed. Owing to the low-energy demand for the formation of CO from CO2 (reaction 8 in Table 2), an interesting process option is to combine electrocatalytic CO2 conversion to CO (Fig. 15) with catalytic methanol synthesis. The former process will provide a mixture of CO and CO2, which can be directly fed to a methanol synthesis reactor without expensive separation steps. The degree of CO2 conversion in the first reactor will determine the amount of hydrogen required for methanol production. The above approach can also be applied for FT synthesis. Since both these hydrogenation processes require high pressures, energy is required to build up pressure after electrolysis of H2O and CO2 or to perform electrolysis at high pressures. A deeper analysis is necessary to ascertain optimal operation conditions, e.g. CO/CO2 ratio, reaction temperature, total pressures of hydrogenation and electrolysis processes. Fig. 15  Scheme for methanol formation via CO2 and CO hydrogenation. In summary, technologies based on catalytic CO2 hydrogenation to useful chemicals appear to be more industrially attractive than electro- or photocatalytic CO2 transformations. This is mainly due to the low energy efficiency and productivity of the latter processes. All the above technologies rely on efficient CO2 capture, purification, and delivery.Conclusions and outlookThe present study has analysed the current status of the conversion of carbon dioxide to chemicals by catalytic hydrogenation, photo- and electrocatalytic processes. The main focus was put on the catalytic aspects. Some reaction engineering concepts have also been discussed. It has been proven on different developmental levels that carbon dioxide is a promising and powerful alternative to produce CO2-neutral renewable fuels and commodity chemicals. The catalytic hydrogenation of CO2 to methanol and methane is now at a commercial scale. These technologies are, however, viable because of the presence of (i) CO2 streams from local biomass or power plants and (ii) H2 produced via water electrolysis using inexpensive renewable power sources. Their economy will be significantly improved when novel cost- and energy-efficient methods for providing large amounts of pure CO2 are developed. In addition, more active catalysts are required since CO2 is a very stable molecule that is reflected in low catalyst productivity when comparing with classical processes operating with CO. This is also valid for CO2-based Fischer–Tropsch synthesis, which has high potential for recovering large amounts of CO2 to synthetic fuels.Significant technical and catalytic advances are still required for the large-scale use of electro- and photocatalytic routes for CO2 conversion into fuels and chemicals due to their low energy efficiency and productivity as stated in the “Conclusions on heterogeneous photocatalysis” section. Novel electrodes enabling operation at current densities close to commercially available H2O electrolysers have to be developed. From a practical point of view, solid oxide electrodes appear to be suitable candidates. For the large-scale deployment of electrocatalytic approaches, a particular attention will be probably paid to building and managing power and heat devices. It is also expected that combining electro- or/and photocatalytic processes with catalytic hydrogenation routes will improve the economy and even the productivity compared with the respective individual approaches.AcknowledgementsDr. Chieh-Chao Yang is gratefully acknowledged for help in evaluating progress in photocatalytic CO2 reduction. EVK acknowledges financial support from the Leibniz-Gemeinschaft under the research grant SAW-2011-LIKAT-2Notes and referencesBP, in The BP Energy Outlook 2030,  2013 Search PubMed .http://www.energy.alberta.ca/OilSands/1715.asp, in Oil Reserves in Canada, 2012.B. Metz, O. Davidson, H. de Coninck, M. Loos and L. Meyer, Carbon Dioxide Capture and Storage,  2005 Search PubMed .M. Aresta, in Carbon Dioxide as Chemical Feedstock, Darmstadt,  2010 Search PubMed .M. Cokoja, C. Bruckmeier, B. Rieger, W. A. Herrmann and F. E. Kuhn, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 8510 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. C. S. Wu, Catal. Surv. Asia, 2009, 13, 30 CrossRef CAS .G. Centi and S. Perathoner, ChemSusChem, 2010, 3, 195 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Z. Jiang, T. Xiao, V. L. Kuznetsov and P. P. Edwards, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A, 2010, 368, 3343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. C. Roy, O. K. Varghese, M. Paulose and C. A. Grimes, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1259 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Takeda and O. Ishitani, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2010, 254, 346 CrossRef CAS .J. M. Saveant, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 2348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .E. E. Benson, C. P. Kubiak, A. J. Sathrum and J. M. Smieja, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 89 RSC .D. T. Whipple and P. J. A. Kenis, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 3451 CrossRef CAS .S. N. Lvov, J. R. Beck and M. S. LaBarbera, in Electrochemical Reduction of CO2 to Fuels, ed. N. Z. Muradov and T. Veziroglu,  2011 Search PubMed .X. M. Liu, G. Q. Lu, Z. F. Yan and J. Beltramini, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2003, 42, 6518 CrossRef CAS .P. S. S. Prasad, J. W. Bae, K. W. Jun and K. W. Lee, Catal. Surv. Asia, 2008, 12, 170 CrossRef CAS .H. B. Zhang, X. L. Liang, X. Dong, H. Y. Li and G. D. Lin, Catal. Surv. Asia, 2009, 13, 41 CrossRef CAS .F. Yagi, R. Kanai, S. Wakamatsu, R. Kajiyama, Y. Suehiro and M. Shimura, Catal. Today, 2005, 104, 2 CrossRef CAS .A. J. Esswein and D. G. Nocera, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 4022 CrossRef CAS PubMed .R. M. Navarro, M. A. Pena and J. L. G. Fierro, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 3952 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. D. Holladay, J. Hu, D. L. King and Y. Wang, Catal. Today, 2009, 139, 244 CrossRef CAS .R. M. Navarro, M. C. Sanchez-Sanchez, M. C. Alvarez-Galvan, F. del Valle and J. L. G. Fierro, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 35 CAS .M. Curry-Nkansah, D. Driscoll, R. Farmer, R. Garland, J. Gruber, N. Gupta, F. Hershkowitz, J. Holladay, K. Nguyen, S. Schlasner, D. Steward and M. Penev, Hydrogen Production Roadmap. Technology Pathways to the Future,  2009 Search PubMed .H. F. Abbas and W. M. A. Wan Daud, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 1160 CrossRef CAS .P. F. v. d. Oosterkamp, in Encyclopedia of Catalysis Synthesis Gas Generation: Industrial, ed. I. Horvath, Weinheim,  2003 Search PubMed .J. Sehested, Catal. Today, 2006, 111, 103 CrossRef CAS .J. Turner, G. Sverdrup, M. K. Mann, P.-C. Maness, B. Kroposki, M. Ghirardi, R. J. Evans and D. Blake, Int. J. Energy Res., 2008, 32, 379 CrossRef CAS .F. E. Osterloh, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 35 CrossRef CAS .A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253 RSC .X. Chen, S. Shen, L. Guo and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6503 CrossRef CAS PubMed .K. Takanabe and K. Domen, ChemCatChem, 2012, 4, 1485 CrossRef CAS .D. Das, N. Khanna and T. N. Veziroglu, Chem. Ind. Chem. Eng. Q., 2008, 14, 57 CrossRef CAS .http://www.audi.de/de/brand/de/unternehmen/aktuelles.detail.2011–05%7Eaudi_balanced_mobility.html, 2011.W. Wang, S. Wang, X. Ma and J. Gong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 3703 RSC .T. Abe, M. Tanizawa, K. Watanabe and A. Taguchi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 315 CAS .S. Sharma, Z. Hu, P. Zhang, E. W. McFarland and H. Metiu, J. Catal., 2011, 278, 297 CrossRef CAS .J.-N. Park and E. W. McFarland, J. Catal., 2009, 266, 92 CrossRef CAS .F. Ocampo, B. Louis and A.-C. Roger, Appl. Catal., A, 2009, 369, 90 CrossRef CAS .G. Du, S. Lim, Y. Yang, C. Wang, L. Pfefferle and G. L. Haller, J. Catal., 2007, 249, 370 CrossRef CAS .M. Inoue, H. Shingen, T. Kitami, S. Akamaru, A. Taguchi, Y. Kawamoto, A. Tada, K. Ohtawa, K. Ohba, M. Matsuyama, K. Watanabe, I. Tsubone and T. Abe, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 112, 1479 Search PubMed .R. K. Thami, J. Kiwi and M. Grtzel, Nature, 1987, 327, 506 CrossRef .G. Centi and S. Perathoner, Catal. Today, 2009, 148, 191 CrossRef CAS .R. W. Dorner, D. R. Hardy, F. W. Williams and H. D. Willauer, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 884 CAS .Y. Q. Zhang, G. Jacobs, D. E. Sparks, M. E. Dry and B. H. Davis, Catal. Today, 2002, 71, 411 CrossRef CAS .R. W. Dorner, D. R. Hardy, F. W. Williams, B. H. Davis and H. D. Willauer, Energy Fuels, 2009, 23, 4190 CrossRef CAS .T. Herranz, S. Rojas, F. J. Prez-Alonso, M. Ojeda, P. Terreros and J. L. G. Fierro, Appl. Catal., A, 2006, 311, 66 CrossRef CAS .T. Z. Li, Y. Yang, C. H. Zhang, X. An, H. J. Wan, Z. C. Tao, H. W. Xiang, Y. W. Li, F. Yi and B. F. Xu, Fuel, 2007, 86, 921 CrossRef CAS .R. W. Dorner, D. R. Hardy, F. W. Williams and H. D. Willauer, Appl. Catal., A, 2010, 373, 112 CrossRef CAS .R. W. Dorner, D. R. Hardy, F. W. Williams and H. D. Willauer, Catal. Commun., 2011, 15, 88 CrossRef CAS .C. Graves, S. D. Ebbesen, M. Mogensen and K. S. Lackner, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2011, 15, 1 CrossRef CAS .G. A. Olah, A. Goeppert and G. K. S. Prakash, Beyond Oil and Gas: The Methanol Economy, Wiley-VCH,  2006 Search PubMed .H. Goehna and P. Koenig, CHEMTECH, 1999, 36 Search PubMed .http://www.carbonrecycling.is/, 2011.F. Pontzen, W. Liebner, V. Gronemann, M. Rothaemel and B. Ahlers, Catal. Today, 2011, 171, 242 CrossRef CAS .G. Liu, D. Willcox, M. Garland and H. H. Kung, J. Catal., 1984, 90, 139 CrossRef CAS .G. C. Chinchen, P. J. Denny, D. G. Parker, M. S. Spencer and D. A. Whan, Appl. Catal., 1987, 30, 333 CrossRef CAS .G. C. Chinchen, P. J. Denny, J. R. Jennings, M. S. Spencer and K. C. Waugh, Appl. Catal., 1988, 36, 1 CrossRef CAS .K. C. Waugh, Catal. Lett., 2012, 142, 1153 CrossRef CAS .X. Guo, D. Mao, G. Lu, S. Wang and G. Wu, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2011, 345, 60 CrossRef CAS .A. Bansode, B. Tidona, P. Rudolf von Rohr and A. Urakawa, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2013, 3, 767 CAS .J. Yoshihara and C. T. Campbell, J. Catal., 1996, 161, 776 CrossRef CAS .C. V. Ovesen, B. S. Clausen, J. Schitz, P. Stoltze, H. Topsøe and J. K. Nørskov, J. Catal., 1997, 168, 133 CrossRef CAS .F. Arena, G. Italiano, K. Barbera, S. Bordiga, G. Bonura, L. Spadaro and F. Frusteri, Appl. Catal., A, 2008, 350, 16 CrossRef CAS .X. Guo, D. Maob, G. Lu, S. Wang and G. Wu, J. Catal., 2010, 271, 178 CrossRef CAS .X. Guo, D. Mao, G. Lu, S. Wang and G. Wu, Catal. Commun., 2011, 12, 1095 CrossRef CAS .M. Behrens, F. Studt, I. Kasatkin, S. Kuehl, M. Haevecker, F. Abild-Pedersen, S. Zander, F. Girgsdies, P. Kurr, B.-L. Kniep, M. Tovar, R. W. Fischer, J. K. Nørskov and R. Schloegl, Science, 2012, 336, 893 CrossRef CAS PubMed .E. Samei, M. Taghizadeh and M. Bahmani, Fuel Process. Technol., 2012, 96, 128 CrossRef CAS .P. Gao, F. Li, F. Xiao, N. Zhao, N. Sun, W. Wei, L. Zhong and Y. Sun, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2012, 2, 1447 CAS .L. Zhang, Y. Zhang and S. Chen, Appl. Catal., A, 2012, 415–416, 118 CrossRef CAS .K. T. Jung and A. T. Bell, Catal. Lett., 2002, 80, 63 CrossRef CAS .F. Liao, Y. Huang, J. Ge, W. Zheng, K. Tedsree, P. Collier, X. Hong and S. C. Tsang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 2162 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X.-L. Liang, X. Dong, G.-D. Lin and H.-B. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2009, 88, 315 CrossRef CAS .H. Kong, H. Y. Li, G. D. Lin and H. B. Zhang, Catal. Lett., 2011, 141, 886 CrossRef CAS .V. M. Lebarbier, R. A. Dagle, L. Kovarik, J. A. Lizarazo-Adarme, D. L. King and D. R. Palo, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2012, 2, 2116 CAS .N. Koizumi, X. Jiang, J. Kugai and C. Song, Catal. Today, 2012, 194, 16 CrossRef CAS .X. Zhou, J. Qu, F. Xu, J. Hu, J. S. Foord, Z. Zeng, X. Hong and S. C. E. Tsang, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 1747 RSC .A. B. Vidal, L. Feria, J. Evans, Y. Takahashi, P. Liu, K. Nakamura, F. Illas and J. A. Rodriguez, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 2275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. F. Zhao, Y. Yang, C. Mims, C. H. F. Peden, J. Li and D. Mei, J. Catal., 2011, 281, 199 CrossRef CAS .L. C. Grabow and M. Mavrikakis, ACS Catal., 2011, 1, 365 CrossRef CAS .M. Gattrell, N. Gupta and A. Co, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2006, 594, 1 CrossRef CAS .D. L. DuBois, in Electrochemical Reactions of Carbon Dioxide, ed. A. J. Bard, M. Stratmann, F. Scholz and C. J. Pickett, Weinheim,  2006 Search PubMed .M. R. DuBois and D. L. DuBois, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1974 CrossRef PubMed .K. Hori, in Handbook of Fuels Cells CO2-Reduction, Catalyzed by Metal Electrodes,  2010 Search PubMed .C. Costentin, M. Robert and J.-M. Saveant, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2423 RSC .Y. Hori, A. Murata and R. Takahashi, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 1, 1989, 85, 2309 RSC .Y. Hori, H. Wakebe, T. Tsukamoto and O. Koga, Electrochim. Acta, 1994, 39, 1833 CrossRef CAS .M. Watanabe, M. Shibata, A. Katoh, M. Azuma and T. Sakata, Denki Kagaku, 1991, 59, 508 CAS .R. L. Cook, R. C. MacDuff and A. F. Sammells, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1988, 135, 1320 CrossRef CAS .Y. Hori, I. Takahashi, O. Koga and N. Hoshi, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2003, 199, 39 CrossRef CAS .M. N. Mahmood, D. Masheder and C. J. Harty, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1987, 17, 1159 CrossRef CAS .K. Hara, A. Kudo, T. Sakata and M. Watanabe, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1995, 142, L57 CrossRef CAS .T. Kobayashi and H. Takahashi, Energy Fuels, 2003, 18, 285 CrossRef .Y. Kohno, T. Yamamoto, T. Tanaka and T. Funabiki, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2001, 175, 173 CrossRef CAS .C. Delacourt, P. L. Ridgway, J. B. Kerr and J. Newman, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2008, 155, B42 CrossRef CAS .E. Dufek, T. Lister and M. McIlwain, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2011, 41, 623 CrossRef CAS .E. J. Dufek, T. E. Lister, S. G. Stone and M. E. McIlwain, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159, F514 CrossRef CAS .S. R. Narayanan, B. Haines, J. Soler and T. I. Valdez, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, A167 CrossRef CAS .E. E. Barton, D. M. Rampulla and A. B. Bocarsly, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 6342 CrossRef CAS PubMed .B. A. Rosen, A. Salehi-Khojin, M. R. Thorson, W. Zhu, D. T. Whipple, P. J. A. Kenis and R. I. Masel, Science, 2011, 334, 643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. R. Goncalves, A. Gomes, J. Condeco, R. Fernandes, T. Pardal, C. A. C. Sequeira and J. B. Branco, Energy Convers. Manage., 2010, 51, 30 CrossRef CAS .M. Le, M. Ren, Z. Zhang, P. T. Sprunger, R. L. Kurtz and J. C. Flake, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, E45 CrossRef CAS .C. W. Li and M. W. Kanan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 7231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Chen and M. W. Kanan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 1986 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Z. Chen, P. Kang, M.-T. Zhang, B. R. Stoner and T. J. Meyer, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 813 CAS .C. M. Stoots, J. E. O'Brien, J. S. Herring and J. J. Hartvigsen, J. Fuel Cell Sci. Technol., 2009, 6, 011014 CrossRef .Z. Zhan, W. Kobsiriphat, J. R. Wilson, M. Pillai, I. Kim and S. A. Barnett, Energy Fuels, 2009, 23, 3089 CrossRef CAS .S. D. Ebbesen, C. Graves and M. Mogensen, Int. J. Green Energy, 2009, 6, 646 CrossRef CAS .B. Hu, V. Stancovski, M. Morton and S. L. Suib, Appl. Catal., A, 2010, 382, 277 CrossRef CAS .C. Graves, S. D. Ebbesen and M. Mogensen, Solid State Ionics, 2011, 192, 398 CrossRef CAS .K. Xie, Y. Zhang, G. Meng and J. T. S. Irvine, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 195 RSC .Z. Zhan and L. Zhao, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 7250 CrossRef CAS .E. E. Barton, D. M. Rampulla and A. B. Bocarsly, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 6342 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. J. Morris, R. T. McGibbon and A. B. Bocarsly, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Cheng, D. Xing, D. F. Call and B. E. Logan, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2009, 43, 3953 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. Villano, F. Aulenta, C. Ciucci, T. Ferri, A. Giuliano and M. Majone, Bioresour. Technol., 2010, 101, 3085 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Zhao, Y. Zhang, B. Zhao, Y. Chang and Z. Li, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2012, 46, 5198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. C. A. A. Van Eerten-Jansen, A. Ter Heijne, C. J. N. Buisman and H. V. M. Hamelers, Int. J. Energy Res., 2012, 36, 809 CrossRef CAS .T. Mogi, T. Ishii, K. Hashimoto and R. Nakamura, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 3967 RSC .H. Li, P. H. Opgenorth, D. G. Wernick, S. Rogers, T.-Y. Wu, W. Higashide, P. Malati, Y.-X. Huo, K. M. Cho and J. C. Liao, Science, 2012, 335, 1596 CrossRef CAS PubMed .V. Augugliaro, L. Palmisano and M. Schiavello, AIChE J., 1991, 37, 1096 CrossRef CAS .M. Salaices, B. Serrano and H. I. de Lasa, Chem. Eng. J., 2002, 90, 219 CrossRef CAS .O. M. Alfano, M. I. Cabrera and A. E. Cassano, Chem. Eng. Sci., 1994, 49, 5327 CrossRef CAS .G. Mul, C. Schacht, W. P. M. van Swaaij and J. A. Moulijn, Chem. Eng. Process., 2012, 51, 137 CrossRef CAS .P. Pathak, M. J. Meziani, L. Castillo and Y. P. Sun, Green Chem., 2005, 7, 667 RSC .C.-C. Yang, J. Vernimmen, V. Meynen, P. Cool and G. Mul, J. Catal., 2011, 284, 1 CrossRef CAS .J. C. S. Wu, H. M. Lin and C. L. Lai, Appl. Catal., A, 2005, 296, 194 CrossRef CAS .Z. Y. Wang, H. C. Chou, J. C. S. Wu, D. P. Tsai and G. Mul, Appl. Catal., A, 2010, 380, 172 CrossRef CAS .M. Halmann, Nature, 1978, 275, 115 CrossRef CAS .T. Inoue, A. Fujishima, S. Konishi and K. Honda, Nature, 1979, 277, 637 CrossRef CAS .K. R. Thampi, J. Kiwi and M. Gratzel, Nature, 1987, 327, 506 CrossRef CAS .K. Hirano, K. Inoue and T. Yatsu, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 1992, 64, 255 CrossRef CAS .O. Ishitani, C. Inoue, Y. Suzuki and T. Ibusuki, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 1993, 72, 269 CrossRef CAS .M. Anpo, H. Yamashita, Y. Ichihashi and S. Ehara, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1995, 396, 21 CrossRef .H. Yamashita, A. Shiga, S. Kawasaki, Y. Ichihashi, S. Ehara and M. Anpo, Energy Convers. Manage., 1995, 36, 617 CrossRef CAS .F. Saladin, L. Forss and I. Kamber, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1995, 533 RSC .F. Saladin and I. Alxneit, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1997, 93, 4159 RSC .S. Kaneco, Y. Shimizu, K. Ohta and T. Mizuno, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 1998, 115, 223 CrossRef CAS .H. Yamashita, Y. Fujii, Y. Ichihashi, S. G. Zhang, K. Ikeue, D. R. Park, K. Koyano, T. Tatsumi and M. Anpo, Catal. Today, 1998, 45, 221 CrossRef CAS .M. Subrahmanyam, S. Kaneco and N. Alonso-Vante, Appl. Catal., B, 1999, 23, 169 CrossRef CAS .K. Ikeue, H. Mukai, H. Yamashita, S. Inagaki, M. Matsuoka and M. Anpo, J. Synchrotron Radiat., 2001, 8, 640 CrossRef CAS PubMed .K. Ikeue, H. Yamashita, M. Anpo and T. Takewaki, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 8350 CrossRef CAS .I. H. Tseng, W. C. Chang and J. C. S. Wu, Appl. Catal., B, 2002, 37, 37 CrossRef CAS .I. Keita, S. Nozaki, M. Ogawa and M. Anpo, Catal. Today, 2002, 74, 241 CrossRef .G. Q. Guan, T. Kida and A. Yoshida, Appl. Catal., B, 2003, 41, 387 CrossRef CAS .G. R. Dey, A. D. Belapurkar and K. Kishore, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2004, 163, 503 CrossRef CAS .I. H. Tseng and J. C. S. Wu, Catal. Today, 2004, 97, 113 CrossRef CAS .I. H. Tseng, J. C. S. Wu and H. Y. Chou, J. Catal., 2004, 221, 432 CrossRef CAS .Y. Ku, W. H. Lee and W. Y. Wang, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2004, 212, 191 CrossRef CAS .J. S. Hwang, J. S. Chang, S. E. Park, K. Ikeue and M. Anpo, Top. Catal., 2005, 35, 311 CrossRef CAS .N. Sasirekha, S. J. S. Basha and K. Shanthi, Appl. Catal., B, 2006, 62, 169 CrossRef CAS .S. S. Tan, L. Zou and E. Hu, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2007, 8, 89 CrossRef .X. H. Xia, Z. H. Jia, Y. Yu, Y. Liang, Z. Wang and L. L. Ma, Carbon, 2007, 45, 717 CrossRef CAS .S. H. Liu, Z. H. Zhao and Z. Z. Wang, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2007, 6, 695 CAS .P. W. Pan and Y. W. Chen, Catal. Commun., 2007, 8, 1546 CrossRef CAS .G. H. Li, S. Ciston, Z. V. Saponjic, L. Chen, N. M. Dimitrijevic, T. Rajh and K. A. Gray, J. Catal., 2008, 253, 105 CrossRef CAS .T. V. Nguyen and J. C. S. Wu, Appl. Catal., A, 2008, 335, 112 CrossRef CAS .O. K. Varghese, M. Paulose, T. J. LaTempa and C. A. Grimes, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 731 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. C. Yang, H. Y. Lin, Y. S. Chien, J. C. S. Wu and H. H. Wu, Catal. Lett., 2009, 131, 381 CrossRef CAS .Q. H. Zhang, W. D. Han, Y. J. Hong and J. G. Yu, Catal. Today, 2009, 148, 335 CrossRef CAS .H. Tsuneoka, K. Teramura, T. Shishido and T. Tanaka, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 8892 CAS .K. Koci, K. Mateju, L. Obalova, S. Krejcikova, Z. Lacny, D. Placha, L. Capek, A. Hospodkova and O. Solcova, Appl. Catal., B, 2010, 96, 239 CrossRef CAS .Y. Li, W. N. Wang, Z. L. Zhan, M. H. Woo, C. Y. Wu and P. Biswas, Appl. Catal., B, 2010, 100, 386 CrossRef CAS .Q. Liu, Y. Zhou, J. H. Kou, X. Y. Chen, Z. P. Tian, J. Gao, S. C. Yan and Z. G. Zou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 14385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. C. Yan, S. X. Ouyang, J. Gao, M. Yang, J. Y. Feng, X. X. Fan, L. J. Wan, Z. S. Li, J. H. Ye, Y. Zhou and Z. G. Zou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 6400 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. J. Wang, R. L. Thompson, J. Baltrus and C. Matranga, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 48 CrossRef CAS .K. Kočí, V. Matějka, P. Kovář, Z. Lacný and L. Obalová, Catal. Today, 2011, 161, 105 CrossRef .Q. Zhang, T. Gao, J. M. Andino and Y. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 123–124, 257 CrossRef CAS .P.-Q. Wang, Y. Bai, J.-Y. Liu, Z. Fan and Y.-Q. Hu, Catal. Commun., 2012, 29, 185 CrossRef CAS .W.-H. Lee, C.-H. Liao, M.-F. Tsai, C.-W. Huang and J. C. S. Wu, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 132–133, 445 CrossRef CAS .Y. Wang, B. Li, C. Zhang, L. Cui, S. Kang, X. Li and L. Zhou, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 130–131, 277 CrossRef CAS .A. Dhakshinamoorthy, S. Navalon, A. Corma and H. Garcia, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9217 CAS .K. Ikeue, H. Yamashita, M. Anpo and T. Takewaki, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 8350 CrossRef CAS .T. Maschmeyer and M. Che, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 1536 CrossRef CAS PubMed .T. Maschmeyer and M. Che, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 9590 CrossRef CAS .C. C. Yang, Y. H. Yu, B. van der Linden, J. C. S. Wu and G. Mul, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 8398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Frei, Chimia, 2009, 63, 721 CrossRef CAS .W. Y. Lin and H. Frei, Cron. Chim., 2006, 9, 207 CrossRef CAS .W. Y. Lin, H. X. Han and H. Frei, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 18269 CrossRef CAS .N. Ulagappan and H. Frei, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2000, 104, 7834 CrossRef CAS .N. Sivasankar, W. W. Weare and H. Frei, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 12976 CrossRef CAS PubMed .F. Jiao and H. Frei, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1018 CAS .F. E. Osterloh, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2294 RSC .T. Wang, L. Yang, X. Du and Y. Yang, Energy Convers. Manage., 2013, 65, 299 CrossRef CAS .K. Chandrasekaran and J. K. Thomas, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1983, 99, 7 CrossRef CAS .M. W. Raphael and M. A. Malati, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 1989, 46, 367 CrossRef CAS .M. A. Malati, L. Attubato and K. Beaney, Sol. Energy Mater., 1996, 40, 1 CrossRef CAS .N. M. Dimitrijevic, B. K. Vijayan, O. G. Poluektov, T. Rajh, K. A. Gray, H. Y. He and P. Zapol, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 3964 CrossRef CAS PubMed .T. Ohno, K. Sarukawa and M. Matsumura, New J. Chem., 2002, 26, 1167 RSC .Y. Zheng, J. Liu, J. Liang, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6717 CAS .H. S. Soo, A. Agiral, A. Bachmeier and H. Frei, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 17104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .F. Neese, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2009, 253, 526 CrossRef CAS .C. J. Cramer and D. G. Truhlar, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 10757 RSC .P. Gori-Giorgi and M. Seidl, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 14405 RSC .K. Burke, J. Chem. Phys., 2012, 136, 150901 CrossRef PubMed .A. J. Cohen, P. Mori-Sánchez and W. Yang, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 289 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. R. Jacob and M. Reiher, arXiv.org, e-Print Arch., Phys., 2012, 1 Search PubMed .R. Zhang, H. Liu, B. Wang and L. Ling, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 126, 108 CrossRef CAS .R. Zhang, B. Wang, H. Liu and L. Ling, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 19811 CAS .S. Yin, T. Swift and Q. Ge, Catal. Today, 2011, 165, 10 CrossRef CAS .S. Yin and Q. Ge, Catal. Today, 2012, 194, 30 CrossRef CAS .S.-Y. Wu and J.-J. Ho, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 13202 CAS .P. Liu, Y. Choi, Y. Yang and M. G. White, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2009, 114, 3888 CrossRef PubMed .G. R. Jackson and D. Mahajan, in Method for production of mixed alcohols from synthesis gas, US Pat., 6,248,796,  2011 .S. Yin, Z. Wang and E. R. Bernstein, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 4699 RSC .A. A. Peterson, F. Abild-Pedersen, F. Studt, J. Rossmeisl and J. K. Nørskov, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1311 CAS .W. J. Durand, A. A. Peterson, F. Studt, F. Abild-Pedersen and J. K. Nørskov, Surf. Sci., 2011, 605, 1354 CrossRef CAS .A. A. Peterson and J. K. Nørskov, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 251 CrossRef CAS .J. A. Keith and E. A. Carter, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 7580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. E. Barton, P. S. Lakkaraju, D. M. Rampulla, A. J. Morris, E. Abelev and A. B. Bocarsly, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 11539 CrossRef PubMed .M. Z. Kamrath, R. A. Relph and M. A. Johnson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 15508 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. J. Morris, R. T. McGibbon and A. B. Bocarsly, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. A. Keith and E. A. Carter, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2012, 8, 8187 CrossRef .K. Xie, N. Umezawa, N. Zhang, P. Reunchan, Y. Zhang and J. Ye, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4211 CAS .S. Luo, Y. Zhao and D. G. Truhlar, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 2975 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Shi and Z. Zou, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2012, 73, 788 CrossRef CAS .M. C. Toroker, D. K. Kanan, N. Alidoust, L. Y. Isseroff, P.-L. Liao and E. A. Carter, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 16644 RSC .P. Li, S. Ouyang, G. Xi, T. Kako and J. Ye, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 7621 CAS .F. Alharbi, J. D. Bass, A. Salhi, A. Alyamani, H.-C. Kim and R. D. Miller, Renewable Energy, 2011, 36, 2753 CrossRef CAS .H. Li, Y. Lei, Y. Huang, Y. Fang, Y. Xu, L. Zhu and X. Li, J. Nat. Gas Chem., 2011, 20, 145 CrossRef CAS .R. D. Richardson, E. J. Holland and B. K. Carpenter, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .B. K. Carpenter and I. Rose, ARKIVOC, 2012, 127 CAS .L. Gonzlez, D. Escudero and L. Serrano-Andrés, ChemPhysChem, 2012, 13, 28 CrossRef PubMed .J. Baltrusaitis, E. V. Patterson and C. Hatch, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2012, 116, 9331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .R. F. Höckendorf, C.-K. Siu, C. van der Linde, O. P. Balaj and M. K. Beyer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 8257 CrossRef PubMed .A. Jess, P. Kaiser, C. Kern, R. B. Unde and C. von Olshausen, Chem. Ing. Tech., 2011, 83, 1777 CrossRef CAS .http://www.mantraenergy.com/Technology/ERCTechnology.aspx.Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Table S1. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ee41272eThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:
Evgenii V. Kondratenko	Evgenii V. Kondratenko (Rubtsovsk, Russia, 1967) graduated from the Novosibirsk State University in 1991 (diploma degree in chemistry with specialisation in chemical kinetics). He earned his PhD (Candidate of Chemical Sciences) in 1995 at the Institute of Chemistry of Natural Materials in Krasnoyarsk. In 1997, he was awarded a fellowship from the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation at the Institute for Applied Chemistry Berlin-Adlershof. After a Post-Doc stay at the same institute, he obtained a habilitation degree (the Venia Legendi degree) from the Technical University Berlin in 2007. He is currently working as a group leader (“Reaction Mechanisms”) at the Leibniz-Institut für Katalyse e.V. an der Universität Rostock. His research field is functionalisation of C1–C4 alkanes, environmental catalysis, and high-temperature reactions with the focus on mechanistic understanding of catalyst operation and on developing reactor concepts for improved catalyst and/or process design.
Guido Mul	Guido Mul (1969) obtained his master's degree in chemistry with specialization in heterogeneous catalysis (Prof. Geus) from Utrecht University in 1992. He received his PhD in 1997 from the Delft University of Technology on the in situ DRIFT analysis of catalytic oxidation of (diesel) soot, research conducted under supervision of Prof. Jacob Moulijn. After a Post-Doc position at SRI-International (Stanford Research Institute) in California, USA (1997–1999), he was awarded a fellowship of the KNAW (Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences) in 2000. This allowed him to return to Delft University of Technology (TUD) and to determine the detailed mechanism of catalytic oxidation reactions, using an integrated approach based on Infrared and Raman spectroscopies and transient kinetics. In 2005 he was awarded the VIDI grant of the Dutch National Science Foundation (NWO), to initiate fundamental research in the field of photocatalysis. He was appointed associate professor at TU Delft in 2007, with the focus on developing/evaluating spectroscopies (ATR, Raman) for analyses of liquid phase (photo)catalytic processes. He was appointed full professor at the University of Twente in 2009 to conduct research in the field of ‘Photocatalytic Synthesis’, with research activities in photocatalysis for hydrogen production and CO2 to fuel conversion, water and air purification, and selective oxidation. Furthermore, development and evaluation of novel reactor concepts based on monoliths and microreactors for (photo)catalysis are part of his current research activities.
Jonas Baltrusaitis	Jonas Baltrusaitis was born in June 24, 1976 in Marijampole, Lithuania. He graduated from Kaunas University of Technology, Lithuania with BSc and MSc degrees in Chemical Engineering in 1998 and 2000, and then worked in the chemical industry as a process engineer. In 2003 he was accepted to the University of Iowa, Department of Chemistry where he graduated in 2007 with a PhD in Physical Chemistry. During his graduate career, he worked in Prof. Vicki Grassian's group on the atmospheric and environmental chemistry topics, surface chemistry, microscopy and spectroscopy. After his PhD and post-doc, JB worked in Central Microscopy Research Facility at the University of Iowa as a research scientist. In 2012, JB has become an assistant professor in the Photocatalytic Synthesis Group, University of Twente, the Netherlands. His research is now at the nexus between energy and environment in designing low key, sustainable methods and materials for energy conversion. JB has been happily married to his wife Marija for 10 years and is a proud owner of 2 adopted dogs.
Gastón O. Larrazábal	Gastón O. Larrazábal (Caracas, Venezuela, 1987) earned his BS degree in Chemical Engineering from Universidad Simón Bolívar (2010) and his MSc degree in Process Engineering (2013) from ETH Zurich. He has recently started his PhD studies at ETH Zurich under the supervision of Prof. Javier Pérez-Ramírez. Gastón is interested in the development of electrocatalytical processes for the conversion of carbon dioxide into fuels and chemicals.
Javier Pérez-Ramírez	Javier Pérez-Ramírez (Benidorm, Spain, 1974) studied Chemical Engineering at the University of Alicante, Spain and earned his PhD degree at TU Delft, Netherlands in 2002. After a period in industry he was appointed ICREA research professor at ICIQ in Tarragona, Spain. In 2010, he took the chair of Catalysis Engineering at the Institute for Chemical and Bioengineering of the ETH Zurich. He is engaged in the development and understanding of new heterogeneous catalysts, multifunctional materials, and reactor engineering concepts devoted to sustainable technologies.
Broader contextPreserving the environment for future generations, particularly in light of concerns about climate change linked to anthropogenic CO2 emissions, is one of the greatest challenges facing today's society. The complexity of this issue is compounded by a myriad of factors, such as the constant push for economic growth, the increase of the world's population and our reliance on fossil fuels. In this context, novel technologies for the sustainable production of energy and chemicals in an economically and environmentally viable manner are urgently needed. One vision for such a technology is using CO2 as a feedstock for the production of energy carriers and commodity chemicals. This could lessen the amount of CO2 released into the atmosphere, lead to more sustainable production processes in the chemical industry and unlock valuable synergies with intermittent renewable energy sources. Catalysis plays a fundamental role in all the routes that have been proposed for CO2 utilisation. This review provides a comprehensive view of the field of CO2 conversion into fuels and chemicals through heterogeneous catalysis, photocatalysis and electrocatalysis and highlights the technical features, recent advances, current limitations and future perspectives of these routes.

 	Fig. 1  Total annual CO2 emissions and partial CO2 pressures in various industry sectors. Adapted from ref. 3.	 

 	Fig. 2  Primary materials and energy sources for H2 generation.	 
CH4 + H2O → 3H2 + CO	(1)
H2O + CO → H2 + CO2	(2)
CxHyOz + O2 + H2O → H2 + CO + CO2 +CnHm + tar	(3)
2H2O → 2H2 + O2	(4)

 	Fig. 3  CO2 conversions to fuels or useful commodity chemicals.	 


Ru/TiO2(B)	2.5	0.24	453	100	100	35
Ru/TiO2(W)	9.5	0.24	693	100	100	35
Ru/TiO2(G)	5.2	0.24	513	100	100	35
Ru/TiO2(B)	3.4	0.24	473	100	100	35
Ru/TiO2(B)	5.0	0.24	693	100	100	35
Ru/TiO2(B)	6.4	0.24	513	100	100	35
Ce0.97Ru0.03O2	 	12.5	753	51	99	36
Ce0.96Ru0.04O2	 	12.5	723	55	99	36
Pd–Mg/SiO2	 	2.0	723	59	95	37
Pd–Ni/SiO2	 	2.0	723	50.5	89	37
10Ni–CZ	 	43000a	623	85	99.5	38
Ni-MCM-41	 	1.6	673	56	96	39

 	Fig. 4  Process diagram for CO2 conversion to liquid fuels. Adapted from ref. 50.	 

 	Fig. 5  MegaDME® basic process instrumentation diagram taken from ref. 54.	 

 	Fig. 6  Pathways for methanol formation from CO2 and H2 or CO and H2 on metallic Cu. * represents a surface Cu site. Adapted from ref. 66, 78 and 79.	 

 	Fig. 7  Laboratory cells used for electrochemical CO2 conversion: (a) two-compartment cell, (b) cell with electrodes separated by an H+-conducting membrane, and (c) cell with a gas diffusion electrode.	 

 	Fig. 8  Electrode materials and reaction products of CO2 reduction. Adapted from ref. 83.	 
	(5)

 	Fig. 9  Comparison of the energy efficiencies and current densities for CO2 reduction to formic acid (), syngas (), and hydrocarbons (). This figure is from ref. 13.  and  represent the data for CO2 reduction to methanol98 and CO,99 respectively.	 
CO2 + 8H+ + 8e− → CH4 + 2H2O	(6)
2H+ + 2e− → H2	(7)
CO2 + 4H2 → CH4 + 2H2O	(8)

 	Fig. 10  Representative data points reflecting the rates of photocatalytic CO2 conversion to methane as a function of the year of study. Both liquid and gas phase operations are shown. Progress in enhancing rates is limited and a game changing material still needs to be developed. Selected rates are based on literature data compiled in Table S1.†128–170	 
	(9)

 	Fig. 11  Calculated limiting potentials for elementary steps upon CO2 hydrogenation to CH4 on fcc transition metal electrocatalysts (from ref. 207).	 

 	Fig. 12  Reaction pathways and their calculated free energies in the reduction of CO2 to methanol. Adapted from ref. 209.	 

 	Fig. 13  CR-EOMCC(2,3)/6-311+G(2df, 2p)//CAM-B3LYP/6-311+G(2df, 2p) reaction energy diagram of CO2 and H2S reactions optimized on the S1 surface. All enthalpies are referenced to those of separated CO2 and H2S optimized in the S0 state. Reaction path A (C–S bond formation mechanism) is shown in red, whereas path B (H–S bond formation mechanism) is shown in green. Adapted from ref. 223.	 

 	Fig. 14  Simplified energy diagram of conversion of CO2 to value-added products. Red and blue arrows indicate energy consumption and release, respectively.	 

1	CO2(g) + 2H2O(l) → CH4(g) + 2O2(g)	890.9
2	CO2(g) + 2H2O(l) → CH3OH(l) + 1.5O2(g)	726.7
3	CO2(g) + H2O(l) → CHOOH(l) + 0.5O2(g)	255.0
4	CO2(g) + 4H2(g) → CH4(g) + 2H2O(g)	−165.1
5	CO2(g) + 3H2(g) → CH3OH(g) + H2O(g)	−49.7
6	CO2(g) + H2(g) → CHOOH(g)	14.9
7	CO2(g) + 3H2(g) → –CH2–(g) + 2H2O(g)	−110.8
8	CO2(g) → CO(g) + 0.5O2(g)	283.2

 	Fig. 15  Scheme for methanol formation via CO2 and CO hydrogenation.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Table S1. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ee41272e

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
