Double hydrophilic copolymers – synthetic approaches, architectural variety, and current application fields  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1CS00086A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1CS00086A
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2022, 51, 995-1044Double hydrophilic copolymers – synthetic approaches, architectural variety, and current application fields

        
          
            Afshin 
            Nabiyan
          
          
        
      abc, 
      
        
          
            Johannes B. 
            Max
          
          
        
      abc and 

        
          
            Felix H. 
            Schacher
          
          
        
      *abc
aInstitute of Organic Chemistry and Macromolecular Chemistry (IOMC), Friedrich-Schiller University Jena, Lessingstraße 8, D-07743 Jena, Germany. E-mail: felix.schacher@uni-jena.de
bJena Center for Soft Matter (JCSM), Friedrich Schiller University Jena, Philosophenweg 7, D-07743 Jena, Germany
cCenter for Energy and Environmental Chemistry Jena (CEEC Jena), Philosophenweg 7a, 07743 Jena, Germany
Received 
      30th August 2021
    First published on 10th January 2022AbstractSolubility and functionality of polymeric materials are essential properties determining their role in any application. In that regard, double hydrophilic copolymers (DHC) are typically constructed from two chemically dissimilar but water-soluble building blocks. During the past decades, these materials have been intensely developed and utilised as, e.g., matrices for the design of multifunctional hybrid materials, in drug carriers and gene delivery, as nanoreactors, or as sensors. This is predominantly due to almost unlimited possibilities to precisely tune DHC composition and topology, their solution behavior, e.g., stimuli-response, and potential interactions with small molecules, ions and (nanoparticle) surfaces. In this contribution we want to highlight that this class of polymers has experienced tremendous progress regarding synthesis, architectural variety, and the possibility to combine response to different stimuli within one material. Especially the implementation of DHCs as versatile building blocks in hybrid materials expanded the range of water-based applications during the last two decades, which now includes also photocatalysis, sensing, and 3D inkjet printing of hydrogels, definitely going beyond already well-established utilisation in biomedicine or as templates.
Afshin Nabiyan
Afshin Nabiyan received his BSc and MSc degrees in pure chemistry and organic chemistry at Isfahan University of Technology (Iran) in 2015. Later, he obtained his PhD degree under the supervision of Felix. H. Schacher at Friedrich-Schiller-Universität Jena (Germany) in 2021. In late 2021, he was awarded the CataLight Young Scientist Support, and recently, he became a postdoctoral researcher at the group of Felix. H. Schacher. His research interests mainly include the synthesis and self-assembly of water-soluble (co)polymers and hybrid materials to construct hierarchical structures for sensing and photocatalysis.
Johannes B. Max
Johannes B. Max received his MSc degree at the university of Freiburg im Breisgau (Germany) in 2017, where his bachelor and master theses were supervised by Rolf Mülhaupt. After an internship at Covestro AG in Leverkusen, he started his PhD studies in the work group of Felix H. Schacher in Jena (Germany). Recently, he is working as a postdoctoral researcher at the Otto Schott Institute of Materials Research. Johannes’ research interests include the synthesis of smart and stimuli-responsive polymers via different routes, their self-assembly, utilization in hybrid materials and applications, e.g., sensors and photocatalysis.
Felix H. Schacher
Felix H. Schacher studied chemistry at the Universities of Bayreuth (Germany) and Lund (Sweden) and obtained his diploma in 2006. After his PhD under the supervision of Axel H. E. Müller in 2009, he joined the group of Ian Manners at the University of Bristol as DAAD postdoctoral fellow. In 2010 he was appointed Juniorprofessor at the Friedrich-Schiller-Universität Jena and became Full Professor at this institution in 2015. He has been awarded the Dr-Hermann-Schnell-Fellowship in 2013 and the Carl-Duisberg Memorial Award of the GDCh in 2020. His scientific interests include controlled/living polymerization techniques, block copolymers, polyelectrolytes, and polyampholytes – all in the context of using (directed) self-assembly processes for material design in the fields of membranes, hybrid materials, and biomedicine.
Introduction
Copolymers are composed of two or more chemically distinct polymer segments or monomer units that are covalently linked.1–3 The design and the preparation of copolymers allows us to access polymeric materials with additional degrees of freedom and properties compared to homopolymers.1–3 Among the copolymer families, water-soluble double hydrophilic copolymers (DHCs), consisting of two distinct hydrophilic blocks or monomers, have recently gained scientific attention due to their interesting solution properties and the growing number of water-based applications.4 Moreover, a large number of copolymer architectures derived from different preparation strategies, ranging from linear block and random copolymers to stars, brushes and macrocycles, have been reported.5–8 Among them, linear double hydrophilic block copolymers (DHBCs) are the most familiar and oldest subclass of DHCs, consisting of at least two different water-soluble blocks. Since their discovery almost 50 years ago,9 the field of DHBC research has continued to develop, not only because of synthetic developments in the field of macromolecular science, but also because of their interesting structure–property relationships, their potential functionality in solution, and their potential application in important sectors of modern life.10,11
Today, DHBCs are important building blocks at the interface of multidisciplinary research including chemistry, biomedicine, material science and nanotechnology. They offer tailormade solutions, e.g., matrices for photocatalytic hydrogen evolution as a sustainable energy source,12 the sensing of heavy metal ions or biological analytes,13–16 enabling the 3D printing of hydrogels,14 or the delivery of anti-cancer drugs.4,17,18
Typically, DHBCs consist of one solubility promoting segment, as well as a second hydrophilic and functional segment. Hence, the number of reported individual polymers is vast, as there exists an almost uncountable number of possible combinations of rather common, e.g. ethylene oxide,16 acrylic acid,19 and vinyl pyridine,20 or less frequently reported hydrophilic monomer units, e.g. featuring charges.21,22 From this perspective, there is an almost endless potential to tune both composition and the resulting characteristics of such materials.
The main characteristics of DHBCs arise from the interplay between the constituting segments. Self-assembly in different environments is mostly driven by one segment turning water-insoluble either through an external stimulus such as pH,23 temperature,24 light,25 or the presence of metal ions,26 or the interaction with molecular,27 or nano-sized compounds28 and surfaces,29 while the second block maintains its solubility in water. This provides access to exceptional assemblies in water, but self-assembly is sometimes even observed in pure water without any additional trigger.30 In that regard, there are also several examples of permanently double hydrophilic copolymers.31
The role of each segment is not always strictly defined. For example, if both of the segments are functional, both of them may switch from hydrophilic to non-hydrophilic nature upon exposure to a certain trigger, resulting in a ‘schizophrenic’ (micellisation) behaviour.32,33 A single block may even exhibit multiple roles; for example, poly(ethylene glycol) PEG represents both a high hydrophilicity along with biocompatibility.34 Indeed, recently multi hydrophilic block copolymers (MHBCs) were also introduced exhibiting an indefinite number of segment combinations.35 Besides, the diverse topologies found in macromolecular chemistry are more frequently exhibiting double hydrophilic nature. The choice of a suitable topology can be seen as an additional parameter defining the material properties.36 Therefore, the corresponding architectures presenting solely hydrophilic segments, e.g., star,37 graft, hyperbranched38 or macrocyclic,8 are closely related to the class of linear DHBCs.
Regarding the synthesis of DHBCs, access is often realised in a similar way compared to common linear block copolymers, making use of controlled polymerisation techniques for the successive addition of different monomers, or by exploiting click chemistry to link readily prepared segments.21,39 However, especially the synthesis of nonlinear DHBCs is rather advanced and usually either multi-site initiators40–42 or bi-functional monomers43 are required, as well as multiple steps.16,44 Further, often different controlled radical polymerisation (CRP) methods are combined, such as atom transfer radical polymerisation (ATRP) and reversible addition–fragmentation chain-transfer polymerisation (RAFT).45 ‘Alternative’ approaches have also been reported, which could be seen as an additional advantage having access to an even broader preparative toolbox, such as grafting-onto reactions to obtain double hydrophilic graft copolymers.46 Liu et al.47 concisely describe the self-assembly and stimulus-responsive behavior of some non-linear amphiphilic and double-hydrophilic copolymer architectures. Herein, the tunable self-assembly using non-linear architectures is emphasized. From this perspective, the classical concept of linear DHBCs will be extended in this review, highlighting the different double hydrophilic copolymer (DHC) architectures that are accessible, including crosslinked 3D structures. They will be divided first into their subclasses: (a) graft, (b) star and miktoarm, (c) toothbrush and centipede-like, (d) hyperbranched and dendritic, (e) macrocyclic and (f) crosslinked; and before their synthesis is discussed, individual features and solution behaviour are examined.
The properties of DHCs are often superior compared to their linear DHBC counterparts, and are already foreseen to be promising materials in different application fields, e.g., sensing,15 catalysis12,48 or as drug delivery systems.17 Together with the concept of multi-hydrophilicity, the topology can be seen as an additional parameter to tune the DHC properties to tailor-make water-soluble polymeric materials. In addition to these DHBCs, double hydrophilic random copolymers that reveal interesting solution properties and applications will also be considered, even though their chemical structure is less defined.
Major developments are also observed in the application of DHCs. Earlier work from Helmut Cölfen in 2001 emphasised the application of DHBCs as surfactants, stabilisers and structure directing materials, e.g., to control crystallisation processes and as templates, in addition to their utilisation in drug delivery.11 In another perspective review, Nottelet et al.49 focus mostly on DHBCs that combine a biocompatible non-ionic block with a degradable functional block such as polysaccharides, polypeptides, polyesters or similar. In this context, the described DHBCs are promising candidates for biomedical applications. However, the application field of DHCs expanded rapidly, and this polymer class is recently used in biomedical applications, as nanocarriers and imaging/contrast agents, in catalysis, sensing, or within hybrid materials and this is also highlighted here.12,15,33,44,48–50 Their water-solubility, together with their potential binding sites, renders DHBCs suitable organic components for hybrid materials in aqueous environments, and their combination with various inorganic materials was found to yield high performance materials.33,51
In general, hybrid materials are one of the most emerging material classes due to the possibility to tune the physical and chemical properties, often profiting from synergistic effects. While the polymers are mainly acting as stabilisers or templates, the inorganic materials contribute advantageous stability, as well as optical and electrical properties.52–54 For this, the rather novel applications of DHCs will be outlined with a special focus on hybrid materials. Since their utilisation is often based on their response to external stimuli, further progress in this field will be discussed as well. Besides giving a broad overview of recent literature in the field of DHCs, this review also covers general trends used in polymer chemistry towards this class of materials. However, within this review, the functions of the DHCs will be unveiled (Fig. 1) and through understanding their structure–property relationship versatile applications were accessed, that are described in the last section of the review.
 Fig. 1  General functions of DHCs, being divided in their interaction with metal ions or molecules (A), nanoparticles (NPs) and surfaces (B), and the response to an external trigger (C). 
Three general functions may be identified: (A) interaction and encapsulation of metal ions or molecules, forming nanoreactors and nanocarriers. Corresponding assemblies are often used as templates. These properties are often required in the construction of defined hybrid nanomaterials, catalysis, or delivery systems. (B) DHCs as stabilizing or dispersing agents, being attached to (nanoparticle) surfaces, granting their stability in aqueous environment and often tuning their properties. This function is found, where inorganic nanoparticles are applied in solution. (C) Responding to the exposure to an external stimulus (pH, temperature, light, ions,…) stimuli-responsive DHCs give a response or an output, e.g., through changing the physical properties of the surrounding solution. Especially sensing applications rely on this mechanism.
Synthetic approaches towards a variety of architectures
Today, researchers in polymer science have access to a wide range of controlled/living polymerization techniques, such as anionic/cationic or controlled radical polymerization. One consequence of those techniques being readily available was the preparation of polymers with various architectures. Among them, linear block copolymers (both amphiphilic and double hydrophilic examples) have been the focus of a very large number of studies. Those typically contain a straightforward synthetic approach, defined structures, and self-assembly studies in the bulk and in selective solvents, rendering such materials interesting for a broad range of applications. Their self-assembly has been intensively investigated, and in solution, this is particularly affected by the block copolymer composition, concentration, solvent, or the presence of additives.2,47,55–57 Linear double hydrophilic block copolymers as one interesting subgroup drew also considerable attention. Quite often, this category of linear block copolymers can reversibly switch between micellar and unimer states upon the application of external stimuli. For this reason, many excellent reports can be found in the literature that have been focused on the synthesis of new double hydrophilic linear block copolymers.2,47,55–57
Recently, non-linear copolymers have also attracted the attention of many researchers. In this regard, a broad variety of possible topologies (architectures) exists, each influencing the properties and function of a given macromolecule.36 Hence, the general concept of block copolymers is extended to non-linear architectures, such as graft, star, miktoarm, centipede, or cyclic, which is supported by recent synthetic advances (Fig. 1).2,57 The supramolecular self-assembly of some representative non-linear copolymers was described by Liu et al.47 Herein, the high potential to tune self-assembly by adjusting the topology is highlighted.
For double-hydrophilic copolymers, the architecture also significantly affects the solution properties, such as the solubility or viscosity.17,31,37,41 This can be considered an additional design element in the preparation of defined materials offering tailor-made solutions for a given dilemma. Moreover, the micellization behaviour of non-linear copolymers differs significantly from that of linear counterparts,58,59 as chain-end effects play a more important role,43 and the functionality itself, as well as the local density of functional groups, differs as well.37,38 As compared to traditional DHBCs, the utilisation of an alternative architecture may often be advantageous, e.g., branched versus block as templates.60 Hence, quite complex materials can be obtained considering both the inherent feature of a specific architecture and the molecular composition, e.g., charge, polarity, segment length and density of side-chains in a double hydrophilic material.12,15,33,48,61
However, in many cases, the preparation of non-linear topologies is more demanding. It is often necessary to use multi-functional initiators, or to combine polymerisation techniques and post-polymerisation modifications. In addition, they often reveal more complex and rather unexplored self-assembly.7,31,41,62 The resulting morphologies may be less defined due to more complicated structures, and this renders characterisation more challenging.21,46,63 From this point of view, the development and utilisation of diverse DHC architectures still bear a lot of potentials. The corresponding copolymers are promising materials for future applications in 3D inkjet printing,13 catalysis,48 sensing15 and biomedicine.17 The distinct topologies that are found in the literature (star and miktoarm, graft, crosslinked and others) will be highlighted in this section (Fig. 2). Crosslinked DHCs, forming chemically linked 3D nano-objects, will also be discussed.64–66 Furthermore, multi-hydrophilic block copolymers (MHBCs) will be introduced, combining even more functionalities.67
 Fig. 2  Schematic depiction of representative DHC architectures, with the individual segments in blue and red: star,39 miktoarm star,37 AB4 miktoarm,59 graft,46 hyperbranched,38 and macrocyclic.8 Multi-hydrophilic copolymers (MHCs) containing additional hydrophilic segments, depicted in green and yellow, for ABC miktoarm,98 A2(BC)2 miktoarm,67 and centipede-shaped copolymers.62 
In general, DHCs are prepared in a similar way compared to other segmented polymers usually following two different strategies. Here, especially controlled/living polymerization techniques, either ionic or radical, allow the construction of well-defined polymers by the sequential addition of monomers. As an alternative, two readily synthesized blocks with active end-groups are linked, e.g., via click chemistry.57 Also, other post-polymerization modification techniques exploiting a reactive polymer backbone give access to defined copolymers, such as graft copolymers.68 However, regarding DHCs some challenges may be identified. The choice of solvent is often limited, since most of the monomers are polar, ionizable, or even bear permanent charge.26,33,61 Thus, some limitations with regard to the choice of polymerization technique can be faced.26,33,61 DHCs usually contain functional moieties, e.g., acids and bases, and hence, initiators and ligands have to be compatible with the corresponding monomers.26,33 Finally, some of the repeat units could not be introduced via a simple polymerization making the use of protective group chemistry necessary.21,42,69 Indeed, great attention should be taken to properly select suitable reaction conditions when designing a specific system. In polymer science, the ultimate goal is mostly to introduce inexpensive, biocompatible, multifunctional, and ideally non-toxic polymers.4,70 At the same time, the methods that are used to polymerize novel hydrophilic (co)polymers may be harmful because of the toxicity and other incompatibilities associated with either catalyst or certain additives.4,70–72 Regarding non-linear architectures, the synthetic approaches become even more complex such as the necessity to use multifunctional initiators. Challenges may also arise from the subsequent characterization both in terms of absolute molar mass as well as the architecture itself, e.g., the number of arms or grafts. For instance, in the case of hydrophilic miktoarm star (co)polymers, it is challenging to construct well-defined structures with multiple precisely designed arms as a consequence of the strict requirements of the complicated preparation and purification procedures.72,73
Graft copolymers (DHGC)
Graft copolymers feature a polymer backbone and chemically different side-chains. They typically present a compact and confined structure, strong chain-end effects and complex self-assembly, e.g., the formation of worm-like micelles, even unimolecular aggregation, as well as lower aggregation numbers compared to linear structures have been reported.7,43,68,74,75 In addition to the choice of various potential backbone or side-chain moieties, e.g., ionic or non-ionic,15,46,76 DHGCs differ in the density and length of side-chains, strongly influencing the resulting characteristics, and allowing broad tuneability.46,77,78 However, while the backbone is generally one of the hydrophilic segments, two distinct hydrophilic blocks can also be linked to the same backbone.79,80
In general, graft copolymers can be synthesised via three approaches, which are also found in the field of double-hydrophilic graft copolymers: grafting-through, grafting-onto and grafting-from.68 Following this, the existing DHGCs were divided into these synthetic routes, and their unique features and potential applications are summarised in Table 1. The pathway selected strongly depends on the desired monomer, each of those three approaches reveals unique advantages and challenges. The grafting-to strategy is based on connecting specific side chains to a linear hydrophilic backbone using a suitable coupling reaction. As the linear backbone and side chains are constructed separately, they could be prepared using appropriate polymerization methods and their chain lengths can be precisely tuned. In case of grafting-through, graft copolymers could be prepared via the polymerization of hydrophilic macromonomers and here, the grafting density and the length of side chains can be tuned as well during macromonomer synthesis. Finally, the grafting-from requires a macroinitiator which already carries the respective initiation sites. This macromolecule can be prepared directly from the initiation-group-containing monomer or by the introduction of initiating functional groups to a specific precursor.68
Table 1 Synthesis, properties and utilisation of double hydrophilic graft copolymers found in the literature




DHGC
Synthesis
Feature/suggested application
Ref.




Abbreviations: P(AMPSNa-co-ANa)-g-PNIPAAm-g-PDMAM: poly(sodium-2-acrylamido-2-methylpropanesulfonate-co-sodium acrylate)-graft-poly(N-isopropyl acrylamide)-graft-poly(N,N-dimethylacrylamide) PSBM-g-P(OEGMA-co-DEGMA): poly(sulfobetaine methacrylate)-graft-poly[oligo(ethyleneglycol) methyl ether methacrylate)-co-di(ethylene glycol) methyl ether methacrylate]; PHEA-g-PDMAEA: poly(2-hydroxyethyl acrylate)-g-poly(2-dimethylamino ethylacrylate); PPEGMEA-g-PMAA: poly[poly(ethylene glycol) methyl ether acrylate]-graft-poly(methacrylic acid); PPEGMEA-g-PDEAEMA: poly[poly(ethylene glycol) methyl ether acrylate]-graft-poly(2-(diethylamino)ethyl methacrylate).





Grafting onto



PDha-g-PEG
Grafting of epoxides and Michael-acceptors
Multi-responsive application as a template, dispersant, in photocatalysis and sensing

15, 46, 48, 61 and 63



PDha-g-NIPAAm


PDha-g-PAA


Gelatine-g-PEG
Grafting of activated PEG
Formation of nanogels with curcumin drug delivery in cancer treatment

18



poly(acetal)hydrolysed-g-PEG
Grafting of mPEG-NH2 on poly(acetal), subsequent hydrolysis
Interaction with inorganic crystals

76



PNIPAAm-g-PEG
Grafting of PEG-NH2 onto P(NIPAAm-co-glycidyl methacrylate) or P(NIPAAm-co-N-acryloylsuccinimide)
Stable spherical aggregates above LCST

77 and 78



PAA-g-PEO
Grafting of mPEG-NH2 (using ETC/HOBt)
Encapsulating and delivering cationic or hydrogen-accepting agrochemicals or drugs

84



P(AMPSNa-co-ANa)-g-PNIPAAm
Grafting of PNIPAAm-NH2/PDMAM-NH2
Complexation of surfactants, tunable aggregation behavior

85



P(AMPSNa-co-ANa)-g-PNIPAAm-g-PDMAM







Grafting from



P(L-Lysine)-g-P(sulfobetaine)
(1) Grafting a RAFT CTA onto the backbone
Suppression of protein aggregation and protein release

82



(2) RAFT polymerisation of the sulfobetaine


PSBM-g-P(OEGMA-co-DEGMA)
(1) FRP of SBM and BIHPM (ATRP initiator containing monomer)
Zwitterionic backbone temperature and salt response tunable self-assembly

75



(2) ATRP copolymerisation of OGMA and DEGMA


PHEA-g-PDMAEA
Initiator functionalised monomer
Self-catalysed hydrolysis of PDMAEA; micelle formation in the organic phase

43



(1) RAFT


(2) SET-LRP


(3) Quaternisation


PHEA-g-PNIPAAm
Sequential RAFT and SET-LRP starting from trifunctional HECPMA
Thermo-response

45



PEO-g-PDMAEMA
(1) Functionalisation of P(EO-co-glycidol) with the initiator
Brush-like structure nanoelectronics, sensing, enhanced oil recovery, and drug and gene delivery systems

83



(2) ATRP of DMAEMA


PPEGMEA-g-PMAA and PPEGMEA-g-PDEAEMA
(1) ATRP
Biomedicine, e.g., drug carrier

79 and 80



(2) Functionalisation with an initiator


(3) ATRP


(4) Hydrolysis


PMA-g-PEG/PDMA
Initiator-functionalised monomer
Coating material protein resistant

86



(1) RAFT


(2) ATRP



Grafting through



PNIPAAm-g-PEO
FRP of PNIPAAm and PEO macromonomers
Aggregation above the LCST

81





The grafting-onto and grafting-through methods often benefit from a one-pot synthesis, sometimes even performed in water, starting from readily prepared functional precursors. This enables the characterisation of each individual building block, and a single reactive backbone can be used for functionalisation with various modifiers. However, a rather random distribution of the side-chains can be assumed and often the adjustment to a certain degree of functionalisation (DoF) is crucial to control structure–property relationships.15,46,63,81
In this respect, Max et al.15,61,63 prepared a library of graft copolymers starting from a pH- and ion-responsive poly(dehydroalanine) (PDha) backbone bearing amino moieties in each repeat unit as reactive handles (Fig. 3). By slightly changing the reaction conditions, various modifiers such as PEG, phosphonic acid, acrylic acid, or N-isopropyl acrylamide (NIPAAm) were grafted via either an aza-Michael addition or the ring-opening of epoxides to obtain tailor-made materials. Hereby, it was found that the DoF and the chain-length significantly influence the solubility, as shown for PEG side-chains.15,46,48,61,63
 Fig. 3  PDha-based graft copolymers derived via an aza-Michael addition and the ring-opening of epoxides in a grafting-onto approach. The amino moieties (red) were exploited as reactive handles.15,46,48,61,63 
Controlled polymerisation techniques typically provide good control over the side-chain length and Đ.43,45,48,79,80,82,83 Sun and Cui43 prepared DHGCs with a hydrophilic poly(2-hydroxy ethyl acrylate) (PHEA) backbone and poly(N-isopropyl acrylamide) (PNIPAAm) or poly(2-(dimethyl amino) ethyl methacrylate) (PDMAEMA) side-chains. They started with a single-electron transfer-living radical polymerization (SET-LRP) initiator-containing monomer (2-hydroxyethyl2-((2-chloropropanoyloxy)methyl)acrylate), which was first polymerised via RAFT (Fig. 4). Afterwards, the second monomer was grafted via SET-LRP to obtain graft copolymers with a narrow molecular weight distribution and grafts, as well as hydroxyl groups in each repeat unit.43,45
 Fig. 4  Synthesis of PHAEA-g-PDMAEA and PPEGMA-g-PDMAEMA via the grafting-onto approach and the smart combination of monomer or polymer modification and controlled polymerisation techniques (RAFT, SET-LRP and ATRP), corresponding to literature reports.43,80 
In another pathway, Gu et al.79,80 synthesised DHGCs based on a poly[poly(ethylene glycol)methyl ether acrylate] (PPEGMA) backbone grafted with both PDMAEMA and PMAA side-chains. In the first step, PEGMA was polymerised via ATRP before functionalising the backbone with an ATRP initiator using lithium diisopropylamide and 2-bromopropionylchloride (DoF = 75%). In the third step, the second monomer was grafted by another ATRP reaction. To obtain poly(methacrylic acid) (PMAA), subsequent hydrolysis of the protected precursor was carried out.
As in the case of linear DHBCs, the graft copolymers usually contain a solubility promoting block and a functional, stimuli-responsive building block. However, self-assembly is more complex and has not been exhaustively studied yet. In this respect, the side-chains may stabilise the graft copolymer after the DHGC becomes amphiphilic upon exposure to a stimulus, as shown for PEG-g-NIPAAm. Here, the PEG side chains can stabilise core–shell nanostructures at temperatures above the lower critical solution temperature (LCST), while some of them still interact with PNIPAAm in the core.77,78,81
Gu et al. described the synthesis of PPEGMEA-g-PMAA and PPEGMEA-graft-poly(2-(diethylamino)ethyl methacrylate) (PDEAEMA) graft copolymers. While the carboxylic acid groups containing graft copolymer was a suitable stabiliser and template for Fe3O4 NPs through ionic interactions, the pH- and salt response of PPEGMEA-g-PDEAEMA was studied. For this DHGC, the reversible formation of micelles depends on both the pH and the NaCl concentration, where the PDEAEMA chains collapse within the core. T. Jiang et al.75 also described the tuneable self-assembly of poly(sulfobetaine methacrylate)-graft-poly[oligo(ethyleneglycol)methyl ether methacrylate)-co-di(ethylene glycol)methyl ether methacrylate] (PSBM-g-P(OEGMA-co-DEGMA)), containing a zwitterionic backbone.
The aggregation strongly depends on the temperature, salt concentration, and the polymer structure itself (longer or shorter side-chains). This allows the formation of distinct nano-objects, where either the backbone or the grafts collapse within the core. However, in case of longer side-chains, low aggregation numbers of around 2 were found for the micelles.75
Due to their versatile solution behaviour and efficient interaction with inorganic nanoparticles,15,79 ions,15 proteins,82 or drugs, DHGCs are already found in various applications such as sensing,15 catalysis,12,48 suppression of protein aggregation,82 or cancer treatment.18 Further utilisation in carrier systems, nanoelectronics, oil recovery, and as dispersants is foreseen.46,83,84
Stars and miktoarm star copolymers
Star-shaped double-hydrophilic copolymers benefit from a higher density of functional groups compared to linear block copolymers with both internal and peripheral functional moieites. This is leading to higher loading capacities and lower aggregation numbers as well as often micellar structures with increased stability. Besides, they exhibit a lower solution viscosity due to less entanglements being formed.37,87
The structural diversity in the field of segmented, double-hydrophilic star and miktoarm copolymers is broad. They differ in arm number (3, 4, 8, 21 and more), and their arrangement: block copolymers, or individual blocks (arms) linked through the core. In this respect, different types of miktoarm star exist: star block copolymers, miktoarm stars and AxBy-type non-linear block copolymers, and the variety of these topologies and the hydrophilic segments are depicted in Table 2. Regarding the synthetic access, in any case, the utilisation of multi-site initiators or crosslinking points is necessary, besides the smart combination of controlled polymerisation techniques and end-group modifications.
Table 2 Schematic structure of star and miktoarm-shaped DHCs and the corresponding polymers




Schematic depiction
Polymers
Ref.




Abbreviations: PDMA: poly(N,N-dimethylacrylamide); PEO-b-PEtOx: poly(ethylene oxide)-block-poly(2-ethyl-2-oxazoline); PAA-b-P(MEA-co-OEGA480): PAA-b-poly[(2-methoxyethyl acrylate)-co-(oligo(ethylene glycol) acrylate)]; P4VP: poly(4-vinyl pyridine); POEGMAm: poly(oligo(ethylene glycol) methacrylate); PSEMA: poly(succinyloxyethyl methacrylate)]; PPO/PEO (Jeffamine)-b-…GMA, HEMA, HEA, MEMA, MPC, DEA, DMA: poly(alkylene oxides)-block-…glycerol monomethacrylate, 2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate, 2-hydroxyethyl acrylate, 2-(N-morpholino ethyl methacrylate, 2-methacryloyloxyethyl phosphorylcholine, 2-(diethylamino)ethyl methacrylate; 2-(dimethylamino)ethyl methacrylate; PZLL-b-(PBLG)2: poly(ε-benzyloxycarbonyl-L-lysine)-block-poly(γ-benzyl-L-glutamate).







PNIPAAm-b-PDMA or PHEAm (3 arms)

13, 37, 39, 42, 69 and 90–92



PEO-b-PEtOx (8 arms)


P(OEGA)-b-PAA (9 arms)


PAA-b-P(MEA-co-OEGA480) (21 arms)


P4VP-b-PAA (21 arms)


PNIPAAm-b-PAA (21 arms)


(PDMAEMA-b-POEGMA)n (n arms)





(PDMAEMA)n(POEGMAm)m (n and m = 24)

37






PDMAEMA-star-PMAA (34, 35, 38 arms)

89






PDEA4-b-poly(propylene oxide)-b-PDEA4

58






PNIPAAm-b-PDEA4

59






PNIPAAm-b-PAA3

93



PAA-b-PNIPAAm3





PDEA-b-PSEMA2

31, 41 and 96



PPO/PEO (Jeffamine)-b-…P GMA, HEMA, HEA, MEMA, MPC, DEA, DMA


PZLL-b-(PBLG)2





(PNIPAAm)2-(PAA)2

93






PEG(-b-PMAA)-b-PDEA

97 and 98



PEG(-b-PDEA)-b-PNIPAAm





(PNIPAAm)2-(PNVP-b-PAA)2

67



(PNIPAAm-b-PAA)2-(PNVP)2





(PNIPAM-b-PAA)2-(PVP)2

93–95



(PNIPAM)2-(PVP-b-PAA)2




The arm-first approach is based on the utilisation of reactive arms as macromonomers. Rudolph et al.39 synthesised poly(ethylene oxide)-block-poly(2-ethyl-2-oxazoline)8 (PEO-b-PEtOx)8 starting from star-shaped (PEO)8 with azide end-groups. Afterwards, alkyne-functionalised PEtOx were linked to the PEO precursor via a copper-catalysed azide–alkyne cycloaddition click reaction (CuAAc). Alternatively, the star block copolymer was obtained by the CROP of EtOx from a [PEO-Ts]8 macroinitiator. In a similar approach, Skandalis et al.37,88 synthesised (PDMAEMAnPOEGMAm)p miktoarm star polymers with 24 arms each. First, the PDMAEMA homopolymer was synthesised via RAFT and then crosslinked with ethylene glycol dimethacrylate (EGDM), a difunctional monomer, to obtain a crosslinked core. Hereby, the chain transfer agent (CTA) was transferred to the core and chain-extended with OEGMA to graft the POEGMA arms. On the other hand, (PDMAEMA-b-POEGMA)n star block copolymers were synthesised via a core first approach. After the EGDM core containing the CTA was synthesised, DMAEMA and OEGMA were polymerised sequentially. In both strategies, the star–star coupling cannot be excluded, but the core-first approach provides improved control and straightforward purification, i.e., the removal of the remaining monomer or homo star polymers.
The PDMAEMA segments or arms were further quaternised to tune the hydrophilicity.37 An alternative architecture was realised by Taghavi-Kahagh et al.,89 preparing polyampholytic PDMAEMA-star-PMAA DHCs, containing hydrophilic PDMAEMA arms and a hydrophilic PMAA core. Therefore, the arms were synthesised first via RAFT, such that they possessed functional CTA end-groups. Afterwards, MAA and dual-functional N,N′-methylenebis(acrylamide) were added in a distillation-preparation technique to form the core. Changing the arm length (i.e., their molecular weight) and/or arm number is then straightforward to further tune the solution properties.89
The core first approach is more often exploited in the synthesis of star block copolymers, starting from multifunctional initiator cores and followed by CRP. For this, cyclodextrin (21 arms),42,69,90 dendritic polyesters (nine arms)13,91 and glycerol ethoxylate (3 arms)92 were used for the defined synthesis of the block copolymer. For the polymerisation of the corresponding block copolymers, in addition to conventional ATRP, SET-LRP and photo ATRP were applied to precisely control the segment length. It should be noted that for the synthesis of poly(acrylic acid) (PAA)-containing star block copolymers, deprotection of the protected PtBAA segment is necessary.42,90 The use of a dual-functional, four-arm ATRP/RAFT initiator, as shown in Fig. 5, was used to synthesise non-linear miktoarm block copolymers (AB3, A2B2) by combining both CRP techniques.40 This pathway also gives access to multi-hydrophilic DHCs, A2(BC)2 and (AB)2C2, by the sequential addition of monomers.67,93–95
 Fig. 5  Four-arm initiator-containing sites for ATRP and RAFT polymerisation (left). It can contain one or three of each moiety, and allows the combination of both methods.40 Trifunctional initiators allow for the post-polymerisation modification of the hydroxyl groups for additional ATRPs.41 
However, Cai and Armes31,41,99 applied another trifunctional initiator, 2-(diethanolamino)acetyloxyethyl 2-bromoisobutyrate, to construct Y-shaped (AB2) and zwitterionic DHCs using only ATRP. After the polymerisation of PDEA, the hydroxyl groups of the initiator were esterified to obtain a dual-functional ATRP macroinitiator for subsequent polymerisation.41
Other miktoarm DHCs were synthesised starting from an end-group functionalised segment, where either commercially available31,58 or readily synthesised examples38 containing amino moieties were used. These were transformed into multifunctional ATRP initiators by Michael-addition reactions or the ring opening of epoxides and subsequent esterification.31,38,58 In this respect, AB2, AB4, A2BA2 and A4BA4 miktoarm DHCs were synthesised after polymerisation of the second monomer. Liu et al. describe the preparation of ABC miktoarm star terpolymers in a multi-step approach including the synthesis of a trifunctional initiator, ATRP, CuAAC click reactions, and a deprotection step.97,98
Although the synthetic access to the above-described architectures is not always straightforward, star and miktoarm DHCs exhibit interesting solution self-assembly. One might expect that while more than two sorts of polymer segments are arranged in a non-linear DHBC, their solution self-assembly could be more complex and attractive. In general, the self-assembly of miktoarm and stars copolymer is less studied since this architecture class is generally less studied and most experimental works involve linear block copolymers.97,100,101 So far from literature reports we could realize that they often show more complex self-assembly patterns if compared to linear block copolymers.15,31,41,58,59,67,93 The micellisation behaviour could differ, e.g., with respect to the unimer-to-micelle transition kinetics, the stability of the resulting aggregates, or the dimension and one decisive factor clearly is that junction points of more than two chemically distinct segments exist.31,41,58,59,67,87,93
Due to their unique properties, star-shaped DHCc show great potential in biomedical applications and even in 3D inkjet printing for the preparation of hydrogels. For this, hydrogels were constructed using the individual arms of P(OEGA)-b-PAA as dynamic physical crosslinking points complexing different metal cations.13,91 The exciting micellisation behaviour is shown in the case of PDEA4-block-poly(propylene oxide)-block-PDEA4 (A4BA4) copolymers, where both unimolecular or flowerlike micelles were found depending on the temperature and pH value.58 For star block copolymers, unimolecular micelles were also found for 21 arm, dual pH-responsive P4VP-b-PAA (Fig. 6A).
 Fig. 6  (A) Schematic depiction of the self-assembly of a dual pH-responsive P4VP-b-PAA star block copolymer at different pH-values. Adopted with permission from ref. 42. Copyright © 2020 American Chemical Society. (B) Cooperative self-assembly of (PNIPAAm-b-PAA)2-(PVP)2 in NaOH solution. Here, dendritic fractal patterns were formed. Adapted from ref. 93. with permission of Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Under basic conditions, the PAA segment is stretched, and the P4VP blocks collapse to form the core. On the other hand, in an acidic environment, inverse unimolecular micelles are formed with P4VP extending into the solution. However, at intermediate pH values, aggregation between the star block copolymers was observed, resulting from apparent zero net charge and polyelectrolyte complex formation (Fig. 6A).42 However, aggregation in pure water was also observed without any stimulus, and this phenomenon was ascribed to the different hydrophilicity of the constituting segments.37,39
Within this architectural class, MHBCs can introduce additional complexity by including multiple functionalities – thereby further tuning eventual phase transitions, water-solubility, or biocompatibility.67,93 The zwitterionic ABC miktoarm star terpolymers (PEG(-b-PMAA)-b-PDEA) from Liu et al., for example, consist of an anionic and a cationic segment, as well as a non-ionic PEG block. This enables multiple phase-transitions by changing the pH-value, giving polyion, hydrogen-bonded, or even hydrophobic cores.98 Sun et al. describes the cooperative self-assembly and crystallisation of miktoarm (PNIPAAm-b-PAA)2-(PVP)2 in an alkaline solution, as shown in Fig. 6B. The investigated nanohybrids of the DHC and the alkali salts form well-defined micro-sized objects (needles and dendritic patterns). Each segment has its own function: the PAA interacts with the metal cations acting as a scaffold, PVP forms hydrogen bonds with the PNIPAAm segment, and PNIPAAm reveals self-concentration and intermolecular association. The obtained materials are interesting candidates for use, e.g., in sensors or microprinting.93
Toothbrush and centipede-like architectures
Toothbrush and centipede-like architectures have also been reported for DHGCs, which exhibit a linear block and a segment containing grafts with different lengths, revealing exceptional self-assembly.6,7,43,45,62,79,80,83,84,102 A centipede-shaped brush even exhibits two chemically distinct chains connected to each grafting point.62 In this context, switching between different morphologies, e.g., vesicles to micelles or worm-like assemblies to micelles, as well as the formation of schizophrenic micelles has been described. An advantage of this architecture is, that the high density of chains in a brush-like segment can increase the colloidal stability of the formed aggregates, if compared to linear segments.51 The corresponding materials show interesting thermo or pH-induced micellisation in water to form unimolecular or spherical micelles and vesicles.102 While Sun et al. prepared PNIPAAm-b-POEGMA via sequential RAFT of NIPAAm and OEGMA with three or eight OEGMA units as brushes,102 C. Feng et al. synthesised such DHCs in a grafting-from approach, using either ATRP or SET-LRP. First, the linear segment was synthesised in a controlled manner before it was chain-extended with hydroxyethyl acrylate (HEA). Afterwards, the hydroxyl groups were converted into ATRP initiators and the third monomer was polymerised to obtain PNIPAAm-b-(PEA-g-P2VP) and PNIPAAm-b-(PEA-g-PDEAEMA).5–7 PNIPAAm-b-(PEA-g-PDEAEMA) the latter was found to be a suitable stabiliser and template for the preparation of AuNPs in water,74 and other applications are foreseen in biomedicine,102 as biological vectors or protective shells for sensitive enzymes.6,7
PEO-b-[PGMA-g-(PDEA)(PMEO2MA)] is a special case of MHBC. It is a centipede-like MHBC, which was prepared using two ATRP steps, post-polymerisation modification reactions, as well as CuAAc chemistry. Nevertheless, the dual-responsive polymer exhibits a ‘schizophrenic’ micellisation behaviour, switching between worm-like unimers and two different types of micellar objects.62 Jeong et al. investigated the influence of the molecular geometry on the colloidal properties and the controlled drug release by comparing a typical PAA-b-PEG block copolymer with brush-like PAA-b-PEGMA. Hereby, micellar structures containing the bulky brush-like chains in the shell exhibit fundamentally different self-association kinetics compared to the linear chains in the shell, and significantly influenced the release of cisplatin complexed in the PAA core (Fig. 7A). This is an interesting example of how the core/corona structures can be synthetically tuned and how this affects potential application scenarios.51 Regarding the above-mentioned examples, toothbrush shaped DHCs reveal great potential to be applied as templates,74 protective shells6,7 and for the controlled delivery of drugs.51
 Fig. 7  (A) Schematic depiction of the influence of the micellar geometry on the self-association and drug release of DHCs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 51. Copyright © 2018 American Chemical Society and (B) schematic depiction of linear, branched, and dendritic DHCs, and the structural elements of the corresponding segments. Linear hyperbranched DHCs typically consist of a PEG segment and hyperbranched glycerol17,38 or PEI.60 Dendritic DHCs usually consist of a HPAMAM core and either PEG103–106 or PLL side-chains.107 
Hyperbranched and dendritic architectures
In general, there exist two types of hyperbranched and dendritic DHCs. One consists of a linear PEG linked to a hyperbranched segment, and the other is based on polyamidoamine dendrimers (HPAMAM) containing PEG or poly(lysin) grafts (Fig. 7B). Hyperbranched linear DHCs feature an enhanced water solubility, a high density of the polymer itself, polyfunctionality, and a high local concentration of functional end-groups.17,38,60 This results in increased loading capacities, and more effective chelation of metal ions compared to linear DHCs as investigated by Qi et al.,60 rendering them suitable for drug-delivery and catalytic systems or templates.17,38,60 PEG-b-poly(glycerol) was synthesised starting from PEG-OH in four steps. First, it was chain-extended with ethoxyethyl glycidol ether, and the hydroxyl group deprotected and deprotonated before branches were introduced using glycidol.60 Lee et al. exploited the polyfunctional hydroxyl groups for the attachment of the anticancer drug doxorubicin via hydrazon-based bonds. The obtained micelles were successfully tested as drug delivery systems.17 On the other hand, PEG-b-PEI were found to be suitable nanoreactors for the synthesis and stabilisation of CdS and Pd, Cu, Rh and Pt NPs. The amino moieties allow a strong interaction with the NP surface, and the corresponding systems are interesting candidates for catalysis in water or biomineralisation.60,108
Multi-arm dendritic polymers form highly stable (unimolecular) micelles and feature a functional interior, rendering these materials useful nanocapsules and nanoreactors to be applied in the template-assisted synthesis of nanoparticles and drug-delivery systems.103–107 The hydrophilic PEG or poly(lysine) side-chains, respectively, hereby promote the formation of core–shell structures,103 increase transfection efficiency and reduce cytotoxicity.104,107 The HPAMAM core is prepared from an AB monomer (methyl acrylate) and a C4 monomer (ethylene diamine) by Michael-addition reactions followed by amidation.103,105 In a grafting-onto approach, the peripheral amine groups were converted with activated PEGs containing an N-hydroxysuccinimide (NHS) ester105 or succinimide carbonate moiety.104 Also, the HPAMAM end-groups can be activated before grafting PEG, which was already realised for hydrazones,103 oligoamines, and alkynes.106 The grafting-from approach is also possible for this topology class, as already studied by Pan et al. They polymerised modified lysine from the dendrimers before a subsequent deprotection step. The obtained polymers form nanoplexes with DNA and were found to be effective gene vectors.107
Macrocyclic DHCs
Until now, cyclic- or ring-shaped polymers remained relatively unexplored as a consequence of the complex synthetic procedures required. However, they exhibit unique properties due to their lack of end-groups or reduced hydrodynamic radii, and developments in their synthesis have led to increased interest in these architectures.109,110 Z. Ge et al. synthesised linear α,ω-heterodifunctional poly(2-(2-methoxy-ethoxy)-ethyl methacrylate)-block-poly(oligo(ethylene glycol)methyl ether methacrylate), alkenyl-PMEO2MA-b-POEGMA-N3 block copolymers via successive ATRP and end-group functionalisation, which form micelles at 40 °C in water. This leads to the spatial separation of the alkenyl and azide moieties, and under suitable conditions for click chemistry only released unimers will react intramolecularly. This procedure allows the reaction of relatively high concentrations of linear precursors, which is unusual for the synthesis of macrocycles and the corresponding cyclic- PMEO2MA-b-POEGMA were able to form flower-like micelles. Using the same procedure, pH-responsive cyclic-PDMA-b-PDEA was synthesised and compared to the linear precursors. Their self-assembly differs resulting in higher critical micelle concentrations (CMC), more compact hydrodynamic radii, and lower aggregation numbers.8
There appears to be a lot of potential in the design of ring-shaped DHCs and even novel architectures, e.g., multicycles or tadpoles could be implemented.
Crosslinking of DHCs
Crosslinked nanostructures consisting of DHBCs could be considered a separate architectural subclass, which forms 3D structures where at least one part is crosslinked. While assemblies from linear DHBCs may dissociate under dilute conditions such as within body fluids, crosslinked nano-objects benefit from higher stability and longer lifetime.64,65,111 Hence, they are promising candidates as drug delivery systems, e.g., in cancer treatment loading doxorubicin or cisplatin in the core,111,112 which justifies additional steps in the synthetic protocol. In the literature, three morphologies exist: core crosslinked micelles,111–114 vesicles,64–66 and nanogels.115 The crosslinking of preformed 3D objects was, for example, achieved starting from polymerisation-induced self-assembly (PISA), complexation with metal ions, or even from DHBC aggregates in pure water. The crosslinking can be viewed as an additional design element, by determining the density or the type of linker, e.g., resulting in degradable or non-degradable junction points.
In general, PISA is an emerging technique for the preparation of block copolymer nanostructures via various controlled polymerisation methods. Hereby, well-soluble segments are chain-extended with a solvophobic monomer, decreasing solubility and inducing aggregation at a certain degree of polymerisation, resulting in the formation of nano-objects.116,117 PISA was exploited for the preparation of crosslinked poly(ethylene glycol) methyl ether methacrylate-block-poly(glycerol methacrylate-co-bis(2-methacryloyl)oxyethyl disulfide)) PPEGMA-b-(PGLMA/PBMOD) vesicles. At first, PPEGMA macroinitiators were synthesised via reversible complexation mediated polymerisation before polymerising the second segment consisting of hydrophobic solketal methacrylate and bis(2-methacryloyl)oxyethyl disulfide as crosslinker. The obtained crosslinked amphiphilic ABC vesicles were then hydrolysed to obtain double hydrophilic PPEGMA-b-(PGLMA/PBMOD) vesicles with hydrodynamic diameters of 190 nm, as shown in Fig. 8A.66
 Fig. 8  (A) DLS measurements (a) and TEM micrographs (b) of the crosslinked double hydrophilic vesicles described by Sarkar et al.66 Adapted from ref. 66. with permission of Royal Society of Chemistry. (B) Preparation of a nanogel by the photo-induced crosslinking of the coumarin containing core.118 Reprinted with permission from ref. 118. Copyright © 2009 American Chemical Society. 
Upon employing a disulfide-based crosslinking strategy, the corresponding nano-objects could be cleaved in the presence of glutathione, which is found in tumour cells, leading to the dissolution of the nanostructures and rendering these materials highly interesting nanocarriers.66 Qu et al.114 synthesised crosslinked poly[poly(ethylene glycol)methyl ether methacrylate-block-N,N′-di(methyl amino)ethyl methacrylate-block-methacrylic acid] PPEGMEMA-b-PDMAEMA-b-PMAA micelles starting from micellar PPEGMEMA-b-PDMAEMA-b-poly(tert butyl methacrylate) (PtBMA) triblock terpolymers. In this case, hydrophobic PtBMA segments, bearing reactive end-groups, self-assemble within the core. Then, the addition of a bifunctional crosslinker stabilises the structures before the tert-butyl groups are cleaved to obtain hydrophilic PMAA. Each segment exhibits its own function in this system: PPEGMA acts as a stabiliser in the corona and increases biocompatibility, PDMAEMA induces pH-dependent charge, PtBMA promotes the self-assembly and its product PMAA acts as a proton sponge.114
Willersinn et al. described the self-assembly of PEO-b-poly(N-vinyl pyrrolidone)-co-(N-vinyl imidazole)) and pullulan-block-poly(N-vinyl pyrrolidone) in water, without an external stimulus, forming vesicles. This behaviour is not fully understood yet, but probably results from the different hydrophilicity of each segment, differences in chain rigidity, and the volume fraction may also be a contributing factor.64,65
While the vinyl imidazole-containing polymer was crosslinked with a dihalide,64 in case of pullulan segments this was realised by cysteamine dihydrochloride, yielding stable vesicles with a diameter of 700 nm.65 Upon using this crosslinking agent, the pH- or redox-induced disassembly is possible, leading to an increased amount of unimer species.
Bronich et al.,113 Kim et al.,111 and Bontha et al.112 exploited the polyion-metal complex formation of PMA and Ca2+ (Ba2+ and Sr2+ are also possible) to induce micellisation. Here, commercially available PEO-b-PMA was complexed by adding CaCl2 and the resulting physically crosslinked micelles were converted with 1-(3-dimethyl amino propyl)-3-ethylcarbodiimide hydrochloride and 1,2-ethylenediamine to obtain further crosslinks. The obtained micelles were purified by dialysis and revealed diameters of around 170 nm, which were constant even upon 100-fold dilution. The core-crosslinked micelles were further tested as nanocarriers by loading doxorubicin and cisplatin.111–113 A similar approach was applied for graft-comb Pluronic-PAA copolymers, leading to stable nano-gels with pH-dependent swelling.112
In addition to the well-defined nano-sized micelles and vesicles described above, covalently crosslinked double hydrophilic nanogels and hydrogels must be mentioned in the context of 3D architectures, although a concise distinction is difficult. The synthesis of nanogels by various approaches has been reviewed by Khoee and Asadi.119 Herein, the preparation from polymer precursors or monomers is described via different crosslinking reactions. The corresponding materials exhibit high water uptake, biocompatibility, and promising mechanical properties. Among others, for example, photo-crosslinkable PEG-b-P(DMAEMA-co-2-cinnamoyloxyethyl acrylate),120 or PEO-b-P(MEOMA-co-4-methyl-[7-(methacryloyl)oxyethyloxy]coumarin] nanogels were examined and the thermo and light-responsive behaviour is depicted in Fig. 8B.118 Although not mentioned in this review, another interesting example is a core–shell PSB-b-PNIPAAm nanogel, revealing a dual-thermo response with both upper critical solution temperature (UCST) and LCST behaviour.121 It is also noteworthy that PEG-PEI nanogels, which were first introduced in 1999, are promising drug delivery systems.122–124
Stimuli-responsive polymers
The last decades have witnessed tremendous progress in the field of stimuli-responsive polymers. This is predominantly owed to the new strategies available for the polymerisation of “functional” monomers and the active development of post-polymerisation modifications.125–133 During the revolutionary stage of developing stimuli-responsive polymeric systems, DHC have also emerged as a subclass in this family, adding notable contributions to possible compositions and applications. The stimuli-responsive behaviour is indeed an important concept within DHCs, in general, since most of them also exhibit at least one type of response, and this then significantly governs the solution behaviour. As a result, their response to triggers is exploited for self-assembly, to interact with metal ions, catch-and-release mechanisms, or for translation into a measurable readout.15,32,33,133–135 This expands the range of applications of DHCs to include e.g., sensors, which will be described later.
In general, most of the above described DHCs with different topologies also exhibit a stimuli-responsive in one way or another. So far, Ge et al.10 discussed several stimuli responsive hydrophilic copolymers for drug delivery and enhanced imaging, summarising some interesting combinations. Herein, we will focus on combinations of different monomers, yielding DHCs which contain at least one stimuli-responsive building block. As many excellent systems have been developed, we will highlight some pioneering work in several categories including double and multi-stimuli responsive hydrophilic copolymers (DHCs and multi hydrophilic copolymers (MHCs)). A general understanding of stimuli-responsive DHCs could help tailor their properties for their implementation to fulfil certain tasks.
In the following section, stimuli-responsive DHCs are presented. The DHCs were categorised as follows: stimuli-responsive DHCs reacting towards the exposure of one or more triggers, and MHCs exhibiting at least one stimuli-response with more than two segments.
Stimuli-responsive DHCs

Thermo-responsive polymers. 
In addition to amphiphilic thermo-responsive polymers, DHCs have been studied intensively. The majority of these DHCs described involve a combination of thermo-responsive moieties with either non-ionic or ionic (i.e., polyelectrolyte) segments to control the morphology and complexation,26,33 self-assembly,33,136,137 hydrogel formation,138–140 or tuning of the LCST/UCST points.24,141–143 Some thermo-responsive DHCs with ionic and non-ionic segments are summarised in Table 3, with some of the interesting and representative works highlighted below. It is worth noting, that most of the thermo-responsive DHCs contain PNIPAAm segments, being also one of the most studied thermo-responsive homopolymers.
Table 3 Selected examples of thermo-responsive DHCs, showing their structure and potential features. In addition to their thermo-response, the materials are responsive towards pH and metal ions




(Co)polymer structures
Special features
Ref.




(Co)polymers containing PNIPAAm units





Room temperature synthesis of PNIPAAm

138, 153 and 154



Temperature-induced self-assembly


Nanostructured hydrogels


Dual thermo-responsive





Formation of polyplex micelles

137 and 155





Thermo- and pH-responsive





Thermo- and pH-responsive

156






Coil-to-helix transitions based on polypeptide

157





Thermo- and pH-responsive





Gold nanoparticle incorporated core and shell

158





Thermo- and pH-responsive





Schizophrenic micelles

24





Dual thermo-responsive





“Schizophrenic” self-assembly: from micelles to vesicles

159





Thermo- and pH-responsive





Co-assembly of double-hydrophilic block copolymer and interpolyelectrolyte complex

88





Thermo- and pH-responsive





Triple hydrophilic UCST–LCST block Copolymers

141





Thermo- and pH-responsive





Formation of circular micelles with a sunflower-like structure

160





Dual thermo-responsive





Tunable morphology

161





Thermo- and pH-responsive





Controlled drug delivery

162





Thermo- and pH-responsive





Preparation and stabilisation of AuNPs

163





Thermo- and pH-responsive





Stimuli-responsive microgels and their assembly through metal–ligand interactions

164





Thermo- and metal ion-responsive





Polyampholytic graft copolymers

15





Self-assembly in solution




Triple thermo-, pH- and metal ion-responsive






(Co)polymers based on other thermoresponsive units





Self-assembly in solution

33



Thermo- and metal ion-responsive





Step-wise self-assembly

165



Thermo-responsive





Functionalisation of quantum dots

166



Thermo-responsive






Non-linear thermoresponsive (co)polymers





Non-linear multi-responsive, multi-hydrophilic block copolymers

67 and 94



Thermo- and pH-responsive





Multi-hydrophilic block copolymers

93 and 95



Thermo- and pH-responsive





Pentablock star-shaped polymers

92



Thermo-responsive




One of the first examples of ionic segments was reported by Laschewsky in 2002 (Fig. 9A). They reported a “schizophrenic” thermo-responsive DHC, which was constructed from non-ionic NIPAAm and the zwitterionic monomer 3-[N-(3-methacryl amido propyl)-N,N-dimethyl] ammonium propane sulfonate (SPP) by RAFT polymerisation (Fig. 9A). This block copolymer showed double thermo-responsive behaviour in water. Both segments of these DHC dissolve in aqueous solution at intermediate temperatures, while at high temperatures, the NIPAAm segment collapses due to the LCST. At lower temperature the SPP chains collapse due to UCST behaviour.
 Fig. 9  (A) Simplified model of the self-assembly of PNIPAAm-b-PSPP block copolymers with temperature.24 Reprinted with permission from ref. 24. Copyright © 2002 American Chemical Society and (B) illustration of the aggregate formation for PNIPAAm-b-PAA in aqueous solution in dependence of pH and temperature. Reprinted with permission from ref. 144. Copyright © 2002 American Chemical Society. 
In another interesting example, Müller et al.144 also reported PNIPAAm-b-PAA by RAFT polymerisation (Fig. 9B), where the formation of larger aggregates at pH 4.5 and temperatures above the LCST point was reported. However, their study also confirmed that the solution behaviour is strongly dependent on hydrogen bonding interactions between the acrylic acid and NIPAAm segments.33 Indeed, they were also able to tune the cloud point of PNIPAAm from Tc = 32 °C to 35 °C by adjusting the pH value. This is due to the fact that acrylic acid segments are highly charged at pH 5–7 and thereby increase the cloud point temperature. However, below pH 4.5 charge density decreases, which has an adverse effect. In another key example, Max et al.,15 presented a triple-responsive graft copolymer based on PDha featuring monomeric NIPAAm side chains (PDha-g-NIPAAm), which after being used as a template for the preparation of AgNPs could be used as a sensor for pH, temperature, as well as the presence of multivalent metal ions.
Thermo-responsive DHC-containing non-ionic segments mostly feature PEG, and as one interesting and early work, Zhang et al.145 reported thermo-responsive micellisation of poly(ethylene glycol)-block-poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (PEG-b-PNIPAAm) in aqueous solution. Their observation indicated the formation of micellar structures, which could be tuned by the block copolymer concentration and composition.
Poly(2-alkyl-2-oxazoline)s, e.g., featuring methyl, ethyl, propyl, or isopropyl side chains, have also received great attention for constructing DHCs.146–148 Two representative recent examples are DHC of poly(2-methyl-2-oxazoline)-block-poly(2-ethyl-2-oxazoline) (PMeOx-b-PEtOx) and poly(2-isopropyl-2-oxazoline)-block-poly(2-methyl-2-oxazoline) (PiPrOx-b-PMeOx) reported by Guégan et al.149 They show a pathway to obtain DHBCs in a two-step procedure, with an inside cationic part and a hydrophilic and neutral outer part that are very promising for polyplex formation towards non-viral gene delivery. In another key work for poly(2-alkyl-2-oxazoline)s, Takahashi et al.148 combined poly(2-isopropyl-2-oxazoline) and poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (PiPrOx-b-PNIPAAm), and they reported that the dehydration of each block does not occur independently. However, non-ionic blocks like PEG were also attached to thermo-responsive units such as PNIPAAm and poly(2-oxazoline)s for different applications, one example being hydrogel formation.150,151 Sanson et al.150 reported microgels from NIPAAm in the presence of poly(ethylene glycol)methacrylate (PEG) as a macro-comonomer and methylene bisacrylamide (MBA) as crosslinker.
Pullulan, another non-ionic block, was also combined with thermo-responsive PiPrOx. Here, Morimoto et al.152 reported the preparation of polymeric biphasic, gel/crystal nanocomposites using simple heat treatment in water. According to their observations, an appropriate selection of the length of the PiPrOx can lead to reversibly thermo-responsive nano-gels and permanently fixed crystalline/amorphous nano-assemblies.

pH-Responsive DHCs
In the previous section, we showed that the properties of thermo-responsive DHCs can be tuned by adding pH-responsive segments. Now, we will show that pH-responsive materials are influenced by the incorporation of either thermo-responsive or other non-ionic segments.
The concept of “pH-responsive polymers” predominantly describes polymers with ionisable acidic or basic functional groups where the overall charge varies with the solution pH. These groups can either accept or release protons upon changes in local pH, and this topic has seen a tremendous amount of contributions already.129,130,167 In this direction, DHCs containing pH-responsive functional groups have also become increasingly popular during the past few years.
In general, DHCs with pH-responsive segments commonly can either exhibit reversible changes in solubility or conformational properties as a function of pH. Functional groups are mostly ionic moieties that can dissociate into charged groups or form ionic groups upon protonation. In response to changes in solution pH, one of the segments becomes less hydrophilic, which usually leads to aggregation. The respective DHCs contain a range of suitable comonomers, and are summarised in Table 4. Their solution behaviour is mainly based on ionic interactions, which lead to variations in the chain stretching due to electrostatic repulsions, rendering such materials of interest for different applications as stabilisers, templates for NP formation, drug and gene delivery, as surfactants, dispersants, sensors, in catalysis, or as surface modifiers, complexants, or building blocks for the formation of hydrogels.15,46,91,168–170
Table 4 Examples of pH-responsive DHCs, showing their structure and potential features and applications. In addition to their pH-response, the materials are responsive towards: temperature and metal ions




(Co)polymer structures
Special feature/application
Ref.




pH-Responsive DHCs carrying carboxylic acid units





Self-assembly/disassembly of giant vesicles at biologically-relevant pH, ion complexation, templates

23, 176 and 186–188



Photocontrolled self-assembly of supramolecular polymer nanocontainers


Oxidation-responsive micelles based on a selenium-containing polymeric superamphiphiles


pH- and metal ion-responsive





Tunable self-assembly

189



pH-Responsive





Encapsulation and release of metalloporphyrins

27 and 168



Dispersion of TiO2


Dual pH-responsive





Hydration-dependent hierarchical structures

190



pH-Responsive





Coating of iron oxide NPs to provide colloidal stability

191 and 192



Template for Zinc Oxide/Magnetite iron oxide nanoparticles


pH-Responsive





Dispersant for coal

193 and 194



Template for magnetite iron oxide nanoparticles


pH-Responsive





Application in oil recovery

195



Multi-acidic


pH-Responsive





Well-defined AB2 Y-shaped miktoarm star polypeptide

96



Dual pH-Responsive superamphiphiles


pH-Responsive





Voltage-responsive superamphiphiles

196





pH-Responsive







Platform to construct tunable and functional super-amphiphilic aggregates

197



pH-Responsive


pH-Responsive DHCs carrying non-carboxylic acid units





Micellisation induced by porphyrin

198–202



Template


pH-Responsive





Template for superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles

201 and 202



pH-Responsive





Polyphosphoester-based responsive DHBC

203



pH-Responsive





Iminoboronate-based dual-responsive micelles

204



pH-Responsive





Mixed polyplex micelles

137



Dual pH-responsive





Multi-responsive hydrogels

205



Glucose and pH-responsive





Spectrophotometric determination of fluoride

206



pH-Responsive





Formation of polyion complex vesicles

207



pH-Responsive





Polyelectrolyte–surfactant complexes

208 and 209



Solubilisation of hydrophobic compounds (pyrene)


pH-Responsive




Structures of pH-responsive DHCs vary in architecture and, similar to stimuli-responsive polymers in general, typical examples of pH-responsive groups are carboxyl, pyridine, sulfonic acids, phosphates, or tertiary amines. However, polyampholytic or polyzwitterionic segments bear both basic and acidic groups, sometimes even within the same monomer unit.15,24,63,171,172 In addition, the combination of ionic groups can be chosen depending on any desired application or targeted composition.
A well-known combination is poly(ethylene oxide)-block-poly(methacrylic acid) which was reported by Murata et al.173 in 2002. They reported nanoaggregate formation upon metal ion chelation in water.173 Later in 2005, Bronich et al.113 developed PEO-b-PAA/Ca2+ by crosslinking the core (Fig. 10A). Almost simultaneously, Tjandra et al.174 reported the use of PEO-b-PMAA, which was prepared by ATRP, as a template for the formation of hydroxyapatite.
 Fig. 10  (A) Polymeric micelle with crosslinked ionic core. Reprinted with permission from ref. 113. Copyright © 2005 American Chemical Society. (B) Schematic formation and degradation of vesicles formed from PEO-b-PAA. Adapted with permission from ref. 23. Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry, and (C) schematic illustration for structuring silica using induced micelles of DHCs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 175. Copyright © 2008 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
PEO-b-PMAA was further investigated for understanding the solution behaviour in the presence of Ca2+ ions by Sondjaja et al.176 They observed that the aggregates not only depend on the Ca2+/block copolymer ratio, but that structural rearrangements of the resulting Ca2+/PEO-b-PMAA complex were also triggered by changes of the water activity itself. In 2008, Gérardin et al.175 reported another innovative strategy to construct mesoporous materials at room temperature in aqueous medium using PEO-b-PAA (Fig. 10B). Later, Ra Schin et al.23 reported vesicle formation of PEO-b-PAA by self-assembly and degradation in response to the pH value (Fig. 10C). In another example, Hao et al.84 investigated the solution behaviour of PAA-g-PEO, and their results indicated the formation of large inter-chain complexes, which also depended on the pH value and salt concentration.
The complexation between DHCs presenting oppositely charged ionic segments has also been of great interest for the construction of well-defined nano-objects.44,177,178 This is also known as polyion complexation (PIC) or interpolyelectrolyte complex formation (IPEC), and pioneering work in this field has been described by Kataoka and Harada, focusing on the application of these systems as potential nanocarrier systems.44 In this review, they indicate that extensive studies have been carried out on polyion complex micelles from DHC systems. As an interesting example, we should highlight the research by Yusa et al.178 Here, they described the RAFT polymerisation of diblock copolymers consisting of a hydrophilic poly(2-(methacryl oyloxy)ethyl phosphoryl choline) (PMPC) block and either a cationic or anionic block was prepared from (3-(methacryl amido)propyl)trimethyl ammonium chloride (MAPTAC) or sodium 2-(acrylamido)-2-methylpropanesulfonate (AMPS) (Fig. 11A). Polyion complex vesicles were afterwards formed upon mixing and stoichiometric charge neutralisation.
 Fig. 11  (A) Schematic illustration of polyion complex vesicle formation from charged diblock copolymers. Adapted with permission from ref. 178. Copyright 2017, Molecular Diversity Preservation International, (B) schematic representation of the self-assembly into vesicles of the diblock copolymer PGA-b-PLys.177 Reprinted with permission from ref. 177. Copyright © 2005 American Chemical Society, and (C) supramolecular self-assembly between double hydrophilic PEG-b-poly(L-homoarginine) and carboxylate-containing amphiphiles leading to nanoparticle formation.185 Reprinted with permission from ref. 185. Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society. 
Another interesting subclass of pH-responsive DHCs are materials featuring polypeptide/amino acid units (amino acids, Tables 3 and 4). Prominent examples are poly(L-glutamic acid) (PLGA), poly(dehydroalanine) (PDha), poly(histidine) (PHIS), or poly(aspartic acid) (PASA).15,126,162,167,179–181 Some of these polymers are inherently biocompatible and even degradable.126,167 Aside from being biocompatible, such examples are able to synergistically combine features from synthetic and natural polymers, such as their design, synthetic access and bio-mimicking properties.126 Selected examples include the work of Kataoka et al.,182–184 or Rodríguez-Hernández et al.177 In the latter case, the reversible self-assembly of schizophrenic vesicles for zwitterionic diblock copolymers from poly(L-glutamic acid)-block-poly(L-lysine) (PGA-b-PLys) has been demonstrated (Fig. 11B). They also described the mechanism by neutralisation of the polypeptide block, which then changes from a random coil conformation into a neutral and compact α-helical structure.
Another recent example in the category of polypeptides is cationic poly(L-arginine) for constructing double hydrophilic block copolypeptides. The cationic segment can penetrate cells, and was already used in supra-amphiphile-based polymers. Furthermore, Praveen et al.185 described the synthesis of a pH-responsive supra-amphiphilic DHBC based on PEG-b-PLys) (Fig. 11C). Encapsulation of the hydrophobic model dye Nile red, and subsequent co-localisation studies, showed the successful uptake of encapsulation of the dye.
Light-responsive DHCs
Light-responsive materials are receiving more and more attention, mainly because the “activation” can be controlled both spatially and temporally.210 Consequently, light-responsive polymers have been the subject of several recent reviews.125,210–212
While temperature- and pH-responsive DHCs have been reported frequently, the world of light-responsive DHCs is rather unexplored compared to that. One reason for this, presumably, is that many of the chromophores employed are rather hydrophobic.
In general, photochromic dyes are used to construct light-responsive polymers. These dyes usually undergo absorption or excitation and a reversible or irreversible isomerisation upon irradiation. This behaviour is typically associated with a change in polarity, as well as a corresponding colour change. Such processes are observed in hydrophobic compounds like azobenzene, spiropyran, salicylideneaniline, spyrooxazine, coumarin, etc.125,213–217 Although these moieties are rather hydrophobic, some light-responsive DHCs have appeared recently (Table 5). They can be divided into two main categories: (i) the light-responsive units are comonomers and chromophores simultaneously, or (ii) the chromophore is introduced as an end-group (label).
Table 5 Examples of light-responsive DHCs, showing their structure and potential features and applications. In addition to their light-response the materials are responsive towards: temperature, pH, and metal ions




Copolymer
Special feature/application
Ref.





Light-responsive DHCs with chromophores as end-group






Schizophrenic behaviour

221 and 222



Dye end-group


Light signal and thermo-responsive





Dye end-group

223



Light- and thermo-responsive





Multi-responsive microgels

164



Light-, metal ion- and thermo-responsive







Light-responsive DHCs with chromophores as separate comonomer






Temperature-dependent fluorescence lifetime

219



Light- and thermo-responsive





Shell material for photoactive latex particles through polymerisation-induced self-assembly

218



Production of singlet oxygen


Light- and pH-Responsive





Probes for ratiometric fluorescent and chiroptical F− sensors

224



Light-responsive





Sensor for sensitive detection and bioimaging of Zn2+ and Pb2+

225



Light-, metal ion- and thermo-responsive




As an example for the attachment of a hydrophilic chromophore to a DHC backbone, we must highlight the work of Boussiron et al.218 and Gota et al.219 The former reported light-responsive core–shell particles were accessed by RAFT polymerisation of acrylic acid with 2-Rose Bengal ethyl acrylate. Self-assembly occurs once the hydrophilic macromolecular chain transfer agent is extended with hydrophobic n-butyl acrylate leading to PISA. (Fig. 12). This then allowed the preparation of light-responsive polymeric films.
 Fig. 12  Schematic illustration for the synthesis of photoactive latex particles and films.218 Reprinted with permission from ref. 218. © 2018 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. 
In this direction, Hu et al.220 also reported the fabrication of highly sensitive fluorescent probes for pH value and temperature based on a DHC of NIPAAm and oligo(ethylene glycol) monomethyl ether methacrylate (OEGMA). In this case, both blocks were copolymerised with rhodamine B-ethylene diamine (RhBAM) and fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) to prepare P(NIPAAm-co-FITC)-b-P(OEGMA-co-RhBAM). Upon heating, the collapse of the PNIPAAm leads to micelles enabling effective fluorescence resonance energy transfer between the FITC and RhBAM units.
Regarding the aforementioned labelling approach, most DHC examples were prepared by attachment of one or several chromophores to a polymer backbone (Table 5). Notably, even one light-responsive unit can be sufficient to induce significant property changes or to enable tracking of the resulting DHC, allowing the use of these samples as florescence probes,220 labelling reagents for drug delivery,221,226,227 in fluorometric techniques,228 as polymeric pH sensors, chemosensors and biosensors,229–231 or as temperature probes.232 As another interesting case, Romão et al.221 labelled poly(N,N-dimethyl acrylamide)-block-poly(N,N-diethyl acrylamide) with rhodamine B and used the resulting DHC to monitor phase separation and interactions in mixed monolayers of dipalmitoyl phosphatidylglycerol.
Stimuli-responsive MHCs
Nowadays, a relatively new trend in stimuli-responsive polymeric materials is the combination of several functional moieties within one polymer that can respond to different stimuli. As a result, multi-stimuli responsive polymers appeared (response to >2 triggers), which can be regarded as a starting point for complex sensing or versatile theranostic approaches.130 These materials are often synthetically more challenging, but in return offer broad applicability.233,234 Ideally, the combination of different and orthogonal stimuli can enhance the degree of precision of a given sensor and in addition changes the conditions necessary for a certain response.130
DHCs have also been developed in that direction, with the predominant focus on sensing applications.15,229,235,236 We have already presented different examples regarding the synthesis of DHCs, including the introduction of different stimuli-responsive units. Often, also here one building block represents a temperature-responsive polymer segment, and prominent examples are listed in Table 6. Hereby, additional thermo-, pH-, or light-responsive building blocks were introduced. As already mentioned, variation of the pH value can directly influence the LCST of a given system. For instance, Jinag et al.237 reported the preparation of multi-responsive DHCs that combine pH-responsive segments with thermo-responsive poly(N-isopropyl acrylamide) (Fig. 13A).
Table 6 Examples of stimuli-responsive MHCs, being responsive to light, temperature, pH, and metal ions




Copolymers
Stimuli-response/feature
Ref.







Thermo-responsive

242



Statistical, diblock and triblock copolymers


Tunable aggregation behavior





Temperature-dependent self-assembly

243



Crosslinking possible


Thermo-responsive





Multi-arm star-shaped glycopolymers

244



Sugars as binding sites


Thermo-responsive





Triple hydrophilic block copolymer with dual LCST and temperature-induced self-assembly

240



Thermo-responsive





Tunable self-assembly

241



Thermo-responsive





Sono-RAFT polymerisation-induced self-assembly

245



thermo-responsive





Sequence-controlled multi-block copolymerization

35



Dual thermo-responsive





BAB triblock copolymer

171



Tunable aggregation behavior


Thermo-responsive





Dual pH- and thermo-responsive

246






Complexation of a cationic surfactant

85



pH- and thermo-responsive





pH- and thermo-responsive

247






pH- and thermo-responsive

237






pH- and thermo-responsive

248






Hg2+-Reactive probes

229



Light-, metal ion- and thermo-responsive





Ratiometric fluorescent detection of Hg2+ ions

235



Crosslinking possible


Light-, metal ion- and thermo-responsive





Fluorescence chemosensor

249



Metal ion and thermo-responsive





Dynamic hydrogel

140



Metal ion- and thermo-responsive





Detection of Hg2+ ions modulated by morphological changes

250



Metal ion- and thermo-responsive




 Fig. 13  (A) Schizophrenic micellisation of a PDEA-b-PDMA-b-PNIPAM triblock terpolymer in aqueous solution.237 Adapted with permission from ref. 237. Copyright © 2007 American Chemical Society. (B) Schematic illustration of the preparation of both core- and shell-crosslinked nanogel particles and their thermal transitions in aqueous solution.238 Adopted with permission from ref. 238. Copyright © 2011 American Chemical Society, and (C) schematic illustration of micelles and vesicles formed from PEG-b-PNIPAAm-b-P(NIPAAm-co-HEAAm) triblock copolymer,240 reprinted from ref. 240 with permission of Royal Society of Chemistry. 
As an example, an ABC triblock terpolymer, poly(2-(diethyl amino)ethyl methacrylate)-block-poly(2-(dimethyl amino)ethyl methacrylate)-block-poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (PDEA-b-PDMA-b-PNIPAM) was synthesised by RAFT polymerisation. They reported on “schizophrenic” micellisation in aqueous solution. However, three-layered micelles were also observed.
In another approach to construct multi-responsive DHCs, thermo-responsive blocks can be combined with light-responsive segments. He et al.238 reported on the preparation of nanogels from poly[N,N-dimethyl acrylamide-co-4-methyl-[7-(methacryloyl) oxyethyloxy] coumarin]-block-poly[N-isopropylacrylamide-co-4-methyl-[7-(methacryloyl) oxyethyloxy]coumarin] (P(DMA-co-CMA)-b-P(NIPAM-co-CMA)) by RAFT polymerisation (Fig. 13B). In this work, they incorporated coumarin as photo-crosslinkers randomly into the two constituting blocks, after crosslinking, the prepared nanostructures were both light- and temperature-responsive.
In another DHC system reported by Yu et al.,239 a thermo- and pH-responsive block was prepared by the copolymerisation of N-hydroxymethyl acrylamide (NHMA) and NIPAAm, which was then grafted with 2-diazo-1,2-naphthoquinone to generate a triple-responsive DHC, albeit the light response was irreversible in this case.
In case of PEG, a non-ionic segment, in combination with another responsive block often enables self-assembly on demand (trigger), whereby PEG grants the overall solubility of the formed nanostructure. As one example, Wei et al.240 reported triple hydrophilic block copolymers with dual LCST from PEG-b-PNIPAAm-b-P(NIPAAm-co-HEAAm) by ATRP (Fig. 13C). This led to a two-stage morphological transition, starting from unimers to micelles, and finally to vesicles.
In another interesting example, Banerjee et al.241 investigated a series of triblock terpolymers from poly(ethylene glycol)-block-poly(N-isopropyl acrylamide)-block-poly(tert-butyl acrylate) and poly(ethylene glycol)-block-poly(N-isopropyl acrylamide)-block-poly(glycidyl methacrylate). In addition, different morphological transitions in water could be demonstrated here.
As outlined above, the properties and functions of DHCs can not only be tuned by the choice of the topology but also the smart combination of stimuli-responses. This adds more functionality, and the interplay of different responses gives interesting solution properties, e.g., schizophrenic micellisation, the possibility of crosslinking or different readout signals. Considering these design aspects, certain applications may be targeted, as described in the following section.
Applications
Water-soluble polymers are very attractive materials, and they find applications in various fields from cosmetics, detergents, water treatment, or coatings.5,221–225 This is mostly due to favourable interactions with other materials, e.g., complex formation or even stabilising effects to improve solubility.48,170,251–254 Examples would be the coating,29 stabilisation,12,48 or functionalization of inorganic nanoparticles in aqueous media.15,33,249 DHCs play a significant role here, and are employed in drug and gene delivery, as surfactants, or to support crystallisation. Their application has already been addressed in several review articles.11,44,49,255 However, during the last twenty years, new applications for DHCs have appeared.11,44,49,255 These will be outlined here and discussed for different DHCs in the following sections. First, we will focus on hybrid materials based on DHCs, which currently represent one of the most vibrant areas of nanoscience research. We will also show that DHCs offer intriguing properties for the design of hybrid materials and how additional functionality can be implemented. We will then discuss some of their interesting applications in catalysis and sensing, which address some of the current society demands, e.g. the efficient hydrogen production or the sensing of heavy metal ions.15,61
Hybrid materials based on DHCs
Organic–inorganic hybrid materials have been widely utilised – even in industrial applications.52,256–258 The integration of both organic and inorganic components into one material is desired to improve the overall features, to tune the physical and chemical properties and obtain additional functionalities in the resulting hybrid materials.257
More specific, hybrid materials based on polymers have attracted great attention, and show outstanding potential to combine different properties in one material and open new windows towards catalysis, sensing, adsorption, separation, gas storage, or optical devices.258–261
DHCs, typically the organic component of such a hybrid material, generally act as templates, stabilisers and matrices for the inorganic building blocks. Multifunctional stimuli-responsive polymers have become an indispensable component of organic–inorganic hybrid materials, and many reviews have addressed both stimuli-responsive polymers129,130,227 and hybrid materials.52,256–258 Yet, a comprehensive review summarising the current progress in hybrid materials based on stimuli-responsive DHCs is not available. Consequently, this part of the review will elucidate hybrid materials based solely on DHCs as the organic component, focusing on new applications for these hybrid systems.
Commonly, DHCs are used as modifiers, shell coating, templates, stabilisers, embedding environment and synthetic reactors for inorganic materials such as metal ions, noble metal nanoparticles, (semiconducting) metal oxides and silicon oxide nanoparticles. The tunability of DHCs and their functional groups allows almost perfect control over the properties of the hybrid system. This can be observed e.g. for control over the size distribution of semiconducting, magnetic, and noble metal NPs.12,61
DHCs with functional segments bearing ligand groups in each monomer unit enable the interaction with metal ions, inducing the formation of polyion complexes. In that regard carboxylic acids, amino moieties, dopamine, and phosphonic acid were found to be suitable binding sites.46,48,61,262 The second block may either be ionic (positively or negatively charged) or non-ionic in nature. These materials exhibit well-defined micellar structures, stabilised by the second, solubility-promoting block.33 For this, the choice of the DHC composition and architecture determines the strength and type of interaction.
Mostly the interaction of the DHCs and the corresponding component (metal ion, surface or NP) is physically, but also the chemical linkage between the building blocks was observed.61,263
The hybrid materials introduced are either based on metal cations (I), noble metal NPs (II), or semiconducting or metal oxide NPs (III). In addition to the more common physical interactions between components, a covalent approach will be detailed as well (IV). These nanocomposites are high-performing materials, and after elucidating the underlying role of the DHCs and potential uses, we focus on their application in catalysis and sensing.
Chelation of metal cations – concept and applications
Loading micellar structures with metal ions draws great attention because of their ability to use them as reservoirs of inorganic ions in nanoreactors and catalytic reactions such as inorganic polycondensation.264–266 Metal ions by themselves often reveal interesting characteristics and may be incorporated in DHC nanocontainers to increase their stability, or to deliver them to a certain target. Here, the complexation of Mn2+, Gd2+ and Pt2+ is particularly relevant for biomedical applications.
Mn2+ has attracted particular attention due to its paramagnetic properties arising from its 5 unpaired electrons and its high coordination number.267,268 Mn2+ ions were also introduced to DHC to induce self-assembly and to form magnetic nano-objects by several research groups.26 Notably, complexation of Mn2+ ions does not always lead to self-assembly due to the relatively high aqueous solubility of coordinated Mn2+ ions. In this context, Shin et al.269 reported a more successful system based on poly(ethylene glycol)-block-poly(acrylic acid) (PEG-b-PAA) for direct conjugation of Mn2+ ions inside sterically stabilised polymer assemblies (Fig. 14A). Moreover, PEG-b-PAA was end-functionalised with the fluorophore pyrene. Their observation indicates the ability of the hybrid system to form a crosslinked gel-like scaffold with moderate hydrophilicity at the Mn2+ ions-chelated interior, allowing efficient water permeation for an enhanced magnetic resonance contrasting effect.
 Fig. 14  (A) Construction of paramagnetic manganese-chelated polymeric nanoparticles using a pyrene-end-modified double hydrophilic block copolymer. Reprinted with permission from ref. 269. Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society.269 (B) Self-assembly of double hydrophilic block copolymers triggered by the presence of gadolinium ions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 19. Copyright © 2016 American Chemical Society.19 (C) Schematic illustration of the self-assembly process for the formation of PtII-polymeric NPs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 51. Copyright © 2018 American Chemical Society.,51 and (D) conjugation of Pt drugs and the formation of micelles, and the release of platinum from polymeric platinum micelles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 263. Copyright © 2011 American Chemical Society.263 
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) is a valuable medical imaging technique that can be used for imaging and analysis of biological tissue.270 In this technique, gadolinium ions are employed as agents to provide contrast between different tissue types.268,271 Immobilisation of Gd-complexes within macromolecules is one way to slow down the rotational motion and provide more efficient relaxation.268,271,272 Recently, DHCs were also utilised to immobilise Gd-complexes through the formation of hybrid polymeric NPs. In this area, Frangville et al.19 reported a PEO-b-PAA DHBC complexing gadolinium ions (Fig. 14B). The polymeric NPs formed through the chelation of the gadolinium ions by the PAA units are stable against dilution, pH, and ionic strength, and had an average diameter near 20 nm. However, their observations regarding the magnetic properties of Gd ions proposed high magnetic relaxivities and in vivo magnetic resonance potential for polymeric NPs.
Cisplatin, a platinum(II)-based anticancer drug, is a well-known metal complex that exhibits high antitumor activity.273,274 However, its clinical toxicity can cause major problems.274,275 To moderate this, many strategies to encapsulate this cytotoxic drug inside versatile delivery pockets such as lipid vesicles and polymeric micelles have been carried out. A straightforward strategy to enhance the delivery efficiency whilst alleviating its toxicity is through encapsulation by DHCs containing a metal-coordinating ligand block. So far, numerous attempts have been made to encapsulate this cytotoxic agent inside different DHC architectures.51,263,276,277 For instance, Jeong et al.51 reported a facile regulation strategy for the drug-release of a PtII-encapsulated delivery system based a PAA block and a solubilising mPEG-grafted poly(methacrylate) segment (poly(PEGMA)) (Fig. 14C). In addition to the relative ratio between the PtII-binding residues (PAA) and the hydrophilic block (mPEG/PEGMA), their results indicated that the different copolymers exhibited significantly different kinetic regimes for the PtII-mediated unimer association.
Another interesting DHC system for loading cisplatin was reported by Huynh et al. in 2011 (Fig. 14D).263 They first synthesised a polymerisable monomer to coordinate with the Pt complex (i.e., 1,1-di-tert-butyl 3-(2-(methacryloyloxy)ethyl)butane-1,1,3-tricarboxylate) by Michael addition. The obtained monomer was used for block extension of poly[oligo(ethylene glycol)methyl ether methacrylate] (POEGMEMA), a macro-RAFT agent, to form block copolymers carrying bidentate carboxylate ligands with varying block lengths (Fig. 14B). The length of the core block significantly contributed to micellar size and the overall toxicity of the platinum drug. Their observations for toxicity with A549, a lung cancer cell, indicates that while a shorter PMAETC block led to higher platinum drug loading, it also can provide a better and faster drug release.
Polyelectrolyte-based DHCs were also used to form micellar structures loaded with metal ions.264–266 In this context, Schacher et al.12,26,33 reported different compositions of DHCs based on poly(2-acrylamidoglycolic acid) (PAGA) for chelating metal ions and forming a variety of nanostructures. For instance, in one study they described the chain-extension of a poly(2-iso-propyl-2-oxazoline) macroinitiator with PAGA to obtain (poly(2-iso-propyl-2-oxazoline)-block-poly(2-acrylamidoglycolic acid) PiPrOx-b-PAGA) (Fig. 15). Their observations indicate that PiPrOx-b-PAGA can encapsulate metal ions due to chelation by the PAGA segment (i.e., Cu2+, Co2+, or Ni2+). Their investigation also revealed that the DHC formed different micellar nanostructures, and their morphology was influenced both by the type of metal ion, as well as the weight fraction of PAGA within the block copolymer. This was also reported for other block copolymer compositions containing PAGA segments such as poly(N-acryloylmorpholine)-block-PAGA (PNAM-b-PAGA) or poly(ethylene oxide)-block-PAGA (PEO-b-PAGA).26
 Fig. 15  Schematic depiction of the aggregation of PiPrOx-b-PAGA by the addition of metal ions (A), hydrodynamic radii for different PiPrOx-b-PAGA (1.0 mg mL−1) block copolymers after the addition of varying amounts of Cu2+ (B), and Rh for the aggregates formed by PiPrOx80-b-PAGA117(1.0 mg mL−1) and various metal ions at different ratios (C).33 Reprinted with permission from ref. 33. Copyright © 2020 American Chemical Society. 
Layrac et al.265 also reported that a system containing neutral poly(acrylamide) and ionisable poly(vinylphosphonic acid) (PAM-b-PVPA) was synthesised by quantitative chain extension of a polyacrylamide macroxanthate with vinylphosphonic acid. They also indicated the formation of micellar structures in the presence of metal ions such as Ni2+, Co2+, Mn2+, Cu2+, and Zn2+. Similar approaches were also reported for polyion complex micelles by Sanson et al.266 In this study, block copolymers are designed based on poly(acrylic acid)-block-poly(acrylamide) (PAA-b-PAM) or poly(acrylic acid)-block-poly(2-hydroxyethylacrylate) (PAA-b-PHEA). These DHCs also consist of an ionisable complexing block (PAA, PAM) and a neutral stabilising block (PHEA), and they were mixed with solutions of metal ions such as Al3+ and La3+.266
Templates for the preparation of noble metal NPs – DHC-assisted complexation and reduction of metal ions
Noble metal NPs, especially Au and Ag, are currently receiving tremendous research interest due to their physicochemical properties, chemical stability, and their wide range of applications.278–280 Therefore, it is not surprising that tailor-made DHCs were developed for their synthesis and stabilisation – being advantageous compared to low-molecular weight compounds, especially by granting enhanced stability.281 The template-assisted synthesis gives control over the physical and chemical properties of crystals determining their shape and composition. A common strategy to synthesise crystals using DHCs is utilising the polyelectrolyte segment via a complexation/reduction approach.15,46,158 In this strategy, the DHC acts as a reducing/stabilising agent. For instance, Max et al.46 introduced a pH-responsive polyampholytic graft copolymer templates as a simple way to control the formation, size, and shape of Au and AgNPs by tuning the overall charge of the DHC. To achieve this, they used poly(dehydroalanine)-graft-poly(ethylene glycol) (PDha-g-PEG), which is based on a polyampholytic backbone with varying net charge and charge density depending on pH (Fig. 16A). They indicate that the PDha backbone with both amino and carboxylic acid groups in each repeat unit can selectively interact with [AuCl4]− and Ag+ salts in solution, and this permits a straightforward synthesis of Ag, Au, and AgAu alloy NPs, where the composition of the alloys was even determined by the environmental pH.
 Fig. 16  (A) Preparation of NPs and bimetallic alloys in the presence of PDha-g-PEG graft copolymers by the reduction of metal-containing salts using a reducing agent, heat, or UV-light. Adapted with permission from ref. 46. Copyright © 2020 American Chemical Society. (B) Strategy for the formation of positively charged micelles (PSS/P(mDOPA)-co-P(DMAEMA+)) and positively charged silver-loaded micelles (PSS/P(mDOPA)-co-P(DMAEMA+)/Ag0/AgCl).282 Adopted with permission from ref. 282. Copyright © 2012 American Chemical Society. (C) Schematic representation of AuNP formation via DHBC templates.281 Adapted from ref. 281 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, and (D) schematic diagram of the synthesis of Ag@SiO2 core–shell nanoparticles.285 Adapted from ref. 285 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Another key example of synthesising noble metal NPs and utilizing them as antimicrobial coating was reported by Falentin-Daudré et al.282,283 Here, AgNPs were prepared using polyelectrolyte micelles, which were exploited as an antimicrobial coating on stainless steel. This interesting polyelectrolyte micelle was constructed by electrostatic interactions between the polycation based on a DHC from 3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine (DOPA) and polyanion based (poly(styrene sulfonate), PSS) (Fig. 16B). Their observations indicated that the DOPA units anchor to the stainless steel and form and stabilize biocidal AgNP. In a similar manner, Liu et al.284 reported a micellar nanoreactor consisting of poly[(ethylene oxide)-block-glycerol monomethacrylate-block-2-(diethyl amino)ethyl methacrylate] (PEO-MA-DEA) and poly[(ethylene oxide)-block-2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate-block-2-(diethylamino)ethyl methacrylate] (PEO-EMA-DEA) triblock terpolymers for the synthesis of AuNPs within the core. In this report, the basic DEA residues in the core of the crosslinked shell micelles were first protonated using HAuCl4, and then the electrostatically bound AuCl4− anions were reduced to NPs of elemental gold using NaBH4 at neutral pH. The gold-loaded crosslinked micellar structures exhibited excellent long-term colloidal stability.
The stability of AuNPs is often limited in various biological environments, that may be improved using DHCs. In this context, Seo et al.281 reported a highly stable system based on DHCs to stabilize the AuNPs against cyanide etching. They introduced PEO-b-PAA as a template to form AuNPs from etching (Fig. 16D). They observed that the stability of the NPs in the solution can be tuned by adjusting the molecular weight of the different copolymer blocks.
Silica nanostructures decorated with metal NP are of interest in the context of catalysis or diagnostics.285–288 Especially here, multifunctional DHCs can fulfill several roles, e.g. by connecting both towards the SiO2 and potential noble metal NPs.
As an interesting representative work, Bastakoti et al.285 reported a simple approach to synthesise Ag@SiO2 core–shell NPs using poly[3-(methacryloyl amino)propyl trimethyl ammonium chloride]-block poly[2-(dimethyl amino)ethyl methacrylate] (PMAPTAC-b-PDMAEMA) as a structure-directing template (Fig. 16D). However, after synthesising the core–shell hybrid structures, and tuning the size by adjusting the block copolymer length, the Ag@SiO2 core–shell NPs were used as a nano-catalyst to reduce p-nitrophenol. These core–shell hybrids prepared using DHC materials exhibited excellent catalytic properties.
Preparation and stabilisation of semiconducting and metal oxide NPs
Semiconducting and metal oxide NPs are important inorganic compounds found in many applications such as catalysis and waste-water treatment.289,290 Similarly to the above described metal chelation and noble metal NP preparation, DHCs were designed as suitable nanoreactors and stabilisers.12,291–293
Semiconducting NPs have drawn much interest during the past decades owing to their application in catalysis,12,61 sensors,15 light emitting diodes and transistors.294 They have unique size-dependent chemical and physical properties, which may be tuned by the DHCs.60,295–298
For instance, Cölfen et al.60 synthesised stable CdS NPs using a poly(ethylene glycol)-block-poly(ethylene imine) double hydrophilic BCP. In another case, Nabiyan et al.12 demonstrated the use of a DHC based on poly(2-iso-propyl-2-oxazoline)-block-poly(2-acrylamido glycolic acid) (PiPrOx-b-PAGA) for the preparation of photocatalytically-active organic/inorganic hybrid micelles.
ZnS, a wide-bandgap semiconductor, is also highly interesting owing to its light-emitting, UV sensing and photocatalytic properties.299–301 Furthermore, ZnS is used exhaustively as a capping material for quantum dots based on toxic CdS and CdSe due to its low toxicity, as these materials are designed for biomedical applications.299 Recently, DHCs were also used to prepare Zn NPs, as shown by Tarasov et al.301 (Fig. 17A). They exploited poly(acrylic acid)-block-polyacrylamide (PAA-b-PAM) of various molecular weights for the formation of polyion micelles loaded with precursor hybrid. In this micellar structure, the anionic PAA core was composed of Zn2+ ions, while the PAM corona stabilised the core–corona system. Their observation indicated the formation of ZnS NP with a diameter of 3–4 nm. In this respect, their investigation revealed that the size of ZnS NP is weakly dependent on the copolymer block length, while the size distribution correlates with the copolymer asymmetry degree in such a way that a higher MPAM/MPAA ratio yields particles with a narrower size distribution.
 Fig. 17  (A) Scheme showing the formation of ZnS nanoparticles with the use of a copolymer PAA-b-PAM.301 Adapted from ref. 301 with permission of Royal Society of Chemistry. (B) Scheme of CdSe quantum dots stabilised by a DHBC.308 (C) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of RuO2 nanoparticles using a double hydrophilic block copolymer as a template.309 Adapted from ref. 309 with permission of Royal Society of Chemistry, and (D) schematic representation of the synthesis of magnetite nanoparticles stabilised with the diblock copolymer PMAA23-b-PStSNa200, and their occlusion within calcite single crystals.194 Adapted from ref. 194. with permission of Royal Society of Chemistry. 
On the other hand, closely related ZnO is an environmentally friendly and inexpensive luminescent semiconductor, which renders this material very attractive for biological applications. Many studies have been performed to control the size and shape of the ZnO inorganic core and/or to choose the chemical structure of the stabilising ligand shell.302–305 Different families of polymeric ligands with different architectures (branched, block, etc.) and compositions have been shown to favour ligand exchange on preformed ZnONPs. As we are focussing on DHCs, we direct you to the work by Zheng et al.,302 who introduced low molar mass poly(ethylene glycol)-block-poly(acrylic acid) (PEG-b-PAA) and poly(ethylene glycol)-block-poly(vinylphosphonic acid) (PEG-b-PVPA) to form a stable colloidal solution of ZnO NPs in both organic solvents and water. In general, amine and carboxyl groups promote the luminescent properties and ensure good anchoring to the surface of the ZnO NPs.306 However, phosphonic acid groups also demonstrate a high affinity to metal oxide-based NPs.307 Nevertheless, they selected PAA as a first interacting block to promote the replacement of amine ligands present on the surface of ZnO NPs. Their optical observations indicate, that while luminescence remains constant for pristine ZnO NPs, an increase in luminescence is observed for ZnO NPs modified by the two types of polymers. They also discussed the advantages and drawbacks of phosphonic acid groups over carboxylic acid groups.
CdSe semiconductors reveal a tunable band gap between 1.7 eV for the bulk material to 2.4 eV by decreasing the particle size to 2 nm.297,308 Therefore, CdSe quantum dots can cover a wide domain of the visible spectrum, which is suitable for applications in sensing and solar cells.308,310,311 Notably, for any application employing CdSe quantum dots, it is essential that no cadmium is released to the environment. This is particularly important if applying these quantum dots for cell labelling due to their cytotoxicity. Therefore, such quantum dots are ideally highly photostable, synthesised directly in water, and protected by ideal capping agents. As an example, Cölfen et al.308 reported a DHC consisting of a PEG block and a poly(ethylene imine) segment via a straightforward approach to obtain CdSe quantum dots in an aqueous solution with a controllable size (Fig. 17B). They determined that the particle size can be controlled simply by adjusting the polymer concentration during synthesis.
Nowadays, supercapacitors are important in the field of electrochemical energy storage and conversion devices due to their satisfactory performance with respect to secondary batteries and fuel cells.312,313 Among the various electrode materials used to fabricate supercapacitors, materials based on ruthenium oxide (RuO2) are particularly noteworthy. The main reason is that RuO2 features a high theoretical specific capacitance (1400–2000 F g−1), but high production costs and agglomeration effects currently prevent market usage.314–316 However, the relatively low electronic conductivity of hydrous RuO2·xH2O (89 S cm−1) is still a problem, which prevents the balancing of the electronic and proton conduction channels needed to achieve a high power supercapacitor electrode.309 Furthermore, the high capacitance of RuO2 remains, with good proton permeation and electronic conduction simultaneously. In order to address these issues, Seo et al.309 suggest using a DHC as a nanoreactor, which then also acts as an ionic and electronic conduction layer for ruthenium oxide NPs. In their reports, they used a DHC based on PEO-b-PAA to form micellar nanostructures. Upon the addition of the ruthenium precursor, RuCl3·xH2O, and a reducing agent, RuO2 NPs were successfully formed within the DHC micelles (Fig. 17C).
NPs with strong magnetic properties may be exploited for a wide range of applications: the magnetic separation of biochemical materials289,317 and cells,318 magnetic guidance of particle systems for site-specific drug delivery,317–320 contrast agents for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI),321,322 diagnosis,323 or tissue repair.324 The size and charge of magnetic particles strongly affects their biodistribution.319,325 Another crucial point is that the magnetic properties and solution behaviour rely significantly on the surface chemistry of the particles.319,326 Indeed, in this context, due to the fact that the bare iron oxide particles are likely to agglomerate, it is necessary to tailor the NP surface chemistry appropriately.
Usually, surface tailoring should establish a high colloidal stability, biocompatibility, and specific bio-recognition of the particle surface.327 Polymers can play a significant role in stabilising magnetic NPs, and can offer enhanced colloidal stability. For example, in our previous review, we described polyzwitterions as a subclass of polyelectrolytes and their use as coating materials for magnetic particles.327 Focusing on DHCs, we will also discuss the synthesis of this class of polymers-based hybrid materials and the use of DHCs in stabilising magnetic particles. Graft and block copolymers containing acidic groups were found to be strong ligands, but also catechol (dopamine) moieties can attach to metal oxide surfaces.262,328 In 2014, Nguyen et al.329 summarised some conventional DHBCs, that were used as templates to prepare iron oxide NPs. The iron oxide particles were typically prepared by a coprecipitation approach in the presence of the DHBCs. Some examples are highlighted in Table 7, including selected cases reported by Nguyen et al.
Table 7 Double hydrophilic block copolymers used for preparation of magnetic iron oxide particles by coprecipitation




DHC composition
Ref.








337







338







330 and 339







340







341







333







342







343







344







345





As an interesting example, Kulak et al.194 report a facile strategy for the crystal growth of Fe3O4 with the assistance of a DHBC, poly(sodium 4-styrenesulphonate)-block-poly(methacrylic acid) [PNaStS-b-PMAA] (Fig. 17D).
Kulak et al.194 they observed that the PMAA acted as the anchoring block and physically adsorbed onto the inorganic NP. Moreover, they noted that the PNaStS units behaved as electrostatic stabilisers, guaranteeing the colloidal stability of the formed nanoparticles in solution. Furthermore, these strong acidic units enhanced the binding ability towards both the NP and the host crystal. In a similar approach, Sondjaja et al.176,330 also used a double hydrophilic block copolymer, PEO-b-PAA, to prepare magnetic NPs. They showed that PEO-b-PAA can control the particle growth, as well as act as a stabiliser and clustering agent. They also indicated that the iron-to-polymer ratio can be used to tune the particle size up to 100 nm. Graft copolymers have also been used to prepare and stabilise iron oxide NPs. In one example, Gu et al.79 synthesised a well-defined densely grafted double hydrophilic copolymer by ATRP, poly[poly(ethylene glycol)methyl ether acrylate]-graft-poly(methoxymethyl methacrylate), which was used in the preparation and stabilisation of iron oxide NPs with a narrow size distribution (Fig. 18A).
 Fig. 18  (A) Superparamagnetic Fe3O4/polymer nanocomposites with PPEGMEA-g-PMAA densely grafted double hydrophilic copolymers via the grafting-through strategy. Adapted from ref. 79. with permission of Royal Society of Chemistry and (B) (1) poly(vinyl phosphonic acid)-based double hydrophilic block copolymers for the stabilisation of iron oxide nanoparticles. Adapted with permission from ref. 347. Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society.347 (2) Synthesis of biocompatible poly[2-(methacryloyloxy)ethyl phosphorylcholine]-coated magnetite NPs.307 Adapted from ref. 307 with permission of Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The nature of the anchoring groups is a crucial parameter for the strong attachment of the polymer to the iron oxide NP surface. Alkoxysilyl, dopamine, and carboxylic groups are among the most commonly used surface anchoring moieties.329 However, some restrictions of the mentioned anchoring groups have been described in a review and publications by Boyer and coworkers.272,331–333 In this context, while dopamine and carboxylic acid groups form mostly unstable bonds, phosphonates are strong binding groups due to the formation of Fe–O–P bonds.331,334–336
DHCs were also developed for anchoring through the phosphonate functional group. To achieve this, Markiewicz et al.307 prepared poly(vinyl phosphonic acid)-based double hydrophilic block copolymers for a one-step in situ preparation of water-dispersible iron oxide NPs with well-defined and controllable size and high colloidal stability (Fig. 18B-2).
Poly(ethylene glycol)-block-poly(vinylphosphonic acid) block copolymers (PEG-b-PVPA, Fig. 18B-1) were obtained using RAFT polymerisation. Hemocompatibility tests demonstrated that the haemolysis rates with phosphonated copolymers were much lower than for their carboxylated analogues. In another key example, Linot et al.346 reported a high-density core–shell magnetofluorescent hybrid material. The DHC shell was tailored by varying the composition and architecture of the PEG, PMAA, and (2-methylacryloyl) oxy methyl phosphonic acid (MAPA) units. The ability of DHCs for constructing the hybrid materials provides a great opportunity to construct magnetofluorescent architectures of superparamagnetic iron oxide NPs.346 In a similar approach, Armes et al.347 reported the use of poly[2-(methacryl oyloxy)ethyl phosphoryl choline]-block-(glycerol monomethacrylate) in the synthesis of colloidally stable ultrafine magnetite sols (Fig. 18B-1). In this work, paramagnetic sols were synthesised in the aqueous solution by chemical coprecipitation of ferric and ferrous salts in the presence of the block copolymer. They claim that the sol strategy implemented improves the colloidal stability with respect to long-term storage and pH variation.
Covalent attachment of DHCs on surfaces
The above-described examples mainly describe the physical interactions between the polymer and the inorganic material, e.g., via electrostatic attraction. Although this approach is quite straightforward and already leads to highly stable composites, the covalent linking of hydrophilic copolymers by chemical linkage was investigated and will be outlined in this section.
The most common strategy to chemically link the organic and inorganic components in a nanocomposite is through grafting. This can be further divided into “grafting-from”, “grafting-to”, and a one-pot “grafting-through” approach. Here, we focus on recent developments of DHCs within the mentioned categories, highlighting some of these concepts with selected literature reports.
In the “grafting-to” method, as-synthesised polymers are grafted onto the surface through a chemical reaction or a ligand exchange. Polymers used for this purpose must contain one or more functional groups that can be immobilised either directly to the surface or to the original capping ligands on the surface. Double hydrophilic block copolymers were also used for the “grafting-to” approach. In this context, Luo et al.348 reported the synthesis of a three-layer microstructure with a gold core, poly(2-(dimethyl amino)ethyl methacrylate) (PDMA) inner shell, and poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) outer corona (Fig. 19A-1). PEO-b-PDMA, a double hydrophilic block copolymer, was prepared by RAFT polymerisation and grafted to the AuNPs via the thiol end-groups. The inner shell was afterwards crosslinked by 1,2-bis(2-iodoethoxy)ethane and their results indicate that core–shell AuNPs before and after shell crosslinking both exhibit reversible swelling upon varying the solution pH. Compared to the non-crosslinked core–shell AuNPs, the shell crosslinking of the hybrid gold NPs leads to a permanent core–shell nanostructure with increased colloidal stability.
 Fig. 19  (A) (1) Synthesis of shell crosslinked core–shell gold nanoparticles with a gold core, a crosslinked PDMA inner shell, and a PEO outer corona.348 Adopted with permission from ref. 348. Copyright © 2005 American Chemical Society. (2) Schematic illustration for the fabrication of Au@copolymer nanostructures.350 (B) SiO2@P(EtOx-stat-EI) core–shell hybrid NPs and (B) cryo-TEM image of SiO2@P(EtOx-stat-EI)20 after the in situ generation of AuNPs.349 Adapted with permission from ref. 349. Copyright 2015. Wiley-VCH. (C) Chemical structure of the ethylene glycol dendrons covalently coupled to surface-active oligo-catechol anchors.262,328 Adopted with permission from ref. 328 and 262. Copyright © 2005 and 2011 American Chemical Society. (D) Schematic illustration of protein-resistant behaviour of poly(ethylene glycol)-containing phosphonate/phosphate units on stainless steel surfaces.351 Reprinted with permission from ref. 351. Copyright © 2021 American Chemical Society. 
In another example of “grafting-to”, Eckardt et al.349 introduced a method to tune the charge of SiO2 NPs by well-defined poly(2-ethyl-2-oxazoline-stat-ethylene imine) P(EtOx-stat-EI) (Fig. 19B). In this study, PEtOx was first polymerised by cationic ring-opening polymerisation before being grafted onto the surface of the SiO2 NPs by the triethoxysilyl linker. They further introduced positive charges onto the SiO2 NPs by the acidic hydrolysis of PEtOx to produce P(EtOx-stat-EI).
The “grafting-from” method usually uses surface-initiated controlled/“living” polymerization to grow polymers from the NP surface. The resulting hybrid polymers feature high grafting densities due to the lower steric hindrance and the higher diffusivity of the initiators/monomers if compared to the polymers. However, to obtain high-quality hybrid polymers, several possible problems need to be solved, including NP stability during polymerisation and crosslinking of the growing polymers. Li et al.350 reported a binary thermo-responsive DHC of poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) and poly(methoxy-oligo(ethylene glycol)methacrylate) that are grafted from AuNPs through a consecutive ATRP strategy (Fig. 19A-2). They proposed from their observations that the core–shell hybrid NPs are well-defined with cloud points at around 33 and 55 °C in water. They attribute the two cloud points to the inner PNIPAAM homopolymer layer and the outer PMOEGMA-containing copolymer layer, respectively.
In the “grafting-through” approach, usually, the polymerisable groups are anchored onto the surface of the NP. Accordingly, the polymerization can be started in a solution that often contains initiator, monomers, and modified NP. However, the NP can act as a crosslinking agent during polymerization. Hereby, by entering to the propagation stage, the pre-attached polymerisable moiety will be integrated into the growing polymer chains.352,353 So far, quite a few examples of the “grafting-through” approach have been reported for NPs such as Fe3O4, silica and gold NPs.352,354,355 For example, in the case of silica, Biggs et al.355 reported a two-step route to prepare anionic ATRP macroinitiators from poly(2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate) precursors. The macroinitiator was electrostatically adsorbed onto ultrafine cationic Ludox CL silica sols. The obtained hybrid was surface polymerised with various hydrophilic monomers in aqueous solution. Their results indicate a range of polymer-grafted ultrafine silica sols.
Beyond core–shell materials based on NPs, modification of rather flat surfaces using polymer coatings can provide and protect functionality, durability, and reliability of a wide range of compounds that have been utilised in corrosion and wear protection, medical implants, drug delivery systems, and biosensors.328 Compared to other polymers, DHCs exhibit excellent performance within this field. This type of modification also follows the “grafting-from” and “grafting-to” techniques. For instance, Textor et al.262,328 reported a DHC with dendritic architecture and copolymers based on ethylene glycol and a catechol segment (Fig. 19C). This dendron was molecularly assembled in an aqueous buffer onto titanium oxide surfaces. In this study, they evaluated the resistance of the monomolecular layers against nonspecific protein adsorption in contact with full blood serum. They also reported the adsorption kinetics and resulting surface coverage.
Stainless steel is utilised in a wide variety of applications from the food industry to medical care. The surface of steel has great potential to adsorb different compounds such as proteins and bacteria, eventually leading to biofouling. One main strategy used to overcome these issues and establish antifouling surfaces is the introduction of polymers.356–359
Among the different polymers examined for this purpose, DHCs showed excellent antifouling effects.357,360–362 As one example, Kousar et al.351 reported a nano-coating for a stainless steel substrate. In this work, they used copolymers based on poly(ethylene glycol) methyl ether methacrylate and 2-(meth acryloyloxy)ethyl phosphate (poly(PEGMA-co-MEP)), that was used also as an antifouling coating for covering steel surface (Fig. 19D). Their observations indicated that the copolymer barrier exhibited a resistance to protein absorption of over 99% compared to a bare surface. In another key report by Giamblanco et al.,361 they compared the protein adsorption on iron oxide NPs (sub-10 nm) and flat substrates functionalised using a grafting-to approach. The polymer coating was constructed of an alternating polymer from poly(ethylene glycol methacrylate-co-dimethyl(methacryoyloxy) methyl phosphonic acid) and poly(poly(ethylene glycol) methacrylate-co-methacrylic acid) (poly(PEGMA-co-MAA)). Here, they achieved different protein resistance values ranging typically from 65 to 99% depending on polymer composition, acid–base conditions, the molecular weight of copolymers, and nature of the grafting agent and layer extension.
Stimuli-responsive copolymers have also been grafted onto various surfaces to form brushes. These smart polymeric surfaces have been used for various applications such as drug delivery systems and antireflection coatings. Kumar et al.363 introduced a general approach to graft stimuli-responsive DHC brushes onto the surface of silicon wafers and quartz glass by ATRP. The polymer brush was obtained by grafting poly(N,N′-dimethylacrylamide)-block-poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (PDMA-b-PNIPAM) onto the surface. They achieved a thermosensitive release of dyes and switched between swollen and collapsed PNIPAM chains. However, this switching was used to control the release kinetics of the entrapped guest molecules such as model dye molecules.
DHCs for catalysis and sensing
The above-described strategies towards DHC-based hybrid materials can be carefully chosen for each individual inorganic compound to determine the resulting properties. Now we want to highlight the transfer of these materials to catalysis and sensing, as two emerging applications. While catalysts often rely on hybrid materials, sensors rely on the function of the polymer itself. Depending on the application, the distribution of the hydrophilic monomer units may be segmented or even random, since sometimes only the effect of both distinct entities in the resulting materials is important. In the case of micellar structures, segmented DHCs are beneficial, while molecular catalysts may also be carried by random or graft copolymers.15,364,365
Catalysis
Catalysis is one of the most important processes in nature. These types of reactions typically occur in aqueous environments. To prevent the deactivation of catalysts in water or protection of the main reaction from unwanted cross-reactions, catalysts are often separately protected by specific compartments. These concepts have inspired the design of a range of synthetic nanoreactors. Polymers with the capability of forming nanoreactors were already introduced as successful and prominent examples,366–371 and in this context different advantages were found, including control over-reactivity and composition of active sites, enhanced stability, and defined 3D environments for catalysis (Fig. 20).367,370,371 This development was supported by milestones in controlled/“living” polymerisation techniques, and in the meantime, the self-assembly of (co)polymers was found to be a versatile strategy to prepare a broad range of functional materials in a controlled manner with different ordered structures.372 In that regard, many examples for polymer-supported catalysis have been developed, and their structure and properties have been discussed in multiple reviews.366,370–372
 Fig. 20  (A) Schematic illustration of the catalysis mechanism using PNIPAM-b-PVim micelles as catalytic nanoreactors.373 Reprinted from ref. 373. Copyright © 2007, American Chemical Society. (B) Synthesis illustration of P(DMA-co-GMADPA) and the corresponding oxidation reactions used in catalysis.364 (C) Designer thermo-responsive nanoreactors for the templated control radical polymerization of styrene to obtain monodisperse nanoparticles with independent control over particle size and molecular weight.374 Reprinted from ref. 374. Copyright © 2010, American Chemical Society, and (D) photocatalytically-active block copolymer hybrid micelles from PiPrOx-b-PAGA.12 Reprinted with permission from ref. 12, © 2020 Elsevier. 
Regarding DHCs, the catalytically active moieties are typically embedded, and the examples can be divided into three categories: (i) incorporation in the DHC as an separate organic segment; (ii) covalent grafting/complexation of metals or organic functional groups to the DHC segments; (iii) catalytically active molecules or NPs were attached to the core or the shell of DHC micellar structures.
We will first highlight some examples where catalytically active moieties were incorporated into DHCs as a separate segment. In this regard, Liu et al.373 first reported DHC micelles containing a catalytic segment that was able to catalyse the hydrolysis of esters. They reported that poly(N-isopropylacrylamide)-block-poly(N-vinyl imidazole) (PNIPAAm-b-PVim) was successfully prepared by RAFT polymerisation (Fig. 20A). Herein, the PVim segment was able to catalyse ester hydrolysis and above the phase transition temperature of PNIPAM or in a suitable mixture of methanol/water (cononsolvency), the PNIPAAm block becomes hydrophobic and stable micelles were formed with a dense core consisting of a hydrophobic PNIPAAm block and a polar PVim shell. The catalytic activity of the PNIPAAm-b-PVim toward the hydrolysis of p-nitrophenyl acetate (NPA) could be tuned by the external temperature or solvent composition.
Micellar structures could become more attractive when they are switchable. Yu et al.375,376 reported a thermo-responsive block containing azlactone moieties used for the post-polymerisation attachment of an amino-functionalised organocatalyst based on L-prolinamide. For this, they synthesised a thermo-responsive DHC based on poly(N-isopropylacrylamide-co-vinyl-4,4-dimethylazlactone) attached to different blocks such as poly(ethylene glycol), poly(N,N-dimethylacrylamide), and poly(2,3-dihydroxypropyl acrylate). They showed by dynamic light scattering that temperature-induced self-assembly of the functionalised block copolymers led to the formation of nanoreactors with the hydrophobic substrates in the core and the immobilised organocatalyst at the hydrophilic/hydrophobic interface. The functionalised DHCs were subjected to an aldol reaction between p-nitro benzaldehyde and cyclohexanone in water. Upon temperature-induced aggregation, an increase in conversion was observed. The enantioselectivity of the polymer-bound organocatalyst hereby improved with an increasing hydrophilic/hydrophobic interface as a result of the different stability of the polymer aggregates.
Mimicking enzymes that contain the catalytically active site has always inspired polymer chemists to create functional chains able to “fold” into unimolecular or single-chain polymer nanoparticles. Over the years, many researchers have introduced the catalytic site within a single-chain polymer.377 In this context, the catalytic sites are distributed randomly within a segment or as an entire block, while water-soluble segments stabilise the single chain polymer nanoparticles in aqueous environments.366,377 Accordingly, DHCs that contain catalytic sites in a random or ordered fashion within a segment, were reported to enhance the catalytic efficiency.
For example, Thanneeru et al.364 reported the use of synthetic polymers to assist Cu-based dioxygen activation. In their work, a series of linear random copolymers of poly(N,N′-dimethylacrylamide)-co-2-hydroxy-3-(dipicolylamino) propyl methacrylate (P(DMA-co-GMADPA)) were introduced to incorporate type-3 Cu sites through Cu-dipicolylamine (DPA) coordination (Fig. 20B). The random copolymers of P(DMA-co-GMADPA) were synthesised using RAFT polymerisation and a small library of copolymers with different mole fractions of GMADPA was prepared by varying the feed ratios of DMA and GMADPA monomers. These bioinspired catalytic hybrids were used to enhance the catalytic activity in oxygen activation. For this purpose, the enzyme-like activity of these Cu-based polymers using O2 for the oxidation of ascorbic acid (AA) and 3,5-di-tert-butylcatechol (DTBC) was studied. Their investigation indicates that a 6–8-fold activity enhancement may be reached, compared to the molecular complex of Cu with an identical coordination site.
A single DHC chain can also directly host the organocatalysts, as shown by Moore et al.378 for the incorporation of the MacMillan catalyst. This organocatalyst is capable of catalysing a variety of organic reactions such as Diels–Alder reactions,379 1,3-dipolar cycloadditions,380 and Friedel–Crafts alkylations.381 They successfully378 synthesised a monomer containing the MacMillan catalytic functionality and afterwards a variety of copolymers with the comonomer diethylene glycol methyl ether methacrylate (DEGMA) by RAFT polymerisation. These polymers showed lower critical solution temperature (LCST) behaviour where the cloud point was found to be dependent on the degree of catalyst incorporation. The catalytic activity of the functional copolymers was demonstrated by the Diels–Alder reaction between cyclopentadiene and trans-hexen-1-al and shows enantioselectivity close to those previously reported by MacMillan. Catalytic activity of the copolymers could be demonstrated with high yields and selectivities. Interestingly, a DHC system was also used as a nanoreactor for polymerisation. As a representative example, Sebakhy et al.374 successfully polymerised styrene by RAFT using poly(N-isopropylacrylamide-block-dimethyl acrylamide) as a nanoreactor (Fig. 20C).374
Whereas, the previously discussed DHCs typically rely on the covalent attachment of organic or inorganic catalysts to the polymers, it is effectively possible to load the catalytic compounds into DHC nanoreactors by co-assembly or encapsulation. The corresponding nanocontainers may even be loaded with more than one catalytic moiety. In this regard, Costabel et al.48 presented a new self-assembly strategy based on DHCs to activate the fourfold-substituted perylene monoimide (PMI) photosensitisers for visible light-driven hydrogen evolution. They showed that PDha-g-PEG can solubilise PMI and [Mo3S13]2− clusters simultaneously, and this solubilization resulted in hybrid materials for enhanced visible light-driven hydrogen evolution reaction (HER).
Metal and metal oxide NPs are already well-known as unique catalytically active materials.382 However, due to their high specific surface area, they commonly need efficient immobilisation and stabilisation while maintaining their catalytic activity.366 Dealing with this issue, DHCs are often used as templates to form and immobilise the catalytically active metal NPs. Here, we will highlight several such examples involving DHCs.
Nabiyan et al.12 prepared photocatalytically active DHCs by immobilising CdS nanoparticles for photocatalytic water splitting within well-defined poly(2-iso-propyl-2-oxazoline)-block-poly(2-acrylamido glycolic acid) (PiPrOx-b-PAGA) block copolymers (Fig. 20D). A spherical inorganic–organic micellar system was attained containing ultra-small CdS nanoparticles within the core. These particles maintained their photoactivity, and were applied in photocatalytic H2 production with an 18-fold increase in H2 production compared to bare CdS nanoparticles under similar conditions. They attributed this enhancement in photocatalytic activity to several factors: the 3D confinement within the DHC micellar nanostructures, the presence of ultra-small CdS nanoparticles, and the improved stability of the CdS nanoparticles within the micellar core.
In another example, Duan et al.383 reported a nanohybrid catalytic system consisting of ultrafine palladium NPs supported on reduced graphene oxide modified with a thermo-responsive polymer for heterogeneous catalysis. The polymer system was grafted by a catechol-terminated thermo-responsive double-hydrophilic diblock copolymer, poly(poly(ethylene glycol)methyl ether methacrylate-co-2,3-epithiopropyl methacrylate)-block-poly-(N-isopropylacrylamide) (P(PEGMA-co-ETMA)-b-PNIPAM) using RAFT polymerisation from a catechol-containing chain transfer agent (Fig. 21A).
 Fig. 21  (A) Schematic depiction of the preparation and catalytic application of the PdNPs@BPrGO nanocatalyst.383 Reprinted from ref. 383 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry. (B) In situ synthesis and thermo-responsiveness of PNIPAM-capped AuNPs in the absence of free linear PNIPAM chains.90 Reprinted with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2019. Wiley-VCH, (C) structure depiction of PMPC-b-PDMA-b-PHPMA and corresponding spheres, worms, jellyfish, and vesicles that can be directly prepared, depending on either the total solids concentration or the mean degree of polymerisation of the PHPMA block and reduction of p-NP to p-AP. Adapted with permission from ref. 384. Copyright © 2018 American Chemical Society and (D) schematic illustration of polyampholytic graft copolymer@TiO2 as matrix for hydrogen production. Adopted with permission from ref. 61. Copyright 2020. Wiley-VCH. 
In this system, the PETMA segments behaved as ligands in the block copolymer, which can interact with the Pd atoms and stabilise the PdNPs in aqueous solution. Besides, the obtained block copolymer can be easily adhered to graphene oxide via mussel-inspired chemistry, as a powerful way of surface adhesion. The catalytic activity of the nanohybrid system was studied in detail using the model reduction reaction of methylene blue (MB) and nitrophenols in the presence of NaBH4 with high catalytic activity. In a similar approach, Chen et al.90 reported a hybrid nanoreactor based on star-like thermo-responsive PAA-b-PNIPAAm (Fig. 21B). The unimolecular star-like DHCs were used as a nanoreactor to form Au-NPs and the resulting hybrid material was able to tune the optical properties by its thermo-response and the hydrogenation of 4-nitrophenol, a model reaction, was evaluated with respect to the temperature-dependent catalytic activation.
Towards the hybrid nanoreactor, a biomimetic template based on DHCs was also introduced by Sugihara et al.384 with a triple-hydrophilic ABC triblock copolymers of poly[2-(meth acryloyloxy) ethyl phosphoryl choline]-block-poly[2-(dimethyl amino) ethyl methacrylate]-block-poly(2-hydroxy propyl methacrylate) (PMPC-b-PDMA-b-PHPMA) (Fig. 21C). The polymer template was used to embed Ag+ ions to form Ag-NPs in situ. The final morphology could be tuned by the degree of polymerisation of HPMA and the solid concentration in the polymerisation mixture. The resulting Ag-NPs loaded in the assemblies exhibited excellent stability, dispersibility, and catalytic activity for the reduction of p-nitrophenol. The order of rate constants for the reduction using Ag-NPs loaded in the assemblies is worms > vesicles > spheres.
Tailored core–shell hybrid NPs have attracted extensive attention as a result of their tunable properties.385,386 With a special emphasis on this material class, Nabiyan et al.61 reported a core–shell hybrid system based on polyampholytic graft copolymers to enhance the performance of TiO2 NPs for hydrogen evolution. Here, they coated the TiO2 core with a polyampholytic (poly(dehydroalanine)-graft-(n-propyl phosphonic acid acrylamide) shell (PDha-g-PAA@TiO2, Fig. 21D). The multifunctional PDha-g-PAA shell facilitates the efficient immobilisation of the negatively charged photosensitiser Eosin Y (EY) and enables electronic interactions between EY, the TiO2 core, and [Mo3S13]2− clusters as cocatalyst. This is an important example showing how DHCs can be systematically designed and act as versatile matrices to combine various compounds in close proximity.
Sensors
Over the past two decades, also polymeric sensors have received growing attention. In this area, stimuli-responsive (co)polymers that can respond to specific analytes or environmental parameters have found many uses in the development of sensory devices. There are several reviews that highlight polymers as important materials for the construction of sensors with various applications such as the sensing of heavy metals, analysts or environmental conditions.387–390
In polymer-based sensing systems, a wide range of stimuli, such as pH, temperature, ionic strength, light, specific analytes or external additives (ions, bioactive molecules, etc.), have been exploited, inducing changes in chain conformation, solubility, and the self-assembly of responsive polymers.387
As we outlined above, a tremendous amount of (multi)stimuli-responsive DHCs have been prepared. Hence, DHC-based sensors have shown great success, based on the function of the DHC itself. They have been designed mostly in two research directions: (i) the integration of molecules and functional groups with sensing ability directly into the DHC structure; and (ii) the introduction of novel detection mechanisms and concepts into responsive polymer-based sensors, e.g., through hybridisation. Here, we focus on the recent developments in DHC-based sensors, highlighting some of these concepts and mechanisms.
The intrinsic properties of DHCs (such as pH- or temperature-response) can be combined with a fluorescence signal, which emanates from covalently incorporated sensitive fluorescent moieties. In this approach, DHCs can undergo chain collapse or aggregation in an aqueous solution upon changing the pH or temperature, accompanied by changes in chain conformations and the formation of hydrophobic/hydrophilic domains. In the meantime, pH and temperature variations can be converted into considerable changes in fluorescence output intensities by changes in the microenvironment hydrophilicity/hydrophobicity which the respective chromophore experiences.30,49
Thermo-responsive DHCs in aqueous solution commonly generate aggregates with reduced polarity above their LCST temperature, and in combination with fluorescent dyes, the DHCs become promising thermometers. Uchiyama et al. reported several DHC systems based on a thermo-responsive polymer and fluorescent comonomers.219,228,365,391,392 In a typical example,228 they copolymerised 4-N-(2-acryloyl oxyethyl)-N-methylamino-7-(N,N-dimethylamino)sulfonyl-2,1,3-benzoxadiazole (DBD-AE) with N,N-dimethyl aminopropyl acrylamide (DMAPAM) and N-tert-butylacrylamide (NTBAM) (poly(DBD-AE-co-DMAPAM-co-NTBAM)). They observed a dramatic increase in fluorescence emission intensity at temperatures above the LCST (Fig. 22A). They also determined that the thermal phase transition leads to the collapse and aggregation of polymer chains, and this renders the microenvironment of DBD dyes to transform from being hydrophilic to hydrophobic, accompanied by a considerable increase in quantum yields of the covalently embedded DBDAE dyes. Other fluorescent dyes such as rhodamine,25,222,229,232,393,394 and Eosin395 were also covalently attached to thermo-responsive units to construct polymer-based thermometers.
 Fig. 22  (A) Thermo-responsive P(DMAPAM-co-NTBAM-co-DBDAE) copolymer in aqueous solution serves as a fluorescent molecular thermometer. (1) Fluorescence intensity changes upon heating and cooling cycles. Inset: Fluorescence spectra. (2) Visual and fluorescent images at temperatures below and above the LCST. Adapted from ref. 228. Copyright © 2004, American Chemical Society. (B) Scheme showing the chemical structures of P(DMA290-co-IDHPMA96) and Eu3+ ions, and the corresponding illustration of fluorescence ON/OFF and sol–gel transition driven by dynamic metal–ligand coordination.169,396 (C) Triple-responsive graft copolymer based on PDha-g-NIPAAm,15 and (D) colorimetric detection of mercury(II) ions via the formation of the strongly electron-withdrawing cyanide groups promoted by mercury(II) ions.397 Reprinted from ref. 397 with permission of Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Measuring and exploiting variations in pH value is crucial in the diagnosis of different types of cancer.128,398 pH sensors based on DHCs have been constructed, using similar principles for temperature sensing. In this respect, pH changes above or below the pKa resulted in either protonation or deprotonation, which is typically accompanied by a significant variation in aqueous solubility.128,399,400
Sun et al.401 reported the copolymerisation of acrylamide and methylenebis(acrylamide) with a pH-sensitive dye comonomer (a fluoresceinamine derivative) and a pH-insensitive reference dye (a rhodamine B derivative). Their approach by micro-emulsion led to NPs with a mean diameter of 50 nm. These sensors were capable of detecting the pH in the physiologically relevant range from pH 5.8 to 7.2. In another interesting study, Wu et al.399 incorporated Calcon dye covalently into a semisoft pH-sensitive polymer matrix microgel of poly(N-isopropylacrylamide-co-acrylic acid-co-acrylamide) (P(NIPAM-co-AA-co-AM)) to fabricate nanoparticle-based pH sensors.
Sensors for heavy metal ions (chemosensors) have attracted great interest in recent years because of their environmental and biological relevance. The mechanism of these types of sensors mostly relies on the communication between the supramolecular recognition and fluorescent reporter units. The combination of specific supramolecular recognition with fluorescent systems has allowed the construction of on/off switchable molecular logic gates. In this category, Weng et al.169,396 reported Eu-containing DHC hydrogels that exhibit fast self-healing and tuneable fluorochromic properties in response to several different stimuli: pH, temperature, metal ions, sonication, moisture and force (Fig. 22B). The DHC hydrogels are constructed using Eu–iminodiacetate (IDA) coordination in a hydrophilic poly(N,N-dimethyl acrylamide) matrix. Dynamic metal–ligand coordination allows reversible formation and disruption of hydrogel networks under various stimuli.
In another recent example of sensors for heavy metal ions, polyampholytic graft copolymers have been utilised to construct a detection system with tuneable sensitivity.15 In this research a metal-chelating and pH-responsive polymer was combined with thermo-responsive monomers and Ag NPs due to their optical properties. Max et al.15 showed that three triggers result in two measurable outputs from polymeric sensors (Fig. 22C). They first designed a multi-responsive polyampholytic graft copolymer of poly(dehydroalanine)-graft-NIPAAm, (PDha-g-NIPAAm). They then investigated its response to changes in pH and temperature, as well as the type and concentration of metal cations. The interplay of these responses allowed these changes to be detected by the transformation of external triggers into simple measurable outputs, e.g., the cloud point temperature. In the case of Ag-NP-based hybrid materials, changes in the surface plasmon resonance (SPR) of the encapsulated NPs was also detected as an additional output.
Another notable example is the sensing of mercury(II) ions, which was carried out using an oxime-containing polymeric probe. Kim et al.397 reported a DHC of 2-(dimethylamino)ethyl methacrylate (DMAEMA) and (E)-2-((4-((4-formylphenyl)diazenyl)phenyl)(methyl)-amino)ethyl acrylate (FPDEA), which were copolymerised from a poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) macroinitiator using ATRP (Fig. 22D). The synthesised DHC detected mercury(II) ions by a temperature-dependent morphological transition between unimers and micellar aggregates.
A key example of sensors based on supramolecular recognition and DHCs, microgels and nanogels were utilised by many research groups to construct detection systems with tuneable sensitivity.236,402–406 For instance, Liu et al. reported several DHC microgel sensor systems based on NIPAAm.236,402–404 In most of the cases, a metal-chelating and fluorescence reporting comonomer was copolymerised with a thermo-responsive monomer such as NIPAAm. Liu et al.402 in their investigation also indicate the microgel system based on dansyl aminoethyl-acrylamide (DAEAM): fluorescence reporter, N-(2-(2-oxo-2-(pyridine-2-ylmethylamino)ethylamino) ethyl) acrylamide (PyAM): metal-chelating, and NIPAAm: thermo-responsive monomer (P(NIPAAm-co-PyAM-co-DAEAM), (Fig. 23A).
 Fig. 23  (A) Synthetic scheme depicting the preparation of Cu2+-sensing P(NIPAM-co-PyAM-co-DAEAM) microgels. Adapted with permission from ref. 402. Copyright © 2009 American Chemical Society. (B) Schematic representation of the chemical structure transitions of a thermo-responsive PEG-b-P(NIPAM-co-p-NAPMA) diblock copolymer in the presence of NO followed by UV irradiation.407 
They utilised the thermo-responsive collapse/swelling of microgels to construct detection systems with tuneable sensitivity in the detection of Cu2+ ions. Their data revealed that the binding of metal ions to metal-chelating units leads to the fluorescence quenching of the fluorescence reporter. However, they also confirmed that the detection sensitivity of P(NIPAAm-co-PyAM-co-DAEAM) microgels can be dramatically enhanced via thermo-induced microgel collapse at elevated temperatures.
Systems that are responsive to endogenous gas transmitter molecules (i.e., nitric oxide, hydrogen sulfide, and carbon monoxide) are becoming an interesting research topic within the sensor community. Here, DHCs are also used for detecting nitric oxide. In the exemplary research by Hu et al.,407 and for the first time, N-(4-aminophenyl) methacryl amide (p-NAPMA), which is responsive to nitric oxide, was polymerised with poly(ethylene glycol)-b-(N-isopropylacrylamide-co-p-NAPMA) (PEG-b-P(NIPAM-co-NAPMA)) (Fig. 23B). Indeed, PEG-b-P(NIPAM-co-p-NAPMA) was rendered with unique NO- and UV-responsive characteristics. They also observed a relationship between UV irradiation and the LCST transition.
Conclusions
The field of DHCs has seen huge progress during the last decade, both with respect to synthetic approaches, architectural variety as well as design and application – rendering these materials an important class of water-soluble polymers. As outlined above, DHCs profit from a high tunability considering topology and, with that, the density of functional groups, self-assembly in different environments, solubility, viscosity, and (backbone) conformation. Besides, the combination of different (stimuli-responsive) monomers and their sequence, e.g., block vs. random copolymers gives access to truly tailor-made materials. Hereby, modern synthetic tools including end-group functionalization, the use of multi-functional initiators, or post-polymerization modifications also gave access to multi-hydrophilic copolymers (MHCs).
Self-assembly of DHCs has been thoroughly studied relying both on inter- and intrachain interactions. In this regard, crosslinking of micelles, worms, and nanogels has led to an increased stability in water. In general, micelle formation often is controlled by the response to a suitable external stimulus and novel DHCs might allow the use of several such triggers, leading to programmable materials, e.g., through ‘schizophrenic’ behaviour. We herein described the combination of the most important and frequently used stimuli (pH, temperature, light, or the presence of metal ions), including several examples for triple-responsive polymers. Understanding their structure–property relationship and functions in water enables the DHCs to be exploited in various application fields, one of the most promising being hybrid materials. DHCs mainly act as nanoreactors, nanocarriers, templates, matrices, stabilizers, and dispersants via both attractive physical and chemical interactions.
Within this review different hybrid materials have been highlighted and divided into the combination of DHCs with metal ions, NPs, or other surfaces. It is noteworthy that in many cases the individual building blocks might be exchanged and due to this, the number of such examples is expected to grow further. For example, DHCs were exploited for the efficient complexation of metal cations such as Mn2+ or Gd3+, leading to the formation of micellar structures. Similar assemblies were also used as templates for the preparation of stable and well-defined noble metal, semiconducting, and magnetic NPs. Moreover, DHCs may be used as coatings for a wide range of surfaces such as stainless steel. It can be said that whereas earlier utilisation of DHCs took place predominantly in biomedicine and biomineralization, the field in our opinion is moving more towards efficient platforms for sensing or the combination/immobilization of different compounds in close proximity, e.g., in (photo)catalysis. Regarding the latter, photocatalytic hydrogen evolution can be seen as a key example, and several cases report on a significant boost of catalytic activity in DHC-based hybrid materials.
In summary, the field of DHCs shows tremendous further potential and room for synthetic innovations. We are quite sure that this will lead to more examples of high-performance polymeric materials to be applied in interdisciplinary research fields, in so far unexplored organic/inorganic hybrid materials, or sensing and/or separation approaches in water. However, DHCs in our opinion can also build bridges between hydrophilic and hydrophobic materials, thereby promising greener approaches for the transfer of different systems to aqueous media or for the use of surface-active compounds in general. We expect that such materials also have a bright future in terms of heterogeneous catalysis, allowing hierarchical structuring of functional materials and hybrid materials, or assisting in structure formation in general. Likewise, constructing eco-friendly DHCs will undoubtedly continue to be an attractive research topic. In addition, although we described a variety of applications for DHCs, the exploration of them in other areas, such as photonics, energy storage, or solar energy conversion is still in its infancy. We hope that this review will promote the further integration of DHCs in other related disciplines.
Author contributions
A. Nabiyan and J. B. Max equally conceived, researched, wrote, and edited this contribution. All authors jointly wrote the manuscript and discussed the content.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, project no. SCHA1640/18-1) and within the framework of TRR234 “CataLight” (Project No. 364549901, project B5).
Notes and references
F. S. Bates and G. H. Fredrickson, Phys. Today, 1999, 52(2), 32 CrossRef CAS .
F. H. Schacher, P. A. Rupar and I. Manners, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 7898–7921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Rudolph, M. von der Lühe, M. Hartlieb, S. Norsic, U. S. Schubert, C. Boisson, F. D’Agosto and F. H. Schacher, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 10085–10098 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. G. Kadajji and G. V. Betageri, Polymers, 2011, 3, 1972–2009 CrossRef CAS .
C. Feng, Z. Shen, Y. Li, L. Gu, Y. Zhang, G. Lu and X. Huang, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2009, 47, 1811–1824 CrossRef CAS .
C. Feng, Y. Li, D. Yang, Y. Li, J. Hu, S. Zhai, G. Lu and X. Huang, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2010, 48, 15–23 CrossRef CAS .
C. Feng, Z. Shen, L. Gu, S. Zhang, L. Li, G. Lu and X. Huang, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2008, 46, 5638–5651 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ge, Y. Zhou, J. Xu, H. Liu, D. Chen and S. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 1628–1629 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kamachi, M. Kurihara and J. K. Stille, Macromolecules, 1972, 5, 161–167 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ge and S. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 7289–7325 RSC .
H. Cölfen, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2001, 22, 219–252 CrossRef .
A. Nabiyan, M. Schulz, C. Neumann, B. Dietzek, A. Turchanin and F. H. Schacher, Eur. Polym. J., 2020, 140, 110037 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Nakagawa, S. Ohta, M. Nakamura and T. Ito, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 55571–55576 RSC .
C. Kilic Bektas, T. Dursun Usal, N. Hasirci and V. Hasirci, Biol. Soft Matter Fundam. Prop. Appl., 2021, 89–114 CrossRef .
J. B. Max, A. Nabiyan, J. Eichhorn and F. H. Schacher, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2021, 2000671 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. V. Semagina, A. V. Bykov, E. M. Sulman, V. G. Matveeva, S. N. Sidorov, L. V. Dubrovina, P. M. Valetsky, O. I. Kiselyova, A. R. Khokhlov and B. Stein, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2004, 208, 273–284 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lee, K. Saito, H.-R. Lee, M. J. Lee, Y. Shibasaki, Y. Oishi and B.-S. Kim, Biomacromolecules, 2012, 13, 1190–1196 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. T. T. Le, T. N. Q. Nguyen, V. Du Cao, D. T. Hoang, V. C. Ngo and T. T. Hoang Thi, Pharmaceutics, 2019, 11, 591 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Frangville, Y. Li, C. Billotey, D. R. Talham, J. Taleb, P. Roux, J.-D. Marty and C. Mingotaud, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 4069–4073 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Mahltig, J.-F. Gohy, S. Antoun, R. Jérôme and M. Stamm, Colloid Polym. Sci., 2002, 280, 495–502 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Max, P. J. Mons, J. C. Tom and F. H. Schacher, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2020, 221, 1900383 CrossRef CAS .
K. Vijayakrishna, S. K. Jewrajka, A. Ruiz, R. Marcilla, J. A. Pomposo, D. Mecerreyes, D. Taton and Y. Gnanou, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 6299–6308 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. R. Shin, P. T. McAninch, I. M. Henderson, A. Gomez, A. C. Greene, E. C. Carnes and W. F. Paxton, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 9043–9046 RSC .
M. Arotçaréna, B. Heise, S. Ishaya and A. Laschewsky, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 3787–3793 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wu, H. Hu, J. Hu, T. Liu, G. Zhang and S. Liu, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 3711–3720 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Volkmann, M. Köhler, F. H. Sobotta, M. T. Enke, J. C. Brendel and F. H. Schacher, Macromolecules, 2018, 51, 7284–7294 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Bo and Y. Zhao, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2006, 44, 1734–1744 CrossRef CAS .
E. Seo, J. Kim, Y. Hong, Y. S. Kim, D. Lee and B.-S. Kim, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 11686–11693 CrossRef CAS .
K. Lipponen, S. Tähkä, M. Kostiainen and M. Riekkola, Electrophoresis, 2014, 35, 1106–1113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. V. K. J. Schmidt, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2018, 219, 1700494 CrossRef .
Y. Cai, Y. Tang and S. P. Armes, Macromolecules, 2004, 37, 9728–9737 CrossRef CAS .
M. Khimani, S. Yusa, V. K. Aswal and P. Bahadur, J. Mol. Liq., 2019, 276, 47–56 CrossRef CAS .
A. Nabiyan, P. Biehl and F. H. Schacher, Macromolecules, 2020, 53, 5056–5067 CrossRef CAS .
S. Khan, J. McCabe, K. Hill and P. A. Beales, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 562, 418–428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Alsubaie, A. Anastasaki, P. Wilson and D. M. Haddleton, Polym. Chem., 2014, 6, 406–417 RSC .
Y. Tezuka and H. Oike, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 11570–11576 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Skandalis and S. Pispas, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2019, 57, 1771–1783 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wurm, J. Nieberle and H. Frey, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 1184–1188 CrossRef CAS .
T. Rudolph, S. Crotty, M. Von der Lühe, D. Pretzel, U. S. Schubert and F. H. Schacher, Polymers, 2013, 5, 1081–1101 CrossRef .
Y. Qiu, W. Zhang, Y. Yan, J. Zhu, Z. Zhang and X. Zhu, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2010, 48, 5180–5188 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cai and S. P. Armes, Macromolecules, 2005, 38, 271–279 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-W. Harn, Y. He, Z. Wang, Y. Chen, S. Liang, Z. Li, Q. Li, L. Zhu and Z. Lin, Macromolecules, 2020, 53, 8286–8295 CrossRef CAS .
F. Sun, C. Feng, H. Liu and X. Huang, Polym. Chem., 2016, 7, 6973–6979 RSC .
A. Harada and K. Kataoka, Polym. J., 2018, 50, 95–100 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cui, X. Jiang, C. Feng, G. Gu, J. Xu and X. Huang, Polym. Chem., 2016, 7, 3156–3164 RSC .
J. B. Max, K. Kowalczuk, M. Köhler, C. Neumann, F. Pielenz, L. V. Sigolaeva, D. V. Pergushov, A. Turchanin, F. Langenhorst and F. H. Schacher, Macromolecules, 2020, 1900383 CAS .
Z. Ge and S. Liu, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2009, 30, 1523–1532 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Costabel, A. Skabeev, A. Nabiyan, Y. Luo, J. Max, A. Rajagopal, D. Kowalczyk, B. Dietzek, M. Wächtler, H. Görls, D. Ziegenbalg, Y. Zagranyarski, C. Streb, F. H. Schacher and K. Peneva, Chem. – Eur. J., 2020, 4511–4523 Search PubMed .
A. El Jundi, S. J. Buwalda, Y. Bakkour, X. Garric and B. Nottelet, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 102213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Khimani, H. Patel, V. Patel, P. Parekh and R. L. Vekariya, Polym. Bull., 2019, 1–28 Search PubMed .
Y.-H. Jeong, H.-W. Shin, J.-Y. Kwon and S.-M. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 23617–23629 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Saveleva, K. Eftekhari, A. Abalymov, T. E. L. Douglas, D. Volodkin, B. V. Parakhonskiy and A. G. Skirtach, Front. Chem, 2019, 7, 179 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. MacLachlan, I. Manners and G. A. Ozin, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 675–681 CrossRef CAS .
K. J. C. Van Bommel, A. Friggeri and S. Shinkai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 980–999 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Mai and A. Eisenberg, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 5969–5985 RSC .
J. C. Brendel and F. H. Schacher, Chem. – Asian J., 2018, 13, 230–239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Feng, X. Lu, W. Wang, N.-G. Kang and J. W. Mays, Polymers, 2017, 9, 494 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Xu, Z. Ge, Z. Zhu, S. Luo, H. Liu and S. Liu, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 8178–8185 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ge, Y. Cai, J. Yin, Z. Zhu, J. Rao and S. Liu, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 1114–1122 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Qi, H. Cölfen and M. Antonietti, Nano Lett., 2001, 1, 61–65 CrossRef CAS .
A. Nabiyan, J. B. Max, C. Neumann, M. Heiland, A. Turchanin, C. Streb and F. H. Schacher, Chem. – Eur. J., 2021 DOI:10.1002/chem.202100091 .
C. Li, Z. Ge, J. Fang and S. Liu, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 2916–2924 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Max, D. V. Pergushov, L. V. Sigolaeva and F. H. Schacher, Polym. Chem., 2019, 10, 3006–3019 RSC .
J. Willersinn, M. Drechsler, M. Antonietti and B. V. K. J. Schmidt, Macromolecules, 2016, 49, 5331–5341 CrossRef CAS .
J. Willersinn and B. V. K. J. Schmidt, Polym. Chem., 2018, 9, 1626–1637 RSC .
J. Sarkar, K. B. J. Chan and A. Goto, Polym. Chem., 2021, 12, 1060–1067 RSC .
W. Zhang, W. Zhang, Z. Cheng, N. Zhou, J. Zhu, Z. Zhang, G. Chen and X. Zhu, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 3366–3373 CrossRef CAS .
C. Feng, Y. Li, D. Yang, J. Hu, X. Zhang and X. Huang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 1282–1295 RSC .
J. He, W. Zhang, C. Lv, R. Chen, L. Wang, Y. Wang and X. Pan, Polymer, 2021, 215, 123345 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Stenzel, C. Barner-Kowollik, T. P. Davis and H. M. Dalton, Macromol. Biosci., 2004, 4, 445–453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, T. L. U. Nguyen, J. Bernard, T. P. Davis, C. Barner-Kowollik and M. H. Stenzel, Biomacromolecules, 2007, 8, 2890–2901 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wu, W. Wang and J. Li, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2015, 46, 55–85 CrossRef CAS .
T. Higashihara, M. Hayashi and A. Hirao, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2011, 36, 323–375 CrossRef CAS .
C. Feng, L. Gu, D. Yang, J. Hu, G. Lu and X. Huang, Polymer, 2009, 50, 3990–3996 CrossRef CAS .
T. Jiang, V. Aseyev, J. Niskanen, S. Hietala, Q. Zhang and H. Tenhu, Macromolecules, 2020, 53, 8267–8275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Baśko and P. Kubisa, Macromolecules, 2002, 35, 8948–8953 CrossRef .
J. Virtanen, C. Baron and H. Tenhu, Macromolecules, 2000, 33, 336–341 CrossRef CAS .
J. Virtanen and H. Tenhu, Macromolecules, 2000, 33, 5970–5975 CrossRef CAS .
L. Gu, Z. Shen, C. Feng, Y. Li, G. Lu, X. Huang, G. Wang and J. Huang, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 4332–4340 RSC .
L. Gu, C. Feng, D. Yang, Y. Li, J. Hu, G. Lu and X. Huang, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2009, 47, 3142–3153 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, J. Li, Y. Ding, G. Zhang, Q. Zhang and C. Wu, Macromolecules, 2005, 38, 4403–4408 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhao, R. Rajan and K. Matsumura, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 39459–39469 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Sui, X. Zhao, Z. Wu, Y. Xia, H. Liang and Y. Li, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 153–160 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hao, G. Yuan, W. He, H. Cheng, C. C. Han and C. Wu, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 2002–2008 CrossRef CAS .
A. Daktiloudis, A. Chronaios, N. Mavriki, Z. Iatridi and G. Bokias, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2014, 430, 293–301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Tan, J. Xing, F. Cao, L. Chen, C. Zhang, R. Shi and Y. Wang, Chinese J. Polym. Sci., 2013, 31, 691–701 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, Z. Li, P. Huang, Z. He and W. Ding, Colloid Polym. Sci., 2018, 296, 1787–1794 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fanova, I. Davidovich, Y. Talmon, A. Skandalis, S. Pispas and M. Štěpánek, ACS Appl. Polym. Mater., 2021, 1956–1963 CrossRef CAS .
A. Taghavi-Kahagh, S. A. Safavi-Mirmahalleh, R. Pashaei-Sarnaghi, M. Salami-Kalajahi and H. Roghani-Mamaqani, J. Mol. Liq., 2021, 116247 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, Z. Wang, Y. W. Harn, S. Pan, Z. Li, S. Lin, J. Peng, G. Zhang and Z. Lin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 11910–11917 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Nakagawa, Y. Amano, S. Nakasako, S. Ohta and T. Ito, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng., 2015, 1, 914–918 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Aksakal, M. Resmini and C. R. Becer, Polym. Chem., 2016, 7, 171–175 RSC .
S. Sun, S. Xu, W. Zhang, P. Wu, W. Zhang and X. Zhu, Polym. Chem., 2013, 4, 5800–5809 RSC .
S. Sun, W. Zhang, W. Zhang, P. Wu and X. Zhu, Soft Matter, 2012, 8, 3980–3987 RSC .
S. Sun, P. Wu, W. Zhang, W. Zhang and X. Zhu, Soft Matter, 2013, 9, 1807–1816 RSC .
J. Rao, Y. Zhang, J. Zhang and S. Liu, Biomacromolecules, 2008, 9, 2586–2593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, H. Liu, J. Hu, C. Li and S. Liu, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2009, 30, 941–947 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, C. Li, H. Liu and S. Liu, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 4724–4734 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Bütün, S. Liu, J. V. M. Weaver, X. Bories-Azeau, Y. Cai and S. P. Armes, React. Funct. Polym., 2006, 66, 157–165 CrossRef .
S. Pispas, N. Hadjichristidis, I. Potemkin and A. Khokhlov, Macromolecules, 2000, 33, 1741–1746 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pispas, Y. Poulos and N. Hadjichristidis, Macromolecules, 1998, 31, 4177–4181 CrossRef CAS .
L. Sun, Y. Zhou, X. Zhou, Q. Fu, S. Zhao, X. Tu, X. Zhang, L. Ma, M. Liu and H. Wei, Polym. Chem., 2017, 8, 500–504 RSC .
O. Koshkina, T. Lang, R. Thiermann, D. Docter, R. H. Stauber, C. Secker, H. Schlaad, S. Weidner, B. Mohr and M. Maskos, Langmuir, 2015, 31, 8873–8881 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, Y. Jiao, Y. Wang, D. Lu and W. Yang, Int. J. Pharm., 2014, 465, 112–119 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. He, Y. Li, X.-R. Jia, J. Du, X. Ying, W.-L. Lu, J.-N. Lou and Y. Wei, Biomaterials, 2011, 32, 478–487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yu, Y. Nie, C. Dohmen, Y. Li and E. Wagner, Biomacromolecules, 2011, 12, 2039–2047 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Pan, C. Wang, X. Zeng, Y. Wen, H. Wu and M. Feng, Int. J. Pharm., 2011, 420, 206–215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. N. Sidorov, L. M. Bronstein, P. M. Valetsky, J. Hartmann, H. Cölfen, H. Schnablegger and M. Antonietti, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 1999, 212, 197–211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. M. Haque and S. M. Grayson, Nat. Chem., 2020, 12, 433–444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Liénard, J. De Winter and O. Coulembier, J. Polym. Sci., 2020, 58, 1481–1502 CrossRef .
J. O. Kim, A. V. Kabanov and T. K. Bronich, J. Controlled Release, 2009, 138, 197–204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bontha, A. V. Kabanov and T. K. Bronich, J. Controlled Release, 2006, 114, 163–174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. K. Bronich, P. A. Keifer, L. S. Shlyakhtenko and A. V. Kabanov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 8236–8237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-B. Qu, R. Chapman, F. Chen, H. Lu and M. H. Stenzel, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 13865–13874 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. K. Bronich, S. Bontha, L. S. Shlyakhtenko, L. Bromberg, T. Alan Hatton and A. V. Kabanov, J. Drug Target, 2006, 14, 357–366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. W. Penfold, J. Yeow, C. Boyer and S. P. Armes, ACS Macro Lett., 2019, 8, 1029–1054 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, C.-Y. Hong and C.-Y. Pan, Polym. Chem., 2020, 11, 3673–3689 RSC .
J. He, X. Tong and Y. Zhao, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 4845–4852 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Mishra, Handbook of encapsulation and controlled release, CRC Press,  2015 Search PubMed .
S. Yusa, M. Sugahara, T. Endo and Y. Morishima, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 5258–5265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Rajan and K. Matsumura, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2017, 38, 1700478 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Vinogradov, E. Batrakova and A. Kabanov, Colloids Surf., B, 1999, 16, 291–304 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ganta, A. Shi, S. K. Battina, M. Pyle, S. Rana, D. H. Hua, M. Tamura and D. Troyer, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2008, 8, 2334–2340 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Pinelli, F. Pizzetti, Ó. F. Ortolà, A. Marchetti, A. Rossetti, A. Sacchetti and F. Rossi, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2020, 21, 6621 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. D. Jochum and P. Theato, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 7468–7483 RSC .
K. Bauri, M. Nandi and P. De, Polym. Chem., 2018, 9, 1257–1287 RSC .
L. Johnson, D. M. Gray, E. Niezabitowska and T. O. McDonald, Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 7879–7896 RSC .
L. Hu, Q. Zhang, X. Li and M. J. Serpe, Mater. Horiz., 2019, 6, 1774–1793 RSC .
M. Wei, Y. Gao, X. Li and M. J. Serpe, Polym. Chem., 2017, 8, 127–143 RSC .
P. Schattling, F. D. Jochum and P. Theato, Polym. Chem., 2014, 5, 25–36 RSC .
T. Manouras and M. Vamvakaki, Polym. Chem., 2017, 8, 74–96 RSC .
H. Che and J. C. M. van Hest, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2016, 4, 4632–4647 RSC .
L. K. Rivera-Tarazona, Z. T. Campbell and T. H. Ware, Soft Matter, 2021, 17, 785–809 RSC .

          A. B. Lowe and C. L. McCormick, Stimuli responsive water-soluble and amphiphilic (co) polymers, ACS Publications,  2001 Search PubMed .
A. Schmalz, M. Hanisch, H. Schmalz and A. H. E. Müller, Polymer, 2010, 51, 1213–1217 CrossRef CAS .
Z. A. Jiménez and R. Yoshida, Macromolecules, 2015, 48, 4599–4606 CrossRef .
R. Kanto, R. Yonenuma, M. Yamamoto, H. Furusawa, S. Yano, M. Haruki and H. Mori, Langmuir, 2021, 37, 3001–3014 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. An, Q. Shi, W. Tang, C.-K. Tsung, C. J. Hawker and G. D. Stucky, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 14493–14499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Li, B. Kumru, N. Al Nakeeb, J. Willersinn and B. V. K. J. Schmidt, Polymers, 2018, 10, 576 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Le Bohec, M. Banère, S. Piogé, S. Pascual, L. Benyahia and L. Fontaine, Polym. Chem., 2016, 7, 6834–6842 RSC .
L. Mäkinen, D. Varadharajan, H. Tenhu and S. Hietala, Macromolecules, 2016, 49, 986–993 CrossRef .
H. Yoshimitsu, E. Korchagina, A. Kanazawa, S. Kanaoka, F. M. Winnik and S. Aoshima, Polym. Chem., 2016, 7, 2062–2068 RSC .
C. M. Papadakis, P. Müller-Buschbaum and A. Laschewsky, Langmuir, 2019, 35, 9660–9676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Schilli, M. Zhang, E. Rizzardo, S. H. Thang, Y. K. Chong, K. Edwards, G. Karlsson and A. H. E. Müller, Macromolecules, 2004, 37, 7861–7866 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, L. Shi, K. Wu and Y. An, Macromolecules, 2005, 38, 5743–5747 CrossRef CAS .
R. Hoogenboom, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 7978–7994 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Hoogenboom and H. Schlaad, Polym. Chem., 2017, 8, 24–40 RSC .
R. Takahashi, X.-P. Qiu, N. Xue, T. Sato, K. Terao and F. M. Winnik, Macromolecules, 2014, 47, 6900–6910 CrossRef CAS .
G. Delecourt, L. Plet, V. Bennevault and P. Guégan, ACS Appl. Polym. Mater., 2020, 2, 2696–2705 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Sayed, C. Lorthioir, P. Perrin and N. Sanson, Soft Matter, 2019, 15, 963–972 RSC .
A. Alexander, J. Khan, S. Saraf and S. Saraf, Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm., 2014, 88, 575–585 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Morimoto, R. Obeid, S. Yamane, F. M. Winnik and K. Akiyoshi, Soft Matter, 2009, 5, 1597–1600 RSC .
P. De, S. R. Gondi and B. S. Sumerlin, Biomacromolecules, 2008, 9, 1064–1070 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Convertine, B. S. Lokitz, Y. Vasileva, L. J. Myrick, C. W. Scales, A. B. Lowe and C. L. McCormick, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 1724–1730 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Maki, H. Mori and T. Endo, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2010, 211, 45–56 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhao, X. Zhuang, C. He, X. Chen and X. Jing, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2008, 29, 1810–1816 CrossRef CAS .
J. Rao, Z. Luo, Z. Ge, H. Liu and S. Liu, Biomacromolecules, 2007, 8, 3871–3878 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhou, K. Jiang, Y. Chen and S. Liu, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2008, 46, 6518–6531 CrossRef CAS .
A. E. Smith, X. Xu, S. E. Kirkland-York, D. A. Savin and C. L. McCormick, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 1210–1217 CrossRef CAS .
W. Pan, H. Chen, G. Wen, D. Giaouzi, S. Pispas and J. Zuo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 17150–17157 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, J. Li, W. Li and A. Zhang, Biomacromolecules, 2007, 8, 3557–3567 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. P. Johnson, Y. Il Jeong, J. V. John, C.-W. Chung, D. H. Kang, M. Selvaraj, H. Suh and I. Kim, Biomacromolecules, 2013, 14, 1434–1443 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Nuopponen and H. Tenhu, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 5352–5357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lee, E. J. Choi, I. Varga, P. M. Claesson, S.-H. Yun and C. Song, Polym. Chem., 2018, 9, 1032–1039 RSC .
J. Shen, C. Chen, W. Fu, L. Shi and Z. Li, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 6271–6278 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Viswanath, Y. Shen, A. N. Green, R. Tan, A. B. Greytak and B. C. Benicewicz, Macromolecules, 2014, 47, 8137–8144 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kocak, C. Tuncer and V. Bütün, Polym. Chem., 2017, 8, 144–176 RSC .
J. R. C. Costa, C. Correia, J. R. Gois, S. M. C. Silva, F. E. Antunes, J. Moniz, A. C. Serra and J. F. J. Coelho, Prog. Org. Coat., 2017, 104, 34–42 CrossRef CAS .
G. Weng, S. Thanneeru and J. He, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706526 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Sai, A. Erbas, A. Dannenhoffer, D. Huang, A. Weingarten, E. Siismets, K. Jang, K. Qu, L. C. Palmer and M. O. De La Cruz, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 158–168 RSC .
K. Skrabania, W. Li and A. Laschewsky, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2008, 209, 1389–1403 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Vishnevetskaya, V. Hildebrand, B.-J. Niebuur, I. Grillo, S. K. Filippov, A. Laschewsky, P. Müller-Buschbaum and C. M. Papadakis, Macromolecules, 2017, 50, 3985–3999 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Y.-K. Gong, K. Nakashima and Y. Murata, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 6727–6729 CrossRef CAS .
W. Tjandra, J. Yao, P. Ravi, K. C. Tam and A. Alamsjah, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 4865–4872 CrossRef CAS .
N. Baccile, J. Reboul, B. Blanc, B. Coq, P. Lacroix-Desmazes, M. In and C. Gérardin, Angew. Chem., 2008, 120, 8561–8565 CrossRef .
H. R. Sondjaja, T. A. Hatton and K. C. Tam, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 8501–8506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Rodríguez-Hernández and S. Lecommandoux, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 2026–2027 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Nakai, K. Ishihara, M. Kappl, S. Fujii, Y. Nakamura and S. Yusa, Polymers, 2017, 9, 49 CrossRef PubMed .
R. P. Johnson, S. Uthaman, J. V. John, H. R. Lee, S. J. Lee, H. Park, I.-K. Park, H. Suh and I. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 21770–21779 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Huang, J. Li, L. Liao, J. Li, L. Wu, C. Dong, P. Lai and D. Liu, Eur. Polym. J., 2012, 48, 696–704 CrossRef CAS .
W. Agut, A. Brûlet, D. Taton and S. Lecommandoux, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 11526–11533 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kishimura, S. Liamsuwan, H. Matsuda, W.-F. Dong, K. Osada, Y. Yamasaki and K. Kataoka, Soft Matter, 2009, 5, 529–532 RSC .
S. Katayose and K. Kataoka, Bioconjugate Chem., 1997, 8, 702–707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yokoyama, M. Miyauchi, N. Yamada, T. Okano, Y. Sakurai, K. Kataoka and S. Inoue, Cancer Res., 1990, 50, 1693–1700 CAS .
K. Praveen, S. Das, V. Dhaware, B. Pandey, B. Mondal and S. Sen Gupta, ACS Appl. Bio Mater., 2019, 2, 4162–4172 CrossRef CAS .
J. Reboul, T. Nugay, N. Anik, H. Cottet, V. Ponsinet, M. In, P. Lacroix-Desmazes and C. Gerardin, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 5836–5846 RSC .
P. Han, N. Ma, H. Ren, H. Xu, Z. Li, Z. Wang and X. Zhang, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 14414–14418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, P. Han, H. Xu, Z. Wang, X. Zhang and A. V. Kabanov, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 709–715 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Mountrichas and S. Pispas, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 4767–4774 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Ferreira, L. Piculell and W. Loh, Macromolecules, 2018, 51, 9915–9924 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xue, E. Foster, Y. Wang, S. Nayak, V. Cheng, V. W. Ngo, K. D. Pennell, C. W. Bielawski and K. P. Johnston, Energy Fuels, 2014, 28, 3655–3665 CrossRef CAS .
A. N. Kulak, R. Grimes, Y.-Y. Kim, M. Semsarilar, C. Anduix-Canto, O. Cespedes, S. P. Armes and F. C. Meldrum, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 7528–7536 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kakui and H. Kamiya, Energy Fuels, 2004, 18, 652–658 CrossRef CAS .
A. N. Kulak, M. Semsarilar, Y.-Y. Kim, J. Ihli, L. A. Fielding, O. Cespedes, S. P. Armes and F. C. Meldrum, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 738–743 RSC .
X. Liu, X. Sheng, Q. Yao, L. Zhao, Z. Xu and Y. Zhou, Energy Fuels, 2021, 6136–6143 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chang, Z. Cheng, B. Ren, R. Dong, J. Peng, S. Fu and Z. Tong, Soft Matter, 2015, 11, 7494–7501 RSC .
Y. Han, L. Xia, L. Zhu, S. Zhang, Z. Li and Y. Wang, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 15134–15140 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhao, R. Ma, J. Li, Y. Li, Y. An and L. Shi, Biomacromolecules, 2008, 9, 2601–2608 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhao, X. Wang, Y. Li, R. Ma, Y. An and L. Shi, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 6253–6260 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhao, A. Li, R. Xiang, L. Shen and L. Shi, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 8936–8943 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Rocha, J. Mendes, L. Durães, H. Maleki, A. Portugal, C. F. G. C. Geraldes, A. Serra and J. Coelho, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2014, 2, 1565–1575 RSC .
N. Rocha, D. P. Rodrigues, A. Gaspar, L. Durães, A. C. Serra and J. F. J. Coelho, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 24428–24432 RSC .
X. Liu, P. Ni, J. He and M. Zhang, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 4771–4781 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ma, C. Zhang, Y. Liu, C. Li, Y. Xu, B. Li, Y. Zhang, Y. An and L. Shi, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 21328–21335 RSC .
R. Guo, Q. Su, J. Zhang, A. Dong, C. Lin and J. Zhang, Biomacromolecules, 2017, 18, 1356–1364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hu, M. R. Whittaker, T. P. Davis and J. F. Quinn, ACS Macro Lett., 2015, 4, 236–241 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ohara, K. Nakai, S. Ahmed, K. Matsumura, K. Ishihara and S. Yusa, Langmuir, 2018, 35, 1249–1256 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Stepanek, P. Matejicek, K. Procházka, S. K. Filippov, B. Angelov, M. Slouf, G. Mountrichas and S. Pispas, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 5275–5281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Mountrichas and S. Pispas, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2007, 45, 5790–5799 CrossRef CAS .
J. Schumers, C. Fustin and J. Gohy, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2010, 31, 1588–1607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 4887–4895 RSC .
Y. Zhao, Macromolecules, 2012, 45, 3647–3657 CrossRef CAS .
F. D. Jochum and P. Theato, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 6717–6719 RSC .
Y. Wang, N. Ma, Z. Wang and X. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 2823–2826 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Grimm, S. C. Maßmann and F. H. Schacher, Polym. Chem., 2019, 10, 2674–2685 RSC .
F. Ercole, T. P. Davis and R. A. Evans, Polym. Chem., 2010, 1, 37–54 RSC .
A. Ben-Miled, A. Nabiyan, K. Wondraczek, F. H. Schacher and L. Wondraczek, Polymers, 2021, 13, 1633 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Boussiron, M. Le Bechec, L. Petrizza, J. Sabalot, S. Lacombe and M. Save, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2019, 40, 1800329 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Gota, S. Uchiyama, T. Yoshihara, S. Tobita and T. Ohwada, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2008, 112, 2829–2836 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hu, X. Zhang, D. Wang, X. Hu, T. Liu, G. Zhang and S. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 19030–19038 RSC .
R. I. S. Romao, Q. Ferreira, J. Morgado, J. M. G. Martinho and A. M. P. S. Goncalves da Silva, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 17165–17177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. I. S. Romao, M. Beija, M.-T. Charreyre, J. P. S. Farinha, A. M. P. S. Goncalves da Silva and J. M. G. Martinho, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 1807–1815 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. P. Kreuzer, T. Widmann, N. Aldosari, L. Bießmann, G. Mangiapia, V. Hildebrand, A. Laschewsky, C. M. Papadakis and P. Müller-Buschbaum, Macromolecules, 2020, 53, 9108–9121 CrossRef CAS .
H. Mori, E. Takahashi, A. Ishizuki and K. Nakabayashi, Macromolecules, 2013, 46, 6451–6465 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wei, G. Zhao, N. Lin, S. Guang and H. Xu, Org. Electron., 2020, 82, 105711 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ganta, H. Devalapally, A. Shahiwala and M. Amiji, J. Controlled Release, 2008, 126, 187–204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Klaikherd, C. Nagamani and S. Thayumanavan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 4830–4838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Uchiyama, N. Kawai, A. P. de Silva and K. Iwai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 3032–3033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hu, C. Li and S. Liu, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 724–729 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Liu and S. Liu, Anal. Chem., 2011, 83, 2775–2785 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. N. Kim, Z. Guo, W. Zhu, J. Yoon and H. Tian, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 79–93 RSC .
K. Zhou, Y. Wang, X. Huang, K. Luby-Phelps, B. D. Sumer and J. Gao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 6109–6114 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Guragain, B. P. Bastakoti, V. Malgras, K. Nakashima and Y. Yamauchi, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 13164–13174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhuang, M. R. Gordon, J. Ventura, L. Li and S. Thayumanavan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 7421–7435 RSC .
X. Wan, T. Liu and S. Liu, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 4082–4090 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Li and S. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 10716–10723 RSC .
X. Jiang, Z. Ge, J. Xu, H. Liu and S. Liu, Biomacromolecules, 2007, 8, 3184–3192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. He, B. Yan, L. Tremblay and Y. Zhao, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 436–444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yu, F. Tian, C. Wei and C. Wang, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2009, 47, 2763–2773 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wei, S. Perrier, S. Dehn, R. Ravarian and F. Dehghani, Soft Matter, 2012, 8, 9526–9528 RSC .
R. Banerjee and D. Dhara, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 4137–4146 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, S. Mizutani, S. Sato, A. Narumi, O. Haba, S. Kawaguchi, M. Kikuchi, T. Kakuchi and X. Shen, Polym. Chem., 2020, 11, 2346–2359 RSC .
M. Najafi, M. Habibi, R. Fokkink, W. E. Hennink and T. Vermonden, Soft Matter, 2021, 17, 2132–2141 RSC .
A. Monaco, V. P. Beyer, R. Napier and C. R. Becer, Biomacromolecules, 2020, 21, 3736–3744 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Piogé, T. N. Tran, T. G. McKenzie, S. Pascual, M. Ashokkumar, L. Fontaine and G. Qiao, Macromolecules, 2018, 51, 8862–8869 CrossRef .
J. Li, T. Wang, D. Wu, X. Zhang, J. Yan, S. Du, Y. Guo, J. Wang and A. Zhang, Biomacromolecules, 2008, 9, 2670–2676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, X. Jiang, Y. Zhang, Y. Li and S. Liu, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 9125–9132 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yang, Z. Yang, C. Mu, X. Fan, W. Tian and Q. Wang, Polym. Chem., 2015, 6, 3382–3386 RSC .
J. Han, B. An, Y. Wang, X. Bao, L. Ni, C. Li, L. Wang and X. Xie, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 250, 436–445 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, Y. Wang, W. Li, W. Zhi, Y. Liu, L. Ni and Y. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 40575–40584 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Nakayama, Y. Nishio and M. Watanabe, Langmuir, 2003, 19, 8542–8549 CrossRef CAS .
J.-X. Jian, Q. Liu, Z.-J. Li, F. Wang, X.-B. Li, C.-B. Li, B. Liu, Q.-Y. Meng, B. Chen and K. Feng, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1–9 Search PubMed .
L. Xie, J. Tian, Y. Ouyang, X. Guo, W. Zhang, U.-P. Apfel, W. Zhang and R. Cao, Angew. Chem., 2020, 15978–15982 CrossRef .

          F. Schué, Water soluble polymers: solution properties and applications, ed. Z. Amjad, Plenum Press, New York, 1998, pp. 259, ISBN 0-306-45931-0 Search PubMed.
B. L. Rivas, E. D. Pereira, M. Palencia and J. Sánchez, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2011, 36, 294–322 CrossRef CAS .
L. Nicole, C. Laberty-Robert, L. Rozes and C. Sanchez, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 6267–6292 RSC .
C. Sanchez, P. Belleville, M. Popall and L. Nicole, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 696–753 RSC .
G. Schottner, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 3422–3435 CrossRef CAS .
J. Pyun and K. Matyjaszewski, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 3436–3448 CrossRef CAS .
C. Sanchez, C. Boissiere, S. Cassaignon, C. Chanéac, O. Durupthy, M. Faustini, D. Grosso, C. Laberty-Robert, L. Nicole and D. Portehault, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 221–238 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Mir, L. A. Nagahara, T. Thundat, P. Mokarian-Tabari, H. Furukawa and A. Khosla, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2018, 165, B3137 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Dalsin, L. Lin, S. Tosatti, J. Vörös, M. Textor and P. B. Messersmith, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 640–646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. T. Huynh, P. de Souza and M. H. Stenzel, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 7888–7900 CrossRef CAS .
C. Gérardin, N. Sanson, F. Bouyer, F. Fajula, J. Putaux, M. Joanicot and T. Chopin, Angew. Chem., 2003, 115, 3809–3813 CrossRef .
G. Layrac, C. Gérardin, D. Tichit, S. Harrisson and M. Destarac, Polymer, 2015, 72, 292–300 CrossRef CAS .
N. Sanson, F. Bouyer, M. Destarac, M. In and C. Gérardin, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 3773–3782 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Tan, Z. Ye, E.-K. Jeong, X. Wu, D. L. Parker and Z.-R. Lu, Bioconjugate Chem., 2011, 22, 931–937 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. L. Villaraza, A. Bumb and M. W. Brechbiel, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 2921–2959 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-W. Shin, H. Sohn, Y.-H. Jeong and S.-M. Lee, Langmuir, 2019, 35, 6421–6428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. C. Pierre, M. J. Allen and P. Caravan, JBIC, J. Biol. Inorg. Chem., 2014, 19, 127–131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. S. Winalski, S. Shortkroff, R. V. Mulkern, E. Schneider and G. M. Rosen, Magn. Reson. Med., 2002, 48, 965–972 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, S. Laurent, L. Esser, L. Vander Elst, R. N. Muller, A. B. Lowe, C. Boyer and T. P. Davis, Polym. Chem., 2014, 5, 2592–2601 RSC .
T. C. Johnstone, K. Suntharalingam and S. J. Lippard, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 3436–3486 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Kelland, Nat. Rev. Cancer, 2007, 7, 573–584 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. van Zutphen and J. Reedijk, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2005, 249, 2845–2853 CrossRef CAS .
N. Nishiyama, M. Yokoyama, T. Aoyagi, T. Okano, Y. Sakurai and K. Kataoka, Langmuir, 1999, 15, 377–383 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-H. Jeong, T. Ahn, W. Yu and S.-M. Lee, ACS Macro Lett., 2021, 10, 492–497 CrossRef CAS .
V. Amendola, R. Pilot, M. Frasconi, O. M. Maragò and M. A. Iatì, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2017, 29, 203002 CrossRef PubMed .
Y.-C. Yeh, B. Creran and V. M. Rotello, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 1871–1880 RSC .
N. Tarannum and Y. K. Gautam, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 34926–34948 RSC .
E. Seo, S.-H. Lee, S. Lee, S.-H. Choi, C. J. Hawker and B.-S. Kim, Polym. Chem., 2017, 8, 4528–4537 RSC .
C. Falentin-Daudré, E. Faure, T. Svaldo-Lanero, F. Farina, C. Jérôme, C. Van De Weerdt, J. Martial, A.-S. Duwez and C. Detrembleur, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 7233–7241 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Charlot, V. Sciannaméa, S. Lenoir, E. Faure, R. Jérôme, C. Jérôme, C. Van De Weerdt, J. Martial, C. Archambeau and N. Willet, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 4117–4125 RSC .
S. Liu, J. V. M. Weaver, M. Save and S. P. Armes, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 8350–8357 CrossRef CAS .
B. P. Bastakoti, S. Guragain, S. Yusa and K. Nakashima, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 5938–5940 RSC .
Y. Lu, Y. Yin, Z.-Y. Li and Y. Xia, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 785–788 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cavaliere-Jaricot, M. Darbandi and T. Nann, Chem. Commun., 2007, 2031–2033 RSC .
C. Xue, X. Chen, S. J. Hurst and C. A. Mirkin, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 4071–4074 CrossRef CAS .
M. Iranmanesh and J. Hulliger, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 5925–5934 RSC .
T. Shao, N. Falcone and H.-B. Kraatz, ACS Omega, 2020, 5, 1312–1317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Ensafi, M. Jafari-Asl, A. Nabiyan and B. Rezaei, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163, H610–H617 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, P. Wang, J. Hou, J. Qian, C. Wang and Y. Ao, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2018, 8, 5406–5415 RSC .
J. Aldana, Y. A. Wang and X. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 8844–8850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. L. Rogach, N. Gaponik, J. M. Lupton, C. Bertoni, D. E. Gallardo, S. Dunn, N. Li Pira, M. Paderi, P. Repetto and S. G. Romanov, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 6538–6549 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Eychmüller, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 6514–6528 CrossRef .
A. Mills and S. Le Hunte, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A: Chem., 1997, 108, 1–35 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 1996, 271, 933–937 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhong, Y. Xi, S. Wu, Q. Liu, L. Zhao and S. Bai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 14863–14894 RSC .
X. Fang, T. Zhai, U. K. Gautam, L. Li, L. Wu, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2011, 56, 175–287 CrossRef CAS .
W. W. Yu, E. Chang, J. C. Falkner, J. Zhang, A. M. Al-Somali, C. M. Sayes, J. Johns, R. Drezek and V. L. Colvin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 2871–2879 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Tarasov, D. Houssein, M. Destarac, N. Marcotte, C. Gérardin and D. Tichit, New J. Chem., 2013, 37, 508–514 RSC .
Z. Zheng, M. Mounsamy, N. Lauth-de Viguerie, Y. Coppel, S. Harrisson, M. Destarac, C. Mingotaud, M. L. Kahn and J.-D. Marty, Polym. Chem., 2019, 10, 145–154 RSC .
Y. L. Wu, C. S. Lim, S. Fu, A. I. Y. Tok, H. M. Lau, F. Y. C. Boey and X. T. Zeng, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 215604 CrossRef .
M. Beija, R. Salvayre, N. Lauth-de Viguerie and J.-D. Marty, Trends Biotechnol., 2012, 30, 485–496 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Ensafi, E. Khoddami, A. Nabiyan and B. Rezaei, React. Funct. Polym., 2017, 116, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
R. Quiñones, K. Rodriguez and R. J. Iuliucci, Thin Solid Films, 2014, 565, 155–164 CrossRef .
K. H. Markiewicz, L. Seiler, I. Misztalewska, K. Winkler, S. Harrisson, A. Z. Wilczewska, M. Destarac and J.-D. Marty, Polym. Chem., 2016, 7, 6391–6399 RSC .
D. Runge and H. Cölfen, Z. Phys. Chem., 2018, 232, 1281–1293 CrossRef CAS .
E. Seo, T. Lee, K. T. Lee, H.-K. Song and B.-S. Kim, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 11598–11604 RSC .
Y. Tang, Q. Yang, T. Wu, L. Liu, Y. Ding and B. Yu, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 6324–6330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Rahman, M. R. Karim, H. F. Alharbi, B. Aldokhayel, T. Uzzaman and H. Zahir, Chem. – Asian J., 2021, 16, 902–921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Yuan, L. Yang, L. Hou, L. Shen, X. Zhang and X. W. D. Lou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7883–7887 RSC .
P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Nanosci. Technol., 2010, 320–329 Search PubMed .
C.-C. Hu, K.-H. Chang, M.-C. Lin and Y.-T. Wu, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2690–2695 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Liu, J. Duay, T. Lane and S. B. Lee, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 4309–4316 RSC .
D. Majumdar, T. Maiyalagan and Z. Jiang, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 4343–4372 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Zborowski and J. J. Chalmers, Magnetic cell separation, Elsevier,  2011 Search PubMed .
Y. Haik, V. Pai and C.-J. Chen, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 1999, 194, 254–261 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Dresco, V. S. Zaitsev, R. J. Gambino and B. Chu, Langmuir, 1999, 15, 1945–1951 CrossRef CAS .
B. Polyak and G. Friedman, Expert Opin. Drug Delivery, 2009, 6, 53–70 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, I. H. El-Sayed, W. Qian and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 2115–2120 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jun, Y.-M. Huh, J. Choi, J.-H. Lee, H.-T. Song, S. Kim, S. Yoon, K.-S. Kim, J.-S. Shin and J.-S. Suh, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 5732–5733 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Fuentes, C. Mateo, A. Rodriguez, M. Casqueiro, J. C. Tercero, H. H. Riese, R. Fernández-Lafuente and J. M. Guisán, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2006, 21, 1574–1580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. L. Kraitchman, A. W. Heldman, E. Atalar, L. C. Amado, B. J. Martin, M. F. Pittenger, J. M. Hare and J. W. M. Bulte, Circulation, 2003, 107, 2290–2293 CrossRef PubMed .
M. I. Papisov, A. Bogdanov Jr, B. Schaffer, N. Nossiff, T. Shen, R. Weissleder and T. J. Brady, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 1993, 122, 383–386 CrossRef CAS .
D. Pouliquen, H. Perroud, F. Calza, P. Jallet and J. J. Le Jeune, Magn. Reson. Med., 1992, 24, 75–84 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Biehl, M. Von der Lühe, S. Dutz and F. H. Schacher, Polymers, 2018, 10, 91 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Gillich, E. M. Benetti, E. Rakhmatullina, R. Konradi, W. Li, A. Zhang, A. D. Schlüter and M. Textor, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 10940–10950 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. T. A. Nguyen, M. Gauthier and O. Sandre, Nanomaterials, 2014, 4, 628–685 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Sondjaja, T. A. Hatton and M. K. C. Tam, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 2009, 321, 2393–2397 CrossRef CAS .
C. Boyer, M. R. Whittaker, V. Bulmus, J. Liu and T. P. Davis, NPG Asia Mater., 2010, 2, 23–30 CrossRef .
N. Zaquen, J. Yeow, T. Junkers, C. Boyer and P. B. Zetterlund, Macromolecules, 2018, 51, 5165–5172 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Basuki, A. Jacquemin, L. Esser, Y. Li, C. Boyer and T. P. Davis, Polym. Chem., 2014, 5, 2611–2620 RSC .
L. Sandiford, A. Phinikaridou, A. Protti, L. K. Meszaros, X. Cui, Y. Yan, G. Frodsham, P. A. Williamson, N. Gaddum and R. M. Botnar, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 500–512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Boyer, V. Bulmus, P. Priyanto, W. Y. Teoh, R. Amal and T. P. Davis, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 111–123 RSC .
J. S. Basuki, H. T. T. Duong, A. Macmillan, R. B. Erlich, L. Esser, M. C. Akerfeldt, R. M. Whan, M. Kavallaris, C. Boyer and T. P. Davis, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 10175–10189 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wan, Y. Zheng, Y. Liu, H. Yan and K. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 3424–3430 RSC .
M. Guo, Y. Yan, H. Zhang, H. Yan, Y. Cao, K. Liu, S. Wan, J. Huang and W. Yue, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 5104–5112 RSC .
K. Wormuth, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2001, 241, 366–377 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kumagai, Y. Imai, T. Nakamura, Y. Yamasaki, M. Sekino, S. Ueno, K. Hanaoka, K. Kikuchi, T. Nagano and E. Kaneko, Colloids Surf., B, 2007, 56, 174–181 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Y. Yoon, C. Kotsmar, D. R. Ingram, C. Huh, S. L. Bryant, T. E. Milner and K. P. Johnston, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 10962–10969 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Papaphilippou, L. Loizou, N. C. Popa, A. Han, L. Vekas, A. Odysseos and T. Krasia-Christoforou, Biomacromolecules, 2009, 10, 2662–2671 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ujiie, N. Kanayama, K. Asai, M. Kishimoto, Y. Ohara, Y. Akashi, K. Yamada, S. Hashimoto, T. Oda and N. Ohkohchi, Colloids Surf., B, 2011, 88, 771–778 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Li and J. Huang, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2008, 109, 501–507 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, S. Xu and E. Kumacheva, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 7908–7914 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Linot, J. Poly, J. Boucard, D. Pouliquen, S. Nedellec, P. Hulin, N. Marec, P. Arosio, A. Lascialfari and A. Guerrini, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 14242–14257 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-J. Yuan, S. P. Armes, Y. Takabayashi, K. Prassides, C. A. P. Leite, F. Galembeck and A. L. Lewis, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 10989–10993 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Luo, J. Xu, Y. Zhang, S. Liu and C. Wu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 22159–22166 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Eckardt, C. Pietsch, O. Zumann, M. von der Lühe, D. S. Brauer and F. H. Schacher, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2016, 37, 337–342 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Li, Y. Cui, K. Wang, Q. He, X. Yan and J. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 3134–3140 CrossRef CAS .
F. Kousar, J. Malmström, S. Swift, J. Ross, J. Perera and S. C. Moratti, ACS Appl. Polym. Mater., 2021, 2785–2801 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wu, U. Glebe and A. Böker, Polym. Chem., 2015, 6, 5143–5184 RSC .
M. A. Macchione, C. Biglione and M. Strumia, Polymers, 2018, 10, 527 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Z. Khaled, A. Cevenini, I. K. Yazdi, A. Parodi, M. Evangelopoulos, C. Corbo, S. Scaria, Y. Hu, S. G. Haddix and B. Corradetti, Biomaterials, 2016, 87, 57–68 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-D. Vo, A. Schmid, S. P. Armes, K. Sakai and S. Biggs, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 408–413 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Banerjee, R. C. Pangule and R. S. Kane, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 690–718 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wei, D. B. Ravn, L. Gram and P. Kingshott, Colloids Surf., B, 2003, 32, 275–291 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Statz, R. J. Meagher, A. E. Barron and P. B. Messersmith, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 7972–7973 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Dalsin and P. B. Messersmith, Mater. Today, 2005, 8, 38–46 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jiang and Z. Cao, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 920–932 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Giamblanco, G. Marletta, A. Graillot, N. Bia, C. Loubat and J.-F. Berret, ACS Omega, 2017, 2, 1309–1320 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Torrisi, A. Graillot, L. Vitorazi, Q. Crouzet, G. Marletta, C. Loubat and J.-F. Berret, Biomacromolecules, 2014, 15, 3171–3179 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kumar, Y. L. Dory, M. Lepage and Y. Zhao, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 7385–7393 CrossRef CAS .
S. Thanneeru, N. Milazzo, A. Lopes, Z. Wei, A. M. Angeles-Boza and J. He, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 4252–4256 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Uchiyama, Y. Matsumura, A. P. de Silva and K. Iwai, Anal. Chem., 2004, 76, 1793–1798 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T.-L. Nghiem, D. Coban, S. Tjaberings and A. H. Gröschel, Polymers, 2020, 12, 2190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. E. Bergbreiter, J. Tian and C. Hongfa, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 530–582 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. I. Dzhardimalieva, A. K. Zharmagambetova, S. E. Kudaibergenov and I. E. Uflyand, Kinet. Catal., 2020, 61, 198–223 CrossRef CAS .
V. S. Vyas, V. W. Lau and B. V. Lotsch, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 5191–5204 CrossRef CAS .
Z. B. Shifrina, V. G. Matveeva and L. M. Bronstein, Chem. Rev., 2020, 1350–1396 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. L. Wadsworth, D. Khusnutdinova and G. F. Moore, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 21654–21665 RSC .
C. Li, Q. Li, Y. V. Kaneti, D. Hou, Y. Yamauchi and Y. Mai, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 4681–4736 RSC .
Z. Ge, D. Xie, D. Chen, X. Jiang, Y. Zhang, H. Liu and S. Liu, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 3538–3546 CrossRef CAS .
K. O. Sebakhy, S. Kessel and M. J. Monteiro, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 9598 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yu, A. Herberg and D. Kuckling, Eur. Polym. J., 2019, 120, 109207 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yu, A. Herberg and D. Kuckling, Polymers, 2020, 12, 2265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Perez-Baena, F. Barroso-Bujans, U. Gasser, A. Arbe, A. J. Moreno, J. Colmenero and J. A. Pomposo, ACS Macro Lett., 2013, 2, 775–779 CrossRef CAS .
B. L. Moore, A. Lu, D. A. Longbottom and R. K. O’Reilly, Polym. Chem., 2013, 4, 2304–2312 RSC .
K. A. Ahrendt, C. J. Borths and D. W. C. MacMillan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 4243–4244 CrossRef CAS .
W. S. Jen, J. J. M. Wiener and D. W. C. MacMillan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 9874–9875 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Austin and D. W. C. MacMillan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 1172–1173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liu and A. Corma, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 4981–5079 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Duan, Y. Yang, J. Lü and C. Lü, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 12487–12496 RSC .
S. Sugihara, M. Sudo and Y. Maeda, Langmuir, 2018, 35, 1346–1356 CrossRef PubMed .
M. B. Gawande, A. Goswami, T. Asefa, H. Guo, A. V. Biradar, D.-L. Peng, R. Zboril and R. S. Varma, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 7540–7590 RSC .
C. Gao, F. Lyu and Y. Yin, Chem. Rev., 2021, 121, 834–881 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hu and S. Liu, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 8315–8330 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cichosz, A. Masek and M. Zaborski, Polym. Test., 2018, 67, 342–348 CrossRef CAS .
D. T. McQuade, A. E. Pullen and T. M. Swager, Chem. Rev., 2000, 100, 2537–2574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Peters, Smart Mater. Struct., 2010, 20, 13002 CrossRef .
S. Uchiyama, Y. Matsumura, A. P. de Silva and K. Iwai, Anal. Chem., 2003, 75, 5926–5935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Onoda, S. Uchiyama and T. Ohwada, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 9651–9657 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shiraishi, R. Miyamoto and T. Hirai, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A: Chem., 2008, 200, 432–437 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shiraishi, R. Miyamoto, X. Zhang and T. Hirai, Org. Lett., 2007, 9, 3921–3924 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Liu, J. Hu, G. Zhang and S. Liu, Bioconjugate Chem., 2015, 26, 1328–1338 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhou, L. Wang, Z. Wei, G. Weng and J. He, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1903543 CrossRef .
H.-J. Kim and H. Lee, Polym. Chem., 2019, 10, 4017–4024 RSC .
L. Li, Z. Yang and X. Chen, Acc. Chem. Res., 2020, 53, 2044–2054 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wu, T. Zhou, M. Aiello and S. Zhou, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 4905–4913 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, Z. T. Bennett, B. D. Sumer and J. Gao, Acc. Chem. Res., 2020, 53, 2546–2557 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Sun, A. M. Scharff-Poulsen, H. Gu and K. Almdal, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 3381–3384 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yin, X. Guan, D. Wang and S. Liu, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 11367–11374 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Liu, J. Hu, J. Yin, Y. Zhang, C. Li and S. Liu, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 3439–3446 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yin, C. Li, D. Wang and S. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2010, 114, 12213–12220 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wu, T. Zhou, J. Shen and S. Zhou, Chem. Commun., 2009, 4390–4392 RSC .
C. Gota, K. Okabe, T. Funatsu, Y. Harada and S. Uchiyama, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 2766–2767 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hu, M. R. Whittaker, J. F. Quinn and T. P. Davis, Macromolecules, 2016, 49, 2741–2749 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Afshin Nabiyan
	Afshin Nabiyan received his BSc and MSc degrees in pure chemistry and organic chemistry at Isfahan University of Technology (Iran) in 2015. Later, he obtained his PhD degree under the supervision of Felix. H. Schacher at Friedrich-Schiller-Universität Jena (Germany) in 2021. In late 2021, he was awarded the CataLight Young Scientist Support, and recently, he became a postdoctoral researcher at the group of Felix. H. Schacher. His research interests mainly include the synthesis and self-assembly of water-soluble (co)polymers and hybrid materials to construct hierarchical structures for sensing and photocatalysis.

Johannes B. Max
	Johannes B. Max received his MSc degree at the university of Freiburg im Breisgau (Germany) in 2017, where his bachelor and master theses were supervised by Rolf Mülhaupt. After an internship at Covestro AG in Leverkusen, he started his PhD studies in the work group of Felix H. Schacher in Jena (Germany). Recently, he is working as a postdoctoral researcher at the Otto Schott Institute of Materials Research. Johannes’ research interests include the synthesis of smart and stimuli-responsive polymers via different routes, their self-assembly, utilization in hybrid materials and applications, e.g., sensors and photocatalysis.

Felix H. Schacher
	Felix H. Schacher studied chemistry at the Universities of Bayreuth (Germany) and Lund (Sweden) and obtained his diploma in 2006. After his PhD under the supervision of Axel H. E. Müller in 2009, he joined the group of Ian Manners at the University of Bristol as DAAD postdoctoral fellow. In 2010 he was appointed Juniorprofessor at the Friedrich-Schiller-Universität Jena and became Full Professor at this institution in 2015. He has been awarded the Dr-Hermann-Schnell-Fellowship in 2013 and the Carl-Duisberg Memorial Award of the GDCh in 2020. His scientific interests include controlled/living polymerization techniques, block copolymers, polyelectrolytes, and polyampholytes – all in the context of using (directed) self-assembly processes for material design in the fields of membranes, hybrid materials, and biomedicine.

 	Fig. 1  General functions of DHCs, being divided in their interaction with metal ions or molecules (A), nanoparticles (NPs) and surfaces (B), and the response to an external trigger (C).	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic depiction of representative DHC architectures, with the individual segments in blue and red: star,39 miktoarm star,37 AB4 miktoarm,59 graft,46 hyperbranched,38 and macrocyclic.8 Multi-hydrophilic copolymers (MHCs) containing additional hydrophilic segments, depicted in green and yellow, for ABC miktoarm,98 A2(BC)2 miktoarm,67 and centipede-shaped copolymers.62	 



Grafting onto

PDha-g-PEG	Grafting of epoxides and Michael-acceptors	Multi-responsive application as a template, dispersant, in photocatalysis and sensing	
15, 46, 48, 61 and 63

PDha-g-NIPAAm
PDha-g-PAA
Gelatine-g-PEG	Grafting of activated PEG	Formation of nanogels with curcumin drug delivery in cancer treatment	
18

poly(acetal)hydrolysed-g-PEG	Grafting of mPEG-NH2 on poly(acetal), subsequent hydrolysis	Interaction with inorganic crystals	
76

PNIPAAm-g-PEG	Grafting of PEG-NH2 onto P(NIPAAm-co-glycidyl methacrylate) or P(NIPAAm-co-N-acryloylsuccinimide)	Stable spherical aggregates above LCST	
77 and 78

PAA-g-PEO	Grafting of mPEG-NH2 (using ETC/HOBt)	Encapsulating and delivering cationic or hydrogen-accepting agrochemicals or drugs	
84

P(AMPSNa-co-ANa)-g-PNIPAAm	Grafting of PNIPAAm-NH2/PDMAM-NH2	Complexation of surfactants, tunable aggregation behavior	
85

P(AMPSNa-co-ANa)-g-PNIPAAm-g-PDMAM



Grafting from

P(L-Lysine)-g-P(sulfobetaine)	(1) Grafting a RAFT CTA onto the backbone	Suppression of protein aggregation and protein release	
82

(2) RAFT polymerisation of the sulfobetaine
PSBM-g-P(OEGMA-co-DEGMA)	(1) FRP of SBM and BIHPM (ATRP initiator containing monomer)	Zwitterionic backbone temperature and salt response tunable self-assembly	
75

(2) ATRP copolymerisation of OGMA and DEGMA
PHEA-g-PDMAEA	Initiator functionalised monomer	Self-catalysed hydrolysis of PDMAEA; micelle formation in the organic phase	
43

(1) RAFT
(2) SET-LRP
(3) Quaternisation
PHEA-g-PNIPAAm	Sequential RAFT and SET-LRP starting from trifunctional HECPMA	Thermo-response	
45

PEO-g-PDMAEMA	(1) Functionalisation of P(EO-co-glycidol) with the initiator	Brush-like structure nanoelectronics, sensing, enhanced oil recovery, and drug and gene delivery systems	
83

(2) ATRP of DMAEMA
PPEGMEA-g-PMAA and PPEGMEA-g-PDEAEMA	(1) ATRP	Biomedicine, e.g., drug carrier	
79 and 80

(2) Functionalisation with an initiator
(3) ATRP
(4) Hydrolysis
PMA-g-PEG/PDMA	Initiator-functionalised monomer	Coating material protein resistant	
86

(1) RAFT
(2) ATRP

Grafting through

PNIPAAm-g-PEO	FRP of PNIPAAm and PEO macromonomers	Aggregation above the LCST	
81


 	Fig. 3  PDha-based graft copolymers derived via an aza-Michael addition and the ring-opening of epoxides in a grafting-onto approach. The amino moieties (red) were exploited as reactive handles.15,46,48,61,63	 

 	Fig. 4  Synthesis of PHAEA-g-PDMAEA and PPEGMA-g-PDMAEMA via the grafting-onto approach and the smart combination of monomer or polymer modification and controlled polymerisation techniques (RAFT, SET-LRP and ATRP), corresponding to literature reports.43,80	 




	PNIPAAm-b-PDMA or PHEAm (3 arms)	
13, 37, 39, 42, 69 and 90–92

PEO-b-PEtOx (8 arms)
P(OEGA)-b-PAA (9 arms)
PAA-b-P(MEA-co-OEGA480) (21 arms)
P4VP-b-PAA (21 arms)
PNIPAAm-b-PAA (21 arms)
(PDMAEMA-b-POEGMA)n (n arms)


	(PDMAEMA)n(POEGMAm)m (n and m = 24)	
37



	PDMAEMA-star-PMAA (34, 35, 38 arms)	
89



	PDEA4-b-poly(propylene oxide)-b-PDEA4	
58



	PNIPAAm-b-PDEA4	
59



	PNIPAAm-b-PAA3	
93

PAA-b-PNIPAAm3


	PDEA-b-PSEMA2	
31, 41 and 96

PPO/PEO (Jeffamine)-b-…P GMA, HEMA, HEA, MEMA, MPC, DEA, DMA
PZLL-b-(PBLG)2


	(PNIPAAm)2-(PAA)2	
93



	PEG(-b-PMAA)-b-PDEA	
97 and 98

PEG(-b-PDEA)-b-PNIPAAm


	(PNIPAAm)2-(PNVP-b-PAA)2	
67

(PNIPAAm-b-PAA)2-(PNVP)2


	(PNIPAM-b-PAA)2-(PVP)2	
93–95

(PNIPAM)2-(PVP-b-PAA)2

 	Fig. 5  Four-arm initiator-containing sites for ATRP and RAFT polymerisation (left). It can contain one or three of each moiety, and allows the combination of both methods.40 Trifunctional initiators allow for the post-polymerisation modification of the hydroxyl groups for additional ATRPs.41	 

 	Fig. 6  (A) Schematic depiction of the self-assembly of a dual pH-responsive P4VP-b-PAA star block copolymer at different pH-values. Adopted with permission from ref. 42. Copyright © 2020 American Chemical Society. (B) Cooperative self-assembly of (PNIPAAm-b-PAA)2-(PVP)2 in NaOH solution. Here, dendritic fractal patterns were formed. Adapted from ref. 93. with permission of Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 7  (A) Schematic depiction of the influence of the micellar geometry on the self-association and drug release of DHCs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 51. Copyright © 2018 American Chemical Society and (B) schematic depiction of linear, branched, and dendritic DHCs, and the structural elements of the corresponding segments. Linear hyperbranched DHCs typically consist of a PEG segment and hyperbranched glycerol17,38 or PEI.60 Dendritic DHCs usually consist of a HPAMAM core and either PEG103–106 or PLL side-chains.107	 

 	Fig. 8  (A) DLS measurements (a) and TEM micrographs (b) of the crosslinked double hydrophilic vesicles described by Sarkar et al.66 Adapted from ref. 66. with permission of Royal Society of Chemistry. (B) Preparation of a nanogel by the photo-induced crosslinking of the coumarin containing core.118 Reprinted with permission from ref. 118. Copyright © 2009 American Chemical Society.	 

(Co)polymers containing PNIPAAm units


	Room temperature synthesis of PNIPAAm	
138, 153 and 154

Temperature-induced self-assembly
Nanostructured hydrogels
Dual thermo-responsive


	Formation of polyplex micelles	
137 and 155


	Thermo- and pH-responsive


	Thermo- and pH-responsive	
156



	Coil-to-helix transitions based on polypeptide	
157


	Thermo- and pH-responsive


	Gold nanoparticle incorporated core and shell	
158


	Thermo- and pH-responsive


	Schizophrenic micelles	
24


	Dual thermo-responsive


	“Schizophrenic” self-assembly: from micelles to vesicles	
159


	Thermo- and pH-responsive


	Co-assembly of double-hydrophilic block copolymer and interpolyelectrolyte complex	
88


	Thermo- and pH-responsive


	Triple hydrophilic UCST–LCST block Copolymers	
141


	Thermo- and pH-responsive


	Formation of circular micelles with a sunflower-like structure	
160


	Dual thermo-responsive


	Tunable morphology	
161


	Thermo- and pH-responsive


	Controlled drug delivery	
162


	Thermo- and pH-responsive


	Preparation and stabilisation of AuNPs	
163


	Thermo- and pH-responsive


	Stimuli-responsive microgels and their assembly through metal–ligand interactions	
164


	Thermo- and metal ion-responsive


	Polyampholytic graft copolymers	
15


	Self-assembly in solution

	Triple thermo-, pH- and metal ion-responsive


(Co)polymers based on other thermoresponsive units


	Self-assembly in solution	
33

Thermo- and metal ion-responsive


	Step-wise self-assembly	
165

Thermo-responsive


	Functionalisation of quantum dots	
166

Thermo-responsive


Non-linear thermoresponsive (co)polymers


	Non-linear multi-responsive, multi-hydrophilic block copolymers	
67 and 94

Thermo- and pH-responsive


	Multi-hydrophilic block copolymers	
93 and 95

Thermo- and pH-responsive


	Pentablock star-shaped polymers	
92

Thermo-responsive

 	Fig. 9  (A) Simplified model of the self-assembly of PNIPAAm-b-PSPP block copolymers with temperature.24 Reprinted with permission from ref. 24. Copyright © 2002 American Chemical Society and (B) illustration of the aggregate formation for PNIPAAm-b-PAA in aqueous solution in dependence of pH and temperature. Reprinted with permission from ref. 144. Copyright © 2002 American Chemical Society.	 

pH-Responsive DHCs carrying carboxylic acid units


	Self-assembly/disassembly of giant vesicles at biologically-relevant pH, ion complexation, templates	
23, 176 and 186–188

Photocontrolled self-assembly of supramolecular polymer nanocontainers
Oxidation-responsive micelles based on a selenium-containing polymeric superamphiphiles
pH- and metal ion-responsive


	Tunable self-assembly	
189

pH-Responsive


	Encapsulation and release of metalloporphyrins	
27 and 168

Dispersion of TiO2
Dual pH-responsive


	Hydration-dependent hierarchical structures	
190

pH-Responsive


	Coating of iron oxide NPs to provide colloidal stability	
191 and 192

Template for Zinc Oxide/Magnetite iron oxide nanoparticles
pH-Responsive


	Dispersant for coal	
193 and 194

Template for magnetite iron oxide nanoparticles
pH-Responsive


	Application in oil recovery	
195

Multi-acidic
pH-Responsive


	Well-defined AB2 Y-shaped miktoarm star polypeptide	
96

Dual pH-Responsive superamphiphiles
pH-Responsive


	Voltage-responsive superamphiphiles	
196


	pH-Responsive	



	Platform to construct tunable and functional super-amphiphilic aggregates	
197

pH-Responsive
pH-Responsive DHCs carrying non-carboxylic acid units


	Micellisation induced by porphyrin	
198–202

Template
pH-Responsive


	Template for superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles	
201 and 202

pH-Responsive


	Polyphosphoester-based responsive DHBC	
203

pH-Responsive


	Iminoboronate-based dual-responsive micelles	
204

pH-Responsive


	Mixed polyplex micelles	
137

Dual pH-responsive


	Multi-responsive hydrogels	
205

Glucose and pH-responsive


	Spectrophotometric determination of fluoride	
206

pH-Responsive


	Formation of polyion complex vesicles	
207

pH-Responsive


	Polyelectrolyte–surfactant complexes	
208 and 209

Solubilisation of hydrophobic compounds (pyrene)
pH-Responsive

 	Fig. 10  (A) Polymeric micelle with crosslinked ionic core. Reprinted with permission from ref. 113. Copyright © 2005 American Chemical Society. (B) Schematic formation and degradation of vesicles formed from PEO-b-PAA. Adapted with permission from ref. 23. Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry, and (C) schematic illustration for structuring silica using induced micelles of DHCs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 175. Copyright © 2008 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.	 

 	Fig. 11  (A) Schematic illustration of polyion complex vesicle formation from charged diblock copolymers. Adapted with permission from ref. 178. Copyright 2017, Molecular Diversity Preservation International, (B) schematic representation of the self-assembly into vesicles of the diblock copolymer PGA-b-PLys.177 Reprinted with permission from ref. 177. Copyright © 2005 American Chemical Society, and (C) supramolecular self-assembly between double hydrophilic PEG-b-poly(L-homoarginine) and carboxylate-containing amphiphiles leading to nanoparticle formation.185 Reprinted with permission from ref. 185. Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society.	 


Light-responsive DHCs with chromophores as end-group



	Schizophrenic behaviour	
221 and 222

Dye end-group
Light signal and thermo-responsive


	Dye end-group	
223

Light- and thermo-responsive


	Multi-responsive microgels	
164

Light-, metal ion- and thermo-responsive



Light-responsive DHCs with chromophores as separate comonomer



	Temperature-dependent fluorescence lifetime	
219

Light- and thermo-responsive


	Shell material for photoactive latex particles through polymerisation-induced self-assembly	
218

Production of singlet oxygen
Light- and pH-Responsive


	Probes for ratiometric fluorescent and chiroptical F− sensors	
224

Light-responsive


	Sensor for sensitive detection and bioimaging of Zn2+ and Pb2+	
225

Light-, metal ion- and thermo-responsive

 	Fig. 12  Schematic illustration for the synthesis of photoactive latex particles and films.218 Reprinted with permission from ref. 218. © 2018 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.	 



	Thermo-responsive	
242

Statistical, diblock and triblock copolymers
Tunable aggregation behavior


	Temperature-dependent self-assembly	
243

Crosslinking possible
Thermo-responsive


	Multi-arm star-shaped glycopolymers	
244

Sugars as binding sites
Thermo-responsive


	Triple hydrophilic block copolymer with dual LCST and temperature-induced self-assembly	
240

Thermo-responsive


	Tunable self-assembly	
241

Thermo-responsive


	Sono-RAFT polymerisation-induced self-assembly	
245

thermo-responsive


	Sequence-controlled multi-block copolymerization	
35

Dual thermo-responsive


	BAB triblock copolymer	
171

Tunable aggregation behavior
Thermo-responsive


	Dual pH- and thermo-responsive	
246



	Complexation of a cationic surfactant	
85

pH- and thermo-responsive


	pH- and thermo-responsive	
247



	pH- and thermo-responsive	
237



	pH- and thermo-responsive	
248



	Hg2+-Reactive probes	
229

Light-, metal ion- and thermo-responsive


	Ratiometric fluorescent detection of Hg2+ ions	
235

Crosslinking possible
Light-, metal ion- and thermo-responsive


	Fluorescence chemosensor	
249

Metal ion and thermo-responsive


	Dynamic hydrogel	
140

Metal ion- and thermo-responsive


	Detection of Hg2+ ions modulated by morphological changes	
250

Metal ion- and thermo-responsive

 	Fig. 13  (A) Schizophrenic micellisation of a PDEA-b-PDMA-b-PNIPAM triblock terpolymer in aqueous solution.237 Adapted with permission from ref. 237. Copyright © 2007 American Chemical Society. (B) Schematic illustration of the preparation of both core- and shell-crosslinked nanogel particles and their thermal transitions in aqueous solution.238 Adopted with permission from ref. 238. Copyright © 2011 American Chemical Society, and (C) schematic illustration of micelles and vesicles formed from PEG-b-PNIPAAm-b-P(NIPAAm-co-HEAAm) triblock copolymer,240 reprinted from ref. 240 with permission of Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 14  (A) Construction of paramagnetic manganese-chelated polymeric nanoparticles using a pyrene-end-modified double hydrophilic block copolymer. Reprinted with permission from ref. 269. Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society.269 (B) Self-assembly of double hydrophilic block copolymers triggered by the presence of gadolinium ions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 19. Copyright © 2016 American Chemical Society.19 (C) Schematic illustration of the self-assembly process for the formation of PtII-polymeric NPs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 51. Copyright © 2018 American Chemical Society.,51 and (D) conjugation of Pt drugs and the formation of micelles, and the release of platinum from polymeric platinum micelles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 263. Copyright © 2011 American Chemical Society.263	 

 	Fig. 15  Schematic depiction of the aggregation of PiPrOx-b-PAGA by the addition of metal ions (A), hydrodynamic radii for different PiPrOx-b-PAGA (1.0 mg mL−1) block copolymers after the addition of varying amounts of Cu2+ (B), and Rh for the aggregates formed by PiPrOx80-b-PAGA117(1.0 mg mL−1) and various metal ions at different ratios (C).33 Reprinted with permission from ref. 33. Copyright © 2020 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  (A) Preparation of NPs and bimetallic alloys in the presence of PDha-g-PEG graft copolymers by the reduction of metal-containing salts using a reducing agent, heat, or UV-light. Adapted with permission from ref. 46. Copyright © 2020 American Chemical Society. (B) Strategy for the formation of positively charged micelles (PSS/P(mDOPA)-co-P(DMAEMA+)) and positively charged silver-loaded micelles (PSS/P(mDOPA)-co-P(DMAEMA+)/Ag0/AgCl).282 Adopted with permission from ref. 282. Copyright © 2012 American Chemical Society. (C) Schematic representation of AuNP formation via DHBC templates.281 Adapted from ref. 281 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, and (D) schematic diagram of the synthesis of Ag@SiO2 core–shell nanoparticles.285 Adapted from ref. 285 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 17  (A) Scheme showing the formation of ZnS nanoparticles with the use of a copolymer PAA-b-PAM.301 Adapted from ref. 301 with permission of Royal Society of Chemistry. (B) Scheme of CdSe quantum dots stabilised by a DHBC.308 (C) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of RuO2 nanoparticles using a double hydrophilic block copolymer as a template.309 Adapted from ref. 309 with permission of Royal Society of Chemistry, and (D) schematic representation of the synthesis of magnetite nanoparticles stabilised with the diblock copolymer PMAA23-b-PStSNa200, and their occlusion within calcite single crystals.194 Adapted from ref. 194. with permission of Royal Society of Chemistry.	 



	
337



	
338



	
330 and 339



	
340



	
341



	
333



	
342



	
343



	
344



	
345


 	Fig. 18  (A) Superparamagnetic Fe3O4/polymer nanocomposites with PPEGMEA-g-PMAA densely grafted double hydrophilic copolymers via the grafting-through strategy. Adapted from ref. 79. with permission of Royal Society of Chemistry and (B) (1) poly(vinyl phosphonic acid)-based double hydrophilic block copolymers for the stabilisation of iron oxide nanoparticles. Adapted with permission from ref. 347. Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society.347 (2) Synthesis of biocompatible poly[2-(methacryloyloxy)ethyl phosphorylcholine]-coated magnetite NPs.307 Adapted from ref. 307 with permission of Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 19  (A) (1) Synthesis of shell crosslinked core–shell gold nanoparticles with a gold core, a crosslinked PDMA inner shell, and a PEO outer corona.348 Adopted with permission from ref. 348. Copyright © 2005 American Chemical Society. (2) Schematic illustration for the fabrication of Au@copolymer nanostructures.350 (B) SiO2@P(EtOx-stat-EI) core–shell hybrid NPs and (B) cryo-TEM image of SiO2@P(EtOx-stat-EI)20 after the in situ generation of AuNPs.349 Adapted with permission from ref. 349. Copyright 2015. Wiley-VCH. (C) Chemical structure of the ethylene glycol dendrons covalently coupled to surface-active oligo-catechol anchors.262,328 Adopted with permission from ref. 328 and 262. Copyright © 2005 and 2011 American Chemical Society. (D) Schematic illustration of protein-resistant behaviour of poly(ethylene glycol)-containing phosphonate/phosphate units on stainless steel surfaces.351 Reprinted with permission from ref. 351. Copyright © 2021 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 20  (A) Schematic illustration of the catalysis mechanism using PNIPAM-b-PVim micelles as catalytic nanoreactors.373 Reprinted from ref. 373. Copyright © 2007, American Chemical Society. (B) Synthesis illustration of P(DMA-co-GMADPA) and the corresponding oxidation reactions used in catalysis.364 (C) Designer thermo-responsive nanoreactors for the templated control radical polymerization of styrene to obtain monodisperse nanoparticles with independent control over particle size and molecular weight.374 Reprinted from ref. 374. Copyright © 2010, American Chemical Society, and (D) photocatalytically-active block copolymer hybrid micelles from PiPrOx-b-PAGA.12 Reprinted with permission from ref. 12, © 2020 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 21  (A) Schematic depiction of the preparation and catalytic application of the PdNPs@BPrGO nanocatalyst.383 Reprinted from ref. 383 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry. (B) In situ synthesis and thermo-responsiveness of PNIPAM-capped AuNPs in the absence of free linear PNIPAM chains.90 Reprinted with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2019. Wiley-VCH, (C) structure depiction of PMPC-b-PDMA-b-PHPMA and corresponding spheres, worms, jellyfish, and vesicles that can be directly prepared, depending on either the total solids concentration or the mean degree of polymerisation of the PHPMA block and reduction of p-NP to p-AP. Adapted with permission from ref. 384. Copyright © 2018 American Chemical Society and (D) schematic illustration of polyampholytic graft copolymer@TiO2 as matrix for hydrogen production. Adopted with permission from ref. 61. Copyright 2020. Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 22  (A) Thermo-responsive P(DMAPAM-co-NTBAM-co-DBDAE) copolymer in aqueous solution serves as a fluorescent molecular thermometer. (1) Fluorescence intensity changes upon heating and cooling cycles. Inset: Fluorescence spectra. (2) Visual and fluorescent images at temperatures below and above the LCST. Adapted from ref. 228. Copyright © 2004, American Chemical Society. (B) Scheme showing the chemical structures of P(DMA290-co-IDHPMA96) and Eu3+ ions, and the corresponding illustration of fluorescence ON/OFF and sol–gel transition driven by dynamic metal–ligand coordination.169,396 (C) Triple-responsive graft copolymer based on PDha-g-NIPAAm,15 and (D) colorimetric detection of mercury(II) ions via the formation of the strongly electron-withdrawing cyanide groups promoted by mercury(II) ions.397 Reprinted from ref. 397 with permission of Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 23  (A) Synthetic scheme depicting the preparation of Cu2+-sensing P(NIPAM-co-PyAM-co-DAEAM) microgels. Adapted with permission from ref. 402. Copyright © 2009 American Chemical Society. (B) Schematic representation of the chemical structure transitions of a thermo-responsive PEG-b-P(NIPAM-co-p-NAPMA) diblock copolymer in the presence of NO followed by UV irradiation.407	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
