Electrocatalytic conversion of CO 2 to produce solar fuels in electrolyte or electrolyte-less configurations of PEC cells  - Faraday Discussions (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5FD00069F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5FD00069F
(Paper)
Faraday Discuss., 2015, 183, 125-145Electrocatalytic conversion of CO2 to produce solar fuels in electrolyte or electrolyte-less configurations of PEC cells

        
          
            C. 
            Ampelli
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            C. 
            Genovese
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            B. C. 
            Marepally†
, 
      
        
          
            G. 
            Papanikolaou
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            S. 
            Perathoner
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            G. 
            Centi
          
        
      
Dept. DIECII, Section Industrial Chemistry, University of Messina, CASPE/INSTM and ERIC aisbl, V.le F. Stagno D'Alcontres 31, 98166 Messina, Italy. E-mail: centi@unime.it; perathon@unime.it
Received 
      10th May 2015
    , Accepted 10th June 2015First published on 11th June 2015AbstractThe electrocatalytic reduction of CO2 is studied on a series of electrodes (based on Cu, Co, Fe and Pt metal nanoparticles deposited on carbon nanotubes or carbon black and then placed at the interface between a Nafion membrane and a gas-diffusion-layer electrode) on two types of cells: one operating in the presence of a liquid bulk electrolyte and the other in the absence of the electrolyte (electrolyte-less conditions). The results evidence how the latter conditions allow productivity of about one order of magnitude higher and how to change the type of products formed. Under electrolyte-less conditions, the formation of >C2 products such as acetone and isopropanol is observed, but not in liquid-phase cell operations on the same electrodes. The relative order of productivity in CO2 electrocatalytic reduction in the series of electrodes investigated is also different between the two types of cells. The implications of these results in terms of possible differences in the reaction mechanism are commented on, as well as in terms of the design of photoelectrocatalytic (PEC) solar cells.
Introduction
There is an increasing interest in the literature on solar fuels,1–10 although different concepts are often associated to this definition. Solar fuels are indicated here as those having a carbon-negative footprint, because they utilize emitted CO2 to produce energy carriers or chemicals through the use of renewable energy (RE) sources. The net effect is thus of introducing RE into the energy or chemical production cycle. The type of products obtained in this process is relevant, because they should preferably be drop-in liquid-fuels according to both economic and sustainability perspectives. In fact, it is often forgotten that there are many problems (economic, normative, authorization etc.) associated with the introduction of new products requiring a novel infrastructure. Being on such a large scale as the problem of energy is, a “sustainable” transition to a low-carbon economy is only possible by the development of energy vectors and raw materials for chemistry, which smoothly integrate in the actual system and infrastructure, minimizing the above issues. Liquid products are necessary to allow energy-efficient and low cost transport over long distances and storage for a long time, one of the actual main advantages of oil and derivate energy carriers.
We previously discussed the above aspects in more detail, in relation to the need to develop a sustainable low-carbon energy and chemical production method.11–14 In this vision, CO2, biomass and solar energy are the three key elements around which future sustainable scenarios for energy and chemical production should be developed.12,15 Critical factors to enable this scenario are the development of new approaches for the electrochemical conversion of CO2, a key step towards artificial leaf-type devices.7,16 Many reviews have recently discussed the electrocatalytic conversion of CO2,17–23 as well as artificial leaf-type or photosynthetic devices,7,10,24–29 although only a few of them are cited.
A common aspect is the presence of a bulk electrolyte used to close the electric circuit in the electrocatalytic cell or photoelectrocatalytic (PEC) devices. We have shown, however, that a different approach is possible, indicated as electrolyte-less (EL), because a bulk liquid electrolyte is absent.30 The ionic conduction is realized through a membrane having the photo- and electro-catalysts on the two opposite faces of the membrane, while the electronic conduction is realized through an external wire.31 This EL approach allows the conversion of CO2 electrocatalytically to >C1 products,32–34 while essentially C1 products, with traces of C2 products are detected in the presence of an electrolyte.35–40
EL design for PEC solar cells shows some advantages: (i) it is possible to operate at higher temperatures, allowing process intensification and the use of solar concentrators; (ii) the problems related to CO2 adsorption/diffusion in the liquid phase are eliminated; (iii) the sealing and design of the cell is greatly simplified; (iv) gas-cap formation on the electrode (which may largely decrease the performance) is avoided; (v) operations under pressure are simplified; (vi) light scattering and absorption by the liquid are avoided; (vii) corrosion of the electrode (a main issue in conventional PEC cells) is virtually absent. However, the greatest advantage is the more effective (from cost and energy perspectives) recovery of the liquid products of CO2 reduction, because they can be collected from the gas stream leaving the EL-PEC cell and not from the liquid electrolyte, requiring distillation or other costly separation procedures. However, the electrodes in a EL-PEC cell, or the hemi-cell for the electrocatalytic reduction of CO2, should be different from the conventional ones utilized in PEC or electrochemical cells. In fact, together with good electron conductivity, the electrode for the electroreduction of CO2 should guarantee a good transport of the protons coming from the membrane to the active centers for CO2 reduction.
There is thus an intriguing question as to whether this difference in electrode characteristics is responsible for the different type of products observed experimentally during the electrocatalytic reduction of CO2 or instead there are intrinsic differences in terms of reactivity and reaction mechanism deriving from the presence or not of a bulk liquid electrolyte. The electric double layer, which determines the characteristics of the interface at the catalytic centers, depends on the electrolyte. In PEC cells, concentrated electrolyte solutions are used to minimize internal resistance, but in a EL-PEC cell approach the electrolyte is virtually absent. However, a thin liquid film may be present over the electrocatalysts. Although the ionic transport (to close the circuit) can be realized by surface transport over the electrocatalysts and then through the membrane (without thus the need of a liquid film over the electrode), a surface aqueous acid thin layer may eventually be present as well as the occurrence of capillary condensation in micropores, depending on the temperature and pressure of operations. Nevertheless, the interface between the electrocatalysts and a bulk electrolyte is clearly different from that when the electrocatalysts are in direct contact with the gas phase (CO2), even when a thin aqueous film may be present. The concentration of CO2 at the surface of the electrocatalyst is thus expected to be different. However, the different type of electrodes used in conventional and EL hemi-cells for the electrocatalytic reduction of CO2 do not allow for clarification of above question or to obtain better insight into the motivation for the different behaviours between conventional and EL-cells in the electrocatalytic conversion of CO2.
The aim of this contribution is thus to utilize the same type of electrodes and reaction conditions, except for the presence of the liquid bulk electrolyte, in order to compare conventional and EL approaches, determine more precisely the differences in the productivity and type of products, and obtain indications about possible differences in the reaction mechanism.
Electrochemical cells for the reduction of CO2
In electrochemistry, attention is typically focused on the electrode and operative conditions, while cell design is often not considered, except in engineering terms for the realization of optimal charge transport, homogeneous flow and electron distribution in large cells, etc. The possibility to operate without a liquid electrolyte is not typically considered for the electrocatalytic reduction of CO2, although PEM (proton exchange membrane) fuel cells may be considered an example of EL operations. We will compare here two different approaches for the electrochemical reduction of CO2: (1) gas phase (EL-cell approach) and (2) liquid phase, e.g. the conventional one, although using the same type of electrocatalysts as the gas-phase approach. The two devices show common aspects:
(i) the two electrodic compartments are separated by a proton selective membrane, which allows the migration of protons from the anode to the cathode side;
(ii) the electrocatalyst (metal nanoparticles supported over a functionalized carbon nanotube – CNT) is located at the cathode side, supported over a conductive net (carbon paper) and in close contact with the membrane, while the external part, which is in contact with the gas or liquid phase, is coated with Teflon to realize a gas diffusion electrode (GDE) (Fig. 1) as in PEM fuel cells;
(iii) CO2 continuously flows to the cathode of the electrocatalytic cell as 100% CO2 at a rate of 10–20 ml min−1;
(iv) the currents/potentials applied are similar (1–2 V; 10–100 mA).
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the GDE-type electrodes utilized for CO2 electrochemical reduction. The image on the left shows the full gas-diffusion electrode (GDE), while the images on the right are scanning electron microscopy images of the side in contact with the membrane and of the side in contact with the gas phase (CO2) or the electrolyte in which the CO2 is bubbled. 
These cells are the CO2 reduction hemi-cells of PEC solar cells, where a photo-anode is also present. The latter is a photo-active material able to absorb sunlight to create charge-separation, with the holes utilized at suitable catalytic centers for the reaction of water oxidation to produce O2 and protons, the latter being transported to the electrocatalyst through the membrane. The electrons are instead collected and transported externally (through a wire) to the conductive electrocatalyst. We have studied the photo-anode behaviour by preparing TiO2 nanostructured electrodes,33 doped with noble (Pt, Au)41 and non-noble nanoparticles (Cu)42 to enhance their visible response. Electrolyte and EL operations for the photoanode side (indicated as liquid and gas phase operations, respectively) were both investigated. In water photoelectrolysis and ethanol dehydrogenation processes, higher performances (in terms of H2 production) of the gas phase with respect to liquid-phase configuration were observed.42,43 Therefore, a full EL-PEC cell may be developed, both for the anodic and cathodic parts. However, discussion will be focused here only on the electrocatalytic reduction of CO2, thus on the cathodic part of the PEC cell.
Experimental
Synthesis of the electrode materials
The working electrode for the electrochemical cells for CO2 reduction consists of a carbon substrate on which the metal nanoparticles are deposited. This electrocatalyst is then deposited on a gas diffusion layer (GDL 25 BC Sigracet®), on the side not modified with Teflon. The carbon substrates are commercial carbon black (CB, Vulcan® XC-72) and carbon nanotubes (CNTs, PR-24-XT-PS Pyrograf®).
PR-24-XT-PS CNTs have an average diameter of about 100 nanometers. The inner part shows well-ordered graphitic layers aligned along the main axis, but the external surface displays a turbographic structure. The CNTs were pyrolyzed at 750 °C to remove polyaromatic hydrocarbons from their surface. Due to the turbographic structure, these CNTs offer a large amount of sites for functionalization of the external surface.
The nature of the functional groups on the carbon surface plays a key role in the catalytic activity of the electrocatalysts. Thus, CNTs were functionalized by direct oxidative treatment in concentrated HNO3, introducing oxygen functionalities on the carbon surface. In detail, 1 g of CNTs (or CB) was suspended in 50 ml HNO3 (65% Sigma Aldrich) and treated in reflux at 100 °C for 3 h, followed by rinsing until at a neutral pH, filtering, and drying overnight. Different types of oxygen functionalities were introduced by this treatment. The total quantity and relative distribution can vary as a function of the annealing post-treatment in an inert atmosphere, as shown from synchrotron radiation XPS data.23
The main properties of a commercial GDL and CNTs are reported in Table 1.
Table 1 Properties of the as-produced commercial materials used to prepare the electrocatalyst




Properties of GDL 25 BC Sigracet®




Thickness
235 μm


Areal weight
86 g m−2


Porosity
80%


Air permeability
1.0 cm3 (cm2 s−1)


Electrical resistance (through plane)
<12 mΩ cm2






Properties of CNTs PR-24-XT-PS Pyrograf®




Fiber diameter (average)
100 nm


Surface area
45 m2 g−1


Dispersive surface energy
85 mJ m−2


Moisture
<5 wt%


Iron
<14000 ppm


Polyaromatic hydrocarbons
<1 mg PAH per g fiber




Before depositing the carbon substrates on the GDL, metal (M = Cu, Co, Fe or Pt) nanoparticles (NPs) were deposited on CB and CNTs by an incipient wetness impregnation method using an ethanolic solution containing the proper metal precursor [Cu(NO3)2·3H2O; Co(NO3)2·6H2O; Fe(NO3)3·9H2O; H2PtCl6·xH2O]. After drying at 60 °C for 24 h, the samples were reduced for 2 h at 350 °C under a slow H2 flow. The total amount of metal loaded onto the carbon substrate was 10 wt%. This amount was chosen in order to have an amount comparable to the metal loading in the electrocatalysts for PEM fuel cells (usually 10–20 wt%), which corresponds to a small metal loading in the final catalyst (about 0.5 mg cm−2).
The as-prepared carbon substrates with the deposited nanoparticles were then deposited on the GDL using a similar impregnation in anhydrous ethanol and after joining the GDL with the Nafion membrane, the samples were tested as working electrodes both in liquid and gas phase cell configurations. While in the liquid-phase cell the electrode is in contact with the electrolyte solution saturated with CO2, in the gas-phase cell the electrode is absent and ionic conductivity is guaranteed from the contact with the proton-conducting membrane (Nafion®). Before use, the Nafion® membrane was pre-treated with hydrogen peroxide to eliminate organic impurities and finally activated with H2SO4.
Characterization
Surface area of the samples (BET method) was determined by the physical adsorption of N2 at liquid nitrogen temperatures by using a Micrometrics ASAP 2010 system.
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images were acquired by using a Philips CM12 microscope (resolution 0.2 nm) with an accelerating voltage of 120 kV, while SEM images were recorded with a Philips XL-30-FEG scanning electron microscope.
Liquid-phase cell
The electrochemical cell, made in Plexiglas® to allow visual inspection, has a three-electrode configuration and is schematically illustrated in Fig. 2. The working electrode (about 3 cm2) is located at the cathode side, at a small distance (0.5 cm) from a saturated Ag/AgCl electrode (working as the reference electrode) to reduce the solution resistance. The electric contact with the working electrode is maintained with a Pt wire. The counter-electrode is a commercial Pt rod (Amel) immersed in the anode compartment. A potentiostat/galvanostat (Amel mod. 2049A) is employed to supply a constant current/bias between the electrodes.
 Fig. 2  Schematic drawing of the experimental apparatus for electrocatalytic tests of CO2 reduction in liquid phase, e.g. in the presence of a liquid electrolyte. 
The anode compartment is physically separated from the cathode side by a proton-conducting membrane (Nafion® 117, Ion Power). A 0.5 M aqueous solution of KHCO3 was used as the electrolyte solution in both the cathode and anode compartments. The volume of the electrolyte solution at the anode was about 9–10 ml. The electrochemical cell was designed in order to have a large surface area of the electrode and to minimize the electrolyte solution in direct contact with the electrocatalyst. A continuous flow of pure CO2 (10 ml min−1) was introduced into an external reservoir to saturate the electrolyte solution. This prevents interference from gas bubbles striking the electrode surface in the cathode compartment. The electrolyte solution is continuously circulated between the cathode compartment and the external container by using a peristaltic pump. The total amount of solution (cathode + external container) was 20 ml.
The liquid products were analysed by sampling the liquid in the external container and determining the composition of the solution using 1H nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (NMR, Varian NMR 500) and gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS, Thermo Trace 1310, ISQ Single Quadrupole MS, column Stabilwax MS). The gas products were detected by sampling the gaseous stream leaving the external container at regular intervals and analysing using gas-chromatography (GC-TCD, Agilent 7890A, column 5A Plot).
Gas-phase cell (EL conditions)
The electrochemical cell for CO2 reduction working in the gas-phase (electrolyte-less – EL – conditions) was designed to operate under a continuous flow of CO2 diffusing through the GDL to arrive at the surface of the electrocatalyst. The cell was made in Plexiglas® and it is located within an oven to work eventually at higher temperatures, up to about 70–80 °C, although all the tests reported here were carried out at room temperature to be comparable to those in the liquid cell, which do not allow operations at temperatures above about 40 °C. Fig. 3 reports a schematic drawing of the experimental apparatus.
 Fig. 3  Schematic drawing of the experimental apparatus for electrocatalytic tests of CO2 reduction in gas phase, e.g. in electrolyte-less (EL) conditions. 
The cell has a three-electrode configuration, with a Pt wire as the counter-electrode and a saturated Ag/AgCl electrode as the reference electrode, both immersed in the anode compartment. A membrane electrode assembly (MEA) separates the two cell compartments. The MEA consists of: (i) a proton-conducting membrane (Nafion® 117) and (ii) the electrocatalyst deposited on the GDL. These two samples were assembled together by hot pressing at 80 atm and 130 °C for 90 s. The electrocatalyst is located at the interface with the membrane. The anode side, to be more comparable with the liquid cell, works in the liquid phase and is used to provide the protons (through the Nafion membrane) needed for the CO2 reduction process. The anode side is filled with an electrolyte aqueous solution (KCl 0.5 M) and it is in direct contact with one side of the Nafion® membrane. A gas flow of pure CO2 (10 ml min−1) is continuously fluxed into the cathodic compartment.
A potentiostat/galvanostat (Amel mod. 2049A) was used to supply a constant current (10–20 mA) between the electrodes. The voltage increased as a function of time-on-stream during the first hour stabilizing to a value of around 1.4 to 1.5 V. At the end of the reaction (typically 1 h), the current polarity was inverted to facilitate desorption of the products from the working electrode. The liquid products were collected in a cold trap from the flux leaving the cathodic part of the cell. They were analyzed using a gas chromatograph equipped with a mass detector (Thermo Scientific GC Trace 1310 – ISQ MS).
Results and discussion
Characterization of the electrodes
The BET characterization of the electrocatalysts is reported in Table 2. An increase in the surface area and pore volume after the addition of Cu, Co, Fe nanoparticles is observed, but not for Pt, although no relevant changes in the average pore volume were observed in all cases. The effect may thus be interpreted as a reduced sticking between the CNTs, due to the change in the surface properties of functionalized CNTs during the process of addition of the metallic nanoparticles. On the contrary, the samples based on CB (carbon black) as the support (only an iron sample is reported in Table 2, with the results for the other samples being quite similar) have a significantly larger BET surface area and pore volume.
Table 2 Characterization of the textural characteristics of the electrocatalysts using a BET method




Electro-catalyst

a
BET, m2 g−1

V
m, cm3 g−1
Average pore diameter, nm




CNTox
23, 1
5, 3
11, 4


Cu-CNTox
48, 3
11, 1
10, 8


Co-CNTox
72, 6
16, 7
14, 9


Fe-CNTox
63, 8
14, 6
9, 2


Fe-CB
221, 2
50, 8
12, 2


Pt-CNTox
23, 6
5, 4
11, 3





Fig. 4 reports an image by TEM of a Fe-CNT sample. It may be observed that there is presence of a good dispersion of iron particles, preferentially located on the external surface of the CNT. The average size is between 3 and 5 nm, with a relatively narrow distribution. A similar distribution of the metal nanoparticles is observed in the other samples. Pt allows for obtaining a slightly lower average size for the metal particles, centred around 1–3 nm. A good dispersion is also observed in the samples based on a CB support, without determining relevant differences in terms of dispersion and average metal nanoparticle size. It may thus be concluded that in spite of the different surface areas, both CNTsox and CB allow a good dispersion of the metal nanoparticles and an analogous average size to be obtained.
 Fig. 4  Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image of a Fe-CNT sample. Image provided by M Laurent Veyre and E.A. Quadrelli (CPE Lyon, France) who are acknowledged. 
CO2 electrocatalytic reduction in a liquid phase cell
The main products detected in the liquid electrolyte on the cathode side are reported in Table 3 for all the electrocatalysts tested in the liquid-phase cell. As a reference, (i) metal Cu foil and (ii) CNTox alone (e.g. without metal particles, but deposed on the GDL) were analysed.
Table 3 Main products formed in 1 h of reaction in the CO2 electrochemical reduction in the liquid phase




Electrode
Formic acid [M]
Acetic acid [M]
Methyl formate [M]




Cu foil
6.1 × 10−4
4.0 × 10−4
—


Cu-CB/GDL
3.6 × 10−5
1.4 × 10−5
1.7 × 10−4


Fe-CB/GDL
4.6 × 10−5
5.4 × 10−5
6.0 × 10−6


Co-CB/GDL
8.1 × 10−5
9.5 × 10−5
7 × 10−6


Cu-CNTox/GDL
1.2 × 10−4
8.4 × 10−5
1.5 × 10−5


Fe-CNTox/GDL
1.8 × 10−5
2.1 × 10−5
1.2 × 10−5


Pt-CNTox/GDL
2.3 × 10−4
1.8 × 10−4
—


CNTox/GDL
2.2 × 10−5
1.4 × 10−5
—




The main products detected in the liquid electrolyte solution were: formic acid, acetic acid and methyl formate. The pure Cu foil electrode also formed methanol in traces. The main other product of the reaction, detected in the gas stream leaving the cell (see Fig. 2) is H2, while CO, CH4 or C2 hydrocarbons were not detected in all the samples.
The first interesting observation is that CNTox itself is able to form H2 (from protons and electrons), as well as some products of CO2 conversion. In the absence of CNTs, the products of CO2 conversion were instead not detected. Thus, the CNT itself (without metal particles) is able to convert CO2 electrocatalytically. It is worth noting that without the oxidative pretreatment, the CNT is inactive, thus the behaviour observed cannot be attributed to residual traces of metal utilized for the synthesis of the CNT itself (by catalytic chemical vapour deposition). The activity has to be related to the oxygen functional groups created during the CNT pretreatment (see the Experimental part).
Formic acid formation may be explained as deriving from the reaction of H2 (formed by the catalytic electroreduction of the protons diffusing through the membrane) with the CO2 present in the electrolyte. However, bubbling together H2 and CO2 in the absence of a potential/current applied to the electrode did not result in the formation of products of CO2 conversion. Reasonably, the functional groups present on CNTox, likely chetonic groups as observed for other catalytic reactions,44 are able to reduce CO2 to formic acid according to a mechanism tentatively outlined in Scheme 1.
 Scheme 1  Tentative reaction mechanism of CO2 at chetonic groups present on the surface of CNTox. 
Chetonic groups present at the edges or defects of CNTs may act as trapping sites for electrons, forming resonance species as outline in Scheme 1. The presence of an electron localized on the carbon activates the nearlying C–C bond, becoming able to coordinate the oxygen in CO2, breaking the molecule from linearity. The activation of nearlying C–C bonds, making it susceptible for O2 activation, is the mechanism proposed for N-doped CNTs active in the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR).44,45
Acetic acid is the other main product observed using a CNTox/GDL electrocatalyst (Table 3). It is not easy to explain the formation of this product. A preliminary hypothesis is that the further reduction of formic acid, with a mechanism similar to that outlined in Scheme 1, leads to the formation of formaldehyde. Formaldehyde may selectively transform with even 100% selectivity to acetic acid in relatively mild conditions (100 °C, 500 psi CO) in the presence of a strong acid (HI).46 Formic acid in strong acid conditions (as present near the electrocatalyst surface, being located close to the Nafion membrane) decomposes to CO and H2O. Carbon monoxide may react with formaldehyde in the presence of a strong acid to selectively give acetic acid (a variation of the Kock–Haaf reaction).46 It is reasonable that a similar mechanism occurs in our case during the electrochemical reduction of CO2: (1) (2a) (2b) (3)
This may also explain why methanol, the further product of formaldehyde reduction, is not observed.
The presence of a metal nanoparticle leads to an increase in the productivity in the conversion of CO2 and the presence of methyl formate in some cases (Table 3). The latter reasonably derives from the reaction of formic acid esterification with methanol under acid conditions: (4)
Methyl formate may thus be associated with the formation of methanol and its fast conversion under the reaction conditions present in our experiments.
Various other observations can be made on the results evidenced in Table 3. Copper-based electrodes have been tested in three types of forms: as Cu foil (as a reference, being one of the type of electrodes often utilized in the electrocatalytic reduction of CO2), and in the form of copper nanoparticles supported over CNTox or CB. It may be observed that methyl formate is observed in both cases using CB or CNTox as a support for copper nanoparticles, but not when copper foil is used. This result indicates that the presence of copper metal nanoparticles supported on carbon materials rather than copper itself (as suggested often in literature) promotes the formation of methanol. In terms of productivity, a Cu-CB/GDL has a formation of methyl formate nearly one order of magnitude higher than a Cu-CNTox/GDL, although the copper amount and size of the copper nanoparticles is analogous. The higher surface area of CB with respect to CNTox (Table 2) may thus not be the reason for the different behaviour, as the dispersion of copper in the two supports is relatively similar. We may also note in Table 3 that formic and acetic acid formation is instead higher in a Cu-CNTox/GDL in comparison to a Cu-CB/GDL. Thus the main difference between the two samples is in the rate of the further reduction of formaldehyde to methanol: (5)with methanol then further reacting according to eqn (4). CB (Vulcan XC-72) contains about 0.3% S, present as sulphonic groups (–SO3H) on the surface. These acid groups, stronger than the –COOH groups present on CNTox as a consequence of the oxidative pretreatment, reasonably favour a better surface transport of protons coming from the membrane. Probably the difference in the behaviour observed between the CNTox/GDL and Cu-CB/GDL is associated with the different concentration of protons at the electrocatalytic centers, although this hypothesis should have better proof. A higher proton concentration favours the further reduction up to methanol, reducing the rate of side reactions. In fact, Table 3 shows that productivity to acetic acid (which can be considered a side reaction with respect to methanol formation) is about six times higher in the CNTox/GDL with respect to the Cu-CB/GDL, which parallels the strong decrease in methyl formate productivity.
A comparison of the results of the Cu-foil electrode with those of the Cu-CB/GDL and Cu-CNTox/GDL electrodes provides some further interesting indications. To estimate the amount of copper present in the two types of samples, it may be considered that in the Cu-CB/GDL or Cu-CNTox/GDL the total amount of copper in the 3 cm2 electrode is about 1.5 mg. To estimate the amount of copper active in copper foil, it is not possible to just have the weight of the foils, but it may be assumed that a foil of the same electrode size (3 cm2) having a 10 nm thickness would have a comparable thickness to the size of copper nanoparticles in the samples over the carbon support.
Considering for copper a density of 8.9 g cm−3, this estimated amount of “surface” copper in the copper foil is about 0.03 mg, thus significantly lower than that present in the “3D-like” electrodes based on a carbon support. Alternatively, it may be considered as the surface area of metal copper. For copper-foil, it is simply the geometrical electrode area of the copper foil, e.g. 3 cm2. For copper nanoparticles, the surface area can be estimated assuming round-shaped copper nanoparticles of 10 nm size. With this simplification, the surface area for a total amount of 1.5 mg of copper in the electrode results to be about 0.5 × 106 cm2, e.g. much larger than that of the geometrical surface of the copper foil electrode. It may be argued that the real surface of the copper foil is not flat, but some roughness is present as well as some porosity. Also for metal nanoparticles, the part of the surface in contact with the carbon is not accessible (lowering the electrocatalytic active surface), but also particles smaller than 10 nm are present, increasing the overall metal surface. However, the differences estimated for the two types of electrodes (copper foil and copper nanoparticles on a carbon support) are so large indicating that the issue is not related to a too simple model to calculate the active surface area of copper.
Therefore, the electrocatalytic active copper is much lower in copper-foil than in samples supported over carbon. Nevertheless, the productivity in conversion of CO2 is about five times higher in Cu-foil than that of the Cu-CB/GDL sample and even more with respect to the Cu-CNTox/GDL (Table 3). This indicates that transport of protons/electrons as well as CO2 diffusion to the active electrocatalytic centers is dominating the behaviour and productivity is not related to the metal active surface area in our experimental conditions.
This conclusion may also explain why notwithstanding some differences, the behaviour of other metal nanoparticles, namely iron and cobalt, is not significantly different from that observed for copper nanoparticles (Table 3). However, copper, particularly when on a CB support, allows significantly higher methyl formate formation with respect to iron nanoparticles on the same support. Pt nanoparticles, on the contrary, do not form methyl formate but, as for Cu foil, they give larger quantities of formic acid as well as acetic acid.
The change of production rate with time during liquid-phase cell experiments is shown in Fig. 5 for Cu-CB/GDL and Cu-CNTs/GDL electrodes. Formic acid formation decreases after 3 h of reaction, while the concentration of acetic acid increases in both the cases in agreement with the reaction mechanism discussed before. The methyl formate concentration in the liquid phase is higher after 1 h for the Cu-CB/GDL, strongly decreasing after 3 h, due to its high volatility (methyl formate boiling point = 32 °C). Traces of methyl formate were found in the gas outlet from the external container.
 Fig. 5  Time dependence of formic acid, acetic acid and methyl formate formation for liquid-phase testing experiments with (a) Cu-CB/GDL and (b) Cu-CNTox/GDL electrocatalysts. 
It should also be commented that pH changes greatly influence the performance, in agreement with the discussion on the possible reaction mechanism. The aqueous electrolyte used for liquid phase experiments is KHCO3 (0.5 M). When CO2 is bubbled into the hemi-cell compartments, an acid–base equilibrium between CO2 and HCO3− establishes in solution: CO2 + H2O ⇌ HCO3− + H+(6)
The pH of the fresh electrolyte is about 12, but decreases to about 9 when CO2 is bubbled in it. A small flow of pure CO2 (10 ml min−1) was also fluxed directly into the anode compartment to favour desorption of O2 and oxygen species on the Pt counter-electrode surface which may increase the overpotential of the cell.47 The flux of CO2 in both compartments of the cell also avoids the creation of pH gradients related to the solubilisation of CO2, as indicated in eqn (6). However, the pH in the anodic section varies as a consequence of the reaction. The pH of the electrolyte solution at the anode compartment is initially 6. It maintains stable during the first 30–60 min, depending on the electrocatalyst in the cathodic part. During this initial time, the voltage and current given to the electrochemical cell remain stable (Fig. 6). Then, a sharp decrease of both the current and potential is observed, due to the following reaction at the anode, which decreases the pH inhibiting the half-reaction at the anode: H2O ⇌ 1/2O2 + 2H+ + 2e−(7)
 Fig. 6  Profiles of voltage (E) and current (I) as a function of time in experiments in the liquid-phase. (A) addition of some drops of fresh electrolyte solution (0.5 M KHCO3); (B) addition of some drops of 1 M NaOH aqueous solution to maintain pH in the anode part at pH > 6. 
By adding some drops of 1 M NaOH aqueous solution, the pH increased to values above 6 and the current rapidly returned back to the set-point value. In order to have stable performances, it is thus necessary to maintain a pH > 6 in the anodic part by adding a base.
This corroborates that the transport of protons across the membrane is the rate limiting process in our case, because otherwise they should be transported to the cathodic part where they are consumed to generate H2 and reduce CO2.
The comparison of these results with those reported in the literature in terms of TOF (turnover frequency) is not easy, because the cell/electrodes and cell operation conditions are different and TOF values are typically not reported in the literature for the electrocatalytic reduction of CO2. Kuhl et al.35 have not only made a quite detailed investigation of this reaction, but have also reported the TOF values for each of the products determined (in the supplementary part). Due to the different types of electrode (a copper foil mechanically polished) and reaction conditions, they observed different types of products in the reduction of CO2 (CH4, formate, CO, methanol, ethylene, ethanol, glycolaldehyde, acetaldehyde, acetate, ethylenglycol, n-propanol, allyl alcohol, acetone). It is thus possible to compare the total TOF in products of CO2 reduction, rather than for the single species. The results are reported in Table 4. A potential of −1.1 V (vs. RHE), corresponding to the maximum formation of products of CO2 reduction in the Kuhl et al.35 results, was chosen for this comparison. TOF data are reported as μmol s−1 cm−2, e.g. the same unit used by Kuhl et al.35 They also reported in parallel the TOF values expressed as molecules s−1 surface Cu atoms−1. However, this estimate requires a series of assumptions on the number of Cu atoms which are even less valid in our case, due to the different types of electrodes. As Kuhl et al.35 used only a Cu foil electrode, we report the TOF data in Table 4 only for the Cu-based electrode, for a more homogeneous comparison. TOF results may be easily derived for the other electrodes, being proportional to the total amount of product formed. Having not detected in our case CO formation, the results of Kuhl et al.35 are differentiated to or not to include the amount of CO formed. However, the differences are limited.
Table 4 TOF values (μmol s−1 cm−2) on copper-based electrodes, in comparison with TOF values reported by Kuhl et al.35 (*) for Cu foil electrode




Electrode
TOF (all products)
TOF (all products, except CO)
TOF (all products)




Cu foil
9.35 × 10−2
—
—


Cu-CB/GDL
2.04 × 10−2
—
—


Cu-CNTox/GDL
2.03 × 10−2
—
—


Cu foil (*)


6.66 × 10−3
6.96 × 10−3




As shown in Table 4, TOF data in our electrodes are from three times higher (for dispersed Cu nanoparticles on a carbon support) to 13 times higher (for Cu foil).
CO2 electrocatalytic reduction in a gas phase cell (EL operations)
Experiments made in the gas-phase electrochemical cell on the same electrodes used for the liquid-phase cell show relevant differences, regarding both the types of products formed and the productivity. However, a common aspect in both cells is the relevant formation of H2. Hydrogen is an undesired product, because it reduces the Faradaic efficiency to the products of CO2 reduction. This indicates that in our experimental conditions the use of electrons/protons for the reduction of CO2 is a slower process with respect their recombination to form H2. Inhibiting the last reaction is thus a requirement to improve the performances in the electrocatalytic reduction of CO2. On the other hand, these results also show that the formation of H2 is a facile reaction not specifically requiring dedicated catalysts.
There are main differences in the type of products of reaction between liquid- and gas-phase cell operations, e.g. the presence or absence of the bulk electrolyte. In the gas outlet stream leaving the cathodic part of the cell, together with H2, CO and in a small amount CH4 are also detected in the case of EL operations. The two last products are not detected in liquid phase operations. Although CO may form from formic acid decomposition (eqn (2a)) in liquid-phase operations, it immediately reacts and CO is not detected in the product stream leaving the cell, at least up to the detection limit. On the contrary, CO is a main product of CO2 electrocatalytic reduction in gas-phase cell operations, indicating a different mechanism of formation, with probably CO being the primary product of CO2 reduction, rather than a secondary product, as observed in liquid-phase operations. This may explain why methane, deriving from the catalytic reduction of CO on copper, iron and cobalt metal nanoparticles, is observed even if in small amounts in experiments with gas-phase cells, but not in those with liquid-phase cells.
The type of liquid products formed, detected in the electrolyte or condensed in the cold trap from the gaseous stream leaving the gas-phase cell, are also different in the two cases. Table 5 summarizes the behaviour of the different types of tested electrodes in gas-phase cells (EL conditions). A first observation is that different types of products are observed:
(i) methanol, rather than formic acid as the C1 main product (together with CO);
(ii) acetaldehyde and ethanol together with acetic acid as C2 products, while only the latter was observed together with methyl formate in some electrocatalysts;
(iii) acetone and isopropanol as C3 products, while no C3 products were detected in liquid phase operations.
Table 5 Products obtained in the CO2 electrochemical reduction in gas-phase




Electrode
Methanol, mmol h−1
Acetaldehyde, mmol h−1
Ethanol, mmol h−1
Acetone, mmol h−1
Isopropanol, mmol h−1
Acetic acid, mmol h−1
H2, mmol h−1
CO, mmol h−1




Co-CNTox/GDL
1.2 × 10−4
4.5 × 10−5
2.0 × 10−4
1.3 × 10−6
—
3.4 × 10−5
2.0 × 10−1
3.2 × 10−2


Cu-CNTox/GDL
4.8 × 10−5
1.1 × 10−5
6.7 × 10−5
1.0 × 10−7
9.3 × 10−6
—
1.7 × 10−1
9.6 × 10−3


Fe-CB/GDL
1.1 × 10−4
2.9 × 10−5
1.1 × 10−4
1.2 × 10−6
1.1 × 10−6
1.5 × 10−5
3.2 × 10−1
3.6 × 10−2


Fe-CNTox/GDL
1.4 × 10−4
6.7 × 10−5
9.4 × 10−5
1.8 × 10−7
8.4 × 10−5
9.2 × 10−5
3.6 × 10−1
6.5 × 10−2


Pt-CNTox/GDL
1.0 × 10−5
1.7 × 10−5
3.6 × 10−5
1.7 × 10−7
2.4 × 10−5
1.4 × 10−5
4.5 × 10−1
3.5 × 10−2




This different type of products clearly suggests a different type of mechanism of CO2 electrocatalytic conversion, in agreement with what is commented earlier. Table 6 summarizes the difference observed in the type of products of reduction of CO2 between gas-phase and liquid-phase cell operations.
Table 6 Comparison of types of products obtained in liquid and gas phase operations in CO2 electrocatalytic reduction




Gas phase
Liquid phase




Methanol
Formic acid


Acetaldehyde
Acetic acid


Ethanol
Methanol (in traces)


Acetone




Isopropanol




Hydrocarbons C4–C9 (in traces)






It may be observed that not only is the productivity different between gas-phase (Table 5) and liquid-phase (Table 3) operations, but also the relative order of activity. In gas-phase cells, the best productivity to products of CO2 reduction is shown by a Fe-CNTox/GDL (around 4.8 × 10−4 mmol h−1). The same electrode in liquid phase operations, considering the total volume of electrolyte, has a productivity of about 0.3 × 10−4 mmol h−1, e.g. about one order of magnitude lower. For the Cu-CTNox/GDL catalyst, productivity in gas-phase operations is about 1.4 × 10−4 mmol h−1, while in liquid-phase operations about 0.15 × 10−4 mmol h−1. Thus again a difference of about one order of magnitude is observed.
Also the relative order of productivity to products of CO2 reduction is different, being:Fe-CNTox/GDL > Fe-CB/GDL > Cu-CNTox/GDL > Pt-CNTox/GDLin gas-phase cells (Table 5) while for liquid-phase cells (Table 3):Pt-CNTox/GDL ≈ Fe-CNTox/GDL > Cu-CNTox/GDL > Fe-CB/GDL.
This observation further remarks that different aspects may determine the productivity in the reduction of CO2, and can be reasonably associated to the different reaction mechanisms.
Differences in the reaction mechanism
Clarification of the above question requires a more in depth analysis of the reaction mechanisms, with operando techniques, which, however, are not simple to apply to electrochemical tests under relevant environmental conditions. We may thus advance only some initial considerations, which help in setting the scene for more detailed mechanistic studies.
As earlier commented, the mechanism in the liquid-phase may be associated (on the specific carbon-based electrocatalysts we utilize) with the activation mechanism of CO2 at specific carbon sites, such as the carbonyl groups formed by oxidation pretreatment. One electron transfer to this site generates a C–O− center, with the charge localized on the carbon activating the nearlying C–C bond making it susceptible of activating the oxygen in the OC bond of carbon dioxide, thus generating a δ+ charge on the C of CO2, facilitating the electron transfer from a C–O− center. In a different paper on the reactivity of carbon nanotubes (modified by a specific surface nitrogen doping mechanism),48 we showed that the amount of nitrogen in CNTs influences performance in the electrocatalytic reduction of CO2. The behaviour linearly correlated with the change of work function in these materials. The latter aspect influences the electronic coupling between the electron donor/acceptor and in turn the rate of electron transfer.
This can provide an explanation of the role of metal nanoparticles in our electrocatalysts. It may be noted, in fact, that there are differences in the behaviour and productivity, but limited with respect to the very relevant change in the type of metal nanoparticles, from Pt to Cu, Fe and Co. If the reaction occurs only at the metal surface, much greater differences are expected. On the other hand, metal nanoparticles may change locally the work function of carbon, thus facilitating the electron transfer. It may be also facilitate the electron transfer to protons, generating H˙ species, which are more reactive in reacting with oxygen of CO2 or with the products of its reduction. The metal will thus act as co-catalyst with the functional groups present on activated carbon, rather than as unique catalytic sites. The sites will thus be mainly located at the perimetral edge between carbon and metal particles, in agreement with previous studies using calorimetry on this type of electrocatalysts for the reduction of CO2.49 Although clearly further demonstrations are necessary to support this mechanism, it can provide preliminary indications on the aspects investigated, as being different from the actual mechanisms proposed for CO2 electrocatalytic conversion, which are focused only on the role of the metal surface.
Reasonably the intermediate generated in this mechanism of reduction of CO2 requires a solvent to be stabilized. On the other hand, metal nanoparticles are easy passivated, because CO2 dissociation at the electrocatalyst metal surface generates CO and an O species, both remain strongly bound to the metal surface. In the absence of the bulk electrolyte, both the absence of the solvent (electrolyte) and the higher CO2 concentration at the surface of the electrocatalyst reasonably contribute in inhibiting one side of the mechanism of electron transfer/hydrogenation of CO2 (via formic acid and formaldehyde), and on the other hand, promoting the mechanism of CO2 dissociation to CO at the metal surface or reasonably at the metal-carbon perimetral region. The further reaction of adsorbed species on the metal surface leads to C–C bond formation and to the products being observed experimentally.
Although speculative, this change in the type of mechanism of CO2 reduction may explain the differences observed in the productivity, type of products and relative rates of reactions between different electrodes. These observations show how a more complex surface chemistry in the electrocatalytic reduction of CO2 may exist with respect to what is previously suggested in the literature. A better understanding of these aspects opens new possibilities in controlling the type of products formed and their productivity, as evidenced from the comparison between liquid- and gas-phase operations on the same electrodes. On the other hand, the results also remark that carbon may not only be a support, but also plays a relevant role in understanding the chemistry of the reduction of CO2. This also opens new possibilities in the design of electrocatalysts for the reduction of CO2 and of the critical elements to consider for their improvement.
Conclusions
The comparison of the same electrodes for the electrocatalytic reduction of CO2 in operations in the presence (liquid-phase) or absence (gas-phase) of a bulk electrolyte provide a series of interesting indications both on the limiting steps of the process and on the reaction mechanism.
It is demonstrated that under electrolyte-less (EL) operations, the productivity in the reduction of CO2 is about one order of magnitude larger, and different types of products are formed. This is related to differences in the reaction mechanism, which were discussed, although further studies are needed to better clarify the reaction mechanism and the influence of the presence of the electrolyte.
In liquid-phase operations it is suggested that the mechanism involves step reduction via intermediate formation of formic acid and formaldehyde and finally methanol, although the latter step is observed only in some electrodes. In fact, due to the strong acidic conditions present at the electrocatalyst, located at the interface with Nafion membrane, formic acid decomposes to generate CO, which reacts with formaldehyde to form acetic acid. Methanol also reacts further in these strong acid conditions to form methyl formate.
In gas-phase operations, this mechanism is no longer effective and the conversion of CO2 involves its dissociation to CO, which remains strongly chemisorbed, giving rise to further transformation reactions and the formation of C–C bonds that produce a different spectrum of products of that observed in liquid-phase operations.
The electrocatalysts utilized here are based on metal nanoparticles (Fe, Cu, Co, Pt) deposited on two types of conductive carbon supports: carbon nanotubes functionalized by oxidation treatment (CNTox) and Vulcan XC-72 carbon black (CB). CNTsox without metal particles are active both in producing H2 from protons/electrons and in the reduction of CO2. The possible mechanism and the role of carbonyl groups, formed during the oxidative treatment, is outlined. It is commented on why in general and also when metal nanoparticles are present, the carbon does not act only as a support or to transport charges, but has also an active role in the reaction mechanism. It is suggested that the active sites for the electrocatalytic reduction of CO2 are located at the perimetral edge between metal nanoparticles and the carbon. The nature of the latter, in particular the type of surface functional groups, thus determine considerably the performance, as experimentally observed.
As commented, these results are the start, not the end of the analysis of the mechanism of reaction in the type of electrodes investigated here. However, we believe that these results provide evidence on how a more complex surface chemistry than typically supposed in the literature is present in the electrocatalytic reduction of CO2 in the type of electrodes we investigated. It should be noted that their performances are better than that of various other electrodes reported in the literature for the conversion of CO2, even if the different reaction conditions and the way data are reported do not often allow for a precise comparison.
There is thus the need of a better understanding of the performance and reaction mechanism of these electrocatalysts (based on metal nanoparticles on conductive, functionalized carbon supports) for the reduction of CO2. They may open new possibilities in controlling the type of products formed and their productivity in this challenging reaction.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the PRIN10-11 project “Mechanisms of activation of CO2 for the design of new materials for energy and resource efficiency” and the EU project ECO2CO2 (“Eco-friendly biorefinery fine chemicals from CO2 photocatalytic reduction”), which have partially supported this work. C. Marepally also thanks the European Doctoral Programme on Sustainable Industrial Chemistry (SINCHEM) for supporting his PhD programme in collaboration with CPE Lyon (Prof. E.A. Quadrelli). M Laurent VEYRE (UMR 5265 CNRS, CP2 Lyon Université de Lyon) is acknowledged for TEM images.
Notes and references
G. A. Ozin, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1957 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          G. Centi and S. Perathoner, in Green Carbon Dioxide, ed. G. Centi and S. Perathoner, Wiley & Sons,  2014, ch. 1, p. 1 Search PubMed .
M. D. Kaerkaes, O. Verho, E. V. Johnston and B. Aakermark, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11863 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Protti, A. Albini and N. Serpone, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 19790 RSC .
C. van der Giesen, R. Kleijn and G. J. Kramer, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2014, 48, 7111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Thomas, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 19 Search PubMed .
S. Bensaid, G. Centi, E. Garrone, S. Perathoner and G. Saracco, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 50 Search PubMed .
G. Centi and S. Perathoner, Greenhouse Gases: Sci. Technol., 2011, 1, 21 CrossRef CAS .
G. Centi and S. Perathoner, ChemSusChem, 2010, 3, 195 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. G. Nocera, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 767 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ampelli, S. Perathoner and G. Centi, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A, 2015, 373, 1 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Lanzafame, G. Centi and S. Perathoner, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7562 RSC .
S. Perathoner and G. Centi, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 1274 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Centi, E. A. Quadrelli and S. Perathoner, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1711 Search PubMed .
S. Perathoner and G. Centi, J. Chin. Chem. Soc., 2014, 61, 719 CrossRef CAS .

          G. Centi and S. Perathoner, Artificial leaves, in Kirk-Othmer Encyclopedia of Chemical Technology,  2014 Search PubMed .
J. Albo, M. Alvarez-Guerra, P. Castano and A. Irabien, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 2304 RSC .
P. Kang, Z. Chen, M. Brookhart and T. J. Meyer, Top. Catal., 2015, 58, 30 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Lu, J. Rosen and F. Jiao, ChemCatChem, 2015, 7, 38 CrossRef CAS .
E. S. Rountree, B. D. McCarthy, T. T. Eisenhart and J. L. Dempsey, Inorg. Chem., 2014, 53, 9983 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Qiao, Y. Liu, F. Hong and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 631 RSC .
E. V. Kondratenko, G. Mul, J. Baltrusaitis, G. O. Larrazabal and J. Perez-Ramirez, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3112 Search PubMed .
C. Genovese, C. Ampelli, S. Perathoner and G. Centi, J. Energy Chem., 2013, 22, 202 CrossRef CAS .

          G. Centi and S. Perathoner, in Chemical Energy Storage, ed. R. Schlögl, De Gruyter,  2013, p. 379 Search PubMed .
K. S. Joya, Y. F. Joya, K. Ocakoglu and R. van de Krol, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 10426 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Barber and P. D. Tran, J. R. Soc., Interface, 2013, 10, 20120984 CrossRef PubMed .
M. D. Kaerkaes, O. Verho, E. V. Johnston and B. Aakermark, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11863 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Fukuzumi and Y. Yamada, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 1834 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. K. Bora, A. Braun and E. C. Constable, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 407 Search PubMed .
C. Ampelli, G. Centi, R. Passalacqua and S. Perathoner, Catal. Today, 2015 DOI:10.1016/j.cattod.2015.07.020 .
C. Ampelli, C. Genovese, S. Perathoner, G. Centi, M. Errahali, G. Gatti and L. Marchese, Chem. Eng. Trans., 2014, 41, 13 Search PubMed ; C. Ampelli, C. Genovese, R. Passalacqua, S. Perathoner and G. Centi, Theor. Found. Chem. Eng., 2012, 46, 651 CrossRef CAS .
C. Genovese, C. Ampelli, S. Perathoner and G. Centi, J. Catal., 2013, 308, 237 CrossRef CAS ; C. Ampelli, S. Perathoner and G. Centi, Chin. J. Catal., 2014, 35, 783 CrossRef .
C. Ampelli, G. Centi, R. Passalacqua and S. Perathoner, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 292 Search PubMed .
G. Centi, S. Perathoner, G. Wine and M. Gangeri, Green Chem., 2007, 9, 671 RSC .
K. P. Kuhl, E. R. Cave, D. N. Abramc and T. F. Jaramillo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7050 Search PubMed .
P. Hirunsit, W. Soodsawang and J. Limtrakul, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 8238 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Shen, Z. Chen, X. Huang, M. Liu and G. Zhao, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2015, 49, 5828 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Albo, M. Alvarez-Guerra, P. Castano and A. Irabien, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 2304 RSC .
S. Back, H. Kim and Y. Jung, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 965 CrossRef CAS .
S. Rasul, D. H. Anjum, A. Jedidi, Y. Minenkov, L. Cavallo and K. Takanabe, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 2146 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ampelli, C. Genovese, P. Lanzafame, S. Perathoner and G. Centi, Chem. Eng. Trans., 2014, 39, 1627 Search PubMed .
C. Ampelli, R. Passalacqua, C. Genovese, S. Perathoner, G. Centi, T. Montini, V. Gombac and P. Fornasiero, Chem. Eng. Trans., 2013, 35, 583 Search PubMed ; C. Ampelli, R. Passalacqua, C. Genovese, S. Perathoner, G. Centi, T. Montini, V. Gombac, J. J. Delgado and P. Fornasiero, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 21776 RSC .
C. Ampelli, C. Genovese, R. Passalacqua, S. Perathoner and G. Centi, Appl. Therm. Eng., 2014, 70, 1270 CrossRef CAS .
D.-W. Wang and D. S. Su, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 576 Search PubMed .
G. Centi, S. Perathoner and D. S. Su, Catal. Surv. Asia, 2014, 18, 149 CrossRef CAS ; D. S. Su, S. Perathoner and G. Centi, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 5782 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Kaplan, J. Org. Chem., 1985, 50, 5376 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Nørskov, J. Rossmeisl, A. Logadottir, L. Lindqvist, J. R. Kitchin, T. Bligaard and H. Jónsson, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 17886 CrossRef .
J. Xu, R. Huang, X. Sun, B. Zhang, Y. Lin, Q. Li, D. Su and G. Centi, Nano Energy, 2015 Search PubMed  , submitted.
R. Arrigo, M. E. Schuster, S. Wrabetz, F. Girgsdies, J.-P. Tessonnier, G. Centi, S. Perathoner, D. S. Su and R. Schlögl, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 577 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† B. C. Marepally currently at C2P2 UMR 5265 (CNRS, CP2 Lyon Université de Lyon), Villeurbanne Cedex (France).This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the GDE-type electrodes utilized for CO2 electrochemical reduction. The image on the left shows the full gas-diffusion electrode (GDE), while the images on the right are scanning electron microscopy images of the side in contact with the membrane and of the side in contact with the gas phase (CO2) or the electrolyte in which the CO2 is bubbled.	 

Thickness	235 μm
Areal weight	86 g m−2
Porosity	80%
Air permeability	1.0 cm3 (cm2 s−1)
Electrical resistance (through plane)	<12 mΩ cm2

Fiber diameter (average)	100 nm
Surface area	45 m2 g−1
Dispersive surface energy	85 mJ m−2
Moisture	<5 wt%
Iron	<14000 ppm
Polyaromatic hydrocarbons	<1 mg PAH per g fiber

 	Fig. 2  Schematic drawing of the experimental apparatus for electrocatalytic tests of CO2 reduction in liquid phase, e.g. in the presence of a liquid electrolyte.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic drawing of the experimental apparatus for electrocatalytic tests of CO2 reduction in gas phase, e.g. in electrolyte-less (EL) conditions.	 

CNTox	23, 1	5, 3	11, 4
Cu-CNTox	48, 3	11, 1	10, 8
Co-CNTox	72, 6	16, 7	14, 9
Fe-CNTox	63, 8	14, 6	9, 2
Fe-CB	221, 2	50, 8	12, 2
Pt-CNTox	23, 6	5, 4	11, 3

 	Fig. 4  Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image of a Fe-CNT sample. Image provided by M Laurent Veyre and E.A. Quadrelli (CPE Lyon, France) who are acknowledged.	 

Cu foil	6.1 × 10−4	4.0 × 10−4	—
Cu-CB/GDL	3.6 × 10−5	1.4 × 10−5	1.7 × 10−4
Fe-CB/GDL	4.6 × 10−5	5.4 × 10−5	6.0 × 10−6
Co-CB/GDL	8.1 × 10−5	9.5 × 10−5	7 × 10−6
Cu-CNTox/GDL	1.2 × 10−4	8.4 × 10−5	1.5 × 10−5
Fe-CNTox/GDL	1.8 × 10−5	2.1 × 10−5	1.2 × 10−5
Pt-CNTox/GDL	2.3 × 10−4	1.8 × 10−4	—
CNTox/GDL	2.2 × 10−5	1.4 × 10−5	—

 	Scheme 1  Tentative reaction mechanism of CO2 at chetonic groups present on the surface of CNTox.	 
	(1)
	(2a)
	(2b)
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)

 	Fig. 5  Time dependence of formic acid, acetic acid and methyl formate formation for liquid-phase testing experiments with (a) Cu-CB/GDL and (b) Cu-CNTox/GDL electrocatalysts.	 
CO2 + H2O ⇌ HCO3− + H+	(6)
H2O ⇌ 1/2O2 + 2H+ + 2e−	(7)

 	Fig. 6  Profiles of voltage (E) and current (I) as a function of time in experiments in the liquid-phase. (A) addition of some drops of fresh electrolyte solution (0.5 M KHCO3); (B) addition of some drops of 1 M NaOH aqueous solution to maintain pH in the anode part at pH > 6.	 

Cu foil	9.35 × 10−2	—	—
Cu-CB/GDL	2.04 × 10−2	—	—
Cu-CNTox/GDL	2.03 × 10−2	—	—
Cu foil (*)	
	6.66 × 10−3	6.96 × 10−3

Co-CNTox/GDL	1.2 × 10−4	4.5 × 10−5	2.0 × 10−4	1.3 × 10−6	—	3.4 × 10−5	2.0 × 10−1	3.2 × 10−2
Cu-CNTox/GDL	4.8 × 10−5	1.1 × 10−5	6.7 × 10−5	1.0 × 10−7	9.3 × 10−6	—	1.7 × 10−1	9.6 × 10−3
Fe-CB/GDL	1.1 × 10−4	2.9 × 10−5	1.1 × 10−4	1.2 × 10−6	1.1 × 10−6	1.5 × 10−5	3.2 × 10−1	3.6 × 10−2
Fe-CNTox/GDL	1.4 × 10−4	6.7 × 10−5	9.4 × 10−5	1.8 × 10−7	8.4 × 10−5	9.2 × 10−5	3.6 × 10−1	6.5 × 10−2
Pt-CNTox/GDL	1.0 × 10−5	1.7 × 10−5	3.6 × 10−5	1.7 × 10−7	2.4 × 10−5	1.4 × 10−5	4.5 × 10−1	3.5 × 10−2

Methanol	Formic acid
Acetaldehyde	Acetic acid
Ethanol	Methanol (in traces)
Acetone	

Isopropanol	

Hydrocarbons C4–C9 (in traces)	

Fe-CNTox/GDL > Fe-CB/GDL > Cu-CNTox/GDL > Pt-CNTox/GDL
Pt-CNTox/GDL ≈ Fe-CNTox/GDL > Cu-CNTox/GDL > Fe-CB/GDL.
Footnote
† B. C. Marepally currently at C2P2 UMR 5265 (CNRS, CP2 Lyon Université de Lyon), Villeurbanne Cedex (France).

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
