Electro-analytical characterization of photovoltaic cells by combining voltammetry and impedance spectroscopy : voltage dependent parameters of a sili ...  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C0EE00307G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C0EE00307G
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 485-498Show Chemical TermsElectro-analytical characterization of photovoltaic cells by combining voltammetry and impedance spectroscopy: voltage dependent parameters of a silicon solar cell under controlled illumination and temperature

        
          
            J. E. 
            Garland
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            D. J. 
            Crain
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            J. P. 
            Zheng
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            C. M. 
            Sulyma
          
        
       and 

        
          
            D. 
            Roy
          
        
      *
      Department of Physics, Clarkson University, Potsdam, NY 13699-5820, USA. E-mail: samoy@clarkson.edu;  Fax: +1-315-268-7754;   Tel: +1-315-268-6676
Received 
      26th July 2010
    , Accepted 22nd October 2010First published on 26th November 2010AbstractThis work reports a detailed electro-analytical framework for direct determination of a broad range of performance-indicator parameters of silicon solar cells. A mono-crystalline Si cell, equipped with the efficiency-boosting back surface field (BSF) feature, is used as a model system for this study. Independently controlled illumination (0–1 Sun, from a solar simulator) and temperature of the cell prevent the interference of photothermal and photovoltaic processes during the measurements. The technique of D.C. voltammetry is employed to obtain current–voltage plots, fill-factors, efficiencies and effective cell resistances. The same experimental platform also supports A.C. impedance spectroscopic probing of the solar cell, which, in combination with complex nonlinear least square analysis of the experimental data, provides detailed information about both the emitter–base and the BSF components of the photovoltaic device. These impedance measurements lead to straightforward determination of the diffusion and depletion layer capacitances, diode resistance, series resistance, concentration of majority carriers as well as lifetime of minority carriers in the base, resistance and capacitance of the BSF junction, and relaxation time of holes in the BSF. The results presented here demonstrate how relatively simple electro-analytical experiments can be strategically utilized for quantitative characterization of photovoltaic systems.

Broader context
Novel materials and new processing techniques have played increasingly important roles in the advancement of photovoltaic (PV) energy conversion through the last decade. This in turn has placed significant new demands on the PV characterization tools for quantitative measurement and analysis of a broad range of performance-indicator parameters of the next generation solar cells. The electro-analytical probe of impedance spectroscopy (IS) has emerged in recent years as a powerful characterization technique that is potentially capable of meeting these demands. The present study explores these analytical features of IS by combining it with linear sweep voltammetry and by using a model system of a mono-crystalline silicon solar cell. In addition to determining the standard performance parameters of the solar cell, the characteristic electrical features of the back-surface field (an efficiency-enhancing feature of Si based cells) have been studied here in detail. The results demonstrate how electro-analytical experiments can rapidly gather rather large amounts of data for efficient and accurate measurements of a variety of solar cell parameters as functions of illumination, voltage and temperatures. The general framework of this experimental approach can readily be extended to characterization studies of other types of inorganic and organic solar cells.

1. Introduction
Detailed measurements of the characteristic parameters of silicon solar cells are critical to optimizing new material-designs and processing techniques that are driving various recent developments in the photovoltaic (PV) technologies.1–8 However, most D.C. techniques traditionally used for solar cell characterization are not particularly useful for probing the A.C. parameters that are necessary for designing transient loads of such devices.1–4 Furthermore, as the thicknesses of solar cells progressively drop, and as electron recombination in the back surface becomes important with the development of better base materials, the back-surface-field (BSF) feature9,10 becomes rather standard in new Si cells.11,12 In this view, resolving the electrical response of the BSF also represents a relevant aspect of Si solar cell characterization, but this option typically is not integrated in the conventional protocols of PV testing. The present report demonstrates how these specific issues can be effectively addressed by combining the electro-analytical techniques of impedance spectroscopy (IS) and linear sweep voltammetry (LSV). A commercial BSF mono-crystalline Si (c-Si) solar cell is used here as a model system to explore these analytical aspects of LSV and IS for PV characterization.

        IS can readily resolve the different capacitive elements, as well as the series and shunt resistances of a variety of solar cells.1,2,13–16 Quantitative processing of such IS data, however, requires an adequate formulation of the A.C. responsive cell equivalent circuit (CEC).1,2,15 The analytical framework for this specific application of IS can be adapted from the formalism that has been developed extensively in the field of electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS).17–21IS studies of Si solar cells have been reported in recent years,1,2,15,16 and this method is extended here by coupling it with CEC-modeling through complex nonlinear least square (CNLS) analysis of impedance spectra.22–24 The experimental protocol of LSV, which also is practiced widely in electrochemistry,22 is combined in the present work with IS. Independent controls of temperature and illumination keep the photothermal and photovoltaic effects separated in the analysis of experimental data. LSV provides current–voltage plots as well as the associated D.C. parameters, namely the short circuit current (Jsc), open circuit voltage (Voc), fill-factor (FF), net cell resistance (Rdc), the voltage (Vmp) and current (Jmp) coordinates of the maximum power-point, and power conversion efficiency (η) of the test cell. IS detects the individual signatures of the cell's metalized contacts, the n+–p diode as well as the p–p+ BSF junction. Section 2 of this report introduces the notations and the theoretical framework used here for data analysis. The experimental procedures and findings are presented in subsequent sections.
2. Theoretical considerations
2.1. Equivalent circuit of a BSF Si solar cell

          BSF equipped c-Si cells typically contain a phosphorus-doped n+ emitter, a boron-doped p-type base, and an aluminium-doped p+ BSF, with Ag and Al metalized contacts at the front (emitter) and back (base) surfaces, respectively.10,12Fig. 1A (not drawn to scale) schematically shows the basic layout of such a cell. The n+–p junction is located at xj, and the depletion (or transition) region widths are wn and wp on the emitter and base sides, respectively; wn = Nawj/(Na + Nd) and wp = Ndwj/(Na + Nd);25Na and Nd are the acceptor and donor concentrations, respectively; wj is the total width of the space charge region (SCR) and depends on the dielectric function ε of the semiconductor. The formula of wj has been discussed elsewhere, for example, in eqn (5.57) of ref. 25. The built-in and the bias voltages of the n+–p junction are denoted as Vbi and Vj, respectively. Vbi = (kBT/|e|)ln(NaNd/n2i), where ni is the intrinsic carrier concentration; ni = (Nanp0)1/2 = (Ndpn0)1/2 with np0 and pn0 denoting the minority carrier concentrations in the base and emitter regions, respectively;25,26kB and T represent the Boltzmann constant and cell temperature, respectively; e is the electron charge. For n+ emitters (Nd ≫ Na), wn ≪ wp ≈ w.10 The sign of Vj is positive or negative, depending on whether the diode junction is forward (+VFB) or reverse (−VRB) biased.
 Fig. 1  (A) Schematic of a c-Si n+–p–p+ solar cell with a p+ BSF and an Al back-contact. The details of surface textures and the anti-reflection coating (ARC) are not included in the drawing. The depletion layer widths are wn and wp on the emitter and base sides of the diode junction (located at xj), respectively. The widths of the hole-accumulation and hole-depletion regions are wL and wH, respectively. Vbi and Vp0 are the built-in potentials at the n+–p and the p–p+ junctions, respectively. (B) The single-diode model of a c-Si solar cell, generalized here with the inclusion of the L–H junction and the metal-semiconductor back contact. The elements are described in the main text. 
Holes from the p+ side of the low–high (LH) interface (p–p+ BSF) diffuse into the p side to form a hole-accumulation layer at x0 − wL ≤ x ≤ x0 and a hole-depletion layer at x0 ≤ x ≤ x0 + wH. This sets up a built-in voltage Vp0 at x0; Vp0 = (kBT/|e|)ln(Na+/Na); Na+ is the hole-concentration in the p+ region. The net voltage drop at the LH interface is VLH.27 The electric field associated with the LH-SCR repels diffusing electrons from the n+–p junction back into the p-region, which contributes to increasing the cell-efficiency and constitutes the main function of the BSF.28 Since Vbi and Vp0 have the same polarity, the LH junction is forward biased when the emitter–base junction is forward biased.

Fig. 1B shows a generalized version of the single diode model of a c-Si solar cell29 including the elements of the LH junction and the leaky Schottky barrier formed at the back contact of Al.3,4 The box labeled “LH” in Fig. 1B represents the net impedance of the LH junction30 and is placed in the CEC following the model previously discussed by Green et al.31 and Glunz et al.32 The resistance Rsh in Fig. 1B describes the main shunt-path of electrons33 and is placed across the n+–p sector of the cell, assuming that electrons are effectively repelled by the LH-BSF. Jsh is the current through Rsh. JL and J are the light generated and net output currents of the cell, respectively. Jd′ is the current through the LH junction; Jd′ = Jd + Jsh, Jd is the diode current, and J = JL − Jd′.
The net series resistance of the cell is Rs, which contains a strictly ohmic component Rs0. The p+–Al Schottky diode shown in series with Rs0 represents the back contact of the solar cell34 and Rbc represents the non-ohmic leakage resistance of this diode:35Rs = (Rs0 + Rbc). The current source often associated with the Schottky diode is disregarded here since the illumination level (≤1 Sun) used in this work is insufficient to activate such a source. The front surface metallization (Ag/n+–Si) is assumed to be a stable ohmic contact.6,36
In the single-diode model, carrier recombination in the n+–p SCR is accounted for by using an effective diode ideality factor (m) in the formula of Jd:25,26,29 (1)where J0 is the effective reverse saturation current of the diode, which depends on two types of saturation currents, J01 for recombination in the quasi-neutral regions and J02 for recombination in the SCR of the n+–p diode.3,4J02 depends on the SCR width.10,37J01 = (J0b + J0e), with J0b and J0e representing the base and emitter components of J01, respectively; J0b = |e|DnnP0/Ln; J0e = |e|Dppn0/Lp; Dn(Dp) and Ln(Lp) are the diffusion coefficient and diffusion length of electrons (holes), respectively.26J01 and J02 are related to two separate ideality factors, with the values of 1 and 2, respectively.36 For the single-diode model, it is customary to take 1 ≤ m ≤ 2, where the lower and the upper bounds of m are expected at strong forward bias and reverse bias/weak forward bias voltages, respectively.4
The voltage at the emitter–base junction of the solar cell has the form: Vj = V + JRS − VLH, where the “current–source” convention (positive J) is adapted, and Ohm's law is assumed to define the potential drop at Rs. If J = 0, then V ≡ Voc = Vj + VLH. By setting this condition, in eqn (1), and using the above definition of Voc, (2)

Eqn (2) shows how the presence of the BSF in a solar cell can increase the value of Voc (and hence the efficiency) through the inclusion of VLH. Nevertheless, for typical BSF cells, VLH < Vp0 < 26 mV,27 whereas Vj in most J–V measurements for such cells vary over a range of at least 0.5 V. Based on this comparison, the contribution of VLH can often be ignored for practical evaluation of Vj.10,26,29
2.2. Resistive parameters affecting the D.C. response of the solar cell
To discuss the D.C. characteristics of the Si solar cell, the CEC of Fig. 1B is rearranged in Fig. 2A including a load resistance (Rl) and depicting the main resistive components of the n+–p diode. The resistance of the LH junction is RLH, which carries the current J′d. The D.C. behavior of the n+–p junction is determined primarily by the total resistance (Rj) of this junction:29Rj = [(Rd)−1 + (Rsh)−1]−1, where Rd is the diffusion resistance of the n+–p diode. The analytical form of Rd is found from the voltage dependence of J at intermediate and strong forward bias (FB) voltages where diffusion effects in the quasi-neutral regions prevail. Here, (1/Rd) = (∂/∂Vj)(Jdb + Jde), with Jdb and Jde denoting the base and emitter components of the diode diffusion current, respectively. The base (Rdb) and emitter (Rde) contributions to Rd are defined as Rdb = |∂Jdb/∂V|−1 and Rde = |∂Jde/∂Vj|−1, so that (Rd)−1 = (Rdb)−1 + (Rde)−1. According to the above definitions, (3)with Rde having essentially the same form of eqn (3), only with J0b replaced by J0e.
 Fig. 2  (A) Currents and resistive elements that govern the steady state operation of an n+–p–p+ Si solar cell. RLH is the resistance of the p–p+ junction; Rdb and Rde are the base and emitter contributions to the n+–p diode resistance, respectively. Rl and Rs represent the load and the net series resistances, respectively. (B) Cell-equivalent circuit showing the main A.C. parameters that control transient operations of the cell. The resistive elements are the same as those considered in (A). Cdb and Cde are the diffusion capacitances of the base and the emitter, respectively. CT and CLH are the capacitances of the space charge layers of the n+–p and the p–p+ junctions, respectively. (C) A composite version of (B), where Rj denotes the combined resistance of Rdb, Rde and Rsh; Cj is the net capacitance of the combination of Cdb, Cde and CT. The potentiostat applies both D.C. (V) and A.C. (Ṽ) voltages to the solar cell. 
The total D.C. resistance (Rdc) of the Si solar cell is defined as:29Rdc = −(∂J/∂V)−1, where J = JL − Jsh − Jd, and according to eqn (1), (4)
Since JL and Jsh are independent of variations in VLH, one may define: RLH = (∂J′d/∂VLH)−1 ≈ −(∂J/∂VLH)−1. By taking derivatives of both sides of eqn (4), and incorporating the above definitions of Rdc and RLH in the resulting expression, the full expression for Rdc is obtained: (5)
For IS based characterization of Si solar cells, sometimes it is assumed that1Rdc ≈ (Rd + RS), and the conditions that lead to this special case of eqn (5) can be examined as follows. The identity, Rdc = (Rd + RS + RLH), holds if (i) Rd ≪ (∂Jsh/∂V)−1 and (ii) J ≪ (∂RS/∂V)−1 in eqn (5). Since (∂Jsh/∂V)−1 ≈ Rsh, the first condition is satisfied under FB, where |e|Vj ≫ mkBT in eqn (3), giving Rd ≪ Rsh ≈ (∂Jsh/∂V)−1. The second condition is met when the voltage dependence of Rs is weak or non-existent. The simple identity, Rdc ≈ (Rd + RS), requires a third condition, namely, (Rd + RS) ≫ RLH.
Under reverse bias, Rd becomes very large according to eqn (3). In this case, Rd(∂Jsh/∂V) ≈ (Rd/Rsh) ≫ [1 + J(∂Rs/∂V)], and consequently, eqn (5) then takes the form: Rdc(−VRB) ≈ Rsh[1+{(Rs + RLH)/Rd}]. Additionally, for large values of Rd, one has Rj ≈ Rsh and (Rs + RLH)/Rd ≪ 1, so that the above expression of Rdc simplifies as Rdc(−VRB) ≈ Rsh. Under strong FB, (Rd/Rsh) ≪ 1, Rj(VFB) ≈ Rd in eqn (5), and then: (6)
The left and the right hand sides of eqn (6) can be measured independently using LSV and IS, respectively. A comparison of these two sets of results can serve as a self-consistent check of both the D.C. and the A.C. measurements.
The role of Rs in determining the power delivery efficiency of the solar cell can be quantified as follows. The voltage (Va) between points P and E in the CEC of Fig. 2A has the form: Va = J(Rs + Rl) = J′d(Rj + RLH). Thus, Jd′ = J[(Rl+ Rs)(Rj + RLH)−1], and hence, J = (JL − J′d) = JL(Rj + RLH)(Rj + RLH +Rs + Rl)−1. The power (Pl) delivered to the load Rl is: Pl = J2Rl. The impedance matching criterion for maximum power delivery at a given D.C. bias is then obtained as: Rl = (Rj + RLH + Rs). The power dissipated (Ps) due to ohmic losses in Rs is: Ps = J2Rs. The efficiency (EP) of power delivery by the cell is defined as: EP = (Pl − Ps)/Pl = 1 − (Rs/Rl). EP is maximum when (Rs/Rl) ≪ 1, that is, under the condition of impedance matching, Rs/(Rj + RLH + Rs) ≪ 1. Thus the efficiency of the solar cell is maximized if Rs ≪ (Rj + RLH)(7)where Rj depends on the D.C. voltage bias of the solar cell. As shown later in this report, Rs and RLH also become voltage dependent in the region of maximum power-point of cell operation.
2.3. Impedance parameters affecting the A.C. response characteristics of the solar cell
If an A.C. perturbation signal (Ṽ) of angular frequency ω is applied between points “B” and “E” of the CEC in Fig. 2A, the capacitances embedded in this circuit will be brought out in addition to the resistances shown. The resulting A.C. version of this circuit then takes the form of Fig. 2B, where the capacitive components of the cell are explicitly included. Since RLH in the modified Ebers-Moll scheme is connected in series with the n+–p diode,31,32 the capacitance CLH of the LH-SCR appears in series with the capacitances of the emitter–base junction. Cdb and Cde are the base and emitter contributions to the diffusion capacitance Cd of the p–n+ diode, respectively. The transition (charge depletion) layer capacitance of this diode is CT. Under strictly D.C. conditions, Cd has the following well known form:26,30,37 [Cd]DC = [Cdb]DC + [Cde]DC or, (8)
The algebraic sum of Cdb and Cde in the expression of Cd indicates the analytical basis for connecting these two capacitances in parallel in Fig. 2.26
If Vj ≥ 3[mkBT/|e|], then J0 ≈ J01 and (Jdb/J0b) = (Jde/J0e) ≈ exp(|e|Vj/mkBT). In this case of forward bias, [Cdb]DC ≈ (e2L2nJdb)/(mkBTDn) and [Cde]DC ≈ (e2L2pJde)/(mkBTDp). By combining these identities in eqn (3), one obtains the minority carrier lifetimes in the emitter (τpn) and the base (τnp) of the solar cell: Rdb[Cdb]DC = (Ln2/Dn) = τnp, and Rde[Cde]DC = (Lp2/Dp) ≈ τpn. At relatively low A.C. frequencies, the dynamic diffusion capacitances are written as:25,26,29Cdb(ωτnp ≪ 1) = (1/2)[Cdb]dc, and Cdb(ωτnp ≪ 1) = (1/2)[Cdb]dc. Thus, τnp = 2Rdb[Cdb(ωτnp ≪ 1)](9)and likewise, τpn = 2Rde[Cde(ωτpn ≪ 1)].2,26 The area-normalized D.C. form of the transition layer capacitance can be obtained from the definition, [CT]DC = (ε/wj), and the A.C. version of this term also has the same form:26,29CT ≈ [(ε|e|Na)/{2(Vbi − Vj)}]1/2, for Nd ≫ Na. The net capacitance (Cj) of the n+–p junction is written as Cj = (CT + Cdb + Cde).
CNLS analysis of IS data can only detect Cj and Rj, but not the individual base and emitter components of these elements.18–21 The CEC corresponding to this description is shown in Fig. 2C, including the potentiostat used for LSV and IS. For the n+–p diode, J0e ≪ J0b,, Cd ≈ Cdb and Rd ≈ Rdb,10 so that Cj ≈ CT + Cdb and (1/Rj) ≈ (1/Rsh) + (1/Rdb). Under FB, the exponential terms of Cdb and Rdb dominate the expressions of Cj and Rj, respectively, leading to the results, (10) (11)where β = (|e|τnpJ0b)/(2mkBT). In reverse bias (Vj = −VRB), the exponential terms of Cdb and Rdb become negligibly small, making Rj(−VRB) = Rdc, and leading to the following Mott–Schottky expression for Cj(≡CT):26,29 (12)
By measuring Cj and Rj over a broad range of Vj, it is possible to extract CT and Cd from Cj, as well as Rsh and Rd from Rj according to the D.C. voltage dependencies of these elements.1,2 The diode ideality factor can be determined from the slopes of the Vj dependent linear plots of eqn (10) and (11).
In comparison with the case of the n+–p junction, theoretical treatments of the LH junction are considerably more complex and less explored, and do not readily lead to analytical solutions for CLH and RLH.27,38 Nevertheless, the system variables that dictate the values of these latter parameters can be briefly examined from phenomenological considerations. When the LH junction voltage changes in response to variations in Vj, the area-normalized density (Qp) of hole carriers, as well as the width parameters, wL and wH, of the LH-SCR change.27 These variations give rise to the differential capacitance of the LH junction: CLH = (∂Qp/∂VLH), where Qp can be obtained by integrating the spatially varying hole concentration (derived in ref. 27) in the LH region. Since the current through the LH junction is equal to Jd′ (Fig. 2A), the resistance of the LH junction can be defined as: (13)
When examined as a function of Vj, both CLH and RLH would display a combined voltage (Vj) dependent effect of the terms wL, wH and VLH.
It is necessary to emphasize in the present context that the so called “hole-depletion” region of the LH junction is never completely depleted of hole-carriers, because the hole-concentration in this region always remains ≥Na of the p-type base.27,28 Thus, unlike the depletion layer of the n+–p SCR, the LH-SCR contains mobile hole-carriers, and consequently, does not act like a high-impedance diode in the reverse bias.39 Furthermore, for typical Si solar cells with Al-BSFs, the hole-depletion layer is significantly thinner than the hole-accumulation layer of the BSF junction.27 Due to these reasons, CLH should not be considered as a “depletion capacitance” in the same sense as that describes CT of the n+–p SCR.38,39 The main difference between CT and CLH is that the former arises from immobile charges (ion-cores) of the n+–p SCR, whereas the latter is due to mobile hole-carriers of the LH-SCR. In this regard, CLH and RLH should contain the characteristic voltage dependent features of a diffusion capacitance and a diffusion resistance, respectively.
The considerations for IS based experimental detection of the LH junction can be noted as follows. The net impedance (Z) of the CEC shown in Fig. 2C is a series combination of the impedances Zj and ZLH of the n+–p and the L–H junctions, respectively. Therefore, the RLH–CLH loop will remain undetected in IS as long as the following conditions are satisfied: (i) Z′j ≫ Z′LH, and (ii) |Z″j| ≫ |Z″LH|, where the primed and double-primed terms represent real and imaginary impedance components, respectively. Considering the individual impedance elements of Fig. 2C, the last two conditions can be written as follows: (14) (15)
In eqn (14) and (15), Rj, Cj, RLH and CLH vary with changes in the D.C. bias of the cell. For a given set of IS parameters used, the entire CEC shown in Fig. 2C might only be observed in a certain range of V where eqn (14) and (15) are not satisfied, whereas the Rj–Cj branch alone might appear selectively at voltages that are favorable to meeting the conditions specified in these equations. If RjCj ≥ RLHCLH, and if eqn (14) is satisfied, then the condition of eqn (15) is automatically met.
The CECs in Fig. 2 are based on the traditional considerations of Kirchhoff's circuit rules, which provide a relatively simple method of treating the A.C. electrical behavior of the solar cell on equal footing with the standard diode-based D.C. circuit models of such cells.2,15,16,26,31,35 Recently, Bisquert et al. have introduced an alternate approach to the modeling of A.C. equivalent circuits for solar cells, where circuit configurations are developed considering the distribution of Fermi levels at selective contacts of the light-absorber.40 Typically, the CECs described in this latter formalism appear as transmission line networks, with special cases leading to circuits such as the one considered here in Fig. 2C.1,40
2.4. Verification of results for illumination and bias dependent impedance elements
If the temperature of the solar cell is externally controlled, then light induced thermal effects cannot change Jd and the impedance elements. Under these conditions, the main effect of illumination on the solar cell parameters comes through photocurrent induced alteration of the n+–p junction voltage (Vj ≈ V + [JL − Jd′]Rs).29 Because the impedance parameters of the n+–p junction depend on Vj, their apparent illumination dependencies also originate from that of Vj. Therefore, these diode parameters should appear independent of the level of moderate illumination (at ≤1 Sun) if they are examined on the JRs-compensated voltage scale of Vj. If CT, Cd, and Rd obtained with varying levels of cell illumination are plotted as functions of Vj, the measurement of the impedance parameters as well as that of Vj should be considered valid as long as the plots for the different illuminations overlay on each other. This forms the basis for a self-consistent method of validating the results of both the LSV and the IS measurements.
An essential step of the above test is the evaluation of Vj by measuring J and Rs with IS as functions of V at various cell illuminations. This in turn also requires validation of the Rs data, because the measurement of Rs for Si solar cells has been a subject of extensive discussion for a long time,35,41 and as noted here in eqn (7), Rs is critical in determining the cell's power delivery performance. The IS-measured Rs data can also be validated, as mentioned above, by checking the convergence of Rs values with respect to variable illuminations of the cell.
3. Experimental
All experiments reported here were carried out with the test cell and the light source enclosed in a dark Faraday cage setup on an Ealing Optical Table. The Si solar cell used for this study (2 × 2 cm2 surface area, VLSI standards model SRC-1000-TC-QZ), mounted on an aluminium block with an integral K-type thermocouple, was obtained from Newport Oriel. The manufacturer specified parameters for this cell included: FF = 75.6 ± 0.8%, η = 14.7 ± 0.3%, Isc = 127.3 ± 1.8 mA, and area = 3.998 ± 0.006 cm2. Cell illumination was achieved by using a Newport Model 91159 solar simulator (150 W, equipped with 1.5 AM-G filter) or a Feit Electric halogen bulb (12 V to 50 W, model MR16) with a 38° beam spread. A Lambda LK-350FM stable power supply, with 1 mV line- and load-regulations and 500 µV rms ripple, was used to operate the halogen lamp, which provided less than 0.005% noise in the detected signal. The solar simulator (associated with ∼1.5% rms noise) was used for I–V characterization and for measuring η of the cell, whereas the halogen lamp was used to record high resolution IS data under illumination. The temperature of the solar cell was measured with its built in thermocouple at a resolution of 0.1 °C, and was controlled with a model TC 24-10 Peltier thermoelectric controller (pulse width modulated) from TE technologies.
A PAR-versaSTAT-3 potentiostat with four terminals was used for LSV and IS. The working electrode (WE) and one of the reference electrodes (RE) of the potentiostat terminal were connected together to the back contact of the solar cell. The counter electrode (CE) and the other reference electrode were connected to the front fingers of the cell, and the applied D.C. voltage, V, was scanned at a rate of 5 mV s−1. The connecting leads between the cell and the potentiostat were designed carefully to avoid inductive elements. IS data were collected in the form of Nyquist impedance spectra with judiciously selected A.C. perturbation frequencies where high-frequency components of the series resistance were fully resolved and frequency dispersive effects were avoided. The presence of any inductive reactance in the high frequency end of the recorded spectrum was accounted for in the CNLS fits.
Typically, 196 frequencies (at specific intervals on a logarithmic scale) were included in the A.C. spectra with an amplitude of 5 mV (rms), maintained below kBT/|e| to avoid nonlinearities. The (cut-in, or threshold, or) knee voltage of the solar cell was ∼0.4 V. To probe the high-impedance response of the cell at V ≤ 0.4 V, the A.C. spectrum of IS was extended from 1 Hz to 100 kHz, whereas to examine the low-impedance behavior of the cell at V > 0.4 V, the perturbation frequencies were varied between 100 Hz and 100 kHz, with 98 frequencies taken with a linear spacing and 98 frequencies taken on a logarithmic spacing between 100 Hz and 100 kHz. These selections not only helped to minimize inductive effects at high frequencies, but also resulted in an even weighting between the high- and low-frequency decades. The “zero impedance” reference of the test setup at the device-under-test insertion point had a magnitude of <30 mΩ at 100 kHz. Recorded impedance spectra were validated using the standard frequency-comparison method.17 The modulus weighting scheme21 was used for CNLS calculations, and only those CECs having ≤5% uncertainty in each of the constituent elements were accepted for reporting.
4. Results and discussion
4.1. Current–voltage plots and D.C. parameters of a temperature- and illumination-controlled cell

Fig. 3 shows voltage dependent current (J) and power (P = JV) densities of the c-Si test cell, maintained at 25 °C. Plots (a)–(e) correspond to cell illuminations varied from 0 to 1 Sun in steps of 0.25 Sun. The measured currents (J = JL − Jd′) show the increasing trend of JL with increasing illuminations. The graphs in Fig. 3 demonstrate how the potentiostat used for LSV can explore both forward and reverse biased responses of the solar cell. This capability of LSV for probing extended negative voltage regions can be particularly useful for detecting nonlinear shunts of Si solar cells that generate hot-spots and pre-breakdown sites under reverse bias.42 The area boxed by the dashed lines in Fig. 3B represents the practical region for solar cell operation.
 Fig. 3  (A) Surface area normalized current, J, and (B) power, P, measured at 25 °C for a c-Si solar cell as functions of the D.C. bias voltage, V, at the illuminations of (a) 0, (b) 0.25, (c) 0.50, (d) 0.75 and (e) 1.00 Sun. The boxed sector in the upper right corner of panel B indicates the practical voltage region for solar cell operation. 
The values of Voc and Jsc, as well as those of Vmp and Jmp corresponding to the maximum power point (Pmp), determined from Fig. 3B are listed in Table 1. Because the test cell was maintained here at a constant temperature, the illumination dependent increase of Voc observed in Table 1 was restricted to the contribution of JL. Table 1 also lists the illumination dependent FF and η of the solar cell; FF = (JmpVmp)/(JscVoc), η = FF(JocVoc)/Pin, and Pin is the input power of incident photons.29 The observed values of these parameters are quite typical of c-Si solar cells with Al-BSF.11,42–44
Table 1 Illumination dependent parameters of the c-Si solar characterized in the present work using LSV and ISa




Parameter
0.25 Sun
0.50 Sun
0.75 Sun
1.00 Sun





a All measurements were performed with the cell temperature fixed at 25 °C.
b Obtained from eqn (2) using the voltage averaged value of m from Fig. 11 and Voc.
c Illumination independent and <1% deviated from mean values. For dark cells, Vbi = 0.769 V and Na = 2.39 × 1016 cm−3.





FF
0.712
0.736
0.747
0.752



η (%)
12.6
13.6
14.2
14.5



V
oc/V
0.556
0.580
0.594
0.603



J
sc/mA cm−2
7.95
16.0
24.0
32.0



V
mp/V
0.450
0.478
0.490
0.500



V
jmp
                    /V
0.454
0.485
0.511
0.525



J
mp/mA cm−2
7.03
14.3
21.7
29.0



P
mp/mW cm−2
3.16
6.82
10.6
14.5



R
s at Vmp/Ω cm2
0.69
0.72
0.86
0.90



R
j at Vmp/Ω cm2
59.9
33.1
20.3
15.7



C
j at Vmp/µF cm−2
0.13
0.22
0.39
0.53



V
bi/Vc
0.762
0.758
0.758
0.757



N
a
c/1016 cm−3
2.39
2.38
2.39
2.39



J
0
b
,
c/nA cm−2
0.76
0.76
0.76
0.77



R
LH
                     at Vmp/Ω cm2
9.3
8.2
6.1
4.7



C
LH at Vmp/Ω cm2
0.27
0.19
0.19
0.22




4.2. 
          D.C. bias dependent Nyquist plots and A.C. response characteristics of a temperature controlled cell

          IS experiments were performed at 25 °C with controlled variations of the D.C. bias (−0.4 to 0.6 V) and illumination (0–1 Sun). The Nyquist plots in Fig. 4–6 display illustrative results of these experiments. The symbols represent experimental data and the lines are CNLS fits to the data using the CEC of Fig. 2C. The complete set of these IS data matched the description of a single CEC (Fig. 2C), while the values of the individual circuit elements varied. Fig. 4 shows the evolution of the A.C. response of a dark solar cell maintained at 25 °C, as the D.C. voltage bias of the cell was varied. Nyquist plots, collected in groups from different sectors of the applied voltage span, are shown in panels (A)–(E) using optimized scales. The plots in Fig. 4A correspond to reverse and weakly forward biased regions, where Cdb ≪ CT ≈ Cj and Rj ≈ Rsh ≪ Rd. The dark n+–p diode remains turned off (J ≈ 0) throughout this region, resulting in rather high values of Z′ and Z″. CNLS fits to the Nyquist plots of Fig. 4A lead to a shorted out configuration for the RLH–CLH loop, implying that both eqn (14) and (15) are satisfied in this voltage region.
 Fig. 4  Nyquist spectra for a dark cell recorded at various D.C. voltages. The symbols represent experimental data and the lines are CNLS fits to the data using the circuit model of Fig. 2C. In (A), the plots of successively decreasing radii were collected at gradually increasing D.C. voltages in the following order: V = −0.400, −0.300, −0.250, −0.200, −0.150, −0.100, −0.500, 0, 0.050 and 0.10 V. In (B), the plots of large to small radii correspond to V = 0.150, 0.200, 0.250, 0.275, 0.300, 0.325, and 0.350 V. The plots of successively decreasing radii in (C) were recorded at 0.375, 0.400, 0.425, 0.450, 0.475, and 0.500 V. In (D) and (E), the diode of the solar cell was forward biased at V = 0.525 and 0.550 V, respectively, where the spectral signatures of the CLH–RLH loop appeared and became more prominent with increasing voltages. The vertical arrows in (D) and (E) indicate the approximate frequency region indicating the transition between the two time constants (RLHCLH) and (RjCj). 
As the D.C. bias of the solar cell is gradually increased from −0.4 to 0.1V, the p–n+ diode becomes more conductive,26,29 and this is indicated by the correspondingly decreasing radii of the semi-circular Nyquist graphs in Fig. 4A. This trend of decreasing Z′ and Z″ continues in Fig. 4B and C, as the diode of the solar cell is increasingly forward biased. At V > 0.4 V, the roles of Cdb (increasing in FB) and Rdb (decreasing in FB) become more prominent, and the diode impedance drops to a level where eqn (14) and (15) no longer hold. Consequently, the full CEC of Fig. 2C including the RLH–CLH unit becomes necessary in this region to obtain satisfactory CNLS fits to the data. In Fig. 4D and E, the solar cell behaves like an n+–p diode (Rj–Cj loop) at relatively lower frequencies on the right side of the vertical arrow and exhibits the RLH–CLH response of the p+–p BSF at higher frequencies on the left side of the arrow. As V increases further from 0.575 to 0.620 V (where Cj ≈ Cd and Rj ≈ Rd), the impedance of the dark cell displays additional drops. This is shown in Fig. 5, where the slanted dashed line indicates how the transition between the diode- and the BSF-dominated cell impedances depends on the D.C. forward bias.
 Fig. 5  Nyquist spectra for a dark cell, exploring the heavily forward biased region, 0.575–0.620 V in steps of 2.5 mV, where CLH and RLH were detected. The dashed line shows the approximate frequency region corresponding to the transition of time constants from (RLHCLH) to (Rj–Cj). The circles and the lines represent experimental data and CNLS fits to the data using Fig. 2C, respectively. 

Fig. 6 shows illustrative Nyquist spectra for a cell at 25 °C under 1 Sun. Fig. 6A presents plots, recorded at 25 mV intervals in the 0.375–0.475 V range, which corresponds to the “knee” region of plot (e) in Fig. 3A. The plots of the smaller radii represent higher voltages as the cell impedance drops with increased charge injection. All Nyquist plots recorded for the illuminated cell with bias voltages between −0.400 and 0.475 V lead to a simplified version of the CEC of Fig. 2C, where the RLH–CLH loop was shorted out. Once again, the RLH–CLH loop became detectable in the diffusion region (Cj ≈ Cd and Rj ≈ Rd) under strong forward bias between 0.500 and 0.630 V. Sample Nyquist plots collected for this latter case are shown in Fig. 6B–D. The arrows pointing at the plots of Fig. 6B and C indicate the transition region where the signature features of the Rj–Cj branch can be distinguished from those of the RLH–CLH loop. Fig. 6D provides a 3-D perspective of more Nyquist spectra recorded between 0.600 and 0.630 V at 2.5 mV intervals. A comparison of Fig. 6 with Fig. 4 and 5 indicates that the voltage induced IS features observed for the dark solar cells were largely maintained for the illuminated cells, and that only the overall cell-impedance was somewhat lowered for the illuminated cell.
 Fig. 6  
            D.C. voltage dependent Nyquist spectra for an n+–p–p+ Si solar cell illuminated at 1.0 Sun. The symbols and the lines show experimental data and CNLS fits to the data using Fig. 2C, respectively. The forward biased voltages (varied from 0.375 to 0.475 V in steps of 0.025 V) in (A) correspond to the knee region of the J–V plot (e) shown in Fig. 3A. (B) and (C) correspond to the strong forward bias regions, where CLH and RLH became detectable. The vertical arrows in (B) and (C) show the transition of time constants from RjCj to RLHCLH. (D) Nyquist plots in the heavily forward biased region, 0.60 to 0.63 V in steps of 2.5 mV. 
The CEC including a series combination of two45,46 (or more47) parallel R–C loops, as obtained here from Fig. 4 and 5 for the n+–p–p+ Si cell, has also been observed previously for other types of Si based solar cells and similar devices. In such cases, the interpretation of the extra R–C loops that appear in addition to the expected (Rj–Cj) loop of the n+–p junction depends largely on the configuration of the device used.45–47 In the present work, the A.C. circuit model of Fig. 2C is an extension of the D.C. circuit shown in Fig. 1B, which is a widely accepted model of Si solar cells with p–p+ BSFs.31,32 Therefore, based on the discussion of Section 2, we attribute the (RLH–CLH) unit that appears in addition to the expected (Rj–Cj) unit of the n+–p junction, to the LH junction formed at the BSF of the solar cell. Further evidence supporting this attribution of the (RLH–CLH) unit to the p–p+ junction of the solar cell is presented later in the context of Fig. 12.
4.3. Resistive components of the solar cell

Fig. 7A shows Rs measured at 25 °C using IS at different levels of cell illumination (0–1 Sun) as a function of V. Fig. 7B displays V-dependence of the potential drop JRs across Rs, determined by combining the results from Fig. 7A with the correspondingly measured J(V, Sun). Even though the voltage axis in Fig. 7A has not been scaled to that of Vj, the Rs data plotted there for the different cell illuminations overlay rather noticeably. The values of Rs in Fig. 7A are comparable both in their order of magnitude and their voltage response to those reported by Suresh for a back surface reflector field c-Si solar cell using IS at room temperature.2 The voltage independence of Rs at −0.40 ≤ Vj ≤ 0.36 V is due to the dominance of the ohmic contact resistance Rs0 within this range. Because the Schottky diode does not by itself act as a source of photocurrents at ≤1 Sun illumination,31,32 the plots of Rs in Fig. 7A appear largely independent of the light intensities. When J increases with increasing illumination JRs also increases accordingly.
 Fig. 7  (A) Surface area-normalized series resistance Rs and (B) voltage drop at Rs for a temperature (25 °C) controlled Si solar cell, as functions of illumination and terminal voltage of the cell. The circles, inverted triangles, crosses, triangles and squares represent 0, 0.25, 0.50, 0.75 and 1.00 Sun illuminations. 
The voltage dependence of Rs observed in the neighborhood of Vmp can be attributed to the non-ohmic term Rbc associated with the Al/p+–Si back contact of the solar cell. Al forms a low-barrier Schottky diode on p–Si.48 The tunneling current through such a diode varies as a function of the voltage drop across the diode. To describe this effect, Schroeder49 and Conley et al.50 have considered a voltage dependent tunneling resistance, which, in Fig. 1B of the present work, is taken as Rbc. The tunneling resistance of an unperturbed Al/p+–Si Schottky barrier with a typical value of Nd+ at 1019 cm−3 should be on the same order of magnitude of Rs found here in Fig. 7A.49 As seen in Fig. 2 of ref. 50, this tunneling resistance would display a potential induced maximum at the Fermi degeneracy of the semiconductor.49 The observed trend of the Rs–V plots in Fig. 7A matches the above descriptions of a voltage-perturbed Schottky diode.

Fig. 8A and B examine Rdc(V) and Rj(Vj), respectively, for different illuminations at 25 °C (Vj = V + JRs). The symbols represent the term (Rj + Rs + RLH) where the individual resistances were determined using IS. The line plots (a) and (b) denote Rdc obtained as from plots (a) and (e) of Fig. 3, respectively. The results of the A.C. and the D.C. measurements are in mutual agreement. Under reverse bias, Rsh measured with IS as well as Rdc measured with LSV is nearly independent of voltage variations. The order of magnitude and the rather insignificant illumination dependence of Rsh observed in Fig. 8A are consistent with previous findings.51–54
 Fig. 8  (A) Lines (a) and (b) represent Rdc as the inverse slope of the J–V plots recorded at 0 at 1 Sun illuminations, respectively. The symbols denote the term (Rj + Rs + RLH) measured using IS at different illuminations of the solar cell. (B) Resistance of the n+–p diode junction, measured using IS at different illuminations. (C) The dashed lines (a) and (b) represent the term, ln [Rdc] obtained as −(δJ/δV)−1 from the J–V plots recorded at 0 at 1 Sun illuminations, respectively. The symbols in (C) provide plots of ln [Rj], with Rj determined through IS measurements at different levels of cell illumination. In all three panels, the circles, inverted triangles, crosses, triangles and squares denote 0, 0.25, 0.75 and 1.00 Sun illuminations of the solar cell, respectively. The solid line through the symbols is a fit to the composite dataset using eqn (13). In (B) and (C), the voltage drop across Rs has been taken into account in the evaluation of the n+–p junction voltage. 
In the reverse- and weakly forward biased regions, the values of Rdc are dominated by those of Rj. Hence, the plots of Rj in this voltage region of Fig. 8B appear very similar to their counterparts for Rdc in Fig. 8A. At strong forward voltages, Rj ≈ Rd, and Rdc becomes considerably larger than Rj(Rd) alone, since Rs and RLH are on the same order as Rj. This is shown in Fig. 8C, where plots (a) and (b) represent the term ln [Rdc] obtained from the graphs of plots (a) and (e) in Fig. 3, respectively. The symbols denote ln [Rj] calculated using experimental IS data and the resulting graph falls below lines (a) and (b), showing that Rdc ≈ (Rs + Rj + RLH) > Rj ≈ Rd in this voltage region. The solid line through the symbols in Fig. 8C is a linear fit to the composite IS data, which, according to eqn (11), results in the value of m quoted in the figure. The plots of Rj in Fig. 8B are largely independent of the level of cell illumination, because the voltage axis has been rescaled here from V to Vj.
4.4. Capacitive components of the solar cell

Fig. 9A shows the n+–p diode capacitance Cj(V), recorded using IS at different levels of cell illumination. The mutually displaced locations of these plots (noticeable particularly between 0.5 and 0.6 V) demonstrate how photogeneration of charge carriers affects the n+–p junction voltage of the solar cell. These same data are plotted in Fig. 9B using the normalized voltage axis, V + JRs. The main panel in Fig. 9B shows the strong forward bias voltage region, and the inset shows the full experimental voltage range. The mutually superimposed appearance of the graphs denoted by the different symbols in Fig. 9B reinforces the point that photogenerated charge carriers affect the impedance parameters of the solar cell only by changing the value of Vj.
 Fig. 9  (A and B) Values of Cj for a temperature controlled (25 °C) Si solar cell, obtained from CNLS analysis of IS data, as functions of V and Vj, respectively. The different symbols, identified in (A), correspond to different levels of cell illumination. The inset in (B) shows the data for the full D.C. voltage range scanned to record IS. Panel (C) shows illumination and voltage dependent values of the term ln [Cj] on the JRs corrected voltage scale of Vj. These (diffusion capacitance) data in panel (C) are extracted from the highly forward biased regions of the graphs in (B). The straight line through the data in (C) is a calculated fit using eqn (10), yielding the diode ideality factor (m) as indicated. 
Under strong forward bias, Cj ≈ Cd, where the capacitance plots in Fig. 9B exhibit their exponential dependence on Vj. Data taken from this region of Fig. 9B are plotted in Fig. 9C in the form of eqn (10). The values of the diffusion capacitance obtained in this way are similar to those reported by other authors for similar solar cells.1,2,15 The linear fit to the combined symbols in Fig. 9C provides the diode ideality factor m indicated in the figure. This m, obtained from the Cd(Vj) data, is 17% smaller than the m determined by fitting the Rd(Vj) data in Fig. 8C. This suggests that Cd in Fig. 9C increases at a somewhat faster rate than the rate at which Rd in Fig. 8C decreases under the same conditions of increasing Vj. In terms of Fig. 2B, the D.C. diode current flows through Rd, whereas Cd is D.C. blocking, and only depends on the width and the density of the diffusion region. Therefore, in comparison with Cd, voltage induced variations of the current carrying element Rd might be more sensitive to the presence of defects and recombination centers. It is likely, in this view, that the value of m measured using the Cd(Vj) data would be in relatively better agreement (closer to 1) with the theoretically expected m. The results for m obtained from Fig. 8C and 9C are consistent with this description. Coupling of surface and bulk recombination of charge carriers could also contribute to the different D.C. response characteristics of Rd and Cd.27,38
The reverse and weakly forward biased data (symbols) for Cj (∼CT) at different cell-illuminations are presented as Mott–Schottky plots in Fig. 10A–E. The lines are fits to the data according to eqn (12). The slopes as well as the intercepts of these plots are mutually similar for the different light intensities. This is demonstrated more clearly in Fig. 10F, where all five plots from Fig. 10A–E, denoted by the different symbols, are graphed together. Consistent with the observations already made in Fig. 7–9, the five Mott–Schottky graphs for 0–1 Sun illuminations appear as a highly superimposed single plot in Fig. 10F. The line through the symbols in Fig. 10F indicates the linear fit to the composite data. Together with the results of Fig. 7–9, and based on the discussion of Section 2.4, the illumination independent capacitance data of Fig. 10 demonstrate once again the validity of the IS measurements reported here.
 Fig. 10  Mott–Schottky capacitance plots for a temperature controlled (25 °C) Si solar cell exposed to different light intensities. These data were recorded using IS in the voltage region (from −0.400 to 0.375 V) where the transition layer capacitance CT dominates the value of Cj. The n+–p junction voltage has been corrected for the potential drop at Rs, which leads to mutual coincidence of the plots for different illuminations in (F). The symbols are experimental data and the solid lines are straight line fits according to eqn (12). 
4.5. Built in potential, acceptor concentration, dark saturation current and ideality factor of the solar cell
The slopes, [2/(|e|εNa)], and the intercepts, [2Vbi/(|e|εNa)], of the line-fits in Fig. 10 provide the values of Na and Vbi listed in Table 1. The acceptor density of the p-base measured here falls within the commonly quoted range (1.5–4.0 × 1016 cm−3), for this parameter for c-Si solar cells.10,29 The results for Vbi also are consistent among the separate illumination controlled experiments and are comparable with previously reported values.1,2,10,25 Since the temperature and the illumination of the test cell were independently controlled, the values of Vbi in the four columns of Table 1 are essentially the same. The average values of Vbi (0.761 V) and Na (2.39 × 1016 cm−3) were obtained from the linear fit to the composite plot in Fig. 10F.
To determine the reverse saturation current J0, the recorded dark current data (J ≈ Jd) were plotted in Fig. 11 (symbols) using the voltage axis of Vj, and eqn (1) was applied (solid line) to fit these data with J0 and m treated as variable fitting parameters. This leads to the values of J0 and m indicated in Fig. 11. The value of m obtained in this way can be taken as an average ideality factor for the cell over the voltage range explored in Fig. 11. Breitenstein et al., have reported the diode ideality factor for a typical (undamaged) Si solar cell,55 where m was around 1.5 in the 0.0–0.3 V range, and continuously dropped to a value of 1.0 as the cell bias was increased from 0.3 to 0.6 V.48 These published results are consistent with the values of m obtained here in Fig. 8, 9 and 11, by operating the solar cell at 0.57–0.62 and −0.4–0.6 V, respectively.
 Fig. 11  Current–voltage data for a dark Si solar cell (maintained at 25 °C) used to determine the diode reverse saturation current (J0) and the voltage-averaged value of the diode ideality factor (m). The potential drop across Rs has been taken into account in the calculation of the n+–p junction voltage. The symbols represent experimental data and the solid line is a fit of eqn. (1) to these data, where J0 and m were used as fitting parameters, yielding the values shown. 
To check the consistency between the results of the dark and the illuminated cells, J0 was also determined for 0.25–1.00 Sun illuminations. The following expression, obtained from eqn (2) (without including the contribution of VLH), was used for this purpose: J0 ≃ Jscexp[−(|e|Voc)/(mkBT)]. The value of m from Fig. 11 and those of Jsc and Voc from Table 1 were used in this expression. These results for J0, as listed in Table 1, came out in good mutual agreement with each other for the different cell illuminations, as well as with that observed for a dark cell in Fig. 11. These results are also comparable with those previously published.56,57
4.6. Low–high (p–p+) junction parameters
As noted in the context of Fig. 4–6, the RLH–CLH loop of the CEC was only detected under forward bias at V > Vmp. Fig. 12 shows the variations of RLH and CLH, measured using IS as functions of Vj in this region at different illuminations. RLH and CLH vary in a coupled mode with mutually opposing trends, implying that both these elements are associated with a single component of the solar cell, and that they are representative of a specific time scale of charge transport. In the discussion of Fig. 1, 2 and 4–6, the origin of RLH and CLH has been associated with the p–p+ junction of the solar cell. The following observations from Fig. 12 present several lines of evidence in support of making this attribution.
 Fig. 12  IS-measured results for the D.C. bias dependent values of the (A) capacitance CLH, (B) resistance RLH, and (C) voltage VLH of the low–high (p–p+) junction located at the back surface of a temperature controlled (25 °C) Si solar cell. The different symbols, as identified in Fig. 9A, represent different levels of cell illumination. The n+–p diode junction voltage has been corrected for the potential drop at Rs. 
The foremost common feature of RLH and CLH that links these elements with the LH interface of the solar cell is the D.C. voltage range where they are detected. At Vj < 0.45 V, the electrical response of the n+–p diode junction shifts out of its low-impedance diffusion mode into the high-impedance charge-depletion mode. On the other hand, the LH junction operating predominantly under diffusion control cannot develop a complete charge depletion layer due to switching from forward to reverse bias.27,38,44 Consequently, with decreasing voltages, Rj increases significantly (Fig. 8B), accompanying a similar drastic rise in the reactance of Cj (drop in the value of Cj) (Fig. 9B), whereas the impedance of the p–p+ junction undergoes no such large scale increments under the same conditions.27 This explains why the conditions of eqn (14) and (15) become operative under reverse bias and low forward bias settings of the solar cell, where the impedance signature of the LH junction is overwhelmed by that of the n+–p diode.
Another predictable feature of the LH interface that can be noted in Fig. 12 is the mutually overlaying appearance of the plots collected at different illuminations. When variations in the light level change Vj by altering the values of J, then VLH also changes simultaneously due to its placement in series with Vj (Fig. 2A). Thus, rescaling of the voltage from V to Vj also normalizes the corresponding changes of the LH junction potential. The RLH and CLH graphs of Fig. 12 display this expected behavior of the LH junction.
For further verification of the origin of RLH, one can examine if the values of VLH implied by the results of Fig. 12C fall within the theoretically predicted range of typical p–p+LH junction voltages. To do this, an order of magnitude for VLH can be estimated from the experimental data of Fig. 11 and 12B, by assuming: VLH ≈ Jd′RLH ≈ JdRLH(16)at strong forward biased voltages (Jsh ≪ Jd) where RLH is detected. It is also reasonable to assume that in the presence of illumination, Jd only changes due to light induced changes in the values of Vj. This second assumption allows for the evaluation of Jd from eqn (1) as functions of both Vj and cell illumination using m and J0 from Fig. 11. The plot shown in Fig. 12C was obtained by combining these results for Jd and the RLH data from Fig. 12B in eqn (16). The most notable finding in Fig. 12C is that, VLH < kBT/|e| = 26 mV, throughout the range of Vj where RLH and CLH are found. This upper bound of VLH is a distinct attribute of typical p–p+LH junctions involving p–Si and Al-diffused p+–Si. This restriction on the value of VLH originates from the fact that the hole “depletion” layer formed on the p+ side of such a p–p+ junction is considerably thin (∼6 nm) compared to the hole accumulation layer (0.2–0.6 µm) formed on the p side of the junction.27 As a result, the built-in potential (Vp0) of typical p–p+ junctions almost never exceeds the value of kBT/|e|, and VLH, which should always be less than Vp0, remains confined below this limit. 27
At 0.57 < Vj < 0.6, the values of RLH in Fig. 12B are relatively small (≪1 Ω cm2) and allow the approximate ohmic form of eqn (16) to serve as a satisfactory description of the VLH. In this voltage region, the VLH data of Fig. 12C for the different cell illuminations mutually overlay in the same fashion as the other CEC parameters studied here. At lower voltages, the VLH plots for the different light intensities break away from each other, but maintain a common feature in the form of a slight peak around Vmp. This peak in VLH is coupled with the similar feature observed in the voltage dependence of Rs in Fig. 7A. Most probably, the variations in VLH affect the Fermi degeneracy of the p+ Si at the back contact, which in turn causes the voltage dependent peak in Rs.49,50 Such an effect could be dictated by an interplay between the charge transport characteristics of the BSF and those of the Al back contact.27 Nevertheless, the voltage region (0.45 < Vj < 0.55 V) that seems to promote this effect leads to relatively larger values of the differential resistance RLH, where the simple ohmic form of eqn (16) may no longer serve as a reasonable formulation of VLH.
Finally, one may examine how the observed voltage dependencies of RLH and CLH fit in the description of charge transport in the p–p+ LH junction. The variations of RLH and CLH contain contributions of multiple voltage induced effects, including those of the parameters VLH, wL and wH. Nevertheless, the voltage (Vj) dependencies of both RLH and CLH in Fig. 12A appear predominantly as exponential at 0.55 V ≤ Vj ≤ 0.60 V. According to Fig. 12C, this corresponds to the voltage range where VLH is linear in Vj, that is VLH = KVj, with K representing a (negative) constant of proportionality. This implies that RLH and CLH change exponentially with variations in the potential drop VLH across the LH unit, displaying the signature attribute of diffusion elements (similar to those of Rj and Cj). This observation is in full agreement with the point emphasized in the discussion following eqn (13) that both the resistive and the capacitive components of a p–p+ LH junction are strongly dictated by mobile hole-carriers (rather than by immobile ion cores).
To clarify this point further in a phenomenological sense, we note from eqn (1) that Jd′ ≈ Jdb in the FB region where VLH is linear in Vj. Therefore, in this voltage region, eqn (13) implies that RLH = |K(∂Jdb/∂Vj)−1| ≡ |K|Rdb. This in turn suggests that for 0.55 V ≤ Vj ≤ 0.60 V, RLH behaves essentially as a scaled version of Rj, because Rdb ≈ Rj at such FB voltages. Consequently, in the strong FB region of Fig. 12BRLH carries the same type of exponential voltage dependence of Rj that is observed in Fig. 8C. Because, RLH and CLH are mutually coupled, the considerations presented above in the discussion of RLH can also be used to explain the exponential voltage dependence of CLH observed in Fig. 12A.
The results discussed above explain in detail why the high-frequency secondary Nyquist arc detected in Fig. 4–6 at strong FB voltages should be associated with the LH junction of the BSF solar cell studied here. The RLH–CLH unit in the CEC of a BSF solar cell cannot be resolved in conventional D.C. characterization of such cells although its effects on η and Voc can be noted. Moreover, depending on the experimental control parameters, resistive contributions of the LH unit could interfere with Rs measurements (while the CLH branch would remain open in D.C. experiments).57,58
4.7. Relaxation times of charge carriers

Fig. 13A shows (RjCj) and (RLHCLH), determined from Fig. 8, 9 and 12 for different illuminations. At −0.45 ≤ V ≤ 0.00 V, RjCj is essentially equal to RshCT. With increasing forward bias, diffusion of injected charge carriers plays increasingly dominant roles in dictating the electrical behavior of the n+–p diode, and at V > Vmp, the electrical response of the BSF becomes measurable. As noted in Fig. 12C, VLH decreases with increasing Vj in this region. This causes the initial drop of RLHCLH while increasing Vj from 0.45 to 0.55 V in Fig. 13A. By further increasing Vj from 0.55 to 0.62 V (correspondingly decreasing VLH), the value of RLHCLH stabilizes around 2 µs while RjCj increases from 15 to 20 µs. The voltage dependencies of these parameters in the higher FB region are shown in Fig. 13B using the formal definitions of the characteristic relaxation times τnp and τLH of the n+–p and the p–p+ junctions, respectively. The factor of 2 has been empirically introduced in the formulation of τLH to be consistent with the definition of τnp.
 Fig. 13  (A) Characteristic relaxation times, RjCj and RLHCLH, of charge carriers in the regions of the diode (n+–p) and low–high (p–p+) junctions of a temperature controlled (25 °C) Si solar cell, plotted as functions of the junction voltage of the diode. The different symbols (identified in Fig. 9A) represent different degrees of cell-illumination. (B) Voltage (JRs corrected) and illumination (different symbols) dependent values of the relaxation times τnp and τLH. The different illuminations represented by the different symbols in (B) are the same as those in (A). 
The values of τnp observed in Fig. 13B are consistent with previously reported minority carrier lifetimes in the p-type base of similar BSF cells.2Fig. 13B indicates an increasing trend of τnp as Vj increases from 0.55 to 0.62 V. This is a consequence of the somewhat different rates of the voltage induced variations in Cd and Rd, as already indicated in the different values of m in Fig. 8C and 9C. As noted in the discussion of Fig. 9C, this effect could arise from a voltage activated coupling between surface and bulk recombination processes.59,60 The τLH data in Fig. 13B are largely voltage independent and consistent with the ∼5 µs value previously reported for hole relaxation time in Al-doped BSF of Si.61 The voltage independent behavior of τLH seen in Fig. 13B can be explained by noting that VLH in Fig. 12C drops to its minimum values in the corresponding range of Vj. The SCR of the LH junction should be almost fully relaxed and unaffected due to the weakened forward bias of VLH under these conditions.
5. Conclusions
The techniques of IS and LSV have been combined in this work for detailed electro-analytical characterization of a c-Si solar cell, with a specific focus on the relatively under-explored electrical characteristics of the BSF and the Al-back contact of the device. The experiments demonstrate the importance of temperature controlled measurements, as well as the relevance of adequately normalizing the emitter–base junction voltage Vj from the measured terminal voltage of the solar cell. The standard D.C. cell parameters are measured using LSV. The IS data show how illumination (≤1 Sun) dependent variations of the cell's impedance parameters are rooted in light-induced changes in the emitter–base interfacial voltage. A non-ohmic, D.C. bias dependent component of Rs is detected using IS, which is attributed to the leakage resistance at the Al–p+ back contact. The different effects of the depletion- and diffusion-controlled charge transport regimes have been identified. The measured A.C. parameters of the solar cell have been analyzed to determine the built in potential of the n+–p junction, the concentration of acceptors and the lifetime of electrons in the base, as well as the relaxation time of holes at the LH interface of the BSF. The findings reported here not only demonstrate the utility of LSV and IS for solar cell characterization, but also illustrate the experimental criteria necessary for detailed evaluations of the cell parameters.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Army Research Office (grant no. W911NF-05-1-0339).
References
I. Mora-Seró, G. Garcia-Belmonte, P. P. Boix, M. A. Vázquez and J. Bisquert, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 678–686 RSC .
M. S. Suresh, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1996, 43, 21–28 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. H. van der Heide, A. Schönecker, J. H. Bultman and W. C. Sinke, Progr. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2005, 13, 3–16 Search PubMed .
E. Radziemska, Energy Convers. Manage., 2005, 46, 1485–1494 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, D. Inns and D. K. Sadana, J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 107, 073507-1–073507-4 .
S. W. Glunz, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 3276–3284 CrossRef CAS .
J. Degoulange, I. Perichaud, C. Trassy and S. Martinuzzi, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 1269–1273 CrossRef CAS .
G. delCoso, C. del Cañizo and W. C. Sinke, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 345–349 CrossRef CAS .

          H. J. Hovel, in Semiconductors and Semimetals, ed. R. K. Willardson and A. C. Beer, Academic Press, New York,  1975, vol. 11 Search PubMed .

          J. Nelson, The Physics of Solar Cells, Imperial College Press, London,  2004 Search PubMed .
M. A. Green, K. Emery, D. L. King, Y. Hisikawa and W. Warta, Progr. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2006, 14, 45–51 Search PubMed .
S. W. Glunz, Adv. OptoElectron., 2007, 1, 97370-1–97370-15 Search PubMed .
Q. Wang, J.-E. Moser and M. Grätzel, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 14945–14953 CrossRef CAS .
M. Glatthaaa, M. Riede, N. Keegan, K. Sylvester-Hvid, B. Zimmermann, M. Niggemann, A. Hinsch and A. Gombert, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 390–393 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Kumar, M. S. Suresh and J. Nagaraju, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2000, 60, 155–166 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chenvidhy, K. Kirtikara and C. Jivacate, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2003, 80, 459–464 CrossRef .
J. E. Garland, C. M. Pettit and D. Roy, Electrochim. Acta, 2004, 49, 2623–2635 CrossRef CAS .

Impedance Spectroscopy, ed. E. Barsoukov and J. R. Macdonald, Wiley, Hoboken, 2nd edn,  2005 Search PubMed .

          M. E. Orazem and B. Tribollet, Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy, Wiley, Hoboken,  2008 Search PubMed .
B. A. Boukamp, Solid State Ionics, 2004, 169, 65–73 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Sluyters-Rebach and J. H. Sluyters, in Electroanal. Chem, ed. A. J. Bard, Marcel Dekker, New York,  1970, vol. 4, p. 1 Search PubMed .

          A. J. Bard and L. R. Faulkner, Electrochemical Methods: Fundamentals and Applications, Wiley, New York,  2001 Search PubMed .
C. M. Pettit, P. C. Goonetilleke, C. M. Sulyma and D. Roy, Anal. Chem., 2006, 78, 3723–3729 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Pettit, J. E. Garland, M. J. Walters and D. Roy, Electrochim. Acta, 2004, 49, 3293–3304 CrossRef CAS .

          B. G. Streetman, Solid State Electronic Devices, Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs,  1995 Search PubMed .

          J. Millman and C. C. Halkias, Integrated Electronics, McGraw Hill, London,  1972 Search PubMed .
S. N. Singh and P. K. Singh, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 1991, 38, 337–343 CrossRef .
A. Morales-Acevedo, G. Santana, A. Martel and L. Hernández, Solid-State Electron., 1999, 43, 2075–2079 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Goetzberger, J. Knobloch and B. Voss, Crystalline Silicon Solar Cells, J. Wiley, New York,  1998 Search PubMed .

          S. M. Sze, Physics of Semiconductor Devices, J. Wiley, New York,  1981 Search PubMed .
M. A, Green, A. W. Blakers, J. Zhao, A. M. Milne, A. Wang and X. Dai, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 1990, 37, 331–336 CrossRef CAS .

          S. W. Glunz, J. Nekarda, H. Mäckel and A. Cuevas, Proc. 22nd European Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conference, Milan, Italy, 3–7 September, 2007, pp. 849–853.
O. Breitenstein, J. P. Rakotoniaina, M. H. Rifai and M. Werner, Progr. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2004, 12, 529–538 Search PubMed .
İ. Dökme, S. Altindal and M. Bülbül, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2006, 252, 7749–7754 CrossRef .
M. Wolf and H. Rauschenbach, Adv. Energy Convers., 1963, 3, 455–479 CrossRef .
C. Ballif, D. M. Huljić, G. Willeke and A. Hessler-Wyser, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 82, 1878–1880 CrossRef CAS .

          S. S. Li, Semiconductor Physical Electronics, Plenum Press, New York,  1993 Search PubMed .
S. S. De, A. K. Ghosh, M. Bera, A. Hajra and J. C. Haldar, Physica B (Amsterdam), 1996, 228, 363–368 CrossRef CAS .
O. von Roos, J. Appl. Phys., 1978, 49, 3503–3510 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Bisquert, J. Garcia-Canadas, I. Mora-Seró and E. Palomares, Organic Photovoltaics IV, in Proceedings of SPIE, ed. Z. H. Kafafi and P. A. Lane, SPIE, Bellingham, WA,  2004, vol. 5215, pp. 49–59 Search PubMed .
M. Bashahu and A. Habyarimana, Renewable Energy, 1995, 6, 129–138 CrossRef CAS .
O. Breitenstein, J. Bauer, T. Trupke and R. A. Bardos, Progr. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2008, 16, 325–330 Search PubMed .
D. Muñoz, C. Voz, I. Martin, A. Orpella, R. Alcubilla, F. Villar, J. Bertomeu, J. Andreu and P. Roca-i-Cabarrocas, Thin Solid Films, 2008, 516, 6782–6785 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Fossum, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 1977, 24, 322–325 CrossRef .
I. Mora-Seró, Y. Luoa, G. Garcia-Belmonte, J. Bisquert, D. Muñoz, C. Voz, J. Puigdollers and R. Alcubill, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 505–509 CrossRef CAS .
L. Raniero, E. Fortunato, I. Ferreira and R. Martins, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2006, 352, 1880–1883 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kumar, P. K Singh, G. S. Chilana and S. R. Dhariwal, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2009, 24, 095001–095008 CrossRef .
G. A. Adegboyega, A. Poggi, E. Susi, A. Castaldini and A. Cavallini, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 1989, 48, 391–395 CrossRef .

          D. Schroeder, in Simulation of Semiconductor Devices and Processes, ed. W. Fichtner and D. Aemmer, Hartung-Gore Verlag, Zurich,  1991, vol. 4, pp. 313–319 Search PubMed .
J. W. Conley, C. B. Duke, G. D. Mahan and J. J. Tiemann, Phys. Rev., 1966, 150, 466–469 CrossRef CAS .
O. Breitenstein, A. Kaminski, J. J. Marchand and A. Laugier, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1998, 51, 221–231 CrossRef .
S. Banerjee and W. A. Anderson, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1986, 49, 38–40 CrossRef CAS .
Priyanka, M. Lal and S. N. Singh, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 137–142 CrossRef .
I. M. Ikram, M. K. Rabinal and B. G. Mulimani, Eur. J. Phys., 2009, 30, 127–134 CrossRef CAS .
O. Breitenstein, J. Bauer, A. Lotnyk and J.-M. Wagner, Superlattices Microstruct., 2009, 45, 182–189 CrossRef CAS .
H. Plagwitz and R. Brendel, Progr. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2006, 14, 1–12 Search PubMed .
F. Khan, S. N. Singh and M. Husain, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2010, 25, 015002 CrossRef .
M. Chegaar, G. Azzouzi and P. Mialhe, Solid-State Electron., 2006, 50, 1234–1237 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Arch, R. Brendel and J. H. Werner, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1997, 45, 309–322 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Bruno, M. G. Martínez Bogado, J. C. Plá and J. C. Durán, Phys. Status Solidi A, 1999, 174, 231–238 CrossRef CAS .
R. Lago-Aurrekoetxea, C. del Cañizo, I. Tobías and A. Luque, Solid-State Electron., 2005, 49, 49–55 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:

Broader context
Novel materials and new processing techniques have played increasingly important roles in the advancement of photovoltaic (PV) energy conversion through the last decade. This in turn has placed significant new demands on the PV characterization tools for quantitative measurement and analysis of a broad range of performance-indicator parameters of the next generation solar cells. The electro-analytical probe of impedance spectroscopy (IS) has emerged in recent years as a powerful characterization technique that is potentially capable of meeting these demands. The present study explores these analytical features of IS by combining it with linear sweep voltammetry and by using a model system of a mono-crystalline silicon solar cell. In addition to determining the standard performance parameters of the solar cell, the characteristic electrical features of the back-surface field (an efficiency-enhancing feature of Si based cells) have been studied here in detail. The results demonstrate how electro-analytical experiments can rapidly gather rather large amounts of data for efficient and accurate measurements of a variety of solar cell parameters as functions of illumination, voltage and temperatures. The general framework of this experimental approach can readily be extended to characterization studies of other types of inorganic and organic solar cells.


 	Fig. 1  (A) Schematic of a c-Si n+–p–p+ solar cell with a p+ BSF and an Al back-contact. The details of surface textures and the anti-reflection coating (ARC) are not included in the drawing. The depletion layer widths are wn and wp on the emitter and base sides of the diode junction (located at xj), respectively. The widths of the hole-accumulation and hole-depletion regions are wL and wH, respectively. Vbi and Vp0 are the built-in potentials at the n+–p and the p–p+ junctions, respectively. (B) The single-diode model of a c-Si solar cell, generalized here with the inclusion of the L–H junction and the metal-semiconductor back contact. The elements are described in the main text.	 
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)

 	Fig. 2  (A) Currents and resistive elements that govern the steady state operation of an n+–p–p+ Si solar cell. RLH is the resistance of the p–p+ junction; Rdb and Rde are the base and emitter contributions to the n+–p diode resistance, respectively. Rl and Rs represent the load and the net series resistances, respectively. (B) Cell-equivalent circuit showing the main A.C. parameters that control transient operations of the cell. The resistive elements are the same as those considered in (A). Cdb and Cde are the diffusion capacitances of the base and the emitter, respectively. CT and CLH are the capacitances of the space charge layers of the n+–p and the p–p+ junctions, respectively. (C) A composite version of (B), where Rj denotes the combined resistance of Rdb, Rde and Rsh; Cj is the net capacitance of the combination of Cdb, Cde and CT. The potentiostat applies both D.C. (V) and A.C. (Ṽ) voltages to the solar cell.	 
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)
Rs ≪ (Rj + RLH)	(7)
	(8)
τnp = 2Rdb[Cdb(ωτnp ≪ 1)]	(9)
	(10)
	(11)
	(12)
	(13)
	(14)
	(15)

 	Fig. 3  (A) Surface area normalized current, J, and (B) power, P, measured at 25 °C for a c-Si solar cell as functions of the D.C. bias voltage, V, at the illuminations of (a) 0, (b) 0.25, (c) 0.50, (d) 0.75 and (e) 1.00 Sun. The boxed sector in the upper right corner of panel B indicates the practical voltage region for solar cell operation.	 


FF	0.712	0.736	0.747	0.752

η (%)	12.6	13.6	14.2	14.5

V
oc/V	0.556	0.580	0.594	0.603

J
sc/mA cm−2	7.95	16.0	24.0	32.0

V
mp/V	0.450	0.478	0.490	0.500

V
jmp
                    /V	0.454	0.485	0.511	0.525

J
mp/mA cm−2	7.03	14.3	21.7	29.0

P
mp/mW cm−2	3.16	6.82	10.6	14.5

R
s at Vmp/Ω cm2	0.69	0.72	0.86	0.90

R
j at Vmp/Ω cm2	59.9	33.1	20.3	15.7

C
j at Vmp/µF cm−2	0.13	0.22	0.39	0.53

V
bi/Vc	0.762	0.758	0.758	0.757

N
a
c/1016 cm−3	2.39	2.38	2.39	2.39

J
0
b
,
c/nA cm−2	0.76	0.76	0.76	0.77

R
LH
                     at Vmp/Ω cm2	9.3	8.2	6.1	4.7

C
LH at Vmp/Ω cm2	0.27	0.19	0.19	0.22

 	Fig. 4  Nyquist spectra for a dark cell recorded at various D.C. voltages. The symbols represent experimental data and the lines are CNLS fits to the data using the circuit model of Fig. 2C. In (A), the plots of successively decreasing radii were collected at gradually increasing D.C. voltages in the following order: V = −0.400, −0.300, −0.250, −0.200, −0.150, −0.100, −0.500, 0, 0.050 and 0.10 V. In (B), the plots of large to small radii correspond to V = 0.150, 0.200, 0.250, 0.275, 0.300, 0.325, and 0.350 V. The plots of successively decreasing radii in (C) were recorded at 0.375, 0.400, 0.425, 0.450, 0.475, and 0.500 V. In (D) and (E), the diode of the solar cell was forward biased at V = 0.525 and 0.550 V, respectively, where the spectral signatures of the CLH–RLH loop appeared and became more prominent with increasing voltages. The vertical arrows in (D) and (E) indicate the approximate frequency region indicating the transition between the two time constants (RLHCLH) and (RjCj).	 

 	Fig. 5  Nyquist spectra for a dark cell, exploring the heavily forward biased region, 0.575–0.620 V in steps of 2.5 mV, where CLH and RLH were detected. The dashed line shows the approximate frequency region corresponding to the transition of time constants from (RLHCLH) to (Rj–Cj). The circles and the lines represent experimental data and CNLS fits to the data using Fig. 2C, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 6  
            D.C. voltage dependent Nyquist spectra for an n+–p–p+ Si solar cell illuminated at 1.0 Sun. The symbols and the lines show experimental data and CNLS fits to the data using Fig. 2C, respectively. The forward biased voltages (varied from 0.375 to 0.475 V in steps of 0.025 V) in (A) correspond to the knee region of the J–V plot (e) shown in Fig. 3A. (B) and (C) correspond to the strong forward bias regions, where CLH and RLH became detectable. The vertical arrows in (B) and (C) show the transition of time constants from RjCj to RLHCLH. (D) Nyquist plots in the heavily forward biased region, 0.60 to 0.63 V in steps of 2.5 mV.	 

 	Fig. 7  (A) Surface area-normalized series resistance Rs and (B) voltage drop at Rs for a temperature (25 °C) controlled Si solar cell, as functions of illumination and terminal voltage of the cell. The circles, inverted triangles, crosses, triangles and squares represent 0, 0.25, 0.50, 0.75 and 1.00 Sun illuminations.	 

 	Fig. 8  (A) Lines (a) and (b) represent Rdc as the inverse slope of the J–V plots recorded at 0 at 1 Sun illuminations, respectively. The symbols denote the term (Rj + Rs + RLH) measured using IS at different illuminations of the solar cell. (B) Resistance of the n+–p diode junction, measured using IS at different illuminations. (C) The dashed lines (a) and (b) represent the term, ln [Rdc] obtained as −(δJ/δV)−1 from the J–V plots recorded at 0 at 1 Sun illuminations, respectively. The symbols in (C) provide plots of ln [Rj], with Rj determined through IS measurements at different levels of cell illumination. In all three panels, the circles, inverted triangles, crosses, triangles and squares denote 0, 0.25, 0.75 and 1.00 Sun illuminations of the solar cell, respectively. The solid line through the symbols is a fit to the composite dataset using eqn (13). In (B) and (C), the voltage drop across Rs has been taken into account in the evaluation of the n+–p junction voltage.	 

 	Fig. 9  (A and B) Values of Cj for a temperature controlled (25 °C) Si solar cell, obtained from CNLS analysis of IS data, as functions of V and Vj, respectively. The different symbols, identified in (A), correspond to different levels of cell illumination. The inset in (B) shows the data for the full D.C. voltage range scanned to record IS. Panel (C) shows illumination and voltage dependent values of the term ln [Cj] on the JRs corrected voltage scale of Vj. These (diffusion capacitance) data in panel (C) are extracted from the highly forward biased regions of the graphs in (B). The straight line through the data in (C) is a calculated fit using eqn (10), yielding the diode ideality factor (m) as indicated.	 

 	Fig. 10  Mott–Schottky capacitance plots for a temperature controlled (25 °C) Si solar cell exposed to different light intensities. These data were recorded using IS in the voltage region (from −0.400 to 0.375 V) where the transition layer capacitance CT dominates the value of Cj. The n+–p junction voltage has been corrected for the potential drop at Rs, which leads to mutual coincidence of the plots for different illuminations in (F). The symbols are experimental data and the solid lines are straight line fits according to eqn (12).	 

 	Fig. 11  Current–voltage data for a dark Si solar cell (maintained at 25 °C) used to determine the diode reverse saturation current (J0) and the voltage-averaged value of the diode ideality factor (m). The potential drop across Rs has been taken into account in the calculation of the n+–p junction voltage. The symbols represent experimental data and the solid line is a fit of eqn. (1) to these data, where J0 and m were used as fitting parameters, yielding the values shown.	 

 	Fig. 12  IS-measured results for the D.C. bias dependent values of the (A) capacitance CLH, (B) resistance RLH, and (C) voltage VLH of the low–high (p–p+) junction located at the back surface of a temperature controlled (25 °C) Si solar cell. The different symbols, as identified in Fig. 9A, represent different levels of cell illumination. The n+–p diode junction voltage has been corrected for the potential drop at Rs.	 
VLH ≈ Jd′RLH ≈ JdRLH	(16)

 	Fig. 13  (A) Characteristic relaxation times, RjCj and RLHCLH, of charge carriers in the regions of the diode (n+–p) and low–high (p–p+) junctions of a temperature controlled (25 °C) Si solar cell, plotted as functions of the junction voltage of the diode. The different symbols (identified in Fig. 9A) represent different degrees of cell-illumination. (B) Voltage (JRs corrected) and illumination (different symbols) dependent values of the relaxation times τnp and τLH. The different illuminations represented by the different symbols in (B) are the same as those in (A).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
