Self-organization of tetrapyrrole constituents to give a photoactive protocell   - Chemical Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2SC01120D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2SC01120D
(Edge Article)
Chem. Sci., 2012, 3, 1963-1974Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsSelf-organization of tetrapyrrole constituents to give a photoactive protocell†

        
          
            Ana R. M. 
            Soares
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Masahiko 
            Taniguchi
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Vanampally 
            Chandrashaker
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Jonathan S. 
            Lindsey
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemistry, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC 27695, USA. E-mail: jlindsey@ncsu.edu
Received 
      26th December 2011
    , Accepted 28th February 2012First published on 22nd March 2012AbstractA tandem combinatorial reaction of four acyclic, colorless compounds (two α-aminoketones and two diones; one polar and one nonpolar for each) in aqueous solution (30 mM each, 60 °C, pH 7, 24 h) containing lipid vesicles and with or without quinones and solar illumination affords a distribution of up to 538 porphyrins in 1.6–3.9% overall yield. The reactions leading to the porphyrins can occur in either or both the aqueous phase and the hydrophobic membrane of the vesicles. The porphyrins encompass a broad range of polarity and partition in the aqueous-lipid medium. Two fractions obtained by size-exclusion chromatography include porphyrins associated with the lipid vesicles and porphyrins in the aqueous phase. The porphyrins in both phases are photoactive as demonstrated by fluorescence quantum yield measurements (Φf ∼ 0.07–0.08) and by the Krasnovsky reaction (a photosynthetic-like process). The constituents of the Krasnovsky reaction employed here are methyl red, ascorbic acid, and 2,6-dichlorophenolindophenol. Illumination of the two porphyrin-containing samples (aqueous phase or vesicles) in the presence of the Krasnovsky constituents results in the reduction of methyl red and oxidation of ascorbic acid. Thus, the overall process transforms a colorless aqueous suspension via four stages (two combinatorial reactions, oxidation, physical partitioning) to photoactive porphyrins in distinct venues. The process may provide a model for the origin of pigments that enable proto-photosynthesis.
Introduction
Photosynthesis ultimately provides the source of energy for almost all life on Earth, and is known to have played a central role in the evolution of the biosphere, but the role of light-driven processes in the origin of life remains uncertain.1–7 Oparin and Haldane, for example, proposed that the first cells were heterotrophs rather than autotrophs, obtaining energy by fermentation of primordial organic feedstocks rather than by photosynthesis. The rationale for their views stemmed from the greater perceived complexity of photosynthesis versus fermentation.2 The molecular complexity of modern photosynthesis is indeed extraordinary, with hundreds of (bacterio)chlorophylls participating as a unit in light-harvesting and energy-transduction processes.8 Modern biological fermentation processes are now known to also be quite complex.2 In photosynthesis, the tetrapyrrole macrocycles are typically organized in integral membrane proteins, and the energy derived from the absorbed quantum of light is stored upon separation of charge across a membrane. Nonetheless, simple constructs of porphyrins assembled in bilayer lipid membranes have been shown to undergo light-driven interfacial electron-transfer reactions and to pump protons across the membrane against a gradient.9,10 These processes—which reflect the inherent electronic properties, excited-state features, and versatile physicochemical attributes of tetrapyrrole macrocycles—augur well for the occurrence of photosynthetic-like phenomena in systems far simpler than those in modern photosynthetic cells. A fundamental question in this regard is whether a simple form of photosynthesis (proto-photosynthesis)1–4,11,12 can originate spontaneously and thereby fuel the first cells (protocells)13via Earth-abundant sunlight. To address this question depends in part upon identification of simple pathways for the formation and self-organization of the constituents.
We recently described a tandem combinatorial process whereby four relatively simple acyclic reactants (two diones and two aminoketones) combine to form four pyrroles, which undergo self-condensation to give the corresponding porphyrinogens.14 Virtual library generation indicated that 538 porphyrinogens can potentially form from the four pyrroles. The two combinatorial reactions are illustrated in stages 1 and 2 in Fig. 1. The presence of one polar and one nonpolar substituent in each pair of acyclic reactants results in one pyrrole substituted with two hydrophobic groups, one pyrrole with two hydrophilic groups, and two pyrroles wherein each has one hydrophobic and one hydrophilic group. The resulting collection of tetrapyrrole macrocycles encompasses molecules of diverse polarity owing to the pattern of polar and nonpolar groups about the perimeter of the macrocycle, including those that are hydrophilic, amphiphilic, hydrophobic, or of uncertain polarity. While routes to the acyclic reactants from early Earth-available substances are not known (and their presence in the prebiotic era may never be known), the chemical reactions provide a model for examining the possible prebiogenesis of diverse tetrapyrrole macrocycles.
 Fig. 1  Self-organization of constituents to give a photoactive protocell. The distinct stages include (1) combinatorial formation of pyrroles, (2) combinatorial formation of porphyrinogens, (3) oxidation to form porphyrins and (4) aqueous-membrane partitioning (“P” denotes porphyrins). The 4 of 538 possible macrocycles displayed (clockwise from top left: uroporphyrinogen III, coproporphyrinogen I, etioporphyrinogen I, and mesoporphyrinogen IX) represent the four polarity categories; the relative amounts of each category are derived by calculation. Aqueous-membrane partitioning can also occur at stages 1–3. 
In this paper, we examine the tandem combinatorial reactions in conjunction with two additional processes in situ: the oxidation of the porphyrinogens to give the corresponding porphyrins, and the partitioning of individual porphyrins in the aqueous phase or in vesicles composed of phosphatidylcholine (stages 3 and 4, Fig. 1). Thus, the overall process begins with the four acyclic reactants in aqueous solution containing vesicles and the presence or absence of an oxidant (one or two quinones). The resulting porphyrin mixtures in the two venues (aqueous phase, vesicles) are examined for photoactivity. Taken together, the multistage process outlined in Fig. 1 may provide a chemical model for the origin of pigments essential to proto-photosynthetic systems.
Results
In the previous paper, the combinatorial reaction of two diones (1-AcOH, 1-Me) and two aminoketones (2-PrOH, 2-Et) to give diverse porphyrinogens was performed in aqueous solution in the presence or absence of the surfactant sodium dodecylsulfate.14 The reactions were assessed by absorption spectroscopy following oxidation upon treatment with I2 (to accomplish the 6e−/6H+ oxidative conversion of porphyrinogens to porphyrins), by HPLC-ESI-MS of the porphyrinogens and of the porphyrins, and by HPLC with fluorescence detection of the porphyrins. Here, the reactions were carried out in the presence of vesicles (composed of phosphatidylcholine) rather than with sodium dodecylsulfate, and with in situ oxidation as described in the next section.
Oxidation
The combinatorial reactions of two diones (1-AcOH, 1-Me) and two aminoketones (2-PrOH, 2-Et) were carried out in the presence of large unilamellar vesicles (20 mM [lipid]). The reactions were performed in aqueous solution at pH 7 (potassium phosphate buffer) and 30 mM for each of the four reactants under anaerobic conditions for 24 h at 60 °C, followed by illumination. The results are shown in Table 1. The combination of light and hydrophilic and/or hydrophobic quinones was examined to identify suitable conditions for the oxidation of porphyrinogens to give the corresponding porphyrins. The hydrophobic quinone chosen was 2,3,5,6-tetrachloro-1,4-benzoquinone (TCQ, E1/2 = 0.01 V versus saturated calomel electrode (SCE))15 whereas the water-soluble quinone was 1,2-naphthoquinone-4-sulfonate (NQS, E1/2 = −0.027 V versus SCE).16 The concentration of quinone found empirically to give the highest yield (4 mM) was sub-stoichiometric on the basis of a 15 mM theoretical yield of porphyrinogen (Table S1†). The yield of porphyrins in the crude reaction mixture was determined by absorption spectroscopy. Subsequent treatment with I2 was performed to achieve complete oxidation and thereby determine the overall yield of porphyrins. Thus, oxidation was performed by two means: in situ photooxidation (light ± quinones) and/or subsequent chemical oxidation (upon treatment with I2).
Table 1 Data for in situ oxidation of the combinatorial reaction products in the presence of vesicles.a




Entry
Quinoneb

hν
c

Yield (%)
Percentage of oxidationf (%)


Crude reaction mixtured
After I2 oxidatione





a Each reaction mixture was carried out (30 mM for each reactant) for 24 h at 60 °C and pH 7 in the presence of vesicles (20 mM [lipid]), the glucose oxidase/catalase enzyme system, and 4 mM of quinone unless noted otherwise.
b The total concentration of quinone, when present, was 4 mM.
c Illumination was performed with a solar simulator for 69 min using an AM 0D filter (3 sun h).
d Yield of porphyrin in situ following stages 1–4 in Fig. 1.
e Yield upon treatment of a reaction sample from the crude reaction mixture (following stages 1–4) with I2 to give exhaustive conversion of porphyrinogens to porphyrins.
f Percentage of oxidation in the crude reaction mixture (following stages 1–4) versus that upon subsequent chemical oxidation (with I2).





1
No
No
1.6
8.9
18


2
No
Yes
3.2
8.9
36


3

NQS

No
2.7
7.2
38


4

NQS

Yes
3.0
5.6
54


5

TCQ

No
2.3
5.5
42


6

TCQ

Yes
3.3
6.9
48


7

NQS + TCQ
No
3.0
7.2
42


8

NQS + TCQ
Yes
3.9
6.7
58




The reaction in the absence of any quinone or illumination afforded porphyrins in 1.6% yield, but treatment with I2 gave porphyrins in 8.9% yield (entry 1, Table 1). This result indicates that a significant amount of background oxidation can occur in situ (18% of the total). The same reaction without any quinone but with illumination afforded twice as much porphyrin (3.2%) in the crude sample, whereas subsequent oxidation with I2 gave the same total yield of 8.9% (entry 2). Reaction in the presence of the hydrophilic quinone NQS gave increased yield of porphyrin in the dark (entry 3 versus entry 1) but no increase in the light versus that without quinone (entry 4 versus entry 2). Use of the hydrophobic quinone TCQ gave comparable results (entries 5 and 6). Use of NQS and TCQ together gave 3.0% yield in the dark versus 3.9% upon illumination (entries 7 and 8). The latter was the highest yield obtained upon photooxidation, and represents 58% of the yield (6.7%) obtained upon subsequent treatment with I2.
All of the results shown in Table 1 pertain to reactions carried out in the presence of glucose and the enzymes glucose oxidase and catalase, a system designed for in situ deoxygenation of reaction mixtures. Reactions in the absence of the glucose oxidase/catalase system gave comparable results (Table S2†). Thus, the yield of porphyrin in the absence of quinones stems from action of an oxidant of unknown identity (vide infra). Regardless, the conditions in entry 8 in Table 1 (of NQS and TCQ with the glucose oxidase/catalase system and illumination) were used for the studies described below.
Aqueous-membrane partitioning
The [2 × 2] combinatorial reaction affords diverse tetrapyrrole macrocycles that differ in polarity. The virtual library of 538 porphyrins was assessed for numbers of compounds that meet four distinct polarity categories (hydrophilic, uncertain, amphiphilic, and hydrophobic).14 The polarity categories are illustrated in Table 2. Hydrophilic is defined where all substituents are polar. Hydrophobic is defined where all substituents are nonpolar. Amphiphilic is defined as having a continuous tract of 2–6 polar groups followed by a continuous tract of 6–2 nonpolar groups.14 All other porphyrins, which necessarily have interspersed polar and nonpolar groups, have uncertain polarity. On the basis of these definitions, analysis of the virtual library of 538 expected porphyrins indicates the presence of relatively tiny amounts of hydrophilic or hydrophobic porphyrins (0.4% each), whereas the amount of amphiphilic porphyrins (15.6%) is substantial. Although many of the porphyrins in the uncertain polarity category may fall into one of the other categories, the rather strict definitions employed here are appropriate in the absence of knowledge about the partitioning of porphyrins with such substituent patterns.
Table 2 Polarity categories of tetrapyrrole macrocycles









Polarity category
Substituent patterns
# of patterns
# of porphyrins
% of porphyrins
Example





a A continuous tract of 2–6 polar groups followed by 6–2 nonpolar groups, respectively, about the perimeter of the macrocycle.
b All patterns other than those defined for hydrophilic, hydrophobic, and amphiphilic.





hydrophilic
all polar
1
4
0.4
uroporphyrins


hydrophobic
all nonpolar
1
4
0.4
etioporphyrins


amphiphilic
2–6 of a type in continuous tracta
8
86
15.6
mesoporphyrin IX


uncertain
interspersedb
33
444
83.6
coproporphyrin I




The crude reaction mixture formed in the presence of the two quinones and subjected to photooxidation (entry 8, Table 1) was passed over a size-exclusion chromatography (SEC) column with aqueous elution. Two fractions were obtained: an early-eluting fraction composed of porphyrins and vesicles, and a late-eluting fraction composed of porphyrins. No other fractions were observed, and no porphyrins remained bound on the column as determined by visual inspection.
The composition of the two fractions was examined by HPLC analysis with fluorescence detection (Fig. 2). A mixture of standard porphyrins (composed of etioporphyrin I, mesoporphyrin IX, coproporphyrin I, hexacarboxylic acid porphyrin I, and uroporphyrin III, which contain 0, 2, 4, 6, and 8 carboxylic acid groups, respectively) was used for comparison (panel A) with the crude reaction mixture (panel B). The vesicles fraction was enriched in the hydrophobic porphyrins, with almost all porphyrins exhibiting an elution time after that of the coproporphyrin standard (panel C). Conversely, the aqueous fraction was enriched in hydrophilic porphyrins, with almost all porphyrins exhibiting an elution time before that of mesoporphyrin (panel D). These results are not surprising and confirm expectations about the aqueous-lipid partitioning of the diverse porphyrins formed in the [2 × 2] combinatorial reaction.
 Fig. 2  HPLC analysis with fluorescence detection (λexc = 401 nm, λem = 624 nm) to assess aqueous-lipid partitioning of porphyrins (normalized intensities). (A) Five porphyrin standards: uro (uroporphyrin I), hexa (hexacarboxylic acid porphyrin I), copro (coproporphyrin I), meso (mesoporphyrin IX), and etio (etioporphyrin I). (B) Crude reaction mixture with both quinones following photooxidation (entry 8, Table 1). (C) Porphyrins/vesicles fraction following SEC of the mixture in panel B. (D) Porphyrins/aqueous phase fraction following SEC of the mixture in panel B. 
Absorption and fluorescence properties
Three porphyrin samples (crude reaction mixture, porphyrins/aqueous phase, porphyrins/vesicles) were characterized by absorption and fluorescence spectroscopy (Fig. 3). Fluorescence quantum yield measurements were carried out using etioporphyrin I in toluene (Φf = 0.10)17 as the reference.18 The crude reaction mixture exhibited typical absorption and fluorescence spectra as well as a Φf value (0.086) comparable to that of etioporphyrin in DMF. The porphyrins/aqueous phase sample was quite similar with Φf = 0.084. The porphyrins/vesicles sample also gave a typical absorption spectrum but the fluorescence spectrum gave two peaks (613, 622 nm) assigned to (0,0) transitions and a shoulder on the long-wavelength emission (674, ∼690 shoulder) commensurate with two (0,1) transitions. Regardless, the porphyrins/vesicles sample gave a Φf value of 0.072 indicating a high level of photochemical activity.
 Fig. 3  Absorption spectra of the crude reaction mixture and the two phases following SEC separation (top panel). Fluorescence emission spectra of the crude reaction mixture and the two phases following SEC separation (bottom panel). 
To compare the results for the three mixtures, data also were collected for identical quantities of four standard porphyrins in representative media (DMF, aqueous solution with or without vesicles). The four standard porphyrins (etioporphyrin I, mesoporphyrin IX, coproporphyrin I and uroporphyrin III) encompass a broad range of polarity (Table 2).14 The fluorescence quantum yields for etioporphyrin I, mesoporphyrin IX, coproporphyrin I and uroporphyrin III in DMF are 0.091, 0.102, 0.113 and 0.078, respectively, which are comparable to literature values for uroporphyrin (estimated Φf ∼ 0.055 in neutral aqueous solution19 or Φf ∼ 0.04 in water);20 mesoporphyrin dimethyl ester (in organic solvents Φf = 0.08,21 0.095,22 and 0.1523); and coproporphyrin I (Φf = 0.105 in aqueous solution at pH 10).24 A complete set of spectra (absorption and fluorescence) and fluorescence quantum yield data for the benchmark porphyrins were obtained (Figures S1 and S2, Table S3†). The absorption and fluorescence spectra of coproporphyrin and etioporphyrin in the presence of vesicles closely resembled that of the porphyrins/vesicles fraction, including the presence of two bands corresponding to the (0,0) transition and to the (0,1) transition in the fluorescence spectrum (black trace, Fig. 3).
Krasnovsky reaction
The Krasnovsky reaction, a photosynthetic-like process,25,26 is illustrated in Fig. 4. Illumination of the porphyrin (“P”) causes the reduction of methyl red and the oxidation of ascorbic acid. The redox shuttle 2,6-dichlorophenolindophenol (DCPIP) is membrane-permeable27 and is known to facilitate the reaction, presumably as an electron relay between ascorbic acid and the porphyrin.28
 Fig. 4  Conceptual illustration of the Krasnovsky reaction where P denotes porphyrins (top). Structures of selected constituents in the Krasnovsky reaction (bottom). 
Three distinct porphyrin samples were examined for activity in the Krasnovsky reaction. The three samples include (1) the crude reaction mixture of the combinatorial process following in situ photooxidation (panel B, Fig. 2), (2) the fraction thereof upon separation by SEC shown in panel C (denoted porphyrins/vesicles), and (3) the fraction thereof upon separation by SEC shown in panel D (denoted porphyrins/aqueous phase). An aliquot of each sample was combined with the constituents for the Krasnovsky reaction, which include methyl red, ascorbic acid, and DCPIP. The quantities employed here for porphyrins/methyl red/DCPIP/ascorbic acid (in μM) were 3:75:90:6000, respectively. The large amount of ascorbic acid resulted in reduction of DCPIP (in the dark) as evidenced by absorption spectroscopy.29 The samples were then deaerated and treated to illumination with a broadband white light source. The samples were prepared in 1 cm pathlength cuvettes to facilitate monitoring by absorption spectroscopy.
Representative absorption spectra collected over time are shown in Fig. 5 for the case of the porphyrins/vesicles. The absorption spectrum immediately prior to illumination shows the peak of the Soret band of the porphyrins at ∼400 nm and the broad absorption of methyl red extending across the 400–480 nm spectral region. The ratio of porphyrins/methyl red is 1:25 on the basis of the molar absorption coefficients in aqueous solution of the porphyrins30 (εSoret = 190000 M−1 cm−1) and methyl red28 (ε440 nm = 17000 M−1 cm−1). Upon illumination, the band due to methyl red rapidly diminishes and reaches the baseline in ∼5 min. The complete conversion of methyl red (presumably forming leuco-methyl red) indicates that the porphyrin mixture is functioning catalytically with a turnover number >25. Similar results were obtained for the other two reaction samples (Figure S3†).
 Fig. 5  Spectral change upon illumination of the porphyrins/vesicles in the presence of the Krasnovsky reaction constituents. The disappearance of methyl red is seen at 440 nm. The porphyrin band (∼400 nm) is relatively unchanged upon illumination. 
The timecourse for the photoreduction of methyl red (by disappearance of the absorbance at 440 nm) for each of the three samples is shown in the top panel of Fig. 6. The half-life for disappearance of methyl red was 1.5 min (porphyrins/aqueous phase), 2 min (crude reaction mixture), and 3 min (porphyrins/vesicles). The absorption value at the endpoint was not identical for the three cases owing to light scattering by the vesicles.
 Fig. 6  Timecourse of methyl red photoreduction (440 nm) in the Krasnovsky reaction. Top panel: Photoactivity of the crude reaction mixture (blue inverted triangles), porphyrins/aqueous phase (red circles), and porphyrins/vesicles (black squares). Bottom panel: Photoactivity of the porphyrins/vesicles (black squares) and upon omission experiments—in the dark (red circles), in the absence of DCPIP (blue triangles), or in the absence of ascorbic acid and DCPIP (green inverted triangles). 
A series of control experiments also was performed for the case of the porphyrins/vesicles sample. The data are shown in the bottom panel of Fig. 6 (also see Figure S3†). The data for the complete system (black squares) from the top panel are shown for comparison. Omission of DCPIP does not inactivate the Krasnovsky process but does result in a slower reaction (blue triangles). On the other hand, the omission of ascorbic acid and DCPIP results in no reduction of methyl red (green inverted triangles), and no reduction is observed with the complete system in the dark (red circles). The complete system with omission of the porphyrins also resulted in 7% decrease in the quantity of methyl red upon illumination for 10 min (Figure S4†). Thus, ascorbic acid, porphyrins, and light are all essential for the reduction of methyl red.
The photoactivity of the porphyrins/vesicles in the Krasnovsky reaction was compared to that of two standard porphyrins—mesoporphyrin and uroporphyrin—in the presence of vesicles. The results are depicted in Fig. 7. For uroporphyrin and mesoporphyrin, the absorption (light-scattering) of the pure vesicles was subtracted from the overall absorption spectra. Upon illumination, the two standard porphyrins gave total discharge of methyl red, as did the porphyrins/vesicles. The reactions varied in rate, however, with a half-life of 1.5 min (uroporphyrin), 3 min (porphyrins/vesicles, see Fig. 6), and 10.5 min (mesoporphyrin). The photoreaction with uroporphyrin occurs entirely in aqueous solution and is not significantly affected by the presence of vesicles (Figure S5†). The photoreaction with the amphiphilic mesoporphyrin, which is embedded in the vesicles, proceeds at a rate ∼7-fold slower. One interpretation of the intermediate rate observed with the porphyrins/vesicles is that vesicles incorporate (or associate with) porphyrins of a range of polarity in addition to those with solely amphiphilic character.
 Fig. 7  Comparison of the Krasnovsky photoactivity of the porphyrins/vesicles versus two standard porphyrins (uroporphyrin and mesoporphyrin) in the presence of vesicles. The data show the timecourse of methyl red photoreduction at 440 nm. 
Discussion
The results presented herein concern a four-stage process that transforms four relatively simple, colorless acyclic substances to a collection of photoactive porphyrins partitioned in aqueous solution or in vesicles (Fig. 1). The four stages include two combinatorial reactions, one chemical/photochemical process, and one physical partitioning on the basis of polarity. The polarity-based partitioning arises owing to the polar and/or nonpolar substituents of the reactants, and the distinct patterns of such substituents arrayed about the perimeter of the respective macrocycles. The overall yield of porphyrins is low (∼3%), but porphyrins in anaerobic environments are known to accumulate and persist over eons.31 The two combinatorial reactions have been considered in detail.14 Here, we first discuss two additional stages of the overall process, then consider the observed photoactivity of the porphyrins.
1. Porphyrinogen dehydrogenation
Porphyrinogens are known to readily convert to porphyrins upon chemical oxidation (I2,32–34 quinones,35,36 nitrobenzene,37 air38), photooxidation,39–41 and electrochemical oxidation.42,43 The facile transformation reflects the deep thermodynamic well occupied by the (unsaturated) porphyrins versus (saturated) porphyrinogens in addition to the kinetically and thermodynamically labile benzylic site (pyrrolic α-methyl position) that undergoes oxidation. The porphyrinogens examined herein, like the naturally occurring porphyrinogens, are exceptionally prone to such dehydrogenation given the presence of electron-releasing alkyl substituents at both β-positions of each pyrrole ring. The prior conditions for photooxidation (which can be autocatalytic)39 typically employed molecular oxygen.
The photooxidation conditions examined herein with the combinatorial mixture were only partially successful. Two points warrant attention. First, the yield of porphyrins was 3.9% upon illumination of the bulk reaction mixture in the presence of both quinones. However, transfer of an aliquot from the reaction mixture to dilute aqueous acid and treatment with I2 gave a yield of 6.7% (Table 1, entry 8). These disparate results may be reconciled by the striking differences in conditions: the photooxidation is carried out under conditions where the theoretical (100%) yield of porphyrinogen is 15 mM (or 750 μM for a 5% yield). By contrast, the concentration upon dilution and treatment with I2 is >400-fold lower, at 35 μM (or 1.8 μM for a 5% yield). The local concentration in the vesicle membranes must be even higher than this calculation implies given the partitioning of the tetrapyrrole macrocycles. One interpretation is that aggregation of a portion of the tetrapyrrole macrocycles in the aqueous–vesicles medium results in resistance to photooxidation, either by sequestration or by quenching of excited-state species that mediate the oxidation. An alternative interpretation is that the use of a sub-stoichiometric amount of quinone (4 mM, 0.09 times the theoretical) limits the overall conversion (Table S1†). However, use of larger quantities of quinone resulted in lower yields. TCQ (and other quinones) in the dark are known to oxidize oligopyrromethanes (including precursors to the porphyrinogen) thereby terminating condensation.35 The successful condensation in the presence of an oxidant requires balanced rates of pyrrole formation and condensation, oxidation of precursors to the porphyrinogen, and oxidation of the porphyrinogen.35
Second, a significant amount of conversion of porphyrinogen to porphyrin occurred in the absence of a quinone (3.2%), absence of light (3.0%), or absence of quinones and light (1.6%) (Table 1). The formation of the porphyrin in these control experiments occurred despite the use of an in situ method for deoxygenation (glucose oxidase, catalase, and glucose).44,45 One interpretation is that reaction intermediates (e.g., dipyrrin units46,47 or species derived from the ketone-containing reactants) may serve as oxidants. A more extensive study of the oxidation/photooxidation process will be required to identify suitable conditions for high yields. Regardless, the concentration of porphyrin in the final crude reaction mixture is ∼0.2–0.6 mM depending on whether oxidation occurs in the dark or light and with or without quinones present.
2. Aqueous-membrane partitioning
The [2 × 2] combinatorial reaction of acyclic reactants affords a distribution of porphyrins characterized by a very broad range of polarity spanning etioporphyrin to uroporphyrin (Fig. 2). The overall yield of porphyrin (as measured by chemical oxidation with I2) with 30 mM of each of the four reactants in the presence of vesicles was slightly greater than that of the non-combinatorial reaction (60 mM of each of the two reactants) to form uroporphyrin (or coproporphyrin) in the absence of vesicles.34 Prior studies with and without a surfactant of (i) the formation of etioporphyrinogen14 and (ii) the [2 × 2] combinatorial reaction distribution14 together indicate that a non-negligible extent of bond-forming chemistry takes place in the hydrophobic domain of the surfactant, which in this case is in the lipid bilayer of the vesicles. The combinatorial reaction in the presence of vesicles indicated ∼1:1 distribution of the porphyrins between vesicles and aqueous solution. The 1:1 ratio was surprising given expectations about the individual members of the composition, where 15.6% of the porphyrin mixture is expected to be amphiphilic and 0.4% to be hydrophobic. Thus, the hydrophobic porphyrins and those porphyrins that satisfy the (admittedly narrow) criteria we employed to denote amphiphilicity together are expected to constitute only 16% of the mixture. The larger quantity (∼50%) observed in practice suggests a departure in the composition of the actual mixture from theoretical prediction, or the vesicle association by a greater variety of porphyrins with interspersed polar/nonpolar groups. Conversely, the larger quantity (∼50%) of porphyrins observed in the aqueous fraction exceeds expectations.
The vast information available concerning solubility and assembly properties of β-substituted porphyrins largely accrues from studies of porphyrins obtained via biosynthesis. For example, uroporphyrins are water-soluble at neutral pH at concentrations ≥0.1 mM39 whereas porphyrins with two or four carboxylic acids aggregate in a process that is dependent on pH and ionic strength.48,49 Thus, coproporphyrin is monomeric at pH 10, aggregated at neutral pH50 (accompanied by a hypsochromic shift of the absorption spectrum51 and quenched fluorescence52), and disaggregated upon addition of a cationic (cetyltrimethylammonium bromide) or neutral (Triton X-100) surfactant to form micelles.53 No data appear to be available concerning porphyrins with 5–7 carboxylic acids. Thus, more needs to be learned about the physicochemical properties of porphyrins with interspersed patterns of polar/nonpolar groups that fall outside our narrow definition of amphiphilic character, and also are outside the scope of present biosynthetic processes. In addition, it is unknown whether the assembly into the vesicle membrane occurs prior to or during reactions leading to porphyrinogens (stages 1, 2), during the oxidation process (stage 3), or following porphyrin formation (stage 4, Fig. 1). In general, the combinatorial formation and subsequent screening of diverse porphyrins has been relatively unexplored.54
3. Porphyrins associated with vesicles
The chief rationale here for studying porphyrin formation in the presence of vesicles is to assess the viability of proto-photosynthetic function of the membrane-associated porphyrins. The incorporation, aggregation state, and photophysical properties of porphyrins in vesicles have been the subject of considerable study.10,55–58 Relevant findings concerning the assembly of porphyrins in membranes include the following: (i) the incorporation of amphiphilic porphyrins into vesicles proceeds at a diffusion-limited rate and is relatively independent of pH or membrane depth.55 (ii) The flip-flop rate of amphiphilic porphyrins from one leaflet to the other depends on pH and on the length of the membrane lipids (the rate constant is ∼1 s−1 at neutral pH and with C16:1 lipids).57 (iii) Amphiphilic porphyrins assembled closer to the interface exhibit faster rates and higher yields of photoreaction with aqueous iodide.58 (iv) Porphyrins in membranes can exist as monomers or as a variety of aggregates, of which some of the latter retain photochemical activity.59
A lower bound on the amount of porphyrin per vesicle can be estimated as follows. Assuming the lipid molecules (65 mM) prior to extrusion were quantitatively converted to vesicles, there was no rupture during reaction, and all were collected upon SEC, there would be 3 × 1018 lipid molecules in the porphyrins/vesicles fraction. Absorption measurements of the porphyrin/vesicles fraction yielded 6 × 1016 porphyrin molecules. The average diameter of the vesicles determined by DLS was 120 nm (Figure S6†), corresponding to ∼1 × 105 lipid molecules per vesicle (assuming an interfacial area of 69.4 Å2 per lipid and head-head bilayer thickness of 3.69 nm60). The analysis leads to a lower bound of ∼2 × 103 porphyrin molecules per vesicle and 1 porphyrin per ∼50 lipid molecules.
The presence of ∼50 lipid molecules per porphyrin reflects a reasonably high concentration of porphyrin in or associated with the bilayer membrane. Perhaps more importantly, the number of porphyrins per vesicle (∼2000) is only ∼3.7 times the theoretical number (538) of types of porphyrins. Accordingly, the vesicles are expected to be compositionally heterogeneous with regards to the types of porphyrins. In other words, a given vesicle is not expected to contain exactly the same distribution of porphyrins as another vesicle. This analysis suggests the possibility—with smaller vesicles and/or a larger combinatorial mixture of porphyrins—for a repertoire of protocells with distinct photoactivity.
4. Photosynthetic-like function
Two proxies to gauge photochemical activity entailed absorption/fluorescence measurements and the Krasnovsky reaction. Both the porphyrins/aqueous phase fraction and the porphyrins/vesicles fraction exhibited spectral features typical of β-substituted porphyrins. The fluorescence quantum yield values (Φf = 0.084, 0.072) were comparable to those of diverse benchmark porphyrins in homogeneous solution (Φf = 0.078–0.113 in DMF, Table S3†). These results indicate the integrity of the excited singlet states of at least a preponderance of the diverse members of the combinatorial mixture of porphyrins.
The Krasnovsky reaction was developed in an effort to mimic photosynthetic-like processes in the absence of chromatophores.61,62 This photoreaction, although quite general with regards to constituents, typically is comprised of chlorophyll or analogue thereof as photosensitizer, an electron donor (e.g., ascorbic acid, thiol), and an electron acceptor (e.g., quinone, methyl viologen, or azo dye).26 Given the concentrations employed, the reaction predominantly involves the excited triplet states of the photosensitizers. Studies of mechanism25 have suggested two processes that differ only in sequence and nature of the intermediates: (i) initial transfer of an electron from the excited chlorophyll to the acceptor to afford the intermediate chlorophyll cation radical which then reacts with ascorbic acid,63,64 or (ii) the initial transfer of an electron from ascorbic acid to the excited chlorophyll to afford the intermediate chlorophyll anion radical, which then reacts with the acceptor.65 The two mechanisms may operate simultaneously with different efficiencies. The Krasnovsky reaction has been studied in solution, microemulsions, and vesicles,25,26,65,66 and has been proposed as a prebiotic photosynthetic-like process.1
The products of the tandem combinatorial reaction followed by photooxidation were found to be active in the Krasnovsky reaction composed of ascorbic acid, DCPIP, and methyl red. The two fractions isolated by SEC differed only in the rate of reaction. The porphyrins/aqueous phase fraction gave overall reaction—assessed by the visible discharge of methyl red absorption—that was ∼2-fold faster than that of the porphyrins/vesicles. For comparison, uroporphyrin in aqueous solution gave a half-life (1.5 min) equal to that of the porphyrins/aqueous phase, whereas mesoporphyrin in vesicles gave a half-life that was ∼3-fold slower (10 min) than that of the porphyrins/vesicles (3 min) (Fig. 6). The slower rates with porphyrins in vesicles may reflect depth in the bilayer membrane,58 and/or the activity of only a fraction of the total porphyrins such as those in the outer leaflet. Regardless, the ratio of porphyrin/methyl red was 1:25, and the complete discharge of methyl red upon illumination over 10 min with little change to the porphyrins is indicative of the robustness of the porphyrin samples (Fig. 5). The upper limit of the turnover number (>25) remains to be determined.
The composition of the reaction mixtures warrants comment. Each fraction (aqueous, vesicles) is expected to consist of a diverse collection of porphyrins as well as reaction intermediates (e.g., pyrroles; oligopyrromethenes such as dipyrrins, tripyrrins, and bilins; quinones and hydroquinones). The total concentration of the quinone species initially employed was 4 mM, which is ∼6.8-fold larger than the final concentration of porphyrin (3.9% yield corresponds to 0.59 mM in entry 8, Table 1) that was subjected to fractionation and then diluted for the measurements of fluorescence and the Krasnovsky reaction. The quinone/hydroquinone species are expected to partition with the aqueous or vesicles fraction; indeed, no yellow band was observed during the SEC. The addition of Krasnovsky constituents to diluted porphyrin samples resulted in ratios of porphyrins/methyl red/DCPIP/ascorbic acid (in μM) of 3:75:90:6000, respectively. In other words, if the quinone/hydroquinone species are present, the respective concentrations would increase in the following order: porphyrins < quinone/hydroquinone species < Krasnovsky constituents. The minimum conclusion is that the porphyrins are fluorescent and support the Krasnovsky reaction in the presence of a rather complex mixture. Such activity in the midst of diverse constituents would be required for prebiotic function.
A control experiment showed that no reduction of the methyl red was observed in the absence of light under the conditions employed here for the Krasnovsky reaction (ascorbic acid, DCPIP, pH 7 and illumination for 10 min) (Fig. 6). This result is consistent with reduction of methyl red by ascorbic acid upon illumination of the porphyrins. Surprisingly, with rare exception,67 the thermodynamics of the Krasnovsky reaction appear to have received little attention. An estimate of the free energy of reaction requires knowledge of the redox properties of the constituents. At pH 7, the dominant redox couple for ascorbic acid (AH2) is A˙−/AH− with reduction potential of +0.09 V versus SCE.68 Thus, ascorbic acid functions as a hydrogen atom donor at neutral pH.68–70 The reduction of methyl red is quite complex: a 2e−/2H+ reduction to give the hydrazo species (leuco-methyl red) can be followed by 2e−/2H+ reduction to form anthranilic acid and dimethyl-p-phenylenediamine. A range of potentials has been reported for the reduction of methyl red in neutral aqueous solution. The values (reported here versus SCE) include −0.359 V,71 −0.30 V,72 and +0.14 V;73 one further value (−0.395 V) is reported74 with unknown reference potential. In neutral aqueous solution, a single peak is observed for the first (2e−/2H+) reduction,71 and the peak of the second (2e−/2H+) reduction is only partially separated from that of the first.71,75 The reduction process is more simple in anhydrous organic solution, where two successive one-electron processes ensue (−0.79, −1.64 V versus SCE).76
The uncertainty in the electrochemical potentials for methyl red precludes an analysis of the overall thermodynamics of the Krasnovsky reaction. Indeed, the quite negative potentials reported for reduction of methyl red may stem from adsorption of methyl red molecules on the electrode surface. Thus, it is unclear whether the chemical transformation in the present instantiation of the Krasnovsky reaction is light-driven (endergonic) or merely light-triggered (exergonic). Regardless, porphyrins in solution and other assemblies are known to participate in light-driven endergonic processes where a sizable fraction of the energy from the absorbed light is stored in the resulting chemical products.77–79 A minimum conclusion from the studies described here is that the porphyrin molecules—formed in situ and self-assembled in two venues—exhibit photoactive triplet excited states. The excited triplet states of β-octaalkylporphyrins provide considerable energy (typically 1.60 eV22,23) and should be suitable to support a variety of redox processes, including those of prebiotic relevance.
Outlook
A sample of four water-soluble, relatively simple, colorless, acyclic reactants in the presence of vesicles and quinones upon warming and illumination is transformed to photoactive porphyrins partitioned in aqueous solution and in the vesicles. The porphyrins support photochemical processes as exemplified by the Krasnovsky reaction. While combinatorial processes often are regarded as deleterious with regards to prebiotic chemistry—generating vast diversity relative to the extremely narrow selection of molecules present in modern biochemistry—here the combinatorial processes yield molecules that exhibit photochemical function in two distinct venues.
The reaction processes examined herein are meant to serve as a chemical model given that routes from presumed early Earth-available substances to the aminoketones and diones have yet to be demonstrated. Phospholipids also have not been shown to form under prebiotic conditions, although a variety of more simple surfactants are known to form vesicles.80,81 Quinones have been shown to form in interstellar ice analogues upon UV irradiation.82,83
Access to a source of energy is critically important for the origin and maintenance of living organisms.2,4,84–87 While the nature of the first cells and their energy-transduction processes are under vigorous discussion,6,86 the abundance of sunlight on Earth would afford proto-phototrophs with a distinct advantage.2,4,84 A number of pigments proposed for early-Earth photochemistry include condensed aromatic hydrocarbons88–90 and various “biological” porphyrins (uroporphyrins,11,40 coproporphyrins,40 protoporphyrin IX12,91).14 The spontaneous partitioning and assembly of porphyrins in vesicles is attractive given that porphyrins in bilayers are central to a variety of energy-transduction schemes.5,10,86 In this regard, the multistep chemical reactions and self-organization processes described herein may provide a model for the origin of pigments that enable the spontaneous emergence of proto-photosynthesis.
Experimental section
Samples and solutions
δ-Aminolevulinic acid (ALA = 2-PrOH), 1,2-naphthoquinone-4-sulfonic acid sodium salt (NQS), 2,3,5,6-tetrachloro-1,4-benzoquinone (TCQ), D-glucose, glucose oxidase type VII (from Aspergillus niger), catalase (from bovine liver), L-ascorbic acid, and 2,6-dichlorophenolindophenol sodium salt hydrate were used as obtained from Sigma-Aldrich. 1-Aminobutan-2-one (2-Et) was prepared as described in the literature.92 The syntheses of 1,5-dimethoxy-3-methylpentan-2,4-dione (1-Me) and 5-methoxy-3-(methoxyacetyl)levulinic acid (1-AcOH) will be described elsewhere. L-α-Phosphatidylcholine (egg, chicken; Avanti Polar Lipids), porphyrins (etioporphyrin I, mesoporphyrin IX dihydrochloride, coproporphyrin I dihydrochloride, hexacarboxylic acid porphyrin I dihydrochloride, uroporphyrin I dihydrochloride and uroporphyrin III dihydrochloride; Frontier Scientific), and methyl red (Fisher Scientific) were used as received.
Stock solutions of 1-Me (0.5 M), 1-AcOH (0.5 M), 2-Et (0.5 M) and 2-PrOH (0.5 M) were prepared in deionized water and stored in frozen form at −15 °C. Stock solutions of D-glucose (4 M) and NQS (0.15 M) were prepared in deionized water, whereas TCQ (0.15 M) was prepared in tetrahydrofuran. A solution containing 20 mg mL−1 of glucose oxidase and 2 mg mL−1 of catalase was prepared in 0.1 M potassium phosphate buffer (pH 7). The phosphate buffer solutions of 0.1 and 0.5 M were prepared at pH 7 using potassium hydrogen phosphate (1.0 M) and potassium dihydrogen phosphate (1.0 M). The pH values were measured with a pH meter at room temperature (21 °C) and are typically within ±0.1 pH unit.
Preparation of vesicles by extrusion
Large, unilamellar vesicles of L-α-phosphatidylcholine were prepared by a slightly modified extrusion method93 using a LipoFast extruder (Avestine, Ottawa, Canada). Briefly, a chloroform solution of the phosphatidylcholine (100 mg) was evaporated under argon flow, and the lipid film was thoroughly dried overnight on a vacuum pump. The dried film was hydrated in 2 mL of 0.1 M potassium phosphate buffer (pH 7) with moderate agitation for 30 min. The resulting hydrated large, multilamellar vesicles were subsequently frozen in liquid nitrogen and thawed in a 50 °C water bath. The freeze-thaw cycle was repeated 10 times. The vesicles were extruded 11 times through two polycarbonate filters of 0.1 μm pore size, employing nitrogen pressure of up to 1400 kPa, to yield large, unilamellar vesicles with a mean diameter of 120 nm. The inner vesicle volume consisted of aqueous phosphate solution. The vesicle suspension was stored at 4 °C when not in use. Average sizes of the vesicles were determined by dynamic light scattering (DLS) using a Zetasizer 1000 HSA (Malvern Instruments, Malvern UK) equipped with a 5 mW helium–neon laser at 633 nm. The scattered light was collected at an angle of 90°. The mean diameter of the vesicles was determined by averaging the results from three measurements at 21 °C (Figure S6†).

In situ deoxygenation
An enzymatic system for deoxygenation employs glucose oxidase and catalase for the aerobic oxidation of glucose. Oxygen and glucose are converted by glucose oxidase to gluconic acid and peroxide; peroxide is subsequently consumed by catalase.44,45 We employed this enzymatic system in an effort to remove residual oxygen. Briefly, 2 μL of a stock solution containing 20 mg mL−1 of glucose oxidase and 2 mg mL−1 of catalase in 0.1 M potassium phosphate buffer (pH 7) was added (together with 2-PrOH) to the frozen reaction mixtures containing 0.3% glucose.
Reactions
All experiments were carried out at 0.5 mL scale for 24 h at 60 °C. The reaction vials contained a stir bar. Aliquots of 1-Me, 1-AcOH, 2-Et and D-glucose stock solutions were added to 0.5 M potassium phosphate buffer (pH 7). The samples were deoxygenated by three alternating cycles of vacuum-argon purges, and subsequently frozen. Aliquots of glucose oxidase/catalase and 2-PrOH stock solutions were added on the open benchtop to the frozen solutions containing all other components. While the frozen solutions were thawing, vesicles (to give 20 mM [lipid]) and aliquots of quinone stock solutions (to give 4 mM NQS, 4 mM TCQ, or the combination of 2 mM NQS and 2 mM TCQ) were added. For samples to be illuminated, each reaction vessel was sealed with a cap equipped with a quartz cover (containing one small perforation). For samples not to be subjected to illumination, each reaction vessel was sealed with a cap equipped with an opaque rubber septum (perforated with a syringe needle). The reaction vials were placed in a photochemical reaction chamber (equipped with a quartz cover) designed for investigating multiple reactions in parallel. The reaction chamber was evacuated under reduced pressure and then flushed with argon, a procedure done without cooling so as to not disrupt the vesicles. The reaction chamber was placed on a hot plate so that the internal temperature of the vials was 60 °C. A slow flow of argon was passed continuously through the reaction chamber. The reaction mixtures were slowly stirred (∼50 rpm) so as to not disrupt the vesicles. After 24 h, the reaction chamber containing the samples was placed under a solar simulator using an “Air Mass 0 Direct” (AM 0D) filter with total output power density 3575 W m−2. The reaction chamber was illuminated for 69 min (corresponding to 3 sun hours), with slow stirring, using the solar simulator (Oriel Class A 1000 W Full Spectrum Solar Simulator, model 91192, Newport Corporation) equipped with a xenon short arc lamp (450 W). Survey experiments employed a shorter illumination period and AM 1D filter (Table S1†).
Porphyrin yields
Porphyrin yield determinations were performed by absorbance measurements of the crude reaction mixtures (following stages 1–4, Fig. 1). An aliquot (50 μL) of the crude reaction mixture (30 mM of each reactant) was added under aerobic conditions to a dilution vial containing 350 μL of water. The solution was briefly mixed and then 50 μL of the diluted sample was transferred to a cuvette containing 2.6 mL of 0.1 N HCl. The absorption spectrum was recorded to give the yield of porphyrin using a molar absorption coefficient of 505000 M−1cm−1 at the Soret band maximum.14,33 Then, the cuvette was treated with 56 μL of I2 solution (50 mM in ethanol) to convert any porphyrinogens or partially oxidized porphyrinogens to the corresponding porphyrin. Excess iodine was then discharged by treatment with 56 μL of Na2S2O3 solution (200 mM in water). Again the absorption spectrum was recorded to give the overall porphyrin yield, using the same molar absorption coefficient.
Analysis of porphyrin partitioning
A crude reaction mixture (following photooxidation) containing porphyrins and vesicles was analyzed by SEC to assess the aqueous-membrane partitioning of the porphyrins in the mixture. A sample of Sephadex G-100 (500 mg) was pre-equilibrated for 2 h in 1.5 mL of potassium phosphate buffer (0.1 M, pH 7), and the resulting slurry was poured to make a column (1.7 × 5.0 cm). A 250-μL aliquot of the crude reaction mixture was placed on top of the column and eluted with the same buffer at a flow rate of 1.5 mL min−1. Two distinct colored bands were observed, a fast eluting band (porphyrins/vesicles) and a slow eluting band (porphyrins/aqueous phase). The bands were collected for analysis by HPLC (to determine the composition of the porphyrins), by absorption spectroscopy (to determine the relative amounts in the two bands), and by DLS (to determine the size distributions of the vesicles, Figure S6†). HPLC analysis was carried out under conditions identical to those described previously.14
Fluorescence emission analyses
Fluorescence measurements were performed on a QuantaMasterTM 40 spectrofluorometer (Photon Technology International) at room temperature with excitation and emission slit widths corresponding to a 2 nm bandpass, and a sweep rate of 1 nm s−1. The spectra were corrected for excitation intensity and instrument response on emission. The fluorescence emission spectra were obtained upon excitation at the peak of the Soret band of samples having absorbance values ∼0.1 in 1 cm pathlength cuvettes. The emission was integrated in each case over the range 590–710 nm.
Stock solutions were prepared in tetrahydrofuran for etioporphyrin I (125 μM), methanol for mesoporphyrin IX dihydrochloride (60 μM) and coproporphyrin I dihydrochloride (60 μM), and potassium phosphate buffer pH 7 for uroporphyrin III dihydrochloride (60 μM). Solutions of 0.1 absorbance at the Soret band maximum were prepared by adding aliquots of porphyrin stock solutions (15.0 μL of etioporphyrin I, 23.5 μL of mesoporphyrin IX, 20.5 μL of coproporphyrin I, and 18.0 μL of uroporphyrin III) to a cuvette containing DMF (final volume = 2 mL). The fluorescence quantum yields (Φf) in DMF were calculated18 using etioporphyrin I as the standard (Φf = 0.1 in toluene). The fluorescence quantum yields in a different medium were determined by relation of the integrated emission intensity of the porphyrin in each medium with the absorbance at the Soret band maximum (Abs (λmax)) in DMF. The reported quantum yields (Φf) are uncorrected for the refractive index changes of the various media.
Two different approaches, each based on fluorescence emission measurements, were followed to study the photochemical activity of the porphyrins. The first approach consisted of the following: (a) adding aliquots of porphyrin stock solutions (same quantity as used for DMF solutions) to a cuvette containing potassium phosphate buffer (0.1 M, pH 7; final volume = 2 mL); (b) subsequent addition of 10 μL of vesicles (65 mM) to the aqueous solution; and (c) incubation of the samples at 37 °C for 1 h. Absorption and emission spectra were collected in each of these steps. In the second approach, the stock solutions of the porphyrins were directly injected into 500 μL of vesicles (1.3 mM) in aqueous phosphate buffer followed by incubation of the suspensions for 1 h at 37 °C. The volume was adjusted to 2 mL before the acquisition of the absorption and emission spectra. The quantity of solvents, tetrahydrofuran and methanol, added to the aqueous lipid suspensions did not significantly affect the vesicle size distribution as confirmed by DLS.
Krasnovsky reaction
The complete reaction system for the Krasnovsky reaction contained 6 mM of L-ascorbic acid, 90 μM of DCPIP, 3 μM of porphyrins, and 75 μM of methyl red. The porphyrins were from a variety of sources, including the crude reaction mixture (before SEC fractionation), the two bands obtained upon SEC fractionation, and intact pure porphyrins. A 240 μL aliquot of ascorbic acid (50 mM in water) was neutralized by addition of 1.5 μL of KOH (10 M) immediately before use. The neutralized ascorbic acid was treated with 72 μL of DCPIP stock solution (2.5 mM in water). The resulting mixture was transferred to a 1 cm pathlength cuvette containing 0.1 M potassium phosphate buffer (pH 7), the volume of which was adjusted to ensure that the final volume following the addition of porphyrins and methyl red was 2.0 mL. Then, an aliquot of a porphyrin sample (concentration determined using ε = 505000 M−1cm−1 in 0.1 M HCl) in aqueous solution (unless noted otherwise) was added to the cuvette, followed by 30 μL of methyl red (5 mM in water). The cuvette was bubbled gently with argon for 10 min in an effort to achieve anaerobic conditions. The illumination was performed with a 300 W slide-projector lamp. The photoreduction of the methyl red was followed by absorption spectroscopy (bleaching of the absorption at 440 nm). When a pure sample of mesoporphyrin was examined, the porphyrin was added to the cuvette (containing lipid vesicles; 3 mM) as a stock solution in methanol.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by a grant from the NSF Chemistry of Life Processes Program (NSF CHE-0953010). We thank Prof. Edmond Bowden for discussion of electrochemistry.
References
A. A. Krasnovsky, Origins Life, 1976, 7, 133–143 CrossRef CAS .
T. Cavalier-Smith, Cold Spring Harbor Symp. Quant. Biol., 1987, 52, 805–824 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Mauzerall, Origins Life Evol. Biosphere, 1990, 20, 293–302 CrossRef CAS .

          D. C. Mauzerall, in Encyclopedia of Earth System Science, Academic Press, San Diego, CA,  1992, vol. 3, pp. 445–453 Search PubMed .
J. M. Olson and R. E. Blankenship, Photosynth. Res., 2004, 80, 373–386 CrossRef CAS .
T. Cavalier-Smith, Biol. Direct, 2006, 1, 19 CrossRef .
M. Rosing, D. K. Bird, N. H. Sleep, W. Glassley and F. Albarede, Palaeogeogr., Palaeoclimatol., Palaeoecol,, 2006, 232, 99–113 CrossRef .
D. Mauzerall and N. L. Greenbaum, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Bioenerg., 1989, 974, 119–140 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sun and D. Mauzerall, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1996, 93, 10758–10762 CrossRef CAS .

          D. Mauzerall and K. Sun, in Planar Lipid Bilayers (BLM) and their Applications, ed. H. T. Tien and A. Ottova-Leitmannova, Elsevier, Amsterdam,  2003, pp. 963–979 Search PubMed .
J. A. Mercer-Smith and D. C. Mauzerall, Photochem. Photobiol., 1984, 39, 397–405 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Olson and B. K. Pierson, Origins Life Evol. Biosphere, 1987, 17, 419–430 CrossRef CAS .

Protocells: Bridging Nonliving and Living Matter, ed. S. Rasmussen, M. A. Bedau, L. Chen, D. Deamer, D. C. Krakauer, N. H. Packard and P. F. Stadler, The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA,  2009 Search PubMed .
M. Taniguchi, A. R. M. Soares, V. Chandrashaker and J. S. Lindsey, New J. Chem., 2012, 36, 1057–1069 RSC .
M. E. Peover, J. Chem. Soc., 1962, 4540–4549 RSC .
D. C.-S. Tse and T. Kuwana, Anal. Chem., 1978, 50, 1315–1318 CrossRef CAS .
A. T. Gradyushko and M. P. Tsvirko, Opt. Spectrosc., 1971, 31, 291–295 Search PubMed .
A. T. R. Williams, S. A. Winfield and J. N. Miller, Analyst, 1983, 108, 1067–1071 RSC .
J. Feitelson and D. Mauzerall, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 7698–7703 CrossRef CAS .
R. W. Larsen, D. H. Omdal, R. Jasuja, S. L. Niu and D. M. Jameson, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 8012–8020 CrossRef CAS .
P. G. Seybold and M. Gouterman, J. Mol. Spectrosc., 1969, 31, 1–13 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gouterman and G.-E. Khalil, J. Mol. Spectrosc., 1974, 53, 88–100 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. Tsvirko, K. N. Solovev, A. T. Gradyushko and S. S. Dvornikov, Opt. Spectrosc., 1975, 38, 400–404 Search PubMed .
D. B. Papkovskii, A. P. Savitskii and G. V. Ponomarev, J. Appl. Spectrosc., 1990, 51, 1174–1177 CrossRef .
A. A. Krasnovsky, Biophys. J., 1972, 12, 749–763 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Krasnovsky, Photosynth. Res., 1992, 33, 177–193 CrossRef .
C. M. Cabello, W. B. Bair III, A. S. Bause and G. T. Wondrak, Biochem. Pharmacol., 2009, 78, 344–354 CrossRef CAS .
L. P. Vernon, Acta Chem. Scand., 1961, 15, 1639–1650 CrossRef CAS .
J.McD. Armstrong, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Gen. Subj., 1964, 86, 194–197 CrossRef CAS .
D. Mauzerall, Biochemistry, 1965, 4, 1801–1810 CrossRef CAS .

          H. J. Callot and R. Ocampo, in The Porphyrin Handbook, ed. K. M. Kadish, K. M. Smith and R. Guilard, Academic Press, San Diego, CA,  2000, vol. 1, pp. 349–398 Search PubMed .
D. Mauzerall, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1960, 82, 2605–2609 CrossRef CAS .
D. Mauzerall, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1960, 82, 2601–2605 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Lindsey, V. Chandrashaker, M. Taniguchi and M. Ptaszek, New J. Chem., 2011, 35, 65–75 RSC .
J. S. Lindsey, K. A. MacCrum, J. S. Tyhonas and Y.-Y. Chuang, J. Org. Chem., 1994, 59, 579–587 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Lindsey, Acc. Chem. Res., 2010, 43, 300–311 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. S. Cristiano, D. J. P. Gago, A. M. d'A Rocha Gonsalves, R. A. W. Johnstone, M. McCarron and J. M. T. B. Varejão, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2003, 1, 565–574 CAS .

          J. S. Lindsey, in The Porphyrin Handbook, ed. K. M. Kadish, K. M. Smith and R. Guilard, Academic Press, San Diego, CA,  2000, vol. 1, pp. 45–118 Search PubMed .
D. Mauzerall and S. Granick, J. Biol. Chem., 1958, 232, 1141–1162 CAS .
J. A. Mercer-Smith, A. Raudino and D. C. Mauzerall, Photochem. Photobiol., 1985, 42, 239–244 CrossRef CAS .
M. Danton and C. K. Lim, Biomed. Chromatogr., 2007, 21, 534–545 CrossRef CAS .
C. K. Lim, F. Li and T. J. Peters, J. Chromatogr., Biomed. Appl., 1988, 429, 123–153 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bondon, E. Porhiel, C. Pebay, L. Thouin, J. Leroy and C. Moinet, Electrochim. Acta, 2001, 46, 1899–1903 CrossRef .
R. E. Benesch and R. Benesch, Science, 1953, 118, 447–448 CAS .
S. W. Englander, D. B. Calhoun and J. J. Englander, Anal. Biochem., 1987, 161, 300–306 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Lindsey and R. W. Wagner, J. Org. Chem., 1989, 54, 828–836 CrossRef CAS .
G. R. Geier III and J. S. Lindsey, J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 2, 2001, 687–700 RSC .
S. B. Brown, M. Shillcock and P. Jones, Biochem. J., 1976, 153, 279–285 CAS .
R. Margalit and M. Rotenberg, Biochem. J., 1984, 219, 445–450 CAS .
R. Giovannetti, L. Alibabaei and L. Petetta, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2010, 211, 108–114 CrossRef CAS .
H. Morales-Rojas and A. K. Yatsimirsky, J. Phys. Org. Chem., 1999, 12, 377–387 CrossRef CAS .
E. G. Matveeva, M. I. Nelen, O. I. Lobanov and A. P. Savitsky, J. Fluoresc., 2003, 13, 79–88 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kepczynski, R. P. Pandian, K. M. Smith and B. Ehrenberg, Photochem. Photobiol., 2002, 76, 127–134 CrossRef CAS .

          C. M. Drain and S. Singh, in Handbook of Porphyrin Science, ed. K. M. Kadish, K. M. Smith and R. Guilard, World Scientific, Singapore,  2010, vol. 3, pp. 485–537 Search PubMed .
C. Vever-Bizet and D. Brault, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Biomembr., 1993, 1153, 170–174 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ricchelli, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 1995, 29, 109–118 CrossRef CAS .
N. Maman and D. Brault, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Biomembr., 1998, 1414, 31–42 CrossRef CAS .
A. Lavi, H. Weitman, R. T. Holmes, K. M. Smith and B. Ehrenberg, Biophys. J., 2002, 82, 2101–2110 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ricchelli, S. Gobbo, G. Moreno, C. Salet, L. Brancaleon and A. Mazzini, Eur. J. Biochem., 1998, 253, 760–765 CAS .
J. F. Nagle and S. Tristram-Nagle, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 2000, 1469, 159–195 CAS .
A. A. Krasnovsky, Dokl. Akad. Nauk. SSSR, 1948, 60, 421–424 Search PubMed .
R. Livingston and R. Pariser, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1948, 70, 1510–1515 CrossRef CAS .
G. R. Seely, J. Phys. Chem., 1965, 69, 2779–2782 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ke, L. P. Vernon and E. R. Shaw, Biochemistry, 1965, 4, 137–144 CrossRef CAS .
J. Aghion, A. P. Losev, A. Moxhet and M. Stevens, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 1992, 16, 37–46 CrossRef CAS .
L. E. Weaner and R. A. Mackay, Colloids Surf., 1989, 40, 267–277 CrossRef CAS .
T. Mizushima, A. Yoshida, A. Harada, Y. Yoneda, T. Minatani and S. Murata, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2006, 4, 4336–4344 CAS .
D. Njus and P. M. Kelley, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Bioenerg., 1993, 1144, 235–248 CrossRef CAS .
T. Iyanagi, I. Yamazaki and K. F. Anan, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Bioenerg., 1985, 806, 255–261 CrossRef CAS .
D. Njus and P. M. Kelley, Hypothesis, 1991, 248, 147–151 Search PubMed .
G. Xu, J. J. O'Dea and J. G. Osteryoung, Dyes Pigm., 1996, 30, 201–223 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, S. Lin, L. Du and H.-S. Zhuang, Anal. Lett., 2006, 39, 947–956 CrossRef CAS .
S. Babanova, Y. Hubenova and M. Mitov, J. Biosci. Bioeng., 2011, 112, 379–387 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. Gale, B. L. Bentz, B. T. Chait, F. H. Field and R. J. Cotter, Anal. Chem., 1986, 58, 1070–1076 CrossRef CAS .
G. R. Seely, J. Phys. Chem., 1965, 69, 821–827 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zbaida and W. G. Levine, Chem. Res. Toxicol., 1991, 4, 82–88 CrossRef CAS .
G. R. Seely, Photochem. Photobiol., 1978, 27, 639–654 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ilani and D. Mauzerall, Biophys. J., 1981, 35, 79–92 CrossRef CAS .
D. Mauzerall and S. G. Ballard, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 1982, 33, 377–407 CrossRef CAS .
P. Walde, Origins Life Evol. Biosphere, 2006, 36, 109–150 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Szostak, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, Ser. B, 2011, 366, 2894–2901 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. Bernstein, S. A. Sandford, L. J. Allamandola, J. S. Gillette, S. J. Clemett and R. N. Zare, Science, 1999, 283, 1135–1138 CrossRef CAS .
S. F. M. Ashbourn, J. E. Elsila, J. P. Dworkin, M. P. Bernstein, S. A. Sandford and L. J. Allamandola, Meteorit. Planet. Sci., 2007, 42, 2035–2041 CrossRef CAS .
D. Mauzerall, Photosynth. Res., 1992, 33, 163–170 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Deamer, Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev., 1997, 61, 239–261 CAS .
S. Berry, J. Mol. Evol., 2002, 54, 595–613 CrossRef CAS .
R. Pascal and L. Boiteau, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, Ser. B, 2011, 366, 2949–2958 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Deamer, Adv. Space Res., 1992, 12(4), 183–189 CrossRef CAS .
P. Ehrenfreund, S. Rasmussen, J. Cleaves and L. Chen, Astrobiology, 2006, 6, 490–520 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Cape, P.-A. Monnard and J. M. Boncella, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 661–671 RSC .
A. A. Sivash, Z. Masinovsky and G. I. Lozovaya, BioSystems, 1991, 25, 131–140 CrossRef CAS .
I. Adam, D. Orain and P. Meier, Synlett, 2004, 11, 2031–2033 Search PubMed .

          M. J. Hope, M. B. Bally, G. Webb and P. R. Cullis, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 812, pp. 55–65 Search PubMed.

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: further characterization data. See DOI: 10.1039/c2sc01120dThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Self-organization of constituents to give a photoactive protocell. The distinct stages include (1) combinatorial formation of pyrroles, (2) combinatorial formation of porphyrinogens, (3) oxidation to form porphyrins and (4) aqueous-membrane partitioning (“P” denotes porphyrins). The 4 of 538 possible macrocycles displayed (clockwise from top left: uroporphyrinogen III, coproporphyrinogen I, etioporphyrinogen I, and mesoporphyrinogen IX) represent the four polarity categories; the relative amounts of each category are derived by calculation. Aqueous-membrane partitioning can also occur at stages 1–3.	 



1	No	No	1.6	8.9	18
2	No	Yes	3.2	8.9	36
3	
NQS
	No	2.7	7.2	38
4	
NQS
	Yes	3.0	5.6	54
5	
TCQ
	No	2.3	5.5	42
6	
TCQ
	Yes	3.3	6.9	48
7	
NQS + TCQ	No	3.0	7.2	42
8	
NQS + TCQ	Yes	3.9	6.7	58



hydrophilic	all polar	1	4	0.4	uroporphyrins
hydrophobic	all nonpolar	1	4	0.4	etioporphyrins
amphiphilic	2–6 of a type in continuous tracta	8	86	15.6	mesoporphyrin IX
uncertain	interspersedb	33	444	83.6	coproporphyrin I

 	Fig. 2  HPLC analysis with fluorescence detection (λexc = 401 nm, λem = 624 nm) to assess aqueous-lipid partitioning of porphyrins (normalized intensities). (A) Five porphyrin standards: uro (uroporphyrin I), hexa (hexacarboxylic acid porphyrin I), copro (coproporphyrin I), meso (mesoporphyrin IX), and etio (etioporphyrin I). (B) Crude reaction mixture with both quinones following photooxidation (entry 8, Table 1). (C) Porphyrins/vesicles fraction following SEC of the mixture in panel B. (D) Porphyrins/aqueous phase fraction following SEC of the mixture in panel B.	 

 	Fig. 3  Absorption spectra of the crude reaction mixture and the two phases following SEC separation (top panel). Fluorescence emission spectra of the crude reaction mixture and the two phases following SEC separation (bottom panel).	 

 	Fig. 4  Conceptual illustration of the Krasnovsky reaction where P denotes porphyrins (top). Structures of selected constituents in the Krasnovsky reaction (bottom).	 

 	Fig. 5  Spectral change upon illumination of the porphyrins/vesicles in the presence of the Krasnovsky reaction constituents. The disappearance of methyl red is seen at 440 nm. The porphyrin band (∼400 nm) is relatively unchanged upon illumination.	 

 	Fig. 6  Timecourse of methyl red photoreduction (440 nm) in the Krasnovsky reaction. Top panel: Photoactivity of the crude reaction mixture (blue inverted triangles), porphyrins/aqueous phase (red circles), and porphyrins/vesicles (black squares). Bottom panel: Photoactivity of the porphyrins/vesicles (black squares) and upon omission experiments—in the dark (red circles), in the absence of DCPIP (blue triangles), or in the absence of ascorbic acid and DCPIP (green inverted triangles).	 

 	Fig. 7  Comparison of the Krasnovsky photoactivity of the porphyrins/vesicles versus two standard porphyrins (uroporphyrin and mesoporphyrin) in the presence of vesicles. The data show the timecourse of methyl red photoreduction at 440 nm.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: further characterization data. See DOI: 10.1039/c2sc01120d

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
