Structure and reaction mechanism of binary Ni–Al oxides as materials for lithium-ion battery anodes   - Dalton Transactions (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1DT01911B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1DT01911B
(Paper)
Dalton Trans., 2021, 50, 14176-14186Structure and reaction mechanism of binary Ni–Al oxides as materials for lithium-ion battery anodes†

        
          
            Noriyuki 
            Sonoyama
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Kaori 
            Niki
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Akihiro 
            Koide
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Mina 
            Eguchi
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Yoshitaka 
            Ogasawara
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Tetsuya 
            Tsukada
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Patrick K. 
            Dedetemo
          
        
      a
aDepartment of Life and Applied Chemistry, Nagoya Institute of Technology, Gokiso-cyo, Showa-ku, Nagoya 466-8555, Japan. E-mail: sonoyama@nitech.ac.jp
bDepartment of Chemistry, Chiba University, 1-33, Yayoicho, Inage Ward, Chiba-shi, Chiba, 263-8522 Japan
cSynchrotron Radiation Research Center, National Institutes for Quantum and Radiological Science and Technology, SPring-8, 1-1-1 Koto, Sayo, Hyogo 679-5148, Japan
Received 
      10th June 2021
    , Accepted 31st August 2021First published on 7th September 2021AbstractA nanometer sized solid solution of NiO and Al2O3 was synthesized by calcination of Ni–Al layered double hydroxides (LDHs). The crystal structure of the obtained compound was determined by XRD and XAFS analyses: Ni2+ and Al3+ ions are located at the metal ion site of the rock salt structure and a certain amount of cation vacancies are also introduced for charge compensation. The electrochemical properties of the Ni–Al binary metal oxide as an anode material for lithium ion batteries were examined by the constant current charge–discharge test. Ni–Al oxide showed higher charging capacity in comparison with pristine NiO. In particular, the capacity in the lower voltage region (below 1.5 V), the limited capacity in this region is the weak point of the conversion anode, was improved to 540 mA h g−1 that is about twice that of pristine NiO. This improvement in the capacity in the lower voltage region is concluded to be due to the redox activity of Al3+ ions during the charge–discharge on the basis of the results of electrochemical measurements and ex situ XAFS measurements at the Ni and Al edge. The reaction mechanism of this compound is investigated using ex situ XRD and XAFS methods. For the charge (reduction) in the higher voltage region (OCV–1.0 V), lithium ion intercalation into the cation vacancy sites and/or lithium ion adsorption on the surface of particles are proceeding. For the charge in the lower voltage region (1.0–0.03 V), conversion reaction occurs by the reduction of Ni2+ and Al3+ ions to metal particles with surface electrolyte interface (SEI) layer formation. For the discharge in the lower voltage region (0.03–1.5 V), only Al metal particles are oxidized to Al3+ ions and some intermediate complexes are formed. For the discharge in the higher voltage region (1.5–3.0 V), the lattice of the Ni–Al binary oxide solid solution is reconstructed with the oxidation of Ni to Ni2+.
Introduction
Lithium-ion batteries (LIBs), widely used in mobile devices such as laptop computers and smartphones, have recently been employed to power (hybrid) electric vehicles, which are expected to represent a major fraction of next-generation automobiles. Moreover, LIBs are believed to be well suited for use in power storage plants, which, as their name suggests, store electric power produced by renewable power sources such as solar cells and wind power stations and can supply it on demand for power leveling purposes. However, the storage of such large amounts of power requires the use of cost-effective high-capacity materials, which, unluckily, have not been developed yet. In particular, high-capacity anode materials are highly sought after. At present, LIB anodes are mainly fabricated from graphite, the theoretical capacity of which is almost used up. Therefore, the development of new materials for anode capacity improvement is a task of high practical importance. Currently, three kinds of high-capacity anode materials are investigated, namely Li metal;1–3 alloys4–9 containing Si, Sn, etc.; and conversion materials such as MO (M = Ni, Co, Cu, etc.)10–16 and MH2 (M = Ti and Mg).17,18 Among them, Li metal and alloys exhibit very large theoretical capacities but suffer from a number of difficult-to-overcome inherent disadvantages. For example, the formation of Li dendrites during charge–discharge cycling of batteries with Li metal anodes causes short-circuiting and may result in firing and flaming,19 which are problems that require extensive basic research to be overcome.1–3 In turn, alloy materials suffer from low cycling stability caused by an increase of volume.4–6 Actually, a number of methods for mitigating this problem have been reported. Many of them mainly improve the electron conducting path by use of materials with high electron conductivity such as carbon nanotubes or hybrid conductive materials.7–9 The cost and effort of hybridization will be the point to overcome.
Finally, conversion materials suffer from limited capacity in the lower-voltage region. Tarascon et al.10 have reported that conversion of transition metal oxide nanoparticles results in their reduction and the formation of fine transition metal particles and Li2O:20,21 MO + 2Li+ + 2e− → M + Li2O (M = transition metal, e.g., Ni)(1)
As an example, Fig. S1† shows the charge–discharge curves of NiO nanoparticles in the third cycle recorded for a half-cell with a Li counter electrode. In these curves, the oxidation of Ni and reduction of NiO correspond to discharge and charge processes in a full-cell LIB, respectively. The discharge voltage of the full cell is given by the discharge potential at the cathode minus the potential at the anode for each half cell, i.e., the anode voltage significantly affects the LIB performance. Fig. S1† shows the discharge capacity of NiO up to 1.5 V, revealing that the capacity of this material (268 mA h g−1) in the lower-voltage region is very small compared to the total capacity, which is thought to reflect the reaction voltage of NiO. Table 1 lists the electrochemical reaction voltages (E) of various metal oxides estimated using the Nernst equation: (2)where , n, and F are the standard Gibbs energy of formation, number of transferred electrons, and the Faraday constant, respectively.
Table 1 Theoretical capacity and estimated reaction voltage of various metal oxide compounds as conversion materials for lithium ion battery anodes




Compounds
Theoretical capacity (mA h g−1)
Reaction voltage E° vs. Li+/Li




CoO
715
1.80 V


NiO
718
1.81 V


Fe2O3
1007
1.62 V


V2O5
1474
1.44 V


TiO2
1342
0.60 V


Al2O3
1577
0.17 V




The capacity in the lower-voltage region is reported to reflect the occurrence of capacitor-like reactions.14 According to Table 1, CoO and NiO exhibit reaction voltages of 1.80 and 1.81 V, respectively, which explains why the lower-voltage capacity of these oxides is small despite their high theoretical capacities of >700 mA h g−1. Another reason for limited capacity in the lower-voltage region would be the large polarization owing to low electric conductivity. Fang et al. pointed out that this large polarization would cause poor energy efficiency of the storage process in the transition metal oxide conversion reaction.22 On the other hand, TiO2 and Al2O3 exhibit low reaction potentials and very high theoretical capacities, which indicate that the small lower-voltage capacities of NiO and CoO can be ascribed to the high reaction voltages of these metal oxides and may be improved by the use of materials with lower reaction voltages such as TiO2 or Al2O3 (0.62 and 0.18 V, respectively). However, the use of Ti4+ or Al3+ as redox-active ions in the conversion reaction is hindered by their low electric conductivity. This weak point limits the use of conversion reactions for materials other than oxides. For example, metal hydrides (MHx) are known to react more with Li+ in the lower voltage region17,18 than transition metal oxide materials. Actually, the use of MHx as anode materials for lithium ion batteries is limited due to their low electric conductivity.
Previously, we prepared a metastable solid solution of NiO in Fe3+ and V5+ oxides from layered double hydroxides23–25 and have reported the improved electrochemical properties and capacity in the lower voltage region.23,24 The purpose of our present study is to (1) improve the electrochemical properties of conversion materials by utilizing the redox reactions of Al3+ ions in solid-solution-phase binary Ni–Al oxides25 and (2) investigate the reaction mechanism of Al3+ ion conversion as the anode material for lithium ion batteries. As shown in Table 1, the estimated reaction voltage of aluminum oxide is 0.17 V that is inside of the voltage window of a lithium ion battery system. This suggests the potential for the redox activity of aluminum ions as the anode material for lithium ion batteries. Actually, the electric conductivity of Al oxides is very low, and their redox reactions in LIB anodes have not been reported to date. However, Hosono et al. have recently described Ca–Al oxides, showing that they exhibit acceptable electric conductivity.26 These findings suggest that Al3+ can possibly be used as a redox-active ion if an appropriate host structure is selected. In the present paper, we have experimentally proved that the Ni–Al oxide structure contains Al3+ ions homogeneously distributed in the semiconducting host (Fig. 1(c)) and cation vacancies introduced into this host structure are expected to act as Li+ diffusion paths and storage sites during charge–discharge, i.e., the above environment should be appropriate for activating the redox activity of Al3+. Although the conversion reactions of commonly used transition metal oxides have already been mechanistically studied,27 the behavior of binary Ni–Al oxides is expected to be complicated and feature the stepwise reduction of Ni2+ and Al3+ ions, highlighting the need for in-depth mechanistic investigations aimed at the development of conversion materials with excellent electrochemical properties. To address the above consideration, we investigated the mechanism of binary Ni–Al oxide reactions occurring during charge–discharge by ex situ XRD and ex situ XAFS measurements. This paper is the first report of the Al3+ ion conversion reaction as the anode material for lithium ion batteries as far as we know.
 Fig. 1  (a) XRD patterns of NiAl-LDHs with various Ni:Al molar ratios. (b) XRD patterns of NiAl-LDHs sintered at 300 °C. (c) Structural model of sintered NixAl-LDH. (d) Relationship between the lattice parameter of sintered NixAl-LDH and the content of Al3+ therein. 
Results and discussion

Fig. 1(a) shows the XRD patterns of precursor LDHs with various Ni:Al molar ratios, revealing that typical 003, 006, and 009 interlayer diffractions were observed for all samples and confirming that the above LDHs could be successfully synthesized. For brevity, these materials were named Ni3Al-, Ni2.5Al-, Ni2Al-, Ni1.5Al-, and NiAl-LDHs according to their Ni:Al molar ratios. Weak peaks attributable to Al(OH)3 were observed only for NiAl-LDH.

Fig. 1(b) shows the XRD patterns of sintered NiAl-LDHs. For sintered Ni3Al-LDH, the broad diffraction peaks at 38, 43 and 63° were assigned to rock-salt-structured NiO, and no peaks of impurity phases were observed. The above peaks were also observed for other sintered samples, which suggested the formation of a solid-solution-phase Ni–Al oxide with a rock-salt NiO host structure.23–25,28,29 In our previous work, we reported that calcination of Mg–Fe and Ni–Fe LDHs affords rock-salt-structured compounds and suggested that these species can be described as MII–MIII oxide solid solutions containing cation vacancies for charge compensation (Fig. 1(c)) on the basis of XRD and EXAFS analyses.23–25
The fine structure of sintered Ni3Al-LDH was probed by EXAFS. Fig. 2 shows the Ni K-edge EXAFS spectrum revealing that the peak of the first coordination region corresponds to the oxide ion and that at the second coordination binary metal oxide obtained by sintering Ni3Al-LDH at 300 °C, the region can be ascribed to Ni2+, Al3+, or cation vacancies. Solid and dotted lines correspond to the experimental spectrum and the fit obtained on the basis of the model shown in Fig. 1(c), respectively. The good quality of the above fit (residual error = 0.0366) indicated that the employed structural model was sufficiently reliable. For brevity, sintered NixAl-LDHs were denoted as NixAlO.
 Fig. 2  Experimental Ni K-edge EXAFS spectrum of Ni2AlO and the simulated spectrum obtained based on the model shown in Fig. 1(c). 

Fig. 1(b) shows that the XRD peaks of Ni–Al oxides shifted to higher angles (i.e. a decrease in the lattice parameter of these oxides) with an increase in the Al content. Fig. 1(d) shows that the lattice parameters of Ni–Al oxides were proportional to the Al content in agreement with Vegard's law, which also confirms the successful formation of solid-solution-phase Ni–Al binary oxides.

Fig. 3(a) and (b) present the SEM image of Ni3Al-LDH and the TEM image of Ni2AlO, respectively, showing that the sintering process afforded aggregated nanometer-size particles with diameters of 50–100 nm, in agreement with our previous reports,25 on the other hand, non-sintered Ni3Al LDH comprised micrometer-size particles. Fig. 3(c) shows the energy-dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) atomic mappings of Ni and Al for Ni2AlO, revealing that the above elements were uniformly distributed over the entire surface. These data also support the formation of a NiO-Al2O3 solid solution featuring Al3+ ions dissolved in rock-salt NiO.
 Fig. 3  (a)SEM image of Ni3Al-LDH before sintering, (b) TEM image of Ni2AlO, and (c) Ni and Al EDS mappings of Ni2AlO. 
Electrochemical properties

Fig. 4(a) and (b) show the first and second charge–discharge curves of Ni3AlO and NiO, respectively. During the first charge cycle, both NiO and Ni3AlO exhibited behaviors different from those in later cycles, showing fairly large charge capacities of >1200 mA h g−1 and large irreversible capacities of 700 and 600 mA h g−1, respectively, whereas the corresponding second-cycle reversible capacities were 700 and 920 mA h g−1 in the discharge process, respectively. These high irreversible capacities were ascribed to the formation of surface films (also known as solid-electrolyte interfaces (SEIs)) caused by electrolyte decomposition.23,30 One of the most important characteristics of anode materials is their discharge capacity in the lower-voltage region, which determines the usable capacity and average voltage. From this viewpoint, the potency of NiO as an anode material is very limited, since this material has very small lower-voltage-region capacity, similar to almost all metal oxide conversion materials. In contrast, Ni3AlO exhibited much higher capacity in the lower-voltage region than NiO. Discharge capacity comparison in the potential window of 0.03–1.5 V chosen as a tentative standard (arrows in Fig. 4(a) and (b)) allowed the capacities of NiO and Ni3AlO to be obtained as 268 and 567 mA h g−1, respectively, which suggested that the conversion reaction during the charging of Ni3AlO was accompanied by Al3+ reduction.
 Fig. 4  Charge–discharge curves of (a) NiO and (b)Ni3AlO. (c) Relationship between the discharge capacity in the lower voltage region (0.03–1.5 V) and the content of Al3+. (d) Cycling stability of NixAlO (x = 1–3). 
To compare the performances of the synthesized Ni–Al oxides as anode materials, their discharge capacities within 0.03–1.5 V were plotted as a function of the Al content (Fig. 4(c)). Notably, Fig. S2† shows the cyclic voltammograms of NiO and Ni3AlO, demonstrating that the former exhibited well-defined reduction peaks at 0.1 and 1.1 V and oxidation peaks at 1.1 and 2.5 V. The pair of peaks at higher voltage was assigned to the redox reactions of Ni2+, and the pair of lower-voltage peaks were attributed to the occurrence of capacitor-like charge–discharge.14 For Ni3AlO, the reduction peaks observed at 0.03, 0.6 and 1.4 V were ascribed to capacitor-like charge–discharge, and the pair of peaks at 0.6 V (reduction) and 1.1 V (oxidation) was assigned to the redox reactions of Al3+. The reduction peak at 1.4 V and the oxidation peak at 2.4 V were attributed to the redox reactions of Ni2+. Finally, the oxidation peak at 1.6 V was tentatively assigned to the oxidation of subdivided Ni metal.
In our previous study, we investigated the reaction of sintered Ni–Fe and Ni–V LDHs in the higher-potential region (above 1.0 V) of the charging process using ex situ XRD, XAFS, and AC impedance measurements.24 A slight shift of its XRD peak during reduction to 1.5 V and a concomitant shift of the Ni-K edge EXAFS peak indicate that as described for charge–discharge curves in Fig. 4(b), charging in this region was accompanied by Li ion intercalation into the cation vacancy sites of the binary metal oxide (red back area in the expanded charge curve in Fig. 4(b) inset). Moreover, the change in AC impedance spectra was ascribed to Li ion adsorption on the surface of binary metal oxide nanoparticles (blue back area in Fig. 4(b) inset).25 Therefore, the fact that the reaction voltage of Ni2+ was divided into two parts in the corresponding cyclic voltammogram was ascribed to the abovementioned two-step reaction mechanism of NiAlO.
Fig. S2† shows a comparison of the voltammograms of NiO and Ni3AlO, revealing that both the reduction and oxidation currents of Ni3AlO exceeded those of NiO, particularly for the lower-voltage region, which was consistent with the capacity increase observed for Ni3AlO in the latter region.
The redox behaviors of the synthesized materials were further probed by AC impedance measurements during charge–discharge. Fig. S3† shows the typical Nyquist plots of Ni2AlO, revealing that the changes observed during charge–discharge were similar to those previously reported for a Ni2V binary metal oxide prepared by calcination of Ni2V-LDH.23 The large semicircle observed for the initial state was thought to reflect the charge transfer resistance (CTR). During the first charge, the radius of this semi-circle decreased with decreasing voltage, which was ascribed to the introduction of electrons into the conduction band with progressing reduction of Ni2+. At voltages below 1.0 V, a new semicircle appeared in the lower-frequency region, which was assigned to the formation of an SEI layer with moderate resistance at the surface of electrode materials23,30 and was consistent with the observation of large irreversible charge capacity during the first charge. During subsequent discharge to 0.25 V, CTR decreased, which seemed to reflect the decrease in the amount of Li2O disturbing the charge transfer between the conductive additive and the active material. Upon further discharge, the decrease in electrons in the conduction band resulted in a monotonous CTR increase. During the second charge, a reversible Nyquist plot change similar to that seen in the first discharge was observed. The above Nyquist plots were analyzed using the equivalent circuit shown in the inset of Fig. S3,† and the most important region (where the conversion of Al3+ ions seemed to proceed) was identified as 0.5–1.0 V. In Fig. 4(d), the cycle dependence of the charging capacity of the compounds synthesized in the present study is shown. The capacity of all samples faded gradually with cycling.
This low cycling stability would result in the loss of electron conduction paths upon a charge–discharge-induced volume change.
Reaction mechanism
The conversion reaction of binary metal oxide containing Al was mechanistically investigated by recording the ex situ XRD and XAFS spectra of Ni3AlO during charge–discharge. Fig. 5 shows the ex situ XRD patterns of Ni3AlO, revealing that charging had almost no effect on the intensity of the 220 peak at 63° until 1.0 V, whereas the position of this peak progressively shifted to lower angles. Previously, we observed a similar shift during charging for Ni–V, Ni–Ti, and Mg–Fe binary oxides and assigned it to the lattice expansion induced by Li insertion into cation vacancies.25 The 220 peak disappeared upon further charging to 0.03 V and never re-appeared during charge–discharge cycling. Such XRD peak disappearance during the first charge was previously reported by Poizot et al.10 and was explained by the amorphization of particles during the conversion reaction. The above amorphization of the electrode material made it difficult to trace and discuss the detailed mechanism of the conversion reaction using XRD measurements. Therefore, we probed the above mechanism using ex situ XAFS, since this technique allows us to probe the valence states of both Ni and Al and provides information on the fine structure around the corresponding ions even for the amorphous state. In our previous work, we recorded the ex situ XAFS spectra of Ni–V and Ni–Fe binary oxides prepared by calcination of the corresponding LDHs, which showed that V5+ and Fe3+ ions were reduced concomitantly with Ni2+ ions.24
 Fig. 5  
Ex situ XRD patterns of Ni3AlO recorded during charge–discharge. 
Fig. S4† shows the first charge–discharge curves of Ni2AlO. For the ease of discussion, the charge–discharge processes were divided into four regions: region I (charge from open circuit voltage to 0.5 V), region II (charge from 0.5 to 0.03 V), region III (discharge from 0.03 to 1.0 V), and region IV (discharge from 1.0 to 3.0 V). Additionally, we recorded XAFS spectra at points marked by filled red circles in Fig. S4† to investigate the valence states of Al and Ni ions and determine the fine structure around these metals.
In region I, the steep cell voltage decrease observed upon charging to 0.7 V was followed by a plateau. As mentioned in the previous section, the initial charging of sintered LDH at 3.5–1.0 V was reported to involve a two-step reaction.25 In the higher-voltage region, Li intercalation into cation vacancies and Li ion adsorption on the electrode material surface is proceeding. Fig. 6(a) and 7(a) show Ni and Al K-edge XANES spectra recorded for the first charge, revealing that whereas the absorption edge of Ni shifted to lower energies upon charging, and that of Al hardly changed, which indicated that only Ni ions were reduced in this region. Fig. 8 shows that the Ni K-edge EXAFS spectra hardly changed in this region, i.e., the rock-salt structure of Ni2AlO was maintained. The above data indicated the occurrence of reactions other than conversion in this region, e.g., Li intercalation or surface adsorption, as suggested in our previous study.25
 Fig. 6  Ni K-edge ex situ XANES spectra of Ni3AlO recorded during (a) charge and (b) discharge. 
 Fig. 7  Al K-edge XANES spectra of Ni3AlO recorded during (a) charge and (b) discharge. (c) Simulated XANES spectra of AlLi2O surrounded by Li2O and Al metal obtained by ab initio calculations. (d) Expanded Al K-edge XANES spectra of Ni3AlO before and after charging to 0.03 V. 
 Fig. 8  Ni K edge EXAFS spectra of Ni3AlO (a) on the first charging (b) on the first discharging. 
In region II (also denoted as the conversion region), the cell voltage gradually decreased and reached a large plateau. Fig. 6(a) and 7(a) show the XANES spectra recorded to evaluate further changes at Ni and Al K-edges. Notably, the absorption edge of Ni shifted to lower energies, finally reaching the position of Ni foil, which indicated the complete reduction of Ni2+ ions to Ni metal. The absorption edge of Al also shifted to lower energies, which was accompanied by peak intensity loss. For Al, the absorption edge shift was less pronounced than for Ni, and the position of Al foil was not reached.
In the case of Al XAFS, the exact valence of Al cannot be estimated only from the position of the corresponding absorption edge, since the above position largely depends on the host structure.31 As an example, Fig. S5† shows the XAFS spectra of α- and γ-Al2O3, revealing that their Al absorption edges are positioned at different energies (1563 and 1562 eV, respectively) despite the fact that the metal valences were identical in both cases. In the present case, the produced Al metal particles were surrounded by Li2O formed in the conversion reaction. Therefore, owing to the high ionicity of Li2O, the presence of oxide anions around Al metal is expected to influence the electronic structure of the above particles. To confirm the effect of surrounding Li2O, we simulated the XAFS spectrum of a Li2O-surrounded Al metal particle by ab initio calculations, with the model used for simulation shown in Fig. S6.† In this model, Al metal was placed in the body-centered position of Li2O with an anti-fluorite structure (AlLi2O).

Fig. 7(c) shows the simulated XAFS spectrum of AlLi2O and that of Al foil, with the horizontal axis representing the relative energy difference. Interestingly, the absorption of Al metal in the region of 0–20 eV was represented by two bands (reflecting the interaction of Al with surrounding Li2O) with a splitting gap of 13 eV. Fig. 7(d) shows an enlarged XANES spectrum of pristine Ni3AlO and that of Ni3AlO charged to 0.03, revealing that the absorption edge of the former that was observed at 1562 eV shifted to 1557 eV upon reduction, which corresponded to the K-edge of metallic Al. This result supports the hypothesis that the splitting of the Al XANES spectrum was caused by the interaction of Al with Li2O, although the simulated energy difference between the two absorption bands and their intensity did not agree with the experimentally observed values. This discrepancy was ascribed to the inaccuracy of the employed structural model, since the actual numbers of oxide ions around Al metal and the corresponding distances are difficult to estimate.

Fig. 8 shows the Ni K-edge EXAFS spectra, revealing that charging to 0.03 V resulted in a complete spectral pattern change. Specifically, the peaks at 1.7 and 2.6 Å disappeared upon charging, and a new single peak at 2.2 Å was observed. This change was ascribed to the conversion to small metal particles, as previously reported by Boesenberg.26 The distance of 2.2 Å was almost equal to the metal-to-metal distance in metallic Ni (2.49 Å) estimated from its lattice parameter (3.52 Å). This slightly shorter distance was ascribed to the presence of Al particles with smaller radii, and the above finding also indicated the occurrence of Ni2AlO conversion in this region.
Region III was characterized by a gradual voltage increase upon discharge. Notably, Ni2AlO exhibited a sufficiently high capacity (580 mA h g−1), whereas only limited capacity was observed in the case of NiO (280 mA h g−1), as mentioned above. Ni K-edge XANES spectra (Fig. 6(b)) indicated only a slight shift to lower energies, whereas Al K-edge spectra (Fig. 7(b)) revealed a reversible shift to higher energies up to the initial position before charging. The Ni K-edge EXAFS spectra shown in Fig. 8 also hardly changed after charging, which suggested that in this region, Al was re-oxidized to Al3+, whereas Ni remained unchanged and was present as small metal particles. Thus, the lower-voltage-region capacity originated from the redox reactions of Al metal particles. The formation of a state where only Al was oxidized to Al3+ and Ni remained in the metallic state was unexpected, and it was speculated that Al3+ ions formed intermediate complexes with Li2O in this intermediate state, the detailed structure of which is not clear yet.
In region IV, the voltage increased to 3.0 V with a certain amount of capacity. The corresponding Ni K-edge XANES spectra shown in Fig. 6(b) show that the absorption edge shifted to higher energies back to the initial pre-charge position. On the other hand, the Al K-edge XANES spectra shown in Fig. 7(b) did not change, which means that only Ni was oxidized to Ni2+ in this region. Fig. 8 shows the Ni K-edge EXAFS spectra at 1.0 and 3.0 V, demonstrating that the EXAFS pattern became similar to that of the initial pre-charge state, i.e., the rock-salt structure was reconstructed by discharge to 3.0 V.
Subsequently, we attempted to determine whether the solid solution structure of Ni–Al binary metal oxides was reformed after the charge–discharge process. Fig. 8 shows the Ni K-edge EXAFS spectrum of the initial state and that recorded after the first cycle, revealing that although the observed spectral changes were insignificant, the peak intensity decreased. This decrease was ascribed to further particle grain refining by reversible conversion, which corresponded to the disappearance of XRD peaks. In the case of Al, it was difficult to determine whether Al3+ ions were reconstructed as a solid solution within NiO based on EXAFS results, since the Al K-edge EXAFS spectra could not be acquired because of the presence of the absorption edge of Si, which is an impurity difficult to exclude from the measurement system. However, we think that the Ni–Al binary oxide solid solution was reconstructed during the discharge process after the conversion. As mentioned above, Al K-edge XANES spectra are very sensitive to the host structure. Notably, the XANES spectra of α- and γ-Al2O3 (Fig. S5†) are markedly different, whereas those of the Ni–Al binary oxide before and after charge–discharge (Fig. 7(a) and (b)) were similar. In addition, the host structure of Al3+ ions influences the absorption edges of XANES spectra, as can be seen in Fig. S5.† The XANES spectrum recorded after the first cycle did not feature peaks other than those of the Ni–Al binary metal oxide, which confirmed the re-construction of its solid solution structure after charge–discharge.

Fig. 9 summarizes the reactions of Ni–Al binary oxides, showing that Li intercalation at cation vacancy sites and/or the surface adsorption of Li ions occur in the higher-voltage charge region. The lower-voltage charge region is characterized by the conversion of the binary metal oxide and the concomitant reduction of both Ni2+and Al3+ to form Ni and Al particles. Lower-voltage discharge is accompanied only by the oxidation of Al, which results in the formation of an intermediate complex of Al3+ with surrounding Li2O. Finally, higher-voltage discharge features the oxidation of Ni to reform the solid solution of the binary Ni–Al oxide.
 Fig. 9  Schematic diagram representing the reactions of NixAlO during charge–discharge. 
Boesenberg et al.27 have discussed the conversion mechanism of NiO on the basis of XAFS data, speculating that the oxidation process is not simply the reverse of the reduction observed for NiO conversion because of the catalytic activity of Ni nanoparticles. The above researchers also suggested that this asymmetric reaction mechanism and the change in oxide crystallinity and atomic ordering result in large voltage hysteresis.
In the case of NiAlO systems, the reaction asymmetry increases, i.e., Ni2+ and Al3+ ions are reduced simultaneously, whereas the oxidation of Al and Ni occurs in a stepwise manner. In spite of this irreversible reaction mechanism, the voltage hysteresis observed for NiAlO charge–discharge was less pronounced (0.6 V) than that of NiO (0.8 V), which seemed to be induced by the introduction of Li ions into cation vacancies and/or the multiple catalytic effects of Ni and Al nanoparticles.
The developed system has two weak points, one of which is low electric conductivity. Another weak point is the insufficient cycling stability caused by the loss of electron conduction paths upon charge–discharge-induced volume change. Since the purpose of this paper is to determine whether the conversion of Al3+ ions occurs and to elucidate the reaction mechanism, a large amount of conductive additives are added to ensure that the reaction occurs (1:2 by weight). To overcome the above drawbacks, surface coating of the primary particles with carbon is currently under investigation in our group. With the achievement of this method, NiAlO can be used as the actual anode material for lithium ion batteies.
Experimental
All chemicals were purchased from Kishida Chemical (GR grade). NiAl-LDHs with various Ni:Al ratios were synthesized by co-precipitation from metal nitrate or chloride solutions according to the procedure reported in a previous paper.25 Briefly, an aqueous solution containing NaOH (1 M) and Na2CO3 (0.1 M) was dropwise added into an aqueous solution of the above metal salts, and the resulting gel was vigorously stirred for 12 h. After precipitation and washing with copious amounts of water, the obtained LDHs were dried at 120 °C overnight and subsequently sintered at 300 °C for 12 h to obtain binary Ni–Al oxides.
XRD patterns were recorded on a Rigaku RAD-C instrument using Cu Kα radiation, and powder sample morphology was observed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM; Hitachi S-4800) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM; JEOL JSM z2500). Ni and Al elemental analyses were carried out using a multi-type inductively coupled plasma emission spectrometer (Shimadzu ICPE-9000). X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) measurements were performed on BL-7C and BL-9A beamlines at the High Energy Accelerator Research organization using an electron storage ring (electron energy = 2.5 GeV, storage current = 450 mA) and a Si (111) monochromator. Energy calibration was carried out using the first inflection point of the Ni metal foil spectrum as a reference. Each sample was mixed with acetylene black powder in a 1:1 (w/w) ratio, and the resulting mixture was pelletized. For ex situ XAS measurements, binary metal oxide composites (active material/acetylene black 1/4 1:1 wt%) were charged to 1 V using HS cells (Hohsen Corp.) at a rate of 30 mA g−1. The charged samples were removed, rinsed with dimethyl carbonate, and set in a sealed case in an Ar-filled glove box. XANES and EXAFS spectra were analyzed using the IFEFFIT program package (version 1.2.11).32 Fitting for multiple metal oxides was performed in an R-space of 1–3 Å. During data fitting, the amplitude reduction factor (So2), coordination distance (R), and the Debye–Waller factor (s2) of cells were varied, while the coordination number (N) was constrained to the crystallographic value.
The electrochemical performances of binary metal oxides were examined using CR 2032 coin cells at 25 °C. The electrode material comprised 32 wt% of the active material (tap density: 2.04 g cm−3 for Ni3AlO), 64 wt% of acetylene black, and 4 wt% of PTFE as a binder. Li metal was used as the anode, and 1 M LiPF6 in EC:DEC (3:7 (v/v)) was used as an electrolyte. Charge–discharge measurements were carried out in the potential range of 3.0–0.03 V at a current density of 10 mA g−1 that was controlled using a battery test system (interface model 0Z0-A19). Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy measurements were performed at various electrode voltages using an impedance analyzer (Solatron 1260) over a frequency range of 10 mHz to 1 MHz at an applied voltage of 10 mV. The voltage imposed on the electrode was controlled using a potentiostat (Solatron 1280 C).
Conclusions
Herein, we demonstrated that the redox reactions of Al ions can be utilized to fabricate a promising conversion material for LIB anodes. The redox activity of Al ions was facilitated by the structure of the electrode material, wherein both electrons and Li ions could be supplied to Al ions during charge–discharge.
The above redox activity improved the major drawback of the conversion anode, namely its small capacity in the lower-voltage region, and allowed the fabricated binary Ni–Al oxides to act as promising anode materials with excellent cost performance.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Notes and references
H. Sano, H. Sakaebe and H. Matsumoto, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 6663–6669 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ding, W. Xu, G. L. Graff, J. Zhang, M. L. Sushko, X. Chen, Y. Shao, M. H. Engelhard, Z. Nie, J. Xiao, X. Liu, P. V. Sushko, J. Liu and J. G. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 4450–4456 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ghassemi, M. Au, N. Chen, P. A. Heiden and R. S. Yassar, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 123113 CrossRef .
C.-M. Park, J.-H. Kim, H. Kim and H.-J. Sohn, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 3115–3141 RSC .
U. Kasavajjula, C. Wang and A. J. Appleby, J. Power Sources, 2007, 163, 1003–1039 CrossRef CAS .
B. Key, R. Bhattacharyya, M. Morcrette, V. Seznec, J.-M. Tarascon and C. P. Grey, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 9239–9249 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Liu, H. Wu, M. T. McDowell, Y. Yao, C. Wang and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3315–3321 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Hertzberg, A. Alexeev and G. Yushin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 8548–8549 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wu, G. Zheng, N. Liu, T. J. Carney, Y. Yang and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 904–909 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Poizot, S. Laruelle, S. Grugeon, L. Dupont and J. M. Tarascon, Nature, 2000, 407, 496–499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. V. Reddy, G. V. Subba Rao and B. V. R. Chowdari, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 5364–5457 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Debart, L. Dupont, P. Poizot, J. B. Leriche and J. M. Tarascon, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2001, 148, A1266–A1274 CrossRef CAS .
S. Grugeon, S. Laruelle, R. Herrera-Urbina, L. Dupont, P. Poizot and J. M. Tarascon, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2001, 148, A285–A292 CrossRef CAS .
S. Laruelle, S. Grugeon, P. Poizot, M. Dolle, L. Dupont and J. M. Tarascon, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2002, 149, A627–A634 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, H. M. Dahn, R. J. Sanderson, A. D. W. Todd and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2008, 155, A975–A981 CrossRef CAS .
P. Poizot, S. Laruelle, S. Grugeon, L. Dupont and J. M. Tarascon, Ionics, 2000, 6, 321–330 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Oumellal, A. Rougier, J. M. Tarascon and L. Aymard, J. Power Sources, 2009, 192, 698–702 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Oumellal, A. Rougier, G. A. Nazri, J. M. Tarascon and L. Aymard, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 916–921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Aurbach, E. Zinigrad, Y. Cohen and H. Teller, Solid State Ionics, 2002, 148, 405–416 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cabana, L. Monconduit, D. Larcher and M. R. Palacin, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E170–E192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. V. Reddy, G. V. Subba Rao and B. V. R. Chowdari, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 5364–5457 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Fang, D. Bresser and S. Passerini, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 10, 1902485 CrossRef .
Z. Quan, E. Ni, Y. Ogasawara and N. Sonoyama, Solid State Ionics, 2014, 268, 268–272 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Quan, E. Ni, Y. Ogasawara and N. Sonoyama, Solid State Ionics, 2014, 262, 128–132 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Quan, E. Ni, S. Hayashi and N. Sonoyama, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 8848–8856 RSC .
W. Kim Sung, S. Matsuishi, T. Nomura, Y. Kubota, M. Takata, K. Hayashi, T. Kamiya, M. Hirano and H. Hosono, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1138–1143 CrossRef PubMed .
U. Boesenberg, M. A. Marcus, A. K. Shukla, T. Yi, E. McDermott, P. F. Teh, M. Srinivasan, A. Moewes and J. Cabana, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 7133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kannan, A. Narayanan and C. S. Swamy, J. Mater. Sci., 1996, 31, 2353–2360 CrossRef CAS .
S. Velu, K. Suzuki, M. P. Kapoor, S. Tomura, F. Ohashi and T. Osaki, Chem. Mater., 2000, 12, 719–730 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Xiang, J. P. Tu, Y. Q. Qiao, X. L. Wang, J. Zhong, D. Zhang and C. D. Gu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 2505–2513 CrossRef CAS .

          L. M. Perander, Master thesis, The University of Auckland,  2010 .
M. Newville, J. Synchrotron Radiat., 2001, 8, 322–324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1dt01911bThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:
MO + 2Li+ + 2e− → M + Li2O (M = transition metal, e.g., Ni)	(1)
	(2)

CoO	715	1.80 V
NiO	718	1.81 V
Fe2O3	1007	1.62 V
V2O5	1474	1.44 V
TiO2	1342	0.60 V
Al2O3	1577	0.17 V

 	Fig. 1  (a) XRD patterns of NiAl-LDHs with various Ni:Al molar ratios. (b) XRD patterns of NiAl-LDHs sintered at 300 °C. (c) Structural model of sintered NixAl-LDH. (d) Relationship between the lattice parameter of sintered NixAl-LDH and the content of Al3+ therein.	 

 	Fig. 2  Experimental Ni K-edge EXAFS spectrum of Ni2AlO and the simulated spectrum obtained based on the model shown in Fig. 1(c).	 

 	Fig. 3  (a)SEM image of Ni3Al-LDH before sintering, (b) TEM image of Ni2AlO, and (c) Ni and Al EDS mappings of Ni2AlO.	 

 	Fig. 4  Charge–discharge curves of (a) NiO and (b)Ni3AlO. (c) Relationship between the discharge capacity in the lower voltage region (0.03–1.5 V) and the content of Al3+. (d) Cycling stability of NixAlO (x = 1–3).	 

 	Fig. 5  
Ex situ XRD patterns of Ni3AlO recorded during charge–discharge.	 

 	Fig. 6  Ni K-edge ex situ XANES spectra of Ni3AlO recorded during (a) charge and (b) discharge.	 

 	Fig. 7  Al K-edge XANES spectra of Ni3AlO recorded during (a) charge and (b) discharge. (c) Simulated XANES spectra of AlLi2O surrounded by Li2O and Al metal obtained by ab initio calculations. (d) Expanded Al K-edge XANES spectra of Ni3AlO before and after charging to 0.03 V.	 

 	Fig. 8  Ni K edge EXAFS spectra of Ni3AlO (a) on the first charging (b) on the first discharging.	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic diagram representing the reactions of NixAlO during charge–discharge.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1dt01911b

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
