Impact of microstructure and crystallinity on surface exchange kinetics of strontium titanium iron oxide perovskite by in situ optical transmission re ...  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7TA04940D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7TA04940D
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 23006-23019Impact of microstructure and crystallinity on surface exchange kinetics of strontium titanium iron oxide perovskite by in situ optical transmission relaxation approach†

        
          
            Ting 
            Chen
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            George F. 
            Harrington
          
        
      bcd, 
      
        
          
            Kazunari 
            Sasaki
          
        
      abc and 

        
          
            Nicola H. 
            Perry
          
        
      *bd
aDepartment of Hydrogen Energy Systems, Kyushu University, Nishi-ku, Fukuoka 819-0395, Japan
bInternational Institute for Carbon-Neutral Energy Research (WPI-I2CNER), Kyushu University, Nishi-ku, Fukuoka 819-0395, Japan. E-mail: perry@i2cner.kyushu-u.ac.jp
cNext-Generation Fuel Cell Research Center (NEXT-FC), Kyushu University, 744 Motooka Nishi-ku, Fukuoka 819-0325, Japan
dDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA
Received 
      7th June 2017
    , Accepted 29th September 2017First published on 2nd October 2017AbstractThe rate of oxygen exchange at the surface of mixed conductors is a critical property impacting the performance of elevated temperature energy conversion/storage devices. Microstructural features, such as grain boundary density and crystalline quality, are expected to impact the surface exchange kinetics, but their effect has not yet been widely studied. In this work, mixed conducting perovskite SrTi0.65Fe0.35O3−δ (STF35) thin films grown by pulsed laser deposition were applied as a model system to systematically study the effect of microstructure on oxygen surface exchange kinetics. The impact of growth temperature on crystalline quality, orientation, grain size, surface roughness, and surface chemistry was evaluated by X-ray diffraction, scanning probe microscopy, transmission electron microscopy, and angle-resolved X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (AR-XPS). A contact-free, continuous, in situ optical transmission relaxation approach was then applied to quantify the films' native surface oxygen exchange coefficients (kchem). Amorphous films, grown at low temperatures (25 °C), did not exhibit measurable oxygen exchange ability. Highly crystalline films, grown at high temperatures (800 °C), exhibited reasonable, but not optimal kchem. The most rapid kchem was found for intermediate growth conditions, i.e., for amorphous-grown thin films just after crystallization at higher temperatures (550 °C) or for films grown near (580 °C) the crystallization temperature. Combined with the AR-XPS results showing greater surface Sr concentrations in films grown at higher temperatures, results suggest rapid kchem is obtained as a trade-off between good crystalline quality and low Sr surface concentration. Degradation of kchem over time was correlated to increased Sr surface concentration. Additionally, (100)-oriented epitaxial vs. nano-columnar grained (110)-oriented thin films with excellent crystalline quality exhibited very similar kchem and aging behavior, suggesting that neither grain boundaries nor film orientation cause observable changes in surface exchange kinetics in this composition.
1. Introduction
The oxygen surface exchange kinetics of mixed conducting oxides play a critical role in their oxygen reduction/evolution reaction efficiency, which is central to the performance of these gas-facing active oxide components in a variety of high temperature electrochemical devices. Such surface-active, mixed conducting components enable solar thermo-chemical water splitting reactors,1 gas separation membranes,2 oxygen sensors,3 and reversible solid oxide cells (R-SOCs: Solid Oxide Fuel Cells (SOFCs) and Solid Oxide Electrolysis Cells (SOECs)), which are promising devices for both power generation (direct conversion of chemical fuels to electricity) and energy storage (H2 or syngas).4,5 Key challenges facing R-SOCs, for example, include the need to decrease the polarization resistance of the mixed conducting oxygen electrode and to mitigate its delamination, both of which may originate in sluggish surface oxygen incorporation/excorporation kinetics, particularly at lower temperature operation. These problems can cause both durability limitations and large efficiency losses, which can dominate overall SOC losses at intermediate (500–700 °C) temperatures.6–9 Understanding and thereby improving oxygen surface exchange kinetics is therefore the key to lowering such losses and improving the mixed conducting oxide performance.10,11
Design principles or descriptors, identifying and linking key structural features to surface exchange kinetics, are needed in order to enable rational design of highly efficient mixed conducting oxides.12 Towards this goal, various studies have adopted two primary strategies: (1) tailoring the bulk defect chemistry (e.g., oxygen vacancy13,14 and/or electron content15–17) or electronic structure (e.g., Fermi level15 or oxygen 2p band center18) through altering composition16,19,20 or applying strain,15,21–23 and (2) modifying surface chemistry, e.g., surface Ag deposition,24 surface coating (La1−xSrxMnO3 coating on La1−xSrxCo1−yFeyO3−δ),25 surface decoration (La, Sr, Co decoration on La0.8Sr0.2CoO3−δ),26 or surface chemical treatment (aqueous Hf chloride on La0.8Sr0.2CoO3−δ thin films,27 La/Sr/Co/Fe nitrates on (Ce,Gd)O2−δ pellet surfaces, La/Sr oxides on (Pr,Ce)O2−δ thin films, or SrO/CoO monolayers on La1−xSrxCoO3−δ),28–30 to understand and enhance the oxygen surface exchange kinetics. On the other hand, relatively few studies have focused on clarifying the role of microstructural features in controlling the surface exchange coefficient (k), particularly for mixed ionic-electronic conductor (MIEC) materials. Regarding MIECs, Plonczak et al. tailored the nanostructures of mixed conducting LaxSr1−xCoyFe1−yO3−δ thin films and illustrated that the activation energy of the oxygen surface exchange process depends on the thin film nanostructure,31,32 and Develos-Bagarinao et al. also reported that the oxygen exchange kinetics of La0.6Sr0.4Co0.2Fe0.8O3−δ thin films were influenced by their microstructure and crystalline orientation.33 Navickas et al. focused on an almost pure electronic conductor, Sr-doped LaMnO3 (LSM), showing that the grain boundaries in LSM can facilitate both fast oxygen diffusion and oxygen exchange kinetics.34 Tarancon et al. also reported the enhanced oxide-ion transport properties along La0.8Sr0.2MnO3+δ grain boundaries at the same time.35 Owing to the possibility of different electronic and ionic defect concentrations (e.g., space charge effects, impurity segregation) and mobilities near grain boundaries compared to those in grain cores or single crystals, grain boundaries could impact the diffusivity of both oxide ions and cations, the chemical surface exchange coefficient (kchem), and the time-dependence of degradation via cation surface segregation.36–39 Therefore such effects warrant further study in true MIEC materials.
In this work we chose the perovskite SrTi1−xFexO3−δ (STFx × 100) as a model MIEC oxide for our study, as it exhibits rapid oxygen surface exchange kinetics,40,41 is of established technological interest as an oxygen electrode of R-SOCs42 and high temperature oxygen sensor,3 and has well-characterized point defect chemistry,43,44 ionic and electronic transport properties,45 structural properties,42 and oxygen reduction kinetics.15 Additionally, the impact of bulk defect chemistry and electronic structure on k in STF has been studied in limited work, suggesting the key role of conduction band electrons in the rate-determining step of surface exchange.41,46,47 Nonetheless, the role of microstructural features, such as crystallinity, orientation, and grain boundary density, present in real electrodes (as opposed to perfect single crystals) in impacting the surface exchange kinetics of STF35 has not been previously investigated, to the authors' knowledge. Therefore, it is desirable to develop a better fundamental understanding of the relationship between microstructural features and surface exchange kinetics. Model thin film electrodes were used in this study, as a method to systematically control the crystallinity, microstructure, surface area, and thickness. Previous investigations have confirmed that the oxygen surface exchange, rather than diffusion, limits the redox kinetics for STF thin films with similar thickness to those in the present work in a similar temperature range.15,42
In this work, a series of SrTi0.65Fe0.35O3−δ (STF35) thin films was deposited by pulsed laser deposition onto transparent yttria-stabilized zirconia (YSZ) and SrTiO3 single crystal substrates at different temperatures to obtain different microstructures (e.g., epitaxial vs. columnar-nano-grained structures; crystalline vs. amorphous). The microstructures and surface chemistry of the STF35 thin films as a function of growth temperature and subsequent heat treatments were evaluated. The surface exchange coefficients (kchem) were examined by non-contact, continuous in situ optical transmission relaxation as a function of measuring temperature and time. Through creating and characterizing in detail well-defined microstructures, and quantifying the native kchem (without metal current collectors) continuously, we aimed to elucidate the relationship between STF35 structure (presence/absence of grain boundaries, crystallinity) and oxygen surface exchange kinetics. Additionally, the interplay between processing or measuring conditions, surface chemistry, and kchem and its degradation/aging behavior has also been observed.
2. Experimental approach
2.1. Fabrication of thin films
A dense ceramic target of SrTi0.65Fe0.35O3−δ (STF35) for pulsed laser deposition (PLD) was prepared by a modified Pechini method. The detailed fabrication procedures can be found in ref. 48. A number of amorphous or oriented, polycrystalline STF35 thin films were deposited by PLD (Pascal Corp., Japan) at different nominal growth temperatures (room temperature (RT, ∼25 °C), 400 °C, 580 °C, 700 °C and 800 °C) on single crystal, (100)-oriented 13 mol% Y2O3 stabilized zirconia (YSZ) substrates with both sides polished, and one epitaxial STF35 thin film was grown at 800 °C on a (100)-oriented SrTiO3 (STO) substrate with both sides polished (Dalian Keri Optoelectronic Technology Corp., China). The excimer laser wavelength was 248 nm (COMPEX Pro 50F, Coherent), the laser energy set at 90–93 mJ with a repetition frequency of 5 Hz, and the laser spot area was about 2–3 mm2. The oxygen pressure was maintained at 5 Pa and sustained in the main chamber after an initial evacuation to high vacuum (4 × 10−6 Pa). Both the substrate and target were continuously rotated, and the distance of target-to-substrate was about 5 cm. The growth rate was calibrated by X-ray reflectivity (XRR, Smartlab, Rigaku Corp., Japan) for very thin films, calculated by a modified Bragg equation,49 and the thicknesses of films used in the kchem studies were also verified by transmission electron microscopy (TEM, 2100HC, JEOL Ltd., Japan). The thickness of the thin films in this study was 70 to 110 nm.
2.2. Structural and surface chemical characterization
The crystalline structures of the STF35 thin films were evaluated by X-ray diffraction (XRD, Rigaku Corp., Japan). High-resolution coupled scans and rocking curves were carried out using Cu-Kα radiation, parallel-beam incident optics, and a Ge (220) × 2 monochromator. The surface morphologies, grain sizes and surface roughness of STF35 thin films were characterized by scanning probe microscopes (SPM, Shimadzu Corp., Japan) in dynamic force microscope (DFM) mode and field-emission scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Helios Nanolab 600i, FEI Company, USA). The thickness and crystallinity of thin films were validated through transmission electron microscopy (TEM, JEM-2100HC, JEOL Ltd., Japan) of cross-sections prepared by the in situ ‘lift-out’ technique using a dual-beam focused ion beam (FIB-SEM, Helios Nanolab, 600i, FEI Company, USA). The surface of the films was first coated in several nanometers of Pt via a desktop sputterer to prevent charging, followed by several microns of Pt in the FIB-SEM to protect the surface. The cross-sections were prepared and thinned with the FIB at 30 keV, followed by 5 keV, and then 2 keV to minimize amorphizing beam damage to the specimen.
The surface chemical compositions of the STF35 thin films were monitored by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, ULVAC-PHI, PHI5000 Versaprobe), with an X-ray source of 1486.6 eV operated at 25.34 W. Pass energies of 187.5 eV and 58.7 eV were used for survey scans and each constituent cation's high resolution scans, respectively. Angle profile measurements were conducted from 20° to 90° (the angle of photoelectron emission with respect to the sample face) to acquire the concentration of each element (Sr 3d, Ti 2p, O 1s and Fe 2p) in the thin film surface region. In our work, an angle of 90° means that a greater depth is probed, whereas 20° samples the chemistry closer to the outer surface. A depth profile was additionally conducted by sputtering with a 2 kV Ar gun with a 2 × 2 mm2 rastering area for ten minutes. The peak-fitting and chemical quantification analysis were performed using Multipack software (Ulvac-Phi, Inc.). Binding energy values were calibrated through setting the energy of the referenced C 1s peak at 284.8 eV. Peak backgrounds were fit to an “Inter-Shirley” function using the software. The sensitivity factors of Sr 3d, Ti 2p, Fe 2p and O 1s determined for this XPS machine are 1.992, 2.077, 2.946 and 0.733, respectively.
2.3. Optical transmission relaxation (OTR) measurement
The oxygen surface exchange coefficient (kchem) was quantified through applying an in situ Optical Transmission Relaxation (OTR) approach. This approach has been recently applied to another mixed conducting oxide thin film composition, (Ce,Pr)O2−δ,29,50 while optical transmission more generally has been applied in a series of studies to determine oxygen concentrations as a function of time and lateral dimensions in Fe-doped SrTiO3 single crystals.51,52 Under relatively oxidizing conditions, Fe in SrTi1−xFexO3−δ (STF) ranges between the valence states Fe4+ and Fe3+.44,53,54 The reduction/oxidation reaction in STF under these conditions can be described in the following defect reactions: (1) (2)
As can be seen in these equations, previous researchers applied two types of defect model in Fe-substituted SrTiO3: one (eqn (2)) applies to the case where Fe is very dilute, and SrTiO3 is the reference compound, as used by Merkle et al.;44 the other (eqn (1)) is for the SrTiO3–SrFeO2.5 solid solution with non-dilute Fe; this is another defect chemical model as described in ref. 45 and 46, which uses inherently oxygen-deficient STF with Fe3+ as the reference compound. For low Fe concentrations, the magnitude of optical absorption in the visible spectrum around 2.8 eV (∼443 nm)52,55 relates to the concentration of Fe in its more oxidized state (Fe4+;  or ), resulting in brown coloration. The material becomes more transparent as Fe is more reduced (down to Fe3+;  or ). Within this range, the change in optical absorption at 2.8 eV appears to be directly proportional to the change in oxidized Fe concentration, which in turn is considered proportional to the change in oxygen concentration for electroneutrality (assuming full localization of electronic charge on Fe, as in eqn (1)), as seen by agreement between optical measurements of oxygen content and thermodynamic point defect chemical models.36,52 We note that the Fe concentration used in the present work is necessarily higher than those used in previous single crystal studies, owing to the need for a greater concentration of optical absorbers in the thin film geometry. Because the electronic structure of STF is expected to gradually change as a function of Fe content, the optical properties may be modified from those previously studied in dilute Fe-doped SrTiO3. The present work assumes that a linear relationship of optical absorption at 2.8 eV and oxygen content is still upheld for non-dilute Fe, given that the range over which pO2 is modified during relaxation in this work is very small. Both the relaxation behavior shown in this paper and our related steady-state absorption results with DFT calculations (to be published separately) support this interpretation. Additionally, absorption spectra at 25 °C (to be published separately) demonstrate absorption edge energies of ∼2.93–3.25 eV with higher values corresponding to lower oxygen contents, so the light energy used in this work (2.8 eV) should be sufficiently below the absorption edge. A representative transmission spectrum for a STF35 film is given in the ESI, Fig. S1.†
For the in situ measurements, a chopped beam of monochromated and collimated light (Optical chopper system MC2000, Thorlabs, USA) at 442 nm (FL441.6-10 filter, Thorlabs, USA) was shone through the thin film and substrate. The thin film was vertically held in a quartz tube in a modified furnace with two transparent quartz windows, which allowed the light beam to pass through the sample. The light was chopped at 200 Hz, and the incident and transmitted beam intensities were compared using a beam splitter and lock-in amplifiers (Model SR830 DSP, Stanford Research Systems, USA) to isolate changes in transmitted light coming from the sample vs. those from the background or light source.50 Optical transmitted light intensity changes as a function of time were measured upon rapidly varying the oxygen partial pressure (O2/N2: 4% O2 and 21% O2) using mass flow controllers and switches; the gas flush time was about 4 s as measured by a residual gas analyzer (RGA200, Seki Technotron Corp., Japan). Since attenuation of monochromatic light intensity by the film depends exponentially on the absorption coefficient (α) of the film at that wavelength, (3)(where I is light intensity, Ii is incident intensity, and L is film thickness), it is possible to relate measured transmitted light intensity changes to changes in the absorption coefficient, and therefore to changes in concentrations of oxidized Fe (∼Fe4+) and oxygen in the films. From this relationship, kchem could be fitted using the equations described later in this paper and in ref. 56. The OTR measurements of STF35 thin films were conducted from 300 °C to 550 °C, and all the thin films were measured under the same thermal cycle history. All the high purity gases were further dried and purified by molecular sieves and desiccants in the gas lines.
3. Results
3.1. Growth conditions vs. structure
STF35 film growth rates, studied by X-Ray Reflectivity (XRR), varied with substrate temperature from 0.0041 nm per pulse at 700 °C to 0.0031 nm per pulse at 25 °C (as shown in ESI Fig. S2†). The impact of growth temperature on film structure was studied by XRD, to check the crystallographic orientation and crystalline quality with coupled scans and rocking curves. As seen in Fig. 1(a), only peaks corresponding to the (110) planes were observed, indicating that the films have a single out-of-plane orientation when grown on YSZ. No peaks were observed for films grown at 400 °C, whereas for films grown at 580 °C a low intensity (110) peak is observed suggesting a degree of crystallization, as seen in the inset of Fig. 1(a). As the growth temperature is increased to 700 °C and 800 °C, the (110) peak becomes more intense and shifts to higher angles, corresponding to a decrease in the out-of-plane lattice parameter. The peaks could not be fit with a single pseudo-Voigt function, which would be expected for diffraction from a single set of equally-spaced planes, suggesting a variation of the lattice parameter of the (110)-orientated planes. With increasing growth temperature, better crystalline quality was obtained, as seen by the increase in (110) peak intensity and the narrowing of rocking curves (Fig. 1(b)). For example, the full width at half maximum (FWHM) of rocking curves for films grown at 700 °C and 800 °C is 0.62 deg. and 0.08 deg., respectively. For the epitaxial thin film, 800 °C-grown STF35 on the STO substrate, the only observed film peaks were (100), (200) and (300), corresponding to the out-of-plane orientation of STO. There are some bumps/interference fringes on either side of the main peak of the epitaxial thin film, compared to none on the coupled scan of a bare STO substrate, as shown in Fig. 1(c). The XRD and SPM (not shown) results were consistent with this STF35 film being epitaxial and free of grain boundaries, as expected owing to the same structure and almost identical lattice parameter to STO.
 Fig. 1  (a) Coupled XRD scan of STF35 thin films grown on YSZ at different temperatures (400–800 °C); (b) rocking curves of STF35 thin films grown on YSZ at different temperatures (580–800 °C); (c) coupled scan of STO substrate and STF35 thin film grown on STO substrate at 800 °C. 
The grain size and surface roughness of STF35 thin films were measured by SPM as shown in Fig. 2. Films were very smooth and lacked any definition of clear grains at low growth temperatures (Fig. 2a), which is consistent with the XRD results indicating an amorphous structure. Clearly defined grains could be observed in crystalline thin films (700 °C and 800 °C-grown films, Fig. 2(c) and (d)). For the 580 °C-grown thin film (Fig. 2b), which we interpreted from XRD to be just starting to crystallize, an intermediate surface morphology was observed. The RMS (root mean square) roughness of the STF35 thin films and their average grain sizes (by line-intercept method) are shown in Table 1. Both the grain size and surface roughness increased with increasing temperature.57
 Fig. 2  Scanning Probe Microscopy (SPM) topographic images of STF35 amorphous and crystalline layers on YSZ prepared at different temperatures (a) 400 °C, (b) 580 °C, (c) 700 °C, (d) 800 °C, measured in dynamic mode. Sizes listed in (c and d) are average grain sizes for those samples. 
Table 1 Measured RMS surface roughness, grain size, orientation, and rocking curve peak width (full width half max, FWHM) of STF35 thin films on YSZ substrates




Growth temperature/°C
Surface roughness/nm
Grain size/nm
Orientation
RC FWHM/deg.




400
0.09
—
Amorphous




580
0.63
—






700
2.45
27.7 ± 2.3
(110)
0.615


800
1.34–6.99
42.8 ± 3.3
(110)
0.078




3.2. Optical studies
A non-contact in situ optical transmission relaxation (OTR) approach was applied to quantify the oxygen surface exchange kinetics. The plots of measured optical transmitted light intensity (at 442 nm), applied temperature, and applied oxygen partial pressure as a function of time for the 25 °C-grown thin film are shown in Fig. 3. There was no obvious optical response when the oxygen partial pressure was changed either from 21% to 4% O2 or from 4% to 21% O2 for the as-grown amorphous film below a measurement temperature of 500 °C; however, upon heating these films at 500–550 °C, rapid oxygen exchange could be detected optically in the same film as shown in Fig. 3(a). This dramatic change in surface exchange ability at 500–550 °C is attributed to the onset of crystallization in the film, as suggested by the aforementioned XRD coupled scans and the TEM results (shown later). Subsequently, the film optically demonstrated an ability to exchange oxygen rapidly at temperatures as low as 300 °C after the in situ crystallization (Fig. 3(b)). For comparison, a film grown at 800 °C for 1 h was measured in the same way, i.e., with the same thermal history. A relatively slow optical absorption response was observed in this film through varying the oxygen partial pressure even below 300 °C for the first measurement, as shown in Fig. 4. The result indicated that crystalline thin films could show faster oxygen exchange kinetics compared to the amorphous thin films.
 Fig. 3  
In situ optical transmitted light intensity at 442 nm of 25 °C-grown thin film for (a) first time measurement up to 550 °C and (b) second time measurement (after cooling to 25 °C at the end of the first measurement). Data were measured as a function of temperature and oxygen partial pressure, as shown. 
 Fig. 4  
In situ transmitted light intensity at 442 nm of as-grown STF35 thin film, deposited at 800 °C (first time measurement). Data were measured as a function of temperature and oxygen partial pressure, as shown. 

Fig. 5 shows SEM micrographs of the surface of a 25 °C-grown STF35 thin film post 550 °C treatment (a) and an as-deposited 800 °C-grown STF35 film (b). Obvious gas channels or free spaces were observed to have developed in the RT-grown thin film after in situ crystallization (Fig. 5(a)), which significantly increase the surface area, suggesting one possible reason for dramatically faster oxygen surface exchange kinetics upon crystallization. As discussed further later, the presence of cracks suggests that ions in the film move closer together upon crystallizing, compared to the amorphous state. By contrast, no cracks were observed in an 800 °C-grown thin film, as shown in Fig. 5(b).
 Fig. 5  Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) images of the surface microstructure, for (a) 25 °C-grown STF35 thin film after a 550 °C thermal treatment and (b) 800 °C-grown STF35 thin film, as deposited. 

Fig. 6(a) shows a bright-field TEM micrograph of a cross section taken from the RT-grown STF35 thin film after the 550 °C treatment shown in Fig. 5(a). The deposited STF35 material has been identified and marked with a dashed red line. The contrast variation in the deposited STF35 indicates that the grains are very small in size, on the order of approximately 5 nm. A high-resolution phase-contrast image of the substrate–film interface is shown in Fig. 6(b), where lattice fringes from the STF35 can be seen, demonstrating the crystalline nature of the film. Selected area electron diffraction shows that indeed the STF35 is partially crystalline, although no preferential orientation of the film either in-plane or out-of-plane is observed, as shown in Fig. 6(c).
 Fig. 6  Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) images of a 25 °C-grown STF35 thin film after a 550 °C heat treatment: (a) bright-field image, (b) high-resolution image of the substrate–film interface and (c) selected area electron diffraction pattern of the film and substrate. 
In contrast, the 800 °C-grown thin film was found to be dense, have a much smoother surface, and consist of columnar grains as shown in the bright-field TEM image in Fig. 7(a) and the high resolution image in Fig. 7(b). The grain size was found to be approximately 10–20 nm, which is reasonably consistent with the AFM results. The selected area electron diffraction pattern in Fig. 7(c) confirms the (110) out-of-plane orientation observed by XRD, and shows preferential in-plane orientations of the STF film with either the (001) or (110) planes parallel to the in-plane (001) YSZ planes.
 Fig. 7  Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) images of 800 °C-grown STF35 thin film (as deposited): (a) bright-field image, (b) high-resolution of the substrate–film interface, and (c) selected area electron diffraction pattern of the film and substrate. The spots have been indexed and the lattice vector parallel to the direction of the electron beam is noted at the bottom of the image. 
As mentioned earlier, a previous study verified that the oxygen surface exchange kinetics dominate the overall reduction/oxidation kinetics of STF thin films of thicknesses similar to those used in this work, which are well below the critical length for these temperatures.15 Therefore, the chemical surface exchange coefficient (kchem) of different STF35 thin films grown at 25, 400, 580, 700 and 800 °C on YSZ and STO substrates could be determined from the transient optical absorption responses upon rapidly changing the oxygen partial pressure (as seen in Fig. 8(a)) based on the following equations for surface exchange-limited kinetics:58,59 (4) (5)where It, I0 and If are the transmitted light intensities at any given time (t), initial time and final time, respectively, τ is the time constant, and L is the thickness of the thin film. By fitting the measured optical transmission relaxation according to these equations, kchem can be determined. Derivations of these equations, as applied in the optical transmission setting, can be found in ref. 56, where a similar approach was applied to study the surface exchange kinetics of (Ce,Pr)O2 films optically. The impact of growth temperature on kchem, determined by fitting the data to eqn (4) and (5), is shown in Fig. 8(a) and (b). Values of τ below 4 s could not be accurately quantified due to the gas flush time limit of this instrument in its present configuration. In this paper, all the kchem values shown were calculated from fitting the relaxation occurring during the reduction reaction/oxygen evolution process (gas change from 21% O2 to 4% O2), as shown in Fig. 8(c). Additionally, data in Fig. 8(a) and (b) are area-normalized kchem values, with kchem multiplied by a factor ≤1, as described in the caption, to correct for different surface areas as determined by AFM, SEM, and TEM images. The results for each thin film in Fig. 8(a) represent values obtained during the second measurement, after an identical thermal cycle was used in the first measurement (as shown in Fig. 3(a)). The red dashed line represents the upper limit of kchem that could be accurately measured, given the gas flush time limitation. Conservatively estimated error bars of ±20% were added, considering possible sources of uncertainty/error such as the relaxation curve fitting process, thickness variations across the film, etc., which are discussed further in Section 4.4. During the second measurement, it is noteworthy that comparison of the calculated kchem values showed more than two or three orders of magnitude higher kchem for films grown below and up to the crystallization temperature compared to the films grown at higher temperatures (700–800 °C). Additionally, results were similar for 800 °C-grown thin films either on a lattice-mismatched YSZ substrate (high grain boundary density, (110) orientation) or a lattice-matched STO substrate (epitaxial, (100) orientation, low grain boundary density expected). In Fig. 8(b), data from both first- and second-time measurements are plotted as a function of film growth temperature. It can be clearly seen that under these selected measurement conditions, the area-normalized kchem is optimized for growth conditions near to the crystallization point (∼550 °C). Relative decreases in area-normalized kchem for both lower and higher growth temperatures, as well as differences between first- and second-time measurements, may be interpreted in terms of crystallinity and surface chemistry, as described further in the discussion section.
 Fig. 8  (a) Area-normalized kchem (after an identical thermal cycle up to 550 °C) as a function of measuring temperature for different STF35 thin films that were deposited at different temperatures. Please note: area-normalized kchem represents raw kchem value multiplied by the following factors to correct for surface-area differences, as estimated from AFM, TEM, and SEM results: 0.33 (25 °C-grown), 1 (400 °C to 800 °C-grown); (b) area-normalized kchem replotted as a function of film growth temperature, for selected measurement temperatures. “2nd time” measurements were performed after an initial “1st time” measurement up to 550 °C, as described in the text; (c) example of relaxation fit for 580 °C-grown STF35 thin film during the second time measurement at 300 °C. 
Fig. S4† shows the kchem values for the 800 °C-grown thin film on a YSZ substrate, measured first during increasing temperature and subsequently during decreasing temperature. From this Arrhenius plot it can be seen that both series of measurements yielded similar activation energies (about 1.28 eV and 1.29 eV for the heating and cooling process, respectively). The stability of the apparent activation energy for this sample suggests that it represents a true surface quantity, whereas in general the apparent activation energy may be a convolution of the true activation energy for surface exchange and “aging” effects during the measurement, which lead to time-dependent changes in the surface chemistry and properties. These effects are discussed further later. Briefly, we understand that the 800 °C-grown thin film had already undergone some “aging” during the deposition and/or the prior measurements that could enable its relative stability during this heating and cooling measurement. Activation energies of other low temperature-grown thin films are not reported here, owing to concerns of “aging” during the measurement, discussed later.

Fig. 9 shows the dependence of kchem on measuring time at 500 °C for four thin films (800 °C-grown, 700 °C-grown, 25 °C-grown, each on YSZ substrates, and 800 °C-grown on a STO substrate). These aging studies were performed after the “first time” measurement up to 550 °C, as described above. All of these STF35 thin films underwent fast degradation of kchem in the initial 30 h of the aging measurement at 500 °C and then became relatively more stable. The epitaxial (single crystal) thin film grown at 800 °C on the STO substrate showed similar aging behavior to the columnar nano-grained film grown at 800 °C on a YSZ substrate. Although the aging behavior is similar, these films grown at higher temperatures exhibit lower kchem values compared to other low temperature growth films, consistent with previous optical results.
 Fig. 9  Continuously measured in situ kchemversus aging time at 500 °C for different STF35 thin films which were deposited at different temperatures and on different substrates. Dashed line indicates upper limit of accurate k measurement owing to gas flush time limitation. Note the initial k values at time = 0 are for the second time measurement, as discussed in the text (i.e., not as-deposited). 
3.3. XPS analysis
Sr segregation to the surface has been found in many perovskite and perovskite-related structures, including LaxSr1−xCoO3−δ,38,60 LaxSr1−xCoyFe1−yO3−δ,61 LaxSr1−xMnO3−δ,62 and Sr(Ti,Fe)O3−δ.63,64 The resulting change in surface chemistry (e.g., enrichment of Sr within the perovskite lattice, Sr termination, development of Ruddlesden–Popper surface structures with SrO layers, or precipitation of secondary phases including SrO, Sr(OH)2, SrCO3, etc.60,62,65) has been implicated in the deterioration of oxygen surface exchange kinetics.63
In order to further understand the reason for the “aging” or deterioration of kchem and different kchem values of STF35 thin films prepared in different ways, the surface chemistry of the films was characterized by angle-resolved XPS. Using a similar approach, Chen et al.63 indicated that the sampling depth at 90° (the angle of sample with photoelectron emission) is about 5 nm for Fe 2p, 6 nm for Ti 2p and 7 nm for Sr 3d based on the NIST surface structure database. Through decreasing the angle, more surface-sensitive sampling could be characterized. Fig. 10 displays the ratio of A-site (Sr) to B-site (Ti + Fe) concentrations in STF35 thin films at the surface for different emission angles (20–90°) by the AR-XPS technique. The shown systematic error bar value of ±0.1 is estimated from the ratio of Sr/(Ti + Fe) measured in a polished polycrystalline STF35 ceramic using the same sensitivity factors. More surface Sr was observed on thin films grown at high temperatures (800 °C-grown on YSZ and STO substrates after aging). A separately-measured XPS depth profile on a 800 °C-grown film, measured by sputtering into the sample, can be seen in the ESI (Fig. S5†), confirming the gradual enhancement in Sr/(Ti + Fe) ratio towards the surface. Previous XPS studies demonstrated that Sr-enrichment at the surface of STF specifically could be present as a Ruddlesden–Popper phase SrO·nSr(Ti,Fe)O3, SrO, SrCO3, or Sr(OH)2.66–68 As Jung et al. reported,64 surface segregation leading to a SrO-excess layer could serve as a barrier for oxygen exchange, which could explain the lower kchem of films grown at higher temperatures in our work.
 Fig. 10  Ratio of A-to-B-site cation concentration Sr/(Fe + Ti), in the surface region of various STF35 thin films, as a function of emission angle (relative to the surface plane) by angle resolved XPS (AR-XPS). Smaller angles correspond to more surface sensitive results. 
After etching the aged thin film (800 °C-grown, after 100 h aging measurement at 500 °C) with dilute (0.14 mol l−1) HCl solution for 30 s, the surface Sr:(Fe + Ti) ratio significantly decreased. A corresponding OTR measurement at 500 °C was also conducted on a 800 °C-grown thin film after aging at 500 °C and subsequent etching, as shown in Fig. 9. The result showed that kchem recovered to a value close to those prior to significant aging, and is consistent with the understanding that Sr segregation can limit k, as also seen in the impedance results in ref. 63 and 64.
4. Discussion
This work aimed to characterize and understand the relationship between STF35 thin film growth conditions, microstructure (grain boundary density, crystalline quality), and oxygen surface exchange kinetics, through the use of systematically varied deposition parameters, well-defined microstructures, and continuous in situ quantification of the native surfaces' kchem. In this section, a number of the resulting key findings are highlighted and discussed in more detail, in terms of their origins and implications.
4.1. Chemo-mechanical coupling: variation of oxidation with film growth conditions
In Fig. 1(b), it can be seen that higher growth temperatures led to films with smaller out-of-plane lattice parameters. A similar trend has been observed for other, non-MIEC oxide films as a function of growth or annealing temperature69,70 and might be a more general feature. However, in the present case, these films with smaller lattice parameters grown at higher temperatures also exhibited increased brown coloration (as shown in Fig. S3†). These results are consistent with increasing oxidation of the films with increasing growth temperature, since more oxidized Fe is thought to be responsible for the optical absorption leading to brown coloration. Further, with Fe4+ being smaller than the more reduced Fe3+, the lattice is known to shrink as it becomes more oxidized.48 Such chemical expansion/contraction processes have been observed in polycrystalline bulk ceramic STF in an isotropic manner.48,71 In the thin films in the present work, owing to possible in-plane pinning of the perovskite lattice against the substrate, larger out-of-plane expansion and contraction is possible during chemical expansion in a non-isotropic manner.72 Such distortion could help to explain the peak shape of the (110) XRD reflection, which would be consistent with some non-cubic distortion of the crystal structure in the films grown at higher temperatures.
It should be noted that in equilibrium, crystalline mixed conducting oxides often become more reduced with increasing temperature in a given atmosphere, owing to the stability of oxygen vacancies and decrease in oxygen chemical potential, while the opposite trend appears to be observed as a function of growth temperature in the present work. One possibility is that oxygen enters the films from the oxide ion conducting substrate during growth, since diffusion of oxygen from the substrate into the film would be thermally-activated, proceeding more readily at high substrate temperatures. Oxidation of films via an oxygen-donating substrate has been suggested by other researchers.73 On the other hand the low chemical diffusivity in YSZ, given its low electronic conductivity, might be insufficient to cause the enhanced film oxidation at high growth temperatures in this case. Further studies would be needed to identify the cause of variable oxidation, considering the impact of growth conditions on metastability in as-grown films.
Finally, it is also interesting to consider the correlation observed between the degree of oxidation and crystallinity, i.e., higher growth temperatures led to both more oxidized and more crystalline films. The shrinking of free volume during crystallization, surmised from the open channels that developed in the films (Fig. 5) and consistent with other reports of higher density corresponding to crystalline (vs. amorphous) structure,74–76 may produce a lattice that is more amenable to smaller cations, such as the more oxidized Fe4+ as compared to Fe3+ or Fe2+. The decrease in optical transmission during crystallization, observed in Fig. 3(a) and indicative of increasing oxidation, is consistent with this understanding.
4.2. Relating structure to surface exchange kinetics
It is worthwhile to consider why as-grown amorphous thin films, grown at low temperatures (e.g., 25 °C), did not exhibit measurable oxygen exchange ability optically, while highly crystalline films, grown at high temperatures (800 °C), exhibited reasonable surface exchange kinetics, as shown in Fig. 3 and 4. In general, fast surface exchange kinetics have been correlated with a high availability of oxygen defects, sometimes represented by the oxide ion conductivity13 (encompassing their concentration and mobility). In amorphous materials, this ionic conductivity may be lower.77,78 Additionally, for STF specifically, the availability of conduction band electrons for charge transfer has been hypothesized to limit the oxygen exchange kinetics.15 In the present case perhaps the transfer of such electrons to/from adsorbed oxygen is hindered by the amorphous structure, such as by a lower electronic mobility70 compared to crystalline STF and/or by the inability of Fe to change valence in that structure. The (surmised) larger free volume in amorphous films might prevent the larger Fe3+ or Fe2+ cations from readily oxidizing to the smaller Fe4+ species. Anecdotally other researchers have observed slow (or non-existent) surface oxygen exchange for amorphous regions, e.g., those created during ion milling, and the present result also suggests that one should avoid as much as possible any process leading to total amorphization in order to retain active surfaces. On the other hand partial crystallinity appears to provide good surface activity in the present work, and Evans et al. also reported that a cell containing a partially amorphous (La,Sr)CoO3−δ cathode showed a high power density of 200 mW cm−2 at a low operating temperature of 400 °C, with promise for micro-SOFCs.79
Immediately after in situ crystallization, the previously amorphous films exhibited immeasurably fast transmitted light intensity changes in response to oxygen partial pressure changes. At this stage, the in situ crystallized thin films exhibited faster kchem compared to dense crystalline thin films grown at high temperatures, and indeed compared to available kchem data for STF, to the authors' knowledge. At least three factors may be responsible for the change to ultra-rapid surface exchange kinetics: (1) crystallization itself appears to lead to faster surface exchange kinetics. (2) Gas channels or free spaces between grains were opened when the presumably larger amorphous ion network shrank to the smaller crystalline lattice (Fig. 5). This morphology change leads to an increase in surface area so that there are more sites for oxygen exchange. However, we estimated the surface area increase to be approximately a factor of three, which by itself does not account for all of the increase in k vs. dense crystalline films fabricated at higher temperatures. (3) Pristine surfaces for exchange are opened during the shrinkage process. These surfaces are expected to exhibit a composition similar to bulk STF since no time at high temperatures has elapsed for Sr segregation to occur. These surfaces may intrinsically enable faster exchange compared to those exposed to higher temperatures, particularly if B-site cations are accessible for facile charge transfer. To our knowledge, this work is the first report demonstrating in situ crystallization as a means to achieve unprecedented surface exchange kinetics. Limited studies have observed effects of surface roughness, however. Pietrowski et al. found that surface roughness has little effect on k of yttria-stabilized zirconia in humid conditions, but there is an increase of 2–3 orders of magnitude for rougher surfaces in dry conditions, which was hypothesized to be due to the changed surface composition, increased surface area, or a local variation of k.80
It is observed from Fig. 8 that the highly crystalline films grown at high temperatures exhibited reasonable, though not optimal, kchem. This result again offers support for the beneficial effect of crystallinity. The most rapid kchem however was found for intermediate growth conditions, i.e., for amorphous-grown thin films just after crystallization (at 500–550 °C), as discussed above, or for films grown near the crystallization temperature (580 °C). Combined with the AR-XPS results showing greater surface Sr concentration in films grown at higher temperatures (Fig. 10), results suggest rapid kchem is obtained as a trade-off between good crystalline quality (obtained at higher growth temperatures) and low Sr surface concentration (obtained at lower growth temperatures).
By growing films on various substrates with different lattice mismatches, this study also enabled us to observe any effect of crystalline orientation or grain boundary density on the surface exchange kinetics. Earlier work, applying SIMS depth profile analysis to study k* of (La,Sr)(Co,Fe)O3−x thin films reported that both the grain boundaries and crystalline orientation could influence the surface exchange kinetics.33 The 800 °C-grown thin film on a STO substrate ((100)-oriented epitaxial) exhibited a very similar kchem and aging behavior compared to a 800 °C-grown film on a YSZ substrate with excellent crystalline quality but nano-sized columnar grains (Fig. 9), which suggests that neither grain boundary density (at this nano range of grain size) nor film orientation cause observable changes in surface exchange kinetics in this composition and under these conditions. In certain materials, such as La0.8Sr0.2MnO3 (LSM) or La0.8Sr0.2CoO3 thin films, grain boundaries could enable faster oxygen reduction than the grain surfaces.34,38 These materials are good electronic conductors, while the grain boundary regions may exhibit enhanced oxygen defect concentrations, or anion disorder leading to locally enhanced oxygen ion mobility, beneficial for oxygen exchange or transport. In the present work (compared to LSM) the grains are already mixed conducting and highly effective at oxygen exchange, so grain boundaries might not offer any additional benefit. Also in this STF35 composition with a high Fe concentration, space charge widths at grain boundaries are not expected to be large, and grain boundaries are not thought to have any particularly strong impact on electrical conductivity for this particular composition.36 Finally, in the present work, given the high growth temperature, Sr segregation might be the main factor inhibiting the oxygen surface exchange in both the epitaxial and nanocrystalline oriented samples.
4.3. Continuous studies of degradation
Degradation of surface exchange kinetics has been shown to be a relatively rapid process at elevated temperatures,60 which could be affected by the annealing atmosphere81–83 and time, surface microstructure,38 cation stoichiometry,64,84 and presence of impurities.61 Of relevance to the present work, one expects that the presence of grain boundaries perpendicular to an electrode's surface might result in more rapid Sr segregation and surface kinetics deterioration, owing to the typically faster cation diffusion along grain boundaries compared to bulk cation diffusion in many oxides. For example, Navickas et al. reported that the Sr diffusivity through the grain boundaries is higher than in the bulk in La0.8Sr0.2MnO3 perovskite material,34 and Kubicek et al. also confirmed that the Sr cation diffusion along the grain boundaries is about 3 orders magnitude faster than in the bulk of the grains in La0.8Sr0.2CoO3−δ nanostructured thin films.38
The present AR-XPS results demonstrated Sr excess on the surface of thin films after aging and also after deposition at high temperatures. Given the slower surface exchange kinetics for these conditions, the results are consistent with previous research correlating Sr segregation existing on STF thin films' surface with diminished surface oxygen reduction activity.63 The degradation of kchem over time was correlated to increased Sr surface concentration, which could be at least temporarily removed to some extent by etching, recovering the kinetics, which is also consistent with previous research.63,64 Both the AR-XPS (Fig. 10) and XPS depth profile (Fig. S4†) results also showed that the excess Sr was not simply a Sr-termination of an otherwise stoichiometric film; rather, Sr excess in the range of a few nm was observed. It should be noted that other modes of degradation, such as extrinsic impurity poisoning, may be present in the films, and that Sr segregation alone may not be completely responsible for the aging. Additionally, in contrast to expectations relating to fast Sr diffusion along grain boundaries, grain boundaries were not observed to significantly speed up the aging rate in the conditions of the present study. As discussed above, the differences observed in degradation behavior between epitaxial vs. nanograined films were not large. Certainly, since the epitaxial film demonstrated typical aging behavior, a high density of grain boundaries is not required for sample aging. Further studies would be needed to determine if any small differences between epitaxial vs. nanograined films are statistically significant.
4.4. Benefits and limitations of the optical transmission relaxation approach
It should be noted that the optical transmission relaxation approach offers a means to measure kchem continuously, on native surfaces without metal contacts, and under realistic operating environments. The method can therefore provide insight into native surface exchange kinetics via a variety of measurements, as demonstrated in this paper: time-dependent degradation studies, measurements of pristine or aged surface reactivity as a function of temperature or gas environment, and continuous in situ kchem measurements during microstructural evolution. As many oxides exhibit optical changes that are sensitive to their oxygen content (e.g., via multivalent cations and/or defect-induced color centers), this technique may be more broadly applied in the future, even as it has previously been applied to another composition.29 Further studies are ongoing to probe the broader applicability of the in situ crystallization/dynamic nanostructuring process for fast oxygen exchange kinetics in mixed conducting thin films.
On the other hand the optical approach is limited to such systems that are optically active, and presently there is also the limitation that it cannot quantify very fast k values due to the gas line flush time. In terms of accuracy, errors could be introduced via imprecise thickness measurements or thickness variations across the films as well as from the relaxation curve fitting procedure, which may give slight variations in k values depending on the number of data points included in the fit. It should also be noted that, although we conservatively estimate up to ±20% error in the k values reported in this work on the basis of these uncertainties, the difference in k values measured for different thin film samples prepared under nominally identical conditions could in principle be larger, since it is challenging to grow and transport to the measurement chamber identical samples with identical surface chemistries. The results demonstrated, for example, that k is very sensitive to thermal history and therefore presumably surface chemistry: the pristine and aged thin films exhibited more than 4 orders of magnitude difference in k. Therefore in this work, as is recommended for other studies, all measurements were conducted with the same thermal history and purified gas environment, and it may also be beneficial to handle and store samples in an appropriate way to minimize any contamination or aging.
Accuracy was also roughly assessed by comparing the oxygen surface exchange coefficients determined by the optical transmission relaxation approach to values reported in the literature for Sr(Ti,Fe)O3−x with similar Fe concentrations. The same caveat applies to this approach as was noted above, namely, that thermal history, environmental gas purity, and surface chemistry variations possible among different samples may impact such comparisons. Additionally, electrical conductivity relaxation and impedance spectroscopy measurements use metallic current collectors which may influence the results,56,85 and tracer exchange measurements are evaluated ex situ. The kchem of a pristine 700 °C-grown STF35 thin film at 500 °C (for the first time measurement) was 1.93 × 10−6 cm s−1, while a kchem of 1.38 × 10−7 cm s−1 for SrTi0.5Fe0.5O2.75 bulk at 500 °C was extrapolated from the higher temperature values reported by F. S.-Küppers et al. using an electrical conductivity relaxation measurement.71 To make a comparison with reported tracer oxygen surface exchange coefficients (k*) and electrical oxygen surface exchange coefficients (kq), a thermodynamic factor ωo for mixed conductors was applied,56,86,87 and the value of ωo was determined to be about 145 at around 600 °C at 0.21 atm using the oxygen nonstoichiometry data of STF35 in ref. 46 and 85. With this approximation of the thermodynamic factor, the equivalent k* and kq derived from this work's kchem value for STF35 at 500 °C and pO2 = 0.21 atm is about 1.33 × 10−8 cm s−1. This value is in reasonable agreement with a kq of 7.62 × 10−7 cm s−1 at 570 °C for a 700 °C-grown STF35 thin film determined by impedance spectroscopy by W. Jung et al.15 and a k* of 2.09 × 10−7 cm s−1 at 500 °C for a 700 °C-grown STF50 thin film obtained by V. Metlenko et al.47
Reproducibility of the kchem values obtained in the present work, for a given sample, was also assessed by repeated isothermal reduction–oxidation cycles at two temperatures. Table S1† shows the oxygen exchange coefficients obtained for the reduction process (21% to 4% O2) at 550 °C and 600 °C for 5 redox cycles for the 700 °C-grown STF35 thin film after 100 h aging at 500 °C. During these measurements the sample demonstrated a monotonic decrease of kchem over time, suggesting that it continued to age at these elevated temperatures. Nonetheless, the standard deviation of the kchem values for the 5 cycles, even including this degradation, was only ∼6% at 550 °C, which demonstrates excellent reproducibility.
5. Conclusions
STF35 thin films with systematically varied degrees of crystallinity, grain boundary density, surface chemistry, and orientation were grown by PLD on (100) YSZ and (100) STO single crystal substrates at different temperatures (25–800 °C). Higher crystallinity, larger grain sizes, greater oxidation, and higher Sr surface concentrations were observed to occur with increasing growth temperature. The oxygen surface exchange kinetics of these STF35 thin films were evaluated by a contact-free, in situ and continuous optical transmission relaxation approach as a function of measurement temperature and aging time upon modulating the oxygen partial pressure. The results indicated that the as-grown crystalline thin films exhibited significantly faster oxygen exchange kinetics compared to the amorphous thin films. Even faster k values were observed for thin films which had been grown at lower temperatures after their subsequent in situ crystallization in the range 500–550 °C. We observed that the in situ crystallization process opens up nanosized gas channels in the electrodes, presumably due to a shrinkage of the ion network upon crystallizing. This dynamic nanostructuring process, leading to a higher surface area, possible exposure of pristine surfaces, and increased crystallinity is thought to be one explanation for their much faster surface exchange kinetics. However, similarly fast kinetics could also be obtained by growing dense, barely crystallized films near the crystallization temperature (580 °C). In this case the optimized kinetics appear to occur as a result of both reasonable crystallinity (a benefit of high temperature growth) and a low degree of Sr segregation (a benefit of low temperature growth). Crystalline films with and without a high density of nano columnar grain boundaries exhibited almost identical initial k values and similar degradation behavior. Unlike the clear impact of Sr segregation and crystallinity, neither grain boundary density nor crystallographic orientation appears to be the dominant factor influencing kchem in this STF35 composition under these conditions.
Conflicts of interest
We confirm there are no conflicts of interest to report.
Acknowledgements
This research was primarily funded by JSPS Kakenhi Grant-in-Aid for Young Scientists (B) project number JP15K18213 (to N. H. Perry) and by the International Institute for Carbon-Neutral Energy Research (WPI-I2CNER, MEXT) at Kyushu University, Japan. G. F. Harrington and K. Sasaki acknowledge Progress-100 funding for Kyushu University – MIT collaboration. GFH also gratefully acknowledges financial support from a Kakenhi Grant-in-Aid for Encouragement of Young Scientists (B) Award (No. JP16K18235).
References
W. C. Chueh, C. Falter, M. Abbott, D. Scipio, P. Furler, S. M. Haile and A. Steinfeld, Science, 2010, 330, 1797–1801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Sunarso, S. Baumann, J. M. Serra, W. A. Meulenberg, S. Liu, Y. S. Lin and J. C. Diniz da Costa, J. Membr. Sci., 2008, 320, 13–41 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rothschild, S. J. Litzelman, H. L. Tuller, W. Menesklou, T. Schneider and E. Ivers-Tiffee, Sens. Actuators, B, 2005, 108, 223–230 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Laguna-Bercero, J. Power Sources, 2012, 203, 4–16 CrossRef CAS .
C. Graves, S. D. Ebbesen, S. H. Jensen, S. B. Simonsen and M. B. Mogensen, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 239–244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. P. Brandon, S. Skinner and B. C. H. Steele, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2003, 33, 183–213 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Adler, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4791–4843 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. P. Shao and S. M. Haile, Nature, 2004, 431, 170–173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Tietz, D. Sebold, A. Brisse and J. Schefold, J. Power Sources, 2013, 223, 129–135 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hayd, H. Yokokawa and E. Ivers-Tiffee, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, F351–F359 CrossRef CAS .
B. Guan, W. Li, H. Zhang and X. Liu, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, F707–F712 CrossRef CAS .
N. H. Perry and T. Ishihara, Materials, 2016, 9, 858 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Wang, R. Merkle, Y. A. Mastrikov, E. A. Kotomin and J. Maier, J. Mater. Res., 2012, 27, 2000–2008 CrossRef CAS .

          J. A. Kilner, in Proceedings of the Second International Symposium on Ionic and Mixed Conducting Ceramics, ed. T. A. Ramanarayanan, W. L. Worrell and H. L. Tuller, The Electrochemical Society Inc., Pennington, NJ, USA,  1994, pp. 174–190 Search PubMed .
W. Jung and H. L. Tuller, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 1184–1191 CrossRef CAS .
N. H. Perry, D. Pergolesi, S. R. Bishop and H. L. Tuller, Solid State Ionics, 2015, 273, 18–24 CrossRef CAS .

          B. A. Boukamp, H. J. M. Bouwmeester and A. J. Burggraaf, in Ionic and Mixed Conducting Ceramics, ed. T. A. Ramanarayanan, W. L. Worrell and H. L. Tuller, The Electrochemical Society Inc., Pennington, NJ, USA,  1994, pp. 141–149 Search PubMed .
Y. L. Lee, D. Lee, X. R. Wang, H. N. Lee, D. Morgan and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 244–249 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Kim, M. Kuhn, S. R. Bishop and H. L. Tuller, Solid State Ionics, 2013, 230, 2–6 CrossRef CAS .

          L. Wang, R. Merkle and J. Maier, in Solid Oxide Fuel Cells 11, ed. S. C. Singhal and H. Yokokawa,  2009, vol. 25, pp. 2497–2505 Search PubMed .
S. Wagner, C. Warnke, W. Menesklou, C. Argirusis, T. Damjanovic, G. Borchardt and E. Iverstiffee, Solid State Ionics, 2006, 177, 1607–1612 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Drahus, P. Jakes, E. Erdem and R.-A. Eichel, Solid State Ionics, 2011, 184, 47–51 CrossRef CAS .
N. Tsvetkov, Q. Y. Lu, Y. Chen and B. Yildiz, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 1613–1621 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Egger and W. Sitte, Solid State Ionics, 2014, 258, 30–37 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ding, A. V. Virkar, M. Liu and F. Liu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 489–496 RSC .
E. Mutoro, E. J. Crumlin, M. D. Biegalski, H. M. Christen and Y. Shao-Horn, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3689 CAS .
N. Tsvetkov, Q. Lu, L. Sun, E. J. Crumlin and B. Yildiz, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 1010–1016 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Druce and J. A. Kilner, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 161, F99–F104 CrossRef .
L. Zhao, N. H. Perry, T. Daio, K. Sasaki and S. R. Bishop, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 3065–3070 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Rupp, A. K. Opitz, A. Nenning, A. Limbeck and J. Fleig, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 640–645 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Plonczak, A. Bieberle-Hütter, M. Søgaard, T. Ryll, J. Martynczuk, P. V. Hendriksen and L. J. Gauckler, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 2764–2775 CrossRef CAS .
P. Plonczak, M. Sogaard, A. Bieberle-Hutter, P. V. Hendriksen and L. J. Gauckler, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159, B471–B482 CrossRef CAS .
K. Develos-Bagarinao, H. Kishimoto, J. De Vero, K. Yamaji and T. Horita, Solid State Ionics, 2016, 288, 6–9 CrossRef CAS .
E. Navickas, T. M. Huber, Y. Chen, W. Hetaba, G. Holzlechner, G. Rupp, M. Stoger-Pollach, G. Friedbacher, H. Hutter, B. Yildiz and J. Fleig, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 7659–7669 RSC .
A. M. Saranya, D. Pla, A. Morata, A. Cavallaro, J. Canales-Vazquez, J. A. Kilner, M. Burriel and A. Tarancon, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500377 CrossRef .
R. Merkle and J. Maier, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2002, 4, 4140–4148 RSC .
N. H. Perry and T. O. Mason, Solid State Ionics, 2010, 181, 276–284 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kubicek, G. M. Rupp, S. Huber, A. Penn, A. K. Opitz, J. Bernardi, M. Stoger-Pollach, H. Hutter and J. Fleig, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 2715–2726 RSC .

          N. H. Perry, G. F. Harrington and H. L. Tuller, in Metal Oxide-based Thin Film Structures: Formation, Characterization and Application of Interface-based Phenomena, ed. N. P. a. V. Esposito, Elsevier,  2017, accepted for publication Search PubMed .
W. Jung and H. L. Tuller, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2008, 155, B1194 CrossRef CAS .
W. Jung and H. L. Tuller, Solid State Ionics, 2009, 180, 843–847 CrossRef CAS .
S. Molin, W. Lewandowska-Iwaniak, B. Kusz, M. Gazda and P. Jasinski, J. Electroceram., 2012, 28, 80–87 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Drahus, P. Jakes, E. Erdem and R. A. Eichel, Solid State Ionics, 2011, 184, 47–51 CrossRef CAS .
R. Merkle and J. Maier, Angew. Chem., 2008, 47, 3874–3894 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Rothschild, W. Menesklou, H. L. Tuller and E. Ivers-Tiffee, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 3651–3659 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kuhn, J. J. Kim, S. R. Bishop and H. L. Tuller, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 2970–2975 CrossRef CAS .
V. Metlenko, W. Jung, S. R. Bishop, H. L. Tuller and R. A. De Souza, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 29495–29505 RSC .
N. H. Perry, J. J. Kim, S. R. Bishop and H. L. Tuller, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 3602–3611 CAS .
T. C. Huang, R. Gilles and G. Will, Thin Solid Films, 1993, 230, 99–101 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Kim, S. R. Bishop, N. J. Thompson, D. Chen and H. L. Tuller, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 1374–1379 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Yu, J.-S. Lee and J. Maier, Solid State Ionics, 2010, 181, 154–162 CrossRef CAS .
I. Denk, F. Noll and J. Maier, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1997, 80, 279–285 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ghaffari, M. Shannon, H. Hui, O. K. Tan and A. Irannejad, Surf. Sci., 2012, 606, 670–677 CrossRef CAS .
C. T. Luiskutty and P. J. Ouseph, Solid State Commun., 1973, 13, 405–409 CrossRef CAS .

          H.-J. Hagemann, RWTH Aachen,  1980 Search PubMed .

          J. J. Kim, S. R. Bishop, N. J. Thompson and H. L. Tuller, in Solid Oxide Fuel Cells 13, ed. T. Kawada and S. C. Singhal,  2013, vol. 57, pp. 1979–1984 Search PubMed .
I. R. de Larramendi, R. L. Anton, J. I. R. de Larramendi, S. Baliteau, F. Mauvy, J. C. Grenier and T. Rojo, J. Power Sources, 2007, 169, 35–39 CrossRef .

          J. Crank, The Mathematics of Diffusion, JSTOR,  1957 Search PubMed .
Q. Yang, T. E. Burye, R. R. Lunt and J. D. Nicholas, Solid State Ionics, 2013, 249–250, 123–128 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Rupp, H. Téllez, J. Druce, A. Limbeck, T. Ishihara, J. Kilner and J. Fleig, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 22759–22769 CAS .
E. Bucher and W. Sitte, Solid State Ionics, 2011, 192, 480–482 CrossRef CAS .
H. Dulli, P. A. Dowben, S. H. Liou and E. W. Plummer, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2000, 62, 14629–14632 CrossRef .
Y. Chen, W. Jung, Z. Cai, J. J. Kim, H. L. Tuller and B. Yildiz, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7979 CAS .
W. Jung and H. L. Tuller, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5370–5378 CAS .
K. Szot and W. Speier, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1999, 60, 5909–5926 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Nagarkar, P. C. Searson and F. D. Gealy, J. Appl. Phys., 1991, 69, 459 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liang and D. A. Bonnell, Surf. Sci., 1994, 310, 128–134 CrossRef CAS .
W. D. Yang, J. Mater. Sci., 1999, 34, 3533–3544 CrossRef CAS .
R. Frison, S. Heiroth, J. L. M. Rupp, K. Conder, E. J. Barthazy, E. Müller, M. Horisberger, M. Döbeli and L. J. Gauckler, Solid State Ionics, 2013, 232, 29–36 CrossRef CAS .
D. B. Buchholz, L. Zeng, M. J. Bedzyk and R. P. H. Chang, Prog. Nat. Sci.: Mater. Int., 2013, 23, 475–480 CrossRef .
F. Schulze-Küppers, S. F. P. ten Donkelaar, S. Baumann, P. Prigorodov, Y. J. Sohn, H. J. M. Bouwmeester, W. A. Meulenberg and O. Guillon, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2015, 147, 414–421 CrossRef .
J. Sheth, D. Chen, J. J. Kim, W. J. Bowman, P. A. Crozier, H. L. Tuller, S. T. Misture, S. Zdzieszynski, B. W. Sheldon and S. R. Bishop, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 16499–16510 RSC .
D. Stender, S. Cook, J. A. Kilner, M. Dobeli, K. Conder, T. Lippert and A. Wokaun, Solid State Ionics, 2013, 249, 56–62 CrossRef .
C. S. Gorham, J. T. Gaskins, G. N. Parsons, M. D. Losego and P. E. Hopkins, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 253107 CrossRef .
M. Shiojiri, Y. Saito and H. Okada, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1977, 16, 1481 CrossRef CAS .

CRC Handbook of Chemistry & Physics, 97th edn, CRC Press,  2016 Search PubMed.
W. Z. Wang, F. Sun, X. P. Guo, H. L. Liao, O. Elkedim and J. C. Liang, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2011, 205, 3665–3670 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dru, E. Meillot, K. Wittmann-Teneze, R. Benoit and M. L. Saboungi, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2010, 205, 1060–1064 CrossRef CAS .
A. Evans, J. Martynczuk, D. Stender, C. W. Schneider, T. Lippert and M. Prestat, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1400747 CrossRef .
M. J. Pietrowski, R. A. De Souza, M. Fartmann, R. ter Veen and M. Martin, Fuel Cells, 2013, 13, 673–681 CAS .
Y. Yu, H. Luo, D. Cetin, X. Lin, K. Ludwig, U. Pal, S. Gopalan and S. Basu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2014, 323, 71–77 CrossRef CAS .
D. Oh, D. Gostovic and E. D. Wachsman, J. Mater. Res., 2012, 27, 1992–1999 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lee, J. W. Han, Y. Chen, Z. Cai and B. Yildiz, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 7909–7925 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          W. Lee and B. Yildiz, in Solid Oxide Fuel Cells 13, ed. T. Kawada and S. C. Singhal,  2013, vol. 57, pp. 2115–2123 Search PubMed .
N. H. Perry, J. J. Kim and H. L. Tuller, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2017 Search PubMed  , under review.
J. Maier, Solid State Ionics, 1998, 112, 197–228 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. ten Elshof, M. H. R. Lankhorst and H. J. M. Bouwmeester, Solid State Ionics, 1997, 99, 15–22 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ta04940dThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)

 	Fig. 1  (a) Coupled XRD scan of STF35 thin films grown on YSZ at different temperatures (400–800 °C); (b) rocking curves of STF35 thin films grown on YSZ at different temperatures (580–800 °C); (c) coupled scan of STO substrate and STF35 thin film grown on STO substrate at 800 °C.	 

 	Fig. 2  Scanning Probe Microscopy (SPM) topographic images of STF35 amorphous and crystalline layers on YSZ prepared at different temperatures (a) 400 °C, (b) 580 °C, (c) 700 °C, (d) 800 °C, measured in dynamic mode. Sizes listed in (c and d) are average grain sizes for those samples.	 

400	0.09	—	Amorphous	

580	0.63	—	
	

700	2.45	27.7 ± 2.3	(110)	0.615
800	1.34–6.99	42.8 ± 3.3	(110)	0.078

 	Fig. 3  
In situ optical transmitted light intensity at 442 nm of 25 °C-grown thin film for (a) first time measurement up to 550 °C and (b) second time measurement (after cooling to 25 °C at the end of the first measurement). Data were measured as a function of temperature and oxygen partial pressure, as shown.	 

 	Fig. 4  
In situ transmitted light intensity at 442 nm of as-grown STF35 thin film, deposited at 800 °C (first time measurement). Data were measured as a function of temperature and oxygen partial pressure, as shown.	 

 	Fig. 5  Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) images of the surface microstructure, for (a) 25 °C-grown STF35 thin film after a 550 °C thermal treatment and (b) 800 °C-grown STF35 thin film, as deposited.	 

 	Fig. 6  Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) images of a 25 °C-grown STF35 thin film after a 550 °C heat treatment: (a) bright-field image, (b) high-resolution image of the substrate–film interface and (c) selected area electron diffraction pattern of the film and substrate.	 

 	Fig. 7  Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) images of 800 °C-grown STF35 thin film (as deposited): (a) bright-field image, (b) high-resolution of the substrate–film interface, and (c) selected area electron diffraction pattern of the film and substrate. The spots have been indexed and the lattice vector parallel to the direction of the electron beam is noted at the bottom of the image.	 
	(4)
	(5)

 	Fig. 8  (a) Area-normalized kchem (after an identical thermal cycle up to 550 °C) as a function of measuring temperature for different STF35 thin films that were deposited at different temperatures. Please note: area-normalized kchem represents raw kchem value multiplied by the following factors to correct for surface-area differences, as estimated from AFM, TEM, and SEM results: 0.33 (25 °C-grown), 1 (400 °C to 800 °C-grown); (b) area-normalized kchem replotted as a function of film growth temperature, for selected measurement temperatures. “2nd time” measurements were performed after an initial “1st time” measurement up to 550 °C, as described in the text; (c) example of relaxation fit for 580 °C-grown STF35 thin film during the second time measurement at 300 °C.	 

 	Fig. 9  Continuously measured in situ kchemversus aging time at 500 °C for different STF35 thin films which were deposited at different temperatures and on different substrates. Dashed line indicates upper limit of accurate k measurement owing to gas flush time limitation. Note the initial k values at time = 0 are for the second time measurement, as discussed in the text (i.e., not as-deposited).	 

 	Fig. 10  Ratio of A-to-B-site cation concentration Sr/(Fe + Ti), in the surface region of various STF35 thin films, as a function of emission angle (relative to the surface plane) by angle resolved XPS (AR-XPS). Smaller angles correspond to more surface sensitive results.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ta04940d

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
