Smart biomaterials and their potential applications in tissue engineering  - Journal of Materials Chemistry B (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2TB01106A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2TB01106A
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. B, 2022, 10, 6859-6895Smart biomaterials and their potential applications in tissue engineering

        
          
            Haider Mohammed 
            Khan†
a, 
      
        
          
            Xiaoxia 
            Liao†
b, 
      
        
          
            Bilal Ahmed 
            Sheikh†
a, 
      
        
          
            Yixi 
            Wang
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Zhixuan 
            Su
          
        
      cd, 
      
        
          
            Chuan 
            Guo
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zhengyong 
            Li
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Changchun 
            Zhou
          
        
      *cd, 
      
        
          
            Ying 
            Cen
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Qingquan 
            Kong
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Orthopedics, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, 610041, Chengdu, China. E-mail: kongspine@126.com
bDepartment of Burn and Plastic Surgery, West China School of Medicine, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, 610041, Chengdu, China. E-mail: cenying0414@163.com
cCollege of Biomedical Engineering, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610064, China
dNational Engineering Research Centre for Biomaterials, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610064, China. E-mail: changchunzhou@scu.edu.cn
Received 
      25th May 2022
    , Accepted 10th July 2022First published on 7th September 2022AbstractSmart biomaterials have been rapidly advancing ever since the concept of tissue engineering was proposed. Interacting with human cells, smart biomaterials can play a key role in novel tissue morphogenesis. Various aspects of biomaterials utilized in or being sought for the goal of encouraging bone regeneration, skin graft engineering, and nerve conduits are discussed in this review. Beginning with bone, this study summarizes all the available bioceramics and materials along with their properties used singly or in conjunction with each other to create scaffolds for bone tissue engineering. A quick overview of the skin-based nanocomposite biomaterials possessing antibacterial properties for wound healing is outlined along with skin regeneration therapies using infrared radiation, electrospinning, and piezoelectricity, which aid in wound healing. Furthermore, a brief overview of bioengineered artificial skin grafts made of various natural and synthetic polymers has been presented. Finally, by examining the interactions between natural and synthetic-based biomaterials and the biological environment, their strengths and drawbacks for constructing peripheral nerve conduits are highlighted. The description of the preclinical outcome of nerve regeneration in injury healed with various natural-based conduits receives special attention. The organic and synthetic worlds collide at the interface of nanomaterials and biological systems, producing a new scientific field including nanomaterial design for tissue engineering.
1. Introduction
The terms “smart biomaterials” and constructs are used to describe: (1) biomaterials and structures with instructive or triggering effects on cells and tissues, created by engineering the material's responsiveness to both internal and external stimuli or by possessing smartly customized properties and functions that can encourage tissue repair and regeneration, such as pH, temperature, ionic strength, and magnetism, to promote damaged tissue repair and regeneration and (2) materials possessing intelligently tailored individual properties and controlled functions to actively1,2 participate in tissue regeneration in a valuable way. Despite the fact that simple polymeric biomaterials offer the necessary mechanical and physical qualities for tissue development, their poor biomimetic features and lack of interactions with human progenitor cells continue to impede the promotion of functional tissue creation. Therefore, the development of smart functional biomaterials that react to stimuli might be the next option for generating smart 3D biomimetic scaffolds that actively engage with human stem cells and progenitors as well as maintain structural integrity to rapidly build functional tissue. This article reviews the recent developments in smart biomaterials and constructs for tissue repair and regeneration. These biomaterials are used to evaluate, treat, enhance, repair, or replace tissues or organs in the body. Smart biomaterial advances have had a major influence on all sectors of medicine over the past several decades, revolutionizing tissue engineering, drug delivery, immunological engineering, and medical device manufacturing. The growing interest in precision medicines tailored to the individual needs of patients, the emergence of gene and immune therapies, advances in three-dimensional (3D) printing technologies, and more recently, focused modalities that have the potential to expand the boundaries of modern medicine, are all driving up demand for biomaterials.1–3 Tissue engineering and regenerative medicine techniques that utilize biomaterials offer amazing promise to overcome the current limitations of traditional methods and materials. Old age, trauma, fracture nonunion, removal of bone tumors, and other causes of large bone defects or injuries are major orthopedic issues that have a negative impact on human health and well-being.4,5 The use of autologous bone grafts to correct bone abnormalities is still considered the “gold standard.” However, the drawbacks of autologous bone grafting include secondary damages, high donor site morbidity, restriction to a specific shape, and insufficient autogenous bone. Accordingly, it is not widely used in therapeutic settings. Alternatively, tissue engineering makes it possible to create artificial bone grafts that may be used to repair major bone defects. Similarly, burns, diabetes, and other factors may cause wounds that alter the look and physiological activities of the skin. A significant region of damage increases the body's metabolism, causes excessive water and protein loss, and may even be deadly.3 Thus, to prevent cell death caused by direct cell injection, tissue engineering not only prevents wounds but also creates an appropriate growth environment for seed cells. In addition to being biocompatible, the ideal scaffold should promote cell attachment and proliferation. It must remove secretions and limit the loss of bodily fluids to prevent bacterial infection and provide a moist environment favorable to healing. Finally, the repair of the human nervous system is a complex and interconnected process, resulting in substantial hurdles in its research and understanding. Considering the advancements in the domains of tissue engineering and regenerative medicine, the scientific community has observed an upsurge in biomaterial-based techniques for neural tissue regeneration therapies. However, although tremendous results have been observed in pre-clinical trials for each of these “tissue defect fillers” for bone, skin, and nerves, clinical trials with these implantable scaffolds are still required, which will be a major accomplishment, undoubtedly promoting the research on smart biomaterials and tissue engineering. The anticipated data will be important in establishing these “bridges” as strong instruments in building long-awaited successful therapeutical procedures. Fig. 1 shows some typical hotspot smart biomaterials and their potential applications in artificial skin graft engineering, bone tissue engineering, and nerve conduit engineering (Fig. 2).
 Fig. 1  Some typical hotspot smart biomaterials and their potential applications in artificial skin graft engineering, bone tissue engineering, and nerve conduit engineering. 
 Fig. 2  Schematic showing an example of nanostructured bioceramics to harvest biomorphic scaffolds with the help of 3D printing in the field of bone tissue engineering. 
2. Smart biomaterials for bone tissue engineering
Bone tissue engineering relies on three main building blocks, i.e., scaffolds, cells, and growth factors (GFPs).6 Ideally, a scaffold should be biodegradable and biocompatible, bioactive, osteoconductive, and osteoinductive. Biomaterials and additives, such as medicines, growth factors (GFs), and stem cells, have been proven to be effective in the development of artificial bone scaffolds for the healing of broken bones. Composite materials, which combine two or more elements with exceptional qualities, are commonly employed in bone tissue engineering because of their versatility. Polymers such as calcium phosphates and calcium carbonate have been utilized to create scaffolds. For example, hydrogel networks, conductive polymers, and signaling molecules may be added to bone tissue engineering scaffolds to enhance their biocompatibility. Smart scaffolds and stem cell constructions for bone tissue engineering are two examples of smart biomaterial-based techniques, in addition to smart medication delivery systems for enhancing bone regeneration. The use of smart polymers and smart materials may help shift biofilm species from a pathogenic composition toward a healthy one, hence reducing the risk of drug resistance. Besides delivering and guiding stem cells to enhance tissue regeneration, these smart biomaterials may also administer medicines and bioactive substances with spatially and temporally controlled release, modulate/suppress the formation of biofilms and fight infections in wound sites. Regenerative medicine and hard tissue engineering may be improved significantly with the use of smart biomaterials, which have the potential to revolutionize the field of medicine.
2.1. Popular smart biomaterials used as bone tissue engineering scaffolds
Bone is a natural nanostructured composite whose 60% dry weight consists of inorganic minerals, the majority of which is hydroxyapatite, a calcium phosphate (CaP) ceramic.32 Calcium-phosphate-based materials closely resemble the mineral phase of bone, and thus have been shown to have higher osteoinductivity, making CaP a desirable bone graft material.33,34 Although previous bioceramics possessed low mechanical qualities and poor biodegradability and porosity,35,36 the newest generation of bioceramics are nanostructured and have greatly enhanced bioactivity, biodegradation, and mechanical properties, as discussed below. Table 1 summarizes the advantages and disadvantages of these bioceramics.
Table 1 Summary of the major nanostructured CaP-based bone regeneration materials along with their relative advantages and disadvantages






Structure
Advantages
Disadvantages
Ref.




Nanostructured


Bioceramics


Nano-bioglasses



Biocompatible
Suboptimal biodegradation

37–40



Improved and enhanced bone integration biodegradation.
Poor mechanical properties


Hydroxyapatite



High biocompatibility.
Poor mechanical properties

41–45



Resembles the bone mineral phase.
Slow degradation rates in vivo


Closely resembles a variety of ions and can be doped in bone minerals. Osteoconductive.
Limited osteoinductivity


A wide variety of compositions are possible (e.g., powder, solid scaffolds, cement, and coatings).




High biocompatibility.




Tricalcium phosphate



Gives novel matrix deposition its fundamental building components.
Poor mechanical properties.

46–49



To adjust its bioactivity and degradation, it may be doped with different ions. Osteoconductive.




It is versatile and may be utilized in a variety of ways (e.g., powder, solid scaffolds, cement, and coatings).




Rapid in vivo degradation.




Nanocomposites


Ceramic/polymer composites (e.g., HA/PLGA, HA/alginate)
PLGA
High biocompatibility.
May have limited osteoinductivity.

50–60








Ease of fabrication.
Fabrication requires organic solvents.




Can be used to prepare scaffolds with complex 3D architectures.






Improved mechanical properties of scaffolds.






Tunable degradation rate.






Bio-hybrid composites


High biocompatibility.
Lack load-bearing capability.

61–64



Organic solvents are not necessary for fabrication.




Biologically-inspired.




Bioactivity is excellent.






2.2. Electrical nanomaterials harnessing piezoelectricity and magnetic conductivity smart biomaterials
Since the development of nanotechnology, the science of bone mechanobiology has dramatically improved, allowing us to gain a better understanding of bone remodeling and homeostasis regulated by mechanical stresses.65 However, although their origin is unknown, to regulate cell activity and the remodeling process, electric potentials for the generation of mechanical stress are known to be essential.66–68 In addition to stress-induced potentials, electric fields existing endogenously in live tissues, as well as electrical stimulation provided externally, have been shown to modify cell activity and accelerate tissue development.69–73 To promote bone regeneration and repair, tampering with the electrical environment has emerged as a viable strategy, with nanotechnological approaches showing enormous potential. The nanomaterials that recapitulate or leverage the physical stimuli naturally present in the bone can be classified as follows: (i) piezoelectric, (ii) electrically conductive, and (iii) magnetic materials. The advantages and disadvantages of various nanostructured materials are shown in Table 2.
Table 2 The advantages and disadvantages of using nanostructured materials to harness physical stimuli for bone regeneration






Structure
Advantages
Disadvantages
Ref.




Nanostructured piezoelectric materials


Ceramics with piezoelectric properties (e.g., BT, BN, and ZnO)
Barium titanate (BT)
Piezoelectric properties that are consistent.
Potential for cytotoxicity behavior.

68,74–86






Potential for osteoinduction is desirable.




Polymers with piezoelectric properties (e.g., PLLA, PHBV, PVDF, and their copolymers)



Non-toxicity and biocompatibility. Manufacturing adaptability. High impact resistance and strength.
Poor biodegradability.


Composite piezoelectric polymer-ceramic
—
Ability to modify and improve composite properties such as mechanical, piezoelectric, biodegradability, and Bioactivity.
Insufficient data on the piezoelectric properties of some composite materials.


Nanostructured electrically conductive materials


Conductive for nanomaterials (non-polymeric, such as graphene or gold nanoparticles)



Outstanding mechanical properties.
Concerns regarding their biocompatibility and long-term safety of non-degradability.

87–100



High electrical conductivity ensures that bioelectric impulses are reliably delivered.




Nanopolymers that conduct electricity (e.g., polyheterocyclic family of conductive polymers)
Structures of conducting polymers (from top to bottom): polypyrrole, polythiophene, polyparaphenylene, polyaniline
Enhanced biocompatibility and biodegradability.
Inadequate mechanical and processing properties.







Flexibility in manufacturing.
A lack of animal studies evaluating their in vivo performance.










Nanostructured magnetically


Responsive materials


Magnetic nanoparticles (MNPs) and magnetoelectric composites



The qualities of superparamagnetic remote (external) stimulation cue delivery ability.
Biocompatibility and long-term safety are unclear.

44,101–115





2.3. 3D-Printed customized smart biomaterials for bone tissue engineering
Native bone has structural properties that span several orders of magnitude in terms of organization (nm to cm scale).116 The molecular interactions between the organic and mineral components and dynamical hierarchical structure of bone play a crucial role in its biological and mechanical features.117 Consequently, the application of these properties in the hierarchical design of biomaterials has the potential to be a viable strategy for stimulating bone regeneration. Nanostructured delivery systems and scaffold materials that mimic the structural features of the natural bone matrix are discussed in this section, aiming to recreate native nanocues as closely as possible. Table 3 provides an overview and summary of the most widely developed nanostructured delivery techniques for bone repair.
Table 3 Main nanostructured delivery systems used in bone regeneration, with their advantages and disadvantages






Structure
Advantages
Disadvantages
Ref.




Inorganic nanostructure delivery system


Ceramics (e.g., HA and TCP)
HA
Intrinsic osteoconductive properties. Wide functionalization of their surface.
Poor biodegradability profile.

36,118–127








Low payload yield.


Oxides of metals or metalloids (e.g., silica)



Customizable mesoporous framework.
Cytotoxic effects at specific particle sizes and/or concentrations.

128–143



Encapsulation of bioactive compounds on the surface of a material.




Architecture and topography that can be altered.




Adhesion and proliferation of cells may be improved.




Organic nanostructure delivery system


Synthetic polymers (e.g., PLA and PLGA)
PLGA
Easily accessible. Biocompatibility is generally positive. Numerous changeable features, e.g., L/G ratio and molecular weight. Cross-linkers or surface modification may be used to modify.
Payload yield is low. Burst discharge. Difficulties associated with achieving continuous discharge. Certain polymers degrade into cytotoxic compounds.

120,144–149












Natural polymers (e.g., gelatin, chitosan)
Gelatin
Easily available. Biocompatibility and biodegradability are good. Properties similar to that of living organisms. It can be altered with cross-linkers or surface functionalization.
Low payload yield. Rapid breakdown in vivo.

146,150–161
















Burst release. Controlled release is difficult to achieve.


Composite nanostructure delivery system


Composites
—
Increased loading efficiency.
Typically, it requires a higher level of synthesis.

158,162–170



Flexible release kinetics.




Long-term release.




An effort to maximize the unique qualities of each material.






2.4. Specific properties of smart biomaterials used for bone tissue engineering
Metals, polymers (both natural and synthetic), ceramics, and composites of various materials have all been employed in biomedicine for a long time. An Ashby plot shows the stiffness and strength values (normalized by density) of various materials.171 Natural materials, with the exception of silk, which has exceptional toughness, have substantially lower strength and toughness ratings than engineering materials. Alternatively, many natural materials have a toughness value that considerably outweighs their composition and uniform combination.171 The selected matrix material has a significant impact on the characteristics of bone scaffolds. Bone tissue engineering scaffolds have been fabricated using a variety of polymers. Table 4 provides an overview of various biomaterials, including their properties, benefits, and drawbacks.
Table 4 Biomaterials and their characteristics used to create bone tissue engineering scaffolds in detail




Biomaterials
Type
Characteristics
Advantages
Disadvantages
Ref.




Metal


Biocompatible metallic scaffolds with appropriate mechanical qualities.
Biocompatible with excellent mechanical properties.
Non-biodegradable




Tantalum
Natural element
Biodegradable and corrosion-proof materials.
Widely utilized as implant biomaterials.
For the revision surgery almost no degradation for removing the implant.

172–175



Magnesium
Natural element
Permeable and biodegradable implant.
Mechanical characteristics comparable to that of human bone.
Metal ion or particle leaching leads to toxic risk.

176–182



Titanium and titanium alloys
Synthetic alloy
Biocompatibility, corrosion resistance, and a comparable elasticity modulus for trabecular bone.
Strong bone affinity
Non-biodegradable

183–187



Nickel-titanium alloy (nitinol)
Synthetic alloy
Unique mechanical characteristics (e.g., the shape memory and superelastic effects).
Metals with low elasticity modulus, pseudo-elasticity, and high damping potential matching the characteristics of natural bone.
The high rigidity of titanium may promote stress shielding and implant loosening despite the fact that nitinol shows almost no deterioration.

188–191



Natural polymer


Specific breakdown rates and excellent biological characteristics are similar to extracellular matrix.
Biocompatible degradation.
Low mechanical strength.




Collagen
Natural protein
Natural bone organic materials play an important
Biodegradable. Variety of scaffolds.
Management and sanitation both are difficult.

192–194







Role.








Gelatin
Polypeptide
Denaturalized collagen.
Creating mixtures through cross-linking.



169,195–197



Silk fibroin
Polypeptide
Mechanical characteristics of silk fibroin are good.





198–200



Chitosan
Polysaccharide
Positively charged polysaccharide are biocompatible to resist bacteria.





201



Alginate
Polysaccharide
Negatively charged polysaccharide, may be crosslink and printed by injection.





202–204



Hyaluronic acid
Glycosaminoglycan
Negatively charged glycosaminoglycan, biocompatible and can create hydrogel by crosslinking.
Easy chemical functionalization and degradability.



200,205–208



Synthetic polymer


Mechanical and physical attributes can be changed.
Acidic degradation may produce negative tissue responses.






PLA, PGA and PLGA
Polyester
Materials for clinical applications are FDA-approved.
Changing the degree of hydroxylation allows for control over water solubility and crystallinity.
Lack of cell adhesion and hydrophobicity.

209–211



PCL
Polyester
Crystallinity and mechanical strength are outstanding.

In situ crosslinking and printing by injection.
It takes years to deteriorate.

212–215



PVA
Polyvinyl ester
Hydroxylated synthetic polyvinyl acetate.
The shape, porosity, and degradation rate of implantable devices may be tailored to meet specific requirements.



216–219



PPF
Polyester
It has several non-saturable double bonds and hazardous crosslinks.
Customized mechanical strength and deterioration rates.



220,221



Polyurethane (PU)
Plastic polymer
Outstanding mechanical properties.





222–224



Bioinert ceramic


Implanted tissue cannot be used for medical reactions.





225–228



Aluminum, e.g., a-aluminum oxide (Al2O3)
Metal oxide
Mechanical qualities are improved, whereas biological activity is absent.








Zirconia
Metal oxide
Structures are interconnected but do not have chemical or biological interactions between their constituent parts.





229–231



Bioactive ceramic


Post-implantation medical responses may be seen in live tissue.








HA
Phosphate mineral
Bone is mostly composed of inorganic materials.
Osteoconductive, nontoxic and biocompatible.



227,232–234



Tricalcium phosphate (TCP), e.g., beta-tricalcium phosphate (b-TCP)
Calcium salt
Calcium/phosphorus ratio is comparable to natural bone tissue.
Non-irreversible rejection of calcium and phosphorus, but also biocompatible.
α-TCP degrades rapidly and dissolves rapidly. The rate of degradation and the rate of osteogenesis are incompatible.

127,198,235–237



Calcium sulfate (CaSO4)
Calcium salt
Excellent post-surgical material.





238–241



Akermanite (Ca/Si/Mg)
Melilite mineral
A low deterioration rate and excellent mechanical properties.





242–244







In comparison to β-TCP, this compound improves osteogenic differentiation and increases gene expression.








Diopside (MgCaSi2O6)
Inosilicate mineral
Fast firing and strong thermal expansion capabilities at low temperatures.





245–248



Bioactive glasses (BGs)
Glass ceramic biomaterial
Main components for Na2O, CaO, SiO2 and P2O5; brittleness.





249–255





2.5. Composite smart biomaterials for bone tissue engineering
Composite biomaterials are made up of two or more components. The use of composite materials is primarily intended to increase the processability, printing performance, mechanical characteristics, and bioactivity of scaffolds. Due to the particular biological responses between scaffolds and live tissues, Ti6Al4V, HA, b-TCP, and BG are frequently used as bioactive biomaterials. Among the newest studied materials, Mg–Zn, PLLA, and tungsten disulfide nanoparticles (WS2) have shown promising outcomes.256–258 Natural polymers (such as collagen, gelatin, silk fibroin, and chitosan) and synthetic polymers (such as PLA, PGA, and PCL) are the most common bioresorbable biomaterials used in bone tissue engineering (such as HA, b-TCP, and BGs). Because of their outstanding bone regeneration potential, scaffolds incorporating additives (such as growth factors) have been used in clinical applications. However, the extensive development of scaffolds is hampered by their high production costs. Ti6Al4V is a fantastic example of a metal matrix composite.259,260 The coating of Ti6Al4V scaffolds with a tantalum layer can dramatically improve bone ingrowth, osteointegration, and osteogenesis261 together with simvastatin/hydrogel262 or polydopamine-assisted hydroxyapatite coating (HA/pDA).263 However, although metal matrix composites, such as Ti6Al4V, have numerous advantages, their inability to degrade limits their potential as optimal materials. Scaffolds have made significant progress with the use of polymer matrix composites and ceramic matrix composites in bone tissue engineering. Biodegradability and mechanical characteristics are just two of the many advantages of polymer composites.264–273 The predominant inorganic elements of natural bone are ceramic materials, especially HA.274 Composite materials made up of ceramic and polymer components have attributes that make them ideal for making scaffolds for bone tissue engineering.264,266,269,271 For example, the vitro bioactivity and biocompatibility of scaffolds increased when tungsten disulfide nanoparticles (WS2) were combined with microporous bioactive glass in a specific concentration range, resulting in composites with enhanced compressive strength through the stress transfer mechanism,258 as summarized in Table 5.
Table 5 Summary of composite materials used in manufacturing scaffolds for bone tissue engineering




Type
Raw materials
Additives
Study outcome
Ref.




Metal matrix composite
Ti6Al4V


Comparable to human bone, improved mechanical shield.

259,260



Ti6Al4V
Tantalum (Ta)
Ta promotes bone formation.

261



Ti6Al4V
Simvastatin/hydrogel
Neovascularization, osteointegration, and bone ingrowth improved significantly.

262



Ti6Al4V
HA/pDA
Accelerated bone regeneration and enhanced new bone fusion.

263



Ti6Al4V/Fibrin glue
Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and BMP-2.
Significantly increased bone formation and angiogenesis.

275



Mg-Zn
Nano-hydroxyapatite derived from fish bones (fHA).
Better implant-tissue interactions by accelerated biomineralization and decreased degradation of composites.

256



Polymer matrix composites
Bioactive glass (BG)
Collagen-glycosaminoglycan (CG)
Bioengineering encourages bone tissue regeneration and overcomes difficulties in tissue transplantation.

276



Poly(L/DL lactide)(PLDL)/PCL
Osteogenon-drug
Osteogenon improved cell adhesion, cell differentiation, and mineralization.

277



PEG/PU
BMSCs
Thermal stability, regulation, degradation at acidic pH (5.8), biodegradability, cell compatibility, and good porosity characterizes the polymer matrix.

278



PLA
Bioactive organically modified glass (ormoglass)
It varies the characteristics of the fibers by changing the trial parameters (roughness, stiffness, and morphology).

268



Poly(D,L-lactide) (PDLLA)
BGs and CuO/ZnO
Incorporation of Cu- and Zn-doped BG in

265







PDLLA may lead to enhanced bioactivity in scaffolds.




Polarized poly(L-lactide) (PLLA)
Ca2+/Mn4+ co-doped
By incorporating bioactive Ca/Mn components, their piezoelectric properties might boost osteogenic activity in vitro and in vivo.

257



BaTiO3 nanofiber


Ceramic matrix composites
Titanium dioxide
PLGA/gentamicin
It was confirmed that gentamicin had excellent antibacterial properties, and the scaffolds were compatible with osteoblast-like cells (MG-63).

267



HA/β-TCP
BMP-2
Continuous integration potential for bone tissue engineering.

264



β-TCP
Iron-containing
Calcium phosphate (CaP) ceramic bone conduction characteristics may be aided by the presence of iron, permitting the production of engineered bone tissue.

266




n-HA/poly(D,L-lactide coglycolide) (PLAGA)
hMSCs
500 ng of rhBMP-2 added to the PELA/HA scaffolds for testing bone regeneration.

279



HA/Poly(D,L-lactic acid)-co-poly-(ethylene glycol)-co-poly(D,L-lactic acid)(PELA)
BMSCs/rhBMP-2
Compounded compressive strength increased.

280



Tungsten disulfide nanoparticles (WS2)
Macroporous bioactive glass

In vitro bioactivity and biocompatibility of the scaffolds may be improved.

258



Functional composite
Photo crosslinking of PCL and bioactive polydopamine coating polypyrrole (PPy), HA, gelatin and mesoporous silica
Temperature
Poly-dopamine coating, the ability to automatically transform irregular flaws and enhanced bioactivity.

273





Electrical stimulation
Excellent mechanical properties increased protein adsorption.

272



PLGA
Black phosphorus (BP)/SrCl2
Scaffolds demonstrated high biocompatibility and bone regeneration potential.

270



Polypyrrole/alginate (PPy/Alg)
hMSCs and electrical stimulation
Cell adhesion and growth improved.

271



Gelatin/bioactive glass
Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(4-styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT: PSS) and electrical stimulation
PEDOT stabilizes the scaffold framework and improves the cellular characteristics of mesenchymal stem cells.

269



Transglutaminase crosslinked gelatin (TG-Gel)
BMP-2, matrix rigidity and mechanical signaling
Osteogenic differentiation was enhanced by the combination of hydrogel hardness with BMP-2.

281





3. Smart biomaterials for skin tissue engineering
The skin is an essential “first line of defense” in the human immune system.7 It is not uncommon for wound healing to be the same regardless of the type of tissue, including the skin. Several factors influence the ability of wounds to heal and regenerate new skin tissue, including the type of wound (epidermal, deep dermal, and full-thickness), the degree of tissue damage caused by burns or physical trauma (first, second, and third-degree), the amount of moisture around the wound, and the presence of inflammation or secondary infections.8 There are several growth factors involved in skin wound healing, including epidermal growth factors (EGF) and alpha and beta tissue growth factors (TGF-α and TGF-β, respectively). Natural substances with anti-inflammatory, anti-microbial, and antioxidant characteristics, such as turmeric (active component curcumin) and honey, are often used in traditional skin wound care methods to speed up the healing process. Warm or cold fomentation may minimize swelling and speed up the healing process (Fig. 3).8,9
 Fig. 3  Schematic illustrating the use of various nano-biomaterials to harvest artificial skin grafts with the help of piezoelectric, infrared and electrospinning modalities. 
The simple contraction and proliferation of cells in wounds are needed to cure small wounds. Alternatively, there are several hazards associated with big skin wounds given that they take much longer to heal, and thus more likely to develop into chronic wounds (e.g., inflammation, infection, and scarring).8 Skin grafts are the first choice for the treatment of skin wounds. Autogenic, allogeneic, and xenogeneic skin transplants are the three types of grafts. Autogenic and allogenic grafts both have the potential to produce immuno-rejection and disease transmission; however, their status is the gold standard in organ transplantation.10 In contrast, skin replacements are a much more efficient choice than skin transplants in terms of time and cost. Cellular (containing cells) and non-cell-containing skin replacements (SNS) are used to heal skin wounds.11 Biobrane®, Integra®, Alloderm®, Transcyte®, Dermagraft®, and Apligraf® are all commercially available skin replacements, which each have drawbacks that limit their effectiveness as wound healing treatments. In general, these products are expensive.9,11–14 The core principle of skin tissue engineering is to either create new, biocompatible alternatives for skin tissue or rebuild existing skin tissue. The cutting-edge techniques for skin regeneration treatments include the use of cells or cell implants, the transfer of growth factors to tissue, and the use of diverse matrices, such as scaffolds, to create three-dimensional (3D) cellular structures.15 Biomaterial modalities, such as infrared radiation (IR), electrospinning, and piezoelectric stimulation, may be used in conjunction with these techniques to enhance the process of wound healing. Here, we provide a quick introduction to these three modalities. For photorejuvenation, a short burst of IR-induced reactive oxygen species (ROS) has been identified in several studies to be advantageous. There was an increase in the secretion of transforming growth factor-1 (TGF-β1), an anti-inflammatory cytokine, which activates fibroblasts for enhanced wound healing, when 8–12 nm IR radiation was employed for full-thickness skin wound healing in rats.16 Studies have also been conducted using infra-red radiation (λ = 950 nm) to promote fibroblast proliferation in vitro, with positive results.17 For the fabrication of polymer-based nanofibrous scaffolds, electrospinning is one of the techniques employed. Electrically spun fibers can be fabricated with diameters in the nano to micro range, depending on the polymer solution used in the electrospinning process.18,19 The addition of bioactive compounds, either directly to the scaffold material or by incorporation in the pre-formed scaffold, may be used to alleviate the problem of bacterial infections. A variety of bioactive compounds, including growth factors, may also be placed on electrospun nanofibers. An endogenous electric field (EF) is produced by changes in the transepithelial potential (TEP) of the injured epithelial layer, regardless if the skin lesion is acute or chronic. Subsequently, the EF activity modulates the skin-cell behavior and facilitates regeneration. Angiogenesis and keratinocyte migration may be influenced by endogenous EF.20,21 Electrotaxis, a process in which certain cells migrate toward the cathode (e.g., fibroblasts, keratinocytes, and epithelial cells),21 while others (e.g., endothelial cells) migrate toward the anode, may be guided by EFs produced in vitro or in vivo. Electrical stimulation of a wound site has also been utilized in an inpatient environment as a means of enhancing wound healing. Exogenous EF treatment for wound healing may be widely used if it can be administered at the site of a wound without the need for external electrical equipment.22,23
3.1. Antibacterial smart biomaterials for artificial skin grafts
The occurrence of persistent infections is a defining feature of chronic wounds. Most chronic wound infections, including Staphylococcus aureus and Pseudomonas aeruginosa, can form bacterial biofilms.
Furthermore, bacteria in mature biofilms have up to 500 times higher antibiotic resistance than planktonic cells (freely living). Systemic antibiotics should only be administered if sepsis, abscess production, cellulitis, osteomyelitis, or lymphangitis are present.282 Also considering that antibiotics come with certain side effects and often have compliance issues, there is a need for alternative approaches to achieve infection-free wound healing. The antimicrobial properties of silver metal ions (Ag) are well-documented, where silver nanoparticles (nAg) are the most extensively employed reinforcement in polymer matrixes for chronic wound healing. Chitosan gel reinforced with nAg may inhibit the development of bacterial biofilms and kill bacteria in existing biofilms, according to research.283–285 Furthermore, compared to the silver sulfadiazine employed as the reference treatment in trials, the new chitosan/nAgn formulation showed lower cytotoxicity.286 Another form of nanofiller employed in the production of antibacterial skin grafts and wound dressings is nanosized titanium dioxide particles (nTiO2). It has been shown that incorporating nTiO2 in a polymer matrix increases its mechanical characteristics while simultaneously providing antibacterial activity against a variety of Gram-positive and Gram-negative microorganisms. However, nTiO2 particles have been found to cause inflammatory reactions, cytotoxicity, and the formation of reactive oxygen species in a range of cell types in vitro. It is possible to reduce the cytotoxicity of nTiO2 by gradually releasing titanium ions from composite biomaterials, which provides antibacterial protection and accelerates wound healing.287,288 In addition, a chitosan/pectin/nTiO2/nanocomposite was produced, which showed antibacterial activity (tests on E. coli, S. aureus, P. aeruginosa, and B. subtilis), was nontoxic to mouse fibroblasts, and accelerated wound healing in a rat model.287 Also, antibacterial chitosan nTiO2 nanocomposite was created, which promoted rapid wound healing and a consistent immune response in a rat model.289 Likewise, a bilayered nanocomposite made of chitosan nTiO2 as the upper layer and an ECM sheet obtained from human adipose tissue as the lower layer was developed for full-thickness wound healing. In a rat model, the top layer of the nanocomposite showed antibacterial action against E. coli and S. aureus, while the bottom layer stimulated wound healing, re-epithelialization, and angiogenesis.290Table 6 shows other antibacterial nanocomposites used as artificial skin grafts and wound dressings.
Table 6 Artificial skin transplant and wound dressing nanocomposite biomaterials with antimicrobial properties




Biomaterial composition
Type of nanoparticle
Tested bacterial strain
Corresponding antibiotic spectrum
Demonstrated effect in vitro or in vivo
Ref.





Bacillus subtilis: B. subtilis; Citrobacter freundii: C. freundii; Escherichia coli: E. coli; Klebsiella pneumonia: K. pneumonia; Pseudomonas aeruginosa: P. aeruginosa; Staphylococcus aureus: S. aureus; methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus: MRSA; Staphylococcus epidermidis: S. epidermidis; Staphylococcus hyicus: S. hyicus; Staphylococcus intermedius: S. intermedius; and Salmonella typhimurium: S. typhimurium.




Chitosan, HA
nAg

E. coli, S. aureus, MRSA, P. aeruginosa, K. pneumonia
Gram +ve + Gram −ve
Efficacy in vitro against human dermal fibroblasts with minimal cytotoxicity against microorganisms (at low concentrations of nAg).

286



Poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) carboxymethyl-chitosan
nAg

E. coli

Gram −ve
Efficacy against bacteria in vitro, but not tested on eukaryotic cells.

291



Chitosan, 4-(ethoxycarbonyl) phenyl-1-aminooxobutanoic acid
nAg

E. coli, S. aureus, P. aeruginosa
Gram +ve + Gram −ve
Efficacy against bacteria in vitro, but not tested on eukaryotic cells.

292



Chitosan, PVA
nAg

E. coli



Efficacy against bacteria in vitro, but not tested on eukaryotic cells.

293



Chitosan, gelatin
nAg

E. coli, S. aureus
Gram +ve + Gram −ve
Enhanced wound healing in a rabbit model with antibacterial activity with no cytotoxic to mouse fibroblasts in vitro.

294



Biosynthesized bacterial nanocellulose
nAg

S. aureus, P. aeruginosa, S. epidermidis
Gram +ve + Gram −ve
Efficacy in vitro against human dermal fibroblasts, with no harmful impact (at low concentrations of nAg).

295



2-Acrylamido-2-methylpropane sulfonic acid sodium salt
nAg
MRSA, P. aeruginosa
Gram +ve + Gram −ve

In vitro antibacterial activity with no deleterious impact on human skin fibroblasts; bacterial colonization prevention in a porcine burn model.

296



Sulfonated polystyrene
nAg

E. coli, S. aureus, P. aeruginosa, S. epidermidis
Gram +ve + Gram −ve
Efficacy against bacteria in vitro, but not tested on eukaryotic cells.

297



Chitosan
nAu

S. aureus, P. aeruginosa
Gram +ve + Gram −ve
Effect against biofilm-forming antibiotic resistant types of bacteria; however, no cytotoxicity was seen in vitro against human skin keratinocytes.

298



Alginate, polyethylene glycol diacrylate
Cu-doped bioactive glass nanoparticles

E. coli, S. aureus
Gram +ve + Gram −ve

In vitro antibacterial activity; accelerated collagen deposition and enhanced early angiogenesis of diabetic full-thickness wounds in a mouse model.

299



Chitosan-g-pluronic copolymer
Nanocurcumin

E. coli, S. aureus, P. aeruginosa, S. typhimurium
Gram +ve + Gram −ve

In vitro antibacterial action with no cytotoxic impact on human dermal fibroblasts; increased collagen deposition, granulation, and wound maturity in a mouse model of burn wounds.

300



Chitosan, gelatin
nFe3O4

E. coli, S. aureus
Gram +ve + Gram −ve
Efficacy against bacteria in vitro, but not tested on eukaryotic cells.

301



2-Acrylamido-2-methylpropane sulfonic acid, acrylamide, acrylonitrile, acrylic acid
nFe3O4

E. coli, B. subtilis
Gram +ve + Gram −ve
Efficacy against bacteria in vitro, but not tested on eukaryotic cells.

302



Chitosan, pectin
nTiO2

E. coli, S. aureus, P. aeruginosa, B. subtilis
Gram +ve + Gram −ve

In vitro antibacterial activity with no cytotoxic effect on mouse fibroblasts; rat wound healing accelerated.

287



Chitosan
nTiO2

S. aureus

Gram +ve
Bactericidal effect in vitro; in rat model wound healing increased.

289



Chitosan, ECM sheet from human adipose tissue
nTiO2

E. coli, S. aureus
Gram +ve + Gram −ve

In vitro antibacterial action; in a rat model, stimulation of granulation tissue development, re-epithelialization, and angiogenesis.

290



Chitosan, poly(N-vinylpyrrolidone)
nTiO2

E. coli, S. aureus, P. aeruginosa, B. subtilis
Gram +ve + Gram −ve
Antibacterial activity with no cytotoxic effect against mouse fibroblasts in vitro; accelerated healing of open excision type wounds in a rat model.

303



Poly(N-vinylpyrrolidone)
nTiO2

S. aureus

Gram +ve
Efficacy against bacteria in vitro, but not tested on eukaryotic cells.

304



Chitosan
nZnO

P. aeruginosa, S. intermedius, S. hyicus
Gram +ve + Gram −ve

In vitro antibacterial activity with no cytotoxic effect on human skin fibroblasts; quicker wound healing and re-epithelialization in a rat model.

305



Bacterial cellulose
nZnO

E. coli, S. aureus, P. aeruginosa, C. freundii
Gram +ve + Gram −ve

In vitro antibacterial activity; faster wound healing in a burn mouse model.

306



Alginate
nZnO

E. coli, S. aureus, MRSA
Gram +ve + Gram −ve

In vitro antibacterial activity with little cytotoxicity against human dermal fibroblasts (at low nZnO concentrations); re-epithelialization in an ex vivo porcine skin model.

284



Chitosan, alginate
nZnO

S. aureus

Gram +ve

In vitro antibacterial activity with little cytotoxicity against human cervical cancer cells (HeLa cell line); enhanced tissue formation and wound healing in a mouse model.

307



Germanium (Ge), diamond like carbons (DLC)
DLC-Ge nanocomposite

S. aureus, P. aeruginosa
Gram +ve + Gram −ve
Suppressed bacterial adherence at a rate of 40% for P. aeruginosa and 25% for S. aureus bacterial strains, respectively.

308





3.2. Infrared radiation smart biomaterials for skin tissue engineering
In recent years, photodermatological research has made huge strides in understanding the molecular pathways that underpin both the beneficial and harmful effects of IR radiation on human skin.
For IRA illumination, most research relied on artificial light sources. This allows researchers to determine the most effective wavelength, power, and fluence to irradiate patients rather than using multi-wavelength ambient IR radiation from the sun, which can generate heat-induced metalloproteinase-1 (MMP-1) and induce photoprotection in human skin.309 Human skin was irradiated with an infrared lamp having a maximum emission of 1100–1120 nm. It was found that endothelial cell marker CD31 showed an increase in the number of blood vessels after IR radiation, which is most likely owing to an increase in VEGF and a decrease in thrombospondin-2 (TSP-2), an antiangiogenic factor, in the skin's epidermis.310 However, radiation-induced free radicals in human skin can reduce antioxidants such as carotenoids to varying degrees. In comparison to beta-carotene, lycopene, a carotenoid, decreased rapidly.311 Many non-invasive measures, such as resonance Raman spectroscopy, reflection spectroscopy, and skin color measurement, have been employed to explore the generation of free radicals in human skin after exposure to IR radiation.312,313 The use of infrared light to interact with cells and tissues is summarized in Table 7, and some of the medical uses of infrared radiation are also presented.
Table 7 For various cells and tissues, different types of infrared radiation may be used in a medical application




Target
Light source or material
Wave lengths
Results
Ref.




Skin wound in rat
Ceramic-coated sheet
5.6–25 μm (maximal intensity of 8–12 μm)
Increase wound healing and expression of TGF-β1.

16



Dermal abrasions in mice
Diode laser
810 nm
Increase collagen accumulation and healing effect.

314



Soft tissues in rat
Diode laser
904 nm
Increase wound healing and exclusion zone (EZ) growth (1H-NMR 1/T).

315,316



Soft tissues in rat
Diode laser
904 nm
Increase wound healing, membrane effect measured by 1H-NMR tau(c).

315,317



Human skin
Radiator equipped with a water filter
600–1500 nm
Formed free radicals and reduced concentration of β carotene antioxidants.

318



Human dermal fibroblasts
Water-filtered IR-A irradiation source
760–1440 nm
Increased expression of MMP-1 in the dermis.

319



Breast cancer cells and normal breast epithelial cells.
Blackbody source equipped with 3–5 μm filter
3–5 μm
Stopped G2/M cancer cell cycle progression and changed actin filament production with microtubule network remodeling.

320





3.3. Electrospinning smart biomaterials for skin tissue engineering
Electrospinning is a method of fabricating fibers with diameters ranging from the nano to micro scale using polymer solutions.321–328 Electrospinning is a method employed for the creation of a fibrous membrane on a collector by applying a high voltage a droplet projecting from the tip of a needle, resulting in an electrically charged jet of polymeric solution.322–324,326,328 A variety of characteristics may be employed to modify the morphological and mechanical properties of nanofibers. These factors may be linked to the molecular weight of the polymer, viscosity and conductivity of the polymer solution; ambient variables such as temperature and humidity; and processing circumstances such as feed rate, voltage, needle-to-collector distance, and collector type.321,323,324,326 Electrospinning has become a popular technology in biomedical research, particularly tissue engineering, due to its capacity to alter nanofiber properties.323 It is also a straightforward, reliable, cost-effective, and versatile process, which can be utilized with a variety of polymers,323,324,326,329 such as chitosan,330–332 polylactic acid (PLA),333,334 and polycaprolactone (PCL).332,335 Additionally, the highly interconnected porosity and high surface-to-volume ratio of electrospun nanofibers enable the transport of moisture and nutrients to the wound site and promote angiogenesis, collagen production, and cell adhesion, migration, growth, and differentiation.323,324,326 During successive phases of the electrospinning process, the characteristics of the nanofibers may be tailored (Fig. 4)336 to improve the features of the scaffold.
 Fig. 4  Possibility of the addition of bioactive substances during different electrospinning stages. Reproduced with permission.4 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. 
Type of electrospinning: Changes in the electrospinner setup may have a variety of effects. The number and type of syringes used in the electrospinner, as illustrated in Fig. 5, are two of the most commonly adjusted setup parts.336 Electrospinning is a one-step process in which the polymer solution is injected into a single syringe with a single needle and only the polymer solution given in that syringe generates nanofibers. Electrospinning several layers from different syringes, often two, in the electrospinner is used to mix various polymer solutions during the electrospinning process, instead of mixing them in the same polymer solution prior to electrospinning.337,338 This approach may be used to combine two polymer solutions that do not include a common solvent, or if one of the polymer solutions is capable of causing a chemical reaction or complexation when it comes into contact with another polymer solution. Electrospinning in two directions simultaneously is referred to as coaxial electrospinning, where a core-shell structure is electrospun from several polymer solutions, generally two. Using a double co-axial needle arrangement or phase separation, this structure can emerge spontaneously. The shell layer polymer solution is ejected by the outer needle, while the core layer polymer solution is expelled through the inner needle in a double co-axial needle arrangement.339
 Fig. 5  Types of electrospinning: (A) single electrospinning, (B) multiple electrospinning and (C) co-axial electrospinning. Reproduced with permission.4 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. 
3.4. Piezoelectric smart biomaterials for skin tissue engineering
The advancement of electrotherapy for accelerating wound healing, tissue regeneration, improving musculoskeletal function, and bone fracture repair has resulted from the increasing knowledge on the role of bioelectricity. Piezoelectric materials are useful for tissue engineering as electroactive scaffolds for tissue repair and regeneration, which may deliver varying electrical stimulation under mechanical stress without requiring an external power supply.340 The application of nanomaterials and nanostructures to gather mechanical energy has led to the creation of piezoelectric nanogenerators (PENG) in the field of biomedicine. A piezoelectric generator (PENG) is an energy-harvesting device that can transform ambient energy (e.g., mechanical, solar and thermal power) into electric energy using nanostructured piezoelectric materials.341 ZnO, barium titanate (BaTiO3 and BTO), PZT, PVDF, and MoS2 are the most widely studied piezoelectric materials, with properties such as flexibility, bendability, non-toxicity, biocompatibility, and biodegradability, and good potential for innovative application in the field of biomedical nanogenerators.342,343 ZnO nanowires are known for their combination of semiconducting and piezoelectric properties, and their ability to create rectifying piezoelectric currents.341 They are made from a variety of conductive copolymer coatings.344 BTO is an inorganic substance with excellent bio- and cytocompatibility. It is lead-free and is commonly used to strengthen the PENG performance of composites.345 PVDF and its copolymers, P(VDF-TrFE), are biocompatible polymers with high flexibility, low weight, low thermal conductivity, high chemical corrosion resistance, and heat resistance. They have been used in biomechanical energy conversion systems, sensors, implantable self-powered devices, and wound scaffolds.346,347Table 8 summarizes the key findings from the most recent in vitro and in vivo investigations on the efficacy and bio-feasibility of PENGs for wound healing.
Table 8 Piezoelectric nanogenerators for skin graft engineering




Piezomaterials
Structure
Features
Ref.





a NR: nanorod; PDMS: polydimethylsiloxane; P(VDF-TrFE): poly(vinylidene fluoride-tri-fluoroethylene); PVDF: polyvinylidene fluoride; BTO: BaTiO3; Hsp90: heat shock protein 90; HIF-1α: hypoxia-inducible factor 1α; ROS: reactive oxygen species; PLLA: poly(L-lactic-acid).





ZnO NRsa
ZnO NRs aligned on PDMSa

In vitro: increased skin-cell regeneration activity of a bidirectionally produced ZnO NR-based piezoelectric patch.

342







Enhancement of wound healing in rats in vivo.




ZnO, P(VDF-TrFE)a
P(VDF-TrFE)/ZnO nanocomposite scaffolds
Increased cell viability, adhesion, and proliferation in vitro.

348







Promotion of angiogenesis in vivo.




P(VDF)a
Polyurethane/PVDF scaffolds
Enhancement of fibroblast migration, adhesion, and secretion in vitro.

349







Increased fibrosis in vivo.




P(VDF-TrFE) nanofiber
P(VDF-TrFE) nanofiber scaffolds
Increased fibroblast cell proliferation rate by 1.6 times in vitro; 1.5 V, 52.5 nA electrical output.

350







High electrical output of 6 mV and 6 μA through rat leg motion in vivo.




PVDF nanofibers
Bioinspired hybrid patch with PVDF nanofibers aligned on mussel-inspired hydrogel matrix
Growth and migration of fibroblasts, promoting collagen deposition, angiogenesis, and re-epithelialization in vitro. Approximately one-third reduction in a mouse wound in vivo.

351



Polydopamine
Polydopamine coating on chitosan film (CM@DA)
Enhancement of wound healing in rats by elevation of Hsp90 and HIF-1α* expression in vivo.

352



BTOa
TiO2/BTO/Au heterostructure
Photodynamic bacteria are killed by the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS*) in vitro.

353







Accelerated wound healing in infected wounds in vivo.




PLLA hybrid
Piezoelectric ‘double-layered PLLA with nonpiezoelectric ‘meso-poly(lactic acid) (meso-PLA) triboelectric nanogenerator’
The hybrid NG generated 0.31 mW of power, which was 11% more than the PLLA-based PENG in vitro.

354







Not tested in vivo.






3.5. Composite smart biomaterials for skin tissue engineering
Natural polymers, such as collagen, gelatin, chitosan, fibrin, and HA, or synthetic polymers, such as polyethylene glycol (PEG) or polylactic-co-glycolic acid, are used to make artificial skin grafts (PLGA).355,356 Natural materials with the ability to restore the physiological functionality of the ECM (e.g., fibrin, fibronectin, collagen, HA, chitosan, and glycosaminoglycans-GAGs) have been demonstrated to be the most effective method for treating chronic wounds in the development of synthetic skin replacements.283,357,358 Low antigenicity, excellent biodegradability, minimal toxicity, and low risk of chronic inflammatory reactions and rejection are all key characteristics of the above-mentioned biomaterials.359,360 To improve wound healing and protect against infections, skin substitutes are frequently combined with growth hormones and antimicrobial agents.361,362 These composite biomaterials can be used in conjunction with the other modalities discussed above such as IR. Table 9 shows several types of skin grafts composed of natural polymers and their composites with synthetic materials.
Table 9 Various types of bioengineered artificial skin grafts made of natural and synthetic polymers




Biomaterial composition
Cellular content
Demonstrated effect in vitro or in vivo
Ref.




Collagen, PLGA, glucophage
Acellular
Diabetes wounds in rats heal more quickly when collagen levels are higher.

355



Bovine type I collagen, HA
Acellular
Enhancement of skin defect repair in the full-thickness skin defect rat model.

363



Collagen, alginate, curcumin-loaded chitosan nanoparticles
Acellular
Diabetes wounds healed more quickly and completely re-epithelialized in the rat model.

364



Gelatin, carboxymethyl chitosan
Acellular
Mouse embryonic fibroblasts were shown to express type I collagen and VEGF in vitro.

365



Montmorillonite, bacterial cellulose
Acellular
Accelerated wound healing, granulation tissue development, and re-epithelialization of the burn sites in the murine model rats.

366



Carboxymethyl cellulose, PEG
Acellular
More quickly and complete healing of full-thickness wounds in diabetic rats.

367



Silk fibroin, PLACL, vitamin E, curcumin
Acellular
Increased fibroblast proliferation and collagen production in vitro.

368



Fibrin
Cellular (fibroblasts)
Improvement of diabetic rat wound healing.

369



Collagen, HA, EGF
Cellular (fibroblasts)
Enhanced fibroblasts emit more VEGF and HGF in vitro.

370



PCL, gum tragacanth, curcumin
Cellular (MCSs)
Enhanced granulation tissue development, collagen deposition, and faster healing in diabetes rat models.

371



Chitosan
Cellular (fibroblasts, hair follicle stem cells)
Acquired epidermis and dermis similar to native skin in individuals with acute partial or full-thickness skin lesions*.

372



Bovine type I collagen
Cellular (fibroblasts, keratinocytes)
Proliferation and migration of fibroblasts and keratinocytes in vitro, respectively.

373



Fibrin-coated poly-L-lactide (PLLA), collagen
Cellular (fibroblasts, keratinocytes)
Skin substitutes containing dermal, epidermal, and hypodermal layers were developed in vitro.

374



Fibrin
Cellular (fibroblasts, keratinocytes, ADSCs)
Improvement of diabetic rat wound healing.

375



Hesperidin-coated alginate, chitosan
Acellular
As shown by the time-kill and MTT assays, hydrogels have antibacterial characteristics as well as a good effect on cell growth in vitro.

376







The manufactured hydrogels had better-wound closure than the gauze-treated wound (the control group), with the alginate/chitosan/10% hesperidin group having the best wound closure percentage in vivo.




AgNPs/PLA/PEG nanofilm
Acellular
Antibacterial testing revealed that the incorporation of biogenic AgNPs into PLA/PEG nanofibers completely inhibited the development of P. aeruginosa and S. aureus in vitro.

377





4. Smart biomaterials for nerve tissue engineering
Nerve damage in the periphery can be repaired surgically; however, if there is substantial substance loss (greater than 5 mm), grafts from various sources, including nerve guidance conduits (NGC), are required for repair.24 NGCs reduce myofibroblast infiltration and scar tissue formation and provide physical support for regenerating nerves.25 Before conducting in vivo experiments on different animal models, it is standard procedure to conduct preliminary in vitro studies. Mice and rats are usually used for short gaps up to 15 mm, while for long gaps, animal models such as rabbits, pigs, lambs, cats, dogs, and primates are typically employed.26,27 The above-mentioned strategy for nerves, similar to that for bone and skin, necessitates three prerequisites, i.e., scaffolds, cells, and growth factors. Hydrogels, which are crosslinked polymer networks and highly water-absorbent, have been widely developed as injectable scaffolds for central nervous system (CNS) regeneration. Currently, the main strategies for treating CNS injury and disease are drug delivery and cell transplantation. Drugs/cells can be delivered to the target sites using injectable hydrogels. Furthermore, glial scar formation serves as the major impediment to axon regeneration following CNS injury or disease.28 Thus, to solve this problem, injectable hydrogels may fill irregular holes for structural support, while simultaneously creating a suitable microenvironment for axonal development. Axonal development is insignificant if axons wander randomly because axons require guidance for effective regeneration to occur.29 To substitute autologous nerve grafts for peripheral nerve system (PNS) regeneration, NGC, a tubular scaffold that connects two severed nerve stumps, was designed. NGCs are used to improve the healing of long-distance peripheral nerve lesions in which axons must stretch over a large nerve gap and attach to the distal nerve segment.30 Growth factors and an extracellular matrix may be produced by cells put into the damaged nerve. Neural and other stem cells are being studied extensively in both CNS and PNS regeneration, with Schwann cells the most often employed in PNS regeneration.31 Furthermore, the fundamental qualities of an ideal nerve conduit are outlined and discussed in the nerve section, together with the advantages and shortcomings of natural-based biomaterials employed in the fabrication of nerve conduits (Fig. 6).
 Fig. 6  Schematic representing various biomaterials used as nerve conduits. 
4.1. Smart biomaterials used as nerve conduits
In both the central nervous system (CNS) and the peripheral nervous system (PNS), nerve regeneration is a significant therapeutic problem. Degeneration of the central nervous system (CNS) caused by disease (such as Alzheimer's and Parkinson's disease) or trauma (such as traumatic brain injury and spinal cord injury) frequently ends in lifelong paralysis and loss of sensation. Spontaneous neuronal regeneration in the CNS is usually ineffective, whereas the PNS has an inherent potential to regenerate. However, PNS regeneration only occurs across very small distances. In many situations, damage to the PNS causes motor and sensory dysfunction. For neuroprotection and nerve regeneration, biomaterials in the form of scaffolds or nanoparticles have attracted significant interest. To deliver medications, nanoparticles can be made from a variety of lipids, polymers, metals, and carbon compounds.378 Collagen, gelatin, chitosan, alginate, hyaluronan, silk fibroin, poly(L-lactic acid), poly(glycolic acid), polycaprolactone, polyphosphoester, and polyurethane are among the natural and synthetic polymers used in neural regeneration. Because electrical impulses are transferred for neural transmission, conductive biomaterials such as poly-pyrrole, polythiophene, and polyaniline may increase neurite development to improve the bioactivity.379 The mechanical attributes of biomaterial scaffolds can affect neural regeneration, with soft materials (0.11 kPa) promoting neuronal differentiation, while stiffer materials (710 kPa) promote glial differentiation.380 The most commonly used scaffolds in CNS and PNS regeneration are hydrogels and nerve guide conduits (NGC) (Fig. 7A).381 Furthermore, in each category, self-healing injectable hydrogels and three-dimensional (3D) printed NGC with unique properties are appealing candidates. Biomaterial scaffolds for neural regeneration have been created as crucial therapeutic techniques, particularly when cells and/or growth agents are integrated (Fig. 7B).381 Thus, the use of self-healing injectable hydrogels and 3D-printed NGCs for CNS and PNS regeneration is on the horizon.
 Fig. 7  Biomaterials used in neuronal regeneration. (A) Hydrogel and NGC examples utilized in CNS and PNS regeneration. In CNS regeneration, hydrogels such as drug-loaded hydrogels, cell-loaded hydrogels, conductive hydrogels, and channeled hydrogels are being developed. Porous NGCs, micro-grooved NGCs, sponge-filled NGCs, multichannel NGCs, filament-filled NGCs, and hydrogel-filled NGCs are used in PNS regeneration. (B) Potential strategies of biomaterial scaffolds for CNS and PNS regeneration. Neural- and vascular-related cells are used to generate more ideal cells and cellular spheroids. Cells (or cellular spheroids) and growth factors are mixed with pre-gel solutions to create a self-healing injectable hydrogel or 3D-printed NGC. For CNS regeneration, self-healing hydrogel may be injected into the injured location of the brain or spinal cord using a long, thin needle. 3D-manufactured NGC may be surgically implanted to bridge a peripheral nerve gap for PNS regeneration. Three-dimensional (3D); central nervous system (CNS); nerve guidance conduit (NGC), and peripheral nervous system (PNS). 
4.2. Natural and synthetic smart biomaterials for nerve engineering
Natural biomaterials are ideal candidates for tissue engineering because they include adhesion molecules, and cell-binding sites, and are compatible with the surrounding tissues. Natural-based biomaterials are available in large numbers at low cost due to their widespread availability; however, their purification is less standardized than synthetic biomaterials.382 The challenge of finding an easily available refined source for the large-scale manufacturing of these natural biomaterials is also an issue. Natural biomaterials have the benefit of causing no unexpected or undesirable immune-mediated responses after appropriate purification. These biomaterials are typically biodegradable and merge with the surrounding tissues. Compared to their synthetic counterparts, their breakdown products are less cytotoxic and biocompatible, and more readily digested and metabolized by the host tissues.383 Natural polymers provide stronger interactions between the scaffold and tissue due to their outstanding biocompatibility and bioactive qualities, which increase cell adhesion, proliferation, and tissue regeneration.384,385
Alternatively, synthetic biomaterials have more adjustable mechanical characteristics that may be produced by making minor adjustments during their production.382 Synthetic biomaterials are intriguing because of their great repeatability and easy production in huge quantities. For many years, the absence of binding sites and low biocompatibility of synthetic biomaterials were major problems; however, tissue engineering now addresses these issue by designing scaffolds with a nanostructured surface topography that provides cells with binding sites.386 Actin cytoskeleton rearrangement, focal adhesion creation and distribution, and lamellipodia and filopodia production are all influenced by scaffold surface topographical alterations, which impact cell growth, migration, and adhesion.387–390Table 10 lists the most well-studied biomaterials for nerve regeneration.
Table 10 Materials studied for nerve regeneration and tested in SCI models




Polymer
Nature
Properties
Type of bridge combination
Therapy
Ref.




PLA, poly(lactide); PLGA, poly(lactide-co-glycolide); PCL, poly(e-caprolactone); PCLEEP, poly(e-caprolactone-co-ethyl ethylene phosphate); P(HEMA), Ser-Ile-Lys-Val-Ala-Val (SIKVAV), poly(2-hydroxyehtyl methacrylate); and siRNA, small interference RNA.




PLA
Synthetic, degradable
Asymmetric conduit
Single-walled conduit, electrospun fibres
Drug release

391–394



PLGA
Synthetic, degradable
Aligned nanofibrous structure
Multiple channel; electrospun fibres
Plasmid DNA; Schwann cells; self-assembling peptides for growth factor delivery; drug delivery

394–399



PCL
Synthetic, degradable
Loaded with nerve growth factor (NGF)
Porous scaffold
Neural stem cells

394,400,401



PCLEEP
Synthetic, degradable


Electrospun fibres
Drug delivery, siRNA

402–404



P(HEMA) and copolymers
Synthetic, non-degradable
Absorb a liquid or solution and become a hydrogel.
Hydrogel; scaffold
Drug delivery; modified with SIKVAV

394,405–408



Chitosan
Natural; degradable
Loaded with alpha-lipoic acid
Porous scaffold, conduit
Endothelial cells; collagen hydrogel as filler; bone marrow stem cells

394,409–413



Collagen
Natural, degradable
Loaded with Cerebrospinal Fluid
Electrospun fibres; oriented pore channels; hydrogel
Growth factors; chondroitinase ABC, stem cells

394,412,414–417



Gelatin
Natural, degradable
Tricalcium Phosphate and Glutaraldehyde crosslinking
Scaffold
Neuronal + endothelial cell lines

394,418,419



Agarose
Natural
High conductivity and stability in the oxidized state.
Hydrogel/scaffold
Growth factors

394,420,421



Hyaluronic acid
Natural
Viscosity, elasticity, lubrication and a high capacity for holding water
Porous scaffold, scaffold coating, hydrogel
Growth factors, cells

394,422–425





4.3. Natural smart biomaterials as nerve conduits and their advantages and disadvantages
Biocompatible and non-toxic are two important terms when discussing natural polymers. Natural polymers are promising materials for nerve tissue engineering structures because of their properties.426 Natural materials such as chitosan409,411 and collagen415 are commonly utilized to construct nerve conduits (for the peripheral or CNS). Hyaluronic acid, agarose, and gelatin are some of the other materials used as spinal cord injury scaffolds, as shown in Table 11. Blending has been extensively researched to combine the advantages of both natural and synthetic polymers, as demonstrated by the many combinations of PCL with gelatin,427 collagen,428 and chitosan.429 Conduits have been treated with cell adhesion peptides to improve their bioactivity430,431 or extracellular matrix proteins such as fibronectin409,432–434 and laminin.411,432,435,436 The use of extracellular components on neural bridges is based on the idea of increasing cell adhesion and boosting through axon pathfinding.
Table 11 Advantages and disadvantages of natural-based smart biomaterials used as nerve conduits




Natural-based biomaterial
Advantages
Disadvantages




Hyaluronic acid
Microbial fermentation produces it on a large number.437
Very poor mechanical properties (too weak to be used in the manufacture of a conduit).438,439


Promotes axonal regeneration.438,439


Used successfully as conduit internal fillers.440
Fast degradation.441,442


Alginate
Exceptional chemical adaptability.443
Mechanical resistance is weak when used as a conduit when not mixed with other polymers.447


Blend able with different polymers.443


Manufactured with various techniques (electrospinning, 3D printing).444,445
High degradation rate.448


Used successfully as conduit internal fillers.446


Chitin and Chitosan
After cellulose chitin is the most abundant polysaccharide in nature.449
Low mechanical strength.458


At low-cost, chitosan can be easily derived from chitin.450


Axonal regeneration and decreased scar formation are promoted by chitosan.451–453


Degradation products have a favorable effect on nerve regeneration.454,455


Various methods for increasing mechanical strength: double-layered conduits456,457 or biomaterial mixing.458,459


Transparency, adaptability, and resistance to collapse.452,460


Collagen
The protein found in the greatest abundance in the human body.461
Mechanical stress resistance is low, and manipulability is poor.465


An excellent medium for medication and cell delivery.382
There are certain scar neuroma cases in patients.466,467


Its physical characteristics may be altered at various sections of the same conduit.462




It is possible to get topographical signals that direct axon regrowth.463,464




Gelatin
Plasticity, adhesiveness and low antigenicity.468
Cross-linking chemicals are required because gelatin conduits are water-soluble and easily collapse.470,471


Bioactive compounds may be readily integrated into the gelatin scaffolds and progressively released throughout their disintegration, due to their chemical characteristics and degradation kinetics.469




Silk fibroin
Profitable and low cost because of its ease of purification and availability in large quantities.472
In general, solutions of silk fibroin are weak and fragile.472


High fracture and compression resistance, as well as good elasticity and flexibility.473


Degradation influenced by processing methods.457,474


A negative immunological response.475


Good mechanical strength.475


Fibrin
Adhesive characteristics.476,477
High degradation rate.480


No collapse.478,479
It is more efficient to use autologous fibrin than commercial ones.481


Porosity sufficient to allow for nutrient uptake.478,479 Prevents fibrous tissue formation.478,479




Keratin
Hydrophilic surface, biodegradable, and bioactive.482 Good as conduit filler.483,484
As a conduit, it has a low mechanical resistance.482


Usable blended with other polymers.485
Fast degradation rate.482


PHB
Maintain constant pH during degradation.486
The reabsorption process takes a long period (over 2 years).488


Exceptional mechanical and physical properties that altered by various manufacturing techniques.487


Early vascularization after implantation.488
Reduction in elasticity and ductility because of a tendency to crystallize.490


Low levels of inflammatory infiltration.489
Fragility and lack of hydrophilicity.490


PHBV
Flexibility and ease of processing are two advantages over PHB.490 Structuring and easy to handle.491
In compared to petroleum-based synthetic polymers, this material has a small processing window and a low strain-at-break.492


Cellulose/soy protein
Enhanced reconstruction of motor function.493
Low mechanical properties.493




4.4. Synthetic smart biomaterials as nerve conduits and their properties
Polyesters are biopolymers that are biodegradable and obtained from renewable resources, where the poly-hydroxy-alkanoate (PHA) family is the most effective in tissue engineering applications.494,495 PHAs are created by bacterial and archaeal fermentation under circumstances of nutritional deficiency or abundant carbon sources and are stored in their cytoplasm.496,497 The structure and characteristics of the PHA family members vary greatly depending on the kind of microbe, biosynthesis circumstances, and carbon source employed during their manufacture.498,499 PHAs have a distinct benefits over other biomaterials used in medical devices given that they maintain a constant local pH during their breakdown, which enhances their biocompatibility.486 However, the production of PHAs is very costly, which can be reduced in a variety of ways, including the creation of recombinant microbes capable of producing massive amounts of PHAs, as recently reviewed.500 The most researched members of this family are poly(3-hydroxybutyric acid) (PHB) and poly(3-hydroxybutyric acid-co-3-hydroxyvaleric acid) (PHBV). These polymers can be easily processed into conduits utilizing a variety of manufacturing processes, including extrusion, electrospinning, and rolling sheets on a mandrel,384 and various preclinical investigations on nerve regeneration employing PHA-based conduits have yielded positive findings. Employing techniques such as rotor-twisting, microchannels, and injection molding in in vivo rat models, better suture strength, minimal inflammation, and better protein adsorption were achieved.501–504 The relevant studies together with the natural polyesters are summarized in Table 12.
Table 12 Synthetic polyester based smart-biomaterials for nerve conduits






Method of conduit production
Properties and analyses
Results and findings
Ref.




Poly(3-hydroxybutyric acid) PBH, poly(3-hydroxybutyrate-co-hydroxyvalerate) PHBV, and PLA, poly(lactide).




PBH
Electrospinning and salt-leaching procedures

In vitro mechanical and physical analyses of conduits.
The wettability and permeability of the salt-leached scaffolds were higher.

487







Nanofibrous scaffolds may provide cell adhesion and morphology.




Conduit obtained from PHB sheets (Astra Tech, Göteborg, Sweden), consisting of compressed PHB fibers
Nerve regeneration 120 days following repair of 2 or 4 cm rabbit peroneal nerve gaps.
PHB tubes were non-friable, flexible, and inconsistently firm. In all animals, regeneration occurred over 2 and 4 cm gaps.

488



Conduits obtained from PHB sheets (Astra Tech, Göteborg, Sweden), consisting of compressed PHB fibers
Nerve regeneration up to 63 days after repairing a 4 cm rabbit peroneal nerve lesion with a PHB conduit.
PHB tubes were observed to be coated with a very thin pseudo-capsule at all harvest locations.

505







PHB tube vascularized after 21 days.








Regenerated nerve fibers parallel to the PHB conduit long axis.








An empty PHB conduit, peripheral nerve regeneration over a 4 cm gap.




Conduits obtained from PHB sheets (Astra Tech, Göteborg, Sweden), consisting of compressed PHB fibers
Nerve regeneration after 30 days closure of 10 mm nerve gap in rat sciatic nerves.
Good at nerve endings and through the conduit wall.

489







PHB conduit showed little inflammatory infiltration and excellent nerve regeneration.








Nerve regeneration in PHB conduits did not completely coincide.




PHBV
Nanofibrous electrospun sheets rolled around a cylindrical rod and sealed with heat to obtain a conduit
30 mm rat sciatic nerve gap healed with nanofibrous PHBV conduit.
Restoration of nerve.

506







The PHBV conduit group and the autograft experimental group had similar skeletal muscle reinnervation and myelinated nerve fiber diameter distribution.




Nanofibrous electrospun sheets rolled and sealed with heat to obtain a conduit
30 mm rat sciatic nerve gap repaired with nanofibrous PHBV conduit.
In both experimental groups, motor and nociceptive functional recovery was similar (PHBV conduit or autograft).

491





Several behavioural tests were done to examine motor.






PHBV conduit designed on micropatterned silicon wafers
30 mm rat sciatic nerve gap were repaired using PHVB conduit, sensory and motor function restored.
Schwann and glial cells were found in regenerated nerves.

507



For both conduit experimental groups, nerve continuity was restored and myelinated fibers were found. Recovery of motor and sensory functions was reported in both conduit experimental groups.


Aligned nanofibrous PHBV-based conduits
For 10 weeks, a 10 mm rat sciatic nerve lesion was repaired.
Sciatic nerves were effectively rejoined.

508







Myelinated axons decreased in the experimental group.




PHBV conduit made by oriented nanofibers obtained through electrospinning technique.
For 1, 2, and 4 months, a 10 mm rat sciatic nerve lesion was healed using the PHBV conduit.
Nerve regeneration within the conduit was similar to that with autograft, where autograft group regenerated better and quicker.

509





Macroscopic examination and morphological evaluation.








Analyses of function and electrophysiology.










No variations in axon number or myelin sheath repair thickness in 8 weeks, where PHBV conduit group were more vascularized than autograft group.








All experimental groups had functional recovery.




PLA
Rotor-twisting into filaments and microbraiding into single or multilayer tubes.
These conduits-maintained lumen and wall integrity after subcutaneous insertion in rats.
Mechanical strength of PLA sutures increased.

502



Fabricating nanofibrous conduit scaffolds with single or multiple microchannels.
The conduits were implanted into a 10 mm lesion in the rat sciatic nerve.
Nerve regeneration was seen in all animals, with histologically evident axon-Schwann cell regeneration units and little inflammation.

501,504



Nanofibrous conduits fabricated by injection molding/TIPS
The surface area is more than three orders of magnitude bigger than that of solid wall tubes.
Increase in protein adsorption and cell adhesion.

503





4.5. Future design of smart biomaterials for nerve conduits
Conventional data processing technologies in conjunction with surface modification procedures have been successful in the production of NGCs to date.510 To create channels, natural-based biopolymers are primarily treated by casting porous membranes, and then wrapping, electrospinning, and dip-molding them. However, these approaches do not allow the encapsulation of biological signals such as growth factors and nerve supporting cells into the conduit to aid the regeneration process. Non-conventional methods have recently gained popularity as methods for processing natural-based polymers into NGCs.511 Together with other benefits, 3D bioprinting allows a tailored geometry to be obtained via the clinical imaging of injured nerves, and biological cues in the manufacturing process, which improve the efficiency of biological stimuli following in vivo implantation,512 has recently altered the approach of using bio-inks as forming materials in the production of NGCs, emphasizing the advantages of natural-based biopolymers over synthetic ones. Moreover, recent findings revealed that 3D bioprinting can be used to create neural guidance channels, lumen loading cells, and growth factor gradients throughout the length of nerve guides.513 Alternatively, recent biomaterial design advances have focused on the utilization of modified natural polymers to provide superior mechanical qualities.471,514 The use of natural polymers such as methacrylate is now widely used in additive manufacturing to create complex geometries. For example, gelatin methacrylate (GelMA) has been used in several sectors of tissue engineering due to its biocompatibility and mechanical tunability, and NGC with varying channel topologies has been generated via 3D bioprinting of GelMA.515 GelMA hydrogels manufactured in 3D have been investigated as nerve conduits with encouraging results. Because of its high hydrophilicity, it can be combined with nanoparticles516,517 or platelets518 to boost peripheral nerve regeneration and functional recovery.
5. Prospects and future direction
To date, although the biomaterials used for bone regeneration have shown promise, not all bone abnormalities are the same. For example, the healing of significant bone defects caused by trauma necessitates the use of a mechanically capable scaffold.519 Alternatively, arthroplasty needs measures to extend the life of implants, where the longevity of traditional materials is still a severe drawback in this environment.520 The key to success in this application is to improve the osseointegration of current implants by surface modification.521,522 Orthopedic infection is another important obstacle to implant-based bone repair, and other material features such as antibacterial capabilities should be considered.
Furthermore, a variety of patient-related variables, both local and systemic, such as old age, gender, pre-existing chronic diseases, and the use of certain drugs, may affect the biological milieu for bone repair.523 Nanotechnological techniques used for bone regeneration may deliver more effective and longer-lasting implants, lower infection rates, and promote bony healing, all of which may lead to better patient outcomes. Nanotechnology, in particular, has enabled the development of materials that can overcome the challenges associated with enhancing bone regeneration from a variety of perspectives, such as simulating the nano-composition and structure of bone, while also acting as a delivery vehicle for bioactive molecules and/or cells.524 Nano-biomaterials that can mimic more than one of the features of bone discussed herein may outperform conventional materials in clinical setting. Nanotechnology, for example, provides oncology patients with unique ways to integrate drug delivery functionalities into osteoinductive biomaterials, which may then be employed for both bone regeneration and cancer treatment.525–527
There are numerous issues that may emerge if wound healing is delayed, including a greater psychological load and expense. When a patient has diabetes or an immune system that is already impaired, complications such as systemic infection or even amputation are likely to occur from even a little incision. Furthermore, is very difficult to treat a big wound, whether it has skin abnormalities or not, in a healthy young adult. Accordingly, wound dressings and applications, including negative pressure devices, hyperbaric oxygen treatment, and electrical stimulation, have flourished during the last few decades.528 There are several studies demonstrating the healing benefits of piezoelectricity-based electrical stimulation on wounds.529 However, in actual practice, electrical stimulation is often used for pain management and rehabilitation rather than wound healing. For wound healing, the huge size of the extracorporeal power supply is a key impediment, in addition to its high cost, unpleasant wearability and inability to monitor the healing process in real time. Currently, nano generators are employed to convert all of the energy we use every day into electricity.530 There is strong clinical evidence that IR may promote cell death through apoptosis, necrosis, and anoikis selectively.531 As a physiological reaction, it also causes cell differentiation rather than proliferation.532 For this particular therapy, electrospun nanofibrous scaffolds have shown efficacy.336 Shortly, biosensing systems may be entirely included inside nanofibers, similar to how drug delivery systems are inserted into nanofibrous scaffolds. We predict that additional commercialized items and rigorous methodology will be published in the area of employing nanofibrous scaffolds for wound healing and skin regeneration in the future years.
Finally, natural-based biomaterial-derived conduits have similar features to synthetic conduits, making them equally appropriate for peripheral nerve regeneration. Natural-based biomaterials are also bioactive, which is a crucial factor to consider. The impact of bioactivity on nerve regeneration has received significant attention in the literature, with some researchers proposing that the release of neurotrophic factors or the existence of bioactive binding sites inside a conduit may help neuron regeneration. Synthetic materials have the advantage of being easily tweaked and controlled, but they lack locations for specific proteins to connect to and cells to interact with, resulting in a lack of integration with native tissue. Researchers have employed a variety of strategies to improve conduit function, including the addition of internal filler hydrogels or cells that release neurotrophic factors, as well as direct conduit alteration. To increase their bioactivity, certain conduits are directly changed to enable the covalent attachment of biochemical cues such as proteins, peptide sequences, and growth hormones. Natural materials offer the benefit of providing the necessary biological locations for proteins to attach and biological signals to influence cell activity. Although this bioactivity is less controlled than that of synthetic biomaterials, the release of molecules such as chitooligosaccharides enhances nerve regeneration without interfering with other biological processes.454,455 Most preclinical investigations in the literature focus on nerve regeneration inside the conduit and biomaterial local effects in the implantation site rather than systemic repercussions. Indeed, few researchers have considered the systemic effects of biomaterials, which may be a technique for addressing the challenges of non-controlled multi-bioactivity of distinct biopolymers. Alternatively, researchers prefer to view the existence of bioactive sites on natural biopolymers as a positive trait rather than a flaw. Furthermore, some experts feel that to boost the bioactivity of natural biomaterials such as silk, they must be modified using several methods.533
In the future, researchers should focus on better investigating the association of biomaterials with the body to develop better immunoprotective biocompatible materials, embracing bioorthogonal and biocompatible chemistries for the synthesis of biomaterials, including living polymerization and click chemistry, together with incorporation of natural or biocompatible building blocks (e.g., natural metabolites, “Generally Recognized As Safe” substances) in biomaterial design. Improving our knowledge of material-cell interactions can be accomplished by simplifying the interactions between the two components and using simple in vitro or in vivo models that accurately capture the intended interaction. For example, certain of the functional groups of the material can be shielded or changed, enabling identification of the important entities engaged in influencing cellular contact or behavior, which can be further assessed by reporter assays related to the activity of particular cellular pathways (e.g., inflammation and proliferation). Another way to improve our knowledge of these interactions is to use computer models of the surface chemical structure of materials.
6. Conclusions
In conclusion, nanostructured materials have demonstrated that they have the complexity required to meet the difficulties in this new field. Because the future of bone regeneration is oriented toward a more individualized approach, nanostructured immunomodulatory materials will be among the most disruptive bone regenerative technologies. All these skin graft engineering advancements based on recombinant technology may pave the way for the development of next-generation smart biomaterials shortly. Overall, we believe that the technical advances in fundamental science and engineering, together with materials science research, have enormous future potential. Preclinical and clinical research on new skin biomaterials may open the door for effective treatments and the commercialization of skin-based products. Other information regarding conduit manufacture and data about conduit features, such as wall thickness or porosity, are frequently omitted from preclinical investigations, which may be important in understanding how the qualities of conduits impact nerve regeneration, and thus must be investigated further. Consequently, despite the fact that conduits have been shown to effectively support nerve regeneration and are often utilized, nerve autografts remain the gold standard for mending lengthy nerve lesions, emphasizing the need for more effective alternatives. Smart biomaterials can have a significant impact on the translation of preclinical studies into the clinic, but a number of factors must be considered, including regulatory and manufacturing constraints (such as material complexity and ease of scalability), consistency in performance, and biocompatibility over time. There may be regulatory and manufacturing issues and difficulties in demonstrating high levels of consistency in patients for smart biomaterials that comprise a blend of biologics, medication, or tissue components, each with its own specific regulatory process. Using smart materials in tissue engineering, the 3D printing of organs may become more stable and simpler, while also better integrated with the patient's own tissue, which can help prevent rejection and inflammation in the patient. To enhance biomaterial design, computational and machine learning technologies may be used to better anticipate the interactions with physiological components such as serum proteins, cell membranes, and cellular receptors, which have a significant influence.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was partially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (81171731, 31971251). Project of Chengdu Science and Technology Bureau (2021-YF05-01619-SN). Sichuan University Panzhihua science and technology cooperation project (2021CDPZH-4). Science and Technology Project of Tibet Autonomous Region (XZ201901-GB-08), and the 1·3·5 Project for Disciplines of Excellence, West China Hospital, Sichuan University (ZYJC21026, ZYGD21001, ZYJC21077).
References
B. A. Aguado, 
            et al., Engineering precision biomaterials for personalized medicine, Sci. Transl. Med., 2018, 10(424), 1–7,  DOI:10.1126/scitranslmed.aam8645 .
J. C. Kaczmarek, P. S. Kowalski and D. G. Anderson, Advances in the delivery of RNA therapeutics: from concept to clinical reality., Genome Med., 2017, 9(1), 60 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. S. Zhang and A. Khademhosseini, Advances in engineering hydrogels, Science, 2017, 356(6337), 1–27,  DOI:10.1126/science.aaf3627 .
C. Laurencin, Y. Khan and S. F. El-Amin, Bone graft substitutes, Expert Rev. Med. Devices, 2006, 3(1), 49–57 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, 
            et al., Correction: 3D Bioprinting Technologies for Hard Tissue and Organ Engineering, Materials, 2016, 9, 802 CrossRef PubMed  . Materials (Basel), 2016. 9(11).
J. O. B. Fergal, Biomaterials & scaffolds for tissue engineering, Mater. Today, 2011, 14(3), 88–95 CrossRef .
T. T. Nyame, 
            et al., Tissue-Engineered Skin Substitutes, Plast. Reconstr. Surg., 2015, 136(6), 1379–1388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. D. Mogoşanu and A. M. Grumezescu, Natural and synthetic polymers for wounds and burns dressing, Int. J. Pharm., 2014, 463(2), 127–136 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Pham, 
            et al., Bioengineered skin substitutes for the management of burns: a systematic review, Burns, 2007, 33(8), 946–957 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Ahmadi-Aghkand, 
            et al., Recent prospective of nanofiber scaffolds fabrication approaches for skin regeneration, Artif. Cells, Nanomed., Biotechnol., 2016, 44(7), 1635–1641 CrossRef CAS .
L. Alrubaiy and K. K. Al-Rubaiy, Skin substitutes: a brief review of types and clinical applications, Oman Med. J., 2009, 24(1), 4–6 Search PubMed .
A. W. Chua, 
            et al., Skin tissue engineering advances in severe burns: review and therapeutic applications, Burns Trauma, 2016, 4, 3 Search PubMed .
R. E. Horch, 
            et al., Tissue engineering of cultured skin substitutes, J. Cell. Mol. Med., 2005, 9(3), 592–608 CrossRef PubMed .
M. N. Nicholas, M. G. Jeschke and S. Amini-Nik, Methodologies in creating skin substitutes, Cell. Mol. Life Sci., 2016, 73(18), 3453–3472 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. N. Alaribe, S. L. Manoto and S. C. Motaung, Scaffolds from biomaterials: advantages and limitations in bone and tissue engineering, Biologia, 2016, 71(4), 353–366 CrossRef .
H. Toyokawa, 
            et al., Promotive effects of far-infrared ray on full-thickness skin wound healing in rats, Exp. Biol. Med., 2003, 228(6), 724–729 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Duke, 
            et al., Hybrid electro-optical stimulation of the rat sciatic nerve induces force generation in the plantarflexor muscles, J. Neural. Eng., 2012, 9(6), 066006 CrossRef PubMed .
A. S. Gkogkos, 
            et al., Effect of Nd:YAG Low Level Laser Therapy on Human Gingival Fibroblasts, Int. J. Dent., 2015, 2015, 258941 Search PubMed .
Y. Y. Huang, 
            et al., Biphasic dose response in low level light therapy – an update, Dose-Response, 2011, 9(4), 602–618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Hamblin, 
            et al., Low level laser (light) therapy and photobiomodulation: the path forward. in Mechanisms for Low-Light Therapy X, Int. Soc. Optics Photonics, 2015, 1–11,  DOI:10.1117/12.2084049 .
E. Rodriguez-Santana, 
            et al., Photo-infrared pulsed biomodulation in age-related macular degeneration associated to neurological disease: one interventional case report and mini-review, J. Chin. Clin. Med., 2008, 3, 470–477 Search PubMed .
J. Wells, 
            et al., Biophysical mechanisms of transient optical stimulation of peripheral nerve, Biophys. J., 2007, 93(7), 2567–2580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Wells, 
            et al., Optically mediated nerve stimulation: Identification of injury thresholds, Lasers Surg. Med., 2007, 39(6), 513–526 CrossRef PubMed .
M. F. Meek and J. H. Coert, US Food and Drug Administration/Conformit Europe-approved absorbable nerve conduits for clinical repair of peripheral and cranial nerves, Ann. Plast. Surg., 2008, 60(4), 466–472 CAS .
G. Lundborg, A 25 year perspective of peripheral nerve surgery: evolving neuroscientific concepts and clinical significance, J. Hand Surg. Am., 2000, 25(3), 391–414 CrossRef CAS .
D. Angius, 
            et al., A systematic review of animal models used to study nerve regeneration in tissue-engineered scaffolds, Biomaterials, 2012, 33(32), 8034–8039 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kornfeld, P. M. Vogt and C. Radtke, Nerve grafting for peripheral nerve injuries with extended defect sizes, Wien. Med. Wochenschr., 2019, 169(9-10), 240–251 CrossRef .
J. M. Cregg, 
            et al., Functional regeneration beyond the glial scar, Exp. Neurol., 2014, 253, 197–207 CrossRef .
H. M. Geller and J. W. Fawcett, Building a bridge: engineering spinal cord repair, Exp. Neurol., 2002, 174(2), 125–136 CrossRef .
X. Gu, 
            et al., Construction of tissue engineered nerve grafts and their application in peripheral nerve regeneration, Prog. Neurobiol., 2011, 93(2), 204–230 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. Han and S. H. Hsu, Using 3D bioprinting to produce mini-brain, Neural Regener. Res., 2017, 12(10), 1595–1596 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Marsell and T. A. Einhorn, The biology of fracture healing, Injury, 2011, 42(6), 551–555 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Szpalski and R. Gunzburg, Applications of calcium phosphate-based cancellous bone void fillers in trauma surgery, Orthopedics, 2002, 25(Suppl. 5), s601–s609 Search PubMed .
P. V. Giannoudis, H. Dinopoulos and E. Tsiridis, Bone substitutes: an update, Injury, 2005, 36(Suppl. 3), S20–S27 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Fielding and S. Bose, SiO2 and ZnO dopants in three-dimensionally printed tricalcium phosphate bone tissue engineering scaffolds enhance osteogenesis and angiogenesis in vivo, Acta Biomater., 2013, 9(11), 9137–9148 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wen, 
            et al., 3D printed porous ceramic scaffolds for bone tissue engineering: a review, Biomater. Sci., 2017, 5(9), 1690–1698 RSC .
M. Vallet-Regí, C. V. Ragel and A. J. Salinas, Glasses with Medical Applications, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2003,(6), 1029–1042 CrossRef .
I. Izquierdo-Barba, A. J. Salinas and M. Vallet-Regí, Bioactive Glasses: From Macro to Nano, Int. J. Appl. Glass Sci., 2013, 4(2), 149–161 CrossRef CAS .
P. H. K. E. Ducheyne, Compr. Biomater. I, 2011, 1, 1–577,  DOI:10.1016/j.nima.2007.11.020 .
M. T. Islam, 
            et al., Bioactive calcium phosphate-based glasses and ceramics and their biomedical applications: a review, J. Tissue Eng., 2017, 8, 2041731417719170 Search PubMed .
S. C. Liou, 
            et al., Structural characterization of nano-sized calcium deficient apatite powders, Biomaterials, 2004, 25(2), 189–196 CrossRef CAS .
C. Capuccini, 
            et al., Strontium-substituted hydroxyapatite coatings synthesized by pulsed-laser deposition: in vitro osteoblast and osteoclast response, Acta Biomater., 2008, 4(6), 1885–1893 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Boanini, M. Gazzano and A. Bigi, Ionic substitutions in calcium phosphates synthesized at low temperature, Acta Biomater., 2010, 6(6), 1882–1894 CrossRef CAS .
A. Tampieri, 
            et al., Intrinsic magnetism and hyperthermia in bioactive Fe-doped hydroxyapatite, Acta Biomater., 2012, 8(2), 843–851 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Zofková, P. Nemcikova and P. Matucha, Trace elements and bone health, Clin. Chem. Lab. Med., 2013, 51(8), 1555–1561 CrossRef .
J. Shepherd and S. Best, Calcium phosphate scaffolds for bone repair, JOM, 2011, 63(4), 83–92 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sadat-Shojai, 
            et al., Synthesis methods for nanosized hydroxyapatite with diverse structures, Acta Biomater., 2013, 9(8), 7591–7621 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Vahabzadeh and S. Bose, Effects of Iron on Physical and Mechanical Properties, and Osteoblast Cell Interaction in β-Tricalcium Phosphate, Ann. Biomed. Eng., 2017, 45(3), 819–828 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Sergi, 
            et al., Bioactive Zn-doped hydroxyapatite coatings and their antibacterial efficacy against Escherichia coli and Staphylococcus aureus, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2018, 352, 84–91 CrossRef CAS .
X. Miao, 
            et al., Preparation and characterization of interpenetrating
phased TCP/HA/PLGA composites, Mater. Lett., 2005, 59(29–30), 4000–4005 CrossRef CAS .
A. Tampieri, 
            et al., HA/alginate hybrid composites prepared through bio-inspired nucleation, Acta Biomater., 2005, 1(3), 343–351 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. W. Kim, J. H. Song and H. E. Kim, Nanofiber generation of gelatin–hydroxyapatite biomimetics for guided tissue regeneration, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15(12), 1988–1994 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Heo, 
            et al., Fabrication and characterization of novel nano- and micro-HA/PCL composite scaffolds using a modified rapid prototyping process, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part A, 2009, 89(1), 108–116 Search PubMed .
D. Lauritano, 
            et al., Nanomaterials for Periodontal Tissue Engineering: Chitosan-Based Scaffolds. A Systematic Review, Nanomaterials, 2020, 10(4), 605 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Bernstein, 
            et al., Low Temperature Fabrication of β - TCP–PCL Nanocomposites for Bone Implants, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2010, 12(8), B341–B347 CrossRef .
F. Cruz, Fabrication of HA/PLLA composite scaffolds for bone tissue engineering using additive manufacturing technologies, Biopolymers, 2010, 11, 227–242 Search PubMed .
S. Bhumiratana, 
            et al., Nucleation and growth of mineralized bone matrix on silk-hydroxyapatite composite scaffolds, Biomaterials, 2011, 32(11), 2812–2820 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, 
            et al., Improved Cell Adhesion and Osteogenesis of op-HA/PLGA Composite by Poly(dopamine)-Assisted Immobilization of Collagen Mimetic Peptide and Osteogenic Growth Peptide, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8(40), 26559–26569 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhu, 
            et al., Repair of rabbit cartilage defect based on the fusion of rabbit bone marrow stromal cells and Nano-HA/PLLA composite material, Artif. Cells, Nanomed., Biotechnol., 2017, 45(1), 115–119 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Bian, 
            et al., The construction and performance of multi-level hierarchical hydroxyapatite (HA)/collagen composite implant based on biomimetic bone Haversian motif, Mater. Des., 2019, 162, 60–69 CrossRef CAS .
A. Tampieri, 
            et al., Synthetic biomineralisation yielding HA/collagen hybrid composite, Adv. Appl. Ceram., 2008, 107(5), 298–302 CrossRef CAS .
A. Tampieri, 
            et al., Mimicking natural bio-mineralization processes: a new tool for osteochondral scaffold development, Trends Biotechnol., 2011, 29(10), 526–535 CrossRef CAS .
S. Minardi, 
            et al., Evaluation of the osteoinductive potential of a bio-inspired scaffold mimicking the osteogenic niche for bone augmentation, Biomaterials, 2015, 62, 128–137 CrossRef CAS .
S. Minardi, 
            et al., Biomimetic hydroxyapatite/collagen composite drives bone niche recapitulation in a rabbit orthotopic model, Mater Today Bio, 2019, 2, 100005 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Chen, 
            et al., Boning up on Wolff's Law: mechanical regulation of the cells that make and maintain bone, J. Biomech., 2010, 43(1), 108–118 CrossRef PubMed .
R. A. Perez, 
            et al., Therapeutically relevant aspects in bone repair and regeneration, Mater. Today, 2015, 18(10), 573–589 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ribeiro, 
            et al., Piezoelectric polymers as biomaterials for tissue engineering applications, Colloids Surf., B, 2015, 136, 46–55 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, 
            et al., Nanocomposite membranes enhance bone regeneration through restoring physiological electric microenvironment, ACS Nano, 2016, 10(8), 7279–7286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. D. McCaig, 
            et al., Controlling cell behavior electrically: current views and future potential, Physiol. Rev., 2005, 85(3), 943–978 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Balint, N. J. Cassidy and S. H. Cartmell, Electrical stimulation: a novel tool for tissue engineering, Tissue Eng., Part B, 2013, 19(1), 48–57 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Kang, 
            et al., Combined effect of three types of biophysical stimuli for bone regeneration, Tissue Eng., Part A, 2014, 20(11-12), 1767–1777 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Reid and M. Zhao, The electrical response to injury: molecular mechanisms and wound healing, Adv. Wound Care, 2014, 3(2), 184–201 CrossRef PubMed .
R. H. Funk, Endogenous electric fields as guiding cue for cell migration, Front. Physiol., 2015, 6, 143 Search PubMed .
M. D. Maeder, D. Damjanovic and N. Setter, Lead free piezoelectric materials, J. Electroceram., 2004, 13(1), 385–392 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Boccaccini and J. J. Blaker, Bioactive composite materials
for tissue engineering scaffolds, Exp. Rev. Med. Dev., 2005, 2(3), 303–317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Opoku, 
            et al., Fabrication of ZnO nanowire based piezoelectric generators and related structures, Phys. Proc., 2015, 70, 858–862 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bramhill, S. Ross and G. Ross, Bioactive Nanocomposites for Tissue Repair and Regeneration: A Review, Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health, 2017, 14(1), 1–21,  DOI:10.3390/ijerph14010066 .
S. M. Damaraju, 
            et al., Three-dimensional piezoelectric fibrous scaffolds selectively promote mesenchymal stem cell differentiation, Biomaterials, 2017, 149, 51–62 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Fernandes, 
            et al., Reinforcement of poly-L-lactic acid electrospun membranes with strontium borosilicate bioactive glasses for bone tissue engineering, Acta Biomater., 2016, 44, 168–177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, 
            et al., Boron nitride nanotube-enhanced osteogenic differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part B, 2016, 104(2), 323–329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Panda and B. Sahoo, PZT to lead free piezo ceramics: a review, Ferroelectrics, 2015, 474(1), 128–143 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ribeiro, 
            et al., In vivo demonstration of the suitability of piezoelectric stimuli for bone reparation, Mater. Lett., 2017, 209, 118–121 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rocca, 
            et al., Barium titanate nanoparticles and hypergravity stimulation improve differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells into osteoblasts, Int. J. Nanomed., 2015, 10, 433–445 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Tajbakhsh and F. Hajiali, A comprehensive study on the fabrication and properties of biocomposites of poly(lactic acid)/ceramics for bone tissue engineering, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2017, 70, 897–912 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ehterami, 
            et al., Fabrication and characterization of highly porous barium titanate based scaffold coated by Gel/HA nanocomposite with high piezoelectric coefficient for bone tissue engineering applications, J. Mech. Behav. Biomed. Mater., 2018, 79, 195–202 CrossRef CAS .
F. C. Kao, 
            et al., The application of nanogenerators and piezoelectricity in osteogenesis, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2019, 20(1), 1103–1117 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Kim, 
            et al., Graphene-biomineral hybrid materials, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23(17), 2009–2014 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Otero, J. Martinez and J. Arias-Pardilla, Biomimetic electrochemistry from conducting polymers. A review: artificial muscles, smart membranes, smart drug delivery and computer/neuron interfaces, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 84, 112–128 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bitounis, 
            et al., Prospects and challenges of graphene in biomedical applications, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25(16), 2258–2268 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liu, 
            et al., Increased proliferation and differentiation of pre-osteoblasts MC3T3-E1 cells on nanostructured polypyrrole membrane under combined electrical and mechanical stimulation, J. Biomed. Nanotechnol., 2013, 9(9), 1532–1539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Nurunnabi, 
            et al., Bioapplication of graphene oxide derivatives: drug/gene delivery, imaging, polymeric modification, toxicology, therapeutics and challenges, RSC Adv., 2015, 5(52), 42141–42161 RSC .
S. Sridhar, 
            et al., Cardiogenic differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells with gold nanoparticle loaded functionalized nanofibers, Colloids Surf., B, 2015, 134, 346–354 CrossRef CAS .
K. Assaf, 
            et al., Sciatic nerve repair using poly(ε-caprolactone) tubular prosthesis associated with nanoparticles of carbon and graphene, Brain Behav., 2017, 7(8), e00755 CrossRef PubMed .
J.-W. Kim, 
            et al., The effect of reduced graphene oxide-coated biphasic calcium phosphate bone graft material on osteogenesis, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2017, 18(8), 1725 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Silva, 
            et al., PDLLA honeycomb-like scaffolds with a high loading of superhydrophilic graphene/multi-walled carbon nanotubes promote osteoblast in vitro functions and guided in vivo bone regeneration, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2017, 73, 31–39 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, 
            et al., A 3D graphene coated bioglass scaffold for bone defect therapy based on the molecular targeting approach, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5(33), 6794–6800 RSC .
T. Zhou, 
            et al., Electrospun Poly(3-hydroxybutyrate-co-4-hydroxybutyrate)/Graphene Oxide Scaffold: Enhanced Properties and Promoted in Vivo Bone Repair in Rats, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9(49), 42589–42600 CrossRef CAS .
E. W. C. Chan, 
            et al., Electrospun Polythiophene Phenylenes for Tissue Engineering, Biomacromolecules, 2018, 19(5), 1456–1468 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cheng, Q. Wan and X. Pei, Graphene Family Materials in Bone Tissue Regeneration: Perspectives and Challenges, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2018, 13(1), 289 CrossRef PubMed .
Ö. Lalegül-Ülker, A. E. Elçin and Y. M. Elçin, Intrinsically Conductive Polymer Nanocomposites for Cellular Applications, Adv. Exp. Med. Biol., 2018, 1078, 135–153 CrossRef PubMed .
T. R. Pisanic, 2nd, 
            et al., Nanotoxicity of iron oxide nanoparticle internalization in growing neurons, Biomaterials, 2007, 28(16), 2572–2581 CrossRef .
U. O. Häfeli, 
            et al., Cell Uptake and in Vitro Toxicity of Magnetic Nanoparticles Suitable for Drug Delivery, Mol. Pharmaceutics, 2009, 6(5), 1417–1428 CrossRef PubMed .
D. M. Huang, 
            et al., The promotion of human mesenchymal stem cell proliferation by superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles, Biomaterials, 2009, 30(22), 3645–3651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Bock, 
            et al., A novel route in bone tissue engineering: magnetic biomimetic scaffolds, Acta Biomater., 2010, 6(3), 786–796 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wu, 
            et al., Toxic effects of iron oxide nanoparticles on human umbilical vein endothelial cells, Int. J. Nanomed., 2010, 5, 385–399 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, 
            et al., A novel calcium phosphate ceramic-magnetic nanoparticle composite as a potential bone substitute, Biomed. Mater., 2010, 5(1), 15001 CrossRef .
Y. Wei, 
            et al., Magnetic biodegradable Fe3O4/CS/PVA nanofibrous membranes for bone regeneration, Biomed. Mater., 2011, 6(5), 055008 CrossRef PubMed .
M. T. Zhu, 
            et al., Endothelial dysfunction and inflammation induced by iron oxide nanoparticle exposure: risk factors for early atherosclerosis, Toxicol. Lett., 2011, 203(2), 162–171 CrossRef CAS .
S. Panseri, 
            et al., Intrinsically superparamagnetic Fe-hydroxyapatite nanoparticles positively influence osteoblast-like cell behaviour, J. Nanobiotechnol., 2012, 10, 32 CrossRef CAS .
S. Alarifi, 
            et al., Iron oxide nanoparticles induce oxidative stress, DNA damage, and caspase activation in the human breast cancer cell line, Biol. Trace Elem. Res., 2014, 159(1), 416–424 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Singh, 
            et al., Potential of magnetic nanofiber scaffolds with mechanical and biological properties applicable for bone regeneration, PLoS One, 2014, 9(4), e91584 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Shen, 
            et al., Iron-induced myocardial injury: an alarming side effect of superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles, J. Cell. Mol. Med., 2015, 19(8), 2032–2035 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, 
            et al., Boron nitride nanotube-enhanced osteogenic differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part B, 2016, 104(2), 323–329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ribeiro, 
            et al., Proving the suitability of magnetoelectric stimuli for tissue engineering applications, Colloids Surf., B, 2016, 140, 430–436 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. M. Yun, 
            et al., Magnetic nanocomposite scaffolds combined with static magnetic field in the stimulation of osteoblastic differentiation and bone formation, Biomaterials, 2016, 85, 88–98 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Chen, J. Roether and A. Boccaccini, Tissue engineering scaffolds from bioactive glass and composite materials, Top. Tissue Eng., 2008, 4(6), 1–27 Search PubMed .
H. S. Gupta, 
            et al., Nanoscale deformation mechanisms in bone, Nano Lett., 2005, 5(10), 2108–2111 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bose and S. Tarafder, Calcium phosphate ceramic systems in growth factor and drug delivery for bone tissue engineering: a review, Acta Biomater., 2012, 8(4), 1401–1421 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Dong, 
            et al., Understanding adsorption-desorption dynamics of BMP-2 on hydroxyapatite (001) surface, Biophys. J., 2007, 93(3), 750–759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Habraken, J. G. Wolke and J. A. Jansen, Ceramic composites as matrices and scaffolds for drug delivery in tissue engineering, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2007, 59(4-5), 234–248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Z. LeGeros, Calcium phosphate-based osteoinductive materials, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108(11), 4742–4753 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Matsumoto, 
            et al., Hydroxyapatite particles as a controlled release carrier of protein, Biomaterials, 2004, 25(17), 3807–3812 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xie, 
            et al., Hydroxyapatite nanoparticles as a controlled-release carrier of BMP-2: absorption and release kinetics in vitro, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Med., 2010, 21(6), 1875–1880 CrossRef CAS .

          H. Yuan, THE DISTILLERY, 2010.
B. J. Jeon, 
            et al., Fabrication of porous PLGA microspheres with BMP-2 releasing polyphosphate-functionalized nano-hydroxyapatite for enhanced bone regeneration, Macromol. Res., 2012, 20(7), 715–724 CrossRef CAS .
R. Fan, 
            et al., Injectable thermosensitive hydrogel composite with surface-functionalized calcium phosphate as raw materials, Int. J. Nanomed., 2014, 9, 615–626 Search PubMed .
G. Fielding and S. Bose, SiO2 and ZnO dopants in 3D printed TCP scaffolds enhances osteogenesis and angiogenesis in vivo, Acta Biomater., 2013, 9, 11 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Cui, 
            et al., Sustained Delivery of BMP-2-Related Peptide from the True Bone Ceramics/Hollow Mesoporous Silica Nanoparticles Scaffold for Bone Tissue Regeneration, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng., 2018, 4(1), 211–221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hu, 
            et al., TiO2 nanotubes as drug nanoreservoirs for the regulation of mobility and differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells, Acta Biomater., 2012, 8(1), 439–448 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Huang, 
            et al., Surface modified titania nanotubes containing anti-bacterial drugs for controlled delivery nanosystems with high bioactivity, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2014, 2(48), 8616–8625 RSC .
D. H. Kwon, 
            et al., Bone tissue response following local drug delivery of bisphosphonate through titanium oxide nanotube implants in a rabbit model, J. Clin. Periodontol., 2017, 44(9), 941–949 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Lai, 
            et al., Surface functionalization of TiO2 nanotubes with bone morphogenetic protein 2 and its synergistic effect on the differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells, Biomacromolecules, 2011, 12(4), 1097–1105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Lallana, 
            et al., Click chemistry for drug delivery nanosystems, Pharm. Res., 2012, 29(1), 1–34 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liu, R. Bhatia and T. J. Webster, Atomic layer deposition of nano-TiO(2) thin films with enhanced biocompatibility and antimicrobial activity for orthopedic implants, Int. J. Nanomed., 2017, 12, 8711–8723 CrossRef CAS .
A. Magrez, 
            et al., Cellular toxicity of TiO2-based nanofilaments, ACS Nano, 2009, 3(8), 2274–2280 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Oh, 
            et al., Growth of nano-scale hydroxyapatite using chemically treated titanium oxide nanotubes, Biomaterials, 2005, 26(24), 4938–4943 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. V. Portan, 
            et al., On the biocompatibility between TiO2 nanotubes layer and human osteoblasts, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part A, 2012, 100(10), 2546–2553 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Raja, M. Misra and K. Paramguru, Deposition of calcium phosphate coating on nanotubular anodized titanium, Mater. Lett., 2005, 59(17), 2137–2141 CrossRef CAS .
M. I. Setyawati, 
            et al., Cytotoxic and genotoxic characterization of titanium dioxide, gadolinium oxide, and poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) nanoparticles in human fibroblasts, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part A, 2013, 101A(3), 633–640 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Shadjou and M. Hasanzadeh, Bone tissue engineering using silica-based mesoporous nanobiomaterials: recent progress, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2015, 55, 401–409 CrossRef CAS .
F. Tang, L. Li and D. Chen, Mesoporous silica nanoparticles: synthesis, biocompatibility and drug delivery, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24(12), 1504–1534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tang, 
            et al., Layer-by-layer assembly of silica nanoparticles on 3D fibrous scaffolds: enhancement of osteoblast cell adhesion, proliferation, and differentiation, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part A, 2014, 102(11), 3803–3812 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhou, 
            et al., BMP-2 Derived Peptide and Dexamethasone Incorporated Mesoporous Silica Nanoparticles for Enhanced Osteogenic Differentiation of Bone Mesenchymal Stem Cells, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7(29), 15777–15789 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. Alcantar, E. S. Aydil and J. N. Israelachvili, Polyethylene glycol–coated biocompatible surfaces, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., 2000, 51(3), 343–351 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Anderson and M. S. Shive, Biodegradation and biocompatibility of PLA and PLGA microspheres, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 1997, 28(1), 5–24 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jacob, 
            et al., Biopolymer based nanomaterials in drug delivery systems: a review, Mater. Today Chem., 2018, 9, 43–55 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Lü, 
            et al., Current advances in research and clinical applications of PLGA-based nanotechnology, Expert Rev. Mol. Diagn., 2009, 9(4), 325–341 CrossRef PubMed .
H. K. Makadia and S. J. Siegel, Poly Lactic-co-Glycolic Acid (PLGA) as Biodegradable Controlled Drug Delivery Carrier, Polymers, 2011, 3(3), 1377–1397 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Puppi, 
            et al., Polymeric materials for bone and cartilage repair, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2010, 35(4), 403–440 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Aframian, 
            et al., Tissue compatibility of two biodegradable tubular scaffolds implanted adjacent to skin or buccal mucosa in mice, Tissue Eng., 2002, 8(4), 649–659 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Amjadian, 
            et al., The synergistic effect of nano-hydroxyapatite and dexamethasone in the fibrous delivery system of gelatin and poly(L-lactide) on the osteogenesis of mesenchymal stem cells, Int. J. Pharm., 2016, 507(1–2), 1–11 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cai, 
            et al., Multifunctional nano-hydroxyapatite and alginate/gelatin based sticky gel composites for potential bone regeneration, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2016, 181, 227–233 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ding, 
            et al., Silk-Hydroxyapatite Nanoscale Scaffolds with Programmable Growth Factor Delivery for Bone Repair, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8(37), 24463–24470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Farokhi, 
            et al., Bio-hybrid silk fibroin/calcium phosphate/PLGA nanocomposite scaffold to control the delivery of vascular endothelial growth factor, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2014, 35, 401–410 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Friess, Collagen-biomaterial for drug delivery, Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm., 1998, 45(2), 113–136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. He, 
            et al., Improved cellularization and angiogenesis using collagen scaffolds chemically conjugated with vascular endothelial growth factor, Acta Biomater., 2011, 7(3), 1084–1093 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. B. Malafaya, G. A. Silva and R. L. Reis, Natural-origin polymers as carriers and scaffolds for biomolecules and cell delivery in tissue engineering applications, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2007, 59(4-5), 207–233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Niu, 
            et al., Porous nano-HA/collagen/PLLA scaffold containing chitosan microspheres for controlled delivery of synthetic peptide derived from BMP-2, J. Controlled Release, 2009, 134(2), 111–117 CrossRef CAS .
P. N. Oliveira, 
            et al., Self-crosslinked fibrous collagen/chitosan blends: processing, properties evaluation and monitoring of degradation by bi-fluorescence imaging, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2019, 131, 353–367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Shen, 
            et al., Sequential and sustained release of SDF-1 and BMP-2 from silk fibroin-nanohydroxyapatite scaffold for the enhancement of bone regeneration, Biomaterials, 2016, 106, 205–216 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. N. Vo, F. K. Kasper and A. G. Mikos, Strategies for controlled delivery of growth factors and cells for bone regeneration, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2012, 64(12), 1292–1309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Fan, 
            et al., Mesoporous silicon–PLGA composite microspheres for the double controlled release of biomolecules for orthopedic tissue engineering, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22(2), 282–293 CrossRef CAS .
B. S. Kim, S. S. Yang and C. S. Kim, Incorporation of BMP-2 nanoparticles on the surface of a 3D-printed hydroxyapatite scaffold using an ε-polycaprolactone polymer emulsion coating method for bone tissue engineering, Colloids Surf., B, 2018, 170, 421–429 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Li, 
            et al., Electrospun silk-BMP-2 scaffolds for bone tissue engineering, Biomaterials, 2006, 27(16), 3115–3124 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, 
            et al., Segmental bone regeneration using an rhBMP-2-loaded gelatin/nanohydroxyapatite/fibrin scaffold in a rabbit model, Biomaterials, 2009, 30(31), 6276–6285 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Minardi, 
            et al., Biocompatible PLGA-Mesoporous Silicon Microspheres for the Controlled Release of BMP-2 for Bone Augmentation, Pharmaceutics, 2020, 12(2), 1–11,  DOI:10.3390/pharmaceutics12020118 .
B. T. Reves, 
            et al., Osteoinductivity Assessment of BMP-2 Loaded Composite Chitosan-Nano-Hydroxyapatite Scaffolds in a Rat Muscle Pouch, Materials, 2011, 4(8), 1360–1374 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. K. Singh, 
            et al., Mesoporous silica-layered biopolymer hybrid nanofibrous scaffold: a novel nanobiomatrix platform for therapeutics delivery and bone regeneration, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7(15), 8088–8098 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, 
            et al., Nanoparticle-modified chitosan-agarose-gelatin scaffold for sustained release of SDF-1 and BMP-2, Int. J. Nanomed., 2018, 13, 7395–7408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, 
            et al., Porous nanofibrous scaffold incorporated with S1P loaded mesoporous silica nanoparticles and BMP-2 encapsulated PLGA microspheres for enhancing angiogenesis and osteogenesis, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2018, 6(42), 6731–6743 RSC .
U. G. Wegst, 
            et al., Bioinspired structural materials, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14(1), 23–36 CrossRef CAS .
K. Alvarez and H. Nakajima, Metallic Scaffolds for Bone Regeneration, Materials, 2009, 2(3), 790–832 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bose, M. Roy and A. Bandyopadhyay, Recent advances in bone tissue engineering scaffolds, Trends Biotechnol., 2012, 30(10), 546–554 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Jonitz, 
            et al., Oxygen consumption, acidification and migration capacity of human primary osteoblasts within a three-dimensional tantalum scaffold, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Med., 2011, 22(9), 2089–2095 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. Shimko, 
            et al., Effect of porosity on the fluid flow characteristics and mechanical properties of tantalum scaffolds, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part B, 2005, 73(2), 315–324 CrossRef PubMed .
K. F. Farraro, 
            et al., Revolutionizing orthopaedic biomaterials: the potential of biodegradable and bioresorbable magnesium-based materials for functional tissue engineering, J. Biomech., 2014, 47(9), 1979–1986 CrossRef .
K. J. Kim, 
            et al., Magnesium ions enhance infiltration of osteoblasts in scaffolds via increasing cell motility, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Med., 2017, 28(6), 96 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Li, 
            et al., Additively manufactured biodegradable porous magnesium, Acta Biomater., 2018, 67, 378–392 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Liu, 
            et al., An animal experimental study of porous magnesium scaffold degradation and osteogenesis, Braz. J. Med. Biol. Res., 2014, 47(8), 715–720 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Nabiyouni, 
            et al., Magnesium-based bioceramics in orthopedic applications, Acta Biomater., 2018, 66, 23–43 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yazdimamaghani, 
            et al., Porous magnesium-based scaffolds for tissue engineering, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2017, 71, 1253–1266 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yazdimamaghani, 
            et al., Surface modification of biodegradable porous Mg bone scaffold using polycaprolactone/bioactive glass composite, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2015, 49, 436–444 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, 
            et al., Mechanical properties and biocompatibility of porous titanium scaffolds for bone tissue engineering, J. Mech. Behav. Biomed. Mater., 2017, 75, 169–174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Haugen, 
            et al., Porous ceramic titanium dioxide scaffolds promote bone formation in rabbit peri-implant cortical defect model, Acta Biomater., 2013, 9(2), 5390–5399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Kim, 
            et al., Osteoinductive silk fibroin/titanium dioxide/hydroxyapatite hybrid scaffold for bone tissue engineering, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2016, 82, 160–167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, 
            et al., Porous Nb–Ti–Ta alloy scaffolds for bone tissue engineering: fabrication, mechanical properties and in vitro/vivo biocompatibility, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2017, 78, 503–512 CrossRef CAS .
T. Takizawa, 
            et al., Titanium Fiber Plates for Bone Tissue Repair, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30(4), 1–11,  DOI:10.1002/adma.201703608 .
I. Gotman, 
            et al., Mesenchymal stem cell proliferation and differentiation on load-bearing trabecular Nitinol scaffolds, Acta Biomater., 2013, 9(9), 8440–8448 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Habijan, 
            et al., The biocompatibility of dense and porous Nickel-Titanium produced by selective laser melting, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2013, 33(1), 419–426 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Hoffmann, 
            et al., Rapid prototyped porous nickel-titanium scaffolds as bone substitutes, J. Tissue Eng., 2014, 5, 2041731414540674 Search PubMed .
S. Strauss, 
            et al., Adhesion, vitality and osteogenic differentiation capacity of adipose derived stem cells seeded on nitinol nanoparticle coatings, PLoS One, 2013, 8(1), e53309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Elango, 
            et al., Rheological, biocompatibility and osteogenesis assessment of fish collagen scaffold for bone tissue engineering, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2016, 91, 51–59 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee and G. Kim, Three-Dimensional Hierarchical Nanofibrous Collagen Scaffold Fabricated Using Fibrillated Collagen and Pluronic F-127 for Regenerating Bone Tissue, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10(42), 35801–35811 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, 
            et al., Synergistic intrafibrillar/extrafibrillar mineralization of collagen scaffolds based on a biomimetic strategy to promote the regeneration of bone defects, Int. J. Nanomed., 2016, 11, 2053–2067 CAS .
T. Mazaki, 
            et al., A novel, visible light-induced, rapidly cross-linkable gelatin scaffold for osteochondral tissue engineering, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 4457 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Shi, 
            et al., Structurally and Functionally Optimized Silk-Fibroin-Gelatin Scaffold Using 3D Printing to Repair Cartilage Injury In Vitro and In Vivo, Adv.
Mater., 2017, 29(29), 1–7,  DOI:10.1002/adma.201701089 .
Y. Xia, 
            et al., Bone tissue engineering using bone marrow stromal cells and an injectable sodium alginate/gelatin scaffold, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part A, 2012, 100(4), 1044–1050 CrossRef PubMed .
D. H. Lee, 
            et al., Enhanced osteogenesis of β-tricalcium phosphate reinforced silk fibroin scaffold for bone tissue biofabrication, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2017, 95, 14–23 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Melke, 
            et al., Silk fibroin as biomaterial for bone tissue engineering, Acta Biomater., 2016, 31, 1–16 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gokila, 
            et al., Development of 3D scaffolds using nanochitosan/silk-fibroin/hyaluronic acid biomaterials for tissue engineering applications, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2018, 120(Pt A), 876–885,  DOI:10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2018.08.149 .
S. Preethi Soundarya, 
            et al., Bone tissue engineering: Scaffold preparation using chitosan and other biomaterials with different design and fabrication techniques, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2018, 119, 1228–1239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. M. Kolambkar, 
            et al., An alginate-based hybrid system for growth factor delivery in the functional repair of large bone defects, Biomaterials, 2011, 32(1), 65–74 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Sun and H. Tan, Alginate-Based Biomaterials for Regenerative Medicine Applications, Materials, 2013, 6(4), 1285–1309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Venkatesan, 
            et al., Alginate composites for bone tissue engineering: a review, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2015, 72, 269–281 CrossRef CAS .
N. Cui, 
            et al., Hyaluronic acid hydrogel scaffolds with a triple degradation behavior for bone tissue engineering, Carbohydr. Polym., 2015, 126, 192–198 CrossRef CAS .
C. Manferdini, 
            et al., Mineralization behavior with mesenchymal stromal cells in a biomimetic hyaluronic acid-based scaffold, Biomaterials, 2010, 31(14), 3986–3996 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Patterson, 
            et al., Hyaluronic acid hydrogels with controlled degradation properties for oriented bone regeneration, Biomaterials, 2010, 31(26), 6772–6781 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. D. Prè, G. Conti and A. Sbarbati, Hyaluronic Acid (HA) Scaffolds and Multipotent Stromal Cells (MSCs) in Regenerative Medicine, Stem Cell Rev. Rep., 2016, 12(6), 664–681 CrossRef .
Y. Boukari, 
            et al., A dual-application poly(DL-lactic-co-glycolic) acid (PLGA)-chitosan composite scaffold for potential use in bone tissue engineering, J. Biomater. Sci., Polym. Ed., 2017, 28(16), 1966–1983 CrossRef CAS .
W. Shao, 
            et al., Enhanced bone formation in electrospun poly(L-lactic-co-glycolic acid)-tussah silk fibroin ultrafine nanofiber scaffolds incorporated with graphene oxide, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2016, 62, 823–834 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Zaky, 
            et al., Poly(glycerol sebacate) elastomer supports bone regeneration by its mechanical properties being closer to osteoid tissue rather than to mature bone, Acta Biomater., 2017, 54, 95–106 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Ahn, H. J. Lee and G. H. Kim, Polycaprolactone scaffolds fabricated with an advanced electrohydrodynamic direct-printing method for bone tissue regeneration, Biomacromolecules, 2011, 12(12), 4256–4263 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Gorodzha, 
            et al., A comparison study between electrospun polycaprolactone and piezoelectric poly(3-hydroxybutyrate-co-3-hydroxyvalerate) scaffolds for bone tissue engineering, Colloids Surf., B, 2017, 160, 48–59 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Guo, 
            et al., In vitro evaluation of random and aligned polycaprolactone/gelatin fibers via electrospinning for bone tissue engineering, J. Biomater. Sci., Polym. Ed., 2015, 26(15), 989–1001 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Sharifi, 
            et al., Polycaprolactone/carboxymethyl chitosan nanofibrous scaffolds for bone tissue engineering application, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2018, 115, 243–248 CrossRef CAS .
C. Gao, 
            et al., Preparation and in vitro characterization of electrospun PVA scaffolds coated with bioactive glass for bone regeneration, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part A, 2012, 100(5), 1324–1334 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Li, 
            et al., Osteogenesis and chondrogenesis of biomimetic integrated porous PVA/gel/V-n-HA/pa6 scaffolds and BMSCs construct in repair of articular osteochondral defect, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part A, 2015, 103(10), 3226–3236 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Qu, 
            et al., Ectopic osteochondral formation of biomimetic porous PVA-n-HA/PA6 bilayered scaffold and BMSCs construct in rabbit, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part B, 2011, 96(1), 9–15 CrossRef .
T. Wan, 
            et al., Investigating a new drug delivery nano composite membrane system based on PVA/PCL and PVA/HA(PEG) for the controlled release of biopharmaceuticals for bone infections, Injury, 2015, 46(Suppl. 8), S39–S43 CrossRef .
D. L. Alge, 
            et al., Poly(propylene fumarate) reinforced dicalcium phosphate dihydrate cement composites for bone tissue engineering, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part A, 2012, 100(7), 1792–1802 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Mishra, 
            et al., Effect of prevascularization on in vivo vascularization of poly(propylene fumarate)/fibrin scaffolds, Biomaterials, 2016, 77, 255–266 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Meskinfam, 
            et al., Polyurethane foam/nano hydroxyapatite composite as a suitable scaffold for bone tissue regeneration, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2018, 82, 130–140 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yang, 
            et al., Biological evaluation of porous aliphatic polyurethane/hydroxyapatite composite scaffolds for bone tissue engineering, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part A, 2015, 103(7), 2251–2259 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yoshii, 
            et al., Local injection of lovastatin in biodegradable polyurethane scaffolds enhances bone regeneration in a critical-sized segmental defect in rat femora, J. Tissue Eng. Regen. Med., 2014, 8(8), 589–595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kytýř, 
            et al., Deformation analysis of gellan-gum based bone scaffold using on-the-fly tomography, Mater. Des., 2017, 134, 400–417 CrossRef .
M. L. Lastra, 
            et al., Nanostructured fumarate copolymer-chitosan crosslinked scaffold: an in vitro osteochondrogenesis regeneration study, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part A, 2018, 106(2), 570–579 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mondal, 
            et al., Nano-hydroxyapatite bioactive glass composite scaffold with enhanced mechanical and biological performance for tissue engineering application, Ceram. Int., 2018, 44(13), 15735–15746 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pietraszek, 
            et al., Halloysite-alkaline phosphatase system-A potential bioactive component of scaffold for bone tissue engineering, Colloids Surf., B, 2019, 173, 1–8 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Afzal, Implantable zirconia bioceramics for bone repair and replacement: a chronological review, Mater. Express, 2014, 4(1), 1–12 CrossRef CAS .
X. Q. Huang, 
            et al., Hollow mesoporous zirconia delivery system for biomineralization precursors, Acta Biomater., 2018, 67, 366–377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Qu, 
            et al., Biomaterials for bone tissue engineering scaffolds: a review, RSC Adv., 2019, 9(45), 26252–26262 RSC .
S. V. Dorozhkin, Bioceramics of calcium orthophosphates, Biomaterials, 2010, 31(7), 1465–1485 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lei, 
            et al., Strontium hydroxyapatite/chitosan nanohybrid scaffolds with enhanced osteoinductivity for bone tissue engineering, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2017, 72, 134–142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Yang, 
            et al., 3D Printed Fe Scaffolds with HA Nanocoating for Bone Regeneration, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng., 2018, 4(2), 608–616 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ke and S. Bose, Doped tricalcium phosphate bone tissue engineering scaffolds using sucrose as template and microwave sintering: enhancement of mechanical and biological properties, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2017, 78, 398–404 CrossRef CAS .
R. Taktak, 
            et al., Tricalcium phosphate-Fluorapatite as bone tissue engineering: evaluation of bioactivity and biocompatibility, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2018, 86, 121–128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yang, 
            et al., β-Tricalcium phosphate/poly(glycerol sebacate) scaffolds with robust mechanical property for bone tissue engineering, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2015, 56, 37–47 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Qi, 
            et al., Three dimensional printing of calcium sulfate and mesoporous bioactive glass scaffolds for improving bone regeneration in vitro and in vivo, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 42556 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shen, 
            et al., Engineering scaffolds integrated with calcium sulfate and oyster shell for enhanced bone tissue regeneration, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6(15), 12177–12188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Shuai, 
            et al., Functionalization of Calcium Sulfate/Bioglass Scaffolds with Zinc Oxide Whisker, Molecules, 2016, 21(3), 378 CrossRef .
Z. Zhou, 
            et al., Printability of calcium phosphate: calcium sulfate powders for the application of tissue engineered bone scaffolds using the 3D printing technique, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2014, 38, 1–10 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Liu, 
            et al., Three-dimensional printing akermanite porous scaffolds for load-bearing bone defect repair: an investigation of osteogenic capability and mechanical evolution, J. Biomater. Appl., 2016, 31(5), 650–660 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Shokrollahi, F. Salimi and A. Doostmohammadi, The fabrication and characterization of barium titanate/akermanite nano-bio-ceramic with a suitable piezoelectric coefficient for bone defect recovery, J. Mech. Behav. Biomed. Mater., 2017, 74, 365–370 CrossRef CAS .
C. Shuai, 
            et al., Akermanite scaffolds reinforced with boron nitride nanosheets in bone tissue engineering, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Med., 2015, 26(5), 188 CrossRef .
Z. Ba, 
            et al., Nanoporous diopside modulates biocompatibility, degradability and osteogenesis of bioactive scaffolds of gliadin-based composites for new bone formation, Int. J. Nanomed., 2018, 13, 3883–3896 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Kumar, 
            et al., Synthesis and characterization of diopside particles and their suitability along with chitosan matrix for bone tissue engineering in vitro and in vivo, J. Biomed. Nanotechnol., 2014, 10(6), 970–981 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Liu, 
            et al., Synergistic Effect of Carbon Nanotubes and Graphene on Diopside Scaffolds, BioMed Res. Int., 2016, 2016, 7090635 Search PubMed .
C. Wu, Y. Ramaswamy and H. Zreiqat, Porous diopside (CaMgSi(2)O(6)) scaffold: a promising bioactive material for bone tissue engineering, Acta Biomater., 2010, 6(6), 2237–2245 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bellucci, 
            et al., Sol–gel derived bioactive glasses with low tendency to crystallize: synthesis, post-sintering bioactivity and possible application for the production of porous scaffolds, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2014, 43, 573–586 CrossRef CAS .
C. Bian, 
            et al., Synthesis of magnetic, macro/mesoporous bioactive glasses based on coral skeleton for bone tissue engineering, IET Nanobiotechnol., 2014, 8(4), 275–281 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Goel, 
            et al., Alkali-free bioactive glasses for bone tissue engineering: a preliminary investigation, Acta Biomater., 2012, 8(1), 361–372 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gu, 
            et al., Bone regeneration in rat calvarial defects implanted with fibrous scaffolds composed of a mixture of silicate and borate bioactive glasses, Acta Biomater., 2013, 9(11), 9126–9136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Hoppe, N. S. Güldal and A. R. Boccaccini, A review of the biological response to ionic dissolution products from bioactive glasses and glass-ceramics, Biomaterials, 2011, 32(11), 2757–2774 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Sarker, 
            et al., Combining collagen and bioactive glasses for bone tissue engineering: a review, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2015, 4(2), 176–194 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Sriranganathan, 
            et al., Strontium substituted bioactive glasses for tissue engineered scaffolds: the importance of octacalcium phosphate, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Med., 2016, 27(2), 39 CrossRef .

          M. K. Elipey, et al., In vitro, 2021.
T. Zheng, 
            et al., Improving bone regeneration with composites consisting of piezoelectric poly(L-lactide) and piezoelectric calcium/manganese co-doped barium titanate nanofibers, Composites, Part B, 2022, 109734 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Deliormanlı, 
            et al., WS2/bioactive glass composites: fabrication, structural, mechanical and radiation attenuation properties, Ceram. Int., 2021, 47(21), 29739–29747 CrossRef .
F. Yang, 
            et al., Laser beam melting 3D printing of Ti6Al4V based porous structured dental implants: fabrication, biocompatibility analysis and photoelastic study, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 45360 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Y. Zhu, 
            et al., Mechanical characterization of 3D printed multi-morphology porous Ti6Al4V scaffolds based on triply periodic minimal surface architectures, Am. J. Transl. Res., 2018, 10(11), 3443–3454 CAS .
X. Li, 
            et al., Tantalum coating on porous Ti6Al4V scaffold using chemical vapor deposition and preliminary biological evaluation, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2013, 33(5), 2987–2994 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, 
            et al., Incorporating simvastatin/poloxamer 407 hydrogel into 3D-printed porous Ti(6)Al(4)V scaffolds for the promotion of angiogenesis, osseointegration and bone ingrowth, Biofabrication, 2016, 8(4), 045012 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Li, 
            et al., Improving osteointegration and osteogenesis of three-dimensional porous Ti6Al4V scaffolds by polydopamine-assisted biomimetic hydroxyapatite coating, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7(10), 5715–5724 CrossRef CAS .
A. Abarrategi, 
            et al., Biological properties of solid free form designed ceramic scaffolds with BMP-2: in vitro and in vivo evaluation, PLoS One, 2012, 7(3), e34117 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Bejarano, 
            et al., PDLLA scaffolds with Cu- and Zn-doped bioactive glasses having multifunctional properties for bone regeneration, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part A, 2017, 105(3), 746–756 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Manchón, 
            et al., A new iron calcium phosphate material to improve the osteoconductive properties of a biodegradable ceramic: a study in rabbit calvaria, Biomed. Mater., 2015, 10(5), 055012 CrossRef PubMed .
Ł. Rumian, 
            et al., Ceramic scaffolds enriched with gentamicin loaded poly(lactide-co-glycolide) microparticles for prevention and treatment of bone tissue infections, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2016, 69, 856–864 CrossRef .
N. Sachot, 
            et al., Towards 4th generation biomaterials: a covalent hybrid polymer-ormoglass architecture, Nanoscale, 2015, 7(37), 15349–15361 RSC .
A. Shahini, 
            et al., 3D conductive nanocomposite scaffold for bone tissue engineering, Int. J. Nanomed., 2014, 9, 167–181 Search PubMed .
X. Wang, 
            et al., Near-infrared light-triggered drug delivery system based on black phosphorus for in vivo bone regeneration, Biomaterials, 2018, 179, 164–174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yang, 
            et al., Polypyrrole/Alginate Hybrid Hydrogels: Electrically Conductive and Soft Biomaterials for Human Mesenchymal Stem Cell Culture and Potential Neural Tissue Engineering Applications, Macromol. Biosci., 2016, 16(11), 1653–1661 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Zanjanizadeh Ezazi, 
            et al., Conductive vancomycin-loaded mesoporous silica polypyrrole-based scaffolds for bone regeneration, Int. J Pharm., 2018, 536(1), 241–250 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhang, 
            et al., A bioactive “self-fitting” shape memory polymer scaffold with potential to treat cranio-maxillo facial bone defects, Acta Biomater., 2014, 10(11), 4597–4605 CrossRef CAS .
N. Eliaz and N. Metoki, Calcium Phosphate Bioceramics: A Review of Their History, Structure, Properties, Coating Technologies and Biomedical Applications, Materials, 2017, 10(4), 1–104,  DOI:10.3390/ma10040334 .
J. Lv, 
            et al., Enhanced angiogenesis and osteogenesis in critical bone defects by the controlled release of BMP-2 and VEGF: implantation of electron beam melting-fabricated porous Ti6Al4V scaffolds incorporating growth factor-doped fibrin glue, Biomed. Mater., 2015, 10(3), 035013 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Quinlan, 
            et al., Hypoxia-mimicking bioactive glass/collagen glycosaminoglycan composite scaffolds to enhance angiogenesis and bone repair, Biomaterials, 2015, 52, 358–366 CrossRef CAS .
I. Rajzer, E. Menaszek and O. Castano, Electrospun polymer scaffolds modified with drugs for tissue engineering, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2017, 77, 493–499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Geesala, 
            et al., Porous polymer scaffold for on-site delivery of stem cells – Protects from oxidative stress and potentiates wound tissue repair, Biomaterials, 2016, 77, 1–13 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Lv, 
            et al., Nano-ceramic composite scaffolds for bioreactor-based bone engineering, Clin. Orthop. Relat. Res., 2013, 471(8), 2422–2433 CrossRef PubMed .
A. B. Kutikov, 
            et al., Templated repair of long bone defects in rats with bioactive spiral-wrapped electrospun amphiphilic polymer/hydroxyapatite scaffolds, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7(8), 4890–4901 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tan, 
            et al., The synergetic effect of hydrogel stiffness and growth factor on osteogenic differentiation, Biomaterials, 2014, 35(20), 5294–5306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Siddiqui and J. M. Bernstein, Chronic wound infection: facts and controversies, Clin. Dermatol., 2010, 28(5), 519–526 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Jayakumar, 
            et al., Biomaterials based on chitin and chitosan in wound dressing applications, Biotechnol. Adv., 2011, 29(3), 322–337 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mohandas, 
            et al., Exploration of alginate hydrogel/nano zinc oxide composite bandages for infected wounds, Int. J. Nanomed., 2015, 10(Suppl. 1), 53–66 CAS .
M. Pérez-Díaz, 
            et al., Anti-biofilm activity of chitosan gels formulated with silver nanoparticles and their cytotoxic effect on human fibroblasts, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2016, 60, 317–323 CrossRef .
B. S. Anisha, 
            et al., Chitosan-hyaluronic acid/nano silver composite sponges for drug resistant bacteria infected diabetic wounds, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2013, 62, 310–320 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Archana, J. Dutta and P. K. Dutta, Evaluation of chitosan nano dressing for wound healing: characterization, in vitro and in vivo studies, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2013, 57, 193–203 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mohandas, 
            et al., Chitosan based metallic nanocomposite scaffolds as antimicrobial wound dressings, Bioact. Mater., 2018, 3(3), 267–277 CrossRef PubMed .
C. C. Peng, 
            et al., Composite nano-titanium oxide-chitosan artificial skin exhibits strong wound-healing effect-an approach with anti-inflammatory and bactericidal kinetics, Macromol. Biosci., 2008, 8(4), 316–327 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Woo, 
            et al., A bilayer composite composed of TiO2-incorporated electrospun chitosan membrane and human extracellular matrix sheet as a wound dressing, J. Biomater. Sci., Polym. Ed., 2015, 26(13), 841–854 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, 
            et al., A facile method for electrospinning of Ag nanoparticles/poly(vinyl alcohol)/carboxymethyl-chitosan nanofibers, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2012, 258(22), 8867–8873 CrossRef CAS .
R. Srivastava, D. K. Tiwari and P. K. Dutta, 4-(Ethoxycarbonyl) phenyl-1-amino-oxobutanoic acid-chitosan complex as a new matrix for silver nanocomposite film: preparation, characterization and antibacterial activity, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2011, 49(5), 863–870 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Abdelgawad, S. M. Hudson and O. J. Rojas, Antimicrobial wound dressing nanofiber mats from multicomponent (chitosan/silver-NPs/polyvinyl alcohol) systems, Carbohydr. Polym., 2014, 100, 166–178 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ye, J. Cheng and K. Yu, 
            In situ reduction of silver nanoparticles by gelatin to obtain porous silver nanoparticle/chitosan composites with enhanced antimicrobial and wound-healing activity, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2019, 121, 633–642 CrossRef CAS .
M. Moniri, 
            et al., In vitro molecular study of wound healing using biosynthesized bacteria nanocellulose/silver nanocomposite assisted by bioinformatics databases, Int. J. Nanomed., 2018, 13, 5097–5112 CrossRef CAS .
B. Boonkaew, 
            et al., Development and characterization of a novel, antimicrobial, sterile hydrogel dressing for burn wounds: single-step production with gamma irradiation creates silver nanoparticles and radical polymerization, J. Pharm. Sci., 2014, 103(10), 3244–3253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Bartel, 
            et al., Silver-decorated gel-shell nanobeads: physicochemical characterization and evaluation of antibacterial properties, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol., 2020, 11, 620–630 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Regiel-Futyra, 
            et al., Development of noncytotoxic chitosan-gold nanocomposites as efficient antibacterial materials, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7(2), 1087–1099 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, 
            et al., Bioactive antibacterial silica-based nanocomposites hydrogel scaffolds with high angiogenesis for promoting diabetic wound healing and skin repair, Theranostics, 2020, 10(11), 4929–4943 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. H. Dang, 
            et al., Injectable Nanocurcumin-Formulated Chitosan-g-Pluronic Hydrogel Exhibiting a Great Potential for Burn Treatment, J. Healthcare Eng., 2018, 2018, 5754890 Search PubMed .
N. Cai, 
            et al., Tailoring mechanical and antibacterial properties of chitosan/gelatin nanofiber membranes with Fe3O4 nanoparticles for potential wound dressing application, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2016, 369, 492–500 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Farag, 
            et al., Antimicrobial Activity of Hybrids Terpolymers Based on Magnetite Hydrogel Nanocomposites, Materials, 2019, 12(21), 1–13,  DOI:10.3390/ma12213604 .
D. Archana, 
            et al., In vivo evaluation of chitosan-PVP-titanium dioxide nanocomposite as wound dressing material, Carbohydr. Polym., 2013, 95(1), 530–539 CrossRef CAS .
O. Timaeva, 
            et al., Synthesis and physico-chemical properties of poly(N-vinyl pyrrolidone)-based hydrogels with titania nanoparticles, J. Mater. Sci., 2020, 55(7), 3005–3021 CrossRef CAS .
P. T. Kumar, 
            et al., Flexible and microporous chitosan hydrogel/nano ZnO composite bandages for wound dressing: in vitro and in vivo evaluation, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4(5), 2618–2629 CrossRef .
A. Khalid, 
            et al., Bacterial cellulose-zinc oxide nanocomposites as a novel dressing system for burn wounds, Carbohydr. Polym., 2017, 164, 214–221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Arshad, 
            et al., ZnO-NPs embedded biodegradable thiolated bandage for postoperative surgical site infection: in vitro and in vivo evaluation, PLoS One, 2019, 14(6), e0217079 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. E. Arslan, et al., Structural, biocompatibility, and antibacterial properties of Ge–DLC nanocomposite for biomedical applications, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part B, 2022 Search PubMed.
S. Grether-Beck, 
            et al., Photoprotection of human skin beyond ultraviolet radiation, Photodermatol. Photoimmunol. Photomed., 2014, 30(2-3), 167–174 CrossRef .
M. S. Kim, 
            et al., Infrared exposure induces an angiogenic switch in human skin that is partially mediated by heat, Br. J. Dermatol., 2006, 155(6), 1131–1138 CrossRef CAS .
M. Darvin, 
            et al., In vivo Raman spectroscopic analysis of the influence of IR radiation on the carotenoid antioxidant substances beta-carotene and lycopene in the human skin. Formation of free radicals, Laser Phys. Lett., 2007, 4(4), 318 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. arvin, 
            et al., Formation of free radicals in human skin during irradiation with infrared light, J. Invest. Dermatol., 2010, 130(2), 629–631 CrossRef .
M. E. Darvin, 
            et al., Optical methods for noninvasive determination of carotenoids in human and animal skin, J. Biomed. Opt., 2013, 18(6), 61230 CrossRef .
A. Gupta, T. Dai and M. R. Hamblin, Effect of red and near-infrared wavelengths on low-level laser (light) therapy-induced healing of partial-thickness dermal abrasion in mice, Lasers Med. Sci., 2014, 29(1), 257–265 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Santana-Blank, 
            et al., Water-light interaction: a novel pathway for multi hallmark therapy in cancer, Int. J. Cancer Ther. Oncol., 2014, 2(1), 02012 Search PubMed .
L. A. Santana-Blank, 
            et al., Short-term bioeffects of an infrared pulsed laser device on burned rat skin monitored by transverse relaxation times (NMR), Lasers Surg. Med., 2000, 27(5), 411–419 CrossRef CAS .
E. Rodríguez-Santana, 
            et al., H-NMR spin-lattice and correlation times of burned soft-tissue after treatment with an infrared pulsed laser device, Lasers Surg. Med., 2003, 33(3), 190–198 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Darvin, 
            et al., Non-invasive in vivo detection of the carotenoid antioxidant substance lycopene in the human skin using the resonance Raman spectroscopy, Laser Phys. Lett., 2006, 3(9), 460 CrossRef CAS .
P. Schroeder, 
            et al., Infrared radiation-induced matrix metalloproteinase in human skin: implications for protection, J. Invest. Dermatol., 2008, 128(10), 2491–2497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Y. Chang, 
            et al., Middle infrared radiation induces G2/M cell cycle arrest in A549 lung cancer cells, PLoS One, 2013, 8(1), e54117 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. I. Braghirolli, D. Steffens and P. Pranke, Electrospinning for regenerative medicine: a review of the main topics, Drug Discovery Today, 2014, 19(6), 743–753 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. G. Kumbar, 
            et al., Electrospun nanofiber scaffolds: engineering soft tissues, Biomed. Mater., 2008, 3(3), 034002 CrossRef CAS .
A. Memic, 
            et al., Latest Progress in Electrospun Nanofibers for Wound Healing Applications, ACS Appl. Bio Mater., 2019, 2(3), 952–969 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. P. Miguel, 
            et al., Electrospun polymeric nanofibres as wound dressings: a review, Colloids Surf., B, 2018, 169, 60–71 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Varshosaz, A. Jahanian and M. Maktoobian, Montelukast incorporated poly(methyl vinyl ether-co-maleic acid)/poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) electrospun nanofibers for wound dressing, Fibers Polym., 2017, 18(11), 2125–2134 CrossRef CAS .
J. Venugopal, 
            et al., Interaction of cells and nanofiber scaffolds in tissue engineering, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part B, 2008, 84(1), 34–48 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xue, 
            et al., Electrospun Nanofibers: New Concepts, Materials, and Applications, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50(8), 1976–1987 CrossRef CAS .
J. Doshi and D. H. Reneker, Electrospinning process and applications of electrospun fibers, J. Electrost., 1995, 35(2-3), 151–160 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, 
            et al., Recent advances in electrospun nanofibers for wound healing, Nanomedicine, 2017, 12(11), 1335–1352 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Alavarse, 
            et al., Tetracycline hydrochloride-loaded electrospun nanofibers mats based on PVA and chitosan for wound dressing, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2017, 77, 271–281 CrossRef CAS .
A. Deng, 
            et al., Electrospinning of in situ crosslinked recombinant human collagen peptide/chitosan nanofibers for wound healing, Biomater. Sci., 2018, 6(8), 2197–2208 RSC .
J. Wang, 
            et al., Multifunctional electrospun nanofibers for wound application – Novel insights into the control of drug release and antimicrobial activity, Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm., 2018, 129, 175–183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fang, 
            et al., Biodegradable core-shell electrospun nanofibers based on PLA and γ-PGA for wound healing, Eur. Polym. J., 2019, 116, 30–37 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hajikhani, Z. Emam-Djomeh and G. Askari, Fabrication and characterization of mucoadhesive bioplastic patch via coaxial polylactic acid (PLA) based electrospun nanofibers with antimicrobial and wound healing application, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2021, 172, 143–153 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Suryamathi, 
            et al., Tridax procumbens extract loaded electrospun PCL nanofibers: a novel wound dressing material, Macromol. Res., 2019, 27(1), 55–60 CrossRef CAS .
I. A. Arida, 
            et al., Electrospun polymer-based nanofiber scaffolds for skin regeneration, J. Drug Delivery Sci. Technol., 2021, 64, 102623 CrossRef CAS .
B. Duan, 
            et al., A nanofibrous composite membrane of PLGA–chitosan/PVA prepared by electrospinning, Eur. Polym. J., 2006, 42(9), 2013–2022 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Karami, 
            et al., Preparation and performance evaluations of electrospun poly(ε-caprolactone), poly(lactic acid), and their hybrid (50/50) nanofibrous mats containing thymol as an herbal drug for effective wound healing, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2013, 129(2), 756–766 CrossRef CAS .
S. Torres-Giner, 
            et al., Controlled delivery of gentamicin
antibiotic from bioactive electrospun polylactide-based ultrathin fibers, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2012, 14(4), B112–B122 CrossRef .
F.-C. Kao, 
            et al., Self-assisted wound healing using piezoelectric and triboelectric nanogenerators, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2022, 23(1), 1–16 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. L. Wang and J. Song, Piezoelectric nanogenerators based on zinc oxide nanowire arrays, Science, 2006, 312(5771), 242–246 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Bhang, 
            et al., Zinc oxide nanorod - based piezoelectric dermal patch for wound healing, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27(1), 1603497 CrossRef .
J. Fang, 
            et al., Enhanced mechanical energy harvesting using needleless electrospun poly(vinylidene fluoride) nanofibre webs, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6(7), 2196–2202 RSC .
J. Cui, Zinc oxide nanowires, Mater. Charact., 2012, 64, 43–52 CrossRef CAS .
B. Dudem, 
            et al., Highly-flexible piezoelectric nanogenerators with silver nanowires and barium titanate embedded composite films for mechanical energy harvesting, Appl. Energy, 2018, 230, 865–874 CrossRef CAS .
D. U. Erbulut, 
            et al., Application of an asymmetric finite element model of the C2-T1 cervical spine for evaluating the role of soft tissues in stability, Med. Eng. Phys., 2014, 36(7), 915–921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. H. Rajabi, M. Jaffe and T. L. Arinzeh, Piezoelectric materials for tissue regeneration: a review, Acta Biomater., 2015, 24, 12–23 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Augustine, 
            et al., Electrospun poly(vinylidene fluoride-trifluoroethylene)/zinc oxide nanocomposite tissue engineering scaffolds with enhanced cell adhesion and blood vessel formation, Nano Res., 2017, 10(10), 3358–3376 CrossRef CAS .
H. F. Guo, 
            et al., Piezoelectric PU/PVDF electrospun scaffolds for wound healing applications, Colloids Surf., B, 2012, 96, 29–36 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Wang, 
            et al., Piezoelectric nanofibrous scaffolds as in vivo energy harvesters for modifying fibroblast alignment and proliferation in wound healing, Nano Energy, 2018, 43, 63–71 CrossRef CAS .
S. Du, 
            et al., Bioinspired hybrid patches with self-adhesive hydrogel and piezoelectric nanogenerator for promoting skin wound healing, Nano Res., 2020, 13(9), 2525–2533 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, 
            et al., Piezoelectric and photothermal dual functional film for enhanced dermal wound regeneration via upregulation of Hsp90 and HIF-1α, Appl. Mater. Today, 2020, 20, 100756 CrossRef .
X. Yu, 
            et al., Heterostructured nanorod array with piezophototronic and plasmonic effect for photodynamic bacteria killing and wound healing, Nano Energy, 2018, 46, 29–38 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gong, 
            et al., Biocompatible poly(lactic acid)-based hybrid piezoelectric and electret nanogenerator for electronic skin applications, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30(14), 1908724 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Lee, 
            et al., Augmentation of diabetic wound healing and enhancement of collagen content using nanofibrous glucophage-loaded collagen/PLGA scaffold membranes, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2015, 439, 88–97 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhu, Bioactive modification of poly(ethylene glycol) hydrogels for tissue engineering, Biomaterials, 2010, 31(17), 4639–4656 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Dai, 
            et al., Chitosan preparations for wounds and burns: antimicrobial and wound-healing effects, Expert Rev. Anti-Infect. Ther., 2011, 9(7), 857–879 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Dhivya, V. V. Padma and E. Santhini, Wound dressings – a review, Biomedicine, 2015, 5(4), 22 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Dixit, 
            et al., Immunological challenges associated with artificial skin grafts: available solutions and stem cells in future design of synthetic skin, J. Biol. Eng., 2017, 11, 49 CrossRef PubMed .
M. J. Randall, 
            et al., Advances in the Biofabrication of 3D Skin in vitro: Healthy and Pathological Models, Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol., 2018, 6, 154 CrossRef .
A. A. Mahmoud and A. H. Salama, Norfloxacin-loaded collagen/chitosan scaffolds for skin reconstruction: preparation, evaluation and in vivo wound healing assessment, Eur. J. Pharm. Sci., 2016, 83, 155–165 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Yu, 
            et al., Wound dressing composed of hyaluronic acid and collagen containing EGF or bFGF: comparative culture study, J. Biomater. Sci., Polym. Ed., 2013, 24(8), 1015–1026 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kubo and Y. Kuroyanagi, Spongy matrix of hyaluronic acid and collagen as a cultured dermal substitute: evaluation in an animal test, J. Artif. Organs, 2003, 6(1), 64–70 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. V. Karri, 
            et al., Curcumin loaded chitosan nanoparticles impregnated into collagen-alginate scaffolds for diabetic wound healing, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2016, 93(Pt B), 1519–1529 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Agarwal, 
            et al., Gelatin/Carboxymethyl chitosan based scaffolds for dermal tissue engineering applications, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2016, 93(Pt B), 1499–1506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Haider, 
            et al., Recent advances in the synthesis, functionalization and biomedical applications of hydroxyapatite: a review, RSC Adv., 2017, 7(13), 7442–7458 RSC .
P. Basu, 
            et al., Characterization and Evaluation of Carboxymethyl Cellulose-Based Films for Healing of Full-Thickness Wounds in Normal and Diabetic Rats, ACS Omega, 2018, 3(10), 12622–12632 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Gandhimathi, 
            et al., Biocomposite nanofibrous strategies for the controlled release of biomolecules for skin tissue regeneration, Int. J. Nanomed., 2014, 9, 4709–4722 Search PubMed .
S. M. Kouhbananinejad, 
            et al., A fibrinous and allogeneic fibroblast-enriched membrane as a biocompatible material can improve diabetic wound healing, Biomater. Sci., 2019, 7(5), 1949–1961 RSC .
M. Kuroyanagi, 
            et al., Development of cultured dermal substitute composed of hyaluronic acid and collagen spongy sheet containing fibroblasts and epidermal growth factor, J. Biomater. Sci., Polym. Ed., 2014, 25(11), 1133–1143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ranjbar-Mohammadi, 
            et al., Antibacterial performance and in vivo diabetic wound healing of curcumin loaded gum tragacanth/poly(ε-caprolactone) electrospun nanofibers, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2016, 69, 1183–1191 CrossRef .
A. B. Mohd Hilmi, 
            et al., Chitosan dermal substitute and chitosan skin substitute contribute to accelerated full-thickness wound healing in irradiated rats, Biomed. Res. Int., 2013, 2013, 795458 Search PubMed .
M. Meuli, 
            et al., A Cultured Autologous Dermo-epidermal Skin Substitute for Full-Thickness Skin Defects: A Phase I, Open, Prospective Clinical Trial in Children, Plast. Reconstr. Surg., 2019, 144(1), 188–198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Bacakova, 
            et al., A two-layer skin construct consisting of a collagen hydrogel reinforced by a fibrin-coated polylactide nanofibrous membrane, Int. J. Nanomed., 2019, 14, 5033–5050 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kober, 
            et al., Generation of a Fibrin Based Three-Layered Skin Substitute, BioMed Res. Int., 2015, 2015, 170427 Search PubMed .
Z. Bagher, 
            et al., Wound healing with alginate/chitosan hydrogel containing hesperidin in rat model, J. Drug Delivery Sci. Technol., 2020, 55, 101379 CrossRef CAS .
H. Bardania, 
            et al., Facile preparation of a novel biogenic silver-loaded Nanofilm with intrinsic anti-bacterial and oxidant scavenging activities for wound healing, Sci. Rep., 2020, 10(1), 6129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Y. Hsieh, T. C. Tseng and S. H. Hsu, Self-healing hydrogel for tissue repair in the central nervous system, Neural Regener. Res., 2015, 10(12), 1922–1923 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Guo and P. X. Ma, Conducting Polymers for Tissue Engineering, Biomacromolecules, 2018, 19(6), 1764–1782 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. C. Tseng, 
            et al., An Injectable, Self-Healing Hydrogel to Repair the Central Nervous System, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27(23), 3518–3524 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu and S. H. Hsu, Biomaterials and neural regeneration, Neural Regener. Res., 2020, 15(7), 1243–1244 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Dalamagkas, M. Tsintou and A. Seifalian, Advances in peripheral nervous system regenerative therapeutic strategies: a biomaterials approach, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2016, 65, 425–432 CrossRef CAS .
W. L. Stoppel, 
            et al., Clinical applications of naturally derived biopolymer-based scaffolds for regenerative medicine, Ann. Biomed. Eng., 2015, 43(3), 657–680 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Arslantunali, 
            et al., Peripheral nerve conduits: technology update, Med. Dev., 2014, 7, 405–424 CAS .
R. de Queiroz Antonino, 
            et al., Preparation and Characterization of Chitosan Obtained from Shells of Shrimp (Litopenaeus vannamei Boone), Mar. Drugs, 2017, 15(5), 1–12,  DOI:10.3390/md15050141 .
D. Singh, 
            et al., Nano-biomimetics for nano/micro tissue regeneration, J. Biomed. Nanotechnol., 2014, 10(10), 3141–3161 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Harvey, E. W. Hill and A. Bayat, Designing implant surface topography for improved biocompatibility, Expert Rev. Med. Devices, 2013, 10(2), 257–267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. K. Mattila and P. Lappalainen, Filopodia: molecular architecture and cellular functions, Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol., 2008, 9(6), 446–454 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. B. Rahmany and M. Van Dyke, Biomimetic approaches to modulate cellular adhesion in biomaterials: a review, Acta Biomater., 2013, 9(3), 5431–5437 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhao, 
            et al., Colloid Interface Sci, Commun, 2020, 35, 100249 CAS .
A. Hurtado, 
            et al., Robust CNS regeneration after complete spinal cord transection using aligned poly-L-lactic acid microfibers, Biomaterials, 2011, 32(26), 6068–6079 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Oudega, 
            et al., Axonal regeneration into Schwann cell grafts within resorbable poly(alpha-hydroxyacid) guidance channels in the adult rat spinal cord, Biomaterials, 2001, 22(10), 1125–1136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Schaub and R. J. Gilbert, Controlled release of 6-aminonicotinamide from aligned, electrospun fibers alters astrocyte metabolism and dorsal root ganglia neurite outgrowth, J. Neural. Eng., 2011, 8(4), 046026 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Zarrintaj, 
            et al., Conductive biomaterials as nerve conduits: recent advances and future challenges, Appl. Mater. Today, 2020, 20, 100784 CrossRef .
B. K. Chen, 
            et al., Comparison of polymer scaffolds in rat spinal cord: a step toward quantitative assessment of combinatorial approaches to spinal cord repair, Biomaterials, 2011, 32(32), 8077–8086 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. De Laporte, 
            et al., Plasmid releasing multiple channel bridges for transgene expression after spinal cord injury, Mol. Ther., 2009, 17(2), 318–326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Gelain, 
            et al., Transplantation of nanostructured composite scaffolds results in the regeneration of chronically injured spinal cords, ACS Nano, 2011, 5(1), 227–236 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, 
            et al., Multiple channel bridges for spinal cord injury: cellular characterization of host response, Tissue Eng., Part A, 2009, 15(11), 3283–3295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, 
            et al., Nanofibrous Patches for Spinal Cord Regeneration, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20(9), 1433–1440 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. H. Hwang, 
            et al., Combination of multifaceted strategies to maximize the therapeutic benefits of neural stem cell transplantation for spinal cord repair, Cell. Transplant., 2011, 20(9), 1361–1379 Search PubMed .
D. Y. Wong, 
            et al., Macro-architectures in spinal cord scaffold implants influence regeneration, J. Neurotrauma, 2008, 25(8), 1027–1037 CrossRef .
S. Y. Chew, 
            et al., Aligned Protein-Polymer Composite Fibers Enhance Nerve Regeneration: A Potential Tissue-Engineering Platform, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17(8), 1288–1296 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Chew, 
            et al., Sustained release of proteins from electrospun biodegradable fibers, Biomacromolecules, 2005, 6(4), 2017–2024 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. O. Rujitanaroj, 
            et al., Nanofiber-mediated controlled release of siRNA complexes for long term gene-silencing applications, Biomaterials, 2011, 32(25), 5915–5923 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Baumann, 
            et al., An injectable drug delivery platform for sustained combination therapy, J. Controlled Release, 2009, 138(3), 205–213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Giannetti, 
            et al., Acrylic hydrogel implants after spinal cord lesion in the adult rat, Neurol. Res., 2001, 23(4), 405–409 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kubinová, 
            et al., The use of superporous Ac-CGGASIKVAVS-OH-modified PHEMA scaffolds to promote cell adhesion and the differentiation of human fetal neural precursors, Biomaterials, 2010, 31(23), 5966–5975 CrossRef .
E. C. Tsai, 
            et al., Synthetic hydrogel guidance channels facilitate regeneration of adult rat brainstem motor axons after complete spinal cord transection, J. Neurotrauma, 2004, 21(6), 789–804 CrossRef PubMed .
I. F. Amaral, 
            et al., Endothelialization of chitosan porous conduits via immobilization of a recombinant fibronectin fragment (rhFNIII7-10), Acta Biomater., 2013, 9(3), 5643–5652 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, 
            et al., Bone marrow stromal cells-loaded chitosan conduits promote repair of complete transection injury in rat spinal cord, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Med., 2011, 22(10), 2347–2356 CrossRef CAS .
H. Cheng, 
            et al., Laminin-incorporated nerve conduits made by plasma treatment for repairing spinal cord injury, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun., 2007, 357(4), 938–944 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, 
            et al., Repair of thoracic spinal cord injury by chitosan tube implantation in adult rats, Biomaterials, 2009, 30(6), 1121–1132 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Nomura, 
            et al., Extramedullary chitosan channels promote survival of transplanted neural stem and progenitor cells
and create a tissue bridge after complete spinal cord transection, Tissue Eng., Part A, 2008, 14(5), 649–665 CrossRef CAS .
R. H. Cholas, H. P. Hsu and M. Spector, The reparative response to cross-linked collagen-based scaffolds in a rat spinal cord gap model, Biomaterials, 2012, 33(7), 2050–2059 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Liu, 
            et al., Nanofibrous collagen nerve conduits for spinal cord repair, Tissue Eng., Part A, 2012, 18(9–10), 1057–1066 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Liu, 
            et al., Sustained release of neurotrophin-3 and chondroitinase ABC from electrospun collagen nanofiber scaffold for spinal cord injury repair, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part A, 2012, 100(1), 236–242 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Madaghiele, 
            et al., Collagen-based matrices with axially oriented pores, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part A, 2008, 85(3), 757–767 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Saglam, 
            et al., Angioneural crosstalk in scaffolds with oriented microchannels for regenerative spinal cord injury repair, J. Mol. Neurosci., 2013, 49(2), 334–346 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zeng, 
            et al., Integration of donor mesenchymal stem cell-derived neuron-like cells into host neural network after rat spinal cord transection, Biomaterials, 2015, 53, 184–201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Chvatal, 
            et al., Spatial distribution and acute anti-inflammatory effects of Methylprednisolone after sustained local delivery to the contused spinal cord, Biomaterials, 2008, 29(12), 1967–1975 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Gao, 
            et al., Templated agarose scaffolds for the support of motor axon regeneration into sites of complete spinal cord transection, Biomaterials, 2013, 34(5), 1529–1536 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Gupta, C. H. Tator and M. S. Shoichet, Fast-gelling injectable blend of hyaluronan and methylcellulose for intrathecal, localized delivery to the injured spinal cord, Biomaterials, 2006, 27(11), 2370–2379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. J. Her, 
            et al., Control of three-dimensional substrate stiffness to manipulate mesenchymal stem cell fate toward neuronal or glial lineages, Acta Biomater., 2013, 9(2), 5170–5180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Park, 
            et al., Nerve regeneration following spinal cord injury using matrix metalloproteinase-sensitive, hyaluronic acid-based biomimetic hydrogel scaffold containing brain-derived neurotrophic factor, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part A, 2010, 93(3), 1091–1099 Search PubMed .
A. M. Thomas and L. D. Shea, Polysaccharide-modified scaffolds for controlled lentivirus delivery in vitro and after spinal cord injury, J. Controlled Release, 2013, 170(3), 421–429 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Ciardelli and V. Chiono, Materials for peripheral nerve regeneration, Macromol. Biosci., 2006, 6(1), 13–26 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Alvarez-Perez, 
            et al., Influence of gelatin cues in PCL electrospun membranes on nerve outgrowth, Biomacromolecules, 2010, 11(9), 2238–2246 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. P. Prabhakaran, 
            et al., Surface modified electrospun nanofibrous scaffolds for nerve tissue engineering, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19(45), 455102 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Bhattarai, 
            et al., Natural - synthetic polyblend nanofibers for biomedical applications, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21(27), 2792–2797 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. de Luca, 
            et al., Immobilization of cell-binding peptides on poly-ε-caprolactone film surface to biomimic the peripheral nervous system, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part A, 2013, 101(2), 491–501 CrossRef CAS .
V. M. Tysseling-Mattiace, 
            et al., Self-assembling nanofibers inhibit glial scar formation and promote axon elongation after spinal cord injury, J. Neurosci., 2008, 28(14), 3814–3823 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. De Laporte, A. L. Yan and L. D. Shea, Local gene delivery from ECM-coated poly(lactide-co-glycolide) multiple channel bridges after spinal cord injury, Biomaterials, 2009, 30(12), 2361–2368 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. N. Novikova, 
            et al., Biodegradable poly-beta-hydroxybutyrate scaffold seeded with Schwann cells to promote spinal cord repair, Biomaterials, 2008, 29(9), 1198–1206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Zuidema, 
            et al., Enhanced GLT-1 mediated glutamate uptake and migration of primary astrocytes directed by fibronectin-coated electrospun poly-L-lactic acid fibers, Biomaterials, 2014, 35(5), 1439–1449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. Koh, 
            et al., Enhancement of neurite outgrowth using nano-structured scaffolds coupled with laminin, Biomaterials, 2008, 29(26), 3574–3582 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Matsumoto, 
            et al., Peripheral nerve regeneration across an 80-mm gap bridged by a polyglycolic acid (PGA)-collagen tube filled with laminin-coated collagen fibers: a histological and electrophysiological evaluation of regenerated nerves, Brain Res., 2000, 868(2), 315–328 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Hemshekhar, 
            et al., Emerging roles of hyaluronic acid bioscaffolds in tissue engineering and regenerative medicine, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2016, 86, 917–928 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. K. Wang, 
            et al., Hyaluronic acid enhances peripheral nerve regeneration in vivo, Microsurgery, 1998, 18(4), 270–275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, 
            et al., Implantation of neural stem cells embedded in hyaluronic acid and collagen composite conduit promotes regeneration in a rabbit facial nerve injury model, J. Transl. Med., 2008, 6, 67 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Xu, 
            et al., Preparation and characterization of injectable chitosan–hyaluronic acid hydrogels for nerve growth factor sustained release, J. Bioact. Compat. Polym., 2017, 32(2), 146–162 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Drury and D. J. Mooney, Hydrogels for tissue engineering: scaffold design variables and applications, Biomaterials, 2003, 24(24), 4337–4351 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Jansen, 
            et al., A hyaluronan-based nerve guide: in vitro cytotoxicity, subcutaneous tissue reactions, and degradation in the rat, Biomaterials, 2004, 25(3), 483–489 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Kim and G. Kim, Three-dimensional electrospun polycaprolactone (PCL)/alginate hybrid composite scaffolds, Carbohydr. Polym., 2014, 114, 213–221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Sergeeva, A. S. Vikulina and D. Volodkin, Porous alginate scaffolds assembled using vaterite CaCO3 crystals, Micromachines, 2019, 10(6), 357 CrossRef .
I. Singh, 
            et al., Preparation and evaluation of microfluidic magnetic alginate microparticles for magnetically templated hydrogels, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 561, 647–658 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. A. Pfister, 
            et al., Controlled nerve growth factor release from multi-ply alginate/chitosan-based nerve conduits, Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm., 2008, 69(2), 563–572 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Hashimoto, 
            et al., Peripheral nerve regeneration through alginate gel: analysis of early outgrowth and late increase in diameter of regenerating axons, Exp. Brain Res., 2002, 146(3), 356–368 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Golafshan, M. Kharaziha and M. Fathi, Tough and conductive hybrid graphene-PVA: alginate fibrous scaffolds for engineering neural construct, Carbon, 2017, 111, 752–763 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Martínez, M. P. Falomir and D. Gozalbo, Chitin: a structural biopolysaccharide with multiple applications, eLS, 2014, 1–10,  DOI:10.1002/9780470015902.a0000694.pub3 .
T. Freier, 
            et al., Controlling cell adhesion and degradation of chitosan films by N-acetylation, Biomaterials, 2005, 26(29), 5872–5878 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Haastert-Talini, 
            et al., Chitosan tubes of varying degrees of acetylation for bridging peripheral nerve defects, Biomaterials, 2013, 34(38), 9886–9904 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Neubrech, 
            et al., Enhancing the Outcome of Traumatic Sensory Nerve Lesions of the Hand by Additional Use of a Chitosan Nerve Tube in Primary Nerve Repair: A Randomized Controlled Bicentric Trial, Plast Reconstr. Surg, 2018, 142(2), 415–424 CrossRef CAS .
L. Stenberg, 
            et al., Nerve regeneration in chitosan conduits and in autologous nerve grafts in healthy and in type 2 diabetic Goto-Kakizaki rats, Eur. J. Neurosci., 2016, 43(3), 463–473 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Gong, 
            et al., Chitooligosaccharides promote peripheral nerve regeneration in a rabbit common peroneal nerve crush injury model, Microsurgery, 2009, 29(8), 650–656 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhao, 
            et al., Chitosan degradation products facilitate peripheral nerve regeneration by improving macrophage-constructed microenvironments, Biomaterials, 2017, 134, 64–77 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, 
            et al., Enhanced nerve regeneration through a bilayered chitosan tube: the effect of introduction of glycine spacer into the CYIGSR sequence, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part A, 2008, 85(4), 919–928 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, 
            et al., In vivo degradation of three-dimensional silk fibroin scaffolds, Biomaterials, 2008, 29(24–25), 3415–3428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Boecker, 
            et al., Relevance and Recent Developments of Chitosan in Peripheral Nerve Surgery, Front. Cell. Neurosci., 2019, 13, 104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Fan, 
            et al., Repairing a 35-mm-long median nerve defect with a chitosan/PGA artificial nerve graft in the human: a case study, Microsurgery, 2008, 28(4), 238–242 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Neubrech, 
            et al., Chitosan nerve tube for primary repair of traumatic sensory nerve lesions of the hand without a gap: study protocol for a randomized controlled trial, Trials, 2016, 17, 48 CrossRef .
A. Pabari, 
            et al., Modern surgical management of peripheral nerve gap, J. Plast. Reconstr. Aesthet. Surg., 2010, 63(12), 1941–1948 CrossRef PubMed .
T. B. Aigner, 
            et al., Nerve guidance conduit design based on self-rolling tubes, Mater. Today Bio, 2020, 5, 100042 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Stang, 
            et al., Collagen nerve conduits-assessment of biocompatibility and axonal regeneration, Biomed. Mater. Eng., 2005, 15(1-2), 3–12 CAS .
F. Stang, 
            et al., Structural parameters of collagen nerve grafts influence peripheral nerve regeneration, Biomaterials, 2005, 26(16), 3083–3091 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Schmidt, 
            et al., Evaluation of a thin and mechanically stable collagen cell carrier, Tissue Eng., Part C, 2011, 17(12), 1161–1170 CrossRef CAS .
E. Liodaki, 
            et al., Removal of collagen nerve conduits (NeuraGen) after unsuccessful implantation: focus on histological findings, J. Reconstr. Microsurg., 2013, 29(8), 517–522 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Rbia, 
            et al., Collagen Nerve Conduits and Processed Nerve Allografts for the Reconstruction of Digital Nerve Gaps: A Single-Institution Case Series and Review of the Literature, World Neurosurg., 2019, 127, e1176–e1184 CrossRef PubMed .
S. M. Lien, L. Y. Ko and T. J. Huang, Effect of pore size on ECM secretion and cell growth in gelatin scaffold for articular cartilage tissue engineering, Acta Biomater., 2009, 5(2), 670–679 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. R. Chen, 
            et al., Release characteristics and bioactivity of gelatin-tricalcium phosphate membranes covalently immobilized with nerve growth factors, Biomaterials, 2005, 26(33), 6579–6587 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. S. Liu, 
            et al., A novel use of genipin-fixed gelatin as extracellular matrix for peripheral nerve regeneration, J. Biomater. Appl., 2004, 19(1), 21–34 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Tonda-Turo, 
            et al., Comparative analysis of gelatin scaffolds crosslinked by genipin and silane coupling agent, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2011, 49(4), 700–706 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kundu, 
            et al., Silk fibroin biomaterials for tissue regenerations, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2013, 65(4), 457–470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. G. Omenetto and D. L. Kaplan, New opportunities for an ancient material, Science, 2010, 329(5991), 528–531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, 
            et al., Water-stable silk fibroin nerve conduits with tunable degradation prepared by a mild freezing-induced assembly, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 2019, 164, 61–68 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, 
            et al., Development and evaluation of silk fibroin-based nerve grafts used for peripheral nerve regeneration, Biomaterials, 2007, 28(36), 5526–5535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Park and K. M. Woo, Fibrin-Based Biomaterial Applications in Tissue Engineering and Regenerative Medicine, Adv. Exp. Med. Biol., 2018, 1064, 253–261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, 
            et al., Nerve Repair With Fibrin Nerve Conduit and Modified Suture Placement, Anat. Rec., 2018, 301(10), 1690–1696 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. McGrath, 
            et al., Long-Term Effects of Fibrin Conduit with Human Mesenchymal Stem Cells and Immunosuppression after Peripheral Nerve Repair in a Xenogenic Model, Cell Med., 2018, 10, 2155179018760327 Search PubMed .
R. Takazawa, 
            et al., Mesothelial cell sheets cultured on fibrin gel prevent adhesion formation in an intestinal hernia model, Tissue Eng., 2005, 11(3–4), 618–625 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. L. Rowe, S. Lee and J. P. Stegemann, Influence of thrombin concentration on the mechanical and morphological properties of cell-seeded fibrin hydrogels, Acta Biomater., 2007, 3(1), 59–67 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. de la Puente and D. Ludeña, Cell culture in autologous fibrin scaffolds for applications in tissue engineering, Exp. Cell Res., 2014, 322(1), 1–11 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Rajabi, 
            et al., Keratinous materials: structures and functions in biomedical applications, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2020, 110, 110612 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. J. Apel, 
            et al., Peripheral nerve regeneration using a keratin-based scaffold: long-term functional and histological outcomes in a mouse model, J. Hand Surg. Am., 2008, 33(9), 1541–1547 CrossRef .
L. A. Pace, 
            et al., A human hair keratin hydrogel scaffold enhances median nerve regeneration in nonhuman primates: an electrophysiological and histological study, Tissue Eng., Part A, 2014, 20(3-4), 507–517 CAS .
P. Gupta and K. K. Nayak, Optimization of keratin/alginate scaffold using RSM and its characterization for tissue engineering, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2016, 85, 141–149 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Koller, Biodegradable and Biocompatible Polyhydroxy-alkanoates (PHA): Auspicious Microbial Macromolecules for Pharmaceutical and Therapeutic Applications, Molecules, 2018, 23(2), 1–20,  DOI:10.3390/molecules23020362 .
E. Masaeli, 
            et al., Does the tissue engineering architecture of poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) scaffold affects cell-material interactions?, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part A, 2012, 100(7), 1907–1918 CrossRef PubMed .
P. N. Mohanna, G. Terenghi and M. Wiberg, Composite PHB-GGF conduit for long nerve gap repair: a long-term evaluation, Scand. J. Plast. Reconstr. Surg. Hand Surg., 2005, 39(3), 129–137 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Hazari, 
            et al., A resorbable nerve conduit as an alternative to nerve autograft in nerve gap repair, Br. J. Plast. Surg., 1999, 52(8), 653–657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. A. Zhuikov, 
            et al., Comparative Structure-Property Characterization of Poly(3-Hydroxybutyrate-Co-3-Hydroxyvalerate)s Films under Hydrolytic and Enzymatic Degradation: Finding a Transition Point in 3-Hydroxyvalerate Content, Polymers, 2020, 12(3), 1–15,  DOI:10.3390/polym12030728 .
E. Biazar, S. Heidari Keshel and M. Pouya, Behavioral evaluation of regenerated rat sciatic nerve by a nanofibrous PHBV conduit filled with Schwann cells as artificial nerve graft, Cell Commun. Adhes., 2013, 20(5), 93–103 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhao and L.-S. Turng, Mechanical performance of microcellular injection molded biocomposites from green plastics: PLA and PHBV, Biocomposites, 2015, 141–160 Search PubMed .
L. Luo, 
            et al., Construction of nerve guide conduits from cellulose/soy protein composite membranes combined with Schwann cells and pyrroloquinoline quinone for the repair of peripheral nerve defect, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun., 2015, 457(4), 507–513 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Anjum, 
            et al., Microbial production of polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHAs) and its copolymers: a review of recent advancements, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2016, 89, 161–174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Basnett, 
            et al., Production of a novel medium chain length poly(3-hydroxyalkanoate) using unprocessed biodiesel waste and its evaluation as a tissue engineering scaffold, Microb. Biotechnol., 2017, 10(6), 1384–1399 CrossRef CAS .

          G.-Q. Chen, Plastics completely synthesized by bacteria: polyhydroxyalkanoates, in Plastics from bacteria,  2010, Springer, pp. 17–37 Search PubMed .
A. Rodriguez-Contreras, Recent Advances in the Use of Polyhydroyalkanoates in Biomedicine, Bioengineering, 2019, 6(3), 1–14,  DOI:10.3390/bioengineering6030082 .
G. Licciardello, A. F. Catara and V. Catara, Production of Polyhydroxyalkanoates and Extracellular Products Using Pseudomonas Corrugata and P. Mediterranea: A Review, Bioengineering, 2019, 6(4), 1–13,  DOI:10.3390/bioengineering6040105 .
J. Możejko-Ciesielska, P. Marciniak and K. Szacherska, Polyhydroxyalkanoates Synthesized by Aeromonas Species: Trends and Challenges, Polymers, 2019, 11(8), 1–17,  DOI:10.3390/polym11081328 .
Y. Zheng, 
            et al., Engineering biosynthesis of polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHA) for diversity and cost reduction, Metab. Eng., 2020, 58, 82–93 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, R. Mauck and R. Tuan, Application of nanofibrous scaffolds in skeletal tissue engineering, J. Biomed. Nanotechnol., 2005, 1, 1–17 CrossRef .
M.-C. Lu, 
            et al., Evaluation of a multi-layer microbraided polylactic acid fiber-reinforced conduit for peripheral nerve regeneration, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Med., 2009, 20(5), 1175–1180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Sun, 
            et al., Development of channeled nanofibrous scaffolds for oriented tissue engineering, Macromol. Biosci., 2012, 12(6), 761–769 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhao, 
            et al., Nanomaterial scaffolds for stem cell proliferation and differentiation in tissue engineering, Biotechnol. Adv., 2013, 31(5), 654–668 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. C. Young, M. Wiberg and G. Terenghi, Poly-3-hydroxybutyrate (PHB): a resorbable conduit for long-gap repair in peripheral nerves, Br. J. Plast. Surg., 2002, 55(3), 235–240 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Biazar, 
            et al., Nanofibrous nerve conduits for repair of 30-mm-long sciatic nerve defects, Neural Regener. Res., 2013, 8(24), 2266–2274 Search PubMed .
M. Karimi, 
            et al., Rat sciatic nerve reconstruction across a 30 mm defect bridged by an oriented porous PHBV tube with Schwann cell as artificial nerve graft, ASAIO J., 2014, 60(2), 224–233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Hu, 
            et al., Neuronally differentiated adipose-derived stem cells and aligned PHBV nanofiber nerve scaffolds promote sciatic nerve regeneration, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun., 2017, 489(2), 171–178 CrossRef CAS .
M. Demirbilek, 
            et al., Aligned bacterial PHBV nanofibrous conduit for peripheral nerve regeneration, Artif. Cells, Nanomed., Biotechnol., 2015, 43(4), 243–251 CrossRef CAS .
V. Chiono and C. Tonda-Turo, Trends in the design of nerve guidance channels in peripheral nerve tissue engineering, Prog. Neurobiol., 2015, 131, 87–104 CrossRef PubMed .
B. N. Johnson and X. Jia, 3D printed nerve guidance channels: computer-aided control of geometry, physical cues, biological supplements and gradients, Neural Regener. Res., 2016, 11(10), 1568–1569 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Maiti and D. Díaz, Díaz, 3D Printed Polymeric Hydrogels for Nerve Regeneration, Polymers, 2018, 10(9), 1–12,  DOI:10.3390/polym10091041 .
E. B. Petcu, 
            et al., 3D printing strategies for peripheral nerve regeneration, Biofabrication, 2018, 10(3), 032001 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Noè, 
            et al., Light Processable Starch Hydrogels, Polymers, 2020, 12(6), 1–14,  DOI:10.3390/polym12061359 .
W. Ye, 
            et al., 3D printing of gelatin methacrylate-based nerve guidance conduits with multiple channels, Mater. Des., 2020, 192, 108757 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tao, 
            et al., Rapid 3D printing of functional nanoparticle-enhanced conduits for effective nerve repair, Acta Biomater., 2019, 90, 49–59 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, 
            et al., 3D printing of nerve conduits with nanoparticle-encapsulated RGFP966, Appl. Mater. Today, 2019, 16, 247–256 CrossRef .
J. Tao, 
            et al., 3D - Printed Nerve Conduits with Live Platelets for Effective Peripheral Nerve Repair, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30(42), 2004272 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Masquelet, et al., Reconstruction of the long bones by the induced membrane and spongy autograft, in Annales de chirurgie plastique et esthetique,  2000 Search PubMed .
W. R. Smith, 
            et al., Nanotechnology in orthopedics: a clinically oriented review, BMC Musculoskelet Disord., 2018, 19(1), 67 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Puértolas and S. Kurtz, Evaluation of carbon nanotubes and graphene as reinforcements for UHMWPE-based composites in arthroplastic applications: a review, J. Mech. Behav. Biomed. Mater., 2014, 39, 129–145 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Serra, 
            et al., Nanostructured severe plastic deformation processed titanium for orthodontic mini-implants, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2013, 33(7), 4197–4202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Andrzejowski and P. V. Giannoudis, The ‘diamond concept’for long bone non-union management, J. Orthop. Traumatol., 2019, 20(1), 1–13 Search PubMed .
X. Zhao, 
            et al., Active scaffolds for on-demand drug and cell delivery, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011, 108(1), 67–72 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Acharya and S. K. Sahoo, PLGA nanoparticles containing various anticancer agents and tumour delivery by EPR effect, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2011, 63(3), 170–183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Gu, 
            et al., Nanotechnology in the targeted drug delivery for bone diseases and bone regeneration, Int. J. Nanomed., 2013, 8, 2305–2317 CrossRef .
P. Rawat, 
            et al., Design and development of bioceramic based functionalized PLGA nanoparticles of risedronate for bone targeting: in vitro characterization and pharmacodynamic evaluation, Pharm. Res., 2015, 32(10), 3149–3158 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Dasgupta, 
            et al., Drugging DNA repair to target T-ALL cells, Leuk. Lymphoma, 2018, 59(7), 1746–1749 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          E. Haesler, R. Rayner and K. Carville, The pan pacific clinical practice guideline for the prevention and management of pressure injury, vol. 20,  2012, Cambridge Publishing, p. 13 Search PubMed .

          Pressure ulcer prevention and treatment following spinal cord injury: a clinical practice guideline for health-care professionals, J. Spinal Cord. Med.,  2001, 24, Suppl. 1, S40–S101 Search PubMed.
L. Santana-Blank, 
            et al., Water's many roles in laser photobiomodulation, J. Cancer Res. Treat., 2015, 3, 1–5 CrossRef CAS .
L. A. Santana-Blank, 
            et al., Photo - induced cytomorphologic changes in an advanced cancer phase I clinical trial, Lasers Surg. Med., 2002, 30(1), 18–25 CrossRef .
A. Magaz, 
            et al., Bioactive Silk-Based Nerve Guidance Conduits for Augmenting Peripheral Nerve Repair, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2018, 7(23), e1800308 CrossRef .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this paper.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Some typical hotspot smart biomaterials and their potential applications in artificial skin graft engineering, bone tissue engineering, and nerve conduit engineering.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic showing an example of nanostructured bioceramics to harvest biomorphic scaffolds with the help of 3D printing in the field of bone tissue engineering.	 

Nanostructured
Bioceramics
Nano-bioglasses	

	Biocompatible	Suboptimal biodegradation	
37–40

Improved and enhanced bone integration biodegradation.	Poor mechanical properties
Hydroxyapatite	

	High biocompatibility.	Poor mechanical properties	
41–45

Resembles the bone mineral phase.	Slow degradation rates in vivo
Closely resembles a variety of ions and can be doped in bone minerals. Osteoconductive.	Limited osteoinductivity
A wide variety of compositions are possible (e.g., powder, solid scaffolds, cement, and coatings).	

High biocompatibility.	

Tricalcium phosphate	

	Gives novel matrix deposition its fundamental building components.	Poor mechanical properties.	
46–49

To adjust its bioactivity and degradation, it may be doped with different ions. Osteoconductive.	

It is versatile and may be utilized in a variety of ways (e.g., powder, solid scaffolds, cement, and coatings).	

Rapid in vivo degradation.	

Nanocomposites
Ceramic/polymer composites (e.g., HA/PLGA, HA/alginate)	PLGA	High biocompatibility.	May have limited osteoinductivity.	
50–60


	

	Ease of fabrication.	Fabrication requires organic solvents.	

Can be used to prepare scaffolds with complex 3D architectures.	
	

Improved mechanical properties of scaffolds.	
	

Tunable degradation rate.	
	

Bio-hybrid composites	
	High biocompatibility.	Lack load-bearing capability.	
61–64

Organic solvents are not necessary for fabrication.	

Biologically-inspired.	

Bioactivity is excellent.	


Nanostructured piezoelectric materials
Ceramics with piezoelectric properties (e.g., BT, BN, and ZnO)	Barium titanate (BT)	Piezoelectric properties that are consistent.	Potential for cytotoxicity behavior.	
68,74–86



	Potential for osteoinduction is desirable.	

Polymers with piezoelectric properties (e.g., PLLA, PHBV, PVDF, and their copolymers)	

	Non-toxicity and biocompatibility. Manufacturing adaptability. High impact resistance and strength.	Poor biodegradability.
Composite piezoelectric polymer-ceramic	—	Ability to modify and improve composite properties such as mechanical, piezoelectric, biodegradability, and Bioactivity.	Insufficient data on the piezoelectric properties of some composite materials.
Nanostructured electrically conductive materials
Conductive for nanomaterials (non-polymeric, such as graphene or gold nanoparticles)	

	Outstanding mechanical properties.	Concerns regarding their biocompatibility and long-term safety of non-degradability.	
87–100

High electrical conductivity ensures that bioelectric impulses are reliably delivered.	

Nanopolymers that conduct electricity (e.g., polyheterocyclic family of conductive polymers)	Structures of conducting polymers (from top to bottom): polypyrrole, polythiophene, polyparaphenylene, polyaniline	Enhanced biocompatibility and biodegradability.	Inadequate mechanical and processing properties.

	

	Flexibility in manufacturing.	A lack of animal studies evaluating their in vivo performance.

	
	

Nanostructured magnetically
Responsive materials
Magnetic nanoparticles (MNPs) and magnetoelectric composites	

	The qualities of superparamagnetic remote (external) stimulation cue delivery ability.	Biocompatibility and long-term safety are unclear.	
44,101–115


Inorganic nanostructure delivery system
Ceramics (e.g., HA and TCP)	HA	Intrinsic osteoconductive properties. Wide functionalization of their surface.	Poor biodegradability profile.	
36,118–127



	
	Low payload yield.
Oxides of metals or metalloids (e.g., silica)	

	Customizable mesoporous framework.	Cytotoxic effects at specific particle sizes and/or concentrations.	
128–143

Encapsulation of bioactive compounds on the surface of a material.	

Architecture and topography that can be altered.	

Adhesion and proliferation of cells may be improved.	

Organic nanostructure delivery system
Synthetic polymers (e.g., PLA and PLGA)	PLGA	Easily accessible. Biocompatibility is generally positive. Numerous changeable features, e.g., L/G ratio and molecular weight. Cross-linkers or surface modification may be used to modify.	Payload yield is low. Burst discharge. Difficulties associated with achieving continuous discharge. Certain polymers degrade into cytotoxic compounds.	
120,144–149



	
	

Natural polymers (e.g., gelatin, chitosan)	Gelatin	Easily available. Biocompatibility and biodegradability are good. Properties similar to that of living organisms. It can be altered with cross-linkers or surface functionalization.	Low payload yield. Rapid breakdown in vivo.	
146,150–161



	
	


	
	Burst release. Controlled release is difficult to achieve.
Composite nanostructure delivery system
Composites	—	Increased loading efficiency.	Typically, it requires a higher level of synthesis.	
158,162–170

Flexible release kinetics.	

Long-term release.	

An effort to maximize the unique qualities of each material.	


Metal	
	Biocompatible metallic scaffolds with appropriate mechanical qualities.	Biocompatible with excellent mechanical properties.	Non-biodegradable	

Tantalum	Natural element	Biodegradable and corrosion-proof materials.	Widely utilized as implant biomaterials.	For the revision surgery almost no degradation for removing the implant.	
172–175

Magnesium	Natural element	Permeable and biodegradable implant.	Mechanical characteristics comparable to that of human bone.	Metal ion or particle leaching leads to toxic risk.	
176–182

Titanium and titanium alloys	Synthetic alloy	Biocompatibility, corrosion resistance, and a comparable elasticity modulus for trabecular bone.	Strong bone affinity	Non-biodegradable	
183–187

Nickel-titanium alloy (nitinol)	Synthetic alloy	Unique mechanical characteristics (e.g., the shape memory and superelastic effects).	Metals with low elasticity modulus, pseudo-elasticity, and high damping potential matching the characteristics of natural bone.	The high rigidity of titanium may promote stress shielding and implant loosening despite the fact that nitinol shows almost no deterioration.	
188–191

Natural polymer	
	Specific breakdown rates and excellent biological characteristics are similar to extracellular matrix.	Biocompatible degradation.	Low mechanical strength.	

Collagen	Natural protein	Natural bone organic materials play an important	Biodegradable. Variety of scaffolds.	Management and sanitation both are difficult.	
192–194


	
	Role.	
	
	

Gelatin	Polypeptide	Denaturalized collagen.	Creating mixtures through cross-linking.	
	
169,195–197

Silk fibroin	Polypeptide	Mechanical characteristics of silk fibroin are good.	
	
	
198–200

Chitosan	Polysaccharide	Positively charged polysaccharide are biocompatible to resist bacteria.	
	
	
201

Alginate	Polysaccharide	Negatively charged polysaccharide, may be crosslink and printed by injection.	
	
	
202–204

Hyaluronic acid	Glycosaminoglycan	Negatively charged glycosaminoglycan, biocompatible and can create hydrogel by crosslinking.	Easy chemical functionalization and degradability.	
	
200,205–208

Synthetic polymer	
	Mechanical and physical attributes can be changed.	Acidic degradation may produce negative tissue responses.	
	

PLA, PGA and PLGA	Polyester	Materials for clinical applications are FDA-approved.	Changing the degree of hydroxylation allows for control over water solubility and crystallinity.	Lack of cell adhesion and hydrophobicity.	
209–211

PCL	Polyester	Crystallinity and mechanical strength are outstanding.	
In situ crosslinking and printing by injection.	It takes years to deteriorate.	
212–215

PVA	Polyvinyl ester	Hydroxylated synthetic polyvinyl acetate.	The shape, porosity, and degradation rate of implantable devices may be tailored to meet specific requirements.	
	
216–219

PPF	Polyester	It has several non-saturable double bonds and hazardous crosslinks.	Customized mechanical strength and deterioration rates.	
	
220,221

Polyurethane (PU)	Plastic polymer	Outstanding mechanical properties.	
	
	
222–224

Bioinert ceramic	
	Implanted tissue cannot be used for medical reactions.	
	
	
225–228

Aluminum, e.g., a-aluminum oxide (Al2O3)	Metal oxide	Mechanical qualities are improved, whereas biological activity is absent.	
	
	

Zirconia	Metal oxide	Structures are interconnected but do not have chemical or biological interactions between their constituent parts.	
	
	
229–231

Bioactive ceramic	
	Post-implantation medical responses may be seen in live tissue.	
	
	

HA	Phosphate mineral	Bone is mostly composed of inorganic materials.	Osteoconductive, nontoxic and biocompatible.	
	
227,232–234

Tricalcium phosphate (TCP), e.g., beta-tricalcium phosphate (b-TCP)	Calcium salt	Calcium/phosphorus ratio is comparable to natural bone tissue.	Non-irreversible rejection of calcium and phosphorus, but also biocompatible.	α-TCP degrades rapidly and dissolves rapidly. The rate of degradation and the rate of osteogenesis are incompatible.	
127,198,235–237

Calcium sulfate (CaSO4)	Calcium salt	Excellent post-surgical material.	
	
	
238–241

Akermanite (Ca/Si/Mg)	Melilite mineral	A low deterioration rate and excellent mechanical properties.	
	
	
242–244


	
	In comparison to β-TCP, this compound improves osteogenic differentiation and increases gene expression.	
	
	

Diopside (MgCaSi2O6)	Inosilicate mineral	Fast firing and strong thermal expansion capabilities at low temperatures.	
	
	
245–248

Bioactive glasses (BGs)	Glass ceramic biomaterial	Main components for Na2O, CaO, SiO2 and P2O5; brittleness.	
	
	
249–255


Metal matrix composite	Ti6Al4V	
	Comparable to human bone, improved mechanical shield.	
259,260

Ti6Al4V	Tantalum (Ta)	Ta promotes bone formation.	
261

Ti6Al4V	Simvastatin/hydrogel	Neovascularization, osteointegration, and bone ingrowth improved significantly.	
262

Ti6Al4V	HA/pDA	Accelerated bone regeneration and enhanced new bone fusion.	
263

Ti6Al4V/Fibrin glue	Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and BMP-2.	Significantly increased bone formation and angiogenesis.	
275

Mg-Zn	Nano-hydroxyapatite derived from fish bones (fHA).	Better implant-tissue interactions by accelerated biomineralization and decreased degradation of composites.	
256

Polymer matrix composites	Bioactive glass (BG)	Collagen-glycosaminoglycan (CG)	Bioengineering encourages bone tissue regeneration and overcomes difficulties in tissue transplantation.	
276

Poly(L/DL lactide)(PLDL)/PCL	Osteogenon-drug	Osteogenon improved cell adhesion, cell differentiation, and mineralization.	
277

PEG/PU	BMSCs	Thermal stability, regulation, degradation at acidic pH (5.8), biodegradability, cell compatibility, and good porosity characterizes the polymer matrix.	
278

PLA	Bioactive organically modified glass (ormoglass)	It varies the characteristics of the fibers by changing the trial parameters (roughness, stiffness, and morphology).	
268

Poly(D,L-lactide) (PDLLA)	BGs and CuO/ZnO	Incorporation of Cu- and Zn-doped BG in	
265


	
	PDLLA may lead to enhanced bioactivity in scaffolds.	

Polarized poly(L-lactide) (PLLA)	Ca2+/Mn4+ co-doped	By incorporating bioactive Ca/Mn components, their piezoelectric properties might boost osteogenic activity in vitro and in vivo.	
257

BaTiO3 nanofiber
Ceramic matrix composites	Titanium dioxide	PLGA/gentamicin	It was confirmed that gentamicin had excellent antibacterial properties, and the scaffolds were compatible with osteoblast-like cells (MG-63).	
267

HA/β-TCP	BMP-2	Continuous integration potential for bone tissue engineering.	
264

β-TCP	Iron-containing	Calcium phosphate (CaP) ceramic bone conduction characteristics may be aided by the presence of iron, permitting the production of engineered bone tissue.	
266


n-HA/poly(D,L-lactide coglycolide) (PLAGA)	hMSCs	500 ng of rhBMP-2 added to the PELA/HA scaffolds for testing bone regeneration.	
279

HA/Poly(D,L-lactic acid)-co-poly-(ethylene glycol)-co-poly(D,L-lactic acid)(PELA)	BMSCs/rhBMP-2	Compounded compressive strength increased.	
280

Tungsten disulfide nanoparticles (WS2)	Macroporous bioactive glass	
In vitro bioactivity and biocompatibility of the scaffolds may be improved.	
258

Functional composite	Photo crosslinking of PCL and bioactive polydopamine coating polypyrrole (PPy), HA, gelatin and mesoporous silica	Temperature	Poly-dopamine coating, the ability to automatically transform irregular flaws and enhanced bioactivity.	
273


	Electrical stimulation	Excellent mechanical properties increased protein adsorption.	
272

PLGA	Black phosphorus (BP)/SrCl2	Scaffolds demonstrated high biocompatibility and bone regeneration potential.	
270

Polypyrrole/alginate (PPy/Alg)	hMSCs and electrical stimulation	Cell adhesion and growth improved.	
271

Gelatin/bioactive glass	Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(4-styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT: PSS) and electrical stimulation	PEDOT stabilizes the scaffold framework and improves the cellular characteristics of mesenchymal stem cells.	
269

Transglutaminase crosslinked gelatin (TG-Gel)	BMP-2, matrix rigidity and mechanical signaling	Osteogenic differentiation was enhanced by the combination of hydrogel hardness with BMP-2.	
281


 	Fig. 3  Schematic illustrating the use of various nano-biomaterials to harvest artificial skin grafts with the help of piezoelectric, infrared and electrospinning modalities.	 


Chitosan, HA	nAg	
E. coli, S. aureus, MRSA, P. aeruginosa, K. pneumonia	Gram +ve + Gram −ve	Efficacy in vitro against human dermal fibroblasts with minimal cytotoxicity against microorganisms (at low concentrations of nAg).	
286

Poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) carboxymethyl-chitosan	nAg	
E. coli
	Gram −ve	Efficacy against bacteria in vitro, but not tested on eukaryotic cells.	
291

Chitosan, 4-(ethoxycarbonyl) phenyl-1-aminooxobutanoic acid	nAg	
E. coli, S. aureus, P. aeruginosa	Gram +ve + Gram −ve	Efficacy against bacteria in vitro, but not tested on eukaryotic cells.	
292

Chitosan, PVA	nAg	
E. coli
	
	Efficacy against bacteria in vitro, but not tested on eukaryotic cells.	
293

Chitosan, gelatin	nAg	
E. coli, S. aureus	Gram +ve + Gram −ve	Enhanced wound healing in a rabbit model with antibacterial activity with no cytotoxic to mouse fibroblasts in vitro.	
294

Biosynthesized bacterial nanocellulose	nAg	
S. aureus, P. aeruginosa, S. epidermidis	Gram +ve + Gram −ve	Efficacy in vitro against human dermal fibroblasts, with no harmful impact (at low concentrations of nAg).	
295

2-Acrylamido-2-methylpropane sulfonic acid sodium salt	nAg	MRSA, P. aeruginosa	Gram +ve + Gram −ve	
In vitro antibacterial activity with no deleterious impact on human skin fibroblasts; bacterial colonization prevention in a porcine burn model.	
296

Sulfonated polystyrene	nAg	
E. coli, S. aureus, P. aeruginosa, S. epidermidis	Gram +ve + Gram −ve	Efficacy against bacteria in vitro, but not tested on eukaryotic cells.	
297

Chitosan	nAu	
S. aureus, P. aeruginosa	Gram +ve + Gram −ve	Effect against biofilm-forming antibiotic resistant types of bacteria; however, no cytotoxicity was seen in vitro against human skin keratinocytes.	
298

Alginate, polyethylene glycol diacrylate	Cu-doped bioactive glass nanoparticles	
E. coli, S. aureus	Gram +ve + Gram −ve	
In vitro antibacterial activity; accelerated collagen deposition and enhanced early angiogenesis of diabetic full-thickness wounds in a mouse model.	
299

Chitosan-g-pluronic copolymer	Nanocurcumin	
E. coli, S. aureus, P. aeruginosa, S. typhimurium	Gram +ve + Gram −ve	
In vitro antibacterial action with no cytotoxic impact on human dermal fibroblasts; increased collagen deposition, granulation, and wound maturity in a mouse model of burn wounds.	
300

Chitosan, gelatin	nFe3O4	
E. coli, S. aureus	Gram +ve + Gram −ve	Efficacy against bacteria in vitro, but not tested on eukaryotic cells.	
301

2-Acrylamido-2-methylpropane sulfonic acid, acrylamide, acrylonitrile, acrylic acid	nFe3O4	
E. coli, B. subtilis	Gram +ve + Gram −ve	Efficacy against bacteria in vitro, but not tested on eukaryotic cells.	
302

Chitosan, pectin	nTiO2	
E. coli, S. aureus, P. aeruginosa, B. subtilis	Gram +ve + Gram −ve	
In vitro antibacterial activity with no cytotoxic effect on mouse fibroblasts; rat wound healing accelerated.	
287

Chitosan	nTiO2	
S. aureus
	Gram +ve	Bactericidal effect in vitro; in rat model wound healing increased.	
289

Chitosan, ECM sheet from human adipose tissue	nTiO2	
E. coli, S. aureus	Gram +ve + Gram −ve	
In vitro antibacterial action; in a rat model, stimulation of granulation tissue development, re-epithelialization, and angiogenesis.	
290

Chitosan, poly(N-vinylpyrrolidone)	nTiO2	
E. coli, S. aureus, P. aeruginosa, B. subtilis	Gram +ve + Gram −ve	Antibacterial activity with no cytotoxic effect against mouse fibroblasts in vitro; accelerated healing of open excision type wounds in a rat model.	
303

Poly(N-vinylpyrrolidone)	nTiO2	
S. aureus
	Gram +ve	Efficacy against bacteria in vitro, but not tested on eukaryotic cells.	
304

Chitosan	nZnO	
P. aeruginosa, S. intermedius, S. hyicus	Gram +ve + Gram −ve	
In vitro antibacterial activity with no cytotoxic effect on human skin fibroblasts; quicker wound healing and re-epithelialization in a rat model.	
305

Bacterial cellulose	nZnO	
E. coli, S. aureus, P. aeruginosa, C. freundii	Gram +ve + Gram −ve	
In vitro antibacterial activity; faster wound healing in a burn mouse model.	
306

Alginate	nZnO	
E. coli, S. aureus, MRSA	Gram +ve + Gram −ve	
In vitro antibacterial activity with little cytotoxicity against human dermal fibroblasts (at low nZnO concentrations); re-epithelialization in an ex vivo porcine skin model.	
284

Chitosan, alginate	nZnO	
S. aureus
	Gram +ve	
In vitro antibacterial activity with little cytotoxicity against human cervical cancer cells (HeLa cell line); enhanced tissue formation and wound healing in a mouse model.	
307

Germanium (Ge), diamond like carbons (DLC)	DLC-Ge nanocomposite	
S. aureus, P. aeruginosa	Gram +ve + Gram −ve	Suppressed bacterial adherence at a rate of 40% for P. aeruginosa and 25% for S. aureus bacterial strains, respectively.	
308


Skin wound in rat	Ceramic-coated sheet	5.6–25 μm (maximal intensity of 8–12 μm)	Increase wound healing and expression of TGF-β1.	
16

Dermal abrasions in mice	Diode laser	810 nm	Increase collagen accumulation and healing effect.	
314

Soft tissues in rat	Diode laser	904 nm	Increase wound healing and exclusion zone (EZ) growth (1H-NMR 1/T).	
315,316

Soft tissues in rat	Diode laser	904 nm	Increase wound healing, membrane effect measured by 1H-NMR tau(c).	
315,317

Human skin	Radiator equipped with a water filter	600–1500 nm	Formed free radicals and reduced concentration of β carotene antioxidants.	
318

Human dermal fibroblasts	Water-filtered IR-A irradiation source	760–1440 nm	Increased expression of MMP-1 in the dermis.	
319

Breast cancer cells and normal breast epithelial cells.	Blackbody source equipped with 3–5 μm filter	3–5 μm	Stopped G2/M cancer cell cycle progression and changed actin filament production with microtubule network remodeling.	
320


 	Fig. 4  Possibility of the addition of bioactive substances during different electrospinning stages. Reproduced with permission.4 Copyright 2021, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 5  Types of electrospinning: (A) single electrospinning, (B) multiple electrospinning and (C) co-axial electrospinning. Reproduced with permission.4 Copyright 2021, Elsevier.	 


ZnO NRsa	ZnO NRs aligned on PDMSa	
In vitro: increased skin-cell regeneration activity of a bidirectionally produced ZnO NR-based piezoelectric patch.	
342


	
	Enhancement of wound healing in rats in vivo.	

ZnO, P(VDF-TrFE)a	P(VDF-TrFE)/ZnO nanocomposite scaffolds	Increased cell viability, adhesion, and proliferation in vitro.	
348


	
	Promotion of angiogenesis in vivo.	

P(VDF)a	Polyurethane/PVDF scaffolds	Enhancement of fibroblast migration, adhesion, and secretion in vitro.	
349


	
	Increased fibrosis in vivo.	

P(VDF-TrFE) nanofiber	P(VDF-TrFE) nanofiber scaffolds	Increased fibroblast cell proliferation rate by 1.6 times in vitro; 1.5 V, 52.5 nA electrical output.	
350


	
	High electrical output of 6 mV and 6 μA through rat leg motion in vivo.	

PVDF nanofibers	Bioinspired hybrid patch with PVDF nanofibers aligned on mussel-inspired hydrogel matrix	Growth and migration of fibroblasts, promoting collagen deposition, angiogenesis, and re-epithelialization in vitro. Approximately one-third reduction in a mouse wound in vivo.	
351

Polydopamine	Polydopamine coating on chitosan film (CM@DA)	Enhancement of wound healing in rats by elevation of Hsp90 and HIF-1α* expression in vivo.	
352

BTOa	TiO2/BTO/Au heterostructure	Photodynamic bacteria are killed by the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS*) in vitro.	
353


	
	Accelerated wound healing in infected wounds in vivo.	

PLLA hybrid	Piezoelectric ‘double-layered PLLA with nonpiezoelectric ‘meso-poly(lactic acid) (meso-PLA) triboelectric nanogenerator’	The hybrid NG generated 0.31 mW of power, which was 11% more than the PLLA-based PENG in vitro.	
354


	
	Not tested in vivo.	


Collagen, PLGA, glucophage	Acellular	Diabetes wounds in rats heal more quickly when collagen levels are higher.	
355

Bovine type I collagen, HA	Acellular	Enhancement of skin defect repair in the full-thickness skin defect rat model.	
363

Collagen, alginate, curcumin-loaded chitosan nanoparticles	Acellular	Diabetes wounds healed more quickly and completely re-epithelialized in the rat model.	
364

Gelatin, carboxymethyl chitosan	Acellular	Mouse embryonic fibroblasts were shown to express type I collagen and VEGF in vitro.	
365

Montmorillonite, bacterial cellulose	Acellular	Accelerated wound healing, granulation tissue development, and re-epithelialization of the burn sites in the murine model rats.	
366

Carboxymethyl cellulose, PEG	Acellular	More quickly and complete healing of full-thickness wounds in diabetic rats.	
367

Silk fibroin, PLACL, vitamin E, curcumin	Acellular	Increased fibroblast proliferation and collagen production in vitro.	
368

Fibrin	Cellular (fibroblasts)	Improvement of diabetic rat wound healing.	
369

Collagen, HA, EGF	Cellular (fibroblasts)	Enhanced fibroblasts emit more VEGF and HGF in vitro.	
370

PCL, gum tragacanth, curcumin	Cellular (MCSs)	Enhanced granulation tissue development, collagen deposition, and faster healing in diabetes rat models.	
371

Chitosan	Cellular (fibroblasts, hair follicle stem cells)	Acquired epidermis and dermis similar to native skin in individuals with acute partial or full-thickness skin lesions*.	
372

Bovine type I collagen	Cellular (fibroblasts, keratinocytes)	Proliferation and migration of fibroblasts and keratinocytes in vitro, respectively.	
373

Fibrin-coated poly-L-lactide (PLLA), collagen	Cellular (fibroblasts, keratinocytes)	Skin substitutes containing dermal, epidermal, and hypodermal layers were developed in vitro.	
374

Fibrin	Cellular (fibroblasts, keratinocytes, ADSCs)	Improvement of diabetic rat wound healing.	
375

Hesperidin-coated alginate, chitosan	Acellular	As shown by the time-kill and MTT assays, hydrogels have antibacterial characteristics as well as a good effect on cell growth in vitro.	
376


	
	The manufactured hydrogels had better-wound closure than the gauze-treated wound (the control group), with the alginate/chitosan/10% hesperidin group having the best wound closure percentage in vivo.	

AgNPs/PLA/PEG nanofilm	Acellular	Antibacterial testing revealed that the incorporation of biogenic AgNPs into PLA/PEG nanofibers completely inhibited the development of P. aeruginosa and S. aureus in vitro.	
377


 	Fig. 6  Schematic representing various biomaterials used as nerve conduits.	 

 	Fig. 7  Biomaterials used in neuronal regeneration. (A) Hydrogel and NGC examples utilized in CNS and PNS regeneration. In CNS regeneration, hydrogels such as drug-loaded hydrogels, cell-loaded hydrogels, conductive hydrogels, and channeled hydrogels are being developed. Porous NGCs, micro-grooved NGCs, sponge-filled NGCs, multichannel NGCs, filament-filled NGCs, and hydrogel-filled NGCs are used in PNS regeneration. (B) Potential strategies of biomaterial scaffolds for CNS and PNS regeneration. Neural- and vascular-related cells are used to generate more ideal cells and cellular spheroids. Cells (or cellular spheroids) and growth factors are mixed with pre-gel solutions to create a self-healing injectable hydrogel or 3D-printed NGC. For CNS regeneration, self-healing hydrogel may be injected into the injured location of the brain or spinal cord using a long, thin needle. 3D-manufactured NGC may be surgically implanted to bridge a peripheral nerve gap for PNS regeneration. Three-dimensional (3D); central nervous system (CNS); nerve guidance conduit (NGC), and peripheral nervous system (PNS).	 


PLA	Synthetic, degradable	Asymmetric conduit	Single-walled conduit, electrospun fibres	Drug release	
391–394

PLGA	Synthetic, degradable	Aligned nanofibrous structure	Multiple channel; electrospun fibres	Plasmid DNA; Schwann cells; self-assembling peptides for growth factor delivery; drug delivery	
394–399

PCL	Synthetic, degradable	Loaded with nerve growth factor (NGF)	Porous scaffold	Neural stem cells	
394,400,401

PCLEEP	Synthetic, degradable	
	Electrospun fibres	Drug delivery, siRNA	
402–404

P(HEMA) and copolymers	Synthetic, non-degradable	Absorb a liquid or solution and become a hydrogel.	Hydrogel; scaffold	Drug delivery; modified with SIKVAV	
394,405–408

Chitosan	Natural; degradable	Loaded with alpha-lipoic acid	Porous scaffold, conduit	Endothelial cells; collagen hydrogel as filler; bone marrow stem cells	
394,409–413

Collagen	Natural, degradable	Loaded with Cerebrospinal Fluid	Electrospun fibres; oriented pore channels; hydrogel	Growth factors; chondroitinase ABC, stem cells	
394,412,414–417

Gelatin	Natural, degradable	Tricalcium Phosphate and Glutaraldehyde crosslinking	Scaffold	Neuronal + endothelial cell lines	
394,418,419

Agarose	Natural	High conductivity and stability in the oxidized state.	Hydrogel/scaffold	Growth factors	
394,420,421

Hyaluronic acid	Natural	Viscosity, elasticity, lubrication and a high capacity for holding water	Porous scaffold, scaffold coating, hydrogel	Growth factors, cells	
394,422–425


Hyaluronic acid	Microbial fermentation produces it on a large number.437	Very poor mechanical properties (too weak to be used in the manufacture of a conduit).438,439
Promotes axonal regeneration.438,439
Used successfully as conduit internal fillers.440	Fast degradation.441,442
Alginate	Exceptional chemical adaptability.443	Mechanical resistance is weak when used as a conduit when not mixed with other polymers.447
Blend able with different polymers.443
Manufactured with various techniques (electrospinning, 3D printing).444,445	High degradation rate.448
Used successfully as conduit internal fillers.446
Chitin and Chitosan	After cellulose chitin is the most abundant polysaccharide in nature.449	Low mechanical strength.458
At low-cost, chitosan can be easily derived from chitin.450
Axonal regeneration and decreased scar formation are promoted by chitosan.451–453
Degradation products have a favorable effect on nerve regeneration.454,455
Various methods for increasing mechanical strength: double-layered conduits456,457 or biomaterial mixing.458,459
Transparency, adaptability, and resistance to collapse.452,460
Collagen	The protein found in the greatest abundance in the human body.461	Mechanical stress resistance is low, and manipulability is poor.465
An excellent medium for medication and cell delivery.382	There are certain scar neuroma cases in patients.466,467
Its physical characteristics may be altered at various sections of the same conduit.462	

It is possible to get topographical signals that direct axon regrowth.463,464	

Gelatin	Plasticity, adhesiveness and low antigenicity.468	Cross-linking chemicals are required because gelatin conduits are water-soluble and easily collapse.470,471
Bioactive compounds may be readily integrated into the gelatin scaffolds and progressively released throughout their disintegration, due to their chemical characteristics and degradation kinetics.469	

Silk fibroin	Profitable and low cost because of its ease of purification and availability in large quantities.472	In general, solutions of silk fibroin are weak and fragile.472
High fracture and compression resistance, as well as good elasticity and flexibility.473
Degradation influenced by processing methods.457,474
A negative immunological response.475
Good mechanical strength.475
Fibrin	Adhesive characteristics.476,477	High degradation rate.480
No collapse.478,479	It is more efficient to use autologous fibrin than commercial ones.481
Porosity sufficient to allow for nutrient uptake.478,479 Prevents fibrous tissue formation.478,479	

Keratin	Hydrophilic surface, biodegradable, and bioactive.482 Good as conduit filler.483,484	As a conduit, it has a low mechanical resistance.482
Usable blended with other polymers.485	Fast degradation rate.482
PHB	Maintain constant pH during degradation.486	The reabsorption process takes a long period (over 2 years).488
Exceptional mechanical and physical properties that altered by various manufacturing techniques.487
Early vascularization after implantation.488	Reduction in elasticity and ductility because of a tendency to crystallize.490
Low levels of inflammatory infiltration.489	Fragility and lack of hydrophilicity.490
PHBV	Flexibility and ease of processing are two advantages over PHB.490 Structuring and easy to handle.491	In compared to petroleum-based synthetic polymers, this material has a small processing window and a low strain-at-break.492
Cellulose/soy protein	Enhanced reconstruction of motor function.493	Low mechanical properties.493


PBH	Electrospinning and salt-leaching procedures	
In vitro mechanical and physical analyses of conduits.	The wettability and permeability of the salt-leached scaffolds were higher.	
487


	
	Nanofibrous scaffolds may provide cell adhesion and morphology.	

Conduit obtained from PHB sheets (Astra Tech, Göteborg, Sweden), consisting of compressed PHB fibers	Nerve regeneration 120 days following repair of 2 or 4 cm rabbit peroneal nerve gaps.	PHB tubes were non-friable, flexible, and inconsistently firm. In all animals, regeneration occurred over 2 and 4 cm gaps.	
488

Conduits obtained from PHB sheets (Astra Tech, Göteborg, Sweden), consisting of compressed PHB fibers	Nerve regeneration up to 63 days after repairing a 4 cm rabbit peroneal nerve lesion with a PHB conduit.	PHB tubes were observed to be coated with a very thin pseudo-capsule at all harvest locations.	
505


	
	PHB tube vascularized after 21 days.	


	
	Regenerated nerve fibers parallel to the PHB conduit long axis.	


	
	An empty PHB conduit, peripheral nerve regeneration over a 4 cm gap.	

Conduits obtained from PHB sheets (Astra Tech, Göteborg, Sweden), consisting of compressed PHB fibers	Nerve regeneration after 30 days closure of 10 mm nerve gap in rat sciatic nerves.	Good at nerve endings and through the conduit wall.	
489


	
	PHB conduit showed little inflammatory infiltration and excellent nerve regeneration.	


	
	Nerve regeneration in PHB conduits did not completely coincide.	

PHBV	Nanofibrous electrospun sheets rolled around a cylindrical rod and sealed with heat to obtain a conduit	30 mm rat sciatic nerve gap healed with nanofibrous PHBV conduit.	Restoration of nerve.	
506


	
	The PHBV conduit group and the autograft experimental group had similar skeletal muscle reinnervation and myelinated nerve fiber diameter distribution.	

Nanofibrous electrospun sheets rolled and sealed with heat to obtain a conduit	30 mm rat sciatic nerve gap repaired with nanofibrous PHBV conduit.	In both experimental groups, motor and nociceptive functional recovery was similar (PHBV conduit or autograft).	
491


	Several behavioural tests were done to examine motor.	
	

PHBV conduit designed on micropatterned silicon wafers	30 mm rat sciatic nerve gap were repaired using PHVB conduit, sensory and motor function restored.	Schwann and glial cells were found in regenerated nerves.	
507

For both conduit experimental groups, nerve continuity was restored and myelinated fibers were found. Recovery of motor and sensory functions was reported in both conduit experimental groups.
Aligned nanofibrous PHBV-based conduits	For 10 weeks, a 10 mm rat sciatic nerve lesion was repaired.	Sciatic nerves were effectively rejoined.	
508


	
	Myelinated axons decreased in the experimental group.	

PHBV conduit made by oriented nanofibers obtained through electrospinning technique.	For 1, 2, and 4 months, a 10 mm rat sciatic nerve lesion was healed using the PHBV conduit.	Nerve regeneration within the conduit was similar to that with autograft, where autograft group regenerated better and quicker.	
509


	Macroscopic examination and morphological evaluation.	
	


	Analyses of function and electrophysiology.	
	


	
	No variations in axon number or myelin sheath repair thickness in 8 weeks, where PHBV conduit group were more vascularized than autograft group.	


	
	All experimental groups had functional recovery.	

PLA	Rotor-twisting into filaments and microbraiding into single or multilayer tubes.	These conduits-maintained lumen and wall integrity after subcutaneous insertion in rats.	Mechanical strength of PLA sutures increased.	
502

Fabricating nanofibrous conduit scaffolds with single or multiple microchannels.	The conduits were implanted into a 10 mm lesion in the rat sciatic nerve.	Nerve regeneration was seen in all animals, with histologically evident axon-Schwann cell regeneration units and little inflammation.	
501,504

Nanofibrous conduits fabricated by injection molding/TIPS	The surface area is more than three orders of magnitude bigger than that of solid wall tubes.	Increase in protein adsorption and cell adhesion.	
503

Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this paper.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
