Design and fabrication of carbon dots for energy conversion and storage   - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8CS00750K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8CS00750K
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 2315-2337Design and fabrication of carbon dots for energy conversion and storage†

        
          
            Chao 
            Hu
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Mingyu 
            Li
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Jieshan 
            Qiu
          
          
        
      *bc and 

        
          
            Ya-Ping 
            Sun
          
          
        
      d
aSchool of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710049, P. R. China
bLiaoning Key Lab for Energy Materials and Chemical Engineering, School of Chemical Engineering, State Key Lab of Fine Chemicals, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian 116024, P. R. China
cState Key Laboratory of Chemical Resource Engineering, College of Chemical Engineering, Beijing University of Chemical Technology, Beijing 100029, P. R. China. E-mail: qiujs@mail.buct.edu.cn
dDepartment of Chemistry and Laboratory for Emerging Materials & Technology, Clemson University, Clemson, SC 29634-0973, USA
Received 
      15th December 2018
    First published on 18th March 2019AbstractThe emergence of carbon dots (CDs) has opened up an exciting new field in the science and technology of carbon nanomaterials and has attracted increasing interest in recent years. Due to their diverse physicochemical properties and favourable attributes, such as quantum confinement effects and abundant surface defects, CDs and their derived hybrids have shown exciting and indispensable prospects in the energy conversion and storage fields. Considering the latest developments, in this review, we comprehensively summarize the classification and structure of CDs. Three strategies for structural engineering of CDs are presented and analyzed, in terms of the tuning of size and crystallinity, and the methodologies for surface modification and heteroatom doping, with a focus on the relationship among the synthesis methods, structure and properties of the concerned CDs. More importantly, the recent advances in energy-oriented applications of CDs, including photo- and electro-catalysis, light-emitting diodes, photovoltaic cells, lithium/sodium ion batteries and supercapacitors, will be systematically highlighted. Finally, we discuss and outline the remaining major challenges and opportunities for CDs in the future.
Chao Hu
Chao Hu received his PhD degree from Dalian University of Technology in 2015. He is currently a lecturer in the School of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong University, China. He has worked as a visiting scholar for one year in the Institute of Chemical Sciences and Engineering at the École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL) in Switzerland. His main research is focused on the synthesis of functional carbon materials for energy storage and conversion applications.
Mingyu Li
Mingyu Li received her BS degree from the School of Chemical Engineering at Dalian University of Technology (DUT) in 2013. She is currently a PhD candidate under the supervision of Prof. Jieshan Qiu in the School of Chemical Engineering at DUT. Her research is mainly focused on the synthesis of fluorescent carbon dots and their applications in optoelectronics.
Jieshan Qiu
Jieshan Qiu received his PhD degree in organic chemical engineering from Dalian University of Technology in 1990. Now he is a Cheung-Kong Distinguished Professor of Carbon Science and Chemical Engineering, and the Dean of College of Chemical Engineering, Beijing University of Chemical Technology, China. His research encompasses both fundamental and applied aspects of carbon materials and science, with a focus on the methodologies for producing carbon materials from coal and coal-derived by-products such as coal tar pitch, and their applications in energy storage and conversion (solar cells, supercapacitor and batteries, etc.), catalysis and environment protection.
Ya-Ping Sun
Ya-Ping Sun received his PhD degree from Florida State University in 1989. After postdoctoral training at the University of Texas at Austin, he joined the Clemson faculty in 1992. He has been the Frank Henry Leslie Chair Professor of Natural & Physical Sciences since 2003. His research interests are primarily in carbon-based nanomaterials.
1. Introduction
Carbon nanomaterials, including fullerene, carbon nanotubes, graphene and graphdiyne, have successively drawn much attention in recent years due to their fascinating nanostructures, and favourable electronic, mechanical, optical and thermal properties.1–3 Most recently, luminescent carbon dots (CDs), as a new type of carbon nanomaterials, have been extensively pursued and studied. In striking contrast to semiconductor quantum dots, CDs are considered to be superior luminescent alternatives with low toxicity and low environmental hazard. CDs are also highlighted in terms of high specific surface area, excellent electron-transfer efficiency, tunable light-harvesting range (from deep UV to near-infrared), abundant edge defects, and especially their outstanding photoinduced redox properties that resemble those found in traditional semiconductor nanostructures, thus rendering them greatly attractive in a spectrum of applications, especially in energy-related areas such as photocatalysis, electrocatalysis and optoelectronic devices.
CDs were serendipitously discovered during purifying single-walled carbon nanotubes derived from arc-discharge soot.4 Using a preparative electrophoretic method, a mixture of unknown fluorescent nanoparticles was obtained. These carbonaceous nanoparticles were further fractionated into a number of components with size-dependent fluorescent properties. Afterwards, Sun et al. named these fluorescent nanoparticles quantum-sized carbon dots due to the similar spectral features and properties they share with their widely pursued silicon counterparts.5 The fluorescence spectra of the CDs are generally broad and dependent on the excitation wavelength, and cover from the visible to near-infrared range.
At present, CDs are generally defined as surface-passivated small carbon nanoparticles (typically the size less than 10 nm) that are brightly fluorescent.6 Surface passivation is apparently critical to their fluorescence properties. In the earlier studies, CDs were typically obtained from oxidation etching of bulk carbons such as graphite and carbon nanotubes, which offered them abundant oxygen-containing moieties at their surface and reliable water solubility and suitability for further functionalization.4,5 Due to the high percentage of oxygen content, some reported CDs have also been referred to as “carbogenic dots”.7–9 According to the different carbon cores, CDs can be mainly classified into three types: graphene quantum dots (GQDs), carbon nanodots (CNDs), and polymer dots (PDs) (Fig. 1).10 Single-layered GQDs (s-GQDs) possess one layer of graphene debris as their carbon cores, while multi-layered GQDs (m-GQDs) feature a graphitic nanocrystal structure. CNDs are quasi-spherical carbon nanoparticles without a distinct crystal lattice, which is predominantly composed of sp2/sp3 carbons or amorphous carbon together with embedded sp2-hybridized nanocrystalline regions. PDs are aggregated or cross-linked polymer nanoparticles derived from linear polymers or monomers.11 “Carbon quantum dots”, which are more accurately referred to as CNDs or m-GQDs, are loosely defined in some literature by the absence of the classical quantum confinement effect.6,12
 Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of the structure of CDs. 
The diversity of CDs is primarily attributed to the variety of carbon precursors and synthetic strategies. Approaches for the synthesis of CDs can be generally divided into two main categories: top-down and bottom-up methods.13 Top-down methods involve “breaking” larger carbon structures (graphite, graphene, carbon nanotubes, carbon black, coal, etc.) into smaller nanosized ones under harsh and strong conditions, such as arc-discharging, laser ablation, electrochemical etching or chemical oxidation. In contrast, bottom-up methods synthesize CDs from small molecules or polymer precursors under relatively facile and mild conditions, such as hydrothermal treatment, ultrasonic reaction, microwave-assisted pyrolysis, supported routes, etc. Top-down methods are beneficial to synthesize CDs with high crystallinity and intact structures,14–16 while bottom-up methods occasionally tend to yield CDs with an amorphous carbon core and abundant doping sites and surface functional groups.17,18
From both fundamental and applied perspectives, photoluminescence (PL) is one of the most appealing characteristics of CDs.19–21 The brightness of PL is quantitatively reflected by the value of emission quantum yield (QY), which is profoundly influenced by the synthetic methods and carbon precursors (Fig. 2). Top-down routes generally result in CDs with a relatively low QY compared with bottom-up routes, although specific precursors and technologic conditions should be taken into account. In most cases, CDs exhibit a broad PL profile and an excitation-dependent PL behaviour, that is, the emission peak position and intensity are both affected by the excitation wavelength. The maximum emission of the previously reported CDs is mostly located at the blue- or green-light region, while recent studies have successfully demonstrated the fabrication of red- and near-infrared-emissive CDs.22–24 The PL behaviour and QY of CDs can be theoretically controlled by the particle size and surface states (such as functional groups and heteroatom doping), and be significantly influenced by external circumstances (such as solvents, temperature, pH and pressure).25–29 Nevertheless, the conclusive mechanism of the PL is still an open debate and hence requires in-depth clarification. To date, four kinds of PL mechanisms have been proposed: quantum confinement effects of conjugated π-domains (suitable for s-GQDs), defect states (suitable for GQDs and CNDs), molecule states (suitable for CNDs and PDs) and crosslink-enhanced emission effects (suitable for PDs).10 In some cases, the electron transfer from the core of CDs to the surface should be considered, and thus CDs will emit through a core-surface electronic coupling mechanism.30 Additionally, other luminescence properties of CDs, including up-conversion PL,31,32 electrochemiluminescence,33–37 chemiluminescence,38,39 piezochromic luminescence,25,26 and phosphorescence40–42 have also been successively revealed and studied.
 Fig. 2  Quantum yields of CDs synthesized from different carbon precursors. The detailed information is summarized in Tables S1 and S2 in the ESI.† 
Moreover, CDs have been demonstrated to be excellent electron donors and/or electron acceptors.43 For example, the PL emission of PEG1500N-passivated CDs was quenched by the well-known electron acceptors of 4-nitrotoluene and 2,4-dinitrotoluene, with the observed Stern–Volmer quenching constants of 38 M−1 and 83 M−1, respectively.44 The bimolecular quenching constants of the same electron acceptors are 9.5 × 109 M−1 s−1 and 2.1 × 1010 M−1 s−1, respectively, which are beyond the upper limit for any bimolecular PL quenching process in solution, thus highlighting the high efficiency of the underlying electron transfer as well as the presence of static quenching contributions. On the other hand, CDs are similarly strong electron acceptors as well, and can efficiently quench the PL of known electron donors such as N,N-diethylaniline.44 These substantial redox properties of CDs will offer promise for their use in light-harvesting, energy conversion and related applications.
2. Structural engineering
2.1 Size and crystallinity control
Single-layered graphene is supposed to be a zero-band gap material with infinite Bohr radius. Nevertheless, the quantum confinement effect and band gap opening may arise in a nanoscale graphene sheet due to the localized π-electrons, especially when the size is less than 10 nm (that is, s-GQD). Moreover, the band gap and related PL emission of s-GQDs should be theoretically size-dependent, and the emission wavelength of s-GQDs red-shifts with increasing size. Using density functional theory (DFT) and time-dependent density functional theory (TDDFT), Chen et al. systematically investigated the influences of size and shape on the band gap and PL properties of s-GQDs.45 They found that s-GQDs fluoresce from deep UV to near infrared with increasing size (Fig. 3a). Specifically, the smallest s-GQDs (that is, benzene) emit at 235.2 nm, while 2.31 nm s-GQD emit at 999.5 nm. On varying the size of s-GQDs from 0.89 to 1.80 nm, the emission covers the entire visible light spectrum (400–770 nm). It was also revealed that s-GQDs with different edge configurations exhibit distinct quantum confinement properties. Armchair edges widen the band gap of s-GQDs due to the localized states scattered in the centre, while similarly-sized zigzag-edged s-GQDs have a relatively narrow band gap because of the localized states pushed to the edge sites.
 Fig. 3  (a) Calculated emission wavelength using a TDDFT method in a vacuum as a function of the diameter of s-GQDs. The solid line is the linear fitting of zigzag-edged s-GQDs (G1–G6). Reproduced with permission from ref. 45. Copyright 2014, the Royal Society of Chemistry. (b and c) TEM images of electrochemically synthesized CDs obtained at applied potentials of 0.5 V (b) and 2.5 V (c). Reproduced with permission from ref. 52. Copyright 2011, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
In fact, such a perfect s-GQD structure with tailored size and shape is practically hard to obtain. Normally, the crystallinity and size of CDs are simultaneously affected by synthetic routes and the corresponding process conditions. Taking citric acid-based CDs as an example, the carbon skeleton structure and size of CDs are both influenced by the pyrolysis temperature.8,46 Small fluorophore molecules are first formed at lower reaction temperatures (<180 °C).46 As the pyrolysis proceeds to a higher temperature (e.g., 230 °C), a spherical carbon core (polymer cluster or amorphous carbon) with a diameter of 19 nm is formed at the expense of the fluorophores or the initial molecules.8 Further pyrolysis (e.g., 300 °C) results in a significant shrinkage of the CDs in size. Actually, some other studies have demonstrated the graphitic character of the carbon core at high pyrolysis temperatures (>280 °C).47,48 Such a graphitized core of CDs is supposed to have a large impact on their light-harvesting ability that will be discussed later.49 Stepwise organic synthesis of CDs was reported by Li's group. They found that oxidative condensation of polyphenylene dendritic precursors by a solution chemistry method led to fused graphene moieties and the formation of GQDs containing 168, 132 and 170 conjugated carbon atoms, respectively.50 Hu et al. synthesized CDs from single-chain polymeric nanoparticles by a “bijective approach”, that is, each CD is generated from only one polymeric nanoparticle.51 Narrowly distributed and size-tunable CDs were obtained by controlling the amount of enediyne moiety in the linear polymer precursors. For the three sets of linear polymers with the enediyne moieties of 266, 42 and 35 per polymer chain, the average diameters of the resultant CDs were 4.5, 2.1 and 2.0 nm, respectively.
As for top-down strategies, Pang et al. synthesized size-controlled CDs by electrochemical etching of carbon fibers at different applied potentials (Fig. 3b and c).52 The average diameter of the CDs was 3.3, 2.7 and 2.2 nm when adjusting the potentials at 0.5, 1.5 and 2.5 V, respectively. For CDs synthesized using chemical oxidation methods, the oxidation temperature normally plays a vital role in controlling the size and optical properties.53 Higher temperatures lead to smaller CDs which show a blue-shifted emission and an absorption at shorter wavelengths. The size of CDs can be also tuned by tailored carbon precursors. For example, Qiu et al. synthesized coal-derived CDs with the size varying from 1.96 to 3.10 nm through a carbonization pre-treatment of the coal precursor.54
Post-synthesis separation techniques such as dialysis,55 centrifugation,56 ultra-filtration,14,57 gel electrophoresis58 and column chromatography,59,60 have been successfully used to obtain purified and size-tunable CDs. Colon et al. used a high-resolution separation technique, namely, anion-exchange high-performance liquid chromatography, to isolate refined CDs form the as-made CD mixture.60 The fractions showed different particle size distributions with the average diameters of 7.1, 9.4, 10.1 and 14.0 nm. Using dialysis tubes with different molecular weight (Mw) cutoffs of 1000, 3500 and 7000 Da, narrowly distributed GQDs with different sizes were gradually separated.55 The size distributions of CDs with Mw between 1000–3500, 3500–7000 and >7000 were mainly <5, 10–20 and 16–20 nm, respectively.
2.2 Surface modification
The PL properties and energy gaps of CDs are significantly influenced by surface modification and passivation. In some cases, there was even no detectable PL from the CD sample without surface passivation.5,61 Various modification agents, including small molecules and polymers, have been widely used. Tetsuka et al. designed optically tunable amino-functionalized GQDs through ammonia-mediated cutting of graphene oxide.62 In order to protect the graphene structure from being destroyed, they subjected the graphene oxide to a mild hydrothermal treatment at 70–150 °C in ammonia solution. Consequently, the soft bond-scission reaction and direct bonding of amine with graphene edges can be simultaneously achieved by the nucleophilic substitution process. It was found that lower hydrothermal temperature and higher ammonia concentration resulted in a higher N/C ratio. Importantly, the PL of the extracted GQDs can be tailored from the violet to yellow region by controlling the degree of primary amine functionalization. Following the above study, they further evaluated the effects of other different nitrogen-containing functional groups on the energy levels and gaps in GQDs (Fig. 4a and b).63 The highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) levels of GQDs were found to be continuously tuned by different nitrogen moieties due to their strong orbital resonance with the graphene core. Specifically, GQDs functionalized with o-phenylenediamine (OPD-GQDs), diaminonaphthalene (DAN-GQDs), azo (Azo-GQDs), or p-methyl red (pMR-GQDs) had lower energy levels, whereas GQDs modified with primary (NH2-GQDs) or dimethyl amine (NMe2-GQDs) had degenerate HOMO orbitals and higher energy levels.
 Fig. 4  (a) Predicted energy level diagram for various nitrogen-functionalized GQDs (NF-GQDs). (b) Measured energy level diagram for the corresponding NF-GQDs. The mismatch between the predicted energy levels and the measured ones arises from the difference in the size of NF-GQDs and the quantity of nitrogenous functional groups. Reproduced with permission from ref. 63. Copyright 2016, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (c) Graphical representation of oxygen-functionalized CDs with oxidized (CDs) or reduced (r-CDs) states. Photographs of aqueous solutions of CDs (left) and r-CDs (right) were obtained under UV light irradiation (360 nm). (d) The maximum emission wavelengths of CDs under oxidation–reduction cycles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2011, the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Qiu et al. functionalized coal-derived CDs with various organic amino molecules via the amide bond bridging reaction.64 The modified CDs all showed an enhanced QY in comparison to the original CDs. More importantly, the surface polarity of the CDs could be readily tuned by the length of hydrocarbon chains of these amino molecules. Gupta et al. functionalized GQDs with aniline using a similar grafting method.65 The resultant modified GQDs not only shifted their PL colour from blue to white, but also changed the polarity from hydrophilic to hydrophobic nature, allowing them to be homogeneously dispersed in poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl) (P3HT) matrix. Lau et al. synthesized polyaniline-functionalized GQDs by a chemical oxidation polymerization process.66 The PL colour of the as-made GQDs red-shifted from 454 to 515 nm depending on the amount of polyaniline. Recently, starting with wide-gap GQDs, Chen et al. proposed two surface modification strategies to narrow the band gap of GQDs.67 Specifically, narrowing the band gap can be achieved by conjugating GQDs with poly aromatic rings to enlarge the π-conjugated sp2-carbon network or, alternatively, by introducing an intermediate n-orbital between π and π* orbitals by functionalization with electron-donating functional groups. The band gaps of the original GQDs and the CQDs conjugated with OPD, 2,3-diaminonaphthalene, 1,8-diaminonaphthalene and 1,1′-bi(2-naphthalene) were determined to be 2.40, 2.05, 1.95, 1.91 and 1.88 eV, respectively. On the other hand, the band gaps of GQDs grafted with p-anisidine, 4-(trifluoromethoxy)aniline, and 4-(trichloromethoxy)aniline were 2.08, 2.02, and 1.94 eV, respectively.
CDs synthesized by oxidation approaches (such as nitric acid oxidation, electrochemical etching, etc.) normally feature oxygen-containing functional groups at their surface, which are easily tailored by the post-synthesis reduction treatment. Using NaBH4 as a reducing agent, green luminescent CDs derived from oxidation cutting of graphene oxide can be transformed into blue luminescent reduced-state CDs with an improved QY (Fig. 4c).68 Interestingly, the reduced CDs can be re-oxidized to form the original green emitting CDs, and the oxidation–reduction cycle can be repeated (Fig. 4d). Zhang and co-workers revealed that these oxygen species (carbonyl and epoxy groups) on the surface of CDs were partially transformed into hydroxyl groups during the chemical reduction process.69 The original CDs consisted of plenty of disorder-induced defect states (mainly related to carbonyl, carboxyl, hydroxyl and epoxy groups) within the n–π* gap and exhibited a broad prominent PL emission centred at longer wavelengths. After NaBH4 reduction, the number of disorder-induced states within the n–π* gap decreased, while an increased number of graphenol topological defects (hydroxyl-functionalized isolated small sp2 domains) were formed. In addition to the NaBH4 mentioned above, some other reduction routes such as hydrothermal treatment,70 hydrazine reduction,71 and ultraviolet light irradiation,72 were also verified to effectively modify the surface oxygen groups and PL properties of CDs.
The absorption and emission behaviours of CDs can also be tuned by surface charge engineering.73 Through reacting with an alkali (NaOH or KOH), the solvothermally synthesized CDs were functionalized by metal cations, and exhibited orange emission with the QY as high as 46%. In contrast, after further removing the surface functionalized metal cations in a dilute HCl aqueous solution, the non-metal-cation-functionalized CDs showed an increased overlap between the absorption and emission spectra with a lower QY of 6%. This phenomenon is possibly because surface metal-cation-functionalization could lift the Fermi level of CDs, thus leading to a decreased self-absorption and an enhanced output orange emission.73
2.3 Heteroatom doping
Similar to surface modification, heteroatom doping is a widely used strategy for manipulating the PL properties of CDs. Using boron and nitrogen atoms as electron-deficient and electron-rich dopant models, respectively, Saavedra and co-workers have investigated the band gaps and emissive states of heteroatom-doped GQDs.74 They synthesized three different types of GQDs with similar sizes, chemical compositions and defects: undoped GQDs (UGQDs), boron-doped GQDs (BGQDs) and nitrogen-doped GQDs (NGQDs). Based on a combinative study of spectroscopic characterizations and theoretical calculations, the results showed that the BGQDs and NGQDs exhibited a red-shifted and a blue-shifted PL emission, respectively, in comparison to the UGQDs. In the BGQDs, the boron atom provides an empty orbital to the carbon π system, thus giving rise to a decrease in the electron density in the HOMO and an upgrade in the HOMO level (Fig. 5a and b). However, in the NGQDs, the pyridinic nitrogen contributes a lone pair of electrons to the occupied π orbitals, causing a decline in the HOMO level and a wider band gap. Wang et al. demonstrated that different nitrogen-doping types and positions give rise to different absorption and emission behaviours.27 The centre doping creates non-fluorescent mid-states causing blockage of the transition channel of photo-excited electrons, while edge doping increases photo-excited electrons in the emission transition channel, thereby enhancing the radiation transition probability and the PL intensity. Otyepka et al. theoretically revealed that graphitic nitrogen in CDs alters the carbon π system's electronic energy levels and causes a red-shift in their absorption spectra and a reduction in the electronic band gap.75 In another report, the graphitic nitrogen was supposed to generate midgap states within the HOMO–LUMO gap of CDs, similarly giving rise to a red-shifted absorption and a low-energy PL emission.76 Recently, Ye et al. disclosed that doping electron-withdrawing fluorine atoms into CDs also delivered a red-shifted PL emission.77 The fluorine-doped CDs emitted a red PL emission under excitation at 530 nm, while the CDs without fluorine doping showed a yellowish green emission under the same excitation.
 Fig. 5  (a and b) DFT-simulated (a) and experimentally measured (b) HOMO and LUMO energy levels for nitrogen-doped GQDs (NGQDs), undoped GQDs (UGQDs) and boron-doped GQDs (BGQDs). The HOMO and LUMO of the GQDs shown in panel (b) were determined from a combination of absorption spectrum data and electrochemical measurements. Reproduced with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (c) The configuration of oxygen-rich NGQDs including p- and n-type domains, connected through sp2 clusters as Ohmic contact. Reproduced with permission from ref. 78. Copyright 2014, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
CDs with the basal plane and edge bearing oxygen species are p-type materials because oxygen atoms are more electronegative than carbon atoms. Nitrogen doping in CDs can repair the vacancy-type defects and introduce n-type conductivity to compensate for the unbalanced charges on p-type CDs.78 For CDs featuring single-layered graphene debris (that is, s-GQDs), the PL emission may be associated with the formation of p–n type photochemical diodes in the CDs (Fig. 5c). The small sp2 clusters act as the interfacial junction between the n- and p-type domains. Such a CD structure may produce a photocatalytic medium effective for overall water-splitting into H2 and O2, showing a remarkable similarity to biological photosynthesis. The results will be further discussed in Section 3.1. Transient absorption spectroscopy revealed that nitrogen doping in CDs significantly increases the efficiency of hole scavenging by electron donors and extends the lifetime of photogenerated electrons, thus allowing the high absorption coefficient of CDs to be translated into high charge extraction for efficient photocatalysis.49 Moreover, heteroatom doping (N, B, S, P etc.) into CDs can break the electroneutrality of carbon networks and create charged sites favourable for adsorption of reactants, rendering CDs as a promising metal-free catalyst for various reactions. For example, NGQDs catalysed the electrochemical reduction of carbon dioxide into multi-carbon hydrocarbons and oxygenates at high Faradaic efficiencies and low overpotentials.79 Nitrogen and/or boron doped CDs exhibited a superior catalytic activity for the oxygen reduction reaction in comparison to that of undoped CDs.80,81 Under visible light irradiation, nitrogen and sulfur co-doped GQDs showed optimized photocatalytic activity for the oxidative coupling reactions of amines compared to nitrogen-doped and pure GQDs.82
In some cases, metal atoms can be doped into the carbon matrix in terms of M–N–C structures (M refers to metal atom). For example, Wu and his co-workers synthesized Cu–N-doped CDs through a one-step pyrolysis of Na2[Cu(EDTA)].83 Unlike undoped CDs, the Cu–N-doped CDs showed superior electron-transfer properties. When applied as photocatalysts for the photooxidation of 1,4-dihydro-2,6-dimethylpyridine-3,5-dicarboxylate (1,4-DHP), Cu–N-doped CDs delivered a product yield of 60.80%, which was 3.5 times higher than that of CDs without Cu–N doping. Following this study, graphitized CDs co-doped with Fe and Cu (or Zn and Cu) were further developed in their group.84,85 The synergy between the dual metal dopants in CDs further promoted the photocatalytic efficiency for the photooxidation of 1,4-DHP.
3. Applications of CDs in solar- and electro-driven catalysis
3.1 Photocatalytic hydrogen evolution and CO2 reduction
Photocatalysis requires efficient coupling of light-harvesting and charge transfer in catalytic processes. In this respect, CDs have been put forward as potential sensitizers or direct photocatalysts in the process of solar energy conversion. The intrinsic photocatalytic characteristic of GQDs was revealed by Teng's group. They designed and synthesized a new type of NGQDs derived from graphene oxide sheets, with oxygen functional groups on the crystal surface and nitrogen atoms embedded in the GQD frame (Fig. 5c).78 GQDs functionalized with oxygen species are p-doped materials, while nitrogen-doping and/or nitrogen-containing groups transform GQDs into n-type semiconductors. Coexistence of p- and n-domains in the NGQDs may form photochemical diodes to facilitate charge separation. The band gap of the resulting NGQDs was ca. 2.2 eV, which is capable of absorbing visible light to generate excitons. Due to the unique atomic and electronic structures, these GQDs can be used as photocatalysts for overall water-splitting under visible light illumination.78 In a gas-enclosed system with external visible light irradiation, the water-splitting activity of the NGQDs was about half that of the Rh2−yCryO3/GaN:ZnO catalyst. When combined with Pt as a co-catalyst, the NGQDs exhibited high photocatalytic activity for H2 production with a quantum efficiency of 12.8% under 420 nm light irradiation, which is superior to that of g-C3N4 and most metal-containing photocatalysts.86 The hydrogen evolution quantum efficiency for Pt-deposited GQDs was further enhanced to 29% when co-doped with sulfur and nitrogen.87 In another report, CDs prepared from carbon nanotubes without any modification were demonstrated to exhibit the ability of photocatalytic H2 generation under UV-light irradiation.88 With the help of methanol as a sacrificial donor, the H2 generation rate of the pure CDs reached 3615.3 μmol g−1 h−1. A recent report revealed that graphitized nitrogen-doped CDs showed an order of magnitude improvement in the rate of solar H2 evolution compared to amorphous undoped CDs.49 CDs with a higher degree of graphitization showed distinctly improved light absorption, while nitrogen doping in CDs allowed the high absorption coefficient of graphitic CDs to be translated into high charge extraction for efficient photocatalysis.
Semiconductor photocatalysts, such as metal oxides (TiO2, ZnO, Fe2O3 and SiO2), have been widely used for photocatalytic H2 production. However, they suffer from many drawbacks such as inappropriate band gaps which are incapable of harnessing a broader range of visible or near-infrared light. To this end, the coupling of semiconductor photocatalysts with CDs as photosensitizers or co-catalysts has recently attracted much attention.89–94 For example, Zhang et al. developed a facile hydrothermal route to prepare a CD-modified P25 TiO2 composite (CDs/P25).95 Under UV-vis light irradiation, the CDs/P25 exhibited a photocatalytic H2 evolution rate which was ca. four times higher than that of pure P25. The CDs act not only as a photosensitizer, but also as an electron reservoir to trap the photoinduced electrons from the excited P25 for the efficient separation of electron–hole pairs. Kang et al. designed and prepared a metal-free CDs/carbon nitride composite (CDs/C3N4) which could split water in two steps by visible light irradiation (Fig. 6).96 Water is first catalytically split by C3N4 into peroxide and hydrogen (the rate-limiting step), then the CDs decompose peroxide into hydrogen and oxygen. This composite photocatalyst was very active in the absence of any sacrificial agents, with quantum efficiencies of 16% at 420 ± 20 nm wavelength, 6.29% at 580 ± 15 nm wavelength, and 4.42% at 600 ± 10 nm wavelength, and a determined overall solar energy conversion efficiency as high as 2.0%. Moreover, during 200 recycling tests over 200 days, CQDs/C3N4 maintained a high rate of hydrogen and oxygen production, and little change in the composition and structure was observed. In the following studies, the morphology and structure of C3N4 were demonstrated to be of great importance to the photocatalytic performance of the CDs/C3N4 catalyst.97,98
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the two-step/two-electron process of CDs/C3N4 for photocatalytic overall water splitting. (b) UV-vis absorption spectra of C3N4 (black curve) and CDs/C3N4 (red curve) catalysts. Inset: Digital photograph of catalyst powders. (c) Typical time course of H2 and O2 production from water under visible light irradiation (by a 300 W Xe lamp using a long-pass cutoff filter allowing λ > 420 nm) catalyzed by CDs/C3N4 (CD concentration, 1.6 × 10−5 gCD gcatalyst−1). (d) Wavelength-dependent quantum efficiency of water splitting by catalysts with two different concentrations of CDs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 96. Copyright 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
In addition to CDs and semiconductor composites mentioned above, CDs combined with molecular photocatalysts are also decent alternatives for solar light driven H2 production. Reisner et al. prepared low-cost CDs by direct thermolysis of citric acid, which were further used as a light absorber and photosensitizer for a Ni-bis-(diphosphine) photocatalyst.99 The CDs can absorb UV and visible light and directly transfer photoexcited electrons to the solution-based molecular Ni catalysts, giving an activity of 398 μmolH2 (gCD)−1 h−1 and a “per Ni catalyst” turnover frequency of 41 h−1. The quantum efficiency was estimated to be as high as 1.4%, comparable to that of previously reported dye–catalyst hybrid systems. With the help of a donor recycling system, this homogeneous CD-molecular photocatalyst can maintain a benchmark photostability of over five days under full solar spectrum irradiation.100
Sun et al. first explored the possibility of CDs as potential photocatalysts to convert CO2 into hydrocarbon fuels, since the use of solar irradiation represents an ultimate solution to solve the challenge of increasing atmospheric CO2 levels.101 They synthesized PEG1500N-functionalized CDs, then coated them with gold or platinum nanoparticles via photoreduction of the corresponding metal salt precursor. The coated CDs were directly used for harvesting visible photons to drive the photoreduction process, while the noble metal coating was designed to soak up the surface-confined electrons and disrupt the radiative recombination. As a result, the yield for the reduction to formic acid was estimated to be ca. 0.3% under visible light irradiation (425–720 nm). Following the pioneering study, they further used better-controlled gold-doped CDs as aqueous soluble catalysts for a closer examination of the visible-light photoconversion of CO2 into small organic acids.102,103 It was found that an amount of acetic acid can be formed under high CO2 pressures, although many electrons are required in this photoreduction process. With the short-path optical photoreactor and a CO2 pressure of 700 psia, the observed production rates for formic acid and acetic acid were 1.2 and 0.06 mmol h−1 g−1, respectively. The CDs synthesized by using carbon soot from overcooked barbequed meat as a carbon source also exhibited similar photocatalytic activities.104 MacFarlane et al. synthesized and tested a novel photocatalyst consisting of CDs and Cu2O, which offered a high rate of photocatalytic conversion of CO2 to methanol under solar light irradiation (55.7 μmol g−1 h−1), and exhibited excellent stability during the conversion process.105 The good catalytic performance is mainly attributed to the photoinduced charge separation and transfer capabilities of the involved CDs, and the protruding structure of the CDs/Cu2O catalyst.
3.2 Electrocatalytic oxygen reduction, water splitting and CO2 reduction
The oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), oxygen evolution reaction (OER) and hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) are important processes for a variety of electrochemical energy conversion devices that directly convert chemical energy to electric power or the inverse process. However, the development of high-performance and inexpensive catalysts remains a major challenge. CDs have emerged as a potential alternative for the conventional Pt- and Ru-based electrocatalysts, and many efforts have been made in this area. Qu et al. employed graphite fiber-derived GQDs supported on multi-walled carbon nanotubes (GQD/MWCNT) as a metal-free electrocatalyst for the ORR, showing improved electrocatalytic activities, long-term stability and strong methanol tolerance in comparison to commercially available Pt/C catalysts.106 The number of electron transfers involved in the ORR was calculated to be as high as 3.8 for GQD/MWCNT. Nanohybrids consisting of GQDs and C3N4 nanosheets showed an ORR onset potential of ca. −0.07 V, closer to the Pt/C catalyst at ca. −0.01 V.107 Kang et al. designed and prepared electrocatalysts by synergistic coupling of CDs with NiFe layered double-hydroxide (CDs/NiFe-LDH) for the OER, which delivered a high electrocatalytic stability and activity.108 The overpotential was ca. 235 mV in 1 M KOH at a current density of 10 mA cm−2. At a constant current density of 2.5 mA cm−2, the CDs/NiFe-LDH nanocomposite exhibited a nearly constant operating potential for 3000 s. Recently, Yang and his coworkers prepared a ruthenium nanoparticles/carbon dots (Ru/CDs) hybrid by a pyrolysis approach.109 The Ru/CDs catalyst showed a remarkable HER catalytic activity under alkaline conditions (1 M KOH) with an onset overpotential of 0 mV and a Tafel slope of 47 mV decade−1. Moreover, there was an increase in overpotential of only 4 mV after 10000 cycles at 10 mA cm−2.
The electroneutrality of the CD surface can be modulated by heteroatom doping or surface modification, thus making CDs with more surface defects and active sites for enhanced electrocatalytic performance.81,110–113 For example, nitrogen-doped CDs derived from graphene or coal catalysed the ORR in a favourable four electron reduction pathway, and exhibited an electrocatalytic activity comparable to that of the commercial Pt/C catalyst.80,114 The boron/nitrogen-codoped GQDs coupled with graphene even showed an ORR onset potential which was ca. 15 mV more positive than that of the Pt/C.115 Theoretical calculations revealed that pyridinic and graphitic nitrogen in nitrogen-doped CDs were the most active sites with overpotentials of 0.55 and 0.79–0.90 V, respectively, and they were responsible for the improved electrocatalytic performance for the ORR.116 Kang et al. proposed that surface modification of CDs with different functional groups can serve as a versatile design strategy for a variety of electrocatalytic applications.117 Specifically, phosphorus-modified CDs showed an ORR activity close to that of Pt/C, while amidogen-terminated CDs exhibited a slightly better OER activity than the IrO2/C. The stabilities of the two CD-based catalysts were both higher than that of their corresponding benchmark catalysts.
Electrochemically converting the over-emitted CO2 into CO or value-added organic chemicals is a promising but challenging energy conversion technology. NGQDs with substantially enriched density of nitrogen-doping defects at edge sites were demonstrated to exhibit a high activity towards CO2 electroreduction, as evidenced by high reduction current densities at low overpotentials.79 More importantly, NGQDs preferentially produced multi-carbon hydrocarbons and oxygenates with a high Faradaic efficiency (FE) up to 45%, which is comparable to that of copper-based electrocatalysts. A nanoscale gold catalyst was verified to be one of the best catalysts to electrochemically convert CO2 into CO with high selectivity. However, the reported lowest overpotential on gold catalysts was ca. −0.1 V (vs. RHE), partially due to the surfactants on gold catalysts which have negative effects on the activity and selectivity. To solve this issue, Zhu et al. in situ converted the surfactants on the single-crystalline gold nanoparticles (SCAu NPs) into NGQDs through a hydrothermal treatment, thus forming NGQD-coated SCAu NPs (NGQDs-SCAu NPs).118 The CO2 reduction results and DFT calculations both revealed that the surfactant-converted NGQDs can increase the catalytic activity for converting CO2 to CO due to the synergistic effect between gold and NGQDs. The onset potential reached as low as −0.15 V (vs. RHE), corresponding to a significantly improved overpotential of only 0.04 V (Fig. 7). Kang et al. recently developed binary or ternary CD-based electrocatalysts for high-performance electrochemical reduction of CO2.119–121 The enhanced activities were mainly attributed to the distinct adsorption capacity of CDs for CO2 molecules and protons. In their studies, copper nanocorals hybridized with CDs showed a superior activity for CO2 electroreduction to HCOOH with a low overpotential of 0.13 V and an FE up to 79% at the potential of −0.7 V (vs. RHE).119 The ternary electrocatalyst composed of Au, C3N4 and CDs (Au–CDs–C3N4) demonstrated a high CO FE of ca. 79.8% at −0.5 V (vs. RHE) and a 2.8-fold enhancement of current density at −1.0 V (vs. RHE) in comparison with pure Au nanoparticles.120 Moreover, the ternary catalyst exhibited long-term stability during eight hours electrolysis. In another report, Kang et al. proposed a concept of coupling a HER catalyst (Co3O4) with a CO2 reduction catalyst (CDs-C3N4) to obtain a three-component electrocatalyst for syngas production. It initiated CO2 reduction to CO at a low overpotential of 0.17 V (vs. RHE) in aqueous solution, and delivered a total current density of 15 mA cm−2 at the potential of −1.0 V (vs. RHE). The H2/CO ratio of the produced syngas can be readily tuned from 0.07 to 4 by controlling the applied potential.
 Fig. 7  Faradaic efficiencies for electrocatalytic conversion of CO2 to CO under various potentials, catalyzed by a single-crystalline gold (SC Au) catalyst with or without NGQD coating. Reproduced with permission from ref. 118. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
3.3 Photoelectrochemical catalysis
CDs can be used as an alternative sensitizer to enhance the solar absorption of the host materials in photoelectronchemical (PEC) cells.122–125 ZnO nanowire arrays (ZnO NWs) growing on fluorine-doped SnO2 glass were covalently attached with GQDs through amido bonds (GQDs@ZnO NWs), and then used as a photoelectrode for PEC water splitting, delivering prominent higher photo-induced open-circuit voltage and short-circuit current density than that of the bare ZnO NW photoelectrode.126 Under 450 nm light illumination, the incident photon to current conversion efficiency for the GQDs@ZnO NW photoelectrode-based PEC cell was measured to be ca. 0.42% without any applied bias and 3.18% with a 0.6 V applied bias. Similarly, the PEC performance of a Cu2S nanowire array (Cu2S NWs) photoelectrode was distinctly enhanced by dipping-assembly of CDs on their surface.127 The CD-decorated Cu2S NWs exhibited a photocurrent density of 1.05 mA cm−2 at 0 V (vs. RHE) and an optimized photocathode efficiency of 0.148% under AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2), four times higher than those of the plain Cu2S NWs. In another report, single-crystal WO3 nanoflakes decorated with CDs showed a photocurrent density of 1.46 mA cm−2 at 1.0 V (vs. Ag/AgCl), which was about twice higher than that of the plain WO3 electrode.128 In the case of BiVO4-based PEC hybrid systems, Fang and his co-workers fabricated a CD-coated BiVO4 inverse opal structure for PEC hydrogen generation, showing a photocurrent density of ca. 2.3 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V (vs. RHE) and an applied bias photon-to-current efficiency (ABPE) of 0.35% at 0.87 V (vs. RHE).129 Yang et al. demonstrated the efficiency of an integrated photoanode for PEC water splitting which was actually fabricated by seamlessly embedding CDs between the BiVO4 core and NiOOH/FeOOH shell. The CDs not only broaden the light-harvesting range of BiVO4 from UV to near infrared, but also maintain the hole transfer ability from the BiVO4 core to the NiOOH/FeOOH shell. Benefiting from the synergistic effect between BiVO4 and CDs, this BiVO4-based PEC device exhibited an optimized performance, with the photocurrent density as high as 5.99 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V (vs. RHE) and the ABPE as high as 2.29% at 0.6 V (vs. RHE).130
The water oxidation reaction in PEC water-splitting is regarded as a rate determining and kinetically unfavourable process. To this end, Gong et al. deposited CDs and Co3O4 nanoclusters on hematite (α-Fe2O3) for PEC water oxidation (Fig. 8), exhibiting a 60 mV cathodically shifted onset potential and 78% higher photocurrent density (1.48 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE) compared with that of the plain Fe2O3 photoanode.131 The two co-catalysts loaded onto the anode favour a two-step–two-electron reaction pathway; that is, the water molecule at the slow-reaction site on Co3O4 is first oxidized to H2O2, which is immediately oxidized to O2 on the CD co-catalyst. The synergistic catalytic effect between CDs and Co3O4 accelerated the slow reaction process on Co3O4, finally leading to an improved solar-driven water oxidation activity of the Fe2O3 photoanodes.
 Fig. 8  (a and b) TEM images of CDs/Co3O4–Fe2O3 photoanodes at low (a) and high (b) magnification. White circles in (a) indicate CDs. (c) Schematic illustration of the fast/slow reaction processes on Co3O4 co-catalyst and the two-step–two-electron reaction pathway for photocatalytic water oxidation on the CDs/Co3O4–Fe2O3 photoanode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 131. Copyright 2016, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Silicon is a promising photocathode material for PEC hydrogen production since its conduction band edge is more negative than the HER potential. However, the small band bending between the conduction band edge and the H+/H2 redox level limits its PEC activity in aqueous electrolytes. To solve this problem, Hong et al. proposed NGQDs that were derived from N2-plasma cutting of graphene as a catalyst for the solar-driven HER on p-type silicon nanowire photocathodes.132,133 The NGQD-decorated Si-based PEC device showed an anodically shifted onset potential (0.26 V vs. RHE) compared with the device without the NGQD catalyst (0.17 V vs. RHE). The ABPE of the NGQD electrodes was 2.29%, which is much higher than that of the bare silicon nanowire system (0.91%) and other reported carbon-based PEC HER catalysts. Shen et al. also demonstrated that N2-plasma treated CDs can obviously boost the catalytic activity for solar-driven HER on an np+-Si photocathode.134 The excellent catalytic performance is attributed to the obvious sp3 disorder C–C and C–N structures in the CDs, which can work as catalytic sites, leading to better carrier transfer, electrochemical activity and higher flat band potential at the electrode/electrolyte interface.
4. Applications of CDs in light-emitting diodes
4.1 Phosphor-based light-emitting diodes
Light-emitting diodes (LEDs) as the most efficient solid-state lighting devices can significantly economize the electricity used for lighting.135 LED-plus-phosphor is a popular fabrication approach for LED devices, which typically consist of a UV or blue-light-emissive GaN LED chip and a coating of colour-converting phosphors. Chen et al. first demonstrated that solid-state CDs can be employed as novel phosphors to construct LED devices.136 They synthesized blue-, orange- and white-light-emissive CDs from unzipping of epoxy-enriched polystyrene photonic crystals. The condensed films of these CDs displayed strong PL, although there was a red-shift and broadening of the emission peak compared with that of CDs in aqueous solution. The LED devices were subsequently built by coating the as-prepared CD films on a 370 nm excitation light emitting chip. The Commission Internationale de l’Éclairage (CIE) colour coordinates were realized at (0.19, 0.28), (0.45, 0.44) and (0.34, 0.37) for the blue-, orange- and white-light-emissive CDs, respectively.
In order to avoid solid-state quenching of PL, it is suggested that CDs should be surface-modified and dispersed in a bulk matrix before their use in LEDs. For example, the CDs functionalized with carboxyl and amide groups can be homogeneously mixed with starch particles, thus suppressing the non-radiative decay process with a QY of ca. 50%.137 The hydroxyl-modified CDs dispersed in silica xerogel showed a QY exceeding 40% at a high loading fraction of 19.2 wt%,138 which is due to the effective dispersion of silica that makes the distance among CD particles in CD/silica composites extended.139 The blue- and red-emissive CDs were assembled into mesoporous alumina, exhibiting excellent PL emitting properties and thermal stabilities.140 Lau et al. dispersed the glucose-derived GQDs in an agar matrix (GQDs–agar).141 A LED device was subsequently constructed by coating the GQDs–agar composite onto a blue LED chip, showing a superior performance with over 61% light-conversion efficiency and over 100 hour colour stability. The CDs prepared by carbonizing N-acetylcysteine or organic acid were readily mixed with epoxy resin, serving as the colour-converting phosphor for LEDs.142,143 Freestanding luminescent films prepared by dispersing CDs in a poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) matrix were combined with InGaN chips to fabricate LEDs, exhibiting a correlated colour temperature (CCT) of 5080.4 K with no temporal degradation in the emission spectrum under practical operation conditions.144 Tetsuka et al. incorporated amino-functionalized GQDs (afGQDs) into a clay host using electrostatic interactions between cellulose nanofiber (CNF) wrapped afGQDs (afGQDs@CNF) and clay platelets.145 Through a simple casting of aqueous dispersion of afGQDs@CNF and clay, a highly luminescent flexible and transparent film with a well-organized structure was produced, offering good physical stability and bright colourful photoluminescence with no photoluminescence quenching of afGQDs. By coating the afGQDs@CNF–clay film as a color converting material onto a blue LED, white light emission with the CIE coordinates of (0.33, 0.37) was realized.
The aggregation-induced quenching of solid-state CDs can be further suppressed by controlling the interparticle spacing of CDs. Liu and coworkers found that the water-soluble CDs, which were synthesized by one-pot hydrothermal treatment of poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) and ethylenediamine (EDA), showed a remarkable yellow–green emission in the solid state.146 This unique property is mainly attributed to the prominent steric hindrance of the PVA chains, which keeps the aggregate an appropriate interval between its inner particles. With the assistance of N-(b-aminoethyl)-gaminopropyl trimethoxysilane (KH-792) as distance barrier chains, the as-prepared organosilane-functionalized CDs also exhibited strong blue fluorescence in the aggregation state.147 The QY was as high as 65.8%, which was 2.5-fold higher than that of their solution.
White LEDs (WLEDs) are the next-generation lighting devices of choice that have drawn much attention.148–154 Xie et al. combined the green- and red-emissive CDs with blue LED chips to form trichromatic WLEDs.155 By controlling the ratio of the two different colour-emissive CDs, the colour rendering index (CRI) of the optimized WLEDs could reach 88, thus meeting the standard for indoor lighting (>80). Sun et al. synthesized multiple-colour-emissive CDs through controlled thermal pyrolysis of citric acid and urea.156 The as-obtained CDs were readily dispersed in epoxy resin and maintained the original optical properties of the CDs (Fig. 9a and b). The CDs/epoxy composites with blue-, green- and red-emission were coated on different chips (emission at 365 nm, 450 nm and 530 nm) to form monochrome down-conversion LED devices with the emission peaks located at ca. 440, 540 and 620 nm, respectively (Fig. 9c and d). To construct the WLEDs, the blue-, green- and red-emissive CDs were mixed together into epoxy resin, then coated onto the surface of a 365 nm UV chip. By optimizing the ratio of the three types of CDs, pure WLED devices were achieved with the CIE colour coordinates of (0.33, 0.34) and the CRI of 92 (Fig. 9e). The emitting light spectrum covers most of the visible light region, as confirmed in Fig. 9f. Moreover, after continuously illuminating for over 20 days, the emitting light spectrum of the white LED device showed negligible decline in intensity, indicating the excellent stability of the CDs as potential phosphors for LEDs.
 Fig. 9  Optical properties of CDs/epoxy composites and the corresponding LED devices. (a and b) The optical photographs of the CDs/epoxy composite discs under room light (a) and different excitation light (b). The epoxy discs display different colours due to the different kinds of added CDs. (c and d) The photographs of the monochrome blue, green, and red down-conversion LED devices by coating CDs/epoxy on the different chips (c) and the corresponding light emission spectra (d). (e) The CIE colour coordinates of the white LED (WLED) derived from a mixture of blue-, green- and red-light-emissive CDs. Inset at right top corner is the optical photograph of the WLED in the on-state. (f) The emitting light spectrum of the WLED. (g) The emitting spectra of the WLED initially and after illuminating for over 20 days. Reprinted with permission from ref. 156. Copyright 2018, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Warm WLEDs with a higher CRI are urgently desired for the further development of CD-based WLEDs. However, the synthesis of red-emissive CDs (the most indispensable phosphor component for warm WLEDs) with enhanced QYs still holds a great challenge. To this end, Fan and her co-workers developed a novel sequential dehydrative condensation and dehydrogenative planarization approach to synthesize highly-efficient red-emissive CDs with the QY as high as 53%.22 The precursor of 1,3-dihydroxynaphthalene was supposed to play a vital role for the formation of the red-emissive CDs because it could concomitantly serve as a building block to form large sized π-conjugated carbon domains with hydroxy groups at the edge and defect sites. Combining such red-emissive CDs with blue- and green emissive ones as phosphors, they subsequently fabricated a UV-pumped warm WLED device, of which the CRI value was increased to 97. In a recent report, Yang and her co-workers fabricated solid-state luminous red–green–blue CD films using blue-emissive CDs as a tri-functional material (phosphor, dispersant and curing agent).157 The constructed UV-pumped WLEDs showed a high CRI with good colour stability. More importantly, the CCT could be adjusted from 3466 to 7368 K by controlling the volume ratio of the red-, green- and blue-emissive CDs.
4.2 Electroluminescent light-emitting diodes
The emerging light-emissive CDs show great potential as new types of electroluminescent active layers for LEDs. Ma et al. first demonstrated the LED device originating from single CD components, of which the structure and energy level diagram are shown in Fig. 10.158 Specifically, 40 nm thick poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly-(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) was employed to be the hole injection layer. The purified CDs synthesized by thermally carbonizing citric acid in hot octadecene were spun-cast onto the PEDOT:PSS to form a 20 nm thick emissive layer. In addition, a 40 nm 1,3,5-tris(N-phenylbenzimidazol-2-yl)benzene (TPBI) layer was used as the electron transport layer. The cathode layer consisted of a 1 nm thick LiF and a 120 nm thick aluminium sheet. The constructed LED device showed a high stability at various applied voltages with a turn-on voltage of ca. 6 V and a maximum external quantum efficiency (EQE) of 0.083% at the current density of 5 mA cm−2. The corresponding CIE coordinates were (0.40, 0.43). However, in the report of Zhang et al., the LED device consisting of a CD emissive layer sandwiched between an organic hole transport layer and an organic or inorganic electron transport layer, showed colour-switchable electroluminescence (EL) by changing the applied voltage.159 This voltage-dependent EL behaviour is probably because several recombination mechanisms with different excited states coexist in each single CD.
 Fig. 10  (a) Structural diagram of CD-based LEDs. (b) Energy band diagram of CD-based LEDs relative to ITO and LiF/Al work functions. (c) Molecular structures of PEDOT:PSS and TPBI, and the schematic drawing of the CDs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 158. Copyright 2011, the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
CDs can be used as a dopant in organic LEDs (OLEDs). Gupta et al. reported that the turn-on voltage of OLEDs decreased from 6 to 4 V after the incorporation of 1% GQDs into the poly(2-methoxy-5-(2-ethylhexyloxy)-1,4-phenylenevinylene) polymer light emissive layer.65 Rhee et al. fabricated OLEDs employing 4,4′-bis(carbazol-9-yl)biphenyl (CBP) as a host and a series of GQDs with different sizes as a dopant.160 Electrons and holes were injected by an electrical bias into CBP, and then transferred from CBP to GQDs. The EL colour of the OLED device was red-shifted from blue to white with increased size of the GQDs at a fixed bias potential. Meanwhile, the EL intensity was increased because larger GQDs with a more appropriate band gap facilitated the energy transfer from the host to the GQDs. The EQE of the device was ca. 0.1%, however, still quite a bit lower than that of the state-of-the-art LEDs based on semiconductor quantum dots. Following the pioneering study, they further constructed an OLED device using nitrogen-containing GQDs blended with TPBI and tris(4-carbazoyl-9-ylphenyl)amine as the emissive layer.161 The as-constructed LEDs exhibited green EL with a narrow linewidth (full width at half maximum less than 80 nm) and a high colour purity. The maximum current efficiency and EQE was as high as 3.47 cd A−1 and 1.28%, respectively, which are the highest values ever reported for CD-based LEDs. Fan et al. synthesized multicolour fluorescent CDs through solvothermal carbonization of citric acid and diaminonaphthalene.162 Using the green-light-emissive CDs as a dopant into the poly(N-vinyl carbazole) (PVK) emissive layer, a WLED with colour coordinates at (0.30, 0.33) was successfully built. The maximum luminance and current efficiency were 2050 cd m−2 and 1.1 cd A−1, respectively. Recently, Yang et al. fabricated monochromic LEDs using oleophilic CD-doped PVK as the emissive layer. The maximum brightness of the yellow and blue LEDs were up to 339.5 cd m−2 and 569.8 cd m−2, respectively, which are the highest of the CD-based monochromic LEDs ever reported.163,164 The EL of CDs was realized by the host–guest energy transfer mechanism.164
The surface plasmon resonance effect allows enhanced EL performance of LEDs. For example, using CD-supported silver (CD-Ag) nanoparticles as plasmonic materials in OLEDs, the current efficiency and EQE were 27.16 cd A−1 and 9.07%, respectively, more than twice as high as those for the device without CD-Ag nanoparticles.165 Moreover, CDs can be employed as novel surface-plasmons for ZnO-based quantum dot LEDs.166 By embedding CDs into p-GaN/Al2O3/ZnO quantum dot LEDs, the EL intensity was significantly enhanced by ca. 20-fold.
5. Applications of CDs in photovoltaic cells
5.1 Organic and dye-sensitized solar cells
CDs with high specific surface area, high mobility and tunable band gap are promising electron acceptor materials analogous to fullerene in organic solar cells. Qu et al. fabricated bulk heterojunction (BHJ) polymer solar cells with the structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:GQDs/Al.167 The LUMO level of the used GQDs was estimated to be in the range of 4.2–4.4 eV, which is beneficial to form an electron transport cascade. The incorporation of GQDs into BHJ solar cells was demonstrated to notably improve the photovoltaic performance, with an open-circuit voltage of 0.67 V and a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 1.28%. Gupta et al. also demonstrated that aniline-functionalized GQDs (ANI-GQDs) dispersed in conjugated polymers showed enhanced performance in BHJ solar cells as compared to graphene sheet (GS) blended conjugated polymers.65 Under 100 mW AM 1.5G illumination, the BHJ device with 1 wt% GQDs in P3HT delivered the PCE, open-circuit voltage, short-circuit current density and fill factor of 1.14%, 0.61 V, 3.51 mA cm−2 and 0.53, respectively (Fig. 11). By adjusting the composition and concentration of electron acceptors in the active layer, the photovoltaic performance of the BHJ solar cells can be further improved, reaching a maximum PCE of 5.24%.168 Kim et al. prepared CD-supported silver nanoparticles (CD-Ag nanoparticles) using CDs both as a reducing agent and a template.165 Due to the broad light absorption originating from the surface plasmon resonance effect of the CD-Ag nanoparticles, the PCE of PTB7:PC71BM-based BHJ solar cells was increased from 7.53% to 8.31% after incorporation of the CD-Ag nanoparticles as the active layer. Moreover, the plasmonic CD-Ag nanoparticles delivered an internal quantum efficiency approaching 100%, which indicates that every absorbed photon leads to a separated pair of charge carriers and all photogenerated carriers are collected at the electrodes without any loss.
 Fig. 11  Current–voltage characteristics of the photovoltaic devices based on aniline-functionalized graphene sheets (ANI-GSs) and aniline-functionalized GQDs (ANI-GQDs) with different GQD contents, under 100 mW AM 1.5G illumination. Reproduced with permission from ref. 65. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. 
Electrode interfacial buffer layers are vital for BHJ polymer solar cells, because they can facilitate charge extraction and prevent charge recombination at the interface. In this respect, CDs can be used as charge transport materials or modifiers to improve the performance of organic solar cells. Using CDs synthesized by the chemical vapour deposition approach as the electron transport layers, the as-fabricated polymer solar cells showed an improved thermal stability in comparison to LiF-based devices due to the less molecule diffusion of CDs.169 Nitrogen/sulphur-codoped CDs were verified to be an effective surface modifier for ZnO electron transport layers in organic solar cells. The incorporation of CDs evidently reduced the roughness and surface energy of the ZnO layer, thus facilitating the transport of photogenerated carriers.170 In addition, the CDs with a small size (ca. 4 nm) and high content of periphery COOH groups were supposed to be an excellent hole transport layer.171 The work function of the 4 nm CDs was increased from 5.01 eV of graphene oxide to 5.26 eV, while the small size gave the CDs a good film-forming capability. When used as a hole transport layer in polymer solar cells, the fabricated device showed better performance than that of graphene oxide and PEDOT:PSS, reaching a PCE as high as 7.91%.
CD-based hybrids are regarded to be alternatives to Pt as the counter electrode material for dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). For example, GQD-doped polypyrrole film as a counter electrode delivered a PCE of 5.27% for DSSCs, which was ca. 20% higher than that of the polypyrrole electrode without GQDs (4.46%) and was comparable to that of a Pt counter electrode (6.02%).172 CD-doped polyaniline (PANI) films also proved their superiority as counter electrodes for DSSCs.173,174 More importantly, CDs can act as an efficient nucleating agent for aniline polymerization, giving rise to a porous PANI/CDs structure with a large surface area (43.6 m2 g−1), an increased electrical conductivity of ca. 774 S cm−1, and an enhanced degree of para-coupling in the PANI microstructure. As a result, the fabricated PANI/CDs film exhibited a superior PCE of 7.45%.173 Lu et al. developed an all-carbon counter electrode, that is, a GQD-decorated carbon aerogel (GQDs/CA), for the reduction of I3− to I− in DSSCs.175 This carbon-based electrode showed an electrocatalytic efficiency similar to and a long-term stability better than a Pt electrode. The cathodic current density even slightly increased after 500 cycles for the GQDs/CA electrode. Electrically conductive perovskite films, such as SrRuO3, were demonstrated to achieve a high capability toward I3− reduction.176 In this regard, Guo et al. further decorated GQDs onto a mesoporous SrRuO3 (GQDs/SRO) counter electrode using a dipping technique. The loaded GQDs could provide plenty more catalytically active sites, and serve as conductive bridging fillers for the formation of a high conductive network for the GQDs/SRO electrode. Consequently, the fabricated DSSCs assembled with the GQDs/SRO electrode achieved an improved PCE of 8.05%, higher than that of the pure SrRuO3 mesoporous film (7.16%).177 In another report by Tang et al., a transparent CDs/CoSe hybrid counter electrode was constructed for I3− reduction in bifacial DSSCs. Notably, the CDs/CoSe hybrids showed excellent optical transparencies (>60% at 400–1000 nm), and the incorporation of CDs did not change the transmittance of the electrode. Owing to the wide spectral absorption and superior catalytic activity of the CDs/CoSe electrode, the fabricated DSSC device yielded a front and rear PCE of 9.08% and 7.01%, respectively.178
5.2 Perovskite and silicon-based solar cells
Perovskite solar cells have recently emerged as a revolutionary class of photovoltaics featuring high-efficiency and low-cost. CDs have been proposed as a potential superfast electron tunnel in perovskite solar cells.179,180 By inserting an ultrathin GQD layer between the perovskite and mesoporous TiO2, the PCE of perovskite solar cells was improved from 8.81% to 10.15%.181 The PL of the perovskite at ca. 760 nm was dramatically quenched upon the addition of GQDs. From the transient absorption measurements, a faster electron extraction time with the presence of GQDs (90–106 ps) than that without their presence (260–307 ps) was directly observed, indicating that the electron extraction from perovskite to TiO2 is significantly enhanced by the interlayer of GQDs. Tetsuka et al. also demonstrated the use of nitrogen-functionalized GQDs (NF-GQDs) as an electron extraction layer for perovskite solar cells.63 The relative energy levels and schematic structure of the cell are shown in Fig. 12a and b, respectively. Compared with the cell without NF-GQDs (Fig. 12c), the photo-induced bleaching band (ca. 740 nm) of the NF-GQD-inserted cell showed a decreased and broadened peak with a slight red-shift at longer delays (Fig. 12d), implying efficient charge transfer from CH3NH3PbI3 to TiO2. The decay-time constant of the NF-GQD-inserted cell was dramatically decreased from 283 to 94 ps (Fig. 12e). Wang and his co-workers introduced a solution-processed CDs/TiO2 composite as a high quality electron transport layer (ETL) to fabricate planar n-i-p perovskite solar cells.182 It was found that the addition of CDs increased the electronic coupling between the CH3NH3PbI3−xClx and TiO2 ETL interface, and improved the energy levels that contribute to an enhanced electron extraction ability. Compared with the reference without CDs, the short-circuit current density and open-circuit voltage of the CD-added perovskite devices were increased to 21.36 mA cm−2 and 1.14 V, respectively. With optimized CD modification contents (10 wt%), the planar heterojunction perovskite solar cell devices could achieve a PCE as high as ca. 19%. Jang et al. revealed that by introducing GQDs into a blocking TiO2 layer via O2 plasma treatment, the performance of the GQD-inserted planar perovskite solar cells was enhanced with the PCE reaching 19.11%.183 When persistently attached by 90% humidity at 25 °C or 80 °C at zero humidity, the inorganic perovskite device interfacially modified with GQDs retained a PCE of 87% over 130 days, or 95% over 40 days.184
 Fig. 12  (a) Energy band alignment for a perovskite solar cell made with a layer of nitrogen-functionalized GQDs (NF-GQDs). (b) Schematic representation of the sample used for optical measurements. (c and d) Transient absorption spectra of a CH3NH3PbI3/TiO2 sample after excitation at 400 nm (c) and a CH3NH3PbI3/NH2-GQDs/TiO2 sample after excitation at 400 nm (d). (e) Normalized kinetic traces for photobleaching probed at 740 nm: red, CH3NH3PbI3/TiO2; and blue, CH3NH3PbI3/NH2-GQDs/TiO2. Inset shows normalized kinetic traces for different NF-GQD functionalities: black, CH3NH3PbI3/DAN-GQDs/TiO2; blue, CH3NH3PbI3/NH2-GQDs/TiO2; pink, CH3NH3PbI3/OPD-GQDs/TiO2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 63. Copyright 2016, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Crystalline silicon p–n junction solar cells are the most widely used in practice owing to their high efficiency as well as long lifetime. It was revealed that by using GQDs as the active layer in crystalline silicon solar cells, photo-generated electron–hole pairs can be effectively separated at the interface due to the large junction gap between GQDs and n-silicon, thus resulting in an improved PCE (6.63%) as compared to that of the device without GQDs (2.92%).185 Instead of silicon planar film, Yu et al. used vertically standing silicon nanowire (SiNW) arrays to assemble a core–shell heterojunction photovoltaic device by directly coating CDs onto the SiNW surface.186 The SiNW arrays are favourable for strong photon trapping and fast charge transport, while the CDs act as an efficient surface modification layer for SiNWs to broaden the optical absorption range and to suppress the recombination activity. The core–shell heterojunction showed excellent rectifying behaviour with the rectification ratio of 103 at ±0.8 V and an optimized PCE as high as 9.10%. The thickness of the shell layer played a vital role in the photovoltaic performance of the core–shell structured solar cell, and the maximum PCE value was achieved when the CD layer reached five.
CDs have emerged as potential sensitizers and light-harvesting materials for TiO2- or ZnO-based sensitized solar cells,187–190 but preliminary exploration of their utilization revealed a low PCE (<1%), perhaps because of some not-yet-optimized material issues.
6. Applications of CDs in energy storage
6.1 Lithium/sodium ion batteries
Carbon materials have been considered as one of the most promising candidates for the electrode materials of both lithium ion batteries (LIBs) and sodium ion batteries (SIBs), owing to their striking advantages, such as electrical conductivity, chemical stability and abundance. As for CDs, they can work as a surface stabilizer for the active electrode material. For example, Fan et al. used graphene foam for bottom-up growth of single-crystalline long-range-ordered VO2 nanoarrays, which were subsequently coated with a thin GQD layer (thickness of ca. 2 nm) by electrophoresis deposition.191 The GQD coating can effectively prevent the VO2 nanoarrays from undergoing agglomeration, and minimize the dissolution of the active material. As a result, the GQD-coated VO2 array electrodes delivered lithium and sodium storage capacities of 420 and 306 mA h g−1, respectively, and exhibited a high lithium capacity retention of 94% after 1500 cycles at 60C (18 A g−1). In another report by Tong et al., VO2 interwoven nanowires were directly grown on a commercially available carbon cloth followed by coating of CDs.192 When used as the cathode materials for LIBs and SIBs, the resultant CD-coated VO2 nanostructures showed capacities of 420 and 328 mA h g−1 at the current density rate of 0.3C for LIBs and SIBs, respectively. At the current density rate of 60C, the CD-coated VO2 electrode exhibited a lithium storage capacity of 173 mA h g−1, and retained more than 100% of its initial capacity after 500 cycles. The bare VO2 electrode, however, could only retain 70% of its initial capacity under the same test conditions. The similar protective effect of the CDs was also demonstrated in the CuO nanowire array and hierarchical TiO2 electrodes.193,194
CDs can be directly used as building blocks to form 3D porous carbon frameworks (PCFs) via a carbonization process (Fig. 13).195 The CD-derived PCFs consisted of thin carbon films with an interlayer spacing of 0.42 nm, which provided quantities of sodium storage sites and short sodium ion diffusion length. Benefiting from the special 3D structure and high specific surface area (467 m2 g−1), the PCF anode showed extremely excellent cycling stability and ultrafast rate capability. At the current density of 5 A g−1, the initial sodium storage capacity can still be 104.1 mA h g−1. More importantly, 99.8 mA h g−1 can be retained after 10000 cycles. CDs were also proposed as “designer additives” for rutile TiO2.196 The morphology of TiO2 can be tailored by CDs from nanoparticles to nanoneedles, which further self-organize into a 3D petal-like structure, thus resulting in a shortened diffusion pathway of the sodium ions and an improved electrochemical performance for sodium storage. Moreover, an ultrathin graphene layer was formed on the surface of TiO2 to remarkably increase the conductivity of the ensemble. Consequently, when used as an anode in SIBs, the CD-tailored TiO2 delivered a sodium storage capacity of 245.3 mA h g−1 at the rate of 0.25C (83.75 mA g−1). After 4000 cycles at the extremely high rate of 10C (3350 mA g−1), a capacity of 74.6 mA h g−1 was retained with the retention as high as 94.4%. Teng et al. revealed that GQDs could modify the functionalities of a gel polymer electrolyte (GPE) for LIBs.197 The GPE was composed of a polymer framework and a salt LiPF6 solvated in carbonate solvents. The incorporation of GQDs into the polymer framework could suppress the formation of ion–solvent clusters and facilitate Li+-ion transport in the GPE. As a result, the assembled LIB using GQD-contained GPE preserved the capacity at high rates up to 20C and showed high electrochemical stability with 100% capacity retention after 500 cycles at the rate of 5C.
 Fig. 13  (a and b) TEM (a) and HRTEM (b) images of CD-derived 3D porous carbon frameworks (PCFs). (c) Cycle performance of the PCFs as an anode for sodium ion batteries. Reprinted with permission from ref. 195. Copyright 2015, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Recently, Fan and his coworkers synthesized edge-nitrogen-rich CD pillared graphene blocks (N-CDGBs) for sodium ion storage with ultrahigh volumetric/gravimetric capacity and ultralong-term cycling stability.198 For the synthesis of N-CDGBs, aniline monomer was self-polymerized into graphene oxide blocks, then followed by a carbonization treatment. The edge-nitrogen-rich CDs were formed and uniformly distributed between the graphene sheets. Theoretical calculations revealed that the embedded CDs enhanced the sodium ion adsorption energy due to the introduction of negative electron densities. Benefiting from high bulk density (1.5 g cm−3), and the CD pillared graphene structure with abundant edge-nitrogen doping (95%), the N-CDGBs as an anode delivered volumetric and gravimetric capacities of 780 mA h cm−3 and 520 mA h g−1, respectively, at 0.02 A g−1. Moreover, the N-CDGB structure and capacity could be well kept after 10000 cycles at 10 A g−1.
6.2 Supercapacitors
Supercapacitors, which serve as a major complement to batteries, can store energy through either the electrochemical double layer effect or fast surface redox reactions (pseudocapacitance). The electrochemical performance of symmetrical supercapacitors based on carbon materials was remarkably improved when hybridized with CDs, due to the large specific surface area of CDs that renders more surface active sites and edges accessible for the ion adsorption–desorption process.199–202 Interestingly, layered porous carbons derived from CDs can be directly used as high-density supercapacitor electrodes, showing a volumetric capacitance of 157.4 F cm−3 in a 6 M KOH electrolyte with a good rate capability.203 Recently, Kaner et al. developed a simple route to prepare high-surface-area 3D turbostratic graphene (3D-ts-graphene) from biomolecule-derived CDs (Fig. 14a and b).204 The CDs were synthesized by microwave-assisted pyrolysis of citric acid and urea, and subsequently annealed at temperatures up to 400 °C in an inert atmosphere. Next, the pyrolyzed CDs were converted to 3D-ts-graphene by a laser treatment. The 3D-ts-graphene showed excellent electrochemical properties, delivering a nearly ideal capacitive behaviour with the volumetric capacitance of 27.5 mF L−1 at the current density of 560 A L−1. Compared with the commercial aluminium-based capacitor, the 3D-ts-graphene showed a similar charge–discharge rate but a much higher energy density (Fig. 14c).
 Fig. 14  (a and b) SEM (a) and TEM (b) images of CD-derived 3D turbostatic graphene (3D-ts-graphene). (c) Energy versus power density plot comparing the volumetric specific energy and power densities of a 3D-ts-graphene cell (red) with a commercial aluminum electrolytic capacitor (3.0 V/300 μF) and typical thin film lithium-ion batteries. Reprinted with permission from ref. 204. Copyright 2018, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
CDs can be a contributive dopant to the metal oxide-based electrode materials for supercapacitors. For example, Ji et al. fabricated a CD-decorated RuO2 hybrid (CDs/RuO2), which exhibited a high specific capacitance of 460 F g−1 at an ultrahigh current density of 50 A g−1 (41.9 wt% Ru loading), and excellent cycling stability (96.9% capability retention over 5000 cycles at 5 A g−1).205 The rate capability of the CDs/RuO2 hybrid is superior to other reported RuO2-based hybrids. Subsequently, they developed porous NiO2O4 spheres hybrids which were tuned by CDs.206 The as-obtained hybrids as positive materials for asymmetric supercapacitors showed a high specific capacitance of 88.9 F g−1, and the corresponding energy density and power density were 27.8 W h kg−1 and 128 W kg−1, respectively. Xiong and co-workers employed graphitic nitrogen-doped CDs to construct CDs/NiCo2O4 composites.207 The hybrid supercapacitor, in which the as-made CDs/NiCo2O4 composite and porous carbon were used as the positive and negative electrode respectively, exhibited a specific capacitance of 138.8 F g−1, corresponding to an energy density of 62.0 W h kg−1. It was suggested that the low electrochemical impedance of the CDs/NiCo2O4 composite is mainly responsible for the pronounced electrochemical performance. CDs can provide a favourable interface for the interactions between electrolytes and electrodes, leading to an improvement in the specific capacitance, rate performance and cycling stability.191,208
Conducting polymers are well-known efficient pseudocapacitance materials for supercapacitors. Coupling of polymers (such as polypyrrole and polyaniline) with CDs gave rise to an enhanced stable specific capacitance.209 Seferos et al. presented a strategy to incorporate CDs into conjugated PEDOT films by covalent functionalization and electropolymerization.210 The as-obtained CDs/PEDOT films exhibited a capacitance of 152.8 F cm−3 at 1.84 A cm−3, an increase of ca. 30% compared with the similarly prepared poly(hydroxymethyl 3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) films. Bi et al. synthesized a ternary composite of graphene oxide/CDs/polypyrrole (GO/CDs/PPy) by in situ polymerization of GO/CDs with pyrrole under mild conditions.211 The CDs sandwiched between GO film and PPy can facilitate electron transportation through the active layer and increase the dielectric constant of the ternary composite. As a result, GO/CDs/PPy showed a specific capacitance of 576 F g−1 (current density of 0.5 A g−1), and the supercapacitor built by two symmetric GO/CDs/PPy electrodes exhibited an energy density of 30.1 W h kg−1 at a power density of 250 W kg−1 with an excellent cycling stability after 5000 cycles.
CDs as an efficient advanced material for micro-supercapacitors were verified by Yan et al.212 The electrochemical tests showed that a GQDs//GQDs symmetric micro-supercapacitor fabricated by a simple electrodeposition approach had a superior rate capability up to 1000 V s−1, and a high area specific capacitor of 468.1 μF cm−2 in 0.5 M Na2SO4 aqueous solution. Furthermore, another kind of GQDs//MnO2 asymmetric micro-supercapacitor was built by using MnO2 nanoneedles as the positive electrode and GQDs as the negative electrode in an aqueous electrolyte, displaying twice higher specific capacitance (1107.4 μF cm−2) and energy density (0.154 μW h cm−2) compared with the GQDs//GQDs symmetric micro-supercapacitor.212 The pronounced electrochemical performance of the GQD-based asymmetric micro-supercapacitor was also proved by using PANI nanofibers as the positive active material.213 Using H3PO4/PVA gel as the electrolyte, an all-solid-state GQDs//PANI asymmetric micro-supercapacitor was successfully fabricated, which had an upper-limit scan rate of 700 V s−1. Similarly, Chen et al. constructed an all-solid-state micro-supercapacitor based on CDs/graphene fiber hybrids.214 The CDs acting as a reinforcing nanofiller afforded an enhanced mechanical strength of 109.93 MPa for the CDs/graphene fiber hybrids, which was three times larger than that for bare graphene fibers. In addition, the specific surface area of the hybrids was increased from 245.6 m2 g−1 to 435.1 m2 g−1 after the incorporation of the CDs. The constructed CDs/graphene fiber micro-supercapacitor thus delivered a long-term bending durability of 2000 cycles and a large capacitance of 607 mF cm−2, indicating its promising applications in the next generation of flexible electronics, such as wearable watches and microsensors.
7. Summary and future perspectives
In summary, we have brought together the current advances of CDs relating their structural engineering, properties and especially versatile energy-oriented applications. These exciting research results reveal that CDs can offer many special opportunities in an extremely multidisciplinary circumstance to investigate phenomena and properties which have never been observed before, though there are many new aspects yet to be studied. The progress in CD research is in its early stage as compared to the graphene counterpart. At present, one of the major challenges for the development of CDs is lack of a scalable production method for preparing high-quality CDs with desirable structures (such as size, crystallinity, layer, shape and location of defects). It should be noted that few studies have referred to the purity of CD samples, where impurities such amorphous carbon, oligomers and carbon particles may inevitably exist. For bottom-up-synthesized CDs (e.g. citric acid-derived CDs), fluorophore molecules (e.g. citrazinic acid) are occasionally formed as a side-product of the synthesis.215 These issues, along with the low degree of control of CD structures, will inevitably hinder their full use in energy-related applications in at least three ways: (1) it will be difficult to fabricate customized CDs for specific applications; (2) the contribution of impurities involved in the CDs to the applied performance cannot be excluded; and (3) the function mechanism of CDs in specific applications cannot be clearly elaborated. In order to address these problems, separation methods for size or morphology-specific fractions need to be further developed. On the other hand, controlled preparation of CDs can be guided by better understanding of CD formation mechanisms. Therefore, it is of great importance to develop in situ techniques for characterizing the CD formation process of different synthetic routes.
The PL behaviour of CDs is mostly determined by the structure of the carbon core and functional groups on the surface. However, the impact of other luminescent impurities involved in the CD sample such as molecular fluorophores, should be taken into account.216 Although substantial progress in synthesizing multicolour emissive CDs has been made, developing a general procedure to tune the band gap and PL of all types of CDs remains a puzzle. Furthermore, PL mechanisms and the detailed nature of excited states need to be accurately clarified. Tackling these challenges will require exact characterization of the structure and optical properties of CDs using advanced techniques, for example, time-resolved electron paramagnetic resonance and fluorescence correlation spectroscopy.217
CDs exhibit distinguishable advantages in energy-related applications because they combine the electrical features of carbon materials with the unique optical properties of semiconductor quantum dots. In the light-harvesting process, CDs can act as a light absorber and sensitizer. The HOMO and LUMO levels of CDs can be tuned by controlling the CD size, crystallinity, surface functional groups and doped heteroatoms, thus rendering the full utilization of the solar spectrum. CDs are also excellent electron donors and acceptors, which is beneficial for the development of solar cells and PEC systems. CDs which are coupled or hybridized with photocatalytic species (such as metal oxides and sulfides) can provide superfast electron tunnels that facilitate the charge separation and transfer. By surface modification of CDs and covalent immobilisation with catalytic species, improved charge diffusion between CDs and catalysts will be expected in the future research, which will further contribute to the increased light-harvesting performance. In addition, femtosecond spectroscopy techniques could be extensively used to address the fundamental properties of photoinduced charge transfer from and to CDs in various coupled systems.218
The large specific surface area and abundant defects and edges allow CDs to be effective metal-free catalysts for energy conversion from electric or solar energy to chemically-fixed energy, such as electrocatalytic CO2 reduction and solar-driven hydrogen fuel production. CDs have also been regarded as an effective alternative for the commonly used Pt catalysts in the counter electrode of DSSCs. The heteroatom-doping strategy will further significantly enhance the intrinsic catalytic activity of CDs.110 Some other interesting catalytic conversion processes, for example, electrocatalytic reduction of nitrogen to ammonia and solar-driven organic transformations, may be further developed. CDs are also a kind of promising material for LED devices, whatever serves as a phosphor material or an electroluminescent active layer. However, the synthesis of CDs with a long emission wavelength and a high QY is still urgently required for the further development of CD-based LEDs.22 Furthermore, more attention should be paid to the CD-based warm WLEDs with a high CRI (>80) and a low CCT (<4000 K) for indoor lighting applications. In the last few years, the lasing emission behaviour of CDs has been unveiled and studied in detail.30,219,220 This unique optical property makes CDs promising for the design and fabrication of CD-based lasers, which are another type of “untraditional” light-emitting device besides LEDs. When CDs are used as a carbon precursor for secondary batteries and supercapacitors, an issue is why CDs could be efficacious. What are the special merits of CD-derived materials for battery and supercapacitor applications compared with other carbon-based materials?
Although far from being fully exploited, CDs have already shown their remarkable potential for a wide spectrum of applications. We envision that further development of controllable synthetic methods and a better understanding on the correlation between structure and properties will greatly extend the application scope of CD-based materials. There is no doubt that their unique features will inspire more exciting achievements in future research, especially if in-depth theoretical and experimental studies are combined and elaborately designed.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (xjj2017083, zrzd2017014), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51702254, U1710117, 21522601, U1508201), the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2016M602827), the Natural Science Basic Research Plan in Shanxi Province of China (2017JQ5027), and the Liaoning Province Doctoral Startup Grant (201501173).
Notes and references
M. Prato, J. Mater. Chem., 1997, 7, 1097–1109 RSC .
D. Tasis, N. Tagmatarchis, A. Bianco and M. Prato, Chem. Rev., 2006, 106, 1105–1136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Guo and S. Dong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 2644–2672 RSC .
X. Xu, R. Ray, Y. Gu, H. J. Ploehn, L. Gearheart, K. Raker and W. A. Scrivens, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 12736–12737 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-P. Sun, B. Zhou, Y. Lin, W. Wang, K. A. S. Fernando, P. Pathak, M. J. Meziani, B. A. Harruff, X. Wang, H. F. Wang, P. J. G. Luo, H. Yang, M. E. Kose, B. L. Chen, L. M. Veca and S. Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 7756–7757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Anilkumar, X. Wang, L. Cao, S. Sahu, J.-H. Liu, P. Wang, K. Korch, K. N. Tackett Ii, A. Parenzan and Y.-P. Sun, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 2023–2027 RSC .
A. B. Bourlinos, A. Stassinopoulos, D. Anglos, R. Zboril, V. Georgakilas and E. P. Giannelis, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 4539–4541 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Krysmann, A. Kelarakis, P. Dallas and E. P. Giannelis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 747–750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. B. Bourlinos, A. Stassinopoulos, D. Anglos, R. Zboril, M. Karakassides and E. P. Giannelis, Small, 2008, 4, 455–458 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhu, Y. Song, X. Zhao, J. Shao, J. Zhang and B. Yang, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 355–381 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, D. Li, K. Zhang, M. Yang, H. Sun and B. Yang, Small, 2018, 14, 1703919 CrossRef PubMed .
G. E. LeCroy, F. Messina, A. Sciortino, C. E. Bunker, P. Wang, K. A. S. Fernando and Y.-P. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 28180–28186 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. M. Hutton, B. C. M. Martindale and E. Reisner, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 6111–6123 RSC .
Q. L. Zhao, Z. L. Zhang, B. H. Huang, J. Peng, M. Zhang and D. W. Pang, Chem. Commun., 2008, 5116–5118 RSC .
M. Li, C. Yu, C. Hu, W. Yang, C. Zhao, S. Wang, M. Zhang, J. Zhao, X. Wang and J. Qiu, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 320, 570–575 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wu, Y. Wang, W. Wu, C. Hu, X. Wang, J. Zheng, Z. Li, B. Jiang and J. Qiu, Carbon, 2014, 78, 480–489 CrossRef CAS .
A. Jaiswal, S. S. Ghosh and A. Chattopadhyay, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 407–409 RSC .
C. Zhu, J. Zhai and S. Dong, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 9367–9369 RSC .
B. van Dam, H. Nie, B. Ju, E. Marino, J. M. J. Paulusse, P. Schall, M. Li and K. Dohnalová, Small, 2017, 13, 1702098 CrossRef PubMed .
C.-Y. Teng, B.-S. Nguyen, T.-F. Yeh, Y.-L. Lee, S.-J. Chen and H. Teng, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 8256–8265 RSC .
M. Shamsipur, A. Barati and S. Karami, Carbon, 2017, 124, 429–472 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, F. Yuan, X. Li, Y. Li, H. Zhong, L. Fan and S. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702910 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Li, P. Jing, L. Sun, Y. An, X. Shan, X. Lu, D. Zhou, D. Han, D. Shen, Y. Zhai, S. Qu, R. Zbořil and A. L. Rogach, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705913 CrossRef PubMed .
M. T. Hasan, R. Gonzalez-Rodriguez, C. Ryan, N. Faerber, J. L. Coffer and A. V. Naumov, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1804337 CrossRef .
S. Lu, G. Xiao, L. Sui, T. Feng, X. Yong, S. Zhu, B. Li, Z. Liu, B. Zou, M. Jin, J. S. Tse, H. Yan and B. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 6187–6191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, G. Xiao, M. Yang, B. Zou, Z.-L. Zhang and D.-W. Pang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 1893–1897 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Niu, Y. Li, H. Shu and J. Wang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 19376–19382 RSC .
C. Wang, Z. Xu, H. Cheng, H. Lin, M. G. Humphrey and C. Zhang, Carbon, 2015, 82, 87–95 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kalytchuk, K. Poláková, Y. Wang, J. P. Froning, K. Cepe, A. L. Rogach and R. Zbořil, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 1432–1442 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Sciortino, N. Mauro, G. Buscarino, L. Sciortino, R. Popescu, R. Schneider, G. Giammona, D. Gerthsen, M. Cannas and F. Messina, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 1695–1700 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cao, X. Wang, M. J. Meziani, F. Lu, H. Wang, P. G. Luo, Y. Lin, B. A. Harruff, L. M. Veca, D. Murray, S.-Y. Xie and Y.-P. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 11318–11319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liu, B. Guo, Z. Rao, B. Zhang and J. R. Gong, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2436–2441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zheng, Y. Chi, Y. Dong, J. Lin and B. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 4564–4565 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhu, X. Wang, Y. Li, Z. Wang, F. Yang and X. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2009, 5118–5120 RSC .
R. Zhang, J. R. Adsetts, Y. Nie, X. Sun and Z. Ding, Carbon, 2018, 129, 45–53 CrossRef CAS .
S. Carrara, F. Arcudi, M. Prato and L. De Cola, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 4757–4761 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Qin, N. Liu, H. Li, Y. Sun, L. Hu, S. Zhao, D. Han, Y. Liu, Z. Kang and L. Niu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 27546–27554 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lin, W. Xue, H. Chen and J.-M. Lin, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 1051–1053 RSC .
L. Zhao, F. Di, D. Wang, L.-H. Guo, Y. Yang, B. Wan and H. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 2655–2658 RSC .
L. Q. Bai, N. Xue, X. R. Wang, W. Y. Shi and C. Lu, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 6658–6664 RSC .
K. Jiang, L. Zhang, J. Lu, C. Xu, C. Cai and H. Lin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 7231–7235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Long, Y. Feng, C. Cao, Y. Li, J. Han, S. Li, C. Peng, Z. Li and W. Feng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1800791 CrossRef .
R. Long, D. Casanova, W.-H. Fang and O. V. Prezhdo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 2619–2629 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, L. Cao, F. Lu, M. J. Meziani, H. Li, G. Qi, B. Zhou, B. A. Harruff, F. Kermarrec and Y.-P. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2009, 3774–3776 RSC .
M. A. Sk, A. Ananthanarayanan, L. Huang, K. H. Lim and P. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 6954–6960 RSC .
Y. Song, S. Zhu, S. Zhang, Y. Fu, L. Wang, X. Zhao and B. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 5976–5984 RSC .
S. Wang, Z.-G. Chen, I. Cole and Q. Li, Carbon, 2015, 82, 304–313 CrossRef CAS .
P. C. Hsu, Z. Y. Shih, C. H. Lee and H. T. Chang, Green Chem., 2012, 14, 917–920 RSC .
B. C. M. Martindale, G. A. M. Hutton, C. A. Caputo, S. Prantl, R. Godin, J. R. Durrant and E. Reisner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 6459–6463 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yan, X. Cui and L. S. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 5944–5945 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhu, S. Sun, Y. Wang, S. Deng, G. Qian, M. Wang and A. Hu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 580–586 RSC .
L. Bao, Z. L. Zhang, Z. Q. Tian, L. Zhang, C. Liu, Y. Lin, B. Qi and D. W. Pang, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5801–5806 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Peng, W. Gao, B. K. Gupta, Z. Liu, R. Romero-Aburto, L. Ge, L. Song, L. B. Alemany, X. Zhan, G. Gao, S. A. Vithayathil, B. A. Kaipparettu, A. A. Marti, T. Hayashi, J. Zhu and P. M. Ajayan, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 844–849 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Hu, C. Yu, M. Li, X. Wang, J. Yang, Z. Zhao, A. Eychmüller, Y. P. Sun and J. Qiu, Small, 2014, 10, 4926–4933 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, S. Wang, M. Liu, B. Yang, L. Feng, Y. Ji, L. Tao and Y. Wei, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 19013–19018 RSC .
X. M. Sun, Z. Liu, K. Welsher, J. T. Robinson, A. Goodwin, S. Zaric and H. J. Dai, Nano Res., 2008, 1, 203–212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Q. Dong, N. N. Zhou, X. M. Lin, J. P. Lin, Y. W. Chi and G. N. Chen, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 5895–5899 CrossRef CAS .
H. P. Liu, T. Ye and C. D. Mao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 6473–6475 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, X. He, Z. Kang, H. Huang, Y. Liu, J. Liu, S. Lian, C. H. A. Tsang, X. Yang and S.-T. Lee, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 4430–4434 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Vinci, I. M. Ferrer, S. J. Seedhouse, A. K. Bourdon, J. M. Reynard, B. A. Foster, F. V. Bright and L. A. Colón, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 239–243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, L. Cao, S. T. Yang, F. S. Lu, M. J. Meziani, L. L. Tian, K. W. Sun, M. A. Bloodgood and Y. P. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 5310–5314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tetsuka, R. Asahi, A. Nagoya, K. Okamoto, I. Tajima, R. Ohta and A. Okamoto, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5333–5338 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tetsuka, A. Nagoya, T. Fukusumi and T. Matsui, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4632–4638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, C. Hu, C. Yu, S. Wang, P. Zhang and J. Qiu, Carbon, 2015, 91, 291–297 CrossRef CAS .
V. Gupta, N. Chaudhary, R. Srivastava, G. D. Sharma, R. Bhardwaj and S. Chand, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 9960–9963 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Luk, B. L. Chen, K. S. Teng, L. B. Tang and S. P. Lau, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 4526–4532 RSC .
Y. Yan, J. Chen, N. Li, J. Tian, K. Li, J. Jiang, J. Liu, Q. Tian and P. Chen, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 3523–3532 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zheng, Q. Wang, Y. Long, H. Zhang, X. Huang and R. Zhu, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 10650–10652 RSC .
W. Zhang, Y. Liu, X. Meng, T. Ding, Y. Xu, H. Xu, Y. Ren, B. Liu, J. Huang, J. Yang and X. Fang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 22361–22366 RSC .
P. Luo, Y. Qiu, X. Guan and L. Jiang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 19011–19016 RSC .
Y. Dong, R. Dai, T. Dong, Y. Chi and G. Chen, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 11240–11245 RSC .
Y. Li, X. Liu, J. Wang, H. Liu, S. Li, Y. Hou, W. Wan, W. Xue, N. Ma and J. Z. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 26004–26011 CrossRef CAS .
S. Qu, D. Zhou, D. Li, W. Ji, P. Jing, D. Han, L. Liu, H. Zeng and D. Shen, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3516–3521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Yang, C. Wu, X. Luo, X. Liu, Y. Gao, P. Wu, C. Cai and S. S. Saavedra, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 6483–6492 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sarkar, M. Sudolská, M. Dubecký, C. J. Reckmeier, A. L. Rogach, R. Zbořil and M. Otyepka, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 1303–1308 CrossRef CAS .
K. Holá, M. Sudolská, S. Kalytchuk, D. Nachtigallová, A. L. Rogach, M. Otyepka and R. Zbořil, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 12402–12410 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Yang, H. Zhang, J. Lai, X. Peng, Y. Hu, W. Gu and L. Ye, Carbon, 2018, 128, 78–85 CrossRef CAS .
T.-F. Yeh, C.-Y. Teng, S.-J. Chen and H. Teng, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3297–3303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wu, S. Ma, J. Sun, J. I. Gold, C. Tiwary, B. Kim, L. Zhu, N. Chopra, I. N. Odeh, R. Vajtai, A. Z. Yu, R. Luo, J. Lou, G. Ding, P. J. A. Kenis and P. M. Ajayan, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13869 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Hu, C. Yu, M. Li, X. Wang, Q. Dong, G. Wang and J. Qiu, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 3419–3422 RSC .
T. V. Tam, S. G. Kang, F. B. Kadumudi, E. Oh, S. G. Lee and W. M. Choi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 10537–10543 RSC .
S.-J. Jeon, T.-W. Kang, J.-M. Ju, M.-J. Kim, J. H. Park, F. Raza, J. Han, H.-R. Lee and J.-H. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 8211–8219 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wu, L. Zhan, W. Fan, J. Song, X. Li, Z. Li, R. Wang, J. Zhang, J. Zheng, M. Wu and H. Zeng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 6540–6544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, W. Xu, C. Han, X. Wang, Y. Wang, Z. Li, W. Wu and M. Wu, Carbon, 2018, 126, 128–134 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wu, Q. Zhang, R. Wang, Y. Zhao, Z. Li, H. Ning, Q. Zhao, G. P. Wiederrecht, J. Qiu and M. Wu, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 747–753 CrossRef CAS .
T.-F. Yeh, S.-J. Chen and H. Teng, Nano Energy, 2015, 12, 476–485 CrossRef CAS .
B.-S. Nguyen, Y.-K. Xiao, C.-Y. Shih, V.-C. Nguyen, W.-Y. Chou and H. Teng, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 10721–10730 RSC .
P. Yang, J. Zhao, J. Wang, H. Cui, L. Li and Z. Zhu, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 21332–21335 RSC .
H. Yu, R. Shi, Y. Zhao, G. I. N. Waterhouse, L.-Z. Wu, C.-H. Tung and T. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9454–9477 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wu, J. Zhao, S. Guo, L. Wang, W. Shi, H. Huang, Y. Liu and Z. H. Kang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 17314–17321 RSC .
W. Shi, F. Guo, C. Zhu, H. Wang, H. Li, H. Huang, Y. Liu and Z. Kang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 19800–19807 RSC .
C. Zhu, C. Liu, Y. Zhou, Y. Fu, S. Guo, H. Li, S. Zhao, H. Huang, Y. Liu and Z. Kang, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 216, 114–121 CrossRef CAS .
C. a. Liu, Y. Fu, Y. Xia, C. Zhu, L. Hu, K. Zhang, H. Wu, H. Huang, Y. Liu, T. Xie, J. Zhong and Z. Kang, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 2454–2460 RSC .
G. Zhang, Q. Ji, Z. Wu, G. Wang, H. Liu, J. Qu and J. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1706462 CrossRef .
H. Yu, Y. Zhao, C. Zhou, L. Shang, Y. Peng, Y. Cao, L.-Z. Wu, C.-H. Tung and T. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 3344–3351 RSC .
J. Liu, Y. Liu, N. Liu, Y. Han, X. Zhang, H. Huang, Y. Lifshitz, S.-T. Lee, J. Zhong and Z. Kang, Science, 2015, 347, 970–974 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liu, T. Chen, Y. Guo, Z. Zhang and X. Fang, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 193, 248–258 CrossRef CAS .
J.-P. Zou, L.-C. Wang, J. Luo, Y.-C. Nie, Q.-J. Xing, X.-B. Luo, H.-M. Du, S.-L. Luo and S. L. Suib, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 193, 103–109 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. M. Martindale, G. A. M. Hutton, C. A. Caputo and E. Reisner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 6018–6025 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. C. M. Martindale, E. Joliat, C. Bachmann, R. Alberto and E. Reisner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 9402–9406 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Cao, S. Sahu, P. Anilkumar, C. E. Bunker, J. Xu, K. A. S. Fernando, P. Wang, E. A. Guliants, K. N. Tackett and Y.-P. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 4754–4757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sahu, Y. Liu, P. Wang, C. E. Bunker, K. A. S. Fernando, W. K. Lewis, E. A. Guliants, F. Yang, J. Wang and Y.-P. Sun, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 8631–8636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sahu, L. Cao, M. J. Meziani, C. E. Bunker, K. A. S. Fernando, P. Wang and Y. P. Sun, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2015, 634, 122–128 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, S. Sahu, S. K. Sonkar, K. N. Tackett Ii, K. W. Sun, Y. Liu, H. Maimaiti, P. Anilkumar and Y.-P. Sun, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 15604–15607 RSC .
H. Li, X. Zhang and D. R. MacFarlane, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401077 CrossRef .
X. Zhou, Z. Tian, J. Li, H. Ruan, Y. Ma, Z. Yang and Y. Qu, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 2603–2607 RSC .
C. Xu, Q. Han, Y. Zhao, L. Wang, Y. Li and L. Qu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 1841–1846 RSC .
D. Tang, J. Liu, X. Wu, R. Liu, X. Han, Y. Han, H. Huang, Y. Liu and Z. Kang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 7918–7925 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, Y. Liu, M. Wu, X. Feng, S. A. T. Redfern, Y. Shang, X. Yong, T. Feng, K. Wu, Z. Liu, B. Li, Z. Chen, J. S. Tse, S. Lu and B. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800676 CrossRef PubMed .
D.-W. Wang and D. Su, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 576–591 RSC .
Y. Rao, H. Ning, X. Ma, Y. Liu, Y. Wang, H. Liu, J. Liu, Q. Zhao and M. Wu, Carbon, 2018, 129, 335–341 CrossRef CAS .
J.-J. Lv, J. Zhao, H. Fang, L.-P. Jiang, L.-L. Li, J. Ma and J.-J. Zhu, Small, 2017, 13, 1700264 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Jiang, Y. Wang, J. Hao, Y. Liu, W. Li and J. Li, Carbon, 2017, 122, 64–73 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Y. Zhao, H. Cheng, Y. Hu, G. Shi, L. Dai and L. Qu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15–18 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Fei, R. Ye, G. Ye, Y. Gong, Z. Peng, X. Fan, E. L. G. Samuel, P. M. Ajayan and J. M. Tour, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 10837–10843 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. A. Saidi, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 4160–4165 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, S. Zhao, C. Li, M. Yang, Y. Yang, Y. Liu, Y. Lifshitz, S.-T. Lee and Z. Kang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502039 CrossRef .
J. Fu, Y. Wang, J. Liu, K. Huang, Y. Chen, Y. Li and J.-J. Zhu, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 946–951 CrossRef CAS .
S. Guo, S. Zhao, J. Gao, C. Zhu, X. Wu, Y. Fu, H. Huang, Y. Liu and Z. Kang, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 298–304 RSC .
S. Guo, S. Zhao, X. Wu, H. Li, Y. Zhou, C. Zhu, N. Yang, X. Jiang, J. Gao, L. Bai, Y. Liu, Y. Lifshitz, S.-T. Lee and Z. Kang, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1828 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Zhao, Z. Tang, S. Guo, M. Han, C. Zhu, Y. Zhou, L. Bai, J. Gao, H. Huang, Y. Li, Y. Liu and Z. Kang, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 188–197 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, H. Huang, J. Liu, Y. Liu and Z. H. Kang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 11529–11533 RSC .
X. Zhang, F. Wang, H. Huang, H. Li, X. Han, Y. Liu and Z. Kang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 2274–2278 RSC .
K. D. Yang, Y. Ha, U. Sim, J. An, C. W. Lee, K. Jin, Y. Kim, J. Park, J. S. Hong, J. H. Lee, H.-E. Lee, H.-Y. Jeong, H. Kim and K. T. Nam, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 233–242 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, D. Chen, Z. Hu, L. Qin, X. Sun and Y. Huang, Carbon, 2017, 125, 344–351 CrossRef CAS .
C. X. Guo, Y. Q. Dong, H. B. Yang and C. M. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 997–1003 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, R. Zhao, Y. Su, Z. Yang and Y. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2015, 8, 8559–8567 RSC .
W. Shi, X. Zhang, J. Brillet, D. Huang, M. Li, M. Wang and Y. Shen, Carbon, 2016, 105, 387–393 CrossRef CAS .
F. Nan, Z. H. Kang, J. L. Wang, M. R. Shen and L. Fang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 153901 CrossRef .
K. Ye, Z. Wang, J. Gu, S. Xiao, Y. Yuan, Y. Zhu, Y. Zhang, W. Mai and S. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 772–779 RSC .
P. Zhang, T. Wang, X. Chang, L. Zhang and J. Gong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 5851–5855 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Moon, J. An, U. Sim, S.-P. Cho, J. H. Kang, C. Chung, J.-H. Seo, J. Lee, K. T. Nam and B. H. Hong, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3501–3505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Sim, J. Moon, J. An, J. H. Kang, S. E. Jerng, J. Moon, S.-P. Cho, B. H. Hong and K. T. Nam, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1329–1338 RSC .
D. Chen, S. Dai, X. Su, Y. Xin, S. Zou, X. Wang, Z. Kang and M. Shen, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 15340–15343 RSC .
E. F. Schubert and J. K. Kim, Science, 2005, 308, 1274–1278 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Guo, C.-F. Wang, Z.-Y. Yu, L. Chen and S. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 2692–2694 RSC .
M. Sun, S. Qu, Z. Hao, W. Ji, P. Jing, H. Zhang, L. Zhang, J. Zhao and D. Shen, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 13076–13081 RSC .
D. Zhou, D. Li, P. Jing, Y. Zhai, D. Shen, S. Qu and A. L. Rogach, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 1779–1787 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, F. Zhang, Y. Wang, Y. Yang and X. Liu, Carbon, 2018, 126, 426–436 CrossRef CAS .
Y. He, J. He, Z. Yu, H. Zhang, Y. Liu, G. Hu, M. Zheng, H. Dong, J. Zhuang and B. Lei, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 2495–2501 RSC .
C. M. Luk, L. B. Tang, W. F. Zhang, S. F. Yu, K. S. Teng and S. P. Lau, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 22378–22381 RSC .
Q.-L. Chen, C.-F. Wang and S. Chen, J. Mater. Sci., 2013, 48, 2352–2357 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, S. F. Yu, L. Fei, L. Jin, S. Pan and P. Lin, Carbon, 2015, 85, 344–350 CrossRef CAS .
W. Kwon, S. Do, J. Lee, S. Hwang, J. K. Kim and S.-W. Rhee, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 1893–1899 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tetsuka, A. Nagoya and R. Asahi, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 3536–3541 RSC .
Y. Chen, M. Zheng, Y. Xiao, H. Dong, H. Zhang, J. Zhuang, H. Hu, B. Lei and Y. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 312–318 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zheng, Y. Wang, F. Zhang, Y. Yang, X. Liu, K. Guo, H. Wang and B. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 8105–8111 RSC .
J. Zhu, X. Bai, Y. Zhai, X. Chen, Y. Zhu, G. Pan, H. Zhang, B. Dong and H. Song, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 11416–11420 RSC .
B. Yuan, Z. Xie, P. Chen and S. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 5957–5963 RSC .
F. Zhang, X. Feng, Y. Zhang, L. Yan, Y. Yang and X. Liu, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 8618–8632 RSC .
J. He, Y. He, Y. Chen, B. Lei, J. Zhuang, Y. Xiao, Y. Liang, M. Zheng, H. Zhang and Y. Liu, Small, 2017, 13, 1700075 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Chen, H. Lian, Y. Wei, X. He, Y. Chen, B. Wang, Q. Zeng and J. Lin, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 6734–6743 RSC .
F. Zhang, Y. Wang, Y. Miao, Y. He, Y. Yang and X. Liu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 109, 083103 CrossRef .
J. Zheng, X. Liu, Y. Yang, X. Liu and B. Xu, New Carbon Mater., 2018, 33, 276–288 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, K. Wang, Z. Han, Z. Yin, C. Zhou, F. Du, S. Zhou, P. Chen and Z. Xie, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 9629–9637 RSC .
X. Miao, D. Qu, D. Yang, B. Nie, Y. Zhao, H. Fan and Z. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704740 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Ding, J. Zheng, J. Wang, Y. Yang and X. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 1502–1509 RSC .
F. Wang, Y.-h. Chen, C.-y. Liu and D.-g. Ma, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 3502–3504 RSC .
X. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, S. Kalytchuk, S. V. Kershaw, Y. Wang, P. Wang, T. Zhang, Y. Zhao, H. Zhang, T. Cui, Y. Wang, J. Zhao, W. W. Yu and A. L. Rogach, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 11234–11241 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Kwon, Y.-H. Kim, C.-L. Lee, M. Lee, H. C. Choi, T.-W. Lee and S.-W. Rhee, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1306–1311 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Kwon, Y.-H. Kim, J.-H. Kim, T. Lee, S. Do, Y. Park, M. S. Jeong, T.-W. Lee and S.-W. Rhee, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 24205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Yuan, Z. Wang, X. Li, Y. Li, Z. A. Tan, L. Fan and S. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604436 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Xu, Y. Miao, J. Zheng, H. Wang, Y. Yang and X. Liu, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 11211–11221 RSC .
J. Xu, Y. Miao, J. Zheng, Y. Yang and X. Liu, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6, 1800181 CrossRef .
H. Choi, S.-J. Ko, Y. Choi, P. Joo, T. Kim, B. R. Lee, J.-W. Jung, H. J. Choi, M. Cha, J.-R. Jeong, I.-W. Hwang, M. H. Song, B.-S. Kim and J. Y. Kim, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 732–738 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, F. Zhu, H. Xu, W. Liu, L. Yang, Z. Wang, J. Ma, Z. Kang and Y. Liu, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 14592–14601 RSC .
Y. Li, Y. Hu, Y. Zhao, G. Shi, L. Deng, Y. Hou and L. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 776–780 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Li, L. Kou, W. Chen, C. Wu and T. Guo, NPG Asia Mater., 2013, 5, e60 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yan, Y. Yang, C.-Q. Ma, X. Liu, H. Wang and B. Xu, Carbon, 2016, 109, 598–607 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, L. Yan, G. Ji, C. Wang, H. Gu, Q. Luo, Q. Chen, L. Chen, Y. Yang, C.-Q. Ma and X. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 2243–2253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ding, Z. Hao, B. Meng, Z. Xie, J. Liu and L. Dai, Nano Energy, 2015, 15, 186–192 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, C. X. Guo, Q. Zhang, Y. Lei, J. Xie, S. Ee, G. Guai, Q. Song and C. M. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 2047–2052 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Lee, S. Cho, M. Kim, J. Kim, J. Ryu, K.-Y. Shin and J. Jang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 19018–19026 RSC .
M. Dinari, M. M. Momeni and M. Goudarzirad, J. Mater. Sci., 2016, 51, 2964–2971 CrossRef CAS .
C.-C. Wang and S.-Y. Lu, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 1209–1215 RSC .
T. Liu, J. Hou, B. Wang, F. Bai, H. Chen, L. Gao, Y. Cao, H. He, J. Wang, N. Wang, G. Cao and Z. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 10794–10800 RSC .
T. Liu, K. Yu, H. Chen, L. Hao, T. Li, L. Gao, H. He, N. Wang and Z. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 17848–17855 RSC .
W. Zhu, Y. Zhao, J. Duan, Y. Duan, Q. Tang and B. He, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 9894–9897 RSC .
J. Xie, K. Huang, X. Yu, Z. Yang, K. Xiao, Y. Qiang, X. Zhu, L. Xu, P. Wang, C. Cui and D. Yang, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 9176–9182 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, J. Zhang, S. Chen, H. Zhang, L. Li and Z. Fu, J. Mater. Sci., 2018, 53, 9180–9190 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhu, J. Ma, Z. Wang, C. Mu, Z. Fan, L. Du, Y. Bai, L. Fan, H. Yan, D. L. Phillips and S. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 3760–3763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, W. Shi, W. Huang, E.-P. Yao, J. Han, Z. Chen, S. Liu, Y. Shen, M. Wang and Y. Yang, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 2328–2335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ryu, J. W. Lee, H. Yu, J. Yun, K. Lee, J. Lee, D. Hwang, J. Kang, S. K. Kim and J. Jang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 16834–16842 RSC .
J. Duan, Y. Zhao, B. He and Q. Tang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 3787–3791 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Gao, K. Ding, Y. Wang, K. Ruan, S. Diao, Q. Zhang, B. Sun and J. Jie, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 5164–5171 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xie, B. Nie, L. Zeng, F.-X. Liang, M.-Z. Wang, L. Luo, M. Feng, Y. Yu, C.-Y. Wu, Y. Wu and S.-H. Yu, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 4015–4022 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, X. Wu, X. Li, W. Wang, L. Wang, M. Gu and Q. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 15522–15525 RSC .
P. Mirtchev, E. J. Henderson, N. Soheilnia, C. M. Yip and G. A. Ozin, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 12, 1265–1269 RSC .
M. Dutta, S. Sarkar, T. Ghosh and D. Basak, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 20127–20131 CrossRef CAS .
J. Briscoe, A. Marinovic, M. Sevilla, S. Dunn and M. Titirici, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 4463–4468 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chao, C. Zhu, X. Xia, J. Liu, X. Zhang, J. Wang, P. Liang, J. Lin, H. Zhang, Z. X. Shen and H. J. Fan, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 565–573 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-S. Balogun, Y. Luo, F. Lyu, F. Wang, H. Yang, H. Li, C. Liang, M. Huang, Y. Huang and Y. Tong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 9733–9744 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhu, D. Chao, J. Sun, I. M. Bacho, Z. Fan, C. F. Ng, X. Xia, H. Huang, H. Zhang, Z. X. Shen, G. Ding and H. J. Fan, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 2, 1400499 CrossRef .
W. Zhang, T. Xu, Z. Liu, N.-L. Wu and M. Wei, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 1413–1416 RSC .
H. Hou, C. E. Banks, M. Jing, Y. Zhang and X. Ji, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7861–7866 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, C. W. Foster, C. E. Banks, L. Shao, H. Hou, G. Zou, J. Chen, Z. Huang and X. Ji, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9391–9399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. M. Chen, S. T. Hsu, Y. H. Tseng, T. F. Yeh, S. S. Hou, J. S. Jan, Y. L. Lee and H. Teng, Small, 2018, 14, 1703571 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Liu, L. Zhang, L. Sheng, Q. Zhou, T. Wei, J. Feng and Z. Fan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1802042 CrossRef .
Y. Hu, Y. Zhao, G. Lu, N. Chen, Z. Zhang, H. Li, H. Shao and L. Qu, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 195401 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Chen, Y. Hu, C. Hu, H. Cheng, Z. Zhang, H. Shao and L. Qu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 19307–19313 RSC .
L. Lingxiao, F. Yueqiong, C. Qing, Z. Yang, H. Yue, Z. Zhipan, C. Nan and Q. Liangti, Nanotechnology, 2014, 25, 235401 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Feng, P. Xie, S. Xue, L. Li, X. Hou, Z. Liu, D. Wu, L. Wang and P. K. Chu, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2018, 808, 321–328 CrossRef CAS .
G. Chen, S. Wu, L. Hui, Y. Zhao, J. Ye, Z. Tan, W. Zeng, Z. Tao, L. Yang and Y. Zhu, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 19028 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Strauss, K. Marsh, M. D. Kowal, M. El-Kady and R. B. Kaner, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704449 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhu, X. Ji, C. Pan, Q. Sun, W. Song, L. Fang, Q. Chen and C. E. Banks, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3665–3675 RSC .
Y. Zhu, Z. Wu, M. Jing, H. Hou, Y. Yang, Y. Zhang, X. Yang, W. Song, X. Jia and X. Ji, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 866–877 RSC .
J.-S. Wei, H. Ding, P. Zhang, Y.-F. Song, J. Chen, Y.-G. Wang and H.-M. Xiong, Small, 2016, 12, 5927–5934 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Hassan, E. Haque, K. R. Reddy, A. I. Minett, J. Chen and V. G. Gomes, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 11988–11994 RSC .
B. Devadas and T. Imae, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 127–134 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Miltenburg, T. B. Schon, E. L. Kynaston, J. G. Manion and D. S. Seferos, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 6611–6615 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, J. Wang, J. Liu, J. Wu, H. Chen and H. Bi, Carbon, 2017, 115, 134–146 CrossRef CAS .
W.-W. Liu, Y.-Q. Feng, X.-B. Yan, J.-T. Chen and Q.-J. Xue, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 4111–4122 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liu, X. Yan, J. Chen, Y. Feng and Q. Xue, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 6053–6062 RSC .
Q. Li, H. Cheng, X. Wu, C.-F. Wang, G. Wu and S. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 14112–14119 RSC .
S. Zhu, X. Zhao, Y. Song, S. Lu and B. Yang, Nano Today, 2016, 11, 128–132 CrossRef CAS .
J. Schneider, C. J. Reckmeier, Y. Xiong, M. von Seckendorff, A. S. Susha, P. Kasák and A. L. Rogach, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 2014–2022 CrossRef CAS .
M. Righetto, A. Privitera, I. Fortunati, D. Mosconi, M. Zerbetto, M. L. Curri, M. Corricelli, A. Moretto, S. Agnoli, L. Franco, R. Bozio and C. Ferrante, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 2236–2242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Sciortino, A. Madonia, M. Gazzetto, L. Sciortino, E. J. Rohwer, T. Feurer, F. M. Gelardi, M. Cannas, A. Cannizzo and F. Messina, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 11902–11911 RSC .
S. Qu, X. Liu, X. Guo, M. Chu, L. Zhang and D. Shen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 2689–2695 CrossRef CAS .
W. F. Zhang, H. Zhu, S. F. Yu and H. Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2263–2267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8cs00750kThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

Chao Hu
	Chao Hu received his PhD degree from Dalian University of Technology in 2015. He is currently a lecturer in the School of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong University, China. He has worked as a visiting scholar for one year in the Institute of Chemical Sciences and Engineering at the École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL) in Switzerland. His main research is focused on the synthesis of functional carbon materials for energy storage and conversion applications.

Mingyu Li
	Mingyu Li received her BS degree from the School of Chemical Engineering at Dalian University of Technology (DUT) in 2013. She is currently a PhD candidate under the supervision of Prof. Jieshan Qiu in the School of Chemical Engineering at DUT. Her research is mainly focused on the synthesis of fluorescent carbon dots and their applications in optoelectronics.

Jieshan Qiu
	Jieshan Qiu received his PhD degree in organic chemical engineering from Dalian University of Technology in 1990. Now he is a Cheung-Kong Distinguished Professor of Carbon Science and Chemical Engineering, and the Dean of College of Chemical Engineering, Beijing University of Chemical Technology, China. His research encompasses both fundamental and applied aspects of carbon materials and science, with a focus on the methodologies for producing carbon materials from coal and coal-derived by-products such as coal tar pitch, and their applications in energy storage and conversion (solar cells, supercapacitor and batteries, etc.), catalysis and environment protection.

Ya-Ping Sun
	Ya-Ping Sun received his PhD degree from Florida State University in 1989. After postdoctoral training at the University of Texas at Austin, he joined the Clemson faculty in 1992. He has been the Frank Henry Leslie Chair Professor of Natural & Physical Sciences since 2003. His research interests are primarily in carbon-based nanomaterials.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of the structure of CDs.	 

 	Fig. 2  Quantum yields of CDs synthesized from different carbon precursors. The detailed information is summarized in Tables S1 and S2 in the ESI.†	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Calculated emission wavelength using a TDDFT method in a vacuum as a function of the diameter of s-GQDs. The solid line is the linear fitting of zigzag-edged s-GQDs (G1–G6). Reproduced with permission from ref. 45. Copyright 2014, the Royal Society of Chemistry. (b and c) TEM images of electrochemically synthesized CDs obtained at applied potentials of 0.5 V (b) and 2.5 V (c). Reproduced with permission from ref. 52. Copyright 2011, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Predicted energy level diagram for various nitrogen-functionalized GQDs (NF-GQDs). (b) Measured energy level diagram for the corresponding NF-GQDs. The mismatch between the predicted energy levels and the measured ones arises from the difference in the size of NF-GQDs and the quantity of nitrogenous functional groups. Reproduced with permission from ref. 63. Copyright 2016, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (c) Graphical representation of oxygen-functionalized CDs with oxidized (CDs) or reduced (r-CDs) states. Photographs of aqueous solutions of CDs (left) and r-CDs (right) were obtained under UV light irradiation (360 nm). (d) The maximum emission wavelengths of CDs under oxidation–reduction cycles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2011, the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a and b) DFT-simulated (a) and experimentally measured (b) HOMO and LUMO energy levels for nitrogen-doped GQDs (NGQDs), undoped GQDs (UGQDs) and boron-doped GQDs (BGQDs). The HOMO and LUMO of the GQDs shown in panel (b) were determined from a combination of absorption spectrum data and electrochemical measurements. Reproduced with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (c) The configuration of oxygen-rich NGQDs including p- and n-type domains, connected through sp2 clusters as Ohmic contact. Reproduced with permission from ref. 78. Copyright 2014, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the two-step/two-electron process of CDs/C3N4 for photocatalytic overall water splitting. (b) UV-vis absorption spectra of C3N4 (black curve) and CDs/C3N4 (red curve) catalysts. Inset: Digital photograph of catalyst powders. (c) Typical time course of H2 and O2 production from water under visible light irradiation (by a 300 W Xe lamp using a long-pass cutoff filter allowing λ > 420 nm) catalyzed by CDs/C3N4 (CD concentration, 1.6 × 10−5 gCD gcatalyst−1). (d) Wavelength-dependent quantum efficiency of water splitting by catalysts with two different concentrations of CDs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 96. Copyright 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 7  Faradaic efficiencies for electrocatalytic conversion of CO2 to CO under various potentials, catalyzed by a single-crystalline gold (SC Au) catalyst with or without NGQD coating. Reproduced with permission from ref. 118. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a and b) TEM images of CDs/Co3O4–Fe2O3 photoanodes at low (a) and high (b) magnification. White circles in (a) indicate CDs. (c) Schematic illustration of the fast/slow reaction processes on Co3O4 co-catalyst and the two-step–two-electron reaction pathway for photocatalytic water oxidation on the CDs/Co3O4–Fe2O3 photoanode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 131. Copyright 2016, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.	 

 	Fig. 9  Optical properties of CDs/epoxy composites and the corresponding LED devices. (a and b) The optical photographs of the CDs/epoxy composite discs under room light (a) and different excitation light (b). The epoxy discs display different colours due to the different kinds of added CDs. (c and d) The photographs of the monochrome blue, green, and red down-conversion LED devices by coating CDs/epoxy on the different chips (c) and the corresponding light emission spectra (d). (e) The CIE colour coordinates of the white LED (WLED) derived from a mixture of blue-, green- and red-light-emissive CDs. Inset at right top corner is the optical photograph of the WLED in the on-state. (f) The emitting light spectrum of the WLED. (g) The emitting spectra of the WLED initially and after illuminating for over 20 days. Reprinted with permission from ref. 156. Copyright 2018, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Structural diagram of CD-based LEDs. (b) Energy band diagram of CD-based LEDs relative to ITO and LiF/Al work functions. (c) Molecular structures of PEDOT:PSS and TPBI, and the schematic drawing of the CDs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 158. Copyright 2011, the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 11  Current–voltage characteristics of the photovoltaic devices based on aniline-functionalized graphene sheets (ANI-GSs) and aniline-functionalized GQDs (ANI-GQDs) with different GQD contents, under 100 mW AM 1.5G illumination. Reproduced with permission from ref. 65. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Energy band alignment for a perovskite solar cell made with a layer of nitrogen-functionalized GQDs (NF-GQDs). (b) Schematic representation of the sample used for optical measurements. (c and d) Transient absorption spectra of a CH3NH3PbI3/TiO2 sample after excitation at 400 nm (c) and a CH3NH3PbI3/NH2-GQDs/TiO2 sample after excitation at 400 nm (d). (e) Normalized kinetic traces for photobleaching probed at 740 nm: red, CH3NH3PbI3/TiO2; and blue, CH3NH3PbI3/NH2-GQDs/TiO2. Inset shows normalized kinetic traces for different NF-GQD functionalities: black, CH3NH3PbI3/DAN-GQDs/TiO2; blue, CH3NH3PbI3/NH2-GQDs/TiO2; pink, CH3NH3PbI3/OPD-GQDs/TiO2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 63. Copyright 2016, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a and b) TEM (a) and HRTEM (b) images of CD-derived 3D porous carbon frameworks (PCFs). (c) Cycle performance of the PCFs as an anode for sodium ion batteries. Reprinted with permission from ref. 195. Copyright 2015, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a and b) SEM (a) and TEM (b) images of CD-derived 3D turbostatic graphene (3D-ts-graphene). (c) Energy versus power density plot comparing the volumetric specific energy and power densities of a 3D-ts-graphene cell (red) with a commercial aluminum electrolytic capacitor (3.0 V/300 μF) and typical thin film lithium-ion batteries. Reprinted with permission from ref. 204. Copyright 2018, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8cs00750k

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
