Relating band edge DOS occupancy statistics associated excited state electron entropy generation to free energy loss and intrinsic V oc deficit of sol ...  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D3CP01279D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D3CP01279D
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2023, 25, 14334-14347Relating band edge DOS occupancy statistics associated excited state electron entropy generation to free energy loss and intrinsic Voc deficit of solar cells†

        
          
            Like 
            Huang
          
        
      
Department of Microelectronic Science and Engineering, School of Physical Science and Technology, Ningbo University, Fenghua Road 818, Ningbo 315211, China. E-mail: huanglike@nbu.edu.cn
Received 
      21st March 2023
    , Accepted 26th April 2023First published on 27th April 2023AbstractEver since the invention of solar cells, thermodynamics has been used to assess their performance limits and investigate advances in materials science and photovoltaic technology to reduce the gap between practical efficiencies and thermodynamic limits to photovoltaic energy conversion. By systematically addressing thermodynamic efficiency losses in current photovoltaics, ultrahigh efficiency photovoltaic can be expected. Currently, the non-radiative recombination of some ultrahigh efficient solar cells is almost completely suppressed, and the radiative recombination loss is the key to restricting the further improvement of device performance. This work relates the energy band edge electronic density of states (DOS) of semiconductor absorber and transport layer, excited/transfer state electronic entropy to thermodynamically inevitable energy loss during photoelectric conversion in solar cells. Through comprehensive theoretical analysis and device simulation, it is revealed why solar cells based on semiconductor material with a low DOS have higher Voc. On account of the basic limitations of thermodynamic laws on the energy conversion process, this work reveals a hidden variable that affects the photovoltaic performance and puts forward the band edge DOS engineering as a new dimension in performance optimization of solar cells apart from the traditional material and defect passivation engineering, etc. This work highlights the great importance of DOS engineering for further improving the performance of solar cell devices.
1. Introduction
Within just a decade, the photoelectric conversion efficiency (PCE) of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) has reached a record 25.7%.1 Apart from the merit of easy fabrication and instructive research experience from traditional solution-processed solar cells, such outstanding efficiency naturally makes people wonder whether halide perovskites have special properties that make them superior to other materials as photovoltaic absorbers.2 It is commonly believed that perovskite semiconductors exhibit several remarkable and unique properties that make them ideal for optoelectronic applications: an easily tunable and direct band gap near the optimal value of Shockley–Queisser limit for single-junction solar cells, a large absorption coefficient, much higher than that of Si and even superior to GaAs, sharp absorption edges with a small Urbach energy, large photogenerated carrier lifetime and diffusion length, and small and balanced electron and hole effective masses, leading to efficient ambipolar transport with high mobility.2 Others, however, argue that the mobility of typical perovskites is actually not that high, especially when compared to inorganic semiconductor absorbers (GaAs, μe ≈ 8000 cm2 V−1 s−1) in high-efficiency solar cells.3
As a basic parameter, high open circuit voltage (Voc) is of vital significance for high device performance, which demands low non-radiative recombination and comes along with high photoluminescence quantum yields (PLQY).4,5 For a realistic solar cell with defect-induced non-radiative recombination loss, its Voc is directly related to the ability to extract its internal luminescence, as derived by Ross et al.:5–8 (1)where Voc,rad is the radiative limit of Voc, i.e., a thermodynamic limit in the case of 100% radiative recombination. kB is the Boltzmann constant, T is the temperature, e is the electronic charge, and ηext is the external luminescence quantum efficiency. ηext is experimentally measurable as PLQY. For any solar cell technology to approach the radiative limit, efficient external electroluminescence (EL) is a necessity. ΔVoc,non-rad is Voc loss associated with defect-induced non-radiative recombination. Obviously, the non-radiative recombination Voc loss is directly related to the external luminescence quantum efficiency ηext. According to eqn (1), by improving the quality of the absorption layer and passivating defects to inhibit non-radiative recombination, the device's Voc can gradually approach the radiative limit.8
Based on this insightful theory, material/interface engineering and device optimization have significantly reduced the defect and non-radiative recombination of conventional solar cells and PSCs over the past several decades, making their Voc gradually approach the radiative limit.9 For example, Grätzel et al. recently reported a record efficiency of 25.7% based on FAPbI3 perovskite with a band gap of 1.53 eV.1 The Voc of the device is 1.22 V, which is approaching the radiative limit Voc,rad (97.6% of the radiative recombination limit of 1.25 V). Here, the Voc loss (Eg/e − Voc) is 0.31 eV, consistent with the common values of about 0.3 V that still exists in all high-efficiency single junction solar cells where the non-radiative recombination loss is almost eliminated, which is the inevitable radiative recombination Voc loss due to thermodynamics. For such a device with optimized material quality and device design, the space for defect passivation to further improve the Voc is almost zero.
It should be noted that even with such a low non-radiative recombination loss and such a high Voc, this Voc only accounts for 79.7% of Eg/e, which means that even if the non-radiative recombination loss is completely eliminated, the Voc of the device still presents remarkable intrinsic radiative recombination loss (about 20% of Eg/e). In fact, the dominant energy loss of high-efficiency solar cells, such as GaAs, is also radiative recombination loss. Therefore, as the non-radiative recombination loss in high-efficiency devices is almost eliminated, and the device Voc gradually approaches the radiative recombination limit, new physical insights need to be proposed to further improve the Voc and thus, device performance.8
Recently, the low density of states (DOS) of the valence and conduction bands (VB and CB) and the associated low effective mass found experimentally and theoretically for HPs have been considered as a possible ingredient to the great success of PSCs, especially for their high Voc.10,11 However, this result lacks intuitive physical and energetics insights. As from the energy dispersion relationship of the band edge, the effective mass of the carrier is positively correlated with the band edge DOS. This means that a small DOS leads to a small effective mass, which usually contributes to high mobility.12 From the perspective of semiconductor physics, large mobility is indeed helpful in improving device performance. However, in fact, the mobility of perovskite is not that high.3 Obviously, the potential contribution of a small DOS to a large Voc cannot be understood only from the perspective of semiconductor physics.
In this context, correlating semiconductor physics and thermodynamics may provide new insights, as although solar cells are semiconductor devices, their ultimate efficiency is essentially limited by thermodynamics. In this work, combined with theoretical derivation and device simulation of PSC, we will point out that the occupation statistics of photogenerated carriers in the band edge electronic DOS leads to entropy generation and thus the free energy loss of excited state electrons, which is the essential reason for Voc loss of any solar cell.
2. Results and discussion
2.1 Theory: origin of Voc from semiconductor device physics
To get a general expression of the Voc, let us switch from the above “thermodynamic radiative view” (eqn (1)) to the “semiconductor picture”, and therefore eqn (1) can be rewritten using the band gap energy Eg and charge carrier densities (n for electrons and p for holes) as will be described by eqn (5) below.
According to semiconductor (device) physics, the relationship between Voc and the quasi-Fermi levels EFn and EFp of electrons and holes in the absorber is as follows:11 eVoc = EFn − EFp(2)Fermi level represents the chemical potential of electrons/holes in semiconductors. Therefore, the increase in the chemical potential of electrons/holes after photoexcited electron transition is: Δμ = EFn − EFp = μC − μV(3)The electron concentration n in CB and hole concentration p in VB can be expressed as:10,13 (4.1) (4.2)Combining eqn (2)–(4), we can get the Voc of a solar cell:10 (5)wherein, (6)is the effective DOS of CB and VB,  are the effective masses of CB electrons and VB holes, respectively.13 According to the Pauli exclusion principle, the concentration of CB electrons and VB holes cannot be greater than their corresponding effective DOS, that is np ≤ NCNV, thus: eVoc = Δμ ≤ Eg(7)
From eqn (5), it can be seen that, for electrons/holes excited by photons with energy equal to the band gap, the energy loss caused by factors such as device temperature, CB electron and VB hole concentration, and CB/VB DOS is the reason why the device Voc is less than the band gap Eg. From the thermodynamic point of view, such a free energy loss of the excited electrons/holes must correspond to a specific kind of entropy increase of the solar cell device as a thermodynamic system.
In thermodynamics, entropy is a fundamental thermodynamic quantity indicative of the accessible degrees of freedom in a system. Entropy increase corresponds to the decrease of the available energy (exergy) of the system. In the Boltzmann formulation, the statistical entropy is:14 S = kBlnΩ(8)where kB is the Boltzmann constant and Ω is the number of microstates for a given macrostate. We will prove that the term  in eqn (5) should have the meaning of free energy loss associated with entropy increase. This implies that, although Voc scales with Eg, it cannot reach Eg for finite temperature, which is due to the second term that can be motivated by the entropy of charge carriers in the accessible DOS in the conduction and valence bands (NC and NV).
2.2 Effect of the band-edge DOS of perovskite layer on Voc and device performance from device simulation
According to eqn (5), the Voc of a solar cell device depends on the loss term determined by the excitation intensity (n/p) and the effective DOS at the CB minimum and VB maximum (NC and NV) of the absorber layer (which is actually further related to the temperature T, as will be discussed later). Next, we will first study the effect of the effective DOS of the absorber layer on the device performance via device simulation with PSCs as an example. The device simulator of the Solar Cell Capacitance Simulator (SCAPS, ver. 3.2.01), developed by the University of Gent, was used to model the PSCs.15

Fig. 1a presents the Voc of various absorber material-based solar cells with the same electronic parameters except for NCNV.16–18 It can be seen that a large NCNV value means a low Voc, which leads to lower efficiency. Fig. 1b shows the variation trend of the J–V curves of the device with varying NC and NV of the perovskite layer based on device simulation. As can be seen, with the increase of NC from 1016 to 1022 cm−3, the J–V curves of the device have changed significantly. Specifically, the Voc is reduced from 1.12 to 0.83 V (Fig. 1c), which is consistent with the trend of Fig. 1a. According to eqn (5), the change of Voc with lnNC should be linear, and the calculated results present a similar linear relationship.
 Fig. 1  
V
oc of various absorber materials with the same electronic parameters except for NC and NV (a). Effect of effective DOS NC at the bottom of CB of perovskite on device performance: J–V curves (b), Voc (c), Jsc (d), FF (e), and PCE (f). 
Interestingly, the changing trend of short-circuit current density (Jsc) and fill factor (FF) is different from that of Voc. As shown in Fig. 1d, when NC increases from 1016 to 1022 cm−3, the Jsc of the device increases slightly from 22.26 to 23.48 mA cm−2. The reason for this result may be that the absorptivity of the semiconductor is positively correlated with the electronic DOS at the bottom of the CB and the top of the VB; the large NC leads to the enhancement of absorption and the increase of Jsc (further explanation will be given below). With the increase of NC of the perovskite layer, the FF of the device first increases and then saturates (Fig. 1e). The overall result is that with other parameters remaining unchanged, the PCE of the device first increases and then decreases with the increase of NC of the perovskite layer, and the performance of the device is the best at NC = 1018 cm−3 (Fig. 1f). This value is indeed consistent with the DOS of halide perovskite currently reported. Such an NC is indeed significantly smaller than that of traditional semiconductors such as silicon, which is also the potential reason for the high Voc and high efficiency of PSCs, as pointed out in the previous works.10
Similarly, because of the symmetry of the behavior of electrons and holes in semiconductor and p–n junction devices, the VB maximum effective electronic DOS NV of the absorber layer may also have a significant impact on the device performance. Fig. 2a shows the variation trend of the J–V curves of the device with varying NV of the perovskite layer based on device simulation. It can be seen that with the increase of NV from 1016 to 1022 cm−3, the J–V curves indeed changed significantly. Just as expected, the Voc is reduced from 1.08 to 0.91 V (Fig. 2b), which is consistent with the changing trend of Fig. 1a. While interestingly, the influence of NV on the J–V curves is slightly different from that of NC (mainly reflected in the different influence on the Jsc). Different from the influence of NC on the device performance, the change of NV has little influence on the Jsc and FF (Fig. 2c and d). Here, the changing trend of FF is difficult to fully understand due to the lack of direct physical intuition. However, the reason why the change of Jsc shows such a trend can be attributed to the following reasons: for a fixed NC = 2.2 × 1018 cm−3, increasing NV does not cause a significant increase in absorption, especially when NV > NC, because the bottom of the CB with limited DOS cannot provide more electronic states for electrons excited from VB to occupy. The overall result of the above changes is that when other parameters remain unchanged, the PCE of the device decreases gradually with the increase of NV in the absorber layer, especially when NV > 1018 cm−3 (Fig. 2e).
 Fig. 2  Effect of effective DOS at the VB maximum of perovskite (NV1) on device performance: J–V curves (a), Voc (b), Jsc (c), FF (d), and PCE (e). (f) Voc loss under different excitation intensities and with different NCNV values. 

Fig. 2f further shows the dependence of the Voc loss on the excitation intensity (n/p). It can be seen that under a fixed NC/NV, the Voc loss term decreases, and the Voc increases with the excitation intensity. Therefore, this is also the basic idea of concentrating photovoltaic (CPV) and the embodiment of its advantages. The green diamond area in Fig. 2f shows the numerical range of common solar cells (considering factors such as band gap and light absorption range), while the red dotted diamond area shows the numerical range of PSCs. Note that according to Fig. 2f, when n/p is about 1015–1016 cm−3 and NC/NV is about 1018 cm−3, the Voc loss value is very close to the Voc deficit (Eg/e − Voc) of about 0.3 eV reported by most efficient PSCs.
Usual irradiation levels (such as AM 1.5G, 1 sun) are only able to create a low concentration of photogenerated charges carriers (n, p < 1016 cm−3),19 whereas the total available states (NC/NV) of common semiconductors can be about 1020 cm−3, and the classic occupancy of electrons/holes is only about 1%. To facilitate discussion, eqn (5) can be changed to: (9)where  describes the classic occupation degree of photogenerated non-equilibrium carrier np to the effective electron DOS NCNV. Under general illumination (such as AM 1.5G, 1 sun), the photogenerated non-equilibrium carrier concentration (np: 1028–1032 cm−6) in the absorber layer is much smaller than the value of NCNV (≥1036 cm−6), leading to  far less than 1. Therefore, the second term in eqn (9) is negative, and with the increase in the difference between np and NCNV, the lower the occupation, the lower the Voc.
The above results imply that for efficient solar cells, the effective electronic DOS at the bottom of the CB and the top of the VB of the absorber material should be as small as possible (≤1018 cm−3), and the excitation intensity should be as large as possible to increase the occupancy of photogenerated carriers to the band edge DOS and reduce the Voc loss. Halide perovskite materials happen to have a low effective DOS, which may be one of the important reasons for their low Voc loss and high device performance, not just the widely considered appropriate band gap, high mobility, long carrier life, high defect tolerance, and so on. However, the physical insights behind this are not intuitive presently. Below, we will put out new insights to explain this from the perspective of thermodynamics.
2.3 Band-edge DOS occupancy statistics, excited state electrons entropy generation, and free-energy loss associated Voc deficit from thermodynamics
Now, let us turn again to the thermodynamic aspect of solar cells. In fact, with further in-depth consideration, according to eqn (5), the Voc of a solar cell depends not only on the excitation intensity (proportional to the photogenerated non-equilibrium carrier concentration np) and the effective electronic DOS NC and NV of the absorber layer, but also on the occupation of the photogenerated non-equilibrium carrier (np) to the effective electron DOS NCNV and the temperature T as a whole. The direct result of this notion is that, for a specific semiconductor absorber material, the maximum exportable Voc is its band gap Eg/e when the temperature approaches absolute zero (T → 0). In fact, as the absolute zero temperature cannot be reached in thermodynamics, the Voc of the device will always be less than the band gap Eg/e, as shown in eqn (5) with a negative term. The value of the negative term depends on the occupation and temperature of the non-equilibrium carrier (np) to the effective electronic DOS NCNV.
According to eqn (5) and the above numerical calculation results, the effective electron DOS of the absorber layer significantly affects the device performance. Moreover, although eqn (5) is changed to eqn (9) and the concept of the classical occupation of photogenerated non-equilibrium carriers on the effective electron DOS NCNV is introduced, it still lacks obvious physical intuition, and the above results are still difficult to understand. The reason may be that we have not considered the quantum properties and quantum identity of electrons; that is, electrons are indistinguishable from each other.
In order to reveal the specific mechanism behind the above phenomenon and deeply understand the influence of the effective electron DOS of the absorber layer on the device performance, we established relevant physical models and carried out device simulation and further analysis below.
Considering the quantum properties of electrons and the identity principle, in order to deeply understand the physical meaning behind the above results, we need to use the quantum statistical physics of electrons for further analysis. We first consider the electronic process of the absorber layer under light irradiation. For the optical excitation of the absorber layer, there exist several simultaneous processes as shown in Fig. 3a: (1) photons with energy much smaller than the band gap will not be absorbed; (2) photons with energy equal to Eg − Eb will generate excitons (For some semiconductors with significant exciton effects, sub-band gap absorption shown in process 2 can occur, but this is not within the scope of our discussion in this paper.); (3) photons with energy hν = Eg creates a pair of free electrons and holes across the band gap; (4) photons with energy greater than or equal to the band gap will excite to produce free electron–hole pairs, but the latter will produce hot carriers, and their energy will be quickly transferred to the lattice through relaxation. In order to focus on the essence and key process of the problem, here, we only consider process 3, in which the non-equilibrium free electron/hole pairs are generated. Regardless of the hot carrier effect, the available energy (exergy, i.e., the maximum useful work allowed by the law of thermodynamics) F of an excited electron can be expressed as G = U − TS + PV. For solar cells as a thermodynamic system, there is no volume change during the process of solar energy conversion. The Gibbs free energy of photogenerated electrons is reduced to Helmholtz free energy: F = U − TS = Eg − TS(10)where TS is the entropy increase associated energy loss of the electrons/holes excited by the photon in the process of photoelectric energy conversion.
 Fig. 3  Excitation process considered in the perovskite layer (a) (1) light with an energy below the band gap is not absorbed; (2) exciton absorption; (3) light at an energy hν creates an excitation from the valence to the conduction band of a semiconductor an electron–hole pair is formed across the band gap with energy Eg; (4) light at an energy hν > Eg creates a hot electron–hole pair with high kinetic energy. After thermalization in the conduction band, an electron–hole pair is formed across the band gap with energy Eg as process 3. Entropy increases due to excited state electron generation (b). Entropy per charge carrier as a function of the NC of perovskite (c) and excitation intensity n (cm−3, d). Entropy losses due to excited state electron generation, relaxation, transfer, and capture by defect states (e). Entropy increase due to excited state electron transfer from perovskite to ETL (f). 
Considering eqn (5), (10) and Boltzmann's statistical entropy formula 8 according to dimensional analysis and formal analysis, we guess that the term  in eqn (5) (at least in form) has the meaning of entropy! Therefore, the term  should have the dimension and physical meaning of energy loss related to the entropy increase of electron/hole. As such, the term  should be entropy increase of excited electron/hole, and the term  should be the total number of all possible microscopic states that are occupied by excited electrons/holes in NCNV.
Next, we will simply prove this understanding with quantum statistical physics analysis of excited electrons and holes. For eqn (5), we further expand it as follows: (11)Below, we will see that the last two terms on the right side of eqn (11) represent the average entropy increase of a single photogenerated electron and hole induced by light excitation, respectively.
Firstly, let us consider the entropy increase of (single) photogenerated electrons caused by light excitation (Fig. 3b). Considering that n photons with energy hν = Eg are absorbed by 1 cm3 semiconductor absorber layer material, n/p electron/hole pairs will be generated (n/p is the non-equilibrium electron/hole concentration, regardless of recombination, that is EQE = 100%). According to quantum statistical physics, the number of possible microscopic states in which the n electrons occupy N = NC electronic states at the bottom of CB (Fig. 3b) is:13 (12)The spin effect of electrons is not considered here, as one can easily prove that it has little effect on the results, following the above train of thought. According to the statistical significance of Boltzmann entropy (eqn (8)), entropy change means the change of total microscopic state number: ΔS = S′ − S = kBln(Ωfinal) − kBln(Ωinitial) = kBln(Ωfinal/Ωinitial). Then, the entropy increase of these excited electrons becomes: (13)Considering that n (about 1014–1016 cm−3) and N (about 1018–1022 cm−3) are both very large, Stirling approximation:13 ln(x!) = xlnx − x(14)can be used and the above expression approximately equals: (15)Usually, under the AM 1.5 light intensity, N ≫ n, then N − n ≈ N, thus the first term of the above formula is approximately zero, and the overall approximation is: (16)Let n = p, and N = NC, N = NV, the entropy changes of excited n electrons and p holes are: (17.1) (17.2)
Further, the average entropy = of a single electron/hole becomes: (18.1) (18.2)These are actually the last two terms in eqn (11) of the Voc formula. Therefore, the last two terms on the right side of eqn (11) indeed represent the average entropy increase of a single photogenerated electron and hole induced by light excitation, respectively (Fig. 3b). We call it excited state electron entropy generation. It shows that the Voc loss term  in eqn (5) is the sum of free energy loss associated with the average entropy increase of a single electron and hole induced by light excitation multiplied by the temperature T.
This suggests that the entropy increase related energy loss in the Voc formula 5 is related to the excitation intensity (illumination intensity, then n = p) and the electron DOS (NCNV) of the absorber layer as a semiconductor or to the occupation of the DOS by the photogenerated electron/hole under a certain excitation intensity. That is, under the same excitation light intensity, if n = p is constant, the entropy change of electron/hole increases with the electron DOS, resulting in the increase of energy loss and the decrease of Voc. On the other hand, for the same electron DOS, the weaker the light intensity, the smaller the n/p, the larger the electron–hole entropy and the lower the Voc. This suggests that we can increase the Voc by increasing the light intensity (which is a common and practical approach, such as via concentrating photovoltaic) and reducing the “hidden variable” electron DOS of a semiconductor absorber layer (DOS engineering, which is not actually reported experimentally). Considering the usual AM1.5 G sunlight with fixed intensity, the absorber layer with lower electron DOS is the potential factor that contributes to a high Voc. Therefore, we predict that the band edge DOS engineering will be a potential direction to further increase the Voc of solar cells in the future. In short, we prove that the negative term in the Voc formula is the energy loss related to the excited electron entropy generation, so it is easy and more intuitive to understand that the Voc of the device changes with DOS.
According to eqn (18.1), we calculate the relationship between the average entropy increase of a single excited electron and the effective electron DOS NC at the bottom of the CB of the absorber layer. As shown in Fig. 3c and d, in the NC value range of a common semiconductor absorber layer (1018–1020 cm−3), under the illumination intensity of AM 1.5G (n: 1014–1016 cm−3),19 the average entropy increase of a single excited state electron is of the order of 1 × 10−20 J K−1. The average entropy increase of a single excited hole should have a similar value. Under all excitation intensities, the average entropy increase of a single excited state electron/hole increases with the increase of NC/NV. Theoretically, when n = NC and p = NV, the Voc loss of the device is zero, even if the temperature T is not zero. When n > NC, the photogenerated non-equilibrium electrons will preferentially occupy the electronic state at the bottom of the CB, and the excess photogenerated non-equilibrium electrons will have to occupy a higher CB energy level. This formula will be meaningless. In fact, in order to occupy a higher CB level, these excess photogenerated non-equilibrium electrons will have to absorb photons with energy greater than the band gap, which is not within our above hypothesis (hν = Eg).
In actual solar cell devices, there will be various defect states at each functional layer and interface (Fig. 3e). Photogenerated carriers will also transfer to these inter-band defect levels, which will also cause entropy increase and energy loss (Fig. 3e). Since we mainly consider the intrinsic Voc loss of a solar cell related to the band edge DOS occupation, here, we do not consider the entropy increase and energy loss related to the defect state.
2.4 Effect of DOS on absorption coefficient and Jsc
As discussed above, we intuitively understand the potential impact of DOS on the Voc of a solar cell based on thermodynamic entropy. On the other hand, the absorption coefficient of a semiconductor material is directly related to its electronic DOS at CB and VB, according to the pioneering work by Stephen et al. They showed that the optical absorption coefficient is given by:20 (19)with (20)as the joint density-of-states (JDOS) function and D2(hν) being the optical transition matrix element. Obviously, the absorption coefficient α is positively correlated with the electronic DOS of CB and VB. This should be the reason why the Jsc in the above calculation results decreases with the decrease of the electronic DOS (Fig. 1b, d and 2a, c), although the reduction is not significant. However, because the increased amplitude of Voc is greater than that of Jsc, the overall result is that a properly low electronic DOS improves the efficiency of the device (Fig. 1f and 2e). This means that the trade-off between the Jsc and the Voc is not only related through the band gap but also through the band edge DOS. Therefore, our work here emphasizes the necessity of band edge DOS engineering apart from conventional band gap engineering.
2.5 Effect of the band-edge DOS of charge transport layer on Voc and device performance
By analogy with excited state entropy in the absorber layer, we speculate that when excited state electrons/holes are transferred to the corresponding charge transport layer (CTL), entropy increase (we call it transfer state electron entropy generation) will occur again because the new occupation of electronic states is involved-excited state electron transfer induced entropy increase (Fig. 3f and 5a). Therefore, we calculate the effect of the electronic DOS of the transport layer on the device performance. Firstly, we study the effect of the electron DOS of the electron transport layer (ETL) on the performance of the device.
Just as expected, the DOS of the ETL (dominantly NC) does significantly affect the photovoltaic performance of the device (Fig. 4). In particular, its CB DOS NC significantly affects the device performance, which implies that when the photogenerated electrons are transferred to the CB of the ETL, a new entropy increase will be generated due to the redistribution and occupation of electrons (Fig. 5b). However, it is interesting that the varied VB DOS of ETL has no effect on the device performance at all. Considering the fact that photogenerated electrons are transferred to the CB rather than the VB of the ETL (Fig. 5a), this result is natural and easy to understand. Fig. 5 proposes a model to reveal the influence of ETL/ECL (electron collection layer) and HTL (hole transport layer) DOS on the entropy increase of excited state electron/hole.
 Fig. 4  Effect of effective DOS NC at the bottom of CB of ETL/ECL on device performance: J–V curves (a), Voc (c), Jsc (d), FF (e) and PCE (f). Effect of effective DOS NV at the VB maximum of ETL/ECL on device performance: J–V curves (b). The dashed arrows in (a) and (b) indicate the direction of curve change as NC increases. 
 Fig. 5  Schematic diagram of the charge transfer process among energy bands and proposed model for electronic entropy generation of charge transfer states at the absorber/CTL interface: (a) Photoexcited carrier generation in perovskite, (b) CB electron entropy produced at the perovskite/ETL interface, (d) zero CB electron entropy produced at the perovskite/HTL interface; (c) zero VB hole entropy produced at the perovskite/ETL interface, (e) VB hole entropy produced at the perovskite/HTL interface. 
Moreover, due to the deep VB energy level of the ETL, the injection of photogenerated holes in perovskite into its VB is disadvantageous in energy and is therefore prohibited (Fig. 5a). Therefore, the VB electron DOS NV of the ETL has no contribution to the increase in electron/hole entropy and thus the free energy loss of electron and Voc loss of the device (Fig. 5c). These results suggest that for the ETL/ECL with a main function of electron collection and hole blocking, it mainly causes thermodynamically inevitable energy loss and Voc reduction of the device through the increase of excited state electron entropy generation. This enlightens us that in order to achieve more efficient (perovskite) solar cells, it is very important to use ETL materials with as small CB effective electron DOS as possible.
In addition, according to the model of Fig. 5, if the semiconducting ETL and HTL are replaced by insulators, the relevant entropy increase and energy loss associated with interface charge transfer can be zero, as electrons/holes are transferred by quantum tunneling but not passing through the CB and VB of semiconductor-based charge transport layer (ETL and HTL). This may inspire new solar cell device designs.
Similarly, according to the reverse symmetry of electron/hole transfer and the reverse symmetry of energy band structure of each functional layer of the whole device, it can be expected that the change of VB DOS of the HTL will have a great impact on the device performance, as the redistribution of photogenerated holes in VB of HTL from VB of perovskite will produce entropy increase and energy loss during the injection into its VB (Fig. 5e). On the other hand, the CB edge level of the HTL is shallow, and the photogenerated electrons in perovskite cannot be injected, so the electrons do not produce entropy increase and free energy loss at this interface (Fig. 5d). Therefore, the CB DOS of the HTL has no effect on the device performance.
The actual results are indeed as expected. As can be seen from Fig. 6a, when the effective DOS NC at the bottom of CB of HTL is continuously changed, the J–V curve of the device does not change. It can be seen from Fig. 6b, but when all other parameters remain unchanged, the J–V curve of the device changes significantly with the increase of the effective DOS NV at the top of VB. When NV increases from 1017–1022 cm−3, the Voc decreases rapidly from 1.07 to 0.92 V (Fig. 6c). According to the above analysis, this is because, with the increase of NV of HTL, the photogenerated holes transferred to the VB of HTL will produce a higher entropy increase, resulting in higher energy loss. Interestingly, as the NV of HTL increases, the Jsc of the device decreases slightly (Fig. 6d), from 22.67 mA cm−2 to 22.51 mA cm−2. The FF shows a more complex change behavior (Fig. 6e). With the NV of HTL, FF first increases from 81.65% to 81.72% and then decreases rapidly to 79.29%. As a direct result, with the NV of HTL, the PCE decreases monotonically from 19.79% to 16.41% (Fig. 6f). This enlightens us that in order to achieve more efficient (perovskite) solar cells, it is very important to use HTL materials with as small VB maximum effective DOS as possible. For example, one of the potential reasons why 2D perovskite can improve the performance of devices may be that it is similar to 3D perovskite with low VBM effective DOS.
 Fig. 6  Effect of effective DOS NC at the bottom of CB of HTL on device performance: J–V curves (a). Effect of effective DOS NV at the VB maximum of HTL on device performance: J–V curves (b), Voc (c), Jsc (d), FF (e), and PCE (f). 
2.6 Entropy increase and free-energy loss associated with excited state electron transfer
Accordingly, considering the introduction of CTL and the entropy increase associated with electron transfer due to electron re-occupancy of the DOS of CTL, it is necessary to introduce a new term into eqn (2) to change it into: (21)In the formula, each item is energy loss related to photogenerated electron-induced entropy increase, photogenerated hole-induced entropy increase, excited electron transfer entropy increase, and excited hole transfer entropy increase.
Considering that the actual device may contain multiple ETL/HTLs, the above formula can be further expressed as: (22)
According to formula 14 or 14′, for any ETL/HTL based on semiconductor material in the device, if the effective electron DOS at the bottom of CB (VB maximum) is large, significant additional entropy-related energy loss and voltage loss will be introduced. This also enlightens us that it is also a feasible way to reduce the use of semiconductor-based transport layer (simplifying device structure) or using semiconductor materials with lower effective electron DOS at the bottom of CB (VB top) as an electron (hole) transport layer. Alternatively, directly using a non-semiconductor material (insulator as mentioned above) as a carrier selective interface layer to replace the semiconductor-based CTL may potentially reduce the Voc loss. For the former, halide perovskite can be used as an alternative material as CTL to construct simple p–n or conventional p–i–n junction all perovskite solar cells because of its naturally low band edge DOS. For the latter, it is a feasible path to use ultra-thin wide band gap materials to build MIS-structured solar cells. The recently reported work with a certification efficiency of 25.5% uses ultra-thin broadband gap perovskite as the interface layer. Wu et al. used an insulating layer to improve the performance of electronic layer-free devices to 21%, and the Voc was also significantly improved.20b
2.7 Inspired novel device design for high Voc and high efficiency
In order to demonstrate the potential beneficial effect of low DOS of the perovskite absorber layer and CTL on the device performance, we further simulate the device performance of 3D/2D mixed dimension all perovskite p–n heterojunction solar cell with respect to the effect of NV of the 2D perovskite HTL on the device performance. Fig. 7a gives the energy band structure of the 3D/2D mixed dimension all perovskite p–n heterojunction solar cells. Fig. 7b displays the J–V curves of the device with different NV of the 2D perovskite HTL (with the NC and NV of 3D perovskite fixed at 2.2 × 1018 and 1.9 × 1019 cm−3). From Fig. 7c, with the increase of NV of 2D perovskite HTL, Voc decreases significantly. Although the Jsc also decreases, the overall margin in value reduction is very small (Fig. 7d). The FF shows a bell-shaped change with the increase of NV (Fig. 7e). Accordingly, the PCE of the device reaches its maximum value when the NV of 2D perovskite HTL is about 1017 cm−3.
 Fig. 7  3D–2D mixed dimension all perovskite p–n heterojunction solar cells (a) with 2D perovskite as HTL. Effect of NV of 2D perovskite HTL on the device performance: (b) J–V curves, (c) Voc, (d) Jsc, (e) FF, (f) PCE. 
In order to further reveal the advantages of all perovskite heterojunction solar cells, we further calculated the joint effects of band edge DOS of 3D perovskite absorber layer and 2D perovskite HTL on the final device performance. From Fig. 8a, when the band edge DOS of 3D and 2D perovskite is small simultaneously, the Voc of the device is maximized. While the Voc is minimum when both DOS are at their maximum. Voc of the device decreases with the increase of DOS of 3D and 2D perovskite. The decreased margin of Jsc with both DOS is very small, although it mainly reduces with NV of 2D perovskite HTL. The range of NC of 3D perovskite studied seems to have little effect on Jsc, which may be because the thickness of perovskite is sufficient enough to ensure sufficient light absorption (Fig. 8b). The changes in FF with both DOS are complex and difficult to analyze as there are too many factors that affect FF (Fig. 8c). On the whole, because the decreased amplitude of Jsc is very small, and both DOS mainly affects the Voc, followed by FF, the variation tendency of PCE with both DOS is almost consistent with that of Voc and FF with both DOS (Fig. 8d).
 Fig. 8  The joint effects of band edge DOS of 3D perovskite absorber layer (NC-3D) and 2D perovskite HTL (NV-2D) on the final device performance: (a) Voc, (b) Jsc, (c) FF, (d) PCE. 
2.8 Relationship between band edge DOS and effective electron mass
In fact, for many of the key properties of solar cell absorber material that directly determines the photovoltaic performance, i.e., absorption (absorption coefficient α), charge transport (carrier mobility μ) and recombination, effective electron mass  appears in all of their function expressions.
Usually, effective electron mass or effective DOS are features of the band structure that are always calculated in the context of computational material screening efforts. The effective DOS is related to the energy-dependent DOS close (within a few kBT) to the band edges. A parabolic approximation to the energy dispersion relation (energy vs. momentum, i.e., E−k relation) of the bands is often adopted, although many semiconductors have dispersion relations that become non-parabolic away from the CB minimum (CBM) or VB maximum (VBM). For example, the relationship between the energy E and momentum k of an electron near the CB edge can be approximated by:13 (23)where ħ = h/2π is the reduced Planck constant and  is the effective mass of electron in CB. Analogous equations can be written down for the VB hole. In this case, the effective mass of the carrier is determined by the second-order derivative of the band edge E−k function relationship:13 (24)For halide perovskite, due to its high anisotropy of crystal structure and electronic structure, the curvature of E(k) might be different along different directions in k-space; thus, the , in general, is tensorial. However, we ignore this difference and adopt the approximation of isotropy ( is the same in all directions of k-space), which is reasonable according to the material calculation results. Obviously, the larger the curvature of E(k) near the band edge, the smaller the  of the carrier. In addition, the  of carriers also determines the effective electronic DOS at the band edge according to eqn (6).13 Therefore, the carrier effective mass  is closely related to the band edge energy structure, which correlates with the curvature of the band edge energy dispersion E(k) and the effective electron DOS: the smaller the  of the carrier, the lower the effective electronic DOS at the band edge.
For practical materials, if the anisotropy of the lattice and electronic structure is significant, the different orientations of the crystal relative to the substrate surface will also lead to the obvious difference in carrier transport performance in absorber material and photovoltaic performance of the device.21 The crystal orientation and crystal plane-dependent photovoltaic performance of PSCs was proposed in our earlier work,21 which has been confirmed by a large number of subsequent works on the optimization of crystal orientation to improve device performance presently.
According to eqn (16), eqn (2) can be transformed into: (25)As can be seen from eqn (25), Voc is a multivariate function of band gap Eg, temperature T, electron/hole effective mass  and excitation intensity n/p. Moreover, the specific values of these variables are basically experimentally measurable. This means that Eg, T,  and n/p can be regulated through practical experiments so as to effectively control the Voc and carefully study the specific influence law of the changes of the above variables on the Voc of the device.
2.9 Effect of temperature on Voc and device performance
Temperature also affects entropy-related energy loss. In fact, it is precisely because the temperature cannot be zero (the third law of thermodynamics) that the entropy-related energy loss cannot be zero. A solar cell dissipates most of the incident solar power as heat, leading to an increase in the cell temperature above the ambient. The amplitude of the temperature increase is largely dependent on the illumination level to which the cell is submitted and the efficiency with which the residual heat is extracted from the cell. The effect of temperature increase on solar cell performance is studied via device simulation. Fig. 9a shows the effect of temperature on the device J–V curve from device simulation. The increase in temperature mainly leads to a significant decrease in the Voc of the device (Fig. 9b), followed by the fill factor (Fig. 9d) and little effect on the Jsc (Fig. 9a).
 Fig. 9  Effect of temperature on device performance: J–V curves (a), Voc (b), Voc (c, experimental data), FF (d), and PCE (e). Dependence of Voc on temperature T, with S almost unchanged (f). 
The results of Fig. 9 also show that the performance of the device is better at low temperatures, and the performance of the device decreases significantly with the increase in temperature (Fig. 9b and e). This is because the device has lower entropy-related energy loss at low temperatures, which is also the potential of perovskite and other solar cells in low-temperature environments such as cold polar regions or space. It is worth noting that Fig. 9c shows the varying results of the device Voc with temperature in the actual experiment. It can be seen that the Voc of the actual device decreases faster with the increase in temperature than the result from device simulation (Fig. 9c), which may be caused by the reduction of band gap caused by lattice expansion or phase transition of the actual material at high temperature, which is not considered in the device simulation.
For MAPbI3 PSCs, assuming a band gap of 1.55 eV and a maximum Voc of 1.26 V at 300 K, entropy S can be calculated to be 0.29/300 eV K−1 ≈ 0.001 eV K−1. Assuming that entropy S does not change with temperature, the function of the Voc with respect to temperature can be expressed as: eVoc(T) = 1.55 − 0.001T(26)This gives the result that when the temperature tends to be zero, the Voc tends to be Eg/e (Fig. 9f).
However, the actual situation may be more complicated. According to eqn (5), the temperature coefficient of Voc is derived as follows:22 (27)
The third summand in the equation has a minor contribution to the derivative because the terms dn/n and dp/p are likely to be very small. The second summand can be expressed in a more useful form:22 (28)From eqn (28), it is inferred that the temperature dependence is mainly related to the term (Voc − Eg/e)/T, which after integration, provides a linear relationship Voc−T (eqn (28)) as observed experimentally. The main result is that dVoc/dT, being the negative temperature coefficients larger in the case of small Voc values. It should be noted here that this temperature coefficient originated from the temperature dependence of the Boltzmann function. In addition, heating reduces the size of the energy gap.
3. Conclusions
In summary, the application of the second law of thermodynamics to semiconductors relates the DOS of semiconductor absorber and transport layer, excited/transfer state electronic entropy to Voc loss of solar cell. The results reveal the free energy and intrinsic Voc loss of solar cells from the perspective of excited state electron entropy generation. In particular, through theoretical analysis, we have revealed the entropy-related significance of the loss term in the Voc formula for ideal solar cells. Low band edge DOS of absorber means low excited state electron entropy generation and large Voc. This indicates a feasible direction for further reducing the electron entropy generation through the regulation of electronic density of states so as to further improve the device Voc and efficiency. This further reveals why perovskite solar cells have high Voc and efficiency, as lower effective masses and smaller effective electron density of state lead to smaller entropy generation and thus smaller free energy loss and Voc loss. While the valence band DOS of the electron transport layer and the conduction band DOS of the hole transport layer do not affect the device Voc. This work highlights the significance of band edge DOS engineering for further improving the performance of solar cell devices.
Data availability
The research data can be obtained by contacting the author.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NFSC) (No. 61904182) and the K. C. Wong Magna Fund at Ningbo University. L. K. Huang also thanks the sponsored open project of the National Laboratory of Solid State Microstructures, Nanjing University (M35013).
References
Y. Haizhou, P. Ahlawat, A. Mishra, R. W. Tress and T. F. Eickemeyer, Science, 2020, 370, eabb8985 CrossRef .
F. Giustino and H. J. Snaith, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 1233–1240 CrossRef CAS .
T. M. Brenner, D. A. Egger, A. M. Rappe, L. Kronik, G. Hodes and D. Cahen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4754–4757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kirchartz, J. A. Márquez, M. Stolterfoht and T. Unold, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1904134 CrossRef CAS .
O. D. Miller, E. Yablonovitch and S. R. Kurtz, IEEE J. Photovolt., 2012, 2, 303–311 Search PubMed .
R. T. Ross, J. Chem. Phys., 1967, 46, 4590–4593 CrossRef CAS .
U. Rau, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 76, 085303 CrossRef .
W. Tress, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602358 CrossRef .
Y. Li, H. Xie, E. L. Lim, A. Hagfeldt and D. Bi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2022, 12, 2102730 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou and G. Long, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 1455–1462 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou and A. Gray-Weale, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 4476–4486 RSC .
G. Giorgi, J.-I. Fujisawa, H. Segawa and K. Yamashita, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 4213–4216 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. J. Dobson, Phys. Bull., 1982, 33, 139 CrossRef .
E. Roduner and S. G. Radhakrishnan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 2768–2784 RSC .
L. Huang, X. Sun, C. Li, R. Xu, J. Xu, Y. Du, Y. Wu, J. Ni, H. Cai and J. Li, Sol. Energy Mater.: Sol. Cells, 2016, 157, 1038–1047 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hollemann, F. Haase, S. Schäfer, J. Krügener, R. Brendel and R. Peibst, Prog. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2019, 27, 950–958 CrossRef CAS .
T. AlZoubi, A. Moghrabi, M. Moustafa and S. Yasin, Sol. Energy, 2021, 225, 44–52 CrossRef CAS .
F. M. T. Enam, K. S. Rahman, M. I. Kamaruzzaman, K. Sobayel, P. Chelvanathan, B. Bais, M. Akhtaruzzaman, A. R. M. Alamoud and N. Amin, Optik, 2017, 139, 397–406 CrossRef CAS .
V. D’innocenzo, G. Grancini, M. J. Alcocer, A. R. S. Kandada, S. D. Stranks, M. M. Lee, G. Lanzani, H. J. Snaith and A. Petrozza, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 1–6 Search PubMed .

  (a) F. Orapunt and S. K. O’Leary, J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 104, 073513 CrossRef ; 
  (b) W. Wu, J. Liao and J. Zhong, Angew. Chem., 2020, 132, 21166–21173 CrossRef .
L. Huang, Z. Hu, G. Yue, J. Liu, X. Cui, J. Zhang and Y. Zhu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 22015–22022 RSC .
K. A. Thakur, W. Garcia-Belmonte and H. Bisquert, Sol. Energy Mater.: Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 2131–2135 CrossRef .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d3cp01279dThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2023
Table Content:
	(1)
eVoc = EFn − EFp	(2)
Δμ = EFn − EFp = μC − μV	(3)
	(4.1)
	(4.2)
	(5)
	(6)
eVoc = Δμ ≤ Eg	(7)
S = kBlnΩ	(8)

 	Fig. 1  
V
oc of various absorber materials with the same electronic parameters except for NC and NV (a). Effect of effective DOS NC at the bottom of CB of perovskite on device performance: J–V curves (b), Voc (c), Jsc (d), FF (e), and PCE (f).	 

 	Fig. 2  Effect of effective DOS at the VB maximum of perovskite (NV1) on device performance: J–V curves (a), Voc (b), Jsc (c), FF (d), and PCE (e). (f) Voc loss under different excitation intensities and with different NCNV values.	 
	(9)
F = U − TS = Eg − TS	(10)

 	Fig. 3  Excitation process considered in the perovskite layer (a) (1) light with an energy below the band gap is not absorbed; (2) exciton absorption; (3) light at an energy hν creates an excitation from the valence to the conduction band of a semiconductor an electron–hole pair is formed across the band gap with energy Eg; (4) light at an energy hν > Eg creates a hot electron–hole pair with high kinetic energy. After thermalization in the conduction band, an electron–hole pair is formed across the band gap with energy Eg as process 3. Entropy increases due to excited state electron generation (b). Entropy per charge carrier as a function of the NC of perovskite (c) and excitation intensity n (cm−3, d). Entropy losses due to excited state electron generation, relaxation, transfer, and capture by defect states (e). Entropy increase due to excited state electron transfer from perovskite to ETL (f).	 
	(11)
	(12)
	(13)
ln(x!) = xlnx − x	(14)
	(15)
	(16)
	(17.1)
	(17.2)
	(18.1)
	(18.2)
	(19)
	(20)

 	Fig. 4  Effect of effective DOS NC at the bottom of CB of ETL/ECL on device performance: J–V curves (a), Voc (c), Jsc (d), FF (e) and PCE (f). Effect of effective DOS NV at the VB maximum of ETL/ECL on device performance: J–V curves (b). The dashed arrows in (a) and (b) indicate the direction of curve change as NC increases.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic diagram of the charge transfer process among energy bands and proposed model for electronic entropy generation of charge transfer states at the absorber/CTL interface: (a) Photoexcited carrier generation in perovskite, (b) CB electron entropy produced at the perovskite/ETL interface, (d) zero CB electron entropy produced at the perovskite/HTL interface; (c) zero VB hole entropy produced at the perovskite/ETL interface, (e) VB hole entropy produced at the perovskite/HTL interface.	 

 	Fig. 6  Effect of effective DOS NC at the bottom of CB of HTL on device performance: J–V curves (a). Effect of effective DOS NV at the VB maximum of HTL on device performance: J–V curves (b), Voc (c), Jsc (d), FF (e), and PCE (f).	 
	(21)
	(22)

 	Fig. 7  3D–2D mixed dimension all perovskite p–n heterojunction solar cells (a) with 2D perovskite as HTL. Effect of NV of 2D perovskite HTL on the device performance: (b) J–V curves, (c) Voc, (d) Jsc, (e) FF, (f) PCE.	 

 	Fig. 8  The joint effects of band edge DOS of 3D perovskite absorber layer (NC-3D) and 2D perovskite HTL (NV-2D) on the final device performance: (a) Voc, (b) Jsc, (c) FF, (d) PCE.	 
	(23)
	(24)
	(25)

 	Fig. 9  Effect of temperature on device performance: J–V curves (a), Voc (b), Voc (c, experimental data), FF (d), and PCE (e). Dependence of Voc on temperature T, with S almost unchanged (f).	 
eVoc(T) = 1.55 − 0.001T	(26)
	(27)
	(28)
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d3cp01279d

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2023
