Solar steam generation based on the photothermal effect: from designs to applications, and beyond  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9TA05935K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9TA05935K
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 19203-19227Solar steam generation based on the photothermal effect: from designs to applications, and beyond

        
          
            Yawen 
            Lin
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hao 
            Xu
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Xiaoli 
            Shan
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yunsong 
            Di
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Aiqing 
            Zhao
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yujing 
            Hu
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Zhixing 
            Gan
          
          
        
      *a
aKey Laboratory of Optoelectronic Technology of Jiangsu Province, Center for Quantum Transport and Thermal Energy Science, School of Physics and Technology, Nanjing Normal University, Nanjing 210023, China. E-mail: diyunsong@njnu.edu.cn; zxgan@njnu.edu.cn
bScience for Life Laboratory, School of Engineering Sciences in Chemistry, Biotechnology and Health, KTH-Royal Institute of Technology, SE-171 21 Stockholm, Sweden
Received 
      4th June 2019
    , Accepted 20th July 2019First published on 21st July 2019AbstractUsing broadband solar energy for producing clean water can potentially and effectively solve the water pollution and shortage crisis. With the rapid development of material science and nanotechnology, solar steam generation (SSG), based on photothermal nanomaterials, is expanding by leaps and bounds. This review comprehensively covers the state-of-the-art designs and applications of SSG. In this review, the photothermal effect, water supply, and thermal management are proposed as the three keys for the high-efficiency SSG system. Various kinds of photothermal materials with strong optical absorption covering the broad solar spectrum are classified and discussed with examples. The rational design of the water supply and steam escape system enabling the SSG to proceed smoothly is reviewed. Current efforts to minimize the heat loss by rational thermal management are also presented. As follows, typical applications, such as desalination of seawater, purification of wastewater, photothermal steam sterilization, as well as related applications including light-driven thermoelectric system and photo-heat-catalyst are overviewed. At the end of this review, the remaining challenges, as well as opportunities to be seized, are raised for consideration.Yawen LinYawen Lin is currently a second-year graduate student at the School of Physics and Technology of Nanjing Normal University. She received her bachelor's degree in Engineering from Nanjing Normal University in 2017. Her research focuses on the rational design and application of photothermal nanomaterials to achieve sustainable-solar energy-driven clean water production.Hao XuHao Xu obtained his B.S. in Applied Physics in 2010 from Northeastern University, China. He then studied as a master's student in micro- and solid-state electronics in Nanjing University, with an emphasis on the GaN ultraviolet detector. He obtained his Ph.D. degree in Biological Physics from the Royal Institute of Technology (KTH), Sweden (2016). He is currently working at KTH as a researcher and his research interests involve the optoelectronic properties of nanomaterials, bioimaging and computational image analysis.Xiaoli ShanXiaoli Shan is currently a first-year graduate student at the School of Physical Science and Technology of Nanjing Normal University. She received her bachelor's degree in Engineering from Sanjiang University in 2018. Her research focuses on photocatalytic materials and the design of photothermal nanomaterials to achieve sustainable-solar energy-driven clean water production.Yunsong DiYunsong Di obtained his B.S. in Physics in 2000 from Nanjing Normal University, China, and then he was assigned to work as an assistant at his alma mater after graduation. From 2003, he studied as a master's and Ph.D. student in nanoelectronics and devices at Southeast University, with an emphasis on electronic emission and detection, and he received his Ph.D. degree in 2009. His primary research interests include electron transportation, surface plasmon and photoelectric detection of novel nanomaterials and nanostructures, such as carbon-based nanomaterials and perovskites.Aiqing ZhaoAiqing Zhao received her bachelor's degree from Sanjiang University in 2018. She is currently a master's degree candidate at the School of Physics and Technology of Nanjing Normal University. Her current research focuses on the design and synthesis of low-dimensional perovskite nanostructures, as well as their applications.Yujing HuYujing Hu is currently a second-year graduate student at the School of Physics and Technology of Nanjing Normal University. She received her bachelor's degree in Engineering from Lvliang University in 2017. Her research focuses on the developments of nanomaterials for the improved photoelectric conversion efficiency of solar cells.Zhixing GanZhixing Gan obtained his B.S. in Applied Physics in 2010 from Northeastern University, China, and then received his Ph.D. degree at Nanjing University in 2015. He subsequently joined the School of Physical Science and Technology, Nanjing Normal University, as a principal investigator. His primary research interests include the photothermal effect and photoluminescence of novel nanomaterials, such as carbon nanomaterials, graphene, 2D materials, and perovskites.
1. Introduction
According to a report by Jamieson et al., even creatures living in the deepest marine ecosystems of the earth are eating plastic waste in surprising amounts, indicating that it is highly likely that there are no marine ecosystems left unaffected by water pollution.1 Under these urgent circumstances, solar steam generation (SSG), an ancient technology,2,3 provides a sustainable means for conquering the problems, since SSG can produce clean drinkable water from polluted water by using renewable, abundant, and broad-spectrum solar energy rather than fossil fuels.4 In recent years, SSG has been attracting tremendous attention from researchers, leading to a great development of SSG nanomaterials. These nanomaterials can maximally make use of solar energy and contribute profoundly to human daily life in various ways, including photothermal conversion,5,6 photoelectric conversion,7,8 medicine,9,10 sterilization,11,12 photochemical conversion,13,14 and “solar” fuel product.15–17 Today, solar distillation via SSG by using photothermal nanomaterials at zero CO2 emission could significantly help us to solve the worsening global warming, scarcity of clean water, and energy shortage.18,19
Many efforts have been devoted to developing photothermal materials for SSG. In a typical solar-driven evaporation process, these photothermal materials are designed to harvest solar energy to generate heat, then the heat is transmitted to bulk water for vapor generation.20,21 Great progress has been achieved in this realm very recently, involving both the syntheses of new materials and rational designs of the SSG systems. Regarding photothermal materials, diverse kinds have recently emerged, such as different types of materials (metallic nanoparticles, metal oxides,22 carbon-based materials, polymers,23 and semiconductors) and different structures of materials (porous structures, bioinspired materials,24,25 and composite membranes). To date, there are several excellent review articles extensively discussing this topic.26–28 An SSG system has been constructed on the basis of the photothermal effect, converting solar energy to heat. Ho's team reported recent progress in solar absorber materials design based on various photothermal conversion mechanisms and evaluated the prerequisites in terms of optical, thermal, and wetting properties for efficient solar-driven water vaporization.26,28 They classified the photothermal conversion into three categories, namely, plasmonic localized heating of metals, non-radiative relaxation of semiconductors, and thermal vibration of molecules.26 The basis of the photothermal conversion process was investigated to afford researchers with a better understanding of the photothermal effect.27 Importantly, environmental energy-enhanced evaporation provides a new route to facilitate water evaporation processes in the real world. Kim et al. described the fundamental principles and mechanisms of light-to-heat conversion, and the effects of structural features in the development of broadband light-absorbing nanomaterials.29 However, they mainly highlighted materials and designs of nanostructures of broadband light absorbers for light-to-heat conversion. From quite a different perspective, Elimelech's group addressed emerging opportunities and sustainable approaches for the application of engineered nanomaterials in water treatment and reuse. Potential opportunities, development, and implementation barriers were discussed along with research efforts needed to overcome the barriers.30 However, other applications for SSG, based on light-to-heat conversion, were not mentioned and there is still the need for a comprehensive review on SSG covering from designs to applications, and beyond.
In this review, by summarizing the latest advances in photothermal materials for SSG, we propose three key essentials for the rational design of SSG: (i) photothermal effect, (ii) water supply and steam escape, and (iii) thermal management. These are divided into two sections: the design of photothermal materials and the design of SSG devices. More specifically, as illustrated in Fig. 1, in SSG systems, photothermal components play key roles in absorbing and converting solar energy to thermal energy, then the water supply system transports bulk water to use the heat generated. During the process, thermal management (insulation layer) is of great importance to suppress the heat loss and ensure thermal energy is maximally used for water evaporation at the interface rather than heating the bulk water at the bottom. A thorough consideration of these three factors is needed for designing highly efficient SSG. Secondly, in view of the importance of SSG, its wide applications are reviewed, such as typical applications (seawater desalination, wastewater purification and thermal steam sterilization) and related applications (heat-to-electric conversion and photo-heat-catalytic). Lastly, remaining opportunities and challenges are extracted to stimulate further research interest in this field.
 Fig. 1  Three key factors for the design of SSG: photothermal effect, water supply & steam escape, and thermal management. 
2. Design of photothermal materials
2.1 Photothermal materials converting sunlight to heat
A solar collector is a device used to help to harness solar irradiation as a useful form of energy. Among various solar collectors, the parabolic trough collector (PTC) is considered to be one of the best options for medium temperature (150–400 °C) heat requirements; nanofluid and selective coatings in the receiver tube of the solar PTC determine its performance.14,31 The solar energy can be rapidly and efficiently absorbed with the use of the nanofluid and selective coatings. When the solar light irradiates the material, the material will interact with the sunlight (electromagnetic), and partially convert the solar energy into other forms of energy, including thermal energy, i.e., the so-called photothermal conversion.15,32,33 There are several criteria to be met for designing photothermal nanomaterials for SSG to efficiently convert sunlight to heat. (i) The first is the high absorption of the broad solar spectrum. The full solar spectrum has a wavelength of 300 nm to 2500 nm, and it is crucial to maximize the absorption of sunlight including ultraviolet (UV) visible, and near-infrared (NIR) radiation. (ii) The second is low mid-infrared radiation (MIR). The MIR range is negligible in the solar irradiation, in comparison to the visible and NIR ranges, but MIR strongly contributes to thermal dissipation. As such, low irradiation in the MIR range indicates weak thermal dissipation, which has great benefits for photothermal performance. (iii) The third is effective solar to heat conversion. Solar energy can be converted into many forms of energy, such as photons, internal energy, mechanical energy, thermal energy, electric energy, chemical energy, and so on. Thus, a highly efficient photothermal conversion is also a necessary condition. (iv) The fourth is low thermal energy loss. Whether it is the reflection of a smooth plane that occurs when absorbing the spectrum, or the loss of thermal energy obtained after photothermal conversion, it should be considered when designing the photothermal materials. (v) The fifth is constructive feasibility. Practicality is very important for photothermal nanomaterials to be used for SSG. The practical photothermal materials for SSG should be low-cost, easily produced on a large scale, demonstrate good recyclability, and have long-term stability.
Moreover, nanomaterials have competitive advantages for light-to-heat conversion due to their excellent physical properties of small size and large specific surface area.34,35 Taking metal particles, for example, they intuitively turn black with their sizes being reduced to the nanoscale, called metal black. Specifically, the platinum white (platinum) becomes platinum black,36 and the metallic chromium becomes chrome black.37 According to the theory of black body radiation,38 black nanomaterials are able to absorb most of the external electromagnetic radiation. Essentially, when the size of the nanoparticles (NPs) is equivalent to or less than the De Broglie wave of the conduction electrons, the periodic boundary conditions will be destroyed, i.e., the size effect.39 The NPs' magnetic properties, internal pressure, light absorption, thermal resistance, chemical activity, catalytic properties, and melting point will change dramatically, which can be engineered for practical use.30,40 For instance, by using the properties of plasmon resonance frequency shift with particle size change, the NP size can be tuned to control the absorption spectrum to meet the demands of different applications, such as electromagnetic shielding with broadband microwave absorption and photothermal conversion with broadband solar absorption.41 Furthermore, the photothermal NPs can be fabricated into porous structures to increase the multi-scattering of sunlight.42 In this way, the reflection by smooth surfaces will be reduced and thus light absorption will be enhanced, which is very important for photothermal materials to effectively convert the abundant and broadband sunlight.43–45
The typical approaches to synthesizing nanomaterials are widely used for the fabrication of nano-absorbers in SSG: (1) in evaporation coacervation under inert gas, NPs are fabricated with the size distribution of 1–100 nm and clean surface by applying high pressure. For example, nanoceramics have been successfully developed by using the inert gas evaporation and vacuum in situ pressure methods described above.46 (2) In hydrothermal and hydrolysis methods, the hydrothermal precipitation, synthesis, decomposition and crystallization are suitable for the preparation of nano-oxides.33 The sol–gel method, solvent evaporation decomposition method, emulsion method and evaporation separation method are priority choices for polymers. (3) In carbonization by high temperature, various carbon-based materials for SSG have been developed by carbonization at low cost, e.g., wood, lotus seed pods, mushroom, and kelp are carbonized to achieve black rough surfaces.47–49 (4) In the combined method, photothermal nanomaterials can be formed by a combination of a physical vapor phase method and a chemical deposition process including ball milling and jet machining. Many composite membranes, for example, metal nanoparticles coated on cellulose membranes, are synthesized by the combined deposition method.50
Essentially, photothermal materials are the core of the SSG system. Absorbers covering the solar spectrum with highly effective light-to-heat conversion are ideal candidates for photothermal agents. As shown in Fig. 2 and 3, various kinds of photothermal nanomaterials with effective optical absorption in the broadband solar spectrum have been reported in the past three years.29,51 Different types of materials (metals, metal oxides, carbon-based materials, polymers, semiconductors) and different structures of materials (porous structures, bioinspired materials, and composite membranes) are fabricated to meet the ultimate requirements—a black and rough surface with broadband sunlight absorption.
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic of the simulated plasmonic-nanoparticle-coated foils. The scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image in the left inset shows Cu NPs comprised of smaller features. The scale bar represents a length of 50 nm. The right inset shows a single simulated spherical nanoparticle as a cluster of 20 nm spheres, ref. 55; copyright 2017, Wiley. (b) Schematic illustration of the water evaporation applications of the WO2.9 nanorods, ref. 9; copyright 2018, Wiley. (c) The schematic illustration of SSG based on carbon sponge (CS), ref. 74; copyright 2018, Wiley. (d) Schematic illustration of SSG based on polymers, ref. 82; copyright 2019, Wiley. (e) Schematic of the experimental setup of SnSe for solar-driven water evaporation, ref. 42; copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
 Fig. 3  (a) The typical microstructures of porous structures for water treatment, ref. 93; copyright 2019, Springer Nature. (b) Transpiration of trees (left) and mimetic transpiration system (right) under one-sun solar illumination for solar steam generation, ref. 99; copyright 2018, Elsevier. (c) Digital photograph of the pure poly(vinylidene fluoride) membrane (PVDFM) (left) and 12 mg-CuS/PVDFM (right), ref. 50; copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
2.2 Classification of SSG photothermal materials based on material types

2.2.1 Metallic nanoparticles. 
Plasmonic resonance of metallic NPs can effectively scatter, trap, and absorb light over a broad spectrum, following the generation of heat via nonradiative damping after sunlight absorption.52–54 To date, various metallic NPs exhibiting high solar absorption performance have been synthesized for photothermal conversion. In 2017, Yang et al. fabricated Cu NPs by galvanic displacement reaction, which is a scalable and environment-friendly process (Fig. 2a).55 Cu NPs fabricated simply by a substitution reaction exhibited a near-unity (∼97.7%) light absorption covering a broad incident angle and wavelength range (200–1300 nm). The average optical reflectance of Cu NPs was below 3% from 200 to 1300 nm wavelength, meaning that ∼97.7% of the irradiated solar energy in the corresponding spectrum can be absorbed.56 At different incident angles, the Cu NPs exhibited an almost omnidirectional optical absorption. When the incident angle changed from 0° to 50°, the average optical reflectance was constantly below 5% in the wavelength range of 200–1300 nm. This reported method could render the photothermal conversion cheap and effective.56 Inspired by Yang's work, we then developed a competitive SSG system based on the Cu NPs, and a solar steam generation efficiency up to 73% at 2 sun (1 sun = 1 kW m−2) illumination was acquired.56
Noble metal NPs are the most well-known photothermal materials. Compared to the narrow resonant band of the conventional plasmonic NPs, in 2019, Chen et al. developed a unique confined seeded growth strategy to synthesize black silver nanostructures with broadband absorption over the visible and near-infrared spectrum.57 Wen et al. experimentally investigated the photothermal conversion behaviour of gold/water and multiwalled carbon nanotube (MWCNT)/water nanofluids at different volumetric concentrations (0.0001–0.004% and 0.0001–0.03%, respectively) in a direct absorption solar collector.58 They found that the optimal nanoparticle volumetric concentration was 0.002% for the gold nanofluid and 0.001% for the MWCNT samples. According to the results of this optimization, solar energy can be absorbed to the utmost.58
Moreover, the optical absorption ability of metal NPs can be further enhanced by combining with graphene. Very recently, the Campos team synthesized nanofluids based on spherical gold, silver, and copper NPs, nonspherical silver NPs, layered graphene oxides (GO), and GO/silver hybrid structures and analysed the thermal behaviour of direct absorption solar collectors under different material combinations.59 These results confirmed the thermal conversion of non-spherical silver and that GO/Ag hybrid nanofluids present the best solar-to-heat behaviours under both low and high solar irradiation. The nanofluids increased their temperature around 90 K after just 600 s under high solar flux, reaching the boiling point.59 The plasmonic metal particles were also used to functionalize cotton fibers for efficient solar water desalination. The nanocomposite fibers showed average water evaporation rates of 1.4 kg m−2 h−1 under one sun illumination.60


2.2.2 Metal oxides. 
Because of the intervalence charge transfer, localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) of free electrons, and small polaron absorption, metal oxides with narrow band gaps also show strong and wide absorption covering the visible to NIR regions. The strong light absorption of metal oxides makes them suitable as photothermal agents since the absorbed light may be converted into heat via nonradiative recombinations of electron–hole pairs originating from the light absorption of metal oxide.61
Tungsten oxide (WOx) is an important photothermal metal oxide that has been widely used for SSG.9,61,62 As shown in Fig. 2b, WO2.9 fabricated by the phase transition from WO3 showed a high total absorption capacity (ca. 90.6%) over the whole solar spectrum as well as significant photothermal conversion capability. The WO2.9 afforded an optic to thermal conversion efficiency as high as around 86.9% and a water evaporation efficiency of about 81% upon solar light irradiation.9 Moreover, two-dimensional (2D) defective WOx nanosheets prepared via introducing oxygen vacancies into WO3 are also excellent candidates for photothermal conversion. The novel 2D plasmonic WOx nanosheets exhibited broadband and intense light absorption in the full solar spectrum, which were used as high-performance photo-absorbers for efficient SSG.62 Wu et al. successfully prepared melt electrospun reduced tungsten oxide/polylactic acid (WO2.72/PLA) fiber membranes with improved NIR photothermal conversion properties owing to strong NIR photo-absorption by the metal oxide, and the water evaporation efficiency was 81.39%.61
Other metal oxides, such as iron oxides, molybdenum oxides, and titanium dioxides have also been widely utilized for SSG. Very recently, Ulset et al. established the process of photothermal evaporation in nanofluids with iron oxide NPs and carbon black.63 The nanofluids reached the efficiency maxima of 66% at 3% wt carbon black NPs and 75% at 10% wt iron oxide NPs separately. They also developed an empirical model of photothermal steam generation in nanofluids.63 Deng's team reported a method to prepare stably dispersed graphene-based solar-thermal fluids by growing Fe3O4 NPs on the surface of graphene and processing with further surface modification of the NPs with polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) chains that were chemically identical to the silicone oil-based fluid.64 The resultant nanofluids maintained stable dispersion after repeated heating and were employed for consistent direct solar-thermal energy harvesting at 100 °C.64 More recently, Wang's group reported an oxygen-defected molybdenum oxide hierarchical nanostructure (MoOx HNS) composed of ultrathin nanosheets with atomic-level thickness, which behaved as an efficient absorber for SSG.65 Under 1 sun illumination, the evaporation rate reached 1.255 kg m−2 h−1, with the energy conversion efficiency of 85.6%.65 The porous titanium dioxide (TiO2) nanotube arrays with great light-trapping ability were also developed for light-to-heat conversion by combining with the surface plasmon resonance of Ni NPs. The composite achieved a high absorption of 96.83% in the solar spectrum from 300 to 2500 nm.39


2.2.3 Carbon-based materials. 
As reviewed in the section on metallic nanoparticles, metallic NPs exhibit superior photothermal performance. Eventually, most nanofluids used for photothermal applications are produced with gold NPs. However, the noble metals are very expensive, limiting their practical applications. Carbon-based materials with zero band gap can absorb sunlight as a black body. They possess huge potential in the solar thermal conversion with high stability and no harm to the environment,66 and, importantly, they are low-cost. Wen et al. performed well-controlled experiments for two different categorized particles, i.e., gold and carbon black in suspensions, and assessed their performance in terms of evaporation rate, materials cost, and energy consumption. The results showed that the cost of producing 1 g s−1 vapour for gold nanofluids was ∼300 fold higher than that produced by carbon black nanofluids, hinting that gold nanofluids are less feasible for solar evaporation applications. This infeasibility is mainly due to the high cost and the low absorbance of gold as compared to carbon black NPs.67 In the past years, various carbon nanostructures including NPs, nanotubes, nanofibers, graphene-based nanocomposites, and carbonization of carbonaceous material have been developed for photothermal and SSG applications.
For 0D carbon-based NPs, Balakin's team proposed a low-cost alternative solution for the preparation of carbon black NPs. The nanofluid-generated nanoparticle-free steam was produced in a parabolic collector with 73% efficiency and 25 °C superheat under solar conditions in the Nordic region, which was applicable for technical desalination, disinfection, and direct heating.68 A porous structure composed of carbon NPs showed strong light absorption by reducing the reflection and elongating the light pathway.13 In the near recent past, Yang et al. demonstrated a universal and stable photothermal coating for interfacial solar steam devices based on Chinese ink stabilized with atomic layer deposition (ALD).69 Compared with the pure water with a low evaporation rate of 0.31 kg m−2 h−1, the water evaporation rates with ALD/Chinese-ink-coated membrane and wood significantly increased to 0.75 kg m−2 h−1 and 1.31 kg m−2 h−1, respectively. The evaporation efficiencies of the ALD/Chinese-ink-coated membrane and wood were 47.0% and 82.2%, respectively.
The 1D ultralong hydroxyapatite nanowires and carbon nanotubes also showed promising applications in highly efficient solar energy-driven photothermal water steam generation and water purification. High water evaporation efficiencies of 83.2% at 1 kW m−2 and 92.8% at 10 kW m−2 for these 1D structures were achieved owing to the high light absorption, photothermal conversion capability, high-temperature stability, low thermal conductivity, and the interconnected porous structure. Interestingly, this kind of photothermal paper is highly flexible and fire-resistant.70 Besides, the ultra-robust SSG, based on carbon fibers that were modified by hydrothermal carbonization, was fabricated and used for the highly efficient purification of multi-media systems, including organic solvent dyes, oil-in-water emulsions, and seawater. The braided carbon fiber fabrics with good wettability, improved surface area, and excellent light absorption (approximate to 93%) can produce freshwater at a rate of 5.4 kg m−2 per day from simulated Dead Seawater, which is enough to satisfy an individual's daily need.71
Graphene and reduced graphene oxide (rGO) are newly emerging 2D carbon nanostructures with excellent photothermal performances. A novel photo-receiver composed of reduced graphene oxide (rGO) and polyurethane (PU) matrix was designed for highly efficient SSG. The functional rGO/PU foam exhibited a solar photothermal efficiency of ∼81% at a light density of 10 kW m−2.72 Jiang et al. reported a facile but effective approach to improve the photothermal performance by combining 2D rGO and 1D multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) with different nanomorphologies.43 The photothermal layer can be easily deposited on polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) substrate. The resulting rGO–MWCNT based membrane was flexible and showed an obvious improvement in the evaporation rate, about 79.0% and 8.9% higher than those of pure rGO and MWCNT membranes, respectively.43 Moreover, Jin's group developed a highly efficient photothermal membrane with broadband solar absorption by combining two excellent solar harvesting materials: plasmonic Ag/Au hollow and GO films.40 A high-efficiency steam generation with a solar thermal conversion efficiency up to 92% at 10 kW m−2 was realized.40 Recently, Awad et al. designed and developed a new class of plasmonic graphene polyurethane (PGPU) nanocomposite foam for efficient solar water desalination.73 The Au/Ag-PGPU foams exhibited average water evaporation rates of 1.00, 6.59, and 11.34 kg m−2 h−1 with superb solar thermal efficiencies of up to 63%, 88%, and 96.5%, under 1, 5, and 8 sun illumination, respectively.73
3D porous carbon nanostructures were also promising candidates for SSG. For instance, carbon sponge (CS) demonstrated high-efficiency in in situ consequential photothermic vaporization by employing a scalable 3D elastic cellular nitrogen-enriched structure.74 As shown in Fig. 2c, the CS had a broadband optical absorption and desirable inbuilt elastic cellular pore structure that maintained its viability in wicking-holding of water and accommodating cyclical dynamic fluid flow-volume variable stress, then the vaporization rate under 1 sun in the floating configuration was achieved at 1.39 kg m−2 h−1 and conversion efficiency was 90%.74
Carbonization of carbonaceous material is another very important approach to acquiring the carbon nanostructures at low cost.75–77 Lin et al. synthesized carbonized melamine foams through one-step calcination, and then used them as integrative solar absorbers (ISAs) for water evaporation, realizing highly efficient SSG with a water evaporation rate of 1.270 kg m−2 h−1 and an energy conversion efficiency of 87.3% under 1 kW m−2 solar illumination.78 Chen's team prepared a self-floating carbonized tissue membrane for high-efficiency solar steam generation via the carbonization of commercial facial tissue. This membrane can effectively generate water steam at a rate of 4.45 kg m−2 h−1 with a photothermal conversion efficiency of as high as 95% under 3 sun illumination.79
Carbonization of plants provides a new route to easily synthesize the carbon nanomaterials.11,24 To date, carbonization of wood,47 mushrooms,49 daikon,80 and lotus seed pods48 have been reported for SSG applications. For example, Fang et al. investigated the hierarchical porous structures of lotus seed pods and used carbonized lotus seed pods for SSG under normal solar irradiation. The carbonized lotus seed pods possessing hierarchical porous structures exhibited highly efficient SSG performance, owing to their excellent light-absorbing and heat generation ability, good thermal insulation, hydrophilic surfaces, and interconnected hierarchical pores. The evaporation rate of the carbonized lotus seed pod was 1.30 kg m−2 h−1 under 1 sun illumination.48 Very recently, kelp was carbonized for SSG and seawater desalination.81 The carbonized kelp showed good stability, high solar absorption (∼93%), porous microstructure, and hydrophilic surface. A high solar to steam conversion efficiency of 84.8% and evaporation rate of 1.351 kg m−2 h−1 were obtained under one sun illumination.81 Compared with mushrooms49 and lotus seed pods48 that cost a lot in industrialization on a large scale, it is commercially valuable to choose salt-tolerant and abundant kelp for SSG. Targeting the desalination of seawater, it is almost at no cost to locally collect the kelp, indicating that a promising SSG device with long-term stability can be produced at an extremely low cost (∼3.8$ per m2).


2.2.4 Polymers. 
Polymers possess similar advantages to NPs, drawing wide attention for their SSG applications. Very recently, Xu's group demonstrated that multilayer polypyrrole (PPy) nanosheets, with spontaneously formed surface structures such as wrinkles and ridges via sequential polymerization on paper substrates, can dramatically enhance broadband and wide-angle light absorption across the full solar spectrum, leading to an impressive solar-thermal conversion efficiency of 95.33% under 1 sun illumination (Fig. 2d).82 The SSG efficiency was calculated to be 68.05%, 77.35%, 92.12%, 90.61%, 88.09%, and 81.78% for devices with 1, 2, 4, 5, 7, and 10 layers of PPy nanosheets, respectively.82
In 2019, Jia's group demonstrated the fabrication of a novel bilayer photothermal material based on an attapulgite/poly acrylamide composite (APAC), which has the merits of cost-efficiency, scalable manufacture, and high solar energy conversion efficiency.83 The bilayered APAC showed a high vapor rate of 1.2 kg m−2 h−1 under 1 sun illumination, equal to 85% solar-to-vapor efficiency.83 In 2018, Liu et al. presented work on a geopolymer-biomass mesoporous carbon composite (GBMCC) device with mesoporous and macroporous structures for harvesting solar energy.84 The GBMCC device gave water evaporation rates of 1.58 and 2.71 kg m−2 h−1 under 1 and 3 sun illumination, with solar thermal conversion efficiency up to 84.95% and 67.6%, respectively. The proper combinations of materials with optimized chemical and porous structures ensured perfect light absorption ability, excellent mechanical characteristics, tailored structure and geometry, together with perfect thermal management, which provided a new approach toward industrial scale, low cost, and high efficiency solar thermal generation technologies.84 An inexpensive and scalable room-temperature synthesis of organic gel with sparsely dispersed AuF (≈27.2 ppm) was demonstrated. The 3D composite gel exhibited many desirable properties for solar-driven vaporization in an integral scheme, including broadband absorption, high photothermal conversion, efficient fluid capillarity, and effective macro–nano heat insulation. The gel-based solar absorber showed a vaporization efficiency of 85% under solar irradiation of one sun intensity.85


2.2.5 Semiconductors. 
Semiconductors absorb photons with energy larger than the semiconductor band gap via the transition of electrons from the valence band to the conduction band. Various kinds of semiconductors with narrow bandgaps are developed for photothermal conversion. For example, due to the strong light–matter coupling, broad absorption wavelength range, and prominent quantum confinement effect, layered tin monoselenide (SnSe) has great potential to effectively harness solar irradiation and convert it to heat energy, as shown in Fig. 2e.42 Importantly, the maximum evaporation rate of SnSe-coated nickel foam (SnSe@NF) has reached 0.85 kg m−2 h−1, which is 21% larger than that obtained with the commercial super blue coating (0.7 kg m−2 h−1) under the same conditions. A systematic analysis revealed that its good photothermal conversion capability was attributed to the synergetic effect of multi-scattering-induced light trapping and the optimal trade-off between light absorption and phonon emission.42
In 2018, Hu's team developed a membrane consisting of a narrow bandgap (0.45 eV) semiconductor of CuFeSe2 NPs (NPs) decorated wood (coded as black wood membrane), for high-efficiency SSG. Due to these excellent properties such as mesoporous structure, low density, heat-localization, low thermal conductivity, high hydrophilicity, and cost-effectiveness, the CuFeSe2 NP-decorated wood membrane achieved a high solar thermal efficiency of 86.2% under irradiation of 5 kW m−2.86 Cheng et al. proposed a perfect absorber design for the broadband solar spectrum by using an array of pyramidal nanostructures made from Bi2Te3 (a natural hyperbolic material) placed on the top of a substrate. The proposed structure could achieve absorbance values greater than 99.9% in the wavelength range of 300–2400 nm, which covers most of the solar radiation spectrum. This study could provide a route for effectively harvesting solar energy in photothermal conversion processes by semiconductors.87 For the first time, centimeter-scale BiInSe3-coated nickel foam (BiInSe3@NF) as an efficient solar-enabled evaporator was successfully achieved and exploited for solar energy-driven water evaporation in 2017. Benefitting from multiple scattering-induced light trapping of the rough substrate, strong light–matter interaction and intermediate band (IB)-induced efficient phonon emission of BiInSe3, the BiInSe3@NF device achieved a high evaporation rate of 0.83 kg m−2 h−1 under 1 sun illumination, which was 2.5 times that of pure water.88 After that, Yao's group developed a floatable solar-enabled 2D layered alloy material seawater evaporator by depositing BiInSe3 onto carbon foam via one-step pulsed-laser deposition. Importantly, the BiInSe3@CF device exhibited an evaporation rate of 1.1 kg m−2 h−1 upon 1 sun illumination due to its strong light–matter interaction, abundant intermediate band states, and superior stability.89
TiN is also a high-efficiency photothermal semiconductor. Zhang et al. examined a novel solar-powered membrane distillation process that employed a photothermal nanofluid as the feed water and energy collector.90 They showed that TiN nanofluid exhibited a high optical absorption efficiency, a low sedimentation potential, and a high membrane distillation flux; the membrane distillation flux was as high as 2.77 kg (m−2 h−1) under 5 kW m−2 irradiation.90 In addition, chemically exfoliated MoS2 (ce-MoS2) was demonstrated as a highly efficient, scalable, and environmentally benign (low toxicity) photothermal material for solar evaporators to create fresh water. Owing to the efficient photothermal conversion of ce-MoS2 nanosheets, high solar evaporation efficiencies of ∼76% and ∼81% were achieved under 0.76 kW m−2 and 5.35 kW m−2 light intensities, respectively.91 The photothermal performance of MoS2 can be further enhanced by combining with other optical absorbers. The superb SSG photothermal performance of a 2D ultrathin flexible membrane was demonstrated in single-walled nanotube (SWNT)–MoS2 film. The as-prepared SWNT–MoS2 film exhibited an absorption of more than 82% over the whole solar spectral range and achieved an impressively high evaporation efficiency of 91.5% under 5 sun illumination.92

2.3 Classification of SSG photothermal materials based on material structure

2.3.1 Porous structures. 
The colloidal particles or macromolecules in the sol or solution are connected to each other under certain conditions to form a spatial network structure, and the structural voids are filled with a liquid as a dispersion medium; this special dispersion is called a gel. Gels are available in two forms: hydrogels and aerogels. For SSG, hydrogels and aerogels often have unexpectedly excellent evaporation performances due to their porosity, thermal insulation and three-dimensional structures. For example, as shown in Fig. 3a, Geng et al. reported the negative temperature response of poly(N-iso-propylacrylamide) (PNIPAm) hydrogel (PN) anchored onto a superhydrophilic melamine foam skeleton, with a layer of PNIPAm-modified graphene (PG) filter membrane coated outside. Under one sun illumination, this rationally engineered structure offered a collection rate of 4.2 kg m−2 h−1. The PN core exhibited rapid, self-propelled, and reversible water suction and guttation properties, due to the swelling/deswelling switch near the lower critical solution temperature (LCST). The superhydrophilic melamine foam was employed to accelerate the water suction and guttation rate of PN. The PG membrane had the capability to separate ions and molecules with a relatively high rejection rate (>99%), which allowed the purifier to absorb clean water in brine feed or organic pollutants. Due to the excellent sunlight-to-heat transformation of PG and the unique thermal-responsive feature of PN, clean water was produced via transpiration and guttation.93
Aerogels can be easily fabricated into porous three-dimensional structures. The super-light structures can float on the water without the support of a membrane. Meanwhile, the porous nature is good for vapor escaping, making aerogels good choices for SSG. Fu's team reported a simple method for fabricating graphene aerogel (GA) from graphene oxides simply by photo-reduction for harvesting solar energy. GA can not only convert almost the entire incident solar light to heat energy but can also float on the surface of water and pump the interface water, forming a constant water stream. SSG efficiencies of 53.6 ± 2.5% and 82.7 ± 2.5% were achieved at light intensities of 1 and 10 kW m−2, respectively.94 Fu et al. introduced a new solar absorber of modified graphene aerogel (MGA) prepared by one-step hydrothermal method and oxygen plasma treatment for rapid and efficient SSG. Furthermore, under one sun illumination, MGA exhibited a high evaporation efficiency of 76.9%, which was ascribed to both the intrinsic properties of rGO with excellent light absorption and the particular structural merits including the MGA-hydrophilic surface for supplying water and connected networks for steam to escape, as well as a porous matrix with low thermal conductivity.95 Mu's team demonstrated the synthesis of hollow-carbon-nanotubes (HCNTs) aerogels with abundant porosity (92%), superhydrophilic open channels, low apparent density (57 mg cm−3), broad light absorption (99%), and low thermal conductivity (0.192 W m−1 K−1) for efficient SSG, from which an exceptionally high solar steam generation efficiency of up to 86.8% was achieved under 1 sun illumination.96


2.3.2 Bioinspired structures. 
As is well known, the growth of plants relies on the absorption of sunlight, thus, it is natural to find design inspiration for SSG from the plants.97 The state-of-the-art progress in bioinspired photothermal materials is reviewed in this section. The inspiration comes from the transpiration process of plants in nature. Xu's team demonstrated a simple, low-cost, and environmentally friendly strategy to realize highly efficient solar evaporation by using polydopamine-coated wood as both the light-to-heat converter and water pump. Solar steam was rapidly generated after only 5 seconds of light irradiation and the solar-steam generation efficiency reached 87% under 1 sun.98 In 2018, as illustrated in Fig. 3b, Zhao et al. designed a mimetic transpiration system imitating the water transport and transpiration of trees, with the hydrophilic air-laid paper acting as the root of tree, commercial expanded polyethylene foam playing the role of the soil for reducing the parasitic heat loss, and black carbonized wood with tremendous vertical channels as the photothermal converter. Originating from the excellent thermal management of the system, >97% carbonized wood solar absorbance, and the greenhouse effect of vapor, the proof-of-concept mimetic transpiration system generator with carbonized wood achieved a record high conversion efficiency of 91.3% under one sun.99 More interestingly, as the solar intensity was varied, the water evaporation was tuned through reversible transformations of microstructures reminiscent of the stomatal opening and closing of leaves. Thus, Qu's group proposed the concept of intelligent solar water evaporation, which contained a thermally responsive and microstructured graphene/poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (mG/PNIPAm) membrane. This mG/PNIPAm membrane displayed a high water evaporation rate of 1.66 kg m−2 h−1 under weak sunlight (intensity < 1 sun) while there was a low rate of 0.24 kg m−2 h−1 under intense sunlight (1 sun < intensity < 2 sun).100
Inspired by biological fixation, Zhang's team proposed a novel “nano-fixation” strategy to prepare a photothermal foam for SSG in an inexpensive manner. The nanofixation involved the in situ crystallization of MoS2 nanocrystals on a melamine-derived carbon skeleton, restricting its shrinkage; this in turn yielded foams with larger 3D macropores. Due to the unique structural advantages of the skeleton-fixed foam, i.e., large 3D macropores for steam transport, hydrophobicity, and low density for localized heating, the hybrid foam showed a rapid water evaporation rate (1.458 kg m−2 h−1) with high energy conversion efficiency (90.4%) under 1 sun illumination.101 Inspiration was also gained from lotuses. Scalable, chemically and mechanically stable, and conductive photothermal conversion coatings with self-healing superhydrophobicity were fabricated by spraying a mixture of beeswax, multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs), and polydimethylsiloxane for broadband light absorption and efficient photothermal conversion (82.2%).102 In addition to the inspiration from biological processes, biomaterials and biostructures were also directly used as the components in the SSG devices. Jha et al. presented extremely low-cost candle soot-coated cotton as an ideal floating absorber to generate highly efficient steam using the concept of interfacial solar heating. The floating absorber was synthesized from traditional household materials and a photothermal efficiency of 80% was achieved under 1 sun illumination.19 Inspired by silk cocoons and biofoam, Tian et al. demonstrated a simple method to create plasmonically active three-dimensional biofoams by integrating plasmonic nanostructures with highly porous biomaterial aerogels. The evaporation efficiency of the plasmonic aerogel was calculated to be 76.3% at a power density of 5.1 sun.103


2.3.3 Composite membranes. 
Optical absorption is the primary requirement for photothermal nanomaterials. In order to better form the interface evaporation and increase unnecessary thermal loss, the optical absorber layer needs to float on the liquid by a thermally insulating layer. Thus, the SSG normally contains two separated layers: optical absorbers and thermal insulators. To integrate the multilayers, many composite membranes were designed with multiple functions. In 2018, Deng's team synthesized a membrane consisting of the light-to-heat conversion carbon black film as the top layer and the porous poly(vinylidene difluoride) (PVDF) film embedded with pyroelectric barium titanate (BaTiO3) NPs (BTO NPs) as the bottom layer. The composite membrane reached a fast average rate of temperature change of 3 °C s−1 and the instantaneous rate of 13 °C s−1.5 A more elaborate structure was designed by Hou et al., which included functionalized carbon black as a broadband light-absorbing material (>96%), a porous hydrophilic mixed cellulose ester (MCE) membrane as the substrate, an air-laid paper as a water path, and polystyrene foam (PSF) as thermal insulation. A high evaporation efficiency of 85% under one sun illumination resulted from the specially designed structures.8 However, the components with different functions were simply attached.
In order to simplify the composite system, thus further improving the efficiency and reliability, researchers are continuously trying to integrate multiple functions. Yin's group presented a novel laminar solar absorber consisting of graphite powder (GP) and a semipermeable collodion membrane (SCM) as an integrated structural system for highly efficient water evaporation. The 8 mg-GP/SCM (i.e., the GP/SCM with 8 mg GP added) enabled water evaporation with high efficiency of 56.8% under 1.5 sun illumination and 65.8% under 3 sun illumination, respectively.104 Similarly, a robust CuCr2O4/SiO2 composite membrane was fabricated, which exhibited outstanding solar-driven water evaporation performance (1.32 kg m−2 h−1) under one sun illumination.105 Huang's team demonstrated the immobilization of graphene-based material in hydrophobic polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) membrane surface for water desalination via photothermal membrane distillation (PMD). Due to the broadband and high-efficiency solar absorption by using the polydopamine-reduced graphene oxide (pDA-rGO) membrane, this system showed that the water vapor flux of the pDA-rGO/PTFE membrane was as much as 78.6%, which was higher than the bare PTFE membrane.106 As depicted in Fig. 3c, Tao et al. synthesized a three-dimensional plasmonic covellite CuS hierarchical nanostructure as the light-absorbing material via a facile one-pot hydrothermal method for structurally integrated solar absorbers with microporous poly(vinylidene fluoride) membrane (PVDFM) as the supporting material. A broadband and highly efficient light absorption has been achieved in the wavelength of 300–2500 nm, along with high water evaporation efficiencies of 90.4 ± 1.1% and 93.3 ± 2.0% under 1 and 4 sun illumination, respectively.50 In the same year, this team demonstrated a novel interfacial evaporator employing Cu9S5 nanonets with heterogeneous hexagonal holes as the photothermal conversion material and a microporous poly(vinylidene fluoride) membrane (PVDFM) as the supporting material. The Cu9S5/PVDFM evaporator displayed a broadband (from 250 to 2000 nm) and large (91.7%) solar absorptance and solar vapor generation efficiencies of 80.2 ± 0.6% and 91.5 ± 1.1% under 1 sun and 4 sun illumination, respectively.107 An integrated system consisting of high-strength nanoporous Au NP and poly(p-phenylene benzobisoxazole) nanofibre (PBONF) was fabricated, and enhanced SSG performance was acquired. Under one sun illumination, the Au NP/PBONF composite films exhibited an evaporation rate of 1.424 kg m−2 h−1 and a solar-vapor conversion efficiency of 83%.108
Remark: Table 1 shows a flowchart of the classification of nano-absorbers used in SSG, specific nanomaterials and their limitations, which provide useful information to the readers. These tips can provide instructions for designing excellent nanomaterials based on the photothermal effect: (i) strong and broadband absorption of the solar spectrum and highly effective light-to-heat conversion. (ii) Minimal thermal dissipation and energy loss. (iii) Feasibility: low-cost, easy-preparation, production at large scale, good recyclability, and long-term stability.
Table 1 The classification of nano-absorbers for SSG












3. Design of devices for SSG
3.1 Rapid water supply and fluent steam channels
The water transportation and steam escape channels are also crucial factors for the design of SSG devices. In order to facilitate the escape of steam, as depicted in Fig. 4, the porous structure and hydrophilic surface, by using capillary force to transport water from bottom to top, nicely meet this requirement. In the past years, various porous structures with ultralow density have been used to float the photothermal layers on the top of bulk water. For example, the bilayered attapulgite/polyacrylamide (BAPA) composite with a low density of 0.0191 g cm−3 was synthesized, which is so very light that it could stand on top of a dandelion. Meanwhile, the loose structure and large numbers of pores of the BAPA are beneficial for SSG with fluent vapor transportation apart from low density. The BAPA composite showed a high vapor rate of 1.2 kg m−2 h−1 under 1 sun illumination, equal to 85% solar-to-vapor efficiency.83 As shown in Fig. 4a, the 3D-print technique was also developed to construct the evaporator with super-light features, so it could be placed on a fragile plant without breaking it. An all-in-one evaporator with a concave structure was fabricated by the 3D-print technique. The porous evaporator had a high porosity (97.3%) and efficient broadband solar absorption (>97%), as well as an intrinsic low thermal conductivity enabling heat localization. Consequently, the 3D-printed evaporator had a high solar steam efficiency of 85.6% under 1 sun illumination. The advanced 3D printing fabrication technique provides a novel route to design a porous steam channel for high-efficiency steam generation.109
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of SSG based on the 3D-printed evaporator. The magnified image shows the SEM images of the graphene oxide/nanofibrillated cellulose (GO/NFC) layer. The hydrophilic structure enables the rapid transport of water from the bulk to the evaporative surface/interface. The porous mesh-like structure contributes to fast water transport inside its interconnected microchannels, ref. 109; copyright 2017, Wiley. (b) Schematic of the CuFeSe2 NP-decorated wood membrane for efficient SSG. The magnified image shows the mesostructure of the black wood, which contains many steam escaping channels in the wood, ref. 86; copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Schematic illustration of a Janus absorber for SSG and desalination. The magnified image shows the structures with both hydrophilic and hydrophobic features, ref. 110; copyright 2018, Wiley. 
The hydrophilic feature, enabling the rapid transport of water from bulk to the evaporative surface/interface, is another crucial factor for rapid water supply and fluent steam channels. For example, Wang et al. demonstrated a facile route to enhance the light-trapping efficiency over a broad spectral and angular range by leveraging self-organized surface structures with wrinkling features on large-area multilayer polypyrrole (PPy) nanosheets. Moreover, when a drop of water was placed on the surface of the PPy nanosheets, the droplet was immediately absorbed in less than one second, indicating that PPy nanosheets are hydrophilic, which is desired for SSG. The corresponding solar vapor conversion efficiency was 92.12% with 4 layers of PPy nanosheets under 1 sun illumination.93 A similar conclusion has been supported and accepted by different research groups. It is reported that the porous structure with the hydrophilic features of the hydroxyapatite nanowire/carbon nanotubes (HN/CNT) photothermal paper provided available transportation paths for efficient water supply and evaporation. High water evaporation efficiencies of 83.2% at one sun illumination and 92.8% at 10 sun were achieved.70 In Fig. 4b, as mentioned in Section 2.2.5 for semiconductors, the CuFeSe2 NP-decorated wood membrane provided steam escape channels in the wood and hydrophilic structure that could pump water. Then, it achieved a high solar thermal efficiency of 86.2% under irradiation of 5 sun.86 In our previous work, different membranes were chosen to support the photothermal Cu NPs to optimize the SSG. When a cellulose membrane was used to support Cu NPs to form a device floating on the water surface, the SSG performance was significantly improved.56 One of the key reasons is that the hydrophilic cellulose membrane efficiently supplies water via the capillary force. Thus, a SSG efficiency of up to 73% was acquired at a low irradiation power density of 2 sun.
The hydrophilic/hydrophobic feature is a very complex factor affecting the SSG performance. Based on the difference in the hydrophilic and hydrophobic properties, different materials and surfaces are designed to meet different requirements. The hydrophilic structure can transport water by using capillary force, while the hydrophobic structure can prevent salt from adhering. When designing the membrane structure, the hydrophilic or hydrophobic structure, or a combination of both, can be considered according to specific functions targeted. For example, Huang et al. demonstrated the immobilization of graphene-based material on a hydrophobic polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) membrane for water desalination via photothermal membrane distillation. The evaporated water mass loss based on polydopamine-reduced graphene oxide (pDA-rGO) PTFE membrane reached 0.7163 kg m−2 after 1 h under 1 sun illumination.106 Kiriarachchi et al. acquired cellulose from cotton biomass waste, which can be used as a cost-effective host material for plasmonic NPs in SSG. The cotton fibers are highly hydrophilic because of the oxygen-containing cellulosic functional groups on the surface of the fibers, thus the cotton fibers take up water very rapidly and tend to sink in water. As a result, the plasmonic functionalized cotton (PFC) nanocomposite fibers are highly efficient, flexible, low weight, and cost-effective materials for solar water desalination and wastewater treatment. The nanocomposite fibers showed average water evaporation rates of 1.4 and 11.3 kg m−2 h−1 with superb solar thermal efficiencies of up to 86.3% and 94.3% under 1 and 8 sun illumination, respectively.60 In the following structure, the top surface of the mixed cellulose ester/hierarchical ZnO particles/Au (MCE/HP/Au) membranes was superhydrophobic while the bottom surface was hydrophilic. The hydrophilic bottom surface maintained the contact with the water, resulting in rapid water transport, whereas the superhydrophobic top surface faced the solar light source, resulting in efficient photothermal conversion. The steam generation rate could reach up to ∼8.70 kg m−2 h−1 under 10 sun illumination.20 As depicted in Fig. 4c, a similar two-layer structure with both hydrophilic and hydrophobic features was also demonstrated by Zhu's group. In their design, the hydrophilic polyacrylonitrile (PAN) layer pumped water, while the hydrophobic carbon black (CB) NPs coated poly methylmethacrylate (PMMA) layer cut off water transportation and prevented salts from accumulating on the surface, contributing to the long-term stability of the structure, absorption, and performance. The Janus absorber demonstrated a high efficiency (72%) and a stable water output (1.3 kg m−2 h−1, over 16 days) under 1 sun illumination.110
Remark: For complex seawater, the SSG faces three main limitations for water supply and steam channels: channel blockage by salt, heavy metal ion pollution, and low recyclability. The following will be helpful for achieving rapid water supply and fluent steam channels: (i) porous structure for steam escape; (ii) a hydrophilic surface by using capillary force to transport water from bottom to top; (iii) a hydrophobic structure for salt-rejection; (iv) recyclability and stability, with resistance to heat, photoirradiation, and the corrosion of brine.
3.2 Rational thermal management
In SSG, the heat converted from the solar absorber is transferred to the bulk water, and then the water temperature rises to generate steam. Rational thermal management will directly affect the SSG performance. Generally, thermal conduction, convection, and irradiation are the main pathways causing heat loss. In particular, thermal conduction is the dominant channel, which is tightly associated with water supply. As shown in Fig. 5a, the Au–carbon core–shell structures with strong optical absorption were previously synthesized by a facile hydrothermal method according to a design based on numerical simulation.111 Regarding thermal transport, it is well known that interfacial thermal (Kapitza) resistance occurs between different materials,112 and an effective method to reduce Kapitza resistance is to introduce an interlayer acting as a thermal coupler.113,114 In the Au-carbon core–shell structures, the carbon shell can act as a thermal coupler and facilitate the heat transfer from the Au core to the surrounding water. The simulation results explicitly demonstrate that the temperature of bare Au NP (415 K) is much higher than the one covered with carbon shell (357 K), when assuming that the thermal fluxes produced by photothermal effect are the same. A smaller temperature gradient implies a higher thermal conductivity, meaning that when the metallic NP is enveloped in a carbon shell, the heat dissipates to the surroundings more promptly. Note that the heat by photothermal conversion contributes to two main parts, namely, the heating of the bulk water and the steam generation. Thermal barriers at particle–liquid interfaces leading to high local temperatures of nanoparticle are favourable for steam generation. For instance, the photothermal energy conversion efficiency of Au–C nanospheres is about fivefold that of Au particles; however, the steam generation rate by Au–C nanospheres is only threefold that of Au particles.111 This is because the Au particles show higher thermal barriers at the particle–liquid interface, and thus generates steam more easily111 therefore, the design of thermal conductance at the interfaces is very important for SSG.
 Fig. 5  (a) Simulated temperature distributions of a single Au NP with or without a carbon shell at the same heating power, ref. 111; copyright 2017, Wiley. (b) Schematic diagrams of carbon sponge (CS) in various configurations and infrared images after 30 min of light irradiation (sinking; suspending; floating), ref. 74; copyright 2018, Wiley. (c) The temperature changes of corresponding samples before and after solar illumination (1 sun) monitored by IR camera, ref. 72; copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (d) Thermal images taken during SSG for carbonized kelp, ref. 81; copyright 2019, Author(s). This article is distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY) license. 
Maximizing the use of heat absorbed from solar energy is the key to increasing evaporation efficiency, implying that a core target of thermal management is the reduction of heat loss. In Fig. 5b, Ho's team explored thermal conduction of carbon sponges (CS) in three configurations, i.e. sinking, suspending, and floating. In the context of CS in contact with the bulk water, the vaporization rates under one sun in the sinking, suspending, and floating configurations were determined to be 0.77, 1.18, and 1.39 kg m−2 h−1, respectively, which corresponded to conversion efficiencies of 47%, 76%, and 90%. From the infrared images after 30 min of light irradiation, it can be seen that for the sinking model, the heat was disseminated in the entire bulk water. The bulk water obstructed the light penetration and vapor exchange, resulting in lower light absorbance and water evaporation. It was obvious that the heat generated by the CS was largely lost to bulk water, resulting in low evaporation efficiency.74 Whereas, The suspending and floating CS indicated enhanced heat localization as opposed to the sinking CS. Compared to suspending CS, floating CS had lower heat loss because of the reduction of the contact area, which diminished the heat transfer between the CS and bulk water. Considering both the lower bulk temperature and higher surface evaporation factors, the floating CS indeed displayed the highest vaporization efficiency among the three configurations.
The sinking and suspending situations are bottom-heating-based evaporation. The solar light is absorbed by a solar absorber and converted into thermal energy to heat up the bulk liquid from the bottom.115 In order to efficiently generate vapor and transfer heat (absorbed from solar) to local water, the floating case is the interfacial heating-based evaporation system. The solar-thermal conversion and heating are localized at the air–liquid interface; thus, the heat loss is largely suppressed. It is not enough to only localize heat for thermal management, as illustrated in Fig. 5c; limiting heat conduction to bulk water is also an effective way to improve evaporation efficiency and thermal management. In view of this situation, a thermal insulation layer is frequently used to minimize the heat transfer to the bulk water. Qu et al. prepared a thermal insulating layer that caused the entire structure to float and blocked heat conduction to bulk water. After 1 sun solar illumination for 60 min, the temperature of the bulk water only rose by 3.2 °C. This design made full use of the heat to generate steam at the interface instead of warming up the bulk water, and achieved water evaporation rates of 1.62 and 6.25 kg m−2 h−1 under 1 and 4 sun illumination, respectively.116 In our previous work, a thermal insulating expanded polystyrene foam was used to support the carbonized kelp.81 As confirmed by the infrared thermograms (Fig. 5d), the heat energy stemming from carbonized kelp can be maximally used for water evaporation while minimizing heat loss to bulk water. Due to the important thermal insulation layer, the upper surface temperature was high due to the photothermal effect, while the temperature of the water body under the insulation layer almost remained at room temperature. In comparison, without this thermal insulation, as the water quantity increased, the efficiency of the device decreased dramatically from 61% to 27%, because the heat loss to bulk water increased significantly.56 Strict thermal insulation, rendering the heat generation and SSG, only occurs at the interfaces and is critical to high-efficiency evaporation.
In the past few years, different materials have been developed as thermal insulation layers. For example, atomic layer deposition/Chinese-ink were coated on polypropylene membrane and wood for SSG. The evaporation efficiencies were 47.0% and 82.2%, respectively. The discrepancy was mainly attributed to the higher thermal resistance of wood.69 In fact, the optical absorber could be integrated with the thermal insulation layer. The rGO nanosheets covalently cross-linked to polyurethane matrix provided excellent stability and broad optical absorption, together with the property of thermal insulation served by polyurethane, resulting in the rapid increase in local thermal energy under illumination.72 Despite the consideration of using polyurethane to act as thermal insulation, the heat gradually spread to the bottom water (Fig. 5c). Wang's team rationally designed and fabricated a bilayered photothermal membrane with a porous film of rGO on the top and polystyrene (PS) foam was placed at the bottom. The functional rGO/PU foam exhibited a solar photothermal efficiency of ∼81% at an optical density of 10 sun.117 The expanded polystyrene (PS) foam (0.034 W m−1 K−1) was used as an excellent thermal barrier to minimize heat transfer to the non-evaporative bulk water. Then, a high thermal efficiency of around 88% was obtained under 1 sun, corresponding to the evaporation rate of 1.28 kg m−2 h−1.118 Wood has been used as a thermal insulation material for decades. Hu's group evaluated the thermal insulation capabilities of the vertically cut wood and super thermal insulation material styrofoam (isotropic, 0.03 W m−1 K−1). When the heat source was 90, 120, and 160 °C, the stabilized backside temperature of vertically cut wood was 60, 87, and 98.1 °C, respectively, even lower than that of super thermal insulation styrofoam (65, 88.9, and 113 °C, respectively). The anisotropic thermal conductivity of wood helped the heat confinement in the solar energy receiving layer by impeding the conductive heat transfer into the wood matrix, then a high steam generation efficiency of 80% under 1 sun and 89% under 10 sun was achieved.119
For thermal insulation, besides insulation materials with low thermal conductivity, Yu et al. demonstrated a hierarchically nanostructured gel (HNG) based on polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) and polypyrrole (PPy) that served as an independent solar vapour generator. The unique PVA network provided not only a steam escape channel but also thermal insulation to evaporate water with an extremely high rate of 3.2 kg m−2 h−1via 94% solar energy from 1 sun illumination.33 Above all, there are various ways to achieve thermal insulation, depending on the requirement for the structure of the design.
Remark: Rational thermal management for maximizing the use of heat absorbed from solar energy is a very important factor for increasing evaporation efficiency. Table 2 summarizes the possible techniques to improve thermal management, which may provide some instructions for research on the development of SSG: (i) localize heat at the air-liquid interface to avoid heat transfer to the bulk water. (ii) Heat the water evenly to avoid convection. (iii) Use low mid-infrared irradiation to minimize thermal irradiation.
Table 2 The possible techniques to improve thermal management




Heat loss
Thermal management
Technique




Thermal conduction
Prevent heat from being conducted downward
Use thermal insulation layer (expanded polystyrene foam, polypropylene membrane, wood, and so on) to localize the heat at the air–liquid interface rather than transferring it to the bulk water69,81,119


Convection
Heat the water of the same plane evenly
Keep the area of the surface of the nano-absorbers and the area of the surface of the heated water body as uniform as possible56,72,118


Irradiation
Minimize mid-infrared irradiation
Design electronic structure to acquire low mid-infrared irradiation to minimize thermal irradiation55,56




4. Applications based on SSG
4.1 Desalination of seawater
Desalination is the process of converting seawater into fresh water, which is conventionally realized via reverse osmosis and distillation. The reverse osmosis method can remove more than 99% of the salt ions in seawater to obtain potable fresh water. However, the high operating pressure, high energy consumption, and membrane pollution, hinder the further promotion of reverse osmosis technology. Distillation is also a traditional method for separating and purifying liquid mixtures, but suffers from high energy consumption, thus high cost. SSG is a renewable and environmentally friendly approach to solving the water shortage issue for desalination.
The solar energy-driven steam generation based on photothermal nanomaterials has achieved superior performances with high evaporation rates. Fig. 6a–d shows the typical solar thermal evaporation curves of time-dependent mass change under various solar illumination conditions. For Fig. 6a, the evaporation rates for geopolymer-biomass mesoporous carbon composite (GBMCC) were measured to be 1.58 kg m−2 h−1 at 1 sun solar intensity, while it was 0.502 kg m−2 h−1 for blank water surface. As the solar illumination intensity increased, the evaporation rates increased remarkably. It reached almost 2.24 kg m−2 h−1 at 2 sun, and further increased to 2.71 kg m−2 h−1 at 3 sun solar intensities.84 As shown in Fig. 6b, after 60 min of solar light irradiation, the mass decrease of water in the presence of the hydroxyapatite nanowire/carbon nanotubes (HN/CNT) photothermal paper was 1.09 kg m−2, which was much higher than that of pure water in the dark (0.11 kg m−2) and pure water under solar light irradiation (0.30 kg m−2).70 As shown in Fig. 6c, the energy efficiencies of the bilayered attapulgite/polyacrylamide composite (BAPAC) (1.3 cm) was calculated to be 80% at 1 sun, 51% at 2 suns and 47% at 3 sun and 24% for natural water, respectively.83 The speeds of the water weight loss with a treated wood twice-coated polydopamine (TW-2PDA) sample under the simulated sunlight irradiation were 0.97, 1.38, 2.17, 4.03, 5.56, 7.54 kg m−2 h−1 for the light powers of 0.8, 1.0, 1.4, 2.0, and 2.7 to 3.5 kW m−2, respectively98 (Fig. 6d).
 Fig. 6  (a–d) Cumulative mass change of water versus solar light irradiation time for various photothermal materials, (a) GBMCC, ref. 84; copyright 2018, Wiley. (b) HN/CNT, ref. 70; copyright 2018, Wiley. (c) BAPAC, ref. 83; copyright 2019, Elsevier. (d) TW-2PDA, ref. 98; copyright 2017, Wiley. (e–g) Bar graph of the concentration of Na+, K+, Ca2+, Mg2+ for various evaporation structures before and after desalination: (e) CuFeSe2 NPs, ref. 86; copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) Ti3C2 MXene membrane, ref. 18; copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) HN/CNT, ref. 70; copyright 2018, Wiley. (h) Concentrations of NaCl in five kinds of simulated seawater samples and the condensed clean water after solar energy-driven photothermal desalination by HN/CNT, ref. 70; copyright 2018, Wiley. 
The highly efficient solar thermal evaporation shows great potential for the desalination of seawater. For example, the desalination effects of the black wood were evaluated using water samples from the South China Sea with Na+, Mg2+, K+, and Ca2+ ions.82 As shown in Fig. 6e, the concentrations of Na+, Mg2+, K+, and Ca2+ within the solar steam-treated water samples were 4.18, 0.71, 2.45 and 3.05 mg L−1, respectively. These ion concentrations were much lower as compared to the initial salty water (South China Sea), reaching the World Health Organization (WHO) standard.86 In Fig. 6f, the concentrations of four primary ions (Na+, K+, Mg2+ and Ca2+) can be distinctly reduced over 99.5% rejection rate, meeting the drinking standard defined by the WHO.18Fig. 6g reveals that the concentrations of five primary ions (Na+, K+, Mg2+, Ca2+ and B3+) were remarkably reduced with the ion rejection ratios higher than 94.32% after solar energy-driven photothermal desalination using the HN/CNT photothermal paper. The concentrations of ions were far below the ion concentrations for the drinkable water as defined by the WHO. As shown in Fig. 6h, the concentrations of NaCl in the condensed water obtained from five simulated seawater samples decreased by three orders of magnitude as compared with those of the original solutions.70 These examples demonstrated the excellent performance of SSG for seawater desalination.
4.2 Purification of wastewater
Purification of diluted water is also urgent and significant for solving the water shortage issue. Purification refers to the separation of impurities from the mixture to increase its purity. As an important physical and chemical method, purification plays an important role in research and production. Similar to the desalination of seawater, clean water can be cheaply collected from wastewater by SSG. As shown in Fig. 7, typical pollutants, including heavy metal ions, organic dyes, volatile organics, phosphate, sulphate, nitrate, and even coliforms can be removed after purification by SSG.
 Fig. 7  (a) Purification of heavy metal ions and volatile organics: organic and heavy metal ion rejection performance, ref. 18; copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Purification of dyes: photograph of the water before and after purification for 2 h, ref. 20; copyright 2018, Elsevier. (c) The bar graph illustrates the nitrate, sulphate and phosphate values of sewage and treated water, ref. 19; copyright 2019, Elsevier. (d) The purification of Gram-negative E. coli, ref. 70; copyright 2018, Wiley. 
As illustrated in Fig. 7a, simulated wastewater containing representative organic dyes of rhodamine B (RhB) and methyl orange (MO), and heavy metal ions like Cu2+ and Cr6+, was evaporated; the results indicated that a nearly 100% rejection rate can be realized after SSG.18 The photo-thermal-purification of the MCE/HP/Au membrane was also applied for water cleaning. Water contaminated with RhB was treated with the membrane under solar irradiation of 10 sun. As shown in Fig. 7b, after purification for 2 h, the contaminated water was converted into clean water.20
In addition, volatile organics in wastewater are also an issue that should not be ignored in wastewater treatment. Hence, the solar evaporation of acetone and benzene aqueous solutions was conducted to study the rejection performance of the volatile organics in water. The results indicated that the concentrations of acetone and benzene were dramatically decreased after evaporation, achieving rejection rates of 92.9% and 95.9% for acetone and benzene, respectively, as shown in Fig. 7a.18 For further assessment of the purified water to be potable, Wilson et al. tested the sulphate, phosphate, and nitrate content in the water after the treatment; as expected, the concentrations decreased extensively (Fig. 7c). The final ppm values of sulphate, phosphate, and nitrate satisfied the standard guideline values provided by WHO for drinking water.19
Moreover, Gram-negative E. coli can also be removed by the SSG, which is very important for potable water. In addition to heavy metal ions such as Ni2+, Cu2+, Cd2+, Mn2+ and organic dyes such as MO and RhB, Gram-negative E. coli was also present in the original wastewater. After solar energy-driven photothermal purification based on HN/CNT paper, the concentrations of the metal ions in the condensed water were below 2 μg L−1, which were lower than the concentrations as defined by the drinking water standard. The collected condensed water after purification was colorless and transparent, indicating that MO and RhB were substantially removed.70 Interestingly, as shown in Fig. 7d, the wastewater before purification contained a high density of Gram-negative E. coli, whereas, after purification, Gram-negative E. coli almost disappeared in the condensed water.70
4.3 Photothermal steam sterilization
Photothermal steam sterilization has received widespread attention as an emerging application based on SSG. Steam sterilization is one of the most widely used and most reliable methods for sterilization in medical procedures. However, traditional steam sterilization technology consumes electricity. In developing countries and regions, about 1.5 billion people lack long-term power supply. More seriously, the stable supply of electricity cannot even be guaranteed in special situations such as in the wild and during disasters. The lack of effective and reliable sterilization techniques has exposed people in these areas to a variety of dangerous epidemics caused by pathogen infections. Therefore, it is extremely urgent to provide a reliable, efficient, and low-cost sterilization method for off-grid areas and special scenes. The SSG makes use of clean solar energy to generate high-temperature steam, which can effectively kill a variety of bacterial and vegetative spores. Current research efforts suggest that the sterilization effect exceeds the requirements of the International Health Organization for the sterilization of medical devices.11,12
For example, very recently, as shown in Fig. 8a, Zhu's team revealed the kinetic advantages of interfacial photothermal conversion and applied it in the field of steam sterilization. The temperature of steam was 132 °C when the interfacial heating system ran for 8.4 minutes. Moreover, the temperature of the nanofluid solar steam reached 121 °C when the interfacial heating system was run for only 17.3 min, unambiguously showing the advantage of interfacial solar steam generation.11 Deng's team presented a steam sterilization approach by using the solar-driven evaporation system at the water/air interface. In this system, a reduced graphene oxide/polytetrafluoroethylene composite membrane floating at the water/air interface acts as a light-to-heat conversion medium to harvest and convert incident solar light into localized heat. By using the heat to increase the temperature of the membrane, the steam's temperature increased to 120 °C. Its successful sterilization capability was demonstrated through both chemical and biological sterilization tests, as shown in Fig. 8b.12 The photothermal effect-based solar-driven sterilization approach offers a potential low-cost solution to meet the need for sterilization in undeveloped areas that lack electrical power but have ample solar radiation.
 Fig. 8  (a) Photograph and schematic of the interfacial-heating-based solar autoclave (total volume of 10.5 L). Lower panel: photographs of the bacterial map before and after steam sterilization, ref. 11. Copyright 2018, Wiley. (b) Schematic illustration of steam sterilization via interfacial evaporation, ref. 12. Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
5. Other relevant applications based on the photothermal effect
5.1 Light-driven thermoelectric system
Thermal-electric conversion refers to the mutual conversion between thermal energy and electrical energy. Thermoelectric effects include the Seebeck effect, the Peltier effect, and the Thompson effect. The discovery of the thermoelectric conversion effect has aroused great interest in both the scientific community and engineering field, because the thermoelectric effect indicates a direct conversion between thermal energy and electrical energy at the macroscopic scale. Thermoelectric materials are functional materials that convert electrical energy and thermal energy through the movement of their internal carriers and their interactions. Compared with the traditional power generation method, for the thermoelectric system, there is no external rotating member, so there is no noise during operation and no wear between the components. In addition, since it has no fluid medium, there is no environmental pollution. The main feature of thermoelectric materials is that it can deliver heat to the carrier of electrical energy in the material-electron or hole carriers, which transport heat from the higher temperature end to the lower temperature end. At the same time, voltage is generated at both ends of the material due to the directional movement of electrons or holes. The resulting voltage provides an available source of energy. This effect is worthy of incorporation into energy conversion and utilization in practical applications.
Along with the development of SSG, a new light-driven thermoelectric system with efficient solar-thermal-electric energy conversion properties was constructed. For example, as shown in Fig. 9a and b, PCHSM (phase change heat storage material) with photothermal conversion properties and PCCSM (phase change cool storage material) were used as the hot-side and cold-side of the thermoelectric device, respectively. The PCHSM had large storage capacity (112.9 J g−1) and strong photothermal conversion properties because of the ultrafast photothermal conversion of the dye–polymer PCMs (phase change materials). The dye structures in the PCHSM absorbed photons and transferred energy to the polymer chain, then released the excessive energy by heat. When the device was placed under sunlight, the temperature of the hot-side material rapidly increased, which was accompanied by a change in the electric current (35 mA) and voltage (600 mV).120 Under solar illumination, the capacitance, energy density, and power density of the supercapacitors were all largely enhanced due to the photothermal effect.
 Fig. 9  (a) and (b) The device diagram (a) and current/temperature–time curves (b) of the solar-thermal-electric energy conversion experiment under the sunlight (I = 3 sun), ref. 120. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (c) Hybrid concept for generating electricity from solar power: concentrated sunlight is stored and converted via photovoltaics (PV), thermoelectrics (TE), and mechanical engines (ME) to achieve 50% conversion efficiency. (d) Block diagram providing the details of the energy flow (in terms of yellow photons, red phonons, and blue electrons), specifically calculated for the PV/TE/ME hybrid system illustrated in (c), ref. 15. Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Similarly, as depicted in Fig. 9c and d, Shakouri et al. developed a utility-scale photovoltaic/thermoelectric/mechanical (PV/TE/ME) hybrid approach that brought together three distinctive power-generating components. The system can produce power for hours after sunset and achieved solar-to-electricity conversion efficiencies over 50%.15 Moreover, the photothermal effect can be used to improve the capacitance of the capacitor. Yi et al. employed three-dimensional hierarchical graphene as the electrodes of the capacitor. The electrodes showed an absorption of >92.88% over the entire solar spectrum, a response time of <200 s and a surface temperature change of ∼39 °C under 1 solar illumination (1 kW m−2). Due to the charge storage ability enhanced by the photothermal effect, the capacitance of the pseudocapacitor increased by ∼1.5 times, and the capacitance of the electric double-layer capacitor increased by ∼3.7 times under 1 sun illumination. This work provides a new way for photo-thermal-electric conversion and new design ideas for energy storage devices.121
5.2 Photo-heat-catalysts
Various photocatalysts using nano-scale semiconductor materials have attracted enormous interest for the efficient harvesting of solar energy, which is always a worldwide target for human beings.122,123 To date, lots of photocatalysts have been developed to utilize visible light energy. However, NIR light occupies about 44% of the solar spectrum, and the direct utilization of NIR is still a tough challenge.124 In our previous work,125 as shown in Fig. 10a, we found that the photothermal effect of graphene-based nanocomposites importantly contributed to the enhanced photocatalytic performance, indicating that designing nanocomposites with improved photothermal performance is a promising strategy for acquiring highly efficient photocatalytic activity. Inspired by this work, many high-performance photocatalysts were developed by enhancing the photothermal effect,126,127 pointing out a new path for the utilization of NIR light energy.
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic diagram of a photo-heat-catalyst over P25-rGO, ref. 125; copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic diagram of a photo-heat-catalyst over P25/Fe3O4@SiO2, ref. 127; copyright 2016, Elsevier. 
For example, Wu's team developed a new strategy for the utilization of NIR light from solar energy to facilitate the photocatalytic reactions. In Fig. 10b, Fe3O4@SiO2 absorbs the infrared light, and transforms it into thermal energy based on the photothermal effect, which then accelerates the NO photocatalytic activity of traditional photocatalysts. After 120 min of illumination, the temperature of optimum P25/Fe3O4@SiO2 rose to 57.4 °C from 25 °C and it's NO conversion capability showed an enhancement of 38.9% with the comparison to pure P25.127 Li et al. reported that the hybrid nanomaterial Pt-rGO-TiO2, featuring the broad light wavelength absorption (800–2500 nm), could be used as a highly active photo-thermal responsive catalyst for efficient volatile organic compound (VOCs) decomposition under infrared (IR) irradiation. The maximum photothermal conversion efficiency is able to reach 14.1% with a significant toluene conversion of 95% and CO2 yield of 72% under IR irradiation intensity of 116 mW cm−2, along with retaining its stability for nearly 50 h.126
Moreover, the efficient steam reforming of methanol can be realized over Pt-loaded SrTiO3 at temperatures as low as 150 °C via a photothermocatalytic process, which demonstrates that the photothermocatalytic process can provide a low-energy-consumption but efficient alternative to the traditional thermocatalysis. An optimal catalyst achieved a high methanol conversion of 95.5% and a selectivity of 94.4% for syngas during 15 min of light irradiation.36 The photothermal-catalysis based on the MCE/HP/Au membrane can effectively degrade the organic dyes, which can be applied to water cleaning. To evaluate the photo-thermal-catalytic performances, water contaminated with RhB was treated with the membrane under solar irradiation of 10 sun. From Fig. 7b, after purification for 2 h, the contaminated water was converted into clean water.20
6. Opportunities and challenges
6.1 Opportunities

6.1.1 The development of new photothermal nanomaterials for SSG. 
The photothermal section is the core component of SSG. Thus, the discovery and rational design of new photothermal nanomaterials are very crucial for the development of new generation SSG with high efficiencies, low costs, and broad applications. Due to the advent of the era of big data intelligence, the mature development of various types of simulation software can be used to simulate the characteristics of materials, then new materials can be created, and new mechanisms can be explored and exploited. Because the traditional trial-and-error methods are usually inefficient, especially when thousands of candidates are treated, rapidly discovering functional materials remains an open challenge. Lu's team developed a target-driven method to predict undiscovered hybrid organic–inorganic perovskites (HOIPs) for photovoltaics. Six orthorhombic lead-free HOIPs with appropriate bandgaps for solar cells and room temperature thermal stability were successfully screened out from 5158 unexplored HOIPs and two of them stood out with direct bandgaps in the visible region and excellent environmental stability.128
Regarding the design of photothermal nanomaterials, for instance, the absorption of Au NPs with different sizes can be simulated. The simulation results showed that diameters of <100 nm and the layer thicknesses of ≈150–300 nm were optimal for selective solar absorption.55 Yang's group demonstrated that plasmonic-NP-coated foils (PNFs) were suitable for selective solar absorption (96%) based on a numerical simulation. The fabrication process is simple, inexpensive, and environmentally friendly, which allows for the convenient tuning of the PNFs' solar absorptance and thermal emittance.55 Thus, big data, machine learning, and computational simulation will be very powerful tools for the discovery and design of new photothermal nanomaterials.


6.1.2 The development of new mechanisms for enhanced photothermal effects. 
Although photothermal and related effects have been extensively investigated, there are still opportunities to develop new physical mechanisms for enhanced photothermal effects from the fundamental level. For example, the magnetic field-enhanced photothermal effect (MFEP) of Fe3O4 NPs was proposed in our previous work.129 A remarkable temperature increase was observed under irradiation with NIR combined with an alternating magnetic field. The temperature increase caused by MFEP was substantially larger than the sum of isolated photothermal and magnetothermal effects, which was attributed to the hot-phonon bottleneck effect. Normally, the photothermal effect contains three main stages: the first stage is hot carrier-phonon scattering by the emission of optical phonons; then at the second stage, the optical phonons relax to the low-energy acoustic modes via the decay of optical phonons to acoustic phonons; the final stage is the propagation of acoustic phonons to the far-field, leading to local lattice heating.111,130,131 When the hot carrier density is high,131,132 the relaxation rate of a non-equilibrium carrier-phonon system is reduced, which is known as the hot-phonon bottleneck effect. For the Fe3O4 NPs, if the thermal effect is excited by an isolated illumination or magnetic field, acoustic phonons smoothly propagate away, accompanied by hot carrier cooling. However, the hot carriers could rapidly accumulate when both illumination and magnetic field are applied, since the relaxation of the acoustic phonon is blocked due to the phonon bottleneck effect. As a result, the acoustic phonons upconvert and recycle the thermal energy and reheat the carriers. Therefore, MFEP exhibited a superior hyperthermia performance as compared to the common photothermal effects. The photothermal effect is essentially the relaxation of the hot-carrier. MFEP offers some mechanism enlightenment to enhance the photothermal performance by intervening in the hot-carrier dynamics. Thus, the development and employment of new mechanisms for enhanced photothermal effects is another important opportunity for promoting the SSG.


6.1.3 The rational design of SSG device structures. 
The development of portable, integrated, adaptive, and smart SSG devices remains to be researched. Compared to the traditional water treatment techniques, one of the biggest advantages of SSG is the portability. However, the current loose device structures hinder the commercialization and practical applications of SSG. To solve this problem, for example, Wu et al. combined commercial degreasing cotton, photothermal CuS yolk–shell nanocages and agarose to produce a highly flexible photothermal aerogel, which delivered a high energy efficiency (94.9%) for SSG under 1 sun illumination, corresponding to a water evaporation rate of 1.63 kg m−2 h−1. This portable and flexible photothermal cotton-CuS nanocage-agarose aerogel showed great potential for practical application.133 The rational optimization of floating structures is also an important research challenge and opportunity. The integration of multiple functions, high porosity, lightweight, mechanical robustness, low thermal conductivities, and appropriate pore scale, is crucial for portable solar-thermal evaporators. Through one-step calcination, Lin's group obtained carbonized melamine foams as integrative solar absorbers (ISAs) for water evaporation, realizing highly efficient SSG. The optimized ISA showed excellent light absorption (>96%) for solar energy and exhibited one of the best performances for SSG with a water evaporation rate of 1.270 kg m−2 h−1 and an energy conversion efficiency of 87.3% under 1 sun illumination.78
The development of smart SSG devices is a very promising direction that deserves future research efforts. For example, as inspired by plant growth, a smart SSG with self-adaptability in response to changing environments was proposed by Qu's group.100 Intelligent solar water evaporation (iSWE) was realized based on a thermally responsive microstructured graphene/poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (mG/PNIPAm) membrane. As the solar intensity varied, the water evaporation was tuned through reversible transformations of microstructures reminiscent of the stomatal opening and closing of leaves. Then, a high water evaporation rate of 1.66 kg m−2 h−1 under weak sunlight (intensity < 1sun) and a low water evaporation rate of 0.24 kg m−2 h−1 under intense light (1 sun < intensity < 2 sun) were attained. This mG/PNIPAm membrane provides a smart material platform with self-adaptability in response to changing environments because of the double-layer structure with predictable shape and dynamics. The leaf-like membrane can further autonomously modulate the water evaporation by self-curling under intense solar irradiation in accordance with simulation results.100

6.2 Challenges

6.2.1 Scalable fabrication over a large area with low cost. 
Since the current SSG efficiency is already high enough, there is only limited room for improvement. Therefore, further cutting the cost becomes the most crucial factor for practical applications. The large-scale production of stable, recyclable, biodegradable, and sustainable photothermal nanomaterials at low-cost is still a challenge. In the laboratory, the products of nanomaterials are usually synthesized in tiny amounts, regardless of the cost. Though critical, this important concern has only attracted limited attention. As an effort toward this concern, Yang et al. have tried to scale up the production of photothermal papers for SSG. The highly flexible fire-resistant HN/CNT photothermal paper based on ultralong hydroxyapatite nanowires and carbon nanotubes (HN/CNT) has demonstrated high performance in SSG additions.70 The scaled-up production of the HN/CNT photothermal paper has been realized by employing the large-scale synthesis of HNs using a large stainless-steel autoclave with a volume of 100 L. The large-scale nanomaterials exhibited a stable performance in recycling and long-time usage, which efficiently produced clean water from real seawater and simulated harmful wastewater containing industrial dyes, biological bacteria, and heavy metals.


6.2.2 Sustainable treatment of complex seawater. 
Typically, in the laboratory, artificial salty water is usually regarded as seawater to be treated by SSG. However, it adds another challenge for SSG when faced with real seawater consisting of many more complex constituents. As irradiation time increases, a large amount of steam is generated; meanwhile, the salt particles will also be crystallized, which would inhibit the further transport of water, resulting in reduced evaporation efficiency. Therefore, the design of a salt-rejecting structure is also of great significance for the practical applications of SSG. Chen's group presented an experimental demonstration of a salt-rejecting evaporation structure that can operate continuously under sunlight to generate clean vapor while floating in a saline body of water such as an ocean. They used porous and hydrophilic white fabric to wick water to the solar-absorbing evaporation structure above, while advecting and diffusing concentrated salt back down into the body of water.134 Apart from the salt-rejecting structure, hydrophobic membranes were also used to reject salt. Zhao et al. proposed a hydrophobic membrane, which contained a salt-blocking delaminated Ti3C2 nanosheet layer with trimethoxy (1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluorodecyl) silane modification for sunlight harvesting and a piece of commercial filter membrane for water supply. A solar evaporation rate of 1.31 kg m−2 h−1 and a solar steam conversion efficiency of 71% under 1 sun illumination were achieved.18 Nevertheless, it is still a serious challenge for SSG to have sustainable desalination in water evaporation and salt-rejecting in complex seawater at a high efficiency.

7. Summary and prospects
SSG is a renewable and environmentally friendly approach to solving the water shortage issue. In this review, we mainly discuss this topic from four aspects, namely, the design and development of photothermal materials, rational design of devices for SSG, applications of SSG, as well as the remaining opportunities and challenges. Various kinds of highly efficient photothermal materials with strong optical absorption in the broadband solar spectrum are reviewed. In the past three years, metals, metal oxides, carbon-based materials, polymers, and semiconductors have been exploited for SSG applications. Regarding the water supply, mass transportation and steam escape channels are essential for the rapid transport of water from the bulk to the evaporative surface. Porous structure and hydrophilic/hydrophobic features are discussed in this section. As a core element, the state-of-the-art efforts on thermal management to improve the SSG efficiency are presented in the last section on design. To avoid heat loss to bulk water, the interfacial evaporation based on a thermal insulation layer is well accepted.
The SSG has already shown great application prospects. The primary motivation of SSG is desalination of seawater, purification of wastewater and photothermal steam sterilization, which has obtained great achievements. Moreover, the thermal energy harvested from sunlight can be further converted to other forms, thus allowing much wider applications in addition to water treatment. Some relevant applications, such as light-driven thermoelectric systems and photo-heat-catalysts, are reviewed in the application Section 5.
Despite intensive efforts, the development of SSG is far from mature. There are still plenty of opportunities and challenges for future advancement. (i) The big data intelligence and machine learning may speed up the exploration of new photothermal nanomaterials, which may attract enormous attention in the near future. By using various simulation methods, nanomaterials with high efficiencies and low-cost can be rapidly found and created for SSG. (ii) Fundamentally, more new physical mechanisms can be explored and exploited. (iii) The portable, integrated, adaptive, and smart SSG devices remain to be explored. The flexible device provides a smart material platform with self-adaptability in response to changing environments. (iv) Scalable fabrication over a large area with low-cost and salt-rejecting structure are also of great significance for the practical applications of SSG. (v) Sustainable treatment of complex seawater is still a challenge that awaits future advancement. When faced with real seawater consisting of many more complex constituents, hydrophilic surfaces, by using capillary force to transport water from bottom to top, and hydrophobic structures for salt-rejection can cooperate interdependently. We hope this review will evoke more research efforts devoted to the SSG development, eventually overcoming the challenges and promoting future applications of SSG.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
References
A. J. Jamieson, L. S. R. Brooks, W. D. K. Reid, S. B. Piertney, B. E. Narayanaswamy and T. D. Linley, R. Soc. Open Sci., 2019, 6, 180667 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Singh and R. S. Mishra, Int. J. Eng. Res. Sci. Technol., 2018, 21, 451–464 Search PubMed .
A. N. Abdelqader, S. K. Fateen, K. A. El-metwally, A. Soliman and I. M. Ismail, Int. J. Eng. Res. Sci. Technol., 2018, 82, 1215–1260 Search PubMed .
P. Yang, K. Liu, Q. Chen, J. Li, J. Duan, G. Xue, Z. Xu, W. Xie and J. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1923–1927 RSC .
M. Min, Y. Liu, C. Song, D. Zhao, X. Wang, Y. Qiao, R. Feng, W. Hao, P. Tao, W. Shang, J. Wu and T. Deng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 21246–21253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Bontempi, I. Vassalini, S. Danesi, M. Ferroni, M. Donarelli, P. Colombi and I. Alessandri, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 2127–2132 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Aboelwafa, S. K. Fateen, A. Soliman and I. M. Ismail, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 82, 868–885 CrossRef CAS .
B. Hou, Z. Cui, X. Zhu, X. Liu, G. Wang, J. Wang, T. Mei, J. Li and X. Wang, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2019, 222, 159–164 CrossRef CAS .
L. Sun, Z. Li, R. Su, Y. Wang, Z. Li, B. Du, Y. Sun, P. Guan, F. Besenbacher and M. Yu, Angew. Chem. Int., Ed., 2018, 57, 10666–10671 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Xing, Q. Zou, C. Yuan, L. Zhao, R. Chang and X. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2019, 1900822, 1–8 Search PubMed .
X. Li, C. Liu, J. Li, G. Lv, J. Zhu, L. Zhou, M. Du, L. Bertoluzzi and S. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1805159 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Zhao, P. Tao, T. Deng, J. Lou, Z. Wang, C. Yang, C. Song, Y. Chen, Y. Liu, F. Yu, W. Shang, Y. Zhang and J. Wu, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 19384–19389 RSC .
X. Zhang, W. Gao, X. Su, F. Wang, B. Liu and J. Wang, Nano Energy, 2018, 48, 481–488 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kodama, S. Bellan, N. Gokon and H. Seok, Sol. Energy, 2017, 156, 113–132 CrossRef CAS .
P. Bermel, K. Yazawa, J. L. Gray, X. Xu and A. Shakouri, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2776–2788 RSC .
L. Cioccolanti, R. Tascioni, E. Bocci and M. Villarini, Energy Convers. Manage., 2018, 163, 407–419 CrossRef .
P. T. Krenzke, J. R. Fosheim and J. H. Davidson, Sol. Energy, 2017, 156, 48–72 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, Y. Yang, C. Yang, Y. Tian, Y. Han, J. Liu, X. Yin and W. Que, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 16196–16204 RSC .
H. M. Wilson, S. Rahman A. R, A. E. Parab and N. Jha, Desalination, 2019, 456, 85–96 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Y. He and X. Liu, Energy Convers. Manage., 2018, 173, 158–166 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jin, G. Lin, L. Bai, A. Zeiny and D. Wen, Nano Energy, 2016, 28, 397–406 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhu, J. Xu, W. Zhao and F. Huang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 31716–31721 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhao, Y. Shi, L. Pan and G. Yu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 1734–1743 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, W. Xu and X. Wang, Sci. China Mater., 2018, 61, 905–914 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chen, Y. He, X. Wang and Y. Hu, Appl. Energy, 2018, 211, 735–742 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gao, L. Zhu, C. K. N. Peh and G. W. Ho, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 841–864 RSC .
L. Zhu, M. Gao, C. K. N. Peh and G. W. Ho, Mater. Horizons, 2018, 5, 323–343 RSC .
L. Zhu, M. Gao, C. K. N. Peh and G. W. Ho, Nano Energy, 2019, 57, 507–518 CrossRef CAS .
J. U. Kim, S. Lee, S. J. Kang and T. Kim, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 21555–21574 RSC .
P. J. J. Alvarez, C. K. Chan, M. Elimelech, N. J. Halas and D. Villagrán, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 634–641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Kumaresan, P. Sudhakar, R. Santosh and R. Velraj, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 77, 1363–1374 CrossRef .
C. Tregambi, R. Chirone, F. Montagnaro, P. Salatino and R. Solimene, Sol. Energy, 2016, 129, 85–100 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhao, X. Zhou, Y. Shi, M. Alexander, S. Mendez and L. Qu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 489–496 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Shin, G. Kang, P. Gupta, S. Behera, H. Lee, A. M. Urbas, W. Park and K. Kim, Adv. Optical Mater., 2018, 6, 1800317 CrossRef .
M. Fan, S. You, J. Xia, W. Zheng, H. Zhang, H. Liang, X. Li and B. Li, Appl. Energy, 2018, 225, 769–781 CrossRef .
X. Han, L. Song, H. Xu and S. Ouyang, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2018, 3, 2515–2518 RSC .
R. W. Moss, P. Henshall, F. Arya, G. S. F. Shire, T. Hyde and P. C. Eames, Appl. Energy, 2018, 216, 588–601 CrossRef .
S. M. Stewart, J. Quant. Spectrosc. Radiat. Transfer, 2012, 113, 232–238 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, Y. Zhou, R. Li, X. Wang and G. Z. Chen, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 464, 716–724 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, J. Zhang, P. Wang, C. Li, X. Xu and Y. Jin, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 3854–3863 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Mallah, S. N. Kazi, M. Nashrul, M. Zubir and A. Badarudin, Appl. Energy, 2018, 229, 505–521 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yao, Z. Zheng and G. Yang, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 2876–2886 RSC .
Y. Wang, C. Wang, X. Song, S. K. Megarajan and H. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 963–971 RSC .
Y. Li, X. Cui, M. Zhao, Y. Xu, L. Chen, Z. Cao, S. Yang and Y. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 704–710 RSC .
S. Hong, Y. Shi, R. Li, C. Zhang, Y. Jin and P. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 28517–28524 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ishii, R. P. Sugavaneshwar, K. Chen, T. D. Dao and T. Nagao, Opt. Mater. Express, 2016, 6, 640 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhu, Y. Li, G. Chen, F. Jiang, Z. Yang, X. Luo, Y. Wang, S. D. Lacey, J. Dai, C. Wang, C. Jia, J. Wan, Y. Yao, A. Gong, B. Yang, Z. Yu, S. Das and L. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 1704107, 1–9 Search PubMed .
J. Fang, J. Liu, J. Gu, Q. Liu, W. Zhang, H. Su and D. Zhang, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 6217–6221 CrossRef CAS .
N. Xu, X. Hu, W. Xu, X. Li, L. Zhou, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606762 CrossRef .
F. Tao, Y. Zhang, K. Yin, S. Cao, X. Chang, Y. Lei, D. Wang, R. Fan, L. Dong, Y. Yin and X. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 35154–35163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Nistal, E. Garcia, D. Pérez-Coll, C. Prieto, M. Belmonte, M. I. Osendi and P. Miranzo, Carbon, 2018, 139, 556–563 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Deng, J. Zhou, L. Miao, C. Liu, Y. Peng, L. Sun and S. Tanemura, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 7691–7709 RSC .
I. Alessandri, M. Ferroni and L. E. Depero, Plasmonics, 2013, 8, 129–132 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liu, H. Cao and J. Xu, Sol. Energy, 2018, 170, 184–191 CrossRef CAS .
J. Mandal, D. Wang, A. C. Overvig, N. N. Shi and D. Paley, Adv. Mater., 2017, 1702156, 1–9 Search PubMed .
Y. Lin, Z. Chen, L. Fang, M. Meng and Z. Liu, Nanotechnology, 2019, 30, 015402 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Ge and Y. Yin, Nano Lett., 2018, 19, 400–407 Search PubMed .
C. L. L. Beicker, M. Amjad, E. P. Bandarra and D. Wen, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 188, 51–65 CrossRef CAS .
C. Campos, D. Vasco, C. Angulo, P. A. Burdiles and J. Cardemil, Energy Convers. Manage., 2019, 181, 247–257 CrossRef CAS .
H. D. Kiriarachchi, F. S. Awad, A. A. Hassan, J. A. Bobb, A. Lin and M. S. El-shall, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 18531–18539 RSC .
T. F. Chala, C. Wu, M. Chou and Z. Guo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 28955–28962 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ming, A. Guo, G. Wang and X. Wang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 185, 333–341 CrossRef CAS .
E. T. Ulset, P. Kosinski, Y. Zabednova, O. V. Zhdaneev, P. G. Struchalin and B. V. Balakin, Nano Energy, 2018, 50, 339–346 CrossRef CAS .
P. Tao, L. Shu, J. Zhang, C. Lee, Q. Ye, H. Guo and T. Deng, Prog. Nat. Sci.: Mater. Int., 2018, 28, 554–562 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Lu, Y. Yang, J. Feng and X. Wang, Sol. RRL, 2019, 3, 1800277 CrossRef .
H. Li, Y. He, Y. Hu and X. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 9362–9368 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Zeiny, H. Jin, G. Lin, P. Song and D. Wen, Renewable Energy, 2018, 122, 443–454 CrossRef CAS .
E. T. Ulset, P. Kosinski and B. V Balakin, Appl. Therm. Eng., 2018, 137, 62–65 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, Z. Chen, Y. Xie, J. Wang, J. W. Elam, W. Li and S. B. Darling, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 6, 1801252 CrossRef .
Z. Xiong, Y. Zhu, D. Qin, F. Chen and R. Yang, Small, 2018, 14, 1803387 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Li, Q. Fang, X. Xi, Y. Chen and F. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 586–593 RSC .
G. Wang, Y. Fu, A. Guo, T. Mei, J. Wang, J. Li and X. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 5629–5635 CrossRef CAS .
F. S. Awad, H. D. Kiriarachchi, K. M. Abouzeid and M. S. El-shall, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 976–985 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhu, M. Gao, C. K. N. Peh, X. Wang and G. W. Ho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702149 CrossRef .
X. Lin, J. Chen, Z. Yuan, M. Yang, G. Chen, D. Yu, M. Zhang, W. Hong and X. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 4642–4648 RSC .
Y. Shao, Z. Jiang, Y. Zhang, T. Wang, P. Zhao, Z. Zhang, J. Yuan and H. Wang, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 11704–11710 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Bin Yao, J. Ge, C. F. Wang, X. Wang, W. Hu, Z. J. Zheng, Y. Ni and S. H. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6692–6698 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Hong and X. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 4642–4648 RSC .
Y. Chen, Y. Shi, H. Kou, D. Liu, Y. Huang, Z. Chen and B. Zhang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 2911–2915 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yu, C. Ma, H. Zhu, C. Zhang, M. Zhu and D. Wu, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 191, 83–90 Search PubMed .
Y. Lin, W. Zhou, Y. Di, X. Zhang, L. Yang and Z. Gan, AIP Adv., 2019, 9, 055110 CrossRef .
X. Wang, Q. Liu, S. Wu, B. Xu and H. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 1807716, 1–9 Search PubMed .
J. Jia, W. Liang, H. Sun, Z. Zhu, C. Wang and A. Li, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 361, 999–1006 CrossRef CAS .
F. Liu, B. Zhao, W. Wu, H. Yang, Y. Ning, Y. Lai and R. Bradley, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1803266 CrossRef .
M. Gao, L. Zhu and W. H. Ghim, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800711 CrossRef .
H. Liu, C. Chen, H. Wen, R. Guo, N. A. Williams, B. Wang, F. Chen and L. Hu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 18839–18846 RSC .
Z. Wang, Z. M. Zhang, X. Quan and P. Cheng, Sol. Energy, 2018, 159, 329–336 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Q. Zheng and G. W. Yang, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 16396–16403 RSC .
J. Yao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 3869–3876 RSC .
Y. Zhang, L. Liu, K. Li, D. Hou and J. Wang, Chemosphere, 2018, 212, 554–562 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Ghim, Q. Jiang, S. Cao, S. Singamaneni and Y. Jun, Nano Energy, 2018, 53, 949–957 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, Y. Yang, L. Fu, M. Zou, Z. Li and A. Cao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1704505 CrossRef .
H. Geng, Q. Xu, M. Wu and H. Ma, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1512 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Fu, G. Wang, T. Mei, J. Li, J. Wang and X. Wang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 5, 4665–4671 CrossRef .
Y. Fu, G. Wang, X. Ming, X. Liu, B. Hou, T. Mei, J. Li, J. Wang and X. Wang, Carbon, 2018, 130, 250–256 CrossRef CAS .
P. Mu, Z. Zhang, W. Bai, J. He, H. Sun and Z. Zhu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1802158 CrossRef .
H. Zhou, J. Xu, X. Liu, H. Zhang, D. Wang, Z. Chen, D. Zhang and T. Fan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1705309 CrossRef .
X. Wu, G. Y. Chen, W. Zhang, X. Liu and H. Xu, Adv. Sustainable Syst., 2017, 1, 1700046 CrossRef .
P. Liu, L. Miao, Z. Deng, J. Zhou, H. Su and L. Sun, Mater. Today Energy, 2018, 8, 166–173 CrossRef .
P. Zhang, F. Liu, Q. Liao, H. Yao, H. Geng, H. Cheng and C. Li, Angew. Chem. Int., Ed., 2018, 57, 16343–16347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, W. Zhu, S. Shi and N. Hu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 16220–16227 RSC .
D. Weng, F. Xu, X. Li, Y. Li and J. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 24441–24451 RSC .
L. Tian, J. Luan, K. Liu, Q. Jiang, S. Tadepalli, M. K. Gupta, R. R. Naik and S. Singamaneni, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 609–616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Tao, Y. Zhang, B. Wang, F. Zhang, X. Chang and R. Fan, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 180, 34–45 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shi, R. Li, L. Shi, E. Ahmed, Y. Jin and P. Wang, Adv. Sustainable Syst., 2018, 2, 1700145 CrossRef .
L. Huang, J. Pei, H. Jiang and X. Hu, Desalination, 2018, 442, 1–7 CrossRef CAS .
F. Tao, Y. Zhang, K. Yin, S. Cao and X. Chang, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2018, 2, 2762–2769 RSC .
M. Chen, Y. Wu, W. Song, Y. Mo, X. Lin, Q. He and B. Guo, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 6186–6193 RSC .
Y. Li, T. Gao, Z. Yang, C. Chen, W. Luo, J. Song, E. Hitz, C. Jia, Y. Zhou, B. Liu, B. Yang and L. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700981 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Xu, X. Hu, S. Zhuang, Y. Wang, X. Li and L. Zhou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 1702884, 1–7 Search PubMed .
Z. Gan, Z. Chen, L. Liu, L. Zhang, W. Tu and Y. Liu, Sol. RRL, 2017, 1, 1600032 CrossRef .
P. Koumoutsakos, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 5744–5749 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Chen and L. Zhang, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2015, 27, 125401 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Zhang, P. Keblinski, J. Wang and B. Li, Phys. Rev. B, 2011, 83, 64303 CrossRef .
P. Tao, G. Ni, C. Song, W. Shang, J. Wu, J. Zhu, G. Chen and T. Deng, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 1031–1041 CrossRef .
P. Zhang, J. Li, L. Lv, Y. Zhao and L. Qu, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 5087–5093 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Shi, Y. Wang, L. Zhang and P. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 16212–16219 RSC .
Z. Liu, H. Song, D. Ji, C. Li, A. Cheney, Y. Liu, N. Zhang, X. Zeng, B. Chen, J. Gao, Y. Li, X. Liu, D. Aga, S. Jiang, Z. Yu and Q. Gan, Global Challenges, 2017, 1, 1600003 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Li, H. Liu, X. Zhao, G. Chen, J. Dai, G. Pastel, C. Jia, C. Chen, E. Hitz, D. Siddhartha, R. Yang and L. Hu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1707134 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, G. G. Gurzadyan, M. M. Umair, W. Wang and R. Lu, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 344, 402–409 CrossRef CAS .
F. Yi, H. Ren and Z. Liu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2016–2024 RSC .
M. Q. Yang, L. Shen, Y. Lu, S. W. Chee, X. Lu, X. Chi, Z. Chen, Q. H. Xu, U. Mirsaidov and G. W. Ho, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 3077–3081 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Q. Yang, M. Gao, M. Hong and G. W. Ho, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1802894 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Mao, Y. Li, J. Hou, M. Zeng and X. Zhao, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 174–175, 496–503 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Gan, X. Wu, M. Meng, X. Zhu, L. Yang and P. K. Chu, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 9304–9310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, S. Cai, E. Yu, B. Weng, X. Chen and J. Chen, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 233, 260–271 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hu, H. Wang, F. Dong and Z. Wu, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 204, 584–592 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lu, Q. Zhou, Y. Ouyang, Y. Guo, Q. Li and J. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3405 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Pan, Y. Lin, Z. Gan, X. Luo, W. Zhou and N. Zhang, J. Appl. Phys., 2018, 123, 115115 CrossRef .
M. L. Brongersma, N. J. Halas and P. Nordlander, Nat. Publ. Gr., 2015, 10, 25–34 CAS .
B. Hejda and K. Kral, Phys. Rev. B, 1993, 47, 15554–15561 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, X. Wen, H. Xia, R. Sheng, Q. Ma, J. Kim, P. Tapping, T. Harada, T. W. Kee, F. Huang, Y. Cheng, M. Green, A. Ho-baillie, S. Huang, S. Shrestha, R. Patterson and G. Conibeer, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14120 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wu, M. Edward, J. Leslie, J. Sorupia and B. Shao, Nano Energy, 2019, 56, 708–715 CrossRef CAS .
G. Ni, S. H. Zandavi, S. M. Javid, S. V. Boriskina, T. A. Cooper and G. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1510–1519 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:
Yawen Lin	Yawen Lin is currently a second-year graduate student at the School of Physics and Technology of Nanjing Normal University. She received her bachelor's degree in Engineering from Nanjing Normal University in 2017. Her research focuses on the rational design and application of photothermal nanomaterials to achieve sustainable-solar energy-driven clean water production.
Hao Xu	Hao Xu obtained his B.S. in Applied Physics in 2010 from Northeastern University, China. He then studied as a master's student in micro- and solid-state electronics in Nanjing University, with an emphasis on the GaN ultraviolet detector. He obtained his Ph.D. degree in Biological Physics from the Royal Institute of Technology (KTH), Sweden (2016). He is currently working at KTH as a researcher and his research interests involve the optoelectronic properties of nanomaterials, bioimaging and computational image analysis.
Xiaoli Shan	Xiaoli Shan is currently a first-year graduate student at the School of Physical Science and Technology of Nanjing Normal University. She received her bachelor's degree in Engineering from Sanjiang University in 2018. Her research focuses on photocatalytic materials and the design of photothermal nanomaterials to achieve sustainable-solar energy-driven clean water production.
Yunsong Di	Yunsong Di obtained his B.S. in Physics in 2000 from Nanjing Normal University, China, and then he was assigned to work as an assistant at his alma mater after graduation. From 2003, he studied as a master's and Ph.D. student in nanoelectronics and devices at Southeast University, with an emphasis on electronic emission and detection, and he received his Ph.D. degree in 2009. His primary research interests include electron transportation, surface plasmon and photoelectric detection of novel nanomaterials and nanostructures, such as carbon-based nanomaterials and perovskites.
Aiqing Zhao	Aiqing Zhao received her bachelor's degree from Sanjiang University in 2018. She is currently a master's degree candidate at the School of Physics and Technology of Nanjing Normal University. Her current research focuses on the design and synthesis of low-dimensional perovskite nanostructures, as well as their applications.
Yujing Hu	Yujing Hu is currently a second-year graduate student at the School of Physics and Technology of Nanjing Normal University. She received her bachelor's degree in Engineering from Lvliang University in 2017. Her research focuses on the developments of nanomaterials for the improved photoelectric conversion efficiency of solar cells.
Zhixing Gan	Zhixing Gan obtained his B.S. in Applied Physics in 2010 from Northeastern University, China, and then received his Ph.D. degree at Nanjing University in 2015. He subsequently joined the School of Physical Science and Technology, Nanjing Normal University, as a principal investigator. His primary research interests include the photothermal effect and photoluminescence of novel nanomaterials, such as carbon nanomaterials, graphene, 2D materials, and perovskites.

 	Fig. 1  Three key factors for the design of SSG: photothermal effect, water supply & steam escape, and thermal management.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic of the simulated plasmonic-nanoparticle-coated foils. The scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image in the left inset shows Cu NPs comprised of smaller features. The scale bar represents a length of 50 nm. The right inset shows a single simulated spherical nanoparticle as a cluster of 20 nm spheres, ref. 55; copyright 2017, Wiley. (b) Schematic illustration of the water evaporation applications of the WO2.9 nanorods, ref. 9; copyright 2018, Wiley. (c) The schematic illustration of SSG based on carbon sponge (CS), ref. 74; copyright 2018, Wiley. (d) Schematic illustration of SSG based on polymers, ref. 82; copyright 2019, Wiley. (e) Schematic of the experimental setup of SnSe for solar-driven water evaporation, ref. 42; copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) The typical microstructures of porous structures for water treatment, ref. 93; copyright 2019, Springer Nature. (b) Transpiration of trees (left) and mimetic transpiration system (right) under one-sun solar illumination for solar steam generation, ref. 99; copyright 2018, Elsevier. (c) Digital photograph of the pure poly(vinylidene fluoride) membrane (PVDFM) (left) and 12 mg-CuS/PVDFM (right), ref. 50; copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 




 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of SSG based on the 3D-printed evaporator. The magnified image shows the SEM images of the graphene oxide/nanofibrillated cellulose (GO/NFC) layer. The hydrophilic structure enables the rapid transport of water from the bulk to the evaporative surface/interface. The porous mesh-like structure contributes to fast water transport inside its interconnected microchannels, ref. 109; copyright 2017, Wiley. (b) Schematic of the CuFeSe2 NP-decorated wood membrane for efficient SSG. The magnified image shows the mesostructure of the black wood, which contains many steam escaping channels in the wood, ref. 86; copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Schematic illustration of a Janus absorber for SSG and desalination. The magnified image shows the structures with both hydrophilic and hydrophobic features, ref. 110; copyright 2018, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Simulated temperature distributions of a single Au NP with or without a carbon shell at the same heating power, ref. 111; copyright 2017, Wiley. (b) Schematic diagrams of carbon sponge (CS) in various configurations and infrared images after 30 min of light irradiation (sinking; suspending; floating), ref. 74; copyright 2018, Wiley. (c) The temperature changes of corresponding samples before and after solar illumination (1 sun) monitored by IR camera, ref. 72; copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (d) Thermal images taken during SSG for carbonized kelp, ref. 81; copyright 2019, Author(s). This article is distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY) license.	 

Thermal conduction	Prevent heat from being conducted downward	Use thermal insulation layer (expanded polystyrene foam, polypropylene membrane, wood, and so on) to localize the heat at the air–liquid interface rather than transferring it to the bulk water69,81,119
Convection	Heat the water of the same plane evenly	Keep the area of the surface of the nano-absorbers and the area of the surface of the heated water body as uniform as possible56,72,118
Irradiation	Minimize mid-infrared irradiation	Design electronic structure to acquire low mid-infrared irradiation to minimize thermal irradiation55,56

 	Fig. 6  (a–d) Cumulative mass change of water versus solar light irradiation time for various photothermal materials, (a) GBMCC, ref. 84; copyright 2018, Wiley. (b) HN/CNT, ref. 70; copyright 2018, Wiley. (c) BAPAC, ref. 83; copyright 2019, Elsevier. (d) TW-2PDA, ref. 98; copyright 2017, Wiley. (e–g) Bar graph of the concentration of Na+, K+, Ca2+, Mg2+ for various evaporation structures before and after desalination: (e) CuFeSe2 NPs, ref. 86; copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) Ti3C2 MXene membrane, ref. 18; copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) HN/CNT, ref. 70; copyright 2018, Wiley. (h) Concentrations of NaCl in five kinds of simulated seawater samples and the condensed clean water after solar energy-driven photothermal desalination by HN/CNT, ref. 70; copyright 2018, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Purification of heavy metal ions and volatile organics: organic and heavy metal ion rejection performance, ref. 18; copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Purification of dyes: photograph of the water before and after purification for 2 h, ref. 20; copyright 2018, Elsevier. (c) The bar graph illustrates the nitrate, sulphate and phosphate values of sewage and treated water, ref. 19; copyright 2019, Elsevier. (d) The purification of Gram-negative E. coli, ref. 70; copyright 2018, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Photograph and schematic of the interfacial-heating-based solar autoclave (total volume of 10.5 L). Lower panel: photographs of the bacterial map before and after steam sterilization, ref. 11. Copyright 2018, Wiley. (b) Schematic illustration of steam sterilization via interfacial evaporation, ref. 12. Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) and (b) The device diagram (a) and current/temperature–time curves (b) of the solar-thermal-electric energy conversion experiment under the sunlight (I = 3 sun), ref. 120. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (c) Hybrid concept for generating electricity from solar power: concentrated sunlight is stored and converted via photovoltaics (PV), thermoelectrics (TE), and mechanical engines (ME) to achieve 50% conversion efficiency. (d) Block diagram providing the details of the energy flow (in terms of yellow photons, red phonons, and blue electrons), specifically calculated for the PV/TE/ME hybrid system illustrated in (c), ref. 15. Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic diagram of a photo-heat-catalyst over P25-rGO, ref. 125; copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic diagram of a photo-heat-catalyst over P25/Fe3O4@SiO2, ref. 127; copyright 2016, Elsevier.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
