Nanostructured carbon-based electrodes: bridging the gap between thin-film lithium-ion batteries and electrochemical capacitors  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C0EE00642D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C0EE00642D
(Perspective)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1972-1985Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsNanostructured carbon-based electrodes: bridging the gap between thin-film lithium-ion batteries and electrochemical capacitors

        
          
            Seung Woo 
            Lee
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Betar M. 
            Gallant
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hye Ryung 
            Byon
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Paula T. 
            Hammond
          
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Yang 
            Shao-Horn
          
          
        
      *abc
aDepartment of Mechanical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA
bDepartment of Chemical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA
cDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA. E-mail: hammond@mit.edu; shaohorn@mit.edu
Received 
      9th November 2010
    , Accepted 22nd December 2010First published on 26th January 2011AbstractThe fast evolution of portable electronic devices and micro-electro-mechanical systems (MEMS) requires multi-functional microscale energy sources that have high power, high energy, long cycle life, and the adaptability to various substrates. Nanostructured thin-film lithium-ion batteries and electrochemical capacitors (ECs) are among the most promising energy storage devices that can meet these demands. This perspective presents an overview of recent progresses and challenges associated with the development of binder-free, carbon-based nanostructured electrodes prepared from layer-by-layer (LbL) electrostatic assembly, which provide enhanced gravimetric and volumetric energy for ECs and enhanced power capabilities for batteries. Based on promising findings for thin electrodes of several microns in thickness, LbL-based electrodes could also potentially be envisioned for portable electronics, electrified transportation, and load-leveling applications if successful scale-up to tens or hundreds of microns can be achieved.Seung Woo LeeDr Seung Woo Lee received his BS degree with highest honor in Chemical Engineering from Seoul National University and was awarded a Samsung Scholarship for his graduate studies. He obtained a PhD in Chemical engineering under the direction of Prof. Paula T. Hammond and Yang Shao-Horn at Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). His Ph.D. research has focused on designing high-energy and high-power density nanostructured electrodes for electrochemical energy storage, and catalysts for electrochemical energy conversion of small molecules such as O2 reduction. Currently he is conducting his postdoc research in the area of catalysis for solar energy storage with Prof. Daniel G. Nocera and Yang Shao- Horn at MIT.Betar M. GallantBetar Gallant is pursuing a Ph.D. in the Department of Mechanical Engineering at MIT under the direction of Prof. Yang Shao-Horn. She received her B.S. and M.S. Mechanical Engineering degrees in 2008 and 2010 from MIT. Her current research in the Electrochemical Energy Lab focuses on the synthesis, material characterization, and electrochemical studies of novel nanostructured electrode materials for lithium-ion batteries, lithium air batteries, electrochemical capacitors, and capacitive desalination systems.Hye Ryung ByonHye Ryung Byon is a postdoctoral researcher of Prof. Yang Shao-Horn's group (Electrochemical Energy Lab) in the Department of Mechanical Engineering and Materials Science and Engineering at MIT. She received her PhD in chemistry from the Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH, South Korea) working on biological and chemical applications of carbon nanotubes. During her postdoctoral studies, she has extended her expertise to develop noble carbon nanotube and graphene structures for applications of supercapacitors and proton exchange membrane fuel cells.Paula T. HammondPaula T. Hammond is Bayer Chair Professor of Chemical Engineering at MIT. She is an associate editor of ACS Nano. Her research and educational program emphasizes the use of molecular aspects in the study and development of new materials and processes. Its basis is the molecular design and synthesis of self-assembling polymeric systems and charged nano-objects, and the understanding and use of secondary interactions to guide their assembly at surfaces as well as in the bulk state. More recent applications investigate in her group include ultrathin film systems for micro-batteries and fuel cells, drug delivery, and cellular template for biomaterials.Yang Shao-HornYang Shao-Horn is Associate Professor of Mechanical Engineering and Materials Science and Engineering. She works with graduate students and postdocs on materials for electrochemical energy storage and conversion, which is centered on studying the influence of surface chemistry and electronic structures of thin films and nanomaterials on lithium reactivity and catalytic activity of small molecules of energy consequence, and applying fundamental understanding in reaction mechanisms to design new materials for lithium storage and electrocatalysis of small molecules such as oxygen reduction, water splitting, methanol oxidation and CO2 reduction.

Broader context
The application landscape for electrochemical energy storage technologies is set to expand rapidly over the next several decades as demand grows in new areas ranging from micro-devices to electrified transportation and clean energy storage and supply. Two excellent candidates for these applications are lithium-ion batteries, which can store high energy on a gravimetric and volumetric basis but have relatively low power, and electrochemical capacitors (ECs), which are ideal for high power applications but are limited for energy storage. As future applications will require both high energy and power, a major challenge will be to develop electrode materials that can bridge the performance gap within a single device. Recent developments of nanomaterials in lithium-ion batteries have increased the power performance by reducing lithium storage material dimensions down to the nanometre scale, which reduces the lithium diffusion time. Nanostructuring of electrode materials has increased the energy density of ECs by enabling higher charge storage through well-tuned subnanometer pores, or by utilization of high surface areas for Faradaic charge storage (pseudocapacitance). Currently, the excellent performance of nanostructured electrodes with thickness of a few microns can be integrated on Si chips or flexible plastic substrates, suggesting promising energy sources for portable electronic devices and micro-electro-mechanical systems (MEMS). If these nanostructured electrodes can be successfully scaled up to thicknesses of hundreds of microns without losing performance, they could be promising for incorporation into electric vehicles, heavy machinery, and load-leveling applications.

1. Introduction
1.1 The energy storage landscape
Energy storage technology is a critical link between energy supply and demand for systems ranging from microdevices to electric vehicles and the electrical grid. Research efforts to develop versatile, portable energy storage technology have mostly focused on two types of electrochemical devices: lithium-ion batteries1,2 and electrochemical capacitors (ECs, also referred to as supercapacitors).3,4Lithium-ion batteries exhibit very high gravimetric and volumetric energy densities (150 Wh/kgcell and 350 Wh/Lcell, respectively)1 among commercialized rechargeable batteries and have, therefore, become the dominant power source for consumer electronics and main contender for electric propulsion systems, where their relatively light weight and small form factor is desirable. On the other hand, ECs have much higher power capabilities (10 kW kg−1cell) but lower energy densities (5 Wh/kgcell) than lithium-ion batteries (1 kW kg−1cell),4 and have found commercial success in certain niche applications, where high power is essential, such as backup power supplies or load-leveling of heavy machinery.
Future applications for electrochemical energy storage will demand both high gravimetric energy and power. The power and energy tradeoff between commercialized lithium-ion batteries and ECs is illustrated in the Ragone plot of electrochemical energy storage devices (Fig. 1) alongside U.S. Department of Energy5 and U.S. Advanced Battery Consortium6 performance targets for hybrid-electric (HEVs) and plug-in hybrid-electric vehicles (PHEVs). To meet these goals, there is a need for devices that can span the performance gaps between existing technologies. Strategies include increasing the energy of ECs but at the expense of power output (∼10 Wh/kgcell at ∼1 kW kg−1cell)5 for improved HEV regenerative braking and power assist, and boosting the power capability of batteries (increasing the energy output at intermediate powers) to extend the range and performance of passenger cars (∼140–160 Wh/kgcell at ∼0.3 kW kg−1cell) and SUVs (∼80 Wh/kgcell at ∼0.75 kW kg−1cell).7 As the development of electric propulsion becomes increasingly attractive for environmental reasons, the availability of safe, long lasting, low cost and high-energy and -power density batteries could be the crucial enabling factor. In addition, the fast evolution of portable electronic devices suchc as solar watches and pocket flash cameras, micro-electro-mechanical systems (MEMS), and wireless sensor networks strongly demands microscale energy sources8,9 which have multi-functionality including high-power and -energy, long cycle life, compact size, flexibility, and the adaptability to various substrates. Moreover, the development of thin-film electrodes can allow the study of intrinsic material properties and charge storage mechanisms in the absence of significant transport losses that occur with conventional electrodes having much greater thicknesses, and can, therefore, help to understand how electrode structures influence the power and energy characteristics and identify promising electrode nanostructures to scale-up in thickness. Furthermore, high-density thin films upon to a few microns in thickness can be made without insulating binder, which can provide insights into understanding the influence of binder on electrochemical characteristics of electrodes and developing strategies and methods to make binder-free electrodes of tens or hundred of microns with high packing densities.
 Fig. 1  
Ragone plot showing device-level gravimetric energy and power densities of commercial lithium-ion batteries and electrochemical capacitors (ECs), and performance targets for hybrid-electric (HEVs) and plug-in hybrid-electric vehicles (PHEVs) from the U.S. Department of Energy and U.S. Advanced Battery Consortium.5–7 The shaded curves were obtained from ref. 4. 
1.2 Different storage mechanisms of lithium-ion batteries and ECs
The energy-power tradeoff between batteries and ECs can be understood in terms of the distinct mechanisms of charge storage occurring at the electrodes. Lithium-ion batteries store energy chemically in the bulk of active materials through lithium intercalation/de-intercalation between two host structures, as shown in Fig. 2a. Conventional lithium-ion batteries utilize lithium transition metal oxides (e.g.LiMO2, M = Co, Ni, Mn)1,2,10,11 or phosphate materials (e.g.LiFePO4)12,13 with expected capacities of 150–300 mAh/g for the positive electrode in the voltage range 3.5–4.5 V vs. Li. Graphite is commonly used for the negative electrode (theoretical capacity of 372 mAh/g at the potential ∼0.1 V vs. Li).10Lithium intercalation allows high utilization of active material mass (up to one lithium stored per transition metal) and, therefore, high gravimetric energies, but the rate capability (power) is limited ultimately by the solid-state diffusion of lithium, giving relatively lower gravimetric power than ECs. In contrast, ECs4 store charge on the surface of active materials through the formation of an electrical double layer capacitance or though Faradaic reactions (pseudocapacitance) near the surface, respectively, as shown in Fig. 2b. These processes are much faster compared to solid-state lithium diffusion, providing higher power capability than lithium-ion batteries. However, as they only utilize the surface of active materials, ECs have lower gravimetric energies. Activated carbon powders14–17 have been the most popular for EC electrodes owing to high surface area (1000–2000 m2 g−1) giving a specific capacitance in the range of 100–200 F/g,17 as well as widespread availability, low cost, good stability, and tunable properties such as morphology and degree of graphitization through treatment processes.14 The use of pseudocapacitive materials in ECs can increase the gravimetric energies by utilizing reversible redox reactions in the near-surface regions.18 For example, ruthenium oxides (RuO2) have been actively studied due to fast mixed proton/electron conducting properties, but high cost has limited the application for ECs.18 On the other hand, manganese oxides (MnO2)18,19 and electronically conducting redox polymers20 such as polyaniline21 have attracted attention as promising, low-cost electrode materials for ECs. In addition, a recent study of mesoporous films of iso-oriented α-MoO3 has showed the promising pseudocapacitive mechanism, which has lithium intercalation reaction into the iso-oriented layered crystalline domain but still maintains a similar reaction time scale as surface redox pseudocapacitance.22 Finally, the treatment of carbon using phosphomolybdic acid,23melamine and urea,24,25boron and nitrogen doping26 have introduced psuedocapacitance on the surface of carbons, showing enhanced energy density.
 Fig. 2  Schematic of charging and discharging processes in lithium-ion batteries and ECs. 
In addition to high power characteristics, ECs have a clear advantage over lithium-ion batteries in cycle life (hundreds of thousands or millions of cycles) with minimal capacity fade compared to only thousands of cycles for batteries.4 In lithium-ion batteries, lithium intercalation can cause structural changes of the active material,27–29 which may introduce strains30 and fracture within individual active particles, and ultimately capacity loss and shortened cycle life.31 This issue is exacerbated by high-power charging or discharging. In contrast, surface-constrained reactions in ECs do not impose such volumetric strains. Therefore, the most promising new electrode materials will combine not only high energy and power, but also retain the stability and cycling advantage of ECs.
1.3 Charge storage using nanostructured electrodes
Several unique characteristics of nanostructured electrodes make them ideal candidates for combining high energy and power at the material level. These advantages include: (i) increased electrochemically active surface areas for charge transfer, (ii) reduction of electronic and ionic transport resistance at smaller diffusion length scales, and (iii) the ability to incorporate high-energy materials into an outer nanostructured framework capable of sustaining high powers.4,32,33 Recent advancement of nanostructured electrodes32,33 has improved electrochemical performance significantly, providing combined performance of batteries and ECs. Reducing lithium storage material dimensions down to the nanometre scale32–37 can increase the power characteristics of lithium rechargeable batteries, where the time of lithium diffusion accompanying the Faradaic reactions of active particles is decreased. However, nanostructured battery electrodes34,38 still have lower power capability than EC electrodes. On the other hand, researchers have increased the gravimetric energy of ECs by utilizing carbon subnanometer pores for ion adsorption4,39 or employing the pseudocapacitance of nanostructured transition metal oxides.40,41 As there are several recent reviews,32,33,37 examining nanostructured electrodes for lithium-ion batteries, we here focus on nanostructured electrodes for ECs or high-power lithium battery applications, particularly binder-free thin films.
The advantages of nanomaterials are not fully realized when using conventional electrode synthesis techniques, in which an electrode slurry is prepared by mixing active particles and binder in solvent and coating the slurry on the metal foil current collector. The disadvantages of this process include the inability to control three-dimensional connectivity of active particles or tailor electrode porosity. In addition, conventional electrodes require polymer binder to hold particles together mechanically and ensure good electrical contact, however this binder is insulating, adds inactive mass, and can cover the surface of electrode materials, which decreases the electrochemically active surface area.
The development of nanostructured electrodes for micro-scale energy storage devices faces additional challenges. Conventional integration methods onto Si wafers for micro-capacitors or -batteries include doctor-blade or ink-jet techniques based on the mixture of carbon powder and polymer binder, which it is difficult to achieve thicknesses below 10 microns due to the large particle sizes of activated carbons. However, advanced devices demand precise control of thickness on the nanometre scale, conformal uniform coating, and adaptability on various chips including glass and flexible polymer substrates. In this perspective, we focus on recent advances in binder-free, carbon-based, nanostructured, thin-film electrodes for EC applications. Not only can these electrodes provide a power boost to thin-film and micro-scale energy storage devices, but they also offer an opportunity to demonstrate how charge storage mechanisms, electrode energy and power characteristic can be influenced by the architecture and chemistry of nanostructured materials.
2. Binder-free nanostructured carbon electrodes for ECs
Binder-free, nanostructrured electrodes can be prepared by spray,42 Meyer rod,43chemical vapor deposition (CVD),8,44–46contact printing,47electrophoretic deposition,48 and layer-by-layer (LbL) assembly.49,50 Vertically-aligned single-walled carbon nanotube (V-SWNT) film grown from a water-assisted CVD44 and multi-walled carbon nanotube (MWNT) film from a thermal CVD process46 can have packing densities in the range from 0.03 to 0.57 g cm−344 and thicknesses up to 500 microns, which have shown volumetric capacitance up to ∼46 F/cm3 in organic electrolyte. However, these processes involve high-temperature or corrosive treatments, which might limit the selection of substrates and manufacturing routes to fabricate micro-devices. Continuous carbon films with thicknesses ranging from 1 to 200 microns can be also made from etching carbide-derived carbons (CDCs) at temperatures as low as 250 °C,8,51 which have shown high volumetric capacitance of ∼180 F/cm3 in organic electrolyte. Recently, thin films of SWNT have been prepared by spray using an air-brush pistol42 and Meyer rod coating43 on polyethylene-therephthalate (PET) and paper substrates, which are not exposed to high temperatures. These thin-film electrodes (0.1–15 microns) have a high packing density (0.7–1.0 g cm−3) and show high specific (∼200 F/g) and volumetric (∼200 F/cm3 for an electrode thickness of 720 nm) capacitances in aqueous solution. In this perspective, we focus on binder-free nanostructured carbon-based electrodes prepared by LbL assembly, where their microstructure, surface chemistry and electrochemical characteristics are discussed in detail.
3. LbL-assembled carbon-based nanostructured electrodes
3.1 
          LbL assembly principle
The LbL assembly process52 is a thin-film formation technique based on the alternating adsorption of positively- and negatively-charged species onto a substrate under ambient, aqueous conditions. Unlike Langmuir–Blodgett techniques based on the assembly of surface-active materials on a trough, the electrostatic LbL assembly process requires no specialized equipment, is highly stable and can be used to generate films under room temperature conditions. Thin film characteristics such as thickness, electrical conductivity, and mechanical integrity can be controlled by adsorption conditions such as solution pH53 and salt content, and post-treatments including heat treatments,49,54,55 chemical covalent cross-linking56 and exposure to different pH conditions.57 The resulting LbL films are typically pin-hole free, and can be conformally coated on a variety of substrates. Processing of LbL films is environmentally friendly, versatile, inexpensive, and offers potential for scalability as it utilizes very simple water-based dip-, roll-, and spray-coating processes to create the desired thin-film electrodes. In addition, a key advantage of the LbL process is that it can be adapted to incorporate a wide variety of active material chemistries and morphologies, such as organic and inorganic nanostructures and functional polymers.58–60 These advantages make LbL multilayer films promising electrode materials for use in batteries, ECs, fuel cells, solar cells, and sensors. Moreover, the LbL process enables assembly of extremely thin film (<300 nm) electrodes or solid electrolytes, which is ideal for characterizing the intrinsic capacitance and other performance characteristics of a nanostructured material, and for studying the effects of increasing electrode thickness for real applications.
Another promising advantage of the LbL technique is the ability to control redox processes for charge storage at the interface between the electrodes and electrolytes. For instance, the use of charged nanomaterials for LbL self-assembly allows incorporation of organic and inorganic surface-functionalized materials whose chemical groups can interact with and store ions, while the high specific surface areas of such materials can contribute high double layer capacitance. Furthermore, these nano-objects, which include polymers and inorganic materials, are highly interpenetrated in the LbL films; the resulting thin films are essentially nanoscale blends that allow the maximization of interface area between electrode elements without phase separation. LbL also enables the systematic control of film porosity using known porous transitions57,61,62 or the controlled assembly of irregular nanostructures, which is critical to allow electrolyte access to enhance electrochemically active surface area for high-power charge storage.
Our recent work on the design of nanostructured electrodes involves the introduction of surface charge onto nano-carbons via surface functionalization, and incorporation of these functionalized nano-carbons into assembled structures utilizing the electrostatically-driven LbL process.49,54,63 In particular, we utilize MWNTs and graphene, which are promising for batteries and ECs due to their high specific surface area, high electrical conductivity, and chemical and mechanical stability. Functionalized MWNTs (MWNT-COO− and MWNT-NH3+)49 and graphene oxide (GO, negative surface charge)54 exhibit pH dependent zeta potential and degree of ionization, and can therefore be treated like weak polyelectrolytes. Consequently, functionalized nano-carbons can be directly incorporated into LbL multilayer films by electrostatic interactions (Fig. 3). All-carbon electrodes assembled by LbL include (1) LbL-MWNT electrodes, obtained via sequential adsorption of MWNT-NH3+ and MWNT-COO− dispersions,49 and (2) LbL-MWNT/Graphene electrodes, obtained from alternative dipping of MWNT-NH3+ and negatively charged GO54via a modified Carl Zeiss DS50 programmable slide stainer with customizable dipping time and cycle number. The thickness and morphology of the LbL films can be controlled by adjusting the assembly pH conditions. Importantly, the use of surface-modified materials enables stable aqueous dispersions that are free of aggregates. This addresses a major challenge associated with processing of MWNTs and graphene, which have the tendency to aggregate into ropes or bundles owing to strong van der Waals attractions.49,54 As-assembled LbL-MWNT electrodes can be heat-treated in vacuum sequentially at temperatures such as 150 °C and in H2 at temperatures such as 300 °C to increase mechanical stability and electrical conductivity.49Hydrazine vapor54 can be used to reduce GO to graphene, and increase electrical conductivity and mechanical stability of the electrodes. These electrodes have high electrical conductivity over ∼10 S cm−1 after the post-treatments.49,54 Unlike composite electrodes which require insulating binder materials and other additives to improve the mechanical integrity of electrodes, LbL electrodes exhibit good mechanical strength through chemical cross-linking during the heat-treatment process,49 obviating the need for binder or other additives.
 Fig. 3  Schematic of layer-by-layer assembly of functionalized MWNTs. Modified from ref. 49. 
These LbL all-carbon electrodes can work as nano-frameworks capable of incorporating materials that can undergo surface Faradaic reactions such as oxygen functional groups and nano-scale metal oxides, both of which can increase the energy and power densities of ECs. In this paper, we discuss the utilization of Faradaic reactions of surface functional groups on LbL all-carbon electrodes in lithium cells, and tailored incorporation of MnO2 and RuO2 into the nanostructured network to boost pseudocapacitance for proton storage in aqueous electrolytes (shown in Fig. 4).
 Fig. 4  Schematic showing incorporation of Faradaic reactions from oxygen- and nitrogen-containing functional groups, manganese oxides, and ruthenium oxides on carbon-based nanostructured electrodes. 
3.2. Physical characteristics of LbL electrodes

Fig. 5 shows examples of LbL-assembled MWNT (LbL-MWNT) electrodes prepared on various substrates including Si wafers and flexible polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) substrate by sequential adsorption of positively (MWNT-NH3+) and negatively (MWNT-COO−) charged MWNT dispersions (Fig. 3).49,50 The electrode thickness increases linearly with the number of dipping cycles (bilayers), showing that thickness could be precisely controlled from several nanometres to several microns. Since the energy storage capacity is exactly proportional to the thickness of electrodes for a confined footprint area, controlling thickness at the nanometre scale can enable the pinpoint controllability of capacity, which is potentially important for micro-scale energy storage. In addition, ultrathin LbL-MWNT electrodes below 100 nm still showed transparency on glass or ITO coated glass substrates, which could be useful for photovoltaic conversion and storage devices. More importantly, LbL-MWNT films can maintain conformal coatings even on a highly bent PDMS substrate, which could serve as a promising electrode for flexible energy storage devices such as e-books and smart cards.
 Fig. 5  Images of LbL-MWNT electrodes on (a) Si wafers and (b) polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) substrates. Number on image indicates the number of bilayer (n) in (MWNT-NH3+/MWNT-COO−)n. Thickness of the LbL-MWNT electrodes as a function of the number of bilayers is shown in the inset, showing a linear relationship for LbL-MWNT electrodes with thicknesses from 20 nm to 3 μm. Error bars show the standard deviation of the thickness, computed from three samples for each thickness. Thickness data adapted from ref. 50. 
The LbL process yields electrodes with highly desirable microstructure for charge storage, including well-developed pores, high electrochemically active surface area, and good electronic interconnectivity of carbon nanostructures. There are clear morphological differences between LbL all-carbon electrodes (Fig. 6) and composite electrodes (20 wt% polyvinylidene fluoride (PVdF) and 80 wt% pristine MWNT) synthesized via the doctor-blade method. The composite electrode of pristine MWNTs showed partial aggregation and local alignment of MWNTs because of strong van der Waals interactions among MWNTs (Fig. 6a), and a low packing density under 0.45 g cm−3. On the other hand, LbL-MWNT electrodes exhibited a closely packed, randomly oriented network structure (Fig. 6b) and interconnected nano-pores within the MWNT matrix (Fig. 6b inset) while LbL-MWNT/Graphene electrode showed interconnected structure in which MWNTs act as pillars for separating graphene sheets (Fig. 6c and Fig.6c inset54), providing fast ion diffusion channels. Moreover, Fig. 6d shows a representative cross-sectional SEM image of an LbL-MWNT electrode on ITO coated glass, indicating that thickness is uniform and the coating is conformal on the substrate. In these LbL all-carbon electrodes, the striking morphological differences compared to composite electrodes can be attributed to: (1) prevention of precipitation and agglomeration of nano-carbons in dispersion owing to charge repulsion, and (2) electrostatic cross-linking between oppositely-charged nano-carbons during LbL assembly, which can create a randomly oriented network structure and prevent alignment to yield an attractive electrode structure for charge storage. Furthermore, LbL all carbon electrodes can have higher electrode densities (∼0.83 g cm−3 for LbL-MWNT49,50 and ∼0.92 g cm−3 for LbL-MWNT/graphene54) compared to conventional composite electrode64 and vertically oriented carbon nanotubes (0.5∼0.6 g cm−3),44,45 which is important to achieve high volumetric energy densities.
 Fig. 6  Microstructure of composite electrode with pristine MWNT and LbL all-carbon electrodes. (a) Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of composite electrode (20 wt% PVdF and 80 wt% pristine MWNT). SEM top view and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) (inset) images of (b) LbL-MWNT and (c) LbL-MWNT/graphene electrodes. (d) Cross-sectional image of LbL-MWNT on ITO coated glass. LbL all-carbon electrodes include (1) LbL-MWNT electrodes, obtained via sequential adsorption of MWNT-NH3+ and MWNT-COO− dispersions, and (2) LbL-MWNT/graphene electrodes, obtained from alternative dipping of MWNT-NH3+ and negatively charged GO and continuous chemical reduction of GO to graphene. As-assembled LbL-MWNT electrodes were heat-treated sequentially at 150 °C in vacuum for 12 h and at 300 °C in H2 for 2 h to increase mechanical stability and electrical conductivity. Hydrazine vapor was used to reduce GO to graphene, and electrical conductivity and mechanical stability of the electrodes increased after the reduction step. Both LbL all-carbon electrodes showed high packing density (∼0.83 g cm−3 for LbL-MWNT49,50 and ∼0.92 g cm−3 for LbL-MWNT/graphene54), and high electrical conductivity over ∼10 S cm−1 after heat-treatments and chemical reduction steps, respectively. 
3.3 Charge storage mechanisms and electrochemical performance of LbL carbon-based electrodes

3.3.1 
            Lithium
            storage on oxygen and nitrogen functional groups. 
One promising approach for improving the capacitances of carbon-based electrodes is to incorporate fast Faradaic reactions (pseudocapacitance) on the electrically conductive carbon framework (Fig. 4). Oxygen- and nitrogen-containing functional groups on carbons can act as pseudocapacitive charge storage mechanisms in aqueous electrolytes. Recently, Bandosz and co-workers24,25 have shown that the specific capacitance of activated carbon can be increased to ∼300 F/g in 1 M H2SO4 by incorporating oxygen and nitrogen functional groups such as quinine oxygens and quaternary- and pyridinic-nitrogens on the surface of carbon. We show that Faradaic reactions occur on the LbL-MWNT electrode surfaces in a lithium cell, where the available potential range of nonaqueous electrolyte is much wider (∼4.5 V of nonaqueous electrolytes) compared to ∼1 V of aqueous electrolytes, enabling much higher energy density.50

LbL all-carbon electrodes from functionalized MWNTs contain significant amounts of oxygen- and nitrogen-containing surface groups. Surface chemistry of pristine MWNT and LbL all-carbon electrodes can be revealed viaX-ray photoemission spectroscopy (XPS) analysis (Fig. 7).49,54 A wide scan survey showed that the atomic compositions of LbL all-carbon electrodes are 85.7% carbon, 10.6% oxygen, and 3.7% nitrogen for the LbL-MWNT electrode, and 85.9% carbon, 8.6% oxygen, and 5.6% nitrogen for the LbL-MWNT/Graphene electrode.49,54 Characteristic C 1s peaks of LbL all–carbon electrodes were assigned to sp2 (284.5 eV) and sp3 (285.2 eV) hybridized carbon,65carbon atoms in C–N or C–O (285.9 ± 0.1 eV),65,66carbonyl CO groups (286.7 ± 0.1 eV),65,67 and amide N–CO or carboxylic COOR groups (288.2 ± 0.2 eV).66
 Fig. 7  
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) spectra of pristine MWNT and LbL all-carbon electrodes. (a) Wide scan survey, (b) C1s spectra of LbL-MWNT and LbL-MWNT/graphene electrodes. XPS data adapted from ref. 49,50 and 54. 
The surface oxygen and nitrogen functional groups on LbL all-carbon electrodes are the origin of the high gravimetric capacitance observed in lithium cells. The role of these surface functional groups can be revealed clearly from potential-dependent cyclic voltammetry (CV) measurements in lithium cells (Fig. 8). In the voltage range from 3 to ∼4.2 V vs.Li, corresponding to the aqueous electrolyte range of 0 to ∼1.2 V vs.Standard Hydrogen Electrode (SHE), PVdF/pristine MWNT composite electrode have much smaller gravimetric capacitance of ∼30 F/g (at 3.5 V) compared to ∼60 F/g (at 3.5 V) for PVdF/MWNT-COOH, ∼120 F/g (at 3.5 V) for LbL-MWNT and ∼75 F/g (at 3.5 V) for LbL-MWNT/Graphene electrodes. This difference between LbL all-carbon electrodes and composite electrodes comes from (1) better utilization of the electrochemically active surface area within the LbL-assembled carbon network, as suggested from of the comparison of film microstructures (Fig. 6), and (2) partial utilization of redox reactions centered around 3 V vs. Li on functionalized carbon. Extending the lower potential limit to 1.5 V vs. Li allows full utilization of surface functional groups for charge storage on LbL all-carbon electrodes, resulting in a significant increase in the gravimetric capacitance to ∼250 F/g (at 3.5 V) of LbL-MWNT and ∼120 F/g (at 3.5 V) of LbL-MWNT/Graphene electrodes. A characteristic reversible Faradaic peak at ∼3 V vs. Li of these electrodes (more noticeable for LbL-MWNT/Graphene) can be assigned primarily to CO + Li+ + e− ↔ C–OLi, which is analgous to the charge storage mechanisms previously reported for aromatic carbonyl derivatives such as such as poly(2,5-dihydroxy-1,4-benzoquinone-3,6-methylene),68Li2C6O6,69 and oxidized MWNTs.70 In addition, it is speculated that various oxygen and nitrogen functional groups (Fig. 7b) on LbL all-carbon electrodes can be reduced by Li+ from 1.5 to 3.5 V vs. Li and could involve multiple surface redox reactions giving rise to broad redox peaks over a wide potential window instead of sharp characteristic redox peaks. The hypothesis is supported by the fact that PVdF/pristine MWNT composite electrode showed only a negligible increase in gravimetric capacitance from ∼30 to ∼35 F/g (at 3.5 V) upon extending the potential window from 3 to 1.5 V (Fig. 8). This is in agreement with utilization of only double layer capacitance, which further emphasizes the role of surface functional groups for high gravimetric capacitance of LbL all-carbon electrodes.
 Fig. 8  Potential-dependent cyclic voltammograms of (a) PVdF/pristine MWNT composite electrodes, (b) PVdF/MWNT-COOH composite electrodes, (c) LbL-MWNT, and (d) LbL-MWNT/Graphene electrodes measured on ITO-coated glasses in two-electrodelithium cells with 1 M LiPF6 in a mixture of ethylene carbonate and dimethyl carbonate (volume ratio 3:7). The composite electrodes consisted of 20 wt% PVdF and 80 wt% MWNT. The thicknesses of the LbL-MWNT and LbL-MWNT/Graphene electrodes were 0.3 μm and 1.3 μm, respectively. Figs. 8 (b) and (c) data adapted from ref. 50. 

LbL all-carbon electrodes show remarkable rate capabilities from galvanostatic charge/discharge measurements (Fig. 9). At low discharge rates (∼0.1 A g−1), the capacity of LbL-MWNT electrodes (∼1.5 μm) was ∼200 mAh/g (∼160 mAh/cm3), and that of LbL-MWNT/Graphene electrodes (∼1.3 μm) was ∼120 mAh/g (∼110 mAh/cm3), which is comparable to the expected capacities (∼227 mAh/g for LbL-MWNT and ∼184 mAh/g for LbL-MWNT/Graphene) by assuming full utilization of oxygen functional groups for one electron transfer Faradaic reactions. Fig. 9c compares volumetric capacities of LbL all-carbon electrodes as a function of volumetric discharge rate, showing retention of more than half of their capacities when discharge rates increase over two order magnitudes from 0.07 A cm−3 to 10 A cm−3. It is interesting that even though the LbL-MWNT/Graphene electrode showed lower capacity, it exhibited better capacity retention compared to LbL-MWNT with increasing discharge rates. We hypothesize that Faradaic reactions on surface functional groups can be fully utilized at low current densities, but the contribution of Faradaic reactions decreases as current increases due to the faster kinetics of double layer capacitance compared to Faradaic reactions. Therefore LbL-MWNT electrodes, having more Faradaic reactions due to higher oxygen content, can have higher capacity at low rates, but decrease faster than LbL- MWNT/Graphene (Fig. 9d). Finally, LbL-MWNT electrodes showed no capacity loss up 2,500 cycles, suggesting very good cycle stability of surface Faradaic reactions and no structural change of the nanostructured electrode in a lithium cell.50
 Fig. 9  Charge and discharge profiles of an (a) LbL-MWNT and (b) LbL-MWNT/Graphene electrodes obtained over a wide range of gravimetric current densities between 1.5 and 4.5 V vs. Li. Before each charge and discharge measurement for the data in Fig. 9 (a) and (b), cells were held at 1.5 and 4.5 V for 30 min, respectively. (c) Volumetric discharge capacity vs. volumetric current for the electrodes in Fig. 9 (a) and (b). (d) Schematic of the energy storage mechanism on an TEM image of the LbL-MWNT electrode. White arrows indicate conduction channels of electrons though graphite layers. Data of Fig. 9 (a) adapted from ref. 50 and TEM image of 9 (d) was modified from ref. 50. 


3.3.2 
            Proton
            storage in nano-scale metal oxides on LbL-MWNT electrodes. 
Incorporating nano-scale pseudocapacitive metal oxides into the carbon matrix has been investigated as a promising strategy to improve both energy and power densities of energy storage devices.4 These carbon matrix/metal-oxide nanocomposite electrodes have been demonstrated with various kinds of carbons including nanotubes,71–75carbon nanofoam,41,76 and activated carbon,77,78 showing significant increase in performance compared to pure carbon electrodes.14 The charge storage mechanism is reversible oxidation and reduction of metal oxides with protons and electrolyte cations such as K+ and Na+ (eqn (1)).4,19 Practical specific capacitances of RuO2 and MnO2 in aqueous electrolytes are ∼1360 F/g18 and ∼1370 F/g79 based on redox reactions associate with metal ions, respectively. However, high capacitance is only available for nano-sized particles and/or nanometre scale ultrathin films4,18 because pseudocapacitive reactions are confined to the surface hydrated layer with a thickness of only several nanometres. In addition, low electrical conductivity (10−5∼10−6 S cm−1)19 of MnO2 can become rate-limiting for high power applications. Consequently, maximizing the utilization of MO2 pseudocapacity and designing highly electrically conductive electrode microstructure is critical to enhance the performance of metal-oxide-based ECs. For example, in EC applications, a nano-sized RuO2/activated carbon composite obtained capacitance of over 850 F/gRuO2,40 while MnO2/template mesoporous carbon exhibited ∼600 F/gMnO2.80 The key challenges with these composite electrodes are uniformity of coating of nano-sized metal oxides onto the carbon matrix, achieving full utilization of metal oxides, and development of an inter-connected 3D porous network structure. With optimized nano-composite structures, it is possible to fully utilize both high energy density of metal oxides and high power density of the carbon matrix. MO2 + xC+ + xe− ↔ MOOCx(1)Where, M= Ru, Mn, etc. and C = H+, Na+, K+, etc.
We have recently incorporated nano-scale MnO2 coating on LbL-MWNT electrodes using an electroless redox deposition,81 in which the loading of MnO2 can be controlled by dipping time of the electrodes in permangate ion solution. Fig. 10a and 10b show SEM and TEM images after 60 min dipping, which clearly shows nano-scale conformal coating of MnO2 on the surface of MWNT. These LbL-MWNT/MnO2 electrodes showed high volumetric capacitance of ∼246 F/cm3 in mild neutral electrolyte (0.1 M K2SO4) and excellent capacity retention up to fast scan rate of 1000 mV s−1 owing to the optimized nanostructure for fast ion and electron transportation.81
 Fig. 10  (a) SEM and (b) TEM images of LbL-MWNT/MnO2 electrodes prepared by dipping LbL-MWNT electrode into 0.1 M KMnO4/0.1 M K2SO4 solution for 60 min. (c) A representative low-magnification TEM image of RuO2 nanoparticles within the LbL-MWNT electrode after potential 400 depositions. Potential and time scale of square-wave potential cycles is overlaid. (d) Histogram and high-magnification TEM image (inset) of RuO2 nanoparticles within the LbL-MWNT film electrode after 400 potential depositions. Number-averaged diameter (dn) and standard deviation of RuO2 nanoparticles is indicated. At least 100 randomly selected nanoparticles were counted to present the histogram and dn. For the square-wave potential deposition, the LbL-MWNT electrodes were subjected to a potential deposition cycles with lower potential (−0.10 V vs. Standard Calomel Electrode (SCE) stayed for 0.02 s) and higher potential (1.10 V vs.SCE stayed for 3 s) in 50 mM RuCl3 + 0.1 M HClO4 solutions. The thicknesses of the LbL-MWNT/MnO2 and LbL-MWNT/RuO2 electrodes were 240 nm and 140 nm, respectively. 

LbL
            carbon electrodes can also serve as a matrix for hydrous RuO2 nanoparticles, obtained by a square-wave potential electrochemical deposition method. Using this technique, we systematically incorporate uniformly- distributed nano-size RuO2 into LbL-WMNT electrodes. For LbL-MWNT electrodes, square-wave potential deposition enables the reduction of metal precursors during a very short time period (∼0.02 s), thus allowing the formation of nano-size metal clusters without large aggregation at low potential (−0.10 V vs.SCE). On the other hand, at high potential (1.10 V vs.SCE), reduced metal nanoparticles are oxidized and metal precursors can simultaneously diffuse into the porous LbL-MWNT film electrode. Longer oxidation time (∼3 s) at high potential allows the metal ion to completely diffuse into the electrode, and also can prevent localized reduction on the surface of the LbL-MWNT thin film. By repeating these square-wave potential cycles, nano-sized RuO2 can be formed uniformly within the LbL-MWNT electrode. Fig. 10c shows representative low and high magnification TEM images and core size distribution of RuO2 nanoparticles within the LbL-MWNT electrodes after 400 square-wave potential depositions. The prepared RuO2 particles were uniformly distributed within the LbL-MWNT framework as shown in the low magnification TEM image. Moreover, the diameter size histogram (Fig. 10d) of RuO2 nanoparticles showed very narrow core size distribution in the LbL-MWNT electrode, which is 1.7 ± 0.3 nm.
The LbL-MWNT/RuO2 electrodes show high volumetric capacitance and the excellent rate capability, which can be attributed to full utilization of pseudocapacitance of nano-size RuO2 and the inter-connected 3D porous network structure. Representative CV data of LbL-MWNT/RuO2 electrodes are shown in Fig. 11. The LbL-MWNT framework with the thickness of 130 nm shows a volumetric current of ∼5 A cm−3 based on mostly electrical double layer capacitance16 of MWNTs and Faradaic redox reactions with surface functional groups.14,49 Volumetric currents of the LbL-MWNT/RuO2 electrodes increased with electropulse deposition cycle numbers owing to the increased pseudocapacitive RuO2 loading, which simultaneously increases volumetric capacitance (Fig. 11a and 11b). Volumetric capacitance of the LbL-MWNT/RuO2 electrodes were found to scale linearly as a function of cycle number, and finally reached over 1000 F/cm3electrode after 600 depositions (Fig. 11b).
 Fig. 11  (a) Cyclic voltammograms for the different number of square-wave potential deposition cycles of LbL-MWNT/RuO2 electrodes in a 0.5 M H2SO4 electrolyte at a scan rate of 50 mV/s. (b) Comparison of volumetric capacitance as a function of potential deposition number. Capacitance was estimated from the cyclic voltammograms at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1 (Fig. 11a). (c) Scan rate dependent cyclic voltammograms of the LbL-MWNT/RuO2 composite electrode (600 depositions) at various scan rates (50 mV s−1 ∼ 500 mV s−1) (d) Volumetric capacitance (F/cm3) obtained from the LbL-MWNT/RuO2 composite electrode (600 depositions) as a function of scan rates (50 mV ∼ 500 mV s−1). CV measurements of LbL-MWNT/RuO2 electrodes were conducted on ITO-coated glasses after a thermal annealing process at 150 °C for 12 h in air. The thicknesses of the LbL-MWNT/RuO2 electrodes were 120–140 nm. 
To the best of our knowledge, this LbL-MWNT/RuO2 electrode shows the highest volumetric capacitance among the carbon/pseudocapacitive oxides composite electrodes4,18 for ECs, based on the electrode volume including matrix and pseudocapacitive materials. Moreover, it is important to note that uniformly distributed nano-size RuO2 nanoparticles within the LbL-MWNT electrode increased capacitance without increasing the bulk volume of the LbL-MWNT framework. Fig. 11c shows scan rate- dependence of CVs on the LbL-MWNT/RuO2 electrodes in the scan rate range from 50 to 500 mV/s. The CVs for the LbL-MWNT/RuO2 electrodes maintained a similar shape up to an extremely fast scan rate of 500 mV s−1 with small distortion, which resulted in only ∼35% loss of the capacitance compared to that measured at 50 mV s−1 (Fig. 11d).

4. Summary
Novel LbL all-carbon films can be assembled by repeated, sequential immersion of substrates into aqueous solutions containing positively and negatively charged nano-carbons.49,50,54LbL electrodes have an interpenetrating network structure that can achieve high electronic conductivity, whereas the well-developed porous structure can facilitate fast ion diffusion. In addition, LbL all-carbon assembly produces electrodes free of insulating polymer binder, allowing better utilization of the electrochemically active surface area. These electrodes have high packing density of ∼70%, which is among the highest reported for nanostructured carbon electrodes, and resulted in high volumetric capacitance (130∼150 F/cm3) in aqueous electrolyte (Fig. 12). Further increases in the capacitance up to 1000 F/cm3 in aqueous electrolytes can be achieved via the incorporation of nano-scale inorganic oxides (MnO2 and RuO2) with pseudocapacitive properties through electroless redox deposition81 and square-wave potential depostion methods. The electrochemical characteristics of such composite LbL electrodes were investigated for micro EC applications, where the possibility of precisely controlling both the capacity and the capacitance of very thin electrodes offers a significant advantage compared to conventional techniques.
 Fig. 12  Comparison of the volumetric capacitance (F/cm3) in aqueous electrolytes for various LbL electrodes including LbL-MWNT,49LbL-MWNT/Graphene,54LbL-MWNT/MnO2,81 and LbL-MWNT/RuO2. Thickness of ultrathin LbL electrodes is in the range 130∼350 nm. LbL-MWNT/RuO2 electrodes were measured at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1 in 0.5 M H2SO4. 
Effective utilzation of oxygen-containing groups on LbL eletrodes in lithium cells provides high gravimetric capacity of ∼200 mAh/g with exceptionally high rate capability. If we convert the galvanostatic discharge results (Fig. 9) to a Ragone plot (Fig. 13) based on LbL electrode mass, LbL-MWNT eletrodes can deliver ∼200 Wh/kg at high power density of ∼100 kW kg−1, which exceeds the current gravimetric power capability of lithium-ion batteries as well as the gravimetric energy of conventional ECs. In addition to our LbL-MWNT electrodes, recently-reported advanced nanostructured electrodes (gray oval in Fig. 13) based on CNTs47 and graphene82 also showed significantly enhanced energy and power density for ECs. The high energy densities of LbL-MWNT electrodes compared to those reports can be attributed to the Faradaic reactions between lithium ions and surface functional groups on MWNT electrodes (rendering high pseudocapacitance), which can be accessed in the voltage window from 1.5 V vs. 4.5 V vs. Li in a nonaqueous electrolyte (not accessible in aqueous electrolytes) (Fig.13). The ability to store charge via different mechanisms (Faradaic and double layer capacitance) in different power regimes without capacity loss or degradation with cycling lends uniquely high versatility to these nanostructured electrodes and opens up a new direction for development of high-energy, high-power electrodes. However, it should be mentioned that since the thicknesses of LbL electrodes in this study are low (1.3∼1.5 μm) relative to conventional electrodes (50∼200 μm) with minimized transport resistance, straightforward comparison of energy and power performance is only possible with thin-film micro-batteries9,84–86 having similar thickness (1∼2.5 μm). Drawbacks of LbL-MWNT electrodes in lithium cells include the polarization between charge and discharge (charging voltages higher than those on discharge), which led to ∼30% energy loss (the difference before energy input on charge and energy release on discharge) per cycle at high power. Surface functionalization of carbon surfaces with organic molecules87 may allow the tuning of the potential profile and increasing the round-trip efficiency by reducing the voltage polarization during charge and discharge.
 Fig. 13  A Ragone plot showing electrode-level gravimetric energy and power densities of LbL-MWNT (black squares), LbL-MWNT/Graphene (green circles) in lithium cells having 4.5 V vs. Li as the upper-potential limit. The performance of electrochemical capacitor electrodes is estimated from gravimetric energy and power of electrochemical capacitors in the Ragone plot of a previous review paper4 by multiplying by a factor of 8. The grey oval includes the most advanced nanostructured carbon electrodes based on nanotubes47 and graphene.82 The performance of Li-ion battery electrodes includes LiCoO2,69 LiNi0.5Mn0.5O2,83LiFePO4,38,69 and thin-film micro-batteries (1∼2.5 μm).9 Only positive electrode weight was considered in the gravimetric energy and power density calculations. The thickness of the LbL all-carbon electrodes was 1.5 μm for LbL-MWNT, and 1.3 μm for LbL-MWNT/Graphene. 
5. Research outlook
The LbL process can produce all-carbon films with precisely controlled thicknesses onto various 2D and 3D substrates, serving as a promising platform for the integration of energy storage electrodes into micro-devices. To meet the demands of these applications, conformal coating of LbL-MWNT electrodes can be deposited on various 2D or 3D substrates, including Si or silicon carbide (SiC) wafers, glass, and polymers, for the development of thin-film micro batteries and ECs. In addition, by applying the multilayer approach to combine electrodes and solid electrolytes, one can imagine developing completely integrated and flexible thin film electrochemical devices.88Patterning techniques developed for LbL assemblies allow extension of these concepts to suitable geometries for MEMS and flexible electronics. We have shown that patterned LbL-MWNT electrodes can be deposited on a Si wafer (Fig. 14) and on a flexible ITO-coated PET film,89 which can enable sophisticated design of MEMS electrodes. Given this versatility, we believe that interest in the LbL process will continue to grow as it allows a “bottom-up” synthesis technique in which electrode properties can be engineered or fine-tuned at the most fundamental level.
 Fig. 14  
Optical microscope (left) and SEM (right) images of pattern-transferred LbL-MWNT electrodes from PDMS to Si wafers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 89. 
Conventional LbL fabrication by alternate dipping of a substrate into polyanion, polycation and rinse baths takes on the order of tens of minutes to build a layer with a thickness of a few nanometres, which can hamper process scaling to thicker electrodes comparable to what is available in commercial devices (approximately 10–100 μm). Therefore, as our investigations to date have focused on electrodes with thicknesses up to 3 μm, we consider that the long term goal is to develop thicker, larger-capacity electrodes. One opportunity to decrease process time and increasing thickness is a newly developed and automated spraying system for LbL electrodes.90,91 Uniform LbL films similar to those created with dipping can be generated using adaptable, commercial equipment, and nanomaterials can be incorporated into LbL films quite rapidly and over very large footprint areas. The automated spray process utilizes cycle times as short as two seconds, and cuts down the processing time by as much as 70 to 100 times.91 Notably, the high surface area, chemical functionality and high porosity, combined with the absence of carbon nanotube aggregation and lack of binder in these systems yield materials that outperform other systems electrochemically while maintaining a simple and easily implemented water-based process. We also will be focused on the scale-up fabrication of LbL electrodes on a number of commonly used substrates such as metal foils and ITO-coated plastic that is amenable to generating significant quantities of battery electrode materials through large area batches, or continuous roll-to-roll processing via automated misting.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the support from Contour Energy Systems for this project, and the MRSEC Program of the National Science Foundation under award number DMR - 0819762. The assistance of S. Chen in the SEM and TEM image collection, of J. Kim in square-wave potential deposition, of N. Yabuuchi in electrochemical measurements, and of E. Mutoro in schematics is greatly appreciated. S.W.L. acknowledges a Samsung Scholarship from the Samsung Foundation of Culture and B.M.G. acknowledges a graduate research fellowship from the National Science Foundation.
Notes and references
J. M. Tarascon and M. Armand, Nature, 2001, 414, 359–367 CrossRef CAS .
M. Armand and J. M. Tarascon, Nature, 2008, 451, 652–657 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Miller and P. Simon, Science, 2008, 321, 651–652 CrossRef CAS .
P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 845–854 CrossRef CAS .

          D. Howell, Progress Report for Energy Storage Research and Development, U.S. Department of Energy,  2008 Search PubMed .

          USABC, Requirements of End of Life Energy Storage Systems for PHEVs (http://www.uscar.org) Search PubMed.
M. Thackeray, Overview of BATT Cathode Projects, BATT Discussion Meeting, 2010 Search PubMed .
J. Chmiola, C. Largeot, P. L. Taberna, P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Science, 2010, 328, 480–483 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Dudney, Electrochem. Soc. Interface, 2008, 17, 44–48 Search PubMed  , Fall.
M. Winter, J. O. Besenhard, M. E. Spahr and P. Novak, Adv. Mater., 1998, 10, 725–763 CrossRef CAS .
N. Yabuuchi, S. Kumar, H. H. Li, Y. T. Kim and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2007, 154, A566–A578 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Padhi, K. S. Nanjundaswamy and J. B. Goodenough, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, 1188–1194 CAS .
B. Kang and G. Ceder, Nature, 2009, 458, 190–193 CrossRef CAS .
E. Frackowiak and F. Beguin, Carbon, 2001, 39, 937–950 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Pandolfo and A. F. Hollenkamp, J. Power Sources, 2006, 157, 11–27 CrossRef CAS .
P. Simon and A. Burke, Electrochem. Soc. Interface, 2008, 17, 38–43 Search PubMed  , Spring.
M. Toupin, D. Belanger, I. R. Hill and D. Quinn, J. Power Sources, 2005, 140, 203–210 CrossRef CAS .
K. Naoi and P. Simon, Electrochemical Society Interface, 2008, 17, 34–37 Search PubMed  , Spring.
D. Bélanger, T. Brousse and J. W. Long, Electrochem. Soc. Interface, 2008, 17, 49–52 Search PubMed  , Spring.
K. Naoi and M. Morita, Electrochem. Soc. Interface, 2008, 17, 44–48 Search PubMed  , Spring.
I. Kovalenko, D. G. Bucknall and G. Yushin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 3979–3986 CrossRef CAS .
T. Brezesinski, J. Wang, S. H. Tolbert and B. Dunn, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 146–151 CrossRef CAS .
S. Park, K. Lian and Y. Gogotsi, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, A921–A926 CrossRef CAS .
M. Seredych, D. Hulicova-Jurcakova, G. Q. Lu and T. J. Bandosz, Carbon, 2008, 46, 1475–1488 CrossRef CAS .
D. Hulicova-Jurcakova, M. Seredych, G. Q. Lu and T. J. Bandosz, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 438–447 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kwon, H. Nishihara, H. Itoi, Q. H. Yang and T. Kyotani, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 11961–11968 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shao-Horn, S. A. Hackney, A. R. Armstrong, P. G. Bruce, R. Gitzendanner, C. S. Johnson and M. M. Thackeray, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1999, 146, 2404–2412 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shao-Horn, F. Weill, L. Croguennec, D. Carlier, M. Menetrier and C. Delmas, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 2977–2983 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shao-Horn, S. Levasseur, F. Weill and C. Delmas, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2003, 150, A366–A373 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Thackeray, Y. Shao-Horn, A. J. Kahaian, K. D. Kepler, J. T. Vaughey and S. A. Hackney, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 1998, 1, 7–9 CrossRef CAS .
J. Vetter, P. Novak, M. R. Wagner, C. Veit, K. C. Moller, J. O. Besenhard, M. Winter, M. Wohlfahrt-Mehrens, C. Vogler and A. Hammouche, J. Power Sources, 2005, 147, 269–281 CrossRef CAS .
P. G. Bruce, B. Scrosati and J. M. Tarascon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 2930–2946 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Arico, P. Bruce, B. Scrosati, J. M. Tarascon and W. Van Schalkwijk, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 366–377 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Lee, H. Yi, W. J. Kim, K. Kang, D. S. Yun, M. S. Strano, G. Ceder and A. M. Belcher, Science, 2009, 324, 1051–1055 CAS .
L. F. Nazar, G. Goward, F. Leroux, M. Duncan, H. Huang, T. Kerr and J. Gaubicher, Int. J. Inorg. Mater., 2001, 3, 191–200 CrossRef CAS .
P. Poizot, S. Laruelle, S. Grugeon, L. Dupont and J. M. Tarascon, Nature, 2000, 407, 496–499 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. Sides, N. C. Li, C. J. Patrissi, B. Scrosati and C. R. Martin, Mrs Bull., 2002, 27, 604–607 .
X. L. Wu, L. Y. Jiang, F. F. Cao, Y. G. Guo and L. J. Wan, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2710–2714 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chmiola, G. Yushin, R. Dash and Y. Gogotsi, J. Power Sources, 2006, 158, 765–772 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Hu, W. C. Chen and K. H. Chang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2004, 151, A281–A290 CrossRef CAS .
A. E. Fischer, K. A. Pettigrew, D. R. Rolison, R. M. Stroud and J. W. Long, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 281–286 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kaempgen, C. K. Chan, J. Ma, Y. Cui and G. Gruner, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1872–1876 CrossRef CAS .
L. B. Hu, J. W. Choi, Y. Yang, S. Jeong, F. La Mantia, L. F. Cui and Y. Cui, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106, 21490–21494 CrossRef .
D. N. Futaba, K. Hata, T. Yamada, T. Hiraoka, Y. Hayamizu, Y. Kakudate, O. Tanaike, H. Hatori, M. Yumura and S. Iijima, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 987–994 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, G. P. Cao and Y. S. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 932–943 RSC .
V. L. Pushparaj, M. M. Shaijumon, A. Kumar, S. Murugesan, L. Ci, R. Vajtai, R. J. Linhardt, O. Nalamasu and P. M. Ajayan, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2007, 104, 13574–13577 CrossRef .
A. Izadi-Najafabadi, S. Yasuda, K. Kobashi, T. Yamada, D. N. Futaba, H. Hatori, M. Yumura, S. Iijima and K. Hata, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E235–E241 CrossRef CAS .
D. Pech, M. Brunet, H. Durou, P. H. Huang, V. Mochalin, Y. Gogotsi, P. L. Taberna and P. Simon, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 651–654 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Lee, B.-S. Kim, S. Chen, Y. Shao-Horn and P. T. Hammond, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 671–679 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Lee, N. Yabuuchi, B. M. Gallant, S. Chen, B. S. Kim, P. T. Hammond and Y. Shao-Horn, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 531–537 CrossRef CAS .
M. Heon, S. Lofland, J. Applegate, R. Nolte, E. Cortes, J. D. Hettinger, P. Taberna, P. Simon, P. Huang, M. Brunet and Y. Gogotsi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 135–138 RSC .
G. Decher, Science, 1997, 277, 1232–1237 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Shiratori and M. F. Rubner, Macromolecules, 2000, 33, 4213–4219 CrossRef CAS .
H. R. Byon, S. W. Lee, S. Chen, P. T. Hammond and Y. Shao-Horn, Carbon, 2011, 49, 457–467 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Gemici, H. Shimomura, R. E. Cohen and M. F. Rubner, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 2168–2177 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Yang and M. F. Rubner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 2100–2101 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Mendelsohn, C. J. Barrett, V. V. Chan, A. J. Pal, A. M. Mayes and M. F. Rubner, Langmuir, 2000, 16, 5017–5023 CrossRef CAS .
P. T. Hammond, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 1271–1293 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ariga, J. P. Hill and Q. M. Ji, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2007, 9, 2319–2340 RSC .
C. Y. Jiang and V. V. Tsukruk, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 829–840 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Lowman, H. Tokuhisa, J. L. Lutkenhaus and P. T. Hammond, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 9791–9795 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Lutkenhaus, K. McEnnis and P. T. Hammond, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 6047–6054 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, S. W. Lee, P. T. Hammond and Y. Shao-Horn, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2993–3001 CrossRef CAS .
A. Alonso, V. Ruiz, C. Blanco, R. Santamaria, M. Granda, R. Menedez and S. G. E. de Jager, Carbon, 2006, 44, 441–446 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ago, T. Kugler, F. Cacialli, W. R. Salaneck, M. S. P. Shaffer, A. H. Windle and R. H. Friend, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 8116–8121 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ramanathan, F. T. Fisher, R. S. Ruoff and L. C. Brinson, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 1290–1295 CrossRef CAS .
C. Kozlowski and P.M. A. Sherwood, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 1, 1985, 81, 2745–2756 RSC .
T. Le Gall, K. H. Reiman, M. C. Grossel and J. R. Owen, J. Power Sources, 2003, 119, 316–320 CrossRef .
H. Chen, M. Armand, G. Demailly, F. Dolhem, P. Poizot and J. M. Tarascon, ChemSusChem, 2008, 1, 348–355 CrossRef CAS .
L. Kavan, R. Bacsa, M. Tunckol, P. Serp, S. M. Zakeeruddin, F. Le Formal, M. Zukalova and M. Graetzel, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 5360–5369 CrossRef .
T. Bordjiba and D. Belanger, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, A378–A384 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Ma, K. W. Nam, W. S. Yoon, X. Q. Yang, K. Y. Ahn, K. H. Oh and K. B. Kim, J. Power Sources, 2008, 178, 483–489 CrossRef CAS .
X. F. Xie and L. Gao, Carbon, 2007, 45, 2365–2373 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Ma, K. Y. Ahn, E. S. Lee, K. H. Oh and K. B. Kim, Carbon, 2007, 45, 375–382 CrossRef CAS .
Y. T. Kim and T. Mitani, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 3 .
A. E. Fischer, M. P. Saunders, K. A. Pettigrew, D. R. Rolison and J. W. Long, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2008, 155, A246–A252 CrossRef CAS .
T. Brousse, M. Toupin and D. Belanger, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2004, 151, A614–A622 CrossRef CAS .
T. Brousse, P. L. Taberna, O. Crosnier, R. Dugas, P. Guillemet, Y. Scudeller, Y. Zhou, F. Favier, D. Belanger and P. Simon, J. Power Sources, 2007, 173, 633–641 CrossRef CAS .
M. Toupin, T. Brousse and D. Belanger, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 3184–3190 CrossRef CAS .
X. P. Dong, W. H. Shen, J. L. Gu, L. M. Xiong, Y. F. Zhu, Z. Li and J. L. Shi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 6015–6019 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Lee, J. Kim, S. Chen, P. T. Hammond and Y. Shao-Horn, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3889–3896 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Stoller, S. J. Park, Y. W. Zhu, J. H. An and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3498–3502 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Kang, Y. S. Meng, J. Breger, C. P. Grey and G. Ceder, Science, 2006, 311, 977–980 CrossRef CAS .
P. Birke, W. F. Chu and W. Weppner, Solid State Ionics, 1996, 93, 1–15 CrossRef CAS .
N. J. Dudney and Y. I. Jang, J. Power Sources, 2003, 119, 300–304 CrossRef .
J. Hong, C. S. Wang, N. J. Dudney and M. J. Lance, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2007, 154, A805–A809 CrossRef CAS .

          B. Genorio, K. Pirnat, R. Cerc-Korosec, R. Dominko and M. Gaberscek, Angew. Chem.-Int. Edit., 49, pp. 7222–7224 Search PubMed.
J. L. Lutkenhaus and P. T. Hammond, Soft Matter, 2007, 3, 804–816 RSC .
B. S. Kim, S. W. Lee, H. Yoon, M. S. Strano, Y. Shao-Horn and P. T. Hammond, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 4791–4797 CrossRef CAS .
K. C. Krogman, J. L. Lowery, N. S. Zacharia, G. C. Rutledge and P. T. Hammond, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 512–518 CrossRef CAS .
K. C. Krogman, N. S. Zacharia, S. Schroeder and P. T. Hammond, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 3137–3141 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:
Seung Woo Lee	Dr Seung Woo Lee received his BS degree with highest honor in Chemical Engineering from Seoul National University and was awarded a Samsung Scholarship for his graduate studies. He obtained a PhD in Chemical engineering under the direction of Prof. Paula T. Hammond and Yang Shao-Horn at Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). His Ph.D. research has focused on designing high-energy and high-power density nanostructured electrodes for electrochemical energy storage, and catalysts for electrochemical energy conversion of small molecules such as O2 reduction. Currently he is conducting his postdoc research in the area of catalysis for solar energy storage with Prof. Daniel G. Nocera and Yang Shao- Horn at MIT.
Betar M. Gallant	Betar Gallant is pursuing a Ph.D. in the Department of Mechanical Engineering at MIT under the direction of Prof. Yang Shao-Horn. She received her B.S. and M.S. Mechanical Engineering degrees in 2008 and 2010 from MIT. Her current research in the Electrochemical Energy Lab focuses on the synthesis, material characterization, and electrochemical studies of novel nanostructured electrode materials for lithium-ion batteries, lithium air batteries, electrochemical capacitors, and capacitive desalination systems.
Hye Ryung Byon	Hye Ryung Byon is a postdoctoral researcher of Prof. Yang Shao-Horn's group (Electrochemical Energy Lab) in the Department of Mechanical Engineering and Materials Science and Engineering at MIT. She received her PhD in chemistry from the Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH, South Korea) working on biological and chemical applications of carbon nanotubes. During her postdoctoral studies, she has extended her expertise to develop noble carbon nanotube and graphene structures for applications of supercapacitors and proton exchange membrane fuel cells.
Paula T. Hammond	Paula T. Hammond is Bayer Chair Professor of Chemical Engineering at MIT. She is an associate editor of ACS Nano. Her research and educational program emphasizes the use of molecular aspects in the study and development of new materials and processes. Its basis is the molecular design and synthesis of self-assembling polymeric systems and charged nano-objects, and the understanding and use of secondary interactions to guide their assembly at surfaces as well as in the bulk state. More recent applications investigate in her group include ultrathin film systems for micro-batteries and fuel cells, drug delivery, and cellular template for biomaterials.
Yang Shao-Horn	Yang Shao-Horn is Associate Professor of Mechanical Engineering and Materials Science and Engineering. She works with graduate students and postdocs on materials for electrochemical energy storage and conversion, which is centered on studying the influence of surface chemistry and electronic structures of thin films and nanomaterials on lithium reactivity and catalytic activity of small molecules of energy consequence, and applying fundamental understanding in reaction mechanisms to design new materials for lithium storage and electrocatalysis of small molecules such as oxygen reduction, water splitting, methanol oxidation and CO2 reduction.

Broader context
The application landscape for electrochemical energy storage technologies is set to expand rapidly over the next several decades as demand grows in new areas ranging from micro-devices to electrified transportation and clean energy storage and supply. Two excellent candidates for these applications are lithium-ion batteries, which can store high energy on a gravimetric and volumetric basis but have relatively low power, and electrochemical capacitors (ECs), which are ideal for high power applications but are limited for energy storage. As future applications will require both high energy and power, a major challenge will be to develop electrode materials that can bridge the performance gap within a single device. Recent developments of nanomaterials in lithium-ion batteries have increased the power performance by reducing lithium storage material dimensions down to the nanometre scale, which reduces the lithium diffusion time. Nanostructuring of electrode materials has increased the energy density of ECs by enabling higher charge storage through well-tuned subnanometer pores, or by utilization of high surface areas for Faradaic charge storage (pseudocapacitance). Currently, the excellent performance of nanostructured electrodes with thickness of a few microns can be integrated on Si chips or flexible plastic substrates, suggesting promising energy sources for portable electronic devices and micro-electro-mechanical systems (MEMS). If these nanostructured electrodes can be successfully scaled up to thicknesses of hundreds of microns without losing performance, they could be promising for incorporation into electric vehicles, heavy machinery, and load-leveling applications.


 	Fig. 1  
Ragone plot showing device-level gravimetric energy and power densities of commercial lithium-ion batteries and electrochemical capacitors (ECs), and performance targets for hybrid-electric (HEVs) and plug-in hybrid-electric vehicles (PHEVs) from the U.S. Department of Energy and U.S. Advanced Battery Consortium.5–7 The shaded curves were obtained from ref. 4.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic of charging and discharging processes in lithium-ion batteries and ECs.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic of layer-by-layer assembly of functionalized MWNTs. Modified from ref. 49.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic showing incorporation of Faradaic reactions from oxygen- and nitrogen-containing functional groups, manganese oxides, and ruthenium oxides on carbon-based nanostructured electrodes.	 

 	Fig. 5  Images of LbL-MWNT electrodes on (a) Si wafers and (b) polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) substrates. Number on image indicates the number of bilayer (n) in (MWNT-NH3+/MWNT-COO−)n. Thickness of the LbL-MWNT electrodes as a function of the number of bilayers is shown in the inset, showing a linear relationship for LbL-MWNT electrodes with thicknesses from 20 nm to 3 μm. Error bars show the standard deviation of the thickness, computed from three samples for each thickness. Thickness data adapted from ref. 50.	 

 	Fig. 6  Microstructure of composite electrode with pristine MWNT and LbL all-carbon electrodes. (a) Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of composite electrode (20 wt% PVdF and 80 wt% pristine MWNT). SEM top view and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) (inset) images of (b) LbL-MWNT and (c) LbL-MWNT/graphene electrodes. (d) Cross-sectional image of LbL-MWNT on ITO coated glass. LbL all-carbon electrodes include (1) LbL-MWNT electrodes, obtained via sequential adsorption of MWNT-NH3+ and MWNT-COO− dispersions, and (2) LbL-MWNT/graphene electrodes, obtained from alternative dipping of MWNT-NH3+ and negatively charged GO and continuous chemical reduction of GO to graphene. As-assembled LbL-MWNT electrodes were heat-treated sequentially at 150 °C in vacuum for 12 h and at 300 °C in H2 for 2 h to increase mechanical stability and electrical conductivity. Hydrazine vapor was used to reduce GO to graphene, and electrical conductivity and mechanical stability of the electrodes increased after the reduction step. Both LbL all-carbon electrodes showed high packing density (∼0.83 g cm−3 for LbL-MWNT49,50 and ∼0.92 g cm−3 for LbL-MWNT/graphene54), and high electrical conductivity over ∼10 S cm−1 after heat-treatments and chemical reduction steps, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 7  
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) spectra of pristine MWNT and LbL all-carbon electrodes. (a) Wide scan survey, (b) C1s spectra of LbL-MWNT and LbL-MWNT/graphene electrodes. XPS data adapted from ref. 49,50 and 54.	 

 	Fig. 8  Potential-dependent cyclic voltammograms of (a) PVdF/pristine MWNT composite electrodes, (b) PVdF/MWNT-COOH composite electrodes, (c) LbL-MWNT, and (d) LbL-MWNT/Graphene electrodes measured on ITO-coated glasses in two-electrodelithium cells with 1 M LiPF6 in a mixture of ethylene carbonate and dimethyl carbonate (volume ratio 3:7). The composite electrodes consisted of 20 wt% PVdF and 80 wt% MWNT. The thicknesses of the LbL-MWNT and LbL-MWNT/Graphene electrodes were 0.3 μm and 1.3 μm, respectively. Figs. 8 (b) and (c) data adapted from ref. 50.	 

 	Fig. 9  Charge and discharge profiles of an (a) LbL-MWNT and (b) LbL-MWNT/Graphene electrodes obtained over a wide range of gravimetric current densities between 1.5 and 4.5 V vs. Li. Before each charge and discharge measurement for the data in Fig. 9 (a) and (b), cells were held at 1.5 and 4.5 V for 30 min, respectively. (c) Volumetric discharge capacity vs. volumetric current for the electrodes in Fig. 9 (a) and (b). (d) Schematic of the energy storage mechanism on an TEM image of the LbL-MWNT electrode. White arrows indicate conduction channels of electrons though graphite layers. Data of Fig. 9 (a) adapted from ref. 50 and TEM image of 9 (d) was modified from ref. 50.	 
MO2 + xC+ + xe− ↔ MOOCx	(1)

 	Fig. 10  (a) SEM and (b) TEM images of LbL-MWNT/MnO2 electrodes prepared by dipping LbL-MWNT electrode into 0.1 M KMnO4/0.1 M K2SO4 solution for 60 min. (c) A representative low-magnification TEM image of RuO2 nanoparticles within the LbL-MWNT electrode after potential 400 depositions. Potential and time scale of square-wave potential cycles is overlaid. (d) Histogram and high-magnification TEM image (inset) of RuO2 nanoparticles within the LbL-MWNT film electrode after 400 potential depositions. Number-averaged diameter (dn) and standard deviation of RuO2 nanoparticles is indicated. At least 100 randomly selected nanoparticles were counted to present the histogram and dn. For the square-wave potential deposition, the LbL-MWNT electrodes were subjected to a potential deposition cycles with lower potential (−0.10 V vs. Standard Calomel Electrode (SCE) stayed for 0.02 s) and higher potential (1.10 V vs.SCE stayed for 3 s) in 50 mM RuCl3 + 0.1 M HClO4 solutions. The thicknesses of the LbL-MWNT/MnO2 and LbL-MWNT/RuO2 electrodes were 240 nm and 140 nm, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Cyclic voltammograms for the different number of square-wave potential deposition cycles of LbL-MWNT/RuO2 electrodes in a 0.5 M H2SO4 electrolyte at a scan rate of 50 mV/s. (b) Comparison of volumetric capacitance as a function of potential deposition number. Capacitance was estimated from the cyclic voltammograms at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1 (Fig. 11a). (c) Scan rate dependent cyclic voltammograms of the LbL-MWNT/RuO2 composite electrode (600 depositions) at various scan rates (50 mV s−1 ∼ 500 mV s−1) (d) Volumetric capacitance (F/cm3) obtained from the LbL-MWNT/RuO2 composite electrode (600 depositions) as a function of scan rates (50 mV ∼ 500 mV s−1). CV measurements of LbL-MWNT/RuO2 electrodes were conducted on ITO-coated glasses after a thermal annealing process at 150 °C for 12 h in air. The thicknesses of the LbL-MWNT/RuO2 electrodes were 120–140 nm.	 

 	Fig. 12  Comparison of the volumetric capacitance (F/cm3) in aqueous electrolytes for various LbL electrodes including LbL-MWNT,49LbL-MWNT/Graphene,54LbL-MWNT/MnO2,81 and LbL-MWNT/RuO2. Thickness of ultrathin LbL electrodes is in the range 130∼350 nm. LbL-MWNT/RuO2 electrodes were measured at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1 in 0.5 M H2SO4.	 

 	Fig. 13  A Ragone plot showing electrode-level gravimetric energy and power densities of LbL-MWNT (black squares), LbL-MWNT/Graphene (green circles) in lithium cells having 4.5 V vs. Li as the upper-potential limit. The performance of electrochemical capacitor electrodes is estimated from gravimetric energy and power of electrochemical capacitors in the Ragone plot of a previous review paper4 by multiplying by a factor of 8. The grey oval includes the most advanced nanostructured carbon electrodes based on nanotubes47 and graphene.82 The performance of Li-ion battery electrodes includes LiCoO2,69 LiNi0.5Mn0.5O2,83LiFePO4,38,69 and thin-film micro-batteries (1∼2.5 μm).9 Only positive electrode weight was considered in the gravimetric energy and power density calculations. The thickness of the LbL all-carbon electrodes was 1.5 μm for LbL-MWNT, and 1.3 μm for LbL-MWNT/Graphene.	 

 	Fig. 14  
Optical microscope (left) and SEM (right) images of pattern-transferred LbL-MWNT electrodes from PDMS to Si wafers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 89.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
