Mesoporous materials and electrochemistry    - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2CS35322A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2CS35322A
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 4098-4140Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsMesoporous materials and electrochemistry†‡

        
          
            Alain 
            Walcarius
          
          
        
      *
      Laboratoire de Chimie Physique et Microbiologie pour l'Environnement, UMR 7564 CNRS – Université de Lorraine, 405 rue de Vandoeuvre, 54600 Villers-les-Nancy, France. E-mail: alain.walcarius@lcpme.cnrs-nancy.fr;  Fax: +33 3 83 27 54 44;   Tel: +33 3 83 68 52 43
Received 
      8th August 2012
    First published on 18th January 2013AbstractOrdered mesoporous materials prepared by the template route have attracted increasing interest from the electrochemists community due to their plenty of unique properties and functionalities that can be effectively exploited in electrochemical devices. This review will cover the whole field of the intersection between electrochemistry and ordered mesoporous materials. The latter are either electronically insulating (silica and some other metal oxides, as well as silica-based organic–inorganic hybrid materials), semi-conducting (metal oxides), or conducting (metals, carbons). The three main intersection areas are: (1) the development/use of electrochemical methods to characterize the properties of mesoporous materials (i.e., charge and mass transfer processes); (2) the generation of mesostructured solids by electro-assisted deposition using appropriate templates; and (3) the application of these novel materials for electrochemical purposes. The most common devices to date are based on a bulk composite or thin film configuration and the resulting electrodes modified with such mesoporous materials have been successfully applied in various fields, including mainly electrochemical sensing and biosensing as well as energy conversion and storage (620 references).
Alain Walcarius
Alain Walcarius received his PhD (1994) from the University of Namur (Belgium). After a post-doctoral stay in the Joe Wang group in New Mexico State University (USA), he joined the CNRS (France) in 1996 as a Research Associate. He is currently Senior Researcher at CNRS and Director of the Laboratory of Physical Chemistry and Microbiology for the Environment (Nancy, France) where his analytical and electroanalytical chemistry group works in the area of chemical reactions at solid/liquid interfaces. Among his actual research interests is the intersection between the chemistry of silica-based organic–inorganic hybrid materials, analytical chemistry, and electrochemistry, with possible applications in the field of electrochemical reactors and sensors. He has published more than 160 scientific papers, 8 book chapters and one book.
1 Introduction
Emerging from some key pioneering publications,1,2 the past two decades have faced an extraordinary development of a wide range of ordered mesoporous materials, mostly obtained by template routes. Actually, the term “mesoporous materials” refers to solids based on either ordered or disordered networks with broad or narrow distribution of pores in the range between 2 and 50 nm. In the context of this review, only uniformly ordered mesoporous solids exhibiting periodically arranged mesopores of monodisperse size will be considered.
Historically, ordered mesoporous silicas were the first reported class of such materials. They were typically obtained by introducing supramolecular assemblies (e.g., ionic or non-ionic surfactant micelles or block copolymers) in a sol–gel synthesis medium in which silica walls grew around the self-assembled template to form periodic mesoporous solids exhibiting a narrow, controlled pore size distribution in hexagonal, cubic or lamellar structures.2 Nowadays, it is well-established that controllable soft templating is likely to generate fascinating porous solids with regular mesostructures, along with very high specific surface areas, thermal and mechanical stability, highly uniform pore distribution and tunable pore size, high adsorption capacity and unprecedented hosting properties.3–5 Non-siliceous mesoporous materials have been prepared,6,7 including notably metal oxides (other than silica),8,9 mesoporous non-oxide materials,10 ordered porous metals,11,12 mesoporous carbons,13–17 and even organic polymers,17,18 most of them being obtained from nanocasting pathways (i.e., replica using mesoporous materials as hard templates).6,19,20 Of related interest are hierarchically structured macro-mesoporous materials12,21–23 and ordered macroporous structures prepared using self-assembled colloidal crystal templates.24–26 One important stage that has triggered the explosion of these fields relies on the possibility of modifying the physical and chemical properties of mesoporous materials (especially the silica-based ones) by the incorporation of organic components either on the mesopore walls (via weak or strong chemical bonds), or trapped within the channels, or even as part of the silica walls, leading to hybrid organic–inorganic mesoporous materials that can be exploited as nanoreactors with advanced properties,27–37 providing they are sufficiently stable.
While most of the early works were primarily devoted to synthesis and characterization aspects, the beginning of the 21st century saw considerable development in emerging applications of template-based ordered materials.38–40 As reported in numerous well-documented reviews, they can seek the opportunities in the fields of catalysis and supported catalysts,41–46 membranes and separation platforms,46–49 nanocasting matrices for the synthesis of nanostructured materials by replication13,14,20 or nanoparticle networks and nanowire assemblies,50,51 electroanalytical chemistry,48,52–57 immobilization hosts for enzymes and other biomolecules in an active form58–61 and application in biocatalysis62 or as biosensors,54,55,63–65 bio-inspired nanocomposites,66 optical, photochemical or photocatalytic devices,8,67–71 biomedical applications (drug delivery systems,63,72–74 bioceramics that promote bone tissue regeneration73,75,76), new generation of molecular machines,77,78 sensors,54,56,72,79 environmental technologies and green chemistry,80–82 as well as energy conversion and storage (dye-sensitized solar cells, batteries, supercapacitors and fuel cells).83–86
On the other hand, the need to couple the intrinsic properties of a suitable modifier to a particular redox process has driven the emergence of the so-called modified electrodes.87–89 Chemically modified electrodes are integrated chemical systems that combine in a single device an intelligently designed chemical component in close connection to an electrode surface, which can be advantageously exploited for many practical applications, especially in the field of electrochemical sensors and biosensors.90–93 In the past, electrode modifiers were usually classified into three categories: monomolecular layers, homogeneous multimolecular layers (i.e., polymers94) and heterogeneous multimolecular layers.89 The latter category includes notably inorganic materials such as, e.g., metal hexacyanoferrates,95 clays,96,97 zeolites,54,98 or sol–gel materials.48,53,99–101 More recently, in parallel to the emergence of nanoscience and nanotechnology, nanomaterials have become a tremendous centre of interest in electrochemistry, notably to build nanostructured electrodes with improved performance.102–106 These nanomaterials indeed exhibit attractive features for possible application in electrochemistry, such as: (i) large surface areas (high number of surface-active sites, ideal support for the immobilization of suitable reagents); (ii) widely open and interconnected porous structure (fast mass transport); (iii) good conductivity and intrinsic electrocatalytic properties (for noble metals and carbons); and (iv) high mechanical stability owing to their multidimensional structure. One can distinguish two bottom-up approaches to generate nanoarchitectures on electrode surfaces: (i) the assembly of one dimensional nanostructures (nanoparticles, nanowires or nanorods) into functional 2D or 3D architectures107 or nanoparticulate films108 (which have been the focus of several previous reviews109–116 and will not be considered here) and (ii) the preparation of single-phase continuous ordered and porous mesostructures from supramolecular template assemblies and their integration into electrochemical devices (which are the focus of this review).
The aim of this review is thus to provide an in-depth coverage of the intersection between electrochemistry and the template-based mesoporous materials. After a brief description of the various types of mesoporous materials used to date in connection with electrochemistry, including their preparation, main features and interest for electrochemical purposes, a discussion will be made on the ways to confine such advanced materials at electrode surfaces. The review will then be divided into three main parts: (i) the use of electrochemical methods to characterize the materials properties; (ii) the electro-assisted generation of ordered porous thin films on electrode surfaces; and (iii) the exploitation of the attractive and sometimes unique properties of mesoporous materials for selected electrochemical applications.
2 Main types of mesoporous materials used in connection with electrochemistry
The following sub-sections intend to briefly describe the mesoporous materials used to date in connection with electrochemistry, only, and therefore not the whole ranges of materials that might be part of these families.
2.1. Silica and silica-based organic–inorganic hybrids
Silica-based materials are robust inorganic solids exhibiting both high specific surface area and a three-dimensional structure made of highly open spaces interconnected to each other via SiO4 tetrahedra, giving rise to highly porous structures. Most of them can be manufactured quite easily at room temperature by sol–gel processing, involving the hydrolysis of silicon alkoxide precursors (e.g., tetramethoxysilane or tetraethoxysilane) and a catalytic polycondensation to produce a macromolecular network of siloxane bonds. The structure of evolving silicates is a consequence of the successive polymerization, gelation, aging, drying, and heating steps. A fine tuning of the experimental parameters affecting these steps allows control over the microstructure of the final materials.
Ordered silica-based mesoporous materials are made of a periodic and regular arrangement of well-defined mesopores and amorphous inorganic framework structures. They are usually highly porous (pore volume > 0.7 mL g−1), with high specific surface areas (500–1500 m2 g−1), and they share characteristics of both silica gels and molecular sieve zeolites (showing however larger pore sizes). Ordered mesoporous silicas are usually prepared by the sol–gel process, involving the hydrolysis and condensation of a tetraalkoxysilane (Si(OR)4), in the presence of a supramolecular template (e.g., a surfactant). The silica framework can be formed around pre-formed liquid crystal mesophases but the organized architectures are often obtained via a self-assembly cooperative process taking place in situ between the templates and the silica network precursors (Fig. 1).5,117
 Fig. 1  Schematic pathway for preparing surfactant-templated mesoporous silicas, illustrating a formation mechanism based on a preformed liquid crystal (LC) mesophase (route A) or a cooperative process (route B). Adapted from ref. 118, Copyright (2002) American Chemical Society. 
Various ionic or non-ionic surfactants or water-soluble polymers can be used to prepare well-ordered mesoporous silica with monodisperse pore sizes ranging typically between 2 and 10 nm,21,118,119 and most common materials are based on 2D and 3D structures even if lamellar and less ordered mesostructures (e.g., wormlike) can also be obtained.5 Most common mesoporous silica materials used for electrochemical purposes are the small pore hexagonal MCM-41 and cubic MCM-48 (MCM = Mobil Composition of Matter), the large pore hexagonal SBA-15 and cubic SBA-16 (SBA = Santa Barbara Amorphous), as well as HMS (hexagonal mesoporous silica), MSU materials (MSU = Michigan State University), and some others. Efforts have been also directed to prepare ordered silicas with a bimodal (or even trimodal) distribution of pore sizes, i.e., with hierarchically controlled macro- and mesopores.21,30,120,121
The morphology of mesoporous silica materials can be tuned by adjusting the synthesis conditions. Powders are usually obtained by gelification of bulk sols according to the above process (Fig. 1) and both particle size and shape can be tuned by an appropriate control of the experimental conditions.122–124 A general method to prepare mesoporous silica thin films with controlled mesostructure and pore size is the so-called “Evaporation-Induced Self-Assembly” (EISA).125,126 In contrast to the bulk gelification discussed above for getting particles, the EISA process is based on a more diluted sol from which the polycondensation of silica precursors around the supramolecular template is driven by solvent evaporation upon withdrawal of the solid support from the sol (i.e., by dip-coating, see Fig. 2). The careful control of the sol composition and the nature of the template, as well as post-treatment temperature and humidity level, enables us to get mesostructures with distinct symmetry (cubic, hexagonal, double gyroid, rhombohedral, etc.).126 Using hard templates (such as nano- or microbeads) enables us to extend the method to the generation of ordered macroporous thin films25 or even to achieve multimodal hierarchical porosity.127 Such rigid three-dimensional matrices based on defined multiscale porous networks exhibiting a tunable pore size and connectivity, high surface area and accessibility, which can be prepared onto solid supports (as electrode surfaces), hold great promise in terms of favouring effective transport reactions at electrode/solution interfaces.
 Fig. 2  Mesostructured thin-film formation by dip-coating. Step 1: the isotropic initial sol where the condensation is optimally slowed down. Step 2: the evaporation proceeds and micelles start to form above the CMC. Step 3: the evaporation is complete; the film equilibrates with its environment and the final mesostructure is selected by adjusting the relative humidity (RH) before further inorganic condensation. Step 4: the inorganic network is condensed; the hybrid microstructure is stabilized. Adapted from ref. 126, Copyright (2004) Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
The emergence of organically-functionalized silica-based materials appears as a breakthrough in extending dramatically the application range of mesoporous silicas by permitting a precise control of their structural and, especially, chemical properties.27–37 Even if a straightforward way to get organic–inorganic hybrids is the “simple” adsorption of organic moieties onto the silica surface (i.e., via weak chemical bonds), the most attractive hybrids are those based on a strong covalent bond between the organic and inorganic components because this would avoid leaching of the organic groups when using the materials in solution. Silica-based mesoporous organic–inorganic hybrids can be basically prepared by two synthetic procedures: the two-step post-synthesis grafting and the one-step self-assembly co-condensation.128,129 The grafting route (Fig. 3A) involves the reaction of a suitable organosilane reagent with the silica surface. This is often made in an organic solvent (e.g., toluene) under reflux using silane coupling agents such as organo-alkoxysilanes or -chlorosilanes, as commonly used to functionalize other types of silicas (e.g., silica gels).130 Drying the mesoporous support prior to grafting is recommended to avoid anarchic self-condensation of the organosilane reagent away from the pore walls in the presence of residual water molecules.27,28,118 An interesting alternative is the so-called “water-controlled coating”, which consists in using just enough water to form a monolayer on the internal surface of the mesopore channels, enabling thereby the self-assembly of a continuous organosilane layer grafted onto the mesostructure, as exemplified for mercaptopropyl-functionalized solids.131 The second method (one-step), firstly reported independently by two groups in 1996,132,133 involves the hydrolysis/co-condensation of a tetra-alkoxysilane in mixture with one or more organo-alkoxysilane(s), in the presence of the template (Fig. 3B). In such a way, an ordered silica framework with mesopore walls covered with a wide range of pendent organic groups can be obtained,27–32,34,128 but attention should be paid to the compatibility of the organo-alkoxysilane precursor with the synthesis conditions to avoid any chemical or structural damage (e.g., degradation of the organo-functional groups, destabilization of the template assemblies). For instance, a too high organosilane content (i.e., above 20% relative to the total amount of precursors in the starting sol) may lead to significant loss in the mesoporous ordering level in the final hybrid material.134–136 Nevertheless, the co-condensation route offers the advantage of an easier control of the amount of incorporated organo-functional groups, which are usually more homogeneously distributed in the whole material in comparison to the hybrids obtained by post-synthesis grafting137–140 (except if experimental conditions are used to get a self-assembled monolayer of the grafting agent131,140), as well as smaller effects on porosity drop upon functionalization and shorter preparation times. Functionalized thin films can also be prepared by EISA in the presence of suitable organosilanes but, again, their amounts are usually restricted to ca. 15–20% to avoid significant loss in the mesostructural order.141,142 To be complete, one has to mention a third approach, firstly reported in 1999,143–145 based on the use of bridged silsesquioxane (RO)3Si–R′–Si(OR)3 precursors (alone or with Si(OR)4) which are allowed to (co)condense in the presence of a structure-directing agent (Fig. 3C) to form “periodic mesoporous organosilicas” in which the organo-functional groups are mainly located inside the mesopore walls.146–148 This approach can also be combined with the previous ones to produce bi-functionalized materials containing organic groups inside both the framework and the channel pores.149
 Fig. 3  The three main strategies applied to produce organically functionalized mesoporous silica: post-synthesis grafting (A), co-condensation route (B), periodic mesoporous organosilicas from bridged silesquioxanes (RO)3SiSi(OR)3 (C). 
These materials are of interest in electrochemistry for several reasons. First, their highly porous and regularly ordered 3D structure should ensure good accessibility and fast mass transport to the active centres. This might be useful to enhance the sensitivity in preconcentration electroanalysis (voltammetric detection subsequent to open-circuit accumulation). Moreover, the possibility of immobilizing a great variety of organo-functional groups opens the door to improvements in selectivity of the recognition event. Secondly, the materials bearing redox-active moieties can be promising to induce intra-silica electron transfer chains or to act as electron shuttles or mediators, with promising applications in electrocatalysis. Third, the possibility for nano-bioencapsulation (e.g., enzyme immobilization58–61) in such functionalized and mesostructured reactors could result in the development of integrated systems combining molecular recognition, catalysis and signal transduction, with applications in the field of electrochemical biosensors.
2.2. Nonsiliceous mesoporous metal oxides
Mesoporous ordered metal oxides other than silica are extremely difficult to prepare via a direct templating mechanism (i.e., using soft templates). Compared to silicon alkoxides, the hydrolysis and polymerization of transition metal alkoxides are not easy to control precisely. The resulting non-siliceous materials are generally not robust enough to maintain the mesostructure after the formation of the oxide framework, and they usually exhibit very poor structural ordering and low thermal stability after template removal.150 Nevertheless, a few successful examples of mesoporous oxides (titania, zirconia, niobium oxide or vanadia) obtained by the direct synthesis pathway have been reported.9,118 The EISA method has somewhat broadened the range of mesoporous metal oxides that can be prepared by direct soft templating, also applicable to the generation of thin films (e.g., TiO2 thin film electrodes),151,152 but the synthesis procedures remain rather sophisticated and post-treatments are usually necessary to keep the mesostructural order in the final materials.9,150
A versatile strategy to overcome the limitations of the soft templating route and to extend the scope of nanostructured porous materials is the so-called nanocasting procedures.153,154 This basically involves the use of a 3D-interconnected porous solid as a hard template, which is then filled with a precursor for another solid material and, after reaction and removal of the hard template, the desired product is obtained in its pure form as a negative replica of the exotemplate. Fig. 4 shows a schematic diagram in which a mesoporous solid (e.g., hexagonal or cubic mesoporous silica) is used as an example of a hard template. Note that the 3D-interconnected porous structure is intrinsically present in the cubic mesostructures (e.g., MCM-48, SBA-16, Kit-6) whereas the hexagonal mesostructures can be effectively used as hard templates only if they contain micropores between the 1D mesopores (such as in SBA-15 materials), otherwise the replica material is not expected to be arranged in a 3D mesostructure and appears as independent nanorods. A necessary condition to obtain high-quality replica structures is the uniform and complete pore filling, making crucial the surface functionality of the silica template for wettability reasons. The appropriate experimental conditions have been discussed elsewhere,9,150,153,154 and ordered mesoporous chromium oxide, indium oxide, cobalt oxide, manganese oxide, cerium oxide, as well as some ferromagnetic ordered mesoporous materials have been obtained. Both their semi-conducting properties and high surface areas are expected to be attractive for electrochemical applications in the field of energy storage and conversion.9,108,155 Note that ordered mesoporous non-oxide materials have also been prepared, notably via the nanocasting approach,10,154 but their use in connection with electrochemistry remains limited to date.
 Fig. 4  Schematic illustration of the nanocasting pathway using mesoporous silica hard templates with (A) hexagonal and (B) cubic geometry. 
A special case is that of mesoporous titania which has attracted considerable attention because of its photocatalytic properties156 that can be advantageously exploited in photovoltaics. Among the main features are (of course) the semi-conducting properties of anatase but also the large surface area of the materials (likely to adsorb a great quantity of dyes, for instance) and the possibility of controlling their structure and morphology over several length scales (i.e., a high surface-to-volume ratio is required for effective charge separation, whereas larger structures provide advantages in enhancing light scattering).106 Ordered mesoporous titania thin films can also be produced in a controlled way by the EISA process.157
2.3. Ordered porous metals
The straightforward route to prepare metallic nanostructures is metal deposition (either electroless or electrochemical deposition) through hard templates, as first and largely described for getting metal nanotubes or nanorods using porous membranes (as track-etched polycarbonate or anodized aluminum oxide).158,159 Such an approach could be basically extended to ordered mesoporous hard templates (Fig. 4), but metal deposition as continuous structures in such confined mesoscale environments remains challenging. Some successful examples have appeared in the literature (see illustrative examples of hexagonal and cubic mesoporous platinum in Fig. 5). The employed methods are either the impregnation of the mesoporous silica template with a metal precursor followed by hydrogen reduction,160 or electrodeposition through a mesoporous silica film,161 or even electroless deposition by using a reducing agent.162
 Fig. 5  (A) TEM images of nanostructured Pt networks obtained with MCM-48 silica as a template. Reproduced from ref. 160, Copyright (2001) American Chemical Society. (B) HRSEM images of the 2D hexagonal mesoporous silica thin film made by spin coating: (B1) top and (B2) cross-sectional views. Reprinted from ref. 161, Copyright (2006) Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Another approach, more versatile than nanocasting, relies on the soft-template processes since they enable us to design mesoporous metals with controlled and tunable structure and morphology over a wide composition range.11 The story started with two pioneering works in 1997, both developed by Attard et al.163,164 based on the impregnation of a surfactant-based lyotropic liquid crystalline (LLC) phase with a platinum precursor (H2PtCl6) and its subsequent reduction. In the first case, mesoporous Pt particles were obtained from a bulk LLC phase upon chemical reduction of the precursor,163 while the second approach involved Pt electrodeposition through a LLC film previously deposited onto a solid electrode surface164 (the latter method will be described in more detail in Section 5.1 of this review). Later on, these concepts were extended to generating other metals.11
Finally, of related interest (though not belonging to the mesoporous materials) are the ordered macroporous metals prepared by colloidal crystal templating.25,165 Ordered porous metals with inverse opal macrostructure are prepared by filling the free space of close-packed colloidal crystals with a metal precursor (by infiltration and subsequent reduction, by electroless or electrochemical deposition, or by chemical vapour deposition), followed by the removal of the templates by thermal processing, solvent extraction or chemical etching.
Evidently, all these electrically conducting ordered porous metals exhibiting a large surface area and 3D-interconnected structure are of particular interest for electrochemical purposes, as a result of their electroactive surface area which can be greater than the geometric one by several orders of magnitude (see Section 4.1). They are also likely to offer a suitable platform for functionalization while maintaining good accessibility to external reagents.
2.4. Ordered mesoporous carbons
Besides fullerenes, carbon nanotubes, and graphene, which are nowadays commonly used carbon nanomaterials for electrochemical purposes, another family is now emerging in the field: the ordered mesoporous carbons, which appear very promising for applications in energy conversion and storage166,167 or in electroanalysis.57 Their attractiveness is rather similar to that of ordered porous metals in that sense they also exhibit a widely open and highly interconnected pore structure in addition to very large conductive surface areas.
The first examples of ordered mesoporous carbons have been reported in 1999, independently by two distinct groups,168,169 just one year after the firstly reported macroporous carbon with inverse opal structure.170 They are usually prepared according to a template carbonization route.171 Again, both hard14 and soft17 templating approaches have been applied but the most common is nanocasting (based on the use of mesoporous silica templates).
The preparation of ordered mesoporous carbon by nanocasting involves several successive steps, including: (i) the preparation of a mesoporous silica matrix with controlled architecture; (ii) the introduction of a suitable carbon precursor into the mesopores (by either wet impregnation or chemical vapour deposition); (iii) the polymerization of the resulting organic–inorganic composite and its carbonization at high temperature; and (iv) the removal of the silica mould (by etching in HF or alkaline dissolution). As the space once occupied by the host hard template is transferred into the pores of the carbon material, the resulting structure is a replica of the mesoporous silica one. Till now, CMK-1 and CMK-3 materials (Fig. 6A), respectively, obtained from the small-pore cubic Kit-6 or MCM-48 mesoporous silicas and the large-pore hexagonal SBA-15 or analogous solids, were the main mesoporous carbons used in electrochemistry. As a consequence of different thicknesses of the silica walls in the starting mesoporous silica moulds (i.e., thinner in MCM-48 and thicker in SBA-15), the average pore sizes of the resulting replica CMK-1 and CMK-3 materials were also distinct but the pore size distribution remained narrow in both cases (Fig. 6C). Mesoporous silicas with tunable wall thickness (such as SBA-15) are particularly attractive templates, as they enable fine tuning of the mesoporous carbon pore sizes. As expected, the carbon replica mesostructures were of similar geometry (i.e., cubic or hexagonal) to the starting mesoporous silica templates (Fig. 6B and D). Sucrose was most often used as the carbon precursor source to generate uniform mesoporous carbons, among others (e.g., furfuryl alcohol, naphthalene and anthracene). Both the precursor nature and concentration have proven to have a significant influence on the physico-chemical characteristics of the final materials.172 For instance, the mesoporous carbons of the CMK-3 type used to date for electroanalytical purposes were characterized by specific surface areas in the 900–1500 m2 g−1 range, total pore volumes extending from 1.1 to 1.7 cm3 g−1, and pore sizes ranging typically between 3.3 and 5.0 nm.57
 Fig. 6  (A) Schematic view of the most commonly used mesoporous silica hard templates and the corresponding ordered mesoporous carbons; (B) transmission electron micrographs of CMK-1 and CMK-3 materials; (C) typical pore size distributions of CMK-1 and CMK-3; (D) X-ray diffractograms of both the mesoporous silica hard templates MCM-48 and SBA-15 and the corresponding ordered mesoporous carbons CMK-1 and CMK-3. Reprinted from ref. 57, Copyright (2012) Elsevier Ltd. 
Ordered mesoporous carbonaceous frameworks can also be prepared by soft-templating, based on supramolecular aggregates as templates (mainly block copolymers).17 Both the aggregates of block copolymers themselves and the assembling with thermosetting resins have the abilities to organize the ordered mesostructures. This usually involves several steps: (i) formation of supramolecular arrangement of molecules, (ii) templating, (iii) cross-linking, (iv) removal of templates, and (v) carbonization. Compared to mesoporous carbons obtained by nanocasting, which can suffer from some limitations (only a few cases are partially graphitized, the pore size distribution is relatively wider than the mother silica template, and the use of mesoporous silica as a scaffold makes the process expensive, somewhat complicated, and time-consuming), the soft-templating route is likely to circumvent some of these limitations, notably via the generation of mesoporous carbons with improved electrical conductivity (graphitized mesoporous carbons).17
3 Electrode configurations and electrochemical devices
The electrode configurations and/or the experimental devices involving mesoporous materials are strongly dependent on the target application and they have to be designed by taking into account the morphology of the mesoporous material (powder, monolith, thin film). The insulating or conducting properties of the materials might also play a role in the choice of the most interesting system. Actually, two main configurations (film-coated and bulk composite electrodes) have been reported to be appropriate for most applications. In addition, electrochemical devices based on powders in suspension can also be useful, notably for characterization purposes.
3.1. Thin (and thick) films on electrode surfaces
Here, one has to distinguish two “extreme” cases: the formation of particles-based coatings and the generation of continuous uniform thin films, the frontier in between however likely being narrow as continuous films formed from building nanocrystals have also been reported (see, e.g., TiO2).173
As many mesoporous materials are prepared in the form of powders, the first attempts to bring these solid particles onto the surface of solid electrodes involved their direct deposition from suspensions containing the powdered material. This was easily achieved through the dropping of an aliquot of such suspension onto the electrode surface, and subsequent solvent evaporation under quiescent or spinning conditions, which was largely exploited to coat electrodes with mesoporous silica174,175 or carbon176,177 particles. This is indeed a simple way to get the required material in a pure form (i.e., with all its intrinsic properties not affected by any additive) onto the electrode surface, but such a configuration has a serious drawback, the lack of mechanical stability, which restricts its use over prolonged periods especially in stirred media. To circumvent this limitation and to improve robustness for handling, one can recommend to cover the particulate film with a “protecting” or “strengthening” overlayer. Examples are available for organic polymers such as Nafion,177,178 poly(vinyl alcohol),179,180 polystyrene,181 poly(ethylene glycol)182 or acrylic resins,183 as deposited by evaporation over mesoporous silica (or carbon) deposits, but also organic or inorganic coatings electrophoretically deposited over metal oxide particles.184,185 In the case of non-conductive silica-based films, graphite particles can be used in addition to the mesoporous material to enhance the overall conductivity of the deposit.181 In addition to this bilayer arrangement of mesoporous particles covered with a polymer, single composite layers made of mesoporous particles dispersed into a polymeric matrix were also prepared as thin films on electrodes. This was performed by dissolving a polymer (mostly poly(vinyl alcohol),180,186,187 but also polystyrene,188 poly(vinyl chloride),189 Nafion,177,190 poly(4-vinylpyridine),191 chitosan192 or gelatin193) in the suspension containing the powdered material, resulting in the encapsulation of the mesoporous particles within a network of interpenetrated polymer chains upon solvent evaporation. Electropolymerization of conducting polymers in the presence of mesoporous particles in suspension constitutes another way of getting composite films of mesoporous materials entrapped in a macromolecular binder.194,195 It should be noted however that the binder might not be so inert with respect to interactions with solution-phase species, thus likely interfering with the properties of the mesoporous material itself.
To overcome this limitation, continuous mesostructures on electrode surfaces have been prepared by one-step template synthetic procedures.55,56 These films offer the advantage of covering uniformly the electrode with a homogeneous material without intergrain effects. The synthetic pathways are strongly dependent on the nature of the target mesoporous material, as discussed hereafter.
# Mesoporous silica-based and metal oxide films are primarily prepared by the sol–gel process, according to the aforementioned “Evaporation-Induced Self-Assembly” (EISA) method, which is based on the deposition of a sol solution onto a solid support (by dip-coating, spin-coating or dropping) and its evaporation with concomitant micellisation and condensation, as described in several reviews.9,125,126,129,196,197 Briefly, the sol solution is made of inorganic precursors alone or in mixture with organically-modified metal oxides and a surfactant usually dissolved in a water–ethanol mixture. Upon evaporation of volatile components taking place at the air/film interface, the concomitant self-assembly polycondensation of the surfactant and the precursors results in the formation of a homogeneous mesostructured deposit (with typical thicknesses in the range of 50 nm–700 nm). Pioneering works directed to generate ordered porous films on solid electrode surfaces led to poorly permeable deposits (probably because of unfavourable pore orientation) and suffered from cracks formation arising from surfactant extraction.198 Later on, the ability to precisely control the structural arrangement of silica films on the mesoscale has led to more accurately engineered mesoporous film electrodes with continuous structural order over wide areas and variable permeation properties depending on the film structure.199 A large variety of materials has been deposited on electrode surfaces for various applications, including silica and functionalized silica, titania, tin oxide, indium tin oxide, niobium oxide. The porosity of the material induced by appropriate templating varied from mesoporous197 to macroporous,200 including also multimodal porosity201 (see some illustrative examples in Fig. 7). One should also mention a rather novel approach called “Electro-Assisted Self-Assembly” (EASA),202–204 which is likely to generate mesoporous silica films with preferential mesopore orientation perpendicularly to the underlying electrode surface (for more details, see Section 5.3). Finally, to overcome some difficulties associated to the soft-templating synthesis of non-siliceous mesoporous thin films, attempts have been made to prepare them by the nanocasting route (Fig. 4) but, if it operates quite well for powders,9 it remains challenging for thin films because the presence of the substrate on one side of the hard template film limits (or even does not allow) the flow of the impregnating precursor solution. An alternative promising approach seems to be the electrochemically induced self-assembly of mesoporous metal oxide layers in the presence of structure directing agents such as lyotropic liquid crystals205 or even more diluted surfactant solutions206 (for more details, see Section 5.2).
 Fig. 7  Electron micrographs of (A) mesoporous (A1 hexagonal silica, A2 hexagonal titania, A3 cubic silica), (B) macroporous titania, and (C) macro-mesoporous silica thin films. Reprinted respectively from ref. 161, Copyright (2006) Royal Society of Chemistry, from H. Zhou, C. Wang, Z. Feng, S. Li and B. Xu, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2012, 207, 34, from S. Y. Kwon, J. C. Kim and B. Choi, Thin Solid Films, 2008, 516, 2843, from Y. Zhao, B. Yang, J. Xu, Z. Fu, M. Wu and F. Li, Thin Solid Films, 2012, 520, 351, Copyright (2012, 2008, 2012) Elsevier Ltd., and from ref. 204, Copyright (2010) American Chemical Society. 
# Nanostructured and porous metal thin films are mainly produced by electrodeposition from a metal ion precursor solution using self-organizing templates (for details, see Section 5.1). Briefly, one can distinguish various cases depending on the template type and concentration: (i) the production of mesoporous metallic films by electrodeposition from lyotropic liquid crystalline phases formed at the electrode/solution interphase (from concentrated surfactants or block copolymers), as firstly reported for mesoporous platinum;164 (ii) the self-assembly co-electrodeposition of metal–surfactant mesoporous films under potential control from diluted surfactant solutions;207 (iii) the electrodeposition of metal nanostructures through colloidal crystalline templates originating from the regular spatial arrangement of spherical colloidal particles with very uniform sizes onto an electrode surface, giving rise to ordered porous metals with inverse opal structure.208 In the first two cases, the resulting materials are mesoporous while the third one produces meso- or macroporous deposits depending on the size of the used templating spheres (usually in the range from 20 nm to 1 μm).209 If many types of porous metal films can be formed by such template routes,11 those of particular interest in electrochemistry are based on gold and platinum. It is noteworthy that macroporous platinum and gold have been largely used in many electrochemical applications but getting ordered mesoporous gold films (with the mesostructure maintained after template removal) remains challenging to date. One also has to mention that metal nanostructures on electrodes can be obtained by electrodeposition through hard templates (such as mesoporous silica),210 but filling narrow pores (i.e., 2–3 nm) requires rather harsh conditions (e.g., supercritical fluids).211 Finally, mesoporous metals can be formed in a confined area (such as in microfluidic channels) by a so-called evaporation-mediated direct template (EDIT) method.212
# Ordered mesoporous carbon (OMC) film electrodes are essentially prepared from OMC particles, as mentioned above, which have been pre-formed by nanocasting (see Section 2.4). However, some examples are available dealing with continuous carbon nanostructures prepared by in situ direct templating, e.g., via self-assembly of resorcinol-formaldehyde and block copolymers.213
3.2. Bulk composite electrodes
The dispersion of as-synthesized mesoporous particles in conductive composite matrices constitutes a rather simple and widely used approach to confine such nanoengineered materials at electrode/solution interfaces. This strategy was especially applied for nonconductive materials such as silica, silica-based organic–inorganic hybrids and some other metal oxides or mesoporous carbons.
The vast majority of bulk composite electrodes are those involving mesoporous silica and organosilica modified carbon paste electrodes (first examples at the end of 90's),214,215 which were especially used for electroanalytical purposes (see many other examples in a previous review54). The main attractive features of such an approach are: (i) the “universal” character of the method as any type of solid can be incorporated into a carbon paste matrix, even those which are difficult (or impossible) to prepare as thin films; (ii) the ease of preparation (simple mixing of the mesoporous particles with graphite powder and mineral oil);93 and (iii) a close contact between the mesoporous particles and the conductive matrix ensuring effective and fast electrochemical responses (in contrast to nonconductive thin films for which the redox species have to cross the mesoporous layer to reach the electroactive surface to be detected). As far as all components of the modified paste are uniformly dispersed in the composite, the electrode can reach a good level of reproducibility after mechanical renewal of its surface. Of related interest is the dispersion of these particles into a carbon ink and the deposition of the resulting composite as thick films screen-printed onto a plastic or ceramic substrate.216,217 Screen-printed electrodes behave similarly to the carbon paste ones and offer the advantage to be compatible with mass production manufacturing of single-use sensors.218 Though less common, non-siliceous mesoporous metal oxides have been incorporated into carbon paste electrodes, such as titania219 or zirconia.220 Ordered mesoporous carbon paste electrodes221 were also used, as well as OMC modified carbon ionic liquid electrodes (CILE), which were prepared by mixing OMC powder with an imidazolium salt and liquid paraffin.222
Other conductive composite matrices have been prepared, based on pressed materials. For example, devices made of pressed mixtures of graphite powder and mesoporous silica particles in the form of pellets or onto conducting supports (e.g., platinum grid or gauze)223,224 offer the advantage of being binder-free and thereby compatible with utilization in organic solvents. Other examples are OMC powders pressed along with a few amounts (≈5–10%) of an inert polymer binder (usually poly(vinylidene fluoride),225 or Teflon) onto a metallic mesh (e.g., Ni225), or as a bulk pellet.226 In this case, the quantity of polymeric binder should be large enough to ensure good compacting properties, but not too large to avoid lack of electrical conductivity. A way to circumvent the latter limitation is the addition of another carbon source in the composite (typically at 10%), such as acetylene black227 or carbon black.228 Finally, one has to note that the use of too high pressure in the preparation may result in some damage in the mesostructure of such highly porous materials.
3.3. Other electrochemical devices involving mesoporous materials
Besides the above “generic” approaches (thin films and composite electrodes), some other strategies have proven to be useful at the intersection between electrochemistry and mesoporous materials.
Electrically conductive monoliths (mainly based on carbon materials) have been prepared and used as such, notably for energy applications (electrochemical capacitors and lithium batteries). To be efficient, such monoliths should be characterized by a highly interconnected porous structure. At first, they were based on bicontinuous cubic mesostructures (e.g., formed by nanocasting using mesoporous silica monoliths as hard templates),229 but they rapidly let the place to hierarchical materials. Examples are available for multimodal macro/mesoporous carbon monoliths, prepared either by nanocasting from monolithic silica with hierarchical pore structure,230,231 or via a dual “hard and soft” template approach,232,233 or even by one-step soft templating.234 Improving the device performance was achieved by the introduction of nanoparticles (e.g., SnO2 nanocrystals via infiltration–hydrolysis) while maintaining connections between the macropores.235
Powdered mesoporous materials dispersed in aqueous suspensions were also used, primarily for investigating the sorption properties and mass transport issues by electrochemical methods. This was especially the case of functionalized mesoporous silica materials.134,236 In such configurations, the mesoporous solid does not contact an electrode surface, but the electrode is used to quantify the concentration of solutes that are likely to interact with the mesoporous adsorbent (transient measurements of solution-phase species, enabling us to indirectly evaluate the amounts of adsorbed species by difference; see Section 4.2.1 for more information).
4 Use of electrochemical methods to characterize the materials properties and reactivity
A first advantage of combining electrochemistry and mesoporous materials is the possibility (sometimes unique) of characterizing some of their properties and some aspects of their reactivity. The electrochemical methods have been notably useful to estimate electroactive surface areas and double layer capacities, to analyze the behaviour of surface-confined redox probes, or to quantify mass (and charge) transport processes inside such confined environments.
4.1. Electrochemical response of mesoporous electrodes
The electroactive surface area and/or capacity properties of conductive mesoporous thin films (i.e., metals and carbons) can be determined by cyclic voltammetry. For mesoporous (or macroporous) electrodes made of noble metals (Pt, Au), this is easily achieved via the monitoring of peak currents originating from surface-confined redox species such as gold oxides on gold or hydrogen and platinum oxides on platinum (Fig. 8).237–239 For example, mesoporous platinum films of various thicknesses (as prepared by electrodeposition at various charges, Fig. 8A) have the obvious advantage of active surface areas much larger than the geometric ones, leading to currents that can be higher up to several orders of magnitude (expressed as roughness factors, Rf, in the figure caption).237,240 Similar enhancement effects have been observed with ordered macroporous gold deposits (Fig. 8B), with Rf values rising when decreasing the pore sizes (but remaining significantly lower than those for mesoporous films),241 confirming the ability of small mesopores to enlarge the specific surface areas of these films. For ordered mesoporous carbon (OMC) films, the effect of the large electroactive areas is visible from their high capacitive currents (Fig. 9), much higher than that for the flat glassy carbon electrode support onto which the OMC particles have been deposited (compare curves “c” and “a”). This was also the case for the OMC film with the Nafion binder, yet with some current decrease, suggesting that the presence of the polymer binder contributes to the decrease of the accessible electroactive carbon surface area (see curve “d”).242 Such large electroactive surface areas of conductive porous materials are notably attractive for electrochemical double layer capacitors.
 Fig. 8  (A) Cyclic voltammograms (scan rate 100 mV s−1) recorded in 1 M aqueous sulfuric acid for mesoporous platinum films deposited onto a 2 mm diameter Pt disc electrode with deposition charges of (i) 0.0 (Rf = 3.2), (ii) 0.40 (Rf = 32), (iii) 0.80 (Rf = 55) and (iv) 2.1 C cm−2 (Rf = 145). Rf denotes the ratio of real to geometric surface area. Reprinted with permission from ref. 237, Copyright (2005) Elsevier Ltd. (B) (a) Cyclic voltammograms for a gold ordered macroporous electrode (OME) with a pore diameter of 114 nm in 1 M H2SO4 at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1. (b) Reduction waves for a gold film and OMEs with different pore sizes, recorded in the same medium. In all cases the thickness of the OMEs was 2 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 241, Copyright (2007) American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 9  Cyclic voltammograms recorded at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1 using (a) a bare glassy carbon electrode (GCE), or (b) Nafion/GCE, (c) OMC/GCE and (d) Nafion-OMC/GCE electrodes in 0.1 M KCl solution. Reproduced with permission from ref. 242, Copyright (2008) Elsevier. 
The specific electroactive surface areas of conductive mesoporous thin films (expressed in cm2 × cm−3) are comparable to those of nanoparticles of similar dimensions, but they exhibit much higher charge transfer rates, thanks to their continuous wall structure, in comparison to corresponding deposits made of agglomerated nanoparticles that may suffer from interparticle resistance to charge transport.209 This advantage is especially important for applications in supercapacitors for which the power density is directly related to the rate of charge–discharge processes. For other electrochemical applications, particularly in electroanalysis for which the faradaic component of the current response is the most important one, such an advantage must be somewhat tempered, as capacitive currents also show an increase that is proportional to the active surface area, resulting in an overall unchanged signal-to-noise ratio when using these electrodes and applying classical voltammetric techniques. As a consequence, the attractiveness of a large electrode surface area is only valid for surface-confined redox probes,237 or slow reactions, or reactions that need to be catalysed by a surface bound mediator for which the redox current is directly correlated with an increase of active surface area,243 whereas solution-phase redox couples with fast charge transfer kinetics don't have the possibility to explore the inner surface of the electrode in the characteristic time scale of the experiment.244 In the latter case, the voltammetric signals are governed by linear diffusion in solution (i.e., the diffusion layer is much thicker than the porous metal layer). So the conclusion of improved sensitivity and the detection limit of such electrodes is only valid when working under steady-state conditions or applying differential pulse techniques that allow minimizing the influence of the capacitive current.245 Another case for which the use of highly porous electrodes is of particular interest is when working with ultramicroelectrodes where the geometric surface is usually only a few μm2 and therefore limits currents to the nA or even pA range. In this case, enhancing the active surface area with respect to the geometric one enables us to partially or even completely compensate this loss in current, thus improving indirectly the performance of the device.238
On the other hand, the large active area of such nanostructured electrodes is particularly suited to the immobilization of huge amounts of reactants. Cyclic voltammetry is mostly used to characterize the electrochemical response of the electroactive ones. Examples are available for redox species adsorbed within OMCs: ferrocene carboxylic acid,246,247 polyoxometalates,180,248 a cobalt phthalocyanine,249 Nile Blue,250 or tetrathiafulvalene.251 All of them exhibited surface-confined electron transfer processes and, if durably immobilized, they gave rise to stable responses under multisweep conditions. Electroactive polymers such as polythionine,252 poly(Azure B),253 poly(neutral red),254 polycatechol,255 or Prussian Blue256 have been otherwise electropolymerized within OMC materials. Direct electrochemistry was claimed for immobilized haemoglobin257 or cytochrome c258 on macroporous gold films, but this is not due to the macrostructure. Interestingly, the internal surface of macroporous electrodes can be decorated with sol–gel-derived materials without any pore clogging effect, offering an effective way to immobilize other reactants such as redox mediators and/or biomolecules.259
Finally, the electrochemical behaviour of redox probes attached to nonconductive mesoporous silica materials was also evaluated. First, weakly immobilized moieties (i.e., adsorbed molecular species, oligomeric materials deposited onto the silica walls, or redox probes immobilized in surfactant-containing mesoporous silica) were usually characterized by potential shifts in their voltammetric signals with respect to those recorded in solution (see examples in previous reviews).52,54 Secondly, redox probes have also been covalently attached to mesoporous silica, either as pendent arms grafted onto the internal surface of the pores (e.g., ferrocene260,261 or phenothiazine262 derivatives) or as part of the silica walls in periodic organosilicas (e.g., viologen263). For such redox moieties strongly-attached to an insulating material, the only way for electron transfer is via electron hopping between adjacent sites, so that the intensity of the voltammetric signals was often much lower than that for redox probes attached to conductive mesoporous materials (e.g., ferrocene carboxylic acid attached to mesoporous carbon247). For example, a hexagonally organized mesoporous silica with 4,4′-bipyridinium units (BP) integrated via covalent bonds within the silica walls gave rise to small ill-defined signals attributable to a predominance of “external” viologen units that are likely to leach from the surface of the material or to contact the electrode surface (limiting depth of electrochemically accessible BP units).263 A way to circumvent somewhat this limitation is to increase the functionalization level to get a density of functional groups high enough to enable effective charge propagation through the mesoporous silica, leading to concomitantly much larger currents.260,261 A surface-confined electron transfer mechanism (i.e., peak currents directly proportional to the potential scan rate) can be observed,262 but only if the pseudo-diffusion of electrons or the electrolyte ions diffusion (to maintain charge balance) does not become the rate-determining step.261 Small redox-active biomolecules such as cytochrome c,264,265 haemoglobin,266,267 or myoglobin268 were successfully immobilized in porous silicas while retaining their activity but it is hard to believe that the resulting voltammetric peaks are due to direct electron transfer between the immobilized biomolecules and the electrode surface. Using mesoporous titania instead of silica as a support for redox proteins is likely to improve the rate of the electron transfer processes, thanks to its semiconducting properties.267 On the other hand, the use of mesoporous transparent electrode materials, such as titania,269 indium-tin oxide,270,271 or antimony doped-tin oxide,272 enables the spectroelectrochemical investigation of redox proteins, which is notably useful to get in situ and real time information on their electrocatalytic properties.271
4.2. Electrochemical approaches to characterize transport issues in mesoporous materials

4.2.1. Mass transport in mesoporous (organo)silica particles. 
The regular three-dimensional structure made of mesochannels of monodisperse dimension should impart fast mass transport issues, notably in comparison to diffusion in the non-ordered silica gel homologues. This postulate was checked thanks to the development of suitable electrochemical methods likely to monitor, in situ and in real time the kinetics associated to mass transfer reactions between a solution and solid particles in suspension.273
Potentiometric pH monitoring of aqueous suspensions of mesoporous silica particles grafted with aminopropyl groups was first exploited to determine the kinetics associated to the protonation of the amine groups located in the material.236,273 Assuming a rate-determining step being the diffusion of protons (and associated counter anion) inside the functionalized particles, and fitting the “proton consumption versus time” plot to a spherical diffusion model (silica particles have been considered as spherical in a first approximation), enabled us to evaluate the variation of the apparent diffusion coefficients (Dapp) as a function of the reaction progress (see typical data in Fig. 10, for two amine-functionalized mesoporous silica samples and one non-ordered silica gel grafted with the same aminopropyl groups). Two conclusions can be drawn from these preliminary investigations: (i) mass transport was faster in well-ordered mesoporous samples than in the non-ordered homologues, but only at low protonation levels; (ii) Dapp values were found to drop dramatically in mesostructured materials, suggesting significant electrostatic shielding effects when generating charged moieties onto the internal surface of regular mesochannels.236
 Fig. 10  Variation of the apparent diffusion coefficient during protonation of various aminopropyl-grafted silica samples: (a) large pore (∼6 nm) silica gel, (b) small pore (∼3 nm) MCM-41, and (c) large pore (∼6 nm) SBA-15 mesoporous silicas, as a function of the extent of reaction. Reprinted with permission from ref. 236, Copyright (2003) American Chemical Society. 
More detailed kinetic studies have been made on the basis of a “school case” system: the uptake of mercury(II) by complexation to mercaptopropyl-functionalized mesoporous silica adsorbents. The method of leftovers was first applied to study the uptake rates of Hg(II) species by rather large adsorbent microspheres (10–12 μm in diameter), for which diffusion coefficients in the range 10−11–10−10 cm2 s−1 have been calculated using the shrinking core model.274 This method of leftovers involving intermittent sampling for analysis operates quite well for such rather large particles with moderate pore size, but is on the wrong track in the case of faster events (i.e., Hg(II) binding to smaller particles and/or more open structures). This is the reason why our group has proposed an electrochemical method based on a rotating disk electrode to monitor in situ and continuously the consumption of Hg(II) from the suspension.236 Typically, the electrode is biased at a cathodic potential value under conditions where steady-state currents are proportional to solution-phase Hg(II) species, the adsorbent particles are then added under stirring and Hg(II) uptake is monitored via Hg(II) consumption from the solution with time. This enables collection of two data points every second, which is compatible with fast uptake kinetics. This approach was applied to Hg(II) binding to a wide range of mercaptopropyl-functionalized mesoporous silica materials, either prepared by post-synthesis grafting236 or by one-step co-condensation,134,140 and the results were compared to the corresponding nonordered gels.273 Unlikely to what was observed for the large particles for which synergistic acceleration of the uptake rate occurred with increasing Hg(II) loading,274Dapp values decreased slowly upon gradual filling because less and less space was available for the ingress of metal species.236 Another main conclusion is that the ordered mesoporous solids exhibited faster diffusion processes (by about one order of magnitude) in comparison to nonordered gels of similar or even larger porosity. Then, effects of long-range versus short-range mesostructural order–disorder and pH on the adsorption rates have been reported.134,140 This is illustrated in Fig. 11 for Hg(II) binding to a wide range of mercaptopropyl-functionalized silica spheres of the MCM-41 and MCM-48 series prepared by self-assembly co-condensation of mercaptopropyltrimethoxysilane (MPTMS) or mercaptopropyltriethoxysilane (MPTES) and TEOS precursors in hydroalcoholic medium in the presence of a cationic surfactant as a template and ammonia as a catalyst. These materials of approximately the same particle size and morphology featured different functionalization levels, various degrees of structural order, and variable distribution of thiol groups in their pores.136 The main conclusions that can be drawn from these kinetic results are that only little differences in diffusion rates are observed between materials of the MCM-41 and MCM-48 series at similar functionalization levels, fast mass transport occurred in well-ordered mesostructures in comparison to the poorly or non-ordered ones (except at pH 2 where charge formation induced some restriction in materials characterized by long-range structural order), and even faster processes were observed in the wormlike frameworks (characterized by shorter range order).140
 Fig. 11  Variation of the initial apparent diffusion coefficient (Dapp,0) for Hg(II) in mercaptopropyl-silica (MPS) spheres as a function of the relative molar ratio of MPTMS (or MPTES) in the starting sol, as evaluated from uptake experiments performed at pH 2 (A and C) and pH 4 (B and D). Parts A and B correspond to hexagonal materials (MPSHEX-n%) while parts C and D are related to the cubic series (MPSCUB-n%). Data were estimated from kinetic curves at the early times of the experiments when the uptake process is dominated by the smaller spherical particles (see the text for calculus details). Reproduced from ref. 140, Copyright (2009) Elsevier. 
In the SBA-15–SBA-16 series, mass transport rates were slightly faster in the hexagonal mesostructures and Dapp values measured in adsorbents prepared by post-synthesis grafting were larger than in those obtained by the one-step co-condensation route (especially at low Hg(II) loadings).275 Again, the formation of charged complexes (i.e., at pH 2) was disadvantageous in well-ordered mesostructures due to electrostatic shielding effects: for example, by applying a suitable theory likely to calculate the diffusion coefficient for Hg(II) inside the mesopore channels (Dpore),276Dpore values of 6.1 × 10−9 and 9.5 × 10−8 cm2 s−1 have been obtained from Hg(II) sorption experiments performed, respectively, at pH 2 and 4 using a thiol-functionalized mesoporous silica of the MCM-41 type.277
The series of thiol-functionalized mesoporous materials was also exploited to develop a new electrochemical method for the qualitative or semi-quantitative analysis of mass transfer rates in organically-modified silica-based materials.278 The method is based on the modification of carbon paste electrodes with the adsorbent particles and applying them in the preconcentration of Hg(II) from diluted solutions prior to voltammetric quantification, under conditions where the uptake process is diffusion-controlled. In this case, the recorded voltammetric signals constitute an indirect measurement of the rate at which Hg(II) species reach the thiol binding sites in the mesoporous solids. This approach gave rise to results following the same trend as that of Dapp values obtained from the above rotating disk electrode technique, but it cannot give quantitative diffusion data. Interest in it relies on the qualitative information one can get when the classical approaches become limited, e.g. in the case of poor reaction yields (too low consumption of the adsorbate from solution), in the case of very fast uptake processes (too fast concentration fall, not measurable in solution), or even for adsorbents displaying rather low chemical stability in aqueous medium (long contact times forbidden). For instance, it allowed us to compare the rate of Cu(II) uptake by aminopropyl-grafted mesoporous silica materials containing various amounts of amine groups, which cannot be studied by conventional methods.278 Indirectly, these observations highlight the crucial role played by the porosity/mesostructure of the electrode modifier in defining its response intensity and, thereby, the sensitivity of the modified electrode when used for applications in the field of, e.g., electrochemical sensors where diffusion-controlled processes often constitute a limiting factor.54


4.2.2. Mass transport through mesoporous thin films. 
Covering the surface of a solid electrode with an insulating layer (such as mesoporous silica, other metal oxides, or silica-based organic–inorganic hybrids) requires the transport of redox probes through the film for being electrochemically detectable via an electron transfer reaction at the electrode surface. Alternatively, such an electrode response can be very useful to characterize transport issues through mesoporous (organo)silica or metal oxide thin films, but careful attention should be paid to separate the contributions of charge transfer and mass transport (which might be intertwined).279 As discussed below, several electrochemical methods have been used for that purpose: cyclic voltammetry, hydrodynamic voltammetry, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy, and scanning electrochemical microscopy.
Cyclic voltammetry (CV). 
CV can first be used to check if the deposited mesoporous silica material covers well the entire electrode area in the form of a crack-free layer. Indeed, before surfactant extraction, a uniformly deposited film leads to a suppressed CV response for solution-phase redox probes due to the nonporous character of the templated hydrophobic film (see curve a in Fig. 12A). After template extraction, well-defined CV signals can be obtained (see curve b in Fig. 12A) because the redox probes are now likely to cross the mesostructure and to be electrochemically detected at the electrode surface. By using a reversible redox probe, the intensity of the voltammetric response can be related to the rate of mass transport through the film and this was found to be very dependent on both the type of mesoporous silica (structure, pore size and orientation) and the probe characteristics (size, charge, concentration),199 as well as on the presence of organo-functional groups attached to the walls of the mesopore channels.142,280 For instance, the trend of increasing permeability with respect to the mesostructure type is as follows: 2D hexagonal and rhombohedral < 3D hexagonal < orthorhombic and cubic < vertically-oriented 2D hexagonal mesostructures.199,202,281 An illustration for 2D hexagonal, 3D hexagonal and cubic films is given in Fig. 12B. Effects of porosity and pore orientation were also reported for mesoporous titania282 or zirconia283 films (see Fig. 12C for an illustration of permeability through zirconia films templated at various extents). Enhanced transport rates can be induced by creating periodic bi- or multi-modal hierarchy (with a combination of meso- and macropores of variable dimensions, Fig. 12D), giving rise to more open films with highly interconnected pores.201,204 The influence of pore size and pore interconnection on peak heights obtained by cyclic voltammetry is illustrated in Fig. 12E and F. The charge of the used redox probe is also an important parameter to take into account. For example, the positively-charged species (such as Ru(NH3)63+ or Ru(bpy)32+) are likely to accumulate via favourable electrostatic interactions with the negatively-charged silica surface, leading to high peak currents (even higher than on the bare electrode, see curve c in comparison to the top inset in Fig. 12B), whereas negatively-charged probes (such as Fe(CN)63− or I−) are rejected and gave rise to very low current responses.142,199,284 Functionalization of the mesopore walls further brings additional influence on the film permeability, either via variation in the pore size or through the intrinsic reactivity of the functional groups. Examples are available for mesoporous silica modified with methyl groups in various quantities (permeability modulated by the hydrophobic–hydrophilic balance and pore size),280 with aminopropyl groups (pH-dependent permselectivity),142,285 with polyelectrolyte or polymer brushes (calcium- or light activated permeability changes),286–288 with alkylammonium groups (change in electrostatic shielding with respect to bare silica from anionic to cationic),289 or with more sophisticated moieties such as photoresponsive azobenzene derivatives (photoregulation of permselectivity properties).290 All these permeability modulations resulted in significant changes in the CV response of the film electrodes. From these observations, it is clear that not only the physical diffusion of the probe through the film is responsible for permeation rates but also its interactions with the surrounding mesopore environment, so that one should consider mass transport rather than “apparent” diffusion.
 Fig. 12  (A) Cyclic voltammetric curves recorded in 0.05 M hydrogen phthalate solutions (pH 4.1) containing 5 mM Ru(NH3)63+ at a glassy carbon electrode covered with a CTAB-templated silica film (a) before and (b) after surfactant extraction. The potential scan rate was 50 mV s−1. Inset: electrochemical response measured with the bare glassy carbon electrode. Reproduced from ref. 440, Copyright (2007) WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH. (B) Cyclic voltammograms recorded at 50 mV s−1 in 0.05 M hydrogen phthalate solution (pH 4.1) containing 0.5 mM Ru(bpy)32+ using ITO electrodes covered by mesoporous silica thin films with 2D hexagonal symmetry (a), 3D hexagonal symmetry (b) and cubic structure (c). Bottom-right inset: enlargement of curve (a); top-left inset: signal obtained at bare ITO. Reproduced from ref. 199, Copyright (2007) American Chemical Society. (C) Cyclic voltammetric curves of 2 mM ferrocene in acetonitrile containing 0.5 M LiClO4 at the bare Pt electrode and Pt disk-shaped nanoelectrodes made of polymer templated ZrO2 films with different mass ratios between the copolymer and the inorganic precursor: (a) 1/5 mass ratio, (b) 1/10 mass ratio, (c) 1/50 mass ratio, and (d) 1/100 mass ratio. Scan rate is 50 mV s−1. Reproduced from ref. 283, Copyright (2012) American Chemical Society. (D) Schematic representation of hierarchically ordered silica thin films prepared from 1-hexadecyl-3-methylimidazolium chloride (IL), poly(ω-hydroxypoly(ethylene-co-butylene)-co-poly(ethylene oxide)) (KLE) and/or polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) templates. (a) Large (spherical) mesopores. (b) Small (worm-like) and large mesopores. (c) Large mesopores and macropores. (d) Small and large mesopores and macropores. (E, F) Cyclic voltammograms of porous silica films functionalized with ferrocene carboxylic acid in 0.1 M LiClO4–acetonitrile (sweep rate 50 mV s−1). (E) A monomodal mesoporous KLE film, a bimodal mesoporous KLE-IL film and a monomodal IL-silica film with a worm-like pore system (3 nm). (F) A bimodal meso-macroporous KLE-PMMA and a trimodal meso-macroporous KLE-IL-PMMA film. Reproduced from ref. 201, Copyright (2007) Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH. 
Hydrodynamic voltammetry. 
Changes observed in the CV responses remain however somewhat qualitative or semi-quantitative, even if estimation of apparent diffusion coefficients of redox probes within mesoporous silica films is basically possible if the effective electrode surface area is known, via the slope of the peak current versus the square root of the potential scan rate plot.198 A more convenient approach to the quantitative analysis of mass transport processes is working under hydrodynamic conditions. This can be achieved by using a rotating disc electrode (RDE)142 or a wall-jet cell (WJC).199,204,280 In contrast to the classical RDE approach, the second method (WJC) offers the advantage of operating with any kind of support (even those not likely to be rotating) and WJC was claimed to give the same results as RDE.291 These methods are based on the variation in the hydrodynamic conditions (variable rotation speeds for RDE or fluxes for WJC) and the resulting effect on limiting currents, Ilim, which are controlled by both the mass transport in solution, IMT, and the film permeability, Iperm (eqn (1)). Among these two contributions, the electrode response will be dominated by the film permeability under conditions of high convection (eqn (2)). (1) (2)A plot of (Imeasured)−1versus (flux)−3/4 for WJC or versus (rotation speed)−2 for RDE allows thus the estimation of Iperm. In eqn (2), d is the film thickness (which has to be determined, for example by scanning electron microscopy,280 profilometry or ellipsometry,292 or atomic force microscopy293), n is the number of exchanged electrons, F is the Faraday constant, A is the electrode surface area, C is the concentration of the redox probe in solution, P represents the partition coefficient between the film and the solution and Df the diffusion coefficient of the molecular probe in the film. The results are often discussed on the basis of the permeability (as defined by the product of P and Df) because estimating P is often difficult. The method was applied to the characterization of permeability through mesoporous silica thin films prepared using CTAB as a template, giving rise to much higher permeability values for cubic films than for 2D-hexagonal ones (by ∼2 orders of magnitude).199 The method is notably very useful to characterize a series of thin films prepared according to the same procedure but showing distinct features. For example, hexagonal and vertically oriented mesoporous silica thin films bearing various amounts of methyl groups (with variable pore size and hydrophobic–hydrophilic balance) led to more and more restricted mass transport for a target redox probe (ferroceneethanol in this case) as the methyl group content was higher in the material, due to less and less available space in the mesopore channels for the probe to diffuse (see Fig. 13A in which higher 1/Ilim values, i.e., the plot intercepts, correspond to slower diffusion rates). From these data, one can extract permeability values, which were found to decrease from 1 × 10−7 to 3 × 10−10 cm2 s−1, from 0% to 60% methyl group content, respectively.280
 Fig. 13  (A) 1/Ilimvs. V−3/4 plots obtained from chronoamperometry experiments performed at a potential of 0.8 V vs. an Ag/AgCl reference electrode in 0.05 mol L−1 potassium hydrogen phthalate solutions containing 1 mM ferrocenethanol (Fc) using ITO electrodes modified with mesoporous silica films incorporating various methyl group contents (a–g correspond, respectively, to films prepared from sols containing (a) 0, (b) 10, (c) 20, (d) 30, (e) 40, (f) 50 and (g) 60% MTES). (B) Experimental SECM approach curves recorded with a 25 mm-diameter Pt ultramicroelectrode (UME) approaching ITO plates modified with the same series of surfactant-extracted methyl-functionalized mesoporous silica thin films. Current variations (i.e., normalized current, IR, plotted as a function of the normalized UME–substrate distance, d/a) were measured by using 1 mM ferrocenedimethanol (Fc) as the redox probe in a 0.05 mol L−1 potassium hydrogen phthalate solution. The tip voltage was held at +600 mV and ITO substrates were biased at 0 mV vs. a silver wire pseudo-reference. Reprinted from ref. 280, Copyright (2010) Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). 
EIS is basically not suited to offer information on mass transport processes as they are intertwined with charge transfer reactions so that the relaxation times for both processes overlap. Nevertheless, a model has been developed to separate the frequency dependence of the various faradaic and non-faradaic electrochemical processes, suggesting that EIS could be used to assess the transport properties through mesoporous silica films.281 Actually, the accessible area of the nanoporous film coated electrode is obtained from the high-frequency data, while the effective diffusivity of the redox probe is obtained from intermediate frequencies. This method was applied to compare the permeability properties of various mesoporous silica thin films prepared by evaporation-induced self-assembly using various organic templates (CTAB, P123, F127 and Brij 58) to get distinct mesostructures (double gyroid, cubic, hexagonal or rhombohedral). It was found that the degree of order and orientation in the film, in addition to the symmetry/topology, is a dominant factor that determines the accessible electrode area and mass transport of the redox probe. EIS was also exploited to study the stability of the nanoporous silica films in aqueous solutions as a function of pH,281 to determine charge transfer resistance of mesoporous titania films,294 or to investigate the effect of pore symmetry and connectivity on ion transport in mesoporous carbons of approximately the same pore size.295
Scanning electrochemical microscopy (SECM). 
Information on the permeability properties of templated inorganic thin films at a local scale (μm range) can be merely obtained by SECM. The principle (schematically represented in the left part of Fig. 13B) implies the use of an ultramicroelectrode (UME) positioned close to the film/solution interface and a redox probe in solution which is electrochemically transformed at the UME surface and can be regenerated only if the molecular probe can diffuse though the film to access to the underlying electrode surface. Experimental data are usually recorded in the form of so-called “approach curves” (see Fig. 13B for the particular example of the same series of methylated mesoporous silica films described above). Their fitting on the basis of a suitable model296 enables us to obtain normalized diffusion rate constants (κ) from which one can calculate effective rate constants (keff values) according to eqn (3) if the radius of the ultramicroelectrode (a) and the diffusion coefficient of the probe in solution (Ds) are known. (3)In the present example, using ferrocenedimethanol as the redox probe, the apparent rate constant decreased significantly by two orders of magnitude, from 2.1 × 10−2 to 2.0 × 10−4 cm s−1, by increasing the methyl group content from 0% to 60%.280 The interpretation to give to this rate constant depends on the nature of the film, as it can be affected by either the effective access to the electrode surface297 or the restricted diffusion into the pores,298 as well as charge transfer limitations. This technique is likely to distinguish transport rates through thin films exhibiting close features, e.g., oriented mesoporous silica films with various pore diameters, for which exponential increase of keff values with the mesopore size was observed.279 Finally, SECM is the only way to date to investigate the permeability of mesoporous microdots (10–50 μm in diameter) deposited onto conductive supports to solution-phase molecular probes.299

5 Electrochemical synthesis of templated ordered porous materials
Besides providing interesting tools to characterize charge and mass transfer reactions in mesoporous materials, electrochemistry was recently proven to be an attractive, and sometimes unique, means to synthesize ordered mesoporous (and macroporous) deposits on electrode surfaces. Actually, this constitutes one of the most versatile ways to prepare nanostructured electrodes. This was mainly achieved by direct electrodeposition or indirect electro-assisted deposition of selected precursor compounds (to give metals, semiconductors, metal oxides, polymers, or sol–gel-derived materials) through soft and/or hard templates.55–57 The soft templates are typically lyotropic liquid crystalline phases209 (made from highly concentrated surfactants or block copolymers) which can exist in the form of spatial arrangements with distinct symmetry (hexagonal, cubic, lamellar, see Fig. 14 for illustration). They can also be more diluted surfactant solutions containing the precursors, which are likely to undergo self-assembly co-electrodeposition in the form of a nanostructured thin film.11 The hard templates are mainly preformed mesoporous films, whose mesopores are filled with the precursors, which are then subjected to electrochemical deposition in the void volumes of the template material (formation of a structural replica).161 Note that such a hard template route to electrogenerate mesoporous materials constitutes somewhat an adaptation of a rather old method involving electrochemical deposition of metal nanowires or nanotubes through the pores of macroporous ceramic or polymeric membranes.300–302 An alternative approach is the electrodeposition through packed colloidal crystal assemblies, i.e., in the vacant spaces originating from a regular arrangement of microspheres (Fig. 15),55 but one has to mention that this method was mainly applied to the generation of ordered macroporous deposits rather than the mesoporous ones.209
 Fig. 14  Illustrative schemes of some surfactant assemblies and lyotropic liquid crystalline (LLC) phases that can be designed onto electrode surfaces and around which mesoporous films can be generated by electrochemistry. For the top LLC cartoons, blue represents the water domain, the white circles represent the hydrophilic head groups, and the yellow regions represent the hydrophobic alkyl chains. 
 Fig. 15  Illustrative scheme for the preparation of a colloidal crystal assembly around which a macro- or mesoporous material is then electrodeposited. 
Basically, one can distinguish three mechanisms that have been exploited to electrogenerate mesoporous thin films around supramolecular assemblies or through hard templates:
# direct electrodeposition of metals, which is usually performed by electro-reduction of metal cations in solution (eqn (4)); Mn+(aq) + ne− → M(s)(4)# indirect precipitation of metal hydroxides by electrogenerated hydroxide ions (eqn 5(a) and (b)), which could be then aged to form oxides, or one-step formation of metal oxides (eqn (6)); 2H2O + 2e− → 2OH(aq)− + H2(g)(5a) (5b) Mn+(aq) + (n − 2x)e− + xH2O → MOx(s) + 2xH(aq)+(6)# sol–gel film deposition by polycondensation of hydrolyzed precursors (e.g., Si(OH)4) catalyzed by electrogenerated hydroxide ions (eqn (7)). (7)Note that in the two last cases (both initiated via a local pH increase at the electrode/solution interface), the generation of OH− species can proceed through other ways than water reduction, such as nitrate or perchlorate reduction or cathodic decomposition of molecular oxygen or hydrogen peroxide.303–305
5.1. Macro- and mesoporous metals
Mesoporous silica films prepared by EISA can serve as hard templates to create metal nanowire films by electrodeposition (i.e., electrochemical reduction of metal ions (eqn (4)) through the mesochannels), as first reported for palladium in 2D hexagonally ordered mesoporous silica films.306 Several 3D nanowire networks were then prepared using porous silica films with 3D mesoporous structures.307 Platinum nanowire thin films with S, Y, and swirl shapes were obtained using mesoporous silica templates of the SBA-15 type.161 A recent breakthrough in the field is the electrodeposition of a wide range of mesoporous metals (including copper, silver, cobalt, iron, or germanium) from supercritical fluids (CO2/acetonitrile or hydrofluorocarbons), which can rather easily penetrate porous and nanoporous structures, thanks to their low viscosities and enhanced mass transport rates.211 The film growth is usually controlled via tuning of the electrodeposition time. These hard template approaches for mesoporous metals electrodeposition suffer however from the difficulty to completely fill the free space of mesoporous thin films deposited on solid supports with the precursor solution (contrary to particles for which evacuation can occur in the opposite direction), which probably explains the ever-growing development of soft-template processes.11
Soft templating approaches for the electrosynthesis of ordered mesoporous metals (and alloys) originate from an important discovery made in early 1997, demonstrating that mesoporous platinum films can be produced by electrodeposition from lyotropic liquid crystals (LLC) made from assemblies of nonionic ethyleneglycol-based surfactants.164 LLC phases (top of Fig. 14) are characterized by internal structures of typical dimensions determined by the size of the surfactant molecule (i.e., in the range 2–3 nm for ethyleneglycol-based derivatives), and filling their aqueous domain with the appropriate metal salt and electrolyte required for electrodeposition does not significantly alter such mesostructured phases. Upon electrochemical reduction of the metal salt, an ordered metallic mesoporous film is formed by growing from the underlying electrode surface through the porous LLC phase. The mesopore diameters can be quite easily tuned by the choice of surfactant (e.g., the use of block copolymers to get larger pores)308 by the addition of lipophilic substances (e.g., water immiscible co-solvents).309 Selecting appropriate surfactants and tuning their concentration enable us to control the final architecture type.308,309 At first, 2D hexagonal mesoporous metals (e.g., platinum,310 palladium,311 rhodium,312 or bimetallic films313,314) were mainly produced. Then, other mesostructure types (mainly platinum) were electrogenerated, such as the cubic ones,239 the lamellar ones,315 or even nanostructures with hierarchical pore systems.316 The characteristics of the mesoporous metal film (surface area, morphology, uniformity and thickness) are determined by the deposition conditions (applied potential, deposition time, temperature).310In situ monitoring of the electrodeposition process by quartz crystal electroacoustic impedance, with an electrochemical quartz crystal microbalance, enables us to evaluate the film thickness.317 Later on, these electrosynthesis concepts were extended to generating other mesoporous deposits,318 such as semi-metals,319 binary or multicomponent alloys (as obtained by co-reduction of two or more metal ions),320,321 or even conducting polymers (e.g., polyaniline,322 yet not metallic but electronically conductive). Recent effort was also made to control pore alignment in mesoporous platinum films,323 or to prepare platinum films with extra-large mesoporosity (pore size of up to 30 nm).324 Thanks to the ability of electrochemistry to distinguish between isolating and conductive surfaces on a heterogeneous support, localized electrodeposition of mesoporous metals, through LLC phases, was claimed to be possible and the concept was demonstrated via the formation of mesoporous platinum in the confined area of microfluidic channels.212
Dilute surfactant solutions have been used to produce ordered mesoporous metals by electrogeneration. By taking advantage of the possible assembly of ionic surfactants onto electrode surfaces under potential control,325 a 2D hexagonal ordered platinum mesostructure was successfully obtained using sodium dodecyl sulfate as a template.207 In such a way, there is no need to pre-form an organized lyotropic mesophase onto the electrode surface (no direct physical cast), the mesoporous film formation results from a self-assembly co-electrodeposition process under accurate potential control. The method was then extended to the preparation of nanoporous gold nanosheet film via a surfactant emulsion template.326 To date, however, the use of potential-controlled surfactant assemblies remains rather limited to generate mesoporous metals, but it was more largely applied to prepare mesoporous metal oxides (see Section 5.2).
Finally, one has to mention another approach to templated nanomaterials on electrodes, which lies in between the hard and soft template methods, consisting in the electrosynthesis of macro- or mesoporous metallic structures around softly arranged colloidal assemblies made of packed spherical hard nanoparticles. The principle of the method (Fig. 15) involves the electrochemical deposition of metallic films through templates assembled from submicron diameter monodisperse polystyrene or silica spheres, leading to highly ordered porous metal layers. The porous, interconnected metal network is revealed after dissolution or calcination of the template beads. Pioneered in early 2000,208 the method was largely developed, afterwards.244,327 An interesting point is that the film thickness can be precisely controlled by following the temporal oscillations in the reduction currents (due to periodic variation of the active electrode surface area during the growth of metal deposits in the template), which notably enables us to stop the electrodeposition at a half-layer position (with a precision of ca. 10 nm).244 Such film with an open aperture at the top is of particular interest to favor mass transport from the external solution to the interior of the macrostructure. Of course, the macroporous films are beyond the scope of this review (see other papers55,56,209 for more details), but the process is mentioned here as it constitutes the basis of preparing hierarchically porous metallic films with porosity at different length scales, by combining the packed colloidal crystal assemblies with the soft surfactant templates.316 Note that hierarchical 3D metal nanowire networks can also be obtained from the hard nanocasting approach.307
5.2. Ordered mesoporous metal oxides and hydroxides
The aforementioned potential-controlled surfactant assemblies have been exploited to electrochemically generate highly ordered mesoporous metal oxide and metal hydroxide thin films. The method, as firstly reported in 2002,328 is named electrochemical interfacial surfactant templating. Its principle (Fig. 16) involves the use of a dilute surfactant solution (0.01 wt% ≤ surfactant content ≤ 10 wt%) containing also the inorganic precursors and subsequent electrodeposition (eqn (5) and (6)) according to a cooperative templating mechanism.303,328–330 The driving force to incorporate a mesostructure into the inorganic films is determined by the cooperative interactions between the surfactant, inorganic ions, and the working electrode during electrodeposition. These interfacial amphiphilic assemblies are independent from the solution surfactant structures, because the surfactant concentration at the interface is much higher than in the bulk solution and the nature of the solid substrate can have a significant effect on surfactant assemblies.325,331 The amphiphilic surfactants are selected based on the types of metal species to be deposited (e.g., charge and/or coordination preference) and compositions of electroplating solutions (e.g., pH and supporting electrolyte).303 The main objective is to ensure strong interactions between the metal ions and the hydrophilic groups of the surfactants in order to tightly bind these cations on the surface of the surfactant micelles serving as counter ions. It is therefore not so surprising to notice that anionic surfactants (such as dodecyl sulfate) were mostly used for that purpose because they can favourably interact with metal cations. The electrical bias applied to initiate the deposition process actually plays 2 roles, the first one being the organization of the interfacial template assemblies and the second one being the precipitation of the inorganic deposit around these templates, most often via electrochemically-induced pH change. Attention should be paid to adjust the electrodeposition rate to maintain a continuous reconstruction of the interfacial organic–inorganic assemblies. At first, many works were dealing with the formation of nanostructured ZnO films,303,328–330 then the process was extended to other materials, such as tungsten oxide,332 nickel hydroxide,333 cobalt hydroxide,334 tin oxide,335 or manganese oxide.336 The electrochemical interfacial surfactant templating method has been used to date to produce thin films with lamellar structures, as well as 2D hexagonal or 3D worm-like mesostructures. The potential-driven interfacial assembly also offers new avenues in controlling mesopores orientation via in situ patterning of the electrode surface.303
 Fig. 16  Schematic representation of an electrochemical interfacial surfactant templating method. An interfacial amphiphilic assembly composed of hexagonally close-packed spherical micelles is used as a template in this scheme and W.E. represents the working electrode. Reproduced from ref. 329, Copyright (2005) American Chemical Society. 
Another method to generate metal oxide and metal hydroxide films with a desired mesostructure is the electro-assisted deposition through lyotropic liquid crystalline phases of surfactants (Fig. 14), as reported above for mesoporous metals. In this case, a high weight percent of surfactant (>40 wt%) and inorganic salt (>40 wt%) is used to form a LLC phase in the electroplating solution, which is used as a physical cast to deposit the mesoporous films. Contrary to the above dynamic process dominated by cooperative interactions, the present approach leads to thin films with mesostructure types determined by the mesophase type of the LLC. Examples are available for zinc and copper oxides,337 nickel hydroxide338 or nickel oxide,339 cobalt hydroxide340 or cobalt oxide,341 and manganese dioxide.342 It should be mentioned, however, that the supported films prepared by such an interfacial technique are often granular.
In principle, the nanocasting approach could also be applied to electrogenerate non-siliceous metal hydroxides or oxides within hard mesoporous templates (since porous metal oxide monoliths prepared by nanocasting have been described343), but this was not so common for getting mesoporous thin films. The only examples are macroporous deposits with inverse opal structure (e.g., ZnO,344 RuO2,345 TiO2346).
5.3. Ordered and oriented mesoporous sol–gel films
A recent important discovery is the possibility offered by electrochemistry to prepare ordered and oriented mesoporous silica thin films, by the so-called electro-assisted self-assembly (EASA) method.202,203
This method also involves the formation of surfactant assemblies under potential control and concomitant growing of a templated inorganic film (as in Fig. 16), but the electrogenerated species (e.g., OH−) do not serve in this case to precipitate a metal hydroxide but they act as catalysts to gelify a sol onto the electrode surface. Actually, the method originates from an earlier observation according to which a suitable cathodic potential applied to an electrode immersed in a hydrolyzed sol solution, in order to locally generate OH− species at the electrode/solution interface, induces the polycondensation of the silane precursors and growth of silica or organically-modified silica films onto the electrode surface.347–350 In the presence of a cationic surfactant (i.e., cetyltrimethylammonium bromide, CTAB) in the sol, the electrochemically-driven cooperative self-assembly of surfactant micelles and concomitant silica formation lead to hexagonally-packed mesopore channels growing perpendicularly to the electrode surface (see parts A and B in Fig. 17), a configuration extremely difficult to obtain by other methods such as EISA.351 Homogeneous deposits can be obtained by EASA over wide areas (cm2), even on nonflat surfaces (see part D in Fig. 17), with thicknesses typically in the 50–200 nm range. The hexagonal packing is maintained over the whole surface but the thin film usually shows granular domains with grain boundaries either parallel or normal to the channel direction.352 Getting such vertically-aligned mesoporous silica film (i.e., an orientation with accessible pores from the surface, which is expected to enhance mass transport rates through the film and hence improve sensitivity of voltammetric analysis) is possible on various electrode materials such as glassy carbon, platinum, gold, copper, or ITO. The deposition time has to be short enough to avoid the formation of aggregates (some are visible in Fig. 17C).203 These films can also be prepared on insulating supports using higher electric fields.353
 Fig. 17  (A,B) TEM images of CTAB-templated mesoporous silica films formed by electro-assisted deposition on a glassy carbon electrode: high-magnification top view (A) and cross-sectional view (B). (C) Cross-sectional view obtained by FE-SEM for a mesoporous silica film prepared as in A and B, but electrodeposited this time on ITO (after vertical cleaving of the substrate “glass–ITO–mesoporous silica). (D) Cross-sectional view obtained by FE-SEM for a mesoporous silica film electrodeposited on a gold CD-trode displaying a streaked morphology at the μm level. Figures A–C have been adapted from ref. 202, with permission of Nature Publishing Group. 
These oriented mesoporous films can be obtained in one step in a functionalized form by adding an organo-alkoxysilane in the medium, such as aminopropyl-, mercaptopropyl- or methyl-trialkoxysilanes.142,202,280 However, the organized mesostructures were maintained only up to a maximum functionalization level (i.e., 10% for amino groups142 and 50–60% for the methyl ones280). Another way of modification is the growth of nanowires that were attempted to be electrogenerated within such vertically oriented mesoporous silica films (used as a hard template), as exemplified for Prussian Blue,284 the conducting polymers polythiophene354 and polyaniline,355 or metallic nickel.356 Co-electrochemically deposited palladium nanorod array/sol–gel silica thin film was also reported.357
Recent advances in the field were directed to get deposits with various morphologies (Fig. 18). First, the EASA method is compatible with the generation of bimodal macro and mesoporous films (Fig. 18A) while maintaining the mesopore orientation over the whole thickness (Fig. 7C) by combining with the colloidal sphere assemblies.204 Secondly, sol–gel electro-assisted synthesis was combined with a photolithographic/chemical etching process to form free-standing porous silica microstructures (Fig. 18B); though not reported in the paper,358 these deposits should be mesostructured as they were obtained under similar conditions as in EASA.203 Third, the local electro-assisted deposition of mesoporous silica spots of micron size (Fig. 18C) was achieved using a scanning electrochemical microscope, which was used to position a microelectrode (diameter from 5 to 50 μm), accurately at a close distance form the underlying surface to be modified, while locally electrolyzing the sol in the thin layer formed between the microelectrode and this surface.299 Under these conditions, with an appropriate arrangement of the working and counter electrodes (i.e., ensuring potential-driven interfacial assembly of the surfactants), thin films with mesopore channels growing perpendicularly from the surface can be obtained. Finally, taking advantage of the possibility offered by electrochemical methods to deposit sol–gel thin films onto the internal surface of complex 3D systems such as macroporous electrodes293,359 or electrospun microfibers assemblies,360 mesoporous silica films have been formed on 3-D scaffolds such as nickel foams.356,361
 Fig. 18  (A) FE-SEM (left) and TEM (right) images showing cross sectional views of bimodal macro-mesoporous silica films obtained by electro-assisted deposition. Reproduced from ref. 204, Copyright (2010) American Chemical Society. (B) SEM image of silica microstructures formed by electro-assisted generation on square-patterned recessed electrodes. Reproduced from ref. 358, Copyright (2012) American Chemical Society. (C) Electrogeneration of surfactant-templated silica microdots on ITO: (a) schematic representation of the method; (b) FE-SEM top view of an individual dot prepared using a 25 μm diameter platinum SECM tip; (c) SEM image of 8 microdots formed successively. Reproduced from ref. 299, Copyright (2011) American Chemical Society. 
6 Selected applications of mesoporous materials in electrochemistry
The attractive features of mesoporous metals, carbons, as well as silica-based and non-siliceous metal oxides (large surface areas, widely open and interconnected porous structure, intrinsic catalytic and/or conductivity properties, hosting capability) can be advantageously exploited in electrochemical applications. An overview of the main directions developed to date is provided hereafter. Rather than a comprehensive coverage of the field (ca. over 2500 references according to the Web of Science), the following sub-sections intend to give a flavour of the main domains emerged in the past 5–10 years, while directing the reader interested in more in-depth coverage of selected sub-topics towards previous reviews, when available.
6.1. Electroanalysis, sensors and biosensors
Some reviews are available dealing, exclusively or partly, with the electroanalytical applications of mesoporous materials. They include mesoporous silica and organically-modified silicates in electroanalysis,54 mesoporous silica-based materials for sensing79 or biosensing,65 templated porous film electrodes in electrochemical analysis,55,56 or analytical applications or ordered porous carbons.57 Most applications deal with chemical sensors (mainly based on preconcentration and/or electrocatalytic detection schemes) and electrochemical biosensors.

6.1.1. Direct detection – electrocatalysis. 
The straightforward detection scheme is the direct detection of target analytes at mesoporous materials modified electrodes. One can basically distinguish between the electronically conductive materials (mesoporous metals and carbons) and the nonconductive metal oxides (mainly mesoporous silica), which can be used as such or functionalized with appropriate catalysts.
Mesoporous metals (Pt and Pd) and ordered mesoporous carbon (OMC) film electrodes have been applied to the sensitive detection of various analytes thanks to their large active area.362–383 Better-defined signals, at lower overvoltage, were often observed in comparison to those recorded using bare electrodes. Two illustrative examples for the analysis of mixtures of quinone derivatives at mesoporous Pt (Fig. 19) and biologically-relevant species at OMC electrodes (Fig. 20) are described hereafter.
 Fig. 19  (A) Differential pulse voltammetry for (i) polycrystalline and (ii) mesoporous platinum electrodes in a mixture solution of 0.5 mM catechol and 0.5 mM hydroquinone in 1.0 M HClO4. The DPV parameters are as follows: scan rate: 10 mV s−1, pulse amplitude: 30 mV and pulse width: 50 ms. (B) DPV for mesoporous platinum electrode in the solution of 0.5 mM catechol in 1.0 M HClO4 and containing different concentrations of hydroquinone in the range from 0.05 to 2.0 mM. (C) DPV response for the same electrode as in (B) in the solution of 0.5 mM hydroquinone in 1.0 M HClO4 and containing different concentrations of catechol in the range from 0.05 to 1.0 mM. Reproduced from ref. 365, Copyright (2007) Elsevier. 
 Fig. 20  Cyclic voltammetry of (A) bare glassy carbon electrode (GCE) or (B) OMC/Nafion film electrode in pH 7.4 phosphate buffer solution without (dotted line) or with (solid line) the mixture of 0.25 mM ascorbic acid (AA), 0.25 mM dopamine (DA) and 0.5 mM uric acid (UA). The scan rate is 100 mV s−1. Reproduced from ref. 380, Copyright (2009) Elsevier. 
A mesoporous Pt electrode can be effectively used for the detection of catechol and hydroquinone in mixture (Fig. 19), in a more sensitive and selective way than on a common polycrystalline platinum electrode.365 Actually, the first example of effective electrocatalysis at the templated porous electrode is the detection of hydrogen peroxide at mesoporous platinum ultramicroelectrodes, showing an excellent electrochemical reversibility for oxidation and reduction reactions, with very sensitive voltammetric response, thanks to the unique combination of quasi-hemispherical diffusion and large electroactive area.240 Other reports then appeared for the nonenzymatic detection of glucose via its electrocatalytic oxidation at ordered mesoporous Pt electrodes,239,362,366 or the amperometric detection of a mixture of sugars (glucose, fructose, sucrose) after separation by ion exchange chromatography.368 Other examples of direct electrocatalysis at mesoporous Pt have been reported for thiourea electrooxidation370 or oxygen reduction,363 whereas mesoporous Ni was proven to be effective for detection of alcohol367 and mesoporous Pd catalytically active for the reduction of nitrite364 or formic acid oxidation.369 On the other hand, the cyclic voltammetric response of a mixture of ascorbic acid (AA), dopamine (DA) and uric acid (UA) (Fig. 20) exhibited well-resolved peaks with a OMC modified electrode (Fig. 20B) whereas these co-existing species cannot be distinguished using the unmodified glassy carbon electrode (only a single signal appeared at 0.35 V, Fig. 20A).380 This suggests electrocatalytic properties for OMC, which can be attributed to edge-plane graphite sites.176,177 As a result, it was possible to selectively detect dopamine,176 uric acid,379 or epinephrine,242 in the presence of ascorbic acid, or simultaneously AA, DA and UA in mixture.380,383 Other analytes were selectively detected thanks to these electrocatalytic properties. They include dihydroxybenzene or nitrotoluene and nitrobenzene derivatives,378 some drugs (calcium dobesilate377 or isoniazid381), methyl parathion,382L-cysteine in the presence of glutathione,376 and NADH.374,375 In comparison to carbon nanotubes (CNTs) or graphite powder and glassy carbon, the electrocatalytic performance of OMC was often claimed to be superior (better sensitivity, extended linear range and lower detection limit), due to improved electron transfer kinetics and catalytic capabilities.221,371 Better sensitivity was usually observed for more open/porous OMC structures.372,373
The surface of mesoporous materials can also serve as a support for another conductive material (e.g., metallic film or nanoparticles) likely to oxidize or reduce the target analyte at lower overpotentials. Examples of supported electrocatalysis can be found with mesoporous metals, OMC, and mesoporous silica materials. Bismuth-coated mesoporous platinum microelectrodes showed improved electrocatalytic behaviour, along with better selectivity and larger sensitivity, for glucose384 or formic acid385 detection in comparison to the non-modified mesoporous Pt. On the other hand, the incorporation of noble metal nanoparticles (NPs) inside the mesopore network of OMC materials, such as gold,386 platinum,387,388 or palladium,389 enabled the electrocatalytic detection of hydrogen peroxide. These NPs enabled operation at rather low overvoltages (applied potentials close to 0.0 V), resulting in quite good selectivity of species such as ascorbic acid, uric acid, dopamine, or acetaminophen. Hydrazine detection was achieved using palladium389 and platinum390 NPs on OMC. Interestingly, such nanosystems based on platinum387,388 or bimetallic platinum–palladium391 nanoparticles are likely to catalyze the direct oxidation of glucose at pH values close to neutrality,387 whereas the use of nonmodified OMC materials required highly alkaline media.392 Metal NPs can also be immobilized in electronically insulating materials for electrocatalytic purposes, such as gold393 or silver394 NPs in amine-functionalized mesoporous silica, which were then, respectively, applied to the detection of glucose393 or H2O2394 at low overpotentials.
Another way to further enhance the sensitivity of the method, but also to improve the detection selectivity, is the mediated electrocatalysis involving the use of charge transfer mediators. Such mediators are notably important in electroanalysis because they enable at reducing the overpotentials usually observed for numerous electroactive analytes. The general principle (Fig. 21) is described by eqn (8)–(10) for the example of the oxidation of a substrate SRed into a product POx. Assuming a high overpotential for the electrochemical oxidation of SRed (, eqn (8); the subscript S indicates the substrate), the addition of a mediator MRed (from a fast MOx/MRed redox couple) enables us to lower the overpotential barrier by electrogeneration of MOx at  (eqn (10)), which then reacts chemically with SRed to produce POx with concomitant regeneration of the catalyst MRed (eqn (9)). The overall process results therefore in the electrochemical transformation of SRed at a much lower overpotential than the initial substrate in the absence of a mediator . (8) (9) (10)From a practical point of view, it is important to immobilize the mediator at the electrode surface (reagent-free (bio)sensors), and mesoporous materials are attractive hosts to achieve this goal. If some examples of electrocatalytic sensors are available (see hereafter), it is however noteworthy that the most overwhelming applications of mediated electrocatalysis with mesoporous materials are found in the biosensors field (see Section 6.1.3). Several families of mediators have been immobilized within/onto OMC-modified electrodes and applied to the electrocatalytic detection of various analytes. This is the case of inorganic compounds such as the polyoxometalate H6P2Mo12O62·xH2O (to detect nitrite, bromate, iodate, and H2O2),180 cerium(III) 12-tungstophosphoric acid (for the analysis of guanine, adenine, or both of them in mixture),248 as well as cerium or cobalt hexacyanoferrates (for amperometric sensing of hydrazine396 and L-dopa397). In the family of metal oxides, hydroxides or sulfides, one can find several examples (Ni(OH)2,398 Cu2S,399 or Fe3O4400) exhibiting electrocatalytic properties towards H2O2. Organometallic catalysts were also used for that purpose: ferrocene derivatives applied to the detection of ascorbic acid247 and uric acid,246 or a binuclear cobalt phthalocyanine for the amperometric detection of 2-mercapto-ethanol.249 Molecular or polymeric organic redox mediators have been immobilized onto OMC surfaces by impregnation or electropolymerization. They include adsorbed Nile Blue,250 Meldola's Blue,395 and tetrathiafulvalene,251 to detect NADH, H2O2, and dissolved oxygen, respectively, while polythionine,252 poly(Azure B),253 poly(neutral red),254 or polycatechol,255 supported on OMC, led to selective NADH detection. On the other hand, mesoporous silica-based materials were also used to host mediators and deposited as thin films on electrodes or dispersed in carbon paste electrodes for electrocatalytic purposes.
 Fig. 21  Scheme illustrating the general principle of mediated electrocatalysis at a mediator-modified electrode: (a) overpotential observed for the direct oxidation of a reductant substrate SRed into an oxidized product POx (dotted line represents the curve that would have been obtained in the absence of kinetic limitations); (b) electrochemical behaviour of a redox mediator couple (MRed/MOx) characterized by fast electron transfer kinetics; (c) electrocatalytic transformation of SRed into POx by means of the mediator immobilized at the electrode surface. 
Polyoxometalates or Prussian Blue derivatives have been immobilized in (protonated) amine-functionalized mesoporous silica due to favourable electrostatic interactions.260,401,402 12-tungstophosphoric heteropolyacid anions (in FSM-16) and 1:12 phosphomolybdic anions (in MCM-41) have been, respectively, used as charge-transfer co-factors for the amperometric detection of NO2−402 and ClO3−/BrO3−.401 The electrocatalytic reduction of nitrite ions was also reported using a redox polymer based on the poly(4-vinylpyridine) complex of [Os(bpy)2Cl]+ quaternized with methyl iodide, immobilized onto a mesoporous silica.191 More sophisticated systems can be built, such as zinc phthalocyanine adsorbed on Ag/Au NPs anchored onto thiol-functionalized MCM-41, which exhibited synergistic effects for the electrocatalytic reduction of molecular oxygen.403


6.1.2. Preconcentration electroanalysis. 
The accumulation of target analytes from dilute solutions onto the electrode surface prior to their electrochemical detection is a commonly-used approach for enhancing the electrode sensitivity. This can be basically achieved under potentiostatic conditions for electroactive metal cations, with detection by anodic stripping voltammetry (as described for Ag+ on mesoporous Pt404 or Pb2+ on OMC electrodes405), but no significant improvement with respect to the corresponding conventional planar electrodes was observed,404 as a result of similar faradaic-to-capacitive current ratios. Better results, exploiting the large surface areas of mesoporous materials, can be obtained by performing the analyte preconcentration at open-circuit. In this case, the accumulation of the target species occurs via adsorption or electrostatic binding to the mesopore surface, and the efficiency of the process is ensured by the large surface areas (great adsorption capacity) and the open and interconnected mesoporosity (high transport rates). This has been applied to the analysis of catechol and hydroquinone,406 ultra-trace nitroaromatic compounds,407 nitrobenzene,408 tirapazamine,409 morphine,410 riboflavin,411 the Sudan I dye,412 or folic acid,413 at OMC modified electrodes. Sorption properties of ordered mesoporous silica were otherwise exploited for the preconcentration electroanalysis of metal cations,214 nitroaromatic compounds,175 bisphenol A,414 ascorbic and uric acids and xanthine,415 nitro- and aminophenol derivatives,416,417 and some drugs,418,419 while chlorophenol was successfully accumulated onto mesoporous titania prior to sensitive detection.420
Even if heavy metal species, such as Hg(II), can accumulate on mesoporous silica, simply by adsorption,421 the performance of the adsorbent can be greatly improved by functionalization with suitable organic groups. Mesoporous organosilica materials have indeed found various applications as nanoengineered adsorbents for pollutant removal,422 but also as electrode modifiers for preconcentration electroanalysis.54 Their main features in this respect are, on one hand, the possibility of tuning the selectivity of the recognition event (and therefore the selectivity of the detection) by an adequate selection of the organo-functional group and, on the other hand, the well-ordered and rigid mesostructure ensuring fast transport of reactants (and thereby high preconcentration efficiency and good sensitivity for the sensor). Among the most significant advances is the dramatically enhanced sensitivity observed when using an electrode modified with a mesostructured adsorbent instead of the non-ordered homologue, as illustrated by the comparison of Hg(II) detection subsequent to open-circuit accumulation at thiol-functionalized silica materials (Fig. 22). This agrees well with the fastest mass transport processes discussed above (Section 4.2.1).423 At first, many works were based on rather simple functions such as thiol424–426 or amine groups.142 Later on, in an attempt to improve the selectivity of the accumulation step, several other organo-functional groups have been used (Fig. 23), such as quaternary ammonium,427 sulfonate,428 glycinylurea,429 salicylamide,217 carnosine,430 acetamide phosphonic acid,431 benzothiazolethiol,432 acetylacetone,433 cyclam derivatives,434,435 β-cyclodextrin,436 5-mercapto-1-methyltetrazole,437,438 or ionic liquids.439 They are likely to accumulate analytes via complexation and ion exchange.
 Fig. 22  Influence of the preconcentration time on the voltammetric response of carbon paste electrodes modified with (A) a mercaptopropyl-functionalized mesoporous silica prepared from a TEOS/MPTMS 80:20 and (B) an amorphous silica gel grafted with the mercaptopropyl group; accumulation medium: 5 × 10−7 M Hg(NO3)2 in 0.1 M HNO3; detection medium: 3 M HCl; other conditions of the detection process: 1 min electrolysis at −0.7 V, followed by anodic stripping differential pulse voltammetric detection. Inset: variation of the stripping peak area with the accumulation time. 
 Fig. 23  Examples of organo-functional groups used to modify mesoporous silica materials, which have been exploited to date in preconcentration electroanalysis. 
Several analytes have been detected using electrodes modified with mesoporous organic–inorganic hybrid materials, such as Ag(I),440 Cu(II),435 Cd(II),431 Hg(II),425,432 Pb(II),424,437 Eu(III),217 U(VI).441 The experiment involves first the preconcentration of the analyte in the mesostructured hybrid material, usually followed by its desorption in the detection medium, and subsequent quantitative electrochemical detection. Recent efforts were directed to the analysis of several cations in a mixture (e.g., {Cd(II) + Pb(II) + Cu(II)}426,433 or {Hg(II) + Cd(II) + Pb(II) + Cu(II)}439) which were accumulated together before being selectively detected via voltammetric signals located at distinct potential values. Sometimes, the selectivity is induced by the preferential recognition of the organo-functional group for the target metal in the presence of potentially-interfering species, which can be tuned by molecular engineering of the immobilized ligands. For example, using mesoporous silica bearing cyclam groups led to very good selectivity for Cu(II),434 whereas the addition of acetamide arms on the cyclam centres resulted in shifting the selectivity towards Pb(II).435 The preconcentration/voltammetric detection scheme was applied on the basis of both film and bulk composite electrode configurations. Both gave good results but the response time of film electrodes is often slower, especially at low analyte concentration, because the accumulation starts on the upper part of the film contacting the solution, which results in very low amounts of accumulated species when operating in dilute solutions, some of them being lost after desorption in the detection medium and therefore not detectable on the electrode surface.438 This effect can be minimized by utilizing very thin films with mesopore channels oriented normal to the underlying electrode, which contributes to the acceleration of the recognition event. Note that the advantage of ordered mesoporous adsorbents in giving rise to more sensitive detection in preconcentration electroanalysis (in comparison to non-ordered silica gels) is only valid when the rate-determining step is the diffusion of the analyte in the material, not in the case of kinetics dominated by the complexation reaction itself.442 Organic species can also be determined using functionalized mesoporous silica (e.g., bisphenol A443 or dihydroxybenzene isomers444 after accumulation at aminopropyl-grafted SBA-15). In addition, organically-modified mesoporous silica films can act as permselective barriers, as demonstrated for aminopropyl-functionalized films exhibiting ion-permselective pH-switchable behaviour,285,289,445 which constitutes another possible avenue to improve selectivity by rejecting interferences.


6.1.3. Electrochemical biosensors and related devices. 
An electrochemical biosensor is an analytical device contains an immobilized sensitive biomaterial (mainly an enzyme, but also antibody, antigen, organelles, DNA, whole cells or tissues) in close contact with an electrochemical transducer that is likely to convert a biological event into a quantitatively measurable electrical signal. Two key requirements that are still to be improved in the development of electrochemical biosensors (and bioreactors as well) are: (i) the need for effective and durable immobilization of huge amounts of biomolecules in an active form, and (ii) a favorable environment for efficient electron transfer reactions. The mesoporous materials offer several attractive properties that can be exploited for that purposes (large surface areas for immobilization of reactants and biocomponents, interconnected pore systems to ensure fast accessibility to active centres, intrinsic electrocatalytic properties or support for electrocatalysts, possibility of functionalization). Although most advances to date have been achieved with silica-based mesoporous materials,65 some others (notably OMC and nonsiliceous metal oxides) start to become useful to the field of bioelectrochemistry. Some directions are briefly discussed below.
Immobilization of heme proteins, direct electrochemistry and electrocatalysis. 
The redox protein haemoglobin immobilized on electronically-conductive OMC materials (CMK-3,192 CMK-1,446 FDU-15,447 a mesoporous carbon/whisker-like carbon,194 or graphitized macro- or mesoporous carbons448) exhibited both direct electrochemistry and electrocatalytic response to H2O2 detection. Strong binding of the protein to the OMC surface was ensured by an activation step to produce oxygen-active centres such as carboxylic acid moieties. Also, the heterogeneous electron transfer kinetics was found to be dependent on the OMC pore size, increasing while decreasing pore size, to reach a maximum value when pore size (i.e., 2.8 nm) matched the dimensions of the biomolecule (i.e., 2.1 × 3.5 × 4.4 nm59), suggesting optimum confinement in this case.446 Similar direct electrochemistry was claimed for heme proteins immobilized in mesoporous semi-conductors (i.e., haemoglobin in TiO2267 and cytochrome c in Nb2O5449). As suggested above (end of Section 4.1), possible direct electrochemistry was also claimed for heme proteins such as cytochrome c,264,265 haemoglobin,266,267 or myoglobin,268,450 when immobilized in non-conductive mesoporous silica particles or continuous mesoporous silica layers deposited as thin films on electrode surfaces. Such systems indeed gave rise to well-defined voltammetric responses indicating that the proteins retain their biological activity once immobilized within the mesoporous material. The pore structure and size of the host material have significant effects (Fig. 24) on the amount of immobilized proteins (e.g., haemoglobin almost excluded from MCM-41 while fitting well inside SBA-15451) and, at similar loadings, the interconnected 3D or bimodal mesostructures resulted in higher current responses.451,452 Sometimes, additives were used to improve the electron transfer reactions (e.g., ionic liquids453), or to prevent leakage of the protein out of the material (e.g., chitosan452). Again, due to their peroxidase activity, the immobilized heme proteins were sensitive to the presence of hydrogen peroxide, showing an electrocatalytic response towards hydrogen peroxide.264,266,268,450,452,453 The sensitivity of the device was dependent on the electrode configuration and the addition of gold nanoparticles or CdTe quantum dots was reported to enhance the biosensor response.174,179
 Fig. 24  (A) Binding plots of (a) Hb/MCM-41, (b) Hb/SBA-15 and (c) Hb/MCF; MCM-41 and SBA-15 are 1D hexagonal materials while MCF is a 3D mesostructure. (B) Schematic of haemoglobin (Hb) immobilized on mesoporous silica materials and the electron transfer between Hb and the GC electrode. (C) CVs of (a) Hb/GC electrode, (b) Hb/MCM-41/GC electrode, (c) Hb/SBA-15/GC electrode and (d) Hb/MCF/GC modified electrode at 0.3 V s−1 in PBS (pH 7.0). Reproduced from ref. 451, Copyright (2010) Elsevier. 
Enzyme immobilization and electrochemical biosensors. 
The mesoporous materials (especially the silica-based ones, but also OMC) have proven to be suitable immobilization matrices for enzymes, while keeping their biological activity,58–61 and for biosensor construction.65 The first family concerns the so-called first generation biosensors in which only the enzyme is immobilized on the material and the electrode is used to detect the enzymatically-generated products. Examples are available for glucose oxidase or horseradish peroxidase (HRP) entrapped in mesoporous silica particles deposited as thin films on a glassy carbon electrode (GCE),178,190,454 or for glucose oxidase (GOD) and alcohol dehydrogenase immobilized within OMC particles which were also then coated onto the GCE.455,456 In the latter case, optimum electrochemical behaviour under conditions of pore size matching (i.e., OMC pore size of the same order of magnitude as that of the enzyme),455 and better performance (extended linear range, lower detection limit, better sensitivity and faster response time), was claimed for OMC materials in comparison to similar devices based on carbon nanotubes.221,456 For the nonconductive silica matrices, larger pore sizes were necessary to ensure fast mass transport processes (contrary to OMC in which the enzymatic product can be electrochemically detected nearly at the same place it was formed, the same product generated in an insulating silica matrix has to diffuse out of the structure to the electrode surface to be detected). A way to somewhat overcome this problem is to increase the conductivity by incorporating gold nanoparticles,187via the use of conducting polymers,457 or via the formation of silica–carbon composite nanostructures.178 Note that a purely organic ordered mesoporous polyaniline film, as fabricated by electrodeposition from a LCC phase, was also used as an immobilization matrix for HRP and applied as a hydrogen peroxide biosensor.322 On the other hand, Au and Pt nanoparticles supported on OMC, which are likely to lower the overvoltages usually required to detect H2O2 with high selectivity, were co-immobilized with GOD and applied as amperometric glucose biosensors.193,195 Bienzymatic systems based on the co-immobilization of two enzymes (e.g., tyrosinase and HRP458 or 2-hydroxybiphenyl 3-monooxygenase and GOD459) were claimed to operate quite well, suggesting that the confined environment of the mesoporous silica host preserves the necessary interactions. The second family involves the use of additional mediators which are co-immobilized with the enzyme in the mesoporous material to build so-called second generation biosensors. Except the case of ethanol detection at OMC bearing Meldola's Blue and alcohol dehydrogenase,460 all other examples to date are based on mesoporous silica hosts, including the use of formaldehyde dehydrogenase and quinone for formaldehyde detection,461 laccase and methylene blue for catechol determination,462 or lactate oxidase and a cobalt phthalocyanine for the analysis of L-lactate.463 The use of metal or metal oxide catalysts (e.g., CuO deposited on SBA-15 along with tyrosinase464 or Cu-doped OMC comprising laccase465) was also reported as a means to enhance the performance of electrochemical biosensors. Finally, it is worth mentioning that mesoporous metals were not yet applied in the biosensors field until now, although ordered macroporous metal electrodes were largely used for that purpose but this is beyond the scope of the present review (see other reports55,56).
Electrochemical immunosensors and aptasensors. 
The hosting properties of mesoporous silica were exploited to fabricate ultrasensitive electrochemical immunosensors. One can basically distinguish two different approaches for the electrochemical detection of the antigen–antibody recognition event. The first one relies on the use of mesoporous silica nanoparticles (in which the enzyme, e.g., HRP, a mediator and a first antibody have been immobilized) as nanolabels, which are expected to bind to an electrode surface (bearing a second antibody) in the presence of the analyte (the antigen, in a sandwich configuration between the two complementary antibodies), the resulting current response being directly proportional to the amount of nanolabels onto the electrode surface, and thus to the analyte concentration.466 Of course, improving the electronic conductivity of the nanolabel and the electrode surface led to better performance of the device (see an example of an electrochemical immunosensor in Fig. 25, with signal amplification strategies based on the incorporation of gold nanoparticles in the mesoporous nanolabel and the engineering of the electrode surface with graphene nanosheets, carbon nanotubes and gold nanoparticles).467–469 In the second approach (Fig. 26), the antibody is still immobilized on the mesoporous material, but this one is now coated onto the electrode surface and the mediator is in solution; upon formation of the immunoconjugates, the electrode becomes progressively blocked and the electrochemical response shows a signal decrease proportional to the target analyte concentration.470–472 Finally, new kinds of electrochemical label-free aptasensors were recently described, based on graphene–mesoporous silica–gold NP hybrids as an enhanced element of the sensing platform.473–475 This was applied to the detection of ATP473 or DNA474 using a parallel-motif DNA triplex system for amplification, or as a chiral selector for oligopeptides based on target-induced conjunction of a split aptamer.475 Mesoporous materials have been also implemented in an original device as a synthetic solid-state nanopores array behaving as single-molecule sensors, exhibiting nearly perfect selectivity for single strain DNA over double strain DNA.476
 Fig. 25  Example of an immunosensor for detection of human chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG). Fabrication process of Au/thionine (TH)/MCM-41 nanolabels bearing HRP-labeled hCG signal antibodies (HRP-Ab2) and the measurement protocol of the electrochemical immunosensor based on an electrode modified with grapheme nanosheets, carbon nanotubes and Au nanoparticles. Reproduced from ref. 467, Copyright (2012) Elsevier. 
 Fig. 26  Diagram illustrating the preparation of a label-free immunosensor for the determination of α-fetoprotein (AFP). GNP-APTS-MPS represents gold nanoparticles immobilized in aminopropyl-functionalized mesoporous silica, EDC/NHS the coupling agent for attaching anti-AFP (the monoclonal antibodies of AFP) to GNP-APTS-MPS, PVA is poly(vinyl alcohol) and GCE glassy carbon electrode. Reproduced from ref. 471, Copyright (2012) Elsevier. 


6.1.4. Other electrochemical sensors. 
The sorption properties of mesoporous materials have been exploited in the development of electrochemiluminescence (ECL) sensors. Tris(2,2′-bipyridyl)ruthenium(II) was mainly used as the ECL signal producer, as immobilized by adsorption in OMC,477 by adsorption/ion exchange in a mesoporous titania–Nafion composite,478 by ion exchange in sulfonic acid-functionalized MCM-41,479 or covalently bonded to mesoporous silica.480 Other ECL signal producers were also used, such as luminol on a mesoporous platinum electrode481 or 9,10-diarylanthracene units in periodic mesoporous organosilica structures of MCM-41 or SBA-15 type.182 Of related interest is the spectroelectrochemical sensing of H2O2 by HRP and cytochrome c peroxidase co-immobilized into mesoporous TiO2 and SnO2 electrodes.482
Some potentiometric applications of mesoporous materials were also reported. For example, nanostructured palladium films electrodeposited through an LLC template onto platinum microdisks exhibited a pH-sensitive potentiometric response.483 A dichromate ion-selective sensor was developed on the basis of a 8-hydroxyquinoline-functionalized SBA-15–ionic liquid–carbon nanotubes–graphite composite.484 Ordered macroporous carbon monoliths prepared by the sphere templating method have been used as novel and effective solid contacts in ion-selective electrodes.304,485
Crystalline mesoporous metal oxides found interest in gas sensing.486 Some examples based on electrochemical detection methods (i.e., conductivity changes, surface photovoltage measurements) are mesoporous silica for sensing alcohol vapours487 or detection of humidity changes;488 tin-doped silica for NO2 sensing;489 mesostructured In2O3 nanoparticles for the determination of volatile organic compounds;490 WO3 for NO2 sensing;491 highly ordered mesoporous Cr2O3 materials for various gaseous species (ethanol, isopropanol, acetone, gasoline…);492 and some other nanostructured metal oxides synthesized by hard templating which were also used for gas sensing applications.493 Thin films made of hexagonally ordered mesoporous carbon nanopowders were sensitive to gases such as O2 and NH3.494 Conductivity changes in pressed pellets of SnO2–MCM-41 particles have also been exploited to detect gaseous analytes, such as CO, H2, or CH4.495

6.2. Energy conversion and storage
Engineering materials at the nanoscale has started to become a well-established strategy in designing devices for energy conversion and storage. Finding innovative electrode materials with architecturally tailored nanostructures was triggered by the need for systems (batteries, supercapacitors, fuel cells, dye-sensitized solar cells) exhibiting always better performance (extraordinarily high energy densities, high rate capabilities, high yields). The field of nanostructured electrodes for energy conversion and storage has been the focus of numerous reviews so that only some general trends will be presented hereafter, along with citing these reviews (for the reader interested in more details) as well as some illustrative works to give a flavour of recent investigations.

6.2.1. Energy storage. 
Electrochemical energy storage/release is realized by electron and ion charge–discharge. Batteries and supercapacitors are two kinds of typical electrochemical energy storage devices, both of which store electricity in electrochemical processes. A rechargeable battery is usually composed of an anode, a cathode, a separator, and an electrolyte (see, e.g., Fig. S1 in ESI‡ for the example of a typical Li-ion battery). During discharge, electrochemical reactions occur at the electrodes, generating electrons that flow through an external circuit; during charge, an external voltage across the electrodes is applied, driving the movements of electrons and reactions at the electrodes. The principles of supercapacitors include an electrical double layer and pseudo-capacitive charge-storage modes. The former (most largely used) is based on the separation of charges at the interface between a solid electrode and an electrolyte (Fig. S2 in ESI‡) and the latter is a fast faradaic process involving electrochemical redox reactions. Among the various alternative energy storage technologies, electrochemical energy storage shows advantages of high efficiency, versatility, and flexibility. Li-ion batteries are the most important and widely used rechargeable battery with advantages of high voltage, low self-discharge, long cycling life, low toxicity, and high reliability. Supercapacitors have attracted increasing interest because of their high power storage capability, which is highly desirable for applications in electric vehicles and hybrid electric vehicles. The performance of Li-ion batteries and supercapacitors is intimately related to the electrode materials used. With the development of materials design strategies, synthesis techniques, and characterization methodologies, electrode materials and consequently the performance of batteries and supercapacitors have been progressing rapidly.496 Things being what they are, the current approaches are often based on a trial-and-error strategy of experiments and going deeper in the understanding of interface processes would benefit from cooperation between material scientists, electrochemists, and energy storage engineers.497 Nevertheless, nanostructured electrodes based on advanced materials are basically attractive for energy storage purposes.105 Among them, those designed from mesoporous materials hold an ever-growing position and, as the field has been extensively reviewed very recently (often as part of general reviews),9,86,155,166,167,497–504 only some highlights are given hereafter.
Rechargeable lithium batteries. 
The electrode reaction in a rechargeable lithium battery implies simultaneous intercalation of Li+ and e− into the active intercalation host of a composite electrode. Limitations of the system are mainly the capacity of the lithium insertion compounds and the transport rates of both Li+ cations and electrons. From the scheme of a Li-ion battery (Fig. S1 in ESI‡), it appears that mesoporous materials are expected to play a role in improving the behaviour of the anode and the cathode. Actually, the cathode is reported to be the lithium battery component that most limits its performance.502 It is usually constituted of LiCoO2 particles and reducing the dimensions of the electrode particles from the micrometer to the nanometer regime can enhance the transport rates.503 Another avenue is the use of mesoporous lithium insertion compounds and, although it remains difficult to prepare mesoporous cathodes based on lithium transition-metal compounds, some successful examples are available. They include notably a mesoporous low-temperature LiCoO2 material obtained by a post-templating reaction,505 or the ordered mesoporous LiMn2O4 (actually Li[Li0.12–Mn1.88]O4) spinel.506 These materials combine higher rate capability than the corresponding bulk solids, and also exhibit good mesostructural stability when cycled over a wide voltage range, along with demonstrating superior lithium cycling during continuous intercalation/removal (see typical capacity retention on cycling in Fig. 27). This approach based on mesoporous materials offers a number of advantages. Because the particles are of micrometer dimensions, fabrication into composite electrodes is similar to dense micrometer-sized particles, resulting in a similar packing density. The number of contacts that must be maintained between particles to ensure electron transport is not increased. The electrolyte can flood the pores leading to a high electrolyte/electrode contact area. The thin (nm-sized) walls ensure short diffusion distances for Li+ upon intercalation. In the case of ordered mesoporous materials, all the pores have the same dimensions (monodisperse), as do the walls, hence transport of Li+ within the pores, and within the walls upon intercalation, is identical everywhere, and all of the surface is equally exposed to the electrolyte. However, both pore size and wall thickness influence the rate of intercalation processes, but the latter is more sensitive than the former.507 Other ordered mesoporous forms of intercalation cathodes have appeared (e.g., TiO2,508 α-Fe2O3,509 β- MnO2,510 LiFePO4,511 LiTiO2512 and others513) and they are expected to be more numerous in the future. Efforts were finally made to improve the performance of the underlying electrode supporting the insertion material and ordered mesoporous carbons (OMC) were of special interest thanks to their high surface area, porosity, and good conductivity. OMC can be used as such,514 as a support for insertion compounds,515 or in the form of hybrid nanostructured carbon–metal oxide composites.516 On the other hand, some works have also been performed on the anode side and, again, metal oxide-doped OMC materials were of interest to ensure good cycling stability, high rate capacity and high charge–discharge capacity.517–521 Graphene-encapsulated mesoporous metal oxides (e.g., Co3O4, Cr2O3, and NiO) were also described as novel anode materials for lithium-ion batteries.522 The main motivation beyond these investigations on hybrid materials is the research of potential graphite substitutes exhibiting higher specific capacity while maintaining a good level of electronic conductivity.523
 Fig. 27  (A) TEM images of mesoporous LiCoO2, before (a) and (b) after 200 cycles of charge–discharge. (B) Charge storage (lithium) as a function of cycle number for (a) mesoporous LiCoO2 and (b) nanoparticle LiCoO2. Reproduced from ref. 503, Copyright (2008) Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH. 
Supercapacitors. 
As mentioned above, the two types of electrochemical supercapacitors are the electrochemical double layer capacitors (EDLCs) exploiting the high surface area carbon materials with regularly interconnected multimodal porous networks to offer effective charge storage,167,524 and pseudo-capacitors for which mesoporous transition metal oxides are of particular interest.504 Note that mesoporous carbon incorporated metal oxide nanomaterials are composites exhibiting synergistic properties in the supercapacitive behaviors.86 Few words on the intersection between ordered mesoporous materials and both EDLCs and pseudo-capacitors are given here (see more details in other reviews86,155,166,167,497–500). Dealing with EDLCs, ordered mesoporous carbons with controlled pore sizes are promising materials to further improve the power and energy densities of capacitors as they meet two important requirements: (i) they are likely to ensure good dynamic charge propagation by facilitating fast ion and electron transportation; (ii) they can be manufactured with micropores which have been recently reported to be of major importance for efficient electrical double layer formation (the pore size should ideally match the size of the ions).525 The ordered porous carbon materials obtained by a templating procedure have been first proposed as interesting supercapacitor electrodes.225–228 A high capacity would be obtained for materials likely to trap a maximum amount of ions in their pores and, as it was demonstrated that ions are preferably trapped in ultramicropores (i.e., size below 0.7 nm), one usually observes a linear dependence of capacitance values on the micropore volumes of OMC materials (Fig. 28).526 As under the application of an electrical polarization, the solvated ions have to diffuse to these small pores to become trapped as non-solvated ones, optimizing this mass transport would require to connect a great number of micropores to a regular mesoporous network. The possibility of accurately tuning the porosity (pore size and interconnections) and conductivity properties of mesoporous materials thus make them potentially interesting for such applications. Advances have been made in improving the EDLCs performance in terms of enhanced capacitance but also good cyclability and significant progress have been already achieved.524 Briefly, one can mention the importance of the carbon precursor (e.g., pitch-based carbon sources have the advantage of being graphitizable, leading to more conductive OMC than the sucrose-based ones), the usefulness to activate the OMC materials (to generate a highly developed surface area with numerous micropores), the accurate pore size control (appropriate tuning and/or development of hierarchical pore structures to combine fast transport and high trapping efficiency), or the necessary morphology control (from spherical particles, fibers, monoliths or films, useful for practical applications). Attempting to go one step further, recent efforts have been directed to the preparation of ordered mesoporous carbon–metal oxide composites as electrode materials for supercapacitors.86 Examples are available for OMC modified with ruthenium oxide,527 bismuth oxide,528 lead oxide,529 molybdenum oxide,530 cobalt oxide,531 or mixed metal oxides (e.g., cobalt and vanadium oxides).532 Following the same strategy, nanoporous metal–metal oxide hybrid electrodes have been prepared as electrochemical supercapacitors, giving rise to additional double layers and pseudo-capacitive behaviours.533 Note that mesoporous metal electrodes could be basically used as such for EDLCs but, on the basis above discussion about size matching, they should include micropores in multimodal nanostructures, as bicontinuous metal films obtained from oil–water–surfactant microemulsions as templates.534 Mesoporous transition metal oxides are attractive materials for being used in/as pseudo-capacitors.9,504 The interest in using pseudo-capacitor-based materials for electrochemical capacitors is to overcome the limited energy densities usually obtained with EDLCs (10–20 μF cm−2) by exploiting faradaic reactions that are characterized by much higher energy density (∼100 μF cm−2).535 Various successful examples are available, including, e.g., electrogenerated mesoporous cobalt hydroxide or nickel oxide films,339,340 mesoporous TiO2 films obtained by EISA,536 a mesoporous film of iso-oriented α-MnO3,537 ordered mesoporous β-MnO2538 or Co3O4539 prepared by nanocasting, CeO2 films,540 or a series of group V transition metal oxides.541 Maximizing power and energy densities of supercapacitors requires configuring redox-active materials in specific architectures that: (i) maximize electrolyte–electrode contact area, (ii) minimize transport distances for both electrons and charge compensating species, and (iii) minimize transport barriers.
 Fig. 28  Capacitance values in aqueous (▲) and organic (■) media of nanostructured carbons synthesized with various carbon precursors and templates (thus leading to distinct textural characteristics) versus their micropore volume determined by CO2 adsorption. Reproduced from ref. 526, Copyright (2005) Elsevier. 
The above examples demonstrate that mesoporous materials fulfil at least some of these requirements as ordered metal oxides usually gave rise to better rate capabilities than their non-ordered homologues,9,538,540 and that the combination of nanocrystals and mesoporosity is beneficial to enhancing capacitive energy storage.504,536,537


6.2.2. Energy conversion. 
The two main devices for electrochemical energy conversion are fuel cells and solar cells. Fuel cells are electrochemical devices that convert the chemical energy of a fuel (e.g. hydrogen, methanol, etc.) and an oxidant (air or pure oxygen) in the presence of a catalyst into electricity, heat and water (Fig. S3 in ESI‡). Solar cells are usually divided into two categories: photovoltaics in which light is directly transformed into electricity, and dye-sensitized solar cells that utilize a light adsorbing dye (usually accommodated onto a semiconductor) with electron transfer to a counter electrode through an electrochemical reaction involving an electron transfer mediator, thus sending out a current (see Fig. S4 in ESI‡ for an illustration of the operating principle based on the TiO2–I−/I3− system). Both fuel cells and solar cells technologies took advantage of materials science, and the mesoporous materials of interest for those purposes are briefly discussed hereafter.
Fuel cells. 
Among the wide variety of fuel cells, proton exchange membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs) and direct methanol fuel cells (DMFCs) have been extensively studied over the past two decades and started to emerge as some of the potential systems, which not only provide clean energy but also offer good commercial viability. In spite of significant advances and several successful applications of PEMFCs and DMFCs, they still suffer from high-cost (mainly due to the catalyst) and durability issues. Platinum (Pt) and Pt based alloys are the most commonly used catalysts for PEMFCs and DMFCs. They are commonly supported on conductive and porous membranes. An ideal support should offer the following: (i) good electrical conductivity, (ii) good catalyst–support interaction, (iii) large surface area, (iv) mesoporous structure enabling the ionomer and polymer electrolyte to bring the catalyst nanoparticles close to the reactants, i.e. to maximize the triple-phase boundary, (v) good water handling capability to avoid flooding, (vi) good corrosion resistance, and (vii) easy recovery of the catalyst.542 Besides the conventionally used supports (highly conductive carbon blacks), recent investigations were directed towards nanostructured supports, which can be broadly classified into two main categories: (i) carbon based/carbonaceous supports and (ii) non-carbonaceous supports. The advantage of using carbon based supports is that they enable fast electron transfer rates and high electrocatalytic activity whereas the search for non-carbonaceous based supports is particularly essential to deal with the issue of carbon corrosion, which can lead to loss of the catalyst (affecting the overall performance of the fuel cell).543 With respect to the families of materials considered in this review, mainly the ordered mesoporous carbon (OMC) and mesoporous metal oxide materials have found applications in the field of fuel cells, and to less extent, mesoporous metals. The synthesis and application aspects of ordered mesoporous carbon as novel material for fuel cell catalysts have been reviewed.84 The use of OMC in fuel cells was initiated in 2001, on the basis of OMC supported catalysts.544 This kind of application clearly exploits the support properties of OMC materials for getting uniformly dispersed nanoparticles of the catalytic noble metals usually used in DMFCs (electrocatalyst for methanol oxidation)545–549 or in PEMFCs (electrocatalytic oxygen reduction).550–553 Synthetic efforts were also made to prepare OMC doped with heteroatoms554,555 or exhibiting graphitic framework structures in order to improve conductivity.556 In addition to their support ability, OMC also enables efficient diffusion of hydrogen to the active catalytic sites, thanks to their widely open porosity, and their surface oxygen groups are considered to improve interactions between the metal catalyst and the carbon support allowing better dispersion. A variety of features are likely to affect the OMC materials performance in fuel cells applications, such as the pore morphology (i.e., superior activity for 3D interconnected mesostructures557), the pore size and pore size distribution,558 the choice of template (hard or soft) used to prepare OMC,559 or the surface state of the OMC material.560 For example, better electrocatalytic behaviour for OMC based electrodes (13–27 mW cm−2, for CMK-3 with different surface chemistry) has been reported in comparison to a commercial porous carbon electrode (9.5 mW cm−2, for E-TEK)560 (see illustration of polarization and power density curves in Fig. S5 in ESI‡). Such performance remains however low so that efforts are currently made to improve the electrical conductivity of OMC to thwart this limitation.561 A way to reach this goal is the direct synthesis method, i.e., by graphitization (which should be also preferred for large-scale applications).84 Bi-metallic catalyst systems, as commonly-used in fuels cells,562 have also been investigated with OMC (e.g., Pt–Ru563 or others564), and prototype power sources for notebooks have been developed with a cathode based on Pt and an anode based on Pt–Ru catalysts deposited as nanoparticles onto a graphitized OMC material. The performance of the so-assembled membrane electrodes (20 in a single stack) showed 80 mW cm−2 power density at 8 V using a 0.75 M methanol solution and air under ambient conditions.84 Recently, ordered mesoporous metals found interest as electrodes for fuel cells application,565 which can be related to their high surface area and intrinsic catalytic properties (i.e., towards methanol oxidation566 or oxygen reduction567). Finally, mesoporous metal oxides have started to be used in connection with fuel cells, as many conductive or semi-conductive oxides have been studied for a long time as catalyst support materials or as secondary supports to modify and promote the catalyst support, offering some advantages over carbonaceous supports (better resistance to corrosion, intrinsic electrocatalytic properties).543,561 For example, mesoporous titania supported Pt electrocatalysts were used as cathode catalysts for PEMFCs, showing higher electrocatalytic activity and better stability than commercial Pt/C.568 Mesoporous SnO2 bearing Pt nanoparticles exhibited similar electrochemical activity but significantly improved electrochemical stability compared to that of commercial Pt/C especially at high potentials.569 Ordered mesoporous WO3 possessing an electronically conductive framework comparable to an OMC framework, when decorated with Pt nanoparticles and used as a fuel cell cathode, was reported to offer better long-term operational stability than Pt/C.570 A mesostructured Pt/WO3 electrochemical catalyst prepared by loading a small amount of Pt (7.5 wt%) on mesoporous tungsten oxide showed high electrocatalytic activity for hydrogen electrooxidation and exhibited much improved resistance to CO poisoning relative to a 20 wt% Pt/C catalyst.571 Mesoporous binary metal oxides with supported metal nanoparticles (Pt on yttria supported zirconia,572 Au on CeO2/TiO2-ZrO2,573 or Ni–Fe on CeO2–ZrO2574) were also of interest for improving the performance of fuel cell electrodes. It is finally worth mentioning that ordered mesoporous materials, especially proton-conducting organic–inorganic hybrids (e.g., mesoporous silica containing sulfonic acids, phosphonic acid or carboxylic acid), might be of interest as membranes for fuel cells because they are likely to exhibit good thermostability and efficient proton conductivity at high temperature and low humidity.575
Dye-sensitized solar cells. 
Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) are photoelectrochemical solar cells functioning on the basis of photoinduced charge separation at a dye-sensitized interface between a nanocrystalline, porous metal oxide electrode and a redox electrolyte. Most DSSCs consist of mesoporous TiO2 electrodes (ordered or not) sensitized with organic dyes such as ruthenium dyes,85 Pt counter-electrodes, and I−/I3− redox electrolytes. The role of TiO2 is adsorption of dye molecules and transport of photo-excited electrons from the dye to the transparent conductive oxide electrode.576 To load more dye molecules and to induce efficient electrolyte (I−/I3−) diffusion, nanocrystalline TiO2 with a particle size of 10–30 nm have been employed to construct nanoporous TiO2 layers. In regard to electron transport, however, the nanoparticle-based TiO2 electrode is not an optimum structure, since it possesses numerous grain boundaries among the nanoparticles. Long-range ordered mesoporous TiO2 films have thus been proposed as more efficient structures for the electron transport, by minimizing the amount of grain boundaries, and for fast electrolyte diffusion thanks to their interconnected pores of uniform size. The field of DSSCs based on mesoporous TiO2 materials has been extensively reviewed,9,71,85,106,108,516 from their preparation and modification to their characterization and use as photoanodes, so that only a very few aspects are mentioned here, along with some very recent advances. The first and major breakthrough in the field is the successful preparation of mechanically stable TiO2 films in the anatase phase, as reported in 2001 by three independent groups.577–579 The key point of the synthesis is a post-treatment step by aging the as-deposited films under a humid atmosphere, permitting the reproducible preparation of high-quality mesoporous TiO2 nanocrystalline films with long-range ordering.577 Controllable synthesis of cubic (Im3m) mesoporous TiO2 films was reported just some time after.580,581 This was the starting point to a universal route to fabricate highly organized mesoporous TiO2 films with tuneable surface area, pore size and mesophase, mainly based on the use of block copolymer templates.71 Then, such kind of templated films were used in DSSCs. A main difficulty is that the EISA process applied to generate mesoporous TiO2 films leads to thicknesses typically in the 200–500 nm range, i.e., more than one order of magnitude lower than typical values (∼10 μm) reported for nanocrystalline TiO2 films exhibiting optimum photovoltaic efficiency in DSSCs. The second breakthrough was thus the development of methods likely to increase the film thickness. This was first achieved by successive layer-by-layer deposition of ordered mesoporous TiO2 layers, providing enhanced solar conversion efficiency by about 50% compared to that of traditional films of the same thickness made from randomly oriented anatase.582 Less time consuming procedures have then been developed.71 Structure–property correlations have been established, from nanostructured titania with various morphologies and mesostructure types, showing notably the potential ability of bi-continuous double gyroid structures to improve DSSC device performance.516,583 Nonmesoporous metal oxides, which can be obtained with the similar synthetic strategy applied to the mesoporous TiO2 films, can also be employed in DSSCs.584 Finally, enhanced performance of DSSCs can be achieved by nanoengineering of the counter electrode, e.g., by electrodeposition of a mesoporous Pt film on a transparent fluorine-doped tin oxide electrode, giving rise to higher short-circuit photocurrent arising from the increases in the active surface area and light reflection as well as the decrease in the sheet resistance of the ED-Pt film, relative to those of the Pt films prepared by the other deposition methods.585

6.3. Electrochromism
Another photoelectrochemical application involving mesoporous materials is the electrochromism. Electrochromism is a reversible change in material's optical properties (transmittance, absorbance and reflectance) under an applied voltage. The mechanism usually involves potential-driven insertion–extraction of ions into/out of electrochromic materials. Many inorganic and organic materials exhibit electrochromic properties but nanostructures with small sizes and large specific surface areas become increasingly developed/used because they are expected to facilitate the ion insertion–extraction process and then to enhance the properties of electrochromic materials and devices.586 In the series of materials considered in this review, mainly mesoporous TiO2 and WO3 have been exploited for electrochromism purposes. A first example demonstrated that mesoporous WO3 could exhibit the well-known electrochromic properties of this oxide and that the unique microstructure led to better electrochemical and optical reversibilities, with higher rates of coloration/bleaching as compared to standard sol–gel derived tungsten oxides.587 It was then shown that a combination of mesoporosity and crystallinity leads to improved reversibility of ion insertion–extraction and cycling stability and that 3D mesoporosity significantly improves the electrochromic response time as a result of shorter diffusion path lengths compared to the dense materials.588 For the same reason, bimodal WO3 thin films demonstrated superior performance over their monomodal counterparts.589 Only WO3 films with a highly crystalline framework exhibit almost unchanged electrochromic characteristics after prolonged potentiostatic cycling and exposure to elevated operating temperatures, whereas amorphous and partially crystalline films suffer from irreversible performance degradation due to structural modifications.590 Interestingly, it was observed that replacing the commonly-used indium tin oxide (ITO) with a thin metal layer as a quasi-transparent electrode leads to enhancement and acceleration of the electrochromic response of WO3, as otherwise there is an electronic activation barrier at the interface between WO3 and the ITO electrode, impeding fast electron transfer.591 On the other hand, viologen-modified periodic mesoporous nanocrystalline anatase thin film electrodes also behave as electrochromic materials. Highly organized mesoporous TiO2 electrodes exhibited similar colour switching speed and reversibility to nanocrystalline TiO2 but demonstrated better performance in regard to colour contrast.592 It was demonstrated that the electrochromic devices with an effective area of 1 × 1 cm2 fabricated from viologen-anchored mesoporous TiO2 films presented appreciably a stronger blue colour than those nanocrystalline films made of 7 nm-sized TiO2 nanoparticles with the similar thickness (see parts a–e in Fig. 29). The response time of the devices from mesoporous TiO2 films was around 1 s, whereas that of films from the nanocrystalline TiO2 layer 3 μm in thickness was ∼3 s (Fig. 29f). Again, better performance was attributed to the well-organized mesopore structures, offering an efficient electrolyte transport as well as the fast electron transfer from the ITO electrode to the anchored viologen moieties.593 Recently, a high-speed passive-matrix electrochromic display using a mesoporous TiO2 electrode with vertical porosity, modified with a leuco dye (Fig. 30a), has been reported.594 The high speed and high resolution electrochromic response was attributed to the vertical orientation of mesopore channels that can support effective diffusion of leuco dyes perpendicular to the electrode and can prevent the diffusion of the dye around the electrode. The device (Fig. 30b) consists of a working electrode and a counter electrode and electrolyte, and the mesoporous TiO2 film was grown only on the observation side of the working electrode. Imaging and erasing can be carried out by applying a potential of ±3.0 V to the device. The leuco modified mesoporous TiO2 electrode shows potential for the realization of a full-colour reflective display for use in e-papers. Finally, metal oxides other than WO3 and TiO2 have also been reported to exhibit electrochromic applications, such as V2O5,595 Co3O4,596 or nickel and manganese oxides.597
 Fig. 29  (a–d) Photographs for the electrochromic devices (ECDs) in colored state made by mesoporous TiO2 (Meso-TiO2) and nanocrystalline TiO2 (NC-TiO2) films with different thicknesses: Meso-TiO2 with thicknesses of (a) 330 and (b) 600 nm; NC-TiO2 with thicknesses of (c) 700 nm and (d) 3 m; (e) optical absorption spectra for the several ECDs; (f) transient absorbances at 530 nm for the ECDs made of the viologen-modified Meso- and NC-TiO2 electrodes with the stepwise voltage of −3.0 V and 3.0 V. Reproduced from ref. 593, Copyright (2006) Springer. 
 Fig. 30  (a) Mechanism of imaging using a leuco dye on a mesoporous TiO2 electrode with vertical pores. Imaging and erasing are carried out by applying a potential of ±3.0 V to the device. The leuco dye is changed to its colored form on the surface of the working electrode when an electric current is applied. The colored dye changes back to the colorless form when a reverse electric current is applied to the electrodes. (b) Imaging process for a passive-matrix electrochromic display. The working electrode (with mesoporous structure) and counter electrode (without mesoporous structure) are arranged orthogonally. The points of intersection of the electrodes are colourable positions. The electrode has striped ITO layers 420 mm wide and separated by 30 mm on a glass substrate. Reproduced from ref. 594, Copyright (2010) Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
7. Conclusions and outlook
This review provides the first full coverage of all the aspects of the intersection between the chemistry of ordered mesoporous materials and electrochemistry. The field is rapidly growing (∼5000 citations can be found in the Web of Science with keywords “mesoporous” and “electrode”) and topical (about 2/3 of the references cited here are dated ≥2007). Actually, the review focussed only on ordered mesoporous materials obtained by a template route and not on assemblies of nano-objects at the mesoscale (which are sometimes also ascribed to mesoporous materials). The main families of mesoporous materials used to date in connection with electrochemistry are silica and silica-based organic–inorganic hybrids, non-siliceous metal oxides, metals, and carbons. The interplay between electrochemical science and the chemistry of such nanosystems has found significant outputs in three complementary directions: (i) the use or development of electrochemical methods to characterize charge and mass transfer reactions in templated mesostructured solids, (ii) the electro-assisted generation of templated mesoporous thin films on electrodes, and (iii) the exploitation of the attractive, sometimes unique, properties of such templated materials for applications in the fields of (bio)electroanalytical chemistry and energy. Some topics have been already well-developed, others are currently under great progress and some others are still in their infancy, but the most significant evolution in recent years is the ever-growing development of practical applications of mesoporous materials for electrochemical purposes. Most of them exploit the attractive features of templated materials (widely open porosity, large surface areas with interconnected pores, intrinsic conductivity, or platform for functionalization). However, even if one starts to see a real relationship between structuration at the nanoscale and the properties of the final materials, going one step further in designing electrochemical devices with high performance would benefit from closer exchanges between electrochemists and materials scientists.
It has been clearly established that electrochemical methods are likely to provide important and quantitative information about transport issues in mesoporous materials. Actually, hydrodynamic voltammetry unambiguously demonstrated the definite advantage of materials made of ordered mesochannels of monodisperse size in fastening uptake/release rates in comparison to the nontemplated ones, which was often proposed to explain the good performance of mesoporous materials. Electrochemical methods were also used to characterize the behaviour of redox-active materials. Nevertheless, these methods could also be useful to discriminate between various processes that might be rate-determining in various applications (electron transfer through conductors and semi-conductors, pseudo-diffusion of electrons and electron hopping, mass transfer reactions associated to charge transfer, analysis of charge and mass transfer reactions at the local scale by electrochemical microscopy, etc…). A fundamental remaining question is how to explain (and perhaps to solve) problems that may happen at solid–solid (i.e., electrode/material) or solid–liquid (i.e., material/solution) interfaces in electrochemical devices. This could be analyzed by designing materials of distinct composition and variable textural parameters while some problems could be solved via a modification of the electrode material or a pre-treatment of the electrode surface or even via the use of appropriate catalysts or electrocatalysts. Finally, there is a lack of fundamental knowledge of the reactivity inside the confined environment of mesopore channels and, even if some electrostatic shielding effects have been brought to the front, there are still many things to learn about the energetics and kinetics of the key processes. Molecular dynamics could also be helpful in that area.598
The electrodeposition of ordered mesoporous metal films and the electro-assisted generation of templated metal oxides and hydroxides as well as sol–gel-derived mesoporous silica are now well-established synthetic procedures to get mesostructures in a controlled way on electrode surfaces. The diversity of mesoporous materials that can be produced by this way remains however limited and would benefit to be extended in the future for increasing their scope of application and/or improving the performance of existing systems. For example, efforts could be made to generate functionalized materials or multicomponent deposits. With respect to the silica-based films, the addition of zirconium oxide or semi-conducting oxides in the framework would lead to improving, respectively, their chemical stability or electronic conductivity. The generation of ordered metal–ceramic composites is also a possible direction (such electrochemical synthesis was already demonstrated for non-ordered gold nanoparticles/sol–gel composite materials599). Filling the vertical mesochannels of oriented mesoporous silica films by, e.g., metal electrodeposition, would be an elegant way to get nanowire arrays with unprecedented wires density but this remains challenging to date (see one very recent example for oriented gold nanowires600). Further improvements should be realized by tailoring the surface composition of mesoporous metals and carbons. Another direction would be the generation of multi-modal and multi-component materials by successive or simultaneous electro-assisted deposition of distinct components using different templates (e.g., surfactant-templated mesoporous silica deposited onto macroporous metal films electrogenerated through packed colloidal crystals assemblies). This could lead to electrochemical reactors taking advantage of a large electroactive surface area provided by the macroporous metal and a mesoporous layer likely to host a large amount of reactants (e.g., electrocatalysts, biomolecules).
With respect to electrochemical applications of mesoporous materials, recent efforts have been devoted to design particular templated nanosystems, not only to show the feasibility, but also for practical target applications. Extensive investigations have been carried out to improve the materials properties and/or device performance, including enhancement of sensitivity in electrochemical sensors and biosensors (by nanostructuration combined with functionalization with suitable charge transfer mediators, preconcentration agents or biologically-active compounds), improvement of energy storage performance (high rate capability, high energy density, long-term operational stability), efficiency enhancement of fuel cells (faster electron transfer and high electrocatalytic activity) and dye-sensitized solar cells and electrochromic materials (faster transport issues for enhanced photoelectrochemical conversion processes). Considerable challenges still remain in developing high-quality mesoporous materials exhibiting all the requirements to get the optimum behaviours (i.e., highest sensitivity and selectivity in sensing and biosensing, most efficient storage capacity and conversion yields for energy applications), in a very durable way, which constitute the prerequisites to accelerate practical applications of devices development. Of course, efforts that are needed and remaining challenges can be very different for each type of application (e.g., search for increasing selectivity in the sensor field to enable analyses in real media where interfering species are likely to exist, getting high-quality mesoporous TiO2 films with a thickness of up to several micrometers (without collapsing of the mesostructure) for photoelectronic devices, or finding strategies to improve the loading uniformity and stability of nanoparticles in mesoporous materials to maximize their performance in fuel cells). The hard templating method has been used extensively and successfully to synthesize ordered mesoporous metal oxides or carbons but it is not a direct one-step method, the preparation is expensive, and difficult to scale up. A logical consequence is the need for investigations of alternative synthesis methods. Such novel preparation ways should lead to materials with novel/improved properties (e.g., graphitized OMC with higher conductivity).601 Long lifetime stability is also required for many applications (especially in the case of expensive components such as noble metals), so that efforts should be made in designing materials with enhanced long-term mechanical and chemical stabilities. Extending the range of properties of mesoporous materials for increasing their scope of application also requires broadening and diversifying the composition of mesoporous materials. This can be achieved by modifying the existing materials (organic functionalization, coating with other inorganic compounds, deposition of nanoparticles, confinement of biomolecules, etc…), or by designing nonsiliceous and/or non-oxide materials. Research also should focus on the mesoporous multicomponent systems, which are not only expected to provide additional properties, but could also lead to synergistic effects likely to be exploited in selected applications requiring multifunctional materials (e.g., electrocatalysis and preconcentration in sensors, or conductivity and insertion properties in batteries). Materials with hierarchical porosity and structures hold great promise in this respect (as reported, e.g., for energy applications602). In addition, effects of the textural parameters of mesoporous materials, especially wall thickness, pore geometry and size, and pore volume, on the performance of the fabricated electrochemical devices should be well established and interfacial problems should be solved. Despite the great progress in showing the feasibility of diverse applications, until now, real-case operating devices ready for commercial developments have not been obtained. It is anticipated that major advances will emerge in the future by strengthening the collaboration between materials scientists and electrochemists.
An important final question that should be addressed, however, is that of the stability of mesoporous materials under operational conditions. This is especially critical for silica-based materials, which suffer from rather low hydrothermal stability as a result of chemical and structural degradation caused by hydrolysis of Si–O–Si bonds in aqueous solutions.603–606 Materials of the MCM series with small wall thickness are less stable than the SBA series exhibiting thicker walls, but only those without microporosity have been claimed to be stable under water treatment.605 Even if colloidal mesoporous silica nanoparticles were found to partly retain their mesostructure and morphology after more than half of them are degraded,606 significant loss in mesostructural order was usually observed over prolonged use in aqueous solutions, especially at high pH.607 Indeed, pH plays an important role in the dissolution–precipitation processes of silica, resulting in rather stable mesostructures at pH 4, moderately stable materials at neutral pH (i.e., hour range) and instability in alkaline media (as expected for silica).604,608 This is true for particles and also for thin films.609 So, the use of silica-based mesoporous materials is restricted to acidic to neutral media and restricted residence time in aqueous solutions, which might be acceptable for sensing applications (especially those based on single-use devices) but not suited to long-term use (such as required in energy storage or conversion). Both pre-treatment (e.g., with ammonium hexafluorosilicate610) and post-synthesis hydrothermal restructuring treatments611 have been proposed to extend the lifetime of the materials. Supercritical CO2 processing has also been reported to improve stability of mesoporous silica films under biologically relevant conditions.612 The most promising avenues seem to be, on one hand, the doping with other metal oxide (aluminium, zirconium),609,613 and on the other hand, the chemical modification of the silica surface (notably via hydrophobization).614–616 Remaining challenges in the first approach are to get hybrid oxides with uniform composition while keeping the possibility for further functionalization, and the second one would require fine tuning of the hydrophilic-to-hydrophobic balance to get the best compromise between stability and reactivity in aqueous medium. A particular case that should be considered with great care is that of silica-based materials bearing amino groups. Indeed, aminopropyl-functionalized silica is known to release progressively its aminopropylsilane moieties in solution due to amine-assisted hydrolysis of siloxane bonds617 and, even if such degradation is stopped after metal ion binding (because the electron pair on the N atom is involved in the metal–ligand complex and no more available for nucleophilic attack618), this constitutes a drawback in the practical applications of these sorbents in aqueous media. The presence of other kinds of basic nitrogen-containing groups on the silica surface was also claimed to lower the long-term stability of these materials upon prolonged contact with water.608 A strategy to overcome this problem would require the physical separation of amine groups from the surface silanol moieties, as suggested for mesoporous materials functionalized with bulky cyclic polyamine ligands (i.e., cyclam family) attached to the silica surface via 1, 2, or 4 siloxypropyl arms.619 The aqueous stability of the hybrid materials was largely improved by increasing the number of silyl groups but this advantage was counterbalanced by a lower reactivity.442,619 Another promising avenue is to control the nature and length of the linker (see, e.g. improved hydrolytic stability when using aminosilane monolayers derived from N-(6-aminohexyl)aminomethyltriethoxysilane).620
References
C. T. Kresge, M. E. Leonowicz, W. J. Roth, J. C. Vartuli and J. S. Beck, Nature, 1992, 359, 710 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Beck, J. C. Vartuli, W. J. Roth, M. E. Leonowicz, C. T. Kresge, K. D. Schmitt, C. T. W. Chu, D. H. Olson and E. W. Sheppard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1992, 114, 10834 CrossRef CAS .
U. Ciesla and F. Schüth, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 1999, 27, 131 CrossRef CAS .

          F. Di Renzo, A. Galarneau, P. Trens and F. Fajula, in Handbook of Porous Solids, ed. F. Schueth, K. S. W. Sing and J. Weitkamp, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmBH, Weinheim, Germany,  2002, vol. 3, pp. 1311–1395 Search PubMed .
Y. Wan and D. Zhao, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 2821 CrossRef CAS .
F. Schueth, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 3184 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wan, H. Yang and D. Zhao, ACS Symp. Ser., 2008, 986, 2 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhao, S. Budhi and R. T. Koodali, ACS Symp. Ser., 2010, 1045, 97 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ren, Z. Ma and P. G. Bruce, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 4909 RSC .
Y. Shi, Y. Wan and D. Zhao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 3854 RSC .
Y. Yamauchi and K. Kuroda, Chem.–Asian J., 2008, 3, 664 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lu and A. Eychmueller, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 410, 244 CrossRef .
R. Ryoo, S. H. Joo, M. Kruk and M. Jaroniec, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 677 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, S. Han and T. Hyeon, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14, 478 RSC .
J. Lee, J. Kim and T. Hyeon, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2073 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liang, Z. Li and S. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 3696 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wan, Y. Shi and D. Zhao, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 932 CrossRef CAS .
I. Muylaert, A. Verberckmoes, J. De Decker and P. Van Der Voort, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2012, 175, 39 CrossRef CAS .
A.-H. Lu and F. Schueth, C. R. Chim., 2005, 8, 609 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang and D. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 1217 CAS .
B.-L. Su, A. Léonard and Z.-Y. Yuan, C. R. Chim., 2005, 8, 713 CrossRef CAS .
K. Nakanishi, Mater. Res. Soc. Symp. Proc., 2007, 1007, S03-01 CrossRef .
B. Platschel, A. Keilbac and A. Stein, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2395 CrossRef .
A. Stein, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2001, 44–45, 227 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Lytle and A. Stein, Annu. Rev. Nano Res., 2006, 1, 1 CrossRef CAS .
A. Stein, F. Li and N. R. Denny, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 649 CrossRef CAS .
A. Stein, B. J. Melde and R. C. Schroden, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 1403 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sayari and S. Hamoudi, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 3151 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kickelbick, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 3102 CrossRef CAS .
B. Lebeau, J. Patarin and C. Sanchez, Adv. Technol. Mater. Mater. Process. J., 2004, 6, 298 CAS .
A. Vinu, K. Z. Hossain and K. Ariga, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2005, 5, 347 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. P. Corriu, A. Mehdi and C. Reye, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 4285 RSC .
G. E. Fryxell, S. V. Mattigod, Y. Lin, H. Wu, S. Fiskum, K. Parker, F. Zheng, W. Yantasee, T. S. Zemanian, R. S. Addleman, J. Liu, K. Kemner, S. Kelly and X. Feng, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 2863 RSC .

          B. Lebeau, F. Gaslain, C. Fernandez-Martin and F. Babonneau, in Ordered Porous Solids, ed. V. Valtchez, S. Mintova and M. Tsapatsis, Elsevier Ltd., Oxford, UK,  2009, pp. 283–308 Search PubMed .
A. Mehdi, C. Reye and R. J. P. Corriu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 563 RSC .
G. J. A. A. Soler-Illia and O. Azzaroni, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 1107 RSC .

          A. Mehdi, in Hybrid Nanomaterials, ed. B. P. S. Chauhan, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, NJ,  2011, pp. 299–329 Search PubMed .
M. E. Davis, Nature, 2002, 417, 813 CrossRef CAS .
C. Sanchez, B. Julián, P. Belleville and M. Popall, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 3559 RSC .
L. F. Giraldo, B. L. Lopez, L. Perez, S. Urrego, L. Sierra and M. Mesa, Macromol. Symp., 2007, 258, 129 CrossRef CAS .

          D. Brunel and M. Lasperas, in Nanostructured Catalysts, ed. S. L. Scott, C. M. Crudden and C. W. Jones, Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers, New York, USA,  2003, pp. 157–177 Search PubMed .
A. Taguchi and F. Schueth, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2004, 77, 1 CrossRef .
J. H. Clark, D. J. MacQuarrie and S. J. Tavener, Dalton Trans., 2006, 4297 RSC .
J. P. Gabaldon, M. Bore and A. K. Datye, Top. Catal., 2007, 44, 253 CrossRef CAS .

          Y. Wan and D. Zhao, in Synthesis of Solid Catalysts, ed. K. P. De Jong, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmBH, Weinheim, Germany,  2009, pp. 277–300 Search PubMed .
L. G. A. van de Water and T. Maschmeyer, Top. Catal., 2004, 29, 67 CrossRef CAS .
A. Yamaguchi and N. Teramae, Anal. Sci., 2008, 24, 25 CrossRef CAS .
A. Walcarius and M. M. Collinson, Annu. Rev. Anal. Chem., 2009, 2, 121 CrossRef CAS .
P. Kumar and V. V. Guliants, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2010, 132, 1 CrossRef CAS .

          J. D. Holmes, M. A. Morris and K. M. Ryan, in Self-Assembly, ed. B. H. Robinson, IOS Press, Amsterdam, Netherlands,  2003, pp. 175–183 Search PubMed .
T. Gacoin, S. Besson and J.-P. Boilot, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2006, 18, S85 CrossRef CAS .
A. Walcarius, C. R. Chim., 2005, 8, 693 CrossRef CAS .
A. Walcarius, D. Mandler, J. Cox, M. M. Collinson and O. Lev, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 3663 RSC .
A. Walcarius, Electroanalysis, 2008, 20, 711 CrossRef CAS .
A. Walcarius and A. Kuhn, TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem., 2008, 27, 593 CrossRef CAS .
A. Walcarius, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2010, 396, 261 CrossRef CAS .
A. Walcarius, TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem., 2012, 38, 79 CrossRef CAS .
H. H. P. Yiu and P. A. Wright, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 3690 RSC .
M. Hartmann, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 4577 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Vinu, N. Gokulakrishnan, T. Mori and K. Ariga, in Bio-Inorganic Hybrid Nanomaterials, ed. E. Ruiz-Hitzky, K. Ariga and Y. Lvov, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, Germany,  2008, pp. 113–157 Search PubMed .
S. Hudson, J. Cooney and E. Magner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 8582 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hartmann and D. Jung, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 844 RSC .
I. I. Slowing, B. G. Trewyn, S. Giri and V. S.-Y. Lin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1225 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ispas, I. Sokolov and S. Andreescu, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2009, 393, 543 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hasanzadeh, N. Shadjou, M. de la Guardia, M. Eskandani and P. Sheikhzadeh, TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem., 2012, 33, 117 CrossRef CAS .
T. Asefa, N. Coombs, H. Grondey, M. Jaroniec, M. Kruk, M. J. MacLachlan and G. A. Ozin, Mater. Res. Soc. Symp. Proc., 2002, 707, 93 CAS .
B. J. Scott, G. Wirnsberger and G. D. Stucky, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 3140 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ogawa, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2002, 3, 129 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yamashita and K. Mori, Chem. Lett., 2007, 348 CrossRef CAS .
A.-L. Penard, T. Gacoin and J.-P. Boilot, Acc. Chem. Res., 2007, 40, 895 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Pan, X. S. Zhao and W. I. Lee, Chem. Eng. J., 2011, 170, 363 CrossRef CAS .
B. G. Trewyn, S. Giri, I. I. Slowing and V. S.-Y. Lin, Chem. Commun., 2007, 3236 RSC .
M. Colilla, I. Izquierdo-Barba and M. Vallet-Regi, Expert Opin. Ther. Pat., 2008, 18, 639 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2009, 117, 1 CrossRef CAS .
M. Vallet-Regi, M. Colilla and I. Izquierdo-Barba, J. Biomed. Nanotechnol., 2008, 4, 1 CAS .
I. Izquierdo-Barba, M. Manzano, M. Colilla and M. Vallet-Regi, Key Eng. Mater., 2008, 377, 133 CrossRef CAS .
S. Angelos, E. Johansson, J. F. Stoddart and J. I. Zink, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 2261 CrossRef CAS .
E. Johansson, E. Choi, S. Angelos, M. Liong and J. I. Zink, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2008, 46, 313 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Melde, B. J. Johnson and P. T. Charles, Sensors, 2008, 8, 5202 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kim and J. Yi, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2004, 10, 41 CAS .
M. Jaroniec and O. Olkhovyk, NATO Sci. Ser., II, 2006, 228, 325 CAS .
R. T. Cygan, C. J. Brinker, M. D. Nyman, K. Leung and S. B. Rempe, MRS Bull., 2008, 33, 42 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Peter, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2007, 9, 2630 RSC .
H. Chang, S. H. Joo and C. Pak, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 3078 RSC .
A. Reynal and E. Palomares, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2011, 4509 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jiang, J. Ma and C. Li, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4197 CrossRef CAS .
R. W. Murray, Electroanal. Chem., 1984, 13, 191 CAS .
A. Merz, Top. Curr. Chem., 1990, 152, 49 CrossRef CAS .

          R. W. Murray, Molecular Design of Electrodes Surfaces, Techniques of Chemistry, vol. 22, Wiley, New York,  1992 Search PubMed .
J. Wang, Electroanalysis, 1991, 3, 255 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Cox, M. E. Tess and T. E. Cummings, Rev. Anal. Chem., 1996, 15, 173 CrossRef .
J. Labuda, M. Vanickova, M. Buckova and E. Korgova, Chem. Pap., 2000, 54, 95 CAS .

          I. Svancara, K. Kalcher, A. Walcarius and K. Vytras, Electroanalysis with Carbon Paste Electrodes, CRC Press, Taylor & Francis Group, Boca Raton, FL,  2012 Search PubMed .

          D. Leech, in Electroactive Polymer Electrochemistry, Part II Methods and Applications, ed. M. E. G. Lyons, Plenum Press, New York,  1996, pp. 269–296 Search PubMed .
J. Joseph, H. Gomathi and G. P. Rao, Bull. Electrochem., 1992, 8, 86 CAS .
Z. Navratilova and P. Kula, Electroanalysis, 2003, 15, 837 CrossRef CAS .
C. Mousty, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2010, 396, 315 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Walcarius, in Handbook of Zeolite Science and Technology, ed. S. M. Auerbach, K. A. Carrado and P. K. Dutta, Marcel Dekker, New York,  2003, ch. 14, pp. 721–783 Search PubMed .
O. Lev, Z. Wu, S. Bharathi, V. Glezer, A. Modestov, J. Gun, L. Rabinovich and S. Sampath, Chem. Mater., 1997, 9, 2354 CrossRef CAS .

          P. Audebert and A. Walcarius, in Functional Hybrid Materials, ed. P. Gomez-Romero and C. Sanchez, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2004, ch. 6, pp. 172–209 Search PubMed .
O. Lev and S. Sampath, Electroanal. Chem., 2010, 23, 301 Search PubMed .
M. Xu, J. Wang and F. Zhou, Curr. Top. Electrochem., 2006, 11, 57 CAS .
Y.-G. Guo, J.-S. Hu and L.-J. Wan, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2878 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, H. Bai and G. Shi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 2397 RSC .
R. Liu, J. Duay and S. B. Lee, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 1384 RSC .
M. Rawolle, M. A. Niedermeier, G. Kaune, J. Perlich, P. Lellig, M. Memesa, Y.-J. Cheng, J. S. Gutmann and P. Müller-Buschbaum, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 5131 RSC .
R. K. Joshi and J. J. Schneider, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 5285 RSC .
G. Oskam, Curr. Top. Electrochem., 2004, 10, 141 CAS .
A. N. Shipway, M. Lahav and I. Willner, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 993 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Gooding, Electrochim. Acta, 2005, 50, 3049 CrossRef CAS .
S. Guo and S. Dong, TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem., 2009, 28, 96 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Pereira, A. Kisne, N. Duran and L. T. Kubota, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2010, 10, 651 CrossRef CAS .
M. Oyama, Anal. Sci., 2010, 26, 1 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Belding, F. W. Campbell, E. J. F. Dickinson and R. G. Compton, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 11208 RSC .

          M. S. El-Deab, M. I. Awad and T. Ohsaka, in Metal Oxide Nanostructures and Their Applications, ed. A. Umar and Y.-B. Hahn, American Scientific Publishers, Stevenson Ranch, CA,  2010, vol. 3, pp. 441–481 Search PubMed .
D. S. Hecht, L.-B. Hu and G. Irvin, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1482 CrossRef CAS .
B. Lebeau, J. Parmentier, M. Soulard, C. Fowler, R. Zana, C. Vix-Guterl and J. Patarin, C. R. Chim., 2005, 8, 597 CrossRef CAS .
G. J. Soler-Illia, C. Sanchez, B. Lebeau and J. Patarin, Chem. Rev., 2002, 102, 4093 CrossRef .
G. J. Soler-Illia, E. L. Crepaldi, D. Grosso and C. Sanchez, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2003, 8, 109 CrossRef CAS .
J.-S. Hu, L.-S. Zhong, W.-G. Song and L.-J. Wan, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2977 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kuang, T. Brezesinski and B. Smarsly, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 10534 CrossRef CAS .
K. Schumacher, M. Grun and K. K. Unger, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 1999, 27, 201 CrossRef CAS .
C. E. Fowler, D. Khushalani, B. Lebeau and S. Mann, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 649 CrossRef CAS .
K. Möller, J. Kobler and T. Bein, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 605 CrossRef .
Y. Lu, R. Ganguli, C. A. Drewien, M. T. Anderson, C. J. Brinker, W. Gong, Y. Guo, H. Soyez, B. Dunn, M. H. Huang and J. I. Zink, Nature, 1997, 389, 364 CrossRef CAS .
D. Grosso, F. Cagnol, G. J. A. A. Soler-Ilia, E. L. Crepaldi, H. Amenitsch, A. Brunet-bruneau, A. Bourgeois and C. Sanchez, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2004, 14, 309 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhao and M. M. Collinson, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 4312 CrossRef CAS .
F. Hoffmann, M. Cornelius, J. Morell and M. Froeba, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 3216 CrossRef CAS .
C. Sanchez, C. Boissiere, D. Grosso, C. Laberty and L. Nicole, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 682 CrossRef CAS .

          E. F. Vansant, P. Van der Voort and K. C. Vrancken, Characterisation and Chemical Modification of the Silica Surface, Elsevier, the Netherlands,  1995 Search PubMed .
X. Feng, G. E. Fryxell, L. Q. Wang, A. Y. Kim, J. Liu and K. M. Kemner, Science, 1997, 276, 923 CrossRef CAS .
S. L. Burkett, S. D. Sims and S. Mann, Chem. Commun., 1996, 1367 RSC .
D. J. Macquarrie, Chem. Commun., 1996, 1961 RSC .
A. Walcarius and C. Delacôte, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 4181 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, K. S. K. Lin, J. C. C. Chan and S. Cheng, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 1763 CrossRef CAS .
F. Gaslain, C. Delacôte, B. Lebeau and A. Walcarius, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2009, 49, 112 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Lim and A. Stein, Chem. Mater., 1999, 11, 3285 CrossRef CAS .
L. Mercier and T. J. Pinnavaia, Chem. Mater., 2000, 12, 188 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. P. Corriu, E. Lancelle-Beltran, A. Mehdi, C. Reyé, S. Brandès and R. Guilard, J. Mater. Chem., 2002, 12, 1355 RSC .
C. Delacôte, F. O. M. Gaslain, B. Lebeau and A. Walcarius, Talanta, 2009, 79, 877 CrossRef .
F. Cagnol, D. Grosso and C. Sanchez, Chem. Commun., 2004, 1742 RSC .
M. Etienne, A. Goux, E. Sibottier and A. Walcarius, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2009, 9, 2398 CrossRef CAS .
T. Asefa, M. J. MacLachlan, N. Coombs and G. A. Ozin, Nature, 1999, 402, 867 CAS .
B. J. Melde, B. T. Holland, C. F. Blanford and A. Stein, Chem. Mater., 1999, 11, 3302 CrossRef CAS .
S. Inagaki, S. Guan, Y. Fukushima, T. Ohsuna and O. Terasaki, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 9611 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Hunks and G. A. Ozin, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 3716 RSC .
F. Hoffmann, M. Cornelius, J. Morell and M. Froeba, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2006, 6, 265 CAS .
H.-S. Xia, C.-H. Zhou, D. S. Tong and C. X. Lin, J. Porous Mater., 2010, 17, 225 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. P. Corriu, A. Mehdi, C. Reye and C. Thieuleux, Chem. Commun., 2002, 1382 RSC .
P. Van Der Voort, C. Vercaemst, D. Schaubroeck and F. Verpoort, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2008, 10, 347 RSC .
D.-H. Cha, Y.-S. Kim, J. H. Pan, Y. H. Lee and W. I. Lee, Stud. Surf. Sci. Catal., 2007, 165, 625 CrossRef CAS .
B. Neumann, T. Brezesinsky, B. Smarsly and H. Tributsch, Diffus. Defect Data, Pt. B, 2010, 162, 91 CAS .
A.-H. Lu and F. Schüth, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1793 CrossRef CAS .

          A.-H. Lu and D. Zhao, Nanocasting: A Versatile Strategy for Creating Nanostructured Porous Materials, RSC Publishing, UK,  2009 Search PubMed .
G. Wang, L. Zhang and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 797 RSC .
A. A. Ismail and D. W. Bahnemann, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 11686 RSC .
G. J. A. A. Soler-Ilia, D. Grosso, E. L. Crepaldi, F. Cagnol and C. Sanchez, Mater. Res. Soc. Symp. Proc., 2002, 726, 243 Search PubMed .
M. Wirtz, S. Yu and C. R. Martin, Analyst, 2002, 127, 871 RSC .
G. Cao and D. Liu, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2008, 136, 45 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Shin, R. Ryoo, Z. Liu and O. Terasaki, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 1246 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Wu, Y. Yamauchi, T. Ohsuna and K. Kuroda, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 3091 RSC .
Z. T. Zhang, Z. W. Pan, S. M. Mahurin and S. Dai, Chem. Commun., 2003, 2584 RSC .
G. S. Attard, C. G. Goltner, J. M. Corker, S. Henke and R. H. Templer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1997, 36, 1315 CrossRef CAS .
G. S. Attard, P. N. Bartlett, N. R. B. Coleman, J. M. Elliott, J. R. Owen and J. H. Wang, Science, 1997, 278, 838 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Kulinowski, P. Jiang, H. Vaswani and V. L. Colvin, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 833 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Upare, S. Yoon and C. W. Lee, Korean J. Chem. Eng., 2011, 28, 731 CrossRef CAS .

Carbons for Electrochemical Energy Storage and Conversion Systems, ed. E. Frackowiak and F. Beguin, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL,  2011 Search PubMed .
R. Ryoo, S. H. Joo and S. Jun, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 7743 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, S. Yoon, T. Hyeon, S. M. Oh and K. B. Kim, Chem. Commun., 1999, 2177 RSC .
A. A. Zakhidov, R. H. Baughman, Z. Iqbal, C. Cui, I. Khayrullin, S. O. Dantas, J. Marti and V. G. Ralchenko, Science, 1998, 282, 897 CrossRef CAS .

          Y. Xia, Z. Yang and R. Mokaya, in Porous Materials, ed. D. W. Bruce, D. O'Hare and R. I. Walton, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd., Chichester, UK,  2010, pp. 217–264 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhai, Y. Wan, Y. Cheng, Y. Shi, F. Zhang, B. Tu and D. Zhao, J. Porous Mater., 2008, 15, 601 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, D. Weng, X. Wang, Y. Cheng, G. Wang and Y. Lu, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 3736 RSC .
Y. Z. Xian, Y. Xian, L. H. Zhou, F. H. Wu, Y. Ling and L. T. Jin, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 142 CrossRef CAS .
H.-X. Zhang, A.-M. Cao, J.-S. Hu, L.-J. Wan and S.-T. Lee, Anal. Chem., 2006, 78, 1967 CrossRef CAS .
N. Jia, Z. Wang, G. Yang, H. Shen and L. Zhu, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 233 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhou, J. Ding, L. Guo and Q. K. Shang, Anal. Chem., 2007, 79, 5328 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wu, H. Ju and Y. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 585 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, L. Zhang, B. Liu, X. Lu and J. Li, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2007, 23, 695 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhou, L. Guo, F. Y. Lin and H. X. Liu, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2007, 587, 124 CrossRef CAS .
I. Diaz, B. Garcia, B. Alonso, C. M. Casado, M. Moran, J. Losada and J. Perez-Pariente, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 1073 CrossRef CAS .
M. Alvaro, M. Benitez, J. F. Cabeza, H. Garcia and A. Leyva, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 7532 CAS .
A. Domenech, H. Garcia and E. Carbonell, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2005, 577, 249 CrossRef CAS .
L. Grinis, S. Kotlyar, S. Ruehle, J. Grinblat and A. Zaban, Adv. Funct.
Mater., 2010, 20, 282 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ameen, M. S. Akhtar, Y. S. Kim, O.-B. Yang and H.-S. Shin, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2011, 11, 1559 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Dai, G. Lu, J. Bao, X. Huang and H. Ju, Electroanalysis, 2007, 19, 1591 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Bai, H. Yang, W. Yang, Y. Li and C. Sun, Sens. Actuators, B, 2007, 124, 179 CrossRef .
G. Villemure and T. J. Pinnavaia, Chem. Mater., 1999, 11, 789 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-X. Jiang, N. Ding and S.-G. Sun, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2004, 563, 15 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. Dai, J. Ni, X. H. Huang, G. F. Lu and J. C. Bao, Bioelectrochemistry, 2007, 70, 250 CrossRef CAS .
F. Xie, W. Li, J. He, S. Yu, T. Fu and H. Yang, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2004, 86, 425 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Feng, J. J. Xu and H. Y. Chen, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2007, 22, 1618 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yu, D. Yu, T. Zhao and B. Zeng, Talanta, 2008, 74, 1586 CrossRef CAS .
G. X. Ma, Y. G. Wang, C. X. Wang, T. H. Lu and Y. Y. Xia, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 4748 CrossRef CAS .
X. Jiang, Y. Wu, X. Mao, X. Cui and L. Zhu, Sens. Actuators, B, 2011, 153, 158 CrossRef .
C. J. Brinker, MRS Bull., 2004, 29, 631 CrossRef CAS .

          B. Smarsly and D. Fattakhova-Rohlfing, in Solution Processing of Inorganic Materials, ed. D. B. Mitzi, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, NJ,  2009, pp. 283–312 Search PubMed .
C. Song and G. Villemure, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2001, 44–45, 679 CrossRef CAS .
M. Etienne, A. Quach, D. Grosso, L. Nicole, C. Sanchez and A. Walcarius, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 844 CrossRef CAS .
E. Arsenault, N. Soheilnia and G. A. Ozin, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 2984 CrossRef CAS .
O. Sel, S. Sallard, T. Brezesinski, J. Rathouský, D. R. Dunphy, A. Collord and B. M. Smarsly, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 3241 CrossRef CAS .
A. Walcarius, E. Sibottier, M. Etienne and J. Ghanbaja, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 602 CrossRef CAS .
A. Goux, M. Etienne, E. Aubert, C. Lecomte, J. Ghanbaja and A. Walcarius, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 731 CrossRef CAS .
M. Etienne, S. Sallard, M. Schröder, Y. Guillemin, S. Mascotto, B. M. Smarsly and A. Walcarius, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 3426 CrossRef CAS .
G. S. Attard, M. Edgar and C. G. Goltner, Acta Mater., 1998, 46, 751 CrossRef CAS .

          G. D. Stucky, K. S. Choi and E. W. McFarland, U.S. Pat. Appl. Publ., US 20040016646 A1 20040129,  2004 Search PubMed .
K. S. Choi, E. W. McFarland and G. D. Stucky, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 2018 CrossRef CAS .
P. N. Bartlett, P. R. Birkin and M. A. Ghanem, Chem. Commun., 2000, 1671 RSC .
P. N. Bartlett, Electrochem. Soc. Interface, 2004, 13, 28 Search PubMed .
T. Suzuki, H. Miyata, T. Noma and K. Kuroda, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 1831 CAS .
J. Ke, W. Su, S. M. Howdle, M. W. George, D. Cook, M. Perdjon-Abel, P. N. Bartlett, W. Zhang, F. Cheng, W. Levason, G. Reid, J. Hyde, J. Wilson, D. Smith, K. Mallik and P. Sazio, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 35, 14768 CrossRef .
Y. Yamauchi, T. Momma, H. Kitoh, T. Osaka and K. Kuroda, Electrochem. Commun., 2005, 7, 1364 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liang, K. Hong, G. A. Guiochon, J. W. Mays and S. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 5785 CrossRef CAS .
A. Walcarius, C. Despas, P. Trens, M. J. Hudson and J. Bessière, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1998, 453, 249 CrossRef CAS .
A. Walcarius, N. Luthi, J.-L. Blin, B.-L. Su and L. Lamberts, Electrochim. Acta, 1999, 44, 4601 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yantasee, L. A. Deibler, G. E. Fryxell, C. Timchalk and Y. Lin, Electrochem. Commun., 2005, 7, 1170 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yantasee, G. E. Fryxell and Y. Lin, Analyst, 2006, 131, 1342 RSC .

          K. Kalcher, I. Svancara, R. Metelka, K. Vytras and A. Walcarius, in Encyclopedia of Sensors, ed. C. A. Grimes, E. C. Dickey and M. V. Pishko, American Scientific Publishers, Stevenson Ranch, CA,  2006, vol. 4, pp. 283–430 Search PubMed .
H. G. Lin, X. B. Ji, Q. Y. Chen, Y. K. Zhou, C. E. Banks and K. B. Wu, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 1990 CrossRef CAS .
X. Tan, B. Li, G. Zhan and C. Li, Electroanalysis, 2010, 22, 151 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhu, C. Tian, D. Zhu and R. Yang, Electroanalysis, 2008, 20, 1128 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. Zhu, X. Li, Y. Zeng and W. Sun, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2010, 25, 2313 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Diaz, F. Bedioui, E. Briot, J. Devynck and K. J. Balkus, Mater. Res. Soc. Symp. Proc., 1996, 431, 89 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zheng, L. Gao and J. Guo, J. Solid State Chem., 2000, 152, 447 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhou, S. Zhu, M. Hibino and I. Honma, J. Power Sources, 2003, 122, 219 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xing, S. Z. Qiao, R. G. Ding, F. Li, G. Q. Lu, Z. F. Yan and H. M. Cheng, Carbon, 2006, 44, 216 CrossRef CAS .
C. Vix-Guterl, S. Saadallah, K. Jurewicz, E. Frackowiak, M. Reda, J. Parmentier, J. Patarin and F. Beguin, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2004, 108, 148 CrossRef .
A. B. Fuertes, G. Lota, T. A. Centeno and E. Frackowiak, Electrochim. Acta, 2005, 50, 2799 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, O. Shi, X. Liu, S. Xie, D. Jiang, F. Zhang, C. Yu, B. Tu and D. Zhao, Chem. Commun., 2002, 2842 RSC .
Y.-S. Hu, P. Adelhelm, B. M. Smarsly, S. Hore, M. Antonietti and J. Maier, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1873 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, F. Li, N. S. Ergang and A. Stein, ECS Trans., 2008, 6, 199 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, M. Zheng, J. Cao, X. Ke, J. Liu, Y. Chen and J. Tao, Mater. Lett., 2008, 62, 548 CrossRef CAS .
N. Brun, S. R. S. Prabaharan, C. Surcin, M. Morcrette, H. Deleuze, M. Birot, O. Babot, M.-F. Achard and R. Backov, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 1408 CAS .
D. Carriazo, F. Pico, M. C. Gutierrez, F. Rubio, J. M. Rojo and F. del Monte, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 773 RSC .
Z. Wang, M. A. Fierke and A. Stein, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2008, 155, A658 CrossRef CAS .
A. Walcarius, M. Etienne and B. Lebeau, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 2161 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Ghanem and F. Marken, Electrochem. Commun., 2005, 7, 1333 CrossRef CAS .
R. Szamocki, A. Velichko, C. Holzapfel, F. Mucklich, S. Ravaine, P. Garrigue, N. Sojic, R. Hempelmann and A. Kuhn, Anal. Chem., 2007, 79, 533 CrossRef CAS .
S. Park, H. Boo, S. Y. Lee, H. M. Kim, K. B. Kim, H. C. Kim and T. D. Chung, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 6143 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. G. Evans, J. M. Elliott, L. M. Andrews, P. N. Bartlett, P. J. Doyle and G. Denuault, Anal. Chem., 2002, 74, 1322 CrossRef CAS .
D. Hung, Z. Liu, N. Shah, Y. Hao and P. C. Searson, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 3308 CAS .
M. Zhou, L. Guo, Y. Hou and X. J. Peng, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 4176 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ben-Ali, D. A. Cook, S. A. G. Evans, A. Thienpont, P. N. Bartlett and A. Kuhn, Electrochem. Commun., 2003, 5, 747 CrossRef CAS .
R. Szamocki, S. Reculusa, S. Ravaine, P. N. Bartlett, A. Kuhn and R. Hempelmann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 1317 CrossRef CAS .
R. Szamocki, A. Velichko, F. Muecklich, S. Reculusa, S. Ravaine, S. Neugebauer, W. Schuhmann, R. Hempelmann and A. Kuhn, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 2121 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Ndamanisha and L. Guo, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2008, 23, 1680 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Ndamanisha, L. Guo and G. Wang, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2008, 113, 114 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liu, J. C. Ndamanisha, J. Bai and L. Guo, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 3035 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liu, L. Guo, X. Bo, J. Bai and X. Cui, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2010, 673, 88 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhu, R. Yang, X. Jiang and D. Yang, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 530 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Ndamanisha, X. Bo and L. Guo, Analyst, 2010, 135, 621 RSC .
B. Qi, X. Peng, J. Fang and L. Guo, Electroanalysis, 2009, 21, 875 CAS .
J. Fang, B. Qi, L. Yang and L. Guo, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2010, 643, 52 CrossRef CAS .
B. Lu, J. Bai, X. Bo, L. Yang and L. Guo, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 4647 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bai, X. Bo, B. Qi and L. Guo, Electroanalysis, 2010, 22, 1750 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bai, B. Qi, J. C. Ndamanisha and L. Guo, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2009, 119, 193 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, C. Yang, Y. Song, W. Gao and X. Xia, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1267 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, J. Li, X.-H. Xia and S.-Q. Liu, Talanta, 2010, 82, 1164 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, M. Etienne, G.-W. Kohring, Y. Bon Saint Côme, A. Kuhn and A. Walcarius, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 9032 CrossRef CAS .
D. Fattakhova Rohlfing, J. Rathouský, Y. Rohlfing, O. Bartels and M. Wark, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 11320 CrossRef .
C. Delacôte, J.-P. Bouillon and A. Walcarius, Electrochim. Acta, 2006, 51, 6373 CrossRef .
Z. Zhou, A. W. Franz, S. Bay, B. Sarkar, A. Seifert, P. Yang, A. Wagener, S. Ernst, M. Pagels, T. J. J. Müller and W. R. Thiel, Chem.–Asian J., 2010, 5, 2001 CrossRef CAS .
A. Doménech, M. Alvaro, B. Ferrer and H. García, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 12781 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, J. Wang, W. Wu, S. Qian and Y. Man, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 2098 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, K. Qian, K. Guo, J. Kong, J.-L. Marty, C. Yu and B. Liu, Microchim. Acta, 2011, 175, 87 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, Q. Xu, X. Feng, J.-J. Zhu and W. Hou, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2007, 387, 1553 CrossRef CAS .
N. Jia, Y. Wen, G. Yang, Q. Lian, C. Xu and H. Shen, Electrochem. Commun., 2008, 10, 774 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Dai, X. Xu and H. Ju, Anal. Biochem., 2004, 332, 23 CrossRef CAS .
C. Renault, V. Balland, E. Martinez-Ferrero, L. Nicole, C. Sanchez and B. Limoges, Chem. Commun., 2009, 7494 RSC .
S. Frasca, T. von Graberg, J.-J. Feng, A. Thomas, B. M. Smarsly, I. M. Weidinger, F. W. Scheller, P. Hildebrandt and U. Wollenberger, ChemCatChem, 2010, 2, 839 CrossRef CAS .
S. Frasca, C. Richter, T. von Graberg, B. M. Smarsly and U. Wollenberger, Eng. Life Sci., 2011, 11, 554 CrossRef CAS .
P. Kwan, D. Schmitt, A. M. Volosin, C. L. McIntosh, D.-K. Seo and A. K. Jones, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 12367 RSC .
A. Walcarius, M. Etienne and J. Bessière, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 2757 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bibby and L. Mercier, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 1591 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lesaint, F. Frébault, C. Delacôte, B. Lebeau, C. Marichal, A. Walcarius and J. Patarin, Stud. Surf. Sci. Catal., 2005, 156, 925 CrossRef CAS .
C. Amatore, Chem.–Eur. J., 2008, 14, 5449 CrossRef CAS .
C. Amatore, A. Oleinick, O. V. Klymenko, C. Delacôte, A. Walcarius and I. Svir, Anal. Chem., 2008, 80, 3229 CrossRef CAS .
A. Walcarius, C. Delacôte and S. Sayen, Electrochim. Acta, 2004, 49, 3775 CrossRef CAS .
M. Etienne, Y. Guillemin, D. Grosso and A. Walcarius, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2013 DOI:10.1007/s00216-012-6334-7  , in press.
Y. Guillemin, M. Etienne, E. Aubert and A. Walcarius, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 6799 RSC .
T.-C. Wei and H. W. Hillhouse, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 5689 CrossRef CAS .
M. Etienne, D. Grosso, C. Boissière, C. Sanchez and A. Walcarius, Chem. Commun., 2005, 4566 RSC .
O. Fontaine, C. Laberty-Robert and C. Sanchez, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 3650 CrossRef CAS .
A. Goux, J. Ghanbaja and A. Walcarius, J. Mater. Sci., 2009, 44, 6601 CrossRef CAS .
D. Fattakhova-Rohlfing, M. Wark and J. Rathouský, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 1640 CrossRef CAS .
A. Calvo, B. Yameen, F. J. Williams, O. Azzaroni and G. J. A. A. Soler-Illia, Chem. Commun., 2009, 2553 RSC .
A. Brunsen, C. Díaz, L. I. Pietrasanta, B. Yameen, M. Ceolín, G. J. A. A. Soler-Illia and O. Azzaroni, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 3583 CrossRef CAS .
A. Brunsen, J. Cui, M. Ceolín, A. del Campo, G. J. A. A. Soler-Illia and O. Azzaroni, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 1422 RSC .
D. Fattakhova-Rohlfing, M. Wark and J. Rathouský, Sens. Actuators, B, 2007, 126, 78 CrossRef .
D. R. Dunphy, P. Atanassov, S. D. Bunge, Z. Chen, G. P. López, T. J. Boyle and C. J. Brinker, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 551 CrossRef .
A. M. Massari, R. W. Gurney, C. P. Schwartz, S. T. Nguyen and J. T. Hupp, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 4422 CrossRef CAS .
C. Boissière, D. Grosso, S. Lepoutre, L. Nicole, A. Brunet-Bruneau and C. Sanchez, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 12362 CrossRef .
F. Qu, R. Nasraoui, M. Etienne, Y. Bon Saint Come, A. Kuhn, J. Lenz, J. Gajdzik, R. Hempelmann and A. Walcarius, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13, 138 CrossRef CAS .
A. Attia, M. Zukalova, L. Pospisil and L. Kavan, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2007, 11, 1163 CrossRef CAS .
G. Sun, J. Wang, X. Liu, D. Long, W. Qiao and L. Ling, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 18745 CAS .
C. Lefrou, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2007, 601, 94 CrossRef CAS .
C. Cannes, F. Kanoufi and A. J. Bard, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 8134 CrossRef CAS .
R. Cornut and C. Lefrou, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2008, 623, 197 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guillemin, M. Etienne, E. Sibottier and A. Walcarius, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 5313 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. Martin and D. T. Mitchell, Electroanal. Chem., 1999, 21, 1 CAS .
P. Ugo, L. M. Moretto and F. Vezza, ChemPhysChem, 2002, 3, 917 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Piao and H. Kim, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2009, 9, 2215 CrossRef CAS .
K.-S. Choi and E. M. P. Steinmiller, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 6953 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Collinson, Acc. Chem. Res., 2007, 40, 777 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Collinson, D. A. Higgins, R. Kommidi and D. Campbell-Rance, Anal. Chem., 2008, 80, 651 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, W. L. Zhou, B. F. McCaughy, J. E. Hampsey, X. Ji, Y.-B. Jiang, H. Xu, J. Tang, R. H. Schmehl, C. O'Connor, C. J. Brinker and Y. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 130 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Wang, H. M. Luo, R. Kou, M. P. Gil, S. G. Xiao, V. O. Golub, Z. Z. Yang and C. J. Brinker, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 6169 CrossRef CAS .
A. Takai, Y. Yamauchi and K. Kuroda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 208 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Elliott, G. S. Attard, P. N. Bartlett, J. R. Owen, N. Ryan and G. Singh, J. New Mater. Electrochem. Syst., 1999, 2, 239 CAS .
J. M. Elliott, G. S. Attard, P. N. Bartlett, N. R. B. Coleman, D. A. S. Merckel and J. R. Owen, Chem. Mater., 1999, 11, 3602 CrossRef CAS .
P. N. Bartlett, B. Gollas, S. Guerin and J. Marwan, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2002, 4, 3835 RSC .
P. N. Bartlett and J. Marwan, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2003, 62, 73 CrossRef CAS .
S. Guerin and G. S. Attard, Electrochem. Commun., 2001, 3, 544 CrossRef CAS .
P. N. Bartlett and J. Marwan, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 2962 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Zhao, X. Chen, Y. J. Li, Y. C. Chai, G. D. Zhang and J. Liu, Chem. Lett., 2004, 842 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yamauchi and K. Kuroda, Electrochem. Commun., 2006, 8, 1677 CrossRef CAS .
B. Gollas, J. M. Elliott and P. N. Bartlett, Electrochim. Acta, 2000, 45, 3711 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Seddon and M. E. Raimondi, Mol. Cryst. Liq. Cryst. Sci. Technol., Sect. A, 2000, 347, 221 CrossRef CAS .
H. Luo, L. Sun, Y. Lu and Y. Yan, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 10218 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yamauchi, A. Tonegawa, M. Komatsu, H. Wang, L. Wang, Y. Nemoto, N. Suzuki and K. Kuroda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 5100 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yamauchi, M. Komatsu, M. Fuziwara, Y. Nemoto, K. Sato, T. Yokoshima, H. Sukegawa, K. Inomata and K. Kuroda, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 7792 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xu, J. J. Zhu and X. Y. Hu, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2007, 597, 151 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. Asghar, J. M. Elliott and A. M. Squires, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 13311 RSC .
H. Wang, L. Wang, T. Sato, Y. Sakamoto, S. Tominaka, K. Miyasaka, N. Miyamoto, Y. Nemoto, O. Terasaki and Y. Yamauchi, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 1591 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chen, I. Burgess and J. Lipkowski, Surf. Sci., 2009, 603, 1878 CrossRef CAS .
X. Bu, J. Yuan, J. Song, D. Han and L. Niu, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2009, 116, 153 CrossRef CAS .
P. N. Bartlett, J. J. Baumberg, P. R. Birkin, M. A. Ghanem and M. C. Netti, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 2199 CrossRef CAS .
K.-S. Choi, H. C. Lichtenegger and G. D. Stucky, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 12402 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tan, E. M. P. Steinmiller and K.-S. Choi, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 9618 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. P. Steinmiller and K.-S. Choi, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 12710 CrossRef CAS .
I. Burgess, C. A. Jeffrey, X. Cai, G. Szymanski, Z. Galus and J. Lipkowski, Langmuir, 1999, 15, 2607 CrossRef CAS .
S.-H. Baeck, K.-S. Choi, T. F. Jaramillo, G. D. Stucky and E. W. McFarland, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 1269 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tan, S. Srinivasan and K.-S. Choi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 3596 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Yarger, E. M. P. Steinmiller and K.-S. Choi, Chem. Commun., 2007, 159 RSC .
R. L. Spray and K.-S. Choi, Chem. Commun., 2007, 3655 RSC .
C.-W. Lee, K.-W. Nam, B.-W. Cho and K.-B. Kim, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2010, 130, 208 CrossRef CAS .
H. Luo, J. Zhang and Y. Yan, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 3769 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Nelson and J. R. Owen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2003, 150, A1313 CrossRef CAS .
D.-D. Zhao, M. W. Xu, W.-J. Zhou, J. Zhang and H. L. Li, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 2699 CrossRef CAS .
W.-J. Zhou, M.-W. Xu, D.-D. Zhao, C.-L. Xu and H.-L. Li, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2008, 117, 55 CrossRef .
H. M. Al-Bishri, I. S. El-Hallag and E. H. El-Mossalamy, Bull. Korean Chem. Soc., 2010, 31, 3730 CrossRef CAS .
B. Dong, T. Xue, C.-L. Xu and H.-L. Li, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2008, 112, 627 CrossRef CAS .
F. M. Sayler, A. J. Grano, W. Scogin, P. Sanders, J.-H. Smatt, K. H. Shaughnessy and M. G. Bakker, MRS Online Proc. Libr., 2011, 1389 Search PubMed .
H. Yan, Y. Yang, Z. Fu, B. Yang, L. Xia, S. Fu and F. Li, Electrochem. Commun., 2005, 7, 1117 CrossRef CAS .
C.-C. Hu, K.-H. Chang, M.-C. Lin and Y.-T. Wu, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2690 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, X. Zhu, Y. Dan, J. H. Moon, V. W. Chen, A. T. Johnson, J. W. Perry and S. Yang, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 1816 CrossRef CAS .
R. Shacham, D. Avnir and D. Mandler, Adv. Mater., 1999, 11, 384 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Collinson, N. Moore, P. N. Deepa and M. Kanungo, Langmuir, 2003, 19, 7669 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sayen and A. Walcarius, Electrochem. Commun., 2003, 5, 341 CrossRef CAS .
E. Sibottier, S. Sayen, F. Gaboriaud and A. Walcarius, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 8366 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Brinker and D. R. Dunphy, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2006, 11, 126 CrossRef CAS .
F.-F. Xu, F.-M. Cui, M.-L. Ruan, L.-L. Zhang and J.-L. Shi, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 7535 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, R. Xiong and G. Wei, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2010, 204, 2187 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. del Valle, M. Gacitua, F. R. Diaz, F. Armijo and R. del Rio, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 2117 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kang, H. Lee and J. Kwak, J. Korean Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 14, 22 CrossRef CAS .
N. L. Cordes and M. G. Bakker, MRS Online Proc. Libr., 2011, 1304 Search PubMed .
F. Qu, H. Sun, Y. Zhang, H. Lu and M. Yang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2012, 166–167, 837 CrossRef CAS .
F. Luna-Vera, D. Dong, R. Hamze, S. Liu and M. M. Collinson, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 2265 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lalo, Y. Bon-Saint-Côme, B. Plano, M. Etienne, A. Walcarius and A. Kuhn, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 2323 CrossRef CAS .
I. Mazurenko, M. Etienne, R. Ostermann, B. Smarsly, O. Tananaiko, V. Zaitsev and A. Walcarius, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 7140 CrossRef CAS .
N. L. Cordes and M. G. Bakker, MRS Online Proc. Libr., 2009, 1214E CAS .
S. Park, T. D. Chung and H. C. Kim, Anal. Chem., 2003, 75, 3046 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nie and J. M. Elliott, J. Mater. Sci. Technol., 2005, 21, 863 CAS .
G. Denuault, C. Milhano and D. Pletcher, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2005, 7, 3545 RSC .
M. A. Ghanem, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 2501 CrossRef CAS .
H.-K. Seo, D.-J. Park and J.-Y. Park, Thin Solid Films, 2008, 516, 5227 CrossRef CAS .
T.-R. Ling, K.-T. Lien, J.-J. Jow and T.-Y. Lin, Electroanalysis, 2009, 21, 2213 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Han, H. N. Choi, S. Park, T. D. Chung and W. Y. Lee, Anal. Sci., 2010, 26, 995 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ye, Y. Wang, X. Chen, B. Yue, S. Chi Tsang and H. He, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 7389 RSC .
M. A. Ghanem, B. A. Coles, R. G. Compton and F. Marken, Electroanalysis, 2006, 18, 793 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhou, L. Shang, B. Li, L. Huang and S. Dong, Electrochem. Commun., 2008, 10, 859 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hou, L. Guo and G. Wang, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2008, 617, 211 CrossRef CAS .
X. Bo, W. Xie, J. C. Ndamanisha, J. Bai and L. Guo, Electroanalysis, 2009, 21, 2549 CrossRef CAS .
C. You, X. Yan, Y. Wang, S. Zhang, J. Kong, D. Zhao and B. Liu, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 227 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, C. You, S. Zhang, J. Kong, J.-L. Marty, D. Zhao and B. Liu, Microchim. Acta, 2009, 167, 75 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Ndamanisha, J. Bai, B. Qi and L. Guo, Anal. Biochem., 2009, 386, 79 CrossRef CAS .
G. Hu, Y. Ma, Y. Guo and S. Shao, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2009, 633, 264 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bai, L. Guo, J. C. Ndamanisha and B. Qi, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2009, 39, 2497 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ma, G. Hu, S. Shao and Y. Guo, Chem. Pap., 2009, 63, 641 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zheng, J. Ye, L. Zhou, Y. Zhang and C. Yu, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2009, 625, 82 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yan, X. Bo and L. Guo, Sens. Actuators, B, 2011, 155, 837 CrossRef .
D. Pan, S. Ma, X. Bo and L. Guo, Microchim. Acta, 2011, 173, 215 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, P. Jiang, X. Bo and L. Guo, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 65, 115 CrossRef CAS .
S. Daniele, D. Battistel, S. Bergamin and C. Bragato, Electroanalysis, 2010, 22, 1511 CrossRef CAS .
S. Daniele, C. Bragato and D. Battistel, Electroanalysis, 2012, 24, 759 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, X. Bo, J. Bai, L. Zhu and L. Guo, Electroanalysis, 2010, 22, 2536 CrossRef CAS .
X. Bo, J. C. Ndamanisha, J. Bai and L. Guo, Talanta, 2010, 82, 85 CrossRef CAS .
C. Su, C. Zhang, G. Lu and C. Ma, Electroanalysis, 2010, 22, 1901 CrossRef CAS .
X. Bo, J. Bai, J. Ju and L. Guo, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2010, 675, 29 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, X. Bo, C. Luhana and L. Guo, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 5849 CrossRef CAS .
X. Bo, J. Bai, L. Yang and L. Guo, Sens. Actuators, B, 2011, 157, 662 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Ndamanisha and L. Guo, Bioelectrochemistry, 2009, 77, 60 CrossRef CAS .
J.-L. Yu, S. Lu, J.-W. Li, F.-Q. Zhao and B.-Z. Zeng, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2007, 11, 1211 CrossRef CAS .
M. Vinoba, S. K. Jeong, M. Bhagiyalakshmi and M. Alagar, Bull. Korean Chem. Soc., 2010, 31, 3668 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhou, L. Deng, D. Wen, L. Shang, L. Jin and S. Dong, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2009, 24, 2904 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, B. Lu, L. Guo and B. Qi, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2011, 650, 171 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yan, D. Pan, H. Wang, X. Bo and L. Guo, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2011, 663, 36 CrossRef CAS .
B. Lu, J. Bai, X. Bo, L. Zhu and L. Guo, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 8724 CrossRef CAS .
X. Bo, J. Bai, L. Wang and L. Guo, Talanta, 2010, 81, 339 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Ndamanisha, Y. Hou, J. Bai and L. Guo, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 54, 3935 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, W. Li, C. Sun and L. Li, Electroanalysis, 2002, 14, 368 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, L. Li, Z. Wang, A. Cui, C. Sun and J. Zhao, Mater. Lett., 2001, 49, 228 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pal and V. Ganesan, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 13264 CrossRef CAS .
P. Lozano-Sanchez and J. M. Elliott, Analyst, 2008, 133, 256 RSC .
L. Zhu, C. Tian, R. Yang and J. Zhai, Electroanalysis, 2008, 20, 527 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yu, W. Du, F. Zhao and B. Zeng, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 54, 984 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zang, C. X. Guo, F. Hu, L. Yu and C. M. Li, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2011, 683, 187 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ma, Y. Zhang, X. Zhang, G. Zhu, B. Liu and J. Chen, Talanta, 2012, 88, 696 CrossRef CAS .
G. Hu, Y. Guo and S. Shao, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2009, 24, 3391 CrossRef CAS .
F. Li, J. Song, C. Shan, D. Gao, X. Xu and L. Niu, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2010, 25, 1408 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bai, J. C. Ndamanisha, L. Liu, L. Yang and L. Guo, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2010, 14, 2251 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yang, L. Zhu, X. Jiang and L. Guo, Sens. Actuators, B, 2009, 141, 124 CrossRef .
H. Yang, B. Lu, B. Qi and L. Guo, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2011, 660, 2 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, J. Yang and K. Wu, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2009, 638, 23 CrossRef CAS .
D. Sun, Y. Zhang, F. Wang, K. Wu, J. Chen and Y. Zhou, Sens. Actuators, B, 2009, 141, 641 CrossRef .
C. Zhou, Z. Liu, Y. Dong and D. Li, Electroanalysis, 2009, 21, 853 CAS .
D. Sun, X. Li, H. Zhang and X. Xie, Int. J. Environ. Anal. Chem., 2012, 92, 324 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, W. Huang and X. Zheng, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2009, 39, 2415 CrossRef CAS .
D. Sun, F. Wang, K. Wu, J. Chen and Y. Zhou, Microchim. Acta, 2009, 167, 35 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wan, Y. Zhang, H. Lin, K. Wu, J. Chen and Y. Zhou, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, F151 CrossRef CAS .
A. Walcarius and J. Bessière, Chem. Mater., 1999, 11, 3009 CrossRef CAS .
A. Walcarius and L. Mercier, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 4478 RSC .

          M. Etienne, C. Delacôte and A. Walcarius, in Progress in Electrochemistry Research, ed. M. Nunez, Nova Science Publishers, Inc., Hauppauge, New York,  2005, pp. 145–184 Search PubMed .
W. Yantasee, Y. Lin, X. Li, G. E. Fryxell, T. S. Zemanian and V. V. Viswanathan, Analyst, 2003, 128, 899 RSC .
A. Walcarius, M. Etienne, S. Sayen and B. Lebeau, Electroanalysis, 2003, 15, 414 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yantasee, B. Charnhattakorn, G. E. Fryxell, Y. Lin, C. Timchalk and R. S. Addleman, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2008, 620, 55 CrossRef CAS .
A. Walcarius and V. Ganesan, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 469 CrossRef CAS .
V. Ganesan and A. Walcarius, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 3632 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yantasee, G. E. Fryxell, M. M. Conner and Y. Lin, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2005, 5, 1537 CrossRef CAS .
A. Walcarius, S. Sayen, C. Gérardin, F. Hamdoune and L. Rodehuser, Colloids Surf., A, 2004, 234, 145 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yantasee, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2004, 502, 207 CrossRef CAS .
I. Cesarino, G. Marino, J. do Rosario Matos and E. T. G. Cavalheiro, J. Braz. Chem. Soc., 2007, 18, 810 CrossRef CAS .
D. E. Popa, M. Mureseanu and I. G. Tanase, Rev. Chim. (Bucharest), 2012, 63, 507 CAS .
S. Goubert-Renaudin, M. Etienne, Y. Rousselin, F. Denat, B. Lebeau and A. Walcarius, Electroanalysis, 2009, 21, 280 CrossRef CAS .
S. Goubert-Renaudin, M. Moreau, C. Despas, M. Meyer, F. Denat, B. Lebeau and A. Walcarius, Electroanalysis, 2009, 21, 1731 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, Z. Liu, X. Zhang, S. Duan, S. Xu and C. Zhou, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 58, 142 CrossRef CAS .
S. Morante-Zarcero, A. Sanchez, M. Fajardo, I. Hierro and I. Sierra, Microchim. Acta, 2010, 169, 57 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sanchez and A. Walcarius, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 4207 CrossRef .
P. Zhang, S. Dong, G. Gu and T. Huang, Bull. Korean Chem. Soc., 2010, 31, 2949 CrossRef CAS .
M. Etienne, J. Cortot and A. Walcarius, Electroanalysis, 2007, 19, 129 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yantasee, Y. Lin, G. E. Fryxell and Z. Wang, Electroanalysis, 2004, 16, 870 CrossRef CAS .
S. Goubert-Renaudin, M. Etienne, S. Brandès, M. Meyer, F. Denat, B. Lebeau and A. Walcarius, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 9804 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Y. Yang, L. Xu and J. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 56, 2105 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, S. Duan, X. Xu, S. Xu and C. Zhou, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 56, 1981 CrossRef .
X. Liu, Y. Hua and G. Villemure, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2009, 117, 317 CrossRef CAS .
C. You, X. Yan, J. Kong, D. Zhao and B. Liu, Electrochem. Commun., 2008, 10, 1864 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pei, S. Qu and Y. Zhang, Sensors, 2010, 10, 1279 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lu, Y. Xiao, Z. Lei and J. Chen, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2010, 25, 244 CrossRef .
X. Xin, B. Tian, J. Kong, S. Zhang, B. Liu and D. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 1932 CrossRef .
Y. Teng, X. Wu, Q. Zhou, C. Chen, H. Zhao and M. Lan, Sens. Actuators, B, 2009, 142, 267 CrossRef .
J. Li, Z. Xiong, L. Zhou, X. Han and H. Liu, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2010, 130, 333 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, Q. Zhang and J. Li, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 1530 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, X. Zeng, X. Liu, X. Liu, W. Wei and S. Luo, Colloids Surf., B, 2010, 79, 241 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Dai, H. Ju and H. Chen, Electroanalysis, 2005, 17, 862 CrossRef CAS .
C. You, X. Yan, J. Kong, D. Zhao and B. Liu, Talanta, 2011, 83, 1507 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhou, L. Shang, B. Li, L. Huang and S. Dong, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2008, 24, 442 CrossRef CAS .
C.-C. Chen, J.-S. Do and Y. Gu, Sensors, 2009, 9, 4635 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Dai, X. Xu, L. Wu and H. Ju, Electroanalysis, 2005, 17, 1571 CrossRef CAS .
D. Stefanakis, A. Margellou, A. Psarouli, N. Chaniotakis and D. F. Ghanotakis, Anal. Lett., 2010, 43, 2582 CrossRef CAS .
X. Jiang, L. Zhu, D. Yang, X. Mao and Y. Wu, Electroanalysis, 2009, 21, 1617 CrossRef CAS .
T. Shimomura, T. Itoh, T. Sumiya, F. Mizukami and M. Ono, Sens. Actuators, B, 2008, 135, 268 CrossRef .
X. Xu, P. Lu, Y. Zhou, Z. Zhao and M. Guo, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2009, 29, 2160 CrossRef CAS .
T. Shimomura, T. Sumiya, M. Ono, T. Ito and T. Hanaoka, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2012, 714, 114 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, J. Lei and H. Ju, Electroanalysis, 2010, 22, 2407 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, M. Guo, P. Lu and R. Wang, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2010, 30, 722 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yang, H. Li, A. Javadi and S. Gong, Biomaterials, 2010, 31, 3281 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lu, S. Liu, S. Ge, M. Yan, J. Yu and X. Hu, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2012, 33, 29 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, Q. Lin, X. Zhang, X. He, X. Xing, W. Lian, J. Li, M. Cui and J. Huang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2012, 166–167, 562 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Cui, Y. Cai, D. Wu, H. Yu, Y. Li, K. Mao, H. Wang, H. Fan, Q. Wie and B. Du, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 69, 79 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lin, Z. Wei and C. Mao, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2011, 29, 40 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lin, Z. Wei and P. Chu, Anal. Biochem., 2012, 421, 97 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wu, R. Li, H. Wang, S. Liu, H. Wang, Q. Wei and B. Du, Analyst, 2012, 137, 608 RSC .
S. Guo, Y. Du, X. Yang, S. Dong and E. Wang, Anal. Chem., 2011, 83, 8035 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Du, S. Guo, H. Qin, S. Dong and E. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 799 RSC .
Y. Du, S. Guo, S. Dong and E. Wang, Biomaterials, 2011, 32, 8584 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, Y. Jiang, D. R. Dunphy, D. P. Adams, C. Hodges, N. Liu, N. Zhang, G. Xomeritakis, X. Jin, N. R. Aluru, S. J. Gaik, H. W. Hillhouse and C. J. Brinker, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 667 CrossRef CAS .
S.-H. Liu, L.-J. Jia, W.-M. Lou, H.-L. Qi and C.-X. Zhang, Acad. J. Xi'an Jiaotong Univ., 2010, 22, 14 CAS .
H. N. Choi, S. H. Yoon, Y.-K. Lyu and W.-Y. Lee, Electroanalysis, 2007, 19, 459 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, M. Huang, X. Liu, H. Wei, Y. Xu, G. Xu and E. Wang, Analyst, 2007, 132, 687 RSC .
J. Font, P. de March, F. Busque, E. Casas, M. Benitez, L. Teruel and H. Garcia, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 2336 RSC .
J. H. Han, J. Jang, B. K. Kim, H. N. Choi and W.-Y. Lee, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2011, 660, 101 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Astuti, E. Topoglidis, A. G. Cass and J. R. Durrant, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2009, 648, 2 CrossRef CAS .
T. Imokawa, K.-J. Williams and G. Denuault, Anal. Chem., 2006, 78, 265 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Ganjali, Z. Rafiei-Sarmazdeh, T. Poursaberi, S. J. Shahtaheri and P. Norouzi, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2012, 7, 1908 CAS .
C.-Z. Lai, M. A. Fierke, A. Stein and P. Bühlmann, Anal. Chem., 2007, 79, 4621 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yue and W. Zhou, Prog. Nat. Sci., 2008, 18, 1329 CrossRef CAS .
P. Innocenzi, A. Martucci, M. Guglielmi, A. Bearzotti and E. Traversa, Sens. Actuators, B, 2001, 76, 299 CrossRef .
J. M. Bertolo, A. Bearzotti, P. Falcaro, E. Traversa and P. Innocenzi, Sensor Lett., 2003, 1, 64 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yuliarto, H. S. Zhou, T. Yamada, I. Honma, Y. Katsumura and M. Ichihara, Anal. Chem., 2004, 76, 6719 CrossRef CAS .
B. L. Zhu, C. S. Xie, D. W. Zeng, A. H. Wang, W. L. Song and X. Z. Zhao, J. Mater. Sci., 2005, 40, 5783 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Lee, K. H. Nam and D. D. Lee, Thin Solid Films, 2000, 375, 142 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, X. Du, X. Xing, G. Wang and S. Z. Qiao, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 865 RSC .
E. Rossinyol, J. Arbiol, F. Peiro, A. Cornet, J. R. Morante, B. Tian, T. Bo and D. Zhao, Sens. Actuators, B, 2005, 109, 57 CrossRef .
C.-C. Lu and K.-H. Liao, Sens. Actuators, B, 2010, 143, 500 CrossRef .
G. Li and S. Kawi, Sens. Actuators, B, 1999, 59, 1 CrossRef .
C. Liu, F. Li, L.-P. Ma and H.-M. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E28 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Su and R. Schlögl, ChemSusChem, 2010, 3, 136 CrossRef CAS .
L. Dai, D. W. Chang, J.-B. Baek and W. Lu, Small, 2012, 8, 1130 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ghosh and Y. H. Lee, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 480 CrossRef CAS .
H. Nishihara and T. Kyotani, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4473 CrossRef CAS .
B. Dunn, F. Bonet, L. Noailles and P. Tang, ACS Symp. Ser., 2005, 890, 341 CrossRef CAS .
P. G. Bruce, Solid State Ionics, 2008, 179, 752 CrossRef CAS .
P. G. Bruce, B. Scrosati and J.-M. Tarascon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 2930 CrossRef CAS .
T. Brezesinski, J. Wang, S. H. Tolbert and B. Dunn, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2011, 57, 330 CrossRef CAS .
F. Jiao, K. M. Shaju and P. G. Bruce, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 6550 CrossRef CAS .
F. Jiao, J. Bao, A. H. Hill and P. G. Bruce, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 9711 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ren, A. R. Armstrong, F. Jiao and P. G. Bruce, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 996 CrossRef CAS .
D. Fattakhova-Rohlfing, M. Wark, T. Brezesinski, B. M. Smarsly and J. Rathousky, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 123 CrossRef CAS .
K. Brezesinski, J. Haetge, J. Wang, S. Mascotto, C. Reitz, A. Rein, S. H. Tolbert, J. Perlich, B. Dunn and T. Brezesinski, Small, 2011, 7, 407 CrossRef CAS .
F. Jiao and P. G. Bruce, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 657 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Doherty, R. A. Caruso, B. M. Smarsly and C. J. Drummond, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2895 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ren, L. J. Hardwick and P. G. Bruce, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 2570 CrossRef CAS .
C. Jiang, E. Hosono and H. Zhou, Nanotoday, 2006, 1, 28 CrossRef .
H. Zhou, S. Zhu, M. Hibino, I. Honma and M. Ichihara, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 2107 CrossRef CAS .
J. Schuster, G. He, B. Mandlmeier, T. Yim, K. T. Lee, T. Bein and L. F. Nazar, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 3591 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Orilall and U. Wiesner, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 520 RSC .
Z. Li, N. Liu, X. Wang, C. Wang, Y. Qi and L. Yin, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 16640 RSC .
H. Zhang, H. Tao, Y. Jiang, Z. Jiao, M. Wu and B. Zhao, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 2950 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yang and Q. Gao, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2011, 143, 230 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-Y. Zhou, Y.-H. Kim, C.-S. Jo, J.-W. Lee, C.-W. Lee and S.-H. Yoon, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 4944 RSC .
G.-L. Xu, S.-R. Chen, J.-T. Li, F.-S. Ke, L. Huang and S.-G. Sun, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2011, 656, 185 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yue, Z. Lin, S. Jiang and X. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 16318 RSC .
F. Di Lupo, C. Gerbaldi, G. Meligrana, S. Bodoardo and N. Penazzi, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2011, 6, 3580 CAS .
Y. Zhai, Y. Dou, D. Zhao, P. F. Fulvio, R. T. Mayes and S. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4828 CrossRef CAS .
C. Merlet, B. Rotenberg, P. A. Madden, P.-L. Taberna, P. Simon, Y. Gogotsi and M. Salanne, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 306 CrossRef CAS .
C. Vix-Guterl, E. Frackowiak, K. Jurewicz, M. Friebe, J. Parmentier and F. Beguin, Carbon, 2005, 43, 1293 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, R. Wang and R. Cao, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2008, 111, 32 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yuan, J. Zeng, N. Kristian, Y. Wang and X. Wang, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 313 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Feng, J. C. Zhao, P. Liu, B. H. Tang and J. L. Xu, J. New Mater. Electrochem. Syst., 2010, 13, 321 CAS .
Y. Zhou, C. Wee Lee and S. Yoon, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2011, 14, A157 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, P. Liu, Y. Lu, J. Zhao, J. Feng, Y. Song and B. Tang, Adv. Mater. Res., 2011, 239–242, 1026 CrossRef CAS .
M. Dai, L. Song, J. T. LaBelle and B. D. Vogt, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 2869 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lang, A. Hirata, T. Fujita and M. Chen, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 232 CrossRef CAS .
C. Cook, R. Woo, B. O'Neil, M. Leigh, J. Manning and M. G. Bakker, Mater. Res. Soc. Symp. Proc., 2008, 1059E, KK10-32 Search PubMed .
B. E. Conway and W. G. Pell, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2003, 7, 637 CrossRef CAS .
T. Brezesinski, J. Wang, J. Polleux, B. Dunn and S. H. Tolbert, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 1802 CrossRef CAS .
T. Brezesinski, J. Wang, S. H. Tolbert and B. Dunn, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 146 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Luo and Y. Y. Xia, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2007, 154, A987 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wu, Y. G. Wang, F. Li and Y. Y. Xia, Acta Chim. Sin., 2009, 67, 208 CAS .
T. Brezesinski, J. Wang, R. Senter, K. Brezesinski, B. Dunn and S. H. Tolbert, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 967 CrossRef CAS .
K. Brezesinski, J. Wang, J. Haetge, C. Reitz, S. O. Steinmueller, S. H. Tolbert, B. M. Smarsly, B. Dunn and T. Brezesinski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 6982 CrossRef CAS .
N. Jha, A. L. M. Reddy, M. M. Shaijumon, N. Rajalakshmi and S. Ramaprabhu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2008, 33, 427 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sharma and B. G. Pollet, J. Power Sources, 2012, 208, 96 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Joo, S. J. Choi, I. Oh, J. Kwak, Z. Liu, O. Terasaki and R. Ryoo, Nature, 2001, 412, 169 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Joo, C. Pak, D. J. You, S.-A. Lee, H. I. Lee, J. M. Kim, H. Chang and D. Seung, Electrochim. Acta, 2006, 52, 1618 CrossRef CAS .
L. Calvillo, M. J. Lazaro, E. Garcia-Bordeje, R. Moliner, P. L. Cabot, I. Esparbe, E. Pastor and J. J. Quintana, J. Power Sources, 2007, 169, 59 CrossRef CAS .
H.-T. Kim, D. J. You, H.-K. Yoon, S. H. Joo, C. Pak, H. Chang and I.-S. Song, J. Power Sources, 2008, 180, 724 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Joo, H. I. Lee, D. J. You, K. Kwon, J. H. Kim, Y. S. Choi, M. Kang, J. M. Kim, C. Pak, H. Chang and D. Seung, Carbon, 2008, 46, 2034 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-P. Sun, X.-G. Zhang, Y.-Y. Liang, H. Tong, R. L. Xue, S. D. Yang and H.-L. Li, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2009, 633, 1 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ding, K.-Y. Chan, J. Ren and F.-S. Xiao, Electrochim. Acta, 2005, 50, 3131 CrossRef CAS .
E. P. Ambrosio, C. Francia, M. Manzoli, N. Penazzi and P. Spinelli, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2008, 33, 3142 CrossRef CAS .
E. P. Ambrosio, M. A. Dumitrescu, C. Francia, C. Gerbaldi and P. Spinelli, Fuel Cells, 2009, 9, 197 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, J. S. Lee, Q. Zhu, J. Liu, Y. Wang and S. Dai, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 2178 CrossRef CAS .
A. Stein, Z. Wang and M. A. Fierke, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 265 CrossRef CAS .
Y. X. Guo, J. P. He, T. Wang, H. R. Xue, Y. Hu, G. Li, J. Tang and X. Sun, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 9299 CrossRef CAS .
F. Su, J. Zeng, X. Bao, Y. Yu, J. Y. Lee and X. S. Zhao, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 3960 CrossRef CAS .
S. Song, Y. Liang, Z. Li, Y. Wang, R. Fu, D. Wu and P. Tsiakaras, Appl. Catal., B, 2010, 98, 132 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu and S. Creager, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 2721 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhao, J. He, C. Zhang, J. Zhou, X. Chen and T. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 1028 CAS .
L. Calvillo, M. Gangeri, S. Perathoner, G. Centi, R. Moliner and M. J. Lazaro, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 9805 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shao, J. Liu, Y. Wang and Y. Lin, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 46 RSC .
Y. Qiao and C. M. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 4027 RSC .
J. R. C. Salgado, F. Alcaide, G. Alvarez, L. Calvillo, M. J. Lazaro and E. Pastor, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 4022 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ji, K. T. Li, R. Holden, L. Zhang, J. Zhang, G. A. Botton, M. Couillard and L. F. Nazar, Nat. Chem., 2010, 2, 286 CrossRef CAS .
E. A. Franceschini, M. M. Bruno, F. A. Viva, F. J. Williams, M. Jobbagy and H. R. Corti, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 71, 173 CrossRef CAS .
E. A. Franceschini, G. A. Planes, F. J. Williams, G. J. A. A. Soler-Illia and H. R. Corti, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 1723 CrossRef CAS .
P. R. Birkin, J. M. Elliott and Y. E. Watson, Chem. Commun., 2000, 1693 RSC .
S.-Y. Huang, P. Ganesan and B. N. Popov, Appl. Catal.,
B, 2011, 102, 71 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhang, S. Y. Huang and B. N. Popov, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, B1163 CrossRef CAS .
E. Kang, S. An, S. Yoon, J. K. Kim and J. Lee, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 7416 RSC .
X. Cui, L. Guo, F. Cui, Q. He and J. Shi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 4134 CAS .
M. Mamak, N. Coombs and G. A. Ozin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2001, 11, 59 CrossRef CAS .
V. Idakiev, T. Tabakova, K. Tenchev, Z. Y. Yuan, T. Z. Ren, A. Vantomme and B. L. Su, J. Mater. Sci., 2009, 44, 6637 CrossRef CAS .
K. Watanabe, T. Miyao, K. Higashiyama, H. Yamashita and M. Watanabe, Catal. Commun., 2011, 12, 976 CrossRef CAS .
C. Laberty-Robert, K. Vallé, F. Pereira and C. Sanchez, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 961 RSC .
B. O'Regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737 CrossRef CAS .
D. Grosso, G. J. A. A. De Soler-Illia, F. Babonneau, C. Sanchez, P. A. Albouy, A. Brunet-Bruneau and A. R. Balkenende, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 1085 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Yun, K. Miyazawa, H. Zhou, I. Honma and M. Kuwabara, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 1377 CrossRef CAS .
Y. K. Hwang, K. C. Lee and Y. U. Kwon, Chem. Commun., 2001, 1738 RSC .
P. C. A. Alberius, K. L. Frindell, R. C. Hayward, E. J. Kramer, G. D. Stucky and B. F. Chmelka, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 3284 CrossRef CAS .
E. L. Crepaldi, G. J. d. A. A. Soler-Illia, D. Grosso, F. Cagnol, F. Ribot and C. Sanchez, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 9770 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zukalová, A. Zukal, L. Kavan, M. K. Nazeeruddin, P. Liska and M. Gräzel, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1789 CrossRef .
P. Docampo, M. Stefik, S. Guldin, R. Gunning, N. A. Yufa, N. Cai, P. Wang, U. Steiner, U. Wiesner and H. S. Snaith, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 676 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Snaith and L. Schmidt-Mende, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3187 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Yoon, R. Vittal, J. Lee, W.-S. Chae and K.-J. Kim, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 2890 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, X. W. Sun and Z. Jiao, Materials, 2010, 3, 5029 CrossRef CAS .
W. Cheng, E. Baudrin, B. Dunn and J. I. Zink, J. Mater. Chem., 2001, 11, 92 RSC .
T. Brezesinski, D. Fattakhova Rohlfing, S. Sallard, M. Antonietti and B. M. Smarsly, Small, 2006, 2, 1203 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, Y. Pang and S. N. B. Hodgson, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 8591 RSC .
S. Sallard, T. Brezesinski and B. M. Smarsly, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 7200 CAS .
R. Ostermann and B. M. Smarsly, Nanoscale, 2009, 1, 266 RSC .
Y. C. Sung, M. Mamak, N. Coombs, N. Chopra and G. A. Ozin, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1231 CrossRef .
H. K. Jheong, Y. J. Kim, J. H. Pan, T. Y. Won and W. I. Lee, J. Electroceram., 2006, 17, 929 CrossRef CAS .
W. Weng, T. Higuchi, M. Suzuki, T. Fukuoka, T. Shimomura, M. Ono, L. Radhakrishnan, H. Wang, N. Suzuki, H. Oveisi and Y. Yamauchi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 3956 CrossRef CAS .
A. Cremonesi, D. Bersani, P. P. Lottici, Y. Djaoued and R. Bruening, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 515, 1500 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Yuan, X. H. Xia, J. B. Wu, J. S. Gui, Y. B. Chen and S. Y. Guo, J. Membr. Sci., 2010, 364, 298 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yoshino, K. Kobayashi, S. Araki, K. Nakamura and N. Kobayashi, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 99, 43 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Bae, J.-H. Han and T. D. Chung, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 448 RSC .
R. Toledano and D. Mandler, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 3951 CrossRef .
Y. Kanno, T. Suzuki, Y. Yamauchi and K. Kuroda, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 24672 CAS .
Z. X. Wu, W. Li, Y. Y. Xia, P. Webley and D. Y. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 8835 RSC .
Y. Li, Z.-Y. Fu and B.-L. Su, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 4634 CrossRef CAS .
D. Trong On, S. M. J. Zaidi and S. Kaliaguine, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 1998, 22, 211 CrossRef .
M. V. Landau, S. P. Varkey, M. Herskowitz, O. Regev, S. Pevzner, T. Sen and Z. Luz, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 1999, 33, 149 CrossRef CAS .
A. Galarneau, M. Nader, F. Guenneau, F. Di Renzo and A. Gedeon, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 8268 CAS .
H. Yamada, C. Urata, Y. Aoyama, S. Osada, Y. Yamauchi and K. Kuroda, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 1462 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sayen and A. Walcarius, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2005, 581, 70 CrossRef CAS .
A. Le-Tuan Pham, D. L. Sedlak and F. M. Doyle, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 1216, 258 CrossRef .
J. D. Bass, D. Grosso, C. Boissière, E. Belamie, T. Coradin and C. Sanchez, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 4349 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Song, C. L. Zou, G. X. Niu and D. Y. Zhao, Chin. J. Catal., 2012, 33, 140 CrossRef CAS .
F. Carniato, C. Bisio, G. Paul, G. Gatti, L. Bertinetti, S. Coluccia and L. Marchese, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 5504 RSC .
X. X. Li, S. Barua, K. Rege and B. D. Vogt, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 11935 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Dunphy, S. Singer, A. W. Cook, B. Smarsly, D. A. Doshi and C. J. Brinker, Langmuir, 2003, 19, 10403 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Castricum, M. C. Mittelmeijer-Hazeleger, A. Sah and J. E. ten Elshof, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2006, 88, 63 CrossRef CAS .
T. Fontecave, C. Sanchez, T. Azais and C. Boissière, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 4326 CrossRef CAS .
G. Smeulders, V. Meynen, A. Silvestre-Albero, K. Houthoofd, M. Mertens, J. Silvestre-Albero, J. A. Martens and P. Cool, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2012, 132, 1077 CrossRef CAS .
M. Etienne and A. Walcarius, Talanta, 2003, 59, 1173 CrossRef CAS .
A. Walcarius, M. Etienne and C. Delacôte, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2004, 508, 87 CrossRef CAS .
M. Etienne, S. Goubert-Renaudin, Y. Rousselin, C. Marichal, F. Denat, B. Lebeau and A. Walcarius, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 3137 CrossRef CAS .
E. Asenath-Smith and W. Chen, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 12405 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† Part of the mesoporous materials themed issue.‡ Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2cs35322aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

Alain Walcarius
	Alain Walcarius received his PhD (1994) from the University of Namur (Belgium). After a post-doctoral stay in the Joe Wang group in New Mexico State University (USA), he joined the CNRS (France) in 1996 as a Research Associate. He is currently Senior Researcher at CNRS and Director of the Laboratory of Physical Chemistry and Microbiology for the Environment (Nancy, France) where his analytical and electroanalytical chemistry group works in the area of chemical reactions at solid/liquid interfaces. Among his actual research interests is the intersection between the chemistry of silica-based organic–inorganic hybrid materials, analytical chemistry, and electrochemistry, with possible applications in the field of electrochemical reactors and sensors. He has published more than 160 scientific papers, 8 book chapters and one book.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic pathway for preparing surfactant-templated mesoporous silicas, illustrating a formation mechanism based on a preformed liquid crystal (LC) mesophase (route A) or a cooperative process (route B). Adapted from ref. 118, Copyright (2002) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 2  Mesostructured thin-film formation by dip-coating. Step 1: the isotropic initial sol where the condensation is optimally slowed down. Step 2: the evaporation proceeds and micelles start to form above the CMC. Step 3: the evaporation is complete; the film equilibrates with its environment and the final mesostructure is selected by adjusting the relative humidity (RH) before further inorganic condensation. Step 4: the inorganic network is condensed; the hybrid microstructure is stabilized. Adapted from ref. 126, Copyright (2004) Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 3  The three main strategies applied to produce organically functionalized mesoporous silica: post-synthesis grafting (A), co-condensation route (B), periodic mesoporous organosilicas from bridged silesquioxanes (RO)3SiSi(OR)3 (C).	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic illustration of the nanocasting pathway using mesoporous silica hard templates with (A) hexagonal and (B) cubic geometry.	 

 	Fig. 5  (A) TEM images of nanostructured Pt networks obtained with MCM-48 silica as a template. Reproduced from ref. 160, Copyright (2001) American Chemical Society. (B) HRSEM images of the 2D hexagonal mesoporous silica thin film made by spin coating: (B1) top and (B2) cross-sectional views. Reprinted from ref. 161, Copyright (2006) Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 6  (A) Schematic view of the most commonly used mesoporous silica hard templates and the corresponding ordered mesoporous carbons; (B) transmission electron micrographs of CMK-1 and CMK-3 materials; (C) typical pore size distributions of CMK-1 and CMK-3; (D) X-ray diffractograms of both the mesoporous silica hard templates MCM-48 and SBA-15 and the corresponding ordered mesoporous carbons CMK-1 and CMK-3. Reprinted from ref. 57, Copyright (2012) Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 7  Electron micrographs of (A) mesoporous (A1 hexagonal silica, A2 hexagonal titania, A3 cubic silica), (B) macroporous titania, and (C) macro-mesoporous silica thin films. Reprinted respectively from ref. 161, Copyright (2006) Royal Society of Chemistry, from H. Zhou, C. Wang, Z. Feng, S. Li and B. Xu, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2012, 207, 34, from S. Y. Kwon, J. C. Kim and B. Choi, Thin Solid Films, 2008, 516, 2843, from Y. Zhao, B. Yang, J. Xu, Z. Fu, M. Wu and F. Li, Thin Solid Films, 2012, 520, 351, Copyright (2012, 2008, 2012) Elsevier Ltd., and from ref. 204, Copyright (2010) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (A) Cyclic voltammograms (scan rate 100 mV s−1) recorded in 1 M aqueous sulfuric acid for mesoporous platinum films deposited onto a 2 mm diameter Pt disc electrode with deposition charges of (i) 0.0 (Rf = 3.2), (ii) 0.40 (Rf = 32), (iii) 0.80 (Rf = 55) and (iv) 2.1 C cm−2 (Rf = 145). Rf denotes the ratio of real to geometric surface area. Reprinted with permission from ref. 237, Copyright (2005) Elsevier Ltd. (B) (a) Cyclic voltammograms for a gold ordered macroporous electrode (OME) with a pore diameter of 114 nm in 1 M H2SO4 at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1. (b) Reduction waves for a gold film and OMEs with different pore sizes, recorded in the same medium. In all cases the thickness of the OMEs was 2 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 241, Copyright (2007) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  Cyclic voltammograms recorded at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1 using (a) a bare glassy carbon electrode (GCE), or (b) Nafion/GCE, (c) OMC/GCE and (d) Nafion-OMC/GCE electrodes in 0.1 M KCl solution. Reproduced with permission from ref. 242, Copyright (2008) Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 10  Variation of the apparent diffusion coefficient during protonation of various aminopropyl-grafted silica samples: (a) large pore (∼6 nm) silica gel, (b) small pore (∼3 nm) MCM-41, and (c) large pore (∼6 nm) SBA-15 mesoporous silicas, as a function of the extent of reaction. Reprinted with permission from ref. 236, Copyright (2003) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  Variation of the initial apparent diffusion coefficient (Dapp,0) for Hg(II) in mercaptopropyl-silica (MPS) spheres as a function of the relative molar ratio of MPTMS (or MPTES) in the starting sol, as evaluated from uptake experiments performed at pH 2 (A and C) and pH 4 (B and D). Parts A and B correspond to hexagonal materials (MPSHEX-n%) while parts C and D are related to the cubic series (MPSCUB-n%). Data were estimated from kinetic curves at the early times of the experiments when the uptake process is dominated by the smaller spherical particles (see the text for calculus details). Reproduced from ref. 140, Copyright (2009) Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 12  (A) Cyclic voltammetric curves recorded in 0.05 M hydrogen phthalate solutions (pH 4.1) containing 5 mM Ru(NH3)63+ at a glassy carbon electrode covered with a CTAB-templated silica film (a) before and (b) after surfactant extraction. The potential scan rate was 50 mV s−1. Inset: electrochemical response measured with the bare glassy carbon electrode. Reproduced from ref. 440, Copyright (2007) WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH. (B) Cyclic voltammograms recorded at 50 mV s−1 in 0.05 M hydrogen phthalate solution (pH 4.1) containing 0.5 mM Ru(bpy)32+ using ITO electrodes covered by mesoporous silica thin films with 2D hexagonal symmetry (a), 3D hexagonal symmetry (b) and cubic structure (c). Bottom-right inset: enlargement of curve (a); top-left inset: signal obtained at bare ITO. Reproduced from ref. 199, Copyright (2007) American Chemical Society. (C) Cyclic voltammetric curves of 2 mM ferrocene in acetonitrile containing 0.5 M LiClO4 at the bare Pt electrode and Pt disk-shaped nanoelectrodes made of polymer templated ZrO2 films with different mass ratios between the copolymer and the inorganic precursor: (a) 1/5 mass ratio, (b) 1/10 mass ratio, (c) 1/50 mass ratio, and (d) 1/100 mass ratio. Scan rate is 50 mV s−1. Reproduced from ref. 283, Copyright (2012) American Chemical Society. (D) Schematic representation of hierarchically ordered silica thin films prepared from 1-hexadecyl-3-methylimidazolium chloride (IL), poly(ω-hydroxypoly(ethylene-co-butylene)-co-poly(ethylene oxide)) (KLE) and/or polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) templates. (a) Large (spherical) mesopores. (b) Small (worm-like) and large mesopores. (c) Large mesopores and macropores. (d) Small and large mesopores and macropores. (E, F) Cyclic voltammograms of porous silica films functionalized with ferrocene carboxylic acid in 0.1 M LiClO4–acetonitrile (sweep rate 50 mV s−1). (E) A monomodal mesoporous KLE film, a bimodal mesoporous KLE-IL film and a monomodal IL-silica film with a worm-like pore system (3 nm). (F) A bimodal meso-macroporous KLE-PMMA and a trimodal meso-macroporous KLE-IL-PMMA film. Reproduced from ref. 201, Copyright (2007) Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH.	 
	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 13  (A) 1/Ilimvs. V−3/4 plots obtained from chronoamperometry experiments performed at a potential of 0.8 V vs. an Ag/AgCl reference electrode in 0.05 mol L−1 potassium hydrogen phthalate solutions containing 1 mM ferrocenethanol (Fc) using ITO electrodes modified with mesoporous silica films incorporating various methyl group contents (a–g correspond, respectively, to films prepared from sols containing (a) 0, (b) 10, (c) 20, (d) 30, (e) 40, (f) 50 and (g) 60% MTES). (B) Experimental SECM approach curves recorded with a 25 mm-diameter Pt ultramicroelectrode (UME) approaching ITO plates modified with the same series of surfactant-extracted methyl-functionalized mesoporous silica thin films. Current variations (i.e., normalized current, IR, plotted as a function of the normalized UME–substrate distance, d/a) were measured by using 1 mM ferrocenedimethanol (Fc) as the redox probe in a 0.05 mol L−1 potassium hydrogen phthalate solution. The tip voltage was held at +600 mV and ITO substrates were biased at 0 mV vs. a silver wire pseudo-reference. Reprinted from ref. 280, Copyright (2010) Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
	(3)

 	Fig. 14  Illustrative schemes of some surfactant assemblies and lyotropic liquid crystalline (LLC) phases that can be designed onto electrode surfaces and around which mesoporous films can be generated by electrochemistry. For the top LLC cartoons, blue represents the water domain, the white circles represent the hydrophilic head groups, and the yellow regions represent the hydrophobic alkyl chains.	 

 	Fig. 15  Illustrative scheme for the preparation of a colloidal crystal assembly around which a macro- or mesoporous material is then electrodeposited.	 
Mn+(aq) + ne− → M(s)	(4)
2H2O + 2e− → 2OH(aq)− + H2(g)	(5a)
	(5b)
Mn+(aq) + (n − 2x)e− + xH2O → MOx(s) + 2xH(aq)+	(6)
	(7)

 	Fig. 16  Schematic representation of an electrochemical interfacial surfactant templating method. An interfacial amphiphilic assembly composed of hexagonally close-packed spherical micelles is used as a template in this scheme and W.E. represents the working electrode. Reproduced from ref. 329, Copyright (2005) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  (A,B) TEM images of CTAB-templated mesoporous silica films formed by electro-assisted deposition on a glassy carbon electrode: high-magnification top view (A) and cross-sectional view (B). (C) Cross-sectional view obtained by FE-SEM for a mesoporous silica film prepared as in A and B, but electrodeposited this time on ITO (after vertical cleaving of the substrate “glass–ITO–mesoporous silica). (D) Cross-sectional view obtained by FE-SEM for a mesoporous silica film electrodeposited on a gold CD-trode displaying a streaked morphology at the μm level. Figures A–C have been adapted from ref. 202, with permission of Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 18  (A) FE-SEM (left) and TEM (right) images showing cross sectional views of bimodal macro-mesoporous silica films obtained by electro-assisted deposition. Reproduced from ref. 204, Copyright (2010) American Chemical Society. (B) SEM image of silica microstructures formed by electro-assisted generation on square-patterned recessed electrodes. Reproduced from ref. 358, Copyright (2012) American Chemical Society. (C) Electrogeneration of surfactant-templated silica microdots on ITO: (a) schematic representation of the method; (b) FE-SEM top view of an individual dot prepared using a 25 μm diameter platinum SECM tip; (c) SEM image of 8 microdots formed successively. Reproduced from ref. 299, Copyright (2011) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 19  (A) Differential pulse voltammetry for (i) polycrystalline and (ii) mesoporous platinum electrodes in a mixture solution of 0.5 mM catechol and 0.5 mM hydroquinone in 1.0 M HClO4. The DPV parameters are as follows: scan rate: 10 mV s−1, pulse amplitude: 30 mV and pulse width: 50 ms. (B) DPV for mesoporous platinum electrode in the solution of 0.5 mM catechol in 1.0 M HClO4 and containing different concentrations of hydroquinone in the range from 0.05 to 2.0 mM. (C) DPV response for the same electrode as in (B) in the solution of 0.5 mM hydroquinone in 1.0 M HClO4 and containing different concentrations of catechol in the range from 0.05 to 1.0 mM. Reproduced from ref. 365, Copyright (2007) Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 20  Cyclic voltammetry of (A) bare glassy carbon electrode (GCE) or (B) OMC/Nafion film electrode in pH 7.4 phosphate buffer solution without (dotted line) or with (solid line) the mixture of 0.25 mM ascorbic acid (AA), 0.25 mM dopamine (DA) and 0.5 mM uric acid (UA). The scan rate is 100 mV s−1. Reproduced from ref. 380, Copyright (2009) Elsevier.	 
	(8)
	(9)
	(10)

 	Fig. 21  Scheme illustrating the general principle of mediated electrocatalysis at a mediator-modified electrode: (a) overpotential observed for the direct oxidation of a reductant substrate SRed into an oxidized product POx (dotted line represents the curve that would have been obtained in the absence of kinetic limitations); (b) electrochemical behaviour of a redox mediator couple (MRed/MOx) characterized by fast electron transfer kinetics; (c) electrocatalytic transformation of SRed into POx by means of the mediator immobilized at the electrode surface.	 

 	Fig. 22  Influence of the preconcentration time on the voltammetric response of carbon paste electrodes modified with (A) a mercaptopropyl-functionalized mesoporous silica prepared from a TEOS/MPTMS 80:20 and (B) an amorphous silica gel grafted with the mercaptopropyl group; accumulation medium: 5 × 10−7 M Hg(NO3)2 in 0.1 M HNO3; detection medium: 3 M HCl; other conditions of the detection process: 1 min electrolysis at −0.7 V, followed by anodic stripping differential pulse voltammetric detection. Inset: variation of the stripping peak area with the accumulation time.	 

 	Fig. 23  Examples of organo-functional groups used to modify mesoporous silica materials, which have been exploited to date in preconcentration electroanalysis.	 

 	Fig. 24  (A) Binding plots of (a) Hb/MCM-41, (b) Hb/SBA-15 and (c) Hb/MCF; MCM-41 and SBA-15 are 1D hexagonal materials while MCF is a 3D mesostructure. (B) Schematic of haemoglobin (Hb) immobilized on mesoporous silica materials and the electron transfer between Hb and the GC electrode. (C) CVs of (a) Hb/GC electrode, (b) Hb/MCM-41/GC electrode, (c) Hb/SBA-15/GC electrode and (d) Hb/MCF/GC modified electrode at 0.3 V s−1 in PBS (pH 7.0). Reproduced from ref. 451, Copyright (2010) Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 25  Example of an immunosensor for detection of human chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG). Fabrication process of Au/thionine (TH)/MCM-41 nanolabels bearing HRP-labeled hCG signal antibodies (HRP-Ab2) and the measurement protocol of the electrochemical immunosensor based on an electrode modified with grapheme nanosheets, carbon nanotubes and Au nanoparticles. Reproduced from ref. 467, Copyright (2012) Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 26  Diagram illustrating the preparation of a label-free immunosensor for the determination of α-fetoprotein (AFP). GNP-APTS-MPS represents gold nanoparticles immobilized in aminopropyl-functionalized mesoporous silica, EDC/NHS the coupling agent for attaching anti-AFP (the monoclonal antibodies of AFP) to GNP-APTS-MPS, PVA is poly(vinyl alcohol) and GCE glassy carbon electrode. Reproduced from ref. 471, Copyright (2012) Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 27  (A) TEM images of mesoporous LiCoO2, before (a) and (b) after 200 cycles of charge–discharge. (B) Charge storage (lithium) as a function of cycle number for (a) mesoporous LiCoO2 and (b) nanoparticle LiCoO2. Reproduced from ref. 503, Copyright (2008) Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH.	 

 	Fig. 28  Capacitance values in aqueous (▲) and organic (■) media of nanostructured carbons synthesized with various carbon precursors and templates (thus leading to distinct textural characteristics) versus their micropore volume determined by CO2 adsorption. Reproduced from ref. 526, Copyright (2005) Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 29  (a–d) Photographs for the electrochromic devices (ECDs) in colored state made by mesoporous TiO2 (Meso-TiO2) and nanocrystalline TiO2 (NC-TiO2) films with different thicknesses: Meso-TiO2 with thicknesses of (a) 330 and (b) 600 nm; NC-TiO2 with thicknesses of (c) 700 nm and (d) 3 m; (e) optical absorption spectra for the several ECDs; (f) transient absorbances at 530 nm for the ECDs made of the viologen-modified Meso- and NC-TiO2 electrodes with the stepwise voltage of −3.0 V and 3.0 V. Reproduced from ref. 593, Copyright (2006) Springer.	 

 	Fig. 30  (a) Mechanism of imaging using a leuco dye on a mesoporous TiO2 electrode with vertical pores. Imaging and erasing are carried out by applying a potential of ±3.0 V to the device. The leuco dye is changed to its colored form on the surface of the working electrode when an electric current is applied. The colored dye changes back to the colorless form when a reverse electric current is applied to the electrodes. (b) Imaging process for a passive-matrix electrochromic display. The working electrode (with mesoporous structure) and counter electrode (without mesoporous structure) are arranged orthogonally. The points of intersection of the electrodes are colourable positions. The electrode has striped ITO layers 420 mm wide and separated by 30 mm on a glass substrate. Reproduced from ref. 594, Copyright (2010) Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 
Footnotes
† Part of the mesoporous materials themed issue.
‡ Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2cs35322a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
