Towards promising electrochemical technology for load leveling applications: extending cycle life of lead acid batteries by the use of carbon nano-tub ...  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2EE22970F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2EE22970F
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 587-594Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsTowards promising electrochemical technology for load leveling applications: extending cycle life of lead acid batteries by the use of carbon nano-tubes (CNTs)

        
          
            Roni 
            Shapira
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Gilbert Daniel 
            Nessim
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Tomer 
            Zimrin
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Doron 
            Aurbach
          
        
      *
      Bar-Ilan University, Department of Chemistry, Ramat-Gan, Israel. E-mail: aurbach@mail.biu.ac.il
Received 
      25th July 2012
    , Accepted 19th November 2012First published on 20th November 2012AbstractLead acid (LA) batteries are an established mature technology mainly used for low energy density applications. Crumbling/sulfation is the main failure mechanism of the active materials, which limits their cycle life. LA batteries possessing long cycle life can serve as an ideal energy storage technology for load leveling applications. By uniformly adding properly oxidized CNTs to the positive active material of LA batteries, we achieved a pronounced improvement in their cycle life. This improvement was mainly attained by the formation of a stable conductive grid that enabled the delivery of current to all the active material. The grid consisted of composites made of CNTs conformably coated with lead salts. By enabling a uniform electron distribution, and subsequently proper electrochemical redox reactions, the formation of too big PbSO4 particles did not occur, thus changing the failure mechanism from crumbling/sulfation to pure crumbling. Additionally, the perfect coating of the CNTs prevented their electrochemical oxidation to CO or CO2. This improvement in cycle life is significant and extends the importance of LA batteries beyond their traditional applications.

Broader context
Intensive use of sustainable energy (wind, solar) requires availability of reliable technologies for energy storage. We have seen in recent years impressive progress in the development of new wind turbines and novel photo-voltaic cells, however, development of appropriate storage devices for these ‘volatile’ fluctuating power sources is much behind. We actually lack good and reliable technologies for load leveling (LL) applications, which we need for intensive use of sustainable energy. Lead acid batteries (LABs) may serve as ideal technology for LL applications, because they are relatively cheap, fast, and reliable; moreover, lead is very abundant in the earth's crust and most important is that the used LABs can be easily recycled. The main problem of these batteries is their limited cycle life. The reactions in a LAB are complicated because they involve conversion of conductive lead and lead oxide (negative and positive electrodes, respectively) to insulating PbSO4, which leads to disintegration of the active mass upon cycling. Using partially oxidized carbon nano-tubes as an additive to the positive PbO2 electrodes of LABs remarkably increases their cycle life by improving the electrical and mechanical integrity of the active mass upon cycling. Judicious use of CNTs as an additive to LAB electrodes may bring them prolonged cycle life thus making them very suitable for LL applications. Consequently, the work described in this paper advances the development of reliable and important technology for sustainable energy storage and conversion.

1 Introduction
Lead-acid technology has been successfully employed in secondary batteries for over 150 years:1 SLI (starting, lighting, and ignition) car batteries, standby power batteries for high-energy consumption such as power stations (peak shaving and load leveling), telecommunication networks, medical equipment, etc. down to UPS (uninterrupted power supply) systems.2 Considering materials availability, process cost and recycling options, lead acid technology is a clear winner over other battery technologies, including all kinds of Li and Li ion batteries. However, energy density and cycleability remain the major limitations for lead acid technology. Improving cycleabilty would further position this technology as the prime candidate for load leveling and stationary applications. Note that lead acid batteries with prolonged cycle life can serve as ideal storage technology for sustainable energy.
Among the main advantages of this battery technology are its low cost, stable voltage profile (conversion type battery), high reliability, robustness and safety.2,3 Its main disadvantages are:
(1) Low specific energy, mainly due to the high molecular weight of all lead compounds.3
(2) Poor material utilization, where only one quarter of the lead is used as the actual negative active material (NAM) and positive active material (PAM), while one quarter forms the grid, and the last half only functions as a mechanical/conductive skeleton in the PAM.3
(3) Acceleration of the main failure modes (sulfation and crumbling) is a function of the depth of discharge, as will be explained later.2
There are three main lead-acid battery configurations: (1) flat pasted (Faure), which can be flooded or valve regulated lead acid (VRLA), (2) rolled (Planté), or (3) tubular.4 Although our findings can be extended to all types of lead-acid batteries, only the flooded flat pasted type is discussed here. The chemical reactions occurring in the battery cell for all configurations are:Negative pole: Pb(s) ⇄ Pb2+(aq) + 2e−Positive Pole: 2e− + PbO2(s) + 4H+ ⇄ Pb2+(aq) + 2H2O
Precipitation (similar on both negative and positive poles)Pb2+(aq) + SO2−4(aq) ⇄ PbSO4(s)
Precise examination of the lead-acid flooded cell revealed that both its cycle life and energy density are limited by three main failure mechanisms of the PAM: grid corrosion, crumbling and sulfation of the active material. Culpin and Rand stated that “the service life of flooded-electrolyte batteries is generally limited by the performance of the positive plate, the capacity of which declines on cycling, especially under deep discharge. From the onset, the positive plate has to be sufficiently robust to withstand the mechanical stresses caused by the differences in the molar volumes of the active material (PbO2) and the discharge product (PbSO4)”.2 Therefore in flooded cells much research has been conducted to improve the performance of the PAM and the grid.2,5
As cited above, crumbling is driven by the expansion from lead dioxide to lead sulfate (9.38 g cm−3 to 6.29 g cm−3 respectively) and by the contraction from lead sulfate back to lead dioxide that occurs during discharge and recharge respectively. This expansion/contraction during discharge/recharge introduces stresses that gradually crumble the active material from the electrode, ultimately leading to the loss of all the PAM from the electrode.2,6,7
Sulfation is driven by the formation of large crystals of PbSO4. During discharge, PbSO4, an electrical insulator, is formed on the electrodes. During each discharge, most of the nucleated PbSO4 crystals are of sub-micrometric size. However, depending on the depth of the discharge, H2SO4 concentration gradient, and current density, some PbSO4 crystals exceeding 1 to 2 microns in their diameter are formed. During later discharges, these large crystals further grow in size, thus consuming the active material. These larger crystals are thermodynamically stable and hardly dissolve during recharge. Moreover, since they are electrical insulators, these larger crystals hinder the diffusion of Pb2+ ions to the conductive regions of the PAM.
Carbonaceous additives for lead-acid batteries were studied intensively during the last decade, mainly for the negative active material of VRLA cells.3,8–12 Among the contribution of the various carbon allotropes, we can mention: enhancement of the overall conductivity of the active material, facilitation of the formation of small isolated PbSO4 particles that are easy to dissolve, and the ability of carbons to act as electro-osmotic pumps that facilitate acid diffusion in the active material bulk.13,14
The addition of carbon fibers and graphite to the PAM paste has been studied to increase the electrode porous structure, thus enhancing the power density (and to some extent energy density) and accelerating the electrode formation.3,15 More affordable carbon allotropes such as carbon black, activated carbon, graphite and even aerogels, carbon cloth and fibers have also been investigated.16–18 However, carbides, graphene and carbon nanotubes (CNTs)19,20 have not been significantly investigated mainly because of their high cost, which has been considered an obstacle to practical industrialization. However, the high electrical conductivity, large aspect ratio, mechanical strength, and chemical durability of multiwall CNTs (MWCNTs)21 position them well as additives that could help limiting the sulfation failure mechanism. In this work, we investigated a PAM for lead acid flooded cells based on a composite material comprising oxidized CNTs and lead dioxide.
2 Experimental
2.1 Synthesis of auxiliary (reference) cells
Both positive and negative electrodes were prepared from leady oxide (LO, i.e. a mixture of PbOx with 1 ≤ x ≤ 2) which was produced in a commercial Barton pot by Vulcan Inc (Israel, a LA batteries manufacturer). For the PAM, we mixed LO with Dynel® 1/8 (0.2 wt% vs. the LO). For the NAM, we mixed LO with Dynel® 1/16 (0.06 wt% vs. the LO) and an expander (0.75 wt% vs. the LO; VULCA01 by Hammond; consisting of BaSO4 and carbon black). We added and mixed distilled water (150 μg g−1 LO powder) and H2SO4 (16 μl g−1 LO powder; 1.84 sp.gr.) to both PAM and NAM mixtures to form the paste. After short stirring and waiting for one hour at room temperature, we manually pasted 3 g of the PAM and 10 g of the counter NAM on lead grids (4, 10 cm2 correspondingly; 1.3 mm wide), which were extruded from commercial lead acid battery grids. The electrodes were then compressed between Teflon® sheets (3 ton; 3 min) and cured in two stages: first at 55 °C at 100% relative humidity (RH) for 48 hours, followed by 55 °C at 20% RH for an additional 24 hours. These conditions form tribasic lead sulfate crystals (3PbO·PbSO4) since the process temperature is lower than the transition temperature to form tetrabasic lead sulfate (4PbO·PbSO4). The cured electrodes were then immersed in a polypropylene test tube with a microscope glass slide as a separator in H2SO4 solution (3 M) for 18 hours aiming towards forming only the β structure13 followed by constant-current/constant voltage (CC/CV) formation (i.e. C/2 till 2.3 V followed by polarization to 2.3 V until the current is reduced to 5 mA).
2.2 Synthesis of PAM impregnated with CNTs
Composite positive electrodes were prepared in a similar way to the above-described auxiliary cells with the addition of oxidized MWCNTs (from Arkema; 10 nm in diameter and 1–10 μm in length; 0.8 wt% of oxygen, denoted in this paper as CNTs) that were added to the LO powder (1% by weight) and the Dynel® blend. The mixtures with the CNTs were then mixed in a planetary centrifugal vacuum mixer (ARV-310 by Thinky) for 2 minutes at 1000 rpm under atmospheric conditions. With this material, we then synthesized PAM electrodes as described in the previous paragraph (synthesis of auxiliary cells). Comparing the electrical resistivity of the CNTs containing composites to the reference (CNTs) free active mass shows that the former composites have lower resistivity by a factor of 4 (5 kΩ cm vs. 20 kΩ cm).
2.3 Electrochemical analyses
The electrochemical analyses were carried out with a MSTAT 32 channel potentiostat (Arbin Instruments, College Station, TX) as follows:
(1) The fully charged cells were discharged at C/20 rate upto 1.6 V to assess their actual capacity of 97 mA h g−1.
(2) Following a complete CC/CV recharge, similar to the first formation stage, the cells were then subjected to a 3 min open circuit voltage (OCV), 20 min discharge (C rate), 3 min OCV, and CC/CV recharge. The failure criterion was determined when the cell could not provide 1.6 V all along the discharge with dV/dt below 0.001 V s−1 (to discriminate voltage spikes).
2.4 Synthesis of CNT–PbSO4 core–shell needle composites
There is a strong indication that the CNTs in the electrodes' active mass are not affected by the relatively high positive potentials applied to the cathodes upon charging (no CO2 evolution upon prolonged cycling, see later). We assume that their stability is due to their full coverage by protective lead compounds, formed by their contact with the lead oxide and H2SO4. In an attempt to simulate what happens in the composite active mass, CNT–PbSO4 composites were synthesized by immersing a cellulose dialysis membrane (EW-02900-42 by Cole Parmer) containing PbSO4 powder (in excess; 307734 by Sigma-Aldrich) in a polypropylene test tube containing oxidized CNTs and a 3 M H2SO4 solution at room temperature. The membrane enabled the diffusion of ions but kept separated the PbSO4 particles and the CNTs during the experiment. A droplet of the solution containing CNTs was taken and deposited on a porous carbon substrate which drew out the excess water solution.22 We then rinsed the substrate in distilled water to eliminate the residual acid and Pb2+ ions, allowed the substrate to dry, and finally characterized using high resolution scanning electron microscopy (model Helios 600 by FEI). Fig. 1a and b show HRSEM images of a single pristine and a lead oxide coated CNT. For these measurements, the samples for imaging were prepared from aqueous dispersions and laid on carbon fibers as described in ref. 22. These images demonstrate both the difference in morphology between the coated and pristine CNTs (the length remains invariant while the CNT is homogeneously coated) and the fact that the CNTs we used are indeed well separated from each other and do not form bundles. These studies demonstrate the excellent adhesion of the lead compounds (lead oxide and PbSO4) to the CNTs, attributed to their partial (surface) oxidation.
 Fig. 1  HRSEM images of a core–shell oxidized CNT coated with a tribasic lead sulfate (3PbO·PbSO4) composite and a pristine CNT (a and b respectively). The samples were prepared for imaging as described in ref. 22; a typical HRTEM image of the core–shell structure and the EDS spectrum related to this image (c and d respectively). 
2.5 FTIR analysis
In order to check whether the CNTs were oxidized to CO or CO2 at the required elevated charging potential, we prepared a custom-made sealed chamber for Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectrometry. A composite positive electrode was inserted along with its counter negative electrode and a separator into a vacuum-sealed polypropylene chamber with a stainless steel cap (Fig. 2). The chamber was flooded with 3 M H2SO4 solution up to the CaF2 window. The optical path included the air between two CaF2 windows. The experiment was handled in a glove box with controlled dry air atmosphere without CO or CO2. After 18 hours of ventilation of the prepared chamber in the glove box, the chamber was sealed and the cells were charged (i.e. formed) followed by one of two modes of cycling:
 Fig. 2  The set-up for CO/CO2 detection (by FTIR) during anodic polarization of CNTs containing PbO2 electrodes in flooded LA cells. A scheme of the LA cell containing the optical windows that were measured within the FTIR spectrometer (placed during prolonged polarization in its sample chamber). 
(1) Invariable charge–discharge cycling, similar to the above electrochemical analysis.
(2) Charge–discharge cycling, similar to the above electrochemical analysis except that the recharging potential was increased by 0.1 V with each cycle, starting from 2.3 V, to assess the CNT oxidation by FTIR detection of CO or CO2 in the chamber atmosphere using a Nicolet 6700 from Thermo scientific. The cell atmosphere was monitored starting from the sealing of the chamber. We collected data:
(1) Before starting the initial electrode formation charging (i.e. baseline).
(2) During the formation stage (first charging), specifically after 1, 2, 18 (when the cell reached 2.3 V), 24, and 48 hours.
(3) Randomly during the cycling.
The cell was not ventilated along the entire experiment span in order to detect accumulation of CO or CO2.
3 Results and discussion
Mixing the CNTs (which contain 0.8 wt% of oxygen) with leady oxide (LO) powder using a planetary centrifugal mixer resulted in a homogenous dispersion (Fig. 3a and b). EDS mapping (Fig. 3e and f) shows well the uniform dispersion of the carbonaceous moieties with the LO powder. It is remarkable that the mixed CNTs were not chopped and maintained their initial length of up to 10 μm. We attribute this to the good adhesion of the LO to the oxidized CNTs, which forms core–shell structures that further protect the CNTs both mechanically and chemically (see description of our simulation work in the images of Fig. 1). The mixing procedure chosen in this work plays an important role in determining the quality of the composite electrodes thus explored. In contrast, an alternative mixing procedure by ball milling (pulverisette 6 by Fritsch) in a zirconia canister using various zirconia ball sizes (0.5, 1, 5 and 10 mm), frequency of rotations (denoted as revolutions per minute – rpm; 100–600 rpm), and time spans (1–128 min) resulted in either preservation of the bundles (mainly when the experiment period was too short) or in complete chopping of the CNTs to fragments of 100–200 nm (Fig. 3c and d).23,24 Using the model developed by Abdellaoui and Gaffet,25,26 we estimated the kinetic energy provided by the planetary centrifugal mixing using sub-micrometer scale LO powder as the ball milling agent, to be in the order of 7.7 × 10−16 J per collision compared to 3.8 × 10−6 J per collision using a 10 mm (diameter) ZrO2 grinding agent. This less impactful but much better distributed energy (proportional to the number of particles) led to the homogeneous mixture with undamaged oxidized CNTs. We believe that the impact energy and its uniform distribution were sufficient to release the van der Waals attraction between adjacent CNTs without chopping them.
 Fig. 3  SEM images of the homogenous mixture of MWCNTs and lead oxides after planetary centrifugal mixing at 1000 rpm (a and b) and SEM images of representative bundled (c) and chopped (d) CNTs after ball milling of CNTs and lead oxide powder (ZrO2 canister and balls; 5 mm balls; 600 rpm; 128 min) and EDS mapping of these mixtures after planetary centrifugal mixing, carbon mapping (e) and lead mapping (f). 
When we added water to form the electrode, the mixture of well-oxidized CNTs and LO powder was stable and did not separate back into CNT bundles. In contrast, when we added water to mixtures of non-oxidized or too-oxidized CNTs, we observed a clear phase separation. This may be due to the increase in the surface free energy of CNTs with increasing oxidation due to the introduction of the various oxides, from the pristine hydrophobic CNTs (i.e. low surface free energy) up to the high surface free energy of LO. We hypothesize that too oxidized CNTs have an even higher surface energy than LO, leading to phase separation. Moreover, the different oxides (and their possible combination) as observed in high-resolution X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (HR-XPS, not shown) on the surface of the CNTs may contribute to the stability of the mixture, and thus to the cathode performance, similar to Hansen27 parameters for liquids and melts.
We characterized the cycling of over 15 lead acid cells assembled from either positive electrodes consisting of composite PAM impregnated with CNTs (Fig. 4a) or from reference positive electrodes that comprised a standard mixture, no CNTs added, as in commercial LA batteries (Fig. 4b). Based on the determined failure criteria, namely the drop of the cell voltage below 1.6 V during discharge, we measured with the composite electrodes (containing CNTs) in most experiments around 1000 cycles before failure. With some cells (containing the electrodes with CNTs) up to 1700 cycles could be obtained when the discharging was carried out up to depth of discharge (DOD) of 33% of the initial cathode capacity. These values are four to seven times higher than that obtained by our best reference cells (without CNTs in the positive electrodes) for which we measured up to around 250 cycles before failure. This performance of the reference cells is very similar to that of commercial LA batteries. It is important to note that all the reference cells failed because of the cathode side. At the end of the experiments the negative electrodes looked invariant while the positive electrodes were always disintegrated. In contrast, in all the experiments in which cathodes containing CNTs were used, the limiting factor was the anode. At the end of these experiments the negative electrodes looked disintegrated, while the positive composite electrodes remained well integrated. Taking into account the difficulty in the preparation of the composite lead paste/CNT electrodes and the fact that the laboratory conditions cannot produce optimized electrodes, we expect that there is a room for further optimization, thus, the improvement demonstrated herein due to the presence of CNTs in the electrodes can be further increased. Electrodes which will be consistently produced in standard procedures, where environmental conditions and process parameters can be strictly controlled, are supposed to exhibit better performance. The obvious next step is to use CNTs as an additive also for the anodes in LA batteries and to test full cells with both electrodes containing CNTs as a critically important additive.
 Fig. 4  (a) Typical voltage – time vs. cycle number of LA cells containing cathodes modified by CNTs (b) typical voltage – time vs. cycle number of a regular reference cell. The inset shows typical voltage profiles of a good cycle and a cycle that reflects failure. 
As expected, the studied cells demonstrated constant voltage profile through most of their life span. We gently shocked the cells twice a week to avoid stratification; this can be observed in the small voltage fluctuations in the chrono-potentiometric plots. Remarkably, with CNT-containing cathodes, the crumbled PAM retained its black color, as was clearly observed during cycling, indicating that it was not sulfated (sulfated PAM is white). A detailed examination of a single cycle shows a recharging time of 32 minutes for the CNT-containing cell (until the charging process ends, namely, 33% of the cell capacity was recharged) compared to 44 minutes that it usually took for a standard reference cell to complete its charging process (during each single cycle). This represents a 27% increase in the recharging efficiency due to the presence of CNTs in the composite cathode of these cells. As usually observed in commonly used conventional LA batteries, the cells exhibit a voltage drop during a few cycles before reaching the failure criteria; this most probably relates to the actual DOD which is approaching the cell limiting DOD at the examined rates of operation. The actual DOD gradually increased along the cell cycling due to the continuous slow degradation of the active material. However, this slow degradation did not appear as a gradual voltage drop during prolonged cycling experiments, except during the last few tens of cycles before failure, because the cells were operating at low enough DOD that left enough living active mass during many hundreds of cycles (in both positive and negative electrodes), so, the discharge process could be completed above an acceptable threshold voltage (>1.9 V). During the last few tens of cycles, the high magnitude of the DOD accelerated the degradation of the active material (i.e. pronounced crumbling and sulfation at the limiting electrode), thus leading to a failure of the battery.
Postmortem analysis of the electrodes from both reference (Fig. 5a) and improved cells i.e. cathodes containing CNTs (Fig. 5b and c), after the cells reached their end of life, revealed pronounced differences in the morphology of the cycled positive electrodes. The reference electrodes underwent both sulfation and crumbling while the electrodes containing CNTs underwent only crumbling. Characterization of the positive electrodes from reference cells after their failure by HRSEM (Fig. 5a) supplemented by EDS showed a mixture of large PbSO4 crystals with a size of a few tens of microns, typical of sulfation, combined with sub-micronic PbO2 powder, typical of crumbling. In contrast, the electrodes containing CNTs showed homogeneously dispersed sub-micron crystals (Fig. 5b and c), typical of crumbling. The difference in morphology between these two types of electrodes is striking and exhibits a pronounced effect of the presence of the CNTs on the electrode structure during prolonged cycling.
 Fig. 5  An HRSEM image of a failed reference cathode (no CNT) demonstrating combined sulfation–crumbling failure mechanisms (upper left) and an HRSEM image of a CNT containing cathode measured after failure of the cell (upper middle and upper right), two levels of magnification. Charts (lower left and lower right) show typical EDS spectra of these electrodes after cycling (reference and CNT containing electrodes respectively). 
Imaging of aged electrodes at higher magnification (Fig. 5c) revealed that the structure of the cycled electrodes containing CNTs is characterized by sub-micrometric grains and thin needles with diameters of 90 ± 60 nm and lengths up to half a micron. This differs from the typical granular structure observed with standard (reference) electrodes. EDS spectra of these electrodes (Fig. 5d and e) showed that the failed reference electrode contained relatively high levels of oxygen and sulfur (compared to lead) while the failed electrode containing CNTs did not seem to contain any pronounced amount of sulfur (although separation between Pb and S peaks is not easy, the EDS system clearly detected sulfur in the case of failed reference electrodes).
We hypothesized that the processes occurring in the electrodes containing CNTs during the 18-hour immersion of the cured electrodes in the sulfuric acid solution led to the formation of needles, because of the presence of oxidized CNTs coated with tribasic lead sulfate (3PbO·PbSO4). These are subsequently charged and changed to CNTs coated with PbO2. To verify this hypothesis, we synthesized composite mixtures comprising oxidized CNT–tribasic lead sulfate and showed that we obtained a core–shell structure (see Experimental section) by the following observations:
(1) HRSEM measurements of treated CNTs (covered by 3PbO–PbSO4) showed only tubular structures with lengths similar to those of our oxidized CNTs but with much thicker diameter. Note that we were able to measure single nano-tubes. No pristine CNTs or CNT bundles were observed after treatment, see Fig. 1.
(2) The needle shape structures did not exhibit electrostatic charging due to the electron beam during the SEM measurements, despite the insulating nature of the PbSO4, indicating that the core of the structure may be conducting.
Furthermore, we did two control experiments using the same synthesis technique pointing to the existence of CNTs in the core of the features we observed:
(1) Without adding CNTs: we observed granular lead sulfate crystals in contrast to the needle shape observed when CNTs were added.
(2) Without adding tribasic lead sulfite: we observed the oxidized CNTs; as expected, at the temperature and acid concentration used herein, the crystallinity of the CNTs is not supposed to be affected.
Carbonaceous additives can be electrochemically oxidized at the elevated potentials used herein (1.8 V upon charging, vs. standard hydrogen electrode, SHE). It was critically important to demonstrate that the CNTs used herein were not oxidized in the LA cells, because of the above described core–shell structure of the CNTs, fully covered by lead compounds (PbO2 and PbSO4), which provided sufficient protection to the CNTs against oxidation. We measured LA cells with cathodes containing CNTs during prolonged cycling, while being placed in the measurement compartment of an FTIR spectrometer (in situ FTIR measurements, see Experimental section and Fig. 2). No CO or CO2 formation was detected (see representative FTIR spectra in Fig. 6) during prolonged experiments during which these gases would accumulate in the cell much above the detection limit, if they were formed. This seems to prove that CNT oxidation indeed did not occur in these cells, probably due to the protection of the CNTs by the core–shell structure as explained above.
 Fig. 6  
In situ FTIR measurements of atmosphere above a full LA cell cathode which contained CNTs that was cycled (several hundreds of cycles) while being placed in the measurement chamber of the FTIR spectrometer. Graph (a) is the single beam background spectrum measured after the cell was assembled, sealed and equilibrated. Graph (b) is a typical single beam spectrum of the cell upon cycling. Spectra (c), (d), and (e) were obtained by dividing single beam spectra measured after 2 cycles, 22 cycles and 250 cycles respectively, by the background single beam spectrum. Some meaningless noise appears between 750 and 500 cm−1 in the subtracted spectra. 
The matching of the surface energies of properly oxidized CNTs and that of the lead salts, combined with the low solubility of lead salts (e.g., Ksp values for lead dioxide and lead sulfate in water are 3.3 × 10−66 and 1.3 × 10−8 respectively28,29), drives the formation of a stable core–shell composite with perfect coverage of the CNTs. The coating consists of PbO2, PbSO4, 3PbO·PbSO4, 4PbO·PbSO4 or any combination of them varying as a function of the transitory partial state of charge and the battery history (thermal, cycling profile, production conditions, etc.). Since electrochemistry occurs on surfaces, this perfect coating prevents any electrochemical oxidation of the carbonaceous core to CO or CO2.
Hence, we suggest a change in the morphology of these electrodes from non-uniform multi-micrometric particles which reflect both sulfation and crumbling of the active mass in the case of regular electrodes (which leads to their rapid failure) to a uniform active mass comprising uniformly distributed sub-micrometric particles, due to the presence of CNTs.
The coated CNTs form a grid that evenly distributed current across all the active material since the concentration of the coated CNTs was well above the percolation threshold. Consequently, a proper red-ox activity through all the active material occurred during operation since the electrical resistance at the junctions of crossing CNTs is sufficiently low due to the sub-micronic size of the CNT coating (electrons can tunnel through). Hence, the electrical networking of the entire active mass is well maintained by the CNTs dispersed homogeneously in the composite structure.
4 Conclusions
We showed that the addition of properly oxidized CNTs in an amount above the percolation threshold to the active mass of the positive electrodes (cathodes) in lead acid batteries led to a remarkable improvement in the cycle life of these systems. This improvement was mainly achieved by the formation of a stable conductive grid that enabled the delivery of current to all the active material. The grid consisted of composite networks made of CNTs fully coated with lead compounds (PbOx + PbSO4). Such a core–shell structure of the CNT covered by the lead compounds protected the CNTs from oxidation (as clearly proven by in situ FTIR measurements) and yet allowed a good flow of charge throughout the active mass due to the superb electrical conductivity of the CNTs. By enabling a uniform electron distribution, and subsequently proper redox reactions, sulfation did not occur, thus avoiding the classical failure mechanism of LA battery electrodes, namely crumbling and sulfation. The results achieved showed that a thoughtful introduction of nano-materials to a mature technology such as lead acid batteries can provide a significant breakthrough in their performance, thus up-scaling their applicability as a leading storage technology for sustainable energy (i.e. advance load leveling applications).
Acknowledgements
This research was supported by a grant from NES consortium of the MAGNET program of the Israel Ministry of Trade and Industry, by a BSF grant (USA-Israel Binational Science Foundation) and by the Israel Strategic Alternative Energy Foundation (I-SAEF). Dr Nessim was partially supported by a FP7 Marie Curie Reintegration Grant.
References
G. Planté, Acad. Sci., Paris, C. R., 1860, 50, 640–642 Search PubMed .
B. Culpin and D. A. J. Rand, J. Power Sources, 1991, 36, 415–438 CrossRef CAS .

          D. Pavlov, Lead-Acid Batteries: Science and Technology, Elsevier, Amsterdam,  2011 Search PubMed .

          D. A. J. Rand, P. T. Moseley, J. Garche and C. D. Parker, Valve-regulated lead-acid batteries, Elsevier, Amsterdam; Boston,  2004 Search PubMed .
R. D. Prengaman, J. Power Sources, 2011, 95, 224–233 CrossRef .
P. Ruetschi, J. Power Sources, 1977, 2, 3–24 CrossRef CAS .
E. Bashtavelova and D. Pavlov, J. Power Sources, 1990, 30, 77–97 CrossRef .
P. T. Moseley, J. Power Sources, 2009, 191, 134–138 CrossRef CAS .
P. Moseley, R. Nelson and A. Hollenkamp, J. Power Sources, 2006, 157, 3–10 CrossRef CAS .
D. Pavlov, P. Nikolov and T. Rogachev, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 4444–4457 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Boden, D. V. Loosemore, M. A. Spence and T. D. Wojcinski, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 4470–4493 CrossRef CAS .
D. Pavlov, P. Nikolov and T. Rogachev, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 5155–5167 CrossRef CAS .
D. Pavlov, T. Rogachev, P. Nikolov and G. Petkova, J. Power Sources, 2009, 191, 58–75 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. McAllister, R. Ponraj, I. F. Cheng and D. B. Edwards, J. Power Sources, 2007, 173, 882–886 CrossRef CAS .
M. Fernández, J. Valenciano, F. Trinidad and N. Muñoz, J. Power Sources, 2010, 194, 4458–4469 CrossRef .

          P. K. P. Atanassova, G. Moeser, A. Kyrlidis and M. Oljaca, presented in part at the 8th International conference on lead-acid batteries, Albena, Bulgaria,  2011 Search PubMed .
R. E. R. J. Ball, E. L. Thacker and R. Stevens, J. Mater. Sci., 2003, 38, 3013–3017 CrossRef CAS .
L.-W. Ma, B.-Z. Chen, Y. Chen and Y. Yuan, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2009, 39, 1609–1615 CrossRef CAS .
M. Endo, T. Hayashi, Y. A. Kim, M. Terrones and M. S. Dresselhaus, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A, 2004, 362, 2223–2238 CrossRef CAS .
L. T. G. Toussainta, J. Alzieub, J. C. Campsb, D. Livignib, J. F. Sarrauc, J. P. Vaurijouxc, D. Benchetritec, V. Gauthierc and M. Vilasia, J. Power Sources, 2005, 144, 546–551 CrossRef .
G. D. Nessim, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 1306–1323 RSC .
N. D. R. Leifer, M. Noked, G. D. Nessim and D. Aurbach, Carbon, 2011, 49(3), 1042–1047 CrossRef CAS .
S. Huh, M. Batmunkh, Y. Kim, H. Chung, H. Jeong and H. Choi, Nanosci. Nanotechnol. Lett., 2012, 4, 20–29 CrossRef CAS .
B. K. Jang and Y. Sakka, Mater. Trans., 2010, 51, 192–195 CrossRef CAS .
E. Abdellaoui and E. Gaffet, Acta Metall. Mater., 1995, 43, 1087–1098 CrossRef .
K. Gheisari, S. Javadpoura, J. T. Oh and M. Ghaffari, J. Alloys Compd., 1994, 209, 351–361 CrossRef .

          C. M. Hansen, Hansen solubility parameters: a user's handbook, Taylor & Francis, Boca Raton, Fla, London,  2007 Search PubMed .
T. E. Graedel, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1994, 141, 922–927 CrossRef CAS .

          D. R. Lide and W. M. Haynes, Handbook of chemistry and physics: a ready-reference book of chemical and physical data, CRC Press, Boca Raton, Fla,  2010 Search PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

Broader context
Intensive use of sustainable energy (wind, solar) requires availability of reliable technologies for energy storage. We have seen in recent years impressive progress in the development of new wind turbines and novel photo-voltaic cells, however, development of appropriate storage devices for these ‘volatile’ fluctuating power sources is much behind. We actually lack good and reliable technologies for load leveling (LL) applications, which we need for intensive use of sustainable energy. Lead acid batteries (LABs) may serve as ideal technology for LL applications, because they are relatively cheap, fast, and reliable; moreover, lead is very abundant in the earth's crust and most important is that the used LABs can be easily recycled. The main problem of these batteries is their limited cycle life. The reactions in a LAB are complicated because they involve conversion of conductive lead and lead oxide (negative and positive electrodes, respectively) to insulating PbSO4, which leads to disintegration of the active mass upon cycling. Using partially oxidized carbon nano-tubes as an additive to the positive PbO2 electrodes of LABs remarkably increases their cycle life by improving the electrical and mechanical integrity of the active mass upon cycling. Judicious use of CNTs as an additive to LAB electrodes may bring them prolonged cycle life thus making them very suitable for LL applications. Consequently, the work described in this paper advances the development of reliable and important technology for sustainable energy storage and conversion.

Negative pole: Pb(s) ⇄ Pb2+(aq) + 2e−
Positive Pole: 2e− + PbO2(s) + 4H+ ⇄ Pb2+(aq) + 2H2O
Pb2+(aq) + SO2−4(aq) ⇄ PbSO4(s)

 	Fig. 1  HRSEM images of a core–shell oxidized CNT coated with a tribasic lead sulfate (3PbO·PbSO4) composite and a pristine CNT (a and b respectively). The samples were prepared for imaging as described in ref. 22; a typical HRTEM image of the core–shell structure and the EDS spectrum related to this image (c and d respectively).	 

 	Fig. 2  The set-up for CO/CO2 detection (by FTIR) during anodic polarization of CNTs containing PbO2 electrodes in flooded LA cells. A scheme of the LA cell containing the optical windows that were measured within the FTIR spectrometer (placed during prolonged polarization in its sample chamber).	 

 	Fig. 3  SEM images of the homogenous mixture of MWCNTs and lead oxides after planetary centrifugal mixing at 1000 rpm (a and b) and SEM images of representative bundled (c) and chopped (d) CNTs after ball milling of CNTs and lead oxide powder (ZrO2 canister and balls; 5 mm balls; 600 rpm; 128 min) and EDS mapping of these mixtures after planetary centrifugal mixing, carbon mapping (e) and lead mapping (f).	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Typical voltage – time vs. cycle number of LA cells containing cathodes modified by CNTs (b) typical voltage – time vs. cycle number of a regular reference cell. The inset shows typical voltage profiles of a good cycle and a cycle that reflects failure.	 

 	Fig. 5  An HRSEM image of a failed reference cathode (no CNT) demonstrating combined sulfation–crumbling failure mechanisms (upper left) and an HRSEM image of a CNT containing cathode measured after failure of the cell (upper middle and upper right), two levels of magnification. Charts (lower left and lower right) show typical EDS spectra of these electrodes after cycling (reference and CNT containing electrodes respectively).	 

 	Fig. 6  
In situ FTIR measurements of atmosphere above a full LA cell cathode which contained CNTs that was cycled (several hundreds of cycles) while being placed in the measurement chamber of the FTIR spectrometer. Graph (a) is the single beam background spectrum measured after the cell was assembled, sealed and equilibrated. Graph (b) is a typical single beam spectrum of the cell upon cycling. Spectra (c), (d), and (e) were obtained by dividing single beam spectra measured after 2 cycles, 22 cycles and 250 cycles respectively, by the background single beam spectrum. Some meaningless noise appears between 750 and 500 cm−1 in the subtracted spectra.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
