Double charge carrier mechanism through 2D/2D interface-assisted ultrafast water reduction and antibiotic degradation over architectural S,P co-doped  ...  - Inorganic Chemistry Frontiers (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0QI00617C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0QI00617C
(Research Article)
Inorg. Chem. Front., 2020, 7, 3695-3717Double charge carrier mechanism through 2D/2D interface-assisted ultrafast water reduction and antibiotic degradation over architectural S,P co-doped g-C3N4/ZnCr LDH photocatalyst†

        
          
            Dipti Prava 
            Sahoo
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Kundan Kumar 
            Das
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Sulagna 
            Patnaik
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Kulamani 
            Parida
          
        
      *
      Centre for Nano Science and Nano Technology, Siksha O Anusandhan (Deemed to be University), Bhubaneswar-751030, India. E-mail: kulamaniparida@soauniversity.ac.in; paridakulamani@yahoo.com;  Fax: +91-674-2350642;   Tel: +91-674-2351777
Received 
      25th May 2020
    , Accepted 23rd August 2020First published on 11th September 2020AbstractThe fabrication of a constructive heterostructure and thus the induced 2D/2D interfacial phase indicates great importance in semiconductor based photocatalysts. The energetic electrostatic force of interactions between the positively charged 2D ZnCr LDH nanosheet and the negatively charged 2D S,P co-doped g-C3N4 helps to form a robust heterostructure. By doping S and P simultaneously into the g-C3N4 matrix, the band potentials have been easily engineered for wide range visible light harvesting in comparison to the pure g-C3N4. This innovative 2D/2D S,P co-doped g-C3N4/ZnCr LDH heterostructure interface provides a high surface area and suitable redox potentials for various photocatalytic reactions. The as-fabricated S,P-g-C3N4/ZnCr LDH heterostructure shows considerable enhanced photocatalytic performance for the degradation of ciprofloxacin (95% in 90 min) and H2 evolution (1319 μmol per 2 h) under visible light irradiation as compared to the pure material (g-C3N4, S,P-g-C3N4, and LDH nanosheet) and mono-doped heterostructure. The enhanced photocatalytic activities attributed to the loading of the ZnCr LDH nanosheet onto the surface of the S,P co-doped g-C3N4 allows effective interfacial charge mobility and transfer through intimate 2D/2D interfacial contact. In addition, the co-doping also generates some defect sites in the heterostructure that act as trapping centers for photogenerated charge pairs and the excess unpaired electrons of S and P atom delocalized in the π-conjugated triazine ring, constructing a rich-electron state, which is beneficial for the photocatalytic process. XRD, FTIR, and TEM studies of the reused composite show that the heterostructure hybrid material is very stable and can be reused many times. Our innovation in the fabrication, design, and physicochemical behaviours of the 2D/2D heterostructure may get utilized in different photocatalytic performances towards antibiotic degradation and H2 production.
Introduction
Solar-energy conversion and environmental pollution are two of the most important problems that are faced by the world today. The most prospective long-term solution for the problems related to fossil fuel reserves and environmental issues have been focused on the development of sustainable energy sources. Recently, nanostructured photocatalysis has attracted wide attention as an inexpensive, effortless, and effective approach for cleaning the environment, especially the toxic organic pollutant decomposition in water.1 Among large number of organic toxic compounds, ciprofloxacin is a fluoroquinolone (FQ) antibiotic that has been extensively used to cure different diseases. However, owing to its bacterial drug resistance and proliferation effect even in trace amount, creates a large adverse effect on the eco-system and human beings.2 Meanwhile, H2 evolution from water splitting over the semiconductor-based photocatalyst is one of the most capable strategies for dealing with the increasing worldwide energy issues and for realizing the conversion of solar energy to chemical energy.3
The use of high performance nanostructured materials is emerging as one of the most promising strategies compared to the corresponding bulk counterparts in the field of sustainability. By reducing the dimension, these nanostructured materials have recently appeared as a new class of potentially inexpensive photocatalysts with enhanced activity and stability. These dimensionally controlled nanostructured materials, owing to the quantum confinement effect at the nanoscale, modify the electronic and optical properties substantially. Reducing the dimension via the geometry, size modulation, and band gap tuning results in various 0D, 1D, and 2D nanostructures.4
Among these, 2D nanomaterials have become a research hot in comparison to 0D and 1D materials because of their extraordinary advantages in the field of photocatalysis. 2D nanomaterials possess a larger surface to volume ratio and provide a greater number of surface-active sites, and the ultrathin structure minimizes the path of charge transfer from the bulk to the surface. Thus, they potentially improve the performance by reducing the process of charge recombination. More number of surface-active sites function as active centers to attract the substrate molecules effectively and intimately.5 In particular, the discovery of 2D layered materials has been playing a crucial role and has attracted increasing attention. Due to their unique properties, 2D material-based photocatalysts provide an excellent platform for constructing heterostructures and find applications in various areas such as sustainable energy development, organic catalysis, photocatalysis, and environmental remediation. In view of the geometry, the 2D/2D type heterostructure exhibits the highest charge mobility because of maximum face to face contact and larger interfacial contact region. A good number of research works have been published in this field having matching band potentials to form a heterostructure.6–8
Among different 2D materials, ZnCr-layered double hydroxide (LDH) has been explored as an excellent nanostructure due to interlayer anion exchange ability, unique 2D layered configuration, brucite-like positively charged hydroxide layers, tunable metal cation composition, and constructive redox chemistry matching with the band structure.9 Because of its excellent features as a photocatalyst, it has been extensively used in the purification of polluted water and the development of energy sources. However, the potential applications are restricted due to poor photon absorption ability, low conductivity, and high rate of charge recombination. Recently, a good number of LDH-based nanocomposite architectures have been designed to overcome these limitations.10,11 Specifically, in many cases, LDH has been used as a potential template to build the 2D/2D nano-heterostructure with a matching interface so as to reduce the charge transfer pathway, which can proficiently accelerate charge pair transfer and migration. In this context, g-C3N4 with a tri-s-triazine ring 2D layered structure, sp2 hybridised π-conjugated electronic structure, easy method of preparation, good physicochemical stability, and suitable band gap energy (nearly 2.7 eV) was found to be suitable for the formation of the 2D/2D heterostructure.12 Tonda et al. established the design of a 2D/2D heterostructure between g-C3N4 and NiAl-LDH utilizing strong electrostatic interactions for enhanced photocatalytic CO2 reduction.13 Another SnNb2O6/CoFe-LDH 2D/2D heterostructure has been reported by Liu et al., which displayed distinctly enhanced photocatalytic methyl orange (MO) degradation.14 The enhanced photocatalytic performance can be attributed to the short charge pair transfer distance via the 2D/2D atomic-level in-plane heterostructure with a suitable interface. In addition, various g-C3N4/LDH nanocomposites have also been reported for photocatalytic application.15,16 Our group designed NiFe LDH/g-C3N4 visible light response layered nanocomposite for photocatalytic H2 and O2 evolution.17 However, the low surface area, minimum absorption capacity (below 460 nm), and particularly quick recombination of photoinduced charge pairs of bulk g-C3N4 substantially decreased the photocatalytic behaviour of the heterostructure. Furthermore, non-metal doping (N, P, B, S, O) with remarkable photocatalytic activity has been constantly explored by different groups of researchers recently.18
It is understood that non-metals act as dopants, expand the visible light absorption ability by generating a mid-gap between the valence and conduction bands, increase the surface area, adjust the chemical environment with texture of g-C3N4, prolong the photoinduced charge careers separation efficiency, and creating some defect densities that behave as active sites for reactant substrates and act as trapping centers for the charge pairs to cause easy photocatalytic reactions.19 Nevertheless, it is worth noting that solo non-metal incorporation could not reach all the above-mentioned improvements to obtain a reasonable photocatalytic performance. Therefore, co-doping can merge the qualities of both the elements, ensuring superior photocatalytic activity. Currently, several research studies have explored that P and S co-doped g-C3N4 possesses better photocatalytic performance in comparison to neat g-C3N4.19,20 As a preference, the S atoms substitute the N atoms in the g-C3N4 matrix, resulting in its suitable redox character for the photocatalytic reaction process. Similarly, the electron-rich P atom substitutes the C atom and co-ordinates with the adjacent N atom through covalent bonds. The excess unpaired electron of the S and P atoms are delocalized around the π-conjugated triazine aromatic ring, thus constructing a rich-electron state, which was beneficial for the photocatalytic reaction. By taking these features, Si et al. prepared the NiS/P–S co-doped g-C3N4 visible light induced nanocomposite for photocatalytic H2 evolution.21
Keeping in mind the benefits of nanoengineering heterostructures, herein we successfully attempt to construct an architectural assembly of 2D/2D heterostructure by coupling ZnCr LDH with S and P co-doped g-C3N4, which can provide a high surface area and create a streamlined pathway for good light harvesting along with suitable redox potentials to carry out various photocatalytic reactions. By introducing S and P co-doped g-C3N4, the band potentials are easily tuned for visible light harvesting. The loading of the ZnCr LDH nanosheet onto the S,P co-doped g-C3N4 surface may allow effective interfacial charge migration by taking advantage of the close interfacial contact. As such, the as-fabricated S,P co-doped g-C3N4/ZnCr LDH 2D/2D heterostructure display considerably better photocatalytic activities for the ciprofloxacin degradation and H2 evolution under irradiation with visible light. This research affords an advanced progress that addresses environmental pollution remediation and the energy crises.
Experimental section
Preparation of S-doped g-C3N4, P-doped g-C3N4, and S,P co-doped g-C3N4

In situ thermal decomposition method was adapted for the preparation of sulphur (S) doped, phosphorus (P) doped, and S,P co-doped g-C3N4. Briefly, melamine (1.5 g), di-ammonium hydrogen phosphate (P precursor), and sulphur powder (S precursor) were taken and uniformly mixed in the solid state. The resultant mixture was transferred to an alumina crucible, which was subjected to calcination at 550 °C for 4 h with a heating rate at 2 °C min−1. The synthesized yellow material was washed with ethyl alcohol and distilled water to eliminate impurities and the obtained product (SPCN) was dried at 100 °C for 24 h. The SPCN material was synthesized by maintaining 10 wt% of both sulphur and phosphorous incorporation in the g-C3N4 matrix. A similar process was followed for the preparation of individual S-doped g-C3N4 (SCN), P-doped g-C3N4 (PCN), and pure g-C3N4 (CN).19
Preparation of the S,P co-doped g-C3N4–ZnCr LDH heterostructure
To synthesize g-C3N4–ZnCr LDH and the S,P co-doped g-C3N4–ZnCr LDH heterostructure, the in situ co-precipitation method was employed. In detail, 5, 10, 20, and 30 wt% of g-C3N4 was mixed with distilled water (30 mL) and sonicated for 10 min. After sonication, Zn(NO3)2 (12 mM) and Cr(NO3)3 (6 mM) aqueous solution having a molar ratio of 2:1 was added gradually in a dropwise manner to the above dispersed solution. The pH of the solution was maintained in the range of 7–8 by the addition of 1 M sodium hydroxide. Sodium bicarbonate solution (1 M) was used for the intercalation of CO32− ions. The solution mixture was allowed to stir continuously for about 24 h. The reaction mixture was filtered from distilled water and ethanol to remove the extra dissolved ions present in the solution. The as-obtained final material was dried in a vacuum oven at 80 °C. The products were named as LCN5, LCN10, LCN20, and LCN30, respectively. The photocatalytic performance of the as-synthesized products was studied towards ciprofloxacin degradation; the details are given in the activity part. It was observed that the 10 wt% CN-modified ZnCr LDH (LCN10) composite showed the highest photoactivity. After finding a suitable weight percentage for photocatalytic activity, the composites of SCN, PCN, and SPCN were made with LDH by following the above-mentioned process. The newly formed composites were named as LSCN10, LPCN10, and LSPCN10, respectively. For the comparative study, pure LDH was also prepared.11,22
Formation mechanism of the S,P co-doped-g-C3N4/ZnCr LDH heterostructure
In the present research, the LSPCN10 heterostructure was fabricated through the simple in situ co-precipitation technique and the formation mechanism is demonstrated in Scheme 1. During the preparation of SPCN, the doping of S atom substituted the C and N atoms, whereas the P atom substituted only the C atom within the CN matrix, which was confirmed by the XPS analysis. The incorporation of S atom caused little effect on the CN band structure due to the formation of feeble covalent bonds with the neighbouring N atoms, while P doping reduced the band gap. The excess electrons of the S and P atoms are transferred to the vacancy side and make the development of the defect states on the g-C3N4 matrix easy. Moreover, in pure CN, the charge carriers move from one triazine unit to another, which was repressed by the N3 bridge atoms because their involvement is insignificant in the conduction and valence band edge.19 On the contrary, P doping in the SPCN samples facilitated an increase in the unpaired electrons, which are delocalised from one π-conjugated triazine ring of CN to a nearer triazine unit. In addition to that, the incorporation of S atom in SPCN resulted in the bonding of two sp2-hybrid orbitals of S atom with two sp2-hybrid orbital of the neighbouring N atom and induced LUMO–HOMO delocalization in the region of adjacent N and S atoms by reducing the recombination of charge pairs in CN. After the introduction of Zn(NO3)2 and Cr (NO3)3 in the ultrasonically dispersed SPCN nanosheets, Zn2+ and Cr3+ metal ions strongly interact with the negatively charged surface of the SPCN nanosheets by electrostatic or coulombic interactions. After the addition of NaOH and Na2CO3 into the dispersion mixture, a large quantity of Zn2+/Cr2+ LDH nuclei develop on the SPCN surface during the subsequent aging process. The negatively charged SPCN sheet provides active nucleation sites for the in situ formation of LDH. Consequently, the stacking-to-stacking progression of the LDH sheets can be constructed successfully, which results in the formation of the 2D/2D SPCN (10 wt%)/LDH (LSPCN10) heterostructure. Furthermore, the zeta potential measurement was performed (pH = 7) to examine the interactions between SPCN and the LDH semiconductor. The surface zeta potential value of pure LDH was found to be +55.9 mV, as shown in Fig. S1a.† This value indicates that the LDH surface possesses strong positive charge as its metal hydroxide layer contains some Zn2+ cations that are substituted with Cr3+ in the octahedral lattice. When LDH was coupled with the SPCN material, a considerable negative shift in the zeta potential was observed (−13.7 mV) at the LSPCN10 heterostructure (Fig. S1b†). This finding clearly suggests that the formation of the self-assembled 2D/2D LSPCN10 heterostructure was established through electrostatic interactions.13
 Scheme 1  Synthesis of the S,P-g-C3N4/ZnCr LDH (LSPCN10) 2D/2D heterostructure. 
Photocatalytic hydrogen evolution reaction
The as-prepared photocatalysts were examined towards H2 evolution under illumination with visible light at ambient pressure and temperature. In this experiment, the catalyst (0.02 g) was taken in 20 mL aqueous solution of the hole scavenger (10 vol% CH3OH) in a batch reactor. The suspension was vigorously stirred to avoid the settlement of particles at the bottom of the reactor vessel. In order to create an inert atmosphere, N2 gas was purged into the catalyst solution before visible-light illumination. 150 W Xe lamp with 1 M NaNO2 solution cut-off filter (420 nm ≤ λ) was used as the visible light source. Water displacement technique was adopted for H2 gas collection and it was analysed through GC-17A instrument equipped with a thermal conductivity detector with a 5 Å molecular sieve column. The apparent conversion efficiency for photocatalytic H2 evolution was calculated to be 10.2% by using the following formula (eqn (1)).10 (1)
Photocatalytic degradation of ciprofloxacin (CPX)
The catalytic abilities of the as-synthesized materials were evaluated by the photo-degradation of CPX under visible light. In the experimental procedure, 20 mg of the catalyst was added to the 20 mL aqueous solution of CPX (20 mg L−1) and was kept in an irradiation chamber (BS-02, Germany). A 250 W medium pressure Hg lamp with a UV cut-off filter (420 nm ≤ λ) was used as the light source (90 min). Before the illumination of light, the catalyst solution was stirred in dark for 30 min to obtain the adsorption–desorption equilibrium between the pollutant and the catalyst surface. The concentration of the antibiotic (CPX) was analyzed at regular intervals of time using a UV-Vis spectrophotometer at the wavelength of 276 nm. To confirm the function of the active radical species in the photodegradation process, trapping experiment was performed. 1 mM of all the quenchers was [triethanolamine (TEOA), para-Benzoquinone (p-BQ), isopropanol (IPA), and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO)] added to the CPX/catalyst suspension and irradiated under visible light for 1 h. Holes (h+), superoxide radical (˙O2−), hydroxyls radical (˙OH), and electron (e−) were quenched by TEOA, p-BQ, IPA, and DMSO scavenger, respectively. Moreover, to confirm the ˙O2− and ˙OH radicals, nitrobluetetrazolium (NBT, 5 × 10−5 mol L−1) absorbance and terephthalic acid (TAOH, 5 × 10−4 M) photoluminescence (PL) probe method was conducted, respectively. By using liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) technique (TSQ Quantum Access MAX Triple Quadrupole Mass Spectrometer and Thermo Fisher Scientific), the generation of intermediates throughout the CPX photodegradation was detected. To estimate the mineralization efficiency of CPX in the photodegradation process, total organic carbon (TOC) measurement (multi N/C 3100, Jena, Germany) was carried out.
The photo-degradation efficiency (η) of CPX was calculated by the following equation (2)where C0 and C stand for the initial and final concentration of CPX, and η corresponds to the degradation efficiency.
Material characterization
The crystallographic structure and phase purity of the samples were analyzed by X-ray diffraction (XRD). A Rigaku Miniflex instrument equipped with a Cu Kα irradiation source (where λ = 1.54178) was used for XRD analysis at a 2° min−1 scan rate. The zeta potential measurement was carried out by a Malvern Zetasizer S instrument. The N2 adsorption–desorption isotherm was measured for the Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) surface area on a specific surface area analyzer (NOVA3000, Quanta chrome GmbH, Germany) and pore size distribution and pore volumes were calculated by the Barrett–Joyner–Halenda (BJH) technique. In order to determine the internal microstructure of the samples, transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) were conducted. At a high voltage of 200 kV, a Philips TECNAI G2 instrument was used for TEM and HRTEM analysis. Similarly, scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was performed on a Hitachi S-3400N instrument (at 5 kV, low) for studying the topology and surface morphology of the samples. The functional groups present in the catalysts were identified by a JASCO FTIR-4600 spectrometer. The oxidation states, chemical environment, and elemental composition were measured by XPS using a Kartos axis ultra-X-ray photoelectron spectrometer, which was equipped with a monochromatized X-ray source (Al Kα) and a charge neutralizer. The C 1s peak was considered as the reference peak. The electron spin resonance signals of the as-prepared samples were analyzed by a JES-FA200 ESR spectrometer at room temperature. A UV-Vis JASCO 750 (BaSO4 as the reference) was utilized for determining the optical response of the photocatalyst. Photoluminescence behavior was studied by a JASCO-FP-8300 fluorescence spectrometer. Time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) study was conducted using a fluorescence spectrometer (Edinburgh Instruments FLS920 equipped with a F290H pulsed xenon flash lamp). An IVIUMnSTAT electrochemical workstation connected with a 300 W Xe lamp (visible light source, 420 nm ≤ λ) was used for measuring the electrochemical properties of the photocatalysts. A conventional pyrex cell contained the three electrode arrangement with a working electrode [FTO (fluorine-doped tin oxide), prepared by the electrophoresis deposition method], a reference electrode (Ag/AgCl electrode), and a counter electrode (Pt electrode). 0.5 M Na2SO4 (pH = 7.2) solution was used as the electrolyte. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was carried out at a frequency from 105 Hz to 0.1 Hz with 0 biases under visible light illumination at open circuit potential. The linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) plots were measured under visible light irradiation by applying a potential in the range of 0–1.4 V at a 10 mV s−1 scan rate. 0.4 V was implemented for studying the transient photocurrent response. The Mott–Schottky (MS) plots was obtained at different frequencies (500 Hz, 1000 Hz, and 1500 Hz).
Results and discussion
The phase purity and crystalline nature of the prepared nanomaterials were confirmed from the XRD patterns and the obtained results are illustrated in Fig. 1. Usually, it has been established that CN is the building block of the trigonal 2D N-bridged tri-s-triazine polymer unit stacked in the graphitic form. As can be seen in CN, there are two distinctive diffraction peaks corresponding to the basal plane (100) and (002) indexed at the 2θ value of 13° and 27.4°, respectively. The former characteristic peak was associated with the in-plane structural packing motif of tri-s-triazine group and the second one was due to the periodic interlayer-stacking of the aromatic rings.23,24 After the doping of phosphorus, sulphur, and co-doping of both (phosphorus and sulphur), the (002) peak of PCN, SCN, and SPCN shifts negatively from 27.5° to 27.2°, 27.3°, and 27.25°, respectively, in comparison to that of pure CN, which indicates the enlargement of the corresponding interlayer distance from 3.25 Å to 3.24, 3.21, and 3.23 Å, respectively. Such a downward shift in the 2θ value and the increase in the interlayer distance may be associated with the larger radius of the doped P (98 pm) and S (88 pm) atoms than that of the C atom (67 pm) in the CN skeleton.25 In addition, the broadening and intensity reduction of the (002) peak in case of PCN, SCN, and SPCN with respect to pristine CN represents the decline in the long-range interplanar stacking (enlarged (002) diffraction patterns are inserted in Fig. 1a). The doping of a heteroatom into the lattice of CN results in greater lattice distortions. Moreover, the diffraction pattern suggests that the co-doping of S and P non-metals does not affect the crystal orientation of CN. As displayed in Fig. 1b, for pristine LDH, the reflections (003), (006), (012), (015), (018), (110), and (113) are ascribed to the 2θ values of 11.6° and 23.3°, 34.0°, 38.6°, 46.6°, 59.6°, and 61.1° of the lattice plane, respectively, which can be identified as the hexagonal phase having a rhombohedral symmetry with the R3m space group (JCPDS-41-1428).26 The d-spacing value of LDH was found to be 0.77 nm (c = 3d003), which is due to the existence of carbonate as an inter-gallery anion. After nanocomposite formation between LDH with CN and doped CN (SCN, PCN, and SPCN), overlapped diffraction patterns of CN and LDH were observed. In case of all the nanocomposites (LCN10, LSCN10, LPCN10, and LSPCN10), a less intense peak analogous to the (002) plane of CN was observed at 27.5° (enlarged (002) diffraction patterns are inserted in Fig. 1b).27 By using the Scherrer equation, the average crystallite size was calculated and found to be 4.4, 4.3, 4.2, 4.15, and 4.1 nm for LDH, LCN10, LSCN10, LPCN10, and LSPCN10, respectively.10 This indicates that the crystal growth of LDH was not hindered by the crystal growth of CN and doped CN. Therefore, it could be deduced that the crystalline structure of LDH and doped CN (SCN, PCN, and SPCN) remained unaffected after hybridization, leading to the construction of the exotic heterostructure that is more crucial for photocatalytic applications.
 Fig. 1  XRD patterns of (a) CN, SCN, PCN, and SPCN, (b) LDH, LCN10, LSCN10, LPCN10, and LSPCN10 heterostructures [enlarged (002) diffraction patterns of CN are inserted in both (a) and (b) images]. 
The existence of functional groups and the formation of pure and heterostructured composites were confirmed from FTIR analysis. Fig. 2 displays the FTIR spectra of the LDH, CN, SPCN, LCN10, and LSPCN10 samples. Pure CN possesses a strong and intense absorption peak at approximately 810 cm−1 corresponding to the bending mode of the heptazine units along with the organic aromatic rings (basically known as aromatic C–N stretching), which was detected in the region of 1200–1700 cm−1.17,19 The CN (sp2) and C–N (sp3) stretching vibrational modes were observed at 1320 and 1550 cm−1, respectively.28,29 The 1235 cm−1 stretching band predicts the C–NH–C co-ordinate bond, which represents the basic unit of CN. Apart from small peaks, a broad band is also located in between the range of 3100–3500 cm−1 due to the N–H stretching vibration of the uncondensed amino groups bonded to the sp2 hybridized carbon of the triazine unit of CN. Due to the polymeric structure of CN, the intensity of the N–H stretching vibration is very weak. In SPCN, no significant change in the FTIR spectrum was observed, thus confirming that S,P co-doping does not affect the chemical structure of the graphite-like sp2-bonded triazine units. However, no stretching band corresponding to the S and P bonds were observed, which may be due to the low quantity of the dopants and may also be due to overlapping with the basic CN vibration peaks. However, in LDH, a broad band was observed in the range of 3220–3600 cm−1 for the –OH stretching mode, as hydroxyl groups are found in the brucite layers and the inter-gallery region of LDH. The stretching bands located at 1370 and 1493 cm−1 describe the asymmetry and symmetric vibrational modes of the intercalated CO32− anion, respectively. The H–O–H bending vibration was located in the range of 1590–1640 cm−1. This peak suggests the existence of hydroxyl and adsorbed H2O groups present in the samples. Moreover, the metal lattice vibrations (Zn/Cr–OH, Zn–O–Cr, Zn/Cr–O) were also observed at lower wavenumbers in the range from 500–700 cm−1 for pristine LDH.11 The above-mentioned characteristic bands of CN and LDH were found in LCN10 and LSPCN10. Moreover, the intensity of the peak for CN decreased in the case of both LCN10 and LSPCN10. These outcomes further confirm the existence of LDH on SPCN through electrostatic force of interaction in the LSPCN10 heterostructure, which is responsible for the enhancement in the charge separation and photocatalytic activity.
 Fig. 2  FTIR spectra of the LDH, CN, SPCN, LCN10 and LSPCN10 materials. 
The SEM image (Fig. S2†) displays the surface morphology of pristine LDH, SPCN, and LSPCN10. An irregular platelet-like structure with a smooth surface can be observed for pristine LDH (Fig. S2a†), while an irregular and layered sheet-like structure was observed for SPCN, as shown in Fig. S2b.† However, an agglomerated type morphology was obtained for the LSPCN10 heterostructure, as shown in Fig. S2c.† These observations specify the good interaction occurring between two 2D/2D materials through coulombic force and charge transfer communications.8 Moreover the internal structure of the prepared sample was analyzed by TEM and HRTEM techniques, as shown in Fig. 3.30,31 Pristine LDH samples were found to exhibit a classic platelet-like morphology with an uneven hexagonal shape, as displayed in the Fig. 3a. The particle size of the LDH sheets was found to be in the nanometer range.10 Some irregular platelets of LDH are stacked on each other that give it a disordered appearance. Fig. 3b demonstrates the TEM images of SPCN. As predicted, a flat sheet-like structure with a smooth surface was observed for the SPCN sample. However, in the LSPCN10 micro image (Fig. 3c), massive well-dispersed nanoscale LDH platelets were found to be uniformly grown on the surface of the SPCN sheet through self-assembly electrostatic interactions, which agrees with previous literature.13 This evidently signifies that the opposite surface charge of LDH and SPCN could help to create strong interactions between them during the in situ growth process. In addition, it is well known that the SPCN structure contains many suitable sites for interaction due to the presence of lone pairs of electrons and have a great affinity towards metal cations. Metal ions such as Zn2+ and Cr3+ in LDH coordinate with the lone pair of electrons present in SPCN by electrostatic forces. Moreover, most of the metal ions tend to bind to the inner surface of SPCN through strong chemical bonds.32 This uncommon spatial arrangement of SPCN and LDH in the 2D/2D LSPCN10 heterostructure could generate speedy charge transport nanochannels that significantly enhance the charge migration and separation capability.8 Furthermore the high-resolution TEM image (Fig. 3d) shows that the composite consists of 2D/2D nanosheet structures with the presence of 3 sets of lattice fringes with an inter-planar distance of 0.15, 0.19, and 0.26 nm corresponding to the (113), (110), and (012) crystal planes of LDH respectiverly.10 The lattice fringes of SPCN were not visualized due to their low crystallinity or amorphous character, which matches with the previous literature.33 Remarkably, an significant intimate 2D/2D interfacial contact was observed between LDH and SPCN in Fig. 3d, suggesting the formation of the 2D/2D LSPCN10 heterostructure. In addition, the SAED pattern shown in Fig. 3e describes the polycrystalline nature of the material. The most prominent crystal plane of LDH [(113) and (110)] can be traced from the concentric rings of LSPCN10. In addition, to study the elemental distribution and composition of LSPCN10, the energy-dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectra were recorded and are shown in Fig. S3.† The EDX image clearly displays the uniform distribution of elements including C, N, S, P, O, Zn, and Cr in the LSPCN10 heterostructure.
 Fig. 3  TEM images of (a) LDH, (b) SPCN, (c) LSPCN10; HRTEM images of (d) the lattice fringes; (e) SAED pattern of the LSPCN10 material. 
The N2 adsoption–desorption equilibrium study was employed to study the surface properties including the specific surface area (SBET), pore size distribution (PSD), and pore volume of the prepared photocatalysts (Fig. 4a and b). All the samples reflect a type IV isotherm with an H3 hysteresis loop. The above isotherm and hysteresis loop generally indicate the presence of mesopores along with the formation of large pores in between the secondary particles.34 During thermal decomposition, large amounts of ammonia and carbon dioxide gases are released from melamine, which is basically responsible for the generation of pores on the surface of CN and making the sample porous. According to our previous study, the surface area, mean pore size, and pore volume of LDH was calculated to be 28.7 m2 g−1, 1.64 nm, and 0.04 cm3 g−1, respectively.26 As shown in Table 1, the surface area of the CN, SPCN, LCN10, and LSPCN10 photocatalysts was found to be 7.8, 8.9, 91.7, and 101.7 m2 g−1, respectively. Moreover, the LSPCN10 composite shows greater surface area in comparison to that of pristine LCN10. The doping of S and P atoms in the triazine lattices may hinder the crystal growth of CN, leading to enhancement in the surface area. The detailed information about surface area, pore size distribution, and pore volume has been summarized and given in Table 1. Generally, a larger surface area provides more active sites for the reaction to occur and is also known to enhance the photocatalytic performance.15
 Fig. 4  (a) N2 adsorption–desorption isotherms of (a) CN, SPCN, (b) LCN10, and LSPCN10 (their pore size distribution curves are inserted in both a and b images). 
Table 1 Textural properties of CN, SPCN, LCN10, and LSPCN10




Samples
Surface area (m2 g−1)
Mean pore diameter (nm)
Pore volume (cm3 g−1)




LDH
28.7
3.4
0.04


CN
7.8
6.35
0.012


SPCN
8.9
9.4
0.02


LCN10
91.7
7.4
0.17


LSPCN10
101.7
6.9
0.18




XPS measurements were executed to obtain information about the components, chemical bonding, and oxidation states of the samples. The high-resolution XPS spectra of LSPCN10 (Fig. 5) and SPCN (Fig. S4†) materials could be deconvoluted into several peaks with the help of CASA XPS and Origin softwares. The XPS spectrum of the LSPCN10 photocatalyst demonstrates the existence of C, N, S, P, Zn, Cr, and O elements with the successful formation of the heterostructure. The transfer of electrons from SPCN to LDH in the LSPCN10 system through the 2D/2D interface has been proved by the XPS analysis. According to our previous literature, in case of bare LDH (Fig. S5 a and b†), the Zn 2p and Cr 2p spectra exhibited four distinctive peaks (Zn 2p3/2, Zn 2p1/2, Cr 2p3/2 and Cr 2p1/2) at banding energy of 1022.0, 1045.0, 577.7 and 587.1 eV respectively, which confirmed the presence of Zn2+ and Cr3+ in the metal hydroxide layer of LDH.26 Furthermore, peak fitted Zn 2p and Cr 2p bands of LSPCN10 (Fig. 5a and b) were measured to explain the property of Zn and Cr phases as well as their interactions with SPCN. After the construction of the heterostructure between LDH with SPCN, a red shift was observed for the Zn and Cr 2p spectra as compared to that of neat LDH. The deconvoluted four spin–orbit doublet peaks corresponding to the Zn 2p and Cr 2p spectra (Zn 2p3/2 = 1021.8 eV, Zn 2p1/2 = 1044.9 eV, Cr 2p3/2 = 577.6 eV, and Cr 2p1/2 = 586.9 eV) also confirm the existence of Zn2+ and Cr3+ in the LSPCN10 material. The O 1s peak of pristine LDH is compared with the O 1s peak of LSPCN10. In case of pristine LDH (Fig. S5c†), the O 1s high-resolution XPS spectrum could be resolved into two peaks at 531.5 eV and 532.2 eV, corresponding to the surface hydroxyl groups coordinated with the metal centers in the brucite-like layer and the presence of carbonate ion in the inter-gallery domain. In contrast, the O 1s spectrum of LSPCN10 (Fig. 5c) displays two different peaks located at lower binding energies (531.3 and 532.1 eV) with respect to that of pure LDH. The C 1s XPS peaks in neat LDH and SPCN could be split into two peaks, as shown in Fig. S5d and S4a.† For both the cases, the former peak was centered at the binding energy of 284.9 eV for the reference carbon. The peak at 288.8 eV in LDH is attributed to the interlayer carbon of the carbonate ion and the peak at 288.1 eV in SPCN was assigned to the sp2-hybridized carbon in the triazine aromatic ring (N–CN) of the CN lattice. However, in the case of LSPCN10, the high-resolution C 1s spectrum (Fig. 5d) split into four peaks positioned at 284.9 eV, 286.5 eV, 288.6 eV, and 290.2 eV, which was attributed to the adventitious carbon species, C–O bond, sp2-hybridized carbon in the triazine aromatic ring (N–CN) of the CN lattice, and the presence of intercalated carbonate ion (OH–CO), respectively. As compared to the parent SPCN, the sp2-hybridized carbon peak of the LSPCN heterostructure shifted towards positive binding energy.30 As shown in Fig. S4b,† the N 1s spectrum for SPCN can be deconvoluted into four smaller peaks with the binding energies of 398.5, 399.6, and 401.0 eV. The former two peaks are ascribed to sp2-hybridized nitrogen atom coordinated to C-atoms (C–NC) and the tertiary nitrogen (N–(C)3) in connection with the structural motif (C6N7) or the amino groups ((C)2–N–H), respectively. The latter less intense peaks represent the (N–(C)3) group of aromatic cycles.19,20,35 However, after hybridisation with LDH, the N 1s spectrum displays a positive shift in the binding energy, as depicted in Fig. 5e. Moreover, the XPS spectra of P 2p (Fig. S4c†) at 133.9 eV is ascribed to P–N, which suggests that P atoms may substitute the C atoms and form covalent bonds with adjacent N in the heptazine CN framework of the SPCN material.20,36 In Fig. S4d,† the S 2p spectrum was deconvoluted into three peaks observed at 163.9 eV, 165.2 eV, and 169.3 eV. The former two were ascribed to the C–S bond and the N–S bond formed by replacing the lattice N and C in the triazine ring of the CN matrix with S atom respectively. The third peak was due to surface adsorbed SO42− compound.19,37 The binding energies of the as-fabricated heterostructure for the P 2p and S 2p region were not changed (Fig. 5f and g). In addition, the negative shift in the binding energy of the Zn 2p, Cr 2p, and O 1s spectra in the LSPCN10 heterostructure compared to that of the pure LDH material with positive shifting of the C 1s and N 1s peaks of LSPCN10 with respect to SPCN demonstrates that good electronic interactions were developed between these two parent materials. Moreover, the red and blue shift in the binding energy indicates that the electrons were transferred from the SPCN semiconductor to the LDH material, which is beneficial for reducing the recombination of photoinduced charge pairs. These XPS results explain that strong electronic interactions between LDH and SPCN could help in the formation of the 2D/2D LSPCN10 heterostructure.
 Fig. 5  High resolution deconvoluted XPS spectra of LSPCN10: (a) Zn 2p, (b) Cr 2p, (c) O 1s, (d) C 1s, (e) N 1s, (f) P 2p, and (g) S 2p. 
In photocatalysis, unpaired electrons are an essential feature to evaluate the photocatalytic performance. EPR technique was studied in dark to measure the spin state unpaired electrons at room temperature. Fig. 6 displays that LCN10, LSCN10, LPCN10, and LSPCN10 possess one single Lorentzian line centered at the g value of 1.9763 due to the presence of unpaired electrons in the sp2 carbon of the π-conjugated heptazine aromatic ring.19 Compared to LCN10, the EPR intensity of the mono-doping materials (LSCN10 and LPCN10) is significantly enhanced, which may be attributed to the increase in the defect sites. Furthermore, the co-doped 2D/2D LSPCN10 heterostructure also exhibits a greatly strengthened EPR signal among all the doping and non-doping composite materials. This suggests that the S atom exhibits more unpaired electrons than the N atom, which are moved to the neighbouring C atom and get delocalised in the large π bonds of the heptazine unit. Similarly, the P atom also assists in increasing the number of unpaired electrons and in improving the carrier mobility. The excess electrons of S and P atoms are transferred to the vacancies side and make the development of defect-related states easy, which delays the recombination process of the charge pairs.38,39
 Fig. 6  EPR patterns of LCN10, LSCN10, LPCN10, and LSPCN10. 
To evaluate the optical behaviour and band gap energy of the as-synthesized materials, UV-visible diffuse reflectance spectroscopy was carried out. As depicted in Fig. 7a, bare CN exhibits photo-absorption from the UV to the visible region and has an absorption edge of about 440–450 nm. This may be ascribed to the electron transition between the populated N 2p orbital to the C 2p orbital associated with the n–π* transition. Interestingly, after S and P doping, the light trapping capabilities of pure CN could improve in both the UV and visible regions. In addition, the absorption edges of SCN and PCN were shifted towards longer wavelength from 447 nm (neat CN) to 452 nm and 463 nm, respectively. Furthermore, compared to CN, SCN, and PCN, SPCN displayed enhanced light harvesting property as well as a longer optical absorption edge (470 nm). This red shift suggests that the co-doping of sulphur and phosphorus revealed the trapping of maximum photon energy and produced more photogenerated charge pairs. This superior light response of SPCN could be originated from the incorporation of S and P atoms into the CN backbone, which has a major impact on the electronic properties and band arrangement, which are directly connected to the optical behaviour of CN.19,20,40Fig. 7b shows the optical absorption spectra of LDH, LCN10, LSCN10, LPCN10, and LSPCN10. Pure LDH exhibits absorption spectra both in the UV and visible zones. The intrinsic absorption peak was positioned in the range of 200–270 nm due to ligand–metal charge transfer spectra (LMCT) associated with charge transition between the O 2p orbital to the Zn 4s and Cr 3d orbitals. Another band appeared in the range of 270–320 nm, which is attributed to the metal–metal charge transfer (MMCT), i.e., from the Cr-3d-t2g to the Zn-4s orbital. The above absorption peaks primarily arose due to the octahedral crystal field splitting state of the bimetallic oxo-bridged linkage. In addition, two more absorption bands at 410 and 570 nm indicated the d–d transitions of 4A2g → 4T1g(F) and 4A2g → 4T2g(F) for the Cr3+ ion (d3 configuration), respectively.10 After the introduction of CN, SCN, PCN, and SPCN into LDH, the optical properties of LDH were extensively affected in the resultant heterostructure. All the prepared nanohybrids display a considerable absorption over the whole UV-Visible region of wavelengths, having an optimal blue-shift of the absorption edges. As predicted in Fig. 7b, the absorption edge of LSCN10 and LPCN10 was shifted towards lower wavelength in comparison to that of LCN10. Furthermore, after the hybridization of LDH and SPCN, the absorption tail further get shifted towards the blue wavelength region with respect to LDH, LCN10, LSCN10, and LPCN10. This changeable optical property endorsed the well-built coupling among SPCN and LDH in the as obtained photocatalyst, which robustly impacted the absorption property. In addition, the blue shift in the case of LSPCN10 suggests the quantum confinement effect of SPCN. The co-doping of S and P into the CN matrix results to decrease in the particle size of CN; thereby, after hybridisation with LDH, the optical edge of LSPCN10 shifted towards a lower wavelength.17 The photon harvesting capability of the LSPCN10 composite can be explained by the dual function of SPCN and LDH. Among of the duo, the electrons of the doped heteroatom in SPCN tend to be delocalized into the π-conjugated triazine structure, thus creating a high electron density, which is advantageous for photocatalytic applications also. LDH is equally responsible and exhibits a powerful absorption in the UV-Vis region due to d–d transitions and LMCT spectra, as described earlier.
 Fig. 7  UV-Vis diffuse reflectance spectra of (a) CN, SCN, PCN, SPCN, (b) LDH, LCN10, LSCN10, LPCN10, LSPCN10; band gap energy of (c) CN, SPCN, (d) LDH, and (e) LCN10 and LSPCN10. 
The energy gap (Eg) of the photocatalyst can be determined using the Tauc equation.11 As shown in Fig. 7c–e, CN, SPCN, LDH, and LSPCN10 show direct transition. As compared to CN (2.75 eV), SPCN exhibited a narrow band gap (2.65 eV). This reduction in the energy gap can be ascribed to the created impurity band by the partially filled P doping and the localised electronic band of CN as the P 2p level has valence electrons. In addition, the incorporation of S atoms within the heptazine units of CN produced comparatively weak covalent bonds with the neighbouring N atoms, thus narrowing the electronic band structure of SPCN.19 The band gap energy of LDH was calculated to be 2.5 eV.10,41 After the composite formation, the band gap was found to be 2.68 eV (LCN10) and 2.59 eV (LSPCN10), respectively.17
Photocatalytic applications
The photocatalytic performance of the as-synthesized LDH, CN, LCN5, LCN10, LCN20, and LCN30 materials was investigated towards CPX degradation under visible light irradiation (λ ≥ 420) in order to find out the best photocatalyst. Fig. 8a displays the CPX degradation by the above-mentioned samples. Higher percentage of CPX degradation was observed for all the heterostructures compared to the bare LDH and CN materials. Hybrid formation between CN and LDH results in an increase in the separation between the photoinduced charge pairs through the 2D/2D heterogeneous interfaces and enhances the photocatalytic efficiency towards CPX degradation of the as-synthesized heterostructures. Moreover, the photocatalytic performance of the heterostructures was found to be improved with increasing wt% of CN, i.e., from 5 wt% to 10 wt% and then shows a decreasing trend from 20 wt% to 30 wt%. Although the 2D/2D interaction exists in LCN20 (20 wt% of CN) and LCN30 (30 wt% of CN) heterostructure but still a decrease in the photocatalytic activity was observed. This can be accredited to: (i) the increase in the CN loading blocks the active sites present on the LDH surface.17 As a result, the opacity of the catalyst surface increases and hinders the light absorbing properties of the photocatalyst in the reaction system and hampers the effective charge separation process; (ii) a very high amount of CN self-aggregated on the LDH nanosheet in the hybrid, which decreased the density of the 2D/2D CN/LDH heterostructure. Hence, an optimized amount of CN (10 wt%) is essential for improving the photocatalytic performance of LDH. In the present scenario, CN was utilized to improve the charge separation of the excitons, whereas LDH is believed to be the photoactive material. CPX degradation follows the order: LCN10 (76%) > LCN5 (74%) > LCN20 (69%) > LCN30 (68%) > LDH (64%) > CN (38%), as shown in Fig. 8a. Among the CN-loaded LDH composites, LCN10 shows the maximum CPX degradation. Thus, LCN10 has been considered as an optimum system for further study. Furthermore, the photocatalytic performance was enhanced by doping and co-doping of S and P, followed by coupling with LDH. As shown in Fig. 8b, the newly fabricated LSCN10, LPCN10, and LSPCN10 systems were analyzed for CPX degradation, out of which the LSPCN10 2D/2D heterostructure was found to be an efficient photocatalyst. The designed photocatalyst follows the order LSPCN10 (95%) > LSCN10 (89%) > LPCN10 (87%) > LCN10 (76%).
 Fig. 8  Photocatalytic CPX degradation over (a) CN, LDH, LCN5, LCN10, LCN20, and LCN30, (b) LCN10, LSCN10, LPCN10, and LSPCN10, (c) photodegradation of CPX as a function of absorption and light irradiation time, (d) pseudo-first order kinetics plot for different photocatalysts: without catalyst (blank), CN, SPCN, LDH, LCN10, and LSPCN10 materials, and (e) time-dependent UV absorbance spectra of CPX over the LSPCN10 heterostructure. 
In particular, the photocatalytic degradation of CPX of the synthesized samples (LDH, CN, SPCN, LCN10, and LSPCN10) is summarized in Fig. 8c. Blank experiments (without the catalyst) were performed to quantify the self-degrading property of CPX and the result shows that self-degradation can be ignored. For the adsorption process of CPX in the dark condition, both the hybrid materials LCN10 and LSPCN10 display nearly 29% of CPX adsorption capacity, which is much higher than that of the LDH (17%), SPCN (12%), and CN (8%) materials. This is due to their high specific surface area, which provides more active sides for lower mass transfer resistance and leads to effective collision between the catalyst and the reactants, consequently enhancing the adsorption process. The degradation of CPX by various photocatalysts follows the order: LSPCN10 (95%) > LCN10 (76%) > LDH (63%) > SPCN (56%) > CN (51%). Again, the degradation kinetics, i.e., ln(C/C0) vs. time graph displayed in Fig. 8d was found to follow pseudo-first order kinetics and the detailed rate constant is presented in Table 2. The outcome suggests that LSPCN10 is a superior catalyst for CPX degradation. Strong affinity towards visible light, presence of a large amount of active sites, and better separation and shipment of photo-excitons are some of the factors that make LSPCN10 a better photocatalyst than the others. In addition, Fig. 8e displays the UV spectra of CPX throughout the degradation process. The absorbance peak intensity of CPX at λmax = 277 nm gradually reduced and slightly shifted with increasing time duration. The peak almost vanished after 90 min of visible light irradiation, implying that a majority of the CXP can be degraded.42
Table 2 
K
app and R2 values of all the synthesized samples towards CPX degradation




Catalyst

k
aap (10−4 min−1)
Regression co-efficient (R2)




Blank
8
0.95


CN
52
0.96


SPCN
84
0.98


LDH
111
0.90


LPCN10
169
0.93


LSPCN10
330
0.99




The major intermediates generated during CPX degradation were analysed by the LC-MS technique. The mass spectra of the intermediate during the reaction time (0–90 min) is depicted in Fig. S6.† A concentrated peak having m/z = 332 corresponding to the [CPX + H]+ ion was observed for neat CPX concentration (Fig. S6a†). After 90 min, the peak strength at m/z = 332 reduced considerably, demonstrating that CPX decayed gradually. As displayed in Scheme 2, three possible pathways of CPX degradation are proposed based on the generation of these intermediates [CP1 (m/z = 365), CP2 (m/z = 362), CP3 (m/z = 346), CP4 (m/z = 291), CP5 (m/z = 237), CP6 (m/z = 219), CP7 (m/z = 213), CP8 (m/z = 197), CP9 (m/z = 171), CP10 (m/z = 169), CP11 (m/z = 133), CP12 (m/z = 126)] and previous literature on extensive studies on the CPX degradation route:
(I) Path I involves the destruction process of the piperazinyl ring. Initially, a carbonyl and hydroxyl group are attached on the piperazine ring before it breaks and CP2 (m/z = 362) is formed. After this formation procedure, the intermediate CP4 (m/z = 291) us actually generated but is not detected by the LC-MS. However, the formation of CP6 (m/z = 219) proves the existence of CP4 (m/z = 291) due to the decarbonylation of the amine moiety along with decarboxylation. The intermediate CP10 (m/z = 203) is formed after the removal of the amine group; at that time, the piperazinyl moiety is completely deconstructed. Finally, the loss of fluorine, cyclopropane, and amine group leads to the generation of intermediate CP11 (m/z = 133).
(II) Pathway 2 is mainly associated with the quinolone hydroxylation process. The hydroxyl radicals attack the pyridine ring, leading to the breakage of the quinolone ring and generation of CP1 (m/z = 365). After that, a series of reactions (removal of acetyl, formyl, cyclopropane moieties) along with oxidation are carried out. The oxidation of the compound results in the formation of intermediates CP9 (m/z = 171) and CP7 (m/z = 213) through the removal of the piperazinyl moieties and decarboxylation, followed by hydroxylation, respectively. Further, intermediate CP7 undergoes hydroxylation to give the fragments at m/z = 126.
(III) Pathway III is proposed to be the defluorination process. First, fluorine is substituted by the hydroxyl group, then hydroxylation of the aromatic ring results in the transformation of the parent [CPX + H]+ to CP3 (m/z = 346). After that, the piperazine ring and quinolone moiety were destroyed simultaneously to produce fragments at m/z = 237. Subsequently, the elimination of the cyclopropane moiety led to the generation of intermediate CP8 (m/z = 197). In addition, intermediate CP10 (m/z = 169) was obtained due to the decarboxylation and hydroxylation reactions.43,44
 Scheme 2  Possible degradation pathways for photocatalytic CPX degradation in the presence of LSPCN10. 
Finally, intermediate products having lower m/z value may be further degraded into CO2 and H2O, NO3−, F−, and NH4+. In addition, the mineralization proficiency of the prepared photocatalyst was evaluated by the total organic carbon of CPX. Fig. S7† exhibits both the TOC and photodegradation efficiency of CPX over the photocatalyst. The photodegradation along with the mineralization efficiency of CPX were found to be 95% and 66%, respectively. The output results specify that CPX degradation passed through different intermediates rather than being converted to CO2 and H2O as the degradation percentage was found to be more than the mineralization ones.
In the photocatalytic process, the was found to be a significant parameter, which can noticeably hamper the pollutant degradation rate. In the present research, the photocatalytic decomposition of CPX was studied at various pH. Fig. S8c† depicts the degradation efficiency of 64%, 97%, 96%, 95%, and 46% at pH 3.0, 4.5, 6.3, 8.5, and 10, respectively. It was noticed that the degradation percentage increased from pH 3.0 to 4.5, and its value was almost same for the pH of 4.5, 6.3, and 8.5, after which the degradation rate suddenly reduced with a further increase in the pH level (pH 10). However, four pKa values have been reported for CPX (Fig. S8a†) where it exists as cation (CIP0,+), zwitterions (CIP−,+), and anion (CIP−,0) at different pH.45 The point of zero charge (PZC) of LSPCN10 was determined to be 6.85 (Fig. S8b†).11 When pH < PZC value, the surface was positively charged, whereas the surface was negatively charged at pH > PZC. The CPX molecule was protonated at pH 3 because the reported pKa values of CPX were higher than 3, whereas the surface charge of LSPCN10 was positive. Therefore, electrostatic repulsion was developed between the positive charges of CPX and LSPCN10, which retards the degradation process. From the pH range between 4.0–8.5, the CPX molecule shows electroneutral property containing both positive and negative charges. Thereby, at pH 4.5 and 6.3, the CPX molecule could be easily adsorbed on the positive surface of LSPCN10 by electrostatic attraction; similarly, at pH 7 and 8.5, the pollutant was still in the neutral form and was attracted by negative surface of LSPCN10, which enhanced the degradation process. After that, the degradation efficiency decreased suddenly at pH 10 due to the repulsive force between the photocatalyst and CPX because they are both negatively charged. According to these results, the wide pH range (4.0–8.5) of CPX facilitated the adsorption process and enhanced the photocatalytic degradation.
It is well known that real water matrix contains some inorganic salts; therefore, it is essential to investigate their impacts (cations and anions) on the photocatalytic CPX degradation process. For anions, 0.05 M of NaCl, NaNO3, Na2SO4, Na2CO3, and Na3PO4 were added to the CPX solution. The results in Fig. 7 show that the anions hamper the CPX decay process in the order: PO43− > CO32− > SO42− > NO3− > Cl−. This performance might be due to the electrostatic repulsive force.45,46 When the charge of these anions increases, the electrostatic repulsion force increases at the CPX adsorption sites and retards the adsorption phenomena. It should be noted that the inhibition effect of CO32− and SO42− might be explained by the following equations (eqn (3) and (4)). SO42− + ˙OH → ˙SO4− + H2O(3) CO32− + ˙OH → ˙CO3− + H2O(4)
The existing CO32− and SO42− ions in the reaction mixture consume the hydroxyl radical and produce weaker oxidizing agents (˙SO4−, ˙CO3−) at the LSPCN10 photocatalyst. Consequently, the formation of active radicals is diminished to delay the CPX removal significantly.47,48 In addition, the NO3− ions show moderate impact on the degradation process with the help of OH˙ as the dominating scavenger. It should be attributed to the N atoms present in the CPX molecule, which are oxidized to NO3− by the reaction with ˙OH radicals (eqn (5)).49 According to equilibrium law, the concentration of NO3− may retard the decay efficiency. CPX(–N) + ˙OH → NO3−(5)
However, the degradation process was not significantly affected with the addition of Cl−. When the Cl− anion reacts with ˙OH radicals to create secondary oxidants such as ˙HOCl− and ˙Cl, it offers feasible pathways for CPX decay.50 Cl− + ˙OH → HOCl−(6) ˙HOCl− + H+ → ˙Cl + H2O(7)
To study the effect of cations, NaCl, CaCl2, and MgCl2 were added to the CPX solution, and the results are displayed in Fig. 9a. It was observed that monovalent Na+ has an insignificant impact whereas divalent Ca2+ and Mg2+ show more hindering effect on the photocatalytic CPX degradation performance. Both of these divalent cations showed similar results. The reason for the adverse effect could be accredited to the formation of metal complexes with the CPX molecule on the photocatalysts surface, which arrest the progress of degradation.46
 Fig. 9  (a) Photocatalytic CPX degradation with the addition of different scavengers, (b) NBT absorbance spectra, and (c) TAOH photoluminescence spectra over the LDH and LSPCN10 materials. 
Assessments of the trapping experiment were done to determine the crucial role played by the free radicals during the photodegradation of CPX. In this direction, triethanolamine (TEOA), para-benzoquinone (p-BQ), isopropanol (IPA), and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) were utilized for quenching holes (h+), superoxide radicals (˙O2−), hydroxyl radicals (˙OH), and electrons (e−), respectively, from the reaction suspension. As highlighted in Fig. 9a, it was observed that the maximum CPX degradation was recorded for the LSPCN10 photocatalyst in the absence of scavengers. The degradation of CPX was drastically hindered (only 25%) in the presence of p-BQ and 52% in the presence of IPA. This suggests that both superoxide (˙O2−) and hydroxyl (˙OH) radicals were the most important reactive active species (ROS) involved in CPX degradation, out of which superoxide plays a dominant role. Moreover, after the addition of quenchers such as TEOA for holes (h+), 68% removal of CPX was observed, whereas a negligible change was observed after the introduction of DMSO as the electron (e−) trapper. From the above discussion, it was concluded that the superoxide radical plays a major role while the hydroxyl radical plays a minor role in the degradation process. The generation of superoxide and hydroxyl radicals was further confirmed from the NBT transformation and terephthalic acid (TAOH) photoluminescence (PL) probe method. The peak at 259 nm wavelength in the UV-Vis spectra of NBT gradually decreased from that for LDH to LSPCN10, implying that more superoxide radicals were formed at the LSPCN10 heterostructure, which helps in pollutant degradation compared to the parent materials (Fig. 9b). In the TAOH photoluminescence probe technique, the generated hydroxyl species reacts with TAOH to form a complex of 2-hydroxyterephthalic acid, which was generally observed at a wavelength of 426 nm. It is well known that the luminescence intensities are directly associated with the generation of the ˙OH radical. From Fig. 9c, it can be observed that LSPCN10 exhibited a highly intense PL emission peak in comparison to neat LDH and SPCN. This result suggests that the heterostructure generated more hydroxyl radicals, which play a secondary role in the CPX removal process with respect to bare materials.
Further, the fabricated LDH- and CN-based semiconductors were evaluated using an assay for determining the remarkable activity for photocatalytic H2 generation from water reduction reaction under visible light illumination (λ ≥ 420 nm). In the absence of the catalyst or visible light, no H2 gas was evolved, which explains that photocatalytic hydrogen evolution reaction depends on the mutual effect of the catalyst and light. As depicted in Fig. 10, the CN material only possesses a very low photocatalytic H2 evolution rate of 77 μmol per 2 h owing to its restricted visible-light absorbing power and poor charge separation ability. It is noteworthy that after the doping of S and P, the H2 production rate was enhanced to 322 μmol per 2 h. In addition, the co-doping of S and P in the CN structure resulted in a significant promotional effect owing to the transformation of its optical properties and the inhibition of the recombination of the photogenerated charge pairs. Pure LDH displayed 715 μmol per 2 h of H2 evolution rate. A noticeably improved hydrogen generation rate of 1147 μmol per 2 h was recorded for LCN10, which tremendously exceeds the rate of all the parent materials. The improvement in the photocatalytic activity of LCN10 could be attributed to the addition of CN, which provides electron-conducting channels and speeds up the separation and movement of exciton carriers. Meanwhile, the 2D/2D heterostructure increases the contact interface of LDH and CN for the quicker migration of electrons.8,13,17 Furthermore, the H2 evolution rate was increased by 1.14 times in case of LSPCN10 (1319 μmol per 2 h) compared to that of LCN10. Such a considerable improvement in the photocatalytic activity of LSPCN10 towards CPX degradation and H2 evolution is credited to the combined effect of co-doping (S and P) and the formation of the 2D/2D heterostructure. The synergetic effect of S and P incorporation into the lattice structure of the CN skeleton at the LSPCN10 photocatalyst is able to attain increased surface reactivity and enhanced specific surface area compared to LCN10 and both the parent materials.21 Hence, the increased surface area provides more active sites for the adsorption of pollutants such as CPX and results in highest degradation. Moreover, P and S atoms both have an extra valence electron than C and N atom, which could work as an electron contributor and increase the donor density in the photocatalyst, resulting in superior charge separation between LDH and SPCN. Therefore, the better performance of LSPCN10 towards photocatalytic activity (H2 evolution and CPX degradation) should be realistically accredited to the extensive light absorption, enhanced charge transfer, highly efficient 2D/2D heterostructure, and improved hydrophilic surface by the introduction of P and S heteroatoms in the CN structure. Further, the advanced photocatalytic performance of the LSPCN10 heterostructure for H2 evolution and ciprofloxacin degradation has been compared with other LDH and g-C3N4 based material, including our previous reported literature (displayed in Tables S1 and S2†).
 Fig. 10  Photocatalytic H2 evolution over CN, SPCN, LDH, LCN10, and LSPCN10 photocatalysts. 
Source of the enhanced photocatalytic behaviour
The efficient production and immediate segregation of the photoinduced excitons are important requirements for photocatalysis, which can be analyzed by PL spectroscopy. In this study, the PL spectra of the as-prepared photocatalysts (LDH, LCN10, and LSPCN10) were obtained under the excitation of 370 nm and are illustrated in Fig. 11a. In case of LDH, a strong band in the range of 420–450 nm was observed due to the radiative recombination of the charge pairs trapped by the localized surface and a low intense peak located at 470 nm is ascribed to the band-to-band transitional signal of LDH. In addition, a less intense band at about 500 nm was due to the surface defect sites in the LDH material.26 In addition, the UV-Vis spectrum of LDH is in full agreement with the PL analysis. After the introduction of CN into the LDH material, the fluorescent intensity of the LCN10 samples was noticeably quenched compared to that of the parent materials, suggesting the influence of the 2D/2D binary heterostructure in creating speedy charge transport nanochannel so as to accelerate the charge transfer and separation process.8 Furthermore, the PL intensity of LSCN10 and LSPCN10 is lower than that of LCN10. This is ascribed to the co-doping of S and P, which creates some defect states in the skeleton of SPCN on the LSPCN10 surface, which could acts as the trapping centers for the photogenerated charge pairs. Moreover, the excess unpaired electron gets delocalised on the surface, thus prolonging the lifetime of the charge pairs and inhibiting the recombination phenomena of the photogenerated charge carriers. Furthermore, it is well known that a longer charge carrier lifetime usually represents a higher possibility of their participation in the photocatalytic reactions, thus playing a pivotal role in determining their photoactivity.51 Therefore, TRPL decay measurement was employed to acquire an informative idea about the charge carrier life-time/recombination and reflects the transfer efficiency of the photo-generated excitons. Fig. 11b displays the TRPL spectra of the LDH, LCN10, and LSPCN10 samples (excitation at 370 nm). Simultaneously, the PL lifetimes were calculated by fitting the TRPL decay curves with the following exponential fitting equation (8)τ1 and τ2 signify two emission lifetimes of faster and slower parameter, respectively (τ1 < τ2), whereas A1 and A2 are the corresponding PL amplitudes. τ1 is initiated by direct charge pair generation and τ2 direct originates from the electron formation due to self-trapped excitation. The average lifetime (τA) was calculated using eqn (9). (9)
 Fig. 11  (a) PL spectra, (b) TRPL spectra (the inserted table shows the photoinduced charge lifetimes of LDH, LCN10, and LSPCN10) of LDH, LCN10, and LSPCN10, (c) EIS measurements (Bode plots of LDH, LCN10, and LSPCN10 are inserted), (d) LSV plots of CN, SPCN, LDH, LCN10, and LSPCN10, Mott–Schottky plots of (e) CN, SPCN, (f) LDH, LCN10, and LSPCN10 heterostructure. 
The detailed life-time of all the photocatalysts has been tabulated (inserted table in Fig. 11b). It is conveyed that the introduction of CN to LDH increased the lifetime from 5.63 ns (LDH) to 7.11 ns (LCN10), thus indicating the accelerated charge transfer induced by the 2D/2D heterostructure. Further, it was observed that LSPCN10 shows the highest mean lifetime compared to the LCN10 samples, suggesting that the synergetic effective of S and P co-doping can elongate the lifetime of the charge carriers. LSPCN10 shows the longest lifetime of 9.37 ns.
EIS measurements of the various prepared photocatalysts were performed under visible light irradiation to examine the charge transportation efficiency at the corresponding electrode/electrolyte interface. Generally, the semicircular part (lower frequency) in EIS is assigned to electron transfer resistance (Rct) and constant phase at the electrode/electrolyte interface, whereas the inclined straight line portion (higher frequency) originates from the Warburg impedance corresponding to the ion-diffusion process.52 The smallest radius in the Nyquist plot explains the lowest electron-transfer resistance and largest interfacial charge transportation at the electrode facet. In light of the above principle, the results of the EIS study (Fig. 11c) suggest decreased charge transfer resistance in case of LCN10 compared to the neat counterparts (CN, SPCN, and LDH). This clearly indicates that the interfacial resistance decreases more effectively by the addition of LDH to CN through the 2D/2D heterostructure. After the formation of the heterostructure, the contact area of LDH and CN increases for more rapid interfacial charge transfer.8 Furthermore, a reduced semicircle was observed for LSPCN10 compared to LCN10, which indicates the creation of defect sites in the LSPCN10 photo-electrode by the co-doping of S and P atoms, which act as quenching sites for the photogenerated electron and lower the charge transfer resistance.
The Bode plots of LDH, LCN10, and LSPCN10 are shown in the inserted image of Fig. 11c. In comparison to pristine LDH, the characteristic frequency peak (fmax) of the LCN10 and LSPCN10 electrodes shifted towards a lower frequency. The shifting of the peak from higher frequencies to lower frequencies also indicates the rapid migration process of the photo-excitons. In addition, the lifetime of the photoinduced electron (τn) in the photocathodes is closely related to the frequency and can be easily calculated by considering eqn (10).53 The estimated lifetime of the LDH, LCN10, and LSPCN10 photocathodes were found to be 5.12 × 10−5, 7 × 10−5, and 9.2 × 10−5 μs, respectively. The prolonged lifetime of the photoexcited electron at LSPCN10 clearly demonstrated delayed recombination with a better charge transportation process. (10)
The LSV plots of all the synthesised samples under visible light irradiation provide evidences in support of the photocatalytic activity. Fig. 11d shows the photocurrent density for the CN, SPCN, LDH, LCN10, and LSPCN10 samples as 0.03, 0.30, 0.8, 1.1, and 1.6 mA cm−2, with the corresponding onset potentials at 1.25, 1.18, 1.09, 0.97, and 0.9 V, respectively, which were progressively shifted towards more negative potentials on going from CN to LSPCN10. The anodic photocurrent density corresponds to the photocatalytic activity that increased with the increase in the applied potential. The photocurrent densities of the neat materials (CN, SPCN, and LDH) were much less. However, LSPCN10 showed appreciably improved photocurrent density of 1.6 mA cm−2 at lower onset potentials compared to LCN10 due to the enhanced carrier transport rate. P and S co-doping in the CN matrix could significantly depress the recombination of the photo-excitons and effectively facilitate the segregation of the photoexcited electrons and holes by the defect-trapping of the electrons, resulting in increased photocurrent density. Moreover, to achieve further support and to investigate the interfacial electron–hole separation efficiency, the transient photocurrent study of different samples was carried out.54 Fig. S9† shows the time-dependent photocurrent response of CN, SPCN, LDH, LCN10, and LSPCN10 with the introduction of discontinuous visible light irradiation for a period of 300 s. It is clearly visible that LDH exhibits higher photocurrent density compared to CN and SPCN materials but the improvement is not as significant as that for LCN10, which can be accredited to the efficient electron mobility with holes that governs the charge transport process after 2D/2D coupling between LDH and CN. Furthermore, the LSPCN10 heterostructure shows better photocurrent than LCN10. This result suggests that after P and S co-incorporation in the CN matrix, followed by hybridization with the LDH material, the defects in the structure of samples act as trapping centers for the photoinduced electrons, thus efficiently separating the charge pair at the interface of the heterostructure. The synergetic interaction between the LDH and SPCN 2D/2D semiconductors greatly inhibits the recombination rate and increases the lifetime of the charge carriers. However, when the electrode is made up the heterostructure, the photocurrent response suddenly increases once the light illumination is turned on and the photocurrent is speedily reduced when the light is turned off. This indicates that the electrons jump to the conduction band and the holes are quenched after irradiation.
To examine the detailed band structure and semiconducting characteristics of the photocatalyst, the Mott–Schottky plot was drawn. As shown in Fig. S10a and b,† the Mott–Schottky plots of SPCN and LDH were obtained at different frequencies (500 Hz, 1000 Hz, and 1500 Hz). The flat-band (EFB) potential is the X-intercept by the linear intersection of the Mott–Schottky plot at 1/C2 = 0.11 The extrapolation of the Mott–Schottky curve obtained under different frequencies intercepts the X-axis at the flat band potential of −0.7 V for LDH and −1.5 V for SPCN vs. the Ag/AgCl electrode.55 Moreover, as shown in Fig. 11e, it could be concluded that the doping of heteroatoms (S and P) in CN did not change the semiconductor type as SPCN showed a positive slope with n-type material such as CN (500 Hz). Similarly, LDH, LCN10, and LSPCN10 (500 Hz) displayed (Fig. 11f) typical n-type semiconducting characteristics with a positive slope. The EFB value lies near to the conduction band (ECB) potential edge of the n-type semiconductors. From Fig. S10a and b,† the ECB for SPCN and LDH was found to be −1.50 V and −0.7 V vs. Ag/AgCl electrode, whereas it was −0.88 V and −0.08 V vs. NHE, respectively. By using the eqn (11) below, the obtained potentials were converted to the NHE scale.56 ENHE = EAg/AgCl + E0Ag/AgCl + 0.059 pH(11)
The valence band edge potentials (EVB) can be computed by combining the band gap energy obtained from UV-Vis DRS and the ECB from the Mott–Schottky plot. The estimated EVB potential for SPCN and LDH was found to be 1.76 V and 2.42 V vs. NHE, respectively. It can be seen that the band alignment between the SPCN and LDH photocatalysts is in the staggered form, which reveals the formation of the heterostructure at their interface. Moreover, the EFB of the LSPCN10 sample shifted towards the more cathodic side, i.e., −0.88 V versus Ag/AgCl compared to both LCN10 and LDH. The more negative flat band potential is attributed to the significantly increased electron donor density. Furthermore, the negative shift in the flat band potential from LCN10 to LSPCN10 with the narrowing of the band gap suggests that the co-doping of the S and P heteroatoms leads to the quantum confinement effect. When the SPCN and LDH are close to each other, the Fermi level of LDH is moved towards the positive direction because it is located below its ECB position, which is more negative as compared to the Fermi level of SPCN. Therefore, the surface electron of SPCN gets transferred to LDH, resulting in band bending and consequently, an interfacial electric field at the 2D/2D interface was created. An increase in band bending favors the upward shift of the Fermi level and also favors the rapid separation of the electron–hole at the interfacial surface of the photoelectrode/electrolyte.57 These outcomes specify that the electron–hole transfer kinetics of LDH was enhanced due to the establishment of the LSPCN10 heterostructure, where SPCN plays an essential role in the charge segregation process in LSPCN10 because of its extraordinary hole flexibility.
Proposed photocatalytic charge transfer mechanism for CPX degradation and H2 evolution
On the basis of the scavenger experiment results and the band edge position of SPCN and LDH, a photocatalytic mechanism for CPX degradation and H2 evolution at the interface of the LSPCN10 photocatalyst can be described, as shown in Scheme 3. Both the photoelectrochemical measurement and PL spectra results satisfactorily demonstrate the higher charge transfer efficiency and delayed recombination of photo-excitons in the LSPCN10 heterostructure. At the same time, the in situ co-precipitation method provides close 2D/2D interactions through electrostatic force between SPCN and LDH, which is advantageous for exciton transport at the interface. The narrowing of the band gap and downshifting of the ECB of the SPCN semiconductor compared to CN may be beneficial for transferring the charge carriers to the other semiconductor.58 The suitable overlapping band energy levels of SPCN (ECB = −0.88 V, EVB = 1.76 V vs. NHE) and LDH (ECB = −0.08 V, EVB = 2.42 V vs. NHE) can lead to the formation of an efficient heterostructure. The LSPCN10 nanohybrid showed an expectable hydrogen evolution capability as the ECB potentials of both SPCN and LDH are more negative compared to the E0 (H+/H2 = 0 eV vs. NHE).59–62 The more negative ECB potential and less positive EVB potential of SPCN with respect to the LDH semiconductor demonstrates that the photo-excited electrons on the ECB of SPCN are transferred to the ECB of LDH and the photogenerated holes are transferred from the EVB of LDH to the EVB of SPCN.8 Collectively, the electrons on the LDH surface react with the surface chemisorbed water molecules to successfully reduced the protons and produce H2 gas in the presence of CH3OH as the hole scavenger (Scheme 3a). According to the scavenger experiment, ˙O2− is the main active species in photocatalytic CPX degradation. The ECB potential of LDH is more negative compared to the potential of O2/˙O2− (−0.046 V vs. NHE).11,63 Therefore, the accumulated electrons clustered on the ECB of LDH react with the surface adsorbed oxygen molecules to generate ˙O2−. Then, the active ˙O2− species reacts with the proton (H+) to produce H2O2 and then subsequently generates the ˙OH radical, which is involved in the photodegradation process and converts CPX into the demineralised product. Moreover, the redox potential of OH−/˙OH (1.99 V vs. NHE) is extra positive than the EVB potential of SPCN; therefore, ˙OH generation is not directly possible.63 However, the active ˙OH species could be produced indirectly from ˙O2− and it can be said that the concentration of the ˙OH species depends on the formation amount of the ˙O2− radical. In this way, the ˙OH radical play a secondary role in the degradation process. On the other hand, the photoinduced holes present in the EVB position of SPCN directly participate in the oxidation of CPX. The detailed degradation mechanism of CPX over the LSPCN10 photocatalyst is depicted in Scheme 3b. Conclusively, it can be said that the synergism of the 2D/2D heterostructure and the co-doping of the heteroatom in the CN skeleton promotes the light absorption capacity of the LSPCN10 photocatalyst, which accelerates the separation of the photo-excited electrons and holes, delays the lifetime of the photo-excitons, and thus, enhances the photocatalytic reaction process.
 Scheme 3  Photocatalytic charge transfer mechanism for (a) ciprofloxacin degradation and (b) H2 evolution over S,P-g-C3N4/ZnCr LDH 2D/2D heterostructure under visible light irradiation. 
Recycling and stability are some of the important properties of semiconducting materials, which play an essential role in the field of photocatalysis. The reusability and stability characteristics of the LSPCN10 photocatalyst were evaluated towards CPX degradation and H2 evolution for 5 consecutive runs, as portrayed in Fig. 12a and b. After every reaction process, the photocatalyst was recovered, cleaned, and dried for further utilization. It was observed that CPX degradation was found to be constant up to the 3rd cycle run and then decreased in the 4th and 5th test runs. Similarly, for the H2 evolution rate, the photocatalyst was found to be stable up to the 3rd consecutive cycle and thereafter decreased in the 4th and 5th cycle tests. Moreover, the XRD and FTIR characterization of the fresh and re-used LSPCN10 photocatalyst was done and the results have been displayed in Fig. 12c and d, respectively. However, from the XRD pattern, no significant structural change was noticed in the re-used photocatalyst in comparison to the fresh one. Similarly, the intensity of all the bending and stretching vibrational bands was slightly reduced after the oxidation of CPX. In addition, TEM images of the fresh and reused catalyst (Fig. 12e and f) clearly suggest that the morphology of the LSPCN10 heterostructure did not change considerably after the photocatalytic reaction. The above discussion confirms that the prepared photocatalyst is stable enough for repeated use.
 Fig. 12  Reusability study of photocatalytic (a) CPX degradation, (b) H2 evolution, (c) XRD, (d) FTIR spectra, (e) and (f) TEM images of the fresh and reused LSPCN10 photocatalyst, respectively. 
Conclusion
A S,P-g-C3N4/ZnCr LDH 2D/2D heterostructure were prepared by the in situ co-precipitation method. The 2D/2D assembly of the positively charged ZnCr LDH sheets and the negatively charged S,P co-doped g-C3N4 nanosheets was established through the strong 2D/2D interface system, which was confirmed by the HRTEM analysis. The resulting S,P-g-C3N4/ZnCr LDH 2D/2D heterostructure was found to possess optimum activity for photocatalytic H2 evolution and ciprofloxacin degradation under visible-light irradiation, which is 1.5, 1.9, and 3 times higher than that of the mono-doped heterostructure, bare ZnCr LDH, and S,P-g-C3N4, respectively. The outstanding performance of this new 2D/2D co-doped heterostructure material is mainly due to the synergistic interaction between the two oppositely charged S,P co-doped g-C3N4 and ZnCr-LDH species having strong 2D/2D assembled interfacial contact, which create defect sites by the incorporation of a non-metal, and the excess electrons of the heteroatoms (S and P) delocalised around the SPCN matrix suppressed the charge carrier recombination with improved separation. Moreover, the electrochemical results such as the highest photocurrent densities, reduced Nyquist arc of the EIS plot, and the prolonged lifetime of the injected electron support the improved photocatalytic results of the S,P-g-C3N4/ZnCr LDH 2D/2D heterostructure. More importantly, the heterostructure is highly photostable even after 5 consecutive experimental cycles, without any significant change in the activity.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
Acknowledgements
The authors are very much thankful to SOA (Deemed to be University) management for their support with encouragement. Mr. Asutosh Mohanty (IISC, Bangalore) is greatly acknowledged for the TEM, SEM and TRPL analysis. Dr. Priyabrat Mohapatra (C.V. Raman College of Engineering, Bhubaneswar) is greatly acknowledged for analysing the LCMS.
References
X. Zhang, R. Li, M. Jia, S. Wang, Y. Huang and C. Chen, Degradation of ciprofloxacin in aqueous bismuth oxybromide (BiOBr) suspensions under visible light irradiation: A direct hole oxidation pathway, Chem. Eng. J., 2015, 274, 290–297 CrossRef .
M. J. Benotti, R. A. Trenholm, J. C. Vanderford, B. D. Stanford and S. A. Snyder, Pharmaceuticals and Endocrine Disruptin Compounds in U.S. Drinking Water, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2009, 43, 597–603 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hu, Q. Zhou and Y. Luo, Occurrence and source analysis of typical veterinary antibiotics in manure, soil, vegetables and groundwater from organic vegetable bases, northern China, Environ. Pollut., 2010, 158, 2992–2998 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, Ultrathin Two-Dimensional Nanomaterials, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 9451–9469 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, Z. Zhang, D. Wu, X. Zhang and X. Zhao, Computational Screening of 2D Materials and Rational Design of Heterojunctions for Water Splitting Photocatalysts, Small Methods, 2018, 2, 1700359 CrossRef .
Q. Wang, W. Wang, L. Zhong, D. Liu, X. Cao and F. Cui, Oxygen vacancy-rich 2D/2D BiOCl-g-C3N4 ultrathin heterostructure nanosheets for enhanced visible-light-driven photocatalytic activity in environmental remediation, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 220, 290–302 CrossRef CAS .
P. Xia, B. Zhu, B. Cheng, J. Yu and J. Xu, 2D/2D g-C3N4/MnO2nanocomposite as a direct Z-scheme photocatalyst for enhanced photocatalytic activity, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 965–973 CrossRef CAS .
B. Lin, H. Li, H. An, W. Hao, J. Wei, Y. Dai, C. Ma and G. Yang, Preparation of 2D/2D g-C3N4 nanosheet@ZnIn2S4 nanoleaf heterojunctions with well-designed high-speed charge transfer nanochannels towards high efficiency photocatalytic hydrogen evolution, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 220, 542–552 CrossRef CAS .
L. Mohapatra and K. Parida, A review on the recent progress, challenges and perspective of layered double hydroxides as promising photocatalysts, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 10744–10766 RSC .
D. P. Sahoo, S. Nayak, K. H. Reddy, S. Martha and K. Parida, Fabrication of a Co(OH)2/ZnCr LDH “p–n” heterojunction photocatalyst with enhanced separation of charge carriers for efficient visible-light-driven H2 and O2 evolution, Inorg. Chem., 2018, 57, 3840–3854 CrossRef .
D. P. Sahoo, S. Patnaik, D. Rath and K. Parida, Synergistic effects of plasmon induced Ag@ Ag3VO4/ZnCr LDH ternary heterostructures towards visible light responsive O2 evolution and phenol oxidation reactions, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2018, 5, 879–896 RSC .
S. Patnaik, G. Swain and K. Parida, Highly efficient charge transfer through double Z-scheme mechanism by Cu promoted MoO3/g-C3N4 hybrid nanocomposite with superior electrochemical and photo catalytic performance, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 5950–5964 RSC .
S. Tonda, S. Kumar, M. Bhardwaj, P. Yadav and S. Ogale, g-C3N4/NiAl-LDH 2D/2D Hybrid Heterojunction for High- Performance Photocatalytic Reduction of CO2 into Renewable Fuels, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 2667–2678 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, J. Li, L. Wang, X. Bing, X. Cui, F. Ji and D. D. Kionga, Synthesis of a novel magnetic SnNb2O6/CoFe-LDH 2D/2D heterostructures for the degradation of organic pollutants under visible light irradiation, J. Mater. Sci., 2019, 54, 172–187 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, H. Wang, Y. Sun, T. Xiao, W. Tu, X. Yuan, G. Zeng, S. Li and J. W. Chew, Photogenerated Charge Transfer via Interfacial Internal Electric Field for Significantly Improved Photocatalysis in Direct Z-scheme Oxygen-doped Carbon Nitrogen/CoAl-Layered Double Hydroxide Heterojunction, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 227, 530–540 CrossRef CAS .
M. Shakeel, M. Arif, G. Yasin, B. Li and H. D. Khan, Layered by Layered Ni-Mn-LDH/g-C3N4 Nanohybrid for Multi-Purpose Photo/electrocatalysis: Morphology Controlled Strategy for Effective Charge Carriers Separation, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 242, 485–498 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nayak, L. Mohapatra and K. Parida, Visible light-driven novel g-C3N4/NiFe-LDH composite photocatalyst with enhanced photocatalytic activity towards water oxidation and reduction reaction, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 18622–18635 RSC .
X. Ma, Y. Lv, J. Xu, Y. Liu, R. Zhang and Y. Zhu, A Strategy of enhancing the photoactivity of g-C3N4 via doping of nonmetal elements: A first-principles study, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 23485–23493 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hu, W.-Z. Hung, M.-S. Wang and P.-J. Lu, Phosphorus and sulphur codoped g-C3N4 as an efficient metal-free photocatalyst, Carbon, 2018, 127, 374–383 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jiang, X. Yuan, G. Zeng, X. Chen, Z. Wu, J. Liang, J. Zhang, H. Wang and H. Wang, Phosphorous and sulphur codoped g-C3N4: Facile preparation, mechanism insight and application as efficient photocatalyst for tetracycline and methyl orange degradation under visible light irradiation, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 5831–5841 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liu, X. Xu, Z. Si, Z. Wang, R. Ran, Y. He and D. Weng, Noble metal-free NiS/P-S codoped g-C3N4 photocatalysts with strong visible light absorbance and enhanced H2 evolution activity, Catal. Commun., 2018, 106, 55–59 CrossRef CAS .
K. Parida and L. Mohapatra, Recent progress in the development of carbonate-intercalated Zn/Cr LDH as a novel photocatalyst for hydrogen evolution aimed at the utilization of solar light, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 1173–1178 RSC .
F. Raziq, Y. Qu, M. Humayun, A. Zada, H. Yu and L. Jing, Synthesis of SnO2/B-P codoped g-C3N4 nanocomposites as efficient cocatalyst-free visible-light photocatalysts for CO2conversion and pollutant degradation, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 201, 486–494 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, L. Zhang, J. Liu, X. Fan, B. Wang, M. Wang, W. Ren, J. Wang, M. Li and J. Shi, Brand new P-doped g-C3N4: enhanced photocatalytic activity for H2 evolution and Rhodamine B degradation under visible light, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 3862–3867 RSC .
H.-B. Fang, X.-H. Zhang, J. Wu, N. Li, Y.-Z. Zheng and X. Tao, Fragmented Phosphorus-Doped Graphitic Carbon Nitride Nanoflakes with Broad Sub-bandgap Absorption for Highly Efficient Visible-Light Photocatalytic Hydrogen Evolution, Appl. Catal. B: Environ., 2018, 225, 397–405 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Sahoo, S. Patnaik, D. Rath, P. Mohapatra, A. Mohanty and K. Parida, Influence of Au/Pd alloy on an amine functionalised ZnCr LDH–MCM-41 nanocomposite: A visible light sensitive photocatalyst towards one-pot imine synthesis, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2019, 9, 2493–2513 RSC .
M. Shakeel, M. Arif, G. Yasin, B. Li and H. D. Khan, Layered by layered Ni-Mn-LDH/g-C3N4 nanohybrid for multi-purpose photo/electrocatalysis: morphology controlled strategy for effective charge carriers separation, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 242, 485–498 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Guo, Y. Xie, X. Wang, S. Zhang, T. Hou and S. Lv, Synthesis of carbon nitride nanotubes with the C3N4 stoichiometry via a benzene-thermal process at low temperatures, Chem. Commun., 2004, 26, 7 Search PubMed .
Y. Wang, R. Shi, J. Lin and Y. Zhu, Enhancement of photocurrent and photocatalytic activity of ZnO hybridized with graphite-like C3N4, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2922 RSC .
H. Dong, M. Xiao, S. Yu, H. Wu, Y. Wang, J. Sun, G. Chen and C. Li, Insight into the
Activity and Stability of Rh x P Nano-Species Supported on g-C3N4 for Photocatalytic H2 Production, ACS Catal., 2019, 10, 458–462 CrossRef .
C. Li, S. Yu, H. Dong, Y. Wang, H. Wu, X. Zhang, G. Chen and C. Liu, Mesoporous ferriferrous oxide nanoreactors modified on graphitic carbon nitride towards improvement of physical, photoelectrochemical properties and photocatalytic performance, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 531, 331–342 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, J. Liang, X. Song, H. Yang, X. Li, H. Dai, Y. Song, Y. Liu, J. Hu, X. Pan, X. O. Yang and Z. Liang, Enhanced water dissociation performance of graphitic-C3N4 assembled with ZnCr-layered double hydroxide, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 337, 560–566 CrossRef CAS .
T. Su, Z. D. Hood, M. Naguib, L. Bai, S. Luo, C. M. Rouleau, I. N. Ivanov, H. Ji, Z. Qin and Z. Wu, 2D/2D heterojunction of Ti3C2/g-C3N4 nanosheets for enhanced photocatalytic hydrogen evolution, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 8138–8149 RSC .
K. K. Das, S. Patnaik, B. Nanda, A. C. Pradhan and K. M. Parida, ZnFe2O4-Decorated Mesoporous Al2O3 Modified MCM-41: A Solar-Light-Active Photocatalyst for the Effective Removal of Phenol and Cr(VI) from Water, ChemistrySelect, 2019, 4, 1806–1819 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, T.-Y. Liu, T. Huang, X.-H. Liu and X.-J. Yang, Novel mesoporous P-doped graphitic carbon nitride nanosheets coupled with ZnIn2S4 nanosheets as efficient visible light driven heterostructures with remarkably enhanced photo-reduction activity, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 3711–3719 RSC .
Y. Zhou, L. Zhang, J. Liu, X. Fan, B. Wang, M. Wang, W. Ren, J. Wang, M. Li and J. Shi, Brand new P-doped g-C3N4: enhanced photocatalytic activity for H2 evolution and Rhodamine B degradation under visible light, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 3862–3867 RSC .
K. Wang, Q. Li, B. Liu, B. Cheng, W. Hob and J. Yu, Sulfur-doped g-C3N4 with enhanced photocatalytic CO2-reductionvperformance, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 176–177, 44–52 CAS .
S. Cao, B. Fan, Y. Feng, H. Chen, F. Jiang and X. Wang, Sulfur-doped g-C3N4 nanosheets with carbon vacancies: General synthesis and improved activity for simulated solar-light photocatalytic nitrogen fixation, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 353, 147–156 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang, D. Li, R. Li, Q. Zhang, T. Chen, H. Liu, Y. Liu, W. Lv and G. Lui, An efficient metal-free phosphorus and oxygen co-doped g-C3N4 photocatalyst with enhanced visible light photocatalytic activity for the degradation of fluoroquinolone antibiotics, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 374, 242–253 CrossRef CAS .
J. Luo, X. Zhou, L. Ma and X. Xu, Enhancing visible-light photocatalytic activity of g- C3N4 by doping phosphorus and coupling with CeO2 for the degradation of methyl orange under visible light irradiation, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 68728 RSC .
M. Lan, G. Fan, L. Yang and F. Li, Significantly Enhanced Visible- Light-Induced Photocatalytic Performance of Hybrid Zn–Cr Layered Double Hydroxide/Graphene Nanocomposite and the Mechanism Study, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2014, 53, 12943–12952 CrossRef CAS .
A. Behera, D. Kandi, S. Mansingh and K. Parida, Facile synthesis of ZnFe2O4@RGO nanocomposites towards photocatalytic ciprofloxacin degradation and H2 energy production, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 556, 667–679 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ma, B. Yao, W. Zhang, Y. He, Y. Yu, J. Niuc and C. Wang, A novel multi-flaw MoS2 nanosheet piezo catalyst with super high degradation efficiency for ciprofloxacin, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2018, 5, 2876–2887 RSC .
L. Xu, W.-Q. Chen, S.-Q. Ke, M. Zhu, W.-H. Qiu, N. Liu, S. Namuangruk, P. Maitarad, S. Impeng and L. Tang, Efficient Photocatalytic Reactions of Cr(VI) Reduction, Ciprofloxacin and RhB Oxidation with Sn(II) Doped BiOBr, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2019, 9, 5953–5961 RSC .
M. Chen, J. Yao, Y. Huang, H. Gong and W. Chu, Enhanced Photocatalytic Degradation of Ciprofloxacin over Bi2O3/(BiO)2CO3 Heterojunctions: Efficiency, Kinetics, Pathways, Mechanisms and Toxicity Evaluation, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 334, 453–461 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Deng, L. Tang, C. Feng, G. Zeng, J. Wang, Y. Zhou, Y. Liu, B. Peng and H. Feng, Construction of plasmonic Ag modified phosphorous-doped ultrathin g-C3N4nanosheets/BiVO4 photocatalyst with enhanced visible-near-infrared response ability for ciprofloxacin degradation, J. Hazard. Mater., 2018, 344, 758–769 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chen and W. Chu, Photocatalytic degradation and decomposition mechanism of fluoroquinolones norfloxacin over bismuth tungstate: Experiment and mathematic model, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 168, 175–182 CrossRef .
M. Amjadi, J. L. Manzoori and T. Hallaj, A novel chemiluminescence method for determination of bisphenol Abased on the carbon dot-enhanced H2O2 system, J. Lumin., 2015, 158, 160–164 CrossRef CAS .
A. BiancoPrevot, C. Baiocchi, M. C. Brussino, E. Pramauro, P. Savarino, V. Augugliaro, G. Marcì and L. Palmisano, Photocatalytic Degradation of Acid Blue 80 in Aqueous Solutions Containing TiO2 Suspensions, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2001, 35, 971–976 CrossRef .
C.-H. Liao, S.-F. Kang and F.-A. Wu, Hydroxyl radical scavenging role of chloride and bicarbonate ions in the H2O2/UV process, Chemosphere, 2001, 44, 1193–1200 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, S. Yu, H. Dong, C. Liu, H. Wu, H. Che and G. Chen, Z-scheme mesoporous photocatalyst constructed by modification of Sn3O4 nanoclusters on g-C3N4 nanosheets with improved photocatalytic performance and mechanism insight, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 238, 284–293 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xia, J. Tu, P. Y. Q. Zhang, Y. J. Mai, X. L. Wang, C. D. Gu and X. B. Zhao, Three-Dimentional Porous Nano-Ni/Co(OH)2Nanoflake Composite Film: A Pseudocapacitive Material with Superior Performance, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 22662–22668 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Sahoo, S. Patnaik and K. Parida, Construction of a Z-Scheme Dictated WO3−X/Ag/ZnCr LDH Synergistically Visible Light-Induced Photocatalyst towards Tetracycline Degradation and H2 Evolution, ACS Omega, 2019, 4, 14721–14741 CrossRef CAS .
H. Dong, S. Hong, P. Zhang, S. Yu, Y. Wang, S. Yuan, H. Li, J. Sun, G. Chen and C. Li, Metal-free Z-scheme 2D/2D VdW heterojunction for high-efficiency and durable photocatalytic H2 production, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 125150 CrossRef CAS .
H. Dong, X. Zhang, J. Li, P. Zhou, S. Yu, N. Song, C. Liu, G. Che and C. Li, Construction of morphology-controlled nonmetal 2D/3D homojunction towards enhancing photocatalytic activity and mechanism insight, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 263, 118270 CrossRef .
S. Patnaik, K. K. Das, A. Mohanty and K. Parida, Enhanced photo catalytic reduction of Cr(VI) over polymer-sensitized g-C3N4/ZnFe2O4 and its synergism with phenol oxidation under visible light, Catal. Today, 2018, 315, 52–66 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jourshabani, Z. Shariatinia, G. Achari, C. H. Langford and A. Badiei, Facile synthesis of NiS2 nanoparticles ingrained in sulfur-doped carbon nitride framework with enhanced visible light photocatalytic activity: Two functional roles of thiourea, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 13448–13466 RSC .
M. Jourshabani, Z. Shariatinia and A. Badiei, In situ fabrication of SnO2/S-doped g-C3N4 nanocomposites and improved visible light driven photodegradation of methylene blue, J. Mol. Liq., 2017, 248, 688–702 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sohail, H. Kim and T. W. Kim, Enhanced photocatalytic performance of a Ti-based metal-organic framework for hydrogen production: Hybridization with ZnCr-LDH nanosheets, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9, 1–11 CrossRef .
G. Zhang, B. Lin, Y. Qiu, L. He, Y. Chen and B. Gao, Highly efficient visible-light-driven photocatalytic hydrogen generation by immobilizing CdSe nanocrystals on ZnCr-layered double hydroxide nanosheets, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 4758–4765 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hong, X. Xia, Y. Wang and R. Xu, Mesoporous carbon nitride with in situ sulfur doping for enhanced photocatalytic hydrogen evolution from water under visible light, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 15006–15012 RSC .
J. Feng, D. Zhang, H. Zhou, M. Pi, X. Wang and S. Chen, Coupling P nanostructures with P-doped g-C3N4 as efficient visible light photocatalysts for H2 evolution and RhB degradation, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 6342–6349 CrossRef CAS .
N. Tian, H. Huang, C. Liu, F. Dong, T. Zhang, X. Du, S. Yu and Y. Zhang, In situ co-pyrolysis fabrication of CeO2/g-C3N4 n–n type heterojunction for synchronously promoting photo-induced oxidation and reduction properties, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 17120–17129 RSC .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Zeta potential study (LDH and LSPCN10), SEM images (LDH SPCN LSPCN10), EDX elemental analysis of LSPCN10 material, high resolution deconvoluted XPS spectra of bare SPCN and LDH, LC-MS of LSPCN10 at different times, TOC removal percentage of CPX over LSPCN10, molecular structure of CPX, PZC plot of LSPCN10 heterostructure, photocatalytic degradation of CPX at different pH with the effect of anion and cation over the LSPCN10 phtocatalyst, transient photocurrent response study (CN, SPCN, LDH, LCN10, and LSPCN10), and comparison table for photocatalytic H2 evolution and CPX degradation over the present photocatalyst with different LDH and g-C3N4 modified nanocomposites. See DOI: 10.1039/d0qi00617cThis journal is © the Partner Organisations 2020
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  Synthesis of the S,P-g-C3N4/ZnCr LDH (LSPCN10) 2D/2D heterostructure.	 
	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 1  XRD patterns of (a) CN, SCN, PCN, and SPCN, (b) LDH, LCN10, LSCN10, LPCN10, and LSPCN10 heterostructures [enlarged (002) diffraction patterns of CN are inserted in both (a) and (b) images].	 

 	Fig. 2  FTIR spectra of the LDH, CN, SPCN, LCN10 and LSPCN10 materials.	 

 	Fig. 3  TEM images of (a) LDH, (b) SPCN, (c) LSPCN10; HRTEM images of (d) the lattice fringes; (e) SAED pattern of the LSPCN10 material.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) N2 adsorption–desorption isotherms of (a) CN, SPCN, (b) LCN10, and LSPCN10 (their pore size distribution curves are inserted in both a and b images).	 

LDH	28.7	3.4	0.04
CN	7.8	6.35	0.012
SPCN	8.9	9.4	0.02
LCN10	91.7	7.4	0.17
LSPCN10	101.7	6.9	0.18

 	Fig. 5  High resolution deconvoluted XPS spectra of LSPCN10: (a) Zn 2p, (b) Cr 2p, (c) O 1s, (d) C 1s, (e) N 1s, (f) P 2p, and (g) S 2p.	 

 	Fig. 6  EPR patterns of LCN10, LSCN10, LPCN10, and LSPCN10.	 

 	Fig. 7  UV-Vis diffuse reflectance spectra of (a) CN, SCN, PCN, SPCN, (b) LDH, LCN10, LSCN10, LPCN10, LSPCN10; band gap energy of (c) CN, SPCN, (d) LDH, and (e) LCN10 and LSPCN10.	 

 	Fig. 8  Photocatalytic CPX degradation over (a) CN, LDH, LCN5, LCN10, LCN20, and LCN30, (b) LCN10, LSCN10, LPCN10, and LSPCN10, (c) photodegradation of CPX as a function of absorption and light irradiation time, (d) pseudo-first order kinetics plot for different photocatalysts: without catalyst (blank), CN, SPCN, LDH, LCN10, and LSPCN10 materials, and (e) time-dependent UV absorbance spectra of CPX over the LSPCN10 heterostructure.	 

Blank	8	0.95
CN	52	0.96
SPCN	84	0.98
LDH	111	0.90
LPCN10	169	0.93
LSPCN10	330	0.99

 	Scheme 2  Possible degradation pathways for photocatalytic CPX degradation in the presence of LSPCN10.	 
SO42− + ˙OH → ˙SO4− + H2O	(3)
CO32− + ˙OH → ˙CO3− + H2O	(4)
CPX(–N) + ˙OH → NO3−	(5)
Cl− + ˙OH → HOCl−	(6)
˙HOCl− + H+ → ˙Cl + H2O	(7)

 	Fig. 9  (a) Photocatalytic CPX degradation with the addition of different scavengers, (b) NBT absorbance spectra, and (c) TAOH photoluminescence spectra over the LDH and LSPCN10 materials.	 

 	Fig. 10  Photocatalytic H2 evolution over CN, SPCN, LDH, LCN10, and LSPCN10 photocatalysts.	 
	(8)
	(9)

 	Fig. 11  (a) PL spectra, (b) TRPL spectra (the inserted table shows the photoinduced charge lifetimes of LDH, LCN10, and LSPCN10) of LDH, LCN10, and LSPCN10, (c) EIS measurements (Bode plots of LDH, LCN10, and LSPCN10 are inserted), (d) LSV plots of CN, SPCN, LDH, LCN10, and LSPCN10, Mott–Schottky plots of (e) CN, SPCN, (f) LDH, LCN10, and LSPCN10 heterostructure.	 
	(10)
ENHE = EAg/AgCl + E0Ag/AgCl + 0.059 pH	(11)

 	Scheme 3  Photocatalytic charge transfer mechanism for (a) ciprofloxacin degradation and (b) H2 evolution over S,P-g-C3N4/ZnCr LDH 2D/2D heterostructure under visible light irradiation.	 

 	Fig. 12  Reusability study of photocatalytic (a) CPX degradation, (b) H2 evolution, (c) XRD, (d) FTIR spectra, (e) and (f) TEM images of the fresh and reused LSPCN10 photocatalyst, respectively.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Zeta potential study (LDH and LSPCN10), SEM images (LDH SPCN LSPCN10), EDX elemental analysis of LSPCN10 material, high resolution deconvoluted XPS spectra of bare SPCN and LDH, LC-MS of LSPCN10 at different times, TOC removal percentage of CPX over LSPCN10, molecular structure of CPX, PZC plot of LSPCN10 heterostructure, photocatalytic degradation of CPX at different pH with the effect of anion and cation over the LSPCN10 phtocatalyst, transient photocurrent response study (CN, SPCN, LDH, LCN10, and LSPCN10), and comparison table for photocatalytic H2 evolution and CPX degradation over the present photocatalyst with different LDH and g-C3N4 modified nanocomposites. See DOI: 10.1039/d0qi00617c

This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2020
