A durable VO 2 transition layer and defect inactivation in BiVO 4 via spontaneous valence-charge control   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2TA05260A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2TA05260A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 21300-21314A durable VO2 transition layer and defect inactivation in BiVO4via spontaneous valence-charge control†

        
          
            Dong Su 
            Kim‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Kun Woong 
            Lee‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Ji Hoon 
            Choi
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hak Hyeon 
            Lee
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hee Won 
            Suh
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ho Seong 
            Lee
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Hyung Koun 
            Cho
          
        
      *ab
aSchool of Advanced Materials Science and Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University, 2066, Seobu-ro, Jangan-gu, Suwon, Gyeonggi-do 16419, Republic of Korea. E-mail: chohk@skku.edu;  Fax: +82 31 290 7410;   Tel: +82 31 290 7364
bResearch Center for Advanced Materials Technology, Sungkyunkwan University (SKKU), 2066 Seobu-ro, Jangan-gu, Suwon, Gyeonggi-do, Republic of Korea
cSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Kyungpook National University, 80, Daehak-ro, Buk-gu, Daegu 41566, Republic of Korea
Received 
      1st July 2022
    , Accepted 23rd August 2022First published on 24th August 2022AbstractThe performance of bismuth vanadate (BiVO4) photoanodes is limited by surface defects and photo-corrosion instability. This paper proposes a revolutionary protection layer that overcomes these problems. Considering the role of V5+ ion dissolution in photo-corrosion, we propose a surface photoelectrochemical oxidation approach, artificially altering photo-corrosion to advanced photo-oxidation by strategically adding V5+ and H2O2 to the electrolyte. The surface phase transition thus induced creates an unprecedented vanadium oxide (VO2) photoelectrochemical protection layer that is robust, conductive, and ultrathin, while exhibiting atomic controllability. Charge-kinetic characterization of the BiVO4/VO2 photoanodes revealed faster transport of interfacial charges (86%) and transfer of photogenerated carriers through the VO2 protection layer (95%); this approach affords near-ideal performance and contributes toward high stability and extreme durability. The BiVO4/VO2/CoFeOx photoanodes displayed a high photocurrent density of 6.2 mA cm−2 and an onset potential of 0.25 VRHE, with an applied bias photon-to-current efficiency of 2.4% at 0.62 VRHE.
Introduction
Photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting is a promising technology for directly producing hydrogen fuel from seawater by using solar energy. Green hydrogen gas is an eco-friendly, zero-carbon fuel resource that, on reacting with oxygen, can supply electrical power.1–3 PEC water splitting entails the use of an abundant source material (water), generates very pure H2, and only involves low levels of CO2 emissions; thus, it is a significantly attractive hydrogen-production strategy.4,5 The core components of a PEC cell are a photoanode, which drives the oxygen evolution reaction [OER; +1.23 V vs. the reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE)], and a photocathode, which drives the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER; 0 VRHE).6,7 These semiconductor photoelectrodes must be designed for sufficient light absorption, effective charge separation, long-term stability, and high surface reactivity.8,9
In this context, bismuth vanadate (BiVO4) has attracted particular attention owing to its appropriate bandgap (2.4 eV) and suitable band-edge positions.8,10,11 It also possesses a favorable surface and bulk structure with a lower onset potential (and/or longer carrier-diffusion length) than those of other potential photoanodes such as α-Fe2O3 (∼2.1 eV),12–14 CuWO4 (∼2.3 eV),15 CuV2O6 (∼1.84 eV),16 or ZnFe2O4 (∼2.0 eV).13,17 However, BiVO4 photoanodes suffer from high surface photo-corrosion, sluggish OER kinetics, and charge recombination due to the various surface defects and trap sites. Thus far, most reported photocurrent densities for BiVO4 photoanodes are considerably lower than the theoretical expectation (7.5 mA cm−2) for natural-sunlight-and-seawater PEC conditions (solar-to-hydrogen efficiency 9.2%, AM 1.5 G illumination at 100 mW cm−2).
Light absorption, carrier separation, and the redox reaction are the key factors determining the photoanode performance of BiVO4.8 The strategies developed to improve the PEC activities of BiVO4 photoanodes include elemental doping,18–20 facet tailoring,21,22 and hetero-junction techniques.23,24 Although improvements have been achieved in terms of the carrier mobility and electrical conductivity, the PEC conversion efficiency still remains severely restricted by the undesired reactivity of the surface defects and the intrinsically severe surface corrosion (Scheme 1a). The first issue influences the photovoltage (Vph) and photocurrent (Jph), whereas the second issue influences the long-term stability; hence, balancing these two issues necessitates a trade-off between the opposing trends.25
 Scheme 1  Schematic of pristine BiVO4 photoanodes in operating for photoelectrochemical water oxidation. (a) Factors limiting the performance of pristine BiVO4. (b) Conventional protection methods that partly overcome the intrinsic limitations of the unstable surface state. (c) Proposed method and its advantages. 
Currently, the photoelectrochemical activity is considerably lower than the theoretical optimum primarily due to the slow water-oxidation kinetics at the semiconductor/electrolyte interface, as charge recombination and charge-transfer resistance are somewhat unfavorable for bare BiVO4.26 In addition, vanadium vacancies (VVs) unintentionally generated during the initial BiVO4 growth are defect sites that can significantly reduce the photovoltage and photocurrent for photoexcited carriers.27 Various other surface defects can also cause unnecessary band pinning for the charge transfer at the photoanode/electrolyte interfaces. Such band pinning reduces band bending and, consequently, the driving potential difference between the Fermi level of the semiconductors and the chemical potential of the electrolyte, i.e., the maximum achievable photovoltage.28 In addition, the photo-corrosion of the BiVO4 photoanode due to the dissolution loss of V5+ ions from the BiVO4 lattice degrades the stability of the photo-absorption layer and reduces the initially high photocurrent.29,30 Accordingly, various surface treatments that reduce VV production have been suggested to reduce the decrease in Jph and Vph for BiVO4.
As the PEC performance of BiVO4-based photoanodes is being enhanced continuously, the photostability of BiVO4 is becoming the most important issue for long-term operation. Currently, there are three types of methods used to deactivate the surface defects in photoelectrodes, prevent photo-corrosion, or ensure long-lasting stability (Scheme 1b); nevertheless, none of these methods can satisfy both the stability and water-splitting performance criteria simultaneously.
In the first method, a surface-protection layer that can guarantee the (photo-)electrochemical stability of the photoelectrode surface is installed. This protection layer prevents direct contact between the photoelectrode and the electrolyte and also restricts the photo-corrosion of the photoanodes by suppressing dangerous chemical reactions when electrons or holes are transferred to the electrolyte.31 However, chemically stable and electrically insulating materials such as TiO2 and Al2O3 are generally used in these protective layers,32–36 which, therefore, have lower conductivities than the photoanode. This decelerates charge transport and leads to carrier-recombination losses; the water-splitting efficiency of the photoelectrode is also deteriorated.31 Furthermore, certain defect sites still remain on the BiVO4 surface.
In the second method for suppressing photo-corrosion, a catalyst layer is used to increase the rate of interfacial charge transfer. In a semiconductor that is not thermodynamically stable against photo-corrosion, this increase can provide a certain amount of protection: if the rate of interfacial charge transfer or surface recombination is significantly higher than that of photo-corrosion, the latter can be kinetically suppressed.37 This is one of the several reasons indicating the importance of identifying an effective catalyst layer for kinetically suppressed photo-corrosion. However, typical catalysts with nanoparticle structures cannot completely cover the surface of photoelectrodes, and slow photo-corrosion kinetics is still expected.
Although the first and second methods can be performed simultaneously with appropriate surface-protection layers and catalysts, surface defects still remain in photoanodes. In the third method, the experimental conditions are designed to prevent the corrosion reaction entirely. In general, the PEC driving of photoanodes requires natural sunlight (1 sun, 1 AM), seawater, and an applied bias voltage > 1.23 VRHE. Because solar energy and water-splitting levels are unchangeable parameters, recent research has focused on novel electrolyte conditions. For example, an electrolyte without a photo-corrosion-inducing V5+ dissolution reaction has been used; however, in this case, a pure water-splitting reaction may not occur, and the use of seawater is limited.38
To address these aforementioned issues, we herein propose a new strategy that utilizes vanadium, a transition metal, to form a new oxide protective layer, thereby suppressing photo-corrosion to a remarkable extent, while simultaneously achieving high performance. This research was motivated by the fact that the photo-corrosion of BiVO4 photoanodes is structurally disrupted by the dissolution loss of V5+ ions in the BiVO4 lattice. Although our understanding of the photo-corrosion pathway in BiVO4 photoanodes under illumination is still incomplete, it is clear that preventing the photooxidative dissolution of V5+ on the BiVO4 surface enables the spontaneous formation of a protective oxide film through atomically controlled surface-oxidation technology; this results in the excellent suppression of photo-corrosion and the achievement of a high Vph and Jph. As shown in Scheme 1c, we developed a (photo)electrochemical phase-transition process for achieving an ultra-thin photoelectrochemical protection layer (PPL) on illuminated BiVO4 surfaces using strategically designed electrolytes relevant to the OER. We termed this approach as the surface photoelectrochemical oxidation (SPO) method. Furthermore, based on theoretical predictions, we designed a process environment wherein water splitting and the surface oxidation of BiVO4via photogenerated holes under illumination could occur concurrently; we found that the spontaneous and electrochemically controlled formation of the SPO-processed vanadium oxide (SPO-VO2) PPL is associated with the presence of V4+ and V5+ ions in the multifunctional electrolytes. Additionally, this process can produce efficient catalysts that maximize the role of an activated surface via electrical connection between the surface and catalyst through photoelectrochemical deposition (PED). Consequently, this investigation provides insights into securing a uniform and conductive VO2 PPL to ensure the stability of photoelectrodes against photo-corrosion. Thus far, PED has only been used for forming nanoparticle shapes; however, in this work, we achieved a uniform protective layer across the entire surface by using the original photoanode surface as a seed. Thus, photoelectrochemical reactions can be used to achieve a modified BiVO4 surface with a SPO-VO2 PPL that simultaneously provides highly durable surface healing for PEC water splitting. The resulting photocurrent density is remarkable (6.2 mA cm−2) and accompanied by long-term stability (>100 h). These findings provide insights into the role of the surface treatment as well as a facile and rapid approach for the large-scale fabrication of efficient BiVO4 photoanodes suitable for direct hydrogen production from sunlight and seawater.
Results and discussion
Photo-corrosion of the BiVO4 photoanode via V5+ dissolution
We formed a typical BiVO4 film through the sol–gel method. The optimization of the sol–gel synthesis for high crystallization, strong absorption, and uniform growth of BiVO4 is described in the Experimental section. The pristine BiVO4 films were annealed at 550 °C for 2 h in a box furnace; this temperature maximized absorption and the charge-transport properties (Fig. S1 and S2, ESI†). A scanning electron microscope (SEM) image of the resulting pristine BiVO4 photoanodes, which uniformly covered the entire surface in the form of a film, is shown in Fig. 1a. The BiVO4 photoanode layer was more evident in the high resolution-transmission electron microscope (HR-TEM) image (Fig. S3, ESI†), and its composition profile from energy-dispersive X-ray (EDX) measurements indicates that Bi and V were uniformly distributed.
 Fig. 1  Photo-corrosion of pristine BiVO4 photoanodes. (a and b) Scanning electron micrographs of BiVO4 photoanodes before and after J–t stress for 100 min at 1.23 VRHE, respectively. Orange circles indicate photo-corrosion. (c) Linear-sweep voltammetry (black line) and chronoamperometry (orange line) at 1.23 VRHE in potassium borate electrolyte under AM 1.5 G illumination (100 mW cm−2), with a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. (d) ICP-OES analysis of the concentration of Bi and V in BiVO4 before and after J–t stress for 50 and 100 min. (e) Schematic of the photo-corrosion mechanism. 
However, the pristine BiVO4 resulted in the chemical and photoelectrochemical instability of the polycrystalline BiVO4 electrode in a typical PEC electrolyte solution due to unintended dissolution. The SEM image in Fig. 1b depicts a distinct crystallinity change in the pristine BiVO4 after withstanding a chronoamperometry (CA) stress of 1.23 VRHE for 100 min under PEC conditions (electrolyte pH 9.5, illumination 1.5 AM). As shown in Fig. 1c, the pristine BiVO4 exhibited an open-circuit potential of 0.5 VRHE and a maximum photocurrent of 1.3 mA cm−2 at 1.23 VRHE. Next, the pristine BiVO4 photoanode was subjected to J–t stress via CA for 100 min; the photocurrent of the pristine BiVO4 was significantly reduced (∼52%). We employed inductively-coupled-plasma optical-emission spectrometry (ICP-OES) with the same electrolyte used for the J–t stress measurements (Fig. 1d) to elucidate the sample's dissolution during degradation. The results quantitatively revealed the presence of Bi and V in the electrolyte after J–t stress for 0, 50, and 100 min. After 50 min of stress, the concentration of V (4.4 μmol L−1) was considerably higher than that of Bi (1.1 μmol L−1); after 100 min, the concentration of V reached 9.1 μmol L−1, and the Bi/V ratio decreased to 0.17. This suggests that the vanadium leached from BiVO4 induces a major compositional change during anodic photo-corrosion. The exact origin of the photo-corrosion can be understood through X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) of the corroded BiVO4 photoanode. Accordingly, XPS measurements were conducted in the core-level energy ranges of bismuth and vanadium. Based on the XPS fitting results of the pristine BiVO4 photoanode, Bi3+ and V5+ form the main structure of BiVO4. On the photoanode surface subjected to J–t stress for 100 min, the quantity of Bi was higher than that of V, and the presence of V5+ decreased considerably (Fig. S4, ESI†). This proves that the V5+ ions present on the BiVO4 surface were dissolved in the electrolyte; by contrast, the Bi-based oxides (such as BiOx and Bi2O3) were not dissolved but instead existed on the photoanode surface.39 The ultraviolet-visible spectra also indicated a considerable change in the absorbance before and after the J–t stress (Fig. S5, ESI†), thereby confirming that photo-corrosion altered the surface stoichiometry and morphology of BiVO4. In a typical PEC electrolyte, pristine BiVO4 can result in generation of a water oxidation reaction [(i) reaction] and an anodic photo-corrosion reaction [(ii) reaction] in a typical PEC electrolyte, derived from the following two equations: BiVO4 + hν → h+ + e− (irradiation).(1)
(i) Water-oxidation reaction at 1.23 VRHE under illumination: BiVO4 + 4h+ + 2H2O → 4O2 + 4H+ (oxygen-evolution reaction).(2)
(ii) Photo-corrosion reaction at 1.23 VRHE under illumination: BiVO4 + h+ → V2O5 + Bi2O3–5 (photo-corrosion),(3) V2O5 → V5+aq (dissolution).(4)
The compositional change caused by the photo-corrosion of BiVO4 is evidently related to the oxidation process of the elements present in BiVO4.40 The anodic photo-corrosion process of BiVO4 is schematically illustrated in Fig. 1e. For the BiVO4 surface in contact with the electrolyte, accumulated holes can photoelectrochemically oxidize the elements present in BiVO4. As the V5+ ions in BiVO4 cannot be oxidized further, the dissolution of V5+ must be coupled with the photo-oxidation of Bi3+ and/or the lattice oxide (O2−) ions. The V2O5 phase is likely to be dissolved in aqueous solutions and is predicted (based on the V–H2O Pourbaix diagram) to have limited stability at pH < 3 and a high V5+ concentration.41,42 At a near-neutral pH, complex ions such as H2VO4− and V4O124− exist with the aqueous phase depending on the V5+ concentration. The Bi-rich or Bi2O3∼5 surface of BiVO4 has also been mentioned in the literature;39 the photoanode surface becomes more Bi-rich after anodic PEC degradation. When the stress of the stability limit is applied to BiVO4, shunt paths are generated in the weak regions, and even the light-absorption layer is detached from the substrate. The surface change of BiVO4 after the PEC measurement is presented in Fig. S6 (ESI†).
Overcoming V5+ dissolution using spontaneous valence-charge control
The photo-corrosion of BiVO4 was attributed to the dissolution of V5+ ions, a result of the fast oxidation kinetics of holes formed through light absorption. Vanadium compounds are highly sensitive to changes in the oxygen stoichiometry due to their various multivalent characteristics, resulting in a series of compounds known as Magnéli (VnO2n) and Wadsley phases (VnO2n+1).43,44 In particular, V4+ or V3+ oxides, which are used as the active layers in transistors and memories owing to their electrochemical stability and high conductivity, can be formed through the oxidation/reduction of V5+ oxides and are excellent candidates for suppressing photo-corrosive dissolution.45–47 Hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), which is used as a redox agent, enables the spontaneous phase transition of vanadium via a reduction reaction.48 The chemical reaction sequence of pristine BiVO4 in the spontaneous reduction electrolyte (SRE), i.e., the typical PEC electrolyte + H2O2 saturation, is
(i) Reduction reaction for surface phase transition in SRE: V5+(in BiVO4 surface) + H2O2 → V4+ + H+ + HOO (spontaneous reaction)(5) V5++ H2O2 → VOOH4+ + H+(5-1) VOOH4+ + H+ → V4+ + ˙HO2 + H+(5-2)
It was confirmed through XPS fitting that the surface of pristine BiVO4 was reduced from V5+ to V4+ through a spontaneous chemical reaction in SRE(aq): the contribution of the V4+ ion increased by a factor of ∼9 compared to the initial state (Fig. S7a, ESI†). The BiVO4 photoanode with the surface phase transition showed slightly enhanced photo-corrosion stability (Fig. S7b, ESI†). This implies that, although V5+ was converted to V4+ through reduction on the exposed BiVO4 surface, additional growth of the protective layer to secure sufficient stability against photo-corrosion was mandatory. Thus, we propose a surface photoelectrochemical oxidation (SPO) strategy in which photo-corrosion is artificially changed into advanced photo-oxidation, and a suitable surface phase-transition reaction is also induced. The proposed SPO mechanism produces robust, conductive, ultra-thin protective layers with atomic controllability.
Four electrolytes for deactivating dissolution-activation sites of V5+ ions causing photo-corrosion were investigated: (i) the typical PEC electrolyte [PEC(aq)], (ii) PEC(aq) + V5+ [V5+(aq)], (iii) PEC(aq) + H2O2 [SRE(aq)], and (iv) PEC(aq) + V5+ + H2O2 [V5+SRE(aq)]. It has been recently reported that V5+ saturated electrolyte inhibits V5+ dissolution in agreement with Le Châtelier's principle.38 If the dissolution of V5+ exposed on the BiVO4 surface is blocked with a chemical concentration gradient, all holes reaching the surface can be used for water oxidation (eqn (2)) and surface recombination, and photo-corrosion reactions (eqn (3) and (4)) can be suppressed. Since the SPO process of the BiVO4 photoanode proceeds in a manner similar to the OER operation of PEC, the complete SPO reaction can be expected to considerably inhibit the dissolution of V5+ by using the V5+ saturated electrolyte. The J–V plots in Fig. 2a indicate that BiVO4 showed almost the same PEC reactions up to approximately 2.5 VRHE in PEC(aq) (orange line) and saturated V5+(sat-aq) (green line), and typical electrochemical behavior was observed in the bias region (>2.5 VRHE). However, when the applied potential was fixed at 1.75 VRHE in the J–t stress experiments for each electrolyte (Fig. 2b), the PEC(aq) and the V5+(aq) electrolytes showed a clear difference in stability. Under the typical PEC(aq) conditions in which V5+ was not saturated, the BiVO4 showed a photocurrent of 1.16 mA cm−2 with a 57% decrease in photocurrent after 5000 s of J–t stress; there was no significant change in the photocurrent of BiVO4 in the V5+(aq) (green line), despite a similar initial photocurrent. Nevertheless, the BiVO4 measured in V5+-saturated electrolyte showed a rapid decrease in photocurrent during the re-measurement in PEC(aq) (Fig. S8, ESI†). This proves that the BiVO4 surface provides no permanent protective effect; long-lasting photoelectrochemical stability is not guaranteed under typical PEC(aq) conditions without any addition.
 Fig. 2  Formation of the VO2 photoelectrochemical protection layer on BiVO4. Different electrolytes are used: PEC(aq) (orange line), V5+(aq) (green line), SRE(aq) (sky-blue line), and [V5+SRE](aq) (red line). (a) LSV of pristine BiVO4 photoanodes in the four electrolytes from 0 to 2.75 VRHE under AM 1.5 G illumination (100 mW cm−2) with a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. (b) CA of pristine BiVO4 photoanodes in the four electrolytes at 1.75 VRHE under 1.5 G illumination. (c) Band diagram showing the individual potentials of various chemical reactions within the BiVO4 bandgap. 
In the measured J–V curve of BiVO4 in the SRE(aq) electrolyte, intrinsic two-step water-oxidation peaks of H2O2 were observed at 0.68 VRHE and 1.72 VRHE (sky-blue line in Fig. 2a). Note that the increased onset potential (0.28 VRHE) and photocurrent (3.0 mA cm−2 at 1.23 VRHE) of BiVO4 were achieved by resolving the defect-involved surface limitation due to the hole-scavenging role of H2O2. The anodic PEC reaction of BiVO4 in the SRE(aq) electrolyte is followed by
(i) Typical PEC electrolyte added with H2O2 [SRE(aq), for inactivating photo-corrosion of V5+]: BiVO4 + hν → h+ + e− (irradiation)(6)
(ii) Surface-treatment reaction (surface reduction): V5+ (in BiVO4 surface) + H2O2 → V4+ + H+ + HOO (spontaneous reaction)(7) V5+ + H2O2 → VOOH4+ + H+(7-1) VOOH4+ + H+ → V4+ + ˙HO2 + H+(7-2)
(iii) Hole-scavenging water-oxidation reaction: BiVO4 + H2O2 + 2h+ → O2 + 2H+ (0.68 VRHE, primary oxidation)(8) BiVO4 + H2O2 + h+ → ˙O2− + 2H+ (1.72 VRHE, secondary oxidation)(9)
According to eqn (7), V5+, which exists in the BiVO4 surface lattice and causes photo-corrosion, is spontaneously reduced to V4+ in SRE(aq), and the light-absorption layer can be stabilized by the photoelectrochemical surface-treatment effect with slight photo-corrosion inactivation. Smith et al. and Wang et al. reported that the reduction of vanadium ions (V5+ → V4+) on the BiVO4 surface minimizes the recombination loss and increases the photovoltage,49,50 making it possible to decrease the surface band pinning due to surface defects. In the photoelectrochemical surface treatment using SRE, a continuous increase in the photocurrent was observed during the J–t measurements; this represents an affirmative healing process [SRE(aq) treatment, sky-blue line in Fig. 2b]. Our experimental goal was to induce a permanent chemical concentration gradient in the V5+ saturated electrolyte that would prevent the dissolution of V5+ during the SPO process.
Formation of the photoelectrochemically prepared VO2 protection layer
Various overlayers (e.g., buffer layers, protection layers, and co-catalyst layers) have been used to increase the long-term stability and reactivity of water splitting in PEC cells. PED has been used to deposit the co-catalysts because it provides superior electrical and mechanical networking with the photoelectrode.29,51 PED can increase the electrochemical reactivity by producing structures that grow into nanoparticles or nanocluster structures.52 However, the formation of a surface-protection layer by PED has rarely been reported: it is difficult to deposit heterogeneous, thick insulating films on the semiconducting absorber surface. Although PED can connect the absorption and protective layers electrically to reduce the interfacial loss and to contribute actively to charge transfer, a surface-protective layer grown through PED in general does not uniformly cover the entire surface. Prior research has therefore focused on surface-protection layers with physically bonded heterostructures, although the absence of an electrical connection between the absorber and protection layers inevitably induces a large loss at the interface.
Semiconductors composed of V5+ ions are electrochemically unstable and readily dissolve in electrolytes, whereas V4+-based oxides have relatively good electrical conductivity and are chemically stable.44–46 According to the theoretical Pourbaix diagram, the electrochemical deposition of V5+-related compounds is impossible under typical PEC conditions, whereas deposition of compounds involving V4+ is allowed. Thus, when the V5+(aq) in the SRE(aq) is simultaneously added to the electrolyte, the chemical concentration gradient of V5+ can be constantly maintained, and the V5+ ion in the electrolyte is spontaneously reduced to V4+ by reacting with SRE(aq). Although the direct utilization of V5+ ions in PED is difficult, the condition of spontaneous multivalent change can be a strategic precursor for the electrochemical deposition of oxide semiconductors containing V4+. When utilizing the method of spontaneous valence-charge control described in the previous section with [V5+SRE](aq), three dominant anodic PEC equations are expected: the primary water-oxidation reaction, the PED reaction, and the reduction of V5+ to V4+ in BiVO4.
(i) Water-oxidation reaction: BiVO4 + H2O2 + 2h+ → O2 + 2H+ (0.68 VRHE, primary oxidation)(10) BiVO4 + H2O2 + h+ → ˙O2− + 2H+ (1.72 VRHE, secondary oxidation)(11)
(ii) V5+ to V4+ reduction reaction: V5+ (in BiVO4 surface) + H2O2 → V4+ + H+ + HOO (spontaneous reaction, surface treatment)(12) V5+ (in solution) + H2O2 → V4+ + H+ + HOO (spontaneous reaction)(13)
(iii) Photoelectrochemical-oxidation deposition reaction: V4+ (in solution) + OH− + h+ → VO2+ + H+ (1.23 VRHE)(14) VO2+ + H2O2 + h+ → VO2 + OH− + H+ (1.51 VRHE, electrodeposition of the protective layer)(15)
Linear-sweep voltammetry (LSV) of pristine BiVO4 in the [V5+SRE](aq) electrolyte shows that the photocurrent is lower up to 1.5 VRHE compared to that in the electrolyte containing only SRE(aq), as shown in Fig. 2a. This is because a considerable amount of H2O2 is spontaneously consumed by reactions (12) and (13), reducing the influence of scavengers on BiVO4. Interestingly, the photocurrent in the [V5+SRE](aq) electrolyte (red line) exhibits a distinct shoulder peak above 1.6 VRHE; this corresponds to the region of the SPO reaction (eqn (15)) where the BiVO4 photoanode exhibits self-curing properties, and durable V4+-based oxide compounds are readily grown. According to the J–t measurements, the photocurrent of BiVO4 in the [V5+SRE](aq) (the red line of Fig. 2b) continuously increased for 5000 s; this was probably due to the enhanced performance of the light-absorbing BiVO4 layer. Here, the band gap of pristine BiVO4 was 2.4 eV, and spontaneous-redox and water-oxidation reaction levels were included within the BiVO4 band gap in an electrolyte solution with a pH of 9.5, as shown in Fig. 2c.
To investigate the formation of V4+-based oxides, the growth process of eqn (15) was individually confirmed in pristine BiVO4 by directly saturating V4+ ions in the electrolyte (Fig. S9, ESI†). The PED potential of the V4+-based oxide was determined to be in the range 1.7 to 2.2 VRHE in the electrolyte. V4+ directly dissolved without the additional help of H2O2, whereas it was not observed in the electrolyte [V5+(aq)] with the direct addition of V5+ ions. The direct electrodeposition of V4+-based oxides on the BiVO4 surface is one of the key strategies of our research; nevertheless, it is anticipated that the band pinning remaining on the BiVO4 surface cannot be resolved in this way, because the V5+ ions on the BiVO4 surface cannot easily reduce to V4+. Therefore, to simultaneously form a robust protective layer and perform BiVO4 surface treatment, the multifunctional synergetic effects of the electrolytes utilizing the combined [V5+SRE](aq) are essential. Moreover, the photoelectrochemical formation of the VO2 surface protective layer seems likely to have the advantage of causing the layer to be electrochemically and stoichiometrically networked to the absorption layer.
Phase analysis of the BiVO4/VO2-PPL photoanode prepared through SPO
The SPO process was carried out for 5000 s under 1-sun illumination by continuously applying 1.75 VRHE to the individual electrolyte. After the SPO process, we first performed phase and microstructural analyses using XPS, X-ray diffraction (XRD), and SEM to observe the surface changes of the BiVO4 film. Fig. 3a shows the deconvoluted XPS spectra of pristine BiVO4, BiVO4:PEC(aq), BiVO4:V5+, BiVO4:SRE, and BiVO4:[V5+SRE], focusing on the vanadium energy range. A considerable linear shift of the V 2p3/2 peak toward a lower binding energy as a function of SPO process time was clearly observed in the BiVO4:[V5+SRE] sample (Fig. 3b). It has been previously reported that the binding energy of the V5+ state is 517.1 eV, while the V4+ oxidation state is located at 516.4 eV. The origin of the interfacial trap in BiVO4 is known to be V5+. The surface-morphology change of BiVO4 with SPO-treatment process time is shown in Fig. S10 (ESI†). As the surface-treatment time increased, the edge-effect region disappeared, oxide grew on the surface, and grain size increased.
 Fig. 3  Characterization and stability of the VO2 protective layer prepared through the SPO process. (a) X-ray photoelectron spectra of V 2p3/2 for the BiVO4 samples with J–t stress treatment for 5000 s in each electrolyte. (b) The change of binding energy of V 2p3/2 peaks of BiVO4 before and after SPO for 500, 1000, 3000, and 5000 s. (c) X-ray diffraction patterns of BiVO4 samples with J–t stress treatment for 5 hours in each electrolyte. Here, FTO is the black square, monoclinic BiVO4 is the yellow triangle, and monoclinic VO2 is the orange circle. (d) ICP-OES analysis of Bi and V concentrations in the electrolyte when BiVO4 was re-measured in potassium borate electrolyte before and after J–t stress for 3600 s in each electrolyte. 
To assess the relative intensity of the different components in the V 2p3/2 spectra, curve fitting was performed; the relative V4+/V5+ area ratios are shown in Fig. S11 and Table S1 (ESI†). The V4+/V5+ ratio of pristine BiVO4 not subjected to any stress was 0.14, with V5+ ions being predominant. In the case of the SPO prepared BiVO4/VO2-PPL, the ratio was considerably larger (7.63), implying the predominance of V4+ bonding (i.e., the formation of the VO2 phase) on the surface. The reduction of V5+, which causes interfacial traps, can lessen unnecessary band pinning by consuming V5+ ions related to the origin of photo-corrosive dissolution. A summary of the calculated XPS surface chemical compositions is given in Table S2 (ESI†). As expected, the photoelectrochemical treatment of the BiVO4 in [V5+SRE](aq) led to thin VO2 layers with high durability; the final structure was BiVO4/VO2-PPL. This layer was confirmed with the HR-TEM (Fig. S12, ESI†), and the compositional line profile was obtained by EDX measurements (Fig. S13, ESI†). As a result, we found that the grown VO2 layer was ultra-thin: approximately 5 nm in thickness.
Rational design of an electrolyte-independent VO2 protection layer
The XPS technique only provides quantitative information about the oxidation state of the sample surface and does not allow changes in vanadium oxidation in the bulk to be evaluated. Thus, SEM (Fig. S14, ESI†) and energy-dispersive X-ray (EDX) measurements were performed to analyze the composition and phase of the bulk region. Compared to BiVO4 treated with other electrolytes, BiVO4 subjected to SPO in [V5+SRE](aq) was clearly coarsened. EDX composition analysis in the bulk (Table S3, ESI†) revealed an increase in V 2p due to the SPO of the surface, along with a slight change in Bi 4f. To verify the formation of the VO2, we intentionally grew a very thick V4+-based oxide layer by extending the SPO treatment time for longer than 5000 s. The XRD results clearly identified a VO2 crystal phase, as shown in Fig. 3c.
To measure the stability of BiVO4 photoelectrodes subjected to J–t treatment in various electrolytes, ICP-OES analysis was performed after re-measurement of the J–t characteristic for 60 min under the same initial PEC conditions (Fig. 3d). Pristine BiVO4 and BiVO4:V5+(sat-aq) after J–t treatment in the V5+(sat-aq) electrolyte exhibited almost the same dissolution behavior, because they underwent almost the same severe photo-corrosion reaction. Interestingly, it was confirmed that SPO in [V5+SRE](aq) showed imperfect protection properties and only delayed the degradation time, without eliminating the photo-corrosion problem. Thus, the BiVO4/VO2 photoelectrochemically treated in [V5+SRE](aq) did not dissolve perfectly, owing to the spontaneous formation of a VO2 protection layer.
(Photo-)electrochemical behavior of BiVO4 photoanodes
The charge transport behavior of BiVO4/VO2 photoanodes, whose stability is guaranteed by the SPO VO2 protection layer (SPO process in [V5+SRE](aq)), was investigated using electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) for kinetic analysis. EIS was conducted at 0.5 VRHE to measure the resistance and capacitance along various interfaces in the multi-layered structure under dark conditions using 10 mV AC signals with frequencies ranging from 1 Hz to 1 MHz. The transport of photo-generated charges was investigated by photoelectrochemical impedance spectroscopy (PEIS) under illuminated conditions, in which the PEC reactions for the carrier injection process occur through the photoelectrode surface/electrolyte junction.
As indicated by the orange dots of Fig. 4a, the EIS curves of the BiVO4/VO2 photoanodes could be fitted to semicircles divided into three regions, as the SPO VO2 protection layer is resistive enough to be distinguished under dark conditions. The series resistance R1 is the resistance at the FTO/BiVO4 interface. Resistance R2 reflects the accumulation and trapping of charges in the bulk of the BiVO4 layer. The R3 component indicates the resistance to charge transport at the new BiVO4/VO2 interface. R4 is the resistance at the SPO VO2 and electrolyte interfaces. For pristine BiVO4 without a VO2 protection layer, constant phase element 1 (CPE1, capacitance) is related to the bulk space-charge capacitance of BiVO4 and is the first semicircle (black dots). The largest semicircle is that of CPE3, which indicates a double layer formed at the photoanode and electrolyte interface. The diameter of the semicircle corresponding to the electrolyte region is larger than that of the bulk BiVO4 region, owing to insufficient charge transfer in the absence of a catalyst and minority photocarriers on the photoanode surface. With no minority carriers for forming the circuit on the BiVO4/VO2 photoanode, CPE2 was created by stacking the VO2, thereby producing a new semicircle and increasing the overall resistance. This proves that charge transport in the dark is restricted because of the intrinsic properties of the VO2 resistor and the sluggish minority carriers. However, the carrier dynamic behavior of the interface between VO2 and electrolyte, characterized by CPE3 and R4, is analogous to that of pristine BiVO4.
 Fig. 4  Charge transport properties of pristine BiVO4 and BiVO4 with VO2-PPL prepared by the SPO process (BiVO4/VO2). The black dots and line denote pristine BiVO4, and the orange dots and line denote the BiVO4/VO2 photoanode. (a) Nyquist plot of the photoanodes at 0.5 VRHE in the dark state. (b) Nyquist plot of the photoanodes at 0.5 VRHE in the illuminated state (100 mW cm−2). (c) Mott–Schottky plot of photoanodes at a frequency of 1000 Hz in the dark state. The donor density (ND) and flat band potential (Vfb) of photoanodes are shown in the inset table. (d) Observed and calculated time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) lifetime-decay spectra of photoanodes (excited at 375 nm). TRPL fitting data with a biexponential functional equation are shown in the inset table. 
Similar to how the contribution of VO2 formation can be understood from the EIS results, the transport properties of photo-generated charges can be analyzed by comparing the PEIS results of the pristine BiVO4 and BiVO4/VO2 photoanodes measured at 0.5 VRHE under 1-sun AM 1.5 G light irradiation, as shown in Fig. 4b. The photo-generated electron–hole pairs (EHPs) significantly reduced the diameters of all three semicircles. Specifically, for the BiVO4/VO2 photoanode, the diameter of the first semicircle (representing the BiVO4 or VO2 region in PEIS) became smaller than the sum of those of the first and second semicircles of the BiVO4 region under dark conditions. Contrary to the EIS data, when BiVO4/VO2 is compared with pristine BiVO4, the last semicircle (representing the slowdown of kinetic charge transport at the electrolyte interface) is much smaller.
In the case of illuminated conditions, the EHPs (probably formed on the BiVO4 surface) suppressed recombination loss by enabling effective charge transport into the photoelectrochemically grown VO2 layer. Therefore, BiVO4/VO2 effectively restricted the presence of leakage current in the dark state and was expressively activated in the illuminated state, increasing the charge-transfer efficiency and contributing to high stability. The circuit diagram in Fig. S15a (ESI†) was constructed with an equivalent-circuit model of the Nyquist plots in Fig. 4a and the Bode phase plots in Fig. S15b (ESI†) for the dark state of BiVO4/VO2 and BiVO4, respectively (Fig. S15c, ESI†). We also conducted Mott–Schottky (M–S) analysis of these samples to investigate additional effects on the electrical conductivity and describe energy-band structures involving the VO2 layer, as shown in Fig. 4c. M–S analysis was conducted at a frequency of 1000 Hz, which is the capacitance region of the photoanode and electrolyte. It was clearly observed that the flat-band potential (Vfb) shifted in the negative direction from 0.241 to 0.148 VRHE by the formation of thin VO2, which is beneficial for the junction with the OER level. Time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) from excitation at 375 nm was analyzed further elucidate the enhanced charge-transfer kinetics in the photoanode. As shown in Fig. 4d, the decay rates of the two samples were initially similar but revealed distinct differences over time. The nonradiative recombination in the surface defects (the short lifetime component, τS) and the free-exciton interband transport (the long lifetime component, τL) were fitted from the TRPL spectra via a biexponential function (inset table of Fig. 4d). The smaller τL value for the BiVO4/VO2 photoanode (2.1 ns) indicates that the interfacial charge transfer of photogenerated carriers through the VO2 protection layer was faster and more efficient. Such efficient charge separation and ultrafast transfer are consistent with the PEIS results, demonstrating the possibility of improving the PEC performance of BiVO4/VO2 photoanodes.
Photoelectrochemical (PEC) performances and charge transport properties of BiVO4/VO2
The PEC measurements of pristine BiVO4 and BiVO4/VO2 photoanodes were carried out with a three-electrode system in 1 M potassium borate solution (PB, pH 9.5) simulated under AM 1.5 G illumination (100 mW cm−2). To use the photoanodes for PEC water splitting in the electrolyte without a hole scavenger, CoFeOx catalysts were used as an OEC material,53 which was deposited on the surface of BiVO4 and BiVO4/VO2 photoanodes by PED (Fig. S16, ESI†). CoFeOx has been recently reported to show higher OER activity and stability than CoOx and FeOx catalysts.54–57 In addition, we used the PED method for catalyst growth to enhance the utilization of the VO2 layer deposited via PED. As shown in the LSV curves of Fig. 5a, the BiVO4 with only a VO2 PPL (orange) showed 1.85 times more Jph than pristine BiVO4 and a relatively small Vph shift of approximately 50 mV, still requiring considerable overvoltage for water splitting. The BiVO4/CoFeOx photoanode without VO2 (red) showed significantly improved Vph characteristics with a 250 mV shift and a Jph almost the same as that of the BiVO4/VO2 photocurrent, which suggests that the overpotential for water splitting can be lowered by the presence of an adequate OEC. The BiVO4/VO2/CoFeOx photoanode showed the highest photocurrent density, reaching 6.2 mA cm−2 at 1.23 VRHE (4.7 times that of pristine BiVO4). It is thus likely that a photoanode simultaneously decorated with VO2 and the OEC can guarantee an extraordinarily high photovoltage and photocurrent.
 Fig. 5  Photoelectrochemical performance and charge-kinetic behavior of photoanodes. (a) LSV in potassium borate electrolyte under AM 1.5 G illumination (100 mW cm−2) with a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. (b) LSV under scavenger conditions (Na2SO3) with 0.1 M Na2SO3 under AM 1.5 G illumination (100 mW cm−2) with a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. (c) Applied bias photon-to-current efficiencies (ABPEs). (d) Calculated charge-transport efficiencies. (e) Charge-transport efficiencies. (f) Incident photon-to-current conversion efficiencies (IPCEs) measured at 1.23 VRHE. (g) Schematic of the growth steps of VO2 photoelectrochemical protection layers and CoFeOx oxygen-evolution catalyst layers. Red × signs: active surface-defect sites; green + signs: inactive surface-defect sites. 
Accordingly, the use of electrolytes containing sacrificial reagents (scavengers) was investigated (Fig. 5b). Na2SO3 could be used as a hole scavenger to evaluate the expected maximum photocurrent density from the prepared photoelectrodes by completely eliminating the effect of surface-recombination loss and providing a fast charge-transport path. Interestingly, the BiVO4/VO2 photoanode had a considerably higher Jph than the BiVO4/CoFeOx photoanode and exhibited almost the same Vph characteristics, contrary to the results obtained in typical water-splitting electrolyte (Fig. 5a). Further, compared to pristine BiVO4, BiVO4/VO2 had a higher Jph; this indicates that the SPO treatment produces better charge separation, consistent with the PEIS, M–S, and TRPL results. The OEC formed by PED showed the characteristic that was maximally activated in the presence of a VO2 overlayer. The VO2 protection layer formed by SPO treatment induced the activation of the inactive photoactive sites; when the PED OEC was subsequently grown, the catalyst and the photoelectrode were electrically connected, and the photoactive sites could be fully activated; thus, a synergetic effect could be expected. To attain clear evidence of this effect, the charge-transport efficiency ηtransport and charge-transfer efficiency ηtransfer were calculated (Fig. 5d and e, respectively), using the LSV curves in Fig. 5a and b, as follows:ηtransport = Jscavenger/Jabs,ηtransfer = JH2O/Jscavenger,where JH2O is the photocurrent density of all photoanodes in 1.0 M PB, and Jscavenger is the photocurrent density of all photoanodes in 1.0 M PB containing 0.1 M Na2SO3. The BiVO4/VO2/CoFeOx photoanode exhibited higher ηtransport and ηtransfer values than pristine BiVO4. As shown in Fig. 5g, where each role is subdivided, the deposition of the VO2 protection layer healed unfavorable recombination caused by various defects on the BiVO4 surface during SPO growth while simultaneously promoting charge transport. In Fig. 5d, the charge-transport efficiencies were estimated to be 79% and 86% for BiVO4/VO2 and BiVO4/VO2/CoFeOx, respectively, in the presence of a VO2 overlayer. The CoFeOx catalysts significantly reduced the overvoltage for oxygen-gas evolution and quickly consumed the holes for the prompt OER. The charge transfer efficiency measurements show the contribution of the CoFeOx OEC (Fig. 5e). Without the CoFeOx OEC, there was no significant difference between the pristine BiVO4 (black line) and BiVO4/VO2 (orange line) photoanodes. However, the BiVO4/CoFeOx (red line) and BiVO4/VO2/CoFeOx (green line) photoanodes containing the OEC showed significant differences in charge-transfer efficiency. In particular, the charge-transfer efficiency of the BiOV4/VO2/CoFeOx photoanodes was close to the ideal value (∼95%). This improvement in charge-transfer efficiency is likely closely related to the contribution of VO2. These results indicate that when SPO-VO2 is directly exposed to the electrolyte without an OER catalyst, there are no significant catalytic properties for oxygen evolution. Nevertheless, when the same PED-CoFeOx catalysts were grown on the photoanode, BiVO4/SPO-VO2 provided a surface that, compared to pristine BiVO4, yielded high-performance PED-CoFeOx catalysts. In conclusion, the produced SPO-VO2 layers serve as a protective layer to stabilize the unstable surface of pristine BiVO4 and also provide an underlying layer suitable for CoFeOx catalyst growth, thus enhancing the charge-transfer efficiency (Fig. 5g). These results indicate that the synergetic effect of the dual PED comprising VO2 and CoFeOx can promote both bulk charge transport and surface charge transfer without interference. Fig. 5c shows the applied bias photon-to-current efficiencies (ABPEs) of all photoanodes calculated from the LSV curves in Fig. 5a. The maximum value for the BiVO4/VO2/CoFeOx photoelectrode reached 2.4% at 0.62 VRHE, approximately nine times that of the BiVO4 electrode (0.26% at 0.89 VRHE). The difference in the water splitting performance was also confirmed by the incident-photon-to-current conversion efficiencies (IPCEs) (Fig. 5f). The maximum IPCEs of BiVO4/VO2/CoFeOx and pristine BiVO4 at 450 nm were 77 and 26%, respectively, and the integrated photocurrent densities closely matched the J–V results shown in Fig. 5a.
Dynamic open-circuit photovoltage analysis and stability of photoanodes
To investigate the photocurrent improvement of BiVO4/VO2/CoFeOx under illumination, open-circuit potential (OCP) and photovoltage measurements were performed on the sample before and after turning off the light (Fig. 6a) (OCP is defined as the difference in the Fermi levels between the BiVO4 photoanode and the counter electrodes). The BiVO4/VO2/CoFeOx electrode in the dark state assumed the highest positive potential (OCP) at 0.93 VRHE, owing to the absence of minority carriers and the additional resistance of the stacked overlayers. These results are consistent with the J–V results analyzed in the dark state (Fig. S17, ESI†) and the EIS data shown in Fig. 4a. The increased dark OCP of BiVO4/VO2/CoFeOx was due to the characteristics of VO2, which formed an additional semicircle in the EIS analysis as an insulating property in the dark state.
 Fig. 6  Dynamic photovoltage and photostability analysis of photoanodes. (a) Open-circuit potential (OCP) of photoanodes in the dark and illuminated states in potassium borate (PB) electrolyte. (b) OCP decay of photoanodes in the illuminated state. (c) Comparison of the OCP of photoanodes with and without the scavenger (0.1 M Na2SO3). The data under the scavenger conditions are indicated by round blue marks. (d) CA plot for photostability of BiVO4/VO2/CoFeOx photoanodes for 100 h in PB electrolyte at 1.23 VRHE under chopped illumination. (e) Gas-chromatography results for the BiVO4/VO2/CoFeOx photoanode showing hydrogen (blue squares and dashed line) and oxygen (red dots and dashed line) gas evolution in PB electrolyte. The solid lines mean theoretical gas evolution. 
Among the photogenerated EHPs, the charge-separated holes were readily transported into the electrolyte and combined with the hydroxyl species to produce oxygen gas. The resultant electron accumulation shifted the Fermi level to a more negative potential, thereby increasing the photovoltage under illumination. When the electron accumulation reached its maximum level, a steady-state photovoltage due to the competition with charge recombination was observed. The photovoltage and its decay behavior under illumination conditions are illustrated in Fig. 6a and b. With light irradiation, the photovoltage for all the samples was shifted to more negative potentials, indicating the formation of photogenerated electrons and accumulation of photogenerated holes at the surface; when enough of the latter accumulated, they could combine with hydroxyl ions in the electrolyte or recombine with electrons.
The pristine BiVO4 and BiVO4/VO2 samples without the catalyst had OCPs of 0.52 and 0.48 VRHE, respectively, and thus required a relatively high overpotential for water splitting. The BiVO4/CoFeOx and BiVO4/VO2/CoFeOx photoanodes with catalysts show OCPs under illumination more favorable for water splitting: 0.27 and 0.26 VRHE, respectively. The time dependency of the absolute OCP value was strongly dependent on with the carrier lifetime. As can be seen from Fig. 6b (which shows the decay lifetime of the photovoltage formed on the photoelectrode surface), the BiVO4/VO2/CoFeOx photoanode largely maintained the initial photovoltage with little or no decay. Thus, surprisingly, the predicted negative effects, including photo-corrosion, low charge transfer, and interfacial trapping, can be minimized by the proposed SPO process in the [V5+SRE](aq). A deeper knowledge of this mechanism will further the understanding of the photoelectrochemical contribution of the proposed method to overall PEC performance.

Fig. 6c shows the measured absolute value of photovoltage under irradiation in the electrolyte (PB with and without Na2SO3 as a hole scavenger). The photovoltage values can be improved by artificially adding Na2SO3 to the electrolyte because of the efficient scavenging of holes on the photoanode, ideally reaching the maximum photovoltage. The three types of data points marked in Fig. 6c are the results obtained in the dark state (triangles) and in the illuminated state with (round dots) and without (square dots) a scavenger. Here, the y-axis represents the OCP value, and the OCP difference between dark and illumination is indicated as a photovoltage. The blue values represent the potential gap (Vgap) between the actual OCP and the ideal maximum OCP of the photoanode. Vgap is the limit for the photoanodes that does not indicate maximum performance because of defects at the surface and interface. Pristine BiVO4 under illumination had a photovoltage of Δ0.26 V and an absolute photovoltage of Δ0.48 V (black line and dot, respectively). The BiVO4/VO2/CoFeOx photoanode demonstrated an excellent photovoltage of Δ0.70 V (black arrow); this additional improvement of the photovoltage was due to SPO in [V5+SRE](aq) inducing a stable photoelectrode surface and defect healing. With the scavenger, the Vgap between the real and ideal maximum OCPs showed extraordinary improvement in BiVO4/VO2/CoFeOx, where Vgap was extremely low (Δ0.04 V); by contrast, pristine BiVO4 had a large Vgap (Δ0.22 V), indicating considerable deviation from the optimal properties.
By injecting photocharges into trap sites that hinder charge transfer, the SPO treatment of the BiVO4 electrode could semi-permanently overcome the limitation of photovoltage in the open-circuit state. Furthermore, the rate of hydrogen-evolution (1.8 μmol min−1) was measured in the half-cell system using the BiVO4/VO2/CoFeOx photoanode and a Pt counter electrode with extremely reliable stability for 100 h at 1.23 VRHE, as shown in Fig. 6d and e, where the ratio of the HER to the OER (2:1) was consistently maintained at 2:1. Compared to the reported BiVO4 based photoanodes with similar structures containing the protection layer and a catalyst (Table S4, ESI†), BiVO4 prepared by SPO in [V5+SRE](aq) showed impressive PEC performance, yielding an anodic photocurrent density of 6.2 mA cm−2 at 1.23 VRHE, an onset potential of 0.25 VRHE, and an ABPE of 2.4% at 0.58 VRHE, while guaranteeing long-term stability. The SPO process proposed for the photoelectrochemical growth of a uniform VO2 protection layer and the effective catalysts enable us to suppress the photo-corrosion of BiVO4 and enhance the photovoltage and photocurrent synergetically.
Experimental
Synthesis of the BiVO4 photoanode
The fluoride-doped tin oxide (FTO) substrates (10 Ω−1, 2.0 × 1.0 cm2) were cleaned by ultrasonic treatment in acetone, ethanol, and deionized water. BiVO4 thin films were prepared by the sol–gel technique based on the solution method. First, 50 × 10−3 M Bi(NO3)3·5H2O was dissolved in 20 mL of aqueous acetic acid. The solution was stirred at 300 rpm for 1 h. 46.5 × 10−3 M VO(acac)2 was then added to the solution, which was stirred at 300 rpm for 15 min. The final mixture was prepared by adding 0.2 g of ethyl cellulose as an organic binder. The as-prepared mixture was spin coated at 3000 rpm for 40 s onto the FTO substrates (10 Ω sq−1) with a spin coater (WS-650Mz, Laurell Technologies). The spin-coated FTO substrate was soft baked at 550 °C for 30 min on a hot plate in air for pre-crystallization and then dried for 30 min. To obtain a photo-absorber with appropriate thickness and crystallinity, controlled annealing experiments were conducted at 450, 500, 550, and 580 °C; the optimal annealing temperature was found to be 550 °C. The above coating and annealing processes were repeated four times. Finally, the BiVO4 film was hard-baked at 550 °C in a box furnace in air for 2 h with a heating rate of 2 °C min−1.
Vanadyl-assisted photoelectrochemical oxidation and spontaneous deposition of the VO2 layer
The novel VO2 passivation layers of the BiVO4 photoanodes were photo-electrochemically prepared from a solution of 0.1 M V2O5 and hydrogen peroxide with potassium borate (PB) electrolyte buffered to pH 9.5 under illuminated conditions (100 mW cm−2). Photoelectrodeposition was carried out at a potential of 1.75 VRHE with a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. The deposition potential in cyclic voltammetry was 1.75 VRHE.
Photoelectrochemical deposition for CoFeOx oxygen-evolution catalysts
The method of loading CoFeOx as an oxygen-evolution catalyst (OEC) was adapted with a similar approach to the coating of the passivation layer. The photoelectrochemical solution was composed of 10 × 10−3 M FeCl3·6H2O, 16 × 10−3 M CoCl2·5H2O, and 0.1 M NaOAc dissolved in DI water. The as-prepared solution was coated on pristine BiVO4 and BiVO4/VO2 films by the consecutive sweeping of positive voltage from 1.7 to 2.0 VRHE to form the CoFeOx catalyst layer. The electrodeposition-potential region was selected after observing the chemical reaction via cyclic voltammetry. Repeated sweeps of 30 cycles were found to be optimal.
Materials characterization
The crystalline structure and morphology of the photoanodes were characterized using X-ray diffraction (XRD; D8 Advance, Brucker) with a Cu Kα radiation source (λ = 1.5418 Å) and X-ray photoemission spectroscopy (XPS; NEXSA, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with an X-ray spot size of 400 μm. Field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM; JSM-6700F, JEOL) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM; JEM-2100F, JEOL) with an accelerating voltage of 200 keV were utilized for image observation. The quantities of Bi3+ and V5+ ions existing in the electrolyte solutions after photoelectrochemical characterization were measured using inductively-coupled-plasma optical-emission spectrometry (ICP-OES; AVIO 550Max, PerkinElmer). After PEC measurements, 1 mL of nitric acid was added into the solutions, and the filtered solutions were quantitatively analyzed after pretreatment at 200 °C for 16 hours in a graphite block. Quantitative elemental analysis of the photoanode was also carried out by energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS; JEM-2100F, JEOL) with an accelerating voltage of 200 keV. The optical characteristics of the photoanode were investigated using a UV-VIS-NIR spectrophotometer (Cary5000, Agilent) with an integrating sphere from 300 to 800 nm. The time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL; MicroTime-200, Picoquant) measurement was performed using an inverted-type scanning confocal microscope with a 375 nm laser and 40× objective.
Photoelectrochemical measurements
In general, photoelectrochemical measurements were performed with a 1.5 G filtered light source using a solar simulator (HAL-320, Asahi Spectra) and VersaSTAT 3 system (AMETEK). A typical three-electrode configuration was used, with the photoanode as the working electrode, an Ag/AgCl reference electrode (referenced to saturated 4 M KCl), and a Pt counter electrode. The electrolyte was a 1.0 M borate buffer solution, which was prepared by adjusting the H3BO3 solution to pH 9.5 with KOH solution. For sulfite oxidation conditions, an additional 0.1 M Na2SO3 was added to this buffer solution. Linear-sweep voltammetry (LSV) and cyclic voltammetry (CV) scans were performed along the positive direction with a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 in the dark and illuminated states. The long-term stability of PEC operation was investigated by chronoamperometry at a constant applied potential of 1.23 VRHE. Electrochemical-impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was performed from 10−3 to 106 Hz with an amplitude of 10 mV, recorded at a bias of 0.5 VRHE in the dark and illuminated states. Mott–Schottky plots were obtained from 0 to 1.23 VRHE with a frequency of 103 Hz. During the investigation of the PEC performances, all the potentials (versus Ag/AgCl) were converted to the RHE conditions using the Nernst equation:ERHE = EAg/AgCl + 0.1976 + (0.0591 × pH) at 25 °C.
In the Mott–Schottky measurement, the photoanode donor density (ND) was calculated as follows:  when ε is the relative permittivity (68 for BiVO4), ε0 is the vacuum permittivity (8.85 × 10−12 F m−1), and e is the electronic charge (1.602 × 10−19 C). The applied bias photon-to-current efficiency (ABPE) was calculated from the J–V curve usingABPE = [(1.23 − Vapp) (V) × Jph (mA cm−2)/Plight (mW cm−2)] × 100%,where Jph is the photocurrent density obtained under an applied bias Vapp, and Plight is the power density of the illumination. The incident-photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE; SolarLab XM, AMETEK Solartron) was characterized with a light-emitting diode with a wavelength of 490 nm as follows:IPCE = [(1240/λ) × (Jligth − Jdark)/Pλ] × 100%.
H2 and O2 gas detection was performed by applying 1.23 VRHE using a three-electrode set-up in an H-type quartz electrolytic cell after Ar purging for 30 min. The illumination area of the electrode was 0.5 cm2. The evolved gases were monitored by gas chromatography (8890 GC System, Agilent, 9 ft × 1/8 in × 2 mm Molsieve 5A 80/100 UM columns, and 6 ft × 1/8 in × 2 mm Porapak Q 80/100 SS columns). The faradaic efficiency was given by:Faradaic efficiency = [A × n (mol) × F (C mol−1)/charge passed through WE (C)] × 100%,where A is the number of electrons (4 for O2 gas) required to generate H2 or O2 gas, n is moles of measured H2 or O2, and F is the Faraday constant (96485 C mol−1).
Conclusions
It was found that the photo-corrosion of BiVO4 occurs due to the dissolution of V5+ ions via the fast oxidation kinetics of holes formed through light absorption. Further, V5+ ion-based compounds are electrochemically unstable and readily dissolve in electrolytes, whereas V4+-based oxides are chemically stable materials. Therefore, as a novel photoanode structure with a high PEC performance and high durability, BiVO4/VO2/CoFeOx photoanodes were developed to mitigate the formation of intrinsic surface defects and the photo-corrosion caused by V5+ dissolution in the [V5+SRE](aq) electrolyte. The surface photoelectrochemical oxidation (SPO) approach using the spontaneous-charge valence change was employed using V5+ and H2O2 additives in the electrolytes, which inactivated the surface defects and remarkably suppressed photo-corrosion. The vanadium compounds exposed on the BiVO4 surface were used as a seed layer for the stable growth of the protective layer via the spontaneous oxidation of the transition ion, resulting in the formation of a permanent and sustainable VO2 protective layer. Finally, we prepared CoFeOx oxygen evolution catalysts by PED in a similar process to the growth of the VO2 protective layer. This maximized the number of improved active sites without hole scavengers. The BiVO4/VO2/CoFeOx photoanodes exhibited the highest PEC performance, along with a high stability and high durability through electrical connection with the OEC. An analysis of the time dependence of the absolute OCP as a function of the carrier lifetime showed that the BiVO4/VO2/CoFeOx photoanode considerably maintained the initial photovoltage with little or no decay. Thus, the intrinsic photo-corrosion, low charge transfer, and interfacial charge traps of BiVO4 could be well-suppressed by the proposed SPO in [V5+SRE](aq).
Author contributions
D. S. K.: conceptualization and design, investigation, and manuscript writing and revision. K. W. L.: conceptualization, conduction of experiments, data processing, and analysis, investigation, and writing. J. H. C.: investigation. H. H. L.: investigation and design. H. W. S.: investigation and discussion. H. S. L.: TEM analysis, data processing, and investigation. H. K. C.: corresponding author, supervision, and manuscript writing and revision. All authors commented on the manuscript.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This research was financially supported by the Basic Science Research Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Education (No. 2021R1A2C3011870 and 2019R1A6A1A03033215).
Notes and references
W. Yang, R. R. Prabhakar, J. Tan, S. D. Tilley and J. Moon, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 4979–5015 RSC .
B. A. Pinaud, J. D. Benck, L. C. Seitz, A. J. Forman, Z. Chen, T. G. Deutsch, B. D. James, K. N. Baum, G. N. Baum, S. Ardo, H. Wang, E. Miller and T. F. Jaramillo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1983–2002 RSC .
A. A. Basheer and I. Ali, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 11564–11573 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tayebi and B. K. Lee, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2019, 111, 332–343 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, W. Yang, W. Niu, P. Adams, S. Siol, Z. Wang and S. D. Tilley, ChemSusChem, 2021, 14, 3967–3974 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Grätzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 338–344 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Paracchino, V. Laporte, K. Sivula, M. Grätzel and E. Thimsen, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 456–461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Kim and J. S. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1–35 Search PubMed .
R. R. Prabhakar, T. Moehl, D. Friedrich, M. Kunst, S. Shukla, D. Adeleye, V. H. Damle, S. Siol, W. Cui, L. Gouda, J. Suh, Y. R. Tischler, R. van de Krol and S. D. Tilley, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 2112184 CrossRef CAS .
I. Roger, M. A. Shipman and M. D. Symes, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2017, 1, 3 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, J. Zhang, M. S. Balogun, Y. Tong and Y. Huang, Mater. Today Sustain., 2022, 18, 100118 CrossRef .
D. Chen, Z. Liu and S. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 265, 118580 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Tamirat, J. Rick, A. A. Dubale, W. N. Su and B. J. Hwang, Nanoscale Horiz., 2016, 1, 243–267 RSC .
K. J. McDonald and K. S. Choi, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 4863–4869 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, C. Li and P. Diao, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 308, 195–205 CrossRef CAS .
W. Guo, W. D. Chemelewski, O. Mabayoje, P. Xiao, Y. Zhang and C. B. Mullins, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 27220–27227 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cao, X. Yan, Z. Kang, Q. Liang, X. Liao and Y. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2016, 24, 25–31 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Kim, Y. Jo, J. H. Kim, J. W. Jang, H. J. Kang, Y. H. Lee, D. S. Kim, Y. Jun and J. S. Lee, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 11820–11829 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Talasila, S. Sachdev, U. Srivastva, D. Saxena and S. S. V. Ramakumar, Energy Rep., 2020, 6, 1963–1972 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, D. Chen, J. Zhang, M. S. Balogun, P. Wang, Y. Tong and Y. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 32, 1–9 Search PubMed .
H. S. Han, S. Shin, D. H. Kim, I. J. Park, J. S. Kim, P. S. Huang, J. K. Lee, I. S. Cho and X. Zheng, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1299–1306 RSC .
D. Li, Y. Liu, W. Shi, C. Shao, S. Wang, C. Ding, T. Liu, F. Fan, J. Shi and C. Li, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 825–831 CrossRef CAS .
K. H. Ye, H. Li, D. Huang, S. Xiao, W. Qiu, M. Li, Y. Hu, W. Mai, H. Ji and S. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1–9 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, J. Wan, Y. Ma, Y. Wang and X. Li, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 404, 127054 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Kim, Y. B. Kim, J. H. Choi, H. W. Suh, H. H. Lee, K. W. Lee, S. H. Jung, J. J. Kim, N. G. Deshpande and H. K. Cho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 1–11 Search PubMed .
M. T. Mayer, Curr. Opin. Electrochem., 2017, 2, 104–110 CrossRef CAS .
T. Tran-Phu, Z. Fusco, I. Di Bernardo, J. Lipton-Duffin, C. Y. Toe, R. Daiyan, T. Gengenbach, C. H. Lin, R. Bo, H. T. Nguyen, G. M. J. Barca, T. Wu, H. Chen, R. Amal and A. Tricoli, Chem. Mater., 2021, 33, 3553–3565 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Bard, A. B. Bocarsly, F. F. Fan, E. G. Walton and M. S. Wrighton, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1980, 3671–3677 CrossRef CAS .
M. Dare-Edwards, J. Goodenough, A. Hamnett and P. Trevelick, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 1, 1983, 79, 2027–2041 RSC .
G. F. Samu and C. Janáky, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 21595–21614 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Beetz, S. Häringer, P. Elsässer, J. Kampmann, L. Sauerland, F. Wolf, M. Günther, A. Fischer and T. Bein, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 1–8 CrossRef .
H. Chen, J. Li, W. Yang, S. E. Balaghi, C. A. Triana, C. K. Mavrokefalos and G. R. Patzke, ACS Catal., 2021, 11, 7637–7646 CrossRef CAS .
E. Usman, M. Barzgar Vishlaghi, A. Kahraman, N. Solati and S. Kaya, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 60602–60611 CrossRef CAS .
K. R. Tolod, T. Saboo, S. Hernández, H. Guzmán, M. Castellino, R. Irani, P. Bogdanoff, F. F. Abdi, E. A. Quadrelli and N. Russo, Appl. Catal., A, 2020, 605, 117796 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kafizas, X. Xing, S. Selim, C. A. Mesa, Y. Ma, C. Burgess, M. A. McLachlan and J. R. Durrant, Catal. Today, 2019, 321–322, 59–66 CrossRef CAS .
K. Fuku, Y. Miyase, Y. Miseki, T. Gunji and K. Sayama, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 47619–47623 RSC .
C. Zachäus, F. F. Abdi, L. M. Peter and R. Van De Krol, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 3712–3719 RSC .
D. K. Lee and K. S. Choi, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 53–60 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yao, X. Zhao, J. Hu, H. Xie, D. Wang, X. Cao, Z. Zhang, Y. Huang, Z. Chen and T. Sritharan, iScience, 2019, 19, 976–985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, M. Rohloff, O. Kasian, A. M. Mingers, K. J. J. Mayrhofer, A. Fischer, C. Scheu and S. Cherevko, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 23410–23418 CrossRef CAS .
F. M. Toma, J. K. Cooper, V. Kunzelmann, M. T. McDowell, J. Yu, D. M. Larson, N. J. Borys, C. Abelyan, J. W. Beeman, K. M. Yu, J. Yang, L. Chen, M. R. Shaner, J. Spurgeon, F. A. Houle, K. A. Persson and I. D. Sharp, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 1–11 Search PubMed .
M. Lee, X. Ding, S. Banerjee, F. Krause, V. Smirnov, O. Astakhov, T. Merdzhanova, B. Klingebiel, T. Kirchartz, F. Finger, U. Rau and S. Haas, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2020, 200592 Search PubMed .
N. Bahlawane and D. Lenoble, Chem. Vap. Deposition, 2014, 20, 299–311 CrossRef CAS .
I. N. Reddy, A. Sreedhar, J. Shim and J. S. Gwag, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2019, 835, 40–47 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Z. Zhang, Y. Zhu, Z. Li, R. Vajtai, L. Ci and P. M. Ajayan, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 1492–1496 CrossRef CAS .
A. Holsteen, I. S. Kim and L. J. Lauhon, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1898–1902 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. J. Trześniewski and W. A. Smith, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 2919–2926 RSC .
O. Monfort and P. Petrisková, Processes, 2021, 9, 1–57 RSC .
B. J. Trześniewski, I. A. Digdaya, T. Nagaki, S. Ravishankar, I. Herraiz-Cardona, D. A. Vermaas, A. Longo, S. Gimenez and W. A. Smith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1517–1529 RSC .
E. Y. Liu, J. E. Thorne, Y. He and D. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 22083–22087 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Hu, Y. Li, X. Wei, L. Wang, H. She, J. Huang and Q. Wang, Adv. Powder Mater., 2022, 1, 100024 CrossRef .
Y. L. Kawamura, T. Sakka and Y. H. Ogata, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152, C701 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, R. García-Rodríguez, P. Cameron and S. Eslava, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2972–2984 RSC .
C. G. Morales-Guio, L. Liardet and X. Hu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 8946–8957 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Burke, M. G. Kast, L. Trotochaud, A. M. Smith and S. W. Boettcher, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 3638–3648 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lu, K. hang Ye, S. Zhang, J. Zhang, J. Yang, Y. Huang and H. Ji, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 428, 131027 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, Y. Huang, X. Lu, J. Yang and Y. Tong, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 8306–8314 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See https://doi.org/10.1039/d2ta05260a‡ The authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  Schematic of pristine BiVO4 photoanodes in operating for photoelectrochemical water oxidation. (a) Factors limiting the performance of pristine BiVO4. (b) Conventional protection methods that partly overcome the intrinsic limitations of the unstable surface state. (c) Proposed method and its advantages.	 

 	Fig. 1  Photo-corrosion of pristine BiVO4 photoanodes. (a and b) Scanning electron micrographs of BiVO4 photoanodes before and after J–t stress for 100 min at 1.23 VRHE, respectively. Orange circles indicate photo-corrosion. (c) Linear-sweep voltammetry (black line) and chronoamperometry (orange line) at 1.23 VRHE in potassium borate electrolyte under AM 1.5 G illumination (100 mW cm−2), with a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. (d) ICP-OES analysis of the concentration of Bi and V in BiVO4 before and after J–t stress for 50 and 100 min. (e) Schematic of the photo-corrosion mechanism.	 
BiVO4 + hν → h+ + e− (irradiation).	(1)
BiVO4 + 4h+ + 2H2O → 4O2 + 4H+ (oxygen-evolution reaction).	(2)
BiVO4 + h+ → V2O5 + Bi2O3–5 (photo-corrosion),	(3)
V2O5 → V5+aq (dissolution).	(4)
V5+(in BiVO4 surface) + H2O2 → V4+ + H+ + HOO (spontaneous reaction)	(5)
V5++ H2O2 → VOOH4+ + H+	(5-1)
VOOH4+ + H+ → V4+ + ˙HO2 + H+	(5-2)

 	Fig. 2  Formation of the VO2 photoelectrochemical protection layer on BiVO4. Different electrolytes are used: PEC(aq) (orange line), V5+(aq) (green line), SRE(aq) (sky-blue line), and [V5+SRE](aq) (red line). (a) LSV of pristine BiVO4 photoanodes in the four electrolytes from 0 to 2.75 VRHE under AM 1.5 G illumination (100 mW cm−2) with a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. (b) CA of pristine BiVO4 photoanodes in the four electrolytes at 1.75 VRHE under 1.5 G illumination. (c) Band diagram showing the individual potentials of various chemical reactions within the BiVO4 bandgap.	 
BiVO4 + hν → h+ + e− (irradiation)	(6)
V5+ (in BiVO4 surface) + H2O2 → V4+ + H+ + HOO (spontaneous reaction)	(7)
V5+ + H2O2 → VOOH4+ + H+	(7-1)
VOOH4+ + H+ → V4+ + ˙HO2 + H+	(7-2)
BiVO4 + H2O2 + 2h+ → O2 + 2H+ (0.68 VRHE, primary oxidation)	(8)
BiVO4 + H2O2 + h+ → ˙O2− + 2H+ (1.72 VRHE, secondary oxidation)	(9)
BiVO4 + H2O2 + 2h+ → O2 + 2H+ (0.68 VRHE, primary oxidation)	(10)
BiVO4 + H2O2 + h+ → ˙O2− + 2H+ (1.72 VRHE, secondary oxidation)	(11)
V5+ (in BiVO4 surface) + H2O2 → V4+ + H+ + HOO (spontaneous reaction, surface treatment)	(12)
V5+ (in solution) + H2O2 → V4+ + H+ + HOO (spontaneous reaction)	(13)
V4+ (in solution) + OH− + h+ → VO2+ + H+ (1.23 VRHE)	(14)
VO2+ + H2O2 + h+ → VO2 + OH− + H+ (1.51 VRHE, electrodeposition of the protective layer)	(15)

 	Fig. 3  Characterization and stability of the VO2 protective layer prepared through the SPO process. (a) X-ray photoelectron spectra of V 2p3/2 for the BiVO4 samples with J–t stress treatment for 5000 s in each electrolyte. (b) The change of binding energy of V 2p3/2 peaks of BiVO4 before and after SPO for 500, 1000, 3000, and 5000 s. (c) X-ray diffraction patterns of BiVO4 samples with J–t stress treatment for 5 hours in each electrolyte. Here, FTO is the black square, monoclinic BiVO4 is the yellow triangle, and monoclinic VO2 is the orange circle. (d) ICP-OES analysis of Bi and V concentrations in the electrolyte when BiVO4 was re-measured in potassium borate electrolyte before and after J–t stress for 3600 s in each electrolyte.	 

 	Fig. 4  Charge transport properties of pristine BiVO4 and BiVO4 with VO2-PPL prepared by the SPO process (BiVO4/VO2). The black dots and line denote pristine BiVO4, and the orange dots and line denote the BiVO4/VO2 photoanode. (a) Nyquist plot of the photoanodes at 0.5 VRHE in the dark state. (b) Nyquist plot of the photoanodes at 0.5 VRHE in the illuminated state (100 mW cm−2). (c) Mott–Schottky plot of photoanodes at a frequency of 1000 Hz in the dark state. The donor density (ND) and flat band potential (Vfb) of photoanodes are shown in the inset table. (d) Observed and calculated time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) lifetime-decay spectra of photoanodes (excited at 375 nm). TRPL fitting data with a biexponential functional equation are shown in the inset table.	 

 	Fig. 5  Photoelectrochemical performance and charge-kinetic behavior of photoanodes. (a) LSV in potassium borate electrolyte under AM 1.5 G illumination (100 mW cm−2) with a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. (b) LSV under scavenger conditions (Na2SO3) with 0.1 M Na2SO3 under AM 1.5 G illumination (100 mW cm−2) with a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. (c) Applied bias photon-to-current efficiencies (ABPEs). (d) Calculated charge-transport efficiencies. (e) Charge-transport efficiencies. (f) Incident photon-to-current conversion efficiencies (IPCEs) measured at 1.23 VRHE. (g) Schematic of the growth steps of VO2 photoelectrochemical protection layers and CoFeOx oxygen-evolution catalyst layers. Red × signs: active surface-defect sites; green + signs: inactive surface-defect sites.	 
ηtransport = Jscavenger/Jabs,
ηtransfer = JH2O/Jscavenger,

 	Fig. 6  Dynamic photovoltage and photostability analysis of photoanodes. (a) Open-circuit potential (OCP) of photoanodes in the dark and illuminated states in potassium borate (PB) electrolyte. (b) OCP decay of photoanodes in the illuminated state. (c) Comparison of the OCP of photoanodes with and without the scavenger (0.1 M Na2SO3). The data under the scavenger conditions are indicated by round blue marks. (d) CA plot for photostability of BiVO4/VO2/CoFeOx photoanodes for 100 h in PB electrolyte at 1.23 VRHE under chopped illumination. (e) Gas-chromatography results for the BiVO4/VO2/CoFeOx photoanode showing hydrogen (blue squares and dashed line) and oxygen (red dots and dashed line) gas evolution in PB electrolyte. The solid lines mean theoretical gas evolution.	 
ERHE = EAg/AgCl + 0.1976 + (0.0591 × pH) at 25 °C.

 		 
ABPE = [(1.23 − Vapp) (V) × Jph (mA cm−2)/Plight (mW cm−2)] × 100%,
IPCE = [(1240/λ) × (Jligth − Jdark)/Pλ] × 100%.
Faradaic efficiency = [A × n (mol) × F (C mol−1)/charge passed through WE (C)] × 100%,
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See https://doi.org/10.1039/d2ta05260a
‡ The authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
