A high performance quasi-solid-state self-powered UV photodetector based on TiO 2 nanorod arrays   - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4NR01665C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4NR01665C
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 9116-9121A high performance quasi-solid-state self-powered UV photodetector based on TiO2 nanorod arrays†

        
          
            Yanru 
            Xie
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Lin 
            Wei
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Qinghao 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yanxue 
            Chen
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Hong 
            Liu
          
        
      *c, 
      
        
          
            Shishen 
            Yan
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jun 
            Jiao
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Guolei 
            Liu
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Liangmo 
            Mei
          
        
      a
aSchool of Physics, Shandong University, Jinan, 250100, P. R. China. E-mail: cyx@sdu.edu.cn
bSchool of Information Science and Engineering, Shandong University, Jinan, 250100, P. R. China
cState Key Laboratory of Crystal Materials and Institute of Crystal Materials, Shandong University, Jinan, 250100, P. R. China. E-mail: hongliu@sdu.edu.cn
dDepartment of Mechanical & Materials Engineering, Department of Physics, Portland State University, Post Office Box 751, Portland, Oregon 97207-0751, USA
Received 
      27th March 2014
    , Accepted 9th June 2014First published on 30th June 2014AbstractSelf-powered UV photodetectors based on TiO2 and ZnO nanorod arrays have attracted lots of attention in recent years due to their various advantages. Impressive performances were observed in photochemical cell based UV detectors. However, liquid electrolytes are not ideal for long-term operation and are inconvenient for practical applications. Hence there is an urgent demand for replacing liquid electrolytes with solid-state hole transfer materials. Herein we report a nanostructured quasi-solid-state UV photodetector fabricated using a liquid crystal (LC)-embedded electrolyte with a light-trapping scheme. Vertical rutile TiO2 nanorod arrays grown on fluorine-doped tin oxide conductive glass were used as the active photoanode. A high incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency of 29% at 383 nm and a quick response time of less than 0.03 s were observed. In addition, it was revealed that the quasi-solid-state UV photodetector showed visible-blind, high responsivity, fast time response and good photosensitivity linearity in a wide light intensity range. The LC-embedded electrolyte with a light-trapping scheme enhanced the light absorption and thus improved the photodetecting performance. This self-powered device is a promising candidate for application in high-sensitivity and high-speed UV light photodetectors.
Introduction
Ultraviolet (UV) photodetectors with fast response, good selectivity, high responsivity, and large signal-to-noise ratio are highly required for a variety of industrial and scientific applications, including secure space-to-space communications, chemical sensing, environmental monitoring and optoelectronic circuits.1–5 Compared with photodetectors based on p–n junctions,6,7 p–i–n photodiodes,8 Schottky barrier (SB)9,10 and metal–semiconductor–metal (MSM) structures,11 photodetectors based on photoelectrochemical cells (PECs)12 are more promising due to their low-cost, facile fabrication process and fast time response. Using this simple and effective PEC structure, lithography, lift-off and expensive microfabrication techniques are avoided. In addition, PEC-based photodetectors work in “self-powered” mode, which do not require batteries as an external power source, making this kind of detector suitable for large-area two-dimensional arrays that contain huge amounts of small UV sensors. In the past few years, PEC photodetectors based on nanostructured TiO2, such as nanocrystalline TiO2 films, multilayer TiO2 nanorod-assembled cloth/nanorod arrays or TiO2/SnO2 branched heterojunction nanostructures, have attracted lots of attention due to their excellent physical and chemical properties.13–16 Impressive performances were observed in these UV detectors, demonstrating their potential in nanoscale photoelectrical devices. Usually PEC-based photodetectors use a liquid I−/I3− redox couple electrolyte due to its excellent performance in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs).17 Charge separation takes place at the semiconductor and electrolyte interface due to differing kinetics of electron and hole transfer to the electrolyte.18 Under light illumination, photocurrent can be continuously regenerated owing to the I−/I3− redox couples. However, despite its excellent performance in both DSSCs and photodetectors, the liquid I−/I3− redox couple electrolyte is highly corrosive, volatile, photoreactive and interacting with common metallic components and sealing materials. Consequently, the presence of a liquid electrolyte in devices may result in some practical limitations of sealing and long-term stability. Attractive alternatives to liquid electrolytes are organic solid hole-transporting materials and quasi-solid-state electrolytes solidifying the redox couple I−/I3− with polymers, which prevents volatizing and leakage of organic solvents used.19 Several approaches have been reported for solid-state UV photodetectors using CuSCN,20 poly(9,9-dihexylfluorene)21 or poly-N-vinylcarbazole22 as the hole transfer layers. But their photoresponsivity remains modest because of their low mobilities. Much research work should be conducted to improve the performance of these self-powered photodetectors.
Recently, a new type of electrolyte with a light-trapping scheme has been reported, in which the redox couple I−/I3− was solidified by liquid crystals (LCs).23 Quasi-solid-state DSSCs based on this type of electrolyte yield an efficiency of 8.18% at AM 1.5. Detailed analysis indicates that the LC molecules formed a network on the sub-micrometer scale, and the liquid I−/I3− redox couple electrolyte filled in the cavity of the network, resulting in effective pathways for the transport of electroactive species. Furthermore, the network on the sub-micrometer scale could effectively scatter light and contribute to the light trapping, consequently resulting in an increased light-harvesting efficiency. Considering its outstanding properties, an improved photodetecting performance can be expected for detectors based on this type of quasi-solid-state electrolyte.
In this paper, a self-powered UV photodetector was fabricated based on single crystalline rutile TiO2 nanorod arrays (TNAs) and a quasi-solid-state electrolyte solidified by LCs. Schottky-barrier like behavior is observed in this photodetector, which can help to separate the photogenerated electron–hole pairs and generate photocurrent without any external bias. This self-powered photodetector demonstrates fast response speed, high photosensitivity, excellent spectral selectivity as well as uncomplicated low-cost fabrication process and environment-friendly features.
Experimental
Fabrication of TiO2 nanorod arrays
The rutile TNAs were grown vertically on FTO-glass using the hydrothermal method. A diluted hydrochloric solution was prepared by mixing 50 mL of deionized water with 40 mL of concentrated hydrochloric acid. The solution was stirred at ambient temperature for 5 min; then, 400 μL of titanium tetrachloride was added to the mixture. The mixture was stirred for another 10 min and injected into a stainless steel autoclave with a Teflon container cartridge. The FTO-glass was ultrasonically cleaned and placed against the Teflon container wall with the conducting side facing down. The hydrothermal synthesis was conducted at 180 °C for 2 h. After synthesis, the autoclave was cooled to room temperature. The FTO-glass was rinsed thoroughly with deionized water and annealed at 500 °C for 1 h in air.
Assembly of the quasi-solid-state UV photodetector with a liquid crystal-embedded electrolyte
For device fabrication, the TNAs grown on FTO-glass were used as the active photoanode. A 20 nm thick Pt film deposited on FTO-glass by magnetron sputtering formed the counter electrode. The composition of the quasi-solid-state electrolyte was as follows: LiI (0.1 M), I2 (0.1 M), 1-propyl-3-methylimidazolium iodide (1.0 M), and 4-tert-butylpyridine (0.5 M), and the solvent was 3 acetonitrile, Nematic LC, 4-cyano-4′-n-heptyloxybiphenyl, weight ratio (vs. liquid electrolyte) was 30%. When assembling the device, the electrolyte was kept at 60 °C for 30 min to become liquid state. Then, the melted liquid crystal-embedded electrolyte was sandwiched by a TNA electrode and a counter electrode with two clips; the space between the two electrodes is controlled by a 60 μm thick sealing material. After cooling down to room temperature, a quasi-solid-state UV photodetector with liquid crystal-embedded electrolyte was fabricated.
Characterization and measurements
The crystal structures of the TNAs were examined by X-ray diffraction (XRD; XD-3, PG Instruments Ltd., Beijing, China) with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 0.154 nm). The surface morphology was characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM; Hitachi S-4800, Hitachi, Ltd., Tokyo, Japan). Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images were collected on a JEOL JEM 2100F electron microscope (JEM 2100F, JEOL Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) with an accelerating voltage of 200 kV. The spectral responsivity characteristics and the typical current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the quasi-solid-state UV photodetector in the dark and under illumination were recorded using a programmable sourcemeter (2400, Keithley Instruments Inc., Cleveland, OH, USA). A 500 W xenon lamp (7ILX500, 7Star Optical Instruments Co., Beijing, China) equipped with a monochromator (7ISW30, 7Star Optical Instruments Co.) was used as the light source to generate monochromatic light from 240 to 550 nm for the spectral response characterization. For the photoresponse switching behavior measurement, a UV LED (NCSU033B(T), Nichia Co., Japan) with a wavelength of 365 nm was used as the light source and the photocurrent was measured using an electrochemical workstation (RST5200, Zhengzhou Shirusi Instrument Technology Co. Ltd, Zhengzhou, China).
Results and discussion

Fig. 1a and b show typical SEM images of the hydrothermally grown TNA sample from top views. Fig. 1a depicts a low-magnification SEM image of the TNAs, revealing that the entire surface of the FTO-coated glass substrate is uniformly covered with ordered TiO2 nanorods. The higher magnification SEM image depicted in Fig. 1b shows that the TiO2 nanorods are tetragonal in shape with square top facets consisting of many small grids. The density of nanorods is typically 20 nanorods per μm2 and diameters are ranging from 100–150 nm. No significant change in TNA morphology was observed after annealing at 500 °C. TEM images give more detailed information about the TiO2 nanorod. Fig. 1c displays the low-resolution TEM image of a typical TiO2 nanorod. It can be clearly seen that the diameter is about 100 nm, consistent with that measured by SEM in Fig. 1b. The cross-section features of the TNAs coated with the liquid crystal electrolyte after removing the solvent were also investigated by SEM. As shown in Fig. S1,† it can be clearly seen that the gap between TiO2 nanorods is filled by the liquid crystal electrolyte. This effective pore-filling is beneficial to the charge separation and transport, which will result in a higher external quantum efficiency of the UV detector. The zoomed-in TEM image of the tip of the nanorod is shown in the inset of Fig. 1c, which indicates that each individual nanorod indeed consists of a bundle of thinner nanorods, with diameters of about 10 to 20 nm. The high-resolution TEM image collected from the edge of the nanorod reveals that the typical TiO2 nanorod has a single crystalline structure with interplanar spacings of 0.325 nm and 0.296 nm, in accordance with the d-spacings of (110) and (001) planes of rutile TiO2, respectively. These results indicate that the TiO2 nanorod grows along the [001] direction. The crystal phases of the TNAs were studied by X-ray diffraction and the corresponding pattern is presented in Fig. 1e. The 2θ scan pattern shows that the TNAs grown on the FTO-glass substrate have a tetragonal rutile structure [JCPDS no. 02-0494]. SnO2 peaks are due to patterns of the substrate. Obviously, there are no extra peaks appearing in the pattern, especially the anatase phase diffraction peaks, which is a usual distort phase in rutile TiO2 XRD results. The rutile phase of TNAs is also verified by Raman spectra shown in Fig. 1f. Raman spectroscopy can sensitively identify the anatase and rutile phases of TiO2 by analyzing their characteristic Raman bands. Four first-order Raman spectra of rutile TiO2 are located at 143 cm−1 (B1g), 447 cm−1 (Eg), 612 cm−1 (A1g), and 826 cm−1 (B2g). The Raman peak at 242 cm−1 is related to a multi-phonon process. The Eg and A1g modes as well as the two-phonon bands at 242 cm−1 are the major characteristic Raman bands of rutile TiO2, while the B1g mode is weak and the B2g mode is almost absent. In Fig. 1d, The Eg (447 cm−1) and A1g (612 cm−1) modes as well as the two-phonon bands at *242 cm−1 (marked as *) are strong and no characteristic Raman bands due to anatase TiO2 appear.
 Fig. 1  (a and b) Top view SEM images of TNAs at different magnifications. (c) Low-resolution TEM image of a typical TiO2 nanorod. (d) The high-resolution TEM image collected from the edge of the nanorod. (e) X-ray diffraction pattern of the TNAs grown on FTO glass. (f) Raman spectra of the TNAs. 

Fig. 2a shows a schematic device structure showing the quasi-solid-state photodetector assembled using the TNAs. The FTO substrate and the Pt layer were used as the top and bottom electrodes to collect the photocurrent under irradiation. The UV light is irradiated from the side of FTO-glass with TNAs. Concepts for the liquid electrolyte without light trapping and quasi-solid-state electrolyte with the light trapping scheme are shown in Fig. 2b and c respectively. An obvious difference between Fig. 2b and c can be observed. The main purpose of light trapping is the increase of the optical light path within the PEC system. Thus, photons will have a higher absorption probability, increasing the photocurrent density in the photodetector. It has been proved in ref. 23 that the diffused reflectance of the quasi-solid-state electrolyte was much higher than that of the blank liquid electrolyte, indicating that the introduction of the LC increased the light-scattering efficiency of the electrolyte. As a result, a light-trapping scheme was formed in quasi-solid-state electrolyte due to the addition of the LC, which led to the remarkable decrease of the light transmittance. I0 is the incident photon flux and I′ is the increased incident photon flux caused by the light-trapping scheme in the LC-based quasi-solid-state electrolyte (Fig. 2c). In the PEC, due to the interval between the TiO2 nanorods, a certain part of the incident light is transmitted through the electrolyte and cannot be absorbed by the TNA active layer. When the electrolyte with the light-trapping scheme was used in the photodetector, the incident loss decreased and more photoelectrons were generated. In addition, the LC directors are aligned in the same direction as each other to form a network on the molecular level. The network which could effectively scatter light and contribute to the light trapping can bring in effective pathways for the transport of redox species. As a result, the optical path length of the incident light and the light-harvesting efficiency were increased.
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic device structure of the PEC-based UV photodetector. (b) Geometry for illumination of the PEC from the substrate side, showing the schematic of the light-harvesting in the electrolyte without the light trapping and (c) quasi-solid-state electrolyte with the light-trapping scheme. 
The transmission spectra of the TNA film and FTO-glass are shown in Fig. 3a. A sharp absorption edge located at 320 nm can be observed for FTO-glass, which determined the spectral response edge in the short-wavelength region. From the transmission spectrum of TNAs, it can be clearly seen that the incident light shorter than 375 nm is absorbed by TNAs, which set the spectral response edge in the long-wavelength region. The low transmittance (<25%) in the wavelength range of 400–550 nm is caused by the strong light scattering from TNAs. From these two transmittance spectra, we can conclude that only light with the wavelength between 320 nm and 420 nm can reach the TNAs and contribute to the UV photoresponsivity, which is confirmed in the following spectral response characterization. For the TNAs with the quasi-solid-state electrolyte, a much lower transmission was observed near the absorption edge of rutile TiO2, which should be caused by the light trapping effect (Fig. S2†).23 For light with energy larger than the band-gap of TiO2, the light was absorbed strongly by the TNAs and it is quite difficult to detect the light trapping effect because of this strong absorption. To test the spectral responsivity of the self-powered quasi-solid-state photodetector, the wavelength selective ability was measured in terms of the current signal in short-circuit condition using a Xe lamp with a monochromator in the range of 270–550 nm at a nominal zero bias, as shown in Fig. 3b. The relationship between the responsivity and the incident light wavelength is defined as the photocurrent per unit of incident optical power. It is clearly seen that excellent UV-light detection selectivity in the spectral range between 320 and 420 nm is observed, which indicates that the device can be a very suitable photodetector for UV-A range application photodetectors. In addition to the excellent wavelength selectivity, the photodetector also exhibits a high sensitivity. The maximum responsivity of the spectrum is about 0.09 A W−1, located at a wavelength of 383 nm. The incident photon to current efficiency (IPCE) is an important measurement for photodetector testing, which can directly reflect detectors' spectral response. The IPCE can be calculated by measuring the spectral response according to the following equation: IPCE% = 1240 × SR(λ)/λ, where SR(λ) describes the spectral response at each wavelength. The corresponding IPCE of this quasi-solid-state photodetector is higher than 29%. To the best of our knowledge, this value is the highest currently reported result for self-powered solid-state heterojunction photodetectors. It is over five times that of a ZnO nanorods/Spiro-MeOTAD organic–inorganic hybrid photodetector24 and at least two orders of magnitude larger than that of an n-ZnO/p-NiO core–shell nanowire array photodetector.25 The high sensitivity is due to the excellent hole transfer properties and the light-trapping scheme of the LC-based electrolyte. When the quasi-solid-state electrolyte with the light-trapping scheme was introduced, the incident photon loss decreased and the generation of photoelectrons enhanced (Fig. 2c). In addition, the response spectral range of this kind of detector can be modulated by band-gap engineering. It has been reported that doping TiO2 with anions such as carbon, nitrogen, hydrogen and fluorine can shift the optical band-gap towards lower energy and result in the enhanced photocatalytic activity in the visible light region.26–29 By replacing the undoped TNA active layer with doped TiO2, a self-powered photodetector with a high photoresponsivity in the visible light range can be expected. Similar results have been observed in ZnO based organic–inorganic hybrid photo-detectors.24 Nitrogen doping can shift the absorption edge of ZnO to 650 nm and a rapid and strong photoresponse was observed in the N:ZnO–SpiroMeOTAD photodiode.
 Fig. 3  (a) The transmission spectra of the TNA film and FTO-glass. (b) Spectral responsivity characteristic of the quasi-solid-state photodetector with irradiance wavelength ranging from 270 nm to 550 nm under 0 V bias. 
Typical current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the self-powered photodetector measured at applied bias from −1 V to 1 V under dark (black line) and 365 nm light illumination with a power density of 2.5 mW cm−2 (red line) are shown in Fig. 4. A diode behavior (DB) with significant rectification characteristics is demonstrated from the J–V curve of the device in the dark, indicating the formation of a p–n junction interface between the electrolyte and TiO2 nanorods. The forward turn-on voltage is about 0.6 V and the reversed breakdown voltage is more than 1 V. The rectification ratio was measured to be 45 at ±0.7 V. Under the illumination of 2.5 mW cm−2 UV light (λ = 365 nm), the UV detector shows an excellent photovoltaic performance, yielding a short-circuit current density of 175 μA cm−2 and an open-circuit voltage of 0.46 V. This inherent built-in potential arising from the TiO2–electrolyte interface acts as a driving force to separate the photogenerated electron–hole pairs and produces the photocurrent. Therefore, this device can operate not only in photodiode mode but also in photovoltaic mode without any external bias.
 Fig. 4  Incident light dependent J–V characteristics were measured at applied bias from −1 to 1 V and exposed to 365 nm UV-light irradiation with light intensities of 2.5 mW cm−2. 
The response speed is a key parameter determining the properties of a photodetector to react to a fast-changing optical signal. Fig. 5 shows the incident light dependent current density–time (J–T) characteristics of the quasi-solid-state photodetector measured at zero bias with UV-light on/off switching irradiation. The light intensity is 2.5 mW cm−2 with an on/off internal of 10 s. The time response of the photodetector is characterized by the decaying and rising time. Six repeat cycles under on/off switching irradiation are displayed in Fig. 5, in which the photocurrent was observed to be excellent reproducible with fast response (both decay and rise times are less than 0.03 s). Upon illumination, the photocurrent density increased to the maximum value, and then dramatically decreased to its initial value as the light was turned off. Furthermore, the resolution between incident light and dark (the signal-to-noise ratio for the device) is outstanding. With the UV light on/off illumination, the signal-to-noise ratio of the device could respond quickly between “high” and “low” states with an “on/off” ratio of three orders of magnitude. The characteristics of the photodetector suggest that it is a good candidate for optoelectronic switches, with the dark insulating state as “OFF” and the UV-exposed conducting state as “ON”. The quasi-solid-state photodetector can be reversibly switched between the low and the high conductivity. The light-trapping scheme in the LC-based electrolyte provides a great contribution to the rapid response and quite large “on/off” ratio. The network in LC affords a good contact between TiO2 nanorods and quasi-solid-state electrolyte. At the same time, the optical light path is increased due to the light trapping, which might improve the light absorption efficiency in the gap space between the nanorods and thus more photogenerated electron–hole pairs are generated. The high signal-to-noise ratio of the device indicates a high sensitivity, which may be attributed to a high light-absorption efficiency of the PEC with light trapping scheme. The long-term stability of the quasi-solid-state photodetector was also checked. As shown in Fig. S3 and S4,† after putting the detector under an ambient environment for more than 5 months, its spectral responsivity and time response kept nearly unchangeable. This result clearly indicates that the TiO2 nanorod arrays and the Pt counter electrode are stable when contacted with the quasi-solid-state electrolyte. This good long-term stability of the detector will be beneficial to its practical applications.
 Fig. 5  Incident light dependent J–T characteristics of the quasi-solid-state photodetector were measured at 0 V bias and exposed to 365 nm UV-light on/off switching irradiation with a light intensity of 2.5 mW cm−2. 
An excellent UV photodetector should show visible-blind, high responsivity, fast time response and good photosensitivity linearity in a wide light intensity range. Fig. 6 shows the photocurrent of the quasi-solid-state photodetector versus incident light intensities. The photocurrent measurements of the quasi-solid-state photodetector were carried out at 0 V bias and under 365 nm UV light irradiation with light intensities varying from 40 μW cm−2 to 2.5 mW cm−2. The photocurrent increases with the light intensity, consistent with the fact that the charge carrier photogeneration efficiency is proportional to the absorbed photon flux. Clearly, the photocurrent is almost linearly increased with increasing incident UV light intensity. This linear variation of photocurrent suggests that the photodetector can be appropriately used for accurate UV light measurement. The photocurrent increases more slowly with the illumination intensity at higher light intensities. This phenomenon may result from the saturation of the photoresponse at higher illumination intensities.
 Fig. 6  Photocurrent as a function of the incident UV (λ = 365 nm) intensity in a wide range from 40 μW cm−2 to 2.5 mW cm−2. 
Conclusions
In summary, we have designed and fabricated a new type of nanostructured UV photodetector with an LC-embedded quasi-solid-state electrolyte. Due to the light trapping scheme of the quasi-solid-state electrolyte, the UV photodetector exhibits a fast photoresponse speed and a high photosensitivity. With the light on/off illumination, the device could respond quickly between “high” and “low” states with a large “on/off” ratio of three orders of magnitude, and keep good stability. All these results indicate great potential of the quasi-solid-state UV photodetector for high-sensitivity and high-speed UV light detecting and photoelectronic switches.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Key Basic Research Program of China (2013CB922303, 2010CB833103), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (11274201, 51231007), the 111 Project (B13029) and the Fundamental Research Funds of Shandong University (2014YQ003).
Notes and references
M. Razeghi and A. Rogalski, J. Appl. Phys., 1996, 79, 7433 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. V. Averine, P. I. Kuznetzov, V. A. Zhitov and N. V. Alkeev, Solid-State Electron., 2008, 52, 618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. K. Wang, S. J. Chang, Y. K. Su, C. S. Chang, Y. Z. Chiou, C. H. Kuo, T. K. Lin, T. K. Ko and J. J. Tang, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2004, 112, 25 CrossRef PubMed .
Y.-Q. Bie, Z.-M. Liao, H.-Z. Zhang, G.-R. Li, Y. Ye, Y.-B. Zhou, J. Xu, Z.-X. Qin, L. Dai and D.-P. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 649 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Young, L. W. Ji, S. J. Chang, S. H. Liang, K. T. Lam, T. H. Fang, K. J. Chen, X. L. Du and Q. K. Xue, Sens. Actuators, A, 2007, 135, 529 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. K. Sheu, M. L. Lee, L. S. Yeh, C. J. Kao, C. J. Tun, M. G. Chen, G. C. Chi, S. J. Chang, Y. K. Su and C. T. Lee, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 81, 4263 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Ya. I. Alivov, Ü. Özgür, S. Dogan, D. Johnstone, V. Avrutin, N. Onojima, C. Liu, J. Xie, Q. Fan and H. Morkoç, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 241108 CrossRef PubMed .
K.-H. Chang, J.-K. Sheu, M.-L. Lee, S.-Ju. Tu, C.-C. Yang, H.-S. Kuo, J. H. Yang and W.-C. Lai, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 013502 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Sciuto, F. Roccaforte, S. Di Franco and V. Raineri, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 081111 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Liang, H. Sheng, Y. Liu, Z. Huo, Y. Lu and H. Shen, J. Cryst. Growth, 2001, 225, 110 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Young, L. W. Ji, S. J. Chang and Y. K. Su, J. Cryst. Growth, 2006, 293, 43 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Grätzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 338 CrossRef PubMed .
C. L. Cao, C. G. Hu, X. Wang, S. X. Wang, Y. S. Tian and H. L. Zhang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2011, 156, 114 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. D. Li, C. T. Gao, H. G. Duan, B. G. Lu, X. J. Pan and E. Q. Xie, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 640 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. R. Wang, S. H. Ran, B. Liu, D. Chen and G. Z. Shen, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 3350 RSC .
X. D. Li, C. T. Gao, H. G. Duan, B. G. Lu, Y. Q. Wang, L. L. Chen, Z. X. Zhang, X. J. Pan and E. Q. Xie, Small, 2013, 9, 2005 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-Q. Wu, B.-X. Lei, H.-S. Rao, Y.-F. Xu, Y.-F. Wang, C.-Y. Su and D.-B. Kuang, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1352 Search PubMed .
R. S. Mane, B. R. Sankapal and C. D. Lokhande, Mater. Chem. Phys., 1999, 60, 196 CrossRef CAS .
C. Cheng, Y. T. Shi, C. Zhu, W. Li, L. Wang, K. K. Fung and N. Wang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 10631 RSC .
S. M. Hatch, J. Briscoe and S. Dunn, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 867 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Han, C. Fan, G. Wu, H.-Z. Chen and M. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 13438 CAS .
L. D. Wang, D. X. Zhao, Z. S. Su, F. Fang, B. H. Li, Z. Z. Zhang, D. Z. Shen and X. H. Wang, Org. Electron., 2010, 11, 1318 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wang, X. Pan, X. Q. Fang, L. Guo, W. Q. Liu, C. N. Zhang, Y. Huang, L. H. Hu and S. Y. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 5526 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Game, U. Singh, T. Kumari, A. Banpurkar and S. Ogale, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 503 RSC .
P.-N. Ni, C.-X. Shan, S.-P. Wang, X.-Y. Liu and D.-Z. Shen, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 4445 RSC .
F. Dong, S. Guo, H. Q. Wang, X. F. Li and Z. B. Wu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 13285 CAS .
R. Asahi, T. Morikawa, T. Ohwaki, K. Aoki and Y. Taga, Science, 2001, 293, 269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. B. Chen, L. Liu, P. Y. Yu and S. S. Mao, Science, 2011, 331, 746 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Yu, J. G. Yu, W. K. Ho, Z. T. Jiang and L. Z. Zhang, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 3808 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c4nr01665cThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a and b) Top view SEM images of TNAs at different magnifications. (c) Low-resolution TEM image of a typical TiO2 nanorod. (d) The high-resolution TEM image collected from the edge of the nanorod. (e) X-ray diffraction pattern of the TNAs grown on FTO glass. (f) Raman spectra of the TNAs.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic device structure of the PEC-based UV photodetector. (b) Geometry for illumination of the PEC from the substrate side, showing the schematic of the light-harvesting in the electrolyte without the light trapping and (c) quasi-solid-state electrolyte with the light-trapping scheme.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) The transmission spectra of the TNA film and FTO-glass. (b) Spectral responsivity characteristic of the quasi-solid-state photodetector with irradiance wavelength ranging from 270 nm to 550 nm under 0 V bias.	 

 	Fig. 4  Incident light dependent J–V characteristics were measured at applied bias from −1 to 1 V and exposed to 365 nm UV-light irradiation with light intensities of 2.5 mW cm−2.	 

 	Fig. 5  Incident light dependent J–T characteristics of the quasi-solid-state photodetector were measured at 0 V bias and exposed to 365 nm UV-light on/off switching irradiation with a light intensity of 2.5 mW cm−2.	 

 	Fig. 6  Photocurrent as a function of the incident UV (λ = 365 nm) intensity in a wide range from 40 μW cm−2 to 2.5 mW cm−2.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c4nr01665c

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
