3D MXenes as promising alternatives for potential electrocatalysis applications: opportunities and challenges  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2TC01542K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2TC01542K
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2022, 10, 9669-96903D MXenes as promising alternatives for potential electrocatalysis applications: opportunities and challenges

        
          
            Tahir 
            Rasheed
          
          
        
      
Interdisciplinary Research Center for Advanced Materials, King Fahd University of Petroleum and Minerals (KFUPM), Dhahran 31261, Saudi Arabia. E-mail: tahir.rasheed@kfupm.edu.sa; tahir.rasheed@hotmail.com
Received 
      14th April 2022
    , Accepted 10th June 2022First published on 13th June 2022AbstractSince the invention of MXenes (Ti3C2Tx), they have been positioned as a booming class of two-dimensional (2D) nanomaterials for energy conversion and storage applications. These extraordinary features arise from their surface functionalization, their high electrical conductivity, their outstanding dispersion in a variety of solvents, and the presence of several functional groups on their surfaces. However, the presence of van der Waals interactions results in the stacking of the 2D nanosheets of MXenes, like other 2D nanomaterials. This stacking results in a reduction in the number of active sites and poor ionic kinetics, which in turn reduces the activity of the material and hence the performances of MXene-based devices. Therefore, the conversion of 2D MXenes into three-dimensional (3D) MXene architecture has been shown to be an effective technique for reducing restacking, resulting in higher porosity, increased specific surface areas, and shorter mass and ion transportation distances in comparison to 1D and 2D architectures. Herein, we have attempted to summarize commonly used methodologies, such as assembly, templating, 3D printing, electrospinning, and gas foaming, for the construction of 3D MXenes and MXene-based moieties for their potential application as electrocatalytic materials. Further, the structure–property correlation of 3D MXene architectures are also given special consideration. Finally, related challenges and probable future prospects of 3D MXenes have also been discussed.
Tahir Rasheed
Dr Tahir Rasheed is currently working as a researcher at the Interdisciplinary Research Center for Advanced Materials, King Fahd University of Petroleum and Minerals, Saudi Arabia. He completed his PhD degree and postdoctoral research in polymer chemistry at the School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China. His research interests focus on multiple disciplines, including the controllable synthesis, characterization, and self-assembly of polymeric materials, polymer-based composites, nanomaterials, nanocomposites, and hybrid nanocomposites, with special emphasis on their potential applications in the fields of sensing and biosensing, electrocatalysis, the degradation and quantification of various emerging pollutants, and energy storage devices.
1. Introduction
In 2004 the unprecedented exfoliation of graphene sparked a wave of excitement in 2D nanomaterials research.1 Because of their unusual optical, electrical, and mechanical properties, 2D nanomaterials demonstrate prodigious potential for wide-ranging applications in energy conversion and storage, environmental protection, optoelectronics, medicine, biology, catalysis and sensors.2–5 Therefore, new classes of 2D materials, including metal oxides,6 nitrides,7 germanane,8 silicene,9 dichalcogenides,10 and phosphorene,11 have been facilely synthesized and employed in a number of research areas. MXenes, a new class of 2D transition metal nitrides or carbides with the generic formula Mn+1XnTx, are made by the targeted etching of A elements from ternary MAX phases (Mn+1AXn). Here, M is transition metal, A is group IIIA or IVA element, X is nitrogen or carbon and n is a number from 1 to 4, while Tx is associated with the functionalities present on the surface.12–14 The distinctive structure of MXenes guarantees their applicability in the field of electrochemical energy storage and conversion applications. Generally, MXene-based nanohybrids exhibit good durability and activity towards the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) in an acidic medium.15 Despite this, the presence of strong hydrogen bonding and van der Waals interactions between nearby nanosheets, self-restacking and the aggregation of few or single-layer MXene nanosheets are frequently unavoidable during electrode production operations. These activities restrict the accessibility of electrolyte ions, preventing MXenes from fully utilizing their functional surfaces and thereby decreasing their electrochemical performance.16,17 The creation of 3D frameworks from 2D MXenes gives a viable solution to these problems.18,19 The most commonly observed advantages of 3D MXenes are: (i) a 3D MXene structure can maintain a large specific surface area because of inhibition of restacking of nanosheets in the 3D architecture.20 As a result, a large number of electrochemically active sites are available to the electrolyte, allowing for enough electrochemical reactions to occur. (ii) The abundance of channels in 3D MXene designs favors rapid electrolyte diffusion, and the high electrical conductivity of MXenes makes them suitable current collectors or active materials for rapid charge carrier movement inside the porous framework. (iii) The plentiful functional groups (–O, –OH, and –F) can serve as attractive binding sites for a variety of organic and inorganic substances, allowing for the creation of 3D MXene structures of varying complexity and utility. (iv) The 3D conductive topologies ensure excellent charge transfer throughout the total volume of dense electrodes, which is essential for increasing the exploitation of active materials irrespective of electrode thickness or mass loading in real-world applications. 3D MXene structures, unsurprisingly, show great promise for high-performance energy conversion and storage applications.
Herein, we initially highlight common synthetic approaches for the production of 3D MXene architectures. Then they are addressed in terms of their applications in electrochemical energy conversion, with a focus on electrocatalysis of different species for the production of viable products as alternative energy sources (Fig. 1). Finally, we discuss some of the challenges and prospects in this exciting field of research. We also propose solutions to these issues in order to accelerate the development of 3D MXene designs for bigger breakthroughs and a wider variety of applications.
 Fig. 1  A schematic illustration of different preparation methodologies of 3D MXene architectures along with their applications in electrocatalysis. 
2. Synthetic strategies for 3D MXene architectures
The synthetic strategies for MXenes have been comprehensively reviewed elsewhere.21,22 Therefore, we will exclusively discuss manufacturing strategies for 3D MXene structures. The most commonly employed methods for the synthesis of 3D MXenes are assembly, template and 3D printing.
2.1. Assembly methods
MXenes can be evenly disseminated in aqueous solution due to the presence of numerous hydrating surface groups (–O, –OH, and –F). A 2D MXene nanostructure in solution will interact and assemble into 3D porous frameworks by the introduction of some gelating agent or disturbing the equilibrium between the van der Waals interactions and the electrostatic repulsive force.23,24 A prototypical gelation mediator, graphene oxide (GO), may combine uniformly with MXene nanostructures in water, resulting in 3D MXene or rGO composites.24 For example, rGO sheets produced via ascorbic acid reduction followed by hydrothermal treatment are interconnected with one another creating a three-dimensional framework. Simultaneously, Ti3C2Tx nanosheets are formed on the framework of rGO surfaces, resulting in the formation of a Ti3C2Tx/rGO hybrid hydrogel (Fig. 2a).25 The as-prepared Ti3C2Tx/rGO hybrid hydrogel reveals an overall aligned and uniform architecture with unidirectional assembly of nanosheets of Ti3C2Tx and rGO (Fig. 2b). The Ti3C2Tx/rGO aerogel is able to stand on a flower because of its porosity and aligned structure. As portrayed in Fig. 2c, 100 mg of Ti3C2Tx/rGO-based aerogel exhibits good mechanical strength and can bear a load of 500 g without fracturing the architecture. Furthermore, epichlorohydrin (ECH)26 and ethylenediamine27 can also be employed as gelating agents for the manufacturing of 3D MXenes. Jiang and coworkers employed hydrogen bond interactions and etherification processes to construct a Ti3C2Tx MXene/cellulose hydrogel with a 3D porous structure using ECH as a crosslinker. ECH facilitates the establishment of covalent bonds between cellulose and MXene nanosheets.26 In another report, Wang and coworkers carried out the hydrothermal treatment of Ti3C2Tx MXene in a solution of ammonia and thiourea dioxide, which resulted in the formation of a 3D Ti3C2Tx aerogel doped with nitrogen. The as-prepared 3D architecture revealed a 108 m2 g−1 BET surface area.28 Another self-assembly based method that can also be used for the production of 3D MXenes is liquid–liquid self-assembly.29,30 For example, at the oil–water interface, hydrophilic Ti3C2Tx dispersed in water and oil-soluble amine-functionalized polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxane dissolved in toluene interacted. The interfacial tension of the water–toluene system was significantly reduced, resulting in a sheet of interlocking MXene nanosheets.30 Further, robust water-in-oil Pickering emulsions with a water:oil ratio of 1:8 were achieved after extensively homogenizing the mixture. Due to the extremely quick interfacial clogging of the MXene-based nanoparticles, all the droplets have irregularly shaped configurations, unlike ordinary Pickering emulsions with spherical forms. By freeze-drying concentrated emulsion droplets with pore sizes and shapes that were comparable to those of the emulsion droplets, a lightweight, hydrophobic, and isotropic 3D MXene aerogel with outstanding mechanical properties was easily created.30
 Fig. 2  Assembly methods for manufacturing 3D MXene architectures. (a) A schematic diagram illustrating the fabrication process of a 3D Ti3C2Tx MXene/rGO hybrid aerogel. (b) A side-view SEM image of a 3D MXene/rGO aerogel. (c) Digital images of a 3D MXene/rGO aerogel (100 mg) standing on a flower (left) and supporting a weight of 500 g (right). Reproduced with permission.25 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
2.2. Template methods
One of the most simple and effective approaches for creating 3D porous constructions is template synthesis.31 By altering the size and/or shape of the templates, the microstructure of the resulting 3D materials may be easily adjusted.32 Generally, the following steps are considered for the synthesis of 3D MXenes by using the template method: (i) preparation of template, (ii) coating of material onto the template, and (iii) removing the template (if required).33 The most extensively used templates for fabricating 3D graphene materials are poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) and polystyrene (PS) spheres, which also apply to fabricating 3D microporous MXenes.18,34–36 For example, the mixing of Ti3C2Tx MXene and polystyrene spheres (1:3) was carried out homogenously in aqueous solution. During this procedure, the surface of the polystyrene spheres was spontaneously covered with MXene sheets. This wrapping is the result of interaction among the hydroxyl groups present on the surface. Finally, 3D MXene (Ti3C2Tx) was obtained by filtering the suspension and removing the template (PS spheres) at 450 °C in an inert atmosphere. The porous structure of 3D MXene scaffolds remained unaltered after removing the template. This maintained structure is because of hydrogen bonding and van der Waals interactions between surrounding 2D Ti3C2Tx nanosheets.18 These sheets could also be employed as porous substrates for the production of 3D MXene-based nanocomposites like 3D polyaniline@macroporous Ti3C2Tx (3D PANI@M-Ti3C2Tx).18 Similarly, sulfur particles and spheres of melamine formaldehyde were also used as a template for the fabrication of 3D-structured MXenes.37–39 Without the need for filtration, 3D monolayers with porous structures can be employed directly as templates for creating 3D MXene frameworks. Furthermore, carbon foam,40 graphene aerogel,41 melamine foam,42 nickel foam,43 electrospun polymer fiber networks44,45 and commercial sponge46,47 are other materials which can be facilely applied as template materials. MXenes are immediately coated onto the structures of 3D templates using a simple dropping/dipping procedure in this case. Taking the example of an MXene composite, a clean sponge of melamine substrate was dipped into a solution of MXene so that the 2D MXene nanosheets could be easily and uniformly absorbed onto the surface. After that the sponge was transferred to an oven for drying at 80 °C. A 3D MXene–sponge composite formed after 24 hours, with a thin layer of MXenes anchoring on the sponge's 3D skeleton (Fig. 3).47 Likewise an ice-templated method can also be employed for the synthesis of 3D MXenes for a number of applications, such as 3D Ti3C2Tx/bacterial cellulose/polyethylene glycol48 and 3D Ti3C2Tx/polyethylene glycol49 for the conversion and storage of solar energy, 3D Ti3C2Tx/carbon for wearable sensors,50,51 3D Fe2O3/Ti3C2Tx52 for electrochemical energy storage, 3D Co3O4/Ti3C2Tx/rGO,53 and 3D NiO/Ti3C2Tx.54
 Fig. 3  A schematic illustration of the fabrication procedure of an MXene-sponge.47 Copyright 2018, Elsevier Ltd. 
2.3. 3D printing methods
Additive manufacturing, often known as 3D printing, is a new technology that allows for the scalable production of a wide range of 3D items and complicated structures using appropriate inks.55,56 MXene inks are projected to bring 2D MXene nanostructures into 3D frameworks through printing because of their advantageous viscosity and compressive rheological properties. A concentration of Ti3C2Tx inks above 50 mg mL−1 may flow easily through small nozzles and instantly regain their solid-like characteristics, keeping the nozzle's interpenetrating shape after deployment, resulting in a programmable 3D MXene architecture.57 Furthermore, independently printed filaments (mean diameter of roughly 326 μm) established a durable 3D structure without internal collapse or overlapping, according to morphological analysis. The Ti3C2Tx nanosheets were structured into a corporate network with pore sizes varying from 3 to 35 μm on a structural level (Fig. 4a).58,59
 Fig. 4  Other methods for manufacturing 3D MXene architectures. (a) A schematic illustration of the preparation route for fabricating Ti3C2Tx-based electrode film on an NF substrate via the MEPD method. Reproduced with permission.59 Copyright 2017, Elsevier Ltd. (b) An electrospinning method for preparing 3D PVA/MXene; the inset shows an SEM image of PVA/MXene. Reproduced with permission.60 (c) A schematic diagram of the fabrication of hierarchical scaffolds with tailored macro/micro-porous architectures.61 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2017, Elsevier Ltd. 
2.4. Electrospinning methods
Electrospinning is a facile, adaptable, and affordable technology for creating 3D polymer networks with variable porosity and fiber diameter.62 The typical process involves the application of an electrical potential between a grounded target and a droplet of melt or polymer solution. When the surface tension of the droplet is overcome by the applied electric field, then a charged array of polymeric solution is subjected and grows thinner and longer until it is collected or solidified on the target.63 These fibers construct a 3D network by stacking at random on top of one another. The most commonly used electrospinning polymers are polyacrylonitrile (PAN), polyethylene oxide (PEO), polyvinyl alcohol (PVA), polyacrylic acid (PAA), polycaprolactone (PCL) and polyurethane (PU).64 They can readily dissolve in MXenes in polar organic or aqueous solvents.65 For instance, a homogenous mixture is formed by PVA and MXenes when dissolved in water and a Ti3C2Tx/PVA composite framework with numerous mesopores is obtained by passing a voltage of 18 kV through the solution (Fig. 4b).60 Furthermore, a PAN/Ti3C2Tx composite network was successfully created in N,N-dimethylformamide using the same method. Ti3C2Tx MXene nanosheets were discovered inside the polymer fibers in this example. Furthermore, carbonization of this Ti3C2Tx/PAN composite resulted in a 3D Ti3C2Tx/carbon network with no structural fracture.66 Some other reports on the production of 3D MXenes by using an electrospinning approach presented Ti3C2Tx/alginate/PEO,67 Ti3C2Tx/PEO,68 Ti3C2Tx/PVA/PAA/Fe3O4,69 Ti3C2Tx/chitosan70 and Ti3C2Tx/PAA.67
2.5. Gas foaming technology
3D architectures are frequently prepared using gas foaming technology.61,71 The example includes the production of CO2, O2 and CO as a result of the interaction between hydroxyl groups present on the surface of Ti3C2Tx MXene and hydrazine at 90 °C. The enormous volumes of gaseous species ensured that high pressure was quickly established between MXene nanosheets, counteracting the van der Waals forces that keep the nanosheets connected. As a result, countless microscopic pores developed between the parallel layers, leading to a distinct 3D foam of porous MXene with an increase in thickness (Fig. 4c).72 This MXene foam had a hydrophobic nature as a result of the elimination of hydrophilic groups.
3. MXenes as potential electrocatalysts
Electrochemical systems, such as H2 production and reduction, CO2 reduction, and other oxidation/reduction reactions, provide a crucial and environmentally beneficial answer to difficult environmental issues.73 Designing innovative non-precious-metal-based electrocatalysts to facilitate reaction kinetics is clearly one of the prerequisites for commercialization. When decisive factors, such as the number of active sites, electric conductivity, and reactivity of electrocatalysts, are considered, MXenes with a profligate rate of electron transfer, customizable surface designs, and a high surface area show outstanding promise in increasing electrocatalytic activities.74 The current state of advances of MXene and MXene-based catalysts used in oxygen evolution and reduction reactions (OER and ORR), hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), methanol oxidation reaction (MOR), nitrogen reduction reaction (NRR), water splitting solar steam generation and CO2 reduction reaction (CRR) is discussed in detail.
3.1. MXenes for CO2 conversion
Increased utilization of fossil fuels causes societal CO2 emissions, which interrupt the balance of natural carbon, resulting in environmental issues including rising sea levels and global warming.75 The electrochemical manufacture of significant compounds utilizing CO2 as the source of carbon has gained a lot of interest in recent years, owing to its low electricity costs from renewable energy sources and the power coming from superfluous CO2 emissions.76 This CO2RR driven by renewable energy can convert CO2 into high-value chemicals and fuels like carbon monoxide (CO), formic acid (HCOOH), ethylene (C2H4), methane (CH4) and methanol (CH3OH).77–80 MXenes have been employed in CO2RR as a potential electrocatalyst material on the basis of their higher conductivity, adjustable surface functionalities, and various binding sites.81–83 Li and coworkers82 used numerical simulations to evaluate the efficiency of transition metal carbide M3C2 and discovered that Cr3C2 and Mo3C2 were the best alternative catalyst choices for highly selective CO2 to CH4 conversion. Because it is currently difficult to synthesize pristine MXene in the lab, understanding the surface terminations (–OH and –O functional groups) is critical for unraveling the CO2RR reaction steps. The amount of energy required for the conversion of CO2 to CH4 is of the order of 1.05 and 1.31. eV using bare MXene as a catalyst. While the surface termination of MXene by –O and –OH functionalities reduces this energy to values of 0.35 and 0.54 eV. Hence, it is evident that the conversion is facilitated by surface-modified MXenes compared with bare MXenes. In a study, Xiao and coworkers investigated the hydrogenation of CO2 on the surface of M3C2 using DFT measurements in conjunction with a computational hydrogen electrode (CHE) model.84 The deposited CO2 is liberated and can react with hydrogen present on the surface to produce bicarbonate species, resulting in the CO2RR having higher competing selectivity over the HER. All conceivable pathways for converting CO2 to CH4 were investigated, and it was discovered that the creation of bicarbonate (HCO2) species is perhaps the most energy-efficient reaction route, whilst HCHO is the primary precursor in the CO2RR. This effort is likely to open up the way forward in developing new materials, such as W3C2, Mo2TiC2, Mo3C2 and V3C2, as promising CO2RR catalysts to convert CH4 with lower overpotentials of 0.41, 0.17, 0.45 and 0.74 V. Under typical conditions, the electrocatalytic CO2RR reactive pathway might be a difficult process. Under varying potentials, various products and intermediates can be generated according to the reaction kinetics of each underlying process. According to the findings, OH-terminal or O-terminal MXene can aid in the more vigorous progression of the CO2RR process. The development of an MXene-based electrocatalyst for CO2RR is still in its infancy in comparison to other 2D and 3D materials. Although inspiring advances have also been made in the present research, the study of the catalytic mechanism and nature of the active sites present on the surface of MXenes is essential.
3.2. MXenes and hybrids for water splitting reactions (HER, OER, and ORR)
Water splitting through electrocatalytic techniques has received a lot of attention due to being an environmentally friendly and economical strategy for the production of hydrogen using renewable resources. For this purpose, electrocatalysts possessing sufficient electronic conductivity are required to speed up charge transfer kinetics and ultimately decrease the half reaction overpotential. MXenes are good options to synthesize electrocatalysts with high performance, as they exhibit good surface characteristics, high electronic conductivity and a variety of chemicals. Another available option is using metal–organic frameworks as electrocatalysts owing to agile ion transfer, porous structure, and metal centers with exposed surfaces. It has been suggested that their combination with two-dimensional nanosheets will further enhance the electrocatalytic performance. For instance, Huang et al. synthesized a 2D cobalt 1,4-benzenedicarboxylate (CoBDC) and Ti3C2Tx hybrid with the help of an interdiffusion reaction (Fig. 5a).85 Interestingly, the synthesized hybrid demonstrated a 10 mA cm−2 current density@1.64 V vs. RHE and 48.2 mV dec−1 Tafel slope in basic media when employed for OER. Both added materials contributed to the overall enhanced performance due to the porous structure and greater electrochemically active surface area of CoBDC and quick ion and charge transfer rates of Ti3C2Tx. In another DFT study, Du et al. found that two-dimensional MXenes (e.g., Ti2C, Ti3C2, V2C) were terminated through a combination of hydroxyl and oxygen, whereas Nb-based MXenes were entirely terminated under standard conditions.86 Qiu et al. devised a process for employing three-dimensional MXene as a support material for the decomposition of water87 (Fig. 5b). The presence of macropores in MXene resulted in rapid charge/mass transfer rates as well as promoted OER. A high current density of 500 mA cm−2 is obtained with a low overpotential and commercial applications. Similarly, another MXene-based hybrid was reported and it had a hierarchical structure and agglomeration-resistant attributes due to isotropic capillary-forced synthesis (Fig. 5c).88 The synthesized nanocomposite consisting of metal oxide, three-dimensional MXene, PGM or sulfur exhibited a large electrochemically active surface area, rapid transfer kinetics as well as diffusion rates. Specifically, the CoP-3D MXene nanocomposite shows excellent electrocatalytic activity for H2 and O2 in basic media. An et al. devised a route to convert Ti2CTx into an active electrocatalyst with the help of nitriding using sodium amide (NaNH2).89 The nitride product (N-Ti2CTx) demonstrated promising electrocatalytic activity (current density 10 mA cm−2, overpotential 215 mV vs. normal hydrogen electrode). In addition to that, the synthesized electrocatalyst was found to be highly durable in acidic media (0.5 M H2SO4), which shows the robustness of the catalyst towards HER. Fan's group suggested a simple way to enhance the HER performance in basic solution by synthesizing doped MoS2 in combination with Mo2CTx.90 The advantage of Co doping was in terms of the modification of the electronic structure of the former and to enhance the intrinsic capabilities of the electrocatalyst. Experimental data showed that Co-MoS2/Mo2CTx nanocomposites had a minor overpotential (112 mV@10 mA cm−2) and stability in basic solution over extended periods of time. Similarly, Tian's group investigated co-catalysts containing Ti3C2 tungsten disulfide for the evolution of hydrogen.91
 Fig. 5  (a) A schematic illustration of the preparation of a Ti3C2Tx–CoBDC hybrid for the oxygen evolution reaction. Reproduced with permission from ref. 85 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (b) A schematic illustration of the fabrication of a hierarchically structured 3D electrocatalytic electrode via growing a mesoporous network of NiFe-LDH nanosheets onto a macroporous MXene/NF frame, and corresponding SEM images. Reproduced with permission from ref. 87 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (c) The substantial merits of an aggregation-resistant 3D MXene architecture and the capillary-forced assembly of an MXene to 3D architecture and related hybrid systems via spray drying aerosol droplets of MXene-containing colloids. Reproduced with permission from ref. 88 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
Nanosheets of titania were deposited on Ti3C2 and 1T-WS2 NPs, followed by homogenous dispersion onto a TiO2@Ti3C2 nanohybrid. Interestingly, the photocatalytic performance of the electrocatalyst in terms of hydrogen evolution with 15 wt% WS2 loading was found to be 50 times superior to titania nanosheets, which was ascribed to a better electron transfer mechanism by adding materials. During the last few decades, theoretical studies have become a key part of material science. In such studies, electrocatalysts can be analyzed through a systematic approach at the nanometric level. In addition to that, energy and transition changes of electrons are vital attributes for interpreting different mechanisms behind the design of novel electrocatalysts. Song and co-workers performed DFT calculations to determine the surface characteristics of Ni2P and interface of Ni2P/Cr2CO2 for application as bifunctional catalysts and also gave insight into the mechanisms for enhancement of electrochemical performance of the prepared electrocatalyst.92 Interestingly, the optimal value of overpotential for OER was found to be 0.95 V for Ni2P and for Ni2P/Cr2CO2 a lower value of overpotential (0.80 V) was found. Hydrogen adsorption on the catalyst led to a Gibbs free energy of 0.09 eV with a reasonable coverage of hydrogen. It was noticed that transfer of charge took place from an Ni atom to an O atom, which led to weaker coupling between intermediate products and nickel and enhanced the catalytic performance of Ni2P in terms of OER and HER. Lv et al. synthesized Ti3C2Tx with a thin layer of titania nanosheets on it followed by photo-deposition of nanodots of copper oxide on titania.93 The resultant catalyst successfully split water into hydrogen (860 mmol g−1 h−1) and oxygen. The synthesis of efficient bifunctional electrocatalysts is the need of the hour in the paradigm of renewable energy with potential applications in water splitting. Zhang and co-workers synthesized a novel bifunctional electrocatalyst through the deposition of transition metals onto Cr2CO2 and employed it for the splitting of water (Fig. 6).94 It was observed that Ni atoms successfully anchored on MXene and a relatively lower overpotential was recorded for OER (0.46 V) and HER (0.16 V). Migration of a number of electrons was noticed from nickel to oxygen of MXene, that enhanced the bonding strength between the aforesaid materials. Moreover, simulation studies revealed inhibition of the formation of nickel-based clusters due to stability of Ni atoms on the MXene substrate. Additionally, more insight was provided by the authors into the possible route of Ni/Cr2CO2 preparation for catalysis that paved the way for the experimental synthesis of the catalyst. Yan et al. proposed Ni-based bimetal phosphorus trisulfide (Ni1−xFexPS3) and the corresponding MXene was synthesized95 with the help of a self-assembly technique executed through an in situ reaction at reduced temperature. The synthesized nanocomposite exhibited a reduced overpotential (282 mV) and Tafel slope (36.5 mV dec−1) for the oxygen evolution reaction in basic media. In addition, Ni0.7Fe0.3PS3@MXene demonstrated a reduced overpotential (196 mV) for the hydrogen evolution reaction in basic media. Moreover, catalysts with varying amounts of nickel and iron exhibited a reduced onset potential and required 1.65 V to achieve a 10 mA cm−2 current density when employed for the splitting of water.
 Fig. 6  A schematic diagram of a transition metal anchored on a Cr2CO2 surface as a bifunctional catalyst for overall water splitting. Reproduced with permission from ref. 94 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
OER involves a process of four-electron transfer along with intermediates which is considered more complex than HER. To achieve durable and efficient OER, it is required to synthesize an electrocatalyst with a unique design and heterostructure. It has been reported that MXenes are not very suitable for OER96 but can work as conductive support materials, regulate a cocatalyst's electronic density, and exhibit potential to provide OER-active motifs to amplify OER performance. For example, g-C3N4 in combination with Ti3C2Tx generated an extremely active Ti–Nx motif at the junction of two materials for a noble-metal-like OER performance.97 Many active materials for OER, such as oxides,98 transition metal chalcogenides,99 nitrides,100 MOFs,85 phosphides,101 C-based materials,97,102 LDHs,103,104 and QDs,105 have been combined with MXenes to achieve high OER performance. More importantly, new horizons have been opened up due to the introduction of non-noble-metal MXene composites which have ousted noble-metal-based catalysts for water splitting and the oxygen evolution reaction. Composite materials with heterostructures often lead to strain and mismatch at the junction, that has been studied in phase engineering to modify electronic states at the junction and introduce metastable phases of material.106 Li and co-workers used a mixture of stable and metastable phases of MoSe2 and stabilized it followed by deposition onto Ti3C2Tx and employed it as a bifunctional electrocatalyst for OER and HER.99 The resultant hybrid architecture outperformed their individual phases and components for both OER and HER. The synthesized hybrid also needed a moderate potential (1.64 V vs. reversible hydrogen electrode) to deliver −10 mA cm−2 current density for a stretched period of time (50 h), meanwhile maintaining a high content of the 1T phase. The enhancement in activity was ascribed to the improved charge transfer (realized through MXene) and confined heterostructure that avoided aggregation. MoSe2 also added to the enhancement in activity due to a number of active sites of a highly stable 1T phase. In short, such combinations of MXenes can provide stabilized metastable phases which are pivotal to higher activities. Studies have revealed that LDHs are suitable materials for water splitting and OER using alkaline media, but they aggregate with ease and exhibit poor electrical conductivity.103 In the literature, LDHs were modified by the introduction of C-based materials to assist charge transport. Moreover, carbon-based supports needed to be functionalized, which consequently results in reduced electrical conductivity and structural stability. So, Yu and co-workers synthesized hybrid structures using MXenes for self-assembly of FeNiLDH over Ti3C2Tx in a three-dimensional pattern (Fig. 7).104
 Fig. 7  The in situ formation of secondary materials on MXenes to form MXene hybrids: the in situ electrostatic self-assembly of an FeNi-DH/Ti3C2Tx hybrid. Adapted with permission from ref. 104. Copyright 2017 Elsevier Ltd. 
Such an arrangement was advantageous because it reduced aggregation and repulsion between different sheets of LDH without compromising on ECSA and it was prominent while checking OER performance.103,107 The stability was also found to be superior compared to a mixture of Ti3C2Tx and FeNi-LDH and an LDH/rGO and FeNi mixture. Fe and Ni with an increased oxidation state added to the improvement in OER performance and it was reinforced by XPS results.104 In addition, an effort was made to combine an FeNi-LDH/Ti3C2Tx heterostructure with a nickel foam to form a three-dimensional network for the maximization of mass transport and electrochemically active surface area, resulting in excellent current density (500 mA cm−2) at reduced overpotentials for HER (205 mV) and OER (300 mV) in basic media.87 In another study, Co LDH was successfully grown on Ti3C2Tx controlling the surface oxidation of the latter during the oxygen evolution reaction, thus countering an impediment to charge transfer at the junction of LDH-MXene.108 The same composite structure can be further processed to achieve bifunctional catalysts: e.g., phosphosulfides. For instance, LDH/MXenes are transformed into NixFe1−xPS3/MXene composites through thermal annealing in a vacuum-sealed bottle and using red phosphorous.95 Such nanocomposites have a unique nano-mosaic morphology due to the presence of thermal stress and consequently exhibit high ECSA. Additionally, the composition of the hybrid can be easily modified by changing the Fe/Ni ratio in the corresponding precursor. It is important to note that the catalytic activity of the composites depends upon the ratio of Fe and Ni. Ni0.9Fe0.1PS3/Ti3C2Tx was discovered to be most efficient for HER activity in basic media, whereas Ni0.7Fe0.3PS3/Ti3C2Tx showed superior OER performance. A couple of the aforesaid materials can provide thorough water splitting (@ −10 mA cm−2 and 1.65 V vs. reversible hydrogen electrode) compared to a noble metal IrO2‖Pt/C standard (which is 1.71 V vs. reversible hydrogen electrode). The prepared couple was also found to have excellent stability for a long time (50 h) at the same potential. In short, this study showed strain engineering for maximization of the electrochemically active surface area and introducing flexibility by tailoring multi-metal mixtures to synthesize bifunctional catalysts. MXenes have also been used in combination with transition metal phosphides to form bifunctional OER and HER catalysts.88,101,109 In another study, Xiu and co-workers investigated a hybrid architecture consisting of CoP@3D and Ti3C2Tx-based MXene for enhancement of electrochemical performance.88 Following a process of nebulizing, MXene colloids had cobalt salts added in the form of droplets which were dried quickly at high temperature (600 °C). MXene sheets were isotopically compressed into agglomeration-resistant Co3O4@3D Ti3C2Tx composites with the help of solvent evaporation (Fig. 8a). Upon the further addition of phosphorous, Co3O4 converted into an OER-active compound (CoP). The advantage of using MXene was the availability of a three-dimensional and interconnected porous structure (Fig. 8b) which led to a large ECSA and facilitated charge transport. A successful multifunctional OER and HER electrocatalyst was synthesized and it needed a low overpotential (1.565 V vs. RHE) to deliver a high current density (−10 mA cm−2) as well as remaining stable even after long hours (150 h @−100 mA cm−2). A combination of MXenes with transition metal phosphides is also believed to transfer the d-band center of the transition metal to higher energies, enhancing OER and adsorption of –OH.109 Moreover, one-dimensional nanorods of CoP were grown on Ti3C2Tx-based MXene to add bending and tensile stress to MXene for maximization of ECSA and consequent OER performance.101
 Fig. 8  MXene hybrids for EC water splitting. (a) Assembly and (b) a scanning electron microscope (SEM) image of 3D CoP-MXene. Adapted with permission from ref. 88 Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 
Fossil fuels have traditionally been our primary source of energy. Although they hastened the progress of human socioeconomic development, they also posed huge hurdles in terms of ecological issues.110 Excessive consumption of fossil fuels causes thermal pollution, global warming and air pollution, all of which are incompatible with the global paradigm of sustainable development. Hydrogen is a novel sustainable energy substitute to fossil fuels because of its high calorific value, and it can be created by electrocatalytic water splitting.111 Simultaneously, platinum (Pt) is the most commonly used electrocatalyst in HER.112 The scarcity and high cost of Pt, on the other hand, severely limit their practical application. A recent study has demonstrated that MXene-derived catalysts have a promising future in HER, both experimentally and theoretically. Different functionalities are the main driving force for MXene-based electrocatalysts and their performance is greatly influenced by these groups. The study reported that the presence of more fluorine on the reference surface reduces the catalytic activity. This indicates that the presence of F-functionalities is damaging to HER. Zhang and coworkers employed an electrochemical stripping approach for the development of dual-metal-based MXene (Mo2TiC2Tx-VMo) nanocrystalline sheets. The as-prepared sheets have abundant vacancies for Mo.113 The new catalyst has an excellent electrocatalytic ability and low overpotentials of 30 and 77 mV, allowing it to reach 10 and 100 mA cm−2 and a mass activity that is nearly 40 times greater than the existing platinum-on-carbon catalyst. Furthermore, owing to the strong covalent bond between Mo2TiC2Tx and Pt atoms, Mo2TiC2Tx-PtSA exhibits remarkable stability against HER, preventing roughness and surface diffusion of the catalyst. By combining annealing and liquid nitrogen freezing, Liu and coworkers114 demonstrated a straightforward technique for producing fractional “nanorods” such as MoS2/Ti3C2Tx hybrids. The folding of Ti3C2Tx nanorods and the creation of vertically aligned MoS2 microcrystals were both aided by the quick-freezing procedure. During electrocatalytic processes, this unique MoS2/Ti3C2Tx hybrid fractionation provides additional active areas and increases charge transfer. With a tiny starting overpotential of 30 mV, it demonstrated remarkable catalytic performance for HER. Furthermore, when compared to MoS2, the exchange current density rose by more than 25 times. Huang and coworkers115 used a simple hydrothermal technique to directly synthesise the MoS2/Ti3C2 heterostructure. MoS2 nanosheets can be grown vertically on planar Ti3C2 nanosheets using this approach. Because of the open layer architecture and significant interfacial interaction, the resulting MoS2/Ti3C2 heterostructures have significantly increased HER activity compared to conventional MoS2 nanosheets. By constructing a tiny number of carbon-coated MoS2 nanostructures plated with carbon on carbon-stable Ti3C2 MXene, Wu and coworkers15 created MoS2/Ti3C2-MXene@C nanocrystals with outstanding electrical characteristics, strong interfacial interaction and structural stability. This material, which can be referred to as a highly active HER electrocatalyst, has outstanding durability and activity and in an acidic solution. Wang and coworkers116 used in situ polymerization on the surface of Ti3C2Tx MXene using Mo and dopamine as precursors to create a hybrid of carbon-encapsulated nitrogen-doped Mo2C nanodots on Ti3C2Tx MXene (Mo2C/Ti3C2Tx@NC). Polydopamine plays a wide variety of roles throughout the annealing process, including generating N-doped carbon, trapping MoO42− ions into nanoscale Mo2C nanodots, and maintaining MXene sheets against spontaneous oxidation. The as-prepared hybrid, with an overpotential of 53 mV at 10 mA cm−2 and great stability over 30 hours, demonstrates excellent HER performance in an acidic electrolyte. Simulations and experiments show that the nanodots (Mo2C) doped with pyridinic nitrogen and coated with carbon function as active sites, whereas Ti3C2Tx MXene enhances charge transfer, resulting synergistically in improved HER activity. In another approach, Li and coworkers reported monolithic cracking of water using a 1T/2H MoSe2-on-MXene surface. They represent these heterojunctions as 1T/2H MoSe2/MXene nanosheets. The 1T/2H MoSe2/MXene electrocatalyst demonstrates dramatically improved HER capability thanks to the high-conductivity base of MXene, as well as the good conductivity and plentiful active sites of 1T/2H phase MoSe2. The most important part of this report was that when the as-prepared catalyst was used as a bifunctional electrocatalyst for water splitting it needed only 1.64 V at a current density of 10 mA cm−2. These heterostructures also reveal significant durability as water splitting electrocatalysts.99 Another widely used electrocatalyst based on MXene is molybdenum carbide. Benefiting from the idea, She and coworkers117 presented their study of an HER electrocatalyst. Because of the active state of the catalytic process, Mo2CTx has higher HER activity than Ti2CTx. Furthermore, Dong and coworkers presented another Mo-based electrocatalyst (Mo–Mo2C).118 The as-reported catalyst reveals a Tafel slope of 55 mV dec−1 and overpotential of 67 mV in an acidic medium. Furthermore, the electrocatalyst has good cycling durability, indicating that it performs well in electrocatalysis. Wu and coworkers119 also achieved efficient HER over the pH spectrum by accurately developing a multifunctional cooperative catalytic functionality between hybrid carbon and bimetallic cobalt-molybdenum carbide MXene. The results obtained from this catalyst could easily compete with the commercially available catalyst Pt/C in acidic conditions (0.5 M H2SO4) or 1 M KOH solution. Furthermore, the as-prepared CoxMo2−xC/MXene/NC electrocatalyst outperforms the conventional catalyst in a pH range of 2.2–11.2. When used directly in seawater for electrolysis of the hydrogen reaction, this type of catalyst has activity comparable to platinum, with an average lifespan more than 64 times that of Pt/C catalysts and a Faraday efficiency of 98%, which is greater than those of corresponding catalysts.
Sun and coworkers120 used chemical vapor deposition to create better quality Mo2C/graphene heterostructures and 2D Mo2C crystals on liquid gold. AFM (atomic force microscopy) confirmed that Mo2C has a peculiar sinking growth behavior on liquid metal. The addition of hydrogen, on the other hand, had a considerable impact on the formation of graphene and Mo2C. By altering the carbon/hydrogen ratio, a hybrid structure of Mo2C/graphene may be created. The charge transfer between the electrode and catalyst is greater than with a pristine Mo2C crystal on Au foil, demonstrating the effectiveness and practicality of the produced catalyst for HER. Pan and coworkers121 used DFT simulations to investigate the HER on MXene (W2X and Mo2X, X = N and C), and discovered that the composition, position of H-adsorption, and surface modification all play a role in HER efficiency. The W2C single layer shows good HER performance and a practically negligible overpotential at higher hydrogen density compared to other MXenes, and hydrogenation can boost its catalytic efficiency over a broader range of hydrogen densities; however, oxidation can drastically decrease its activity. The Mo2X monolayer must be designed and synthesized with oxygen in order to increase HER activity. The MXene activity can be compared to that of Pt at a higher hydrogen density by altering its constitution and synthesis method, and it can be used to treat HER. Li and coworkers83 investigated the HER kinetics and thermodynamics of M2XO2 MXene, as well as the process of enhancing HER performance by changing distinct TM atoms, using high-throughput simulations. The introduction of transition metal atoms to the MXene surface will greatly boost their HER reactivity, as the majority of original MXenes show little HER performance. According to the findings, adding transition metal atoms to the surfaces of M2XO2 produces electron rearrangement on the surface of MXene, altering the charging process on oxygen and shifting charge for the movement of H, resulting in a large improvement in reactivity. Ling and coworkers122 used first-principles simulations to explore HER efficiency using vanadium carbide with a fully oxygen-terminated surface (V2CO2). The findings suggest that the potential of pure V2CO2 as an HER catalyst is hampered by significant H-adsorption. The H-adsorption free energy may be reduced to zero by inserting suitable transition metal atoms (Fe, Co, or Ni) on the surface, which is equivalent to or even greater than the Pt(111) surface. In addition, Chen and coworkers123 used DFT simulations to investigate the HER catalytic characteristics of M2CO2 (M = Ti, V, Hf, Zr, Ta) after incorporating transition metal atoms. According to the findings, the insertion of transition metal atoms changed the conductivities of MXenes and the differential Gibbs free energies of HER. With the incorporation of transition metal atoms, good metallic conductivity and HER catalytic activity may be achieved simultaneously for particular MXenes. With the implantation of different transition metal elements, the Gibbs free energy varied on a regular basis, which is connected to the periodic change in electronegativity of transition metal elements. After implanting transition metal atoms, a variety of M2CO2 (M = Ti, Hf, Zr, and Ta) catalysts were found to be effective HER catalysts.
In different applications, OER is the main process for fuel cells, metal air batteries and water splitting. There are some wonderful options available, such as RuO2 and IrO2, but their high cost and scarcity make them less favorable candidates.124 It is therefore required to develop such electrocatalysts which are inexpensive and exhibit excellent electrochemical performance. Recently, MXenes have been extensively employed for OER with outstanding performance. Ma and coworkers97 developed a membrane based on Ti3C2 and g-C3N4 (TCCN) and employed it for OER using alkaline media. Ti3C2 in combination with g-C3N4 through Ti–Nx interaction, produces a porous structure accompanied with a conductive framework and a hydrophilic surface, which demonstrates outstanding electrocatalytic performance for OER. Such combinations not only pave the way for O2 electrochemistry but also open up horizons for a wide variety of catalysts. Zhao and coworkers85 synthesized 2D MOFs (1,4-cobalt dicarboxylate, CoBDC) with Ti3C2Tx (MXene phase) nanosheets with the help of an interdiffusion reaction, and employed the composite material for the oxygen evolution reaction. The results demonstrate that the prepared composite material attains a current density of 10 mA cm−2 @ 1.64 V vs. RHE and a Tafel slope of 48.2 mV dec−1 in basic media (0.1 M KOH). The Ti3C2Tx–CoBDC hybrid material uses the hydrophilicity and electrical conductivity of Ti3C2Tx along with the active sites of two-dimensional MOFs, thus facilitating mass and electron transfer, and exhibits promising OER activity in comparison with a commercially available IrO2 catalyst. Moreover, Wen and coworkers125 prepared an MXene-supported CoNi-ZIF-67 composite through the process of co-precipitation. It was interesting to note that the addition of MXene led to small-sized particles of CoNi-ZIF-67 and Co/Ni oxidation consequently produced an outstanding electrocatalyst (CoNi-ZIF-67@Ti3C2Tx) for OER. The synergetic effects of highly active CoNi-ZIF-67 and conductive MXene facilitated excellent OER activity with a reasonable Tafel slope (65.1 mV dec−1) and reduced initial potential (275 mV vs. RHE) that was way better than a standard catalyst and CoNi-ZIF-67. A facile route to synthesize MXene consisting of cobalt borates and Ti3C2Tx was reported by Liu and co-workers. A swift reaction took place at room temperature.126 It is important to note that Ti3C2Tx hinders the agglomeration of Co–Bi as well as improving electron transport. In addition, the combination of the aforesaid materials ensures a quick redox reaction through electrostatic attraction. The synthesized catalyst delivered outstanding electrocatalytic activity with an overpotential of 250 mV, Tafel slope of 53 mV dec−1 and current density of 10 mA cm−2. Another excellent catalyst for OER, which has been reported recently, is FeOOH. Li and co-workers105 synthesized a Ti3C2Tx–FeOOH heterostructure and employed it to increase the catalytic performance of FeOOH for OER using alkaline media. The prepared catalyst exhibited outstanding performance compared to FeOOH alone in terms of current density, (10 mA cm−2), initial potential (1.65 V vs. RHE) and Tafel slope (31.7 mV dec−1) using alkaline media. The interactions between Ti3C2Tx and FeOOH QDs resulted in exceptional stability for OER in KOH. Moreover, Zhao and co-workers127 prepared a hybrid catalyst consisting of Ti3C2 and FeOOH via the directional growth of FeOOH NSs on Ti3C2 nanosheets at room temperature. Interestingly, the prepared structure exhibited quick mass transportation, and ensured more electroactive sites and agile charge transfer through the interaction between the above-mentioned materials. The catalyst showed enhanced current density (10 mA cm−2 @ 1.63 V vs. RHE) and Tafel slope (95 mV dec−1), and exhibited outstanding stability for the oxygen evolution reaction even after 30 h. In addition to the aforesaid options, layered double hydroxides based on iron, cobalt and nickel have also been reported as effective electrocatalysts for OER applications. Benchakar and co-workers108 synthesized a non-PGM electrocatalyst comprising Co-LDH and Ti3C2Tx and employed it for OER. The layered structure was observed to be highly reactive and beneficial for OER. Additionally, MXene retains its structure during preparation of the composite and LDH helps to avoid MXene oxidation, thus keeping the conductivity intact. The prepared catalyst demonstrated higher catalytic activity for OER in comparison with the commercially available catalyst IrO2. Likewise, another composite was reported by Tian and co-workers,128 which comprised MXene and FeCo-LDH. In comparison with multilayers or nanofibers, single-layer MXenes exhibit superior electrochemical performance due to utilization of a number of active sites. The prepared hybrid showed improved durability and electrocatalytic activity for OER because of its greater electrochemically active surface area and electron transfer capability. Interestingly, a low overpotential (268 mV @ current density of 10 mA cm−2) was observed compared to MWCNT and graphene together with LDH. Similarly, Yu and co-workers synthesized an electrocatalyst comprising MXene and LDH for OER.104 The as-prepared catalyst showed excellent characteristics, such as high stability, improved conductivity, enhanced surface activity and outstanding electrocatalytic performance realized through the synergetic effects of combining the materials. The Tafel slope and overpotential were found to be lower in the case of FeNi-LDH/Ti3C2-MXene in comparison with FeNi-LDH/rGO and commercially available catalysts. Another promising material for OER is cobalt oxide and it has been extensively reported. Lu and coworkers effectively produced a highly active electrocatalyst for OER comprising 0D Co3O4 and 2D Ti3C2.129 As a result of activation, the prepared catalyst exhibited an overpotential of 300 mV @ 10 mA cm−2 using basic media, which was remarkably superior to those of the individual materials. The inclusion of 2D MXenes in hybrid electrocatalysts imparts unique attributes, such as interface and morphological adjustments, and electron transport acceleration, consequently leading to the formation of heterojunctions along with improved electrical conductivity, more active sites and narrow charge transfer pathways, resulting in enhanced electrocatalytic performance. The aforementioned studies depict that most catalysts lack sufficient electrical conductivity, but MXene can significantly counter this issue. Recently, it has proven to be a good strategy for the improvement of electrocatalysts used in OER; however, only Ti3C2Tx-based electrocatalysts have been explored. So, there is the possibility of trying other MXenes as efficient and economical electrocatalysts for OER applications.
The introduction of cutting-edge technologies, such as metal–air batteries and fuel cells, has opened up new horizons for the replacement of conventional energy resources and curbing of environmental issues. Durable and super-active electrocatalysts are the need of the hour for potential applications as electrocatalyst for the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) in fuel cells. The traditionally used PGM group of catalysts are the state of the art but their scarcity, high cost, and lower durability make them less favorable in fuel cell applications. For this reason, the development of non-PGM catalysts, which are cost-effective, is on the way. In the last decade or so, research has been focused on introducing non-PGM or even metal-free electrocatalysts for OER. In particular, metal-free catalysts have been explored, such as graphene, CNTs or porous carbon-based ones. At present, MXenes and their nanocomposites have appeared as alternative electrocatalysts. Interestingly, MXenes exhibit a hydrophilic nature with excellent conductivity and stability, and can be employed as promising electrocatalysts. To be precise, recent studies have focused on MXene nanocomposites for OER applications: for instance, the combination of Ti3C2 and g-C3N4 nanosheets has been investigated.130 CuTCNQ and TiO2 based electrocatalysts have demonstrated outstanding electrochemical performance and stability in alkaline media.131,132 The sandwich structure consisting of a surface layer with titanium atoms at the corners and an innermost layer of carbon atoms makes a layer-by-layer structure for an electrocatalyst providing active sites for ORR. Such structures are sources of electrocatalysts with excellent stability, ORR catalytic activity in alkaline media and cost-effectiveness. Yu and co-workers synthesized a composite of Ti3C2 NPs and g-C3N4 nanosheets. The hybrid architecture demonstrated substantial enhancement in ORR activity compared to nanosheets of pristine g-C3N4. Moreover, it has been observed that the electrocatalytic activity is merely dependent upon the extent of stacking of Ti3C2 NPs. The optimal value of Ti3C2 stacking was found to be approximately 2 wt%. The excellent electrochemical performance was attributed to the enhanced adsorption of oxygen and well-managed charge separation between the two materials. It has also been reported that in comparison with the commercially available catalyst Pt/C, a g-C3N4/Ti3C2 electrocatalyst showed excellent methanol tolerance without using expensive metals.133 The combination of Mo2C and V2C MXenes with doped graphene can act as a probable candidate for ORR because of its low ORR overpotential (0.36 V) and acceptable kinetic barrier realized through electronic interactions between MXene and doped graphene.134 As far as QDs of Ti3C2Tx and MoS2 in combination with MWCNTs are concerned, an excellent ORR performance (Tafel slope 90 mV dec−1, E1/2, 0.75 V) was observed compared to other non-PGM electrocatalysts, quite close to the values of a commercially available catalyst (Pt/C, Tafel slope 89 mV dec−1, E1/2 0.80 V). In addition, the aforesaid material (Fig. 9) also exhibited superior electro-oxidation performance for methanol in alkaline media, delivering a current density of 160 A g−1 @ 2.2 V accompanied by excellent oxidation of methanol. The literature gave insights into the potential of Ti3C2Tx QDs along with MWCNTs and MoS2 as a bifunctional electrocatalyst for ORR and MOR.135–137 Moreover, doped MXene (e.g., Fe-doped) materials exhibit outstanding ORR performance in terms of half-wave potential because of charge-separation-enhanced oxygen adsorption.
 Fig. 9  MoS2QDs@Ti3C2TxQDs@MMWCNTs for the methanol oxidation and oxygen reduction reactions in basic solution. Reprinted with permission from ref. 138. 
A synthesized hybrid structure based on Mn3O4 and MXene demonstrates promising ORR activity through the four-electron oxygen reduction route and comparable onset potential (approximately 0.89 V) in alkaline media. The electrical conductivity of the metal and hydrophilicity led to a quick electron transfer mechanism and inhibited NP aggregation. In addition, greater stability is observed for Mn3O4/MXene in comparison with Mn3O4/acetylene black, which is realized through the stable hybrid structure of the former.139 As-synthesized inexpensive iron-doped MXene hybrid structures with outstanding ORR performance can be suitable candidates as ORR electrocatalysts and for other applications as well, such as fuel cells and air batteries.
3.3. Methanol oxidation reaction
Direct methanol fuel cells (DMFCs), are regarded as environmentally benign, sustainable and effective sources of energy.140 But there are some issues which hinder their widespread application, such as slow kinetics and sufficiently higher overpotential.141 It is the need of the hour to synthesize an effective and inexpensive electrocatalyst for MOR. MXenes have emerged as novel materials for applications in energy storage devices. Theoretically, the two-dimensional structure can provide number of anchoring sites as well as functionalities at the surface. Moreover, the stability and electronic conductivity of MXene lead to excellent MOR performance. Conclusively, MXene shows great potential for the electro-oxidation of methanol. Yang and co-workers138 prepared a novel hybrid material based on MoS2 QDs, MWCNTS and Ti3C2Tx QDs and employed it as an emerging electrocatalyst for MOR in basic media. It was noticed that the prepared catalyst effectively electro-oxidized methanol in basic media (KOH) with superior current density (160 A g−1 @ 2.2 V) showing outstanding MOR performance in basic solution. Wang and co-workers142 effectively anchored Pt NPs over Ti3C2 MXene and used it as an MOR electrocatalyst. The results indicated that Pt/Ti3C2 showed promising MOR performance accompanied by lower initial potential and substantial current density (1.137 mA cm−2), which were many times time higher than those of the commercially available catalyst Pt/C. Moreover, stability over extended periods (two hours) was noted. The excellent MOR performance was ascribed to the unique structure of two-dimensional nanosheets, outstanding electric conductivity, strong interactions accompanied by synergistic effects between Ti3C2 and platinum. Lang and co-workers143 demonstrated a 60% increase in catalytic activity toward MOR using Pd catalysts realized through the incorporation of MXene with surface modifications. Interestingly, the synthesized catalyst (Pd/MXene) showed a high MOR performance (12.4 mA cm−2) which was far better than that of the commercially available catalyst Pd/C. Such catalysts offer advantages, such as more exposed surfaces, low Pd loadings, and modification of Pd electronic structure. It has also been found through DFT computations and spectroscopy that the abundant electronegative characteristics of the MXene surface can lead to strong metal–support interactions with palladium, resulting in maximum adsorption of methanol. There are a limited number of reports regarding the use of MXenes for MOR; meanwhile, structural stability and sufficient electronic conductivity further necessitate their applications. Conclusively, MXenes are promising candidates for the electro-oxidation of methanol and can broaden its utilization in DMFCs.
3.4. Nitrogen reduction reaction
Ammonia is regarded as an energy source which is free of carbon and widely accepted due to increased energy density and hydrogen capacity. The areas of application include resins, fertilizers, dyes, and textiles. The conventional way of producing ammonia is through the Haber–Bosch method, that accomplishes the reaction by converting nitrogen and hydrogen into NH3 under harsh environments (very high pressure and temperature).144 Ultimately the synthesis utilizes high amounts of energy and emits greenhouse gases. That is why it is necessary to introduce ecofriendly and sustainable routes. One such route is the electrochemical reduction of nitrogen and it is found to be a useful method as it utilizes a reduced amount of energy accompanied by a high yield of ammonia. Meanwhile, the exploitation of highly efficient electrocatalysts is of prime importance for ammonia-producing industries.145–147 As an alternative material, MXenes have been reported to catalyze highly stable nitrogen. In this regard, different morphologies and functional groups of MXene are pivotal for the nitrogen reduction reaction. Zhao and colleagues148 discovered that Ti3C2Tx-based MXene could effectively transform nitrogen to ammonia under the action of ambient conditions. It is worth mentioning that such a catalyst can provide a greater amount of ammonia (20.4 mg h−1 mg−1) with sufficient faradaic efficiency (9.3% @ −0.4 V vs. RHE) in acidic media as well as high structural and electrochemical stability. While Luo's group149 tried to modify the size of MXene to regulate the orientation of host metals to realize the exposure of active sites and deliver promising electrosynthesis efficiency at reduced potentials. The experimental data revealed that electrochemically active sites with the metal host decided the potential of MXene for the electrosynthesis of ammonia. Additionally, Li and coworkers150 synthesized a Ti3C2Tx-based catalyst of small size by a fluorine-free route. The as-synthesized catalyst delivered a high amount of ammonia 36.9 μg h−1 mgcat−1 with a faradaic efficiency of 9.1% @ −0.3 V vs. reversible hydrogen electrode in acidic media. The effect of the size-fluorine-free route led to a doubled improvement in performance in comparison with the fluorine-based technique. It was also found through DFT studies that the edge of titanium along with –OH groups on the MXene surface were more useful for the activation and adsorption of nitrogen. Similarly, Jin and co-workers151 effectively synthesized QDs based on Ti3C2OH and employed them as a nitrogen reduction reaction catalyst through stirring of MXene in a solution of NaOH. This technique was found to be ecofriendly with a greater number of active sites without damaging the raw materials. These QDs delivered a sufficient yield of ammonia (62.94 μg h−1 mgcat−1) and faradaic efficiency (13.30%) @ −0.50 V in acidic electrolyte media along with excellent electrocatalytic performance, chemical stability, and selectivity. Interestingly, this electrocatalytic activity is better than that of most previous investigations on electrocatalysts for NRR under ambient conditions. It has also been found that the inclusion of transition metal atoms (e.g., Mo, Au, and Ru) can successfully improve the electrochemical performance of MXenes. DFT studies conducted by Li's group152 revealed that a number of transition metal atoms occupied vacancies in nanosheets of MXene. The studies also showed that atoms such as Zr, Hf, Mo, W, Ta, Re, and Os deposited on defective layers of Mo2TiC2O2 could impressively facilitate the nitrogen reduction reaction. Mo2TiC2O2–ZrSA was found to be the most outstanding catalyst as it exhibited the lowest potential barrier and promising selectivity for NRR. Overall, it was concluded that MXene doped with transition metals could act as potential candidates for delivering high-performance NRR. Huang and co-workers153 investigated transition-metal-supported Mo2CO2 and Ti2CO2 as efficient catalysts for the nitrogen reduction reaction. The results of the calculations demonstrated that Ti2CO2/Mo2CO2 with a single Mo or Ru atom showed superior NRR performance. Moreover, the potential was found to be smaller compared to Ti2CO2 because of the high conductivity of Mo2CO2. Additionally, nitrogen could be easily converted to ammonia with the help of Ti@Mo2CO2 through different mechanisms with a limiting potential of −0.64 V. Moreover, Mo@Mo2CO2 was analyzed for NRR selectivity and activity through a Gibbs free energy comparison of hydrogen, dinitrogen along with initial dinitrogen protonation as well as adsorption of hydrogen. The mechanism was found to be a distal or hybrid one for the reduction of nitrogen and the overpotential was observed to be 0.16 or 0.19 V, demonstrating Mo@Mo2CO2 as a successful electrocatalyst for the nitrogen reduction reaction Additionally, Cheng and co-workers154 determined that immobilization of an Mo atom onto Ti2NO2-based MXene led to the formation of an excellent electrocatalyst. Liu's group deposited155 gold particles onto the Ti3C2 surface through ultrasonic reduction, and revealed that the nitrogen–nitrogen triple bond was weakened due to the nitrogen adsorption energy at the MXene and gold cluster interface. The average ammonia yield was found to be 30.06 μg h−1 mg−1 with a faradaic efficiency of 18.34% @ −0.2 V vs. reversible hydrogen electrode when the gold concentration was 0.94%. Moreover, Liu and co-workers156 synthesized an electrocatalyst based on MXene as well as ruthenium (Ru@MXene). Using a basic electrolyte, the ammonia yield was found to be 2.3 μmol h−1 cm−2. Additionally, the faradaic efficiency was reported to be 13.13% @ −0.4 V vs. reversible hydrogen electrode. In the recent times, titania has also been considered as an electrocatalyst for NRR with its unique attribute of non-toxicity. Zhang and co-workers157 synthesized an electrocatalyst based on Ti3C2Tx and Ti, which acted as a source of titania growth through a hydrothermal process. The as-prepared nanocomposite showed outstanding NRR performance at ambient temperature. It was interesting to note that the ammonia yield was higher (26.32 μg h−1 mgcat−1) and the FE was determined to be 8.42% @ −0.6 V vs. reversible hydrogen electrode. Moreover, Yan and co-workers58 prepared titania NPs deposited onto Ti3C2Tx nanoflakes through a one-step approach consisting of thermal-ethanol treatment. It is a well-known fact that the oxygen vacancies act as active sites for the synthesis of ammonia. In addition, Ti3C2Tx with high conductivity facilitates electron transport and inhibits self-agglomeration of titania nanoparticles. At the same time, the addition of titania nanoparticles increases the specific surface area of MXene. The experimental data revealed that the prepared catalyst had higher values of ammonia yield (32.17 μg h−1 mgcat−1 @ −0.55 V vs. reversible hydrogen electrode) and faradaic efficiency (16.07% @ −0.45 V vs. reversible hydrogen electrode in acidic media), compared to pure titania, MXene and other available catalysts. Kong and co-workers158 modified Ti3C2Tx using MnO2 and employed it as a catalyst for high performance in the nitrogen reduction reaction. The results demonstrated that the prepared electrocatalyst showed outstanding selectivity and durability for the synthesis of ammonia under ambient conditions. As far as the ammonia yield is concerned, 34.12 mg h−1 mgcat−1 was delivered by MnO2-modified MXene accompanied by high faradaic efficiency (11.39% @ −0.55 V vs. reversible hydrogen electrode in acidic media). Recently, it has been shown that strong interactions between nitrogen and boron can lead to successful nitrogen reduction. Based on DFT studies, Zheng and co-workers159 step-by-step investigated the electrocatalytic performance of one boron atom placed on two-dimensional TMC. It was found that boron-doped MXenes showed brilliant selectivity and catalytic activity with reasonable limiting potentials (from −0.20 to −0.24 V). Boron is believed to stimulate empty and filled orbitals and efficiently activate the nitrogen triple bond, leading to excellent NRR activity. MXenes are a good option as electrocatalysts for NRR, but the presence of surface oxygen on MXene results in weak interactions with
nitrogen and leads to the occurrence of competitive HER, causing a deterioration in the current efficiency. For practical applications of MXenes, it is necessary to produce more active and exposed nitrogen adsorption sites for efficient NRR. The literature reveals that MXene alone and in combination with transition metals can be employed for nitrogen reduction. In conclusion, the above discussion paves the way for the design/fabrication of cost-effective and extremely efficient MXene-based nanohybrids for the nitrogen reduction reaction.
3.5. MXene-based composites for solar steam generation
Solar energy can be efficiently utilized for the generation of steam power and it is a replenishable, attractive, and eco-friendly source that can be further used for sewage purification and desalination to overcome water scarcity in the world. Ti3C2-based MXene in the form of a thin film has been used for the production of solar-based steam.160 The conversion efficiency of the aforementioned MXene has been analyzed with the help of a thermal measurement and light absorption system; however, the hydrophobic nature of Ti3C2 affects the evaporation efficiency.42 There is a further need to explore the potential of MXenes for desalination and purification purposes. Additionally, MXenes in combination with other photocatalysts have been utilized in applications such as the conversion of solar energy into chemical energy, the degradation of different compounds, charge separation, and inhibition of swift charge recombination. The performance of the photocatalyst depends upon the morphology as well as the composition, which are determined by the synthesis procedure. Yang and co-workers investigated MXene deposited on melamine foam and employed it for a solar steam generator. The hydrophilicity of MXenes and the macropores of melamine led to water absorption on a continuous basis. Consequently, high water evaporation rates (1.41–7.49 kg m−2 h−1) and efficiencies (88.7% to 94.2%) were achieved using different solar illuminations. Such systems can be used to generate pure water from wastewater and saline water accompanied by metal ion and organic dye rejection of nearly 100%.42 Yang et al. studied the potential of cellulose films coated with MXene for applications in water evaporation under solar illumination. The synthesized film exhibited excellent absorption efficiency (94%) under a wide variety of solar spectra along with a high rate (1.44 kg m−2 h−1) of water evaporation using one solar illumination. Additionally, a membrane based on the aforementioned composite exhibited outstanding antibacterial efficiency (99.9%) (Fig. 10).161 Likewise, an MXene-based membrane with a hydrophobic nature and silane modification was synthesized. The as-synthesized MXene membrane had unique characteristics, such as high stability and light utilization, active evaporation channels, and swift water transport. Interestingly, the experimental data showed a high evaporation rate (1.31 kg m−2 h−1) under solar illumination and excellent conversion efficiency (71%) for steam, depicting the potential of the catalyst for purification of sea and wastewater with heavy metals and organic dyes.162 Chen and coworkers introduced nano-coatings based on two-dimensional biomimetic materials, such as rGO and MXenes. These novel materials can be employed in applications of electric/solar dual heaters and solar steam-generation as they are prone to successful conversion of light to heat.163
 Fig. 10  A schematic illustration of the design of an anti-biofouling MXene/cellulose membrane steam generator and digital images of the MXene/cellulose membrane. Reproduced with permission from ref. 161. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
4. Perspectives and challenges
The current advances in the preparation of 3D MXene structures and their application in electrochemical energy conversion have been conclusively summarized in this paper. For fabricating different types of 3D MXenes and their composite materials, many preparatory methods have been established, including assembly, template, 3D printing, gas foaming, and electrospinning methods. Because MXene nanosheet restacking is successfully restricted in these 3D designs, they provide more active sites for electrochemical reactions. The increased electrical conductivity and 3D porous assembly also provide interpenetrating routes for the highly efficient transportation of ions and electrons. Consequently, 3D MXene structures show high performance in terms of electrochemical energy conversion, especially in comparison to other materials. Despite extensive research and significant development, several fundamental issues remain unresolved. The rational design and careful control of pore morphology, including wall thickness and size, are the first steps. Several 3D MXene designs have been successfully prepared, although they all show unordered macroporous formations with uncontrolled wall thicknesses. Secondly, issues related to scalability during the production of 3D MXenes are of concern. Unfortunately, the most widely used approaches for building 3D MXene architectures still involve complex procedures, limited production, and harmful chemicals. Third, recent efforts have primarily concentrated on the hybridization of 3D MXenes with carbon and inorganic components, with only a few organic components being included. Further, organic diversity, multifunctionality, and molecular-level tailorability will make their incorporation into 3D MXene designs a key future avenue for 3D MXene architectures, leading to novel applications and discoveries. Fourth, because of the abundance of macropores, the low density of 3D MXene structures necessarily results in poor volumetric performance. To eliminate the majority of waste blank space and increase the packing density of electrodes, pore structure design and rational mechanical compression would be beneficial. Fifth, Ti3C2Tx is used in the majority of contemporary 3D MXene designs. Given the unique properties of different MXenes, the exploration of 3D MXene designs based on various types of MXenes, such as Ta4C3Tx, Nb3C2Tx, and Mo2TiC2Tx, may lead to significant breakthroughs in the fields of electrochemical energy storage and conversion. To summarise, 3D MXene structures offer a multitude of new possibilities and intriguing applications due to their superior physicochemical features. Rapid advances in manufacturing techniques and synthesis processes will lead to more breakthroughs and commercialization in the near future.
Conflicts of interest
The representative author has no conflicts of interest to disclose in any capacity, either competing or financial.
Acknowledgements
The Interdisciplinary Research Center for Advanced Materials, King Fahd University of Petroleum and Minerals, Saudi Arabia is thankfully acknowledged for providing literature services. The author did not receive any funding to furnish this work.
References
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D.-E. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Electric field effect in atomically thin carbon films, Science, 2004, 306(5696), 666–669 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Cai, B. Liu, X. Zou and H.-M. Cheng, Chemical vapor deposition growth and applications of two-dimensional materials and their heterostructures., Chem. Rev., 2018, 118(13), 6091–6133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, Q. Weng, Y. Yang, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, Hybrid two-dimensional materials in rechargeable battery applications and their microscopic mechanisms, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45(15), 4042–4073 RSC .
X. Zhang, Z. Zhang and Z. Zhou, MXene-based materials for electrochemical energy storage, J. Energy Chem., 2018, 27(1), 73–85 CrossRef .
H. Cui, Y. Guo, W. Ma and Z. Zhou, 2D materials for electrochemical energy storage: Design, preparation, and application, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13(6), 1155–1171 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. ten Elshof, H. Yuan and P. Gonzalez Rodriguez, Two-dimensional metal oxide and metal hydroxide nanosheets: synthesis, controlled assembly and applications in energy conversion and storage, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6(23), 1600355 CrossRef .
C. Jin, F. Lin, K. Suenaga and S. Iijima, Fabrication of a freestanding boron nitride single layer and its defect assignments, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 102(19), 195505 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Bianco, S. Butler, S. Jiang, O. D. Restrepo, W. Windl and J. E. Goldberger, Stability and exfoliation of germanane: a germanium graphane analogue, ACS Nano, 2013, 7(5), 4414–4421 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Vogt, P. De Padova, C. Quaresima, J. Avila, E. Frantzeskakis, M. C. Asensio, A. Resta, B. Ealet and G. Le Lay, Silicene: Compelling experimental evidence for graphenelike two-dimensional silicon, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 108(15), 155501 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Chhowalla, H. S. Shin, G. Eda, L.-J. Li, K. P. Loh and H. Zhang, The chemistry of two-dimensional layered transition metal dichalcogenide nanosheets, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5(4), 263–275 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Kou, C. Chen and S. C. Smith, Phosphorene: Fabrication, properties, and applications, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6(14), 2794–2805 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Deysher, C. E. Shuck, K. Hantanasirisakul, N. C. Frey, A. C. Foucher, K. Maleski, A. Sarycheva, V. B. Shenoy, E. A. Stach and B. Anasori, Synthesis of Mo4VAlC4 MAX phase and two-dimensional Mo4VC4 MXene with five atomic layers of transition metals, ACS Nano, 2019, 14(1), 204–217 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Naguib, M. Kurtoglu, V. Presser, J. Lu, J. Niu, M. Heon, L. Hultman, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, Two-dimensional nanocrystals produced by exfoliation of Ti3AlC2, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23(37), 4248–4253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wu, T. Shang, Y. Deng, Y. Tao and Q. H. Yang, The assembly of MXenes from 2D to 3D, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7(7), 1903077 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wu, Z. Wang, M. Yu, L. Xiu and J. Qiu, Stabilizing the MXenes by carbon nanoplating for developing hierarchical nanohybrids with efficient lithium storage and hydrogen evolution capability, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29(24), 1607017 CrossRef PubMed .
C. E. Ren, M. Q. Zhao, T. Makaryan, J. Halim, M. Boota, S. Kota, B. Anasori, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Porous two-dimensional transition metal carbide (MXene) flakes for high-performance Li-ion storage, ChemElectroChem, 2016, 3(5), 689–693 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhao, H. Di, X. Hui, D. Zhao, R. Wang, C. Wang and L. Yin, Self-assembled Ti3C2 MXene and N-rich porous carbon hybrids as superior anodes for high-performance potassium-ion batteries, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13(1), 246–257 RSC .
K. Li, X. Wang, S. Li, P. Urbankowski, J. Li, Y. Xu and Y. Gogotsi, An ultrafast conducting polymer@MXene positive electrode with high volumetric capacitance for advanced asymmetric supercapacitors, Small, 2020, 16(4), 1906851 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Yun, Q. Lu, X. Zhang, C. Tan and H. Zhang, Three-dimensional architectures constructed from transition-metal dichalcogenide nanomaterials for electrochemical energy storage and conversion., Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57(3), 626–646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhan, M. Naguib, M. Lukatskaya, P. R. Kent, Y. Gogotsi and D.-E. Jiang, Understanding the MXene pseudocapacitance, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9(6), 1223–1228 CrossRef CAS .
M. Anasori, M. R. Lukatskaya and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2(2), 16098 CrossRef .
J. Pang, R. G. Mendes, A. Bachmatiuk, L. Zhao, H. Q. Ta, T. Gemming, H. Liu, Z. Liu and M. H. Rummeli, Applications of 2D MXenes in energy conversion and storage systems, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48(1), 72–133 RSC .
Z. Lin, J. Liu, W. Peng, Y. Zhu, Y. Zhao, K. Jiang, M. Peng and Y. Tan, Highly stable 3D Ti3C2Tx MXene-based foam architectures toward high-performance terahertz radiation shielding, ACS Nano, 2020, 14(2), 2109–2117 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhao, L.-M. Peng, C.-Y. Tang, J.-H. Pu, X.-J. Zha, K. Ke, R.-Y. Bao, M.-B. Yang and W. Yang, All-weather-available, continuous steam generation based on the synergistic photo-thermal and electro-thermal conversion by MXene-based aerogels, Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7(3), 855–865 RSC .
S. Zhao, H.-B. Zhang, J.-Q. Luo, Q.-W. Wang, B. Xu, S. Hong and Z.-Z. Yu, Highly electrically conductive three-dimensional Ti3C2T x MXene/reduced graphene oxide hybrid aerogels with excellent electromagnetic interference shielding performances, ACS Nano, 2018, 12(11), 11193–11202 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jiang, X. Xie, Y. Chen, Y. Liu, R. Yang and G. Sui, Hierarchically structured cellulose aerogels with interconnected MXene networks and their enhanced microwave absorption properties, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6(32), 8679–8687 RSC .
T. Shang, Z. Lin, C. Qi, X. Liu, P. Li, Y. Tao, Z. Wu, D. Li, P. Simon and Q. H. Yang, 3D macroscopic architectures from self-assembled MXene hydrogels., Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29(33), 1903960 CrossRef .
X. Wang, Q. Fu, J. Wen, X. Ma, C. Zhu, X. Zhang and D. Qi, 3D Ti 3 C 2 T x aerogels with enhanced surface area for high performance supercapacitors, Nanoscale, 2018, 10(44), 20828–20835 RSC .
R. Bian, R. Lin, G. Wang, G. Lu, W. Zhi, S. Xiang, T. Wang, P. S. Clegg, D. Cai and W. Huang, 3D assembly of Ti 3 C 2-MXene directed by water/oil interfaces, Nanoscale, 2018, 10(8), 3621–3625 RSC .
S. Shi, B. Qian, X. Wu, H. Sun, H. Wang, H. B. Zhang, Z. Z. Yu and T. P. Russell, Self-assembly of MXene-surfactants at liquid–liquid interfaces: From structured liquids to 3D aerogels, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58(50), 18171–18176 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yu, W. Qiu, F. Wang, T. Zhai, P. Fang, X. Lu and Y. Tong, Three dimensional architectures: Design, assembly and application in electrochemical capacitors, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3(31), 15792–15823 RSC .
X. Wang, J. Feng, Y. Bai, Q. Zhang and Y. Yin, Synthesis, properties, and applications of hollow micro-/nanostructures, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116(18), 10983–11060 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Quan, X. Lin, N. Zhang and Y.-J. Xu, Graphene and its derivatives as versatile templates for materials synthesis and functional applications, Nanoscale, 2017, 9(7), 2398–2416 RSC .
M. R. Lukatskaya, S. Kota, Z. Lin, M.-Q. Zhao, N. Shpigel, M. D. Levi, J. Halim, P.-L. Taberna, M. W. Barsoum and P. Simon, Ultra-high-rate pseudocapacitive energy storage in two-dimensional transition metal carbides, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2(8), 1–6 Search PubMed .
X. Wang, Y. Chen, F. Hu, S. Zhang, B. Fan, Z. Min, R. Zhang, B. Zhao, H. Wang and H. Lu, Electromagnetic interference shielding performance of flexible, hydrophobic honeycomb-structured Ag@ Ti3C2Tx Composites, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2021, 2101028 Search PubMed .
M.-Q. Zhao, C. E. Ren, M. Alhabeb, B. Anasori, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Magnesium-ion storage capability of MXenes, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2(2), 1572–1578 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Fan, C. Wei, L. Yu, Z. Xia, J. Cai, Z. Tian, G. Zou, S. X. Dou and J. Sun, 3D printing of porous nitrogen-doped Ti3C2 MXene scaffolds for high-performance sodium-ion hybrid capacitors, ACS Nano, 2020, 14(1), 867–876 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Yu, Z. Fan, Y. Shao, Z. Tian, J. Sun and Z. Liu, Versatile N-doped MXene ink for printed electrochemical energy storage application, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9(34), 1901839 CrossRef .
Q. Zhao, Q. Zhu, J. Miao, P. Zhang, P. Wan, L. He and B. Xu, Flexible 3D porous MXene foam for high-performance lithium-ion batteries, Small, 2019, 15(51), 1904293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, J. Yang, Z. Chen and Y. Hu, A new flexible and ultralight carbon foam/Ti3C2 TX MXene hybrid for high-performance electromagnetic wave absorption, RSC Adv., 2019, 9(70), 41038–41049 RSC .
Q. Wang, S. Wang, X. Guo, L. Ruan, N. Wei, Y. Ma, J. Li, M. Wang, W. Li and W. Zeng, Mxene-reduced graphene oxide aerogel for aqueous zinc-ion hybrid supercapacitor with ultralong cycle life, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2019, 5(12), 1900537 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao, X.-J. Zha, J.-H. Pu, L. Bai, R.-Y. Bao, Z.-Y. Liu, M.-B. Yang and W. Yang, Macroporous three-dimensional MXene architectures for highly efficient solar steam generation, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7(17), 10446–10455 RSC .
J. Guo, Y. Zhao and T. Ma, Electrostatic self-assembly of 2D delaminated MXene (Ti3C2) onto Ni foam with superior electrochemical
performance for supercapacitor, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 305, 164–174 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yang, F. Yin, D. Xia, H. Peng, J. Yang and W. Yuan, A highly flexible and multifunctional strain sensor based on a network-structured MXene/polyurethane mat with ultra-high sensitivity and a broad sensing range, Nanoscale, 2019, 11(20), 9949–9957 RSC .
W. Yuan, K. Yang, H. Peng, F. Li and F. Yin, A flexible VOCs sensor based on a 3D Mxene framework with a high sensing performance, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6(37), 18116–18124 RSC .
X.-P. Li, Y. Li, X. Li, D. Song, P. Min, C. Hu, H.-B. Zhang, N. Koratkar and Z.-Z. Yu, Highly sensitive, reliable and flexible piezoresistive pressure sensors featuring polyurethane sponge coated with MXene sheets, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 542, 54–62 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yue, N. Liu, W. Liu, M. Li, Y. Ma, C. Luo, S. Wang, J. Rao, X. Hu and J. Su, 3D hybrid porous Mxene-sponge network and its application in piezoresistive sensor, Nano Energy, 2018, 50, 79–87 CrossRef CAS .
L. Tang, X. Zhao, C. Feng, L. Bai, J. Yang, R. Bao, Z. Liu, M. Yang and W. Yang, Bacterial cellulose/MXene hybrid aerogels for photodriven shape-stabilized composite phase change materials, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2019, 203, 110174 CrossRef CAS .
P. Lin, J. Xie, Y. He, X. Lu, W. Li, J. Fang, S. Yan, L. Zhang, X. Sheng and Y. Chen, MXene aerogel-based phase change materials toward solar energy conversion, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2020, 206, 110229 CrossRef CAS .
R. Butt, A. H. Siddique, S. W. Bokhari, S. Jiang, D. Lei, X. Zhou and Z. Liu, Niobium carbide/reduced graphene oxide hybrid porous aerogel as high capacity and long-life anode material for Li-ion batteries, Int. J. Energy Res., 2019, 43(9), 4995–5003 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ma, Y. Yue, H. Zhang, F. Cheng, W. Zhao, J. Rao, S. Luo, J. Wang, X. Jiang and Z. Liu, 3D synergistical MXene/reduced graphene oxide aerogel for a piezoresistive sensor, ACS Nano, 2018, 12(4), 3209–3216 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Tang, H. Liu, X. Guo, S. Wang, W. Wu, A. K. Mondal, C. Wang and G. Wang, A novel lithium-ion hybrid capacitor based on an aerogel-like MXene wrapped Fe2O3 nanosphere anode and a 3D nitrogen sulphur dual-doped porous carbon cathode, Mater. Chem. Front., 2018, 2(10), 1811–1821 RSC .
R. Liu, A. Zhang, J. Tang, J. Tian, W. Huang, J. Cai, C. Barrow, W. Yang and J. Liu, Fabrication of cobaltosic oxide nanoparticle-doped 3 D MXene/graphene hybrid porous aerogels for all-solid-state supercapacitors, Chem. – Eur. J., 2019, 25(21), 5547–5554 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Zhang, G. Ying, L. Liu, F. Ma, L. Su, C. Zhang, D. Wu, X. Wang and Y. Zhou, Three-dimensional porous Ti3C2Tx-NiO composite electrodes with enhanced electrochemical performance for supercapacitors, Materials, 2019, 12(1), 188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Fu, Y. Yao, J. Dai and L. Hu, Progress in 3D printing of carbon materials for energy-related applications, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29(9), 1603486 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Tian, J. Jin, S. Yuan, C. K. Chua, S. B. Tor and K. Zhou, Emerging 3D-printed electrochemical energy storage devices: A critical review, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7(17), 1700127 CrossRef .
W. Yang, J. Yang, J. J. Byun, F. P. Moissinac, J. Xu, S. J. Haigh, M. Domingos, M. A. Bissett, R. A. Dryfe and S. Barg, 3D printing of freestanding MXene architectures for current-collector-free supercapacitors, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31(37), 1902725 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Fang, Z. Liu, J. Han, Z. Jin, Y. Han, F. Wang, Y. Niu, Y. Wu and Y. Xu, High-performance electrocatalytic conversion of N2 to NH3 using oxygen-vacancy-rich TiO2 in situ grown on Ti3C2Tx MXene, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9(16), 1803406 CrossRef .
S. Xu, G. Wei, J. Li, Y. Ji, N. Klyui, V. Izotov and W. Han, Binder-free Ti3C2Tx MXene electrode film for supercapacitor produced by electrophoretic deposition method, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 317, 1026–1036 CrossRef CAS .
C. Jiang, C. Wu, X. Li, Y. Yao, L. Lan, F. Zhao, Z. Ye, Y. Ying and J. Ping, All-electrospun flexible triboelectric nanogenerator based on metallic MXene nanosheets, Nano Energy, 2019, 59, 268–276 CrossRef CAS .
P. Song, C. Zhou, H. Fan, B. Zhang, X. Pei, Y. Fan, Q. Jiang, R. Bao, Q. Yang and Z. Dong, Novel 3D porous biocomposite scaffolds fabricated by fused deposition modeling and gas foaming combined technology, Composites, Part B, 2018, 152, 151–159 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, S. Chen, Y. Morsi, H. El-Hamshary, M. El-Newhy, C. Fan and X. Mo, Superabsorbent 3D scaffold based on electrospun nanofibers for cartilage tissue engineering, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8(37), 24415–24425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. S. Chronakis, Novel nanocomposites and nanoceramics based on polymer nanofibers using electrospinning process—A review, J. Mater. Process. Technol., 2005, 167(2-3), 283–293 CrossRef CAS .
X.-H. Qin, Y.-Q. Wan, J.-H. He, J. Zhang, J.-Y. Yu and S.-Y. Wang, Effect of LiCl on electrospinning of PAN polymer solution: Theoretical analysis and experimental verification, Polymer, 2004, 45(18), 6409–6413 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maleski, V. N. Mochalin and Y. Gogotsi, Dispersions of two-dimensional titanium carbide MXene in organic solvents, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29(4), 1632–1640 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Levitt, M. Alhabeb, C. B. Hatter, A. Sarycheva, G. Dion and Y. Gogotsi, Electrospun MXene/carbon nanofibers as supercapacitor electrodes, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7(1), 269–277 RSC .
E. A. Mayerberger, O. Urbanek, R. M. McDaniel, R. M. Street, M. W. Barsoum and C. L. Schauer, Preparation and characterization of polymer–Ti3C2Tx (MXene) composite nanofibers produced via electrospinning, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2017, 134(37), 45295 CrossRef .
W. Shao, M. Tebyetekerwa, I. Marriam, W. Li, Y. Wu, S. Peng, S. Ramakrishna, S. Yang and M. Zhu, Polyester@MXene nanofibers-based yarn electrodes, J. Power Sources, 2018, 396, 683–690 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, R. Wang, T. Jiao, G. Zou, F. Zhan, J. Yin, L. Zhang, J. Zhou and Q. Peng, Facile preparation of hierarchical AgNP-loaded MXene/Fe3O4/polymer nanocomposites by electrospinning with enhanced catalytic performance for wastewater treatment, ACS Omega, 2019, 4(1), 1897–1906 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. A. Mayerberger, R. M. Street, R. M. McDaniel, M. W. Barsoum and C. L. Schauer, Antibacterial properties of electrospun Ti3C2Tz (MXene)/chitosan nanofibers, RSC Adv., 2018, 8(62), 35386–35394 RSC .

          J. Kuiper and Y. Deng, Functional 3D Tissue Engineering Scaffolds: Materials, Technologies, and Applications, Elsevier Science,  2018 Search PubMed .
J. Liu, H. B. Zhang, R. Sun, Y. Liu, Z. Liu, A. Zhou and Z. Z. Yu, Hydrophobic, flexible, and lightweight MXene foams for high-performance electromagnetic-interference shielding, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29(38), 1702367 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Fu, N. Wang, D. Legut, C. Si, Q. Zhang, S. Du, T. C. Germann, J. S. Francisco and R. Zhang, Rational design of flexible two-dimensional MXenes with multiple functionalities, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119(23), 11980–12031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, Y. Wu, X. Yuan, G. Zeng, J. Zhou, X. Wang and J. W. Chew, Clay-inspired MXene-based electrochemical devices and photo-electrocatalyst: State-of-the-art progresses and challenges, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30(12), 1704561 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Li and Y. Wu, 2D early transition metal carbides (MXenes) for catalysis, Small, 2019, 15(29), 1804736 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Luc, B. H. Ko, S. Kattel, S. Li, D. Su, J. G. Chen and F. Jiao, SO2-Induced selectivity change in CO2 electroreduction, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141(25), 9902–9909 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Daiyan, W. H. Saputera, H. Masood, J. Leverett, X. Lu and R. Amal, A disquisition on the active sites of heterogeneous catalysts for electrochemical reduction of CO2 to value-added chemicals and fuel, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10(11), 1902106 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Lei, H. Zhu, K. Song, N. Wei, L. Liu, D. Zhang, J. Yin, X. Dong, K. Yao and N. Wang, Investigating the origin of enhanced C2+ selectivity in oxide-/hydroxide-derived copper electrodes during CO2 electroreduction, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142(9), 4213–4222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Liu, M. Gao, X. Ren, F. Meng, Y. Yang, L. Gao, Q. Yang and T. Ma, Current progress in electrocatalytic carbon dioxide reduction to fuels on heterogeneous catalysts, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8(7), 3541–3562 RSC .
S. Zhang, Q. Fan, R. Xia and T. J. Meyer, CO2 reduction: From homogeneous to heterogeneous electrocatalysis, Acc. Chem. Res., 2020, 53(1), 255–264 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Di, C. Yan, A. D. Handoko, Z. W. Seh, H. Li and Z. Liu, Ultrathin two-dimensional materials for photo-and electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution, Mater. Today, 2018, 21(7), 749–770 CrossRef CAS .
N. Li, X. Chen, W.-J. Ong, D. R. MacFarlane, X. Zhao, A. K. Cheetham and C. Sun, Understanding of electrochemical mechanisms for CO2 capture and conversion into hydrocarbon fuels in transition-metal carbides (MXenes), ACS Nano, 2017, 11(11), 10825–10833 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Li, J. Zhu, A. D. Handoko, R. Zhang, H. Wang, D. Legut, X. Wen, Z. Fu, Z. W. Seh and Q. Zhang, High-throughput theoretical optimization of the hydrogen evolution reaction on MXenes by transition metal modification, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6(10), 4271–4278 RSC .
Y. Xiao and W. Zhang, High throughput screening of M3C2 MXenes for efficient CO2 reduction conversion into hydrocarbon fuels, Nanoscale, 2020, 12(14), 7660–7673 RSC .
L. Zhao, B. Dong, S. Li, L. Zhou, L. Lai, Z. Wang, S. Zhao, M. Han, K. Gao and M. Lu, Interdiffusion reaction-assisted hybridization of two-dimensional metal–organic frameworks and Ti3C2Tx nanosheets for electrocatalytic oxygen evolution, ACS Nano, 2017, 11(6), 5800–5807 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Gao, A. P. O’Mullane and A. Du, 2D MXenes: A new family of promising catalysts for the hydrogen evolution reaction, ACS Catal., 2017, 7(1), 494–500 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yu, Z. Wang, J. Liu, F. Sun, P. Yang and J. Qiu, A hierarchically porous and hydrophilic 3D nickel–iron/MXene electrode for accelerating oxygen and hydrogen evolution at high current densities, Nano Energy, 2019, 63, 103880 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xiu, Z. Wang, M. Yu, X. Wu and J. Qiu, Aggregation-resistant 3D MXene-based architecture as efficient bifunctional electrocatalyst for overall water splitting, ACS Nano, 2018, 12(8), 8017–8028 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yoon, A. P. Tiwari, M. Lee, M. Choi, W. Song, J. Im, T. Zyung, H.-K. Jung, S. S. Lee and S. Jeon, Enhanced electrocatalytic activity by chemical nitridation of two-dimensional titanium carbide MXene for hydrogen evolution, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6(42), 20869–20877 RSC .
J. Liang, C. Ding, J. Liu, T. Chen, W. Peng, Y. Li, F. Zhang and X. Fan, Heterostructure engineering of Co-doped MoS2 coupled with Mo2CTx MXene for enhanced hydrogen evolution in alkaline media, Nanoscale, 2019, 11(22), 10992–11000 RSC .
Y. Li, L. Ding, S. Yin, Z. Liang, Y. Xue, X. Wang, H. Cui and J. Tian, Photocatalytic H2 evolution on TiO2 assembled with Ti3C2 MXene and metallic 1T-WS 2 as Co-catalysts, Nano-Micro Lett., 2020, 12(1), 1–12 Search PubMed .
Y. Cheng, Y. Zhang, Y. Li, J. Dai and Y. Song, Hierarchical Ni2P/Cr2CTx (MXene) composites with oxidized surface groups as efficient bifunctional electrocatalysts for overall water splitting, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7(15), 9324–9334 RSC .
C. Peng, P. Wei, X. Li, Y. Liu, Y. Cao, H. Wang, H. Yu, F. Peng, L. Zhang and B. Zhang, High efficiency photocatalytic hydrogen production over ternary Cu/TiO2@ Ti3C2Tx enabled by low-work-function 2D titanium carbide, Nano Energy, 2018, 53, 97–107 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cheng, J. Dai, Y. Song and Y. Zhang, Nanostructure of Cr2CO2 MXene supported single metal atom as an efficient bifunctional electrocatalyst for overall water splitting, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2(9), 6851–6859 CrossRef CAS .
C. F. Du, K. N. Dinh, Q. Liang, Y. Zheng, Y. Luo, J. Zhang and Q. Yan, Self-assemble and in situ formation of Ni1−xFexPS3 nanomosaic-decorated MXene hybrids for overall water splitting, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8(26), 1801127 CrossRef .
H. Wang and J.-M. Lee, Recent advances in structural engineering of MXene electrocatalysts, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8(21), 10604–10624 RSC .
T. Y. Ma, J. L. Cao, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Interacting carbon nitride and titanium carbide nanosheets for high-performance oxygen evolution, Angew. Chem., 2016, 128(3), 1150–1154 CrossRef .
Y. Tang, C. Yang, Y. Yang, X. Yin, W. Que and J. Zhu, Three dimensional hierarchical network structure of S-NiFe2O4 modified few-layer titanium carbides (MXene) flakes on nickel foam as a high efficient electrocatalyst for oxygen evolution, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 296, 762–770 CrossRef CAS .
N. Li, Y. Zhang, M. Jia, X. Lv, X. Li, R. Li, X. Ding, Y.-Z. Zheng and X. Tao, 1T/2H MoSe2-on-MXene heterostructure as bifunctional electrocatalyst for efficient overall water splitting, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 326, 134976 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wu, H. Wang, P. Xiong, G. Li, T. Qiu, W.-B. Gong, F. Zhao, C. Li, Q. Li and G. Wang, Molecularly thin nitride sheets stabilized by titanium carbide as efficient bifunctional electrocatalysts for fiber-shaped rechargeable zinc-air batteries, Nano Lett., 2020, 20(4), 2892–2898 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Selvam, J. Lee, G. H. Choi, M. J. Oh, S. Xu, B. Lim and P. J. Yoo, MXene supported CoxAy (A = OH, P, Se) electrocatalysts for overall water splitting: Unveiling the role of anions in intrinsic activity and stability, J. Mat. Chem. A, 2019, 7(48), 27383–27393 RSC .
Y. Zhang, H. Jiang, Y. Lin, H. Liu, Q. He, C. Wu, T. Duan and L. Song, In situ growth of cobalt nanoparticles encapsulated nitrogen-doped carbon nanotubes among Ti3C2Tx (MXene) matrix for oxygen reduction and evolution, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 5(16), 1800392 Search PubMed .
C. Hao, Y. Wu, Y. An, B. Cui, J. Lin, X. Li, D. Wang, M. Jiang, Z. Cheng and S. Hu, Interface-coupling of CoFe-LDH on MXene as high-performance oxygen evolution catalyst, Mater. Today Energy, 2019, 12, 453–462 CrossRef .
M. Yu, S. Zhou, Z. Wang, J. Zhao and J. Qiu, Boosting electrocatalytic oxygen evolution by synergistically coupling layered double hydroxide with MXene, Nano Energy, 2018, 44, 181–190 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, T. Chen, P. Juan, W. Peng, Y. Li, F. Zhang and X. Fan, Hierarchical cobalt borate/MXenes hybrid with extraordinary electrocatalytic performance in oxygen evolution reaction, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11(21), 3758–3765 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Deng, F. Yang, Q. Zhang, Y. Zhong, Y. Zeng, S. Lin, X. Wang, X. Lu, C. Z. Wang and L. Gu, Phase modulation of (1T-2H)-MoSe2/TiC-C shell/core arrays via nitrogen doping for highly efficient hydrogen evolution reaction, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30(34), 1802223 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Hao, Y. Wei, J. Wang, Z. Wang, Z. Zhu, S. Zhao, M. Han and X. Huang, In situ hybridization of an MXene/TiO 2/NiFeCo-layered double hydroxide composite for electrochemical and photoelectrochemical oxygen evolution, RSC Adv., 2018, 8(37), 20576–20584 RSC .
M. Benchakar, T. Bilyk, C. Garnero, L. Loupias, C. Morais, J. Pacaud, C. Canaff, P. Chartier, S. Morisset and N. Guignard, MXene supported cobalt layered double hydroxide nanocrystals: Facile synthesis route for a synergistic oxygen evolution reaction electrocatalyst, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 6(23), 1901328 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Yue, J. Sun, S. Chen, Y. Zhou, H. Li, Y. Chen, R. Zhang, G. Wei and Y. Kang, Hierarchical mesoporous MXene–NiCoP electrocatalyst for water-splitting, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12(16), 18570–18577 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Peng, X. Chen, W.-J. Ong, X. Zhao and N. Li, Surface and heterointerface engineering of 2D MXenes and their nanocomposites: insights into electro-and photocatalysis, Chem, 2019, 5(1), 18–50 CAS .
C. Niether, S. Faure, A. Bordet, J. Deseure, M. Chatenet, J. Carrey, B. Chaudret and A. Rouet, Improved water electrolysis using magnetic heating of FeC–Ni core–shell nanoparticles. Nature, Energy, 2018, 3(6), 476–483 CAS .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Advancing the electrochemistry of the hydrogen-evolution reaction through combining experiment and theory, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54(1), 52–65 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, Y. Zhao, X. Guo, C. Chen, C.-L. Dong, R.-S. Liu, C.-P. Han, Y. Li, Y. Gogotsi and G. Wang, Single platinum atoms immobilized on an MXene as an efficient catalyst for the hydrogen evolution reaction, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1(12), 985–992 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, Y. Liu, D. Xu, Y. Zhu, W. Peng, Y. Li, F. Zhang and X. Fan, Hierarchical “nanoroll” like MoS2/Ti3C2Tx hybrid with high electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution activity, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 241, 89–94 CrossRef CAS .
L. Huang, L. Ai, M. Wang, J. Jiang and S. Wang, Hierarchical MoS2 nanosheets integrated Ti3C2 MXenes for electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44(2), 965–976 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, Y. Lin, S. Liu, J. Li, L. Bu, J. Chen, X. Xiao, J.-H. Choi, L. Gao and J.-M. Lee, Confined growth of pyridinic N–Mo2C sites on MXenes for hydrogen evolution, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8(15), 7109–7116 RSC .
Z. W. Seh, K. D. Fredrickson, B. Anasori, J. Kibsgaard, A. L. Strickler, M. R. Lukatskaya, Y. Gogotsi, T. F. Jaramillo and A. Vojvodic, Two-dimensional molybdenum carbide (MXene) as an efficient electrocatalyst for hydrogen evolution, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1(3), 589–594 CrossRef CAS .
J. Dong, Q. Wu, C. Huang, W. Yao and Q. Xu, Cost effective Mo rich Mo2C electrocatalysts for the hydrogen evolution reaction, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6(21), 10028–10035 RSC .
X. Wu, S. Zhou, Z. Wang, J. Liu, W. Pei, P. Yang, J. Zhao and J. Qiu, Engineering multifunctional collaborative catalytic interface enabling efficient hydrogen evolution in all pH range and seawater, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9(34), 1901333 CrossRef .
W. Sun, X. Wang, J. Feng, T. Li, Y. Huan, J. Qiao, L. He and D. Ma, Controlled synthesis of 2D Mo2C/graphene heterostructure on liquid Au substrates as enhanced electrocatalytic electrodes, Nanotechnology, 2019, 30(38), 385601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Pan, Ultra-high electrochemical catalytic activity of MXenes, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6(1), 1–10 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Ling, L. Shi, Y. Ouyang, Q. Chen and J. Wang, Transition metal-promoted V2CO2 (MXenes): A new and highly active catalyst for hydrogen evolution reaction, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3(11), 1600180 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Chen, S. Huang, B. Huang, M. Wan and N. Zhou, Transition metal atoms implanted into MXenes (M2CO2) for enhanced electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution reaction, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 509, 145319 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wu, Y. Wei, X. Ren, X. Ji, Y. Liu, X. Guo, Z. Liu, A. M. Asiri, Q. Wei and X. Sun, Co(OH)2 nanoparticle-encapsulating conductive nanowires array: Room-temperature electrochemical preparation for high-performance water oxidation electrocatalysis, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30(9), 1705366 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wen, Z. Wei, C. Ma, X. Xing, Z. Li and D. Luo, MXene boosted CoNi-ZIF-67 as highly efficient electrocatalysts for oxygen evolution, Nanomaterials, 2019, 9(5), 775 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Li, S. Wei, Y. Xu, J. Liu, J. Wu, G. Jia and X. Cui, Synergetic enhancement of oxygen evolution reaction by Ti3C2Tx nanosheets supported amorphous FeOOH quantum dots, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 290, 364–368 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhao, X. Ma, S. Lin, Z. Xu and L. Li, Ambient growth of hierarchical FeOOH/MXene as enhanced electrocatalyst for oxygen evolution reaction, ChemistrySelect, 2020, 5(6), 1890–1895 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tian, Y. Jiang, H. Tong, Y. Xu and L. Xia, MXene-supported FeCo-LDHs as highly efficient catalysts for enhanced electrocatalytic oxygen evolution reaction, ChemNanoMat, 2020, 6(1), 154–159 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lu, D. Fan, Z. Chen, W. Xiao, C. Cao and X. Yang, Anchoring Co3O4 nanoparticles on MXene for efficient electrocatalytic oxygen evolution, Sci. Bull., 2020, 65(6), 460–466 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lin, Y. Chen and J. Shi, Insights into 2D MXenes for versatile biomedical applications: Current advances and challenges ahead, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5(10), 1800518 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Hussain, R. Ojha, L. L. Martin, A. M. Bond, R. Ramanathan and V. Bansal, Controlling the morphological and redox properties of the CuTCNQ catalyst through solvent engineering, Emergent Mater., 2019, 2(1), 35–44 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wu, N. Ambrožová, E. Eftekhari, N. Aravindakshan, W. Wang, Q. Wang, S. Zhang, K. Kočí and Q. Li, Photocatalytic H2 generation from aqueous ammonia solution using TiO2 nanowires-intercalated reduced graphene oxide composite membrane under low power UV light, Emergent Mater., 2019, 2(3), 303–311 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yu, W. Yin, T. Wang and Y. Zhang, Decorating g-C3N4 nanosheets with Ti3C2 MXene nanoparticles for efficient oxygen reduction reaction, Langmuir, 2019, 35(8), 2909–2916 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhou, X. Yang, W. Pei, N. Liu and J. Zhao, Heterostructures of MXenes and N-doped graphene as highly active bifunctional electrocatalysts, Nanoscale, 2018, 10(23), 10876–10883 RSC .
Y. Deng, Y. Dong, G. Wang, K. Sun, X. Shi, L. Zheng, X. Li and S. Liao, Well-defined ZIF-derived Fe–N codoped carbon nanoframes as efficient oxygen reduction catalysts, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9(11), 9699–9709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Li, W. Chen, H. Xiao, Y. Gong, Z. Li, L. Zheng, X. Zheng, W. Yan, W. C. Cheong and R. Shen, Fe isolated single atoms on S, N codoped carbon by copolymer pyrolysis strategy for highly efficient oxygen reduction reaction, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30(25), 1800588 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Tang, C. Yang, Y. Tian, Y. Luo, X. Yin and W. Que, The effect of in situ nitrogen doping on the oxygen evolution reaction of MXenes, Nanoscale Adv., 2020, 2(3), 1187–1194 RSC .
X. Yang, Q. Jia, F. Duan, B. Hu, M. Wang, L. He, Y. Song and Z. Zhang, Multiwall carbon nanotubes loaded with MoS2 quantum dots and MXene quantum dots: Non–Pt bifunctional catalyst for the methanol oxidation and oxygen reduction reactions in alkaline solution, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 464, 78–87 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jiang, J. Duan, J. Zhu, S. Chen and M. Antonietti, Iron-cluster-directed synthesis of 2D/2D Fe–N–C/MXene
superlattice-like heterostructure with enhanced oxygen reduction electrocatalysis, ACS Nano, 2020, 14(2), 2436–2444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, X. Qu, Y. Han, L. Shen, S. Yin, G. Li, Y. Jiang and S. Sun, Engineering PtRu bimetallic nanoparticles with adjustable alloying degree for methanol electrooxidation: Enhanced catalytic performance, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 263, 118345 CrossRef CAS .
W. Huang, H. Wang, J. Zhou, J. Wang, P. N. Duchesne, D. Muir, P. Zhang, N. Han, F. Zhao and M. Zeng, Highly active and durable methanol oxidation electrocatalyst based on the synergy of platinum–nickel hydroxide–graphene, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6(1), 1–8 Search PubMed .
Y. Wang, J. Wang, G. Han, C. Du, Q. Deng, Y. Gao, G. Yin and Y. Song, Pt decorated Ti3C2 MXene for enhanced methanol oxidation reaction, Ceram. Int., 2019, 45(2), 2411–2417 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lang, Z. Zhuang, S. Li, L. Xia, Y. Zhao, Y. Zhao, C. Han and L. Zhou, MXene surface terminations enable strong metal–support interactions for efficient methanol oxidation on palladium, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 12(2), 2400–2406 CrossRef PubMed .
M. M. Shi, D. Bao, B. R. Wulan, Y. H. Li, Y. F. Zhang, J. M. Yan and Q. Jiang, Au sub-nanoclusters on TiO2 toward highly efficient and selective electrocatalyst for N2 conversion to NH3 at ambient conditions, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29(17), 1606550 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Deng, T. Wang, A. A. Alshehri, K. A. Alzahrani, Y. Wang, H. Ye, Y. Luo and X. Sun, Improving the electrocatalytic N2 reduction activity of Pd nanoparticles through surface modification, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7(38), 21674–21677 RSC .
T. Wu, W. Kong, Y. Zhang, Z. Xing, J. Zhao, T. Wang, X. Shi, Y. Luo and X. Sun, Greatly enhanced electrocatalytic N2 reduction on TiO2 via V doping, Small Methods, 2019, 3(11), 1900356 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhao, C. Liu, X. Zhang, X. Zhu, P. Wei, L. Ji, Y. Guo, S. Gao, Y. Luo and Z. Wang, An ultrasmall Ru2P nanoparticles–reduced graphene oxide hybrid: an efficient electrocatalyst for NH3 synthesis under ambient conditions, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8(1), 77–81 RSC .
J. Zhao, L. Zhang, X.-Y. Xie, X. Li, Y. Ma, Q. Liu, W.-H. Fang, X. Shi, G. Cui and X. Sun, Ti3C2Tx (T = F, OH) MXene nanosheets: Conductive 2D catalysts for ambient electrohydrogenation of N2 to NH3, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6(47), 24031–24035 RSC .
Y. Luo, G.-F. Chen, L. Ding, X. Chen, L.-X. Ding and H. Wang, Efficient electrocatalytic N2 fixation with MXene under ambient conditions, Joule, 2019, 3(1), 279–289 CrossRef CAS .
T. Li, X. Yan, L. Huang, J. Li, L. Yao, Q. Zhu, W. Wang, W. Abbas, R. Naz and J. Gu, Fluorine-free Ti3C2Tx (T = O, OH) nanosheets (∼50–100 nm) for nitrogen fixation under ambient conditions, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7(24), 14462–14465 RSC .
Z. Jin, C. Liu, Z. Liu, J. Han, Y. Fang, Y. Han, Y. Niu, Y. Wu, C. Sun and Y. Xu, Rational
design of hydroxyl-rich Ti3C2Tx MXene quantum dots for high-performance electrochemical N2 reduction, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10(22), 2000797 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, X. Wang, H. Guo, G. Yao, H. Yu, Z. Tian, B. Li and L. Chen, Theoretical screening of single transition metal atoms embedded in MXene defects as superior electrocatalyst of nitrogen reduction reaction, Small Methods, 2019, 3(11), 1900337 CrossRef CAS .
B. Huang, N. Li, W.-J. Ong and N. Zhou, Single atom-supported MXene: How single-atomic-site catalysts tune the high activity and selectivity of electrochemical nitrogen fixation, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7(48), 27620–27631 RSC .
Y. Cheng, J. Dai, Y. Song and Y. Zhang, Single molybdenum atom anchored on 2D Ti2NO2 MXene as a promising electrocatalyst for N2 fixation, Nanoscale, 2019, 11(39), 18132–18141 RSC .
D. Liu, G. Zhang, Q. Ji, Y. Zhang and J. Li, Synergistic electrocatalytic nitrogen reduction enabled by confinement of nanosized Au particles onto a two-dimensional Ti3C2 substrate, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11(29), 25758–25765 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Liu, M. Gao, X. Ren, F. Meng, Y. Yang, Q. Yang, W. Guan, L. Gao, X. Liang and T. Ma, A two-dimensional Ru@MXene catalyst for highly selective ambient electrocatalytic nitrogen reduction, Nanoscale, 2020, 12(20), 10933–10938 RSC .
J. Zhang, L. Yang, H. Wang, G. Zhu, H. Wen, H. Feng, X. Sun, X. Guan, J. Wen and Y. Yao, 
            In situ hydrothermal growth of TiO2 nanoparticles on a conductive Ti3C2Tx MXene nanosheet: A synergistically active Ti-based nanohybrid electrocatalyst for enhanced N2 reduction to NH3 at ambient conditions, Inorg. Chem., 2019, 58(9), 5414–5418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Kong, F. F. Gong, Q. Zhou, G. Yu, L. Ji, X. Sun, A. M. Asiri, T. Wang, Y. Luo and Y. Xu, An MnO2–Ti3C2Tx MXene nanohybrid: An efficient and durable electrocatalyst toward artificial N2 fixation to NH3 under ambient conditions, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7(32), 18823–18827 RSC .
S. Zheng, S. Li, Z. Mei, Z. Hu, M. Chu, J. Liu, X. Chen and F. Pan, Electrochemical nitrogen reduction reaction performance of single-boron catalysts tuned by MXene substrates, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10(22), 6984–6989 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Li, L. Zhang, L. Shi and P. Wang, MXene Ti3C2: An effective 2D light-to-heat conversion material, ACS Nano, 2017, 11(4), 3752–3759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-J. Zha, X. Zhao, J.-H. Pu, L.-S. Tang, K. Ke, R.-Y. Bao, L. Bai, Z.-Y. Liu, M.-B. Yang and W. Yang, Flexible anti-biofouling MXene/cellulose fibrous membrane for sustainable solar-driven water purification, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11(40), 36589–36597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhao, Y. Yang, C. Yang, Y. Tian, Y. Han, J. Liu, X. Yin and W. Que, A hydrophobic surface enabled salt-blocking 2D Ti3C2 MXene membrane for efficient and stable solar desalination, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6(33), 16196–16204 RSC .
K. Li, T. H. Chang, Z. Li, H. Yang, F. Fu, T. Li, J. S. Ho and P. Y. Chen, Biomimetic MXene textures with enhanced light-to-heat conversion for solar steam generation and wearable thermal management, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9(34), 1901687 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Tahir Rasheed
	Dr Tahir Rasheed is currently working as a researcher at the Interdisciplinary Research Center for Advanced Materials, King Fahd University of Petroleum and Minerals, Saudi Arabia. He completed his PhD degree and postdoctoral research in polymer chemistry at the School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China. His research interests focus on multiple disciplines, including the controllable synthesis, characterization, and self-assembly of polymeric materials, polymer-based composites, nanomaterials, nanocomposites, and hybrid nanocomposites, with special emphasis on their potential applications in the fields of sensing and biosensing, electrocatalysis, the degradation and quantification of various emerging pollutants, and energy storage devices.

 	Fig. 1  A schematic illustration of different preparation methodologies of 3D MXene architectures along with their applications in electrocatalysis.	 

 	Fig. 2  Assembly methods for manufacturing 3D MXene architectures. (a) A schematic diagram illustrating the fabrication process of a 3D Ti3C2Tx MXene/rGO hybrid aerogel. (b) A side-view SEM image of a 3D MXene/rGO aerogel. (c) Digital images of a 3D MXene/rGO aerogel (100 mg) standing on a flower (left) and supporting a weight of 500 g (right). Reproduced with permission.25 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  A schematic illustration of the fabrication procedure of an MXene-sponge.47 Copyright 2018, Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 4  Other methods for manufacturing 3D MXene architectures. (a) A schematic illustration of the preparation route for fabricating Ti3C2Tx-based electrode film on an NF substrate via the MEPD method. Reproduced with permission.59 Copyright 2017, Elsevier Ltd. (b) An electrospinning method for preparing 3D PVA/MXene; the inset shows an SEM image of PVA/MXene. Reproduced with permission.60 (c) A schematic diagram of the fabrication of hierarchical scaffolds with tailored macro/micro-porous architectures.61 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2017, Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) A schematic illustration of the preparation of a Ti3C2Tx–CoBDC hybrid for the oxygen evolution reaction. Reproduced with permission from ref. 85 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (b) A schematic illustration of the fabrication of a hierarchically structured 3D electrocatalytic electrode via growing a mesoporous network of NiFe-LDH nanosheets onto a macroporous MXene/NF frame, and corresponding SEM images. Reproduced with permission from ref. 87 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (c) The substantial merits of an aggregation-resistant 3D MXene architecture and the capillary-forced assembly of an MXene to 3D architecture and related hybrid systems via spray drying aerosol droplets of MXene-containing colloids. Reproduced with permission from ref. 88 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  A schematic diagram of a transition metal anchored on a Cr2CO2 surface as a bifunctional catalyst for overall water splitting. Reproduced with permission from ref. 94 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  The in situ formation of secondary materials on MXenes to form MXene hybrids: the in situ electrostatic self-assembly of an FeNi-DH/Ti3C2Tx hybrid. Adapted with permission from ref. 104. Copyright 2017 Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 8  MXene hybrids for EC water splitting. (a) Assembly and (b) a scanning electron microscope (SEM) image of 3D CoP-MXene. Adapted with permission from ref. 88 Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  MoS2QDs@Ti3C2TxQDs@MMWCNTs for the methanol oxidation and oxygen reduction reactions in basic solution. Reprinted with permission from ref. 138.	 

 	Fig. 10  A schematic illustration of the design of an anti-biofouling MXene/cellulose membrane steam generator and digital images of the MXene/cellulose membrane. Reproduced with permission from ref. 161. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
