ZnSe nanoribbon /Si nanowire p–n heterojunction arrays and their photovoltaic application with graphene transparent electrodes   - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2JM34720B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2JM34720B
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 22873-22880Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsZnSe nanoribbon/Si nanowire p–n heterojunction arrays and their photovoltaic application with graphene transparent electrodes†

        
          
            Xiwei 
            Zhang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Xiujuan 
            Zhang
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Xiaozhen 
            Zhang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yuping 
            Zhang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Liang 
            Bian
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yiming 
            Wu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Chao 
            Xie
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yuanyuan 
            Han
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yan 
            Wang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Peng 
            Gao
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Liu 
            Wang
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Jiansheng 
            Jie
          
        
      *
      Institute of Functional Nano & Soft Materials (FUNSOM), Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Carbon-Based Functional Materials & Devices, Soochow University, Suzhou, Jiangsu 215123, P. R. China. E-mail: jsjie@suda.edu.cn; xjzhang@suda.edu.cn;  Fax: +86-512-65882846;   Tel: +86-512-65881265
Received 
      18th July 2012
    , Accepted 5th September 2012First published on 6th September 2012AbstractThe narrow indirect bandgap of Si hinders the full absorption and utilization of the solar light. Energy band engineering to the Si based photovoltaic devices is essential to address this problem. Here we report the fabrication of ZnSe nanoribbon (ZnSeNR)/Si nanowire (SiNW) p–n heterojunction arrays by directly growing or simply drop-casting the p-type ZnSeNRs on highly aligned n-type SiNW arrays. Phosphorus (P) was used as dopant to achieve robust p-type doping in the ZnSe nanostructures with a hole concentration as high as 6.5 × 1018 cm−3. Thanks to the matched bandgap and the light trapping arising from the one-dimensional (1D) array structure, the heterojunction arrays exhibited improved light absorption, particularly in the blue/UV wavelength range. Moreover, by taking advantage of the ohmic contact between graphene and p-ZnSeNR, heterojunction array solar cells with graphene transparent electrode were fabricated, giving rise to a power conversion efficiency of ∼0.78% under AM 1.5G illumination. It was found that the surface passivation to the SiNW array played an important role in determining the device performance; an efficiency up to 2.27% was obtained after surface modification with methyl groups. Our results demonstrate the heterojunction arrays, together with the graphene transparent electrodes, could be promising candidates for high-performance and low-cost photovoltaic applications.
1. Introduction
The development of new energy technology has spurred the recent advancements in solar cells based on new materials and structures where organic, organic–inorganic hybrid and dye-sensitized solar cells are just a few target areas.1–3 However, due to optical and electrical losses, the power conversion efficiency of these solar cells often discounts a lot. Optical losses reduce the solar absorption by reflection, shading of the light and unmatched absorbed radiation, while electrical losses caused by contact and interface recombination limit both the photocurrent and the output voltage of the devices.4 To overcome these issues, utilization of heterojunctions based on semiconductor nanostructures is supposed to be one of the most efficient methods.5,6 On the other hand, one-dimensional (1D) nanostructure arrays could effectively reduce the light losses, increase the junction areas, and enhance the carrier collection.7–9 Also, by combining nanostructures with different bandgaps, each part of the heterojunctions can selectively absorb the sunlight in a certain spectrum range, thus leading to wider light absorption and more efficient light utilization. Thereby nanostructure-based heterojunctions have shown the great promise for realizing high-performance solar cells. Up to now, various hierarchical nano-heterojunctions such as n-ZnO/p-Si branched NW, 3-D p-Si nanopillar/n-ZnO nanowire-array, and n-CdS film/p-Si nanoporous pillar array have been constructed and their photovoltaic characteristics are intensively investigated.10–12 However, suffering from the poor electrical contact and imperfect heterojunction interfaces, these devices usually exhibit limited performance that is not as high as expectation.
As a wide direct bandgap II–VI semiconductor, ZnSe has important applications in optoelectronic devices such as light-emitting diodes (LEDs), laser diodes (LDs), and solar cells.13–15 With a moderate bandgap of ∼2.7 eV, ZnSe offers effective absorption from blue to ultraviolet (UV) light, which is in accordance with the strongest spectral region of solar radiation. Recently, ZnSe nanostructures have received much attention due to their unique electronic and optoelectronic properties. Their synthesis and optical properties have been intensively studied.16–18 In spite of these progresses, the practical applications of the ZnSe nanostructures are still hampered by the difficulty in controlling their transport properties, particularly p-type conductivity. In ZnSe films and bulks, the efficient p-type doping is usually restricted by the strong self-compensation effect.19 In contrast, recent investigation demonstrated that the p-type doping in ZnSe nanowires (ZnSeNWs) could be more efficient by using group V elements such as bismuth (Bi) and arsenic (As) as the dopants.20,21 The high-crystal quality and the potential size effect are suggested to be responsible for the improved doping performance in ZnSe nanostructures.22 On the other hand, large-area and low-cost fabrication of highly aligned silicon nanowire (SiNW) arrays could be realized by using a metal-assisted chemical etching method.23 With its unique properties in light trapping as well as efficient carrier transport, solar cells based on SiNW arrays have lately attracted considerable attention.24 Nevertheless, the narrow indirect bandgap (∼1.12 eV) of Si, which leads to less efficient light absorption and utilization in the short wavelength range, is a main issue faced by the Si photovoltaic techniques. In order to reduce the optical and electrical losses, the suitable window electrodes are also essential and transparent conductive oxides (TCOs) are widely used, but they are expensive and usually need high-vacuum deposition processes, thus limiting their applications in low-cost solar cells. The rise of graphene provides new opportunities for high-performance optoelectronic devices. Because of the excellent conductivity, high chemical and thermal stability, good transparency, and capability for large-area fabrication and transfer, graphene is regarded as a promising window electrode and shows the potential to replace the TCOs in the future.25,26
Herein, we reported the synthesis of ZnSe nanostructures with efficient p-type doping by using phosphorus (P) as the dopant, which is reported to create a more stable and shallower acceptor level in the ZnSe films compared to other elements.27 The p-type characteristics were verified by the electrical measurements on individual ZnSeNWs. Furthermore, p–n heterojunction arrays were constructed by directly growing or simply drop-casting the p-type ZnSe nanoribbons (p-ZnSeNRs) on highly aligned n-type SiNW arrays. Through transferring the multi-layer graphene film onto the top of the p-ZnSeNR array as the conductive transparent electrode, pronounced photovoltaic behaviors were investigated for the heterojunction arrays. The devices also exhibited superior performance compared to the counterparts with metal electrodes due to the excellent transparency of the graphene film. Our results demonstrate the potential of novel nanostructure-based heterojunction arrays for solar energy conversion applications.
2. Experimental details
2.1 Synthesis and characterization of the p-type ZnSe nanostructures
Synthesis of the p-type ZnSe nanostructures was conducted in a horizontal alumina tube furnace by using P as the dopant via a thermal evaporation method. In a typical experiment, 0.1 g P powder (Aladdin, 99.99%) and 0.25 g ZnSe powder (Aldrich, 99.99%) were loaded into two separated alumina boats and then transferred to the upstream direction and centre region of the furnace, respectively. The distance between the two boats was about 8 cm. Si substrates coated with 10 nm Au catalyst were placed at the downstream position ∼13 cm from the ZnSe source. After evacuating to a base pressure of 5.3 × 10−3 Pa, the reaction chamber was flushed and refilled with 50 sccm H2 gas (5% in Ar) to a pressure of 150 Torr. After that, the ZnSe powder was heated to 1040 °C in 1 h and maintained at that temperature for 1.5 h. Temperatures for the P source and Si substrates were ∼800 °C and ∼700 °C, respectively, during the experiment. A layer of yellow wool-like product could be observed on the Si substrate surfaces after the system was cooled down to room temperature. We noted that ZnSe nanostructures tended to grow into NW shape if bare Si substrate was used, while ZnSeNRs were obtained on the aligned SiNW array. The distinct nucleation and growth characteristics of ZnSe nanostructures in these two substrates might be responsible for this difference.
Morphologies and structures of the as-synthesized ZnSe nanostructures were characterized by field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM, SIRION 200 FEG) and high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM, JEOL JEM-2010). Compositions were analyzed by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, Thermo ESCALAB 250) and energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) in HRTEM. Room-temperature photoluminescence (RT-PL, LabRAM-HR) spectra were obtained under the excitation of 325 nm He–Cd laser.
To evaluate the electrical transport properties of the P-doped ZnSe nanostructures, back-gate field-effect transistors (FETs) based on individual ZnSeNWs were constructed on the SiO2 (300 nm)/p+-Si substrate with Cu/Au (4 nm/50 nm) source–drain contacts. The p+-Si substrate then served as the global back gate in the FETs. To examine the contact performance of the graphene film, the film was first transferred onto the surface of the p-type ZnSeNWs, and then photolithography and followed oxygen plasma etching were employed to define the graphene electrode pairs on the NWs. Temperature-dependent electrical measurements were carried out by using a semiconductor characterization system (Keithley 4200-SCS) combined with a low temperature system (Janis/CCS-350S).
2.2 Synthesis and characterization of the multi-layer graphene film
Multi-layer graphene film was prepared at 1000 °C by using a mixed gas of CH4 (40 sccm) and H2 (20 sccm) via a chemical vapor deposition (CVD) method,28 and 25 μm thick Cu foil was employed as the catalytic substrate. After growth, the graphene film was spin-coated with 5 wt% polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) in chlorobenzene, and the underlying Cu foil was then removed in Marble's reagent solution (CuSO4:HCl:H2O 10 g:50 ml:50 ml). The structure of the multi-layer graphene film was characterized by HRTEM and Raman spectrum (Jobin Yvon/Labram HR800).
2.3 Fabrication and photovoltaic characteristics of the ZnSeNR/SiNW p–n heterojunction arrays
Two types of ZnSeNR/SiNW p–n heterojunction arrays were fabricated in this work. For the first type, a quasi-aligned p-type ZnSeNR array was directly grown on the top of highly aligned n-type SiNW array (Fig. 4a and b). Briefly, a photoresist window (0.5 cm × 0.5 cm) was first defined on surface of the SiO2 (300 nm)/n-type (100) Si (resistivity 5–15 Ω cm−1) substrate, and then the SiO2 layer in the window was removed by a buffered oxide etch (BOE) solution. After that, a vertically aligned SiNW array with length of ∼10 μm was prepared within the window via an Ag-assisted chemical etching method.23 Gold sol (particle size ∼30 nm) was then drop-casted on the SiNW array as a catalyst for the ZnSeNR growth. A quasi-aligned p-ZnSeNR array with a height of ∼40 μm was fabricated on the n-SiNW array under the same conditions described above but with a shorter growth duration of ∼30 min. Then, the graphene/PMMA film was directly transferred onto the top of the ZnSeNR/SiNW heterojunction array as the transparent top electrode and subsequently PMMA was removed by hot acetone. To improve the conductivity, AuCl3 (10 mM) solution was spin-coated on the graphene film to decorate the film with Au nanoparticles. As for the second type, the SiNW array was first modified with methyl groups according the method described in the previous report.29 And then the as-synthesized p-ZnSeNRs were dispersed on the n-SiNW array until the array surface was fully covered by the p-ZnSeNRs. After that, Cu/Au (4 nm/20 nm) electrode was deposited onto the p-ZnSeNRs by e-beam evaporation. Absorption spectra of the ZnSeNR/SiNW heterojunction array and the SiNW array were detected by UV-visible-NIR absorption spectrometer (PerkinElmer/Lambda 750). Solar simulator equipped with a 300 W xeon lamp and an AM 1.5G filter (Newport 91160), together with the white light (350 μW cm−2) from the optical microscopy on the probe station, were used as the light sources for detecting the photovoltaic behaviors of the heterojunction arrays.
3. Results and discussion
3.1 Characterization of the P-doped ZnSeNWs

Fig. 1a shows the FESEM image of the P-doped ZnSeNWs grown on bare Si substrates, indicating that the NWs have uniform geometries with diameters ranging from 100 to 500 nm and lengths of several tens of micrometers. In addition, the NWs surfaces are clean and smooth and free from evident impurities. From HRTEM image and the corresponding selected-area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern in Fig. 1b, it is noted that the ZnSeNWs have single crystal wurtzite structure with [001] growth orientation. The atomic smooth edge without any amorphous outer layer also indicates the high quality of the ZnSeNWs. Fig. 1c depicts the PL spectrum of the P-doped ZnSeNWs, along with the spectrum of undoped ZnSeNWs for comparison. The emission peak at ∼466 nm could be ascribed to the near-band edge (NBE) emission of the ZnSeNWs, while the peak at ∼544 nm and ∼635 nm could be attributed to the deep-level emissions.30 We note that the peak positions and widths for the doped NWs are almost equal to the undoped ones except the small enhancement in the deep-level emissions, revealing the crystallinity and structural integrity of the ZnSeNWs are not seriously degraded by the P doping. On the other hand, a weak peak at ∼136 eV corresponding to P 2p core level emission could be observed in the XPS spectrum (Fig. 1d), implying that the P element has been successfully incorporated into the ZnSeNWs.
 Fig. 1  (a) A typical FESEM image of the P-doped ZnSeNWs synthesized on bare Si substrate. (b) HRTEM image of the P-doped ZnSeNW. Inset shows the corresponding SAED pattern. (c) PL spectra of both undoped and P-doped ZnSeNWs, which are normalized according to the NBE emission peaks. Inset shows the enlarged NEB emissions of the samples. (d) XPS spectrum of the P-doped ZnSeNWs. Inset shows the enlarged P 2p peak. 
3.2 Electrical transport properties of the P-doped ZnSeNWs

Fig. 2a depicts the typical current versus voltage (I–V) curves of an individual P-doped ZnSeNW. Both Cu/Au (4 nm/50 nm) and graphene film electrodes were examined in this work. The ohmic contact of the Cu/Au electrode with the p-ZnSeNW is proved by the linear shape of the I–V curve as well as the large conduction current. Four-probe measurement on a single p-ZnSeNW also demonstrated the very low contact resistance of the Cu/Au electrodes (ESI, Fig. S1†). On the other hand, we note that the graphene film, which is regarded as a promising candidate for future optoelectronic applications as a transparent electrode, also exhibits a good ohmic contact with the p-ZnSeNW, and the conduction current could be significantly enhanced by further modifying the graphene with AuCl3 solution. Even so, from the I–V curves, the contact resistance for the graphene film with the p-ZnSeNW is still much higher than that for the Cu/Au electrode. This result could be mainly attributed to the large sheet resistance of the graphene film.25 Another possible reason is that the contact of the graphene film with the p-ZnSeNW is not so tight and an air gap may exist between them (left inset in Fig. 2a). It is expected that the electrical contact could be further improved by reducing the sheet resistance of the graphene film via appropriate surface modification and doping.31,32 The demonstration of the ohmic contact between a graphene film and p-ZnSe nanostructures is of high importance, which means graphene, a material with extraordinary properties, could be utilized as a transparent electrode in ZnSe nanostructures-based optoelectronic devices, thus opening the exciting opportunities for a host of high-performance ZnSe nanodevices. Fig. 2b plots the typical gate-dependent source–drain current (Ids) versus source–drain voltage (Vds) curves of the ZnSeNW FET. Cu/Au electrodes were used as the source and drain electrodes in the device. It is found that the conduction of the P-doped ZnSeNW decreases with increasing gate voltage (Vg), which is consistent with the typical characteristic of a p-channel metal-oxide-semiconductor FET (MOSFET), revealing the p-type nature of the P-doped ZnSeNWs. The substitutional doping of P3− ions in the ZnSeNWs by replacing Se2− ions is suggested to be responsible for the p-type conductivity observed.33 Moreover, the hole mobility (μh) is estimated to be 1.74 × 10−2 cm2 V−1 s−1 according to the following equation: (1)where transconductance (gm) is extracted from the linear region of the Ids–Vg curve (inset in Fig. 2b), εSiO2 (∼3.9) is the dielectric constant of the SiO2 insulating layer. L (20 μm), h (300 nm), and d (∼200 nm) represent the NW channel length, gate oxide layer thickness, and the NW diameter, respectively. Moreover, the hole concentration (nh) could be deduced to be about 6.5 × 1018 cm−3 through the relation of nh = σ/qμh, where σ is the conductivity of the NW (∼1.88 × 10−2 S cm−1) and q is elementary electrical charge. We note that the hole mobility and concentration of the P-doped ZnSeNW are about twice of that for the Bi-doped ZnSeNWs,20 indicating that P is a more efficient dopant for achieving high-concentration p-type doping in the ZnSe nanostructures.
 Fig. 2  (a) Typical I–V curves of a single P-doped ZnSeNW with Cu/Au and graphene electrodes, respectively. Insets show the FESEM images and the cross-section schematic illustrations of the devices with graphene (left) and Cu/Au (right) electrodes. (b) Electrical transport characteristics of the back-gate FET based on a single P-doped ZnSeNW. Cu/Au source and drain electrodes were used. Ids–Vds curves were measured at varied Vg ranging from −40 V to +40 V in a step of +20 V. Inset is the Ids–Vg curve at Vds = −10 V. 
To further assess the electrical transport properties of the p-type ZnSeNWs, temperature (T) dependent electrical measurements were conducted in the range of 110–290 K. Fig. 3a depicts the conductivity versus temperature curve. Note the conductivity of the p-ZnSeNW increases with the increase of T, varying from 6.71 × 10−5 S cm−1 at 110 K to 2.27 × 10−2 S cm−1 at 290 K. This behavior is in good agreement with the typical characteristic of a doped semiconductor and can be ascribed to the thermal activation of the P3− acceptors in the ZnSeNWs. Fig. 3b displays the logarithmic plot of the conductivity versus 1/T curve, revealing a near linear relation between them. The relationship could be expressed as: σ = σ0exp(−Ea/kBT)(2)where σ0 is a constant, Ea the activation energy for the P3− acceptors, and kB the Boltzmann constant. By fitting the curve in Fig. 3b with this formula, an activation energy of Ea = 97 meV was obtained, which is close to that reported for P-doped ZnSe films (92 meV) and could be assigned to the acceptor energy level for simple substitutional PSe acceptors.34 The above results unambiguously demonstrate that efficient p-type doping has been achieved in the ZnSe nanostructures by using P as the dopant. This success is important for the optoelectronic applications of the ZnSe nanostructures.
 Fig. 3  (a) Conductivity versus temperature curve measured in the range of 110–290 K. (b) Logarithmic plot of conductivity versus reciprocal temperature curve. 
3.3 Photovoltaic devices based on ZnSeNR/SiNW p–n heterojunction arrays
By taking advantage of the p-type ZnSe nanostructures, a new-type photovoltaic device that combines a ZnSeNR/SiNW p–n heterojunction array and a graphene transparent electrode was developed, as shown in Fig. 4a and b. Dense quasi-aligned p-ZnSeNR array was grown on the top of the highly aligned n-SiNW array; each ZnSeNR will contact with one or several SiNWs, forming an axial p–n heterojunction array. Although the shapes of the ZnSeNRs are different from the ZnSeNWs described above, they are synthesized in the same process and possess nearly the same transport properties. Their morphology difference is likely due to the distinct nucleation and growth behavior on various substrates. In fact, the use of the ZnSeNRs is beneficial to the device performance to some extent because of the large effective contact area of the NRs with the graphene film. The height of the SiNW array was optimized to be ∼10 μm by making a trade off between light absorption efficiency and surface carrier recombination.35Fig. 4c shows the Raman spectrum of the graphene film, along with the HRTEM image taken from the edge position in the inset, revealing that the graphene film has thickness of ∼4 layers. The small D band intensity also indicates the low defect and disorder levels of the graphene film.36 The transmittance spectrum of the as-synthesized graphene film was also measured, as shown in Fig. S2 in the ESI.† It is seen that the graphene film has a transmittance of ∼88% in the wavelength length of 400–1200 nm.
 Fig. 4  (a) Cross-section FESEM image of the ZnSeNR/SiNW p–n heterojunction array. (b) Schematic illustration shows the fabrication process for the nano-heterojunction array. (c) Raman spectrum of the multi-layer graphene film. Inset shows the HRTEM image of the graphene film at edge with thickness of ∼4 layers. (d) Absorption spectrum of different device structures for comparison. 
As we know, in a conventional solar cell, only the light with energy larger than the semiconductor bandgap could be absorbed and utilized, while in the case of photon energy exceeding the bandgap, the rest of the energy will be dissipated in the form of heating energy, resulting in the reduction of the conversion efficiency as well as the device lifetime. Therefore, how to adequately utilize the solar energy has become an urgent task faced by the modern solar cells. Fig. 4d depicts the absorption spectrum of the ZnSeNR/SiNW p–n heterojunction array. It is apparent that the light absorption of the heterojunction array is improved compared to the planar Si or ZnSeNR/planar Si. In particular, the light absorption in the blue/UV range, in which the Si absorption begins to decline, is remarkably enhanced by using the ZnSeNR array. Although the absorption of the heterojunction array is still lower than the SiNW array at longer wavelengths due to the light reflection of the quasi-aligned ZnSeNR array, suggesting that further optimization to the ZnSeNR array growth is necessary, this preliminary result has clearly proven the potential of the heterojunction array for high efficient light absorption.
The structures of the ZnSeNR/SiNW p–n heterojunction array were further studied by high-magnification FESEM as well as HRTEM, as shown in Fig. 5. From the cross-section FESEM image of the heterojunction array (Fig. 5a), we can see that the interspace of the SiNW array is fully filled by the ZnSe crystals, and a ZnSe crystal layer also exists on the top of the SiNW array. Fig. 5b and c show the TEM images of an individual SiNW, which was scraped from the heterojunction array and then dispersed on the Cu TEM grid. It is seen that the SiNW is surrounded by a ZnSe layer, forming a core–shell heterojunction structure. This structure could be identified by the different contrast of ZnSe and SiNW in the TEM investigation as well as the EDX examinations (Fig. 5e and f). The large ZnSe and SiNW contact surface will be conducive to the high efficient carrier separation in the photovoltaic application.37Fig. 5d displays the HRTEM image taken from the junction interface area. Notably, the ZnSe layer exhibits good epitaxial relationship with the SiNW due to their matched lattice structure. The lattice constant for Si is a = 0.543 nm, which is close to that of zinc blende ZnSe (a = 0.567 nm). The (100) planes of the ZnSe layer are parallel to the (100) planes of the SiNW. We note that the ZnSe layer on the SiNW has zinc blend structure due to the epitaxial growth, in contrast to the wurtzite structure of the ZnSeNW grown on the bare Si substrate. Considering the similar electrical properties of the zinc blend phase and wurtzite phase ZnSe, this difference will not make much difference in the device performance. The abrupt interface without any amorphous layer also clearly indicates the high quality of the heterojunction.
 Fig. 5  (a) Cross-section FESEM image of the ZnSeNR/SiNW heterojunction array. (b) and (c) TEM images of a single SiNW covered by the ZnSe layer. (d) HRTEM of the SiNW and ZnSe interface detected at the circle region in (c). The junction interface was marked with a dashed line. Insets show the fast Fourier transform (FFT) patterns of the SiNW (left) and ZnSe (right). (e) EDX spectrum of the SiNW taken from the light area in (c). (f) EDX spectrum of the ZnSe taken from the dark area in (c). Cu peaks come from the Cu grid used for TEM investigation. 

Fig. 6a depicts the typical I–V characteristics of the ZnSeNR/SiNW p–n heterojunction array with graphene top electrode measured in the dark and under white light illumination (from the optical microscopy on the probe station), respectively. Note that the device exhibits excellent rectifying behavior with a large rectification ratio of ∼103 within ±0.8 V, a small turn-on voltage of ∼0.3 V, and a low reverse current density of 0.8 μA cm−2 in the dark. The ideality factor (n) of the heterojunction could be deduced to be about 1.66 according to the following equation: (3)
 Fig. 6  (a) Typical I–V characteristics of the ZnSeNR/SiNW heterojunction array measured in the dark and under light illumination. A graphene transparent top electrode was used. Inset shows the I–V curves in a logarithmic plot. (b) Photovoltaic characteristics of the heterojunction array under white light illumination. (c) Time response of the device measured at zero voltage bias. The white light was turned on/off manually. (d) Energy band diagram of the heterojunction array. Inset shows the equivalent electronic model for the device. 
All these parameters depict the high quality of the heterojunction array and thus offer a starting point for its applications. As expected, the device shows pronounced photovoltaic behavior under white light illumination (Fig. 6a and b). The fill factor (FF) and power conversion efficiency (η) could be obtained from the following equations: (4) (5)where Isc is the short circuit current (24.2 μA), Voc is the open voltage (0.171 V), IM (12.7 μA) and VM (0.085 V) present the current and voltage at the point of the I–V characteristic where the power output is maximal, Pin is the white light intensity (350 μW cm−2), S is the effective area of the solar cell (0.25 cm2). Accordingly, FF and η are estimated to be 0.26 and 1.24%, respectively. Fig. 6c displays the photoresponse of the device at zero voltage bias. It is noted that the device shows high sensitivity to the incident light with a large Ion/Ioff ratio (∼103) and fast response speed (rise and fall time <100 ms, over the measurement limitation of the equipment), indicating that electron–hole pairs could be effectively generated and separated in the heterojunction array owing to the presence of a built-in electric field. Moreover, the device exhibits good stability and reproducibility to pulsed light with 60 s per cycle, revealing the possibility of the heterojunction array as a high-performance self-powered photodetector.

Fig. 6d illustrates the energy band diagram of the ZnSeNR/SiNW p–n heterojunction array. Due to the difference in Fermi level (EF), a space charge region, as well as a built-in electric field with direction from SiNW to ZnSeNR, will be established at the interface of the heterojunction array. Under light illumination, the light can penetrate through the transparent graphene electrode and irradiate on the heterojunction array. Electron–hole pairs will be generated and then separated by the built-in electric field, subsequently, collected by the anode/cathode electrodes, giving rise to the photocurrent flow. The light shorter than 470 nm will be mainly absorbed by the ZnSeNR array, while the longer wavelength light is absorbed by the SiNW array due to their bandgap difference. Both of them will contribute to the enhanced light absorption of the heterojunction array. From the energy band diagram, the valance band (Ev) offset between p-ZnSeNR and n-SiNW may generate a large barrier for the holes transport from the n-SiNW to the p-ZnSeNR. In this case, the photocurrent in the long wavelength regime should be much lower than that in the short wavelength regime. This is because the electron–hole pairs can only be generated in the SiNW in the long wavelength regime, but the hole transport to the p-ZnSeNR is blocked by the barrier, leading to the decrease of the photocurrent. However, from the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectrum of the heterojunction (Fig. 7d), the EQE changes very little between 400 and 800 nm, indicating that the device performance is not remarkably degraded by this barrier. Although the underlying reason is not fully clear yet, we propose that the high doping concentration of the ZnSeNR and consequently large tunneling current from SiNW to the ZnSeNR might be responsible for this result. On the other hand, the electrical model is provided in the inset of Fig. 6d to provide a better understanding of the working mechanism of the device. The inner structure of the device could be simplified by using a current source Isc, a backward diode, a series resistance Rs, and a shunt resistance Rsh. A load resistor RL is also connected to the output of the device. Rs and Rsh are estimated to be 8.1 × 104 and 5.23 × 106 Ω, respectively, by slope method, and an optimum matching RL is deduced to be 6.7 × 103 Ω according to the values of IM and VM.
 Fig. 7  Photovoltaic characteristics of the nano-heterojunction arrays under AM 1.5G illumination at 100 mW cm−2. (a) ZnSeNR/SiNW p–n heterojunction array with graphene top electrode. (b) ZnSeNR/SiNW p–n heterojunction array with Cu/Au top electrode. (c) Drop-casted ZnSeNR/CH3–SiNW p–n heterojunction array with Cu/Au top electrode. (d) EQE spectrum of the drop-casted ZnSeNRs/CH3–SiNW p–n heterojunction array. 
The photovoltaic characteristics of the heterojunction array were further studied by using a solar simulator as the light source, as shown in Fig. 7a. As compared with the results obtained under the weak white light, fill factor and conversion efficiency have decreased to 0.16 and 0.14%, respectively, under AM 1.5G at 100 mW cm−2. One of the important reasons for this result is the large series resistance (5.6 × 103 Ω) of the device. To reduce Rs, the graphene film was further decorated with Au nanoparticles by spin-coating the AuCl3 solution (10 mM) on it directly. We note that the transmittance of the graphene film after Au particles decoration has decreased slightly to ∼82% (ESI, Fig. S2†). However, as a result of the increased graphene conductivity, the device still shows improved device performance; Rs decreases significantly to 694 Ω, while FF and η are enhanced to 0.24 and 0.78%, respectively. For comparison, a Cu/Au (4 nm/20 nm) electrode was also evaporated onto the ZnSeNR array and served as the top electrode (Fig. 7b). Although the device shows a small Rs of 72 Ω and a high FF of 39.6%, the efficiency has decreased to 0.56% due to the worse transmittance of the Cu/Au electrode.

Table 1 summarizes the photovoltaic parameters of the ZnSeNR/SiNW p–n heterojunction arrays studied in this work, along with the previous reports about semiconductor/Si nano-heterojunctions for comparison. It is clear that the photovoltaic performances of the ZnSeNR/SiNW p–n heterojunction arrays with a graphene top electrode are close or even superior to the previous reports, such as n-ZnO/p-Si branched NW heterojunctions,10,11 and n-CdS film/p-Si nanoporous pillar arrays etc.,12 revealing the great potential of the ZnSeNR/SiNW heterojunction arrays for future high-performance photovoltaic devices. However, the conversion efficiency (0.78%) of the ZnSeNR/SiNW heterojunction arrays is still lower than the expectation and may impede their practical applications. We suggest that the severe surface recombination on the SiNW array due to the large surface-to-volume ratio might be an important reason. Here we conducted a preliminary investigation on the device characteristics after surface passivation by chemically modifying the SiNW array with methyl groups (–CH3), whose effect in reducing the surface recombination of the SiNWs have been demonstrated previously.29 Differing from the devices mentioned above, the p-ZnSeNRs were directly drop-casted on the SiNW array instead of using the catalytic growth method to avoid damage to the surface chemical groups in the high-temperature NR growth process. In addition, since the drop-casted ZnSeNRs on the SiNW array tended to float away in the solution based graphene transfer process, Cu/Au electrode instead of the graphene film was used in the investigation. Notably, the photovoltaic performance of the device after surface passivation is substantially improved; Voc, Jsc, FF, and η are enhanced to be 0.35 V, 13.9 mA cm−2, 0.468, and 2.27%, respectively, under AM 1.5G illumination (Fig. 7c). This result clearly manifests the importance of the appropriate surface passivation. It is expected that the device performance could be further improved if the graphene top electrode could be used. To this end, additional experiments are being carried out to develop compatible methods for ZnSeNR growth, SiNW surface passivation, and graphene transfer. On the other hand, the EQE spectrum of the drop-casted p-ZnSeNRs/CH3–SiNW array heterojunction was measured and shown in Fig. 7d. It is noted that the device has an EQE of ∼15% in the wavelength range of 400–800 nm, while the EQE tends to decline out of this range. In contrast, in the conventional Si p–n junction solar cell, the EQE shows an obvious decrease at an even longer wavelength of ∼500 nm.38 The wider wavelength active region for the ZnSeNR/SiNW heterojunction array is owed to the enhanced light absorption of the ZnSeNR in blue/UV range (Fig. 4d). We note that the EQE value of our device is still lower than the conventional Si p–n junction solar cells (>80%). The interface recombination and the poor light transmittance of the Cu/Au electrode might be responsible for the relatively low EQE value.
Table 1 Comparison of the photovoltaic performance of the ZnSNR/SiNW p–n heterojunction arrays with other kinds of Si based nano-heterojunctions




Nano-heterojunction structure
Top electrode

R
s (Ω)
FF (%)

η (%)




ZnSeNR/SiNW p–n heterojunction array
Graphene
∼8.1 × 104
26.2%
1.24% white light (350 μW cm−2)


ZnSeNR/SiNW p–n heterojunction array
Graphene
∼5628
15.5%
0.14%


ZnSeNR/SiNW p–n heterojunction array
Graphene/AuCl3
∼694
23.4%
0.78%


ZnSeNR/SiNW p–n heterojunction array
Cu/Au
∼72
39.6%
0.56%


Drop-casted p-ZnSeNRs/CH3–SiNW array
Cu/Au
∼24.5
46.8%
2.27%


n-CdS film/p-Si nanoporous pillar array [ref. 12]
ITO
∼107.7 kΩ
32.8%
1.15 × 10−4%


n-ZnO/p-Si branched NW heterostructures [ref. 10]
ITO
 
25%
0.154%


3-D n-ZnO/p-Si nanopillar nanowire-array [ref. 11]
ITO/PMMA
 
17%
0.512%




4. Conclusion
In summary, ZnSe nanostructures with efficient p-type doping were synthesized by using P as the dopant via a thermal evaporation method. Electrical measurements on the single ZnSeNW revealed a hole concentration as high as 6.5 × 1018 cm−3. By combining the p-type ZnSeNRs with the highly aligned SiNW array, p–n heterojunction arrays were successfully fabricated, which showed promise in enhancing the solar light absorption in the blue/UV range. Photovoltaic devices based on the heterojunction arrays were then constructed through directly transferring the multi-layer graphene film onto the top of the ZnSeNR array as the transparent electrode. The devices possessed a power conversion efficiency of ∼0.78% under AM 1.5G illumination, and the efficiency could be enhanced to ∼2.27% after modified with methyl groups. Potentially, there is a large amount of room to further improve the device performance by means of reducing the graphene sheet resistance, optimizing the device structure, passivating the SiNW with a more efficient method and so on. This new architecture solar cell may has important applications in the future with high-performance and low-cost photovoltaic devices.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Major Research Plan of the National Natural Science Foundation of China (no. 91027021), National Key Basic Research Program of China (973 Program, no. 2012CB932400, 2013CB933500, 2010CB934500, 2011CB808400), and National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC, no. 51172151, 51173124, 50903059, 61106010). We also thank a Project Funded by the Priority Academic Program Development of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions.
Notes and references
H. Y. Chen, J. H. Hou, S. Q. Zhang, Y. Y. Liang, G. W. Yang, Y. Yang, L. P. Yu, Y. Wu and G. Li, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 649 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Shen, B. Q. Sun, D. Liu and S. T. Lee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 19408 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gratzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 338 CrossRef CAS .

          G. Golan and A. Axelevitch, 26th International Conference on Microelectronics,  2008 Search PubMed .
K. S. Leschkies, R. Divakar, J. Basu, E. Enache-Pommer, J. E. Boercker, C. B. Carter, U. R. Kortshagen, D. J. Norris and E. S. Aydil, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1793 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Goodey, S. M. Eichfeld, K. K. Lew, J. M. Redwing and T. E. Mallouk, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 12344 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Lee, D. S. Ruby, D. W. Peters, B. B. McKenzie and J. W. P. Hsu, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1501 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, L. Wang and A. Mascarenhas, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1264 CrossRef CAS .
J. Schrier, D. O. Demchenko and L. W. Wang, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2377 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sun, Y. Jing, N. Park, C. Li, Y. Bando and D. L. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 15465 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, Q. Zhao, J. Xu and D. P. Yu, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 3015 RSC .
C. He, C. B. Han, Y. R. Xu and X. J. Li, J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 110, 094316 CrossRef .
J. Ren, K. A. Bowers, B. Sneed, D. L. Dreifus, J. W. Cook and J. F. Schetzina, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1990, 57, 1901 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Haase, J. Qiu, J. M. DePuydt and H. Cheng, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1991, 59, 1272 CrossRef CAS .
P. Mahawela, G. Sivaraman, S. Jeedigunta, J. Gaduputi, M. Ramalingam and S. Subramanian, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2005, 116, 283 CrossRef .
X. T. Zhang, Z. Liu, Y. P. Leung, Q. Li and S. K. Hark, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 83, 5533 CrossRef CAS .
S. L. Xiong, B. J. Xi, C. M. Wang, G. C. Xi, X. Y. Liu and Y. T. Qian, Chem.–Eur. J., 2007, 13, 7926 CrossRef CAS .
Y. P. Leung, W. C. H. Choy, I. Markov, G. K. H. Pang, H. C. Ong and T. I. Yuk, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 183110 CrossRef .
D. B. Laks and C. G. Van de Walle, Phys. B, 1993, 185, 118 CrossRef CAS .
X. W. Zhang, J. S. Jie, Z. Wang, C. Y. Wu, L. Wang, Q. Peng, Y. Q. Yu, P. Jiang and C. Xie, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 6020 RSC .
H. S. Song, W. J. Zhang, G. D. Yuan, Z. B. He, W. F. Zhang, Y. B. Tang, L. B. Luo, C. S. Lee, I. Bello and S. T. Lee, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 033117 CrossRef .
J. S. Jie, W. J. Zhang, I. Bello, C. S. Lee and S. T. Lee, Nano Today, 2010, 5, 313 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Zhang, K. Q. Peng, X. Fan, J. S. Jie, R. Q. Zhang, S. T. Lee and N. B. Wong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 4444 CAS .
R. R. Nair, P. Blake, A. N. Grigorenko, K. S. Novoselov, T. J. Booth, T. Stauber, N. M. T. Peres and A. K. Geim, Science, 2008, 320, 1308 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, L. J. Zhi and K. Mullen, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 323 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Wu, H. A. Beceril, Z. N. Bao, Z. F. Liu, Y. S. Chen and P. Peumans, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 263302 CrossRef .
G. Neu, C. Morhain, E. Tournie and J. P. Faurie, J. Cryst. Growth, 1998, 184–185, 515 CrossRef .
A. Reina, X. T. Jia, J. Ho, D. Nezich, H. Son, V. Bulovic, M. S. Dresselhaus and J. Kong, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 30 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Shen, B. Q. Sun, D. Liu and S. T. Lee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 19408 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Zhu and Y. Bando, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2003, 377, 367 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Bae, H. K. Kim, Y. B. Lee, X. F. Xu, J. S. Park, Y. Zheng, J. Balakrishnan, T. Lei, H. R. Kim, Y. I. Song, Y. J. Kim, K. S. Kim, B. Ozyilmaz, J. H. Ahn, B. H. Hong and S. Iijima, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 574 CrossRef CAS .
F. Gunes, H. J. Shin, C. Biswas, G. H. Han, E. S. Kim, S. J. Chae, J. Y. Choi and Y. H. Lee, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4595 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Balasubramaniana, T. R. Ravindranb, R. Kesavamoorthyb and K. Ramachandranc, Solid State Commun., 2006, 140, 1 CrossRef .
D. Seghier, H. P. Gislason, C. Morhain, M. Teisseire, E. Tournie, G. Neu and J.-P. Faurie, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2002, 229, 251 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xie, P. Lv, B. A. Nie, J. S. Jie, X. W. Zhang, Z. Wang, P. Jiang, Z. Z. Hu, L. B. Luo, Z. F. Zhu, L. Wang and C. Y. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 133113 CrossRef .
A. Reina, X. T. Jia, J. Ho, D. Nezich, H. Son, V. Bulovic, M. S. Dresselhaus and J. Kong, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 30 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Tang, Z. Y. Huo, S. Brittman, H. W. Gao and P. D. Yang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 568 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kumar, S. K. Srivastava, P. K. Singh, M. Husain and V. Kumar, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 215 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2jm34720bThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) A typical FESEM image of the P-doped ZnSeNWs synthesized on bare Si substrate. (b) HRTEM image of the P-doped ZnSeNW. Inset shows the corresponding SAED pattern. (c) PL spectra of both undoped and P-doped ZnSeNWs, which are normalized according to the NBE emission peaks. Inset shows the enlarged NEB emissions of the samples. (d) XPS spectrum of the P-doped ZnSeNWs. Inset shows the enlarged P 2p peak.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 2  (a) Typical I–V curves of a single P-doped ZnSeNW with Cu/Au and graphene electrodes, respectively. Insets show the FESEM images and the cross-section schematic illustrations of the devices with graphene (left) and Cu/Au (right) electrodes. (b) Electrical transport characteristics of the back-gate FET based on a single P-doped ZnSeNW. Cu/Au source and drain electrodes were used. Ids–Vds curves were measured at varied Vg ranging from −40 V to +40 V in a step of +20 V. Inset is the Ids–Vg curve at Vds = −10 V.	 
σ = σ0exp(−Ea/kBT)	(2)

 	Fig. 3  (a) Conductivity versus temperature curve measured in the range of 110–290 K. (b) Logarithmic plot of conductivity versus reciprocal temperature curve.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Cross-section FESEM image of the ZnSeNR/SiNW p–n heterojunction array. (b) Schematic illustration shows the fabrication process for the nano-heterojunction array. (c) Raman spectrum of the multi-layer graphene film. Inset shows the HRTEM image of the graphene film at edge with thickness of ∼4 layers. (d) Absorption spectrum of different device structures for comparison.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Cross-section FESEM image of the ZnSeNR/SiNW heterojunction array. (b) and (c) TEM images of a single SiNW covered by the ZnSe layer. (d) HRTEM of the SiNW and ZnSe interface detected at the circle region in (c). The junction interface was marked with a dashed line. Insets show the fast Fourier transform (FFT) patterns of the SiNW (left) and ZnSe (right). (e) EDX spectrum of the SiNW taken from the light area in (c). (f) EDX spectrum of the ZnSe taken from the dark area in (c). Cu peaks come from the Cu grid used for TEM investigation.	 
	(3)

 	Fig. 6  (a) Typical I–V characteristics of the ZnSeNR/SiNW heterojunction array measured in the dark and under light illumination. A graphene transparent top electrode was used. Inset shows the I–V curves in a logarithmic plot. (b) Photovoltaic characteristics of the heterojunction array under white light illumination. (c) Time response of the device measured at zero voltage bias. The white light was turned on/off manually. (d) Energy band diagram of the heterojunction array. Inset shows the equivalent electronic model for the device.	 
	(4)
	(5)

 	Fig. 7  Photovoltaic characteristics of the nano-heterojunction arrays under AM 1.5G illumination at 100 mW cm−2. (a) ZnSeNR/SiNW p–n heterojunction array with graphene top electrode. (b) ZnSeNR/SiNW p–n heterojunction array with Cu/Au top electrode. (c) Drop-casted ZnSeNR/CH3–SiNW p–n heterojunction array with Cu/Au top electrode. (d) EQE spectrum of the drop-casted ZnSeNRs/CH3–SiNW p–n heterojunction array.	 

ZnSeNR/SiNW p–n heterojunction array	Graphene	∼8.1 × 104	26.2%	1.24% white light (350 μW cm−2)
ZnSeNR/SiNW p–n heterojunction array	Graphene	∼5628	15.5%	0.14%
ZnSeNR/SiNW p–n heterojunction array	Graphene/AuCl3	∼694	23.4%	0.78%
ZnSeNR/SiNW p–n heterojunction array	Cu/Au	∼72	39.6%	0.56%
Drop-casted p-ZnSeNRs/CH3–SiNW array	Cu/Au	∼24.5	46.8%	2.27%
n-CdS film/p-Si nanoporous pillar array [ref. 12]	ITO	∼107.7 kΩ	32.8%	1.15 × 10−4%
n-ZnO/p-Si branched NW heterostructures [ref. 10]	ITO	 	25%	0.154%
3-D n-ZnO/p-Si nanopillar nanowire-array [ref. 11]	ITO/PMMA	 	17%	0.512%
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2jm34720b

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
