Recent advances in three-dimensional graphene based materials for catalysis applications  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7CS00904F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7CS00904F
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 2165-2216Recent advances in three-dimensional graphene based materials for catalysis applications

        
          
            Bocheng 
            Qiu
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Mingyang 
            Xing
          
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Jinlong 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      *
      Key Laboratory for Advanced Materials and Institute of Fine Chemicals, School of Chemistry & Molecular Engineering, East China University of Science and Technology, 130 Meilong Road, Shanghai 200237, P. R. China. E-mail: mingyangxing@ecust.edu.cn; jlzhang@ecust.edu.cn
Received 
      27th December 2017
    First published on 7th February 2018AbstractOver the past few decades, two-dimensional graphene based materials (2DGMs) have piqued the interest of scientists worldwide, and the exploration of their potential applications in catalysis, sensors, electronic devices and energy storage due to their extraordinary physical and chemical properties has rapidly progressed. As for these 2DGMs, there is a complementary need to assemble 2D building blocks hierarchically into more complicated and hierarchical three-dimensional graphene-based materials (3DGMs). Such a capability is vitally crucial in order to design sophisticated and multi-functional catalysts with tailorable properties. This comprehensive review describes some important recent advances with respect to 3DGMs, including their preparation methods, characterization and applications in catalysis, e.g., photocatalysis, electrocatalysis, organic catalysis, and CO oxidation. The importance of the relationship between the structure and catalytic performance, a topic which has become a central focus of research in order to develop high-performance catalytic systems, is discussed. Likely future developments and their associated challenges are proposed and discussed.
Bocheng Qiu
Bocheng Qiu received his bachelor's degree (2012) from Nanjing Agricultural University, and obtained his PhD degree (2017) from East China University of Science and Technology under the supervision of Professor Jinlong Zhang. He is now a post-doctoral fellow at the Hong Kong Polytechnic University. His research interest focuses on the design and controlled synthesis of hollow nanomaterials and carbon-based hybrid materials and their applications in photo-/electrocatalysis and energy storage.
Mingyang Xing
Dr Mingyang Xing is an Associate Professor and supervisor of postgraduate students at the School of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, East China University of Science and Technology (ECUST). He obtained his Doctoral Degree in 2012 from ECUST, and then worked at the University of California, Riverside, as a visiting scholar for one year. His research focuses on the preparation of functional nanomaterials and applications to the environmental and energy fields. He has published more than 60 papers in SCI journals in these areas, which have been cited more than 3000 times.
Jinlong Zhang
Prof. Dr Jinlong Zhang obtained his bachelor's degree in 1985 and his PhD in 1993 from East China University of Science and Technology, Shanghai, China. Professor Zhang joined the East China University of Science and Technology in 1993. He worked at Osaka Prefecture University as a Postdoctor (JSPS) in collaboration with Prof. Anpo from 1996 to 2000. He is currently on the Editorial Boards of “Applied Catalysis B: Environmental” and “Scientific Reports”. He is also the associate editor of “Res. Chem. Intermed”. His research interests include photocatalysis, mesoporous materials, and materials science.
1. Introduction
The demand for energy is rapidly increasing, a fact which is inextricably linked to the rise of global environmental pollution that many already experience in everyday life. Ameliorating the problem of pollution can be accomplished by carrying out frontier scientific and technological research on catalysis and environmentally friendly energy sources, topics which have attracted much attention over the past decade.1,2 More efficient catalysis and new catalytic technologies are critical for minimizing environmental pollution affording means to reduce waste products, ensure the development of clean energy applications, and from a broader perspective, enable sustainable human development. Nowadays, various catalysts, including photo-,3–7 electro-,8–10 and organic-reaction catalysts,11–13 are becoming increasingly attractive as a result of their growing market value for wastewater treatment, fuel cell technology and drug synthesis. Huge demand has motivated researchers to develop catalysts with advanced performance capabilities, such as those with high activity, high selectivity, exceptional stability and that can be easily recycled. Especially interesting is the notion that nanostructured materials have the potential to meet the requirements of an advanced catalyst, that is, they make possible materials with large surface areas, increased active sites on their surfaces and low metal loading. Take for example advanced carbon materials, such as carbon dots,14 carbon nanowires,15 carbon nanotubes,16 carbon fibers and graphene;17 these materials are expected to continue to play extremely important roles in overcoming severe challenges and achieving dramatic breakthroughs in catalysis, including photocatalysis, electrocatalysis, organic catalytic reactions and so on.
Graphene, a two-dimensional (2D) single hexagonal carbon sheet, is a rising star among the different members of the carbon materials family. In 2004, Geim et al.18 successfully isolated single layer graphene nanosheets by employing a peeling process involving scotch tape. Ever since this great breakthrough, graphene has attracted enormous attention due to its unique properties with respect to chemistry, physics, materials science and mechanics. For instance, graphene has an outstanding specific surface area (∼2630 m2 g−1), high carrier mobility (∼10000 cm2 V−1 s−1), good thermal conductivity (∼5000 W m K−1) at room temperature, excellent optical transparency (∼97%), strong chemical stability and high mechanical strength with a Young's modulus of ∼1.0 TPa.19,20 A variety of synthetic technologies, including chemical vapor deposition (CVD),21 physical exfoliation,22 graphitization and chemical oxidation cleavage,23–25 have been adopted in order to synthesize this promising 2D material. Facile protocols for graphene synthesis also have greatly accelerated the pace of graphene materials research in the fields of life science, energy, and environmental research. As a versatile 2D building block, graphene has been assembled into one-dimensional (1D) fibers,26 2D films or papers,27,28 and three-dimensional (3D) aerogels or hydrogels,29–31 all of which have the potential to dramatically extend the reach of graphene applications and forthcoming commercial products. In particular, the design of 3D graphene materials assembled from 2D graphene has attracted tremendous attention, because 3D graphene can not only retain the properties of 2D graphene, but also emerge with unique properties of its own, such as adjustable pore structures, excellent mechanical strength and outstanding electronic conductivity.22,32 Based on these intriguing properties, 3D graphene as a catalyst or catalyst support has already fulfilled some of the requirements necessary for being considered as an advanced catalyst.
In parallel to the growing knowledge on the synthesis and understanding of 3DGMs, their importance in catalysis should be emphasized. Compared with 2D graphene-based materials (2DGMs), 3DGMs combine micro-, meso- and macropores in such a way that the micro- and mesoporosity endow them with a high specific surface area while the macroporosity guarantees accessibility to this surface, which is more beneficial to the enhancement of catalytic performance. It should be noted that the confinement effect of catalytic components within 3D graphene can stabilize active sites in the catalytic process.33 In addition, another unique advantage is the integrated appearance of these 3DGM monoliths, which makes them convenient for manipulation and collection in use, as well as preventing the environmental risk induced by the toxicity of the release of graphene nanosheets.34 Besides, to understand each function of 3DGMs in catalysis well, we mention here different roles offered to catalysis by the use of 3D graphene, in terms of previous reports about the application of 3DGMs in the field of catalysis. (1) 3D graphene modified by functional groups, such as –OH, –COOH and –NH2, directly plays a catalytic role.35,36 (2) Defect-related or heteroatom doped 3D graphene displays good performance in catalytic reactions, especially in electrocatalysis.37,38 (3) 3D graphene is regarded as a support for catalytic functionalities, such as metals,39 metal oxides,40 chalcogenides,41 nitrides,42 and phosphides.43 (4) 3D graphene can be treated as cocatalysts to facilitate photocatalytic reactions.44
To date, a series of reviews about 2DGMs have been published which focus on preparation schemes, property exploration and specific applications in energy storage or those related to environmental issues.45–48 As for 3DGMs, there are only a few published reviews that focus on fabrication methods or practical applications with respect to lithium ion batteries (LIBs) or supercapacitors.49–52 A review concentrated on the relationship between preparation, structure, and application of 3DGMs in the field of catalysis, however, is still needed. In this review, we first summarize the available synthetic methodologies for the preparation of 3DGMs. In the following section, various characterization technologies and theoretical modelling for analyzing 3DGMs are presented and the properties of 3DGMs are highlighted. Then, the application of 3DGMs in catalysis, including electro-, photo- and other catalytic reactions will be discussed in detail. We also have done a comprehensive comparison of microstructures, physicochemical properties, and catalytic performance between 2DGMs and 3DGMs. In addition, this review is explicitly aimed at providing new views about the structure–function relationship with respect to catalytic performance. Finally, prospective developments and their associated challenges that must be overcome are proposed and discussed at the end.
2. Preparation methods
In the past few years, considerable efforts have been devoted to developing a wide range of synthetic methods for the preparation of 3DGMs consisting of various morphologies, structures and properties.53,54 In fact, these widely used methods can be applied for the preparation of papers, aerogels, hydrogels, foams, networks, scaffolds, sponges, and monoliths. In general, these synthetic technologies can be divided into “template-based” and “template-free” approaches, and the template-based protocols can be further subdivided into CVD-based, solution-based and those based on 3D printing methods. Regarding CVD-based methods, commercial Ni foam is widely used as the 3D template and catalyst in CVD technology.55,56 Different from CVD-based methods, solution-based approaches employ graphene oxide (GO) sheets grown on 3D colloidal-sphere templates followed by the reduction of GO to obtain reduced graphene oxide (RGO). The colloidal-sphere templates in this method include silicon spheres,57 polystyrene (PS) balls,58,59 melamine foam,60,61 cellulose62,63 and natural cotton.63,64 Solution-based methods bear the advantages of enabling large-scale production and being low-cost, but inevitably introduce unwanted vacancies in the lattice structure of the 2D materials, a fact which limits their prospects for application in catalysis. CVD-based methods involve high temperatures, which push up the cost of production but yield 3DGMs with near perfect structures and high quality. On the other hand, template-free methods are widely used to synthesize 3DGMs and rely on the 2D material (GO) being highly dispersed in a desired solvent. The nanocrystallites or their corresponding precursors are also included in the solvent. Then, the 2D materials in this aqueous solution can be transformed into 3DGMs through hydrothermal or solvothermal treatment. This process is caused by van der Waals forces that are balanced among GO sheets becoming broken upon thermal treatment. Template-free methods offer the advantages enabled by self-assembly but fail in allowing for control of the pore structure. Nevertheless, template-based methods can yield under precise control a desired pore size, structure and density. In the following section, we will evaluate the merits and demerits of each synthetic technology.
2.1 Template-based methods

2.1.1 CVD-based methods. 
The direct growth of high quality graphene on various templates using CVD methodologies has been well demonstrated by various groups.21,65 Thus, it is reasonable to consider that 3DGMs can be synthesized by the CVD process by employing pre-fabricated 3D templates. In a typical CVD process, some commonly used templates onto which graphene is deposited on metal nanostructures include anodic aluminum oxide (AAO),66 magnesium oxide,67 nickel-coated pyrolyzed photoresist films68 and metallic salts.69,70 Especially important is the fact that 3D metal templates provide a more remarkable surface area than a 2D metal template, which indicates that a large amount of graphene can be expected to grow simultaneously. For instance, Cheng and co-workers71 firstly fabricated graphene foam (GF) through in situ CVD of graphene by using Ni foam as the template and substrate. Next, they etched the Ni foam while using a thin layer of poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) as a support in order to prevent the hollow graphene skeleton from collapsing. Then, the PMMA layer was removed by addition of acetone, and a GF consisting of an interconnected network was obtained. The detailed design strategies are illustrated in Fig. 1a. It was noted that the use of the PMMA support layer was very vital to obtain a free-standing GF; only a severely distorted and deformed GF was obtained without the PMMA support layer. The morphology of the GF was confirmed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) (Fig. 1b–d). The GF derived using the above mentioned method could combine the structural advantages of having a 3D interconnected network with the superior physicochemical properties of graphene prepared by the CVD technology. The high-resolution TEM (HRTEM) image showed that the GF consists of mono to few-layer graphene sheets (Fig. 1e), indicating the high quality of the GF obtained. Compared with the strategy of reductive self-assembly of the GO sheets into 3D graphene, GF methodologies can be employed to grow continuous and seamless 3D graphene structures. The thickness was controlled to an average precision of three layers based on calculations carried out, and the interlayer resistance was substantially reduced. Correspondingly, the as-prepared GF/poly(dimethyl siloxane) composites showed an electrical conductivity of ∼10 S cm−1 at an ultralow graphene loading amount of ∼0.5 wt%, and was a conductivity which is 6 orders of magnitude higher than those for chemically derived graphene-based materials. Undoubtedly, this method has the potential to greatly benefit catalytic applications which demand high quality graphene. Inspired by this work, some 3DGMs obtained by using Ni foam as a sacrificial template have been synthesized.72–74
 Fig. 1  (a) Synthetic scheme of a GF and integration with PDMS through the CVD method with a nickel foam template, (b) photograph of a 170 × 220mm2 free-standing GF. (c) SEM image of a GF. (d) Low-magnification TEM image of a GF. (e) High-resolution TEM images of graphene sheets with different numbers of layers in a GF; the interlayer spacing of bilayer (2L) and trilayer (3L) graphene is ∼0.34 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 71. Copyright 2011 Nature Publishing Group. (f) The schematic illustrations of the preparation process of 3D-GMOs. Comparison of the 3D-GMOs obtained by using templates of NiCl2·6H2O (g) and Ni foam (h). The inset in (g) is the high-magnification SEM image of the 3D-GMOs in (g). Reprinted with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2013 Nature Publishing Group. 
Although employing Ni foam as a template in the CVD process is a promising route to synthesize 3DGMs with tailorable morphologies, the as-prepared 3DGMs display pore structures of large sizes (hundreds of micrometers) with high porosity (∼99.7%), a feature which decreases the overall yield of graphene. To this end, other templates with smaller sizes have been widely investigated. For example, commercial Ni nanoparticle (NP) templates with an average size of 30 μm can produce 3DGMs with relatively small pore sizes.75 During the process of CVD treatment, the Ni NPs melt as a result of high temperature and aggregate to form a 3D Ni framework. Lee et al.76 reported a simplified CVD method to construct 3DGMs by treating a mixture of Ni powder and PMMA at 1000 °C and low pressure. Compared with a gaseous carbon source (such as CH4), the introduction of solid carbon (PMMA) represents a relatively safe, convenient and cheap route, revealing that this CVD method has great potential for large-scale synthesis of graphene.
Recently, Liu et al.77 explored a method to rapidly prepare 3D graphene macroscopic objects (3D-GMOs) using nickel chloride hexahydrate (NiCl2·6H2O) as both the catalyst precursor and template (Fig. 1f–h). The detailed preparation scheme is illustrated in Fig. 1f. First, the precursor (NiCl2·6H2O) was reduced to form a 3D porous interconnected Ni framework by thermal treatment under Ar/H2 at 600 °C. Then, highly efficient growth was carried out using methane as the carbon source for a duration lasting several seconds to a few minutes. When employing growth times of 1.5 and 10 min, higher density 3DGMOs can be obtained, up to 22 and 100 mg cm−3, respectively. During the process of high-temperature annealing, the adjacent catalytic metal particles were melted and re-constructed into a tightly cross-linked Ni skeleton with larger particle sizes. Thereupon, 3D-GMOs can be obtained by removing the Ni skeletons with an FeCl3/HCl solution. As shown in Fig. 1f and g, the pore size of the obtained 3D-GMOs was far smaller than that of the 3D-GMOs prepared from Ni foam acting as the templates. The smaller pore size can endow 3D-GMOs with a higher density, ranging from 22 to 100 mg cm−3 and a remarkably higher surface area (560 m2 g−1), and removal of the heavy metal ions can be easily achieved. In addition to the metallic Ni-based templates, some nonmetallic templates have also been used to design 3DGMs. Lee et al.78 presented a novel strategy to prepare CVD-grown 3D graphene nano-networks (3D-GNs) using 3D-assembled-colloidal silica as the template. In this case, iron chloride hexahydrate (FeCl3·6H2O) and water-soluble polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) were selected as the catalyst and carbon source, respectively. PVA can easily form a homogeneous dispersion with FeCl3·6H2O as a result of the electrostatic interaction between the hydroxyl groups of PVA and the iron ions in the FeCl3 solution. The composite film consisting of the 3D PVA–FeCl3 bound to the 3D silica templates was annealed at 1000 °C under an H2/Ar atmosphere in order to reduce Fe(III) to Fe(0) and grow graphene on the metal surface. In the final step, the iron catalyst and silica template were removed with an HF/HCl solution to yield the 3D-GN structures. This CVD growth of graphene on an iron film has also been demonstrated in some more recent work.79,80
These CVD-based methods, however, have both strengths and weaknesses. On one hand, CVD methods are capable of synthesizing high-quality 3D graphene structures on a large scale, while on the other hand, it is costly and restrained by the requirement for expensive equipment. Although the 3DGMs prepared by the CVD method possess many excellent properties, there are still some points to be addressed. First, the use of 3DGMs requires etching the Ni templates as well as coating and removing the protective polymer, steps of which inevitably increase the complexity of the experimental process and fabrication costs. Second, the pore sizes of the as-prepared 3DGMs range from hundreds of nanometers to hundreds of micrometers, and it is still a challenge to prepare nanoporous 3DGMs, especially with pore sizes of less than 50 nm (mesoporous structures). Based on these considerations, improvements to the CVD method can be made by seeking suitable templates that can simplify the overall process as well as lead to more control over structural properties.


2.1.2 Solution-based methods. 
Compared with CVD-based methods, solution-based methods that rely on the assembly of GO sheets onto 3D templates followed by chemical reduction of GO to RGO do not require specialized equipment. Colloidal spheres, such as silica and polystyrene, can serve as 3D templates in order to grow 3D macroporous materials. Choi et al.81 fabricated 3D macroporous graphene that relied on chemically modified graphene (CMG) using PS colloidal particles as sacrificial templates and a well-known replicating and embossing technique. Fig. 2a shows the synthetic scheme illustrating the macroporous embossed CMG (e-CMG) films. The 3D macroporous e-CMG film can be obtained by vacuum filtration of a mixed aqueous colloidal suspension of CMG and PS (2.0 μm PS spheres) followed by removal of the PS spheres using toluene resulting in 3D macropores. In order to extend its application, MnO2 was incorporated into the 3D interconnected pores by controlled, self-limiting deposition in a solution of Na2MnO4 and Na2SO4. The preparation of well-ordered free-standing PS/CMG films was driven by the electrostatic attraction between the negatively charged CMG suspension and the positively charged PS colloids. In addition, filtration-type processes were suitable for assembly of CMG sheets into “paper-like” bulk materials with high electronic conductivity and mechanical compressibility. SEM images (Fig. 2b and c) revealed that the PS colloidal particles have been removed leaving behind an open porous structure. The porous structure did not collapse after removal of the PS colloidal particles due to the interconnected nature of the multilayered CMG walls within the e-CMG structure, a hypothesis validated by TEM images (Fig. 2d). The well-defined interconnected pore networks endowed the e-CMG films with a high surface area (194.20 m2 g−1) and a high electronic conductivity (1204 S m−1). Similarly, Huang et al.82 reported 3D graphene capsules, which were prepared by spray pyrolysis from a dispersion of GO and polystyrene colloids. In this case, the attachment of GO sheets onto the polymer colloids was realized by an evaporation-induced capillary force. In addition, it should be noted that this colloidal-template-directed method can be applied towards the synthesis of N or S-doped 3DGMs by the introduction of polyvinyl pyrrolidone (PVP) or S-modified PS templates instead of pure PS templates.52
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic illustrating a procedure to fabricate 3D macroporous films through an embossing process using PS templates for an e-CMG film as well as a subsequent deposition process of MnO2 for a MnO2/e-CMG film. Low-magnified SEM (b) and high-magnified SEM (c) images of the e-CMG film. (d) TEM image of the e-CMG film. Reprinted with permission from ref. 81. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic illustration of the synthesis procedures of the nanoporous graphene foams (NGFs). STEM (f) and HRTEM (g) images of NGFs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2012 John Wiley and Sons. 
Due to the use of PS templates that possess an average size of 20 μm, the resulting pore size of the 3DGMs is also on the micrometer scale. In order to further reduce the pore size of 3DGMs, silica spheres (30–120 nm) acting as templates have been widely investigated. Zhao and co-workers83 constructed nanoporous graphene foams (NGFs) using a template approach that is driven by hydrophobic interactions. It is noted that differing from previous reports84,85 which have described GO as completely hydrophilic, GO here has been shown to be actually amphiphilic with hydrophilic edges and hydrophobic basic planes. This amphilicity is a result of the fact that the oxygen-containing groups tend to exist at the edge while the aromatic rings dominate the central planes. Thus, in order to generate high-quality porous 3D interconnected networks, the hydrophilic surfaces of the silica spheres should be transformed into hydrophobic ones by the addition of suitable surface modification reagents. As shown in Fig. 2e, silica spheres were modified with methyl groups in order to match the hydrophobic nature of the GO central planes. Next, self-assembly of GO on the silica templates was accomplished by virtue of the hydrophobic nature of both the silica templates and GO central planes. The composites obtained by the self-assembly step then are annealed under an inert atmosphere, reducing GO into RGO. Subsequently, the silica templates were removed by HF etching to yield NGFs composed of RGO sheets. The pore size of these nanoporous NGFs can be adjusted from 30 to 120 nm, a diameter which is much smaller than those of the 3DGMs obtained by the CVD method. Scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) and HRTEM images of the NGFs shown in Fig. 2f and g clearly revealed a porous structure throughout the entire sample. The prepared nanoporous NGFs possessed a high surface area of 851 m2 g−1 (1/3 of the theoretical surface area of graphene (2630 m2 g−1) and an ultra-high pore volume (4.3 cm3 g−1)), which allowed these NGFs to perform excellently when applied to the detection of bio-molecules.
In the above mentioned template-directed preparation method for 3DGMs, the colloidal-sphere templates can be easily removed from the self-assembled composites by solvent or thermal treatment in order to obtain the self-supported 3D macroporous structures. High temperature treatment can reduce the GO sheets and enhance the overall properties of the 3D porous structure. The as-prepared 3D graphene framework has been proved to be an excellent support for metal oxide materials (MnO2,81 Co3O4,53 Fe3O4,83etc.). Generally, these colloidal sphere templates, especially the PS templates, are not suitable for CVD-based processes, because they are not compatible with the high temperatures required. Moreover, the quality and electronic conductivity of the 3DGMs obtained from solution-based methods are usually lower than those designed by CVD methods.
Apart from the silica and polymeric spheres, nickel foam, alumina fiber blanket (AFB) and ice have been investigated as templates by various groups. The nickel foam template can not only be used in CVD-based methods, but also functions well in solution-based methods. Zhang et al.86 reported the fabrication of a 3D free-standing nitrogen-doped porous graphene/graphite foam by in situ activation of nitrogen-doped graphene on a highly conductive graphite foam (Fig. 3a). In this case, the Ni foam coated by a thin graphitic layer of carbon (G-coated Ni) was firstly infiltrated with the graphene oxide encapsulated in a polypyrrole (GO@PPY) and KOH mixture. Afterwards, the activated GO@PPY in G-coated Ni (aNGO/G-coated Ni) can be obtained by in situ carbonization and activation treatment. Eventually, the aNGO/graphite foam was prepared after washing with deionized water to remove the residual KOH followed by etching the Ni foam template with FeCl3. The aNGO/graphite foam with an inactive yet lightweight GF support can provide a free-standing 3D interconnected network, and the excellent mechanical strength of the graphite foam makes it suitable for electrodes without additional support. Similarly, Ruoff et al.87 designed a Si/graphene/ultrathin-graphite foam (Si/graphene/UGF) 3D structure by drop-casting a composite of graphene coated Si NPs on an UGF derived from the Ni foam template. Qu and his co-workers88 developed a novel method for the large scale preparation of microchannel-network graphene foams (μCNGFs) using AFB as a template. Fig. 3b showed the different stages during the preparation of μCNGFs. The AFB was initially immersed in a uniform GO solution in order to sufficiently absorb the GO suspension. The presence of the hydroxyl group on the surface of the AFB renders it with a hydrophilic exterior. Thus, GO can be easily absorbed onto the surface of the AFB template through its hydroxyl and carboxyl groups. Moreover, driven by capillary forces, the GO solution can penetrate into the AFB template and fill the voids among the alumina fibers. Afterwards, the GO/AFB composite was freeze-dried after immersing in liquid N2, which was then followed by thermal treatment under a nitrogen atmosphere at 500 °C in order to reduce the GO attached to the AFB template to RGO. The AFB template was finally removed by HF to obtain the pure μCNGFs. The morphologies of AFB and μCNGFs are shown in Fig. 3c–e. The GO sheets are mostly inclined to conform to the morphology of the original AFB template, thus preventing the restacking of the GO sheets and allowing for the generation of 3D cross-linked microchannels. The thickness of the microchannel walls was determined to be 140 nm (Fig. 3f). The as-prepared μCNGFs show excellent electrochemical properties with respect to their application as components in electrochemical double-layer capacitors.
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematics of the fabrication of the aNGO/graphite foam electrode. Reprinted with permission from ref. 86. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic presentation of μCNGF preparation. (1) AFB; (2) AFB soaked with GO suspension; (3) graphene/AFB composite; (4) as-prepared μCNGF after AFB removal. The upper and the lower part depict the process from the perspective of the entire AFB and individual alumina fibers, respectively. (c) SEM image of AFB; (d–f) SEM images of μCNGF under different magnifications. Reprinted with permission from ref. 88. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) Schematic showing the formation of macroporous PSS-G/PVA monoliths using ice-segregation-induced self-assembly (ISISA). (h and i) longitudinal sections, and (j and k) cross-sections of a PSS-G/PVA freeze-dried monolith (1:10 wt ratio). Scale bars: (h, j and k) = 10 mm, (i) = 5 mm. Arrows in (h and i) indicate the direction of freezing. (h and j) Region X showing the layered structure, and (i and k) region Y with macroporous architecture. Reprinted with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2009 John Wiley and Sons. 
In general, the above mentioned hard-template methods involve chemical or thermal reduction of exfoliated GO sheets and hydrothermal carbonization processes, which lead to products with low electrical conductivity. The low conductivity is caused by the fact that the graphene monolayers obtained by chemical reduction of GO sheets do not possess high levels of sp2 hybridized carbons owing to the vacancies and topological defects. To this end, Mann et al.89 selected ice as a template in order to produce graphene–polymer composites with highly ordered 3D structures using the method of ice-segregation-induced self-assembly (ISISA). The original properties of the GO sheets in the as-prepared 3D graphene–polymer composites fabricated by ISISA technology can be maximally maintained. The detailed preparation scheme of the graphene–polymer nanocomposites is shown in Fig. 3g. The 3D graphene–polymer composites were fabricated by ISISA using frozen aqueous dispersions containing homogeneous mixtures of polystyrene sulfonate-stabilized graphene sheets (PSS-G) and PVA. Longitudinal sections of the PSS-G/PVA scaffold clearly indicate that after unidirectional freezing, the growth of close-packed ice crystals compacts the PSS-GO and PVA components between the boundaries of adjacent ice crystals. Sublimation of the ice crystals under high vacuum leads to the formation of well-ordered microchannel structures oriented along the water-ice boundaries (Fig. 3h–k). In addition, the SEM images of cross-sections suggested that the scaffold walls were highly textured, and arranged in different motifs for every monolith depending on their exact positioning. Cao et al.90 developed a general and simple strategy for the large-scale preparation of composite materials composed of 3D GO/metal organic frameworks (MOFs) (this strategy is also based on ISISA technology). In this study, the obtained 3D GO/MOF composite can be used as a precursor for the production of MOF-derived composite materials. As a result, the MOF-derived composite materials showed excellent electrochemical performance.


2.1.3 Three-dimensional (3D) printing. 
3D printing is a simple and effective method to enable the direct production of 3D bulk objects. When nanotechnology is incorporated into 3D printing, it offers huge potential and opportunities for manufacturing 3D bulk materials that possess unique properties and multifunctionality. In 3D printing, metals, polymers or ceramics can be heated and deposited layer-by-layer under computer control in order to fabricate 3D monoliths that can first be designed by the user with software associated with the printer.91 However, when 3D printing is used to produce carbon-based bulk materials, the size of the as-prepared materials will be limited from sub-micrometer to several meters, with the precursors stored in inkjet printable or UV-curable inks.92,93 Hence, in order to construct 3DGMs by 3D printing technology, GO or chemically modified graphene (CMG) should be used as the precursors or as an additive in the ink. CMG is commonly used in the wet processing of porous bulk materials and even wires from oil/water emulsions.94 García-Tuñon and Barg et al.95 functionalized CMG with a branched copolymer surfactant to form water-based ink in order to print self-supported 3D graphene. It should be noted that this strategy addresses the problem that in order to maintain the shape of the printed materials after printing, it must be able to support its own weight. This can be accomplished when good adhesion exists between the previous layers. Yet, the direct 3D printing of all-carbon bulk objects using a binder-free system remains a challenge, especially when inkjet printing is not realized owing to contamination and solubility concerns. Tour et al.32 synthesized in situ 3D graphene foams (GFs) by the manual feeding method, in which an Ni/sucrose scaffold was sintered by a CO2 laser after each layer was deposited (Fig. 4a and b). Note that Ni acts as the template and catalyst while sucrose serves as the solid carbon source for graphene growth. The 3D printed GF obtained by this manual process was of high quality in that it possessed high porosity and excellent mechanical strength. The morphology was investigated by SEM and TEM (Fig. 4c–h). This efficient and simple 3D printing method gets rid of the limitations imposed by the need for inkjet-printable and UV-curable ink materials. Moreover, the shape of the macroscopic monoliths can be adjusted. Thus, this approach represents a promising way for the construction of 3DGMs.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic of in situ synthesis of 3D GF using a simulated 3D printing process. (b) Photographs of 3D printed GF before and after dissolving the Ni. The scale bars are 5 mm. (c–e) SEM images and (f–h) TEM images of 3D printed GFs after removing Ni scaffolds prepared using 100P and 2S in a H2 atmosphere. The inset in (f) is the SAED pattern. Reprinted with permission from ref. 32. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 

2.2 Template-free methods
The template-free preparation of 3DGMs is an efficient and easy bottom-up strategy for self-assembling 3D structures from 2D components. GO and its derivatives combined with their unique properties make these materials ideal 2D building blocks for the construction of 3DGMs. Here, GO is mainly prepared by Hummer's method or modified versions.96 The GO sheets obtained by chemical methods can be assembled into 3DGMs by a variety of different template-free methods, such as hydrothermal reduction, in situ chemical reduction and coupling-agent triggered assembly. We will focus on the details of these strategies in the following section.

2.2.1 Hydrothermal method. 
A key step in fabricating high-quality 3DGMs through hydrothermal treatment is determined by the dispersion of GO in the solution. In general, GO dispersions are stable as a consequence of the balance between attractive and repulsive forces. Thanks to the hydrophilic and carboxyl moieties on the edge of the GO sheets, as well as the epoxy groups on the basal planes, GO forms a uniform and stable aqueous dispersion in water at concentrations as high as 10 mg mL−1. In previous reports, self-assembled hydrogels were routinely constructed by self-assembling either small molecules or macromolecules into 3D networks by employing physical cross-links.97,98 The driving force for forming these physical cross-links is made possible by a combination of very weak interactions, such as hydrogen bonding, van der Waals forces, stacking, and inclusion interactions. Therefore, the cross-links of 3DGMs formed by partial overlapping or coalescing of graphene sheets via π–π stacking interactions are much stronger than those of conventional self-assembled 3D structures. Furthermore, during hydrothermal processing, it is possible to control the macro-appearance and pore structure by simply changing the shape of the reaction vessel, GO concentration and hydrothermal reaction times. These features mean that the macroscopic and microscopic structure of the 3DGMs can be adjusted in a single step.
Shi et al.98 fabricated a self-assembled graphene hydrogel (SGH) with a 3D porous network via a convenient hydrothermal method. We note that this example represents the first time that 2D GO sheets were demonstrated to form complex 3D macrostructures by self-assembly. The SGH can be prepared easily by heating a homogeneous GO dispersion sealed in a Teflon-lined autoclave at 180 °C (Fig. 5a). The as-prepared SGH containing about 97.4 wt% water and 2.6 wt% of hydrothermally prepared RGO still retains a significant degree of mechanical strength. As shown in Fig. 5b, three SGH columns can support 100 g of weight with ease. The SGH possesses a well-defined and interconnected 3D porous structure as illustrated by the image taken from SEM of freeze-dried SGH shown in Fig. 5c and d. The pore size of SGH ranges from submicrometer to several micrometers, and the pore walls consist of stacked RGO sheets. The partial overlapping and coalescing of flexible graphene sheets lead to the formation of physical cross-linking sites in the SGH framework. The flexible nature of the graphene sheets is a key factor for constructing 3DGMs. The SGH is electrically conductive with a conductivity of about 5 × 10−3 S cm−1, which is promising for practical electrochemical applications. This electrical conductivity is caused mainly by the recovery of π-conjugation within the GO sheets upon hydrothermal reduction.
 Fig. 5  (a) Photographs of a 2 mg mL−1 homogeneous GO aqueous dispersion before and after hydrothermal reduction at 180 °C for 12 h; (b) photographs of a strong SGH allowing easy handling and supporting weight; (c and d) SEM images with different magnifications of the SGH interior microstructures. Reprinted with permission from ref. 98. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. (e and f) Photographs of an as-prepared superlight GF and one with a piece of GF size of 1.8 cm × 1.1 cm × 1.2 cm standing on a dandelion. (g and h) SEM images of the sample in (e). Scale bars: (g) 10 μm, (h) 100 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 101. Copyright 2012 John Wiley and Sons. (i) Fabrication illustration of all solid state supercapacitors based on BN-GAs that were involved by a combined hydrothermal process and freeze-drying process. The as-fabricated supercapacitors with a diameter of 7 mm indicated by the dotted green ring and a simplified schematic of ASSSs based on aerogels are shown (below left). (j) Low- and (k) high-magnification SEM images of the as-prepared BN-GAs. (l) Low- and (m) high-magnification SEM images of the as-prepared BN-GAs as a binder/additive-free electrode upon physical pressing. Reprinted with permission from ref. 104. Copyright 2012 John Wiley and Sons. 
The versatility of the hydrothermal method not only allows the addition of some specific additives, such as swelling and linking agents, into the GO dispersion in order to form high quality 3DGMs, but also makes it possible to dope the graphene lattice with some alternative elements, such as nitrogen (N)99 or boron (B).100 Qu and co-workers101 developed a versatile, N-doped, ultralight GF utilizing a two-step method. The hydrothermal treatment leads to GO sheets that form an N-containing graphene gel. Afterwards, the GF can be obtained by freeze-drying followed by annealing at 1050 °C under an Ar atmosphere (Fig. 5e–h). In this particular example, pyrrole was selected as the nitrogen source as well as the swelling agent. As a result of the covalent structure of pyrrole with its electron-rich N atom, this molecule can easily attach to the basal plane of the GO sheets, thus acting as a nitrogen source. Additionally, in comparison to the GF synthesized without the addition of pyrrole, the GF with pyrrole takes up a relatively large volume, because pyrrole efficiently prevents the GO sheets from self-stacking during the hydrothermal reaction. Thus, the density of GF can be reduced to 2.1 ± 0.3 mg cm−3. Such ultralow density is mainly ascribed to the rich open-pore structure throughout the graphene skeleton. The as-prepared GF displays a predominantly macroporous structure (Fig. 5g), which results in a specific surface area of 280 m2 g−1. In this case, the authors provide solid proof that the N from pyrrole has been doped into the graphene by the analysis of X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) spectra. Besides, heteroatoms co-doping into 3D graphene can be also realized by the hydrothermal method.102,103 3D nitrogen and boron co-doped monolithic graphene aerogels (BN-GAs) were prepared by using GO and ammonia boron trifluoride (NH3BF3) as precursors via a hydrothermal reaction and freeze-drying processes (Fig. 5i–m).104 The nitrogen and boron co-doping in 3D graphene network can facilitate charge transfer between neighboring carbon atoms and thus enhance the electrochemical performance of 3DGMs.
Given its low density, excellent electrical conductivity, fine elasticity and high surface area, pure 3D graphene is considered as an ideal support to load catalytic components, including metals,105 metal oxides106 and metal sulfides.56 In fact, hydrothermal methods can achieve in situ growth of inorganic nanomaterials on the surface of 3D graphene. Such in situ strategies mainly involve the direct formation of seed crystals on graphene, and then the seed crystals turn into low dimensional nanocrystals, such as nanoparticles, nanowires, nanorods and nanoplates on the surface of 3D graphene. This process is attributed to the electrostatic interactions between metal ions and the hydroxyl and carboxyl groups on GO.107 For example, Feng et al.108 prepared GA supported SnO2 NPs with a 3D structure by a one-pot hydrothermal method. The high dispersity of SnO2 NPs on GAs is achieved through the electrostatic interactions between Sn4+ and the hydroxyl and carboxyl groups on GO. In another work by Feng et al.,109 3D N-doped graphene aerogel (N-GA) supported Fe3O4 NPs (Fe3O4/N-GAs) were demonstrated by employing a one-step hydrothermal method. The detailed fabrication process of Fe3O4/N-GAs is shown in Fig. 6a. First, iron acetate and polypyrrole (PPy) were added into a GO dispersion to form a homogeneous suspension. Next, these ternary components were hydrothermally self-assembled at 180 °C to form a 3D graphene-based hydrogel. During this process, Fe3O4 NPs nucleated, grew, and crystallized on the surface of the graphene sheets. Meanwhile, incorporation of nitrogen species into the graphene lattice also took place. Finally, the Fe3O4/N-GAs were obtained via freeze-drying followed by thermal treatment at 600 °C under an N2 atmosphere. The SEM and TEM images of the Fe3O4/N-GAs are shown in Fig. 6b–e. It is worth mentioning that a large portion of the Fe3O4 NPs are encapsulated within the graphene layers (Fig. 6c and e), which suggests that effective assembly between the Fe3O4 NPs and graphene occurred. This geometric confinement of the metal oxide NPs within the graphene layers has been shown to suppress the dissolution and agglomeration of the active components, thus improving the interface contacts and enhancing the catalytic activity and stability of these composites.109,110
 Fig. 6  (a) Fabrication process for the 3D Fe3O4/N-GAs catalyst. (1) Stable suspension of GO, iron ions, and PPy dispersed in a vial. (2) Fe- and PPy-supporting graphene hybrid hydrogel prepared by hydrothermal self-assembly and floating on water in a vial, and its ideal assembled model. (3) Monolithic Fe3O4/N-GAs hybrid aerogel obtained after freeze-drying and thermal treatment. (b and c) The typical SEM images of Fe3O4/N-GAs revealing the 3D macroporous structure and uniform distribution of Fe3O4 NPs in the GAs. The red rings in (c) indicate Fe3O4 NPs encapsulated in thin graphene layers. (d) TEM and (e) HRTEM images of Fe3O4/N-GAs revealing an Fe3O4 NP wrapped by graphene layers. Reprinted with permission from ref. 109. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
One-step hydrothermal methods in the absence of other additives may lead to the agglomeration of metal oxides on 3D graphene. Hence, some cross-linking agents are introduced to tune the dispersity of the metal oxide NPs on the surface of 3D graphene. Our group44 developed a simple one-step hydrothermal method for the preparation of ultradispersed TiO2 single nanocrystals grown in situ on a graphene aerogel (GA) surface. In this example, glucose is not only used as the linker to improve the dispersity of TiO2 nanocrystals, but it also serves as a face-controlling agent to produce (001) facets and a mesoporous structure on TiO2. The detailed preparation process for the TiO2/GAs is illustrated in Fig. 7a. The role of glucose in controlling the dispersity of TiO2 nanocrystals on graphene was confirmed by TEM observations (Fig. 7b and c). Moreover, the addition of glucose does not destroy the 3D porous structure (Fig. 7d), while the introduction of TiO2 nanocrystals can prevent self-stacking of the graphene sheets to some extent, thus forming ultrathin graphene layers (Fig. 7c). This in situ growth method ensures the robust binding between TiO2 and GAs, a fact which bodes well for the potential application of TiO2/GAs in photocatalysis. Apart from glucose, cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) is also a good candidate among the cross-linking agents. Niu et al.111 prepared 3D AgBr/GA composites by making use of CTAB as the cross-linker. Due to the amphiphilic nature of CTAB, its alkyl chain is inclined to interact with the GAs leaving the ammonium ion exposed to the bulk solution. This arrangement allows Ag+ to easily react with Br−, and results in the homogeneous in situ growth of AgBr within the 3D porous skeleton of the GAs. The key advantage of this synthetic method is that the loading amount of AgBr can be adjusted easily by changing either the amount of CTAB or Ag+. Although the linking agent plays a significant role in controlling the dispersity of nanocrystals, the presence of the linking agent, however, may cause problems down the road. In particular for those cross-linking agents with long carbon chains, the efficiency of charge transfer between graphene and the metal oxide nanocrystals can be reduced to some extent.112 In contrast, multi-step in situ growth of inorganic nanomaterials on graphene always achieves high dispersity, uniform sizes and suitable loading of the inorganic nanomaterials, as well as keeping the RGO sheets in 3DGMs individually separated. Our group developed a two-step method (a Stöber-like step followed by a hydrothermal step) to design ultralow-density, elastic and versatile Fe2O3/GAs composites.113 Acetylacetone iron (Fe(acac)2) NPs were formed catalytically using ammonium hydroxide (NH3) to afford slow hydrolysis yielding amorphous Fe2O3 seeds on the GO sheets in a water-free mixed solvent system. Afterwards, the Fe2O3 seeds anchored on the GO composite were dispersed in water and hydrothermally treated at 180 °C to form Fe2O3/GAs (Fig. 7e and f). This Stöber-like step is not only conducive for achieving an ultradispersed state with respect to the Fe2O3 NPs (Fig. 7i–n), but also prevents the GO sheets from being reduced, which is highly beneficial for the construction of Fe2O3/GAs with good mechanical strength. The hydrothermal method has been extended also to solvothermal processes in which organic solvents can be employed in place of water.114,115 Gao et al.116 reported a new solvothermal-induced self-assembly approach, using dimethyl formamide (DMF) as the solvent, in order to fabricate monolithic 3D Fe2O3/graphene sheet (Fe2O3/GS) aerogels. Yildirim et al.117 synthesized 3D porous GO frameworks by expansion of GO sheets using a solvothermal method in which methanol was selected as the solvent. The introduction of these organic solvents extends the possibility of incorporating alternative nanocrystals into 3D graphene frameworks.
 Fig. 7  (a) The fabrication process of TiO2/GAs in the presence of glucose. The TEM images of TiO2/GAs obtained in the absence (b) or presence (c) of glucose. (d) The SEM image of TiO2/GAs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic illustration of the in situ growth pathways of highly dispersed Fe2O3 NPs on 3D GAs through Stöber-like and hydrothermal methods. (f) Images of as-prepared Fe2O3/GAs (with a density of 8 mg cm−3). (g and h) HRTEM image of amorphous Fe2O3 seeds on the graphene sheet surface during the Stober-like pretreatment. (i–k) The SEM images of Fe2O3/GAs. (l and m) The TEM images of Fe2O3/GAs. (n) The SEM image of Fe2O3/GAs without Stöber-like pre-treatment. Reprinted with permission from ref. 113. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry. 


2.2.2 
            In situ chemical reduction. 
Besides hydrothermal methods, in situ chemical reduction of GO sheets by introducing reducing agents has been widely investigated in the design of 3DGMs. Various kinds of reducing agents, such as hydrazine hydrate,118 metals,119–121 metal hydrides,122–124 phenolic compounds125 and reducing sugars,126 have been studied. In general, the choice of reducing agent has a significant influence on the pore size, mechanical strength, electrical conductivity and density of the as-prepared 3DGMs. For instance, ascorbic acid, which is weakly reducing and environmentally friendly, can yield 3DGMs with uniform pore structures as a consequence of the fact that during the reduction process, it will not release large quantities of gas. Recently, Hao and Xu et al.127 reported a 3D graphene (3DG)/Fe2O3 aerogel with a porous Fe2O3 framework well encapsulated within the 3D graphene skeleton. The detailed synthetic procedure is illustrated in Fig. 8a. The GO/Prussian blue (PB) composite is prepared by introducing excess Fe3+ ions into the GO/[Fe(CN)6]4− solution. Note that the excess Fe3+ adsorbs onto the surface of PB and ensures the efficient deposition of PB onto the GO sheets by virtue of electrostatic forces. Subsequently, ascorbic acid was introduced as a reducing agent in order to achieve self-assembly, forming the 3DG/PB composite. After thermal treatment, PB NPs on the 3DG can be decomposed into porous Fe2O3 to form a 3DG/Fe2O3 aerogel. This in situ chemical reduction strategy can retain the 3D interconnected network to some extent. The morphologies of the GO/PB and 3DG/Fe2O3 aerogel were investigated by SEM and TEM (Fig. 8b–g). It should be noted that the graphene sheets can conform to the surface of PB, resulting in a coat which enhances the electrochemical performance. Compared with ascorbic acid, hydrazine is a much stronger reducing agent which also has been used extensively. Gao et al.128 prepared multifunctional and ultra-lightweight carbon aerogels by hydrazine vapor reduction of freeze-dried giant graphene oxide (GGO) and carbon nanotube (CNT) foams. Owing to the simplicity of this preparation strategy and the facile large-scale production of GGO and CNTs, carbonaceous aerogels with tailored densities and shapes that include cylinders, rods, squares, etc., were easily obtained (Fig. 9a–c). Such ultra-lightweight aerogels (ULAs) possess 3D interconnected pores with outstanding temperature-invariant elasticity, ultralow density, excellent thermal stability, good electrical conductivity, and high absorption capacities for organic solvents (Fig. 9d and e). Additionally, in this case, the graphene sheets can be interconnected into a variety of different forms including overlapping, twisting and enwrapping, structures which can be observed by SEM (Fig. 9f–h) (the corresponding cartoons of CNT-coated graphene building blocks and their interconnections are shown in Fig. 9i–l). The CNTs employed ranged from several hundreds of nanometers to tens of micrometers in length and were tightly adhered to the monolayer graphene substrates (Fig. 9m–o), a situation which is different from the case of CVD-grown CNT aerogels that require ultralong nanotubes. The UFAs made from neat graphene show an ultralow density of 0.16 cm3 g−1, which is the lowest density to date of the reported ultralight 3DGMs (Fig. 9p). It is noted that such a self-assembly mechanism is the same as that of the hydrothermal methods, in which the elimination of oxygen-containing groups induces the gelation of the GO sheets.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation procedure of 3DG/Fe2O3. (b and c) SEM images of the GO/PB composite. SEM (d and e) and TEM (f and g) images of the microstructure of 3DG/PB. The inset in (d) shows a stable aqueous dispersion of the GO/PB composite and the inset in (i) shows the photograph of a monolithic 3DG/PB aerogel. Reprinted with permission from ref. 127. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 9  Macroscopic and microscopy morphology of UFAs. (a) Digital photograph of UFAs with diverse shapes. (b) A 100 cm3 UFA cylinder standing on a flower. (c) 1000 cm3 UFA cylinder. (d and e) Microscopically porous architecture of a UFA at different magnifications, showing CNT-coated graphene cell walls. (f and g) SEM images of different interconnections for CNT-coated graphene (graphene@CNTs) cell walls: overlapping (f), twisting (g), and wrapping (h). (i) Cartoon of a flattened CNT-coated graphene cell wall. (j–l) Cartoon models corresponding to the three interconnection styles shown in (f and g) respectively. The gray lamellar, orange wires and brown wires represent the graphene sheet, CNTs coated on the top and CNTs coated on the back of the graphene sheet, respectively. (m and n) TEM images of CNT-coated graphene cell walls, the HRTEM image of a cell wall edge (inset in (m), scale bar is 2 nm) and the SAED patterns (inset in (n)) taken at the labeled area. (o) Schematic illustration of idealized building cells of our UFA made by synergistic assembly of graphene and CNTs. (p) SEM image and photograph (inset in (p)) of the lightest neat graphene aerogel (ρ = 0.16 mg cm−3, i.e., 1.38 mg in 8.6 cm3). Reprinted with permission from ref. 128. Copyright 2013 John Wiley and Sons. 


2.2.3 Coupling agent triggering assembly. 
Recently, GO sheets have been self-assembled into macroscopic graphene aerogels using protocols that rely on various covalent and noncovalent techniques, which in principle strengthen conjugated interactions and weaken repulsive forces among the GO sheets. In general, the addition of different coupling agents can promote the gelation of GO solutions. During the process of gelation, these cross-linking molecules form chemical or physical interactions, which can not only influence the morphology of the porous structures, but can also impart new functions to the as-prepared 3DGMs. Cross-linking molecules, which include polymers, bio-molecules, organic molecules and bivalent and trivalent metal ions, have been reported as effective coupling agents for gelation of GO sheets. In particular, polymers and metal ions are two widely used coupling agents. Polymers, such as polyethylenimine (PEI),129 polyacrylamide (PAM),130 polyaniline (PANi),131 PVA89 and PPy132 have been demonstrated as efficient cross-linking agents for constructing porous 3DGMs. For instance, PVA can effectively reinforce the interfacial interaction among GO sheets as a result of the molecular level dispersion of the GO sheets in the PVA matrix. Shi et al.133 prepared 3D porous PVA/GO gels utilizing a tube inversion method (Fig. 10a and b), wherein the final hydrogels contain 5 mg mL−1 GO and 0.5–2.5 mg mL−1 PVA. In this study, the concentration of the coupling agent was systematically investigated. It is interesting to note that the gelation process strongly relies on the weight ratio (r) of PVA to GO (Fig. 10c–f). Han et al.134 designed lightweight GO-based porous materials with 3D interconnected skeletons by a facile method (Fig. 10g and h), in which PEI was selected as the linking agent as well as the amine source, owing to its high amine content. Fig. 10i shows the interaction between the GO sheets and PEI polymers. Alternatively, metal ions including La3+,129 Ca2+,135 Ni2+,136 Pd2+ and Au3+105 have been shown also to serve as good cross-linking agents. Yu et al.137 fabricated a new kind of highly compressible double-networked GO/PAM composite with outstanding mechanical behavior by combining the advantages of conventional hydrogels with those of nanocomposite hydrogels. In this case, Ca2+ serving as the cross-linker was introduced in order to coordinate with the GO sheets through hydrogen bonding (Fig. 10j–l). Moreover, Ca2+ also can be introduced to covalently crosslinked PAM networks owing to the rich hydroxyl and epoxy group of the PAM chains which act as sites of chelation.
 Fig. 10  (a) Structures of GO and PVA. (b) Photographs of GO/PVA mixtures with different content ratios (r) of PVA to GO. From left to right, r = 1:1, 1:1.5, 1:2, 1:5, 1:10, 1:20, 1:40. (c) SEM images of lyophilized 5 mg mL−1 GO and (d–f) GO/PVA blends; r = 1:20 (d), 1:5 (e) or 1:1 (f). Scale bar: 5 mm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 133. Copyright 2010 Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) Illustration of the preparation process of the GO–PEI porous materials (GEPMs). (h) SEM image of the obtained GEPMs. (i) Schematic representation of the GO–PEI hydrogel. Reprinted with permission from ref. 134. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (j) Types of crosslinking networks in the hybrid hydrogel including a Ca2+ coordination-induced GO network (blue), chemically crosslinked PAM network (green), and hydrogen bonds between GO and PAM (red). (k) Compression model for the GO/PAM hydrogel. (l) Stretch model for the GO/PAM hydrogel. Reprinted with permission from ref. 137. Copyright 2014 John Wiley and Sons. 


2.2.4 Chemical activation assisted assembly. 
Chemical activation is a simple and efficient technique to eliminate the re-stacking of graphene sheets and help transform the GO films into 3D porous network. The chemical activation assisted assembly has advantages of high yield, low cost and easy thickness control. Before this, a chemical activation method was widely employed to prepare porous activated carbons. Potassium/sodium hydroxide activation has been successfully applied on CNTs138 and carbon nanofibers,139 and enhanced supercapacitor performance can be achieved. Ruoff et al.140 used chemical activation of exfoliated GO to prepare a 3D porous carbon (Fig. 11a–f). As shown in Fig. 11a, GO sheets were firstly irradiated in a microwave oven to form microwave exfoliated GO (MEGO). Then, the as-made MEGO powder was added into KOH solution followed by filtration and drying to obtain a MEGO/KOH mixture for chemical activation. Eventually, 3D porous carbon can be obtained by heating up the MEGO/KOH mixture to 800 °C for 1 hour in a horizontal tube furnace (50 mm diameter), with an argon flow of 150 sccm and a working pressure of 400 Torr. As a result, the 3D porous carbon showed a specific surface area of up to 3100 m2 g−1, a high electrical conductivity (500 S m−1) and a low oxygen and hydrogen content. In succedent work, Ruoff et al.141 prepared highly conductive, free-standing and flexible porous carbon thin films by chemical activation of RGO paper. It should be noted that the carbon films exhibited a high surface area (2400 m2 g−1) and very high in-plane electrical conductivity (5800 S m−1).
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic showing the microwave exfoliation/reduction of GO and the following chemical activation of MEGO with KOH that creates pores while retaining high electrical conductivity. (b) Low magnification SEM image of a 3D a-MEGO piece. (c) High-resolution SEM image of a different sample region that demonstrates the porous morphology. (d) ADF-STEM image of the same area as (c), acquired simultaneously. As seen, a-MEGO contains micro- and mesopores with a distribution of sizes between ∼1 and ∼10 nm. (e) High-resolution phase contrast electron micrograph of the thin edge of an a-MEGO chunk, taken at 80 kV. There is a variation in focus across the image because of the sloped nature of the sample and changes in sample thickness. The image shows the presence of a dense network of nanometer scale pores surrounded by highly curved, predominantly single-layer carbon. (f) Exit wave reconstructed HRTEM image from the edge of a-MEGO. The in-plane carbon atoms are clearly resolved, and a variety of n-membered carbon rings can be seen. Substantial curvature of the single-carbon sheets is visible, with the in-plane crystallinity being preserved. Reprinted with permission from ref. 140. Copyright 2011 The American Association for the Advancement of the Science. (g) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of laser-scribed graphene-based electrochemical capacitors. Schematic drawings illustrating the leavening process to prepare RGO foams. (h) GO solution used for vacuum filtering. (i) GO layered film on an AAO membrane. (j) Freestanding GO layered film. (k) Freestanding paper-like RGO foam. (l and m) Cross-sectional SEM images of RGO foams formed after 10 h in an autoclave at 90 °C with 80 μL hydrazine monohydrate. Reprinted with permission from ref. 142. Copyright 2012 John Wiley and Sons. 
Besides, the leavening method is also an effective strategy to prevent graphene sheets re-stacking to transform compact graphene structures to 3D porous structure. More correctly, it is a process usually used for increasing the volume of cakes/breads during baking/steaming, thus forming the porous structures. Inspired by this, Chen et al.142 firstly used this leavening method to construct 3DGMs. In this technique (Fig. 11g–m), a GO suspension was firstly filtered through a porous AAO membrane, thereby forming GO films. After peeling them off from the AAO membrane, the free-standing GO films were mixed with a leavening agent (hydrazine monohydrate) and heated to 90 °C for 10 h. The formation of a foam structure with 50 fold expansion and 30% mass loss can be clearly observed. It should be noted that the thickness of GO films can be controlled by the concentration and volume of the GO solution.


2.2.5 Pyrolysis of organic precursors. 
Pyrolysis of organic precursor materials, such as glucose,143 resorcinol/formaldehyde,144,145 phenol/furfural,146 and chitosan,147 is a simple and useful method to produce 3DGMs on a large scale. In general, before pyrolysis treatment, some organic molecules should be mixed to form organic polymer precursors through the sol–gel process (Fig. 12a).148 It is noted that the sol–gel polymerization of resorcinol and formaldehyde is realized in the presence of an acid or alkali as catalysts.144 And subsequently, supercritical CO2 drying or freeze drying techniques are employed to get rid of water from the organic polymer precursors to obtain the organic gel.144,149 Pyrolysis of these dried organic polymer precursors can possibly lead to the growth of a 3D graphene like network. For example, in Worsley's work,144 the organic sol–gel polymerization of resorcinol (R) and formaldehyde (F) was proceeded with sodium carbonate as a catalyst in GO solution. Then, supercritical CO2 was used to dry the GO-RF gels, and pyrolysis at 1050 °C under an inert atmosphere yielded the final graphene aerogel. In another interesting example, Zhang et al.150 reported a new method for the fabrication of graphene/carbon aerogels that involves the sol–gel polymerization of R and F in an alkali treated graphene oxide suspension. In this case, alkali treated graphene oxide can act not only as a 2D block, but also as a solid base catalyst to catalyze the polymerization of R with F. Without the sol–gel treatment, direct pyrolysis of organic molecules can also be used to fabricate 3DGMs. Dai et al.151 described a simple method for large-scale production of 3D N and P co-doping mesoporous nanocarbon (NPMC) foams by direct pyrolysis of PANi aerogels obtained in the presence of phytic acid (Fig. 12b). Such a pyrolysis technique endowed the NPMC with a remarkably high surface area of 1663 m2 g−1, excellent electrical conductivity and heteroatom co-doping, thus achieving good electrocatalytic activity. Similarly, Bao et al.152 reported a 3D porous graphite carbon by pyrolysis of a conjugated polymeric molecular precursor framework. The as-made 3D porous graphite carbon shows record-high surface area (4073 m2 g−1), large pore volume (2.26 cm−3) and excellent electrical conductivity (300 S m−1).
 Fig. 12  (a) Synthetic scheme showing the versatility associated with carbon aerogel (CA) synthesis. As shown, the CA structure can be modified either during the sol–gel polymerization step, through the introduction of additives or templates to the reaction mixture, or through gas- or solution-phase reactions on the surfaces of the CA framework after the pyrolysis step. Reprinted with permission from ref. 148. Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Schematic illustration of the preparation process for the NPMC foams. An aniline (i) –phytic acid (ii) complex (iii) is formed (for clarity, only one of the complexed anilines is shown for an individual phytic acid), followed by oxidative polymerization into a three-dimensional PANi hydrogel crosslinked with phytic acids. As each phytic acid molecule can complex with up to six aniline monomers, phytic acid can be used as the crosslinker and protonic dopant to directly form the three-dimensional PANi hydrogel network; for clarity, only a piece of the two-dimensional network building block is shown in the enlarged view under the three-dimensional PANi hydrogel. The PANi hydrogel is freeze-dried into an aerogel and pyrolysed in Ar to produce the NPMC (for clarity, only a piece of the two-dimensional NPMC network building block is shown in the enlarged view under the three-dimensional NPMC). Reprinted with permission from ref. 151. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group. 


2.2.6 Other methods. 
In addition to the aforementioned template-free methods, other preparation methods, such as centrifugal vacuum evaporation (CVE), laser scribed patterning (LSP) and chemical blowing, have been reported, which exhibited their unique advantages.
For example, Seo et al.29 used a CVE method to fabricate large-scale graphene sponges and free-standing graphene films (Fig. 13a–f). During the CVE process, the GO sheets in the solution can be assembled to generate 3D interconnected GO sponges or multilayer GO films, which are depended on the temperature of CVE. Under the low temperature (40 °C), GO sheets are inclined to form network-linked structure via van der Waals force during water evaporation owing to the outward centrifugal force that is more dominant than the upward evaporation force. With the increment of temperature of the vacuum chamber, the evaporation rate is accelerated and GO sheets are likely assembling with each other at the liquid/vacuum interface to generate the first GO film layer. Afterwards, the second layer GO film is formed under the first film by self-assembly of GO sheets. This process is proceeded continuously to form a series of GO films. This CVE method enables large-scale production of GO sponges or GO films at a low cost without the need of any substrates or complicated instruments. However, the defects introduced from the GO preparation process are hard to be eliminated, which influences the electrical conductivity of GO sponges or films to some extent.
 Fig. 13  Synthetic process for the fabrication of GO sponges and films by speed vacuum centrifugation. (a) 1 mL GO solution (3 mg mL−1) in a 2 mL mictrotube. (b) Schematic illustration of the produced GO sponges and films at different temperatures of the vacuum centrifugation chamber, and a digital image for GO sponges prepared at 40 °C (upper panel), and multilayer GO films prepared at 80 °C (lower panel). (c) The GO sponges, and (d) free-standing GO films recovered from an Eppendorf tube; a representative image of 3 cm diameter GO film (inset). (e) Reduced GO sponges after thermal annealing in H2/Ar at 800 °C for 12 h; the elastic property of the reduced GO sponges was demonstrated by observing the recovery to the flat shape from the folded structure. (f) Free-standing graphene films prepared after thermal annealing in H2/Ar at 800 °C for 12 h. The scale bar represents 1 cm in (c–f). Reprinted with permission from ref. 29. Copyright 2010 John Wiley and Sons. Schematic illustration of the fabrication of laser-scribed graphene-based electrochemical capacitors. (g–j) A GO film supported on a flexible substrate is placed on top of a LightScribe-enabled DVD media disc, and a computer image is then laser-irradiated on the GO film in a computerized LightScribe DVD drive. (k) As shown in the photograph, the GO film changes from golden brown color to black as it reduced to laser-scribed graphene. The low-power infrared laser changes the stacked GO sheets immediately into well-exfoliated few-layered LSG film, as shown in the cross-sectional SEM images. (l) A symmetric EC is constructed from two identical LSG electrodes, ion-porous separator, and electrolyte. Reprinted with permission from ref. 155. Copyright 2012 The American Association for the Advancement of the Science. Growth process and structural regulation of chemical-blowing production. (m) SEM images of glucose (crystals marked in green) and NH4Cl (marked in blue), which were subsequently transformed to melanoidin bubbles (marked in brown) under a browning reaction; these were finally converted into the strutted graphene (SG) containing graphitic membranes and struts (marked in gray). The heating rate is 4 °C min−1. Scale bar, 50 mm. (n–p) SEM images of the SG products grown at the heating rates of 1, 20 and 100 °C min−1, respectively. Scale bars = 200 mm. (q) Changes of SSA and ratio of cell perimeter to strut width versus heating rates. Reprinted with permission from ref. 160. Copyright 2013 Nature Publishing Group. 
The laser scribed patterning (LSP) method is a recently developed new technology that enables a low cost, large-scale and time efficient production of 3DGMs.153,154 To execute the LSP method, aqueous GO dispersion should be firstly drop-cast on a thin and flexible substrate with a size of CD/DVD optical drive. After dried for 24 hours, irradiation of the film with an infrared laser inside an inexpensive commercially LightScribe CD/DVD optical driver reduces the GO to laser-scribed graphene (LSG), which results in the change of film color from golden brown to black. The rapid release of gases caused by laser irradiation can transform initially stack GO sheets into well-exfoliated LSG sheets (see the schematics of the process in Fig. 13g–l).155 As a result, the LSG film showed excellent electrical conductivity (1738 S m−1) and specific surface area (1520 m2 g−1), which ensures a good electrochemical performance. Similar results were also reported by Kaner and El-Kady,156 who combined the microscale design of the device with LSG thus showing the high-power/energy performance.
The chemical blowing strategy has been reported for the production of free-standing 3DGMs.157–159 This technology has two main characteristic features: high volume yield and laterally large areas. Bando et al.160 reported a chemical blowing approach based on a polymeric predecessor to fabricate 3D graphene bubble network. In a typical preparation (the detailed process shown in Fig. 13m–q), the mixing of sucrose, glucose or household sugars with NH4Cl or NH4(CO3)2 is annealed. In this thermal treatment process, a molten syrup is gradually polymerized, whereas chemical released gases from NH4Cl below the glucose-derived polymer into numerous large bubbles, which features the chemical (sugar) blowing. This catalyst- and substrate-free method is simpler than the CVD method, but it also suffers from the disadvantage of high requirement for instruments.

2.3 Synthesis of 3D structures of 0/1D materials or 2D materials other than graphene
The above two sections (Sections 2.1 and 2.2) mainly discuss graphene and GO-based materials for synthesis of 3D structures. However, there are some other important classes of carbon materials where lower dimensions carbon materials derived from 2D graphene or made up of single and few-layer graphene, and 2D graphene-like materials are commonly used to prepare 3D materials. That is, beyond graphene, a wide range of zero-/one-/two-dimensional carbon materials, including zero-dimensional (0D) fullerene,161 1D CNTs,162 graphene nanoribbons (GNRs) and carbon nanofibers,163 2D transition metal disulfides (TMDs)164 and graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4)165 have been widely used to fabricate 3D structures due to their electronic characteristics similar to graphene. The methods to synthesize these 3D structures can also be classified as template-based and template-free methods.
The study of carbon nanostructures began with the discovery of the fullerenes.166 However, reports of monolithic assemblies of 0D materials, such as fullerenes or onion-like carbon (graphitization of nanodiamonds (ND)) are very limited. C60 molecules, known as fullerenes, has been used to form 3DGMs.161 Due to their size and shape, the properties of C60 are completely different from those of CNTs. Consequently, the preparation methods and potential applications of 3D structure of 0D materials (C60 molecules) are different. Recently, Zhu et al.161 used potassium hydroxide activation in ammonia to transform C60 into a 3D porous carbon (Fig. 14a–g). As demonstrated in Fig. 14a, a 3D porous carbon can be prepared through KOH activation of C60 powder in Ar flow. If the KOH activation is proceed under NH3 atmosphere, a N-doped 3D porous carbon can be obtained. The doped N atoms exist into two forms (pyridinic and pyrrolic nitrogen) and the N-doping also caused more defects and a higher volume of meso and macropores in the carbon, which achieves superior energy storage. Shi et al.167 prepared a mesoporous graphite films by graphitizing the composite films of GO and ND. In the graphitizing process, ND converted into onion-like carbon and GO is reduced into RGO. Onion-like carbon were sandwiched between RGO sheets, which not only prevents the aggregation of graphene sheets, but also forms mesopores.
 Fig. 14  (a) Schematic of KOH activation of C60 molecules. Route A indicates the normal activation performed in an Ar flow while route B shows N-doping when NH3 flow is involved in the activation. Hydrogen and oxygen atoms are not shown. (b) Typical SEM image of 3D porous carbon. (c) Typical TEM image of 3D porous carbon, with an electron diffraction pattern in the inset. (d) TEM image of 3D porous carbon at a higher magnifcation with the inset showing the distribution of the interlayer spacings. (e) Typical TEM image of N7.5%–3D porous carbon and (f and g) corresponding energy dispersive spectrum (EDS) maps of elemental C (f) and N (g). Reprinted with permission from ref. 161. Copyright 2017 John Wiley and Sons. 
Compared with 0D fullerenes, 1D CNTs have been widely used to construct 3D structures. Interestingly, 3D CNT aerogels have been reported long before the discovery of 3D graphene.168,169 The organic functionalization of a CNT suspension with an organogelator can lead to the formation of freestanding CNT aerogels. For instance, single-walled CNTs (SWCNTs) modified by ferrocene-grafted poly(p-phenyleneethynylene) can gelate some organic solvents such as chloroform to form robust 3D CNT aerogels.162 Besides, surfactants are also used for the dispersion of CNTs and subsequent formation of aerogels. Yodh et al.170 suspended different concentrations (from 5 to 13 mg mL−1) of as-prepared single-walled CNTs in water with sodium dodecylbenzene sulfonate. The suspensions were left overnight to transform into elastic gels that were subsequently soaked at 90 °C in aqueous solutions of PVA. Reinforcement of aerogels with the PVA polymer can improve the stability and strength of the aerogels, thus supporting at least 8000 times their own weight (Fig. 15a–d). The CVD method is widely used to fabricate 3D CNT architecture. Wu et al.171 designed a macroscopic and monolithic multi-walled CNT sponge by the CVD method in which a precursor solution of ferrocene in dichlorobenzene was injected at 860 °C (Fig. 15e–h). It can be noticed that the diameters and lengths of these multi-walled CNTs range from 30 to 50 nm and 10 to 100 μm, respectively, suggesting that there are multiple layers of CNTs existing in the thick sponge (Fig. 15g). The growth process of CNT sponges can be regarded as a continuous stacking and penetration of many CNT piles into a centimeter thickness (Fig. 15h). Except for the continuous stacking growth process, vertically aligned arrays, where CNTs consecutively grow from the bottom to the top surface, are a good choice to form 3D CNT architecture.172 In particular, when few-walled (one- to three-walled) CNT carpets are closely connected to high-quality graphene, their standalone properties can be performed well. Zhao et al.173 prepared GO and RGO platelets pillared with CNTs by using the CVD method with acetonitrile as the carbon source and nickel as the catalyst. In this case, the alignment, density and length of the CNTs can be tailored. By optimizing the preparation parameters, the resultant 3D composite materials with RGO layers pillared by CNTs showed a robust and porous structure of specific surface area as high as 352 m2 g−1 and excellent visible light photocatalytic performance in degrading dye Rhodamine B (RhB). However, with respect to the graphene/CNT hybrid material, the actual connection between graphene and CNTs was not investigated. To this end, Tour et al.174 disclosed a method to synthesize covalently bonded graphene and CNT carpets using a floating buffer layer (Fig. 16). The growth process is diagrammed in Fig. 16a. First, graphene was grown on the Cu foil, then iron and alumina used as the catalyst and buffer layer, respectively, were deposited on the graphene in series by electron beam (e-beam) evaporation. It is noted that during the growth process, the catalyst and buffer layer were lifted up and the CNT carpet was directly grown out of graphene. The aberration-corrected STEM revealed the atomic structure of covalent bonds in the seamlessly junction region. Moreover, it should be highlighted that without sacrificing their stand-alone properties, the ohmic interconnected graphene and CNT carpet hybrid can be produced as a high surface area material. Similar results were also reported by Ajayan et al.175 and Natelson et al.,176 who have demonstrated the growth of CNTs on nickel-supported graphene with a high double-layer capacitance. Note that in the above-mentioned reports, CNTs are limited to grow on the surface of graphene on which catalyst particles are deposited by dip-coating or e-beam evaporation. Thus, insufficient specific surface area of these graphene/CNT hybrid materials makes it challenging to achieve high loading of active components, which is extremely vital for electrochemical devices with high energy density. Lou et al.177 developed a simple approach to fabricate a 3D architecture consisting of graphene foam (GF) and CNTs. In this case, the catalytic NPs were loaded on GF through a hydrothermal method so that the subsequent CNT growth on GF can be substantially improved as compared to those using e-beam deposition or the dip-coating method, thus improving the active component (MnO2) loading. More recently, a 3D current collector composed of a covalently bonded carbon structure was demonstrated by Ji et al.178 As shown in Fig. 17, hundreds of micrometer-long carbon nanotube bundles are connected to an ultrathin graphite foam (CNTs–UGF) by covalent carbon–carbon bonds. Such carbon–carbon bonds enable the coupling of π-electrons in CNT and UGF, thus favouring the charge transfer between the electrochemically active materials and the out circuit.
 Fig. 15  (a) Macroscopic pieces of 7.5 mg mL−1 CNT aerogels. Pristine CNT aerogel (left) appears black, whereas the aerogel reinforced in a 1 wt% PVA bath (right) is slightly gray. (b) Three PVA-reinforced aerogel pillars (total mass = 13.0 mg) supporting 100 g, or ca. 8000 times their weight. (c) This SEM image of a critical-point-dried aerogel reinforced in a 0.5 wt% PVA solution (CNT content = 10 mg mL−1) reveals an open, porous structure. (d) This TEM image of an unreinforced aerogel reveals small-diameter CNTs arranged in a classic filamentous network. Light, porous, flexible carbon nanotube sponges. Reprinted with permission from ref. 170. Copyright 2007 John Wiley and Sons. (e) A monolithic sponge with a size of 4 cm × 3 cm × 0.8 cm and a bulk density of 7.5 mg cm−3. (f) Cross-sectional SEM image of the sponge showing a porous morphology and overlapped CNTs. (g) TEM image of large-cavity, thin-walled CNTs. (h) Illustration of the sponge consisting of CNT piles (black lines) as the skeleton and open pores (void space). Reprinted with permission from ref. 171. Copyright 2010 John Wiley and Sons. 
 Fig. 16  (a) Scheme for the synthesis of CNT carpets directly from graphene. (b–i) SEM images of nanotube carpet grown from a graphene-covered copper foil. (b and c) The samples grown by using 0.3 nm of iron and 3 nm of alumina. The dark regions in a are gaps in the broken alumina layer and the brighter regions are alumina-covered areas. Scale bar in (a), 50 mm. (c) An enlarged image for one of the lifted areas where the CNTs were grown. Scale bar in (c), 10 mm. (d and e) The samples grown by using 0.5 nm of iron and 3 nm of alumina. Scale bar in (d and e), 10 mm. (d) The top alumina layer is partially broken. (e) The top alumina layer is fully removed during growth. (e–h) The samples grown by using 1 nm of iron and 3 nm of alumina. (f and g) Top view of the CNT carpet on the graphene-covered copper foil. Scale bar in (f), 50 mm. Scale bar in (g), 10 mm. (h) The side view of the CNT carpet grown on the graphene; the height of the CNT is ≈120 mm. Scale bar in (h), 10 mm. (i) The close-up view on the upper portion of the CNT carpet. Scale bar in (i), 1 mm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 174. Copyright 2012 Nature Publishing Group. 
 Fig. 17  (a) SEM images of UGF (left) and CNTs–UGF hybrid (right). (b) Photograph of a CNTs–UGF hybrid with a geometric surface area of 50 cm2. (c) Schematic of the 3D interconnected network of the CNTs–UGF hybrid which allows free electron transfer between the UGF and each CNT. (d–f) SEM images of the CNTs–UGF with different CNT lengths. (g) SEM image of the CNT bundle marked by the blue dashed square in (f). (h) Raman spectra of as-grown CNTs–UGF and UGF. The D peak in the Raman spectrum originates from defects in the CNTs, and does not exist in the spectrum of UGF. (i) TGA curves of UGF and CNTs–UGF hybrid. The 5.7 wt% residue obtained after heating the CNTs–UGF hybrid in air at 1000 °C is from the Fe catalyst and Al2O3 buffer deposited for CNT growth. (j) Pore size distribution of the CNTs–UGF hybrid measured by N2 adsorption/desorption isotherms and fitted by density functional theory. (k) HRTEM image of a CNT. Reprinted with permission from ref. 178. Copyright 2016 John Wiley and Sons. 
Apart from CNTs, GNRs, as another promising 1D material, have been utilized to form 3D network structures. It should be noted that GNRs prepared by longitudinal unzipping of multi-walled CNTs can preserve their structural integrity and high electrical conductivity, that is, GNRs combine elegantly the structure and properties of CNTs and graphene sheets. An in situ unzipping method was reported by Cao et al.,179 who successfully realized the direct conversion from a CNT sponge into a GNR GA (Fig. 18a–c). In this case, such an in situ unzipping process is achieved by infiltration of an oxidative chemical solution into the porous sponge to induce intercalation of the nanotube walls from the defects followed by opening the walls with KMnO4. Besides, the hydrothermal method is an alternative method to construct the 3D structure of 1D GNRs. Yi et al.99 fabricated highly conductive and ultralight N-doped graphene nanoribbon aerogels (N-GNRs-As) through the hydrothermal method, in which pyrrole can act as the N source as well as the swelling agent (Fig. 18d–h). Compared with graphene sheets, GRNs possess special properties, such as a high length-to-width ratio, straight edges, and ideal surface regularity with few defects on the basal plane. On this basis, chemical doping of GNRs-As with heteroatoms can effectively realize further modulation of the electronic energy gap, thus enhancing the reactivity and electrocatalytic ability of the materials when used as ORR catalysts.180
 Fig. 18  (a) The synthetic process in which a CNT sponge is directly converted into a GNR aerogel by unzipping multi-walled nanotubes into multilayer graphene nanoribbons, while maintaining the original three-dimensional network. Structural characterization of GNR aerogels. (b) Photo of a CNT sponge and SEM image of internal nanotubes. (c) Photo of a GNR aerogel made from the CNT sponge in (b), and SEM images of the nanoribbons inside. Reprinted with permission from ref. 179. Copyright 2014 John Wiley and Sons. (d) Illustration of the synthetic route for N-GNRs-As. (e) Photographs of as-prepared 3D graphene nanoribbon aerogels derived from Py-free (left) and 5 vol% Py-containing (middle) GONR suspension (10 mg mL−1) after hydrothermal treatment. (f) A monolith of ultralight N-GNRs-As standing on a dandelion. (g) Photograph of N-GNRs-A in a hot flame of an alcohol burner. (h) SEM image of the resulting N-GNRs-As. Reprinted with permission from ref. 99. Copyright 2015 John Wiley and Sons. 
Self-assembly of carbon nanofibers into a macroscopic structure is a common strategy to construct 3D carbon materials.163 Moreover, low-cost building blocks, such as bacterial cellulose (BC)181 and pitch,182 can completely afford large-scale production. For instance, Yu et al.183 developed a general strategy for fabricating heteroatom-doped free-standing carbon nanofibers (Fig. 19a–j). As shown in Fig. 19a, the BC is first immersed in an aqueous solution of H3PO4/H3BO3 for 10 h at room temperature. Then, the resultant samples are dried followed by a thermal treatment in a N2 atmosphere to form heteroatom-doped 3D carbon nanofibers. It should be noted that all the raw materials involved in the preparation process are low-cost and abundant and the fabrication is generally suitable for an industrial scale-up. Moreover, such heteroatom co-doped 3D carbon nanofibers show excellent energy storage ability. In addition to this template-free method for constructing 3D carbon nanofibers, a template-based method has also been widely used to design 3D carbon nanofibers.184–186 Yu et al.187 hydrothermally constructed aerogels composed of carbonaceous nanofibers (CNFs) by using Te nanowires (NWs) as the template (Fig. 19k–m). Different from the strategy that relied on the assembly of GO sheets onto 3D templates, in this case, glucose was chosen as the carbon source to achieve the Te@C structure by employing a hydrothermal carbonization method. Subsequently, the Te NW templates were removed by washing and chemical etching. After a freeze-drying step, the CNF aerogel was obtained. The as-prepared CNF aerogel exhibits extraordinary compressibility, a fact which is in marked contrast to the brittle nature of traditional low-density aerogels. A macroscopic 3D porous graphite C3N4 structure of 2D graphite C3N4 has been reported by one-step thermal polymerization of urea inside the framework of a low-cost melamine sponge (MS) template (Fig. 20a–d).165 Combining the high loading of urea with the lightweight and good water absorbability of MS makes the method practicable for the synthesis of 3D C3N4 structures. In this case, the resultant 3D C3N4 materials can be easily cut into different shapes with a blade (Fig. 20d). Beyond the template-based method, a template-free method can also be employed to design 3D C3N4 structures. Wang et al.188 fabricated C3N4 aerogels via an aqueous sol–gel strategy without the aid of strong acids. The detailed synthetic process is shown in Fig. 20e. First, the C3N4 NPs were obtained by temperature induced condensation of melamine in combination with a salt molten method using potassium thiocyanate as the solvent. Next, the C3N4 hydrogels can be obtained from self-assembly of the C3N4 NP sol solution. Followed by a freeze drying step, C3N4 aerogels were obtained. Note that this method should be highlighted due to its advantages, such as scalability for mass production and low costs, and the assembly process without the introduction of cross-linking agents. Worsley et al.164 described the synthesis and characterization of monolithic, ultralow density TMD (WS2 and MoS2) aerogels. The monolithic WS2 and MoS2 aerogels are synthesized through thermal decomposition of freeze-dried ammonium thio-molybdate (ATM) and ammonium thio-tungstate (ATT) solutions, respectively. The densities of the pure TMD aerogels represent 0.4% and 0.5% of the densities of single crystal MoS2 and WS2, respectively, and can be adjusted by simply changing the initial ATM and ATT concentrations.
 Fig. 19  (a) Schematic representation of the fabrication process of the free-standing heteroatom doped carbon nanofibers. (b) Photograph of a BC pellicle. (c) SEM image of the N,P-co-doped carbon nanofiber surface (inset: the typical sample, 2.7 × 1.2 cm2). (d) SEM image of the inner of N,P-co-doped carbon nanofiber (N,P-CNF). (e) HRTEM image of the N,P-CNF. (f) Typical energy filter TEM (EFTEM) image of N,P-CNF. (g–j) Corresponding elemental mapping images of (g) C, (h) N, (i) P, and (j) O. Reprinted with permission from ref. 183. Copyright 2014 John Wiley and Sons. (k) Schematic illustration of the synthetic steps for large-scale fabrication of CNF hydrogels and aerogels. (1) Ultrathin TeNW templates were dispersed in a glucose solution. (2) Hydrothermal treatment of the mixture at 180 °C created a monolithic wet gel consisting of Te@C nanocables. (3) CNF hydrogel obtained after etching off the Te templates and washing. (4) CNF aerogel obtained after freeze-drying of the hydrogel. (l) Photograph of an approximately 12 L monolithic wet gel, which was prepared by hydrothermal carbonization of 12 L of solution containing 800 g glucose and 16 mmol Te NWs for 18 h. (m) SEM images of the CNF aerogel with different magnifications showing the nanowire networkstructure. The inset in the right image shows a photograph of a CNF aerogel obtained after freeze-drying. The red circles in the left image of (m) indicate the junctions between fibers. Reprinted with permission from ref. 187. Copyright 2012 John Wiley and Sons. 
 Fig. 20  (a–d) Schematic illustration of the preparation of a macroscopic 3D C3N4 structure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 165. Copyright 2015 John Wiley and Sons. (e) The fabrication process of the C3N4 aerogel and the corresponding photos of as-prepared colloidal solutions of CN NPs (inset: Tyndall effect of C3N4 NP aqueous solution), CN hydrogels and CN aerogels. Reprinted with permission from ref. 188. Copyright 2017 John Wiley and Sons. 
3 Structure characterization, properties and theoretical modelling of 3DGM
The introduction of nanostructured materials into macroscopic devices that can relay phenomena occurring at the nanoscale to the macroscopic level has been a key approach in paving the way towards practical applications with nanomaterials. The catalytic activities of 3DGMs are strongly dependent on the specific surface area, electrical conductivity and mechanical strength of 3D graphene as well as the size, composition, morphology and surface properties of the active components. Thus, different characterization techniques are needed to analyze their structures and properties. Moreover, some detailed characterizations are desirable in order to deeply understand the structure–property–catalytic activity relationship, a set of parameters which are invaluable for determining the specific directions to take with respect to the design and preparation of 3DGMs for catalysis. For example, the photocatalytic activity of TiO2/GAs relies on the TiO2 loading amount, the TiO2 size, the GA pore structure, etc. On the basis of structural analyses and photocatalytic tests, the dependence of photocatalytic activity on the structure can be investigated, and provides reliable experimental feedback necessary for goal-directed synthesis. Besides, heteroatom doping effects, active sites and activation of reactant molecules on 3DGMs should be clarified by first-principles computational simulations. In this section, we mainly focus on commonly used characterization techniques, properties and theoretical modeling for complete analysis of 3D graphene-based catalysts.
3.1 Characterization techniques

3.1.1 Electron microscopy. 
The size, exposed facets of the active components and pore structure of graphene are several important parameters that regulate their electronic and catalytic properties. SEM and TEM are conventionally employed to directly observe the 3D porous structure of graphene sheets and the morphological details of the supported active components, respectively. Due to the limitations of the resolution value of TEM (0.2 nm), however, it is remarkably difficult to identify small clusters of or single atoms on graphene surfaces. HRTEM is an invaluable tool in the study of the crystal structures of small clusters. Additionally, using HRTEM the layers, individual carbon atoms, defects, etc., can be observed clearly. For example, Fan and co-workers189 fabricated graphene foams (GFs)@Fe3O4 composites and clearly observed the 3D network structure and the rough surface covered by the Fe3O4 NPs using data from SEM (Fig. 21a and b) and TEM (Fig. 21c and d), respectively. The lattice fringes and crystal structures are further confirmed by HRTEM analysis (Fig. 21e) and the selected area electron diffraction pattern (SEAD) (Fig. 21f). STEM is an alternative tool for studying the morphology, crystal structure and elemental composition of the 3DGMs. When using the high-angle annular dark field (HAADF) mode, atomic information about the 3DGMs can be obtained. Qu et al.39 fabricated shape-defined ternary Pt/PdCu nanoboxes anchored onto a 3D graphene framework (Fig. 21g) and observed single hollow cubes with an average size of 30 nm (Fig. 21h), which displayed an internal cavity with a uniform shell ca. 5 nm in thickness. The HAADF-STEM-EDS mappings reveal that Cu, Pd and Pt elements are simultaneously distributed along the nanobox shells (Fig. 21i–k). Similarly, other 3D graphene hybrids, such as nitrogen and boron co-doped 3D graphene,104 PtRu bimetal supported 3D graphene,190etc., have been systematically studied by HAADF-STEM.
 Fig. 21  (a and b) SEM morphology of the sample of GF@Fe3O4. (c and d) TEM images of GF@Fe3O4. (e) HRTEM of an individual Fe3O4 nanoparticle. (f) SAED patterns of GF@Fe3O4. Reprinted with permission from ref. 189. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (g) TEM images of Pt/PdCu nanocubes on graphene sheets, (h) HAADF-STEM image of a hollow Pt/PdCu nanocube, (i–k) HAADF-STEM-EDS mapping images of Cu, Pd, and Pt elements, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 39. Copyright 2012 John Wiley and Sons. 


3.1.2 Scanning probe microscopy. 
Scanning probe techniques play a significant role in the structural characterization of solid surfaces with atomic resolution. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) and scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) are the two primary techniques in current use. The surface structures of samples can be investigated by AFM based on the interatomic relationship between the surface atoms of the sample and the small tips of the AFM probes at very short distances. Contact mode, non-contact mode and tapping mode are the three main modes for AFM measurements. The tapping mode, lying between contact and noncontact modes, is widely employed in order to detect the thickness of graphene in 3DGMs. In general, the thickness of pristine graphene can reach up to 0.34 nm. With respect to GO, the thickness of a single GO sheet becomes larger, around 0.5–1.5 nm due to the oxygen-containing groups or even absorbed molecules on the surface.191,192 For instance, Wang and coworkers105 prepared 3D graphene by the self-assembly of graphene oxide with the assistance of a noble metal, and the resulting GO sheets are irregular, having a height of about 0.7 nm. Feng and coworkers193 developed 3D graphene-based macro- and mesoporous frameworks, wherein the mesopores are generated by the silica network grown on the surface of the graphene. In this case, the thickness of the GO sheets is about 1 nm, which is an ideal situation for developing high quality 3DGMs. Similar to AFM, STM can be used to investigate the surface morphology and lattice structure of graphene with atomic resolution. However, the application of STM is always reported in the case of 2D graphene rather than 3DGMs.194–196


3.1.3 Raman spectroscopy. 
The layer information in 3DGMs is a crucial factor to understand in order to design for performance in catalysis applications. Apart from optical microscopy, some other characterizations, such as Raman spectroscopy, are widely used to complement the results from AFM measurements.
Generally speaking, Raman spectroscopy has been used historically to probe structural and electronic characteristics of graphite materials.197 With respect to 3DGMs, it is a powerful technique to investigate the order or disorder of the crystal structure of graphene. From Raman spectroscopic data, the bonding configuration of carbon atoms can be obtained. As shown in Fig. 22a, the three prominent peaks in Raman spectroscopy are the G band at about 1582 cm−1, the D band at about 1338 cm−1 and the D′ band at about 1620 cm−1 (for the last two bands, the given Raman frequency is obtained using a laser excitation wavelength of 514.5 nm).198 The D and D′ bands represent defect-induced Raman features and are related to the vibrations of sp3 carbon atoms of disordered graphene sheets. Thus, these bands cannot be observed for highly crystalline graphene. The G band from domains of sp2 carbon atoms is a result of first-order scattering, and is a doubly degenerate in-plane transverse optic (iTO) and longitudinal optic (LO) phonon mode (E2g symmetry) at the Brillouin zone (BZ) center. The integrated intensity ratio of ID/IG for the D band and G band is widely used for investigating and quantifying defects in 3DGMs. In addition, this ratio can be used to confirm whether or not reduction from GO to RGO has taken place. For example, as shown in Fig. 22b, the intensities of the D/G bands for GO and GAs are 0.92 and 1.00, respectively, while the intensity ratio is increased to 1.04 for Fe2O3/GAs.107 It has been demonstrated many times that, self-assembly of GO sheets into GAs also results in similar increases in intensities of these bands.44,113 Different from graphene prepared by chemical reduction (Fig. 22c), in which the graphitic lattice is irreversibly damaged during the process of chemical exfoliation, the 3D GF grown by the CVD method has few defects (Fig. 22c).71 The relatively flawless structure of the GF is revealed by the absence of the D-band in its Raman spectrum, in which there is a characteristic peak related to the density of disordered carbon atoms, as shown in Fig. 22c, and is an observation which indicates the high quality of the GF obtained. In addition, another band (called the 2D band) observed at 2700 cm−1 is the second-order resonance of the E2g mode, a feature which is sensitive to the number of layers of graphene sheets. Hence, this 2D band can be used to evaluate the thickness of graphene sheets. As demonstrated in Fig. 22d–f, the Raman spectra of 2DGMs change drastically with the numbers of layers.199 A single sharp 2D band of monolayer graphene can be observed. For the two-layer graphene, the 2D band becomes broader and up-shifted as compared to that of the single layer. From the 2D band of bilayer graphene demonstrated in Fig. 21f, the 2D band can be divided into four components, 2D1B, 2D1A, 2D2A and 2D2B. Note that 2D1A and 2D2A have higher intensity than the other two. In addition, with further increasing of the number of graphene layers, the intensity of the 2D1 band weakens. With respect to the graphene with more than five layers, the Raman spectrum resembles that of bulk graphite. This result has been confirmed by Ruoff et al.,200 who found that in the wrinkled regions (more than one layer in the flakes) of 2DGMs, there are peak height variations in both the G and 2D bands, and there is a broadening of the 2D band (Fig. 22g–l). It should be noted that the D map in Fig. 22j, which has been associated with defects in graphene, is rather uniform and near the background level, except for regions where wrinkles are present and close to few-layer regions, which uncovers the high quality and uniformity of graphene on a SiO2/Si substrate. Similarly, in the Raman spectra of 3DGMs, the shape of the 2D band and the intensity ratio between 2D and G bands can also be evaluated to confirm that 3DGMs are constructed by few-layer or multi-layer graphene sheets (Fig. 22c).71,201
 Fig. 22  (a) Raman spectrum of a nanographite sample, showing the main Raman features, the D, G, D′ and G′ bands taken with a laser excitation energy (wavelength) of 2.41 eV (514.5 nm). Reprinted with permission from ref. 198. Copyright 2007 Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Raman spectra of Fe2O3/GAs, GAs, and GO. Reprinted with permission from ref. 107. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (c) Typical Raman spectra of a GF. The bottom spectrum and the other two correspond to monolayer and few-layer graphene, respectively, which are estimated from the intensity, shape and position of the G band and 2D band. The GF was prepared with a CH4 concentration of 0.7vol%. Reprinted with permission from ref. 71. Copyright 2011 Nature Publishing Group. (d) Evolution of the Raman spectra at 514 nm with the number of layers of graphene. (e) Evolution of the Raman spectra at 633 nm with the number of layers of graphene. (f) The four components of the 2D band in two-layer graphene at 514 and 633 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 199. Copyright 2006 American Physical Society. (g) SEM image of graphene transferred on SiO2/Si (285 nm-thick oxide layer) showing wrinkles, as well as two- and three-layer regions. (h) Optical microscope image of the same regions as in (g). (i) Raman spectra from the marked spots with corresponding colored circles or arrows showing the presence of one, two, and three layers of graphene; a.u., arbitrary units. (j–l) Raman maps of the D (1300 to 1400 cm−1), G (1560 to 1620 cm−1), and 2D (2660 to 2700 cm−1) bands, respectively (WITec alpha300, λlaser = 532 nm, ∼500 nm spot size, 100× objector). CCD cts., charge-coupled device counts. Scale bars, 5 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 200. Copyright 2009 The American Association for the Advancement of the Science. 


3.1.4 X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). 
XPS is a powerful tool for investigating the oxidation state, chemical composition, and the chemical bonding nature in 3DGMs. Furthermore, chemical information about the active components bound to the surface can be obtained from the results of XPS characterization. More importantly, the interfacial contact between 3D graphene and the active materials can be analyzed, yielding knowledge which can provide the in-depth understanding needed in order to optimize performance when designing applications for catalysis. For example, in a recent report, the chemical states of Mn and C in 3D graphene–MnO2–NiCo2O4 (G–Mn–NiCo) composites were studied by the XPS.202 As shown in Fig. 23a, the presence of Mn, Co, Ni, C and O was confirmed, an observation which suggests the coexistence of MnO2, NiCo2O4 and graphene in the G–Mn–NiCo sample. The splitting energy of the Mn 2p peak (11.8 eV) is close to that of manganese (4+), further confirming MnO2 as a component in the sample of G–Mn–NiCo (Fig. 23b). Compared with graphene–MnO2 (G–Mn), G–Mn–NiCo exhibits an obvious shift in the binding energy of the Mn 2p1/2 peak (654.3 eV vs. 652.1 eV), a change which is caused by the formation of Mn–O bonds between MnO2 and NiCo2O4 (Fig. 23c). Furthermore, the C 1s XPS spectrum (Fig. 23d) also reveals that a small amount of functional groups, such as hydroxyl and carboxyl groups, on graphene sheets are present, which may serve as anchor sites for the growth of NiCo2O4. This case is rather exceptional, because in most reports the peaks from C–O (epoxy/hydroxyl) and CO (carbonyl/ketone) bonds are not observed, an observation which indicates that the GO sheets have been reduced to RGO sheets through hydrothermal treatment. In addition, the chemical bond between NPs and 3D graphene can be detected by XPS spectra. For example, the Ti–C bond in the sample of TiO2/GAs is confirmed by the C 1s XPS spectra, which strongly suggest the electronic interaction between Ti and C orbitals, a state which can result in photogenerated electron transfer from TiO2 to the graphene.44 The above mentioned results from XPS spectra demonstrate that XPS measurements can provide valuable information about the chemical bonding structure of NPs and the surface interaction between the 3D graphene substrate and metals. On the other hand, the compositional fraction of the different elements in the 3DGMs can be verified through measuring the ratio of the corresponding XPS peak intensities.
 Fig. 23  (a) XPS survey of G–Mn–NiCo. (b) Mn2p XPS spectrum of 3D G–Mn–NiCo. (c) Mn 2p XPS spectrum of G–Mn. (d) C 1s XPS spectrum of 3D G–Mn–NiCo. Reprinted with permission from ref. 202. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) TGA curves, GF, N-GF, B-GF, and BN-GF. Reprinted with permission from ref. 38. Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) TGA curves of PANi aerogel and phytic acid. (g) TGA-MS spectroscopic results of PANi aerogel under thermal treatment. Reprinted with permission from ref. 151. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group. 


3.1.5 Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA). 
TGA a powerful tool that can be used to characterize the thermal stability and loading amount of metal oxides in 3DGMs has also been widely employed.16,203 For example, TGA measurement carried out in the air has been generally employed to determine the chemical composition of 3DGMs, especially for metal oxides/3D graphene composites. Generally speaking, a significant weight loss at approximately 450 °C and a constant weight above 550 °C can be observed in TGA curves.108 In addition, a miniscule weight loss (<5%) appearing below 300 °C is most likely caused by the evaporation of adsorbed water molecules from 3D interconnected graphene networks. As a result, the major weight loss from 300 to 500 °C is mainly attributed to the combustion of graphene.112 Besides, TGA measurement carried in Ar/N2 instead of air can be used to check the thermal stability of heteroatom doped 3DGMs. For instance, Qu et al.38 prepared different heteroatom doped graphene foams (B-GFs, N-GFs and B/N-GFs) and checked the thermal stability through TGA measurements (Fig. 23e). They found that the weight loss at 900 °C for B/N-GF was 4.8 wt%. It was slightly higher than those for pure GF (2.3 wt%) and N-GF (2.5 wt%), but still relatively lower than that for B-GF (18.1 wt%). By combination of TGA analysis and Raman spectroscopy, the authors concluded that defects in the GFs played an important role in regulating their thermal stabilities, which were in the following order of GF > N-GF > B/N-GF > B-GF. Moreover, an analysis method for pyrolysis temperature of formation of porous 3DGMs can be established by the thermogravimetric analysis-mass spectrum (TGA-MS) technique. In the pyrolysis process, the released gases, such as CO2, CO and HCN, can result in the generation of pores and channels, which is favourable to achieving a large surface area for 3DGMs. For example, in Dai's report,151 the optimum temperature of formation of meso-/micropores in N/P co-doped mesoporous nanocarbon (NPMC) foams can be confirmed by component analysis of decomposition gases from the dehydrogenation, denitrogenation, or dephosphorization process (Fig. 23f and g).


3.1.6 Other characterization techniques. 
Besides the techniques discussed above, some other characterization approaches also have been employed widely in order to analyze the structure and properties of 3DGMs. X-ray diffraction (XRD) is an invaluable tool to investigate the structure of 3DGMs as well as the size of NPs grown on graphene by making use of the Debye–Scherrer equation. Through analysis of the resulting XRD patterns, the formation of GO and RGO can be identified. For example, when graphite powder is used to prepare GO sheets, a typical diffraction peak at 2θ = 26.4° from the original graphite with a corresponding d spacing of 0.338 nm is observed.204 However, this peak at 2θ = 26.4° for GO sheets is not observed in the XRD patterns; instead, a new peak around 2θ = 10.8° with a well-defined d-spacing of 0.827 nm is present.24,205 This increased increment of layer spacing is caused by the hydroxyl and epoxy groups, which can result in the reduction of van der Waals forces between the graphite sheets in the exfoliated GO. UV-Vis spectroscopy can also provide valuable qualitative information about the nature of the bond formation between nanomaterials on graphene as well as their interactions. For GO sheets, there are two main absorption peaks in the UV-Vis region. The peak observed around 230 nm and the shoulder peak at nearly 300 nm are attributed to the π–π* transitions of aromatic CC bonds and the n–π* transitions of CO bonds, respectively. On the other hand, some metal oxides can give rise to localized surface plasmon resonances (LSPRs) and can exhibit unique optical properties without the loss of their intrinsic absorption features. Meanwhile, the UV-Vis absorption of coin metal NPs (Au, Ag) is dominated by plasmon resonance peaks at 420 and 520 nm for Ag and Au NPs, respectively. X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) is a kind of nondestructive tool that can be used to analyse the chemical bonds, local electronic structure and coupling effects between 3D graphene and their bound active materials.47,206 In previous reports,207,208 XAS was widely used in order to provide an intrinsic explanation for the observed enhanced performances with respect to catalysis. Worsley et al.209 used XAS spectra in order to understand the differences in chemical structure between graphene aerogels produced by resorcinol–formaldehyde induced self-assembly and highly oriented pyrolytic graphite (HOPG). The XAS spectra revealed that the intensity of the excitonic resonance for the 3D graphene aerogel was greatly reduced in comparison with that for the HOPG, which pointed to a more heterogeneous chemical and physical structure in the aerogels than in the HOPG. To date, however, XAS technology has been seldom used to analyse the interaction between 3D graphene and active materials.

3.2 Properties

3.2.1 Mechanical behaviour. 
The scope of application of 3DGMs, however, is often limited by their mechanical behavior. Most 3DGMs, especially after implantation of metal oxides, metals, etc., do not show high stretchability. For example, some 3DGMs have been shown to rupture when compressed to about half of their original length. In practical applications, such as photocatalytic water purification, 3DGMs with good mechanical strength are much more desirable. The mechanical behavior of 3DGMs is obtained typically by stress–strain analysis. For instance, Qiu and co-workers229 prepared an ultralight and highly compressible graphene aerogel (ULGA). In this work, the authors tested the stretchability of ULGA. As shown in Fig. 24a, the macro-appearance of the ULGA after many cycles of compression remains almost unchanged compared with its original morphology. Fig. 24b demonstrates the stress–strain curves of the ULGA at maximum strains of 30%, 60% and 90%, respectively. Generally, during the loading process, there are three obvious regions which can be identified, which include the elastic region wherein the stress increases linearly with strain (ε < 10%), the plateau region (10% < ε < 80%) in which most of the stored energy becomes dissipated, and the densification region (ε > 80%) marked by sudden incremental changes upon stress owing to the reduction of pore volume. In addition, it is worth noting that the curve resulting from the first round of compression is different from the next, an observation which suggests a higher Young's modulus, maximum stress and a large energy loss coefficient (Fig. 24c). Furthermore, the ratio of energy loss in the compression process can be calculated (Fig. 24d). Apart from a relatively high energy loss in the first cycle, the coefficient remains constant after subsequent cycles. Such robust mechanical properties of the ULGA revealed by the fatigue tests are attributed to the 3D interconnected network. Similar results have been described in other recent reports.241 Recently, our group prepared highly elastic Fe2O3/GAs composites, a material that can undergo large deformations without fracture. It is worth noting that such excellent elasticity is achieved even in the presence of metal oxides, a feature which is rarely reported for GAs after metal oxides have been deposited. This resistance to deformation bodes well for applications in catalysis, electronic devices and pollutant removal.
 Fig. 24  The compression tests of ULGA. (a) The variation of height as a function of time at a loading rate of 60 mm min−1. (b) The stress–strain curves of ULGA at different maximum strain of 30%, 60% and 90%, respectively. (c) The stress–strain curves of ULGA at the maximum strain of 50% for 5 cycles. (d) The corresponding Young's modulus, maximum stress and energy loss coefficient for different cycles derived from (c). The loading rates for (b and c) are both set at 1 mm min−1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 229. Copyright 2013 John Wiley and Sons. (e) The N2 adsorption/desorption isotherms of the BNF at 77 K. (f) Specific surface area and density of a BNF against CVD growth time. Reprinted with permission from ref. 243. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group. (g) The change in the number of GF layers with an increase in CH4 concentration. (h) Electrical conductivity of GFs and GF/PDMS composites as a function of the number of graphene layers. Reprinted with permission from ref. 71. Copyright 2011 Nature Publishing Group. 


3.2.2 Specific surface area and pore structure. 
The catalytic performance of these 3DGMs is directly linked to the specific surface area and pore structure. In particular for electrode materials, the higher specific area means that more catalytically active sites can be exposed, which is in favour of enhanced electrocatalytic performance. Moreover, the high surface area can avoid the aggregation of active nanomaterials, which is beneficial to the cycle performance. Besides, the porous structure can help the catalyst to come into sufficient contact with the reactants. For instance, Kaner et al.155 used a LightScribe DVD optical device to do the laser reduction of a GO film. The produced film showed a remarkably high surface area (1520 m2 g−1), which is comparable to those of typical activated carbon materials (1000–2000 m2 g−1). As a result, the as-prepared film exhibited ultrahigh energy density values in different electrolytes while maintaining the high power density and excellent cycle stability of electrochemical capacitors. Yan et al.242 prepared bind-free graphene foams by electrochemical leavening of graphite papers. The resultant graphene foams exhibited a specific surface area of 110 m2 g−1. Based on the above discussions, it can be deduced that specific surface area and pore structure are mainly determined by the preparation methods. A comparison of the specific surface area and pore size of 3DGMs grown using different methods is presented in Table 1. Besides, for the template-based method, due to the fixed template morphology, the actual value of the surface area depends on the growth conditions. For instance, boron nitride aerogels with a high surface area of 1051 g m−2 were synthesized by CVD-based methods (Fig. 24e).243 Once the CVD growth time was prolonged, it led to more number of layers, which lowered the surface area (Fig. 24f and g).
Table 1 The comparison of pore size, specific surface area, electrical conductivity and density of 3DGMs prepared by different methods




Structure
Template
Method
Pore size
Surface area (m2 g−1)
Electrical conductivity (S m−1)
Density (mg cm−3)
Ref.




Notes: CVD is chemical vapor deposition; 3DGN is three-dimensional graphene network; CVE is centrifugal vacuum evaporation; PS is polystyrene spheres; ACs is activated carbons; GAs is graphene aerogels. e-CMG is embossed chemically modified graphene; LSP is laser scribed patterning; CNTs is carbon nanotubes; PEI is polyethylenimine; e-CMG is embossed chemically modified graphene.




3D porous thin graphite foam
Cu–Ni foam
CVD
5–100 μm
500–1200
900
—
Fan et al.210


Graphene foams
Ni foams
CVD
200–500 μm
850
1000
3–6
Cheng et al.71


3D porous graphite foams
Porous Ni foam
CVD
5–10 μm
980
1100
—
Fan et al.211


3D graphene
Ni foam
CVD
—
500–600
60000
—
Huang et al.212


CNT sponges
No
CVD
80
300–400
167
5–10
Wu et al.171


Aerographite
ZnO
CVD
—
—
0.2
0.18
Adelung et al.213


3D mesoporous carbon
Mesoporous SiO2
CVD
0.5–5 nm
1900
—
—
Huang et al.214


MnO2/graphene foams
Ni foams
CVD
200–500 μm
392
55
—
Xie et al.215


ZnO/3DGN
MOFs
CVD
—
335
—
—
Zhang et al.216


Sn/3DGN
NaCl particles
CVD
0.5–36 nm
365
—
—
Zhao et al.217


Nanoporous graphene foams
SiO2
Solution-based
32.5 nm
851
—
—
Zhao et al.83


Porous graphene monolith
PS
Solution-based
1–3 μm
118–201
—
—
He et al.218


3D graphene frameworks
PS@polydopamine
Solution-based
0.5–100 nm
344
—
—
Qiu et al.219


e-CMG
PS
Solution-based
2 μm
194
1204
—
Huh et al.81


Graphene frameworks
No
Hydrothermal
0.5–10 μm
280
1000–1400
1.8–2.4
Qu et al.101


MoS2/GAs
No
Hydrothermal
0.5–30 nm
105
—
—
Zeng et al.220


Fe2O3/GAs
No
Hydrothermal
10–13 and 50–120 nm
316
—
8
Zhang et al.113


MoSe2/graphene foams
No
Hydrothermal
1.5–90 nm
496
—
—
Ajayan et al.221


TiO2/3DGN
No
Hydrothermal
6–150 nm
155
—
—
Yang et al.222


Graphene hydrogels
No
Hydrothermal
1–10 μm
—
450
—
Shi et al.98


TiO2/GAs
No
Hydrothermal
4–6 nm and 0.1–5 μm
204
—
19
Zhang et al.44


Pd/GAs
No
Hydrothermal
2 μm
—
0.25
30
Wang et al.105


GHs
No
Hydrothermal
1–5 μm
780–950
1.3–3.2
—
Shi et al.223


Graphene monoliths
No
Hydrothermal
—
310–490
0.48–1.76
8.6–24.4
Shi et al.224


NiCo2O4@graphene sponge
Polyurethane sponge
Microwave and hydrothermal
2–5 nm and 50–500 μm
194
—
—
Wang et al.225


Prussian blue/GAs
No
Solvothermal self-assembly
4–27 nm
601
38
45–60
Zhang et al.226


Fe2O3/GAs
No
Solvothermal self-assembly
3–4 nm
212
—
—
Gao et al.116


Graphene xerogel
No
Chemical reduction
—
35–158
36–500
13
Kim et al.227


Carbon aerogels
No
Chemical reduction
1–100
272
0.6
0.75
Gao et al.128


Gas
No
Chemical reduction
3.8–109 nm
117
—
5
Xiao et al.228


Gas
No
Chemical reduction
10–100 μm
—
—
3
Qiu et al.229


CNTs/RGO aerogels
No
Chemical reduction
2–100 nm
435
2.8–7.5
32.2–41.1
Zhang et al.230


Fe3O4/3D graphene
No
Chemical reduction
2–100
95
15
42
Yan et al.231


3D graphene
No
Chemical reduction
3–5 μm
151
0.7–24.8
8
Wang et al.232


3D porous graphene
No
Chemical activation
2–5 nm and 0.05–1 μm
1810
1000
—
Shen et al.233


3D graphene hydrogels
No
CVE
2–70 nm
414
192


Duan et al.234


GO aerogels
No
Coupling agent triggering assembly
2–100 nm
850
—
—
Zhang et al.129


3D GO–PEI porous materials
No
Coupling agent triggering assembly
14 nm
476
—
20–30
Han et al.134


RF-GO aerogels
No
Coupling agent triggering assembly
—
—
—
15.7
Yu et al.235


3D CNT aerogels
No
Coupling agent triggering assembly
1.7–100
590–680
100–200
8.0–9.8
Chen et al.236


3D graphene
No
Chemical blowing
1–30 nm
1005
1
3
Bando et al.237


3D carbon materials
No
Pyrolysis of GO and bacteria
1–5 nm
182
—
—
Lu et al.238


Carbon nanofiber aerogels
No
Pyrolysis of bacterial cellulose
0.2–2 μm
—
20.6
4–6
Yu et al.63


Nanocarbon foams
No
Pyrolysis of polymer frameworks
0.5–10 nm
1663
—
—
Dai et al.151


3D carbon network
No
Pyrolysis of polymer frameworks
0.5–10 nm
4073
300
470
Bao et al.152


mesoporous graphitic films
No
Pyrolysis of GO and diamond
2–11 nm
420
7400–20300
—
Shi et al.167


Fe/Fe3C/3D graphene
No
Pyrolysis of polymer frameworks
—
492
—
—
Zhang et al.239


Graphene foam
No
Vacuum filtration
2–5 μm
—
500–800
30
Chen et al.142


Co3O4/graphene film
PS
Vacuum filtration
1–2 μm
142
—
—
Huh et al.240


Graphene/carbon aerogels
No
Pyrolysis of organic precursors
10–50 nm
736
528
112–189
Zhang et al.150


Graphene cryogels
No
Pyrolysis of organic precursors
1.5–10
244
133
150
Marković et al.149


Gas
No
Pyrolysis of organic precursors
10–100
584
100
10
Baumann et al.144


3D graphene film
No
LSP
—
1520
1738
—
Kaner et al.155






3.2.3 Electrical conductivity. 
The electrical conductivity of 3DGMs is very important for their application in catalysis. Previous studies showed that the excellent electrical conductivity of 3DGMs was very favourable for the adsorption of oxygen molecules on the surface of catalysts, and could lead to the rapid diffusion of electrons during the oxygen reduction reaction process.99,244 In fact, the electrical conductivity of 3DGMs mainly relies on the preparation method. For instance, GFs grown by the CVD method have few defects relative to the solution processed GFs, which endows the CVD grown 3D structures with exceptional physical properties of graphene. According to previous reports,71,211 the electrical conductivity of CVD grown pure 3D GFs can be up to 1000 S m−1, which is noticeably higher than those of GFs processed by most other methods (Table 1). In addition, the number of graphene layers is a key factor in improving the electrical conductivity of 3DGMs (Fig. 24h).71 CVD allows us to conveniently control the number of graphene layers and thus the electrical conductivity of GFs can be controlled by changing the growth parameters.245 Besides, to extend the applications of the GFs, some electro-active materials with low cost, high electrochemical activity, and environmentally friendly nature are embedded into the 3D interconnected network of GFs. However, after introduction of some electro-active materials into the 3DGMs, the electrical conductivity of 3DGMs dramatically decreases owing to the intrinsically poor electrical conductivity of these electro-active materials (Table 1). For example, Xie et al.215 prepared a MnO2/GFs composite network with an extremely large mass loading of 92.9% MnO2. Compared with pure GFs, this MnO2/GFs composite exhibits a relatively low electrical conductivity (55 S m−1).


3.2.4 Mass density. 
The micro-, meso-, and macropore structures from 3D graphene at different length scales bring about specific characteristics and new features to these 3DGMs, such as ultralow mass density. Actually, the density of 3DGMs is also determined by the preparation method (Table 1). The template-based strategy can bring the merits of ordered and hierarchical structures, thus achieving an ultralow density. Xie et al.243 achieved the successful fabrication of boron nitride aerogels with a tunable density ranging from 0.6 to 4.6 mg cm−3 by controlling the CVD time (Fig. 24f). Moreover, Adelung et al.213 used a ZnO template-based CVD approach to prepare 3D microtube-interconnected aerographite with a density of as low as 0.18 mg cm−3, which is even smaller than that of air under ambient conditions. With respect to the template-based method, scalable manufacture is limited. In contrast, the template-free method is desirable for the scalability of 3DGMs, yet in the same breath leads to a relatively high mass density due to the lack of fine control over the structures (Table 1). Therefore, producing 3DGMs with an ultralow density of less than 1 mg cm−3 on a large scale still remains a great challenge unresolved.

3.3 Theoretical modelling
In parallel to increased interest in 3D graphene as catalysts and catalyst supports, the theoretical modelling and simulation of the reactivity of 3DGMs is being carried out in an orderly way. A vital driving force for the theoretical modelling studies would be the keen interest in the chemical properties of 3DGMs, especially for the heteroatom doping effect and edge effect, and surface group modification.
In recent years, it has been found that heteroatom doped 3DGMs demonstrated excellent high electrocatalytic activity. For example, N-, B-, P-, and S doped 3DGMs have acted as metal-free catalysts for the oxygen evolution reaction (ORR).246–248 The doping of N, P, or B into 3D graphene introduces unpaired electrons and causes local high spin density, resulting in high electrocatalytic performance for the ORR catalysis. As early as in 2009, Dai et al.249 put forward that carbon atoms adjacent to nitrogen dopants possess a substantially high positive charge density to counterbalance the strong electronic affinity of the nitrogen atom (Fig. 25a), thus improving ORR activity. And the charge delocalization caused by N doping could also change the chemisorption mode of O2 from the usual end-on adsorption onto the N doped carbon nanotube (N-CNT) electrodes (Fig. 25b). Different from N-doped 3DGMs, there is no obvious charge transfer between S and N for S-doped 3DGMs owing to their similar electro-negativity. After doping N and S successfully into porous graphene, C1 shows the maximum spin density of 0.43, which suggests enhanced ORR activity (Fig. 25c).250 Moreover, owing to asymmetrical spin and charge density caused by the co-doping effect of N and S, other carbon atoms (C2–C5) with high charge density or spin density can be regarded as active sites (Fig. 25c). In another example,251 for B/N co-doped graphene, a higher energy of HO2 adsorption (Ead) than those of B doped graphene and N doped graphene can be observed, which reveals the higher ORR activity (Fig. 25d) (note that Ead is the rate-determining step of the ORR process). Besides, it can be observed that the inactive pyridinic N atom can induce HO2 adsorption at the active B atoms, whereas the graphitic N supresses the activity of B atoms, which indicates that different N types that interact with B atoms have different functions (Fig. 25e and f). It should also be noted that with the increment of the distance between the B and pyridinic N dopants, the intensity of the synergistic effect decreases correspondingly. Apart from ORR, the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) performance can be enhanced by heteroatom doping effects. In a recent work by Dai et al. (Fig. 25h–l),151 the isolated P-doped, the isolated N-doped and the N,P-coupled structures were identified to have the lowest OER overpotentials of 0.49, 0.41 and 0.39 V, respectively, which agreed with the experimental result that N,P-co-doping gives the best OER performance. From elementary reactions of OER over N,P-co-doped graphene foam (Fig. 25h–k), the most active structure was identified as the N,P-co-doped graphene foam and the active sites located on the edge of graphene. With respect to these active sites on graphene, when the electrode potential is 0 V, the OER is uphill, whereas once the electrode potential reaches 0.797 V, all the elementary reaction steps become downhill. More recently, Wei et al.252 uncovered that the edge effect and the topological defects, instead of the nitrogen-doped sites, were more favourable to the enhancement of OER performance. Additionally, nitrogen incorporated topological defects are expected to further enhance the performance.
 Fig. 25  (a) Calculated charge density distribution for the NCNTs. (b) Schematic representations of possible adsorption modes of an oxygen molecule at the CCNTs (top) and NCNTs (bottom). The C atoms around the pyrrolic-like nitrogen could possess much higher positive charges than the C atoms around the pyridinic-like nitrogen. Reprinted with permission from ref. 249. Copyright 2009 The American Association for the Advancement of the Science. (c) Spin and charge density of the graphene network (gray) dual doped by N (black) and S (white). C1 has very high spin density, C2 and C3 have high positive charge density, and C4 and C5 have moderately high positive spin densities. Reprinted with permission from ref. 250. Copyright 2012 John Wiley and Sons. (d) Energies of HO2 adsorption (Ead) on N- and/or B-doped graphene. N(p) and N(g) indicate pyridinic and graphitic N bonding, respectively. (e) Optimized configuration of HO2 adsorbed on B,N-graphene. (f) Ead on various B,N-graphene models with pyridinic or graphitic N groups. (g) Ead on various B,N-graphene models with B active sites as a function of the distance to a pyridinic N atom (sites I–VI as marked in inset). B-Graphene with a single B atom was considered as a reference with an infinitely large distance. Reprinted with permission from ref. 251. Copyright 2013 John Wiley and Sons. Mechanistic study of OER. Initial structure (h) and structures after the adsorption of hydroxyl OH* (i), oxyl O* (j) and peroxyl OOH* (k) intermediates on N and P coupled graphene foam. O*, OH* and OOH* are adsorbed intermediates. (l) Schematic energy profiles for the OER pathway on N,P-co-doped graphene foam in alkaline media. Reprinted with permission from ref. 151. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group. 
For dopant-free 3D graphene, DFT calculations have shown that the catalytic activity can be improved by edge-site exposure or surface group modification. According to the study by Dai et al.,253 the edge sites can improve the ORR performance of graphene, CNTs and graphite. Very recently, Yu et al.254 revealed that abundant sharp edge-sites on 3D graphene can contribute to the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) performance. In this case, the authors established a five-layered model to analyse free energies of H* adsorption at different sites (Fig. 26a and b). It can be found that the HER activity on the region of planar carbon is limited, whereas edge sites of vertical graphene sheets give negative free energies of H* adsorption  from −0.50 to 0.38 eV and the tip sites have the smallest  value, which indicates that the sharp edges sites of 3D graphene is the most active towards HER (Fig. 26c and d). Regarding the surface group effects, Sun et al.255 put forward that the acidic group modification can activate CNTs to obtain high HER performance as early as 2014. Also, in Chai's work,143 surface hydroxyl group modification on 3D graphene shows a bi-center character for H2O adsorption (Fig. 26e and f). The authors analysed the adsorption modes of different overlayer H2O molecules (one-, two-, three- and four-layer H2O molecules) and found that these four modes all display thermodynamic feasibility with adsorption energies of about −45 kJ mol−1 (Fig. 26g–k). These results uncovered that surface hydroxyl modification exhibits a greater tendency to bond to H2O molecules and generates a reservoir to continuously supply H2O molecules to catalytic sites.
 Fig. 26  (a) Illustration of the five-layered graphene model with the dangling bonds terminated by hydrogen atoms. (b) Charge density of graphene corresponding to layers I, II and III labeled in (a). Carbon atoms and hydrogen atoms are labeled in gray and blue, respectively. (c) Energy profiles for the HER pathway on the edge sites of graphene networks and calculated Gibbs free energy change diagram after H* adsorption at four selected sites in the five-layered model. (d) Electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution at the edge site. Reprinted with permission from ref. 254. Copyright 2017 John Wiley and Sons. (e) Charge density contour plot (top) of G–H and the corresponding H2O adsorption optimized configuration (bottom). (f) Charge density contour plot (top) of G–OH and the corresponding H2O adsorption optimized configuration (bottom). Optimized geometrical structures of (g) one-layer, (h) two-layer, (i) three-layer and (j) four-layer H2O clusters adsorbed on G–OH. (k) The comparison of mean adsorption energies of H2O molecules on G–OH and mean binding energies of free H2O to form H2O clusters. Reprinted with permission from ref. 143. Copyright 2017 Royal Society of Chemistry. (l) DOS of selected atoms (1–4) and FePd12 NP (6) before (dashed line) and after (solid line) deposition on SVG and the contour plot of differential charge density of the FePd12/SVG composite (5). The selected atoms are marked in (3). In (5), the charge depletion region is in blue while the charge accumulation is in red (the isovalue is ±0.004 a.u.); the C, Fe, and Pd atoms are shown as brown, dark yellow, and silver spheres, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 257. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. DFT calculations of an O2 molecule and a H2O molecule that intend to pass through a monolayer of graphene, respectively. Potential barrier of an O2 molecule passing through (m) graphene with perfect carbon lattices, and (n) the defective graphene, that is, possessing divacancy and eight-atom vacancy. Potential barrier of a H2O molecule diffusing through (o) graphene with perfect carbon lattices, and (p) the defective graphene. Reprinted with permission from ref. 258. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
On the other hand, it should be also shown by theoretical modelling that the active components of the support are modified by the interaction with the graphene support. The enhanced electro-/photocatalytic performance of 3D graphene-supported catalysts may be attributed to the isolated sp2 hybridized bonds (π electrons) and the strong interaction (charge transfer) between active components and graphene sheets. As early as in 2009, Jugroot et al.256 used DFT calculations to study the binding energy between a single platinum atom and several nitrogen-doped carbon graphene and found that further N doping can double the binding energy of the C–Pt bond, which provides a theoretical basis for studying the graphene-supported catalysts. In 2013, Han et al.257 studied the electronic structure of MPd12 (M = Ni, Fe, Cu, Zn and Pd) anchored on defective graphene by theoretical simulations (Fig. 26l). They found that compared with the free MPd12, lower adsorption energies were obtained for O adsorbed on the defective graphene, which promoted the ORR kinetics. In addition to electrocatalysis, theoretical modelling for the enhanced photocatalytic activity of graphene-supported photocatalysts should also be demonstrated. Recently, Chai et al.258 studied the graphene's function in enhancing the photocorrosion resistance and photocatalytic properties through DFT calculations (Fig. 26m–p). When the O2 molecules reach on the different sites of the perfect monolayer graphene, the barrier energies for O2 molecules completely going through the bridge and hollow sites are 111.2 and 37.4 eV, indicating that the passage of O2 over perfect graphene is fully limited (Fig. 26m). Similarly, for defective graphene, the limitation of O2 passage can still be observed (Fig. 26n). Besides, the possibilities for a H2O molecule to migrate through a graphene barrier are also ruled out (Fig. 26o and p). The limitation of O2/H2O molecules to migrate through a graphene barrier results in the enhanced photocorrosion resistance of metal sulfides.
4. Catalysis applications
Benefiting from the rapid development of preparation methods and characterization techniques, a plenty of 3DGMs composed of 2D materials with different morphologies and properties have been synthesized and applied. More importantly, these 3DGMs have also demonstrated impressive performance in catalytic areas. Table 2 summarizes the most typical 3D structures of 2D materials, along with 2D materials in terms of properties and catalytic performances. Owing to the incorporation of micro-, meso-, and macropores, 3DGMs show a higher specific surface area than 2DGMs, which is favourable for the exposure of more active sites. Besides surface area, it is obvious that the contact angle of the monoliths will determine their access to electrolytes, which will ultimately affect their catalytic performance. Due to the better wettability, 3DGMs display higher catalytic activity than 2DGMs. Apparently, 3DGMs possess more advantages than 2DGMs in the field of catalysis. In this section, we will discuss the various catalytic applications of 3DGMs and make some comments on structural engineering of 3DGMs for catalysis.
Table 2 Comparison of various structures in terms of their constituent units, properties and catalytic applications




Structure
basic constitution unit
Properties comparison (3D vs. 2D)
Catalytic applications
performance comparison (3D vs. 2D)
Ref.




Note: AOPs is advanced oxidation processes; MO is methyl orange; CBZ is carbamazepine; C3N4 is carbon nitride; GAs is graphene aerogels; HER is hydrogen evolution reaction; OER is oxygen evolution reaction; N-GAs is nitrogen doped graphene aerogels; ORR is oxygen reduction reaction.




Fe2O3/Gas
2D GO sheets
Specific surface area: 316 m2 g−1
AOPs
MO removal rate (in 30 min): 90%: 50%
Zhang et al.113


Pore size: 10–13 nm and 50–120 nm


Density: 8 mg cm−3


TiO2/Gas
2D GO sheets
Specific surface area: 65 m2 g−1
AOPs
CBZ removal rate (140 min): 100%: 30%
Lee et al.261



I
D/IG values: 1.41 vs. 0.78


3D C3N4 Monolith
2D C3N4 sheets
Specific surface area: 78 vs. 40 m2 g−1
HER (photocatalysis)
H2 yield rate: 29.0 vs. 10.2 μmol h−1
Yang et al.165


Pore volume: 0.76 vs. 0.28 m2 g−1


C3N4 Gas
2D C3N4 sheets
Specific surface area: 133 vs. 7 m2 g−1
HER (photocatalysis)
H2 yield rate: 30 vs. 4 μmol h−1
Wang et al.188


MoSx/graphene hydrogels
2D GO sheets
contact angle: 8.3° vs. 90°
HER (electrocatalysis)
Overpotential (10 mA cm−2)
Qiao et al.262


140.6 vs. 550 mV


MoS2/Gas
2D GO sheets
Specific surface area: 62 vs. 49 m2 g−1
HER (electrocatalysis)
Current density (200 mV) 95 vs. 27 mA cm−2
Wang et al.263


NiCo/graphene hydrogels
2D GO sheets
contact angle: 7.3° vs. 90°
OER (electrocatalysis)
Onset potential: 350 vs. 425 mV
Qiao et al.264


Graphene/MnO2/NiCo2O4 framework
2D GO sheets
Specific surface area: 70 vs. 108 m2 g−1
OER (electrocatalysis)
Onset potential: 321 vs. 475 mV
Qiao et al.202


N-Doped graphene foam
2D GO sheets
Specific surface area: 670 vs. 384 m2 g−1
ORR
Higher onset potential and lower H2O2 yield
Qiao et al.265


Fe3O4/N-Gas
2D GO sheets
Specific surface area: 110 vs. 9.5 m2 g−1
ORR
Onset potential (V vs. Ag/AgCl): −0.19 vs. −0.26 V
Müllen et al.109


3D graphene/CNTs/Pd composites
2D GO sheets
Specific surface area: 142.3 vs. 87.8
Suzuki cross-coupling reactions
Yield: 99%: 76%
Chen et al.266


Pore volume: 0.52 vs. 0.35


Pd/3D graphene
2D GO sheets
Electrical conductivity: 0.0025 S cm−1
Heck reaction
Higher selectivity (92%) and conversion (100%) than Pd supported by 2D substrate
Wang et al.105


Compressive strength: 0.042 MPa


Compress modulus: 0.26 MPa




4.1 Photocatalysis

4.1.1 Photocatalytic water purification. 
The increasing demand for uncontaminated water resources that has resulted from the quick development of industrialization, rising pollutant emissions and long-term droughts has become an issue worldwide leading to water shortages.112,259 Thus, various strategies and solutions have been adopted in order to garner more available water resources. The storage of rainwater for daily activity and the ability to collect water from windstorms are some examples that promise temporary solutions to address water shortage issues.260 In the long run, chemical techniques offer effective methods that can allow for the reuse of onsite rural wastewater or municipal wastewater from treatment plants arising from agricultural and industrial activities. Advanced oxidation processes (AOPs) are a type of water treatment technology that is attracting the attention of a large number of researchers, because these technologies promise to offer solutions for clean water shortages. The rationale of these AOPs is based on the in situ generation of highly active transitory species, such as OH˙ and O2−, that serve as reagents for mineralization of organic compounds and disinfection of pathogenic bacteria in wastewater. Photocatalytic strategies that make use of semiconductor components have been at the forefront of these AOPs as a result of their potential to offer low-cost and highly efficient platforms. This type of heterogeneous photocatalyst is able to degrade a wide range of refractory organic compounds into readily biodegradable substances that can be eventually mineralized into carbon dioxide and water. However, most of the pollutants can only be partially reduced as opposed to totally degraded. Another drawback is that these photocatalysts must undergo an intricate desorption treatment so as to recycle them repeatedly without loss of catalytic performance. Consequently, photocatalysts with both desirable adsorption/desorption dynamics as well as efficient degradation capabilities are imperative in order to meet the requirements of water treatment processes.267,268 Thanks to the advantages arising from high specific surface areas and interconnected open-frameworks, 3DGMs are ideal candidates in the field of photocatalytic water purification. Moreover, 3DGMs have a unique advantage with respect to photocatalytic water purification, in that their macroscopic dimensions and high elasticity enable them to be recycled with ease. Moreover, 3DGMs also inherit the advantages possessed by their component 2D graphene sheets, such that they can function as their own cocatalyst in order to trap photogenerated electrons, serve as supports that provide adsorption and catalytic sites, and can act as photosensitizers with semiconductor bandgaps that can be tuned.46
In order to highlight the significance of the dimensionality of graphene when applied to photocatalytic water purification, we will discuss the work of many research groups and the various 3DGMs that have been used for photocatalysis (Table 3). Our group first proposed that 3DGMs with massive dimensions can be applied efficiently towards photocatalytic wastewater treatment.44 In this study, TiO2 nanocrystals were embedded into graphene aerogels (TiO2/GAs) making use of a hydrothermal method. The hierarchical channel structure and high surface area of the TiO2/GAs endow them with the ability to absorb large amounts of organic pollutants. Moreover, the introduction of highly conductive GAs into the matrix of TiO2 can improve the electronic conductivity of the TiO2/GAs as compared with pure TiO2 and facilitate electron transfer in the TiO2/GAs composites. As a result, the TiO2/GAs display a high activity for the photocatalytic degradation of methyl orange (MO) and are stable after many cycles (Fig. 27a and b). These features are attributed to the synergistic effect of the interfacial contacts between the TiO2 nanocrystals and GAs, the high surface area present, excellent electrical conductivity, facet characteristics, massive appearance and high elasticity. The large dimensions of the individual TiO2/GAs composites make separation from the liquid reaction medium much easier, and can be isolated simply by using hand tweezers.
Table 3 Some recent reports of 3DGMs toward target photocatalytic water purification




3DGMs photocatalysts
Light source
Photocatalytic application
Photocatalytic activity enhancement
Ref.




Note: MB is methylene blue; RhB is rhodamine B; MO is methyl orange; GOA is graphene oxide aerogel; GAs is graphene aerogels; GA is graphene aerogel.




TiO2/Gas
Solar light (AM 1.5G), 300 W xenon lamp
Degradation of MO
2-Fold of P25/GAs
Zhang et al.44


AgBr/Gas
Visible light (λ > 420 nm)
Degradation of MO
MO, 1.6-fold of AgBr
Niu et al.111


Reduction of CrVI
CrVI, 1.5-fold of AgBr


g-C3N4/graphene oxide aerogel
Visible light (λ > 420 nm), 500 W xenon lamp
Degradation of MO
2.3-Fold of g-C3N4
Jiang et al.272


BiOBr/RGO aerogels
Visible light (λ > 420 nm), 500 W xenon lamp
Degradation of RhB
3-Fold of BiOBr
Li et al.106


ZnS–Gas
Solar light (AM 1.5G), 150 W xenon lamp
Degradation of MB
MB 5-fold of ZnS
Kim et al.273


Reduction of CrVI
CrVI 3.5-fold of ZnS


C3N4/GOA
Solar light (AM 1.5G), 300 W xenon lamp
Degradation of MO
Degradation percentage of 73%
Zhou et al.274


Fe2O3/GAs
Solar light (AM 1.5G), 300 W xenon lamp
Degradation of MO
3-Fold of Fe2O3
Zhang et al.113


CoFe2O4/GAs
Solar light (AM 1.5G), 300 W xenon lamp
Degradation of MO
2.5-Fold of CoFe2O4
Zhang et al.31


Cu2O/RGO aerogels
Visible light (λ > 420 nm), 300 W xenon lamp
Degradation of MO
2.3-Fold of Cu2O
Li et al.275


W18O49/GAs
Visible light (λ > 420 nm), 500 W xenon lamp
Degradation of MO
3-Fold of W18O49
Ding et al.276


MoS2/P25/GAs
UV light, 300 W high pressure Hg lamp
Degradation of MO
1.6-Fold of MoS2/P25
Qi et al.277


3D RGO/TiO2
UV light (13.5 W m−2)
Degradation of carbamazepine
2.5-Fold of TiO2
Lee et al.261


TiO2–GA
UV light (λ < 420 nm), 300 W xenon lamp
Degradation of RhB
4-Fold of P25
Zheng et al.278




 Fig. 27  (a) Cycling photodegradation of MO under simulated solar light irradiation (with an AM 1.5 air mass filter). (b) The mass loss of TiO2/GAs after 5 cycles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
Besides TiO2, AgX (X = Cl, Br) can also be introduced into the porous structure of the GAs.269 Niu et al.111 reported that the AgBr/GA composite is able to degrade MO photooxidatively, and can photoreduce CrVI. As for the enhancement of the photocatalytic ability and resulting stability of the AgBr/GAs (Fig. 28a–d), from the author's view, three possible reasons are proposed based on their theoretical analysis: (i) the adsorption ability of AgBr/GAs for water pollutants plays an important role, a hypothesis which is certified by BET analysis; (ii) owing to the strong interconnection between AgBr and the GAs, the photogenerated electrons are injected efficiently into the graphene sheet through a percolation process, which decreases the recombination rate of electron–hole pairs; (iii) the quality and morphology of the AgBr/GAs are maintained even after several photocatalytic cycles (only a 0.8% quality loss was found after all cycles of degradation had been carried out) (Fig. 28e–j). In addition, after the photocatalysis experiments were finished, the bulk photocatalyst could be separated from solution using a pair of tweezers. Such unique characteristics based on the synergistic combination of desirable adsorption enrichment and photocatalytic degradation have served as inspiration to scientific researchers working on the fabrication of 3D photocatalysts.261,270,271 Alternatively, the photo-assisted Fenton reaction is also a useful method for achieving non-selective degradation of organic pollutants which makes use of AOPs, especially for those pollutants which cannot be degraded using biotechnology. However, there are some long-known drawbacks that still need to be addressed: (1) the efficiency of H2O2 utilization is very low; (2) the range of acceptable pH values for this application is very narrow, a feature which is less than ideal for large-scale wastewater treatment; (3) it is very easy to generate so-called iron cement (Fe(OH)3), which can lead to catalyst deactivation; (4) the catalyst is very difficult to recover. Our group creatively developed an environmentally friendly Fe2O3/GAs catalyst, which can perfectly address these issues.113 As compared to pure Fe2O3 powders, Fe2O3/GAs display highly active and stable performances due to the high conversion efficiency of Fe2+/Fe3+ when the pH of the solution is close to 3.5 (Fig. 29a). Furthermore, the Fe2O3/GAs show high and stable photo-Fenton activity over a wide range of pH values, and relatively low amounts Fe3+ precipitate out of solution as compared to pure Fe2O3 (Fig. 29b–d). Such outstanding photo-Fenton performance is a consequence of the reaction mechanism (Fig. 29e). Under solar light irradiation, both Fe2O3 and MO can be photo-excited to generate high-energy electrons that are capable of transferring to graphene. Then, the Fe3+ can be reduced to Fe2+ by capturing the electron transferred to the graphene. Next, Fe2+ can continue to react with H2O2 to reform Fe3+, a step which suggests that, in principle, the cyclic conversion of Fe2+/Fe3+ can occur indefinitely. At the same time, because of the hydrophobic nature of the Fe2O3/gas composites, water molecules are inhibited from accessing the Fe3+, which greatly reduces the production of iron cement.
 Fig. 28  (a) Photocatalytic oxidative curves of MO by AgBr/GAs and AgBr under visible light (λ > 420 nm) and the absorptive curve of AgBr/GAs in the dark. (b) Eight successive photodegradation dynamic curves of MO over AgBr/GAs. (c) Photocatalytic reductive curves of CrVI by AgBr/GAs and AgBr under visible light (λ > 420 nm) and the absorptive curve of AgBr/GAs in the dark. (d) Five successive photoreductive dynamic curves of CrVI over AgBr/GAs. (e) The quality of AgBr/GAs before the photocatalytic reaction. (f) The quality of AgBr/GAs after the photocatalytic reaction. (g) Tweezers are just used to take the AgBr/GAs from the completed reaction system. (h) Tweezers are just used to take the AgBr/GAs to a fresh system without centrifugation, ultrasound, and drying process. (i) SEM image of AgBr/GAs after the photocatalysis reaction. (j) The AgBr/GAs composite suspends in the aqueous solution. Reprinted with permission from ref. 111. Copyright 2015 John Wiley and Sons. 
 Fig. 29  (a) Cycle test for the solar-driven degradation of methyl-orange (75 mL MO, 10 mg L−1) in different reaction systems (1.2 mL H2O2 (30 wt%), the initial pH was 3.5). (b) Solar-driven degradation of MO on Fe2O3/GAs (1.2 mL H2O2 (30 wt%), the initial pH was adjusted from 3.5 to 9.0 by adding 0.1 M HCl). (c) Cycle test for the solar-driven degradation of MO on different catalysts with the initial pH of 7.0. (d) Absorption spectra of the MO filter liquor photo-degraded by the Fe2O3 powders and Fe2O3/GAs in the presence of 1,10-phenanthroline monohydrate (the initial pH was 3.5). (e) Photo-Fenton reaction model of Fe2O3/GAs in the system containing dye pollutants and H2O2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 113. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
These active components within 3D graphene act as an excellent catalyst for treatment of waste water and the graphene sheets are a good support for copious adsorption of reactants and uniform catalyst loading. The photocatalytic activity arises from the synergistic effect between 3D graphene and active components. (1) The high adsorption capacity of contaminant molecules, especially via π–π stacking interactions for contaminants with aromatic structures, provides a high preconcentration proximal to catalytic components. (2) The 3D graphene, as a support, endows the active components with a high dispersity, thus preventing the reduction of photocatalytic performance. (3) The rapid electron transfer from active components to graphene facilitates the separation of photo-generated carriers.


4.1.2 Photocatalytic water splitting. 
As a promising and powerful way to help alleviate current energy-related issues, artificial photosynthesis that mimics the natural harnessing of light energy to drive the production of chemical substances has attracted much attention over the past decade.279 Despite the fact that much progress has been made, the practical application of photocatalytic water splitting technology has been limited by the lack of highly active photocatalysts.280 In order to address this problem, the construction of 3D macroform photocatalysts with more desirable recovery properties has been proposed as a promising alternative in order to achieve the needs of industrial and practical applications. For these reasons, it is extremely vital after synthesising 3D graphene composites to investigate the synergistic catalytic effects between the 3D graphene and the other components.281 Generally speaking, investigation of these synergistic effects can be carried out through band gap engineering, charge-transfer network design, and interfacial modulation.
In particular, Yang et al.165 reported the construction of a macroscopic 3D porous graphitic carbon nitride (g-CN) monolith (PCNM) synthesized by a well-designed 3D template (melamine sponge). Compared with g-CN powders alone, a large enhancement in the photocatalytic rate of hydrogen evolution for the PCNMs was observed (Fig. 30a). The authors claimed that the high photocatalytic hydrogen activity is caused by the unique 3D interconnected network, large specific surface area, narrow band gap, and a greater number of catalytically active sites (Fig. 30b). The photoluminescence (PL) emission spectra for PCNM showed no obvious peaks, which stands in contrast to the case of g-CN powder, an observation which suggests that a large barrier to charge recombination exists in the PCNMs (Fig. 30c). In addition, the introduction of the 3D interconnected network of porous sheets leads to more efficient charge transport and shortens the diffusion length for charge migration (these features are supported by the EIS plot and photocurrent intensity shown in Fig. 30d), thus improving the separation efficiency between photogenerated electrons and holes. Despite the dramatic progress with respect to the development of highly active photocathodes (for the purpose of reduction of water into hydrogen), the more challenging task is to fabricate effective and stable photoanodes that can oxidize water into oxygen under sunlight irradiation. The above mentioned 2D metal-free C3N4 not only acts as a photocathode to reduce water into hydrogen, but also serves as a photoanode that oxidizes water to oxygen, thanks to its adjustable band gap and suitable band position. This photocatalyst can also be fabricated at low cost. As for photoanodes, three key factors that improve their efficiency exist: (1) having an excellent light-trapping ability, (2) facile separation and movement of photogenerated charge carriers, and (3) possessing fast oxygen evolution reaction (OER) kinetics. The introduction of nitrogen vacancies in C3N4 is an effective way to achieve solar light harvesting by way of narrowing the band gap and changing the surface electron structure. However, a problem that urgently needs to be addressed is that, traditional C3N4 powder always suffers from a complicated recycling process. Massive 3D graphene aerogels are favorable as a choice of material that can solve this problem. Chen and Feng et al.282 developed a novel photoanode composed of a strongly coupling 3D ternary hybrid aerogel for the purpose of solar-light-driven water oxidation, in which N-deficient porous C3N4 nanosheets (DPCN) and nickel-iron-layered double hydroxide (NiFe-LDH) were encapsulated and anchored on a 3D N-doped graphene aerogel (NRGO). After the introduction of the 3D graphene aerogel, the photocurrent density of DPCN/NRGO was obviously enhanced, an observation which suggests that NRGO can improve electron transfer and the absorption of light (Fig. 31a). The PL spectra further confirmed that NRGO plays an important role with respect to charge carrier transfer and separation (Fig. 31b). Moreover, the NiFe-LDH also facilitates the water oxidation reaction, by not only improving the speed of charge carrier transfer, but also by acting as a cocatalyst that increases oxygen evolution kinetics (Fig. 31c and d). In the presence of NRGO, the photoelectric response of these photoanodes becomes much higher than those with DPCN/NiFe-LDH and DPCN. The enhancement can be attributed to the fact that the introduction of 3D NRGO effectively quickens the charge carrier transfer between NiFe-LDH and DPCN, thus greatly suppressing the recombination rate of electron–hole pairs (Fig. 31e–h). As for the high water oxidation activity driven by solar light, the authors proposed a possible charge transfer mechanism. Under irradiation by sunlight, the photogenerated electrons from the DPCN can easily migrate to the NRGO thanks to it being a conductive electron transport pathway. Meanwhile, the holes left on the valence band of DPCN can migrate to the surface of NiFe-LDH through the NRGO interlayer, a process driven by the potential difference between DPCN and NiFe-LDH as well as the strong coupling effects among the components (Fig. 31i–m). Similarly, Cui et al.270 fabricated Ag3PO4/GAs by an in situ ion filtration–precipitation method, and the resulting Ag3PO4/GAs exhibited a 40% enhancement in photocatalytic OER when compared with pristine Ag3PO4 due to the tight contact between Ag3PO4 NPs and the RGO sheets as well as the good conductivity of the GAs.
 Fig. 30  (a) Photocatalytic activity for H2 production, (b) DRS spectrum, (c) PL emission spectra, and (d) EIS plot and photocurrent-time dependence of PCNM (solid line) and the g-CN powder (dotted line). Reprinted with permission from ref. 165. Copyright 2015 John Wiley and Sons. 
 Fig. 31  (a) Variation of photocurrent density versus applied voltage plots for PCN, DPCN, DPCN/NRGO, DPCN/NRGO/NiFe-LDH, and NiFe-LDH with chopped AM 1.5G irradiation. (b) Photoluminescence spectra of PCN, DPCN, DPCN/NRGO, NiFe-LDH, 2D DPCN/NRGO/NiFe-LDH, and DPCN/NRGO/NiFe-LDH. (c) Mott–Schottky plots. (d) IPCE spectra of DPCN, DPCN/NRGO, and DPCN/NRGO/NiFeLDH measured at 1.22 V in 0.01 M Na2SO4 electrolyte under AM 1.5G irradiation. (e) Transient photocurrent density versus time. Number labels (1), (2), (3), (4), and (5) data represent the DPCN/NRGO/NiFe-LDH, 2D DPCN/NRGO/NiFe-LDH, DPCN/NRGO, DPCN/NiFe-LDH, and DPCN, respectively. (f) Photocurrent densities versus time of DPCN/NRGO/NiFe-LDH being applied with different bias potentials under AM 1.5G irradiation. (g) EIS Nyquist plots of DPCN (□, ☆), DPCN/NRGO (△, ○), and DPCN/NRGO/NiFe-LDH (▽, ◇) at a bias of 0.9 V in the dark and under AM 1.5G irradiation. (h) Transient photocurrent responses of DPCN, DPCN/NiFe-LDH, DPCN/NRGO, and DPCN/NRGO/NiFe-LDH under AM 1.5G irradiation at 1.22 V. (i–m) Schematic for the proposed mechanism of water oxidation: (i) DPCN/NRGO/NiFe-LDH, (j) DPCN/NiFe-LDH, (k) DPCN/NRGO, and (l) DPCN. Reprinted with permission from ref. 282. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 

4.2 Electrocatalysis

4.2.1 Hydrogen evolution reaction (HER). 
The efficient electrochemical conversion of water to hydrogen making use of catalysts offers an attractive way to store energy.262,283,284 The electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) is an essential half reaction of the overall water splitting reaction characterized by a two-electron redox process. The development of highly efficient electrocatalysts with low overpotential and good stability is the most important challenge for the HER. 3D GAs represent a new class of carbon materials with complex porous structures and high specific surface areas. Different from the role (support or co-catalyst) in photocatalytic water splitting, 3D graphene, as a catalyst, can directly participate in splitting water due to its exceptional electrical conductivity, tunable electronic structure and strong tolerance to acidic/alkaline conditions. Direct manipulation of the electronic structure of 3D graphene through a much simpler and clearer method is a meaningful way to achieve high electrocatalytic HER performance. Lately, nitrogen and sulfur co-doped 3D nanoporous graphene (NS-G) was prepared by nanoporous Ni-based chemical vapor deposition.285 It can be seen that chemical co-doping significantly enhanced the HER activity of 3D graphene as compared to undoped and single N- or S-doped 3D graphene (Fig. 32a–d). The combination of the negatively charged S dopants and the positively charged N dopants at a lattice defect allows a fast electron transfer path for HER. Theoretical studies have proved that N/S co-doping can produce a synergistic effect in tuning the Gibbs free energy of H* adsorption. One of the recent reports on the use of 3D graphene networks as a HER catalyst came from Yu et al.,254 where they directly deposited vertical graphene sheets on the surface of SiOx nanowire networks to form 3D graphene networks with a large quantity of sharp edge sites through a simple atmospheric pressure CVD method. It should be noted that sharp edge sites of the pure carbon skeleton can exhibit higher charge density than internal carbon atoms to promote the process of proton adsorption and reduction. Thus, such 3D graphene networks can act as a highly active and stable HER electrocatalyst with a low onset potential of 18 mV and a small Tafel slope of 64 mV dec−1.
 Fig. 32  HER activity of chemically doped nanoporous graphenes. (a) CV curves of the samples produced at different CVD temperatures and with different dopants in comparison to undoped nanoporous graphene. (b) Tafel plots for the different graphene samples. (c) Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy of the graphene samples at an HER overpotential of −0.20 V. (d) DFT-calculated HER activities of chemically doped nanoporous graphenes with a geometric lattice defect. Shown is the calculated HER free energy diagram at equilibrium potential for a Pt catalyst and for pyridinic (pN-G), graphitic (gN-G), sulfur doped (S-G), and nitrogen/sulfur co-doped (NS-G) graphene samples. The inset shows a NS-doped graphene model with a nitrogen (blue), a sulfur (yellow), and a hydrogen atom (white). Reprinted with permission from ref. 285. Copyright 2015 John Wiley and Sons. 
Besides, 3D graphene has also been regarded as an ideal scaffold for improving the electrocatalytic HER activity of the supported materials.41,43,54 In general, the 3D structure of the electrocatalyst can provide a highly conductive network for rapid charge carrier transmission during the process of HER, a feature which has the potential to offset the poor conductivity of the active materials resulting from a wide bandgap.41,286 Additionally, the macropores in 3DGMs can provide the electrolyte with easy access to the catalysts bound to the electrode, improving the interaction between the electrolyte and catalysts and further quickening HER kinetics.285,287
Wang et al.263 demonstrated a highly active catalyst that consisted of MoS2 nanosheets and 3D structured GAs (GAs–MoS2). The graphene sheets partially overlapped in 3D space to form interconnected porous structures, which not only can prevent the self-stacking of graphene during the self-assembly process, but these pores provide large surface area upon which MoS2 nanosheets can grow. As a result of the unique structure of the 3D GA, the GA–MoS2 exhibited an onset potential, which is much lower than those of other composite materials (Fig. 33a). It is noted that graphene–MoS2 (G–MoS2) and MoS2 display relatively low current densities when subjected to the same overpotential. In addition, pure GA shows negligible activity in comparison to other composite materials, an observation which further confirms that the excellent performance of GA–MoS2 is attributed to the synergistic effects arising between the GA and MoS2. The fact that GA–MoS2 exhibited the smallest value of the Tafel slope means that GA–MoS2 has the best performance with respect to HER (Fig. 33b), and exposes many more active sites in the 3D framework of GA and the thin MoS2 nanosheets. CV measurements show that the electrochemically active surface area was increased eight times after employing GA as a 3D matrix (Fig. 33c). Besides the high HER activity, the GA–MoS2 composite also exhibited good HER stability, which was evidenced by long-term potential cycling experiments (Fig. 33d). In another interesting work, Du et al.43 designed nickel phosphide (Ni2P) grown three-dimensional few-layer graphene/nickel foam as a highly active HER catalyst. The large 3D framework facilitates proton accessibility and electron transfer, thus improving the HER performance of Ni2P.
 Fig. 33  Electrochemical performance of the HER catalysts in 0.5 M H2SO4: (a) polarization curves for GA–MoS2, G–MoS2, MoS2 and GA loaded onto GC electrodes; (b) Tafel curves of GA–MoS2, G–MoS2 and MoS2; (c) electrochemical capacitance measurements: cyclic voltammograms are performed in a potential window without faradaic processes; (d) stability test of GA–MoS2 through potential cycling, polarization curves before and after 2000 potential cycles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 263. Copyright 2015 John Wiley and Sons. (e) The iR-corrected LSV curves of MoS2–G before and after NaOH treatment in 0.5 M Na2SO4 solution. Scan rate: 10 mV s−1. The inset is the Tafel plots of MoS2–G before and after NaOH treatment. The iR-corrected LSV curves of (f) MoS2 and (g) 3D graphene samples before and after NaOH treatment in 0.5 M Na2SO4 solution. Scan rate: 10 mV s−1. (h) Polarization curves of MoS2–G normalized to the EASA before and after NaOH treatment in 0.5 M Na2SO4 solution. Scan rate: 10 mV s−1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 143. Copyright 2017 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Compared with hydrogen evolution in acidic medium, splitting water into hydrogen in alkaline medium is closer to the actual water-alkali industry, whereas most recently well-developed HER electrocatalysts can only work under acidic conditions and lack intrinsic catalytic activity in alkaline medium.288 In alkaline solution, as the H2O dissociation proceeds, the interfacial H2O molecules are dramatically depleted and lots of OH− ions are released from the catalytic sites.289 Thus, aiming at ensuring a long-lasting efficient alkaline HER process, timely H2O supply or rapid OH− diffusion is extremely required. Functional group, such as –COOH or –OH, modification of 3D graphene appears to be an effective pathway to facilitate H2O supply and dilute the interfacial OH− concentration, thus improving the alkaline HER performance of 3DGMs.255 More recently, a surface hydroxyl modified 3D graphene/MoS2 was prepared to reduce water in alkaline medium.143 After the hydroxyl group modification of graphene, an obvious enhanced alkaline HER performance can be observed (Fig. 33e–g). The hydroxyl groups anchored on the 3D graphene can tightly bond with the H2O molecules via the hydrogen bond and then form a reservoir on the cathode surface to offer a continuous H2O stream for catalytically active sites, thus achieving an excellent HER performance and long-term durability in an alkaline solution.


4.2.2 Oxygen evolution reaction (OER). 
The fabrication of highly effective and stable catalysts for OER is urgently needed owing to the fact that OER is the efficiency-limiting step for many electrochemical conversion devices.290 To date, the most effective catalysts for the sluggish OER are still noble metals, that is, Ir- and Ru-based materials,291 but their applications are strongly limited by their high costs and scarcities. To replace these noble metals, some earth-abundant transition metal alternatives (Co, Ni, Cu, Mn, Fe, etc.) have been widely investigated for their abilities to serve as the active sites.
However, the requirement of complex design strategies and low electrical conductivities, which lead to the underperformance of noble-metal-based materials in most cases, largely limits their applications.
In order to address these issues, these abundant metal-based active materials have been incorporated into 3D scaffolds to form 3D catalysts. For instance, Zhang et al.292 designed a 3D Ni foam/porous carbon/anodized Ni catalyst, which resulted in significant enhancement of the catalytic activity of the metal thanks to the higher catalyst loading and better contacts with the electrode. Taking advantage of a comparatively higher surface area and electron conductivity resulting from nickel foam, many similar fabrications have been investigated for their OER activity.293–295 Similar to 3D metal scaffolds, the 3D nonmetal scaffolds composed of cheaper earth-rich elements (C, N, O, H), such as 3D graphene, also have been imbedded into active metallic materials. Qiao et al.264 prepared NiCo double hydroxides grown on nitrogen-doped graphene hydrogels (NG-NiCo). Note that most of 3DGMs reported to date display hydrophobic properties. In this case, however, the hybrid catalyst (NG-NiCo) was greatly hydrophilic and featured favorable electrode kinetics, great durability, and superior activity (Fig. 34a–f). The well-defined porous structure and high conductivity contributed to the enhanced OER activity by promoting effective charge and mass transport within the electrodes. In addition, this study also demonstrated that the catalytic currents of NG-NiCo are much less affected by the scan rate, an observation which underlines the vital role that 3D structures play when it comes to efficient charge transport. Moreover, the catalytic current of NG-NiCo was much higher than that of the state-of-the-art precious-metal OER catalyst (IrO2). Such significant improvement in performance is made possible by the introduction of dual active sites that arise from the synergistic effects occurring between the 3D N-doped graphene hydrogel and NiCo species. In a similar example, N-doped graphene film-confined nickel particles prepared by Qiao et al.,33 demonstrated high OER activity and strong durability during long-term cycling. The enhanced OER performance is attributed to the synergistic effects of N-doped graphene and Ni, which enhance the activities of both components for OER. Besides, Tang et al.296 designed highly stable Ni-MnO/RGO aerogel catalysts with active metallic Ni for OER with the assistance of 3D porous RGO aerogels (Fig. 34g–j). It is obvious that Ni-MnO/RGO requires a lower overpotential and shows a higher current density over the provided potential range as compared to the other catalysts (Fig. 34g and h). Yuan et al.297 developed NF supported PEI/RGO multilayers as 3D composite OER electrodes. The optimum one achieves the current density of 10 mA cm−2 at an overpotential of 322 mV and exhibits the most favorable OER kinetics via controlling the number of bilayers of PEI/RGO (Fig. 34k–m).
 Fig. 34  (a) LSV plots of NG-NiCo, dried NG-NiCo, and 2D NG-NiCo at 50 mV s−1 in 0.1 M KOH; the inset in (a) shows the corresponding data re-plotted as the current density vs. overpotential. (b) EIS spectra of NG-NiCo and G-NiCo. (c and d) Tafel plots for NG-NiCo in comparison to those for G-NiCo and dried NG-NiCo. (e) Retention percentage of the catalytic current for NG-NiCo and 2D NG-NiCo (0.7 V vs. Ag/AgCl) during the initial 100 s. (f) Chronoamperometric response for NG-NiCo at 0.5 V vs. Ag/AgCl. Reprinted with permission from ref. 264. Copyright 2013 John Wiley and Sons. OER performances of Ni-MnO/RGO aerogels, MnO/RGO aerogels, Ni/RGO aerogels, and commercial RuO2 catalyst: (g) OER polarization curves in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH (rotation rate: 1600 rpm; sweep rate: 5 mV s−1). (h) Overpotentials at a chosen current density of 10 mA cm−1 and the current densities at a chosen potential of 1.60 V. (i) Tafel plots derived from panel (a). (j) Chronoamperometric responses of Ni-MnO/RGO aerogels at 1.60 V in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH; the inset shows OER polarization curves of Ni-MnO/RGO aerogels before and after the stability testing. Reprinted with permission from ref. 296. Copyright 2017 John Wiley and Sons. (k) Polarization curves (without iR correction) of NF and NF@(PEI/RGO)n (n = 0.5, 1, 2, and 3) in 0.1 M KOH. (l) Tafel plots of NF and NF@(PEI/RGO)n (n = 0.5, 1, 2, and 3) in 0.1 M KOH. Reprinted with permission from ref. 297. Copyright 2017 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Currently, some non-noble transition-metal-based OER catalysts are usually prepared as thin films from the precursor solution containing metal cations by electrodeposition, sputtering, dip-coating, and spin-coating methods on 3D porous materials.298–300 This method is simple, time-saving and eco-friendly, avoiding the complicated CVD or hydrothermal processes. Zhang et al.292 designed a 3D Ni foam/porous carbon/anodized Ni (NF/PC/AN) electrode by homogeneous coating of the 3D Ni foam with a porous carbon membrane which is derived from a zeolite imidazolate framework (ZIF-8). This design endows the whole electrode with efficient OER activity and high stability. Shi et al.301 fabricated a Ni–Fe LDH nanoplates/3D RGO catalyst by electrochemically depositing Ni–Fe LDH nanoplates onto the surface of a 3D RGO electrode from a mixed aqueous solution of precursor solution containing Ni2+ and Fe2+, respectively. Without using a binder and conductive additive, this 3D composite electrode only requires an overpotential of 259 mV to obtain a current density of 10 mA cm−2 and a low Tafel slope of 39 mV dec−1 in OER catalysis, which outperforms the IrO2 catalyst.
In contrast to metal-based OER catalysts with 3D structures, unique nonmetal OER catalysts that can serve as the active-site-forming elements are still sorely needed. Note that while a few studies have focused on N-doped materials, including organic N(5)-ethylflavinium ions302 and N-doped graphene–carbon nanotube hybrids,303 the catalytic activity for OER of these materials is not yet sufficient. A recent breakthrough from Qiao's group has been achieved, however, by fabricating graphite carbon nitride and carbon nanotube composites (g-C3N4–CNT) with 3D interconnected networks.304 This 3D catalyst exhibits the highest activity among nonmetal OER catalysts, as well as better performance with more favorable kinetics and stronger durability than noble-metal catalysts. In this work, the authors hypothesized that the 3D interconnected porous skeleton and the large number of active sites, which is related to the high N concentration, taken together are responsible for the improved charge and mass transport, and lead to the outstanding OER activity. Similarly, Wei et al.305 reported a 3D N-doped graphene/single-walled carbon nanotube (NGSH) OER catalyst which was fabricated by in situ doping during CVD growth on layered double hydroxide. The NGSH catalyst promoted the OER current density to 10 mA cm−2 at a potential of 1.63 V, similar to that of IrO2/C materials.


4.2.3 Oxygen reduction reaction (ORR). 
The oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) is a key process in fuel cells and metal–air batteries. The key part in designing a fuel cell is the fabrication of the electrodes, which include a cathode for ORR and an anode for hydrogen or methanol oxidation.306 The cathodic ORR is much slower than the anodic hydrogen oxidation reaction, a property which lowers the ORR performance. Thus, much effort has been focused on developing a highly active cathode catalyst. 3DGMs, as alternative ORR catalysts, could markedly reduce the cost and increase the efficiency of fuel cells. Recently, some nitrogen-doped carbon materials have been prepared that exhibit ORR performances comparable to or better than that of the commercial Pt/C catalyst under alkaline conditions due to their high specific surface areas and high nitrogen doping content.101,307–309 The current theory behind the origin of enhanced ORR activity in heteroatom-doped carbon materials is based on electroneutrality break and electron transfer induced by the heteroatom doping.252
Additionally, the surface functional groups, edge dangling bonds, and defective sites in 3D carbon materials can also improve the ORR performance.310 Recently, it has been demonstrated that a dopant-free nanocarbon structure can deliver excellent ORR activity, which was attributed to the edge sites.253 Moreover, some 3D graphene structures with higher edge exposure for the appropriate incorporation of nitrogen, especially within the distance of edge effect, are in favour of the high ORR activity.310,311 Wei et al.252 reported a heteroatom-doped and edge-rich 3D graphene material (nitrogen-doped graphene mesh, denoted as NGM) as an ORR catalyst. The as-made NGM shows an excellent ORR performance superior to Pt/C in terms of both activity and stability, and a remarkable OER activity comparable with Ir/C (Fig. 35). It should be noted that the ORR activity under acidic conditions is also considerable. The mechanism behind this remarkable performance is based on the effects of nitrogen doping, and edge defects.
 Fig. 35  ORR performances of NGM materials. (a) LSV curves of NGM obtained in O2 or N2-saturated 0.10 M KOH or 0.10 M HClO4 solutions. The difference between the current densities of O2 or N2-saturated tests is assigned to the real ORR current (solid curves). All LSV profiles of ORR are obtained with such correction. (b) The disk current densities (bottom) and ring current densities (top) recorded on an RRDE. (c) Electron transfer number (n) derived from the LSV curves in RRDE measurements. (d) Chronoamperometric response of NGM in O2-saturated 0.10 M KOH with the addition of KSCN (resulting in an electrolyte with 10 × 10−3 M KSCN). (e) Arrhenius plots of Pt/C and NGM, showing the log of exchange current density j0versus the inverse temperature 1/T, and the inset presents the calculated ORR apparent activation energies. (f) ORR chronoamperometric responses at a constant potential of 0.60 V versus RHE for NGM, GM, and Pt/C. The rotating rate was 1600 rpm and the scan rate was 10 mV s−1 for all tests. All electrodes were prepared with the same mass loading of ≈0.25 mg cm−2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 252. Copyright 2016 John Wiley and Sons. 
Despite much progress made in the successful doping of heteroatoms into the graphene lattice made by various research groups,262,312 most mono-heteroatom-doped graphene, especially nitrogen-doped carbon nanotubes or cages, only manifest moderate ORR performance under alkaline conditions. Zhang and Feng et al.37 designed metal-free nitrogen/sulfur co-doped three dimensional graphene foams (N/S-GFs). During investigations into their durability, the authors found that N/S-GFs do not show any significant changes in terms of the position and amplitude of current and potential peaks related to ORR, a characteristic which is indicative of the electrochemical stability of N/S-GFs during the ORR process. The kinetic-limiting current density of the N/S-GFs is very close to that of the commercial Pt/C composite, and much higher than that of N-doped graphene frameworks (N-GFs). In addition to the excellent electrocatalytic activity, N/S-GFs show high stability. In the presence of methanol, the current displayed for these N/S-GFs remains almost unchanged, suggesting that the N/S-GFs indeed exhibit a high selectivity towards the ORR with a remarkable tolerance to crossover effects. Similar results were reported by Qu et al.38 who used a modified CVD method to synthesize B- and N-doped 3D GFs with enhanced ORR performance. The coexistence of B and N atoms in the 3D GFs drastically improves the ORR activity by providing the active sites in favour of electron transfer, lowering the bad gap energy, and enhancing the electroactive surface area significantly.
To further enable the utilization of the unique features of 3D graphene for the ORR, that is, their rich macroporosity and multidimensional electron transport pathways, some mono-/mixed-metal oxides (MnO,313 NiCo2O4314), M (Fe3C,315 Mo2C316) have been incorporated into 3D interconnected porous skeletons. Feng et al109 hydrothermally synthesized 3D monolithic Fe3O4/N-doped graphene aerogel (Fe3O4/N-GAs) hybrids. Compared with Fe3O4/N-doped black carbon (Fe3O4/N-CB) and Fe3O4/N-doped graphene sheets (Fe3O4/N-GSs), the resulting Fe3O4/N-GAs exhibited better electrocatalytic activity for the ORR in an alkaline electrolyte, including a lower ring current, lower H2O2 yield, higher current density, higher electron transfer number and better durability, features of which potentially make Fe3O4/N-GAs a nonprecious metal cathode catalyst for fuel cells (Fig. 36a–f). The authors consider that such high ORR activity is caused by the 3D macroporous structure and high surface area. Additionally, it should be noted that the effect caused by N-doping and the Fe–N–C active sites surrounded by the Fe3O4 interface both favor enhanced electrochemical performance. Furthermore, in this case, the authors found the 3D N-GAs to be a universal carbon support that is superior to other carbon-based supports (GSs and CB) with respect to loading other nonprecious metal electrocatalysts. By using a hydrothermal protocol for the assembly of GO and FePc followed by thermal treatment under an NH3 atmosphere, Hou's group317 successfully prepared 3D N-doped graphene aerogels which served as supports for FexN NPs (FexN/NGAs), and demonstrated this material to be an efficient synergistic ORR catalyst. Note that FexN is rich in nitrogen and is inclined to generate Fe–N–C structures on NGA. In addition, the portion of FexN NPs that were small in size could facilitate the formation of Fe–N–C structures due to their more effective ability to interface. This efficient synergistic ORR catalyst which combines the advantages of both 3D graphene networks and FexN NPs achieved high ORR activity at a level which is superior to commercial Pt/C in alkaline media.
 Fig. 36  (a) CVs of Fe3O4/N-GAs in N2- and O2-staturated 0.1 M aqueous KOH electrolyte solution at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1. (b) LSVs of Fe3O4/N-GAs in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 at different RDE rotation rates (in rpm). (c) Rotating ring-disk electrode (RRDE) test of the ORR on Fe3O4/N-GAs, Fe3O4/N-GSs, Fe3O4/N-CB in an O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH electrolyte at a rotation rate of 1600 rpm. The inset shows the ring current as a function of the electrode potential. (d) Peroxide percentage and (e) electron transfer number of Fe3O4/N-GAs, Fe3O4/N-GSs, and Fe3O4/N-CB as functions of the electrode potential. (f) Peroxide percentage and electron transfer number as functions of Fe3O4 loading at −0.4 V, as measured using an RRDE in an O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH electrolyte. Reprinted with permission from ref. 109. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
Developing 3D graphene-based catalysts with good ORR performance not only in alkaline but also in acidic environments that is greatly desired because most fuel cells operate in acidic electrolytes. Nevertheless, most 3DGMs can only display a good ORR performance in alkaline, but poor activity in acidic medium owing to the insufficient catalytic sites formed within the 3DGMs.101,318,319 To conquer these drawbacks of 3DGMs, a series of approaches, such as assembly of GNRs into 3DGMs,99 developing a unique pore-hierarchical structure within 3DGMs265,320 and the formation of some new active sites,321 are employed to increase the ORR active site density. Chen et al.265 reported an efficient ORR catalyst in acidic medium based on porous graphene foams (PGFs) prepared by using silica spheres as a hard template. As expected, the resultant PGFs show promising ORR activity and stability in acidic solutions due to a 3D macroporous morphology and a high surface area. In another interesting work reported by Yi et al.,99 a N-doping 3D graphene nanoribbons (N-GNRs) were used in the construction of ORR electrodes, which showed pronounced ORR electrocatalytic activity under acidic conditions (Fig. 37a–d). This excellent electrocatalytic performance is attributed to the unique 1D regular structure of GNR that differs from random graphene sheets.
 Fig. 37  The ORR performance for N-GNRs-A in acidic solution. (a) CV curves of N-GNRs-A in an N2- and O2-saturated 0.5 M H2SO4 solution, respectively, at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. (b) Rotating ring-disk electrode (RRDE) curves of the N-GNRs-A at 1600 rpm. The inset shows the ring current as a function of the electrode potential. (c) HO2− production and the corresponding n values of the N-GNRs-A electrode. (d) LSV curves of N-GNRs-A in O2-saturated 0.5 M H2SO4 solution at different rotating speeds. The scan rate is 10 mV s−1. Inset shows the Koutecky–Levich plots derived from LSV curves at different potentials from −0.2 to 0 V. Reprinted with permission from ref. 99. Copyright 2016 John Wiley and Sons. 
Dai et al.322 reported long-term operational stabilities and comparable gravimetric power densities of N-doped CNTs and graphene composites, which was prepared through freeze drying a mixture of GO and oxidized CNT followed by annealing at 800 °C in NH3 for 3 hours. It is noted that the good performance is evaluated in acidic polymer electrolyte membrane (PEM) fuel cells, which currently serve as the mainstream fuel cell technology of great potential for large-scale applications in both transport and stationary systems. Besides, there have been some reports on the dual doping of nitrogen and other heteroatoms into carbon to enhance the catalytic activity in acidic environments owing to the introduction of some new active sites.321,323 For instance, Woo et al.324 synthesized P/N co-doped carbon as an acidic ORR catalyst. The additional P-doping into N-doped carbon modifies the morphology of the catalysts to uneven surfaces with the open edge sites being split and angled, and it increases the surface area of the catalysts. Similar result has been confirmed by Ozaki et al.321 who uncovered that additional doping of B into the N-doped carbon further improved the ORR activity through the formation of a new active site of B–N–C.

4.3 Other catalytic systems

4.3.1 Organic catalytic reaction. 
In the field of organic catalysis, some noble metals, including Pd, Au, Pt, etc., appear to be very important among all the known catalysts as a consequence of their unique properties. In order to be considered an efficient catalyst for a particular organic reaction, the catalyst in question should offer the most favorable combination of activity and selectivity. For example, the Suzuki coupling catalyzed by Pd is a powerful, well-known reaction, and is a common synthetic method in organic chemistry to produce biaryls, conducting polymers, and liquid crystals to name a few examples.325,326 In order to form nanosized noble metals with high stability, some researchers introduced RGO or GO sheets as supports onto which these noble metals could anchor themselves.327,328 Different from 2D RGO or GO sheets, 3DGMs have unique 3D porous structures and can be easily recycled, properties which lend themselves to a broad range of prospects with respect to applications in organic catalysis. Chen et al.266 hydrothermally prepared a composite macroscopic hydrogel composed of graphene/multiwalled carbon nanotubes/Pd (G/MWCNTs/Pd) that possessed a 3D interconnected network. In this structure, MWCNTs can be used to bridge adjacent graphene sheets and prevent their aggregation, which leads to a high contact area between the reactants and catalyst. The resulting G/MWCNTs/Pd composites showed remarkable performance in catalysing Suzuki cross-coupling reactions due to the high porosity, high surface area, and robust chemical and mechanical stability. Thanks to the macroscopic dimensions, the G/MWCNTs/Pd composite can be recycled easily. It should be noted that the strong affinity between Pd and the carbon skeleton can effectively prevent the Pd from leaching during the Suzuki coupling reaction. Lu et al.329 loaded Pd NPs onto a 3D graphene framework (Pd/3DGF) and applied this composite towards the Suzuki cross-coupling reaction of 4-bromoanisole with phenylboronic acid in water using K2CO3 as a base. The results show that the yield of the reaction catalysed by the Pd/3DGF composite was much higher than the yield obtained from a Pd/graphite paper catalyst, demonstrating its excellent catalytic activity. Inspired by this work, many researchers have begun to focus on 3DGMs as catalysts for organic reactions.330,331


4.3.2 CO oxidation. 
The catalytic oxidation of CO is significant in the context of clean air technologies and automotive emission control.332 The low-temperature oxidation of CO is one of the most extensively investigated reactions with respect to heterogeneous catalysis owing to the strict regulations that require low CO emissions from the automobile industry. Precious metal nanocatalysts show high activity for the CO oxidation reaction even in the presence of moisture.333–335 However, most of these catalysts are only effective at high temperature (>100 °C). Thus, a catalyst with high activity and selectivity at low temperature is something to be desired. Previous literature reports have shown that by introducing graphene sheets, some metal catalysts can achieve highly efficient CO oxidation at low temperatures.336,337 Compared with 2DGMs, 3DGMs which possess more active sites and have a 3D interconnected network, have promising potential for applications in the field of CO oxidation. Long et al.338 described a hydrothermal self-assembly protocol for obtaining a flexible Ru/graphene aerogel (Ru/GA). In the case of this composite material, the surface chemistry of the metallic Ru can be easily modulated by pretreatment in either oxidative or reductive atmospheres at moderate temperatures. These pretreatment conditions did not result in substantial changes to the bulk structure of the Ru NPs. As a result, the catalytic activity of Ru/GA towards CO oxidation is very impressive, especially when the pretreatment conditions involved incubating in dry air at 150 °C, which resulted in a catalyst that exhibited 100% CO oxidation at room temperature and excellent long-term catalytic stability.

4.4 Comments on structural engineering of 3DGMs for catalysis.
It is well known that network-linked morphology of 3DGMs, as well as its conductive nature, has significant influence on the catalytic performance of 3DGMs. Especially in photocatalysis and electrocataysis, the fact that the enhanced performance is caused by structural engineering of 3DGMs is repeatedly confirmed. However, some features, such as high mass transfer resistance, may be detrimental to the traditional catalysis reactions. Based on these considerations, some comments on structural engineering of 3DGMs for catalysis are extremely desired.
The structural advantage of 3DGMs in catalysis, especially in photocatalysis and electrocatalysis, is multiple. (1) The 3D interconnected network and good electrical conductivity of graphene make 3DGMs efficient current collectors, where the electrons can transfer rapidly throughout the entire network. (2) Rich porosity and multidimensional channels inside 3DGMs could improve ion adsorption and effectively reduce the electron diffusion length. (3) 3DGM hosts, especially for pure GAs, still bear some reactive functional groups, which can activate the secondary phases that impart additional functions. (4) The elastic graphene matrix can prevent the aggregation of active materials supported by 3D graphene and the collapse, shrinkage, or decomposition of the backbone in the catalytic process. (5) The good mechanical strength ensures an easy recovery of catalysts after catalytic reactions, especially in the fields of photocatalytic water purification, which offsets the main disadvantage of NPs in photocatalysis.
The drawbacks of 3DGMs in catalysis should also be discussed. (1) In some traditional catalytic reactions, such as hydrolysis of ethyl acetate, the high mass transfer resistance in 3DGMs hinders the catalytic performance as compared to the 2D graphene. (2) Although the defects from the formation process of 3D structure are favorable to some catalytic reactions, they lead to the reduction of the electrical conductivity of 3DGMs as compared to 2DGMs.
5. Conclusions and outlook
In the last decade, various 3D graphene materials and their hybrids have been systematically investigated by many researchers. Through embedding catalytically active components within the 3DGMs or by having nonmetal element doped in, the as-prepared 3DGMs have been applied across a broad range of diverse catalytic fields yielding performances that have been improved synergistically several fold. In this review, we have attempted to cast a panoramic review of 3DGMs, which covers the preparation methods for 3DGMs, their structural characterizations and properties, as well as various applications in the field of catalysis. We have also attempted to provide a systematic understanding of the multiple roles of 3D graphene in boosting catalytic performance, and the key factors which affect their activity. To date, according to the reported work about 3DGMs, 3D graphene-based catalysts can be classified into three types based on the composition of the catalysts: (1) metal-free catalysts, including surface functionalized 3DGMs and heteroatom-doped 3DGMs; (2) 3D graphene-supported noble-metal-free catalysts, including transition metals, their oxides, sulfides, carbides, and metal complexes; (3) 3D graphene supported precious metal catalysts, including Pt, Ru, Pd, either monometallic or in the form of alloys. Based on current reports, 3DGMs demonstrate outstanding catalytic performance in photocatalysis, electrocatalysis and other catalytic reactions which make use of their optimized structures. In particular, the 3DGMs co-doped with nonmetal elements, as well as those in which semiconductors with suitable bandgaps have been incorporated, are promising candidates with respect to ORR and photocatalytic water purification, respectively.
It should be noted that, despite the continuous progress that has led to the design and synthesis of 3DGMs as advanced catalysts as well as deeply understanding their catalytic mechanisms, there are still some concerns that need to be addressed. First, as for 3DGMs themselves, the porosity can only be roughly controlled. In general, especially for GAs, pore size distributions range from several nanometers to hundreds of micrometers, and precise adjustments of the pore channels have only barely been achieved. Having a uniform pore structure can not only improve the catalytic activity of 3DGMs, but also further extend their application, because strictly controlled porous structures can lead to fascinating properties. Second, the thickness of the stacked graphene layers within the 3DGMs is difficult to control, especially for the GAs which are built from the self-assembly of GO sheets. It seems that the CVD method is a powerful tool to obtain highly crystallized graphene and tailorable graphene layers. However, NF, as the most popular 3D template in the CVD process, fails to yield uniform porous structures and size distributions. Thus, with respect to future studies, some advanced templates and related processes should be investigated in order to overcome the above two challenges. Third, with regard to catalytic applications, the synergistic effect between the active components and the 3D graphene scaffold is usually invoked to explain enhanced catalytic activity. Nevertheless, the in-depth fundamental mechanism underlying the synergies in most cases has not been revealed in detail. Therefore, these intimate points of contact should be studied systematically. Fourth, with regard to the potential of 3DGMs being implemented into practical applications, both the fabrication of highly active, low-cost and stable 3D graphene-based catalysts and the design of highly compressible and easily recycled 3D catalyst should be taken into consideration together. All the basic and technical problems should be tackled in an integrated fashion by adopting a more system-level perspective. Only by using such a strategy can all challenges be overcome at once.
Looking forward to the future, a wide scope of challenges will continue to create a field full of opportunities for those researchers interested in this hot topic. We sincerely hope that this review can give some inspiration in the next decade of research to come on 3D graphene-based catalysts. Reasoning from a historical viewpoint that recognizes the revolutionary path often taken by proven technologies, starting from fundamental understanding all the way to practical applications, the design of next generation novel catalysts based on 3DGMs will take an awfully long time and require constant effort and interest from the scientific community. But, one thing is certain that, with the assistance of multidisciplinary knowledge from physics, chemistry, biology, mathematics and materials science, we believe that 3DGMs will continue to open up widespread applications in traditional catalysis in near future.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (5171101651, 21677048, 21773062, and 21577036), State Key Research Development Program of China (2016YFA0204200), the “Chenguang Program” from Shanghai Education Development Foundation (14CG30), the Science and Technology Commission of Shanghai Municipality (16JC1401400, 17520711500), Shanghai Pujiang Program (17PJD011), and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (22A201514021).
Notes and references
S. N. Habisreutinger, L. Schmidt-Mende and J. K. Stolarczyk, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 7372–7408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-Q. Yang, N. Zhang, M. Pagliaro and Y.-J. Xu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 8240–8254 RSC .
K. Maeda, K. Teramura, D. Lu, T. Takata, N. Saito, Y. Inoue and K. Domen, Nature, 2006, 440, 295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, K. Maeda, A. Thomas, K. Takanabe, G. Xin, J. M. Carlsson, K. Domen and M. Antonietti, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 76–80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253–278 RSC .
J. Schneider, M. Matsuoka, M. Takeuchi, J. Zhang, Y. Horiuchi, M. Anpo and D. W. Bahnemann, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 9919–9986 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Qiu, Q. Zhu, M. Du, L. Fan, M. Xing and J. Zhang, Angew. Chem., 2017, 129, 2728–2732 CrossRef .
T. Zhou, Y. Du, S. Yin, X. Tian, H. Yang, X. Wang, B. Liu, H. Zheng, S. Qiao and R. Xu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2563–2570 CAS .
M.-R. Gao, J.-X. Liang, Y.-R. Zheng, Y.-F. Xu, J. Jiang, Q. Gao, J. Li and S.-H. Yu, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 5982 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, F. Zhao, X. Wang, C. Xu, Z. Zhang, G. Shi and L. Qu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 13934–13939 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Yang, C. Z. Zhu, X. Y. Tang and M. Shi, Angew. Chem., 2014, 126, 5242–5246 CrossRef .
Z. Lu and S. Ma, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 258–297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, J. Zhu, Y. T. Xia, X. T. Sun and L. Wu, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2016, 358, 3039–3045 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, C. Cheng, S. Tapas, J. Lei, M. Matsuoka, J. Zhang and F. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 13357–13364 CAS .
Y. Cao, L. Xiao, M. L. Sushko, W. Wang, B. Schwenzer, J. Xiao, Z. Nie, L. V. Saraf, Z. Yang and J. Liu, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3783–3787 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Qiu, M. Xing, Q. Yi and J. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 10643–10647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, Z.-R. Tang, X. Fu and Y.-J. Xu, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 7303–7314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. C. Neto, F. Guinea, N. M. Peres, K. S. Novoselov and A. K. Geim, Rev. Mod.
Phys., 2009, 81, 109 CrossRef .
B. Qiu, Y. Zhou, Y. Ma, X. Yang, W. Sheng, M. Xing and J. Zhang, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 8591–8596 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, Y. Zheng, X. Xu, E. Dubuisson, Q. Bao, J. Lu and K. P. Loh, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 9927–9933 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183–191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Stankovich, D. A. Dikin, R. D. Piner, K. A. Kohlhaas, A. Kleinhammes, Y. Jia, Y. Wu, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Carbon, 2007, 45, 1558–1565 CrossRef CAS .
B. Qiu, Q. Li, B. Shen, M. Xing and J. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 183, 216–223 CrossRef CAS .
M. Xing, F. Shen, B. Qiu and J. Zhang, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 5493–5499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Dong, C. Jiang, H. Cheng, Y. Zhao, G. Shi, L. Jiang and L. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1856–1861 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Kim, Y. Zhao, H. Jang, S. Y. Lee, J. M. Kim, K. S. Kim, J.-H. Ahn, P. Kim, J.-Y. Choi and B. H. Hong, Nature, 2009, 457, 706–710 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chen, M. B. Müller, K. J. Gilmore, G. G. Wallace and D. Li, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3557–3561 CrossRef CAS .
F. Liu and T. S. Seo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1930–1936 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xie, G. Yu, N. Liu, Z. Bao, C. S. Criddle and Y. Cui, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6862–6866 CAS .
B. Qiu, Y. Deng, M. Du, M. Xing and J. Zhang, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 29099 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Sha, Y. Li, R. Villegas Salvatierra, T. Wang, P. Dong, Y. Ji, S.-K. Lee, C. Zhang, J. Zhang, R. H. Smith, P. M. Ajayan, J. Lou, N. Zhao and J. M. Tour, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 6860–6867 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, J. Duan, J. Ran, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3693–3699 CAS .
Y. Shen, Q. Fang and B. Chen, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2014, 49, 67–84 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Liu, S. Chung, G. Oh and T. S. Seo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 922–927 CAS .
C. Li and G. Shi, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 5549–5563 RSC .
Y. Su, Y. Zhang, X. Zhuang, S. Li, D. Wu, F. Zhang and X. Feng, Carbon, 2013, 62, 296–301 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xue, D. Yu, L. Dai, R. Wang, D. Li, A. Roy, F. Lu, H. Chen, Y. Liu and J. Qu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 12220–12226 RSC .
C. Hu, H. Cheng, Y. Zhao, Y. Hu, Y. Liu, L. Dai and L. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5493–5498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, F. Xiao, Y. Guo, S. Wang and Y. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 2227–2233 CAS .
W. Zhou, K. Zhou, D. Hou, X. Liu, G. Li, Y. Sang, H. Liu, L. Li and S. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 21534–21540 CAS .
T. Liu, M. Li, C. Jiao, M. Hassan, X. Bo, M. Zhou and H.-L. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 9377–9390 CAS .
A. Han, S. Jin, H. Chen, H. Ji, Z. Sun and P. Du, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 1941–1946 CAS .
B. Qiu, M. Xing and J. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 5852–5855 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Zhang, M.-Q. Yang, S. Liu, Y. Sun and Y.-J. Xu, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 10307–10377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Xiang and J. Yu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 753–759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liu, R. Zhang and W. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 5117–5160 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Xiang, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 782–796 RSC .
X. Cao, Z. Yin and H. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1850–1865 CAS .
X. Yao and Y. Zhao, Chem, 2017, 2, 171–200 CAS .
B. Luo and L. Zhi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 456–477 CAS .
M. Wang, X. Duan, Y. Xu and X. Duan, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 7231–7247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-S. Wu, Y. Sun, Y.-Z. Tan, S. Yang, X. Feng and K. Müllen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 19532–19535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Nardecchia, D. Carriazo, M. L. Ferrer, M. C. Gutiérrez and F. del Monte, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 794–830 RSC .
W. Zhou, X. Cao, Z. Zeng, W. Shi, Y. Zhu, Q. Yan, H. Liu, J. Wang and H. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2216–2221 CAS .
X. Cao, Y. Shi, W. Shi, X. Rui, Q. Yan, J. Kong and H. Zhang, Small, 2013, 9, 3433–3438 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G.-h. Moon, Y. Shin, D. Choi, B. W. Arey, G. J. Exarhos, C. Wang, W. Choi and J. Liu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 6291–6296 RSC .
H. Wang, D. Zhang, T. Yan, X. Wen, J. Zhang, L. Shi and Q. Zhong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 11778–11789 CAS .
J.-S. Lee, S.-I. Kim, J.-C. Yoon and J.-H. Jang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 6047–6055 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. l. Huang, D. Xu, S. Yuan, D. l. Ma, S. Wang, H. y. Zheng and X. b. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 7264–7270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zhang, R. Wang, M. He, J. Lang, S. Xu and X. Yan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 1354–1364 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ouyang, J. Sun, J. Memon, C. Wang, J. Geng and Y. Huang, Carbon, 2013, 62, 501–509 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Wu, C. Li, H. W. Liang, J. F. Chen and S. H. Yu, Angew. Chem., 2013, 125, 2997–3001 CrossRef .
H. Bi, Z. Yin, X. Cao, X. Xie, C. Tan, X. Huang, B. Chen, F. Chen, Q. Yang and X. Bu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5916–5921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Xiang, V. Miseikis, L. Planat, S. Guiducci, S. Roddaro, C. Coletti, F. Beltram and S. Heun, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 1823–1830 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhou, T. Lin, F. Huang, Y. Zhong, Z. Wang, Y. Tang, H. Bi, D. Wan and J. Lin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 2263–2269 CrossRef CAS .
G. Ning, Z. Fan, G. Wang, J. Gao, W. Qian and F. Wei, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 5976–5978 RSC .
X. Xiao, T. E. Beechem, M. T. Brumbach, T. N. Lambert, D. J. Davis, J. R. Michael, C. M. Washburn, J. Wang, S. M. Brozik and D. R. Wheeler, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3573–3579 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, S. Gao, L. Wu, S. Qiu, Y. Guo, X. Geng, M. Chen, S. Liao, C. Zhu and Y. Gong, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2125 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Mao, Z. Wen, H. Kim, G. Lu, P. Hurley and J. Chen, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 7505–7513 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, W. Ren, L. Gao, B. Liu, S. Pei and H.-M. Cheng, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 424–428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-J. Shim, J. Power Sources, 2015, 273, 110–117 CrossRef .
X. Cao, Y. Shi, W. Shi, G. Lu, X. Huang, Q. Yan, Q. Zhang and H. Zhang, Small, 2011, 7, 3163–3168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Yavari, Z. Chen, A. V. Thomas, W. Ren, H.-M. Cheng and N. Koratkar, Sci. Rep., 2011, 1, 166 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Chen, W. Ren, B. Liu, L. Gao, S. Pei, Z.-S. Wu, J. Zhao and H.-M. Cheng, Carbon, 2010, 48, 3543–3550 CrossRef CAS .
C. Shan, H. Tang, T. Wong, L. He and S.-T. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2491–2495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, S. Gao, L. Wu, S. Qiu, Y. Guo, X. Geng, M. Chen, S. Liao, C. Zhu, Y. Gong, M. Long, J. Xu, X. Wei, M. Sun and L. Liu, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2125 CrossRef PubMed .
J.-C. Yoon, J.-S. Lee, S.-I. Kim, K.-H. Kim and J.-H. Jang, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1788 CrossRef .
Y. Xue, B. Wu, Y. Guo, L. Huang, L. Jiang, J. Chen, D. Geng, Y. Liu, W. Hu and G. Yu, Nano Res., 2011, 4, 1208–1214 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kondo, S. Sato, K. Yagi, N. Harada, M. Sato, M. Nihei and N. Yokoyama, Appl. Phys. Express, 2010, 3, 025102 CrossRef .
B. G. Choi, M. Yang, W. H. Hong, J. W. Choi and Y. S. Huh, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 4020–4028 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Sohn, Y. J. Na, H. Chang, K.-M. Roh, H. D. Jang and J. Huang, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 5968–5970 RSC .
X. Huang, K. Qian, J. Yang, J. Zhang, L. Li, C. Yu and D. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4419–4423 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wang, B. Wang, J. Park, J. Yang, X. Shen and J. Yao, Carbon, 2009, 47, 68–72 CrossRef CAS .
R. Romero Aburto, L. B. Alemany, T. K. Weldeghiorghis, S. Ozden, Z. Peng, A. L. Lherbier, A. S. R. Botello Méndez, C. S. Tiwary, J. Taha-Tijerina and Z. Yan, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 7009–7018 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ji, J. Liu, L. Lai, X. Zhao, Y. Zhen, J. Lin, Y. Zhu, H. Ji, L. L. Zhang and R. S. Ruoff, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 8609–8616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ji, H. Ji, L. L. Zhang, X. Zhao, X. Bai, X. Fan, F. Zhang and R. S. Ruoff, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4673–4677 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yan, Y. Ding, C. Hu, H. Cheng, N. Chen, Z. Feng, Z. Zhang and L. Qu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 16786–16792 CAS .
J. L. Vickery, A. J. Patil and S. Mann, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2180–2184 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, W. Shi, P. Li, S. Ye, C. Ye, H. Ye, T. Lu, A. Zheng, J. Zhu, L. Xu, M. Zhong and X. Cao, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 6058–6065 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Farahani, M. Dubé and D. Therriault, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 5794–5821 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. G. Compton and J. A. Lewis, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5930–5935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Utela, D. Storti, R. Anderson and M. Ganter, J. Manuf. Process., 2008, 10, 96–104 CrossRef .
S. Barg, F. M. Perez, N. Ni, P. do Vale Pereira, R. C. Maher, E. Garcia-Tuñon, S. Eslava, S. Agnoli, C. Mattevi and E. Saiz, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5 Search PubMed .
E. García-Tuñon, S. Barg, J. Franco, R. Bell, S. Eslava, E. D'Elia, R. C. Maher, F. Guitian and E. Saiz, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1688–1693 CrossRef PubMed .
W. S. Hummers Jr and R. E. Offeman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1958, 80, 1339 CrossRef .
M. Zhou, A. M. Smith, A. K. Das, N. W. Hodson, R. F. Collins, R. V. Ulijn and J. E. Gough, Biomaterials, 2009, 30, 2523–2530 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, K. Sheng, C. Li and G. Shi, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4324–4330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Chen, R. Du, J. Zhu, Y. Mao, C. Xue, N. Zhang, Y. Hou, J. Zhang and T. Yi, Small, 2015, 11, 1423–1429 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-Y. Yu, L.-F. Chen, L.-T. Song, Y.-W. Zhu, H.-X. Ji and S.-H. Yu, Nano Energy, 2015, 15, 235–243 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, C. Hu, Y. Hu, H. Cheng, G. Shi and L. Qu, Angew. Chem., 2012, 124, 11533–11537 CrossRef .
A. Kudo, H. Kato and I. Tsuji, Chem. Lett., 2004, 33, 1534–1539 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wang, L.-X. Wang, D.-L. Wu, W. Xia and D.-Z. Jia, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 9591 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. S. Wu, A. Winter, L. Chen, Y. Sun, A. Turchanin, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5130–5135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Tang, S. Shen, J. Zhuang and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., 2010, 122, 4707–4711 CrossRef .
W. Liu, J. Cai and Z. Li, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2015, 3, 277–282 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xiao, D. Wu, S. Han, Y. Huang, S. Li, M. He, F. Zhang and X. Feng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 3764–3769 CAS .
Y. Huang, D. Wu, S. Han, S. Li, L. Xiao, F. Zhang and X. Feng, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 1510–1515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-S. Wu, S. Yang, Y. Sun, K. Parvez, X. Feng and K. Müllen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 9082–9085 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yang, X. Feng, S. Ivanovici and K. Müllen, Angew. Chem., 2010, 122, 8586–8589 CrossRef .
Y. Fan, W. Ma, D. Han, S. Gan, X. Dong and L. Niu, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3767–3773 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Qiu, Y. Deng, Q. Li, B. Shen, M. Xing and J. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 12125–12131 CAS .
B. Qiu, M. Xing and J. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 12820–12827 CAS .
Q. Wu, Y. Sun, H. Bai and G. Shi, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 11193–11198 RSC .
H. Huang, S. Yang, R. Vajtai, X. Wang and P. M. Ajayan, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5160–5165 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Wang, C. Xu, M. Du, J. Sun, L. Gao, P. Zhang, H. Yao and C. Lin, Small, 2014, 10, 2260–2269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Srinivas, J. W. Burress, J. Ford and T. Yildirim, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 11323–11329 RSC .
S. Park, J. An, J. R. Potts, A. Velamakanni, S. Murali and R. S. Ruoff, Carbon, 2011, 49, 3019–3023 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Fan, K. Wang, T. Wei, J. Yan, L. Song and B. Shao, Carbon, 2010, 48, 1686–1689 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-J. Fan, W. Kai, J. Yan, T. Wei, L.-J. Zhi, J. Feng, Y.-M. Ren, L.-P. Song and F. Wei, ACS Nano, 2010, 5, 191–198 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Liu, Y. Huang and L. Wang, Mater. Lett., 2013, 91, 125–128 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Shin, K. K. Kim, A. Benayad, S. M. Yoon, H. K. Park, I. S. Jung, M. H. Jin, H. K. Jeong, J. M. Kim and J. Y. Choi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1987–1992 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ambrosi, C. K. Chua, A. Bonanni and M. Pumera, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 2292–2298 CrossRef CAS .
C. K. Chua and M. Pumera, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 1892–1898 CAS .
G. Wang, J. Yang, J. Park, X. Gou, B. Wang, H. Liu and J. Yao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 8192–8195 CAS .
C. Zhu, S. Guo, Y. Fang and S. Dong, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2429–2437 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Jiang, F. Bu, X. Feng, I. Shakir, G. Hao and Y. Xu, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 5140–5147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Sun, Z. Xu and C. Gao, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2554–2560 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Huang, P. Chen, X. Zhang, Y. Lu and W. Zhan, Small, 2013, 9, 1397–1404 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Liu, S. Liang, X.-Z. Tang, D. Yan, X. Li and Z.-Z. Yu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 14160–14167 RSC .
S. Li, D. Wu, C. Cheng, J. Wang, F. Zhang, Y. Su and X. Feng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 12105–12109 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Huang, H. Bai, C. Li and G. Shi, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 4962–4964 RSC .
H. Bai, C. Li, X. Wang and G. Shi, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 2376–2378 RSC .
Z.-Y. Sui, Y. Cui, J.-H. Zhu and B.-H. Han, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 9172–9179 CAS .
S. Park, K.-S. Lee, G. Bozoklu, W. Cai, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 572–578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Huang, S. Lü, X. Zhang and Z. Shao, Soft Matter, 2012, 8, 4609–4615 RSC .
H. P. Cong, P. Wang and S. H. Yu, Small, 2014, 10, 448–453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Raymundo-Pinero, P. Azais, T. Cacciaguerra, D. Cazorla-Amorós, A. Linares-Solano and F. Béguin, Carbon, 2005, 43, 786–795 CrossRef CAS .
V. Barranco, M. Lillo-Rodenas, A. Linares-Solano, A. Oya, F. Pico, J. Ibanez, F. Agullo-Rueda, J. Amarilla and J. Rojo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 10302–10307 CAS .
Y. Zhu, S. Murali, M. D. Stoller, K. Ganesh, W. Cai, P. J. Ferreira, A. Pirkle, R. M. Wallace, K. A. Cychosz and M. Thommes, Science, 2011, 332, 1537–1541 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. L. Zhang, X. Zhao, M. D. Stoller, Y. Zhu, H. Ji, S. Murali, Y. Wu, S. Perales, B. Clevenger and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1806–1812 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Niu, J. Chen, H. H. Hng, J. Ma and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4144–4150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Cai, Z. Lin, M. Wang, F. Pan, J. Chen, Y. Wang, X. Shen and Y. Chai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 24091–24097 CAS .
M. A. Worsley, P. J. Pauzauskie, T. Y. Olson, J. Biener, J. H. Satcher Jr and T. F. Baumann, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 14067–14069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Al-Muhtaseb and J. A. Ritter, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 101–114 CrossRef CAS .
C. Moreno-Castilla and F. Maldonado-Hódar, Carbon, 2005, 43, 455–465 CrossRef CAS .
J.-S. Cheng, J. Du and W. Zhu, Carbohydr. Polym., 2012, 88, 61–67 CrossRef CAS .
J. Biener, M. Stadermann, M. Suss, M. A. Worsley, M. M. Biener, K. A. Rose and T. F. Baumann, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 656–667 CAS .
Z. Marković, B. Babić, M. Dramićanin, I. H. Antunović, V. Pavlović, D. Peruško and B. T. Marković, Synth. Met., 2012, 162, 743–747 CrossRef .
F. Meng, X. Zhang, B. Xu, S. Yue, H. Guo and Y. Luo, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 18537–18539 RSC .
J. Zhang, Z. Zhao, Z. Xia and L. Dai, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 444–452 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. F. To, Z. Chen, H. Yao, J. He, K. Kim, H.-H. Chou, L. Pan, J. Wilcox, Y. Cui and Z. Bao, ACS Cent. Sci., 2015, 1, 68–76 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tian, Y. Shu, X.-F. Wang, M. A. Mohammad, Z. Bie, Q.-Y. Xie, C. Li, W.-T. Mi, Y. Yang and T.-L. Ren, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 8603 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tian, C. Li, M. A. Mohammad, Y.-L. Cui, W.-T. Mi, Y. Yang, D. Xie and T.-L. Ren, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 5883–5890 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. F. El-Kady, V. Strong, S. Dubin and R. B. Kaner, Science, 2012, 335, 1326–1330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. F. El-Kady and R. B. Kaner, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1475 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Wang, C. Zhi, L. Li, H. Zeng, C. Li, M. Mitome, D. Golberg and Y. Bando, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4072–4076 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-F. Jiang, X.-B. Wang, P. Dai, X. Li, Q. Weng, X. Wang, D.-M. Tang, J. Tang, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, Nano Energy, 2015, 16, 81–90 CrossRef CAS .
W. Iqbal, B. Qiu, J. Lei, L. Wang, J. Zhang and M. Anpo, Dalton Trans., 2017, 46, 10678–10684 RSC .
X. Wang, Y. Zhang, C. Zhi, X. Wang, D. Tang, Y. Xu, Q. Weng, X. Jiang, M. Mitome, D. Golberg and Y. Bando, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2905 Search PubMed .
Z. Tan, K. Ni, G. Chen, W. Zeng, Z. Tao, M. Ikram, Q. Zhang, H. Wang, L. Sun, X. Zhu, X. Wu, H. Ji, R. S. Ruoff and Y. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603414 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Chen, C. Xue, R. Ramasubramaniam and H. Liu, Carbon, 2006, 44, 2142–2146 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-Y. Wu, H.-W. Liang, L.-F. Chen, B.-C. Hu and S.-H. Yu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 49, 96–105 CrossRef PubMed .
M. A. Worsley, S. J. Shin, M. D. Merrill, J. Lenhardt, A. J. Nelson, L. Y. Woo, A. E. Gash, T. F. Baumann and C. A. Orme, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 4698–4705 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liang, Z. Li, X. Yu, Z. H. Huang, F. Kang and Q. H. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4634–4639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Georgakilas, J. A. Perman, J. Tucek and R. Zboril, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 4744–4822 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, Q. Wu, Y. Xu, H. Bai, C. Li and G. Shi, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 7154–7160 RSC .
N. I. Kovtyukhova, T. E. Mallouk, L. Pan and E. C. Dickey, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 9761–9769 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Fukushima, A. Kosaka, Y. Ishimura, T. Yamamoto, T. Takigawa, N. Ishii and T. Aida, Science, 2003, 300, 2072–2074 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. B. Bryning, D. E. Milkie, M. F. Islam, L. A. Hough, J. M. Kikkawa and A. G. Yodh, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 661–664 CrossRef CAS .
X. Gui, J. Wei, K. Wang, A. Cao, H. Zhu, Y. Jia, Q. Shu and D. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 617–621 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Hata, D. N. Futaba, K. Mizuno, T. Namai, M. Yumura and S. Iijima, Science, 2004, 306, 1362–1364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. L. Zhang, Z. Xiong and X. Zhao, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 7030–7036 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, L. Li, C. Zhang, G. Casillas, Z. Sun, Z. Yan, G. Ruan, Z. Peng, A.-R. O. Raji and C. Kittrell, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 1225 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Yan, L. Ma, Y. Zhu, I. Lahiri, M. G. Hahm, Z. Liu, S. Yang, C. Xiang, W. Lu and Z. Peng, ACS Nano, 2012, 7, 58–64 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Lin, C. Zhang, Z. Yan, Y. Zhu, Z. Peng, R. H. Hauge, D. Natelson and J. M. Tour, Nano Lett., 2012, 13, 72–78 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Liu, L. Zhang, H. B. Wu, J. Lin, Z. Shen and X. W. D. Lou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3709–3719 CAS .
S. Jin, S. Xin, L. Wang, Z. Du, L. Cao, J. Chen, X. Kong, M. Gong, J. Lu and Y. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9094–9102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Peng, Y. Li, X. He, X. Gui, Y. Shang, C. Wang, C. Wang, W. Zhao, S. Du and E. Shi, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3241–3247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Chen, Y. Hernandez, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 7640–7654 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L.-F. Chen, X.-D. Zhang, H.-W. Liang, M. Kong, Q.-F. Guan, P. Chen, Z.-Y. Wu and S.-H. Yu, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 7092–7102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Jian, H. S. Shim, A. Schwartzman, G. P. Crawford and R. H. Hurt, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 164–167 CrossRef CAS .
L. F. Chen, Z. H. Huang, H. W. Liang, H. L. Gao and S. H. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 5104–5111 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, Z.-Y. Wu, H.-L. Jiang and S.-H. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 14385–14388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. He, Y. Yang, J.-W. Liu and S.-H. Yu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 2732–2753 RSC .
L.-T. Song, Z.-Y. Wu, H.-W. Liang, F. Zhou, Z.-Y. Yu, L. Xu, Z. Pan and S.-H. Yu, Nano Energy, 2016, 19, 117–127 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. Liang, Q. F. Guan, L. F. Chen, Z. Zhu, W. J. Zhang and S. H. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 5101–5105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ou, P. Yang, L. Lin, M. Anpo and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 10905–10910 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Luo, J. Liu, Z. Zeng, C. F. Ng, L. Ma, H. Zhang, J. Lin, Z. Shen and H. J. Fan, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 6136–6143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-C. Kung, P.-Y. Lin, F. J. Buse, Y. Xue, X. Yu, L. Dai and C.-C. Liu, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2014, 52, 1–7 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. A. Mkhoyan, A. W. Contryman, J. Silcox, D. A. Stewart, G. Eda, C. Mattevi, S. Miller and M. Chhowalla, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1058–1063 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. J. Cote, R. Cruz-Silva and J. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 11027–11032 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-S. Wu, Y. Sun, Y.-Z. Tan, S. Yang, X. Feng and K. Müllen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 19532–19535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Günther, S. Dänhardt, M. Ehrensperger, P. Zeller, S. Schmitt and J. Wintterlin, ACS Nano, 2012, 7, 154–164 CrossRef PubMed .
A. K. Engstfeld, H. E. Hoster, R. J. Behm, L. D. Roelofs, X. Liu, C.-Z. Wang, Y. Han and J. W. Evans, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 86, 085442 CrossRef .
L. Tapasztó, G. Dobrik, P. Lambin and L. P. Biró, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 397–401 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Y. Wang, Z. H. Ni, T. Yu, Z. X. Shen, H. M. Wang, Y. H. Wu, W. Chen and A. T. Shen Wee, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 10637–10640 CAS .
M. Pimenta, G. Dresselhaus, M. S. Dresselhaus, L. Cancado, A. Jorio and R. Saito, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2007, 9, 1276–1290 RSC .
A. C. Ferrari, J. Meyer, V. Scardaci, C. Casiraghi, M. Lazzeri, F. Mauri, S. Piscanec, D. Jiang, K. Novoselov and S. Roth, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 97, 187401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, W. Cai, J. An, S. Kim, J. Nah, D. Yang, R. Piner, A. Velamakanni, I. Jung and E. Tutuc, Science, 2009, 324, 1312–1314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Li, Q. Zhang, S. Gao, Q. Song, R. Huang, L. Wang, L. Liu, J. Dai, M. Tang and G. Cheng, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1604 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Chen, J. Duan, W. Han and S. Z. Qiao, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 207–209 RSC .
Y. Zhou, Q. Yi, M. Xing, L. Shang, T. Zhang and J. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 1689–1692 RSC .
W. Li, F. Wang, Y. Liu, J. Wang, J. Yang, L. Zhang, A. A. Elzatahry, D. Al-Dahyan, Y. Xia and D. Zhao, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 2186–2193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, F. Wang, S. Feng, J. Wang, Z. Sun, B. Li, Y. Li, J. Yang, A. A. Elzatahry and Y. Xia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 18300–18303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Feng, J. Zhong, B. Zhao, H. Zhang, L. Xu, X. Sun and S. T. Lee, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 11950–11954 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhao, R. He, K. T. Rim, T. Schiros, K. S. Kim, H. Zhou, C. Gutiérrez, S. Chockalingam, C. J. Arguello and L. Pálová, Science, 2011, 333, 999–1003 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Qiao, A. Wang, X. Yang, L. F. Allard, Z. Jiang, Y. Cui, J. Liu, J. Li and T. Zhang, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 634–641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Worsley, T. Y. Olson, J. R. Lee, T. M. Willey, M. H. Nielsen, S. K. Roberts, P. J. Pauzauskie, J. Biener, J. H. Satcher Jr and T. F. Baumann, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 921–925 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ning, X. Xu, C. Liu and D. Fan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 15768–15773 CAS .
X. Xia, D. Chao, Z. Fan, C. Guan, X. Cao, H. Zhang and H. J. Fan, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1651–1658 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tang, F. Huang, H. Bi, Z. Liu and D. Wan, J. Power Sources, 2012, 203, 130–134 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mecklenburg, A. Schuchardt, Y. K. Mishra, S. Kaps, R. Adelung, A. Lotnyk, L. Kienle and K. Schulte, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 3486–3490 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Lin, I.-W. Chen, F. Liu, C. Yang, H. Bi, F. Xu and F. Huang, Science, 2015, 350, 1508–1513 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. He, W. Chen, X. Li, Z. Zhang, J. Fu, C. Zhao and E. Xie, ACS Nano, 2012, 7, 174–182 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Cao, B. Zheng, X. Rui, W. Shi, Q. Yan and H. Zhang, Angew. Chem., 2014, 126, 1428–1433 CrossRef .
J. Qin, C. He, N. Zhao, Z. Wang, C. Shi, E.-Z. Liu and J. Li, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1728–1738 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Fan, Y. Liu, J. He, Y. Zhou and Y. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 1396–1402 RSC .
C. Zhao, C. Yu, S. Liu, J. Yang, X. Fan, H. Huang and J. Qiu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 6913–6920 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jiang, B. Lin, X. Li, X. Song, H. Xia, L. Li and H. Zeng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 2680–2687 CAS .
J. Yao, B. Liu, S. Ozden, J. Wu, S. Yang, M.-T. F. Rodrigues, K. Kalaga, P. Dong, P. Xiao and Y. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 176, 103–111 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yu, L. Yang, Y. Tian, P. Yang, F. Jiang, S. Hu, X. Wei and J. Zhong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 12750–12758 CAS .
L. Zhang and G. Shi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 17206–17212 CAS .
Y. Li, J. Chen, L. Huang, C. Li, J. D. Hong and G. Shi, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4789–4793 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wei, S. Chen, D. Su, B. Sun, J. Zhu and G. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 8103–8109 CAS .
L. Chen, X. Wang, X. Zhang and H. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 22090–22096 RSC .
H. D. Pham, V. H. Pham, T. V. Cuong, T.-D. Nguyen-Phan, J. S. Chung, E. W. Shin and S. Kim, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 9672–9674 RSC .
L. Xu, G. Xiao, C. Chen, R. Li, Y. Mai, G. Sun and D. Yan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 7498–7504 CAS .
H. Hu, Z. Zhao, W. Wan, Y. Gogotsi and J. Qiu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2219–2223 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Sui, Q. Meng, X. Zhang, R. Ma and B. Cao, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 8767–8771 RSC .
W. Chen, S. Li, C. Chen and L. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5679–5683 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, G. Chen, M. N. Hedhili, H. Zhang and P. Wang, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 7038–7045 RSC .
Y. Li, Z. Li and P. K. Shen, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2474–2480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, Z. Lin, X. Huang, Y. Liu, Y. Huang and X. Duan, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 4042–4049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, L. L. Lu, Z. L. Yu, X. W. Xu, Y. R. Zheng and S. H. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 2397–2401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. R. Kohlmeyer, M. Lor, J. Deng, H. Liu and J. Chen, Carbon, 2011, 49, 2352–2361 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Y. Zhang, C. Zhi, X. Wang, D. Tang, Y. Xu, Q. Weng, X. Jiang, M. Mitome and D. Golberg, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4 Search PubMed .
H. Sun, L. Cao and L. Lu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6206–6213 CAS .
Y. Lai, W. Chen, Z. Zhang, Y. Qu, Y. Gan and J. Li, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 191, 733–742 CrossRef CAS .
B. G. Choi, S.-J. Chang, Y. B. Lee, J. S. Bae, H. J. Kim and Y. S. Huh, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 5924–5930 RSC .
H.-W. Liang, Q.-F. Guan, L.-F. Chen, Z. Zhu, W.-J. Zhang and S.-H. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 5101–5105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, J. Zhu, H. Ang, Y. Zeng, N. Xiao, Y. Gao, W. Liu, H. H. Hng and Q. Yan, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 9651–9658 RSC .
Y. Song, B. Li, S. Yang, G. Ding, C. Zhang and X. Xie, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 10337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ma, L. Sun, W. Huang, L. Zhang, J. Zhao, Q. Fan and W. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 24592–24597 CAS .
K. Shehzad, Y. Xu, C. Gao and X. Duan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 5541–5588 RSC .
Y. Gong, H. Fei, X. Zou, W. Zhou, S. Yang, G. Ye, Z. Liu, Z. Peng, J. Lou and R. Vajtai, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 1181–1186 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, Z. Yao, G. Li, G. Fang, H. Nie, Z. Liu, X. Zhou, X. A. Chen and S. Huang, ACS Nano, 2011, 6, 205–211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Choi, M. W. Chung, H. C. Kwon, S. H. Park and S. I. Woo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 3694–3699 CAS .
K. Gong, F. Du, Z. Xia, M. Durstock and L. Dai, Science, 2009, 323, 760–764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liang, Y. Jiao, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 11496–11500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, L. Ge, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., 2013, 125, 3192–3198 CrossRef .
C. Tang, H. F. Wang, X. Chen, B. Q. Li, T. Z. Hou, B. Zhang, Q. Zhang, M. M. Titirici and F. Wei, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6845–6851 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Tao, Q. Wang, S. Dou, Z. Ma, J. Huo, S. Wang and L. Dai, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 2764–2767 RSC .
H. Wang, X.-B. Li, L. Gao, H.-L. Wu, J. Yang, L. Cai, T.-B. Ma, C.-H. Tung, L.-Z. Wu and G. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 192–197 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Cui, Q. Liu, N. Cheng, A. M. Asiri and X. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 9340–9342 RSC .
M. Groves, A. Chan, C. Malardier-Jugroot and M. Jugroot, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2009, 481, 214–219 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, C. Meng and Y. Han, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 1350–1357 CAS .
M. Wang, L. Cai, Y. Wang, F. Zhou, K. Xu, X. Tao and Y. Chai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 4144–4151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. N. Chong, B. Jin, C. W. Chow and C. Saint, Water Res., 2010, 44, 2997–3027 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mills, R. H. Davies and D. Worsley, Chem. Soc. Rev., 1993, 22, 417–425 RSC .
M. Nawaz, W. Miran, J. Jang and D. S. Lee, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 203, 85–95 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, J. Duan, Y. Tang, B. Jin and S. Z. Qiao, Nano Energy, 2015, 11, 11–18 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, X. Xie, J. Zhang, H. Liu, H. J. Ahn, K. Sun and G. Wang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 15908–15913 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, J. Duan, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 13567–13570 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhou, Z. Bai, M. Wu, J. Qiao and Z. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 3343–3350 CAS .
H.-q. Song, Q. Zhu, X.-j. Zheng and X.-g. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 10368–10377 CAS .
M. Zhang, W. Luo, Z. Wei, W. Jiang, D. Liu and Y. Zhu, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 194, 105–110 CrossRef CAS .
W. Jiang, W. Luo, R. Zong, W. Yao, Z. Li and Y. Zhu, Small, 2016, 12, 4370–4378 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Chen, W. An, L. Liu, Y. Liang and W. Cui, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 217, 65–80 CrossRef CAS .
C. Cui, S. Li, Y. Qiu, H. Hu, X. Li, C. Li, J. Gao and W. Tang, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 200, 666–672 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zeng, Z. Wang, N. Meng, D. T. McCarthy, A. Deletic, J.-H. Pan and X. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 202, 33–41 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Tong, D. Yang, J. Shi, Y. Nan, Y. Sun and Z. Jiang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 25693–25701 CAS .
D. A. Reddy, J. Choi, S. Lee, R. Ma and T. K. Kim, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 18342–18351 RSC .
W. Wan, S. Yu, F. Dong, Q. Zhang and Y. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 7823–7829 CAS .
J. Cai, W. Liu and Z. Li, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 358, 146–151 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, S. Yang, J. Sun, P. He, X. Xu and G. Ding, Carbon, 2014, 78, 38–48 CrossRef CAS .
W. Han, C. Zang, Z. Huang, H. Zhang, L. Ren, X. Qi and J. Zhong, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 19502–19512 CrossRef CAS .
J.-J. Zhang, Y.-H. Wu, J.-Y. Mei, G.-P. Zheng, T.-T. Yan, X.-C. Zheng, P. Liu and X.-X. Guan, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2016, 15, 1012–1019 CAS .
M. Xing, J. Zhang, B. Qiu, B. Tian, M. Anpo and M. Che, Small, 2015, 11, 1920–1929 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Qiu, Q. Zhu, M. Xing and J. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 897–900 RSC .
X. Xu, B. Feng, G. Zhou, Z. Bao and J. Hu, Mater. Des., 2016, 101, 95–101 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hou, Z. Wen, S. Cui, X. Feng and J. Chen, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 2268–2277 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zou and Y. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 5148–5180 RSC .
J. Huang, D. Hou, Y. Zhou, W. Zhou, G. Li, Z. Tang, L. Li and S. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 22886–22891 CAS .
Y. Ito, W. Cong, T. Fujita, Z. Tang and M. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 2131–2136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liao, J. Zhu, X. Bian, L. Zhu, M. D. Scanlon, H. H. Girault and B. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 5326–5333 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Jun, J. Park, S. U. Lee, A. Thomas, W. H. Hong and G. D. Stucky, Angew. Chem., 2013, 125, 11289–11293 CrossRef .
P. Chen, K. Xu, S. Tao, T. Zhou, Y. Tong, H. Ding, L. Zhang, W. Chu, C. Wu and Y. Xie, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 7527–7532 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ooka, M. C. Figueiredo and M. T. Koper, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 9307–9313 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. F. Service, Science, 2009, 324, 1257 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446–6473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, H. x. Zhong, Y. l. Qin and X. b. Zhang, Angew. Chem., 2013, 125, 5356–5361 CrossRef .
X. Lu and C. Zhao, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lu, W. Xu, W. Zhu, Q. Yang, X. Lei, J. Liu, Y. Li, X. Sun and X. Duan, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 6479–6482 RSC .
L. Han, S. Dong and E. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9266–9291 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Fu, X. Yan, Y. Chen, L. Xu, D. Sun, J.-M. Lee and Y. Tang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704609 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Zhao, W. Yuan and C. M. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 1201–1210 CAS .
C. Zhu, Y. Yu, L. Gu, K. Weichert and J. Maier, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 6278–6282 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Guo, Y. Xu and C. Wang, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4288–4294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, X. Yu and P. V. Braun, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 277–281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yu, M. Zhang, W. Yuan and G. Shi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 6921–6928 CAS .
E. Mirzakulova, R. Khatmullin, J. Walpita, T. Corrigan, N. M. Vargas-Barbosa, S. Vyas, S. Oottikkal, S. F. Manzer, C. M. Hadad and K. D. Glusac, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 794–801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, J. Duan, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2925–2930 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Y. Ma, S. Dai, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 7281–7285 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. L. Tian, M. Q. Zhao, D. Yu, X. Y. Kong, J. Q. Huang, Q. Zhang and F. Wei, Small, 2014, 10, 2251–2259 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhu, H. Li, S. Fu, D. Du and Y. Lin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 517–531 RSC .
M. Zhong, E. K. Kim, J. P. McGann, S.-E. Chun, J. F. Whitacre, M. Jaroniec, K. Matyjaszewski and T. Kowalewski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 14846–14857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yang, S. Jiang, Y. Zhao, L. Zhu, S. Chen, X. Wang, Q. Wu, J. Ma, Y. Ma and Z. Hu, Angew. Chem., 2011, 123, 7270–7273 CrossRef .
L. Lai, J. R. Potts, D. Zhan, L. Wang, C. K. Poh, C. Tang, H. Gong, Z. Shen, J. Lin and R. S. Ruoff, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7936–7942 CAS .
M. Li, L. Zhang, Q. Xu, J. Niu and Z. Xia, J. Catal., 2014, 314, 66–72 CrossRef CAS .
D.-W. Wang and D. Su, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 576–591 CAS .
Y. Zhou, C. H. Yen, S. Fu, G. Yang, C. Zhu, D. Du, P. C. Wo, X. Cheng, J. Yang and C. M. Wai, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 3552–3560 RSC .
R. Chen, J. Yan, Y. Liu and J. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 8032–8037 CAS .
X. Tong, S. Chen, C. Guo, X. Xia and X.-Y. Guo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 28274–28282 CAS .
Z. Y. Wu, X. X. Xu, B. C. Hu, H. W. Liang, Y. Lin, L. F. Chen and S. H. Yu, Angew. Chem., 2015, 127, 8297–8301 CrossRef .
Z.-Y. Wu, H.-W. Liang, L.-F. Chen, B.-C. Hu and S.-H. Yu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 96–105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yin, C. Zhang, F. Liu and Y. Hou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 2930–2937 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, W. Zhou, H. Wang, L. Xie, Y. Liang, F. Wei, J.-C. Idrobo, S. J. Pennycook and H. Dai, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 394–400 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. W. Liu, F. Peng, H. J. Wang, H. Yu, W. X. Zheng and J. Yang, Angew. Chem., 2011, 123, 3315–3319 CrossRef .
Y. Zhao, C. Hu, L. Song, L. Wang, G. Shi, L. Dai and L. Qu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1913–1918 CAS .
J.-i. Ozaki, N. Kimura, T. Anahara and A. Oya, Carbon, 2007, 45, 1847–1853 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shui, M. Wang, F. Du and L. Dai, Sci. Adv., 2015, 1, e1400129 Search PubMed .
C. H. Choi, S. H. Park and S. I. Woo, Green Chem., 2011, 13, 406–412 RSC .
C. H. Choi, S. H. Park and S. I. Woo, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 12107–12115 RSC .
J. Lemo, K. Heuzé and D. Astruc, Chem. Commun., 2007, 4351–4353 RSC .
G. M. Scheuermann, L. Rumi, P. Steurer, W. Bannwarth and R. Mülhaupt, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 8262–8270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, X. Fan, J. Qi, J. Ji, S. Wang, G. Zhang and F. Zhang, Nano Res., 2010, 3, 429–437 CrossRef CAS .
K. Qu, L. Wu, J. Ren and X. Qu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 5001–5009 CAS .
M. Yu, Y. Huang, C. Li, Y. Zeng, W. Wang, Y. Li, P. Fang, X. Lu and Y. Tong, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 324–330 CrossRef CAS .
M. Dabiri and M. P. Vajargahy, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 2017, 31 Search PubMed .
X. Liu, X. Zhao, Y. Cao, T. Li, S. Qiu and Q. Shi, New J. Chem., 2017, 41, 865–872 RSC .
Y. Tang, X. Dai, Z. Yang, L. Pan, W. Chen, D. Ma and Z. Lu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 7887–7895 RSC .
S.-H. Oh and G. B. Hoflund, J. Catal., 2007, 245, 35–44 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhan, J. Wang, H. Wang, J. Zhang, X. Liu, P. Zhang, M. Chi, Y. Guo, Y. Guo, G. Lu, S. Sun, S. Dai and H. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 8846–8854 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Shang, T. Bian, B. Zhang, D. Zhang, L.-Z. Wu, C.-H. Tung, Y. Yin and T. Zhang, Angew. Chem., 2014, 126, 254–258 CrossRef .
F. Li, J. Zhao and Z. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 2507–2514 CAS .
G. Xu, R. Wang, F. Yang, D. Ma, Z. Yang and Z. Lu, Carbon, 2017, 118, 35–42 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, H. Zhang, J. Wang, W. Qiao, L. Ling and D. Long, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 3, 1500711 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

Bocheng Qiu
	Bocheng Qiu received his bachelor's degree (2012) from Nanjing Agricultural University, and obtained his PhD degree (2017) from East China University of Science and Technology under the supervision of Professor Jinlong Zhang. He is now a post-doctoral fellow at the Hong Kong Polytechnic University. His research interest focuses on the design and controlled synthesis of hollow nanomaterials and carbon-based hybrid materials and their applications in photo-/electrocatalysis and energy storage.

Mingyang Xing
	Dr Mingyang Xing is an Associate Professor and supervisor of postgraduate students at the School of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, East China University of Science and Technology (ECUST). He obtained his Doctoral Degree in 2012 from ECUST, and then worked at the University of California, Riverside, as a visiting scholar for one year. His research focuses on the preparation of functional nanomaterials and applications to the environmental and energy fields. He has published more than 60 papers in SCI journals in these areas, which have been cited more than 3000 times.

Jinlong Zhang
	Prof. Dr Jinlong Zhang obtained his bachelor's degree in 1985 and his PhD in 1993 from East China University of Science and Technology, Shanghai, China. Professor Zhang joined the East China University of Science and Technology in 1993. He worked at Osaka Prefecture University as a Postdoctor (JSPS) in collaboration with Prof. Anpo from 1996 to 2000. He is currently on the Editorial Boards of “Applied Catalysis B: Environmental” and “Scientific Reports”. He is also the associate editor of “Res. Chem. Intermed”. His research interests include photocatalysis, mesoporous materials, and materials science.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Synthetic scheme of a GF and integration with PDMS through the CVD method with a nickel foam template, (b) photograph of a 170 × 220mm2 free-standing GF. (c) SEM image of a GF. (d) Low-magnification TEM image of a GF. (e) High-resolution TEM images of graphene sheets with different numbers of layers in a GF; the interlayer spacing of bilayer (2L) and trilayer (3L) graphene is ∼0.34 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 71. Copyright 2011 Nature Publishing Group. (f) The schematic illustrations of the preparation process of 3D-GMOs. Comparison of the 3D-GMOs obtained by using templates of NiCl2·6H2O (g) and Ni foam (h). The inset in (g) is the high-magnification SEM image of the 3D-GMOs in (g). Reprinted with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2013 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic illustrating a procedure to fabricate 3D macroporous films through an embossing process using PS templates for an e-CMG film as well as a subsequent deposition process of MnO2 for a MnO2/e-CMG film. Low-magnified SEM (b) and high-magnified SEM (c) images of the e-CMG film. (d) TEM image of the e-CMG film. Reprinted with permission from ref. 81. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic illustration of the synthesis procedures of the nanoporous graphene foams (NGFs). STEM (f) and HRTEM (g) images of NGFs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2012 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematics of the fabrication of the aNGO/graphite foam electrode. Reprinted with permission from ref. 86. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic presentation of μCNGF preparation. (1) AFB; (2) AFB soaked with GO suspension; (3) graphene/AFB composite; (4) as-prepared μCNGF after AFB removal. The upper and the lower part depict the process from the perspective of the entire AFB and individual alumina fibers, respectively. (c) SEM image of AFB; (d–f) SEM images of μCNGF under different magnifications. Reprinted with permission from ref. 88. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) Schematic showing the formation of macroporous PSS-G/PVA monoliths using ice-segregation-induced self-assembly (ISISA). (h and i) longitudinal sections, and (j and k) cross-sections of a PSS-G/PVA freeze-dried monolith (1:10 wt ratio). Scale bars: (h, j and k) = 10 mm, (i) = 5 mm. Arrows in (h and i) indicate the direction of freezing. (h and j) Region X showing the layered structure, and (i and k) region Y with macroporous architecture. Reprinted with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2009 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic of in situ synthesis of 3D GF using a simulated 3D printing process. (b) Photographs of 3D printed GF before and after dissolving the Ni. The scale bars are 5 mm. (c–e) SEM images and (f–h) TEM images of 3D printed GFs after removing Ni scaffolds prepared using 100P and 2S in a H2 atmosphere. The inset in (f) is the SAED pattern. Reprinted with permission from ref. 32. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Photographs of a 2 mg mL−1 homogeneous GO aqueous dispersion before and after hydrothermal reduction at 180 °C for 12 h; (b) photographs of a strong SGH allowing easy handling and supporting weight; (c and d) SEM images with different magnifications of the SGH interior microstructures. Reprinted with permission from ref. 98. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. (e and f) Photographs of an as-prepared superlight GF and one with a piece of GF size of 1.8 cm × 1.1 cm × 1.2 cm standing on a dandelion. (g and h) SEM images of the sample in (e). Scale bars: (g) 10 μm, (h) 100 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 101. Copyright 2012 John Wiley and Sons. (i) Fabrication illustration of all solid state supercapacitors based on BN-GAs that were involved by a combined hydrothermal process and freeze-drying process. The as-fabricated supercapacitors with a diameter of 7 mm indicated by the dotted green ring and a simplified schematic of ASSSs based on aerogels are shown (below left). (j) Low- and (k) high-magnification SEM images of the as-prepared BN-GAs. (l) Low- and (m) high-magnification SEM images of the as-prepared BN-GAs as a binder/additive-free electrode upon physical pressing. Reprinted with permission from ref. 104. Copyright 2012 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Fabrication process for the 3D Fe3O4/N-GAs catalyst. (1) Stable suspension of GO, iron ions, and PPy dispersed in a vial. (2) Fe- and PPy-supporting graphene hybrid hydrogel prepared by hydrothermal self-assembly and floating on water in a vial, and its ideal assembled model. (3) Monolithic Fe3O4/N-GAs hybrid aerogel obtained after freeze-drying and thermal treatment. (b and c) The typical SEM images of Fe3O4/N-GAs revealing the 3D macroporous structure and uniform distribution of Fe3O4 NPs in the GAs. The red rings in (c) indicate Fe3O4 NPs encapsulated in thin graphene layers. (d) TEM and (e) HRTEM images of Fe3O4/N-GAs revealing an Fe3O4 NP wrapped by graphene layers. Reprinted with permission from ref. 109. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) The fabrication process of TiO2/GAs in the presence of glucose. The TEM images of TiO2/GAs obtained in the absence (b) or presence (c) of glucose. (d) The SEM image of TiO2/GAs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic illustration of the in situ growth pathways of highly dispersed Fe2O3 NPs on 3D GAs through Stöber-like and hydrothermal methods. (f) Images of as-prepared Fe2O3/GAs (with a density of 8 mg cm−3). (g and h) HRTEM image of amorphous Fe2O3 seeds on the graphene sheet surface during the Stober-like pretreatment. (i–k) The SEM images of Fe2O3/GAs. (l and m) The TEM images of Fe2O3/GAs. (n) The SEM image of Fe2O3/GAs without Stöber-like pre-treatment. Reprinted with permission from ref. 113. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation procedure of 3DG/Fe2O3. (b and c) SEM images of the GO/PB composite. SEM (d and e) and TEM (f and g) images of the microstructure of 3DG/PB. The inset in (d) shows a stable aqueous dispersion of the GO/PB composite and the inset in (i) shows the photograph of a monolithic 3DG/PB aerogel. Reprinted with permission from ref. 127. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  Macroscopic and microscopy morphology of UFAs. (a) Digital photograph of UFAs with diverse shapes. (b) A 100 cm3 UFA cylinder standing on a flower. (c) 1000 cm3 UFA cylinder. (d and e) Microscopically porous architecture of a UFA at different magnifications, showing CNT-coated graphene cell walls. (f and g) SEM images of different interconnections for CNT-coated graphene (graphene@CNTs) cell walls: overlapping (f), twisting (g), and wrapping (h). (i) Cartoon of a flattened CNT-coated graphene cell wall. (j–l) Cartoon models corresponding to the three interconnection styles shown in (f and g) respectively. The gray lamellar, orange wires and brown wires represent the graphene sheet, CNTs coated on the top and CNTs coated on the back of the graphene sheet, respectively. (m and n) TEM images of CNT-coated graphene cell walls, the HRTEM image of a cell wall edge (inset in (m), scale bar is 2 nm) and the SAED patterns (inset in (n)) taken at the labeled area. (o) Schematic illustration of idealized building cells of our UFA made by synergistic assembly of graphene and CNTs. (p) SEM image and photograph (inset in (p)) of the lightest neat graphene aerogel (ρ = 0.16 mg cm−3, i.e., 1.38 mg in 8.6 cm3). Reprinted with permission from ref. 128. Copyright 2013 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Structures of GO and PVA. (b) Photographs of GO/PVA mixtures with different content ratios (r) of PVA to GO. From left to right, r = 1:1, 1:1.5, 1:2, 1:5, 1:10, 1:20, 1:40. (c) SEM images of lyophilized 5 mg mL−1 GO and (d–f) GO/PVA blends; r = 1:20 (d), 1:5 (e) or 1:1 (f). Scale bar: 5 mm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 133. Copyright 2010 Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) Illustration of the preparation process of the GO–PEI porous materials (GEPMs). (h) SEM image of the obtained GEPMs. (i) Schematic representation of the GO–PEI hydrogel. Reprinted with permission from ref. 134. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (j) Types of crosslinking networks in the hybrid hydrogel including a Ca2+ coordination-induced GO network (blue), chemically crosslinked PAM network (green), and hydrogen bonds between GO and PAM (red). (k) Compression model for the GO/PAM hydrogel. (l) Stretch model for the GO/PAM hydrogel. Reprinted with permission from ref. 137. Copyright 2014 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic showing the microwave exfoliation/reduction of GO and the following chemical activation of MEGO with KOH that creates pores while retaining high electrical conductivity. (b) Low magnification SEM image of a 3D a-MEGO piece. (c) High-resolution SEM image of a different sample region that demonstrates the porous morphology. (d) ADF-STEM image of the same area as (c), acquired simultaneously. As seen, a-MEGO contains micro- and mesopores with a distribution of sizes between ∼1 and ∼10 nm. (e) High-resolution phase contrast electron micrograph of the thin edge of an a-MEGO chunk, taken at 80 kV. There is a variation in focus across the image because of the sloped nature of the sample and changes in sample thickness. The image shows the presence of a dense network of nanometer scale pores surrounded by highly curved, predominantly single-layer carbon. (f) Exit wave reconstructed HRTEM image from the edge of a-MEGO. The in-plane carbon atoms are clearly resolved, and a variety of n-membered carbon rings can be seen. Substantial curvature of the single-carbon sheets is visible, with the in-plane crystallinity being preserved. Reprinted with permission from ref. 140. Copyright 2011 The American Association for the Advancement of the Science. (g) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of laser-scribed graphene-based electrochemical capacitors. Schematic drawings illustrating the leavening process to prepare RGO foams. (h) GO solution used for vacuum filtering. (i) GO layered film on an AAO membrane. (j) Freestanding GO layered film. (k) Freestanding paper-like RGO foam. (l and m) Cross-sectional SEM images of RGO foams formed after 10 h in an autoclave at 90 °C with 80 μL hydrazine monohydrate. Reprinted with permission from ref. 142. Copyright 2012 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Synthetic scheme showing the versatility associated with carbon aerogel (CA) synthesis. As shown, the CA structure can be modified either during the sol–gel polymerization step, through the introduction of additives or templates to the reaction mixture, or through gas- or solution-phase reactions on the surfaces of the CA framework after the pyrolysis step. Reprinted with permission from ref. 148. Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Schematic illustration of the preparation process for the NPMC foams. An aniline (i) –phytic acid (ii) complex (iii) is formed (for clarity, only one of the complexed anilines is shown for an individual phytic acid), followed by oxidative polymerization into a three-dimensional PANi hydrogel crosslinked with phytic acids. As each phytic acid molecule can complex with up to six aniline monomers, phytic acid can be used as the crosslinker and protonic dopant to directly form the three-dimensional PANi hydrogel network; for clarity, only a piece of the two-dimensional network building block is shown in the enlarged view under the three-dimensional PANi hydrogel. The PANi hydrogel is freeze-dried into an aerogel and pyrolysed in Ar to produce the NPMC (for clarity, only a piece of the two-dimensional NPMC network building block is shown in the enlarged view under the three-dimensional NPMC). Reprinted with permission from ref. 151. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 13  Synthetic process for the fabrication of GO sponges and films by speed vacuum centrifugation. (a) 1 mL GO solution (3 mg mL−1) in a 2 mL mictrotube. (b) Schematic illustration of the produced GO sponges and films at different temperatures of the vacuum centrifugation chamber, and a digital image for GO sponges prepared at 40 °C (upper panel), and multilayer GO films prepared at 80 °C (lower panel). (c) The GO sponges, and (d) free-standing GO films recovered from an Eppendorf tube; a representative image of 3 cm diameter GO film (inset). (e) Reduced GO sponges after thermal annealing in H2/Ar at 800 °C for 12 h; the elastic property of the reduced GO sponges was demonstrated by observing the recovery to the flat shape from the folded structure. (f) Free-standing graphene films prepared after thermal annealing in H2/Ar at 800 °C for 12 h. The scale bar represents 1 cm in (c–f). Reprinted with permission from ref. 29. Copyright 2010 John Wiley and Sons. Schematic illustration of the fabrication of laser-scribed graphene-based electrochemical capacitors. (g–j) A GO film supported on a flexible substrate is placed on top of a LightScribe-enabled DVD media disc, and a computer image is then laser-irradiated on the GO film in a computerized LightScribe DVD drive. (k) As shown in the photograph, the GO film changes from golden brown color to black as it reduced to laser-scribed graphene. The low-power infrared laser changes the stacked GO sheets immediately into well-exfoliated few-layered LSG film, as shown in the cross-sectional SEM images. (l) A symmetric EC is constructed from two identical LSG electrodes, ion-porous separator, and electrolyte. Reprinted with permission from ref. 155. Copyright 2012 The American Association for the Advancement of the Science. Growth process and structural regulation of chemical-blowing production. (m) SEM images of glucose (crystals marked in green) and NH4Cl (marked in blue), which were subsequently transformed to melanoidin bubbles (marked in brown) under a browning reaction; these were finally converted into the strutted graphene (SG) containing graphitic membranes and struts (marked in gray). The heating rate is 4 °C min−1. Scale bar, 50 mm. (n–p) SEM images of the SG products grown at the heating rates of 1, 20 and 100 °C min−1, respectively. Scale bars = 200 mm. (q) Changes of SSA and ratio of cell perimeter to strut width versus heating rates. Reprinted with permission from ref. 160. Copyright 2013 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Schematic of KOH activation of C60 molecules. Route A indicates the normal activation performed in an Ar flow while route B shows N-doping when NH3 flow is involved in the activation. Hydrogen and oxygen atoms are not shown. (b) Typical SEM image of 3D porous carbon. (c) Typical TEM image of 3D porous carbon, with an electron diffraction pattern in the inset. (d) TEM image of 3D porous carbon at a higher magnifcation with the inset showing the distribution of the interlayer spacings. (e) Typical TEM image of N7.5%–3D porous carbon and (f and g) corresponding energy dispersive spectrum (EDS) maps of elemental C (f) and N (g). Reprinted with permission from ref. 161. Copyright 2017 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Macroscopic pieces of 7.5 mg mL−1 CNT aerogels. Pristine CNT aerogel (left) appears black, whereas the aerogel reinforced in a 1 wt% PVA bath (right) is slightly gray. (b) Three PVA-reinforced aerogel pillars (total mass = 13.0 mg) supporting 100 g, or ca. 8000 times their weight. (c) This SEM image of a critical-point-dried aerogel reinforced in a 0.5 wt% PVA solution (CNT content = 10 mg mL−1) reveals an open, porous structure. (d) This TEM image of an unreinforced aerogel reveals small-diameter CNTs arranged in a classic filamentous network. Light, porous, flexible carbon nanotube sponges. Reprinted with permission from ref. 170. Copyright 2007 John Wiley and Sons. (e) A monolithic sponge with a size of 4 cm × 3 cm × 0.8 cm and a bulk density of 7.5 mg cm−3. (f) Cross-sectional SEM image of the sponge showing a porous morphology and overlapped CNTs. (g) TEM image of large-cavity, thin-walled CNTs. (h) Illustration of the sponge consisting of CNT piles (black lines) as the skeleton and open pores (void space). Reprinted with permission from ref. 171. Copyright 2010 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Scheme for the synthesis of CNT carpets directly from graphene. (b–i) SEM images of nanotube carpet grown from a graphene-covered copper foil. (b and c) The samples grown by using 0.3 nm of iron and 3 nm of alumina. The dark regions in a are gaps in the broken alumina layer and the brighter regions are alumina-covered areas. Scale bar in (a), 50 mm. (c) An enlarged image for one of the lifted areas where the CNTs were grown. Scale bar in (c), 10 mm. (d and e) The samples grown by using 0.5 nm of iron and 3 nm of alumina. Scale bar in (d and e), 10 mm. (d) The top alumina layer is partially broken. (e) The top alumina layer is fully removed during growth. (e–h) The samples grown by using 1 nm of iron and 3 nm of alumina. (f and g) Top view of the CNT carpet on the graphene-covered copper foil. Scale bar in (f), 50 mm. Scale bar in (g), 10 mm. (h) The side view of the CNT carpet grown on the graphene; the height of the CNT is ≈120 mm. Scale bar in (h), 10 mm. (i) The close-up view on the upper portion of the CNT carpet. Scale bar in (i), 1 mm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 174. Copyright 2012 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) SEM images of UGF (left) and CNTs–UGF hybrid (right). (b) Photograph of a CNTs–UGF hybrid with a geometric surface area of 50 cm2. (c) Schematic of the 3D interconnected network of the CNTs–UGF hybrid which allows free electron transfer between the UGF and each CNT. (d–f) SEM images of the CNTs–UGF with different CNT lengths. (g) SEM image of the CNT bundle marked by the blue dashed square in (f). (h) Raman spectra of as-grown CNTs–UGF and UGF. The D peak in the Raman spectrum originates from defects in the CNTs, and does not exist in the spectrum of UGF. (i) TGA curves of UGF and CNTs–UGF hybrid. The 5.7 wt% residue obtained after heating the CNTs–UGF hybrid in air at 1000 °C is from the Fe catalyst and Al2O3 buffer deposited for CNT growth. (j) Pore size distribution of the CNTs–UGF hybrid measured by N2 adsorption/desorption isotherms and fitted by density functional theory. (k) HRTEM image of a CNT. Reprinted with permission from ref. 178. Copyright 2016 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) The synthetic process in which a CNT sponge is directly converted into a GNR aerogel by unzipping multi-walled nanotubes into multilayer graphene nanoribbons, while maintaining the original three-dimensional network. Structural characterization of GNR aerogels. (b) Photo of a CNT sponge and SEM image of internal nanotubes. (c) Photo of a GNR aerogel made from the CNT sponge in (b), and SEM images of the nanoribbons inside. Reprinted with permission from ref. 179. Copyright 2014 John Wiley and Sons. (d) Illustration of the synthetic route for N-GNRs-As. (e) Photographs of as-prepared 3D graphene nanoribbon aerogels derived from Py-free (left) and 5 vol% Py-containing (middle) GONR suspension (10 mg mL−1) after hydrothermal treatment. (f) A monolith of ultralight N-GNRs-As standing on a dandelion. (g) Photograph of N-GNRs-A in a hot flame of an alcohol burner. (h) SEM image of the resulting N-GNRs-As. Reprinted with permission from ref. 99. Copyright 2015 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Schematic representation of the fabrication process of the free-standing heteroatom doped carbon nanofibers. (b) Photograph of a BC pellicle. (c) SEM image of the N,P-co-doped carbon nanofiber surface (inset: the typical sample, 2.7 × 1.2 cm2). (d) SEM image of the inner of N,P-co-doped carbon nanofiber (N,P-CNF). (e) HRTEM image of the N,P-CNF. (f) Typical energy filter TEM (EFTEM) image of N,P-CNF. (g–j) Corresponding elemental mapping images of (g) C, (h) N, (i) P, and (j) O. Reprinted with permission from ref. 183. Copyright 2014 John Wiley and Sons. (k) Schematic illustration of the synthetic steps for large-scale fabrication of CNF hydrogels and aerogels. (1) Ultrathin TeNW templates were dispersed in a glucose solution. (2) Hydrothermal treatment of the mixture at 180 °C created a monolithic wet gel consisting of Te@C nanocables. (3) CNF hydrogel obtained after etching off the Te templates and washing. (4) CNF aerogel obtained after freeze-drying of the hydrogel. (l) Photograph of an approximately 12 L monolithic wet gel, which was prepared by hydrothermal carbonization of 12 L of solution containing 800 g glucose and 16 mmol Te NWs for 18 h. (m) SEM images of the CNF aerogel with different magnifications showing the nanowire networkstructure. The inset in the right image shows a photograph of a CNF aerogel obtained after freeze-drying. The red circles in the left image of (m) indicate the junctions between fibers. Reprinted with permission from ref. 187. Copyright 2012 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a–d) Schematic illustration of the preparation of a macroscopic 3D C3N4 structure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 165. Copyright 2015 John Wiley and Sons. (e) The fabrication process of the C3N4 aerogel and the corresponding photos of as-prepared colloidal solutions of CN NPs (inset: Tyndall effect of C3N4 NP aqueous solution), CN hydrogels and CN aerogels. Reprinted with permission from ref. 188. Copyright 2017 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a and b) SEM morphology of the sample of GF@Fe3O4. (c and d) TEM images of GF@Fe3O4. (e) HRTEM of an individual Fe3O4 nanoparticle. (f) SAED patterns of GF@Fe3O4. Reprinted with permission from ref. 189. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (g) TEM images of Pt/PdCu nanocubes on graphene sheets, (h) HAADF-STEM image of a hollow Pt/PdCu nanocube, (i–k) HAADF-STEM-EDS mapping images of Cu, Pd, and Pt elements, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 39. Copyright 2012 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Raman spectrum of a nanographite sample, showing the main Raman features, the D, G, D′ and G′ bands taken with a laser excitation energy (wavelength) of 2.41 eV (514.5 nm). Reprinted with permission from ref. 198. Copyright 2007 Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Raman spectra of Fe2O3/GAs, GAs, and GO. Reprinted with permission from ref. 107. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (c) Typical Raman spectra of a GF. The bottom spectrum and the other two correspond to monolayer and few-layer graphene, respectively, which are estimated from the intensity, shape and position of the G band and 2D band. The GF was prepared with a CH4 concentration of 0.7vol%. Reprinted with permission from ref. 71. Copyright 2011 Nature Publishing Group. (d) Evolution of the Raman spectra at 514 nm with the number of layers of graphene. (e) Evolution of the Raman spectra at 633 nm with the number of layers of graphene. (f) The four components of the 2D band in two-layer graphene at 514 and 633 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 199. Copyright 2006 American Physical Society. (g) SEM image of graphene transferred on SiO2/Si (285 nm-thick oxide layer) showing wrinkles, as well as two- and three-layer regions. (h) Optical microscope image of the same regions as in (g). (i) Raman spectra from the marked spots with corresponding colored circles or arrows showing the presence of one, two, and three layers of graphene; a.u., arbitrary units. (j–l) Raman maps of the D (1300 to 1400 cm−1), G (1560 to 1620 cm−1), and 2D (2660 to 2700 cm−1) bands, respectively (WITec alpha300, λlaser = 532 nm, ∼500 nm spot size, 100× objector). CCD cts., charge-coupled device counts. Scale bars, 5 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 200. Copyright 2009 The American Association for the Advancement of the Science.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) XPS survey of G–Mn–NiCo. (b) Mn2p XPS spectrum of 3D G–Mn–NiCo. (c) Mn 2p XPS spectrum of G–Mn. (d) C 1s XPS spectrum of 3D G–Mn–NiCo. Reprinted with permission from ref. 202. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) TGA curves, GF, N-GF, B-GF, and BN-GF. Reprinted with permission from ref. 38. Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) TGA curves of PANi aerogel and phytic acid. (g) TGA-MS spectroscopic results of PANi aerogel under thermal treatment. Reprinted with permission from ref. 151. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 24  The compression tests of ULGA. (a) The variation of height as a function of time at a loading rate of 60 mm min−1. (b) The stress–strain curves of ULGA at different maximum strain of 30%, 60% and 90%, respectively. (c) The stress–strain curves of ULGA at the maximum strain of 50% for 5 cycles. (d) The corresponding Young's modulus, maximum stress and energy loss coefficient for different cycles derived from (c). The loading rates for (b and c) are both set at 1 mm min−1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 229. Copyright 2013 John Wiley and Sons. (e) The N2 adsorption/desorption isotherms of the BNF at 77 K. (f) Specific surface area and density of a BNF against CVD growth time. Reprinted with permission from ref. 243. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group. (g) The change in the number of GF layers with an increase in CH4 concentration. (h) Electrical conductivity of GFs and GF/PDMS composites as a function of the number of graphene layers. Reprinted with permission from ref. 71. Copyright 2011 Nature Publishing Group.	 


3D porous thin graphite foam	Cu–Ni foam	CVD	5–100 μm	500–1200	900	—	Fan et al.210
Graphene foams	Ni foams	CVD	200–500 μm	850	1000	3–6	Cheng et al.71
3D porous graphite foams	Porous Ni foam	CVD	5–10 μm	980	1100	—	Fan et al.211
3D graphene	Ni foam	CVD	—	500–600	60000	—	Huang et al.212
CNT sponges	No	CVD	80	300–400	167	5–10	Wu et al.171
Aerographite	ZnO	CVD	—	—	0.2	0.18	Adelung et al.213
3D mesoporous carbon	Mesoporous SiO2	CVD	0.5–5 nm	1900	—	—	Huang et al.214
MnO2/graphene foams	Ni foams	CVD	200–500 μm	392	55	—	Xie et al.215
ZnO/3DGN	MOFs	CVD	—	335	—	—	Zhang et al.216
Sn/3DGN	NaCl particles	CVD	0.5–36 nm	365	—	—	Zhao et al.217
Nanoporous graphene foams	SiO2	Solution-based	32.5 nm	851	—	—	Zhao et al.83
Porous graphene monolith	PS	Solution-based	1–3 μm	118–201	—	—	He et al.218
3D graphene frameworks	PS@polydopamine	Solution-based	0.5–100 nm	344	—	—	Qiu et al.219
e-CMG	PS	Solution-based	2 μm	194	1204	—	Huh et al.81
Graphene frameworks	No	Hydrothermal	0.5–10 μm	280	1000–1400	1.8–2.4	Qu et al.101
MoS2/GAs	No	Hydrothermal	0.5–30 nm	105	—	—	Zeng et al.220
Fe2O3/GAs	No	Hydrothermal	10–13 and 50–120 nm	316	—	8	Zhang et al.113
MoSe2/graphene foams	No	Hydrothermal	1.5–90 nm	496	—	—	Ajayan et al.221
TiO2/3DGN	No	Hydrothermal	6–150 nm	155	—	—	Yang et al.222
Graphene hydrogels	No	Hydrothermal	1–10 μm	—	450	—	Shi et al.98
TiO2/GAs	No	Hydrothermal	4–6 nm and 0.1–5 μm	204	—	19	Zhang et al.44
Pd/GAs	No	Hydrothermal	2 μm	—	0.25	30	Wang et al.105
GHs	No	Hydrothermal	1–5 μm	780–950	1.3–3.2	—	Shi et al.223
Graphene monoliths	No	Hydrothermal	—	310–490	0.48–1.76	8.6–24.4	Shi et al.224
NiCo2O4@graphene sponge	Polyurethane sponge	Microwave and hydrothermal	2–5 nm and 50–500 μm	194	—	—	Wang et al.225
Prussian blue/GAs	No	Solvothermal self-assembly	4–27 nm	601	38	45–60	Zhang et al.226
Fe2O3/GAs	No	Solvothermal self-assembly	3–4 nm	212	—	—	Gao et al.116
Graphene xerogel	No	Chemical reduction	—	35–158	36–500	13	Kim et al.227
Carbon aerogels	No	Chemical reduction	1–100	272	0.6	0.75	Gao et al.128
Gas	No	Chemical reduction	3.8–109 nm	117	—	5	Xiao et al.228
Gas	No	Chemical reduction	10–100 μm	—	—	3	Qiu et al.229
CNTs/RGO aerogels	No	Chemical reduction	2–100 nm	435	2.8–7.5	32.2–41.1	Zhang et al.230
Fe3O4/3D graphene	No	Chemical reduction	2–100	95	15	42	Yan et al.231
3D graphene	No	Chemical reduction	3–5 μm	151	0.7–24.8	8	Wang et al.232
3D porous graphene	No	Chemical activation	2–5 nm and 0.05–1 μm	1810	1000	—	Shen et al.233
3D graphene hydrogels	No	CVE	2–70 nm	414	192	
	Duan et al.234
GO aerogels	No	Coupling agent triggering assembly	2–100 nm	850	—	—	Zhang et al.129
3D GO–PEI porous materials	No	Coupling agent triggering assembly	14 nm	476	—	20–30	Han et al.134
RF-GO aerogels	No	Coupling agent triggering assembly	—	—	—	15.7	Yu et al.235
3D CNT aerogels	No	Coupling agent triggering assembly	1.7–100	590–680	100–200	8.0–9.8	Chen et al.236
3D graphene	No	Chemical blowing	1–30 nm	1005	1	3	Bando et al.237
3D carbon materials	No	Pyrolysis of GO and bacteria	1–5 nm	182	—	—	Lu et al.238
Carbon nanofiber aerogels	No	Pyrolysis of bacterial cellulose	0.2–2 μm	—	20.6	4–6	Yu et al.63
Nanocarbon foams	No	Pyrolysis of polymer frameworks	0.5–10 nm	1663	—	—	Dai et al.151
3D carbon network	No	Pyrolysis of polymer frameworks	0.5–10 nm	4073	300	470	Bao et al.152
mesoporous graphitic films	No	Pyrolysis of GO and diamond	2–11 nm	420	7400–20300	—	Shi et al.167
Fe/Fe3C/3D graphene	No	Pyrolysis of polymer frameworks	—	492	—	—	Zhang et al.239
Graphene foam	No	Vacuum filtration	2–5 μm	—	500–800	30	Chen et al.142
Co3O4/graphene film	PS	Vacuum filtration	1–2 μm	142	—	—	Huh et al.240
Graphene/carbon aerogels	No	Pyrolysis of organic precursors	10–50 nm	736	528	112–189	Zhang et al.150
Graphene cryogels	No	Pyrolysis of organic precursors	1.5–10	244	133	150	Marković et al.149
Gas	No	Pyrolysis of organic precursors	10–100	584	100	10	Baumann et al.144
3D graphene film	No	LSP	—	1520	1738	—	Kaner et al.155

 	Fig. 25  (a) Calculated charge density distribution for the NCNTs. (b) Schematic representations of possible adsorption modes of an oxygen molecule at the CCNTs (top) and NCNTs (bottom). The C atoms around the pyrrolic-like nitrogen could possess much higher positive charges than the C atoms around the pyridinic-like nitrogen. Reprinted with permission from ref. 249. Copyright 2009 The American Association for the Advancement of the Science. (c) Spin and charge density of the graphene network (gray) dual doped by N (black) and S (white). C1 has very high spin density, C2 and C3 have high positive charge density, and C4 and C5 have moderately high positive spin densities. Reprinted with permission from ref. 250. Copyright 2012 John Wiley and Sons. (d) Energies of HO2 adsorption (Ead) on N- and/or B-doped graphene. N(p) and N(g) indicate pyridinic and graphitic N bonding, respectively. (e) Optimized configuration of HO2 adsorbed on B,N-graphene. (f) Ead on various B,N-graphene models with pyridinic or graphitic N groups. (g) Ead on various B,N-graphene models with B active sites as a function of the distance to a pyridinic N atom (sites I–VI as marked in inset). B-Graphene with a single B atom was considered as a reference with an infinitely large distance. Reprinted with permission from ref. 251. Copyright 2013 John Wiley and Sons. Mechanistic study of OER. Initial structure (h) and structures after the adsorption of hydroxyl OH* (i), oxyl O* (j) and peroxyl OOH* (k) intermediates on N and P coupled graphene foam. O*, OH* and OOH* are adsorbed intermediates. (l) Schematic energy profiles for the OER pathway on N,P-co-doped graphene foam in alkaline media. Reprinted with permission from ref. 151. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) Illustration of the five-layered graphene model with the dangling bonds terminated by hydrogen atoms. (b) Charge density of graphene corresponding to layers I, II and III labeled in (a). Carbon atoms and hydrogen atoms are labeled in gray and blue, respectively. (c) Energy profiles for the HER pathway on the edge sites of graphene networks and calculated Gibbs free energy change diagram after H* adsorption at four selected sites in the five-layered model. (d) Electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution at the edge site. Reprinted with permission from ref. 254. Copyright 2017 John Wiley and Sons. (e) Charge density contour plot (top) of G–H and the corresponding H2O adsorption optimized configuration (bottom). (f) Charge density contour plot (top) of G–OH and the corresponding H2O adsorption optimized configuration (bottom). Optimized geometrical structures of (g) one-layer, (h) two-layer, (i) three-layer and (j) four-layer H2O clusters adsorbed on G–OH. (k) The comparison of mean adsorption energies of H2O molecules on G–OH and mean binding energies of free H2O to form H2O clusters. Reprinted with permission from ref. 143. Copyright 2017 Royal Society of Chemistry. (l) DOS of selected atoms (1–4) and FePd12 NP (6) before (dashed line) and after (solid line) deposition on SVG and the contour plot of differential charge density of the FePd12/SVG composite (5). The selected atoms are marked in (3). In (5), the charge depletion region is in blue while the charge accumulation is in red (the isovalue is ±0.004 a.u.); the C, Fe, and Pd atoms are shown as brown, dark yellow, and silver spheres, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 257. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. DFT calculations of an O2 molecule and a H2O molecule that intend to pass through a monolayer of graphene, respectively. Potential barrier of an O2 molecule passing through (m) graphene with perfect carbon lattices, and (n) the defective graphene, that is, possessing divacancy and eight-atom vacancy. Potential barrier of a H2O molecule diffusing through (o) graphene with perfect carbon lattices, and (p) the defective graphene. Reprinted with permission from ref. 258. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 


Fe2O3/Gas	2D GO sheets	Specific surface area: 316 m2 g−1	AOPs	MO removal rate (in 30 min): 90%: 50%	Zhang et al.113
Pore size: 10–13 nm and 50–120 nm
Density: 8 mg cm−3
TiO2/Gas	2D GO sheets	Specific surface area: 65 m2 g−1	AOPs	CBZ removal rate (140 min): 100%: 30%	Lee et al.261

I
D/IG values: 1.41 vs. 0.78
3D C3N4 Monolith	2D C3N4 sheets	Specific surface area: 78 vs. 40 m2 g−1	HER (photocatalysis)	H2 yield rate: 29.0 vs. 10.2 μmol h−1	Yang et al.165
Pore volume: 0.76 vs. 0.28 m2 g−1
C3N4 Gas	2D C3N4 sheets	Specific surface area: 133 vs. 7 m2 g−1	HER (photocatalysis)	H2 yield rate: 30 vs. 4 μmol h−1	Wang et al.188
MoSx/graphene hydrogels	2D GO sheets	contact angle: 8.3° vs. 90°	HER (electrocatalysis)	Overpotential (10 mA cm−2)	Qiao et al.262
140.6 vs. 550 mV
MoS2/Gas	2D GO sheets	Specific surface area: 62 vs. 49 m2 g−1	HER (electrocatalysis)	Current density (200 mV) 95 vs. 27 mA cm−2	Wang et al.263
NiCo/graphene hydrogels	2D GO sheets	contact angle: 7.3° vs. 90°	OER (electrocatalysis)	Onset potential: 350 vs. 425 mV	Qiao et al.264
Graphene/MnO2/NiCo2O4 framework	2D GO sheets	Specific surface area: 70 vs. 108 m2 g−1	OER (electrocatalysis)	Onset potential: 321 vs. 475 mV	Qiao et al.202
N-Doped graphene foam	2D GO sheets	Specific surface area: 670 vs. 384 m2 g−1	ORR	Higher onset potential and lower H2O2 yield	Qiao et al.265
Fe3O4/N-Gas	2D GO sheets	Specific surface area: 110 vs. 9.5 m2 g−1	ORR	Onset potential (V vs. Ag/AgCl): −0.19 vs. −0.26 V	Müllen et al.109
3D graphene/CNTs/Pd composites	2D GO sheets	Specific surface area: 142.3 vs. 87.8	Suzuki cross-coupling reactions	Yield: 99%: 76%	Chen et al.266
Pore volume: 0.52 vs. 0.35
Pd/3D graphene	2D GO sheets	Electrical conductivity: 0.0025 S cm−1	Heck reaction	Higher selectivity (92%) and conversion (100%) than Pd supported by 2D substrate	Wang et al.105
Compressive strength: 0.042 MPa
Compress modulus: 0.26 MPa


TiO2/Gas	Solar light (AM 1.5G), 300 W xenon lamp	Degradation of MO	2-Fold of P25/GAs	Zhang et al.44
AgBr/Gas	Visible light (λ > 420 nm)	Degradation of MO	MO, 1.6-fold of AgBr	Niu et al.111
Reduction of CrVI	CrVI, 1.5-fold of AgBr
g-C3N4/graphene oxide aerogel	Visible light (λ > 420 nm), 500 W xenon lamp	Degradation of MO	2.3-Fold of g-C3N4	Jiang et al.272
BiOBr/RGO aerogels	Visible light (λ > 420 nm), 500 W xenon lamp	Degradation of RhB	3-Fold of BiOBr	Li et al.106
ZnS–Gas	Solar light (AM 1.5G), 150 W xenon lamp	Degradation of MB	MB 5-fold of ZnS	Kim et al.273
Reduction of CrVI	CrVI 3.5-fold of ZnS
C3N4/GOA	Solar light (AM 1.5G), 300 W xenon lamp	Degradation of MO	Degradation percentage of 73%	Zhou et al.274
Fe2O3/GAs	Solar light (AM 1.5G), 300 W xenon lamp	Degradation of MO	3-Fold of Fe2O3	Zhang et al.113
CoFe2O4/GAs	Solar light (AM 1.5G), 300 W xenon lamp	Degradation of MO	2.5-Fold of CoFe2O4	Zhang et al.31
Cu2O/RGO aerogels	Visible light (λ > 420 nm), 300 W xenon lamp	Degradation of MO	2.3-Fold of Cu2O	Li et al.275
W18O49/GAs	Visible light (λ > 420 nm), 500 W xenon lamp	Degradation of MO	3-Fold of W18O49	Ding et al.276
MoS2/P25/GAs	UV light, 300 W high pressure Hg lamp	Degradation of MO	1.6-Fold of MoS2/P25	Qi et al.277
3D RGO/TiO2	UV light (13.5 W m−2)	Degradation of carbamazepine	2.5-Fold of TiO2	Lee et al.261
TiO2–GA	UV light (λ < 420 nm), 300 W xenon lamp	Degradation of RhB	4-Fold of P25	Zheng et al.278

 	Fig. 27  (a) Cycling photodegradation of MO under simulated solar light irradiation (with an AM 1.5 air mass filter). (b) The mass loss of TiO2/GAs after 5 cycles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 28  (a) Photocatalytic oxidative curves of MO by AgBr/GAs and AgBr under visible light (λ > 420 nm) and the absorptive curve of AgBr/GAs in the dark. (b) Eight successive photodegradation dynamic curves of MO over AgBr/GAs. (c) Photocatalytic reductive curves of CrVI by AgBr/GAs and AgBr under visible light (λ > 420 nm) and the absorptive curve of AgBr/GAs in the dark. (d) Five successive photoreductive dynamic curves of CrVI over AgBr/GAs. (e) The quality of AgBr/GAs before the photocatalytic reaction. (f) The quality of AgBr/GAs after the photocatalytic reaction. (g) Tweezers are just used to take the AgBr/GAs from the completed reaction system. (h) Tweezers are just used to take the AgBr/GAs to a fresh system without centrifugation, ultrasound, and drying process. (i) SEM image of AgBr/GAs after the photocatalysis reaction. (j) The AgBr/GAs composite suspends in the aqueous solution. Reprinted with permission from ref. 111. Copyright 2015 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 29  (a) Cycle test for the solar-driven degradation of methyl-orange (75 mL MO, 10 mg L−1) in different reaction systems (1.2 mL H2O2 (30 wt%), the initial pH was 3.5). (b) Solar-driven degradation of MO on Fe2O3/GAs (1.2 mL H2O2 (30 wt%), the initial pH was adjusted from 3.5 to 9.0 by adding 0.1 M HCl). (c) Cycle test for the solar-driven degradation of MO on different catalysts with the initial pH of 7.0. (d) Absorption spectra of the MO filter liquor photo-degraded by the Fe2O3 powders and Fe2O3/GAs in the presence of 1,10-phenanthroline monohydrate (the initial pH was 3.5). (e) Photo-Fenton reaction model of Fe2O3/GAs in the system containing dye pollutants and H2O2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 113. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 30  (a) Photocatalytic activity for H2 production, (b) DRS spectrum, (c) PL emission spectra, and (d) EIS plot and photocurrent-time dependence of PCNM (solid line) and the g-CN powder (dotted line). Reprinted with permission from ref. 165. Copyright 2015 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 31  (a) Variation of photocurrent density versus applied voltage plots for PCN, DPCN, DPCN/NRGO, DPCN/NRGO/NiFe-LDH, and NiFe-LDH with chopped AM 1.5G irradiation. (b) Photoluminescence spectra of PCN, DPCN, DPCN/NRGO, NiFe-LDH, 2D DPCN/NRGO/NiFe-LDH, and DPCN/NRGO/NiFe-LDH. (c) Mott–Schottky plots. (d) IPCE spectra of DPCN, DPCN/NRGO, and DPCN/NRGO/NiFeLDH measured at 1.22 V in 0.01 M Na2SO4 electrolyte under AM 1.5G irradiation. (e) Transient photocurrent density versus time. Number labels (1), (2), (3), (4), and (5) data represent the DPCN/NRGO/NiFe-LDH, 2D DPCN/NRGO/NiFe-LDH, DPCN/NRGO, DPCN/NiFe-LDH, and DPCN, respectively. (f) Photocurrent densities versus time of DPCN/NRGO/NiFe-LDH being applied with different bias potentials under AM 1.5G irradiation. (g) EIS Nyquist plots of DPCN (□, ☆), DPCN/NRGO (△, ○), and DPCN/NRGO/NiFe-LDH (▽, ◇) at a bias of 0.9 V in the dark and under AM 1.5G irradiation. (h) Transient photocurrent responses of DPCN, DPCN/NiFe-LDH, DPCN/NRGO, and DPCN/NRGO/NiFe-LDH under AM 1.5G irradiation at 1.22 V. (i–m) Schematic for the proposed mechanism of water oxidation: (i) DPCN/NRGO/NiFe-LDH, (j) DPCN/NiFe-LDH, (k) DPCN/NRGO, and (l) DPCN. Reprinted with permission from ref. 282. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 32  HER activity of chemically doped nanoporous graphenes. (a) CV curves of the samples produced at different CVD temperatures and with different dopants in comparison to undoped nanoporous graphene. (b) Tafel plots for the different graphene samples. (c) Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy of the graphene samples at an HER overpotential of −0.20 V. (d) DFT-calculated HER activities of chemically doped nanoporous graphenes with a geometric lattice defect. Shown is the calculated HER free energy diagram at equilibrium potential for a Pt catalyst and for pyridinic (pN-G), graphitic (gN-G), sulfur doped (S-G), and nitrogen/sulfur co-doped (NS-G) graphene samples. The inset shows a NS-doped graphene model with a nitrogen (blue), a sulfur (yellow), and a hydrogen atom (white). Reprinted with permission from ref. 285. Copyright 2015 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 33  Electrochemical performance of the HER catalysts in 0.5 M H2SO4: (a) polarization curves for GA–MoS2, G–MoS2, MoS2 and GA loaded onto GC electrodes; (b) Tafel curves of GA–MoS2, G–MoS2 and MoS2; (c) electrochemical capacitance measurements: cyclic voltammograms are performed in a potential window without faradaic processes; (d) stability test of GA–MoS2 through potential cycling, polarization curves before and after 2000 potential cycles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 263. Copyright 2015 John Wiley and Sons. (e) The iR-corrected LSV curves of MoS2–G before and after NaOH treatment in 0.5 M Na2SO4 solution. Scan rate: 10 mV s−1. The inset is the Tafel plots of MoS2–G before and after NaOH treatment. The iR-corrected LSV curves of (f) MoS2 and (g) 3D graphene samples before and after NaOH treatment in 0.5 M Na2SO4 solution. Scan rate: 10 mV s−1. (h) Polarization curves of MoS2–G normalized to the EASA before and after NaOH treatment in 0.5 M Na2SO4 solution. Scan rate: 10 mV s−1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 143. Copyright 2017 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 34  (a) LSV plots of NG-NiCo, dried NG-NiCo, and 2D NG-NiCo at 50 mV s−1 in 0.1 M KOH; the inset in (a) shows the corresponding data re-plotted as the current density vs. overpotential. (b) EIS spectra of NG-NiCo and G-NiCo. (c and d) Tafel plots for NG-NiCo in comparison to those for G-NiCo and dried NG-NiCo. (e) Retention percentage of the catalytic current for NG-NiCo and 2D NG-NiCo (0.7 V vs. Ag/AgCl) during the initial 100 s. (f) Chronoamperometric response for NG-NiCo at 0.5 V vs. Ag/AgCl. Reprinted with permission from ref. 264. Copyright 2013 John Wiley and Sons. OER performances of Ni-MnO/RGO aerogels, MnO/RGO aerogels, Ni/RGO aerogels, and commercial RuO2 catalyst: (g) OER polarization curves in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH (rotation rate: 1600 rpm; sweep rate: 5 mV s−1). (h) Overpotentials at a chosen current density of 10 mA cm−1 and the current densities at a chosen potential of 1.60 V. (i) Tafel plots derived from panel (a). (j) Chronoamperometric responses of Ni-MnO/RGO aerogels at 1.60 V in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH; the inset shows OER polarization curves of Ni-MnO/RGO aerogels before and after the stability testing. Reprinted with permission from ref. 296. Copyright 2017 John Wiley and Sons. (k) Polarization curves (without iR correction) of NF and NF@(PEI/RGO)n (n = 0.5, 1, 2, and 3) in 0.1 M KOH. (l) Tafel plots of NF and NF@(PEI/RGO)n (n = 0.5, 1, 2, and 3) in 0.1 M KOH. Reprinted with permission from ref. 297. Copyright 2017 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 35  ORR performances of NGM materials. (a) LSV curves of NGM obtained in O2 or N2-saturated 0.10 M KOH or 0.10 M HClO4 solutions. The difference between the current densities of O2 or N2-saturated tests is assigned to the real ORR current (solid curves). All LSV profiles of ORR are obtained with such correction. (b) The disk current densities (bottom) and ring current densities (top) recorded on an RRDE. (c) Electron transfer number (n) derived from the LSV curves in RRDE measurements. (d) Chronoamperometric response of NGM in O2-saturated 0.10 M KOH with the addition of KSCN (resulting in an electrolyte with 10 × 10−3 M KSCN). (e) Arrhenius plots of Pt/C and NGM, showing the log of exchange current density j0versus the inverse temperature 1/T, and the inset presents the calculated ORR apparent activation energies. (f) ORR chronoamperometric responses at a constant potential of 0.60 V versus RHE for NGM, GM, and Pt/C. The rotating rate was 1600 rpm and the scan rate was 10 mV s−1 for all tests. All electrodes were prepared with the same mass loading of ≈0.25 mg cm−2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 252. Copyright 2016 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 36  (a) CVs of Fe3O4/N-GAs in N2- and O2-staturated 0.1 M aqueous KOH electrolyte solution at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1. (b) LSVs of Fe3O4/N-GAs in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 at different RDE rotation rates (in rpm). (c) Rotating ring-disk electrode (RRDE) test of the ORR on Fe3O4/N-GAs, Fe3O4/N-GSs, Fe3O4/N-CB in an O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH electrolyte at a rotation rate of 1600 rpm. The inset shows the ring current as a function of the electrode potential. (d) Peroxide percentage and (e) electron transfer number of Fe3O4/N-GAs, Fe3O4/N-GSs, and Fe3O4/N-CB as functions of the electrode potential. (f) Peroxide percentage and electron transfer number as functions of Fe3O4 loading at −0.4 V, as measured using an RRDE in an O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH electrolyte. Reprinted with permission from ref. 109. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 37  The ORR performance for N-GNRs-A in acidic solution. (a) CV curves of N-GNRs-A in an N2- and O2-saturated 0.5 M H2SO4 solution, respectively, at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. (b) Rotating ring-disk electrode (RRDE) curves of the N-GNRs-A at 1600 rpm. The inset shows the ring current as a function of the electrode potential. (c) HO2− production and the corresponding n values of the N-GNRs-A electrode. (d) LSV curves of N-GNRs-A in O2-saturated 0.5 M H2SO4 solution at different rotating speeds. The scan rate is 10 mV s−1. Inset shows the Koutecky–Levich plots derived from LSV curves at different potentials from −0.2 to 0 V. Reprinted with permission from ref. 99. Copyright 2016 John Wiley and Sons.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
